All glories to Sri Sri Guru and Gaurahga!
Sri Kalki Purana
Sri Krsna Dvaipayana Vyasadeva
Translated by Bhumipati Das
Edited by Purnaprajna Das
Presented by Laxman Das and
Sanmohini Devi Dasi
Published by
Tai Nitai Press


А С К N О W L Е D С; Е М Е N Т S
It is with great satisfaction that I present this English
edition of Sri Kalki Purana, which was compiled by Srlla
Vyasadeva for the pleasure of the devotees. 
1 pray that this
presentation will be accepted as a sincere attempt to glorify Lord
Kalki, the incarnation of Godhead. My Godbrother, Laxman Das,
inspired me to undertake this translation of Sri Kalki Purana and
so I first wish to thank him. He has also paid the total amount
required for the publication of this book. Without his assistance,
this book would not have been possible to publish. I also wish
to thank Purnaprajna Prabhu for editing and proofreading
this book, Kurma Rupa Prabhu for doing the layout and cover
design, and Anjana Dasa for painting the cover illustration. I
also wish to thank my wife, Caitanya Devi Dasi, and son, Bhakti
Siddhanta Das, for typing the manuscript into the computer. I
thank Giridhari Das for typing the roman transliteration of the
verses.
Bhumipati Dasa
Completed on the disappearance day of Srlla
Bhaktisiddhanta SarasvatI Thakura 8/12/2006


C O N T E N T S
Introduction 
vii
C H A P T E R S
1. A Description of Kali-Yuga 
1
2. The Birth and Sacred Thread Ceremony of Lord Kalki 
14
3. Lord Kalki Receives Benedictions From Siva and Parvati 
27
4. PadmavatI Receives a Benediction From Lord Siva 
40
5. Padmavati's Svayamvara 
52
6. Suka Goes To Simhala as the Envoy of Lord Kalki
Conversation Between PadmavatI And Suka 
60
7. The Procedure for Worshiping Lord Visnu 
70
8. Conversation Between PadmavatI and Suka
Lord Kalki Goes to Simhala 
79
9. The Meeting of Lord Kalki and PadmavatI 
, 
91
10. The Marriage Of Lord Kalki To PadmavatI
Prayers of The Kings To Lord Kalki 
100
11. The Story of Ananta and How He was Influenced by Maya 
110
12. The Meeting of Ananta And Harhsa 
125
13. Visvakarma Reconstructs the Village of Sambhala
The Arrival of Lord Kalki 
137
14. Lord Kalki Conquers the Buddhists Who Opposed Him 
148
15. Lord Kalki Is Attacked By The Mleccha Women
Instructions by the Weapons Personified 
161
16. The Killing of the RaksasI, Kuthodarl 
173
17. The Descendents of the Surya Dynasty
Lord Ramacandra's Pastimes 
185


18. The Descendents of Lord Ramacandra
King Maru and King Devapi 
204
19. The Appearance of Satya-Yuga
Description of the Different Manus 
214
20. Lord Kalki Goes Out to Conquer Kali and His Allies 
219
21. The Followers of Kali Are Defeated
The Killing of Koka And Vikoka 
231
22. Lord Kalki Travels To Bhallatanagara Ruled By Sas'idhvaja
A Great Battle Takes Place 
241
23. King Sasidhvaja Brings Lord Kalki to His Palace 
253
24. The Prayers of Susanta
Lord Kalki Marries King Sasidhvaja's Daughter 
259
25. The Devotion of Sas'idhvaja And His Previous History 
268
26. The Glories of the Devotees of Lord Han 
281
27. The Story of Dvivida Gorilla
King Sasidhvaja's Previous Birth as King Satrajit 
289
28. Kalki Travels to Kaficananagara and Delivered Visakanya 
299
29. Prayers Offered to Maya-Devi,
The Deliverance Of King Sas'idhvaja 
308
30. Lord Kalki And Vis'nuyasa Perform Sacrifices
Instructions by Narada Mum 
313
31. The Vow of Rukmini 
327
32. Lord Kalki Enjoys Pastimes With His Consorts 
339
33. The Demigods Arrive at Sambhala
The Disappearance of Lord Kalki 
346
34. Prayers Offered to Mother Ganga 
356
35. The Glories of Hearing Sri Kalki Purana 
361


I N Г R О D L С Т I О N
About five thousand years ago, Sri Krsna Dvaipayana Vyasa, an
empowered incarnation of Lord Krsna, appeared in the holy land of
Bharatavarsa. Realizing that as the four yugas progress, the human
beings' power of understanding gradually diminishes; He divided the
one Veda into four and imparted them to His four principal disciples.
These four Vedas are the Sama, Rk, Yajur, and Atharva. Later on, His
disciples again divided the Vedas into many branches.
Even after dividing the Vedas, Srila Vyasadeva did not feel
satisfied. Thinking that it will be impossible for the people of Kah-yuga
to understand the actual purport of the Vedas, He took the essence of
that understanding and compiled a simple literature called the Purana
Samhita, in story form. Based on this literature, His three principal
disciples wrote three more sarhhitas: Savarm-samhita, Samsapayana-
samhita, and Akrtavrana-samhita. The eighteen Puranas and thirty-six
sub Puranas were later compiled, being based on these four samhitas.
Because Srila Vyasadeva's Purana Samhita is the source of these
literatures, all the Puranas and sub Puranas are attributed to him.
Among the upa-puranas or sub Puranas, the Kalki Purana is most
sacred and widely respected. At the end of Kah-yuga, the Supreme Lord,
Han, will incarnate as Lord Kalki and kill all the mlecchas, yavanas,
atheists, and Buddhists of the world that defy the Vedic authority. The
pastimes of Lord Kalki are the subject matter of this literature, which
is presented in story form. Exalted personalities can see everything,
past, present, and future. For this reason, there is no fault in narrating
these future events as if they had already occurred. The Kalki Purana
consists of thirty-five chapters.


C H A P T E R 
O N E
A Description of Kali-Yuga
Text 1
sendra deiagana munisvarajana
lokah sapalah sada yam sarvartha
susiddhaye pratidinam bhaktya
bhajanti uttamah torn
vighnesam anantam acyutam
ajam sarvajna sarvasrayam
vande vaidika tantnkadi vwidhaih
sastrmh puro vanditam
I offer my respectful obeisances unto Lord Acyuta, the unborn,
omniscient, and unlimited Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the
destroyer of all obstacles, the shelter of all living entities, and the original
speaker of the Vedic literature He is worshiped with great devotion by
the demigods, headed by Indra, the foremost of sages, and by the rulers
of the various planetary systems, for the purpose of attaining all kinds of
perfection in life
Text 2
narayanam namaskrtya
naram cawa narottamam
devim sarasvatin can a
tato jayam udirayet
Before reciting this Kalki Purana,, which is the verv means of conquest,
one should offer respectful obeisances unto the Personality of Godhead,
Narayana, unto Nara narayana Rsi, the supermost human being, unto
mother SarasvatI, the goddess of learning, and unto Srila Vyasadeva, the
author
Text 3
yad dordanda karala sarpa kavala
jvala jvalad vigraha netuh batkarah


SRI KALKI PURANA
vala danda dahtd bhupdh ksiti ksobhakdh
sasvat saindhava vahano dvija
janih kalkih paratma hanh
pdrdt satyayugadikrt sa
bhagavan dharma pravrm pnyah
May the Supreme Personality of Godhead, having assumed the form
of Kalki, who is the Supersoul of all living entities, establish the eternal
principles of religion Having appeared in a family of brdhmanas, He will
annihilate the sinful kings of Kali-yuga by the fire of the poison emanating
from His ferocious serpent-like hands while riding on the back of an
excellent horse of the Sindh province. In this way, He will protect the
pious and re-establish Satya-yuga
Text 4-5
ш sutavacah srutva
naimisaranya vdsinah
saunakadya mahabhagdh
papracchustam katha mimdm
he suta sarvadharmajna
lomaharsana putraka
mkalajfia purdnajna
vada bhdgavatim kathdm
After Sri Suta Gosvami had offered his obeisances to the Supreme
Lord m this manner, the sages at Naimisaranya, headed by Saunaka Rsi,
said: О Suta Gosvami
1 О son of Romaharsana! О knower of religious
principles! О seer of past, present and future! О learned authority of the
Puranas, please continue narrating to us the pastimes of the Supreme
Lord.
Text 6
как kalih kutra va jato
]agatam isvarah prabhuh
katham vd nitya dharmasya
vinasah kalina krtah


A D E S C R I P T I O N OF K A L I - Y U G A
Who is Kali? Where was he born? How did he become the master
of the world? How does he destroy the observance of eternal religious
principles?
Text 7
iti tesam vacah srutva
suto dhyawd hanm prabhum
saharsa pulakodbhmna
sarvangah praha tan munin
After hearing these words of the great sages, Siita Gosvaml became
so ecstatic that the hairs of his body stood on end He then absorbed his
mind in remembrance of Lord Han and continued to speak to the sages
Text 8
suta uvdca
srnudhvam idam dkhyanam
bhavisyam paramadbhutam
kathitam brahmand purvam
ndradaya viprcchate
Suta GosvamI said: Please listen attentively as I describe wonderful
pastimes of the Lord that will be revealed at a future time. These
transcendental pastimes were previously glorified by Lord Brahma, who
was born from the universal lotus flower, when he was> requested to speak
by the great sage, Narada
Text 9
naradah praha munaye
vyasaya amita tejase
sa vyaso nijaputraya
brahmarataya dhimate
Thereafter, Narada repeated what he had heard to the unhmitedly
powerful Srila Vyasadeva, who in turn narrated these topics to his exalted
son, Brahmarata
Text 10
sa cdbhimanyu putrdya
visnurataya samsadi


SRI KALKI PURANA
praha bhagavatan dharmdnn
astadasa sahasrakan
Brahmarata then described these topics of bhagavata-dharma to
Abhimanyu's son, who was known as Visnurata, as he was seated in the
royal assembly This narration consists of eighteen thousand verses
Text 11
tada nrpe lay am prdpte
saptahe prasna sasitam
markandeyadibhih prstah
pi aha punyasrame sukah
After hearing for one week without interruption, the saintly king
relinquished his material body and departed from this world, although
the discussion of the glories of the Lord had not ended. After the passing
away of Abhimanyu's son, great sages, headed by Markandeya, continued
to inquire from Sukadeva GosvamI in that sacred dsrama
Text 12
tatraham tadanu jnatah
srutavanasmi yah kathah
bhavisyah kathaya masa
punya bhagavatih subhah
I was present at that time, and so I heard everything from Sukadeva
GosvamI, by his order I will now narrate to you these most auspicious
pastimes of the Supreme Lord that will take place in the future
Text 13
tarn srnudhvam maha bhagdh
samahta dhiyo'rusam
gate krsne svandayam
pradurbhuto yatha kahh
О greatly fortunate sages, please listen attentively as I describe to you
how Kali appeared in this world after Lord Krsna had returned to His
own abode


A DESCRIPTION OF KALI-YUGA
Text 14
pralayante jagatsrastdh
brahmd loka pitdmahah
sasarja ghoram mahnam
prsthadesdt svapatakam
After the annihilation, the secondary creator of the universe, Lord
Brahma, the grandfather of everyone, who was born on the universal
lotus flower, created Sin personified, having a black complexion, from
his back.
Text 15
sa cardharma iu khyatas
tasya vamsanu kirttanat
sravandt smaranal lokah
sarva pdpaih pramucyate
The name of Sm personified was Adharma By faithfully hearing
about, chanting, and remembering the descendents of Adharma, one
quickly becomes freed from all sinful reactions.
Text 16
adharmasya priyd ramya
mithyd mdrjara locana
tasya putro'atejasvi
dambhah parama kopanah
The wife of Adharma, (Irrehgion), was named Mithya, (Falsehood)
She was very beautiful, and had eyes like those of a cat They had a son
named Dambha, (Pride), who was always very angry and eneigetic
Text 17
sa maydyam bhaginyantu
lobham pntranca kanyakam
nikrtim janaya masa
tayoh kodhah suto'bhavat
Dambha had a sister named Maya, and within her womb, he begot
a son named Lobha, (Greed), and a daughter named Nikrti, (Cunning)
Lobha begot a son named Krodha, (Anger), in the womb of Nikrti


SRI KALKI 
PURANA
Text 18
sa himsayam bhaginyantu
janaya mdsa tarn kahm
vamahasta dhrtopastham
tailabhyaktanjana prabham
Himsa, (Envy), was Krodha's sister. From the womb of Himsa, Krodha
begot a son named Kali. Kali is always seen to be holding his genitals in
his left hand. His complexion is very black, like black ointment that has
been mixed with oil
Text 19
kdkodaram karalasam
lolajihvam bhaydnakam
putigandham dyutamadya
stn suvarna krtasrayam
Kali's abdomen is like that of a crow, his face is frightening to behold,
and his tongue is red and appears to be full of greed. His appearance is
very fearful and a bad smell emanates from his body. Kali is very fond of
playing chess, drinking wine, enjoying the company of prostitutes, and
associating with gold merchants.
Texts 20-21
bhaginyantu duruktyam sa
bhayam putranca kanyakdm
mrtyum sa }anaydmdsa
tayosca nirayo'bhavat
ydtanaydm bhaginyantu
lebhe putrayutayutam
ittham kahkule }dta
vahavo dharma mndakdh
Kali's sister was Durukti, (Harsh Speech). From Durukti's womb,
Kali begot a son named Bhaya, (Fear), and a daughter named, Mrtyu
(Death). Bhaya begot a son named Niraya (Hell) from the womb of Mrtyu
and Niraya begot ten thousand sons in the womb of his sister, Yatana
(Excessive Pain). Thus I have described the destructive progeny of Kali,
who were all blasphemers of genuine religious principles.


A 
D E S C R I P T I O N OF K A L I - Y U G A
Text 22
yajna adhyayanadi dana
veda tantra vinasakdh
adhi vyadhi jardglam
duhkhah soka bhayasrayah
All these relatives of Kali were the destroyers of sacrifice, study of
the Vedas, and charity, because they transgressed all the Vedic principles
of religion. They were reservoirs of mental distress, disease, old age,
destruction of religious principles, sorrow, lamentation, and fear
Texts 23-24
kahraja anugdscerur
yuthaso lokandsakdh
babhuvuh kala vibhrastdh
ksanikdh котика narah
dambhdcara duracaras
tata mdtr vihimsakdh
vedahnd dvijd dinah
sudrasevd parah sada
These descendents of Kali are found wandering everywhere
throughout the kingdom of Kali, destroying the people of the world They
are misguided by the influence of time, very restless by nature, full of
lusty desires, extremely sinful, very proud, and violent even to their own
father and mother Those who are known as twice-born among them are
devoid of all good behavior, without any observance of proper etiquette,
and always engaged in the service of sudras.
Texts 25-27
kutarka vdda vahuld
dharma vikrayino'dhamah
veda vikrayino brdtya
rasa vikrayinas tatha
mamsa vikrayinah krurah
sisnodara parayandh
paradara rata matta
varna sankara karakdh


SRI KALKI 
PURANA
hrsvakarah papasarah
satha matha nwasinah
sodasdbddyusah sydla
bandhavd nicasangamdh
These fallen souls are very fond of dry arguments, and they use
religion as a means of livelihood, teach Vedic knowledge as a profession,
are fallen from the execution of their vows, and sell wine and other
abominable things, including meat. They are cruel by nature, and very
fond of gratifying their bellies and genitals. For this reason, they lust
after the wives of otners and are always seen to be intoxicated They were
not born from a father and mother who were properly married, ?nd they
are short in stature and always engaged in sinful acts, such as cheating
others They generally reside in a sacred place, live for only sixteen years,
associate with wretched people, and only consider a brother-in-law to be
a friend and relative
Text 28
vwada kalaha ksuvdhah
kesa vesa vibhusanah
kalau kuhna dhanmah
pujyd vddardhusikd dvijdh
The people of Kah-yuga are accustomed to quarrelling and fighting
amongst themselves. They go to great lengths to groom their hair, wear
the best of clothes, and decorate themselves with costly ornaments.
Text 29
sanyasino grhasakta
grahasthdstva vihnah
gurumndd para dharma
dhvajinah sadhuvancakdh
In Kah-yuga, a person with a lot of money will naturally be respected
as a great soul. If a twice-born person earns his livelihood by lending
money on interest, he will be considered a pillar of society. The sannydsls
of Kah-yuga will be attached to home and property, and householders will
become devoid of all power of discrimination. In Kah-yuga, people will
blaspheme a spiritual master or other elderly person without hesitation.


A 
D E S C R I P T I O N 
OF 
K A L I - Y I G A
Indeed, people in general will simply become hypocrites, liars, and
cheaters
Texts 30-37
pratigraha ratah sudra
parasva haranadarah
dvayoh svikaram ndvdhah
sathe maitn laddnyata
pratidane ksamd'saktau
virakti karanaksame
vacalatvanca panditye
yasor'the dharma sevanam
dhanadhya tvanca sadhutve
dure rare ca tirthata
sutramatrena viprawam
dandamatrena maskan
alpasasya vasumati
naditire'varopita
stnyo vesyalapa sukhah
wapupmsa tyaktamanasah
paranna lolupa vipras
candala grhayajakdh
stnyo vaidhavya hinasca
svacchanda acarana pn\ah
citravrsa kara megha
mandasasya ca medini
prajabhaksa nrpa lokah
karapida prapiditah
skandhe bharam kare putram
krtva ksuvdhdh prajajanah
giridurgam vanam ghoram
asraMsyann durbhagah


10 
SRI KALKI PURANA
madhu mamscur mulaphalair
aharaih prcma dhannah
etam tu proxhame pade
kaleh krsna vinindakah
In Kah-yuga, sudras will accept charity from others,, or else plunder
others' wealth without discrimination. Mutual agreement will become
the sole criteria for solemnizing the marriage of a boy and girl. People will
show sympathy and magnanimity, but it will simply be a form of duplicity.
Forgiveness will be granted only when a person is unable to harm the
offending party. In a society of might makes right, people will easily
become annoyed with those in a weaker position. Even fools will be very
talkative in an attempt to prove that they are learned. People will engage
in religious ceremonies, but simply to acquire a reputation. If one has got
wealth, he will be considered to be a saint. Just to bathe in a holy place,
people will travel a great distance and undergo much trouble. Simply by
putting on a sacred thread, one will be recognized as a brahmana. Simply
by carrying a staff, one will be recognized as a sannyasl.
The earth will restrict the production of food grains. The currents of
rivers will flow very rapidly, and even married women will behave little
better than prostitutes, because they have practically no attachment for
their husbands. Those who are twice-born will be dependent on others,
so much so that they will not hesitate to engage as priests for sudras.
Women will become promiscuous, so that will be easily abandoned by
their husbands. Clouds will shower ram very irregularly, and the land
will not yield sufficient crops. Kings will whimsically torture and kill
their subjects, and burden them with excessive taxes. Such unfortunate
subjects will finally take their family and belongings and take shelter of
mountains and dense forests. The people of Kah-yuga will sustain their
lives by eatmg flesh, honey, fruit, and roots, without discrimination.
Almost everyone will take pleasure in blaspheming the Supreme Lord,
Sri Krsna These are some of the symptoms that will manifest at the
beginning of Kah-yuga.
Text 38
dvitne tannama hinas
trtiye varna sankarah


A DESCRIPTION OF KAII-YUGA 
11
ekaiarnas caturthe ca
vismrta cyuta satkrnah
In the second quarter of Kali-yuga, people will no longer chant the
holy names of Lord Krsna. In the third quarter of Kali-yuga, there will be
an upsurge of unwanted population, and in the final quarter of Kali-yuga,
there will be only one class of human being, because God consciousness
will have been long forgotten.
Text 39
nihsiadhyaya svadha staha
vausadom kara varjitah
deva sarve mraharah
brahmanam saranam yuyuh
When the study of the Vedas, performance of sacrifice, chanting of
mantras, and other religious practices thus disappear from this world during
Kali-yuga, the demigods, being afflicted due to not receiving their share
of sacrificial offerings, will take shelter of Lord Brahma, the grandfather
of the universe, who was born from the universal lotus flower
Texts 40-43
dhantnm agratah krwa
ksinam dinam manasvinim
dadrsur brahmano lokam
vedadhvani ninaditam
yajriadhumaih samahrnam
munwarya nnevitam
suvarna vedikamadhye
daksinavarttam ujjvalam
vahnim yupankita udyana
vana puspa phalani itam
sarobhih sarasair hamsair
ahvayantam watithim
vayu lola lata jala 
'
kusumah kulakulaih


SRI KALKI 
PURANA
pranamahvana satkara
madhuralapam iksanaih
Keeping mother earth, who had become emaciated due to great
distress in front, all of the demigods went to the abode of Lord Brahma
There, they experienced that the entire atmosphere was surcharged with
the sounds of the chanting of Vedic mantras, and everywhere was smoke
pouring from the sacrificial fires Lord Brahma, the leader of all the sages,
was sitting upon his throne, conducting a fire sacrifice on an altar made
of gold Here and there were many gardens and orchards full of flowers,
fruit, and wood for performing fire sacrifices. Swans, cranes, and other
aquatic birds made wonderful sounds, as if they were greeting their guests
with joy The swans, cranes, and other aquatic birds were surrounded
b-y intoxicated bumblebees hovering around innumerable creepers and
flowers, swinging to and fro in the cool breeze Thus, it appeared as if they
were all offering obeisances and speaking very sweetly while greeting
their guests with great pleasure
Text 44
tad brahma sadanam devah
sesvarah khnnamanasah
vwisustadanujfxata
nijakaryam nweditum
Thus, all the demigods, headed by Indra, arrived in the abode of
Lord Brahma in a distressed state of mind By the order of Prajapati, they
entered the assembly hall of Lord Brahma, so that they could disclose to
him to cause of their grief
Text 45
tnbhuvana janakam soda
sanastham sanaka wnandana
sanatanaisca siddhaih
panseuta pada kamalam
brahmanam detata nemuh
The demigods first offered their respectful obeisances to Lord Brahma,
whose lotus feet were being served by perfected beings such as Sanaka,
Sanandana, and Sanatana as he sat in meditation Lord Brahma is the


A 
D E S C R I P T I O N 
OF K A L I - Y L G A 
П
secondary creator of the three worlds who acts under the direction of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead
Thus ends the translation of the first chapter of Sri Kalki Pin ana


C H A P T F R 
T V\ О
The Birth and Sacred Thread Ceremony of Lord Kalki
Text 1
suta utaca
upaustas tato deia
brahmano vacanat purah
kalerdosad dharma hanim
katha^a ma swadarat
Suta Goswamt said Thereafter, by the order of Lord Brahma, all the
demigods sat in front of him and then explained how the observance of
rehgious principles was declining at an alarming rate in Kali yuga
Text 2
deianam tadvacah srutia
brahma tanaha duhkhitan
pi asadayitva tarn usnum
sadhayisyami abhipsitam
After hearing their words saturated with anguish, Lord Brahma said
Let us all approach Lord Visnu We should please Him with our prayers
so that He may act for our welfare
Text 3
m devaihpariirto
gatia goloka tasinam
stutva praha puro brahma
deianam hdayepsitam
After saying this, Lord Brahma took all the demigods and went to the
abode of Lord Han known as Goloka There, he offered prayers to the
Supreme Lord, informing Him ot the plight of the demigods
Text 4
tacchrutia pundankakbo
hiahmanam idam at rant


T H E BIRTH AND SACRED THREAD CEREMONY OF LORD KALKI 
15
sambhale i isnuyasaso
grhe pradurbhabamyaham.
sumatyam matan vibho '
kanyayam ttannidesatah
After hearing everything in detail, lotus eyed Lord Han said О
Brahma, rest assured that I will soon descend to the earth and appear
in the village known as Sambhala I will take birth in the house of a
hrahmana named Visnuyasa, from the womb of his wife, Sumati
Text 5
caturbhir bhratrbhir deia
kansyami kahksayam
bhaianto bandhava deiah
svamsena aiatansyatha
My mission will be to eliminate the wicked Kali, with the help of My
four brothers О demigods, your expansions should also take birth on the
earth to assist Me in My mission
Text 6
lyam mama pnya laksmih
simhale sambhausyati
brhadrathasya bhupasya
kaumudyam kamaleksana
bharyyayam mama bharyaisa
padma namra jamsyati
My consort, the beloved lotus eyed Kamala devi, will also appear on
the earth, having the name Padma She will be born from the womb of
Kaumudi, the wife of Brhadratha, the king of Simhala
Text 7
yata yuyam bhuiam dtiah
stamsai atarane rntah
rajawau mum deiapi
sthapayisyami aham bhun


16 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
0 demigods, you should not delay. By your plenary portions, take
birth on the earth Later on, 1 will entrust the responsibility for ruling the
earth to two powerful kings named Maru and Devapl.
Text 8
punah kratayugam krtta
dharmdn samsthapya purvavat
kalwyalam sanmrasya
prayasye svalayarn vibhoh
1 will then again establish Satya-yuga, and thus reinstate the principles
of religion as they were before. Rest assured that I will return to Vaikuntha
only after destroying the poisonous snake, Kali.
Text 9
ityud intam akarnya
brahma devaganair vrtah
)agama brahmasadanam
devasca tndevam yuyuh
After Lord Han assured the demigods in this way, Lord Brahma,
surrounded by the other demigods, departed for his own abode. From
there, the demigods returned to their respective abodes.
Text 10
rnahimna svasya bhagavan
nija janma krtodyamah
viprarse sambhala gramam
abnesa paratmakah
О greatly powerful brahmana, thereafter, with a desire to make
His appearance within this world in a humanlike form by His own
transcendental potency, the Supreme Lord, Han, the Supersoul within
the heart of everyone, entered the village of Sambhala.
Text 11
sumutyam visnuyasasa
garbhamadhatta vaisnam
graha naksatra rasyadi
sevita sn padambujam


Тнь 
BIRTH AND SACRED THREAD CEREMONY OF LORD KALKI 
17
Meanwhile, in due course of time, Visnuyasa's wife, Sumati, became
pregnant so that all auspicious symptoms began to appear in her body.
Thereafter, all the presiding deities of the planets, stars, and constellations
began serving the lotus feet of the child within her womb.
Text 12
sant samudra girayo lokah
samsthanu jangamah
saharsa rsayo deva
jate visnau jagatpatau
On an auspicious day and at an auspicious time, Lord Han, the master
of the universe, took birth withm this world. At this time, all the lakes,
rivers, oceans, mountains, demigods, and sages, and indeed all moving
and non-moving living entitieo, became filled with ecstasy.
Texts 13-14
babhuvah sai vasawanam
ananda vwidhasrayah
nrtyanti pitaro hrstds
tusta devd jaguryabah
cakrur vadyani gandhana
nanrtuscapa saroganah
Every living being began to display symptoms of happiness upon the
appearance of the Supreme Lord. The forefathers danced in ecstasy, the
demigods sang the glories of Lord Han, the Gandharvas plaved musical
instruments, and Apsaras danced with great jubilation,
Text 15
dvadasyam шк1а paksasya
madhabe masi mddhavah
jdte dadrsaiuh putram
pitarau hrstamanasau
In this setting, Lord Han incarnated within this world in His form
as Kalki on the twelfth day during the fortnight of the waxing moon in
the month of Vais'akha Upon seeing the beautiful bab\, the hearts of
Visnuyas'a and Sumati became filled with great happiness.


18 
SRI KALKI PURANA
Text 16
dhdtri matd mahdsasthi
ndbhicchctri tadamvikd
gangodaka kleda moksd
sdvitri mdrjanodyatd
When Lord Kalki appeared, Mahasasthl was His nurse, Ambika cut
His umbilical cord, and Savitrl cleansed His body with water from the
Ganges.
Text 17
tasya visnor anantasya
vasudhd'dhdt payahsudhdm
mdtrkd mdngalya vacah
krsna janma dine yathd
On the auspicious day of Lord Kalki's advent, mother earth showered
nectar in the form of an abundance of milk, and the elderly ladies blessed
the child with auspicious words.
Texts 18-19
brahmd tadupddhdr ydsu
svdsugarh prdbu sevakam
ydhni mtikd gdrarh
gawd visnurh prabodhaya
caturbhujam idarh ruparh
devdndm api durlabham
tyaktvd mdnusa vad ruparh
kuru ndtha vicdritam
Lord Brahma, who knew the mystery of the Lord's appearance, hastily
called for his servant, Pavana, and told him to immediately go to the
maternity home and offer the following prayer to Lord Visnu: О Lord,
please consider how this four-armed form of Yours is rarely seen, even by
the demigods. Please assume a two-armed form like that of a human being
and then carry out Your mission.
Text 20
iti brahma vacah sruwd
pavanah surabhi sukham


THE BIRTH AND SACRED THREAD CEREMONY OF LORD KALKI
sasitih prdha tarasd
brahmano vacanadrtah
Without delay, Pavana-deva, whose cooling body has a very pleasing
aroma, went to the maternity room of Lord Kalki and submitted Brahma'.s
appeal.
Text 21
tacchrtva pundarikaksas
tat ksanat dvibhujo'bhavat
taddt tat pitarau druva
vismayd panna manasau
When the lotus-eyed Lord heard this request, He immediately
assumed a two-armed form. His father and mother were certainly struck
with wonder upon seeing this wonderful pastime of the Lord.
Text 22
bhrama samskdra vattatra
menate tasya mdyayd
tatastu sambhala grdme
sutsavd jivajdtayah
mangaldcdra babhuldh
pdpatdpa vivarjitdh
The parents could not understand the actual truth regarding their
son because of being bewildered by the Lord's yogamaya potency. They
considered that their vision of the Lord's four-armed form had been
a hallucination, and that all along they had witnessed His two-armed
form. Thereafter, all the inhabitants of Sambhala celebrated the Lord's
appearance by performing auspicious rituals, completely forgetful of their
material miseries.
Text 23
sumatistarh sutarh labdhva
vimurh jisnurh jagatpatmi
purnakdmd vipra mukhyan
dhuydddt mvam satam


20 
S R I K A L K I 
P U R A N A
Having received the all-glorious Lord Visnu, the master of the three
worlds, as her son, mother Sumati's happiness knew no bounds. She
invited the brahmanas and gave them each one hundred cows in chanty.
Text 24
hareh kalyanakrd nsnu
yasah suddhena cetasa
samarg yajur vidbhir
agrayais tannama karane ratah
For the welfare of his child, the pure-hearted Visnuyas'a invited many
brahmanas that were expert in reciting the Rg Veda, Yajur Veda, and Sama
Veda, and had them perform the child's name-giving ceremony.
Text 25
tada ramah krpo ьу aso
draumr bhksu sannnah
samdyata hanm drstam
bdlakatvam upagatam
At that time, Lord Rama, Krpacarya, Vyasadeva, and Asvattama
came there in the guise of brahmanas to have the darsana of Lord Han,
who has assumed the form of child Kalki.
Text 26
tanagatan samdlokya
caturah surya sanmbhan
hrstaroma dvijavarah
pujayancakra isvaran
As Visnuyasa, the foremost of brahmanas, gazed upon those four
exalted brahmanas whose effulgence was equal to that of the sun-god, his
hair stood on end. He then worshiped these four exalted personalities,
offering them nice prayers
Text 27
pujitaste svasanesu
samvistah svasukhasrayah
hanm kodagatam ta*ya
dadnuh sarva murttayah


THE BIRTH AND SACRED THREAD CEREMONY OF LORD KALKI 
21
After bemg worshiped by Visnuyasa, these four who were disguised as
brahmanas, who could indeed assume any form at will, sat at ease m their
respective places. While seated, they gazed at child Kalki as He was seated
upon the lap of His father
Text 28
tarn bdlakam nardkaram
visnum nawd mumsvarah
kalki kalka vindsartham
dvirbhutam vidurbudhah
The four exalted brahmanas offered their obeisances unto Lord Visnu,
who had assumed the form of a human being. They very well understood
that Lord Kalki had appeared to rid the earth of all those who had become
degraded to the level of sinful demons.
Text 29
ndma kurvams tatastasya
kalki ntya bhwisrutam
krtvd samskara karmani
yayuste hrstamdnasah
The four exalted brahmanas named the transcendental child Kalki.
They happily performed the child's birth ceremony and then departed for
their own abodes.
Text 30
tatah sa bavrdhe tatra
sumatya panpdhtah
kdlenalpe kamsdnh
suklapakse yatha sasi
Thereafter, as the moon in the fortnight of the waxing moon increases
day by day, Lord Kalki grew up under the care of His affectionate mother,
oumati Within a very short time, the Lord grew up to become a voung
boy.
Text 31
kalker yesthastrayah surah
kaviprajna sumantrakah


SRI KALKI 
PURANA
pitrmatr pnyakara
guru vipra pratisthitah
Before Lord Kalki's birth, three sons were born to Sumati, named
Kavi, Prajna, and Sumantra All of them were heroic warriors who always
acted for the pleasure of their spiritual master and their parents. They
were highly praised by all elderly respectable people and hrahmanas
Text 32
kalkeramsah purojatah
sadhavo dharmatatparah
gargya bhagya visdladya
jnatayas tadanuvratah
Great saintly persons like Gargamum, Bhagya, and Vis'ala had also
appeared in the family of Lord Kalki All of them were parts and parcels
of Kalki, and His obedient servants.
Text 33
visakhay upa bhupala
pahtas tapavarjitah
brahmandh kalkim alokya
рахат pritim upagatah
These exalted personalities were maintained by the king, who was
named Visakhaupa. After having the darsana of Lord Kalki, all these
brahmanas felt jubilant and relieved of all material miseries.
Texts 34-35
tato visnuyasdh putram
dhiram sarva gundkaram
kalkim kamala patraksam
provaca pathanadrtam
tata te brакта samskaiam
yajnasutram anuttamam
savitnm vdcayisyami
tato vedan pathisyasi
After some time, when Visnuyasa saw that his lotus-eyed child, Kalki,
who was a reservoir of transcendental qualities, was ready to begin His


T H E BIRTH AND SACRED THRFAD CEREMONY OF LORD KALKI 
23
education, he called him and spoke with a gentle voice. My dear child, I
will now arrange for Your sacred thread ceremony so that you can chant
the Gayatri mantras and begin Your study of the Vedas
Text 36
kalkiruvaca
ко vedahka ca sautn
kena sutrena samskratah
brahmana vukta loke
tat tattvam vada tdta mama
Lord Kalki said: My dear father, what are the Vedas
1 What are the
Gayatri mantras
1. How is it that one can become a brahmana simply by
undergoing some ritual and putting on a thread? Please describe all this
truthfully.
Text 37
pitovaca vedo harervak
savitn vedamata pratisthita
tngunanca trwrt sutram
tena viprdh pratisthitah
Visnuyas'a said: My dear son, the words of the Supreme Lord constitute
the Vedas, and the Savitrl, or Gayatri, mantras are the mother of the
Vedas. The sacred thread represents the three modes of material nature,
which are controlled by the Supreme Brahman. When a brahmana wears
his sacred thread, he becomes highly respected within society.
Text 38
dasayajnaih samskrta ye
brahmana brahma vadinah
tatra tedasca lokanam
trayanam iha posakah
Brahmanas who have duly undergone the ten samskaras and have
studied the four Vedas thoroughly are qualified to protect the principles
of the Vedas.
Text 39
yajnadhyayana danadi
tapah svadhyaya samyamaih


24 
SRI KALKI PIRANA
pnnayanti hanm bhaktya
bedatantra vidhanatah
Only brahmanas can please Lord Han by their unshakable faith and
devotion They study the Vedas, perform fire sacrifices, give charity,
undergo penance, and carefully control their senses
Text 40
tasmat yathopanayana
karmane'ham dvyaih'saha
bamskarttum bandhava janais
wamicchami subhe dine
Therefore, on an auspicious day, I would like to invite all my relatives, as
well as qualified brahmanas, and perform Your sacred thread ceremony
Text 41
putra uvaca
ke ca te dasa samskara
brahmanesu pratisthitah
brahmanah kena va visnum
arcayanti vidhanatah
Lord Kalki said: My dear father, what are the ten samskaras, which by
observing a brahmana becomes highly regarded in society
7 Tell Me how a
brahmana engages in the worship of Lord Visnu.
Texts 42-43
pitovaca
brahmanayam brahmanajjato
garbhadhanadi samskrtah
sandhya trayena savitn
рща japa parayanah
tapasvi satyaian dhiro
dharmatma trati samsrtim
visnavarcanam idam jnawa
sadananda mayo dvijah
Visnuyasa said One who is born of brahmana parents who had
observed the garbhadhana samskara, worship the Supreme Lord according


THE BIRTH AND SACRED THREAD CEREMONY OF LORD KALKI 
25
to the prescribed rules and regulations, chant the Gayatrl mantra three
times a day, undergo austerities, always speak truthfully, and are patient,
will happily rise above the modes of material nature and thus be able to
deliver other living entities from the ocean of material existence
Text 44
putra uvaca
kutraste sa dvijo yena
tarayati akhilam jagat
sanmargena hanm pnnan
kamadondhd jagattraye
Lord Kalki said. Where can that brahmana be found who pleases
Lord Visnu by following the path of devotional service, who works for the
welfare of all living entities within the three worlds, and who is capable
of delivering all the people of the world7
Text 45
pitovaca
kahnd balmd dharma
ghatina dvija patina
mrdkrata dharmarata
gata varsan tarantaram
Visnuyasa said: At present, the pious brahmanas have left this country
(India), having been chastised by the powerful Kali, who is envious of
saintly persons, and who destroys the practice of religious principles
Texts 46-47
ye svalpa tapaso viprah
sthitdh kahyugantare
sisnodara bhrto'dharma
nirata virataknyah
pdpasard duracaras
tephinah kalaviha
dtmanam raksitum naiva
saktdh sudrasya sevakah


26 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
Only those brahmanas who have not become very powerful as a result
of their performance of austerity are still under the control of Kali. They
are simpl-y engaged in eating, sleeping, enjoying sex, and acting sinfully
m other ways, thus avoiding their duty to perform the Vedic rituals. Such
brahmanas are sinful and powerless because they whimsically engage
in the service of sudras. Thus, they are completely unable to protect
themselves from the influence of Kali.
Text 48
iti janaka vaco nisamya kalkih
kahkula nasa mano'bhilasajanma
dvija nija vacanais tadopanito
gurukula vasam uvasa sadhunarthah
When Lord Kalki, the maintainer of the devotees, who had taken
birth with a desire to destroy the influence of Kah-yuga, heard these
words of his father, he underwent the sacred thread ceremony and then
left home to live at the asrama of His guru
Thus ends the translation of the second chapter of Sri Kalki Purana


C H A P T E R 
T H R F P
Lord Kalki Receives Benedictions From Lord Siva and Parvati
Text 1
suta uvdca
tato vastum gurukule
yantam kalkim ninksya sah
mahendradn sthito ramah
samaniya asramam prabhuh
Suta Gosvami said: Thereafter, Lord Kalki went to live at the gurukula.
Upon seeing Him approach, the greatly powerful Parasuiama, who lives
at Mount Mahendra, took Him to His asrama.
Text 2
praha warn pdthayisyami
gurum mam viddhi dharmatah
bhrguvamsa samutpannam
jamadagnyam mahdprabhum
Lord Parasurama said: My dear child, I will act as Your teacher and
so You may treat me as Your acarya. I am the son of the greatly powerful
sage, Jamadagm, and thus I belong to the Bhrgu dynasty
Texts 3-4
veda vedanga tattavajnam
dhanurveda visdradam
krtva mhksatnyam prthx im
dattva viprdya daksindm
mahendradrau tapastaptum
agato'ham dvydtmaja
warn pathatra пцат vedam
yaccanyacchastram uttamam
I am well-versed in the four Vedas, the literature dealing with
grammar, and the six branches of the Vedas. I am very expert in the art
of shooting arrows. Previously, I made the entire earth devoid of ksatrnas


28 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
and then gave the southern portion of the country to the brdhmanas
Thereafter, I went to Mount Mahendra to perform austerities О son of a
brahmana, you may stay here and study whatever scriptures you like
Text 5
itt tadvaca trprasrutya
samprahrsta tanuruhah
kalkih puro namaskrtya
vedadhm tato'bhavat
Suta GosvamI said: Upon hearing these words of Parasurama, Kalki
became very pleased and immediately offered His respectful obesiances
to Him Thereafter, He began to study the Vedas under the direction of
his spiritual master.
Text 6
sangam catuhsastikalam
dhanurveda ddi kanca yat
samadhitya jamadaghyat
kalkih praha kratanjahh
Kalki mastered the sixty-four arts under the tutelage of the son of
Jamadagni. He also learned the Vedas, the branches of the Vedas, the
Dhanurveda., and other departments of knowledge. Thereafter, He folded
His hands and spoke to His guru as follows.
Text 7
daksinam prarthaya vibho
ya deya tava sanmdhau
yayd me sarva siddhhsyad
ya syat tvattosa kdnni
Lord Kalki said: О my Lord, please tell me what kind of daksina I
should give You so that You will be pleased, and I will thus be able to
achieve complete perfection in life.
Text 8
rdma uvaca
brahmana prdrthito bhumana
kali nigraha karanat


B E N E D I C T I O N S 
F R O M 
L O R D SIVA 
AND P A R V A T I 
29
visnuh sarvasrayah pumah
sa jdtah sambhale bhavan
Parasurama said: О great soul! Long ago, Brahma prayed to Lord
Visnu, the shelter of all living entities and the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, to destroy the influence of Kali. I understand that You are that
same Supreme Personality, appearing in the village of Sambhala.
Text 9
matto vidyam swadastiam
labdhva vedamayam sukam
simhale ca priyam padmam
dharman samsthdpayisyasi
You have learned the art of discharging arrows from Me. You will
imbibe transcendental knowledge from Sukadeva Gosvami, and You will
be awarded a powerful weapon by Lord Siva. Thereafter, You will marry
a woman named Padma from the island of Simhala Your mission is to re-
establish sanatana-dharma.
Text 10
tato digvijaye bhupan
dharmahinan kahpriyan
nigrhya bauddhdn devdpim
marunca sthapayissyasi
Thereafter, You will set out to conquer the entire world and in
the course of that conquest, You will defeat many sinful kings who
are representatives of Kali. You will also annihilate many followers of
Buddhism and finally, You will entrust the responsibility ot ruling the
world to Devapi and Maru
Text 11
vayame taistu santustah
sddhukrtycuh sadaksinah
ущпат danam tapah karma
kansyamo yathocitam
1 am fully satisfied just to know that You will perform these pastimes
and so there is no need for any other daksina When the principles of


30 
S R I K A L K I P T J R A N A
leligion are re-established, then people will perform sacrifice, give chanty,
and undergo austerity without impediment.
Text 12
ityetat vacanam sruti a
namaskratya munim gurum
viltoda kesvaram devam
gatva tubtava sankaram
After hearing these words of Paras'urama and offering him obeisances
three times, Lord Kalki, the master of the demigods, approached Lord
Mahadeva and began to offer him prayers.
Text 13
pujayitva yathanyayam
swam sdntam mahesvaram
pranipatyasu tosam tarn
dhyatvd praha hrdi sthitam
After offering His respectful obeisances to Lord Siva, who is very
easily pleased, and worshiping him with devotion, Lord Kalki began to
speak, keeping His mind fully under control.
Text 14
kalkiruvaca
gaunnatham visvanatham
samnayam bhutavasam
vasuki kanthabhusam tryaksam
pancasyddi devam puranam
vande sandrananda sandohadaksam
Lord Kalki said: О Lord Sankara, you are the oldest of all, the husband
of Gaun, the lord of the universe, the only protector of the living entities,
and the shelter of everyone. Your neck is decorated with the serpent,
Vabuki, you have three eyes and five heads, you are always absorbed in
transcendental ecstasy, and you award liberation to your devotees I offer
my obeisances unto you
Text 15
yogadhisam kamanasam
karalam ganga sangaklinna


BENEDICTIONS FROM LORD SIVA AND PARVATI
murddhanarnisam jatajutato
panksipta bhavam mahakalavn
tandrabhalam namami
You are the lord of mystic yoga and the destroyer of lusty desires.
Your form is fearful to behold, your head is always wet with the water of
the Ganges, the matted hair on your head looks most enchanting, your
forehead is decorated with a mark of the half moon, and you are the
personification of maha-kala. I offer my obeisances unto you.
Texts 16-17
smasdnastham bhutavetala sangam
папа sastraih khadaga suladibhisca
vyagrat yugra vahavo lokandse
yasya krodhad dhataloko'stameti
vo bhutadih panca bhutaih
sisrksuh tanmatratma kalakarma
svabhavaih prahrtyedam prap^a
jwawamiso brahmanando
ramate tarn namami
You frequent crematoriums in the company of ghosts and hobgoblins,
and you carry a trident and other weapons in your hands At the time
of annihilation, the entire creation is burnt to ashes by the blazing fire
emanating from your anger. The conditioned souls are born in this world
under the influence of false ego, and their bodies are made of the five
gross material elements. You are the lord of the mode of ignorance, and
thus you are one of the directors of the material universe Although you
are involved in universal affairs, you always remain aloof from material
association as you remain absorbed in transcendental ecstasy 1 offer my
obeisances unto you
Text 18
sthitau iisnuh sanajisnuh
suratma lokan sadhun
dharmasetun vibharsi
brahmadyase ^o'bhimam


32 
SRI KALKI PURANA
gundtma savdadyangaistam
paresam bhajdmi
I worship Lord Siva, the protector of the universe and the Supersoul of
all living entities He is always victorious, being a qualitative incarnation
of Lord Visnu, and He delivers saintly persons by protecting the principles
of religion. He is the personification of transcendental sound, a reservoir
of divine qualities, and the possessor of great intelligence.
Text 19
yasyd]ndyd vayavo vanti
loke jvalatyagnih savita yati
tapyan sitamsuh khe tdrakaih
sagrahmsca pravarttate
tarn paresam prapadye
By your order the wind blows, fire burns, the sun distributes heat
and light, and the moon, planets and stars illuminate the sky. I offer my
obeisances unto you.
Text 20
yasyasvdsat sarvadhatn dhantn
devo varsat yambu kalah pramata
merurmadhye bhuvanandnca bharttd
tamisanam visvarupam namdrra
B\ your order, the earth sustains all moving and non moving entities,
Indra showers ram, the time factor divides the duties of everyone, and
Mount Sumeru, which is the shelter of the universe, remains fixed at the
center I offer my humble obeisances to the universal form of Lord Siva.
Text 21
iti kalkistavam srutia
suvah sarvatma darsanah
saksdt prdha isannisah
parvati sahito'gratah
After hearing these prayers, Lord Siva, being omniscient, appeared
before Lord Kalki with Parvati and spoke to Him while smiling grandly.


B E N E D I C T I O N S 
F R O M 
L O R D SIVA 
AND P A R V A T I 
33
Text 22
kalkeh samsprsya hastena
samasta vayavam muda
tamdha varaya prestha
varam yatte'bhi kdmksitam
Lord Siva caressed the entire body of Lord Kalki with his hands and
then said: О foremost of all beings, please ask from me the benediction
You desire.
Text 23
waya krtamidam. stotram
ye pathanti jana bhuvi
tesdm sarvartha siddhhsya
adiha loke paratra ca
Anyone on this earth who faithfully hears the glorious prayers that
you have offered me will achieve all kinds of perfection, both in this life
and in the next.
Text 24
vidydrthim capnuydd vidydm
dharmdrthim dharmam apruyat
kamdn avapnuyat kdnx'
pathanat srvanddapi
If a student recites these prayers, his education will become fruitful,
if a pious person recites these prayers, he will attain pious merit, and
if a sense enjoyer recites these prayers, he will enjoy all kinds of sense
gratification. Anyone who recites or hears these prayers will have all his
desires fulfilled.
Text 25
warn gdrudam ida casvam
kamagam bahurnpnvxm
sukamenanca sarvajfiam
maya dattam grhana bhoh
This horse was manifested from Garuda, and it can go anywhere at
will and assume many different forms. Here also is a parrot that knows


34 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
everything—past, present, and future. I would like to offer You both the
horse and the parrot and so please accept them
Text 26
sanasastrastra vidvamsam
sanavedartha paragam
jayinam sarvabhutanam
warn vadisyanti manavah
By the influence of this horse and parrot, the people of the world will
know You as a learned scholar of all scriptures who is a master of the art
of releasing arrows, and thus the conqueror of all.
Text 27
ratnat sarum kardlanca
karavala mahaprabham
grhana gurubharayah
prthwya bhdra sadhanam
I would also like to present You this sharp, strong sword and so please
accept it. The handle of this sword is bedecked with jewels, and it is
extremely powerful. As such, this sword will help You to reduce the heavy
burden of the earth.
Text 28
m vaca dsrutya
namaskratya mahesvaram
sambhala grama gamat
turagena tvararwitah
After hearing all this, Lord Kalki offered His obeisances and then
departed for the village of Sambhala, riding on the back of the horse
given by Lord Siva.
Text 29
pitaram mataram bhratan
namaskrtya yathavidhi
sarvam tadvarnayd masa
jamadagnyasya bhasitam


B E N E D I C T I O N S 
F R O M 
L O R D 
S I V A 
AND 
P A R V A T I
Upon arriving home, Lord Kalki offered his respectful obeisances
to His father, mother, and brothers. He then narrated whatever had
happened and told them about the orders of His guru, Paras'urama
Text 30
snasya varadananca
kathayuva subhah kathah
kalkih paramatejasvi
jrxatibhyo'py avadan muda
The unhmitedly powerful Lord Kalki also described the benedictions
He had received from Mahadeva. Thereafter, the Lord happily met the
other brahmanas of the village and also informed them of all that had
transpired.
Text 31
gargya bhargya visalad
yasta cchrutva nanditah sthitah
kathopa kathanam jatam
sambhala gramavasinam
When great personalities, such as Gargya, Bhargya, and Visala heard
about these pastimes of Lord Kalki, they became extremely pleased.
From that time onwards, the inhabitants of Sambhala simply absorbed
themselves in repeatedly hearing and chanting the glories of Lord Kalki.
Text 32
visakha yupa bhupalah
srutva tesanca bhasitam
prddurbhavam harermene
kalmigraha kaiakam
King VisakhayOpa also came to hear these w-onderful discussions of
Lord Kalki and thus he became convinced that the Supreme Lord Han
had incarnated in this world to destroy the influence of Kah-yuga.
Text 33
mdhismatyam mjapure
yagadana tapobratan


36 
SRI 
KALKI 
P U R A N A
brahmanan ksatnyan vaisyan
sudrdnapi hareh pnydn
King Visakhayupa could see that the people of his capital, Mahismati,
including the brahmanas, ksatnyas, vaisyas and sudras, had suddenly
experienced a change of heart so that they were now performing sacrifices,
giving chanty, and undergoing austerities.
Text 34
svadharma niratdn drstava
dharmastho'bhunnrpah svayam
prajapalah suddhamanah
pradur bhavdcchnyah pateh
Due to the influence of the incarnation of the Supreme Lord, the
husband of goddess LaksmI, everyone in the capital became a follower of
religious principles The king also became pious, so that he maintained
his subjects with a pure heart.
Text 35
adharma vamsyastan drstvd
janan dharma hyapardn
lobha nrtddayo jagmus
tadesat duhkhitdn bhrsam
Those who had been born in sinful families also became inclined to
executing religious principles. When the greedy, wretched people who
were totally devoid of truthfulness, being servants of Kali, saw this change
of heart, they became very unhappy and left the country.
Text 36
jattram turaga mdruhya
khadaganca vimalaprabham
damsitah sasaram cdpam
grahitvagat puradvahih
Thereafter, Lord Kalki picked up His brightly shining trident and
bow and arrows and set out from His palace, riding upon His victorious
horse and wearing His amulet.


B E N E D I C T I O N S 
F R O M L O R D 
S I V A 
AND P A R V A T I 
37
Text 37
visakhayupa bhupalah
prdydt sadhujana priyah
kalkim drastum hareram sa
mavirbhutanca sambhak
When the king of that country, Visakhayupa, who was very dear to
saintly persons, realized that Lord Kalki, the incarnation of the Supreme
Lord, Han, had appeared, he went to see Him
Texts 38-39
kavim prajnam sumantunca
puraskratya mahdprabham
gargya bhargya visalaisca
jndtibhih parwantam
visakhayupo dadrse
candram taraganairwa
purddvahih surmr yadvad
indramuccaih sravahsthitam
The king saw that, just as Indra, the king of heaven, rides on the back
of his horse, Uccahisrava, in the midst of the demigods, and as the moon
is surrounded by all the stars, Lord Kalki was seated on the back of His
horse, surrounded by many greatly intelligent and powerful personalities,
including Sumanta, Gargya, Bhargya, and Visala.
Text 40
visakhay upo' vanatah
samprahrasta tanuruhah
kalkeralo kanat sadyah
pumdtmam vaisnavo'bhavat
As soon as King Visakhayupa saw Lord Kalki, he became stunned in
ecstasy and the hairs of his body stood on end. He offered his obeisances
to Lord Kalki so that by His mercy, the king became a devotee of the
Lord.


38 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
Text 41
saha raina vasan kalkih
dharmdndha puroditdn
brahmana ksatnya visdma
asramanam samdsatah
Lord Kalki lived with King Visakhayupa for some time In the course
of his stay, Lord Kalki briefly described to the king the principles of four
varnas and four ctsramas.
Text 42
mamdmsan kali vibhrastan
iti majjanma sangatan
raja suydsca asvamedhdbhyam
mam yajasva samdhitah
(Lord Kalki said:) Many pious human beings have become degraded
in this age of Kali. But because of My presence, they will all become
pious once again. Now I would like that all of you worship Me by the
performance of a Rajasuya sacrifice and a horse sacrifice.
Text 43
ahameva paroloko
dharmascdham sandtanah
kala svabhdva samskdrah
karmanu gatayo mama
I am the supreme destination for everyone. I am the objective of
eternal religious principles. Religion, sin, destiny, the time factor, nature,
deeds, and samskaras are My followers.
Text 44
soma suryakule jatau
devdpi marusamjhakau
sthdpayitvd kratayugam
krtvd yasydmi sadvatim
I will install King Devapi of the Candra dynasty and King Maru
of the Surya dynasty upon the throne to rule the world, and after
the commencement of Satya-yuga, I will return to My own abode,
Vaikuntha.


B E N E D I C T I O N S 
F R O M 
L O R D 
SIVA 
A N D P A R V A T I 
39
Text 45
iti tadvacanam sratva raja
kalkim hanm prabhum
pranamya prdha saddharman
vaisnavdn manasepsitdn
After hearing this, King Vis'akhayupa offered his respectful obeisances
to Lord Kalki and then further inquired about Vaisnava dharma from
Him.
Text 46
iti nrpavacanavn nisamya kalhh
kahkula ndsana vasanuvatarah
пщапа pansad vinodakdn
madhura vacobhirdha sadhurdharman
After hearing the king's inquiries, the Supreme Lord, Kalki, who had
incarnated to destroy the dynasty of Kali, began to speak very sweetly
about the religious principles that are followed by saintly persons, just for
the pleasure of His servants.
Thus ends the translation of the third chapter of Sri Kalki Purana.


C H A P T E R 
F O U R
Padmavati Receives a Benediction From Lord Siva
Text 1
suta uvaca
tatah kalkih sabha madhye
rajamdno raviryathd
iabha.se tarn nrpam dharma
mayo dharman dvijapriyan
Suta GosvamI said: О great sages, thereafter, the Supreme Lord, Kalki,
who is the personification of religious principles, described to the king
the duties of brahmanas while sitting in the royal assembly, appearing just
like a brilliant sun.
Text 2
kalkiruvaca
kdlena brahmano nase
pralaye mayi sangata
ahameva samevdgre
ndnyat kdryamidam mama
Lord Kalki said: When the final dissolution of the universe will take
place, everyone, even Lord Brahma, will be annihilated. At that time, the
entire universe will become merged within Me. In the beginning, only I
existed, and thereafter, all living entities and elements emanated from
Me.
Text3
prasupta loka tantrasya
dvata hinasya catmanah
mahdnisdnte rantum me
samudbhuto virat prabhuh
After the final dissolution, the entire universe remained unmanifest
and there was no one except the Supersoul. Then, at the end of that long
and dark night, I manifested My universal form in order to enact the
pastime of material creation


P A D M A V A T I 
R l C E l V E S 
A 
B E N E D I C T I O N 
F R O M 
L O R D 
S l V A 
4 1
Text 4
sahasrasirsa purusah
sahasraksah sahasrapat
tadangajo'bhavat brahma
vedaiakro vnahaprabhuh
That universal form of Mine has thousands of heads, thousands of
eyes, and thousands of legs. From the mouth of the universal form came
the supremely powerful Brahma, who spoke the four Vedas
Texts 5-6
nvopadher mamamsacca
prakrtya mayaya svaya
brahmopahih sa sarvajno
mama vagveda sasitah
sasarja /ivajataru
kalamayasa yogatah
deid manvadayo lokah
sapraja payah prabhuh
In accordance with My order, which is as good as the Vedas, the
omniscient Brahma began his work of creating the living entities, who
are My separated parts and parcels, as well as the time factor, and the
planetary systems In the beginning, Brahma created the progenitors,
Manus, demigods, and human beings
Text 7
guninya mayayamsa me
nanopadhau sasarjire
sopadhaya ime loka
deva sasthanu jangamah
Although all of them are My parts and parcels, they engage in different
kinds of activities by the arrangement of may a, under the dictation ot the
three modes of material nature As a result, all moving and non-moving
living entities are materially designated.


42 
SRI KALKI 
P D R A N A
Text 8
mamamsd may ay a srsta
yato mayyavisan laye
eiam vidha brahmana ye
macchanra madatmikah
All mo\ ing and non-moving living entities are My separated parts
and parcels, although they appear to be products of mdyd. At the end,
everyone will merge into Me. The brahmanas and other members of the
social order are just like parts of My body.
Text 9
mamuddharanti bhuvane
yajna dhyana satkiydh
mam prasevanti samsanti
tapo dana kiyasviha
The brahmanas always worship Me by the performance of devotional
activities, such as sacrifice, study of the Vedas, undergoing austerities,
and giving chanty.
Text 10
smaranti amodayanty eva
nanye devadayas tatha
brahmana vedavaktdro
vedd me murttayah pardh
The twice-born devotees who preach the purport of the Vedas, and
who are themselves personifications of the Vedas, please Me to such an
extent that none of the demigods or anyone else can.
Text 11
tasmddime brahmana jdstaih
pustastn jagajjanah
jaganti me sanram
tatpose brahmano varah
The Vedic knowledge has spread only by the work of those who are
twice-born. All of the living entities in this world, who are My parts
and parcels, are being protected by the Vedas Therefore it is to be


P A D M A V A T I 
R E C E I V E S A B E N E D I C T I O N 
F R O M 
L O R D 
S I \ \
concluded that those who are twice-born are the principal instruments
for maintaining My body
Text 12
tenaham tan namasyami
suddha sattva gunasrayah
tato jaganmayam pmvam
mam sevante'khdasrayah
That is why I offer My obeisances to the brahmanas from My position
in the mode of pure goodness. Those who are twice-born are the shelter
of everyone and they serve Me, considering Me to be the basis of the
entire universe.
Text 13
visdkhayupa uvaca
viprasya laksanam bruhi
tvadbhakah ka ca tatkrta
yatas tavanugrahena
vagvdna brahmandh krtah
Visakhayupa 
said: My dear Lord, kmdl\ 
describe to me the
characteristics of a genuine brahmana. 
In what wa^ do they render
devotional service unto You? It appears that their words carry the weight
of Vedic injunctions, by Your mercy.
Text 14
kalkiruvaca
veda mamisvaiam prdhur
avyaktam vyaktimatpamm
te veda brahmana mukhe
ndna dharme prakasitah
Lord Kalki said: I exist bevond the realm of visible moving and поп-
moving entities, as described in the Vedas I am celebrated as the non-
manifested Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Vedas are manifested
in various forms through the mouths of the brahmanas
Text 15
у о dharmo brahmananam hi
sa bhaktir mama puskala


44 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
tayaham tositah snsah
sambhaiami suge \uge
The religion of the brahmanas is to render pure devotional service
unto Me Being pleased by their devotional service, 1 incarnate, along
w ith Goddess Laksmi, m every millennium
Text 16
urdhiantu tra-rtam sutram
sadhava nirmitam samuh
taniu trayam adhoibrttam
"vajnasutram vidurbudhah
A sacred thread should be prepared by either married or unmarried
brdhmana ladies They should take three strands ot thread and fold them
to make six circles
Text 17
tngunam dadgranthi yuktam
veda pravara sammitam
sirodharan nabhimadhyat
prstharddha panmatiakam
According to the injunctions of the Vedas, the sacred thread should
consist of six circles of thread. It should divide one's back into two halves
as it hangs from the shoulder to the navel
Text 18
yajurudam nabhimitam
sama gana may am ndhih
vamaskandhena udhrtam
yajfiasutram balapradam
Such a sacred thread should be worn by brahmanas who study the
Yajur Veda The sacred thread for those who study the Sama Veda should
hang below the navel This is the Vedic injunction When the sacred
thread is placed over the left shoulder, it gives one strength
Text 19
madbha\ma candanadyaistu
dharayet tdakam dvijah


P A D M A V A T I 
R E C F I V E S 
A 
B E N E D I C T I O N 
F R O M 
L O R D 
S I V A 
45
bhale tnpundam karmangam
kesa paryantam ujjialam
It is the duty of those who are twice-born to mark the forehead with
tilaka made of clay, ash, or sandalwood paste Marking the body with tilaka
is a limb of devotional service The brahmanas decorate their foreheads
with tilaka, beginning from the nose up to the hair lme
Text 20
pundram anguli manantu
tnpundram tat tridha krtam
brahmavisnu swavasam
darsandt papa nasanam
The length of one's tilaka should be three fingers It is said that Brahma,
Visnu and Siva reside withm the marking of tilaka. Therefore, simply by
seeing a person's tilaka, one becomes freed from sinful reactions
Text 21
brdhmandndm kare warga
vaco veda kare havih
gatre tirthdni ragasca
nadii,u prakrtis tnvrt
The heavenly planets are present m the hands of a brahmana Their
worlds are non-different from the Vedas Sacrificial ingredients also exist
in the hands of a brahmana 
In his body reside all the holy places, and
attachment for religious principles, as well a» the three modes of material
nature, resides withm his navel
Text 22
sautn kantha kuhara
hrdayam brahma samjnitam
tesam stanantare dharmah
prsthu dharmah prakmntah
The Gayatri mantra is a brahmana'ь necklace, and his heart is the
residence of the Supreme Brahman Religious principles reside on a
brahmana s chest and lrrehgion resides on his back


46 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
Text 23
bhudeva brahmana rajan
рщуа vandya saduktibhih
caturasramya kusala
mama dharma pravarttakah
О King, the brahmanas are considered to be the real leaders of society
and so it is the duty of everyone to worship them, and show them respect
by greeting them cheerfully. Even though the brahmanas may belong to
any of the four asramas, they always preach My mission as their prime
occupation
Text 24
balascapi jnana vrddhds
tapovrddha mama priyah
tesam vacah palayitum
avatarah krta maya
Even young brahmana boys are enriched with transcendental
knowledge and austerity. For this reason, they are very dear to Me.
Indeed, I incarnate withm the material world just to show the truth of
their statements, which are always based upon the Vedas.
Text 25
mahabhdgyam brahmananam
sarva papa pranasanam
kahdosa haram srutva
mucyate sarvato bhayat
By hearing these discussions of those who are twice-born, good
fortune will prevail as all of one's sinful reactions are vanquished. Indeed,
by such submissive hearing, one can be freed of the contamination of Kali
so that no anxiety or fear will be able to enter his heart.
Text 26
in kalknacah srutia
kahdosa vinasanam
pranamya tarn suddhamanah
prayayau vaisnavagranih


P A D M A V A T I 
R E C E I V E S A B E N E D I C T I O N 
F R O M 
L O R D 
S I \ Л 
47
After hearing these discussions, which destroy the contamination of
Kali, from the lotus-like mouth of Lord Kalki, the exalted Vaisnava king,
Vis'akhayupa, departed with a purified mind.
Text 27
gate rajani sandhydyam
4ivadatta suko budhah
cantva kalkipuratah
stutvd tarn puratah sthitah
The day passed and evening approached when the supremely
intelligent Suka, who was favored by Lord Siva, arrived before Lord Kalki
after wandering about at his will. He offered his obeisances to Lord Kalki
and then stood before Him with folded hands.
Text 28
tarn sukam prdha kalkiuu
sasmitam stun pdthakam
svagatam hhavatd kasmad
desat him khaditam tatah
Upon seeing Suka, who was reciting prayers, Lord Kalki smilingly
said: May you achieve auspiciousness. Where are you coming from? What
have you eaten?
Text 29
suka uvaca
srnu ndtha vaco mahyam
kautuhala samanvitam
aham gatasca jaladher
madhye simhala samjnake
Suka said: My dear Lord, I will tell You something of great interest
and so please hear me with attention I have just visited the island known
as Simhala, which is situated in the middle of the ocean
Text 30
yathavrattam dvipagatam
cantram sravanapnyam
brhadrathasya nrpateh
kan-\ayas cantamrtam


48 
SRI KALKI P U R A N A
Please listen to the wonderful characteristics of that island, which is
ruled over bv a king named Brhadratha. He has a beautiful daughter whose
qualities are like nectar, and which are very pleasing to hear about
Text 31
kaumndyam iha jataya
jagatam papa nasanam
cantam simhale dvipe
cdturtarnya janavrte
This girl was born from the womb of Queen Kaumudi. One who heais
of her divine qualities is relieved of all sinful reactions That island is
inhabited by the members of all the four varnas
Text 32
prasada harm.-) a sadana
pura raji urdjate
ratna sphatika kud^ddi
svama bhaa virajite
The island is decorated with beautiful palaces, residential quarters,
agricultural fields, and cities. Many gates and pillars bedecked with jewels
and crystal have been erected here and there. Indeed, the entire island
shines like gold
Text 33
stnbhir uttama tesabhih
padminibhih samavrte
mwbhih sarabair hamsair
upakula jala kule
On that island reside тащ nicely dressed women who are decorated
with auspicious characteristics There are many beautiful lakes m which
cranes and swans are seen placing.
Text 34
bhrnga ranga prasangadha^e
padmaih kalhara kundakaih
nanambuja latajala
vanopa vanamamdate


P A D M A V A T I 
R E C E I V E S A B E N E D I C T I O N 
F R O M 
L O R D SIVA 
49
These lakes were filled with lotus flowers and water lilies, and they
are surrounding bv gardens filled with jasmine and other varieties of
flowers. Bumblebees hover over those flowers, being intoxicated by their
aroma and honey Everywhere there are seen beautiful gardens, bushes,
and creepers
Texts 35-36
de.se brhadratho ra)d
mahai ala parakamah
tasya padmavati капу а
dhanya reje yasasvini
bhuvane durlabha loke
praama varavarnmi
kdma moha кап cdru
cantra atra nirmita
That beautiful island is ruled by the pious King Brhadratha. His
daughter, named Padmavati, is certainly glorious and possessed of a
spotless reputation. Such a talented girl, possessing matchless beauty,
is very rarely found within the three worlds. Just by seeing her, one is
reminded of Rati, the enchanter of the mmd of Cupid She is a wonderful
creation of the creator and her characteristics are simply wonderful.
Text 37
swa seva para gaun
•\atha pujya susammata
sakhibhih kanyaka bhisca
japa dhyana parayana
She worships Lord Siva, along with her companions As Parvati is
respected and worshiped by all, this princess is adored b\ one and all
In the association of her friends, she remains fulh absorbed in chanting
mantras and meditating on the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Text 38
jnawa tanca harer laksmim
samud bhutam varanganam
harah pradura bhuta saksat
parvatya saha harsitah


50 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
Understanding that Kamala, whose face is exquisitely beautiful and
who is very dear to Lord Han, had incarnated withm this world, Sankara,
the lord of the demigods, along with Parvartl, joyfully came to see her.
Text 39
sa tamalokya varadam
swam gaun samanvitam
lajjitadho mukhi kincin
ovaca puratah sthitah
Upon seeing Lord Siva and Parvati before her, eager to bestow upon
her a benediction, Padmavati shyly stood with her head bent down, being
unable to utter a sound.
Text 40
haras tamaha subhage
tava narayanah patih
panim grahisyati mudd
nanyo yogyo nrpatmajah
Lord Siva said: О fortunate one, you will receive Lord Narayana as
your husband. He will joyfully accept your hand in marriage. Rest assured
that there is no other prince on earth who is a suitable match for you.
Text 41
kamabhavena bhuvane
ye warn pasyanti mdnavah
tenaiva vayasa nary о
bhavisyantyapi tatksanat
Anyone who lustily casts his glance upon you will immediately be
transformed into a woman, regardless of his age.
Text 42
deva suras tatha naga
gandharvds caranadayah
tvaya rantum yata kale
bhavisyanti kila stnyah


P A D M A V A T I 
R E C E I V E S 
A B E N E D I C T I O N F R O M L O R D S I V A 
51
Whether they be demigods, demons, Nagas, Gandharvas, Caranas,
or anyone else, if they simply desire to enjoy a conjugal relationship with
you, they will immediately transform into women
Texts 43-44
vina ndrayanam devarn
watpani grahanarthi nam
grham yahi tapas tyakwa
bhogdyatanam uttamam
ma ksobhaya hareh patni
kamale vimalam kuru
in datwd varam sennas
tatrawantardadhe harah
However, this curse is not applicable to Lord Han, who is your only
husband. It is only applicable to others. Now, you may give up your
penance and return home. Do not give any further trouble to your tender
body, which is the object for the attainment of great happiness. О lover of
Han! О Kamala! Please take care of your soft and gentle body
After awarding his benediction to Padmavati, Lord Siva disappeared
from view.
Text 45
haravaram m sa nisamya padma
samucitam atma manoratha prakasam
vikasita vadana pranamya somam
mjajana kalayam avivesa rama
Having received her desired benediction from Lord Siva, Padmavati's
happiness knew no bound, so that her face blossomed brightly. She then
offered her obeisances to Uma and Mahadeva and returned home
Thus ends the translation of the fourth chapter ot Sri Kalki Purdna


C
H
\
P
I
E
R 
F i \ t
Padmavati's Svayamvara
Text 1
suka uvaca
gate bahutithe kale
padmdm viksya Brhadrathah
mrudha yauvanam putnm
vismitah papasankaya
Suka said: After a long time had passed, King Brhadratha realized
that his daughter, Padmavati, had grown up. Fearing some misbehavior
on her part, the king began to consider the matter very seriously
Text 2
kaumudim praha mahiam
padmodvahe'tra kam nrpam
varayisyami subhage
kulasila samanvitam
He addressed his queen: О fortunate one, I am considering handing
over my daughter to a pious king who belongs to a noble family and thus
accept him as my son-m-law.
Text3
sa tamaha paam devi
sibena pratibhasitam
visnurasyah patina
па samsa^ah
However, the queen said. О King, the lord of Parvati has already
assured us that Padmavati's husband will undoubtedly be Lord Han
Text 4
m uxsya vacah sruua
raja praha kadeti tam
visnuh sana guhavasah
parumasya grahisyati


P 4 L > M \ \ A I l ' s S \ \ > " v \ 1 \ A R \ 
,- ,
Upon hearing this, King Brhadratha said: When will Lord Han, who
is present within the hearts of all living entities, accept our daughter as
His wife7
Texts 5-6
na me bhdgyodayah kascid
yena jamataram harim
varayib.ya.mi kanwtfie
vedavatyd muneryatha
imam svayavaram padmam
padmdmwa mahodadheh
mathane 'suradevanam
tatha visnur grahisyaa
I do not feel that I am so fortunate as to be able to hand over my
daughter to Lord Visnu. What piety have I accumulated so that I will be
able to accept Lord Han as my son-in-law? Therefore, just like the Muni's
daughter, VedavatI, or Laksmi, who appeared from the ocean of milk as it
was being churned, I would like to arrange a svayamvara for my jewel-like
daughter, Padmavati. Let Lord Han come and accept her in this way.
Text 7
iti bhupaganan bhupah
samahuya puraskrtan
gunaula vayompa
vidyadravina samvrtan
Having made this resolution, the king invited all the other kings of
the country who were adorned with good qualities, of good character,
learned, very wealthy, and m the prime of their youth
Text 8
svayamvarartham padmayah
simhale bahumangale
vicarya karayamasa
sthanam bhupa nwesanam
To insure the svayamvara s grand success, King Brhadratha
made auspicious arrangements throughout his kingdom. He ordered


SRI KALKI 
PURANA
religious rituals to be performed throughout the land, and he also made
arrangements for the stay of the invited guests
Text 9
tatrayatd nrpah sane
vwaha krta niscayah
nijasainyaih panvrtah
svarna ratna vibhusitah
Meanwhile, many kings having the desire to accept Padmavati's hand
in marriage arrived in that island fully decorated with golden ornaments
and accompanied by their armies.
Text 10
rathdn gaja nasvavaran
samdrudha mahabalah
svetacchatra krtacchayah
svetacdmara vijitah
Some kings and princes arrived on chariots, some on elephants, and
yet others came ndmg on beautiful horses. A white umbrella was held
over the heads of these powerful kings as they were fanned with white
camaras
Texts 11-13
sastrastra tejasd dipta
devdh sendra ivabhavan
rucirasvah sukarma ca
madirdkso drdhdsugah
krsnasarah pdradasca
jimutah kruramardanah
kasah kusdmbur vasuman
kankah krathana safijayau
gurumitrah pramathi ca
vijrmbhah srnjayo'ksamah
ete cdnye ca bahavah
samdydtd mahabalah


P A D M A \ \ T I ' S S \ A Y \ M \ A R \ 
С Г
Because of the bnghtlv shining weapons in their hands, these
princes appeared as beautiful as Indra, surrounded by all the demigods
Among the kings who arrived there were Ruciras'va, Sukarma, Madiraksa,
Drdhasuga, Krsnasara, Parada, Jimuta, KrOramardana, Kasa, Kusambu,
Vasuman, Kanka, Krathana, Safijaya, Gurumitra, Piamathl, Vijrmbhah,
Srnjaya, and Aksama
Text 14
vwisuste ranga gatd
svasva sthanesu pujitah
vddya tandava samhrstas
extra mdlyam baradharah
When the kings arrived at the svayamvara, they were respectfully
greeted and thus they took their seats in a happy mood. A dancing and
singing program then commenced for their pleasure Because of the
presence of these illustrious rulers of men, the arena looked very colorful
and enchanting
Text 15
nanabhoga sukhodnktah
ката rdmd ratipradah
tanalokya simhalesah
svam kanyam varavamimm
The eyes and minds of everyone who saw these aristocratic and
powerful kings became filled with joy. When everyone was comfortably
seated, Brhadratha requested his associates to bring his uniquely beautiful
daughter onto the stage.
Text 16
gaunvn caridrarvmam sydmam
tarahdra vibhusitdm
таттикш pravalaisca
sarvamga alankrta subham
Padmavati's complexion was golden, and her face resembled the full
moon She possessed all godly qualities, and she was decorated with a
garland of flowers Her entire body was covered with jewels, pearls, and
coral.


S R I 
K A L K I 
P и RAN A
Text 17
kim may am mohajanamm
kim va kamapnyam bhuvi
rupa lavama sampattya
na canyamiha drstvan
When I saw Padmavati, I considered her to be the personification of
maya, which bewilders everyone. Then again, I wondered whether she
was Rati-devi herself, the beloved consort of Cupid, appearing upon the
earth Although I have traveled throughout the heavenly planets, as well
as on this earth, and indeed throughout the entire three worlds, I had
never seen a more beautiful girl than Padmavati.
Text 18
svarge ksitau va patale'
pyaham barvatrago yadi
pascad dasiganai kirnam
sakhibhih panvantah
When Padmavati came out from the palace, hundreds of her
companions and maid-servants surrounded her on all sides.
Texts 19-21
dauvdnkair vetrahastmh
sasitantah puradvahih
purovandi gandkirndm
prdpayd masa tarn sanaih
nupuraih kinkini bhisca
kvanantim janamohinim
svagatandm nrpandnca
kulasiki gundn bahun
srnvanti hamsa gamand
ratnamdla karagraha
rucira panga bhangena
preksanti lolakundala
When the princess left the palace, she was protected by her personal
guards, who were equipped with various weapons. Professional singers


P \ D M A \ 
A l l ' s 
S V A \ 4 M \ 
\ R \ 
. _
walked before her as she arrived at the svayamvara arena An enchanting
sound was created by her ankle bells and her earrings swung back and forth
as she slowly entered within the midst of the assembled kings and princes,
gazing in all directions, a flower garland in her hand. Padmavati was then
informed of the family background and distinguishing characteristics ot
all those who had come seeking her hand in marriage
Text 22
nrtyat kuntala sopana
gamda mandala mandita
kvhcit smerollasad vakta
dasana dyotadipita
Her hair swung to and fro as she glanced about the arena, and this
increased the beauty of her cheeks. Her face appear.ed even more beautiful
when she smiled, so that she resembled a fully blossomed lotus flower
Text 23
vedi madhyaruna ksauma
vasand kokilasvara
rupa lavanaya panayena
kretukama jagattrayam
The waist of the princess was very thm, she was dressed in red garments,
and her voice was pleasing to the ear, like the singing of a cuckoo When I
saw all of these manifestations of feminine attractiveness, I thought that
the princess had decided to purchase the entire three worlds by paying
the price of her exquisite beauty.
Text 24
samdgatam tarn prasamiksya bhupah
sammohmim kama vimudha cittah
petuh ksitau vismrta vastra sastrdh
rathdsva matta dvipa vahanaste
As soon as the assembled kings saw the jewel-like Padmavati, the\
became greatly afflicted by the arrows of the Cupid Indeed, the\ were so
struck with wonder that that their weapons fell from their hands


58
SRI KALKI PURANA
Text 25
tasyah smaraksobha ninksanena
stnyo babhuvuh kamaniya rupah
vrhannitamva stanabharanamrah
sumadhyamas tatsmrti jatarupah
However, as the kings gazed upon the princess with lusty desires,
they suddenly transformed into females, much to their astonishment.
Their bodily features, chaiactenstics, and personalities became just like
women. Their waists were thm and their figures were beautiful. Indeed,
their beautiful bodies bent slightly forward due to the weight of their
heavy breasts.
Text 26
vilasa hasa vyasanati citrah
kantdnanah sona sa^ojanetrah
stnrupam atmanam aveksya bhupah
stamanva gacchan vii>adanuvrttya
Their movements and smiles, as well as their dancing and singing
skills became that of a woman. Their faces appeared charming, just like
blooming lotus flowers. Upon finding themselves to be beautiful women,
the kings followed Padmavati as if they were her companions.
Text 27
aham vatasthah paridharsitatma
padma vwahotsaia darsanakulah
tasya vato'ntarhrdi duhkhitayah
srotum sthitah stritvamitesu tesu
At that time, I climbed up into a banyan tree, desiring to watch the
svayamvara of Padmavati. I was already very upset after seeing all that
had taken place. I waited just to hear if Padmavati would express her
unhappmess because all the kings had turned into women.
Text 28
jamhi kalke ] kamala vilapam
srutam ucitram jagatama dhisa '
gate vitahotsava mangale sa
swam saranyam hrdaye nidhava


P u i M W U l ' s 
S \ \ Y 4 M \ 4 R \
О Lord Kalki, You are the master of the universe. Let me disclose to
You the lamentations of Your consort, Kamala. while she was meditating
upon her worshipable lord, Sankara.
Text 29
tan drstvd nrpatin gajasva
rathibhis tyaktan sakhitvam gatdn
stnbhavcna samanutan anugatan
padmam vdokydntike dina tyakta
vidhusana vilikhati padamgulaih
kamini isam karttum nijanatham
isvara vacasthathyam hanm sa'smarat
All the kings who came there, hoping to marry Padmavati, were
rejected by their respective carriers, the elephants and horses, and even
their soldiers. When they followed the princess as her companions, she
took off all her ornaments and began to write something on the ground
with her right toe. With a desire to make the words of Lord Siva come
true, Padmavati fixed her mind on her own beloved Lord Han, the
supreme controller
Thus ends the translation of the fifth chapter of Sri Kalki Purana.


C H A P T E R 
S I X
Suka Goes To Simhala as the Envoy of Lord Kalki
Conversation Between Padmavati And Suka
Text 1
suka uvaca
tatah %a vismita mukhi
padma nijajanair vrta
hanm patim antayanti
provaca vimalam sthitam
Suka said: Thereafter, while surrounded by her relatives and
companions, and herself highly astonished, Padmavati addressed one of
her friends, named Vimala, while still remembering her husband, Lord
Han.
Text 2
padmovaca
umale kim krtam dhdtra
Mate hkhanam mama
darsanadapi lokandm
pumsam stnbhava karakam
Padmavati said: О Vimala, is it my destiny, dictated by providence,
that any man who desires me will turn into a woman?
Text 3
mamapi manda bhagyaydh
pdpinydh siva sevinam
viphalatvam anupraptam
vijamuptam yathosare
I am extremely unfortunate and sinful. Just as sowing seeds on barren
land is useless, my worship of Lord Siva has proved futile
Text 4
hanr laksmipauh sarva
jagatdm adhipah prabhuh


CONVERSATION BETWEEN PADMAVATI AND 
SUKA 
61
matkrte' pyabhilasam
lam kansyati jagatpatih
Will the Supreme Lord, Han, the master of the universe, controller of
all controllers, and husband of LaksmI, ever accept me as His consort
7
Texts 5-6
yadi sambhor vaco mithya
yadi visnur namdm smaret
tada hamanale deham
tyajami han bhavitd
km cdham mdnusi dind
kvdste devo jandrdanah
nigrhita vidhatrdham.
sivena panvanata
If the words of Lord Siva prove false, and if Lord Han does not accept
me, I will certainly end my life by entering fire while remembering the
lotus feet of the Lord. Alas, I am a lowly human being. How insignificant
I am and how great is Lord Han, the master of the demigods! The creator
must be angry with me, otherwise why would Sankara, whose forehead is
decorated with the mark of the moon, deceive me?
Text 7
visnuna ca pantyaktd
madanya katra jwati
I am still living, even after being rejected by Lord Han. Who other
than me would remain alive in such a situation?
Text 8
iti nandvildpinya
vacanam socandsrayam
padmaya sdrucestaydh
srutvayd tastavantike
О Lord Kalkl, when I heard these lamentations of Padmavati, whose
character is spotless, I could not wait any longer, and so I approached You
without delay.


62 
S R I K A L K I 
P U R A N A
Text 9
sukasya vacanam srutva
kalkih parama vismitah
tarn jagada punaryahi
padmam bodhayitum pri\am
After hearing these words of Suka, Lord Kalki felt elated He said My
dear Suka, you must go at once and pacify my beloved Padmavati
Text 10
matsandesa baho bhutva
madrupa guna kirttanam
sravayitva punah kira
samayasyasi bandhava
I consider you to be My best well wishing friend 
Please go to
Padmavati as My messenger, and after describing My beauty and qualities
to her, return to Me
Text 11
sa me pnya panraham
tasya deva vinirmitah
madhyasthena way а у ogam
avayosca bhausyati
Padmavati is very dear to Me Indeed, I am her eternal husband Our
union has already been destined by providence Therefore, you act on My
behalf so that we can meet one another
Text 12
sanajno si tidhijno'si
kalajiio'pi kathamrtaih
tamasvasya mamasvasa
kathastasyam samahara
\ou are the knower of everything 
You know all the rules and
regulations prescribed in the Vedas You also understand about the proper
time and circumstances Therefore, pacify Padmavati with your nectarean
words and then return to Me with her assurance


C O N \ E R S A T I O N 
B E T W E E N 
P A D M A V A T I 
A N D 
SUKA 
63
Text 13
m kalker lacah srutva
sukah parama harsitah
pranam\a tarn pnta manah
prayayau simhalam waran
Being instructed by Lord Kalki in this way, Suka became jubilant as
his entire body became filled with ecstasy He offered his obeisances to
the Lord and quickb, departed for Simhala
Texts 14-16
khagah samudra parena
snatta pitiamrtam pay ah
vija pura phalaharo
yayau ia]a nwesanarn
tatra kanyapuram gatia
vrkse nagebvare lasan
padmam alokya tarn praha
suko manusa bhasaya
kusalam te lararohe
rupa yauvana salini
itam lola nayaaam manye
laksmi rupam napmari
Thus, Suka, the great parrot, crossed the ocean Upon reaching
his destination, he first bathed, drank some water, and ate many sweet
and ripe fruit After that, he entered the king's palace and sat at the
top of a nagakesara tree, which was situated within the compound of the
ladies' quarters After some time, the magnanimous Suka saw Padmavati
approach, and so he addressed her in a human voice О beautiful ladv
with a most charming face, your e^es appear to be \er^ restless B\ seeing
you, I feel that you are Laksmi, the goddess of fortune
Text 17
padmananam padmagandham
padmanetiam kmambujc
kamalam kalayanam tt am
laksayami param smmn


SRI KALKI 
P O R A N A
Your face resembles a lotus flower. The aroma of your body is like the
scent of a lotus and your eyes are just like lotus petals. Your hands are
reddish, like lotus flowers, and you hold a lotus in your hand.
Text 18
kim dhatra sarva jagatam
rupa lavanya sampaddm
mrmitdsi vararohe
jivanam mohakanni
О beautiful one with a charming face, you simply bewilder all living
entities I think that the creator had made you after collecting all the
beautiful objects of the world.
Texts 19-20
in bhdsitam akarnya
kirasya amitam adbhutam
hasanti praha sd devi
mm padma padmamdhni
kswam kasmdd agato'si
katham mam sukarupadhrka
devo vd danavo va
warn agato'si dayaparah
Upon hearing these sweet words of Suka, PadmavatI, whose navel
resembled a lotus, smiled and said: Who are you? Where have you come
from? Are you a demigod or demon who has taken the form of a parrot? Is
it out of compassion for me that you have come here?
Text 21
suka uvaca
sarvajno'ham kamagami
sarvasdstrartha tattvavit
deva gandharva bhupanam
sabhdsu panpujitah
Suka said: I am the knower of everything, and so I know the intensions
of everyone. I am well aware of the real purport of all scriptures. 1 am
highly regarded in the assembly of demigods, Gandharvas, and saintly
kings.


C O N V E R S A T I O N 
B E T W E E N 
P A D M A V A T I A N D S U K A 
65
Text 22
carami svecchayd khe warn
iksanartham ihdgatah
wamaham hrdi santaptdm
tyakta bhogam manahsvinim
I travel in outer space of my own free will. I have now come her just to
see you. Although you are very learned, at present you are afflicted with
grief, and thus you have given up all thoughts of enjoyment.
Texts 23-24
hdsyaldpa sakhi sanga
dehabharana varjitam
vilokyaham dina cetah
prcchami srotum intam
kokda lapa santapa
janakam madhuram mrdu
tava dantaustha }ihva
agra luhtdksara panktayah
yat karna kuhare magnas
tesdm kim varnyate tapah
You have given up smiling, joking, speaking with others, the company
of your friends, and all kinds of jewelry. By seeing you in such a pathetic
condition, I feel morose and so I would like to hear your sweet voice,
which defeats the song of a cuckoo. Only one who has undergone great
austerities is able to hear the words that are produced by the combined
effort of your teeth, lips, and tongue.
Texts 25-26
saukumaryam sinsasya
kva kantirva msakare
piyusam kva vadantyeva
anandam brahmani te dhunah
tava bahulata vaddha
ye раьуапй sudhananam
tesam tapo dana japair
vyarthair kim janayisyati


66 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
For you, the tenderness of a slrlsa flower and the brightness of the full
moon are most insignificant. People always glorify the nectar and bliss of
Brahman, but to you even this seems insignificant The pious exalted soul
who will drink the nectar of your face while being held in the creepers
of your arms does not require to perform any religious duties, such as
performing penance, chanting mantras, and giving charity.
Text 27
tilakalaka sammisram
lola kundala manditam
loleksanollasad vaktram
pasyatam na punarbhavah
Anyone who once beholds your beautiful face decorated with marks
of tilaka, curly hair, swinging earrings, and beautiful eyes, will no longer
have to accept another material body.
Text 28
brhadrathasute svadhim
vada bhavini yatkrtam
tapah ksindmwa tanum
laksayami щат vina
kanaka pratima yadvat
pamsubhir malmikrta
О daughter of King Brhadratha! О well-wisher of all! Please tell me
the cause of your mental agony. You have no material attachment and yet
you have become very weak because of mental distress. At present, you
look like a golden deity covered by dust.
Text 29
padmovaca
kim rupena kulenapi
dkanena abhijanena va
sarvam msphalatam eti
yasya devam daksinam
PadmavatI said: If Lord Han is against someone then what is the use
of beauty, opulence, and a prestigious lineage?


C O N V E R S A T I O N 
B E T W E E N 
P A D M A V A T I 
A N D 
S U K A 
67
Text 30
srnu kira mamakhyanam
yadi vd viditam tava
balyah pauganda-kaisore
harasevam karomyaham
My dear bird, if you do not know why I am suffering then kindly hear
with attention. I engaged in the worship of Lord Siva as a child, and also
when I became a mature girl.
Text 31
term pujavidhanena tusto
bhutva mahesvarah
varam varaya padme '
tvamityaha priyaya saha
As a result of my worship, Lord lva, whose head is decorated with
the sign of the moon, appeared before me along with Parvati and said: О
Padmavati, ask me for a benediction.
Text 32
lajjayadho mukhim agi e
sthitam mam viksya sankarah
praha te bhavati wami
hanrnarayanah prabhuh
When he saw me standing before him, my head hung low due to
shyness, and my body fully covered, he assured me, saying- The Supreme
Lord, Han, will become >our husband.
Text 33
deio va danato vanyo
gandharvo га taveksanat
kamena manasa nan
bhausyati na samsayah
Whether he is a demigod, Gandharva, asura, or any other creature,
if a male looks upon you with lust in his heart, then he will immediatel\
turn into a woman.


68 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
Text 34
it! dawd varam somah
praha visnurcanam yatha
tathdham te pravaksyami
samahita manah srnu
(Padmavati said to Suka:) Let me tell you about the procedure for
worshiping Lord Han that Lord Siva described to me after awarding me
that benediction.
Text 35
etah sakhyo nrpdh purvam
ahrta ye svayamvare
pitrd dharmdrthina drstvd
ramyam mam yauvanan vitam
These companions of mine that you see here—they were all great
kings at the time of my svayambara, which was arranged by my father.
Texts 36-37
svdgataste sukhasina
vwdha krta ruscaydh
yuvdno gunavantasca
rupadravina sammatah
stayamvara gatam mam te
vdokya ruciraprabham
ratnamdla sntakardm
nipetuh kama mohitdh.
These kings were very handsome, highly skilled, and unhmitedly
powerful After they had assembled here with a desire to marry me, I
entered the arena of my svayamvara, holding a necklace of jewels in my
hands. Although these kings had been sitting at ease, as soon as they saw
me, their hearts were pierced by the arrows of Cupid, and some even
fainted, falling onto the ground
Text 38
tata uttthdya sambhrantdh
samprecya stntvamatmanah


C O N V E R S A T I O N 
BETWEEN PADMAVATI 
A N D SUKA 
69
stanabhara mtamvena
gurwnd pannamitah
However, as soon as they stood up, having regained their composure,
they where aghast to find that they had been transformed into women
with rounded hips and heavy breasts.
Text 39
hiyd bhiyd ca satrimam
mitranamita duhkhadam
stnbhavam manasa dhydtvd
mameva anugatdk suka
О parrot, upon seeing themselves in this way, the kings became
highly embarrassed and afraid to look at one another At last, with broken
hearts, they decided to follow me as my companions.
Text 40
pdncarya hare ratah
sakhyah sarva gunanvitdh
mayd saha tapodhydna
pujdh kurvanti sammatah
Since that time, all these kings have been living with me as my
companions. They are very talented women and are living under the
shelter of my affection. Along with me, they also engage in worshiping
Lord Han, rending service unto Him, meditating upon the Lord, and
performing austerities for His pleasure.
Text 41
taduditam m samnnisamya kirah
sravana sukham nijamanasa prakasanam
samuata vacanaih pratiksya padmam
muraham yajanam punah pracaste
After hearing this wonderful story from the mouth of Padmavati,
Suka continued to speak with her in a very pleasing manner, and then
brought up the subject of Lord Han's worship
Thus ends the translation of the sixth chapter of Sri Kalki Purana


С Н А. Р I Ь R 
S F V F N
The Procedure for Worshiping Lord Visnu
Text 1
suka uvaca
visnurcanam sevenoktam
srotum icchdmyaham subhe
dhanasi krtapunayasi
swa sisyatvam agata
Suka said: О auspicious lady, you are certainly most glorious and pious,
and thus you exhibit unalloyed devotion for Lord Siva. Now I would like
to hear about the procedure for worshiping Lord Han as instructed by
Lord Siva.
Text 2
aham bhagya vasadatra
samagamya tavantikam
чгпотт paramascaryam
kirakara nwaranam
It is my good fortune that I have met you here today. Please describe
in detail the worship of Lord Han, for by hearing such topics, I will be
freed from having to endure life in the lower species.
Text3
bhagavad bhakti yoganca
japadhyana vidhim muda
paramdnanda sandoha
dana daksam srutipnyam
Worship of Lord Han is a limb of pure devotional service, and it
includes meditation upon the Lord and the chanting of His mantras.
Discussions of Lord Han are always very pleasing to the ears and heart.
Texts 4-5
padmovaca
sn visnorarcanam punyam


T H E 
P R O C E D U R E 
F O R W O R S H I P I N G 
L O R D 
V I S N U 
71
sivena panbhasitam
yat srddhayanusthi tasya
srutasya gatitasya ca
sadyah papaharam pumsam
guru go brahma ghatinam
samahitena manasa
srnu kira yathoditam
Padmavatl said: The procedure for worshiping Lord Han that was
described by Lord Siva is most sacred. By performing such worship, or
even hearing about it with faith, one is immediately freed from all sinful
reactions, even those for killing a spiritual master, cow, or brahmana. О
parrot, hear attentively as I describe the procedure for worshiping Lord
Han that was instructed by Lord Siva.
Text 6
krwa yathokta karmani
purvahne manakrta sucih
praksdlya para padau ca
sprstvapah svdsane vaset
Early in the morning, one should bathe and perform his other daily
duties. He should then wash his hands and feet, perform acamana, and sit
on a proper asana to begin his worship of the Lord
Text 7
praamukhah samyatatma
sanganyasam prakalpayet
bhutasuddhim tato'rghasya
sthapanam vidhi vaccaret
With a controlled mind, one should sit facing east and then perform
the various nyasas and other required rituals Thereafter, one should
place all the articles for worship, such as arghya, in their proper places.
TextS
tatah kesava krtvadi
пуачепа tanmayo bhavet
atmanam tanmayam dhyatva
hrdistham svasane rvyaset


72 
S R I K A L K I 
P U R A N A
Before beginning, one should thmk of himself as being qualitatively
one with Lord Visnu while displaying the kesava-klrti-nyusa 
One should
then invite Lord Han to be seated on a lotus asana within his heart
Texts 9-10
padydrdhya acamaniyadyaih
snana vdso vibhusinaih
yathopacarmh sampujya
mulamantrena desikah
dhydyet padadi kesamtam
hrdayambuja madhyagam
prasanna vadanam devam
bhaktd bhista phalapradam
One should then worship Lord Han by offering Him various articles,
including pddya, arghya, dcamanlya, snanlya, and ornaments. Next, one
should meditate on the Lord, beginning from His lotus feet, gradually
raising one's attention to His face. The Lord should be meditated upon as
being situated in one's lotus-like heart He should be seen smiling as He
fulfills all the desires of His devotees.
Text 11
от пато nardyandya svaha
yogena siddha vibudhaih
panbhavya manam laksmyalayam
culasi kdcita bhaktabhrngam
prottunga rakta nakharamguh patraatram
bhangdrasam hanpadambuicvm asraye'ham
One should then chant от пато ndrdyanaya svdhd and recite the
following prayer: I take shelter of the lotus feet of Lord Han, who is
constantly meditated upon by learned mystic yogib He is the shelter of
Goddess LaksmI, and the bee-like devotees drink the nectar of the tulasl
buds at His lotus feet. His reddish nails have colored the water of the
Ganges
Text 12
gumphan mam pracaya ghattita rajahamsa
sinjat sunupura yutam padapadma vmtam


T H E 
P R O C E D U R F 
F O R 
W O R S H I P I N G 
L O R D 
V I S N U 
73
pitamvara ancala vdohx calat рашкат
svarna trwaktra balavayanca hareh smarami
I meditate on the lotus feet of Lord Han, which are decorated with
varieties of precious jewels, which resemble the feet of a swan, and which
are decorated with tinkling ankle bells. His cddara hangs to His lotus feet,
and it appears like a flag flapping in the wind His lotus feet are adorned
with three golden bangles.
Text 13
jamghe suparna gala ralamani pravrddhe
sobhaspada aruna manidyuti cancumadhye
arakta padatala lambana sobhamane loke
ksanotsava kare ca hareh smarami
I meditate on Lord Han's lotus feet, which are the color of the blue
sapphire worn by Garuda Just as the beak of Garuda is reddish, so the
toenails of the Lord are tinged with a pinkish hue The Lord's lotus feet
thus increase the beauty of the lower portion of His body, and are very
pleasing to the eyes of His devotees
Text 14
te janum -makhapater bhuja mula sanga
rangotsavavrta tadid vasane vicitre
cancac patatru mukha mrgata samagita
instant atma yasasi ca hareh smarami
I meditate upon Lord Han's knees, the beauty of which is enhanced
because the end of His cddara, which is draped from His shoulder, resides
there. The Lord's carrier, Garuda, reveals His transcendental glories by
singing narrations of His pastimes.
Text 15
visnoh katim vidhikrtanta manoja bhumim
jwanda kosa ganasanga dukula madhyam
nanaguna prakrti pita viatravastram
dhyayen mbaddha vasanam khaga prstham
I meditate on Lord Han's waist, which is decorated with the three
modes of material nature in the form of colorful cloth, which is the shelter


74 
S R I 
K A L K I 
P U R A N A
of Lord Brahma, Yamaraja, and Kamadeva, and which is the lestmg place
of His marginal energy, the living entities He is seated upon the back of
His carrier, Garuda
Text 16
satodaram bhagavata strnah prakasam
аьата nabhi ukasad udhijanma padmam
nadi nadi gana rasotthasitantra sindhum
dhyaye nada kosa nilayam tanu lomarekham
I meditate upon Lord Han's thin abdomen, which is decorated with
three lines From His abdomen, a lotus flower sprouted that was the birth
place of Lord Brahma and thus, the origin of the universe The Lord's
abdomen is the place of generation of the oceans, and is adorned with
fine hair
Text 17
vaksah payodhi tanaya kuca kumkumena
harena kaustubha mam prabhaya vibhatam
STaiatsa laksmi hancandana prasunam
alocitam bhagavatah subhagam smarami
Lord Han's chest is decorated with kunkuma from Laksml's breasts, as
well as a beautiful necklace and the effulgence of the Kaustubha gem It
is also adorned by the mark of Srivatsa, sandalwood paste, and a beautiful
flower garland I meditate on the expansive chest of Lord Han
Text 18
bahu suiesa sadanau balamangadadi
sobhaspadau duhitya vinasadaksau
tau daksinau bhagaiatasca gadasunabha
tejajitau sulahtau manasa smarami
I meditate on Lord Han's charming right arms, which are decorated
with bangles and a source of great beauty, and are expert in killing sinful
demons The Lord's right arms shine brightly because they hold a club
and disc
Text 19
vamau bhujau muran pardhita padmakhankhau
syamau karrndra liaravan mam bhusanadhayau


T H E 
P R O C E D U R F 
F O R W O R S H I P I N G 
L O R D 
V I S N I 
75
raktamguh ргасала cumbita janumadhyau
padmalaya pnyakarau ruarau smarami
I meditate on Lord Muran's left arms, which appear blackish like the
trunk of an elephant The Lord's left arms carry a lotus flower and conch
shell, and are decorated with jeweled ornaments The reddish fingers of
those long arms touch the Lord's knees The enchanting hands of the
Lord are very pleasing to Goddess LaksmI
Text 20
kantham mrnalam amalam mukhapankajas\a
lekhatrayena lanamahkaya nuitam
kimva vimukti vasa mantraka satphalasya
vrttam ciram bhagaiatah subhagam smarami
I meditate upon Lord Han's beautiful throat, which is like the stem of
His lotus-like face, which is decorated with three perfect lines, which is
adorned with a flower garland, and which is like a stalk of delicious fruit
in the form of mantras that award one liberation
Text 21
raktambujam dasana hasa vikasaramyam
raktadharamtha vara komaia laksudhadhyam
sammana sodbhava caleksana patracitram
iokabh ramam amalanca hareh tmarami
I meditate upon Lord Han's lotus face, which is tinged with the
color of a red lotus flower and has beautiful by red lips The Lord's face
appears even more enchanting when He smiles, thus revelling His teeth
Nectarean words emanate from His face, which is pleasing to the heart,
decorated with restless eyes, and enchanting to the mind
Text 22
suratmajaia satha gandhax idam mnasam
bhrupallavam sthm lavodaya karmadaksam
kamotsaianca kamala hrdaya prakasam
samcmtayami harwaktra i ilasadaksam
By the influence of Lord Han's eyebrows, one is relieved of entering
the abode of Yamaraja Below the eyebrows are two enchanting nostrils,
from which the creation, maintenance, and annihilation of the universes


76 
SRI K A L K I 
P U R A N A
are enacted The Lord's eyebrows are the impetus for many passionate
pastimes They enhance the beauty of the I ord's face and they bring
ecstasy to the heart of Laksmi
Text 23
kamau lasan karakundala gaiidalolau
nanadisanca nabhasasca i ikasageh.au
lolalaka pracaya cumbana kuncitagrau
lagnau harer manikirua tate smarami
I meditate on Lord Han's ears, which are adorned with fish-shaped
earrings that swing to and fro on His cheeks and illuminate the four
directions His ears appear slightly wrinkled due to carrying the burden
of many ornaments
Text 24
bhalam iiutra tdakam prvsa саги gandha
gerocana racanaya lalanaksi sakk\am
brahmaka dhama manikamta kinta jutam
dhyayen manonayana harakam isvarasya
I meditate on Lord Han's forehead, which is decorated with marks
of beautiful tilaka, which is very attractive, and which emits a very sweet
aroma The Lord's forehead is also adorned with beautiful leaves painted
with cow's urine that captivates the hearts of all women His forehead is
the shelter of Brahma, decorated with a jeweled crown, and is pleasing to
the eyes and hearts of all
Text 25
sn vasudeia akuram kutilam nibaddham
папа tugandhi kusumaih svajana darena
dirgham rama hrdaya gasamanam dhunantam
dhyaye mbu vaha ruaram hrdayabja madhye
I meditate upon Lord Han's long black curly hair, which His
associates lovingly decorated with fragrant flowers, which breaks the
chastity of Laksmi, which trembles in the wind, which resembles the color
of a dark monsoon cloud, and which is most enchanting


T H E 
P R O C E D U R E 
F O R W O R S H I P I N G 
L O R D 
V I S N L 
7 7
T e x t 2 6
meghakaram soma swsaprakasam
subhrun nasam sakracapmka manam
lokatitam pundankavataksam
vidyuccailanc asrave ham pun am
I take shelter of Lord Han, who possesses a most attractive form,
whose complexion is dark like a cloud, whose eyes resemble the moon
and sun, whose eyebrows are charming like a rainbow, whose nose is long
like the beak of a bird, whose eyes are broad like lotus petals, and whose
yellow garments are the color of lightning
Text 27
dinam hinam seiaya ledaiatya
papaistapaih puntam me sanram
lobhakanta soka mohadhi i iddham
кграча dyst(T,a pahi mam tasudtia
I am a fallen soul who is de\oid of de\otional service to You as
prescribed in the Vedic literature My body is filled w ith smful propensities,
and is a reservoir of miser\ I am under the control of greed, lamentation,
and illusion, and thus overwhelmed by mental agony О Lord Vasudeva,
kindly deliver me by Your merciful glance
Text 28
ле bhaktavad^am dhya\amanam manop'xam
tyaktim visnoh sodasa slokapuspaih
stutia natia pujaMtia ndhijnah
suddha mukta brahmasaukh^am pra~\anti
Those exalted souls who diligently follow all the prescribed rules and
regulations, who repeatedly bow down before the origin d Personality of
Godhead, who worship Him and offer Him this garland of sixteen pra\ers
with unalloyed devotion, will be purified of all sins and thus merge into
the ocean of transcendental bliss
Text 29
padmeruam idam puntam
siicna panbhasitam


/« 
SRI KALKI PURANA
dhanyam yasasyam ayusyam
svargyam svastyanam param
This prayer spoken by Lord Siva to Padmavati is supremely pure, most
glorious, and the giver of fame. It awards one a long duration of life full of
peace and prosperity, and residence in the heavenly planets after death.
Text 30
pathana ye mahabhagaste
mucyante'ham so'khlat
dharmartha kama moksandm
paretreha phalapradam
Simply by reciting this prayer, a fortunate soul will achieve all four
objectives of life, both in this world and the next.
Thus ends the translation of the seventh chapter of Sri Kalki
Purana.


С И \ Р 1 I R 
E l G H I
Conversation Between Padmavati and Suka
Lord Kalki Goes To Simhala
Texts 1-2
suta uvaca
iti padmatacah srutva
kiro dhirah satam matah
kalkidutah sakhi madkye
sthitam padmam athairaut
vada padme sangapujam
harer adbhuta karmanah
yamasthaya vidhanena
carami bhuvanatrayam
Suta Gosvami said: After hearing these instructions fiom the mouth
of Padmavati, Suka, who is honored by all saintlv persons, very sober,
and a representative of Lord Kalki, said: О Padmavati, kindly describe
the various limbs of Lord Han's worship. I will perform them as I travel
throughout the three worlds
Text 3
padmovata
evam padadi kesantam
dhyatba tam jagadisiaiam
purnatma desiko mulam
mantram japati mantraiit
Padmavati said' A devotee who is well-versed in the chanting of
mantras should meditate on Lord Han as I have described, beginning from
His lotus feet and gradually rising to His head, while accepting Him as the
Lord of the universe and the Supersoul of all living beings Thereafter, he
should faithfully chant the mula-mantra
Texts 4-5
japad anantaram danda
pranaam matirruimscaret


«0 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
visvaksenadi kanantu
datva visnu nweditam
tata udbasya hrdaye
sthapayen manasa ьапа
nrtyan gay an haremama
tarn pasyan sarvatah sthtam
A pious devotee should offer his obeisances to the Lord after chanting
the mula-mantra, falling flat onto the ground. He should then offer the
remnants of Lord Visnu's food to His associates, such as Vis'vaksena,
and after doing so, perform sanklrtana by chanting and dancing, while
perceiving the all-pervading Lord within his heart.
Text 6
tatah sesam mastakena
krtva nawedya bhug bhavet
ityetat kathitam kira
kamalanatha sevanam
Thereafter, the devotee should touch the remnants of the Lord's
flower garland to his head and then honor His remnants of food. This is
the proper way to worship the Lord of Laksml.
Text 7
sakamana kamapurama
kamamrta dayakam
srotiananda karam deva
gandharta naiahrt pnyam
By worshiping the Supreme Lord in this way, a materialistic devotee
will have all of his desires fulfilled, and an unalloyed devotee will attain
liberation from material existence. Such worship is very pleasing to the
demigods, human beings, and Gandharvas
Texts 8-9
suka uvaca
sammtam srutam sabdhi '
bhagavad bhaku laksanam
ttat prabadat papino me
kirasya bhuvi muktidam


C O N V E R S A T I O N 
B E T W E E N 
P A D M A V A T I 
A N D 
S U K A 
81
kintu warn kanamamayim
pratimam ratnabhusitam
sajwamiva pasydmi
durlabham rupinim snyam
Suka said: О chaste one, I have heard with full attention your
description of the characteristics of devotional service to the Supreme
Lord. Now, by your mercy, I will be able to free myself from all sinful
reactions, even though I am not a great devotee. I now see you as a golden
deity decorated with jeweled ornaments and full of life. By seeing your
form, which is very rarely visible in the three worlds, I am convinced that
you are none other than Laksmi.
Text 10
nanyam pasyami sadrsim
rupa sila gunaistaia
nanyo yogyo 51ml bharttd
bhuvene'pi na drsvate
I cannot think of any woman whose beauty, characteristics, and
personality are equal to yours. For this reason, it would be very difficult
to find a suitable husband for you withm the three worlds.
Texts 11-12
kintu pare samudrasya
paramascarya rupavan
gunaian istarah saksat
kascid drsto'timanmah
na hi dhatrkrtam manye
sanrarn sarvasaubhagam
yasya sn vasudeiasya
nantaram dhyana yogatah
And yet, I have found a suitable match for you across the sea. He
is all-attractive, extraordinarily qualified, and non-different from the
Supreme Personality of Godhead While gazing upon His enchanting
body, one cannot imagine that it had been made b) the creator. After
lengthy deliberation, I have concluded that He is directly the Supreme
Lord, Han.


82 
S R I K A L K I P U R A N A
Text 13
ttaya dhyatam tu yadrupam
visnor amita tejasah
tat sakbat krtam ityeva
na tatra kiyadantaram
I feel within the core of my heart that I have seen the supremely
powerful Lord Han, upon whom you always meditate. 1 do not find any
difference between His form and the form of Lord Han.
Text 14
padmovaca
bruhi tanmama kim kutra
jdtah kira pardcaram
janasi tatkrtam karma
iiitarendtra varnaya
Padmavati said: О parrot, please tell me—where is His place of birth?
If you know more about Him then tell me what He has accomplished in
His life.
Text 15
vrksadagaccha pujam te
karomi vidhwodhitam
vijapura phalaharam
kuru чайки pay ah pna
О bird, why are you sitting at the top of this tree
7 Please come down
and sit next to me. I will treat you with respect and so do not be afraid.
Come and have some sweet juicy fruit that I brought and drmk some pure
water
Texts 16-18
tava cancuyugam padma
ragada arunam ujvalam
ratna samghamtam aham
karomi тапаьак pnyam
kandharam suryakantena
maruna svarnaghattina


CONVERSATION 
BETWEEN PADMAVATI 
AND SUKA 
83
karomydcchadanam cat и
muktabhih paksatim tava
patatram kunkumena vngam
i,aurabhena atiatntam
karomi nayana ananda
dayakam rupamidrsam
Alas
1 How beautiful is your beak, so bright and redder than a ruby! I
would be happy to plate your beak with gold Indeed, I will decorate your
neck with a sunstone set in a gold locket. I will cover your wings with
pearls and decorate your entire body with marks of fragrant 
kunkuma.
Thus, anyone who sees you will become very pleaded
Text 19
puccha maccha manivrata
ghargharena atisabditam
padayor nupuralapa
lapinam warn karumyaham
I will decorate your tail with a strand of precious jewels. When you
fly through the sky, this strand of jewels will make an enchanting sound. I
will decorate your feet with ornaments so that when vou walk, there will
be the beautiful sound of tinkling bells.
Text 20
tavamrta kathavrata
tyaktddhim sadhi mamiha
sakhbhih samgatabhiste
/vim kansyami tadvada
My distress has been dissipated b\ hearing your nectarean words.
Now, kindly instruct me—what can I do for you? I and my companions
are prepared to do whatever you ask.
Text 21
iti padmavacah srutva
tadantikam upagatah
kiro dhirah prasannatma
pravaktum upacakrame


84 
SRI KALKI P U R A N A
Upon hearing these words of Padmavatl, Suka descended from the
treetop and spoke as follows.
Text 22
kira uvaca
brahmana prarvitah snso
maha karuniko babhau
wmbhale visnuyasaso
grhe dharmam nraksisuh
The parrot said: The supremely merciful Lord of LaksmI has already
made His advent at the house of a great brahmana named Visnuyasa in
the village of Sambhala He has appeared to re-establish the principles of
religion, having been requested to do so by His exalted devotees.
Texts, 23-25
caturbhir bhratrbhir }nan
gotrajaih pancantah
krtopa nayano vedam
adhitya ramasannidhau
dhanurvedasca gandharvam
swadasvam аыт sukam
kavacanca varam labdhva
sambhalam punaragatah
visakha yupa bhupalam
prapya siksavisesatah
dharmanakhyaya matiman
adharmamsca nirakarot
He is residing with His brothers and other relatives. After His
sacred thread ceremony, He went to the asrama of Parasurama of the
Bhrgu dynasty, where He mastered the Vedas. He also mastered the arts
of discharging arrows and music. He received a sword, horse, parrot, and
shield from Mahadeva, as a benediction. Thereafter, He returned home
to Sambhala and began helping the king, Visakhayupa, protect religious
principles and destroy those who practice irreligion.


C O N V E R S A T I O N 
B E T W E E N P A D M A V A T I 
A N D S O К А 
85
Text 26
m padma tadakhyanam
msamya muditanana
pranhapaya masa sukam
kalker anayanddrta
After hearing this from Suka, Padmavatl's happiness knew no bounds.
Her lotus-like face brightened and she immediately sent Suka to bring
Lord Kalki.
Text 27
bhusayitva svarnaratncas
tamuvdca krtanjahh
She decorated Suka with golden ornaments and spoke to him with
folded hands.
Texts 28-29
padmovaca
nweduam tu janasi
kimanyat kathayamyaham
stnbhava bhayabhitatma
yadi nayati sa prabhuh
tathapi me karmadosat
pranatim kathayisyasi
swena yo varo dattah
ьа me sapo'bhavat kila
Padmavati said- О parrot, you know the request that I will make of
you. What more can I say? If the Lord refuses to come here, fearing that
He might also turn into a woman, then simply convey my obeisances to
Him and describe everything that has happened as a result of my past
misdeeds. Also, inform Him of how the benediction that Lord Siva
awarded me has now become a curse
Texts 30-32
pumsam maddarsane napi
stribhavam kamatah suka
srutteti padmam amantraya
pranamya ca punah punah


86 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
uddiya ргачауаи kimh
sambhalam kalkipahtam
tamagatam samakarnya
kalkih para puranja~sah
kode krtva tarn dadarsa
svarna ratna vibhusitam
sanandam parama ananda
da^akam praha tarn tada
The benediction I received from Lord Siva was that any male who
looked at me with lust would immediately turn into a woman
After hearing these statements of PadmavatI, Suka pacified her and
repeatedly offered his obeisances After giving her sufficient assurances,
he flew into the sky and within a short time, arrived at the village of
Sambhala, which was protected by Lord Kalki When Lord Kalki, the
destroyer of demons, heard the news of Suka's arrival, He became jubilant
When they met, Lord Kalki placed Suka upon His lap and thus saw that
his entire body was decorated with golden ornaments
Texts 33-34
kalkih paramatejasi
tarasminnam alam mkam
puja^itva kare sprswa
pa^ah panena tarpayan
tanmukhe svamukham tattva
papratcha nvidhah kathah
kasmad desaccarma tiam
drstia purvam kimagatah
The all-powerful Lord Kalki caressed Suka's bod\ with His left palm
and offered him some water to drink Indeed, the Lord almost touched
Suka's lips with His own as He said My dear Suka
1 Where have \ou been
during your travels
7 Where are you coming from just now' What are the
wonderful things that you have seen
7
Text 35
kutrositah kuto labdha
manikancana bhusanam


C O N V E R S A T I O N 
B E T W E E N 
P A D M A V A T I 
AND S U K A 
87
aharnisam tvanmdinam
vanchitam mama sarvatah
What were you doing for such a long time7 How did you get these
jeweled ornaments71 have been longing to meet you, throughout the days
and nights
Text 36
taianaloka nenapi ksanam
me yugavad bhavet
Indeed, even a moment of separation from you seemed to Me more
than a yuga
Texts 37-38
m kalkervacah sruttva
pranipatya bhrtam
kathaya masa padmayah
kathah purvodita yatha
samvadam atmanastasya
nijalankara dharanam
sarvam tadvarnaya masa
tasyah pranaa punakam
When the magnanimous Suka heard these words of Lord Kalki,
he repeatedly offered his obeisances and then began speaking, telling
everything about his meeting with Padmavati 
He described their
conversation, and told the story of how she had given him the jeweled
ornaments
Text 39
srutveti vacanam kalkih
sukena sahito muda
jagama tianto'svena
swadattena tanmanah
After hearing everything about Padmavati from Suka, Lord Kalki
became very attached to her Without further delay, the Lord mounted
the horse that was given to Him by Siva and happily departed for the
Simhala island


88 
SRI KALKI P U R A N A
Text 40
samudraparam amalam
simhalam janasamkulam
папа итапа bahulam
bhasiaram mamkancanaih
This island was situated far across the ocean, and thus surrounded
by water on all sides It was thickly populated, many airplanes were seen
there, and it shone with the splendor of countless jewels and gold
Text 41
prasada sadanagresu
pataka toranakulam
srem sabha panattala
pupra gopura manidatam
The city was decorated with many palaces and massive gates On
top of the gates and palaces were placed colorful flags that increased
the beauty of the island There were assembly houses, raised platforms,
memorials, domed buildings, and concrete roads Indeed, there was no
end to the beauty of this magnificent city
Texts 42-43
purastn padimini padma
gandhamoda dvirephinim
punm karumatim tatra
dadarsa puratah sthitam
marala jala sancala
tilola kamalantaram
unmditabja malali
kalita kuhtam sarah
Soon after Lord Kalki's arrival at Simhala, He gazed upon the city,
which was known as KarumatI This city was adorned with a nice lake
filled with lotus flowers The water of the lake was never still, due to the
swans that were always swimming here and there Swarms of humming
bees came from the nearby forest to drink the honey of the lotus flowers


CONVERSATION BETWEEN PADMA\ATI 
AND SLKA 
<S9
Text 44
jala kukkuta dafni
hanaditam hamsasarasaih
tadarsa siaccha pavasam
lahan tola ujitam
Many swans, cranes, and other aquatic birds that were swimming in
the lake created a very pleasing sound The cooling breezes skimming
across the waves of the lake gave pleasure to the trees and plants growing
on the shore
Texts 45-47
lanam kadamia kuddala
sala talamra kesaraih
kapitthasvattha kharjura
vi)a pura karanjakaih
punnaga panasair nagarai
angair arjunasimsapaih
kamul<air nankelaisca
nanairksaista wbhitam
lanam dadarta rutiram
phalapuspa dalavrtam
drstta hrstatanuh шкат
sakarunah kalkih purante lane
praha pntikaram lato tra sarasi
snataiyam ityadvtah tacchma
iinayanntah prabhumatam samin
padmasramam tatsandesamiha
prayanam adhuna gatia sa kiro tadat
The forests surrounding the lake contained many varieties of trees,
including kadamba kuddala and sala While walking in the forest Lord
Kalki became jubilant by seeing its beauty With great affection He said
My dear Suka, I want to bathe at this place


90 
SRI K A I K I 
P I R A N A
Understanding the Lord's intention, Suka humbly said M) dear
Lord, permit me to go and meet Padmavati
Thus Suka came before Padmavati and informed her of Lord Kalki's
armal
Thus ends the translation of the eighth chapter of Sri Kalki Purana


C
H
A
l
'
T
L
R 
N
l
N
h
The Meeting of Lord Kalki and Padmavati
Texts 1-3
suta uiaca
kalkih sarovarabhya.se
jalaharana lartmam
svactha sphatika sopane
praialacita tedike
saroja saurabha i^agra
bhramad bhramara nadite
kadamva pota patah
umtaditya daisant
sammasa sane cure
sadasvenava tantah
kalkih prastha pa^amam
sukam padmasrarnam
Sura Gosvami said Lord Kalki dismounted and sat on a divine altar
that was bedecked with emeralds, crystal, and other precious stones,
which was situated by the pathway used by people to bring water from the
lake The Lord saw swarms of humming bees hovering around the full>
blossomed lotus flowers in the lake, fully intoxicated Ъ) their fragrance
The forest was cool because of the shade provided b\ the kadamba trees
After sitting down comfortably, Lord Kalki sent Suka to see Padmavati
Text 4
sa nagLSiaram madh~\asthah
mko gana dadarsa tarn
harmsastham usini patro
sa\imm sakhibhn inam
Suka flew to the residence of Padmavati and sat at the top of a
nagakesara tree From there, he saw Padmavati King down on a lotus
shaped bed inside the palace, surrounded by her companions


92 
S R I 
K A L K I 
P U R A N A
Text 5
nisvdsa vata tdpena
layatim tadanam bujam
utksipantim sakhidatta
kamalam candanoksitam
Her face looked dry and pale, due to her warm breathing, which was
a sign of her intense separation from the Lord. She held a fully blossomed
lotus flower smeared with sandalwood paste, slowly moving it from side
to side.
Text 6
rev a van pansnatarn
рагафЛКуат samdgatam
dhrtaniram rasagatam
nindantim pavanmn pnyam
Although a gentle cooling breeze blew, carrying fine drops of water,
the pollen of lotus flowers, and the aroma of various other flowers, which
was certainly very pleasant, PadmavatI did not take any pleasure in it at
all, but instead criticized it.
Text 7
sukah sakarunah sadhu
vacanais tdmto say at
sa, tvamehyehi, re svasthi
svdgatam svasti me subhe
When Suka saw Padmavatl's pathetic condition, he attempted to
pacify her with sweet words. PadmavatI then said: О Suka, may you
achieve auspiciousness. I hope that you journey has been fruitful. The
bird said: Yes, I feel that everything is going as planned.
Text 8
gate wayyati vyagrdham
santiste'stu rasayanat
rasayanam durlabham me
sulabham te sivasraye
PadmavatI said: О parrot, since your departure, I have simply been
waiting anxiously for your return Suka said: I think that there is a remedy


T H E 
M E L T I N G 
OF L O R D 
K A L K I 
AND P A D M A V A T I 
93
so that all of -your misery will be vanquished. Padma said: I must be very
unfortunate because I am not able to gam any relief from my suffering.
The bird said: О devotee of Lord Siva, it will not be difficult to dispel
your anguish.
Text 9
leva me bhagya vihinaya
ihawa varavarnmi
devi tarn smasaswe
pi atisthapya gata layam
Padmavatl said: О Suka, I am so unfortunate. How will my desire ever
be fulfilled? Suka said: О gentle lady, your desire will be fulfilled very
soon. I have brought the Lord of your heart and He is waiting by the side
of the lake.
Texts 10-12
evamanyonya samvada
muditdtma manorathe
mukham mukhena nayanam
nay one sadyta dadau
vimala mahm lola
kamala kamakandala
vilauni carumaa
kumudef\asta nayikah
sakhya eta matastabhii
jalakrdartham udyatah
padma praha sar astir am
ayantu sa maya stnyah
Upon realizing that her long cherished desire would soon be fulfilled,
PadmavatI became filled with jo> and the hairs of her bod\ stood on end
She touched her lips to the lips of the parrot and fixed her eyes on his eyes
Padmavatl's eight principle companions—Vimala, Malml, Lola, Kamala,
Kamakandala, Vilasini, CarumatI, and Kumuda—were preparing to go to
the lake to enjoy playing in the water Padma addressed her companions-
My dear friends, let us go now to the lake and enjo\ ourselves


94 
S R I K A L K I 
P U R A N A
Text 13
uyakhya yasu ьпакат
aruhya pamanta sakhibha,
caruiesabhir bhutia
siantah puradiah.h
pray ay аи tiaruam drastum
bhaismi yadupatim yatha
After saying this, Padmavati hurriedly mounted a palanquin and left
the palace, along with her nicely dressed companions She was in a hurry
to see Lord Kalki, and she reminded one of how Rukmmi had left her
palace to meet Sri Krsna, the Lord of the Yadus
Text 14
janah pumamsah path ye purasthah
piadudravuh strata hhayad digantaram
srmgatake va vipanisthita ye
rujamgana sthapita punayakaryah
While Padmavati was going to the lake, all the male citizens ran away,
here and there, fearing that they might turn into females if they looked
at the princess After their wives had seen that they had returned home
safely, the men peacefully engaged in the worship of the Supreme Lord
Text 15
nnantam tam siukam whantyah
naryo и matta lalaiattarasca
padma sukoktaya taduparyupastha
jagama tabhih pamaritabhih
In this way, the road became devoid of men Padama\ati's palanquin
was carried by young, strongly built women According to the plan of
Suka, Padmavati traveled to the lake b\ palanquin, surrounded bv her
companions
Text 16
sarojalam sarasa hamsanaditam
praphulla padmodbhata renuiasitam
cerurvi gahyasu sudhakaralasah
kumudiati namudayaya sobhanah


Т н ь 
M E E T I N G 
OF L O R D 
K A L K I 
A N D P A D M A V A T I 
95
Soon, Padmavati and her companions, whose faces resembled full
moons, and whose forms were very charming to behold, arrived at the
lake The water of the lake was fragrant because of the presence of many
fully blossomed lotus flowers The swans and cranes created a beautiful
sound In this setting, all the girls entered the water and began plaung
with great merriment
Text 17
tasam mukhamoda madandha bhrngah
uha\a padmani mukharaiinde
lagnah sugandhadhi kamakalas\a
nnantas capi na tatyajusce
Bees became captivated by the aroma emanating from the girls' lotus
like faces Indeed, they became so intoxicated that they ga\e up enjoying
the nectar of the lotus flowers Although the girls repeatedly tried to drive
the bees away, the\ kept coming again and again because of the heavenly
fragrance and beauty of their faces
Text 18
hasopahasaih sarasa prakasaih
icuhaisca nrfsaista jalc nharaih
karagrahanta jala yudha narttas
сакагьа tabhii lanitabhn utcaih
At this time, Padmav ati enjoyed playing w ith her friends Their minds
became enlivened by dancing, singing, playing musical instruments
clapping their hands, joking, smiling, and teasing one another
Text 19
sa kamatapta raanasa sukokum
micvi padma sakhibhih samtta
jalat samuttha^a mahaihabhu^a
jagama nirdista kadamia \andam
Thereafter, Padmavati, who was becoming afflicted b\ tht arrows of
Cupid, remembered the words of Suka and then came out ot the watet,
followed by her friends She changed her clothes and decorated herself
with beautiful ornaments, and then went underlie ith a kadamba tree
that had been appointed as the place of rendezvous


96 
SRI KALKI 
P L R A N A
Text 20
sukhe ьауапат mamvedika gatam
kalkim purastad atisurya varcasam
mahamani ыаса vibhusana atom
sukena sarddham tamudaiksa tesam
There, Padmavati saw her beloved Lord Kalki peacefully sleeping on
a raised platform that was decorated with jewels The effulgence of His
bod\ defeated the brilliance of the sun His entire body was decorated
with varieties of precious jewels
Texts 21
tamala nilam kamalapatim prabhum
pitambaram caru saroja locanam
ajanu bahum prthupina laksasam
sri vatsasat kaustubha kantirajitam
The complexion of the Lord of Laksmi was dark, like a tamala tree,
and He was dressed in \ellow garments He had lotus-like eyes, His arms
reached to His knees, and His chest was very broad and displayed the
mark of Snvatsa and Kaustubha gem
Texts 22-23
tadadbhutam rupam aveksya padma
samstambhita usmrta satknartha
suptam tu sambodhayitum pranttam
nibarayamasa usankita sa
kadati eso и talo tirupi
maddarsanat stritiam upaiti saksat
tadatra kim me bhanta bhaiasva
i arena sapa piatimena lole
Upon seeing the transcendental form of the Lord, Padmavati became
stunned and fearful Indeed, she became so overwhelmed with emotion
that she forgot to greet her Lord When Suka attempted to awaken the
Lord, she forbade him, saying If this greatly attractive hero looks at
me and is transformed into a woman, then what will be the use of the
benediction that I had received from Lord Siva
7 Truthfully, I consider
Lord Siva s benediction to be a curse


T H E 
MbtTiNO 
OF L O R D 
K A L K I 
AND P A D M A V A T I 
97
Tevt 24
carataratma jagatama dhsah
prabodhtas tadadhrdayam vaicya
dadarsa padmam pnyarupa sobham
•\atha rama sn madhusudanagre
Lord Kalki, the Supersoul of all living entities and master of the
universe, understood Padmavati's intentions and so woke up He saw that
just as Laksmi stands by the side of Lord Narayana, the most beautiful
and broad eyed Padmavati stood in front of Him
Texts 25-26
samviksya mayamwa mohinim
tam jagada kama kuhtah sa kalkih
sakhibhinsam samupa gatam tam
katak%a uksepa vinamitas^am
ihaihi mstagatam asm bhac^at
samagamaste kusala^a me s~\at
tavananenduh hla kamapura
tapapanodaya sukhaya kante
When the Lord gazed at the princess, Padmavati, who was surrounded
by her friends, she lowered her head out of modesty While gazing at
His eternal consort, who was bewildering like Maya devi, Lord Kalki
said О enchanting one, please come near Me May your arrival bring
you auspiciousness I have finally met you Now, M) affliction caused
by Cupid's arrows has been \ anquished by the soothing ra>s from your
moon-like face
Text 27
lolaksi laianya гаьатлшт
te kamahi dastas^a ndhatwawa
tanotu santim sukruna ht\a
sudurlabham jnanam asntas^a
О restless eyed one, although I am the creator of the unnerse, My
heart has been bitten by the poisonous snake of passion Indeed, 1 find
no other remedy than the nectar of your beautiful face True peace
and happiness are achieved only by accumulating a great mountain ot


98 
S R I K A L K I 
P U R A N A
pious merit To act piouslv is the only objective of those who are souls
surrendered to the Supreme Lord
Text 28
bahu taiaitau kurutam manajnau
hrdi sthitam kamam udantaxasam
carvayatau caru nakhamkusena
dupam yatha sadi ndirna kumbham
Just as an elephant keeper brings a maddened elephant under control
by using a goad, only your enchanting arms will pacify my mind by
extinguishing the burning caused by the five arrows of Cupid
Text 29
stanavimai utthita mastakau te
kama pratodaviva tasasaktau
mamorasa bhinna nyabhimanau
sutarttulau vyadi satam prnam me
Your two rounded breasts covered by a cloth stand with their heads
held high, just like the goad of Cupid Let them be squeezed by My chest
so that My heart's desire will be fulfilled
Text 30
kantasMi чорапат idam lahtrayam
sutrena lomaiah lekha laksitam
ubhajitam ledi ulasjia rnadh^ame
kamasya durga^ra^amastu me prnam
M\ dear one, \our waist is very thin like the middle part of the
sacrificial altar The three lines on your abdomen, which is decorated
with fine hair, appear to be the pathw av of Cupid May that abdomen now
bring Me pleasure
Text 31
mmbhoru sambho^a sukha~\a me syat
nitamia nmxnm pulino pamam te
сатапег taniamsuka sangasobham
pramatta kama nmadod~\a magham


T H E 
M I N T I N G 
o f 
L O R D 
K A I 
M 
A N D 
P A D M A V A T I
О Rambhoru' О beautiful one
1 Your hips can be compared to the
banks of a ri\ er, and thev are bound with fine garments Your hips destroy
the lusty desires of materialistic people who are overwhelmed by insatiable
lust Let these hips be the object of My enjoyment
Text 32
padambiqam te nguli poira utritam
laram marala капа пиригмпат
karnahi dastasMj mamastu santa^e
hrdi sthitam sadamagJiane susobhane
Let your lotus feet, which are placed within the water of My heart,
which is therefore adorned with leaves in the form of \our toes, and which
are decorated with anklets ha\mg tinkling bells, neutralize the poisonous
effect caused by the biting of the snake ot My passion
Text 33
initial tadiacanamurtam
kahkula dhiamsas\a kalkualam
drstia satpurusatvam asya
mudita padma sakhibhi trta
kantam klantamanah krumjah
puta proiata tat sadaram dhiram
dhiram dhirapwasknam
mjapatim natia namaskandhma
After hearing these transcendental woids ot nectar spoken by Lord
Kalki, the destroyer of the contamination of Kali, princess Pidmavati
became overwhelmed with happiness Because her heart hid been
captivated by Lord Kalki, she offered her obeisances to Hun and then,
with great devotion, began to speak to her eternal husband
Thus ends the translation of the ninth chaptei ot \u Kalki Purana


С И V Р Т I R 
П 
\
The Marriage Of Lord Kalki To Padmavati
Prayers of The Kings To Lord Kalki
Texts 1
suta uvaca
sa padma tarn hanm
matva prema gaddabhasira
tustaia iridita den
kanrna tarunalayam
Suta Gosvami said Padmavati understood Lord Kalki to be non-
different from Lord Han, and thus she telt very shy With a voice choked
with affection, she began to offer prayers
Text 2
prasida jagatam natha
dharmabarman ramapate
vidito si visuddhatman
basagam trahi mam prabho
О husband of Laksmi, You are the Lord ot the universe and the
protector of religion О supremely pure Lord, I have now realized Your
true position and so I take shelter of You, please protect me
Text 3
dhanyaham krtapunyaham
tapodana japavrataih
tiam pratosya duraradhyam
labdham taia padambujam
Although You are rarely attained, I have obtained Your lotus feet b>
pleasing You with m\ austerities, gifts of charity, chanting of mantras, and
observance of vows I believe that this is the cause of my great fortune
Text 4
ajfiam kuru padambhojam
tata samsprsya wbhanam


THL 
MARRIAGE OF LORD KALKI TO PADMAVATI 
101
bhaianam у ami rajanam
akhyatum siagatam taia
Now, please order me so that I can go home after touching Your soft
lotus feet and inform everyone of Your auspicious arrival
Text 5
id padma rupa sadma
gatia svapitaram nrpam
prcn UL agamanam kalker
visnor amsa^ya dautyakaih
After speaking in this way, Padmavati, whose beauty was matchless,
returned home and informed her father through a messenger about the
auspicious arrival of Lord Kalki, the incarnation of Lord Han
Text 6
sakhimukhena padmayah
pani grahana kamyaya
barer agamanam srutia
saharso'bhud irhadrathah
When the king heard from Padmavati's friends the news that Lord
Han had arrived with a desire to marry his daughter, he became merged
in a great ocean of happiness
Texts 7-8
pwodhasa brahmanaisca
patrair mitraih sumangalaih
vadya tandaia gitaisca
pujayojana panibhih
jagamanayuum kalhm
sarddham nijajanaih prabhuh
mandayitia karumatim
pataka siarna toranaih
The King and his ministers, priests, brahmanas, friends, and relatives
hurriedly went to greet Lord Kalki in a festive mood with singing, dancing,
and music By the king's order, the entire city of Karumati was decorated
with flags, gates, and auspicious articles


102 
S R I 
K A L K I 
P I R A N A
Texts 9-10
tato jala sayabhyasam
gatia tisnu \asahsutam
mam ledi kayasinam
bhiaanaika gaum pawn
bana dhanopan \atha
sobhante
 
ruuramaho
tia\ud induiMtdhadim
tathana bhusananyuta
When King Brhadratha approached the lake, he saw Lord Visnu, the
son of Visnuyasa, the shelter of those without any shelter, and master of
the universe, sitting on an altar bedecked with jewels The ornaments
on the Lord's blackish body appeared like lightning flashing in a daik
cloud
Text 11
same paatasagra
ghorabhasa bibhusitam
rupalaianya sadane
madanodyama паьапе
The beaut> of the Lord's transcendental body defeated the pride of
Cupid Indeed, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the origin of all
kinds of beauty He was dressed in yellow garments having dark borders
Texts 12-13
dadarse purato raja
rupasila gunakaram
sasmh sapulakah snsam
drstia sadhu tamaita\at
jnana gocara metanme
taiairamanam мага '
yatha mandhati putras\a
yadunathaia kanant
While gazing upon Lord Kalki, the embodiment of all transcendental
qualities, the possessor of sublime characteristics, and the all attractive


T H E 
M A R R I A G E OF L O R D K A L K I 
TO 
P A D M A V A T I
husband of Laksmi, the goddess of fortune, the happiness of the king
knew no bounds Tears of love incessantly flowed from his eyes After
respectfully greeting the Lord, the king said О Lord of the universe,
just as Sri Krsna met the son of Mandhata in a dense forest, bv my good
fortune, You are meeting me here todav
Text 14
ityuktva tarn pujayina
samamya nijasrame
harmya prasada samiadht
sthapaynia dadaa sutam
After greeting Lord Kalki, the king worshiped Him with great respect
and then brought Him to his palace, which had decorated pillars, gates,
and residential quarters He then gave his daughter's hand in charity to
the Lord
Text 15
padmam padma palasaksim
padmanetraya padmimm
padmajadesatah padma
nabhayadad yathakramam
Thus King Brhadratha had his daughter, Padmavati, whose eyes were
like lotus petals, who had the fragrance of a lotus, and who was born
at a place where many lotuses grew, married to the Supreme Lord, who
possesses a lotus like navel
Text 16
kalkir labdhia pnyam bharyam
simhale sadhu satkrtah
samuiasa usesajnah
samiksya dupam uttamam
While being united with His eternal consort at the island of Simhala,
Lord Kalki was praised by manv exalted personalities He decided to reside
there for some time, because He wished to take a tour of the island
Text 17
rajanah stritta mapannah
padmayah sakhitam gatah


104 
S R I K A L K I P U R A N A
drastam samiyustvantah
kalkim visnum jagatpatim
The kings who had been transformed into females and were residing
in Simhala as Padmavati's companions, rushed to see the Lord of the
universe, Kalki.
Text 18
tarn stnyo'pi tamalokya
samsprsya caranambujam
punah pumstvam samapanna
revasnanat tadajnaya
Upon seeing the Lord, they went and touched His lotus feet. Then, by
the Lord's order, they regained their original forms as men while bathing
in the water of the Reva River.
Text 19
padmakalki gaurakrsnau
vipantantard bubhau
bahihsphutau mla pita
vasovyajena pasyatu
Padmavati's complexion was very fair and Lord Kalki's complexion
was dark, like a rain cloud. In this way, they appeared to materialistic
vision to be opposite one another. Princess Padmavati was dressed in blue
garments, and Lord Kalki was dressed in yellow garments.
Text 20
drstva prabhavam kalkestu
rajanah paramad bhutam
pranamya paraya bhaktaya
tustavuh saranarthinah
Having witnessed Lord Kalki's extraordinary influence, all the kings
surrendered unto Him as eternal servants and began to offer prayers with
unalloyed devotion and profound humility.
Text 21
rajana ucuh
jajajaya nijamayaya kalpita


T H E 
MARRIAGE OF LORD KALKI 
TO PADMAVATI 
105
visesa kalpana pannama
jalapluta lokatrayo upakaranam
dkalasya manwnamsmya puntama
vijanar vibhuta mahamina sanra '
warn nijahta dharmasetu
samraksana krtavatarah
The kings said: О Supreme Lord! All glories unto You
1 B\ the
influence of Your supreme potency, this variegated universe has come into
existence. Indeed, this material world is but the effect ot Your external
energy. When all objects within the three worlds were destroyed h) the
water of devastation, and thus the Vedas were also lost, You appealed
as the Matsya incarnation to protect the religious principles that were
previously established by You.
Text 22
punanha dittja bala panlamghi
vasaba sudanadrta jita bhuvana
pardkama hiranayaksa nidhana
prthivyud dharana saml<alpabhi
nivesa dhrta koldvatarah pah nah
When the demons had defeated Indra, the king of heaven, and the
greatly powerful Hiranyaksa, was about to kill him, just to vanquish the
king of the demons and deliver the earth, You assumed the form of Lord
Varaha. Now, please protect us.
Text 23
punanha jaladh mathana drta
deva danava gana mandaracala
nayana vyakuhtanam sahajye nadrta citta
parvatoddharna amrta prasana racanaiataia
kurmmakara prasida paresa warn dina nrpanam
Long ago, the demigods and demons agreed to cooperate to chum
the ocean of milk, for the purpose of producing nectar. They used Mount
Mandara as the churning rod, but were unable to support its weight At
that time, You accepted the form of Lord Kurma and supported Mount
Mandara on Your back. О Lord, You assumed that form so that the


106 
SRI 
K A L K I 
P U R A N A
demigods could drink the nectar of immortality Now, kindly be pleased
upon these most fallen and wretched kings
Text 24
punanha tnbhm ana jawnu
maha bala parakramasya
hiramakasipor ditanam deva
laranam bhcfsabhitanam kahanasa
dm suta ladhaprepsur brahmano
taradanad vadhya^a na sastrastaratn
dna svargamartya patalatale deba
gandhana kinnara nagainti vicmtya
narahan rupena nakhagra bhinnarun
dasta dantacchadam tyaktawn krtavanasi
When the greatly powerful Hiranyakasipu, who had conquered the
three worlds, began to torment the demigods so that they lived in constant
fear, just to protect them, you made up Your mmd to annihilate that king
of the demons Because of the benedictions of Brahma, the demon was
incapable of being killed by any man, demigod, Ganbdhana, Kinnara,
Naga, or weapon He could not be killed in the heaven planets, on earth,
or in the lower planets, nor could he be killed during the day or at night
Still, You assumed Your form as the half-man half-lion incarnation of
Lord Nisimhadeva, so as not to nullify the words of the creator As the
demon attempted to bite You, You tore open his chest with Your sharp
nails and thus sent him to the abode of Yamaraja
Text 25
punanha tnjagajjayino baleh
satre sakranup vatuiamanah
daitya sammohanaya tnpada
bhumisancat chalena iisiakayas
tadutsrsta jala samsparsa uirddha
manobhlasatitam bhutale taler
dauatankatbam angikrtam utitam danaphalam
You appeared as the younger brother of Indra, assuming the form of a
dwarf brahmana, Vamanadeva, and then went to the sacrificial arena of


T H E 
M A R R I A G E ОЬ 
L O R D 
K A L K I 
TO P A D M A V A T I 
107
King Bah to deceive him You simply asked for three steps of land in charify
He agreed but then failed to keep his promise because You assumed a
gigantic form that covered the entire universe with just two steps FinalK,
you sent the king of the demons to reside in the lower planets, and to
reciprocate his unalloyed surrender unto You, You remained with him as
his doorkeeper
Text 26
punanha haihasadi nrpanam
amita bala parakramanam
папа madollanghita maryada
vartmanam mdhanaya
bbrguiamsap jamadagnyah
pitrhoma dhenuharana
pravrddham anyuiasat
tnsapta krtw nihksatnyam pnhnim
krtaianasi parasuramavatarah
When the kings of the earth, such as Haihava, became puffed up
due to their great prowess and disregarded religious principles, You
incarnated as Parasurama, of the Bhrgu dynasty, to annihilate them In
that incarnation, You became enraged at the ksatriyas for stealing your
father's wish-fulfillmg cow, so that You made the earth devoid of ksatriyas
twenty one times
Text 27
punanha pu!ast\a tamsaiatamsasya
iiita sraitb\ah putrasya nisac<mis\a
raianasya lokatraya tapana^a
nidhanam urankrtya ran kulajata
dasarathatmajo tisi ami trad stranyu
palabhya xane sitaharana vasat
prairddha тапмта tanarair
mbadhya saganam dasakandharam
hataumav ramaiatarah
Later on, when the three worlds were being tormented b> the
demoniac son of sage Visrava of the Pulast\a dynasty, the ten headed
Ravana, You incarnated as the son of King Dasaratha of the Sur\a


S R I K A L K I P U R A N A
dynasty to destroy him You mastered the art of releasing arrows from the
great sage Visvamitra and went to the forest in exile for fourteen years
During that time, Ravana kidnapped your wife, Slta You thus became
morose and then crossed the ocean by building a bridge with the help of
Your monkeys soldiers and killed the lord of Lanka, Ravana, along with
his family
Text 28
punanha yadukuia jaladhi kalanidhih
sakala suragana sevita pddaravinda
dvandvah vwidha ddnava daitya dalana
lokatraya dunta tapano vasudevatmap
ramavatdro balabhadrastvam asi
Thereafter, You appeared as the moon-like descendent of Yadu,
Baladeva, the son of Vasudeva. You diminished the burden of the earth by
annihilating many demons. At that time, all the demigods and devotees
worshiped Your lotus feet.
Text 29
punanha vidhkrta veda dharmdnusthana
pihita nanddarsana samghrnam
samsara karma tyaga vidhna brahmabhdsa
vilasa catunm prakrti vimdna ndma
sampadayan buddhdvatdrastvam asi
Then, in due course time, You appeared as Lord Buddha and displayed
hatred for the Vedic principles that had been prescribed by the creator.
You instructed Your followers to give up their attachment for this illusory
material world by renouncing all desires for sense gratification Although
You rejected the Vedas, You never disregarded worldly ethics.
Text 30
adhuna kahkula ndsavatdro
bauddha pdsanda mlecchadindnca
vedadharma setu panpdlandya krtavatarah
kalh mpendsman stntva nirayddudhrta
vanasi tavdnukampam kimiha kathaydmah
Recently, You appeared as Lord Kalki in order to eliminate the
dynasty of Kali by destroying the Buddhists, atheists, and mlecchas,


T H E 
M A R R I A G E OF L O R D K A L K I 
TO PADMAVATI 
109
thereby protecting the true path of religion What more can we say about
Your causeless mercy
 7
Text 31
kva te brahmadinam avidita vilasava taranam
kva nah kama vamakuhta mrga trsnartta manasam
sudusprdpyam •уиьтассагапа jalaja lokanam idam
krpa paravdrah pramudita drsdsvasaya nijan
Whereas we are ordinary human beings who are afflicted by the arrows
of Cupid as soon as we see a beautiful woman and thus are alw ays eager for
sense gratification, You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose
glories are unknown even to the best of demigods, Brahma It is extremely
difficult for people like us to attain shelter at Your lotus feet However,
You are an ocean of mercy and we have taken shelter of You Kindly give
us hope by allowing us to receive Your merciful glance
Thus ends the translation of the tenth chapter of Sri Kalki Purana


C
H
A
P
T
F
R 
E
L
E
V
E
N
The Story of Ananata and How He was Influenced by Maya
Text 1
suta uiaca
srutia nrpanam bhaktanam
гасапат purusottamah
brahmana ksatraut sudra
larnanam dharma maha у at
Suta GosvamI said After hearing the prayers of the kings, who were
all His devotees, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kalki, spoke to
them about the duties of the tour varnas—brahmana, 
ksatriya, vaisya, and
budra
Text 2
pratrttanam nwrttanam
karma у at pankmtatam
sari am samsravaya masa
vedanam anusasanam
The Lord described the duties prescribed by the scriptures for all
classes of men, whether they be attached householders or detached
renunciates
Texts 3-5
ш kalkenacali siutia
rajano visadasayah
pranipatya punah prahuh
purvantu gatimatmanah
stntiam iap~\athaia pumstiam
кач^а ха кепа га krtam
jara yautana bafaadi
sukha duhkhadi kanta у at
kasmat kuto ta kasmin la
kimeta dm la vibho


THE 
STORY OF ANANATA 
111
атпштапча uditam
api karmam iarna^,a
By hearing the talks of Lord Kalki, the hearts of the kings became
purified They bowed down before Him once more and then inquired
about their actual identities They said Why do human beings have male
and female bodies
7 What is the reason for this
1 Why do our bodies change
from childhood to boyhood and then to old age, and why are we subject to
happiness and distress
7 О Lord, please explain all this Apart from these
things, we would also like hear about anvthing else that we do not e\en
know how to inquire about
Texts 6-8
tada tadakarnsa kalkir
anantam munim asmarat
so'pyananto mumimas
tirtha pado brhadbratah
kuilker darsanato muktim
akala^ya gatastiaran
samagatya punah praha
kim kansyami kutia ьа
\as\amiti vacah syutva
kalkih praha hasan munim
krtam drstam иача sanam
jiiata чакча nnarttakam
adrstam akrtanteti
sntua hrstamana mumh
Lord Kalki then invoked the great sage, Ananta As soon as the Lord
remembered the pure hearted ascetic who observed \erv formidable \ov\s,
he immediately arrived there, thinking that he would be dehv ered b\ Lord
Kalki's darsana He said My dear lord, please order me—what shall 1 do
in Your service
7 Lord Kalki smiled and said You know everything abour
Me and My pastimes Destmv cannot be changed Without an action
there cannot be a reaction
Upon hearing these enigmatic words of Lord Kalki, the sage felt gieat
satisfaction


112 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
Text 9
gamandyodyacam tam tu
drswa nrpaganas tatah
kalkim kamala patraksam
procur vismita cetasah
When the lotus-eyed Lord Kalki prepared to depart, the kings were
astonished and spoke as follows.
Text 10
rajan ucuh
hmanenapi kathtam
way a vd kimatanyuta
sarvam tat srotum icchamah
kathopa kathanam dvayoh
The kings said What did this great sage tell You? What did You say to
him in reply7 What had you two discussed previously? We are very eager
to hear about this.
Text 11
nrparwm tadvacah sratvd
tanaha madhusudanah
pracchantu tam munim sdntam
kathopa kathanddrtah
To the kings' inquiry, Lord Kalki replied: If you would like to know
what had transpired between us, then just ask this peaceful and sober
age
Text 12
iti kalker vaco bhuyah
srutvd te nrpa sattamah
anantam ahuh pranatdh
prasnapaiati tirsavah
Being advised by Lord Kalki in this way, the assembled kings offered
their obeisances to the great sage, Ananta, and then inquired from him
as follows


T H E STORY OF ANANATA 
113
Text 13
rajdna ucuh
типе kimatra kathanam
kalkina dharma varmana
durbodhah kena jatas
tatwam varnaya nah prabho
The kings said
1 О exalted sage, Lord Kalki is the protector of religious
principles, and your conversation with Him must have been very
confidential We have an ardent desire to hear what you had said and so
please oblige us.
Text 14
mumruvaca
punkdydm pan purd
pitd me veda paragah
vidramo ndma dharmajnah
khydtah parahue ratah
The great sage, Ananta, said: Long ago, there lived a sage named
Vidruma in the city of Punka. He was well-versed in the Vedic literature,
very highly qualified, and helpful to others I am his only son.
Text 15
soma mama vibho mdta
pati dharma pardyana
tayor vayah pannatau
kale sanddkrtis tvaham
My mother, Soma, was a very chaste wife. I was born when my parents
were quite old, and I was a eunuch.
Texts 16-17
sanjatah sokadah pitror
lokanam nandxtd krtih
mdmdlokya pita klivam
duhkha soka bhayakulah
tyakwa grham swavanam
gatva tustava sankaram


114 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
sampujyesam ndhanena
dhupa dipanu lepanah
My parents were very sad to see that I was a eunuch and everyone
began to gossip and criticize me Finally, my father became so distraught
that he left home and went to a forest of Lord Siva, where he prayed to
the husband of Parvati after worshiping him with offerings of incense, a
ghee lamp, and sandalwood paste
Text 18
iidruma uvaca
snam santam sanalokaika natham
bhutaiasam va>uki kantha bhusam
jata pita baddha gangatarangam
vande sandrananda sandohadaksam
Vidruma said I offer my obeisances to Mahadeva, who awards
benedictions, and is very peaceful, the only real shelter for everyone, and
the master of the universe He is decorated with a necklace of Vasuki,
he holds the Ganges in his matted hair, and he bestows transcendental
happiness upon his devotees
Text 19
ityadi bahubhih stotraih
stutahsa swadah swa
iriarudhah prasannatma
pitaram praha me irnu
Being prayed to like this, Mahadeva became very pleased with my
father While riding upon the back on his bull carrier, he appeared before
my father and smilingly said You can ask me for any benediction you
desire
Text 20
iidramo me pita pi aha
matpumstiam tapa tapitah
hasan sito dadau pumsttam
parvatya pratimoditah
My father said 1 have begotten a son who is a eunuch, and so my
heart is filled with distress


T H E 
STORY OF ANANATA 
115
To this, the husband of Parvati, who was standing by his side, gave my
fathei the benediction that I would become a handsome and virile man
Text 21
mama, pumswam taram labdhva
pita\atah punargrham
purusam mam samalokya
saharsah pmaya saha
After receiving this benediction, my father returned home and found
that I had become an attractive male As a result, the happiness of my
parents knew no bounds
Text 22
tatah pravayasau tau tu
pitarau dvadasabdake
vwaham me karayiwa
bandhubhir mudamagatu
In due course of time, I grew up and became twelve years old At that
time, my elderly parents arranged for my marriage, and then celebrated it
with great pomp, along with all their friends and relatives
Text 23
yajnarata sutam patnim
manmirn rupamhnim
prapyaham pantustatma
grhasthah strnaso bhaiam
I was married to the daughter of Yajnarata She was exquisitely
beautiful, being in the prime of her youth I was ver\ attached to m^
household life and I soon became a henpecked husband
Text 24
tatah katipaye kale
pitarau me mrtau mpah
paralaukika karyam
suhrdbhir brahmanair irtah


116 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
Soon after my marriage, my father and mother left this world. I
dutifully performed the required funeral rites and other rituals, in the
association of my well-wishers and some qualified brahmanas.
Text 25
tayoh krtvd vidhdnena
bhojayitva dvijan bahun
pitror viyoga tapto'ham
visnuseva paro'bhavam
According to my capacity, I fed many qualified brahmanas. Thereafter,
being afflicted by intense separation from my parents, I devoted my time
to the worship of the Supreme Lord.
Text 26
tusto hanrme bhagavdn
]apa pujadi karmabhh
svapne mamdha mayeyam
sneha moha vmirmita
Soon, Lord Han became pleased with me and appeared in my dreams.
He said: All the perfections and attachments that you see in this world
are simply displays of My illusory energy, maya.
Text 27
ayam piteyam mdteti
mamata kulacetasdm
sokaduhkha bhayodvega
jara mrtyu vidhdyikd
Those who are bewildered by such illusory displays think, "He is my
father, she is my mother," and so on, and thus suffer terrible distress, fear,
and anxiety, as well as old age and death.
Text 28
srutvea vacanam visnoh
pratwaddrtham udyatam
mdmalaksyantarhitah sa
vinidro'ham tato'bhavam


T H E STORY OF ANANATA 
117
After hearing these words of wisdom, spoken by Lord Han, I was about
to put up some kind of argument but then the Lord suddenly disappeared
from my dream and I woke up with a start.
Text 29
savismayah sabhdryo'ham
taktvd tarn punkam punm
purusottamdkhyam sn visnor
dlayamcd gamam nrpdh
I was greatly astonished and immediately left my city, Punka. I went
to Purusottama-ksetra, the transcendental abode of Lord Han, along
with my wife.
Text 30
tatrawa daksine pdsrve
nirmdydsramam uttamam
sabhdryah sdnugdmatyah
karomi hansevanam
There, by the right side of the Lord's temple, 1 built my asrama and
began to serve Him, along with my wife and followers.
Text 31
mdyd sandarsanakdmksi
hansadmani samsthitah
gdyan nrtyan japan rxdma
antayan samandpaham
While residing in the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
I developed a desire to see His illusory energy, maya, and so I began to
meditate on the Lord, the deliverer from the ocean of birth and death,
while chanting, dancing, and singing His glories.
Text 32
evam vrtte dvddasdbde
dvadasydm parand dine
sndtukdmah samudre'ham
bandhubhih sahto gatah


118 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
In this way, twelve years passed Then once, before breaking my fast
on Dvadasi, I, along with my associates, went to bathe in the sea
Text 33
tatra magnam jalamdh.au
lahan lola samkule
samutthatum asaktam mam
pratudanti jalecarah
As I entered the water to bathe, I suddenly lost my balance and was
towed under by the current, so that I was convinced that I was about to
die. In fact, some fish or crab began to nibble at me.
Text 34
nnnajjanon majjanena
vyakuh krta cetasam
jala hdlola milana
dahtangam acetasam
Sometimes I was submerged withm the water, and at other times,
I floated on the surface. My heart was very restless and frightened
Gradually, by the pushing of the waves, I lost consciousness and my body
became numb.
Texts 35-36
jaladher daksine kule
patitam pavanentam
тат tatra patitam drstva
brddhasarma dvijottamah
sandhyamupasya saghrnah
svapuram mam samanayat
sa brddhasarma dharmatma
putradara dhananvitah
krtvarugnantu mam
tatra putravat paryapalayat
Thereafter, being driven by the wind, I was washed onto the beach
unconscious, somewhere in the south. At that time, an elderly brdhmana
named Brddha-sharma saw me lying in the sand. He took compassion


T H E 
S T O R Y 
OF A N A N A T A 
119
upon me and so, after completing his worship of the Lord, he brought me
to his house This pious and wealthy Brddha-sarma resided with his wife
and children, and he took care of me, treating me like a son
Text 37
ahantu tatra dinatma
digdesa bhi]na eva na
dampaa tau siapitarau
matva tatravasam nrpah
I could not understand anything about where I was, how I had come
there, and so on. I felt very aggrieved but continued to live at the elderly
brahmana's 
house, considering him as my father and his wife as my
mother
Texts 38-39
sa mam vijnava bahudha
veda dharmesu anusthitam
pradadau sram duhitaram
vwahe vina\anvitah
labdhva cami karakaram
rupa sila gunanvitam
namna carumatim tatra
maninim vismito'bhavam
Realizing that I had been initiated as a member of the twice-born
society, Brddha-s'arma gave his daughter, Carumati, to me in marriage.
This girl was very beautiful, with a complexion like molten gold, and she
was a reservoir of good qualities, and very cultured Having received a
glorious wife like that, I could not trust that my good fortune would last
Text 40
tayaham pantustatma
папа bhoga sukhani itah
janavitva panca putran
sammadenavrto' bhax am
Carumati always endeavored to please me. I lived with her in great
happiness and eventually begot five sons I became merged into an ocean
°f joy.


120 
S R I K A L K I 
P U R A N A
Text 41
jayasca vijayasyawa
kamalo vimalas tathd
budha ityadayah panca
viditastanayd mama
The names of my five sons were Jaya, Vijaya, Kamala, Vimala, and
Budha
Text 42
sajanan bandhubhih putrair
dhanair ndndvidhair aham
viditah pujito loke
devainndro yathd dwi
Just as the king of the demigods is worshiped in the heavenly planets
by all the other demigods, I was respected by my children, friends, relatives,
well-wishers, and others. Soon, my fame spread everywhere
Texts 43-44
budhasya jyestha putrasya
vwdhdrtham samudyatam
drstvd dvijavarastusto
dharmasa.ro rajdm sutam
ditsuh karmdni vedajuas
cakdrabhyu daydnyapi
vddyair gitaisca nrtyaisca
stnganaih svama bhusitaih
In due course of time, I decided that my eldest son, Budha, should
be married. There was a brahmana named Dharmasara who agreed to
give his daughter to my son in marriage. On an auspicious day, he invited
qualified brdhmanas and performed all the necessary rituals Many
beautiful women who were dressed very gorgeously and decorated with
golden ornaments danced joyfully. The whole atmosphere became filled
with the sweet sounds of musical instruments.
Text 45
ahanca putrabhyudaye
pitrdevarsi tarpanam


T H E 
STORY OF ANANATA 
121
karttum samudra velayam
pravistah parmadarat
For the welfare of my son, I went to the shore of the ocean and offered
oblations to the forefathers, demigods, and great sages
Text 46
vela lolayita tanur
jaldd utthaya satvarah
tire sakhin snana sandhya
pardn viksya munmanah
After completing that ritual, as I prepared to depart, I suddenly
spotted my previous friends and relatives who had resided with me at
Purusottama-ksetra, worshiping the Lord at that place I was very
surprised to see them.
Text 47
sadyah samabhavam bhupah
dvadasyam parnadrtan
purusottama sambasan
visnu sevartham udyatan
I was especially astonished when I saw how they were faithfully
engaged in rendering devotional service to Lord Han by breaking the
vow of EkadasI on Dvadasi.
Texts 48-49
te'pi mamagratah Urfoa
tadrupa vayasam nidhim
vismayavista manasam
drstva mamabruvana janah
ananta visnu bhakto'u
jale him drstvaniha
sthale va vyagramanasam
laksayamah katham tatah
To my surprise, I found myself to be the same handsome young man
that had bathed in the sea on a Dvadasi long ago When my friends of
Purusottama-ksetra saw me, they were concerned and said О Ananta,


S R I К A L к I P г к A N Л
why do you look .so anxious? You are a great Vaisnava. Have you seen
something wonderful, either in the water or cm the land?
Text 50
paranam kuru tad bruhi
t\akva visma\atmanah
tan hruvam aharh nan a
kincid drstvam srutam janah
If you have seen something amazing then tell us. Now you can break
your Ekadasi vow, To this, 1 replied: My dear friends, I have not seen or
heard anything wonderful at all.
Text 51
kamatma tat krpana dhir
may a sarhdarsanadrtah
tayd harer mayayaham
mudho vydkulitcndriyah
I had become overwhelmed by lust and thus had lost my vitality.
At that time, 1 desired to see Lord Hari's illusory energy. Then, by the
influence of mayd, I forgot everything about myself and took up a new life
that was full of lusty desires.
Text 52
_ na sarma vedmi kutrapi
sneha moha vasam gatah
atmano vismrtiriyam
ко veda viditdm tu tdm
Due to intense material affection and the influence of illusion, I was
unable to understand my actual position. Actually, I could not understand
how much I had forgotten my actual self. However, nobody else realized
that I had become bewildered by the Lord's illusory energy, mayd.
Text 53
in bharsa dhandgara
piiirthl idhdnu raktadhth
ananto'ham dinamdnd
na jane svdpa sammitam


Т н ь 
S T O R Y 
OF 
A N A N A T A
My mind was simply absorbed in thoughts of my children, wife,
wealth, and the arrangements for the marriage of my children. As a result,
I felt great distress and lamentation. I even torgot that I was Ananta. The
events ot my life at Purusottama-ksetra appeared to me like no more than
a dream.
Text 54
mam nkwa manmi hharya
I'llasam mudhavat fthitam
kandantl kimaho''kasmdt
alapanti maman tike
When my proud wife saw me in that almost senseless condition, she
lamented: Alas! What has happened! She then began to cry out loud
Text 55
iha tarn viksya tarns tatra
smrtvd katara manasam
hamsri'pycki> hodhayitum
dgato mam saduktibhih
As I gazed upon my wife that I had lived with at Purusottama-ksetra,
I immediately remembered everything about my children, wife, wealth,
and so on. At this, my mind became perplexed and morose. Suddenly, a
swan-like personality came before me and began to pacify me with proper
reasoning.
Text 56
dhiro vidita sarvarthah
purnah parama dharmavit
He was sober by nature, the knower of everything, fully satisfied, and
absorbed in thought of the Supreme Personality ot Godhead.
Text 57
mrydkaram sattvasaram pra-idntam
dantarh suddham loka \oka ksayisnum
mamdgretarh pujayitva mudangdh
papracchus temat subha dhyana kamah


124 
SRI K A L K I 
P U R A N A
HIS effulgence was like that of the sun. He was situated in the mode
of unalloyed goodness, and he was peaceful and pure-hearted. Indeed,
the very sight of him could destroy the sufferings of all living entities My
relatives faithfully worshiped that paramahamsa and then inquired from
him about my welfare.
Thus ends the translation of the eleventh chapter of Sri Kalki
Purana.


C H A P T E R 
T W E L V E
The Meeting of Ananta And Hariisa
Text 1
suta uvaca
upaviste tadd hamse
bhiksdm krwa yathoatam
tatah prdhur anantasya
sanrarogya kdmyaya
Suta Gosvami said: After the paramahamsa had his meal and sat
down comfortably, the brahmanas of Purusottama-ksetra asked him how I
could regain my previous health and mental stability.
Texts 2-3
hamsastesdm matam jndtva
praha mdm puratah sthitam
tava cdrumati bhdryd
puirah ража budhddayah
dhana ratnanvitam sadma
sambamdham sandha samkulam
tyaktvd kaddgato'siha
putrodvaha dine na tu
The paramahamsa understood the brahmanas' concern and so he
looked at me and said: My dear Ananta, what are you doing here? Where
are you wife, Carumati, and your five sons headed by Budha, as well as
your house, wealth, and relatives? When did you come here, leaving them
aside? Today is supposed to be the marriage of your eldest son, Budha.
Text 4
savauth a ma sancarah
purdd dharma janadrtah
mmantrya mamihayat
soka samhgna тапаьак


SRI KALKI P U R A N A
You reside on the south shore of the ocean and I saw you busily engaged
in making arrangements for your son's wedding today. The people of that
place respect you ^ery much. You had invited me to attend your son's
wedding today, but you left everything and came here. You seem to be
confused about something.
Text 5
tvanca saptati varsiyas
tatra drsto may a prabho
tnmsad varsiyavat kasmat
in me sambhramo mahan
My dear sir, I saw you there as an elderly man, seventy years old. How
have you now become a young man of thirty?
Text 6
iyam bharya sahaya te
na tatra lokita kvacit
aham va kva kutastasmat
katham va kena kasitah
I never saw in that place this wife that ь seated b\ your side. I don't
know how I have come to see you here.
Text 7
sa cva va na vapi Warn
naham va bhiksurevasah
avayonha samyogas
cendra jala wabhavat
Are you really Ananta, or are you someone else? Am I the same
bannyasl who met ^ou, or am I someone else? My meeting you here seems
mysterious
Text 8
ttam grhasthah svadharmajno
bhiksuko'ham paratmakah
avayonha samvado
balaka unmattayorwa


T H E 
M E E T I N G 
OF A N A N T A 
A N D H A M S A 
127
You are a householder who faithfully executes your occupational
duties and I am a beggar in the renounced order of life Therefore, my
meeting you here seems incompatible, like л comersation between a
child and a madman.
Text 9
tasmddisasya mayeyam
tnjagan mohakarmi
jnana prdptya dcuta iabhya
manye'hamiti bho dvija '
Alas! All this was the pastime of supreme controller's illusory energy,
which bewilders everyone within the three worlds. It is very difficult to
understand this by mere common sense. Unless one understands the
Supreme Lord as being one without a second, one cannot understand the
activities of mdya.
Text 10
Ш bhikbuh samasravya
yadanyat praha vnmitah
markandeya
1 mahabhaga
bhavisyam kathayami te
After speaking to me in this way, the paramahamsa turned and
addressed the great sage, Markandeya, within the hearing of other great
sages: О fortunate one, let me describe to you some events that w ill take
place in the future. Please listen attentively.
Texts 11-12
pralaye ;yd tvaya drsta
purusasyo darambhasi
sa maya mohajanika
panthanam bhanika yatha
tamo hyananta santdpa
nodanodyatam акьап
yayedam akhilam lokam
avrtyd vasthaya stlvtam


128 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
It has been said that the Lord's illusory energy, maya, remains within
the water of devastation that is situated within the abdomen of the
Supreme Lord. This maya bewilders everyone. Just as a prostitute roams
throughout the town, maya spreads her influence throughout the three
worlds. Maud's influence creates the ignorance that forces the conditioned
souls to uselessly transmigrate from one body to another in this material
world. Thus, maya is the cause of all material miseries.
Text 13
laye line trijagati brahma
tanmdtragarh gatah
nirupddhau nirdloke
sisrksur abhavat parah
At the time of dissolution, the three worlds merge into the water of
devastation. All directions, the time factor, and everything else become
unmanifest. Thereafter, the Supreme Personality of Godhead once again
desires to create and so immediately all the material ingredients become
manifest.
Texts 14-15
brahmanyapi dvidhd bhute
purusa prakrti svaya
bhasa samjanaydmdsa
mahdntarh kdlayogatah
kola svabhdva karmdtmd
so'hankdras tato'bhavat
trivrd visnu siva brahma
mayah sarhsara kdranam
By His own will, the Supreme Lord first divides Himself into two—
purusa and prakrti. In due course of time, the purusa manifests the
mahat-tattva from prakrti. From the mahat-tattva, false ego is produced,
and from false ego, the three modes of material nature. Brahma, Visnu,
and Mahesa are the predominating deities of the three modes of material
nature. It is these three personalities that engage in the act of creation.


T H E 
M E E T I N G 
OF A N A N T A 
A N D H A M S A 
129
Text 16
tanmatrdru шьак рапса
jajnire gurxavanti ca
mahdhhutdnyapi tatah
prakrtau brahma sarhsrayat
In the beginning, five subtle material elements are created from false
ego and from these five subtle elements, five gross material elements are
produced. This creation is set in motion after the Supreme Lord glances
over the material nature, maya.
Text 17
jdta devdsura nara
ye cdnye jivajatayah
brahmanda bhdnda sabhdra
janmandsa kriydtmikdh
Thereafter, the demigods, demons, and human beings, as well as
all other moving and non-moving entities, are created throughout the
universe.
Text 18
may ay d may ay a jiva
purusah paramatmanah
sarhsara sarana vyagro
na veddtma gatirh kvacit
All of these categories of conditioned souls are covered by the illusory
energy of the Supreme Lord, and this causes them to become attached,
thinking, "This body is me and everything in relation to this body is
mine." The conditioned souls are so foolish that they do not care to be
delivered from the miserable material existence.
Text 19
aho balavatl rruryd
brahmadyd yadvase sthitdh
gdvo yathd nasi protd
guruxbaddhdh khagd eva
Alas! How strong is mayal Being bewildered by maya, even the
demigods, up to Brahma, are constantly wandering about withm the


130 
SRI K A L K I 
P U R A N A
material world, like bulls tied with ropes through their noses, or birds
kept in a cage
Text 20
tarn may am gunamayim yetu
titisainti munisvarah
sravantim vasananakam
ta eiartha vido bhuvt
The great souls and sages who desire to CUJSS over the ocean of may a
that induces the conditioned souls to enjoy material sense gratification,
which is filled with formidable waves, and which consists of the three
modes of material nature, are certainly glorious and celebrated as knowers
of the truth.
Texts 21-22
шипака rsi uvaca
markandeyo vasisthasca
vamadeva davo'pare
srawa guruvaco bhuyah
kimahuh sravanadrtdh
ranano'nanta vacanam
iti srutva sudhopayam
kim va prahuraho suta
bhavisyamiha varnaya
Saunaka Rsi said: What did the exalted sages, headed by Markandeya,
Vas'istha, and Vamadeva, say after hearing this wonderful talk? What did
the kings who had been listening to Ananta say? Kindly narrate the future
events that were referred to.
Text 23
ш tadvaca asrutya sutah
satkrtya tarn punah
kathayamasa karsnyena
sokamoha vighatkam


T H E 
M E E T I N G ОЬ A N A N T A A N D H A M S A 
131
After hearing these questions of Saunaka Rsi, Romaharsana Suta
praised him very highly and then described in detail the spiritual
knowledge that destroys all lamentation and grief.
Text 24
suta uvaca
tatrananto bhusaganaih
prstah praha krtadarah
tapasd mohanidhanam
indnyananca nigraham
Suta GosvamI said: When the kings respectfully requested Ananta to
continue speaking, Ananta explained how one can overcome maya and
control his senses by executing severe penance
Text 25
ananta uvaca
ato'ham vanamasadya
tapah krtva vidhanatah
nendnyanam manaso
mgraho'bhuta kadacana
Ananta said: Thereafter, I began to reside in a nearby forest and
engage m the practice of penance, according to the prescribed rules and
regulations. However, m spite of my efforts, I failed to regulate my mind
and senses.
Text 26
vane brahma dhyayate me
bharyaputra dhanadikam
visayancantara sasvat
samsmarayati me manah
Whenever I sat down in the forest to meditate upon the Supreme
Lord, thoughts of my wife, children, and assets keep surfacing within my
mind, greatly disturbing me.
Text 27
tesam ьтагапа matrena
duhkha soka bhayadayah


132 
S R I 
K A L K I 
P U R A N A
pratudanti mama prdndn
dharana dhydna ndsakah
As soon as this would happen, my mind would become greatly
disturbed and I would become filled with fear and lamentation. As a
result, my meditation was broken.
Text 28
tato'harh niscitam atir
indriydndnca ghdtane
manaso nigrahastena
bhavisyati na samsayah
The mind can be controlled only when the senses are regulated.
While thinking in this way, I resolved to conquer my senses.
Text 29
ato mamindriydndnca
nigraha vyagra cetasam
tadadhisthdtr devdsca
drstvd mami uranjasd
However, as soon as I attempted to control my senses, the
predominating deities of the senses turned their attention upon me.
Texts 30-31
rupino mama thocuste
bho'nanta! iti te dasa
digvdtdrka praceto'svi
vanhindro pendra mitrakd
indriydndm vayarh devds
tava dehe pratisthitdh
nakhdgra kdnda sarhbhinndn
ndsmdn kurtum ihdrhasi
The controlling deities of the ten senses personally appeared before
me and said: Ananta, we are Dik, Vayu, Surya, Praceta, the Asvinl-
kumaras, Agni, Indra, Upendra, and Mitra. Although we subtly reside
within your body, we have now come before you. You should not cause us
harm by your severe austerity.


T H E 
M E E T I N G 
OF A N A N T A 
A N D 
H A M S A 
133
Text 32
na sreyo hi tavdnanta
mono nigraha karmani
chedane bhedane'smScarh
bhinnamarma marisyasi
Simply by performing severe austerities, you will not receive any
benefit, nor will your mind or senses be controlled. Rather, because of
torturing us, you will suffer greatly.
Text 33
andhdndrh vadhirdrvxnca
vikalendriya jivinam
vane'pi visayavyagram
mdnasarh laksayd mahe
It is a fact that even blind, deaf, and deformed people go to live in the
forest and yet they cannot resist thinking about material enjoyment.
Text 34
jivasydpi grhasthasya
deho geharh mano'nugah
buddhirbhdryd tadanugd
vayamitya vadhdraya
The material body is a house, the spirit soul is the owner of the house,
intelligence is the owner's wife, and the mind is a servant. We are also
servants controlled by the wife of the house, in the form of intelligence.
Text 35
karmdyattasya jivasya mono
mono bandha vimuktikrt
sarhsdrayati lubhdasya
brahmano yasya mdyayd
The conditioned souls are forced to enjoy the fruits of their activities.
The mind is certainly the cause of bondage or liberation. According to
the directions given by the illusory energy of the Lord of the universe,
the mind takes a greedy person here and there throughout the material
world.


134 
SRI 
K A L K I
Texts 36-37
tasman mono nigrahdrtham
visnubhaktim samacara
sukha moksa prada nitam
dahilta sarvakarmanam
daitadvaita pradananda
sandoha hanbhaktika
hanbhaktya jwakosa
vinasante mahamate
Therefore, if you desire to control your mind, you should engage it
in the devotional service of Lord Han with determination. All reactions
to karma are exhausted by one's engagement in the devotional service of
Lord Han. Thus it is concluded that devotional service is the best means
for achieving liberation from material existence. The understanding that
the living entities are simultaneously one with and different from the
Supreme Lord should be cultivated. There is no doubt that devotional
service to Lord Han awards one transcendental bliss. Attachment to
the gross and subtle bodies is destroyed by engagement m unalloyed
devotional service.
Texts 38-39
param prdpsyasi nirvanam
kalker alokanat tvaya
ityaham bodhitastena
bhaktya sampujya kesavam
kalkim didrksur ayatah
krsnam kalki kulantakam
If you simply have the darsana of Lord Kalki, you will attain liberation
from material bondage.
Having been instructed in this way by the controlling deities of the
ten senses, I devotedly worshiped Lord Han with a desire to see Lord
Kalki, who dissipates the contamination of Kali. It is for this reason that
I have come here.


T H E 
M E E T I N G 
OF A N A N T A 
A N D 
H A M S A 
135
Text 40
drstam rupam arupasya
sprstas tatpada pallavah
apadasya srutam vakyam
avacyasya paratmanah
I was fortunate to see the form of the Supreme Lord, who has no
material form. I touched the lorus feet of the Supreme Brahman, who has
no material feet. I heard the words of the Lord of the universe, who never
utters a material sound vibration.
Text 41
ityanantah pramuditah
padmdnatham mjasvaram
kalkim kamalapatrdksam
namaskrtya yayau mumh
After saying this, Ananta offered his obeisances to the lotus-eyed Lord
Kalki, the husband of Padmavati, and then departed in a joyful mood.
Text 42
rajano munwakyena
nirvana padavim gatah
kalkim abhyarca padmdhca
namaskrtya munwratah
After the kings heard the talks of the sage, Ananta, they also began
to observe vows while foUowing the rules and regulations prescribed by
the scriptures. Thus, like sages, they cleared their path to liberation by
worshiping Lord Kalki and Padmavati.
Text 43
suka uvdca
anantasya katham etam
ajnana dhvantanasinim
mayaniyantnm prapathan
srnvan bandhdd vimucyate
Suka said: Anyone who hears this story of Ananta will be freed from
the clutches of maya His darkness of ignorance will be dissipated and h:*


136 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
material bondage cut to pieces, so that ultimately, he will attain liberation
from material existence.
Text 44
sarhsdrdbdhi vildsa lalasa
matih sri visnusevddaro
bhaktyakhyanam idarh
svabheda rahitarh
nirmdya dharmatmana
jndnoudsa nisata khadgam
uditah sadbhakti durgasrayah,
sadvaryarh jayatddasesa
jagatdm dtma sthitarh vaisnavah
The devotees of Lord Hari who are inclined to follow the principles of
religion while at the same time desire to enjoy sense gratification in the
ocean of material existence, should use the sharp sword of transcendental
knowledge gained from this narration to cut to pieces the six principal
enemies that reside within the body, headed by lust, after taking shelter
in the fort of bhakti-yoga.
Thus ends the translation of the twelfth chapter of Sri Kalki Purdna.


C H A P T E R 
T H I R T E E N
Visvakarma Reconstructs the
Village of Sambhala on the Order of Indra
The Arrival of Lord Kalki
Text 1
suta uvdca
gate nrpagane kalkih
padmayd sahd sirhhaldt
samla grama gamane
matirh cakre svasenayd
Suta GosvamI said: After all the kings had departed, Lord Kalki
decided to leave Sirhhala island, taking His wife, PadmavatI, and His
army, and go to the village of Sambhala.
Text 2
tatah kalker abhiprdyarh
viditvd vdsastvaran
visvafarrndnarn dhuya
vacanarh cedarh abaravit
Meanwhile, when Indra realized the intention of Lord Kalki, he called
for Visvakarma and gave him orders.
Text3
indra uvdca
visvakarmana sambhale warn
grhodyd nattya ghattitam
prdsdda harmya sambhddharh
racaya svarnasancayaih
Indra said: О Vis'vakarma, you should immediately go to the village
of Sambhala and construct many palaces, ornamental gates, residential
buildings, and apartments, using as much gold as possible, and decorate
the village with beautiful gardens.


138 
SRI K A L K I 
P U R A N A
Text 4
ratna sphatika vaidurya
ndnamani vinirmitaih
tatraiva silpa naipunyarh
tava yaccasti tat kuru
The entire village should be bedecked with precious jewels and crystal.
Do not hesitate to display your full expertise in the art of architecture.
Text 5
srutvd harervaco visvakarmd
sarma nijarh smaran
sambhale kalamesasya
svastyadi pramukhdn grhdn
Being ordered by Indra in this way, and realizing that this was a
golden opportunity to attain true benefit, Visvakarma immediately went
to Sambhala village and began constructing a beautiful residence for the
husband of Laksml.
Text 6
harhsa sirhha suparnadi
mukharhs cakre sa visvakrt
uparyu pari tdpagna
vdtdyana manoharan
Indeed, he built many houses. One house was shaped like a swan,
another house was shaped like a lion, and still another house looked like
the face of a donkey. These buildings were two, three, or even more stories
tall, and they were all centrally air-conditioned.
Text 7
ndndvana latodydna
sarovdpi susobhitah
sambhalas cabhavat kalker
yathendrasya amardvau
The entire village was decorated with forests, gardens, lakes, and
public wells. Indeed, the village of Sambhala came to resemble Indra's
abode, Amaravatl.


VISVAKARMA 
R E C O N S T R U C T S 
SAMBHALA 
139
Texts 8-10
kalkistu sirhhalad dvipad
vahih send ganairvrtah
tyaktvd kdrumatirh kule
pathodhare karot sthitim
brhadrathastu kaumudyd
sahitah snehakdtarah
padmayd sahitayasmai
padmandthaya visnave
dadau gajdnama yutarh
laksarh mukhyanca vdjindm
rathandnca dvisdhasrmh
ddsindrh dve sate mudd
Meanwhile, Lord Kalki, His army, and associates left Karumati and
started for Sambhala. After traveling some distance, the Lord set up
camp on the shore of the ocean. Out of affection for his daughter, King
Brhadratha mounted a buffalo named Kaumudi and followed his son-in-
law, Lord Kalki, and daughter, Padmavati, up to the sea shore, where he
gave them ten thousand elephants, one hundred thousand horses, two
thousand chariots, and two hundred maidservants.
Text 11
dattvd vdsdrhsi ratndni
bhakti snehdsru locanah
tayormukhd lokanena
ndsakat kiyadi ritum
With great affection, he also gave them various kinds of jewels and
fine garments. The king couldn't take his eyes off the beautiful faces of
his son-in-law and daughter. Indeed, he could not utter a word, being
overcome by strong emotions.
Text 12
mahavisnu dampati tau
prasthdpya punardgatau
pujitau kalki padmabhydrh
nijakdru matirh purim


140 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
Lord Kalki and Padmavati honored and pacified King Brhadratha,
and then begged permission to depart. Feeling great distress in separation,
King Brhadratha finally returned to his capital, Karumati.
Texts 13-14
kalkistu jaladherambho
vigdhya prtanaganaih
par am jigamisurh drstva
jambukarh stambhito'bhavat
jalastambham athalokya
kalkih sabala vdhanah
prayayau payasdm rdser
upari sn niketanah
Lord Kalki then bathed in the ocean, along with His associates.
Suddenly, He saw a jackal crossing the ocean, appearing to walk on the
surface of the water. Upon looking more closely, however, Lord Kalki
saw that there was a bridge spanning the ocean. Taking advantage of
this bridge, the Lord, His carriers, and His army crossed over to the
mainland.
Text 15
gawd pdrarh sukarh prdha
ydhi me sambhaldlayam
After arriving at the far shore, Lord Kalki addressed His parrot: О
Suka, go now to My house in the village of Sambhala.
Text 16
visvakarma krtarh yatra
deva rdjdjnayd bahu
sadma sarhbhddham amalarh
matpriydrtharh susobhanam
There you will find that Visvakarma, the architect of the demigods,
has constructed many beautiful palaces and residential quarters for My
pleasure, by the order of Indra.


VISVAKARMA 
RECONSTRUCTS SAMBHALA 
HI
Text 17
tatrapi pitror jnatindrh
svasti bruyd yathocitam
yadatrdnga vivdhadi
sarvarh vakturh tvamarhasi
Go ahead and convey the news of my welfare to my father, mother,
and other relatives. Tell them everything about My marriage.
Text 18
pascada у ami vrtastai
taistvamadau ydhi sambhalam
You go on ahead, and I will soon arriver there, with My army.
Text 19
kalker vacanam dkarnya
kiro dhirastato yayau
dkdsa garni sarvajnah
sambhalam surapujitam
Being ordered in this way by Lord Kaiki, Suka, who was very sober by
nature, immediately flew into the sky and in a very short while, arrived at
Sambhala, which was highly regarded even by the demigods.
Text 20
saptayojana vistirnarh
cdturvarna jandkulam
surya rasmi pratikdsam
prdsdda satasobhitam
The village was seven yojanas across, and inhabited by members of
all four varnas. Throughout the village were memorial columns made of
white marble that shone like the sun.
Texts 21-22
sarvarttu sukhadam ramyarh
sambhalam vihvalo'visat
grhdd grhantaram drstvd
prdsddddapi cdmvaram


142 
S R I K A L K I P U R A N A
vanad vatdntararh tatra
vrksad vrksdntararh vrajan
The wonderful quality of this village was that no one experienced
distress because of the climate during any season. Suka's heart became
filled with wonder upon seeing the beauty of this village. He went from
one house to another, from one palace to another, up into the sky, over
the numerous gardens, flying from one tree to another.
Texts 23-24
sukah sa visnuyasasah
sadanarh mudito'brajat
tarn gawd rucird Idpaih
kathayitvd priyah kathdh
kalker dgamanarh prdha
sirhhaldt padmayd saha
At last, Suka arrived at Visnuyasa's house with great delight. In a very
sweet voice, he informed Visnuyasa of Lord Kalki and Padma's arrival
from the island of Sirhhala.
Text 25
tatantvaran visnuyasdh
samdndrghya prajdjandn
visdkha упра bhupdlarh
kathaydmdsa harsitah
Visnuyasa then hurriedly went to see King Visakhayupa in a happy
mood and disclosed to him the news, which quickly spread to all the
distinguished citizens.
Text 26
5a raja karaydmdsa
pura grdmddi manditam
svarnakumbhaih sadambhobhih
puritais candanoksitaih
King Visakhayupa ordered his servants to decorate the entire village
with pitchers filled with water and decorated with designs drawn with
sandalwood paste.


V I S V A K A R M A 
R E C O N S T R U C T S 
S A M B H A L A 
143
Text 27
kala guru sugandhadhayair
dipa lajarh kurdksataih
kusumai sukumdraisca
rambhd puga phalanvitai
susubhe sambhala gramo
vibudhdnam manoharah
Sambhala, which was pleasing to the hearts of even demigods, was
thus smeared with aguru and other fragrant substances, illuminated with
many excellent lamps, and decorated with garlands of fragrant flowers,
fruit, twigs, rice paddy, and so on.
Text 28
tarn kalkih pravisad bhima
sendgana vilaksanah
kamini nayanarwmda
mandirdhgah krpanidhih
Finally, the merciful Lord Kalki, who gives pleasure to the eyes of all
young women, and who possesses a most enchanting form, entered the
village, surrounded by His formidable army.
Text 29
padmaya sahitah pitroh
pddayoh pranato'patat
sumatir muditd putrarh
snusarh sakrarh sacimivd
dadrse wamaravatyarh
purna kdmadithih sati
First, Lord Kalki and Padmavati offered obeisances to Visnuyasa and
his wife. Just as Aditi becomes jubilant upon seeing her son, Indra, the
king of the demigods, along with his wife, Sad, the chaste Sumati became
very satisfied to see her son and daughter-in-law.
Texts 30-31
smbhala grama nagan
patdka dhvaja sdlim


144 
SRI K A L K I 
P U R A N A
avarodha sujaghand
prasada vipulastani
mayura cucukd harhsa
sarhgha hdra manohard
patta vasodyota dhwma
vasand kokila svand
sahdsa gopura mukhi
vdmanetrd yathdngana
kalkirh patirh gunavati
prdpya reje tamisvaram
It appeared that the village of Sambhala was also a jubilant woman
welcoming the return of her husband, Lord Kalki. Being decorated so
beautifully, she appeared very charming. The interior of the village was
her thighs, the palaces were her breasts, the peacocks were her nipples,
the swans were her necklace of pearls, the fragrant smoke was her
garments, the sounds of the cuckoos were her words, and the gates were
her enchanting smile. The village thus appeared like a very clever girl
casting a sidelong glance.
Text 32
sa reme padmyd tatra
varsa pugdna jdsrayah
sambhale vihvaldcdra
kattcih kalka vindsanah
The unborn Lord Kalki, who is the shelter of everyone and the
destroyer of all sins, appeared to forget His mission as He spent many
years enjoying life with Padmavati.
Texts 33
kaveh patni kdma kala
susuve paramesthinau
vrhat kirtti vrhadbdhu
mahdbala pardkramau
After some time, Lord Kalki's brother, Kavi, begot two sons in the womb
of his wife, Kamakala. Their names were Brhatklrti and Brhatvahu.


V I S V A K A R M A 
R E C O N S T R U C T S 
S A M B H A L A 
145
Texts 34-35
prdjnasya sannatir bharya
tasyarh putrau babhuvatuh
yajnavijnau sarvaloka
pujitau vijitendriyau
sumantrakastu malinyam
janayamdsa sasanam
vegavantanca sadhunarh
dvdvetdvu pakdrakau
Prajna also begot two sons within the womb of his wife, Sannati.
They were named Yajna and Vijna. These two boys were self-controlled,
and thus respected by everyone. Sumantu also begot two sons, named
Sasana and Vegavana, in the womb of his wife, Malini. These sons were
the benefactors of human society.
Text 36
catah kalkisca padmayarh
jayo vijaya eva ca dvau
putrau janayamasa
lokakhydtau mahdbalau
Lord Kalki also begot two sons in the womb of Padmavati. Their
names were Jaya and Vijaya, and both possessed incomparable prowess.
Texts 37-39
etaih parwrto'mdtaih
sarvarhsampat samanvitau
vdjimedha vidhanartham
udyatarh pitararh prabhuh
samlksya kalkih provdca
pitdmaham ivesvarah
disdrh pdldn vijitydharh
dhananyd hrtya ityuta
karayisydmyi asvamedharh
ydmi digvijaydya bhoh


146 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
Lord Kalki appeared to flourish, being surrounded by all these family
members. Once, Lord Kalki's father, Visnuyas'a, who was on the level of
Lord Brahma, decided to perform a horse sacrifice. Understanding the
intention of His father, Lord Kalki said: My dear father, I will go out and
defeat all other kings in battle and thus bring you sufficient wealth so
that you can conduct the horse sacrifice properly.
Text 40
iti pranamya tarn pritya
kalkih para puranjayah
senaganaih parivrtah
prayayau klkatarh puram
Lord Kalki, who was certainly capable of conquering all other kings,
offered His obeisances to his father and then set out with his army to first
conquer Kikatapura.
Text 41
buddhdlayarh suvipularh
vedadharma vahiskrtam
pitrdevarcana hlnarh
paraloka vilopakam
Most of the inhabitants of this city were Buddhists, who never offered
oblations to their forefathers, nor worshiped the demigods. In fact, they
never even considered what kind of life they would have after death.
Text 42
dehdtma vdda bahularh
kulajdti vivarjitam dhanaih
stribhir bhaksya bhojyaih
svapardbheda darsinam
They accepted their bodies as the self because they had no information
of the eternal soul. They did not designate themselves or their families in
terms of caste, and thus there was no conception of high or low birth. As
far as earning wealth, marriage, or eating were concerned, they had no
sense of discrimination.


V I S V A K A R M A R E C O N S T R U C T S 
S A M B H A L A 
147
Texts 43-44
nandjanaih parivrtarh
pdna bhojana tatparaih
srutvd jino nijaganaih
kalker dgamanarh krudhd
aksauhinibhyarh sahitah
sarhbabhuva puradvahih
The people of that city were interested only in eating, drinking, and
making merry. When the ruler of that city, who was named Jina, heard
that Lord Kalki had come to fight, He quickly gathered an army consisting
of one aksauhini.
Text 45
gajaratha turagaih samacitd bhu
kanaka vibhusana bhusitair varangaih
satasata rathibhir dhrtdstra sastrair dhvaja
patdraji nivdritdta pairbabhau sd
Very soon, the city became filled with numberless horses, chariots,
elephants, chariot drivers decorated with golden ornaments, and infantry
soldiers. All of the soldiers were fully equipped with weapons, and they
carried their flag. The whole city thus seemed transformed into a beautiful
battlefield.
Thus ends the translation of the thirteenth chapter of Sri Kalki
Purana.


C
H
A
P
T
E
R 
F
O
U
R
T
E
E
N
Lord Kalki Conquers the Buddhists Who Opposed Him
Text 1
suta uvaca
tato visnuh sarvajisnuh
kalkih kalka vinasanah
kalayamasa tarn senam
kannimiva kesan
Suta GosvamI said: Just as a lion, the king of the jungle, attacks a
female elephant, Lord Kalki, the life and soul of all living entities, attacked
the army of Buddhists.
Texts 2-3
sendnganam tam ran sangaraksatim
raktaka vastram vivrtoru madhyam
paldyatim cam vikirna kesam
vikujatim praha sa kalkinayakah
re bauddhah ma polayadhvam
nwatadhvam ranangane
yndhyadhvam paurusam sadhu
darsayadhvam punarmama
Thereafter, a fierce battle took place between the Buddhists and Lord
Kalki When the Buddhists became disheartened and began fleeing from
the battle, Lord Kalki, acting as the commander-in-chief of His army,
addressed the opposing warriors, who were injured in the battle, whose
garments and armor were scattered here and there, whose hair had become
loosened, and who were screaming loudly in pain: О Buddhists, do not
run away from the battlefield. Stay here and fight to the best of your
ability so that you will avoid the shame of being considered cowards
Texts 4-5
jino hinabalam kopat
kalker dkarnya tadvacah


L O R D K A L K I 
C O N Q U E R S THE B U D D H I S T S 
149
pratiyoddhum vrsarudhah
khadgacarma dharo yayau
папа prahara nopeto
nandyudha visaradah
kalkina yuyudhe dhiro
devanam vismayavahah
Although jina had been injured, he became enraged upon hearing
Lord Kalki's taunting words. After picking up his sword and shield, he
rushed at Lord Kalki, who was sitting on His horse. In the duel that
ensued, both fought with great enthusiasm so that even the demigods,
who were watching from the heavens, became surprised to witness Jina's
skill in fighting.
Text 6
sulena turagam viddhvd
kalkim vanena mohayan
kodikrtya dratam bhumer
nasakat tolanadrtah
The greatly powerful Jina pierced Kalki's horse with his trident and
then made the Lord fall unconscious by his onslaught of arrows. At this,
the wicked Jina attempted to capture Lord Kalki, but was unable to pick
Him up.
Text 7
)ino visvambhamm jfiawa
kodha kulita hcanah
ciccheddsya tanutranam
kalkeh sastranca dasavat
Lord Kalki had become so heavy that Jina could not even move Him
and this fueled his rage. Being unable to take Lord Kalki prisoner, Jma
finally took His crown and weapons and fled.
Text 8
visdkha yupo'pi tathd
mhatya gadaya )mavn
murcchitam kalhmdddya
hlayd rathamaruhat


150 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
Meanwhile, King Visakhayupa, who had accompanied Lord Kalki,
became furious upon seeing this and so he went and struck Jina with
his club. After accomplishing this feat, the king carefully picked up Lord
Kalki and placed Him on his chariot.
Text 9
labdhasarhjnas tatha kalkih
sevakotsaha ddyakah
samutpatya rathdt tasya
nrpasya jinamd yayau
Soon Lord Kalki regained consciousness and began to rally His
soldiers. The Lord then jumped from Visakhayupa's chariot and charged
at Jina.
Texts 10-11
sulavyathdrh vihdydjau
mahasattvastu rangamah
ringanair bhramanaih pdda
viksepahana nairmuhuh
danddghdtaih sataksepair
bauddha send gandntare
nijadhana ripun kopdt
sataso'tha sahasrasah
Although Lord Kalki's wonderful horse had been injured by Jina's
trident, he soon regained his composure and began roaming over the
battlefield, jumping fiercely while angrily attacking hundreds and
thousands of Buddhist soldiers. In this way, Lord Kalki's horse killed
many sinful men.
Text 12
nisvdsa vdtai ruddlya
kecid dvipdntare'patan
hastyasva ratha sambhddhdh
patitd ranamurddhani
Indeed, the heavy breathing of Lord Kalki's horse caused many
opposing soldiers to fly into the sky and then fall down at distant places.


LORD KALKI CONQUERS THE B U D D H I S T S 
151
Some of them fell upon the horses and chariots as they descended onto
the battlefield.
Text 13
gargya jaghnuh sastisatarh
bhargyah koti satdyutam
visalastu sahasrdndm
pahcavimsarh rane tvaran
Within a short period of time, Gargya and his associates killed six
thousand Buddhist warriors. Bhargya killed ten million enemy soldiers
with the help of his army, and Visala killed twenty-five thousand.
Text 14
ayute dve jadhandjau
putrdbhydrh sahitah kavih
dasalalarh tathd prajnah
pancalaksarh sumantrakah
Kavi and his two sons fought valiantly, killing twenty thousand enemy
soldiers. One million soldiers were killed at the hands of Prajna, and five
hundred thousand were eliminated by Sumanta.
Text 15
jinarh praha hasan kalkis
tisthdgre mama durmate
daivarh mam viddhi sarvatra
subhdsubha phalapradam
Thereafter, Lord Kalki addressed Jina: О sinful one, do not run away!
Come before Me and fight! Know Me to be the personification of destiny,
which awards everyone the results of their pious and sinful acts.
Text 16
madvdna jdla bhinndngo
nihsango ydsyasi ksayam
na ydvat pasyatdvat warn
bandhundrh lalitarh mukham
Very soon your body will be pierced by My arrows so that you will
be forced to leave this world forever, without any companion. Thus, you


152 
S R I K A L K I 
P U R A N A
have very little time left to show your face to your relatives
Texts 17-18
kalker ш ntam sruwa
jinah praha hasan bah
dawam wadrsyam sastre
te badho'yam urankrtah
pratyaksa vadino bauddhd
vayam yuyam vrthasramah
yadi va dawa rupastvam
tathdpyagre sthta vayam
yadi bhettasi vanaughais
tada bauddhaih kimatra te
After hearing the speech of Lord Kalki, Jma laughed sarcastically
and replied Fate cannot be seen. I believe in direct perception because
I follow the philosophy of Buddhism. We do not believe anything unless
we can perceive it We believe that destiny can be changed because this is
the verdict of our scriptures. If You are actually the Supreme Personality
of Godhead as You claim, then kill us What can be gained by merely
uttering boasting words? We Buddhists will never accept You
Text 19
sopdlambham waya khydtam
tvayaye vdstu sthiro bhava
iti krodhad vdnajaleh
kalkim ghoraih samavrnot
Whatever You have claimed to be my destiny will actually be Your
own Just remain before me and see
After saying this, Jma covered the entire body of Lord Kalki with his
sharp arrows.
Text 20
sa tu vanamayam varsam
ksayam runyer'ka vaddhimam
As fog is dissipated by the rising of the sun, Jina's shower of arrows
vanished by the influence of Lord Kalki's potency


LORD KALKI CONQUERS THE BUDDHISTS 
153
Texts 21-22
brahmam vayavyam agneyam
parjanyam cdnyadayudham
kalker darsanamdtrena
nisphaldnya bhavan ksanat
yathosare vijamuptam
ddnama srotnye yatha
yathd visnau satam dvesdt
bhaktiryena krtdpyaho
Simply by Lord Kalki's presence, all of the enemy's weapons, including
the brahmastra, agneyastra, vayavyastra, and parjanyastra, were rendered
ineffective, just like seeds sown in the desert, donations given to unworthy
persons, or devotional service to Lord Han executed out of envy.
Text 23
kalhstu tarn vrsdrudham
avaplutya kace'grahit
tatastau petatur bhumau
tamracudaviva krudhd
In an instant, Lord Kalki jumped into the air and caught hold of
Jina's hair as he sat upon his bull carrier. Both Lord Kalki and Jina fell to
the ground, like two tamracuda birds, and began to wrestle.
Text 24
patitvd sa kalki kacam
jagraha tatkaram kare
Jina then grabbed Lord Kalki by the hair with one hand warded off
His blows with the other.
Text 25
tatah samutthitau vyagrau
yatha camera kesavau
dhrtahastau dhrtakacau
rksavwa mahdbalau
yuyudhdte mahavirau
jinakalki rardyudhau


154 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
Thereafter, appearing just like Canura and Lord Krsna, the two stood
up and continued wrestling, grabbing each other's hair and arms. The
two great heroes had no weapons in their hands as they fought each other
like two powerful bears.
Text 26
tatah kalkir mahayodhi
paddghdtena tatkatim
vibhdjya pdtaya mdsa
talam mattagajo yathd
As a maddened elephant breaks a palm tree, the most expert of all
fighters, Lord Kalki, broke Jina's spine with a powerful kick, so that the
king of the Buddhists fell dead onto the ground.
Text 27
jinam nipautam drstva
bauddhd haheti cukrusuh
kalkeh sendgana viprd
jahrsur nihatarayah
When the Buddhist soldiers saw their leader lying dead upon the
ground, they began to wail in agony. О brahmanas, the killing of Jina
immersed the soldiers of Lord Kalki into an ocean of great happiness.
Text 28
jine nipaate bhrata
tasya suddhodano bah
pddacdn gadapdmh kalkim
hantum drutam yayau
After witnessing the death of his brother, the greatly 
powerful
Suddhodana picked up a club and charged at Lord Kalki, bent upon
destroying Him.
Text 29
havistu tarn vdnavarsaih
parwdrya samantatah
jagarja paraviragh.no
gajamdvrtya simhavat


LORD 
K A L K I 
C O N Q U E R S 
THE 
B U D D H I S T S 
155
In response, Lord Kalki, who very expertly killed all the heroic
warriors that opposed Him as they were seated on the backs of their
elephants, released an incessant shower of arrows at Suddhodana while
roaring like a lion.
Text 30
gaddhastam tamalokya
pattim sa dharmavit kavih
paddtigo gadapdnis
tasthau suddhodandgratah
When the pious hero, Kavi, saw Suddhodana coming with a club in
his hand, he got down from his elephant and obstructed his path while
wielding his own club.
Texts 31-32
sa tu suddhodanastena
yuyudhe bhima vikramah
gajah prau gajeneka
dantdbhydm sagadd vubhau
yuyudhate mahdvnau
gaddyuddha visdradau
krta pratikrtau mattau
nadantau bhavravdn ravan
A fierce battle then ensued between Kavi and Suddhodana. As an
elephant fights with another inimical elephant with its tusks, the great
hero, Kavi, who was very expert in fighting with the club, confronted
Suddhodana. Because they were intoxicated by fighting, they roared
loudly while challenging one another with harsh words. Both tried their
best to defend themselves from their opponent's blows.
Text 33
kavistu gadayd gurvya
suddhodana gaddm nadan
karada pdsyasu taya
svayd vaksasya tadayat


156 
SRI 
KALKI 
P U R A N A
Finally, while roaring like a lion, Kavi struck Suddhodana with his
club so forcefully that Suddhodana's club fell from his hands. Taking
advantage of this opportunity, Kavi landed a very powerful blow to the
chest of his enemy.
Text 34
gadaghatena nihato
virah suddhodano bhuvi
patitvd sahasottthaya
tarn janghe gadayd punah
Although the powerful Suddhodana fell to the ground, he quickly
regained his composure and stood up after picking up his club. By
maneuvering very quickly, he was able to smash his club upon Kavi's
head.
Text 35
samtdditena tenapi
sirasd stambhitah kavih
na papdta sthtasra
sthdnuvad vihyalendnyah
That blow was so forceful that although Kavi did not fall to the
ground, he was dazed and thus stood motionless.
Text 36
suddhodanas tamalokya
sahusdram rathdyunaih
prdvrtam tarasd mayd
devimdne tumdyayau
Still, Suddhodana understood that Kavi was not an ordinary warrior
but was immensely powerful and surrounded by thousands of chariots.
Therefore, he decided to leave the battlefield and bring Maya-devl.
Text 37
yasyd darsana mdtrerm
devasura narddayah
nihsdrdh pratimdkard
bhavanti bhuvandsraydh


L O R D 
K A L K I 
C O N Q U E R S THE B U D D H I S T S 
157
His reason for summoning MayadevI was that as soon as any demigod,
demon, or human being within the three worlds would see her, he would
immediately become stunned, like a statue.
Text 38
bauddhd sauddhodanadyagre
krtva tamagratah punah
yoddhum samdgata mleccha
кой laksa satairvrtah
After regrouping, Suddhodana and his millions of mleccha soldiers,
entered the battlefield, keeping Maya-devI in front
Text 39
svmha dhvaptthita ratham
pheru kaka ganavrtdm
sarvastra sastra janamm
sadvarga pansevitam
Maya-devI sat on a chariot whose flag was marked with the symbol of
a lion, and she manifested various kinds of weapons. Crows and vultures
surrounded her, screaming with shrill voices. The six enemies, headed by
lust, engaged in her personal service.
Texts 40-41
ndndrupdm balavatim
triguna vyakti laksitdm
mdydm ninksya puratah
kalkisena samapatat
nihsarah pratirnakarah
samastah sastrapdnayah
Being confronted by the incredibly powerful Maya-devI, who can
assume any form at will, and who is constituted of three modes of material
nature, the army of Lord Kalki gradually weakened. Indeed, all the great
warriors in Lord Kalki's army, who were well-equipped with celestial
weapons, lost their prowess so that they simply stood motionless, like
statues.


158 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
Text 42
kalkistand lokya nijan
bhrdtrjnati suhrjjandn
may ay a jay ay a jirndn
vibhurasit tadagratah
Lord Kalki saw that His brother and the other warriors had become
afflicted by His inferior energy, maya, and so He quickly approached
her.
Text 43
tdmdlokya vardrohdrh
sri ruparh haririsvarah
sa priyeva tamalokya
pravistd tasya vigrahe
Suddenly, much to everyone's astonishment, beautiful Maya-devI,
who is an expansion of Laksmi, merged into the body of Lord Kalki, like
a beloved consort.
Text 44
tdmandlokya te bauddhd
mdtararh katidhd varah
ruruduh samghaso dindh
hinasva balapaurusah
vismayavista manasah
kva gateyam athdbruvana
Because of Maya-devi's sudden disappearance, the hearts of the
Buddhist leaders became filled with anxiety. They lost all their strength
and began to cry like lost children. They cried out: Alas! Where did our
mother go?
Text 45
kalikah samdlokanena
samutthdpya nijan janan
nisata masimadaya mlecchan
hanturh mano dadhe


L O R D K A L K I 
C O N Q U E R S 
THE B U D D H I S T S 
159
Meanwhile, simply by Lord Kalki's compassionate glance, all of His
warriors regained their composure so that they easily slaughtered the
mlecchas with their sharp swords.
Texts 46-47
sannaddharh turagdrudha
drdhahasta dhrtatsarum
dhanurnisangam anisarh
vanajala prakasitam
dhrtahasta tanutrdna
godhdrhguU virdjitam
Lord Kalki mounted His horse after putting on armor. He equipped
Himself with a sharp sword, bow, and a quiver full of arrows. In this scene,
Lord Kalki appeared very beautiful.
Text 48
megho paryupta tdrdbharh
darhsana svarnavindukam
kirita коп vinyasta
manirdji virdjitam
Golden dots on the Lord's dark forehead appeared like twinkling
stars in the cloudy sky. His diamond crown enhanced His beauty even
further.
Text 49
kdmira nayandnanda
sandoha rasamandiram
vipaksa paksa viksepa
ksipta ruksa kataksakam
Desiring to annihilate the enemy warriors, Lord Kalki, whose
glance increases the pleasure of all young girls, and who is the abode of
transcendental mellows, glared at them in a very angry mood.
Text 50
nijabhaktajanolldsa
sarhvdsa carandmbujam


SRI KALKI PURANA
ninksya kalkim te bauddhas
tatra surdharma nindakah
The hearts of the devotees became joyful while gazing at the Lord's
lotus-like face in this angry feature. However, the Buddhists, who always
blaspheme religious principles, became extremely frightened while
looking at Lord Kalki, who is the reservoir of all pleasure, and especially
the giver of pleasure to the eyes of women.
Text 51
jahrsuh surasanghd khe
yagahuti hutdsanah
The hearts of the demigods became jubilant when they understood
that they would once again receive their shares of sacrificial offerings.
Text 52
subala milana harsah
satrumasaika harsah
samara vara vilasah
sadhu satkara kasah
svajana dunta hartta
jivajdtasya bhartta
racayatu kusalam vah
kama puravatdrah
Lord Kalki, who incarnates for the pleasure of His devotees, removes
the distress of the pious, is the maintainer of all living entities, and appears
in this world to fulfill the desires of all saintly persons, was determined to
eliminate His enemies by utilizing the prowess of His vast army.
Thus ends the translation of the fourteenth chapter of Sri Kalki
Purana


C H A P T E R 
F I F T E E N
Lord Kalki Is Attacked By The Mleccha Women
Instructions by the Weapons Personified
Text 1
sum uvaca
tatah kalkir mlecchaganan
karavdlena kahtdn
vanaih samtaditdnanyan
anayad yamasddanam
Suta GosvamI said: Some of the mlecchas were killed when they were
pierced by Lord Kalki's arrows, and some of them went to the abode of
Yamaraja after being cut to pieces by His sword.
Text 2
visdkkayitpo'pi tatha
kaviprajfia sumantrakah
gdrgya hhargya visalddyd
mlecchan jaghnur asesatah
Innumerable other mleccha warriors were killed by the Lord's
associates, such as VisakhayOpa, Kavi, Prajna, Sumantu, Gargya, Bhargya
and Visala.
Text3
kapota romd kakdksah
kaka krsna dayo'pare
bauddhah sauddhadand yatd
yuyudhuh kalki sairukaih
Many Buddhists, headed by Kapotaroma, Kakaksa, Kakakrsna, and
Suddhodana joined the battle against Lord Kalki's army
Text 4
tesam yuddham abhud ghoram
bhayadam sarvadehinam


162 
SRI 
K A L K I 
P U R A N A
bhutesananda janakam
rudhra runa kardamam
Everyone who witnessed that great battle became astonished and
frightened, although the Lord of the living entities felt blissful. Indeed,
the entire battlefield became mired with blood.
Text 5
gajasva rathasamghdndm
patatam rudhira sravaih
sravanti kesasawdld
vdjigraha sugahika
So much blood poured from the bodies of the slain elephants, horses,
and chariot drivers that a river of blood was created. In that river, the
grass appeared like foam and the crocodiles in the form of horses created
a terrifying sight.
Texts 6-7
dhanustarangd duspdrd
gajarodh pravdhni
sirah kurmd rathatanh
pdnimina srgdsagd
pravrttd tatra bahudha
harsayanti manasvindm
dundubheya ravd pheru
sakunananda ddytni
The arrows floating on the river of blood appeared like waves, the
elephants seemed to form the two banks of that great river, the severed
heads appeared like tortoises, the broken chariots looked like boats, the
severed hands appeared to be fish, and the beating of the drums seemed to
be the sound of the rushing currents. The sounds of the delighted crows
and vultures could be heard on the banks of that river of blood. This
scene, although apparently ghastly, made the devotees jubilant.
Text 8
gajairgajd narairasvdh
kharairusta rathai rathah


L O R D 
K A L K I 
IS A T T A C K E D 
BY M L E C C H A 
W O M E N 
163
mpeturvana bhinndngas
chinna bahvamghn kandhardh
Countless warriors who fought from atop their horses, elephants,
camels, and chariots fell down into that river with their hands, legs,
and heads either pierced by arrows or severed from their bodies by the
powerful enemy warriors.
Text 9
bhasmand gunthita mukhd
raktavastra nivantdh
vikirnakesah panto
ydnti samnydsino yathd
Some of the warriors had their garments stained with blood, some
had their faces covered with ashes, and some had disheveled hair. Out
of shame, the survivors fled the battlefield like mendicants running from
material entanglement.
Text 10
vyagrdh kepi palayante
ydcantyanye jalam punah
kcdkisena sugaksunnd
mleccha no sarma kbhxre
Some of the warriors retreated and some felt thirsty and so begged
for water. In this way, the mleccha soldiers scattered after being attacked
by Lord Kalki's army.
Texts 11-12
tesdm stnyo ratharudhd
gajarudha vihangamaih
samarudhd hayarndha
kharostr vrsavahanah
yoddhu samayayus tyaktvd
patyd patya sukhasraydn
rupavatyo yuvatyo'ti
valavatyah patwratdh


164 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
The wives of the mleccha warriors then arrived on chariots, elephants,
horses, camels, birds, asses, and bulls, to help their husbands fight. These
women were young and beautiful, and strong, and they were not concerned
about their children at home
Text 13
nandbharana bhusadhyah
sannaddha visadaprabhdh
khadga sakti dhanur vdna
valaydkta karambujah
These women were decorated with golden ornaments and they wore
clothing that was suited for fighting. They came to the battlefield with
swords, tridents, and bows and arrows in their hands. They had steel
bangles on their wrists.
Text 14
svamnyo'pyati kaminyo
pumscalyasa pativrata
yuyuryoddhum kalkisamyaih
patinam nidhanaturdh
Some of these women were promiscuous, some were chaste, and
some were simply prostitutes. Being overwhelmed by the death of their
husbands or fathers, they marched onto the battlefield determined to
fight with Lord Kalki's army.
Text 15
mrdbhasma kasthaatrandm
prabhutamndya sasandt
sdksat patinam nidhanam
hm yuvatyo'pi sehire
It is said that people try to protect even insignificant possessions,
such as things made of clay or wood, and so how is it possible that they
would quietly tolerate the death of their beloved husbands7
Text 16
tah stnyah svapatin vana
bhinnat vyakuh yendnyan


L O R D K A L K I 
IS A T T A C K E D 
BY M L E C C H A 
W O M E N 
165
krtva pascdd yuyudhre
kalkismnyair dhrtd yudhdh
The mleccha women kept their husbands, who were bewildered by
the incessant attack of arrows, behind them and advanced to fight with
weapons in their hands.
Text 17
tah stnrudviksya te sarve
vismaya smita mdnasdh
kalkim dgatya te yodhdh
kathaydmasur ddardt
When the soldiers of Lord Kalki saw these women engaged in fighting,
they became astonished and quickly approached the Lord to tell him of
what was taking place.
Text 18
stnndmeva yuyutswndm
kathdh srutvd mahdmatih
kalkih samuditah prdydt
svasainycuh sdnugo rathaih
When the greatly heroic Lord Kalki heard about how His army was
being attacked by a band of furious women, He was surprised. He mounted
His chariot and went to the battlefield, accompanied by His brothers and
their associates.
Text 19
tdh samalokya padmesah
sarva sastrdsra dhdnnih
ndna vdhana samrudhdh
krtavyuhd uvdca sah
Lord Kalki, the husband of PadmavatI, came before the mleccha
women, who were well-equipped with all kinds of weapons and arranged
in a military phalanx while seated upon their carriers, and spoke as
follows.


166 
S R I K A L K I 
P U R A N A
Text 20
kalkiruvdca
re striyah srnutasmakarh
vacanarh pathyam uttamam
striyd yuddhena kirh purhsdrh
vyavahdro'tra vidyate
Lord Kalki said: My dear beautiful ladies, please listen to My words,
which are meant for your benefit. It is not proper etiquette for a woman
to fight with a man.
Text 21
mukhesu candra vimvesu
rdjitdlaka panktisu
praharisyanti ke tatra
nayandnanda ddyisu
Your moon-like faces are decorated with ornamental dots. By seeing
your beautiful faces, everyone becomes happy. How can anyone discharge
a weapon at such faces, or smash them with his fist?
Text 22
vibhrdnta tdra bhramararh
navakoka nadaprabham
dirghdpange ksanarh yatra
tatra kah praharisyati
On your moon-like faces, there are lotus-like eyes around which bee-
like stars are slowly moving. How could a man hit such a charming face?
Text 23
vaksojaa sambhu sattdra
hdravydla vibhusitau
kandarpa darpa dalanau
tatra kah praharisyati
Your siva-linga shaped breasts are beautifully adorned with snake-like
necklaces. Their beauty certainly defeats the pride of Cupid. Who would
like to smash these lovely breasts?


L O R D 
K A L K I 
IS A T T A C K E D 
BY M L E C C H A 
W O M E N 
167
Text 24
lola lila lakavrdta
cakordkanta candrakam
mukhacandrarh cihnahnarh
kastarh hantum ihdrhati
Your moon-like faces have been attacked by cakora birds in the form
of your disheveled hair. Who would be capable of injuring such a spotless
moon-like faces?
Text 25
stanabhdra bhardkdnta
nitdnta ksina madhyamam
tanuloma latd ban&harh
kah pumdn praharisyati
Who could be shameless enough to hit your thin and charming waists,
which are bent due to the burden of your heavy breasts, and which are
decorated with fine lines of hair?
Text 26
nitrdnandena netrena
samavrtam aninditam
jaghanarh sughanarh ramyarh
vdnaih kah praharisyati
Who would be able to shoot arrows into your attractive thighs, which
are very pleasing to the eyes of all men, which are very attractive, and
which are broad and without flaw?
Text 27
iti kalkervacah srutvd
prahasya prdhurddrtdh
asmdkarh warn patln harhsi
tena nastd vayarh vibho
hantum gatdnomastrdni
kardnyevd gatdnyuta


SRI KALKI 
PURANA
After being flattered by Lord Kalki in this way, the mleccha women
said: My dear sir, because our husbands have been killed by You, we have
also been killed by You.
After saying this, the women prepared to attack Lord Kalki, but
they soon found that all of their weapons remained unmovable in their
hands.
Text 28
khadga sakti dhanurvana
sula tomara yastayah
tdh prdhuh purato murttdh
kdrttasvara vibhusandh
The next moment, all of the swords, tridents, bows, arrows, clubs,
rods, and spears appeared before the women in their personified forms
and spoke as follows.
Text 29
sastrdnyucuh
yamasddya vayarh naryo
hirhsaydmah svatejasa
tamutmdnarh sarvamayarh
jdnita krtaniscaydh
The personified weapons said: My dear ladies, you should understand
that this person is Lord Kalki, the incarnation of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. It is from Him alone, the Supreme Soul, that we receive our
power to kill living entities. He is one without a second and the supreme
controller of all existence. Have full faith in our words.
Text 30
tamisam demand ndryas
cardmo yadanujnayd
yatkrtd ndma ritpadi
bhedena viditd vayam
We move about only by His order, and it is by His mercy that we
have received our names and forms. We play a part in world events only
because of Him.


L O R D KALKI 
IS A T T A C K E D BY M L E C C H A W O M E N 
169
Text 31
rupagandha rasasparsa
sabdadyd bhutapancakdh
caranti yadadhisthanat
so'yam kalkih pardtmakah
Being empowered by the Lord, the five gross material elements, which
are the basis of the five objects of the senses, perform their duties. He is
the Supersoul, residing within the hearts of all living entities and within
every atom as well.
Text 32
kalasvabhdva sarhskdra
ndmddyd prakrtih para
yasyecchaya srjatyandarh
mahd hankdra kadikdn
According to His supreme will, the mahat-tattva, or aggregate material
ingredients, acts as the original cause of the cosmic manifestation,
including the time factor.
Text 33
yanmdyayd jagadydtrd
sargasthityanta sarhjnitd
ya evddyah sa evdnte
tasydyah so'yam isvaram
It is the Lord's illusory energy, maya, which manifests this material
world and bewilders all the conditioned souls. The Supreme Lord is the
ultimate cause of the creation and annihilation of everything. Anything
considered auspicious exists in this world only because of Him.
Text 34
asau раите bhdrydham
asya putrdpta vdndhavdh
svapnopa mdstu tanmsthd
vividhdscaindra jdlavat
The bodily conception of life, which causes people to think, "He is my
husband, she is my wife, he is my son, he is my friend, or he is my relative,"


3RI JVALKI 
fURANA
is illusory and not at all factual, like a dream. This bodily conception of
life is also made possible by Him alone
Text 35
sneha moha nibaddhanam
yatdydta drsam matam
na kalki sevinam raga
dvesa vidvesa pai mam
Those who are beyond the influence of material attachment and
affection consider birth and death to be like temporary interruptions
of an eternal journey. The devotees of Lord Kalki are above the duality
of attachment and hatred and so they know very well that whatever is
experienced in this world is not ultimate reality.
Text 36
kutah kdlah kuto mrtyuh
ka yamah kvasti devata
sa eva kalkir bhagavan
mayayd bahuhkrtah
How did the time factor come into existence? Under whose direction
is death taking its toll? Who are the demigods? It is Lord Kalki alone who
has assumed different forms with the help of His various energies.
Text 37
na sastrdni vayam na nary ah
sampraharya na ca kvaat
sastra prahartr bhedo'yam
avivekah paratmanah
My dear ladies, we are not simply weapons, nor do we have the
power to kill anyone independently. "I am a weapon, I am a killer." Such
conceptions are created by the illusory energy of the Supreme Lord,
maya.
Text 38
kalki dasasyapi vayam
hantum ndrhah kathodbhutam
hanisyamo daityapateh
prahladasya yathd hanm


LORD KALKI IS ATTACKED BY MLECCHA WOMEN 
171
When Lord Han accepted the form of Lord Nrsimhadeva, by the
request of Prahlada, who was born in the family of Daityas, we were
unable to strike Him. Now also we will not be able to injure Lord Kalki.
Text 39
ityastranam vacah srutva
stnyo vismitamanasdh
sneha moha vimrmuktas
tarn kalkim saranam yuyuh
After hearing these statements of the personified weapons, the ladies
became thoughtful. Indeed, they had a change of heart, giving up all
attachment and affection for their husbands, by taking shelter of Lord
Kalki.
Text 40
tdh samdlokya padmesah
pranata jfumanisthaya
provaca prahasan bhakti
yogam kdmasa ndsanam
Padmavati's husband, Lord Kalki, became pleased by the sincere
surrender of the wives of the Buddhist soldiers. Thereafter, the Lord
spoke to them about devotional service, which relieves one of all sinful
reactions.
Text 41
larmayogarxca atmanistham
jnanayogam bhidasrayam
naiskarmya laksanam tasam
kathaydmasa madhavah
Lord Kalki described to them the science of the self, and how to
execute karma-yoga. He also explained how one could actually become
the master of his own destiny.
Text 42
tdh stnyah kalkigadita
jnanena vijitendnyah
bhaktyd paramapustad
yogindm durlabham padam


172 
SRI K A L K I 
P U R A N A
These women learned how to control their senses by putting into
practice the transcendental knowledge received from Lord Kalki and
thus attain the supreme destination that is achieved by perfect yogis in
devotion.
Text 43
dattva moham mleccha bauddha stnyandm
krtva yuddham bhmravam bhimakarmd
hatvd bauddhdn mleccha saghdmsca
kalkis tesam jyotth sthdnamdpurya reje
In this way, Lord Kalki, the performer of very wonderful pastimes,
defeated the Buddhists and mlecchas after a fierce battle. By His causeless
mercy, the slain mlecchas and Buddhists returned to the effulgent abode
of the Supreme Lord, and their wives also attained liberation.
Texts 44-45
ye smvanti bauddha nidhanam
mlecchaksayam sddarat
lokdh sokaharam soda subha
karam bhakipradam madhave
tesdmeva punarna janma
maramm sarvdrtha samparakaram
mdya moha vinasanam
pratidinam samsdra tapacchidam
One who faithfully hears or recites this narration of how Lord
Kalki defeated the Buddhists and mlecchas will be freed from all kinds
of lamentation. He will achieve a life of auspiciousness and manifest
devotional service unto Lord Han He will no longer have to suffer the
pangs of repeated birth and death. Simply by hearing this narration, one
is awarded wealth, freedom from delusion, and relief from the miseries of
material existence
Thus ends the translation of the fifteenth chapter of Sri Kalki
Purana


C H A P T E R 
S I X T E E N
The Killing of the Raksasi, Kuthodari
Text 1
suta uvaca
tato bauddhan mlecchaganan
vijitya saha saimkaih
dhandnyd daya ratndm
kikatdt punara brajat
Suta GosvamI said. After killing the Buddhists and mlecchas of
Kikatapura, Lord Kalki took their wealth and returned to His capital,
along with His vast army
Text 2
kalkih parama tejasvi
dharmanam panraksakah
cakranrtham samagatya
sndnam vidhwad acarat
Lord Kalki, the unhmitedly powerful protector of religious principles,
next went to Cakratlrtha and took a ritualistic bath, according to
prescribed procedure.
Text3
bhratrbhir lokapdldbhair
bahubhih svajanair vrtah
samaydtdn munimstatra
dadrse dinamdnasan
One day, as the Lord was sitting in His assembly, surrounded by the
lokapalas, His relatives, and other associates, He saw that some miserable-
looking sages were approaching
Texts 4-6
samudbhya gawmstatra
panpahi jagatpate


ityukta vanto bahudha
ye tdnaha harih parah
bdlakhilyadikdnalpa
kayan cira jatddharan
vinayd vanatah kalkis
tdnaha krpanan bhaydt
kasmad yuyarh samdydtdh
kena w bhisitd vata
tamaharh nihan isydmi
yadivd sydt purandarah
These sages had come out of fear and they pleaded: О master of the
universe, please protect us.
These sages were the Balakhilyas. They were very short in stature,
they were crowned with matted hair, and they wore torn cloth. Lord Hari
inquired: Where are you coming from? Who are you afraid of? I will kill
him, even if he is the lord of the demigods.
Text 7
itydsrutya kalkivdkyarh
tenolldsita mdnasah
jagaduh pundariksarh
nikumbha duhituh kathdh
When the sages heard the Lord give them this assurance, their
happiness knew no bounds. Thereafter, the sages narrated the story of
Nikumbha's daughter.
TextS
munaya ucuh
srnu visnuyasahputra
kumbhakarnat majdtmajd
kuthodarid vikhydtd
gagandrddha samutthitd
The sages said: My dear Lord, please hear our prayer. Kumbhakarna's
son, Nikumbha, has a daughter named Kuthodarl. She is so tall that she
reaches half way to the sky.


Text 9
kalakanjasya mahisi
vikanja janani ca sd
himdlaye sirah krtva
pddau ca nisadhdcale
sete stanarh pdyayanti
vikanja prasthita stara
Her husband's name is Kalakanja. This demoniac couple has a son
named Vikanja. Just now, Kuthodari is lying down, breast-feeding her son,
Vikanja. Her head rests on the Himalaya mountains and her legs reach to
the Nisadha mountain.
Text 10
tasyd nisvdsa vdtena
vivasd vayamagatdh
daivenaiva samdmtah
samprdptds tatpaddspadam
munayo raksaniyaste
raksahsu ca vipatsu ca
We have been pushed here by the force of her strong breath and so
we consider it to be the arrangement of providence that we have met You.
Now, kindly save us from the wrath of this Raksasl.
Text 11
hi tesdm vacah srutud
kalkih para purafijayah
sendganaih parivrto
jagdma himavadvirim
After hearing this from the sages, Lord Kalki immediately left for the
Himalayas, accompanied by His army.
Texts 12ЛЗ
upatyakdm samdsddya
nisdmikdrh nindya sah
prdtar jigamisuh sainyair
dadrse ksira nimnagdm


I/O 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
samkhendu dhavalakaram
phenildm vrhatim drutam
calanam viksya te sarve
stambhita vismayanvitdh
The Lord passed the first night in a valley, and as He was about to
proceed the next morning, He spotted a river of milk. The river was broad
and white, like a conch shell, or moon rays, and it flowed very swiftly, so
that everyone became astonished to see it.
Texts 14-16
senagana gajasvadi
rathayaudhmh samdvrtah
kalkistu bhagavamstatra
jnatartho'pi murusvaran
papraccha ka nadi ceyam
katham dugdha vahdbhavat
te kalkestu vacah srutva
munayah prahur adarat
srnu kalke payasvatydh
prabhavam himavadvirau
samayatd kuthodaryah
stana prasra vanddiha
Even though Lord Kalki knew very well about that river, He nevertheless
questioned the sages, who were accompanying Him: What is the name of
this river? Why is it filled with milk, and not water/ The sages replied. My
dear Lord, we will disclose to You the truth of this river. This river has been
created from the milk that flows from one of Kuthodarl's breasts.
Text 17
ghatika saptakaih canya
payo yasyati vegitam
hinasara tatakdra
bhavisyati mahdmate
After seven hours, another similar river will be created. After some
time, this river of milk will freeze to become a sheet of white ice.


T H E 
K I L L I N G 
OF THE 
R A K S A S I , K U T H O D A R I 
177
Text 18
iti srutvd munmantu
vacanam saimkaih saha
aho kimasya rdksasyah
standdeka tviyam nadi
Upon hearing this from the sages, Lord Kalki and His soldiers
exclaimed: Alas! How wonderful this is1 A river has been created from
the breast milk of a Raksasi!
Text 19
ekam stanam. payayati
vikanjam putram adardt
na jane'sydh sanrasya
pramanam kati va bhavet
This Raksasi affectionately feeds the milk from one of her breasts
to her son, Vikanja. The size of that Raksasl's body is beyond anyone's
imagination.
Text 20
balam vasya nisdcarya
ityucur vismayanvitdh
kalkih pardtmd sannahya
senabhih sahasd yayau
Alas! Who can estimate the strength of that Raksasi?
As they were discussing the Raksasi in this way, Lord Kalki and His
soldiers approached her, who hunts her prey at night.
Text 21
mum darsita mdrgena
yatrdste sa msdtan
puptram stana payayanti
gin murdhm ghanopama
With the assistance of the great sages, Lord Kalki ascended the
mountains until He finally spotted the Raksasi with a very dark complexion
sitting on the peak of a mountain, breast-feeding her son.


178 
S R I K A L K I 
P U R A N A
Text 22
svasa vatati vatena
dura ksipta vanadvipah
yasydh karnavile sukham
prasuptah simhasarnkulah
She breathed so heavily that even wild elephants were thrown far
away into the forest. Lord Kalki and his soldiers were astonished to see
lions sleeping peacefully inside the cavities of her ears.
Text 23
putra pautra panvrta
gin gahvara vibhramdh
kesamulam upalambaya
hannd serate ciram
Deer were sleeping in the pores of her body, along with their calves,
having mistaken them to be mountain caves. They were freed from all
fear of hunters and so the deer clung to the Raksasi's body like lice in a
person's hair.
Texts 24-25
yuka wa na ca vyagra
lubdhdjdtankaya bhrsam
tamalokya girermurdhra
ginvat paramadbhutam
kalkih kamala patrdksah
sarvamstanaha saimkan
bhayodvingnan buddhihinan
tyaktodyama pancchaddn
Upon seeing the Raksasi, who resembled a dark mountain, lying on
a mountain peak, the lotus-petal eyed Lord Kalki gave assurances to His
soldiers, who had become very frightened and had thus lost the will to
fight and were preparing to throw down their weapons.
Text 26
kalkiruvdca
ginrduige vanhidurgam
krtva nsthantu mamakah


T H E K I L L I N G 
OF THE R A K S A S I , 
K U T H O D A R I 
179
gajasva rathayodhd ye
samdyantu maya saha
Lord Kalki said: The infantry soldiers should construct a fort on this
mountain and while remaining within, they should keep it surrounded
by fire at all times. The rest of you warriors should mount your horses,
elephants, and chariots and accompany Me as I accomplish My mission
Text 27
aham svalpena sainyena
yamyasydh sanmukham sanaih
praharttum bana sandohaih
khadgasakti parasvadhaih
My strategy is that I will take only few soldiers and challenge the
Raksasi while showering our arrows, swords, and axes.
Text 28
ityuktvd sthaya pascattan
vanaistam samahanad vah
sa kruddhotthdya sahasa
nanarda paramddbhutam
After saying this, Lord Kalki left His vast army and approached the
Raksasi while showering torrents of arrows upon her. At this, the Raksasi
began to scream with rage.
Text 29
tena nddena mahata
vitrastds cdbhavan janah
nipetuh sairakah sarve
murcchya dhararatale
Her screams were so loud that everyone's senses were stunned. What
to speak of the ordinary soldiers, even the generals fell unconscious onto
the ground.
Text 30
sd rathamsca gajamscapi
vwrtdsya bhaydnaka


180 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
jaghan prasvasa vataih
samdniya kuthodan
Kuthodarl, the ferocious RaksasI, then opened her mouth wide and
swallowed all the chariots, elephants, and horses after pulling them
toward her by her powerful inhalation.
Text 31
sendganas tadudaram
pravistah kalkind saha
yatharksa mukhavatena
pravisanti pipihkah
When a bear breathes heavily, many insects and ants are drawn into
his mouth. In the same way, Lord Kalki and His soldiers were forced to
helplessly enter the Raksasfs mouth.
Text 32
tad drstvd devagandharva
hahakdram pracakire
tatrastha munayah sepur
jepuscanye makarsayah
This stunned all the demigods and Gandharvas who were watching
from the heavens, and made them bitterly lament. Some great sages cursed
the RaksasI while others recited prayers and mantras for the welfare of
Lord Kalki.
Text 33
nipeturnye duhkhdrtta
brahmana brahmavadinah
ruruduh sistayodha ye
jahrsus tannisdcarah
Many qualified brahmanas simply watched quietly, unable to even
attempt to counteract their great distress. The devotees of Lord Kalki
cried out in frustration, whereas the demons shouted with glee.
Text 34
jagatam kadanam drstva
sasmaratmanam dtmana


THE 
KILLING OF THE RAKSASI, KUTHODARI 
181
kalkih kamala patraksah
surdrati msudanah
When Lord Kalki, the slayer of the demons who are inclined to
harass the devotees, witnessed the distress of the spectators, He could
not tolerate it and so He made up His mmd to put an end to the Raksasi
without delay.
Text 35
vandgnim cela carmdbhyam
rathanair ydna ddrubhih
prajvdlyodara madhyena
karabalam samddade
Within the dark stomach of the Raksasi, Lord Kalki created fire with
one of His arrows and then made it blaze up by adding cloth, leather, and
wood. When the fire blazed brightly, the Lord raised His powerful sword.
Texts 36-37
tena khadgena mahata
ddksyam mrbhidya bandhubhih
bahbhir bhrdtrbhir vdhair
vrtah sastrdsra pdnibhh
vahirbabhuva sarvesah
kalkih kalkavindsanah
sahasrakso yathd vrtra
kuksim dambholi nemind
Just as Indra had previously pierced the abdomen of Vrtrasura with
his thunderbolt so that he could come out of the demon's body, Lord
Kalki, the master of the universe and destroyer of all sinful reactions,
emerged from the Raksasfs abdomen, along with His friends, brothers,
and soldiers, who were all well-equipped with weapons, after tearing open
the right side of her ribcage.
Text 38
yonirandhrad gajarathastu
uragds cdbhavan bahih
ndsikd karna vivardt
ke'pi tasydh vinirgatah


182 
SRI 
K A L K I 
P U R A N A
Some elephants, horses, chariots, and infantry soldiers emerged from
the abdomen of the mght-stalking RaksasI, while others emerged through
the holes of her body.
Text 39
te durgatds tatastasyah
sairakd rudhroksitdh
tdm vwyadhur raksipantim
tarasa caranau karau
After the blood-soaked soldiers came out from the Raksasl's body,
they saw her writhing in pain, flailing her arms and legs wildly, and so
they picked up their bows and began showering their arrows upon her.
Text 40
mamara sd bhinna deha
bhinnakuksi snodhara
nadayanti diso dyoh kham
cmnayanti ca parvatan
Thus, the Raksasl's entire body was pierced by sharp arrows, and this
created a vast pool of blood. She screamed and her convulsions shook the
mountain. In this way, her life came to an end.
Text 41
vikanjo'pi tatha viksya
mdtaram kdtaro'bhavat
sa vikanjah kudhd dhavan
sendmadhye nirdyudhah
When the Raksasl's son, Vikunja, witnessed the death of his mother,
he became enraged and jumped in the midst of the ocean that was Lord
Kalki's army, without even bothering to pick up a weapon.
Text 42
gcqamala kuhxm vakso
vaprdji vibhusanah
mahdsarpa krtosnisah
kesari mudntanguhh.


T H E 
K I L L I N G 
OF T H E R A K S A S I , 
K U T H O D A R I 
183
Slam elephants appeared like a garland on his chest, horses were
his ornaments, snakes became his crown, and lions were the rings on his
fingers.
Texts 43-44
mamarda kalhsenam torn
matur vyasana harsitah
sa kalhstam brahmam astram
rdmadattam jighdmsaya
dhanusa pancavarsiyam
raksasam sastramadade
tenastrena sirastasaya
chitva bhumava patayat
Being overwhelmed by grief because of his mother's death, Vikanja
began to torment Lord Kalki's soldiers. To eliminate this five-year-old
Raksasa, Lord Kalki invoked the brahmastra that was given to Him by His
teacher, Paras'urama, That supreme weapon proceeded to sever Vikanja's
head from his body.
Text 45
rudhiraktam dhatu atram
gin smgam wadbhutam
saputram raksasim hatva
muninam vacanad vibhuh
In response to the pleas of the great sages, Lord Kalki thus destroyed
the formidable RaksasI and her son on the peak of a mountain in the
Himalayas.
Text 46
gangdtire handvare
nwdsam samakalpayat
devdnam kusumasdrair
munistrotrmh sapuptah
After witnessing the death of the terrible RaksasI, the demigods
showered flowers upon Lord Kalki, and the sages offered Him nice prayers.
Thereafter, Lord Kalki departed. That evening, He made His camp at
Hardwar, on the banks of the River Ganges.


Text 47
mnaya tarn msdm tatra
kalkih paryanavrtah
pratar dadarsa gangdyas
tire munigandn bakun
tasyah snanabyd]a visnor
dtmano darsand kuldn
Lord Kalki, the incarnation of Lord Han, passed the night at Hardwar,
along with His associates and soldiers. Early the next morning, the great
sages approached Lord Kalki on the pretext of bathing in the Ganges,
being very eager for His darsana.
Text 48
handvdre gangatata rakata
pinddraka vane vasantam
sn mantam mjagana vrtam
tarn muniganah stavaih stutvd
stutva vidhivad uditair janhu
tanayam prapasyantam kalkim
mum janagana drustuma gaman
As Lord Kalki and His associates were enjoying the beautiful sight of
the sacred river Ganges at Hardwar, the great sages approached Him and
offered their obeisances. After doing so, the sages endeavored to please
the Lord by offering Him selected prayers with great devotion.
Thus ends the translation of the sixteenth chapter of Sri Kalki
Purdna.


C H A P T E R 
S E V E N T E E N
The Descendents of the Surya Dynasty
and Lord Ramacandra's Pastimes
Text 1
suta uvdca
sukhagatan mumn drstvd
kalkih parama dharmavit
pujayitva ca vidhwat
sukhdsina nuvaca tan
Suta GosvamI said: After the great sages were comfortably seated,
Lord Kalki, the protector of religious principles, worshiped them and
then spoke as follows.
Text 2
kahkaruvdca
ke yuyam suryya samkdsa
mama bhagya dupasthtdh
tirthdtanotsuka loka
trayanam upakdrakah
Lord Kalki said: You are as brilliant as the sun, inclined to reside in
holy places of pilgrimage, and engaged in work for the welfare of the
world. Who are you? You must have come here as a result of My good
fortune.
Text3
vayam lake punyavanto
bhagyavanto yasasvinah
yatah krpd katdksena
yusmdbhr avalokitdh
We are certainly most fortunate because today your soothing glances
are cast upon Me.


Texts 4-7
tataste vamadevo'tnr
vasistho galavo bhrguh
parasaro narado'svatthdma
ramah krpastntah
durvasa devalah kanvo
vedapramitir angirah
ete canye ca bahavo
munayah samsitavratdh
krtvagre mamdevdpi
candrasuryya kulodbhavau
r&jdnau tau mahdviryyau
tapasya bhiratau ciram
ucuh prahrsta manasah
kalkim kalkavmasanam
mahodadhes tiragatam
visnum suragana yatha
In response, the great sages, Vamadeva, Atn, Vasistha, Galava,
Parasara, Narada, As'vatthama, Parasurama, Krpacarya, Tnta, Durvasa,
Devala, Kanva, Vedapramiti, and Angira, as well as many others, along
with King Maru and King Devapl of the Candra and Surya dynasties, all
of whom were enriched by their severe penance, replied all together. The
sages spoke to Lord Kalki just the demigods had previously spoken to Lord
Han on the shore of the Milk Ocean.
Text 8
munaya uvdcah
jayasesa jaganndtha
viditdkhila manasa
srsthi sthiti layadhyaksa
paramatman prasida nah
The sages said All glories to You, Lord of the universe! You reside
withm the hearts of all living entities. О Supreme Soul, You are the creator,
maintainer, and destroyer of the universe. Please be merciful to us


Text 9
kalakarma gundvdsa
prasanta nijaknya
brahmadinuta padabja
padmandtha prasidanah
О husband of PadmavatI, You are the eternal time factor and all
activities within the universe are thus impelled by You alone. Even
demigods like Brahma glorify Your lotus feet. Please be satisfied to us.
Text 10
iti tesam vacah sruwa
kalkih praha jagatpatih
kavetau hhavatdmagre
sahasattvau tapasvinau
After hearing these prayers, the Lord of the universe, Kalki, said. О
sages, who are these two kings? They appear to be very powerful, as if they
are enriched by the performance of severe penance.
Text 11
kathamatra gatau stutvd
gangam mudita manasau
ka va stutustu jdnhavyd
yuvayor namani ca ke
Why have they come here after offering prayers to the Ganges?
Lord Kalki then turned to the two kings and said: Why are you engaged
in glorifying the River Ganges? Who are you? What are your names?
Text 12
tayormarnh pramuditah
krtanjah puptah km
ddavuvdca vinayi
nyavamsdnu kirttanam
After hearing the words of Lord Kalki, King Maru, who was the more
qualified of the two, folded his hands and very humbly narrated the
history of his dynasty.


188 
S R I K A L K I 
P U R A N A
Text 13
maruruvdca
sarvarh vetsi paratmdpi
antarydmin hrdi sthitah
tavajfiayd sarvametat
kathaydmi srnu prabho
King Maru said: You are the Supersoul, residing in everyone's heart.
You know the intentions of all living entities. О Lord, in accordance with
Your order, I will describe everything You have inquired about.
Texts 14-18
tava ndbher abhud brahmd
maricis tatsuto'bhavat
tato manus tatsuto' bhitd
iksvdkuh satyavikramah
yuvandsva iti khydto
mdndhatd tatsuto'bhavat
purukusat statsuto'bhud
anaranyo mahdmati
trasadasyuh pita tasmdt
haryyasvastrya runastatah
trisarhkus tatsuto dhimdn
hariscandrah pratdpavdn
haritastat sutastasmdt
bharukas tatsuto vrkah
tatsutah sagaras tasmdd
samanjds tatorh'sumdn
tato dilipas tatputro
bhagiratha iti smrtah
yenanitd jdnhaviyarh
Wxydta bhdgirathi bhuvi
stutd nutd pujiteyarh
tava pdda samudbhavd


L O R D R A M A C A N D R A ' S 
P A S T I M E S 
189
О Lord, Brahma was born from Your navel, from Brahma, MaricI
was born, from MaricI, Manu was born, from Manu, Satyavikrama was
born, and from him, Iksavaku. From Iksavaku, Yuvanasva was born, from
him, Mandhata was born, from Mandhata, Purukusat was born, from
Purukusat, Anaranya was born, and from him, Trasadasyu was born. From
Trasadasyu, Haryayasva was born, from Haryayasva, Tryaruna was born,
from him, Trsanku was born. From Trsaiiku, Hariscandra was born, from
Hariscandra, Harita was born, from Harita, Bharuka was born, and from
him, Vrka was born. From Vrka, Asamanya was born, from Asamanya,
Ans'umana was born, from Ansumana, Dillpa was born, and from him,
Bhagiratha was born. Because Bhagiratha brought the Ganges to this
world, she is also known as Bhagirathl. Because the Ganges originated
from Your lotus feet, everyone glorifies, offers obeisances to, and worships
her.
Texts 19-22
bhagirathdt sutastasmdn
ndbhastasmdda bhuda ball
sindhndvipa sutastasmdt
ayutdyus tato'bhavat
rtuparnas tatsuto'bhut
suddsas tatsuto'bhavat
saudasas tatsuto dhimdn
asmakas tatsuto matah
mulakdt sa dasarathas
tasmadeda vidastatah
raja visva sahastasmdt
khawdngo dirghabdhukah
tato rathurajas tasmdt
suto dasarathah krti
tasmddrdmo harih sdksdd
dvirbhuto jagatpatih
From King Bhagiratha, Nabha was born, from Nabha, Sindhudvlpa
was born, from Sindhudvlpa, Ayutayu was born, and from him, Rtuparna
was born. From Rtuparna, Sudasa was born, from Sudasa, Saudasa was


190 
SRI K A L K I 
P U R A N A
born, from Saudasa, Asmaka was born, and from him, Mulaka was born.
From Mulaka, King Das'aratha was born, from Das'aratha, Edavida was
born, from Edavida, Visvasaha was born, and from him, Khatvanga was
born. From Khatvanga, Dlrghavahu was born, from Dlrghavahu, Raghu
was born, from Raghu, Aja was born, and from Aja, Das'aratha was born.
This Dasaratha was the father Lord Ramacandra, the incarnation of Lord
Han, the master of the universe.
Text 23
rdmdvataram akarnya
kalhh paramarsitah
marum praha vbtarena
sn ramacantam vada
Lord Kalki became very pleased while hearing about the glorious
dynasty of Lord Ramacandra. He then requested King Maru to narrate
Lord Ramacandra's glories.
Text 24
maruruvaca
sitapateh karma vaktum
kah samartho'sti bhutale
sesah sahasra vadanmr
api laldyito bhavet
Kmg Maru said: My dear Lord, no one can properly describe the
pastimes of the Lord of Janaki. What to speak of others, even Lord Ananta
with one thousand mouths is unable to do so.
Text 25
tathapi semusi me'sti
vamaydmi tavdjnaya
rdmasaya cantam punyam
pdpatapa pramocanam
Still, by Your order, I will describe to the best of my ability the
transcendental characteristics and pastimes of Lord Ramacandra, the
hearing of which nullifies all sinful reactions and destroys all miseries.


LORD RAMACANDRA'S 
PASTIMES
Texts 26-27
ajadi vibudharthi'to jam
caturbhir amsaih kule
raveraja sutadajo
jagati yatu dhanacayah
sisuh kusikajadhvara
ksayakara ksayo yo balada
bah lahtakandharo
jayati )dnakiballabhah
muneranu sahanup
nikhdasastra vi&yatigo
yayavati valaprabho
janaka raja rajatsabham
vidhaya janamohana dyutim
ativa kamadraiiah pracandakai a
candima bhavanabhanjane janmanah
Long ago, at the request of the demigods, headed by Brahma, Lord
Ramacandra, the husband of Slta, who brought an end to the dynasty of
Ravana, appeared as the son of Maharaja Das'aratha of the Surya dynasty
Lord Rama distinguished Himself in His youth by killing many demons,
headed by Tadaka, in the sacrificial arena of the sage, Visvamitra. It is
only by the mercy of the supremely powerful Lord Ramacandra that one
does not return to this material world He is the master of the art of
discharging weapons, and His transcendental form is most charming to
behold He appeared in this world along with His brother, Laksmana The
Lord, His brother, and Visvamitra went to the assembly of King Janaka
Text 28
tamapratim atejasam
dasarathatmajam sanujam
muneranu yathavidheh saswad
adidevam param ninksya janako
muda ksiti sutapatim sammatam
nipata panaksamam manasi
bhartsayanna yayau


b R I KALKI PURANA
In that assembly, Rama and Laksmana sat behind the great sage,
Visvamitra, just as Candra sits behind Brahma in his assembly. When King
Janaka saw the greatly effulgent Ramacandra, the original Personality of
Godhead, the Supreme Absolute Truth, he was convinced that He was
the suitable husband for his daughter. Although the king had arranged
for certain conditions to be met by the person who would accept his
daughter's hand in marriage, he regretted this and so approached Lord
Ramacandra.
Text 29
sa bhupa panpujito
janaka jeksitair arcatah
kardla kathinam dhanuh
kara saroruhe samhitam
vibhajya balavad drdham
jay a raghuhety uccakair
dhvane tnjagati gatam
panvidhaya rama babhau
After being worshiped by King Janaka, and receiving the sidelong
glance of Slta, Rama, the son of Dasaratha, effortlessly picked up the
bow of Lord Siva and broke it in half. A tremendous sound filled the
four directions. All the assembled kings and sages were astonished to see
Rama's extraordinary prowess.
Text 30
tato janaka bhupatir
dasarathdtmajebhyo dadau
catasra usatirmuda varacaturbhya
udvahane svalamkrta mjdtmajah
path tato balam bhargavas cakdra man
nijam raghuyatau mohogram tyajan
Thereafter, the pious King Janaka greeted Rama and His three
brothers, according to the prescribed procedure, and then handed over
his four nicely dressed and decorated daughters to them Thereafter, when
Lord Ramacandra was returning to Ayodhya after His marriage, He met
Parasurama, who was filled with great rage.


L O R D R A M A C A N D R A ' S 
P A S T I M E S 
193
Text 31
tatah svapuram dgato
dasarathastu sitd.pa.tim
nrpam sacwa samyuto
mjaviatra simhdsane
vidhatum amala prabham
panjanaih knydkdnbhh
samudyatam atim tada
druta vdrayat kcakeyi
Finally, when Ramacandra returned to His palace at Ayodhya, King
Dasaratha consulted His ministers and decided to install Him as heir
apparent to the throne. However, one of Das'aratha's queens, Kaikeyi,
having been influenced by a wicked maidservant, approached the king
and forbade him to install Rama as the future king.
Text 32
tato guru nidesato janakaraja
kanydyutah praydnam akarot
sudhir yadanugah sumitrdsutah
vanam mjaganam tyajan guhagrhe
vasannddardt visrjya nrpaldnchanam
raghupatir }atdsirabhrt
As a result, Ramacandra, along with His wife, Slta, and brother,
Laksmana, went to the forest in exile by the order of His father. The
morose citizens followed them as far as they were permitted. After walking
some distance, Lord Ramacandra arrived at the kingdom of Guhaka.
There, the Lord gave up His royal dress and put on clothing made of tree
bark and kept His hair matted.
Text 33
pnyanuja yutastato
mummato vane pujitah
sa pamcavatikasrame
bharatam dturam sangatam
nwaryya maranam pituh
samavadharyya duhkhdturas


tapovana gato'vasad
raghupaas tatastdh samah
In the forest, Lord Rama, along with His wife and brother, lived like
a sage. Everyone who chanced to meet Him in the forest worshiped Him
with great devotion. Eventually, the Lord built a cottage at Pancavati
and continued to reside there. This was where Bharata came to try and
persuade Lord Rama to return to Ayodhya. Lord Rama refused and
continued to live in the forest for a period of fourteen years, despite
knowing that His father had passed away in His absence.
Text 34
dasanana sahodardm
visama vana vedhaturdm
samiksya vararupimm
prahasatim satim sundanm
rajdsrayam abhipsatim
janaka japatir laksmanat
karala karavalatah
samakaro dvirupdm tatah
One day, as Sita, Rama, and Laksmana were sitting peacefully,
Surpanakha, the sister of ten-headed Ravana, who was dressed very
beautifully and thus appeared very charming with her smiling face, came
there under the influence of lusty desires. Lord Rama made a gesture to
Laksmana, who then took His sharp sword and disfigured the Raksasi by
cutting off her nose.
Text 35
samdpya path danavam kharasaraih
sanaihr паьауап caturdasa sahasrakam
samahanat kharam sdnugam dasanana
vasdnugam kanakacaru camcan mrgam
priydpnyakaro vane samavadhid balad raksasam
Thereafter, Lord Ramacandra killed Surpanakha's brothers, Khara
and Dusana, who commanded an army of fourteen thousand Raksasa
soldiers, for the pleasure of Ravana. Finally, in order to please His wife,
Sita, Rama killed the Raksasa, Maiica, who had assumed the form of a
golden deer.


Text 36
tato dasamukhastvarams
tamabhwiksya rdmam rusd
brajantam anulaksmanam
janakajam jahardsrame tato
raghupatih priyam dala kutira
samsthapitam na viksya tu
vimurcchito bahu vdapya siteti lam
Finding Slta alone in her cottage, the king of the Raksasas, Ravana,
kidnapped her by means of deception. When Lord Rama returned home
and could not find His beloved Slta, He lamented, crying out, "O Slta!"
and fell unconscious.
Text 37
vane nijagandsrame riagatale
jale pallavale vmtya patitam
khagam path dadarsa saumitnnd
jatayu vacanat tato dasamukha
hrtdm janakim vwicca krtavan
pitan vanhikrtyam prabhuh
Lord Ramacandra searched for Slta everywhere, even in the hermitages
of great sages and mountain caves, and throughout the forests. Finally,
the Lord found the king of birds, Jatayu, as he was about to give up his life,
and learned from him how Sira had been kidnapped by Ravana. The Lord
performed the last rites for Jatayu, who was just like His father.
Text 38
pnyaviraha kdtaro'nuja purahsaro
raghavo dhanurdhara dhurandhar
hanbalam nabalapinam dadarsa
rsabhacalad ravija bah rajanuja priyam
pavana nandanam pannatam htam presitam
Lord Ramacandra, the master of releasing arrows, became terribly
afflicted by feelings of separation from Slta. In that condition, He went
with Laksmana to Rsabha Hill, where He met Hanumana, the son of
Pavana, who was a friend of Sugrlva and very expert at fighting.


196 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
Text 39
tatas taduditam matam
pavana putra sugrwayos
trndvi paabhedana mjanrpasana
sthapitam vwicya vyavasdyakair
mjasakha pnyam bdhnam ruhatya
hanbhupatim mjasakham sa ramokarot
Thereafter, at the request of Sugrlva and Hanuman, Lord Rama killed
Vah with an arrow known as sapta-patala-bheda and thus cemented His
friendship with Sugrlva. By His mercy, Sugrlva became the king of the
monkeys.
Text 40
athottaram imam ham janakajam
samanvesanyan jatayu vihagoditar
jalamdhim taran vayujah dasanana
puram visanjanakajam samanandayann
asoka vamkasrame raghupatim punah prdyayau
Then, as indicated by Jatayu, Hanuman, the son of Pavana, while
searching for Sita, crossed the ocean and went to Lanka, where he found
Her in a grove of asoka trees. Hanuman conversed with Sita, and after
gaining Her confidence, he returned to Lord Rama.
Text 41
tato hanumatd balad апаш
raksasam ndsanam ]vala]jvalana
samkula jvahta dagdha lankapuram
vwicya raghunayako jalanidhm rusa
sosayan babandha hanyuthapaih panvrto
nagainsvarah babhamja purapattanam
vwidha sarga durgaksamam nisacara
pateh krudha raghupaah km sadgatih
By employing his immense prowess, Hanuman killed many Raksasas
and set fire to the city of Lanka. Lord Ramacandra, after becoming
enraged at the ocean, built a bridge across the water by floating stones and
in this way reached Lanka, along with His monkey soldiers. Thereafter,


LORD RAMACANDRA'S PASTIMFS 
197
they began to destroy the gardens, fortresses, walls, and gates of that great
city.
Text 42
nato'nuja yuto yudhi
prabala candako dandabhrt
saraih kharatarcuh krudhd
gajarathdsva hamsdkule
kardla karavdlatah prabalakdla
jihvdgrato nihataya vararaksasan
narapatir babhau sdnugah
Thereafter Lord Rama and Sumitra's son, Laksmana, encased
Themselves in armor and equipped themselves with all kinds of celestial
weapons and began to destroy innumerable Raksasas, so that They
appeared like the tongue of a poisonous serpent.
Text 43
tato'ti balabdnarair gin
mah ruhodyat karaih
kardla tamtddanaiar
janaka jdrusd ndsitdn
nijaghnu ramardrddandn
atibalan dasasydnugdn naldngada
hansvara'su gasutarksa rdjddayah
Nala, Angada, Sugrlva, Hanuman, Jamvavan, and other very powerful
monkey soldiers of Lord Rama also killed many of the ten-headed Ravana's
followers, using big trees and mountain peaks as weapons. They were mad
with rage at Ravana, the sworn enemy of the demigods, because he had
kidnapped Sita.
Text 44
tato'ti bala laksmana stndasa
ndtha satrum rane jaghana
ghana ghosananuga ganavr srkprdsanah
prahasta vikatddi kdnapi rusacardn
sangatan nikumbha makardksasan
nisita khadga pataih krudhd


198 
S R I K A L K I 
P U R A N A
The unlimitedly powerful Laksmana killed Ravana's son, Indrajit, who
drank the blood of others and was surrounded by his wicked followers. He
also sent Prahasta, Nikumba, Makaraksa, Vikata, and others to the abode
of Yamaraja by means of His sharp sword.
Text 45
tato dasamukho rane gajarathdsva
pattisvarcur alamghya ganakotibhih
panvrto yuyodhayudhaih kapisvara
camupateh paumananta dwydyndham
radhudvahama mnditam sapadi sangato durjayah
Thereafter, the invincible and arrogant Ravana, who was surrounded
by millions of warriors seated upon elephants, chariots, and horses, as well
as infantry soldiers, approached Lord Rama, the worshipable leader of the
army of monkeys. The incomparably powerful Lord Rama was equipped
with celestial weapons as Ravana attacked Him.
Text 46
dasdnanam anm tato
vidhwarasmaya varddhitam
mahabala parakramam gin
rravdcahxm samyuge jaghana
raghunayako nisita sayakair
uddhatam msasara camupatim
prabala kumbhakarnam tatah
Lord Ramacandra of the Raghu dynasty released His arrows at
Ravana, the king of the Raksasas, who was protected by the benedictions
of Brahma, who appeared like a great mountain on the battlefield,
and who was the avowed enemy of all godly persons, and his brother,
Kumbhakarna.
Text 47
tayoh kharataraih sarmr
gaganam acchaditam
babhau ghanaghata samara
mukharamattand vanhibhih
dhanurgwna mahasani
dhvaniravrtam bhumlam


LORD R A M A C A N D R A ' S 
P A S T I M E S 
199
bhayankara mrantaram
raghupatesca raksahpate
Soon, the entire sky became covered with the arrows released by
Lord Rama and Ravana, so that it appeared to be full of dark clouds. As
the arrows and other weapons clashed, they created terrible sounds and
sparks, so that the sky appeared to be lit with flashes of lightning. The
sounds of drums were heard on that great battlefield, which took on a
very grim appearance.
Text 48
tato dharani jarusd
vividha rama vanaujasa
papdta bhuvi rdvanas
tndasandtha vidrdvanah
tato'ti kutuki hanrj
jvalana raksitam jdnakim
samarpya raghupungave
nijapunm yayau harsitah
Finally, ten-headed Ravana, who creates fear even in the mind of the
king of the demigods, was killed by a powerful arrow of Lord Ramacandra,
compounded by the curse of angry Sita. Hanuman joyfully reunited Sita,
who was pure like fire, with Lord Ramacandra, before they all returned
home.
Text 49
purandara kathddarah
sapadi tatra raksahpatim
vibhisanam abhisanam
samakarot tato raghavah
By the request of Indra, the king of the demigods, Lord Ramacandra
entrusted the responsibility for ruling the kingdom of Lanka to
Vibhisana.
Text 50
hansvara gandvrto'
vamsutayutah sdnujo


200 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
rathe siva sakherite
suvimale lasatpuspake
murusvara ganarccito
raghupatis tvayodhydrh
yayau vivicya munildcchanarh
guhagrhe'ti sakhyarh smaran
Thereafter, Lord Ramacandra, surrounded by the best of monkeys
and accompanied by Laksmana and Slta, returned to Ayodhya after
mounting the celestial Puspaka chariot that was given to Him by Kuvera.
While passing over the forests in which He had earlier resided during His
exile, the Lord remembered how He had lived like a sage, and had become
a good friend of Guhaka.
Text 51
tato nijagamvrto bharatam
aturarh sdntvayan svamdtrgand
vdkyatah pitrnijdsane bhupatih
vasistha munipungavaih krta
nijdbhiseko vibh.uk samasta janapdlakah
surapatir yathd sambabhau
After His return to Ayodhya, the Lord was worshiped by the great
sages. He pacified His brother, Bharata, who had been greatly pained due
to separation from Him. By the order of His mothers, Lord Rama sat on
His father's throne and commenced ruling the kingdom. His coronation
ceremony was performed by great sages, headed by Vasistha Muni. While
seated upon the throne as the King of Ayodhya, Lord Rama appeared like
the king of the demigods and master of all living entities.
Text 52
nardbahudhanakard
dvijavards tapas tatpardh
svadharma krta niscaydh
svajana sangatdh nirbhaydh
ghandh subahu varsino
vasumati sada harsitd


LORD R A M A C A N D R A ' S 
P A S T I M E S 
201
bhavatyati bale nrpe
raghupatd vabhut sajjagat
Simply by the Lords' presence, the kingdom of Ayodhya flourished
in all respects. The brdhmanas cheerfully engaged in performing their
austerities and all the subjects scrupulously observed religious principles.
Because the clouds showered sufficient rain at the proper time, the earth
appeared green and full of prosperity. Indeed, the people of the entire
world became peaceful and pious.
Text 53
tatoyuta samdh priyair
nijagunaih prajd ranjayan
nijdrh raghupatirh pnyarh
nijamano bhavair mohiyan
munlndra ganasarhyuto'pyayajad
adidavan makhair dhanair vipula
daksinair atula vajimedhaistribhih
By exhibiting His transcendental qualities, Lord Ramacandra, the
reservoir of pleasure, fulfilled the desires of everyone, and especially
pleased the heart of Sita. In this way, the Lord ruled Ayodhya for eleven
thousand years. He satisfied the demigods by performing many gorgeous
sacrifices, including three horse sacrifices.
Text 54
tatah kimapi kdranarh
manasi bhdvayan bhupatir
jahau janakajdrh vane
raghuvaras tada nirghmah
tato nijamatarh smaran
samanavat pracetah suto
nijasramam uddradhi
raghupateh priydrh duhkhitdm
Then, for some reason, Lord Rama exiled Sita to the forest, so that He
appeared to act mercilessly. At that time, the magnanimous sage, Valmiki,
gave Sita shelter in his asrama.


SRI 
KALKI FURANA
Texts 55-56
tatah kusalavau sutau
prasusuve dhantn suta
mahdbala parakamau
raghupater yasogdyanau
sa tamapi sutarwitam
rnumvarattu rdmdntike
samarsayad arunditam
suravaraih sadd vanditam
tato raghupatistu tarn
sutayutam rudantim puro
jagdda dahane punah pravisa
sodha nayatmanah itmtam
aveksya sa raghupateh paddb]e
nata vivesa jarvxni yutd
mam ganojjvalam bhutalam
In due course of time, Sita gave birth to two glorious sons, named Lava
and Kus'a, at the hermitage of the sage, Valmiki. After growing up, they
sang the narration of Lord Ramacandra's pastimes composed bv Valmiki.
When Valmiki brought Sita and Her two sons to see Lord Rama, the Lord
said to Her: You must again enter fire to prove Your purity. Upon hearing
these words, mother Sita entered within the earth and went to Rasatala.
Text 57
ninksya raghunayako
janokaja ргачапат smaran
vasistha guru yogato'nwayuto'gamat
svam padam purahsthita janaih svakaih
pasubhinsvarah samsprsan mudd
sarayujwanam rathavaraih panto vihhuh
Thereafter, Lord Ramacandra, His family priest, Vasistha, and His
brothers, followers, and indeed all the inhabitants of Ayodhya, including
the animals, happily bathed in the River Sarayu, and then ascended to
Vaikuntha on celestial chariots.


LORD RAMACANDRA'S PASTIMES
Text 58
ye smvanti raghitdvahasya
cantam karnamrtam sadarat
samsaramava sosananca
pathatdm amodadam moksadam
rogdndrrvha santaye dhanajana
svargadi sampattaye vamsanamapi
vrddhave prabhavati sr\ %ah paresah prabhuh
By faithfully hearing these nectarean narrations of Lord Ramacandra's
pastimes, one gets relief from all material pangs, is awarded good children,
wealth, and followers, and ultimately attains the spiritual world. While
hearing this narration, one's mind floats in an ocean of transcendental
bliss as the ocean of material existence dries up, so that by the mercv of
the Lord of Laksmi, one attains liberation.
Thus ends the translation of the seventeenth chapter of Sri Kalki
Purana.


C H A P T E R 
E I G H T E E N
The Descendents of Lord Ramacandra
King Maru and King Devapi
Texts 1-4
rdmat kuso'bhuda tithis
tato' bhunnisa dhannabhah
tasmdd abhut pundarikah
ksema dhanva'bhavat tatah
devdnirhka stato hinah
paripdtro'tha hinatah
baldhakas tator'kasa
rajandbhas tato'bhavat
khagandd vidhrtas tasmdd
hiranya ndbha sanjnitah
tatah puspdda dhruva tasmdt
syandano'thdgnir varnakah
tasmdcchighro'bhavat putrah
pita me'tidavikramah
tasmdn marurh mam ke'piha
budhancdpi sumitrakam
From Lord Rama was born Kusa, Kusa's son was Atithi, Atithi's son
was Nisada, whose son was Nabha, and his son was Pundarika. Pundarika's
son was Ksemadhanva, whose son was Devanika, Devanlka's son was Hina,
and his son was Paripatra. Paripatra's son was Balahaka, Balahaka's son
was Arka, Arka's son was Rajanabha, his son was Khagana, Khagana's son
was Vidhrta, whose son was Hiranyanabha, and Hiranyanabha's son was
Puspa. Puspa's son was Dhruva, Dhruva's son was Syandana, Syandana's
son was Agnivarna, and his son was the very powerful Sihgra, who is my
father. My name is Maru, but some people call me Budha, or Sumitra.


K I N G MARU AND K I N G D E V A P I 
205
Texts 5-6
kaldpa gramam dsadya
viddhi sattapasi sthitam
tavavatararh vijnaya
vydsdt satyavati sutdt
pratiksya kdlarh hxksabdarh
kaleh praptas tavdntikam
janmakotyarh hasdrh rdser
ndsanarh dharmma sdsanam
yasahkirttikaram sarvam
kdmapurarh pardtmanah
I have been residing at the village of Kalapa, practicing penance.
Recently, I heard of your incarnation from Satyavati's son, Vyasadeva,
and so I have come here to see You. About one hundred thousand years of
Kali-yuga have passed. You are the Supersoul, residing within the hearts
of all living beings. Simply by surrendering to You, all of one's sinful
reactions accumulated during millions of lifetimes are vanquished, one's
piety and reputation are enhanced, and all of one's desires are fulfilled.
Text 7
kalkiruvdca
jhdtastavdnvayam warn ca
suryyavarhsa samudbhavam
dvitiyah kd'parah srimdn
mahdpurusa laksanah
Lord Kalki said: My dear Maru, after hearing about your ancestors, I
can understand that you belong to the Surya dynasty. Who is this person
accompanying you? He appears to possess all auspicious characteristics.
Text 8
iti kalki vacah srutvd
devdpir madhurdksardm
vdrarh vinaya sampannah
pravaktum upacakrame


206 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
Upon hearing the words of Lord Kalki, King Devapi very humbly
spoke as follows.
Texts 9-10
devapi vdca
pralaydnte nabhipadmat
tavdbhu caturdnanah
tadiya tanaydd atres
candra tasmattato budhah
tasmdt pururavd jajne
yaydtir ndhussastatah
devaydnydm yaydtistu
yadum turvasum eva ca
Devapi said: After the final dissolution of the universe, four-headed
Brahma was born from Your lotus-like navel. His son was Atn, whose
son was Candra. Candra's son was Budha, Budha's son was PurOrava,
Pururava's son was Nahusa, and Nahusa's son was King Yayati. Yayati
begot two sons, named Yadu and Turvasu, within the womb of his wife,
Devayani.
Text 11
sarmisthaydm tathd druhyun
canum purunca satpate
janaydmdsa bhutadir
bhutaniva sisrksayd
О Lord of the universe, later on, Yayali begot three more sons named
Druhya, Anu, and Puru, in the womb of Sarmistha. Just as, during the
creation of the universe, false ego creates the five gross material elements,
King Yayati begot these five sons.
Texts 12-13
purorjanmejayas tasmat
pracmvana bhavat tatah
praviras tanmanasyur vawa
tasmacvdbiuiy ado'bhavat


K I N G M A R U AND K I N G D E V A P I 
207
uruksayacca tray rums
taio bhut puskararumh
what ksetrad bhuddhasti
yannamnd hastinapuram
Puru's son was Janmejaya, whose son was Pracinvan. Pracinvan's son
was Pravira, Pravlra's son was Manasyu, Manasyu's son was Abhayada,
Abhayada's son was Uruksaya, Uruksaya's son was Tryarum, whose son
was Puskararuni. Puskararuni begot a son named Brhatksetra, whose son
was Hasti, after whom the city of Hastinapur was named.
Texts 14-16
ajamidho' himidhasca
puramidastu tatsutdh
ajamidhad abhudrksas
tasmat samvaranat kuruh
kuroh panksit sudhanur
janhur msadha eva ca
suhotro'bhut sudhanusas
cayavanacca tatah krti
tato brhad rathas tasmat
kusagra drsabho'bhavat
tatah satyajitah putrah
pmpavdn nahusas tatah
Hasti had three sons named Ajamldha, Ahimldha, and Puramldha.
Ajamldha's son was Rk, whose son was Sanvarana Sanvarana's son was
Kuru, Kuru's son was Panksit, and Panksit's sons were Sudhanu, Jahnu,
and Nisada. Sudhanu's son was Suhotra, Suhotra's son was Cyavana, and
Cyavana's son was Brhadratha, whose son was Kusagra, Kusagra's son was
Rsabha, Rsabha's son was Satyajit, Satyajit's son was Puspavan, and his
son was Nahusa.
Texts 17-18
brhad rathdnya bharyyayam
jarasandhah parantapah
sahadevas tatas tasmat
somapirydt srutasravah


208 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
suratdd vidrathas tasman
sarvabhaumo'bhavat tatah
jayasendd rathaniko'bhud
yutdyusca kopanah
Brhadratha had also begotten the wicked Jarasandha, within the
womb of another wife. Jarasandha's son was Sahadeva, Sahadeva's son
was Simapi, Simapi's son was Srutasrava, Srutasrava's son was Suratha,
and his son was Viduratha. The son of Viduratha was Sarvabhauma,
Sarvabhauma's son was Jayasena, Jayasena's son was Rathanika, and his
son was the wrathful king, Yutayu
Text 19
tasmad devamhis tasmad
rksas tasmad ddipakah
tasmat praapakas tasya
devdpir ahamisvara
The son of Yutayu was Devatithi, Devatithi's son was Rksa, Rksa's
son was Dillpa, and his son was Pratipaka. My dear Lord, I am the son of
Pratipaka, and my name is Devapi.
Text 20
rdjyam sdntanave dattvd
tapasyeka dhiyd aram
kalapa gramam asddya
tvdm didrksu nhagatah
I handed over my kingdom to Santanu and went to reside at the
village of Kalapa, where I perform austerities with undivided attention
After hearing about Your appearance within this world, I came here to
see You.
Text 21
maruna'nena mumbhir
ebhih prdpya paddmbujam
tava kala kardlasydd
ydsyami atmavatam padam


K I N G MARU AND K I N G DEVAPI 
209
Maru and I, along with other sages, will certainly attain the exalted
destination attained by self-realized souls, by the mercy of Your lotus feet.
Thus, we will never again fall into the jaws of death
Text 22
tayorevam vacah srutvd
kalkih kamalalocanah
prahasya marudevapi
samasvasya samavravit
Upon hearing this, lotus-eyed Lord Kalki smiled and then spoke in
an assuring manner.
Text 23
kalkiruvaca
yuvam рогата аЪаггщши
rajdnau viditavubhau
madddesa karau bhutvd
mjarajyam bhansyathah
Lord Kalki said: What you have said is correct. Both of you are very
pious kings. Now, by My order, you should go to your traditional abodes,
and prepare to rule your kingdoms.
Text 24
maro Warn abhiseksydmi
nijayodhya pure'dhuna
hawa mlecchdna dharmisthan
prajabhuta vihimsakdn
My dear King Maru, very soon, I will destroy all the sinful mlecchas
who simply torment the citizens. After doing so, I will come to your capital
city, Avodhya, where I will perform your coronation ceremony.
Text 25
devdpe tava rajye Warn
hastinapura pattane
abhiseksydmi rd]rse
hawd pulkasakdn rane


210 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
My dear King Devapi, after I decimate the wicked Pulkasas, I will
come to your capital city, Hastinapura, and perform your coronation
ceremony.
Texts 26-30
mathurayamaham sthwa
hansyami tuvo bhayam
sayydkarndnustr mukhan
eka janghdn bilodaran
hawd krtam yugam krwd
palayisyamyaham prajdh
tapovesam vratarn tyaktva
samdruhya rathottamam
yuvdm sastrastra kusalau
senagana panchadau
bhutvd maharathau lake.
maya saha cansyathah
visdkha yupa bhupdlas
tanaydm vinaydnvitdm
vwahe ruardpangim
sundanm pradasyati
maro bhupala lokanam
svastaye kuru me vacah
rucirasva sutam santdm
devdpe warn samudvaha
I will continue to give you all protection while residing at Mathura.
I will kill Sayayakarna, Ustramukha, Ekajangha, and Bilodara and
thereafter, re-establish Satya-yuga for the welfare of all pious souls.
Both of you are very expert in understanding all kinds of scriptures
and employing all types of weapons. You should now give up your garb
as ascetics, and to destroy the enemies of the earth, put on your royal
garments and armor and travel with Me as My associates.
My dear Maru, King Visakhayupa has a beautiful and highly-qualified
daughter that he will give vou in marriage. You will become the king of


KING MARU AND KING DEVAPI 
211
the land and for the benefit of all your subjects, act according to My
instructions. My dear Devapi, you will marry Santa, the daughter of
Rucirasva.
Text 31
ityasvasa kaihah kalkeh
srutva tau munibhih saha
vismaya vista hrdayau
mendte hanmisvaram
After hearing these words, King Maru, King Devapi, and all the
assembled sages joyfully accepted Lord Kalki as the incarnation ot the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Han.
Texts 32-33
m brudhatya bhayade
akdsat smyyasanmbhau
rathau nanamam vrata
ghatitau kdmagau purah
samaydtau jvaladdwya
sastrastraih parwantau
dadrsuste sadomadhye
visvakarmma vinirmimu
bhrpa mumganah sabhyah
sahana kimitintdh
As Lord Kalki was thus conversing with the kings and sages, two
celestial chariots that were brilliant like the sun and decorated with
countless jewels, which were constructed by Visvakarma and filled with
celestial weapons, and which fulfill all of one's desires, descended from the
sky. With great enthusiasm, everyone exclaimed: What are we seeing!
Texts 34-35
kalkiruvaca
yuvam aditya somendra
yamavai sravanangajau
rajanau lokaraksdrtham
avirbhu tau vidantyarru


212 
SRI KALKI P U R A N A
kdlena acchaditd kdrau
mana sangadi hoditau
yuvdrh rathavaruhatdrh
sakrudattarh mamdjfiayd
Lord Kalki said: It is understood that both of you are powerful kings
who embody the potency of Surya, Candra, Yama, and Kuvera, and have
descended to protect the earth. Up until now, you remained incognito.
By My order, take these two chariots, which are given to you by Indra, the
king of heaven.
Text 36
evarh vadati visvese
pddmandthe sandtane
devd vavarsuh kusurnais
tustu vurmu nayo'gratah
As Lord Kalki, the husband of Padmavati and maintainer of the
universe, was speaking, the demigods began to shower flowers from the
sky while the assembled sages offered Him selected prayers.
Text 37
gangavdri pariklinna
sorobhuti pardgavdna
sanaih parvatajd sanga
sivavat pavano bavau
Cool and pleasing breezes began to blow, making the atmosphere
very soothing. These breezes had crossed the waves of the River Ganges,
which rests on the head of Mahadeva, and thus caresses Parvatl's soft
limbs, giving her pleasure.
Text 38
tatrdydtah pramudita tanus
tapta cdmi kardbho
dharrrnndvdsah surucira jatd
cirabhrda danda hastah
lokdtito nijatanu таги
ndsita karmasarhghas


K I N G MARU AND K I N G D E V A P I 
213
tejordsih sanakasadrso
maskari puskardksah
Thereafter, an effulgent lotus-eyed mendicant, who looked like sage,
Sanaka, arrived there. This exalted personality was always in a joyful
mood. His complexion was the color of molten gold, and he appeared to be
the shelter of religious principles. He was beautifully dressed, matted hair
crowned his head, and he carried a staff. He was extraordinary. Simply by
contact with the breezes that touched his body, one became purified.
Thus ends the translation of the eighteenth chapter of Sri Kalki
Purana.


C H A P T E R 
N I N E T E E N
The Appearance of Satya-Yuga,
and a Description of the Different Manns
Text 1
suta iwaca
atha kalkih samdlokya
sada sampaabhih saha
samutthdya vavande tarn
pddyargha dcamanadibhih
Suta GosvamI said: As soon as they saw this mendicant, Lord Kalki
and His associates stood up to show respect, and then worshiped him with
offerings of pddya, arghya and acamanlya.
Text 2
vrddharh sarhvesya tarn bhiksurh
sarvdsrama namaskrtam
papraccha ко bhavdnatra
mama bhdgyadi hdgatah
After comfortably seating that member of the renounced order of
life, who was greatly respected by the members of the other dsramas, the
Lord inquired: Who are you? You must have come here as a result of My
good fortune.
Text3
prdyaso mdnavd hke
lokdndrh pdranecchayd
caramti sarvasuhrdah
purnd vigata kalmasdh
Great souls, who are the well-wishers of all living entities, often travel
throughout the world just to deliver the fallen conditioned souls.
Text 4
maskaryuvaca
aharh krtayugarh snsa


T H E 
A P P E A R A N C E OF S A T Y A - Y U G A 
215
tavddesa kararh param
tavdvir bhdva vibhava
prksanartham ihdgatam
Maskarl said: О husband of Laksmi, I am your eternal servant, the
personification of Satya-yuga. I have come here to see Your present
incarnation and thus witness its opulence.
Texts 5-6
nirupddhir bhavdn kdlah
sopddhitvam updgatah
ksana dandala vddyangair
mdyayd racitah svayd
paksahordtram dsarttu
sarhvatsara yugddayah
tavecchayd carantyete
manavascca caturdasa
You are without any material designations and beyond the influence
of time, and yet You have appeared for some time within the vision of the
materially-designated souls, by the arrangement of Your internal potency.
Material time, measured in moments, hours, days, nights, fortnights,
months, seasons, years, yugas, and the reign of the fourteen Manus, moves
by Your supreme will.
Texts 7-11
svdyambhuvastu prathamas
tatah svarociso manuh
trtiya uttamas tasmdt
caturthas tdmasah smrtah
pancamo raivatah sasthas
cdksusah parikirttitah
vaivasvatah saptamo vai
tatah sdvarnir astamah
navamo daksa sdvarnir
brahma sdvarnikas tatah


216 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
dasamo dharmasavamir
ekadasah sa ucyate
rudra savarnikas tatra
manurvaivd dvadasah smrtah
trayodasa manurveda
savamir bkavisrutah
caturdasendra savamir
ete tava vibhutayah
yantyayanti prakasante
ndma rupadi bhedatah
There are fourteen Manus who appear in one day of Brahma.
They are Svayambhuva, Svarocisa, Uttama, Tamasa, Raivata, Caksusa,
Vaivasvata, Savarm, Daksa Savarni, Brahma Savarni, Dharma Savarni,
Rudra Savarni, Loka Visruta, Veda Savarni, and Indra Savarni. These
Manus are fragmental parts of Your supreme opulence. They assume
various names and forms, just to carry out their respective duties.
Texts 12-13
dvddasabda sahasrena
devananca caturyugam
catvan trim dve caikam
sahasra ganitam matam
tdvat chatani catvan
trim dve caikameva hi
sandhyakramena tesantu
sandhyamso'pi tathdvidhah
Twelve thousand years of the demigods is the duration of the four
yugas on earth. The duration of Satya-yuga is four thousand celestial
years, Treta-yuga is three thousand celestial years, Dvapara-yuga is two
thousand celestial years, and Kali-yuga is one thousand celestial years. The
transitional periods of the four yugas are four hundred, three hundred,
two hundred, and one hundred celestial years, respectively. In this way,
the total comes to twelve thousand celestial years.


T H E A P P F A R A N C E OF SATYA-YUGA 
217
Text 14
ekasaptaakam tatra
yugam bhunkte manurbhuvi
manurwmapi sarvesam
evam pannatir bhavet
diva prajdpates tattu
msd sa pankirtita
The duration of the reign of each Manu is seventy-one cycles of the
four yugas. Fourteen Manus reign during one day of Brahma. This is also
the duration of Brahma's night.
Text 15
ahoratranca paksaste
masa samvatsararttava
sadupadhi krtah halo
brahmano janmamrtyukrt
In this way, Brahma passes his days, nights, fortnights, months,
seasons, and years, until the duration of his allotted time is over
Text 16
sata samvatsare brahma
layam prdpnoti hi tvayi
layante tvannabh madhyad
utthtah srjatt prabhuh
Brahma lives for one hundred years and after death, he merges into
Your existence. After the final dissolution of the universe, Brahma once
again is born from Your lotus navel.
Text 17
tatra krta yugante'ham
kalam saddharma palakam
krtakrtyah prajd yatra
tanndmnd mam krtam viduh
I am the personified Satya-yuga. During my lifetime, pure religious
principles are observed and protected I have received the name Satya
because the people this age are pious and truthful.


2 1 8 
SRI KALKI 
PARANA
Texts 18-20
it! dadva ca asrutya
kallar mjajanamtah
praharsam atulam labdhva
srutva tadvacanamrtam
avahttham upalaksya
yugasyaha )<mav hitan
yoddhukamah kaleh puryam
hrsto visasane prabhuh
gaja ratha turagan naramsca yodhan
kanaka vicitra vibhmand atangan
dhrta vwidha vardstra pugan yudhi
rupunan ganayadhva manayadhvom
Lord Kalki was surrounded bv His associates, and after hearing these
words of Satva-yuga, He felt delighted. The Lord, in consideration of the
aiiival of Satva-yuga, ordered His devotees as follows, with a desire to root
out Kali: Pick up your weapons and prepare yourselves to march. Make
an estimate of the strength of our army. How manv chariot warriors, how
many elephant warriors, how many horse soldiers, and how many foot
soldiers do we have?
Thus ends the translation of the nineteenth chapter of Sri Kalki
Purana


C H A P T E R 
T W E N T Y
Lord Kalki Goes Out to Conquer Kali and His Allies
Text 1
suta uvaca
ш tau marudevapi
srutva kalaker vacah purah
krtodvahau rathdrudhau
samdyatau mahabhujau
Suta Gosvami said: Thereafter, according to the desire of Lord Kalki,
the mighty-armed King Maru and King Devapi attended to their marriages
and then returned to the Lord.
Texts 2-3
nandyudha dharaih sainyair
dvrtau suramamnau
baddha godhanguh trdnau
damsitau baddhahastakau
karsnayasa sirastranau
dhanurddhara dhurandharau
ahauhimbhh sadbhuu
kampayantau bhuvam bharaih
Both were famous as heroic warriors and the foremost among wielders
of the bow. They were surrounded by their soldiers, who were equipped
with all varieties of weapons. Due to the presence of their vast armies,
the earth trembled.
Texts 4-6
visakhayupa bhupastu
gajalaksmh samavrta
asvaxh %a\\asra niyutcuh
rathcuh sapta sahasrakmh.
padatibhir dvilaksaisca
sannadrair dhrtakdrmiikaih


220 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
vatoddhutottar usnismh
sarvatah parwdntah
rudhirasva sahasranam
pancasadbhir maharathaih
gajair dasa satair mattair
nava laksair vrtao babhau
King Visakhayupa commanded an army consisting of one hundred
thousand elephants, ten million horses, and seven thousand chariots.
He was also accompanied by two hundred thousand infantry soldiers,
equipped with sharp weapons. Their chadaras and turbans flapped in the
breeze Apart trom these soldiers, the king had amassed fifty thousand
reddish horses, ten thousand maddened elephants, a countless number of
chariots, and nine hundred thousand foot soldiers.
Texts 7-9
aksuhirubhir dasobhih
kalkih para puranjayah
samavrtas tatha devair
evamindro dwi svarat
bhratr putra suhrdbhisca
muditah sainikair vrtah
yayau digvijayakdnksi
jagatam isvarah prabhuh
kale tasmin dvijo dhutvd
dharmah paratanaih saha
samaja gama kahnd
bahnapi nirakrtah
Lord Kalki, the conqueror of conquerors and Lord of the universe, had
an army of ten aksauhinls. Surrounded by His nephew and other relatives
and well-wishers, He appeared like Jndra, the king of heaven, surrounded
by all the demigods Just as Lord Kalki was about to cheerfully depart on
His conquest of the entire world, Dharma, who had been obstructed by
the powerful Kali, arrived there in the garb of a brahmana.


LORD KALKI GOES OUT TO CONQUER KALI AND HIS ALLIES 
221
Texts 10-13
rtam prasddam abhayam
sukham muda matha svayam
yogamartha tatodarpam
smrtim ksemam pratisrayam
naranardyanau cobhau
hareramsau tapovrataa
dharmastvetan samadaya
put) an stnscagatastvaran
sraddha maim dayd sdntis
tustih pustih hyonnatih
buddhir medha titiksa ca
hnr murttir dharmapalakah
etastena sahayata
nija bandhugaimih saha
kalkim alokitum tatra
пщкатуат nweditum
Just to have the darsana of Lord Kalki, and to inform Him of their
activities, Rta, Piasada, Abhaya, Sukha, Priti, Yoga, Anahankara, Smrti,
Ksema, Pratisraya, and Nara-narayana, the plenary portions of Lord
Han, as well as Dharma's wife and children, Sraddha, Maitrl, Daya Santi,
Tusti, Pusti, Kriya, Unnati, Buddhi, Medha, Titiksa, and Lajja, who are all
maintainers of genuine religious principles, along with their friends and
relatives, accompanied Dharma
Texts 14-15
kalkir dvyam samasadya
pvqayitvd yathavidhi
provdca vinayapannah
kastvam kasmddi hagatah
stnbhih putraisca sahitah
ksinapunya iva grahah
kasya va visayadrdjnas
tattattvam vada tawatah


222 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
Upon seeing the brahmana approach, Lord Kalki humbly greeted
him and then worshiped him according to the prescribed procedure
Theieafter, the Lord inquired: My dear sir, who are you? From which
kingdom have you come, along with your wife and children, appearing
like a lusterless planet? Tell Me everything in detail.
Text 16
putrah tnyasca te dindh
hina si*a vaia paurusah
vaisriavah sddhavo yadvad
pasandaisca ttraskrtah
As the devotees of Lord Visnu may lose their strength and enthusiasm
when tortured by the atheists, your wife and sons appear similarly
disheartened.
Text 17
kaikenti vacah srutva
dharmah sarma nijam smaran
provaca kamalandtham
anathastu atikatarah
After hearing these words of Lord Kalki, the husband of Kamala,
Dharma, who appeared to be without shelter and thus morose, began to
narrate his story.
Text 18
putraih stnbhir nijajanaih
ктитщЬ. putair hanm
stutvd natva pujayitva
muditam tarn dayaparam
Before speaking, Dharma, along with his wife, sons, and followers,
worshiped the reservoir of pleasure, Lord Kalki. After doing so, he offeied
his obeisances and then stood before the Lord with folded hands and
spoke as follows.
Text 19
dliarma uvaca
smu kalke rnamakhyaruxm
dharmo'ham brahmarupinah


LORD KALKI GOES O U T TO CONQUER KALI AND H I S ALLIES 
223
tava vaksahsthalajjatah
kamadah sarvadehinam
Dharma said: My dear Lord Kalki, please hear my stoiy. I was born
from Your chest, just as Brahma was born from Your navel My name is
Dharma and my duty is to fulfill the desnes of all living entities.
Text 20
devandm ugmmrhavya
kavyanam kamadhug vibhuh
tavamaya caramyeva
sddhukitti krdanvahom
I am the foremost of demigods. I receive a share of 
sacrifice
performances. I fulfill the desires of saintly persons by awarding them the
results of their religious practices. By Your order, I work for the welfare
of all pious souls.
Text 21
so'ham kdlena balina
kalinapi nnakrtah
ьака kamboja savaraih
sarvair avasa vasina
At present, various clans of mlecchas, like the Sakas, Kambojas, and
Sabaras, reside under the control of Kali. Kali is very powerful and he has
defeated me by his superior influence.
Text 22
adhund te'khilddhara
padamulam updgatah
yatha samsara kalagni
samtaptdh sadhavor'ditah
О shelter of the world, at piesent, all the saintly persons of the world
are being harassed by Kali and are thus burning in the fire of material
existence. It is for this reason that I have come to take shelter of Your
lotus feet.
Texts 23-24
iti vagbhir put vabhir
dhmmena pantO4itah


224 
SRI KALKI PURANA
kalkih kalkaharah snmdn
aha samharsayan sanaih
dharma krtayugam pasya
marum candamsu vamsajam
mam janasi yatha jatam
dhatr prdrthita vigraham
After hearing these piteous words of Dharma, Lord Kalki, the remover
of distress, gave assurances to everyone, saying: О Dharma, just see how
Satya-yuga personified has also come here. This is King Maru of the Surya
dynasty. You know very well that at the request of Grandfather Brahma,
I have assumed this form of Kalki avatara.
Text 25
Intake bauddha dalanam
iti matva sukhi bhava
avaisnavandm anyesam
tavopadrava kanruvm
jighamsuryami sendbhis
cara gam warn vinirbhayah
You will be happy to learn that I have already defeated the Buddhists
residing at Kltaka-desa. My mission is to destroy all the miscreants who
are envious of you and the other Vaisnavas. You can now wander fearlessly
over the earth because I am just about to set out on a tour to conquer all
the kings of the world.
Text 26
ka bhitibte kva moho'sti
yajnadana tapovrataih
sahita sancara vibho
mayi satye vyupasthite
Because Satya-yuga is about to commence, and because I am personally
present on this earth, there is no reason for you to be afraid. Why should
you come under the influence of illusion? Just live happily, along with
sacrifice, charity, penance, and vows


LORD KALKI GOES OUT TO CONQUER KALI AND HIS ALLIES 
225
Text 27
aham yami wayagaccha
svaputrair bandhavaih saha
disam jayartham warn satru
nigrahartham jagatpnya
О Dharma, every pious person within the universe loves you. You
and your sons and followers should go out and conquer all directions by
subduing your enemies. Very soon I will follow you.
Text 28
in kaklervacah srutvd
dharmah parama harsuah
gantum krta maastena
adhipatya mamum smaran
By hearing Lord Kalki's pleasing speech, Dharma experienced great
satisfaction. Becoming convinced of his ability to subdue his enemies, by
the Lord's mercy, Dharma made up his mind to set out.
Text 29
siddhdsrame гащапап
avasthapya stnyasca tah
When Dharma departed to conquer the world, his wives and children
stayed at Siddhasrama.
Texts 30-31
sannaddhah sadhu satkarair
veda brahma maharathah
папа sastranvesanesu
sankalpa vara kamukah
sapta svarasvo bhudeva
sarathir vanhirasrayah
knyabheda balopetah
prayayau dharma nayakah
To assist Dharma in his fight against Kali, saintly persons became
his military garments and armor, the Vedas and Brahman became his
chariot, the supplementary Vedic literature became his arrows and his


226 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
determination, the seven notes of the musical scale became the seven
horses driving his chariot, the brdhmanas became his chariot driver, and
Agni became his seat. In this way, Dharma set out to conquer Kali, along
with a formidable army.
Texts 32-33
yajnadana tapah patrair
yamanca rayamair vrtah
khasa kambojakan sarvan
savaran varvardnapi
jetum kcdkir yayau yatra
kaleravasam ipsitam
bhutabasa balopetam
sarameya varakulam
Lord Kalki also departed, along with His associates, including
personified sacrifice, charity, penance, self-control, and the prescribed
rules and regulations, with the intention of defeating the clans of
mlecchas, such as the Khasas, Karnbojas, Savaras, and "V'aivaras The Lord
went to the favorite residences of Kali, which were the playgrounds of
ghosts, foxes, and jackals.
Text 34
gomamsa puti gandhadhyam
kakoluka swabrtam
stnnam durdyuta kalaha
vwada vyasanasrayam
These places were permeated with the toul odor of decaying beef,
and they were infested with crows and owls. Kali's domain can be found
wherever there is gambling and intoxication, as well as where women
constantly quarrel.
Texts 35-38
ghoram jagadbhayakaram
kamim svaminam giham
kahh smwodyamam kalkeh
putra pautra vrtah krudha


LORD KALKI GOES OUT TO CONQUER KALI AND HIS ALLIES 
227
puradvisasanan prayat
pecakaksa rathopan
dharmah kahm samalokya
rsibhih paiwantah
yuyudhe tena sahasa
kalkwakya pracodiiah
rtevM. dambhah samgrame
ргаъаАо lobha mahvayat
samayad bhayam krodho
bhayam sukhamupayayau
nirayo mudamasadya
yuyudhe vividhayudhaih
Kali's favorite places of residence are always causes of fear and
danger. The men in these places are controlled by women When Kali
received the news of Lord Kalki's impending arrival, he quickly gathered
his sons and grandsons and left his kingdom, the city of Visasana, after
mounting his chariot, which bore the symbol of an owl. When Dharma
saw Kali fleeing, by the order of Lord Kalki, he confronted him, along
with the sages. Rta battled Dambha, Prasada fought with Lobha, Abhaya
challenged Rosa, and Sukha attacked Bhaya. Niraya vigorously fought
with Priti, showering various weapons.
Text 39
adhir yogena ca vyadhih
ksemena ca bahyasa
prasrayena tatha glanir
jardsmrtim upahvayat
Yoga contended with Adhi, the powerful Ksema fought with Vyadhi,
Pras'raya fought with Giant, and Smrti attacked Jara.
Text 40
evam vrtto mahaghoro
•yuddhah parama darunah
tarn drastum agata deva
brahmddyah khc vibhutibhih


228 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
The fighting soon became very intense, as the demigods appeared
overhead as spectators.
Text 41
maruh khasaisca kambojair
yuyudhe bhima vikramaih
devapih samare cinavrvar
varvarais tangamnair api
King Maru entered the ranks of the powerful Khasas and Kambojas
while King Devapi fought with the Colas and the Varvaras.
Text 42
vibakhayupa bhupalah
puhndaih svapacaih saha
yuyudhe vividhaih sastrair
astrair dwyair mahdprabkaih
King Visakhayupa fought valiantly against the Pulindas and Candalas,
employing celestial weapons.
Text 43
kalkih koka vikokabhyam
vahinibhir varayudhaih
tau tu koka vikokau ca
brahmano varadarpitau
Surrounded by His army and invoking many celestial weapons, Lord
Kalki fought with Koka and Vikoka, who were excessively proud due to
receiving a benediction from Brahma.
Text 44
bhratarau danava sresthau
mattau yuddha visdradau
ekarupau mahasatwau
devanum bhayavarddhanau
These two brothers were the foremost among the demons, they were
always intoxicated, and they were very expert fighters. They were like
two halves of one body, exceedingly powerful, and a cause of great fear
for the demigods.


LORD KALKI GOES OUT TO CONQUER KALI AND HIS ALLIES 
229
Text 45
padatikau gaddhastau
vajrangau jayinau disam
suraih parwrtau mrtyu
jitavehatra yodhanau
Their bodies were as hard as thunderbolts and thus impervious to
weapons. They had been engaged in conquering all directions. When
they fought together, they were so formidable that they could defeat even
death personified. Surrounded by powerful soldiers, they fought with
clubs in their hands.
Text 46
taWvyam sa yuyudhe kakhh
sendgana samanvitah
subhanam kalh sainydndm
samarastu mulo'bhavat
In the battle between Lord Kalki and the two brothers, Koka and
Vikoka, the leaders of both armies fought fiercely.
Text 47
hvesitair brhitair danta
sabdais tankdra naditaih
surot kastavr bdhu vegaih
samsabdais talatadanmh
The battlefield redounded with the terrific sounds made by the
elephants and horses, the gnawing of teeth, the challenging words of the
combatants, the twanging of the bows, as well as the slaps and punches.
Text 48
sampuntdh disah sarva
lohd no sarma lebhire
devdsca bhoyasamtrastd
divi vyasta pathd yuyuh
The frightening sounds of war cries spread all directions. It seemed
that no one was able to escape the jaws of death. The demigods became
so astonished while gazing at the ghastly scene that they practically fel1
from their celestial chariots.


230 
SRI KALKI PURANA
Text 49
pasair dandaih khadga saktya sthulair
gaddghdtmr vdna pdtaisca ghoraih
yuddhe smdschinna bahvanghrdnghri madhyah
petuh sarhkhye satasah kotisasca
Due to the onslaught of innumerable weapons, including iron rods,
swords, sakti weapons, tridents, spears, clubs, and arrows, the entire
battlefield became littered with severed arms, legs, and trunks.
Thus ends the translation of the twentieth chapter of Sri Kalki
Purana.


C H A P T E R 
T W E N T Y - O N E
The Followers of Kali Are Defeated
The Killing of Koka And Vikoka
Text 1
sum uvdca
evarh pravrtte sarhgrdrhe
dharmah paramakopanah
krtena sahito ghorark
yuyudhe halina saha
Suta GosvamT said: As the fighting raged, Dharma and Satya-yuga
personified very angrily confronted Kali.
Text 2
kalistva mitra vdnoghair
dharmasydpi krtasya ca
pardbhutah purirh prdydt
tyaktvd gardhabha vdhanam
Being injured and afflicted by showers of arrows, Kali got down from
his donkey carrier and returned to his capital.
Text3
vicchinna pecaka rathah
sravadraktdnga sancayah
chudiurgandhah kardlasyah
strisvdmikam gddgrham
Kali's chariot, which was adorned with a flag having the symbol of an
owl, was shattered. His entire body was soaked with blood, the smell of a
decaying mouse emanated from his body, and his face appeared fraught
with fear. In this condition, He entered his residence.
Text 4
dambhah sambhogarahita
uddhrata vdna gandhatah


232 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
vyakulah svakulangaro
nihsarah pravisad grham
Meanwhile, Dambha, who was a disgrace to his family and a man
of hollow character, being seriously wounded by the onslaught of sharp
arrows, lost all enthusiasm to fight and returned home
Text 5
lobhah prasadd bhihato
gadaya bhannamastakah
sarameya ratham chinnam
tyakwag adradhxram vaman
Lobha was soundly defeated by Prasada, who smashed his adversary's
head with his club Lobha's chariot, the flag of which bore the emblem
of a dog, was pulverized, and so he ran away from the battlefield while
vomiting blood.
Text 6
abhayena ]itah krodhah
kasayikrta locanah
gandhakhuvaham vicchmnam
tyaktvd visasanam gatah
Abhaya defeated Krodha after a hectic fight. Krodha's eyes became
blood-red, and his foul-smelling chariot, the flag of which bore the
emblem of a mouse, was smashed to pieces so that he had no option but
to return to his city, Visasana.
Text 7
bhayam sukha talaghdtadg
tatasumya patad bhuvi
mrayo mudamusthbhyam
pidito yamamayayau
Sukha slapped Bhaya so forcefully that he immediately gave up his
life. Niraya also fell down dead onto the battlefield after being pummeled
by Prlti.
Text 8
ddhi vyadhyadayah sarve
tyaktva vaham uptidravan


T H E 
F O L L O W E P S OF K A L I 
A R E D E F E A T E D 
233
nanddesan bhayodvigna
krtavana prapiditah
Satya-yuga personified fought so heroically while showering his
arrows that Adhi and Vyadhi dismounted their carriers and fearfully ran
to safety.
Text 9
dharmah krtena ъаУмо
gatvd visasanam kaieh
nagaram bana daharmir
dadaha kahna saha
After the enemy had been routed, Dharma and Satya-yuga personified
entered Kali's capital, Visasana, and set the whole city ablaze by releasing
fiery arrows. Indeed, Kali was also burnt in the conflagration, but he
managed to survive.
Text 10
kahr viplusta sarvango
mrtadaro mrtaprajah
jagamaiko rudan dino
varsantaram alaksitah
Because his sons and wives were killed in the fire, Kali felt he had
no alternative but to renounce his kingdom He left the city alone and
traveled to another country, while continually shedding tears out of
distress.
Text 11
marustu sakakambojdn
jaghne dwydstra te;asa
devapih savaramscolan
varvarams tadganan api
Meanwhile, many mlecchas, including the Sakas and Kambojas,
were vanquished by the celestial weapons of King Maru King Devapi
vanquished the Savaras, Colas, and Varvaras, with verv little effort.
Text 12
dwydstra sastra sampauur
ardaydmasa viryavdn


234 
SRI KALKI PURANA
bisakhayupa bhupdlah
pulmddn pulkasdnapi
The greatly powerful Kmg Vis'akhayupa invoked celestial weapons to
defeat the Pulmdas and Pulkasas.
Text 13
jaghana vimala ргащаЬ.
khadgapatena bhunna
nanastrasastra ьагшые
yodha neswanekadha
The pure devotee. King Visakhavupa, continued to slay his enemies
with his sharp sword and torrents of arrows. Within a short while, most
of the enemy soldiers lay dead upon the battlefield.
Text 14
kalkih кока wkokabhyam
gaddpann yudhdw patih
yuyudhe vinyasa vqno
hknndm janayan bhayarn
Lord Kalki, who was especially accomplished in the art of fighting
with a club, caused a great tear to enter the hearts of the enemy as He
oppressed Koka and Vikoka.
Text 15
vrkasurasya putrau tau
naptarau sakuner hanh
tavoh kalkih m yuyudhe
madhukaita bhayor yatha
Кока and Vikoka's father was Vrkasura, and Sakuni was their
grandfather. Just as Lord Han had previously fought with the demons,
Madhu and Kaitabha, Lord Kalki now fought with these two brothers.
Text 16
tayorgada prahdrena
cunmtdngasya tatpateh
karit cyutdpatadbhumau
drstvo cuntyaho janah


T H E 
F O I I O W E R S 
OF K A L I 
A B E D E F E A T E D 
235
The two brothers then managed to land a terrible blow of the club
upon the body of Lord Kalki, so that He appeared injured. Indeed, the
Lord's club fell from His hands, and upon seeing this, the spectators
became astonished.
Text 17
tatah punah kruAha visnur
jagajjisnur mahdbhujah
bhallakena sirastasya
vikokasyacchwat prabhuh
The Lord, the conqueror of the three worlds and master of the
universe, remained unperturbed, however, and in a fit of rage, He
retaliated by severing Vikoka's head with His lance.
Text 18
mrto vikokah kokasya
darsana dutthto bah
tad drstva vismita devdh
kalkisca paravirahd
Although Vikoka appeared to be dead and gone, when his brother
simply gazed upon him, he was at once revived. Upon seeing this, the
demigods, and also Lord Kalki, the destroyer of His enemies, were
amazed.
Text 19
brati korttur gaddpaneh
kokasyapyacchinacchirah
mrtah koko vikokasya
drsthipatat samutthitah
In retaliation for Koka's bringing his brother back to life, Lord Kalki
immediately severed his head. Once again, however, simply by Vikoka's
glance, Koka's head was replaced and he continued fighting as if nothing
had happened.
Text 20
punastau militau tena
yuyudhate mahabalau


236 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
kamampa dharau virau
kalamrtyu wa parau
The two powerful and deceitful demon brothers felt renewed
enthusiasm as they continued to attack Lord Kalki, appearing like fate
and death personified.
Texts 21-22
khadga carma dharau kalhm
praharantau punah punah
kalhh krudha tayos tadvad
vanena sirasi hate
punarlagne samalokya
hansanta paro'bhavat
visa santava athalokya
turagas tava tadayat
With swords and shields in their hands, Koka and Vikoka struck the
Lord, again and again. Lord Kalki became further enraged and at last, He
simultaneously cut off both their heads. And yet, much to His surprise,
both heads miraculously rejoined their trunks as everyone looked on
in astonishment. Lord Kalki anxiously contemplated the matter for a
moment, and then the two brothers resumed their attack At this time,
Lord Kalki's horse began to very forcefully kick the two brothers.
Text 23
kalakalpau duradharsau
turagenarditau bhrsam
kalkestam jaghnatur vanair
amarsd tamralocanau
This made the two invincible demons mad with rage, so that their eyes
became red. Turning their attention away from the Lord, they pierced His
horse with their sharp arrows
Text 24
tayorbhujantaram so'svah
krudha samadasad bhrsam
tau tu prabhmndsthibhujau
visastangada kdrmukau


T H E 
FOLLOWERS OF K A L I 
ARE 
D E F E A T E D 
237
puccham jagrhattnh sapter
gopuccham bdlakaviva
The infuriated horse then bit Koka and Vikoka's arms, breaking their
bones and causing their bangles and amulets to fall to the ground. In
retaliation, the two demons caught the horse by its tails, just as a boy
sometimes grabs the tail of a calf
Text 25
dhrtapucchau tu tau jnatva
saptih рогата kopanah
pascal padbhayam drdham
jaghne tayorvahsasi vaytavat
The enraged horse then kicked both demons in the chest with its
hind legs, and the blows felt just like thunderbolts
Text 26
tyaktapucchau mmcchitau
tau tatksanat punarutthaau
puratah kalhmalokya
babhasate sphutaksarau
Although the two heroes fell unconscious onto the ground, they
quickly regained their senses and stood up, challenging Lord Kalki to
continue fighting.
Text 27
tato brahmd tamabhyetya
krtanjali putah sanaih
provaca kalkim naicdmu
sastrastrair vadhamarhatah
Meanwhile, Lord Brahma, who had been watching the battle from
the sky, approached Lord Kalki and spoke with folded hands. My dear
Lord, You will not be able to kill these two demom with weapons.
Text 28
karaghata dekakdler
ubhayor nirmito vadhah
ubhayor darsanadeva
nobhayor maranavn kvacn


238 
SRI KALKI PURANA
viditveti kurusvatman
yugapacca nayowadham
You will have to kill them simultaneously with the use of Your baie
hands. As long as one ot them remains alive, he can instantly bring back
the life of his brother.
Text 29
m brahmavacah sruwa
tyakta sastrastra vahanah
tayoh praharatoh svairam
kalkndana vayoh krudhd
mustibhyam vajrakalpabhydm
vabhanja мгам tayoh
After hearing the words ot Brahma, who was born from the universal
lotus flower, Loid Kalki abandoned His horse and weapons. Being inflamed
with rage, the Lord suddenly landed two powerful punches that were just
like thunderbolts, simultaneously smashing the two brothers' heads.
Text 30
Ши tatra bhagna rnastiskau
bhagna brangava gaviva
petatur divi devanam
bhayadau bhuvi badhakau
In this way, the two demons, who were a great cause of fear even for
the demigods, and so what to speak of others, fell onto the ground like
two great mountains, their heads smashed.
Text 31
tad drswa mahadascaryam
gandharvapba rasdm gamh
nanrtur jagub tustava
шса munayah siddhacaranah
devasca kui,umasarair
varvasur fasta тапаьак


T H E 
FOLLOWERS 
OF K A L I 
ARE 
D E B A T E D 
239
Being overjoyed, the Gandharvas began to sing, the Apsaras danced
in ecstasy, and the sages offered prayers while the demigods, Siddhas, and
Caranas showered flowers from the sky upon Lord Kalki
Text 32
dwi dundubhayo neduh
prasannasca Ькаьап disah
tayorvadiia piabhuditah
kavir dasa scdiasrakan
sasvan mahagthan saksad
ahanad dwya sayakaih
Lord Kalki felt great satisfaction after finally attaining victory over
Koka and Vikoka. By invoking celestial weapons, the Lord proceeded to
killed ten thousand enemy warriors while smashing then chanots and
slaying their horses.
Text 33
prtijfiah satasakasranam
yodhanavi ranumurddharu
кмуат mnye Mmonirastn
rathinam pahcaviniMiim
The formidable Prajna killed one hundred thousand enemy soldiers
and Sumantu killed twenty-five thousand
Text 34
evamanye gargya bixargya
vibaladya maharathan
rujagnuh samare kruddha
nisadan mleccha varvaran
Other powerful warriors, filled with a terrible rage, including Gargya,
Bhargya, and Visala, also joined the rray, killing innumerable mlecctxas
and Nisadas.
Text 35
evam vijitya tan sarvan
kalkir bhupaganmh saha


240 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
sayyakarnmsca bhalldta
nagaram jetu mayayau
After defeating all His enemies, Lord Kalki and His associates
proceeded towards the city of Bhallatanagara, which was inhabited by
Sayyakarnas.
Text 36
nanavadyair loka samghair varastraih
nanavastrair bhusarnai hhusitdngaih
nandvahaiscama rairvijyamanaih
yato yoddhum kalkir atyugrasenah
While going, Lord Kalki and the kings accompanying Him were
glorified by everyone and music filled the air. The Lord was fanned by
cdmaras as His entourage, which consisted of countless soldieis bearing
celestial weapons, proceeded in a joyful mood, riding upon their chariots,
horses, and elephants.
Thus ends the translation of the twenty-first chapter of Sri Kalki
Purana


C H A P T E R 
T W E N T Y - T W O
Lord Kalki Travels To Bhallatanagara Ruled By Sasidhvaja
A Great Battle Takes Place
Text 1
suta uvdca
senaganaih panvrtah
kalkir narayanah prabhuh
bhallata nagaram prdydt
khadgadhrk sapavahanah
Suta Gosvami said: After a short while, Lord Kalki, sword in hand
and riding upon His horse, arrived at the city of Bhallata, accompanied
by His vast army.
Text 2
sa hhallatesva.ro yogi
jnatva visnum jagatpatim
mjasend ganaih purne
yoddhukamo hanm yayau
The king of Bhallata was a great mystic yogi who was aware that Kalki
was an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Han.
Still, he came out of his city, along with his army, to fight with the Lord.
Text 3
sa harsotpulakah snman
dirghdngah krsna bhavanah
sasidhvajo mahdteja
gajdyuta balah sudhi
This king, named Sasidhvaja, was actually a devotee of Lord Krsna,
and he was constantly merged in transcendental ecstasy He was very
intelligent, handsome, wealthy, and very powerful.
Texts 4-5
tasya patni mahadevi
visnuvrala pardyana


242 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
susanta svamvnam pratia
kalkiaa yoddhum udyatam
natha капшт jaganndtliam
sarvantaryaminam prabhum
kalkim nardyanam saksat
katham warn prahansyasi
His chaste and devoted wife, Susanta, observed many religious vows
in relation to Lord Han. When she saw that her husband was about to
right with Lord Kalki, she said: My dear husband, Kalki is the Supreme
Lord and Supersoul of all living entities. How can you dare to strike and
injure His body
7
Text 6
sasidhvaja uvaca
susante paramo dharmah
prajapati vmirmitah
ynddke praharah sarvatra
gurau sisye harenta
King Sasidhvaja said- О goddess Susanta, m battle, there is no tault
in injuring the body of an elderly person, or even one's disciple. This
principle has been ordamed by Brahma himself.
Text 7
jwato rajabhogah syan
mrtah svarge pramodate
yuddhe jayo va rnrrtyur va
ksavnyanarn sukhavahah
If one comes out victorious in battle, he can enjoy his kingdom
without any hindrance, and if he dies on the battlefield, he goes to enjoy
celestial happiness in heaven. Therefore, for a ksatnya, both victory and
defeat are auspicious.
Texts 8-9
subantovaca
devawarn bhupatitvam va
visayavista kaminam


LORD KALKI 
TRAVELS 
T O BHALLATANAGARA 
243
unmadanam bhave deva
na hareh padasevmam
warn sevakah sa capi saswa n
m^kcuruih sa capradah
yuvayor yuddha milanam
kadvrni mohad bhavisyati
Susanta said: The enjoyment of a kingdom without hindrance, and
the attainment of the heavenly planets may be accepted as the goal of
life by those who are intoxicated by thoughts of sense gratification, but
they are most insignificant for those who render service at the lotus feet
of Lord Han О lord, you are a servant and Lord Kalki is the master You
have no desires for material enjoyment, and He is the bestower of the
fruits of action. Considering this, how is it possible for you to fight with
Him?
Text 10
sasidlwaja uvaca
dvandvattte yadi dvandvam
isvare sevake tatha
dehavesal hlayawa sa
se<va syattatha mama
King Sasidhvaja said: My dear goddess, both the Supreme Lord and
His servants are transcendental to the dualities of material existence, such
as happiness and distress. Material designations are mistakenly attributed
to the Lord and His devotees because they appear in bodies resembling
those of the material world. Therefore, fighting is simply another of our
pastimes.
Text 11
dehavesad isvarasya
kamadya daihika gunah
mayanga yadi jayante
vi^ayasca na kim tatha
Because the Supieme Lord appears in a human-like form, He displays
anger, ambition, and other human qualities Therefore, why should He
not display the desire for enjoyment?


244 
SRI KALKI PURANA
Text 12
brahmato brahmatesasya
sannwe sannta.
sevakasya bheda drsas
wevam janmalayodayah
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is eternal, and full of knowledge
and bliss. When He incarnates within this world, He remains as He is,
even though He assumes a body similar to that of a human being. He
and His servant's birth, activities, and disappearance are transcendental,
although to materialists they appear mundane.
Text 13
sevya sevakata visnor
maya seven kmtita
dvaitadvaitasya cestaisa
tnvarga }aniha satdm
The object of service, the servant, and the service are creations of the
Lord's internal potency. A devotee's realization that the living entities
are simultaneously one with and different from the Supreme Lord awards
him the three objectives of life.
Text 14
ato'ham kalhnayoddharn.
syami kante svasenaya
warn tarn pujaya kante dya
kamalapatim isvaram
О goddess, it is for this reason that I am eager to fight with Lord
Kalki. You should now worship the Lord of Laksmi with great attention.
Text 15
susdnta uvaca
krtartho'ham wayavisnu
seva sammihtatmand
svaminniha paratrapi
vaisnavi prathita gaah


LORD KALKI 
TRAVELS 
T O BHALLATANAGARA 
245
Susanta said: О lord, I am very glad that you have such a wonderful
service attitude toward Lord Han. There is no other objective in this
world or the next than Lord Visnu.
Text 16
it; tasyd valgu vdbhih
pranatayah sasidhvajah
atmanam vaisnavam mene
sasrunetro hanm svaran
Upon hearing Susanta speak in this way, and seeing her offer
obeisances to the Lord, King Sasidhvaia remembered Lord Han as tears
came to his eyes. Indeed, he felt proud to be a devotee of Lord Visnu.
Text 17
tamahngaya pramuditah
surair bahubhirdvrtah
vadanndma smaran rupam
vaisnavmr yoddhu mdyayau
Thereafter, the king joyfully embraced his wife and then entered the
battlefield while remembering Lord Han and chanting His holy names,
along with countless Vaisnava warriors.
Text 18
gawd tu kalkisenaydm
vidrdvya mahatim camum
sayyakarna ganair viraih
sannadvair udyatdyudhaih
After 
entering the battlefield, 
King Sasidhvaja 
created great
destruction in the ranks of the army of Lord Kalki. At this time, the
powerful Sannadhas and Sayyakarnas picked up their weapons and fought
along with their king.
Text 19
sasidhvaja sutah sn man
suryaketur mahabalah
marubhupena yuyudhea
vaisnavo dhanvindm varah


246 
SRI KALKI 
P U R I N A
Sasidhvaja's son, Sriman Suryakeru, was a great warrior and master
bowman, and a devotee of Lord Han He fought with kmg Maru of the
Sur^a dvnasty
Text 20
tasyanup vrhatketuh
hmtah kokila rvsvanah
deiapina sa yuyudhe
gadcnuddha visaradah
Suryaketu's younger brother was named Brhatketu He wa< very
handsome, he had a voice like a cuckoo, and he was very expert at fighting
with a club He fought with King Devapi
Text 21
visakhayupa bhupastu
Msidhvaja nrpena ca
yuyudhe vividhaih sastraih
kanbhih parwantah
King Visakhayupa, surrounded by many elephant warriors and
brandishing celestial weapons, confronted King Sasidhvaja
Text 22
rudhirasvo dhanurdhan
Iaghuha4ab pratapavan
щаъапепа yuyudhe
bhargyah santena dhannna
In the midst of the dust raised by the hooves of the horses, the greatly
powerful Gargya, a master bowman whose arms moved like the wind and
who rode upon a red horse, engaged in fighting with the very expert
bowman, Santa
Text 23
suloih prasmr %adaghatcur
tana saktyrsti tomarath
bhallmh khadgav bhnsandibhih
kuntaih samabhavadranah


LORD K A I K I 
TRAVELS 
T O 
BHALLATANAGARA 
247
The battle became very intense as all these powerful warriors fought
with their tridents, clubs, arrows, anchors, spears, swords, maces, and
axes
Text 24
patakabhir dhvajms cinhais
tomarms chatra camarmh
proddhuta dhuli patalair
andhakaro mahanabhuta
The battlefield became a collage of flags, poles, emblems, clubs,
umbrellas, camaras, and dust raised by the hoo\ es of the horses
Text 25
gagane'nughana devah
ke va vasam na cakire
gandharveh sadhusandarbhan
gayanair amrtayonaih
The demigods observed this fierce battle from their positions behind
the clouds The Gandharvas hovered over the battlefield, singing in sweet
voices
Texts 26-28
drustum tamae;atoh sarve
lokoh samaram adbhutam
sankha dundubh sannadair
asphotair vrmhitair api
htesitair yodhanot krustair
loka тика wabhavan
rathino rathibhih sakam
padatmca padatibhih
haya hxyain bhascebhaih
samaro'ma
ra danavaih
yathabhavat sa tu ghano
yamarastra twarddhanah


248 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
Indeed, a huge crowd gathered to witness the battle. Because of the
deafening noise created by the blowing of conch shells, beating of drums,
challenges of the warriors, cries of the elephants, neighing of horses, and
clash of weapons, no one could hear what their companions were saying
Everyone engaged in fighting with their equals. Soon, the battle came
to resemble a great fight between the demigods and demons, thus giving
Yamaraja many candidates for punishment.
Text 29
sasidhvaja camunathaih
kalh senddhi path saha
rapetuh sairakd bhumau
chinna vahvanghn kandharah
Numerous soldiers belonging to the armies of both Lord Kalki and
Sasidhvaja lost their arms, legs, and heads in that great battle
Text 30
dhavanto'bh druvantasca
viklavanto'srguksitah
uparyupan sanchannd
gajasva ratha marditah
Some injured soldiers ran here and there, screaming with pain, others
made grotesque sounds, while still others lav soaked with blood Some
wounded soldiers fell onto other warriors, and others were crushed under
the legs of horses and elephants, and the wheels of chariots.
Text 31
mpetuh pradhane vvrah
koti koti sahasrasah
bhutesdnanda sandohah
sravanto rudhi rodakam
In that great battle, may tens of millions of great warriors lost their
lives, so that the battlefield became a river of blood Although certainly
a ghastly sight, ghosts, hobgoblins, jackals, demons, and foxes were very
happy to see that river


LORD KALKI TRAVELS T O BHALLATANAGARA 
-49
Text 32
usnisahamsah sanchinna
gcqa rodho rathasnavah
karorumindbharana
masi kdncana valukah
The crowns floating in that river of blood appeared like swans, the
slain elephants looked like its banks, the chariots were boats, the severed
hands and legs were fish, and the innumerable swords looked like so much
golden sand on the shore.
Text 33
evath pravrttah sangrame
nadyah sadyo'ti darunah
In this way, the entire battlefield wore the appearance of a mightv
river.
Text 34
suryaketustu maruna
sahito yuyudhe bah
kdlakalpo durdgharso
marum vdnair tadayat
marustu tatra dasabhr
marganair ahanad bhrsam
The strongly-built Suryaketu, who looked like a second YamarSja,
covered King Maru with showers of arrows. In retaliation, Maru released
ten wonderful arrows that injured Suryaketu.
Texts 35-36
marubandhuto virah
smyaketura marsitah
jaghdn turagdn hopat
padodghatena tadratham
curnayitvd'tha tenapi
tasya vaksasya tadayat
gaddghdtena tenapi
marur murccham avapaha


250 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
Being pierced by Maru's arrows, Suryaketu became enraged and
countered by killing the king's horses, one by one. He then broke King
Maru's chariot to pieces, smashing it with his club. Due to being struck
by one of the blows, King Maru lost his balance and fell to the ground
unconscious.
Text 37
sarathis tamapovdha
rathenanyeva dharmavit
brhatketusca devapim
vanaih pracchadayad bah
King Maru's loyal charioteer quickly came and placed him on another
chariot. Meanwhile, the powerful Brhatketu dazed Devapi with his
incessant stream of arrows.
Text 38
dhanui vikrsya tarasd
mharena yatha ramm
sa tu vanamayam varsam
panvarya nyayudhaih
As thick fog covers the sun, Devapi, who had been greatly afflicted
by Brhatketu's arrows, picked up his bow and countered his adversary's
arrows with his own.
Text 39
brhatketum drdham jaghne
kar.kapatraih sdasitaih
bhmnam sulam athalokya
dhanurgrhya pata tnbhih
King Devapi then employed his wonderful golden arrows to break
Brhatketu's tridents and other weapons into pieces. Brhatketu, who had
also became inflamed with rage, picked up his bow and showered more
arrows upon his adversary.
Text 40
sitadharcah warna pumkhair
gardha patrair ayomukhaih


L O R D 
K A L K I 
T R A V E L S 
T O 
B H A L L A T A N A G A R A 
251
devdpim dsugair jaghne
brhatketuh sasaimkam
Brhatketu then released golden arrows having iron tips and vultures'
feathers, piercing Devapi all over his body.
Text 41
devapis taddhanur dwyavn
ciccheda msitaih saraih
chinnadhanva brhatketuh
khadgapair jighdmsaya
Devapi countered with his sharp arrows and managed to break
Brhatketu's celebrated bow. Finding no other means, Brhatketu
unsheathed his sword and charged at Devapi in a final attempt to kill
him.
Texts 42-43
devapeh sdrathim sasvam
jaghne suro mahamrdhe
sa devdpir dhanus tyaktva
talenahatya tenpum
bhujayor antaramya
mspipesa sa rardayah
tarn tryasta varsam niskantam
murcchitam satrundrditam
That great warrior, Brhatketu, was able to kill Devapi's horses and
chariot driver as the fierce battle continued. Devapi then threw down
his bow and gave his enemy a powerful blow wirh his fist. Brhatketu was
stunned and so Devapi grabbed him and began squeezing his neck as it was
held between his arm and chest. As a result of this, the twenty-four-year-
old Brhatketu fell down unconscious onto the battlefield, as if dead.
Text 44
ajam viksaya devdpir
mughm suryadhvajo'vadhit
mustina vajrapdtena
so'patan murchito bhuvi


252 
S R I K A L K I 
P U R A N A
murcchitasya npuh krodhat
senaganam tadayat
Upon seeing his brother as if bereft of life, Suryaketu brought his fist
down onto Devapi's head. As a result of that terrible blow, which appeared
like the striking of a thunderbolt, Devapi also fell down unconscious At
this, Suryaketu mercilessly attacked Devapi's soldiers, causing them to
scatter
Text 45
sasidhvajah sarvajagannwasam
kalkim purastad ahhisuryavarcasam
syamam pimngamvaram ambujeksanam
brhadbhujam caru kinta bhusanam
At about that time, King Sas'idhvaja happened to see Lord Kalki
roaming the battlefield 
The Lord's eyes were like lotus petals, His
complexion was very dark, and His effulgence was as bright as the sun
He appeared to be the shelter of the universe. He was dressed in yellow
garments and His arms extended to His knees. On His head was placed a
transcendental crown.
Text 46
папа mam vrata atanga sohhasa
nirasta lokeksana hrttamomayam
visakhayupadibhir avrtam prabhum
dadarsa dharmena krtena pujitam
Lord Kalki's body appeared even more brilliant due to the reflections
of His jeweled ornaments. The Lord presented a very pleasing sight
for everyone. Indeed, His darsana destroyed the contamination within
everyone's heart All the kings, headed by Vis'akhayupa, surrounded the
Lord, and Dharma and Satya-yuga personified were seen worshiping
Him.
Thus ends the translation of the twenty-second chapter of Sri Kalki
Purana


С Н Л Р Г F R 
T w t N l Y - T H R F t
King Sasidhvaja Brings the Unconscious
Lord Kalki to His Palace
Text 1
suta uvaca
hrdi dhyanaspadam rupam
kalker drstva sasidhvajah
puraam khadgadharam cam
twagarndham avravit
Suta GosvamI said: As King Sasidhvaja gazed upon the enchanting
form of Lord Kalki, the incarnation of Lord Han, and thus the only real
object of meditation, who was seated on His celestial horse, holding a
sword, he spoke as follows.
Text 2
dhanurvana dharam cam
vibhusana varangakam
papatapa vmdsartham
udyatam jagatam param
Loid Kalki, the master of the universe, is decorated with transcendental
ornaments and equipped with a bow and arrows, so that it appears as if
He is about to destroy all the suffering and sins of this material world
Text3
praha tarn paramatmanam
hrsta roma saudhvajah
ehyehi pundankaksa
praharam kuru me hrdi
His mind surcharged with feelings of ecstasy, King Sasidhvaja said- О
lotus-eyed Lord, please come and strike my chest.
Texts 4-5
atlmvatman vanabhiya
tamo'ndhe hrdi me visa


254 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
nirgunasya gunajfiatvam
advcatasyastra tadanam
niskdmasya jayodyoga
sahayam уаьуа saimkam
lokdh pasyantu yuddhe me
dvirathe paramatmanah
О Supersoul, situated within the hearts of all living entities, out of fear
of my arrows, please hide within my heart, which is filled with darkness
Although You are without material qualities, You possess unlimited
transcendental qualities. Although You are one without a second, You
are prepared to attack Your enemies. Although You are without material
desires, You have accepted the support of an army for achieving victory I
would like to fight with the Supersoul of all living entities while everyone
else stands aside as spectators.
Text 6
parabuddhir yadi drdkam
prahartta vibhave tvayi
swa visnor bhedakrte
lokam ydsydmi samyuge
You are the almighty Lord. 1 will strike You hard, and while doing
so, if I forget that You are the Supreme Lord, then I hope to achieve that
inferior destination which is attained by those who discriminate between
Lord Siva and Lord Han.
Text 7
Ш rajno vacah sruwa
akrodhah kruddhavad vibhuh
vanaira tadayat samkhye
dhrtayudham anndamam
Upon hearing these words of King Sasidhvaja, the slayer of his
enemies who possessed all kinds of weapons, Lord Kalki displayed some
symptoms of anger, although by nature He is always peaceful, and thus
began to release His arrows


KING SASIDHVAJ-V BRINGS LORD KALKI TO HIS PALACE 
255
Text 8
sasidhvajas tatpraharam
aganasya varayudhaih
tarn ]aghnc vanavarsena
dh.arabh.vnva parvatam
However, King Sasidhvaja did not take this onslaught of arrows very
seriously. As a mountain remains undisturbed by the cloud that showers
rain upon it, King Sasidhvaja remained steady as he counteracted the
Lord's arrows with his own
Text 9
tadvana varsabhinnantah
kahkah paramakopanah
divyaih sastrastra sanghatais
tayor yuddham avarttata
King Sasidhvaja's attack appeared to injure Lord Kalki and this
made the fire of His rage burn brightly Thereafter, a fierce battle ensued
wherein both combatants discharged celestial weapon»
Text 10
brahmdstrasya ca brahmastrair
vdyavasya ca pdrvatmh
agneyasya ca pdrjanyaih
pannagasya ca garudhaih
Both neutralized the effects of each other's brahmastra by invoking
another brahmastra, parvatiastra by employing another parvatiastra, vayu-
astra by discharging another vayu-astra, parjanydstra by invoking an agni-
astra, and garuddstra by employing a pannagastra
Text 11
evam nanavidhan astrair
anyo'nyam abhijaghnatuh
lokdh sapalah samtrasta
yugantabhva menireh
In this way, Lord Kalki and King Sasidhvaja fought furiously while
discharging their entire arsenal of weapons As they witnessed this


25o 
SRI KALKI PURANA
contest, all the spectators, including the rulers of the universe, became
frightened, thinking that the time of annihilation had arrived.
Texts 12ЛЗ
deva kaldgni samtrastd
agarnan khagamdh kila
tato'ti vitathod yogau
vasudeva saddhvajau
nirastrau ba.huyuddh.ena
yuyudhdte parasparam
paddgharais talaghdtair
musti praharanais tathd
As the demigods watched the battle from their vantage point in the
sky, when they saw a fiery weapon being discharged, their hearts became
overwhelmed with fear. After awhile, Lord Kalki and King Sasidhvaja put
aside their bows and arrows and began wrestling—kicking, punching,
and slapping each other with all their strength.
Texts 14*15
niyuddha kusalau virau
mumuddte parasparam
varahoddhrta sabdena
tarn talendhanaddharih
sa mmcchito nrpah kopat
samutthaya ca tatksandt
mustibhydm vajrakalpdbhyam
avadhita kalkimojasd
sa kalkistatpraharena
papdta bhuvi murcchitah
Both Lord Kalki and King Sasidhvaja were very powerful warriors and
expert in the art of fighting. Both became pleased to witness each other's
skill. When Lord Kalki slapped King Sasidhvaja, causing him to lose
consciousness, the sound produced by that blow reminded everyone of


KING SASIDHVAJA BRINGS LORD KALKI TO HIS PALACE 
257
the sound made by Lord Varaha as He delivered the earth from the nether
regions at the beginning of creation. Within a moment, King §as"idhvaja
regained his senses and stood up. In a fit of rage, the king smashed his
fist upon the body of Lord Kalki, making Him fall unconscious onto the
ground.
Text 16
dharmah krtanca tarn drstva
murcchitarh jagadisvaram
samdgatau tamdneturh
kakse tau jagrhe nrpah
Upon seeing this, Dharma and Satya-yuga personified rushed to
where Lord Kali, the master of the universe, was lying. However, before
they could reach Him, King Ssas'idhvaja restrained them, holding them
tightly in his arms.
Text 17
kalkirh vaksasyu paddya
labdharthah prayayau grham
yuddhe nrpandm anyesam
putrau drstva sudurjayau
The king then embraced Lord Kalki to his chest and brought Him to
his palace, considering himself to be very fortunate. He thought that no
king of the earth would now be able to defeat his two sons.
Text 18
kalkirh suradhipa patirh
pradhane vijitya dharmarh
krtanca nijakaksa yuge nidhaya
harsollasad hrdaya utpulakah
pramathi gawd grharh
harigrhe dadpe susantam
Thus, King Sas'idhvaja returned home in a jubilant mood after
defeating Lord Kalki, the Lord of the demigods, carrying Him on his chest


SRI KALKI 
PURANA
and Dharma and Satya-yuga personified in his armpits. Upon returning
h me the king saw his wife Susanta, sitting in the temple of Lord Han.
Text 19
drstvd tasyah sulahta
mukham vaisnavinanca
madhye gdyantindm hanguna
kathastamatha praha гща
devadindm vvnaya vacasd sambhale
janmana vidyalabham pannayavidhim
mlecchd pasanda nasnam
Many other female devotees surrounded the queen, glorifying Lord
Han The king looked at Susanta's lotus-like face and said: He who has
taken birth in the village of Sambhala by the request of the demigods is
this personality I am holding to my chest. He received an education, was
married, and then vanquished many atheists and mlecchas.
Text 20
kalhh svayam hrdi mamdya mihd gato'ddha
murcchacchalena tava bhakli samiksanartham
dharmam krtanca mama kaksayuge susante
kante vihkaya samarcaya samvidhehi
О goddess, Lord Kalki, the Lord of the heart, has now come to our
house on the pretext of being unconscious. Dharma and Satya-yuga are
also our guests and so vou can worship them.
Text 21
m nrpavacasa vinodapurnd
hankrta dharmayutam pranamya natham
saha mjasakhibhir nanartta rdma
hanguna kirttana varttana vilajja
Susanta offered her obeisances to Lord Kalki, Dharma, Satya-yuga,
and her husband. Then, along with her companions, she began to dance
while singing the glories of Lord Han without inhibition.
Thus ends the translation of the twenty-third chapter of Sri
Purana.


C H A P T E R 
T w L N T Y - F o b R
The Prayers of Susanta
Lord Kalki Marries King Sasidhvaja's Daughter
Text 1
susantovaca
jay hare'ma radhisa sevitam
tave padambujam bhun bhusanam
kuru mamagratah sadhu satkrtam
tyaja mahamate mohamatmanah
Susanta said: О Lord Han, all glories unto You. Please give up Your
illusory pastime of being unconscious. О most intelligent one, kindly
show me Your lotus feet, which are faithfully served by saintly persons
and demigods.
Text 2
tave vapur jagadrupa sampada
viracitam satdm manase sthitam
ratipater mono mohodayakam
kuru vicestitam kamapuranam
Your body is fully spiritual and thus it is the most valuable object
within the universe. This form of Yours is present within the hearts of the
devotees. Your beautiful form bewilders even the mind of Cupid. Now,
please do whatever You consider to be beneficial for me.
Text 3
tave yaso jagacchoka ndsanam
mrdu kathamrta pntiddyakam
sthita sudhoksitam candravan mukham
tava karotvalam lokamangalam
The world of lamentation goes far away if Your transcendental glories
enter someone's ears. The shower of nectar in the form of the sweet
words emanating from your moon-like mouth pleases everyone Your face
is adorned with a sweet smile Please speak something with Your lotus
mouth that will benefit all classes of men.


?60 
SRI KALKI 
PURAISA
Text 4
mama patistvayrh sarvadurjayo
yadi tavdpriyarh karmdnd caret
jahi tadatmanah satrum udyatam
kuru krpam nacedidrg isvarah
My husband is a person who irritates everyone. If he has caused
You any pain, kindly give up Your anger and display some compassion.
Otherwise, how will people believe that You are all-merciful?
Text 5
mahadaharh yutarh pancarndtrayd
prakrti jdyayd nirmitam vapuh
tava ninksandl lilayd jagat
sthiti layodayam brahmakalpitam
The material body has been created with the five gross material
elements as its ingredients, as well as the three subtle elements, all of
which are manifestations of Your external energy. In the beginning, You
glanced over material nature for the sake of Your pastimes, and then You
enacted the creation, maintenance, and annihilation of the universe by
Your three qualitative incarnations.
Text 6
bhuviyan marudvdri tejasarh
prdcitibhih sarirendriydsritaih
trigunyd svayd mayayd vibho
kuru krpdrh bhavat sevandrthindm
My dear Lord, please bestow Your mercy upon us, who aspire for
engagement in Your devotional service, even though we possess material
bodies and senses that act under the direction of Your illusory energy,
maya, which consists of three modes.
Text 7
tava gundlayam ndma pdvanarh
kalimalapaharh kirttayanti ye
bhavabhayakbayarh tapatapitd
muhuraho janah sarhsaranti no
1


LORD KALKI MARRIES K I N G SASIDHVAJA'S 
D A U G H T E R 
261
Those who always chant Your holy names, which destroy the
contamination of Kali, removes the fear of material existence, and
enables one to develop transcendental qualities, even though undergoing
material miseries at present, will never again have to accept a material
body.
Text 8
tava januh satath mdnavarddhanarh
dijakulodayam devapahkam
krtayugdrpakam dharmapurakarh
kalikulantakarh santanotu me
Because of Your appearance within this world, the prestige of the
devotees has been reinstated, the brahmanas once again engage in their
ritualistic performances, the demigods feel secure, Satya-yuga will soon
commence, religious principles are being obeyed, and the influence of
Kali has slackened. May I also receive the benefit of Your incarnation.
Text 9
mama grharh patiputra naptrkarh
gajarathair dhvajais carair dhanaih
manivardsanarh sat krtirh vind tava
padabjayoh sobhayanti kim
I have a husband, sons, grandsons, elephants, horses, flags, chariots,
cdmaras, wealth, jeweled asanas, and countless other possessions but
without the presence of Your lotus feet, all these things appear to be of
very little value.
Text 10
tava jagadvapuh sundarasmitarh
mukham aninditarh sundardravam
yadi na me priyarh valgucestite
parikarotyaho mrtyurastivaha
О Lord of the universe, if Your enchanting smiling face, from which
captivating and meaningful words emanate, does not cast its soothing
glance upon me, then let me die without delay.


262 
S R ! KALKI P U R A N A
Text 11
hayacara bhayasara karahara sararux
kharatara varasara dasabala manthana
jayahata parabhara bhavavaya samana
sasadhara sata samarasa bharavadana
As You traverse the surface of the earth, riding upon Your horse, Your
presence removes all fear. You are the shelter of Brahma and Siva. You
vanquish even the most powerful warriors with Your sharp arrows. You
give protection to those who seek Your shelter after being defeated by
You in battle. Your lotus face is as soothing as a hundred moons.
Text 12
iti tasyah susantdya
gitena paritositah
uttasthau ranasayydydh
kalkiryuddhas thaviravat
Being greatly satisfied by Susanta's prayers, Lord Kalki awakened
from His state of unconsciousness and once again assumed the role of an
invincible warrior.
Texts 13-14
susdntdrh purato drstvd
krtarh vdme tu daksine
dharmam sasidhvajarh pascdt
prdheti vriditdnanah
lid warn padmapalasdksi
mama sevdrtham udyatd
kdr\te sasidhvajah sum
mama pascad upasthitah
Seeing Susanta in front of Him, as well as Satya-yuga personified
to His left, Dharma to His right, and King Sasidhvaja behind Him, Lord
Kalki spoke as if embarrassed: О lotus-eyed one, who are you? Why are
you serving Me? Why is the great hero, Sasidhvaja, standing behind Me?
Text 15
he dharma he krtayuga
katharh atragatd vayam


LORD KALKI MARRIES KING SASIDHVAJA'S DAUGHTER 
263
rananganarh vihdydsydh
satrorantah pure vada
0 Dharma! О Satyayuga! Instead of remaining on the battlefield,
why have I been brought to the palace of the enemy?
Text 16
satrupatnyah katharh sadhu
sevante mdmarim mudd
sasidhvajah suramdni
mmcchitarh hand no katham
1 am the enemy of these women. Why are they serving Me in great
happiness? I fell unconscious. Why did the great hero, Sasidhvaja, not
kill Me?
Text 17
susantovaca
patdle divi bhumau vd
narandga surd'surdh
ndrayanasya te kalke
ke vd sevdrh na kurvate
Susanta said: Who is there in Patalaloka, Svargaloka, or Bhuloka,
whether he is a human being, serpent, demon, or demigod, that would not
serve Lord Kalki, the incarnation of Lord Hari?
Text 18
yatsevakdnarh jagatdrh
mitrdndrh darsanddapi
nivarttate satrubhdvas
tasya sdksdt kuto ripuh
All the people of the world are Your servants. It is the duty of
everyone to adopt a friendly attitude toward You. My dear Lord, simply
by seeing You, one's animosity is vanquished. Who would dare to exhibit
his enviousness bv fighting with You, hand to hand?
Text 19
tvayd sarddharh mama patih
satrubhdvena sarhyuge


264 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
yadi yogyas taddnetum
kirn samartho nijcdayam
Had my husband not fought with You in the mood of an enemy, would
he have been able to bring You to his house?
Text 20
tava ddso mama svdmi
aharh dasi nijd tava
avayoh samprasdddya
dgato'si mahabhuja
My husband is Your eternal servant, and I am Your eternal maidservant.
О mighty-armed Lord, You have come here simply to benefit us.
Text 21
dharma uvdca
aharh tavaitayor bhaktyd
ndmarupdnu kirttandt
krtdrtho'smi krtdrtho'smi
krtdrtho'smi kaliksaya
Dharma said: О vanquisher of Kali, I am very impressed to see how
this couple renders devotional service unto You. They chant Your holy
names and they take great pleasure in glorifying You,
Text 22
krtayuga uvdca
adhundham krtayugam
tava ddsasya darsandt
tvamisvaro jagat pujya
sevaka sydsya tejasd
Satya-yuga said: My dear Lord, I consider myself to be very fortunate
to have witnessed the activities of these great devotees. By the influence
of Your devoted servants, Your worship spreads throughout the universe.
Text 23
sasidhvaja uvdca
dandayarh mdrh dandaya vibho
yoddhrtvad udyata yudham


LORD KALKI MARRIES KING SASIDHVAJA'S 
DAUGHTER 
265
yena kdvnd&i rdgena
wayyat manyapi vairita
King Sasidhvaja said: My dear Lord, I had pierced Your body with
many arrows while fighting with You. Therefore, I am a great offender
and so please punish me. You are our life and soul and yet, under the
influence of uncontrollable lust and anger, 1 treated You as an enemy.
Text 24
id kalkir vacastesdrh
nisamya harsitdnanah
Way a jito'smiti nrparh
punah punaruvdca ha
After hearing the king speak with such humility, Lord Kalki said: The
simple fact of the matter is that you defeated Me in the battle.
Text 25
tatah sasidhvajo raja
yuddhd ddhuya putrakan
susantaya matirh buddhvd
ramam prdddt sa kalkaye
Thereafter, King Sasidhvaja summoned his sons from the battlefield
and, as desired by his wife, handed over his daughter, Rama, to Lord Kalki
in marriage.
Texts 26-27
tadaitya таги devapi
sasidhvaja samdhrtau
visdkha yupa bhupasca
rudhirdsvasca sarhyugdt
sayyd karna nrpe ndpi
bhalldtarh puramdyayuh
sendganair asamkhydtaih
sd puri mardditd bhavat
At that time, the kings Maru, Devapi, VisakhayQpa, Sayyakarna, and
Rudhirasva arrived at Bhallata, at the invitation of Sasidhvaja. Thus, the
city became very crowded with the soldiers of these rulers of men.


266 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
Text 28
gajasva ratha sambddhaih
patticchatra ratha dhvajaih
kalkinapi rarnayasca
uvahotsava sampadam
The marriage ceremony of Lord Kalki and Rama was performed with
great pomp with manv elephants, horses, chariots, soldiers present, so
that a great tumult was created.
Texts 29-30
drustum samauyus tvanta
harsat sabala vahanah
samkha bhen rnrdnngdnam
laditrananca rasianaih
nrtya gita vidhanaisca
put asm krta mangalaih
vivdho ramaya kalker
abhuda аи sukhdvahah
Everyone arrived on their various vehicles and carriers in a mood of
joyful anticipation, eager to witness the wedding. The festive mood was
enhanced by the auspicious and delightful sounds ot drums, conch shells,
and mrdangas, as well as the smging, dancing, and clapping of the ladies
Texts 31-32
nrpd nand vidhair bhojyaih
pujita vwisuh sabham
brdhmanah ksatnya vaisyah
sudrasca vara jatayah
vicitra bhoga bharanah
kalkim drastum upavisan
tasyam sabhayam susubhe
kalkih kama lahcanah
All the kings were provided with an incredible variety of sumptuous
food and drmk. The brahmanas, ksatnyas, vaisayas, budras, and outcastes
were also very nicely fed and given charity when they came to s>ee


LORD KALKI MARRIES K I N G SASIDHVAJA'S 
D A U G H T E R 
267
Lord Kalki. All the while, the lotus-eyed Lord remained seated in the
assembly.
Text 33
naksatro gana madhyasthoh
punmh sasadharo yathd
reje raja ganadhiso
lokan sawan vimohayan
Just as> the moon looks very beautiful in the midst of innumerable
stars, so Lord Kalki, the king of kings, appeared glorious in the midst of
that assembly.
Text 34
rama patim kattam aveksya bhupah
sabhagata padma daldyate ksanam
jdmdtaram bhakti yutena кагтшш
vwudhya madhye nisasdda tatra ha
King Sasidhvaja slowly approached the lotus-eved Lord Kalki, the
husband of Rama, and sat beside Him in a mood of awe and reverence,
although he considered Him to be his son-in law.
Thus ends the translation of the twenty-fourth chapter of Sri Kalki
Purana.


C H A P T E R 
T W E N T Y - F I V E
The Devotion of Sasidhvaja And His Previous History
Texts 1-2
suta uvaca
tatrahuste sabha madhye
vaisnavam tarn sasidhvajam
munibhih kathta sesa
bhakti vyasakta vigraham
susantan ca krtenapi
dharmena vidhwad yutam
Suta Gosvami said: The kings then began to speak to the exalted
King Sasidhavaja and his wife, Susanta, in that assembly which included
Dharma and Satya-yuga personified.
Texts 3-4
rajana ucuh
yuvdm nardyana syasya
kalkeh svasuratam gatau
vayam nrpa ime loha
rsayo brdhmandsca ye
preksya bhakti vitanam vam
harau vismita manasdh
prcchamaswa miyam bhaktih
kva labdha paramatmanah
The kings said: You are now the in-laws of Lord Kalki, who is non-
different from the Personality of Godhead, Narayana. We are very
impressed by the devotional attitude of both of you, and so are the
assembled sages, brahmanas, and others. We would like to know how vou
became so advanced on the path of devotional service to the Supreme
Lord.


T H E D E V O T I O N OF SASIDHVAJA 
269
Texts 5-6
kasyava saksita rajan
kimva naisargiki mva
sotrumicchdma he rajan
tri }aga]]ar\a pavanim
kathdm bhagavatim tvattah
samsara asrama nostrum
My dear king, did someone give you instruction regarding the
devotional service of the Lord, or is your devotion spontaneous? We
simply would like to know how you became such an advanced devotee of
the Lord. We know that by hearing this narration, the inhabitants of the
three worlds will be purified, because such talks uproot the root cause of
material existence.
Text 7
sasidhvaja uvaca
stnpumsora vayos tattat
srnutd mogha vikramah
vrttam majjanma karmadi
smrtim tadbhakti laksanam
King Sasidhvaja said: О kings, please listen attentively as I narrate
to you the story of my previous life, and how I came to be a king who is
devoted to the Lord.
Text 8
pura yuga sahasrante
grdhro'ham puti mamsa bhuk
grdhnyam me pnyaranye
krtanido vanaspatau
Thousands of years ago, I was born as a meat-eating vulture. My wife,
Susanta, was a female vulture living in a nest at the top of a tree in the
forest.
Text 9
cacdra kamam sarvatra
vanopavana sankule


270 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
mrtdndm pud marhsaugliaih
prdndndrh vrtdkalpakau
She would travel from forest to forest and tree to tree, according to
her desire. We sustained our lives by eating the rotting, stinking flesh of
dead bodies.
Texts 10-11
ekadd lubaliakah kruru
lulubha pisitasanau
avarh viksya grhe pustarh
grdhrarh tatrapya yojayat
tarn viksya jata visrarhbhau
ksudhaya paripiditau
stnpurhsau patitau tatra
marhsa lobhita cetasau
One day, a cruel hunter saw us and so desired to capture us. For this
purpose, he brought his tame vulture. At that time, we were famished
and so when we saw the tame vulture, we approached it in the hopes of
getting some flesh in charity.
Text 12
vaddhd. vavarh viksya tada
harsaddgatya lubdhakah
jagraha kanthe tarasa
cancva graghata piditah
However, the result was that we fell into the trap of the hunter. As soon
as he saw us ensnared within his net, the hunter joyfully came running
and grabbed me by the neck. We tried our best to defend ourselves with
our beaks.
Text 13
avarh grhitvd gandakydh
silaydm salildntike
mastiskarh cmnaydmdsa
lubdhakah pisitasanah


T H E 
D E V O T I O N OF SASIDHVAJA 
271
Wanting our flesh, the hunter took us to the banks of the Gandaki
River, which is as good as the Ganges, and killed us by smashing our heads
against a salagrama-sila.
Texts 14-15
cakdnkita sild gar.gd
maranddapi tatksandt
jyotir maya vimanena
sadyo bhutvd calurbhujau
prdptau vaikuntha nihxyam
sarva loka namaskrtam.
tatra sthitva yugasatarh
brahmano lokarndgatau
Because we had given up our lives while touching a sdldgrama-sild
on the shore of the holy Gandaki River, we were instantly awarded four-
armed forms and ascended to Vainkuntha in an effulgent celestial chariot.
We resided there for one hundred yuga cycles and then were transferred
to Brahmaloka.
Text 16
brahma loke panca satarh
yugdndm upabhujya vai
devaloke kdiavasad
gatarh yuga catunsatam
In Brahmaloka, we resided for five hundred yuga cycles and then
descended to Svargaloka, where we resided for four hundred yuga cycles.
Text 17
tflto bhuvi nrpdstdvai
baddha sunuraharh smaran
harer anugraham loke
salagrdma sildsramam
After residing in the heavenly planets, we were born in this mortal
world. I can clearly remember how everything was made possible simply
by the mercy of the suldgrdma-sila and Lord Hari.


272 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
Text 18
jatismarawarh gandakydh
kirn tasydh kathaydmyaham
yajjala sparsa mdtrena
mdhdtmyarh mahad adbhatam
It is astonishing to think how one can remember his past lives after
giving up his life on the banks of the River Gandaki. Simply by touching
the water of that river, one can feel something extraordinary.
Text 19
cakdnkita sildsparsa
maranasye drsarh phalanx
na jane vdsudevasya
sevayd kirh bhavisyati
When such a wonderful result is obtained by giving up one's life while
touching a saldgrdma-sild, then what can be said of the result obtained by
those who serve Lord Hari with devotion?
Text 20
itydvdrh hari pujdsu
harsa vihvala cetasau
nrtyantdvanu gdyantou
vilunthantau sthitaviha
Thinking in this way, we remained absorbed in the worship of the
Supreme Lord, sometimes dancing in ecstasy, sometimes singing the
glories of Lord Hari, and sometimes rolling on the ground with a heart
overwhelmed by feelings of love of God. In this way, we passed our lives.
Text 21
kalker ndrdyanarh sasya
avatdrah kaliksayah
purd vidita viryasya
prsto brahma mukhdt srutah
I had already heard from Brahma that Lord Hari would incarnate as
Lord Kalki, to destroy the influence of Kali. I am thus well-aware of His
unexcelled prowess.


T H E D E V O T I O N OF SASIDHVAJA 
273
Text 22-24
iti raja sabhdydm sah
srdvayitvd nijah kathah
dadau gajanam ayutam
asvanarh laksam adarat
rathdnam sat sahasrantu
dadau purnasya bhaktitah
dasindrh yuvatindhca
ramanathaya satsatam
ratndni ca mahdrghydni
dattvd rdjd sasidhvajah
mene krtdrtham dtmdnarh
svajanair bdndhavaih saha
Thus, King Sas'idhvaja narrated his history in that assembly.
He considered himself and his family members to be supremely
fortunate as he gave Lord Kalki, the husband of Rama, ten thousand
elephants, one hundred thousand horses, six thousands chariots,
one hundred young maidservants, and countless valuable jewels.
Text 25
sabhasada iti srutva
purva janmoditdh kathah
vismayd vista manasah
purnarh tarn menire nrpam
After hearing this description of the king's previous life, all the
members of the assembly were astonished and began to regard him even
more highly.
Text 26
kalkirh stuvanto dhydyanto
prasarh santo jagajjandh
punastamdhu rdjdnarh
laksanarh bhakti bhaktayoh


274 
SRI KALKI P U R A N A
Everyone in that assembly began to glorify the Supreme Lord and
meditate upon His transcendental form. After some time, they inquired
from King Sasidhvaja about the characteristics of pure devotional
service.
Text 27
mpa ucuh
bhakaka syad bhagavatah
ко va bhakto vidhanavit
kvm karoti kimasnati
kva vd vasati vakti kim
The kings said: What are the characteristics of devotional service to
the Lord? Who is a genuine devotee, and what are the prescribed rules
and regulations
7 What does a devotee do, what does he eat, where does
he live, and what does he speak about?
Texts 28-29
etan varnaya rajendra
%arvam Warn vetsi sadarat
jatismaratvai krsnasyu
jagatam pavanecchaya
iti tesam vacah srutva
praphulla vadano nrpah
%adhuvddaih samamantrya
tdnaha brahmanoditam
О king, you aie the knower of everything and so please describe
whatever was requested by us.
The king was very happy to hear these questions, which were all in
relation to Lord Han, and so he thanked them. Then, with a desire to
purity the world with the sound of the holy names of Lord Krsna, the
king, having the power to remember his previous lives, began to repeat
whatever he had previously heard from Lord Brahma.
Text 30
sasidhvaja uvata
pura brahma sabha madhye
maham gana sankule


T H E 
D E V O T I O N OF S A S I D H V A J A 
275
sanako naradam praha
bhavadbhir yaswihoditah
King Sas'idhvaja said Once, long ago, in the assembly of Lord Brahma,
there were many great sages present At that time, the sage Sanaka asked
Narada Muni the very questions that you have put before me
Text 31
cesam anugrahenaham
tatwsiwa srutah kathah
yastah mmkathayamiha
srnudhvam papa nasanah
I was also present in that assembly of gieat sages and by their mercy,
I heard everything that was spoken by them. О you who are capable of
removing the sms of the conditioned souls, please listen attentively as I
repeat whatever I had heard.
Text 32
sanaka uvaca
ka bhakuh samsrtihara
harau loka namakrta
tamadau vat nay а типе
nara davakita vayam
Sanaka said- О sage among the demigods, what kind of devotional
service to Lord Han has the power to free one from the cycle of repeated
birth and death? What method of devotional service is most praiseworthy
7
Please speak on this subject, for we are very eager to hear.
Text 33
narada uvaca
manah sastham ind) lyam
samyamya paraya dhiyd
guravapi nyaseddeham
loka tantra vicaksanah
Narada Mum said. One who desues to engage in the devotional
service of the Lord should learn the codes of good conduct after fully
surrendering himself at the lotus feet of the spiritual master and carefully


276 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
controlling his mind and five knowledge-acquiring senses with the help
of good intelligence.
Texts 34-36
gurau prasanne bhagavan
prasidati harih svayam
pranavdgni priyamadhye
namo'rnarh tannidesatah
smared ananyayd budhyd
desikah susamahitah
pdd.ydrgh.ya dcamaniyadyaih
sndna vdsovibhusanaih.
pujayitvd vasudeva pdda
padmarh samdhitah
sarvdnga sundararh ramyarh
smaret hrtpadma madhyagam
If the spiritual master is pleased, then it is to be understood that Lord
Hari is pleased. By the order of the spiritual master, one should chant the
mantra, orn namo svahd. The disciple should worship the lotus feet of Lord
Vasudeva by offering Him padya, arghya, acamanlya, snanlya, vasana, and
ornaments. All the while, he should meditate on the enchanting form of
Lord Vasudeva as it is situated within his heart.
Text 37
evarh dhydtvd vdkya mano
buddhindriya ganaih saha
dtmdnam arpayed vidvdn
hardvekdnta bhdvavit
A sincere and intelligent devotee should surrender his speech, mind,
intelligence, senses, and indeed, his very self at the lotus feet of the
Supreme Lord.
Text 38
angdni devdswesdntu
namdni viditdnyuta
visnoh kalker anantasya
tanye vanyanna vidyate


T H E 
D E V O T I O N OF SASIDHVAJA 
277
All of the demigods are considered to be Lord Hari's bodily limbs.
He possesses unlimited transcendental forms having corresponding
transcendental names.
Text 39
sevyah krsnah sevako'
manye tasydtma murttayah
avidyo padhayo jfianad
vadanti prabhavddayah
Lord Krsna is the actual object of service for all living entities. The
constitutional position of the spirit souls is that they are the Lord's eternal
servants, being part and parcel of Him. This is the conclusion of those
who know the truth, but due to the dense darkness of ignorance, people
in general forget this.
Text 40
bhaktasydpi harau dvaitarh
sevya sevaka vattada
ndnyad vind tamityeva
kva ca kinca ca vidyate
The relationship between the Lord and His devotees is one of master
and servant. Actually, there is nothing that can exist independently of
Lord Krsna.
Text 41
bhaktah smarati tarn visnurh
tan штата ca gdyati
tat karrhdni karotyeva
taddnanda sukhodayah
The devotees always think of Lord Hari, sing His holy names, and
engage in menial service for His satisfaction. By engaging in devotional
service in this way, the devotees feel transcendental pleasure.
Text 42
nrtya tyuddhata vadrauti
hasati praiti tanmanah
vilunthatydtma vismrtyd
na vetti kiyadantaram


278 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
The devotees dance in ecstasy, cry, laugh, and roll on the ground, and
while doing so, they completely forget themselves. Pure devotees never
discriminate, but rather see everyone equally on the spiritual platform.
Text 43
evarh vidhd bhagavato
bhaktir avya bhicdrim
pundti sahasa lokan
sadevasura mdnusdn
Such unadulterated devotional service to the Supreme Lord quickly
purifies everyone—demigods, demons, and human beings.
Text 44
bhaktih sd prakrtir nityd
brahmasampat prakdsita
siva visnu brahma mpd
vedddydndrh vardpi vd
Bhakti-devI is the Lord's eternal spiritual potency and she is described
in all Vedic literature. She is the embodiment of Brahma, Visnu, and
Siva.
Text 45
bhaktdh sattva gimadhydsdt
rajasendriya Idlasdh
tamasd ghora sarhkalpd
bhajanti dvaita drgjandh
Persons in the mode of goodness are called devotees, persons in the
mode of passion are mad after sense gratification, and persons in the
mode of ignorance engage in all kinds of abominable activities.
Text 46
sattva nirgunatdm eti
rajasa visayas prhdm
tamasd narakarh ydnti
sarhsdre dvaita dharmini
People who cultivate the mode of goodness can raise themselves to
the transcendental platform. Those who cultivate the mode of passion


T H E DEVOTION OF SASIDHVAJA, 
279
become filled with material desires, and those who cultivate the mode of
ignorance go to hell.
Text 47
ucchistam avaisistarh va
pathyarh pvtam abhipsitam
bhaktdndm bhojanarh visnor
naivedyarh sdtviakarh matam
Food that is pure, juicy, and nutritious, and that has been offered to
Lord Visnu, is considered to be in the mode of goodness.
Text 48
indriya priti jananarh
sukra sonita varddhanam
bhojanarh rdjasarh suddham
ayurdrogya varddhanam
Food that is prepared with only the satisfaction of the senses in
mind, and which is intended to increase one's blood and semen, and
thus enhance one's duration of life, is considered to be in the mode of
passion.
Text 49
atah prararh tdmasandrh
katvam losna viddhikam
puti paryusitarh jneyarh
bhojanarh tdmasapriyam
Food that is bitter, spicy, hot, sour, stale, burnt, dry, or rotten is
considered to be in the mode of ignorance. Only people deeply imbedded
in the mode of ignorance will relish such food.
Text 50
sdttvikdndrh vane vdso
grdme vdsuttu rajasah
tamasarh dyuta madyddi
sadanarh parikirttitam
People in the mode of goodness like to reside in the forest, people in
the mode of passion like to reside in a city or village, and people in the
mode of ignorance like gambling casinos and brothels.


280 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
Text 51
na data sa harih kincit
sevakastu na yacakah
tathdpi paramd pritis
tayoh kimiti sasvati
Lord Hari does not award His devotee material comforts, nor does
a pure devotee ask anything from the Lord, and yet there are exchanges
of love between them at every moment. The dealings of the Lord and
His devotees are not like those of materialistic people in this miserable
world.
Text 52
ityetat bhagavat isvarasya
visnor guna kathanarh
sanako vivudhya bhaktya
savinaya vacanaih surarsi
varyarh parinutavendra
purarh jagdma suddhah
After hearing these talks in relation to Lord Hari, the master of
everyone, the pure-hearted sage, Sanaka, returned to his abode after
sufficiently glorifying Narada Muni.
Thus ends the translation of the twenty- fifth chapter of Sri Kalki
Purana.


C H A P T E R 
T W E N T Y - S I X
The Glories of the Devotees of Lord Hari
Text 1
sasidhvaja uvaca
etad vah kathitarh bhupdh
kathaniyoru karrrumah
kathd bhaktasya bhaktesca
kimanyarh kathaydmyaham
King Sasidhvaja said: My dear kings, I have thus described the glories
of the devotional service of the Lord, and the wonderful characteristics
of the devotees. Now, what more shall I tell you?
Text 2
bhupd ucuh
Warn rdjan vaisnavasresthah
sarvasattva hite ratah
tavdvesah katharh yuddha
range himsadikarmani
The kings said: My dear king, you are certainly the foremost Vaisnava,
for you are always engaged in working for the welfare of others. Why did
you take part in the violence of war?
Text 3
prayasah sddhavo loke
jlvdnarh hitakdrinah
prdnabuddhi dhanairvdgbhih
sarvesdrh visaydtmandm
It is seen that saintly persons engage in working for the benefit of
others, with their lives, intelligence, wealth, and speech.
Text 4
sasidhvaja uvaca
dvaitaprakasini ydtu
praknih kdmarupini


282 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
sa sute trijagai krt.snarh
vedasmsca trigurw.tmikd
King Sasidhvaja said: The concept of duality arises from the
interaction of the three modes of material nature. From material nature,
the creation of the three worlds was enacted, and thereafter the Vedas
appeared.
Text 5
te veddstrijagaddha dharma
sdsand dharma ndsandh
bhakti pravarttakd loke
kdminarh visaycuslnam
Just to fulfill the desires of materialistic people, the Vedas propagate
the path of fruitive action. At the same time, the Vedas establish the
genuine principles of religion and present the path of pure devotional
service to the Lord.
Text 6
vdtsydyanddi munayo
manavo vedapdragdh
vahanti valimisasya
vedavdkydnu sdsitdh
Under the guidance of the Vedas, great sages like Vatsyayana
propagate the worship of Lord Hari, the master of the universe, within
human society.
Text 7
vayarh tadanugah karma
dharmanisthd. rariapriydh
jighdrh santarh jighdrhsdmo
veddrtha krta niscaydh
Following in the footsteps of the great sages, we sometimes engage in
fighting in a way that is in accordance with religious principles. According
to the Vedic injunctions, it is the duty of a king to kill all aggressors.
Text 8
avadhyasya vadhe ydvdrhs
tdvdn vadhyasya raksaiye


T H E 
G L O R I E S OF THE D E V O T E E S OF LORD H A R I 
283
itydha bhagavdn vyasah
sarvaveddrtha tatparah
Lord Vyasadeva, the compiler of the Vedas, has said that just as it
is a sin to kill someone who deserves protection, so it is a sin to protect
someone who deserves to be killed.
Texrs9-ll
prayascittam na tatrasti
tatra dharmah pravantate
ato'tra vdhimm hawd
bhavatarh yndhi durjayam
dharmarh krtanca kalkintu
samdniyd gata vayam
esa bkaktir mania mata
tavabhipretamiraya
aham tadanu vaksydmi
devavdkyanu sdratah
yadi visnuh sa sarvatra
tadd karh hand ко hatah
If someone intentionally commits a sin, then no amount of atonement
can purify him. That is why I killed innumerable soldiers who apposed
me, and then brought Lord Kalki to my palace, along with Dharma and
Satya-yuga personified. In my opinion, this was bona fide devotional
service. Now, all of you can express your opinions, and I will give my
replies in accordance with the Vedic injunctions. Lord Visnu is present
everywhere. If this fact is established, then who can harm anyone?
Text 12
hantd visnurhato vimur
vddhah kasydsti tatra cet
yuddha yajfiddisu vadho
na vadho vedasdsandt
Who can be killed without the sanction of the Lord? The actual
killer of everyone is Lord V<snu, the protector of everyone is also Lord
Visnu, and the person being killed is part and parcel of Lord Visnu. The


284 
SRI KALKI PURANA
Vedas therefore say that killing in a righteous battle or in a sacrificial
performance does not constitute killing.
Text 13
iti gdyanti munayo
manavasca caturdasa
ittharh yuddhaisca yajnaisca
bhajdmo visnum isvaram
This is also the verdict of the great sages and Manus. We worship
Lord Hari by fighting, and so this is our form of sacrifice.
Text 14
ato bhdgavatirh mdydm
asritya vidhind yajan
sevya sevaka bhavena
sukhi bhavati ndnyathd
Thus, a devotee under the shelter of the Lord's internal energy engages
in the worship of Lord Hari in the mood of a servant and achieves true
happiness, and not otherwise.
Text 15
bhupd ucuh
nimer bhupasya bhupdh,
guroh sdpdn mrtasya ca
tddrse bhogdyatane
virdgah katham ucyatdm
The kings said: О ruler of men. King Nimi had to give up his life
as a result of the curse of his spiritual master, Vasistha. The question
is—how did he develop detachment from his body, which is the source of
all kinds of enjoyment: Why did he not agree to re-enter his body when
the demigods revived him?
Text 16
sisydsdpdt vasisthasya
dehdvaptir mrtasya ca
smyate kila muktandrh
janma bhakta vimuktatd


T H E G L O R I E S OF THE DEVOTEES OF LORD H A R I 
285
It has been heard that the great sage, Vasistha, also had to give up
his life because of the curse of his disciple, but then received another
body. The devotees of the Lord certainly attain liberation. How, after
liberation, does a devotee again take birth?
Text 17
ato bhagavati mdyd
durbodhyd vijitatmanam
vimohayanti samsdre
ndndwadi indrajdlavat
The illusory energy of the Supreme Lord is incomprehensible, even
to highly elevated sages. This mdya, with her variegatedness, bewilders
the entire world, just like an expert magician.
Text 18
iti tesdm vaco bhuyah
srutvd rdjd sasidhvajah
provdca vadatdm srestho
bhakti pravanayd dhiyd
Upon hearing these words of the kings, Sas'idhvaja, who was a very
eloquent speaker, continued his talks with a heart filled with devotion
for the Lord.
Text 19
sasidhvaja uvdca
bahundrh janmandmante
tirtha ksetrddi yogatah
daivdda bhavet sddhu sahgas
tasmdd isvara darsanam
King Sasidhvaja said: As a result of performing many pious activities
and visiting many holy places for many lifetimes, a person receives the
association of saintly persons by the grace of the Lord. By that sddhu-
sanga, he gradually becomes qualified to approach the Supreme Lord.
Text 20
tatah sdlokyatdm prdpya
bhajantyd drta cetasah


286 
SRI KALKI 
P I R A N A
bhuktta bhogan anupaman
bhakto bhavati samsrtau
Such a person ultimately attains the abode of Lord Visnu, where he
engages in the service of the Lord without impediment. A devotee of the
Lord enjoys a very blissful life and he achieves fame in this world as a
saintly person.
Text 21
rajojusah karmapara
hanpujd рол ah sada
tannamani pragayanti
tadnipa smaranotsukdh
Pure devotees worship Lord Han with great enthusiasm, incessantly
chant His holy names, and constantly try to keep the remembrance of His
transcendental form within their hearts.
Text 22
avataranu kirana
parvata vrata mahotsavah
bhagavadbliaku pujadhyah
paramanarida samplutah
They sometimes perform dramas of the pastimes performed by the
Lord's incarnations, they observe sacred vows such as EkadasI, and they
organize grand festivals wherein they worship the Lord with great pomp.
The devotees perform all of these activities with great pleasure
Text 23
ato moksan na vanchanti
distamuka phalodaydh
muktva labhante janmdru
hanbhava £>i akasakah
The devotees so much relish their engagement in devotional service
that they do not even care for liberation Sometimes liberated souls take
birth in this world JUSL to exhibit the truth of Krsna consciousness


T H E 
G L O R I E S OF THE DEVOTEES OF LORD H A R I 
?87
Text 24
hamupuh kseiraartha
pavana dharmatatparak
sarasara vidah sevya
seiaka dvauavigrahah
The devotees are non-ditterent trom Lord Han Even holy places of
pilgrimage become sanctified by their presence The devotees take the
essence of life, knowing very well that only dt-votional service to the Lord
can satisfy the self
Text 25
yathavatarah krsim^ya
tatha tatsevmarti iha
evam lasya mmisata
hla bhaktasya lotane
As Lord Krsna sometimes appears m this world, so His devotees also
come to this world on His behalf The Supreme Lord is always visible
withm the hearts of the pure devotees. This is one ot His pastimes
Text 26
muktasydpi icisisthasya
sarira bhajanadarah
etad vah kaihitam bhupa
mahatmyam bhaktibhaktayoh
It is tor this reason that the greaL sage, Vas'istha, although a liberated
soul, accepted a material body О kings, I have thus briefly described the
glories of devotional service and the Lord's devotees
Text 27
sadych papaharam pumsarn
hanbhakti uvarddhanam
sartendnyastha devanam
ananada
ката ragadi dusaghnam
maya moha ruvaranam


288 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
By hearing these discussions, all of one's sinful reactions are quickly
vanquished so that one's devotional service to Lord Hari is nourished. The
controlling deities of the various limbs of his body also become pleased
by such discussions. Such hearing counteracts all kinds of impediments,
such as lusty desires and ignorance.
Text 28
nandsdstra purana veda
vimala vydkhamrtdmbho nidharh
sarhmaihyd dram triloka
munayo vydsadayo bhdvukdh
krsne bhdvamananya mevam
amalarh haiyanga vinarh navarh
labdhvd sarhsrti nasanarh
tribhuvane sri krsna tulydyate
Exalted devotees throughout the three worlds, by following in the
footsteps of Srila Vyasadeva, have attained the platform of unalloyed
devotional service, which frees one from material bondage. Such devotion
is attained by churning the ocean of the Vedas, Purdnas, and the other
Vedic literature. Unalloyed devotees are considered to be as good as Lord
Krsna, due to being His dear associates.
Thus ends the translation of the twenty-sixth chapter of Sri Kalki
Purana.


C H A P T E R 
T W E N T Y - S E V E N
The Story of Dvivida Gorilla
King Sasidhvaja's Previous Birth as King Satrajit
Text 1
suta uvaca
hi bhupah sabhdyarh sah
kathayiwd nijdh kathdh
sasidhvajah pntamandh
prdha kalkirh krtanjalih
Suta GosvamI said: After happily narrating his story to all the
members of the assembly, King Sasidhvaja addressed Lord Kalki with
folded hands.
Text 2
sasidhvaja uvaca
warn hi ndtha trilokesa
ete bhupas tvadasrayah
mam tathaviddhi rajanarh
tvannidesa kararh hare
King Sasidhvaja said: My dear Lord ! О master of the three worlds, all
these kings are under Your protection. We are ready to carry out whatever
Your order.
Text3
tapastaptam у ami kdmarh
haridvdram munipriyam
ete matputra pautrdsca
pdlaniyds tvadasrayah
I now wish to go to Hardwara, which is very pleasing to the sages, and
execute penance. My sons and grandsons have taken shelter of You and
so please protect them.


290 
SRI K A U I 
PURANA
Text 4
mamdpi kdmarhjdnasi
pura jamvavato yaihd
nidhanarh dvividasyapi
tadd sarvarh suresvara
О Lord of the demigods, I know that You are already aware of my
intention. I am sure that You remember how in Your previous incarnation,
You had defeated Jambavan, the king of the bears, and killed Dvivida
gorilla.
Texts 5-6
ityukwa gantum udyuktarh
ЬЫгуауа. sahitarh nrpam
lajjayadho mukham kalkirh
prdhur bhiipdh kimityuta
he natha kinamenoktarh
yatccha wa wamadho mukhah
katharh tadbruhi kamam nab.
kirn vd nah sddhi samsaydt
When the king finished speaking and prepared to depart along with
his wife, Lord Kalki exhibited a mood of embarrassment and lowered
His head. Upon seeing this, the kings said: My dear Lord, what did King
Sas'idhvaja say to You just now? Why have You lowered your head after
hearing his words?
Text 7
kalkiruvdca
amum prcchata vo bhupd
yusmdkam sarhsayacchidam
sasidhvajam mahdprdjnarh
madbhakti krtaniscayam
Lord Kalki said: My dear kings, you should ask this question of
King Sasidhvaia. He will certainly clarify everything because he is very
intelligent and firmly devoted to Me.


T H E 
STORY OF D V I V I D A G O R I L L A 
291
Text 8
iti kalkervacah sruwd
te bhupah proktakarinah
rajanam tu puriah prdhuh
sarhsayapanna manasdh
Being advised by Lord Kalki in this way, the assembled kings turned
to King Sasidhvaja and spoke as follows.
Text 9
nrpa iicuh
kirn tvayd kathitarh rajan
sasidhvaja mahamate
katharh kalkis tadvadidarn
sruwaivdbhud adhomukhah
The kings said: You are certainly very intelligent. What did you say to
Lord Kalki, and why did He lower His head after hearing it?
Text 10
sasidhvaja uvdca
pura ramavatdre ca
laksmamd. indrajidvadham
moksamcd laksya dvivido
rdksasawdt sa ddruruxt
King Sasidhvaja said: At the time of Lord Ramacandra's manifest
pastimes, Laksmana killed Indrajit. As a result, this son of Ravana was
delivered from his life as a Raksasa.
Text 11
agnydgdre brahma vira
vatenaika hiko jvarah
laksmanasya sarirena
pravisto mohakdrakah
As a result of killing a brahmana with a fiery weapon, Laksmana was
afflicted by an incapacitating fever.


292 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
Text 12
tarn vydkulam abhipreksya
dvivido bhisajdrh varah
asvivarhseta safijdtah
svapayarnasa laksmanam
Upon seeing Laksmana in that pitiful condition, Dvivida gorilla,
who was a renowned physician belonging to the dynasty of the Asvinl-
kumaras, whispered a mantra into His ear.
Text 13
likhiwd rdmabhadrasya
samjndpatrim atandritah
laksmanam darsayamdsa
urdhvastisthan mahdbhujah
He also wrote down that mantra, placed it over Laksmana's head, and
asked Him to look at it.
Text 14
laksmano viksya tarn patnrh
vijvaro balavdna bhut
sa tato dvividarh prdka
vararh varaya vdnara
When Laksmana saw this mantra, His fever instantly subsided so that
He became completely cured. Laksmana then requested Dvivida Gorilla
to ask for a benediction.
Text 15
dvividas tadvacah srutvd
laksmanam prdha hrstavat
tvatto me maranarh prdrthyarh
vdnaratvdcca mocanam
In response, Dvivida Gorilla cheerfully said: I pray that I will die at
Your hands and thus be relieved of this lower form of body.
Text 16
punastam laksmanah prdha
mama janmdntare tava


T H E 
STORY OF D V I V I D A GORILLA 
293
mocanarh bhavatd kisa
balarama saririnah
To this, Laksmana said: When, in the future, I appear as Balarama,
you will be killed by Me and thus freed from your life as a monkey.
Text 17
samudrasyotare tire
dvivido ndma vdnarah
Anyone who writes "Dvivida Gorilla lives on the northern shore of
the salt ocean" on a palm leaf and gazes at it will be instantly cured of
his fever.
Text 18
id mantraksararh dvari
likhitvd tdlapatrake
yastu pasyati tasydpi
nasyatyaikd hikojvarah
If one simply writes this mantra and keeps it above his doorway so
that he sees it every day, he will also be cured of fever very easily.
Text 19
id tasya vararh labdhva
cirdyuh susthavdnarah
balardmdstra bhinndtmd
moksamdpd kudobhayam
Having received this benediction from Laksmana, Dvivida Gorilla
continued to live a long and healthy life. Ultimately, he was killed by
Lord Balarama and thus attained liberation.
Text 20
tathd ksetre sutaputro
nihato lomaharsar\ah
balardmdstra yuktdtmd
naimise'bhut svavdnchayd
Similarly, by his own will, Romaharsana Suta gave up his life at the
hands of Lord Balarama at Naimisaranya.


294 
SRI KALKI PURANA
Text 21
jdrhvavdrhsca purd bhupd
vamanatvam gate harau
tasydpyurdhva gatarh pddam
tatra cakre pradaksinam
О kings, when the incarnation of the Lord, Vamanadeva, covered the
three worlds with two steps, Jambavan circumambulated His raised foot.
Text 22
manojavarh tarn niriksya
vamanah praha vismitah
vnatto vrryu vararh kd
mrksadhlsa mahabala
Lord Vamana became astonished to witness his great speed and said:
О king of the bears, you are certainly very powerful. Now ask Me for a
benediction.
Text 23
hi tarn hrsta vadano
brahmdrhso jdmbuvdn mudd
praha bhoscakra dahanat
mama mrt^ur bhavisyati
Jambavan, who was an expansion of Lord Brahma, replied with great
pleasure: Please award me the benediction that I may die by means of
Your Sudars'ana cakra.
Text 24
ityukte vamanah praha
krsnajanmani me tava
moksas сактетш sambh.inna
sirasih sarhbhavisyati
Lord Vamana said: When I descend to the earth in My original form
as Lord Krsna, I will cut off your head with My cakra so that you will be
liberated from material existence.


T H E 
STORY OF D V I V I D A G O R I L L A 
295
Text 25
mama krsnavatare tu
suryabhaktasya bhupateh
satrajitastu manyartharh
durvadah samajayata
Thereafter, at the time of Lord Krsna's manifest pastimes, I took
birth as King Satrajit, a great devotee of the sun-god. Because of a rumor
spread by me, Lord Krsna's reputation became tarnished.
Text 26
prasenasya mama bhdrtri
vadhastu manihetukah
sirhhat tasyapi manyarthe
vadho )ambavata hrtah
I had a younger brother named Prasena. It so happened that Jambavan
killed a lion that had taken my precious jewel.
Text 27
durvada bhayabhitasya
krsnasya amita tejasah
manyanvesana dtasya
rksend Vhudrane vile
The unlimitedly powerful Lord Krsna, out of fear of defamation, was
searching for this jewel at this time. Finally, He came upon Jambavan
within a mountain cave and for the sake of the jewel, they fought.
Text 28
sa rdjesarh parijnuya
taccaka grasta bandhanam
mukto babhuva sahasa
krsnarh pasyat salaksmanam
The king of bears gradually came to recognize his worshipable Lord,
so that the duel ended peacefully. Thus, there was no need for Jambavan
to be killed by Lord Krsna's cakra. The king of bears attained liberation
simply by receiving the darsana of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.


296 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
Text 29
nova durbddala syamarh
drstvd praddt nijdtmajdm
tadd jdmvavata kanydm
pragrhya manind saha
Jambavan gave not only the jewel, but also his daughter, Jambavati, to
Lord Krsna, whose complexion was the color of tender durva grass.
Text 30
dvarakarh puramdgatya
sabhdyam mdmupa hvayat
dhuya mahyarh pradadau
manirh munigandrcdtam
Thereafter, Lord Krsna returned to Dvaraka and summoned me. He
returned the jewel to me, even though His queens would have certainly
cherished it.
Text 31
so'ham tdrh lajjayd tena
manina kanyakdrh svakam
vivdhena daddvasmai
Idvanydjja grhe mardm
I was embarrassed to discover that I had spread a false rumor about
the Lord. To save face, I insisted that the Lord keep the jewel, and I also
gave Him my daughter, Satyabhama, in marriage. The Lord graciously
accepted both from me.
Text 32
tarn satyabhdmdm dddya
manirh mayyarpya sa prabhuh
dvdrakdm dgatya punar
gajdhvayama gddvibhuh
After some time had passed, Lord Krsna returned the jewel to me and
went to Hastinapura, along with Satyabhama.


T H E STORY OF DVIVIDA GORILLA 
297
Text 33
gate krsne mam nihatya
satadhanva'grahin manim
ato'ham ihajdndmi
purvajanmani yat krtam
While the Lord was thus away from Dvaraka, a king named Satadhanva
killed me and took the jewel. I clearly remember everything that Lord
Kalki did in His previous incarnation.
Text 34
mithydbhi sdpdt krsriasya
nawdbhun mocanarh mama
ato'ham kalkirupdya
krsnasya paramdtmane
dattvd ramdrh satyabhdmd
rupiram ydmi sadgatim
I had falsely accused Lord Krsna of stealing my jewel and so I was not
liberated from material existence at the time of my death. Therefore, in
this lifetime, I will attain my goal by handing over my daughter, Rama,
the incarnation of Satyabhama, to Lord Kalki, the incarnation of Lord
Krsna.
Text 35
sudarsandstra ghdtena
maranam mama kamksitam
marane'bhuditi jndtvd
rane vdnchdmi mocanam
I had hoped to be killed by Lord Krsna's Sudarsana cakra. I was
convinced that if I was killed by Him in battle, then I would attain
liberation.
Text 36
^ ityasau jagatdmlsah
kalkih svasura ghdtanam
srutvaivadho mukhastasthau
hviyd dharmabhiyd prabhuh


298 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
After hearing how He had sanctioned the killing of His father-in-
law, Lord Kalki, the master of the universe, exhibited embarrassment by
lowering His head out of fear of defamation.
Text 37
atydscaryam apurvam uttamam
idarh srutvd nrpd vismita lokah
sarhsadi harsitd muniganah
kalker gundkarsiiah dkhydnam
poramddarena sukhadarh
dhanydm yasasyarh pararh
snmad bhv.pa sasidhvajerita
vaco moksapradarh cd'bhavat
All the assembled kings became very pleased and astonished while
hearing this wonderful story while the sages became so absorbed in
contemplating Lord Kalki's transcendental qualities that they forgot
their separate existence. Those who hear this story as narrated by King
Sas'idhvaja will be awarded happiness, fame, and prosperity in this lifetime,
and ultimately attain liberation from material existence.
Thus ends the translation of the twenty-seventh chapter of Sri Kalki
Purana.


C H A P T E R 
T W E N T Y - E I G H T
Lord Kalki Travels to Kancananagara
Where He Delivered Visakanya
Text 1
suta uvdca
tatah kalkir mahdtejdh
svasurarh tarn sasidhvajam
samdmantrya vacascitraih
saha bhupair yayau harih.
Suta Gosvami said: Lord Kalki satisfied His father-in-law, King
Sasidhvaja, by His pleasing talks, and then departed, along with the
kings.
Text 2
sasidjvajo vararh labdhva
yathdkamarh mahesvaraim
stutvd maydrh tyakta mdyah
sapriyah prayayau vanam
King Sasidhvaja received a benediction from Lord Kalki that enabled
him to free himself from the bondage of the Lord's illusory energy, maya,
by offering her suitable prayers. After some time, he decided to go and
reside in the forest, along with his wife.
Text3
kaikih seruiganaih sdrddhath
prayayau kdficanirh purim
giri durgdsthandrh guptdrh
bhogibhir visavarsibhih
Lord Kalki and His vast army proceeded toward the city of
Kancananagara, which was located in a valley and surrounded by high
mountains. The unique feature of this city was that it was protected by
poisonous serpents.


300 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
Texts 4-5
viddrya durgam saganah
kalkih para puranjayah
chitwd visdyudhdnvdnais
tarn purirh dadrse'cyutah
manikdncana citrddhydrh
ndgakanyd gandvrtdm
haricandana vrksddhydrh
manujaih parivarjitdrh
Lord Kalki, the conqueror of His enemies, penetrated the fort at
Kancananagara and killed all the poisonous snakes. Then He entered
the city, along with His army, and saw that it was lavishly decorated with
jewels and gold. Many young girls (Nagakanyas) were seen roaming here
and there, and there were innumerable wish-fulfilling trees. And yet, the
Lord could not find even a single human being.
Text 6
vilokya kalkih prahasan
prdha bhupan kimityaho
sarpasyeyarh puri ramyd
nardndrh bhayaddyini
ndgandri gand kirnd
kirn ydsydmo vadantivaha
Lord Kalki smiled and said: Look at this wonderful city, which is the
abode of serpents. It is very pleasant for Me to behold, but it would be
a great cause of fear to human beings. I only see Nagakanyas. Should we
continue to tour the city?
Texts 7-8
id. karttavyatd vyagrarh
ramdndtharhharirh prabhum
bhupdrhs tadanu rupdrhsca
khe vdgdhd saririni
vilokya nemdrh senabhih
pravestum bhostvamarhasi


LORD K A L K I 
T R A V E L S TO K A N C A N A N A G A R A 
301
Warn, vinanye marisyanti
visakanya drsddapi
As Lord Kalki, the husband of Rama, and the kings were contemplating
what to do, they suddenly heard a voice from the sky announce: My dear
Lord Hari, it would be better for Your army not to enter this city because
everyone, except for You, would die from the poisonous glances of the
Nagakanyas.
Text 9
dkdsa vdnimd karnya
kalkih suka sahdyakrt
yaydvekah khadga dharas
taragena tvardnvitah
After hearing this unembodied voice, Lord Kalki unsheathed His
sword and entered the city on horseback with His parrot as His only
companion.
Text 10
gawd tdm dadrse virdrh
dhirdnam dharya ndsinim
rupena laksya laksmisarh
prdha prahasi tdnand
After going a short distance, the Lord came upon an enchanting
young girl, whose beauty could certainly distract the mind of even a great
scholar. As soon as this girl saw the all-attractive Lord Kalki, she smiled
and spoke as follows.
Text 11
visakanyovdca
sarhsdro'smin mama nayanayor
viksana ksina dehd lokd
bhapdh kati kati gata
rnatyu matyugra virydh sdharh
diridsura suranara preksana
premahina te netrabja
dvayarasasudhd sdvitd warn namdmi


302 
SRI KALKI PURANA
The Visakanya said: So far, hundreds of powerful kings have traversed
to difficult path to the abode of Yamaraja after being burnt to ashes by my
glance. Because of this, I feel that there is no one more unfortunate and
miserable than I. It seems that I will never be able to receive the love of a
male human being, demigod, or demon. Still, I feel soothing relief because
of Your magnanimous glance, and so I offer my obeisances unto You.
Text 12
kvdharh viseksand dmd
kvdmrteksana sangamah
bhave'smin bhdgyahindydh
kendho tapasa krtah
Because my glance is full of poison, I am most unfortunate and
wretched. On the other hand, Your glance is full of nectar. I do not know
what pious acts I performed in the past so that now I am able to see You.
Text 13
kalkiruvaca
ktisi kalyani susroni
kasmddesd gatistava
bruhi radrh karmand kena
visanetrarh tavabhavat
Lord Kalki said: О beautiful one, who are you? Who is your father?
What is the cause of your misfortune? What did you do so that now you
possess a poisonous glance?
Text 14
visakanyovdca
citragrwasya bharydharn
gandharvasya mahdmate
sulocaneti vikhydta
patyur atyanta kamadd
The Visakanya said: О magnanimous one, my name is Sulocana. The
Gandharva, Citragrlva, is my husband. Previously, I was quite happily
engaged in satisfying my husband in all regards.


LORD KALKI 
TRAVELS TO KANCANANAGARA 
303
Texts 15-16
ekdddham vimdnena
patyd pithena sangatd
gandhamadana kunjesu
reme kama kaldkuld
tatra yaksa mumm drstva
vikrta kdram dturam
rupa yauvana garvena
kataksena'hasam maddt
One day, I went to the Gandhamadana Mountain with my husband,
traveling in a celestial chariot. We then entered a delightful grove and
began enjoying amorous pastimes on a slab of stone. Suddenly, the sage
Yaksa appeared on the path of my vision. Being very proud of my beauty
and youthfulness, and upon seeing the sage's deformed body, I ridiculed
him while glancing at him with malice.
Text 17
sopalambhuirh munih sruwd
vacananca mamdpriyam
sasapa mam krudha tatra
tendham visadaisana
The sage became enraged while hearing my taunts, and so he cursed
me. As a result of his curse, my glance became poisonous.
Text 18
niksiptdham sarpapure
kdncanydm ndginigane
patihind dawahind
cardmi visavarsini
Ever since that time, I have resided in this city of Kancananagara, in
the association of female poisonous serpents. I am very unfortunate to be
without my husband. Wherever I glanced, rays of poison would emanate
from my eyes.
Text 19
na jane kena tapasd
bhavaddrsti patharh gatd


304 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
tyakta sapamrtaksaharh
patilokarh vrajamyatah
I do not know what kind of austerity I previously performed so that
now I am able to have Your darsana. As a result of seeing You, I have been
relieved of my curse, so that my vision is no longer poisonous. Indeed, it
is now full of nectar and so I would like to return to my husband.
Text 20
aho tesamastu sdpah
prasado ma satdmiha
patyuh sapadryer moksat
tava paddvja darsanam
A saintly person's curse is actually a manifestation of his mercy. I now
understand that the sage's curse was actually a blessing. As a result of the
sage's curse, I was able to see You face to face.
Text 21
ityukwd sd yayau svargarh
vimdnen arkavarcasd
kalkistu tatpurddhisam
nrpam cakre mahamatim
After saying this, the Visakanya boarded an effulgent celestial chariot
and departed for the heavenly planets. Lord Kalki then entrusted the
responsibility of ruling Kancananagara to King Mahamati.
Text 22
amarsas tatsuto dhimdn
sahasro ndma tatsutah
sahasratah sutascdsid
rdjd visruta vdnasih
Mahamati's son was Amarsa, whose son was Saharsa. The son of
exalted Saharsa was named Asi.
Texts 23-26
vrhannaldndrh bhupdndrh
sarhbhuta yasya varhsajdh


к
л
LORD KALKI 
TRAVELS 
TO KANCANANAGARA 
305
tarn manurh bhupasdrdularh
ndndmuni ganairvrtah
ayodhyaydrh cabhisicya
mathurdmd gamaddharih
tasydrh bhuparh surya ketum
abhisicya mahdprabham
bhuparh cakre tato gawd
devdpirh vd.rarw.vate
aristhalarh vrkasthalarh
makandanca gajdhvayam
pancadesesvaram krtvd
harih sambhalam dyayau
saumbharh paundrarh pulindanca
surdstrarh magadharh tathd
kavi prdjna bumantubhyah
pradadau bhrdtrvatsalah
Lord Hari enthroned Kings Manu, who belonged to dynasty
descending from Vrhannala, as the ruler of Ayodhya, and then returned
to Mathura with the sages. The Lord installed King Suryaketu as the
ruler of Mathura and then departed for Varanavata. There, He installed
King Devapi as the ruler of Arithala, Vrkasthala, Makanda, Hastinapura,
and Varanavata. Lord Kalki, exhibiting affection toward His brothers,
installed Kavi, Prajna, and Sumantu as the rulers of the Saumbhas,
Paundras, Surastras, Pulindas, and Magadhas.
Text 27
kikatarh madhya kamdtam
andhra modrarh kalingakarh
angarh vangarh svagotrebhyah
pradadau jagadisvarah
Lord Kalki also installed other relatives as the rulers of Kikata, interior
Karnataka, Andhra, Modra, Kalinga, Angam, and Banga.


306 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
Text 28
svayarh sambhala madhyastha
kahkakena kaldpakdn
desarh visdkhayupaya
prdddtkalkih pratdpavdn
Thereafter, the unlinutedly powerful Lord Kalki continued to
reside at Sambhala, and He give Kankanadesa and Kalapadesa to King
Visakhayupa to rule.
Text 29
cola varvara karvdkhydn
dvdrako desa madhyagdn
putrebhyah pradadau kalkih
krtavarm puraskrtdn
Later on, Lord Kalki ordered His son, Krtavarma, to rule numerous
other kingdoms, such as Cola, Varvara, and Karva, which were under the
jurisdiction of Dvaraka.
Text 30
pitre dhandm ratndni
dadau parama bhakatah
prajndh samasvdsya hanh
samhhala grdmavdsina
Lord Kalki respectfully offered heaps of jewels and other kinds of
wealth to His father, and indeed, He satisfied all the citizens of Sambhala.
He then continued to happily reside there as a householder, along with
His wives, Rama and Padmavatl. It was at this time that Satya-yuga
recommenced.
Texts 31-32
padmayd rarnayd kalkir
grhastho mumude bhrsam
dharmas catuspdda bhavat
krtapurnarhjagattrayam
devd yathokta phaladds
cararhti bhuvi sarvatah


LORD KALKI TRAVELS TO KANCANANAGARA 
307
sarvasasyd vasumati
hrsta pusta janavrta
sdthyd cauryyd nrtair hind
ddhi vyadhi vivarjitd
The demigods resumed moving about freely, bestowing benedictions
upon their worshipers. The fields became filled with food grains as
prosperity reigned throughout the world. Everyone became happy and
well-nourished. Cheating, stealing, lies, duplicity, natural disasters, and
disease vanished from the face of the earth.
Text 33
viprd vedavidah sumangah.
yutd ndryastu cdryd vrataih
pujd homa pardh pativrata
dhard ydgodyatdh ksatriydh
vaisyd vastusu dharmato
vinimayaih sri visnupujdpardh
sudrdstu dvija sevandd hari
kathdldpdh saparydpardh
The brahmanas resumed studying the Vedas, the ladies performed
religious rituals, executed holy vows, and participated in the sacrificial
performances of their husbands. In this way, the ladies remained chaste
and pious. The ksatriyas engaged themselves in the performance of fire
sacrifices. The vaisyas worshiped Lord Hari with great pomp, and the
sudras maintained themselves by serving the higher three classes of men.
By serving the brahmanas, the sudras received the opportunity of hearing
the glories of Lord Hari and taking part in His worship.
Thus ends the translation of the twenty-eighth chapter of Sri Kalki
Purana.


C H A P T E R 
T W E N T Y - N I N E
Prayers Offered to Maya-Devi, and
the Deliverance Of King Sasidhvaja
Text 1
saunaka rsi uvdca
sasidhvajo rrmhdrdjah
srutvd mdyarh gatdh krtah
kd vd mdydstutih suta
vada tatwaviddrh vara
yd watkathd visnukathd
vaktvyd sd visuddhaye
Saunaka Rsi said: О Suta, where did King Sasidhvaja go after offering
prayers to Maya-devi? You only speak for the glorification of Lord Hari
and you certainly know the truth of this matter. Please describe to us
these prayers offered to Maya-devi.
Text 2
suta uvdca
srnudhvarh munayah sarve
mdkandeyaya prcchate
sukah prdha visuddhdtmd
mdydstavam anuttamam
Suta GosvamI said: О sages, long ago, at the request of the great
sage, Markandeya, the great soul, Sukadeva GosvamI, had narrated these
excellent prayers offered to Maya-devi. Please listen attentively as I repeat
them to you.
Text3
tacchrnusva pravaksydmi
yathddhtam yathdsrutam
sarvakdma pradarh nanarh
papatdpa vindsanam


PRAYERS 
OFFERED TO MAYA-DEVI 
309
It is the duty of the spiritual master to simply faithfully repeat
whatever he has heard from his predecessors. By reciting these prayers,
all one's desires will be fulfilled and the miseries of material existence will
be vanquished.
Text 4
suka uvdca
bhalldpx nagararh tyaktvd
visnu bhakta sasidhvajah
dima samsdra moksdya
mdyds tavamalarh jagau
Sukadeva Gosvami said: King Sas'idhvaja, who was an unalloyed
devotee of Lord Hari, left the city of Bhallata and while residing in the
forest, recited these prayers to Maya-devI, desiring to attain liberation
from material existence.
Text 5
sasidhvaja uvdca
от hvirhkdrdrh satwasdrdrh
visuddhdm brahmddindrh
mdtararh vedabodhydm
tanvirh svdhdrh bhuta
tanmdtrakaksdrh vande vandydrh
deva gandharva siddhaih
King Sasidhvaja said: I offer my obeisances unto the goddess who is
invoked by the sound vibration hnrh. She is situated in pure goodness as
the cause of Brahma, Visnu and Siva, and she is the truth to be known by
all the Vedas. Her form is subtly worshiped by the chanting of svaha. The
five gross and three subtle elements are present within her abdomen. She
is worshiped by the best of demigods and Gandharvas.
Text 6
lokdtitdm dvaitabhutdrh samide
bhutair bhavydrh vydsa sdtdtapddyaih
vidvad gitdrh kdla kallola loldrh
lildpdnga ksipta samsdra durgdm


310 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
I glorify Maya-devI, who is situated beyond the limits of this material
universe, who is simultaneously one with and different from the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is praised by great sages such as Vyasa
and Satatapa, as well as all intelligent human beings, who conducts the
activities of the conditioned souls by the waves of time, and by whose
sidelong glance the people of this world remain as if drowning in the
ocean of material existence.
Text 7
purnarh prdpydma dvaita labhyarh
saranydm ddye sese madhyato yd
vibhdti ndndrupair deva tiryan manusyais
tamddhdrdrh brahmarupdrh namdmi
I offer my obeisances to Goddess BhagavatI ,who can never be fully
understood, who is the maintainer of the surrendered souls, who remains
as she is before the material creation, during its maintenance, and after
the dissolution, who expands into different forms of demigods, human
beings, and lower species, who is the shelter of everyone, and who appears
in a multitude of forms.
Text 8
yasyd bhdsd trijagadbhdti bhutaima
bhdtye tattada bhdve vidhatuh
kdlo daivarh karma copddhayo ye
tasyarh. bhdsd tarn visistdm namdmi
I offer my obeisances unto the goddess by whose prowess the three
worlds became manifested from the five gross material elements. It is by
her influence that time, providence, and actions are made possible.
Text 9
bhumau gandho rasatdpsu
pratisthd ruparh tejasyeva
vdyau sprsatvam khe
sabdo vd yacvidd bhdsti
ndndtd mabhyetdrh
visvampdrh namdmi


PRAYERS 
OFFERED TO MAYA-DEVI 
311
By her will, the earth manifests the property of fragrance, water the
property of taste, fire the property of form, air the property of touch, and
sky the property of sound. She is the form of the universe and thus she
has entered into everything manifested within the cosmic manifestation.
My humble obeisances to this goddess.
Text 10
sdvitn warn brahmampd bhavani
bhutesasya sri pateh sri svarupdh
saa sukasydpi ndkesvarasya
patni sresthd bhdsi mdye jagatsu
You are Savitrl, the consort of Brahma, who was born on the universal
lotus flower. You are ParvatI, the consort of Siva, Rama, the consort of
Lord Visnu, and Sad the consort of Indra, the king of the demigods. О
goddess, you have expanded your influence to manifest the universe.
Text 11
bdlye bald yuvati yauvane warn
vdrddhakye >'a sthavird kdlakalpd
ndndkdrair ydgayogair updsyd
jndndtitd kdmarupd vibhdsi
You are a small girl in childhood, a grown-up girl in youth, and an
elderly lady in old age. You are the personification of eternal time. People
worship you by employing various procedures. You are situated beyond
the reach of the mundane mind, senses, and power of speech.
Text 12
varenyd warn varada lokasiddhyd
sddhvi dhanyd lokamanyd sukanyd
candi durgd kdlikd kdlikdkhyd
nanddese rupavesair vibhdsi
You are the most beloved goddess because you easily bestow
benedictions upon your worshipers. Indeed, you award perfection
to everyone, according to their aspirations. You are chaste, glorious,
worshipable, beautiful, and young, and you appear in various forms with
appropriate names, such as Candi, Durga, and Kali.


312 
SRI KALKI PURANA
Text 13
tava corona sarojarh devi devddivandyarh
yadi hrdayasaroje bhdvayantiha bhaktyd
srutiyuga kuhare vd sarhsrutarh dharmasampaj
janayati jagadddye sarvasiddhinca tesdm
О worshipable goddess of the world, if one devotedly meditates on
Your lotus feet, which are adored by the demigods, as being situated
within one's heart, or if one simply hears your name, he will certainly
proceed on the path to material prosperity.
Text 14
mdydstavam idam punyarh
suka devena bhasitam
mdrkandeytida vdpydpi
siddhirh lebhe sasidhvajah
Sukadeva GosvamI thus recited this glorification of Maya-devl.
Having received these prayers from the sage, Markandeya, King Sasidhvaja
attained the perfection of life.
Text 15
kokdmukhe tapastaptvd
harirh dhydtvd vandntare
sudarsanena nihato
vaikuntharh saranarh yayau
King Sasidhvaja performed severe austerities at a place known as
Kokamukha. He fixed his mind on the transcendental form of Lord Hari
so that ultimately, he attained the Lord's eternal abode, Vaikuntha, after
being slain by the Sudarsana cakra.
Thus ends the translation of the twenty-ninth chapter of Sri Kalki
Purana.
I


C H A P T E R 
T H I R T Y
Lord Kalki And Visnuyasa Perform Sacrifices
Instructions by Narada Muni
Text 1
suta uvdca
etad vah kathitam viprah
sasidhvaja vimoksanam
kalkeh kathdma pratimdrh
srnvantu vivudhar sabhah
Suta GosvamI said: О brahmanas, I have thus described the
liberation of King Sasidhvaja. Now I will continue to narrate Lord Kalki's
transcendental pastimes.
Text 2
vedo dharmah krtayugarh
devd lokds caracarah
hrstdh pustah susantustah
kalkau rajani cabhavan
With Lord Kalki sitting upon the royal throne, the Vedas, religious
principles, Satya-yuga personified, the demigods, and indeed all other
moving and non-moving living entities became greatly satisfied.
Texts 3-4
ndnd devddi lingesu
bhusanair bhusitesu ca
indrajaiikavad vrtti
kalpakdh pujakd janah
na santi mayarnohadhydh
pdsandah sadhuvancakah
tilakdrdta sarvangdh
kalkau rajani kutraat
In the previous yuga, the brahmanas had worshiped the demigods,
and to bewilder the masses of people, they had displayed some miniscule


314 
SRI" KALKI 
P U R A N A
mystic powers. During the reign of Lord Kalki, all such cheating practices 
j
were stopped so that no atheists or hypocrites could be seen within His
kingdom.
Text 5
sambhale vasatastasya
padmaya ramaya saha
prdha visnuyasah putrarh
devdn yasturh jagaddhitdn
Lord Kalki thus happily resided in the city of Sambhala. One day, His
father said: О benefactor of the demigods and all the people of the world,
we should perform a grand sacrifice for the welfare of the earth.
Texts 6-7
tatcchrtvd prdha pitararh
kalkih par атаках sitah
vinaydvanato bhutvd
dharma kdmdrtha siddhaye
rdjasuyor vdjapeyoir
asvemedhair mahdmakhaih 
;
ndndydgaih karmatantrair 
*
ije kratupatirh harim 
' x
Being thus ordered by His father, Lord Kalki very humbly said: I will
worship Lord Hari by performing the Rajasuya, asvamedha, and other
sacrifices, which are prescribed in the karma-kanda sections of the Vedas,
so that everyone can advance in the three objectives of life—religiosity,
economic development, and sense gratification.
Texts 8-9
krpardma vasisthdsisthddyair
vydsa dhaumydkrta vraruah
asvatthdma madhucchando
mandapdlair mahdtmanah
gangd yamunayor madhye
sndtvdva bhrthamddardt


L O R D 
K A L K I 
A N D 
V I S N U Y A S A 
P E R F O R M 
S A C R I F I C E S 
315
daksindbhih samabhyarcya
brdhmandn vedapdragdn
Lord Kalki first worshiped all the sages, headed by Krpa, Parasurama,
Vyasa, Vasistha, Dhaumya, Akrtavrana, Asvatthama, Madhucchanda,
and Mandapala, as well as those brahmanas who were learned scholars
of the Vedas. He then arranged to perform a sacrifice at a place located
between the Ganges and Yamuna. After taking a ritualistic bath, He gave
sufficient daksina to everyone.
Texts 10-13
carvyaiscosyaisca peyaisca
pupa saskuli ydvakaih
madhu mdmsair mulaphalair
ramyaisca vividhair dvijdn
bhojaydmdsa vidhivat
sawakarma samrddhibhih
yatra vanhirvrtah pake
varuno jalado marut
parivestd dvijdn kdmaih
sadannddyair tosayat
vddyair nrtyaisca gitaisca
patiyajna mahotsavaih
kalkih kamala patrdksah
praharsah pradadau vasu
stnbdla sthavirddibhyah
sarvebhyasca yathocitam
Lord Kalki sumptuously fed all the brahmanas the four kinds of food
that are chewed, licked, sucked, and drank, and this included vegetable
preparations, soup, cakes, meat, fruit, roots, and many other items. The
sacrifice was then performed exactly as prescribed by the scriptures.
During this great sacrifice, Agni acted as the cook, Varuna distributed
water to the guests, and Anila served the food. The lotus-eyed Lord Kalki
pleased everyone by feeding them very delicious food and arranging for
entertainment with dancing, singing, and music. The mood was one of


316 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
great merriment and at the conclusion, everyone, including the young,
elderly, and women, received gifts of wealth.
Texts 14-15
rambhd taladhard nandi
huhur gdyati nrtyati
dattva dandrd pdtrebhyo
brdhmanebhyah sa isvarah
uvdsa tire gangdydh
pitrvakydnu moditah
sabhaydrh visnuyasasah
purvardja kathdh priydh
At this sacrificial performance, Rambha danced, Nandi played
musical instruments, and the Gandharva, Huhu, sang very melodiously.
Lord Kalki, the maintainer of the world, gave charity to the brahmanas
and others as He continued to reside on the banks of the Ganges under
the order of His father. The brahmanas sang narrations of former pious
kings in that assembly, which was presided over by Visnuyas'a. One day,
the great sage, Narada, who is worshiped by the demigods, arrived there,
playing his vina.
Texts 16-17
kathayanto hasantasca
harsayanto dvijd budhdh
tatrdgatas tumburund
ndradah surapujitah
tarn pujaydmdsa mudd
pitrd saha yathd vidhi
tau sampujya visnuyasdh
provdca vinaydnvitah
ndradam vaisnavam pntyd
vindpdnirh mahdmunim
Visnuyas'a cheerfully greeted the exalted sage and then worshiped
him in a mood of humility and devotion. He then addressed the great
sage, Narada, who is a topmost Vaisnava and master of the vlna.


L O R D 
K A L K I 
A N D 
V I S N U Y A S A 
P E R F O R M 
S A C R I F I C E S 
317
Text 18
visnuyasa uvdca
aho bhdgyam aha bhagyarh
mama janma satarjitam
bhavaddhidhdnarh purndndrh
yanme mohdya darsanam
Visnuyasa said: That I am seeing you present here must be the result
of pious activities performed by me during countless previous lifetimes.
Although you are self-satisfied and thus have nothing to accomplish, I
believe that you have come here to deliver me from material existence.
Text 19
adyagnayasca suhutds
trptdsca pitarah param
devdsca parisantustds
tavdveksana pujanat
Today, my forefathers must be very pleased, for I have received
your darsana and the opportunity to worship you. Today, my offering ot
oblations into the sacrificial fire has born fruit. Today, all the demigods
must be pleased with me.
Text 20
yatpujaydrh bhavet pujyo
visnur janma darsanam
pdpasarhgham sparsandcca
kimaho sddhusangamah
A conditioned soul is very rarely blessed with the association of a
devotee like you. By worshiping you. Lord Hari is worshiped. Your darsana
ensures the cessation of the cycle of repeated birth and death in this
world. You touch destroys all sinful reactions.
Text 21
sddhundrh hrdayarh dharmo
vdco devdh sandtandh
karmaksaydm ca karmdni
yatah sddhur harih svayam


318 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
The heart of a saintly person is the abode of religious principles, his
words are those of the eternal Lord, and his activities destroy the reactions
of karma. Therefore, a saintly person is non-different from Lord Han.
Text 22
manye na bhautiko deho
vaisnavasya jagattreye
yathdvatare krsnasya
sato dusta vimgrahe
When Lord Krsna appears in this world as an incarnation to annihilate
the miscreants, His body is fully transcendental. Similarly, the body of a
Vaisnava, even in this world, is transcendental and thus eternal, and not
made of the five gross material elements.
Text 23
prcchami tvdmato brahman
mayd samsara vdndhau
naukdydm visnubhaktya ca
karnadhdro'si parakrt
You are the expert captain of the ship of devotional service to the
Lord that can take one across the ocean of material existence. My dear
sage, kindly allow me to inquire from you about the purpose of the human
form of life.
Text 24
kendhdm ydtanagdrdt
nirvana padam uttamam
lapsyamiha jagad bandho
karmana sarma tadvad
О well-wisher of everyone, how can I free myself from the
entanglement of material existence so that I can attain the platform of
eternal existence? I know this to be my actual self-interest.
Text 25
narada uvdca
aho balavati mayd
sarvascarya mayi subhah


LORD KALKI AND VISNUYASA PERFORM SACRIFICES 
319
pitaram mdtaram visnur
nawa muncanti karhiat
Narada Muni said: Alas! How strong is the illusory energy of the Lord,
mayal She works in an extraordinary manner and must be considered
most auspicious. How astonishing it is that the father of the Supreme Lord
is inquiring from me about the means of his deliverance from illusion!
Text 26
purno ndrayano yasya
sutah kalkir jagatpatih
tarn vihaya visnuyasa
matto muktim abhipsati
Visnuyasa has attracted Lord Kalki, the incarnation of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Narayana, and master of the universe, making
Him act as his son, and still, he is inquiring about liberation from me.
Text 27
vwicyattham brahmasutah
praha brahmaya sasutam
vivikte visnuyasasam
brahmasampad vwirddhanam
The great sage, Narada, the son of Brahma, thought over this matter
for some moments with a bemused smile and then began his spmtual
instructions to Visnuyasa, the son of Brahmayasa, in a secluded place.
Text 28
narada uvdca
dehdvasane jwam sa
drstva dehava lamvanam
mayaya karttum icchantam
yanme tacchrnu moksadam
vmdhyadrau ramam bhuwa
mayouvaca yathecchaya
Narada Muni said: I will now repeat to you what Maya-devI once
said to a living entity when she saw him desiring another material body
after giving up his old and useless one at death. One who hearv this


320 
SRI KALKI PURANA
conversation between Maya-devI and the living entity will be liberated
from material entanglement. Once, at the Vindhya Mountain, Maya-devI
assumed the form of an ordinary woman and began to speak.
Text 29
mayovdca
ham maya maya tyaktah
katham jivitum icchasi
Maya-devI said: I am Maya-devI, the destroyer of your life. Considering
this, why do you want to accept another material body?
Text 30
]iva uvaca
sdham jwamyaham maye
kaye'smin pvanasraye
ahamityanyatha buddhir
vind deham katham bhavet
The ]lva said: О Maya-devI, I want to have another material body
because it is my only shelter. Without a material body, how could one
thmk in terms of "I" and "mine"?
Text 31
mayovaca
dehavandhe yatha slesdt
tatha buddhh katham tava
mayadhinam vina cesta
vmstam te kuto vada
Maya-devI said. You identify the body as the self because your
intelligence is now polluted. All your endeavors are made under the
direction of maya, but if you free yourself from her influence, you can
attain a higher platform of existence.
Text 32
jwa uvaca
mam vina prajnata maye
prakasa visayasprha


L O R D 
K A L K I 
A N D V I S N U Y A S A 
P E R F O R M 
S A C R I F I C E S 
321
The ]lva said: О Maya-devI, without me, your wisdom, manifestations,
and desires for material enjoyment would never fructify.
Text 33
mdyovdca
mdyaya jwati naras
cestate hatacetanah
ruhsarah saravad bhdti
gajabhukta kapitthavat
Maya-devI said: The living entities move like machines, by the
influence of maya, they live in the arrangement of maya, and they appear
to be like wood apples eaten by an elephant because their bodies are
temporary.
Text 34
]iva uvaca
mama samsarga jata warn
папа пата svarupini
mam vimndasi kim mudhe
svairmi svaminam yatha
The )iva said: О fool, your very existence, and so what to speak of
your various names and forms, is because of me. As an unchaste wife
blasphemes her husband, why are you criticizing me
7
Text 35
mamabhdve tavabhavah
prodyat surye tamo yatha
mamavarya vibhasi warn
vavim navaghano yatha
As darkness remains only in the absence of the sun, so without me,
you have no existence. You have covered me, just as a dark cloud covers
the sun.
Text 36
hlavija kusulasi mama maye
jaganmaye nddyante
madhyato bhdsi
nanatvadindra jalavat


322 
SRI KALKI 
P U R A N A
О Maya-devI, you are like the bark of the tree of pastimes in this
world, you create a sense of duality, and you remain unchanged, even as
the universe progresses through the stages of creation, maintenance, and
destruction.
Text 37
evam nirvisayam ratyam
mono vyapara varjitam
abhautikamajwanca
sanram viksya sa'tyajat
Even though Maya-devI sees the living entities' eternal forms, which
are devoid of mental concoction and free from the propensity for material
enjoyment, she awards them temporary material bodies.
Text 38
tyaktvd mam sa dadau
sapamiti lake tavapriya
na sthmrbhavita kastha
kudyopama kathancana
While destroying his material body at the time of death, Maya-devI
cursed this living entity, saying: My dear soul, you will never have a
permanent existence in this world, for you will be little better than a
piece of wood or a wall.
Text J9
sa mayo, tava putrasya
kalker visvatmanah prabhoh
tarn vijnaya yathdkdmam
cara gam hanbhavanah
(The great sage Narada Muni said:) Such is the illusory energy of
your son, Lord Kalki, who is the life and soul of the universe. Try to
understand the workings of Maya-devI so that you will be able to live in
this world freely after surrendering yourself unto Lord Han.
Text 40
nira.se nirmamah santah
sarvabhogesu rusprhah


L O R D 
K A L K I 
A N D 
V I S N U Y A S A 
P E R F O R M 
S A C R I F I C E S 
323
visnau jandidam jnatvd
visnur ]agati vdsakrt
dtmanydm atmanam avesya
sarvato birato bhava
If you can see how you are being controlled by maya, this will help free
you from desiring to enjoy the fruits of your karma. Genuine knowledge
leads to detachment from material ambitions. Know for certain that the
universe is situated in the energy of Lord Han, and that Lord Han has
entered the universe to sustain it. You should therefore fix your mind on
the Supersoul after renouncing all material engagements.
Text 41
evam tarn visnu yasasam
amantrya ca mumsvarau
kalhm pradaksimkrtya
jagmatuh kapilasramam
After instructing Visnuyasa in this way, the great sage, Narada,
departed for Kapilasrama after circumambulating Lord Kalki.
Text 42
naradentam akarnya
kalkim sutam anuttamam
narayanam jagannatham
vanam visnuyasa yayau
Visnuyasa could understand from the words of the great sage, Narada,
that his son, Kalki, was truly the incarnation of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Lord Han. After some time, he gave up his family life and
left home to reside within the forest.
Text 43
gawd vadarikdranyam
tapastapwa sudarunam
jwam vrhati samyojya
pumas tatyaja bhautikam


324 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
He went to Badankasrama and performed severe austerities there. He
united his self with the Supreme Self by means of bhakti-yoga, and then
relinquished his material body after achieving perfection.
Text 44
mrtam svaminam ahngaya
sumatih snehaviklava
vwesa dahana sadhvi
sarvesair dwi samstuta
The chaste wife, Sumati, embraced the dead body of her husband and
thus entered his funeral pyre. The denizens of the heaven praised her
very highly for this courageous act.
Text 45
kalkih srutva mummukhat
pitror mryarmm isvarah
savaspa nayanam snehat
tayoh samakarat knyam
When Lord Kalki heard the news of His parents' demise, He appeared
to become overwhelmed by grief so that tears rolled down His cheeks. As
a dutiful son, the Lord performed the last rites of His parents.
Text 46
padmaya ramaya kalkih
sambhale suravanchite
cakara rajyam dharmdtma
lokaveda puraskrtah
Lord Kalki, who set the example by perfectly observing the codes of
good conduct, continued to reside in the village of Sambhala, which was
desired by even the demigods of heaven. He lived with PadmavatI and
Rama as He continued to rule His kingdom.
Text 47
mahendra sikharadramas
tirtha paryatanddrtah
prayat kalker darsanartham
sambhalam tirtha tirthakrt


LORD KALKI AND VISNUYASA PERFORM SACRIFICES 
325
Meanwhile, Lord Paras'urama, who resides at Mount Mahendra and
whose presence purifies holy places of pilgrimage, arrived at Sambhala,
desiring to see Lord Kalki, in the course of His tlrtha-yatra.
Text 48
tarn drstva sahosatthdya
padmayd ramaya sahd
kalkih prahasto vidhivat
pujancakre vidhdnavit
As soon as Lord Kalki, the perfect follower of the codes of good
conduct, saw His spiritual master, Paras'urama, He cheerfully got up from
His throne, along with Padmavatl and Rama, to greet him.
Text 49
nandrasair gunamayair
bhojayitva viatnte
paryamke'narghya vastradhye
sdyayitvd mudam yayau
Lord Kalki fed Parasurama many varieties of delicious food and
then offered him valuable garments. After doing this, Lord Kalki had
Parasurama rest on an opulent couch.
Texts 50-51
tarn bhuktavantam visrantam
pada samvahanair gurum
santosya vinayapannah
kalkir madhuram avravit
tava prasadat siddham me
guro traivargikanca yat
sasidhvaja sutaydstu
srnu rdma mveditam
As His spiritual master, Parasurama, was resting after his meal, Lord
Kalki gently massaged his feet and spoke with a very sweet and gentle
voice. My dear spiritual master, by your mercy, I have accomplished the
three objectives of life. Now, the daughter of Sasidhvaja has a request and
so please hear it.


326 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
Text 52
iti patwacanarh nisamya rdmd
mja hrdayepsita putralabham istam
vrata japa niyamair yamaisca
kairva mama bhavatiha
mudaha jdmadagnyam
Being introduced by her husband in this way, King Sas'idhvaja's
daughter said: What penance, rules and regulations, and vows should I
observe so that I will receive the son of my desire?
Thus ends the translation of thirtieth chapter of Sri Kalki Purana.


C H A P T E R 
T H I R T Y - O N E
The Vow of Rukmini
Text 1
suta uvdca
jamadannyah samakarnya
ramdrh tarn putra kdnhimm
kalker abhimatarh buddhvd
kdrayad rukminivratam
Suta GosvamI said: Thereafter, Parasurama, with the desire to please
Lord Kalki, began to describe the Rukmini vrata for the satisfaction of
Rama.
Text 2
vratena tena ca ramd
putradhyd subhaga sati
sarvabhogena sarhyuktd
babhuva sthirayauvand
Thereafter, by executing this pious vow, the chaste Rama became
very satisfied, having achieved an ever-youthful form that indicated her
good fortune, as well as the fulfillment of her ardent desire to have a good
son.
Text3
saunaka rsi uvdca
vidhdnarh bruhi me suta
vratasyasya ca yat phalam
purd kena krtarh dharmyarh
rukmini vratam uttamam
Saunaka Rsi said: О Suta, what are the rules and regulations prescribed
for the execution of the Rukmini vratal What is the actual benefit of
observing this vow? Who was the person that initially observed this great
vow? Please describe all this to me.


328 
SRI KALKI PURANA
Text 4
suta uvdca
srnu brahman rdjaputri
sarmistha varsaparvani
avagdhya saroniram
somarh haram apasyata
Suta GosvamI said: О brdhmana, I will reply to all that you have
inquired about and so please listen attentively. One day, while Sarmistha,
the daughter of Vrsaparva, the king of the demons, was bathing in a lake,
she suddenly saw Lord Mahadeva passing by.
Text 5
sd sakhibhih parivrtd
devaydnyd ca sangatd
sambhubhitayd samutthdya
paryadhur vasanarh drutam
Sarmistha was with Devayani and her companions, playing in the
water, and when she saw Lord Mahadeva, she came out of the water to
get dressed, out of respect.
Text 6
tatra sukasya kanydyd
vastravyatyayam dtmanah
sarhlaksya kupitd. prdha
vasanam tyaja bhiksuki
Devayani, the daughter of Sukracarya, the spiritual master of the
demons, had kept her clothes in the same place as Sarmistha. By mistake,
Sarmistha put on Devayani's clothes, and when she saw this, Devayani
became very angry and said: You beggar, return my clothes at once!
Text 7
ato ddnavakanyd sd
ddsibhih parivdritd
tarn tasyd vdsasd baddhvd
кпре ksiptvd gatd grham
Sarmistha, the daughter of the king of the demons, was surrounded by
her friends and maidservants, and when she heard this, she also became


T H E 
VOW 
OF R U K M I N I 
329
very angry. After tying Devayanl's hands and legs, she threw her into a
well and returned home.
Text 8
tarn magnarh rudatim кпре
jaldrtho nahusdtmajah
hare sprstva samudvatya
prdha kd warn vardnana
DevayanI loudly cried out for help inside the well and as if by the will
of providence, the son of Nahusa, King Yayati, came there at that time to
drink some water. The king pulled DevayanI out of the well and inquired:
О girl with a beautiful face, who are you?
Text 9
sd sukaputn vasanam
paridhdya hiyd bhiyd
sarmisthdydh krtarh sarvarh
prdha rdjdnam iksati
Sukracarya's daughter quickly dressed while narrating to the king the
story of her fight with Sarmistha.
Text 10
yaydtis tadabhiprayarh
jndtyd'nu brajya sobhanam
dsvdsya tdm yayau geharh
tasydh parinayddrtah
King Yayati understood the actual intention of DevayanI, and he also
desired to accept her hand in marriage. While giving her assurances, he
followed her for some distance and then returned to his palace.
Texts 11-12
sd gatvd bhavanarh sukrarh
prdha sarmisthayd krtam
tacchrutvd kupitarh viprarh
vrsaparvdha sdntvayan
dandyarh rxdrh dandaya vibho
kopo yadyasthi te mayi


330 
SRI KALKI PURANA
sarmisthdm vdpyapa krtarh
kuru yanmana sepsitam
When DevayanI returned home, she informed her father of what
Sarmistha had done to her. As soon as Sukracarya heard about what
had happened, he became inflamed with rage. The king of the demons,
Vrsaparva, tried his best to pacify his spiritual master, saying: О lord,
if I have behaved offensively, please punish me, and if my daughter has
aroused your anger, then punish her as you wish.
Texts 13-14
rdjdn pramtarh pdde
piturdrstva rusd'vravit
devaydra tviyarh kanyd
mama ddsi bhavatviti
samdniya tadd raja
ddsye tarn viniyujya sah
yayau nijagrharh jndm
daivarh paramdkarh smaran
When the angry DevayanI saw that the king of the demons had fallen
at her father's feet, she intervened, saying: Let your daughter become my
slave!
The intelligent king very well understood that destiny is
incontrovertible and so he summoned his daughter and gave her to
DevayanI as a maidservant. After doing so, he returned home.
Text 15
tatah sukas tamdniya
yydtim pratilomakam
tasmai dadau tdm vidhivat
devaydnim tayd saha
Thereafter, Sukracarya, although a brahmana, invited King Yayati to
accept the hand of his daughter, DevayanI, in marriage. At that time,
Sarmistha went with DevayanI to reside with her husband, King Yayati.
Text 16
dattvd prdha nrparh
vipro'pyendrh rdjasutarh yadi


T H E V O W OF R U K M I N I 
331
sayane hvayase sadyo
jard tvdmupa bhoksayati
At the time of the marriage of DevayanI with Yayati, Sukracarya, the
spiritual master of the demons, gave this warning to the king regarding
Sarmistha: If you invite the princess to your bed, then you will immediately
be afflicted with old age.
Text 17
sukrasyai tad vacah srutva
rdjd tarn varavarninim
adrsydrh sthdpaydmdsa
devaydnya nugdrh bhiyd 
'
Being warned in this way by Sukracarya, the king meticulously avoided
contact with Devayam's companion, the beautiful princess Sarmistha.
Text 18
sd sarmistha rdjaputri
duhkhasokabhaydkuld
nityarh ddsi satdkirm
devaydnintu sevate
Princess Sarmistha, who became morose as a result of the unfortunate
turn of events, engaged in the service of Devyani, along with one hundred
other maidservants.
Text 19
ekadd sd vanagatd
rudati jdnhavi tate
visvdmitrarh munirh tatra
dadrse stribhirdvrtam
One day, as Sarmistha was seated in a forest by the side of the Ganges,
crying, she saw the great sage, Visvamitra, surrounded by many beautiful
women.
Text 20
vratinarh punyagandhdbhih
surupabhih susevitam


332 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
karayantarh vratarh rmlya
dhupa dipa upaharakaih
The sage was seated in the midst of these beautiful ladies, who were all
very nicely decorated with ornaments and sandalwood paste, instructing
them in the procedure for observing a vow which involved offerings of
incense, a ghee lamp, and flower garlands.
Text 21
nirmdyastadalarh padmarh
vedikdydrh sucinhitam
rambhdpotais caturbhistu
catuskonarh virdjitam
First, the sage painted a lotus flower having eight petals and then he
decorated it by placing four banana trees at the four corners.
Text 22
vasasd nirmita grhe
svamapattair vicitrite
nirmitarh sri vdsudevarh
ndndratna vighattitam
This was done by the side of a golden altar inside a room that was
decorated with silk cloth. The sage next installed a Deity of Lord Vasudeva
on that lotus and decorated Him with jeweled ornaments.
Texts 23-24
paurusena ca suhtena
ndndgandho dakaih subhaih
pancdmrtair pancagavyair
yathdmantrair dvijeritaih
sndpayitvd bhadrapithe
karnikdydrh prapujayet
pancabhi darsabhir vdpi
sodasair upacdrakaih
The procedure for worshiping the Deity was that one should first
bathe Him with perfumed water, the five products of the cow, and
five other substances, while chanting the Purusa-sukta mantras as the


T H E 
VOW 
OF R U K M I N I 
333
brahmanas recited Vedic hymns. The Deity should then be placed on the
beautifully decorated altar and adorned with the mark of a lotus. After
worshiping the Deity with either sixteen, ten, or five articles, one should
pray as follows.
Text 25
pddyam ardhva sramahararh
sitalarh sumanoharam
paramananda janakarh
grhana paramesvara
My dear Lord, this cooling padya with remove Your fatigue and so
please happily accept it.
Text 26
durvacandana gandhadyam
drghyarh yuktarh prayatnatah
grhana rukmim ndtha
prasannasya mama prabho
О beloved Lord of RukminI, I made a great endeavor to make this
arghya with durva grass, sandalwood paste, and other fragrant substances.
Please cheerfully accept it.
Text 27
nandtirthodbhavam vari
sugandhi sumanoharam
grhdn dcamamyarh warn
sn nivdsa sriyd saha
О abode of Laksmi, this water has been brought from numerous holy
places of pilgrimage, and it is pure and very fragrant. It is our desire that
You, along with Laksmi, accept this acamana.
Text 28
ndnd kusuma gandhadyam
sutra grathtam uttamam
vaksah sobhdkaram cd ru
mdlyarh naya suresvara


334 
SRI KALKI PURANA
О Lord of the demigods, this garland was prepared with many fragrant
flowers. It will certainly enhance the beauty of Your chest and so please
accept it.
Text 29
tantu santdna samghdna
racitarh bandhanarh hare
grhdndvaranarh suddharh
niravarana sapriya
My dear Lord Hari, although Your transcendental position can never
be covered, it is our desire that You and LaksmI will accept these nicely
woven garments made with purified thread.
Text 30
yajnasutram idarh deva
prajapati vinirmitam
grhdna vasudeva warn
rukminvd ramaya saha
My dear Vasudeva, You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
accompanied by Your consorts, Rama and Rukmini. This sacred thread
was prepared by Lord Brahma and so kindly accept it.
Text 31
ndndratna samdyuktarh
svarnamuktd vighattitam
priyayd saha devesa
grhdna bharariarh mama
О Lord of lords, it is our desire that You and Your beloved Rukmini
will accept this necklace of pearls, jewels, and gold.
Text 32
aadhi ksira guddnnadi
pupa ladduka khandakdn
grhdna rukminindtha
sandtharh kuru-mdrh prabho


T H E 
VOW 
OF R U K M I N I 
335
О Lord of RukminI, please accept these offerings of yogurt, milk, gur,
rice, cakes, laddus, and milk sweets, and award me shelter at Your lotus
feet.
Text 33
karpma aguru gandhadhya
paramanan daddyakam
dhasarh grhana varada
vaidarbhvd priyaya saha
О bestower of benedictions, may You and Your dear Rukminl-devi
accept this incense made with camphor and other perfumed substances.
Text 34
Ыш.кШпат gehasaktdnarh
sarhsdra dhvanta ndsanam
dipam dlokaya vibho
jagaddlokan dnddara
My dear Lord, You dispel the darkness of ignorance within the hearts
of those devotees who are still attached to the material world. Please
accept this ghee lamp and illuminate our vision of You.
Text 35
sydmasundara padmaksa
pitdmvara caturbhuja
prapannarh pdhi devesa
rukminyd sahitdcyuta
О lotus-eyed Lord! О Shyamsundara, who is dressed in yellow
garments! О four-armed Lord! О master of the demigods! О Lord Acyuta,
I take shelter of You. May You and RukminI please protect me.
Text 36
hi tdsdrh vratam drstvd
munirh natvd suduhkhitd
sarmisthd mistavacand
krtdnjahr uvdca tdh


336 
SRI KALKI PURANA
When the greatly distressed Sarmistha saw the powerful sage
conducting this vow on behalf of many women, she went and offered her
obeisances to him and then spoke very sweetly with folded hands.
Text 37
sarmisthovdca
rdjaputrlrh durbhagdrh mam
svdmind parivarjitdm
tratumar hatha he devyo
vratendnena karmand
Sarmistha said: О goddesses, I am a most unfortunate princess, being
bereft of a husband. Please deliver me by instructing me in the observance
of this vow.
Text 38
srutvd tu td vacastasydh
kdrunydcca kiyat kiyat
pujopakaranarh dattvd
kdraydmd surddardt
After hearing this, the women felt compassion for Sarmistha and so
they invited her to join them in observing this vrata with the paraphernalia
they had collected.
Text 39
vratarh krtvd tu sarmistha
labdhvd svdminam isvaram
suwd putrdn susantustd
samabhut sthira yauvand
It was by the execution of this vow that Sarmistha received her
husband so that she was blessed with good children and an ever-youthful
body.
Text 40
sitd cdsoka vanikd
madhye saramayd saha
vratam krtvd patirh lebhe
rdmarh rdksasa ndsanam


T H E 
VOW 
OF R U K M I N I 
337
While residing in the asoka grove outside Lanka, Slta observed
this vow along with Sarama and as a result, she was reunited with Her
husband, Lord Rama, the destroyer of the dynasty of Raksasas.
Text 41
^ 
vrhadasva prasadena
* 
krtvemarh draupadi vratam
patiyuktd duhkhamuktd
\ 
babhuva sthirayauvand
h
* 
By the mercy of Vrhadasva, Draupadi observed this vow and was thus
"I 
blessed to always remain with her husbands, to be freed from all miseries,
f 
and to possess and ever-youthful body.
| 
Text 42
': 
tatha rama site pakse
; 
vaisdkhe dvadasi dine
i 
jdmadagnydd vratam cakre
purnarh varsa catustayam
After hearing this narration, Goddess Rama, the consort of Lord
Kalki, observed the vow on the Dvadasi of the fortnight of the waxing
moon in the month of Vais'akha for four years under the guidance of
Parasurama.
Texts 43-44
pattasutrarh kare baddhva
bhojayita bhojayitva dvijdn bahun
bhuktvd havisyam ksirdktarh
sumstarh svdmind saha
bubhuje prthivirh sarvdm
apurvdrh svajanair vrta
sd putrau susuve sddhvi
meghamdla baldhakau
"ё 
At the conclusion of the vow, she tied a silk thread around her
wrist and fed innumerable brahmanas. With her husband, she ate nicely
prepared havisyama and condensed milk, and thereafter enjoyed life in
this world without any hindrance in the association of her relatives. In


338 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
due course of time, Lord Kalki begot two sons, named Meghamala and
Balahaka, within the womb of Rama.
Text 45
devdndm upakarttdrau
yajnaddna tapovrataih
mahotsahau mahdviryau
subhagau kalkisammatuu
These two sons were very dear to Lord Kalki. They were supremely
fortunate, very powerful, and enthusiastic. They satisfied the demigods
by performing many sacrifices.
Text 46
vratavaram iti krtvd
sarva sampat samrddhya
bhavati vidita tatvd
pujito purna kdmd
hari carana saroja
dvandva bhaktaika tana
brajati gatim apurvdrh
brahma vijnair agamydm
By observing this vow, women can become prosperous due to the
fulfillment of all their desires, and they can acquire spiritual knowledge
so that they will be respected by all classes of people. Because this vow
also awards one devotional service at the lotus feet of Lord Hari, it enables
one to achieve the ultimate goal of life, which is rarely attained even by
elevated personalities.
Thus ends the translation of thirty-first chapter of Sri Kalki Purana.


C H A P T E R 
T H I R T Y - T W O
Lord Kalki Enjoys Pastimes With His Consorts
Text 1
suta uvaca
etadvah kathitarh viprd
vratarh trailokya visrutam
tahpararh kalki krtarh
karma yacchrnuta dvijah
Suta Gosvami said: О brahmanas, I have thus described the vow known
as Rukmani vrata. I will now narrate more pastimes of Lord Kalki.
Text 2
sambhale vasatastasya
sahasra parivatsardh
vyatitd bhratrputra
svajndti sambandhibhih saha
Lord Kalki continued to reside in the village of Sambhala, along
with His brothers, sons, other relatives, and associates, for one thousand
years.
Texts 3-4
sambhale susubhe sreni
sabhdpanaka catvaraih
patakadhvaja citrddhyair
yathendrasydm amrdvati
yatrdsta sasti tirthdndrh
sambhavah sambhale'bhavat
mrtyormoksah ksitau kalker
akalkasya paddsraydt
The entire village of Sambhala, which was as good as the heavenly
planets, appeared very beautiful with its assembly houses, gates, raised
platforms, and flags flapping in the breeze that had been placed here and


340 
SRI KALKI PURANA
there. Anyone who gave up his material body at Sambhala was freed from
all sinful reactions and awarded shelter at the lotus feet of Lord Kalki.
Text 5
vanopavana santana
nandkusuma sarhkulaih
sobhitarh sambhalam grdmarh
manye moksapadarh bhuvi
Thus, the village of Sambhala, which was profusely decorated with
blooming flowers, pious trees, forests, and gardens, became a holy place
that granted liberation from material existence.
Text 6
atra kalkih purastnnarh
nayanananda varddhanah
padmayd ramayd kdmarh
гагата jagatipatih
The master of the universe, Lord Kalki, who was especially pleasing to
the eyes and minds of women, happily resided with PadmavatI and Rama
in the village of Sambhala.
Texts 7-8
suradhipa pradattena
kdmagena rathena vai
nadi parvata kunjesu
dvipesu parayd mudd
ramamdno visanpadmd
ramddyabhi ramdpatih
divdnisan na bubudhe
strainasca kdmalampatah
The Lord would mount His celestial chariot, which had been given to
Him by Indra, and periodically visit holy rivers, mountains, groves, and
islands. In this way, He would enjoy pleasure pastimes with PadmavatI and
Rama. He thus appeared to be a most perfect, passionate male, afflicted
by transcendental lust. Indeed, the Lord of Rama became so absorbed in
thought of His consorts that He completely forgot whether it was day or
night.


LORO KALKI ENJOYS PASTIMES WITH H I S CONSORTS 
341
Texts 9-11
padmd mukhdmoda sarojasidhu
vasopa bhogi suvildsa vasah
prabhuta nilendra mani prakdse
guhavisese pravivesa kalkih
padmd tu padmdsata ruparupd
ramd ca piyusa kald vildsd
рай pravistam girigahvare te
nan sahasrd kulita tvagdtdm
padmd patim preksya guhdnivistam
ranturh manujnd pravivesa pascdt
ramdbald yutha samanvitd tat
pascdd gatd kalki mahograkdmd
One day, Lord Kalki, who was very fond of relishing the sweet nectar
emanating from the lotus-like face of Padmavati, and who was decorated
with a nice blue sapphire, entered a mountain cave. When Padmavati,
who was like a golden lotus flower, and Rama, who was like a pot of
nectar, saw their husband entering a cave with many beautiful women,
they followed Him in expectation of enjoying conjugal bliss.
Text 12
tantrendra ndopala gahvardnte
kdntdbhi rdtma pratimdbhir isam
kalkinca drstvd navaniraddbharh
tatah sthitarh prastaravan mumoha
Padmavati saw Lord Kalki enjoying the association of many beautiful
women, who were as charming as herself. However, upon seeing this,
Padmavati became stunned so that she appeared to be a stone statue.
Text 13
ramd sakhibhhh pramaddbhirdrttd
vilokayanti disamdku Idksi
padmdpi padmdsata sobhamdndrh
visanna cittd na babhau sma cdrttd
Rama and her companions anxious surveyed the scene as tears welled
up in their eyes. Padmavati .normally appeared to be as attractive as


342 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
hundreds of lotus flowers, but upon seeing her husband engaged in this
way, she lamented and thus lost her luster.
Text 14
bhumau likhanti nijakajjalena
kalkirh sukarh tarn, kucakurh kumena
kasturikabhistu tadagram agre
nirmmdya cdlingaya штата bhdvdt
With her tears that had turned black due to being mixed with her eye
ointment, Padmavati made a drawing of Lord Kalki on the ground with
her toe. She also drew His parrot with the kunkuma that had been applied
to her breasts, and she made a border with musk
Text 15
rama kaldldpa para stuvanti
kdmdrdditd tarn hrdaye nidhdye
dhydtvd nijdnta karanaih prapujya
tasthau visarmd karund vasannd
The sweet-speaking Rama, who was afflicted by the arrows of Cupid,
placed Lord Kalki within her heart and worshiped Him with offerings of
flowers. She then fell to the ground, being overburdened by distress and
lamentation.
Text 16
ksandt samutthdya rmoda rdmd
kaldpinah kanthanibharh svandtham
hrddpa gudharh na punah pralabhya
kdmdrdditetyaha hare prasida
After a short while, she got up and cried loudly, like a female peacock.
Being unable to embrace Lord Kalki within her heart, she became agitated
by unrequited passion, saying: О Lord Hari, please be kind to me.
Text 17
padmdpi nirmucya nijdngabhusd
scakdra dhulipatale vildsam
kandanca kastmi kaydpi nilarh
kdmarh nihanturh sivatdmupetya


LORD KALKI ENJOYS PASTIMES W I T H H I S CONSORTS 
343
PadmavatI took off her ornaments and rolled on the ground, so that
her body was soon covered with dust, although her throat appeared bluish
because of the musk. Indeed, it appeared as if she had assumed the form of
Lord Siva to vanquish Cupid.
Text 18
kalavatindm kahydkalayya
ksine ksdndnam harirartta bandhuh
kdma prapuraya sasara madhye
kalkih priydndm suratotsavdya
Understanding the feelings of His poor, beloved wives, knowing that
they wanted to perform conjugal pastimes with Him, Lord Kalki, the
friend of the distressed, approached them so that He could fulfill their
desires.
Texts 19-20
tdm sddarendtma patim manojna
harenabo utha patim yatheyuh
sdnanda bhdvd visadhdnu vrttd
vanesu rdmdh paripmna kdmah
vaibhrdjake caitrarathe supuspe
sunandane mandara kandardnte
reme sa ramdbhir uddratejd
rathena bhdsvat khagamena kalkih
As female elephants meet the king of elephants, the Lord's consorts
jubilantly greeted Him within that forest and thus fulfilled their cherished
desire. Thereafter, Lord Kalki, along with His consorts, mounted an
effulgent celestial chariot that coursed through the sky. In this way, they
enjoyed amorous pastimes in the Vaibhraja forest, Kuvera forest, and a
cave at Mount Mandara.
Text 21
padmd mukhdbjdmrta pdnamatto
rama samdlingana vdsarangl
vardnga ndndrh kucakurh kumakto
ratiprasarhge viparita yuktah


344 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
mukhe vidasto rasana vasista
modah sa kalkirnahi veda deham
Lord Kalki enjoyed the nectar of Padmavatl's lotus-like face, and took
pleasure in tightly embracing Rama. Thus, He became smeared with the
kunkuma from their breasts as they affectionately bit His body. The Lord
became so overwhelmed by love for His consorts that He appeared to
have lost all control over His body.
Text 22
ramah samanah purusottamarh tarn
vaksojamadhye vinidhdya dhirdh
parasparaslesana jatahdsd
remur mukundarh vilasa sanrdh
These two equally beautiful and gentle women embraced Lord Hari,
the supreme enjoyer, to their chest, and thus felt transcendental bliss.
The hairs of their bodies stood on end due to transcendental ecstasy and
this sight made everyone laugh with glee.
Text 23
tatah sarovararh ward
striyo yuyuh klamajvardh
priyena term kalkind
vanantare vihdrind
sarah pravisya padmayd
vimoha rupayd tayd
jalarh dudurvardnggandh
karenavo yathd gajam
After enjoying pastimes of love in many forests, the Lord's consorts
became exhausted and so they went to a nearby lake with their beloved
Lord Kalki. As female elephants throw water on the king of elephants, so
the uniquely charming consorts of the Lord entered the water of the lake
and began to splash water their husband's transcendental body.
Text 24
iti ha yuvati hlo lokanathah sa kalkih
priya yuvati paritah prema bhaktaika labdhyah


LORD KALKI ENJOYS PASTIMES WITH HIS CONSORTS 
345
mja ramana vinodaih siksayan lokavargan
jayati vibudhar bhartta sarhbhale vasudevah
All glories to Lord Kalki, the master of the demigods, the incarnation
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who takes pleasure in sporting
with His consorts, and who can only be approached by those who have
imbibed the mood of unalloyed devotional service. By performing
wonderful pastimes with of His beloved consorts at the village of
Sambhala, Lord Kalki satisfied everyone.
Text 25
ye srnvanti vadanti bhava
catura dhydyanti santah sada
kalkeh sn purusottamasya
caritam karnamrtarh sadardh
tesdrh no sukhayatyalam mura
aripor ddsyabhilasarh vina
sarhsarah parimocananca
paramananda amrtdm. bhonidheh
Those who are very fortunate will hear about, sing, and meditate
upon the nectarean characteristics of Lord Kalki. For the pure devotees
of the Lord, apart from the service of Lord Murari, anything considered
most wonderful by the materialists, even liberation from the ocean of
material existence, appears to be very insignificant.
Thus ends the translation of the thirty-second chapter of Sri Kalki
Purana.


C H A P T E R 
T H I R T Y - T H R E E
The Demigods Arrive at Sambhala
The Disappearance of Lord Kalki
Text 1
suta uvaca
tato devagandh sarve
brahmand sahitd rathaih
svaih svair ganaih parivrtak
kalkirh drastm updyayuh
Suta GosvamI said: Once, all the demigods and great brahmanas,
along with their followers, mounted their celestial chariots and went to
the village of Sambhala, to see Lord Kalki.
Text 2
maharsyah sagandharvdh
kinnards capsarogandh
samdjgmuh pramuditdh
sarhbhalarh surapujitam
Many exalted sages, Gandharvas, Kinnaras, and Apsaras cheerfully
arrived at Sambhala, which was highly desired even by the demigods.
Text3
tatra gawd sabhd madhye
kalkirh kamalahcanam
tejonirhdhim prapanndndrh
jandndm abhayapradam
As they entered the palace courtyard, they saw the greatly effulgent
lotus-eyed Lord Kalki giving assurances to all those who had come to take
shelter of Him.
Text 4
rala jimutasarhkdsarh
digha pivara bhdhukam
kintendrka varnena
sthiravidyun nibhena tarn


T H E DISAPPEARANCE OF LORD KALKI 
347
His transcendental body was the color of a dark rain cloud. His
arms were long and very powerful. His head was adorned with a brightly
shining crown that resembled the sun.
Text 5
sobhamanarh dyu manina
kundalondbhi sdbhina
saharsdldpa vikasad
vadanam smita sobhitam
The beauty of His face was enhanced by His earrings, which were as
brilliant as the sun. His lotus-like face appeared to blossom as He sweetly
smiled while speaking.
Texts 6-7
krpakataksa viksepa
pariksiptavi paksakam
tara hdrollasad vaksas
candrakdnta mamsriyd
kumudvatl modavaharh
sphurat sakrdyudhdmvaram
sarvaddnanda sandoha
rasollasita vigraham
Everyone surrounding Him was favored by His merciful glance. Lotus
flowers adorning His chest appeared more delightful because of the rays
of the moonstone that shone in His beautiful necklace. His garments
appeared like a rainbow, thus further increasing his beauty.
Text 8
ndndmaniganodyota
dipitarh rupam adbhutam
dadrsur deva gandharvdm
ye cdnye samupdgatdh
His entire body shone brilliantly due to the light reflected from
countless jewels. This is how all the demigods, Gandharvas, and Apsaras
saw Lord Kalki.


348 
SRI KALKI PURANA
Text 9
bhaktya paramayd yuktdh
paramananda vigraham
kalkirh kamala patraksarh
tustavuh paramadardt
All of the residents of heaven began to ecstatically offer their prayers
to the lotus-eyed Lord Kalki at the same time.
Text 10
devd ucauh
jaydsesa sarhklesa kaksa prakirnd
nalodddma sarhkirna hisa
surddhisa vesvesa bhutesa bhdvah
tavdnanta cdntah sthitd'ngdpta ratna
prabhdbhdta paddjita anantasakte
The demigods said: О Lord of lords! О master of the demigods! О
worshipable Lord of the living entities! О unlimited Personality of
Godhead, everything is present within You. Your bodily effulgence has
made everything visible. О Lord of the universe, You are like the blazing
fire that burns the dry straw of our sinful reactions to ashes. All glories
to You.
Text 11
prakdsi krtd sesa hka traydtra
vaksah sthale bhdsvat kaustubha sydmd
meghaugha rdjat dvijddhisa sarlra trdhi
visno saddrdh vayarh warn prasannd sasesah
All the universes have emanated from the pours of You body. Your
complexion is the color of a dark rain cloud. Your chest is adorned with
the Kaustubha gem, appearing like the full moon illuminating a dark
cloud. О Lord Hari, we and our wives take shelter of You, and so please
protect us.
Text 12
yadyastyanugraho'smakarh
vraja vaikuntham isvara
tyaktvd sdsita bhukhandarh
sarvadharma avirodhatah


T H E 
D I S A P P E A R A N C E OF LORD KALKI 
349
О master of the universe, if You would like to display Your compassion
for us then return to Your transcendental abode in the spiritual sky.
Truthfulness has now prevailed within the world and so people will follow
religious principles without hindrance.
Text 13
kalkis tesdmiti vacah
srutvd paramaharsitah
patramitraih panvrtas
cakara gamane matim
After hearing the prayers of the demigods, Lord Kalki ecstatically
expressed His own desire to return to Vaikuntha, taking with Him His
eternal associates.
Text 14
putrdndhitya caturo
mahdbala pardkraman
rdjye niksipya sahasa
dharmisthdn prakrti pnydn
Thereafter, Lord Kalki summoned His four very powerful sons, all of
whom were very dear to the citizens because they were very pious and
influential, and handed over the rule of the kingdom to them.
Text 15
tatah prajd samdhuya
kathayitvd nijdh kathdh
prdha tan nija nirydnam
devdndm uparodhatah
The Lord then addressed His subjects, revealing His intention.
Lord Kalki said: At the request of the demigods, I will have return to
Vaikuntha.
Text 16
tacchrutvd tdh prajdh sarvd
rurudur vismaydnvitdh
tarn prdhuh pranatdh putrd
yatha pitaram isvaram


350 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
When the inhabitants of Sambhala heard this, they were shocked
and began shedding tears of grief. Just as sons address their fathers, the
people began speaking to the Lord after offering their obdisances.
Text 17
prajd ucuh
bho ndtha sanadharmajna
ndsman tyaktum ihdrhasi
yatra warn tatra tu vayarh
ydmah pranatavatsala
The citizens said: My dear Lord, You are the original propounder of
genuine religious principles. It is not proper for You to leave us, for You
always displayed affection for those who had sincerely surrender unto
You. Wherever You go, please allow us to accompany You.
Text 18
priyd grhd dhananyatra
putrdh prdndstavdnugdh
paratreha visokdya
jnatvd warn yajnapurusam
Although everyone considers his wife, children, wealth, and house
to be very dear, Your servants know that You are the supreme enjoyer
who, by awarding detachment, vanquishes all suffering in this life and the
next. Because of knowing You in truth, are lives are dedicated to You.
Text 19
iti tadvacanam sruwd
sdnwayiwd saduktibhih
prayayau Minna hrdayah
patnibhydrh sahito vanam
After hearing the prayers of His subjects, Lord Kalki pacified them
as far as possible and then departed for the forest, taking with Him His
two consorts.
Texts 20-21
himdlayarh muniganair
dkirnarh jahnavij alaih


T H E 
D I S A P P E A R A N C E OF L O R D K A L K I 
351
paripwrna devaganaih
sevitam manasah priyam
gatva visnuh suraganair
vrtascdru caturbhujah
usitvd janhavitire
sasmdrdtmanam dtmand
Thereafter, Lord Kalki, surrounded by many sages, traveled to the
Himalaya Mountains, which are adorned by the Ganges River, which is
worshiped even by the demigods and which gives pleasure to the heart.
The Lord sat by the side of the Ganges and then assumed His four-armed
form while entering deep into meditation upon Himself.
Text 22
purnajyotirmayah sdksi
paramatmd purdtanah
babhau surya sahasrdiidrh
tejordsi samadyutih
The Lord appeared as brilliant as thousands of suns, and thus looked
very attractive. He was the witness of everything, the eternal Lord, and
the Supersoul of all living entities.
Text 23
sankha cakra gadd padma
sdmgadyaih samabhistutah
rmndlarhkarandndnca
samalahkar arwkrtih
His form was the ornament of all ornaments. He held a conch, dice,
club, lotus, and bow in His hands.
Text 24
vavrsustarii surah puspaih
kaustubhd mukta kandharam
sugandhi kusumasdrair
deva dundubhi nihsvanaih


352 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
On His chest was the Kaustubha gem. The demigods showered
fragrant flowers as the sounds of beating drums could be heard in the
four directions.
Text 25
tustuvur mumuhuh sarve
lokah sasthanu jangmdh
drstvd rupam arupasya
nirydne vaisnavam padam
In this way, Lord Kalki enacted His pastime of disappearance from
this world. All moving and non-moving living beings that witnessed
the disappearance of the Lord glorified Him in a mood of great
astonishment.
Text 26
taddrstavd mahaddscaryarh
patyuh kalker mahdtmanah
ramd padmaca dahanarh
pravisya tamavdpatuh
Padmavat! and Rama saw Lord Kalki's transcendental form as if
devoid of life and realizing this to be an illusory display of the external
energy, although greatly astonished, they entered fire so as to rejoin their
husband in His eternal abode.
Text 27
dharmah krtayugarh kalaker
djfiayd prthivitale
nihsapatnau susukhinau
bhulokarh ceratusciram
Meanwhile, Dharma and Satya-yuga personified wandered throughout
the world without any fear of enemies, by the order of Lord Kalki. They
happily resided within the world now that Satya-yuga had commenced.
Text 28
devdpisca maruh kdmarh
kalker ddesa kdnnau
prajdh sarhpdlayantau tu
bhuvarh jugupatuh prabhuh


T H E D I S A P P E A R A N C E OF LORD KALKI 
353
By the order of Lord Kalki, the two kings, Maru and Devapl, executed
their duties of protecting the people of the world.
Text 29
visakhayupa bhupdlah
kalker nirydnam idrsam
srutvd svaputrarh visaye
nrparh krtvd gato vanam
When King Visakhayupa heard of Lord Kalki's disappearance from
this world, he installed his son upon the throne and then went to reside
in the forest.
Text 30
anye nrpatayo ye ca
kalker viraha karsitdh
tarn dhydyanto japantasca
viraktdh syur nrpapdsane
Many other kings who were associates or followers of Lord Kalki, being
greatly afflicted by separation from the Lord, renounced their kingdoms
jj 
and passed their remaining days chanting the holy name of the Lord and
meditating upon His transcendental form.
Text 31
iti kalker anantasya
katharh bhuvana pdvanim
kathayita sukah prdydt
nara ndrdyandsramam
After narrating the transcendental pastimes of Lord Kalki, the
incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sukadeva Gosvami
departed for the dsrama of Nara-narayana Rsi.
Text 32
mdrkandeyddayo ye ca
munayah prasamdyandh
srutvdnubhdvarh kalkeste
tarn dhydyanto jaguryasah


SR! KALKI 
PURANA
The great sages, headed by Markandeya, who were undisturbed by
the dualities of material existence, began to practice meditation on the
eternal form of Lord Kalki after hearing His transcendental pastimes
Texts 33-35
yasydnu sdsandd bhumau
nadharmisthah prajdjandh
ndlpdyuso daridrasca
na pdkhandd na haitukdh
nddhay vyddhayah klesd
deva bhumdtma sambhavdh
nirmatsardh saddnandd
babhuvur jivajdtayah
ityetat kathitarh lialker
avatdrarh mahodayam
dhanyarh yasasydm dyusyarh
svargyarh svastyayanarh param
I have thus narrated the pastimes of the incarnation of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Lord Kalki. During His reign, by His supreme will,
no one in the world was sinful or impoverished. There were no atheists or
cheaters, and everyone enjoyed a long duration of life. All living entities
were freed from the threefold material miseries, as well as disease, envy,
and death. Thus, everyone lived peacefully and prosperously. Lord Kalki
was a very magnanimous incarnation of Lord Hari. Simply by hearing
these pastimes of Lord Kalki, all of one's desires will be fulfilled. One will
receive prosperity, fame, a long duration of life, heavenly enjoyment, and
ultimately, the goal of human life.
Text 36
soka santdpa pdpaghnarh
kali vyakuhmdsanam
sukhadarh moksadam loke
vdrhchitdrtha phalapradam
Discussions of Lord Kalki's glories award one happiness in this life
and liberation from material existence after death. Such hearing and
chanting destroys all lamentation, distress, and sinful reactions, because


T H E DISAPPEARANCE OF LORD 
KALKI
355
it clears away the contamination of Kali. All of one's desires can be
fulfilled simply by hearing these narrations.
Text 37
tdvat sdstra pradipdnarh
prakaso bhuvi rocate
bhati bhanuh purdndkhyo
ydvalloke'ti kamadhuk
Only for as long as this sublime literature is not heard, thus
illuminating one with perfect understanding, other books can continue
to display their prominence.
Text 38
srutvaitad bhrgavarhsajo
muniganaih sdkarh saharso
vasi jnawa sutam ameya bodha
viditarh sri lomaharsatmajam
srikalker avatdra vdkyam amalarh
bhaktipradarh sri hareh
susmsuh punardha sddhu
vacasd gangdstavam satkrtah
After hearing about the spotless characteristics of Lord Kalki, the
incarnation of Lord Hari, who bestows devotional service upon His
devotees, the self-controlled sages, headed by Saunaka Rsi, the son of
Bhrgu, felt deeply satisfied at heart. They considered Romaharsana's son,
Suta GosvamI, to be the most intelligent personality within the world.
Thereafter, with a desire to hear the glories of Ganga-devi, they spoke as
follows.
Thus ends the translation of the thirty-third chapter of Sri Kalki
Purana.


C H A P T E R 
T H I R T Y - F O U R
Prayers Offered to Mother Ganga
Texts 1-2
saunaka rsi uvaca
he sum sarvadharmajna
yattvaya kathitarh pura
gangarh stutvd samdydta
munayah kalki sannidhim
stavam tarn vada gangdydh
sarvapapa prandsanam
mohaghnarh subhadarh bhaktyd
srnvatdm. pathatdmiha
Saunaka Rsi said: О Suta GosvamI, foremost knower of religious
principals, you had mentioned that the sages went to see Lord Kalki after
offering prayers to the River Ganga. We would like to hear these prayers
to Ganga-devl. By faithfully hearing or reciting such prayers, one's life
becomes auspicious, all sinful reactions are destroyed, and ultimately one
attains liberation from material existence.
Text 3
suta uvdca
srnudhvamrsayah sarve
gangastavam anuttamam
sokamohahararh pumsdm
rsibhih parikirttitam
Suta Gosvamlsaid: My dear sages, please listen attentively as I recite
the excellent prayers to the Ganga that were offered by the sages, and
which remove all lamentation and distress.
Text 4
rsaya ucuh
lyarh suratarangini bhavana vdridhestdrini
stum hanpaddmbujdd upagatd jagatsarhsadah


PRAYERS OFFERED TO MOTHER GANGA
357
sumeru sikhara amra priyajala malaksalini
prasannavadand subhd bhavabhayasya vidrdvini
The great sages said: The holy Ganga descended from the heavenly
planets to deliver all the conditioned souls from the vast ocean of material
existence. Ganga-devI emanated from the lotus feet of Lord Hari and so
everyone happily glorifies her. The water of the Gaiiga is enjoyed by the
demigods who reside on the peak of Mount Sumeru. By bathing in her
water, all one's sinful reactions are vanquished. By pleasing Ganga-devI,
one can easily gain release from the bondage of material existence.
Text 5
bhagiratham athanugd surakanrhdra darpdpahd
mahesamukuta prabhd girisirah patdkasitd
surdsuranaroragair ajabhavdcyutaih sarhstutd
vimukti phalasdlini kalusa ndsini rdjate
This holy river followed the footsteps of King Bhagiratha. Because
of her, the pride of Airavata, the carrier of Indra, was destroyed. She
increases the beauty of Lord Mahadeva's crown. She is like a white flag on
top of the Himalaya mountains. Everyone glorifies her, be they demigods,
demons, human beings, or serpents, or even Brahma, Visnu, or Siva. She
destroyed all sinful reactions and awards liberation.
Text 6
pitdmaha kamandalu prabhava muktivijdlatd.
sruti smrti gandstutd dvijakulala bdldvrtd
sumeru sikhardbhidd nipatita trilokdvrtd
sudharma phalasdlini sukhapaldsinl rdjate
She was produced from the water pot of Lord Brahma. She is the
creeper grown from the seed of liberation. She is surrounded by many
qualified brahmanas glorifying her by reciting passages from the revealed
scriptures. She descended upon the peak of Mount Sumeru and then
spread throughout the three worlds. Religiosity is her fruit and happiness
is her leaves.
Text 7
carad vihagamdlini sagara varhsa muktipradd
munirhdra vara nandini divimata ca maddkini


358 
SRI KALKI PURANA
soda duritandsini vimaia vari samdarsana
prandma guna kirttanadisu jagatsu sarhrdjate
By seeing her pure water, by offering her obeisances, and by singing
her glories, one's mountain of sinful reactions is destroyed. Birds walk on
her banks or swim in her water. By her mercy, the sons of Sagara achieved
liberation. She is considered to be the daughter of the sage, Jahnu. She is
known as the Mandakini in the heavenly planets.
Text 8
mahdbhidha sutdngand himagirisa kutastam
saphenajahxhdsini sita mardla sancdrim
calallahara satkard vara saroja mdlddhard
rasoilasitu gdmini jaladhi kdmini rajate
She became the queen of King Santanu. The peaks of the Himalayas are
her breasts, her foamy water is her smile, white swans are her movements,
her waves are her hands, and the fully blossomed lotus flowers are the
flower garland that adorns her chest. In this way, she travels to the sea in
a cheerful mood.
Text 9
kvacit kalakalasvana kvacid dhirayddogandh
kvacin mt-,niganaih stuta kvacid ananta sarhpujitd
kvacid ravi karojvald kvacid udagra pdtakuld
kacij jana vigdhitd jayati bhismamdtd sati
Somewhere by the side of the Ganga, great sages are engaged in reciting
prayers, somewhere Lord Ananta worships the Supreme Lord, somewhere
ferocious crocodiles are playing, somewhere the sun is reflected on the
surface of the water, somewhere her water makes a loud splashing sound,
and somewhere people are bathing. May the chaste mother of Bhisma be
glorified.
Text 10
sa eva kusalo janah pranamatiha bhdgirathrh
sa eva tapasdrh nidhirjapati jdnhavirh ddardt
sa eva purusottamah smarati sddhu mandakini
sa eva vijayi prabhuh surataranginirh sevate


PRAYERS 
OFFERED TO MOTHER 
GANGA
359
Anyone who offers obeisances to the Gariga is benefited. He is a great
ascetic who faithfully chants her names. He is the best of all persons who
meditates on her. One who serves the Mandakini is always victorious, and
is considered the master of everyone.
Text 11
bhavdmala jalacitarh khaga srgala minaksatarh
calalla hari lolitarh rucira tlra jambdlitam
kadd nijavapur mudd suranaro ragaih samstuto'pyaharh
trpathagdmira priyamatwa pasydmyaho
О traveler throughout the three worlds, when will I see my body half-
eaten by the aquatic birds and animals who reside in your pure water?
When will I see my body pushed, pulled, and rolled by your forceful
waves? When, upon seeing me in this condition will the demigods, best
of human beings, and serpents glorify me?
Text 12
tvatare vasatirh tavdmalajalasndnarh tava preksanarh
Wanndma smaranarh tavd dayakathd samldpanam pdvanam
gauge me xava sevanaika nipuno'pydnanditas cddrtah
stutvd tvadgatapdtako bhuvi kadd sdntas carisyamyaham
О holy river, when will I reside on your shore, bathe in your pure
water, chant your holy name, discuss your appearance and activities,
engage in your worship, and joyfully wander throughout the world singing
your glories?
Text 13
ityetad rsibhih proktam
gangdstavam anuttamam
svargyam yasasyam dyusyam
pathandt srvanddapi
By reciting or hearing these supremely auspicious prayers to Gaiiga
that were offered by great sages, one can ascend to the spiritual world,
and even in this lifetime, his fame and duration of life will be enhanced.
Text 14
sarvapdpaharam purhsdm
balam dyur vivarddhanam


360 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
prdtar madhyahna sdyahne
gangasannidhyatd bhavet
One who recites or hears these prayers, either in the morning, at
noon, or in the evening, will receive the association of Ganga-devI, all
his sinful reactions will be eradicated, and his strength and duration of
life will increase.
Text 15
ityetad bhargavdkhydnarh
sukadevdn mayd srutam
pathitarh srdvitarh cdtra
punyarh dhanyarh yasaskaram
I heard these prayers from the mouth of Sukadeva Gosvami. One who
hears or recites these sacred prayers will be awarded heaps of pious merit,
wealth, and fame.
Text 16
avatdrarh mahdvisndh
kalkeh paramam adbhutam
pathatdrh smvatdrh bhaktyd
sarvdsubha vindsanam
Those who repeatedly hear the transcendental glories of the
Kalki incarnation of Lord Maha-Visnu with devotion will find that all
inauspiciousness within their hearts has been reduced to nil.
Thus ends the translation of thirty-fourth chapter of Sri Kalki
Purana.


C H A P T E R 
T H I R T Y - F I V E
The Glories of Hearing Sri Kalki Purana
Texts 1-27
suta uvdca
atrdpi sukasamvddo
mdrkandeyena dhimatd
adharma varhs'a kahtanarh
kaier vivaranarh tatah
devdndrh brahma sadana
praydnarh gobhuvd saha
brahmarne vacandd visnor
janma visnuyasogrhe
sumatyarh svarhsakair bhratr
caturbhih sambhale puro
pituh putrerm samvddas
tathopanayanarh hareh
purena saha sarhvdso
vedddhyayanam uttamam
sastrdstrdmrh parijndnarh
siva sandarsanarh tatah
kalkeh stavarh s'uvapuro
varaldbhah sukdpanam
sambhaldgamanarh cakre
jndtibhyo varakirttanam
visdkhayupa bhupane
nijasarvdtma varrumam
mahdbhdgydd brdhmanandrh
sukasydgamanarh tatah
kalkina sukasamvddah
sirhhalakhydn anuttamam


362 
SRI KALKT 
P U R A N A
swadattavard padma
tasya bhupa svayarhvare
darsanad bhupa sarhghanarh
stribhdva parikirttanam
tasya visadah kalkestu
vivahartham samudyama
sukaprasthdpanarh dautye
tayd tasydpi darsanam
sukapadmdparicayah
sn visnoh pujanadikam
pddddi deha dhydnanca
kisdntarh parivarnitam
saha bhusana ddnaftca
punah suka samdgamah
kalkeh padma vivahartham
gamanarh darsanam tayoh
jalakriddprasangena
vivdhas tadanantaram
purhstva praptisca bhupanarh
kalker dasana mdtratah
anantdgamanam rdjnd
sarhvddastena sarhsadi
sandatvdd dtmano janma
karma cdtra sivastavah
mate pitari tadvisnoh
ksetre mdydpradarsanam
atrdkhydnam anantasya
jndna vairdgya vaibhavam
rdjndrh praydnarh kakesca
padmayd saha sambhale
visvakarma vidhdnanca
vasatih padmayd saha


T H E GLORIES OF HEARING SRI KALKI PURANA 
363
jndti bhratr suhrtputraih
senabhir yuddha nigrahah
kathitascdtra tesanca
strindrh sarhyodhandsrayah
tato'tra bdlakholydndm
munindrh svanivedanam
saputrayah kuthodaryd
badhascdtra prakirttatah
haridvdra gatasydpi
kalker muni samdgamah
suryavamcasya kathanams
somasya ca vidhdnatah
sri rdma caritarh cdru
smyavarhsdnu varnane
devdpesca maroh sango
yuddhaydtra prakirttih
mahdghora rane koka
vikoka vinipdtanam
bhalldta gamanarh tatra
sayydkarnddibhih saha
yuddharh sasidhvajendtra
susdntd bhaktikirttanam
yuddhe kalker dnayamam
dharmasya ca krtasya ca
susdntdydh stavastatra
ramodvdhastu kcdkind
sabhayarh purvakathanarh
nijagrdhratva kdranam
moksah sasidhvajasydtra
bhaktiprdrthayitu rvibhoh
visakanyd mocanahca
nrpdndm abhisecanam


364 
$Rl 
KALKI 
PURANA
mdydstavah sambhalesu
nanayajnadi sddhanam
ndraddd visnuyasaso
moksascatra prakirttitah
krtadharma pravrttisca
rukminl vrata klrttanam
Mto vihdrah kalkesca
putra pautradi sambhavah
kathito deva gandharva
gandgamanam atra hi
tato vaikunthagamanarh
visnoh kalker ihoditam
suka prasthdna mucitarh
kathayitva kathdh subhdh
gangdstrotram iha proktam
purdne munisarhmatam
jagatdm dnandakararh
purdnarh pamca laksanam
Suta GosvamI said: The contents of this sanctified Sri Kalki Purana
are: A conversation between the great soul, Markandeya, and Suka; a
description of the dynasty of irreligion' topics regarding Lord Kali' the
demigods travel to Brahmaloka, along with mother earth, who had assumed
the form of a cow; Lord Hari's appearance at the house of Visnuyasa at
request of Brahma; the birth of Lord Kalki's four brothers from the womb
of Sumati; a conversation between the father and son; Lord Kalki's sacred
thread ceremony; Lord Kalki grows up with His father; Lord Kalki studies
the Vedas, Lord Kalki learns how to employ weapons, Padmavatl's meeting
with Siva; Padmavatl's prayers to Siva; PadmavatI receives a benediction
from Siva; Lord Kalki receives His parrot; Lord Kalki returns to Sambhala;
PadmavatI describes Siva's benediction to her relatives; Lord Kalki reveals
Himself to King Visakhayupa; the glories of the brahmanas; the arrival of
Suka; a conversation between Lord Kalki and Suka; Suka describes the
situation in Simhala; the svayamvara of PadmavatI; the lamentation of
PadmavatI, Lord Kalki desires to marry PadmavatI; Lord Kalki sends Suka


T H E GLORIES OF H E A R I N G 
SRI KALKI PURANA 
365
as a messenger; Padmavati meets Suka; the procedure for worshiping Lord
Hari; the procedure for meditating on the Lord's form; Padmavati gives
her ornament to Suka; Suka returns to Lord Kalki; Lord Kalki goes to
Simhala to marry Padmavati; the Lord meets Padmavati on the pretext of
playing in the water, Lord Kalki marries Padmavati, the kings regain their
masculinity simply by seeing Lord Kalki; the arrival of the sage Ananta;
a conversation between Ananta and the kings; the story of Ananta's
previous birth; glorification of Lord Siva; Ananta's father meets Maya-
devl after death; the characteristics of Ananta; Ananta's knowledge and
detachment; the departure of the kings; Lord Kalki returns to Sambhala
with Padmavati; Vis'vakarma reconstructs the village of Sambhala; the
Lord resides at Sambhala along with Padmavati and His relatives, well-
wishers, children, and army; the oppression of the Buddhists; the wives of
the Buddhists go to war; the arrival of the sages known as the Valakhillas;
the process of surrender; the killing of the Kuthodarl witch; the meeting
of Lord Kalki with the sages of Hardwar; a description of the Surya
and Candra dynasties; the pastimes of Lord Ramacandra; the meeting
of Maru and Devapl; the killing of Koka and Vikoka; Lord Kalki goes
to Bhallatanagara; the battle between Lord Kalki and Sayayakarna; the
battle between Lord Kalki and King Sasidhvaja; the devotional service
of Susanta; King Sasidhvaja brings Lord Kalki, Dharma, and Satya-yuga
personified to his home; Sus'anta offers prayers to Lord Kalki; the marriage
of Lord Kalki and Rama; a description of Sasidhvaja's previous lives; the
cause of his taking birth as a vulture; King Sasidhvaja attains liberation;
the deliverance of Visakanya; the coronation ceremony of various kings;
the glorification of Maya-devI; various sacrifices performed at Sambhala;
Visnuyasa achieves liberation by the mercy of Narada Muni; the
commencement of Satya-yuga; discussion of the vow known as RukminI
vrata; the glorious pastimes of Lord Kalki; The birth of Lord Kalki's sons
and grandsons; the demigods and Gandharvas visit Sambhala; Lord
Kalki returns to Vaikuntha; Sukadeva GosvamI departs; and the prayers
to Gaiiga-devi spoken by the sages. This Kalki Purana consists of five
branches of knowledge—creation, sub-creation, the dynasties of the
sun and moon, the Manus, and the pastimes of the descendents in the
dynasties of the sun and moon.


366 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
Text 28
sakala siddhidarh sbkaih
sat sahasrath satddhikam
sarvasastrartha tatwdndrh
sararh sruti manoharam
When those whose hearts are filled with the contamination of Kali
hear this literature, they will be purified and thus achieve all kinds of
perfection. This literature consists of six thousand one hundred verses.
It contains the essence of all scriptures and as such, it pleases the hearts
of everyone.
Text 29
caturvarga pradarh kalki
puranarh parikirttitam
pralaydnte harimukhdt
nihsrtam lokavistrtam
This literature bestows upon the hearer the four objectives of life. It
appeared from the lotus mouth of Lord Hari after the annihilation of the
universe and spread throughout the world.
Text 30
aho vydsena kathitam
dvijarupena bhutale
visnoh kalker bhagavatah
prabhdvarh paramddbhutam
The exalted Krsna Dvaipayana Vyasa appeared in this world as a
brahmana and compiled this literature. It describes the glorious pastimes
of Lord Kalki, the incarnation of Lord Hari.
Text 31
ye bhaktaydtra purana sdram amalarh
sn visnubhdvdplutam srrwantxha vadanti
sddhusadasi ksetre sutirthdsrame
datwd gam turagarh khrarh
gajavararh svarnarh dvijdyadarat
vastralankaranaih prapujya
vidhivad muktdsta evottamdh


T H E GLORIES OF HEARING SRI KALKI 
PURANA
367
Those who study or hear this literature in a holy place of pilgrimage,
at an asrama of sages, or anywhere else in the association of devotees,
after worshiping the brahmanas and giving them cows, horses, asses,
elephants, gold, or cloth in charity, are certainly the best among human
beings, and are eligible for liberation.
Text 32
srutvd vidhdnarh vidhivad
brahmano vedaparagah
ksatriyo bhupatir vaisyo
dhani sudro mahdnbhavet
By carefully studying this literature, a brahmana becomes expert in
all kinds of Vedic understanding, a ksatriya becomes a powerful ruler
of men, a vaisya attains wealth and prosperity, and a sudra becomes an
exalted personality.
Text 33
puptrdrthi labhate putram
dhandrthi labhate dhanam
vidydrthi labhate vidydrh
pathandt sravanddapi
By studying this literature, those who desire a son will receive a son,
those who desire wealth will earn wealth, and those who desire wisdom
will become wise men.
Text 34
ityetat punya makhydna
lomaharsam jo munih
srdvayitvd munin bhaktyd
yayau tirthdtanddrtah
After reciting this sacred literature with faith and devotion to the
great sages, the son of Romaharsana proceeded on his tour of holy places
of pilgrimage.
Text 35
saunako munibhih sdrddham
sutam dnmatrya dharmavit


368 
SRI KALKI 
PURANA
punyaranye harirh dhydtva
brahma prdpa saharsibhih
Saunaka Rsi, who was very pious and well-versed in the literature
dealing with yoga, along with the other sages and Suta Gosvami, began to
practice meditation on Lord Hari so that they finally attained His shelter
at the sanctified place of Naimisaranya.
Text 36
lomaharsanajarh sarva
purdnajnam yatavratam
vydsasisyarh munivararh
tarn sutath pranamamyakam
Let me offer my obeisances at the lotus feet of Suta Gosvami, the son
of the great sage, Romaharsana, who was a disciple of Vyasadeva, a great
scholar of all the Puranas, and a determined ascetic.
Text 37
dlohya sarvasdstrdni
vicdrya cd punah punah
imameva sunispannarh
dhyeyo ndrdyanah sadd
After studying all the scriptures again and again, it must be firmly
concluded that it is Lord Narayana who should be meditated upon.
Text 38
vede rdmdyane caiva
purdne bhdrate tathd
dddvante ca madhye ca
harih sarvatra giyate
It is Lord Hari who is glorified throughout the beginning, middle, and
end of the Vedas, Ramayana, Mahabharata, and Puranas.
Text 39
sajala jaladavarno vdtavegaikavdhah
karadhrta karavdlah sarvalohcdkapdlah
kakikuhxvanahantd satyadharma pranetd
kalayatu kusalarh vah kalkirupah sa bhupah


T H E GLORIES OF HEARING SRI KALKI PURANA 
369
May Lord Kalki, whose complexion is the color of a dark rain cloud,
whose horse travels faster than the wind, who protects the righteous
with His sword, who establishes the principles of religion, and who re-
establishes the Satya-yuga after vanquishing Kali, shower His blessings
upon you.
Thus ends the translation of the thirty-fifth chapter of Sri Kalki
Pur ana.
End of Sn Kaiki Purdna.
