Sr! Narad a 
PancarAtra 
of 
Sri Krsna Dvaipayana Vyasa 
Volume Two 
Third, Fourth and Fifth Ratras 
Translated by Bhumipati Das 
Edited by Purnaprajna Dasa 


From cover; 
The Narada-Pancaratra is mentioned many times in the 
writings of Srila Prabhupada. One verse, especially, 
was quoted by Srila Prabhupada innumer- able times 
because it serves as the definition of devotional 
service. In the purport of Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 
19.170) Srila Prabhupada has written: Devotional 
service is defined in the Narada-Pancaratra as follows: 
sarvopadhi-vinirmuktam tat-paratvena nirmalam 
hrsikena hrsikesa- sevanam bhaktir ucyate 
"One should be free from all material designations and 
cleansed of all material contamination, lie should be 
restored to his pure identity, in which he engages his 
senses in the service of the proprietor of the senses. 
That is called devotional service." This is the most 
famous verse from Narada-pancaratra. 


Dedicated to 
t- y 
%/ 
His Divine Grace 
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada 
founder-acdrya 
International Society for Krishna Consciousness 


Contents 
Introduction ix 
Third Ratra 
Chapter 1 
Parvatl Inquires From Mahadeva about the Process of 
Worshiping Lord Visnu 1 
Chapter 2 
The Performance of Nyasa and the Chanting of Mantras While 
Worshiping the Lord and His Various Energies 9 
Chapter 3 
An Explanation of Various Nyasas and Mantras 21 
Chapter 4 
A Further Explanation of the Performance of 
Various Nyasas 31 
Chapter 5 
Meditation Upon Lord Krsna In His Transcendental 
abode, Vmdavana 41 
Chapter 6 
The Process of Worshiping Lord Krsna Whereby one 
Can attain Samlpya-Mukti, the Liberation of Becoming 
an Eternal associate of the Lord 55 
Chapter 7 
Instructions on Worshiping the Lord and His associates 63 
Chapter 8 
Further Instructions on Worshiping the Lord and His 
Associates 77 
Chapter 9 
The Procedure For Performing Fire Sacrifice 85 


Chapter 10 
Service to Lord Krsna after Diksa. Meditation 
Upon Lord Krsna 93 
Chapter 11 
The Process of Worshiping Lord Krsna at Noon. 
Meditation Upon Lord Krsna 101 
Chapter 12 
Service to Lord Krsna In the Evening 
The Worship of the Gopis 111 
Chapter 13 
Worship of Lord Krsna In His Mantra Form The 
Process of Tarpana 119 
Chapter 14 
The Chanting of Various Mantras and Their Results 129 
Chapter 15 
Description of Lord Krsna In Dvaraka 153 
Fourth Ratra 
Chapter 1 
Mahadeva Narrates One Hundred and Eight Names 
of Lord Krsna to Narada Muni 175 
Chapter 2 
The Glories of Lord Visnu, as Described In a 
Conversation Between Parvati and Lord Siva 189 
Chapter 3 
The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu, as told 
by Lord Siva to Parvati 199 
Chapter 4 
Narada Muni Glorifies Lord Visnu 269 
Chapter 5 
The Trailokya-Mangala-Kavaca of Sri Krsna 277 


Chapter 6 
Prayers to Lord Gopala 289 
Chapter 7 
A Description of the Gopala-kavaca 295 
Chapter 8 
The One Thousand Names of Lord Gopala 301 
Chapter 9 
The Paraphernalia Used For Worshiping the Lord 357 
Chapter 10 
Five Types of Worship 363 
Chapter 11 
Twelve Kinds of Purification Practiced by Vaisnavas 371 
Fifth Ratra 
Chapter 1 
Lord Krsna's Instructions For the Age of Kali 379 
C H A P T E R 2 
The Benefits of Chanting the Twelve-Syllable 
and Eighteen-Syllable Mantras 405 
Chapter 3 
Methods For Meditating Upon the Lord and 
Worshiping Him 423 
Chapter 4 
Further Descriptions of Meditation and 
Worship of the Supreme Lord 435 
Chapter 5 
The One Thousand Holy Names of Sri Radha 447 
Chapter 6 
The Glories of the One Thousand Holy Names 
of Sri Radha 505 


Chapter 7 
The Sri Radha-Kavaca 513 
Chapter 8 
An Explanation of the Meanings of Some of 
the Supreme Lord's Holy Names 523 
Chapter 9 
Worship of and Meditation on Sri Radha 533 
Chapter 10 
The Practice of Mystic Yoga, or Mantra-Yoga 541 
Chapter 11 
The Glories of Mystic Yoga 555 


Introduction 
The Narada-pancardtra is mentioned many times in the writings 
of Srila Prabhupada. One verse, especially, was quoted by 
Srila Prabhupada innumerable times because it serves as the 
definnition of devotional service. 
In the purport of Caitanya-caritdmrta (Madhya 19.170) Srila 
Prabhupada has written: 
Devotional service is defined in the Narada-pancardtra as 
follows: 
sawopddhi-xnnirmuktam 
tatparatvena nirmalam 
hrsikena hrslkesa- 
sevanam bhaktir ucyate 
"One should be free from all material designations and cleansed 
of all material contamination. He should be restored to his 
pure identity, in which he engages his senses in the service of 
the proprietor of the senses. That is called devotional service." 
This is the most famous verse from Naradapancardtra. Another 
verse is quoted by Srila Prabhupada in his purport to Bhagavad- 
gita (5.31): 
A devotee of the Lord, always acting in Krsna consciousness, 
is automatically liberated. In the Naradapancardtra this is 
confirmed in this way: 
dik-kalddy-anavacchinne 
krsne ceto vidhdya ca 
tan-mayo bhavati ksipram 
jlvo brahmatii yojayet 


X 
Sri Narada-pancarAtra 
"By concentrating one's attention on the transcendental form 
of Krsna, who is all-pervading and beyond time and space, one 
becomes absorbed in thinking of Krsna and then attains the 
happy state of transcendental association with Him." 
We know that in the four yugas, four different processes of self- 
realization are prescribed. This is most often explained while 
quoting the following verse from Snmad-Bhagavatam (12.3.52): 
krte yad dhyayato visnurh 
tretdydm yajato makhaih 
dvdpare paricarydydm 
kalau tad dhari-klrtandt 
TRANSLATION 
Whatever result was obtained in Satya-yuga by meditating on 
Visnu, in Treta-yuga by performing sacrifices, and in Dvapara- 
yuga by serving the Lord's lotus feet can be obtained in Kali- 
yuga simply by chanting the Hare Krsna mahd-mantra. 
PURPORT 
A similar verse is found in the Visnu Purdna (6.2.17), and also 
in the Padma Purdna (Uttara-khanda 72.25) and the Brhan- 
naradiya Purdna (38.97): 
dhyayan krte yajan yajnais 
tretdydm dvdpare 'rcayan 
yad dpnoti tad dpnoti 
kalau sankirtya kesavam 
'Whatever is achieved by meditation in Satya-yuga, by the 
performance of sacrifice in Treta-yuga, and by the worship of 
Lord Krsna's lotus feet in Dvapara-yuga is obtained in the age 
of Kali simply by glorifying the name of Lord Kesava." 


Introduction 
xi 
Srila Jiva Gosvami has further quoted from the Brahma-vaivarta 
Parana concerning the degraded condition of people in Kali- 
yuga; 
atah kalau tapo-yoga- 
vidya-yajnadikdh kriydh 
sdngd bhavanti na krtdh 
kusalair api dehibhih 
Thus in the age of Kali the practices of austerity, yoga 
meditation, Deity worship, sacrifice and so pn, along with their 
various subsidiary functions, are not properly carried out, even 
by the most expert embodied souls. 
Srila Jiva Gosvami has also cited the Cdturmdsya-mdhdtmya of 
the Skandq Parana concerning the necessity of chanting Hare 
Krsna in this age: 
tathd caivottamam lake 
tapah sn-hari-kirtanam 
kalau yuge visesena 
visnu-prityai samdcaret 
"In this way the most perfect penance to be executed in this 
world is the chanting of the name of Lord Sri Had. Especially 
in the age of Kali, one can satisfy the Supreme Lord Visnu by 
performing sankirtana." 
In conclusion, massive propaganda should be made all over 
the world to induce people to chant the Hare Krsna mantra, by 
which human society can be rescued from the dangerous ocean 
of the age of Kali. 
In the previous age, Dvapara-yuga, the process of Deity worship 
was prescribed and this method is explained in great detail in 
the Narada-pancardtra. 


xii 
Sri Narada-pai^caratra 
In his purport to Snmad-Bhagavatam (3.9.17), Srila Prabhupada 
has written: 
People in general are all engaged in senseless work. They are 
systematically unmindful of the real beneficial work, which is 
the devotional service of the Lord, technically called the arcana 
regulations. The arcana regulations are directly instructed by 
the Lord in the Narada-pancaratra and are strictly followed by 
the intelligent men, who know well that the highest perfectional 
goal of life is to reach Lord Visnu, who is the root of the tree 
called the cosmic manifestation. 
The purpose of any process of self-realization is to engage 
the practitioner one hundred percent so that his mind 
becomes fully absorbed in transcendence, with no chance of 
engaging on the material platform. In the Dvapara-yuga, a very 
elaborate performance of Deity worship enabled the devotee 
to fully engage his mind and senses in Krsna consciousness. 
This process is not practical in Kali-yuga, however, when the 
sahklrtana-yajna is to be performed. Therefore, what we read 
in the Narada-pancaratra is too elaborate and technical for this 
fallen age. Still, the proceiss of Deity worship is not neglected 
in Kali-yuga, as we see from the following purport in Snmad- 
Bhagavatam (6.3.26) where Srila Prabhupada has written: 
Especially in this age of Kali, sankirtana alone is sufficient. If 
the members of our temples in the different parts of the world 
simply continue sankirtana before the Deity, especially before 
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, they will remain perfect. There is no 
need of any other performances. Nevertheless, to keep oneself 
clean in habits and mind, Deity worship and other regulative 
principles are required. Srila Jlva Gosvam! says that although 
sankirtana is sufficient for the perfection of life, the arcana, or 
worship of the Deity in the temple, must continue in order that 
the devotees may stay clean and pure. Srila Bhaktisiddhanta 


Introduction 
xiii 
Sarasvati Thakura therefore recommended that one follow 
both processes simultaneously. We strictly follow his principle 
of performing Deity worship and sankirtana along parallel lines. 
This we should continue. 
Srila Prabhupada has written in his purport to Srimad- 
Bhagavatam (4.13.4): 
Narada Muni is always glorifying the pastimes of the Lord. In 
this verse we see that not only does he glorify the Lord, but he 
also likes to glorify the devotees of the Lord. The great sage 
Narada's mission is to broadcast the devotional service of the 
Lord. For this purpose he has compiled the Narada-pancardtra, 
a directory of devotional service, so that devotees can always 
take information about how to execute devotional service and 
thus engage twenty-four hours a day in performing sacrifices 
for the pleasure of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
In the purport to Snmad-Bhagavatam (6.8.17) Srila Prabhupada 
has written: 
Narada Muni, who is the guide for arcana, is the author of the 
Narada-pancardtra, which prescribes the regulative principles 
for worshiping the Deity. Everyone engaged in Deity worship, 
whether at home or in the temple, should always seek the mercy 
of Devarsi Narada in order to avoid the thirty-two offenses while 
worshiping the Deity. 
Narada-pancardtra is a very important devotional literature. It is 
referred to in the following verse of Rupa Gosvami, which Srila 
Prabhupada quoted numerous times, as in this excerpt from 
the Bhagavad-gitd purport (7.3): 
Srila Rupa Gosvami writes in his Bhakti-rasdmrta-sindhu 
(1.2.101): 


Sruti-smrti-purdnddi- 
pancardtra-vidhim vind 
aikdntiki harer bhaktir 
utpdtdyaiva kalpate 
"Devotional service of the Lord that ignores the authorized 
Vedic literatures like the Upanisads, Purdnas and Ndrada- 
pancardtra is simply an unnecessary disturbance in society." 
It is our hope that the readers of this humble attempt at 
presenting Ndrada-pancardtra will gain, at the very least, some 
pleasure in hearing the glorification of Lord Krishna, as 
expressed by His pure devotee, Narada Muni. 


Sri Narada 
PancarAtra 


Third Ratra 
Chapter 1 
Parvati Inquires From Mahadeva about the 
Process of Worshiping Lord Visnu 
Text 1 
sri-siva uvdca 
srnu narada vaksydmi 
mantra-yantra-kriyddikdn 
purd vydsena ye proktdh 
sukarh prati mahdmate 
Mahadeva said; O Narada! I shall now describe to you the 
mantras, yantras and various rituals that Vyasadeva had imparted 
to Sukadeva, long ago. Kindly hear with attention. 
Texts 2-4 
pratah-krtya-vidhir yo 'tra 
tathd snana-vidhir mune 
tathd pujddikam sarvarh 
mantraksara-samudbhavam 
mantrdrthas ca yathd 
yena jndyate purusena hi 
purd kailasa-sikhare 
sukha-sevye nirantaram 
parvati mdrh purd bhaktyd 
paripapraccha yat sivam 
tat tat srnu mahdbdho 
mamaikdgra-mand mune 
O sage, on the peak of Mount Kailasa, Parvat! repeatedly 
inquired from me with great devotion about religious duties to 
1 


2 
Sri Narada-paScaratra • Third Ratra 
be performed in the morning, the procedure for bathing, the 
collecting of paraphernalia for worship, as well as about the 
origin and meanings of various mantras. 
O mighty-armed sage! Listen with undivided attention as I 
speak on these subjects, which are meant for the welfare of the 
world. 
TextS 
pdruaty uvdca 
deva-deva mahddeva 
samsdrdrnava-tdraka 
vaktum arhasi devesa 
mantra-tantra-vidhim gum 
Parvat! said: O Mahadeva! O Lord of lords! O deliverer of the 
fallen living entities from the ocean of material existence! 
O foremost spiritual master of the demigods, you alone are 
capable of revealing to me the proper understanding of mantras 
and tantras. 
Texts 6-8 
sri-rddhdyds ca krsnasya 
tathd pujd-vidhim mama 
mantrdrtharh ca tathd yogdn 
ndmndm astottaram satam 
sahasram ca tathd ndmndm 
prabruhi mama sdmpratam 
yady asti mayi kdrunyam 
yady asti mayi dohadam 
tadd prabruhi radhdyd 
ndmndm astottaram satam 
sahasram ca tathd deva 
mantraryantra-vidhim mama 


The Process of Worshiping Lord Visnu 
3 
O lord, please describe to me in detail the process of worshiping 
Sri Sri Radha-Krsna, the meaning of various mantras, the 
procedure for practicing yoga, the one hundred and eight 
names of the Lord, and also the one thousand names of the 
Supreme Lord. If you are actually merciful to me then you will 
tell me Radha's one hundred and eight names, as well as Her 
one thousand names, and the process of chanting mantras and 
performing tantras in relation to Her. 
Text 9 
sri-mahadeva uvaca 
srnu devi pravaksydmi 
mantra-yantra-vidhirh priye 
sukath prati pura proktam 
vedavydsena dhlmatd 
Mahadeva said: O dear one, please listen now as I explain about 
mantras and tantras as it was revealed by Vyasadeva to Sukadeva, 
long ago. 
Text 10 
tat te 'ham sampravaksydmi 
srnusvaika-mandh priye 
ydvato mantra-varnds tu 
sn-krsnasya pardtmanah 
O dearly beloved, kindly hear with rapt attention as I begin my 
glorification of Krsna mantras. 
Text 11 
vydsa uvdca 
kald tu mdyd narakdnta-murtih 
kala-kvanad-venu-nindda-ramyah 
srito hrdi vydkulayams trilokim 
sriye 'stu gopi-jana-vallabho vah 


4 
Sri Narada-pancaratra 
Third Ratra 
Vyasadeva said: May Sri Krsna—who enchants the three worlds 
by the sound of His flute, who assumes a human form, who is 
very dear to the gopis, and whose separatated energy is known 
as maya—reside within your heart. 
Text 12 
guru-carana-saroruha-dvayotthan 
mahita-rajah-kanakdn pranamya murdhnd 
gaditam iha vivecya naradddyair 
yajana-vidhi kathaydmi sdrngapdneh 
After offering obeisances to the most exalted particles of dust 
from the lotus feet of my spiritual master, I shall begin to reveal 
the process of worship of Lord Krsna, as taught by great sages, 
such as Narada. 
Text 13 
sarvesu varnesu tathdsramesu 
ndrisu ndndsu yajan makhesu 
data phaldndm abhivdnchitdndm 
drd^eva gopdlaka-mantra esah 
1 
The Gopdla-mantra is suitable for members of all varnas and 
dsramas, as well as for women, and for all those who perform 
sacrifice. It awards them their desired results. 
Text 14 
srnu vatsa pravaksydmi 
pujanam sarnga-dhanvanah 
yan ndraddya kathitam 
brahmand padma-yonind 
My dear child, let me describe to you the process for worshiping 
Lord Krsna that was previously disclosed to Narada by Brahma, 
who was born on the universal lotus flower. 


The Process of Worshiping Lord Visnu 
5 
Text 15 
prdtah-krty adikarh vaksye 
tathd pujd-vidhi suta 
jagat-kalpa-taror vatsa 
srnusva gadato mama 
My dear son, please hear with attention as I describe the 
ritualistic activities that are to be performed in the morning, 
as well as the process of worshiping Lord Krsna, who is like a 
desire tree because He alone fulfills the desires of everyone. 
Text 16 
nunam acyuta-katdksa-pdtane 
kdranam bhavati bhaktir anjasd 
tac-catustaya-phaldptaye tato 
bhaktimdn adhikrto gurau harau 
Devotional service is the only means whereby one can easily 
attain Lord Krsna's merciful glance. Therefore, if one desires 
to obtain the four objectives of life, one should faithfully serve 
his spiritual master and thereby become qualified to serve 
Lord Had. 
Text 17 
sndto nirmala-suksma- suddha- 
vasano dhautdnghri-pdnydnanah 
sdcdntah sapavitra-mudrita-karah 
svetordhvapundrojjvalah 
praci-dig-vadano nibaddhya- 
sudrdham padmasanam svastikam 
vd "sinah sva-gurun ganadhipam 
atho vandeta baddhanjalih 
First of all, one should bathe and then put on clean clothes. 
Next, one should wash his hands, legs and mouth with water 


6 
Sri Narada-pa^caratra • Third RAtra 
and perform dcamana. Then, one should put a ring made of 
kusa grass on his right hand and decorate his forehead with 
tilaka. After this, one should offer prayers to his spiritual master 
and the previous dcdryas, as well as to the demigods, with folded 
hands while sitting in the padmdsana or svastikdsana (sitting 
posture). 
Text 18 
tato 'stra-mantrena visodhya pdnl 
tritala-dig-bandha-hutdsa-sdldn 
vidhdya bhutdtmakam etad angarii 
visodhayec chuddha-matih kramena 
One should then purify his hands by chanting astrdya phat and 
purify the four directions for the protection of the place of 
worship, or sacrifice. One after another, a sincere devotee of 
Lord Krsna should purify each and every limb of his body. 
Text 19 
idd-vaktre dhumrarh satata- 
gati-bijam salavakam 
smaret purvarh mantri sakala- 
bhuvanocchosana-karam 
svakam deharh tena pratata- 
vapusd 'purya-sakalam 
visodhya vydmuncet pavanam 
atha mdrgena-khamaneh 
One should invoke the grey-complexioned predominating 
deity of the air, Vayu, by chanting salavakam. He should then 
inhale air through his left nostril. After filling the lungs and 
thus becoming purified, one should exhale through the right 
nostril. 


The Process of Worshiping Lord Visnu 
7 
Text 20 
tenaiva mdrgena villna-marutam 
bijarh vicintydrunam dsusuksaneh 
dpurya deharh paridahya vdmato 
muncet samlram saha bhasmand bahih 
Thereafter, one should meditate upon the reddish- 
complexioned deity of fire while chanting his bijo-mantra. While 
inhaling through the left nostril, thus filling one's entire body 
with air, the practitioner bums all his sins by that fire and air 
and finally exhales the ashes from out of his body through his 
right nostril. 
Text 21 
uparam ativa suddham 
amrtdrhsu-pathena vidhurh 
nayatu laldta-candram 
amrtah sakaldrnamayim 
la-pa-ra-japdn nipdtya 
racayec ca tayd sakalam 
vapur amrtaugha-vrstim 
atha vaktra-karddyam idam 
A devotee should then connect the kundalini—which is the 
reservoir of all btjas, and which is situated on the top of one's 
left nostril—with the nectarean moon, which is supposed to be 
situated on one's forehead. In this way, one should mentally 
cleanse his entire body by showering it with nectar. 
Texts 22-23 
siro-vadana-vrtta-drk-sravana- 
ghona-gandausthaka-dvayesu 
sa-siro-mukhesu ca iti 
kramdt vinyaset 


8 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third Ratra 
halas ca kara-pada-sandhisu 
tad agrakesv adardt 
sa-pdrsva-yuga-prstha-ndbhy 
udarakesu yddydn atha 
hrdaya-kaksa-kaku t-kara-mu la-doh- 
pada-yugodara-vaktrdgatdn budhah 
hrdaya-purvam anena pathd 'nvaharh 
nyasatu suddha-ka leuara-siddhaye 
Thereafter, one should perform the nydsa by touching one's 
forehead, face, eyes, ears, nose, cheeks, lips, teeth and mouth 
with vowels. One should also perform the nydsa by touching 
with consonants the joints of one's hands and legs, two sides, 
back, navel and abdomen. Next, an intelligent devotee should 
perform the nydsa by touching with the letters that come after 
the five sets of consonants, one's heart, arms, palms, feet, belly 
and mouth, while chanting appropriate mantras, so that one's 
entire body becomes purified. 
Text 24 
ity dracayya vapur arna-satarddhakena 
sdrddha-ksapesa-savisargaka-sobhanais taih 
vinyasya kesava-purahsara-murti-yuktaih 
kirty ddi-sakti-sahitair nyasatu kramena 
In this way, one should perform the nydsa while touching 
forms of the Supreme Lord, such as Kesava, and energies of 
the Supreme Lord, such as Klrtl, while decorating his body 
with fifty matrkd-bija mantras, along with dots. This is called the 
kesava-kirti-nydsa. 
Thus ends the translation of the first chapter of the Third Rdtra 
of Sri Narada-pahcardtra. 


Chapter 2 
The Performance of Nyasa and the Chanting 
of Mantras While Worshiping the Lord and His 
Various Energies 
Texts 1-3 
vyasa uvdca 
atha kathaydmy arndndrh murtlh 
saktih sakal-bhuvanamaylh 
kesava-kirtir ndrdyana-kdntir 
mddhavas tathd tustih 
govindah pusti-yuto visnu- 
dhrti sudanas ca madhvddyah 
sdntis trivikramas ca kriyd-punar 
vdmano dayd 'cyutah 
mdhara-yutd ca medhd 
hrsikandthas ca harsayd yuktah 
ambujanabha-sraddhd 
damodara-sarhyutd punar lajjd 
Vyasadeva said: I shall now describe how the various Vaikuntha 
forms of the Lord are united with Their pleasure potencies, for 
the purpose of creation. The form of Kesava is associated with 
the energy known as Klrttl, Narayana with KantI, Madhava with 
Tusti, Govinda with Pusti, Visnu with Dhrti, Madhusudana with 
Santi, Trivikrama with Kriya, Vamana with Daya, Srldhara with 
Medha, Hrsikesa with Harsa, Padmanabha with Sraddha and 
Damodara with Lajja. 
Texts 4-5 
laksml savdsudevd sankarsana- 
yutd sarasvati-proktd 
9 


Sri Narada-pancarAtra • Third RAtra 
pradyumnah priti-yuto 'niruddhako 
ratir imah svaropetdh 
cakrijaye gadidurge sdrtigi 
prabhaydnvitas tathd khadgi 
satyd sankhi-candd halivdnyau 
musaliyud-bildsinikd 
The form of Vasudeva is combined with LaksmI, Sahkarsana 
with SarasvatI, Pradyumna with Priti, Aniruddha with Rati, Cakri 
with Jaya, Gadadhara with Durga, Sarhg! with Prabha, Khadgi 
with Sati, Saiikhi with Can da, Hall with Vani, and Musali with 
Yuddha-vilasini. 
Texts 6-10 
suli vijayd past virajd 
visvdnvito 'kuriisoh bhuyah 
vinadd mukunda-yuktd nandaja- 
sunande smrtis ca nandi-yutd 
nava-rddhir narakayutd samrddhir 
agha suddhi-yuk harih krsno 
bhakti-yutah satya-yuta-buddhir 
mati-yuk ca sdsvatah saurih 
ksamayd sum ramayd 
jandrdano me ca bhudharah 
kledini visvddi-murti- 
yuktd klinnd vaikunthd 
purusottamas ca tahd 
vasudhd balind ca pardyand 
bhrjopetd-bhuyah pardyandkhyd 
bdleh suksmd vrsapra-sandhye ca 
savrsd prajnd hamsaprabhd 
vardho nisd ca vimalo 'meghd 


NyAsa and Mantras 
11 
narasimha-vidyute ca pranigaditd 
murtayo 'lath sakti-yutdh 
varndn uktvd sarddha-candrdn purastdt 
murtih saktir rie 'vasdnd ratirh ca 
The form of Suli is associated with Vijaya, Varuna with Viraja, 
Ankusi with Visva, Mukunda with Vinada, Nandaja with 
Sunanda, Nandi with Smrti, Nara with Vrddhi, Narakajit with 
Samrddhi, Hari with Suddhi, Sri Krsna with Bhakti, Satya 
with Buddhi, Sasvata with Mati, Sauri with Ksama , Sura with 
Rama, Janardana with Uma, Bhudhara with Kledini, Visvamurti 
with Klinna, Purusottama with Vaikuntha, Bali with Vasudha 
Parayana, Bala with Mrjopeta Parayana, Vali with Suksma, 
Vrsa with Prasandhya, Savrsa with Prajfia, Harhsa with Prabha, 
Varaha with Nisa, Vimala with Amogha, and Narasimha with 
Vidyuta. These are the names of various forms of the Lord and 
Their energies. While chanting these holy names of the Lord 
and His energies, the mantra should end with the word namah. 
For example: orh kesavdya kirttai namah. 
Texts 11-12 
uktvd nyasye ddibhih 
saptardhdtuna 'tha 
vasudd prdna-bijam 
krodham apy dtmane 'svdn 
udyat-pradyotana-saya- 
rucirh taptarhemavaddtam 
parsva-dvandve jaladhi- 
sutayd visva-dhdtryd ca 
justam ndnd-ratnollasita- 
vividhdkalpam dplta-vastram 
visnurh vande dara-kam 
gadd-kaumudi-cakrapdnim 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third RAtra 
One should perform the nyasa by touching it to seven parts 
of the body, beginning with the forehead, while chanting the 
names of the above-mentioned forms of the Lord and Their 
energies, in the form of bija-mantras. 
One should meditate on Lord Visnu while chanting thefollowing 
prayer; I worship Lord Visnu; whose bodily effulgence is like 
millions of rising suns; whose bodily complexion resembles 
molten gold; who is served by Laksm! and Visvadhatri, standing 
by His side; who is decorated with jeweled ornaments; who is 
dressed in yellow garments; and who holds a conch, disc, club, 
and lotus in His four hands. 
Text 13 
dhydtvaivarh paramdksarair yo 
vinyased dinam anu kesavddi-yuktaih 
medhdyuh-smrti-dhrti-kirti-kdnti-laksmi 
saubhdgyais dram upavrmhito bhavet sah 
A person who properly performs these above-mentioned nydsas 
daily becomes endowed with sound intelligence, a long duration 
of life, good memory, perseverence, unfading glory, opulence, 
beauty and good fortune. 
Text 14 
asum eva ramd-purah-sararh 
prabhajed yo manujo vidhirh budhah 
samupetya ramdrh prathiyasi 
punar ante haritdrh brajety asau 
The intelligent devotee who worships Lord Visnu while chanting 
the mantras beginning with ramd-bija attains all desirable 
opulence in this life and returns to the abode of Lord Hari 
after quitting his material body. 


NyAsa and Mantras 
Text 15 
ity acyuti-krta-tanur vidhivattu tattva 
nydsarh na-puruam apardksara-naty upetam 
bhuyah pardya ca tad dhvayam dtmane ca 
naty antam uddharatutattvamanun kramena 
By this performance of tattva-nydsa, one attains a purified body 
like that of Lord Acyuta. This ritual should first be performed 
without uttering the mantrashnX. after it has been practiced, the 
names of the Lord should be chanted, ending with namah. 
Texta 16-17 
sakala-vapusi Mjarh 
prdnam dyojya madhye 
nyasatu matim ahankdram 
manas ceti mantri 
ka-mukha-hrdaya-guhydnghrisv 
atho sabda-puruarh 
guna-ganam atha kartd 
"disthitam srotra-puruam 
vdg adindriya-vargam dtma- 
nilayesv dkdsa-puruam ganam 
murdhnydsye hrdaye sire 
caranayor hrt-pundankam hrdi 
bimbdni dvisad asta-yug-dasa- 
kald-vydptdni suryodu-rdd 
vahntndm ca yatas tu bhuta- 
vasum usyanty dksair mantravit 
The devotee should chant the tnja-mantra while invoking the 
prdna within his body. He should then perform the nydsa while 
meditating on his mind, intelligence, ego and heart. He should 
perform the nydsa along with the chanting of the sabda-bija- 


Sri Narada-paScaratra • Third RAtra 
mantra while touching his mouth, heart, anus and feet. He 
should then perform the nydsa, touching it to the three material 
modes, ears, head, face, heart, forehead, legs, and finally, to the 
lotus within the heart, the sun and moon, Agni, the aggregate 
of living entities, and the eight Vasus. 
Text 18 
atha paramesthi-pumdrhsau visva- 
nivrtti sarva-haty upanisadarh 
nyased dkasadi-sthdna-sthdnasoya- 
balavdrthih saldvah 
vasudeuah sankarsanah 
pradyumnds caniruddhakah 
ndrdyanas ca kramasah 
paramesthy ddibhir yutah 
By performing this nydsa, according to the proper rules and 
regulations, as described in the Upanisads, and by chanting the 
names of the demigods who are the controllers of the material 
nature, and adding the names of the Supreme Lord in His 
various expansions—such as Vasudeva, Sahkarsna, Pradyumna, 
Aniruddha and Narayana—one attains perfection. 
Text 19 
tatah kopa-tattvarh ksarau vindu-yuktarh 
nrsimharh nyaset sarva-gdtresu tajjnah 
krameneti tattvdtmako nydsa uktah 
svdsdn nikrd-visva-murty adisu sydt 
Thereafter, one should perform the Nrsimhadeua-nydsa, 
touching it to one's entire body while chanting the mantra, 
ksaraum kopatattvdya. This is the procedure for performing the 
tattva-nydsa. The same procedure should be followed while 
performing the Visvamurti-nydsa. 


Nyasa and Mantras 
15 
Texts 20-21 
iti krto 'dhikrto bhavati dhruvarh 
sakala-vaisnava-mantra-japadisu 
pavana-sarh ya-va-la-tattvamanund caret 
tattvam ihajaptum asau manucchaii 
athavdkhilesu hi vidhi-mantra- 
japa-vidhisu mula-mantratah 
sarhyamanam amala-dhir maruto 
vidhindbhyasarhs caratu tattva-sankhyayd 
By properly following these rules and regulations, one becomes 
qualified to chant the Vaisnava mantras. While parcticing mystic 
yoga, one should restrain his breath and chant the tattva 
mantras. A devotee of Lord Krsna can also practice restraining 
his breath while chanting the tattva mantras, along with the 
mula-mantras. 
Text 22 
purato japasya parato 'pi 
vihitam atha tat-tritayarh budhaih 
sodasa ya iha cared dhinesah 
paripuyate sa khalu mdsato harhsah 
Intelligent sages have chalked out three kinds of prescriptions 
to be followed before and after the chanting of a mantra. A 
devotee who follows these procedures while chanting his mantra 
sixteen times daily becomes a pure, swanlike Vaisnava. 
Text 23 
ayavdnga-janmamamundnusu samyamam 
sakalesu krsnam anujdpa-karmasu 
sahitaika-sapta-krti-vdram abhyaset 
tanuydt samasta-duritdpa-hdrind 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third Ratra 
By chanting the Krsna mantras after chanting the nydsa mantras 
sixty-four times, one becomes a controller of his senses so that 
his human birth becomes successful. 
Text 24 
astdvimsati-sankhyam ista-phaladaih 
mantram dasdrnam japan 
ndyacchet pavanarh susamyata- 
matis tv astau dasdrnena cet 
abhyasyann avivdram anyam 
anubhir varndnurupam japan 
kuryad recaka-purvakarma- 
nipunah prdna-prayogam narah 
If the practitioner is unable to retain his breath until he 
completes his chanting of the dasdrna-mantra twenty-eight 
times, or at least eight times, if he is expert in performing the 
other above-mentioned rituals, he should employ the breathing 
process known as recaka. 
Text 25 
recayen mdrutam daksayd daksinah 
purayed vdmayd madhya-nadya punah 
dharayed iritam recakadi-trayam sydt 
kaldd anta-vidydkhyam atrdcyukam 
In this practice, one should exhale through his right nostril 
and then inhale through his left nostril. While restraining his 
breath, he should chant his mantra sixteen, sixty-four or thirty- 
two times, depending upon his capacity. In this way, he will 
make advancement in the practice of the prdndydma exercises 
known as recaka, puraka and kumbhaka. 


NyAsa and Mantras 
Text 26 
prdndydmath vidhdyety atha nija- 
vapusd kalpayed yogapitham 
nyasyed ddhara-sakti-prakrti- 
kamatha-ksamd-ksira-sindhun 
svetadviparh ca ratnojjvala-mahita- 
mahdmandaparh kalpavrksam 
hrd-dese 'rhsa-dvayor udvaya-vadana- 
kati-pdrsva-yugmesu bhuyah 
After performing these exercises of prdnaydma, one should 
think of his body as the yogapitha, decorated with valuable gems 
and surrounded by the Ocean of Milk, Svetadvlpa, elevated 
altars, and desire trees. He should then perform the nydsa by 
touching his shoulders, thighs, face, waist and sides. 
Text 27 
dharmddy adharmddi ca pdda-gatra- 
catustayarh hrdy atha sesa-mantram 
suryendu-vahnin pranavdrhsa-yuktdn 
ddy aksaraih sattva-rajas-tamdmsih 
Thereafter, the devotee should perform the nydsa by touching 
his legs, his entire body and heart while aspiring for knowledge, 
renunciation and opulence. He should also perform the nydsa 
while meditating on the three material modes, the sun, and the 
moon. 
Text 28 
dtmddi-trayam dtma-bija-sahitarh 
vyomdgni-mdyd-lavair 
jndndtmdnam athasta-diksu 
panto madhye ca saktir nava 


Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Third Ratra 
nyastvd pitham anurii ca Ultra 
vidhivat tat-karnika-madhyagarh 
nityananda-citi-prakasam 
amrtarh sancintayen ndma tat 
The devotee should next perform the nydsa while meditating 
on the eight directions and chanting the dtmabija-mantra, and 
then while meditating on nine energies of the Lord. He should 
then sit down and meditate on Lord Krsna, who is the bestower 
of the most confidential transcendental knowledge. 
Text 29 
vimalotkarsani jndnd kriyd yogeti saktayah 
prabhvi satyd tathesdnd 'nugrd navaml tathd 
The nine energies are Vimala, Utkarsanl, Jnana, Kriya-yoga, 
Prabhvi, Satya, Isana, Anugra and Navaml. 
Text 30 
evarh hrdayam bhagavdn visnuh 
sarvdnvitas ca bhutdtmd 
nentdh savdsudevdh sarvdtma 
yutam ca samyogam 
After placing this nydsa on the nine energies, one should chant 
the sublime mantra, namo bhagvate visnave sarvabhutatmane 
vdsudevdya. 
Text 31 
yogdvadhas ca padmarh 
plthd ne-yuto natis cdnte 
pitha-mahdmanur vyaktah 
parydpto "yam saparydsu 
Afterwards, one should chant the pitha mantra: sarvdtma yoga 
padma pithdtmane namah, for it is essential in the worship of 
the Lord. 


NyAsa and Mantras 
Text 32 
karayor yugalam vidhdya mantrdtmakam 
abhydnabhiramyamana-margat 
sakalam vidadhita mantra-varnaih 
paramarh jyotir anuttamam hares tat 
While, folding one's palms in a posture of reverence, one 
should chant his mantra with devotion and in this way, invoke 
the effulgent Lord Hari within his heart. 
Thus ends the translation of the second chapter of the Third 
Rdtra of Sri Narada-paricardtra 


Chapter 3 
An Explanation of Various Nyasas and Mantras 
Text 1 
vydsa uvdca 
atha vaksye mahdmantrarh 
smusvdvahito mune 
yam labdhvd na punar gacchet 
sarhsrtirh pdmaro 'pi hi 
Vyasadeva said: O sage, I shall now reveal the mahd-mantra to 
you. Kindly listen with attention. By receiving this mantra, even 
the most sinful person will no longer be forced to accept birth 
in this miserable material world. 
Text 2 
vaksye manum tribhuvana- 
prathitdtma-bhdvam 
aksina-punya-nicayair 
munibhir vimrgyam 
paksindra-ketu-visayam 
vasu-dharma-kdma- 
moksa-pradarh sakala- 
karmani karma-daksam 
I am going to describe to you this most exalted mantra— 
which is sought after by great sages who possess a great stock 
of piety; which awards religiosity, economic development, 
sense gratification, and liberation; which awards all kinds of 
perfection; which awards devotional service to the Supreme 
Lord; and which imparts to the chanter knowledge of the 
science of self-realization. 
21 


Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Third RatRa 
TextS 
atiguhyam abodha-tula-rdsi-jvalanam 
vdga dhipatyadam nardndm 
duritdpaharam visdpamrtyu- 
graha-rogadi-nivdranaika-hetum 
This understanding is very confidential and it removes the 
darkness of ignorance, destroys all sinful reactions, neutralizes 
the effects of poison, protects one from unnatural death, and is 
the only way to counteract the influence of evil planets. 
Text 4 
jayadam pradhane 'abhayadarh vipine 
salila-plavane sukha-tdranadam 
nara-sapti-ratha-dvipa-vrddhi-karam 
suta-go-dharani-dhana-dhanya-karam 
This mantra awards one victory in battle; fearlessness while 
residing in the forest; and saves one from natural calamities, 
such as floods. The chanting of this mantra naturally increases 
one's opulence—both material and spiritual. It awards one 
good children, cows, land, wealth, and food grains. 
Text 5 
bala-vlrya-saurya-nicaya-pratibhd- 
svara-varna-kdnti-subhagatvakaram 
brahmanda-koti-manimadi-gundstakadam 
" kim atra bahunakhila-dam 
It also bestows upon the chanter strength, valour, heroism, 
ingenuity and bodily lustre like that which is possessed by 
the demigods. It also enables one to possess the eight mystic 
perfections. Indeed, it awards one all types of expertise in every 
field of activity. 


Explanation of Various NyAsas and Mantras 
Texts 6-8 
sdrngi sotura-dantah paro 
rdmdksiyuk dvitlydrnam 
suU saurir bdlo baldnuja- 
dvayam athdksara-catustayam 
sura-tunyah sdnana dvrttah 
sydt sasumo 'stamo 'gni-sakhah 
tad-dayitaksara-yugmam tad 
uparigas tv evam uddharen mantram 
prakdsito dasdksaro manus 
tv ay am madhu-dvisah 
visesatah padaravinda- 
yugmam bhakti-vardhanah 
The ten-syllable mcihd-mantra of Lord Madhusudana is; gopijana 
vallabhdya svdhd. By chanting this mantra, one's devotion at the 
lotus feet of Lord Krsna increases immeasurably. 
Text 9 
narado 'sya munir atra kirtitas 
chanda uktam rsibhir virad api 
devata-sakala-loka-mangalo 
nanda-gopa-tanayah samiritah 
Narada is the presiding sage of this mantra. The meter virdt 
should be used while chanting it. The son of Nanda, Sri Krsna, 
who is the benefactor of all living entities, is the ultimate 
objective of chanting this mantra. 
Texts 10-11 
aiigdni panca hu tab hug dayitd-sametais 
cakrair amusya mukha-vrtta-visupapannaih 
trailokya-raksana-sujdpy asurdntakdkhya- 
purvena ceha kathitdni vibhakti-yuktaih 


Sri Narada-panicaratra • Third Ratra 
hrdaye natih sirasi pdvaka-priyd 
savasat-sikhd-hum iti varmani sthitam 
sa-phad astram ity uditam anga-pancakam 
sa-caturthi-vausad uditam drsoryadi 
Thereafter, one should perform the nydsa along with the 
chanting of appropriate mantras. While touching the heart, 
namah should be uttered. While touching the head, svaha 
should be chanted. While touching the sikhd, vasal should be 
said. While meditating on the kavaca, hum should be chanted. 
While meditating upon a weapon, the word phat should be 
chanted. While touching the eyes, the word vausat should be 
uttered. The five nydsa mantras to be chanted while touching 
the nydsa to the five limbs are, dcakrdya svdhd hrdaydya namah, 
vicakrdya svaha sirase svdhd, sucakrdya svdhd sikhdyai vasat, 
trailokyaraksandrthdya svdhd kavacdya hum and asurdntaka cakrdya 
svdhd astrdya phat. 
Text 12 
mantrdrnair dasabhir 
upeta-candra-khandair 
ahgdndm dasakam 
udiritam namo 'ntam 
hrc-chirsam tad anu 
sikhdtanutra-mantram 
parsva-dvandva-sakati- 
prstha-murddha-yuktam 
With each letter of this ten-letter mantra, one should touch the 
nydsa to the ten limbs of his body. For example—goh hrdaydya 
namah, pi sirase namah, and so on. 


Explanation of Various NyAsas and Mantras 
Texts 13-15 
rakse mantrasyasya bijarh ca sakticakri 
sakri vama-netra-pradiptah 
sa-pradyumno bijam etat-pradlptarh 
mantrah pradyumno jagan mohano 'yam 
harhso medo vakra-vrttdbhy upetah 
potri netrddy anvito 'sau yugdmd 
proktd saktih sarva-girvdna-vrndair 
vandasydgner vallabhd kdma-deyam 
viniyogasya mantrasya 
purusdrtha-catustaye 
krsnam prakrtir ity ukto 
durgadhisthdtr-devatd 
By combining the words cakri, sakri, vdma netra and Pradyumna, 
the word klirh is formed. Then, by adding words such as 
harhsa, medah, vakravrtta, and potrinetra, along with svdhd, the 
worshipable four-syllable mantra is formed. This mantra is: klirh 
hrm svdhd and it fulfills all of one's desires. This mantra also 
helps one to achieve the four objectives of human life. Durga is 
the predominating deity of this mantra and Krsna is the prakrti. 
Text 16 
gopdyati sakalam idarh gopdyati 
pararh pumdrhsam iti gopi 
prakrtes tasyd jdtarh jana iti 
nadadikarh prthivy antam 
The word gopi is used for the protection of all the universes and 
it is offered to the supreme enjoyer. The word jana has been 
used because all rivers and oceans, in this world and in heaven, 
have been manifested from the prakrti of this word. 


Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Third Ratra 
Text 17 
anayor gopi-janayoh 
samlranad dsrito vydptyd 
vallabha ity upadistarh 
sandrdnandam niranjanam jyotih 
To indicate the expansion of the words gopi and jana, as well 
as for the sake of samlrana, the word vallabha has been used. In 
this way, it indicates an intense, blissful, unlimited effulgence. 
Text 18 
svdhety dtmdnam gamaydmlty 
atejase tasmai 
yah kdrya-kdranesah pardmdtmety 
acyutaikatdsya manoh 
The actual purpose of using the word svdhd is to make all living 
entities surrender unto the lotus feet of Lord Krsna, who is one 
without a second, and who is the director of both cause and 
effect. 
Text 19 
athavd gopi-jana iti samasta 
jagad avana-sakti- 
samuddyas tasya dnanyasya 
svdmi vallabha ity upadistah 
athavd vraja-yuvatindm dayitdya 
juhomi mdrh madlyam 
aplty arpayet samastarh brahmani 
sugane samasta-sampattyai 
Alternatively, the phrase gopijana refers to the energy that 
protects the universes, and vallabha refers to the beloved Lord 
of that energy. One should surrender everything to Lord Krsna 
by offering oneself at His lotus feet as an eternal servant. Lord 


Explanation of Various NyAsas and Mantras 
Krsna is the beloved Lord of the young cowherd damsels of 
Vraja. 
Text 20 
krs-sabdah sattdrtho nas 
cananddtmakas tatah 
krsno bhaktdgha-karsandd api tad- 
varnatvdc ca mantramaya-vapusah 
The syllable krs means existence and the letter na means 
full of bliss. So the name, Krsna, destroys all of the devotees' 
sinful reactions. The name Krsna is nondifferent from Krsna 
Himself. 
Text 21 
goh-sabda-vdcatvaj jndnarh 
tenopalabhyata iti govindah 
vettiti sabda-rdsim 
govindo go-vicdranad api 
ete 'bhikhye 'nukramatas 
turya-vibhaktyd 
mantrdt purvarh manmatha- 
bijdd atha pascdt 
sydtdrh ced astddasa- 
varno manu-varyo 
guhydt guhyo vdnchita- 
cintdmanir esah 
The syllable goh means knowledge, or He who is realized by 
that knowledge, or He who knows the intention of the devotees 
when they address Him, or He who tends the cows. That Krsna 
is Govinda. I will now reveal the most confidential eighteen- 
syllable mantra. It is like a spiritual gem and it is most coveted by 


Sri Narada-paNcaratra • Third Ratra 
the devotees of the Lord. The mantra is: kllm krsnaya govindaya 
gopljana vallabhdya svdhd. 
Text 22 
purva-pradiste muni-devate 'sya 
chandas tu gdyatram usanti santah 
angdni mantrdrna-catuskair 
varmdvasdndni yugdrnamas tram 
bijarh saktih prakrtih viniyogas 
cdpi puruavad amusya 
The predominating sage of this mantra is Narada and the 
objective of chanting it is Sri Krsna. The meter of this mantra 
is gdyatn, and the four-letter anga-nydsa should be performed 
while chanting it. Bija and prakrti should be added as before. 
Text 23 
purvatarasya manoratha kathaydmi 
nydsam akhila-siddhi-karam 
vydpayydtho hastayor masta- 
vdhye pdrsve tan aruddham budhena 
nydso varnis tdra-yugmdntarasthair 
bindustam-sauhdrda-krtyair vidheyah 
One should perform the nydsa, with the use of the tdra-bija, on 
all the parts of the body to achieve perfection while chanting 
this mantra. 
Text 24 
sdkhdsu tritii purudny adhi dasasu 
prthag-daksindngustha-purvam 
vdma angusthd vasdnam nyasatu 
visada-dhih srstir uktd karasthd 


Explanation of Various NyAsas and Mantras 
anga-dvandva-purvd sthitir 
ubhayakare samhrtir vdma-purvo- 
daksdngusthdntike tat trayam api 
srjati sthity upetam ca kdryam 
One should perform the srsti-nydsa, sthiti-nydsa and sarhhati-nydsa 
while chanting kUm krsnadya govinddya namah and counting with 
the fingers, beginning from the thumb of the right hand, up to 
the little finger of the left hand. 
Text 25 
tatah sthiti-kramdd budho 
dasdngakdni vinyaset 
tad anga-pancakarh tathd 
vidhih samlritah kare 
In this way, an intelligent practitioner should perform all the 
required nydsas properly so as to achieve quick and definite 
results. 
Text 26 
putitair manundtha mdtrkdrnair 
abhivinyasya sa-bindubhih purdvat 
anu-sarikrti-srsti-mdrga-bhedd 
krsatavdni ca mantra-varna-bhdnji 
By performing the nydsa while pronouncing each vowel and 
consonant separately, divisions of the mantra varnas will be 
created, according to the procedures of the various nydsas. 
Text 27 
sarhhrtdv anugato manu-varyah 
srsti-vartmani bhavet pratiydtah 
uddhrtih khaluh puroktavad esdrh 
nydsa-karma kathaydmy adhundham 


Sri Narada-pa^caratra • Third Ratra 
If one performs the srsti-nydsa after the samhati-nydsa, these 
mantras will be revealed. Now, I shall describe to you the 
performance of nyasakriya. 
Thus ends the translation of the third chapter of the Third. 
Ratra of Sri Naradarfahcaratra. 


Chapter 4 
A Further Explanation of the Performance 
of Various Nyasas 
Text 1 
vydsa uvaca 
mahi-salila-pdvaka 
anilaviyanti garvo mahdn 
punah prakrti-purusau 
para imdni tattvdny atha 
paddndhu-hrdaydsyakdny adhi 
panca madhye dvayarh 
trayarh sakala-gam tato 
nyasatu tad-viparydsatah 
Vyasadeva said: The five separated material energies are earth, 
water, fire, air, and sky. Another group of five subtle energies 
are false ego, mahat, purusa, prakrti and Paramatma. One must 
perform the nydsa five times, placing it on the heart and mouth, 
and then two or three times on the entire body. 
Text 2 
guptatamo "yam nydsah samproktas 
tattva-dasaka-pariklptah 
kdryo 'nyesv api gopdlam 
anu jhatiti phala-siddhyai 
To quickly achieve the desired result, one should follow these 
rituals pertaining to the nydsa and also perform the other nyasas 
that are recommanded for the gopdla-mantra. 
TextS 
akesad dpddam dorbhydrh 
dhruva-putitam anu- 
31 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third RAtra 
vararh nyased vapurbhis 
cdpi purvavad amusya 
murddhany aksnah srutyor 
ghrdne mukha-hrdaya- 
sira-janu-jathara- 
patsu tathaksarani 
One should perform the nydsa while chanting the appropriate 
mantra, touching it to one's head, eyes, ears, nose, mouth, 
heart, knees, abdomen and legs. 
Text 4 
nyased vyaktd srstih sthitir api munibhir 
abhihitd hrdddi-mukhdntikd 
samhdro 'nghry ddi-murddhdntas tritayam 
iti viracayatu srsti-purvam 
anu-sthitirh nydsah sarhhdrdnto 
maskdva-vaikhdnasesu vihito 'yam 
According to the Vaikhanasa sages, sthiti-nydsa refers to the 
nydsa of touching the various parts of the body from the chest 
to the mouth, or from the leg to the head, while chanting one's 
mantra. 
Text 5 
sthity anto grhamedhisu srsty 
anto varnindm iti prdhuh 
vairdgyaryuji grhasthe sarhhdrarh 
kecid dhur deary ah 
Sthiti-nydsa is meant for householders znA 'srsti-nydsa is meant 
for brahmacdns. Previous dcaryashad arranged the samhdra-nydsa 
for householders who are detached from material enjoyment. 


Further Explanation of Various NyAsas 
Text 6 
sahajdnau vanavdsini sthitirh 
ca vidyarthinam srstim 
sirasi nihitd madhyd 
sairdksi tarjanikdnvitd 
sirasi rahitdngusthd jyesthdnvita 
aparanisthikdnesi ca 
Brahmacdns should utter the word vanavdsini while performing 
the srsti- nydsa and sthiti-nydsa. They should touch their head 
with the palm of the hand with their thumb placed on the top 
of the head. In this way, one should perform these nydsas.. 
Text? 
mano 'nuranjanarh hari- 
caranabja-bhakti-vardhanam 
sphurtiye 'thdsya kirtyate 
murti-panjaram 
arti-graha-visadighnarh 
klrti-sn-kanti-pustidam 
I shall now describe the murtipanjara-nydsa, which is pleasing to 
the mind, which awards devotional service to Lord Hari, which 
counteracts the influence of evil planets, which neutralizes the 
effects of poison, and which awards one power and wealth. 
Text 8 
kesavddi-yuga-satka-murtibhir 
ddhdh-pumamihiranu montikdn 
dvadasaksara-bhavaksaraih suraih 
kllva-vama-rahitais ca kramdn nydset 
One should perform this nydsa, placing it on the twelve murtis, 
beginning with Kesava, while chanting the mantra that begins 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third Ratra 
with the surya-btja. One should also chant the btja, khrh, while 
performing this nydsa in relation to Lord Krsna. 
Text 9 
bhalodara-hrd-gabha-tupa-tale 
vdme tava-pdrsva-bhujdnta-gale 
vdma-traya-prstha-kakutsu tathd 
murdhany anu sat-ghagdvantu manum 
caitanydmrta-vapur ka-koti-tejd 
murddhiiisthau vapur akhilam sa vdsudevah 
With each letter of the twelve-letter mantra, one should perform 
the nydsa, touching it to the forehead, abdomen, chest, lower 
part of the body, left side, fingers, throat, back, and head. 
Then, one should meditate on Vasudeva—who is supremely 
cognizant, full of ecstasy, as effulgent as millions of suns, and 
all-pervading—while knowing Him to be situated on one's 
head. 
Text 10 
udhasya vimala-pdthaslva siktam 
vydpnoti prakatita-mantra-varna-kllam 
srsti-sthiti dasa-pancdnga-yugmarh 
nyasadi-tritaya kdsya-hrtsu 
One should consider that his entire body is being submerged 
in the crystal-clear ocean of mantras. Then, he should perform 
the nydsa three times, touching it to the mouth and chest. He 
should then repeat the srsti- nydsa and sthiti-nydsa. He should 
also perform the dasdnga-nydsa and pancdnga-nydsa—twice 
each. 
Text 11 
vinyasya-tu grathayitvd tu mudrdih 
bhuyo disdrh dasakam bandhanlyam 


Further Explanation of Various NyAsas 
tdram hdrdarh visva-murtis ca sdrrigi 
mdsdntarh te vdyumadhye sudevah 
sad-dvandvarno mantra-varyah sa uktah 
sdksdd ddrarh moksa-puryd agamyam 
With the prescribed posture and mudrd, one should once again 
purify the ten directions. The foremost of twelve-syllable mantras 
is: orh namo bhagavate vasudevdya. It is just like the gateway to 
liberation. 
Text 12 
dhdtraryama-mitrdkhyd varundrh 
subhagd vivasvadi-indra-yutah 
pusdhvaya-parjanyo tvastd 
visnus ca bhdnavah proktdh 
Dhata, Aryama, Mitra,Varuna, Arhsuman, Vivasvan, Indra, Pusa, 
Ahvaya, Paijanya and Visnu are addressed as Bhanu. 
Text 13 
atha tu yuga-randhrarnasya 
manor nyasanarh bruve 
racayatu kara-dvandve 
'anguli-pancakesv anga pancakam 
tan mantra mandharh vydpayydtha 
trisah pranavam sakrn 
manujalipayo nyasyd bhuyah 
paddni ca sadaram 
The process of performing the nydsa for this twelve-syllable 
mantra is as follows: while placing it on the five fingers of each 
hand and on the five bodily limbs, one should perform the 
nydsa three times, preceding each syllable of the mantra with 
om. Finally, one should again perform the nydsa, placing it on 
the legs. 


Sri Narada-paNcaratra • Third RAtra 
Text 14 
kaca-bhuvi laldta bhm- 
yugrndntara sravandksinor 
yugala-vadana-grivdhm- 
ndbhi-katy ubhaydnghrisu 
nyasatu sitadhirjdnv anghryor 
aksardni sirasi dhruvarh 
nayana-mukha-hrd-guhydnghrisv 
arpayet pada-pancakam 
Thereafter, a pure-hearted devotee of Lord Krsna should 
meditate on the head, forehead, the space between the 
eyebrows, ears, eyes, face, shoulders, chest, navel, waist and 
both legs. He should once again perform the pancdnga-nydsa, 
placing it on the eyes, mouth, chest, anus and legs. 
Text IS 
pancdngdni nyasodbhuyo 
muny ddin asy anyat sarvam 
tulyarh purvendtho vaksye mudrd 
badhyd manvor yah syuh 
The practitioner should perform the nydsa, placing it on the 
predominating sage of the mantra, as described previously. I 
shall now explain how the various mudrds are formed. 
Text 16 
anangusthd rjavo daksa hasta-sdkhd 
bhaven mudrd hrdaye slrsake ca 
adho 'ngusthd khalu mustih sikhdydrh 
kara-dvandvdhgulayo varmani syuh 
One should perform the mudrd on his head and chest, spreading 
over them all of the fingers of his right hand, except the thumb. 
On the sikha, one should place his clenched fist, and on the 


Further Explanation of Various NyAsas 
kavaca, he should perform the mudrd by touching it with the 
fingers of both hands. 
Text 17 
ndrdca-musty uddhrta-bdhu-yugmam 
vyangustha-tarjany udito dhvanis tu 
visvag-visaktd kathitdstra-mudrd 
yatrdksini tarjani-madhyame tu 
If the clenched fists are raised with the first fingers pointing 
upwards, keeping the thumb within the fist, it is called the 
dhvani-mudrd. If the first finger and the middle finger are waved 
above the eyes, it is called the astra-mudrd. 
Text 18 
osthe vdma-kardngustho 
lagnas tasya kanisthikd 
daksindngustha-samyuktd 
tat-kanisthd prasdritd 
tarjani-madhyamd 'ndmdh 
kincit sankucya cdlitdh 
venu-mudreha kathitd 
suguptd preyasi hareh 
When one joins the thumb and little finger of both hands and 
holds them to his lips while slighdy bending the other three 
fingers of both hands, it is called the venu-mudrd, which is most 
confidential and very dear to Lord Krsna. 
Text 19 
nocyante 'tra prasiddhatvdn 
mdld-sri-vatsa-kaustubhdh 
ucyate 'cyuta-mudrdndrh 
bhadrd bilva-phaldkrtih 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third Ratra 
Because the mudrds for the mark of Srivatsa and the Kaustubha 
gem are very well known, I will not describe them here. I shall 
next explain the bhadrd-mudrd, which resembles a bilva fruit. 
Text 20 
angustharh vamam uddanditam itara- 
kardngusthakendtha baddhvd 
tasydgrarh pldayitvangulibhir 
api ca tarn vdma-hastdngulibhih 
baddhvd gddharh hrdi sthdpayatu 
bimala-dhir vydharen mdra-btjarh 
bilvdkhyd mudrikaisd sphutam iha 
kathitd gopaniyd vidhijnaih 
When the thumbs of both hands are attached and raised 
upwards, and the other fingers are cleanched as fists and placed 
on one's chest, it is called the bilva-mudrd. By this mudrd, one 
should invoke the kama-btja mantra. 
Text 21 
mano-vani-dehair yad iha 
ca divd-rdtra-vihitam 
amatyd matyd vd tad akhilam 
asau duskrta-cayam 
imam mudrdrh jdnan ksapayati 
naras tarn suragand 
namanty asyadhind bhavati 
satatam sarva-janatd 
The best means for nullifying all sinful reactions and 
contamination from one's life is to practice these procedures, 
throughout the day and night, with one's body, mind and 
speech. This will enable one to defeat all kinds of opposition 
created by the demigods, as well as human beings. 


Further Explanation of Various NyAsas 
Text 22 
pranava-hrdor avasdne ca caturthi- 
sudarsanam tathdstra-padam 
uktvd phad antamamund grathayen 
manum astra-mudrayd haritah 
Beginning with the pranava, orh, the word sudarsana should be 
ended in the fourth dative case and the words phat and hrdaye 
added to form the mantra: orh hrdaye sudarsanaya phat. This 
mantra is to be chanted along with the astra-mudrd, for it will 
help one achieve pure devotional service to Lord Hari. 
Text 23 
iti vidhaya samasta-jagaj- 
jani-sthiti-vinasa-vidhdna-visaradam 
sruti-vidhdna-karam manu-vigraham 
smaratu gopa-vadhu-jana-ballabham 
In this way, the devotee should meditate on Lord Krsna, who 
is the goal of these mantras; the lover of the damsels of Vraja; 
and the ultimate supervisor of the creation, maintenance and 
destruction of the universe. 
Thus ends the translation of the fourth chapter of the Third 
Rdtra of Sn Ndrada-pah cardtra. 


Chapter 5 
Meditation Upon Lord Krsna In His 
Transcendental abode, Vradavana 
Text 1 
sii-vydsa uvdca 
atha prakata-saurabhotkalita- 
phulla-mddhvika-sat- 
prasuna-nava-pallava-prakara- 
namra-sdkhair drumaih 
praphulla-nava-manjan- 
lalita-vallari-vestitaih 
smarec chisiritam sivarh 
ksitu-matis tu vrnddvanam 
Vyasadeva said; A pure-hearted devotee should meditate on the 
auspicious abode of Vrndavana. The branches of the trees in 
Vrndavana bend to the ground because of being over-burdened 
by abundant fruit, fragrant flowers, and newly-grown twigs and 
leaves. The creepers in Vrndavana appear most beautiful, as if 
embracing the trees in ecstasy. 
Text 2 
vikdsi-sumano-rasdsvadana- 
manjulaih sancarac- 
chili-mukha mukhod-gatair 
mukharitdntararh jhdnkrtaih 
kapota-suka-sdrikd- 
parabhrtddibhih patribhir 
virdjitam itas tato 
bhujaga-satru-nrtydkulam 
41 


Sri Narada-paScaratra • Third Ratra 
The land of Vrndavana is permeated by the sound of bumblebees 
that move from one flower to another, drinking honey. The 
land of Vrndavana is decorated with many varieties of beautiful 
birds, including doves, parrots and cuckoos, and it looks rpost 
enchanting because of the dancing of innumerable peacocks. 
TextS 
kalinda-duhitus calal-lahari- 
viprusdrh vdhibhir 
vinidra-sarasl-ruhodara- 
rajas cayot-pinjaraih 
pradipita-manobhava- 
vraja-vildsini-vdsasdrh 
vilolan aparair nisevitam 
andratam mdrutaih 
The water of the ever-flowing Yamuna enhances the enthusiasm 
of all the residents of Vrndavana, although it disturbs the 
pollen that has accumulated within the lotus flowers that stand 
in her water. The river Yamuna is constantly being served by 
the breeze that scatters the garments of the gopis. 
Text 4 
pravdla-nava-pallavam 
marakata-cchada vajra-mau- 
ktika-prasava-korakarh 
kamala-rdga-ndnd-phalam 
sthavistham akhila-turbhih 
satata-sevitarh kdmadarii 
tad antar api kalpakdnghri 
pamudancitarh cintayet 
One should meditate on the desire trees of Vrndavana. These 
trees have newly grown twigs that appear like coral. Their leaves 


Meditation Upon Lord Krsna In VrndAvana 
are the color of emeralds and thier buds appear like pearls. 
They are filled with varieties of fruit that are smeared with 
pollen. They are large, they render service in all the seasons, 
and they bestow all kinds of benedictions. 
Text 5 
sahema-sikhard-vaner 
udita-bhdnuvad-bhdsvard 
madho 'sya kanaka-sthalim 
amrta-sikaram vdrinah 
pradlpta-mani-kuttimdm 
kusumama renu-punjojjvaldrh 
smaret punar atandrito 
vigata-sat-tanarigo budhah 
An intelligent devotee should meditate with enthusiasm and 
self-control on the glittering gold mine that is situated in that 
wonderful land. It is filled with spiritual gems. There are hills 
with golden peaks and a mine of pearls that is decorated with 
pollen. 
Text 6 
tad-mtna-kuttima- 
nivista-mahistha-yoga- 
pithe 'sta-patram arunarh 
kamalam vicintya 
udyad-virocana-saro 
ciramusya madhye 
sancintayet sukha-nivistam 
atho mukundam 
Next, one should meditate on a red lotus flower having eight 
petals that is located at the yogapitha, which is situated within 


Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Third Ratra 
an area that is filled with various mines. One should meditate 
on Lord Krsna, the giver of liberation, who is present within 
that lotus flower at the yogapitha. 
Text 7 
saddama-ra tna-dalitanjana- 
megha-puiija- 
pratyagra-nila-jala-janma- 
samdna-bhdsam 
susnigdha-nila-ghana- 
kuncita-kesa-jdlarh 
rdjan-manojna-sitikantha- 
sikhanda-cudam 
The color of Krsna's curly hair is dark blue, like a host of dark 
clouds decorated with precious gems. The Lord's hair increases 
the beauty of His head, as do the enchanting peacock feathers 
that decorate it. 
TextS 
rolamba-ldlita-sura-druma-suna-klptottamsam 
samutkaca-navotpala-karna-puram 
loldlaka-sphurita-bhdla-tala-pradiptam 
goracand tilakam ujjvala-citra-mdlam 
His two earrings, which are made from flowers of the desire 
tree, which swing to and fro, and which are decorated with lotus 
buds, look indescribably charming. His forehead is decorated 
with marks of tilaka mixed with gorocana and He wears a 
garland of forest flowers. 
Text 9 
dpuma-sdrada-gatdrika-sasdrika-bimba- 
kdntdnanarh kamala-patra-visdla-netram 


Meditation Upon Lord Krsna In Vrndavana 
ratna-sphurat-kanaka-kundala-rasmi-dipta- 
ganda-sthali-mukuram unnata-cdm-ndsam 
His eyes resemble the full moon in the autumn season. They 
are as broad as lotus leaves. His cheeks and beautiful raised 
nose shine brightly because of the effulgence emanating from 
His jeweled gold earrings. 
Text 10 
sindura-sundarataradharam indu-kunda- 
manddra-manda-hasita-dyuti-dlpitdsam 
vanya-pravdla-kusuma-pracaydvaklpta- 
graiveyakojjvala-manohara-kambu-kantham 
The moonlike face of Lord Krsna is more beautiful than 
kunkum and His enchanting smile defeats the beauty of fully 
blossomed kunda and wiandara flowers. His necklaces and other 
ornaments made of forest flowers have further enhanced His 
transcendental lovliness. 
Text 11 
matta-bhramad-bhramara-justa-vilambamdna- 
santdnaka-prasava-ddma-pariskrtdrhsam 
hdrabalibhagana-rdjita-plvaroro- 
vyoma-sthali-lalita-kaustubha-bhdnumantam 
His garland of flowers from the desire trees, which is served by 
intoxicated bumblebees, is simply wonderful. A necklace of sun 
stones, as well as the Kaustubha gem, enhances the beauty of 
His broad chest. 
Text 12 
srivatsa-laksana-sulaksitam unnatdmsam 
djdnu-pina-parivrtta-sujdta-bdhum 
avandhurodaram uddra-gabhira-ndbhi 
bhmgdngandni-kara-manjula-roma-rdjim 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third Ratra 
Krsna's two arms are very strongly built and endowed with 
auspicious markings. They stretch to His knees. His abdomen 
is slightly uneven. His navel is very deep and it is decorated 
with hair that is as black as bumblebees. 
Text 13 
ndnd-mani-praghatitdngada-kankanormi- 
graiveya-sara-kala-nupura-tunda-bandham 
dvydnga-rdga-paripinjaritdnga-yastim 
dpita-vastra-paridhita-nitamba-bimbam 
His entire body appears most attractive because of His jeweled 
armlets, bracelets and other ornaments, and because of His 
colorful markings. His hips appear most enchanting, encircled 
by His yellow garments. 
Text 14 
cdruru-jdnum anuvrtta-manojna-jangha- 
kdntonnata-prapada-nindita-kurma-kdntim 
mdnikya-dmpana-lasan-nakha-rdji-rdjad- 
raktanguli-cchadana-sundara-pada-padmam 
His thighs are supremely charming. His knees are round. His 
reddish toes shine brightly. They reflect in mirrors that are 
decorated with diamonds and thus appear exquisitely beautiful. 
Indeed, His lotus feet are indescridably attractive. 
Text 15 
matsydrika-sdridava-ketu-yavdbja-vajra- 
sariilaksitdruna-tardnghri-taldbhirdmam 
Idvanya-sdra-samuddya-vinirmitdnga- 
saundarya-nirjita-mano-bhava-deha-kdntim 
His lotus feet are decorated with auspicious markings, such as 
a fish, anchor, flag, thunderbolt and lotus. It seems that the 
creator must have collected the essence of all beautiful objects 


Meditation Upon Lord Krsna In VrndAvana 
and invested it in the creation of Krsna's body. Because of this, 
even the beauty of Cupid has been defeated by the sight of His 
body. 
Text 16 
asyaravinda-paripurita-venu-randhra- 
lolat-kardnguli-samirita-divya-rdgaih 
sasvad-dravi-krta-vikrsta-samasta-jantu- 
santdna-santatim ananta-sukhdmbu-rdsim 
He has placed His enchanting flute to His lotus-like mouth and 
is playing it very sweetly while moving His reddish fingertips. 
As a result, the hearts of all living entities are being melted 
and merged into an ocean of unlimited transcendental ecstasy. 
Who would not be enchanted by the sound of Krsna's flute? 
Text 17 
gobhir mukhdmbuja-viltna-vilocandbhir 
udhobhara-skhalita-manthara-manda-gdbhih 
dantdya-dasta-parisista-tmdnkurdbhir 
dlambi-vdladhi-latdbhir athdbhivltam 
The cows walk slowly because their eyes are fixed on the lotus- 
like face of Krsna, as well as because of the burden of their full 
udders. Many cows have become motionless while holding a 
morsel of grass in their mouths because of the sound of Krsna's 
flute. 
Text 18 
sa-prmrava-stana-vivarsana-purna-nirma- 
lasyd-vata-ksarita-phenila-dugdha-mugdhaih 
venu-pravartita-manohara-manda-giti- 
dattocca-karna-yugalair api nartakais ca 
The cows stand still at the time of milking, when they shower 
an incessant stream of foamy milk. While delivering milk, they 


Sri Narada-pancarAtra • Third Ratra 
engage their ears in hearing the enchating songs emanating 
from Krsna's flute. 
Text ,19 
pratyagra-spiga-yuga-mastaka-samprahara- 
samrambha-vatkhala-vilola-khurdgra-pdtaih 
dmedurair bahala-sdsna-galair udagra- 
pucchais ca vatsatara-vatsatari-nikdyaih 
Some of the cows are preparing to gore one another with their 
sharp homs, in a challanging mood, while kicking the air with 
their hooves. Some of them are licking the throats and bodies 
of their calves, while raising their tails. 
Text 20 
hunkdra-viksubhita-digualayair mahadbhir 
apy uksabhih prthu-kakudbham-bhdra-khinnaih 
uttambhita-sruti-puti-paripita-varhsa- 
dhvandmrtoddhrta-vikdsi-visala-ghonaih 
Huge bulls have frightened everyone by bellowing loudly. 
They have become afflicted by the burden of the hump on 
their shoulders. After hearing the nectarean sound of Krsna's 
flute, however, they are now standing with their ears raised in 
anticipation. 
Text 21 
gopaih samdna-guna-slla-vayo-vildsa- 
vesais ca murcchita-kala-svara-venu-vlnaih 
mandrocca-tdla-patu-gdna-parair bilola- 
dor-ballari-la li ta-ldsy a-vidhana-daksaih 
All the cowherd boys of Vraja are of the same age, qualities, 
nature, sporting activities and mode of dressing. While hearing 
the sweet sound of Krsna's flute, they have become very excited 


Meditation Upon Lord Krsna In VrndAvana 
and are displaying extraordinary skill in the art of dramatic 
performance by means of their hands and faces. 
Text 22 
janghanta-pivara-katira-ta&nibaddha- 
vydlola-kinkini-ghatdbalitair atadbhih 
mugdhais taraksu-nakha-kalpita-karna-bhusair 
avyakta-manju-vacanaih prthukaih paritam 
They have tied small bells around their thighs and have put 
on earrings made with tiger's nails. They make indistinct yet 
enchanting sounds as they roam in the forest, surrounded by 
their calves. 
Text 23 
atha sulalita-gopa-sundarindrh 
suprthu-visista-nitamba-manthardndm 
guru-kuca- bhangurdvalagna- 
trivali-jpnbhitawma-rdji-bhdjdm 
The beautiful damsels of Vraja walk slowly because of their 
large buttocks. They bend a little forward because of the heavy 
burden of their large breasts. Three lines mark their necks. 
These descriptions add to the enchantment when one meditates 
on Vrndavana. 
Text 24 
tad atimadhura-cdru-venu-vadyamrta-rasa- 
pallavitdnga-jdnghri-pdndm 
mukula-visara-^amya-cdru-romod-gama- 
samalankrta-gdtra-vallarindm 
While hearing the sweet sound of Krsna's flute, the twigs of the 
trees in Vrndavana become filled with nectarean juice and the 
creepers manifest thoms that resemble ornaments, making it 
appear as if they are exhibiting symptoms of ecstatic love. 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third Ratra 
Text 25 
tad atirucira-manda-hdsa-candrdtapa- 
parijunbhita-rdga-vdrirdseh 
taralatara-taranga-ramya-viprut^prakara- 
sama-bhrama-bindu-santatdndm 
When the shadow of the clouds, which act like a canopy, fall 
on the crystal-clear water, the vision of the waves creates an 
unprecedented beauty. 
Text 26 
tad atilalita-manda-cilli-cdpa 
cyuta-nisiteksana-mara-vana-vrddhyd 
dalita-sakala-marma-vihvaldnga- 
pravisrta-duhsaha-vepatha-vyathdndm 
Krsna's eyes and eyebrows, which resemble a wonderful bow, 
release the arrows of Cupid. It appears that His eyes are trying 
to pacify everyone's pangs caused by the three-fold miseries of 
material existence. 
Text 27 
tad atisubhagakamra-rupa-sobhd 
'mrta-rasapana-vidhdna-ldlasdndm 
pranaya-salila-pura-vdhinlndmalasa- 
vilola-vilocandmbujdndm 
The lotus-like eyes of the gopis, who have an intense desire to 
drink the necratean mellows of Sri Krsna's exquisite beauty, are 
quickening the flow of the waves of conjugal pastimes. 
Text 28 
visramsat-kavari-kaldpa- 
vigatotphulla-prasuna-sravan- 
madhvi-lampata-cancanka- 
ghatayd samsevitdndm muhuh 


Meditation Upon Lord Krsna In Vrndavana 
maronmada-mada-skhalan-mrdu- 
girdm dlola-kdncy ucchvasan- 
nivi-vislathamdna-cina- 
sicaydntdvir nitamba-tvisdm 
Their hair has become scattered and the flowers that had 
decorated their hair have fallen to the ground. The sweet 
aroma of these flowers is making the gojbw'minds intoxicated. 
They have been pierced by the arrows of Cupid and so they 
are speaking like madwomen. Because their waistbands have 
become loose, their buttocks are partially exposed. 
Text 29 
skhalita-lalita-pdddmbhoja-manddbhighdta- 
kvanita-mani-tuldkoty dkuldsd-mukhdndm 
calad adhara-kuldndrh kutmalotpaksmaldksi- 
dvaya-sarasi-ruhdndm ullasat-kundaldndm 
Because they are walking as if in a drunken state, their jeweled 
ornaments make a wonderful sound that helps them to express 
dramatic movements with their hands and legs. Sometimes, 
their lips begin to tremble, their blue lotus-like eyes become 
overwhelmed with emotion, and their earrrings begin to 
tremble. 
Text 30 
drdghistha-svasana-samirandbhi-tdpa- 
pramldni-bhavad arunoc ca-pallavdndm 
ndnosdyana-vilasat-kardmbujdndm 
dlibhih satata-nisevitam samantdt 
Because of the hot air coming from the gopls' deep breathing, 
the tender twigs of the trees are drying up. Sri Krsna is 
constantly served by the lotus hands of the gopls, who always 
present various gifts to their beloved Lord. 


Sr! Narada-paSicaratra • Third Ratra 
Text 31 
tdsdm dyata-lola-nila- 
nayana-vydkosa-nildmbuja- 
sragbhih samparipuritdkhila-tanu 
nand-vilnoddsya-padam 
tan mugdhdnana-pankaja 
pravigalan-madhvi-msdsvadinlm 
bibhrdnam pranamonmaddksi- 
madhukrn-mdldm manohdrinim 
The gopis have made large garlands of blue lotus flowers in the 
form of their blue eyes and thus have decorated Krsna's entire 
body. It is certainly a most pleasant sight. The nectarean words 
emanating from the lotus-like mouths of the damsels of Vraja— 
who are overwhelmed by ecstatic love—are very charming. 
Text 32 
gopl-gopa-pasundm bahih 
smared agrato 'sya girvdna-ghatdm 
vittdrthinlrh virinci-trinayana- 
satamanyu-purvikdrh stotra-pardm 
Next, one should meditate on the cowherd men, women and 
animals of Vraja, who are always lavishly glorified by great 
personalities, such as Brahma, Siva and Indra. One should 
also meditate on the statements made by these exalted 
personalities. 
Text 33 
tad-daksinato muni-jana-nikara 
vasu-dharmdn dddya-param 
yogindrdn atha prsthe mumuksu- 
mdldn samddhind sanakddydn 


Meditation Upon Lord Krsna In Vrndavana 
Thereafter, one should meditate on the place where the sages, 
the Vasus, Dharma, and foremost of yogis are situated. One 
should also meditate on the yogapitha, where the great sages 
who desire liberation are sitting in samadhi. 
Text 34 
savye sakdntdn atha siddha-yaksa- 
gandharua-vidyddhara-cdranarhs ca 
sakinnardn apsarasas ca mukhydn 
kdmdrthino nartana-gita-vddyaih 
One should meditate on the Siddhas, Yaksas, Gandharvas, 
Vidyadharas and their wives, as well as prominent Kinnaras 
and Apsaras, who are all accomplished in the arts of dancing, 
singing and playing musical instruments. 
Texts 35-36 
sankhendu-kunda-dhavalam sakaldgamajnam 
sauddmino-tati-pisanga-jatd-kaldpam 
tat-pdda-pankaja-gatdm acaldm ca bhaktirh 
vdnchantam ujjhitatardnya-samasta-sarigam 
ndnd-vidha-sruti-gandnvita-sapta-rdga- 
grdma-trayi-gata-manohara-murcchandbhih 
samprinayantam uditabhir amurh mahatyd 
sancintayen nabhasi dhatr-sutarh munlndram 
One should then meditate on the best of sages, the foremost 
of whom is the son of Dhatr, Narada Muni—whose complexion 
is white like a conch shell, the moon, or a kunda flower; who 
is well versed in all Vedic literature; who has matted hair that 
resembles lightning; who desires unalloyed devotional service 
at the lotus feet of Lord Krsna; who is free from all kinds of bad 
association; and who is always satisfying Lord Hari by chanting 


Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Third Ratra 
His glories while accompanying himself with his stringed 
instrument. 
Thus ends the translation of the fifth chapter of the Third Ratra 
of Sri Narada-pahcardtra. 


Chapter 6 
The Process of Worshiping Lord Krsna Whereby 
one Can attain Samipya-Mukti, the Liberation of 
Becoming an Eternal associate of the Lord 
Text! 
vyasa uvaca 
iti dhyatva 'tmdnarh patu-visada- 
dhir nanda-tanayam 
puro buddhyaivarghya- 
prabhrtibhir anantopahrtibhih 
yajed bhuyo bhaktyd sva-vapus^ 
bahisthais ca vibhavair 
vidhanarh tad brumo vayam 
atula-sannidhyadam atha 
Vyasadeva said: In this way, a pure-hearted practitioner of 
devotional service should meditate on the Supersoul, Sri Krsna, 
while offering various articles, such as arghya, with faith and 
devotion. One should then worship Lord Krsna, who is present 
within his heart. Now, I shall describe the process of worship by 
which one achieves sdmipya-mukti. 
Text 2 
dracayya bhuvi gomaydmbhasd 
sthandilarh nija samudra vistaram 
nyasya tatra vihitdspado 'mbhasd 
sankha-mantra-manund visodhayet 
One should build a raised platform and smear it with cowdung. 
One should then further purify that place by chanting the 
sankha-mantra while spreading kusa grass all around. 
55 


Sri Narada-paScaratra • Third RAtra 
Text 3 
tatra gandha-sumano 'ksatdny atho 
nihkseped dhrdaya-mantram uccaran 
purayed vimala-pdthasd sudhir 
aksaraih pratigataih siro 'ntakaih 
An intelligent devotee should put sandalwood paste and a 
few grains of rice that have been dried in the sun in a bowl of 
pure water and then sprinkle that water all over his body while 
chanting the hrdaya-mantra. 
Text 4 
pitha-sankha-salilesu mantra 
vitvahni-vdsara-nisd-krtdrh kramdt 
mandaldni casaka-sravoksarair 
arcayed vadana-purva-dipitaih 
A person who is learned in that art of chanting mantras should 
then invoke the demigods, such as Agni, Indra and Candra by 
worshiping them with water kept within a conch shell. 
Text 5 
tatra tlrtham anundbhir dhvayet 
tirtham usna-ruci-mandaldt tatah 
sviya-hrt-kamalato harim tathd 
gdlinim ca sikhayd pradarsayet 
Thereafter, one should display the gdlini-mudrd on his chest and 
sikha while invoking all of the holy rivers by means of chanting 
mantras. 
Text 6 
taj-jalam nayana-mantra-viksitarh 
varmand samavagunthyd dor yujd 
mula-mantra-sakalikrtam nyased 
angakais ca kalayed diso 'stratah 


Worshiping Lord Kiisna for Attaining SAmipya-Mukti, 
One should gaze at a pot of water while chanting the nayana- 
mantra, cover it with both hands and perform the ariga-nydsa 
after invoking the Lord while chanting the mula-mantra. Then, 
he should protect himself in the ten directions by chanting the 
astra-mantra. 
Text? 
aksatadi-yutam acyutikrtarh sasprham 
japatu mantram astasah 
kincana ksipatu vardhani-jale 
proksayen nija-tanum tato 'mund 
Next, one should devotedly chant eight times the mantra that 
has already been purified, mix rice that has been dried in the 
sun in water and then sprinkle that water on his body. 
Text 8 
trih-karena manund 'khilam tathd 
sadhanam kusuma-candanddikam 
sankha-purana-vidhih samlrito 
gupta esa yajandgranir iha 
Before the commencement of one's worship, 
establish the conch shell by filling it with water, 
paste and flowers, while chanting the following 
mantra: 
Text 9 
gange ca yamune caiva 
goddvari sarasvati 
narmade sindhu-kdveri jale 
'smin sannidhim kuru 
O Ganga, O Yamuna, O Godavari, O Saraswati, O Narmada, O 
Sindhu, O Kaveri—please make your appearance within this 
water. 
one should 
sandalwood 
confidential 


Sri Narada-paScaratra • Third Ratra 
Text 10 
esa tirtham anuh-prokto 
duritaugha-vinasanah 
kanisthdngusthakau saktau 
karayor itaretaram 
One should chant this mantra while folding his hands so that 
the thumbs and little fingers of both hands touch each other. 
Text II 
tarjani-madhyama 'ndmdh 
samhatd "bhugna-varjitdh 
mudraisa gdlini proktd 
sankhasyopari cdlitd 
By keeping the ring finger, middle finger and first finger 
together and straight, one forms the galini-mudra. One should 
display this mudra over the conch shell. 
Text 12 
atha murdhani mula-cakra-madhye 
nija-ndtham gana-ndyakam samarcyam 
nyasana-krama-tanuh pitha-mantrair 
jala-gandhaksata- dhupa-puspa- dipaih 
Thereafter, one should worship Sri Krsna as being situated on 
his head and Ganapati as situated on the mula-cakra. Then, 
he should perform the nydsa while chanting the pitha-manta 
and offer various items, such as water, sandalwood paste, rice, 
incense, flowers, and a ghee lamp. 
Text 13 
prayajed atha mula-mantra-tejo 
nija-mule hrdaye bhruvos ca madhye 
tritayam smarata smaret tad eki-krtam 
ananda-ghanam tadil-latdbham 


Worshiping Lord Krsna for Attaining Samipya-Mukti, 
Next, one should worship the effulgent Personality of Godhead 
by chanting the mula-mantra, while touching his head, heart 
and the space between his eyebrows. One should then meditate 
on that most blissful personality, Sri Krsna, who is as effulgent 
as lightning. 
Text 14 
tat-te yajnaih sdvayavi-krtya vibhuty ady 
ankdntam vinyasya yajed dsana-purvaih 
bhusdntair bhuyo jala-gandhadibhir arcdrh 
kurydd bhuty ady anga-vidhanavadhi mdntri 
After placing all of the required articles, such as an dsana, in their 
respective places and purifying them by chanting appropriate 
mantras, one should worship the ingredients of worship such as 
water, sandalwood paste, ornaments, dress and bed. 
Text 15 
bhuyo venurii vadanastham 
vaksodese vanamdldm 
vaksojordhvam prayajec ca 
sn-vatsarh kaustubha-ratnam 
One should separately worship the Lord's flute placed upon 
His lips, the flower garland on His chest, as well as the mark of 
Srivatsa and the Kaustubha gem. 
Text 16 
sri-khanda-nisyanda-vicarcitdhgo 
mulena bhalddisu citrakdni 
likhydd atho panjara-murti-mantrair 
andmayo dlpa-sikhdkrtlni 
One should apply sandalwood paste to the Lord's body while 
chanting the mula-mantra and then mark His forehead with 
drawings while chanting the panjara-murti-mantra. To become 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third RAtra 
cured of a disease, an intelligent devotee should meditate on 
Lord Narayana's fnja-mantra, which resembles the flame of a 
ghee lamp. 
Text 17 
puspdnjalim vitanuyad atha panca-krtvo 
mulena pada-yugale tulasi-dvayena 
madhye hardri-yugalena ca murdhnirh padma- 
dvandvena sadbhir api sarva-tanau ca sarvaih 
After completing this, one should offer two tulasi leaves at the 
lotus feet of the Lord while chanting the mula-mantra five times. 
One should offer flowers to the Lord's head, lotus feet and 
entire body while chanting the mula-mantra six times. 
Text 18 
svetdni daksa-bhdge 'pi tac- 
candana-pankildni kusumdni 
raktdni vdma-bhdge 'runa- 
candana-pankha-siktdni 
One should next offer white flowers mixed with sandalwood 
paste to the right side of the Lord and red flowers mixed with 
sandalwood paste to the left side of the Lord. 
Text 19 
tadvac ca dhupa-dipau samarpya 
dhinaydt sudhdrasaih krsnam 
mukha-vasadyarh dattvd 
samarcayed-gandha-puspddyaih 
In this way, one should worship Sri Krsna with utmost humility 
by offering Him incense, a ghee lamp, sandalwood paste, 
flowers and other paraphernalia. One should also offer to the 
Lord a mouth freshener. 


Worshiping Lord Krsna for Attaining SAmipya-Mukti, 
Text 20 
tambule-nartana-gita-vadyaih 
santosya cumaka-salalena 
brahmdrpandkhya-manund 
kurydt svdtmdrpanarh mantri 
A devotee who is expert in the science of chanting mantras 
should offer the Lord betel nuts after offering palatable food. 
One should satisfy the Lord by singing His glories and dancing 
before Him in the temple. Indeed, one should surrender 
his very self at the lotus feet of the Lord while chanting the 
brahmdrpana-mantra. 
Text 21 
athavd sankucita-dhiyd 
laya-vidhi-murti-panjardvacaruh 
yady astadasa-lipind svdnta- 
paddngais ca venu-purvaih proktah 
Or, if one desires to worship the Lord briefly, he should 
follow the procedure for dismantling the place of worship and 
complete the worship mentally while chanting the eighteen- 
syllable mantra. 
Text 22 
suprasannam atha nanda-tanujarh 
bhdvayan japatu mantram ananyah 
sdnu-sarhsmrti yathavidhi sankhyd- 
purane svayarh mano vidadhita 
One should meditate on Krsna, the son of Nanda, and chant 
these mantras a prescribed number of times with undivided 
attention. 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third RAtra 
Text 23 
pranava-putitarh bijarh 
japtvd satarh sahitdstakam 
nija-guru-mukhdd dptdn 
yogdn punaktu mahdmatih 
sad amrta-ciddnanddtmdyam 
japam ca samdpayed 
iti japa-vidhih samyah prokto 
manu-dviayam dsritah 
A noble-hearted practitioner should receive these mantras from 
his spiritual master and then chant them one hundred and 
eight times. While chanting mantras to the Supreme Lord, one 
should follow the prescribed rules and regulations. 
Text 24 
ta imam bhajate vidhirh naro 
bhavitd 'sou dayitah saririndm 
aparaka-kamalaika-mandiram 
paramante samupaiti tan-mahah 
A person who worships the Supreme Lord, Krsna, according to 
this procedure becomes highly respected in society, acheives an 
abundance of wealth and at the end of life, attains liberation. 
Thus ends the translation of the sixth chapter of the Third Rdtra 
of Sri Ndrada-pancardtra. 


Chapter 7 
Instructions on Worshiping 
the Lord and His associates 
Text 1 
vydsa uvdca 
kathyate khalu mantra-vmyayoh 
sddhanarh sakala-siddhi-sddhanam 
yad vidhdya munayo mahlyasim 
siddhim dyur iha naradddayah 
Vyasadeva said: I shall now reveal the process of attaining 
perfection by chanting two mantras. By following this procedure, 
great sages such as Narada have attained perfection in this 
world. 
Text 2 
viprarh pradhvasta-kdla-prabhrti-ripu- 
ghata nirmaldnkam garistham 
bhaktim krsndnghri-pankeruha- 
yugala-rajordginim udvahantam 
vettdram veda-sdstrdgama-vimala- 
pathdrh sammatam satsu vidvdmsarh 
yo-bhaktyd vivitsuh pravana- 
tanu-mand desikam sarhsrayeta 
One should, with utmost devotion, take shelter of a learned 
and exalted sage—who is completely attached to the lotus feet 
of Sri Krsna, who is a foremost brahmana, who has become 
purified by giving up service to the mind, who is charitable, who 
understands the path of devotion as presented in the Vedas, 
and who is accepted by other exalted personalities—to become 
inclined toward the devotional sevice of Sri Krsna. 
63 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third RAtra 
Text 3 
santosayed akutildrdatar dtmand tarn 
svaih svair dhanais ca vapusdpy anukula-vdnyd 
abda-trayarh kamalandbhadhiyd 'tha dhiras 
tuste vivaksatu gurdv atha mantra-diksdm 
An inteligent prac titionershould give up all kinds of duplicity and 
serve his spiritual master for three years with his body, wealth, 
and favorable speech, considering him to be nondifferent from 
God. The spiritual master will impart mantra initiation to such 
a disciple. 
Text 4 
prapanca-sdra-prathitd 'tra diksd 
sarhsmdryate samprati-sarua-siddhaih 
rie yayd santata-jdpino 'pi 
siddhi na yad ddsyati mantra-pugah 
Initiation into Krsna mantras is the only essential objective in 
this material world by which both the teacher and student 
become benefitted. Unless one takes initiation from a bonafide 
spiritual master, no mantra can bestow perfection upon him, 
even if he chants it constantly. 
Text 5 
atha puro vidadhita stava sthalim 
avisamam adhi vdstu balirh budhah 
acala-dormita patra bhu mandaparh 
masrna-vedikam dracayet tatah 
One should first of all build an even platform and on the top of 
it, construct a six-foot-high altar. 
Text 6 
triguna-tantu-yujd kusa-mdlayd 
parivrtarh prakrti-dhvaja-bhusitam 


The Worship of the Lord and His associates 
mukha-catuska-payas-taru- 
toranarh sita-vitdna-virdjitam ujjvalam 
One should then cover the altar with a white canopy that covers 
the four gates on the four sides as well. The canopy should 
be covered with kusa grass and decorated with flower garlands. 
Next, one should install four flags outside the four gates. 
Text 7 
vasu-trigunitdriguli-pramita- 
khdta-vdtdyanarh 
vasor vasupater atho kakubhi 
vistham asmin budhah 
karotu vasu-mekhalarh 
vasu-gandrdha-konarh prati 
java-sthita-gaja-dhvani- 
pratima-yoni-sarhlaksitam 
One should mark a particular spot on the altar. The size of 
that spot should be about one foot square. Then, according to 
the prescribed rules and regulations, he should arrange sitting 
places for the Vasus and the Lord of the Vasus. The place where 
the seats are arranged should be triangular. 
Text 8 
tato mandape gavya- 
gandha madhu-sikte 
likhen mandalarn 
samyagacchadabdam 
suvrtta-trayam rdsi- 
pithdd dhi-vlthl- 
caturdhdvasobhopasobhd-yuktam 
One should decorate the mandala, or place, with milk, yogurt, 
ghee, cowdung, cow urine, sandalwood paste, and honey. He 


Sri Narada-pa^caratra • Third Ratra 
should then enhance the beauty of the mandala by drawing on 
it three circles, rasipltha, and four kinds of samudra. 
Text 9 
tato desika sndna-puruarh vidhdni 
vidhdydtma-pujdvasdndm vidhijnah 
sva-vdmdgratah sankham apy arghya- 
pddy dcamddydni pdtrdni sampuritdni 
A devotee who is dedicated to following the rules and regulations 
should complete the rituals, which includes bathing, and then 
place, on his left side, various articles for worship, such as a 
conch shell, pddya, arghya, and dcamaniya. 
Text 10 
vidhdydnyatah puspa-gandhaksatadyarh 
kara-ksdlane prsthatas cdpi pdtram 
pradlpdvaU-dfipite saruam anyat 
svato 'ngdcdra-sddhanarh cadadhita 
On his right side, he should keep flowers, sandalwood paste, 
and rice that has been dried in the sun. At his back, he should 
keep a pot of water to wash his hands. After this, he should 
light the lamp and begin his worship. 
Text II 
vdyavydsddisa-paryantam arcya- 
pithasyodag-gauravi panktir ddau 
pujyo 'nyatrdpy dmbikeyah kardbjaih 
pdsarh dandarh pustyd-bhiti dadhanah 
He should begin worshiping from the northwest comer, slowly 
moving to the northeast comer of the sanctified spot. On the 
other side of the mandala, he should worship Ganapati, who 
holds a rope, stick, and pusti in his hands, and who displays 
fearlessness. 


The Worship of the Lord and His associates 
Text 12 
dradhya "dhara-sakty ady amara- 
caranaydrapy atho madhya-bhdge 
dharmadin vahni yaksah-pavana- 
siva-gatdn diksv adharmadikdrhs ca 
madhye sesdbja-tejas-tritaya-gana- 
gandndtmajdn kesardndrh 
madhye cdkirna-vdsddikam 
abhiyajatetpitha-mantrena bhuyah 
One should worship the ddhdra-sakti and various demigods, 
including Dharma, in the middle of the mandala. Adharma 
and others should be worshiped in the northeast, northwest, 
southeast and southwest comers. One should then worship 
the three qualities of material nature while chanting the pitha- 
mantra and the dkirnavdsa within the lotus. 
Text 13 
tatah sdlin madhye kamalam 
amaldrhs tandula-vardn 
api nyasyet darbhdrhs tad 
upari ca durvdksata-yutdn 
nyaset pradaksinyat tad 
upari krsdnor dasa kald 
ya-karadydrnddyd yajatu ca 
sugandhadibhir imdh 
Thereafter, one should throw rice paddy, lotus petals, rice that 
has been dried in the sun, kusa grass and durba grass onto the 
mandala and circumambulate it. Next, he should offer worship 
to the ten expansions of the sanctified fire, with sandalwood 
paste and other items while chanting the proper mantra. 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third Ratra 
Text 14 
nyaset kumbham tatra trigunita- 
lasat-tantu-kalitarh 
japarhs tdrarii dhupaih 
suparimalitam jongakamayaih 
kabhadyaih kuntismistha- 
uvasitibhir varna-yugalais 
tathdnyasydbhyarcds tad anu 
kha-maner dvadasa kaldh 
Thereafter, one should install the water pot while chanting the 
purusa-sukta mantra three times, and kabhadyaih kuntismistha 
uvasiti once, while offering sandalwood paste and a ghee lamp. 
After completing this, one should worship the twelve expansions 
of the sun-god. 
Text 15 
evam sahkalpydgnim ddhdra-rupam 
bhdnurh tadvat kumbha-rupam vidhijhah 
nyaset tasminn aksatadyaih samete 
kurcarh svarmarh ratna-varyeh pradiptam 
In this way, the faithful practitioner invites fire, in the form 
of adhdra, and the sun-god, in the form of the water pitcher— 
considering them to be decorated with gold and jewels, while 
chanting the kurcca-mantra, hum. 
Text 16 
atha kvdtha-toyaih ksakaradi-varnair 
vakdrdvasdnaih samdpurayet tarn 
sva-mantra-trijdpdvasdnam payobhir 
gavdrh panca-gavyair jalaih kevalair vd 
One should fill the pitcher with kvdthajala water while chanting 
the appropriate mantras. One should also add cow's milk and 


The Worship of the Lord and His associates 
pancagavya to the pitcher while repeating the mantra three 
times. 
Text 17 
sakala-janasmitha su-yuga-sankhyah 
sura-gana-purvd nyasatu tathaiva 
tad upa-kalds tah salila-sugandhdh 
sa tu sumanobhis tad anu yajec ca 
Afterperforming the njmasixteen times to the above-mentioned 
demigods, the devotee should next sprinkle scented water and 
begin the worship of the other demigods, who are all parts and 
parcels of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
Text 18 
udicya-kustha-kunkumambu- 
loha-sajjatdsuraih 
sasltam ity udiritam hareh 
priydsta-gandhakam 
Udicya, kustha, kunkum, water, gold, sajjatd, dsura and sasita are 
eight well known fragrant objects called astagandha. They are 
all very dear to Sri Hari. 
Text 19 
kvdtha-toya-paripuritodare samvilanghyd 
vidhimd 'sta-gandhakam 
soma-surya-sikhindrh prthak-kald 
seva-karma viniyojayet sudhih 
An intelligent devotee should place kvdthajala in the water pot 
and then add the above-mentioned eight items. Thereafter, he 
should offer it separately to the sun-god, moon-god and Agni. 
Text 20 
tadvad dksarabhavds tu kddibhis 
tddibhih punar ukdrajdh kaldh 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third RAtra 
padibhir malijas tu binduja 
yddibhih sura-ganena nadajdh 
One then has to worship akdrajd by the letters known as 
akdrddi—ukdraja by the letters known as takdrddi—alipijd by .the 
letters known as pddi—vinduja by the letters known as yddi— 
and nddajd by the demigods. 
Text 21 
samdvdhandnte susamsthdpandt prdk 
rcas tatra tatrdtijapyd budhena 
samabhyarcya tds tdh prthak tac ca pdtho ' 
rpayen mula-mantrena kumbhe yathdvat 
The devotee should first finish the invocation and then, before 
the installation, he should chant the appropriate mantras, as 
mentioned in the Vedas. He should then fill the water pots 
while chanting the mulormantras. 
Text 22 
sahakdra-bodha-panasa-stavakaih 
satamanyu-kanthi-kalitaih kalasam 
pidadhdtu puspa-phala-tandulakair 
abhipurnayd ca subha-cakrikayd 
Thereafter, one should cover the water pots with branches of 
either a mango tree, fig tree or jackfruit tree that has at least five 
or seven leaves. On top of that, he should place fruit, flowers 
and rice that has been dried in the sun. 
Text 23 
abhivestayet tad anu kumbha-mukham 
nava-nirmaldrhsuka-yugena budhah 
samalankrte 'tra kusumddibhir apy 
abhivdhayet parataram ca mahah 


The Worship of the Lord and His associates 
Then, the expert sadhaka should cover the water pots (including 
the branches with leaves) with pieces of new, clean cloth, 
decorate them with flowers and invoke effulgent energy into 
them. 
Text 24 
sakall-vidhdya kalasastham arhsum 
harim astu-tattvam anu-vinyasanaih 
paripujayed gurum athdvahitah 
parivdra-yuktam upacdra-ganaih 
Then, following the prescribed rules and regulations, while 
realizing Krsna as the reservior of all transcendental qualtities, 
one should worship Him and His associates by offering all of 
the previously-mentioned ingreidents. 
Text 25 
dattdsanarh svdgatam apy udirya 
tathdrghya-pddydcamaniyakdni 
sndnarh ca vdsas ca vibhusandni 
sdngdya tasmai viniyojya mantri 
A devotee who knows the truth of these mantras should offer an 
asana to the Lord, welcome Him with prayers and then worship 
each of His limbs by offering padya, arghya, dcamaniya, sndniya, 
a dress, and ornaments. 
Text 26 
gdtre pavitrair atha gandha-puspaih 
purvam yajen nydsa-vidhdnato 'sya 
srsti-sthiti svdnga-yugarh ca venum 
mdldm abhijndna-vardsma-mukhyau 
mulena cdrghydrcanavat prapujya 
samarcayed dvarandni bhuyah 


SRI NARADA-PAfJCARATRA • THIRD RATRA 
One must then offer fragrant flowers to each limb of the Lord, 
just as one performs the nydsa while touching the various limbs 
of His body. Thereafter, he should offer a flower garland to the 
Lord and after that, he should worship the accociates of the 
Lord. 
Text 27 
diksv atha dama-sudamau 
vasudamah kinkinl ca sampujydh 
tejo-rupas tad-vad-vahirangani 
kesaresu sumatiryajet 
On one side of the Lord, a devotee should worship Dama, 
Vasudama, Sudama and Kinkinl. After this worship, he should 
worship the Lord's external energy, which is located just outside 
the lotus petals. 
Text 28 
hutavaha-nirrti-sarmrana-siva-diksu 
hrdadi-varma-paryantam 
muktendu-kanta-kuvalaya-hari-nlla- 
hutdsa-prabhdh pramaddh 
In the northeast, northwest, southeast and southwest comers, 
one should worship the pramadds, who are effulgent like moon 
rays and who resemble blue flames. 
Text 29 
abhaya-vara-sphurita-kardh pradhdna- 
tanavo 'nga-devatdh smarydh 
rukminy adyd mahisir astau 
sampujayed dalesu tatah 
One should then meditate on the aiiga devatds, whose hands 
are always ready to offer benedictions. After this, one should 
worship the eight principal queens, headed by Rukminl. 


The Worship of the Lord and His associates 
Text 30 
daksina-kara-dhrta-kamaldvasu- 
bharita-supatra-mudritdnya-karah 
rukminydkhyd satyd lagndjity 
dhvayd sunandd ca 
Queens such as Rukmini, Satya, Nagnajiti and Sunanda—who 
hold a lotus flower in their right hands and a container of 
wealth in their left hands—are always to be worshiped. 
Text 31 
bhuyas ca mitravindd sulaksandpya 
rksajd susild ca 
tapaniya-marakatdbhdh susita- 
vicitrdmbards tv etdh 
prthu-kuca-bhardlasdngayo vividha- 
mdla-prakara-vilasitdbharandh 
One should also worship Mitravinda, Sulaksana, Jambavati and 
Susila—whose beauty can be compared to that of an emerald, 
who are dressed in white garments, who possess heavy breasts, 
and who are decorated with necklaces and other ornaments. 
Text 32 
tato yajed daldgresu 
vasudevath ca devakim 
nanda-gopam yasoddm ca 
balabhadram subhadrikdm 
/ 
Thereafter, the devotee should worship Vasudeva, Devaki, 
Nanda, Yasoda, Balarama and Subhadra, who are situated on 
the tips of the lotus petals. 
Text 33 
gopdla gopls tad-vaktre 
viUna-mita-hcandh 


Sri Narada-paSicarAtra • Third Ratra 
jndna-mudrd-bhayakarau 
pitarau pita-pdndurau 
One should then worship the pale-complexioned forefathers— 
who award fearlessness, and who sit in the posture known as 
jndna-mudrd—while meditating upon the cowherd men and 
women as being merged within their mouths. 
Text 34 
divya-mdldmbardlepa- 
bhusane mdtarau punah 
dhdrayantyau ca varadam 
pdyasdpupa-pdtrakam 
One should once again worship the mothers of the universe by 
offering them new cloth, flower garlands, sandalwood paste, 
sweet rice, cakes and other varieties of food. 
Text 35 
aruna-sydmale hdra-mani- 
kundala-mandite 
balah sankhendu-dhavalo 
musalarh Idngalam dadhat 
One should separately worship Balarama—who is decorated 
with red and black necklaces, jeweled earrings, a plough, and 
a club; and whose complexion is white, like a conch shell or 
moonlight. 
Text 36 
hdldlold-nila-vdsd 
heldvdn eka-kundalah 
• kaldya-sydmald bhadrd 
sutadd bhadra-bhusand 


The Worship of the Lord and His associates 
One should then worship Bhadra and Sutada, who are dressed 
in blue garments, who wear many earrings, whose complexions 
are dark, and who are decorated with enchanting ormaments. 
Texts 37-38 
vardbhaya-yutd pita- 
vasand rudha-yauvand 
venu-vind-vetra-yasti- 
sankha-srtigddi-pdnayah 
gopd gopyas ca vividha 
updyandtta-kardmbujdh 
manddradims ca tad-bdhye 
pujayet kalpa-pddapdn 
Thereafter, one should worship the cowherd boys and girls, who 
always bestow fearlessness and benedictions, who wear colorful 
garments, and who carry a flute, vind, stick, conch shell, and 
buffalo horn. One should then worship desire trees, such as 
the manddra. 
Text 39 
manddra-santdnaka-pdrijdta-kalpa- 
drumdkhydn haricandanarh ca 
madhye caturdiksv abhivdnchitdrtha- 
ddnaika-diksdnvita-namra-sakhan 
In and around the lotus flower, one should worship various 
desire trees, such as the manddra, sanatdna, pdrijdta, kalpadruma 
and haricandana, which are capable of awarding one's desired 
benedictions, and are full of auspiciousness. 
Thus ends the translation of the seventh chapter of the Third 
Rdtra of Sri Narada-pancaratra. 


Chapter 8 
Further Instructions on Worshiping 
the Lord and His Associates 
Text 1 
vydsa uvdca 
hari-havya-vdt-taranija-ksapdtandp 
pati-vdyu-soma-siva-sesa-padmajdn 
prayajet svadiksv amala-dhih svajdty 
adhisvaraheti-patra-parivdra-sametdn 
Vyasadeva said: One should next worship Hari, Agni, Taranija, 
Ksapatana, Samudra, Vayu, Candra, Siva and Sesa in the four 
directions while thinking of them as being eternal servants of 
the Supreme Lord. 
Text 2 
kapisa-kapila-nila-sydmala-sveta-dhumah 
mala-sita-suci-rakta varnato vdsabddydh 
kara-kamala-virdjat svdyudhd divya-vesd 
vividha-mani-ganogra-prasphurad-bhusanddhyah 
These demigods are of various complexions, such as yellow, 
blue, black, white and grey. They are pure souls and they hold 
various weapons in their hands. They are dressed in celestial 
garments and decorated with many jeweled ornaments. 
Texts 
dambholi-sdkty abhidha-danda-krpdna-pasa- 
canddnkusdrddha-gadd-trisikhdri-padmah 
arcyd-bahnir nija-sulaksana-laksita-mauli-yuktdh 
sva-svayudhabhaya-samudyata-pdni-padmah 
Thereafter, one should worship the goddesses of heaven, who 
hold various weapons in their hands, such as the thunderolt, 
77 


Sri NArada-paSicarAtra • Third Ratra 
stick, rope, anchor, bow, and club. They are always ready to 
offer benedictions and they are endowed with divine qualities. 
They are situated on the outer portion of the lotus flower. 
Text 4 
kanaka-rajata-toyaddbhra-campd 
runahima-nila-javd-prabdla-bhdsah 
kramata iti rucdtta-vajra-purud- 
rucira-vilepana-vastra-mdlya-bhusdh 
With complexions resembling the color of gold, silver, a dark 
cloud, snow, red and blue habiscus flowers, and coral, and 
being decorated with flower garlands and sandalwood paste, 
these demigods and goddesses appear like the thunderbolt of 
Cupid. 
Text 5 
kathitam dvrti-saptakam acyutdrcana- 
vidhdv ati sarua-sukhdvaham 
prayajed athavdnga-purandardsani- 
mukhais tritaydvaranam tv idam 
It is essential for a devotee to worship Krsna's associates while 
worshiping Krsna. There are three kinds of associates of the 
Lord—arigas, puranddsanis and mukhas. 
Text 6 
hetyd japitvd jala-gandha-puspaih 
krsndstaketdpy atha krsna-pujdm 
kurydd vudhas tdni samdhvaydni 
vaksydmi tdrddi-namo 'ntikdni 
One should worship Lord Krsna by offering Him water, 
sandalwood paste, flowers and other items. After worshiping 
the Lord, one should recite the prayer, Krsnastaka, for His 
pleasure. 


Instructions on Worshiping the Lord 
Texts 7-8 
sn-krsno vasudevas ca 
narayana-samahvayah 
deuaki-nandano yadu-srestho 
vdrsneya ity api 
asurakranta-sabdante 
bhdrahdnti saptamah 
dharma-samsthdpakas cdcaiva 
caturthy antdh kramdd ime 
Each of these holy names should be chanted in the fourth 
dative case, and should be preceded by om. These names are— 
Sri Krsna, Vasudeva, Narayana, Devaklnandana, Yadusrestha, 
Varsneya, Asurakrantabharahari and Dharmasansthapaka. 
Text 9 
ebhir eudthavd kdryd pujd 
vai kamsa-vairinah 
samsdra-sdgarottirtthe 
sarva-kdmdptaye budhaih 
By worshiping Krsna, the enemy of Kamsa, while chanting these 
mantras, the devotees are delivered from the ocean of material 
existence and attain seven kinds of perfection. 
Text 10 
sarangara-dyuta-dhi-lulitair 
jarjaraih samviklrnair 
guggulvadyair ghana-parimalair 
dhupam dsadya mantn 
dadydn nicair danujam atha 
mdyd-pravendtha dosnd 
ghantdm gandhdksata- 
sumanakair arcitdm vddaydnah 


Sri Narada-paScaratra • Third RAtra 
A practitioner who is expert in the science of chanting mantras 
should take fragrant incense made with gugula and offer it to 
Krsna while ringing a bell and displaying utmost devotion. 
Text 11 
tad uddlptam surabhi-ghrta- 
samsikta-karpura-raktam 
dlpam drstyd-stuti-visada-dhih 
padma-paryantam uccaih 
dastvd puspdnjalim api 
vidhdydrpayitvd ca pddyam 
sd cd sankalpayet tad vipulam 
api tadd-svarna-pdtre nivedyam 
After that, one should take a ghee lamp having camphor on 
the wicks and purify it by chanting the appropriate mantra. He 
should then offer the ghee lamp to the Lord, followed by an 
offering of flowers, pddya, dcamanlya and various kinds of food. 
Text 12 
surabhitarena dugdha- 
havisd susrtena sitd- 
samudamsakai rucira- 
krtya vicitra-vdsaih 
dadhi-navanlta-nutana- 
sitopala-pupanikd- 
ghrta-guda-ndrikela-kadali- 
phala-puspa-rasais ca 
One should offer to the Lord with pure devotion—milk, butter, 
sugar candy, yogurt, fresh cakes, jaggery, a coconut, bananas, 
honey, and other such food. 


Instructions on Worshiping the Lord 
Text 13 
astroksitarh tad ari- 
mudrikayd 'tiraksya 
vdyavyatdpa-parisositam 
agni-dosmd 
sandahya vdma-kara- 
saudhara-sdbhipurnam 
mantrdmrtikrtam 
athdbhimrsan prajapyet 
One should display the astra- mudrd and sanraksana-mudrd for 
one's safety and for the purification of the food to be offered. 
One should then chant appropriate mantras for transforming 
the food into nectar. 
Text 14 
manum astasah surabhi-mudrikayd 
paripurnam arcayatu gandha-puspaih 
harim arthayed atha krta-prasardnjalir 
dsyato 'sya visarec ca mahah 
One should chant this mantra eight times after displaying the 
surabhi-mudrd. One should then fold his hands and offer prayers 
to Lord Hari while meditating upon the glittering effulgence 
emanating from His face. 
Text 15 
vitihotra-dayitdntam uccaran 
mula-mantram atha nihksipej jalam 
arpayet tad amrtdtmakarh havir 
dormajdsa-kusumarh samuddharan 
The devotee should sprinkle water on the articles to be offered 
and then offer ghee and some flowers to the Lord with love and 
devotion. This should be done while chanting the mula-mantra. 


Sri Narada-pa5icaratra • Third Ratra 
Text 16 
nivedaydmi bhagavate 
jusanedam havir havih 
nivedydrpana-mantro 'yam 
sarvdrcdsu nijdkhyayd 
While offering food to Lord Krsna one should chant one's 
favorite name of the Lord. One should pray to the Lord that 
He kindly accept the food that was prepared in ghee. 
Text 17 
grdsa-mudrdm vdma-dosnd 
vikacotpala-sannibhdm 
pradarsayan daksinena 
prdnddindrh ca darsayet 
One should then display with his left hand the grdsa-mudrd, 
which is like a fully blossomed lotus flower. With his right 
hand, he should display the prana-mudrd while chanting prdndya 
svdhd. 
Text 18 
sprset kanisthopakanisthike dve 
sdngustha-murdhnd prathameha mudrd 
tathdpard tarjani-madhyame sydd 
andmika-madhyamike ca madhyd 
This particular mudrd is completed when one touches his 
thumb, little finger, and ring finger to his head. The devotee 
should also display the madhya-mudrd with his first finger, 
middle finger and ring finger. 
Text 19 
anamikd-tarjani-madhyamdh sydt 
tadvac caturthi sa-kanisthikds tdh 


Instructions on Worshiping the Lord 
syat pancami tadvad iti pradistah 
pranadi-mudra nija-mantra-yuktdh 
The pmnddirmudm is displayed by touching the middle finger, 
first finger, ring ring and little finger to the thumb and chanting 
the suitable mantra. 
Text 20 
prdndpana-vydha-samdnoddnah 
kramdc caturthyd yuktdh 
taradhara baddha ceddhah 
krmadhvanas tato manavah 
Mantras are revealed to one who chants the names of the five 
kinds of air—prdna, apdma, vydna, samdna and uddna—ending 
them in the fourth dative case. This chanting is favorable for 
the execution of devotional service to Lord Krsna. 
Text 21 
tato nivedya mudrikdm 
pradhanaya karadvaye 
sprsatv andmikdm nijdrh 
manum japan pradarsayet 
Thereafter, one should display the pradhanarmudra and chant 
the mantras by touching them with the ring finger. 
Text 22 
nandajo 'mbu-manu-binda^yun-natir 
vdmapdrsva udaratmani ca 
ruddha-atmani-nivedyam dtma-bhur- 
mdrh sa pdrsvam anilas tathd niyuk 
After doing this, one should offer water to the son of Nanda 
and then offer obeisances to Him. One should meditate upon 
how the Lord is accepting his offerings of food. 


Sr! Narada-paSicaratra • Third Ratra 
Text 23 
mandalam abhito mantnbijdnkura- 
bhajandni vinyasya 
pistamaydn api dipdn ghrta- 
pumdn vinasyet sudipta-sikhdn 
A learned devotee should then meditate on the seed, leaves 
and petals of the lotus flower that is situated in the middle of 
the sacred place. He should offer sweet rice and other food, as 
well as a ghee lamp, to the sacred place. 
Thus ends the translation of the eighth chapter of the Third 
Rdtra of Sn Ndrada-pancardtra. 


Chapter 9 
The Procedure For Performing Fire Sacrifice 
Text 1 
sri-vyasa uvaca 
atha sarhskrte hutavahe vimala- 
dhirabhivadya samyag abhipujya 
harim juhuyat sitdghrta-yutena 
payah parisadhitena sitadldivina 
Vyasadeva said; After completing the worship of Lord Hari by 
offering Him all the aforementioned items with a pure heart, 
one should perform a fire sacrifice with pure ghee and other 
milk products. 
Text 2 
astottara-sahasrarh samapya 
homarh punar balirii dadydt 
vasisthadhindthebhyo naksatrebhyas 
tatas ca karanebhyah 
One should perform a fire sacrifice by offering one thousand 
and eight oblations into the sacrificial fire while simultaneously 
offering all of the articles once again for the worship of the 
Lord. These articles should also be offered to vasistha adhindtha 
naksatra and to the karanas. 
Text 3 
sampadya pant ca-sudhdrh samarpya 
dattvdmbha udvdsya mukhdrcir dsye 
naivedyam uddhrtya nivedya 
visvaksendya prthvim upalipya bhuyah 
At this time, the devotee should display the sudhd-mudrd, and 
offer water and various kinds of food to Lord Krsna once again. 
85 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third Ratra 
Thereafter, he should carefully clean the sacrificial arena. 
Text 4 
gandusa-danta-dhavanacamanasya-hasta- 
suktydnulepa-mukha-vasaka-mdlya-bhusah 
tdmbulam apy ati nivedya suvddya-nrtya- 
gytaih sudrptam abhipujayatdt pur eva 
After completing this, one should offer water for the Lord 
to wash His hands, mouth and teeth, while reciting Vedic 
hymns. Thereafter, one should offer sandalwood paste, mouth 
freshener, a flower garland, ornaments and betel nuts. One 
should also sing and dance before the Lord. 
Text 5 
gandhddibhih saparivdram athdrghyam asmai 
dattvd vidhdya kusumdnjalim ddarena 
stutvd pranamya sirasd culakodakena 
dtmdnam arpayatu tac carandrvinde 
Thereafter, in the sacrificial arena, one should worship the 
Lord with devotion by offering Him and His associates arghya 
and flowers. One should also offer prayers and obeisances in a 
1 mood of complete surrender. 
Texts 6-7 
iti purvarh prana-buddhi- 
deha-dharmadhikdratah 
jdgrat-svapna-susupty 
dkhydvasthdsu manasd vdcd 
karmand hastdbhydm padbhydm 
udarena sisnd yat smrtam 
yad uktam yat krtarh tat sarvarh 
brahmdrpanarii bhavatu svdhd 


Instructions on Worshiping the Lord 
Indeed, one should surrender his very life, intelligence, body, 
religious principles, mind, and speech, as well as all of the 
activities that he performs with his hands, legs, and stomach, 
during wakefulness or while sleeping. Every activity that one 
performs should be done as an offering to the Lord. 
Text 8 
mam madiyarh ca sakalam 
haraye 'ham samarpaye 
orh tat sad iti samprokto 
mantrah svatmarpane subhah 
One should chant orh tat sat and pray: O Lord, I surrender, myself 
at Your lotus feet, along with everything that I may possess. 
Text9 
anusmaran kalasam acyutarh 
japan sahasrakarh budho vapusy 
athoditojjhitah samd citi-vindpy 
atas tad api nayet sudhatmatam 
One should then meditate on Krsna as being situated in the 
water pitcher that is kept in the sacrificial arena while chanting 
his mantra one thousand times. He should consider himself to 
be a nectarean object for Krsna's enjoyment. 
Text 10 
dhvaja-torana-dik-kalasadi-gatam 
api mandapa-mandala-kunda-latam 
abhiyojya citirh kalase kusumaih 
paripujya japet punar astasatam 
After completing the fire sacrifice, one should collect the flags, 
pillars, pitchers and other articles from the puja altar and then 
chant the mula-mantra eight hundred times. 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third Ratra 
Text 11 
atha sisya upositah prabhdte 
krta-nityah susitambarah suvesah 
dharanl-dhana-dhanya-go-bahulair 
vinayad vipra-vardn hareh prasddya 
A disciple should rise early in the morning, take his bath, and 
then perform his daily religious duties. After completing them, 
he should dress in white cloth and decorate himself with nice 
ornaments. He should then satisfy the qualified devotees of 
Lord Hari by giving them land, grains, wealth and cows. 
Text 12 
bhuyah parity a pranipatya desikarh 
tasmai parasmai purusdya dehine 
tdrh vitta-sdthyarh parihrtya daksindrh 
dattvd tanurh svdrh ca samarpayet sudhlh 
He should then bow down to Krsna by thinking of Him as being 
present in the place of worship. An intelligent devotee should 
give sufficient daksind (remuneration) to his spiritual master 
and take complete shelter of him. 
Text 13 
athdbhiseka-mandape 
sukhopavistam dsane 
gurur visodhayed amurh 
pureva sosanddibhih 
The spiritual master should purify his disciple as he is seated 
on a sanctified asana in the sacrificial arena, in the manner that 
was detailed earlier. 
Text 14 
pitha-nydsdvasdnarh vapusi 
vimala-dhlr nyasya tasydsikdyd 


The Procedure For Performing Fire Sacrifice 
mantrendbhyarcya durvdksata- 
kusuma-yutdm rocandrh ke nidhdya 
dsirvddair dvijdndm visada- 
paturavair gita-vdditra-ghosair 
mdngalyair dnayettam kalasam 
abhivrtas tat-samiparh pratltah 
A pure-hearted devotee has to perform the nydsa, placing it 
on his body, put durvd grass and rice that has been dried in 
the sun on a raised altar, and then beg for the blessings of the 
brdhmanas. 
Text 15 
tendbhilina-mani-mantra-mahausadhena 
dhdmnd perana paramdmrta-rupa-bhdjd 
sampurayan vapur amusya tato vitanvan 
tat-sdmavamyam abhisecayatdt yathdvat 
The sincere practitioner should invite the Supreme Lord, 
Krsna—whose form is full of eternity, knowledge and bliss—by 
chanting these confidential mantras. After doing so, he should 
perform the abhiseka (bathing ceremony) of the Lord. 
Text 16 
ksadyaird 'ntima-varnair adbhis ca 
purna-tanus trirvyakta-mantrdntaih 
paridhrta-sitatara-vasana-dvitayo 
vdcamyamah samdcdntah 
While filling the pitcher with water, one must chant the mantras, 
pronouncing each letter carefully, beginning from sa up to the 
final letter. The sadhaka should then perform dcamana once 
again, while remaining silent. 


Sri Narada-paScaratra • Third RAtra 
Text 17 
bahusah pranamya desika- 
namanarh harim athopasampujya 
tad-daksinatas tisthed abhimukha 
ekdgra-mdnasah sisyah 
After offering worship to Lord Hari, who is known as Desika, 
the disciple who knows very well the science of chanting mantras 
should stand by the right side of his spiritual master. 
Text 18 
nyd,sair yathdvidhi tarn acyuta-sadvidhdya 
gandhdksatddibhir alankrta-varsmano 'sya 
rsy ddi-yuktam atha mantra-varam yathdvat 
bruydt triso gurur anarghyam avdkam ante 
The spiritual master should then perform the appropriate nydsa 
on the disciple and offer him. at the lotus feet of the Supreme 
Lord. He should then decorate his disciple with flowers and 
sandalwood paste, and offer arghya to the Lord while remaining 
silent. 
Text 19 
gurund vidhivat prasddhitarh 
manum astottara-satarh prajapya budhah 
abhivandyd tatah srnoti samyak 
samaydn bhakti-bharena namra-murtih 
The disciple should chant one hundred and eight times the 
mantra that has been chanted by his spiritual master. He 
should greet his spiritual master with humility and receive 
transcendental instruction from him. 
Text 20 
dattvd sisydya manum nyastvdtha 
guruh krtdtma-yajana-vidhih 


The Procedure For Performing Fire Sacrifice 
astottara-sahasrarh sva- 
saktihdndn avdptaye japydt 
Thereafter, the spiritual master should impart to his disciple 
the complete understandaing of the process of Deity worship 
and the performance of nydsa. After doing so, the spiritual 
master should chant his mantra one thousand and eight times, 
just so that he can regain the power he has lost. 
Text 21 
kumbhddikam ca sakalarn gurave nivedya 
sampujayet dvija-vardn api bhojya-jdtaih 
kurvanty anena vidhind ya ihdbhisekarh 
te sampaddrh nilayanam hi ta eva dhanydh 
The disciple should give in charity all the necessities of life, 
including food, to his spiritual master, as well as qualified 
brdhmanas. Anyone who performs worship according to these 
directions certainly obtains great opulence and becomes most 
glorious. 
Text 22 
sahksipya kincid uditd samarpya 
diksd samsmarandya vismadhiydm 
endrh pravisya mantri sarvdn 
mantrdn japet juhuydt yajeta 
For the benefit of the neophyte devotee, I have explained 
some processes briefly. By following these procedures, 
the practitioners of devotional service gradually surrender 
themselves to the point where they can take initiation from 
the spiritual master. After initiation, the disciple soon becomes 
qualified to worship the Deity of the Supreme Lord. 
Thus ends the translation of the ninth chapter of the Third 
Rdtra of Sn Narada-pahcardtra. 


Chapter 10 
Service to Lord Krsna after Diksa. 
Meditation Upon Lord Krsna 
Text 1 
sri-vydsa uvdca 
caitrendu-tan-mdsi tamisra-pakse 
punya-ksetre desikdt prdpya dlksarh 
tendjnaptah purva-sevdrh dvitiye 
mdsi dvddasydm drabhetdmaldydm 
Vyasadeva said; One should take initiation from one's spiritual 
master during the period of the waning moon in the month of 
Caitra, in a holy place. During the period of the waxing moon 
of the next month, the disciple should begin to perform his 
primary service to his spiritual master. 
Text 2 
krtvd sndnddyarh karma dehdrcandntarh 
vartmdsritya prdg Iritarh mantri-mukhyah 
suddho maunl brahmacdn nisdsi 
japydc chdntdtmd suddha-padmdksa-ddmnd 
After completing his bath and other bodily activities, an 
experienced practitioner who is pure-hearted, silent, and 
celibate, and who eats only once a day and is very peaceful, 
should follow the above-mentioned process and chant his 
mantra on beads made from lotus seeds. 
Text3 
tanvan susrusdrh gosu tdbhyah prayacchan 
grdsarh bhutesu prodvaharhs cdnukampdm 
93 


Sri Narada-paScaratra • Third Ratra 
mantradhisthatnm devatdm vandamano 
durgdrh durbodha-dhvdnta-bhdnum gurum ca 
A devotee should cleanse the contamination within his heart by 
serving cows and feeding them, by being merciful to all living 
entities, and by offering respect to Goddess Durga, who is the 
predominating deity of mantras, as well as to elderly persons. 
Texts 4-6 
kurvann dtmiyarh karma vamdsramastham 
mantram japtvd 'dbhih sndna-kdrinibhih sincet 
dcamena pdrthas-tattva-sankhyarh-prajaptam 
bhunjdnas cdnu sapta-japtdn janadhyah 
adreh srnge nadyds tate bilva-mula 
toye hrddaghne gokule-visnu-gehe 
asvatthdd adhastdd ambudhes cdpi tire 
sthdnesv eteyv dslnds tv ekaikasas ta 
prajaped ayuta-catuskam dasdksaram 
manu-varam prthak kramasah 
astadasdksaram ced ayuta- 
dvayam iritd sankhyd 
After rising in the morning, the devotee who follows the 
principles of varndsrama-dharma and chants the mula-mantra, 
should first of all bathe. For performing dcamana, one should 
first chant the proper mantra twenty-four times and then again 
seven times. A sincere practitioner should enthusiastically chant 
the ten-syllable mantra forty thousand times and the eighteen- 
syllable mantra twenty thousand times, either while sitting in a 
cowshed, a temple of Lord Visnu, or under a pipal tree or fig 
tree. 


Service to Lord Krsna after Diksa 
Text 7 
sdkarh mularh phalath go-stana-bhava- 
dadhini bhaiksam annarh ca saktun 
dogdhdnnam cad addnah ksiti-dhara- 
sikharddau kramdt sthdna-bhede 
ekarh vai pdna-saktau gaditam iti 
mayd purva-sevd-vidhdnarh 
nirurtte 'smin bhuyah prajapatu 
vidhivat siddhaye sadhakendrah 
One should make arrangements for food before beginning his 
worship so that later on, he will not be disturbed by thoughts of 
catering to bodily demands. According to the place, one should 
accordingly arrange for food and drink, such as spinach, roots, 
fruit, milk, yogurt, grains, powdered barley, wheat and sweet 
rice. By doing this, a sadhaka can freely concentrate on chanting 
his mantras for attaining perfection. 
Texts 8-10 
dehdrcandnte dinaso dinddau 
dlksokta-mdrga-dvitayarh vidhdnam 
dsritya krsnarh prayajed vivikta- 
gehesu nistho huta-sista-bhoji 
dasa-laksam aksaya-phaladarh manum 
pratijapya nirmala-matir dasdksaram 
juhuydd guddjya-madhu-sarhyutair nabair 
varunddyujair hutavahe dasdyutam 
susila-yugala-varnarh cen 
manum panca-laksam 
prajapatu juhuydc ca prokta- 
kluptdrddha-laksam 


Sri Narada-paKcaratra • Third RAtra 
amala-matir aldbhe 
payasair ambujdndm 
ghrta-sahita sitdbhairdrabhed 
dhoma-karma 
A practitioner should carefully wash his body every morning. 
He should then sit in a solitary place and worship Lord Krsna 
with faith and devotion and accept only the remnants of food 
that had been offered in sacrifice. A pure-hearted devotee 
should chant the ten-syllable mantra while offering oblations 
into the sacrificial fire ten million times. 
One should perform sacrifice by offering honey and ghee 
into the fire one hundred thousand times. By doing so, one 
will surely achieve the desired results. One should chant the 
eighteen-syllable mantra five hundred thousand times and 
perform sacrifice while offering oblations fifty thousand times. 
If one is unable to collect the necessary articles, such as lotus 
flowers, he should instead use sweet rice mixed with ghee. 
Text 11 
asaktdndrh home nigama- 
rasandgendra-gunito 
japah kdryas ceti dvija- 
nrpa-visdm dhur apare 
sa homos ced esdrh sama 
ihajapo homa-balito 
ya ukto varndndrh sa khalu 
vihitas tac-ca na-drsdm 
If a practitioner is unable to strictly follow the above-mentioned 
procedures while performing sacrifice, he should compensate 
by chanting his mantras the number of times previously 
mentioned, multiplied by twelve. It is also recommended that 


Service to Lord Krsna after Diksa 
one should chant the mantra and perform sacrifice as many 
times as there are letters in the mantra. 
Text 12 
yam varnam dsrito yah sudrah sa ca 
tanundm dhruvam vihitam 
vidadhita japam vidhivat sraddhdvdn 
bhakti-bhavdva-namra-tanuh 
If sudras, according to the principles of their social order, 
chant any of the above-mentioned mantras with a favorable 
mentality, they will attain devotional service, faith, and humility 
and ultimately, they will attain perfection. 
Text 13 
punar abhisikto gurund vidhivad 
visrdnya daksindm tasmai 
abhyavahdrya ca viprdn vibhavaih 
sampnnayec ca bhahti-yutah 
After being purified by the spiritual master once again, the 
disciple should give him daksind. He should also satisfy the 
brdhmanas by giving them wealth. 
Text 14 
iti mantra-varam-dvitaydnyavaram 
paribddhya japadibhir acyuta-dhih 
prayajet savana-tritaye dinasi 
vidhindtha mukundam amanda-matih 
By chanting the above-mentioned mantra, a practitioner who is 
pure in heart can bring his mind and senses under control and 
then worship for three consecutive days Lord Krsna, who is the 
bestower of liberation. 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third Ratra 
Texts 15-16 
atha snmad-udydna-samvrdta-hema- 
sthalodbhasi-ratna-sphuran-mandapdntah 
lasat-kalpa-vrksddha uddlpta-ratna- 
sthalddhisthitdmbhoja-pithadhirudham 
mahd-nlla-ntldbham atyanta-bdlarh 
guda-snigdha-vaktrdnta-visrasta-kesam 
anir-brdta-parydkulotphulla-padma- 
pramugdhdnanarh srimad indlvardksam 
One should then meditate on Krsna as He is seated on top of a 
fully blossomed lotus flower that is surrounded by innumerable, 
effulgent desire trees of various colors, within a flower garden. 
The complexion of the Lord is slightly bluish, His nature is 
childish, and He displays an enchanting smile. He has curly hair 
and His face and ears look like fully blossomed lotus flowers. 
Text 17 
calat-kundalolldsi-sotphulla-gandam 
sughonam susonddhararh susmitdsyam 
anekdsmarasmy ullasat-kantha-bhusam- 
lasantam vahantarh nakharh paundarikam 
His earrings swing to and fro across His cheeks. His nose is 
beautiful and His lotus-like face is adorned with an attractive 
smile. His face appears to be shining because of the effulgence 
emanating from His jeweled necklaces. His toenails are as 
charming as lotus flowers. 
Text 18 
samuddhusarorah-sthalam benu-dhunyd 
supustdngam astdpadakalpa-dlptam 
katira-sthale cdru-janghdnta-yugme 
pinaddham kvanat-kinkini-jdla-ddmnd 


Service to Lord Krsna after Diksa 
He looks even more enchanting when He plays His flute. His 
entire body is brilliant, like gold. The tinkling of the small bells 
that decorate His waistband is very pleasing to hear. 
Text 19 
hasantarh hasad-vandhu-jiva-prasuna- 
prabharh panipaddmbujoddra-kdntyd 
kare daksine pdyasarh vdma-haste 
dadhanam navam suddha-haiyarigavinam 
Lord Krsna's attractive smile is just like a bandhujiva flower. 
His hands and legs resemble lotus flowers. In His right hand, 
He holds a pot of sweet rice and in His left hand, He holds a 
pot of butter. 
Text 20 
mahibhdra-bhutdm ardrdti-yuthdn 
anah-putanddin nihanturii pravrttam 
prabhurh gopikd-gopa-vrndaihpantarh 
surendradibhir vanditarh deva-vrndaih 
His mission is to annihilate miscreants like Putana and Sakata, 
who are envious of the demigods and are a burden to the 
earth. He is surrounded by the gopis and is constantly being 
worshiped by exalted personalities like Indra. He is the supreme 
worshipable Lord of all. 
Text 21 
prage pujayitv ety anusmrtya krsnarh 
tad angendra-vajrddibhir bhakti-namrah 
sitdbhe ca-haiyangavinais ca dadhna 
vimisrena daugdhena samprinayet tarn 
One should meditate on Lord Krsna and His plenary portions, 
as well as Indra and other servants. One should satisfy the Lord 


100 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third RAtra 
by offering Him with love and devotion yogurt, butter and ghee 
mixed with sugar. 
Thus ends the translation of the tenth chapter of the Third 
Ratra of Sri Narada-pahcaratra. 


Chapter 11 
The Process of Worshiping Lord Krsna at Noon. 
Meditation Upon Lord Krsna 
Text 1 
vydsa uvaca 
iti prdtar arcayed acyutam yo 
narah pratyaham sasvad dstikya-yuktah 
labhet so 'cirenaiva laksmim samagrdm 
iha pretya suddhim pararh dhdma bhuydt 
Vyasadeva said; A devotee who worships Sri Krsna every morning 
in the above-mentioned way, with firm faith and devotion, 
certainly attains good fortune in this life and returns back to 
Godhead after death. 
Text 2 
ahno mukhe 'nudinam ity abhipujya saurirh 
dadhndthavd guda-yutena nivedya toyaih 
sriman-mukhe samatitarpya tad-dhiyd tarn 
japydt sahasram atha sdstakam adarena 
Before noon, one should again worship Sri Krsna, offering 
Him yogurt, jaggery, water, and other items, and one should 
meditate on how the Lord accepts these things. Thereafter, 
one should chant his worshipable mantra one thousand and 
eight times. 
Text 3 
madhyandine japa-vidhdna-visista-ruparh 
vandydrh surarsi-yati-khecara-mukhya-vrndaih 
go-gopa-vanitd-nikaraih pantarh 
sdndrdmvuda-cchavi-sujdta-manohardngam 
101 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third RAtra 
At noon, the devotee should meditate on Krsna, thinking that the 
Lord— who is glorified by exalted personalities such as Narada, 
the chief demigods, and great renunciates; who is surrounded 
by the cows and cowherd girls; and whose complexion is most 
beautiful, like a dark cloud—eternally enjoys His pastimes in 
Vrndavana. 
Text 4 
mdyura-patra-pariklpta-vatarhsa-ramyam 
dhammillam ullasita-cillikam ambujdksam 
purnendu-vimba-vadanarh mani-kundala-sri- 
gandarh sundsam alisundara-manda-hdsam 
Krsna's curly hair is decorated with a crown made of peacock 
feathers. His eyes are just like lotus flowers. His face is just 
like the full moon. His cheeks shine brightly because of the 
effulgence emanating from His jeweled earrings. His nose is 
very beautiful, and He displays an enchanting smile on His 
lotus-like face. 
Text 5 
pitdmbaram rucira-nupura-hdra-kdnd- 
keyura-kdrmikatakddibhir ujjvaldngam 
divydnulepana-visangitam amsardjad- 
amldda-citra-vanamdlam anariga-diptam 
He is dressed in yellow garments; His lotus feet are decorated 
with beautiful anklets; He is adorned with a necklace, armlets 
and bracelets; and He appears most attractive, being decorated 
with various types of ornaments and garments. His body is 
smeared with sandalwood paste and He wears a garland of forest 
flowers. His beauty easily defeats that of millions of Cupids. 
Text 6 
venurh dhamantam atha-vdma-kare dadhdnam 
savyetare pasupa-yastim uddra-vesam 


Worshiping Lord Krsna at Noon 
103 
dakse mani-pravaram ipsita-dana-daksam 
dhydtvaivam arcayatu nandajam indirdptyai 
In His left hand, Krsna holds His flute and in His right hand, He 
carries a stick for tending the cows. He has dressed Himself in a 
most attractive manner and He is ready to award benedictions 
to deserving devotees. In this way, one should meditate on 
Krsna to obtain good fortune and the perfection of life. 
Text? 
ddmatikdnga-dayitd-suhrdanghripendra- 
vajrddibhih samabhipujya yathd-vidhdnam 
dlksa-vidhana-kathitam ca nivedya-jdtam 
haise nivedayatu pdtra-vare yathdvat 
After being initiated by a qualified spiritual master, one should 
worship, according to the prescribed rules and regulations, 
Sn Krsna, whose lotus feet are decorated with marks of a flag, 
thunderbolt and anchor. One should offer Him all of the 
required paraphernalia on a golden plate. 
Text 8 
astottara-satam atho juhuydt payo 'nnaih 
sarpir yutaih susita-sarkarayd vimisraih 
dadyad balirii ca nija-diksu surarsi-yogi- 
raksopadaivata-ganebhya uddra-cetdh 
Thereafter, one should perform a fire sacrifice by offering 
oblations of sweet rice mixed with ghee one hundred and eight 
times. According to one's capacity, one should satisfy the great 
sages, demigods, yogis, demons and other creatures, by offering 
them gifts with a noble heart. 
Text 9 
navanlta-milita-pdyasa-dhiydrcandnte 
janair mukham tasya 


104 
Sri Narada-paScaratra • Third Ratra 
santarpya japatu mantri sahasram 
astottara-satarh vdpi 
One should meditate, thinking that the Lord is very pleased 
while relishing the sweet rice mixed with ghee that has been 
offered. One should then chant his worshipable mantra either 
one thousand times or one hundred and eight times. 
Text 10 
ahno madhye ballavi-ballabharh tarn 
nityarh bhaktydbhyarcayet yo nardgryah 
devdh sarve tarn namasyanti sasvad 
vartteran vai tad-vase sarva-lokdh 
A fortunate person who daily worships with love and devotion, 
at noon, Sri Krsna, the beloved Lord of the gapls, becomes 
respected by the demigods and gains control over all other 
living entities. 
Text 11 
medhdyuh-sn-kdnti-saubhagya-yuktah 
putrair mitrair go-mahi-ratna-jdtaih 
bhogais cdnyair bhuribhih sannihddhyo 
bhuyad dhdma 'nte ca tasydcyutdkhyam 
Such a person becomes endowed with wisdom, a long duration 
of life, wealth, beauty, good fortune, children, friends, cows, 
land, and many other objects of enjoyment. At the end of his 
life, he returns to the infallible abode of the Supreme Lord. 
Text 12 
trtiya-kdla-pujdydm 
asti kdla-vikalpand 
sdydhne nisi vety atra 
vadanty eke vipascitah 


Worshiping Lord Krsna at Noon 
There is some disagreement about the third worship of the 
day. Some say that it should be performed in the evening while 
others say that it should be performed at night. 
Text 13 
dasdksarena ced rdtrau 
■ sdydhne 'stadasarh tatah 
ubhayom ubhayenaiva 
kuryad ity apare jaguh 
If the ten-syllable mantra is chanted at night, the eighteen- 
syllable mantra should be chanted in the evening. This is the 
arrangement prescribed by other learned scholars of the 
Vedas. 
Text 14 
sdydhne dvdravatydm tu 
citrodydnopasobhite 
dvyasta-sdhasra-sankhydtair 
bhavanair abhisamvrte 
In the evening, one should worship Sri Krsna as He resides at 
the abode of Dvaraka, which contains many beautiful gardens 
and sixteen thousand palaces. 
Texts 15-16 
hamsa-sdrasa-sanktrnaih 
kamalotpala-sdlibhih 
sarobhir amaldmbhobhih 
pante bhavanottame 
udyat-pradyotano-dyota- 
sadyutau mani-mandape 
mrdvdstare sukhdsinam 
hemdmbhojdsane harim 


106 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third Ratra 
The abode of Dvaraka is decorated with many beautiful lakes 
that are filled with swans, cranes and other aquatic birds, as 
well as beautiful lotus flowers and crystal-clear water. There are 
many beautiful residences all over the city of Dvaraka. While 
thinking in this way, a person should worship Sri Hari as He sits 
on a golden lotus flower that is situated within a temple that is 
decorated with jewels and shines like the rising sun. 
Text 17 
naradadyaih parivrtam 
dtma-tattva-vinirnaye 
tebhyo munibhyah svath dhdma 
disantam param aksaram 
He is surrounded by great sages, such as Narada, who have 
assembled to learn the science of the self. The Lord is describing 
to them His supreme and inexhaustible abode. 
Text 18 
indlvara-nibharh saumyam 
padma-patrdyateksanam 
snigdha-kuntala-sambhinna- 
kmta-mukutojjvalam 
His eyes are very beautiful, like blue lotus flowers, and they are 
broad like lotus leaves. His hair is very smooth and His head is 
adorned with a beautiful diamond crown. 
Text 19 
cdru-prasanna-vadanam 
sphuran-makara-kundalam 
srivatsa-vaksasarh bhrdjat 
kaustubharh vanamdlinam 


Worshiping Lord Krsna at Noon 
His most pleasing, enchanting face reflects the light from His 
fish-shaped earrings. His chest is decorated with the mark of 
Srivatsa, the Kaustubha gem, and a garland of forest flowers. 
Text 20 
kdsmira-kapisoraskarh 
plta-kauseya-vdsasam 
hdra-keyura-kataka- 
rasanddyaih pariskrtam 
The color of His chest is like that of fire. He is dressed in yellow 
and red garments and His body is adorned with a necklace, 
armlets, bracelets and other ornaments. 
Text 21 
hrta-visvambhardbhuri- 
bhdrarh mudita-mdnasam 
sankha-cakra-gadd-padma- 
rdjad bhuja-catustayam 
The Lord constantly diminishes the burden of the earth. 
His four hands hold a conch shell, a disc, a club, and a lotus 
flower. 
Text 22 
evaih dhydtvd 'rcayen mantri 
sydd angaih prathamd "vrtih 
dvitiyd mahisibhis tu 
trtiydydm samarcayet 
After meditating on the Supreme Lord in this way, a practitioner 
who is experienced in the science of chanting mantras should 
worship the first circle of the Lord's associates; and then the 
second circle, which includes His queens; and finally, the third 
circle of associates. 


108 
Sri Narada-pancarAtra • Third Ratra 
Text 23 
naradarh parvatarh jisnurh 
nisathoddhava-darukan 
visvaksenam ca saineyam 
diksv agre vinata-sutam 
Thereafter, one should worship, in all directions, Narada, 
Parvata, Jisnu, Nisatha, Uddhava, Daruka, Visvaksena, Saina, 
and Garuda, the son of Vinata. 
Text 24 
lakesais tat-praharanaih 
punar avarana-dvayam 
iti sampujya vidhivat 
payasena nivedayet 
After this, one should worship two more circles of associates— 
first, the Lokapalas, beginning with Indra, and next, their 
weapons. Finally, one should offer sweet rice to them. 
Text 25 
tarpayitvd khanda-misra 
dugdha-buddhyd jalair harim ' 
japed asta-satarh mantri 
bhdvayan purusottamam 
One should next offer water to Lord Sri Hari, thinking it to 
be milk mixed with sugar. Then, he should meditate on the 
pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead while chanting 
his worshipable mantra one hundred and eight times. 
Text 26 
pujdsu homam sarvdsu kurydn 
madhyandine 'thavd 


Worshiping Lord Krsna at Noon 
109 
dsanady arghya-paryantam 
krtvd stutvd namet sudhih 
In the course of worshiping the Supreme Lord at noon, one 
must perform afire sacrifice. Otherwise, he may worship the 
Lord by offering Him various articles, beginning with an dsana 
and ending with arghya. At the end of his worship, the intelligent 
sadhaka should offer his obeisance to the Lord. 
Text 27 
samarpydtmdnam udvdsya 
tarn sva-hrt-sarasiruhe 
vinyasya tan-mayo bhutvd 
punar dtmdnam arcayet 
While thinking that his own self is situated on the lotus flower 
within his heart, the practitioner should totally surrender 
himself to the Supersoul. When he thus becomes fully absorbed 
in thought of the Supreme Lord, he should once again worship 
Him with unalloyed devotion. 
Thus ends the translation of the eleventh chapter of the Third 
Rdtra of Sri Ndrada-pahcardtra. 


Chapter 12 
Service to Lord Krsna In the Evening 
The Worship of the Gopis 
Text 1 
vydsa uvdca 
sdydhne vdsudevam yo nityam 
evam yajen narah 
sarvdn kdmdn avdpydnte 
sa ydti paramdrh gatim 
Vyasadeva said: A person who daily worships Lord Vasudeva 
in the evening, as previously described, will find that all of his 
desires are fulfilled. At the end of his life, he will attain the 
supreme destination. 
Texts 2-3 
rdtrau cm manmathdkrdnta- 
mdnasarh devaki-sutam 
yajed rdsa-parisrdntaih 
gopi-mandala-madhyagam 
prthurh suvrttam masmarh vitasti 
mdtronnatam kau vilikhanna sarikam 
dkramya padbhydm itaretard tu hastair 
bhramo 'yam khalu rdsa-gosthl 
Thereafter, one should worship the son of Devakx at night. 
Although He is situated in the midst of the gopis and appears 
somewhat tired due to enjoying the rasa dance, His heart is 
afflicted by the arrows of Cupid. 
The devotee should draw the Lord's well-built, transcendental 
form on the ground and then worship Him while meditating 
111 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third RAtra 
on how the Lord enjoys the company of the gopls in the arena 
of the rdsa-lila. 
Texts 4-7 
sthala-niraja-masrna-pardga-bhrtd 
lahan-kana-jdla-bharena satd 
marutd paritdpa-krtddhyusite 
susite yamund-puline vipule 
asanra-nisdta-saronmathita- 
pramadd-sata-kotibhir dkulite 
udundtha-karair visadikrta-su- 
prasare vicarad bhraman-nikare 
vidyadhara-kinnara-siddha-surair 
gandharua-bhujarigama-cdranakaih 
ddropahitaih suvimdna-gataih 
svasthair ativrsta-supuspa-caye 
itaretara-baddhatara-pramaddgama- 
kalpita-rdsa-vihdsa-vidhau 
mani-sankugam apy amund vapusd 
bahudhd vihitdsvaka-divya-tanum 
One Should meditate on the Lord as He stands on the bank 
of the Yamuna. A cool breeze blows, carrying the aroma and 
pollen from the lotus flowers that grow there. Sometimes, the 
Lord smiles and sometimes, He teases the gopis. In this way, 
He pleases the minds of thousands of gopis, whose hearts are 
pierced by the arrows of Cupid. 
All of the gopis are decorated with fragrant flowers. The entire 
arena is beautified by the bright moonlight, making it appear 
as if covered with snow. Bumblebees hover around the entire 
area. This arena has become a favorite spot for Vidhyadharas, 
Kinnaras, Siddhas, Devas, Gandharvas, Nagas and Caranas. The 


Serving Lord Krsna in the Evening 
celestial women eagerly watch while sitting in their beautiful 
airplanes as they remain situated in the sky. 
In this way, one should meditate on the Lord, thinking that He 
is controlled by the love and affection of the gopls as He enjoys 
transcendental, conjugal patimes with them. 
Texts 
sudrsam ubhayoh prthag-antaragarh 
dayita-kula-baddha-bhuja-dvitayam 
nija-sanga-vijrmbhad anariga-sikhi- 
jvalitdriga-lasat-pulakdli-yujdm 
Although Krsna appears to be separate from all the gopls, He 
is holding each of thier hands and dancing in ecstasy in the 
oneness of transcendental love. He is the most intimate friend 
of all the gopls. The bumblebees mistake the gopls' eyes to be 
lotus flowers, and thus create an obstruction to their vision of 
Krsna. 
Text9 
vividha-smti-bhinna-manojnataya- 
svarasaptaka-murcchana-tdna-ganaih 
sramamdnam asubhir uddra-mani- 
sphuta-mantra-nasincita-cdrutaram 
The hearts of the gopls are filled with ecstasy because of 
hearing the enchanting music, and because of dancing to 
the accompaniment of very melodious songs. Indeed, the 
combined sound of the musical instruments has touched their 
hearts, causing them to transcendentally relish the singing and 
dancing. 
Text 10 
iti bhinna-tanurh manibhir manitarh 
tapaniyamayair iva mdrakatam 


114 
Sri Narada-pasicaratra • Third RAtra 
mani-nirmita-madhyaga-sanku-lasad 
vipuldruna-pankaja-madhya-gatam 
Because of their intense feelings in ecstatic love, the bodies of 
the gofns appear like emeralds and their brilliance makes them 
resemble the lotus flowers that bloom after sunrise. 
Text II 
atasl-kusumdva-tanurh tarunarh 
tarundruna-padma-paldsa-drsam 
nava-pallava-citra-guluncu-lasacchikhi- 
piccha-pinaddha-kara-pracayam 
The gopis of Vrndavana possess eyes that resemble red atas! 
flowers, or the rising sun. Their eyes can also be compared to 
lotus flowers. Their hair resembles the tail of a peacock and it is 
decorated with newly grown twigs and guludcu creepers. 
Text 12 
catula-bhruvam indu-samdna-mukharh 
mani-kundala-mandita-ganda-yugam 
sasi-vaktra-sadrg-vadana-cchadanam 
mani-rdjad aneka-vidhdbharanam 
Their eyebrows are restless and their faces resemble the moon. 
The gopis' ears are decorated with jeweled earrings. Their 
bodies are fully decorated with various kinds of ornaments. 
Text 13 
asana-prasava-cchadanojjvalasad 
vasanam suvildsa-nivdsa-bhuvam 
nava-vidruma-bhadra-kardnghri-talarh 
bhramardkula-ddma-virdja-bhujam 
At a beautiful place that is most suitable for enjoying amorous 
pastimes, the gopis are engaged in carefully driving away the 
humming bumblebees with their soft lotus-like hands. 


Serving Lord Krsna in the Evening 
115 
Text 14 
taruni-kuca-yuk-jfarirambha-milan- 
masmdruiia-vaksasaTn uksa-gatim 
siva-dhena-samirita-gopa-varam smara- 
vihvalitam bhuvanaika-gumm 
Krsna's chest has assumed a reddish hue because of embracing 
the gopis, whose breasts are smeared with kunkum. The Lord, 
who is the undisputed spiritual master of the entire universe, 
and who the best among the cowherd residents of Vraja, is 
being overwhelmed by transcendental passion. 
Text 15 
pramadeti puthavare vidharam 
prayajed iti rupam arupam ajam 
prathamam paripujya tad anga-vrttim 
mithundni yajed rasasdlimatah 
In this way, an intelligent devotee should install the gopis 
on their altar and then worship them. One should consider 
the gopis to be the bodily limbs of Krsna, who is unchanging, 
beginningless, and full of transcendental mellows. This is the 
method of anga-pujd. 
Text 16 
dala-sodasake smara murti-ganam 
saha-saktikam uttama-rdsa-gatam 
saramdsadanam sva-kald-sahitarh- 
mithundngam athendra-paripramukhdn 
Thereafter, the devotee should worship the transcendental 
forms of the Supreme Lord, such as Kesava, along with His 
beloved consorts, like Klrti, thinking of them as being situated 
on the eight petals of the lotus flower. 


116 
Sri Narada-paScaratra • Third Ratra 
Text 17 
iti samyag amurh paripujya harirh 
catur-dvrti-sarhvrtam ardra-matih 
rajataracite casake sa-sitarh sa- 
ghrtarh supayo 'sya nivedayatat 
A devotee whose heart has become purified due to his sincere 
practice of devotional service should worship Sri Hari, along 
with His four circles of associates, in the manner prescribed 
above, and then offer Him butter, milk, sugar and other food 
on a plate made of silver. 
Text 18 
vibhave sati karhsyamayesu prthak 
svakaresu ca sodasasu kramasah 
mithunesu nivedya pay ah sa-sitarh 
vidadhita purovad atho sakalam 
If a devotee has the means then He should arrange Ip put all 
the paraphernalia for worship, as well as the food to be offered, 
on sixteen plates made of bell metal. 
Text 19 
sakala-bhuvana-mohanarh vidhirh yo 
niyatam amurh nisi nisy uddra-cetdh 
bhavati sa khalu sarva-loka-pujyah 
sriyam atuldrh samavdpya ydty anantam 
A sincere devotee who every night follows this process of 
worshiping the Supreme Lord, who is the enchanter of the 
entire world, becomes worshipable by all, achieves great 
opulence, and at the end of life, goes back to Godhead. 
Text 20 
nisi vd dindnta-samaye prapujyayen 
nityaso harirh bhaktyd 


Serving Lord Krsna in the Evening 
samaphalam ubhayarh hi tatah 
sarhsardbdhirh samuttitirsati yah 
One who regularly worships Sri Hari in the evening or at night 
with wholehearted devotion obtains his desired result and is 
delivered from the ocean of material existence. 
Thus ends the translation of the twelfth chapter of the Third 
Rdtra of Sri Narada-pahcardtra . 


Chapter 13 
Worship of Lord Krsna In His Mantra Form 
The Process of Tarpana 
Text I 
vydsa uvaca 
ity evarh manu-vigraharh madhu- 
ripum yo rdtri-kdlarh yajet 
tasyaivdkhila-jantu-jdta- 
dayitasydmbhodhijd vesmanah 
haste dharma-sukhdrtha-moksa- 
vibhavdh sad-varga-samprdrthitdh 
sandrdnanda-mahd-rasa- 
dravamuco yesdrh phala-srenayah 
Vyasadeva said: Apractitionerwho worships Lord Madhusudana, 
Krsna, in His form as a mantra at night, obtains the favor of all 
living entities and comes to possess great opulence. Laksmidevi 
becomes his companion and he easily achieves the results 
of religiosity, economic development, sense gratification, 
and liberation. He also feels transcendental happiness while 
enjoying the fruit of his karma. 
Text 2 
athocyate purva-samiritdndrh 
pujdvasdne paramasya purhsah 
kalpas tu kdmyesv api tarpandndm 
vindpi pujdrh khalu yaih phalarh sydt 
After the completion of one' s worship of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, the offering of oblations that are to be made to the 
Supersoul is now being described. This process awards one the 
119 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third RAtra 
fulfillment of his desires, even without his engaging in the field 
of fruitive activities. 
TextS 
santarpya pUha-mantram saktih 
sakrt prathamam ucyate tatra 
dvdhya pujayet tarn toyair 
evdrthitaih samupacdraih 
First, one should chant the pttha-mantra and then invoke various 
energies of Lord Krsna at the sanctified place of worship. One 
should then offer worship to these energies by placing before 
them the required paraphernalia and water. 
Text 4 
baddhvdtha dhenu-mudrdm toyaih 
sampddya tarpana-dravyam 
tad-vaddhdnjalind tarn suvarna- 
casaki-krtena tmpayatu 
Thereafter, one should display the dhenu-mudrd before the 
ingredients of worship and sprinkle some water on them to 
purify them. After completing this, one should fold his hands 
and satisfy the articles of worship by placing them on a golden 
tray. 
TextS 
vimsatir astopetd kdla-traya- 
tarpanesu sankhyoktd 
bhuyah sa kdla-vihitdn sakrt 
sakrt tarpayec ca parivdrdn 
Offering of oblations should be done three times a day. Each 
time, there should be twenty-four oblations and on each 
occasion, one should worship the entire family of the Lord, 
along with His associates. 


Worship of Lord Krsna In His Mantra Form 
Text 6 
pratar dadhi-guda-misram 
madhydhne pdyasarh sa-navanltam 
kslrarh trtlya-kdle sasitopalam 
iiy udiritam dravyam 
One should offer yogurt with jaggery in the morning; butter, 
sweet rice and condensed milk at noon; and milk and sugar in 
the evening. 
Text? 
tarpaydmi-padarh yojyarh 
mantrdntesv esu ndmasu 
dvitiydntesu tu punah 
pujdsesarh samdpayet 
While chanting the appropriate mantra, the holy name should 
be pronounced in the second dative case with the word 
tarpaydmi added so that is becomes: I am offering oblations. 
This completes the proper method of worship. 
Text 8 
abhyuksya tat-prasadadbhir 
dtmdnarh prapibedapah 
tajjaptdms tv ambhasod vdsya 
tan-mayah prajapen manum 
One should sprinkle on one's head some water that has already 
been offered, and drink some as well. One should then chant 
the mula-mantra before chanting the above-mentioned mantra 
with full attention. 
Text 9 
atha dravyani kdmyesu 
vaksyante tarpanesu yat 


Sri Narada-paScaratra • Third RAtra 
tani prokta-vidhdndndm 
dsritydnyatamarh yajet 
One must collect those ingredients separately that will be 
offered as oblations with material motives. 
Text 10 
dravyaih sodasabhir annum 
tarpayed ekasas caturvdram 
sa catuh ksirddy antaih sakrj- 
jalddy antam acyutarh bhaktyd 
By offering sixteen items four times, a practitioner must try to 
satisfy the Supreme Lord. One should also offer Him sweet rice 
four times and water just once. In this way, one should worship 
the Supreme Lord, Sri Krsna 
Texts 11-12 
pdyasa-dddhika-krsaram gauddnnam 
payo dadhini navanitam 
djyarh kadali-mocd- 
cocddhydmodakdpupam 
prthukd Idjasametd dravydndrh 
kathitam iha sodasakam 
Idjdnte 'ntya-kslrd prdk 
samarpyam sitopald-punjam 
While performing tarpana (the process of pleasing the Lord), 
one should offer the Lord sweet rice, fried rice, milk, yogurt, 
butter, ghee, bananas, laddus, milk cake, puffed rice, plantain 
flowers, coca, amoda, apupa, prthukd and lazd. These sixteen 
items should be offered to the Lord, followed by sweet rice. 
Text 13 
prage catuhsaptati-vdram ittharh 
pratarpayed yo 'nudinarh naro harim 


Worship of Lord Krsna In His Mantra Form 
ananya-dhis tasya samapta-sampadah 
kara-sthitd mandalato 'bhivanchitah 
A devotee who, with undivided attention, daily performs 
tarpana seventy-four times to please Lord Hari becomes eligible 
to possess great wealth. Indeed, he receives all of his desired 
objects without any trouble. 
Text 14 
dharosna-pakva-payasl-dadhi- 
navanlte ghrtam ca daugdhdnnam 
matsyandi-madhv-amrtam dvddasasas 
tarpayen navabhir ebhih 
One should perform tarpana twelve times while offering nine 
items—milk, condensed milk, yogurt, butter, ghee, sugar 
candy, sugar, honey and other milk products. 
Text 15 
tarpana-vidhir ay am aparah purvodita- 
sama-phalo 'sta-sata-sankhyah 
kdrmani karmani vikrtau jana- 
sarhvalanair visesato vihitah 
The process of tarpana should be performed eight hundred 
times. However, according to circumstances it can be performed 
accordingly. 
Text 16 
sakhanda-dharosna-dhiyd mukundarh 
vrajan purarh grdmam api pratarpya 
labheta bhojyarh sarasarh sa-bhrtyair 
vdsdrhsi dhdnydni dhandni mantri 
One should consider all these offerings to be full of nectar. 
By pleasing Lord Krsna, the giver of liberation, while making 


Sri Narada-pa5jcaratra • Third RAtra 
these offerings, one will come to enjoy palatable food served by 
servants and receive sufficient cloth, grains and wealth. 
Text 17 
ydvat santarpayen mantri 
tdvat-sankhyarh japen manum 
tarpanenaiva sddhydni 
sadhayed akhildny api 
A practitioner should chant his mantra a number of times that 
does not cause him to reduce the number of his offerings of 
tarpana because simply by offering tarpana, all his objectives of 
life will be achieved. 
Text 18 
dvijo bhiksd-vrttir ya iha 
dinaso nanda-tanayah 
svayath bhutvd bhiksdm atati 
hasano gopa-sudrsdm 
asdvetdbhih svair lalita- 
lalitair narma-vidhibhir 
dadhi-ksirdjydbhydrh pracuratara- 
bhiksdm sa labhate 
A brdhmana who earns his livelihood by begging from door to 
door and is a devotee of Lord Krsna and the sun-god should 
continue begging for alms. He should worship Lord Krsna, the 
son of Nanda, and the beloved Lord of the gopis, by offering 
Him butter, yogurt and milk. By doing so, he will receive an 
abundance of alms. 
Text 19 
madhye konesu satsv apy anala-pura- 
putasydlikhet karnikdydm 


Worship of Lord Krsna In His Mantra Form 
kandarpasadhya-yuktarh vivara- 
gata-sad arnarh dvisah kesaresu 
saktih sn-puwa-kalidvi-nava-lipi- 
manoraksa-vdnl-cchaddnam 
madhye vamdn dasdndn dasa-lipim 
anuvaryasya caikaikaso 'bjam 
While worshiping the Lord, a devotee should write the six 
syllables of the six-syllable mantra on the six petals of the lotus. 
When he adds the name of the Lord's energy, such as hnrh 
or srirh, as well as the word raksa, it becomes the ten-syllable 
mantra. (The six-syllable mantra is: kllm krsndya namah and the 
ten-syllable mantra is: hnrh srirh kllm raksakrsndya namah.) 
Texts 20-21 
bhu-padmanabhivrta- 
masrna-manmathena 
gorocandbhi-likhitarh 
tapaniya-sucyd 
patte hiranya-racite 
guliki'krtarh tarn 
gopdla-mantram 
akhildrthadam etad uktam 
sampdta-siktam abhijaptam 
idarh mahadbhir 
dharyarh jagat-traya- __ 
vasikaranaika-daksam 
raksd-yasah-suta-mahi- 
dhana-dhanya-laksmi- 
saubhdgya-lipsubhir 
ajasram anarghya-viryam 


Sri Narada-paScaratra • Third RAtra 
Thereafter, one should draw a picture of a beautiful lotus 
flower having a stem and write on it the gopdla-mantra using a 
gold pen, with cow's urine as ink. This mantra enables one to 
control the three worlds and so every serious devotee should 
chant it. It is also very useful for protection of one's self, as 
well as gaining fame, children, property, wealth, food grains, 
opulence, power and good fortune. 
Text 22 
bhutonmdddpasmrti-visa-murccha- 
vibhrama-jvardrtdndm 
dhydyan sirasi prajapen mantram 
idamjhatiti samayitum vikrtih 
Simply by chanting this mantra with full attention, one can 
become relieved of the fear of being haunted by ghosts, loss 
of memory, poisonous effects, insufficient intelligence, high 
fever, and serious diseases. 
Text 23 
smaras-trivikramdkrdntah 
krsndya-hrdim ity asau 
sad aksaro 'yam samproktah 
sarva-siddhi-karo manuh 
Thus, the six-syllable mantra that awards all perfection is being 
revealed to you. It is: klim krsndya namah. It should always be 
cherished within one's heart. 
Text 24 
kndd-sudlpto mdydvl nava- 
Idnchita-mastakah 
saisd saktih para suksmd 
nityd samvit-svarupini 


Worship of Lord Krsna In His Mantra Form 
Energies, such as para, suksmd, nityd and samvit svarupini, are very 
expert in arranging sporting activites and deceptive pastimes. 
They are always inventive and full of playful ideas. 
Text 25 
asthy agni-govindanavair 
laksmi-bijarh samlritam 
adyam astadasa lipih syad 
virhsaty aksaro manuh 
The laksmi-bija mantra is derived from the words asthi, agni 
and govinda. By chanting this mantra, first the eighteen- 
syllable mantra and then the twenty-syllable mantra will become 
manifest. 
Text 26 
sdlagrdme manau yantre 
mandate pratimdsu ca 
nityarh pujd hareh kdryd 
na tu keuala-bhutale 
One should daily worship Lord Hari in a sanctified place, either 
as the sdlagrdma-sild, as a Deity made from a precious Jewel, as 
diyantra, or mentally. One should never worship the Lord while 
seated on the bare floor. 
Text 27 
iti japa-huta-pujd- 
tarpanadyair mukundarh 
ya iha bhajati manvor 
ekam dsritya nityam 
sa tu suciram ayatndt 
prdpya bhogdn asesdn 
punar amalataram tad- 
dhdma visnoh praydti 


Sri Narada-painjcaratra • Third Ratra 
Any person who worships Sri Krsna, the bestower of liberation, 
by chanting either of the two above-mentioned mantras, 
accompanied by the chanting of other mantras, and the 
performance of fire sacrifices with their offerings of oblations, 
easily comes to enjoy all material facilities in this life and then 
returns to the abode of Lord Visnu after relinquishing his 
temporary, material body. 
Thus ends the translation of the thirteenth chapter of the Third 
Ratra of Sri Ndrada^pahcardtra. 


Chapter 14 
The Chanting of Various Mantras 
and Their Results 
Text 1 
sri-vydsa uvdca 
viniyogdn atho vaksye 
man tray or ubhayoh samdn 
tad artha-kdrino 'nanta-virydn 
mantrdrhs ca kdrhscana 
Vyasadeva said: Now, I shall describe the unlimited potency 
of the two previously-mentioned mantras. In the course of my 
discussion, I shall also describe other mantras. 
Text 2 
vande tarn devaki-sunuh 
sadyo-jdtam dyusaprabham 
pitdmbaram kara-lasac- 
cakra-sankha-gaddmbujam 
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of Sri Krsna, 
who is known as the son of DevakI, whose bodily effulgence 
resembles that of the rising sun, who is dressed in yellow 
garments, and who holds a conch, disc, club, and lotus flower 
in His four hands. 
Texts 
evarh dhydtvd japen man tram 
laksam brdhmye muhurtake 
svadu-plutais ca kusumaih 
paldsair ayutarh hunet 
While meditating on Krsna in this way, one should chant 
his mantra one hundred thousand times during the brahma- 
129 


130 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third Ratra 
muhurtta, which begins one hour and thirty six minutes before 
sunrise. One should then perform a fire sacrifice by offering 
oblations of lotus flowers to the Lord ten thousand times. 
Text 4 
manvor anyatarenaiva 
kuryad yah susamdhitah 
smrtim medhd-mati-balam 
labdhvd sa kavi-vdg bhavet 
One who chants, with full concentration, either of the previously- 
mentioned mantras and faithfully follows all of the prescribed 
rules and regulations, surely achieves an improved memory, 
sharp intelligence, great physical strength, poetic skill, and the 
power of influential speech. 
Text 5 
sydn manus tan mayah purvo 
dhydna-homa-phalo 'parah 
snman-mukunda-caranau 
sadeti saranam tatah 
When one attains perfection by chanting this mantra, he 
automatically attains the results of his meditation and 
performance of fire sacrifice, as well as shelter at the lotus feet 
of Sri Krsna. 
Text 6 
aharh prapadya ity ukto 
maukundastddasdksarah 
narado 'sya tu gdyatri 
mukundas carsi-purvikdh 
After praying; I surrender unto Lord Mukunda, one should first 
meditate on the great sage, Narada, who is the predominating 
sage of the eighteen-syllable mantra. One should also meditate on 


The Chanting of Various Mantras 
the gdyatri-chanda, or the meter to be employed while chanting. 
Of course, one should always meditate upon everything as 
being in relation to Lord Mukunda. 
Text? 
prdtah prdtar ivotthdya 
japtvd yo 'stottaram satam 
anena sadbhir mdsaih sa 
bhavet srutidharo narah 
If a devotee chants this mantra one hundred and eight times, 
evrey day in the morning, for six months, he will certainly 
become a srutidhara, or one who can remember anything just 
by hearing it once. 
TextS 
upasarhhrta-divydngam suro 
'van mdtuvangakam 
calad gos cdranam bdlam 
nlldbhdsarh smaran japet 
While chanting this mantra, one should always remember 
Krsna, who is worshiped by all the demigods, who tends the 
cows in the forest of Vrndavana, whose nature is childish, whose 
complexion is bluish, and who is seated on the lap of Mother 
Yasoda. 
Text 9 
ayutam tavad evdjyair 
juhuydc ca hutdsane 
sa tabbed acaldm sraddham 
bhaktim sdntim ca sdsvatim 
One should then perform a fire sacrifice by offering ghee in the 
fire ten thousand times. If one follows this procedure properly. 


Sri Narada-paisicaratra • Third RAtra 
he can attain unflinching faith and devotion to the Supreme 
Lord, which awards one eternal peace. 
Text 10 
manunaitat samastdnto 
marun-ndmita sabdatah 
bdla-lildtmane hum phat 
nama ity amundthavd 
This mantra should begin with the vdyu-bija, which is yam, and it 
should end with the phrase bdla tildtmane hum phat namah. 
Text 11 
nala-kuvara-gdyatn 
bdla-krsnd itiritd 
rsy ddydh siddhayah sarvdh 
syur japddyair athdmund 
The objective of this gdyatri-manta is Bala-Krsna. Nala-kuvara 
is the superintending deity of this mantra and the perfected 
sages are the predecessors who chanted it. While taking this 
into account, the mantra should be chanted. 
Text 12 
lambite bdla-sayane 
rudantarh ballavi-janaih 
prenkhyamdnarh dugdha-buddhyd 
tarpayet so 'snutephalam 
One who offers oblations into the sacrificial fire while thinking 
that child Krsna is crying while lying on His bed and that the 
gopis are trying to please Him by swinging Him on a swing and 
are feeding Him breast milk, achieves his cherished desire. 
Text 13 
amund vdnurupdnte rasa- 
rupa-padam vadet 


The Chanting of Various Mantras 
133 
osthaih mpa-namo dvandvam 
annddhipataye mama 
One should begin chanting this mantra by uttering amund 
anurupa and then the word rasa-rupa. One should pray: I offer 
my obeisances to Sri Krsna, who supplies us all kinds of food 
grains. 
Text 14 
annam prayaccha svdheti 
trimsad arno 'nnado manuh 
naraddnustavannadhipatayo 
'syarsi-purvakdh 
Amund anurupa rasa-rupam namah mama annddhipataye namah 
annam prayaccha svdh—this is the thirty-syllable mantra. Narada 
is the predominating sage of this mantra. It should be chanted 
in the anustupa meter. 
Texts 15-16 
bhuta-bdla-grahonmdda-smrti- 
bhramsddy upadravaih 
putand-stana-pdtdram grastam 
murdhni smaranjapet 
sdstha-cusana-niruina-sarvdrigiih 
krandatim ca tarn 
dvisya sarve tarn muktvd 
vidravanti hutarh grahdh 
If a person who is haunted by a ghost, who tortures children, 
who is crazy, or who has lost his memory, chants this mantra 
while meditating on Sri Krsna as He is drinking the breast milk 
of Putana, all of his harmful conditons will be vanquished, he 
will no longer have to lament for anything, and all kinds of bad 
influences will immediately flee from him. 


134 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third Ratra 
Text 17 
juhuydt khara-manjaryd 
manjanbhir vibhdvasau 
prasrtaih pan ca-gavyddyaih 
putand-hantur dnane 
Thereafter, while considering the mouth of Sri Hari, who killed 
the witch Putana, to be as good as fire, one should perform a 
fire sacrifice with tulasi-manjaris and the five products of the 
cow. 
Text 18 
prdsayec chista-gavyam tat 
kalasendbhisecayet 
sddhyam sahasra-japtena 
sarvopadrava-sdntaye 
One should fill pitchers with excellent milk and milk products, 
and after performing abhisekha, one should chant his mantra 
one thousand times. By doing so, a devotee becomes relieved 
from all disturbances. 
Text 19 
manunastadasdntena hum 
phat svdhdntikena vd 
rsy ddyd brahma-gdyatn 
graha-vyuharayo 'sya tu 
To neutralize the disturbances caused by evil planets, one should 
chant the eighteen-syllable brahma-gdyatn mantra while adding 
hum phat svdh and invoking the name of the predominating 
sage. 
Text 20 
nija-pdddmbujdksipta- 
sakatam cintayan japet 


The Chanting of Various Mantras 
ayutarh mantrayor ekarh 
sarva-vighnopasdntaye 
While meditating on how the lotus feet of Sri Krsna had turned 
the Sakata demon's cart upside down, one should chant either 
of the previously-mentioned mantras ten thousand times to 
remove all obstacles. 
Text 21 
ajndnam isdrh mantrdndm 
acakradibhir arcana 
angair indradi-vajradyair 
udita sampade sada 
If a practitioner worships these mantras while strictly following 
all the prescribed rules and regulations, he is sure to achieve 
unparalleled opulence. 
Text 22 
bdlo nila-tanur dorbhydm dadhy 
uttham pdyasam dadhat 
harir vodha dvipi-nakha- 
kinkini-jala-manditah 
One should meditate on child Krsna as having a bluish 
complexion. He holds a pot of yogurt and a pot sweet rice in 
His hands. He wears a necklace that is decorated with small 
bells and another necklace having a tiger's nail. 
Text 23 
dhyatvaivam agnau juhuydc 
chata-virydnkura-trikaih 
payah-sarpih-plutair laksam 
ekarh tdvaj jopen manum 
While meditating in this way, a devotee should perform a fire 
sacrifice by offering oblations of cata-vlryankura ghee, milk, 


Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Third RAtra 
and other ingredients. He should then chant his mantra one 
hundred thousand times. 
Text 24 
gurave daksinarh dattvd 
bhojayed dvija-pungavdn 
sa hy abddndrh satamjiven 
nirogi ndtra sarhsayah 
Thereafter, one should offer daksina to his spiritual master and 
feed the brdhmanas. By doing do, a devotee will undoubtedly 
remain free from disease and live for a full one hundred years. 
Text 25 
atrdpy anyo manur-ddsdrndnte 
sri-purusottamah 
dyur me dehi sambhdvya 
visnave prabhavisnave 
There is another ten-syllable mantra that starts with Sri 
Purusottama. While chanting this mantra, one should pray; O 
Lord Visnu, please give me a long duration of life. 
Text 26 
namo 'ntd dvayadhikd trimsad 
arno 'syarsis tu ndradah 
chando 'nustab-devatd ca 
m-krsndngdny ato bruve 
In this regard, there is another mantra that consists of thirty 
letters and begins with namo 'ntd. Narada is the predominating 
sage of this mantra and anstupa is the meter in which this mantra 
should be chanted. Lord Krsna is the objective of this mantra. 
Now, I shall describe its limbs. 


The Chanting of Various Mantras 
Text 27 
ravi-bhutendriya-vasu- 
netrdntair dtmand yutaih 
mahdnanda-prati-jyotirmayo 
vidyadibhih kramdt 
Before chanting this mantra, one should worship the sun- 
god, the five material elements, the five senses, the eight 
Vasus, the eyes, the spirit soul, the Brahman effulgence, and 
transcendental knowledge. 
Text 28 
japtvd laksam imam mantram 
pdyasair ayutarh hunet 
purvavad urvayd juhvad 
dyur dirghataram labhet 
By chanting this mantra one hundred thousand times, and 
performing fire sacrifices by offering oblations of sweet rice and 
durba grass ten thousand times, one achieves a long duration 
of life. 
Text 29 
darayantam bakarh dorbhyarh 
krsnarh samgrhya tundayoh 
smaran sisundm dcakse 
sprstvdnyataram abhyaset 
While meditating on Lord Krsna's pastime of killing the 
demon, Bakasura, by bifurcating his long beak, one should 
chant another mantra, as well as one of Lord Krsna's childhood 
names. 
Text SO 
yaj-japta-tilajdbhyangdd 
bhaveyuh sukhinas ca te 


Sri Narada-paScaratra • Third RAtra 
atrdpy anyo manur bdla- 
bapuse vahni-vallabha 
Upon completing the chanting of this mantra and the 
performance of afire sacrifice, one should bathe after massaging 
his entire body with sesame oil. At the same time, one should 
chant the mantra, bdlabapuse svdh. 
Text 31 
goraksdydrh kvanad-venum 
cdrayantam pasurhs tathd 
uktvd gopalaka-padam 
punar vesadhardya ca 
A practitioner should meditate on Krsna in this way: The Lord 
is protecting the cows, taking them to the pasturing grounds, 
and while tending them, He joyfully plays upon His flute. 
Text 32 
vasudevdya varmastre 
sirdrhsy astadasdksarah 
manur ndrada-gdyatn- 
krsnarsyadi-balena vd 
There is another mantra of Lord Vasudeva, who holds a sword 
and shield in His hands, that consists of eighteen-syllables. 
Narada is the predominating sage of this mantra, gdyatn is 
the meter in which it is to be chanted, and Sri Krsna is the 
objective. 
Text 33 
kuryad go-bdla-sarhraksdma 
acakrady angina budhah 
kumbhi-nasadi-kseddrto 
dasta-murdhni smaran harim 


The Chanting of Various Mantras 
139 
If a learned practitioner is afflicted by a disease, such as 
kumbhinasa, or was bitten by a poisonous snake or scorpion, 
he can get relief from such distress if he simply remembers Sri 
Hari, as He is engaged in protecting the cows. 
Text 34 
nrtyantam kaliya-phanamadhye 
'nyataram abhyaset 
drsd piyusa-varsinyd sincantam 
tat tanuih budhah 
For this purpose, one can also meditate on how Sri Krsna is 
dancing on the hoods of the Kaliya serpent, while enlivening 
everyone by His nectarean glances. 
Text 35 
tarjayan vdma-tarjanyd tain 
dram mocayate visdt 
dpurya kalasam toyaih 
smrtvd kdliya-mardanam 
If one desires to get relief from the effects of poison, he should 
raise the first finger of his left hand while remembering Krsna's 
pastimes of chastising the Kaliya serpent. One should fill a 
pitcher with water, thinking that the water of the pitcher is 
devoid of poison. 
Text 36 
japtvdsta-satam asinced 
visinam sa sukhi bhavet 
karu-madhye nijasydnti-phand- 
madhyo dvi-varnakan 
He should then chant his mantra twelve hundred times and 
sprinkle water from the pitcher towards the snake while 


140 
Sri NArada-paSicarAtra • Third RAtra 
remaining fearless. One should also chant the two-syllable 
mantra while meditating on the hood of the serpent. 
TextS7 
uktvd punar vaden nrtyarh 
karoti tam anantaram 
namdmi devaki-putram 
ity uktvd nrtya-sabdatah 
At the end of his meditation, one should offer obeisances to 
the sight of the son of DevakI, dancing on the hoods of the 
Kaliya serpent. Indeed, one should try to hear the sound of 
Krsna's dancing. 
Text 38 
rdjdnam acyutam bruydd 
iti danta-lipir manuh 
asydngdny anghribhir vyastaih 
samastair narado munih 
If one has a toothache, he should meditate on how he has 
fallen at the lotus feet of Sri Krsna, who is dressed as the King 
of kings. He should chant the mula-mantra while remembering 
the sage, Narada. 
Text 39 
chando 'nustub devatd ca 
krsnah kdliya-mardanah 
japydl laksarh manuvaram 
hotavyam sarpisd 'yutam 
This mantra should be chanted in the anustup meter. Sri Krsna, 
the chastiser of Kaliya, is the objective of this mantra. One 
should chant this mantra one hundred thousand times and 
perform a sacrifice by offering ghee in the sacrificial fire ten 
thousand times. 


The Chanting of Various Mantras 
Text 40 
anga-dikpala-vastrddyair 
area 'sya samiritd 
kriydnenaiva vd sarvd 
visaghni prdg udiritd 
One should worship the angas and the dikpdlas by offering 
them costly cloth. In this way, one completes the procedure for 
neutralizing the effects of poison. 
Text 41 
sadrkso 'nena jagati ndsti 
ksveda-haro manuh 
angaih surataro pisthe 
gutika-dhenu-vdrind 
There is no superior mantra for counteracting the effects of 
poison. While chanting this mantra, gutikds, dhenuvdris and 
kalpavrksas should be applied as medicinal herbs. 
Text 42 
visaghni pdnanasydnjana 
lepaih sddhitd 'mund 
uddanda-vama-dor-danda- 
dhrta-govardhandcalam 
The medicine for neutralizing the effects of poison should 
be applied while chanting this mantra. At the same time, one 
should remember Sri Krsna as He lifted Govardhana Hill with 
His left hand. 
Texts 43-44 
anya-hastdnguli-vyakta- 
svara-varhsdrpitdnanam 
dhydyan japan harirh manvor 
ekarh chatram vind vrajet 


Sri Narada-pascaratra • Third Ratra 
varsa-vdtdsanibhyah sydd 
bhayarh tasya na hi kvacit 
mogha-meghaugha-yatnopagate 
tarn smaranarh hunet 
One should also meditate on how Sri Hari plays His flute by 
expertly moving the fingers of His right hand. While performing 
this meditation, one should chant his mantra. By doing so, the 
devotee will never be disturbed by heavy rain or thunder, even 
if he goes out without any protection. If one remembers his 
worshipable mantra, he will not have any fear from clouds. 
Texts 45-46 
lolair ayuta-sarikhydtair 
andvrstir na sarhsayah 
kridantarh yamund-toye 
majjantarh'plavanadibhih 
tac-chikara-jaldsdraih 
sicyamdnam priyd-janaih 
dhyatva 'yutarh payah-siktair 
huned vd-nira-tarpanaih 
If the above mantra is chanted ten thousand times, there 
will certainly be no rainfall in the immediate future. While 
chanting, one should meditate on how Krsna plays in the water 
of the Yamuna. While offering tarpana ten thousand times, 
one should meditate on how Krsna becomes soaked as the gopis 
continuously splash water upon Him. 
Text 47 
vrstir bhavaty akdle 'pi 
mahati ndtra sarhsayah 
amum eva smaran murdhni 
visphotaka-jvaradibhih 


The Chanting of Various Mantras 
143 
If performed for this purpose, this worship will bring rain, even 
if it is not the season. If one meditates on Krsna, one can also 
get relief from boils on the head, and from fever. 
Texts 48-49 
saddha-mohair drtasya 
japdc chdntir bhavet ksandt 
athavd garuddrudham 
bdla-pradyumna-sarhyutam 
nija-jvard-vinispista- 
jvardbhistutam acyutam 
dhydtvd juhvati bhutasya 
murdhnanya-jvaram abhyaset 
By even a little chanting of this mantra, one afflicted with 
epilepsy can be cured within a short time. To get relief from 
a high fever, one should meditate on Lord Acyuta, along with 
Pradyumna, as He sits on the back of Garuda. While meditating 
in this way, one should perform a fire sacrifice. If one has a 
high fever, this mantra should be recited by someone standing 
over his head. 
Text 50 
sdntirh vrajed asadhyo 'pi 
jvarasyopadravah ksandt 
dhydtvaivam agndv abhyarcya 
yathoktais catur-aiigulaih 
Even .if one is afflicted by an incurable fever, one should think 
that very soon he will be cured. He should collect some dry 
wood and worship the Lord by performing a fire sacrifice. 
Text 51 
juhuyad amrtakhandair 
ayutarh jvara-sdntaye 


144 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third RAtra 
nisdta-sara-nirbhinna- 
bhisma-tdpa-hararh harim 
To cure a high fever, one should perform a fire sacrifice by 
offering pieces of sugar cane into the sacrificial fire- ten 
thousand times. While doing so, one should meditate on how 
Sri Hari removed all of the pangs of Bhisma so that he could 
peacefully lie on the bed of arrows. 
Text 52 
smrtva sprsan japed drtarh 
pdnibhydm roga-sdntaye 
apamrtyu-vindsdya 
sdndipani-suta-pradam 
To gain relief from any disease, someone should touch the 
head of the afflicted person and remember Sri Hari. Sri Hari, 
who brought back to life the dead sons of Sandlpani Muni, will 
certainly save that person from an untimely death. 
Text 53 
dhydtvd 'mrta-latd-khandaih 
kslrdktair ayutarh hunet 
mrta-putrdya viprdya 
sdrjunam dadatarh sutdn 
At the same time, one should perform a fire sacrifice with 
ten thousand offerings of creepers and sweet rice while 
remembering the Supreme Lord, who revived the dead sons of 
His brdhmana teacher. 
Texts 54-55 
dhydtvd laksarh japed ekarh 
manvoh suta-vivrddhaye 
putra-jivendhanacite 
juhuydd anale 'yutam 


The Chanting of Various Mantras 
145 
tat-phalair madhurdktaih syuh 
putrd dirghdyuso 'sya tu 
kslridru-kvatha-sampurnam 
abhyarcya kalasam nisi 
To insure one's having good children, one should chant any of 
the previously-mentioned mantras one hundred thousand times 
and perform a suitable fire sacrifice by offering ten thousand 
oblations. To prolong the duration of life of one's children, 
one should worship Sri Hari at night by offering Him a pitcher 
filled with honey, fruit and juice made from ksiri leaves. 
Texts 56-57 
japtvd 'yutarh prage ndrim 
abhisinced dvi-sad-dinam 
sd bandhydpi sutdn dlrgha- 
jivino gada-varjitdn 
labhate ndtra sandehas 
tajjaptdn ndsini sati 
prdtar vdcarh yamd nan 
raudhi-cchada-pute jalam 
There is no doubt that if a woman chants her mantra ten 
thousand times after bathing in the morning, she will be able 
to produce good, healthy children that have a long duration of 
life, even if she is barren. After finishing the chanting of the 
mantra, she should remain silent and drink water from a leaf 
cup made from leaves of a banyan tree. 
Texts 58-60 
astottara-satam japtam 
mdsam putnyati pivet 
devaki-suta-govinda 
vdsudeva jagat-pate 


146 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third Ratra 
dehi me tanayarh deva 
tvdm aham saranarh gatah 
prahitdrh kdsi-rdjena 
krtydrii jitvd nijdrind 
tat tejasd tu naganrh 
dahantarh bhdvayan harim 
susnigdhdktair huned rdtrau 
sarsapaih sapta vdsardn 
If a woman, desiring to have a son, first purifies water by 
chanting her mantra one hundred and eight times and then 
drinks a small quantity every day for one month—she will 
certainly be blessed with a good son. 
At the same time, she should pray as follows: O Govinda! O son 
of Devakl! O Vasudeva! O Lord of the universe, please bless me 
with a son. I surrender unto You. 
She should perform a fire sacrifice continuously for seven 
nights by offering mustard seeds into the sacrificial fire while 
meditating on how Krsna had defeated the wicked King Kasiraja 
and then burnt his entire kingdom to ashes. 
Texts 61-62 
krtyd kartdram evdsau 
kupitd nasayed dhruvam 
dslnam dsrame divye 
badari-sanda-mandite 
sprsantarh pani-paddbhydrh 
ghantd-karna-kalevaram 
dhydtvd 'cyutarh tilair laksarh 
hunet trir madhurdplutaih 
One should always keep in mind that if Krsna, who is the 
ultimate performer of all activities, becomes displeased then 


The Chanting of Various Mantras 
everything will be spoiled. One should meditate on how Sri 
Krsna is present in an dsrama decorated with beautiful badari 
trees and is touching the body of Ghantakama with His hands 
and legs. While meditating in this way, one should perform a 
fire sacrifice by offering oblations of sesame seeds one hundred 
thousand times, and three sacrifices with oblations of honey. 
Texts 63-65 
japed vd sarva-pdpdndm 
sdntaye kdntaye tanoh 
dvesayantam rukmi-balau 
dyutdsaktau smaran harim 
juhuydd istayor distyai 
gudikd gomayodbhavdh 
jvalad-vahni-mukhair bdnair 
varsantam garudasthitam 
dhdyamdnam ripu-ganam 
anudhdvantam acyutam 
dhydtvaivam abhyasen manvor 
ekarh sapta-sahasrakam 
An intelligent devotee should chant his mantra to get freed 
from all sinful reactions and thus develop his bodily luster. 
One should meditate on Sri Hari, who took away the prowess 
of Rukmi, who was very attached to playing chess. One should 
then perform a fire sacrifice by offering dried cowdung into the 
sacrificial fire. 
Thereafter, one should meditate on Lord Acyuta, who rides 
on the back of Garuda and chases His enemies while shooting 
arrows and emitting fire from His mouth. While meditating 
in this way, one should recite any of the previously-mentioned 
mantras seven thousand times. 


148 
Sri Narada-paisicaratra • Third Ratra 
Text 66 
uccdtanam bhaved etad 
ripundrh saptabhir dinaih 
utksipta-vatsakam dhydyan 
kapittha-phala-hdrinam 
By following this procedure, one will be able to conquer his 
enemies within seven days. During that time, one should fix 
his mind in meditation on how Krsna relishes wood apple fruit, 
and how He killed the demon, Vatsasura. 
Text 67 
ayutarh prajapet sddhyam 
uccdtayati tat-ksandt 
dtmdnam kamsa-mathanam 
dhydtvd mancdn nipdtitam 
By chanting the proper mantra, one can quickly vanquish his 
enemies. This mantra should be chanted while meditating on 
Krsna, the Supersoul, who killed King Kamsa after pulling him 
down from his throne. 
Text 68 
kamsdtmdnam arirh karsan 
gatdsum prajapen manum 
ayutarh juhuydc easy a 
janmoru huta-tarpanaih 
To please Sri Krsna, who dragged King Kamsa into the wrestling 
arena and then killed him, one should perform fire sacrifices 
with ten thousand offerings of oblations. 
Text 69 
api sevita-piyuso 
mriyate 'rimasamsayah 


The Chanting of Various Mantras 
149 
athavd nimba-taildktair 
huned adhibhir aksataih 
By following this process, one can eliminate his enemy, even 
if he had become immortal by drinking nectar. If a person 
performs this sacrifice with offerings of neem oil and rice 
paddy, he will attain a good result. 
Text 70 
ayutarh prayato rdtrau 
marandya ripoh ksandt 
dosdrista-dala-vyosa 
karpdsdsthi-kalair nisi 
To immediately eliminate an enemy, one should perform a 
sacrifice at night, with a pure state of mind, offering turmeric, 
baheda leaves, cotton seeds, black pepper and dry ginger ten 
thousand times. 
Text 71 
huned eranda-taildktaih 
smasdnastho 'ri-sdntaye 
na sastarh mdranam karma 
kurydc ced ayutarh japet 
To vanquish one's enemies, one should perform a sacrifice in 
the crematorium with caster oil. One can then purify himself 
of the reactions for killing his enemies by chanting his mantra 
ten thousand times because to indulge in killing is not at all 
pious. 
Text 72 
huned vd pdyasais tad vac 
chdntaye sdnta-mdnasah 
jaya-kdmi japel laksarh 
pdrijdta-hararh harim 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third Ratra 
If a person wants to achieve peace of mind and victory over 
others, he should perform a sacrifice as previously described 
by making offerings of sweet rice. At the same time, he should 
chant one hundred times the holy name of Sri Hari,- who 
snatched the pdrijdta tree from heaven. 
Text 73 
smaran pardjayas tasya 
na kutascid bhavisyati 
pdrthe disantarh gitdrtham 
vydkhyd-mudrd-kararh harim 
Anyone who remembers the holy name of Lord Hari will never 
face defeat, under any circumstances. To remain fearless, 
one should meditate on how Lord Krsna sits in the posture 
of an instructor and explains the purport of Bhagavad-gitd to 
Arjuna. 
Texts 74-75 
rathastharh bhdvayan japydd 
dharma-vrddhyai samdya ca 
laksath paldsa-kusumair 
huned yo madhurdplutaih 
vydkhydtd sarva-sdstrdndrh 
sa kavir vadirdd bhavet 
visva-rupa-dhararh prodyad 
bhdsvat-koti-samaprabham 
To enhance one's righteousness and come to the platform 
of equilibrium, one should meditate on Sri Hari as He sits 
on His chariot and then perform a sacrifice by offering lotus 
flowers one hundred thousand times. One who follows this 
method becomes an eloquent speaker of the scriptures. For 
this purpose, one should meditate on Sri Hari, who is the form 


The Chanting of Various Mantras 
of the universe, and whose bodily effulgence is as brilliant as 
millions of suns. 
Texts 76-77 
druta-cdmikara-nibham 
agni-somdtmakarh havih 
arkagni-dyotad asydnghri 
-pankajarh divya-bhusanam 
nanayudha-dharam vydptam 
visvdkdsdvakdsakam 
rdstra^ur-grdma-vdstundrh 
sanrasya ca raksane 
His lotus feet are decorated with transcendental ornaments. 
The Lord shines brightly, like fire or the moon. He is equipped 
with various kinds of weapons and He pervades the universes 
in His unmanifested form. One should meditate upon how the 
Lord has descended, for the purpose of giving protection to 
the pious. 
Text 78 
prajapen mantrayor ekataram 
dhydtvaivam ddardt 
athavd vyasta-sarvdnghri- 
racitdngdrjunarsikam 
While meditating on Lord Krsna in this way, with faith and 
devotion, one should chant either of the previously-mentioned 
mantras or else chant the arjunarsi-mantra while placing the 
Lord's lotus feet within his heart. 
Text 79 
tristup-chdndasikarh visvarupa 
visnv adhidaivatam 


Sri Narada-paScaratra • Third RAtra 
japed gitdm anurk sthdne 
hrslkesadyam adyakaih 
huned vd sarva-raksdyai 
sarva-vignopasdntaye 
The meter to be used while chanting this mantra is tristup. 
The objective of the mantra is Lord Visnu, who pervades the 
universe in His unmanifested form. In this regard, one should 
also chant what was spoken by Lord Hrsikesa in the Bhagavad- 
$td. For one's protection and the neutralization of all obstacles, 
one should also perform a sacrifice. 
Thus ends the translation of the fourteenth chapter of the 
Third Rdtra of Sri Narada-pahcardtra. 


Chapter 15 
Description of Lord Krsna In Dvaraka 
Text 1 
sn-vydsa uvdca 
vaksye 'ksaya-dhandvdptyai 
pratipattim sriyah pateh 
suguptdm dhana-nathadyair 
y any air yd kriyate sada 
Sri Vyasadeva said: I shall now describe that most confidential 
process whereby one can achieve the mercy of the husband 
of Kamala, awarding him practically unlimited wealth. While 
performing this, one need not worship demigods, such as 
Kuvera. 
Text 2 
dvdravatydm sahasrdrka- 
bhdsvarair bhavanottamaih 
analpaih kalpa-vrksais ca 
parite mani-mandape 
The abode of Dvaraka is adorned with many beautiful palaces 
that glitter like thousands of suns. All of them are beautified 
by numerous desire trees and raised platforms that are inlaid 
with jewels. 
Texts 
jvalad-ratnamaya-stambha- 
dvara-torana-kudyake 
phulla-srag-ullasac-citra- 
vitdndlambi-mauktike 
153 


154 
Sri Narada-pai^caratra • Third RAtra 
The entire city is decorated with pillars that are inlaid with 
brightly shining jewels and and further beautified by flower 
garlands and colorful flags that are embroidered with pearls 
and gold. 
Text 4 
padma-mga-sthali-mjad 
ratnadyos ca madhyatah 
andrata-galad-ratna- 
sumadhya srasta-bandhanaih 
In that city, there is a place called Padmaraga, by the side 
of which flows a river containing countless jewels. When the 
women bathe in this river, their garments become loosened. 
Text 5 
ratna-pradipdvalibhih 
pradipita-dig antare 
udyad dditya-sankdsa- 
mani-simhdsandsvuje 
The four directions are illuminated by ghee lamps that are 
made of jewels so that the lotus-like throne of the Lord that is 
also inlaid with countless jewels shines like the rising sun and 
thus appears most beautiful. 
Text 6 
samdsino 'cyuto dhyeyo 
druta-hdtaka-sannibhah 
samdnodita-candmrka- 
tadit-koti-sama-dyutih 
Sri Krsna, whose bodily effulgence is equal to millions of 
simultaneously rising suns, and whose complexion is bright 
like a thunderbolt, sits on that throne in a pleasant mood. 


Description of Lord Krsna In DvArakA 
155 
Text 7 
sarvdnga-sundarah saumyah 
sarvdbharana-bhusitah 
plta-vdsds cakra-sankha- 
gada-padmojjvalad-bhujah 
His entire body is very attractive and He appears to be absorbed 
in a mood of humility. He is decorated with numerous 
ornaments. He is dressed in yellow garments and carries a 
conch, disc, club, and lotus in His four hands. 
TextS 
andratojjvalad-ratna- 
dhdraugha-kalasarh sprsan 
vdma-pddd 'mbujdgrena 
musnatd pallavac chavim 
One should invoke this form of Lord Krsna by meditating that 
an excellent pitcher decorated with jewels and twigs has been 
placed by the left side of His lotus feet. 
Text 9 
rukmini-satyabhdme 'Sydmdnanda 
murdhni ratnaugha-dhdrayd 
sincantyau daksa-vdmasthe 
svadohstha-kalasotthayd 
Rukmini and Satyabhama are standing on His right and 
left sides, pouring water on Krsna's head from the pitchers 
decorated with jewels that they keep on their waists. 
Text 10 
ndgnajiti sunandd ca 
disantyau kalasau tayoh 
tdbhydrh ca daksa-vdmasthe 
mitravindd-sulaksane 


156 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third RAtra 
NagnajitI, Sunanda, Mitravinda and Sulaksana stand behind 
RukminI and Satyabhama. 
Text 11 
ratna-nadyoh samuddhrtya 
ratna-purna-ghatau tayoh 
jdmbavati-susild ca 
disantyau daksa-vdmage 
JambavatI and Suslla are fetching water from the jewel-producing 
river in pitchers that are decorated with jewels. 
Text 12 
bahih sodasa-sdhasra- 
sankhydtdh paritah priydh 
dhyeydh kanaka-ratnaugha- 
dhdrdyuk kalasojjvaldh 
Just outside this place, the remaining sixteen thousand queens 
anxiously wait for their turn to perform the abhiseka of Lord 
Krsna while holding pitchers full of water in their hands. 
Text 13 
tad bahis casta-nidhayah 
purayantyo dhannair dhardm 
tad-bahir vrsnayah sarve 
purosac ca surddayah 
Behind them, the members of the Vrsni dynasty are standing 
with a great quantity of wealth, distributing it to needy people. 
Text 14 
dhydtvaivam paramdtmdnarh 
visatyantam manum japet 
catur-laksam huned adhyais 
catvdrimsat-sahasrakam 


Description of Lord Krsna In DvAraka 
After meditating on the Supersoul, Sri Krsna, in this way, one 
should chant the twenty-one syllable mantra four hundred 
thousand times and perform a sacrifice by offering ghee into 
the sacrificial fire forty thousand times. 
Text 15 
saktih-sri-purvikety 
astadasdrno vi msad-arnakah 
mantro 'nena sadrso 'nyo 
manur na hi jagat traye 
The twenty-syllable mantra is formed by adding snm and hrirh 
to the eighteen-syllable mantra. There is no mantra within the 
three words that can be compared with this mantra. 
Text 16 
rsir brahmd 'sya gdyatri- 
cchandah krsnas tu devatd 
purva-proktavad evdsya 
bija-sakty ddi-kalpand 
The predominating sage of this mantra is Brahma, the meter 
for chanting it is gdyatri, Sri Krsna is the supreme objective of 
this mantra and the words, Mja and sakti, are included in it. 
Text 17 
kalpah sanatkumdrokto 
mantrasydsyocyate 'dhund 
pitha-nydsdntikarh krtvd 
puruokta-kramatah sudhih 
I shall now describe the mantra spoken by Sanat-kumara. 
Rituals, such as the pitha-nydsa, should be performed by a wise 
practitioner along with the chanting of this mantra. 


158 
Sri Narada-paScaratra • Third Ratra 
Text 18 
kara-dvandvariguli-talesv 
anga-satkarh pravinyaset 
mantrena vydpakam krtvd 
mdtrkdrh ganu-samputdm 
One should learn how to perform many elaborate nydsas, 
such as the sadanga-nydsa, wherein one purifies six parts of his 
body while touching them. Afterwards, one should progress to 
the mdtrkd-nydsa, which is to be performed as one chants his 
mantra. 
Text 19 
sarhhdra-srsti-mdrgena 
dasa-tattvdni vinyaset 
punas ca vydpakam krtvd 
mantra-vamdms tanau nyaset 
According to the path established since the time of creation, 
one should invoke the ten material elements within ones body, 
perform an elaborate nydsa and then invoke the letters of the 
mantra while touching them to the parts of his body. 
Texts 20-21 
murdhni bhdle bhruvor madhye 
netrayoh karnayor nasoh 
sdnane cibuke gande 
dormule hrdi tandake 
ndbhau linge tathadhara- 
katyor jdnvos ca janghayoh 
gulphayoh padayor nyasyet 
srstir esd samiritd 
One should perform the srsti-nydsa, touching it to one's head, 
forehead, the space between the eyebrows, eyes, ears, nose, 


- Description of Lord Krsna In DvArakA 
mouth, cheeks, lips, shoulders, chest, tongue, navel, genitals, 
stomach, waist, thighs, knees, hips, and legs. 
Text 22 
sthitir hrd adi-nasanta 
saihhrtis caranddika 
vidhdyaivarh panca-krtvah 
sthity antarh murti-panjaram 
One should then perform the sthiti-nydsa five times, from the 
chest to the nose, and the samhrti-nydsa five times on the legs. 
Text 23 
srsti-sthiti ca vinyasya 
sad anga-nydsam dcaret 
gunabdhi-veda- 
karandksdksarair anisaihmanoh 
After completing the srsti and sthitl nydsas, one should perform 
the sadanga-nydsa. There are three, four, five, seven and eleven- 
syllable mantras that are to be chanted at this time. 
Text 24 
mudrdrh baddhvd kintdkhydm 
dig-bandharh purvavac caret 
evarh dhyatvarcayed deharh 
murti-panjara-purvakam 
One should display the kinta-mudrd to guard the f our directions, 
as previously described. Thereafter, one should perform 
meditation and worship the murtipanjara. 
Texts 25-26 
athavd hy arcayed visnum 
tad artharh mantram ucyate 


160 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third RAtra 
gomayenopalipyoruim 
tatra pitham nidhapayet 
vilipya gandha-paiikena 
likhed asta-daldmbujam 
karnikdydm tu sat-konam sa- 
sddhyas tatra manmatham 
If a devotee desires to worship Lord Visnu, he should become 
expert in chanting the required mantras. First, he should 
cleanse the place of worship by smearing it over with cow dung. 
Then, he should decorate the place of worship with sandalwood 
paste and other items. He should then draw a lotus flower with 
eight petals. The center of the lotus should be hexangular. 
Thereafter, the devotee should invoke the transcendental 
Cupid within that lotus. 
Text 27 
sistais tain saptadasabhir 
aksarair vestayet smaram 
rdg-rakso 'nila-konesu 
sriyam sistesu samvidam 
After invoking him, one should nicely cover Kamadeva with 
seventeen letters and clearly write the bija, snm, on the eastern, 
northwestern and southeastern comers of the lotus. 
Text 28 
sad aksaram sandhisu ca 
hesavesu trisas trisah 
vilikhet smara-gdyatn- 
mdld-mantram daldstake 
The six-syllable mantra should be written three times on the 
joints of the flower, as well as on the stem and the middle of the 


Description of Lord Krsna In DvArakA 
flower. Next, one should write the kdma-gdyatri mantra on each 
of the eight petals of the lotus. 
Text 29 
satsah samlikhya tad-bdhye 
vestayen mdtrkdksaraih 
bhu-vimbarh ca likhed 
bdhye daldndm dig-vidiksv api 
One should write the bija-mantra six times and surround it 
with the mdtrkdvarnas. Outside the petals, one should draw the 
marks of bhuvimba in all directions. 
Text 30 
etan-mantrarh hatakddi- 
patresv dlikhya purvavat 
sadhitarh dhdrayed ghoraih 
so 'rcyate tridasair api 
Anyone who writes this mantra on a gold plate and worships 
it according to the prescribed rules and regulations certainly 
becomes as worshipable as the demigods. 
Text 31 
syad gdyatri kdma-deva- 
puspa-bdnau ca ne 'ntakau 
vidmahe-dhimahi-yutau 
tan no 'rigah pracodaydt 
Utter the words Kamadeva and Puspavana in the fourth dative 
case while chanting this mantra. The devotee should pray: O 
transcendental Cupid, kindly inspire us as we meditate upon 
You. 
This is the kdma-gdyatri mantra: klirh kamadevdya vidmahe 
puspabdndya dhimahi tanno' nangah pracodaydt. 


Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Third Ratra 
Text 32 
japydj japadau gopdla- 
manundm jana-ranjanim 
naty ante kdma-devdya tie 
'ntarh sarva-jana-priyam 
One should carefully chant the kdma-gdyatri mantra. Before 
chanting the gopdla-mantra, one should chant: jana ranjandyai 
kamadevdya saruajana priydya namoh. 
Text 33-34 
uktvd sarva-jandnte tu 
manmohana-padarh tathd 
jvalajvala prajvaleti 
prokto sarva-janasya ca 
hrdayam ca mama bruydt 
vasarh kuru-yugarh sivah 
prokto madana-mantro 
'sta-catvarimsadbhir aksaraih 
The forty-eight syllable kdma-gdyatri mantra is: saruajana 
sammohana jvala prajvala hrdayam mama vasarh kuru sivah. 
Text 35 
japadau mara-bijadyo 
jagat-traya-vasikarah 
bhu-grham caturastram 
syad asta-bajra-vibhusitam 
Before one begins to chant this mantra, which controls the three 
worlds, one should write the kdma-btja mantra on the sanctified 
ground and decorate it with a square yantra and astavajras. 
Text 36 
pitharh purvavad abhyarcya 
murtirh sahkalpya paurusim 


Description of Lord Krsna In DvArakA 
163 
tatravdhydcyutam bhaktyd 
sakali-krtya pujayet 
Thereafter, one should perform the pithapujd and invoke 
Lord Acyuta by chanting the paurusi-mantra. At this time, the 
devotee should perform the nydsa on each and every limb of 
the Supreme Lord's transcendental body. 
Texts 37-38 
dsanddi-vibhusdntarh punar 
nydsa-kramdn nyaset 
srsti-sthiti sad arigam ca 
kintam kundala-dvayam 
cakrarh sankham gaddm padmarh 
mdldrh srivatsa-kaustubhau 
gandhdksata-prasunais ca 
mulendbhyarcya purvavat 
One should then once again perform the srsti, sthiti and sadanga 
nydsas after offering a sitting place and various articles to the 
Lord. Thereafter, one should worship the Lord by offering 
Him a crown, earrings, conch, disc, club, lotus flower, a flower 
garland, the symbol of Srivatsa, the kaustubha gem, sandalwood 
paste, flowers and rice paddy, while chanting the mula-mantra. 
Text 39 
ddau vahni-pura-dvandva-s 
konesv angdni pujayet 
sahrc-chirah sikhd-varma- 
netra-mantram iti kramdt 
One should then offer worship to the anga-devdtds, such as 
Agni, in each comer. Next, one should purify his sikhd, head, 
amulet and eyes by chanting a mantra for each. 


164 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Third Ratra 
Texts 40-41 
vasudevah sankarsanah 
pradyumnahs caniruddhakah 
agny adi-dala-mulesu 
sdntihr laksmi sarasvati 
ratis ca dig-dalesv asyas 
tato 'stau mahisir yajet 
rukminy adyd daksasavya 
kramdt patrdgrakesu ca 
Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna, Aniruddha, Agn! and other 
demigods are understood to be situated at the base of the lotus 
leaves. Santi, Laksmi, Sarasvati and Rati are understood to be 
situated just outside the leaves. 
Thereafter, one should worship the eight principal queens, 
beginning with RukminI, placing them on the tips of the leaves, 
from right to left. 
Text 42 
tatah sodasa-sdhasrarh 
sakrd evdrcayet priydh 
indradind-mukundddydn 
makardnanda-kacchapdn 
After completing the worship of the sixteen thousand queens, 
one should worship personalities like Indra, Mukunda, 
Makarananda and Kacchapa. 
Text 43 
snkha-padmddikdrhs cdpi 
nidhin astau kramdd yajet 
tad bahis cendra-bajrddyd 
dvrtih samprapujayet 


Description of Lord Krsna In DvArakA 
165 
Thereafter, the Lord's conch, lotus, disc and club; as well as 
the eight nidhisr, should be worshiped. After this, one should 
worship Indra, Vajra and others, outside of that pitha. 
Text 44 
iti saptdvrti-vrtam 
abhyarcydcyutam ddardt 
pnnayed dadhi-khanddjya- 
misrena tu payombhasd 
After faithfully worshiping Lord Acyuta, along with His seven 
circles of associates, one should perform tarpana with yogurt, 
milk, sugar candy, ghee and water. 
Text 45 
rdjopacdrdn dattvd ca 
stutvd natvd ca kesavam 
udvdsayet sva-hrdaye 
parivdra-ganaih saha 
After worshiping Lord Kesava in the mood of a king by giving 
Him very opulent offerings, gifts, prayers and homage, one 
should think that the Lord and His associates are situated in 
his heart. 
Text 46 
nyastdtmdnarh samabhyarcya 
tan may ah prajapen manum 
ratndbhiseka-dhydnejyd 
vimsaty amdsrite ratd 
Thereafter, one should surrender himself completely unto the 
Lord's lotus feet and remain fully absorbed in meditation upon 
Him. In this way, a devotee should worship the Lord,, decorate 
Him with jewels, and chant the twenty-syllable mantra. 


166 
Sri Narada-paScaratra • Third Ratra 
Text 47 
japa-homdrcana-dhydnair 
yo 'mum prabhajate manum 
tad vesma puryate ratna- 
svarna-dhdnyair andvrtam 
Anyone who worships this mantra by chanting it without 
committing offenses and performs a fire sacrifice while offering 
various ingredients, certainly acheives sufficient jewels, gold 
and food grains. 
Text 48 
prthvi prthvi kare tasya 
sava-sasya-kuldkuld 
putrair mitraih sa sampannah 
praydty ante par dm gatim 
The whole world becomes controlled by such a devotee and 
he comes to possess all objects of prosperity. He receives good 
children and friends and at the end of life, he goes back to 
Godhead. 
Text 49 
ahndv abhyarcya govindarh 
sukla-puspaih sa-tandulaih 
djydktair ayutarh hutvd 
bhasma tan murdhni dhdrayet 
In this worship, one should offer white flowers into the 
sacrificial fire, worship Lord Govinda with rice paddy and ghee, 
and smear the ashes from the sacrificial altar on his head after 
offering ten thousand oblations. 
Texts 50-51 
tasydnndndrh samrddhih sydt 
tad-vase sarva-yositah 


Description of Lord Kr§na In DvArakA 
ajyair laksarh huned rakta- 
padmair vd madhur dplutaih 
sriyd tasyaindram aisvaryarh 
krpanesdya te dhruvam 
suklddi-vastra-ldbhdya 
sukrdya kusumair hunet 
This practice will enhance the performer's prosperity and 
women will become naturally attracted to him. If a sadhaka 
chants this mantra while offering one hundred thousand lotus 
flowers dipped in ghee or honey, he can achieve opulence 
equal to that of Indra. After putting on white clothes, one 
should perform a sacrifice with flowers offered to the demigod, 
Sukra. 
Texts 52-56 
trimadhvaktair dasa-satam 
djydktair vdsta-sarhyutam 
ksaudra-siktaih sitaih 
puspair astottara-sahasrakam 
hunen nityarh saisa dsit 
purodha nrpater bhavet 
dasastddasa-varnoktarh 
japa-dhyana-hutadikam 
vidadhyat karma cdnena 
tdbhydm apy atra kirtitam 
vdg-bhavarh mdra-bijam 
ca krsndya bhuvanesvan 
govindaya ramd-gopi- 
jana-vallabha te sivah 
caturdasa-svaropetah sukrah 
sandi tad urdhvatah 


Sri NArada-pancaratra • Third Ratra 
dvdvirhsaty aksaro mantro 
vag isatva-praddyakah 
astddasdrnavat saruarh 
sad rsyddikam asya tu 
One who performs a sacrifice by offering oblations of honey 
three times, ghee one thousand and eight times, and white 
flowers dipped in honey one thousand and eight times, attains 
the position of a royal priest. 
In the course of performing such sacrifices, one should chant 
the ten-syllable or the eighteen-syllable mantra. The twenty-two 
syllable mantra is; aim klim krsndya hnm govinddya ram gopijana 
vallabhaya om svdhd. The sadaiiga-nydsa is similar to that which 
is performed while chanting the eighteen-syllable mantra. 
Texts 57-58 
pujd ca vimsaty arnoktd 
pratipattis tu kathyate 
vdmordhva-haste dadhatam 
vidyd-sarvasva-pustakam 
aksa-mdldm ca daksordhve 
sphdtiklm mdtrkdmaylm 
sabda-brahmamayam vettham 
adhah pdni-dvayeritam 
For attaining name, fame and material objects of enjoyment, 
one should worship the twenty-syllbale mantra. While chanting 
this mantra, one should meditate upon how the Lord's upper 
left hand is raised, as if to pick up a book of transcendental 
knowledge. His upper right hand holds a string of aksa beads 
and another string of beads made of crystal. His lower hands 
are decorated with the transcendental sound vibration. 


Description of Lord Krsna In DvArakA 
169 
Texts 59-60 
gdyantarh pita-vasanarh 
sydmalarh komalc chavim 
barhi-barha-krtottaihsam 
sawajnarh sarva-vedibhih 
updsitarh muni-ganair 
upatisthed dharirh sadd 
dhydtvaivarh pramaddvesa- 
vildsa-bhavanesvaram 
One should always sing the glories of Sri Hari, who is dressed 
in yellow garments, whose complexion is blackish, who appears 
most sublime, who is bedecked with peacock feathers, who is 
onniscient, and who is constantly worshiped by those sages 
who have reached the supreme goal of acquiring knowledge. 
By meditating in this way, a practitioner achieves opulent 
garments and house, ample facility for material enjoyment, and 
authority, over women. 
Texts 61-65 
catur-laksarh japen man tram 
imam mantri susarhyatah 
pdldsa-puspaih svddvaktais 
catvdrirhsat sahasrakam 
juhuydt karmandnena tatah 
siddho bhaved dhruvam 
yo 'smin nisnata-dhlr mantri 
vartate babhrugaddavdt 
gadya-padya-mayl vdni 
tasya gangd-pravdhavat 
sarva-vedesu sdstresu 
purdnesu ca panditah 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third RAtra 
sampattiih paramdrh labdhvd 
cdnte ydti pararh padam 
sri-sakti-smara-krsndya 
govinddya sivo manuh 
druvarnd brahma-gdyatri 
krsnarsyddir athdsya tu 
vedais triveda-yugmdrnair 
anga-satkam ihoditam 
One should chant this mantra of Sri Hari four hundred 
thousand times. Next, a practitioner who has experienced 
the true value of chanting mantras should carefully perform 
a sacrifice, offering oblations of lotus flowers and juicy fruit 
forty thousand times. By doing so, he attains the perfection of 
chanting this mantra and thereby accomplishes everything that 
is worth achieving. Such a person can easily master the art of 
eloquent speech in any field of knowledge. He soon becomes 
renowned as a scholar of the Vedic literature, including the 
Purdnas. He achieves great opulence in this life and returns to 
the spiritual world after relinquishing his material body. 
The ten-syllable mantra is: mm hrirh klim krsndya govinddya 
namah. Lord Krsna is the predominating sage of this mantra 
and the sadanga-nydsa of this mantra is similar to that of the 
eighteen-syllable mantra. The syllable hfim is referred to as the 
brahma-gdyatri. 
Text 66 
virhsaty arnodita-japa- 
dhydna-homdrcana-kriyah 
mantro 'yam sakalaisvarya- 
kdnksibhih sevyatdrh budhaih 


Description of Lord Krsna In DvarakA 
While chanting the twenty-syllable mantra, a practitioner should 
also perform meditation, fire sacrifice and worship. This mantra 
will certainly award one great opulence. 
Texts 67-68 
sn-sakti-kdma-purodnga- 
janma-sakti-ramdntikah 
dasdksarah sa eavadau 
sydc ca sakti-ramdnvitah 
mantrau vikrtir avyarndvdcakrddy 
angindv imau 
vimsaty arnokta-yajana- 
vidhd dhyayed athdcyutam 
There is another ten-syllable mantra: mm hrirhkllrh angajanmasakti 
ramdya. The rules and regulations for worshiping this mantra 
are the same as that of the twenty-syllable mantra. 
Text 69 
varaddbhaya-hastdbhydrh 
slisyantam svdngake ptiye 
padmotpala-kare tdbhydm 
slistam cakra-darojjvalam 
One should meditate on how Lord Acyuta bestows fearlessness 
on saintly persons, and how He embraces His beloved gopis 
with love. 
Text 70 
dasa-laksam japed djyais 
tdvat-sdhasra-homatah 
siddhdv imau mula-sampat- 
sukha-saubhagyadau nrndm 
One should chant this mantra one million times and offer 
oblations ten thousand times while performing fire sacrifices. 


Sri Narada-paiScaratra • Third Ratra 
This will award the devotee perfection, opulence, wealth, 
friendship, and good fortune. 
Text 71 
mdra-saktirasd-puruo 
dasdrno manavas traya 
etesdrh manurndvandmangarsy 
adi-dasdrnavavat 
There are three other ten-syllable mantras that begin with kllrh 
hrirh srirh. All of the procedures for chanting these mantras are 
similar to those of the above-mentioned ten-syllable mantra. 
Texts 72-73 
sankha-cakra-dhanur-bana- 
pasankusa-dharo 'runah 
venurh dhaman dhrto dorbhydm 
dhyeyah krsno-divdkare 
ddye gam dhydnam evarh 
dvitiye virhsad arnavat 
dasarnavat trtiye 'nga- 
dikpaladyaih samarcand 
While chanting these mantras, one should meditate on Krsna, 
who holds a bow, conch, disc, rope, and anchor in His hands. 
His effulgence is as brilliant as the sun. He plays upon His 
flute very sweetly. While meditating on the sun-god and other 
demigods, one should chant the twenty-syllable mantra. The 
ten-syllable mantra is also to be chanted while meditating on 
the dikpalas and the Lord's associates. 
Text 74 
panca-laksam japet tdvad 
ayutarh pdyasair hunet 


Description of Lord Krsna In DvArakA 
tatah siddhds tu manavo 
nrndrh sampattikdntiddh 
While performing such worship, one should chant the mantra 
five hundred thousand times and perform a fire sacrifice by 
offering oblations of sweetricefifty thousand times. By executing 
this process, a person achieves prosperity and influence. 
iti sn-narada-panca-rdtre 
jndndmrtasdre trtiya-rdtre 
mantra-pujd-homa-vidhi-visayaka 
pancadaso 'dhydyah 
samdptarh cedam trtiya-rdtram 
Thus ends the translation of the fifteenth chapter of the Third 
Rdtra of Sri Narada-pahcardtra. 


Fourth Ratra 
Chapter 1 
Mahadeva Narrates One Hundred and Eight 
Names of Lord Krsna to Narada Muni 
Text 1 
sii mahadeva uvdcha 
srnu devl prabaksdmi 
bhakti mukti prasddhanarh 
ndmndm astottara satam 
sri krsnasya pardtmanah 
\ 
Sri Mahadeva said: O Devi, please hear with attention as I 
reveal to you the one hundred and eight names of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, Lord Krsna. The chanting of these holy 
names of the Lord awards one devotional service and liberation 
from material bondage. 
Text 2 
purvakalpe dharoddhdre 
prthibyd sesa kena ca 
samvddam paramdscarya 
smusu kamaldnane 
O lotus-eyed one, long ago, when Lord Ananta had delivered 
mother earth, He revealed to her these most confidential holy 
names. 
TextS 
ndtah parataram stotrarh 
ndtah parataram tapah 
ndtah parataram vidyd 
tirtham ndtah parataram 
175 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
There is no prayer superior to the chanting of these holy names, 
there is no austerity superior to the chanting of these names of 
the Lord, there is no knowledge superior to this chanting, and 
there is no holy place superior to the chanting of Lord Krsna's 
holy names. 
Text 4 
vedanam ca yathd sama 
tirthdndm mathurd para, 
ksetmndm kdsikd devi 
mantrdndm sti dasdksarah 
Just as the Sama-veda is the best of all Vedas, as Mathura is best 
of all holy places of pilgrimage, as KasI is the best of sacred 
places—the ten-syllable mantra is the best of all mantras. And 
yet, better still is the chanting of these one hundred and eight 
holy names of Lord Krsna. 
Texts 5-6 
vaisnavandm vaisnavindm 
yathdham tvam tatha para 
dsramdndm yathd nydsah 
siddhdndm kapilo yathd 
ayudhdndm yathd vajram 
dhenundm kanadhug yathd 
manoratham prasravatdm 
yathd ndmndm satdstakam 
As you and I are the best of Vaisnavls and Vaisnavas, as the 
sannydsa-dsrama is best of the four dsramas, as Kapiladeva is best 
among perfected beings, as the vajra is the best of all weapons, 
as Surabhi is the best of cows, and as mental concoctions are the 
best of flowing currents— the one hundred and eight names of 
Krsna are the best of all holy names. 


MahAdeva Narrates 108 Names of Lord Krsna 
Texts 7-8 
tatteham sarhpravaksami 
savadhana avadharaya 
pranamya vasudha devi 
sesarh sankarsanatmakam 
papracha parayd bhktyd 
jandndrh mukti hetabe 
ndmndm astottrasatarh 
in krsnasya ramd patheh 
Listen carefully as I describe these holy names to you. Once 
upon a time, mother earth offered her obeisances to Lord 
Anantadeva with great devotion and then inquired from Him 
about the one hundred and eight holy names of Sri Krsna, the 
husband of Laksml. 
Text 9 
bhumir uvdca 
krsndvatdre rohinyd 
ndmena api tvayd saha 
alankrtarh janma punsdrh 
api vrnddvanaukasam 
Mother earth said: When You personally appeared, along with 
Krsna and Balarama, to take part in the Lord's manifested 
pastimes in this world, the inhabitants of Vrndavana were 
greatly benefited. 
Text 10 
tasya devasya krsnasya 
Hid vigraha dharinah 
yasyopadhi niyuktdni 
santi ndmdnl anekesah 


Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Lord Krsna has innumerable names. These holy names 
are attributed to Him, according to His pastimes and the 
relationships He establishes with His devotees. 
Texts 11-12 
tesu mukhyani ndmdni 
srotu kdmd cirddaham 
sankarsandtmanah stottrarh 
yatojdndsi vdkmayam 
tattdni ydni ndmdni 
vdsudevasya vdsuke 
ndtah parataram stottrarh 
trim lokesu vidyate 
O Lord, I have a great desire to hear the principal names 
of Lord Krsna. If You know these holy names of Krsna, who 
is nondifferent from Sankarsana, kindly reveal them to me 
because there is nothing superior to these holy names in the 
three worlds. 
Text 13 
sri sesa uvdca 
vasundhare vardrohe 
jandndm asti muktidam 
sarvamangala murdhanyam 
animddi aslasiddhidarh 
Sri Sesa said; O mother earth, I am very well conversant with 
these holy names that award one auspiciousness, the eight 
mystic perfections, and liberation from material bondage. 
Text 14 
mahdpdtaka kotighnam 
sarvatirtha phalapradam 


MahAdeva Narrates 108 Names of Lord Krsna 
samasta japa yanndndm 
phaladam pdpandsanarh 
These holy names of the Lord nullify the reactions to millions 
of sinful activities that one may have previously performed. 
They award one the results of traveling to all the holy places 
of pilgrimage, the chanting of various mantras, and the 
performance of all kinds of sacrifice. 
Texts 15-16 
srnu devi prabaksdmi 
ndmndm astottara satarh 
sahasra ndmndm punydndrh 
triravrttyd tu yat phalam 
ekdvrttya tu krsnasya 
ndma ekarh tat prayachati 
tasmdt punnyatamam ca 
tat strottram papa prandsanam 
O goddess, now hear from me these one hundred and eight 
holy names of the Lord. The result one attains by chanting one 
thousand names of the Lord three times can be attained simply 
by chanting these one hundred and eight names once. For this 
reason, these holy names are considered most auspicious and 
sacred. 
The predominating sage of these one hundred and eight names 
of Lord Krsna is Anantadeva. The chanting should be done in 
the anustupa meter and Lord Krsna is the supreme objective. 
Text 17 
sn-krsna kamala-natho 
vasudevdh sandtandh 
vasudeudtmajah punyo 
llld-manusa-vigrahah 


180 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Sri Krsna is the all- attractive Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
the husband of Laksml, the form of pure goodness, the primeval 
Lord, and the son of Vasudeva. The Lord assumes the form of 
a human being to perform His transcendental pastimes within 
this world. 
Text 18 
snvatsa-kaustubha-dharo 
yasodd-vatsalo harih 
caturbhujatta-cakrasi 
gada-sankhambujayudhah 
Sri Krsna is decorated with the mark of Srivatsa and He wears 
the Kaustubha gem. He is the beloved child of Yasoda and He 
removes the distress of His devotees. He holds a cakra, club, 
conch and lotus in His four hands. 
Text 19 
devaki-nandanah sriso 
nanda-gopa-priydtmajah 
yamund-vega-samhdri 
balabhadra-priyanujah 
Sri Krsna is the son of DevakI, the Lord of the goddess of 
fortune, the child of Nanda Maharaja, the Lord who subdued 
the waves of the Yamuna, and the brother of Balarama. 
Text 20 
putand-jivita-harah 
sakatdsura-bhanjanah 
nanda-vraja-jandnandi 
sac-cid-dnanda-vigrahah 
Sri Krsna is the killer of Putana, the destroyer of Sakatasura, 
and the giver of pleasure to the residents of Vraja. He is the 
Supreme Lord, who is eternal and full of knowledge and bliss. 


MahAdeva Narrates 108 Names of Lord Krsna jgi 
Text 21 
navanita-navahan 
mucukunda-frasadakah 
sodasa-stn-sahasresa 
tribhango-madhurakrtih 
Sri Krsna is famous as the butter thief, the giver of liberation 
to Mucukunda, and the husband of sixteen thousand queens. 
He has a three-fold bending transcendental form that is the 
essence of all sweetness. 
Text 22 
suka-vag-amrtabdhindur 
govinda gobidama patih 
vatsa-pdlana-sancdn 
dhenukdsura-bhanjanah 
Sri Krsna likes to imitate the singing of parrots. He is the 
reservoir of all transcendental rasas, the master of the cows and 
senses, the Lord of the cowherd men, the cowherd boy who 
tends the calves, and the killer of Dhenukasura. 
Text 23 
tmi-krta-tmdvartto 
yamaldijuna-bhanjanah 
uttana-tdla-bhettd ca 
tamdla-syamaldkrtih 
Sri Krsna is the destroyer of Trnavarta, the Lord who uprooted 
the twin Arjuna trees, the distributor of palm fruit to His 
cowherd boy friends, and the blackish Personality of Godhead. 
Text 24 
gopa-goplsvaro yogi 
surya koti-sama-prabhah 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
ilapatih paramajyotir 
yadavendro yadu-dvahah 
Sri Krsna is the Lord of all the cowherd men and women of 
Vraja, He is the master of mystic yoga, He is as effulgerit as 
millions of suns, He is the husband of mother earth, He is the 
source of the Brahman effulgence, and He is the Lord and 
maintainer of the Yadus. 
Text 25 
vanamdll pita-vdsdh 
pdrijdtapahdrakah 
govardhanacaloddhartta 
gopdlah sarva-pdlakdh 
Sri Krsna is decorated with a garland of forest flowers and He 
wears yellow garments. He brought the pdrijdta flower from 
heaven, He is the lifter of Govardhana Hill, and He is the 
maintainer of the cows and indeed, all living entities. 
Text 26 
ajo nirdnjanah kdma- 
janaka kanja-locanah 
madhuhd mathurd-ndtho 
dvarakd-ndyako ball 
Sri Krsna is unborn, free from contamination, the source of 
transcendental passion, lotus-eyed, the killer of the Madhu 
demon, the Lord of Mathura, the hero of Dvaraka, and the all- 
powerful Lord of the universe. 
Text 27 
vmddvandnta-sancdn 
tulasi-ddma-bhusanah 
sydmantaka-maner harta 
nara-ndrdyandtmakah 


MahAdeva Narrates 108 Names of Lord Krsna .jgS 
Sri Krsna wanders about the forests of Vrndavana, wears a 
garland of tu/osi leaves, and claims possession of the Syamantaka 
jewel. He appears as Nara-Narayana Rsis. 
Text 28 
kubjakrsnambara-dharo 
mdyi parama-purusah 
mustikdsura-canura- 
malla-yuddha-visdradah 
Sri Krsna's cloth was pulled by Kubja. He is the possessor of 
variagated potencies, the Supreme Lord, and the destroyer 
of Mustika and Canura. Sri Krsna is very expert in the art of 
fighting. 
Text 29 
sarhsdra-vairih karhsdri 
murdri narakdntakah 
anddir-brahmacdn ca 
krsndvyasana-karsakah 
Sri Krsna vanquishes one's material existence. He is the enemy 
of Kamsa, the killer of the Mura demon, and the destroyer of 
Narakasura. The Lord is beginningless, an eternal brahmacdn, 
and is fond of stealing the go/tts'garments. 
Text 30 
sisupdla-siras-chetta 
duryodhana-kulantakrt 
vidurdkrura-varado 
visvarupa-pradarsakah 
Sri Krsna severed Sisupala's head. He is the destroyer of 
Duryodhana's family, the giver of benedictions to Vidura and 
Akrura, and the displayer of the universal form. 


184 
Sri Narada-paivicaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 31 
satya-vdk satya-sankalpah 
satyabhdmd-rato jayl 
subhadra-purvajo visnor 
bhisma-mukti-praddyakah 
Sri Krsna is truthful in speech and is indeed, fixed in truth. 
He is attached to Satyabhama, always victorious, and the elder 
brother of Subhadra. He is the original Lord Visnu and the 
giver of liberation to Bhisma. 
Text 32 
jagad-gurur jaganndtho 
venu-vadya-visaradah 
vrsabhdsura-vidhvamsi 
bandsura-valantakrt 
Sri Krsna is the spiritual master of the entire world and the 
Lord of the universe. He is expert in playing upon His flute, 
the killer of Vrsabhasura, and the destroyer of the prowess of 
Banasura. 
Text 33 
yudhisthira-pratisthdtd 
varhi-varhavatamsakah 
partha-sdrathir avyaktyo 
gitdmrta-mahodadhih 
Sri Krsna installed Yudhisthira upon the royal throne. He is the 
Lord who is decorated with a peacock feather, and He is the 
chariot driver of Aijuna. He is unmanifested before the eyes of 
materialistic persons and He is the propagator of the Bhagavad- 
gitd. 


MahAdeva Narrates 108 Names of Lord Krsna 
185 
Text 34 
kdliya-phdni-manikya- 
ranjita-sn-padambujdh 
ddmodaro yajna-bhoktd 
ddnavendra-vindsanah 
Sri Krsna's lotus feet are illuminated by the jewels decorating 
the Kaliya serpent's hoods. He was bound with ropes by mother 
Yasoda, He is the enjoyer of sacrifices, and He is the destroyer 
of the chiefs of the demons. 
Text 35 
ndrdyanam param-brahma 
pannagdsana-vyahanah 
jala-kndd samdsakta- 
gopl-vastrapahdrakah 
Sri Krsna is the shelter of all living entities, the supreme 
Brahman, and the Lord who rides on the back of Garuda. He 
enjoys sporting in the water, and He steals the garments of the 
gopls. 
Text 36 
om punya-slokas tlrtha-karo 
veda-vidyd ddya-nidhih 
sarva-tirthdtmakah 
sarva-graha-rupi pardt-parah 
Sri Krsna is glorified by select verses, makes a place sacred by 
His very presence, is to be known by the Vedas, an ocean of 
mercy, the form of all holy places, and the Lord who accepts 
everything that is offered to Him with love and devotion. He is 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 


186 
Sri NArada-p.ancarAtra • Fourth Ratra 
Text37 
ityevarh krsnadevasya 
ndmndm astottra satam 
krsnena krsna bhaktena 
srutvd gitdmrtarh purd 
These one hundred and eight holy names of Sri Krsna are very 
dear to Krsna and His devotees. They are full of nectar and 
should be heard and chanted by all. 
Text 38 
stottram krsna priyakaram 
krtam tasmdt mayd param 
krsna-ndrndmrtam ndmo 
paramdnanda ddyakam 
I have thus revealed to you the glories of the nectarian names 
of Lord Krsna that are His favorites. 
. Texts 3940 
anupadrava duhkhaghnam 
paramdyusya vardhanam 
ddna sruta tapas tirtham 
yat krtantviha janmani 
pathatdrii srnvatam ca eva 
koti koti gunarh bhavet 
putra pradama putrdndm 
gatindm gatipradam 
By reciting these holy names of the Lord, which remove all of 
one's disturbances and distress, and increase one's duration of 
life, a person can obtain the results of giving charity, performing 
austerities, and traveling to all the holy places of pilgrimage. By 
chanting or hearing these holy names of the Lord, those who 


MahAdeva Narrates 108 Names of Lord Krsna 
have no son can receive a son, and those who have no goal of 
life can understand life's ultimate goal. 
Text 41 
dhandvaharh daridrdnarh 
yayechundrh yaydvaharh 
sisundrh gokuldndrh ca 
pustidarh pustivardanarh 
Those who are poor can receive ample wealth and those who 
desire victory can attain it by chanting these holy names of the 
Lord. This prayer nourishes children and cows. 
Text 42 
vdta graha jvarddindm 
samanam sdnti muktidarh 
samasta kdmadam sadyah 
koti janmaghandsanarh 
ante krsna smaranadarh 
bhavatdpa bhaydpaharh 
Moreover, this prayer awards one a cure for old age and disease 
and gives one transcendental peace and liberation from material 
bondage. Anyone who chants these holy names of the Lord 
will become freed from the sinful reactions accumulated from 
millions of lifetimes. At the end of life, the devotee is relieved 
from all fear of material existence due to His remembrance of 
Lord Krsna. 
Text 43 
krsndya yadavendraya 
jndna mudraya yogine 
ndthdya rukminisdya 
narrio vedanta vedine 


188 
Sri Narada-pancarAtra • Fourth Ratra 
I offer my obeisances at the lotus feet of Krsna, who is the 
Lord of the Yadus, the form of pure knowledge, the master of 
perfected yogis, the Lord of Rukmini, and who is known by the 
study of Veddnta. 
Texts 44-45 
imam mantram mahd devi 
japanneva divdnisarh 
sarva grahdnu graha bhak 
sarva priyatamo bhavet 
putra pautraih parivrtah 
sarva siddhi samrddhimdn 
nirvisya bhogdntepi 
krsna sdyujyam apnuydt 
O devi, simply by chanting this mantra, one can please all of the 
planets and become dear to all living beings. One is enabled to 
enjoy the company of his children and grandchildren, achieve 
all perfection and prosperity in this world, and attain liberation 
after giving up his material body at the time of death. 
Thus ends the translation of the first chapter of the Fourth Rdtra 
of Sri Narada-pancardtra. 


Chapter 2 
The Glories of Lord Visnu, as Described In a 
Conversation Between Parvati and Lord Siva 
Text 1 
sukldmbara-dhararh visnurh 
sasi-varnarh caturbhujam 
prasanna-vadanarh dhydyet 
sarva-vighnopasdntaye 
To become freed from all kinds of impediments, one should 
meditate on Sri Visnu, who is dressed in white garments, whose 
complexion is bright like the moon, who manifests a four-armed 
form, and whose face is adorned with a sweet smile. 
Text 2 
om namah krsndya pdrthdya 
sriyai ndrdyandya devyai 
ca sarasvatyai nardya ca 
brahmalokdd iha prdptarh 
ndradam bhagavat-pnyam 
drstvd natvd sabhdydrh tu 
prapracchur munayo mudd 
I offer my obeisances unto Sri Krsna, Partha, Laksmi, Sri 
Narayana, Sarasvati-devi and Nara. The great sage, Narada, 
who is very dear to the Lord, had received this mantra while in 
Brahmaloka. Thereafter, great sages saw him in an assembly of 
devotees and so took the opportunity to inquire from him. 
Text 3 
rsayah ucuh 
brahman kena prakdrena 
sarva-pdpa-ksayo bhavet 
189 


190 
Sri Narada-pancarAtra • Fourth Ratra 
vind ddnena tapasd vina 
tirthair vina makhaih 
The sages inquired; Besides giving charity, performing austerities 
and sacrifice, and traveling to holy places of pilgrimage—how 
can one become freed from all sinful reactions? 
Text 4-5 
vind vedair vind dhydnair 
vind cendriya-nigrahaih 
vind sdstra-samuhais ca 
katharh muktir avdpyate 
ddnena tapasd tirthair 
makhais cdpi vind mune 
devadhidevo devesah 
sthitas tapasi sahkarah 
kath samaradhayed devarii 
japa-dhydna-pardyanah 
O great sage, how can a person attain liberation without going 
to the trouble of studying the Vedas, performing meditation, 
controlling the mind, giving in charity, undergoing austerities 
and performing sacrifices? 
Kindly tell us—upon whom does Siva, the lord of lords and the 
best of demigods, meditate? For whose sake does he perform 
penance and whose holy name does he chant? 
Text 6 
sii narada uvdca 
{dam eva purd prstah 
pdrvatyd paramesvarah 
yad uvdca smudhvam 
hi kathaydmi suvistardt 


The Glories of Lord Visnu 
Sri Narada replied; Please hear with attention what Parvati had 
previously asked her husband, and what he had replied. I will 
describe this sacred conversation in detail. 
Text 7 
kailasa-sikhardsinam 
deva-devarh jagad-gurum 
ranipatya mahadevam 
paryaprcchad umd-patim 
One day, Parvati offered her obeisances to Mahadeva, who is 
the spiritual master of the entire universe, and who was seated 
on the peak of Mount Kailasa, and inquired in the following 
manner; 
Text 8 
sri pdrvaty uvdca 
bhagavams tvarh paro 
devah sarvajnah sarva-pujitah 
tval lirigam arcyate 
devair brahma-suryddikair api 
Parvati said: My dear lord, you are the knower of everything. 
You are worshiped by everyone and you are the almighty Lord. 
Demigods like Brahma and Surya adore you and show you great 
respect. 
Text 9 
tvatto labhante 'bhimatdm 
siddhi sarva-vara-prada 
tvarh janma-mrtyu-rahitah 
svayambhuh sarva-saktimdn 
O bestower of all kinds of benedictions, these personalities 
received their desired perfections simply by your grace. You 


Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fourth RAtra 
are not subjected to birth and death. You are self-manifest and 
omniscient. 
Text 10 
sadd dhydyasi kirn svdmin 
dig-vdsd madandntakah 
tapas carasi kasmdt 
tvarhjatilo bhasma-dhusarah 
My dear husband, you are the banisher of Cupid. For what 
purpose are you performing severe austerities while remaining 
naked and smearing your body with ashes? 
Text II 
kirn vdjapasi devesa 
pararh kautuhalarh hi me 
anugrdhyd priyd cdharh 
tan me kathaya suvrata 
0 controller of the demigods, what is it that you are chanting? 
1 am completely dependent upon your mercy. I have become 
very curious and so kindly inform me of all that I have asked. 
Text 12 
sii-mahddeva uvdca 
nedarh kasydpi kathitarh 
gopaniyam idarh mama 
kirn tu vaksydmi bhadrarh te 
tvarh bhaktdsi priydsi me 
Mahadeva said: I have not disclosed this to anyone because I 
consider the subject matter to be most confidential. Still, I will 
reveal everything to you because you are very dear to me and 
devoted to me without desiring anything in return. 


The Glories of Lord Visnu 
193 
Text 13 
purd satya-yuge devi 
visuddha-matayo 'khildh 
yajanti vimum evaikarh 
jndtvd sarvesvaresvaram 
O goddess, long ago, during Satya-yuga, pure-hearted souls 
worshiped Lord Visnu while considering Him to be the supreme 
controller of all the demigods. 
Text 14 
praydnti paramdm rddhim 
aihikdmusmiklrh pardm 
yd na prdptd 'maraih 
sarvair aksayd klesa-varjitd 
As a result of this worship, they easily achieved an abundance 
of worldly and heavenly pleasure that even the demigods could 
only hope to aspire for. 
Text 15 
na tarn santah prapadyante 
vindcdra-ratdn nardn 
sam mukhad api sarhsrutya 
deva vimur bahirmukhdh 
Only such pious and well-behaved devotees could achieve such 
an opulent position, freed from all fear of material miseries. 
When the demigods heard about this, they become averse to 
the worship of Lord Visnu. 
Text 16 
vedaih purdnaih siddhdntair 
bhinnair visrdnta-cetasah 
niscayam nddhigacchanti kirn 
tattvarh kirn par ark padam 


194 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Ordinary practitioners of spiritual disciplines cannot ascertain 
the nature of the Absolute Truth because they become 
bewildered while studying the Vedas, Puranas, and other 
scriptures. Considering this, how can they attain the supreme 
destination? 
Texts 17-20 
tula-purusa-ddnadyair 
asvamedhadibhir makhaih 
varanasi-prayagadi- 
tlrtha-sndnadibhih priye 
gaya-sraddhadibhih pitryair 
vedapathadibhir japaih 
tapobhir ugrair niyamair 
dharmair bhuta-dayddibhih 
gum-susrusanaih satyair 
dharmair varnasramoditaih 
jhana-dhyanadibhih samyak 
caritair janma-janmabhih 
na ydti tat param sreyo 
visnurh sarvesvaresvaram 
sarva-bhdvair andsritya 
purdnarh purusottamam 
O dear one, even if a person gives a huge amount of wealth in 
charity; performs a horse-sacrifice; travels to many holy places 
of pilgrimage, such as Varanasi and Prayaga; offers oblations 
to the forefathers at Gaya; studies the Vedas; chants mantras^ 
undergoes severe penance; controls his senses; displays 
compassion toward all living entities; faithfully serves his 
spiritual master; follows the principles of varnasrama-dharma-, 
cultivates spiritual knowledge; or practices meditation—he will 
not obtain the ultimate goal of life if he does not take complete 


The Glories of Lord Visnu 
195 
shelter of the lotus feet of Lord Visnu, who is the master of all 
the demigods and the primeval Lord of creation. 
Texts 21-22 
ananya-gatayo martyd 
bhogino 'pi paran tapdh 
jndna-vairdgya-rahitd 
brahmacaryddi-varjitdh 
sarva-dharma-jito visnor 
ndma-mdtraika-jalpakdh 
sukhena yarn gatirh ydnti 
na tdrh sarve 'pi dhdrmikdh 
Mortal sense enjoyers who cause trouble to others, who have 
no spiritual shelter, and who are devoid of spiritual knowledge, 
renunciation and the practice of celibacy effortlessly attain an 
exalted destination, simply by chanting the holy name of Lord 
Visnu, that cannot be achieved by even the most pious persons 
who have no taste for chanting the Lord's holy names. 
Text 23 
smartavyah satatarh visnur 
vismarttavyo na karhicit 
sarve vidhi-nisiddhdh 
syur etasyaiva hi kinkardh 
Krsria is the origin of Lord Visnu. He should always be 
remembered and never forgotten at any time. All the rules and 
prohibitions mentioned in the sdstras should be the servants of 
these two principles. 
Texts 24-25 
kirn tu brahmadibhir devaih 
purd drstvd nirarhhasah 


196 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
nirbhayarh visnu ndmnaiva 
yathestam padam dgatdn 
alaksya cdtmanah pujdih 
samyag arddhito harih 
mayd casm ad api sraisthyam 
vdnchito 'yam yat dtmand 
Factually, demigods such as Brahma had previously attained 
their exalted positions simply on the strength of chanting the 
holy name of Lord Visnu. By doing so, they became sinless and 
fearless. When I realized this truth, I began worshiping Lord 
Hari without any personal aspirations and thus obtained this 
enviable position, by His grace. 
Texts 26-28 
tatah sdksdj jagan ndthah 
prasanno bhakta-vatsalah 
amsdmsendtmano vaitdn 
pujaydmdsa kesavah 
devdn pitfn dvijdn havya- 
kavydsdn karundmayah 
tatah prabhrti pujyante 
trailokye sacardcare 
brahmddayah surah same 
prasaddt sdrhga-dhanvanah 
mam covdca tadd mattah 
pujya-srestho bhavisyasi 
Ever since that time, the demigods have been worshiped by 
the mercy of the Supreme Lord's plenary portions, who are all 
compassionate towards Their devotees. Thus, by the mercy of 
Lord Kesava, the forefathers, demigods, brdhmanas and sages 
became worshipable within the three worlds. 


The Glories of Lord Visnu 
The Supreme Lord once told me; You will be worshiped by 
Me. 
Texts 29-30 
tvdm drddhya yadd sambho 
grahisydmi varam tava 
dvdparddau yuge bhutvd 
kalayd mdnusddisu 
dgamaih kalpitais tvam hi 
jandn mad-vimukhdn kuru 
mdrh ca gopayame na 
sydt srstir evottarottard 
tatas tarn pranipatydham 
uvdca paramesvaram 
The Supreme Lord continued: O Sambhu, I will obtain a 
benediction from You by worshiping You. Then, in the Dvapara- 
yuga, I will incarnate in a human-like form. Thereafter, you will 
misguide people by preaching the philosophy of impersonalism, 
thus keeping Me hidden. This will help serve the purpose of 
maintaining the creation. 
Thereafter, I offered my obeisances to the Supreme Lord and 
inquired; 
Thus ends the translation of the second chapter of the Fourth 
Rdtra of Sn Ndrada-pahcardtra. 


Chapter 3 
The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu, 
as told by Lord Siva to Parvati 
Text 1 
sn-mahadeva uvdca 
brahma-hatyd-sahasrandm 
pdpaiii sdmyet kathancana 
na punas tvayy amjndte 
kalpa-koti-satair api 
Sri Mahadeva said: O Supreme Lord, somehow or other, the 
sinful reactions for killing one thousand brdhmanas can be 
nullified. However, if one does not understand You, he cannot 
become freed from his sinful reactions, even after millions of 
kalpas. 
Text 2 
yasmdn mayd krtd spardhd 
pavitram sydt-katham hare 
nasyanti sarva-pdpdni 
tan mdm vada suresvara 
tad aha devo govindo mama 
pntyd yathd-yatham 
O Lord Hari, master of the demigods, please forgive my audacity 
and clearly tell me—how I can become freed from all sinful 
reactions and thereby become purified? 
When I petitioned the Lord in this way, He replied to me in a 
most pleasing manner. 
199 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 3 
sn-bhagavdn uvdca 
sadd ndma-sahasrarh me 
pdvanam mat-paddv aham 
tatparo 'nudinarh sambho 
sarvaisvaryam yadlcchasi 
The Supreme Lord said: O Sambhu, I have one thousand names 
that are purifying and award one the ultimate goal of life. If you 
really want to attain all types of perfection then always chant 
these holy names. 
Text 4 
sri-mahddeva uvdca 
tam eva tapasd nityam 
bhajdmi staumi cintaye 
tenddvitiya-mahimo jagat- 
pujyo 'smi pdrvati 
Sri Mahadeva said: O ParvatI, all of my penance, prayers, 
meditation and worship are eternally meant for Him alone. 
Because of this, I have become worshipable by all and my glories 
are sung throughout the universe. 
TextS 
sn-pdruaty uvdca 
tan me kathaya devesa 
yathdham api sankara 
sarvesvan nirupamd tava 
sydrh sadrsl prabho 
Sri ParvatI said: O lord of the demigods! O Sankara! Please 
reveal these holy names to me so that I can also become glorious 
and the master of the living entities, like you. 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
Text 6 
sn-mahadeva uvaca 
sadhu sadhu tvaya prsto 
visnor bhagavatah sive 
ndmndrh sahasrarh vaksydmi 
mukhyarh trailokya-marigalam 
Sri Mahadeva said: Because you have inquired about the all- 
auspicious one thousand holy names of Lord Visnu, you must 
certainly be considered most saintly. Because of this, I am duty 
bound to reveal these principal holy names to You. 
Text 7 
namo ndrdyandya 
purusottamdya ca mahdtmane 
visuddha-sadmddhisthdya 
mahd-harhsdya dhlmahi 
Let us offer our respectful obeisances unto the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, Narayana, who is eternally situated in 
the mode of pure goodness, who is most magnanimous, and 
who is the foremost swan-like personality. 
Text 8 
orh asya-sn-visnoh sahasra-ndma-mantrasya mahadeva rsih. 
anustupa chandah. paramdtmd devatd. surya-koti-pratikdsa 
iti bijam. gangd-tirthottamd saktih. prapanndsanipnjara 
iti kilakam. divydstra ity astrarh. sarua-pdpa-ksaydrtham 
sarvdbhlsta siddhyartham sn-visnomdma-sahasram jape 
viniyogah. 
Mahadeva is the predominating sage of this Visnu-sahasra-ndma 
mantra. The Supersoul is the objective of chanting this mantra 
and it should be sung in the anustup meter. Suryakoti pratikdsa 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Third Ratra 
is the seed of this mantra, gangd tirthottamd is the energy and 
prapanndsani panjara is the kilaka. These transcendental holy 
names are just like a weapon by which one can destroy all of his 
sinful reactions. This prayer will fulfill all of one's desires. , 
Before reciting the thousand names of Visnu, one should chant 
the following mantra: 
orh vdsudevarh param brahma ityarhgusthdbhydm namah 
orh mula prakrtiriti tarjanibhydm namah 
orh bhumahd vardha iti madhyamdbhydm namah 
orh suryavamsadhvajo rdma andmikdbhyarh namah 
orh brahmadi kamaladi gadd suryakesavarh iti kanisthikdbhyarh 
sesa iti karatala karaprsthabhydm namah 
Text 9 
visnurh bhdsvat-kintdhgada- 
valaya-gana-kalpaharodardh- 
ghri-sroni-bhusarh-suvakso- 
mani-makara-mahd- 
kundalarh manditdrhsarh 
hastodyac cakra-sahkhdmbu- 
jagadam amalarh pita-kauseya-vdso- 
vidyud bhdsarh samudyad dinakara- 
sadrsarh padma-hastarh namdmi 
Thereafter, one should meditate on the Supreme Lord by 
reciting the following one thousand holy names. 
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of Lord 
Visnu, whose abdomen, lotus feet and waist are adorned with 
various ornaments; whose head, hands and arms are decorated 
with a crown, bracelets and armlets; whose che:st is most 
enchanting; whose ears are decorated with fish-shaped earrings; 
whose attractive hands hold a conch, disc, club and lotus; who is 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
dressed in yellow garments that resemble lightning; and whose 
lotus hands are attractive, like the morning sun. 
Text 10 
orh vasudevah pararh 
brahma paramdtmd pardtparam 
pararh dhdma pararh jyotih 
pararh tattvarh pararh padam 
Sri Visnu is the son of Vasudeva, the Supreme Brahman, the 
Supersoul, the Supreme Absolute Truth, the ultimate shelter, 
supremely effulgent, the transcendental objective, the supreme 
destination,... 
Text 11 
pararh sivarh paro dhyeyah 
pararh jhdnarh para gatih 
paramdrthah pararh sreyah 
paranandah parodayah 
. . . supremely auspicious, the transcendental object of 
meditation, the personification of spiritual knowledge, the 
supreme goal of life, the supreme benefactor, the true self- 
interest of all, the origin of all spiritual manifestations,. . . 
Text 12 
paro vyaktah pararh vyoma 
parardhah paramesvarah 
nirdmayo niruikdro 
nirvikalpo nirdsrayah 
... the origin of the the spiritual sky, the foremost personality, 
the supreme controller, unconlaminated, unchangeable, 
without a rival, fully independent,. . . 


204 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 13 
niranjano nirdlambo 
nirlepo niravagrahah 
nirguno niskalo 'nanto 
'cintyo 'sdvacalo 'cyutah 
. . . faultless, without any support, fully transcendental, 
unlimited, beyond the influence of the three modes of material 
nature, without material designations, limitless, inconceivable, 
infallible, . . . 
Text 14 
atlndriyo 'mito 'rodhyo 
'niho 'niso 'vyayo 'ksayah 
sarvajnah sarvagah sarvah 
sarvadah sarva-bhdvanah 
... beyond the jurisdiction of the senses, the greatest personality, 
uncheckable, devoid of material desires, without any controller, 
inexhaustible, imperishable, capable of traveling anywhere at 
will, the sum total of everything, the bestower of everything 
enjoyed by the living entities, equally disposed toward all,... 
Text 15 
sarvah sambhuh sarva-sdksl 
pujyah sarvasya sarua-drk 
sarua-saktih sarva-sdrah 
sarvdtmd saruato-mukhah 
. . . inclusive of everything, Sambhu, the witness of everything, 
worshipable by all, the seer of everything, the source of all 
energies, the essence of everything, the life and soul of all living 
beings, the almighty Lord,. . . 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
Text 16 
sarvdvdsah sarva-rupah 
sarvddi sarva-duhkhahd 
sarvdrthah sarvato bhadrah 
sarva-kdrana-kdranam 
. all-pervading, the form of the cosmic manifestation, the 
origin of everything, the remover of the devotees' distress, the 
source of all objectives of life, ever pleasing, the cause of all 
causes,. . . 
Text 17 
sarvdtisdyakah sarvddhyaksah 
sarvesvaresvarah 
sadvirhsako mahdvisnur 
mahdguhyo mahdharih 
. . . eternally fixed in His original position, the director of 
universal affairs, the controller of all controllers, the source of 
the twenty-six elements, Mahavisnu, very difficult to understand 
for the nondevotees, the destroyer of the devotees' distress, . . 
Text 18 
nityodito nitya-yukto 
nitydnandah sandtanah 
mdyd-patir yoga-patih 
kaivalya-patir dtma-bhuh 
... eternal existence, the form of eternity, eternally blissful, the 
primeval Lord, the Lord of the material energy, the master of 
mystic yoga, the master of liberation, manifested by His internal 
potency,. . . 


Sri NArada-paScarAtra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 19 
janma-mrtyu-jardtitah 
kdldtito bhavdtigah 
purnah satyah suddha-buddha- 
svarupo nitya-cinmayah 
. . . beyond the influence of birth, death, old age and disease; 
beyond the control of the material time factor; beyond the 
jurisdiction of matter; the complete whole; the Absolute Truth; 
the personification of pure knowledge; eternally situated in 
spiritual existence,. . . 
Text 20 
yogi-priyo yogamayo bhava- 
bandhaika-mocakah 
purdnah purusah pratyak 
caitanyarh purusottamah 
. . very dear to the yogis, the form of mystic yoga, the only 
one who can remove one's bondage to material existence, the 
oldest, fully cognizant, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, . 
Text 21 
veddnta-vedyo durjneyas 
tdpa-traya-vivarjitah 
brahma-vidydsrayo 'langhyah 
sva-prakdsah svayam-prabhah 
. . . known through study of Vedanta, incomprehensible, aloof 
from the influence of the three-fold material miseries, the abode 
of knowledge of Brahman, insurmountable, self-manifest, self- 
effulgent, . .. 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
Text 22 
sarvopeyah udasinah 
pratiavah sarvatah samah 
sarvanavadyo dusprdpas 
turiyas tamasah parah 
. . . completely detached in all situations, the form of om, 
equally disposed toward everyone, flawless, rarely attained, fully 
transcendental, situated beyond the darkness of ignorance, . . 
Text 23 
kutasthah sarva-samslisto 
vdrigamanogocardtigah 
sankarsatiah sarva-harah 
kdlah sarva-bhayankarah 
. . . unchangeable, inclusive of everything, beyond the 
comprehension of speech and the mind, Sankarsana, the 
ultimate cause of annihilation, all-devouring time, most fearful 
f©r the atheists,. . . 
Text 24 
anullanghyah sarva-gatir 
mahd-rudro durasadah 
mula-prakrtir dnandah 
prajndtd visva-mohanah 
... unconquerable, the resting place of all manifestations, Maha- 
rudra, difficult to realize, the cause of the original nature, full 
of ecstasy, the knower of everthing, the enchanter of the entire 
world,. . . 
Text 25 
mahd-mdyo visva-bijam 
para-sakti-sukhaikabhuk 


208 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
sarva-kamyo 'nantasilah 
sarva-bhuta-vasankarah 
. . . the cause of the material energy, the original seed of the 
universe, the enjoyer of spiritual potencies, the ultimate goal 
for all, limitless, the master of all living entities, . .. 
Text 26 
aniruddhah sawa-jivo 
hrsikeso manah patih 
nirupadhih priyo harhso 
'ksarah sarva-niyojakah 
. . . Aniruddha, the seed-giving father of all living entities, 
the proprietor of the senses, the Lord of the mind, free from 
material designations, dear to all, the supreme swan-like 
personality, without beginning or end, the supreme controller, 
Text 27 
brahma prdnesvarah sarva- 
bhutabhrd deha-ndyakah 
ksetrajnah prakrti-svdmi 
puruso visva-sutra-dhrk 
. . . Brahma, the controller of the life-air, the sustainer of all 
living entities, the hero within the body, the supreme knower of 
the body, the Lord of the material nature, the supreme enjoyer, 
the controller of the universe, . . . 
Text 28 
antarydml tri-dhdmd 'ntah- 
sdksi triguna isvarah 
yogi mrgyah padmandbhah 
sesasdyi my ah patih 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
209 
... the indwelling Supersoul, the shelter of the three worlds, the 
internal witness, the controller of the three modes of material 
nature, the master of mystic yoga, and the one who must be 
ascertained by introspection. He has a lotus-like navel and He 
lies on the bed of Sesa. He is the husband of Laksml,. . . 
Text 29 
sn-satyopasya-paddbjo 
nantah snh-sn-niketanah 
nitya-vaksahsthalastha-snh 
sn-nidhih sndharo harih 
. . . the eternal worshipable Lord, unlimited, full of opulence, 
the abode of opulence, the residence of the goddess of fortune, 
an ocean of beauty, the husband of Laksml, the one who takes 
away the miseries of His devotees, .. . 
Text 30 
ramya-snr niscaya-sndo 
visnuh ksimbdhi-mandirah 
kaustubhodbhdsitorasko 
madhavo jagad drtihd 
.. . indescribably beautiful, the giver of wealth, and the soul of 
the universe. He lies on the ocean of milk, and shines brightly 
because of the effulgence of the Kaustubha gem. He is the 
husband of Laksml, and the destroyer of the distress of the 
people of this world. 
Text 31 
srivatsa-vakso nihsimah 
kalydna-guna-bhdjanam 
pitdmbaro jaganndtho 
jagad dhdtd jagat-pitd 


210 
Sri Narada-paScaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Sri Visnu's chest is decorated with the mark of Srivatsa. He has 
no limit, and He is decorated with the quality of compassion, 
dressed in yellow garments, the Lord of the universe, the 
sustainer of the universe, the father of the universe,. . . 
Text 32 
jagad bandhur jagat-srastd 
jagat-kartd jagan nidhih 
jagad eka-sphurad-viryo 
nahamvadi jaganmayah 
.. . the friend of all living entities within the universe, the creator 
of the universe, the cause of the universe, the substance of the 
universe, the powerful person behind the cosmic manifestation, 
one without a second, all-pervading throughout the universe, . 
Text 33 
sarvdscaryamayah sarva- 
siddhdrthah sarva-virajit 
sarvdmoghodyamo brahma- 
rudrady utkrsta-cetanah 
. . . most wonderful; endowed with all perfection; victorious 
over all kinds of heroes; all-auspicious; the worshipable Lord of 
Brahma, Rudra and other chiefs of the demigods, . . . 
Text 34 
sambho pitdmaho brahma- 
pitd sakrady adhisvarah 
saiva-deva-priyah sarva- 
deva-vrttir anuttamah 
. . . the grandfather of Sambhu, the grandfather of all living 
beings, the father of Brahma, the chastiser of His enemies, very 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
dear to the demigods, the maintainer of the demigods, without 
superior or equal,. . . 
Text 35 
sarva-devaika-saranarh 
sarva-devaika-daivatam 
yajna-bhug yajna-phqlad o 
yajneso yajna-bhdvanah 
... the only shelter of the demigods, the source of the demigods' 
prowess, the enjoyer of sacrifice, the giver of the fruit of sacrifice, 
the Lord of sacrifice, the benefactor of sacrifice,. . . 
Text 36 
yajna-trdtd yajna-pumdn 
vanamdli dvija-priyah 
dvijaikamdnado 'hisrah 
kula-deuo 'surdntakah 
... the deliverer of those who perform sacrifice, and the goal of 
sacrifice. Sri Visnu wears a garland of forest flowers, He is dear 
to the brdhmanas, and He is always ready to give respect to the 
brdhmanas. He is non-envious, the family Deity, the killer of the 
demons, .. . 
Text 37 
sarva-dustdntakrt sarva- 
sajjandnanda-pdlakah 
sarva-lokaika-jatharah 
sarva-lokaika-sandalah 
. the destroyer of all miscreants, the giver of pleasure to 
saintly persons, the mother of the universe, the shelter of the 
universe,... 


212 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth RAtra 
Text 38 
srsti-sthity anta-krc cakri 
sarngadhanva gadadharah 
sankhabhrn nandaki-padma- 
pdnir garuda-vdhanah 
. . . and the cause of creation, maintenance and annihilation. 
He carries a disc in His hand, He holds a bow in His hand, He 
carries a club in His hand, He holds a conch in His hand, He 
carries a sword in His hand, He holds a lotus in His hand, and 
He rides on the back of Garuda. 
Text 39 
anirddesya-vapuh sarvah 
sarva-laokaikapdvanah 
ananta-kirttir nihsnsah 
paurusah sarva-mangalah 
Sri Visnu possesses a transcendental body that is not subjected 
to material time, place or circumstances. He is the sum total of 
everything, the purifier of everyone, unlimitedly glorious, the 
actual proprietor of all wealth, the almighty Lord, the source of 
all auspiciousness, . . . 
Text 40 
surya-kotipratikdso 
yama-koti-vindsanah 
brahma-koti-jagat-srastd 
vdyu-koti-mahdbalah 
... as effulgent as millions of suns, as devouring as millions 
of Yamarajas, as powerful a creator as millions of Brahmas, as 
strong as millions of Vayus, . . . 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
213 
Text 41 
kotindu-jagadanandi 
sambhu-koti-mahesvarah 
kuvera-koti-laksmivdn 
satru-koti-vindsanah 
... as pleasant as millions of moons, as powerful as millions of 
Sivas, as rich as millions of Kuveras, as expert as the killer of 
millions of enemies, . . . 
Text 42 
kandarpa-koti-ldvanyd 
durga-koti-vimarddhanah 
samudra-koti-gambhiras 
tirtha-koti-samdhvayah 
... as lovely as millions of Cupids, the destroyer of millions of 
distresses, as grave as millions of oceans, and the personification 
of millions of universes. He immediately nullifies the sinful 
reactions that would require millions of horse-sacrifices 
to neutralize, and He is adored by millions of sacrificial 
performances. 
Text 43 
himavat-koti-niskampah 
koti-brahmdnda-vigrahah 
koty asvamedha-pdpaghno 
yajna-koti-samdrcanah 
Sri Visnu is immovable, like millions of mountains. He is the 
form of millions of universes, the destroyer of sinful reactions 
that take millions of horse-sacrifices to nullify, and is worshiped 
by the performance of millions of sacrifices. 


214 
Sri NArada-pancarAtra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 44 
sudhd-koti-svasthya-hetuh 
kamadhuk-koti-kdmadah 
brahma-vidyd-koti-rupah 
sipivistah sucisravdh 
Sri Visnu possesses a form that surpasses millions of reservoirs of 
nectar and fulfills everyone's desires. He is the personification 
of transcendental knowledge, the indwelling Supersoul, the 
most sanctified personality, ... 
Text 45 
visvambharas tirtha-pddah 
punya-sravana-kirtanah 
adidevo jagaj jaitro 
mukundah kdlanemihd 
. . . and the maintainer of everyone in the universe. He 
shelters all of the holy places under His lotus feet and awards 
auspiciousness to those who hear and chant about Him. He 
is the original Lord, the soul of the universe, the giver of 
liberation, the killer of Kalanemi,... 
Text 46 
vaikuntho 'nanta-mdhdtmyo 
mahd-yogisvaresvarah 
nitya-trpto na sad bhdvo 
nihsanko narakdntakah 
. . . fully transcendental, unlimitedly glorious, the Lord of the 
foremost yogis, eternally satisfied, most magnanimous, fearless, 
the killer of Narakasura, . .. 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
Text 47 
dindndthaika-saranarh 
visvaika-vyasandpahd 
jagat-ksamd-krto nityo 
krpdluh sajjandsrayah 
... the shelter of the poor, the destroyer of miseries, the deliverer 
from material existence, ever-existing, full of compassion, the 
shelter of pious persons, . . . 
Text 48 
yogesvarah sadodirno 
vrddhi-ksaya-vivarjitah 
adhoksajo visvaretd 
prajdpati-sabhddhipah 
. . . the master of mystic powers, always undivided, without a 
conception of loss or gain, beyond material sense perception, 
the most powerful personality within the universe, the leader in 
the assembly of Brahma, . .. 
Text 49 
sakra-brahmdrdta-padah 
sambhu-brahmordhva-dhdmagah 
surya-someksano visva- 
bhoktd saruasya pdragah 
. . . and worshipable by the demons and demigods. He resides 
in His own abode that is situated beyond the realms of Brahma 
and Siva, and His eyes are the sun and the moon. He is the 
supreme enjoyer of the universe, situated beyond the reach of 
the materially conditioned souls,. .. 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 50 
jagat-setur dharma-setur 
dhiro 'rista-dhurandharah 
nirmamo 'khila-lokeso 
nihsango 'dbhuta-bhogavdn 
. . . the protector of the universe, the protector of religious 
principles, sober, the killer of Aristasura, devoid of material 
attachment, the master of the universe, free from the association 
of matter, astonishingly full of enjoyment,. . . 
Text 51 
ramyamdyo visva-visvo 
visvakseno nagottamah 
sarvdsreyah patir devyd 
sarva-bhusana-bhusitah 
... by nature full of enjoyment, the creator of the universe, 
the sustainer of the universe, all-pervading throughout the 
universe, the shelter of all, the protector of the goddess of 
fortune, decorated with transcendental ornaments,. . . 
Text 52 
smva-laksana-laksanyah 
sarva-daityendra-darpahd 
samasta-deva-sarvajnah 
sarva-daivata-ndyakah 
. . . the possessor of all transcendental qualities, the destroyer 
of the demons' pride, the knower of the demigods, the master 
of the demigods,. . . 
Text 53 
samasta-devatd-durgah 
prapanndsani-panjarah 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
samasta-deva-kava ca rh 
sarva-deva-siromanih 
. . . the reliever of the demigods' distress, the abode of 
fearlessness, the deliverer of the demigods, the crest jewel of 
all the demigods, .. . 
Text 54 
samasta-bhaya-nirbhinno 
bhagavdn vistarasravdh 
vibhuh sarva-hitodarko 
hatdrih sugati-pradah 
. . . the remover of all fear, the possessor of six opulences in 
full, supremely exalted, the almighty Lord, the benefactor of all 
living entities, the killer of His enemies, the bestower of one's 
goal of life, .. . 
Text 55 
sarva-daivata-jiveso 
brdhmanddi-niyojakah 
brahma-smbhu-pardrdhddhyl 
brahma-jesthyah sisuh svardt 
. . . the master of the lives of the demigods, the guide of the 
brdhmanas, more opulent and powerful than Brahma and 
Siva, superior to Brahma, the transcendental child, supremely 
independent,. .. 
Text 56 
virdt bhakta-parddhlnah 
stutyah sarvdrtha-sddhakah 
sarvdrtha-kartd krtyajnah 
svdrtha-krtyasadojjhitah 


218 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fourth RAtra 
... the universal form, controlled by His devotees, the object of 
glorification, the bestower of all objectives of life, the ultimate 
goal of life, grateful, the bestower of one's self-interest, . .. 
Text 57 
sadd navah sadd bhadrah 
sadd sdntah sadd sivah 
sadd priyah sadd tustah 
sadd pustah saddrcitah 
... ever-fresh, always gentle, always peaceful, always auspicious, 
always dear to everyone, always satisfied, always nourished, 
always worshiped,.. . 
Text 58 
sadd putah pdvandgro 
veda-guhyo vrsdkapih 
sahasra-ndmd-triyugas 
catur murttis catur bhujah 
. . . always pure, the topmost purifying agent, confidential to 
the Vedas, and the bestower of one's cherished objectives. He 
possesses one thousand names, appears in three yugas, has 
quadruple forms, possesses four arms,.. . 
Text 59 
bhuta-bhavya-bhavanndtho 
mahd-purusa-purvajah 
ndrdyano munja-kesah 
sarva-yoga-vinismrtah 
... is the knower of past, present and future; the origin of the 
purusa incarnations; the shelter of all living entities; decorated 
with curly hair; the reservoir of all transcendental relationships, 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
219 
Text 60 
veda-sdro yajna-sdrah 
sdma-sdras taponidhih 
sddhya-srestah purdnarsir 
nisthd-sdnti-pardyanah 
. . . the essence of the Vedas, the essence of all sacrifices, the 
essence of all hymns, enriched with penance, the supreme 
objective of life, the primeval sage, and the abode of peace and 
tranquility. 
Text 61 
sivas trisula-vidhvamsi sri- 
kanthaika-vara-pradah 
nara-krsno harir dharma- 
nandano dharma-jivanah 
Sri Visnu defeated the prowess of Siva's trident, He is the giver 
of benedictions to Sri Kantha, and He appears as Krsna in a 
human-like form. He is the remover of all distress, the son of 
Dharma, the life and soul of religion,. .. 
Text 62 
ddikartd sawa-satyah 
sarua-stn-ratna-darpahd 
trikdlo jita-kandarpa 
urvasl-drn munisvarah 
... the original creator; the ultimate truth; the destroyer of the 
pride of all women; the knower of past, present, and future; the 
enchanter of Cupid; the object of Urvasi's vision, the master of 
introspective sages, .. . 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth RAtra 
Text 63 
adyah kavir hayagnvah 
sawa-vdgisvaresvarah 
sarua-devamayo brahma 
gurur vdgmisvan-patih 
. . . the origin of everything, omniscient, Hayagnva, the most 
eloquent speaker, the origin of all demigods, the spiritual 
master of Brahma, a most fluent speaker, the husband of the 
goddess of fortune, . . . 
Text 64 
ananta-vidyd-prabhavo 
muld-vidyd-vindsakah 
sarudrhano jagaj jddhya- 
ndsako madhusudana 
... unlimitedly influential and wise, the destroyer of ignorance, 
worshi^able for all, the purifyer of material contamination, the 
killer of the Madhu demon, . .. 
Text 65 
ananta-mantra-kotisah 
sabda-brahmaika-pdvakah 
adi-vidvdn veda-kartd 
veddtmd sruti-sdgarah 
. . . the objective of countless mantras, understood only by 
receiving the transcendental sound vibration, the original 
learned personality, the compiler of the Vedas, the goal of the 
Vedas, an ocean of knowledge, . .. 
Text 66 
brahmdrtha-veddbharanah 
sarua-vijndna-janma-bhuh 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
vidyd-rdj ojnd na-rdjo 
jndna-sindhur akharndardhih 
.. . the purport of all Vedic knowledge, the bestower of all kinds 
of practical knowledge, the king of knowledge, the essence of 
knowledge, an ocean of knowledge, the possessor of undeviating 
intelligence, . . . 
Text 67 
matsya-devo mahd-srrigo 
jagad-bija-vahitra-dhrk 
lild-vydptdnildmbhodhis 
catur veda-pravartakah 
. . . the Matsya incarnation, the boar incarnation, the original 
seed of the universe, a reservoir of unlimited pastimes, the 
speaker of the four Vedas, . . . 
Text 68 
adi-kurmo 'khilddhdras 
tmi-krta-jagad bhavah 
amari-hta-devaughah 
piyusotpatti-kdranam 
. . . the Kurma incarnation, and the basis of all that be. This 
world is no more than a blade of grass to Him and He enabled 
the demigods to become immortal by destroying their sins. He 
is a reservoir of nectar, . . . 
Text 69 
dtma-dhdro dhard-dhdro 
yajndngo dharani-dharah 
hira nydksa-harah prthvi- 
patih sraddhadi-kalpakah 
. . . the shelter of all spirit souls, the sustainer of the universe, 
(he goal of sacrifice, the deliverer of the earth, the killer of 


222 
Sri Narada-paSicarAtra • Fourth Ratra 
Hiranyaksa, the husband of the earth, He who inaugurated the 
system of sraddha, . . . 
Text 70 
samasta-pitr-bhltighnah 
samasta-pitr-jivanam 
havya-kavyaika-bhug-bhavyo 
guna-bhavyaika-ddyakah 
... the remover of fear from the minds of the forefathers, the life 
and soul of the forefathers, the ultimate enjoyer of all sacrificial 
offerings, fully qualified in all respects, and the original source 
of all existence. 
Text 71 
lomdnta-lina-jaladhih 
ksobhitdsesa-sdgarah 
mahd-vardho yajnaghna- 
dhvamsano ydjnikdsrayah 
Sri Visnu creates an ocean by producing water from the pores 
of His body, He agitates the ocean in the form of Sesa, He 
assumes the form of Varaha, He is the destroyer of those who 
disturb performances of sacrifice, and He is the protector of 
the performers of sacrifice. 
Text 72 
narasirhho divya-sirhhah 
sarvdristdrti-duhkha-hd 
eka-vlrodbhuta-balo 
yantra-mantraika-bhanjanam 
Sri Visnu assumes the half-man half-lion incarnation, He is 
the transcendental lion-like personality, the destroyer of the 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
223 
distress caused by one's enemies, the possessor of supreme 
strength, the goal of all religious rituals and the chanting of 
mantras, . . . 
Text 73 
brahmadi-duhsaha-jyotir 
yugdntdgny atibhisanah 
koti-vjrddhika-nakho 
gaja-duspreksa-murtidhrk 
. the source of the glaring effulgence that is unbearable 
to even personalities like Brahma; the cause of the fire of 
annihilation; the possessor of nails more powerful than 
millions of thunderbolts; the bestower of liberation to the king 
of elephants, Gajendra,. . . 
Text 74 
mdtr-cakra-pramathano 
mahd-mdtr-ganesvarah 
acintyo mogha-viryddhyah 
samastdsuragha-smarah 
the protector of surrendered souls from imprisonment in a 
mother's womb, the Lord of all exalted mothers, inconceivable, 
possessing infalliable prowess, and the destroyer of the sinful 
reactions of the demons. 
Text 75 
hiranyakasipu-cchedi 
kdlah sankarsanah patih 
krtdnta-vdhanah sadyah 
samasta-bhaya-ndsanah 
Sri Visnu tore apart the body of Hiranyakasipu. He is the time 
factor, Sankarsana, the supreme protector, the preacher of the 
Vedic conclusions, and the remover of all sorts of fear. 


224 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth RAtra 
Text 76 
sarva-vighndntakah sarua- 
siddhidah sarva-purakah 
samasta-pataka-dhvamsi 
siddha-mantrddhikdhvayah 
He vanquishes all obstacles, awards all perfection, fulfills all 
desires, washes away all sinful reactions, and is the goal of 
chanting mantras. 
Text 77 
bhairaveso hardrtighnah 
kdla-kalpo durasadah 
daily a-garhha-srdvindmd 
sphutad brahmdnda-varjitah 
Sri Visnu is the Lord of Siva, the mitigator of Siva's distress, 
the ability of Yamaraja, incomprehensible to the materially 
conditioned mind, and the annihilator of the demons. He 
resides beyond the manifested universes, .. . 
Text 78 
smrti-mdtrdkhila-trdtd 
bhuta-rupo mahd-harih 
brahma-carma-sirah-pattd 
dikpdlo 'rdhdnga-bhusanah 
. . . and delivers one immediately upon being remembered. 
He is the total form of the living entities, the great deliverer, 
bedecked with the crown of wisdom, the ornament of the 
predominating demigods of the directions, . .. 
Text 79 
dvadasdrka-siroddma 
rudra-sirsaika-nupurah 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
yogini-grasia-girijd- 
rato bhairava-tarjakah 
... the crest jewel of the twelve Adityas; the crown of the eleven 
Rudras; the worshipable Lord of Parvati, the daughter of the 
Himalayas; the chastiser of Siva,. . . 
Text 80 
vira-cakresvaro 'ty ugro 
yamdrih kdla-samvarah 
krodhesvaro rudra-candl- 
parivddi sudustabhdk 
. . . the master of the formidable disc that is extremely sharp, 
the enemy of Death personified, the Lord of the material time 
factor, the Lord of anger, the subduer of mundane lust, the 
destroyer of miscreants,. . . 
Text 81 
sarvdksah sarva-mrtyus ca 
mrtyur mrtyu-nivartakah 
asddhyah sarva-rogaghnah 
sarva-dugraha-saumyakrt 
. . . the witness of everything, the giver of death to the living 
entities, the annihilator of the suprintendent of death, 
the remover of incurable diseases, He who neutralizes 
inauspiciousess,. . . 
Text 82 
ganesa-koti-darpaghno 
duhsaho 'sesa-gotrahd 
deva-danava-durdharso 
jagad bhaksya-pradah pita 
. . . the destroyer of the pride of millions of rulers of human 
society, unbearable for His enemies, He who can terminate the 


repetition of unlimited births and deaths, unconquerable by 
the demons and demigods, the supplier of food to all living 
beings, the seed-giving father,. . . 
Text 83 
samasta-durgati-trdtd 
jagad bhaksaka-bhaksakah 
ugreso 'sura-mdrjdrah 
kdla-musaka-bhaksakah 
... the remover of all kinds of miseries, the annihilator of those 
who attempt to destroy the world, the Lord of Rudra, like a cat 
killing the mouse-like demons,. .. 
Text 84 
anai.h , udhadorddando 
a: si tit ho vlra-bhadrajit 
yogin i-takra-guhyesah 
sakrdrih pasu-mdmsa-bhuk 
. . . equipped with infallible weapons, the half-man half-lion 
incarnation, the conqueror of Virabhadra, the Lord of the 
hlddini potency, the enemy of Indra, the ordainer of animal 
sacrifice,.. . 
Text 85 
rudro ndrdyano mesa- 
rupa-sankara-vdhanah 
mesa-rupi siva-trdtd 
dusta-sakti-sahasrabhuk 
. . . Rudra, Narayana, the form of the bull who carries Siva, 
the deliverer of Siva, the eliminator of millions of powerful 
miscreants, . . . 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
Text 86 
tulasi-ballabho viro 
cintyamdyo khilestadah 
maha-sivah sivarudro 
bhairavaika-kapdlabhrt 
. . . dear to Tulasi-devi, a hero, inconceivably powerful, the 
supplier of all necessities of life, greatly auspicious, the 
benefactor of the enemies of Siva, the maintainer of Siva,.. . 
Text87 
bhillo-cakresvarah sakro 
divya-mohana-rupadhrk 
gauri-saubhagyado maya- 
nidhir maya-bhayapahah 
... the master of the Sudarsana cakra, the enemy of the demons, 
He who possesses a most enchanting form, the bestower of good 
fortune to Parvati, the regulator of the oceans, the remover of 
the fear caused by material nature,... 
Text 88 
brahma-tejomayo brahma 
srimayas ca trayimayah 
subrahmanyo bali-dhvamsi 
vamano 'diti-duhkhahd 
... the cause of the Brahman effulgence, the Supreme Brahman, 
full of opulence, the origin of the three purusa incarnations, 
endowed with brahminical qualities, the chastiser of Bali, the 
dwarf incarnation, He who removed Aditi's distress,... 
Text 89 
upendro nrpatir visnuh 
kasyapdnvaya-mandanah 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth RAtra 
bali-svarajyadah sarva- 
deua-vipratmado 'cyutah 
. . . Upendra, the supreme autocrat, the almighty Lord, the 
giver of pleasure to Kasyapa, He who returned the kingdom 
to Bali, He who treats the demigods and brdhmanas as His own 
family, the infallible Lord, . . . 
Text 90 
urukramas tirtha-padas 
tridasas ca trivikramah 
vyomapadah svapadambhah 
pavitrita-jagat trayah 
. . . most powerful, He whose lotus feet are most sanctified, the 
Lord of the demigods, Vamanadeva, the Lord of the spiritual 
sky, He who purifies the three worlds by traversing the surface 
of the earth with His lotus feet, . . . 
Text 91 
brahmesady abhivandydnghrir 
druta-karmadri-dhdranah 
acin tyddbh uta-vistdro 
visva-vrkso mahd-balah 
. . . worshiped by great personalities, such as Brahma and Siva; 
always active; and the lifter of Govardhana Hill. He manifests 
Himself in a most wonderful manner. He is the original seed of 
the universe and the most powerful personality. 
Text 92 
bahu-murdhd pardngachid 
bhrgu-patni-siroharah 
papas teya sada-punyo 
daityeso nitya-khandakah 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
229 
Sri Visnu possesses many heads, His bodily limbs are 
transcendental, and He severed the head of Bhrgu's wife. He is 
the destroyer of all the devotees' sinful reactions, full of piety, 
the killer of the demons, the vanquisher of His enemies,. . . 
Text 93 
puritdkhila-deveso 
visvdrthaikdvatdra-krt 
amaro nitya-guptdtmd 
bhakta-cintdrmanih sadd 
. . . and the worshipable Lord of the demigods. He incarnates 
for the benefit of all people, and He is immortal. He eternally 
reserves the right of not being exposed to the nondevotees. He 
is like a touchstone for the devotees,. . . 
Text 94 
varadah kdrtaviryddi-rdja 
-rdjya-prado 'naghah 
visva-sldghyo 'mitdcdro 
dattdtreyo munisvarah 
. . . the giver of benedictions, the bestower of an immense 
kingdom to Kartaviryarjuna, sinless, the object of glorification 
for everyone within the world, gentle in behavior, Dattatreya, 
the master of introspective sages,. . . 
Text 95 
para-sakti-samdyukto 
yogandnda-madonmadah 
samastendrdri-tejohrt 
paramananda-pddapah 
. . . the possessor of inconceivable potencies, and always 
intoxicated by ecstatic love. He takes away the prowess of 


Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fourth Ratra 
the enemies of the demigods and He is the desire tree of 
transcendental ecstasy, .. . 
Text 96 
anasuyd-garbha-ratno 
bhoga-moksa-sukha-pradah 
jamadagni-kuladityo 
renukadbhuta-saktihrt 
the jewel-like child of Anusuya, the giver of material 
enjoyment and liberation, the sun-like personality in the family 
of Jamadagni, the bestower of divine prowess to Renuka,.. . 
Text 97 
mdtr-hatydgha-nirlepah 
skandajid vipra-rdjyadah 
sarva-ksatrdntakrd-vim- 
darpahd kdrtaviryajit 
... aloof from the sin of killing His own mother, the vanquisher 
of Karttikeya, the giver of a kingdom to the brdhmanas, the 
destroyer of the ksatriyas, the remover of heroes' pride, He who 
defeated the powerful king Kartavirya, . . . 
Text 98 
yogi yogdvatdras ca 
yogiso yoga-tatparah 
paramananda-ddtd ca 
sivdcdrya-yasah pradah 
... the Lord of mystic yogis:, the incarnation of mystic perfection; 
the master of the foremost of yogis', always absorbed in yoga', 
the giver of transcendental bliss; the giver of fame to the great 
dcdrya, Siva, . . . 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
Text 99 
bhlmah parasurdmas ca, 
sivdcdryaika-visva-bhuh 
sivdkhila-jndna-koso 
bhismdcdryo 'gni-daivatah 
. . . the most powerful, Parasurama, the Lord of Siva, the 
controller of the universe, the source of Siva's knowledge, the 
spiritual master of Bhisma, the Lord of the fire-god, .. . 
Text 100 
drondcdrya-gurur visva- 
jaitradhanvd krtdnta-krt 
advitlya-tamo-murtir 
brahmaryaika-daksinah 
. . . the spiritual master of Dronacarya, the conqueror of the 
universe, the compiler of the Sdnkhya philosophy, one without 
a second, a celebrated celibate,. . . 
Text 101 
manu-sresthah sat dm 
setur mahiydn vrsabho virdt 
ddi-rdjah ksiti-pitd 
sarua-ratnaika-dohakrt 
.. . the best of Manus, the pride of saintly persons, greater than 
the greatest, the highest of all, the primeval ruler, the father of 
the universe, the bestower of opulence upon the earth,. . . 
Text 102 
prthu-janmddy eka-dakso 
hrih srih klrtti svayarh dhrtih 
jagad-vutti-pradarh cakravartti 
-srestho durastradhrk 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth RAtra 
... the origin of King Prthu, full of intelligence, full of opulence, 
supremely glorious, possessed of great self-restraint, the 
bestower of propensities to all living entities, the undisputed 
ruler, and equipped with infallible weapons. 
Text 103 
sanakadi-muni-prdpad 
bhagavad-bhakti-vardhanah 
varndsramadi-dharmdndm 
kartd vaktd pravarttakah 
Sri Visnu awarded devotional service to great sages, headed by 
Sanaka; and He introduced and propogated the principles of 
varndsrama-dharma. 
Text 104 
surya-vamsa-dhvajo rdmo 
rdghavah sad gundrnavah 
kdkustha-vlratd-dharmo- 
rdja-dharma-dhurandharah 
He is the victory flag of the Surya dynasty, Lord Rama, the scion 
of the Raghu dynasty, an ocean of transcendental qualities, the 
source of Ramacandra's divine prowess, expert in the science 
of royal duties,... 
Text 105 
nitya-susthdsayah sarva- 
bhadra-grdhl subhaika-drk 
nava-ratnam ratna-nidhih 
sarvddhyakso mahd-nidhih 
. .. and never affected by material contamination. He appreciates 
the gentle behavior of His devotees and sees only the good in others. 
He is adorned with nine precious gems, the director of everything 
in existence, the original cause of the great ocean,... 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
233 
Text 106 
sarva-sresthasrayah sarva- 
sastrdstra-grdma-viryavdn 
jagad-vasl ddsarathih 
sarva-ratndsrayo nrpah 
. . . the best shelter of all, and expert in employing the best of 
weapons. He keeps the entire universe under His control, He is 
the son of Dasaratha, the source of all precious gems, an ideal 
king,. . . 
Text 107 
dharmah samasta-dharmastho 
dharma-drstdkhilartihrt 
atindro jndna-vijndna- 
pdradrsvd ksamdmbudhih 
. . . the form of religion, the knower of religious principles, 
the protector of religious principles, the remover of all distress, 
situated beyond the reach of mundane senses, the source of all 
theoritical and practical knowledge, an ocean of forgiveness, . 
Text 108 
sarva-prakrstah sistesto 
harsa-sokddy andkulah 
pitrdjnd-tyakta-sdmrdjyah 
sapatnodaya-nirbhayah 
... the primeval Lord, most sober, and equal in both happiness 
and lamentation. He gave up His kingdom on the order of His 
father, and He is the giver of fearlessness to His wife. 
Text 109 
guhddesdrpitais caryah 
siva-sparddha-jatadharah 


234 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
citrakutapta-ratnadri- 
jagadiso ranecarah 
Sri Visnu bestows intelligence unto the hearts of surrendered 
souls, He is Siva decorated with matted hair, the opulence of 
Citrakuta, the controller of the universe, and He who ran away 
from the battlefield. 
Text 110 
yathestdmogha-sastrdstro 
devendra-tanayaksiha 
brahmendradi-nataisiko 
mdricaghno virddhahd 
Sri Visnu has unlimited arms and weapons, He is pleasing to 
the eyes of godly personalities, great demigods like Brahma 
and Indra bow down to Him, He is the killer of Marica, and the 
destroyer of material pangs. 
Text 111 
brahma-sdpa-hatd-sesa- 
dandakaranya-pavanah 
caturdasa-sahasrdgrya- 
raksoghnaika-saraikabhrt 
In the forest of Dandakaranya, which had been cursed by 
Brahma, He destroyed fourteen thousand Raksasas with the 
help of His arrows. 
Text 112 
khardris tri-sirohantd 
dusanaghno jandrdanah 
jatdyuso 'gni-gatido 
kabandha-svarga-dayakah 
Sri Visnu is the killer of Khara, the killer of the three-headed 
demon, the destroyer of Dusana, the chastiser of the demon 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
2S5 
Jana, the deliverer of Jatayu, the bestower of liberation to Agni, 
and the deliverer of Kabandha. 
Text 113 
lild-dhanuhkotydpasta- 
dundubhy asthi-mahdcayah 
sapta-tdlavyathdkrsta- 
dhvaja-patala-ddnavah 
He effortlessly broke the bow of Siva amidst the beating of 
drums by the denizens of heaven. He delivered seven palm 
trees and sent the demons to Patalaloka. 
Text 114 
sugrive rdjyado dhimdn 
manasaivdbhaya-pradah 
hanumad-rudra-mukhyesah 
samasta-kapi-dehabhrt 
He installed Sugriva as king. He is full of intelligence and 
gives fearlessness to the mind. He is the worshipable Lord of 
Hanuman and Rudra, and the Lord and master of the monkey 
army. 
Text 115 
agni-daivatya-bdnaika- 
vydkulikrta-sdgarah 
samlicchakoti-bdnaika- 
suska-nirdagdha-sagarah 
He plunged the society of demons into an ocean of bewilderment 
and mercilessly destroyed millions of mlecchas with His sharp 
arrows. 
Text 116 
sa-ndga-daitya-dhamaika- 
vydkulikrta-sdgarah 


Sri Narada-paivicaratra • Fourth RAtra 
samudrddbhuta-purvaika- 
baddha-setur yasonidhih 
He threw the Nagas and Daityas into an ocean of bewilderment, 
constructed a wonderful bridge over the ocean, and is an ocean 
of fame and glories. 
Text 117 
asadhya-sadhako lankd- 
samulotkarsa-daksinah 
varadrpta-jana-sthdna- 
paulastya-kula-krntanah 
Sri Visnii does that which is impossible for anyone else to do. He 
completely uprooted the city of Lanka, He gives benedictions 
to surrendered souls, and He enhanced the prestige of the 
Pulastya dynasty. 
Text 118 
rdvanaghnah prahastac chit 
kumbhakarnabhid ugra-hd 
rdvanaika-mukhac chetd 
nihsahkendraika-rdjyadah 
He is the killer of Ravana, the destroyer of Prahas'ta, the killer 
of Kumbhakarna, and most formidable for His enemies. He 
severed the head of Ravana, returned the kingdom to Indra, 
Text 119 
svargdsvargatva-vi cchedi 
devendrdd indratd-harah 
rakso-devatva-hrd dharmd 
dharma-harmyah purustutah 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
. . . destroys worldly and heavenly kingdoms at the time of 
annihilation, and kills the pride born of the position of Indra. 
He is the savior of religion, the protector of religious principles, 
glorified by King Puru, . .. 
Text 120 
nati-matra-dasdsydrir 
datta-rdjya-vibhlsanah 
sudhd-srsti-mrtdsesa- 
sva-sainya-jivanaika-krt 
. . . and the destroyer of the ten-headed demon. He installed 
Vibhisana as the king of Lanka, aind revived all the soldiers by 
showering unlimited nectar upon them. 
Text 121 
deva-brdhmana-ndmaika- 
dhdtd sarvdmardrcitah 
brahma-suryendra-rudrddi- 
bandyo 'rcita-satdm priyah 
He is the uplifter of the prestige of the brdhmanasand. demigods; 
adored by immortal beings; worshiped by Brahma, Surya, Indra, 
Rudra and other chiefs of the demigods; the worshipable Lord 
of the devotees,. . . 
Text 122 
ayodhydkhila-rdjdgryah 
sarva-bhuta-manoharah 
svdmyatulya-krpd-datto 
hlnoskrstaika-sat-priyah 
... the king of Ayodhya, the enchanter of all living entities, and 
the bestower of mercy to the devotees. He transforms the fallen 
souls into saintly personalities. 


258 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 123 
sva-paksadi-nydya-darsi 
hindrtho 'dhika-sddhakah 
bddha-vydjdnu cita- 
krttdvako 'khila-tustikrt 
Sri Visnu metes out justice even to members of His own family, 
awards the goal of life to even wretched persons, and gives more 
than one deserves. He is exepert in removing impediments on 
the path of spiritual life and thus satisfies everyone,.. . 
Text 124 
pdrvaty adhika-yuktdtmd 
priydtyaktah surdrijit 
sdksdt-kusalavat- 
sadmendrdgnindto 'pardjitah 
... and He is the worshipable Lord of Parvatl. He was separated 
from His consort, He defeats the enemies of the demigods, and 
He is the abode of well-being for personalities such as Indra 
and Agni. He is always unconquerable,. . . 
Text 125 
kosalmdro virabdhuh 
satydrtha-tyakta-sodarah 
yasodd-nandano nandi 
dharani-mandalodayah 
. . . the Lord of Kosala, and the mighty-armed Lord. He was 
ready to give up His brothers for the sake of keeping His word, 
He is the son of Yasoda, always blissful, and the auspicious 
rising sun of this world. 
Text 126 
brahmadi-kdmya-sdnnidhya 
-sandthikrta-daivatah 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
239 
brahmalokapta-canddlady 
asesa-prdni-sdrthapah 
Sri Visnu fulfills all the desires of the demigods, headed by 
Brahma; He is the master of the demigods, and He awards 
the supreme goal of life to all living entities, beginning from 
Brahma down to the dog-eaters. 
Text 127 
svarnita-gardabhasvddi- 
cirdyodhydbalaikakrt 
rdmddvitiyah saumitri- 
laksmana-prahatendrajit 
He is the life and soul of the inhabitants of Ayodhya, including 
the dogs, asses and horses. He is nondifferent from Rama and 
He inspired Laksmana, the son of Sumitra, to defeat Indrajit. 
Text 128 
visnu-bhaktdsivdmhah ksit- 
pddukd-rdjya-nirvrtah 
bharato 'sahya-gandharva- 
kotighno lavandntakah 
Sri Visnu awards auspiciousness to His devotees, He gave His 
shoes for the sake of overseeing the rule of Ayodhya, and He 
expanded Himself as Bharata. He is the killer of the sinful 
Gandharvas, the vanquisher of Lavanasura, .. . 
Text 129 
satrughno vaidyardd 
ayurveda-garbhausadhi-patih 
nitydnitya-karo dhanvantarir 
yajno jagad dharah 
. . . Satrughna, the most expert physician, the reservoir of 
Ayurvedic medicine, the source of all temporary and eternal 


Sri Narada-paScaratra • Fourth Ratra 
objects, Dhanvantari, the personification of sacrifice, the 
deliverer of the entire world, . .. 
Text 130 
surya-vighnah surd-jivo 
daksineso dvija-priyah 
chinha-murdhopadesdrka- 
tanuja-krta-maitrikdh 
. . . the protector of the sun-god, the life and soul of all saintly 
persons, the master of magnanimous personalities, and dear 
to the brdhmanas. He made friends with the son of the person 
whose head was severed,. . . 
Text 131 
sesdnga-sthdpita-narah 
kapilah kardamdtmajah 
yogatmaka-dhyana-bhanga- 
sagardtmaja-bhasmakrt 
. .. and He lies down on the bed of Ananta Sesa. He incarnates 
as Kapila, He is the son of Kardama, and He burnt to ashes 
the sons of King Sagara when His meditation was disturbed by 
them. 
Text 132 
dharmo visvendra-surabhi- 
patih suddhdtma-bhavitah 
sambhu-tripura-ddhaika- 
sthairya-visva-rathoddhatah 
He is the Lord of Dharma, Indra and Surabhi and is always 
situated in the mode of pure goodness. He pacified Siva as he 
was seated on his chariot, fighting the demon, Tripura. 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Vi^u 
Text 133 
visvatmasesa-rudrdrtha- 
siras cheddksatd-krtih 
vdjapeyddi-ndmdgnir 
veda-dharma-pardyanah 
Sri Visnu is the life and soul of the universe. He often cuts off 
the heads of the demons for the sake of Siva and Sesa. He is the 
form of the sacrificial fire known as vdjapeya, the protector of 
the Vedic pinciples of religion,. . . 
Text 134 
sveta-dvipa-patih sdnkhya- 
pranetd sarva-siddhirat 
visva-prakdsita-dhydna- 
yogo moha-tamisra-hd 
. . . the Lord of Svetadvipa, the originator of the Sdnkhya 
philposophy, and the master of all mystic perfections. He 
undergoes meditation for the purpose of exhibiting the cosmic 
manifestation. He brings His devotees out from the darkness 
of ignorance,. . . 
Text 135 
bhakta-sambhu-jito 
daitydmrta-vdpi-samas tapah 
mahd-pralaya-visvaiko 
'dvitiyo 'khila-daityardt 
. . . He is controlled by the love of His dear devotee, Sambhu; 
and He deprived the demons of their share of the nectar. He is 
the cause of the final dissolution of the material creation, one 
without a second, the chastiser of the demons, . . . 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 136 
sesa-devah sahasrdksah 
sahasrdnghri-siro-bhujah 
phanl phani-phand- 
kdrayojitdbdhy ambuda-ksitih 
:.. and is nondifferent from Lord Sesa. He possesses thousands 
of eyes, legs, heads, hands and hoods as He rests on the 
ocean. 
Text 137 
kdldgni-mdra-janako 
musaldstro haldyudhah 
nildmbaro vdruniso 
mano-vdkkdya-dosa-hd 
Sri Visnu manifests the fire of destruction in His form as Rudra, 
holds a club and plough in His hands, and has a complexion 
like the blue sky. He is the husband of VarunI; the destroyer of 
offenses created by one's body, mind and speech;. . . 
Text 138 
sva-santosa-trpti-mdtrah 
pdtitaika-dasdnanah 
bali-samyamano ghoro 
rauhineyah pralamba-hd 
. . . and is always self-satisfied. He destroyed the ten-headed 
Ravana, and He is the Lord of Bali, very grave, the son of RohinI, 
and the killer of Pralambasura. 
Text 139 
mustikaghno dvivid-hd 
kdlindi-bhedano balah 
revati-ramanah purva- 
bhaktir evdcyutdgrajah 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
243 
Sri Visnu killed Mustika, He killed Dvividha gorilla, and He 
pulled the river Kalindl with His plough. He is Balarama, the 
enjoyer of Revati, the bestower of devotional service as practiced 
in Vraja, the elder brother of Krsna,. . . 
Text 140 
devakl-vasudevottho 
'diti-kasyapa-nandanah 
vdrsneyah sdtvatdm sresthah 
saurir yadu-kulodvahah 
. . . the son of DevakI and Vasudeva, the beloved son of Aditi 
and Kasyapa, the scion of the Vrsni dynasty, and the best among 
exalted personalities. He has appeared in the Sura dynasty and 
is the ornament of the Yadu dynasty. 
Text 141 
nardkrtih purna-brahma 
savyasdd parantapah 
brahmddi-kdmand-nitya 
-jagat-parveta-saisavah 
Sri Visnu is the Supreme Lord, appearing in a human-like form; 
the Supreme Brahman; capable of releasing arrows with both 
hands; and the killer of His enemies. To fulfill the desires of 
devotees like Brahma, He appeared as a transcendental child. 
Text 142 
putandghnah sakata-bhid 
yamaldrjuna-bhanjanah 
vatsdsurdrih kesighno 
dhenukdrir gavisvarah 
He killed the witch Putana, broke the Sakata cart, uprooted 
the yamala-arjuna trees, killed Vatsasura, destroyed the Kesi 
demon, and killed Dhenukasura. He is the Lord of the cows. 


244 
Sr! Narada-painicaratra • Fourth RAtra 
Text 143 
damodaro gopa-devo 
yasoddnanda-kdrakah 
kaliya-marddanah sarva- 
gopa-gopt-jana-priyah 
He was bound by His mother with ropes, He is the life and soul 
of the cowherd men, He gives pleasure to mother Yasoda, He 
chastised the Kaliya serpent, and He is very dear to the gopts. 
Text 144 
lila-govardhana-dharo 
govindo gokulotsavah 
aiista-mathanah kdmonmatta 
gopi-vimuktidah 
He lifted Govardhana Hill with ease. He is the Lord and master 
of the cows, the pleasure of the people of Gokula, and the killer 
of Aristasura. He fulfilled the desires of the gopis, who were 
afflicted with transcendental passion. 
Text 145 
sadyah kubalaydpida- 
ghdtl cdnura-mardanah 
karhsdrir ugrasenddi- 
rdjya-sthdyya 'rihd 'marah 
He killed the elephant Kuvalayapida, eliminated the wrestler 
Canura, killed Karhsa, and installed Ugrasena as the King 
of Mathura. He is the slayer of His enemies and is eternally 
existing. 
Text 146 
sudharmdnkita-bhuloko 
jardsandha-baldntakah 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
245 
tyakta-bhakta-jardsandha 
bhimasena-yasah pradah 
Sri Visnu re-established religious principles; relieved the earth 
of Jarasandha's oppression; and had Jarasandha killed by 
Bhima, just to give credit to His devotee. 
Text 147 
sandipani-mrtapatya- 
data kalantakadijit 
rukmini-ramano rukmi- 
sdsano narakdntakrt 
He returned the dead son of His teacher, Sandipani Muni; 
He defeated sinful kings, such as Kalayavana, He enjoyed the 
company of Rukmini, He chastised Rukmi, and He put an end 
to Narakasura. 
Text 148 
samasta-naraka-trdtd 
sarua-bhupati-kotijit 
samasta-sundari-kdnto 
'surdrir garuda-dhvajah 
He delivers all living entities and He conquered the powerful 
warriors who were inimical to Him. He is the beloved Lord of 
all beautiful women and the killer of the demons. He mounts a 
chariot decorated with a flag of Garuda. 
Text 149 
ekdki jita-rudrdrka- 
marud dpo 'khilesvarah 
devendra-darpa-ha 
kalpa-drumdlankrta-bhutalah 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Sri Visnu is one without a second;' the conquerer of Siva, Surya 
and Vayu; the supreme controller of all; the destroyoer of 
Indra's pride; and He who beautified the earth by decorating it 
with the pdrijdta flower from heaven. 
Text 150 
bdna-bdhu-sahasracchit- 
skandhddi-gana-kotijit 
lildjita-mahddevo 
mahddevaika-pujitah 
He severed the one thousand arms of Banasura, vanquished 
expert warriors like Kartikeya, and defeated Mahadeva as one 
of His pastimes. He is the Lord who is worshiped by Mahadeva 
with firm determination. 
Text 151 
indrdrthdrjufia-nirmatsur 
jayadah pandavaikadhrk 
kdsi-rdja-siras chettd 
rudra-sakty eka-mardanah 
He awarded fearlessness to Arjuna, gave victory to the Pandavas, 
enabled the Pandavas to remain together, severed the head of 
Kasiraja, and belittled the prowess of Siva. 
Text 152 
visvesvara-prasadddhyah 
kdsi-rdja-sutdrdanah 
sambhu-pratijnd-pdtd ca 
svayambhu-gana-pujakah 
He displayed mercy upon the controller of the universe (Siva), 
killed the son of Kasiraja, kept the promise made by Siva intact, 
and worshiped the followers of Brahma. 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
Text 153 
kdslsa-gana-kotighno 
loka-siksa-dvijarcakah 
siva-tivra-tapo-vasyah 
pura siba-vara-pradah 
He killed millions of soldiers belonging to the King of Kasi; 
worshiped the brdhmanas, just to set the example; and was 
satisfied by Siva's severe penance. He is the original personality 
and the giver of benedictions to Siva. 
Text 154 
gaydsura-pratijnddhrk 
svdmsa-sarikara-pujakah 
siva-kanyd-vrata- 
patih krsna-rupa-sivdrihd 
He accepted the challenge of Gayasura; and adored Sahkara, 
who is His plenary portion. He is the objective of the vow of 
Siva's daughter and the killer of the dark-complexioned enemy 
of Siva. 
Text 155 
mahdlaksmi-vapur gaurt- 
trdno devala-vdta-hd 
vinidra-mu cakundaika- 
brahmdstra-yuvandsvahrt 
He manifests the form of Mahalaksml. He is the deliverer 
of ParvatI and the killer of the demon, Devala. He caused 
Mucukunda to bum Kalayavana to ashes. 
Text 156 
akruro 'kru-mukhyaika- 
bhakta-svacchanda-muktidah 


248 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth RAtra 
sabala-stri-jala- 
knddmrtavdpi-krtdrnavah 
He is very kind-hearted and He awards benedictions to the 
devotees who are honest and well-behaved. He manifests an 
ocean of transcendental pastimes in which He enjoys sporting 
in the water, along with the cowherd boys and girls. 
Text 157 
yamund-patir dnita- 
pari nlta-dvijdtmakah 
snddma-sanku-bhaktdrtha- 
bhumydnitendra-bhairavah 
He is the husband of Yamuna, and He is very respectful to the 
brdhmanas and very dear to them. He is the life and soul of 
Sridama and Sahku, and He is the Lord who forced powerful 
kings to remain kneeling. 
Text 158 
durvrtta-sisupdlaika- 
muktikoddharakesvarah 
dcanddlddikarh prdpya 
dvdraka-nidhi-kotikrt 
He is the lion-like personality who delivered the miscreant, 
Sisupala; the ultimate goal of all living entities, including dog 
eaters; and an ocean of nectar for the inhabitants of Dvaraka. 
Text 159 
brahmastra-dagdha- 
garbhastha-panksij 
jlvanaikakrt parinita-dvija- 
sutdnetd 'rjuna-maddpahah 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
He saved the life of Pariksit when he was being burnt by the 
powerful heat of the brahmdstra and He married the daughter 
of a brdhmana. At the end, He withdrew Aijuna's prowess. 
Text 160 
gudha-mudrdkrti-grasta- 
bhismddy akhila-gauravah 
pdrthdrtha-khanditdsesa- 
divydstrah pdrtha-mohabhrt 
Sri Visnu enhanced the prestige of Bhlsma as he was lying on 
a bed of arrows, He accepted the role of Aijuna's charioteer 
and protected him from the onslaught of innumerable celestial 
weapons. He dispelled Aijuna's illusion. 
Text 161 
brahma-sdpacchala- 
dhvasta-yddavo vibhavdvahah 
anarigo jita-gauriso 
rati-kdntah sadepsitah 
He caused the annihilation of the Yadu dynasty by having a 
brdhmana curse them. He is the original cause of all opulence, 
the transcendental Cupid, the conqueror of Parvati's husband, 
the beloved Lord of Rati, and the most coveted object of all 
exalted souls. 
Text 162 
puspesur visva-vijayl 
smarah kdmesvari-patih 
usd-patir visva-hetur 
visva-trpto 'dhi-purusah 
He releases the arrow of transcendental lust, He is the conqurer 
of the universe, the object of meditation, the husband of 


250 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
the goddess of transcendental passion, the husband of Usa, 
the original cause of the cosmic manifestation, the giver of 
satisfaction to all within the universe, the supreme enjoyer, . 
Text 163 
caturdtmd catur varnas 
catur veda-vidhdyakah 
catur visvaika-visvdtmd 
sarvotkrstdsu kotisu 
. . . and the origin of the quadruple expansions. He appears 
in four yugas in four different colors. He is the compiler of the 
four Vedas, the life and soul of the material and spiritual worlds, 
the best among millions of exalted personalities, . . . 
Text 164 
dsraydtmd purdnarsir 
vydsah sdstra-sahasrakrt 
mahdbhdrata-nirmdtd 
kavindro vddardyanah 
... the ultimate shelter of all living entities, and the oldest sage. 
He has incarnated as Vyasadeva and compiled thousands of 
revealed scriptures. He composed the great epic, Mahdbhdrata. 
He is the foremost of poets, the son of Vyasadeva, .. . 
Text 165 
krsna-dvaipdyanah sarva- 
purusdrthaka-bodhakah 
veddnta-karttd brahmaika- 
vyanjakah puru-vamsakrt 
. Krsna Dvaipayana, the bestower of the four objectives of 
human life, the compiler of Vedanta, the preacher of Brahman 
realization, the inaugurator of the Puru dynasty, . . . 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
Text 166 
buddho dhydnajitdsesa- 
deva-devo jagat-priyah 
nirdyudho jagaj jaitrah 
snghano dusta-mohanah 
. . . Buddha, the Lord of unlimited demigods who meditate 
upon Him, the object of love for the inhabitants of the universe, 
without any rival, the conquerer of the universe, and extremely 
attractive. He bewilders the minds of the miscreants. 
Text 167 
daitya-veda-bahiskarttd 
veddrtha-sruti-gopakah 
suddhodanir nasta-distah 
sukhadah sad asat patih 
He expertly refuted athiestic philosophy, He conceals the 
confidential purport of the Vedas, He enjoys food offered by 
His devotees, He destroys the devotees' sinful reactions, and 
He gives happiness to all. He is the ultimate sanctioner of all 
good and bad behavior. 
Text 168 
yathd-yogydkhila-krpah 
sarua-sunyo 'khilestadah 
catus koti-prthak- 
tattvam prajndpdramitesvarah 
He displays mercy toward everyone, according to one's 
qualifications. He is free from all material connections, the 
supplier of all desired objects, the Absolute Truth situated 
beyond the three modes of material nature, and the controller 
of the entire cosmic manifestation. 


252 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 169 
pasanda-sruti-margena 
pasanda-sruti-gopakah 
kalkt visnu-yasah 
putah kali-kdla-vilopakah 
Sn Visnu skillfully obscures the real meaning of the Vedas by 
propogating the path of athiesm. He is Kalki, and the son of 
Visnuyasa. He brings about an end to the age of Kali. 
Text 170 
samasta-mleccha-hastaghnah 
sarua-sista-dvijatikrt 
sa tya-pravarttakau deva- 
dvija-dtrgha-ksudhapahah 
He annihilates all the mlecchas and protects gentle and 
brdhminical people. He is the propounder of truth, and He 
maintains the demigods and saintly people. 
Text 171 
asva-gavadi-vedena 
prthm-durgati-ndsanah 
sadyah ksmdnanta-laksmikrt 
nasta-nihsesa-dharmakrt 
He destroys the distresses of the people of the earth through the 
propogation of Vedic knowledge. He is able to instantaneously 
produce unlimited opulence and He can complete His mission 
effortlessly. 
Text 172 
ananta-svarga-ydgaika- 
hema-purndkhila-dvijah 
asddhyaika-jagac chdstd 
visva-vandyo-jaya-dhvajah 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
253 
Sri Visnu inaugurates the performance of unlimitedly 
opulent sacrificial performances and fulfills the desires of the 
brdhmanas. He is difficult to attain and He awards punishment 
to the deviant living entities. He is worshiped throughout the 
universe, the flag of victory, . . . 
Text 173 
atma-tattvadhipah kartr- 
srestho vidhir umd-patih 
bhartuh sresthah prajesdgryo 
marici-janakdgranih 
. . . the preacher of the science of self-realization, the ultimate 
doer of everything, the creator, the maintainer of all created 
beings, the master of the controllers of the universe, the Lord 
of Brahma,. . . 
Text 174 
kasyapo devardd indrah 
prahlddo daityardt sasi 
naksatreso ravis tejah 
sresthah sukrah kavisvarah 
. Kasyapa, Devarata, Indra, Prahlada, the chastiser of the 
demons, the moon-god, the Lord of the stars, the sun-god, the 
best of all illuminating objects, Venus, the master of Brahma, 
Text 175 
maharsirdt bhrgur visnur 
ddityeso balih svardt 
vdyur vahni suci-sresthah 
sahkaro rudrardt guruh 
. . . the crest jewel among all the great sages, Bhrgu, the 
almighty Lord, the Lord of the twelve Adityas, Bali, supremely 


254 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
independent, Vayu, Agni, the best among all pure spiritual 
beings, Sahkara, Rudra, the spiritual master, . .. 
Text 176 
vidvattamas citraratho 
gandharvdgryo vasuttamah 
varnddir agryd stri gauri 
saktydgryd sris ca ndradah 
. . . the topmost learned personality; Citraratha, the king of the 
Gandharvas; the Lord of the Vasus; the creator of the varnas, 
the original Personality of Godhead; the creator of the form 
of a woman; the goddess of fortune; ParvatI; the great sage, 
Narada, . . . 
Text 177 
devarsirdt pdndavdgryo 
'rjuno narada-vddardt 
pavanah pavanesdno 
varuno yddasdm-patih 
. . . who is the sage among the demigods; the Lord of the 
Pandavas; and Aijuna. He confirms the philosophy of Narada. 
He is Pavana, the master of Pavana, Varuna, and the Lord of 
the Yadus. 
Text 178 
gangd-tirthottamoddhrtarh 
chatrakdgryarii barausadham 
annarh sudarsandstrdgryo 
bajra-praharanottamam 
Sri Visnu made Gahga the most sacred river, He gives shelter 
to all and He awards benedictions to those who deserve them. 
He is the grain of rice, the Sudarsana cakra, the prowess of the 
thunderbolt weapon, ... 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
Text 179 
uccaihsrava vdjirdja 
airdvata ibhesvarah 
arundhaty ekapatniso 
hy asvattho 'sesa-vrksardt 
. . . Ucchaihsrava, the king of horses that emerged from the 
ocean of milk; Airavata, the king of elephants; the Lord of 
ArundhatI; the sacred asvattha tree; the origin of unlimited 
desire trees,. . . 
Text 180 
adhydtma-vidyd-vidyatma 
pranavas chandasdm varah 
merur giri-patir mdrgo 
mdsdgryah kdla-sattamah 
.. . the propounder of spiritual knowledge; the transcendental 
vibration orh; the best of poems; Mount Sumeru, the king of 
hills; the auspicious path; the first among the months; the best 
of auspicious times, . . . 
Text 181 
dinddyatma puwa-siddhih 
kapilah sdma-vedardt 
tdrksah khagendra-rtvagiyo 
vasantah kalpa-pddapah 
. . . the cause of day and night; eternally perfect; Kapila; the 
Sama-veda; Kasyapa; Garuda; the best of seasons, spring; the 
wish-fulfilling tree;. . . 
Text 182 
ddtr-sresthah kdmadhenur 
drtighndgryah surottamah 


256 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth RAtra 
cinta-manir guru- 
srestho mata hitatamah pita 
. . . the most charitable personality, the wish-fulfilling cow, 
expert in mitigating the distress of others, the best among the 
demigods, the spiritual gem, the best of spiritual masters, the 
supreme mother, the benefactor of all, the supreme father, .. 
Text 183 
sirhho mrgendro nagendro 
vasukir bhudharo nrpah 
vanaso brahmanas 
cdntakkarandgryarh namo namah 
. . . the lion, which is the king of animals; the king of serpents, 
Vasuki; Sesa; the emperor; the Lord of the four varnas-, and 
the topmost brahmana. He dwells within the hearts of all living 
entities. 
O Lord, I offer my repeated obeisances unto You. 
Text 184 
ity etad-vasudeuasya 
visitor ndma-sahasrakam 
sarvdparddha-samanarh 
pararh bhakti-vibarddhanam 
These one thousand holy names of Vasudeva, Lord Visnu, 
neuralize all the offenses of the chanter and award him pure 
devotional service. 
Text 185 
aksaya-brahmalokddi- 
sarvdrthdpty eka-sddhanam 
visnu-lokaika-sopdnam 
sarva-duhkha-vindsanam 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
257 
The chanting of the one thousand names of Lord Visnu awards 
one the four objectives of human life and ultimately, the 
attainment of the transcendental abode of Lord Visnu. The 
abode of Visnu is distinct from the material planets because 
in the abode of the Lord, all kinds of material miseries are 
conspicuous by their absence. 
Text 186 
samasta-sukhadarh satyarh 
pararh nirvdna-ddyakam 
kdma-krodhddi-nihsesa- 
mano-mala-visodhanam 
By reciting these one thousand names of Lord Visnu, one 
achieves all sources of happiness in this life and is delivered 
from material existence after death. The chanting of these holy 
names will purify one's mind of the contamination of lust and 
anger. 
Text 187 
sdntidarh pdvanarh nfndrh 
mahd pdtakindm api 
sarvesdm prdnindm dsu 
sarvdbhista-phala-pradam 
The chanting of the thousand names of Lord Visnu purifies the 
mind of even the most sinful person. These holy names of the 
Lord are beneficial for all living entities. 
Text 188 
sarva-vighna-prasamanarh 
sarvdrista-vindsanam 
ghora-duhsvapna-samanath 
tivra-ddridrya-ndsanam 


258 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth RAtra 
By reciting these holy names of the Lord, all of one's obstacles 
and inauspicious conditions will be vanquished in the very near 
future. This chanting will remove even the most severe distress 
and poven . 
Text 189 
tdpa-traydpaharh guhyarh 
dhana-dhanya-yasas karam 
sarvaisvarya-pradarh sarva- 
siddhidarh sarva-kdmadam 
The chanting of these holy names counteracts the threefold 
material miseries. It is most confidential and bestows upon one 
wealth, grains and fame. It awards one all kinds of perfection, 
in all circumstances. 
Text 190 
tirtha-yajna-tapo-ddna- 
vrata-koti-phala-pradam 
aprajn a-jddya-samanarh 
sarua-vidyd-pravarttakam 
The result one achieves by traveling to holy places of pilgrimage, 
performing sacrifice, giving charity, and observing other vows 
can be achieved simply by reciting these one thousand names 
of Lord Visnu. This chanting destroys one's ignorance and 
enlightens one with transcendental knowledge. 
Text 191 
rdjyadam rdjya-kdmdndrh 
rogindrh sarva-roganut 
bandhydndrh sutadarh cam 
sarva-srestha-phala-pradam 
Those who desire to rule a kingdom can fulfill their ambition 
by reciting the one thousand names of the Lord. A diseased 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
259 
person can be cured and a barren woman can beget children. 
Indeed, everyone can achieve the highest benefit by chanting 
this Visnu-sahasra-ndma mantra. 
Text 192 
astra-grama-visa-dhvamsi 
graha-plda-vinasanam 
mangalyam punyam dyusyam 
sravandt pathandj japdt 
This chanting can neutralize the effects of weapons and poison 
and remove the miseries caused by inauspicious planets. By 
hearing, chanting and discussing these holy names—one's 
piety, auspiciousness and duration of life are enhanced. 
Text 193 
sakrd asydkhild veddh 
sdngd mantras ca kotisah 
purdna-sdstram smrtayah 
pathitdh pdthitds tathd 
Simply by chanting these holy names of the Lord, one attains 
the result of studying the Vedas, reciting millions of mantras, 
and studying the 
Text 194 
japtvdsya slokam slokdrdham 
padarh vd pathatah priye 
nityam sidhyati sarvesdm 
acirdrt kisuto 'khilam 
My dear one, simply by chanting one line, half of a line, or 
eVen one word of this mantra, one can instantly obtain all 
perfection. 


260 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 195 
prdnena sadrsarh sadyah 
praty aharh sarva-karmasu 
idarh bhadre tvayd gopyarh 
pdthyarh svarthaika-siddhaye 
O gentle lady, you should keep this chanting very confidentially, 
just as you would protect your very life and soul. You should 
recite these one thousand names of the Lord to obtain your 
real self-interest. 
Text 196 
ndvaisnavdya ddtyavyarh 
vikalpopahatdtmane 
bhakti-sraddhd-vihindya 
visnu-sdmdnya-darsine 
You should not reveal these holy names to those who are 
faithless, who are not inclined toward the devotional service of 
the Lord, who consider Lord Visnu to be an ordinary human 
being, and who are non-devotees. 
Text 197 
deyarh putrdya sisydya 
suddhdya hita-kdmyayd 
mat-prasaddd rte nedarh 
grahisyanty alpa-medhasah 
One should instruct these one thousand names of Lord Visnu 
to a pure-hearted disciple or son, with a desire to benefit him. 
Less intelligent people will not appreciate the chanting of these 
holy names because they are bereft of the Lord's mercy. 
Text 198 
kalau sadyah phalarh kalpa- 
grdmam esyati naradah 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
261 
lokdndm bhdgya-hindndrh 
yena duhkham vinasyati 
The great sage, Narada, will appear in Kali-yuga, in the village 
of Kalpagrama, with a desire to benefit the unfortunate people 
of this world by removing their distress. 
Text 199 
ksetresu vaisnavesv 
etad arydvatte bhavisyati 
ndsti visnoh param satyam 
ndsti-visnoh param padam 
If these holy names are chanted in a holy place in the land 
of Aryavarta, they will award one increased benefit. Know for 
certain that there is no truth superior to Lord Visnu, and no 
goal superior to Him. 
Text 200 
ndsti visnoh param jndnam 
ndsti mokso hy avaisnavah 
ndsti-visnoh paro-maniro 
ndsti-visnoh param tapah 
There is no knowledge superior to the understanding of Lord 
Visnu, no liberation superior to association with Lord Visnu, 
no mantra superior to the holy names of Lord Visnu, and no 
penance superior to surrender to Lord Visnu. 
Text 201 
ndsti visnoh param dhydnam 
ndsti mantro hy avaisnavah 
kin tasya bahubhir mantraih 
kirn japair bahu-vistaraih 


262 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
There is no meditation superior to remembrance of Lord 
Visnu's transcendental name, form and pastimes. There is no 
mantra greater than the holy names of Lord Visnu. Considering 
this—what is the use of chanting other mantras in relation to 
Lord Visnu? 
Text 202 
bdjapeya-sahasraih kirn 
bhaktir yasya janardane 
sarua-tirthamayo visnuh 
sarva-sdstramayah prabhuh 
What is the need of performing thousands of vdjapeya sacrifices 
if one is engaged in the devotional service of Lord Visnu? Lord 
Visnu is the most sacred of all sacred places and the goal of all 
religious performances. 
Text 203 
sarva-kratumayo visnuh 
satyarh satyam vaddmy aham 
dbrah ma-sdra-sarvasva m 
sarvam etan mayoditam 
I am telling you the truth—Lord Visnu is the actual enjoyer 
of all sacrifices. I have thus revealed to you the essence of 
everything within the universe. 
Text 204 
in pdruaty uvdca 
dhanydsmy anugrhltdsmi 
krtdrthdsmi jagad-guro 
yan medarh srutam stotram 
tvad-rahasyam sudurlabham 
Sri Parvati said: O spiritual master of the universe, I feel that 
my life has now become successful. I have been greatly favored 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
263 
by you and I am fully satisfied that I have received these most 
confidential prayers from you. 
Text 205 
aho bata mnhat-kastarh 
samasta sukhade haw 
vidyamane 'pi sarvese 
mudhdh klisyanti sarhsrtau 
How pathetic it is! Although the Supreme Lord possesses all of 
these transcendental qualities, foolish people suffer continuous 
distress in this world rather than worship Him. 
Text 206 
yam uddisya-sada ndtho 
maheso 'pi digambarah 
jatilo bhasma-liptdhgas 
tapasvl viksito janaih 
Even you, the master of the material nature, forget your dress, 
keep matted hair, smear ashes all over your body, and undergo 
severe penance for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord. 
Text 207 
ato 'dhiko na devo 'sti 
laksmi-kdntdn madhu-dvisah 
yat tat tvarh cintayate 
nityam tvayd yogisvarena hi 
Therefore, it must be concluded that there is no one greater 
than the Supreme Lord, Visnu, the killer of the Madhu demon 
and the husband of Laksml. Despite being the master of all 
mystic yogis, you are constantly engaged in meditation upon 
Him. 


Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 208 
atah pararh kim adhikarh 
padarh sri-purusottamdt 
tam avijfidya tan mudhd 
yajante jfidna-mdninah 
Who can be equal to or superior to the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead? The so-called learned scholars adopt various 
processes of worship without understanding His actual glories. 
Text 209 
musitdsmi tvayd ndtha 
dram yad ayam isvarah 
prakdsito na me yasya 
dattddyd divya-saktayah 
O my lord, I am eternally grateful to you because today, you 
have revealed to me the divine potency that you had previously 
kept secret. 
Text 210 
aho saruesvaro visnuh 
sarva-devottamottamah 
bhavad adi-gurur mudhaih 
sdmdnya iva laksyate 
Lord Visnu alone is the supreme controller of all existence. 
He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is your original 
spiritual master. Alas! Fools consider Him to be an ordinary 
man when He appears within this world as an incarnation. 
Text 211 
mahiyasdm hi mdhdtmyam 
bhajamdndn bhajanti cet 
dvisato 'pi tathd papa 
anupeksyante ksamdlaydh 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
Great souls easily realize the Supreme Lord, whereas sinful- 
minded people who are envious of the Lord foolishly neglect 
their ultimate shelter. 
Text 212 
maydpi bdlye sva-pituh 
prajfid drstd bubhuksitdh 
duhkhddasaktdh svarh 
posturh sriyd nddhydsitdh purd 
In my childhood, I displayed compassion for such foolish 
people, who were unable to even lead their families toward the 
path of auspiciousness. 
Text 213 
tvayd sarhvardhitdbhis ca 
prajdbhir vibudhddayah 
visasadbhih sva-saktyddydh 
samuhrn mitra-bdndhavdh 
You had bestowed great mercy upon Indra and others, so that 
according to their respective qualifications, they are now able 
to wander about freely in this world. 
Text 214 
tvayd vind kva devatvam 
kva dhairyarh kva parigrahah 
sarve bhavanti jlvanto 
ydtandh sirasi sthitdh 
Supremacy, patience and perfection of life cannot be achieved 
without your mercy. People in this world struggle hard for 
existence due to forgetfulness of you. 
Text 215 
tdmrte naiva dharmdrihau 
kdmo mokso 'pi durlabhah 


Sri Narada-pa5icaratra • Fourth Ratra 
ksudhitdndrh durgatdndrh 
kuto yoga-samddhayah 
Without your mercy—religiosity, economic development, 
sense gratification, and liberation are very difficult to achieve. 
How can people afflicted by hunger and distress attain self- 
realization? 
Texts 216-218 
sd ca sarhsdra-sdraikd 
sarva-lokaika-pdlikd 
vasyd sd kamald yasya 
tyaktvd tvdm api sankarah 
sriyd dharmena sauryena 
rupendrjava-sampadd 
sarvdtisaya-viryena sampurna 
asya mahdtmanah 
kas tena tulyatdmeti 
deva-devena visnund 
yasydrhsdrhsaka-bhdgena 
vind sarvarh viliyate 
O Mahadeva! Kamala, the goddess of fortune, has left you and 
taken shelter of Lord Visnu, who is under the control of great 
souls that are endowed with opulence, religious principles, 
prowess, beauty and magnanimity. Therefore, who can compare 
with the Supreme Lord, Visnu? Without the presence of His 
plenary portion, everything would be instantly annihilated. 
Text 219 
jagad etat tathd prdhur 
dosdyaitad vimohitdh 
ndsya janma jard mrtyur 
ndprdpyam vdrtham eva vd 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Visnu 
The whole world is bewildered because material existence is 
full of defects. The existence of the Supreme Lord is untinged 
by birth, death or old age. There is nothing within existence 
that is not owned and controlled by Him. 
Text 220 
tathapi kurute dharman 
palanaya satdrh krte 
vijndpaya mahddevam 
pranamyaikam mahesvaram 
And yet. He engages in activities for the sake of maintaining 
the status of saintly persons. He protects religious principles 
and is the only proper object of adoration. 
Text 221 
avadhdrya tathd sdharh 
kdnta kdmada sdsvata 
kdmddy dsakta-cittatvdt 
kin tu sarvesvara prabho 
O beloved lord of my life, I have heard this prayer from you 
with full attention. 
Text 222 
tvan-mayatvdt prasadad 
vd saknomi pathitum nacet 
visnoh sahasra-ndmaitat 
praty aharh vrsabha-dhvaja 
ndmnaikena tu yena sydt 
tat-phalarh bruhi me prabho 
O Vrsabhadhvaja! If, due to restlessness, I am unable to 
concentrate on this prayer and pronounce the names properly 
then kindly tell me a single holy name that I can chant instead 
of the whole prayer. Let me chant this holy name daily and 


268 
Sri Narada-paScaratra • Fourth RAtra 
obtain the same result as I would by chanting the one thousand 
names of Lord Visnu. 
Text 223 
sri mahadeva uvdca 
rdma rdmeti rdmeti 
rama-rdmo manorame 
sahasra-ndmabhis tulyam 
rdma-ndma vardnane 
Sri Mahadeva said: O beautiful-faced lady, just a single holy 
name, Rama, is equal to the one thousand names of Lord 
Visnu. 
Text 224 
atha sarvdni tirthdni 
jalarh caiva praydgajam 
visnor ndma-sahasrasya 
kaldrh ndrhanti sodasim 
The holy water from all the sacred places in this world cannot 
be compared to even one-sixteenth part of the glories of Sri 
Visnu-sahasra-ndma. 
Thus ends the translation of the third chapter of the Fourth 
Rdtra of Sri Ndrada-pan cardtra. 


Chapter 4 
Narada Muni Glorifies Lord Visnu 
Text 1 
in mahadeva uvdca 
srnu devi pravaksydmi 
stotram parama-durlabham 
yajjndtvd na punar gacchen 
naro niraya-ydtandm 
Sri Mahadeva said: O goddess, I am now going to reveal to you a 
most confidential prayer. Kindly listen to me with full attention 
for by learning this prayer, a person will never again have to 
suffer the pain of hellish life. 
Text 2 
kavacam ca mahesdni 
trailokya-marigalddikam 
ndraddya ca yat proktam 
brahma-putrena dhimatd 
sanat-kumdrena purd 
yogindra-guru-vartmand 
O wife of Mahesa, I am now going to explain to you the kavaca 
known as the trailokya-mangala kavaca, which was spoken to 
Narada by the most intelligent son of Brahma, the great sage, 
Sanat-kumara, who had previously received it from his spiritual 
master, who is the foremost of yogis. 
Text 3 
in narada uvdca 
prasida bhagavan mahyam 
ajndndt-kunthitdtmane 
269 


Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fourth Ratra 
tavdrighri-parikaja-rajo- 
rdginlih bhaktim uttamdm 
The great sage, Narada, said: O Lord, I am a most ignorant 
person and my mind is contaminated. Therefore, be merciful 
and bestow upon me the highest platform of devotional service, 
which attracts one to Your lotus feet. 
Text 4 
aja praslda bhagavan 
namita-dyuti-panjara 
aprameya prasldasmad 
duhkhahan purusottama 
O unborn Lord, You are immesurable, the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, and You mitigate our distress. Please be kind to 
me. 
Text 5 
sva-samvedya prasldasmad 
anandatmann andmaya 
acintya-sdra visvdtman 
praslda paramesvara 
O supreme controller! O knower of Your own self. O blissful 
Lord! O inconceivable Lord of the universe, please be merciful 
to me. 
Text 6 
praslda tunga tungdndrh 
praslda siva sobhana 
praslda guna-gambhira 
gambhirdndm mahadyute 
O Lord who is greater than the greatest! O all-auspicious and 
all-attractive Lord! You possesses unfathomable transcendental 


Narada Muni Glorifies Lord Visnu 
qualities. You are the most enlightened among all enlightened 
personalities. Please be kind to me. 
Text 7 
prasida vyakta vistirna 
vistlrndndm agocara 
prasiddrdmrdra-jatindrh 
praslddntdnta-ddyinam 
O Lord who sometimes becomes manifest before us! You cannot 
be perceived by those who rely upon their limited material 
senses. You are the most soothing among all soothing objects. 
You are the beginning, middle and end of everything. Please 
be merciful to me. 
Text 8 
guror gariyah sarvesa 
praslddnanta dehindm 
jaya mddhava mdydtmana 
jaya sdsvata sankhabhrt 
O controller of all manifestations! O unlimited Lord of the 
embodied souls! O supreme spiritual master, please be kind 
to me. O controller of maya! O Madhava! O eternal Lord! All 
glories to You, who holds a conch shell in Your hand! 
Text 9 
jaya sankhadhara sriman 
jaya nandaka-nandana 
jaya cakra-gadd-pdne 
jaya deva jandrdana 
O Supreme Lord, holder of the conch, all glories to You! O 
son of Nanda, You carry a disc in Your hand. O Janardana, all 
glories to You. 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 10 
jaya ratna-varabaddha- 
kiritakrdnta-mastaka 
jaya paksi-patic 
chayaniruddharka-kardruna 
O Supreme Lord, Your head is decorated with a jeweled crown. 
You ride on the back of Garuda and You appear reddish because 
of the reflection of the sunlight on Your body. All glories to 
You. 
Text 11 
namaste narakdrdte 
namaste madhusudana 
namas te lalitd-pdnga 
namaste nara-kdntaka 
O Supreme Lord, appearing in a human-like form! O killer of 
Madhu, Your bodily limbs are most pleasing to the eyes. You 
are the slayer of Narakasura. My obeisances are unto You. 
Text 12 
namah papa-haresdna 
namah sarva-bhaydpaha 
namah sambhuta-sarvdtman 
namah sambhrta-kaustubha 
O sun-like personality, You free Your devotees from their sinful 
reactions. You remove everyone's fear. You are the origin of all 
the living entities. You are decorated with a beautiful Kaustubha 
gem. I bow down to You. 
Text 13 
namaste nayandtita 
namaste bhaya-hdraka 


Narada Muni Glorifies Lord Visnu 
namo vibhinna-vesdya 
namah sruti-pathdtiga 
You are most pleasing to the eyes. You remove the fear of Your 
devotees. You are beyond the perception of the Vedas. O Lord, 
You appear in various incarnations. I offer my obeisances unto 
You. 
Text 14 
namas tri-murtti-bhedena 
svarga-sthity anta-hetave 
visnave tridasdrdti- 
jisnave paramdtmane 
You create, maintain and annihilate the universes in Your three 
forms as the qualitative incarnations. You are the Supersoul, 
Lord Visnu, who vanquishes the enemies of the demigods. 
Texts 15-16 
cakra-bhinndri-cakrdya 
cakrine cakra-ballabha 
visvdya visva-vandydya 
visva-bhutdnuvarttine 
namo 'stu yogi-dhyeydtman 
namo 'stv adhydtma-rupine 
bhakti-praddya bhaktdndm 
namas te bhakti-dayine 
By the attack of Your cakra, the enemy's cakra is broken to 
pieces. You hold the Sudarsana cakra in Your hand. Your cakra 
is very dear to You. You are the form of the universe. You are 
the worshipable Lord of the universe. The inhabitants of the 
universe follow in Your footsteps. My obeisances unto You. 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth RAtra 
O object of meditation for the yogis! O supreme spirit! O giver 
of devotional service to the devotees, I offer my obeisances 
unto You. 
Text 17 
pujanam havanam cejyd 
dhydnam pascdn namas kriyd 
devesa karma sarvarh me 
bhaved dradhanarh tava 
O Lord of the demigods, let my worship, performance of 
sacrifice, meditation, and offering of obeisances be placed at 
Your lotus feet. 
Text 18 
iti havana-japdrccd- 
bhedato visnu-pujd 
niyata-hrdaya-karma 
yas tu mantri cirdya 
sa khalu sakala-kdmdn 
prdpya krsndntardtmd 
ananamrti-vimuktdm 
uttamdm bhaktim eti 
If a devotee who properly chants his mantras performs 
fire sacrifices and worships Lord Visnu within his heart, 
surrendering unto Him wholeheartedly, he certainly achieves 
his desired results. Such a practitioner of devotional service 
becomes liberated from the bondage of birth and death and 
attains the platform of spontaneous devotional service. 
Text 19 
go-gopa-gopikdvitam 
gqpdlarh gosu gopradam 


NArada Muni Glorifies Lord Visnu 
gopair idyam gosahasrair 
naumi gokula-ndyakam 
O Lord of Gokula, You are surrounded by cows, cowherd boys 
and cowherd girls. You give cows in charity. You are always 
worshiped by thousands of cowherd inhabitants of Vraja. O 
Gopala, my humble obeisances unto You. 
Text 20 
pnnayed anayd stutyd 
jaganndtham jaganmayam 
dharmdrtha-kdma-moksdndm 
dptaye purusottamam 
To please the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the 
Lord of the universe and who pervades the universe, and to 
achieve success in religiosity, economic development, sense 
gratification, and liberation, one should offer these prayers to 
the Supreme Lord. 
Thus ends the translation of the fourth chapter of the Fourth 
Rdtra of Sri Ndrada-pahcardtra. 


Chapter 5 
The Trailokya-Mahgala-Kavaca of Sri Krsna 
Text 1 
sri-ndrada uvdca 
bhagavan sarva-dhannajnn 
kavacam yat prakdsitam 
trailokya-mangalam ndma 
krpayd kathaya prabho 
Sri Narada said: O my master, you are the supreme knower of 
religious principles. O lord, please reveal to me the trailokya- 
mangala kavaca. 
Text 2 
in sanatkumdra uvdca 
smu vaksydmi viprendra 
kavacam paramddbhutam 
ndrdyanena kathitam 
krpayd brahmane purd 
Sri Sanat-kumara said: O foremost of brdhmanas, please hear 
attentively as I disclose to you the most wonderful kavaca that 
Lord Narayana had previously revealed to Brahma, out of 
compassion. 
TextS 
brahmand kathitam mahyam 
pararh snehad vaddmi te 
ati-guhyatararh tattvarh 
brahma-mantraugha-vigraham 
After receiving this kavaca, Brahma had explained it to me. 
Now, out of affection for you, I will disclose the confidential 
truth of this supreme mantra. 
277 


Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 4 
yad dhrtvd pathanad brahmd 
srsti vitanute dhruvam 
yad dhrtvd pathandt-pdti 
mahdlaksmir jagat trayam 
By the prowess received from this kavaca, Brahma creates and 
Mahalaksm! protects the three worlds. 
Texts 5-6 
pathanad dhdrandt sambhuh 
sarhhartd sarva-mantravit 
trailokya-janani durgd 
mahisadi-mahdsurdn 
vara-drptdn jaghdnaiva 
pathanad dharanadyatah 
evam indradaya same 
samaisvaryam avdpnuyuh 
Mahadeva has become famous as the knower of all mantras and 
the annihilator of the universe on the strength of reciting these 
mantras. Durga, who is the mother of the three worlds, was able 
to kill the powerful demon, Mahisasura, by the strength of this 
mantra. Similarly, many renowned personalities, such as Indra, 
became qualified to possess great opulence because of chanting 
this mantra. 
Text 7 
idam kavacam atyanta- 
guptam kutrdpi no vadet 
sisydya bhakti-yuktdya 
sadhakdya prakdsayet 
This kavaca is very confidential and as such, you should not 
disclose it to anyone. This kavaca should only be disclosed to 


The Trailokya-Mangala-Kavaca of SrI Krsna 
an honest disciple whose heart is filled with devotion for the 
Supreme Lord. 
Texts 8-9 
sathdya para-sisydya 
dattvd mrtyum avdpnuydt 
tarilokya marigalasydsya 
kavacasya prajdpatih 
rsischandas ca gdyatn 
devo ndrdyanah svayam. 
dharmdrtha-kdma-moksesu 
viniyogah prakirtitah. 
If one gives this kavaca to a cheater, or to someone else's 
disciple, he will die. Prajapati is the predominating sage of the 
trailokya-mangala kavaca. It should be chanted in the Gayatri 
meter. Lord Narayana is the objective of this kavaca. This kavaca 
is capable of awarding one religiosity, economic development, 
sense gratification, and liberation. 
Text 10 
pranavo me sirah pdtu 
namo ndrdyandya ca 
bhdlarh me netra-yugalam 
astdrno bhakti-muktidah 
May the pranava orh protect my head, may the chanting of namo 
ndrdyandya protect my forehead, and may the eight-syllable 
mantra, am namo ndrdyandya, which awards one devotional 
service and liberation, protect my eyes. 
Texts 11-12 
kUm pdydc chrotra-yugmam 
caikdksarah sarva-mohanak 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
klirh-krsnaya sada ghrdnam 
govinddyeti jihnikdm 
gopi-jana-padarh vallabhdya 
svdhdnanarh mama 
astddasdksaro mantrah 
kantham pdtu dasdksarah 
May the all-attractive one-syllable mantra klim protect my ears, 
may the mantra klim krsndya protect my nose, may the mantra 
govinddya protect my tongue, may the eighteen-syllable mantra, 
klim krsndya govinddya gopijana vallabhdya svdha protect my 
face, and may the ten-syllable mantra, gopijana vallabhdya svdha 
protect my throat. 
Texts 13-14 
gopi-jana-padarh vallabhdya 
svdha bhuja-dvayam 
klim glaum klim sydmalahgdya 
namah-skandhau-dasdksarah 
klim krsna klim karau pdydt 
klim krsndydhgato 'vatu 
hrdayam bhuvanesdni klim 
krsndya klim stanau mama 
May the mantra, gopijana vallabhdya svdha protect my arms. May 
the ten-syllable mantra, kUrh glaum khrh sydmalahgdya namah 
protect my shoulders. May the mantra, klim krsna klim protect 
my hands. May the mantra, klim krsndya protect my entire body. 
May the controller of the universe protect my heart, and may 
the mantra, klim krsndya protect my breasts. 
Text 15 
gopdldydgni-jdydntarh 
kuksi-yugmam saddvatu 


The Trailokya-Mangala-Kavaca of ^r! Krsna 
klirh krsndya sadd pdtu 
pdrsva-yugmam anuttamah 
May the mantra, gopdldya svdha always protect my two sides 
above the waist and may the mantra, kltrii krsndya always protect 
my two sides below the waist. 
Texts 16-19 
krsna-govindakau pdtu 
smaradyau ne-yutau manuh 
astdksarah pdtu ndbhi 
krsneti dvayaksaro 'vatu 
prstham klirh krsna kahkdlam 
klirh krsndya dvithdntakah 
sakthini satatarh pdtu 
srirh hnrh klirh krsnathadvayam 
uru saptdksarah pdydt 
trayodasdksaro 'vatu 
srirh hrirh klirh padato 
gopi-jana-ballabha-dantatah 
bhayd svdheti pdyurh vai 
klirh hrirh srirh sadasdrnakah 
jdnuni ca sadd pdtu hrirh 
srirh klirh ca dasdksarah 
May the mantra, klirh krsndya govinddya protect my navel and may 
the two-syllable mantra, krsna protect my back. May the mantra, 
klirh krsna protect my skeleton and may the mantra, klirh krsndya 
thah thah protect my muscles. May the seventeen-syllable mantra, 
srirh hrirh klirh krsna thah thah protect my thighs, and may the 
thirteen-syllable mantra, srirh hrirh klirh gopijanavallabhdya svdha 
protect my anus. May the mantra, klirh hrirh srirh protect my knees, 
and may the mantra, hrirh srirh klirh always protect me. 


282 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth RAtra 
Texts 20-23 
trayodasdksarah pdtu 
jarighe cakrddyuddyudhah 
astddasdksaro hrirh srirh 
purvako virhsad arnakah 
sarvdngam me sadd pdtu 
dvdrakd-ndyako ball 
namo bhagavate pascdd- 
vdsudevdya tat-param 
tdrddyo dvddasdrno 'yam 
prdcydrh mark sarvaddvatu 
srirh hrirh klirh ca dasdrnas tu 
klirh hrirh srirh sodasdrnakah 
gadadyuddyudho visnur 
mdm anger disi raksatu 
hrirh srirh dasdksaro mantro 
daksine mdm saddvatu 
May the thirteen-syllable mantra protect/my hips, may the 
eighteen-syllable mantra beginning with hfim srirh protect my 
weapons, and may the twenty-syllable mantra protect my entire 
body. 
May the twelve-syllable mantra, orh namo bhagavate vasudevdya 
protect me from the west; may Lord Visnu who holds the club 
and disc in His hands and who is indicated by the bija mantras, 
srirh, hrirh, and klirh, as well as the ten-syllable mantra, protect 
me from the south. 
I 
Text 24 
tdro namo bhagavate 
rukmini-ballabhdya ca 


The Trailokya-Mangala-Kavaca of SrI Krsna 
svaheti sodasamo 'yam 
nairtyarh disi raksatu 
May the sixteen-syllable mantra, orh namo bhagavate rukmini- 
ballabhaya svaha protect me from the southwest. 
Text 25 
klirh hrsikepadarh sdya 
namo mam vdrunevatu 
astadasarnah kdmdnto 
vdyavye mam sadavatu 
May the mantra, klirh hrsikesdya namaha protect me from water 
and may the eighteen-syllable mantra ending with kdma always 
protect me from the northwest. 
Text 26 
srirh mdyd kdma krsndya 
govinddya dvitho manuh 
dvadasdmatmako visnur 
uttare mam sadavatu 
May Sri Visnu, who is the predominating Deity of the twelve- 
syllable mantra, srirh hrirh klirh krsndya govinddya thathaih always 
protect me from the north. 
Texts 27-29 
vdg-bhavarh kdmarh krsndya 
hrirh govinddya tatparam 
srirh gopi-jana-ballabhdnte 
bhdya svdhd hasaus tatah 
dvavirhsaty aksaro mantro 
mdmaisdnye sadavatu 
kdliyasya phand-madhye 
divyarh nrtyarh karoti tarn 


284 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fourth RAtra 
namdmi deuaki-putram 
nrtya-rdjdnam acyutam 
dvatrirhsad aksaro mantro 
'py adho math sarvaddvatu 
May the twenty-two syllable mantra, aim kllrh krsndya hrirh 
govinddya gopijanavallabhdya svdha hasau protect me from the 
northeast. 
I offer my respectful obeisances unto Lord Acyuta, the son of 
Devakl, who danced on the hood of the Kaliya serpent. 
May the thirty-two syllable mantra, kdliyasya phand madhye divyam 
nrtyarh karoti tarn namdmi deuaki putram nrtya rdjdnam acyutam 
protect the lower parts of my body. 
Text 30 
kdmadevdya vidmahe 
puspa-bdndya dhlmahi 
tanno 'nangah pracodaydd 
esd mdrh pdtu cordhvatah 
May the kdma-gdyatri, kllrh kdmadevdya vidmahe puspabdndya 
dhlmahi tanno 'nangah pracodayat protect the upper parts of my 
body. 
Text 31 
iti te kathitam vipra brahma- 
mantraugha-vigraham 
trailokya-mahgalam ndma 
kavacam brahma-rupakam 
O brdhmana, I have thus revealed to you the trailokya-mahgala 
kavaca. It is nondifferent from the Supreme Lord and it is the 
essence of all the transcendental mantras. 


The Trailokya-Mangala-Kavaca of Sri Krsna 
Text 32 
brahmand kathitarh purvam 
ndrdyana-mukhdc chrutam 
tava snehdn mayd "khydtarh 
pravaktavyarh na kasyacit 
This kavaca was first heard by Brahma from the mouth of Lord 
Narayana, and now I have revealed it to you, out of affection. 
Do not disclose it to anyone. 
Text 33 
gurum pranamya vidhivat 
kavacam prapathet tatah 
sakrt dvis trir yathdjnanarh 
so 'pi sarua-tapomayah 
First, you should offer obeisances unto your spiritual master 
and then recite with rapt attention this kavaca either one, two 
or three times. This practice will award you the merit of all 
kinds of austerities. 
Texts 34-35 
mantresu sakalesv eva 
desiko ndtra sarhsayah 
satam astottararh cdsya 
purascarya-vidhih smrtah 
havanadin-dasdrhsena krtvd 
tat-sadhayet dhruvam 
yadi sydt siddhi-kavaco 
visnur eva bhavet svayam 
It is a fact that if a person chants only a portion of these mantras, 
he will still get the desired results. It is recommended that one 
first perform the ritual known as purascarana one hundred and 
eight times and offer oblations into the sacrificial fire eighteen 


286 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth RAtra 
times. One who perfectly follows this process will surely attain 
the lotus feet of Lord Visnu. 
Text 36 
mantra-siddhir bhavet tasya 
purascaryd-vidhdnatah 
spardhdm uddhuya satatam 
laksmir vdnl vaset tatah 
When one achieves the perfection of chanting these mantras, 
while performing the rituals of purascarana, Laksmi and 
Sarasvati will continuously reside with him. 
Text 37 
puspdnjaly astakarh dattvd 
mulenaiva pathet-sakrt 
dasa-varsa-sahasranarh 
pujdydh phalam dpnuydt 
By reciting this kavaca only once, while offering a handful of 
flowers eight times, accompanied by the chanting of the mula 
mantra, one obtains the result of worshiping the Lord for ten 
thousands years. 
Text 38 
bhurje vilikhya gulikdrh 
svarnasthdrh dharayed yadi 
kanthe vd daksine bdhau 
so 'pi visnur na samsayah 
If a person writes this kavaca on birch bark, puts it in a golden 
amulet, and then wears it around his neck or on his right arm, 
he will certainly become qualified to receive Lord Visnu's 
mercy. 


The Trailokya-Mangala-Kavaca of Sri Krsna 
Texts 39-41 
asvamedha-sahasrdni 
vdjapeya-satdni ca 
maha-ddnddi ydny eva 
prddaksinyarh bhuvas tathd 
kaldrh ndrhanti tdny eva 
sakrd uccdrandt tatah 
kavacasya prasddena jivan 
mukto bhaven narah 
trailokyam ksobhayaty eva 
trailokya-vijayi bhavet 
idarh kavacam ajndtvd yajed 
yah purusottamam 
sata-laksa-prajdpto 'pi na 
mantras tasya sidhyati 
The merit one attains by performing one thousand horse 
sacrifices, one hundred vdjapeya sacrifices, giving a huge amount 
of wealth in charity, and circumambulating the entire earth 
cannot be compared with the merit one obtains by reciting this 
kavaca only once. 
By the mercy of this kavaca, one is liberated in this very life 
and everyone feels fear in his presence. Indeed, one becomes 
capable of conquering the three worlds, by the grace of this 
kavaca. 
However, if one worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
without understanding the importance of this kavaca—even 
after chanting it hundreds and thousands of times, one will not 
attain the perfection of chanting these mantras. 
Thus ends the translation of the fifth chapter of the Fourth Rdtra 
of Sri Narada-pancardtra. 


Chapter 6 
Prayers to Lord Gopala 
Textl 
sn-narada uvdca 
navlna-nirada-sydmarh 
nilendrivara-locanam 
vallabi-nandanam vande 
krsnarh gopdla-mpinam 
Sri Narada said: I offer my obeisances to Sri Krsna, whose 
complexion is just like the color of a newly-formed monsoon 
cloud, whose eyes are as beautiful as the blue lotus, who gives 
pleasure to the gopls, and who appeared in the form of a 
cowherd boy. 
Text 2 
sphurad barha-dalodvaddha- 
nlla-kuncita-murdhajam 
kadamba-kusumodvaddha- 
vanamdld-vibhusitam 
His bluish curly hair is nicely decorated with peacock feathers 
and He wears a garland of forest flowers, such as the kadamba. 
Text 3 
ganda-mandala-sarhsargi- 
calat-kuncita-kuntalam 
sthula-muktd-phaloddra- 
hdrodyotita-vaksasam 
His curly hair swings to and fro over His cheeks. His broad 
chest is decorated with a necklace of large pearls. 
289 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth RAtra 
Text 4 
hemdngadatula-koti- 
kintojjvala-vigraham 
manda-mdruta-sariksobha- 
calitdmbara-sancayam 
His entire body is illuminated by the light reflected from His 
golden ornaments and diamond crown. His garments wave in 
the gentle breeze. 
Text 5 
rucir-austha-puta-nyasta- 
vamsi-madhura-nisvanaih 
lasad gopdlikd-ceto 
mohayantarh punah punah 
As He plays His supremely enchanting flute, manifesting the 
most wonderful sound vibrations, the hearts of the cowherd 
damsels are repeatedly overwhelmed by attraction for Him. 
Texts 6-7 
vallavi-vadandmbhoja-madhu- 
pdna-madhu-vratam 
ksobhayantam manas tdsdm 
sasmerdpdnga-viksanaih 
yauvanod bhinna-dehdbih 
samsaktdbhih pamsparam 
vicitrdmbara-bhusdbhir 
gopa-ndribhir dvrtam 
He is like a honeybee that relishes the nectar from the lotus- 
like faces of the gopis. He has aroused their transcendental 
passion by bestowing upon them His sidelong glances. He is 
surrounded by young gopis who are very attached to Him and 


Prayers to Lord GopAla 
who are dressed in a most attractive manner and decorated 
with beautiful ornaments. 
Text 8 
prabhinndnjana-kdlindl- 
jala-keli-kalotsukam 
yodhayantarh kvacid gopdn 
vydharantarh gavdnganam 
Sometimes, Sri Krsna enjoys conjugal pastimes in the black 
water of the Kalindl. Sometimes, He enjoys mock fighting with 
His cowherd boyfriends and sometimes, He leads His friends to 
the pasturing grounds. 
Text 9 
kdlindi-jala-sarhsargi- 
sitaldnila-sevite 
kadamba-padapac chdye 
sthitarh vrnddvane kvacit 
Sometimes, He sits under a kadamba tree in the forest of 
Vrndavana and sometimes, He enjoys the cool breezes that kiss 
the water of the Yamuna. 
Text 10 
ratna-bhudhara-sarhlagna- 
ratndsana-paiigraham 
kalpa-padapa-madhyastha- 
hema-mandapikdgatam 
Sometimes, He sits on ajeweled throne at the foot of a mountain 
filled with gold and sometimes, He enjoys pastimes on a golden 
altar in the midst of many desire trees. 
Text 11 
vasanta-kusumdmodara- 
surabhl-krta-dinmukhe 


Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fourth Ratra 
govardhana-gimu ramyai 
sthitarh rdsa-rasotsukam 
Sometimes, He goes to the enchanting Govardhana Hill, where 
the atmosphere is saturated with the fragrance of innumerable 
flowers that blossom in the spring. There, He enjoys rdsa-lild 
pastimes. 
Text 12 
savya-hasta-tala-nyasta- 
girivarydta-patrakam 
khanditd-khandalonmukta- 
muktd-sdra-ghandghanam 
He lifted Govardhana Hill with His left hand, like an umbrella, 
and thus counteracted the torrents of rain sent by Indra. 
Text 13 
venu-vadya-maholldsa-krta- 
hunkdra-nisvanaih 
sarasair unmukhaih sasvad 
gokulair abhiviksitam 
When Sri Krsna joyfully plays upon His flute, producing an 
enchanting sound, all of the calves and cows stare at Him with 
unblinking eyes. 
Text 14 
krsnam evanugdyadbhis 
tac cestd-vasavarttibhih 
danda-pdsodyata-karair 
gopdlair upa-sobhitam 
He is always surrounded by His cowherd boyfriends, who 
continuously sing His glories and imitate His behavior while 
carrying sticks and ropes in their hands. 


Prayers to Lord GopAla 
Text 15 
naradadyair muni-sresthair 
veda-veddnga-pdragaih 
priti-susnigdhayd vdcd 
stuyamdnam pardtparam 
Sri Krsna is constantly being glorified with select, pleasing 
words by great sages, such as Narada, who are expert in the 
understanding of the Vedic literature. 
Text 16 
ya evarh cintayed devarh 
bhaktyd samstauti mdnavah 
trisandhyam tasya tusto 
'sau daddti varam ipsitam 
When one meditates on Krsna in this way and offers this prayer 
to Him with devotion three times a day, He certainly becomes 
pleased and awards one with the fulfillment of all his desires. 
Text 17 
rdja-vallabhatdm eti bhavet 
sarva-jana-priyah 
acaldm sriyam dpnoti sa 
vdgml jdyate dhruvam 
Such a sincere devotee becomes very dear to the ruler of his 
kingdom and the object of affection for all living beings. He 
comes to possess inexhaustible opulence and becomes a most 
eloquent speaker. 
Thus ends the translation of the sixth chapter of the Fourth 
Rdtra of Sri Ndrada-pahcardtra. 


Chapter 7 
A Description of the Gopala-kavaca 
Text 1 
sri mahadeva uvdca 
atha vaksydmi kavacarh 
gopdlasya jagad-guroh 
yasya smarana-mdtrena 
jivan mukto bhaven narah 
Sri Mahadeva said: Now, I will explain the ftawacaof Lord Gopala, 
the spiritual master of the universe. Simply by remembering this 
kavaca, a practitioner of devotional service becomes liberated 
in this very life. 
Text 2 
smu devi pravaksydmi 
sdvadhdnd 'vadhdraya 
ndrado 'sya rsir devi 
chando 'nustub uddhrtam 
devoid bdla-krsnas ca 
caturvarga-praddyakah 
siro me bdla-krsnas ca pdtu 
nityarh mama sruti 
O goddess, please hear with attention. The predominating sage 
of this kavaca is Narada and it should be chanted in the anustub 
meter. Bala Krsna is the objective of this kavaca and it is meant 
for accomplishing the four objectives of human life. May Lord 
Bala Krsna eternally protect my head and ears. 
Text 4 
ndrdyanah pdtu kantham 
gopi-vandyah kapolakam 
295 


296 
Sri Narada-pa^caratra • Fourth Ratra 
ndsike madhuhd patu 
caksusi nanda-nandanah 
May Lord Narayana protect my neck, may the worshipable Lord 
of the gopis protect my cheeks, may the killer of the Madhu 
demon protect my nose, and may the son of Nanda protect my 
eyes. 
Text 5 
jandrdanah pdtu dantdn 
adhare mddhavas tathd 
urdhvaustharh pdtu vdrdhas 
civukarh kesi-sudanah 
May Lord Janardana protect my teeth, may Lord Madhava 
protect my lower lip, may Lord Varaha protect my upper lip, 
and may the killer of the Kesi demon protect my chin. 
Text 6 
hrdayam gopikd-ndtho 
ndbhirh setu-pradah sadd 
hastau govardhana-dharah 
pddau pitdmbaro 'vatu 
May the Lord of the gopis protect my heart, may the sustainer of 
all that be protect my navel, may the lifter of Govardhana Hill 
protect my hands, and may the Lord who is dressed in yellow 
garments protect my legs. 
Text 7 
kardnguli sndharo me 
pdddngulyah krpdmayah 
lingam pdtu gadd-pdnir 
bdla-kndd-manoramah 
May Lord Sridhara protect my fingers, may the most merciful 
Lord protect my toes, and may the Supreme Lord who holds 


Description of the GopAla-kavaca 
a club in His hand and who performs wonderful childhood 
pastimes protect the lower part of my body. 
Text 8 
jagan-ndthah pdtu purvarh 
sri-rdmo 'vatu pascimam 
uttararh kaitabhdris ca 
daksinarh hanumat-prabhuh 
May the Lord of the universe protect me from the east, may 
Lord Ramacandra protect me from the west, may the Lord who 
killed the Kaitava demon protect me from the north, and may 
Hanuman protect me from the south. 
Text 9 
dgneydm pdtu govindo 
nairrtirh pdtu kesavah 
vdyavydrh pdtu daitydrir 
aisdnydm gopa-nandanah 
May Lord Govinda protect me from the southeast, may Lord 
Kesava protect me from southwest, may the killer of the demons 
protect me from the northwest, and may the beloved son of 
Nanda protect me from the northeast. 
Text 10 
urdhvath pdtu pralambdrir 
adhah kaitabha-mardanah 
saydnam pdtu putdtmd 
gatau pdtu sriyah patih 
May the killer of Pralambasura protect me from above, may the 
slayer of Kaitava protect me from below, may the most sanctified 
Lord protect me during my sleep, and may the husband of 
LaksmI protect me while I'm walking. 


Sri Narada-paScaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 11 
sesah pdtu nirdlambe jagrad 
bhdve hy apdm patih 
bhojane kesihd pdtu hrsnah 
sarvdnga-sandhisu 
May Lord Anantadeva protect me when I have no shelter, may 
Varuna protect me when I am awake, may the killer of Kesi 
protect me while I am eating, and may Sri Krsna protect my 
entire body. 
Text 12 
ganand'su nisdndtho 
divdndtho dina-ksaye 
iti te kathitarh divyarh 
kavacarh paramddbhutam 
May the Lord of the night protect me at night, may the Lord of 
the day protect me during the day. 
I have thus revealed to You the most wonderful kavaca. 
Texts 13-16 
yah pathen nityam euedarh 
kavacarh prayato narah 
tasydsu vipado devi 
nasyanti ripu-sahghata 
ante gopdla-caranarh 
prdpnoti paramesvari 
tri-sandhyam eka-sandhyam 
vd yah pathet smuyad api 
tat sarvado ramdndthah 
paripdti caturbhujah 
ajhdtvd kavacarh devi 
gopdlarh pujayed yadi 


Description of the GopAla-kavaca 
sarvarh tasya vrthd devi 
japa-homarcanadikam 
sa sastra-ghatarh samprdpya 
mrtyum eti na sarhsayah 
O goddess, anyone who recites this kavaca daily with full 
concentration becomes freed from the danger caused by his 
enemies and at the end of his life, he attains the lotus feet of 
Lord Gopala. 
O supreme goddess, one who recites this kavaca three times 
a day, or only once, either in the morning or in the evening, 
obtains the fulfillment of his desires by the mercy of the Lord 
of Laksmi. Such a devotee is always protected by the four-armed 
Supreme Lord. 
O Devi, if one worships Lord Gopala without understanding 
the glories of the Gopdla-kavaca, all of his chanting of mantras, 
performing of sacrifice, and offering of worship goes in vain. 
Such a person undoubtedly invites an untimely death by means 
of a weapon. 
Thus ends the translation of the seventh chapter of the Fourth 
Rdtra of Sri Ndrada-pancaratra. 


Chapter 8 
The One Thousand Names of Lord Gopala 
Text I 
in pdrvati uvaca - 
bhagavan sarva devesa 
deva devajagad guro 
kalhitam kavacam divyarh 
bala gopala rupinam 
Sri Parvati said: O supreme among the demiods! O Lord of 
lords! O spiritual master of the universe! I am very happy to 
have heard the Bdla-gopdla kavaca, which you revealed to me. 
Texts II-III 
srutam mayd tava mukhdt 
par am kautuhalam mama 
iddnirn srotumicchdmi 
gopdlasya pardtmanah 
sahasram ndma divydndvn 
asesena anuklrtaya 
tameva saranam ndtha 
trdhi mam bhakta vatsala 
After hearing this from your mouth, I have developed an 
eagerness to hear more and more. Now, kindly describe to 
me the one thousand holy names of Lord Gopala, who is the 
Supersoul of all living entities. O lord, you are very affectionate 
to your devotees. I take shelter of you—please protect me. 
Text IV 
yadi sneho 'sti devesa 
mam prati prdnavallabha 
301 


302 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
kena prakasitam purvarh 
kutra kirhvd kadd kranu 
pivato 'cyuta plyusam na 
mehatrdsti virdmatd 
O master of the demigods! O beloved lord of my life! If you 
have any affection for me, kindly tell me who first revealed the 
one thousand holy names of Lord Acyuta, where this occurred, 
and to whom it was revealed. My mind is very eager to hear 
these holy names. 
Text V 
in mahddeva uvdca 
in bdla krsnasya sahasrandmnah 
stotrasya kalpdkhya suradrumasya 
vydso vadatyakhila sdsra nirotesa kartd 
srnvan sukam muniganesu surarsivaryah 
Sri Mahadeva replied: The one thousand names of Bala-Krsna 
are just like a desire tree. When Vyasadeva, the compiler of the 
Vedas, revealed these holy names to Sukadeva, at that time, 
Narada Muni, the foremost sage, was present. 
Text VI 
purd maharsayah sarve 
ndradam dandake vane 
jijndsanti sma bhaktyd ca 
gopdlasya pardtmanah 
Long ago, in the forest of Dandakaranya, great sages inquired 
from Narada Muni about these one thousand names of Lord 
Gopala, the Supersoul of all living entities. 
Text VII 
ndmnah sahasram paramam 
srnu devi samdsatah 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 
303 
srutvd sri bdla krsnasya 
ndmna sdhasrakam priye 
O Goddess! O dear one! Listen attentively as I disclose to you 
the one thousand names of Sri Bala-Krsna. 
Text VIII 
vyapaiti sarva pdpdni 
brahma hatyddikdni ca 
kalau bdlesvaro devah 
kalau vmddvanarh vanam 
By hearing these holy names, one becomes relieved of all sinful 
reactions, even for the killing of a brdhmana. In the age of 
Kali, Krsna is the supreme worshipable form of the Lord and 
Vrndavana is His supreme abode. 
Text IX 
kalau gangd mukti ddtri 
kalau gild para gatih 
ndsti yajnddi kdrydni 
harera ndmaiva kevalam 
kalau vimuktaye nrndm 
ndstyeva gatiranyathd 
In the age of Kali, the Ganges awards liberation, the 
understanding of the Bhagavad-gitd awards one the supreme 
destination, whereas the performance of sacrifices is not 
recommended. The chanting of the holy names of Lord Hari 
has been ascertained as the only means of being delivered 
from material existence. There is no other way apart from the 
chanting of the holy names of the Lord. 
The predominating sage of these one thousand holy names is 
Narada Muni, Sri Bala-Krsna is the objective of these mantras, 


304 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fourth Ratra 
and they are to be chanted for the purpose of obtaining the 
ultimate goal of life. 
The one thousand holy names of Bala-Krsna are as follows: 
Text 1 
bdla-krsnah surddhiso 
bhutavdso vrajesvarah 
vrajendra-nandana nandl 
vrajdngana-vihdranah 
Sri Bala-Krsna is the Supreme Lord in the form of a child, the 
controller of the demigods, the abode of all living entities, the 
Lord of Vraja, the son of the King of Vraja, the bestower of 
transcendental happiness, the Lord who enjoyed pastimes with 
the cowherd boys of Vraja, . . . 
Text 2 
go-gopa-gopikdnanda- 
kdrako bhakti-vardhanah 
go-vatsa-puccha-sankarsa- 
jatdnanda-bharo 'jayah 
. . . and the bestower of happiness to the cows, cowherd men 
and gopis of Vraja. He increases the devotional sentiments of 
His devotees and He takes pleasure in pulling the tails of the 
cows. He is the unconquerable Lord. 
Text 3 
ringamdna-gatih srimdn 
ati-bhakti-prakdsanah 
dhuli-dhusara-sarvdngo 
ghatl-plta-pancchadah 
Sri Bala-Krsna crawls upon the ground. He is most attractive, 
He awards pure devotional service, and He smears dust all over 
His body. He is dressed in yellow garments, . . . 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 
305 
Text 4 
puratdbharanah sriso 
gatir gatimatdm sadd 
yogiso yoga-vandyas ca 
yogddhiso yasah-pradah 
.. . decorated with gold ornaments, the husband of LaksmI, the 
ultimate goal of the transcendentalists, the master of perfected 
yogis, the worshipable Lord of the yogis, obtained by the 
practice of yoga, the giver of fame, . .. 
Text 5 
yasoda-nandanah krsno 
govatsa-paricdrakah 
gavendras ca gavdksas ca 
gavadhyakso gavdm-patih 
. . . the son of Yasoda, and all-atrtractive. He takes cafe of the 
calves and cows. He is the Lord of the cows, the Lord of the 
cowherd men, the proprietor of the cows,. . . 
Text 6 
gavesas ca gavisas ca 
go-carana-pardyanah 
go-dhu li-dhdma-priy ako 
go-dhuli-krta-bhusanah 
... the master of the cows; the master of the cowherd community 
of Vraja; very fond of tending cows; very dear to Vrndavana, 
which is filled with the dust from the hooves of the cows; the 
Lord who is decorated by the dust from the hooves of the 
cows, 


306 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 7 
go-rasyo go-rasdso go- 
gorasdncita-dhdmakah 
gorasdsvddako vaidyo 
veddtito vasu-pradah 
... fond of drinking milk, fond of eating milk products, nourished 
by milk products, the relisher of milk products, the supreme 
knower of the Vedas, situated beyond the understanding of the 
Vedas, the giver of wealth,. . . 
Text 8 
vipuldmso ripu-haro 
viksaro jay ado jay ah 
jagad-vandyo jaganndtho 
jagad-aradhya-padakah 
... the almighty Lord, the killer of His enemies, inexhaustible, 
the giver of victory, always glorious, worshiped by everyone in 
the universe, and the Lord of the universe. His lotus feet are 
worshiped by everyone within the universe. 
Text 9 
jagadiso jagat-kartd 
jagat-pujyo jaydrihd 
jayatdrh jaya-silas ca 
jaydtito jagad-balah 
Sri Bala-Krsna is the controller of universe, the creator of the 
universe, worshipable for all the inhabitants of the universe, 
the destroyer of those who are inimical to Him, victorious over 
all other victorious personalities, invincible, the prowess of the 
universe, . . . 
Text 10 
jagad-dhartd pdlayitd 
pdtd dhdtd mahesvarah 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 
307 
radhikanandano radha- 
prdna-ndtho rasa-pradah 
. . . the maintainer of the universe, the sustainer of all living 
beings, the supplier of everyone's necessities of life, the father 
of all living entities, the supreme controller, the giver of 
pleasure to Radhika, the life and soul of Radha, the bestower 
of transcendental mellows,. . . 
Text 11 
rddhd-bhakti-karah suddho 
mdhdrddhyo ramd-ptiyah 
gokulananda-ddtd ca 
gokulananda-rupa-dhrk 
. . . the object of Radha's devotional service, supremely pure, 
the worshipable Lord of Radha, dear to Goddess LaksmI, the 
giver of happiness to the residents of Gokula, the form of 
transcendental ecstasy for the inhabitants of Gokula, . .. 
Text 12 
gokulesvara-kalydno 
gokula-vara-nandanah 
golokdbhiratih sragvi 
golokesvara-ndyakah 
. . . the benefactor of the inhabitants of Gokula, the son of the 
King of Gokula, the object of attachment for the residents of 
Gokula, decorated with a garland of forest flowers, and the 
hero of Gokula. 
Text 13 
nityam-goloka-vasatir 
nityam-go-gopa-nandanah 
ganesvaro ganddhyakso 
gandndrh paripurakah 


308 
Sri Narada-paScaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Sri Bala-Krsna eternally resides in Gokula. He is eternally the 
beloved child of the cows and cowherd men of Gokula, the 
worshipable Lord of human society, the director of human 
society, the supplier of everything necessary for the maintenance 
of human society, .. . 
Text 14 
gunl gunotkaro ganyo 
gunatito gunakarah 
guna-priyo gunadharo 
gunaradhyo ganagranih 
.. .full oftranscendental qualities, the origin of all transcendental 
qualities, the most beloved personality, situated beyond the 
three material qualities, the origin of all divine qualities, dear 
to exalted personalities, the basis of all existence, the objective 
of all good qualities, the reservoir of transcendental qualities, 
Text 15 
gana-ndyako vighna-hdro 
herambah pdrvati-sutah 
parvatddhinivdsi ca 
govardhana-dharo guruh 
. . . the supreme hero appearing within human society, the 
destroyer of all impediments, the greatest hero, and the son of 
Parvat!. He resides near the mountain, and He is the lifter of 
Govardhana Hill, the supreme spiritual master, .. . 
Text 16 
govardhana-patih sdnto 
govardhana-vihdrakah 
govardhano gita-gatir 
gavdkso go-vrseksanah 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 309 
the Lord of Govardhana, and supremely peaceful. He 
enjoys pastimes at Govardhana Hill. He is Govardhana Hill, 
the objective of select prayers, the maintainer of the cows, the 
protector of the cows and bulls, . . . 
Text 17 
gabhasti-nemir gitdtmd 
gitd-gamyo gati-pradah 
gavdmeyo yajna-nemir 
yajndngo yajna-rupa-dhrk 
. . . the effulgent Personality of Godhead, the speaker 
of transcendental instructions, He who relishes His own 
glorification, the giver of the ultimate goal of life, always 
associated with cows, the objective of sacrifice, the limbs of 
sacrifice, the personification of sacrifice,. . . 
Text 18 
yajna-priyo yajna-hartd 
yajna-gamyo yajur-gatih 
yajna-jno yajna-gamyas ca 
yajna-prapyo vimatsarah 
. . . the beloved objective of sacrifice, He who destroys all 
obstacles to the successful completion of sacrifice, known only 
through the performance of sacrifice, the goal of all sacrifices, 
the ingredients of sacrifices, to be understood by sacrificial 
performances, attained by the performance of sacrifice, never 
envious of anyone,. . . 
Text 19 
yajndnta-krd yajna-guhyo 
yajndtito yajuh-priyah 
manur manv-ddi-rupi ca 
manvantara-viharakah 


310 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth RAtra 
. . . the final destination of those who perform sacrifice, the 
very confidential meaning of sacrifice, situated beyond the 
purview of those who perform sacrifice, dear to the performers 
of sacrifice, and the supreme living being. He assumes the 
form of the various Manus, and He is the creator of the reign 
of Manu, . . . 
Text 20 
manu-priyo manor varhsa- 
dhdri madhavama-patih 
mdyd-priyo mahd-mdyo 
mdydtito maydntakah 
. . . very dear to Manu, belonging to the dynasty of Manu, the 
husband of LaksmI, the protector of Goddess Uma, dear to 
the external energy, the form of the external energy, beyond 
the domain of the material energy, and the killer of the Maya 
demon. 
Text 21 
mdydbhigdml mdydkhyo 
mahd-mdyd-vara-pradah 
mahd-mdyd-prado mdyd- 
nando mdyesvarah kavih 
Sri Bala-Krsna glances over the material nature. He is worshiped 
in the form of Maya, the giver of benedictions to Mahamaya, 
and the giver of supremacy over the conditioned souls to 
Mahamaya. He takes pleasure in associating with His energy. 
He is the controller of Maya, the most expert poet, .. . 
Text 22 
karanam kdranam kartd 
kdryarh karma kriyd matih 
kdrydtito gavdm ndtho 
jaganndtho gundkarah 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Gopala 
311 
. . . the actual performer of all actions, the cause of all causes, 
the doer of everything, the giver of the results of activities, the 
creator of the five causes for action, the predominating Deity of 
the mind, situated beyond the effects of all activities, the Lord 
of the cows, the Lord of the universe, the original source of all 
good qualities, ... 
Text 23 
visva-rupo virupakhyo 
vidyanando vasu-pradah 
vasudevo vasistheso 
vdniso vdk-patir mahah 
. . . the universal form, He who appears in many wonderful 
forms, the ecstatic knower of everything, the protector of the 
earth, the son of Vasudeva, the Lord of Vasista, the Lord of 
SarasvatI, the controlling Deity of speech, the almighty Lord, 
Text 24 
vasudevo vasu-srestho 
devakl-nandano 'rihd 
vasu-pdtd vasu-patir 
vasudhd-paripdlakah 
. . . the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the foremost of 
Vasus, the son of DevakI, the vanquisher of His enemies, the 
maintainer of the earth, the Lord of the earth, the support of 
the earth,. . . 
Text 25 
kamsdrih karhsa-hantd ca 
karhsdrddhyo gatir gavdm 
govindo gomatdrh-pdlo 
gopa-ndn-janddhipah 


SRI NARADA-PAfVCARATRA • FOURTH RATRA 
. . . the enemy of Karhsa, the killer of Karhsa, the worshipable 
Lord of Karhsa, the objective of the cows, the master of the 
senses, the maintainer of the cowerherd men, the beloved Lord 
of the cowherd damsels of Vraja,. . . 
Text 26 
gopi-rato ruru-nakha- 
dhdri harir jagad-guruh 
jdnu-janghantardlas ca 
pitdmbara-dharo harih 
. . . and attached to the gopis. He wears a tiger's claw and He 
crawls on His knees. He is the destroyer of all material miseries, 
the spiritual master of the entire world, dressed in yellow 
garments, the remover of all distress, . .. 
Text 27 
haiyangavina-sambhoktd 
pdyasdso gavdm guruh 
brahmanyo brdhmandrddhyo 
nityam-go-vipra-pdlakah 
. . . the enjoyer of fresh butter and sweet rice, the master of 
the cows, the worshipable Lord of the brdhmanas, the Supreme 
Lord, the eternal maintainer of the cows and the brdhmanas, . 
Text 28 
bhakta-priyo bhakta-labhyo 
bhaktydtito bhuvdm-gatih 
bhurloka-pdtd hartd ca 
bhu-gola-paricintakah 
... very dear to the devotees, ultimately attained by the devotees, 
the transcendental destination achieved by the devotees, the 
goal of life after attaining a human birth, the maintainer of the 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 3^3 
earth, the destroyer of the miscreants, and the actual benefactor 
of the inhabitants of the earth. 
Text 29 
nityam-bhurloka-vdsl ca 
janaloka-nivdsakah 
tapoloka-nivdsl ca 
vaikuntho vistara-sravah 
Sri Bala-Krsna eternally resides in the earthly manifestation 
of His supreme abode. He resides in Janaloka, Tapaloka, and 
Vaikunthaloka. He is the most famous personality. 
Text 30 
vikuntha-vdso vaikuntha- 
vdsl hdsl rasa-pradah 
rasika-gopikdnanda- 
ddyako bdla-dhrg-vapuh 
Sri Bala-Krsna lives in the transcendental abode where there 
is no anxiety, Vaikuntha. He is always sweetly smiling, the 
bestower of transcendental mellows, and the giver of pleasure 
to the gopis of Vraja. He assumed the form of a divine child. 
Text 31 
yasasvl yamund-tlra- 
puline- 'tiva-mohanah 
vastra-hartd gopikdndm 
manohdri vara-pradah 
Sri Bala-Krsna is supremely famous. He appears most enchanting 
as He stands on the banks of the river Yamuna, and He stole 
the garmaents of the gopls. He is most attractive, the bestower 
of benedictions,. .. 


314 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 32 
dadhi-bhakso dayd dharo 
data pdta hrtdhrtah 
mandapo mandalddhiso 
rdja-rdjesvaro vibhuh 
. . . the enjoyer of yogurt, the abode of compassion, the 
maintainer of all, the destroyer, the sacrificial arena, the. 
sacrificial platform, the master of the foremost of kings, and 
the most powerful personality. 
Text 33 
visva-dhrg visva-bhug visva- 
pdlako visva-mohanah 
vidvat-priyo vita-havyo 
havya-gavya-krtdsanah 
Sri Bala-Krsna holds the universes on His hoods. He is the 
supreme enjoyer of everything that takes place within the 
universe, the maintainer of the universe, the enchanter of the 
universe, dear to those who are actually learned, the scion of 
the Surya dynasty, the enjoyer of sacrificial ingredients,.. . 
Text 34 
kavya-bhuk pitr-varti ca 
kavydtmd kavya-bhojanah 
rdmo virdmo ratido 
rati-bhdrtd rati-priyah 
. . . the enjoyer of sacrificial oblations, the fonnost forefather, 
the soul of all oblations, the enjoyer of all types of oblations, 
the enjoyer of transcendental pastimes, the shelter of all, the 
giver of transcendental pleasure, the object of transcendental 
lust, fond of enjoying conjugal pastimes, . . . 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 
Text 35 
pradyumno 'krura-ddmyas ca 
krurdtmd krura-mardanah 
krpdlus ca ddyalus ca 
saydluh saritdm patih 
. . . Pradyumna, the master of Akrura, very strict, the chastiser 
of those who are cruel, merciful, compassionate, He who takes 
pleasure in mystic slumber, the Lord of the Ganges,. .. 
Text 36 
nadl-nada-vidhdtd ca 
nadi-nada-vihdrakah 
sindhuh sindhu-priyo dantah 
sdntah kdntah kald-nidhih 
. . . the creator of rivers, He who enjoys sporting in rivers 
and lakes, the creator of oceans, fond of the ocean, the most 
charitable personality, peaceful, always an object of love, and a 
reservoir of artistry. 
Text 37 
sannydsa-krt satdm-bhdrtd 
sadhucchista-krtdsanah 
sadhu-piiyah sadhu-gamyah 
sadhv-dcdra-nisevakah 
Sri Bala-Krsna sometimes accepts the renouced order of life. 
He is the maintainer of the devotees and He relishes the 
remnants left by His devotees. He is very dear to the devotees, 
the ultimate destination of the devotees, worshiped by those 
who possess saintly qualities, . . . 
Text 38 
janma-karma-phala-tydgi 
yogi bhogi mrgi-patih 


316 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
mdrgdtito yoga-mdrgo 
margamdno maho-ravih 
... not subject to birth and the reactions of karma, the foremost 
mystic yogi, the supreme enjoyer, the Lord of the renunciates, 
not dependent upon the ordinary course of affairs, the 
inaugurator of the yoga system, the propounder of the topmost 
path, and a sun-like personality. 
Text 39 
ravi-locano raver arhsa- 
bhogi dvadasa-mpa-dhrk 
gopdla-bdlo gopdlo 
balakdnanda-ddyakah 
The sun is one of His eyes and the sun is an expansion of His 
potency. He manifests the twelve Adityas. He is the protector of 
the cows, a cowherd boy, the giver of pleasure to the cowherd 
boys, . . . 
Text 40 
bdlakdndm-patih sriso 
viratih sarva-pdpindm 
srilah srimdn sri-yutas ca 
sn-nivdsah sriyah-patih 
. . . the master of the cowherd boys, the controller of Laksmi, 
the downfall of sinful people, the possessor of unlimited beauty 
and opulence, most handsome, learned, the residence of 
Laksmi, the husband of Laksmi, . . . 
Text 41 
sridah srisah sriyah-kdnto 
ramd-kdnto ramesvarah 
sri-kdnto dharan-kdnta 
umdkdnta-priyah prabhuh 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 
. . . the giver of opulence, the possesser of all opulence, the 
beloved Lord of Laksmi, the beloved Lord of Rama, the master 
of Rama, the husband of the goddess of fortune, the beloved 
Lord of the earth, very dear to the husband of Uma, the 
supreme master of all existence, . .. 
Text 42 
isto 'bhildsi varado 
veda-gamyo durasayah 
duhkha-harta duhkha-ndso 
bhava-duhkha-nirdsakah 
. . . the ultimate goal of life, the most desirable object, the 
bestower of benedictions, and understood through the 
reception of Vedic knowledge. He removes sinful motives, 
destroys material miseries, alleviates suffering and removes all 
material distress. 
Text 43 
yathecchdcdra-nirato 
yathecchdcdra-supriyah 
yathecchdldbha-santusto 
yathecchasya-mano- 'ntarah 
Sri Bala-Krsna is always independent and He acts in a most 
independent manner. He is satisfied with whatever He receives 
and He is the life and soul of those who are fully detached from 
material existence. 
Text 44 
navlna-nlraddbhdso 
mldnjana-caya-prabhah 
nava-durdina-meghabho 
nava-megha-cchavih kvacit 


318 
Sri Narada-paSjcaratra • Fourth Ratra 
He has the appearance of a newly-formed monsoon cloud. His 
complexion is blackish. His beauty is often compared to that of 
a dark cloud. 
Text 45 
svarna-vdrno nydsa-dhdn 
dvi-bhujo bahu-bdhukah 
kirita-dhdri mukuti 
murti-panjara-sundarah 
Sri Bala-Krsna sometimes appears with a complexion like the 
color of gold and accepts the renounced order of life. He 
sometimes possesses two arms and sometimes possesses many 
arms. He sometimes wears a crown and sometimes is decorated 
with a turban. His entire form is most enchanting. 
Text 46 
manoratha-pathdtita- 
kdrako bhakta-vatsalah 
kanvdnna-bhoktd kapilo 
kapiso garuddtmakah 
Sri Bala-Krsna is situated beyond the jurisdiction of mental 
speculation, affectionate to the devotees, the enjoyer of food 
offered with devotion, Kapiladeva, the Lord of the monkeys, 
and the life and soul of Garuda. 
Text 47 
suvarnah parno hemdbhah 
putandntaka ity api 
putand-stana-pdtd ca 
prdndnta-karano ripoh 
He sometimes appears with a complexion like the color of 
molten gold. He manifests a golden effulgence, and He is the 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 
319 
killer of Putana, the maintainer of Putana, the slayer of His 
enemies,.. . 
Text 48 
vatsa-ndso vatsa-pdlo 
vatsesvaro vasuttamah 
hemdbho hema-kanthas ca 
srivatsah srimatdm-patih 
. . . the killer of Vatsasura, the maintainer of the cows, the 
master of the cowherd boys, and the Lord of the earth. He 
possesses a golden effulgence and has a throat that resembles 
gold. He is decorated with the mark of Srivatsa, the Lord of all 
truly learned personalities, . . . 
Text 49 
sanandana-pathdrddhyo 
dhdtd dhdtumatdm-patih 
sanatkumdra-yogdtmd 
sanakesvara-rupa-dhrk 
. . . the worshipable Lord of Sanandana, the maintainer of 
everyone, the Lord of all embodied living entities, meditated 
upon by Sanat-kumara, the Lord and master of Sanaka,. .. 
Text 50 
sanatana-padoddtd 
nityarh caiva sandtanah 
bhdndira-vana-vdsi ca 
sn-imiddvana-ndyakah 
... the shelter of Sanatana, the most charitable person, eternal, 
and beginningless. He wanders throughout the forest of 
Bhandiravana and He is the hero of Sri Vrndavana. 


320 
Sri Narada-paisicarAtra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 51 
vmddvanesvari-pujyo 
vrndaranya-viharanah 
yamund-tira-go-dhenu- 
pdlako megha-manmathah 
Sri Bala-Krsna is the worshipable Lord of the Queen of 
Vrndavana. He enjoys pastimes in the forests of Vrndavana, He 
tends cows on the banks of the Yamuna, and He looks more 
enchanting than Cupid. 
Text 52 
kandarpa-darpa-harano 
mano-nayana-nandanah 
bdla-keli-priyah kdnto 
bala-kridd-paricchadah 
He defeats the pride of Cupid. He is the giver of pleasure to the 
mind and eyes, fond of relishing chilhood pastimes, and the 
lover of the gopis. He always dresses in a manner that is suitable 
for His childhood pastimes. 
Text 53 
bdldndm raksako bdlah 
kridd-kautuka-kdrakah 
bdlya-rupa-dharo dhanvl 
dhdnuski sula-dhrk vibhuh 
He is the protector of the cowherd boys, a cowherd boy, and 
always fond of playing and joking. He assumes the form of a 
child, carries a bow in His hand, holds a bow and an arrow, and 
carries a trident. He is the Supreme Lord. 
Text 54 
amrtdmso 'mrta-vapuh 
piyusa-paripdlakah 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 321 
piyusa-pdri pauravya- 
nandano nandi-vardhanah 
Sri Bala-Krsna possesses an existence of immortality and a 
transcendental body composed of immortality. He is the 
supplier of nectar, the enjoyer of nectar, a descendent of the 
Puru dynasty, He who gives pleasure to all living entities,. . . 
Text 55 
snddmdrhsuka-pdtd ca 
sriddma-paribhusanah 
vrnddranya-priyah krsnah 
kisorah kdnta-rupa-dhrk 
. . . the maintainer of Sridama and Suka, decorated with a rope 
aroung His waist, fond of the forest of Vrndavana, all-attractive, 
in the prime of His youth, the object of ecstatic love, . . . 
Text 56 
kdma-rdjah kdldtito 
yogindm paricintakah 
vrsesvarah krpa-pdlo 
gdyatn-gati-vallabhah 
... the master of Cupid, the fountainhead of plenary portions, 
the guide of mystic yogis, the Lord of Nandi, the distributor of 
mercy, the objective of the Gayatri mantra, ... 
Text 57 
nirvana-ddyako moksa- 
dayl veda-vibhdgakah 
veda-vy dsa-priyo vaidyo 
vaidyananda-priyah subhah 
... the bestower of salvation from material existence, the giver 
of liberation, the one who divided the Vedas, dear to Vedavyasa, 
the knower of the Vedas, fond of Vedic wisdom, all-auspicious, 


322 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 58 
sukadeva-gayd-ndtho 
gaydsur-gati-pradah 
vibhur jisnur garisthus ca 
sthavisthas ca sthavlyasdm 
... the Ixird of Sukadeva, the Lord of Gaya, the giver of liberation 
to Gayasura, nondifferent from LordVisnu, always victorious, 
the most exalted, the most firm of all immovable objects,. . . 
Text 59 
varisthas ca yavisthas ca 
bhuristhas ca bhuvah patih 
durgater ndsako durga- 
pdlako dusta-ndsakah 
. . . greater than the greatest, ever-youthful, full of opulence, 
the master of bhuvar-loka, the remover of all miseries, the 
maintainer of the mateiral world, the killer of miscreants,. . . 
Texts 60-61 
kdliya-sarpa-damano 
yamuna-nirmalodakah 
yamund-puline ramye 
nirmdle pdvanodake 
vasantarh bdla-gopdla- 
rupa-dhdn girdm-patih 
vag-ddtd vdk-prado vdnl- 
ndtho brdhmana-rdksakah 
. . . the subduer of the Kaliya serpent, and the crystal-clear 
water of the Yamuna. He assumes the form of a cowherd boy 
to sport on the banks of the Yamuna and in the clear water of 
the Yamuna. He is the husband of the goddess of learning, the 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 323 
giver of knowledge, the distributor of knowledge, the husband 
of SarasvatI, the protector of the brdhmanas,. . . 
Text 62 
brahmanyo brahma-krd brahma 
brahma-karma-praddyakah 
brahmanya-devo brahmanya- 
dayako brdhmana-priyah 
... the Supreme Brahman, the source of Brahman, the Supreme 
Lord, the inaugurator of brahminical duties, the Lord of the 
brdhmanas, the giver of self-realization, dear to the brdhmanas. 
Text 63 
svasti-priyo 'svastha-dharo 
'svdstha-ndso dhiyam-patih 
kvanan-nupura-dhrg visva- 
rupi visvesvarah sivah 
... fond of peace, never afflicted by illness, the curer of disease, 
the master of intelligence, realized through the reception of 
transcendental sound vibration, the form of the universe, the 
controller of the universe, most auspicious,. . . 
Text 64 
sivdtmako bdlya-vapuh 
sivdtmd siva-rupa-dhrk 
saddsiva-priyo devah 
siva-vandyo jagat-sivah 
... and the very soul of auspiciousness. He accepts the form of a 
child. He is the embodiment of auspiciousness. He accepts the 
form of Siva. He is dear to Sadasiva, the worshipable Lord, and 
worshiped by Siva. He looks after the welfare of the inhabitants 
of the universe. 


Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fourth RAtra 
Text 65 
go-madhya-vasi go-vdsi 
gopa-gopi-mano- 'ntarah 
dharmo dharma-dhurinas ca 
dharma-rupo dham-dharah 
Sri Bala-Krsna lives among cows, He is the abode of cows, and 
He dwells in the hearts of the cowherd boys and girls. He is 
the creator of religious principles, the knower of religious 
principles, the personification of religion, and the sustainer of 
the universe. 
Text 66 
svoparjistha-yasah kirti- 
vardhano nandi-rupakah 
devahuti-jnana-data 
yoga-sdnkhya-nivdrtakah 
Sri Bala-Krsna earns His fame by His own endeavor and He 
forever increases His glories. He is the embodiment of 
transcendental ecstasy, the giver of knowledge to Devahuti, the 
founder of the Sankhya philosophy, ... 
Text 67 
tmdvdrta-prdna-hdn 
sakatdsura-bhanjanah 
pralamba-hdri ripu-hd 
tathd dhenuka-mardanah 
. . . the killer of Trnavarta, the slayer of Sakatasura, the 
annihilator of Pralamba, the vanquisher of His enemies, the 
killer of Dhenukasura, . . . 
Text 68 
arista-ndsano 'cintyah 
kesi-hd kesi-ndsanah 


The One Thousand Names of Lord Gopala 
325 
kanka-hd kamsa-hd kamsa- 
ndsano ripu-ndsanah 
... the destroyer of Aristasura, the inconceivable Lord, the killer 
of the Kesi demon, victorious over Kesi, the killer of Kahka, 
victorious over Kamsa, the killer of Kamsa, and the destroyer 
of the demons. 
Text 69 
yamu nd-jala-kallola- 
darsi harsi priyam-vadah 
svacchanda-hdn yamund- 
jala-hdn sura-priyah 
Sri Bala-Krsna takes pleasure in watching the waves of the 
Yamuna. He is always blissful, He speaks very sweetly, He is fully 
independent, He enjoys sporting in the water of the Yamuna 
and He is very dear to godly personalities. 
Text 70 
lild-dhrta-vapu h keli- 
kdrako dharan-dhara 
goptd garistho gati-do 
gati-kdn gayesvarah 
He accepts various forms to enjoy His transcendental pastimes. 
He is expert in the art of enjoying conjugal pastimes, the 
deliverer of the earth, the maintainer of the creation, the 
greatest of all, the propounder of life's ultimate goal, He who 
helps one achieve the ultimate goal of life, the Lord of Gaya, . 
Text 71 
sobhd-priyah subha-karo 
vipula-sn-pratdpanah 
kesi-daitya-haro ddni 
data dharmartha-sadhanah 


326 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth RAtra 
. . . dear to all beautiful women, the benefactor of all, the 
possessor of unlimited opulence, the killer of the Kesi demon, 
the most munificent giver of charity, the supplier of everything 
required for the maintenance of the creation, the goal of all 
religious principles, . .. 
Text 72 
tri-sdma trika-krt-sdmah 
sarvdtmd sarua-dipanah 
sarvajnah sugato buddho 
bauddha-rupi jandrdanah 
. . . glorified by the three kinds of Vedic literature, He who 
divided the Vedas into three parts, the life and soul of all 
living beings, the illuminator of the universe, the omniscient 
Lord, the auspicious goal for all living entities, fully intelligent, 
Buddha, the shelter of all living entities,. . . 
Text 73 
daitydrih pundarikdksah 
padma-ndbho 'cyuto 'sitah 
padmdksah padmajd-kdnto 
garuddsana-vigrahah 
. . . and the killer of the demons. He has eyes like lotus petals 
and He has a lotus-like navel. He is infalliable and never 
contaminated. He has lotus eyes. He is the Lord of Brahma 
and He rides on the back of Garuda. 
Text 74 
gdrutmata-dharo dhenu- 
pdlakah supta-vigmhah 
artihd pdpahdnehd 
bhuti-hd bhuti-vardhanah 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 
Sri Bala-Krsna appreciates the service attitude of Garuda. He 
is the maintainer of the cows and He dwells in the core of 
everyone's heart. He is the remover of all distress, the destroyer 
of a devotee's sinful reactions, free from material desires, the 
one who takes away material opulence, the one who enhances 
spiritual opulence,. .. 
Text 75 
vanchd-kalpa-drumah sdksdn- 
medhdvi garuda-dhvajah 
nilah svetah sitah krsno 
gaurah pitdmbara-cchadah 
. . . like a desire tree that fulfills the desires of everyone, 
and supremely wise. His chariot is decorated with the flag of 
Garuda and He dresses in blue, white, black, gold and yellow 
garments. 
Text 76 
bhaktdrti-ndsano girnah 
sirno jirna-tanu-cchadah 
bali-priyo bali-haro 
bali-vardhana-tat-parah 
He mitigates the distress of the devotees. He is the glorified 
Lord, the most subtle, and the oldest. He assumes various 
transcendental forms. He is dear to Bali, He who deceived Bali, 
He who arrested Bali,. . . 
Text 77 
vdmano vdmadevas ca 
daitydrih khanja-locanah 
udirnah sarvato-goptd 
yoga-gamyah purdtanah 


328 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
... Lord Vamana, Vamadeva, the killer of the demons, the lotus- 
eyed Lord, most magnanimous, the protector in all respects, 
realized through the practice of bhakti-yoga, the primeval Lord, 
Text 78 
ndrdyano nara-vapuh 
krsndrjuna-vapur-dharah 
tri-ndbhis tri-vrtdm-sevyo 
yugdtito yugdtmakah 
... and the shelter of all living entities. He appears in a human- 
like form and He assumes the forms of Krsna and Aijuna. In 
His abdomen, the material modes of nature reside. He is the 
worshipable Lord of the demigods, the Supreme Lord who 
appears in every millenium, He who establishes the four yugas, 
Text 79 
harhso hamsi hamsa-vapur 
hamsa-rupi krpdmayah 
hardtmako hara-vapur 
hara-bhdvana-tat-parah 
. . . worshiped by swan-like men and women, the form of a 
transcendental swan, Haihsa-avatara, full of mercy, the life and 
soul of Siva, the form of Siva, always meditated upon by Siva,. . 
Text 80 
dharma-rdgo yama-vapus 
tripurdntaka-vigrahah 
yudhisthira-priyo rdjya- 
ddtd rdjendra-vigrahah 
... the propounder of religious principles, the superintendent of 
death, the destroyer of the Tripura demon, dear to Yudhisthira, 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 329 
the giver of a kingdom to Yudhisthira, and the personification 
of the foremost of kings. 
Text 81 
indra-yajna-haro govar- 
dhana-dhari girdm-patih 
yajna-bhug yajna-kdri ca 
hitakdn hitdntakah 
Sri Bala-Krsna stopped the performance of sacrifice to Indra. 
He is the lifter of Govardhana Hill, the master of sound, the 
enjoyer of sacrificial performances, the performer of sacrifice, 
the supreme benefactor, the sum total of beneficial objects,. 
Text 82 
akrura-vandyo visva-dhrug 
asva-hdn haydsyakah 
hayagnvah smita-mukho 
gopl-kdnto 'runa-dhvajah 
. . . and worshiped by Akrura. He holds the universe on one of 
His hoods. He appears with the head of a horse. He assumes the 
form of a horse. He appears as Hayagriva. He is always smiling 
and the lover of the gopis. He carries a red flag. 
Text 83 
nirasta-samydtisayah 
sarvdtmd sarua-khandanah 
gopi-pnti-karo gopi- 
mano-hdri harir harih 
There is no one equal to or greater than Him. He is the life and 
soul of all existence. He refutes all philosophical discrepancies 
and He gives pleasure to the gopls. He is the enchanter of 
the gopls' minds, the destroyer of all miseries, the attracter of 
everyone's heart,. . . 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 84 
laksmano bharato rdmah 
satrughno nila-rupakah 
hanumaj-jnana-data ca 
jdnaki-vallabho girih 
. . . Laksmana, Bharata, Rama, and Satrughna. He has a bluish 
complexion. He is the giver of knowledge to Hanuman, the 
beloved Lord of Sita, and the Lord of the mountians. 
Text 85 
giri-rupi giri-natho 
giri-yajna-pravdrtakah 
girer anga-dharo gopa- 
gopi-go-tapa-ndsanah 
Sri Bala-Krsna assumed the form of a mountain. He inaugurated 
the worship of Govardhana Hill, established Govardhana- 
puja, and lifted Govardhana Hill. He destroyed the fear of the 
cowherd men, women, and cows of Vraja. 
Text 86 
bhavdbdhi-potah subha-krt 
subha-bhuk subha-vardhanah 
vardroho hari-mukho 
manduka-gati-ldlasah 
He is the boat for crossing the material ocean. He awards 
auspiciousness to those who worship Him. He enjoys auspicious 
association and He enhances the auspiciousness of everyone 
who seeks it. He has the most beautiful bodily features. He is 
the chief among all mitigators of distress, fond of imitating 
frogs,. . . 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 
Text 87 
netra-baddha-kriyo gopa- 
bdlako bdlako gunah 
gundrnava-priyo bhuta- 
ndtho bhutdtmakas ca sah 
. . . fond of playing blind man's bluff, a cowherd boy, a 
transcendental child, full of transcendental qualities, dear 
because of possessing an ocean of transcendental qualities, 
the Lord of the living entities, and the Supersoul of all living 
entities. 
Text 88 
indra-jid bhaya-ddtd ca 
yajusdm-patir ap-patih 
girbdna-vandyo girbdna- 
gatir isto gurur gatih 
Sri Bala-Krsna created fear in the mind of Indrajit. He is the 
Lord of sacrifice, the master of all bodies of water, respected by 
the demigods, the goal of the demigods, the supreme object of 
worship, the original spiritual master, the supreme destination, 
Text 89 
caturmukha-stuti-mukho 
brahma-ndrada-sevitah 
umakanta-dhiydrddhyo 
ganana-guna-simakah 
. . . always glorified by the four-headed Brahma, served by 
Brahma and Narada, worshiped with devotion by the husband 
of Uma, the Supreme Lord who possesses unlimited divine 
qualities,. .. 


332 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth RAtra 
Text 90 
simanta-mdrgo ganikd- 
gana-mandala-sevitah 
gopi-drk^padma-madhupo 
gopi-dpi-mandalesvarah 
. . . beyond the perception of those performing sddhana, 
decorated with a garland of jasmine flowers, and the object of 
the goptj'vision. He drinks the nectar from the lotus-like faces 
of the gopis. 
Text 91 
gopy-dlingana-krd gopl- 
hrdaydnanda-kdrakah 
mayura-puccha-sikharah 
kankandngada-bhusanah 
He embraces the gopis and gives pleasure to the hearts of the 
gopis. He is decorated with a peacock feather and wears armlets 
and bracelets. 
Text 92 
svarna-campaka-sandolah 
svama-nupura-bhusanah 
svarna-tatanka-karnas ca 
svama-campaka-bhusitah 
Sri Bala-Krsna is decorated with golden campaka flowers. His 
lotus feet are adorned with golden anklets, He wears golden 
earrings and is decorated with a garland of golden campaka 
flowers. 
Text 93 
cudagrdrpita-ratnendra- 
sdrah svarndmbara-cchadah 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 333 
djdnu-bdhuh sumukho 
jagaj-janana-tat-parah 
He wears a jeweled crown and is dressed in gold and blue 
garments. His arms reach to His knees, He has a most attractive 
face and He is always eager to benefit the people of this world. 
Text 94 
bala-kriddti-capalo 
bhandlra-vana-nandanah 
mahd-sdlah sruti-mukho 
gangd-carana-sevanah 
Sri Bala-Krsna relishes His childhood pastimes. He is very 
restless, and He enjoys playing in the Bhandlravana forest. He 
is the Lord of the trees and the speaker of the Vedas. His lotus 
feet are served by Ganga-devl. 
Text 95 
gangdmbu-pddah karajd- 
kara-toydjalesvarah 
gandakl-tlra-sambhuto 
gandaki-jala-mardanah 
His lotus feet are the source of the Ganges. Indeed, His toenail 
is the source of that transcendental water. He appears on the 
banks of the river Gandaki and He takes pleasure within the 
water of the Gandaki. 
Text 96 
sdlagrdmah sdla-rupi 
sasibhusana-bhusanah 
sasi-pddah sasi-nakho 
vardrho yuvati-priyah 


334 
Sri Narada-pa5icaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Sri Bala-Krsna manifests Himself as the salagrdma-slla. He 
appears in various forms of salagrdma-sllas, and He is the 
decoration on the head of Siva. His lotus feet and toenails are 
effulgent like the moon. He manifests Himself as the Boar 
incarnation. He is very dear to young women,. . . 
Text 97 
prema-pradah prema-labhyo 
bhaktydtito bhava-pradah 
ananta-sayi sava-krd 
chaydno yoginisvarah 
. . . the bestower of love of God, obtained by means of pure 
love, the goal of pure devotional service, and the bestower of 
supreme auspiciousness. He lies on the bed of Ananta-sesa, in 
the ocean of milk. He is the Lord of the goddess presiding over 
the path of yoga,. . . 
Text 98 
putand-sakuni-prdna- 
hdrako bhava-pdlakah 
sarva-laksana-laksanyo 
laksmimdn laksmandgrajah 
. . . the destroyer of Putana and Sakuni, the maintainer of the 
cosmic manifestation, endowed with all auspicious symptoms, 
the Lord of Laksml, the elder brother of Laksmana, .. . 
Text 99 
sarvdnta-krt sarva-guhyah 
sarvdtito 'surdntakah 
prdtar-dsana-sampurno 
dharani-renu-gunthitah 
. . . the annihilator of everything, most confidential among 
all confidential subjects, beyond the reach of mundane sense 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 
335 
perception, and the killer of the demons. He enjoys a hearty 
breakfast and thereafter, His transcendental body becomes 
covered with the dust ofVraja. 
Text 100 
ijyo mahejyah sarvejya 
ijya-rupijya-bhojanah 
brahmdrpana-paro nityam- 
brahmdgni-ptiti-ldlasah 
Sri Bala-Krsna is to be worshiped. He is supremely worshipable, 
worshipable by all, and the propounder of the process of 
worship. He enjoys the ingredients of worship, He is very dear 
to those who offer everything while worshiping Him, and He 
personally maintains those who perform sacrifice to please 
Him. 
Text 101 
madano madandrddhyo 
manomathana-rupakah 
nlldncitdkuncitako 
bala-vpiddbhibhusitah 
He is the transcendental Cupid, worshiped by Cupid, and the 
enchanter of the mind. He possesses dark curly hair and is 
surrounded by young cowherd boys. 
Text 102 
stoka-kndd-paro nityam 
stoka-bhojana-tat-parah 
lalitd-visakhd-sydma- 
lata-vandita-pddakah 
Sri Bala-Krsna enjoys transcendental pastimes. He is eternal. 
He eats moderately. His lotus feet are worshiped by Lalita, 
Visakha and Syamalata. 


336 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth RAtra 
Text 103 
srimati-priya-kdri ca 
srimatyd pada-pujitah 
sri-sarhsevita-pdddbjo 
venu-vddya-visdradah 
He is very dear to Radhika. His lotus feet are worshiped by 
Radhika. His lotus feet are served with love by Radhika and He 
is very expert in playing His flute. 
Text 104 
srnga-vetra-karo nityarh- 
srhga-vddya-priyah sadd 
balardmdnujah srimdn 
gajendra-stuta-pddakah 
Sri Bala-Krsna carries a buffalo bom and a stick. He is fond 
of blowing His buffalo horn. He is the younger brother of 
Balarama and full of transcendental opulence. His lotus feet 
are glorified by the king of elephants, Gajendra. 
Text 105 
haldyudhah pita-vdso 
nildmbara-paricchadah 
gajendra-vaktro herdmbo 
laland-kula-pdlakah 
Sri Bala-Krsna carries a plough in His hand, wears yellow 
garments, and also dresses in blue clothing. He sometimes 
assumes a face like that of an elephant. He is a great hero and 
He is the maintainer of the damsels of Vraja. 
Text 106 
rasa-kridd-vinodas ca 
gopl-nayana-hdrakah 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 337 
bala-prado vita-bhayo 
bhaktdrti-parindsanah 
He is very fond of enjoying His rasa dance pastimes. He attracts 
the attention of the gopis. He is the bestower of spiritual strength, 
the remover of fear, the destroyer of the devotees' distress,. . . 
Text 107 
bhakta-priyo bhakti-ddtd 
damodara ibhas-patih 
indra-darpa-haro 'nanto 
nityanandas cid-dtmakah 
. . . very dear to the devotees, the one who awards devotional 
service to those who aspire for it, the Lord whose abdomen was 
bound by a rope, the Lord of the elephants, the destroyer of 
Indra's pride, unlimited, etemaly blissful, the embodiment of 
spiritual potency,. . . 
Text 108 
caitanya-rupas caitanyas 
cetana guna-varjitah 
advaitdcdra-nipuno 
'dvaitah parama-ndyakah 
.. . the form of supreme consciousness, fully cognizant, devoid 
of mundane qualities, one without a second, undivided, the 
foremost heroic personality,. . . 
Text 109 
siva-bhakti-prado bhakto 
bhaktdndm-antardsayah 
vidvattamo durgati-hd 
punydtmd punya-pdlakah 


338 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
. . . and the giver of devotional service to Siva. He sometimes 
takes the role of a devotee, and He is the eternal Lord of the 
devotees, the best of learned personalities, the remover of all 
sufferings, the most sacred existence, the protector of pious 
living entities, . . . 
Text 110 
jyesthah sresthah kanisthas ca 
nistho 'tistha umd-patih 
surendra-vandya-carano 
gotra-hd gotra-varjitah 
. . . the oldest, the greatest, the youngest, always fixed in 
His determination, always active, the husband of Uma, and 
worshiped by the king of the demigods. He does not belong to 
a particular caste and He is without any particular family. 
Text 111 
ndrdyana-priyo ndra- 
sdyl ndrada-sevitah 
gopdla-bdla-sathsevyah 
sadd-nirmala-mdnasah 
He is very dear to Narayana. He lies on the water. He is served 
by Narada, served with love by the cowherd boys, always pure- 
hearted, . . . 
Text 112 
manu-mantro mantra-patir 
dhdtd dhdma-vivarjitah 
dham-prado dhrti-guno 
yoglndro kalpa-pddapah 
. . . the deliverer of the mind, the master of mantras, and the 
one who maintains all others. He has no fixed residence, and 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 339 
He is the support of the earth, the quality of perseverance, and 
the foremost of yogis. He is like a desire tree, . . . 
Text 113 
acintydtisaydnanda- 
rupi pdndava-pujitah 
sisupdla^prdna-hdri 
dantavakra-nisudanah 
. .. inconcevably blissful, worshiped by the Pandavas, the killer 
of Sisupala, the slayer of Dantavakra, . . . 
Text 114 
anddir ddi-puruso 
gotri gotra-vivarjitah 
sarvdpat-tdrako durgo 
dusta-daitya-kuldntakah 
. . . without beginning, the primeval Lord, the origin of the 
ancient dynasties, without family designation, the vanquisher 
of the three-fold material miseries, He who imprisons the 
conditioned souls, the killer of the demons and miscreants, . 
Text 115 
nirantarah suci-mukho 
nikumbha-kula-dipanah 
bhdnur hanur dhanuh sthdnuh 
krsdnuh krtanur dhanuh 
. . . always existing, ever truthful, the light of Nikumbha's 
family, the sun-god, and Hanuman. He carries a bow in His 
hand. He is the almighty Lord, the most subtle existence, and 
fully accomplished in the art of creation. 


340 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth RAtra 
Textile 
janur janmddi-rahito 
jdti-gotra-vivarjitah 
ddvdnala-nihantd ca 
danujdrir bakdpahd 
Sri Bala-Krsna is the origin of all. He does not have to undergo 
the pangs of birth and death. He does not belong to any caste 
or lineage. He is the extinguisher of the forest fire, the enemy 
of the sons of Dhanu, and the killer of Bakasura. 
Text 117 
prahldda-bhakto bhaktesta- 
ddtd ddnava-gotra-hd 
surabhir dugdha-po dugdha- 
han saurih sucdm-harih 
Sri Bala-Krsna manifests Himself as the devotee, Prahlada. He 
bestows the goal of life to His devotees. He is the killer of the 
Danavas, Surabhi, fond of drinking milk, steals milk products 
f rom His neighbors, the form of pure goodness, the most sacred 
existence, the remover of all miseries, . . . 
Text 118 
yathesta-do 'ti-sulabhah 
sarvajnah smvato-mukhah 
daitydrih kaitabhdris ca 
kamsdrih sarva-tdpanah 
. . . supplies the necessities of life to all living beings, easily 
accessible for those who are pure, omniscient, facing all 
directions, the killer of the demons, the killer of Kaitabha, the 
killer of Karhsa, and the remover of all suffering. 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 
Text 119 
dvi-bhujah sad-bhujo hy antar- 
bhujo mdtdli-sdrathih 
sesah sesddhindthas ca 
sesi sesdnta-vigrahah 
Sri Bala-Krsna has a two-armed form. He has a six-armed form, 
and He sometimes conceals His arms. He is the charioteer of 
Indra, Sesa, the Lord of Sesa, the origin of Sesa, . . . 
Text 120 
ketur dharitn-caritras 
catur-murtis catur-gatih 
caturdhd catur-dtmd ca 
catur-varga-praddyakah 
. . . and the symbol of victory. He sometimes wanders over the 
earth. He is the origin of the quadruple expansions, the shelter 
of the four kinds of neophyte devotees, and the giver of the 
four kinds of liberation. He sometimes assumes four forms 
simultaneously. He awards the four objectives of human life. 
Text 121 
kandarpa-darpa-hdn ca 
nityah sarvanga-sundarah 
sadpati-patir netd 
data moksa-gurur dvijah 
He destroys the pride of Cupid. He is ever-existing. He is the all- 
attractive Lord, the Lord of the husband of Saci, the supreme 
hero, the most charitable, and the bestower of liberation to the 
spiritual masters and brdhmanas. 
Text 122 
hrta-sva-ndtho 'ndthasya 
ndthah sn-garudasanah 


Sri Narada-paScaratra • Fourth Ratra 
sridharah srikarah sreyah 
path gatir apam-gatih 
Sri Bala-Krsna is the only shelter of the materially impoverished. 
Garuda is His carrier. He keeps Laksmi on His chest and He 
has lotus-like hands. He is the ultimate destination of the 
transcendentalists, the goal of all spiritual paths, the cause of 
the manifestation of water,.. . 
Text 123 
asesa-vandyo gitatma 
gitd-gdna-pardyanah 
gdyath-dhdma subhado 
veldmoda-pardyanah 
. . . unlimitedly glorified, the Bhagavad-gitd, the singing of the 
verses of Bhagavad-gitd, the Gayatri mantra, the bestower of 
auspiciousness, the enjoyer of sporting in the water,. .. 
Text 124 
dhanddi-pah kula-patir 
vdsudevdtmajo 'ri-hd 
ajaika-pdt sahasrdkso 
nitydtmd nitya-vigrahah 
. . . the master of wealth, the Lord of the Yadu dynasty, the 
son of Vasudeva, the killer of His enemies, one of the eleven 
Rudras, He who possesses one thousand eyes, and eternal. He 
possesses innumerable eternal forms. 
Text 125 
nityah sarvagatah sthdnur 
ajo 'gnir giri-ndyakah 
go-ndyakah soka-hantd 
kdmdrih' kama-dipanah 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 
343 
Sri Bala-Krsna is eternally existing. He resides everywhere. 
He is fixed, unbom, Agni, the best of mountains, the Lord of 
the cows, the destroyer of lamentation, the enemy of lust, the 
stimulator of transcendental lust,. .. 
Text 126 
vijitdtmd vidheydtmd 
somdtmd soma-vigrahah 
graha-rupt grahddhyakso 
graha-mardana-kdrakah 
self controlled, fully independent, the nourishment of 
all kinds of plants and creepers, the moon-god, the form of 
the planets, the director of the planets, and the Lord who 
neutralizes the bad effects of inauspicious planets. 
Text 127 
vaikhdnasah punya-jano 
jagad-ddir jagat-patih 
nilendivara-bho nila- 
vapuh kdmdnga-ndsanah 
Sri Bala-Krsna sometimes accepts the vdnaprastha order of life. 
He is full of piety, the creator of the universe, and the Lord of 
the universe. His complexion is like the color of a blue lotus. 
He has a blue complexion and He is the destroyer of Cupid's 
arrows. 
Text 128 
kdma-fnjdnvitah sthulah 
krsah krsa-tanur nijah 
naigameyo 'gni-putras ca 
sdn-mdtura umd-patih 
He is satisfied by the chanting of the Kama-gayatri mantra, the 
creator of the gross material elements, and the creator of the 


344 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
subtle material elements. He has a transcendental body, and He 
is the owner of everything, the source of all Vedic knowledge, 
the son of Agni, and Kartekeya. 
Text 129 
manduka-vesadhyaksas ca 
tathd ndkula-ndsanah 
sirhho hanndrah keslndra- 
hantd tdpa-nivdranah 
Sri Bala-Krsna imitates the movements of frogs. He is the killer 
of demoniac people, Nrsimhadeva, the Lord of the elephants, 
the killer of KesI, and the nullifler of material miseries. 
Text 130 
girindrajd-pdda-sevyah 
sadd-nirmala-mdnasah 
saddsiva-priyo devah 
sivah sarua umd-patih 
The lotus feet of Sri Bala-Krsna is served by the daughter of 
the Himalayas. He is always pure in mind, dear to Sadasiva, the 
Supreme Lord, most auspicious, the all in all, the Lord of Uma, 
Text 131 
siva-bhakto girdm ddih 
sivdrddhyo jagad-guruh 
siva-priyo nila-kanthah 
siti-kantha usd-patih 
a devotee of Siva, the controlling Deity of speech, the 
worshipable Lord of Siva, the spiritual master of the universe, 
dear to Siva, Siva, nondifferent from Siva, and the Lord of Usa. 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 
345 
Text 132 
pradyumna-putro nisathah 
sathah satha-dhandpahd 
dhupa-priyo dhupa-data 
guggulv-aguru-dhupitah 
Sri Bala-Krsna appeared as the son of Pradyumna. He acts 
without duplicity, He is the greatest cheater, and He takes away 
the wealth of cheaters. He is worshiped with incense, He enjoys 
the aroma of incense offered with devotion, and He is pleased 
by the aroma of guggula and aguru. 
Text 133 
nildmbarah plta-vdsd 
rakta-sveta-paricchadah 
nisd-patir diva-ndtho 
deva-brdhmana-pdlakah 
Sri Bala-Krsna's complexion is blue, like the sky. He dresses 
in yellow garments and decorates Himself with red and white 
cloth. He is the Lord of the night, the Lord of the day, the 
maintainer of the demigods and brdhmanas, . .. 
Text 134 
umd-priyo yogi-mano- 
hdri hdra-vibhusitah 
khagendra-vandya-pdddbjah 
sevdtapa-parari-mukhah 
. . . dear to Uma, the enchanter of the minds of the yogis, and 
decorated with a necklace. His lotus feet are worshiped by 
Gaurda, and He never abandons those who strictly engage in 
His devotional service. 


346 
Sri Narada-paScaratra • Fourth RAtra 
Text 135 
pardrtha-do para-patih 
pardt-parataro guruh 
sevd-priyo nirgunas ca 
sa-gunah sruti-sundarah 
He is the bestower of one's real self-interest, the master of the 
material nature, the Supreme Absolute Truth, the original 
spiritual master, pleased by the execution of devotional service, 
devoid of material qualities, endowed with transcendental 
qualities, He who possesses beautiful ears, . . . 
Text 136 
devadhidevo deveso 
deva-pujyo divd-patih 
divah path brhad-bhdnuh 
sevitepsita-ddyakah 
. . . the Lord of the demigods, the controller of the demigods, 
worshipable by the demigods, the Lord of the sun-god, the 
master of heaven, and the sun-god. He awards the desired 
results to His servants. 
Text 137 
gotamdsrama-vdsi ca 
gotamah sn-nisevitah 
raktdmbara-dharo divyo 
devi-paddbja-piijitah 
He becomes a resident of Gautama's asrama, where He is 
adored by the sage, Gautama. He has reddish lips, He is fully 
transcendental, and His lotus feet are worshiped by the goddess 
of fortune. 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 
Text 138 
sevitdrtha-praddtd ca 
sevd-sevya-girindrajah 
dhatur-mano-vihdn ca 
vidhdtd dhatur-uttamah 
He supplies the ingredients for His worship. He is the 
worshipable Lord of the daughter of the Himalayas. He creates 
unlimitedly within His mind, He is the creator, and He is 
superior to the creator. 
Text 139 
ajndna-hantd jndnendra- 
vandyo vandya-dhanadhipah 
apdm-patir jala-nidhir 
dhard-patir asesakah 
He is the destroyer of ignorance, worshiped by the best of 
learned personalities, the treasure of exalted devotees, the 
Lord of water, the creator of oceans, the Lord of the earth, 
unlimited,. . . 
Text 140 
devendra-vandyo lokdtmd 
trilokdtmd trilokapdt 
gopdla-ddyako gandha- 
prado guhyaka-sevitak 
... adored by the best of demigods, the life and soul of all living 
entities, the life of the inhabitants of the three worlds, the 
annihilator of the three worlds, the supplier of all necessities 
to the cows, fond of decorating Himself with sandalwood paste, 
served by His devotee Guhyaka,. . . 


348 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 141 
nirgunah purusdtitah 
prakrteh para ujjvalah 
kdrttikeyo 'mrta-hartd 
ndgdrir ndga-hdrakah 
. . . aloof from the three modes of material nature, the origin 
of the three purusdvatdras, the essence of the material world, 
greatly effulgent, Kartekeya, He who took away the necter from 
the demons, the enemy of the Nagas, and the destroyer of the 
Nagas. 
Text 142 
ndgendra-sdyl dharani- 
patir dditya-rupakah 
yasasvi vigatdsi ca 
kuruksetrddhipah sasl 
Sri Bala-Krsna lies on the bed of Ananta-sesa. He lifted the 
earth and He assumed the form of the sun-god. He is the most 
famous personality, free from material desires, the hero of 
Kuruksetra, a moon-like personality,. . . 
Text 143 
sasakdrih subhdcdro 
girbdna-gana-sevitah 
gati-prado nara-sakhah 
sltaldtmd yasah-patih 
. . . and the enemy of the moon-god. His actions are always 
auspicious. He is served by the demigods, the bestower of the 
goal of life, the real friend of human society, the most sublime 
personality, the Lord of fame, . . . 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 
349 
Text 144 
vijitdrir ganddhyakso 
yogdtmd yoga-pdlakah 
devendra-sevyo devendra- 
pdpa-hdn yaso-dhanah 
... the conquerer of His enemies, the leader of human society, 
the goal of mystic yoga, the protector of the path of yoga, 
served by the king of the demigods, the destroyer of the sinful 
reactions of the king of the demigods, the wealth of mother 
Yasoda, ... 
Text 145 
akincana-dhanah snmdn 
ameydtmd mahadri-dhrk 
mahd-pralaya-kdri ca 
sad-suto jaya-pradah 
... the wealth of those who are bereft of all material possessions, 
most handsome, limitless, the lifter of the great mountain, and 
the annihilator of the entire creation. He appears in this world 
as the son of Sac! and all of His activities are glorious. 
Text 146 
janesvarah sarva-vidhi- 
rupi brdhmana-pdlakah 
simhdsana-nivdsi ca 
cetandrahitah sivah 
Sri Bala-Krsna is the controller of human society, the creator 
of all rules and regulations, the support of the brdhmanas, He 
who most deserves to sit on a throne, without any material 
consciousness, always auspicious, .. . 


350 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 147 
siva-prado daksa-yajiia- 
hantd bhrgu-nivdrakah 
virabhadra-bhaydvdrtah 
kdlah parama-nirvranah 
. . . the giver of auspiciousness and the destroyer of Daksa's 
sacrifice. He checked Bhrgu and created fear in the mind 
of Virabhadra. He is time personified and He can never be 
harmed. 
Text 148 
udukhala-nibandhas ca 
sokdtmd soka-ndsanah 
dtma-yonih svayarh-jato 
vaikhdnah-pdpa-hdrakah 
Sri Bala-Krsna was bound to a wooden mortar. He is the source 
of lamentation, the destroyer of lamentation, self-manifested, 
the Lord who appears out of His own sweet will, the destroyer 
of the ascetics' sinful reactions, . . . 
Text 149 
kirti-pradah kirti-ddtd 
gajendra-bhujapmjitah 
sarvdntardtmd sarvdtmd 
moksa-rupi nirdyudhah 
uddhava-jndna-ddtd ca 
yamaldrjuna-bhanjanah 
. . . the bestower of piety, the giver of fame, worshiped by the 
king of the elephants, the Supersoul of all, the life and soul of 
all living beings, the very form of liberation, He who does not 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 
351 
require any weapons to defend Himself, the giver of knowledge 
to Uddhava, and He who uprooted the yamala-arjuna trees. 
Texts 150-151 
Phalasmti (The result of hearing) 
ity etat kathitarh devi 
sahasrarh ndma cottamam 
adi-devasya vai visnor 
bdlakatvam upeyusah 
yah pathet pathayed vdpi 
srnuydt srdvayita vd 
kirn phalarh labhate devi 
vakturh ndsti mama priye 
O Goddess, I have thus revealed to you the one thousand 
names of Sri Bala-Gopala. My dear one, I am unable to properly 
explain the wonderful result one obtains by reciting this Gopdla- 
sahasra-ndma. This result is achieved whether one personally 
recites these holy names, has someone else recite them, reads 
them, or has someone else read them. The original Personality 
of Godhead appeared in this world, assuming the form of a 
child. 
Text 152 
brahmahatyadi kdniha 
pdpdnica mahantica 
vilayam ydnti devesi 
gopdlasya prasadataha 
O Queen of the demigods, by the mercy of Lord Gopala, one's 
sinful reactions, even those accrued by the killing of a brdhmana, 
are completely destroyed. 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Texts 153-155 
dvddasydrh paurnamdsydm vd 
saptamydrh ravi-vdsare 
paksa-dvaye ca samprdpya 
hari-vdsaram eva ca 
ya pathet smuydd vdpi 
najanus tasya vidyate 
satyam satyam mahesdni 
satyam satyam na samsayah 
ekddasydrh sucir bhutvd 
seuyd bhaktir hare subhd 
srutvd ndma-sahasrdni 
naro mucyeta pdtakdt 
O wife of Mahesa, one who recites or hears the one thousand 
holy names of Lord Gopala, either on DvadasI, Pumima, 
Saptami, or EkadasI, during either the period of the waxing 
or waning moon, will not again be bom in this material world. 
This is a fact. 
Text 156 
na satdya praddtabyarh 
na dharma dhvjine punh 
nindakdya ca viprdndm 
devdndm vaisnavasya ca 
This sahasra-ndma should not be instmcted to those who are 
duplicitous and deceitful, as well as to those who blaspheme 
the demigods, brdhmanas and Vaisnavas. 
Text 157 
guru bhakti vihindya 
siva dvesa ratdya ca 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 
353 
radha durgd bheda matau 
satyam satyam na samsayah 
One should never impart these holy names to those who have 
no devotion for the lotus feet of the spiritual master, who are 
opposed to Lord Siva, and who make a distinction between 
Radha and Durga. 
Text 158 
yadi nindehan mahesdni 
guruha sa bhaved dhruvam 
vaisnavesu ca sdntesu 
nityam vairdghya rdgisu 
O wife of Mahesa, if a person blasphemes the Vaisnavas, who 
are always peaceful and detached from material concerns, he is 
to be considered as the killer of his spiritual master. 
Texts 159-160 
brdhmandya visudhdya 
sandhydrcana ratdya ca 
advaita dcdra nirate 
siva bhakti ratdya ca 
guru vdkya rathdyaiva 
nityam deyam mahesvari 
gopitam sarva tantresu 
tava snehdt prakirtitam 
O Goddess, the Gopdla-sahasra-ndma should be taught to pious 
brdhmanas who are faithfully engaged in performing their 
occupational duties, who follow the brahminical rules and 
regulations strictly, who are faithful to Lord Siva, and who 
obey the orders of their spiritual master. Although these holy 
names are very confidential, I have revealed them to you, out 
of affection. 


354 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fourth RAtra 
Text 161 
ndtah parataram stotmrh 
ndtah parataro manuh 
ndtah parataro devo 
yugesv api catuhsv api 
There are no prayers or mantras that are more worshipable, in 
any of the four yugas, than these one thousand holy names of 
Bala-Krsna. 
Text 162 
hari-bhakteh pard ndsti 
moksa-sreni nagendraje 
vaisnavebhyah par am ndsti 
prdnebhyo 'pi priyd mama 
O daughter of the Himalayas, there is no path superior to 
devotional service to Lord Had for achieving liberation from 
material bondage. Similarly, there is no one superior to a 
Vaisnava in this world. The devotees and devotional service are 
as dear to me as my own life! 
Texts 163-164 
vaisnavesu ca sahgo me 
sadd bhavatu sundari 
yasya varhse kvacid daivad 
vaisnavo rdga-varjitah 
bhavet tad-varhsake ye ye 
purve syuh pitaras tathd 
bhavanti nirmalds te hi 
ydnti nirvdnatdrh hare 
O beautiful one, may I always have the good fortune of 
associating with Vaisnavas. When a Vaisnava who is detached 
from materialistic life is bom, the forefathers of his family 


The One Thousand Names of Lord GopAla 
355 
become free from all sinful reactions and are thus enabled to 
go back to Godhead. 
Text 165 
bahuna kirn ihoktena 
vaisnavdndm tu darsandt 
nirmaldh pdpa-rahitdh 
pdpinah syur na samsayah 
What more can I say? Simply by having the darsana of a Vaisnava, 
even sinful people are liberated from all sinful reactions. 
Text 166 
kalau bdlesvaro devah 
kalau gangaiva kevald 
kalau nasty eva nasty eva 
nasty eva gatir anyathd 
Lord Bala-Gopala should be the only worshipful Deity for the 
people of Kali-yuga, just as the Ganges is the most sacred river. 
There is no other way, there is no other way, there is no other 
way for achieving perfection in Kali-yuga other than worhiping 
Lord Bala-Gopala and the Ganges. 
Thus ends the translation of the eighth chapter of the Fourth 
Rdtra of Sri Ndrada-pancardtra. 


Chapter 9 
The Paraphernalia Used For 
Worshiping the Lord 
Text 1 
sri mahadeva uvaca 
paribhdsdm atho vaksye 
upacdra-vidhau hareh 
dravydndm ydvati sankhyd 
pdtrdHdm dravya-samgatih 
Mahadeva said: Now I shall describe the ingredients that are 
used for Sri Hari's worship. Each ingredient should be kept on 
a plate. 
Text 2 
hdtakam rdjatam tdmra- 
mdra-kuta-mrgddind 
upacdra-vidhdv etat 
dravyam dhur manisinah 
Learned persons have prescribed the use of various articles for 
worship, including gold, silver, copper, dhuturd flowers, and 
deerskin. 
Text 3 
dsane panca puspdni 
svdgate sat catus-phalam 
jalam sydmdka-durvdbja- 
visnu-krdntdbhir Iritam 
Five types of flowers should be put on the Lord's sitting place. 
Six drops of water should be sprinkled while invoking the 
357 


358 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth RAtra 
Lord's presence. Aparajitd flowers, small rudra plants, grains, 
and durva grass are required for the worship of the Supreme 
Lord. 
Text 4 
padye cdrghye jalarh tdvad 
gandha-puspdksatdnvitam 
durvds tildksatam caiva 
kusdgra-sveta-sarsapdh 
The ingredients for preparing pddya are sandalwood paste, 
flowers, uncooked rice, and water. The ingredients for 
preparing arghya are durvd grass, sesame seeds, kusa grass and 
white mustard seeds. 
Texts 5-6 
jdti-phalam lavangarh ca 
kakkolarh toya-sat-phalam 
proktam dcamanarh kdrhsye 
madhuparkam ghrtarh madhu 
dadhnd saha palaikarii tu 
suddharh vdri tathdcame 
parimdnan tu pancdsat 
palarh vd suddham ambhasah 
The ingredients for preparing dcamaniya are nutmeg, cloves, 
camphor, and twenty-five grams of water. For preparing 
dcamaniya, it is also recommended that one use ghee, honey, 
yogurt and four grams of water—placing them in a brass 
container. For the second dcamaniya, one needs about two 
hundred grams of fresh water. 
Text 7 
nirmalenodakendtha 
sarvatra paripumatd 


The Paraphernalia Used For Worshiping the Lord 
359 
salilarh garhitarh sarvarh 
tyajet puja-vidhau hareh 
One should fill some new pots with fresh water. One must be 
very careful not to ever use contaminated water in the worship 
of Lord Visnu. 
Texts 
vitasti-matrad 
adhikarh mula 
svarnady dbharanany 
eva muktd-ratna-yutdni ca 
Golden jeweled ornaments with pearls should be bigger than 
six inches in diameter. 
Text9 
candandguru-karpura- 
padma-gandha-paldvadhi 
nana-vidhdni puspdni 
pancdsad adhikdni ca 
One should offer sandalwood paste, aguru, camphor and 
padmagandha—all together weighing about four grams. One 
also requires about fifty flowers of various varieties. 
Text 10 
kdrhsyddi-nirmite pdtre 
dhupa-guggulu-karmabhdk 
ydvad bhaksyarh bhavet 
pumsas tdvad dadydj jandrdane 
One should offer incense, gugulu, and other items to the Lord 
on a brass plate. One should also offer one's favorite foods to 
Lord Janardana. 


360 
Sri Narada-paScaratra • Fourth RAtra 
Texts 11-12 
naivedyarh yat tu bhaksyarh 
ca tadadika-caturvidham 
karpurddi-ghrtdvrttih 
sd ca kdrpdsa-nirmitd 
saptdvrttayd susanjapto dipah 
sydc catur-angulah 
sild-pistarh vandandydrh 
saptadhd-varnayen narah 
The food should include preparations made with ghee that 
are chewed, sucked, licked and drunk. One should then offer 
camphor and other mouth fresheners to the Lord. One should 
offer a ghee lamp with wicks made of cotton and ghee, and 
the flames should be four inches high. Thereafter, one should 
offer obeisances to the Lord by chanting at least seven different 
mantras. 
Text 13 
kdryd tdmrddi-pdtre tat 
pntaye harimedhasah 
durvdksata-pramdnarh tu 
vijneyarh tu satadhikam 
Thereafter, for the pleasure of Sri Hari, one should put more 
than one hundred blades of durvd grass and some rice paddy 
on a copper plate and offer them to Him. 
Text 14 
tattvato 'yam vidhih prokto 
vibhave sati sarvadd 
esdm abhdve saruesdm yathd 
sakty dbhipujayet 


The Paraphernalia Used For .Worshiping the Lord 
sarva-bhogdnvito bhutva 
vrajed ante hareh puram 
If a worshiper has the capacity, he should follow the above- 
mentioned procedure while worshiping the Lord. Otherwise, 
one can offer whatever is within his means. By doing so, one 
will achieve a life of happiness in this world and go back to 
Vaikuntha after quitting his temporary, material body. 
Thus ends the translation of the ninth chapter of the Fourth 
Rdtra of Sri Narada-pahcaratra. 


Chapter 10 
Five Types of Worship 
Text 1 
sn mahadeva uvdca 
yasya darsanam icchanti 
devd brahma-harddayah 
krpayd deva-devesa mad 
agre sannidhobhava 
(While invoking the Lord's presence, one should chant 
the following mantras.) Sri Mahadeva said: O Lord of the 
demigods—whose leaders, such as Brahma and Siva, always 
desire to see—kindly become visible to me. 
Text 2 
tasya teparamesdna svdgatam 
svdgatam prabho 
krtdrtho 'nugrhlto 'smi 
saphalam jivitam mama 
O Lord! O supreme controller, I welcome You. I have been 
blessed by You and so I am greatly satisfied. My life has now 
become successful. 
TextS 
yad dgato 'si devesa cid 
anandamaydvyaya 
ajnanad vd pramadad vd 
vaikalydt sadhanasya ca 
yady apurnam bhavet krtyarh 
tathdpy abhimukho bhava 
363 


364 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
O Lord of the demigods! O supremely blissful and inexhaustible 
Lord! You have so kindly appeared before me and so please 
forgive me if I commit offenses due to ignorance or a lack of 
proper sadhana. 
Text 4 
yad bhakti-lesa-samparkdt 
paramdnanda-sambhavah 
tasmai te paramesdya pddyam 
suddhdya kalpaye 
(While offering padya, one should chant the following mantra.) 
O Supreme Personality of Godhead, You award transcendental 
happiness to those who have performed even a tinge of 
devotional service. May the padya I am offering to You become 
sanctified. 
Text 5 
devdndm api devdya 
devdndrh devatdtmane 
dcdmarh kalpaydm isa 
cdtmandm suddhi-hetave 
(While offering dcamaniya, one should chant the following 
mantra.) You are the Lord of the demigods and the life and 
soul of the demigods. I therefore offer You this dcamaniya, for 
my purification. 
Text 6 
tdpa-traya-haram divyarh 
paramdnanda-sambhavam 
tdpa-traya-vimoksdya 
tavdrghyarh kalpaydmy aham 
(While offering arghya, one should chant the following mantra.) 
O supremely ecstatic Lord! O destroyer of the three-fold 


Five Types of Worship 
365 
material miseries! To get freedom from the three-fold material 
miseries, I offer you this arghya. 
Text 7 
sarva-kalmasa-hindya 
paripuma-mukhdtmane 
madhuparkam idarn deva 
kalpaydmi prasida me 
(While offering madhuparka, one should chant the following 
mantra.) I am offering madhuparka to the supremely blissful 
personality who is free from all sinful reactions. O Lord, kindly 
be pleased with me. 
Text 8 
ucchisto 'py asucirvdpi 
yasya smarana-mdtratah 
suddhim dpnoti tasmai te 
punar dcamaniyakam 
(While offering punar dcamaniya, one should chant the 
following mantra.) O Lord, all contamination becomes washed 
away simply by Your remembrance. I offer this punar dcamaniya 
unto You. 
Text 9 
paramananda-bodhdya 
nimagnd-nija-murttaye 
sdngapdngam idam sndnam 
kalpaydmy aham isa te 
(While offering sndnlya, one should chant the following 
mantra.) You are the embodiment of transcendental ecstasy 
and spiritual knowledge. You are always absorbed in Your own 
self. Please accept the sndniya that I offer to You. 


366 
Sri Narada-pancaraxra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 10 
mdyd-citra-patdcchanna- 
nija-guhyoru-tejase 
nirdvarana-vijndya vdsas 
te kalpaydmy aham 
(While offering vastra, one should chant the following mantra). 
O Supreme Lord, You keep Yourself concealed from the vision 
of gross materialists. Because You are now revealed, I offer this 
garment to You. 
Text 11 
yam dsritya mahd-mdyd 
jagat-sammohini soda 
tasmai te paramesdya 
kalpaydmy uttanyakam 
(While offering uttariya, one should chant the following 
mantra.) I offer this garment to the Supreme Lord, under 
whose shelter and guidance the external energy bewilders all 
of the conditioned souls within the universe. 
Text 12 
yasya sakti-trayenedam 
samprotam akhilam jagat 
yajna-sutrdya tasmai te 
yajna-sutram prakalpaye 
(While offering yajnupavlta, one should chant the following 
mantra.) I offer this sacred thread to the Supreme Lord, whose 
three principal energies are working inconceivably throughout 
the universe. 
Text 13 
svabhdva-sundardngdya 
nana-sakty dsraydya te 


Five Types of Worship 
367 
bhusandni vidtrdni 
kalpaydmi surdrcita 
(While offering bhusana, one should chant the following 
mantra.) He who is naturally beautiful and who is surrounded 
by various energies—I offer unto Him these ornaments. 
Text 14 
samasta-deva-devesa sarva- 
trpti-karam param 
akhandananda-sampurnam 
grhdna jalam uttamam 
(While offering water, one should chant the following mantra.) 
O master of the demigods, You satisfy everyone and You are 
the embodiment of transcendental bliss. Kindly accept this 
pure water. 
Text 15 
paramananda-saurabhya- 
paripuma-digantaram 
grhdna paramam gandham 
krpayd paramesvara 
(While offering sandalwood paste, one should chant the 
following mantra.) O supreme controller, please accept this 
sandalwood paste, the fragrance of which fills all directions. 
Text 16 
tunya-vana-sambhutarh 
nana-guna-manoharam 
sumanda-saurabham pusparh 
grhyatdm idam uttamam 
(While offering flowers, one should chant the following 
mantra.) O Lord, kindly accept these fragrant flowers that were 


B68 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
collected from a divine forest. They are very beautiful and most 
excellent. 
Text 17 
vanaspati-raso divyo 
gandhadhyah sumanoharah 
dghreyah sarva-devdndrh 
dhupo 'yam pratigrhyatdm 
(While offering incense, one should chant the following mantra.) 
O Lord, please accept this incense, which is made from herbal 
extracts, and which is very aromatic and thus pleasing to all. 
Text 18 
suprakdso mahd-dipah 
sarvatas timirdpahah 
savdhydbhyantaram jyotir 
dipo 'yarn pratigrhyatdm 
(While offering a ghee lamp, one should chant the following 
mantra.) 
Please accept this brightly illuminating ghee lamp, which 
dissipates the darkness of ignorance, and which shines both 
internally and externally. 
Text 19 
sat-patra-siddharh subhagarh 
vividhdneka-bhaksanam 
nivedaydmi devesa 
sdnugdya grhdna tat 
(While offering food, one should chant the following mantra.) 
O master of the demigods, it is my hope that You enjoy this 
nicely prepared food. I offer it to You with devotion. 


Five Types of Worship 
369 
Text 20 
pujd ca pancadha prokta 
tdsdrh bheddti srnusva me 
abhigamanam updddnarh 
yogah svddhydya eva ca 
ijyd panca-prakdrdrcd 
kramena kathaydmi te 
Thereafter, one should offer water to the Lord once again, 
while chanting the mantra that was previously given. Now, hear 
about the five kinds of worship—aiAigamana, upddana, yoga, 
svddhdya and ijyd. 
Text 21 
tato 'bhigamanam ndma 
devatd-sthana-mdrjanam 
upalepana-nirmdlya- 
dun-karanam eva ca 
(While offering pddya, one should chant the following mantra.) 
To remove the remnants of the Lord's flower garlands and 
other decorations, and to sweep the floor and wipe the altar is 
called abhigamana. 
Text 22 
updddnarh ndma gandha- 
puspadi-cayanam tathd 
yogo ndma sva-dehasya 
svdtmatvenaiva bhdvand 
To collect ingredients, such as sandalwood paste and flowers, is 
called upddana. To purify oneself with the chanting of mantras 
is called yoga. 


370 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fourth Ratra 
Text 23 
svadhyayo ndma mantrdrtha- 
sandhdna-puruako japah 
sukta-stotrddi-pdthas tu 
hari-sankirttanam tathd 
Svddhdya refers to the chanting of mantras while meditating on 
their meaning, the reciting of prayers like the Purusa-sukta, and 
performing hari-nama-sankirtana. 
Text 24 
tattvadi-sastrady abhydsah 
svadhyayah parikirttitah 
ijyd ndma sva-devasya 
pujanam tu yathdrthatah 
Study of the scriptures is also known as svddhdya. To chant one's 
favorite names of his worshipable Lord is called ijyd. 
Text 25 
iti panca-prakdrdrcd 
kathitd tava suvrate 
sdrsni-sdmipya-sdlokya- 
sdyujya-sdrupyadd kramdt 
O gentle lady, who has taken pious vows, I have thus explained 
to you the five kinds of worship, the following of which can 
enable you to attain the five kinds of liberation—sdrsti, sdmplya, 
sdlokya, sdjujya and sdrupyd. 
Thus ends the translation of the tenth chapter of the Fourth 
Rdtra of Sri Narada-pancaratra. 


Chapter 11 
Twelve Kinds of Purification 
Practiced by Vaisnavas 
Text 1 
in siva uvdca 
atha dvadasa-sarhsuddhir 
vaisnavdndm ihocyate 
grhopasarpanarh caiva 
tathdnugamanam hareh 
bhakti-pradaksinam caiva 
padayo sodhanarh punah 
pujdrtharh patra-puspdndrh 
bhaktyaivottolanam hareh 
Sri Mahadeva said: Now I shall describe twelve kinds of 
purification that are accepted by Vaisnavas. Prominent 
among these are—cleansing the temple, following the Lord's 
procession, circumambulating the temple with devotion, 
washing one's feet before entering the temple, and collecting 
flowers and tulasi leaves for worshiping Lord Hari. 
Text 3 
karayoh sarva-suddhindm 
iyarh suddhir visisyate 
tan ndma-kirtanam caiva 
gundndm api kirtanam 
Among all types of purification, the cleansing of one's hands is 
considered most important. The chanting of the holy names, 
qualities and pastimes of the Lord is considered to be the 
principal aspect of worship. 
371 


Sri Narada-paFjcaratra • Fourth RAtra 
Text 4 
bhaktyd sn-krsna-devasya 
vacasah suddhir isyate 
tat-kathd-sravanam caiva 
tasyotsava-ninksanam 
One should purify his speech by glorifying Sri Krsna with 
devotion. One should hear about Him and attend His 
festivals. 
Text 5 
srotrayor netrayos cava 
suddhih samyag ihocyate 
padodakasya nirmdlya- 
mdldndm api dhdranam 
To purify one's ears and eyes, one should smell and see the 
flower garlands that have been offered to the Lord, as well as 
the water that has washed His lotus feet. 
Text 6 
ucyate sirasah suddhih 
pranatasya hareh punch 
dghrdnam gandha-puspader 
nirmdlyasya tapodhana 
O you who are enriched by the performance of austerity, 
the head should be purified by bowing down to Sri Hari. 
The purification of the nose is accomplished by smelling the 
sandalwood paste and flowers that have been offered to the 
Lord. 
Text 7 
visuddhih sydd anantasya 
ghrdnasydpi vidhiyate 


Twelve Kinds of Purification Practiced by Vaisnavas 
patrarh puspadikarh yac 
ca krsna-pdda-yugarpitam 
One's existence can be purified by smelling the flowers and 
tulasi leaves that have been offered at the lotus feet of the 
Supreme Lord, Sri Krsna. 
Texts 
tad ekarh pdvanarh loke 
tad dhi sarvarh visodhayet 
laldte ca gadd kdryd murdhnim 
cdparh sardmstathd 
One should touch the Lord's club to his forehead. One should 
also touch the Lord's bow and arrow to his head. By doing so, 
one will become fully purified, even in this material world. 
Texts 9-17 
nandakarh caiva hm madhye 
sankharh cakrarh bhuja-dvaye 
sankha-cakrdnvito viprah 
smasdne mriyate yadi 
pray age yd gatih proktd 
sd gatis tasya gotama 
ydnair vd pddukdbhir vd 
ydnarh bhagavato grhe 
devotsavesv dsavi ca 
apramdno mad agratah 
ucchiste caiva vd 'sauce- 
bhagavad vandanddikam 
eka-hasta-pramdnas ca 
tat-purastdt pradaksinam 


Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fourth Ratra 
pada-pmsdmnarh caiva 
tathd paryanka-bandhanam 
sayanarh bhaksanam cdpi 
mithyd-bhdsanam eva ca 
uccair bhdso mitho vairarh 
rodandni ca vigrahah 
nigrahdnugrahas caiva 
strisu ca krura-bhdsanam 
kambaldvaranam caiva 
paranindd para-stutih 
aslila-bhdsanam caiva 
adho-vdyu-vimoksanam 
saktau gaunopacdras 
ca anivedita-bhaksanam 
tat tat-kdla-bhavdndrh ca 
phalddlndm anarpanam 
viniyuktdvasistasya 
praddnarh vyanjavasya ca 
spastl-krtvdsanam caiva 
para-nindd para-stutih 
gurau maunarh nija-stotrarh 
devata-nindanam tathd 
aparadhas tathd visnor 
dvdtrimsat parikirttitdh 
One should touch the Lord's trident to his chest and one 
should touch the Lord's conch and disc to his arms. 
It is said that if a brdhmana whose body is decorated with the 
marks of a conch and disc gives up his life in the crematorium, 


Twelve Kinds of Purification Practiced by Vaisnavas 
he attains the same destination as one who relinquishes his 
body at Prayaga. 
These are the thirty-two offenses to be avoided while worshiping 
Lord Had. (1) One should not enter the temple of the Deity 
in a car or palanquin or while wearing shoes. (2) One should 
not fail to observe the festivals for the pleasure of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, such as Janmastam! and Ratha-yatra. 
(3) One should not avoid bowing down before the Deity. (4) 
One should not enter the temple to worship the Lord without 
having first washed his hands and feet after eating. (5) One 
should not enter the temple in a contaminated state. (6) One 
should not bow down with one hand. (7) One should not 
circumambulate in front of Sri Krsna. (8) One should not 
spread his legs before the Deity. (9) One should not sit before 
the Deity while holding one's ankles, elbows or knees. (10) 
One should not lie down before the Deity of Krsna. (11) One 
should not accept prasada before the Deity. (12) One should 
never speak a lie before the Deity. (13) One should not talk very 
loudly before the Deity. (14) One should not talk with others 
before the Deity. (15) One should not cry or howl before the 
Deity. (16) One should not quarrel or fight before the Deity. 
(17) One should not chastise anyone before the Deity. (18) 
One should not be charitable to beggars before the Deity. (19) 
One should not speak very harshly to a woman before the Deity. 
(20) One should not wear a fur blanket before the Deity. (21) 
One should not eulogize or praise anyone else before the Deity. 
(22) One should not speak any ill names before the Deity. (23) 
One should not pass air before the Deity. (24) One should not 
fail to worship the Deity according to one's means. (25) One 
should not eat anything that was not first offered to Krsna. (26) 
One should not fail to offer fresh fruit and grains to Krsna, 


S76 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fourth Ratra 
according to the season. (27) After food has been cooked, 
it should not be given to anyone before being offered to the 
Deity. (28) One should not sit with his back toward the Deity. 
(29) One should not offer obeisances silently to the spiritual 
master—one should recite aloud the prayers to the spiritual 
master while offering obeisances. (30) One should not fail to 
offer some praise in the presence of the spiritual master. (31) 
One should not praise himself before the spiritual master. (32) 
One should not deride the demigods before the Deity. 
Text 18 
salagrdma-sild-toyam na 
pitvd yas tu mastake 
praksepanarh prakurvita 
brahma-hd sa nigadyate 
If one sprinkles on one's head the water that has washed the 
lotus feet of the salagrdma-sild without drinking it, he certainly 
invites sinful reactions equal to the killing of a brdhmana. 
Text 19 
visnoh padodakam pitam 
koti-janmdgha-ndsanam 
tad evdsta-gunarh pdpam 
bhumau bindu-nipdtandt 
By drinking the water that has washed the lotus feet of Lord 
Visnu, all of one's sinful reactions accumulated from millions of 
lifetimes are at once destroyed. If one carelessly spills that water 
on the ground, his sinful reactions are increased eightfold. 
Text 20 
akdla-mrtyu-haranam 
sarua-vyddhi-vindsanam 
visnoh padodakam puny am 
sirasd dhdraydmy aham 


Twelve Kinds of Purification Practiced by Vaisnavas 
I touch the sanctified water that has washed the lotus feet of 
Lord Visnu to my head. This water insures that one will not 
suffer an untimely death and it cures all diseases. 
Text 21 
hatydm hanti tad anghrijdpi 
tulasi steyarh ca toyam pade 
naivedyam bahu anna-pdna- 
janitam gurvangandsangajam 
The tulasi leaves from the Lord's lotus feet can counteract 
the sin of killing. The Lord's carandmrta can nullify the sin of 
stealing, and His remnants of food can destroy the sins of eating 
anything and everything and enjoying an intimate relationship 
with the wife of one's spiritual master. 
Text 22 
snsddhina-matih sthitir hari- 
janais tat-sangajam kilvisam 
sdlagrdma-sildrcanasya- 
mahimd-ko 'py esalokottarah 
By associating with devotees of Lord Hari and maintaining 
the mood of being an eternal servant of Lord Hari, one's sins 
accumulated due to bad association are neutralized. Who can 
describe the extraordinary glories of worshiping the sdlagrdma- 
sild? 
Text 23 
kesavdgre nrtya-gitam 
yah karoti kalau narah 
pade pade 'svamedhasya 
phalam dpnoti nityasah 
In this age of Kali, a person who sings and dances before Lord 
Kesava obtains the result of performing a horse sacrifice with 


Sri Narada-paSjcaratra • Fourth Ratra 
every step he takes. These are the statements of the great sage, 
Vasistha. 
Text 24 
kesavdgre nrtya-gitarh 
na karoti harer dine 
vahnind kirii na dagdho 'sau 
gatah kirn na rasdtalam 
The person who does not dance and sing before Lord Kesava 
on the day of Ekadasi—is he not burnt in a fire before attaining 
Rasatala? 
Text 24 
smaranarh kirtanarh visnoh 
kalau mantra-japddisu 
ddnarh tu pritaye tasya 
ndnyathd gatir isyate 
In this age of Kali, one should always remember Lord Visnu 
and glorify Him while chanting His holy names. One should 
always try to give charity forTlis pleasure. There is no means for 
advancement other than this. This is the statement of Narada 
Muni. 
Thus ends the translation of the eleventh chapter of the Fourth 
Rdtra of Sri Narada-pancardtra. 
End of the Fourth Ratra. 


Fifth Ratra 
Chapter 1 
Lord Krsna's Instructions For the Age of Kali 
Text 1 
sn-mahadeva uvdca 
athocyante punar mantrah 
srnusvaikamandh priye 
yesdth vijndna-mdtrena 
naro bhaktatvam dvrajet 
Sri Mahadeva said: My dear, I shall once again describe those 
mantras which by chanting, one develops his attachment for 
devotional service to the Lord. Kindly hear with rapt attention. 
Text 2 
yesdth tantrddi-sdstranarh 
vicdro naiva hi kvacit 
karomy asesato devi bhakti- 
mukti-prado nrndm 
O Devi, I shall explain in detail the subject matter of tantras as 
it has never been discussed before. This understanding awards 
devotional service and liberation to the best of human beings. 
Text 3 
upadesa-vidhirh vaksye 
sn-krsnasya kalau yathd 
dadyan mantrarh guruh 
svacchah sisyarh bhakti-samanvitam 
First, I shall tell you about Sri Krsna's instructions that are 
especially meant for the people of the degraded age of Kali. 
379 


380 
Sri Narada-paisicaratra • Fifth Ratra 
A pure devotee, acting as a spiritual master, should impart a 
suitable mantra to his dedicated disciple. 
Texts 4-5 
uposyaika-dinam purvam 
yad vd bhuktvd havisyakam 
sndtvd tu nirmale toye 
purvdsyah susthd-mdnasah 
sisyam codan-mukhastharh 
ca harer ndmnas tu sodasa 
sa srdvyaiva tato dadyan 
mantram trailokya-mangalam 
After completely fasting the day before initiation or, if that is 
not possible, eating havisydnnapisX. once, the spiritual master 
should bathe in the morning on the day of initiation and then 
sit down facing east. The disciple should sit by his side, facing 
north. The spiritual master should then make his disciple chant 
the Hare Krsna mahd-mantra sixteen times before imparting to 
him the trailokya-mangala mantra. 
Text 6 
tato guruh svayam devarh 
sampujya vidhivad dhunet 
vaimavokta-vidhdnena 
sthandile samskrte 'pi ca 
Thereafter, the spiritual master should personally worship 
the Supreme Lord and perform a fire sacrifice, according to 
the rules and regulations that are prescribed in the Vaisnava 
literature. 
Text 7 
tatas tu daksina deyd 
sisyena gurave yathd 


Lord Kr^na's Instructions For the Age of Kali 
samarthena sva-saktyd 
tu vitta-sathya-vivarjitah 
The disciple must give up any miserly mentality and present 
daksina to his spiritual master, according to his capacity. 
TextS 
athocyante mahd-mantrdh 
krsnasya bdla-rupinah 
ndmnah sahasrarh satakam 
kavacarh ca suresvari 
0 Goddess, now listen as I disclose to you various mantras, the 
one thousand holy names, the one hundred holy names and 
the kavaca of Sri Visnu in His form as child Krsna. 
Text 9 
sn-krsndya namah 
astadasdrno mdrdnto manuh 
suta-dhana-pradah 
rsyady astddasdrnoktam 
mamdha-svaraih kramdt 
angdny asya manor atiga- 
dikpdlds traih samarcand 
1 offer my obeisances unto Sri Krsna. By chanting the eighteen- 
syllable mantra that ends with the kdma-bija, one achieves wealth 
and good children. One should systematically worship all the 
letters of the mantra, the presiding sage of the mantra, the 
objective of the mantra, as well was the dikpdlas and the Lord's 
weapons. The mantra is: om namo bhagavate gopijanavallabhdya 
svdhd kUm. 
Text 10 
pdnau pdyasa-pankamdhita-rasam 
vibhran mudd daksine 


582 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth Ratra 
savye sarada-candra-mandala- 
nibharh haiyangavlnarh dadhat 
kanthe kalpita-pundarika-nakhavad 
ddma pradlptarh vahan 
devo divya-digambaro disatuh nah 
saukhyarh yasodd-sutah 
May Yasoda's beloved child, who joyfully holds a pot of sweet 
rice in His left hand and a pot of fresh butter that resembles the 
autumn moon in His right hand, always give us great pleasure. 
He is decorated with a flower garland, tiger's claw, rope, and 
lotus flower. 
Text 11 
dinaso 'bhyarcya govindarh 
dvdtrirhsal laksamdnatah 
japtvd dasdrhsarh juhuydt 
sitdnnena payondhasd 
One should daily chant this mantra thirty-two hundred thousand 
times and perform a sacrifice by offering three hundred 
thousand oblations of sweet rice. 
Text 12 
padmastharh devam abhy 
arcya tarpayet tan mukhdmbuje 
kslrena kadali-pankair 
dadhnd haiyangavena ca 
After worshiping the Supreme Lord as He is situated on a lotus 
flower, one should feel satisfaction by offering Him condensed 
milk, bananas, yogurt, and fresh butter. 
Text 13 
sutdrthl tatpayed devam 
vatsardl labhate sutam 


Lord Kr§na's Instructions For the Age of Kali 333 
yad yad icchati tat-sarvarh 
tarpanad eva siddhyati 
If a person who desires to have a son worships the Supreme 
Lord in this way, he will receive a son within one year. He will 
also achieve all other desired objects simply by following this 
process. 
Text 14 
tdrarh hrd bhagavdn ne 'nto 
nanda-putra-padam tathd 
nanddnte vapuse hastdgnimayo 
'nte dasdrnakah 
The ten-syllable mantra consists of the tdra-bija {orh), hrd 
bhagavdn (namo), the word nandaputra ending in the fourth 
dative case (nandaputrdya), and it ends with svdhd. 
Texts 15-16 
astdvirhsaty aksaro 'yam 
bruve dvatrimsad aksaram 
nanda-putra-padam he 
'ntarh syamalahga-padam tathd 
tathd bdla-vapuh krsno 
govindo dasa-varnakah 
anayor narada rsis 
chandas tusniganustubhau 
The twenty-eight syllable mantra is: orh namo bdlavapuse sri 
hrsndya govinddya nanda putrdya sydmaldhgdya svdh. If the word 
bhagavate is added, it becomes the thirty-two syllable mantra. In 
the ten-syllable mantra, the words bdlavapuh, krsna and govinda 
remain as they are. Narada Muni is the superintending sage 
of this mantra and anustupa is the meter in which it should be 
chanted. 


384 
Sri Narada-paScaratra • Fifth RAtra 
Texts 17-18 
acakradyair anga-samsthair 
dikpdlds traih prapujanam 
daksine ratna-casakam 
vdme sauvarna-vetrakam 
kare dadhdnam devobhydm 
dslistam cintayed dharim 
japel laksarh manu-varam 
pdyasair ayutarh hunet 
After worshiping the dcakras, ariga devatds, dikpdlds and weapons, 
one should meditate on Sri Hari, who holds a jeweled cup in 
His left hand and a golden stick in His right hand, and who 
is embraced by His internal energy. In this way, one should 
chant the mantra one hundred thousand times and perform a 
sacrifice while offering ten thousand oblations of sweet rice. 
Texts 19-21 
evam siddhamanur mantn 
trailokyaisvarya-bhdgbhavet 
taradir bhagavdn ne 'nto 
rukmini-vallabhas tathd 
siro 'ntah sodasarno 'yarn 
rukminl-vallabhdhvayah 
sarva-sdksdt prado mantro 
narado 'sya munih smrtah 
chando 'nustub devatd ca 
rukmini-vallabho harih 
ekadrgveda-munidrgvarnair 
asydnga-kalpand 
While following this procedure, if a devotee attains perfection 
in the chanting of this mantra, he can enjoy the opulence of 


Lord Krsi^a's Instructions For the Age of Kali 
385 
the three worlds. The sixteen-syllable mantra is: orh namo 
bhagavate rukmini-vallabhdya svdh. By adding the word rukmini- 
vallabha, this mantra becomes more glorious. Narada Muni is 
the predominating sage of this mantra, anustup is the meter 
in which it is to be chanted, and Krsna, the Lord of RukminI, 
is the objective. One should perform anga-nydsa either one, 
three, four, or seven times. 
Text 22 
tdpic chacchavir ankagdrh 
priyatamdm svarna-prabhdm ambuja- 
prodyad vdma-bhujdm sva- 
bdhu-latayd "slisyan sacintdsmayd 
slisyantim smayamdna-hasta- 
vilasat-sauvarna-vetras dram 
pdydd vah sana-suna-plta- 
vasano ndnd-vibhuso harih 
May the ever-smiling Lord Sri Hari, who tightly embraces the 
gopis with His attractive arms, causing them to become highly 
astonished and embarrassed, and who is adorned with various 
ornaments and yellow garments, eternally protect us. 
Text 23 
dhyatvaivam rukmini-ndtham 
japydl laksam imam manum 
ayutam juhuydt padmair 
arunair madhurdplutaih 
After meditating on the beloved Lord of RukminI, one should 
chant this mantra one hundred thousand times and perform 
a sacrifice while offering as oblations ten thousand red lotus 
flowers dipped in honey. 


386 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth Ratra 
Text 24 
arc ay en nityam arigais tarn 
naradadyair diso 'dhipaih 
vajradyair api dharmartha- 
kama-moksdptaye narah 
To attain perfection in religiosity, economic development, 
sense gratification, and liberation, one should daily worship the 
Supreme Lord, Sri Krsna, along with the aiigadevatas, headed 
by Vajra, the sages, headed by Narada Muni, and the dikpdlas. 
Texts 25-27 
lila-dandadharo gopi-jana- 
samsaktadohpadam 
danddnte bdla-rupeti megha- 
syama-padarh tatah 
bhagavan visnur ity ukto 
vahni-jdydntako manuh 
ekonatrirhsad anto 'sya 
munir-ndrada Iritah 
chando 'nustub devatd ca 
lila-danda-harir matah 
muny abdhikarandngdbdhi- 
varnair anga-kriyd matd 
The twenty-nine syllable mantra is: Hid dandadharo gopl-jana 
sarhsakta dordanda bdla rupa meghasydma visnave svdh. Sri Narada 
is the predominating sage of this mantra, anustup is the meter in 
which it should be recited, and Lord Hari, who holds a stick in 
His hand, is the objective. One should perform anga pujd with 
the words muni, sdgara, karana and the letters of the mantra. 


Lord Krsna's Instructions For the Age of Kali 
Text 28 
sammohayan nija- 
kardmakarastha-llld 
dandena gopa-yuvatih 
sura-sundaris ca 
disydn nija-priyatamd 
sugadaksa-hasto 
devah sriyarh nihata- 
kamsa urukramo vah 
May the Supreme Lord, Trivikrama, who killed Kamsa, who 
bewildered the cowherd damsels and celestial women by 
enthusiastically embracing them with His left arm, and who 
embraced His dearmost go/u with His right arm, always increase 
our good fortune. 
Text 29 
dhydtvaivam prajapel laksarh 
ayutam sita-tandulaih 
trimadhvaktair huned atiga- 
dikpdldstraih samarcayet 
After meditating on the Supreme Lord in this way, one should 
chant this mantra one hundred thousand times. He should then 
perform a fire sacrifice while offering sesame seeds mixed with 
honey as oblations, ten thousand times. After doing so, one 
should worship the dikpdlds and the Lord's weapons. 
Text 30 
lild-danda-harith yo vai 
bhajate nityam adardt 
sa pujyate sarva-lokais 
tarn bhajed indira sadd 


388 
Sri Narada-pa5jcaratra • Fifth Ratra 
One who faithfully worships Lord Hari, who carries a stick in 
His hand, becomes worshipable for everyone within the world, 
and LaksmI favors him in all respects. 
Text 31 
trayodasa-svara-yutah 
sdrrigi modah sa kesavah 
tatha mam sayugas tarah 
sivah saptaksaro 'parah 
The seven-syllable mantra is: orh haurh govallabha kesavah. 
Text 32 
acakradyair ahga-klrptir 
narado 'sya munih smrtah 
chanda usnig-devatd ca 
go-ballabha uddhrtah 
The Lord's cakra and other symbols are the aiiga of this mantra, 
Narada Muni is the predominatiang sage, usnigis, the meter for 
reciting it, and the Lord of the cows is the objective. 
Text 33 
dhyeyo 'cyutah sa kapild- 
gana-madhya-samstho 
ya dhvayan dadhi 
daksinadosni venum 
pdsarh sayasti sapatra- 
payoda-nilah 
pitdmbaro 'hiripu- 
piccha-krtdvatamsah 
May the object of meditation, Sri Hari, who stands in the midst 
of brown cows, who plays His flute with His right hand, who 
sometimes runs with a stick and rope in His hands, whose curly 


Lord Krsna's Instructions For the Age of Kali 
hair is decorated with a peacock feather, and who is dressed in 
fine yellow garments, always protect us. 
Text 34 
manurh laksa japed etarh 
hunet sapta-sahasrakam 
goksirair anga-dikpala-madhye 
'rcyam go-gandntakam 
While meditating in this way, one should chant the above 
mantra one hundred thousand times and perform a sacrifice 
while offering oblations of condensed milk, seven thousand 
times. This should be followed by worship of Sri Krsna, along 
with the aiiga-devatds and dik-pdlas. 
Text 35 
astottara-sahasram yah 
payobhir dinaso hunet 
patanga-go-ganair ddhyo 
dasdrnenaiva vd vidhih 
One who daily performs a sacrifice by offering oblations of 
milk one thousand and eight times will become prosperous by 
possessing many cows and other domestic animals. This is the 
procedure for chanting the ten-syllable jnantra. 
Texts 36-37 
sa naro vasudevo hrn tie 
'ntarh ca bhagavat-padam 
sri-govinda-padam tadvad 
dvadasdrno 'yam iritah 
manur ndrada-gdyatn- 
krsnarpyadi-rathdngakam 
ekaksi-veda-bhutdrnaih 
samastair api kalpayet 


390 
Sri Narada-paScaratra • Fifth Ratra 
The twelve-syllable mantra is: orh namo bhagavate sri govinddya. 
The predominatinag sage of this mantra is Narada Muni, the 
meter for chanting it is gdyatri, and Sri Krsna is the objective. 
One should also worship the anga-devatds and dik-pdlas by 
chanting the mantra beginning with ekdksi-veda-bhutdrna. 
Text 38 
vande kalpadrumuldsrita-manimaya- 
sirhhdsane sannivistarh 
nlldbharh pita-vastrarh kara-kamala- 
lasac chankha-venurh murdrim 
gdbhih saprasravdbhir vrtam amara- 
pati-praudha-hastastha-kumbha- 
prayotat-saudha-dhdrdsnapitam 
abhinavdmbhoja-patrdbha-netram 
I worship Sr! Krsna, Murari, who is seated on a jeweled throne 
that is situated at the base of a desire tree, whose complexion is 
bluish, who is dressed in fine yellow garments, and who holds a 
conch shell and flute in His lotus-like hands. He is surrounded 
by many calves. He is being bathed by divine water poured 
from pitchers by the residents of heaven. The Supreme Lord 
possesses eyes just like lotus petals. 
Text 39 
dhydttvaivam acyutarh japtvd 
ravi-laksam hunet tatah 
dugdhair dvadasa-sdhasrarh 
dinaso 'mum samarcayet 
After meditating on Lord Acyuta in this way, one should chant 
the mantra twelve thousand hundred times and daily perform a 
fire sacrifice by offering twelve thousand oblations of milk. 


Lord Krsna's Instructions For the Age of Kali 
Texts 40-44 
gosthe pratisthitam vdpi 
gehe vd pratimddisu 
samasta-parivdrdrcds tdh 
punar visnu-pdrsaddh 
dvdrdgre 'vani-pithe 'rcydh 
paksindras ca tad agratah 
canda-pracandau prdg-doha- 
vidhdtdrau ca daksine 
jayah savijayah pascad 
balaprabala uttare 
urdhve dvdri sriyam sresthdn 
dvaryetan yugmaso 'rcayet 
pujyo vdstu-pumdrhs tatra 
tatra dvah-pitha-madhyatah 
dvdrdntapdrsvayor arcyd 
gangd ca yamund nadl 
konesu vighnarh durgdrh ca 
bdnlrh ksetresam arcayet 
arcayed vdstu-purusarh 
vesma-madhye samdhitah 
One should daily worship the Supreme Lord, along with His 
associates, in this way, either in the pasturing ground, or at 
home as an installed Deity. One should worship Garuda, placing 
him on an altar near the door. One should worship Canda 
and Pracanda toward the east. One should worship Doha and 
Vidata toward the south. One should worship Jaya and Vijaya 
toward the west. One should worship Bala and Prabala toward 
the north, and one should worship the divine couple as They 
are situated in Dvaraka, either while looking upward or facing 
downward. 


392 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth RAtra 
In the middle of the altar, one should worship Vastudeva. On 
the sides, one should worship Gahga and Yamuna, and in the 
corners, one should worship Ganesa, Sarasvati and Ksetrapala 
Siva. Finally, one should worship the vdstu-purusa with full 
attention. 
Texts 45-50 
tdrarh sdrnga-padarh rie 
'ntarh saparvarh ca sardsanam 
hum phat namah uktvd 
'stra-mudrayd 'gre sthito hareh 
puspdksatarh ksiped diksu 
samdsltdsane tatah 
v id hey am etat-sarvatra 
sthdpite tu visesatah 
dtmdrcandntarh krtvdtha 
guru-pahktirh purdktavat 
m-gururh paramddydms ca 
mahdsmat sawa-puwakdn 
tat padukan naradadln 
purva-siddhan anantaram 
tato bhagavatas cestvd vighna- 
ghndn daksine 'rcayet 
purvavat pltham abhyarcya 
sri-govindam athdrcayet 
rukminlm satyabhdmdrh ca 
pdrsvayor indram agratah 
prsthatah surabhirh cestvd 
kesaresv anga-devatdh 
arcyd hrd ddi-varmdntam 
diksv astrarh konakesu ca 


Lord Krsna's Instructions For the Age of Kali 393 
Thereafter, one should chant the following mantra: orh srdriga 
dhanse humphat namah. One should then display the astra-mudrd 
before the Lord. After doing so, one should throw rice paddy 
and flowers in the four directions while sitting on an asana. 
This procedure should be followed strictly while worshiping 
the installed Deity. 
After purifying oneself, one should worship the previous dcdryas. 
First of all, one should meditate on his spiritual master and 
the Supersoul, Sr! Krsna. Then, one should worship the shoes 
of great sages like Narada Muni and follow this by worshiping 
Ganesa, who destroys all obstacles, while facing south. 
Thereafter, one should worship the altar and then worship Sr! 
Govinda, along with His queens, Rukmin! and Satyabhama, 
who are seen standing in front of Indra. In back, one should 
worship the Surabhi cow, as well as the anga-devatas and the 
Lord's weapons, facing the various directions and corners. 
Texts 51-52 
kalindi rohinl ndgnajity 
ddydh sat-kam-saktayah 
dalesu pitha-konesu 
vahvyddy arccdtha kinkinl 
ddmdni yastayo vesmah 
purah sn-vatsa-kaustubhau 
agrato vanamdldm ca diksv 
astdsu tato 'rcayet 
In the middle of the lotus-shaped altar, one should worship 
the Lord's six energies, such as Kalindi, Rohinl and Nagnajlti. 
Then, one should worship the Vahvyas and follow this by 
worshiping the Lord's anklets, rope, stick, residence, city, 
Srivatsa, Kaustubha gem, and garland of forest flowers, in the 
eight directions. 


394 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth RAtra 
Texts 53-55 
pdncajanyam gaddm cakram 
vasudevam ca devakim 
nanda-gopam yasoddm ca 
sa-go-gopdla-gopikdh 
indradyd devatdh sarvd 
visvaksenam tathottare 
kumudah kumuddksas ca 
pundanko 'tha vdmanah 
sanku-karnah sarva-netrah 
sumukhah supratisthitah 
ekakdlam dvikdlam vd 
trikdlam veti gosthikdm 
After worshiping the Lord's Pancajanya conch shell, club, and 
disc, as well as Vasudeva, DevakI, Nanda Maharaja, Yasoda, cows, 
cowherd boys, and gopls, as well as demigods, headed by Indra 
and Visvakasena, one should worship Kumuda, Kumudaksa, 
Pundarika, Vamana, Sahku-karna, Sarvanetra, Sumukha and 
Supratisthita, either simultaneously or individually. 
Texts 56-58 
sn-govindam yajen nityam 
gobhyas ca yava-sapradah 
dlrgha-jlvl nirdtanko dhenu- 
dhanya-dhanadibhih 
putrair mitrair dhanddhyo 'nte 
praydti paramdm gatim 
urdhva-danta-yutah sdrrigi cakri 
daksi na-karna-yuk 
math sandthdya natyanto mula- 
mantro 'sta-varnakah 


Lord Krsna's Instructions For the Age of Kali 395 
rsir brahmdsya gayatri chandah 
krsnas tu devata 
varna-yugmaih samastena proktarh 
syad anga-pancakam 
Those who worship Sri Govinda daily, and feed green grass to 
the cows, will live a long life, become free from anxiety, and 
come to possess cows, grains, wealth, children and friends. 
They will enjoy life in this world and go back to Godhead in 
their next life. 
The eight-syllable mula-mantra is: gokulandthdya namah. Brahma 
is the predominating sage of this mantra, gayatri is the meter for 
chanting it, and Sri Krsna is the objective. One should conduct 
the pancdnga-puja with the two letters, Krsna. 
Text 59 
panca-varsam ati-drptam angane 
dhdvamdnam aticancaleksanam 
kinkini-valaya-hdra-nupurair 
anjitarh namata gopa-bdlakam 
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of that 
cowherd boy who used to run around in His courtyard up to 
the age of five, whose eyes are extremely restless, and who is 
decorated with anklets, armlets, a necklace and bracelets. 
Text 60 
dhydtvaivarh prajaped asta- 
laksarh tdvat sahasrakam 
juhuyad brahma-vrksottha- 
samidbhih pdyasena vd 
After meditating on Krsna in this way, one should chant his 
mantra eight hundred thousand times and perform a sacrifice 


396 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth RAtra 
by offering oblations of eight thousand pieces of wood from a 
peepal tree, or sweet-rice. 
Text 61 
prdsdddsthdpitam krsnamamund 
nityam arcayet 
dvdra-pujddi pithdntam kurydt 
purvokta-mdrgatah 
In this way, one should daily worship the Deity of Sn Krsna that 
is installed within an opulent temple. Then, he should worship 
the altar and the paraphernalia, according to the proper rules 
and regulations. 
Text 62 
madhye 'rcayed dharim diksu 
vidiksv arigdni ca kramdt 
vdsudevah sarikarsanah 
pradyumnas caniruddhakah 
One should worship Sri Hari in the middle of the altar and 
offer worship to the anga-devatds, Vasudeva, Sahkarsana and 
Pradyumna in the four directions. 
Text 63 
rukminl satyabhdmd ca 
laksmand jdmbavaty api 
dig-vidiksv arcayed etd 
indra-vajmdikdn vahih 
After worshiping the queens, headed by Rukminl, Satyabhama, 
Laksmana and Jambavati, in the four directions, one should 
worship Indra, Vajra and other demigods, outside the altar. 
Text 64 
yo 'mum manum japen nityam 
vidhindbhyarcayan harim 


Lord Krsna's Instructions For the Age of Kali 
sarva-sampatsu-sampurno nityarh 
suddham padarh vrajet 
Anyone who, after worshiping Sri Hari while following the 
prescribed rules and regulations, daily chants this mantra 
becomes endowed with material prosperity and at the end Of 
his life, he attains the supreme destination. 
Texts 65-67 
tdra-m-sakti-mdrdnte 
sn-krsnasya padarh vadet 
sri-govinddya tasyordhvam 
sn-gopi-jana ity api 
vallabhdya tatas trih srih- 
siddha-gopdlako manuh 
madhavi-mandapdsino 
garudendtipdlito 
divya-knddsu niratau rdma- 
krsnau smaran japet 
cakri vasv aksara-yutah sa 
hy ekdrno manur matah 
The siddha-gopdla mantra of Lord Gopala, who wanders in the 
groves, decorated with mddhavi flowers, and who is glorified 
by Garuda, is: om srim hrim klim sri krsndya sri govinddya sri 
gopijanavallabhdya srim srim srim. One should chant the eight- 
syllable or one-syllable mantra of Lord Visnu while meditating 
on Sri Rama-Krsna as They are engaged in Their transcendental 
pastimes. 
Text 68 
krsneti dvayaksarah kdma- 
purvas try arna sa eva tu 


398 
Sri Narada-pa5icaratra • Fifth Ratra 
sa eva catur amah syat he 
'nto 'nyas catur aksarah 
The four-syllable mantra is now being revealed by me. It is; klirh 
krsndya. 
Texts 69-76 
raksyate pahca-varnah syat 
krsndya nama ity api 
krsndyeti smara-dvandva- 
madhye pahcdksaro 'parah 
gopdldydgni-jdydntah sad 
aksarah uddhrtah 
krsndya vayu-Mjadyo 
vahni-jdydntako 'parah 
krsndya smara-bijadyo 
vahni-jdydntako 'parah 
sad-aksarah prdg uditah 
krsna-govi ndakau punah 
sn-sakti-mdra-krsndya 
mdrah saptdksaro 'parah 
krsna-govindakau he 'ntau 
smarddyau vasu-varnakah 
dadhi-bhaksana hevahnir 
jaydbhir aparo 'stakah 
suprasanndtmane procya 
nama ity aparo 'stakah 
klirh glaum klirh sydmaldhgdya 
namas tu syad dasdrnakah 
siro 'nto bdla-vapuse krsnd 
ydnyo manur matah 


Lord Krsna's Instructions For the Age of Kali 
399 
siro 'nto bdla-vapuse kllrh ■ 
krsndya smrto budhaih 
ekddasdksaro mantra 
etesdrh narado munih 
uktam chandas tu gdyatri 
devas tu krsna Iritah 
kalasad dirghakair angam 
athdmum cintayed dharim 
The five-syllable mantra, krsndya namah, gives one protection. 
The six-syllable mantra is: gopdldya svdha. There is another 
mantra that was previously mentioned. It is: klim krsndya svdha. 
The seven-syllable mantra is: srim hrim klim krsndya klim. The 
eight-syllable mantra is: klim krsndya govinddya. There are two 
other eight-syllable mantras. They are: dadhi bhaksandya svdha 
and suprasanndtmane svdha. 
The ten-syllable mantra is: klim glaum klim sydmalangdya namah. 
There is another ten-syllable mantra. It is: bdlavapuse krsndya 
svdha. The eleven-syllable mantra is; bdlavapuse klim krsndya 
svdha. Narada Muni is the superintending sage of all these 
mantras. They should be chanted in the gdyatri meter. Sri Krsna 
is the objective of all these mantras. One should worship Sri 
Hari with the chanting of these mantras, along with offering 
worship to the anga-devatds. 
Text 77 
avyddvydkosa-nildmbuja-rucir 
arundmbhoja-netro 'mbujastho 
bdlojanghd-katlrasthala- 
kalitaranat-kinkiniko mukundah 
dorbhydm haiyangavinam dadhati- 
vimalam pdyasam visva-vandyo 


400 
Sri Narada-paRcaratra • Fifth Ratra 
go-gopi-gopavlto ruru-nakha- 
vilasat-kantha-bhusas dram vah 
May Sri Bala Mukunda Krsna, "who is supremely attractive, like 
a blue lotus, whose eyes resemble a lotus, who is effulgent like 
the rising sun, who is adorned with various ornaments, whose 
waist and thighs are decorated with tinkling bells, who relishes 
fresh butter and sweet rice, and who is surrounded by the cows, 
cowherd boys and cowherd girls of Vraja, protect us. 
Texts 78-79 . 
dhydtvaivam ekam etesdrh 
laksarh japydn manurh tatah 
sapih-sitopalopetaih pdyasair 
ayutarh hunet 
tarpayet tavad etesdrh 
manundm huta-sahkhyayd 
tarpanam vihitam nityam 
arcayet susamdhitah 
After meditating on Krsna in this way, one should chant any 
of the above-mentioned mantras one hundred thousand times 
and perform a fire sacrifice by offering ten thousand oblations 
of sweet-rice. In this manner, one should worship the Supreme 
Lord daily with full concentration and devotion. 
Texts 80-82 
vahny ddlsdntam ahgdni 
hrd ddi-kavacdntikdm 
arcayet purato netram 
astrarh diksu bahih kramdt 
indra-vajradikdh pujydh 
saparyaisd samlritd 


Lord Krsna's Instructions For the Age of Kali 401 
ity ekam esdrh mantrdndm 
yajed yo manujottamah 
kara-praceydh sarvdrthds 
tasydsau pujyate 'maraih 
sadyah phala-pradam mantram 
vaksye 'nyarh catur-aksaram 
Thereafter, one should worship the kavaca mantra, beginning 
with the word hrdaya, at the south-east and south-west comers 
of the altar. He should then worship the eyes and other limbs 
of the body while chanting appropriate mantras. A devotee who 
strictly follows these procedures certainly attains all perfection 
and becomes eligible to be worshiped by the demigods. Now, 
I shall reveal to you the other four-syllable mantra that always 
awards auspicious results. 
Text 83 
samprokto mdrayugmdntarastha- 
krsna-padena tu 
rsyddyam anga-satkarh ca 
prdg uktarh proktam asya tu 
Another four-syllable mantra is: klirh klirh krsna. The procedures 
for chanting this mantra are exactly the same as those that have 
already been described. 
Text 84 
snmat kalpa-drumulodyata-kamala- 
lasat-karnikd-sarhsthito 'yam 
tac chakhalambi-padmodara- 
visavadasarhkhydta-ratndbhisiktah 
hemdbhah-sva-prabhdbhis tribhuvanam 
akhilam bhdsayan vasudevah 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth RAtra 
payad vah payasado 'navatanuvanitd- 
mrga-sirasi sah 
May Sri Krsna, the son of Vasudeva, who is situated on the 
whorl of the lotus flower that sprouted from the root of a desire 
tree, who is decorated with precious jewels, who illuminates the 
three worlds by His effulgence, who is ready to fulfill all desires, 
who is eager to bestow prosperity and happiness upon His 
devotees, who shines brightly like gold, who is worshipable for 
all the inhabitants of the three worlds, and who is unlimitedly 
powerful, protect us. 
Text 85 
dhydtvaivam prajapel laksa- 
catuskarh juhuydt tatah 
trimadhvaktair bilva-phalais 
catvdrirhsat-sahasrakam 
After meditating in this way, one should chant his mantra four 
hundred thousand times and perform a fire sacrifice while 
offering forty thousand oblations of honey and bilva fruit. 
Text 86 
angair rsibhir indrddyair 
vajradyair arcanoditd 
tarpayed dinasah krsnam 
svadu-trayadhiyd janaih 
He should then worship the sages; the demigods, headed by 
Indra; the Lord's weapons, such as the vajra, and the anga- 
devatds. After doing so, he should worship Krsna by offering 
oblations to Him, at least three times. 
Text 87 
mdrayor asya mam sddho 
taktarii ced aparo manuh 


Lord Krsna's Instructions For the Age of Kali 
403 
sadangdnyasya kalavadirghair 
mantra-sikhd manoh 
There is another mantra that begins with kUrh and ends with 
lam ram. The procedure for chanting this mantra is same as that 
which was previously described. 
Text 88 
araktodydna-kalpadruma-sikhara- 
lasat-svarna-doladhirudham 
goplbhydm prenkhyamdnam 
vikasita-nava-bandhuka-sindura-bhasam 
bdlan nlldlakdntam kati-tata- 
vilast-ksudra-ghanta-ghatddhyarh 
vande-sardula-kaman kusala- 
sitagala-kalpa-diptam mukundam 
I offer my obeisances to Bala-Krsna Mukunda, who sits on a 
golden swing that is hanging from a branch of a desire tree 
within a flower garden, and who is being swung by two gopls 
standing on either side of Him. His body has a red complexion 
like that of a iand«Aaflower, orvermillion. His waist is decorated 
with small bells. He is very expert in controlling His passionate 
desires. He awards liberation to all who seek it. 
Text 89 
dhydtvaivam purva-klptena 
japtvd raktotpalair navaih 
madhu-traya-yutair hutvdbhyarcayet 
puwavad dharim 
After meditating in this way, one should chant his mantra and 
perform a sacrifice with red lotus flowers dipped in honey. In 
this way, one should worship Sn Hari with love and devotion. 


404 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth Ratra 
Text 90 
madhura-traya-samyuktd 
mdraktdm sdlinjarim 
juhuydn nityaso 'stordhva- 
satam ekena mantrayoh 
One should perform sacrifice daily by offering oblations of 
honey or rice paddy, one hundred and eight times. 
Text 91 
tasya mandalatah prthvl 
prthvl sasyakuldkuld 
sydc chdli-putra-purnarh 
ca tad vesamdsu prajdyate 
By following this process, the entire earth can become 
prosperous and the practitioner will certainly become enriched 
with all kinds of opulence. 
Text 92 
yas caitayor niyatam 
anyataram bhajet 
manvor japdrcana- 
hutddibhir dtma-bhaktih 
srimdn sa manmatha iva 
pramaddsu rdjnt 
bhuydt tanor vipadi tac 
ca mahdcyutdkhyam 
A person who chants either of the above-mentioned mantras 
and worships it by following all of the rules and regulations 
as previously described becomes very attractive to women, like 
Cupid, and will never have to face any danger in life. 
Thus ends the translation of the first chapter of the Fifth Rdtra 
of Sri Ndrada-pancardtra. 


Chapter 2 
The Benefits of Chanting the Twelve-Syllable 
and Eighteen-Syllable Mantras 
Text 1 
sfi mahadeva uvdca 
athocyate vasya-vidhih purokta- 
dasdrnato 'stddasa-varnatas ca 
smrtyaitayoh sarva-jagat-priyatvarh 
manur manujnasya sadd vidhatte 
Sri Mahadeva said: Now I shall explain the art of mastering the 
above-mentioned ten-syllable and eighteen-syllable mantras. By 
following this prescription, one becomes dear to all classes of 
beings. 
Text 2 
phullair vanya-prasunair 
amumarunatarair arcayitvd dinadau 
nityarh nitya-kriydydrh ratam 
atha-dina-madhyokta-klptya-mukundam 
astopetam sahasram dasalipim 
anuvaryarh japed yah sa mantn 
kuryad vasydny avasyarh sva-sukha- 
mukha-bhuvdrh mantravan mandaldni 
Anyone who, after worshiping Sri Krsna with fully blossomed 
forest flowers in the morning and performing daily worship of 
the Lord at noon, chants one of these mantras one thousand 
and eight times will definitely bring all the people of the world 
under his control, to his complete satisfaction. 
405 


406 
Sri Narada-pancarAtra • Fifth Ratra 
Text 3 
jdti-pmsunair vara-gopa-vesam 
knddratam rakta-haydri-puspaih 
nilotpalair gita-ratam puro 'vadrstvd 
njpddln vasayet kramena 
By seeing Krsna—who is decorated with jdti flowers, who is 
dressed as a cowherd boy, who plays with red flowers and blue 
lotus flowers—within one's heart, by means offull concentration 
and the chanting of his mantra, one becomes qualified to control 
even kings. 
Text 4 
sita-kusuma-sametais 
tandulair djya-siktair 
dasasatam atha hutvd 
nityasah sapta-vdram 
kacabhuvi ca laldte bhasma 
tad dhdrayan nd 
vasayati yuvatirh stri tat- 
pratim sd tadaiva 
To control women and their husbands, one must daily perform 
seven fire sacrifices while offering white flowers and rice mixed 
with ghee as oblations. Afterwards, the sacrificial performer 
should smear his forehead with ashes from the sacrificial fire. 
Text 5 
tdmbula-vastra-kusum 
anjana-candanadhyarh 
japtvd sahasram ayam 
anyatarena manvoh 
yasmai daddti manuvit sa 
jano 'sya sdksdt 


Benefits of Chanting the 12 and 18-Syllable Mantras' 407 
syat kinkaro na khalu 
tatra vicdranlyam 
It is a fact that, after chanting either of the two previously 
mentioned mantras one thousand times, if the devotee 
throws the remnants of betel nuts, flowers, pieces of cloth, or 
sandalwood paste on someone's body, that person will always 
remain his slave. 
Text 6 
raja-dvare vyavahdre sabhdydm 
dyute vade cdsta-yuktarh satarn ca 
japtvd vdcam pramathdm irayed 
yo vartetdsau tatra tatroparistdt 
After chanting his mantra one hundred and eight times, if a 
person speaks in the royal court, while engaged ill ordinary 
dealings, in an assembly, while playing chess, or while debating, 
he will certainly command respect, like a leader. 
Text 7 
dslnarh sura-mathanarh 
kadamba-mule 
gdyantarh madhurataram 
vrajdngandbhih 
smrtvdgnau madhu- 
militair mayurakedhmair 
hutvdsau vasayati 
mantravit trilokim 
If a worshiper—after meditating on Krsna as He is seated under 
a kadamba tree, singing very sweetly in the company of the gopis 
and enchanting the minds of the demigods—performs a fire 
sacrifice while offering oblations of peacock feathers mixed 
with honey, he becomes qualified to control the three worlds. 


408 
Sri Narada-paSicarAtra • Fifth Ratra 
Text 8 
rasa-madhyagatam acyutam smaran 
yo japed dasa-satarh dasaksaram 
nityaso jhatiti mdsato naro 
vdhchitdm ativahet sa kanyakdm 
One who, after meditating on Krsna as He enjoys rasa dance 
pastimes, chants the ten-syllable mantra one thousand times 
every day for one month, can certainly obtain the hand of any 
woman he desires. 
Text 9 
tunga-kubjam adhirudham acyutam 
yd vicintya dinasah sahasrakam 
sdstakam japati sd hi mandaldt 
vdnchitam varam upaiti kanyakd 
While meditating on Krsna as He is seated on a raised throne, 
if a woman chants this mantra one thousand and eight times 
every day, she can obtain the qualified husband of her choice. 
Text 10 
nrtyantam maja-sundari-jana- 
kardmbhojdli-sangrdhitarh 
dhyatvastddasa-varnakarh 
manuvaram laksam japen mantravit 
Idjdndm athavd madhu-druta- 
tarair hutvdyutam curnakair 
udvodhu prajapec ca tavad 
acirad dkdrhksitdn kanyakdm 
While meditating on Krsna as He dances with the gopis and is 
embraced by them, if a worshiper chants the ten-syllable mantra 
one hundred thousand times and performs a sacrifice, offering 


Benefits of Chanting the 12 and 18-Syllable Mantras 409 
uncooked rice, honey and ghee as oblations ten thousand 
times, he can surely achieve his desired bride. 
Text 11 
astddasdhsarena dvija-tarujais 
trimadhvahtair ayutam 
husais tilair vd sita-tandulan 
asayiturh dvijdn juhuydt 
juhuydt krtamdna-bharair vasayen 
nrpatin husumaih kuruntakajaih 
visa-ihsu-rasair api pdtalajair 
itardn api tadvad athovasayet 
By chanting the eighteen-syllable mantra and performing a 
fire sacrifice with oblations of husa grass, sesame seeds, and 
rice paddy, one can subjugate even the king. By chanting this 
mantra and performing a sacrifice with sugarcane juice, one 
can control his ministers. 
Text 12 
abhinavaih kamalair arunotpalaih 
samadhurair api campakapdtalaih 
pratihuned ayutam kramaso 'cirad 
vasayitum suhhajadi-vardngandh 
By performing a sacrifice, offering newly grown red lotus 
flowers, sweet fruit, or jasmine flowers ten thousand times into 
the fire, one quickly becomes qualified to bring beautiful young 
girls under his control and enjoy with them very happily. 
Text 13 
haydri-husumair navais tri- 
madhurdplutair nityasah 
sahasram usir dsavarh 
pratihunen nisithe budhah 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth Ratra 
sugarvita-dhiyarh hathdt 
jhatiti vdrayosdm asau 
karoti nija-kinkanm 
smarasili-mukhair ardditdm 
By performing a sacrifice at midnight, offering one thousand 
oblations of fresh haydri flowers dipped in honey, mixed with the 
juice of the root of the usira tree, a worshiper can lure the most 
chaste lady from her husband and make her his maidservant. 
Text 14 
patu-sarhyutais tri- 
madhurdrdra-bhavair 
api sarsapair dasa- 
sata-tritayam 
nisi juhvato 'sydmdnanda 
saci-dayito - 
'py avaso vasi- 
bhavati kintv apare 
If a person performs a sacrifice at night, offering oblations 
of mustard seeds mixed with honey three thousand times, 
even Indra, who is very dear to Sad, will have to accept his 
subordination. Then, what can be said of others? 
Text 15 
akhanda-bilvajaih 
phala-samit- 
prasavac chadanair 
madhu-drutatarair havandt 
kamalaih sitdksata- 
yutais ca prthak 
kamaldm dray a 
vasayed adrdt 


Benefits of Chanting the 12 and 18-Syllable Mantras 411 
One can keep LaksmI, the goddess of fortune, under his control 
if he performs a sacrifice, offering oblations of rice paddy, bilva 
fruit, dry wood, leaves, flowers, the root of a bilva tree, and lotus 
seeds dipped in honey. 
Text 16 
apahrtya gopa-vanita 
ambara-jdtarh 
hrdayaih kadambam 
adhirudham acyutam 
prajapan mahdnisi 
sahasram dnayet 
drutam urvasim api 
hathdt dasdhatah 
One can summon the celetial nymph, Urvasi, within ten days, if 
he meditates on Krsna as He is sitting on a branch of a kadamba 
tree after stealing the gopis' garments, and chants his mantra 
one thousand times at midnight. 
Text 17 
bahund kim atra 
kathitena mantrayor 
anayoh sadrn na 
hi paw vaslkrtau 
api trpti-karmani 
vidagdha-yositdrh 
kusumdyudha 
astramaya-varsinor iha 
What is the use of speaking elaborately in this regard? There 
is no mantra for subjugating others that is more effective than 
these two mantras. Chanting these two mantras can arouse lusty 


412 
Sri Narada-paivcaratra • Fifth Ratra 
desires within any woman and thus bring her under one's 
control. 
Text 18 
vande kundendu-gauram tarunam 
aruna-pdthoja-patrdbha-netrarh 
sankham cakrarh gaddbje nija-bhuja- 
parighair dyatair adadhdnam 
divyair bhusdngardgair nava-nalina- 
lasan mdlayd ca pradiptam 
dyotat-pitdmbarddhyarh munibhir 
abhivrtam pankastham mukundam 
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of 
Lord Mukunda; whose eyes resemble the kunda flower, the 
moon, or a blooming lotus flower; whose four arms are adorned 
with a conch shell, disc, club and lotus flower; who is decorated 
with enchanting yellow garments and ornaments; who wears 
a garland of lotus flowers; who is surrounded by great sages; 
who is seated on a lotus throne; and who is the bestower of 
liberation to those who aspire for it. 
Text 19 
evarh dhydtvd pumdmsam sphuta- 
hrdaya-sarojdsandsinam ddya 
sdndrdmbhojac chavi vd druta-kanaka- 
nibham-yo japed arka-laksam 
manvor ekarh hi samyag-vasam api 
ca huned arka-sdhasramidhmaih 
kslridrutthaih payobhih sa-madhu- 
ghrta-sitendthavd-pdyasena 
After meditating on the Supreme Lord in this way, and 
establishing the greatly effulgent Lord within his heart, if 


Benefits of Chanting the 12 and 18-Syllable Mantras 423 
a devotee chants either of the two mantras twelve hundred 
thousand times and performs a sacrifice, offering oblations 
of dry wood dipped in honey and sweet rice twelve thousand 
times, he can bring everyone under his control. 
Texts 20-21 
tato lokadhyaksam dhruva- 
citi-sadananda-vapusam 
hrdd pdthojdvir bhava- 
timira-samhdra-mihiram 
nijaikyena dhydyan manum 
amala-cetdh pratidinam 
tri-sdhasram japyet prayajatu 
ca sayahna-vidhind 
vidhim yo 'mum bhaktyd bhajati 
niyatam susthira-matir 
bhavambhodhim bhimarh visama- 
visaya-grdha-nikaraih 
tar a nga ir uttungair jani mrli- 
samdkhyaih pravitatam 
samattorydnalpam vrajati paramam 
dhdmam sa hareh 
Thereafter, one should think that the supreme controller of 
all living entities, Sri Krsna, who is the most handsome and 
who is always blissful, has become manifested in his heart. With 
a pure heart, he should meditate on Him. Every evening, he 
should attentively chant his mantra three thousand times. One 
who follows this process rigidly becomes peaceful, and liberated 
from the danger of creatures such as crocodiles, who flourish 
within material existence. He easily surpasses all difficulties 
and then goes back to Godhead at the end of his life. 


Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth Ratra 
Text 22 
grnams tasya ndmdni 
smvas tadlydh 
kathd sarhsmararhs 
tasya rupdni nityam 
smararhs tat-padambhoruharh 
bhakti-namrah 
sa pujyo budhair nitya- 
yuktah sa eva 
One who chants the Supreme Lord's holy names, listens to 
narrations of His transcendental pastimes, and meditates upon 
His various transcendental forms with utmost humility that is 
naturally bom of devotional service, becomes worshipable even 
by saintly persons. 
Texts 23-28 
vaksye manu-dvayam 
athdti-rahasyam anyat 
sanksepato bhuvana- 
mohana-namadheyam 
brahmendra-vdma- 
nayanendubhir adimo 'nyas 
tat-purvako visa-hrslka- 
yutas ca fie 'ntah 
namo 'stu sammohana-ndrado munis 
chandas tu gdyatram udlritarh budhaih 
trailokya-sammohana-visnur etayoh 
syad devatd vacmy adhuna sad angam 
akliba-kald-dlrghah salavais 
tadapi ca kaldmasdrudhaih 


Benefits of Chanting the 12 and 18-Syllable Mantras 415 
uktarh purvavad asana-vinyasantarh 
samacared atha tu 
karayo sdkhdsu tale vinyasya 
sadadgani cdngulisu saran 
manu-putita-mdtrkd-varnair 
vinyasydngdni vinyasec ca sardn 
visa-hrslka-yutesdn ne-hrt- 
kara-sdkhdbhinnamo 'ntikdn 
sosana mohana sandlpana- 
tdpana-madanakadikdn kramasah 
pancaite samproktd hrdm- 
hnm-kllrh-clusa-ddi-karandh 
sammohanam atha jagatdm 
dhyayet purusottamam samahita-dhih 
Now I shall describe other confidential mysteries regarding these 
two mantras. Klirh hrslkesdya namah—this mantra overwhelms 
everyone. Narada Muni is the superintending sage of this 
mantra, gdyatn is the meter in which it should be chanted, and 
Lord Visnu is the objective. This mantra is meant to be chanted 
for the purpose of enchanting the three worlds. 
Along with the chanting of this mantra, one should perform the 
sadanga-pujd while chanting this mantra: Klirh trailokya mohandya 
vidmahe kdmadevdya dhimahi tanno visnuh pracodayat. This is a 
gdyatri-mantra. 
One should remain seated on his dsana and chant the bija- 
mantras, beginning with sa, la and vaisnava-aparadha, and then 
perform the other required rituals. Thereafter, one should 
perform the sadahga-nydsa on both of his palms and all of his 
fingers while chanting the mdtrkd-varna mantras. Next, one 
should invoke the five arrows—sapana, mohana, sandipana, 


416 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth Ratra 
tdpana and madana—by chanting the mantras hrdrh, hririi, klirh, 
chlum and sarh. These five bija-mantras are meant for controlling 
the three worlds. After doing this, a worshiper should meditate 
on the Supreme Personality of Godhead with full absorption of 
his mind. 
Texts 29-38 
divya-tarudyanodyad rucira- 
maha-kalpa-padapadhastdt 
manimaya-bhutala-vilasad 
bhadra-payo-janma-pitha-nisthasya 
visva-prdni-prodyat 
pradyotanasadyuteh suparnasya 
dslnam unnatdihse vidruma- 
bhangdngam angajonmathitam 
cakra-gaddnkusa-pdsdn 
sumanobdneksu-cdpa-kamala-gaddh 
dadhatam sva-dorbhir arundyata- 
visdla-ghurnitdksi-yugala-lolam 
manimaya-kundala-kinta- 
harangada-kankanormir aranadyaih 
arunair mdlya-vilepais 
coddlptarh pita-vastra-paridhdnam 
nija-vdmorunisandrh slisyantirh 
vdma-hasta-ghrta-nalinim 
klidyadyonim kamaldmodana 
danavydkuldnga-latdm 
surucira-bhusana-mdlyd 'nulepandm 
susita-vasana-parivitdm 
nija-sukha-kamala-vydprta-catuldyita- 
nayana-madhukardm tarunlm 


Benefits of Chanting the 12 and 18-Syllable Mantras 
slisyantarh vama-bhujadandena 
drdharh dhrteksu-cdpena 
taj janita-parama-nirvrti-nirbhara- 
hrdayarh cardcaraika-gurum 
sura-ditija-bhujaga-guhyaka- 
gandharuddyangand-jana-sahasraih 
mada-manmathdlasdngair 
abhivltarh divya-bhusanoUasitaih 
dtmd-bhedatayettharh dhydtvaika 
aksaram athdstddasdrnam 
prajaped dinakara-laksam trimadhura- 
siktais ca kirh-suka-prasavaih 
juhuydd arka-sahasrarh vimalaih 
salilais ca tarpayet tdvat 
virhsaty arnarh proktarh mantram 
dinaso 'mum arcayed bhaktyd 
The Supreme Personality of Godhead holds a club, disc, 
anchor, rope, and arrow made of flowers in His hands. His 
face is decorated with sidelong glances and His lotus-like eyes 
restlessly move in a most enchanting manner. He is decorated 
with jeweled earrings, a diamond crown, necklace, armlets, 
waist band, bracelets, and a garland of red flowers that appear 
even more attractive because He dresses Himself in fine silk 
garments. 
His left hand is draped around the neck of Laksml. Indeed, 
He embraces her tightly to make her sit on His left thigh. She 
bewildered the mind of the Lord by the sweet aroma of the lotus 
flowers that she decorated herself with, and by her charming 
bodily limbs. She is decorated with ornaments, a flower 
garland, sandalwood paste and very fine garments. A swarm of 
bumblebees restlessly hovers around her lotus-like face. 


418 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth RAtra 
The Lord appears very pleased while tightly embracing LaksmI 
with His left arm and casting an affectionate glance at her. 
He is the spiritual master of all moving and non-moving living 
beings within the three worlds. He is constantly being glorified 
by the demigods, demons, Nagas, Pisacas, and Gandharvas. 
He is imbued with transcendental passion and wears divine 
ornaments. Indeed, He appears to be afflicted by transcendental 
lust. Although He is one without a second, the Lord became 
many, so that He could enjoy variegated transcendental 
pastimes. 
After meditating on the Supreme Lord in this way, one should 
chant the eighteen-syllable mantra twelve hundred thousand 
times and perform a sacrifice, offering twelve thousand lotus 
flowers dipped in honey as oblations. Thereafter, one should 
offer oblations of fresh water, the same number of times. Every 
day, the devotee should devotedly worship the Lord by chanting 
the twenty-syllable mantra. 
Text 39 
pithavandovaksydnta-rdjaya 
sirosundbhih pujd-vapum 
harim dvdhya skandhe tasydrghddyaih 
samabhyarcya bhusdntaih 
Next, one should invite Sri Hari to remain on the altar for 
receiving worship. The devotee should then worship each part 
of the Lord's body by offering various ingredients, such as 
pddya and arghya. 
Text 40 
angdni prdndms ca nyaset kramatah 
kiritam api sirasi sravasos ca 
kundale hari-pramundni 
praharandni pdnisu ca 


Benefits of Chanting the 12 and 18-Syllable Mantras 419 
One must infuse life into the Diety by performing the prdna- 
pratisthd ceremony. While worshiping the Deity, one should 
enchance His beauty as far as possible by decorating His 
ears, head and hands with earrings, a crown and weapons, 
respectively. 
Text 41 
sri-vatsa-kaustubhau ca stanayor 
murdhni gale ca vanamdldm 
pita-vasanam nitambe vdmdmse 
sriyam api sva-bijena 
His chest should be decorated with the mark of Srivatsa and 
the Kaustubha jewel. Around His neck should be a garland of 
forest flowers, and He should be dressed in yellow garments. 
One should install LaksmI devi, the Lord's internal potency, on 
His left side. 
Text 42 
istrdtha-kamikdydm angdni 
vidisdsu diksu sardn 
konesu pancamarh vai punar 
agnyadi-dalesu saktayah pujydh 
Next, one should worship the anga-devatdsin the four directions, 
four corners, and in the middle of the lotus flower. After that, 
one should worship the Lord's energies, which are situated on 
the lotus petals. 
Texts 43-44 
laksmih sarasvati ca 
svarnavaddtanibhe atipntyai 
kirttih kdntis ca site 
tustih pustir marakata-pratime 


420 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth Ratra 
divydnga-rdga-bhusana-mdlya- 
dukulair alankrtdnga-latdh 
smerdnandh smardrtd dhrta- 
cdmara-cdru-karatald etdh 
Laksmi and Sarasvati are golden in complexion, Klrti and Kanti 
are white, and Tusti and Pusti have complexions like the color 
of an emerald. These deities are to be decorated with paintings, 
ornaments, flower garlands, earrings and sandalwood paste. 
They should look enchanting and afflicted by lust. They should 
hold camaras and other articles in their hands. 
Text 45 
lokesd bahir arcydh kathitdrcd 
manu-dvayodbhutdh 
prdyah purusottama-vidhir 
ayasairasanocyate bahumattvdt 
The universal controllers should be worshiped outside the lotus 
petals. There is no need to describe their worship because it 
should be done in a mannter similar to that of the Supreme 
Lord. 
Text 46 
trailokya-mohandyety uktvd 
vidmaha iti smardyeti tatah 
dhimahi tanno cdnte visnus 
tad anu pracodaydd gdyatri 
The trailokya-mohan-mantra is: trailokya mohandya vidmahesmardya 
dhimahi tanno visnuh pracodaydt. "We meditate on Lord Visnu, 
who is the enchanter of the three worlds. May He inspire us to 
engage in His service." 


Benefits of Chanting the 12 and 18-Syllable Mantras 
Text 47 
japyaisa tujapadau harita- 
hali sri-kari ca japa-haranaih 
proksayitr-suddhi-vidhaye 
'rcydnydtma-ydgabhu-dravydni 
This mantra should be chanted very carefully. Before chanting 
this mantra, one should worship two energies of the Lord— 
Haritahal! and Srikari—with all necessary ingredients, 
according to the rules and regulations. 
Text 48 
manvor ekena satarh pratarpayen 
mohani-prasuna-dyuter yah 
toyair dinasah prdtah sa tu 
labhate vdnchitdn paksdt kdbhdn 
Anyone who offers oblations of water one hundred times every 
morning while chanting this mantra and meditating upon Sr! 
Krsna, whose effulgence resembles the color of a mohinl flower, 
attains his desired goal within fifteen days. 
Texts 49-50 
hutvd 'yutarh huta-sesarh 
pdtd "jyena tavad atijaptena 
bhojayet sva-sabhikarh ramanirh 
mano 'rpitdrh sva-vasatdrh netum 
astddasdrna-vihitd vidhayah 
kdrye vasya-krtds tdbhydm 
manvor anayoh sadrso nahi 
jdtas tri-loka-vasya-kannani kascit 
One can obtain the woman of his choice if he performs a 
sacrifice by offering ghee into the fire one thousand times 


422 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth Ratra 
while chanting this mantra. After doing so, he should feed the 
remnants of the sacrifice to that woman. Regarding subjugating 
others, one must follow all the procedures that are presceibed 
for the eighteen-syllable mantra. There is nothing more effective 
for controlling others than these two mantras. 
Text 51 
atraikas tujapaddv athava 
krsnah savenu-giti-dhyeyah 
aruna-nupurdnga-vesah kandarpo 
vd prasuna-cdpesudhdri ca 
However, before chanting this mantra, one should meditate on 
Krsna, the flute player. In some cases, one should meditate on 
the transcendental Cupid, who is decorated with red anklets 
and dressed in a flower outfit. 
Text 52 
yastv ekataram manum etayor 
vimala-dhih soda bhajati mantri 
sa dranmudrdnvitatayd tathd 
siddhim viprdndm atitardmeti 
Any pure-hearted devotee who worships any of these mantras 
faithfully becomes as good as a brahmanaand achieves perfection 
without delay. 
Thus ends the translation of the second chapter of the Fifth 
Rdtra of Sn Ndrada-pahcardtra. 


Chapter 3 
Methods For Meditating Upon the Lord 
and Worshiping Him 
Text 1 
sn-mahadeva uvdca 
atha saty asau dvi-trtiya-turyakah 
sikhi-vama-netra-sasi-khanda-manditah 
jaya krsna yuga-nirantardtma-bhumi- 
sikhi-saktitdsya-vrti-sakti-varnakdh 
Sri Mahadeva said: The first mantra should be formed by adding 
sikhi, vdmanetra, sasikhanda mandita, jaya krsna, yuga nirantard, 
dtmabhumi, sikhi-sakti and tdsyavrti to the original mula-mantra. 
Text 2 
prani madhyato mudita-cetase tato 'ntyd - 
'nuparakta-drii-mattargurumdrutdksardh 
sa caturtha-krsna-padam iksukdrmuko 
dasa-varnakas ca manavaryakas tv asau 
The second mantra should be derived from the words prani 
madhya, mudita-ceta, antydanuparakra, drmmatta, gurumdrutdksara 
and krsna, ending in the fourth dative case. 
Text 3 
salavadharacala-sutaramaksaraih putitah 
kramdt kramdgataih samuddharet 
iti danta-surya-vasu-varna uddhrtah 
kavitanuranjanamakarodyakrt 
One should purify his body by chanting a mantra with the 
letters sa, la, and va, as well as the mdyd-btja and laksmi-bija, 
either twelve times or sixteen times. 
423 


424 
Sri Narada-pa^caratra • Fifth Ratra 
Text 4 
mukha-vrtta-nanda-yuta-narado munis 
tv iha chanda uktam amrto virad api 
tri-jagad-vimohana-samdhvayo harih 
khalu devatdsya munibhih samlritd 
Narada Muni is the superintending sage of this mantra, virdt 
is the meter in which it should be chanted, Sri Hari is the 
objective, and it has been revealed to help one subjugate the 
three worlds. One should be careful to add the word nanda 
before the word rsi. 
Text 5 
vasu-mitra-bhudhara-gajatmadin-mayair 
manur arnakais triputlkrtah prthak 
nija-jatimunnigaditam sad-angakam 
kriyayaiva tat khalu jandnuranjanam 
The eight, twelve, seven and ten-syllable mantras are to be 
discovered from the box of mdtrika-varnas. These mantras are 
utilized for attracting the minds of people and pleasing them. 
Text 6 
atha samvisodhya tanu-yuktam anindatah 
praracayya pitham api cdru-carmand 
karayor dasaksara-vidhim kramdt nyaset 
sad-anga-sayakam anahga-pahcakam ca 
Thereafter, the pious worshiper should mentally construct 
a temple within his body and perform the sadanga-puja and 
pancdnaga-puja, according to the rules and regulations that are 
prescribed for the ten-syllable mantra. This is the recommended 
method for purifying one's body. 


Meditating Upon and Worshiping the Lord 
Text 7 
manum idrsarh nyasatu sarvata-stanau 
smara-samputais tad anu mdtrkdksaraih 
dasa-tattvadi dasdrna-kirttitam tv atha 
murtti-panjara-vidhdnam dcaret 
One should also perform the nydsa-kriya on each part of his body 
while chanting the kdma-bija and mdtrkd-varna. One should also 
perform the nydsa of the ten tattvas and murti-panjara. 
Text 8 
srjati-sthiti-dasa-sad-anga-sdyakdn 
nyasatdt tato 'nyad akhilarh puroktavat 
pravidhdya sakala-bhuvanaika-sdksinarh 
smaratdn mukundam anavadya-dhira-dhih 
After completing the nydsa-kryd of the srsti, sthiti, dasa sadanga 
and sdyaka, one should meditate on Sri Krsna as the only witness 
of everything within the three worlds. 
Text 9 
atha bhudharod adhi-pariskrte maho 
nnata-sdla-go-pura-visdla-vlthike 
mula-chadma-grasita-saudha-sahkule 
mani-harmya-vistrta-kavdta-vedike 
At this time, one should consider how Sri Krsna pervades the 
entire world, including the mountains, oceans and the land. 
Simultaneously, He is eternally present in His transcendental 
abode. 
Text 10 
dvija-bhupavit-carana-janmandrh grhair 
vividhais ca silpi-jana-vesmabhis tathd 
ibhavdjyur abhra-khara-dhenu-saurabhac 
chagaldlayais ca lasite sahasrasah 


426 
Sr! Narada-panicaratra • Fifth RAtra 
It is recommended that brdhmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and sudras 
offer worship to Sri Krsna as being present in all of their 
household articles and occupational tools, according to the 
above-mentioned procedure. 
Text 11 
vividhapandsrita-mahdjanakule 
kray a-vi kray a-dravin a-sancaydn ci te 
jana-mdnasdkrti-vidagdha-sundari- 
jana-mandiraih surucirais ca mandite 
If the members of the business community very gorgeously 
worship the Supreme Lord at their places of work, they will 
certainly make huge profits and become rich. 
Text 12 
pithu-dirghikd-vimala-pdthasi sphurad- 
vikacdravinda-makaranda-lampataih 
kalaharhsa-sdrasa-rathdngandmabhir 
vihagair vighustakakubhaih svake pure 
Although the Supreme Lord, Sri Krsna, is present everywhere, 
He is especially present at a beautiful place that is situated 
near a lake filled with aquatic birds, such as swans, cranes and 
cakravdkas. 
Text 13 
smara-pddapaih surabhi-puspa-lolupa- 
bhramardkulair vividha-kamadair nrndm 
siva-manda-mdrutac lacchikhair vrte 
mani-mandape ravi-sahasra saprabhe 
It is very pleasing to invoke the presence of Sri Krsna on a 
jeweled, raised platform that is as effulgent as thousands of suns 
and situated where cool breezes blow and bumblebees hover, 
searching for honey from the fragrant flowers and humming 


Meditating Upon and Worshiping the Lord 
427 
sweetly, thereby arousing lusty desires within the minds of 
men. 
Texts 14-15 
mani-dipitdntare tanu-citra-vistrta-vitdna- 
sdlini vilasite vikasvara-vicitra-ddmabhih 
sugandhi-gandha-saliloksita-sthale pramadd-satair 
madandlasaih kavari-bhdra-lolacdm-cdmaraih 
abhisevite skhalita-manju-bhdsibhih 
stana-bhdra-bhangura-krsdvalagnakaih 
adhivdsa-dhdram anivdrya-varsinah 
sumahdnaddmftarasa-sruter adhah 
The Supreme Lord does not feel as satisfied by the prayers 
offered by the demigods as He does when He is glorified by 
the faulty yet sweet words of the gopis, who are decorated with 
flower garlands, who are afflicted with transcendental passion, 
who fan Krsna with cdmaras, and who serve Him in a most 
enchanting place that is sprinkled with scented water. 
Text 16 
sura-pddapasya mani-bhutalol-lasat- 
prthu-sirhha-vaktra-carandmbujdsane 
abhicintayet sukha-nivistam acyutam 
nava-nlla-nlra-ruha-komalac chavim 
Although the Supreme Lord resides in a jeweled temple 
underneath a desire tree in His transcendental abode, 
Vaikuntha, He renounces it and incarnates in the material 
world, to fulfill the desires of His devotees. In this way, He 
assumes a transcendentally pleasing form, as captivating as a 
blue lotus flower. 


428 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth RAtra 
Text 17 
kutilagra-kuntala-lasat-kiritakam 
smita-ratna-puspa-racitavataihsakam 
sulaldtam udancita-bhruvarh manojnarh 
vipuldyata-vilola-cdru-locanam 
Simply by meditating on the Lord's curly black hair, His 
beautiful crown, His earrings made of flowers, His attractive 
forehead, His raised eyebrows and His broad lotus-like eyes, a 
devotee can attain all auspiciousness. 
Text 18 
mani-mandalosra-paridlpta-gandakaih 
nava-bandhu-jiva-kusumdrunddharam 
smita-candrikojjvalita-din-mukham sphurat- 
pulaka-sramdmbu-kana-manditdnanam 
The Lord's cheeks are decorated with jewels, His enchanting 
smile is as attractive as a bandhujiva flower, and His ever-pleasing 
mood awards fearlessness to the hearts of His devotees. 
Text 19 
sphurad arhsu-ratna-gana-dipta-bhusanottama- 
hdra-ddmabhir ura-sthaliyakam 
ghana-sdra-kunkuma-vilipta-vigraharh 
prthu-dipta-sad dvaya-bhujdvirdjitam 
arundbja-netram angajonmathitdngam 
arikaga-susobhana-kardmbuja-dvayam 
His broad chest is decorated with a jeweled necklace and a 
garland of forest flowers. His arms are decorated with various 
jeweled ornaments. May that lotus-eyed Sri Krsna always protect 
me from the embarrassment of having to deal with envious 
people within society. 


Meditating Upon and Worshiping the Lord 
429 
Text 20 
svdfikastha-bhismakasutoru-yugdntarastham 
tdrh tapta-hema-ru dm dtma-kardmbujdbhydm 
slisyantam drdra-jaghandm upaguhamdndm 
dtmdnamdya-lasatkara-pallavdbhydm 
May the son of Nanda, by whose grace great warriors like Bhisma 
were protected throughout their lives, and who embraced the 
gopis with His lotus-like hands, always protect us. 
Text 21 
dnandodreka-nighndm mukulita- 
nayanendivardih cdru-hdsdm 
prodyad-romanca-lagna srama-jala- 
kanikd-mauktikdlarikrtdrigi 
dtmanydlina-bdhydntara-karana- 
gandm angakair nistarange 
majjantarh lola-ndnd-matim atula- 
mahananda-sandoha-sindhau 
( 
Due to estatic love for Krsna, the gopis close their eyes, smile 
beautifully, and exhibit pearl-like drops of perspiration. Their 
bodily hair stands on end and they are completely merged in 
Krsna, both internally and externally. May the beloved Lord of 
the gopis award pleasure to the devotees. 
Text 22 
sa dvdbhydm yuvatibhydm divya- 
dukuldnulepana-nirmaldbhydm 
manmatha-saranayutdbhydm mukha- 
kamala-lola-locana-bhramardbhydm 
May the Supreme Lord, who stands between two young damsels 
of Vraja while enjoying His transcendental pastimes, shower 
His blessings upon all of you from His lotus-like mouth. 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth Ratra 
Texts 23-24 
bhuja-yugaldslistdbhydm sydmdruna- 
lalita-komaldnga-latdbhydm 
dslistam dtma-daksina-vdma- 
gatdbhydrh karollasat-kamaldbhydm 
prstha-gatayd kalinda-sutayd kara-kamala-yujd 
samparirabdham anjana-rucd ca madana-mathitayd 
padma-gadd-rathanga-jalaja-mrdbhu jayuga-yugalarh 
dordvaya-sarhsakta-varhsa-vilasan mukha-sarasl ruham 
Sri Krsna satisfies the gopls by warmly embracing them with His 
soft body, as He is tightly embraced by them. He sometimes 
displays a four-arm form, holding a conch shell, disc, club and 
lotus in His hands. Now, He is standing on the banks of the 
Yamuna, playing His flute in a most enchanting manner. 
Text 25 
diksu bahih-surarsi-yatibhih 
bhakti-bhdra-vinamra-tanubhih 
stuti-mukhara-mukhaih santatarh 
sevyamdnarh kamala-locanam 
jndna-visayam artha-catustaya- 
pradarh tribhuvana-janakam 
The Supreme Lord is surrounded on all sides by great sages and 
renunciates. They achieve the four objectives of life by serving 
the lotus-eyed Supreme Lord and offering prayers to Him with 
humility and devotion. 
Text 26 
sdndrdnanda-sudhabdhi-magnam 
amale dhdmni-svake 'vasthitarh 
dhydtvaivarh paramarh pumdrhsam 
anaghdt sampreksya dlksd-guroh 


Meditating Upon and Worshiping the Lord 
labdhvamurh manum adarena 
sita-dhir laksam japed yositam 
varta-karna-na-darsanadi- 
rahito mantn gurunam api 
After meditating on Krsna, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who is always absorbed in the mellows of ecstatic 
love in His transcendental abode, one should receive a mantra 
from his spiritual master and chant it one hundred thousand 
times while remaining completely aloof from the association of 
women to the extent of not even looking at them. 
Text 27 
juhuydt tad dasamsam, sasarkard tila- 
ksaudra-ghrtena-pdyasena 
prathamokta-pitha-varyake 'mum 
prayajed anityatd-vimuktyai 
After performing a fire sacrifice by offering oblations of sugar, 
sesame seeds, honey, ghee and sweet rice into the fire ten 
thousand times, one should continue his worship so that he 
can receive perpetual benefit. 
Text 28 
drabhya vibhutim atha nyaset 
kramatah sardntam abhyarcya 
ddye 'ntar dtmdnam vimsaty 
arnodite yantra-vare 
One should write the twenty-syllable mantra within a yantra 
and perform the nydsa on the vibhuti and dtmd, both in the 
beginning and at the end of his worship. 
Text 29 
madhye btjarh parito varunesa- 
yamendra-diksu samlikhya 


SrT Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth Ratra 
purva-bija-catuskan tad api ca 
catvarirhsadbhir aksarair dvyardhikaih 
One should write the mula-bija mantra in the middle of the 
yantra and then write the other four bija-mantras on the west, 
southeast, south and eastern sides. In this way, one should 
meditate on the mantra with forty-two syllables. 
Texts 30-31 
sistais ca pravese siva-hari- 
vahnydsdsri-yuktdms ca vilikhet 
vanmaya-sn-bhandras tad- 
vahvyo 'nupdlitd-likhitdh 
sesam purvoditavat vidhaya 
pitham adhastad abhy arcya 
sankalpya murti-mdtram 
dvdhydbhy arcya madhya-bije tat 
Outside of the yantra, one should write various bija-mantras, 
like sira, hari, agni, dik, vdg, bhava, mdyd and snbhadra. Finally, 
one should worship the altar, as previously mentioned, before 
invoking the presence of the worshipable Lord. Thereafter, 
one should offer worship to the mula-bijas. 
Text 32 
mukha-daksa-savya-prsthaga- 
bijesv arcyds tu saktayah kramasah 
rukminy adyas ca sat-sukonesv 
angdni-kesaresu-sardn 
One should then worship the Lord's energies, such as RukminI, 
with the bija-mantra written on the left and right sides of the 
yantra. He should then worship the anga-devatds in the six 
comers of the yantra and worship the sara within the whorl of 
the lotus. 


Meditating Upon and Worshiping the Lord 433 
Text 33 
laksmy ady adala-madhyesv agnyddisu- 
tad-vahir dhvaja-pramukhdn 
agra keturh sydmam prsthe vipram 
arunam amala-rakta-rucam 
Laksmldevi should be worshiped within the petals of the 
lotus and outside the petals and at the back of the lotus, the 
worshipable Lord, whose complexion is blackish, should be 
worshiped. 
Text 34 
pdrsva-dvaye nidhisdnantau 
tad vad abhipujayet kramasah 
heramba-sastr-dvavdva- 
visvaksendn adhidiksa-vahanadyam 
On both sides of the lotus one should worship Kuvera and 
Anantadeva. In the four directions, one should worship 
personalities like Ganesa, Visvaksena and the Lord's carrier, 
Garuda. 
Text 35 
vidruma-marakata-durvd-svarndbhan 
bahir a thendra-vajradyan 
yajana-vidhdnam itiritam dvrti- 
saptaka-yutam mukundasyah 
Finally, on the outer circle, one should worship Indra, Vajra 
and other demigods, and this should be followed by the seven- 
fold worship of Sri Krsna, who bestows liberation upon those 
who desire it, according to the rules and regulations described 
for the performance of sacrifice. 
Thus ends the translation of the third chapter of the Fifth Ratra 
of Sn Ndrada-pancardtra. 


Chapter 4 
Further Descriptions of Meditation and Worship 
of the Supreme Lord 
Text 1 
sri-mahadeva uvdca 
ity arcayann acyutam adarena yo 
'murhjapen mantra-vararh yat dtmd 
so 'bhy arcyate divya-janair jandndm 
hm-netra-panke-ruhatigma-bhdnuh 
Sri Mahadeva said: One who, after worshiping Krsna in this 
way, chants his mantra with undivided attention, will come to 
appear just like the sun before the eyes of the general mass of 
people. Indeed, such a worshiper becomes adored even by the 
demigods. 
Text 2 
sita-sarkarottara-payah pratipattyd 
tarpayed dina-mukhe-dinasas tam 
salilaih satarh sata-makha-sriyam esa 
sva-vibhuty udanvati karoty udavindum 
By faithfully offering oblations of milk mixed with sugar, or 
simply water, to Lord Krsna every morning, the worshiper 
becomes eligible to enjoy opulence like that of Indra and at the 
end of his life, he attains the supreme destination. 
TextS 
vidalad dalaih sumanasah 
sumanobhir ghana-drava-magnaih 
mamund 'mund havanato 'yuta-sankhyarh 
trijagat-sreyah sa mantravit kavirdt sydt 
435 


436 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth Ratra 
A worshiper who performs a fire sacrifice, offering ten thousand 
flowers as oblations, can bring peace and prosperity to the 
entire world. He becomes renowned as a learned scholar and 
an expert chanter of mantras. 
Text 4 
dhyanad evasya-sadyas tri-darhsa- 
mrgadrsovasyatdm ydnty avasyarh 
kandarparta-japadyaih kim atha 
na sulabharh mantrato 'syantarastharh 
spardhdm uddhuya cittarh mahad 
idam api naisargikirh-sasvad enarii 
sevetemum tri-laksarh sarasija- 
nilayddhlsvanvdpi-vdcdrh 
If one meditates on the objective of his mantra, the celestial 
ladies come under his control after being afflicted by the arrow 
of lust. Anything can be achieved by chanting this mantra. One 
should give up all arrogance and faithfully chant this mantra 
three hundred thousand times while following the prescribed 
rules and regulations. By doing this, one will achieve the favor 
of LaksmI, who is the master of opulence, and SarasvatI, the 
goddess of learning. 
TextS 
adhi-vyadhi-jarapamrtyu-duritair 
bhutaih samastair vidhijno- 
bhdgyena daridratadibhir 
asau durarh vimuktairim 
sat-putraih sahitais ca mitra- 
nivahair justo 'khildbhih sadd 
sampadbhih paripusta-bhuri- 
yasasd jived anekdh samdh 


Descriptions of Meditation and Worship 
437 
Morever, an expert worshiper can become freed from the 
influence of mental agony, disease, old age, premature death, 
distress and poverty. He can live a long life with good children, 
nice friends, abundant wealth and fame. 
Text 6 
akhila-manusu mantra 
vaisnavd vlryavanto 
mahitatara-phalddhyds 
tesu gopdla-mantrdh 
prabalatara ihaiso 
'sista-sammohandkhyo 
manur anupama-sampat- 
kalpand-kalpa-sdkhi 
Among all mantras, the mantras of Lord Visnu are naturally very 
powerful. The gopdla-mantra is especially auspicious and the 
sammohanarmantra is just like a desire tree because it instantly 
awards opulence to the chanter. 
Text 7 
manum imam atihrdyam 
yo bhajed bhakti-namro 
japa-huta-yajanddyair 
dhydnavan mantra-mukhyah 
trutita-sakala-karma- 
granthir udbuddha-cetd 
vrajati sa tu padarh tan 
nitya-suddham murdreh 
One who is attached to chanting mantras should worship this 
mantra by chanting it, meditating upon it, and offering sacrifice 
with a heart filled with devotion. By doing so''he becomes 
purified of all contamination. Such a person returns to the 


438 
Sri Narada-paJjcaratra • Fifth RAtra 
transcendental abode of Sri Hari after being liberated from 
entanglement in fruitive activities. 
TextS 
angikrtyaikam esdrh manum atha 
japa-homdrcanddyair manundm 
astdngotsdritdrih pramudita- 
parisuddhaopa-sanndntardtmd 
yogi yunjita yogdn samudita- 
vikrtih sa purodhdkrtih san 
dtmanyddhdya cittarh visaya- 
sama-sukhdn militdkso nivistah 
If a yogi chants any of these mantras and becomes purified by 
his chanting, performance of sacrifice, and offering of worship 
to the objective of his mantra, he can certainly overcome his 
tendency for mental speculation and become fixed in the self. 
In this way, he will finally attain the liberation of merging into 
the existence of Brahman, or if he desires, liberation in one of 
the Lord's transcendental abodes. 
Text 9 
visvam bhutendriydntah-karanayam 
ivendu-svarupam samastam 
varndtmaitat-pradhdne kalanalayabhaye 
bija-rupe dhruvena 
nitvd tatpumsi visvdtmani tarn 
api pardlambane kdla-tattve 
tarn vai saktau ciddmuny api 
nayatu candrdrhsake vd nisdnte 
While realizing the importance of time, a devotee should 
practice meditation on Sri Krsna, either at dawn or at night. 


Descriptions of Meditation and Worship 
439 
Sn Krsna is the life and soul of all living entities and He who 
enlightens the senses and hearts of all. 
Text 10 
nirdvande nirvisese-niratisaya- 
mahananda-sdndrevasano 
ndpdrthe-kryna-purvdmala- 
sahita-pare sdsvate 'bhydsaniyam 
suksmarh sarikrsya bijottamam 
atha sanakair nita-nisvdsa-cetdh 
praksindpunya-punyo-nirupama- 
sukha-samvit-svarupah sabhuydt 
One should always practice meditation on Sri Krsna, who is free 
from duality, devoid of material variegatedness, and eternally 
absorbed in transcendental bliss. He is called Krsna because 
He attracts even the minds of liberated living entities. The 
Supreme Lord awards pious souls the proper understanding of 
the science of self-realization. 
Texts 11-13 
mulddhdre trikone taruna- 
taranibhe bhdsvare-vibhramantam 
bdldrkdlokalolan-jarathatara- 
kurarigdrika-koti-prabhdbhih 
vidyun mdld-sahasra-dyuti- 
rucira-hasad vandhu-jivdbhirdmam 
traigunydkrdnta-bindum jagad 
udayalaydv eka-hetum vicintya 
tasyordhve-visphurantim sphuta- 
rucira-tadit-punjabharh bhdsvadantam 
udgacchantlm susumnd-sarani 
manusikhdmdlaldtendu-bimbam 


440 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth RAtra 
dn mdtrdrh suksma-rupdn kalita- 
sakala-visvdn kald-ndda-gabhydrh 
mularii yd sarva-dhdmndrh smaratu- 
nirupamdrii hunkrtiddncirarh vah 
nitvd tdrh sanakair adhomukha- 
sahasrarkdrunambhodadher 
dyotatyurna-sasdnka-vimba- 
manutah piyusa-dhdrd-srutim 
vakta-mantramayim nipiya ca 
sudhd-nihsyanda-rupdm 
vised bhayo 'py dtma-niketanarii- 
punar api vyutthdya-pitvd-viset 
One should meditate on the bindu-bija, who is situated within 
the mulddhdra-cakra, who shines brightly like the rising sun, who 
is like an embodiment of thousands of lightning flashes, whose 
complexion is reddish like the bandhu flower, who is endowed 
with the three principal qualities, and who is the cause of the 
creation and annihilation of the material world. 
After that, one should meditate on Nirupama-devi. By doing 
so, all of one's miseries will be vanquished. Nirupama-dev! is 
represented by the syllable hum. This transcendental sound 
vibration glitters like ten thousand bolts of lighming. It is very 
subtle, powerful, situated in the susumnd nerve, and decorated 
with three lines. It sustains the universe, it is known through 
the vibration of sound, and it is the root cause of all planets, 
stars and other celestial abodes. 
The worshiper has to search out Kundalinl-dev! from the 
mulddhdra-cakra and introduce her to the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, who is effulgent like thousands of suns, and who 
makes her drink nectar. When she returns to the mulddhdra- 


Descriptions of Meditation and Worship 
cakra after drinking nectar, one should, according to the rules 
and regulations, invite her once again. 
Texts 14-15 
yo 'bhyasyaty anudinam 
evam dtmandmum 
bijotthdn durita-jardpa- 
mrtyu-rogdn 
jitvd 'sau svayam iva 
murtimdn anangah 
sanjivec dram ali- 
nila-kesa-jdlah 
sphuta-madhura-padama- 
srenir aty adbhutartha 
jhatiti vadana-padman 
nihsaraty asya bant 
api ca sakala-mantrds tasya 
siddhyanti samksubdha- 
parama-ghana-saukhya 
ekaspadarh vartate sah 
Anyone who daily practices this procedure of worship certainly 
becomes free from all distress, old age and the threat of 
premature death. Such a person becomes enchanting, just like 
Cupid, and possesses black hair; He has the ability to speak 
very sweetly in a most pleasing voice. He achieves perfection in 
the chanting of all mantras and accumulates great opulence. He 
becomes a dear friend to all living beings. 
Text 16 
bhrdbhyan murttim mula-cakrad anangam 
sribhir bhdbhi-rakta-piyusa-ugbhih 


442 
Sri Narada-paScaratra • Fifth RAtra 
visvakasampurayantam vicintya 
praty dvesyds tatra vasydya-sddhyah 
One should then meditate on Anahgadeva, who travels 
everywhere and who keeps all the people of this world under 
his control. He is engaged in spreading nectar everywhere 
within the universe and everybody is engaged in performing 
his sddhand. 
Text 17 
ndryo nard vd nagari sabhd vd 
pravesitds tatra nisakta-cetasah 
syuh kinkards tasya jhatity andratarh 
cirdya tan nighnadhiyo na sarhsayah 
Whenever such a worshiper meets women or men, or enters 
a city or an assembly, everyone will become attracted to him. 
Everyone will accept their subordination to him and love to 
work under his direction. There is no doubt of this. 
Text 18 
tarani-dala-sandthe 
sakra-gopdrune yo 
ravi-sasi-sikhi-bimva- 
prasphurad daru-madhye 
hrdaya-sarasije 'mum 
sydmaldngam suvesam 
sa-sukham upanisanam 
samsmared vdsudevam 
A devotee should repeatedly meditate on Lord Krsna, the son 
of Vasudeva, who is effulgent like the sun or the moon, whose 
complexion is blackish, whose curly hair is most charming, 
and who manifests Himself in the heart of His unalloyed 
worshiper. 


Descriptions of Meditation and Worship 
443 
Texts 19-21 
padambhoja-dvaye 'riguly amaldka 
salayesv dvanausan nakhdndm 
sad dharmodara-kantau prapada- 
yuji-lasaj-janghika-dandayos ca 
jdnvorurvoh prasange-nava-vasana- 
vare-mekhaldddmri-ndbhau 
romdvalydm udarodara-bhuvi- 
vipule-vaksasi-praudha-hdre 
snvatsa-kaustubhdvasphuta- 
kamala-lasadvandvasaddhagni- 
bdhnor mule keyura-dipte jagad 
avana-pator dordvaye kankanddhye 
pani-dvandvangulisu 
madhurdllna-visve ca venau 
kanthe sat-kundalogre-sphuta- 
rucira-manau-dlpta-ganda-sthale ca 
kistu-dvandvee ca sone-nayana- 
nalinayor bhru-vildse-laldte 
kesesv dlola-barhesv atisurabhi- 
manqjna-prasunotpalesu 
sone vinyasta-bendv adhara- 
kisalaye danta-panktyarh smitdsya 
jyotsndydm ddi-pumsah kramata iti 
sanaih svarh manah sannidhattdm 
One should meditate on each of Krsna's limbs, such as His 
lotus feet, His fingers and fingernails, His thighs, His navel, 
His round abdomen, His broad chest that is decorated with the 
mark of Srivatsa and the Kaustubha gem, His flower garland, 
His soft and lotus stem-like wrists, His nicely decorated hands, 


444 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth Ratra 
His flute, His neck, His ears that are decorated with earrings, 
His resdess eyes that are decorated with beautiful eyebrows, 
His crown that is decorated with colorful peacock feathers, His 
hair that is decorated with enchanting flowers, His lips that 
give nectar to His flute, and His teeth that are beautified by His 
enchanting smile. In this way, a devotee should meditate upon 
each and every part of the Lord's transcendental body. 
Text 22 
ydvan mano vilayameti 
harer uddre 
manda-smite japatu 
tdvad ananga-bijam 
astddasdrnam athavdpi 
dasdrnakarh vd 
mantram sanair athajapet 
samaye-sva-nisthah 
Until a devotee's mind is fully fixed on the enchanting smiling 
face of Sri Krsna, he should continue to chant the kdma-bija 
mantra. Thereafter, he should begin to chant either the eighteen- 
syllable or ten-syllable mantra, with faith and devotion. 
Text 23 
dropydropya manah padaravindadi 
manda-hasitdntam 
tatra vildpyam ksine cet 
sukhacat-saddtmako bhavati 
When one's mind becomes steady by means of practice of 
meditation and when he thus attains the state of joyfulness and 
tranquality, he should practice fixing his mind on the limbs 
of the Lord, beginning from His lotus toes, up to Hi^ smiling 
face. v 


Descriptions of Meditation and Worship 
445 
Text 24 
nydsa-japa-homa-pujd tarpana- 
mantrdbhiseka-viniyogdndm 
dipikdkdramayodbhdvita kramah 
krsna-mantra-gana-kathitdndm 
The commentators on the devotional literature have all stressed 
the processes of nydsa, sacrifice, worship and the offering 
of oblations while chanting the mantra: om namo bhagavate 
vasudevdya. 
Text 25 
samsaya-timirac chidurd 'sesd 'krama- 
dipikd karena mahadbhih 
kara-dlpikeva dhdryd sasneham 
ahamisam samasta-sukhdptyai 
By following these gradual processes, advance^ devotees will 
be able to dissipate the darkness of ignorance. They will feel 
transcendental ecstasy, day and night, by meditating on the 
effulgent personality who resides within their hearts. 
Text 26 
yas cakrarh nija-keli-sddhanam 
adhisthdna-sthito 'pi prabhur dattam 
manmatha-satrund 'vana-krte 
vydhrtta-lokottaram 
dhatte dlpta-vanendu-bhdnu- 
nayanopetad bhamdyam dhruvam 
vande kdya-vimardanam vadha- 
krtdm bhakti-pradarh yadavam 
I repeatedly offer my obeisances to Sri Krsna, who is the Lord 
of the Yadu dynasty, the bestower of devotional service, always 
fixed in His Self and yet picks up His cakra for the sake of 


Sri Narada-paScaratra • Fifth RAtra 
enjoying pastimes, who rewarded Siva, and who is the enemy 
of Kamadeva. 
Thus ends the translation of the fourth chapter of the Fifth 
Ratra of Sri Ndrada-pancardtra. 


Chapter 5 
The One Thousand Holy Names of Sri Radha 
Text 1-3 
sri-paruaty uvdca 
deva-deva jaganndtha 
bhaktdnugraha-kdraka 
yady asti mayi kdrunyam 
mayi yady asti te daya 
yad yat tvayd pragaditarh 
tat sarvarh me srutam prabho 
guhydd guhyatararh yat tu 
yat te manasi kdsite 
tvayd na gaditarh yat tu 
yasmai kasmai kadacana 
tan mam kathaya devesa 
sahasrarh ndma cottamam 
Sri Parvati said: O lord of lords! O lord of the universe! You 
are very compassionate to the devotees. Whatever you have 
described to me so far, I have heard with rapt attention. 
Now, O lord, if you wish to be compassionate to me, please 
reveal the most elevated of whatever subjects you have heard— 
the most secret of confidential secrets in your heart. 
O lord, if you are really merciful then reveal to me the one 
thousand names of Sri Radha, which are very confidential and 
which you have never disclosed to anyone before. 
Text 4 
sn-radhdyd maha-devyd 
gopyd bhakti-prasddhanam 
447 


448 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth Ratra 
brahmanda-kartri hartri sd 
katham gopitvam dgatd 
Also, kindly explain to me how the holy names of the topmost 
gopl, Sri Radhika, have become the crowning ornament of 
devotional service, and how Sri Radhika has attained the 
position of the topmost gopl and the controller of the universe 
Text 5 
sri mahadeva uvdca 
smu devi vicitrdrthdm 
katham pdpa-hardm subhdm 
ndsti janmdni karmdni 
tasyd nunarh mahesvari 
Sri Mahadeva said: O goddess, now hear from me the most 
auspicious subject matter, the hearing of which insures that all 
of one's sinful reactions are destroyed. There is no doubt that 
such a devotee will not be bom again, or act like a ordinary 
living entity. 
Text 6 
yadd haris caritrdni 
kurute kdrya-gocardt 
tadd vidhdtr-rupdni 
hari-sannidhya-sadhini 
Whenever Sri Hari appears in this world to fulfill His mission 
and enjoy wonderful pastimes, Sri Radhika appears along with 
Him to support Him in His pastimes. 
Text? 
tasyd gopitva-bhdvasya 
kdranam gaditam purd 


One Thousand Holy Names of Sr! RAdhA 
449 
iddnirh srnu deuesi 
namnarh caiva sahasrakam 
The reason why She is the topmost gopt has already been 
explained. O goddess, now hear from me Her one thousand 
holy names. 
TextS 
yan mayd kathitam naiva 
tantresv api kaddpi na 
tava snehdt pravaksydmi 
bhaktyd dhdryarh mumuksubhih 
I had never spoken about these names in any of the tantras. 
Now, out of affection for you, I will disclose them. Every aspiring 
devotee should hear these holy names with faith and devotion. 
Text 9 
mama prdna-samd vidhyd 
bhavyate me W ahar-nisam 
srnusva girije nityarh 
pathasva ca yathd-mati 
These one thousand names are as dear to me as my own life, 
and I meditate on them, day and night. O daughter of the 
Himalayas, you should listen attentively and then recite these 
holy names of Radha every day. 
Text 10 
yasydh prasdddt krsnas tu 
golokesah parah prabhuh 
asyd ndma-sahasrasya 
rsir narada eva ca 
By the potency of these holy names, Krsna, the Lord of Goloka, 
has become known throughout the universe as the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. Narada Muni is the predominating 


450 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth Ratra 
sage of these holy names and Radha, who awards the four 
objectives of life, is the supreme goddess. 
Text 11 
devl radha para praktd 
catur varga prasadhinl 
ork sn-rddha rddhika 
krsna-vallabhd krsna-samyutd 
The goddess, Sri Radha, is completely transcendental and She 
is the bestower of the four objectives of human life. She is the 
original sound vibration, om. She is Krsna's topmost worshiper 
and Krsna's eternal companion. 
Text 12 
vrndavanesvari krsna-priyd 
madana-mohini 
srimatl krsna-kdntd ca 
krsndnanda-pradayini 
She is the Queen of Vrndavana and the lover of Krsna. She is 
more enchanting than Cupid, the most beautiful personality, 
the beloved consort of Krsna, and the giver of pleasure to 
Krsna. 
Text 13 
yasasvinl yasogamyd 
yasodananda-vallabha 
damodara-priya gopl 
gopananda-kan tathd 
She is the most celebrated personality, Her fame is 
unfathomable, She is very dear to Yasoda's son, She is very dear 
to Lord Damodara, She is a cowherd girl and She is the giver of 
happiness to the cowherd people of Vraja. 


One Thousand Holy Names of Sri Radha 
451 
Text 14 
krsndnga-vdsini hrdyd 
hari-kdntd hari-priyd 
pradhdna-gopikd gopa- 
kanyd trailokya-sundan 
She resides in the body of Krsna. She is most enchanting, 
the beloved of Lord Hari, most dear to Lord Hari, the chief 
amongst the gopis, the daughter of a cowherd man, and the 
most beautiful girl within the three worlds. 
Text 15 
vrnddvana-vihdri ca 
vikasita-mukhdmbujd 
gokuldnanda-kartn ca 
gokulananda-dayini 
She enjoys pastimes in Vrndavana, Her face is like a fully 
blossomed lotus flower, and She brings happiness to the 
residents of Gokula. 
Text 16 
gati-pradd gita-gamyd 
gamandgamana-priyd 
visnu-priyd visnu-kdntd 
visitor anga-nivdsinl 
She awards the goal of life, She is approached by those who 
sing Her glories, and She is the beloved of the Supreme Lord 
who sometimes appears and sometimes disappears within this 
world. She is dear to Lord Visnu and the consort of Lord Visnu. 
She resides in the body of Sri Visnu. 
Text 17 
yasodananda-patni ca 
yasodananda-gehinl 


452 
SrE Narada-pancaratra • Fifth Ratra 
kdmdri-kdntd kamesi 
kdma-ldlasa-vigrahd 
She is the wife of Yasoda's son and She resides in Yasoda's 
son's house. She is the beloved of the enemy of lust, the queen 
of amorous pastimes, and the personification of conjugal 
pastimes. 
Text 18 
jaya-pradd jayd jivd 
jlvdnanda-pradayini 
nandanandana-patnl ca 
vrsabhdnu-sutd sivd 
She is the bestower of victory, the personification of victory, the 
life and soul of existence, the giver of happiness to the living 
entities, the wife of Nanda Maharaja's son, the daughter of 
King Vrsabhanu, and the most auspicious personality. 
Text 19 
ganddhyaksd gavddhyaksd 
gavdmgatir anuttamd 
kdncandbhd hema-gdtri 
kancandngada-dhdrinl 
She is the leader of the gopis, the master of the cows, the shelter 
of the cows, and unparalleled. She has a golden complexion. 
Her bodily hue is just like molten gold and She wears golden 
armlets. 
Text 20 
asokd sokorahitd 
visokd soka-ndsinl 
gdyatri vedamdtd ca 
veddtita vid-uttamd 


One Thousand Holy Names of 5r1 RadhA 
453 
She never laments. She is devoid of lamentation, free from 
lamentation, and She destroys lamentation. She is the 
personification of the gdyatri mantra, the mother of the Vedas, 
beyond the reach of the Vedas, and the most erudite scholar. 
Text 21 
niti-sdstra^priya nlti- 
gatir matir abhlstadd 
veda-priya veda-garbha 
veda-mdrga-pravardhinl 
She is attached to the scriptures that describe morality. She 
is the perfect moralist, the most thoughtful personality, the 
fulfiller of everyone's desires, an ardent student of the Vedas, 
the mother of the Vedas, and the preacher of the Vedic way of 
life. 
Text 22 
veda- gamyd veda-pard 
vicitra-kanakojjvald 
tathojjvala-pradd nityd 
tathaivojjvala-gdtrikd 
She is attained by Vedic study and She is the ultimate goal of 
Vedic literature. Her complexion is like brightly shining gold. 
She spreads a bright illumination, She is eternal, and Her entire 
body is effulgent. 
Text 23 
nanda-priya nanda-suta- 
radhyanandapfadd subhd 
subhdngi vimaldngi ca 
vilasiny apardjitd 
She is very dear to Nanda Maharaja, adored by the son Nanda 
Maharaja, the bestower of transcendental ecstasy, and the most 


454 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth RAtra 
auspicious one. Her limbs are supremely beautiful and fully 
matured. She is playful and She is unconquerable. 
Text 24 
janani janmasunyd ca 
janma-mrtyu-jardpahd 
gatir- gatimatdm dhdtn 
dhatranandapraddyini 
She is the original mother of everyone; unborn; and the 
destroyer of birth, death and old age. She is the ultimate goal 
of all aspiring devotees, the maintainer of everyone, and the 
giver of happiness to the supreme maintainer. 
Text 25 
jaganndtha-priyd saila 
vdsinl hema-sundari 
kisori kamald padmd 
padma-hastd payoda-dd 
She is dear to the Lord of the universe. She resides on a hill. 
She is as beautiful as molten gold. She is youthful. She is like 
a lotus flower. She resembles a lotus flower. She holds a lotus 
flower in Her hand, and She is the supplier of water. 
Text 26 
payasvini payo-ddtri 
pavitrd sarva-mangald 
mahd-jiva-pradd krsna- 
kdntd kamala-sundan 
She is like a river. She is the original supplier of water, pure, 
all-auspicious, the ultimate bestower of life, very dear to Krsna, 
and as beautiful as a lotus flower. 


One Thousand Holy Names of Sri RAdhA 
455 
Text 27 
vicitra-vdsini citra- 
vdsinl citra-mpini 
nirgund su-kulind ca 
niskulind nirdkuld 
She is wonderfully fragrant, extraordinarily fragrant, 
enchantingly beautiful, and transcendental to the three modes 
of material nature. She was bom in a pious family, She was not 
bom in a mundane family, and She is free from all material 
miseries. 
Text 28 
gokuldntara-gehd ca 
yogananda-kari tathd 
venu-vddyd venu-ratih 
venu-vddya-pardyand 
She lives in Gokula and She gives pleasure to Krsna when He 
meets Her. She plays a flute, She is attached to Her flute, and 
She is expert at playing the flute. 
Text 29 
gopdlasya-priyd saumya- 
rupd saumya-kulodvahd 
mohdmohd vimohd ca 
gati-nisthd gati-pradd 
She is dear to the cowherd boys and most attractive. She 
appeared in a respected family. She is most enchanting, free 
from bewilderment, never illusioned, fixed in the goal of life, 
and the bestower of the goal of life. 
Text 30 
girbdna-vandyd girbdnd 
girbdna-gana-sevitd 


456 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth RAtra 
lalitd ca visokd ca 
visdkhd citra-mdlini 
She is adored by thd demigods, worshiped by the demigods, and 
served by the demigods. She is playful; free from lamentation; 
the auspicious star, Visakha; and decorated with wonderful 
flower garlands. 
Text 31 
jitendriyd suddha-sattvd 
kulind kula-dlpikd 
dipa-priyd dlpa-ddtn 
vimald vimalodaka 
She has conquered Her senses, She is situated in pure goodness, 
She comes from a noble family, and She is the illuminating 
lamp of Her family. She is fond of lamps, the giver of lamps, the 
most sanctified, and the personification of sacred water. 
Text 32 
kdntdra-vdsinl krsnd 
krsnacandra-priyd matih 
anuttard duhkha-hantn 
duhkha-kartri kulodvahd 
She lives in a forest. She is very dear to Krsna, the beloved 
of Krsnacandra, thoughtful, unsurpassed, the destroyer of 
miseries, the creator of suffering, and the best in Her family. 
Text 33 , 
math laksmlr dhrtir lajjd 
kdntih pustih smrtih ksamd 
ksirodasdyini devi 
devdri-kula-mardini 
She is thoughtful, the goddess Laksmi, tolerant, bashful, 
effulgent, the great nourisher, memory, and forgiving. She lies 


One Thousand Holy Names of ^r! RAdhA 
in the ocean of milk, She is the supreme goddess, and She is the 
destroyer of the demons who are enemies of the demigods. 
Text 34 
vaisnavi ca mahd-laksmih 
kula-pujyd kula-priyd 
samhartn- sarua-daitydndrh 
sdvitri veda-gdmini 
She is the topmost Vaisnava, the goddess Mahalaksmi, highly 
respected by Her family, dear to Her family members, the 
destroyer of the demons, the personified Gdyatri mantra, and a 
follower of the Vedas. 
Text 35 
vedatita nirdlambd 
nirdlamba-gana-priyd 
nirdlamba-janaih pujyd 
nirdlokd nirdsrayd 
She is beyond the reach of the Vedas, completely liberated, 
dear to liberated souls, worshiped by liberated souls, unseen by 
ordinary people, and fully independent. 
Text 36 
ekdngd saruagd sevyd 
brahma-patni sarasvatl 
rdsa-priyd rdsa-gamyd 
rasadhisthatr-devatd 
She is one without a second, all-pervading, the object of service, 
the wife of the Supreme Brahman, the goddess Sarasvati, 
attached to the rasa dance, Krsna's dearmost companion in the 
rasa dance, and the predominating Deity of the rasa dance. 


458 
Sri Narada-pa^caratra • Fifth Ratra 
Text 37 
rasikd rasikdnandd 
svayam-rdsesvan pard 
rasa-mandala-madhyasthd 
rdsa-mandala-sobhitd 
She is the enjoyer of transcendental mellows and She relishes 
the ecstasy of transcendental mellows. She is the queen of the 
rasa dance and fully transcendental. She remains within the 
circle of the rasa dance and increases the beauty of the rdsa-lila 
pastimes. 
Text 38 
rdsa-mandala-sevyd ca 
rdsa-kndd- manohard 
pundankdksa-nilayd 
pundankdksa-gehini 
She is served in the circle of the rdsa-llld, She performs 
enchanting rdsa-llld pastimes, She possesses eyes like lotus 
petals, and She is the wife of lotus-eyed Krsna. 
Text 39 
pundankaksa-sevyd ca 
pundankdksa-vallabhd 
sarva-jivesvan sarva- 
jiva-vandyd pardt prard 
She is served by lotus-eyed Krsna, dear to lotus-eyed Krsna, the 
queen of all living entities, worshiped by all living entities, and 
greater than the greatest. 
Text 40 
prakrtih sambhu-kdntd ca 
saddsiva-manohard 


One Thousand Holy Names of SrI Radha 
459. 
ksut pipasa day a nidra 
bhrdntih srdntih ksamdkuld 
She is the goddess of the material nature, She expands to become 
the wife of Lord Siva and the attractive consort of SadaSiva. She 
is hunger, thirst, compassion, sleep, bewilderment, exhaustion 
and forgiveness. 
Text 41 
vadhu-rupa gopa-patni 
bhdrati siddhayogini 
satya-rupd nitya-rupd 
nitydngi nitya-gehinl 
She is a daughter-in-law, the wife of a cowherd, the goddess of 
speech, a perfect yogini, the personification of eternal truth, 
and the personification of eternity. Her form is eternal and She 
is the eternal wife of Sri Krsna. 
Text 42 
sthdna-ddtn tathd dhdtri 
mahd-laksmih svayam-prabhd 
sindhu-kanyd sthdna-ddtn 
dvdrakd-vdsinl tathd 
She gives shelter to the devotees. She is the universal mother, 
the goddess Mahalaksmi, self-effulgent, and the daughter of the 
ocean of milk. She awards refuge to the surrendered devotees 
and She resides in Dvaraka in an expanded form. 
Text 43 
buddhih sthitih sthdna-rupd 
sarva-kdrana-kdrand 
bhakti-piiyd bhakti-gamyd 
bhaktananda-praddyini 


460 
Sri Narada-paisicaratra • Fifth Ratra 
She is intelligence, steadiness, the ultimate shelter, the 
cause of all causes, attached to devotional service to Krsna, 
approached by devotional service, and the giver of happiness 
to the devotees. 
Text 44 
bhakta-kalpa-drumatita 
tathatlta-gund tathd 
mano-dhisthdtr-devi ca 
krsna-prema-pardyand 
She is greater than a wish-fulfilling tree for the devotees. 
Her transcendental qualities are unapproachable. She is the 
predominating deity of the mind and She is fully devoted to the 
loving service of Krsna. 
Text 45 
nirdmayd saumya-ddtn 
tathd madana-mohinl 
ekdnamsd sivd ksemd 
durgd durgati-ndsini 
She cannot be oppressed by disease. She is generous, the 
enchanter of Cupid, one without a second, the complete 
whole, the most auspicious personality, the personification of 
happiness. Goddess Durga, and the destroyer of all miseries. 
Text 46 
isvari sarva-vandyd ca 
gopaniyd subhahkan 
pdlinl sarva-bhutdndm 
tathd kdmdhga-hdrini 
She is the supreme controller, worshiped by all, most 
confidential, the supreme benefactor, the maintainer of all 
living entities, and the enchanter of Cupid. 


One Thousand Holy Names of ^rI RAdhA 
Text 47 
sadyo-mukti-pradd devi 
veda-sdrd pardtpard 
himdlaya-sutd sarvd 
pdrvati girijd sati 
She awards liberation to those who desire it. She is the supreme 
goddess, the essence of the Vedas, greater than the greatest, 
the daughter of the Himalayas, the sum total of everything, 
Goddess Parvati, the daughter of the lord of the mountain, and 
the most chaste lady. 
Text 48 
daksa-kanyd deva-mdtd 
manda-lajjd haritanurupd 
vrnddranya-priyd vmdd 
vrnddvana-vildsini 
She is the daughter of Daksa, the mother of the demigods, 
sociable, the form of Lord Hari, attached to the forest of 
Vrndavana, and Goddess Vrnda. She enjoys pastimes in 
Vrndavana. 
Text 49 
vildsini vaisnavl ca 
brahmaloka-pratisthitd 
rukmini revati satya- 
bhdmd jdmbavatl tathd 
She is playful, the topmost Vaisnava, situated in the spiritual 
abode, Rukmini, Revati, Satyabhama and Jambavati. 
Text 50 
sulaksmand mitravindd 
kdlindi jahnu-kanykd 


462 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth Ratra 
paripuma purnatara 
tathd haimavati gatih 
She is Sulaksmana, Mitravinda, Kalindi, and the daughter 
of Jahnu. She is perfect, more perfect, the daughter of the 
Himalayas, and the supreme destination. 
Text 51 
apurvd brahma-rupd ca 
brahmdnda-paripdlinl 
brahmanda-bhanda-madbyasthd 
brahmanda-bhanda-rupini 
She is wonderful, completely spiritual, and the maintainer of 
the universes. She enters within the universes and She is the 
support of the universes. 
Text 52 
anda-rupanda-madhyasthd 
tathdnda-paripdlini 
anda-bdhydnda-samhartri 
siva-brahma-hari-priyd 
She is the predominating Deity of the universe, She resides 
within the universe, She maintains the universe, She remains 
outside the universe, She is the destroyer of the universe, and 
She is dear to Siva, Brahma and Visnu. 
Text 53 
mahd-visnu-priyd kalpa- 
vrksa-mpd nirantard 
sdra-bhutd sthird garni 
gaurdngi sasi-sekhard 
She is the beloved of Maha-Visnu, just like a desire tree, 
eternal, the essence of everything, and steady. Her complexion 


One Thousand Holy Names of ^r1 RAdhA 
463 
is golden, Her limbs are golden, and She expands to become 
the consort of Lord Siva. 
Text 54 
sveta-campaka-varndbhd 
sasi-koti-sama-prabhd 
mdlati-mdlya-bhusddhyd 
mdlatl-mdlya-dhdrinl 
Sometimes, Her complexion is just like a white campaka flower. 
She is as effulgent as millions of moons. She is decorated with 
a garland of mdlatl flowers. 
Text 55 
krsna-stutd krsna-kdntd 
vmddvana-vildsinl 
tulasy-adhisthdtr-devl 
sarhsdrdrnava-pdra-dd 
She is glorified along with Krsna, She is the beloved of Krsna, 
She enjoys pastimes in Vrndavana, She is the predominating 
Deity of TulasI, and She delivers the devotees from the ocean 
of material existence. 
Text 56 
saraddharaddmbhodd 
yasodd gopa-nandinl 
atita-gamand gauri 
pardnugraha-kdrini 
She awards the highest objective of life, She is the giver of 
nourishment, She is the giver of water, She is the giver of fame, 
and She is the daughter of a cowherd man. She knows the past, 
Her complexion is fair, and She is very kind to others. 


464 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth RAtra 
Text 57 
karunarnava-sampurna 
karunarnava-dharini 
madhavi madhava-mano- 
hdrini syama-vallabha 
She is an ocean of mercy, She possesses unlimited compassion, 
She is dear to Lord Madhava, She attracts the mind of Lord 
Madhava, and She is the beloved of Syamasundara. 
Text 58 
andhakara-bhaya-dhvasta 
mangalyd mangala-prada 
sri-garbhd sri-pradd srisd 
sn-nivdsdcyutapriyd 
She is the destroyer of the fear of darkness, all-auspicious, 
the bestower of auspiciousness, the mother of all beauty, the 
bestower of opulence, the queen of beauty, the abode of beauty, 
and dear to the infallible Supreme Lord. 
Text 59 
sri-rupd sn-hard sridd 
sn-kdmd sri svarupini 
snddmananda-ddtn ca 
snddmesvara-vallabhd 
She is the personification of beauty, the remover of beauty, the 
giver of beauty, the desire for beauty, the form of beauty, the 
giver of happiness to Sridama, and the beloved of Sridama's 
Lord. 
Text 60 
sn-nitambd sn-ganesd 
sn-svarupdsritd srutih 


One Thousand Holy Names of ^rI RAdhA 
465 
sri-kriya-rupini snla 
sn-krma-bhajananvita 
She possesses beautiful hips. She is the leader of the gopls, 
the embodiment of beauty, the Vedas, and the performance 
of devotional service. She is wonderfully beautiful and She is 
absorbed in the worship of Sri Krsna. 
Text 61 
sn-rddhd srimati sresthd 
srestha-rupd sruti-priyd 
yogesd yoga-mdtd ca 
yogdtitd yuga-priyd 
Sheworships Lord Krsna. She is the most beautiful, the foremost 
personality, dear to the Vedas, the queen of yoga, the mother 
of the Vedas, beyond the jurisdiction of the Vedas, and dear to 
the two Supreme Personalities. 
Text 62 
yoga-priyd yoga-gamyd 
yogini-gana-vanditd 
javd-kusuma-sankdsd 
dddimi-kusumopamd 
She is dear to the process of yoga, approached by yoga, and 
worshiped by yoginls. She resembles a china rose and She is 
like a flower of the pomegranate tree. 
Text 63 
nildmbaradhard dhird 
dhairya-rupa-dhard dhritih 
ratna-simhdsana-sthd ca 
ratna-kundala-bhusitd 


466 
Sri Narada-paivicaratra • Fifth RAtra 
She wears blue garments. She is sober, the form of transcendental 
passion, self-restraint, seated on ajeweled throne, and decorated 
with jeweled earrings. 
Text 64 
ratndlankdra-samyuktd 
ratna-mdlya-dhard pard 
ratnendra-sdra-harddhya 
ratna-mdld-vibhusitd 
She is decorated with jeweled ornaments, She wears jeweled 
necklaces, She is transcendentally situated, She possesses a 
necklace of the most precious jewels, and She is decorated with 
a necklace of jewels. 
Text 65 
indranila-mani-nyasta- 
pada-padma-subha sucih 
kdrttiki paurnamdsi ca 
amdvasyd bhaydpahd 
Her lotus feet are decorated with blue sapphires. She is most 
auspicious, sanctified, the month of Karttika, the full moon 
day, the new moon day, and the remover of fear. 
Text 66 
govinda-rdja-grhini 
govi nda-ga na-puji td 
vaikuntha-ndtha-grhinl 
vaikuntha-paramdlayd 
She is the queen of Lord Govinda, worshiped by the devotees 
of Lord Govinda, and the consort of the Lord of Vaikuntha. She 
resides in the supreme abode of Vaikuntha. 


One Thousand Holy Names of Sri RAdhA 
Text 67 
vaikunthadeva-devadhya 
tathd vaikuntha-sundan 
madalasa vedavatl 
sitd sddhvl pati-vratd 
She is the companion of the Lord of Vaikuntha, the beautiful 
queen of Vaikuntha, overcome by transcendental passion, 
knowledgeble, Goddess Sita, saintly, and chaste. 
Text 68 
anna-pumd sadananda- 
rupd kaivalya-sundari 
kaivalya-ddyini sresthd 
goplndtha-manohard 
She is the goddess Annapurna, or Durga. She is the 
personification of eternal bliss. Her beauty is unique, She is the 
giver of liberation, She is the topmost worshiper of the Lord, 
and She attracts the mind of the lover of the gopis. 
Text 69 
gopindthesvan candi 
ndyikd-nayandnvitd 
ndyikd ndyaka-pritd 
ndyakdnanda-rupinl 
She is the queen of Gopinatha, She is Goddess Candi or Durga, 
She possesses the eyes of a beautiful heroine, She is the most 
beautiful heroine, She is dear to the hero, and She gives 
pleasure to the hero. 
Text 70 
sesd sesavatl sesa- 
rupini jagad-ambikd 


468 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth RAtra 
gopdla-pdlikd mdyd 
jayanandapradd tathd 
She relaxes on Lord Sesa. She is the possessor of Lord Sesa, the 
form of Lord Sesa, the mother of the universe, the maintainer 
of the cowherd community, the illusory energy of the Lord, the 
wife of the Lord, and the giver of happiness. 
Text 71 
kumdri yauvandnandd 
yuvati gopa-sundan 
gopa-mdtd jdnaki ca 
janakdnanda-kdrini 
She is a young girl, in the prime of Her youth. She is fully 
matured, a beautiful cowherd girl, the mother of the cowherd 
community, the daughter of King Janaka, and the giver of 
happiness to King Janaka. 
Text 72 
kaildsa-vdsini rambhd 
vairdgydkula-dipikd 
kamald-kdnta-grhini 
kamald-kamaldlayd 
She resides on Mount Kailasa. She is the Apsara, Ramba; a 
shining lamp of renunciation; the wife of Lord Narayana; the 
goddess of fortune; and the abode of the goddess of fortune. 
Text 73 
trailokya-mdtd jagatdm 
adhisthdtri priya ambikd 
hara-kdntd hara-ratd 
harananda-praddyini 
She is the mother of the three worlds, the predominating Deity 
of the universe, the most beloved, and the original mother. She 


One Thousand Holy Names of SrI RAdhA 
469 
expands to become the consort of Lord Siva. She is attached to 
Lord Siva and the giver of happiness to Lord Siva. 
Text 74 
hara-patni hara-prita 
hara-tosana-tatpara 
haresvari rdma-ratd 
rdmd rdmesvari ramd 
She expands to become the wife of Lord Siva. She is very dear 
to Lord Siva, eager to please Lord Siva and the queen of Lord 
Siva. She is attached to Lord Rama, the wife of Lord Rama, the 
queen of Lord Rama, and the goddess of fortune. 
Text 75 
sydmald citra-lekhd ca 
tathd bhuvana-mohini 
su-gopi gopa-vanitd 
gopa-rdjya-pradd sudhd 
She is dear to Syamasundara, most charming, the enchantress 
of the entire world, a beautiful gopi, the daughter of a cowherd 
man, the giver of a kingdom to the cowherd community, and 
the most auspicious personality. 
Text 76 
angdvapurnd mdheyi 
matsya-rdja-su td sati 
kaumdn ndrasirhhi ca 
vdrdhi nava-durgikd 
Her body is fully mature. She the queen of the earth, the 
daughter of the King of Matsya, the most chaste, the most 
beautiful young girl, the consort of Lord Nrsimha, the consort 
of Lord Varaha, and the origin of the nine Durgas. 


470 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth Ratra 
Text 77 
cancala cancalamoda 
nan bhuvana-sundari 
daksa-yajna-hard ddksi 
daksa-kanyd su-locand 
She is restless and fickle. She appears like an ordinary girl. She 
is the most beautiful girl in the world, and the frustrator of the 
Daksa-yajna. She was born from Daksa. She is the daughter of 
Daksa, and the beautiful-eyed one. 
Text 78 
rati-rupd rati-pritd 
rati-sresthd rati-pradd 
ratir laksmana-geha-sthd 
virajd bhuvanesvari 
She is the form of ecstasy and fond of transcendental ecstasy. 
She possesses the highest ecstasy and She awards ecstasy to 
the devotees. She lives in the house of one who possesses the 
symptoms of ecstasy. She is the virajd river that lies beyond the 
material creation, and the empress of the entire world. 
Text 79 
sankhdspadd barer 
jay a jamatr-kula-vanditd 
bakuld bakulamoda- 
dhdrini yamund jay a 
She is the destroyer of fear, the wife of Lord Hari, worshiped by 
Her in-laws, as beautiful as a bakuld flower, as enchanting as a 
bakuld flower, the river Yamuna, and the goddess of victory. 
Text 80 
vijayd jaya-patni ca yamaldrjuna-bhanjini 
vakresvari vakra-rupd vakra-viksana-viksitd 


One Thousand Holy Names of Sri Radha 
She is the goddess of victory, the wife of the Lord of victory, 
the beloved of the Lord who uprooted the twin yamalarjuna 
trees, the goddess of crookedness, deceptive, and expert at 
employing sidelong glances. 
Text 81 
apardjitdjaganndthd 
jaganndthesvari yatih 
khecari khecara-sutd 
khecaratva-praddyini 
i She is unconquerable, the queen of the universe, the controller 
of the Lord of the universe, and a topmost renunciate. She 
resides in the higher planets. She is the daughter of one 
who resides in the higher planets and She awards one the 
qualification to reside in the higher planets. 
Text 82 
visnu-vaksah-sthala-sthd ca 
visnu-bhdvana-tatpard 
candra-koti-sugdtri ca 
candrdnana-manohan 
She resides on the chest of Lord Visnu, She is absorbed in the 
thought of Lord Visnu, Her body is as beautiful as millions of 
moons, and Her moon-like face is most enchanting. 
Text 83 
sevd-sevyd sivd ksemd 
tathd ksema-kdri vadhuh 
yadavendra-vadhuh sevyd 
siva-bhaktd sivdnvitd 
She is served by devotees who render devotional service. She 
expands to become the consort of Lord Siva. She is patient and 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth Ratra 
She awards patience. She is a beautiful bride, the wife of the 
King of the Yadavas, the most worshipable one, a devotee of 
Lord Siva, and a companion of Lord Siva. 
Text 84 
kevald niskald suksma 
maha-bhimabhayapradd 
jimuta-rupd jaimuti 
jitdmitra-pramodini 
She is liberated, free from contamination, the most subtle, 
terrifying, the creator of fearfulness, the maintainer, the 
beloved of Lord Visnu, and the girl who delights Lord Visnu. 
Text 85 
gopdla-vanitd nandd 
kulajendra-nivdsini 
jayanti yamundiigi ca 
yamund-tosa-kdrini 
She is a cowherd girl and She is dear to Maharaja Nanda. She 
comes from a noble family and resides in a palace. She lives 
near the Yamuna and pleases the Yamuna. 
Text 86 
kali-kalmasa-bhangd ca 
kali-kalmasa-ndsinl 
kali-kalmasa-mpd ca 
nityananda-kan krpd 
She is the deliverer from the contamination of Kali. She rescues 
the devotees from the influence of Kali. She is the form of the 
contamination of Kali. She is the bestower of eternal happiness 
and She is the personification of compassion. 


One Thousand Holy Names of ^r! RadhA 
473 
Text 87 
krpdvati kulavati 
kailasacala-vasini 
vama-detn vdma-bhdgd 
govinda-priya-kdrini 
She is merciful. She was born in a respectable family. She 
resides on Mount Kailasa. She is the goddess of beauty, the 
most fortunate, and very dear to Lord Govinda. 
Text 88 
narendra-kanyd yogesi 
yogini yoga-rupini 
yoga-siddha siddha-rupa 
siddha-ksetra-nivasil 
She is the daughter of a king, the queen of yoga, a performer 
of yoga, the personification of yoga, a perfect yogini, and the 
personification of perfection. She resides in the abode of 
perfection. 
Text 89 
ksetrddhisthdtr-rupd ca 
ksetrdtltd kula-pradd 
kesavdnanda-datri ca 
kesavananda-dayini 
She is the predominating Deity of all holy places. She is 
transcendental to all of the holy places of this world. She awards 
one a noble birth and She gives pleasure to Lord Kesava. 
Text 90 
kesavd kesava-pntd 
kesavi kesavd-priyd 
rdsa-kndd-karirdsa- 
vdsini rdsa-sundan 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth Ratra 
She is the wife of Lord Kesava, very dear to Lord Kesava, the 
beloved of Lord Kesava, and very dear to Lord Krsava. She is 
the enjoyer of the rasa dance, a resident of the rdsa-llld arena, 
and the beautiful heroine of rdsa-lila. 
Text 91 
gokuldnvita-dehd ca 
gokulatva-praddyini 
lavanga-ndmni narangi 
naranga-kula-mandand 
She resides in Gokula and She awards residence in Gokula. Her 
name is as beautiful as a clove flower. She is amorous and She 
is the decoration of He who is expert in performing amorous 
pastimes. 
Text 92 
eld-lavanga-karpura- 
mukha-vdsa-mukhdnvitd 
mukhyd mukhyd-pradd mukhyd- 
rupd mukhya-nivdsinl 
She likes to partake of cardamom, clove and camphor. She is 
the most exalted among all young girls. She awards the ultimate 
goal of life, She possesses the most attractive form, and She 
resides in the highest transcendental abode. 
Text 93 
ndrdyani kripdtitd 
karundmaya-kdrini 
karunyd karund karnd 
gokarnd ndga-karnikd 
She is the wife of Lord Narayana, supremely merciful, most 
compassionate, the personification of compassion, and kind. 


One Thousand Holy Names of ^ri RadhA 
She possesses beautiful ears, has ears like those of a cow, and 
possesses ears like those of a snake. 
Text 94 
sarpinl kaulini ksetra- 
vasini jagad-navaya 
jatila kutila nild 
nilambaradhara subha 
She is like a female serpent, She was bom in a noble family 
and She lives in a holy place. She is the mother of the universe, 
an ascetic, crooked, beautiful, dressed in blue garments, and a 
most auspicious personality. 
Text 95 
nilambara-vidhatn ca 
nilakantha-priyd tathd 
bhagini bhdgini bhogyd 
krsna-bhogyd bhagesvan 
She is dressed in blue garments, dear to Lord Siva, most 
fortunate, an extremely beautiful girl, the foremost among 
the enjoyed, meant to be enjoyed by Krsna, and the goddess of 
transcendental opulence. 
Text 96 
balesvan baldrddhyd 
kdntd kdnta-nitambini 
nitambinl rupavati 
yuvati krsna-plvan 
She expands to become the queen of Balarama. She is worshiped 
by Lord Balarama and She is extremely charming. She has 
beautiful hips, She attracts Her beloved by means of Her hips, 
She is youthful, and She is most dear to Krsna. 


Sri Narada-paScaratra • Fifth RAtra 
Text 97 
vibhdvari vetravati 
sankatd kutildlakd 
ndrdyana-priyd salild 
srkkani-parimohitd 
She is amorous, She carries a stick in Her hand, She is gracefully 
thin, Her hair is curly, She is dear to Lord Narayana, and She 
lives on a hill. By the movement of Her face, She attracts the 
Lord. 
Text 98 
drk-pdta-mohitd- 
prdtardsini navanitikd 
navind nava-ndri ca 
ndranga-phala-sobhitd 
Simply by Her glance, She attracts everyone. She has breakfast 
early in the morning. She chums butter, She is a fresh youth, 
and She is fully grown. She is beautiful, like an orange. 
Text 99 
haimi hema-mukhi candra- 
mukhi sasi-su-sobhand 
ardha-candra-dhard candra- 
vallabhd rohini tamih 
She is as charming as gold, Her face is golden, Her face is like 
the moon, She is beautiful like the moon, Her lower lip is just 
like the half-moon, She is dear to moon-like Krsna, She is a 
beautiful young girl, and She is as charming as the night. 
Text 100 
timingila-kuldmoda- 
matsya-rupdnga-hdrini 


One Thousand Holy Names of Sri RAdha 
477 
kdrani-sarva-bhutdnarh 
kdrydtltd kisorini 
She is the beloved of Lord Matsya and She delightes the timingila 
fish. She is the cause of all living entities, She is beyond all 
material activities and She is a supremely attractive young girl. 
Text 101 
kisora-vallabhd kesa- 
kdrikd kdma-kdrikd 
kdmesvan kdma-kald 
kdlindi-kula-dipikd 
She is the beloved of Krsna in His youth. She has very attractive 
hair. She is passionate, the queen of amorous pastimes, expert 
in the art of performing amorous pastimes and just like a 
brightly shining lamp on the bank of the Kalindl. 
Text 102 
kalindatanayd-tira- 
vdsinl tira-gehinl 
kddambari-pdna-pard 
kusumdmoda-dharinl 
She resides on the bank of the Kalindi, She is the daughter of 
Kalinda, She resides on the bank of the Yamuna, She is fond 
of drinking kddambari nectar, and She is fragrant due to being 
decorated with many flowers. 
Text 103 
kumudd kumudananda 
krsnesl kdma-vallabhd 
tarkdll vaijayantl ca 
nimba-dadima-rupinl 
She is like a kumudd flower and She is pleased by the kumudd 
flower. She is Krsna's queen, a transcendentally passionate 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth Ratra 
lover, and an expert logician. She wears a vaijayanati garland 
and Her form is like a nimba or pomegranate tree. 
Text 104 
bilva-vrksa-priyd krsndm- 
bard hilvopama-stani 
bilvdtmikd bilva-vapur 
bilva-vrksa-nivdsini 
She is fond of the bilva tree, She is Lord Krsna's garment, Her 
breasts are like a bilva fruit, Her form is like that of a bilva tree, 
Her color is like that of a bilva tree, and She resides under a 
bilva tree. 
Text 105 
tulasl-tosikd taiti- 
lananda-paritosikd 
gaja-muktd mahd-muktd 
mahd-mukti-phala-pradd 
She pleases Tulasl-devl. She pleases the Lord, who is fond of 
the partridge. She is decorated with very valuable gaja pearls, 
and She is the bestower of the supreme liberation. 
Text 106 
ananga-mohini sakti- 
rupd sakti-svarupini 
panca-sakti-svarupd ca 
saisavananda-kdrini 
She is transcendentally passionate, very enchanting, the 
spiritual potency of Lord Krsna, the personification of the 
Lord's internal potency, the embodiment of five spiritual 
potencies, and fully absorbed in the enjoyment of youth. 


One Thousand Holy Names of SrI RAdhA 
479 
Text 107 
gajendra-gdmini syama- 
latdnanga-latd tathd 
yosit-sakti-svarupd ca 
yosid-dnanda-kdrini 
She walks like an elephant. She is like a beautiful creeper. 
She is the creeper of passionate desires, the personification of 
feminine prowess, and feminine bliss. 
Text 108 
prema-priyd prema-rupd 
premdnanda-tarangini 
prema-hdrd prema-ddtri 
prema-saktimayi tathd 
She is attached to love of God, the personification of love of 
God, the ocean of ecstatic love, decorated with ecstatic love, the 
giver of ecstatic love, and the personified potency of ecstatic 
love. 
Text 109 
krsna-premavati dhanyd 
krsna-prema-tarang.nl 
prema-bhakti-pradd 
premd premdnanda-tarangini 
She is filled with love for Krsna, most glorious, an ocean of love 
for Krsna, the giver of loving devotional service, and the ocean 
of loving ecstasy. 
Text 110 
prema-kridd-paritdngi 
prema-bhakti-tarangini 
premdrtha-ddyini sarva- 
svetd nitya-tarangini 


480 
Sri Narada-paUcaratra • Fifth Ratra 
Her bodily limbs are always engaged in loving exchanges. 
She is an ocean of loving devotional service; the bestower of 
love of God, which is the ultimate objective of life; very fair- 
complexioned, and the ocean of eternity. 
Text 111 
hdva-bhdvdnitd rudrd 
rudrdnanda-prakdsini 
kapild srnkhald kesa 
pdsa-sambandhini ghatl 
She is expert in the art of gesturing and very dear to Lord Siva. 
She gives happiness to Lord Siva and She has a fair complexion. 
She is obedient. She braids Her hair beautifully and She carries 
a water pot. 
Text 112 
kutira-vdsini dhumrd 
dhumrd-kesd jalodari 
brahmdtida-gocard brahma 
rupini bhdva-bhdvinl 
She lives in a cottage, Her complexion is like the color of 
smoke, and the color of her hair is like that of smoke. She is 
the reservoir of water, She incarnates within the universe, Her 
form is completely spiritual, and She always thinks about the 
welfare of the inhabitants of the material world. 
Text 113 
samsdra-ndsinl saivd 
saivalananda-ddyini 
sisird ema-rdgddbyd 
megha-rupdti-sundan 
She destroys one's material existence, She is a worshiper of 
Lord Siva, She gives happiness to the worshipers of Lord Siva, 


One Thousand Holy Names of SrI RadhA 
She is as cool as morning dew, Her bodily hue is golden, Her 
form is as beautiful as a cloud, and She is the most beautiful 
female personality. 
Text 114 
manoramd vegavatl 
vegadhya veda-vadini 
dayanvita dayadhara 
dayd-rupd susevinl 
She is enchanting and Her movements are very quick. She is 
a follower of the Vedas, the personification of compassion, 
the emblem of compassion, the form of compassion, and the 
ultimate objective of devotional service. 
Text 115 
kisora-sanga-samsargd 
gaura-candrdnand kald 
kaladhindtha-vadand 
kaldndthddhirohini 
She associates with youthful Krsna, Her face is like a brilliant 
moon, Her form is like a crescent moon, Her face resembles 
the full moon, and She is as glorious as the full moon. 
Text 116 
virdga-kusald hema- 
pingald hema-mandnd 
bhdndlra-tdlavana-gd 
kaivarti pivari suki 
She is expert in renunciation, Her complexion is golden, 
She is decorated with golden ornaments, She wanders in the 
Bhandiravana and Talavana forests, She captures a fish in the 
form of Krsna, She is a beautiful young girl, and She speaks like 
a parrot. 


482 
Sri Narada-painicaratra • Fifth RAtra 
Text 117 
sukadeva-gundtitd 
sukadeva-priya sakhl 
vikalokarsini kosd 
kauseydmbara-dharinl 
Her qualities are beyond the power of Sukadeva's descriptions, 
She is very dear to Sukadeva, She is friendly, She mercifully 
delivers the fallen souls, She is transcendentally opulent, and 
She is dressed in fine silk garments. 
Text 118 
kosdvari kosa-rupd 
jagad-utpatti-kdrikd 
srsti-sthiti-kan sarhhdrinl 
sarhhdra-kdrini 
She is a treasury of opulence, the personification of opulence, 
the origin of the material world's creation, the creator and 
maintainer of the universes, the cause of annihilation, and the 
destroyer of the cosmic manifestation. 
Text 119 
kesa-saivala-dhdtn ca 
candra-gatri su-komald 
padmdrigardga-samrdgd 
vindhyddri-parivasinl 
Her hair is luxurious and Her body is as smooth as moonrays. 
She is very soft, and anointed with lotus cosmetics. She resides 
in the Vindhya mountains. 
Text 120 
vindhydlayd sydma-sakhi 
sakhl sarhsdra-rdginl 


One Thousand Holy Names of Sri Radha 
483 
bhutd bhavisya bhavya ca 
bhavya-gdtra bhavdtigd 
She sometimes lives in the Vindhya mountains. She is Krsna's 
companion, She loves the world, She existed in the past, She 
will exist in the future, She exists at present, Her limbs are very 
attractive, and She is not affected by birth and death in this 
material world. 
Text 121 
bhava-ndsdnta-kdriny 
dkdsa-rupd su-vesinl 
rati-ranga-paritydgd 
rati-vegd rati-pradd 
She destroys one's material existence and Her form is 
transcendental. She is always dressed in a most attractive 
manner. She left the arena of amorous pastimes, She enjoys 
the ecstasy of amorous pastimes, and She awards one the 
qualification to enjoy the happiness of amorous pastimes. 
Text 122 
tejasvinl tejo-rupa 
kaivalya-patha-dd subhd 
mukti-hetur mukti-hetu- 
langhinl langhana-ksamd 
She is brilliant and supremely powerful. She guides one on 
the path of liberation. She is all-auspicious and the cause of 
liberation. She condemns personal liberation and She forgives 
one's offenses. 
Text 123 
visdla-netrd vaisdli 
visdla-kula-sambhavd 


484 
Sri Narada-paKicarAtra • Fifth RAtra 
visdla-grha-vasd ca 
visdla-vadan ratih 
Her eyes are broad. She is a most exalted personality. She comes 
from a noble family. She lives in a palace. She appears like a 
badari tree, and She is the personification of conjugal love. 
Text 124 
bhakty-atitd bhakta-gatir 
bhaktikd siva-bhakti-dd 
siva-sakti-svarupd ca 
sivdrdhdnga-vihdrini 
By serving Her, one surpasses material existence. She is the 
ultimate goal of devotional service , She is the personification of 
devotional service. She is the bestower of auspicious devotional 
service. She is the personification of the Lord's auspicious 
potency, and She enjoys with the Lord as His better half. 
Text 125 
sirisa-kusumdmodd 
sinsa-kusumojjvald 
sinsa-mrdhvl sairisi 
sinsa-kusumdkrtih 
She is as fragrent as a sirisa flower. She is as brilliant as a sirisa 
flower. She is as soft as a sirisa flower. She is as glorious as a 
sirisa flower, and She looks like a sirisa flower. 
Text 126 
vdmdnga-hdrini visnoh 
siva-bhakti-sukhdnvitd 
vijitd vijitamodd 
gagand gana-tositd 
She remains at the left side of Lord Visnu, She feels pleasure 
to worship Lord Siva, She is conquered by Lord Krsna, and She 


One Thousand Holy Names of Sri RAdhA 
is overwhelmed by Lord Krsna's fragrance. She manifests the 
spiritual sky and She is served by Her companions. 
Text 127 
haydsya heramba-suta 
gana-mata sukhesvari 
duhkha-hantri duhkha-hara 
sevitepsita-sarvadd 
She is the beloved of Lord Hayagnva, the daughter of Heramba, 
the mother of the demigods, the goddess of happiness, the 
remover of distress, and the killer of distress. She fulfills the 
desire of Her worshipers. 
Text 128 
sarvajnatva-vidhdtn ca 
kulo-ksetra-nivdsini 
lavangd pdndava-sakhi 
sakhi-madhya-nivdsini 
She is omniscient and the controller. She lives in Her family's 
cottage. She is like a lavanga flower and the friend of the 
Pandavas. She lives amidst Her gopi friends. 
Text 129 
grdmyd gitd gayd gamya 
gamandtita-nirbhard 
sarvdriga-sundari gaiiga 
gangd-jalamayi tathd 
She resides in a village and She is glorified by nice songs. She is 
the holy place, Gaya. She is approachable by the devotees and 
She cannot be approached by nondevotees. Her entire body is 
supremely enchanting. She becomes the Ganges and She is like 
the water of the Ganges. 


486 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth RAtra 
Text 130 
garigeritd puta-gdtrd 
pavitra-kula-dlpikd 
pavitra-guna-sllddhyd 
pavitrananda-dayinl 
She is as glorious as the Ganges, most sanctified, like the lamp 
of a sanctified family, and enriched with sanctified qualities 
and behavior. She awards transcendental ecstasy to Her 
worshipers. 
Text 131 
pavitra-guna-slmddhyd 
pavitra-kula-dipani 
kampamdnd kamsa-hard 
vindhydcala-nivdsini 
She is the limit of transcendental qualities and the illumination 
of . her noble family. She shivers due to ecstasy. She is the 
beloved of Lord Krsna, the killer of Kamsa. She lives in the 
Vindhyla mountains. 
Text 132 
goverdhanesvari govardhana- 
hdsyd haydkrtih 
mindvatdrd minesi 
ganganesi hayd gajl 
She is the queen of Govardhana Hill and She smiles upon 
seeing Govardhana Hill. She is dear to Lord Hayagriva, dear 
to Lord Matsya, the consort of Lord Matsya, the queen of the 
spiritual sky, the beloved of Hayagriva, and the consort of the 
Lord who delivered Gajendra. 


One Thousand Holy Names of Sri RAdhA 
487 
Text 133 
harini harini hdra- 
dharinl kanakdkrtih 
vidyut-prabhd vipra-mdtd 
gopa-mdtd gayesvari 
She is as beautiful as a deer and very enchanting. She is 
decorated with necklaces and Her form is golden. She is brilliant 
like lightning, the mother of the brdhmanas, the mother of the 
cowherds, and the predominating Deity of Gaya. 
Text 134 
gavesyari gavesi ca 
gavisi gavi-vdsinl 
gati-jnd gita-kusald 
danujendra-nivdrini 
She is the queen of the cows, the controller of the cows, and 
the maintainer of the cows. She lives in a cowherd village, She is 
aware of the ultimate goal of life, She is expert in singing, and 
She is the chastiser of the king of the demons. 
Text 135 
nirvdna-ddtri nairvdnl 
hetu-yuktd gayottard 
parvatddhinivdsd ca 
nivdsa-kusald tathd 
She awards liberation and She is liberated. She is an expert 
logician, She is the queen of Gaya. She lives on a mountain and 
She brings auspiciousness to Her residence. 
Text 136 
sannydsa-dharma-kusald 
sannydsesl saran-mukhl 


488 
Sri Narada-paScaratra • Fifth Ratra 
sarac-candra-mukhi 
sydma-hdrd ksetra-nivdsini 
She is expert in the understanding of renunciation and She is 
supremely renounced. Her face is like the autumn season and 
Her face is like the moon in autumn. She is the necklace of 
Lord Krsna and She resides in a holy place. 
Text 137 
vasanta-rdga-samrdgd 
vasanta-vasandkrtih 
catur-bhujd sad-bhujd 
dvi-bhujd gaura-vigrahd 
Her desire for amorous pastimes is aroused when She hears the 
vasanta-rdga. Her form is glorious, like spring. She is sometimes 
four-armed, sometimes six-armed, and sometimes two-armed. 
She is a golden personality. 
Text 138 
sahasrdsyd vihdsyd ca 
mudrdsyd mada-ddyini 
prdna-priyd prdna-rupa 
prdna-rupiny apdvrtd 
She is the beloved of the Lord who possesses one thousand 
heads. She is ever smiling, Her face is very expressive, She 
induces Krsna to enjoy amorous pastimes, She is more dear 
to Krsna than His own life, She is the life and soul of Krsna, 
She is the very life of Krsna, and She manifests Herself to the 
devotees. 
Text 139 
krsna-pntd krsna-ratd 
krsna-tosana-tat-pard 


One Thousand Holy Names of Sri RAdhA 
489 
krsna-prema-ratd krsna- 
bhakta bhakta-phala-pradd 
She pleases Krsna, She is attached to Krsna, She is always 
eager to satisfy Krsna, She is attached to love for Krsna, She is 
a devotee of Krsna, and She gives the devotees the results of 
their devotional service. 
Text 140 
krsna-premd prema-bhaktd 
hari-bhakti-praddyini 
caitanya-rupd caitanya- 
priyd caitanya-rupini 
She is the personification of love for Krsna, She is a loving 
devotee of Krsna, She is the bestower of devotional service to 
Lord Hari, She is manifest in the form of Lord Caitanya, She is 
present in the form of Lord Caitanya, and She is dear to Lord 
Caitanya. 
Text-141 
ugra-rupd siva-krodd 
krsna-krodd jalodan 
mahodan mahd-durga- 
kdntdra-sustha-vdsini 
She manifests the fierce form of Durga, She sits on the lap of 
Siva, She sits on the lap of Krsna, She is the reservoir of water, 
She is the origin of the material world, and She resides in a 
great forest that is like an unapproachable fort. 
Text 142 
candrdvali candra-kesl 
candra-prema-tarangini 
samudra-mathanodbhutd 
samudra-jala-vdsini 


490 
Sri Narada-paScaratra • Fifth Ratra 
She is as brilliant as a cluster of moons, Her hair is as lustrous 
as the moon, She is an ocean of love that controls moon-like 
Krsna, She was bom from the churning of the ocean, and She 
resides in the ocean. 
Text 143 
samudrdmrta-rupd ca 
samudra-jala-vdsikd 
kesa-pdsa-ratd nidrd 
ksudhd prema-tarangikd 
site is the nectar derived from the churning of the ocean, 
She resides on the ocean of milk, and She carefully decorates 
Her hair. She is sleep, hunger and an ocean of transcendental 
ecstasy. 
Text 144 
durvd-dad-sydma-tamur 
durvd-dad-tanu-ccbavih 
ndgard ndgari-rdgd 
ndgardnanda-kdrini 
Her body is as sublime as a blade of durvd grass and Her body 
resembles tender durvd grass. She is the beloved of the hero, 
Krsna. She is Krsna's most loving heroine and She charms Her 
hero, Krsna. 
Text 145 
ndgardlingana-pard 
ndgardngana-mangald 
ucca-nicd haimavati 
priyd krsna-taranga-dd 
She eagerly embraces Her hero, Krsna. She illuminates the 
courtyard of Her hero, She is humble, She is the daughter of 


One Thousand Holy Names of !>r1 RAdhA 
the Himalayas, She is very dear to Krsna, and She pleases Krsna 
with the waves of Her loving sentiments. 
Text 146 
premalingana-siddhdnngi 
siddhd sadhya-vildsikd 
marigaldmoda-janani 
mekhalamoda-dhdrini 
She is expert in giving loving embraces. She 
enjoys transcendental pastimes, She is the 
auspiciousness, and She wears a beautiful waist 
Text 147 
ratna-manjira-bhusdrigi 
ratna-bhusana-bhusand, 
jambdla-mdlikd krsna- 
prdnd prdna-vimocand 
She is decorated with tinkling, jeweled ornaments. She wears 
jeweled ornaments. She wears a garland of rose-apple flowers, 
She is the life and soul of Krsna, and She has fully surrendered 
Her life to Krsna. 
Text 148 
satya-pradd satyavati 
sevakananda-ddyikd 
jagad-yonir jagad-bijd 
vicitra-mani-bhusand 
She is the bestower of truth and She is truthful. She awards 
happiness to Her devotees, She is the mother of the universe, 
She is the origin of the universe, and She is decorated with 
wonderful jewels. 
is perfect. She 
source of all 
band. 


Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth RAtra 
Text 149 
radha-ramana-kantd ca 
radhya radhana-rupim 
kaildsa-vasini krsna-prdna- 
sarvasva-dayini 
She is dear to Krsna, the ultimate object of worship, and the 
personification of devotional service. She resides on Mount 
Kailasa and She has surrendered everything to Her life and 
soul, Krsna. 
Text 150 
krsnavatara-nirata 
krsna-bhakta-phaldrthini 
yacakayacakananda- 
karini yacakojjvald 
She eternally serves the incarnations of Krsna, She awards the 
fruit of the devotees' service to Krsna, She awards happiness to 
those who asks for it and those who do not ask for it, and She 
happily accepts the prayers of Her devotees. 
Text 151 
hari-bhusana bhusadhya- 
nanda-yuktdrdra-pada-gd 
hai-hai-tdla-dhard thai- 
thai-sabda-sakti-prakdsinl 
She decorates Herself with Lord Hari's ornaments, She is 
eternally blissful, She is Krsna's better half, and She expertly 
beats the rhythm hai hai and the sound vibration thai thai. 
Text 152 
he-he-sabda-svarupa ca 
hi-hi-vakya-visaradd 


One Thousand Holy Names of ^ri Radha 
493 
jagad-ananda-kartrli ca 
sandrananda-visarada 
She is the personification of the sound he he, and She enjoys 
uttering the sound hi hi. She fills the world with happiness and 
She is expert in relishing the highest transcendental ecstasy. 
Text 153 
panditd panditd-gund 
panditdnanda-kdrini 
paripdlana-kartri ca 
tathd sthiti-vinodini 
She is learned and She has the qualities of a wise man. She 
gives happiness to learned people. She maintains the devotees, 
and She sustains the creation. 
Text 154 
tathd samhara-sabdadhyd 
vidvaj-jana-manohard 
vidusdm pnti-janani 
vidvut-prema-vivardhini 
She is the personification of the universal annhilation. She 
attracts the minds of learned people. She is thoughtful. She is 
the origin of transcendental pleasure, and She increases the 
happiness of wise men. 
Text 155 
nddesi nada-rupd ca 
nada-bindu-vidhdrini 
sunya-sthdna-sthitd 
sunya-rupa-padapa-vdsini 
She is the goddess of sound vibrations. She is the personification 
of sound vibrations. She is expert in speaking in the form of 


494 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth Ratra 
codes, She is situated beyond this material world, and She 
resides under a tree in the transcendental abode of the Lord. 
Text 156 
kdrttika-vrata-kartri ca 
vdsand-harinl tathd 
jala-sdyd jala-tald 
sild-tala-nivdsini 
She observes the vow of Karttika, She takes away one's material 
desires, She lives on the ocean of milk, She resides by the side 
of a lake, and She resides at the foot of a mountain. 
Text 157 
ksudra-kltdnga-samsargd 
sanga-dosa-vindsini 
koti-kandarpa-ldvanyd 
kandarpa-koti-sundan 
She displays mercy even to an insect, She destroys the 
disease that develops due to material association, She is more 
enchanting than millions of Cupids, and She is more beautiful 
than millions of Cupids. 
Text 158 
kandarpa-koti-janani 
kdma-tnja-praddyinl 
kdma-sdstra-vinodd ca 
kdma-sdstra-prakdsinl 
She is the mother of millions of Cupids, She is the personification 
of the kdma-bija mantra, She is expert in the performance of 
conjugal pastimes, and She manifests the art of performing 
conjugal pastimes. 


One Thousand Holy Names of ^Rl RadhA 
495 
Text 159 
kdma-prakdsikd kdminy 
animady-asta-siddhi-dd 
ydmini ydmini-ndtha- 
vadand ydminisvari 
She is transcendentally passionate and She is the most lovely 
girl. She awards the eight mystic perfections, She is as cooling 
as the night, Her face is like the moon, and She is the controller 
of the night. 
Text 160 
ydga-yoga hard bhukti- 
mukti-ddtri hiranya-dd 
kapdla-mdlini devi dhdma- 
rupiny apurva-dd 
She awards the results of Vedic fire sacrifices, She is the 
bestower of sense gratification and liberation, She is the giver 
of gold, She wears a garland of skulls, She is a goddess, She is 
the personification of all the holy places, and She awards that 
which has never before been awarded. 
Text 161 
krpdnvitd gund gaunyd 
gundtita-phala-pradd 
kusmdnda-bhuta-vetdla- 
ndsinl saraddnvitd 
She is compassionate, She is full of transcendental qualities, 
She is most exalted, She awards the transcendental results of 
one's devotional service, She destroys evil spirits and ghosts, 
and She is glorious like autumn. 


Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth RAtra 
Text 162 
sltala savald held Hid 
Idvanya-mahgald 
vidydrthini vidyamdnd 
vidyd vidyd-svarupinl 
She is soothing, She possesses unlimited piety, She is happiness 
personified, She is sporting by nature, She is auspicious and 
beautiful, She is an ardent student, She is very learned, She is 
knowledge, and She is the personification of knowledge. 
Text 163 
dnvlksiki sdstra-rupd 
sastra-siddhdnta-kdrinl 
nagendrd ndga-mdtd ca 
kridd-kautuka-rupini 
She is the science of logic, the personified scriptures, the 
conclusion of the scriptures, the beloved of the King of the 
Nagas, the mother of the Nagas, and always in a playful mood. 
Text 164 
hari-bhdvana-sild ca 
hari-tosana-tat-pard 
hari-prdnd hara-prdnd 
siva-prdnd sivdnvitd 
She is always absorbed in thoughts of Lord Hari, She is always 
eager to please Lord Hari, She is the life and soul of Lord Hari, 
She is the life force of Lord Siva, She is the life and soul of Lord 
Siva, and She is Lord Siva's companion. 
Text 165 
narakdrnava-sarhhantn 
narakdrnava-ndsini 


One Thousand Holy Names of ^Rl RadhA 
naresvan naratlta 
nara-sevyd nardngand 
She destroys the ocean of hellish conditions, She delivers the 
devotees from the ocean of hellish suffering, She is the queen 
of human society, She is situated beyond the realm of human 
beings, She is worshipable for human society, and She appears 
like an ordinary girl. 
Text 166 
yasodanandana-prana- 
vallabhd hari-vallabhd 
yasoddnandanaramya 
yasodanandanesvan 
She is more dear to the son of Yasoda than His own life, She is 
dear to Lord Hari, She gives pleasure to Yasoda's son, and She 
is the queen of the son of Yasoda. 
Text 167 
yasodanandandkrida 
yasoda-kroda-vasinl 
yasodanandana-prdnd 
yasoddnandanarthada 
She enjoys pastimes with Yasoda's son, She sits on the lap of 
Yasoda, She is the life and soul of Yasoda's son, and She fulfills 
the desires of Yasoda's son. 
Text 168 
vatsald kausald kdld 
karundmava-rupinl 
svarga-laksmir bhumi-laksmlr 
draupadl pdndava-priyd 


498 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth RAtra 
She is affectionate, expert, beautiful, the personification of the 
ocean of mercy, the opulence of heaven, the opulence of earth, 
DraupadI, and dear to the Pandavas. 
Text 169 
tathdrjuna-sakhl bhaumi 
bhaimi bhima-kulodvahd 
bhuvand mohand ksind 
pdndsakta-tard tathd 
She is a friend of Aijuna's, an inhabitant of the earth, and highly 
exalted. She is bom in a noble family when She descends into 
the material world. She is enchanting, very slim, and attached 
to chewing betel nuts. 
Text 170 
pdndrthini pdna-pdtrd 
pana-pananda-ddyini 
dugdha-manthana-karmddhyd 
dugdha-manthana-tatpard 
She longs for betel nuts, She carries a container of betel nuts, 
She loves to chew betel nuts, She is expert in churning milk 
into butter, and She is expert in churning yogurt. 
Text 171 
dadhi-bhdnddrthinl krsna 
krodhini nandandngand 
ghrta-liptd takra-yuktd 
yamundpdra-kautukd 
She carries a pot of yogurt, She becomes angry with Krsna, She 
wanders in the courtyard of Nanda Maharaja, She is anointed 
with ghee, She carries buttermilk and She crosses the Yamuna 
river in a cheerful mood. 


One Thousand Holy Names of ^rI RAdhA 
499 
Text 172 
vicitra-kathakd krsna- hdsya- 
bhdsana-tat-pard 
gopdngandvestitd ca 
krsna-sangdrthinl tathd 
She speaks wonderfully. She speaks in a way that makes Krsna 
laugh. She is surrounded by cowherd girls, and She always 
remains in the association of Krsna. 
Text 173 
rdsdsaktd rdsa-tatir 
dsavdsakta-vdsand 
haridrd haritd hdriny 
dnanddrpitd-cetand 
She is attached to the rasa-lila, She enjoys the rasa dance. 
She is attached to drinking nectarean beverages. Her 
complexion is golden. She is very charming, and She 
brings happiness to everyone's heart. 
Text 174 
niscaitanyd ca niscetd 
tathd daru-haridrikd 
subalasya svasd krsna- 
bhdryd bhdsdti-vegini 
She sometimes loses consciousness while absorbed in thoughts 
of love for Krsna, She becomes like a yellow doll made of wood 
due to absorption in love for Krsna, She is the sister of Subala, 
She is the wife of Krsna, and She is an eloquent speaker. 
Text 175 
snddmasya sakhi ddma- 
daminl ddma-dhdrini 


500 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth RAtra 
kaildsini kesini ca 
harid-ambara-dharinl 
She is Sridama's friend, She resembles lightning, and She is 
fond of wearing garlands that look like lightning. She becomes 
Parvati, She has very charming hair, and She wears yellow and 
blue garments. 
Text 176 
hari-sannidhya-ddtn ca 
hari-kautuka-mangald 
hari-pradd hari-dvdrd 
yamund-jala-vdsini 
She awards one the association of Lord Hari, and She is most 
satisfied to remain with Lord Hari. She awards one Lord Hari, 
She is the gateway to Lord Hari, and She lives by the side of the 
Yamuna. 
Text 177 
jaitra-praddjitdrthi ca 
caturd cdturi tami 
tamisrd tdpa-rupd ca 
raudra-rupd yaso-'rthini 
She awards victory and She hankers after victory. She is 
intelligent, expert, the cause of ignorance, the cause of 
darkness, the form of austerity, formidable, and famSous. 
Text 178 
krsndrthini krsna-kald 
krsnananda-vidhdyini 
krsndrtha-vdsand krsna- 
rdgini bhava-bhdvini 
She longs to associate with Krsna, She is an expansion of Krsna, 
She gives pleasure to Krsna, She desires to make Krsna happy, 


One Thousand Holy Names of ^r! RAdhA 
She is attached to Krsna, and She desires the welfare of those 
living in the material world. 
Text 179 
krsnartha-rahita bhakta 
bhakta-bhukti-subha-prada 
m-krsna-rahitd dind 
tathd virahini hareh 
She has no desire other than to please Krsna, She is the 
topmost devotee, She awards suitable results to the devotees 
for their rendering of devotional service, She feels separation 
from Krsna, She is very humble, and She feels distressed due to 
separation from Krsna. 
Text 180 
mathurd mathurd-rdja- 
geha-bhdvana-bhdvand 
sn-krsna-bhdvandmodd 
tathonmada-vidhdyini 
She expands to reside in Mathura. She is always remembered 
by Krsna when He lives at the King of Mathura's palace, 
She becomes ecstatic when She thinks of Krsna, and She is 
intoxicated with love for Krsna. 
Text 181 
krsndrtha-vydkuld krsna- 
sdra-carma-dhard subhd 
alakesvara-pujyd ca 
kuveresvara-vallabhd 
She is greatly eager to please Lord Krsna. She is dear to Lord 
Siva, who wears the skin of an antelope. She is most auspicious, 
worshiped by Kuvera, and dear to the master of Kuvera. 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth Ratra 
Text 182 
dhana-dhanya-vidhatri ca 
jdyd kdyd hayd hayi 
pranavd pranavesi ca 
pranavdrtha-svarupini 
She awards prosperity. She is the wife of Lord Krsna, Her form 
is completely spiritual, She is the consort of Lord Hayagriva, 
and She is dear to Lord Hayagriva. She is the sacred syllable, 
om. She is the queen of the sacred syllable, orh, and She is the 
personification of the sacred syllable, om. 
Text 183 
brahma-visnu-sivdrdhdriga- 
hdrini saiva-sirhsapd 
rdksasi-ndsini bhuta- 
preta-prdna-vindsini 
She is the better half of Brahma, Visnu and Siva. She is dear to 
Lord Siva, She kills the female demons and She destroys ghosts 
and evil spirits. 
Text 184 
sakalepsita-ddtri ca 
sad sadhvl arundhati 
pati-vratd pati-prdnd 
pati-vdkya-vinodinl 
asesa-sadhanl kalpa- 
vdsinl kalpa-rupini 
She fulfills all desires. She becomes Saci. She is saintly. She 
becomes Arundhati. She is faithful to Her husband, She 
regards Her husband as Her life and soul, She feels happy 
while hearing the words of Her husband, She is capable of 
doing anything and everything, She is approached through 


One Thousand Holy Names of SrI RadhA 
503' 
transcendental sound vibration, and She is the personification 
of transcendental sound vibration. 
Thus ends the translation of the fifth chapter of the Fifth Rdtra 
of Sn Ndradafahcardtra. 


Chapter 6 
The Glories of the One Thousand 
Holy Names of Sri Radha 
Text 1 
sn-mahadeva uvdca 
ity etat kathitam devi 
radhd-ndma-sahasrakam 
yah pathet pathayad vapi 
tasya tusyati madhavah 
Sri Mahadeva said; O Devi, I have thus revealed to you the one 
thousand names of Sri Radha. Lord Madhava becomes very 
pleased with a person who recites these holy names or causes 
others to recite them. 
Text 2 
kirn tasya yamundbhir vd 
nadlbhih sarvatah priye 
kuruksetradi-tlrthais ca 
yasya tusto jandrdanah 
O dear one, a person who has attained the favor of Lord 
Janardanahas no need to bathe in the holy water of the Yamuna 
or visit holy places, such as Kuruksetra. 
Text 3 
stotrasydsya prasadena 
kirn na sidhyati bhu-tale 
brdhmano brahma-varcasvl 
ksatriyo jagati-patih 
What is there that cannot be achieved by the grace of this 
payer? A brdhmana can attain perfection in his performance of 
505 


506 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth RAtra 
brdhminical duties, and a ksatriya can become the king of the 
world by the mercy of this prayer. 
Texts 4 
vaisyo nidhi-patir bhuydt 
sudro mucyeta janmatah 
brahma-hatyd-surd-pana- 
steydder ati-pdtakdt 
A vaisya can become rich and a sudra can becomes freed from 
his degraded life. Moreover, the reactions to all kinds of sinful 
activities—even killing a brdhmana, drinking wine, and stealing 
others' property—are at once destroyed by the mercy of this 
prayer. 
Text 5 
sadyo mucyeta devesi 
satyam satyam na sarhsayah 
rddhd-ndma-sahasrasya 
samdnarh ndsti bhu-tale 
O Goddess, there is no doubt that by the mercy of this prayer, 
one immediately becomes liberated because in this world, there 
is nothing equal to the one thousand names of Sri Radha. 
Text 6 
svarge vapy atha pdtdle 
girau vajalato 'pi vd 
ndtah pararii subharh stotram 
tlrtharh ndtah pararh param 
There is nothing more auspicious or sanctified than the one 
thousand names of Sri Radha, either in the heavenly planets, in 
the hellish planets, in the mountains, or in the water. 


Glories of the One Thousand Holy Names of ^rI RAdhA 
Text 7 
ekadasydrh sucir bhutvd 
yah pathet susamdhitah 
tasya sarvartha-siddhih sydc 
chmuydd va su-sobhane 
O beautiful one, all of the desires of a person who recites or 
hears these one thousand names of Sri Radha on Ekadasi, with 
a pure and controlled mind, will be fulfilled. 
Text 8 
dvddasydm paurnamdsydrh vd 
tulasi-sannidhau sive 
yah pathet srnuydd vapi 
tasya tat tat phalarh smu 
O consort of Lord Siva, hear now from me about the results one 
attains by reciting this prayer before Tulasi-devi, on Dvadasi or 
Pumima. » 
Texts 9-14 
asvamedham rdjasuyarh 
bdrhaspatyam tathd trikam 
ati-rdtrarh vdjapeyam 
agnistomarh tathd subham 
krtvd yat phalam dpnoti 
srutvd tat phalam dpnuydt 
kdrttike cdstamlm prdpya 
pathed va srnuydd api 
sahasra-yuga-kalpdntarh 
vaikuntha-vasatirh labhet 
tatas ca brahma-bhavane 
sivasya bhavane punah 


508 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth Ratra 
surddhinatha-bhavane 
punarydti sa-lokatdm 
gangd-tiram samdsadya 
yah pathet smuydd api 
visnoh sdrupyam dydti 
satyarh satyarh suresvari 
mama vaktra-girer jdtd 
paruati-vadandsritd 
The results one achieves by performing sacrifices, such as the 
asvamedha, rdjasuya, bdrhaspatya, trika, atirdtra, vdjapeya, and 
agnistorfia, are easily achieved by hearing this prayer. If one 
recites or hears this prayer on AstamI, in the month of Karttika, 
he becomes qualified to reside in Vaikuntha for thousands of 
kalpas. Thereafter, he goes to Brahmaloka, Sivaloka or Indraloka 
and then eventually returns to Vaikuntha. 
O best of goddesses, anyone who reads or hears this prayer 
while sitting on the banks of the Ganges certainly attains the 
liberation as having the same bodily features as Lord Visnu. 
This prayer was thus spoken by me and heard by ParvatI, the 
daughter of the Himalayas. 
Text 14 
rddhd-ndtha-sahasrdkhyd 
nadi trailokya-pdvani 
pathyate hi mayd nityarh 
bhaktyd saktyd yathocitam 
This river, in the form of the one thousand names of Sri Radha, 
purifies the three worlds. I recite this prayer with utmost care 
and devotion. 


Glories of the One Thousand Holy Names of Sr! RAdha 599 
Text 15 
mama prdna-samam hy etat 
tava prityd prakdsitam 
ndbhaktdya praddtavyam 
pdsanddya kaddcana 
ndstikdydvirdgdya 
rdga-yuktdya sundari 
O beautiful one, this prayer is as dear to me as my life. Out of 
affection, I have revealed to you these one thousand names of 
Sri Radha. One should never repeat this to a nondevotee, an 
atheist, a godless person, one who acts whimsically, or to an 
uncontrolled sense enjoyer. 
Text 16 
tathd deyam mahd-stotram 
hari-bhaktdya sarikari 
vaimavesu yathd-sakti 
ddtre puny drth a-sdline 
O consort of Sahkara, one should disclose this great prayer 
to the devotees of Lord Hari, and to magnanimous and pious 
persons. 
Text 17 
radhd-nama-sudhd-vdri 
mama vaktra-sudhambudheh 
uddhrtdsau tvayd yatndt 
yatas tvam vaimavdgranlh 
Because you have faithfully heard these one thousand names 
of Sri Radha from me, you will be respected as a topmost 
Vaisnavl. 


510 
Sri Narada-pascaratra • Fifth Ratra 
Texts 18-20 
visuddha-sattvaya yathartha-vadine 
dvijasya seva-nirataya mantrine 
datre yathd-sakti subhakta-mdnase 
radha-pada-dhyana-paraya sobhane 
hari-padabja-madhupa- 
mano-bhutdya mdnase 
radhd-pada-sudhdsvada- 
sdline vaisnavdya ca 
dadyat stotram mahd-punyarh 
hari-bhakti-prasddhanam 
janmdntaram na tasydsti 
rddhd-krsna-paddrthinah 
O beautiful one, you should recite this most auspicious prayer 
to those who are situated in the mode of pure goodness, who are 
self-realized, who appreciate the glories of these mantras, who 
are charitable, who are engaged in the service of the brdhmanas, 
who are fully devoted to the Lord, whose minds are fixed at 
the lotus feet of Sri Radhika, who are servants of the lotus feet 
of Sri Hari, and who are fond of relishing the nectar from the 
lotus feet of Sri Radha. The devotees who desire to attain the 
lotus feet of Sri Sri Radha-Krsna will never again be entangled 
in the vicious cycle of birth and death in this world. 
Text 21 
mama prdnd vaisnavd hi 
tesdrh raksdrtham eva hi 
sularh mayd dharyate hi 
ndnyathd maitra-kdranam 
Because the Vaisnavas are as dear to me as my own self, I accept 
the trident for their protection. There should be no doubt 
about this. 


Glories of the One Thousand Holy Names of Sri RAdhA 
Text 22 
hari-bhakti-dvisam arthe 
sularh sandhaiyate maya 
srnu devi yathdrtharh me 
gaditarh tvayi su-vrate 
0 beautiful goddess, I hold a trident in my hand to destroy 
those who are envious of devotional service to Lord Hari. What 
1 am telling you is a fact. 
Text 23 
bhaktasi me priydsi tvam 
adah snehat prakdsitam 
kaddpi nocyate devi 
mayd ndma-sahasrakam 
Because you are my devotee and very dear to me, I have revealed 
to you these one thousand names of Sri Radha. Otherwise, I 
would never have disclosed them. 
Text 24 
kirn pararh tvdtii prabaksdmi 
prdna tulyarh mama priye 
stotram mantram radhikdyd 
yantram kavacam evaca 
O dear one, because you are as dear to me as my own life, I 
will now reveal to you more about Sri Radha, such as prayers, 
mantras, yantras and kavacas. 
Thus ends the translation of the sixth chapter of the Fifth Rdtra 
of Sri Ndrada-pancardtra. 


Chapter 7 
The Sri Radha-Kavaca 
Text 1 
sri pdrvaty uvdca 
kaildsa-vdsina bhagavan 
bhaktdnugraha-kdraka 
rddhikd-kavacam punyarh 
kathayasva mama prabho 
Sri Parvatl said; O resident of Kailasa! O my lord! You are very 
compassionate to the devotees. Please describe to me the sacred 
Sri Rddhika-kavaca. 
Text 2 
yady asti karund ndtha trdhi 
mdm duhkhato bhaydt 
tvam eva saranam ndtha 
sulapdne pinaka-dhrk 
O master, be kind to me and save me from distress and fear 
because, O carrier of a trident and bow, you alone are my 
shelter. 
Text 3 
sri-mahadeva uvdca 
srnusva girije tubhyam 
kavacam purva-sucitam 
sarva-raksd-karam punyarh 
sarva-hatyd-haram param 
Sri Mahadeva said: O daughter of the Himalayas, now hear 
from me about the kavaca that I had previously indicated. This 
kavaca protects one, it is very sanctified, and it relieves one 
from the reactions of killing. 
513 


514 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth Ratra 
Text 4 
hari-bhakti-pradarh saksat 
bhakti-mukti-prasadhanam 
trailokydkarsanam devi 
hari-sannidhya-karakam 
O Devi, this kavaca awards one devotional service to Lord Hari. 
It is the direct process for achieving devotional service to the 
Lord and liberation from material existence. It helps one to 
conquer the three worlds and brings one closer to Sri Hari. 
Text 5 
sarvatra jayadam devi 
sarva-satru-bhaydvaham 
sarvesdrh caiva bhutdndm 
mano-vrtti-kararh param 
It awards one victory in all respects, it creates fear in the minds 
of enemies, and it helps purify the minds of all living entities. 
Text 6 
caturdhd-sukti-janakarh 
saddnanda-karam param 
rdjasuydsvamedhdndm 
yajndndm phala-ddyakam 
This kavaca awards four types of liberation, it bestows great 
happiness and it gives the chanter results equal to those 
attained by the performance of the rdjasuya sacrifice, or horse 
sacrifice. 
Text 7 
idam kavacam ajndtvd 
rddhd-mantram ca yojapet 
sa ndpnoti phalan tasya 
vighnas tasya pade pade 


The ^r1 RadhA-Kavaca 
515 
Anyone who chants the holy names of Sri Radha without 
understanding the importance of this kavaca will not achieve 
any good result. Instead, he will face difficulties at every step. 
Text 8 
rsir asya mahadevo 'nustup- 
chandas ca kirtitah 
radhasya devata proktd rdrii- 
bijarh kilakarh smrtam 
Mahadeva is the superintending sage of the Sri Rddhd-kavaca, 
it should be chanted in the anustup meter, Sri Radhika is the 
objective, and the bija-mantra is ram. 
Text 9 
dharmdrtha-kdma-moksesu 
vitiiyogah prakirtitah 
sn-rddhd se sirah pdtu 
laldtarh radhika tathd 
This kavaca can be employed to attain success in religiosity, 
economic development, sense gratification, and liberation. 
May Sri Radha protect my head. May Sri Radhika protect my 
forehead. 
Text 10 
srimati netra-yugalarh 
karnau gopendra-nandini 
hari-priyd ndsikdrh ca bhru- 
yugarii sasi-sobhand 
May Srimat! protect my eyes, may the daughter of a cowherd 
man protect my ears, may She who is dear to Lord Hari protect 
my nose, and may She who is beautiful like the moon protect 
my eyebrows. 


516 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth RAtra 
Text 11 
ostarh pdtu krpd devi 
adhararh gopikd tathd 
vrsabhdnu-sutd dantdn 
cibukarh gopa-nandirii 
May the Goddess of mercy protect my upper lip, may the gopi 
protect my lower lip, may the daughter of Vrsabhanu protect 
my teeth, and may the bestower of pleasure to the cowherd 
residents of Vraja protect my chin. 
Text 12 
candrdvali pdtu gandam 
jihvdrh krsna-priyd tathd 
kantharh pdtu hari-prdnd 
hrdayam vijayd tathd 
May Candravall protect my cheeks, may She who is dear to 
Krsna protect my tongue, may the life and soul of Lord Hari 
protect my throat, and may the one who is always victorious 
protect my chest. 
Text 13 
bdhu dvau candra-vadand 
udararh subalasvald 
koti-yogdnvitd pdtu padau 
saubhadrikd tathd 
May She whose face resembles the moon protect my arms, may 
the sister of Subala protect my abdomen, and may the most 
gentle and empowered ascetic protect my legs. 
Text 14 
nakhdn candra-mukhi pdtu 
gulphau gopdla-ballabhd 


The ^Rl RadhA-Kavaca 
517 
nakhan vidhu-mukhim detnm 
gopi pada-talarh tathd 
May the moon-faced one protect my nails, may the beloved 
queen of Lord Gopala protect my ankles, may the lovely-faced 
goddess protect my toenails, and may the gopl protect my feet. 
Text 15 
subha-pradd pdtu prstharh 
kaksd sn-kdnta-ballabhd 
jdnu-desamjayd pdtu 
harini pdtu sarvatah 
May the giver of auspiciousness protect my back, may the lover 
of Sri Krsna protect my waist, may the most glorious one protect 
my thighs, and may the enchanter of the three worlds protect 
my entire body. 
Text 16 
vdkyarh bdni sadd pdtu 
dhandgdram dhanesvari 
purvdrh disarh krsna-ratd 
krsna-prdnd ca pascimdm 
May the most eloquent speaker protect my speech, may the 
queen of wealth protect my possessions, may she who is attached 
to Lord Krsna protect me from the east, and may the life and 
soul of Lord Krsna protect me from the west. 
Text 17 
uttardrh haritd pdtu 
daksindm vrsabhdnujd 
candrdvali naisam eva 
diva ksvedita-mekhald 


518 
Sri Narada-paScaratra • Fifth Ratra 
May the worshiper of Lord Hari protect me from the north; 
may the daughter of Vrsabhanu protect me from the south; 
may Candravali protect me at night; and may she, the bells of 
whose waist band make a very sweet sound, maintain me during 
the day. 
Text 18 
saubhagyadd madhya-dine 
sdydhne kdma-rupini 
raudri prdtah pdtu mam 
hi gopino rajaniksaye 
May the bestower of all good fortune protect me at mid-day, may 
the form of transcendental passion protect me in the evening, 
may the daughter of the sun-god protect me at night, and may 
the young cowherd girl protect me at the end of the night. 
Texts 19-21 
hetudd sangave pdtu 
ketu-mdld divdrdhake 
sesd pardhna-samaye 
samitd sarva-sandhisu 
yogini bhoga-samaye 
ratau rati-pradd sadd 
kdmesi kautuke nityam 
yoge ratndvali mama 
sarvadd sarva-kdryesu 
radhikd krsna-mdnasd 
ity etat kathitam devi 
kavacarh paramadbhutam 
May the bestower of the fruit of devotion protect me late in the 
morning, may She who wears a garland of ketaki flowers protect 


The ^ri Radha-Kavaca 
519 
me at noon; may She who accepts Krsna's remnants protect 
me in the afternoon; may She who is self-controlled protect me 
in-between work periods; may the queen of mystic yoga protect 
me during times of enjoyment; may the bestower of happiness 
protect me while I am engaged in conjugal activities; may the 
queen of lust protect me during times of entertainment; may 
she who is decorated with jewels help me in my quest for self- 
realization; and may Sri Radhika, whose mind is fully absorbed 
in Krsna, protect me always—at all times, and as I perform all 
kinds of activities. 
O dev!, I have thus revealed to you the most wonderful kavaca. 
Texts 22-24 
sarva-raksa-karam nama 
maha-raksa-karam param 
pratar madhyahna-samaye 
sayahane prapathed yadi 
sarvartha-siddhis tasya syat 
yad yan manasi vartate 
rajadvare sabhayam ca 
sangrdme satru-sankate 
prdndrya-ndsa-samaye 
yah pathet prayato narah 
tasya siddhir bhaved devi na 
bhayam vidyate kvacit 
This kavaca is the great means for deliverance, and it is most 
effective in giving protection. If a person recites this kavaca, 
either in the morning, at noon, or in the evening, he will attain 
perfection in all his endeavors. If a person recites this kavaca 
with a pure heart in the royal court, in an assembly, on the 
battlefield, while facing danger, or at the time of death, he will 
achieve all perfection and become freed from all fear. 


Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth Ratra 
Texts 25-27 
amdhitd radhikd ca tena 
satyarh na sarhsayah 
gangd-sndndt harer ndma- 
grahandd yat phalarh labhet 
tat phalarh tasya bhavati yah 
pathet prayatah sucih 
haridra-rocana-candra- 
manditarh hari-candanam 
krtvd likhitvd bhurje ca 
dhdrayet mastake bhuje 
kanthe vd deva-devesi sa 
harir ndtra sarhsayah 
There is no doubt that Sri Radha will allow Herself to be 
worshiped by one who faithfully employs this kavaca. The result 
one obtains by chanting the holy name of Lord Hari, or bathing 
in the Ganges, can be obtained by reciting this kavaca with a 
purified mind. 
O goddess, if one writes these mantras on the bark of a birth 
tree with turmeric mixed with sandalwood paste and wears it 
on his head, arm, or neck after putting it in an amulet, he will 
certainly attain the liberation of possessing bodily features like 
that of Lord Hari. There is no doubt of this. 
Text 28 
kavacasya prasadena 
brahmd srstirh sthitirh harih 
sarhhdrarh cdharh niyatarh 
karomi kurute tathd 


The !>r1 RadhA-Kavaca 
By the grace of this kavaca, Brahma became qualified to create 
the universe, Hari received the ability to maintain it, and I 
became its annihilator. 
Text 29 
vaisnavdya visuddhdya 
virdga-gu na-sd line 
dadydt kavacam avyagram 
anyathd ndsam dpnuydt 
One must be careful to impart this kavaca only to pure and 
detached Vaisnavas, otherwise it will create havoc in his life. 
Thus ends the translation of the seventh chapter of the Fifth 
Rdtra of Sn Ndradafahcardtra. 


Chapter 8 
An Explanation of the Meanings of Some of the 
Supreme Lord's Holy Names 
Text 1 
sri-ndrada uvdca 
mahadeva mahadeva 
deva-deva jagat-pate 
mantrdrtharh krsna-mantrdndm 
gudham rddhdmanurh prabho 
vaktum arhasi devesa bhaktarh 
mdrh sasi-khanda-dhrk 
Sri Narada said: O lord of the universe! O foremost among the 
demigods! O lord of lords! O Mahadeva! O master! O sustainer 
of the moon on your head, I am a devotee surrendered unto you. 
Please describe to me the Sri Krsna-mantra and the confidential 
Sri Rddhd-mantra. 
Texts 2-5 
sri-mahddeva uvdca 
krsna-mantrdrtham evdsu 
vaksydmi srnu narada 
kakdrdt-srsti-rupo 'sau- 
lakdrdt sthitir eva ca 
samhdrdt i bhaven nityam 
nirvandd vindur eva ca 
kakarad bhitim dpannd 
yama-dutd bhavanti hi 
rkdrdt pdtakdni syuh 
paldyana-pardni ca 
523 


524 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth RAtra 
sakdroccarandt sarve 
bhutd rdksasa-pannagdh 
vidravanti bhaydrtd vai 
nakdrdd roga-rdsayah 
akdrdt sarvatah sdntir 
esa kalpa-drumo manuh 
Sri Mahadeva said: O Narada, I shall explain to you the 
meaning of the Sn Krsna-mantra and so listen attentively. The 
letter ka from klirh refers to creation, la refers to maintenance, 
the letter e refers to annihilation, and the anusdra, m, refers to 
liberation. 
The Yamadutas are frightened by the letter ka from Krsna; 
all sinful reactions are vanquished by the letter r, and ghosts, 
demons, and Pannagas run away out of fear when they hear the 
letter s. By the chanting of the letter na, all kinds of diseases 
flee; and the letter a awards one peace of mind. 
For this reason, the transcendental sound vibration, Krsna, is 
just like a wish-fulfilling tree. 
Text 6 
kakdro mukha-candro 'sya 
rkdro netra-mandalam 
sakdro bdhu-yugalam 
nakdrah pddam eva ca 
The letter ka represents His moon-like face, r represents His 
eyes, s represents His arms, and na represents His lotus feet. 
Text 7 
akdrah sarva-gdtrdni 
smusva dvija-sattama 
punar anyat pravaksydmi 
smusva dvija-sattama 


Explanations of the Some of the Lord's Holy Names 535 
O best of sages, the letter a represents His entire body. Now, 
listen carefully as I explain another meaning of the holy name, 
Krsna. 
Text 8 
kakarad brahma-rupdtvdt 
srsti-kartd jandrdanah 
rkdrdt srsti-kartd 'sau 
veda-vedyo harih svayam 
The letter ka is transcendental and refers to Lord Janardana, 
the creator of the material world. The letter r refers to Sri Hari, 
who is known only through study of the Vedas, and who is the 
primary creator of the universe. 
Text 9 
sakdrdt siva-rupatvdt srsti- 
sthity anta-kdrakah 
nakdrdt sveta-rupatvdt 
nirvdna-phata-ddyakah 
The letter s is all-auspicious and refers to the Supreme Lord, 
who creates, maintains, and annihilates. The letter na is the 
form of the color white and thus represents liberation. 
Text 10 
jagad bija-sarua-mdyd- 
visargah parikirtitah 
krsna-ndmartha evoktah 
param smu mahdmate 
O noble-hearted sage, the all-powerful external energy, Maya, 
who is the seed of the material world, is represented by the 
letter visarga, or h. Now, please hear about the meanings of 
other names of Krsna. 


526 
Sri Narada-pai^caratra • Fifth RAtra 
Text II 
ma laksmih procyate vede 
dhavas tasydh patir harih 
ato mddhava-ndmd 'sau 
procyate purusottamah 
In the Vedic literature, the letter md refers to LaksmI, and the 
letters dhava refer to her husband, Sri Hari. That is why the 
Supreme Lord is called Madhava. 
Text 12 
md sobhd tejaso murtir 
nirdkdrasya tejasah 
dhavastasya harih sdksdn 
mddhavo 'sau praklrtitah 
The letter ma also refers to the formless effulgence of Brahman, 
and dhava refers to the source of that effulgence. For this 
reason, Lord Visnu is also called Madhava. 
Text 13 
visnur vibhavanatvdc ca 
vydpakatvdc ca ndrada 
bhdvanatvdc ca varndndm 
visnur eva tatah smrtah 
O Narada, the Lord is called Visnu because He is the ultimate 
shelter of all living beings, He is all-pervading, and He is the 
only object of meditation. 
Text 14 
kdso dlptimato yasmdt 
prakdsah sarua-janmandm 
prabhuh prabhavanatvdc ca 
tatah kdsah prabhuh smrtah 


Explanations of the Some of the Lord's Holy Names 
The name Kasa refers to the source of illumination from which 
all living entities have manifested. He is the Lord and master of 
all and so He alone is fit to be called Kasa Prabhu. 
Text 15 
caitanyabhuto jlvdndm 
yatas caitanya-varjitdh 
jadlbhutd bhavantiha 
caitanyas tu tatah smrtah 
Another name of Krsna is Caitanya because He dispels the 
material consciousness of the living entities by reviving their 
spiritual consciousness. 
Text 16 
sevate esa vd bhutvd 
yasmin krsna-sariratah 
atah kesava-ndmd 'sau 
sevyate purusah parah 
The Lord is called Kesava because He became manifested from 
the body of Krsna and is engaged in His service. He is therefore 
worshipable for all. 
Text 17 
hrslkdndm indriydndm 
isah samprocyate yatah 
ato ndrada lo 'kesmin 
hrsihesa iti smrtah 
O Narada, because the Supreme Lord is the master of the living 
entities' senses, He is called Hrsikesa. 
Text 18 
jandn ardayate y as mat 
pralaye mahati dvija 


528 
Sri NArada-pancarAtra • Fifth RAtra 
atah sa procyate vede 
jandrdana iti prabhuh 
O brahmana, the Supreme Lord is calledjanardana in the Vedas 
because He gives trouble to all living entities at the time of 
dissolution. 
Text 19 
ndrdjalam iti proktd 
ayanarh tasya td yatah 
ato ndrdyano ndma 
giyate purusottamah 
The word ndra means water and the word ayana means shelter. 
Because the Lord rests in the water, He is called Narayana. 
Text 20 
ndrarh nara-samuhe ca 
ayanarh te yatah prabho 
ayanarh ca sdksibhuto 
yato ndrdyanah parah 
Another meaning of Narayana is this: The word ndra refers to 
the living entities, and ayana means the source, or witness. 
Text 21 
gdrh prthvlrh svargam evdtha 
vdcarh vd pasavo 'pi vd 
tejaso vd pdlako 'sau 
gopdlas tu tatah smrtah 
The word go refers to the earth, heaven, speech or cows, and 
the word pdla means He who maintains. This is the meaning of 
the name, Gopala. 


Explanations of the Some of the Lord's Holy Names 
Text 22 
bdlakatvdc ca bdlo 'sau 
krsna-varna-gato yatah 
bdla-krsna iti proktd 
yato 'sau purusottamah 
Because the Supreme Personality of Godhead enacted pastimes 
as a child and assumed a blackish complexion, He is called 
Balakrsna. 
Text 23 
va-sabda-bodhe vdyus 
ca laddna-grahanena ca 
kakdro brahmano rupam 
ato bdlaka ucyate 
The letter bd indicates air, the letter la refers to the acceptance 
of charity, and the letter ka represents the Supreme Brahman. 
For this reason, the Lord is called Balaka. 
Text 24 
kartd hartd pdlayitd 
data bhoktd krpdmayah 
ndtho 'yam jagatdrh yasmdt 
jagan-ndthas tatah smrtah 
Because He is the creator, annihilator and maintainer of this 
universe and because He is the giver, the enjoyer, the merciful 
one, and the master of all, He is known as Jagannatha. 
Text 25 
harir harana-silatvdt 
pdpdndrh duhkha-yonindm 
nara-sirhha-vapur yasmdd 
ato brahman harih smrtah 


5B0 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth Ratra 
O brahmana, because He takes away all the distress bom of 
sinful activities, and because He assumed the form of a half- 
man, half-lion incarnation, the Lord is addressed as Hari. 
Text 26 
na cyavanti yato bhaktd 
mahati pralaye sati 
ato 'cyutah sa visvdtmd 
giyate purusottamah 
Because His devotees do not perish, even at the time of the 
total dissolution, the soul of the universe is called Acyuta. 
Texts 27-29 
cyuti 'hino 'vyayo yasmdd 
athavdcyuta isyate 
jagatdm ddibhutas ca madhyas 
cdntas ca yah smrtah 
ato vede purdne ca 
anadih parikirtitah 
gavdm indrah smrto yasmdd 
vdcdm indras tatah param 
ato govinda iti ca 
kirtyate veda-vadibhih 
iti ndma-rahasyarh te 
gaditarh paramadbhutam 
Also, because He is infallible, the inexhaustible personality is 
known as Acyuta. He is called Anadi in the Vedas and Puranas 
because He is the beginning, middle and end of everything. 
He is glorified by the knowers of the Vedas as Govinda because 
He is the Lord and master of the cows and speech. I have thus 
revealed to you the most confidential meanings of some of Lord 
Krsna's holy names. 


Explanations of the Some of the Lord's Holy Names 531 
Texts 30-31 
nasty antarh ndmatas tasya 
yatharthyam muni-purigava 
yadi prthivyd dhulydder 
ganand-karana-ksamah 
bhavisyati tathdpiso 
ndmndrh naiva tu sakyate 
janmdntara-sahasresu 
naiva naiva dvijottama 
O foremost among the twice bom! O best of sages! There is no 
end to the Lord's transcendental names. Even if one were able 
to count the number of particles of dust on the surface of the 
earth, it would not be possible for him to estimate the number 
of the Lord's holy names, even in thousands of lifetimes. 
Thus ends the translation of the eighth chapter of the Fifth 
Rdtra of Sri Ndrada-pan cardtra. 


Chapter 9 
Worship of and Meditation on Sri Radha 
Text 1 
sn-narada uvaca 
adhuna srotum icchdmi 
rahasyarh paramadbhutam 
ye ye mantras ca snmatyd 
rddhikdydh sugopitdh 
tan me bruhi mahddeva 
yady anugrdhyatd mayi 
Sri Narada said: O Mahadeva, I would like to hear something very 
confidential from you. If you wish to be kind to me then please 
reveal the most confidential mantras of SrimatT Radhika. 
Text 2 
sn-mahddeua uvdca 
srnu narada vaksydmi 
pdrvatyai yat prakdsitam 
naiva tattvdm pravaksydmi 
srnusva gadato mama 
Sri Mahadeva said: I have not yet disclosed to you something 
that I had already revealed to ParvatT. Listen with attention as 
I tell you this. 
Text3 
bahni-btjam krosa-yuktam 
tathd bindu-vibhusitam 
etad-bijarh muni-srestham 
btjarh trailokya-pujitam 
533 


5B4 
Sri Narada-paRcaratra • Fifth RAtra 
O foremost of sages, the bija-mantra of Sn Radha is ram. This 
mantra is worshiped throughout the three worlds. 
Text 4 
ekdksaro 'yam viprendra 
manuh sarva-phala-pradah 
purascarana-km mantn japel 
laksa-dvayarh sudhih 
O foremost of brdhmanas, because this one-syllable mantra 
bestows all desired benefits, an intelligent devotee who knows 
the importanc€| of chanting mantras should chant it two hundred 
thousand times after purifying himself. 
\ 
TextS 
athdnyarh mantra-rdjam tu 
srnu kalpa-drumam mahat 
nija-bijarh tato mdyd 
kdma-lnjam atah-param 
radhayai vahni-jdydnto 
mantro 'yam kalpa-pddapah 
prdtah krtyddikarh sarvarh 
purvavat parikalpayH 
Now, hear from me another mantra that is as glorious as a wish- 
fulfilling tree. This great mantra is: srim hrirh klirh radhavai svdha. 
Know for certain that this mantra is just like a desire tree. It is 
most effective if it is chanted in the early morning hours. 
Text? 
ydga-sthdnam tato gatvd 
sthdndsana-parigraham 
bhuta-suddhy adhikarh 
krtvd prdndydman tu mulatah 


Worship of and Meditation on ^ri RAdhA 
535 
Thereafter, one should sit on an asana near the sacrificial arena 
after bathing and performing the required rituals for purifying 
one's body. He should then practice prdndyarha-while chanting 
the mula-mantra. 
TextS 
rsir asya mahddevo 
gdyatri chanda eua ca 
devatd rddhikd proktd 
sarva-sdstresu gopitd 
Mahadeva is the predominating sage of this mantra, gdyatri is 
the meter in which it should be chanted, and Srimat! Radhika 
is the objective. This mantra has been kept very confidential in 
the sdstra. 
Text 9 
euarh rsy ddikarh krtvd 
rdm-bijendnga-kalpand 
tato dhyayet pardrh deulm 
kdncandbhdm vara-praddm 
After performing the preliminary rituals, one should 
worship the anga-deuatas while chanting the bija-mantra, ram. 
Thereafter, one should meditate on the objective of the mantra, 
whose complexion is golden and who is always ready to award 
benedictions. 
Text 10 
kisorim krsna-sahitd 
nildmbara-dhardm subhdm 
daksine dhrta-tambuldm 
pdnau vdme samudgakam 


536 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth Ratra 
She is in the prime of Her youth, very attached to Krsna, dressed 
in blue garments, and all-auspicious. She holds betel nuts in 
Her right hand and a small box in Her left hand. 
Text 11 
dharayantim svama-bhusdrh 
sadd krsndnurdginim 
krsndsya-nayandsaktdrh 
hdm-nupura-bhusitdm 
She is decorated with golden ornaments and She is always 
absorbed in thoughts of Krsna. Her eyes are fixed on the lotus 
face of Krsna. She wears a necklace and Her lotus feet are 
decorated with anklets. 
Texts 12-14 
evarh dhydtvd mdnasais 
tdm upacdraih samarcayet 
tato dhydtvd punar deviih 
saihsthdpya sva-purah sthale 
prdna-pratisthd-mantrena 
prdndn prdnesu yqjayet 
tatah padyddikarh dattvd 
mula-mantrena mantravit 
yathd-vidhi dhupa-dipa- 
naivedyaih paripujayet 
puspdnjalim pahcadhd ca 
dattvd mantrena vaisnavah 
After meditating on Sri Radha in this way, one should worship 
Her in his mind. Then, he should again meditate on Her and 
invite Her to reside within his heart. After installing Her within 
the heart, one should perform the prdna-pratisthd ceremoney 


Worship of and Meditation on ^ri Radha 
that invokes life into the Deity, while chanting the appropriate 
mantras. 
Thereafter, a Vaisnava who knows the science of chanting 
mantras should offer padya, arghya, incense, a ghee lamp, food, 
and puspdnjali five times, while chanting the mula-mantra. 
Text 15 
sukla-puspaih sadd pujyd 
tulasi-patra-sarhyutd 
karavirarh tathd padmarh 
vakarh kdncanam eva ca 
One should offer white flowers and tulasi leaves while worshiping 
the Supreme Lord. Among flowers, karavi, lotus, vaka and 
kdncana flowers are highly recommended for offering. 
Text 16 
suklai-raktais tathd pujyd 
anyathd na samdcaret 
vaisnave sangatih kdryd 
vaisnave ca sadd ratih 
White and red flowers should be offered while worshiping the 
Lord. Other flowers should be rejected. One should always 
make friends with Vaisnavas and deal with them in a very 
respectful manner. 
Text 17 
janmdstamirh samasddya 
rohini-sarhyutd yadi 
labhyate copavdso hi 
kartavyah sarvathd sadd 
If Janmastami falls within the Rohini-naksatra, the devotee 
should completely fast. 


538 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth Ratra 
Text 18 
ndlabhe rohinibhe ca 
saptamirh parivarjayet 
evarh prakdrato brahman 
tathd gqsthdstamim tithim 
If Janmastami does not fall within the Rohini-naksatra, one 
should not observe the rituals that are to be performed the 
day before. O brdhmana, in this way, you should observe 
Gosthastami. 
Texts 19-21 
upavdsah sadd kdryo 
ndnyathd siddhi-hdnikrt 
vaisnavo yadi bhunjita 
ekadasyam pramddatah 
visnv arcanarh vrthd tasya 
narakarh ghoram dpnuydt 
varam pitr-vadham brahman 
mdtfndm gamanam varam 
ekadasyam vaisnavas tu na 
bhunjita kaddcana 
ity etat kathitarh sarvarh 
yat-prstho 'ham iha dvija 
harer dscarya-bhutasya kim 
anyat srotum icchasih 
One should always fast whenever it is recommended, otherwise 
one's spiritual advancement will be hampered. If a Vaisnava 
eats on Ekadasi, out of carelessness, his worship of Lord Visnu 
goes in vain and afterwards, he traverses the path to hell. 


Worship of and Meditation on ^ri Radha 539 
O brdhmana, killing one's father and having sex with one's 
mother is not as grave as eating on Ekadasi. 
O twice-born sage, whateveryou have asked me, I have explained 
in detail. Now, what else in relation to Sri Hari would you like 
to hear about? 
Thus ends the translation of the ninth chapter of the Fifth Rdtra 
of Sn Narada-pahcaratra. 


Chapter 10 
The Practice of Mystic Yoga, or Mantra-Yoga 
Text I 
narada uvaca 
adhuna srotum icchdmi 
sarirasya yathd-kramam 
kd nadyah katidhds tatra 
gatayo vdyu-sambhra md 
Sri Narada said: Now I would like to hear something about the 
body. How many arteries are there in the body, and how do 
they supply air? 
TextS 
visesena mahddeva vaktum 
arhasi mdm prati 
tvad anyah samsayasydsyocchettd 
naivopalabhyate 
O Mahadeva, please tell me this in detail. I do not see anyone 
other than you who can remove my doubt in this regard. 
Text 3 
mahddeva uvaca 
smu narada vaksydmi 
yoga-dhdranam uttamam 
tisra-kotyas tad ardhena 
satire nddayo matdh 
Sri Mahadeva said: O Narada, listen with attention as I explain 
to you about the process of yoga. There are three hundred and 
fifty million arteries within the human body. 
541 


542 
Sri Narada-paSjcaratra • Fifth RAtra 
Text 4 
tdsu mukhyd dasa proktds 
tdsu tistro 'bhyavasthitdh 
pradhdno merudando 'tra 
candra-suiydgni-rupini 
Among them, ten are prominent. Among the prominent ten, 
three arteries that are situated in the backbone are the most 
important. They are called Candra, Surya and Agni. 
TextS 
sakti-rupd ca sd nodi 
sdksdd amrta-vigrahd 
daksine pingaldkhyd tu 
pum-rupd surya-vigrahd 
On the left side of the body, there is an artery called idd and on 
the right side, there is an artery called pingald, which is in the 
form of the sun. 
Text6 
dddimi-kusuma-prakhyd 
visdkhyd munibhih smrtd 
meru-madhye sthitd yd tu 
muladd brahma-vigrahd 
The root of these arteries is the artery known as visdkhyd, which 
appears like a pomegranate flower. This is the verdict of the 
Supreme Lord and great sages. 
Text 7 
sarva-tejomayi sd tu 
susamana bahu-rupinl 
tasyd madhye vicitrdkhyd 
amrta^pldvini subhd 


The Practice of Mystic Yoga, or Mantra-Yoga 543 
The artery called vicitrd is situated within the susamana artery, 
which has many different aspects and which is very powerful. 
Text 8 
sarva-devamayi sd tu 
yogindm hrdayangamd 
visargdd bindu-paryantam 
vydpya tisthati tattvatah 
She is the form of all the demigods, and she is meditated upon 
by the yogis in their heart. She is spread from visarga to bindu. 
Text 9 
mulddhdre trikondkhye 
icchd-jdla-kriydtmake 
mdhye svayambhu-linga tu 
koti-surya-sama-prabham 
The effulgent svayambhu-li nga, which is as brilliant as millions 
of suns, which spreads the network of desire, and which is 
triangular in shape, is situated within the mulddhdra-cakra. 
Text 10 
tad urdhve kdma-bijam tu 
phala-santindu-nadakam 
tad urdhve tu sikhdkdrd 
kundali brahma-vigrahd 
Above the mulddhdra-cakra is the place of the kdma-bija, within a 
dot. Above this, the kundalini-sakti, which is a manifestation of 
the Lord, is situated. 
Text 11 
yad-vahye hema-varndbham 
rasa-varnarh catur-dalam 


544 
Sri Narada-paScaratra • Fifth RAtra 
druta-hema-sama-prakhyam 
padmarh tatra vibhdvayet 
On the outside of the kundalini-cakra, a golden lotus flower 
with fourteen petals is seen. This lotus is called druta-hema- 
samaprakhya, or the flower of molten gold. 
Text 12 
tad urdhve 'gni-sama-prakhyam 
sad dalarh hiraka-prabham 
kadi-canta-sadavarnena 
yuktddhisthdna-sanjnakam 
Above the muladhara-cakra is a diamond-colored lotus flower 
with six petals. It is as effulgent as fire and it is a cakra called 
svadhisthana. On the six petals, the letters from ka to ca are 
imprinted. 
Text 13 
mulam adhdya sat-konam 
muladhdrarh tato viduh 
sva-sabdena param lingarh 
svadhisthdnarh tato viduh 
Because this lotus is situated within the muladhara-cakra it is 
also known as muladhdra, and because it is hexangular and 
combined with svalinga, it is known as svadhisthana. 
Text 14 
tad urdhvam nabhi-dese tu 
mani-puram mahat-prabham 
meghdbham vidyuddbham ca 
bahu-tejomayam tatah 
Above this is the place of the manipura-cakra, which is situated 
near the navel, which possesses the color of a cloud, and which 
shines like lightning. 


The Practice of Mystic Yoga, or Mantra-Yoga 
545 
Text 15 
manivad bhinna-tat-padmarh 
mani-purarh tathocyate 
dasabhis ca danair yuktarh 
dddiphdntdksardnvitam 
It is called the manipura-cakrahecaMse it resembles a jewel. This 
lotus has ten petals that are marked with the letters bha to pha. 
Texts 16-17 
sikhenddhisthitarh padmarh 
visva-lokaika-kdranam 
tad urdhvena hitarh padmam 
udyad aditya-sannibham 
kadi-thdntdksara ir arka- 
patrais cdjyam adhisthitam 
tan madhye bdna-lingath tu 
surydyuta-sama-prabham 
The peak of this lotus is said to be the cause of the creation of 
the universe. Above this is situated the andhata-cakra. It looks 
like a leaf in the light of the rising sun. On the petals of this 
lotus, the letters from ka to tha are written. At the middle of 
this lotus, bdnalinga, which is effulgent like thousands of suns, 
is situated. 
Text 18 
sabda-brahmamayarh 
sabdendhatarh tatra drsyate 
tendhatdkhyarh padmam 
tu munibhih pariklrtyate 
Transcendental sound vibrations and andhata sound vibrations 
emanate from this lotus. That is why the sages call it the andhata 
lotus. 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth Ratra 
Text 19 
ananda-sadanarh tat tu 
purusdvestitarii param 
tad urdhvam tu visuddhakhyarh 
dala-sodasa-pankajam 
This lotus is the abode of happiness and it is controlled by the 
Supreme Lord. Above this lotus, there is another lotus called 
visuddha-padma, which has sixteen petals. 
Text 20 
raveh sodasakair yuktarh dhrumra- 
varnarh mahat-prabham 
visuddharh tanute tasmdj 
jlvasydharh salokandt 
This brightly shining lotus is grey in color. Each petal is bright 
like the sun, and thus purifies the living entities. Indeed, I have 
become purified by this lotus. 
Text 21 
visuddharh padmam dkhydtam 
dkdsdkhyarh mahat param 
djhd-cakrarh tad urdhve tu 
atmanddhisthitarh param 
This lotus is called akasa-visuddha-padma. Above it is the djhdr 
cakra, where the spirit soul resides. 
Text 22 
djhd-sahkramanam tatra 
guror djheti kirtitam 
kaildsdkhye tad urdhve tu 
bodhani tu tad urdhvatah 
This is the region from where all instructions originate. That is 
why it has been called the djhd-cakra. From there, the spiritual 


The Practice of Mystic Yoga, or Mantra-Yoga 
master gives instructions. Above this is kaildsa and further on 
is the region known as bodhani. 
Text 23 
evarh ca sarva-cakrdni 
proktdni tava suvrata 
sahasrdrdmbujarh bindu- 
sthdnarh tad urdhvam Iritam 
0 performer of rigid vows, above all these cakras is a lotus having 
one thousand petals, called bindusthdna. 
Text 24 
ity etat kathitarh sarvarh 
yoga-mdrgam anuttamam 
ddau puraka-yogena 
ddhdre yojayen manah 
1 have thus explained to you the path of yoga. First of all, one 
should fix his mind on the mulddhdra-cakra while practicing the 
breathing exercise czXleApuraka. 
Text 25 
gudamedhrdntare saktim tdm 
urdhvam ca prabodhayet 
linga-bheda-kramenaiva 
bindu-cakrarh tu prdpayet 
Thereafter, one must arouse the energy that is present in- 
between the anus and genitals and gradually bring it to the 
bindu-cakra, while surpassing the other cakras. 
Texts 26-27 
sambhund tdm pardrh 
saktim ekibhdvam vicintayet 
tatrotthitdmrta-rasam 
druta-ldksd-rasopamam 


548 
Sri Narada-paNcaratra • Fifth RAtra 
pdyayitvd ca tdrh saktirh 
krsndkhydrh yoga-siddhidam 
sat-cakra-devatds tatra 
santarpydmrta-dhdrayd 
At this juncture, one should meditate on the combined form of 
Lord Siva and his spiritual energy. The bindu-cakra is where the 
nectarean juice that looks like the juice of lac dye emanates. 
One should offer that nectar to the energy known as Krsna, 
which awards one the perfection of yoga. One should also satisfy 
the predominating deities of the six cakras with that nectar. 
Text 28 
anena jndna-mdrgma 
mulddhdram tatah sudhih 
evam abhyasya cdyamya 
ahany ahani mdrutam 
An intelligent student of yoga should traverse the path of 
jndna in this manner and thus control the life air within the 
mulddhdra-cakra. 
Text 29 
jam-marana-duhkhadyair 
mucyate bhava-vandhandt 
purvokta-dusitd mantrdh 
same siddhyanti ndnyathd 
By practicing this process of yoga, one can become liberated 
from the miseries of old age, death, and the bondage of material 
existence. Even mantras chanted imperfectly will bear fruit by 
this process. There is no doubt of this. 
Text 30 
ye gundh santi devasya 
panca-krtya-vidhayinah 


The Practice of Mystic Yoga, or Mantra-Yoga 
549 
te gundh sadhakavare 
bhavanty eva na cdnyathd 
All of the qualities that a devotee who worships the Lord 
according to the panca-krtya system possess can be developed 
by those who follow this process of yoga. 
Text 31 
ity etat kathitam sarvam 
yoga-mdrgam anuttamam 
idarh tu dhdrand-dhydnam 
srnusvdvahito mama 
I have thus revealed to you the topmost path of yoga. Now, 
listen to the methods of controlling the mind and performing 
meditation. 
Texts 32-33 
dik-kalady anavacchinne 
krsne ceto vidhdya ca 
tanmayo bhavati ksipram 
jivo brahmdni yojandt 
athavd samalarh cittam 
yadd ksipram na siddhyati 
taddvayava-samy ogdd 
yogi yogdn samabhyaset 
First of all, one should meditate on Sri Krsna within his heart, 
without any concern for time, place, or circumstances. Knowing 
Him to be the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one should 
merge his self with the Supreme Self, in the sense of becoming 
one in self-interest. If, by this process, one's heart is not quickly 
purified, one should practice concentrating his mind on the 
bodily limbs of the Supreme Lord. 


550 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth RAtra 
Text 34 
praddmbhoje mano dadyat 
nakha-kinjalka-citrite 
jarigha-yugme tathd rdma- 
kadaR-kanda-sobhite 
One should specifically engage his mind in thinking of the 
Lord's lotus feet and effulgent toenails, which are decorated 
with fragrant flowers, and His thighs, which resemble the stalks 
of banana trees. 
Texts 35-37 
uru-dvaye matta-hasti-kara- 
danda-sama-prabhe 
gangdvarta-gabhlre tu 
ndbhau siddha-bile tatah 
udare vaksasi tathd 
hareh srivatsa-kaustubhe 
purna-candrdyuta-prakhye 
laldte cdru-mandale 
sankha-cakra-gaddmbhoja- 
dor-danda-parimandite 
sahasrdditya-sahkdse 
kiiita-kundala-dvaye 
Next, one should meditate on the Lord's thighs, which resemble 
the trunks of maddened elephants. Then, one should meditate 
on the Lord's navel, which is deep and which resembles a 
whirlpool. After that, one should meditate on His abdomen; 
on His chest; on the mark of Srivatsa and the Kaustubha gem; 
on His beautiful forehead, which shines like ten thousand 
moons; on the conch, disc, club and lotus that He holds in His 


The Practice of Mystic Yoga, or Mantra-Yoga 
551 
hands; and finally, on His crown and earrings, which shine like 
thousands of suns. 
Text 38 
sthane sthdne yajen mantri 
visuddha-suddha-cetasa 
mano nivesya krsne vai 
tanmayo bhavati dhruvam 
yavan mano layam yati 
krsne svdtmani cintayet 
While meditating on Lord Krsna in this way, a pure-hearted 
devotee who understands the importance of chanting mantras 
will surely become fully absorbed in thought of Him. As long as 
the mind is not fully merged in the Supersoul, Sri Krsna, one 
should continuously practice this process of meditation. 
Text 39 
tara-dista-manum mantri 
japa-homam samabhyaset 
atah param na kincic ca 
krtyam dste manohare 
At the same time, one should chant the mantra beginning with 
tdra, and perform sacrifice. 
Text 40 
vidite para-tattve tu 
samastair niyamair alam 
tdla-vrntena kirk kdryarh 
labdhe malaya-mdrute 
When a devotee comes to a genuine understanding of the 
Absolute Truth, he no longer needs to follow any other process. 


552 
Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth RAtra 
What is the need of a fan made of palm leaves when there is a 
cool, scented breeze blowing? 
Text 41 
mantrdbhydsena yogena 
jndnarh jndndya kalpate 
na yogena vind mantro na 
mantrena vind harih 
The ultimate goal of chanting various mantras and practicing 
yoga is the same. There is no value in chanting a mantra without 
practicing yoga, and without chanting a mantra. Lord Hari can 
never be achieved by any amount of yoga practice. 
Text 42 
dvayor abhydsa-yogo hi 
brahma-sarhsiddhi-kdranam 
tamah parivrte gehe 
ghato dlpena drsyate 
Therefore, by both practicing yoga and chanting a mantra, one 
can attain the perfection of realization of the Supreme Lord. It 
is just like this: If there is a lamp in a dark room then all of the 
objects within the room, such as pots, will be seen. 
Text 43 
euam mdydvrto hy dtmd 
manund gocankrtah 
euam te kathitam brahman 
mantra-yogam anuttamam 
durlabharh visaydsaktaih 
sulabharh tadrsdm api 


The Practice of Mystic Yoga, or Mantra-Yoga 
55S 
O brahmana, by chanting mantras, a conditioned soul can come 
to the platform of self-realization. I have thus told you about 
the practice of mantra-yoga, which is rarely understood by 
materialistic people. 
Thus ends the translation of the tenth chapter of Fifth Rdtra of 
Sri Narada-pahcaratra. 


Chapter 11 
The Glories of Mystic Yoga 
Texts 1-3 
sri-mahadeva uvdca 
sanavaty ariguldydmam 
sariram ubhaydtmakam 
gaja-dhvajdntare kandam 
utsedhada-dvayangulam viduh 
tasya dviguna-vistdram 
vrtta-rupena sobhitam 
nddayas tatra samudbhutdh 
mukhyds tisrah praklrttitdh 
idd vdme sthitd nodi 
pingald daksine matd 
tayor madhya-gatd nddl 
susumnd tat-samdsritd 
Sri Mahadeva said: The material body is the residence of the 
Supersoul and the individual spirit soul. The length of the body 
is about sixty fingers, or five to six feet. The mulddhdra-cakra is 
situated between the anus and the genitals. From this point, all 
of the arteries begin. Among all of the arteries, three are most 
prominent. On the left side of the body is the artery called idd, 
on the right side of the body is the artery called pingald, and in 
the middle of the body is the artery called susumnd. 
Texts 4-6 
padangustha-dvayarh ydtd 
sivdkhyd sirasd punah 
brahma-sthdnarh samdpannd 
soma-surydgni-rupini 
555 


556 
Sri Narada-paScaratra • Fifth Ratra 
tasya madhya-gatd nadi 
vicitrd yogi-durllabhd 
brahma-randhrarh vidus tasydh 
padma-sutra-nibharh param 
adhdras tu gatds tatra 
mata-bheddd anekadhd 
divya-mdrgam imam prdhur 
amrtdnanda-kdrakam 
The artery known as sivd emanates from the toes and goes 
all the way up to the head, where it combines with the three 
arteries—idd, pingald and susumnd, or the sun, moon and agni. 
Within the susumnd artery there are many thin veins that 
resemble the thread of a lotus stem and which are very rarely 
seen, even by yogis. These veins go up to the brahma-randhra, or 
the skull. Although there are differences in opinion about this 
among the various schools of yoga, this divine pathway is being 
described herein. 
Text? 
iddydm sancalec cendrah 
pingaldydm divdkarah 
jdtau tu yoga-nidrdydm 
susumnaydm ca tdv ubhau 
The moon moves within the idd artery, and the sun moves 
within the pingald artery but this can be noticed only when the 
susumnd artery is dormant. 
Texts 8-9 
adhdra-kanda-madhyastham 
tri-konam atisundaram 
jyotisdm nilayarh divyarh 
prdhur agama-vedinah 


The Glories of Mystic Yoga 
tatra vidyul latdkdra 
kundali para-devatd 
parisphurati sarudtmd 
suptdhi-sadrsdkrtih 
There is a beautiful triangular area within the ddhdra-cakra. It is 
the source of a divine effulgence. This is the opinion of those 
who are knowers of the Vedas. The controlling deity of this 
region is known as Kundali, who looks like a creeper or lightning 
and is situated in a dormant state within that triangular region, 
in the form of a coiled snake. He is the life and soul of all living 
beings. 
Texts 10-13 
vibharti kundali saktir 
dtmdnarh harhsam dsritd 
harhsah prdndsrayo nityarh 
prdtid nddi-pathdsraydh 
adharad urdhvato vdyur 
yasravat-sawa-dehindm 
deharh prdpya sva-nddibhih 
praydnarh kurutai bahih 
dvadasdngula-manena 
tasmdt prdna iti smrtah 
ramye mrdvdsane suddhe 
patdjina-kusottare 
yad vaikam dsanarh yogi 
yoga-mdrga-paro bhavet 
jndtvd bhuto yatra dehe 
yathdvat prdna-vdyund 
tatra bhuto yajed dehe 
drdhatvav dptaye sudhih 


558 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth RAtra 
The power of Kundall maintains the soul because he takes 
shelter of Hamsa. Hamsa is the shelter of life, and the life air 
moves within the body through the arteries. For all embodied | 
living entities, the different airs circulate within the body and 
the adhdra-cakra, through the arteries. The measurement of the 
outgoing life air is about twelve fingers, or about six inches. 
A yog! should practice yoga by sitting on a soft dsana made of 
wood, animal skin or kusa grass. In order to attain control over 
his body, an intelligent yog! should try to understand the exact 
location of the various bhutas and then worship them by means 
of controlling the life air. 
Texts 14-18 
angulibhir drdham baddhvd 
karandni samdhitah 
angusthdbhydm ubhe srotre 
tarjanibhydm vilocane 
ndsdrandhre ca madhydbhydm 
anydbhir vadanam drdham 
baddhvd "tma-prdna-manasdm 
ekatvam samanusmaran 
dhdrayen mdrutam samyag 
yo 'yam yogi-durlabhah 
nadah sahjdyate tasya kramad 
abhyasyatah sanaih 
sa tu bhrhgdhgand-gita- 
sadrsah prathamo dhvanih 
vamsi-kdmsydnildpurnam 
varhsa-bhdvdnilopamam 
ghantd-rava-samam pascdt 
ghana-megha-svano 'parah 


The Glories of Mystic Yoga 
559 
evam abhyasyatah purhsah 
sarhsdra-ghvdnta-ndsanah 
In order to control the internal organs, a yogi should 
simultaneously close his eyes with his two first fingers and his 
ears with his two thumbs. He should close his nostrils with his 
two middle fingers while keeping the rest of his fingers stiff. 
He should then meditate and while doing so, he should try 
to merge the soul, the life air and the mind as one, In this 
way, one should control the air within the body. By doing so, 
the yogp, will experience a sound vibration that he should try to 
hear very carefully. In the beginning, he may hear a sound like 
the humming of bees. Then, with the help of the air, he may 
experience the sound of a flute. Later, he may come to hear 
the sound of a bell, the thundering of clouds, or some other 
sound. By practicing yoga in this way, the miseries of material 
existence can be gradually vanquished. 
Texts 19-23 
jndnam utpadyate sarvam 
harhsa-ksepanam avyayam 
pum-prakrty dtmakau proktau 
bindu-sargau manisibhih 
tdbhydm kramdt samudbhutau 
bindu-sargdvasdnakau 
harhsau hamsa-prakrty dkhyau 
harhsavdn prakrtis tu sah 
ajapd kathitd tdbhydm 
jivoydm upatisthate 
purusatvdsrayarh mattvd 
prakrtir nityam dtmanah 
yadd tad bhdvam dpnoti 
sadd so 'ham idarh bhavet 


560 
Sri Narada-paSicaratra • Fifth RAtra 
sdkdrarnarh lopayitvd 
prayatnas ca tatah param 
sandhydm kurydt purva-mpdm 
taddsau pranavo bhavet 
pardnandamayarii nityarh 
caitanyaika-gundtmakam 
dtmdbheda-sthitam yogi 
pranavarh bhdvayet sadd 
When one obtains the inexhaustible knowledge of hamsa, he 
automatically masters knowledge of the purusa, of bindu in the 
form of prakrti, and of visarga. This is the opinion of great, self- 
realized souls. 
Gradually, one acquires knowledge of bindu as prakrti and hamsa 
as the purusa. This is also known as ajapd. A person should 
practice yoga very carefully, knowing that ajapd is under the 
shelter of the purusa. When one understands the nature of the 
purusa then he will automatically consider himself to be of the 
same spiritual nature. 
When one gives up chanting of the sdkdra-mantra and performs 
his duties at the sandhyds diligently, pranava, or orh will be 
revealed to him. A yogi should always meditate on pranava, or orh, 
which is eternal, fully cognizant, full of bliss, and nondifferent 
from the soul. 
Texte 24-25 
dsthdya vdcdm atiduram adyarh 
vedyarh sdasamvedya-gunena santah 
dtmdnam ananda-rasaika-sindhu 
pasyanti te tdrakam dtma-nisthdh 
satyarh hetu-vivarjitam sruti- 
girdm adyarh jagat-kdranarh 


The Glories of Mystic Yoga 
vyaptarh sthdvara-jarigamarh 
nirupamarh caitanyam antargatam 
dtmdnarh ravi-candra-vahni- 
vapusarh tdrdtmakam santatarh 
nitydnanda-gundlayarh sukrtinah 
pasyantih ruddhendriyd 
It is the duty of a saintly person to chant the previously 
mentioned mula-bija, om. A devotee should consider orh to be 
the ocean of the mellows for achieving self satisfaction. He 
should become fixed in the self and concentrate his vision on 
the tdraka-bija, orh. 
After learning to control his senses, a pious devotee should 
meditate on the Supreme Absolute Truth, which is eternal, 
causeless, the origin of all divisions of knowledge, the original 
cause of the universe, the creator of all moving and nonmoving 
entities, and the supreme form of consciousness. The Supreme 
Absolute Truth assumes the forms of the sun, moon, and fire. 
He is the deliverer of everyone and the abode of eternal bliss. 
Text 26 
angustha-mdtrarh purusarh bhajante 
caitanya-mdtram ravi- maudalastham 
dhydyanti dugdhdbdhi-bhujanga- 
bhoge saydnam ddyarh kamald-sahdyam 
praphulla-netrotpalam anjandbharh 
caturrnukhendsrita-pdda-padmam 
One should worship the original Personality of Godhead, who 
rests in mystic slumber on the bed of Ananta-sesa, who has 
thousands of hoods, in the ocean of milk. He is the husband 
of Laksmi, the embodiment of spirit, and He is situated in 
the sun. He has beautiful eyes like blue lotus flowers and He 


Sri Narada-pancaratra • Fifth RAtra 
measures about eight fingers, or about four inches. The four- 
headed Brahma remains under the shelter of His lotus feet. 
Text 27 
dmndya-gantr-caranarh dhana-nilam udyat- 
snvatsa-kaustubha-gaddmbuja-sankha-cakram 
hrt-pundarika-nilayarh jagad eka-mulam 
dlokayanti krtinah purusam purdnam 
Devotees who have performed many pious activities should 
always meditate within the lotus of their heart on the primeval 
Lord; whose complexion is dart blue like a newly-formed 
monsoon cloud; who bears a conch, club, disc and lotus flower 
in His hands; whose lotus feet are glorified by the Vedas; and 
who is the origin of everything in existence. 
Texts 28-31 
sn-ndrada uvdca 
iti me yoga-sdstrasya jndtarh 
mdhdtmyam uttamam 
prakdsitarh ca yatnena 
jndndmrtam idarh bhuvi 
budhdh pibata yatnena 
pararh brahma-rasdyanam 
pltvedam amrtarh bhuyo 
mriarh janma na vidyate 
ye 'bhyasyanti tv idarh sdstrarh 
pathanti pdthayanti vd 
siddhayo 'stau kare tesdrh 
dhana-dhanyadi-sampadah 
ddrtdh sawa-sdstresu 
bhoginah ksobha-kdrakdh 


The Glories of Mystic Yoga 
563 
dpnuvanti pararh brahma 
sarua-sastra-visaradah 
Sri Narada said: After acquiring this topmost understanding of 
yoga, I will now reveal it throughout the entire world. Intelligent 
persons should regularly and carefully relish this sacred 
conversation. Whoever drinks this nectar will no longer have 
to suffer birth in this material world. Anyone who hears this 
literature or induces others to hear it will certainly achieve the 
eight types of mystic perfection, wealth, food grains, and other 
assets. This knowledge is glorified by all scriptures. It awards 
disappointment to material sense enjoyers and it leads learned, 
saintly persons to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
Thus ends the translation of the eleventh chapter of the Fifth 
Rdtra of Sri Narada-pancaratra. 
