THE 
NARADA-PURANA 
PART IV 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE LIMITED • DELHI 


First Edition: Delhi, 1952 
Reprint: Delhi, 1997 
Also available at: 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 
41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar. Delhi 110 007 
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, Warden Road, Mumbai 400 026 
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004 
Sanas Plaza, Subhash Nagar, Pune 411 002 
16 St. Mark's Road, Bangalore 560 001 
8 Camac Street, Calcutta 700 017 
Ashok Rajpaxh, Patna 800 004 
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 
PRINTED IN INDIA 
BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS. 
A^5 NARAINA PHASE 1. NEW DELHI 110028 
AND PUBLISHED BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PVT LTD 
BUNG ALOW ROAD. DELHI 110 007 


CONTENTS 
TRANSLATION AND NOTES 
Chapters Part IV Pages 
92. The Brahmapurana : Contents and merit 
accrued 1345 
93. The Padma Purwa : Contents 1352 
94- The Vi§i?u Parana : Contents 1357 
95. The Vayu Puratia : Contents 1360 
96. The Bhagavata Puraim : Contents 1362 
97. The Naradiya Purana : Contents 1366 
98. The Markandeya Pura^.: Contents 1368 
99. The Agni Pur^a : Contents 1371 
100. The Bbavisya Purana : Cemtents 1374 
101. The Brahma-Vaivarta Purana : Contents 1376 
102. The Linga Purana : Contents 1379 
103. The Varaha Purana : Contents 1382 
104. The Skanda Purana : Contents 1384 
105. The Vamana Purana : Contents 1405 
106. The Kurma Purana : Contents 1408 
107. The Matsya Purana : Contents 1410 
108. The Garuda Purana : Contents 1413 
109. The Brahmanda Purana : Contents 1418 
110. The exposition of Vratas to be performed on 
Pratipad (the first day of the lunar fortnight) 1422 
111. Exposition of Vratas to be observed on 
Dvitiyas (the second day of the lunar fortnight) 1428 


112. Enumeration of Vratas to be observed on 
Trtiyas (the third day of the lunar fortnight) 1431 
113. The Exposition of the holy rites to be per¬ 
formed on Caturthis (the fourth day of the 
lunar fortnight) 1440 
114. The Exposition of Holy Vratas to be per¬ 
formed on Paheami days (the fifth day of the 
lunar fortnight) 1449 
115. The Exposition of the holy vows to be 
observed on Sasthi (the sixth day in the lunar 
fortnight) 1456 
116. The Exposition of the rites to be observed 
on Saptarni (the seventh day) 1462 
117. The Review of the Vratas to be observed on 
Astami (the eighth day of the lunar fortnight) 1469 
118. The Exposition of the Vratas to be observed 
on Navami (the ninth day of the lunar fortnight) 1480 
119. The Holy rites to be observed on Da^ami 
(the tenth day of the lunar fortnight). 1483 
120. The Exposition of the Vratas to be observed on 
Ekadasi (the eleventh day of the lunar fortnight) 1491 
121. The Holy rites to be observed on Dvadasi (the 
twelfth day of the lunar fortnight) 1501 
122. The Vratas to be observed on Trayodasi (the 
thirteenth day of the lunar fortnight) 1512 
123- The Vratas to be observed on CaturdasI (The 
fourteenth day of the lunar fortnight) 1521 
124. The Exposition of Vratas to be observed on the 
Full Moon and the New Moon days 1529 
125. The greatness of the Pur^a 1539 
uttarabhaga 
Chapters 
1. The greatness of Ekadasi day 1546 
2. Discussion on Tithis 1548 


3. Yama goes to the Region of Brahma 1554 
t 
4. An Appeal by Yaina 1560 
5. The lamentation of Yania 1563 
6. God Brahma’s Reply 1565 
7. The Statement of Brahma 1567 
8. The description of Mount Mandara 1574 
9. A dialogue between Rukrnahgada and Dharmah- 
gada 1577 
10. The dialogue between Rukrnahgada and Harsa- 
deva 1582 
11. Rukrnahgada meets Mohini 1588 
12. Stipulation of the Conditions 1593 
13. The Fascination of Mohini 1596 
14. The salvation of Godha (the Lizard) 1599 
15. The dialogue between the fatlicr (Rukinafigada) 
and the son {Dharmaiigada) 1605 
16. The Anecdote of a chaste lady 1610 
17. The Statement of Mohini 1617 
18. Honouring the Mothers 1622 
19. The love-making of Mohini 1627 
20. Dharmahgada’s conquest of quarters 1631 
21. Dhannaiigada’s marriages and hisorder as a Ruler 1634 
22. The glory of the month ofKarttika 1638 
23. Mohini’s dialogue with Rukrnahgada 1647 
24. Questions of Mohini 1656 
25. The story of Mohini 1662 
26. The story of Mohini (continued) 1670 
27. The story of Kasthila 1671 
28. Ka.sthila’s story (continued) 1685 
29. The description of Ka^i 1693 
3 The story of Kasthila (continued) 1701 
31. The glory of the month of Magha 1708 
32, The Narration by Sandhyavali 1713 


33. The Submission of Dharmahgada 1720 
34. The Vision of the Lord 1726 
35. Mohini incurs a Curse 1728 
36. Brahma intercedes for Mohini 1736 
37. Mohini regains her physical body 1742 


SECTION IVi 
CHAPTER NINETYTWO 
The Brahmapurdna : Contents and merit accrued 
SHta said : 
1. On hearing these words of Sanalkuniara joyously, 
the delighted Narada who was desirous of knowing the excellent 
thing that is conducive to welfare, said again. 
Narada said : 
2. Well done, O blessed one. Well done. The great 
sacred (Tantra) text, that is the most excellent among the 
(Tantric) scriptural texts has been narrated by you. It renders 
great benefit to all the worlds. 
3. iNow I wish to hear the (Excellent narration of Puranas. 
O sage, tell me whatever (i.c. all legendary episodes) is narrated 
in each of the difl'erent Puranas, since you arc considered 
to be omniscient. 
Suta said ; 
4. O Brahmana, on hearing those auspicious words of 
Narad i, his enquiry regarding the stories in the Puranas, 
Sanatkumara replied. 
1 This section is historically very important as it records the detailed 
contents of each Afahdpurdpa as they stood before the final redaction of the 
present NP. As the notes below will show, the NP docs cover a//the 
contents of all the Puranas and the information regarding interlocutors etc, 
is at variance with the published editions of these Furdpas. But that docs not 
mean that whatever is not recorded in the NP. is spurious. Critical 
editions based on all-India Mss. of the Puranas will be more reliable in 
this matter. 


1346 
N&rada Purina 
Sanatkumdra said : 
5. O Brahmana, the stories extant in the Puranas are 
miraculous and very detailed. 7"hcy have originated* in the 
different Kalpas^ and they include different stories and anecdotes. 
6. This sage Sanatana is the most excellent among 
the knowers of many Kalpas. Ask him about this. No one else 
knows as much as he docs. 
7. On hearing these words of the noble-soulcd Sanat- 
kumara, Narada bowed to Sanatana with great hurnilitv and 
submitted : 
Namda said ; 
8-9. O Brahmana, the most excellent one among the 
knowers of the Puranas, interested in the discussion of the 
perfect knowledge, kindly recount to me the classification of 
the Puranas in their entirety, on hearing which everything 
becomes heard, on knowing which everything is known. It is 
by following the injunctions therein that everything meritorious 
is done. 
10-11. The duties of the diflercnt castes and stages of 
life are clearly understood from it. How many are the Puranas ? 
What is the magnitude (extent) of each ? What are the stories 
that they contain ? O holy Lord, tell me. So also recount to 
me the different stories based on the four castes of people, as 
well as the details of the different holy observances. 
12. Please reveal clearly the stories of the different races 
and dynasties in the order of their creation. O Holy Lord, 
there is no one superior to you in the knowledge of the stories 
contained in the Puranas. 
13a. Hence tell me the story (i.e. the content of the 
Puranas) that dispels all doubts. 
SUta said : 
13b-14a. O Brahmanas, on hearing the speech (request) 
1, This is a convenient plea to reconcile different versions of the same 
story in different /’urdpas. 


IV.92.i4b-22 
1347 
of Narada, Sanatana, the most excellent one among the knowers, 
meditated on Narayana for a short while and said : 
Sanatam said : 
14b-16a. Very well ! O excellent sage, very nice! 
Since your steady inclination is diverted towards the knowledge 
of the stories in the Puranas. This is conducive to the help of 
all the worlds. I shall tell you what had been narrated by 
Brahma formerly. Urged by filial affection, he narrated to 
Marici and other sages. 
16b-18, Brahma’s son named Marici is well known as 
one richly endowed with Vedic learning. He is the master of 
the Vedas and the Vedangas (lores ancillary to Vedas). Once 
he approached his father Brahma, the creator of the worlds. O 
leading sage ! O bestower of honour ! He devoutly bowed to 
him and asked him the same question regarding the holy narra¬ 
tive of the Puranas as you do now, 
Marici said : 
19. O Lord, Lord of the chiefs of the Devas, the 
Creator and the annihilator of the worlds, O omniscient one, O 
presiding deity over all, obeisance be to you, who are gracious to 
all. 
20. O father, I am desirous of hearing. Kindly tell me 
the core of the Puranas, their definition, their authority, the 
narrator and the inquirer. 
Brahma said : 
21. Listen, O dear child, I shall tell you the collective 
account of the Puranas. On knowing it, all the extant literature 
among the mobile and the immobile beings becomes known 
22. O bestower of honour, in all the Kalpas, there was 
only one Parana^ that was the very seed of the fourfold aims of 
life.- It extended to a hundred crores of verses. 
1. With due respect to P.V. Kane (H.D. V. ii.P. 829), I believe that 
originally there was a single text of literature called the Purdffa, on account 
of the following reasons : 


1348 
Ndrada Purdifa 
23-24. It was from the Parana that all other sacred 
literature and sciences were evolved. As days passed by, people, 
could not grasp this Parana properly. On realising it, Hari the 
highly intelligent deity, incarnated himself as Vyaszf in every 
age. In the coarse of every Dvapara age, he reduced it to four 
hundred-thousand verses. 
(1) Not only the NP here but various other Puranas record the 
tradition that originally there was one Purdpa, vide Brahmdpda (BdP) I.l. 40- 
41., LP I. 2.3., Mt. P 53. 3-11, Pd. P V, 145-52, Va. P. I. 60-61. And They 
have a number of common verses. For example compare, NP I.92.22-2S 
(our text) with the following from Mt. P. 53. 4-11. : 
Purdpam ekam evdsit tadd Kalpdntare' nagha / 
Trivarga-sddhanam pupyam iata-kofi-pravistaram // 
Pravxttih sarva-idstrdpdm Purdpasyd’ bhavat tadd / 
Kdlendgrahaparhdrffvd Purdpasya tato nrpa // 
Vydsa-ri^am aharh kftvd sathhardmi yuge yuge / 
Catur-lakfa-pramdpena Dvdpare Dvdpare sadd // 
Tad OffddaJadhd krtvd bhur-loke'smin prakdiyate / 
Adydpi deva-lokesmin iata-ko(i-pravistaram // 
(2) All Puranas conform in general to a uniform structure known as 
Paflca-lak^apa tr claim to have the following five characteristic topics viz., 
the creation of the Universe {Sarga) after destruction or Pralaya 
(Pratisarga) 
(3) Genealogy of Sages and Kings (VarhJa) (4) the great periods, 
called Manvantaras, (5) history of dynasties both Solar and Lunar races, etc. 
(VamSdnucarita) 
(4) Not only verses but long passages of verses are found common to 
a number of Puranas. 
Thus each Purana tries to follow the proto-type of that ancient 
text called the Purana. 
(5) The Atharva Veda (AV. XI. 7, 24 and XV. 6. 10-11) mentions. 
Purdpa which shows that there was no proliferation of Purana upto the 
final redaction of the AV. 
It was by the time of the Dharma-Sutras of Apastamba and Gautama 
that Puranas jvilh different names came into existence “approaching in the 
contents to some extent at leaist of some of the extant Puranas” (HD. V. ii. 
318). Writers from the 2nd to the eighth cent A.D. from Sahara to iSankara 
show that the Purana texts before those authors exhibit the same contents 
and characteristics as many of the extant Purapas. 
The later proliferation does not disprove the existence of one single 
work called Pur&^a. 
For details, vide section 1 of the Introduction. 


IV.92.25-3I 
1349 
25. He divides Purana into eighteen books and hands it 
over to the people of the Earth. Even today, original in the 
region of the Devas, the Purana extends to a hundred crores 
of verses. 
26-28. Of course, there is a condensed version in which 
the essence is described briefly in four hundred thousand 
verses.^ The following are the three times six (eighteen) books 
viz—^Brahma, Padma, Vaisnava, Vayaviya, Bhagavata, Naradiya 
Markandeya, Agneya, Bhavisya, Brahma Vaivarta, Lihgaka, 
Varaha, Skanda, V&mana, Kurma, Matsya, Garuda and 
Brahmanda.® 
29. The single narrative is called the thread that binds 
the narrator and the listener. I shall recount briefly. Listen 
with great concentration. 
30. It wais the Brahma Purana that was narrated at the 
outset* by the noble-souled Vy^a, the Vedic scholar, for the 
benefit of the whole world. 
31. Indeed, it is the foremost among all the Pura^s. It 
bestows virtue, love, wealth and liberation from Sarhsara. It is 
rich with various narratives and historical anecdotes. It consists 
of ten thousand verses.* 
1. The total number of verses in the extant Purdnas as enumerated in 
Mt. P. & Va.P. comes to 400600 which b approximately the same as ‘‘Four 
hundred thousand’* as mentioned here and in other Puranas. 
2. The Ibt of Puranas given here is the same as in the Bh. P XII. 
13. 4-8, VP III. 6.21.23, Mt. P. 53.11 ff Va. P. 104. 2-10, etc. But theru b 
some difference in the serial order. For example, NP. records the Fifjw P 
as the 4th in the Ibt, while a number of others substitute the Saioa as the 
4th instead of V&yu. A.O. Pusalkar has however, convincingly shown that 
the Vdjm b entided to be a Mahapurai^a and Not the Siva Purapa (Studios 
in tho Epics & Purdnas of India (SEP. Ch. 2 pp. 31-41) that the VP contains 
thb Ibt shows that these Puranas existed in the Gupta Age. 
3. Like the NP most Purdnas g^ve the Brahsna the first place in their 
Ibts. But the Vdyu 104,3 and the Dootbhdgaoata (13.3) put the Matsya as the 
first in their Ibt, while the Skanda-Prabhdsa Kha^do 2. 8-9 gives that honour 
to the Brahnd^d^ 
4. The Bh. P. XII. 13.4 agrees with the NP about the number of 
verses (viz 10000) in the Brahsna i* but AP, 272.1 credits it with 25000 
verses while Mt, P. states 13000 as the total No. of verses therein. Actually 


1350 
N&rada PurSna 
32. O leading sage, in it is described the origin of the 
Devas, ♦Suras and Daksa and other Prajapatis. 
33. Then, there is the holy narration of the race of the 
Sun, the Supreme Atman, the lord of the worlds. The narrative 
is destructive of great sins. 
34. In the course of that narrative, the incarnation of 
the glorious Ramacandra^ has been recounted, Ramacandra of 
blissful form incarnating in four manifestations (vyuhas) 
35. Thereafter, the lunar race is described. There is the 
story of Krsna, the Lord of the Universe, that is destructive of 
sins. 
36. There is the description of all the continents and 
sub-continents without omitting anything. The description of the 
nether-worlds and the heavens is also seen (given therein). 
37. There is the enumeration of the Narakas (hells). 
There is a hymn and a narrative of the Sun. Parvati’s birth 
and marriage are described. 
38. Then there is the narrative of Daksa. There is the 
description of the holy centre of ‘Ekamra’® (Bhuvanesvara in 
Orissa). O Narada, the first part of this Purana has thus been 
narrated. 
39. In its second part, there is the description of Puru- 
sottama.* It is explained in detail along with the injunctions 
as to how a pilgrimage (of Jagannatha Puri) is to be conducted. 
the Anandasrama Edt. of this Purana contains 13,761 verses. In the 
Brahma P, Gautami-Mahatmya is given in 106 chapters but the NP. 
docs not record it—a big omission. 
* Probably a misprint. It should be cdsurdridm ca ‘and of Asuras*. 
1. Tliis story of Rama though included in the list of contents of the 
Brahma by the NP. is not found in the printed editions (both Anandasrama 
Poona and Gurumandal (GM) Calcutta.) 
2. Obviously the PaRcardtra doctrine of “Four Manifestations” is 
implied here as Rama is an incarnation of Vifiju (Vasudeva.) 
3. This is in Ch. 41 ofthc Bd. P. (GM. Edt). Ekamra is Bhuvanesh- 
vtir on the river Gandhavati in Orissa—Dc 59. 
4. The description of Puru?ottama Ksetra and how king Indradyumna 
of Avanti carved out three wooden images (of Jagannatha, Balarama and 
SubhadrS) is found in Ghs. 44-51 of the Bd. P. 'Phis Purusottama K^tra is 
Puri of Jagannatha Puri or Sri Ksetra in Orissa. Puri is the ancient Buddhist 


IV.92.40-47a 
1351 
40. It is here itself that the story of Krsna^ is explained 
in detail. There is the description of the region of Yama and 
the procedure of the l^raddhas of the Pitrs (manes). 
41. The duties of the different castes and stages of life 
liave been described in detail. There is the narration of Visnu- 
Dharina and the Yugas as well as the Pralaya (dissolution of 
the world). 
42. There is the narration of the Yogas and the Saiikhyas. 
There is the description of Brahmavada (Philosophy of the 
Brahman) and the eulogy of the Purana. 
43. Thus the Brahma Purana that consists of two parts 
ha.s been described. It is destructive of all sins. It bestows all 
happiness. 
44-46a. He who, after getting copied this Purana 
consisting of the dialogue of Suta and Saunaka that yields 
worldly pleasure (here) and release from Sariisara (hereafter), 
donates devoutly that manuscript on the full moon day in the 
month of Vaisakha, to a Brahmana well-versed in Puranas, 
alongwith gold, water and a cow, after propitiating him with 
garments, sweet dishes and ornaments,—(such a person) stays 
in the region of god Brahma as long as the sun, the moon and 
the stars shine. 
46b-47a. He who reads or listens to this index (table of 
contents) to the Brahma Purana, O Brahmana, shall attain 
the benefit of the reciter and listener of the entire Purana. 
Dantapura which got its name from the shrine of Buddha’s left canine tooth. 
The three images represent Buddha, Diiarma and Sahgha and there were 
car festivals of these when Fa Hian and Hiuen Tsiang visited thb place— 
Dc, pp 162-163. 
1. VV 40-42 give some of the main items in the Bd. P. such as the 
story of Krspa (Chs. 180-211), description of the region of Yama 
(Chs. 214-216). Pitr-iraddha (219-220), Varpasramadharma (Gh. 222), 
discussion of Yoga (Chs. 234, 238),Sahkhya (Chs. 235, 239) and eulogy 
of Puranas (Ch. 235). But a number of chapters on sacred places and other 
important episodes which find a place in every Purana and as such cannot 
be branded as ‘spurious’, are not mentioned in the contents of the Bd. P. 
as summarised in the NP. 


1352 
Ndrada Pur&na 
47b-48a. He who restricts his diet to rice soaked in ghee 
and subdues his sense-organs through (religious) observances 
and listens to the whole of Brahmapurana, shall attain the 
region of Brahma. 
48b-c. O dear one. What more needs be said ? By 
reciting this Purana a man obtains whatever he desires. 
CHAPTER NINETYTHREE 
The Padma Purana : Contents 
God Brahma said : 
1. O son, listen. I shall tell you the story of Padma 
Purana^ It bestows great merit on those men who joyously read 
and listen to it. 
2. Just as a man becomes complete with his five sense 
organs, so also is this Purana with its five sections. It is destruc¬ 
tive of sins. 
1. This Vaisnava Purana is regarded as the heart of the Cosmic 
Hari {Pd. Svarga 62.22). There arc variations in the nomenclatures of the 
diflerent Sections (Khandas) and the total number of verses in this Purana. 
The NP. gives Srsfi, Bhumi, Svarga, Patdla and f7/tara as the names of its 
Khapdas and this is borne out by the Bengal Mss of the Padma P—another 
evidence to show that the author of the NP was an East Indian. The No. of verses 
is 55,000 according to the NP., Bh. P., Mt. P., VaP. but the Brahma 
Vaivarta credits it with 59000 verses. The Anandasrama edition (Poona) 
mentions six Khat^dos viz. Adi, Bhumi, Brahma, Patdla, Srffi and Uttara & 
contains 48,425 verses. The Guru Mandal edition (Calcutta) of the Pd. P. 
has seven Khand^ viz. Srffi, Bhumi, Svarga, Brahma, Patdla, Uttara and 
Kriyd-yoga-sdra and they tally with the statement of the Pd. P, Svarga-Khapda 
1.23-2.5 and the no. of verses is 55000. It is noteworthy that a number of 
topics in the published Padma Purdpa such as the characteristic of heretics 
(Pakhandas), condemnation of the M&ya-Vada, stories regarding wearing 
special Vai^oava marks like urdhva-Pupdra, greatness of Dvaitbm, etc. do 
not form a part of Pd. P. as describad in the NP: 


IV.93.3-8 
1353 
3. O Brahmana, the details of religious duties are 
narrated in it alongwith the accounts of various incidents, 
anecdotes, etc. by Pulastya to Bhisma with the orderly account 
of creation of the universe, etc. 
4. The greatness of Puskara^ is glorified in detail. The 
procedure of the Yajfia of Brahman and the characteristics of 
the study of the Vedas (are described). 
5. Various kinds of (charitable and religious) gifts and 
holy observances are severally glorified. The marriage of 
Parvaii is mentioned. There is the long narrative ofTaraka. 
6. The greatness of cows etc. that bestows all merits has 
been mentioned. The killing of Kalakeyas and other Daityas has 
been described separately. 
7. O excellent Brahmana, the mode of worship of the 
planets and the rite of Dana (religious gift) have been laid down. 
All these have been mentioned by the noble-souled Vy^a in the 
first part of Srstikhanda (Section on creation). 
8. In the context of the worthiness ofxnother, father and 
others of being worshipped, there is the story of Sivasarman* at 
first and then that of Suvrata.® Vrtra’s^ death is described 
afterwards. 
The sfiecial feature of the Pd P is that it was used by Kalidasa for 
the plot of the Sakuntala and the Raghuvamia. There is one special Tirtha 
Mahatmya in the Pd, P. which is not mentioned by the NP and is ignored 
by complacent editors of the Pd. P. at Bombay (The Vehkatesvara Press 
edition) and Poona ('I'he Anandasrama Edt.) and that h \hc Karavira 
Afdhdtmya of 7300 verses MSS evidence of which is unanimous in claiming it 
to be a part of the Pd. P. It is being edited by the present editor in the 
Sk-Pkt. scries of the Shivaji University Kolhapur. 
1. As in the case of the Br. P. in tlie case of the Pd. P, the NP 
mentions only a few topics practically as tokens in each Kha^da and passes 
to the next Purana (Viz. the Visriu) 
Thus the greatness of Puskara mentioned in this verse (No. 4) forms 
Chs, 11U117 and god Brahma’s sacrifice is in Chs. 124-131 and the Vrata 
topic mentioned in the next verse (No. 5) is found in Chs. 200-258 of the 
Pd. P. 
Hence non-mention of a topic in the NP. is not a proof that the 
particular topic in the Pd. P is spurious. 
2. vide PD P. (Guru Mandal Edition) BAumt Khanda (Ch. 1.4) 
3. ibid Ch. 11, 21, 22 
4. ibid Ch. 25 


1354 
Ndrada Pur&m 
9. There are the stories of Prthu, son ofVena^ of Suni- 
tha^ and of Sukala.® There is Dharmakhyana (narration 
ofVirtue) afterwards. 
10. There is the narrative of service rendered to the 
parents. There is the story of Nahusa. Yayati’s^ story is 
narrated. Gurutirtha® (Holy centre) is reviewed. 
11. There is the dialogue between the king and Jaimini 
in which there is a very wonderful story. The story of Asoka- 
Sundari® is mentioned alongwith the death of Daitya Hunda. 
12. The narrative of Kamoda^ alongwith the death of 
Vihunda and the dialogue of Kunjala* with Cyavana. the noble- 
souled (sage). 
13. Then there is the narration of the Siddhas,® The 
benefit of (listening and recounting) this section is narrated. 
Then there is the dialogue between Suta and Saunaka. This is 
remembered as Bhumikhanda. 
14. The origin of the Cosmic Egg is narrated by Sauti to 
the sages. The situation of all the worlds including the Earth 
is described. Thereafter, the holy centres are enumerated. 
15. Then there is the narration of the origin of 
Narmada. The stories of various holy centres in it are severally 
mentioned. The holy account of the holy centres like Kuru- 
ksetra etc. has been described. 
16. The narration of the merit of the Kalindl, the des¬ 
cription of the greatness of Kasi and Gaya, and the merit¬ 
giving glory of Prayaga. 
1. PD Chs 27-29, Vena story is scattered upto the er of 
Bh umi-Khaiida. 
2. ibid Chs 33-36. 
3. ibid Chs 41-GO. 
4. ibid Chs 64, 72-83. 
5. ibid Ch. 85. 
6. ibid Chs 103-116 
7. ibid Ch. 119. 
8. ibid Chs 86,90,122 
9. ibid. Ch 123. 
The above correspondence of topics in NP. verses 8-] 3 in this 
chapter and the various chapters in the Bhumi Khanda of the Pd. P, is 
enough to show the nature of the Anukramapikd Varpaham (The description 
of the Index or table of contents) of the Pd. P. and NP. 


IV.93.17-27a 
1355 
17. The review of the path of activity (Karmayoga) in 
accordance with the castes and stages of life. The dialogue 
between Vyasa and Jaimini is comprised of holy rites and stories. 
18. The story of churning the ocean, thereafter, the 
enumeration of holy vows. The greatness of Drjapaftcaha and 
the hymn that dispels all guilts. 
O Brahmana, this is the section called Svarga Khanda. 
It is destructive of all sins. 
19-21. The description of Rama’s horse sacrifice, Rama’s 
coronation at the outset, the arrival of Agastya and others, the 
narration of the family of Paulastya. The instruction regarding 
horse sacrifice. Then the description of rites regarding the 
sacrificial horse. The holy stories of many kings. The description 
of god Jagannatha (the Lord of the Universe) of Puri, the 
greatness of Vrndavana; it is destructive of all sins. 
22. The narration of the perpetual sports of the incarna¬ 
tion of Krsna, the greatness of the ablution in the month of 
Vaisakha, the benefit of ablution, gifts and worship. 
23. The dialogue between the Earth and Divine Boar 
(Visnu-Varaha), the story of Yama and the Brahmana, the 
dialogue of the messengers of the king, review of the Hymn of 
Kfsna. 
24. The meeting of §iva and Sambhu (?), then the story 
of Dadhica, the incomparable greatness of the Bhasma, the 
excellent greatness of Siva. 
25. The story of the son of Devarata, the praise of the 
knower of the Puranas, the narrative of Gautama, then the 
Siva-Gita. 
26-27a. The story of Rama in another Kalpa, the stay in 
the hermitage of Bharadvaja. This is the Patalakhanda* (The 
section on Patala). It is destructive of all the sins of those who 
listen and recite. It bestows all desired benefits. 
•Some topics mentioned in the NP are found in the extant Pd. Purana 
e*g. greatness of Bhasma (chs 105-108), Praise of the knower of Puranas 
(chs 114-115), The story of Gautama (ch. 114)—V^^ide Pd. P. Pitdla 
(G. M. edition) 


1356 
N&rada Purdtna 
27b-28. The story of Parvata originally recounted to 
Gauri by Siva; then the story of Jalandhara, the narration of 
Sr!-Saila etc.; thereafter, the meritorious story of Sagara is 
narrated. ' 
29. The merit of Gahga, Prayaga, Ka^i and the special 
merit of Gaya, the greatness (in efficacy) of the gift of cooked 
rice etc, the holy rite of Mahadvadaii (12th Tithi of Bhadrapada 
(Suddha) with Sravana Naksatra.) 
30. The greatness of twenty four Ekadasis (eleventh day) 
in each fortnight is described severally, the narration of Visnu- 
dharma, the thousand names of Visnu. 
31. The greatness of Karttikavrata, the benefit of 
ablution in the month of Magha. The greatness of the holy 
centres of the continent Jambudvipa, which destroys sins. 
32. The greatness of Sabhramati, the description of the 
origin of Nrsiihha, the narration of the story of Devasarma and 
others, the description of the greatness of Gita.* 
33. The description of devotion and the greatness of 
^rimad Bhagavata,** the greatness of Indraprastha with the 
stories of many holy centres. 
34. The mentioning of Mantraratna, the description of 
Tripadbhuti; thereafter, the holy stories of the incarnation of 
Matsya (fish) etc. 
35-37. The hundred divine names of Rama, O Brah- 
raana; thereafter, its greatness is described; then the testing of 
the greatness of Sri Visnu by Bhrgu. This is the holy fifth 
section called IJttarakhanda. The excellent man who listens to 
the Padma Purana comprising of five Khandas attains the 
abode of Visnu after enjoying all pleasures here that he desires. 
This Purana contains fiftyfive thousand verses. It is called 
Padma Pur^a. 
38. This must be written in full and handed over to a 
Brahmana well versed in the Puranas after honouring him 
suitably on the full moon day in the month of jyestha along- 
•Vide Pd. P. Uttara Khanda, chs. 175-192. 
•♦Vide ibid. chs. 193-198. 


IV.94.1.4 
1357 
with a gold lotus. He who does so is bowed to by all the Devas. 
He goes to the abode of Visnu. He who reads this index to 
Padma Parana or listens to it attains the merit of listening to 
the whole of Padmapurana. 
CHAPTER NINETYFOUR 
The Vi?m Purdna : The Table of Contents 
isri Brahma said : 
1. O dear child, listen. I shall narrate the great Purana 
of Visnu.' It contains twenty-three thousand verses.^ It is 
destructive of all sins. 
2. In the first section, six divisions have been made by 
the descendant of Sakti i.e. Para^ara. In the first division the 
introduction to the Purana is made to Maitreya. 
3. The primordial causal creation, the origin of the 
Devas and others, the narrative of the churning of the ocean, 
the family-race of Daksa and others. 
4. The story of Dhruva, the anecdote of Prthu, the 
narrative of Pracetas, the story of Prahlada.® 
1. Probably this is the only Purana which conforms to the Paflca- 
lakfafia definition of a Purana. May be due to its being Pro-paHeardtra. 
Ramanuja regards it as an authoritative text. Though I have seen the 
Vei^katesvara Press edition and that of Gopal Narayan & Go. with the 
comm, Viftiucitti and Ratnagarbha’s Vaifxi^oa-kufa-Candrikd, I use here the 
Gita Press edition (Gorakhpur Samvat 2026) 
2. Though the NP. and some other Puranas such as the Vdjnt, 
Matsya, Bhdgavata and Brahma-Vaivarla state that VP consists of 23000 verses, 
the printed editions give only 6000 verses. 
The Gita Press edition has 6373 verses. It appears that the NP in 
in verses 17b* 18, regards VP and Vifftudharmottara Purdpa as one hook while 
Sahkara (800 A.D.) regards them as two separate works (PJ VIII 94-96) 
showing thereby that the present NP. was settled before 800 A.D. 
3. In this verse the NP. mentions topics discussed in VP 1.11-22 


1358 
Ndrada PurA^ 
5-6. The narration of the separate rulership and 
administration. These are the topics in tjje first division. 
(The second division.) The narration of the family of 
Priyavrata, the review of the continents and the sub-continents, 
the narration of the nether worlds and hells; the review of 
seven heavens; the narration of (he day of the week like 
Sunday and others alongwith their separate characteristics. 
7. Then the story of Bharata, which points out the path 
of salvation, the dialogue between Rbhu and Nidagha—these 
are topics in (he second division.^ 
8. ^ (The Third Division.^) The enumeration of the 
Manvantaras; the incarnation of Vedavyasa; (hereafter, the rite 
that lifts one up from hell is mentioned. 
9. The review of all the religious duties (Dharmas) in 
the dialogue between Sagara and Aurva; then Sraddha Kalpa 
(The ri(uals connected with Sraddha) is recounted; the classifi¬ 
cation of the castes and stages of life. 
10. The conduct of life of the good is described; then the 
story of delusion due to Maya; thus the third division that 
destroys all sins has been explained. 
11. (The Fourth Division.) The holy story of the solar 
race, the narration of (he lunar race. Alongwith that there are 
stories of different kings. O excellent sage, these are the topics 
in the fourth division. 
12-15. (The fifth division.) The query about the incarna¬ 
tion of Krsna; then the story of the family of cowherds; the 
death of Putana during his infancy; the slaying of Agha, etc. in 
the course of his boyhood days; killing of Karhsa during the 
youth; the story of his life in Mathura; then in the course of his 
prime of youth his sports at Dvaraka, the killing of all Daiiyas, 
the different marriages, staying at Dvaraka, the Lord of the 
Universe, Kr?na, the Lord of Masters of Yoga removed(lightened) 
1. This verse refers to topics contained in VP Amia II chs. 1-7, 
12-16. 
2. VV 8-10 mention topics described in VP AthJa H chs. 1-3, 8-9^ 
13-16, 17-18. 
3. It appears that the NP is unaware of the chs. 21-24 which 
describe the future kings, in the IV Aihia of the VP. 


IV.94.16-24 
1359 
the burden of the Earth through killing etc. of the enemies; the 
narrative of Astavakra. The fifth division is thus recounted.^ 
16-17a. The story of Kali is mentioned, the four types of 
dissolution. The Knowledge of Brahman reviewed by Kesidh- 
vaja (for the benefit) of Khiindikya. So the sixth division is 
recounted. 
17b-18. Hereafter, the perpetual virtues called Visnu- 
dharrnottaras are mentioned by Suta on being respectfully asked 
by Saunaka and others. Many holy stories, holy rites, obser¬ 
vances, and restraints were also described by him. 
19-20. Dharma-sastra (Code of Laws), Arthasastra 
(Political economy) Vedanta (Metaphysics), Jyotisa (Astrono¬ 
my and Astrology), the narration of the races, hymns according 
to the context; and dynasties, Manvantaras(or Manus); differ¬ 
ent vidyas (lores) that are beneficial to the worlds are describ¬ 
ed. I'liis is verily the Visnu Purana which is a succinct collec¬ 
tion of all the topics of sacred scriptures. 
21-23. In this, the events of the Varaha Kalpa^ have 
been narrated by Vyasa.-'^ He who reads this with devotion and 
he who listens to it wa'th respect goes to the world of Visnu. 
Both of them enjoy all pleasures there. This Parana must be 
written and given to a devotee of Visnu who knows the mean¬ 
ing of the Purana on the full moon day in the month of Asadha 
alongwith ghee and a cow. O Brahrnana, he who does so goes 
to the abode of Visnu through an aerial chariot as refulgent as 
the sun. 
24. O Brahrnana, he who hears the contents of the Visnu 
Purana .shall attain the benefit of the Purana itself. 
1. VV 12-15 summarize the topics in Lord Krsna’s life and form 
the basis for the X Skandha of the Bh. P. 
2. The device to explain different veraions of the same story is to 
attribute it to a different Kalpa. 
3. In VP., Vyasa is not the interlocutor. It is a dialogue between 
Parlijara and Maitreya. 
It appears that the major portion of the present day VP is known to the 
NP and hence it obviously precedes NP in date. 


1360 
N&rada Parana 
CHAPTER NINETYFIVE 
The Vayu Parana : The table of contents 
God Brahma said : 
1. O Brahmana, listen; I shall describe the Vayavlya 
Purana^ on hearing which one attains the abode of Rudra,^ the 
Supreme Soul 
2. This Purana is reputed to comprise of twentyfour 
thousand® verses. In the context of ^vetakalpa, holy rites 
(dharmas) have been described herein by the wind-god. 
3-6. This Vayaviya Purana has two sections. (In the 
first section) the characteristics of creation etc. are mentioned 
in details. Kings and their dynasties in different Manvantaras 
have been recounted. The killing of the demon Gaya^ is describ¬ 
ed in detail. The importance and glory of (different months and 
of) the month of Magha in yielding (religious) merits is men¬ 
tioned. The merit accruing from charitable gifts and the duties 
of the kings have been described in detail. The precise descrip- 
1. This is called as god Vayu is the chief interlocutor. Tlie 
Mt. P. (ch. 53) declares that herein Vayu proclaimed dharmas pertaining to 
^veta-Kalpa. This Purana is published by Vchkatesvara Press Bombay, 
Asiatic Society Calcutta, Anandasram Poona and Guru Mandal Grathmala 
Calcutta (to mention a few). 
2. This Purana belongs to the Sa iva group and is characterised by the 
glory of Rudra as Mt. P. puts it. The elucidation of Pasupata Yoga and the 
emphasis on Siva Mahatmya made NP declare the attainment of Rudra’s 
abode as the fruit of listening to this Purina. 
3. Though Vayu, Mt. P., Bh. P and NP declare 24000 as the total 
number of verses in the Vayu, AP gives the 14000 as the number of verses, 
while according to the Devibhdgavata it is 24,600 verses. 
Actually the Anandasrama edition contains 10,991 verses. It appears 
that sections like Reva Mahatmya and other Mahatmyas which were originally 
in the Vayu P. when the NP wrote this chapter, later got separated as 
independent works (Pusalkar—Studies in Epics and Purdoas (SEP).—P. 7a). 
Pusalkar opines that the Vayu is a Mahapurana while the Siva Purana is an 
Upa-Purdoa (ibid 77). 
4. Kane (HD. vii p 906) and other scholars regard this Gzyk Maha¬ 
tmya as a later addition to counter-balance the Saiva bias in such chapters as 
20.31-35, 24.91-165 {Sarva Stotra), 101.215. 33 etc. 


IV.95.7-14 
1361 
tion of the beings wandering over the Earth, nether worlds, 
quarters and the firmament is made therein and all the holy 
vows and observances etc. are mentioned. Thus the first Section 
has been stated in brief. 
7-9. In the latter section, there is the description of the 
holy river Narmada.^ O leading sage, Siva’s Sarnhita (com¬ 
pendium) is mentioned in detail. The eternal Deity who is ins¬ 
crutable to all the Devas stays perpetually on the banks of 
Narmada wholeheartedly. The waters of Narmada are identi¬ 
cal with Brahma, Hari, himself, the great Kara, the formless 
Brahman and the Kaivalya (salvation) itself. 
10. Verily Reva, (this Narmada) is a certain Sakti 
in the form of a river which has been brought forth from his 
own body by iSiva for the benefit of the worlds. 
11. Those who live on its northern bank are the followers 
of Rudra, Those who reside on the Southern bank go to the 
world of Visnu. 
12. Beginning with Omkaresvara and ending with the 
Western ocean, there are thirtyfive confluences with other 
rivers that destroy sins. 
13. There are eleven confluences on the Northern bank 
(the northern side) and twentythrce in the Southern bank 
(from the south) and the confluence of Reva with the ocean 
is the thirtyfifth. 
14. Together on both the banks of Reva, there are 
four hundred famous holy centres inclusive of the confluences. 
1. VV 7-15 : The Printed Texts (both Anandairama and Guru 
Mandal (GM) editions) do not give the chapters pertaining to the Rev4 
M&hatmya which might have been there when the NP was written. In stead 
of the division Purvardha and UttarSrdha as given in the NP (of the Vayu- 
Purana) the Vayu itself (in ch. 103.44) states that it has four sections {Pidas) 
viz. (1) Prakriyi (2) Anufanga (3) Upodgh&ta and (4) Upasamhdra and it calls 
the Purana as ‘Four-footed Purina narrated by Vayu* in the next verse (ibid 
103.45) 
The Anandasrama edition gives the following division of chapters : 
1. Prakriyi(chs 1-6) (2) Anusahga (chs. 7-64) 3. Ujxxlghata (chs. 65-99) 
(Upasaihhira (chs. 100-112) 
The contents given in the NP are to a great extent different from those 
in the Printed editions of the Vdyu P. 


1362 
Marada Pur&na 
15. O leading sage, there are sixty crores and sixty 
thousand holy centres at every step on both the banks of the 
Reva. 
16. This Saihhita (compendium) of Siva? the great 
Atman, is very meritorious. In this the story of the river 
Narmada has been detailed by Vayu. 
17-18a. He who writes this Purana and gives the manus¬ 
cript with great devotion to a Briihmana householder on the full 
moon day in the month of I^rfivana alongwith jaggery and a 
cow, lives in the world of Rudra as long as fourteen Indras rule 
over the Heaven. 
I8b-20. The man who narrates this Vayaviya Purana or 
listens to this, regularly, restricting his diet to cooked rice con¬ 
secrated with ghee, is undoubtedly Rudra Himself. He who 
listens to or reads this index (or the contents of this Purana) 
shall obtain the benefit of listening to the entire Purana. 
CHAPTER NINETYSIX 
^rimad Bhagavata : Contents 
God Brahma said : 
1. O Marici, listen. I shall tell you (the story of) the 
Purana, I^rimad Bhagavata that has been composed by Veda- 
Vyasa and which is on a par with the Vedas. 
2. It consists of eighteen thousand* verses. It is glorified 
as destructive of sins. This is a veritable wish-yielding celestial 
tree with twelve branches (Skandhas—sections of the Bhagavata). 
3-4. O leading Brahmana therein in the first Skandha, 
when Suta and the sages meet together, the Lord is mentioned 
1. According to the Va. P., A.P., N.P., Br. V. & Devibhagavata and 
the Bh. P. itself, the Bh. P. consists of 18000 verses. But actually the Gita 
Press edition of the Bh. P. contains 14,579 verses. 


IV.96.5-12 
1363 
as embodying the whole of the Universe, The holy life of Vyasa 
as well as that of the Pandavas (is recounted). Then the epi¬ 
sode of Pariksit. This is cited as the first Skandha. 
5-6. In the course of dialogue between Pariksit and Suka 
there is the review of the two types of creation. In the course of 
dialogue between Brahma and Narada there is a nectarlike 
story of the Devas, the characteristics of the Purana and the 
cause and origin of the creation. This second Skandha is thus 
composed by the intelligent Vyasa, 
7-8a. The anecdote of Vidura, his meeting with Maitreya : 
The Prakarana (section) of creation from Brahman, the Supreme 
Soul; the Sahkhya doctrine propounded by Kapila : Thus the 
third Skandha is summarised. 
8b-9. The story of Sati at the outset and that of Dhruva 
thereafter : There the holy story of Pfthu as well as that of 
Pracinabarhis : Thus the excellent fourth Skandha is told, while 
narrating the gross creation (Visarga).^ 
10-1 la. The meritorious story ofPriyavrata and the anec¬ 
dote of the members of his family; thereafter, the description of 
the worlds included in the Cosmic egg. The condition of 
hells. This is considered (as the summary of) the fifth Skandha 
which is technically called Sarhsthana or Sthiti.* 
1 lb-12. The story of Ajamila and the review of the crea¬ 
tion byDaksa. The narrative of Vftra and thereafter, the meri- 
1. The NP. upholds the view advocated by the Bh. P. II.90.1 that 
instead of the traditional five characteristics of a Purana, the Bh. P. redefines 
a Purdria as possessing the following ten characteristics. 
(1) Subtle creation [Sarga)-, (2) Gross creation {Visarga) (3) law and 
order ensured by God {Sthana)\ (4) Protection—welfare of all (Pofapa);{5) 
material lust for Karmas (Oti) (6) the periods of Manus and history of that 
epoch (Manvanlara); (7) accounts of the deeds of the Lord {lidnukathd,) (8) 
physical annihilation [Nirodha) (9) Liberation (AfuA(i); (10) the last resort of 
the Universe or the Ultimate reality (^Airaya), 
These characteristics occur with some variations in the Bh. P. XIL7.9- 
10 but as iSridhara points out the terms Vjiii and Rakfd stand for Sthdna and 
Pofapa. Vamianucarita is used for Isdnukatha, Samsthd includes Nirodha and Mukti; 
and hetu is substituted for Oti, Apdiraya for Airaya. 
2. Despite the efforts of Bopadeva in f/flrtVi/dmirla (and his able com¬ 
mentator Madhusudana Sarasvati) to show how the contents of Skandha V 
demonstrate the characteristics of Sthdna^ a modern reader wonders how the 


1364 
Ndrada PurSm 
torious nativity of the Maruts. This is the sixth Skandha com¬ 
posed by Vyasa in the course of the section known as Paripo§ana 
(or Protection and welfare of all by the Lord). * 
13. The holy story of Prahlada, the review of the castes 
and stages of life. O dear one, thus the seventh Skandha is men¬ 
tioned in the course of the narration of the desire for action as 
directed by past Karman. (It is technically called Oti). 
14-15a. In the course of the narration of the part known 
as Manvantara comes the narration of the elephant-king, the 
churning of the ocean and the check on the prosperity of Bali. 
The story of the incarnation as Fish. This is the eighth Skandha. 
(It comes under Manvantara). 
15b. The narration of the Solar dynasty as well as the 
review of the lunar race. O highly intelligent one, the ninth 
Skandha is mentioned in the course of the narration of the 
dynasties. 
16-17. The story of the childhood of Krsna and his boy¬ 
hood; his stay in thv, Vraja; his early youth and the stay in 
Mathura; his later youth and stay in Dvaraka and the removal 
of the burden on the Earth. This is the tenth Skandha in the 
course of narrating the characteristic section called Nirodha or 
control. 
18-19a. The dialogue between Narada and Vasudeva, the 
meeting of Yadu with Dattatreya and that of Uddhava with Sri 
Krsna. The mutual fight and the annihilation of the Yadavas. 
This is the eleventh Skandha which is designated as Mukti 
(liberation). 
legends of Friyavrau to Bharata (chs 1 to 13} followed by the mythological 
geography, ancient (mythical) astronomy and description of hells form an 
organic whole to be included under the characteristic Sthitu SathsthSna or 
Vrtti. Such doubts naturally arise when the text of the Bh. P. is stretched on 
the DaJa Lakfopa bed of Procrustes. 
It appears that the NP. accepts the traditional Skandha-yiiio 
distribution of the topics or the ten Puriva takfapas of the Bh. P. as folows : 
^ame of the characteristic topic. No. of Skandha illustrating it. 
1. Sarga HI 
2. Viforga IV 
3« Sariuthdna or Sthitt V 
4. Pofopa VI 


IV.96.19b-24 
1365 
19b-21. The future Kali is prophesied; the liberation of 
Pariksit; the composition of the branches of the Vedas; the per¬ 
formance of penance by Markandeya. The Vibhuti (elegance, 
glory) of Sura (Sun-god) and thereafter, that of the Satt- 
vatas. The narration of the number of verses in the Purana. 
This is the twelfth Skandha which is also called A^raya (sup¬ 
port) , Thus the whole of Srimad Bhagavata has been narrated 
to you, O dear one. 
22. It is the bestower of devotion, worldly pleasures and 
salvation on the narrator, listener, instructor, supporter and 
the person who renders assistance. 
23. The manuscript of this book is to be given with 
pleasure to a Brahmana devotee of the Lord alongwith a replica 
of a lion in gold, on the full-moon day in the month of 
Bhadrapada. 
24. If anyone desires for the devotion of the Lord, (he 
must give it) after duly worshipping him (the Brahmana) with 
clothes, gold etc. 
That person too who reads or who listens to this index, 
attains the excellent benefit of listening to the entire Purana. 
5. 
Oti 
VII 
6. 
Mmvantara 
VIII 
7. 
lidnucarita 
IX 
8. 
Nirodha 
X 
9. 
Mukti 
XI 
10. Airaya 
XII 
This distribution is supported by later eminent writers like Bopadcva in 
Harililamxta\ Sridhara, Vira-raghava, Vijayadhvaja, Vallabha and others. 
As I have presented this traditional scheme and criticised it in details in 
my Introduction to the Bh.P. pp, xxii-xxxiv (AITM series vol. VII), I may 
briefly state that the claim of the Bh. P. as a Mah&pur&ipja with ten characteris¬ 
tics is tolerably justifiable within the limits of the Bh. P. as an epic of growth. 
This traditional presentation of the contents of the Bh. P in the NP. 
shows that the major portion of the BH.P. belongs to the pre-NP. era. 


1366 
Ndrada Purdna 
CHAPTER NINETYSEVEN 
The Ndradiya Purdna : Contents 
^ri Brahma said : 
1. O Brahmana, listen, I shall recount to you the 
Naradiya Purana comprising the twentyfive thousand verses,^ 
based on the story of Brhat Kalpa. 
2-3a. In the first quarter of the earlier (first) division, 
there is a dialogue between Suta and l§aunaka, then there is 
a succinct description of Creation. Many holy religious 
stories connected with Pravitii (activity) have been narrated 
in the first quarter of the first division by Sanaka, the great 
soul. 
3b-4. In the second quarter called ‘Moksa Dharma’, 
there is the review of the means to salvation, the detailed 
narration of the aiicillaries of the Vedas and the birth of Suka. 
All these have been recounted to the noble-souled Narada by 
Sanandana. 
5-7a. In the third quarter, the following have been 
narrated to Narada by sage Sanatkumara ; Pasu’s (individual 
soul’s) liberation from Pasa (bondage of Sarhsara) as explained 
in Maha Tantra; the consecration of th(; Mantras, the initiation, 
ihe uplift of the Mantras, the mode of worship, practical appli¬ 
cation, Kavaca (recitation of mantras as protection or coat of 
1. According to the Vdju, Mt. P., Dh. P. A.P., Br. Vaivarla and the 
statement of the J{P. here, this Purana consists of 25000 versc>. But actually 
the Vchkaicivar Press edition of tJic NPcontains 16550 verses (13H4 in the 
1 part and 5406 in the II Part) PJ. VII 2, p 349 states that it consists of 17549 
verses. According to Hazra, the Mt. P., AP and Sk. P. had a different—an 
earlier—version of the NP before them, as that NP (according to these 
Puriinas) was declared by Narada with reference to Brhat Kalpa which b 
merely mentioned here- In the present NP., Narada is a listener. Hence the 
present NP is different. Moreover, a number of Nibandha^writers quo'le from 
theNP but the quotations arc untraceable in this extant Purana. For example, 
the 47 lines quoted from the NP by Jimutavahana in Kdlavivskaarz not traced 
in this NP. It ap()cars that an earlier edition of the NP was a bigger one when 
the mediaval Dharma-sastra writers used it. 


IV.97.7b-I8 
1367 
mail), the thousand names, the hymns to Ganesa, Surya, Visnu, 
Siva and Sakti in due order. 
7b-9. The following topics have been recounted toNarada 
by Sage Sanatana in the fourth quarter : The characteristics of 
the Purana, the authorities and means of valid knowledge, 
charitable gifts, etc. have been mentioned separately alongwith 
the proper time for the gifts. The holy vows that destroy all 
sins and that have to be observed on the Pratipad (first day) 
and other (subsequent) Tilhis in all the months such as of 
Caitra etc. 
10. Thus the first division is summarised. It is called 
Brhadakhyana. In the second division there is the enquiry about 
the vowed observance of Ekadasi. 
11-18. It is a dialogue between Vasisdia and Mandhata : 
It contains the meritorious story of Rukmahgada, the origin 
and activities of MohinI, llic curse on Mohini by Vasu and 
then the way of extrication therefrom; the holiest story of the 
Gaiiga, the narration of the pilgrimage to Gayfi; the incom- 
parabh' greatness of Kasi; the description of Purusottama, the 
injunctions regarding the pilgrimage to the holy centres along¬ 
with many incidental anecdotes; the greatness of Prayaga; 
thereafter, that of Kuruksetra; the description of Haridvara; the 
narration of Kamoda; the greatness of the holy centre liadarl 
as well as that of Kamiksa; the greatness of Pi'abhasa; then the 
description of Puskara; the story of Gautama afterwards and 
then the hymn called Vedapiida; the greatness of the holy 
centre of Gokarna; the narrative of Laksmnna; the narration 
of the greatness of Setu (the Bridge built by Riima from 
Bharata to Laiik.a) ; the description of the sacred river Narmada; 
the greatness of Avaiili; and that of M.ithura; the greatness of 
Vrnd.ivana; tlie approach of thcPa.su (individual soul) near 
Brahman, the story of Mohini thereafter. These are the 
contents of the Naradiya Purana.^ 
I. Despite the difrcrence noted .above, tlie division of lli<? NP in five 
parts and the contents of each mentioned therein, do tally with the contents 
of the extant Puraiia. 


1368 
Ndrada Purdna 
19-21. The man who hears this with devotion or narrates 
it with great concentration goes to the abode of Brahma; no 
hesitation or doubt need be entertained in this respect. He who 
gives (the manuscript of) this book to an excellent.Brahmana 
on the Isupurna* (on the full moon day of the 5th month viz. 
Sravana) alongwith seven cows, attains salvation. He who 
describes this index of Naradiya Purana or listens to it with 
concentration attains Heaven. 
CHAPTER NINETYEIGHT 
The Mdrkandeya Purdna : Contents 
Sri Brahma said : 
1. O sage, henceforth, I shall narrate the Purana named 
Markandeya.^ It is highly meritorious to those who read and 
listen to it. 
2. All the Dharmas have been reviewed therein with 
reference to the wise birds (in the Vindhya mountains)^. 
Markandeya Purana is said to contain nine thousand verses.® 
•The correct reading should bePurmmd; it will mean “Full-moon 
day of Asvina (Srpteinber-October). 
1. This Purana is available in two cdition.s—B.I. (Bibliotheca Indica 
series) and Vehkatesvar Press. Both the editions, however, differ in the total 
number of chapters (viz. 137 and 134) and number of verses in many chapters. 
This Purana is noted for the Devi Mahdtmya or the famous SaplaSati which, 
though an interpolation, must have taken place long before 1000 A.D., as 
verses from the iS'a/'/afafi arc quoted in the Dadhimati Mata Inscription (in 
former Jodhpur state dated 289 of the Gupta era (608 A.D.) vide Epi. Ind. XI. 
299-303. This Purana is assigned a date between 400-600 A.D. (Kane HD. 
V : 11. 903) 
2. VV 2-3. This refers to the introductory part (chs 1-7) of the Mk. P. 
in which Markandcya directs Jaimini to approach the wise birds in Vindhya 
mountain to get answers for his Mahabharara problems (about the Mahabha- 
rata story such as the reason of Nirguna Vasudeva’s assumption of human 
form, Balarama’s token expiation for a Brahmana-slaughter etc.) I wonder 
why Jaimini, a direct disciple of Vyasa, the author of the Mbh., approached 
Markandcya for problems about the Mbh and not to Vyasa himself. The 
wise birds called Dharmas explain his difficulties. 
3. According to the NP.. Vayu, Malsya, Agni and Bh.P the Markai>deya 
P. consists of 9000 verses but the Vchkatesvar edition gives only 6447 verses 


IV.98.3-11 
1369 
3. At the outset, the question of sage Markan<^eya to 
Jaimini is mentioned. Thereafter, the nativity of birds designated 
Dharma is recounted, 
4. The story of their previous birth; the aberration of 
Divaspati (Lord of Heaven); the pilgrimage of Bala, the 
narrative of the sons of Draupadi. 
5. The holy story of Harilcandra; the battle named 
Adibaka;^ the narrative of the father and son (viz. Mah^ati 
and Suraati), then the story of Dattatreya.^ 
6. Then the story of Haihaya alongwith the great 
narrative, (the story of Kuvalayasva ?) then the story of 
Madalasa is mentioned alongwith the story of Alarka. 
7. The holy glorification of the creation is made in nine 
ways; the end of the period of Kalpa is pointed out, the review 
of the creation of the Yaksas. 
8. The creation by Rudra and others is mentioned; the 
activities in the continents have been mentioned; the stories 
of the Manus, diverse and destructive of sins, have been 
mentioned. 
9. Among those stories, the story of Durga is exceedingly 
meritorious, in the eighth Manvantara. Thereafter, the origin of 
Pranava hailing from the brilliance of the three Vedas. 
10. The narration of the nativity of Martan<^a alongwith 
its greatness; the race of Vaivasvata; then the story of Vatsapri. 
11. Then the holy story of the noble-souled Khanitra is 
mentioned; the story of Aviksit and the glorification of 
(PJ. VIII.2. (349). It is possible that when NP. was finally redacted, the 
stories of Rama, Pururavas, Nahusa, Krsna etc. must have been in the then 
MSS of Mk. P., but they came to be deleted later and the printed editions 
of the Mk.P. do not include them. Hence the deficiency in the number of 
verses. 
1. The combat fought between Adi (an acquaiic bird) and a crane 
into which Vasistha and Visvamitra had been transformed respectively due to 
curses given by them to each other due to the harsh treatment given by 
Vi.svamitra to King Hariscandra. God Brahma intervened and stopped this 
duel. 
2. Gf. Bh. P. 1,3,52 where Dattatreya, the 6th incarnation of Vi?ou 
explained Anvikfiki to Alarka and Prahlada. 


1370 Jidrada Purdna 
“Kimiccha” Vrata^ (the vowed observance called “What do 
you wish ?”) 
12. The story of Narisyanta, then the story of Iksvaku, 
thereafter, the story of Nala, and then the excelleftt story of 
Ramacandra, 
13. The narration of the line of Kusa; the description of 
the lunar race; the holy story of Pururavas and the wonderful 
story of Nahusa. 
14. The holy story of Yayati, the enumeration of the 
scions of the family of Yadu; the story of infant Krsna and 
then the story of his life at Mathura, 
15. The story of his life at Dvaraka, the stories of all 
incarnations. Then the description of the Sahkhya philosophy, 
the glorification of Sattva quality in the world. 
16-18, Then the story of Markandeya; the benefit of 
listening to the Purana, The man who listens to this Purana 
called Markandeya with great devotion and respect, O dear 
one, attains the greatest goal. He who writes a gloss on this, 
attains the region of J5iva; lie wlio writes the whole Purana 
and gives it to an excellent Brahmana on the full moon day in 
the month of Karttika alongwith the replica of an elephant in 
gold, attains the region of Brahma. He who narrates or listens 
to this index (of topics in this Purana) shall attain the benefit 
desired as in the case of the whole Markandeya Purana. 
1. Kimiccha is given in the MkP. 122 8,17,20. Alilhi is asked 
what he wants and it is supplied to him. Aviksit, the son of Karandhama 
carried this i-ra/a of his mother and pjoclaimcd : “O beggars [nrthhmli), I 
have solemnly resolved to give you whatever you wish”. 
kimicchatha daddmyefa kriyam&ne Kimicchike —Mk, P, 122.20 


IV.99.1-3 
1371 
CHAPTER NINETYNINE 
The Agni Purdna ; Contents 
^ri Brahma said : 
1. Henceforth, I shall describe to you the Agni Parana. 
The Fire-god recounted the events of Isana Kalpa^ to Vasistha. 
2. It comprises fifteen thousand*® verses of various 
wonderful stories. It dispels all the sins of men who listen 
to this. 
3. At the outset is the enquiry about the Purana, then 
the story of all incarnations, then the chapter on the Creation 
and then the (mode of) worship of Visnu and other things.® 
1. This Purana is an encyclopaedia of the mediaeval India as stated 
by it : Agneye hi purdne'smin sarvd vidydh pradarSitah 
AP. 383.52 
Although the JsfP is supported by the Mt P. and Sk.P. in connecting the 
events in the AP to Bdna fCalpa, the extant AP does not mention that Kalpa 
or that the incidents therein belong to that Kalpa. This is quite natural, as 
Hazra points out that the genuine. Agneya Purdm was forced to travel to the 
south and came to be known as the Vahni Parana and is awaiting publication. 
Hazra states that it is considerably free from the influence of Tanlrism 
while the extant AP is a spurious Agneya Purdna written under the influence 
of Tantrism in the 9th cent. A.D. He states that the extant A^ni Piirdpa is 
different from the AP which was before the writer of the NP. The Sk. P. 
states that glorification t)f the Agni is the aim of the AP but that is not 
found in the present text of the .\P. Moreover, a number of veiscs said to be 
quotations from the AP in Ballalascna’s Ddnasdgara are not traced in the 
present text of the AP. 
Hence, if is held that the published text of the AP is different from the 
text available to the writer of the NP (vide Hazra : Present Agni Purana” 
—///O.XII 683-691, ‘Oar Heritage' Vol. l.u 209. 45). 
2. The NP. is supported by the Bh. P, and Br. Vaiwirta in claiming 
15000 verses to theAP. The AP also calls itself to be PailcadaSa-sdhasram 
(382.04). The statements that it contains 16000 verses [the Vdyu, Mt.P 
Sk.P)%ho'Wi that those Puranas lefer to a different version The Anandas'rama 
edition has 11,457 verses. But Hazra has .shown that the Anandasrama 
edition is not the original but a late compilation, the original Agneya 
or Vahni Parana is unpublished (Hazra—“Discovery of genuine Agneya 
Putana”, Journal, Oriental Institute Baroda V, pp.411-416. 
3. VV 3-22 give the list of various topics described in the AP. As 
the Vahni Purdfta is not available in print, nothing can be said about the con¬ 
tents of that genuine AP. But a comparison of the topics mentioned in these 


1372 
Ndrada Puribyt 
4. Then the rites of fire worship, thereafter, the 
characteristics of the Mantras and Mudr^ (gestures), etc., the 
injunctions regarding all initiations; the review of the procedure 
of ablutions. 
5. The characteristics of Mandala (mystic diagram) 
etc., then the rite of Marjana (wiping off) with the water from 
Kusa grass; the injunction regarding the wearing of the Pavitra 
(Kusa grass with a loop and a tail worn like a ring), and then 
the instructions regarding the temples. 
6-7. Then the worship of Salagrama etc., the separate 
signs and symbols of the Murtis, the injunctions regarding the 
Ny^a rites, the worship of Vinayaka etc. alongwith their 
Pratistha (installation), thereafter the rules regarding initiation 
of diverse kinds; the installation of all deities and the review of 
the Cosmic egg. 
8. The greatness of the Gaiiga and other holy rivers, the 
description of the continents and the sub-continents, the 
arrangement of the upper and the lower worlds, the review of 
Jyotiscakra (the circle of the luminaries.) 
9. Jyotisa (Astrology and Astronomy) is then described 
and then the scripture “Yuddhajayarnava” (Ocean of the 
conquests in battles), then the six holy rites are narrated and also 
the collections of Mantras and medicinal herbs to be used with 
Mantras. 
10. The rites of worshipping Kubjika (an unmarried girl 
of eight years) etc., then the six types of Nyasa rites, then the 
injunction regarding “kotihoma” (a crore of Homas), the 
review of the Manvantaras, 
11. The pious rites of Brahmacarya (vow of celibacy) 
etc., then the rules regarding the rituals of Sraddha, then Graha- 
yajfia (the sacrifice for the planets) is mentioned, then the 
various holy rites laid down in the Vedas and the Smrtis. 
12. The narration of expiatory rites, the Vratas etc. to 
be performed on the various Tithis, days of the week and the 
constellations. 
verses with those in the extant AP (GM;-edition) shows in majority of the 
topics mentioned in the NP are found in the extant AP, 


IV.99.13-25 
1373 
13. The guidance regarding monthly Vratas, the rules 
regarding the charitable gifts of lamps, the worship of the 
Navavyuhas (the nine manifestations) and the review of 
hells. 
14. The review of Vratas (sacred vowed observances) 
and charitable gifts, the direction regarding Nadi Gakra (circle 
of nerves) and the excellent rules regarding the Sandhya 
prayers. 
15. The stipulation regarding the meaning of the 
Gayatri, then the hymn unto the Lihga, the specification of 
the Mantras for the coronation of kings; the righteous duties 
(and activities) of kings. 
16. Then the chapter on dreams is mentioned, the 
review of omens, etc., the specification regarding Mandala 
(mystic diagram) etc., then the rules regarding ‘Ratna Diksa’ 
17. The guidance in polity mentioned by Rama, then 
the characteristics of Ratnas (jewels), then the science of 
archery is described, then the method of dealing is revealed. 
18. The narrative of the conflict between the Devas and 
the Asuras, the review of Ayurveda (Medical Science), the 
Veterinary science (e. g. the treatment of elephants etc., and 
their pacification). 
19. The treatment of cows, diagnosis and treatment of 
men, etc., then the different kinds of Puj^; different kinds of 
Santis (pacificatory rites); then the science of prosody. 
20. Then literature (literary criticism) and the (lexicon 
of) single-syllabled norms, thereafter, the enumeration of the 
formation of words, then lexicon according to the different 
groups and formations. 
21. The characteristics of dissolutions; the review of the 
iSariraka (limbs of the body in AP. ch. 370), description of 
hells, then the Yoga system of Philosophy. 
22. Thereafter, the knowledge of the Brahman, the 
benefit of listening to the Purana, O Brahmana, this is mentioned 
as the Agni Purana. 
23-25. He who writes this and gives it to a person who 
knows the meanings of the Purana, on the full moon day in the 
month of Margai$ir$a in accordance with the injunctions, 
alongwith a gold lotus and a replica of a cow in gingelly seeds. 


1374 
Mdrada Purina 
is honoured in the heavenly world. This index of topics in the 
Agni Purana narrated to you is the bestower of salvation unto 
the men who read and listen to this. It benefits them both 
here and hereafter. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED 
The Bhavisya Purana : Contents 
Sri Brahma said : 
1. Henceforth, I shall recount to you the Bhavisya 
Parana^ which yields all Siddhis and which bestows the desired 
objects of all the worlds. 
2. In it, I have come up as the primordial maker of all 
the Devas. For the purpose of creation, there was born the 
Svayambhuva (son of the self-born) Manu formerly. 
3. He bowed to me and asked me about Dharma (pious 
and religious duties) that is the means of achieving all objects. 
1. This Bhavisya Purana is not what is mentioned in the Apaslainba 
Dharma (1.6.19.13) not the extant Vehkatesvara Edt. For the NP in the 
following verses (VV 411) mentions that Vyasa divided this Purarja into five 
divisions viz. Brahma, Vaifriava, Saiva, Saura and Praitsarga. But the published 
Bhavisya Purana has only fottr Parvas viz. Brahma, Madhyama, Pratisarga and 
Uttara. NP verse 5 states that the Bhavisya P. described the incidents of the 
Aghora Kalfia which is not mentioned in the Printed Edition. The NP in V 6. 
states that the 1st Parvan (Brahma) is a dialogue between Suta and ^aunaka 
which is not found in the printed edition. Pratisarga Parvan in the printed 
editions is a fabrication as it refers to the stories of Adam and Eve, Kabir, 
Nanak and Caitanya etc. 
Thus the account regarding the extent and contents of the Bhavifya P 
as given in the NP., Mt. P. 53. 30-31, AP. 272. 12 does not tally with the 
printed editions. The number of verses in the Bhavifya Pis 14500 according to 
Mt. P. and Vayu. P. but 14000 according to NP. verse 13 and Agni (272. 
12) but the Printed edition is much longer (25,936 verses). PJ—VII-2, p. 
349. Thus the NP describes a diflerent version of the Bhavifya P. than the 
published one. 


IV. 100.4-14 
1375 
Very much delighted I expounded to him the Dharmasaihhita 
(a compendium on Dharma.) 
4. When the highly intelligent Vyasa classified the 
Puranas, thesage divided that Saihhita(of the Bhavisya Parana) 
into five divisions. 
5. The incidents of Aghora Kalpa are mentioned 
alongwith many wonderful stories. There the first Parvan is 
Brahma where the Upakrama (beginning) is mentioned. 
6. Tn the course of the dialogue between Suta and 
Saunaka* there is the transmission of the enquiry regarding the 
Purana. It is full of the stories of the sun and accompanied by 
all narratives. 
7. The entire form of the scripture is endued with the 
characteristics of creation etc. Thereafter, the characteristics of 
the calligraphy of the writers of books are mentioned. 
8. The characteristic features of all Samskaras (purifi¬ 
catory rites) are mentioned here. Seven rituals regarding the 
Tithis of the lunar fortnight are mentioned. 
9-10. The Kalpas for the remaining Tithis beginning 
with Astami (eighth day) are mentioned in the section called 
Vaisnava Parvan. In the next Parvan called Saiva Parvan 
those who are different in bodies are mentioned. (?) In the 
Saura Parvan the final stories are mentioned. The next Parvan 
is called Pratisarga. It contains different stories alongwith the 
conclusion of the Purana. It is the fifth Parvan. 
11-12. Among these five, in the first Parvan, the glory 
of Brahma is very much greater than that of Visnu 
or Siva in regard to Dharma, Kama (love) and Moksa 
(salvation). Thus the story mentioned in the second, third and 
the fourth section (Varga) called Saura and in the last one 
named Pratisarga has been recounted. 
13. The Parvan alongwith the Bhavisya has been pro¬ 
claimed by the intelligent Vyasa. The Purana consists of 
fourteen thousand verses. 
14. The Bhavisya is that Parvan (Purana) where the 
equality among all the deities is glorified. In the point of view 
•Not found in the published version of this Parana 


1376 Nirada Purdna 
of the comparison of the Gunas, the Sruti says that “Brahman 
is equal.” 
15-16. That a learned person who being free from 
jealousy writes or gets written this Purana and on the full 
moon day of the month called ‘Pausa’ (Decernber-January) 
worships duly both the reader (of this Purana) and the book 
(the manuscript of this Purana) alongwith the replica of a 
cow made of jaggery as well as gold, clothes, garlands and 
ornaments. 
17. Or a person who has subdued his sense-organs, 
observes fasts or takes only one meal per day of sacred Havisya 
food (food worthy of being oblated in sacrificial fire), hears or 
glorifies (recounts) this with concentrated mind becomes 
absolved of terrible sins and attains to the supreme region of 
Brahma. 
18-19. He who reads or listens to this index to Bliavisya 
Fhirana as mentioned here shall attain worldly pleasures and 
liberation. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND ONE 
The Brahma-Vaivarta Purana : Contents 
Sri Brahma said : 
1. O dear child, I shall recount to you the tenth Purana 
named Brahmavaivarta.^ It jxjints out the path of the 
Vedas. 
]. This Purana is BrcJima-Vaivarta as the entire Brahman was mani¬ 
fested by Kr?na ; 
viartam Brahma kdrUnyena Krffuna yatra Saunaka ( 
Brahma-Vaivartakarh tena pravadanti puri-vidah // 
—Brahma-Vaivarta 1.1-10 
It is obviously a Vaifiuwa Purdtta—mainly devoted to the glorification of 
Ridha and as such is very p>opular with Gau^ya Vaifoavas. According to 
Wilson this work docs not deserve to be called a Purtnui (Vifpi^urdpa, Intro. 
LXV—LXVII) 


IV.101.2-10a 
1377 
2. In it the Lord himself assumed the form of Savarna 
and narrated the subject matter of the Purana to Narada,^ the 
divine sage. He menlioned the entire miraculous non-mundane 
subject matter to him. 
3. The essence of virtue (dharma), wealth, love and 
liberation from bondage of sarhsara is the pleasure in and love 
for Hari and Hara. In order to establish their non-difference is 
meant the excellent Brahmavaivarta (transformation of 
Brahman). 
4. The events of Rathantara Kalpa narrated in details 
by me in the Purana of hundred crores of verses were condensed 
and narrated by the knower of the Vedas (i.e. Vyasa). 
5. In the Purana called Brahmavaivarta he condensed it 
into four parts. This Purana is reputed to contain eighteen 
thousand verses.® 
6. It consists of parts (sections) called Brahma, Prakrti, 
Ganesa and Krsna. There the Purana starts with the dialogue 
between Suta and Sages. 
7. The first chapter (prakarana) pertains to the crea¬ 
tion; then there is a great verbal disputation between Narada 
and Vedhas (god Brahma) in which both of them met with a 
great defeat. 
8-lOa. Then the attainment of Siva’s world. The acqui¬ 
sition of perfect knowledge through the realisation of S'va’s 
Atman through Siva’s exposition. Thereafter, O Marici, Narada 
1. Although the NP. states that this Purana is in the form of a dialogue 
between Lord Savarni and Narada, in the printed edition (GM) Sauti and 
^aunaka are the interlocutors in the 1st {^Brahma) Khanda while Narayana 
(and not Savarni) and Narada are the interlocutors in the rest of the 
khapdas. 
2. This statement of NP regarding the extent of the Brahma Vaivarta 
(18000 verses) is supported by the Vdyu, MT, P. AP., BH.P., &nd Brahmet 
Vaivarta itself. 
Afiddaia-sahasram ca Brahma-Vaivartam Ipsitam 
Br. Vai. IV. 131. 16 
But in the Anandasrama cdt. there arc 20,694 verses (PJ VII 2. p. 
349) and GM edt. adds an additional (spurious) khap^o—KdSirahasya. 


1378 
JVdrada Purdna 
goes to the hermitage of Savarni^ which was resorted to by 
Siddhas for the purpose of perfect knowledge. That is an 
exceedingly meritorious hermitage causing wonderment in the 
three worlds. This is well known as Brahma Khand^** It is des¬ 
tructive of sins. 
lOb-11. Then the dialogue between Savarni and Narada 
is recounted. It contains the greatness of Krsna and a number 
of various different anecdotes, the greatness of the Kalas 
(digits) that are parts of Prakrti is described. 
12. The mode of worship in tlie precise manner has been 
described in detail. This is the well known Prakrti Khand^ 
that brings about prosperity. 
13. The word of enquiry about the nativity of Ganesa : 
Parvati’s great and meritorious Vrata (holy vow) ; the birth of 
Vighnesa along with Karttikeya. 
14-15a. The wonderful story of Karttavirya andjarnada- 
gnya (Parasurama). A great dispute arises between Ganesa 
and Jamadagnya (Parasurama). This is the Vighnesa Khanda 
that dispels all obstacles. 
15b-l6. The enquiry regarding the birth of iSrikrsna : 
The narration of his birth in wonderful manner, his departure 
to Gokula (the cowherds’ colony), the miracles of killing 
Pulana, etc.; his sports during infancy and boyhood of 
diverse kinds, are described. 
1 7. The Rasa sport in the autumn alongwith the cowherd- 
esses is mentioned; his secret dalliance with Radha is described 
in detail. 
18. Thereafter, Hari goes to Mathura accompained by 
Akrura. After the killing of Kaihsa and others Krsna is con¬ 
secrated as a twice-born (i.e. investiture with the sacred 
thread.) 
1. The Printed text of Br. Vaivarta Brahma Kha^i^a Ch. 28 docs not 
mention Savarni at all. God Sankara sends Narada to Narayapa in the 
Badarivana and the rest of the Purina is a dialogue between Narada and 
Narayana (and not Savarni though Savarni in the NP. is regarded as iden¬ 
tical with Vi?nu). 
A detailed comparison of the contents of the printed Br. Vaivarta Purdvta 
and those given in the NP shows that the author of the NP had a difierent 
version of this Purapa before him. 


IV.lOl.19—102.2 
1379 
19. The wonderful learning of all lores from Sandipani 
ofKasi, the killing of Yavana, thereafter the departure of 
Hari to Dvaraka. 
20. The killing of Naraka etc, was wonderfully carried 
out by Krsna. O Brahmana, this is the Krsna Khanda that 
cuts at the root of worldly existence of men. 
21. This is read, heard, meditated upon, worshipped 
and saluted. Thus is the Supramundane Brahmavaivarta Purana. 
22. This is narrated at the outset by Vyasa. One who 
reads it and listens to it is liberated from the terrible ocean of 
worldly existence through the acquisition of perfect knowledge 
and the suppression of ignorance. 
23. He who writes this out and makes a gift of it on the 
full moon day in the month of Magha alongwith a cow attains 
Brahmaloka. He is liberated from the bondage of ignorance. 
24. He too, who reads or listens to this index (contents 
of this Purana) attains the desired benefit, thanks to Krsna’s 
grace. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWO 
The Linga Parana : Contents 
God Brahmi said : 
1. O son, listen, I shall recount to you the Purana called 
Lihga.^ It bestows worldly pleasures and salvation on those 
who read and listen to it. 
2. It was while stationed in the huge fiery column that 
Hara narrated (the subject matter in the Purana) named Linga 
to me in order that virtue etc, may be realised. The story refers 
1. The LP is published by the Vehkateivara Press, G.M. Calcutta, 
and MLBD, Delhi. Its translation is published in the AITM, Motilal 
Banarsidass, Delhi. I have used the GM. edition for reference here. 


1380 
Nirada PurSno 
to the incidents of the Agni Kalpa.^ 
3. The same thing was described by the holy Lord Vyasa 
in two parts. The Lihga Purana is mentioned to be miraculous 
with many narratives. 
4. It comprises of eleven thousand verses.® It indicates 
the greatness of Kara. It is greater than all the other Puranas. 
It is the essence of the three worlds. 
5. There is the enquiry at the start of the Purana. The 
former creation is succinctly described. Then the Yoga system 
is narrated; thereafter, the Kalpa is recounted. 
6. The origin of the Lihga; then Amba is glorified; then 
the holy dialogue between Sanatkiimara and Silada’s son i.e. 
Nandin. 
7. Thereafter, the story of Dadhica, the review of the 
Yugadharma (virtue peculiar to the different Yugas), then the 
narrative of the Bhuvana Kosa (The globe of the world), then 
the Solar and the Lunar races are described. 
8. Then the creation is described in detail; then the 
story of the Tripuras; the installation of the Lihga and then the 
liberation of the Pasu (individual soul) from Pasa (bondage i.e. 
from sarhsara) 
9. The holy rites of Siva, the survey of good conduct 
Expiatory rites; Aristas (evil portents, harassments etc.); then 
the description of Kasi and Sri Saila. 
10. The narration of Andhaka; then the story of Varaha 
(The Divine Boar), the story of Nrsiihha and then the slaying 
of Jalandhara. 
1. The NP states that the Linga Purd^a {LP) refers to incidents in the- 
Agnt Kalpa, but LP 12.1 states that it describes the incidents in the Ilana- 
Kalpa, 
Udna-Kalpa-vfttintam adhikrtya mahatmandj 
Brahma^ kalpitam purvam Purdpam Laingam uttamamjl 
It means that the NP used a different and older version of the LP than 
the extant published editions. 
2. This statement of the NP regarding the extent of the LP (viz. 
11,000 verses) has been endorsed by the Vdyu, Mt.P., Bh.P., A.P. etc. The LP 
also states that it consists of 11000 verses ; 
Asyaikddaia-sdhasram granthamdnam iha dvijdkl 
But actually the Vchkata Edt. of the LP contains 9185 verses (PJ VII— 
2. p. 349) 


IV.102.11-20a 
1381 
11. The thousand epithets of Siva, the destruction of 
Daksa’s sacrifice. Kama is burnt down, then the story of the 
marriage of Girija. 
12. Then the story of Vinayaka, that of the kings and 
that of Siva; then the story of Upamanyu. This is the summary 
of the first section.^ 
13. The narration of the greatness of Visnu, then the 
story of Ambarisa, O sage, again there is the dialogue between 
Sanatkumara and Nandisa. 
14. The greatness of Siva, the mode of ablution and sacri¬ 
ficial system (yaga) etc, the injunction regarding the worship of 
the sun-god. Then the worship of Siva that confers liberation 
from sarhsara. 
15. Many types of charitable gifts are mentioned; then the 
chapter onSraddha, the Pratistha Tantra (the ritualistic text of 
installation), then the glorification of Aghora, 
16. The great Vidya of Vajresvari, then the glory of 
Gayatrl, the greatness of Tryambaka, (the three-eyed Lord) as 
well as that of listening to the Purana. 
17. Thus the latter half of the Liiiga Purana as compos¬ 
ed by Vyasa has been recounted by me and the greatness of 
Rudra is indicated.^ 
18-19a. This Puraua must be written and gifted to a 
Brahmana with devotion on the full moonday in the month of 
Phalguna alongwith gingelly seeds and a cow. He who does 
so, attains Sayujya with Siva. He does not have to suffer from 
old age or death. 
19b-20a. The man who reads or listens to the Linga 
Purana that dispels sins, enjoys pleasures in this world and 
at the end attains to Siva’s city. 
1. Tliough the NP refers to a few topics in the Purva Bhdga, most of 
them are found in the extant editions. 
2. A comparison of topics given in the NP and those found in the 
printed (GM) edition shovs^ that the published LP has many topics common 
with the LP that was before the author of the NP. 


1382 
Ndrada Purdna 
20b-21. The man who reads the index and the man who 
listens to this —both of them are the devotees of Siva. They 
enjoy both the worlds through the Grace of the Lord of Girija. 
There is no doubt about this. 
CHAPTER OP«: HUNDRED AND THREE 
The Vdrdha Purdna ; Contents 
God Brahma said : 
1. O dear one, listen. I shall recount theVaraha Purana^. 
It is comprised of two parts and it continuously indicates the 
greatness of Visnu. 
2-3. The context of the Manasa Kalpa composed by me 
before, or description of the acts I did in the Manava Kalpa 
before was compiled by Vyasa, the most excellent one among 
scholars in this Purana that comprises twenty-four thousand 
verses. Vyasa is the incarnation of Visnu himself on the earth. 
There at the outset is the auspicious dialogue between the 
Earth and Varaha. (Divine Boar-Visnu). 
1. The Purana is extant in two recensions—The Northern and the 
Southern. The Northern recension published in the B I. (Bibliotheca Indica) 
series contains 217 chapters and 9654 verses (with some chapters c.g. 81-83 
in prose) and jVbt 24,000 verses as stated in the NP below (verse 2) and 
endorsed by the Vayu, MT. P., Bh. P. and while the Agni P (272. 16) credits 
it with 14000 verses. Though the NP states that the Vdrdha P. has two parts, 
the published edition has one part only, though there arc indications in ch. 
217 that there must have been a second part as well. 
This Purana is supposed to have been narrated by Vi?nu-Var.iha to the 
earth-goddess. Kane observes that it is remarkable that Vyasa does not 
appear in this Purana though Suta figures at the beginning of several chapters 
(HD V.ii, p. 904). 
It is obvious that the author of the NPhad a different and bigger version 
of the Vdrdha Purdna before him. 


IV.103.4-17 
1383 
4. In the course of the incidents of the Cinrlier period, 
there is the story of Rambha and then that of Durjaya, there¬ 
after ^raddha Kalpa (the rituals of theSraddha) is described. 
5. The narration of the great penance (Mahatapas)-then 
the origin of Gauri, Vinayaka, the Nagas, the commander-in- 
chicf (i.e. Karttikeya) and Aditya (the sun). 
6. Then there is the narrative of the Ganas of the .god¬ 
dess, of Kubera and that of Vi sa; then the narrative of Satya- 
tapasa alongwith the narration of vratas. 
7. Thereafter, Agastyagita and Rudragita are narrated; 
then the glory of the destruction of demon Mahisa (Buffalo) 
brought about by the three Saktis. 
8. Then is the chapter on Parvaiis (religious festivals), 
the incidental narrative ofl^veta and the charitable gif*^ of cows. 
All these incidents had already been pointed out by me in the 
section on Bhagavad Dharma (virtuous pathway to the 
Lord). 
9-12. Thereafter, the narration ofVratas andTirtlias, the 
expiatory bodily rites for thirtytwo offences. The greatness of 
holy centres is mentioned separately and particularly of 
Mathura, thereafter, the rules of procedure regarding Sraddha 
etc., the description of the world of Yama, in the context of the 
son of the sage, the ultimate result of Karmans and the review 
of Visnu's Vratas, the greatness of Gokarna that is destructive 
of sins, is mentioned. Thus the early part (i.e. the first part) of 
the Pnrana is reviewed. 
13-14. In the latter part, in the course of the dialogue 
between Pulastya and the king of Kurus, the greatness of all the 
holy centres is mentioned in detail, severally. 
All the virtues too have been mentioned. The holy Parvan 
pertaining to Puskara is mentioned. Thus the Varaha Purana, 
that is destructive of sins is recounted to you. 
15-17. This increases devotion to the Lord, of those 
who read and listen to this. He who writes out this Purama 
an 1 gives it to a Brahmana with devotion, along with a gold 
replica of Garucia and gingelly seeds and a cow, on the full 
moon day in the month of Caitra, attains tlie abode of Visnu. 


1384 
Ndrada Purdno 
He is paid obeisance by the groups of Devas and sages. He 
who reads or listens to this index obtains devotion to Visnu that 
is the cause of dissolution of worldly existence. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FOUR 
The Skanda Purdna : Contents 
God Brahma said : 
1. O dear one,'listen. I shall recount Skanda Purana^ 
wherein Lord Mahadeva is present in every word. 
2. In the Purana of a hundred crores of verses, I had 
described the story of Siva. In a hundred thousand verses, the 
essence of those topics has been described by Vyasa. 
1. The NP stales (vci't; 3) that the Sk. P {Skanda Purdna) consists of 
81,000 veises—a view sliaicO J)y tlic Sk.P. itself and by Alt. P. (53-41-42) Br. 
Vaiiarta and Devi Bhdgavata. The Vayu and the fiA. credit it with 81,000 
verses while JP (272. 17) and Skanda (cls< \vhere) state that the Sk. P. has 
84,000 verses. 
CaUirasUt—Sdhasram Skandam Skanderilam niahatU 
But the VChkatesvar edt. contains 04,343 vciscs (PJ VTI 2.349). 
According to the NP. the Sk. P. is divided in the following Khandas—Atdhei- 
vara, Vaifnava, Brahma, hair, Avanti, Ndgara and Prabhdsa. One more Khanda—^The 
Sahyadri—is separately published. But in the Stiia Samhitd the Skanda consists 
of 6 Satnhitds, Hfty Khavdas and a hundred thousand verses. The names of 
Samkitds being Sanatkumdra, Suta, Sdnkari, Vaioiavi, Brdhmi and Saura. 
The published editions—Venkatesvar, Bangavasi, Naval Kishur Press 
(Lucknow) and Gurumandal are not unanimous in contents. Thus in part I 
of Avantikhan^a 04 chapters of the glory of 84 Lingas {CaturaSili linga 
mdhdtmya) are not included in the Lucknow edition, while in the II Part of 
the Avantikhan<;ia, the Lucknow edition gives 110 different chapters. In other 
words, the Lucknow and Bombay editions differ considerably in the Avanti 
Khapda. The GM includes the spurious Satya-ndrdyaifa Mdhdtmya in the 
Read khanda (pp. 1122-2235)—and that too of 4 chapters while usually we 
find 5 chapters of the same. 


IV.104.3-7 
1385 
3. He has named it Skanda. There arc seven khandas 
(parts) in it. It cbmprises eighty one thousand verses. It is 
destructive of all sins. 
4. He who listens to this or reads this becomes Siva 
himself. Therein all the rites and rituals regarding Mahesvara 
have been revealed by Sanmukha (Skanda). 
5-6. These incidents which bring about all Siddhis had 
happened in the Tatpurusa Kalpa. The Mahesvara Khanka-, 
the first Skandha of this (Purana) destroys all sins. It consists of 
a little less than twelve thousand verses. It is highly merito- 
tious and contains big stories. It contains hundreds of good 
stories. It indicates the greatness of Skanda. 
7. The following are the topics dealt with^ in the context 
of the greatness of Kcdara, the Purana has its starting point; 
thereafter the story of Daksa’s Yajna and then the benefit of 
worshipping l^iva Lihga. 
Although the V'chkatesvara Edt. contains more than 12,000 verses more 
than the extent recorded in the NP and other Puranas, the Vehkatesvare 
edition does not include the Mathura and Mdgha Alahdlmyas in the Vaisnavas 
khanda, though the NP mentions them as a part of that khc^ida. Needless 
to say that the author of the NP had a different edition than those before 
tiie modern editors of (he Bombay, Lucknow and Calcutta editions. 
As the SK. P. is a stupendously voluminous Puratia a detailed analysis 
of all its contents is not possible here for want of space. 
1. VV 7-19 mention Uio main topics in the Mahesvara khanda. In 
the GM editions it covers the following subparts, the total no. of pages of 
this khanda being 799. 
Sub part. 
I 
No. of chs. 
35 
pages. 
1—254 
II Kauniaiika 
66 
255—683 
Khanda 
III Arupdcala—Mahdtmya—Purvdrdha 
13 
684—742 
IV —do— 
(Uttarardha) 24 
743—799 
Out of tlie vastness of this volume, the NP. merely mentions the topics 
contained in the following chapters. 
Section Chapters 
I 1-7, 9-13, 27-?I, 34 
II 3, 7, 8, 9,15, 16-33, 37,38, 39, 40, 53, 66. 
III 10-11. 


1386 
Narada Purdna 
8. The narration of churning the ocean, then the 
story of Indra, the ruler of the Devas; the narrative of Parvati 
and her subsequent marriage. 
9. The birth of Kum.ira (Skanda) is narrated there¬ 
after, then the battle wilh Taraka, then the narration of 
Pasupati, alongwith that of Canda. 
10. The narration of being engaged in the game of dice» 
the meeting with Narada. Then in the context of the great¬ 
ness of Kumara, tlie story of five 7’Irthas (holy centres). 
11. The anecdote of king Dharmavarman; the enu¬ 
meration of rivers and oceans; thereafter, the story of Indra- 
dyumna alongwith the story of Nadi-jaiigha. 
12. The appearance of the Earth, the story ofDamanaka, 
the contact between the Earth and the ocean, then the story of 
Lord Kumara. 
13. Then the fight with Taraka alongwith various anec¬ 
dotes, the killing of Taraka, the installation of five Lifigas. 
14. The holy narration of the continents, the orderly 
arrangement of the upper worlds, the situation and magnitude 
of the Cosmic Egg, the story of Varkaresa. 
15. The origin of Mahakala and his extremely miraculous 
story, the greatness of Vasudeva, thereafter the Koti Tirtha. 
16. The narration of different holy centres, Gupta 
Ksetra (near the confluence of the Mahi with the sea) the holy 
story of the Pand'tvas and the achievement of great Vidya. 
17. The wonderful conclusion of pilgrimage to holy 
centres by Kumara; the greatness of Arunacala, the conversa¬ 
tion between Sanaka and Brahma. 
18. The description of Gauri’s penance, the review of 
different holy centres, the narrative of demon Mahisa and his 
wonderful death. 
Actually we find that the NP touches a fringe of this part of the SkP 
and a great number of topics are not even mentioned. 
The same is the case with other Khapdas. One wonders whether a 
shorter version of the Sk. P. was used by the NP or a casual mention of a 
few chapters was looked upon as a table of contents in those days. Many of 
the topics not mentioned by the NP are found in other Parapas also and 
as such one should think thrice before branding them spurious. 


IV. 104.19-26 
1387 
19. The permanent residence of Siva in Dronacala has 
ever been glorified. Thus the part of Maheivara Khanda has 
been recounted. 
20. The second part is called the Vaisnava Khanda. 
Listen to the stories contained in it. At the outset, the narrative 
of the Earth and Varaha. 
21. The greatness of the mountain Venkata, destructive of 
sins is mentioned therein; the holy story of Kamala, the resi¬ 
dence of Srinivasa therein, 
22. The story of Kulala (potter), the story of Suvarna- 
mukhari,^ the wonderful tale of Bharadvaja alongwith different 
narratives. 
23. The dialogue between Mataiiga and Anjana that is 
destructive of sins, the greatness of Purusottama^ (Jagannatha) 
in Orissa thereafter. 
24. The story of Markendeya, the tale of king Ambarisa 
and the auspicious stories of Indradyumna and Vidyapati. 
25. O Brahmana, thereafter, there are the stories of 
Jaimini, Narada and Nilakantha, then the description of 
Narasirhha. 
26. The story of horse-sacrifice of the king and his 
attainment of Brahmaloka, the procedure regarding the Ratha 
Yatra (chariot procession), the rules regarding the abode of 
birth. 
♦The NP. refers to the following chapters from Sk. P. II in 9 1-11 
chs ; 3-8; 9-15, 16-32, 33, 36-40, 53, 66 (from the CxM edition) 
The GM text of the Sk. P, devotes the whole of III—Uttarardha to 
Arunacala. 
1. VV 22-23 refer to incidents in the Vetikafacala Mahatmya (sub-part 
I of this Khanda). The story of Suvarna Mukhari covers chs. 29-35 and the 
dialogue between Matahga and Afljana, chs. 39-40. Out of the 40 chapters 
of this Mahdtmya, only the above topics are mentioned. 
2. Ptmifoltama Kfetra is Jagannatha. Turi in Orissa though originally a 
Buddhist shrine but before the time of the NP. it was completely Brahmanised. 
This Kfetra-M&hitmya consists of 60 chapters which are briefly mentioned 
here in VV 24-28. Of special interest arc Ratha-YatrA (the procession of 
Jagannatha in a chariot) chs 33, 44. The Sayana-Utsava chs 43-44. NP men¬ 
tions a few more stories e. g. that of Indradyumna and Vidyapati, Gundiva 
and Vratas like Akdmika PujA. 


1388 
Ndrada Purdna 
27. The anecdote of Daksinamurti, the tale of Gunc^iva, 
the arrangement for the maintenance of the chariot, the glorifi¬ 
cation of the Sayana-Utsava (the festival of Deity’s going 
to sleep). 
28. The story of Sveta is mentioned here; then the review 
ofPrthutsava (the great Festival), the Dolotsava (Festival of the 
Swing) of the lord and the observance called annual Vrata, the 
Akamika Puja (worship without entertaining any desire in 
return) of Visnu. Different kinds of Yoga and means thereto 
according to the teaching of Uddalaka. 
29. The ten incarnations are enumerated; the rite of 
ablution etc. is glorified; then the greatness ofBadarika' that is 
destructive of sins. 
30-32. The greamess of Agni and other holy centres situ¬ 
ated in the rock of Vainateya; the cause for the residence of the 
Lord; the holy centre named Paficadhara, the situation of 
Meru. In the context of Karttika, the glory of Madalasa. 
33. The narrative of Dhumrake^a, the daily rites and 
duties in the month of Karttika,^ the description of “Panca- 
Bhisma” Vrata that bestows worldly pleasures and salvation. 
34. Then in the context of the greatness of Marga- 
sirsa,® the rules of procedure regarding the bath, the 
glorification of Pundra (the mark on the forehead) etc., the 
meritorious nature of wearing garlands, etc. 
1. VV 29-32 adequately deal with the III section called Badarikdirama 
Mdhdtmya as most of the topics like holy centres of the rocks of Vainateya 
(ch. 4) Kapalamocana, Paficadhara (ch. 7)and Merii-Sariisthapana (ch. 8) 
are mentioned herein. 
2. VV 32-33 deal with the topics in the “glory of the month of 
Karttika” {K^rttika-mdsa-mdkdtmj/a). In the original Sk. P., this section con¬ 
tains 36 chapters. Out of them chapters connected with the glory of 
religious rites in thb month and the Bhiftna paheaka vrata (ch. 32) are men¬ 
tioned and the story of Jalandhara ignored unless we identify “Dhumrake^” 
(mentioned in the NP) with Jalandhara. 
3. VV 34-38 deal with the section MdrgaSirfa Mdhdtmya which consists 
of 17 chapters in the original. It contains the various rites regarding bath 
(ch. 1), the Punc^ra mark on the forehead (ch. 2), the details of worship 
(chs. 5, 7, 8, 9). The importance of Ekadasi and rules of observing that 
fast (chs. 11-13, 15 & 16) and the glory of Mathura (ch. 17). 


IV. 104.35-42 
1389 
35. The merit in the ablution with Paficamrta, the bene¬ 
fit originating from ringing the bell etc.; the benefit of wor¬ 
shipping with different kinds of flowers, the benefit accruing 
from the Tulasi leaves. 
36. The greatness of Naivedya (food offering) to 
God, the glorification of Harivasara (Hari’s day i.e. Ekadasi) 
The Akhan<^aikadasi (the unbroken Ekadaii) as well as the 
merit of keeping awake during Ekadasi. 
37. The rules regarding the festival thereof, the narrative 
of illustrious names of God, recounting of the merit of meditation, 
the greatness of Mathura, etc. 
38. Thereafter, the greatness of the holy centre Mathura 
is separately mentioned, then the greatness of twelve forests is 
mentioned. 
39. In this context, the greatness of Srimad Bhagavata^ 
is mentioned in the course of dialogue between Vajra and 
l§andilya, the inner sp)orts are revealed. 
40. Then the greatness of the months ofMagha^is review¬ 
ed in ten chapters in regard to bath, charitable gifts and Japas 
alongwith suitable anecdotes connected therewith. 
41. Then in the context of the greatness of the devotees 
of Visnu the benefit of Sayyadana (charitable gift of beds) 
is mentioned; the rules regarding the gift of water are mentioned; 
then the story of Kama. 
42. The story of Srutadeva, the wonderful anecdote of 
the Vyadha (hunter), the special glorification of Ak§aya 
Trtiya* (the everlasting Trtiya i.e. the third day of the bright 
half of Vai^akha) 
1. That the SkP has a Bh&gavata Mih&tmya is less known as generally 
the Bhdgavata Mdhdtmya in the Padma P. is printed at the beginning of differ* 
ent editions of the Bh. P. 
2. The GM edition of the Sk. P. does not give Mdgha MShdtn^a but 
gives Vaiidkha Mihitmya instead. The Mdgha Mdhdtmya mentioned in the NP 
consisted of 10 chapters. 
3. The Sk. P. gives a section of 25 chapters for Vaiidkha Mdta 
Mdhdtmya. But the NP mentions only one topic viz. the glorification of 
Akfcya txtiyd (ch. 23 in the original Sk. P.) and ignores all other chapters. 


1390 
Nirada Pur&na 
43. In the context of the greatness of Ayodhya^ the two 
holy Tlrthas viz. Cakratirtha and Brahmatirtha are mentioned. 
These two bring about the liberation from the sin of drinking 
spirituous liquor; the heavenly door with a thousand ^pports. 
44. The description of Candrahari and Dharmahari, the 
anecdote of Svarnavrsti (shower of gold); the confluence of 
Tiloda and Sarayu. 
45. The holy pool of Sita, the lineage of Guptahari, the 
confluence of Sarayu and Gharghara; the holy centres of 
Gk>pratara, Dugdhoda and the set of five (Tirthas) beginning 
with Gurukunda. 
46. Thereafter, the description of thirteen Tirthas such 
as Soma, Arka etc., the greatness of Gaya-kupa (the well of 
Gaya) that causes all sins to recede. 
47. Thereafter, the holy spots beginning with the hermi- 
age of Mandavya, that of Ajita etc., and Manasa etc. are 
mentioned. 
48. Thus the second Khanda called Vaisnava is explained. 
Hereafter, O Marici, listen to the Brahmakhanda that bestows 
merit. 
(The summary of Brahma Khanda) 
49. In the context of the greatness of Setu (Bridge built 
by Rama over the sea), the benefit resulting from bath and 
mere sight; the penance of Galava, the story of Raksasas. 
50. The greatness of Cakratirtha etc, the greatness of 
Vetalatirtha which is in Devipattana^ (city of the Goddess), the 
1. VV 43-46 mention topics desenbed in the Ayodhyd Mdhdtmya, 
a section of 10 chapters in the Vaisnava Khanda of the Sk. P. But one 
wonders why the whole section called ^rf Vdsudeva Mdhdtmya in this Khatt^^ 
of Sk. P. is completely ignored in the NP. 
The first two khapdas viz. Mahejvara and Vaifpava are compared in 
detail with the topics mentioned in the NP. The omissions of topics in the 
NP shows that the author of the NP had a different and a shorter edition of 
the Sk. P. when he enumerated the contents of the Sk. P. As sufficient 
«vidence for this finding is presented above, the comparison with other 
khandas of the Sk. P. is not given here. 
2. This is at a distance of 12 miles from R&mnad (Ramnath Pur). 
It is also called Devipura (Sk. P. Ill 1. 7. 57. 63) and also Devipuri (ibid 
'60). Here Durga killed the demon Mahi^^surau 


iV.104.51-61 
1391 
glorification of the holy place called Papana^a (the destruction 
of sins). 
51. The greatness of Maiigala etc., the description of 
Brahmakunda etc, the greatness of Hanumatkunda, the benefit 
resulting from Agastyatirtha. 
52. The narrative of Ramatirtha etc, the review of 
Laksmitirtha, the greatness of ^ankha and other Tirthas. So 
also the benefit accruing from Sadhyamrta etc. 
53-54. The greatness of Dhanuskoti etc. and that of Ksira- 
Kunda etc., the greatness of Gayatri and o'.her Tirthas is 
described here; the greatness of Ramanatha; the instruction in 
the perfect knowledge of Reality, the recounting of rules 
regarding the pilgrimage to Setu which yields salvation to 
men. 
55. Thereafter, the greatness of Dharmaranya^ (forest of 
Dharma) is mentioned. It was here that Lord Sthanu instructed 
Skanda in Tattva (Philosophic principles). 
56. The origin of Dharmaranya; the glorification of its 
merit, the narration of Karmasiddhi (achievements of the fruit 
of actions, the review of the family-lines of the sages. 
57. The greatness of main Apsarastirthas (Holy centres 
of the divine damsels) is mentioned; the review of the 
principles of Dharma (duties) of the castes and stages of life. 
58-59. The division of heavenly spots, the auspicious 
story of Bakularka, the goddesses Ghatrananda, Santa, Srimata, 
Matangini and Punyadaare stationed herein, the greatness of 
Indresvara etc., the review of Dvaraka etc. 
60. The narrative of the demon Lohasura, the review of 
Gangakupa, the story of Sri Rama, the description of Satya 
Mandira. 
61. The narrative of the repair to the ruins; the accep¬ 
tance of seats, the mentioning of different castes, the 
review of the holy rites in accordance with the Smrtis. 
I. De. gives four locations of Dharmarai;iya but none of them is in 
the South. It may appear to be a mythological forest near Rameivara but 
the association of Brilhma^ of 24 gotras with it (Sk. P. HI ii. 9-27) shows 
the need of its correct location. 


1392 
Nirada Pur dm 
62. Then the holy rites prescribed for Vaisnavas are 
mentioned through different narratives, thereafter, the exposition 
of holy rites, observances etc., in regard to the holy 
Caturmasya (the four months of the rainy season when special 
Vratas are observed). 
63. The eulogy of charitable gifts, thereafter the greatness 
of Vratas, the narration of loop-holes (causes of failures) 
in penance and worship. 
64. The narration of making amends for them (loop¬ 
holes); the review of Salagrama; the means for the destruction 
of Bharaka, the glory of the worship of trees. 
65. The cause of Visnu in regard to the state of being a 
tree, then Parvatl’s subsequent penance, the Tandava dance of 
Kara, the review of the name Rama. 
66. The fall of the Lihga of Kara, the story of Baijavana, 
the story of the nativity of Parvati, the wonderful killing of 
Tar aka. 
67. The narration of prosperity through the Pranava, 
the activities of Taraka, the conclusion of Daksa’s Yajfta, the 
mantra of Twelve syllables (viz. oiii namo bhagavate Vasu- 
devaya) which is its embellishment. 
68. The narration of the path of knowledge and the 
greatness of twelve-syllabled Mantra. The merit of Sravana 
(the means of hearing), etc. that causes happiness to men. 
69. Then in the latter half of the Brahmakhangla the 
wonderful greatness of Siva is narrated, then the greatness of the 
five-syllabled Mantra : Namah Sivaya and that of Gokarna. 
70. The greatness of Sivaratri, the glorification of 
Pradosa Vrata,^ the Vrata on Mondays, the anecdote of 
Simantinl. 
1. This Vrata is to be commenced on an auspicious day in the bright 
half of Caitra or Marganr^a. Its details are given in ch. 18 of OxcBrah- 
mottara Khaijtda of the Sk. P., Kane in HO V. I. 277 gives 6 varieties of this 
Vrata. 


IV. 104.71-82 
1393 
71. The narration of the origin of Bhadrayu, the review 
of good conduct, the guidance of l^ivavarman (?) and the 
description of Bhadrayu’s marriage. 
72. The greatness of Bhadrayu, the glorification of the 
greatness of Bhasma (Sacred ashes), the story of Sahara 
(Hunter), the Vratacalled Uma-Mahe^vara. 
73. The greatness of the Rudraksa bead, the merit of the 
‘Rudnldhyaya’ Mantra, the merit of Sravana (hearing), etc. 
Thus the Brahmakhan^a has been recounted. 
74. Henceforth, the fourth part, the excellent Kasi 
Khanda' (is summarised). The dialogue between Vindhya and 
Naradais described. 
75. The greatness of Satyaloka, the arrival of the Devas 
in the residence of Agastya, the story of a chaste lady, the prais¬ 
ing of the pilgrimage to holy centres. 
76. Then the narration of the seven cities, the review of 
Samyarnini, the attainment of the worlds of Budha (Mercury), 
Indra and Agni by Sivasarman. 
77. The origin of fire, the origin of Varuna from fire (?) 
the origin of the two cities Gandhavati and Alaka and the 
nativity of Hvarl. 
78. The description of these worlds, viz., the moon, the 
sun, the mercury, the Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, my world, Visnu’s 
world of Dhruva’s world (?) and the Tapoloka. 
79. The meritorious story of the world of Dhruva, the 
survey of Satyaloka, the conversation between Skanda and 
Agastya, the origpn of Manikarni. 
80. The prowess of the Gahga, the thousand names of 
the Gahga, the praise of Varanasi, the appearance of Bhairava. 
81. Thereafter, the origin of Dandapani and JhanavapI 
(the well of Knowledge), then the narration of Kalavati and 
the exposition of good conduct. 
82. The narration of a celibate, then the characteristics 
of women, the stipulation of what should be done and what 
should not be done, the description of Avimukteia. 
1. W 74-91 •utnnuu'iae the main topics in the fourth called 
Kdii khantda. It coven the main topics found in the ouant KsHkhapda. 


1394 
Nirada Purd^ 
83. The duties of householders and the Yogins, then the 
knowledge of Kala (Time), the holy story of Divod^a, the 
description of KaiSika. 
84. The appearance on the Earth of Maya Ganapati, 
the Universe due to Visnu’s Maya, then the liberation of 
Divodasa. 
85. Then the origin of Paftcanada and that of Bindu 
Madhava; then the enumeration of holy centres belonging to 
Visnu, the arrival at KasI of the trident-bearing Lord. 
86. The dialogue between Jaigisavya and Mahe^a, the 
name Jyesthesa of Mahesa, the enumeration of holy temples, 
the origin of Kandukesa and Vyaghre^vara. 
87. The origin of Sailes'a and Ratnesvara as well as that 
of Krttivasas; the abode of the deities; Durga’s exploit over the 
Asuras. 
88. Dur^a’s victory, the description of Oihkaresa, then 
the greatness of Oihkara, the origin of the three-eyed Lord 
Siva. 
89. The narration of Kedara, the story of Dharmesa 
bom of Visnu’s arms (?), the narrative of \^resvara, the glori¬ 
fication of the greatness of Ganga. 
90. The greatness of Vi^vakarrne^a, the origin of Daksa’s 
Yajfta as well as that of Satisa, Amrtesa and others, the benumb¬ 
ing of the arms of Para^ara. 
91. The group of holy centres and shrines, the dialogue 
in the Mukti-Man<;lapa (The pandal of salvation) the prosperity 
of Vi^ve^a and then the circumambulatory pilgrimage. 
(Thus the fourth part is summarised) 
92. Hereafter, listen to the description of the fifth part 
called Avanti Khant^a.^ The narration of the forest Mahakala 
Vana; then the chopping off of the head of Brahma. 
1. W 92-141. mention the important topics in the fifth khan^a—the 
Avanti khajtda. One fails to understand why so much importance has been 
attached to this khoftda in the NP as it devotes 49 verses to this kha^^ as 
compared with the meagre 17 verses io K&ii Khapda which is now so popular. 
It may be further added that the geographical location of each 
Tfrtha mentioned here is expected in the annotations of the Skanda Purdm 
proper (translation or original text) and is thus beyond the scope of 
Tfdrada 


IV.104.93-105 
1395 
93. TKe rules regarding expiatory rites.; the origin of 
Agni; the arrival ^bf the Devas, the initiation of the Dev^; Siva's 
hymn that is destructive of different kinds of sins. 
94. The narration of Kapalamocana, the situation of 
the forest Mahakalavana, the holy centre of the Lord 
Kanakhala that is destructive of all sins. 
95. The pool called after the Apsaras (celestial damsels) 
and the lake of Rudra that is meritorious, the holy centres of 
the Lord of Ku^ava, Vidyadhara, and Markatelvara. 
96. The holy waters of Svargadvaracatussindhu (the 
four rivers that constitute the doorways to heaven). Sank* 
aravapika (The tank of Sankara), Sahkararka, Gandhavati 
Tirtha, that is destructive of sins. 
97. DasaiSvamedhika and Anam^ Tirtha that bestow all 
Siddhis, the procession of Pisacaka, etc, Hanumadisvara, Kava- 
cesvara. 
98. The procession of or pilgrimage to MahakaleSa, 
the holy centre of Valmikesvara, the circumabulations of Kuias- 
thali in the fifth Tirtha called Sukra (?). 
99. The centres of Akrura, Ekapada and Candrarkavai- 
bhava; the holy shrine called Karabhesa and those of Laku^e^ 
and others. 
100-101. Markandc^a, Yajfia-vapi-somesa, Narakantaka, 
Kedareivara, Rameia, Saubhagye^a, Nar^kara shrines. Then 
Ke^avarka, Saktibheda, Svarnasara, and other shrines, the 
holy spots of Oihkaresa etc, the glorification of Andhaka^ruti. 
102. The number of Lingas in the Kalaranya, the shrine 
named Svarga^rnga (gold horn), the names of Kusasthall, 
Avanti and Ujjayinl. 
103. The shrines named Padmavatl, Kumudvatl, axid 
Amaravati the names of Vi^ala, and Pratikalpa and 
Amaravatl, the subduing of fever. 
104. The benefit of the names of !§iva etc., the eulogy of 
Siva sung by the Nagas (Serpents), the narrative of killing 
Hirany&k^a, the holy centre of Sundarakunda. 
105. The holy centres of Vindhyavasin (residing in 
Vindhya) called Nilagahgapufkara, the holy centre destructive 
of sins, called Puru^ttama. 


1396 
Nirada VurlHia 
106. TheGomati river, the holy pool of V&mana, the 
thousand names of Vi?nu, the lake of Vire^vara, the shrine of 
Kalabhairava. 
107. The greatness of Nagapaftcaml, the Jayantika 
(birth anniversary) of Nrsimha, the procession of Kutumbe^vara, 
the glorification of divine Sadhakas. 
108. The holy shrine called Karkaraja, the bearing of 
Vighnesa and other Devas, the review of many holy centres in 
the Rudrakunda (the holy pit of Rudra) and others. 
109. The holy pilgrimage of the eight holy centres, the 
greatness of Rcva, the detachment of Dharmaputra, his meeting 
with Markandeya. 
110. Narration of the most excellent experience,* the 
glorification of Amyta; Different names of Narmada in the 
different Kalpas. 
111. The hymn of Narmada composed by the sages, 
the story of Kalaratri; thereafter the prayer of Mahadeva, 
the wonderful stories of several Kalpas. 
112. The story of Vitalya, the story of Jale^vara, 
the description of Gauri Vrata, the burning of Tripuras. 
113. The injunctions regarding the casting off of the 
body, then the confluence of Kaveri, the holy shrines of 
Danitlrtha and Brahmavarta, alongwith the story of livara. 
114-115. The following series of shrines are then 
described : Agni Tirtha, Ravi Tirtha, Meghanada Tirtha, 
Adidaruka Tirtha, Deva Tirtha, Narmadeia, Kapila Tirtha, 
Karafija Tirtha, Ku^dalesa, Pippalada, Vimale&i and 
Sulabhrt, then the story of abduction of Saci and killing of 
Abhraka. (v. 1. Andhaka) 
116. The Tirtha called iSulabhrdudbhava where different 
types of charitable gifts are to be given; then the story of 
Dirgha-tapas and that of R^ya^rhga. 
*v.I.-“ fifdg-LgfSiuibht0ikhifi$um The experience of the initisil 
dissolution (deluged univene) 


IV.104.117-135 
1397 
117. Then the holy story of Gitrasena, the characteristic 
feature of the kingdom of Ka4i,* then the description ofDeva^k 
(The rock of the lord) alongwith the holy centre of 3abaii. 
118-121. Then the holy narrative of Vyadha (the 
hunter) ; then the holy centre of Pu?karinyarka; then the 
following holy pools and shrines—Apretyeivara Tirtha, Sakra 
Tirtha, Karo^ika, Kumareia, Agastyeia, Anandela, Matrja, 
Loke^ia, Dhanadeia, Mahgale^a, Kamaja, Nagela, Gopara. 
Gautama, l§ahkhacudaka, Narade^a, Nandikela, Varui^eivara 
Tirtha, Dadhiskanda and other holy centres; then Hanuma- 
te^vara, Rame^vara and other holy centres, SomeiSa, Pihga- 
le^vara. 
122-129. R^mok$a, Kapilela, Putikela, Jalciaya, 
Candarka, Yama Tirtha, Kalhodi^a, Vanadika, (v. 1. Nandika) 
Narayana, Ko):iia, Vyasa Tirtha, Prabh^aka, Nage^, Sahkar- 
^anaka, Pra^rayelvara Tirtha, the holy confluence of Airandi* 
Suvar^lila Tirtha, Karafija, K^aha, Bhandura, Rohini- 
bhava, Gakra Tirtha, Dhautapapa, Skanda, the holy place 
named after Ahgiras, Ko$i Tirtha, Tirtha called Ayoni, Angara 
Tirtha, Trilocana Tirtha, Indre^, Kambukeia, Someia, 
Kohanesa, Narmada, Arka, Agneya, the excellent BhargaveSvara 
Brahma, Daiva, M^gesa, Adivarahakesvara, Ramesa, Siddheia 
Ahalya, Kahkateivara, Sakra, Saumya, NadeSa, Toyc^a, Ruk- 
mi^ibhava, YojaneSa, Varahe^a, Dvadasi Siva Tirtha, SiddhcSa, 
Mahgale^a, Lihgatirtha, Varaha Tirtha, Kunde^, Sveta- 
varaha, Garbhavela, Rawivara. 
130-135. The holy centres of Sukla etc., Hunkarasvami 
Tirtha, Sahgame^a, Nahu^Sa, Moksana, Paficagopa, 
Nagasava, Siddhe^, Marka^d^tirtha, Akruratirtha, Kamo- 
datirtha, Sularopatirtha, Ma^avya, Gopakelvara, Kapilela, 
Pihgale^, Bhute^, Gahga Tirtha, Gautama Tirtha, Alvamedha, 
Bhrgukaccha Kedarela, the dispeller of sins, Kalakalela, Jale^a, 
i^alagrama, Varahaka, Gandraprabhasa, Aditya, Sripati Tirtha, 
Hamsaka, Mulyasthana (the original abode), Sulela, the 
Tirtha called Ugra, Gitradaivaka, Sikhhia, Koti Tirtha, Dala- 
kanya, Suvarioudca, ^^amok^, (that which liberates from 
*v.l. XiH-4ri^a^a mokfo^am—Salvation of K&fir&ja 


1398 
Ndtada PurSna 
indebtedness), Bharabhuti, Punkha Mun^i, pin^ima (a drum), 
Amale^j Kapalc^a, Sniga Brand! Bhava, Kofi Tirtha and 
Lotaneja. Thereafter, there is Phala^ruJi (A remark like the 
Vcdic passage indicating the benefit) (phalastuti-^praise of 
the benefit). 
136-140. In the context of the greatness ofDrmijaiigala,^ 
there is the story of Rohitaiva, the narration of Dhundhumara 
the strategem of destroying Dhundhu; the killing of 
Dhundhu and the birth of Citravaha, his greatness, 
the prowess of Candida, Ratilvara, Kedare5^^ the Laksatirtha, 
the holy water originating from Visnupadi (Firmament), 
Mukhara, Cyavana, Andh^ya and the lake of Brahma, 
the Tirthas of Cakra, Lalita, the holy centres full of cows, 
Rudravarta and Markanda, the holy centres that dispel sins, 
^ravanesa, Suddhapata, Devandhupretatirtha, the origin of 
holy centre Jihvoda, Sivodbheda and their eulogy in regard 
to their efficacy. 
141. This is the summary of the part called Avanti 
Khanda;* it is destructive of sins of those who listen. 
Henceforth, the sixth part named Nagarakhanda* is being 
narrated. 
The ^dgarakhan^a* 
142. The narration of the origin of Linga, the aus¬ 
picious story of Hariicandra, the greatness of Viivamitra, the 
attainment of heaven by Triianku. 
1. Tlie topics from DrmjaUgala upto Sivodbheda mentioned in VV 136- 
140 are not traced in any extant edition of Avanti Kha^da indicating that 
the author of NSrada Puraiia had a different version of Sk. P. than the 
present printed ones. 
2. The Vehkate^vara, Bangabasi and the GM editions of the Sk. P. 
give a big section of 84 chapten called CaturaHtuliAga-mdhatn^a. But the NP 
does not mention this whole section. 
3. It is surprising that theNP does not even mention the big RevSkhapda 
the Uttar&rdha of which consists of 232 chapters and skips 
to the ^fdgaradchapda. 
4. W. 142-167 give us the main topics in the JddgarOrkhapdot many of 
which are found in the extant Sk. P. 


IV. 104.143-158 
1399 
143. In the context of the greatness of Hatakelvara, the 
killing of demon Vftra, the description of the holy centres 
Nagabila, Sarikha Tirtha and Acalesvara. 
144-I45a. The narration of the city of Camatkara, that 
is very interesting, then the description of these holy centres— 
GayasTrsa, Balasakhya, Balaman^a, Mrgahvaya, Visnupada, 
Gokarna, Yugarupa and Samasraya (that is the support of 
the people). 
145b-146. Siddhesvara, the holy pool ofNagas, the holy 
centre of seven sages, of Agastya as well as that of Bhruna- 
garta, Nalesa, of Bhisma, Vaic^uram, Arkaka (pertaining to the 
Sun-God), Sarmistha (related to Sarmistha), Somanatha, 
Daurga, Atarjakesvara. 
147-150. The story of killing of Jamadagni; the story 
of (Parasurama’s vow of) making (the country) devoid of 
Ksatriyas, the holy centres of Ramahrada, Nagapura, Sadlihga, 
Yajfiabhu, the three shrines of Trikarka beginning with 
Mun<^ira, the marriage of Satl, the shrines of Rudraslr^a, 
Yagesa, Valakhilya and Garuda. The curse of Laksmi, the 
twenlyseven palaces of Soma; the shrine called Pan^uka 
erected by Amba, Agneya (belonging to the fire God), Brahma- 
kunda, Gomukha, the shrine called Lohayasti, the goddess 
Ajapalesvari, the shrine of ^aniscara, (Saturn), the RajavapI 
(Royal tank) Ramesa, Laksmanesvara. 
151-158. The excellentmost among the excellent 
Lihgas—Kulesa and Lavesa. The story of Astasasti and that 
ofDamayanti, the origin of the holy centre Bhaktika Tirtha, 
Ksemamkari, Kedara, Sukla Tirtha, Mukharka, the narration 
of the shrine Satyasandhesvara, the story of Karnotpala, 
Atesvara, the shrines of Yajnavalkya, Gauri, andGanesa. Then 
the description of Vastupada, the narration of Ajagrha, Sau- 
bhagyajidhu (the well of good fortune), the shrine Sulesa< 
the story of Dharraaraja, the story of Lord the bestower of 
sweets, three shrines of Ganapati, the story of Jabali and 
the story of Makareia, the description of Kalesvari and 
Andhaka, the holy pool of Apsaras (celestial damsels), the 
shrines of Pufy&ditya and Rauhitasva, the narrative of the 
origin of NSgara, the stories of Bhrgu Visvamitra, Sarasvati, 


1400 
Ndrada Purdm 
Pippalada, Kaihsarisa and Pendaka, the story of the Yajiia of 
Brahma alongwith the narration of Savitri, Raivata, Bharata 
Yajfla and the survey of the important holy centres. 
159. The three Ksetras (holy shrines) of Kanrava, (i. e. 
the descendants of Kuru) Hatakesa and Prabhasa, the three 
forests of Pau^kara, Naimisa, and Dharma. 
160. The three cities viz. Varanasi, Dvaraka and Avanti, 
the three Vanas (Parks) viz. Vrndavana, Khandavavana and 
Advaika (?) [ta?] vana. 
161. The three excellent villages, viz. Kalpagrama, 
!§alagrama and Nandigrama, the three Tirthas (holy centres) 
viz. Asi Tirtha, Sukla Tirtha and Pitr Tirtha. 
162-63a. The three excellent Parvatas (mountains) viz. 
5ri Parvata, Arbuda Parvata (mount Abu) and Raivata 
Parvata; the three rivers Gaiiga, Narmada, and Sarasvati, 
each of these is glorified as yielding one and a half crore of 
benefits. 
163b-164a. The four holy centres of Kupika, Sankha- 
tlrtha, Amaraka and Balamand^na are said to yield the same 
benefit as Hatakesaksetra. 
164b-165. The iSraddhakalpa (rituals regarding Sraddha) 
according to Samba (alongwith Amba and Aditya ?), that of 
Yudhisthira and Andhaka; the holy rite of Alunya Dayana in 
the four months (of the rainy season), lying down on water., 
the shrine of Maiikane^a, the festival of Sivaratri, Tulapu- 
rusadana rite. 
166. The gift of lands, the shrines of Vanakesa and 
Kapalamocane^vara, Papapinda (the lump of sins), Masalaiiiga 
(the worship of Liiiga for a month), the glorification of the 
extent and magnitude of Yugas. 
167. The narration ofNimbe^a and Sakambhari deities, 
the description of Rudraikada^a (the eleven Rudras), the 
narration of the greatness of charitable gifts and the glorification 
of twelve Adityas. 
The Prabhdsa khania^ 
168a. Thus Nagara khanda (has been summarised). 
Now the part called Prabh^a khanda is being mentioned. 
1. W. 168 to 212 give the detailed contents of the \ast—Prabhasa 


IV.104.168b-180 
1401 
168b-169. The shrines Somesa and Viivcia, the great 
and meritorious holy centre called Arkasthala, the narration of 
Siddheivara etc., is made here separately; the shrines of Agni- 
Urtha, Kapardila and Kedareia and the bestowers of goals 
(heavenly abodes). 
170. The different forms of Kara—viz. Bhima, Bhairava, 
Caniji^a, etc., the planets viz. the Stm, Moon, Mars, Mercury, 
Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, Rahu and Sikhin (Kctu). 
171. Then five others Siddheivara and the forms ofRudra, 
are stationed there. The goddesses of excellent beauty—Aja, 
Pala, Mangala and Lalitesvarl. 
172-74. Then the shrines of Lak^mlla, Y^avela, 
Urvisa, Kamesvara, Gaurisa, Varuneia, Durvasela, Ganeivara, 
Kumare^a, Gan^akalpa and Sakulisvara. Then the holy story 
of Kotisa, Balabrahma, etc., then the stories ofNarake^a, 
Sarhvarteia and Nidhisvara, then that of Balabhadre^vara, 
Gaiiga and Ganapa. 
175. Then the good story of the river named Jambavati 
and the well called Pandukupa, the story of Satamedha 
(hundred sacrifices), Lak^amedha (hundred-thousand sacrifices) 
and Kotimedha (a crore of sacrifices.) 
176-177a. The prominent story of Durv^as, Arka, 
Ghatasthana (place of Water pot) and Hiranyasangama 
(confluence of the Hiranya), the separate stories of Nagararka, 
Krsna, Sankarsana and Samudra (sea), Kumari (Virgin), 
R?etrapMa (the guardian of the fields) and Brahmcia. 
177b-178. The glorification of Pingala and Sangameia, 
l^aiikara, Arkesa, Ghatesa, the holy centre Rsitirtha, Nandarka- 
tritakupa, the wonderful story of Parnarka and Nyankumati 
with Sopana. 
179. The news (or the details) of Varahasvamin and 
that of Ghayalinga and Gulpha, the story of Kanakananda as 
well as that of Kunti and Gange^a. 
180. Then the story of Gamasa, Udbheda, Vidura and 
TrilokciSa (Lord of the three worlds), then the stories of 
Mankaneia, TraipureSa and §an^Ja-Tirtha. 
JCkofi^a which agrees with the extant published Sk. P., showing the degree 
of authenticity of the Khait^a. 


1402 
Ndrada Purina. 
181. Then the stories of Suryapraci and TrJksana( three- 
eyed) as well as that of Umanatha, the stories of Bhuddara 
(the uplifter of the Earth), Sulasthala (spot of Trident), that 
ofCyavana and Arkesa. 
182. The story of the'holy spots of Ajapalela, Balarka 
and Kuberasthala, the meritorious story of Rsitoya, the glori¬ 
fication of Sahgalesvara. 
183. The narration of Narada and Aditya, review of 
Narayana, the greatness of Taptakun^a, description of 
Mulacan^isa. 
184. The story of the four-faced presiding deity of the 
attendants and Kalambesvara, the story of Gopalasvamin and 
Vakulasvamin, as well as the Maruts (Winds). 
185. Then the stories of Ksemarka, Unnata Vighnesa 
and Jalasvami, the stories of Kalamegha, Rukminl, Durvasa, 
IlvaraBhadra. 
186. The stories of the shrines Sahkhavarta, Moksa- 
tirtha, Gospada and Acyutasadman ((Abode of Acyuta) and 
of the deities Jalesvara, Huriikaresvara and Can^isa. 
187. The wonderful story of Vighnesa stationed in 
Asapura and that of Kalakunda, the story of Kapilesa and of 
Jaradgava^iva (Siva with an old cow). 
188. The story of Nala and Karotesvara and that ofHata- 
kesvara, the Yantra and the Bhusa (ornament) of Naradesa, 
Durgakuta and Ganesa’s story. 
189. The story ofBhairavis called Suparna, Ela and that 
of Bhallatirtha, the glorihcation of Kardamala and Gupta 
Some S vara. 
190. The stories of Bahusvarnela (Lord of much gold), 
Srhgela and Kotisvara, the stories of Markan^esvara, 
Damodaragrha and Kotisa. 
191. Svarnarekha, Brahmakun<^a, the shrines of Kuntl- 
Ivara and Bhimesvara, the pit of MrgI (hind) is remembered 
in the temple of Sarvasva and Vastrapatha. 
192. The wonderful stories of Durga, Bhilela, Gahgela 
and Raivata, then the story of Arbudesvara, the glorification 
of Acalelvara. 
193. The story of Nagatirtha, the description of 


IV.104.194-205 
1403 
Vasistha’s hermitage, the great eminence of Bhadrakarna and 
that of Trinetra (the three-eyed) thereafter. 
194. The greatness of Kedara, the glorification of the 
arrival at the holy centre, the stories of the holy centre in the 
form of Kotisvara and that of Arsikesa. 
195. The glorification of Siddhe^a, Sukresvara and 
Manikari^^a, the description of Pangutirtha, Yamatirtha and 
Varahatirtha. 
196. The greatness of Gandra Prabhasa, Pindoda, 
Srimata, Suklatirtha and Katyayani, then the greatness of 
Pindaraka. 
197. Then the glory of Kanakhala, Gakratirtha and 
Manusatirtha, the story of Kapilagnilirtha and that of Raktanu- 
bhandha. 
198. The pilgrimage to Ganesa and Parthesvara shrines, 
the story of Ujjvala, Gandisthana (abode of the Goddess), the 
greatness of l^ivakunda originating from Naga, the story of 
Maheia. 
199. The story of Rame^vara and the origin of Mark- 
andeya, the stories severally of Uddalakesa, SiddheSa and 
Gatatirtha. 
200. The origin of iSridevakhata and the shrines of 
Vy^atirtha and Gautama-tirtha, the greatness of Kulasantara 
and that of the Tirthas of Rama and Koti. 
201. The wonderful origin of Gandrodbheda, liana^rnga, 
and Brahmasthana, the auspicious stories of Tripuskara, 
Rudrahrada and Guhesvara. 
202. The greatness of Avimukta and Uma-Mahelvara, 
the glory of Mahaujas, the description of Jambutirtha. 
203. The story of Gangadhara and Misraka and the 
eulogy of the benefit (of reading this). In the context of the 
greatness of Dvaraka, the story of GandraiSarman. 
204. The holy rite of EkadaS and the narration of (the 
mode) of worship.and keeping awake (on Ek^a^i night), the 
description of Mahadvadalika and the meeting of Prahlada 
and the sage. 
205. The anecdote of Durvasas, the glorification of the 
beginning of Yatra (pilgrimage), the narration of the origin 
of Gomati and the benefit of ablution etc., therein. 


1404 
Ndrada Purdtia 
206. The greatness of Cakratirtha, the confluence of 
the river Gomat! (near Dvaraka) and the ocean (the Arabian 
sea), the narration of the Hrada (deep pool) of Sanaka and 
others, then the story of Nfgatirtha. 
207. The holy story of Gopracara, the arrival of 
cowherdesses at Dvaraka, the narration of Gopisaras (the lake 
of the cowherdesses); the glorification of Brahmatirtha. 
208. The narration of the advent of five rivers, 
alongwith different stories and the glorification of Sivalinga, 
Gadatirtha and the worship etc. of Krsna. 
209. The story of the Murti (the idol) ofTrivikrama, 
the conversation between Durvasas and Krs^, the benefit of 
the recital of death of Kula daitya and the special worship 
thereof. 
210. The glorification of the advent of all the Tlrthas in 
Gomat! and Dvaraka, the survey of Krsna’s temple and the 
coronation at Dvaravati. 
211. There the story of the residence (of all Tlrthas) 
that holy centre; the glorification of the merit of Dvaraka. O 
Brahmana, this is the summary of the seventh part called 
Prabhasika Khanda. 
212>213. In the course of description of the greatness of 
l^iva in the Skanda Pura^ with all the gloriousmost stories, 
he who writes this out and gives it to a Brahmana on the full 
moon day in the month of Magha, receiving him duly and 
with the charitable gift of a gold trident, rejoices in the region 
of Siva. 


IV. 105.1-5 
1405 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIVE 
The V&mana Purdna^ : Contents 
Brakmd said : 
1. O dear one, listen, I shall recount to you the Purina 
named Vamana. It contains stories of Trivikrama and com¬ 
prises ten thousand verses. 
2. It contains the narratives of events of the Kurma 
Kalpa; it has stories descriptive of Vargatraya (the three 
aims of life viz. virtue, love and wealth). It is in two parts. 
It is auspicious to the narrator as well as to the listener. 
3. At the outset, there is the enquiry about the Purana; 
the cutting off of the head ofBrahma, the story of Kapala- 
mocana, the destruction of Daksa’s Yajfta. 
4. The description of (and narration about) Kara in the 
form of Kala, then the burning of Kama, the fight between. 
Prahlada and Narayana, the war between the Devas and the 
Asuras. 
5. The narration of the story of Sukeiil and Arka, then 
the Bhuvanakoia (description of the worlds), then the des¬ 
cription of Kamyavratas (Vratas performed with some desired 
object), then the*story of Sri Durga. 
1. According to the NP. V4yu, Mt. P., Bh. P. the Vimana P. consists 
of 10,000 verses. Further the NP states that the FdiRana consists of two parts 
Purvabh&ga and Uttara bhdga (or Vjddha Vdmaaa) the latter containing the 
following sarhhitis viz. the MiheSvart, Bhdgaoati, Sami and Gapeivari, each 
consisting of 1000 verses (W. 13-14). But the whole of the UttarabhOga is lost 
leaving the PurvUrdha of 6000 verses. But actually in Vehkatesvara edit, 
there are 5451 verses (chs. 26, 44 and 93 being in prose). 
There is a discrepancy in the total number of chapters in the MSS of 
this Purina c. g. Devanigari MSS (94 chs.), Tclugu MSS (89 chs.), 
Sirada code (85 chs.), Adyar Mss (67 chs.). (A. S. Gupta—PJ. V. pp. 360- 
66). Although many of the topics mentioned in the NP are found in the 
printed edition, the absence of the UUardrdha and the no. of verses in the 
extant Purftpa show that the NP refers to a different version of the Vimamt 
Purdoa. 
By the way it may be noted that though this was originally a Vaifoava 
Pur&pa, Saivism has considerably influenced it as the efusodes of Siva are also 
described in details. This synthetic tendency—harmonizing Vaiy^vism, 
Saivism etc. by r^arding these deities as representatives of due Brahman—^ia 
found pracdcsdly in all Pur&pas. 


4406 
NSraida Purd^ 
6. Then the story of Tapati, description of Kuruksetra, 
the incomparable greatness of Satya, the glorihcation of the 
nativity of Parvati. 
7. Her penance, and then the marriage, thereafter, the 
story of Gauri, thereafter, the subsidiary story of Kau^iki and 
then the story of Kumara. 
8. Then the story of killing Andhaka, then the 
narrative of Sadhyas, afterwards, the story of Jabali, the 
wonderful story of Araja. 
9. The fight between Andhaka and Hvara, Andhaka 
given the status of a Gana (attendant of i§iva), the narration of 
the Maruts, then the story of Bali. 
10. Then Laksmi’s story, thereafter the story ofTri- 
vikrama, then auspicious stories are being narrated in the course 
of pilgrimage of Prahlada. 
11. Thereafter, the story of Dhundhu; then the story of 
the Preta (Ghosts), the story of Naksatrapurusa (The name of 
a Vrata), then the story of Sridama. 
12. At the end of the story of Trivikrama, there is an 
excellent hymn composed by Brahma. In the course of 
conversation between Prahlada and Bali in Sutala (Nether- 
worlds) , Hari is praised. 
13. Thus the story of the first half of this Purana is 
mentioned to you. Hereafter, listen to its latter half called 
Bfhad Vamana. 
14. There are four Sariihit^ (compendiums) therein 
each consisting of a thousand verses. They are Mahesvari, 
Bhagavatl, Sauri and GaneSvari.^ 
1. According to the NP, the Kurma Purapa consists of Brihmi, 
Bh&gavati, Sauri and Vai^pavi Sarnhitas and has 17,000 verses in all (verse 
3), a figure endorsed by the Bh. P. (XII. 13, I). But the Vdyu and 
Mat^ credit it with 18,003 verses, while according to AP (272-10) it has 
8000 verses only. The Kurma B itself states that it consists of Brdhmf, BhdgaoaH, 
Sauri and Vaiffiatn Sarnhitas and the Brdhmi contains 6000 verses. But actually 
Vefikatefvara Press edit, gives 5925 verses. The NP. gives the topical analysis 
of each SaAhitd and states the sub-sections of each Sathhiti e. g. the Bh&gavati 
SathhitA has five sections (Paflcor-padi), the Sauri, six Vaifpavi, four 
{catufpadt). The total No. of verses in each section is given as 6000, 4000, 
2000 and 5000 verses respectively. Gh. 106. 


IV.105.15-22 
1407 
15. In the compilation called Maheivari, there is the 
glorification of Krsna and his devotees. In the compendium 
Bhagavati, there is the wonderful story of the incarnation of 
the Mother of the Universe. 
16. In the compendium Sauri, the glory of the Sun is 
spoken (praised) which is destructive of sins. In the com¬ 
pendium Ganesvari there is the story of Gane^a and Maheia. 
17. This is a wonderful Parana named Vamana. It is 
narrated by Pulastya to the noble-souled Narada. 
18. Then it was acquired from Narada by Vyasa, a 
very great Atman. From Yyasa his disciple Romaharsana 
acquired this. 
19. He will narrate it to the Brahmanas of Naimisa 
forest. Thus the auspicious Vamana Purana has been traditionally 
handed down and acquired. 
20-22. Those who read this or listen to this, attain the 
greatest goal. He who writes this out and gives it to aBrahmana 
Vedic scholar at the time of autumnal equinox alongwith ghee 
and a cow, uplifts his Pitrs (ancestors) from hells and leads 
them to heaven. After enjoying all worldly pleasures and 
dying thereafter, he attains the great region of Visnu. 
All this evidence shows that the author of the NP had positively a 
diflerent and a larger version than the extant KP. 
The extant (both Vehkatesvara and K&siraja) editions of KP tally to a 
great extent with the Brdhnl SamhiUt and the other Samhitds seem to have been 
lost. 
Hazra notes that ot%inally the Kdrma was a Pdheardtra Purdinia which was 
subsequently Paiupatised. (vide PR. pp. 57. AT.) 


1408 
Ndrada PurSna 
CaiAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIX 
The KUrmaPurd^ : Contents 
God Brahmd said : 
i«2. O dear child, O Marici, listen to the Purai^ called 
Kurma. It covers the events of the Lak^mi Kalpa. In 
the context of Indradyumna, the merciful Hari, assuming the 
form of a tortoise, proclaimed it to the sages the respective 
greatness of virtue, love, wealth and salvation. 
3. It consists of seventeen thousand verses.^ It is very 
auspicious with four Samhitas. O sage, many of the Brahma 
dharmas (religious duties) mentioned formerly, have been 
explained in it. 
4. They are dealt with in the context of different 
stories. They are the bestowers of good position (hereafter) unto 
men. In the first subdivision there is the usual beginning 
at the outset. 
5. There is the dialogue between LaksmI and Indra¬ 
dyumna and the conversation between the Divine Tortoise and 
the groups of sages. Then is the account of the four castes 
(Varnas) and stages in life (A^ramas, and their (prescribed) 
duties, the narration of the creation of the Universe. 
6. There is a brief description about the calculation of 
Time (such as Yugas, Manvantaras), at the end of the dis¬ 
solution, there is the eulogy of the Lord (by Siddhas), then a 
brief description of the creation (of the universe) and the story 
of Sankara. 
7. The thousand names of Parvati, the exposition of the 
Yoga philosophy, the description of the family of Bhrgu, and then 
that of Svayambhuva (Manu). 
1. According to the VP, Vayu, Bh. P. (xii. 13. 4-9) and Mt. P, 
itself, this Puriqa consists of 14,000 verses while AP credit! it with 13000 (or 
13,003 as per A, S. Gupta) the BVP with 18,000 verses. The Anand&irama 
Press edit, contains 14,062 verses and its contents agree in general with 
given in the NP. ITiis agreement is probably due to its bdng the best 
preserved and the earliest of the 18 Puranas (Kane—HD. vu. p. 899). Kane 
also notes that it has perhaps the largest number of SmfH chapters among 
Purioas and assigns 200 A. D. to 400 A. D. as its probable date. 


IV.l06.8-19b 
1409 
8. The origin of the Devas and others, then the destruc¬ 
tion of Daksa’s Yajfia, the story of the creation by Daksa, then 
the narration of the lineage of Ka^yapa (containing the account 
of the Solar and Lunar dynasties). 
9. The description of the family of Atri, the auspicious 
story of Kfsna, the dialogue between Krsna and Martand^t 
(The Sun-god) and the conversation between Vyasa and the 
Panda vas. 
10. The narration of the characteristic nature of different 
Yogas (Yugadharma), the glorification of Vyasa and Jaimini, 
the greatness of Var^asi and Prayaga. 
11-12. The description of the three worlds, the review of 
the branches of Vedas. In the latter half of the Purana there arc 
the Isvaragita and the Vyasagita. These two illuminate the 
different kinds of Dharmas; the greatness of the different holy 
centres is mentioned separately. 
13. Then there is the narration ofPratisarga (Dissolu¬ 
tion of the Universe). This much is the summary of the first 
division named Brahmi Sariihita. Henceforth, the compendium 
Bhagavati Sarhhita is reviewed. 
14. In this division, the separate activities of the different 
castes are narrated. In the first quarter of this Sarhhita, the 
determination of duties etc. of the Brahmanas has been narrated. 
15. O dear one, it consists of good and disciplined life 
and it enhances their enjoyment and the happiness of worldly 
pleasures. In the second quarter, the functions of the profession 
of the K?atriyas are clearly enunciated. 
16-19a. Ifa (Ksatriya) abides by these, he shall eschew 
sins and go to heaven. In the third quarter, the fourfold acti¬ 
vities of the Vailyas have been explained. If these are followed, 
one shall attain excellent salvation. In its fourth quarter, the 
activities of the l§udras are explained. If these are followed, 
Lord Vi?nu becomes pleased and increases the welfare of men. 
In the fifth quarter the duties and functions of the mixed castes 
are explained. If they are followed, one attains excellent state 
of future life. 
19b. O sage, thus is narrated the second compendium 
(Sarhhita) consisting of five sections (Paftcapadi). 


1410 
Ndrada Purdna 
20. The third compendium is called Sauzi. It lays down 
the various duties of men. To men who desire (to obtain some 
objects), it instructs the six karmans and their Siddhis in six 
different ways. * 
21. The fourth compendium is called Vaisnavi. It is 
glorified as the bestower of Liberation from Samsara. It con¬ 
sists of four sections (Gatus-padi). It is veritable Brahma i.e. 
the Veda incarnate to the twicc-borns. 
22. The four Sarhhitas contain respectively six thousand, 
four thousand, two thousand and five thousand verses. 
23. This Kurma Purana yields the benefit of four 
Vargas (the aims of life) viz. Dharma, Artha, Kama, Moksa. 
It yields the best of all goals to the men who read and listen 
to it. 
24. He who writes this (Purana) with devotion and gives 
it to a Brahmana during the transit of the sun from the tropics, 
alongwith the replica of a tortoise in gold, attains the greatest 
goal. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVEN 
The Matsya Purd^a : Contents 
LordBrahmd said : 
1. O excellent Brahmana, I shall, henceforth, recount 
the Matsya Purana to you. In it, all the events of the seven 
Kalpas in the world, have been condensed. 
2. It has been composed by Vy^a, a scholar in the Vedas, 
in about fourteen thousand verses.* He has begun by describ¬ 
ing Narasimha. 
•The Vdyu, the Matsya and the Bh. P. state this figure, but AP. 
gives 13000 and the Br. V. 18000 verses as the figure. Actually the Anand- 
asrama edition contains 14,062 verses. The contents of that edition tally with 
those given by the NP. here. 


IV.107.3-15 
1411 
3. The discussion between Manu and Matsya, then the 
narration (description) of the Cosmic Egg; the creation of the 
Devas, Asuras and the Marut (wind) from the Brahman. 
4. Madana-Dvada^i (the twelfth lunar day in honour of 
Madana) and the worship of the' guardians of the worlds; the 
survey of the Manvantaras, the description of the government of 
the kingdom by the VaiiSyas. 
5. The birth of Vaivasvata (Manu) from the sun, the 
contact with Budha (Mercury), the narration of the lineage of 
the Pitrs; the opportune time for (performance of) Sraddha). 
6. The peregrination among the Pitr-Tirthas, the origin 
of Soma (the moon), the glorification of the lunar race and the 
story of Yayati. 
7. The story of Karttavirya, the narration of the created 
race, Bhrgu’s curse to Vi?nu to take ten births on the Earth. 
8. Then the glorification of Puru’s race, the race of Huta- 
sana (the fire), the path of activity. Thereafter, the narration of 
the Purana. 
9. The Vrata (holy rite) called Naksatra Purusa, Mar- 
tan<^a-^ayana, theVrataof Krsnastami (the eighth day of the 
dark half of l§ravana observance in honour of Krsna’s birth) 
and that of Rohinicandra. 
10. The greatness of constructing tanks; the gift of the 
trees, the Vrata called Saubhagya and Dayana Agaistya Vrata. 
11. The Vrata of Anantatrtiya, that of Rasakalyanini, that 
of Anandakari and then the Sarasvata (belonging to Sarasvati) 
Vrata. 
12. Uparagabhi^ka (Ablution at the time of eclipse 
Saptami Dayana, Bhima Dvadali, Anangasayana rite. 
13. Aiunyasayanavrata, Angarakavrata (holy rite of 
Mars) Saptami saptaka (seven Saptamis i.e. seventh lunar day) 
Vifokadvadaiivrata (holy rite on the twelfth lunar day for 
wiping off grief). 
14. The gift of Mcru, ten-fold specification of evil planets; 
the narration of the forms of planets, l^ivacaturdasi (the 
fourteenth day of Siva). 
15. The abandonment of all fruits, the holy observance 
of Suryavara (Sunday), the taking of bath at the time of 


1412 Ndrada Purdm 
Sankranti (Solar Transit from one sign of Zodiac to another), 
the holy riteof Vibhuti Dvada^L 
16. The greatness of IJasthivratas (holy rites on^the sixth 
Lunar day) (leading Sastivratas—sixty holy rites), then the 
rules of procedure regarding holy baths, the greatness ofPrayaga, 
the description of continents and the worlds. 
17. The movement in the firmament, the greatness of 
Dhruva (Pole Star), the abodes of the leading Devas, the illu¬ 
mination of the three cities. 
18. The greatness of leading Pitrs, the description of 
Manvantaras, the creation of the set of four Yugas and the 
review of Yugadharma (the characteristics peculiar to the 
different Yugas). 
19. The birth of Vajranga and the nativity of Taraka, the 
greatness of the demon Taraka, the glorification of God 
Brahma. 
20. The nativity of Parvati, the penance-grove of Siva, 
the burning of the body of Ananga (Cupid) and the grief of 
Rati. 
21. The penance-grove of Gauri, soothing by Siva, the 
conversation between Parvati and the sages, the auspicious 
celebration of Siva’s marriage. 
22. The birth of Kumara and the victory of Kumara, the 
terrible killing of Taraka, the description of Narasiihha. 
23. The creation of the lotus-born deity; the killing of 
Andhaka, the greatness of Varanasi as well as that of Narmada. 
24. The description of Pitrs according to the Grotras and 
Pravaras, the glorification of the Pitrgatha (song of Pitrs) 
Ubhayamukhidanam (gift of a cow while giving birth to a calf 
and hence two-faced) and the gift of Krsnajina (deerskin of a 
black antelope). 
25. Then the story of Savitri, the duties of a king, the 
narration of different kinds of evil portents ending with 
eclipses. 
26. The narration of omens at the time of journey, 
the glorification of auspicious signs in dreams, the greatness 
of Vamanaand that of Varaha (Boar) thereafter. 
27. The churning of the ocean, the suppression (nullifica¬ 
tion) of the poison KMaku(a, the clash between the Devas and 


IV. 107.28—108.1 
1413 
the Demons; then the science of Engineering (planning the 
foundation and construction of a house). 
28. The characteristic features of an image (idol); then 
(the construction) of the temple, the characteristic features of 
a mansion, the characteristics of a pavilion. 
29. The indication of future kings, the glorification of 
great gifts, the narration of Kalpas—All these are narrated 
in this Purana. 
30. This Purana is pure and conducive to welfare; it 
causes increase in longevity and fame. He who reads this or 
listens to it, goes to Hari’s abode. 
31. He who writes this and gifts it over to a Brahmana 
after worshipping him on the equinoctial transit, alongwith a 
gold fish and a cow attains the greatest region. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHT 
The Garu<jia Purana : Contents 
God Brahma said : 
1. O Marici, listen, I shall recount to you the auspicious 
Garuda Purana.^ Onbeing asked, the Lord Visriu, seated on 
Garuda, recounted this to Garuda. 
1. The GP [Garuda Pur<ipa) is an ancient encyclopaedia of Indian 
wisdom, though its Preta~kalpa section adds little to its glory. According to 
the NP. Bh. P. (xii. 13. 8) and BV. P., GP consists of 19,000 verses while 
according to the Vdyu and Mt. P the total no. of its verses is 18,000 (Kane 
HD. vii. 832) and according to AP 272, 21, 8000 verses. Kane's statements 
need revision as the V&yu 104.8 (GM. edt.) clearly states, 19000 as its total 
No. of verses. 
ekona-viihta-sdhasraih Vainatepan uddhftaml 
But GP (I. 1. 35) states 8800 verses as its extent. 
offau-Sloka-sahasriiii tatkd cdftau Jatdni caj 
Purdparb Gdruifaih Vydsah pwrd'sau tnd'braald idatn fl 


1414 
Ndrada Purdtfo 
2. It consists of nineteen thousand verses. The story 
deals with the events of the T^k^ya Kalpa. There is the usual 
enquiry about the beginning of the Purana, creation of the 
Universe is described svccinctly. 
3. O Brahma^, there are rules of the procedure of 
the worship of the sun; thereafter, the rules regarding initia¬ 
tion ceremony; then there is the worship in connection with 
Sraddhas, after this (injunctions regarding) the worship of nine 
Vyuhas (manifestations of the Lord). 
4. Then the injunctions regarding the worship, the Paft- 
jara (ritualisticcage) pertaining to Visnu, the chapter on Yoga 
system and the glorification of Visnu’s thousand names. 
5. The meditation on Visnu, then the worship of the Sun, 
thereafter, the Arcana (worship) of Mrtyuftjaya, the Mala- 
mantra (Garland mantra), the worship of Siva and then the 
worship of his attendants. 
6. The adoration of Ciop^a, the worship of Sridhara, the 
fascinator of the three worlds, the worship of Visnu of the five 
Tattvas, the discus and the worship of the Lord. 
7. The rites ofNyasa, etc., the Up^ti, performance of 
Sandhya prayers, the worship of Durga and then the worship of 
the Devas, the worship of Mahe^vara, and then the rite of 
wearing the Pavitra (Darbha grass with a loop worn in the 
finger like a ring) and worshipping. 
8. The meditation on the idol of the Lord, the measure¬ 
ments of the sites of the buildings; the characteristics of palaces, 
the mode of installation of all the Devas with the several 
modes of worship. 
The confusion is due to difference in Mss. or versions of the GP. 
available to the writer of the Purli^a, e. g. GP. i.eh. 107 (ref. to the Parfiiara 
Smi-ti) is not known to the NP. noted by Dr. Ramshankar Bhattacharya 
(GP. Intro, p. 14-15)the table of contents given in the NP screes more 
closely with the Jibanand cdt. of the GP. (though Venkafeivara edt. of GP 
also tallies with that of the NP). 
The Pretakalpa in the NP. differs in some respects from all the printed 
editions of the GP as accretions went on increasing in the Pretakalpa (R. S. 
Bhattacharya—ibid, p. 16). 
A few slips in the readings of the NP (Vehkatejvara) edt. 
NP. &rdddh<t (verse 3) for GP. I. 10 Sr^sdi Pi^A. 
NP. VidhiKriya (verse 9 for GP. I. 53) Pfidhi Kiiyd. 


IV.108.9-17 
1415 
9. The Yoga with its eight ancillaries, the Dharmas re¬ 
garding the charitable gifts, the activity and the rules of proce¬ 
dure regarding the expiatory rites, the narration of different 
continents and their Lords, the description of hells, the solar 
system (planetary system around the sun) and Jyotisa (Science 
of Astrology and Astronomy.) 
10. The science ofSamudrika (Palmistry of prediction 
based on the characteristic marks on the body), the knowledge 
of the notes, scrutiny tests of the Navaratnas (the nine precious 
stones) the glory of the holy centres, the excellent greatness of 
Gaya. 
11. Then the description of the Manvantaras severally 
alongwith their divisions, the enumeration of the Pitrs, the 
duties of the different Varnas (castes), the purification of the 
materials of worship, the dedication of benefit unto God. 
12. I^raddha, worship of vinayaka, Grahayajfia (sacrifice 
for propitiating the planets), the A^ramas y(stages of life), the 
impurity due to birth and death (in the family), NitisMtra 
(science of Polity and Ethics), statements about the holy rites. 
13. The Solar race, the lunar race, the narration of the 
incarnations of Hari, the story of Rama, (the Ramayana), 
the genealogical line of Hari (the Harivarhsa) and then the 
story of Bharata. 
14. The science of life, pathology at the outset and (then) 
the treatment, then materia-medica (Dravyaja Gunah), the 
Kavaca (Mantras ascoatofmail) that dispels ailments and which 
pertains to Visnu and Garuda, the mantra pertaining to 
Tripura. 
15. Praina-cuda-mani (a treatise on answering astrologi- 
cally problems asked) at the end, the exposition of the veteri¬ 
nary science branch about Horses, the enumeration of the 
names of drugs and then discussion about grammar. 
16. The science of prosody, good conduct and discipline, 
and then the rules regarding ablution, the rites of Tarpana 
Vaisvadeva, the twilight prayers and the holy rites (offering 
ablutions to Pitrs during Parvans such as the full moon and the 
new moon days and such other special days. 
17. Nityairaddha (the daily Sraddha), the description of 


1416 
JVdrada Purdna 
Sapin^a rite, the essence of Dharma, the atonement of sins, the 
secondary creation, the dissolution and the particular character¬ 
istics of the Yugas are narrated, the benefit of religious 
rites. 
18. The system of Yoga philosophy, the devotion to 
Visnu, the benefit of obeisance to Hari, the greatness of Visnu, 
the excellent hymn to Narasimha. 
19. The nectar of perfect knowledge, the set of eight ver¬ 
ses in praise of Guha (Karttikeya), the eulogy of Visnu, the 
principal tenets of Vedanta and Sariikhya, the knowledge of 
the Brahman and the Atman. 
20. The gist of the Bhagavadgita, glorification of the fruit 
thereof—these are the topics mentioned in the first section. Then 
in the second section Pretakalpa (the rituals after the death) 
is narrated. 
21. O Brahmana, on being asked by Tarksya (Garuda) 
the lord communicated all these things, the revelation of 
Dharmas, the cause of salvation of the Yogins. 
22. The benefit of charitable gifts etc. is mentioned and 
then the Mantras for the rites of obsequies, then the description 
of the path leading to the world of Yama. 
23. The details (regarding the performance) are stated 
alongwith the fruit of sixteen Sraddhas. Expiatory rites in 
regard to the path of Yama, then the greatness of Dharmaraja. 
24. Specific mention of the harassment of the Pretas 
(ghosts), review of the characteristic signs of the Pretas, the 
narration of the stories of the Pretas; the cause of 
ghosthood. 
25. Consideration of religious rites for the ghosts; state¬ 
ments regarding Sapin(;Iikarana (the rite regarding the offer¬ 
ings of the balls of rice to the departed), the description of the 
release from ghost-hood, the charitable gifts for the purpose of 
salvation (of the ghosts). 
26. The indispensable excellent charitable gift; the in¬ 
ference of things causing happiness to the ghosts; the descrip¬ 
tion of the embodied soul, the description of Yama’s world. 
27. The narration of the uplift from ghosthood; the 
specification regarding the holy rites and the doer, the narra- 


IV.108.28.34 
1417 
tion of the rites to be performed before death, the exposition 
of subsequent rites. 
28. The ‘middle’ sixteen Sraddhas, the stipulation of 
activities for the attainment of heaven, the reckoning of Sutaka 
(period of impurity due to birth), the rite of Narayana Bali 
(oblation unto Narayana.) 
29. The greatness of Vr?otsarga (the rite of setting a bull 
calf free), the avoidance of forbidden activities, statement of the 
rites when accidental and premature death takes place, the 
fruits of human action. 
30. The consideration ofKrtya and Akrtya (what should 
be done and what should not be done), meditation on Visnu for 
the purpose of Salvation, narration of the rites laid down for 
the attainment of heaven, the description of happiness in 
heaven. 
31. The description of Bhurloka, (the Earth,) the 
description of seven nether-worlds, the narration of five 
upper worlds, the description of the position of the Cosmic 
Egg- 
32. Many stories concerning the cosmic egg, the exposi¬ 
tion of the Brahman and the Jiva (the individual soul); the 
narration of the ultimate dissolution (of the Universe) and the 
narration of the eulogy of benefits. 
33. Thus is the Purana named after Garuda; it yields 
worldly pleasures and salvation; it is glorified as destructive of 
sins of those men who read and listen to it. 
34. He who writes out this Purana and gifts it to 
a Brahmana at the time of equinoctial transit, alongwith a pair 
of swans made of gold, goes to heaven. 


1418 
NSrada Purdm 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINE 
The Brahmdnda Purina : Contents 
God Brahmd said : 
1. O dear one, listen, I shall recount to you the ancient 
(Parana) named Brahman^a.^ It comprises twelve thousand 
verses. It deals with the events of the Adikalpa. 
2. It has four Padas (quarters), the first one is called 
Prakriyapada, then is the Anusahgapada, the third one 
is Upodghata Pada (quarter of Introductory matter) and the 
fourth one is Upasaihhara (conclusion). 
3. The first two quarters constitute the first or earlier 
section, the third quarter forms the middle section and the 
fourth quarter, the final section. 
4. At the beginning, there is the stipulation of duties, 
then the story of the Naimi^a forest, the origin of Hiranyagar- 
bha, the conception of the different worlds. 
5. This is the (summary of the) first quarter. O bcstower 
of honour, listen to the second. The narration of the Kalpas and 
the Manvantaras, the knowledge of the worlds, thereafter. 
1. According to the NP., Bh. P. (xii. 13. 8), AP. (272. 23), the Brah- 
manda P. consists of 12,000 verses and 12,200 according to Mt. P. 53. 54. 
But the Vehkatesvara edt. gives 14,286 verses. Its contents are divided into 
three parts (the preliminary {Purva) part containing 2 sections: Prakriyi 
(Introduction in 5 Chs.) and Anufahga (various kalpas, mam-ages, etc. in 33 
Chs.) Part II {Upodghata) deals with the genealt^ies of kings or dynastic 
history. Part III {Upa-samhira) is a recapitulation of the creation of the 
Universe, Manu-epochs, dissolution of the Universe). It is however, called a 
Purina with four piarts (catu^pada) v. 29. 
Kirfel in his Purdpa Paftcalakfapa has noted the close similarity in 
hundreds of verses in the Vdyu and Brahmdpda Purdpas and proposed a theory 
that they formed one Purapa originally. 
The Purdpa traces the tradition of authorship as follows: God Brammi— 
Vasistha—>-Para^ra->Jat(lkarnya—^-Vayu or Prabhafljana—►Vyasa (vv. 33- 
34). 
This table of contents in the NP tallies in general with those of the- 
printed editions of the Brahmanda Purina except the 40 chapters of the 
Laliti episode. 
(vide table of contents of the Purina Edt. Jagadish Sastri MUBD, Delhi, 
pp ix-xi,) 


IV. 109.6-17 
1419 
6. The narration of the mental creation, the description 
of Rudra’s offsprings, the elegance and prowess of Mahadeva 
and thereafter, the creation by the sages. 
7. The conquest of fires, the description of the exis¬ 
tence of Kala (Time), the specification of the family of Priya- 
vrata, the length and extent of the Earth. 
8. The description of the (sub-continent) Bharata and 
then the review of other sub-continents, the description of Jam- 
budvlpa and other continents, then the description of the 
nether-worlds. 
9. The enumeration of the upper worlds, and thereafter, 
the movements of the planets, the narration of the Solar Array 
(Planetary system), the enumeration of the Divine planets. 
10. The explanation of the name Nilakantha, prowess 
of Mahadeva, description of the New moon day, the review of 
the principles of the different Yugas. 
11. The institution of the Yajflas, the last two Yugas and 
their activity, the characteristic features of the human beings 
etc. in different Yugas, the description of the spiritual lineage 
of the sages. 
12. The narration of the classification of the Vedas, the 
description of Svayambhuva Manu and the enumeration of 
the remaining Manvantaras and then the milking of the 
Earth. 
13. The first part, the second quarter ends with the cur¬ 
rent creation in the Caksusa Manvantara. Then in the Upod- 
ghata quarter, the glorification of the seven sages. 
14. The family of Prajapati; the birth of the Devas and 
others therefrom; the desire for victory, the narration of the 
origin of the Maruts. 
15. The narration of the descendants of Kasyapa, the 
review of the families of the sages, the narration of the Pitr 
Kalpa, and thereafter, the Sraddha Kalpa (the rituals regarding 
the Sraddha). 
16. The origin of Vaivasvata Manu and thereafter, the 
creation by him, and the family of Manu’s sons, ultimately the 
review of the Gandharvas. 
17. The narration of the family of Iksvaku, the family 


1420 
Nirada Purdna 
of the noble-souled Atri, the family of Amavasu and the wonder¬ 
ful story of Raji. 
18. The story of Yayati, the review of the family of 
Yadu; the story of Karttavirya, thereafter, the story of Jamada- 
agni and his son, 
19. The description of the family ofVrsni, the birth of 
Sagara, the story ofBhargava (Para^u-Rama) subsequent to the 
killing of his father. 
20. The story of Sagara, the story of Bhargava once 
again, the story of the battle between the Devas and Asuras, the 
description of the manifestation ofKrsna. 
21. The meritorious hymn in praise of Indra glorified by 
Sukra, the narration of the greatness ofVisnu and the review of 
the family of Bali. 
22. The story of the future kings after the advent of the 
Kali age. This is the quarter of Upodghata in the middle 
section, the third quarter (in the Purana). 
23. I shall recount the fourth quarter viz. Upasarhhara 
(Conclusion) in the final section, the narration of Vaivasvata 
Manvantara precisely and in detail. 
24. What has been mentioned before is mentioned here 
succinctly; thereafter; the story of the future Manus. 
25. The specification of the Kalpas and the dissolution 
(then), thereafter the measurement of Time, then the fourteen 
worlds are mentioned along with their respective characteristics. 
26. The description of hells (attained) by impious 
activities, the narration of Manomayapura (City of Mind) and 
thereafter, the Prakrtika Laya (Dissolution within Prakrti). 
27. Thereafter, the description of iSiva’s city. The three¬ 
fold goal of creatures, thanks to the contact with the Gunas, 
is described. 
28. Thereafter, the description by means of positive and 
negative assertions (i. e. invariable concomitance and logical 
discontinuance) of the Brahman, the great Atman, that is 
beyond specifications and argumentation. 
29. Thus the quarter section on Upasarhhara has been 
summarised. Thus the Brahmanda Purana comprising four 
quarters has been described to you. 


IV. 109.30-42 
1421 
30-33a. O Brahmana, this Parana called Brahmanda is 
the eighteenth Parana, the most essential of all chief (Puranas). 
What is originally composed of foar hundred thousand verses 
has been narrated separately in eighteen books, O bestower of 
honour, by the sage Vyasa the son of Parasara who is the real 
instructor of all the sages of purified souls. Those sages who by 
nature practise religious virtues and bless the wretched ones, 
heard these Puranas from me and revealed them to the world, 
33b-36a. Formerly, this Purana has been narrated by me 
to Vasistha; it was passed on by him to his son l§akti, by him 
it was recounted to Jatukarnya, Then Vyasa obtained it from 
the mouth of the Wind-God, making it authoritative in the 
world; he propagated this excellent Purana in the Public (the 
world). O dear one, whoever glorifies this and listens to it with 
great concentration, dispels all sins and attains the world devoid 
of ailments. 
36b-37. He who writes out this Purana and gives it to a 
Brahmana after covering it with a cloth and placing it on a 
gold throne, attains the world of Brahman. No doubt need be 
entertained in this respect. 
38. O Marici, these eighteen Puranas narrated briefly 
by me to you should be heard in full. 
39. The excellent man who listens to the eighteen Puranas 
or narrates them in accordance with the injunctions, is not 
born here again. 
40. The Sutra (summarised form) of the Puranas 
which has been mentioned by me to you now, should be prac¬ 
tised everyday by one who desires the benefit out of the Puranas. 
41. This should not be narrated to any one who is 
arrogant, hypocrite, sinful, malicious to the Devas and preceptors, 
knavish or one who hates good men. 
42. It must be imparted to one who is quiescent, of 
tranquil mind, interested in service, devoid of indecent rivalry, 
is pure and is a good devotee of Visnu, 


1422 
Nirada Purdm 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TEN 
The Exposition of Vratas to be performed 
on PratipadSy the first day of the 
Lunar fortnight 
J^irada said : 
1. O holy sir, I have heard the full gist of all the 
Puranas, conveyed by you directly and orally in the same 
manner as it was narrated to Marici by Brahma, the highest 
deity. 
2. O highly blessed one, now recount to me, in due 
order, the story of the Tithis (i. e. the details of the different 
lunar days) whereby the holy rites and observances can be 
decided upon. 
3. Now please narrate to me the particular holy 
Vrata (vow or rite) alongwith its detailed procedure of worship 
etc, and enlighten me on what (particular) holy lunar day 
(tithi) and in what (particular) month that Vrata is to be 
performed.^ 
Sandtana said : 
4. O Narada, listen I shall recount to you the holy 
rites (Vratas) of the Tithis separately. They bring about all 
the Siddhis (accomplishments of objects) in the order of the 
Tithis and their lords. 
5-6. God Brahma created the entire Universe on the 
first day in the bright half of Caitra, at the time of sunrise.* 
It was in the beginning of the year and that of the spring in 
the kingdom of Bali (?). The Pratipad is to be taken always 
1. Vratas are of different tyjjcs. Some are to be performed on 
particular tithis, some on days, some depend on the constellation of the 
particular day etc. (AP. 175.1) AP later gives some general rules for observing 
Vratas.). Here Narada wants to know the details of Titki-vratas. 
2. The belief that the Universe was created by god BrahmS at the time 
of sun-rise on the 1st day of the bright half of Caitra, is common to other 
Puranas. CC on Vrata, pp. 360-65, Vrata-r^ja (VRJ.) ch. I., p. 21 quotes 
Bm, P and prescribes AfahdJdnti and ihc worship of god Brahma as in the NP. 


IV.1I0.7-I6 
1423 
when it is in conjunction with the previous Tithi, by wise 
persons.^ 
7. At that time, the great rite of Santi (the pacificatory 
rite) should be performed. It is destructive of all sins. It 
subdues all evil portents. It dispels the sins of Kali. 
8. It bestows longevity, causes nourishment and enhances 
wealth and good fortune. It is auspicious and holy and is 
conducive to happiness in both the worlds. 
9-10. On that day, at the outset, god Brahma who had 
assumed the physical body of the fire-god, should be worshipped 
with respectful formalities such as washing the feet with water 
and other respectful offerings (Padyasj Arghyas), flowers, 
incense, clothes, ornaments, meals, sacrificial oblations, presents 
and the propitiation of the Brahmanas. Thereafter, the worship 
of deities should be performed separately of each god. 
11-12. After paying obeisance to the Oihkara with (the 
offerings of) water from the Kusa grass, gingelly-seeds and raw 
rice-grains, (the devotee) shall give religious fee or gift 
(Daksina) to a Brahmana who is a Vedic Scholar, alongwith 
clothes and gold for the purpose of complete and perfect per¬ 
formance of the Vrata. This Vrata that has such a special 
Puja in it, is called Sauri Vrata* (Vrata pertaining to the Sun). 
13-14a. O Brahmana, this holy rite yields good health 
to men. O sage, Vidyavrata* is also to be performed on that 
day. O sage, on the same Tithi, the holy rite called Tilaka^ 
was told by Krsna to Ajatasatru (Yudhisthira). 
14b-16. In the month of Jyestha, in the bright half, on 
the first day at sunrise, one should worship the pleasing Karavira 
1. VRJ. quotes this as Vjddha Vasiffha Smrti and states that even if 
the Pronto//is associated with {purva-vrddkd), it should betaken as 
the proper beginning of the year. 
2. Probably the same as Arogyapratipad vrata (VRJ. I p, 23). 
3. NP gives no details of this Vrata, for which vide CC on Vrata I. 338 
40, VRJ. p. 23. 
4. After worshipping Saihvatsara (the year), the performer has to 
apply on his forehead a Tilaka with white sandal-wood paste lor one year 
(CC on Vrata I. 348-50. 


1424 
NSrada Purina 
tree that grows in the temple garden.^ It must be tied with a 
red thread, scents, incense and unguents must be offered along- 
with the germinating seven grains, oranges and pomegranates. 
It must be sprinkled with water mixed with unbtoken rice 
grain. The following Mantra should be uttered for praying for 
forgiveness. 
17-19a. “Obeisance to you O Karavira, the residence of 
meritorious acts, beloved of the sun, always liked by (one who 
wields thunderbolt Dambholi) i.e. Indra, Mrda, (§iva),Durga 
and other deities.” He should then crave forgiveness through the 
Vedic Mantra** “AKrsnena” etc. (RV. I. 35.2). After worship¬ 
ping thus with great devotion and after giving due Daksina 
to a Brahmana, he should circumambulate and go to his house. 
19b-20. On the first day in the bright half of the month 
of Sravana, there is a great Vrata* that yields good fortune 
and intellect. It is the cause of all the Purusarthas) viz. 
virtue, wealth, love and liberation. 
O Brahmana, beginning on a Monday, this Vrata should 
be continued for three and a half months. 
21-22. After observing fast on the fourteenth day in the 
dark half of the month of Karttika, the devotee, earnest and 
interested in the Vrata, should worship Siva on (the following) 
full moon day. On the Pratipad following it He should offer 
Vayana (sweet-meats and other presents) alongwith a gold 
flute (?) to a Brahmana for the purpose of increase in the 
wealth. O leading sage, it is highly meritorious and it increases 
the pleasure of the deities. 
23. On the first day in the bright half of Bhadrapada, 
the Vrata named ‘Mahatma’ (the greatest one) should be 
1. VV 14-19a. describe the Karavira-pralipad-vrata It is observed on 
Vaiiikha Buddha Pratipad in Tamil Nad. Cf. CC. I. 353- 
2. V. 17 which is a prayer inPur&nic SK is said to be the ‘Mantra* 
it K^fpena etc. is a Vedic Mantra in RV. I. 35. 2. 
3. VV 19b-22 describe the Rofaka Vrata, although NP does not 
disclose the name of this mahdi/rata, Vrj., pp. 25-26 describe it as Rofaka 
Vrata. It is also called Bilvu-i^ ;aKa vrata. 


IV. 110.24-33 
1425 
performed. Some call this Vrata by the name of Mauna^ 
(silence). Siva is worshipped in this rite. 
24-27a. The devotee shall, in silence, cook three times 
sixteen fruits alongwith ground flour. He shall give one 
set of sixteen to a Brahmana. He shall give another set of 
sixteen to the Deity. One set of sixteen, he himself eats. Over 
the water pot, the knower of the injunctions worships a gold 
image of Siva and gives everything of it to the preceptor along¬ 
with a cow. O Brahmana, after observing this Vrata of the 
trident-bearing Lord of the Devas forfourteen years, the devotee 
enjoys worldly pleasures, till his death (thereafter), he attains to 
Siva. 
27b-29. O Brahmana, a man who performs Alokavrata* 
on the first day in the bright half of the month of Asvina, 
(himself) becomes Awka (free from grief). He is endowed with 
riches and grains. The Araka tree must be worshipped by those 
who are exclusively devoted to these observances and rites. 
At the end of the Vrata in the twelfth year, he should offer 
the replica of an Aloka tree with great devotion to the pre¬ 
ceptor, He is thereby honoured in Sivaloka. 
30. One shall begin Navaratra* (the festival of nine 
nights) on this very Pratipad. He should worship the goddess 
in the forenoon alongwith the rite of installing the water-pot. 
31. He should sow to germinate barley grains mixed 
with wheat. He should take only one meal once a day. The 
food consumed should not be one that is requested for. 
32-33. In accordance with his ability, he should observe 
fast. The worship of the goddess, repetition of the Mantras and 
recitation of the holy texts (the Sapta^ati) should also be done 
in accordance with one’s capacity. O Brahmana, the three 
Garitas (stories) mentioned in the Marka^dcya Purana should 
be read for all the nine days, by one who desires to get worldly 
1. VV. 23>27a detail the Manna VriUa. HD V. 383-384 gives a Vrata 
of a similar name but the details are somewhat different. 
2. VV 27-29 describe ASoka~vrdta, Thu is different from that given in 
CC 11. 279-283. HD V. i. 295 aUo differs. 
3. VV. 30-34 describe the Xavardtra or Durgd P^i which is observed 
all over India. It is described in details in HD V. i., pp. 154-187. The 
Carita in the Mk. P. mentioned in V. 32 is most probably Dtoi Mdhdtrnya 
(chs. 78-90) or the SaptaSatL 


1426 Mdrada Purda^a 
pleasures and salvation. The worship of virgins alongwith the 
rite of feeding, is praised. 
34. O Brahmana, after performing the Vrata thus, the 
man becomes a receptacle of all Siddhis on the Ear^h, by the 
grace ofDurga. 
35. On the first day in the bright half in the month of 
Urja (Karttika), one should perform all the rites mentioned for 
Navaratra. Particularly, the rite called Annakuta^ (a heap of 
cooked articles of food) causes the increase in the delight of 
Visnu. 
36. In the course of worship of Govardhana, Anna- 
kuta must be made with all cooked articles and with all milk 
products by everyone, for achieving all objects by the 
worshipper. 
37. In the evening the devotee should worship 
Govardhana mountain alongwith the cows, and offer suitable 
Daksina. He shall attain worldly pleasures and liberation. 
38-40a. The excellent Dhanavrata* is to be performed 
on the first day in the bright half of the month of Margasir§a. 
Visnu is to be worshipped at night alongwith Homas. The 
observer of the Vrata should give a replica in gold of the fire- 
god to a Brahmana after covering it with two red clothes. By 
performing this vrata thus, one becomes flourishing in wealth 
and food-grains on the Earth. With his sins burned in fire, he 
is honoured in the Visnuloka. 
1. VV. 35-37 describe the Govardhana Pigd (in the memory of Kfspa’s 
triumph over Indra) or Annakufa. Though v. 35 instructs “to perform all 
the rites mentioned for Navaratra,” the essential difference is that the 
^faoarStra is pertaining to Devi (S&kta) while Govardhana Puja is a strictly 
vegetarian Vaifoava Vrata. Vrj. p. 33 quotes Sanatktandra Samhitd to describe 
the procedure of worship of There are minor regional difTerences 
in performing the Annakufapiijd. 
2. W. 38-40a describe Dkana-vraia which is otherwise called 
Dhartya-vrata (AP. 167. 5-6) or Dhanpa pratipad Vrata. CG I. 355-56 bases 
its description on the Vardha Purdfui 56. 1-16 which is somewhat different 
from what is given here. HD. V. i. 320 lists a Dhana-vrata which begins on 
Ph&^una-Suddha-Trqjwdaif and is concerned with Kubera and as such is 
different from the Dhana-Vrata in the NP. 


lV.110.40b-48 
1427 
40b-4Ia. On the first day in the bright half of the month 
of Pausa, one should worship the Sun-god with devotion. The 
man must restrict his diet to one meal a day. Performing the 
Vrata thus, that mortal being shall attain the world of the Sun. 
41b-42a. On the first day in the bright half of the month 
of Magha, one shall worship the Fire god as Mahe^vara him¬ 
self, in accordance with the injunctions. He becomes rich and 
flourishing on the Earth. 
42b-44a. On the first day in the bright half of the 
month of Phalguna, one should, with water, sprinkle Digambara 
(the naked Lord Siva), the Lord of the Devas, all of whose 
limbs have turned grey due to dust. He should sprinkle the 
water all over his body. Indeed, god Mahesvara is delighted 
even with such secular rites and activities. On being worshipped 
with devotion, he grants his own Sayujya (Salvation where¬ 
in the devotee becomes one with the Deity). 
44b-46.^ On the first day in the bright half of the month 
of Vai^akha, one shall worship Visnu who sports in the Uni¬ 
verse. He should worship in accordance with the injunctions. 
The man who observes the Vrata should feed the Brahmanas. 
Similarly, on the first day in the bright half of the month of 
Jyestha and Asadha, one shall worship Brahma, the preceptor 
of the worlds. Thereat, accompanied by Visnu, Brahma the 
Lord of the chiefs of all worlds, grants identity with himself. 
The devotee shall then attain all the Siddhis. 
47-48.® O excellent Brahmana, Vratas to be observed on 
the first day of the twelve months—Vratas bestowing worldly 
pleasures here and Liberation from Samsara hereafter have been 
recounted to you. Brahmacarya (observance of celibacy) is laid 
down in all these Vratas. The diet during these Vratas is pre¬ 
scribed as Havisyanna (cooked rice soaked in ghee) as common 
to all. 
1. The last redactor of the NP seems to have rectified the missing 
Vratas cn Vaiiikha Sukla 1st, by adding vv. 44b-46. 
2. VV. 47-48 prescribe the general rules about observance of Vratas 
mentioned (vide AP. 175). 


1428 
Ndrada Purd^ 
C3IAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND ELEVEN 
Exposition ofVraias to he observed on DvitiySs (second Tithi in lunar 
fortnight) 
Sandtana said : 
1. O Brahmana, listen. I shall recount to you the Vratas 
of Dvitiyas (to be observed on the second day of the lunar 
fortnight). On observing them with devotion, a man is honoured 
in the Brahmaloka. 
2-3a. On the second day in the bright half of the month 
of Caitra, the devotee should propitiate Brahma alongwith his 
&ikti. He should eulogise the deity and propitiate him with 
Havisyanna (cooked rice soaked in ghee), scents and other 
things. He shall thus attain the benefit of all sacrifices. 
After realising all desires, he shall attain the region of the 
supreme spirit in the end. 
3b-4a. O Brahma^, on this very day, others worship 
the rising crescent moon at the beginnii^ of the night. They 
attain worldly pleasures and liberation. 
4b-6. Or on this day, one shall devotedly worship the twin 
gods, Alvins and offer gold and silver eyes to a Brahmana 
covering them with a pot filled with curd or ghee ? O leading 
Brahmana, by performing this Netravrata^ for twelve years one 
becomes verily a king. He attains a comely form. He becomes 
valorous against the hosts of his enemies. He becomes 
interested in Dharma, and the chief of all kings. 
7-8a. On the second day in the bright half of the month 
of Radha (Vaiiakha), one shall worship Brahma in the form of 
Visnu in accordance with the injunction, over a pitcher contain- 
ing seven kinds of grains. After enjoying all desirable worldly 
pleasures here one attains Vi^nuloka thereby. 
1. VV 4b*6 describe the Nttra-vrata ox CakfUrvraU. CSC on Vrata I. 
392-93 mentions that the Vretin (observer of the Vrata) is to subsist on curds 
and ghee on this tithi. 


IV.111.8b-17a 
1429 
8I>9. On the second day in the bright half of the month 
of Jye^fha, one should worship the Sun-god, Lord of the worlds 
who has assumed the form of the four-faced Lord, in accordance 
with the injunctions. After feeding the Brahmanas with devotion, 
he shall attain the world of Sun-God. 
10-12. The second day in the bright half of the month of 
Asadha is very meritorious. On that day, the observer of the 
Vrata takes Balarama in procession alongwith Subhadra. He 
goes round the various parts of the city, alongwith Bridima^ 
and others. After going near a tank or a river, he should 
celebrate the great festival. At the end of it, he should re-instate 
them duly in the Lord’s abode. He should feed Brahmanas for 
completing the holy rite. 
13. Prajapati or the creator of the universe sleeps on the 
second day in the bright half of the month of Nabhas (Sravana) 
That tithi is therefore very sacred. It is called Afokafayana.* 
14-16a. One should worship the four-faced deity lying in 
the bed alongwith his Sakti. After bowing down to the Lord of 
the worlds, one shall utter this Mantra : “O Srikanta (lover of 
Sri) O Srivatsadharin (one who bears the Srivatsa mark), 
Srivasa (abode of good fortune), O Sripati (Lordof Sri), O 
Dharmartha-Kamada (the bestower of virtue, wealth, and love) 
may not my wedded life perish.” Here the charitable gift of a 
crescent made of gold is recommended. It brings about aU 
Siddhis. 
16b-17a. On the second day in the bright half of the 
month of Bhadrapadk, one should worship the creator of the 
1. VV. 13-15 describe the Aioka-Sqyana-Vrata, also called Aiunya- 
^q^am-Vrata. It is meant for both men and women. NP prescribes the 
worship of the four-faced god Brahmft while he is lying in bed with his Sakti, 
in this Vrata. But in Vifpudharmottara. 1. 145. 6-20 and AP. 177. 3-12 the 
worahip of Vi?nu and Lak$mi is prescribed. Strangely enough after wor¬ 
shipping Brahmi the prayer is addressed to Vifou in the NP (v. 15); the 
name of the Vrata is based on the prayer. 
Lakfmyd na iibtyaih varadayathA U Jeyanam vibhof 
Sajyd mamdpjfoiatffd' stu tathaiva madhusHdanalf 
—AP. 177. 7b-8a. 
It is to be observed for four months from Sravapa, 


1430 
Ndrada Purdi^a 
universe in the form of Indra in accordance with the prescrib¬ 
ed injunctions. He shall obtain the fruit of the performance 
of all sacrifices. 
# 
17b-21.‘ The second day in the bright half of the month 
Alvina is very holy. The charitable gift made on this day is 
said to yield endless benefits. Formerly, Yama was fed by 
Yamuna in her house on the second day in the bright half of 
Karttika. Hence, this is called Yamadvitlya.i If one takes food in 
the house of one’s sister on this day, it is conducive to nourish¬ 
ment. He must give her clothes and ornaments. It is the tithi 
on which Lord Yamaraja was fed by Yamuna with her own 
hand, out of sisterly affection. Hence, he who takes his food 
from the hand of his sister on that day, attains excellent jewels, 
wealth and food-grains. 
22. Pitrs should be worshipped through Sraddha on the 
second day in the bright half of the month of MargaS[rsa. 
Then the devotee obtains good health alongwith his sons and 
grandsons. 
23-24. On the second day in the bright half of the 
month of Pausa, the rite of sprinkling with the water a cow’s 
horns, is the bestower of all desires unto men. The sight of the 
rising moon is abo conducive to the attainment of all desires. 
For the purpose of achieving virtue, love and wealth, the 
devotee should restrict hb diet to cooked rice soaked in ghee 
and subdue his sense-organs and worship the rising moon by 
offering Arghya and flowers alongwith ghee. 
25-29a. On the second day in the bright half of the 
month of Magha, one shall duly worship Prajapati in the form 
of Sun, with red flowers and red unguents. He shall make an 
image of the deity in gold, according to his capacity. He 
should take a copper vessel full of wheat or rice grains. He 
should dedicate all these things to the Lord and offer the same 
to aBrahmana. If thb Vratab thus performed, the devotee shall 
1. VV. I8b-21 describe the Tama dvittyd Vrata. It was on the 2nd day 
of the bright half of K&rttika that Yama, the god of Death, was fed by his 
sister Yamuni that people are advised to go to their sisters on this day and 
take meal and gift her with clothes and ornaments. The story is told in Bf. 


IV.l 11.29b—112.1 
1431 
be like the rising sun. The man will be unapproachable and 
unthwartable in the world. After enjoying all excellent worldly 
pleasures here, he attains Brahma’s region in the end. He will 
be seated in an excellent aerial chariot, eulogised frequently 
by the Devas. 
29b-31. An excellent Brahmana should worship Siva 
with white and fragrant flowers on the second day in the bright 
half of the month of Phalguna. He should make a canopy and 
decorate it with flowers and ornamental fittings. He should 
propitiate the Lord with Naivedyas of various kinds. He should 
offer incense and lights. He should f>erform Nirajana rite 
(waving of lights). Prostrating on the ground with eight limbs 
touching it, he shall make obeisance to the Lord. 
32. Worshipping the Lord of the Devas thus, the man 
becomes free from all sickness. With plenty of wealth and 
food-grains, he shall certainly live for a hundred years. 
33. The injunctions regarding the Dvitiyas of the bright 
half of the month should be followed in the case of those of the 
dark half of the month also, by the people clever in the matter 
of procedures. 
34. It is the fire-god alone that is worshipped separately 
in the different months. He assumes different forms and so is 
worshipped on the Dvitiyas. The vow of celibacy etc. are to 
be observed as before. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWELVE 
Enumeration of Vratas to be observed on Trtiyds (third day of a lunar 
fortnight 
Sandtana said : 
I. O Narada, listen. I shall recount to you the Vratas 
pertaining to Tftiya (third day in the lunar fort-night). On 
P. UUara 14. 18-23. It is also known as Bhrdif-doitiyd {BhaiyyA-duja 
and people make it a point to go to their sister’s place and oiTer her some 
gift. yrj. quotes CC. wherein the Bf. P. mentioned above is quoted. Vrj. 
quotes from the Sanatkumdra Sarnhitdt LP Sc Pd. P. in support of this Vrata 
which b an act of fraternal affection. 


1432 Ndrada Purd^a 
observing these Vratas perfectly, a woman shall attain married 
bliss and good fortune. 
2-5. An unmarried virgin desirous of a bridegroom, and 
one desirous of matrimonial bliss and good fortune fo*r her sons 
and husband, should perform Gauri Vrata.^ The image of 
Gauri is made of gold, silver, copper or clay along with that of 
her Lord (Siva) on the third day in the bright half of the 
month of Caitra. O Brahmana, she then worships it with scents, 
fragrant flowers, clothes, auspicious ornaments, and bundles of 
Durva grass. She observes fast. She propitiates Brahma^ 
women whose husbands and sons are alive and girls with 
auspicious characteristics, by offering them saffron, collyrium, 
clothes and other things. Delighted ip her mind, she should keep 
awake that night with the desire to fulfil the Vrata. 
6. O Brahmana, she should give that image to the 
preceptor if it is metallic. If it is made of clay, she should 
immerse it in a tank or a river. 
7. She should perform this auspicious Gauri Vrata for 
twelve years. With the due formal resolve to donate, she 
should offer twelve cows also for the achievement of her 
desires. 
8. What more needs be spoken ? There is no other bes- 
tower of good fortune and matrimonial bliss to women in all 
the three worlds like Gauri. 
9. A woman attains wealth, good husband, sons, 
learning, ability to command, fame and happiness—in fact all 
desired happiness, by worshipping Gauri with devotion. 
1. VV. 2-9 describe the (?aurt Vrata which if observed for twelve 
years, confers a good consort to the lady observer if unmarried, uninterrupted 
matrimonial bliss, if married, good fortune and all desired happiness. HD V. 
i. p. 296 gives five varieties of this Vrata some of which arc to be observed in 
Aivina {Kxtyaratndkara 219), on the 4th day of Jyc9tha (Bd. p). It is similar 
to GauTl-txtiy&-\rata observed on the 3rd day of the bright half of Caitra, 
Bhddrapada, Magha—{Samaya-mqjfukha 36). 
There is another Gawi Vrata to be observed on the 4th day in the 
bright half of Magha. It is also called phupdhi Vrata, Ku^a Vrata, Lalitd 
Vrata and Sdnti Vrata, vide infra I. 113. 80.85. 


IV.l 12.10-14 
1433 
10. The third day in the bright half of the month of 
Vaisakha is glorified as Ak$aya Trtiya.^ That is the Tithi on 
which Tretayuga began. Whatever holy rite is performed on 
this day is made everlasting (Aksaya) by this Trtiya. 
11-12a. Wise men know that two inaugural days of 
Yugas (viz. that of Krta and Trcta) were in the bright half of 
the month, while those of the other two Yugas (viz. Dvapara 
and Kali) were in the dark fortnight (of the lunar month). 
The two (inaugural) days in the bright fortnight are to be 
accepted (observed) in the earlier half of the day. Out of the 
Yugadi days in the dark fortnight, Dvapara began in Magha 
while the Kali Age commenced in Bhadrapada. Thus commenced 
the Yugas* on these days. 
12b-13. The devotee should worship Narayana, the 
preceptor of the universe accompanied by Sri, with flowers, 
incense and unguents on the third day in the bright half of 
the month of Vaisakha. Or if he takes his holy dip in the waters 
of the Gahga, he is absolved of all sins. 
14. He should worship Visnu with unbroken rice-grains. 
He shall have his ablution with water mixed with unbroken 
1. VV 10-15 describe the Akfaya Txtiyi Vrata which falls on the 
3rd day of the bright half of Vaisakha. Any meritorious act performed on 
this day, becomes ever-lasting. Hence the epithet Akfaya. The speciality of 
this day is that it marks the beginning of the Tretd Tuga. The rite pertains 
to the worship etc. of god Vijnu accompanied by Sri. The performer 
devotee attains the region of Vispu. Cf. Vif(iu Dh. S. 90. 16-17: also Bhavif~ 
voliara P. 30. 2-3 & 19. 
2. VV 11-12a. give the Yugadi/i/Aif vide / 56. 147-48 for the 
Tugidi Tiihis—the tithi on which a particular Yuga began. According to 
the NP. the following are the Yugidi tithis for the following Yugas. 
Tuga Tithi 
!• Kfta 9th day Karttika, 3u. (bright half) (3uddha) 
2. Treta — 3rd day Vaisakha, Su. 
3. Dvapara — 15th day of Migha (Vd—Vadya—dark half) 
4. Kali — 13th day of BhSdrapada, Vd. 
VP. III. 14. 12-13 supports this, though AP. 209. 14 differs about 
Kfta-Yuga. 
As Tugddi days arc recommended for the performance of Srdddha etc., 
the first half of the day is preferable for Tugidi day in the bright half of a 
month, while the latter half is recommended for the Yug&di days in the dark 
half of the month. 


1434 
Ndrada Purdm. 
rice grains. He should feed Brahmanas with the flour of barley 
first fried and then ground. He himself shall partake of it. 
15. O Brahmana, the man who performs the rites thus 
and who is devoted to Visnu attains Visnu’s world. He is bowed 
to by all the Devas. 
16. The third day in the bright half of the month of 
Jyestha is well known by the name Rambha.' On that day, one 
should duly worship and honour an excellent Brahmana accom¬ 
panied by his wife. 
17-18a. With the desire for conjugal blessedness a 
woman should perform this holy rite and worship the Brahmana 
couple with scents, fragrant flowers, silken garments, etc. O 
Br^mana, if this holy Rambha rite is duly observed, it yields 
wealth, sons, and auspicious inclination towards Dharma 
(virtuous and religious rites). 
18b-21a. The lady who desires conjugal bliss should wear 
white clothes in the third day in the bright half of the month of 
A§a«^ha and worship Kesava accompanied by Laksmi symbolised 
or represented in a Brahmana accompanied by his wife. She 
should propitiate them with meals, charitable gifts of cows, 
clothes and ornaments and pleasing words. By observing this 
Vrata, the lady shall be blessed with wealth and food-grains. 
By the grace of the Lord of the Devas, she shall attain Visnu s 
world. 
2lb. Svarna-Gauri Vrata® is to be performed on the 
third day in the bright half of the month of Sravana. 
1. VV 16-18 mention Rambhi Vrata which consists of worship 
of a Brihmana couple. It yields wealth, sons and inclination to Dharma. 
The Rambhd Vrata mentioned in the Bhavifyottara P. 18. 1-36 and CC on Vrata 
I. 426-430 is different, as it recommends that worship of Devi, and homa, etc. 
are to be performed therein. 
2. VV 2lb-29 describe the Svarpa G<mri Vrata to be performed by 
ladies, on the 3rd day of lSravat?a J§u. for the propitiation of goddess Gauri or 
Bhavini. In Karnataka it is observed on the 3rd day of Bhidrapada (Vrj. 
p. 45). Herein the number 16 is very significant. Goddess Gauri is worshipp¬ 
ed with 16 upaedras and prayed for conjugal blessedness, sons and wealth. The 
Vrata is to be observed for 16 years at the end of which a gold image of 
Gauri is to be worshipped, 16 wickerworks filled with 16 edibles are to be 
given to 16 couples of Br§hmaims and the gold image to be given to the 


IV.112.22a-30 
1435 
22a-23a. The lady devotee should worship goddess 
Bhavan! by means of the sixteen Upacaras (articles and modes 
of worship and service) with the Prayer—“O goddess of holy 
rites, obeisance be to you. Be pleased to grant me sons and 
wealth, grant me conjugal blessedness. Do bestow on me all 
other desired things.” 
23b-24a. After praying thus to Bhavani the goddess of 
the Dcvas, accompanied by God Siva, the lady devotee, desirous 
of completion of the holy rite should make the gift of sweet 
meats etc. to Brahmanas. 
24b-25a. After performing this auspicious Vrata for 
sixteen years, she should perform the concluding ceremony of 
the Vrata (Udyapana) with great devotion. She should not 
exhibit stinginess in the matter of expenses. 
25b-28. In a pandal in a pure Mandala (mystic diagram) 
she should perform the worship of GanciSa and other gods. She 
should then place a flat saucer-like copper-dish over the water 
pot and worship a gold-image of Bhavani therein with scents 
and fragrant flowers. Thereafter, theHoma should be performed. 
Sixteen bamboo vessels (baskets) shall be filled with sweet 
dishes and cooked rice, offered to the Devi as Naivedya and 
distributed among Brahmanas, kinsmen and relatives. 
29. The woman interested in the observance of this 
Vrata shall attain the full benefit by giving the gold image 
to the preceptor and monetary gifts to the other Brahmanas. 
30. On the third day in the bright half of the month of 
Bhadrapada, the lady devotee should perform the Vrata of 
Haritalika^ with great devotion, in accordance with the in- 
prcccptor. The Vrj. quotes a story from the Sk. P. about this Vrata. The 
Udy&pam (concluding ceremony) of this Vrata agrees with that in the Sk. P. 
as quoted by Kr;., pp 46-47. 
1. VV 30-35 describe the Harit&lVcd Vrata. This is very popular in 
htaharashtra but not in Gujarat or Bengal. Only women are eligible for 
this and they observe a fast on this day and propitiate goddess UraS and 
Siva. This Vrata is found in late mediaeval digests like the Ninfaya Sindht 
(p. 133). Vrj. pp. 48 quotes the story of Harit&lik& from the 
Bhaoifyottara Purdtia. The Udj^^tana-ntc in the NP is similar to that in the 


1436 
Ndrada Purdjfa 
Junctions, along\vith the rites of Padya (viz. offering water for 
washing the feet, hands, worship) Arghya and Arcana. 
31-32. Then the cooked rice and the Daksina should be 
placed in a gold, silver, copper, bamboo or a clay vessol along- 
with fruits and clothes. The same shall then be given to a 
Brahmana. At the end of it, she should have the Parana (break 
the fast) alongwith the kinsmen. 
33. The woman who observes this holy rite shall enjoy 
all desirable pleasures. She shall become a friend and attendant 
ofGauri, thanks to the efficacy of this Vrata. 
34. Sixteen bamboo-baskets hlled with bliss-yielding 
articles and clothes should be enthusiastically given to a 
Brahmana in accordance with the injunctions. 
35-36. She should then give generous monetary gifts 
to the other excellent Brahmanas also for the satisfaction of 
the goddess. The woman who performs this holy rite of 
Saubhagya Vardhana (that which increases conjugal blessed¬ 
ness) certainly attains it, thanks to the grace of the CJoddess. 
37-38. When the Trtiya in the month of Bhadrapada 
coincides with the constellation Hasta, the Vrata taught by 
J§auri (Krsna ? ) is called Hastagaurivrata'. The Vrata called 
Kotisvari and Lakse^vari^ has been proclaimed by Siva the 
Pinakabearing Lord. Its rules of procedure are being mentioned: 
\RJ, pp. 48-52. Sixteen wicker-baskets containing 'bliss-yielding articles 
(indicating Satibhdgya—conjugal happiness) and cloth are to be given to 
Brahmapas. This Vrata increases conjugal blessedness. The term Satibhdgya 
Vardhana here docs not imply a new Vrata of that name. Dr. Kane in HD. 
V. 1., p. 456 mentions three Saubhdgya Vratas but they are quite 
different. 
1. VV 37-39 describe Hasta-Gaurl-Vrata which is to be observed 
when the constellation Hasta coincides with the 3rd day of Bhadrapada §u. . 
Krfpa has told this Vrata. The Vratdrka requires contemplation of Oauri, 
Hara and Gane^ in this Vrata, for 13 years and the Udydpana (conclusion) 
of this Vrata in the 14th year (HD. V. i. p. 462). 
2. W 38-45a describe the KofUvard alias LakfeJvari Vrata to be 
observed on the 3rd day of BhAdrapada Su. {SuddhaPakfa—The bright half). 
It is called Lak$ejvari as a paste of one hundred thousand grains of rice 
or Sesame seeds is used to form the image of F&rvati. Fast is to be observed 
on that day. CC on Vrata I. 459-461 quotes the Sk. P. for this Vrata. also 
vide HD. V-I. p. 290. 


IV. 112.39-50 
1437 
39. On this day, the Vrata has to be taken up for four 
years. O Narada, every year it has to be performed alongwith 
the observance of fast. 
40. Unbroken rice grains or gingelly seeds should be 
selected, O leading sage, to the extent of one hundred 
thousand. They should be cleaned and put in boiling water. 
41. When the grains are cooked well, a splended image 
of the goddess should be made. It should be embellished with 
scented flowers and flower garlands. 
42-44. Goddess Parvati should be installed therein and 
worshipped with great devotion, with scents, fragrant flowers, 
incense, lights and detailed Naivedya offerings and fruits. O 
Brahmana, she should bow to the goddess and crave forgiveness. 
Then she should immerse the image of the goddess in the middle 
of a water-tank. Dak^ina is then offered to the Br^hmanas who 
are knowers of religious rites and procedures. She should then 
partake of her food the next day. Thus, O Brahmana, the Koti 
Lak^e^vari Vrata has been narrated to you. 
45a. In the end she goes to the world of Gauri, thanks 
to the power of this Vrata. 
45b. On the third day in the bright half of the month of 
Isa (ue. Asvina), the lady devotee should perform BrhadGaurP 
Vrata. 
46. O N^ada, this Vrata is to be performed for five 
years in accordance with the rules of procedure mentioned above. 
At the end, she should worship the main preceptor and other 
Brahmanas with cash presents etc. 
47-50. Five Suvasinis (married women whose husband 
are alive) should be worshipped asHaripriy^ (beloveds of Hari) 
with clothes, ornaments, sandal paste, bodices, earrings and 
necklaces; five bamboo baskets are used and they are tied round 
1. VV. 45 b*53 describe the Brhad-Gavrf-Vrata to be obsoved aa 
the 3rd day of Aivina 3u. (Aiddha) according, to NP., but on Bhidnu 
pada Kr. {Krfpa) Tft^d as per VBJ. In southern Maharashtra and in 
Karnataka, a plant Dorll or Ridga^ (in Marathi) is brought along with its 
roots, finaits and branches for worship. A thread is wound round the neck in 
the name of Gauri. V8J. (pp. 53-54) narrates the story about this VnUa 
from the Bhaoifyottara P. 


1438 
Nirada Purim 
with threads. The baskets are hlled with saffron, cumin-seeds, 
and bliss-yielding articles. Vayanas (preseyits of sweet-meats) 
comprising of ground wheat flour, fresh Apupa (biaked pies), 
fruits etc. These must be given to the Suv^inls who also* be fed. 
After giving as worshipful gift half the materials gathered as 
Vayanas, she shall silently take her food. For the increase of the 
desired objects, a fruit (out of the gift) should be worn round 
the neck. 
51. Getting up early in the morning, bedecked in 
ornaments and accompanied by her friends, she should go to a 
river to the accompaniment of songs and instrumental music. 
There Gauri image is ritualistically bidden farewell to (into 
the river) with the prayer : 
52. “O gentle lady, you had been invoked by me and 
worshipped duly (as per procedure), you may be pleased to go 
away at will, for granting me conjugal bliss”. 
53. After observing the holy rite, thus, O Brahmana, 
and after enjoying all worldly pleasures, thanks to the grace of 
the goddess, she shall attain Gauri’s world after death. 
54-55. On the third day in the bright half of the month 
of Crja (Karttika), she (the lady) should perform Visnugauri- 
vrata.* After worshipping the goddess worthy of being saluted 
by the whole world, with different modes of worship and services 
and after feeding the suvasini (a married woman with husband 
alive) who has been honoured duly with auspicious articles, she 
should bid farewell to the goddess after bowing to her, for 
obtaining the grace of satisfaction of Visnugauri. 
56. On the third day in the bright half of the month of 
Margaiir^, a woman should perform the auspicious HaraGauri 
Vrata* in accordance with the injunctions laid down before, in 
the above-mentioned Vrata and should worship Jagadambika 
(Mother of the Universe). 
57. As a result of the prowess of this Vrata, she shall 
enjoy all charming worldly pleasures. Attaining the world of 
the goddess, she rejoices with her. 
1. VV. 54-55 briefly dcKribes the Vraia called Vif^u Gauri. 
2. VV. 56-57 deal with Hara-Gatiri Vrata. 


IV. 112.58-63 
1439 
58-59a. On the third day in the bright half of the month 
of Pausa, a woman should perform the Brahmagaurivrata' in 
accordance with the injunctions laid down above. O excellent 
Brahmana, on being worshipped^rahmaGauri shall be delighted. 
Thanks to her grace, the lady devotee becomes associated with 
the goddess and rejoices herself. 
59b-60. On the third day in the bright half of the month 
ofMagha, (goddess) Saubhagya-Sundail* should be worshipped 
in accordance with the rules of procedure mentioned before, by 
means of offering Arghya with coconuts. Delighted and rendered 
pleased by means of the Vrata, the goddess grants her own 
world. 
61. The third day in the bright half of the month of 
Phalguna, is the bestower of family happiness. If the goddess 
is worshipped with scents, fragrant flowers etc., she shall be the 
bestower of all auspiciousness. 
62. O sage, in all these Trtiyas (vratas on the third days 
of the lunar fortnight) the rules regarding the Puja of the 
goddess, the honour to the Brahmana, the charitable gifts, Homa 
and the ritualistic dismissal of the goddess are the same. 
63. Thus the Vratas to be performed on Trtiyas have 
been narrated to you here. If observed with great devotion, 
they shall bestow all desirable objects cherished in mind. 
1. VV. 58-59a describeBraAiwa-Cawri Fra/a. It will thus be seen that 
the Gauri Vratas are the same but are associated with each member of the 
Trinity of gods and are performed on the 3rd days of lunar fortnights. 
2. VV. 59b-60 describe the Saubhigya-Stmdari Vrata (to propitiate 
goddess Um&, though the NP. is silent about the name of the deity). VRJ. 
prescribes its performance on M&rgasirsa or M4gha (Kr.) T>h>d, espwrially 
when it is conjoined with the next (4th) Tiths, and not with the previous 
one. VRJ (pp. 54-47) quotes a long story from the Bhavisyottara P. 
glorifying this Vrata. 


1440 
Ndrada Purdna 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTEEN 
The Exposition of the holy rites to be 
performed on Caturthis (the fourth day in , 
the Lunar fortnight) 
Sandtana said : 
1. O Brahmana listen, I shall recount to you the holy 
vows and rites to be observed on Caturth! days.^ On observing 
them, men and women shall attain their cherished desires. 
2-3a. On the fourth day in the Lunar fortnight in the 
month of Gaitra,*, one should duly worship Ganapa (i.e. 
Gane^a) in the form of Vasudeva and offer gold as Daksina to 
a Brahmana. He will be bowed to by the Devas (thereby), and 
then go to Visnuloka. 
3b-4. On the CaturthI day in the month of Vaisakha, the 
devotee should pray to the deity called Sariikarsana. By giving 
a conch-shell to imp>orant Brahmana householders, the knower 
of religious injunctions shall attain the world of Sariikarsana 
and rejoice there for many Kalpas. 
5. On the CaturthI day in the month of Jyestha the per¬ 
son should worship the deity in the form of Pradyumna. By 
giving fruits and roots to the herds (of cattle or beasts), he 
shall attain heaven. 
1. Just as all the third days in the lunar fortnights are sacred to 
the goddess (in any form of the Trinity), the fourth days of the lunar 
fortnights are sacred to god Ganeia. The Vrata gives sp>ecial merit or fruit, 
if the 4th Tithi falls on Sunday or Tuesday. {VV. 90-91 below). 
2. W. 2-6 synthesize the Catur-iyuha doctrine of the Paficaratrins 
with a iSaiva god like Gaoesa, by identifying him with Vifnu. This is 
Vaifnavization, as the NP. is a Vai^nava Furana, while in the Kurma P, 
we find Pi^upatization of an originally Vaif^ava Pura^a 
The Gatuia Vysha accepts the names of the Paiicaritrins. 
Thus we find : 
God Gantta to bo worshipped on the Name of the Vyuha 
^th Tithi of; 
1. Caitra 
2. VaiiSkha 
3* Jye9tha 
4. Asadha 
This Vrata is to be observed for 12 years. 
Vksudeva 
Sankar$ana 
Pradyumna 
Aniruddha 


IV.113.6-18a 
1441 
6. On the Caturthi day in the month of Asadha, a man 
should worship Aniruddha. By giving pot>gourd-vessels to 
ascetics, he attains the cherished desires. 
7. After performing these holy rites of the four Murtis 
for twelve years, the Udyapana rite should be performed in 
accordance with the injunctions, by the devotee who wishes for 
the benefit thereof. 
8. On the Caturthi day in the month of Jyesfha, there 
is another Vrata viz. the excellent Sativrata. By performing it, 
the devotee rejoices in the world of the mother of Ganapati on 
a par with him. 
9-10. There is another auspicious Vrata on the Catur¬ 
thi day in the month of Asadha, since it is the day on which 
Kalpa called Rathantara began. The man should worship 
Ganesa duly with his mind sanctified by faith. He shall attain 
the benefit inaccessible even to the Devas and others. 
11-17a. On the Caturthi day in the month of Srava^ia, 
O sage, when the moon has risen, the devotee, the most excel¬ 
lent among the knowers of the procedure, should offer Arghya 
unto Ganesa. He shall meditate on Lambodara (Gk)d Ganeia), 
the three-eyed, four-armed deity who is red-complexioned, 
whose face beams with pleasure, and who is bedecked in differ¬ 
ent kinds of jewels and ornaments. He should worship him with 
all modes of services such as invocation, etc. He should offer 
Modaka (sweet meat) as Naivedya which gives pleasure to 
Gane^. After performing the Vrata thus, he shall partake of 
the Modakas. During the night, after the worship, he should 
gladly sleep on the bare ground. Thanks to the power of this 
Vrata, he shall obtain all desires cherished in his mind in 
this world, and (after death) shall attain the region of Ganela> 
In all the three worlds, there is no other Vrata like this. Hence, 
it must be observed with all (possible) efforts by one who wishes 
to attain all cherished desires. 
17b-18a. O celestial sage, some wish that the holy rite 
called Durvaganapativrata^ should be performed on this very 
1. W. l7b-23 describe the Durod Gtastapaii Vrata. VRJ (pp. 60 fF) 
states that it commences on the 4th day of Sravaoa Su. 4 or K^rttika 
Su. 4, and quotes stories from the Saura P. and the SK.P. to glorify this- 


1442 NdradaPurdna 
same day. I shall tell you the injunctions regarding its perfor¬ 
mance. 
18b-23a. The devotee should make the image of Gana- 
pati in gold and place it over a copper vessel after*covering it 
with a red cloth. He should worship the (entire set) on the 
mystic diagram called Sarvatobhadra, with red flowers five 
kinds of leaves viz. Bilva, Apamarga, Sami, Durva, and Hari- 
priya (i.e. Tulasi).With these leaves and other floweri he should 
perform worship. He shall offer fruits and sweetmeats as 
Naivedya. After that, O ascetic, with pleasure, he should offer 
the Arghya. Then, O sage, after praying to it, he should give 
the image of Vighneia (ganesa) alongwith the adjuncts to the 
preceptor who knows the rules of procedure. He should honour 
him befittingly and then give it to him. He should continue the 
Vrata for five years, after duly performing worship. After 
enjoying all pleasures here he will go to the world of 
Ganapati. 
23b-27a. On the Gaturthi day (in the dark half) of the 
month of Bhadrapada, is the holy rite called Bahuladhenuka. 
On this day, the deity cow is to be assiduously worshipped 
with scents, garlands, barley, and other things. After circumam¬ 
bulating the cow deity, he should offer charitable gifts, if he 
can afford. If he cannot afford it, he shall bow to it and set it 
free. He should continue the Vrata for five, ten or sixteen years. 
He shall then perform the Udyapana rite and give a milch cow 
(as charitable gift). Thanks to the power of this Vrata, he 
shall enjoy all charming worldly pleasures, and duly honoured 
and greeted by groups of Devas, he shall attain Goloka (the 
world of cows). 
27b-30. On the fourth day in the bright half (of the 
monthofBhadrapada)is the holy rite called Siddha-Vainayaka-^ 
Vrata. As per SK. P., the Vrata is to be observed from Srava^a Su. 4 to 
Magha Su. 4. VRJ. gives two more varieties, one allowing its commence¬ 
ment on any &ukla Caturtki if it falls on a Sunday, and another prescribing 
21 days duration from Sr&va^a Su. 5 to Sriva^a Kr. 10. 
1. W. 23b-27 describe Bahuli~dhenuka Vrata to be performed on 
Bhidrapada Kf. 4, the deity being the cow. 
2. 27b-39 describe the Siddha-Vinilyaka Vrata so popular as Gaotia 
Caturthf in Maharashtra and other parts of India, though with some 


IV. 113.31-37 
1443 
vrata (or ‘Siddhi-Vinayaka vrata). Through invocation and all 
other modes of service, the worship should be performed. Con¬ 
centrating the mind, he should meditate on Siddhivinayaka. 
He should meditate on LordGanesaas Ekadanta (single-tusked) 
iSurpakarna (one with winnow-Iike ears), Gajavaktra (elephant¬ 
faced), Caturbhuja (four-armed), Pasaiikusa-Dhara (one hold¬ 
ing in his hand, a noose and a goad), the Lord resembling 
molten gold (in complexion). He should offer twentyone leaves 
uttering the twentyone names (one by one) with devotion. 
Listen to those names. 
31-37. Sami-leaf should be offered to Sumukha (the 
good-faced Deity), the Bhrhga-leaf to Ganadhi^a, the Bilva- 
leaf to the son of Uma, Durva-grass to the elephant-faced God, 
Badari to Lambodara (the big-bellied deity), Dhattura to the 
son of Hara (Siva), Tulasi-leaf to Surpakarna (God with ears 
like winnowing baskets) Sami-leaf to Vakra-tunda (God with a 
curved trunk), Apamarga leaf to Guhagraja (Elder brother of 
Karttikeya), Barhata leaves (those of brinjals) to Ekadanta 
(Single-tusked god), Sindura (saffron) to Heramba, leaf of the 
fragrant plant called Patra to Gaturhotra, the leaf of the Agas- 
tya tree which is pleasing to Sarvesvara (Lord of all). 
He should them take up a pair of the leaves of Durva 
grass along with scents, fragrant flowers and unbroken rice- 
grains. With great devotion, he should offer worship and 
five Modakas as Naivedya, After the rite of Acamana, obeis¬ 
ance and prayer, he should ritualistically bid farewell to the 
Deity. 
O sage, he should give the image of Vinayaka, made of 
gold, to the preceptor along with adjuncts. He should then 
ditferent procedure than that given in the NP. VRJ (pp. 68 ff) quotes 
SK. P. from Hemidri {CC-Vrata 1.525-29). A strange restriction is that one 
should not look at the moon on this night, lest one should be accused of 
theft. It was due to this that Lord Krs^a was accused of stealing 
away Syamantaka jewel. If, however, one happens to catch a glimpse of 
the moon, he should repeat Verse No. 39 given below in’the NP. recounting 
the Syamantaka episode. This verse is quoted from VP. IV. 13.42 and b 
found in the P. 96. 42 and the BR.P. 16.36 referring to the 
same story. 


1444 
Ndrada PurSm 
give Daksi^ (religious gifts) to Brahmans. O Narada, one 
who performs worship with devotion like this for five years, 
shall attain all cherished desires as a result of his Upasana (de¬ 
votion and worship) here, as well as all splend^ things 
hereafter. 
38-39. Never shall one look at the moon on this Gaturthi 
day (i.e. night). There is no doubt about this that, if one looks 
at the moon, he will be falsely accused. In order to mitigate 
the defect thereof (i.e. of looking at the moon this night), 
this (following) Mantra from the Purana* should be recited : 
“The lion killed Prasena, the lion was killed by Jamba- 
van. O gentle boy, Do not cry. This Syamantaka jewel is 
offered to you.’* 
40-43a. On the Gaturthi day in the bright half of the 
month ofAsvina, one should worship Vinayaka (Kapardisa—the 
god with cowrie-like knotted hair) by means of the Purusa 
Sukta. He should render services without any reason (i.e. with¬ 
out any ulterior motive). He should offer the rice grains along- 
with the shell-coins to a Brahmana religious student who is 
worshipped with scents and fragrant flowers with prayer : “The 
rice grains have Visve Devas as their deity. They are mixed 
with the shell coins whose presiding deity is Hara. May the 
leader of the Ganas of Siva (Kapardin) be pleased, when ( the 
couries) are so dedicated.” 
43b-44a. The holy rite called Karakavrata^ is to be p>er- 
formed on the Gaturthi day in the dark half of the month of 
Karttika. Only women arc authorised to perform this Vrata. 
The rules of the procedure on it are being mentioned. 
*Like other material, the NP. seems to have borrowed this verse from 
the VP. IV. 13.42. The verse appears in a similar context in the P. 96. 
42 and Br. P. 16.36 
1. VV. 43b-51a describe the Kaxaka Vrata. Kcaraka is a water- 
vessel for ascetics, (some times made of coconut shell also). Only women 
are e%ible to observe this. It is to be performed on Kfirttika Kf. Gaturthi 
(Aivina by amdnta reckoning followed in VRJ., pp. 81*82 which quotes 
the Vdmma P. for its details). VBJ. ( pp. 79) narrates a Dai^ratha LalitS 
Vrata on the same day, but does not mix up the two as is done in 
Purufdrtha Cintimaai. The NP. does not mention the picture of Gauri (and 
her family) as the main deity but treats it as a Ga^tia Vrata. 


IV.113.44b-59 
1445 
44b-45. The woman should take her bath and bedeck 
herself. She should then worship god Ganesa. In front of the 
deity ten bowls filled with cooked rice shall be kept and be 
dedicated to the Lord of the Devas with devotion and purity of 
the mind. 
46-47. She should utter (pray) :—“May the deity be gra¬ 
cious unto me.” Saying this she should dedicate them to Gkxl 
Ganesa. Presents shall be given respectfully to Suvasinis (married 
women) and the Brahmanas according to desire. Then at night, 
when the moon rises, she should duly offer Arghya and partake 
of sweet-meats and cooked rice for the fulfilment of the 
Vrata. 
48. Or O sage, the bowls may be filled with milk or 
water alongwith a rice, a betel nut, rice-grains and jewels and 
gifted over to a Brahmana. 
49. The woman devotee should perform this holy rite for 
sixteen or twelve years. After making the due presents, she 
should ritualistically conclude this Vrata. 
50-51 a. Or the holy rite shall be observed by the woman 
throughout her life with a desire for conjugal blessedness. There 
is no other Vrata like this that yields conjugal blessedness to 
women. Hence it should be continuously performed. 
5lb-53. On the fourth day in the bright half of the 
month of Karttika, the holy rite Nagavrata^ is to be celebrated. 
The devotee shall perform the Samkalpa rite in the morning, 
and drink pure water from a cow’s horn. After the bath, he shall 
worship the serpents ^ankhapala and others as well as Sesa by 
means of diverse services (in worship) beginning with invo¬ 
cation. He should make Apyayana (developing and nouri¬ 
shing) by means of milk. This is known as Nagavrata. 
54. O leading Brahmana, if this auspicious observance of 
Nagavrata is performed thus by men, poisons perish ere long, 
and serpents do not bite them. 
55-59. O leading sage, this Vrata is to be celebrated on 
the fourth day in the bright half of the month of Margaiir^. 
1. VV. Slb-54 deal with the ^f&gavrata. CC~Vrata I. 5^ quotes 
this from the KP. 


1446 
Ndrada Purdm 
The full extent of the holy observance is for a period of four 
years, beginning with this CaturthI day. He must spend the 
first year, taking only a single meal per day. He must spend the 
second year by taking meal only at night every da^y. He shall 
spend the third year by taking in only the food obtained without 
solicitation. He shall spend the fourth year also similarly. If no 
food is offered, he observes a fast. After completing the vrala at 
the end of the fourth year, he should perform the rite of ablu¬ 
tion. He is then a Mahavratin (a man of great Vratas). He 
shall then make the replica of the ‘mouse-chariot’ of Vighnes- 
vara (i.e. god Ganesa) made of gold. If he cannot afford this, 
he should make the mystic diagram of a lotus with good petals, 
by means of colours. The jar is placed over it alongwith a cop¬ 
per vessel, that is filled with raw rice-grains. Image of Ganes- 
vara (i.e. Ganesa) is placed over it covered with two clothes. 
The devotee should worship the deity with scents and other 
things. 
60-61. Modaka is to be offered as Naivedya saying : 
“May Ganesa be pleased.” The night shall be spent by keeping 
awake through songs and instrumental music as well as in the 
narration of the Puranas. After the day has dawned, he should 
take bath and perform Homa in accordance with injunctions, 
with gingelly seeds, rice grains, barley grains and white mustard 
along with ghee and sugar-candy. 
62-64. The following sixteen names of the deity should be 
uttered in the dative case. Om is prefixed to them and Namah 
is added at the end. (For example, here the 1st name is Gana. 
It should be uttered and addressed as : Om Ganaya namah). 
The names of the god are : Gana, Ganadhipa, Kusm- 
and^j Tripurantaka, Lambodara, Ekadanta, Rukma-daiiistra, 
Vighnaha, Brahma, Yama, Varuna, Soma, Surya, Hutasana, 
Gandhamadin and Paramesfhin. 
With the utterance of each name, one oblation is offered 
into the fire. A hundred and eight Homas are performed with 
.the utterance of ‘Vakra-tunda’ and ‘Varman’ in the dative 
case (i.e. Vakra-tundaya and Varmane. 
65-66. Thereafter, he performs Homas with Vyahrtis 
to the extent of his capacity and then the Purnahuti is perform¬ 
ed. After worshipping the guardians of the quarters, he should 


IV. 113.67-75 
1447 
feed Brahmanas (twenty-four in number) with sweet-meats and 
milk-pudding. He should then give a cow along with its calf to 
the preceptor, along with monetary gifts. 
67-69a. He shall give cash presents to others also, accord¬ 
ing to his capacity (the more the better). After obeisance and 
circumambulation (around the Brahmanas), the excellent 
Br&hmanas should be bidden farewell to. He should, then, 
with great delight in his mind, take his food along with his kins¬ 
men. By performing this vrata, a man enjoys excellent worldly 
pleasures here, and attains the Liberation called Sayujya 
(absorption in the Deity) with Visnu, thanks to the Grace of 
Ganesa. 
69b-70a. O Narada, some call this by the name Vara- 
vrata.i Its rules of procedure and benefit are the same as in the 
case of the former. 
70b-71. On the Gaturihi dav in the month of Pausa, the 
devotee should pray to Vighnesa with great devotion. He should 
feed a single Brahmana with sweet-meats and offer monetary 
gifts also. O sage, if this is performed, the Vratin (the performer 
of the holy vow) shall become the recepient of riches. 
72-73a. The holy vow Saihkastavrata^ is to be observed 
on the fourth day in the dark half of the month of Magha. The 
Vratin should decide on observance of fast upto the rise of the 
moon, with his mind controlled. 
73b-74a. After the rise of the moon, the image of Ganesa, 
made of clay, should be placed on the pedestal alongwith his 
weapons and the vehicle. 
74b-75. It should be worshipped with the sixteen Upa- 
caras (modes of service) in accordance with injunctions. Modaka 
and ground gingelly seeds alongwith jaggery shall be offered as 
Naivedya. Arghya is offered in a copper vessel mixed with red- 
sandal paste. 
1. VV. 55-70 describe the Mahdvrata or Vara-Caturthl (in the SK.P.. 
vide CC-Vrata, I. .530-31). The observer gets Sdyuj^a (identity) with Visnu 
by observing this Gaijesa Kra/a—a Vaisnavite tilt. 
2. VV. 72-79 prescribe the Sankaf(avrata on the 4th day in 
Magha Kr., but it is observed every montli on Kj. 4 in Maharashtra. VRJ. 
(pp. 82-88) calls it Sankaffa-hara Ga^iapati Vrata (a Ganesa Vrata destroying 
extreme calamities) and attributes the illustrative story to Ndrada P. 


1448 
Ndrada PurS^a 
76-78. Kusa grass, Durva grass, flowers, raw rice grains, 
^amipatra (leaves of the Sami tree) and curds should be mixed 
together and offered to the Moon (with the prayer), “Omoon, 
the ruby in the ocean of the Armament, O Lord of Daksa’s 
daughters, O representative of Ganesa, kindly accept the Arghya 
offered by me.” Uttering this he should offer the divine Arghya, 
that is destructive of sins to Ganeia. After feeding excellent 
Brahmanas in accordance with his capacity, he should take food 
himself with their formal permission. 
79. O Brahmana, by performing this auspicious Vrata 
called Samkasta, he shall become flourishing with wealth and 
foodgrains. He shall never attain difficulty or pain. 
80-82. The excellent holy vow Gaurivrata' is to be ooserv- 
cd on the fourth day in the bright half of the month of Magha. 
On that day, Gauri is to be worshipped alongwith the groups of 
Yoginis by men as well as by women in particular. The articles 
of worship are the following : Kunda flowers, Kumkuma, red 
threads, red flowers, Alaktaka (the juice of red lac), incense, 
lights, oblations, ginger with jaggery, milk and milk puddings, 
salt and the greens called Palakas. 
83. Married women who are not widows and splendid 
Brahmanas are to be worshipped for the increase in conjugal 
bliss. Gifts must be made. One shall take food alongwith 
kinsmen. 
84. O Brahmana, this Gaurivrata is conducive to the in¬ 
crease of conjugal blesssedness. This must be performed every 
year both by men and women. 
85. The same holy rite is called Dhunc^hivrala by others. 
By some it is galled as Kundavrata. Others call it Lalitavrata 
and still others call it Santivrata. 
1. VV. 80-86 describe the Gauri alias phup^hi or Laliti or ^dnii 
Vrata. Though observed on Magha Su. 4, it is essentially a Devi Vrata, not 
directly connected with Ga^iesa, though the NP, attributes its fruits to the 
Grace of Gai^csa. In VRJ. (p. 82), it is called Gauri Caturthi Vrata and 
VBJ. quotes from Brahma P. from CC—Vrata I. 531. 


IV. 113.86—114.1 
1449 
86. Ablution, charitable gift, japa and hojna, O sage, 
all these rites performed on this day shall become thousandfold, 
thanks to the Grace of Dantin (god Ganesa). 
87. On the fourth day in the month of Phaig^a falls the 
auspicious Vrata of Dhundhiraja. Brahmanas are fed with cakes 
of ground gingelly-seed flour. The vower should also partake of 
it himself. 
88. One who is interested in the propitiation of Ganesa 
shall attain Siddhi by oflering religious gifts, Homa and Puja 
with gingelly seeds alone, thanks to His grace. 
89. The image of the elephant-faced deity should be made 
of gold. After worshipping assiduously, it must be given to an 
excellent Brahmana, for the flourishing increase in all riches. 
90. If a Gaturthi day coincides with Sunday or Tuesday 
in any of the twelve months, O leading Brahmana, it yields 
special benefits. 
91. In all the Caturthis, whether of the dark half or of 
the bright half of the month, Vighnesa (God Ganela), the 
Lord of the Devas should be worshipped by those who are 
eagerly engaged in devotion.” 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FOURTEEN 
The Exposition of Holy Vratas to be 
performed on Paheami days {fifth days of Lunar fortnight) 
Sanatana said ; 
I. O Brahmana, I shall recount to you the Vratas to be 
performed on Paficamis^ (fifth days in the halves of 
Lunar months). On observing these rites with devotion, one shall 
attain all cherished desires. 
I. Just as Caturtht Vratas are mainly concerned with god Gaoeia, 
Vratas on the 5th days of lunar fortnights arc auspicious for the worship of 


1450 
N&rada Purdna 
2. The Paficami (fifth day) in the bright half of the 
month of Caitra is called Matsya jayanti. On this day, the 
worship of the incarnation of the Lord as (Divine) Fish is to be 
performed with great festivities, by devotees. 
3-4a. This is called Sripancamp also. On this day, the 
worship of Sri is to be performed by the articles of 
worship such as scents etc., and the Naivedyas of milk pudding 
etc., Laksmi never forsakes a person who worships Laksmi here 
(on this day). 
4b-5a. Prthvivrata, Gandravrata and Hayagrivavrata are 
also to be performed by those who wish to attain different 
Siddhis, in accordance with the respective injunctions. 
5b-6a. On the Paficami day in the month of Vaisakha, 
the man shall worship Sesa, endowed with the attributes of 
serpents. He shall attain the desired benefit. 
6b-7a. The intelligent devoitee shall worship the Pitrs 
(Manes) on the Paficami day in the month of Jyestha. He shall 
have the acquisition of all desired benefits through feeding the 
Brahmanas. 
7b-l la. O sage, Vayu who is present everywhere is to be 
worshipped on the Paficami day in the month of Asadha. He 
should go out of the village and climb up to the ridge of a 
mountain. To a bamboo pole he should tie a banner of five 
colours. It should be succintly high. He should fix the pole in 
the middle of the mystic diagram of a lotus. O Narada, at its 
root in all the quarters, he should worship the guardians of 
the quarters and test the direction of the blow of the wind. 
Beginning with the first Yama, (period of three hours), he 
shall duly worship the Lord of that quarter in which the 
wind blows. 
serpents (NP. verse 61 below), though worship of Sages (Rsi-paflcaini) in 
VV. 34b-48, and of goddess Lalita {Lalitd Paficami VV. 49-.')3) is also 
given importance in the NP. 
1. There arc a number of days (e.g. MSrgasir^a §u. 5, Magha 
Su. 5) on which a Sri Paficami Vrata is prescribed. The iVf Vrata 
described in the NP. is mentioned in the Smrti Kaustubka. 92. VPJ. is 
silent about it. On this day (Caitra iSu, 3) Vratas called PrthvI, Cdndra and 
Hayagriva are also observed. 


IV.114.11b-19 
1451 
lib. He shall thus stay there for four YaJtnas without 
taking food. 
12. He should then return home in the evening. He 
should partake light food. With concentration of mind and 
after bowing down to the guardians of the world, he should lie 
down on bare yet clean ground and go to sleep. 
13. The dream that comes to him in the fourth Yama 
(quarter) on that night shall come true. So says Siva. 
14. If anything inauspicious happens in the dream, the 
devotee should be engaged in the worship of Siva and observe 
fast for all the eight subsequent Yamas (i.e. 24 hours) or for the 
day alone (i.e. 12 hours). 
15-16a. He should then feed eight Brahmanas. Thereby 
he shall attain auspicious benefits. This holy rite is called “Subha- 
subha-Nidarlana”^ (The test for auspicious and inauspicious 
results). It causes blessedness to men in this world as well as 
in other world. 
16b. The auspicious rite called Anna-samrddhi-da^ (the 
bestower of plentitude of food) is to be observed on the Pafi- 
cami day in the dark half of the month of Sravana. 
17-19. O Narada, on the previous CaturthI day when 
there is yet some part of the day, the intelligent devotee shall put 
all cooked food in different vessels and pour water therein. Then 
he should put it in another vessel after draining off all water. The 
next day, after sunrise, he should worship the Pitis, the sages 
and the Devas after due ablution. He should then offer Nai- 
vedya to the Devas. With delighted mind, he shall give 
cooked food to beggars. 
1. VV. 7b-16a describe a peculiar Vrata leading to veridical or 
prognosticating dreams or omens by worshipping tlie wind-god. No 
primitive Meteorology should be read in the presci iption of .setting up a 
flag on a hill-top and notice the direction of the wind per three-hour 
period and worship the wind-god according to its direction of blowing. 
2. W. 16b-26b deal wtth a Vrata giving abundance of food in 
every birth and aptly called Ama-samfddhi-Vrata or briefly as Anna. The 
NP. prescribes this Saiva Vrata as goddess Annapurna is Parvati, the spouse 
of Siva. Kane (HD.V. i) does not mention it. It is probably an original 
contribution of the NP. to Vratas. 


1452 
JVOrada Purdm 
20. He shall spend the whole of the day in this activity. 
At sunset he shall go to Siva’s temple and worship the Lord 
Isvara in the form of Lihga. 
21. After duly worshipping Mahesvara with scents, frag¬ 
rant flowers, etc he shall repeat the five-syllabled Mantra (Om 
Sivaya Namah) a hundred or thousand times. 
22-23a. After dedicating the benefit of Japa to Lord 
Siva, the embodiment of the universe, he should eulogise 
the Lord with all Vedic and Pauranic hymns. Without agi¬ 
tation or perturbation, he should pray to Lord Isana for the 
sake of perpetual acquisition of cooked food. 
23b-24a. “In all my births may I be richly blessed with 
all those foodgrains whether harvested during the autumn or 
during the spring.” 
24b-26. After praying thus to the Lord of the Devas, he 
should come back to his own house. He should give cooked food 
to the Brahmanas and eat it himself silently. O Brahmana, this 
Annavrata (Holy rite of cooked food), if observed duly by 
men, is conducive to the production of all fobd and wealth in 
this world, and yields salvation in the other world. 
27-29. This rite (in propitiation of serpents) is perform¬ 
ed on the fifth day in the bright half of the month of Sravana, 
by men firm in their belief in the Vedas. On either 
side of the door-way, figures of poisonous serpents should be 
drawn in cowdung. He should worship them with scents, etc. 
Thereafter he should worship Indrani with gold, silver, etc, 
curds, raw rice-grains, water from Kxiia. grass, scents, fragrant 
flowers, incense, lights and hoards of Naivedyas. After circum¬ 
ambulating and bowing down, he should pray with great devo¬ 
tion. He should give the articles of worship to leading 
Brahmanas. 
30. “In all my births, may these gold, silver, etc. that 
have been given to Brahmanas be productive of endless benefit.” 
31. O Narada, he who gifts away along with this utter¬ 
ance, the articles with great devotion, will delight Kubera, the 
presiding deity of wealth, who bestows affluence like gold, 
upon his devotees. 
32. After observing the holy rite, the man should feed 


IV. 114.33-39 
1453 
Brahmanas with devotion. Thereafter, he should partake of 
his food surrounded by his wife, children and friends. 
33-34a. The devotee should propitiate serpents with 
milk on the fifth day in the dark half of the month of Bhadra- 
pada, (thereby) the entire family upto the seventh generation 
shall be free from the fear of serpents. 
34b. One should worship the excellent sages^ on the fifth 
day in the bright half of the month of Bhadrapada. 
35.37a. In the morning, he should take his bath in the 
river etc. and perform Nitya rites, Sandhya prayers etc. He 
should then return home and make a platform with clay. He 
should smear and clean it with cowdung and decorate it with 
flowers. O Brahmana, he should then strew Kusa grass thereon 
and worship the seven sages, by means of scents, different 
flowers, incense and splendid lights. 
37b-39. The sages are Kasyaj a, Atri, Bharadvaja, ViiS- 
vamitra, Gautama, Jamadagni and Vasistha. Arghya should 
be duly offered to these. The intelligent devotee should cook 
1. This is the well-known fifi-pafkami Vrata. The NP. records an 
early stage when this Vrata was {Krformed both by men and women. Later 
on it came to be regarded as efficacious in warding off sin in ‘polluting* 
things with their touch by women in their menses, as monthly course or 
menstruation came to be regarded as part of the sin of Brahmai^jta-slaughter 
{^Brahmahatyd) committed by Indra in killing Vftra. Naturally women 
(especially in Maharashtra) Ix^in to perform it after attaining puberty. 
VRJ. (pp. 91-96) records a story from the Bfuwifyottara P. hovt iha sin of 
Br^mana-slaughter i>erpetrated by Indra (in killing Vrtra) came to be 
equally distributed in Fire, rivers, mountains and women (viz. the 
menstruation of women) to expiate which women should observe thu 
Vrata. 
VRJ-also quotes CC-Vrata 1. 568-572 which records the account of 
this Vrata according to the Brahmdtf^a P. There are some differences in the 
details of the worship as given in the NP. and other works (for example 
non-inclusion of Arundhati in seven sages in the NP.), prescription of this 
Vrata even to men. Vrat&rka and VRJ. specifically assert that this Vrata is to 
be observed by women only to ward off the sin of ‘polluting’ things by 
their touch during their monthly course. 
The prescription to cat food that is naturally grown without ploughing 
the field in this Vrata shows that it belongs to the period of food-gathering 
economy. This explains why men and women were eligible for this Vrata in 
the older stage. 


1454 
Narada Purd^ 
^yamaka and other grains that have not been cultivated, as 
Naivedya. After the food offerings, he should ritualistically 
bid farewell to them and cat the same cooked grains himself. 
40-41. In this manner, he should perform this holy rite 
every year, for seven years. At the conclusion of the Vrata, he 
should choose seven Vedic scholars as his Acaryas (preceptors). 
He should make seven images in gold, according to his capacity. 
They must have matted hair, rosary and water pot. 
42. These images should be placed in copper vessels or 
clay pots and the rite of ablution is performed severally with 
Paficamrta. 
43-44. With sixteen types of services and articles of 
worship, they are worshipped with devotion. Arghya is offered 
then, and the homa is performed with gingelly seeds, grains, or 
barley grains etc. The Rk. ‘Sahastoma’ (RV X.130.7) should be 
used while performing homa or the names of the sages shall 
themselves be the Mantras. Or with other holy mantras also 
the homa can be performed. Then the Purnahuti is 
offered. 
45-46. He should then give seven cows as gifts, fully bedeck¬ 
ed in ornaments and clothes. He should worship his preceptor 
also with clothes, ornaments, etc. With the permission of the 
preceptor, he should thereafter dedicate the images unto the 
Brahmanas. After feeding them with devotion, he should bow 
down to them and bid them farewell. 
47. Thereafter, the food left over by the Brahmanas con¬ 
sisting of articles of six different tastes should be taken by him 
along with kinsmen. 
48. After performing this holy rite with its ancillaries he 
shall enjoy all desired worldly pleasures, thanks to the grace of 
seven sages. He shall go hence in an excellent aerial car. 
49-52. On the fifth day in the bright half of the month 
of Aivina, the holy rite of Upanga-Lalita-Vrata* is to be observed. 
1. W. 49-52 briefly describe UpiAga^Laliti-Vrata popularly known 
in Maharashtra as LalUd Paticaml. The detailed procedure of thja Vrata as 
observed in the Deccan is given in VRJ. (pp. 97-103) and the story about 


1V.U4.53-60 
1455 
O Narada, the image of the goddess should be made in gold in 
accordance with one’s ability. The devotee should worship her 
in accordance with the injunctions, with all the sixteen types 
of services. In order to make the Vrata perfect and complete, 
cooked rice alongwith fruits, ghee and monetary gifts should be 
given to an excellent Brahmana— “The boon-granting deity 
accompanied by Sakti has been worshipped by me alongwith 
her vehicle. O Mother, you may be pleased to go to your own 
abode after blessing me” (The foregoing is the final prayer). 
53. O excellent Brahmana, the holy rite of the excellent 
Jaya vrata is to be observed on the fifth day in the bright half 
of the month of Karttika with good faith, for the destruction of 
sins. 
54-55. O Brahmana, the devotee should, with great con¬ 
centration, worship Jaya according to injunction. Clean 
(in body and mind) and bedecked in ornaments, he should wor¬ 
ship her with sixteen types of services. He should feed a single 
Brahmana and give him monetary gifts. Then he should bid 
farewell to him and himself partake of his food silently. 
56. If any one takes his holy dip on the day of Jaya, with 
great devotion, all his sins perish like dear attacked by a lion. 
57. O Brahmana, the fruit that has been glorified as the 
result of the Avabhrtha (concluding) bath in a horse sacrifice, 
is attained by bath on the day of Jaya. 
58. One devoid of sons gets a son, a barren woman 
becomes pregnant, a sick man is freed from ailments and a 
prisoner is released from bondage. 
59. By worshipping serpents duly on the fifth day in the 
bright half of the month of Margaiirsa one attains fearlessness 
from serpents and rejoices alongwith the kinsmen. 
60. In the month of Pau^a too, on the fifth day in the 
bright half, one attains all cherished desires by worshipping 
Madhusudana. No doubt need be entertained in this matter. 
its importance is quoted from the SK. P. It is probably a later 
development. 
For Lalitd'^offhi Vrata vide infra Ch. 115.8-29. 


1456 
Nirada Purdna 
61. O Narada, the worship of the Pitrs and the serpents 
on the fifth day in the bright or dark half of any month is 
recommended in every respect. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTEEN 
The Exposition of the holy vdws to be 
observed on Saffhi (sixth) days 
(in lunar fortnights) 
Sandtana said : 
1. O Brahmana, listen. I shall recount to you the holy 
rites to be observed on 3^sthi days^ (sixth day in the lunar 
fortnight). On observing them perfectly, one shall obtain all 
cherished desires. 
2-3a. On the sixth day in the bright half of the month 
of Caitra, the excellent holy rite of Kumara Vrata is to be 
observed. By worshipping the six-faced Lord on that day in 
accordance with the different injunctions of worship, one shall 
attain a son who is endowed with all good qualities and who 
will live for a long time. 
3b-4a. On the sixth day, in the bright half of the month 
of Vaisakha, the devotee should worship Karttika (Skanda). By 
doing so, one attains motherly affection and happiness. No 
doubt need be entertained in this respect. 
4b-5a. By duly worshipping Divakara (the Sun) on the 
sixth day in the bright half of the month of Jyestha, one attains 
all desired benefits, thanks to his Grace. There is no doubt about 
this. 
1. It u noteworthy that most of the sixth days in lunar fortnights 
are sacred to god Skanda and most of the Vratas have Skanda as the presiding 
deity, the main exception being Lolita ^OffhiiMd KapilA 


IV.115.5b-20 
1457 
5b-6. The excellent holy rite of Skanda is to be observed 
on the sixth day in the bright half of the month of Asac^ha. The 
devotee should observe fast and then worship the beloved son 
of I§iva and Uma. He attains all cherished desires and the 
continuation of the line of sons and grandsons. 
7-8a. On the sixth day in the bright half of the month 
of Sravana, the devotee, endowed with great devotion, should 
worship Sarajanman (i. e. Karttikeya) with the sixteen 
Upacaras (types of services). Thanks to the grace of the six¬ 
faced Lord, he attains all desired objects. 
8b-10. The holy vow that has to be observed on the 
sixth day in the month ofBhadrapada, the Lalita Vrata' is being 
recounted. A woman devotee should take morning bath duly 
on that day. She should wear white cloth and white garlands. 
She should lake the sand from the confluence of a river, in a 
bamboo basket. She should then make five lumps of the sandy 
soil and meditate on goddess Lalita, the sportive lady of the 
forest. 
11-12. She should then take one hundred and eight flowers 
of each of lotus, Karavira Nepali, Jasmine, blue lotus, Ketaki 
and Tagara and twentyeight unbroken buds. With these 
she should worship the goddess. 
13-15. Sitting in front of the goddess, the beloved wife 
of Siva, she should pray as follows : “By taking bath in Kana- 
khala, on the mountain Nllaparvata, ih the Ku^avarta, in the 
Gangadvara and in the Biivaka you obtained Kara as husband. O 
blessed goddess Lalita, the bestower of happiness and conjugal 
blessedness, grant unto me endless blessedness. Obeisance, unto 
you again and again.” Uttering this Mantra, she should worship 
the goddess with splendid Gampaka flowers duly. She should 
then place the Naivedya in front of the goddess. 
16-20. The Naivedya should consist of Trapusa (a kind 
of fruit) Ku§man^a (gourd), coconut, excellent pomegranates, 
Tunj^ira, Karavella(the gourd Momordica charantia), Cirbhata 
1. VV. 8b<29a describe the Laliti ^af(hi Vrata. VRJ. (pp. 103-104) 
quotes Bhavifyottara P. from CC. Vrata I. 617-620). It is popular in 
Gujarat according to VRJ* 


1458 
Mirada Purdi^ 
(a sort of cucumber) and other seasonal fruits taken fresh. The 
surroundings of the image of the goddess should be beautified 
with rows of excellent lights and germinating food grains. There 
should be incense of Sarganaka (?) alongwith Sauhalakha and 
Karaftjaka (?). Gudapuspa (Bassia latifilia) should be placed 
as ornament of the cars. According to one’s affluence, sweet¬ 
meats of large and small varieties of various kinds should be 
used as Naivedya. After worship, she should celebrate the 
festival of keeping awake with songs and instrumental music, 
as well as dances and other scenic items of various types. The 
chaste lady should spend the whole of that night with her 
female friends. 
21-26a. The woman devotee shall not close her eyes 
throughout the four Yamas (yama—3 hours) (of the night). 
By closing her eyes, she will become sinful, barren and unhappy. 
After keeping awake thus, she should take (everything) to a 
river on the Saptami day (i. e. seventh day) to the accompani¬ 
ment of songs and instrumental music. O excellent Brahmana, 
she should give that Naivedya etc. to a leading Brahmana. 
After taking her bath, she should return home and get the Homa 
performed in the fire. The Devas, Pitrs and human beings 
(i. e. guests) shall be worshipped. She should worship and feed 
married women, virgins and fifteen Brahmanas with various 
kinds of foodstuffs and edibles. She should give them various 
charitable gifts as well. Saying “May Lalita be pleased with 
me”, she should bid farewell to them. 
26b-29a. Listen to the merit of this Vrata that bestows 
conjugal blessedness whether performed by a man or a woman. 
O Narada, of what avail is much talk ? That benefit which one 
desires by means of holy rites, austerities, charitable gifts and 
observances is attained by this holy rite. After death, the 
devotee attains the eternal 8ivaloka and rejoices along with 
goddess Lalita like her companion in the world of 8iva for a 
long time. 
29b-30. The sixth day in the bright half of the month of 
Bhadrapada is called Candana $a§thi. By worshipping the 
goddess on that day, the devotee attains the same world as 
that of the deity. If the $a?thi coincides with the constellation 


IV.lI5.31-36a 
1459 
KohinI, the astronomical division called *Vyatipata' and 
Tuesday it is called Kapila$a$thi.^ 
31. The observer of the Vrata devoted to the observance, 
should worship the Sun on that day. Thanks to the grace of 
Sun-God, he attains cherished desires. 
32. O excellent celestial sage, the charitable gift of 
cooked food, Japa, Homa, the rites of Tarpana to the Pitn, 
Devas and sages, when performed on this day, all these 
should be known as everlasting. 
33. After worshipping a tawny coloured cow with clothes, 
garlands and unguents, it shall be given to a Vedic Scholar for 
propitiating the s?m. 
34. On the sixth day in the bright half of the month of 
Asvina, O Brahmana, goddess Katyayani should be worshipped 
with scents and other auspicious articles and also with various 
kinds of Naivedya. 
35-36a The devotee should then crave forgiveness from 
the goddess of the Devas, bow to her, and bid farewell to her. 
1. On«; wonders why such a rare and important occasion like 
KapilS~$affh{ which comes but once in 60 years, is so casually treated here. 
*‘The bright half of Bhadrapada” given in the NP. is by aminta reckoning 
Bhddrapada Kffpa. The occurrence Rohim Constellation in combination 
with other five factors (Tuesday, Vyatip&ta yoga etc) is possible in amdnta 
reckoning. Hemadri states the following combination as Kapili ^affhf : 
BhSdrapada Kr. 6th day, Tuesday, Vyatipata Yoga and Rohini Nak^atra. 
VRJ. confirms these by quoting from another source. But the Karastra 
Mdhatmya a Sthala Purdfta of Kolhapur (regarded as a part of the Pd. P.) 
allows even Sunday as an alternate to Tuesday for Ke^ild §afthi. IT states: 
fofthi bhddre ca kfftid garaja-kfti yutd rohi^i-pdtqyuktd 
vdre Bhanau ca Bhaume' pyatka ca mrga’fire deva-pQjyetha samsthe 
The commentator*Dajib& Joshi Rao*quotes from Puraatasamucct^: 
bhddra mdsyasite pakfe bhdnau caiva kare sthite 
pdte kuje ca rauhif^ydih sd fayfht kapUd bhavet 
The Com. concludes: **As the text {Karaoira Mdhdtnya) states that 
this (Kapila) Sa;thi can fall either on Sunday or Tuesday, even Sunday is 
important. {atra m9le bhdmt-bhaamaBdrayob katkandd bhdmi-vira-yoge^pi 
makkfoA.) 
As this Vrata is Ibr the propitiation of the Sun-god, Sunday might 
have been allowed for in the Karasdra Mdhdtmya. I could not 
trace it to any other authority. The giA of a tawny cow, being an integral 
part of this Vrata, it probably came to be known asKapild 


1460 
Ndrada Furlt^a 
On this day, either the image made of Sandy soil or the chaste 
wife of a Brahmana should be joyfully worshipped by means of 
clothes and auspicious ornaments, for the ^tisfaction of 
Katyayanl. 
36b-37a. No doubt need be entertained in this respect 
that, thanks to the grace of Katyayini, * a virgin shall attain 
the desired bridegroom and a woman the desired son. 
37b-39. The highly blessed army of the Devas was 
entrusted (dedicated) to him (Skanda) by the Devas and hence 
acquired by the nobleminded six-faced Lord on the sixth day in 
the bright half of the month of Karttika. Hence, on that day, 
the devotee should worship the army of the Devas consisting of 
excellent Devas as well as the six-faced Lord with all charming 
Upacaras. O excellent Brahmana, he shall achieve Siddhi 
mentally desired by him. 
40. The worship of the fire-god is also prescribed for 
this day. The devotee should carry it out perfectly alongwith 
the worship of fire, and Homas, with different kinds of articles 
of worship. 
41-42. The Asura Taraka was killed on the sixth day in 
the bright half of the month of Margasirsa. The Satkrti (honour 
and greetings) offered by Brahma and other gods were received 
by Skanda. Hence on this day, the devotee should worship 
Skanda with scents, fragrant flowers, raw rice grains, fruits, 
clothes, ornaments and diverse kinds of Naivedya. 
43. If the §a$thi coincides with Sunday or the constell¬ 
ation Satabhisak or i^atatara^ O excellent sage, it is called 
Campasasthi.^ 
*Thc NP uses both forms—Katyayani : Katyayini 
1. This delimitation of the term Campi ^offht is supported by 
Hemadri (CC-Vrata I. 590-596 wherein he quotes the SK.P.) and by 
Smfti Kaustubha 221-222. VRJ. (p. 108) requires Vaidhrti Y<^a, Tuesday and 
•Visakha Nak$atra on thb day to call it Can^d But this combination 
is so rare that it occurs once in 30 years or so. It is strongly recommended 
that god Maheivara should be seen on this day. But in Maharashtra, 
Margajir^ Su. Sa^flii is called Campd irrespective of the day or 
Yoga. 


IV. 115.44-54 
1461 
44. On that day, Lord Vilvcivara, the destroyer of sins, 
should be seen, worshipped, known and remembered by one 
who wishes for happiness. 
45a. Holy dip, charitable gift etc., performed on this 
day are proclaimed to be everlasting. 
45b-47. O Brahmana, it was on the sixth day in the 
bright half of the month of Pausa that Dinapati (the Sun) 
manifested himself in the form of eternal Visnu, the protector 
of the Universe. Hence, on this day, he is to be worshipped 
with scents and other articles of worship, Naivedyas, clothes 
and ornaments by those who desire for all kinds of happiness. 
48-50a. The sixth day in the bright half of the month 
of Magha is called Vanina^ Sasthi. On that day, one should 
worship god Varuna who has the eternal form of Visnu, with 
scents, red silken garments, flowers, Naivedyas, incense and 
lights. By worshipping thus in accordance with the injunctions, 
the man obtains whatever he desires. After attaining all the 
fruits he rejoices, thanks to his grace. 
50b-51. On the sixth day in the bright half of the month 
of Phalguna, O Brahmana, the devotee should make an image 
of Lord Pasupati duly in clay and worship it with Upacaras 
(sixteen articles and modes). He should bathe the image 
with water or Paftcamrta while uttering l§atarudra mantra. 
52-53. While unguents shall be smeared over the image, 
the deity should be worshipped with raw rice-grains, white 
flowers and fruits. Different kinds of Naivedya should be 
offered. Nirajana (waving of lights) is duly performed. 
After bowing to and craving forgiveness of the Lord, he 
should be ritualistically sent to Kailasa. 
54. O sage, whether he is a man or a woman, whoever 
performs the worship of Siva thus, enjoys all worldly pleasures 
here and in the end attains the goal of Siva 
1. This seems to be a contribution of the NP. as Kane does not 
mention it in HD.V. i. 


1462 
Ndrada Purina 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTEEN 
The Exposition of the rites to he observed 
on the Saptami (Seventh) day. 
Sanitana said : 
1. O Narada, listen. I shall recount to you the holy 
rites to be observed on the Saptamp days (seventh day of a 
lunar fortnight). On observing them with devotion, the man 
attains Sayujya (entire identity) with the Sun-god. 
2-7. One shall take external (i. e. outside the village 
or town in a river or well) bath on the Saptami (seventh) day 
in the bright half of the month of Gaitra. He should draw the 
mystic diagram of the eight-petalled lotus on an altar on the 
dry ground smeared with cowdung and strewn with white sand. 
Vibhavasu (the sun-god must be placed in the pericarp. The 
two devas Krta, Dhatuka (?) should be placed in the eastern 
petal; the Gandharvas, Krta, Karaka should be placed in the 
South-east petal; two Raksasas shall be placed in the Southern 
petal. O excellent sage, the two Akrtas (?) shall be placed in 
the South-west petal, the two great serpents, the sons of Kadru, 
should be placed (as if they are) in motion in the Western 
petal, two Yatudhanas should be placed in the north-west petal, 
two sages shall be placed in the northern petal; O excellent 
Brahtnana, the devotee should fix one planet in the north¬ 
east p>etal. Their worship is to be performed by means of scents, 
garlands, unguents, lights, incense, Naivedyas, petel leaves, 
areca nuts and other things. 
8-9. After worshipping them thus, the devotee should 
perform Homa with ghee. He should give one hundred and 
eight oblations to the sun-god and offer as oblations eight 
Ahutis for each of the others, in due order, uttering their names 
as mantras. Thereafter, he should perform Purnahuti on the 
, 1. Just as the 4th day of a lunar fortnight was sacred to god Ga^eia 
or the 6th day to god Skanda, the 7th day in a lunar fortnight has the sun 
as the special presiding deity. Hence the observance of Saptamt Vratas are 
saud to lead to siyujyatd (identity) with the sun^od. Hence in V.72 below, 
people are exhorted to propitiate the sun-god on all SapUmf days. 


IV.lI6.10-18a 
1463 
altar. O Brahmana, in accordance with one’s capacity, 
monetary gifts should be given to Brahmanas. 
10. After carrying out all these injunctions, the devotee 
shall attain all happiness. At the time of death, he pene¬ 
trates his way through the disc of the Sun and goes to the 
greatest region. 
11. It was on the seventh day in the bright half of the 
month of Vaisakha that Jahnavi (the Gahga) was angrily drunk 
up by Jahnu himself and subsequently let off through the 
right ear. 
12. On that day, the devotee should worship Jahnavi 
after taking bath in the pure water, early in the morning. He 
should worship with scents, fragrant flowers, unbroken rice 
grains and other things, with all requisite upacaras (articles of 
worship), etc. 
13. Then, a thousand pots are to be given (as gifts) in 
the course of this Gahgavrata. If devotedly performed, this 
Vrata' is competent to take seven generations in his family to 
heaven. 
14-18a. The holy rite of Kamalavrata* is also recom¬ 
mended on this day.® Its procedure is being proclaimed. An 
auspicious lotus is made out of gold of the weight of a gingelly 
seed. It is then covered with two clothes. The devotee should 
then worship it with scents, incense and other things, and pray 
as follows : “Hail to you the lotus-handed god; obeisance to 
you the supporter of the universe. O Divakara, (Sun-god) 
salutations to you. O Prabhakara (Sun-god), homage to 
1. Although the N.P. docs not disclose the name of this Vrata, it 
is called Gangd saptami (VRJ, p. 110; Smrti Kauslubka 112 where it quotes 
Br. P.). This is celebrated as Jahnu drank up the river Gahga and on prayer 
from King Bhagiratha, let it Bow through his right car (VR. I. 35*38) 
2. Although NP. prescribes this Solar Vrata on VaisSkha Su. 
Saptami, the Mt. P. 78. 1-11 and Pd. P. V. 21. 281-290 & following them 
Hemidri on Vrata I. 640-41 prescribe them on Caitra Su. Saptami. 
3. Mt. P. 77. 1-17 describe a Kamala Vrata to be performed on this 
(Vaisakha 8u. 7 and mt Caitra 8u 7 as Kane states in HDV. i. 422-23), 
but the procedure and details are different. Hemhdri {CC~Vrata I. 642-43) 
quotes from Pd. P-V. 21. 263-279. 


1464 
Ndrada Purdna 
you.” After praying thus to the Lord of the Devas, he should 
offer that lotus alongwith the water pot and a Kapila (tawny 
coloured) cow to a Brahmana, after sunset. He should observe 
fast throughout that day and take food only on the pcxt day. 
By feeding the Brahmanas with devotion, he shall attain the 
entire benefit of the Vrata. 
18b-21a. The holy rite Nimbavrata is also to be per¬ 
formed on this day. Listen to its injunction even as 1 recount 
it. O excellent Brahmana, the worship of the sun is to be per¬ 
formed with the leaves of Nimba (Margosa), uttering 
the Mantra ‘Khakholkaya’ (TA 10. 59. 1, TAA 10. 66) etc. 
beginning with the Pranava; O Narada, he should then eat the 
leaves of Nimba silently and lie down on the bare ground. 
After feeding the Brahmanas the next day, he should himself 
take food alongwith his kinsmen. This Nimbapatravrata bestows 
all happiness on those who observe it. 
2Ib-26a. The holy rite of Sarkarasaptami is also to be 
observed on this day. Listen to its procedure also from me. 
While the sun was drinking nectar by means of his hand, 
drops of Amrta (nectar) fell on the ground, and they grew 
into the plants of iSali rice, Mudga (greengram), Yava (barley) 
and Iksu (Sugarcane). Sarkara (sugar) is therefore the essence 
of sugarcane and nectar-like and so is liked by the sun. It is 
holy and used in Havya and Kavya. Sarkara Saptami yields 
the same benefit as the horse-sacrifice. It pacifies all miseries. 
It increases the line of sons and daughters. On this day sugar 
must be given as gift and taken alongwith food. This holy rite 
must be assiduously performed, as it is liked by the Sun-god. 
He who observes this with great devotion, shall attain the 
goal of the good (i.e. Heaven). 
26b-27. Indra himself was born as the sun on 
the seventh day in the bright half of the month ofjyestha. He 
should be worshipped according to the injunction. The devotee 
observes fast and subdties his sense-organs. O Brahmana, thanks 
to the grace of Devendra, he attains heaven. 
28-29a. On the seventh day in the bright half of 
the month of Asadha, the sun god became Vivasvan 


IV.ll6.29b-39 
1465 
(the refulgent Sun). The devotee worships him separately with 
scents and fragrant flowers. O leading Brahmana, he (the 
observer of this Vrata) attains identity with the Sun. 
29b-30. The auspicious holy rite called Avyahgavrata' is 
to be observed on the seventh day in the bright half of the 
month of Sravana. At the end of the Puja of Gopali (sun) 
in order to propitiate him, he must givt: a cotton cloth four and 
a half Hastas long. This Vrata is very auspicious. 
31. If this Saptami coincides with the Hasta constellation 
it will be destructive of sins. Charitable gifts, Japa, Homa, 
everything performed on this day shall attain everlasting status. 
32-33. The holy rite of Amuktabharana is to be observed 
on the seventh day in the bright half of the month of Bhadra- 
pada. The worship of Mahesa accompanied by Uma is glorified 
on this day. He is worshipped alongwith Gaiiga and others with 
the sixteen Upacaras. ^ After the prayer and (paying) obei¬ 
sance, he should ritualistically bid farewell to the deity, for the 
flourishing increase of all desires. 
34-39. The holy rite of Phalasaptami* is also to be 
observed on this day. Its procedure is being described: The 
seven fruits are—a coconut, a brinjal, an orange, a pomegra¬ 
nate, a white gourd, Brhati and areca nut. These are placed in 
front of Mahesa. A thread in which seven threads are turned 
and seven knots are made is also placed in front of Mahesa, O 
excellent Brahmana, after worshipping the Lord with great 
devotion, the woman-devotee shall wear the thread round her 
left hand and the man-devotee round his right hand. 
1. As Kane notes (HD. V. i., pp. 264), this form of sun-worship 
was imported from Iran (from Magas or Sakadvipiya Biahmanas) or 
borrowed from Parsis. Sk. Aojanga here is hyper-Sanskritisation of Avestan 
Aivyahghana ‘a girdle’. 'Aivyanga' is a hollow strip made of fine white 
cotton thread, resembling a serpent’s sloughy 122 fingers in length. 
The Brahmanisation of this Vrata becomes complete by Japa, Homa and 
Daksin^. 
2. This is a special variety of Phala-Saptaml. For other varieties vide 
HD. V. i, pp. 353-354. According to Pd. P. V. 21. 249-262 (quoted by 
Hemadri also) the Sungod, and not Mahadeva, is the chief deity as in 
the NP. 


1466 
N&radfl Purina. 
This shall be worn till the end of a year. He should feed 
seven Brahmanas with milk puddings and bid farewell to them. 
The intelligent devotee shall partake of it himself. In order to 
make Vrata perfect and complete, those fruits are given to 
seven Brahmanas. O Brahmana, the observer of thtf Vrata con¬ 
tinues it for seven years with due observances of fast. Such 
an observer of this Vrata attains identity with Mahadeva. 
40-45a. The holy rite Subhasaptam? is to be observed 
on the seventh day in the bright half of the month of Asvina. 
On that day, the devotee should begin the holy rite by taking 
his bath and worshipping the deity. He should make excellent 
Brahmanas read the holy books. He should then worship a 
Kapila cow and pray thus—“O gentle one, I am gifting you 
away. May Aryama, the sun himself be pleased. Protect you, 
the entire Universe, since you are born of Dharma.” After 
praying thus, he gives the cow to a Vedic Scholar, alongwith 
the monetary gift. O Brahmana, after, bowing down to him, he 
himself should set the cow free. He should take in only 
Pafleagavya. Thus, the Vrata is concluded. On the next day 
he should feed Brahmanas. He should partake of that food that 
is left over by them. O Brahmana, this Vrata that is 
performed thus, is well praised. A person endowed with faith 
shall attain worldly pleasures and salvation, thanks to the grace 
of the Lord of the Devas. 
45b-47. The holy rite called Saka Saptami^ is to be 
observed on the seventh day in the bright half of the month 
ofK^ttika. On that day, the devotee should give seven different 
vegetables to seven Brahmanas alongwith gold lotuses. He 
himself shall take in only vegetable food. On the next day, he 
should feed the Brahmanas and give them monetary gifts as 
well. After bidding farewell to them, he himself should partake 
of the food silently alongwith his kinsmen. 
48-51. The holy rite of Mitravrata is to be observed on 
the seventh day in the bright half of the month of Marga^irsa. 
1. Cf. Mt. P. 79. 1-14. 
2. Tills is a difTerent variety of S&ka Vrata. For others vide 
HD. V, 1. P. 423. 


IV.lI6.52-60a 
1467 
The sun was born of Aditi and Ka^yapa and was named Mitra 
and Visnu made him his right eye. Hence on this day, O 
Brahmana, the devotee shall worship him duly and feed seven. 
Brahmanas with sweets and other things. He should then bid 
farewell to them and take food himself. After duly performing 
this, the devotee shall certainly attain the world of the Sun. A 
Brahmana devotee attains Brahma’s world and a Sudra devotee 
takes his rebirth in a good family. 
52-54. The holy rite called Abhaya Saptami is to be 
observed on the seventh day in the bright half of the month of 
Pausa. The devotee observes fast and performs the holy rite 
standing on the bare ground (dhara-sthitah). He worships 
the sun during the three Sandhyas (dawn, noon and 
dusk), then gifts to a Brahmana a Prastha-measure of sweet 
meats alongwith cooked rice soaked in milk. Thereafter, he 
feeds seven other Brahmanas and gives Daksina to all the eight, 
which may be in the form of a piece of land or gold. He 
then bids farewell to them and takes food himself. This is the 
holy rite called Abhaya. It bestows fearlessness (or Liberation 
from Sariisara) on all. 
55. Other Brahmanas call this by the name of Martanda 
Vrata. But learned men say that both are the same, the deity 
being one and the same. 
56-60a. The holy Vrata called SarvaptP (Saptami) is to 
be observed on the seventh day in the dark half of the month 
of Magha. The devotee observes fast during the day and wor¬ 
ships the disc of the Sun made of gold, with scents, fragrant 
flowers, etc. and keeps awake at night. The next day he should 
feed seven Brahmanas with milk-puddings and give them coco¬ 
nuts as Daksina. To the preceptor, he gives the gold replica of 
the Sun’s disc alongwith other Daksinas. He should pray to him 
earnestly and bid farewell to him. Thereafter, he takes food 
himself. Thb is called the holy rite of Sarvaptida. It yields all 
cherished desires. Thanks to the power of this Vrata, dualism 
(Dvaitaih) is achieved in every respect (? desires are fulfilled). 
1. This is a special variety of this Vrata in the NP. For another 
variety vide HD. V. i. p. 444. 


1468 
Ndrada Purdayi 
60b-62a. The holy rite of Acalavrata is performed on the 
seventh day in the bright half of the month of Magha. This is 
also called Trilocana Jayanti (Birth anniversary of the three¬ 
eyed Lord). It is remembered as the destroyer of all sins. 
62b-64. It is also Ratha Saptami^ that grants (even) 
emperorship. The devotee should worship the image of Sun 
made of gold. The image is placed in a chariot yoked to 
golden horses. Alongwith elephants, he shall give this (as gift 
to a deserving person). He who performs this Vrata devoutly 
joyfully enjoys all the pleasures in this world and goes to the 
region of god Siva. This Saptami is Bhaskarl Saptami and is 
comparable to a crore of shining planets. On this day, it is laid 
down that one shall take one’s bath at the time of Arunodaya 
(day-break). He shall place on his head seven leaves each of 
Arka and Badarl and take his bath for absolving the sins of 
seven births. 
65-68. Lord Sun has himself prescribed a Putraprada^ 
Vrata (holy rite that grants sons) on this day. “I shall be born 
with a part of mine as the son of the person who duly worships 
me on the seventh day in the bright half of the month of Magha. 
I will be very much delighted.” Hence, the devotee should 
conquer his sense-organs and observe fast for a day and a night. 
On the next day, he should perform Homa and feed the 
Brahmanas with cooked rice mixed with curds or milk and 
puddings.He who performs the holy rite of Putra Saptami accord¬ 
ing to these injunctions, shall get a good son who will be free 
from ailments and will live for a long time. 
69-70. One should perform the rite of Arkaputa on the 
seventh day in the bright half of the month ofTapasya (Phal- 
guna). He should worship the sun with the leaves of the Arka 
(the sun) plant. He shall eat the leaves of the Arka plant. He 
1. This is an important Vrata in the Deccan. VRj. pp. 115-116 
gives a different Vrata in detail and quotes Bhavifyottara P. story how 
son was restored to health thereby, vide HD. V. i. pp. 388-389. 
2. Kane records a number of Vratas to be observed on different 
days in different months, all granting a son as their fruit (vide HD. V. i. 
pp. 343-345) but this one in the NP is different from the Putra-Saptami Vrata 
in HD. V. i. 345. 


IV.l 16.71—117.3 
1469 
shall repeat the names of the sun continuously. Thus is the holy 
rite called Arkapujavrata. It bestows sons and wealth. It 
destroys all sins. 
71. O Brahmana, some call this holy rite Trivargada- 
Vrata (a Vrata that bestows Dharma, Artha and Kama the three 
aims of life), others call it Yajiiavrata on account of the rite of 
Homa duly performed in it.^ O excellent Brahmana, it is said 
that the sun is to be propitiated in all the Saptamis in all the 
months. It shall enable one to realise all desires. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEEN 
The review of the Viatas to be observed on Affami {eighth days 
of Lunar fortnights) 
Sandtana said : 
1. Bhavani’s birth is reported to have taken place on the 
eighth day in the bright half of the month of Gaitra. The great 
festival of Yatra (procession) must be performed by making a 
hundred circumambulations. 
2. The vision of the mother of the Universe is the 
bestower of all joys and pleasures on men. On this very same day 
the holy rite of Asoka-Kalika-Pralana( drinking of water mixed 
with the tender sprouts of the Asoka tree) also has to be 
observed. 
3. Those who drink (water mixed with) eight buds of 
the Aloka tree on the eighth day in the bright half of 
1. With exception of Vratas like Krfoo-Jatimdffanf^ naajority of the 
Affami Vratas are for the propitiation of some female deity—be it Jagadamb& 
(P&rvati), Mahllakfmi or Reouki. The Bhavini Yatra is given in the 
Kisi Khaij(#a of the SK.P.—VJr,, P. 118. 


1470 
N^ada Purd^ 
the month of Caitra, when the constellation of Punarvasu 
coincides with it, never experience any sorrow.^ 
4a. This is also called Mahastaml since the worship of 
goddess is ordained. , 
4b>7a. On the eighth day in the bright half of the month 
ofVai^akha, the devotee observes fast. He takes his bath (in 
cool) water and j>erforms the rite of ablution to the goddess 
Aparajita by means of the water from MaihsI (Indian Spike¬ 
nard ) and Balaka (a fragrant root of the Plant Andropogom 
Muricatus. After worshipping with scents etc., Naivedya com¬ 
prising of sugar is offered. Before performing breakfast on the 
following Navami day, he should feed some virgins. O 
Brahmana, thanks to the grace of the goddess, he will move 
about in the worlds (above) in a refulgent aerial chariot, him¬ 
self brilliant like the sun.* 
7b-9a. By worshipping the three-eyed Lord on the eighth 
day in the dark half of the month of Jyestha, the devotee shall 
remain in the SivaLoka. He will be bowed to by all the Devas. 
The man who worships the goddess on the eighth day in the 
bright half of the month of Jyestha moves about in an aerial 
chariot alongwith the groups of Gandharvas and Apsaras. 
9b-12. On the eighth day in the bright half of the month 
of Asadha, the devotee takes his bath in water, mixed with 
turmeric powder. With the same water, he shall perform 
the rite of ablution of the goddess in accordance with the 
injunctions. After bathing the deity in pure water, subsequently, 
he should smear the deity with camphor and sandal paste. 
After offering Naivedya consisting of sugar, water for Acamana 
rite should be offered. He should then feed Brahmanas and 
give them suitable gold and monetary gifts. After bidding them 
fkrewell, he should take food himself silently. By performing 
this holy rite, the man shall attain to the world of 
the goddess. 
1. The NP has omitted the mantra at the time of worshipping Asoka 
as the worship of the Ajoka tree is deleted. But this verse (and the mantra 
4t>am a/oia hardbklffa) are given in the GP. I. 133. 1-2, and in the LP 
quoted in Hem^dri’s Vrata I. 862-63, 
2. This Vrata is not recorded in the VRJ and in Kane (HD. V. i). 


IV.l 17.13-21 
1471 
13-14* On the eighth day in the bright half of the month 
of l§ravana, tlie devotee should worship the goddess in accor¬ 
dance with the religious injunctions. After bathing the idol 
in milk, he should offer sweet cooked rice as Naivedya. He 
^should feed Brahmanas on the next day, take food himself and 
conclude the holy rite. This holy rite increases the progeny. 
15. The holy rite called Dasaphala vrata^ is on the 
eighth day in the dark half of the month of Sravana. The 
devotee decides on fasting, takes his bath and performs the 
Nitya (usual, prescribed) rites. 
16-17. With ten leaves of black-coloured Tulasi, he 
worships uttering (in the dative case) these ten names of the 
Lord—Krsna (i.e. Kfsnaya namah) Visnu, Ananta, Govinda, 
Garudadhvaja, Damodara, Hrsikesa, Padmanabha, Hari and 
Prabhu. One should always worship Lord Kfsna by means of 
these names. 
18. He should then circumambulate the deity and pros¬ 
trate himself before it. Thus he should perform the most 
excellent of all the Vratas for ten days. 
19. In the beginning, in the middle and in the end, he 
should perform homa in accordance with the injunctions. 
Uttering the Mantra of (the names of) Krsna, he should 
perform hundred and eight Homas with Garu (cooked rice 
soaked in ghee). 
20-21. At the end of the Homa, the intelligent devotee 
should worship the preceptor duly. He should get a replica of 
the leaf of Tulasi exquisitely made in gold and place it in a 
vessel made of gold, copper, clay or bamboo. He should get an 
*The text : nabhomdse sitaftamyam need be emended as nabkom&si* 
sitdffamydm. The avagraha (marked here as’) before sita is necessary as this 
Vrata falls on Sravai>a K. rSth (HD. V. i. P. 311, also VRJ. p. 122 If) If 
4zmdHta reckoning is not taken, it will fall on Bhadrapada which is not 
recognised in theNP here. 
1. W- 15-26 describe the DaSd-phala Vrata in honour of Lord 
Kr99a< The Vrata is detailed in VRJ. P. 122 If. and is briefly described in 
HD. V. i. 312. The misprint sitt for asite is pointed out in a footnote to 
that verse. 


1472 Ndrada Purina 
image made in gold and worship it in accordance with the 
injunctions. 
22. He should place the image in the vessel and offer it 
to the preceptor. A cow alongwith its calf, should *be given fully 
bedecked in ornaments and clothes. 
23. For ten days, he should offer ten Purikas (fried cakes 
of wheat flour) to the Lord Krsna. The observer of the rite 
shall either offer these Purik^ to a knower of the mode (of 
worship) or eat them himself. 
24. O excellent Brahmana, a bed also should be given as 
gift in accordance with his capacity. On the tenth day he 
should give the image to the preceptor. 
25-26. At the conclusion of the holy rite, ten Purikas 
should be given to each of the ten Brahmanas. He should con¬ 
tinue this rite for ten years. After performing this excellent 
Vrata for ten years and after duly observing the fast, the devotee 
shall realise all his cherished desires. There is no doubt in this 
that in the end, he will attain Sayujya (One-ness) with Kfsna. 
27-28a. This day remembered as (Krsna-Janmastami) ^ 
removes the sins of men. Merely by observing fast on this birth- 
1. VV 27-40 describe the Kr^t^-JanmA^tami V’rata, popular all over 
India. Not merely the NP but other Puranas like Pd. P. III. Ch, 13, Mt. 
P. Ch. 56, AP Ch. 183 highly glorify this Vrata. In the Bhavifyottara P. 44. 1-60 
Krjna himself narrates this Vrata to Yudhisthira : Mediaeval writers on 
Dharma S^tra relying on Puranas, other than the Bhagavata, have discussed 
a great deal about the procedure etc. of performing this Vrata and brought 
in the Mimamsa and Astronomy in distinguishing between the JaiiTndf (ami 
and Jq^anti-Vratas. But that is academic. The NP gives the main features 
of fast, worship, Jdgara (remaining awake that night), though he does not 
mention the breaking of the fast. By the way, it may be noted that the 
Vardha Purdiia (46.14) records that K|-st>a was born on 12 th day in the 
bright half of A;adha. 
In passing, I may record a peculiar custom called Gopdta-Vdla or 
Dahi-hajidi in Maharashtra. It is based on the Bh. P. X. 5.15 where the 
cowherds expressed their delight (at the birth of Krsna) by sprinkling 
curds, ghee etc. on each other. On this occasion, people in Maharashtra 
hang up earthen pots full of curds, butter milk etc. and celebrate with 
songs etc. the birth of Kr?na and some one breaks the pots and people vie 
with each other to get themselves drenched in the curds etc. falling from 
the holes in the pots. 


IV.117.28b-39 
1473 
day of Hari, one is undoubtedly liberated from the sins of seven 
births. 
28b-31a. The devotee who observes fast shall take his 
bath with gingelly seeds mixed in the pure water of a river 
etc. The intelligent devotee shall make a mystic diagram on 
the platform erected in a good place. In its middle, a Kalala 
(vessel) made of copper or clay is placed. Over this vessel, 
another copper vessel is placed. Above this latter vessel, 
the auspicious golden image of Kpsna is placed and 
covered with two cloths. With a pure mind, he should then 
worship it with Padya and other Upacaras. 
3lb-34. In the eight quarters he should worship DevakI, 
Vasudeva, Yasoda, Nanda, Vraja (colony of the cowherds), 
cowherds, cowherdesses and cows. Arartika rite (waving 
of lights before the deity) is performed. Forgiveness is 
craved for, by bowing down with devotion. The devotee 
remains thus till midnight, when he bathes Hari with Paficamrta 
and pure water. He should again worship the Lord with 
scents and other things. He should then offer the following 
things as Naivedya in a silver vessel : viz. Coriander, barley, 
ginger, sugarcandy, and ghee. O Narada, these should be 
offered as Naivedya. 
35. After performing the Arartika (waving of lights in 
front of the deity) rite once again, he should think of the Lord 
as assuming ten different forms. He should then offer 
Arghya to the rising moon. 
36. After requesting the Lord of the Devas for forgive¬ 
ness the observer of the holy rite should pass the rest of the 
night by reciting hymns from the Puranas and sing diverse 
songs in accompaniment of instrumental music. 
37. After the daybreak, he should feed eminent 
Brahmanas with sweet cooked rice. Delighted in his mind, he 
should offer Daksina and bid them farewell. 
38. Thereafter, he should give that image of Vi$nu to- 
the preceptor along with gold, cow and plot of land as well as 
monetary gifts. After bidding farewell to him, the devotee should 
partake of his food. 
39. After performing thus the holy rite, the man attains 
Goloka itself, in the company of his wife, children, friends 


1474 
Ndrada Purdna 
and servants. He goes there, seated in an excellent aerial 
chariot. 
40. In the whole of the three worlds, there is no other 
holy Vrata equal to this. By performing this, the •benefit of a 
erore of Ekadasi Vratas is acquired. 
41-43. On the eighth day in the bright half of the month 
of Nabhasya (Bhadrapada) a person should perform the holy 
rite of Radhavrata.^ As before, he should perform the worship 
of the gold image of Radha placed on the pot. At mid-day, 
after worshipping her, the devotee sliould take in a single meal. 
The devotee who is physically strong observes fast (for the 
complete day). On the next day, he feeds the Suvasinis in 
accordance with injunctions. He then oflers the image to 
the preceptor. He shall partake of his food and formally 
conclude Vrata. 
44. O Brahmana sage, if this holy rite is performed 
duly, the observer of Vrata obtains the esoteric secret of 
the Vraja (of Krsna’s time) and stays among the followers of 
Radha. 
45-46. The holy rite of Durvastami^ too is to be observed 
on this day. Listen to it from me. O excellent Brahmana, the 
Liiiga is to be placed on the Durva-grass growing in a pure 
and clean spot. He should then worship it with flowers, incense, 
scents, lights and Naivedyas, viz. curds, raw rice grains and fruits. 
At the end of Puja, he should, with great concentration, 
offer Arghya uttering the two Mantras. 
47-49a.* “O Durva grass, bowed to by the Devas 
and the Asuras, your birth is from nectar. Grant blessedness 
and line of children to me. Be a bestower of achievements of 
1. Pd. P. III. 7.21-23. It is performed on the 8th day in both 
the fortnights of Bhadrapada (HD. V-1. 392). 
2. VV. 25-52 describe the Durviftami Vrata associated with 3iva 
Lihga. Women and men of all castes are eligible for this. The SmTti Kaustubha 
228-230 and the Bhavifyottara P. 56 give another variety in which the 
DurvS-grass itself (unassociated with any deity like Siva or Ganeja) is the 
deity—that tenacity of the Durva grass for its spread and survival is prayed 
for the spread of one's own race. VV. 47-49a are repeated as the prayer to 
Durva-grass, 


IV.117,49b-58b 
1475 
my works. Just as you are spread over the ground with your 
branches and branchlets, so also grant me growing progeny 
that shall be immortal and unageing.” 
49b-50. The devotee then circumambulates it, feeds 
Brahmanas, gives Daksina to the Brahmanas, takes food himself 
and returns home. Alongwith the monetary gifts, he should 
give Brahmanas splendid, fragrant and sweet fruits. 
51. Thus, O Brahmana, the holy rite of DurvastamI is 
sacred and destructive of the sins of men of all the four castes 
and particularly of the woman folk. 
52. If any woman, out of delusion, does not worship 
Durva duly, undoubtedly she becomes a widow for three births. 
53. O Brahmana, if the Astami coincides with the 
constellation Jyestha, it should be known as Jyesthastami.^ If 
worshipped, it is destructive of sins. 
54. The holy rite of MahalaksmI begins on this day and 
lasts for sixteen days. It brings about all riches. 
55. “O Mahalaksmi, I am devoted to you and I shall 
perform your Vrata. Hence, thanks to your grace, may it come 
to a conclusion (May it be completed) without any impedi¬ 
ment.” 
56. After saying this, the devotee twists round sixteen 
threads to form a string. He ties sixteen knots therein and ties 
the string round his right hand. 
57. The observer of the holy rite should worship Maha¬ 
laksmi everyday, with scents and other things, upto the following 
Astami in the dark half. 
58a. On that day the intelligent devotee .'should perform 
the rite of Udyapana (concluding rite). 
58b. Under the canopy of cloth, the devotee makes the 
mystic diagram called Sarvatobhadra. The Kalasa (vessel) is 
installed thereon and a lamp is lit. 
1. VV. 53-74a describe Jytffhdffami Vrata which is in honour of 
goddess Lak;mi. The wearing of threads with sixteen knots is still popularly 
practised by women in Maharashtra, but not other details of gold images, 
Homa etc. VRJ. (pp. 135-156) gives the details of this Kra/a, Pujd and 
(concluding rite) on the basis of the Biiuii;tj[yottora P. vide HD. V. 
1 pp. 304 and 376. 


1476 
Ndrada PurS^ 
59-62. He should take off strings from the arm and 
keep it below the water pot. Four images in the form of the 
deity are made in gold, and they are bathed in water and 
Paficamrta. After worshipping them in accordance with the 
injunctions, with the sixteen types of Upacaras, the devotee 
keeps awake till midnight, to the accompaniment of songs and 
instrumental music. At midnight, when the nectar-rayed moon 
rises, Arghya is offered to Mah^aksml stationed in the middle 
of the moon’s disc, in accordance with the injunctions, together 
with ^rikhanda (sandal) and other material. The string is also 
offered. 
[ The following Mantras are utterred ] 
63. “O Moon, born of the ocean of milk, brother of 
Mahalaksmi, O storehouse of nectar, accompanied by Rohin!» 
accept my Arghya.” 
64. “O Kamala, bom of the ocean of milk, a resident of 
the Lotus, resting on the chest of Vis^u, be the bestower of all 
the cherished desires on me.” 
65. “O gentle lady Renuka, O beloved wife ofjamadagni, 
O Mistress of the Universe, having only a single Lord, O 
unchanging one, O mother of Parasurama, do what is 
auspicious to me”. 
66-69. The devotee should pray to the goddess Mahala¬ 
ksmi with the above Mantras. He should worship Brahmana 
women duly with scents, lac juice and collyrium and feed 
them. He should perform Homa oblating in the fire 
Bilva, lotus and milk puddings. If they are not available O 
Brahmana, homa is performed with ghee. For acquiring 
houses, homa is performed with sacrificial twigs or gingelly 
seeds. For conquering (i. e. averting) death and for 
subduing ailments the following articles are offered as 
gifts viz.—sandal paste, palmyra leaf, flower-garland, raw 
unbroken rice grains, Durva grass, thread with saffron 
applied, two coconuts and foodstuffs. The food-stuffs should 
be placed in a new winnowing basket. There must be sixteen 
of them in each item. 
70-71. The observer of the holy rite shall cover it with 
another winnowing basket and present it uttering the following 


rv. 117.7 2-81 
1477 
Mantra : —**May Lak^mi, bom of the ocean of milk, sister of 
the moon and the beloved wife of Vi?nu be pleased with this 
Vrata”. He (the person performing this Vrata) should 
dedicate the four gold images to the Brahmanas. 
72. Thereafter, with sweet ccoked rice he shall feed four 
Brahmanas and sixteen Suvasinis (married women whose 
husbands are alive). He should bid farewell to them giving 
them their due Daksinas. 
73-74. After concluding the observances, he should take 
food in the company of the affectionate ones. By performing 
this Vrata of Mahalak^mi, O Brahmana, in accordance, with 
the injunctions, one enjoys all worldly desirable pleasures and 
one shall live in the world of Laksmi for a long time. This is 
called Asokastami also, and in it the holy rite of Rama (l^ri) 
is complete. 
75-76a. On this day, the Asoka tree is worshipped and 
only a single meal is taken every day. By performing the A^oka 
Vrata, the lady, wherever she is born in this world of sorrow, 
becomes free from sorrow. No doubt need be entertained in 
this respect. 
76b-78a. O Brahmana, Mahastami^ is to be observed in 
the bright half of the month of Alvina. 
On that day, Durga is to be worshipped with all Upacaras. 
By observing fast or taking a single meal on the Mahastami 
day, the devotee attains all round affluence and rejoices like a 
god for a long time. 
78b-80. The holy rite of Karaka Vrata is to be observed 
in thedark half of the month of Karttika. On that day, ^ambhu 
accompanied by Uma is to be assiduously worshipped. Arghya 
is also to be always offered, at the time of the moon-rise, by the 
observers of the Vrata who wish for a son endowed with all 
good qualities or happiness of diverse kinds. 
80b-81. Gopa^tami rite is to be observed in the bright 
half of the month of Karttika. On that day, one shall perform 
I. VV. 76b-78a describe Mah&stanu, the 8th day of Navar&tra in 
As'vina 3u. 


1478 
Ndrada Purd^ 
the worship of cows; fodder is offered to the cows, cows are 
circumambulated and followed. Cows are given as gifts by 
those who desire all riches. 
82-85. A special holy rite is performed on the eighth 
day in the dark half of the month of Marga^ir§a. Tlie image of 
a couple is made out ofDarbha grass. They are named Anagha 
and Anagha. They are accompanied by many sons, (images 
are made of these as well). On a spot scrubbed and cleaned 
with cow dung and made auspicious, the couple are placed 
and worshipped with scents, fragrant flowers, and diverse 
kinds of Upacaras. The devotee feeds a Brahmana couple and 
bids farewell to them after giving them Daksinas. A man 
or a woman can perform this holy rite. By performing it in 
accordance with the injunctions, he or she gets a son endowed 
with good characteristics. There is no doubt about this. 
86-87. On the eighth day in the bright half of the month 
of Margasirsa, the devotee observes fast in the presence of 
Kalabhairava. By doing so and keeping awake for that night, 
one is liberated from great sins. Whatever inauspicious sin has 
been committed by a person in his birth as a human being, is 
dissolved entirely by seeing Kalabhairava image; 
88. The holy rite of Sraddha called Astaka^ is to be 
observed on the eighth day in the dark half of the month of 
Pausa. It makes the Pitrs (manes) satisfied for a year. It in¬ 
creases the line of children in the family. 
89. By worshipping §iva devotedly on the eighth day in 
the bright half of the month of Pausa, one attains worldly 
pleasures and liberation by acting in pursuance of his (unflin¬ 
ching) devotion. 
90. On the eighth day in the dark half of the month of 
Magha, one should, with great devotion, worship Bhadrakall, 
the destroyer of the hosts of enemies, and the bestower of all 
cherished desires to her devotees. 
1. Although the NP. limited the term Affaka to the 8th day in 
Pau$a, the AivaUtyana Gr. 5. II. 4. 1. states that the 8th tithis in the dark 
halves of Hmanta and SiSira (i.e. the months of MSrgasir;a, Pau;a, Magha 
and Phalguna) are Affakd days. 


IV. 117.91-99 
1479 
91. O Brahmana, one who wishes for an unbroken line 
of children and absence of defeat in battle, should propitiate 
Bhisma on the eighth day in the bright half of the month of 
Magha. 
92. O Brahmana, on the eighth day in the dark half of 
the month of Phalguna, one should worship goddess Bhima. 
For the achievement of all cherished desires, he should be 
devoted to the Vrata. 
93. O Brahmana, by worshipping properly with scents 
and other things, ^iva and Siva on the eighth day in the bright 
half of the month of Phalguna, one shall become the Lord of all 
Siddhis (Super-natural Powers.) 
94. One should worship goddess Sitala* on the eighth 
day in the second fortnight of the month of Phalguna, with all 
kinds of cooked food prepared duly on the previous Saptami 
(seventh) day. 
95. “O Sitala, you arc the mother of the Universe. O 
^^itala, )ou arc the father of the Universe. O Sitala, you arc 
the support and base of the Universe. Obeisance, to you, 
salutations to you, O Sitala. 
96. I bow down to goddess Sitala, who is seated on a 
donkey, is naked, holds the broom and the water pot and who 
destroys swellings. 
97. Goddess Sitala shall be the bestower of calmness 
and queller of swellings to those who stand in water and repeat 
the name “Sitala, Sitala”. 
98. O Brahmana, thanks to the grace of goddess l§iiala, 
he (thedevotee) shall be tranquil for a year;—he who worships 
Sitala by means of these Mantras of Sitala. 
99. By worshipping Siva and Siva on the eighth day in 
any of the halves and in any of the months, one attains the 
desired benefit. 
1. Sitali is the goddess of Small Pox. According to aminta reckon¬ 
ing the ^iuddffaml is on Gaitra Kf. 8. 


1480 
Ndrada Purina 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTEEN 
The Exposition of the Vratas to be observed on Navami {ninth) 
day {in the lunar fortnight) 
Sandtana said : 
1. O leading Brahmana, henceforth, I shall recount to 
you the Vratas to be observed on the Navami day (i.c. ninth 
day in the lunar fortnight). On performing these rites, people 
in the world attain the desired fruit. 
2. The holy rite of Sri Rama Navami^ is on the ninth 
day in the bright half of the month of Caitra. A devotee who 
is physically strong, should duly observe full fast on that day. 
3. If he is incapable physically (to observe full fast), he 
should take a single meal on that day after the midday 
festival. He shall propitiate Rama, by feeding the Brahmanas 
with sweet cooked rice. 
4-5a. By means of {gifts of) cows, plots of lands, gingel- 
ly seeds, gold etc, and by means (of gifts of) clothes and orna¬ 
ments, Brahmanas should be propitiated. He who devoutly 
performs the holy rite of Sri Ramanavami shall shake off all his 
sins in this world and attain the region of Visnu. 
5b-7. The holy rite of Matrvrata is also to be observed 
on this same day. The Yoginis, sixtyfour in number, accompa¬ 
nied by Bhairava, are to be propitiated by means of garlands, 
scents, clothes and Naivedyas. O prominent Brahmana, it was 
on this day that Bhadrakali was crowned in the chieftancy of 
all mothers. Hence, one should worship her by observing fast 
and controlling his sense-organs, on this day. 
8. He who worships Gan^ika on the ninth day in either 
of the fortnights of the month of Vaisakha, in accordance with 
the injunctions in the matter, rejoices alongwith the Devas. 
1. VV. 2-5a briefly state the outline of Rdmanavamt Vrata. We find 
its detailed description in works like VRJ. (pp. 149-154) where the dialogue 
of Sage Agasti and Sutiksqa (regarding the observance of this Vrata) from 
SK. P. is quoted. Hemadri’s mention of the Vrata (CC. Vrata I, pp. 951-46) 
shows that it was popular in Maharashtra before 12th Cent. A.D. at least. 
NP.’s cursory treatment shows that it was not attached much importance 
then, though Rdma-navamf is now a national festival. 


IV.l 18.9-20 
1481 
9-1 la. On the ninth day in the bright half of the month 
of Jyestha, the excellent man who observes fast, should worship 
Uma duly and feed virgins and Brahmanas in accordance with 
his ability. He should give them monetary gifts to the extent of 
his capacity. He should partake of only cooked Sali rice along- 
with milk. O Brahmana, the man who duly performs this Uma 
Vrata^ enjoys great pleasures in this world. In the end, he 
attains the goal of heaven. 
1 lb-12. (Defective) O chief of Brahmanas, he who per¬ 
forms (the following) holy rite on the ninth day in either of 
the fortnights in the month of Asaejha and worships the fair- 
complexioned goddess Aindri riding the elephant Airavata and 
and partakes food only at night, shall become the enjoyer of 
pleasures in the world of the Devas. He will move about in the 
vehicle of the Devas or he will proceed along the path called 
Devayana. 
13-15. In the month of Sravana, O leading Brahmana, 
the devotee should take food only at night, or he shall observe 
fast for two fortnights and worship Kaumari Can<jika. He 
should worship the goddess, the remover of sins, by means of 
scents, fragrant flowers, incense, lights and diflPerent 
Naivedyas. He should feed virgins. He who performs the excel¬ 
lent Kaumari Vrata- devotedly in this manner, shall go to the 
eternal world of the goddess by means of an aerial chariot. 
16-17a. The ninth day in the bright half of the month of 
Bhadrapada is glorified by the name of Nanda Navami. He who 
worships Durga duly with all Upacaras (articles of worship and 
other formalities) on that day, attains the benefit of a horse- 
sacrifice and is honoured in the world of Visnu. 
17b-20. The ninth day in the bright half of the month 
of Asvina is glorified by the name Mahanavami.* On this day, 
1. VV. 9-1 la describe a special Umd Vrata not recorded by Kane 
in HD V. 1. 
2. VV. 13-15 describe a special Kaumdrf Vrata with Ca^^ikd as the 
main deity. This is not noted by Kane in HD. V. i. 
3. W. 176-22 describe the MahS-navaml in honour of Durgi. As a 
part of Nava-rdtra or the Durgd pQjd festival, it is observed all over India. 
VRJ, p. 158 gives a detailed procedure on the basis of the Bhavigya, 


1482 
Ndrada Purdna 
O Brahmana, the worship of the Sami tree should be performed 
in the afternoon in the eastern quarter. Then, at night, in the 
first watch (Yama) =3 hours), the following (pertaining to the 
goddess) should be worshipped viz— sword, bow, arrpws, iron 
club, trident, javelin, axe, dagger, leathern shield, and umbrella, 
banner, elephant, horse, cow and bull, book, balance, 
baton, noose and discus and the conch. After worshipping a 
buffalo with scents and other articles of worship (Upacara), it 
should be chopped off and dedicated to Bhadrakali. 
21. After offering oblations and after partaking of 
only cooked rice, the devotee should give the monetary gifts to 
the Brahmana and formally conclude the Vrata. 
22. He who thus worships Durga, the destroyer of mise¬ 
ries and sufferings of men, enjoys excellent worldly pleasures 
here and shall attain heavenly region in the end. 
23. The ninth day in the bright half of the month of 
Karitika is glorified as Aksaya Navami (everlasting Navami) 
On that day, the devotee should perform the rite of Tarpana 
at the roots of Asvattha (the holy fig tree). 
24. O Narada, with mantras special to his own branch 
of the Vedas, that Tarpana rite of the Devas, sages and Pitrs 
should be performed correctly. Then the devotee should offer 
Arghya to the sun. 
25. Then he should feed Brahmanas with sweet cooked 
rice. After taking his food and giving Daksina to the 
Brahmanas, he should rest and relax, O chief of sages. 
26. It is the word (precept) of Vidhi (god Brahma) 
that, if anyone performs Japa, Dana, worship of the Brah¬ 
manas, Homa thus, everything of such acts shall be 
entirely everlasting. 
27-28a. The ninth day in the bright half of the month 
of Margaiirsa is glorified as NandinI (Navami). He who 
Viftfu-dharma P. and Vdr&hl Tantra. Kane notes more varieties and records a 
grant by King Pulakesin (early CSUikya dynasty) on Mah^-navami in 
Karitika (HD. V. i. pp. 373-74). In Maharaslitra we worship the Sami tree 
and all our implements on this day. 


IV.lI8.28b—119.1 
1488 
observes fast on that day and worships elaborately goddess 
Jagadamba (the mother of the Universe) with scents and other 
things, attains the benefit of a horse-sacrifice. There is no doubt 
in this respect. 
28b-29a. Tlie devotee should worship Mahamaya on the 
ninth day in the bright half of the month of Pausa. O 
Brahmana, that is conducive to the acquisition of the fruit of 
a Vajapeya-sacrifice provided he takes only a single meal 
every day. 
29b-31a. The ninth day in the bright half of the 
month of Magha is worshipped by the people. It is called 
Mahananda as it always causes delight to men. No doubt need 
be entertained in this respect that the holy bath, charitable gift, 
Japa, Homa, observance of fast, everything performed on that 
day has an everlasting benefit. 
31b. O excellent Brahmana, the ninth day in the bright 
fortnight of the month of Phalguna is of a highly meritorious 
nature. It is called Ananda.^ It is remembered as the remover 
of all sins. O excellent Brahmana, he who observes fast on that 
day and worships goddess Ananda attains all desired benefits. 
It is the I'ruth. It is the Truth that is spoken by me. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETEEN 
The Holy rites to be observed on Daiami (i.e. tenth) days {in The 
Lunar fortnight) 
Sanatana said : 
1. Henceforth, I shall recount to you the holy rites to 
be observed on Dasami (tenth) days (of lunar fortnights). On 
observing them devotedly, man becomes a favourite of 
Dharmaraja. 
1. It appears that some navemi Vratas are associated with inandd vide 
Nandini in Mirgailrfa, mahdnandd in Mdgha and Anandd in Phdlguna. The last 
is recorded as Anandd by Hemadri (Vrata I. 948-850). The procedure 
in the NP. is different from the one recorded by Kane (HD. V. i. P. 270). 


1484 
Ndrada PwSxja 
2. On the tenth day, in the bright half of the month of 
Gaitra, the devotee should worship Dharmaraja^ by means of 
the seasonal flowers and fruits plucked for tlie nonce, and scents 
and other things 
3. He should either observe fast or take a single meal 
per day. After feeding fourteen excellent Brahmanas, he should 
give them monetary gifts according to his capacity. 
4. O Brahmana, he who thus performs the worship of 
Dharmaraja, shall at the behest of Dharma, attain similarity 
with the Devas—a position from which he will not fall. 
5-6. On the tenth day in the bright half of the month of 
Vaisakha, aman should worship god Visnu with scents and other 
articles of worship and formalities) as well as with 
white fragrant flowers. He should make hundred circumambula- 
tions, (round Visnu’s shrine) and assiduously feed Brahmanas. 
He (thereby) attains to the world of Visnu (Visnuloka). No 
doubt need be entertained in this respect. 
7. It was on the tenth day in the bright half of the month 
of Jyestha that the Jahnavi (the river Gahga), the most excel¬ 
lent of all the rivers, came to the Earth from the heaven. 
Hence, the day is remembered as the bcstower of merit. 
8-9. The month of Jyestha,* the bright fortnight, the 
constellation of Hasta, Wednesday, Dasami Tithi, the Gara 
(Karana), Ananda (Yoga) and Vyatipata, the moon in the 
Zodiac of Virgo and the sun in the Zodiac of Taurus—the 
combination of all these ten, O Brahmana, is regarded to be 
1. This and the next Vrata is not recorded in the VRJ. or 
HD. V. 1. 
2. This astronomical combination constituting Dasahard is repeated 
in theSk. P. as follows : 
jytfthe mdsi site pakfe daJlamyambudha-hastayor- 
garinande Vyatlpdte kanyd candre vjfe ravifi / 
daSqyoge narafi sndtvd sarva-papai^ pramucyate If 
Kane says that the Vtvdha P. accepts Tuesday instead of Wednesday 
(HD. V. i. P. 91) but the actual quotation ofVardha P. in the VKJ. p. 165, 
states that it was on Wednesday on 10th Jyeftha 9u. that the GaAg^ 


IV.119.10-19 
1485 
highly meritorious. It removes ten kinds of sins.^ Hence it is 
called Da^ahara. 
10. On this day if a delighted devotee takes his holy dip 
in the Jahnavi in accordance with the injunctions, he goes to 
Hari’s abode. 
11. The tenth day in the bright half of the month of 
Asadha is remembered by Manu and others as highly meri¬ 
torious. Holy dip, Japa, charitable gift, or Homa on that day 
is the bestower of heavenly goal. 
12. The tenth day in the bright half of the month of 
8ravana is the bestower of the fulfilment of all hopes. The 
worship of Siva, with scents and other articles of worship on 
this day, is praiseworthy. 
13. Observance of fast, taking of food only at night, 
feeding of Brahmanas, Japa, the charitable gift of gold, cow, 
etc. performed on this day—all these are destructive of all sins. 
14-19. On the tenth day in the bright half of the month 
of Bhadrapada, O excellent Brahmana, the holy rite called 
Dasavatara^ (the ten incarnations) is to be observed. After 
descended from heaven. The NP. limits the merit of this Vrata to bath in 
the Ganga but the Nir^ya Sindhu (P. 98), on the authority of the SK.P., 
extends the merit of Daiahara to both etc. in all big rivers. A festival of the- 
Gahga is celebrated in towns and villages in big rivers like the Krishna 
and the Godavari in Maharashtra, though not on that big scale as found at 
Haradwar, Prayaga or Varanasi. 
1. The other derivation of Dasahara is "that which washes off ten 
kinds of sins”. The ten kinds of sins are given in Manu XII. 5-7 as 
follows ; 
(1) Mental Sins : Coveting another man’s wealth, wishing evil to- 
befall others, entertaining heretical ideas, 
(2) Vocal Sins : harshness of speech, speaking the untruth, back-biting, 
irrclevent speecli. 
(3) Bodily Sins : misappropriation of another’s wealth, injury to living 
beings, illicit intercourse with another’s wife. 
This efficacy of Daiahard is endorsed in other Puraiias also; vide Br. 
P, 63. 15, Miriusyasindhu (p. 98) quotes the SK. P and Vardha P to the same 
effect. The VRJ. (pp. 166 ff) gives details of this Vrata. 
2. VV. 14-19 describe the Vrata in honour of the currently believed 
ten incarnations of Vi^iju. The inchuion of the Buddha and Kalki in the list 
is comparatively late when people forgot that the Buddha was the propagator 
of a non-Vedic faith. 


1486 
NSrada Purdna 
taking his bath in a water-reservoir (i.e. a tank, a river etc.) and 
performing Sandhya etc. and the rite of T^arpana to the Devas, 
sages and Pitrs, he should, with great concentration, worship 
ten incarnations (of Visnu) viz. Matsya (the Divine Fish), 
Kurma (the Divine Tortoise), Varaha (The boar), Narasiriiha 
{Man-lion), Trivikrama (the religious student Vamana), 
Parasu-Rama, SrI-Rama, Ktsna, Buddha, and Kalki. O 
Narada, he (the observer of the Vrata) should worship ten gold 
images (of these incarnations) in accordance with injunctions. 
He should then give them to ten excellent Brahmanas after duly 
honouring them. After observing fast or taking one meal (on 
that day), he should feed the Brahmanas. After bidding fare¬ 
well to them, he should enjoy a meal with his friends and 
relatives. By performing this Vrata with devotion, he shall 
enjoy all excellent pleasures here. In the end he will go to the 
eternal Visnuloka, in aerial chariot. 
20-22. The tenth day in the bright half of the month 
of Asvina is glorified as Vijaya.^ In the morning the devotee 
places four cow-dung balls in the courtyard of the house in the 
form of the horizon (i.e. semicircle). In their midst he should 
worship the four warriors Rama, Laksmana, Bharata and 
Satrughna. Four vessels with lids are taken and smeared with 
cow-dung. Grains and silver coins are put therein and closed. 
They are covered with white silken cloth. 
Hemadri {Vrata I. 1158-61) instructs to begin this Vrata on 12th 
Mirgaifrfa ^u. \’RJ (P. 168) on the authority of the P,, gives a 
■dififerent procedure though the Trata commences on Bhddrapada Su, 10th and 
the Vrata is to be observed for 10 years. 
1. VV. 20-25a describe one variety of daiamf Vrata allied with 
Rama but not connected with his victory over Ravana which forms the basis 
•of the present Rdmalila festival. This variety is not recorded by Hemadri 
{Vrata 1. BlQ-Ti), Nirmya sindhu (PP. 69-70), VRJ. pp. 169-170 or by Kane 
(HD. V. i. pp. 188-194). 
The other variety in VV 25b-3Ia, which is to be observed by kings 
or noblemen for securing conquest on the enemies, has been current all over 
India in slightly different forms. The worship of the Sami tree, royal 
procession of elephants, horses etc., waving of lights {Nir&jana) after return 
from Sami-Pi\jana etc. have been the common features. The NP. does not 
include the worship of the goddess Aparajiti (recorded in Dhama-sindhu, pp. 


IV. 119.23-33 
1487 
23. The devotee then worships them in accordance with 
the injunctions with scents, fragrant flowers, Naivedyas, etc. 
accompanied by father, mother, brothers, sons, wife and 
servants. 
24-25a. After paying obeisance he feeds the Brahmanas 
who are duly honoured. By performing this holy rite, the man 
remains happy throughout the year. O Brahmana, he shall 
decisively become flourishing in wealth and grains. 
25b-31a. (Another holy rite) On the previous Navami 
day the devotee goes to a l§aml tree and chants Mantras : On 
the afternoon of the Dasami day, O Brahmana, the devotee 
goes again to the Sami tree which is on the eastern side (of the 
village etc) and takes mud from the foot of tree. To the accom¬ 
paniment of songs and instrumental music, he brings the mud 
to the house. He worships the clay in accordance with the 
injunctions and arranges his army. He goes out of the village 
by means of the eastern gate without any perturbation. He 
should get the image of the enemy prepared by means of 
leaves, etc, or mentally fancy the same. He should feel mental¬ 
ly delighted that the deity will hit the enemy with an arrow 
that has its tail of gold. He should then return home at night. 
Or after making all these arrangements he should proceed 
against the enemy to curb him. O Brahmana, this Dasami rite, 
performed always in accordance with the injunctions, shall 
bestow wealth, victory, sons, cows, elephants, horses, goats and 
sheep in this world. O Narada, at death he attains heavenly 
world. 
31b-33. One should perform the holy rite of Sarvabhauma- 
Vrata^ (Vrata for Sovereignty over the world) on the tenth day 
96 ft) though some features in Hcmadri {Vrata I, pp. 970-971) such as 
despatching an arrow at the effigy of the enemy or imagining him to be 
facing oneself, are common. 
In Maharashtra probably due to scarcity of Sami trees, they worship 
the Aptd tree or its branch on the eastern outskirts of the village. Going out 
of the boundary of the village is the technical Simollanghana (crossing the 
boundary for “invading” the enemy). People return home in the evening 
and lights arc waved round the men. {Nlrdjana) by women in the house. 
They distribute the leaves of the Apia tree as ‘‘gold coins". 
1. VV. 31-47 describe the S&rvabhauma Vrata primarily meant for 
kings. A similar Vrata is given in the Vardha P. 63.1-6 and Vifttud/uurma 


1488 
Ndrada Purib^a 
in the bright half of the month of Karttika. The devotee cither 
observes complete fast or takes only one meal a day. At mid¬ 
night, outside the house or the city he offers oblations in all 
the ten directions with Apupa (baked pie) etc. On a level spot 
of ground smeared with cowdung, he draws 'a mystic 
diagram of a lotus of eight petals. After worshipping Gane^ 
and other deities he (wipes off sins) by means of these Mantras. 
34. May God Indra, the king of the Dcvas, the granter 
of all desired things, destroy the sin that is to my cast as a result 
of my own sinful actions. 
35. May God Vahni (fire) the king of all splcndours,the 
granter of all desired things quell the sin that is to my south¬ 
east as a result of my own sinful actions. 
36. May Yama, the king ofPretas, ghosts, the bestower 
of all desired things annihilate the sin that is to my south as a 
result of my own actions. 
37. May Nirrti, the king of Raksasas, the bestower of all 
desired things, wipe off the sin that is to my southwest as a 
result of my own actions. 
38. May Varuna, the Lord of aquatic animals, the 
bestower of all desired things, destroy the sin that is to my west 
as a result of my own actions. 
39. May Vayu, the king of Maruts (gusts of wind), the 
bestower of all desired things eradicate the sin that is to my 
north-west as a result of my own actions. 
40. May Soma (Moon), the Lord of Rksas (constella¬ 
tions) and Yaksas, the bestower of all desired things, quell the 
sin that is to my north as a result of my own actions. 
41. May IiJana, the lord of Bhutas (goblins), the granter 
of all desired things, quell the sin that is to my north-east, as a 
result of my own actions. 
42. May Brahma (the Lord of the Prajapatis), the 
granter of all desired things annihilate the sin that is above, as 
a result of (my own) actions. 
P. III. 164. 1 >7. The guardians of the quarters are at times identified with 
the protectors of the world!;. Manu V.96 mentions SQrya (the Sun) as the 
protector of the South-W'-^t instead of Nirfti in the NP. 


lV.121.43-51 
1489 
43. May Ananta, the king of serpents, the granter of all 
desired things, quell (he sin that is stationed below me as a result 
of my own actions. 
44. After offering oblations in the ten directions thus, 
with great concentration, he should alertly offer oblations to- 
Ksetrapala externally. 
45. After having completed the rites thus the intelligent 
devotee should spend the remaining part of the night in mainly 
auspicious songs, recitation of hymns, Japas etc. 
46. In the morning, he should take bath, worship 
guardians of the worlds (quarters), and honour and feed 
twelve Brahmanas. He should give them Daksina according to 
his ability. 
47. O Brahmana, after performing the holy rite thus, the 
royal devotee shall enjoy all auspicious worldly pleasures. After 
enjoying heavenly pleasures thereafter, for the duration of 
a Yuga, he will become an Emp>eror. 
48. On the tenth day in the bright half of the month 
of Margaslr^, the devotee should perform the holy rite of 
Arogyaka Vrata' (health-giving Vrata). He should worship 
ten Brahmanas with scents and other things and drink the 
water with which their feet have been washed. 
49-50a. After giving Dak$ina to them, he should bid 
them farewell. He should take only a single meal. O Brahmana, 
after performing this Vrata the devotee attains health in this 
world. Thanks to the grace of Dharma-Raja, he rejoices like a 
Deva in the heaven. 
50b-51. On the tenth day in the bright half of the month 
of Pau^a, he should worship Viive Devas.^ They are Kratu, 
1. This is a special variety of VreOa in the NP. Kane records a 
number of Arogya Vratas on different Tithis, but none of them prescribes the 
Ttrtha (water after washing the feet) ci Brihmai^as. Even the Vrata on the 
Daiami day prescribes the worship of goddess Lakfmi and Hari. 
2. These gods are supposed to be the sons of Viiad. The list of 
their names differs e.g. Apte*s SK. Diet. p. 523 and MWP. 992 give the 
following list : 
Vasu, Satya, Kratu, Dakfa, K&la, KUUna, Dhfti, Kuru, Pururavas and 
Afidraoas-^the Ust four are not found in the NP.^list. 


1490 
N&rada Pmifya 
Dak^a, Vasus, Satya, Kala, Kama, Muni, Guru, Vipra and 
Ram. Keiava has identified himself with these in ten different 
ways. 
52-54. He should make effigies of Darbha gfass to re¬ 
present them as seated in their seats or lying down. O Narada, 
he should worship them with scents, incense, lights and Nai- 
vedyas. After giving them Daksina separately, he should ritual- 
istically bid farewell to them. The gifts that had been offered 
to them should be given to excellent Brahmanas or to the 
preceptor. O Brahminical sage, the observer of the Vrata who 
performs the rite thus, taking in only one meal a day, shall be 
the enjoyer of pleasures of both the worlds. 
55-58a. On the tenth day in the bright half of the month 
of Magha, the devotee should observe fast and conquer his 
sense-organs. He should properly and completely worship the 
ten Devas called Angiras after making their images in gold. He 
shall worship them with scents and other Upacaras. They are— 
Atma, Ayus, Manas, Dak^a, Mada, Prana, Barhisman, Gavistha, 
Datta and Satya. O Narada, as their representatives ten 
Brahmanas are to be fed with sweet cooked rice. For the 
purpose of acquiring heavenly world, the devotee should 
give those Brahmanas the golden image. 
58b-62. On the tenth day in the bright half of the last 
month, the devotee should worship the fourteen Yamas. They 
are : Yama, Dharmaraja, Mrtyu, Antaka, Vaivasvata, Kala, 
Sarvabhutaksaya, Audumbara, Dadhna, Nila, Paramesthin, 
Vrkodara, Citra and Gitragupta. He should properly and 
correctly worship them with scents and other Upacaras. He 
shall perform Tarpana three times for each with hand¬ 
ful of water mixed with gingelly seeds. O Narada, thereafter, 
with a copper vessel he should give Arghya to the sun with the 
mixture of red sandal, gingelly seeds, raw rice-grains and barley 
in the waters with the following mantra. 
63. “O sun of thousand rays, come O huge mass of 
splendour, O Lord of the Universe, accept the Arghya given by 
me with devotion. Take pity on me.” 
64-66. The devotee should offer Arghya by uttering the 
above Mantra. He should feed the fourteen Brahmanas and 


IV.119.66—120.4 
1491 
give them silver coins as Dak9i9&. After bidding farewell to 
them, he should partake of his own food. O Brahma^w, the 
devotee who performs the holy rite thus, enjoys ail worldly 
pleasures, inaccessible to the Devas, such a$ sons and riches. At 
the death of his body, he occupies excellent aerial chariot and 
attains to Vi^nu’s Loka. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY 
The exposition of the Vralas to he observed 
on EkddaSi {eleventh) days^ {of the lunar fortnight) 
San&tanasaid : 
1-4. On the eleventh day in cither of the fortnights of 
(any month), O sage, the devotee must desist from taking food. 
1. The NP. being a Vaisnava Purapa gives full details of Ekadasi 
Vrata. It has devoted the whole of Uttarirdha in glorihcation of this 
Vrata. 
The NP. follows POrvirndiUa reckoning. Hence the Ekadaii in the dark 
half is treated first. It is not known why Cailra Ek&daSis should be an 
exception and why Ekidati in Gaitra ^u. and Kr are so much bifurcated 
{Caitra Su in VV 5-8a and Caitra Kr in VV 80-82) 
The following is the Tabular statement of Ekadasis and the month 
and fortnight for their performance. The difference of name in the list in 
HDV. i P. 108 Note 278 is noted in the bracket. 
N. of the lunar Fortnight and jV. of the EkddaSi Vrata 
month 
1. Caitra iSu. 
2. Kr. 
3. Vaifakha Su. 
4. „ Kr. 
5. Jyeytha Su. 
Kamada 
Papamocani (VarOtfaSni) 
Mohini 
Varuthini (Apari) 
Nirjala 
6. Kr 
7. AfUdhft 
8. „ Kr. 
9. Sravana Su. 
»o. „ Kr. 
Apara (Yogini) 
^yani 
Yogini (KAmika or KAmadA} 
Putrada 
KamikA (AjA) 


1492 
Nirada Purdjfa 
With great concentration, he must construct an auspicious 
pavilion decorated with flowers of various kinds exquisitely. 
After taking bath perfectly in accordance with the injunctions, 
he should observe fast and conquer his sense-organs. With 
faith and great concentration he should duly wor^ip Visnu 
with various Upac^as, Japas, Homas and circumambu- 
lations. He should also recite different hymns in prayer to 
the Lord, along^ith songs and instrumental music that captivate 
the mind. He should glorify the Lord with charming shouts of 
Jaya (Be victorious). He should prostrate on the ground like a 
long staff. He should keep awake during the night. (By carrying 
out all these instructions) he attains the great region of Visnu. 
5-8a. On the eleventh day in the bright half of the month 
of Gaitra, the excellent man should observe fast and maintain 
these observances mentioned hereinafter for these days (the 
previous and the subsequent days included i.e. the 10th, 11th 
+ 12th Tithis). On the Dvadali (twelfth) day, he should 
devotedly worship the eternal V^udeva with all the sixteen 
Upacaras. 
Then, he should feed his kinsmen. * After giving Dak§ina 
11. BhUdrapada $u. 
12. „ Kr. 
13. Aivina 8u. 
14. „ Kr. 
15. Karttika l§u. 
16. „ Kr. 
17. MArga^rfaSu. 
18. „ Kr. 
19. Pau^a Su. 
20. „ Kr. 
21. Migha Su. 
22. „ Kr. 
23. Philguna Su. 
24. .. Kr. 
Padma (Parivartini) 
Aja (Indiril) 
Pap^kuja 
Indira (Rami) 
Prabodhinl 
Rami (Utpatti) 
Mok$& (Mokfa^) 
Utpanni (Saphali) 
Putrada 
Saphala ($at-til3,) 
JayS 
$at-tiU (Vijayi) 
Amalak! 
Vijayd (PSpa-mocani) 
W. 1*4 give general instructions on the common ritual in the 
ISkadaH Vratas. 
*The wording in the next line shows that here the read^ should have 
been BrShmofin instead oS hdn^taoan. If the reading be Piffbaia it will do 
as Fiil(toiaasa Brikhmapa. 


IV.120.8b-16 
1493 
to them he should bid farewell to them and take food himself. 
This holy Ekada^ Vrata is called KamadS (the granter of 
desires). It destroys all sins. O Brahmana, if observed 
properly and perfectly, it yields worldly pleasures and salvation. 
8b-10. On the eleventh day in the dark half of the month 
of Vai^akha, a person should observe, with all formalities (of 
this Vrata), fast on this Varuthini (name of this Ekada§I.) (J)n 
the next day, he should worship Madhusudana. The charitable 
gift of gold, cooked food, cow and virgin on this day is highly 
commendable. By performing the holy Vrata of Varuthini 
(Ekadaii), the man devoted to the regular requisite observances 
is liberated from all sins. He attains the region of Visnu. 
ll-12a. On the eleventh day in the bright half of the 
month of Vai^akha, the devotee observes fast on this Mohini 
Ekada^I. On the next day, he takes his bath and worships 
Purusottama with scents and other things. By feeding 
Brahmanas, (thereafter), he shall undoubtedly be liberated from 
sins. 
12b-14a. On the eleventh day in the dark half of the 
month of Jyestha (which is called Apara,^ he should observe 
fast of the Apara Ekada^i, O king,* on the DvadaSi day, he 
performs the daily prescribed (Nitya) rites and worships 
Trivikrama. Thereafter, feeding prominent Br^manas and 
giving them Daksina, he becomes liberated from all sins and 
goes to Visnu’s Region (Vaikuntha). 
14b-16. On the eleventh day in the bright half of the 
month of Jyestha, the holy rite ofNirjala (Abstention from 
water) Ekada^I is observed. O excellent Brahmana, from the 
sun-rise to sunrise (i. e. through-out the Ekadasi day) (not even 
water is to be taken in). On the twelfth day in the morning, 
he performs the prescribed daily routine rites and worships 
Hrsike^a with all the Upacaras; (thereafter) he feeds 
1. As Apari is the name of Ekada» which follows Mohin! 
(HD VI. 1 p. 108 Ft. note 278), the reading in this verse should have been 
Samupofydpardm instead of Samupofya pavdan\ Here par&m is meaningless and 
syntactically imrelated to any substantive. 
2. This is an obvious quotation, as the epithet }(xpa is not appli¬ 
cable to N&rada 


1494 
Xdrada PurSrfa 
Brahmanaiij with devotion. By observing this holy rite, the 
devotee attains the benefit of twcntyfour (Ordinary) 
Ekadalis. 
17-18. On the eleventh day in the dark half of the month 
of A^<^ha, the devotee observes the fast of Yogini Ekada^i. On 
the twelfth day, he performs his daily rites and worships 
Naraya^. Then, he feeds leading Brahmanas and offers Daksina 
to them. He attains the benefit of all charitable gifts and 
rejoices in the abode of Visnu. 
19-24. Listen to the injunctions regarding the holy rite 
on the eleventh day in the bright half of the month of Asa<Jha.^ 
The devotee observes fast on that day in accordance with the 
injunctions. He should instal the image of Visnu made of gold 
or silver, on an auspicious pavilion. The image should be of 
exquisite workmanship, with the four hands shining with conch, 
discus, iron club and the lotus. A yellow silk-cloth should be 
wound round the image. O Brahmana, the image should be 
placed on a couch neatly covered with (silk) cloth. Uttering 
the Mantras he should bathe the Lord with Paftcamfta and 
pure water. The hymn ‘Purusa Sukta’ (RV. X. 90) is recited. 
The Upacaras (articles and modes or details of worship) 
begin with Padya (offering of water to wash the feet of 
the Lord) and end with Nirajana (waving of lights in front 
of the Lord’s image). Then he prays to Hari as follows “O 
Lord of the Universe, if you are asleep, this Universe too shall 
be asleep. When you wake up, the entire Universe consisting 
1. For the detailed discussion of the Vrata vide HD. V. 109-112. 
The details of this Vrata given in NP. (VV. 19-27) are rather different from 
these in HD (ibid). 
I doubt the Indo-European origin of this Sayani Vrata for lack of evidence 
in comparative mythology. Kane's other theory viz. the monsoons causing 
paralysis of activities, journey etc. is more plausible. 
In Maharashtra, this is treated as a Mahd-ekddaSi and perhaps the 
biggest pilgrimage is held at Pandharpur on this occasion. One wonders why 
*farmers who are normally very busy at this time of the year, leave aside 
their agricultural activities and gather at Pandharpur. Is it a continuation 
Q^luch gathering since the days of food-gathering economy ? 
2. This verse (No. 23) is probably a quotatiem as we find it quoted 
in the Dharma Sindhu (P. 53) and Ninfaj>a Sindhu (P. 102) 


IV. 120.25-3 la 
1495 
of the mobile and immobile being wakes up.’* After 
praying thus in the presence of the Lord, the devout man 
should adopt regulations (or Vratas) laid down for 
observance during the period of the Gaturmasya. He should 
adopt them to the extent of his capacity. 
25-26. On the morning of the Dvadasi day, he should 
worship Sesasayin (Lord Visnu reposing on the couch of the 
body of iSesa) with all the sixteen types of Upacaras. He should 
then feed the Brahmanas and propitiate them with Daksinas. 
After that he should take food silently. From that time on¬ 
wards, O leading Brahmana, he should worship the Lord with 
scents and other things every day. 
27. By performing this holy rite of “Sayani-Vrata” of 
the Lord duly, O Brahmana, the man enjoys worldly pleasures 
and Salvations, thanks to the grace of Visnu. 
28-3la. O excellent Brahmana, the excellent man per¬ 
forms the holy rite of ‘Kamika’ (also known as Kamada) on 
the eleventh day in the dark half of the month of Sravana 
alongwith due observances. On the twelfth day, after per¬ 
forming the daily routine rites, he worships l^ridhara, Hari, 
with all the sixteen Upacaras.^ He then feeds Brahmanas, 
gives them Daksina and bids them farewell. Thereafter, 
he takes his food alongwith the kinsmen. O Brahmana, he who 
thus performs the excellent Kamika (Ekadaii) Vrata obtains 
1. The NP. constantly refers to sixteen Upac&ras. They are as 
follows : dvdhana (invitation), dsana (offering a seat), Pdtfya (water for 
washing feet), arghya (respectful offering of water with or without grains of 
rice, durva grass, flowers mixed in it), dcamanlya (offering spoonfuls of water 
for sipping), sndna {bath), vastra (cloth), yajflopavlta (the sacred thread). 
amdtpana or gandha (sandal paste or some fragrant paste), pufpa (decoration 
with flowers) dhupa (burning of incense), dxpa (waving of light), naivedya 
(offering of eatables, food) tdmbula (offering betel-leaves, just after dinner or 
naioedya), dakfipd (religious fee or monetary gift), pradakflpd (clockwise 
circumambulation). 
Many of these were current in Vedic times for receiving guests and 
pitrs at the time of Srdddha and these were extended to images when idol- 
worship came in vogue. It is a superstition to attribute all these to Dravidians 
(For details vide HD. V. i PP. 33-39). 


1496 
NUrada PutStm 
all the cherished desires in this world and attains the greatest 
region of Visnu. ' 
31b-33. On the eleventh day in the bright half of the 
month of Sravana, the devotee performs the holy rite of 
“Pavitra* (prob. an alternative name for Putrada) Ekada^i” 
On the DvadasI day, he should worship Janardana strictly 
adhering to the rules, with all the sixteen Upacaras. Thereafter, 
he feeds Brahmanas and gives them Daksinas. He obtains 
a son endowed with good qualities and then attains Visnu’s 
region. He will be bowed to by all Devas. 
34-36a. On the eleventh day in tbe dark half of the 
month of Bhadrapada, the devotee observes fast of the holy 
rite named ‘Aja-Ekadasi’. On the Dvadasi day, he should 
worship Upendra with various Upacaras, He should 
feed Brahmanas with sweet cooked rice and bid farewell to 
them after giving them Daksina. O Brahmana, he who 
observes the holy rite in this way with great concentration and 
devotion to Aja, enjoys all worldly pleasures. In the end he 
attains the abode of Visnu. 
36b-41a. The devotee has to perform the holy rite of 
PadmWrata* (Ekadasi fast called Padma) on the eleventh 
day in the bright half of the month of Bhadrapada, After 
finishing the daily worship, he should perform the rite of 
KoUdana (giving of a crore of things). O excellent Brahmana, 
the image installed before is worshipped with great festivities. 
The image is taken to the water-reservoir and is touched with 
water and is then worshipped in accordance with the injunctions. 
It is then brought to the platform and laid to rest on the left 
side. On the morning of the Dvadasi day, he worships Vamana 
with scents and other things. The Brahmanas are fed, given 
Daksinaa and bidden farewell to. O Brahmana, he who 
•It is also called Parivartini sl% Lord Vi?nu is supposed to have turned 
on one side during his sleep on this day. (Kane—HD V. I. 109). The NP. 
subscribes to this supposition as v. 39a instructs that the image of Vi?pu 
should be laid to rest on the left side. 


IV. 120.41 b-56a 
1497 
performs the excellent holy rite of Padmavrata thus, enjoys all 
worldly pleasures. In the end he attains release from Sariisara. 
4lb-44. The devotee performs the holy Ekada^i rite 
called Indira, on the eleventh day in the dark half of the 
month of Alvina. He observes fast and at midday, he performs 
Sraddha rite in front of a l^aligrama stone. O Brahmana, this is 
highly pleasing to Visnu. On the next morning of Hari’s day, 
the intelligent devotee worships Padmanabha and feeds 
Brahmanas. After giving them Daksina, he bids farewell to 
them and takes food himself. The man who performs the holy 
rite thus, enjoys all desired worldly pleasures and uplifts a crore 
of his ancestors. In the end he goes to Visnu’s abode. 
45-47. O Brahmana, the devotee observes the holy rite 
called ‘Pasahkusa’, on the eleventh day in the bright half of 
the month of Asvina. After observing fast on this day, he should 
worship Visnu on the day of Visnu (i.c. Dvadasi day). He 
then feeds prominent Brahmanas, gives them Daksina and 
after bowing to them devotedly, he bids farewell to them. 
Thereafter, he takes food himself. The man who performs the 
holy rite of Pasankusa Vrata thus with devotion, enjoys excellent 
worldly pleasures and attains the Saloka Mukti i.e. residence 
in the same region as that of Visnu. 
48-50. O excellent Brahmana, the devotee performs the 
holy rite of Rama Ekadasi on the eleventh day in the dark half 
of the month of Karttika. After duly observing fast on that day, 
he worships Kesava on the morning of Dvadasi day. He 
worships Kesava, the eternal Lord of the Devas, the destroyer of 
Ke^in. He should then feed Biahmanas and bid farewell to them 
after Daksina has been given. O Brahmana, he who performs 
the holy rites thus, enjoys all desired pleasures here. He attains 
to the presence of Ramapati (Visnu) by means of an aerial 
chariot ! (This is known as samipata Mukti). 
51 -56a. On the eleventh day in the bright half of the 
month of Karttika, the devotee observes the fast of Prabodhini 
Ekadali. At night, the devotee wakens up the sleeping Kesava 
(Visnu) with auspicious songs, with Rk, Yajus and Saman 
Mantras and with various kinds of instrumental music. He 
propitiates the Lord presenting him grapes, sugarcane, 


1498 
Mirada Purina 
pome^anate and other fhiits and the plants of banana 
and Snigataka (Trapa Bispinosa etc). After the night 
is over, on the next day, he takes bath and performs 
his daily routine. He should then worship Gadadamodara 
with all the sixteen Upacaras and with the recital of the 
Puru^ukta. After feeding Brahmanas and giving themDaksinas 
to their satisfaction, he should bid farewell to them. He shall 
give that gold image to the preceptor alongwith a cow. He who 
respectfully performs this Bodhini Vrata with devotion, enjoys 
all worldly pleasures and attains the region of Visnu. 
56b-59a. On the eleventh day in the dark half of the 
month of Margasirsa, the devotee observes fast of Utpanna (or 
Utpatti) Ekadasi. On the Dvadasi day, he should worship Lord 
Krsna with scents and other requisites of services or upacaras. 
He then feeds leading Brahmanas and gives them Daksinas, 
After bidding them farewell, he should take food himself along¬ 
with friends and kinsmen. He who performs the Utpanna (or 
Utpatti) Ekadasi Vrata with devotion, rides an aerial chariot 
and attains the region of Visnu. 
59b-62a. On the eleventh day in the bright half of the 
month of Margasirsa, the devotee observes the holy rite of 
Moksa (Moksada) Ekadasi by fasting. On the Dvadasi day, in 
the morning, he worships Ananta who is the embodiment of 
the Universe, with all the Upacaras. The Brahmana devotee 
then feeds the Brahmanas. He bids farewell to them after giving 
them Daksina. He then takes food alongwith the kinsmen. O 
Brahmana, by performing this Vrata, he enjoys all the desired 
worldly pleasures. He uplifts ten generations of his ancestors 
and ten generations of successors. He then attains Hari. 
62b-64a. On the eleventh day in the dark half of the 
month of Pausa, the devotee observes the holy Saphala Ekadasi 
rite. On the Dvadasi day, he worships Acyuta with all Upaca¬ 
ras. After feeding Brahmanas with sweet-meats and giving them 
Daksinas, he bids them farewell. O Brahmana, after perform¬ 
ing the Saphala Ekadail Vrata thus in accordance with the in- 
jimctions, he enjoys all worldly pleasures here (in this world). 
In the end, he goes to the region of Visnu. 
64b-67a. On the eleventh day in the bright half of the 
month of Pausa, the devotee observes the holy rite of Putrada 


IV.120.67b-76 
1499 
Ekadalt On the Dvadaii day, he should worship the discus-armed 
Lord with Arghya and other Upacaras. Thereafter, he should feed 
leading Brahmanas. After giving them Dak^ina, he should bid 
farewell to them and eat the cooked rice left over, alongwith his 
loving kinsmen. O Brahmana, he who performs the holy rite 
thus, enjoys all desired pleasures, in the end; he rides in an aerial 
car and goes to Hari’s abode (Vaikuntha). 
67b-70. On the eleventh day in the dark half of the 
month of Magha, the devotee obscr/es the holy rite of §attiia 
Ekada^L He takes bath with gingelly seeds; he makes gift of 
them; he uses them in the Tarpana rite; he performs Homa 
with them; he eats them and he worships with them on the 
morning of the Dvada^i day. After perfectly worshipping Vai¬ 
kuntha (Visnu) with all the Upacaras, he feeds the Brahmanas. 
Then he bids farewell to them, after Daksina has been 
duly paid, O Brahmana, by performing the holy rite, thus in 
accordance with the injunctions, the devotee, with great concen¬ 
tration, enjoys all desired pleasures here. In the end he attains 
Visnu’s region. 
71-73. On the eleventh day in the bright half of the 
month of Magha, the devotee observes the holy rite of Jaya 
Ekada^L On the day of Hari, in the morning, O Brahmana, he 
should worship Purusa, the Lord of Sri. After feeding, giving 
Daksina and bidding farewell to the Brahmanas, he should 
take in the food left over by them alongwith his kinsmen. He 
should be pure, in mind and body. O Brahmana, he who thus 
performs the holy rite that propitiates KeiJava, enjoys excellent 
pleasures here. In the end, he shall attain the region of Visnu. 
74-76. On the eleventh day in the dark half of the month 
of Phalguna, the devotee observes the holy rite of Vijaya 
Ekada^i. On the Dvada^I day, in the morning, he worships 
Yogisa (the Lord of Yogins) with scents and other things. He 
feeds Brahmanas and gives them Daksinas to their satisfaction. 
After bidding them farewell he should himself silendy take 
food in the company of his kinsmen ^ The man who performs 
the holy rite thus, enjoys the desired pleasures. After 
death, he goes to Vi^iju’s region. He is well honoured by 
the Devas. 


1500 
Ndrada Purdnia 
77-79. O excellent Brahmana, on the eleventh day in 
the bright half of the month of Phalguna^ the devotee* observes 
the holy rite of Amalaki Ekadaii. On the Dvada^i day, in the 
morning, he should worship Pundarikaksa with all Upacaras. 
With excellent cooked food, he should feed the Brahmanas and 
give them Daksina. By performing worship etc. duly on the 
eleventh day in the bright half of the month of Phalguna, that 
is called Amalaki Ekada^i, the devotee attains the greatest 
region ofVisnu. 
80-82. The eleven th day in the dark half of the month 
of Gaitra is called Papamocanika (that which releases one from 
sins). Having observed fast on that day, the devotee worships 
Govinda in the morning on the Dvada^i day, with all the six¬ 
teen Upacaras. He should feed the Brahmanas, give them 
Daksina and bid them farewell. Then he should take food 
alongwith his kinsmen. O Brahmana, he who thus performs the 
holy rite of Papamocanika Vrata attains the world of Visnu by 
means of a shining aerial chariot. 
83. O Brahmana, thus the salvation-yielding holy rites 
on the Ekadasi days in both bright and dark halves (of all the 
months) have been extolled to you. There is no doubt at all 
in this (that they are conducive to the attainment of salvation). 
84. Since this Vrata is to be observed for three consecu¬ 
tive days, it is glorified as the most excellent of all the Vratas. 
Hence, it must be known as highly fruitful. 
85. O Narada, the devotee should miss four meals in the 
course of these three days. On the first day and the third (i.e. 
on Dasami and DvadasI days) he shall miss one meal each (in 
the evening). On the day in the middle (i.e. Ekadaii day) he 
should miss both the meals. 
86-90. Now, I shall recount to you the restraints in regard 
to this Vrata in the course of these three days.' A true devotee 
1. VV. 86-90 lay down the restraints and rules to be observed on 
the three days of Ekidail Vrata. It is noteworthy that the number of 
restraints to be observed is the same as the number of Tithi. Thirteen 
restraints are prescribed for the Daiamlday (The 10th Tithi), eleven ones for 
the Ekadail day, and twelve for the DvddaSl day. 


IV.120.91—121.10a 
1501 
Visnu should always avoid ten things on the Dalami day :— 
Bell metal vessel, meat, cooked lentil, Bengal gram, Kodrava 
grains, greens, wine, food at others’ houses, the second meal and 
sexual intercourse. 
He should avoid these eleven things on the Ekada^i day :• 
gambling, sleep, chewing the betal leaves, washing the teeth, 
slandering, backbiting, stealing, injury to others, sexual inter¬ 
course, anger and telling lies. He should eschew the following 
twelve on the Dvadas! day:— Bell metal vessel, meat, wine, 
honey, oil, conversation with outcaste people who remove ordure, 
physical exercises, journey, second meal, sexual intercourse, 
touching the untouchables and cooked lentil. 
91-92. A Brahmana should observe fast with due obser¬ 
vances of all the restraints, if he is physically compietent. 
Otherwise, the intelligent devotee should take a single meal. 
He should not take food during the night, or he should perform 
the rite of Ayacitavrata (i.e. taking in what is not begged for). 
On no account should he miss such a Vrata as this. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY ONE 
The holy rites to be observed on DoddaH {Twelfth) 
deys {in a lunar fortnight) 
Sandtana said : 
1. Henceforth, O sinless one, I shall recount to you the 
holy rites to be olnerved on Dvadaii (twelfth) days (in a lunar 
fortnight). On observing these Vratas, in this world a man 
becomes more beloved of Vi^nu. 
2-lOa On the twelfth day in the bright half of the month 
of Gaitra, the devotee should perform the holy rite of Madana- 
vrata.^ A pot with no cracks, filled with white raw rice grains 
1. W. 2-10 describe the Mttinne ieOdaSi Vrabi. This is recorded by 
HemSdri (vreto I 1194-98} and VKJ. P. 230. 


1502 
Nirada Purdna 
is placed. Different kinds of fruits are placed nearby with 
stumps ofsugafeane plants. White sandal ^paste is applied over 
the pot and it is covered with two white clothes. Various dishes 
of foodstuffs are also kept nearby and gold according to one’s 
ability is also placed at its side. A copper vessel containing jag¬ 
gery should be placed above the pot. It is there that Lord 
Acyuta in the form of Kama is worshipped with scents and 
other Upacaras. The devotee observes fast. On the next day in 
the morning, he should honour a'Brahmana and give all these 
things to him. He should feed and give Daksina to the Brahma- 
nas. After observing this Vrata thus for a year, the devotee 
should give the preceptor a bed accompanied by all the requi-^ 
site adjuncts, together with ghee and a cow. A Brahmana 
couple should be worshipped, and presented with a gold image 
of Kamadeva alongwith a white milch cow and garments. 
While giving the charitable gifts he should utter : “May Hari 
in the form of Kama be pleased”. He who observes Madana 
DvadasI Vrata thus, becomes liberated from all sins. He attains 
equality with Hari. 
10b. It is on this very same day that Bhartr-Dvadasika 
Vrata is also observed. 
11-14. A bed is made with clean bed-sheets spread over 
it. A gold image of Hari accompanied by l^ri is placed over it. 
A pavilion is made of flowers over it. The observer of the 
Vrata worships the deity with scents and other things. He keeps 
awake at night by means of holy dances, songs, and instrumen¬ 
tal music. On the next day, in the morning, he should gift away 
the gold image of Srihari alongwith the bed to a Prominent 
Brahmana. He should feed the Brahmarias and give them Dak- 
sin^ to their satisfaction. The married life of the person who 
performs the holy rite thus, becomes stable. He enjoys worldly 
pleasures in the course of seven births as well as the pleasures 
desired in both the worlds. 
15-16. On the twelfth day in the bright half of the month 
of Vai^kha, the devotee should observe fast and subdue 
his sense organs. With great devotion, he worships Madhava 
with scents and other Upacaras. He should duly present sweet- 
cooked rice to a Brahmana fill he is satisfied, along with a 
water-pot saying “May Madhava be pleased”. 


IV.121.17-35a 
1503 
17-19a. On the twelfth day in the bright half of the 
month of Jyesfha, the observer of the holy rite should worship 
Trivikrama with scents and other things. Then he should present 
Brahmana with a bowl containing sweet cooked rice. There¬ 
after, he should take in a single meal (i.e. once in a day). 
Trivikrama, the Lord of the Devas, becomes pleased with this 
Vrata. O Narada, he will grant him extensive pleasures and 
salvation in the end. 
19b-21a. The devotee should feed twelve Brahmanas on 
he twelfth day in the bright half of the month of Asadha with 
sweet cooked rice. He should worship them severally with 
scents and other things in due order. Saying “May Lord 
Visnu be pleased with me’', he should devoutly give them the 
following things as gifts—garments, staff, sacred thread, ridges, 
and vessels. 
21b-23a On the twelfth day in the bright half of the 
month of l^ravana, the observer of holy rite should worship 
Sridhara with scents and other things. He should feed 
excellent Brahmanas with cooked rice in curds, and give them 
silver coins for Dak^ina. After bowing to them, he should 
bid them farewell saying, : “May Sridhara, the Lord of 
Devas, be pleased with this Vrata.’* 
23b-24. On the twelfth day in the bright half of the 
month of Bhadrapada, the observer of the holy rite should wor¬ 
ship Vamana and in his presence feed twelve Brahmanas with 
milk puddings. By giving gold as Dak§ina, he delights Visnu. 
25-27a. On the twelfth day in the bright half of the 
month of Aivina, the devotee should worship Padmanabha 
with scents and other Upacaras. After that in the presence 
of the Lord, he should feed the Brahmanas with sweet cooked 
rice. He should present Dak^ina consisting of gold and (sup¬ 
plement it) with clothes. O excellent Brahmana, satisfied with 
this Vrata, Padmanabha grants him the boon of going to 
^vetadvipa and the desired bodily pleasures. 
27b-35a. On the twelfth day in the dark half of the month 
of Karttika the devotee performs the holy rite of Govatsa-Dvada^i 
Vrata^ (the holy rite of cow and its calf). With fragrant sandal 
I. W. 276-35a dacribe a variety of Pro/a different from the one 
recorded in HD, V. i i.e. in the Bhavifya P. or Hemadri (Vrata 1. 1083-84). 


1504 
Ndrada Purina 
paste and other things, the devotee draws the figure of a cow 
alongwith her calf. He then worships it with flower garlands. 
With flowers, raw rice-grains and gingelly seeds he prepares the 
Arghya in a copper vessel in accordance with the injunctions, O 
Narada, the devotee should offer the Arghya at the feet of the 
cow uttering the following Mantra : “O Mother, O Mother of 
cows, born of the milk-ocean, bowed to by Devas and Asuras, O 
Goddess identical with the Devas, decorated by all the Devas, 
kindly accept the Arghya. Obeisance be to you”. Then he should 
offer Vatakas (pies) prepared from black gram and other pulses, 
as Naivedya. Their number may be five, ten or one in accor¬ 
dance with one’s affluence. (The Mantra for Naivedya) *‘0 
Surabhi (divine cow), you are the mother of the Universe. You 
are always stationed at the feet of Visnu (in the region of 
Vi§nu). O Goddess identical with the Devas, please accept 
the mouthful of morsel given by me; O Goddess identical 
with the Devas, decorated by the Devas, O Mother Nandini 
(Divine cow), make my desire fruitful.” 
O excellent Brahmana, on that day the devotee should 
avoid foodstuffs fried in oil or cooked in mudpots; he should 
avoid cow milk, ghee, curds and butter-milk also. 
35b-38. On the twelfth day in the bright half of the 
month of Bhadrapada, O Brahmana, the devotee should worship 
Lord D^odara with scents and other Upacaras. With great 
concentration, he should feed the Brahmanas twelve in num¬ 
ber with cooked rice in His (the Iiord’s) presence. Then, with 
great pleasure, he should offer them water pots duly worshipped, 
filled with water and accompanied by areca nuts, sweet-meats 
and gold. If the rite is performed thus, the devotee becomes a 
favourite of Vi?nu. He enjoys all worldly pleasures. There is 
no doubt in this that on death he obtains Sayujya (identity) 
with Vi?nu. 
39-42. The rite of Nirajana vrata^ is also recommended, 
to be observed on this day. Understand it from me. The devotee 
b The NP, gives two types of ^tfdjoiu Vfuta, VV. 39-43 >re for common 
people and VV. 44-50 for Kings and nobles. It is a S^i Vrata. K*"*- 
records other varieties of this Vrata (HD . V. 1. 334-335),^^ 


IV.121.43-54a 
1505 
adorns (with ornaments) the Lord of the Universe, who has 
thus got up from his slumber. At night-fall the devotee bedecks 
himself and kindles fresh fires. He worships the Lord by means of 
Mantras and performs Homa in the fire kindled by a silver 
lamp that is worshipped by the people, with scents, fragrant 
flowers etc. O sage, the devotee should perform the Nirajana 
(waving of the lights) rite to Hari with that silver lamp. There 
itself he should perform the Nirajana rite for all these in the 
following order viz ; to Laksmi who follows him, to Brahmani, 
Gauri, to Yaksa, to Ganapati, to planets, to Mothers, to 
manes, to mountains and to all the serpents. 
43. To cows, he should perform the Nirajana (waving 
of lights) rite and to buffaloes etc. otht;r Maiigala (auspi¬ 
cious) rites, with shouts like namah (obeisance),Jaya (be vic¬ 
torious) etc. and with the sounds of bells, conchs etc. 
44-50. In this great festival of waving of lights, there 
should be tumultuous noise of the cows with their horn.s 
smeared with saffron and their limbs painted with diverse kinds 
of colours. The king should be accompanied by the chief priest, 
ministers and servants. He should duly worship horses 
endowed with all auspicious characteristic signs, the elephants 
overwhelmed by ichor in their rut, and the royal parapher¬ 
nalia such as the umbrella etc. The auspicious character of 
atmosphere shall be increased with the sounds of conchs, and 
musical instruments. The king, adorned properly should occupy 
a newly made throne studded with various jewels. Then 
a courtesan or a woman of a noble family endowed with all 
auspicious characteristics should, slowly, perform the Nirajana 
rite above the head of the king. This rite is a great !§anti (that 
which subdues and pacifies evils). It should be performed every 
year by the king or any other rich man who wishes for good 
health throughout the year. O Brahmana, if the excellent Santi 
rite named Nirajana is performed in any country, city or 
village, the ailments of the people therein are quelled and cured. 
51-54a. The excellent holy rite of the Sadhya Vrata^ is 
1. This Vrata of semi-divine beings called Sidhya is recorded by 
Hemidri [CC-Vrata I. n73)on xhe A\xihonty of Vi^nudharmotlara (III. 181.1-3) 


1506 NSrada PurSna 
0 
to be observed on the twelfth day in the bright half of the 
month of Marga^Irsa. The Sadhyas are twelve in number. They 
are stated as follows : Manobhava, Prana, Nara, Yata (v.l. 
Apana) Viryavan, Giti, Haya, Nrpa (v.l. Naya) Harhsa, 
Narayana, Vibhu and Prabhu. These shall be represented by 
raw rice grains and worshipped with scents, fragrant flowers 
etc. He should then feed twelve leading Brahmanas. Good 
Daksinas are to be given to them. He should then bid farewell 
to them saying, ‘May Nai-ayana be pleased.’ 
54b-61a. On the very same day, the holy rite of Dvadasa- 
ditya Vrata' is known to be observed. The intelligent devotee 
should worship the twelve Adityas viz : Dhata, Mitra, Aryama, 
Pusa, Sakra, Arhsa, Varuna, Bhaga, Tvastr, Vivasvan, Savitr 
and Visnu. Every month, on the twelfth day in the bright half, 
he should assiduously worship them and spend the year thus. 
At the conclusion of the holy rite, he should worship twelve gold 
images in accordance with the injunctions. He should feed twelve 
excellent Brahmanas with sweet cooked rice. The observer of 
the holy rite should honour them separately and offer the gold 
image to each. By performing the Vrata, called Dvadasaditya 
Vrata thus, the devotee attains the world of the sun and enjoys 
the pleasures therein for a long time. Then, he is born on the 
Earth among human beings as a pious soul, devoid of ailments. 
Thereafter, thanks to the merit of the Vrata, he shall accom¬ 
plish the Vrata again (i.e. he shall perform it successfully 
again) O excellent Brahmana, thanks to its merit, he pierces 
the orb of the sun and attains the Brahman which is unsullied, 
formless and free from mutually clashing pairs (e.g. pleasure, 
pain etc). 
61b-67a. On this very same day is to be observed the 
Akhanda Dvadasi Vrata.* The devotee gets the replica of 
1. Also called JTdmadepa Vrata in HD. V. i., P. 318 on the authority 
of CC. Kra/a I. 1173. 
2. Hemadri on the authority of Vifpudharmottara extends this e£5cacy 
of removing the Vaikalya (deficiency) in performing penance or even 
sacrifices (Frata I. 1117-1124). AP. Ch. 190 limits the efficacy to seven 
births only (VV. 3 & 6), a view endorsed by Garu4a P. 118. 
Hemadri recommends another Vrata of the saffie name for the same 
purpose, but it starts on ASoina 11. (Ibid. Vrata I. 1103-1105). 


lV.121.67b-76a 
1507 
Janardana made in gold. He should worship it with scents and 
fragrant flowers as well as other things. In his presence, he 
should feed Brahmanas, twelve in number, every month. He 
should take food only at night and subdue his sense-organs. At 
the end of the year he worships that image in accordance with 
the injunctions and gives it to the preceptor alongwith a cow. 
He should pray thus; “O Lord, if, in the previous hundred births, 
any Vrata perrormed by me is broken, may it be rendered 
unbroken, thanks to your Grace.” Then he should feed twelve 
leading Brahmanas with milk puddings alongwith sugar-candies. 
He should give gold pieces as Daksina and make obeisance to 
them. O Brahmana, after observing the Vrata thus and pro¬ 
pitiating Janardana, he shall go to Visnu’s great region by 
means of a golden aerial car. 
67b-76a. On the twelfth day in the dark half of the 
month Pausa, the holy rite RQpavrata^ (vrata for beauty) 
is said (to be observed). On the previous Dasami day, 
the observer of the holy rite should duly take his bath and 
collect cow-dung. O Brahmana, it should be of a white cow 
or that of a cow of a single breast. It should be 
gathered from the ether itself (i.e. before it reaches the 
ground after being evacuated by the cow). O Narada, he should 
make one hundred and eight balls out of the dung, and dry 
them in the sun after keeping them in a copper vessel or a mud 
pot. On the Ekadasi day he should observe fast and worship 
the image of Visnu made of gold, in accordance with the 
injunctions. He should keep awake during the nig^t by means 
of very auspicious songs,instrumental music, recitation ofhymns, 
japas, etc. On the Dvadasi day, in the morning, he should place 
the image on a vessal full of gingelly seeds. This latter vessel 
should be placed on a pot full of water. He should then wor¬ 
ship it by means of all Upacaras. By means of attrition 
(or friction of wooden pieces) and other methods he should 
kindle a fresh Are. The intelligent devotee shall worship duly 
and perform Homas with the cow-dung balls one by one, 
alongwith gingelly seeds and ghee, after uttering the twelve- 
1. A special Vrata in the NP not recorded by Kane. 


1508 
Nirada Purina 
syllabled Mantra belonging to Visnu viz. Orii namo l^hagavate 
Vasudevaya. When hundred and eight oblations are completed 
he should perform Purnahuti. With an affable mind and 
great pleasure, he should feed Brahmanas with milk pud¬ 
dings. He should offer the image to the preceptor alongwith the 
water pot. In accordance with his ability, he should give 
Daksina to the Brahmanas. He should bid them farewell 
after bowing to them. By performing the holy rite respectfully, 
the devotee, whether it is a man or a women, attains the 
blessedness of great beauty. No doubt need be entertained in 
this respect. 
76b-85. On the twelfth day in the bright half of the month 
of Pausa, the holy rite of Sujanma-Dvadasi Vrata,^ (the holy rite 
for the attainment of good birth and pedigree) is to be observed. 
After taking the holy bath the devotee takes the vow of Vrata 
for the whole year. After drinking water from a cow’s horn, at 
the outset, he should circumambulate the cow. Thereafter, 
every month, on the twelfth day in the bright half, he should 
offer charitable gifts (as follows):—APrastha measure of ghee, 
four Prasthas of grains and barley, two Ratikas (i.c. the weight 
of the seed of the Gunja plant (Abrus precatorious) of gold 
(1-16) grains, half an A(^haka of gingelly seeds, a potful of milk 
(or water) a Masa weight of silver, and sweet cooked-rice till 
satiety; umbrella and half a Masa of gold, a Prastha measure of 
excellent molasses; a Pola weight of Sandal, a fine thin cloth 
measuring five Hastas, these arc the articles to be given as 
charitable gifts month by month. He should feed himself on 
the following :— cow’s urine, water, ghee, four kinds 
of green vegetables well cooked, cooked barley grains 
mixed with curds, gingelly seeds with ghee and sugar, water 
from the Kusa grass and milk. After performing this holy rite 
for a year, the devotee should get the image of the sun made in 
gold. He should place it on a flat copper vessel, worship it 
in accordance with the injunctions, and give it to the preceptor 
•alongwith a cow. He should then bow down to him. Then 
1. Hem&dri recommends this vrata on the authority of Vifpi-dhatmottara 
P. (CC-Krato. 1174-75). 


IV. 121.86-94 
1509 
twelve Brahmanas should be fed and presented with the due 
Daksinas. O Brahmana, he who performs the holy rite thus, 
takes his birth in a noble family. He shall be free from ailments. 
He shall be affluent in wealth and food-grains. His sense-organs 
shall be unimpaired (i.e. he shall be sound in body). 
86-89a. On the twelfth day in the bright half of the 
month of Magha, O Brahmana, the devotee shall duly and 
devoutly worship the Salagrama stone and place a piece of gold 
in its mouth. It is then placed in a silver vessel and covered 
with two white cloths. The devotee should then give this to a 
Vedic Scholarand thereafter feed him with milk-pudding along 
with sugar-candy and ghee (in a quantity) that is beneficial. 
After observing this, he should take only a single morsel a day. 
He should be interested in meditating on Visnu. After enjoying 
’ all desired pleasures here, he attains the abode of Visnu. 
89b-9Ia. On the twelfth day in the bright half of the 
final month (i.e. Phalguna), the devotee should worship the 
golden image of Hari with scents, fragrant flowers etc. He 
should then give it to a Brahmana, knower of the Vedas. After 
feeding Brahmanas, twelve in number, and giving them 
Daksina, he should bid them farewell; thereafter, he should 
take food alongwith his kinsmen. 
91b-92. The following eight Dvadasis arc days on which 
one should observe fast as they remove sins. The Dvadasis are 
Trisprsa, UnmilinI, PaksavardhinI, Vafijull, Jaya, Vijaya, 
JayantI and Aparajita. 
^ri Ndrada said : 
93. O holy Brahmana, what is the characteristic feature 
of these Dvadasis ? What is the benefit thereof ? Kindly explain 
these things to me as well as other things that may also be 
equally meritorious. 
Sata said : 
94. On being asked thus by Narada, Sanatana, the 
excellent Brahmana sage praised his brother, a great 
devotee of the Lord and said : 


1510 
JVdrada PurOiia 
Sandtana said: 
95. O brother, the question has been pertinently put by 
you who clear the doubts of good men. I shall recount the 
characteristics and the benefit of the great Dvada^is separately. 
(1) Tri-sprid : 
96. If Ekadasi ceases to be, before the sunrise, the 
Dvadasi is called Trispr^ (touching three^.) It is highly 
benevolent. 
97. O Narada, he who observes fast on this day and 
worships Govinda, certainly attains the benefit of a thousand 
horse-sacrifices. 
(ii) Un-milini : 
98. If at the Arunodaya time (dawn), the Ekadasi Tithi 
is over-lapped by Dasami, that day is eschewed and fast is 
observed on the following Dvadasi day (This is called Unmi- 
lini — that which opens). 
99. If on the Unmilini day, the devotee worships Vasu- 
deva perfectly in accordance with the injunctions, he derives the 
benefit of a thousand Rajasuya-sacrifices. 
(iii) Vanjulikd : 
100-102. When at the time of sunrise, the night 
touches Ekadasi, it shall be avoided and the subsequent Dvadasi 
which is called Vafijulika* shall be the day on which the 
devotee shall fast always. On this day, the devotee should 
worship Lord Sarhkarsana with scents and other Upacaras 
devoutly. He is the great Lord who bestows fearlessness or 
Moksa on all. This great Dvadasi yields the benefit of all Kratus 
i.e. sacrifices. It is said to be the remover of ad sins. It bestows 
all riches. 
Three tilhis are ‘touched’ on this day: Ekadaii before 
sunrise, Dv&daSi all the day and TrayodaJi in the last part of that night. 
Hence the name Tri-sp^id. 
. 2. This {Vafljuliki) dvddaSt exists the whole of one civil day (from 
sunrise to sunset) and extends over the next day, so that one can fast and 
the same Tithi—vidc Pfimya Sindhu,p.48, SmiH Kaustubka 


IV.121.103-113 
1511 
103-104. O Brahmana, when Kuhu (new moon) and 
Raka (full Moon) become increased (i.e are of a longer dura¬ 
tion), the Dvadasi is called Paki^vardhanika (that which 
increases the duration of fortnight) and it is highly beneficial. 
On that day the devotee should worship Lord Pradyumna, the 
Lord of the Universe, the bestower of all prosperity and the 
increaser of direct sons and grandsons. 
105. If, in the bright half, Dvadasi coincides with the 
constellation Magha it is called Jaya.^ It conquers all enemies. 
106. On this day, the devotee should worship Lord 
Aniruddha, the husband of Rama, the bestower of all cherished 
desires of men and the granter of all blessedness. 
107-108. If, in the bright half, Dvadasi coincides 
with the constellation Sravana, it is called Vijaya. On that 
day the devotee should worship Gadadhara, the besto¬ 
wer of all happiness for ever, the greatest resort for all pleasures. 
O Brahmana, by observing fast on that day, a man shall attain 
the benefit of pilgrimage of all holy centres. 
109. If, in the bright half, Dvadasi coincides with 
the constellation of which Brahma is the presiding deity 
[Rohini ? ] it is highly meritorious. It is remembered by the 
name ‘Jayanti’. 
110-11 la. On this day the devotee should worship Lord 
Vamana the bestower of Siddhis on men. O leading Brahmana, 
if fast is observed on this day, it yields the benefit of all Vratas. 
If yields the benefit of all charitable gifts; it yields worldly 
pleasures and salvation. 
11 lb-113. If, in the bright half, Dvadasi coincides 
with the constellation Pusya it is called Aparajita. It is the 
1. The NP associates the following DoddaSis in the bright halves of 
the month with the following Nakfatras coinciding on that day : 
N.of Doddaii 
Nakfdtra 
Jaya 
Maghi 
Vijaya 
l§ravai>a 
Jayanti 
Rohini 
AparlLjiti 
Pu?ya 
Expert opinions difler. For example ^iivaya Sindhu, p. 48 associates the 
constellation with Jayil, PtmanmH with Jayanti. 


1512 
J^drada Purdna 
bes tower of all knowledge. On this day the devotee shoyld wor¬ 
ship Lord Narayana, devoid of ailments, the cause of liberation 
(severance) from the bondage of worldly existence, the ocean of 
perfect knowledge. O Brahmana, by the observance of fast alone 
on this day, people will be liberated. 
114, If, Dvadasi in the bright half of the month of 
Asadha coincides with the constellation Anuradha, two Vratas 
must be observed, I’here is no fault since the presiding deity is 
the same. 
115. Similarly, in the bright half of the month Bhadra- 
pada, if Ekadasi coincides with the constellation Sravana and 
if Dvada.sl coincides with the constellation Revati in the 
bright half of the month ofKarttika, two Vratas (viz. Ekadasi 
and Dvada.si are to be observed. 
116-117. O leading Brahmana, incases other than these, 
only one meal is taken on Dvadasi day. This is the natural 
Vrata laid down and it is destructive of sins. Since the Vrata 
of Ekadasi is always in conjunction with that of Dvadasi no 
rite of Udyapana is laid down. This Vrata has to be performed 
throughout one’s life. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYTWO 
The Vratas to be observed 
on TrayodaH [thirteenth day of the lunar fortnight) 
Sandtana said : 
1. Henceforth, therefore, I shall relate to you compre¬ 
hensively the Vratas to be observed on Trayodasi days (i.e. 
thirteenth day of lunar fortnights). On observing these Vratas 
with devotion, the man becomes elegant and highly blessed in 
the world. 
2-3a. On the thirteenth day in the bright half of the 
month of Caitra, an image of Madana is mado. with sandal 


IV.122.3b-I4 
1513 
paste. After worshipping it assiduously, the devotee should waft 
it with a fan. K^rna excited thereby causes the multiplication 
of sons and grandsons. 
3b-4. The worship of Anahga too is to be celebrated on 
this day. O leading sage, understand it. The devotee should 
draw the figure of Anahgas on a wooden plank with saffron, 
turmeric and red powder. He should be depicted as endowed 
with the love of Rati, smart and elegant and holding the flowery 
arrows and bow. 
5. At midday, he should worship Kamadeva, Vasanta 
(presiding deity of the spring), Vajivaktra (the horse-faced 
Lord Visnu) and the bull-bannered Lord Siva with devotion, 
by means of scents, garlands, ornaments and silken garments. 
6-8. He should propitiate them with various kinds of 
foodstuffs. O Narada, in the meantime he repeats this Mantra 
“Obeisance to Mara, Kama, the deity of Kamadeva, the exciter 
of the minds of Brahma, Visnu, Siva and Indra.” Then in 
front of him, he should worship Anganapati (the husband of a 
woman) with devotion, garments, garlands, ornaments and 
other things. He should regard that he (the Brahmana so 
worshipped) is Kama himself. He should then worship a 
Brahmana couple with scents, garments and ornaments. 
9. O Brahmana, he who performs the great festival 
thus, every year, becomes always delighted and well-nourished 
at the advent of the spring. 
10-12a. Or he should worship the following (twelve forms of 
Kama month by month till the year comes to a close : Madana, 
Hrdbhava, Kama, Manmatha, Ratipriya, Anaiiga, Kandarpa, 
(the god with the epithet) Makaradhvaja, Kusumayudha, 
Manobhava, Visamesu and Malatipriya. O Brahmana he 
should worship these twelve forms of Kamadeva. 
12b-13. The charitable gift of a she-goat is also recom¬ 
mended. After taking a holy dip in the river in accordance 
with the injunctions, the devotee should give milch goat to an 
indigent householder. Thanks to this charitable gift, he is not 
reborn in this world. 
14. If this Trayoda^i coincides with Saturday, it is 
Temembered as Mahavanipi. If the devotee is able to get an 


1514 
N&rada PurS^a 
opportunity to take bath in the Gahga, it is more efficacious- 
than a crore such baths at the juncture of solar eclipses * 
15. This is an auspicious combination in regard to the 
worship of Kama, viz : the constellation of l^atabhisak, 
Saturday and the bright half of the month of Gaitra. It is- 
famous by the name of Mahamaha.^ It yields salvation to a 
crore of the members of his family. 
16-18a. On the thirteenth day in the bright half of the 
month of Vai^akha, the holy rite of Kamadevavrata is to be 
observed. The devotee should observe fast and worship Kama 
with scents etc. Thereafter, every month, on the thirteenth day 
in the bright halves, he should perform the holy rite in the 
same manner. At the end of the year, in order to achieve the 
Sahgatva (the status of having the complete fulfilment of the 
Vrata) of the holy rite, he should give a cow bedecked with 
ornaments to a Brahmana after duly honouring him. 
18b-22a. The holy rite of a Daurbhagya-Samana-Vrata* 
(i.e. the holy rite for quelling misfortunes) is to be observed on 
the thirteenth day in the bright half of the month of Jyesfha. 
The devotee should take the holy dip in the river water and 
worship the following three plants growing in clean spots : the 
white Mandara, the white Arka, (the sun-plant) and the red 
Karavira (the oleander). Gazing at the sun in the sky, he 
should utter this mantra and pray : “O Mandara, O Arka, O 
Karavira, you are all born in the family of the sun. Worshipped 
by me, quell my misfortune; obeisance be to you all.” If any 
one devotedly worships the three plants thus every year, his 
misfortune is quelled. No doubt need be entertained in this 
regard. 
22b-28a. On the thirteenth day in the bright half of the 
month of Asadha, the devotee should take in only one meal a 
day. According to his ability, he should get the image of Uma 
1. The complete name of the Vrata \s Mahimahd Vdrupi vide HD^ 
V. i. 405-406. 
2, This Vrata shows how the cult of ‘tree-worship’ of Pre-Aryans 
in India was observed in Hinduism. A number of trees e.g. The Pippala 
(A^vattha), Vata Bilva, Tulasi-Aioka {vide VV. 41-45 below) and others 
have been firmly established as 'deities' in Puranic Hinduism.'' 


IV.122.28b-40 
1515 
and Mahe^vara made in gold, silver or clay. The goddess and 
the Lord of‘ the universe are represented as seated respectively 
on a lion and on a bull. O Narada, the images are installed 
and consecrated m a temple or in a cowpen or in the 
house of a Brahmana, by the divine Mantras. Then the 
worship is continued for five days and the Vrata (vow) of 
taking a single meal is kept up. On the Trtiya (third) day, 
the devotee takes his bath in the morning and worships the 
deities once again. The images are to be given to a Brahma^ 
who is a master of the Vedas and the Vedangas (ancillaries of 
Vedas). This Vrata is continued from year to year for full five 
years. At its end, he should give those images (to a Brahmana) 
alongwith a pair of cows. If the devotee, whether a man or a 
woman, performs this auspicious Vrata thus, he never experi¬ 
ences a break in the conjugal love in the course of seven births. 
28b-32. The auspicious, holy rite of Ratikama-vrata is 
to be observed on the thirteenth day in the bright half of the 
month of Sravana. It prevents widowhood of ladies. It is 
conducive to the increase in the number of children, O excellent 
Brahmana, the virgin or the woman devotee observes fast. The 
images of Rati and Kama are made of copper, clay, gold or 
silver and placed in a similar vessel. She should then properly 
(according to injunctions) worship them with scents etc. Then 
she invites a Brahmana couple for the following Caturdasi day. 
After honouring them and feeding them, she should give them 
images alongwith monetary gifts. This excellent Vrata is 
continued for fourteen years. For completing the Vrata, the 
images are to be given along with a pair of cows. 
33-40. The holy rite of go-tri-ratra' is to be observed on 
the thirteenth day in the bright half of the month of Bhadrapada. 
The image of Laksminarayana is made of gold or silver. On 
an auspicious Mandala (mystic diagram) of a lotus of eight 
petals, the image is to be placed on a pedestal covered with a 
1. K.ane records three varieties of Co-fn-rdtra Vrata out of which 
this is the second and is described by Hcmadri (Vrata II. 293-303). It is a 
synthesis of Vi^qu-worship and cow-worship. 


1516 
N&rada Purina 
cloth, after bathing the image with Paftcamrta. He shoi^d duly 
worship the deity with scents and other things. After the rite of 
waving the light, (Aratrika) he shoulcf make a gift of a pot 
of water and cooked rice. This rite is performed for three days. 
At the conclusion of the Vrata, he should worship the deity 
for a month. O Narada, after gathering enough wealth, he 
should offer it as gift alongwith this Mantra :— “When the great 
ocean was being churned, five cows were born. Nanda is in the 
middle of them. Repeated Obeisance to that cow.” After 
circumambulating the cow, he should give it to a Brahmana 
with this Mantra :— “May cows be in front of me. May cows be 
behind me. May cows be on my sides. I stay in the midst of 
the cows.” Thereafter, he should duly honour a Brahmana 
couple and feed them. After honouring them suitably, the 
devotee should give them an image of Laksmlnarayana. One 
shall obtain from the holy rite of Gotriratravrata, the same 
benefit as one obtains by performing thousands of horse- 
sacrifices and hundreds of Rajasuyas. 
41-45. The holy rite of Tri-ratafoka-Vrata^ is to be 
observed on the thirteenth day in the bright half of the month 
of Asvina. The replica of the Afoka tree is made in gold. The 
woman devotee observes fast. After worshipping the image in 
accordance with the injunctions, she should circumambulate it 
for a hundred and eight times every day. O Brahmana, she 
should repeat this mantra with respect—“O Afoka, formerly 
you have been created by Hara, the merciful deity ! You are 
the cause of rendering help to the whole world. O favourite 
one of Siva, be gracious unto me.” On the third day there¬ 
after, she should worship the bull emblemed deity on that tree, 
in accordance with the injunctions. A Brahmana should be fed 
and given this as a gift. The woman who observed the holy 
rite thus, is never visited by widowhood. She will be blessed 
with sons, grandsons, etc. She will also be the great beloved 
of her husband. 
1. This is an amalgamation of the ancient cult of tree-worship and 
Saivism. This blesses one with Saubh&gya (life on one’s husband) and 
progeny. Kane records a number of Saubhigya Vratas (HD. V. i. 455-57) 
but this is not included therein. 


IV. 122.46-54 
1517 
46-47. The devotee should take only one meal on the 
thirteenth day in the dark half of the month of Karttika, and 
with great concentration, he should light an oil lamp and 
assiduously worship it. Thereafter, he should keep it outside 
his front door saying “May Yama be pleased with me”. O 
leading Brahmana, if this is done, one is not afflicted by Yama. 
48-51 O excellent Brahmana, the devotee should take 
a single meal on the thirteenth day in the bright half of the 
month of Karttika. At sunset, he should take bath again and 
observing silence, light a thousand, a hundred or a row of thirty- 
two lamps for Siva. O Brahmana, he should do so with great 
concentration. He should light the lamp with ghee. With 
scents and other things he should worship Siva. O Narada, he 
should propitiate the Lord with fruits of various kinds and other 
items of Naivedya. Then, he should eulogise Siva, the Lord of 
the Devas, with the following hundred names.^ Those names, 
the bestowers of all desired benefits, are being detailed (as 
follows) ; 
52. Obeisance to Rudra, the terrible, to the bluenecked 
God, to the Creator, to one with matted hair, to the Lord of 
the Devas, bow to Vyomakesa (one whose tresses constitute 
the firmament.) 
53. Hail to the bull-emblemed one, to Soma (God 
accompanied by Uma), obeisance to Somanatha. Obeisance 
to Digambara (i.e. one with the quarters for garments i.e. 
Naked) ; Obeisance to Bhrhga; Obeisance to the deity who 
causes plentitude. 
54. Bow to the deity full of penance (Tapzis). Obeisance 
to the pervaded one. Obeisance to Sipivista (pervaded by rays) 
1. This ‘Century of Rudra’s names’ bears a strong influence 
of the Fifth Prapathaka in the IV Kanda of the Taittirtya Sdmhitdy 
popularly known as Rudrddhy^a. The so called Namakas beginning with 
nomas U Rudra manyave etc. have subsequently strongly influenced the 
‘century of names’ and ‘Thousand of names’ of Rudra or god Siva first,, 
then Vi9pu down to a river like the Gahga. 
It is significant that the author of the NP is not a fanatic Vaifi>ava like 
his later descendants in the south. He treats fiurly both the deities, as they are 
but two names of the Supreme Deity, Para Brahman. 


1518 Marada PurS^a 
# 
Salutations to one fond of serpents. Obeisance to Vyala. and 
to the Lord of serpents (Vyala). 
55. Hail to the supporter of the Earth, obeisance to 
(the god of the form of) Vyoma (ether), to the Lord of Pasus 
and to the lion that destroyed the three Puras (cities) (of 
asuras). Obeisance to Sardula (Tiger), Obeisance to Rsabha 
(the bull, the chief). 
56. Obeisance to Mita (the measured one), to Mita- 
natha (to the Lord of the measured ones); to Siddha (one 
who has realised the soul), to Paramesthin (one stationed in 
the highest being), Obeisance to one who is sung about by the 
Vedas; to one who is concealed in the Vedas; Obeisance 
to one who is worthy of being kept as a secret in the Vedas. 
57. Hail to the long one, to one of a long form, to one 
of large objects; to the greater one (than all); obeisance to the 
deity in whom the universe is installed; obeisance to one of the 
form of the sky. 
58. Obeisance to one who causes welfare; obeisance to 
one of special nature; obeisance to Sista (the disciplined one); 
to Paramatman (the reatest soul), to one who wears 
the elephant’s hide and to one who split the demon 
Andhaka, 
59. Obeisance to one who is blue, red and white (in 
complexion), to one who is the favourite of Ganda and Munda; 
to the Lord fond of devotion, to the destroyer of the Yajfia, to 
the unchanging one. 
60. Hail to you, O Mahadeva, to Mahesa; to Hara, to 
the three-eyed one; obeisance to Triveda (one described in 
three Vedas). Repeated obeisance to one who is the embodi¬ 
ment of the Vedas. 
61. Obeisance to the Artha (wealth), to one whose 
form is Artha, to one who is in the highest reality; obeisance 
to one whose form is the Universe, to the Universe itself, to 
one who is verily the Lord of the Universe. 
62. Obeisance to l^ahkara, to Kala, to one of the form of 
the units of Kala, obeisance to Arupa (one without form), to 
Virupa (the deformed), to the subtlest of the subtie. 


IV.122.63-75a 
1519 
63. Obeisance to you the resident of the cremation 
■ground, to the wearer of the hide garment; to one with the 
moon for crest jewel, obeisance to one who has resorted to 
Rudrabhumi (i.e. cremation ground). 
64-66. Obeisance to Durga (very difficult to know), to 
Durgapara (one who is on the other side of Samsara), to the 
"witness of the limbs of Durga, obeisance to one of the form of 
Lihga, to Lihga and to the Lord of Lingas, obeisance to 
one of the form of Prowess; Obeisance to one whose object 
is prowess. Repeated salutes to the cause of causes, to you, the 
conqueror of Death, to one of the form of the self-born; obei¬ 
sance to the three-eyed one; to the bluenecked, obeisance to 
one full of splendour; to one united to Gauri and the cause of 
auspiciousness. 
67. O Brahmana, this is the century of names glorifying 
the attributes of the Pinaka-bearing Lord. The devotee should 
recite this, make circumambulation and go back to his own 
abode. 
68. O Brahmana, by performing this holy rite, the devotee 
enjoys all worldly pleasures here, thanks to the grace of Maha- 
deva. In the end he shall attain the region of Siva. 
69-71. On the thirteenth day in the bright half of the 
month of Margasirsa, the devotee should duly worship Anaiiga 
who had become so, due to his contact with l§iva. He should 
worship him thrice or once per day. After worshipping with 
scents and other Upacaras in accordance with the injunctions, 
he should feed a Brahmana couple in a pot or on an auspi¬ 
cious cloth. Then, he should give them Daksina and take only 
a single meal. If this vrata is duly performed, O prominent 
Brahmana, the devotee becomes the object of blessedness on 
Earth, thanks to the grace of Mahadeva. 
72. The devotee shall worship Hari—Acyuta on the thir¬ 
teenth day in the bright half of the month of Pausa. For the 
achievement of everything, he should give a pot of ghee to a 
leading Brahmai^a. 
73-73a. O Brahmana, the holy rite of M^ha snana is to 
be observed for three days beginning with the thirteenth day 
in the bright half of the month of Magha. It is conducive to 


1520 
Mdrada Purdna 
the attainment ofmany desired benefits. On this earth even with 
a thousand horse-sacrifices, that benefit cannot be attained, which 
one gets on taking the holy dip in Prayaga for these three days 
in the month of Magha. The holy dip, Japa, Homa and charit¬ 
able gifts on this day yields endless benefits. 
75b-84. On the thirteenth day in the bright half of the 
month of Phalguna, the devotee observes fast. After bowing to 
the Lord of the Universe at the outset, he performs the holy 
rite of Dhanada Vrata.' The picture of the great king, the Lord 
of the Yaksas, is painted in colours on a cloth. The devotee 
worships the Lord with scents and other Upacaras with noble 
emotions of devotion in the mind. O excellent Brahmana, in 
this same manner, he should worship the deity every month on the 
thirteenth day in the bright half, after observing fast or taking 
a single meal. At the end of the Vrata he gets the image of the 
Lord of wealth made along with the image of the lord of Nidhis 
(Treasure) made in gold. O excellent Brahmana, with all the 
sixteen Upacaras, with the ablutions with Paficamrta etc. and 
with different kinds of Naivedyas, he should with great con¬ 
centration and devotion worship the deity. O Brahmana, there¬ 
after, he adorns a cow with its calf by means of cloths, garlands, 
scents and ornaments. He then gifts it away to a knower of the 
Vedas. He feeds twelve or thirteen Brahmanas with sweet cooked 
rice. The preceptor is propitiated with clothes and other things 
and the gold image (Kubera) is given to him. According to his 
ability, he should give Daksina to the Brahmanas, bow to them 
and bid farewell to them. The intelligent devotee, thereafter, 
takes his food alongwith friends and kinsmen. O Brahmana, if 
the Vrata is performed thus, the indigent devotee attains great 
wealth. He rejoices in the world. He becomes well-known on 
the Earth as another Rajaraja (King of Kings or Kubera). 
1. This is Dhana Vrata given in the VifTtu-dharmoltara III. 184. 
1-3 and quoted by Hemidri as Nanda-Vrata. What Hemadri calls Dhanada 
Vrata (Vrata I. 1161-62), begins on the 11th of Mirgasir^ i§u. though 
both have Kubera as the deity to be propitiated. 


lV.123.1-13 
1521 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYTHREE 
Description of the Vratas to be observed on Caturdafi {fourteenth 
day in a lunar fortnight) 
Sandtana said : 
1. O Narada, listen. I shall recount to you the holy rites 
to be observed on the Caturdafi (fourteenth) days (of lunar 
fortnights). On observing these holy rites, a man shall attain 
his cherished desires in this world. 
2>4a. On the fourteenth day in the bright half of the 
month of Gaitra, magnificent worship of Siva should be perform¬ 
ed with saffron, agallochum, sandal paste, scents, and other 
things, clothes and ornaments. Erecting the canopy, the banner 
and the umbrellas, the mothers are to be worshipped. O Brah- 
mana, by performing the worship thus alongwith the observance 
of fast or taking a single meal on that day, the man obtains 
merit more than that of a horse-sacrifice, on this Earth. 
4b-5a. On this very same day, the devotee should per¬ 
form Damanarca (worship by means of Damanaka leaves 
and fragrant flowers). When the Vrata is concluded the devotee 
should dedicate the fruit to Siva of auspicious form. 
5b-8a. On the fourteenth day in the dark half of the 
month of Vai^akha, the intelligent devotee should observe fast. 
At sunset he should take bath and wear clean white clothes 
and worship Lihga with scents and other Upacaras and 
the leaves of a Bilva tree. After giving invitation to a prominent 
Brahmami, he should take food on the next day. O excellent 
Brahmana on all Gaturdaifis in the dark halves of the months, 
the holy rites Sivaratra Vrata should be performed by one who 
wishes for wealth and progeny. 
8b-13. The devotee should observe the holy Vrata of Sri- 
Nrsimha' on the fourteenth day in the bright half of the month, 
of VaiiaUdia. If he is physically capable, he should observe fast. 
1. VV. 8b-13 describe what is popularly known as Nfsiihha JayantL 
as Vi$ou manifested himself on Vaif&kha Su 14 as Natrasiihha in the evening 
on Svkti Nak^atra. The NP. calls thU simply as Jfrsuhha-Vrala. a confusing 
designation, as we have Nirimha Vratas on 8th, 12th and the 13th TiUde 
of different months (vide HO. V. I, {^. 328-329}. 


1522 
Mdrada Purdna 
Otherwise, he should take a single meal on that day. At 
sunset he should worship Nrsiihha, the slayer of the Daityas, 
with all the sixteen Upacaras and ablutions with Paficamrta. 
Then, O Narada, with the following Mantra, he should 
crave forgiveness of the Lord—“O Divine Lion with the 
mane resembling molten gold, with eyes shining like fire and 
with the toucli of claws sharper than thunderbolt, obeisance 
be to you.” After praying thus to the Lord of the Devas, the 
observer of holy rite should lie down on the bare ground. He 
should subdue his sense-organs and anger and should eschew 
all worldly pleasures. O Brahmana, he who duly performs this 
excellent holy rite every year, attains all pleasures and (after 
death) Hari’s region. 
14-15. O leading sage, the pilgrimage to Omkaresvara 
is also to be undertaken on this day. The worship of that deity 
is very difiicult to be obtained. I'he vision of deity is destruc¬ 
tive of sins. Of what avail is much talk ? Whatever is accessible, 
the worship of the deity, meditation, Japa or the vision of 
the deity is the bestower of perfect knowledge and salvation. 
16-18a. On this day, the holy rite of Lihga-Vrata is to 
be performed. It is destructive of sins. Lihga is bathed in 
Pancamrta and saffron is smeared over it. Fruits are offered 
as Naivedyas. Incense, lights, clothes and ornaments are offered 
duly. He who worships Lihga made of ground flour, 
attains worldly pleasures and salvation, thanks to the grace of 
Mahadeva. This Lihga is the bestower of achievements of all 
objects. 
18b-19a. On the fourteenth day in the bright half of the 
month of Jyestha, the devotee performs austerities in the midst 
of five fires, during the day time, at night-fall he should make 
a gift of a golden cow. This is called Rudravrata^. 
19b-20a. On the fourteenth day in the bright half of the 
month of Asa<^ha, the devotee should worship Siva by means of 
1. Rudra-Vrata: This i» PaAedgnitidhana. Kane notes another variety 
HD. V. i. 393-94. 


IV.123.20b-27 
1523 
the flowers of the season and clime. The man who performs 
worship thus shall attain all riches. 
20b-22. The holy rite of Pavitraropana is to be observed 
on the fourteenth day of the bright half of the month of 
Sravana. O excellent Brahmana, that has to be performed in 
accordance with the injunctions laid down in his own branch 
of the Veda. He should repeat the Mantra a hundred times 
and dedicate it to the Goddess. By performing the rite of 
Pavitraropana,! any person, be it a man or a woman, shall 
attain worldly pleasures and salvation by the grace of the great 
Goddess (Mahadevi). 
23-27. The excellent holy rite of Ananta Caturdasi* is to 
be performed on the fourteenth day in the bright half of the 
month of Bhadrapada. The devotee should take only a single 
meal on that day. He cooks the Prastha-measure of ground 
wheat flour smeared with ghee and mixed with sugar and offers 
it to Ananta as Naivedya after worshipping him at the outset 
with scents. The old thread worn round the hand is taken 
off and thrown into the water. A new thread of silken or cotton 
cord is taken and fourteen knots are tied. The woman devotee 
wears this on her left hand and the male devotee on his right 
hand. After cooking the ground flour, he should give it as gift 
alongwith Daksina. He himself shall take in moderate 
(quantity of) food. The intelligent devotee should perform 
this excellent Vrata for twice seven years and then perform 
Udyapana (Valedictory) rite. 
1. VV. 20b-22 mention the outline of Pavitrdropat^a Vrata. For 
<fetails vide HD V. i. 339-40. The NP does not clarify that Pavitra is the 
sacred thread Tajflopavtta. 
2. W. 23-33a describe Anaata-caturdaJi Vrata. Ananta is a form 
of Hari. It is a very popular Vrata and is described with slight variations 
in the procedure in AP. 192. 7-10, xhs Bhat/ifyottara and Vratirka. HemAdri 
(Vrata II pp, 26-36} gives an elaborate description of this Vrata quoting 
the story of KaupijUnya and his wife SltA Kaug^inya losing every thing 
by cutting the Anauita-thread from his wife’s hand and regaining it after 
propitiation of Ananta. Kane (HD. V- I. pp. 151-53) does not clartfy how 
a thread could represent Krfoa. Ananta is the name of Serpent 3efa. Is it 
an assimilation of the cult of serpen t-worship in Brahmanism ? 


1524 
Ndrada Purdifa 
28-33a. The devotee draws the mystic diagram Sarvato- 
Bhadra by means of coloured power and grains. O sage, after 
making it splendid, the devotee places a copj>er pot over it. The 
auspicious golden image of Ananta is then placed over the 
Kalaia (vessel) of copper and covered with a yellow silken cloth. 
He shall then worship the image in accordance with the injunc¬ 
tions. He should severally worship GaneiSa, Mothers, 
planets and the ten guardians of the worlds, quarters. 
He then performs Homa with Havisya (cooked rice soaked 
in ghee) alongwith the Purnahuti. O excellent Brahmana, to 
his preceptor the devotee gives a bed with all adjuncts, a 
cow and the image of Ananta. With great devotion he should 
feed fourteen other Brahmail^as, with sweet cooked rice, and 
propitiate them with Dak^i^s. He who thus respectfully per¬ 
forms the Ananta Vrata, directly enjoys worldly pleasures and 
attains salvation by the grace of Ananta. 
33b-39a. The holy rite ofKadali vrata^ is also to be 
observed on this day. Listen to its rules of procedure from me. 
The devotee may be a man or a woman. He should take his 
bath and worship the plantain tree in the garden by means of 
scents, fragrant flowers, germinating grains as well as curds, 
Durva grass, raw rice-grains, lights, clothes and diverse kinds of 
cooked food. After the worship, the observer of the holy rite 
should pray with this Mantra : ‘‘O plantain tree, who are 
worshipped by the Apsaras, Amara (divine) virgins and the 
serpent virgins, O goddess, obeisance be to you. Grant me 
freedom from ailment in the body and also loveliness.’* After the 
prayer the devotee should feed four virgins or Suv^inis (married 
women); they should be provided with silken cloth, saffron 
powder, collyrium and red lac juice. After bowing to them and 
concluding the observance, he or she should go back to the 
house. O Brahmaina, if this Vrata is performed thus the devotee 
obtains excellent conjugal bliss in this world. After death, he 
shall go to the heavenly world in an aerial chariot. 
1. W 336-39a describe the Kadalf Vrata—^wherein the plantain tree 
is the beauty-giving deity. Hem&dri, on the authority of Bhatdfyottara details 
it {Vrata II. 132-33}. This u another instance of assHttilation of the cult of 
tree worship in Brahmanism. 


IV.123.39b-52 
1525 
39b-43a. On the fourteenth day in the dark half of the 
month of Aivina, the Sraddha rites of the following categories 
of persons are performed viz. those who are killed by means of 
poison or weaptons; those who are drowned in water^ those who 
are burnt by fire, those who are bitten by serpents or mauled 
by beasts of prey, those who are killed by thunderbolt and those 
who murder Brahmanas. They are performed in accordance 
with the rules laid down in the case of Elkoddista Sr^ddhas. 
Brahmanas are fed with sweet cooked rice. The Tarpapa rite is 
performed, mouthfuls of fodder are given to cows and oblations 
are given to dogs and crows. After performing these rites and 
the Acamana rite, the devotee should take his food along with 
his kinsmen. O Brahmana, he who performs l§raddha in this 
manner alongwith the requisite Daksii^s shall uplift the Pitrs 
and go to the eternal world of the Devas. 
43b-45. On the fourteenth day in the bright half of the 
month of Alvina O excellent Brahmapa, the devotee should 
perfectly worship the image in gold of Dharmaraja^ with scents 
etc. After feeding a Brahmana, the image is given to him. O 
Narada, Dharmaraja protects everyone in the world. He 
who thus performs the'excellent rite of gifting away the image 
of Dharmaraja enjoys all excellent pleasures here and at the 
behest of Dharmaraja goes to the heaven. 
46-47. On the fourteenth day in the dark half of the 
month of Karttika, the devotee takes oil bath at the rise of the 
moon. After the bath he should worship Dhartna. The devotee 
shall attain fearlessness from hell. For the propitiation of Yama, 
he should light oil lamps at night fall. With great concentration 
the devotee should place the lamps at the cross-roads or outside 
the house. 
46-52. In the year called Hemalambi, on the fourteenth 
day in the bright half of the glorious month of Karttika, against 
the dawn. Lord Viiveivara took his bath in the holy waters at 
the Manikarpika Tirtha al(uig%vith the Devas. O leading sage, 
with Bhasma he applied the Tripundra (three parallel marks 
on the forehead). He worshipped his own self and performed 
1. This is not recorded by Kane in HD. V. i. 


1526 
Nirada PurStia 
the Pa^upata rite. Hence on that day, the devotee should p)er- 
form the great worship of the Lihga with scents and other things. 
He should offer worship with the flowers of Drona Bilva leaves, 
Arka flowers Ketaki flowers, fruits and different kinds of 
Naivedyas. If the Vrata is thus performed and only a single 
meal is taken on that day, it satisfies Vi^ve^a. O Narada, he 
attains all cherished desires, both here and hereafter. 
53-57. On this very day the holy rite of Brahma- 
kurca Vrata is to be observed by one who wishes for prosperity. 
Observing fast and controlling the sense-organs, the observer of 
the vow should drink Paflcagavya at night. The Paftcagavya is 
made thus : 
The urine of a tawny-coloured cow; the dung of a black 
cow; the milk of a white cow; the curds of a red cow and the ghee 
of a cow of variegated colours.—all these are taken and mixed 
together. The devotee then takes his bath in the morning with 
the water sanctified by Kuila grass and performs the Tarpana 
rite to the Devas. After propitiating the Brahmanas, he should 
himself take his food silently. This is the Brahmakurca Vrata^ 
that destroys all sins. The sin committed during the infancy, 
youth and old age, is dispelled instantaneously by means of 
the Brahma-Kurca vrata and the fast on that day. 
58-60a. The holy rite of Pasana-Vrata is also to be 
observed on this day. Listen to it, O Narada. The devotee 
observes fast during the day. He cooks ground flour in ghee, 
shaping it in the form of a brick. During the night, he worships 
Gauri with scents and other things and offers the flour-brick 
cooked in ghee as Naivedya. O excellent Brahmana, after per¬ 
forming this holy rite in the manner mentioned above, the man 
attains glory, happiness, conjugal bliss and beauty of form. 
60b"63. On the fourteenth day in the bright half of the 
month of Marga^irsa the devotee takes a single meal or abstains 
from food and performs the holy rite mentioned before. He should 
make a gold replica of a bull, worship it and give it to a Brah¬ 
mana. On the next day, he should get up early in the morning, 
1. Brahma^KSrca is treated here as a Vrata thou|;h it is really a 
Prdjaicitta. 


IV.123.64-73a 
1527 
take his bath and worship Mahesvara accompanied by Uma, 
with lotus flowers, scents, fragrant garlands and unguents. He 
should then feed the Brahmanas with sweet cooked rice and 
propitiate them with Daksinaetc. OBrahmana, this is called Siva 
Vrata. It is the bestower of worldly pleasures and liberation to 
the performers, to the instructors, to those who assist, and to 
those who approve. 
64-66a. On the fourteenth day in the bright half of the 
month of Pausa, the holy rite ofVirupaksavrata is to be observ¬ 
ed. The devotee should think thus “I shall attain the presence 
of KapardiJvara.” Having thought thus, O Brahmana, he should 
worship Virupaksa Siva with scents, fragrant garlands, incense, 
lights, richly prepared cooked rice and obeisances. By giving 
what is contained therein, the devotee rejoices in the heaven 
like Deva. 
66b-68. On the fourteenth day in the dark half of 
Magha is prescribed the holy rite of Yainatapana.^ Before the 
sunrise the devotee must take his bath and perform the rite of 
Tarpana unto Yama with the fourteen names mentioned be¬ 
fore (chap. 119 verses 59-90) for the purpose of liberation from 
all sins. The Tarpana rite is to be performed by means ofgingelly 
seeds, Darbha grass and waler. Krsara and cooked rice cons¬ 
titute the meal of the Brahmanas. He himself should eat the 
same with restricted speech in silence. 
69-73a. O Brahmana, the holy rite of SivaratrP is to be 
observed on the fourteenth day in the dark half of the last 
month (i.e Phalguna). The devotee observes fast, even abjur¬ 
ing water, during the day, and worships the deity at night in 
the self-born Lihga etc. or the Liiiga made of clay with deep 
concentration of mind. He worships the Lord with scents and 
1. Kane has recorded a number of ^iva Vratas (HD. V. i. pp. 
426-427), but this Vrata is different from them. 
2. This is the famous Alahdlivardlri-Vrata popular all over India. 
The NP follows PurpimdrUa reckoning and thus locates it in Phalguna. 
This Vrata is highly extolled in Garuda P. 1-124, SK. P. I-l. 33, Pd. P. VI. 
240 and AP. 193. The whole Kra/a is discussed in details by Kane HD. V. 
1-225-236. As compared with other Pur&Qas and digests, the NP. gives a 
bare outline of the Vrata. 


1528 
N-drada Purd^ta 
other Upacuas, the leaves of the Bilva, etc., water, incense, 
lights, recitation of hymns, Japa etc. as well as Naivedyas duly 
offered. On the next day too the deity is again worshipped with 
the Upacaras. After feeding Brahmanas with sweet cooked 
rice, he should give them the requisite Daksi^ and bid fare¬ 
well to them. By performing the Vrata thus, the man obtains 
immortal pleasures, thanks to the grace of Mah^eva. He is 
well-honoured and respected by Devas. 
73b-74. On the fourteenth day, in the bright half of the 
last month, the devotee worships Durga with great devotion, 
offering scents and other Upacaras. Thereafter, he feeds the 
Brahmanas. O Brahmana, he should take only a single meal 
on that day. By performing the Vrata of Durga thus, he derives 
cherished desires, both here and hereafter, O Narada. 
75-76. The devotee shall observe fast on the fourteenth 
day in (he dark half of the month of Caitra. By drinking 
water from a rice-field on the day one derives the benefit of a 
horse-sacrifice. 
The general procedure regarding Udyapana^ (valedictory 
rite of conclusion) for all these holy rites is now narrated. 
77-79. Fourteen pots with areca nuts, unbroken raw rice- 
grains and sweet-meats, may be made of copper or clay. 
They must be fresh and uncracked. The Daksin^ and silken 
garments should also be placed there. Besides these the follow¬ 
ing too are to be provided as necessary viz. fourteen bamboo 
poles, fourteen sacred seats, fourteen vessels and fourteen sacred 
texts. As for the other things, they should be performed in the 
manner mentioned before. The devotee should not be stingy in 
the matter of expenses. 
1. VV. 77-79 give the general procedure of the (conclud¬ 
ing ceremony) cS these CatmUUf Vratas. 


IV.124.1-9 
1529 
CaiAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYFOUR 
Exposition of Vratas to be observed 
on the Full Moon and the Neva Moon days 
Sandtana said : 
1. Henceforth, O Narada, I shall recount to you the holy 
rite to be observed on the Full Moon day. Listen. On observing 
these rites the performer of Vratas whether he be a man or 
a woman, attains series of happiness. 
2. O leading Brahmana, the Full Moon day in the 
month of Gaitra is the day of the inauguration of the Manvan- 
tara. On this day, the observer of the Vrata should gfive a pot 
of water with cooked rice, for the propitiation of Soma (the 
Moon). 
3. On the full moon day in the month of Vai^kha, the 
gift of all articles is the bestower of all things. Certainly, one 
attams those things which one bestows on a Brahmana. 
4-5a. The holy rite of Dharmaraja Vrata is also to be 
performed on this day.- Listen to it. One should give cooked 
rice and pot of water to an excellent Brahmana on the Full 
Moon day in the month of Vailakha. It is conducive to the 
propitiation of Dharmaraja and it yields the same benefit as the 
gift of a cow. 
5b-7. On this very same day, one should give the hide of 
a deer alongwith its horn and thehoo^ to a Brahma^ alongwith 
gingelly seeds and gold. They should be covered with clothes. 
He who gives, in accordance with the prescribed injimctions, 
the hide of a deer after honouring the scholar who knows 
the ^astras, is actually the donor of the whole of the 
earth consisting of the seven continents, and rejoices in the 
world of Vij^iu as long as the moon, sun and stars 
shine in the firmament. 
6. He who gives to prominent Brahmanas pots full of 
water alongwith gold never meets with sorrow. 
9. On the Full Moon day in the month of Jye^fha the 
holy rite of valasavitrika^ is to be observed. The woman devotee 
1. W. 9-12 briefly descrttie the famous Va^SivUrt-VratM, the 
main fimtures of which are sprinkling water at the foot of a banyan tree. 


1530 Ndrada Purina. 
observes fast and pours nectar like water at the root of the 
Vata (Banyan tree). 
10. She should encircle with threads the holy tree and 
circumambulate it one hundred and eight times. Thereafter, she 
should pray to the divine and highly chaste lady Savitrl : 
11. “O Mother Savitri, who considered your husband 
a deity, you are the mother of the Universe. You are worthy 
of being worshipped by the whole universe. O gentle lady 
present in this Vata tree, obeisance to you. Grant me nonsepara¬ 
tion from my husband. 
12. After praying thus she goes home. On the next 
day, she shall feed SuvasinTs (married women whose husbands 
are alive) and take food herself. She shall be blessed with con¬ 
jugal bliss. 
13-15. The holy rite of Go-padma* is prescribed for 
performance on the full moon day in the month of Asadha. 
After taking his bath the devotee meditates on Hari thus : 
“He has four arms and a huge body. He has the lustre 
of gold. He appears beautiful with the conch, discus, iron 
circumambulating the tree one hundred and eight times and weaving a 
thread round it all the while, prayer of Savitri (associated with the tree) 
for sparing oneself from widowhood and feeding Suvasinis the next day after 
which the lady observer of the Vrata breaks the fast. 
This Vrata is observed on Jyestha Kf. 30 also (infra verse 85), The 
story of Savitri who brought back her husband from the god of deatli is 
extremely popular (vide Mbh.-Vana Ghs, 293-299, Mt. P, Chs. 208-214 
the SK. P.-Prabhdsa Ch. 166). The Vrata consists of fast for three nights 
which the NP. fails to prescribe. Its mention in the AP. 194. 5-8 shows that 
the Vrata was in vogue before the lOth Gent. A.D. It is said that the Vrata 
is called Vafa-Sdvitri as it was under the shade of a Va(a tree that 
Satyavan (Savitri's husband) went and took hold of its branch before he 
collapsed. 
The banyan tree with its spreading branches symbolises the spread of 
one’s race. Perhaps pre-Aryans worshipped this tree for increase and spread 
of their race and the story of Savitri came to be associated with it while 
it was being Brahminised. 
1. VV. 13-17 describe the Go-Padma Vrata. The NP. fails to justify 
the title Go-Padma of this Visnu Vrata. The girl or woman has to draw 
33 figures of cows foot-print everyday during the Vrata. Hence its title 
Goptdma, For detaib vide VRJ., pp. 301-302. 


IV.124.16-28 
1531 
club, lotus, goddess Laksmi and Garuda. He is served by sages, 
Devas, Yaksas, Gandharvas and Kinnaras.” 
(After meditation) he should worship the Lord by 
means of the PunisaSflkta, and with scents and other Upacaras. 
16 He should propitiate the preceptor with clothes, orna¬ 
ments and other things as well as with affectionate mind. He 
should feed Brahmanas and others with sweet cooked rice 
according to his capacity. 
17. O Brahmana, by performing this Vrata, the devotee 
undoubtedly, derives his cherished desires both here and here¬ 
after, thanks to the grace of the Lord of (Kamala) Laksmi. 
18-21. The holy rite of Kokila Vrata is to be observed on 
this very same day. The rules of procedure are now described. 
The observance is from this full moon to the next full moon in 
the month of Sravana. The woman should take her bath in the 
water outside the house (i.e. in a river or a tank). She should 
meditate on goddess Parvatl as follows : “Gauri has the form of 
a cuckoo with golden wings, jewelled eyes, louts-like face, having 
the lustre of coral and the complextion of musk. She is born in 
the heavenly Nandana Park, seated on mango and Campaka 
trees cooking out exquisite song.” Her figure is painted in 
colours on cloth. The devotee worships her every day with 
scents and other things. 
22. O Brahmana, when the Vrata is concluded, she de¬ 
voutly should give a Brahmana the image of the goddess in 
gold or ground flour of gingelly seeds, alongwith a gold piece as 
Daksina. The following Mantra is uttered. 
23. “O Goddess Kokila, born in the park of Citra- 
ratha, O beloved wife of Hara, you have been worshipped and 
given to a Brahmana. Be the cause of happiness to me.” 
24. He should then feed the Brahmana and thirty Sanya- 
sinis if possible, otherwise one, and give clothes etc. and 
Daksina in accordance with her capacity. After bowing to them 
she should bid farewell to them. 
25. O Narada, the woman who performs this excellent 
Kokilavrata attains happiness and conjugal bliss in the course 
of seven births. 
26-28. On the full moon day in the month of Sravana is 


1532 
J^Srada Purdna 
the holy rite of Vedop^arma^ (i.e. inauguration ofVedic stu¬ 
dies) . On this day the rite of Tarpana unto the Devas, sages 
and the Pitfs is to be performed throbgh the Mantras of the 
Yajurveda. (The followers of the Yajurveda perform this rite of 
Upakarma on the day). The followers of Rgveda (i.e. Bah- 
vfcas) perform this on the Caturdasi day and the followers of 
the Samaveda perform this in the month of Bhadrapada (on 
the Caturth! day). The worship of the sages is p)crformed in the 
manner laid down in one's own Sakha (branch of the Vedas). 
The Raksa (holy string) should be tied round the hand in accor¬ 
dance with the injunctions. 
29. White Mustard seeds, unbroken raw rice-grains and 
black mustard are washed in water kept in a bell-metal vessel 
and then tied in a red silk cloth with a saffron-smeared thread. 
The devotee then worships Devas and prays to Visnu 
and others. Delighted in mind, the devotee should lay down to a 
Brahmana and get the thread tied round his wrist by him. 
30-31. Thereafter, he gives Dak^ina to Brahmanas and 
begins the study of the Vedas. After ritualistically dismissing 
the seven sages, he should wear a new sacred thread 
made by himself and coloured with saffron^ etc. According 
to his capacity he should feed the prominent Brahmanas and he 
himself should take only a single meal on that day. 
32. O Brahmana, if this Vrata is performed, it makes atone¬ 
ment for all omissions and commissions in the Vedic study. If 
the Vedic rites are forgotten or are performed in contravention 
of the injunctions, this holy rite rectifies it. 
33-34. The holy rite of Umamaheivara Vrata is to be 
performed on the full moon day in the month of Bhadrapada. 
1. Vttbpdkarma u simply updkanna and means opening, b^inning. 
NariLya^a on AioaUtyana Gr. S. 111. 5.1 sUtei that i^tikarma or updkarmfa is 
the ceremony nr^riting the (re*) beginning of Vedic Studies. Various dates 
and varieties of details of the v^drkeama are given by Kane in HD. II. ii. pp. 
807-818. Due to its performance cm Nakfoira in the month of 
Srilvapa, it came to be knovm as ^rdoopo in MarathL The tradition of 
Vedic studies is lost and what the eldeiiy people do now is to change their 
TcolktpavUa on this day with or without the performance ot the rite of 
l^tkama. The ritual given by the NP is different from the traditional <me 
peescribed in the sUtns. ^ 


IV.124.35-45 
1533 
The devotee take^ a single meal on the previous day i.e. Catur- 
da^i day, assiduously worships l§iva. With palms joined in 
reverence he should pray thus : *‘0 Lord, I shall perform 
holy Vrata (vow) tomorrow.’* After intimating thus to the 
Lord, the devotee takes up the excellent Vrata- 
35. At night, he sleeps near the deity and gets up in the 
last watch (Yama) of the night. After carrying out the routine 
such as voiding of excrement and washing, etc. the devotee 
applies Bhasma and wears Rudrak^. 
36. He should worship Sankara correctly with differ¬ 
ent kinds of Upacaras, fragrant flowers, leaves of Bilva, incense 
lights and diverse kinds of Naivedya. 
37. Then the scholarly devotee should observe fast till 
sunset. After the moonrise, he worships the deity once again 
and keeps awake at night. 
38-41. Carefully and alertly, the devotee should perform 
this rite for fifteen years. In the last year, in the course of its 
Utsarga rite (valedictory and concluding rite), he should get 
two gold images made, that of Uma and that of Mahesa. He 
should get ready fifteen excellent posts made of gold, silver or 
clay. In one of the pots should be placed the two images cover¬ 
ed with a cloth. He should bathe them in Paflcamrta first and 
then in pure water. Thereafter he shall worship deity with 
the sixteen Upacaras. Then fifteen Brahma^as are fed with 
sweet cooked rice and Dak^in^ too are given. 
42-43a. He should give pots to the pieceptor. Each 
of the pots is accompanied by a Murti (image) of the Lord. By 
performing this holy rite named Uma Mahefvara, the 
devotee becomes famous in the world and the receptacle of 
all riches. 
43b-44. On this very same day, the holy rite of $akra- 
Vrata also is to be observed. Early in the morning, the devotee 
takes his bath and worships the ruler of the Devas, in accord¬ 
ance with the injunctions, with scents and other Upac^as and 
different articles of Naivedya in heaps. 
45. Then O, Brahma^a, he should duly feed the invited 
Brahma^as and others who had come as visitors. He shall 
feed the indigent and the helpless also. 


1534 
NUrada Purda^ 
46. O Brahmana, this ^akravrata must be pepformcd 
every year by a king or any other rich man who wishes for plenty 
of food-grains. 
47-48. The holy rite named Kojagara^ is to be observed 
on the full moon day in the month of Asvina. The devotee 
takes the holy dip in accordance with the injunctions. He 
observes fast and subdues his sense-organs. A gold image of 
goddess Laksmi is placed in a pot made of copper or clay» It 
is covered with a cloth and worshipped with different kinds of 
Upacaras. 
49. In the evening when the moon has risen, he should 
light lamps made of gold, silver or clay after tilling them with 
ghee. 
50-51. They should be a hundred thousands, fifty thou¬ 
sand, ten thousand, one thousand or hundred in number. Milk 
puddings are prepared in a huge quantity with plenty of sugar 
and ghee. They shall be kept in many vessels in the bright 
moonlight. When the night has advanced by a full Yama (three 
hours), the devotee shall offer milk puddings as Naivedya to 
Laksmi. 
52. With great devotion he should then feed the 
Brahmanas with the milk puddings. All of them then keep 
awake for the whole of the night with songs and auspicious 
instrumental music and dances. 
53-54. The next day before dawn, the devotee takes 
his bath and dedicates the gold image to the preceptor. (It 
is said) that on this night goddess Mahalaksmi with the gestures 
of granting boon and fearlessness in her lotus-like hands moves 
over the Earth saying—ko jagarti (who is keeping awake) 
on this Earth ? I shall give wealth to that person who 
keeps awake and worships me.” 
55. This Vrata should be performed every year. It 
propitiates Laksmi. It yields prosperity in this world and bliss 
in the other world after death. 
1. W. 47-55 describe the Koj&gara Vrata or Kaumud! Mahotaava 
mentioned in Sanskrit and Prakrit Literature, Pura^as aaid mediaeval 
digests. The NP. docs not mention dice-playing on that night. 


IV. 125.56-66 
1535 
56. On the full moon day in the month of Karttika, Lord 
Karttikeya should be visited for the attainment of Brahmin- 
hood again (i.e. in the next birth) and for the conquest of all 
■enemies. 
57. On this very same day, Tripurotsava (the festival of 
Tripura) should be performed by celebrating illuminations (of 
buildings, ghats etc.), O excellent Brahmana, this festival of 
light at night-fall is conducive to the happiness of all living 
beings. 
58. Insects, locusts, mosquitoes, trees and the living 
beings that move about in water or dry land are not reborn 
after seeing these lights. They attain liberation. 
59-61. O Brahmana, at the time of the moon-rise the 
six Krttikas must be worshipped. So also Karttikeya, Khadgi, 
Varuna and Hutasana (Fire-God) are to be worshipped with 
scents and fragrant flowers, incense, lights, extensive Naivedyas, 
excellent cooked rice, fruits, vegetable and by propitiation of the 
fire-god and the Brahmanas. Thus after bowing down and 
worshipping the Devas, light should be offered outside the 
house. 
62-64. Very near the lamps, a beautiful square-shaped 
pit fourteen Ahgulas deep should be made and sprinkled with 
sandal water. After filling it with milk of cows, the devotee 
should put in it an image of a fish made of gold and exquisite 
in every limb, and with eyes constituted of pearls. Uttering 
the Mantra, ‘Obeisance to the great Fish’ the devotee should 
worship it with scents and other things and offer it to a 
Brahmana. 
65. O excellent Brahmana, the charitable gift of the 
ocean of Milk^ has been recounted to you by me. Thanks to 
the power of this charitable gift, the devotee rejoices in the 
presence of Hari. 
66. O Narada, by performing the rite of Vrsotsarga 
(setting a bull-calf free) during the night, the devotee attains 
Rudra’s region. No doubt need be entertained in this respect. 
1. W. 62-65 describe the Kflra-sSgara ddna (gift of the milky 
ocean). The whole procedure is symbolic. 


1536 
Ndrada Purina 
67. For the profuse abundance of all desired benefits, 
an Adhaka-measure of salt should be offered to « quiet 
Brahmana alongwith gold, on the full moon day in the month 
of M^gailr^. 
68-69. Formerly, this universe was abandoned by Lak^mi. 
So Hari, Indra, Soma, Ti^a and Brhaspati—these five made 
the universe still more dignified and decorated by means of 
the sports of festivities of blessedness on the full moon day 
coinciding with the Pu^ya constellation. 
70. Hence, for the increase of all conjugal bliss and 
good fortune he (the Vratin) should smear his body with the 
Kalka (minced pieces after being boiled in a decoction) of 
white mustard and take his bath when there is the conjunction 
of Pu§ya and the .full moon. 
71-72a. He should pour over his body, water, in which 
all medicinal herbs are put. He should wear new silk clothes. 
After seeing, touching and bowing to all the auspicious articles, 
he should worship Hari, l§akra, Indu, Pusya and Ijya (i.e. 
Jupiter, Brhaspati) with scents and other Upacaras. 
72b-73. After performing Homa he should propitiate 
the Brahmanas by feeding them with milk puddings. O 
Brahmana, by performing this Vrata that increases the pleasure 
of Rama (Lak^nu) and destroys Alaksmi (Misfortune), the 
devotee rejoices here and hereafter. 
74-76a. On the full moon day in the month of Magha, 
the following should be offered as charitable gifts :— gingelly 
seeds, cotton or woollen blanket, jewels, bodice, turban, shoes 
or cash presents. By giving these charitable gifts according to 
his affluence, the devotee rejoices in heaven. He who worships 
Lord l^ankara duly, attains the benefit of a Horse-sacrifice and 
is honoured in Visnu’s world. 
76b-78. The holy rite of Holika-worship^ is to be observed 
1. W. 76b-81 deal with Holik&-worahip. The NP. says that it 
is the celebration of burning K&ma or the ogress HolikS. There is a 
little obscenity attended with this celebration, only Bengal is free from it, 
as they celebrate the DoU-yUtrS of KfSna on this day, and engage a priest 
to perform worship before the bone-fire. This religious element persisted since 
the period of the NP. (or even before) in Bengal. 


IV. 124.79-85 
1537 
on the full moon day in the month of Phalguna. The devotee 
collects all types of wood and cow-dung cakes. After duly kind¬ 
ling fire therein, by means of extensive Mantras destructive of 
Raksasas, the devotee repeats this Mantra—‘*0 Holi, you have 
been made by people of childish traits who are afraid of blood¬ 
sucking Ogresses. Hence I shall worship you. Be the bestower 
of prosperity on the living beings.” 
79. By repeating this Mantra, more and more wood is 
thrown in and the fire is made brighter. The devotees go round 
it and carry on the festivities with songs and instrumental 
music. 
80-81. (There are two opinions about the burning of 
Holika).* (one opinion) : This ogress Holika was a terror to 
Prahlada. Hence, people burn her with wood to the 
accompaniment of songs and instrumental music. This is the 
burning of the Samvatsara (year). In the opinion of others, 
it is the burning of Kama. Thus O leading Brahmana, you 
shall know that there are many traditions in the world. 
82. The two days of festival at the end of a fortnight 
are the full moon and the new moon. Hence the Amavrata^ 
(the holy rite on New Moon days) is described. O Brahmana, 
listen to their separate nature. This Vrata is a great favourite 
of the manes. 
83-84. On the new moon days of the months of Caitra 
and Vaisakha the worship of Pitrs is recommended. The 
8raddha in accordance with the injunction governing festival 
days and in accordance with one’s affluence is to be performed. 
The feeding of Brahmanas and charitable gifts of cows etc. in 
particular, are highly meritorious on the new moon days, in 
all the months. 
85. The Vrata of Savitri is to be observed on the new 
moon day in the month of Jye§tha. O N5rada, its rules of 
*It is a very ancient festival and was called Holika in east India 
(&ibara on Purvamlmdithsd 1. 3. 15-23). Hemidri calls this Hutateni as we 
do now. 
1. In W. 82-96 the NP, groups together Amd-VratM i.e. Vratas 
to be observed on the new-moon days. As this day is specially sacred to the 
nianes (Pitfs) different frdddhas are prescribed on these days. 


1538 Narada Purdna 
procedure are the same as for the festival of the full moon day 
in the month of Jyestha. 
86. O Brahmana, in the months of Asa^ha, Sravana 
and Bhadrapada (when Purnimanta or) ending with the full 
moon day, the following rites are to be performed, and they 
are endless in their benefits. The rites are Sraddha of manes 
(ancestors), charitable gift, Homa and the worship of the 
Devas. 
87>88a. O Brahmana, Kusas grow in the fields of 
gingelly seeds. In the afternoon of the new moon day in the 
month of Bhadrapada, the devotee repeats the Mantra of 
Viririci (god Brahma) and cuts those Kusa grasses saying ‘Hum 
phat’. These grasses can be used always in all holy riles. But 
the other Kusa grasses can be used only once. 
88b-89a. On the new moon day in the month of Asvina, 
Sraddhaand Tarpana of the Pitrsare particularly recommended. 
They must be performed in the waters of Gaiiga. In the holy 
centre of Gaya, it yields liberation. 
89b-91a. On the new moon day in the month of Karttika, 
lights should be offered as gifts in temples of gods, river banks, 
parks, tanks, cowpens, market places, monasteries and other places. 
Worship of LaksmI is performed on this day. Gold and silver 
whether made into ornaments or not (are dealt in on this day). 
Playing at dice throughout the year, predicts gain or loss 
exactly as one wins or loses. 
91b-92a. On this day, worship of cows is laid down in 
the following manner viz. : the horns and other limbs are 
painted; barley and other grains are given; cows are bowed to 
and circumambulated. 
92b-93a. In the month of M^gasirsa also, there is Pitf 
Puja (worship of the manes) by means of Sraddhas and feeding 
of Brahmanas, observances of the restraints of celibacy etc. as 
well as Japa, Homa, Arcana and other rites. 
93b-96. O leading Brahma^, in the months of Pau^a 
and Magha, the l§raddhas pbrform'ed to the Pitrs are more 
efficacious. If on the New Moon Day in the month of Phalguna, 
the day is combined with Karpapata (?) an^ the Sun (i.e. 
prob. Vyatipata, Sravana Naksatra and the Sun are found on 


IV. 125.1. 
1539 
that day), performance of mere Sraddha or feeding of 
Brahmanas is more efficacious (in giving good fruit) than even 
at Gaya (their performance at Gaya); charitable gifts etc. arc 
the bestowers of all benefit if made on the new moon day. If it 
falls on a Monday the benefit is still more. O sage, thus in 
brief, I have recounted to you the duties on the different Tithis. 
In all these instances there are some special cases. Those arc 
mentioned in other Puranas. 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYFIVE 
The greatness of the Purdna^ 
Suta said : 
1. Having recounted thus (the matter in the foregone 
four Padas of this Purana) on being enquired (about it) by 
the sage Narada, it is reported that the (four) Kumaras 
(viz. Sanat, Sanaka, Sanandana and Sana tana) who were 
the most excellent ones among the knowers of the sacred lore 
(sastras) were worshipped by Narada. After performing their 
1. This is the concluding chapter of the original Ndrada Purdfjia 
which consisted of four pddas (^catufPddasamdyuktwn V. 26). Here the 
interlocutors disperse as follows. 
( 1) The Kumaras, the reciters of the NP. are worshipped by N&rada. 
They went to god Siva and learnt the Saiva Agama. After this they visited 
god Brahma and lastly god Vijnu at the Badari forest (W. 1-5). 
(2) Bidding good-bye to Saunaka and other Br^maijias, SQta went 
to his preceptor Vyasa (W. 48-49). 
(3) Saunaka and other Brahmanas remained there in the Naimi$a 
forest and resumed their Satra (sacrificial session) V. 49. 
(4) W. in this chapter 26-47 is the eulogy of the NP. and of the 
benefit denved form hearing NP. This is called phalairuti which marks the 
end of a particular work. 
These verses show that the original NP. was completed here at the 
end of this chapter. 


1540 
Ndrada Purdna 
prescribed daily routine duties, they went to the ' world of 
the Lord ofUma (i.e. god Siva). 
2. There (in the region of god Siva) they bowed down 
to Ugra (i.e. Siva), Isa, whose feet have been worshipped by 
the leading sages like Srivamadeva and others who resembled 
(in refulgence) the fire and the sun—Siva who is worthy of 
being adored by the leaders of the Devas and Asuras. At 
his behest, they sat on the bare ground. 
3. There, they heard the Saiva Agama which is the 
essence of all sacred lores, and which is conducive to the 
liberation of Pa^u (individual soul) from Pasa (bondage 
ofSamsara). After bowing to Purari (Siva) those sages who 
were the very concrete embodiments of Pure knowledge, went 
to the presence of their father (god Brahma). 
4. They bowed down to his lotus feet. They were duly 
honoured and welcomed by their father. Receiving his blessings 
they became holy and sacred. From that time onwards, they 
who are the embodiments of holy places, are continuously 
moving about in the holy centres in all the three worlds. 
5. Thereafter, they went to the holy forest of Badari, 
where they meditated for a long time on the immutable lotus¬ 
like feet of Lord Visnu which are being resorted to by groups 
of leading Devas and on which the ascetics, devoid of passion, 
contemplate. 
6. After acquiring the spiritual knowledge along with 
sound wisdom and discrimination so longed for by him from 
those Kumaras (viz. Sanaka, Sanandana and others), Narada 
was highly pleased in his mind. 
7. From the banks of that celestial river, he returned to 
his father’s presence, where he was warmly welcomed by his 
father (god Brahma). After bowing to him he took his seat 
there. 
8. He described factually the spiritual wisdom along 
with sound knowledge that he had heard from the Kumaras. 
On hearing that, he (i.e. Brahma) too rejoiced. 
9. Then the excellent sage (Narada) bowed down (to 
Brahma) with his head and received his blessings. He came 
over to Kailasa which is frequented by sages and Siddhas. 
10-11. The place is continuously filled with different 


IV.125.12-20 
1541 
kinds ofwonderful things. It is full of trees blossoming in all the 
seasons—trees such as Mandaras, Parijatas, Campakas, Asokas, 
Vaftjulas and many others. They are occupied by flocks 
of different kinds of birds. When their branches are shaken by 
the wind, they appear as though they are inviting the way¬ 
farers. 
12. The place is full of different herds of deer. It is 
thronged by the Siddhas and Kinnaras. It appears splendid, 
thanks to the lakes with crystal-clear water where golden 
lotuses bloom with splendour. 
13-15a. It was reverberated with the sounds of 
various aquatic birds such as Sarasas, Gakravakas and swans. 
It was resounded with the tumultuous sound of the fall of 
heavenly river, by the sporting bevies of celestial damsels 
playing in the waters of the river Alakananda which had 
turned tawny-coloured through the saffron powders from their 
breasts. It was teeming with joyous elephants who bathed their 
mates and cubs with the waters taken up by their trunks. 
15b-16a. On a peak that resembled a white cloud, of 
that mountain, he saw a spreading banyan tree Which extended 
over a hundred Yojanas and which appeared like a black 
cloud. 
16b-18a, Beneath it, he saw Lord Siva seated in the 
middle of a group of Yogins. The lord had matted hair and 
unusual number (i.e. three) of eyes. He was clad in the hide 
of a tiger. He had smeared ashes all over his body. He was 
adorned with serpents as ornaments. He was perpetually reful¬ 
gent with his necklace of Rudraksa-beads and he had a crescent 
of the moon on his head. 
18b-19a. On seeing (the moon-crested) Lord, O 
Brahmana, Narada bent down and lowered his neck with great 
devotion. He bowed his head down at the feet of the Lord of 
the Universe. 
19b-20. With a delighted mind, he eulogised the bull- 
bannered Lord, verbally. At the behest of Sthariu (Siva), he 
sat down. He was greeted and honoured by the Yogins. Then 
the preceptor of the worlds (i.e. Lord iSiva) enquired about 
the health and welfare of Narada. 


1542 
XSrada Purdna 
21-22a. He replied—“Thanks to your Honoyr’s grace, 
I am blest with everything.” O Brahmanas, even as all the 
leading Yogins were listening, (Narada) asked Siva about 
special knowledge of Sambhu, that is conducive to the liberation 
of the Pasu from the Pasa. 
22b-23a. Siva was highly delighted in his mind with 
his respectful devotion. The Lord favourably disposed towards 
those who bow down to him, recounted the Yoga philosophy 
with all its eight subsections, (or accessories) 
23b-24a. After acquiring the knowledge pertaining to 
Sambhu, from Sankara, the benefactor of all the worlds, Narada 
became delighted in his mind. After bowing to him, he went 
near Narayana. 
24b-25a. Narada who was accustomed to coming to and 
fro frequently, propitiated Narayana, who is served by the 
Yogins and the Siddhas. 
25b-26. Thus, O Brahmanas, the great narrative of 
Narada Purana has been recounted to you. It is on a par 
with the Vedas. It is a model for all sacred lores. It comprises 
four Padas (quarters, sections). It increases the perfect knowl¬ 
edge of listeners. 
27-29. O Brahmanas, he who recites and glorifies 
devoutly this narrative pertaining to Narada, in a I^iva temple, 
in the assembly of prominent Brahmanas, in the temple of 
Kesava, in Mathura, in Prayaga, in the presence of Purusottama 
(or at Jagannatha Puri), at Setu (i.e. the bridge built by 
Rama onhisway to Lanka),in Kaftci, at Dvaraka, at Gaiigadvara, 
Kusasthala, on the banks of the lotus tanks (or at Puskara), on 
the banks of rivers—in fact, anywhere (he pleases) shall obtain 
the great benefit of performance of all Yajnas and the visit of 
all holy centres, 
30-31. He shall obtain the benefit of all charitable gifts 
and of performing all austerities. Both the listener and the 
propounder (narrator) should be devoted to Narayana or to 
Siva; He should either observe fast or take in only Havisya 
(bod (cooked rice soaked in ghee). He should subdue his sense- 
organs. Listening thus to this Purana he shall attain 
Siddhi (Mok^). 
32. It is in this narrative that all mt!!rits and Siddhis 


IV.125.33-46 
1543 
originate. It is declared as destructive of all sins of those who 
read and listen to it. 
33. It removes the defects due to Kali’s harrassment; it 
is conducive to the increase of all riches of men. This is liked 
by everyone. It illuminates all knowledge. 
34-37a. It sheds light on the modes of austerities, holy 
rites and their benefits of the followers of Siva, Visnu, Sakti, 
the Sun god and Ganapati. It explains the duties of those who 
adhere to the system of disciplined life in accordance with the 
classification of various castes and stages of life. It throws 
light on the Mantras, Yantras and the ancillary subjects of the 
Vedas with their divisions. It is a brief digest of the Agamas, 
the Vedas and the Sarhkhya tenets. He who reads this devoutly 
or listens to it with great concentration, shall derive all 
cherished desires difficult of access, even to the Devas and 
others. 
37b-39a. After listening to this Narada Purana which 
is on a par with the Vedas, the devotee should worship the 
expounder with devotion, wealth, jewels, silk cloths, etc. 
and with the gifts of plots of land, cows, jewels etc. With the 
gifts of elephants, horses and chariots, he should ever please 
the preceptor. 
39b~40a. O Brahmana, who else can be a preceptor 
other than the person who comments on the Puranas wherein 
all dharmas (religious duties) have been collected together and 
which bestows all the fourfold aims of human life. (viz. 
Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksa). 
40b-41a. The devotee should always do what is pleasing 
to the preceptor who instructs him in religious duties. He 
should render him service physically, mentally and verbally as 
well as through cash presents. 
41b-42. After listening to the Purana duly and after 
performing Homa and worship of the Devas, the devotee should 
feed a hundred Brahmanas, with sweet cooked rice and milk 
puddings. He should give them monetary gifts in accordance 
with his capacity. Madhava shall be pleased with his devotion. 
43-46. Just as Ganga is the most excellent among 
the rivers, Puskara is the most excellent among the lakes, (and 
just as in their respective categories the following are the best 


1544 
Nirada Purina 
viz.) the cityofKa^i, the mountain Meru, Lord Hari, Narayana, 
the Krta age, the Sama Veda, the cow, the Brahmana, the 
cooked rice, water, the month of Margasirsa, the lion, the 
(Cosmic Man) Purusa, the Aivattha (holy fig tree), 
Prahlada, the face, the horse Uccaissravas, the season 
Vasanta (spring), Japa, the serpent Sesa, Aryaman, the bow, 
the fire, Visnu, Indra, the sage Kapila, the Lord of speech 
(Bfhaspati) Kavi (poet, Sukra), Arjuna, Hanuman, Darbha 
grass, the mind, the gandharva Citraratha, the Lotus, the 
Apsaras Drvasi and gold—all these are the most excellent ones 
in their own groups. 
47. Similarly, the Narada Purana is the most excellent 
among all the Puranas. O excellent Brahmanas, peace be 
to you; welfare be to all of you. 
48. I shall now go to my preceptor Vyasa,of unmeasured 
splendour. After saying this, Suta was worshipped by Saunaka 
and other noble souls. 
49. Permitted by all of them, he went his way to sec 
his preceptor Vyasa. 
All those excellent Brahmanas, !§aunaka and others 
carried out the advice they had heard with great concentration 
and perfection in details. They remained there itself, per¬ 
forming their Satra (sacrifice). 
50. He who takes (resorts) to meditating in the form 
of injunctions regarding the performance of Japa and 
worship of Hari, the destroyer of the poison of the sins of Kali, 
purges completely his mind of that poison (or Kali) and 
accomplishes Yoga and ultimately attains the ever-cherished 
region of Hari. 


uttarabhAga^ 
CHAPTER ONE 
Tile greatness of Ekadaii day 
Obeisance to ^ri GnneSa 
Obeisance to ^ri Kffim 
1. May the four arms of Hari protect you all—the arms 
dark like clouds in complexion, hardened by the friction (strokes) 
of the strings of the Sarhga bow and which are like columns 
supporting the big pavilion (-like structure) of the three 
worlds. 
2. May the lotus-like pair of Hari’s feet be the bestower 
of desires on us—the pair of feet refulgent with the brilliance 
of the polished crest jewels of Devas and Asuras (as they bow 
to him). 
Mdndhitc^ said : 
3. O excellent Brahmana, It behoves your honour to 
tell me what that fire is that burns both dry and damp fuel of 
terrible sins. 
1. Although the last redactor of the NP. tries to show that this Part 
{Uttara Khapdo) also called Uttara Bhiga in colophons of chapters) is an 
integral part of the NP {vide Supra 10-18), the whole setting of this 
part is diflferent, showing that it must have been an independent work to 
glorify EJtadaii Vrata and to illustrate it with the Rukmahgada-Mohini 
episode. But this unification of the two parts took place before the 10th 
cent. A.D. (Kane HD. V. ii. pp. 892-93), An early digest writer like 
Devana Bhatta (1200-1223 A.D.) quotes many verses from the Uttara- 
Khaoda of the extant NP. in his Smrti-C/tandrikd. Earlier still, Apararka 
(1100-1130 A.D.) quotes from it two verses on Ekadasi (HD. V. ii. 892). 
Hence, though apocryphal, the Uttara-Khapd^ has been regarded as the 
integral part of the NP. for the last 1000 years. By any standard, it is a 
good story and the writer of this part is a gifted story-teller. 
2. Mdndhdtd—An cmpieror of the solar race, son of king Yuvanaiva, 
He was born from his father’s belly. When the problem of feeding him 


1546 
Mdrada Purina 
4. O sage, born of the four-faced deity (Brahma), 
there is nothing that is unknown to you in the three w(frlds. O 
prominent Brahmana, the three - fold things (of the past, present 
and future time) are precisely known to you. 
5. The sin committed unknowingly is called §uska (dry) 
and the sin committed knowingly is cited as Ardra (wet). 
Please tell us the three events: that which are yet to be (future), 
that which has passed by (past), and that which is current 
(present). 
6a. What is that fire whereby the sin may be reduced 
to ashes? This is esteemed by me (i.e. what I want to know). 
Vasiftha said : 
6b-9. O mighty king, may it be heard what that fire is 
whereby it is possible to reduce to ashes completely the dry as 
well as the wet kinds of sin. A person who, on the day of Lord 
Visnu (i.e. Ekadali day) with due control of sense-organs 
observes fast, worships the killer of demon Madhu (i.e. God 
Visnu), takes bath in water containing Emblic Myrobalan and 
keeps awake during that (Ekadasi) night, completely absolves 
himself of all sins like a gambler losing all his wealth. 
10. O king of kings, the fuel of sins even though 
accumulated (lit. generated) in the course of hundred births, is 
reduced to ashes through the fire called Ekadasi. 
11. O king, there is nothing that sanctifies men so much 
as the day of Padmanabha (i.e. Ekadasi) that destroys sins. 
12. O ruler of men, sins remain in this body, only so long 
as the creature (i.e. man) does not observe fast on the auspi¬ 
cious day of Padmanabha. 
arose, god Indra came forward and said, ‘*He will luck me” {mimdhitd). 
The Pd. P. tells us that when there was a drought for the continuous three 
years, the sages advised him to observe Ekadasi Padma-nabha (i.e. Padm&). 
He observed Ekadasi Vrata and made all his subjects to follow it. Rains 
showered, p>eop]e became happy and the king prospered (Pd. P. VI—Uttara 
Khan4a, Gh. 58. 33-38. 
A proper setting for glorifying the Ekadail Vrata with Mandhata as an 
interlocutor. But it is after two benedictory verses that Mandhata is abruptly 
introduced. In fact no background is provided to this dialogue between 
Miindhata and Vasistha, his family priest. 


Uttarabhdga 1.13-23 
1547 
• 13. Thousands of horse-sacrifices and hundreds of Raj- 
asuya sacrifices do not deserve even a sixteenth part of the fast 
observed on the Ekadaii day. 
14. O Lord, all the sins that have been committed by 
the eleven sense organs shall be dissolved, thanks to the fast on 
the Ekadasi (eleventh) day. 
15. O king, there is nothing equal to EkadaiSi that is 
destructive of sins. Even if it is observed under a pretext 
it exempts one from seeing the son of the Sun-god (i.e. Yama, 
the god of death and Hell). 
16. It bestows heavently pleasure and salvation; it yields 
kingdom and sons; it grants good wives and freedom from 
ailments to the body. 
17-18. O king, neither Ganga, nor Kasi, nor Gaya, nor 
Puskara, nor Kuruksetra nor the river Reva, or theDevika,^ and 
neither the Yamuna nor the Candrabhaga are more meritorious 
than the day of Hari. O leading king, Hari’s abode is attained 
without any strain. 
19. By observing fast during the day on the day of Hari 
and by keeping awake during the night, a man is liberated 
from sins and he goes direct to the region of Vimu. 
20. O leading king, it uplifts ten generations on the 
mother-side, ten generations on the father’s side, and ten 
generations on the wife’s side. 
21-23. O Sovereign king, he leads his own soul to the 
city of Vi§nu. This rite of fast is like the Cintamani (wish-yield¬ 
ing stone) or it is equal to a Nidhi (treasuretrove) or it is like 
the Sarhkalpapadapa (wish-yielding tree). O the most excel¬ 
lent one among kings, those who resort to Dvada^i (i.e. after 
observing fast on the previous day who break fast on this day) 
put forth two more arms (become like visnu four-armed), they 
ride on the enemy of serpents (i.e. Garuda) as their vehicle, 
they will be having garlands and yellow garments (like Visnu). 
Thus they go to Hari’s abode. 
1. The southern portion of the river Sarayu—Oe. p. 55. According to 
Kdlika P., (Ch. 53), Devika is a distinct tiver between Gomati and Sarayu 
and joins at the confluence of Ga9d<>k and Ganga and the confluence is 
called Triveiii. 


1548 
Mdrada Purdna 
24. Thus the power of Dvadasi has been glorified by me, 
O king, it is called the fire that consumes the terrible Tuel of 
sin. 
25. Always the day of Hari should be observed as a day 
of fast by men, devoted to holiness and piety, who wish for 
abundant worldly pleasures as well as sons, grandsons etc. 
26. The man who observes the day of Hari (Ekadasi) 
with great respect, O most excellent one among men, never 
enters the womb of a mother even if he has committed many 
sins or even if he observes the fast with or without intention. 
He goes to the endless region of Visnu, the Lord of the 
world. 
CHAPTER TWO 
Discussion on Tithis^ 
Vasiffha said : 
1. It was bearing on this same topic that the saintly 
residents of the Naimisa forest asked the highly intelligent 
Suta, the disciple of Vyasa. 
1. Tithi is the period required by the moon to gain twelve degrees 
on the sun to the east {Surya-siddhanta, Tithi Tattva p. 2.). Due to the 
irregular motion of the moon, the tithi varies between 67 to 50 ghafikds—a 
finding recorded in the maxim. 
Sapta-vfddhir daSa kfayafi 
As a Tidti is not coterminus with a ‘civil day’ and as every religious 
rite, be it Vrata, Dana etc. must be done at the exact time of the 
Tithi (otherwise it becomes fruitless), this topic has been discussed since 
very old times. As the word is used in theand Grhya and 
Dharma sutras, the belief in Tithi exists since the 8th Gent. B.C. Works 
have been devoted to the discussion of the correct time on a Tithi for 
observing Vratas. For example, Jimuta-vahana’s Kila-viveka, Hemadri’s CC., 
Kdla-mddhava, Nll<dca^fha's Kdla-may&kha, Dharmasindhu and others. 
But this very topic has been discussed previously in NP. 1. 29 and 
elsewhere and the technical terms like Pui^, ^uddhd, ViddhA etc., the 
Tt^ma-Vdiya and rules for deciding the Ekadafi fsist etc. have been 
discussed in details in the annotations to those CShapters and verses. Hence, 
they are not repeated here. 


Uttarabhiga 2.2-9 
1549 
2. On being asked, that highly pleased one recounted the 
greatness of Ekadali^ in detail and also the rules of procedure 
regarding the observance of fast. 
3“4a On hearing that statement of the son of Suta, as 
well as the greatness of the wieldcr of discus (god Visnu) that 
subdues vast multitudes of sins, O king, the excellent Brahmanas 
again asked Suta who is devoid of impurities and who is well 
versed in the Puranas. 
4b-5. “O bestower of honour, you krtow the eighteen 
Puranas. Thanks to the favour of the son of virgin* ‘(i.e. 
Vyasa) you know the Mahabharata too. Hence, there is noth¬ 
ing in the Puranas or the Smrtis which you do not know. 
6-7a. A doubt is produced in our minds in the story of 
Raghunatha that is very extensive, containing hundred crores 
of verses. It behoves you to dispel it by means of factual and 
detailed explanation. 
7b-8a. Is it the end of the Tithi that has to be taken up 
for the observance of fast. Or is it the root (beginning) ? What 
is the rule regarding this in the rites pertaining to the Devas 
and those pertaining to the Pitrs (manes) ? Kindly narrate it as 
there is nothing that is unknown to you. 
Sauti said : 
8b. In regard to the Devas (i.e. rites pertaining to Devas) 
the end-period of the Tithi is to be taken for observing fast. Then 
it is conducive to the increase of their pleasure. 
9. The root (beginning) of the Tithi is declared by the 
knowers of Time as pleasing to the Pitrs. Hence, the tip is 
1. In the previous Chs. in the NP. I discussed Ttthis with reference to 
the religious rites like ^raddha, Vrata etc., but this verse and the following 
discussion makes it clear that the object of this part is disquisition on all 
aspects of Ekddadi Vraia only. 
Another impiortant point here is the conspicuous absence of Narada. 
He is neither a listener nor a narrator of NP. Uttarardha as contrasted 
with NP. Purv&rdha where he is at least the listener. 
2. KdnOut—A child bom of an un-married women. AIbh. Adi. 60.2 tells 
us that Vy£sa alias DvaipSyana was born of an unmarried girl 
(Matsyagandhk or Satyavati) on an island in the Yamuna. 


1550 
jsfdrada Pur dm 
taken up for the observance of fast by those who wish to * obtain 
tenfold benefits. 
10-12a. The root is to be known for being taken up (for 
fast) by those who desire for virtue and piety, for the purpose 
of propitiation of the Pitrs. Neither Dvitiya (the second 
day) nor the Astami (the eighth day) nor Sasthi (the sixth day) 
nor Ekada^i (the eleventh day) in a human fortnight, O king, 
should be taken up by those who wish for virtue, love and 
wealth, if it overlaps (lit. is pierced by) the previous one. 
12b. O excellentBrahmanas, SaptamI (the seventh day) 
in lunar fortnight is always to be taken up only when it over¬ 
laps the previous one. If any one eschews the following, when 
they overlap the previous ones, he falls into hell. Those 
Tithis are Darsa, (the New Moon day), Paurnamasa (the Full 
moon day) and the anniversary day of the father. 
13. O king, he will be visited by misfortunes and loss of 
progeny. O Brahmanas this has been heard by me formerly 
from Krsna Dvaipayana. 
14. That Tithi is called Purvaviddha (overlapping the 
previous one) if there is even a slight trace of it at the time of 
sunrise. That Tithi should be considered Prabhuta (full) (if it 
extends throughout) not excluding the time of sunrise. 
15. In the rite of Parana (break-fast) and in the case of 
death of men, that Tithi is remembered which exists at that 
particular time. In the case of rites pertaining to Pitrs, if 
there is contact of the Tithi at the time of sunset, it is called 
Purna (full). 
16. In that case, the Tithi at the time of sunrise is not 
taken into account. But in the case of rites of the deities, the 
Tithi at the time of sunrise must be taken into account. The in¬ 
telligent devotee should get the Tithi confirmed through a 
thoughtful astrologer. 
17. O leading Brahmanas, the bases for the extent of the 
Tithis are the sun and the moon. The knowers of the time 
reckon it through the movements of moon and tlyp sun. 


Uttarabhdga 2.18-3la 
1551 
18, Due to the fault of the contact of the previous 
Tithi, these arc not worthy of being taken up for worship. 
Those who know about this matter eschew them, O Brahmanas, 
they eschew all the four Yamas. 
19-20.^ Henceforth, I shall recount the orderly procedure 
for bath and worship. If they do not attain purity during the 
day time, the injunctions are so observed for the night. All the 
duties of the day must be completely performed at night-fall. 
This rule has been laid down by me in the case of men who 
observe fast. 
21. O leading Brahmanas, if there is even a little of 
Dvadasi at the time of dawn, the rites of ablution, worship, 
charitable gift, Homa etc. are to be performed then. 
22. The breaking of the fast on a pure Trayodasi day is 
conducive to the attainment of benefit of (a grant of) land 
and performance more than a hundred of Yajftas. There is 
no doubt about it. 
23. For this reason, O Brahmanas, the ablution is to 
be performed alongwith the rite of Pitr-Tarpana, early in the 
morning, without reckoning the day of Dvadasi. 
24. This Dvadasi, if transgressed (?) by men causes great 
loss. Like the Sarasvati who is not washed, it dispels virtue and 
piety. 
25. If there be a loss or increase in the period of Dvadasi 
or if it is available at the sunrise, Dvadasi should be taken ad¬ 
vantage of for the purpose of fasting. It is meritorious. One 
should eschew that Tithi if that overlaps the previous one. 
The Brdhamana submitted : 
26. O Suta, kindly explain to me how can there be a 
fast on the Dvadasi day if the previous Tithi happens to ex¬ 
tend to Dvadasi. 
27-31 a. When the day of fast becomes overlapped by the 
previous Tithi and when there is not even a trace of Ekada^i on 
1. W. 19-32 lay down the rules of observing Ekadau fast by 
Vai^navas. 


1552 
NSrada Purana 
the next day, how is the observance of fast enjoined on that 
day ? O son of Suta, pray explain to me. 
Sauti said : 
O Brahmanas, when on Dvadasi the previous Tithi is not 
at all obtainable and the day of the week is Saturday, Sunday 
or Monday (?) the next day is to be taken up for fasting. 
Even when there is the risk of contravening many Agamas and 
when the Brahmanas raise arguments against it, the holy Dva¬ 
dasi should be observed as the day of fast and the break fast 
(Parana) is on Trayodasi (the Thirteenth day of the lunar 
fortnight). 
31b. When Ekadasi is Viddha (i.e. it is overlapped by 
the previous Tithi) and it is the month of Sravana, it is the 
holy Dvadasi that should be observed as the day of fast, in 
both the fortniglits. This decision, arrived at in accordance 
Avith the Saslras (sacred lore) has been announced to you 
by me. 
32a, What else do you wish to hear? You may be pleased 
to tell me the same. 
The sages said ; 
32b-33a. O Sauti, tell us the rules regarding the obser¬ 
vances on the inaugural days of the Yugas precisely and factually. 
Similarly, tell us the rules regarding the transit of the sun etc. 
There is nothing that cannot be understood by you. 
Sauti said : 
33b-34a. Wise persons know that two of the inaugural 
days of the Yugas fall in tlie bright half of the month and two 
in the dark half. The Tithis in the bright half are to be taken 
up when they exist in the forenoon, those in the dark half are to 
be taken up when they exist in the afternoon. 
34b-35, The Ayana (the tropical transit) has the part of 
the day as the basis and the transit time is sixteen Palas (certain 
unit of time). In the southern portion (transit from the tropic 
of Cancer) the former one ( ? the forenoon) is tQ, be taken and 
in the northern (transit from the tropic of Capricorn) the past 


Uttarabhdga 2.36-46 
1553 
one (the afternoon) is considered (for acceptance). In the 
middle period of Visuva (equinox), it is glorified as Aksaya 
(imperishable). 
36. O Brahmanas, fast is to be undertaken after knowing 
precisely the Tithi mentioned for the full year. Otherwise, 
one is likely to fall into a hell. 
37. The man observing fast when it is Purvaviddha 
breaks Dharma. It is likely to result in death of the progeny 
and loss of wealth. 
38. Just as one eschews the water of the Gaiiga if it is 
contaminated by even a drop of liquor, O leading Brahmana, 
one should avoid the Ekadasi day even if there is the overlapping 
of Dasami by a single pala (a small unit of time). 
39. O excellent Brahmanas, just as one should throw 
away the Pancagavya if it is defiled by a dog, so one should 
do, if Ekadasi in both the fortnights, is defiled by Dasami. 
40. O excellent Brahmanas, the Purvaviddha Ekadasi 
Tithi (i.e. the eleventh day with the overlapping of the tenth 
day) had been formerly given to the Danavas by the scion of 
the family of the Yadus (i.e. Visnu) for the propitiation of the 
noble souls. 
41-44a. O e.xcelicnt Brahmanas the following gifts arc 
no better than gifts offered to Asuras : the monetary gift given 
at the wrong time, the gift to the undeserving, what is given by 
the angry donor, what is given after dishonouring the recipient, 
the gift on a I’ithi ‘pierced by’ the previous Tithi; the gift 
offered by one who is defiled by ucchista (leavings of food), 
what is given unto the fallen ones, what is gifted to the hen¬ 
pecked ones, what is given without water offerings and what is 
offered with subsequent and frequent allusions to it. Hence, O 
Brahmanas, the Ekadasi Tithi should not be observed if it is 
Viddha (i.e. when Dasami overlaps it). 
44b-46. Just as the paramour of Sudra woman defiles 
the previous merits, Sraddha, charitable gifts, Japas, Homas 
and holy dips, so also the Puja offered to Hari in a Tithi over¬ 
lapped by the previous one, undergoes rapid decline like 
darkness at sunrise. Women proud of their blooming youth and 
overwhelmed by the fish-bannered Lord (i.e. Kama or sexual 


1554 
Ndrada Purdna 
passion) abandon their ageing husbands. So also the learned 
men should eschew theTithi that has the Vedha (overlapping). 
For the enhancement of Dharma tliey always adopt other Tithis. 
CHAPTER THREE 
2~a;iw goes to the Region of Brahma^ 
The sages said : 
1. Kindly narrate in detail the rite of propitiating Visnu, 
whereby he becomes satisfied and bounteously bestows the 
cherished desire. 
2. The Lord of the Universe, the consort of Laksml, is 
the destroyer of all the vast multitudes of sins. By what rite 
will he be pleased alongwith all the mobile and immobile 
creation (which he pervades through his omni-presence). 
Sauti said : 
3. Hrsikesa (Visnu) can be captivated by devotion and 
not by riches. O Ruler of the Earth, Visnu when duly wor¬ 
shipped with devotion, grants all desires. 
4. Hence, O Brahmanas, the devotion to the discus¬ 
bearing Lord should always be practised. The Lord of the 
universe worshipped even by ordinary people, shall be the des¬ 
troyer of distress. 
5. Just as a thirsty man immediately derives satisfaction 
with water, so is the Lord pleased immediately (with activities 
of devotion). O Brahmanas, in this connection, a mythological 
narrative that is destructive of sins, is heard. 
1. It is an interesting introduction to the story of Rukmahgada and 
Mohini. This chapter emphasizes the efficacy of the EkddaSi Vrata by 
describing how Yama has to close his Office as all men, being compelled 
to observe Ekadasi by Rukm&hgada, straightway went to Vaikuntb^* 


Uitarabhdga 3.6-14 
1555 
6. It is in the course of conversation between 
Rukmahgada and sage Gautama. 
There was a king named Rukmahgada.^ He was an 
Emperor endowed with the quality of patience and forgiveness. 
7. He was a beloved devotee of the deity lying in the 
Milk Ocean (i.e. Visnu). He was devoted to the day of Hari 
(i.e. Ekadasi). The Lord of the Earth does not see anyone 
other than Padmanabha (Visnu), Lord of the Devas. 
8-11. On the day of Hari (Ekadasi), he used to pro¬ 
claim through his servants by beating a drum kept on an 
elephant—“If any man (or woman) aged more than eight years 
and less than eightyfive years takes food on the day of Visnu, 
that stupid fellow will be punished, killed or banished out of 
the city, even if it be my father, brother, son, wife or friend. 
The person who takes food on the day of Padmanabha (i.e. 
Visnu) will be worthy of being punished like a robber.^ Give 
gifts to leading Brahmanas, have your holy dip in the waters 
of Jahnavi. Listen to my words and enjoy my kingdom.” 
12. Thus on every day of Visnu (Ekadasi day) in the 
bright half of the month and especially in the dark half also, 
the king proclaimed thus through the drums with golden 
coverings. 
13. O excellent Brahmanas, when this was announced 
by the king throughout the land, the pathway leading to 
Hari’s world (Vaikuntha) was thronged by the people going 
there. 
14. All the men who died in the realm of the king 
(observing Ekadasi) whether knowingly or through error, went 
to the abode of Hari. 
1. Rukmangada the son of B^tadhvaja, the King of Vidisd. He is 
the hero of this story. 
2. Hemidri on Kdla (p. 172) quotes these verses >vith a slight 
difference, but in Kdlanirpi^a (p. 257) a different text of the same imF>ort is 
quoted as from the NP. The verse is as follows : 
atra Niradah 
Offdbddd atUiiko martyo hyapSrtt&lHi-hdyanab / 
bhuAkU yo mdnavo mohid tkidaSyim sa pdpakft 11 


1556 
Nirada Pur&na 
15. O Brahmanas, the world of Visnu is definitely 
attained by men even if they fraudulently observe the rite of 
EkadasI that is destructive of sins. 
16. He who takes food on the day of Hari consumes the 
sin of the whole of the Earth. He who does not eat food on 
the day of Hari, attains the virtue (religious merit) of the 
entire Earth. 
1 7. The Smrti following the Vedas says : 
“A Brahmana should not be killed so also Food should not 
be taken on the Ekadasi day in both the fortnights.” 
18. O excellent Brahmanas, the king, the son of the 
Sun (i.e. Yama) became embarrassed. Citraguptai had ample 
rest in his writing activity. 
19. Everything that had been written by him based on 
the activities of the previous births was erased and struck off 
by him (since) the men instantaneously went over to Visnu’s 
abode through their holy rites. 
20. All the hells became devoid of sinful creatures. The 
pathway leading to Yama’s world became scorched by the 
twelve Adityas and delapidated. 
21. All the people went to Hari’s region riding on 
Garuda. The worlds of the Devas also became vacant and 
tenantless. 
22. The sacrifices to the Pitrs and the Devas, pilgrimage 
to holy centres, charitable gifts and other holy rites became 
out of vogue. Excepting Ekadasi, men did not know any other 
Vrata. 
23. When the heaven and the hell became empty, 
N arada went to Dharmaraja (Yama) and said :— 
N&radasaid : 
24. “O King, no cry is heard in your court-yard and 
in the hells. Nothing is being noted down in writing about the 
evil-doers. 
25. This Gitragupta^ is sitting silent like a sage. What 
is the reason whereby no sinner comes to your abode ? 
1. Gitr^upta—the record-keeper of merits and sins of human beings, 
in Yama’s Office. 


Uttarabhaga 3.26-36 
1557 
26-27a. No one engaged in wicked actions comes to 
your threshold. None in the grip of deception and arrogance 
comes to your abode.” 
When these words were uttered by the noble-souled 
Narada, Vaivasvata (son of the Sun), the king of the world of 
Death said with a little disconcertedness : 
Tama said : 
27b-28. O Narada, the King who is now ruling over 
the Earth is a great devotee of Hrsikesa (Lord Visnu). This 
leading king instructs the people announcing on the beating of 
the drum. 
29. “Nothing should be eaten, nothing should be eaten 
at all on the day of Hari. The men who take food shall be 
liable to punishment.” 
30-31. Being afraid of him, all the people observe fast 
on the Ekada^i day. O excellent sage, those who even 
fraudulently observe fast on the Ekada^i day, go to the world 
of Visnu which is devoid of burning and dissolution (at the 
end of Kalpa). Byresorting to Ekada^i (Vrata) people go to 
Hari’s palace. 
32. O excellent Brahmana, the paths leading to my 
world have been made empty by that king now. The hells as 
well as the worlds of heaven-dwellers have been made 
vacant by him. 
33. The writers (Yama’s accountants of deeds of men) 
are taking rest. O excellent Brahma^, what has been already 
written is erased and written off, thanks to the greatness of the 
fast on the EkadaiSl day. 
34. O Brahmana, without experiencing the fruits of 
Brahmana-slaughter and other sins, people go to Hari’s 
mansion by observing fast on the day of Visriu. 
35. O great sage, I have become one resembling a wooden 
deer. I am like a person devoid of eyes and ears, like a Brahmana 
who has eschewed Sandhya prayers. 
36. I am like a hen-pecked husband, or like an impotent 
husband of a youthful woman. I have abandoned all 
desire for such a post of guardianship of the world. 


1558 
NOrada Purdm 
37-38a. I shall now go to the region of Brahma to report 
to him about my misery. If an employee who is to abide by the 
behest of his master does not work actively but goes on eating 
the wealth of his master, he shall certainly go to hell. 
Sauti said : 
38b-41. O Brahmanas, after saying this, Yama went to 
the abode of Viraflci (god Brahma) accompanied by Narada 
and followed by Citragupta. He beheld there seated the great- 
grand-father of all, surrounded by both embodied and bodiless 
people—Brahma the seed of the universe, the support of the 
universe, the self-born deity, the abode of all living beings. He 
was free from sin, and was designated as Orhkara. He is Suci 
(pure) and Sucipada (ofpure region). Brahma, the Supreme Soul 
(Harhsa) holding Ku&i grass was being worshipped by the 
different guardians of the quarters and rulers of the worlds. 
42-47. He was being served by all these (in person) ; viz 
—the Epics, Puranas and Vedas in their embodied forms; 
he was served by the oceans, the rivers and the lakes that had 
assumed bodily forms; the trees such as the holy fig tree and 
others served him by taking up human bodies; so also the tanks, 
wells, lakes, mountains, days and nights, fortnights, months, 
years, Kalas, Kasth^ and Nimesas (units of time), seasons, 
transits of the suns, Yugas, Manvantaras, Kalpas, closing and 
opening of the eyelids (the smallert unit of time) constellations. 
Yogas (combinations) Karanas, (astronomical divisions), 
full-moon days, declines of the moon, new-moon days, 
Dvandvas (i.e. mutually clashing opposites such as happiness 
and misery, profits and loss, success and failures, truth and 
falsehood—all these were serving the deity. The Lord of the 
Devas, the sanctifier of righteousness, was surrounded by 
them. He was being served by persons who knew the holy rites 
and who were befitting him. The grandfather was being served 
by Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas Gumis. 
48-50. The lord was served and surrounded by the 
emotions suefi Santa, (calm), Mudha (confused) and Ati- 
ghora (exceedingly terrible); by the wind, phlegm and bile (the 
humours), by the embodied Atanka (agony)etc. and by Ananda 


Uttarabhdga 3.51-64 
1559 
bliss; the soul of the universe had recourse to the greatest 
Dharma; the creator of the worlds himself was surrounded by 
other living beings not mentioned here; he was being served 
by the embodiments of evil words and harsh statements etc. 
Yama the son of the Sun, entered the place amidst them like a 
bashful bride. 
51-55. With his head bent down and glance directed 
beneath to the floor, he appeared before them. On seeing 
Yama entering alongwith Narada and his Kayastha (accoun¬ 
tant i.e. Gitragupta) the people there were surprised. With 
surprised looks they spoke to one another—“Why ? How 
comes it to be that Bhaskari (son of the Sun i.e. Yama) has 
come here to see the Creator and the grand-sire of the worlds ? 
This son of Sun never remains inactive even for a 
moment. He is always active. Then how is it that he has come 
now. I hope everything is all right with the heaven-dwellers. I 
consider this as the wonder of wonders, that the clerk (Ghitra- 
gupta) has come with his (writing) cloth completely erased and 
clean. He is full of great distress. No person who performs holy 
rites has ever erased his cloth. What has never been seen or 
heard is being seen now.” 
56-58. O Brahmana, even as they were speaking mutual¬ 
ly thus, the son of Sun (i.e. Yama) who used to chastise all 
Jiving beings, fell in front of god Brahma, just like a tree the 
root of which is cut. He cried aloud “O save me, O save me, 
O Lord of the Devas, I have been overwhelmed and oppressed 
since my writing cloth has been erased clean. While you are 
my Lord, O Lotus-seated one, I find myself distressed.” O 
excellent Brahmanas, after saying this he became unconscious, 
motionless. 
59-61. Then a tumultuous commotion arose in the 
assembly, “He who makes all the worlds consisting of the mobile 
and immobile beings, is himself distressed and is crying. 
Why is Yama, the son of the Sun, crying? Or this common 
saying seems to be a statement of truth—the saying “He who 
distresses the people ere long is distressed himself. No man who 
commits an evil action ever attains auspicious results.” 
62-64. Thereafter, knowing the view of god Brahma, 
Vayu the Wind-god, silenced the talk of those people of the 


1560 
Narada Purina 
same mind (i.e. holding the same opinion regarding Yarna and 
his arrival there) The liberal-minded Vayu raised Yama slowly 
with his brawny well-developed hands. He placed him on a seat 
even as he was agitated and was about to run away. He spoke 
to Yama the son of Sun, having the Ethereal form and ac¬ 
companied by his Kayastha (Accounts-clerk Gitragupta). 
65-67. “By whom have you been attacked? By whom 
have you been displaced and banished ? By whom has your 
cloth (record) of the world, the divine cloth, been erased ? 
Speak out everything completely. Or may this god Brahma 
say ? O dear one, he who is the lord of all, shall grant you the 
uplift. O son of Martanda (Sun), he will remove all the 
misery in your heart.” 
68. On being addressed thus by the Windgod, Yama, 
the son of the Lord of Day (the Sun), looked to the face of 
Narada, the son of Brahma and slowly uttered the following 
words in a voice choked with tears. 
CHAPTER FOUR 
An Appeal by Tama 
Tama said : 
1. O Lord Pitamaha, Grandsire of the world, listen to 
my words. O Lord, humiliation of one’s exploits is worse than 
death. 
2. O lotus-born deity, he who is devoid of selfish 
motives and desire, and does not carryout his appointed task, 
falls into hell which is like a blind well. 
3. O lotus-seated one, the employee who does not 
implement the direction, but continues to consume the wealth 
of his master, shall be a worm in the decaying wood. 
4. The employee who, out of greed, consumes (i.e. 
misappropriates) the wealth of the common subjects or the 
king falls into hell for a period of three hundred Kalpas. 
5. He who is interested only in selfish gains and so robs 


Uttarabh&ga 4.6-19 
1561 
his master, shall be a slow-witted mouse in the house for three 
hundred Kalpas. 
6, The employee who, enjoying himself in his house, 
shirks his own work and compels the king’s servants to do his 
work also, shall take the birth of a cat. 
7-8a. O Lord ! It is at your behest that after due con¬ 
sultation with sages and texts on DharmaSastra that I had been 
administering justice and governing the subjects commending 
the merit of the meritorious and condemning the sin of the 
sinners. 
8b-9. Since the beginning of the present Kalpa so long 
as it is your day, I can carry out my duties by dint of 
your command. But today I have been defeated (and over¬ 
powered) in my work by King Rukmahgada.* 
10. O Lord of the Universe, afraid of' that king, the 
entire ocean-girt Earth does not eat anything on the day of 
Visnu (the EkadasI day) that is destructive of all sins. 
11. People eschew all holy rites; they abandon the wor¬ 
ship of Pitrs, they do not worship Devas, they neglect 
pilgrimages, holy ablutions and other good rites. 
12. O bestower of honour, they eschew both the systems 
of philosophy—Yoga and Saiikhya. They neglect the perfect 
knowledge and the knowable; they abandon self study of 
Vedas and the performance of Homas; (over and above all 
these) they commit many number of sins. 
13-15a. Still they go to the region of Visnu by observing 
fast on the day of Hari. They go to the world of Visnu 
alongwith their fathers and grandfathers. Their fathers and 
father’s fathers, mother’s fathers, their fathers and their ances¬ 
tors—all these go to the world of Visnu. 
15b. 19. O Lord, this is the misery that cuts me to the 
quick wiping off my writings (i.e. decrees), the fathers of their 
beloved ones go to the abode of Visnu (?). A man is bom of the 
seed of his ancestors, he is held in the belly of the bearer 
(woman). He who commits any sin, has to experience the fruits 
1. VV. 9-25 a; This is another way of describing the glory and 
efficacy of the EkSdail Vrata. 


1562 
Ndrada Pur&na 
thereof. But O Brahma, the seed that originates from tlie nurse 
is sown by another. It may perhaps redeem both the sides, the 
one wh(3 is olTered the Pin^la and the one to whom the body 
belongs. But the wife has no seed nor the wife holds him in her 
womb. Then, O Lord of the Universe, how does her side attain 
the greatest region through the greatness of the merit of the 
son-in-law ? Therefore, my head aches. 
20. O Lord, no purpose of mine is served, thanks to this 
sort of employment, whoever observes fast on the Ekadasi day 
leaves me olf and goes to Hari. 
21. O Lotus-born deity, he uplifts three generations in¬ 
cluding himself. After leaving olf my path, he goes to Hari’s 
mansion. 
22-24. No man attains such a destination as that of a 
devotee who performs the holy rite of Vi‘^nu—Not even if he 
performs sacrifices (Yajnas), goes on pilgrimage to the holy 
centres or gives charitable gifts or performs those Vratas 
with the exception of those pertaining to Visnu. No one giving 
up life in water or fire attains such a goal. O god Brahma 
neither the person who gives up his body by the Yoga practice 
nor he who falls down from a precipice attains that goal. O 
most excellent one among those who attain good goals, it is the 
truth that has been uttered by me. 
25. Any human being, even if he perpetrates extremely 
wicked actions, goes to the world of Dharanidhara (Visnu who 
holds and supports the Earth). If the man smears his limbs with 
the fruits of embylic myrobalan and if he has no interest in 
sweet juices and meals on the Ekadasi day. 
26. I have become disappointed because I have no work 
on the Earth. Hence, I have resorted to your pair of lotuslike 
feet. O cause of creation, sustenance and dissolution (of the 
universe) make time propitious for the attainment of fear¬ 
lessness on this mere intimation. * 
*But if the reading is sarga~sthiti-ndia~helofi as in my text, the verse 
means. 
“O Lord, who grant immunity from fear by mere request, fix up 
the lime for atiaininc; creation, svjslenance and destruction.’^' 


Uttarahhdga 4.27—5.8a 
1563 
27. May not the sinful men be devoid of restraint 
through my Bhutaganas (attendants). Let them be chained or 
tied with ropes. Let them come near me and be under my 
control. 
28. The path oppressed by the heat of the sun is broken 
because crowds of people are being released very quickly at 
the hands of Visnu’s attendants from the hell Kumbhi. 
They go to the splendid abode of the lord who is greater than 
the greatest. 
CHAPTER FIVE 
The lamentation of Tama 
Tama continued: 
1. The path of the discus-bearing lord has been furnish¬ 
ed and rubbed, O deity worshipped by the three worlds, by 
men who pass through it without break. 
2. O Lord of the Universe, I consider the world of Vi?nu 
to be infinite in magnitude, since it is not filled with the floods 
of people with all living beings cropping up like lotuses. 
3-4. O Pitamaha, (Grandsire of the universe) people 
adhering to their duties, people following other men’s duties, 
pure people and impure people, every one observes fast on the 
day of Visnu and goes to the world of Visnu, at the behest of 
the king. The entire world is accommodated only in the resi¬ 
dence of Madhava. This king is hence our great enemy. He is 
particularly your enemy as well. 
5. O Lord of the worlds, undoubtedly he must be curbed 
and restrained. For the last one thousand years, he has ruled 
over the sphere of the world. 
6-8a. Immeasurable number of persons have been taken 
over by him to the world beloved of Hari. They were enabled 
to ride Garu<Ja. They were given forms having four arms; 
they were neatly clad in ydUow garments; they were 
garlanded and smeared with sweet-smellix^ unguents. If he 


1564 
Ndrada Purdna 
continues to abide by the holy rite of Ekadasi, O Lord of 
Devas, this beloved devotee of Visnu will take the entire 
world to the region of Visnu free from ailments. 
8b-9. This staff of justice and this cloth (the scroll 
recording details of acts of omission and commission of men) 
have been released by your feet (i.e. byyou). My incompar¬ 
able guardianship of the world has been nullified by that king 
RukmMgada. Blessed is that lady who has borne him. 
10. If the son is superior to others in good qualities^ 
he becomes competent to destroy the miseries of his mother. 
Of what avail is a child that is born, if it brings distress to 
its mother ? 
11. If the son does not harass his enemies like the sun 
in the month of Jyestha, the labour pain of the mother has 
gone in vain. O Lord, she is one having a bad son. 
12-13a. That son is called the ailment or diseased part 
from the mother’s womb bom on this earth, if his fame does 
not shine like the lightning among the clouds, the son who docs 
not uplift his father’s side through learning or strength. 
13b-16. The son who is deprived of virtue, wealth and 
love, though bom on the Earth is only an ailment in the belly 
of his mother. His life is futile. O Brahma, there is undoubtedly 
one heroic mother—the lady from whom is born Rukmangada 
for the purpose of erasing my writings. Such a thing as this 
has never been accomplished by any king. O Lord of the Universe, 
even in the Puranas (or even since ancient times) this wiping 
off of the cloth has not been heard of. Seeing this king adhering 
to his service to Hari, proclaiming aloud by means of drum 
and destroying the path leading to my mansion, I cannot 
continue to be alive. 


UttarabhSga 6.1-9 
1565 
CHAPTER SIX 
God Brahma's Reply 
Brahma said : 
1. What surprising thing has been seen by you ? Why 
do your feel distressed ? Distress at the good points in others 
is an agony that lasts till death. 
2. O Sauri (Son of the Sun), how does a man not attain 
the highest region by observing fast on the day of the Lord, 
the mere utterance of whose name enables one to attain the 
same ? 
3. A single bow offered to Krsna is on a par with the 
sacred final (Avabhrtha) ablutions in ten horse-sacrifices. 
Moreover, the person who performs ten horse-sacrifices may be 
reborn in this Sarhsara, but the man who makes obeisance to 
Krsna is never reborn. 
4. If at the tip of one’s tongue the two syllables HARI 
are present, what has one to do with the holy centres of 
Kuruksetra, Kasi and Vraja ? 
5-6. A Brahmana who indulges in sexual intercourse 
with a Gan<;iala woman, especially during her monthly course, 
and eats food cooked in spirituous liquor, can eschew heaps of 
sins accumulated by perpetrating forbidden acts of eating the 
forbidden food and of cohabiting with a forbidden woman, if 
he but remembers Hari at the time of death. He (thereby) 
attains (Sayujya (complete identity) with Visnu and is 
liberated from the bondage of worldly existence. 
7. If one gets salvation on uttering his name, how is it 
that he should not get it by observing fast on his day ? He who 
is sung about in it (fasting period), is the Purusottama 
who becomes contemplated. 
8. Even if he were to utter the name of Lord Janardana 
sportingly or listens to it, a man acquires equality with the 
waters of Ganga in regard to sanctity and meritoriousness. 
9. Purusottama, the Sovereign Lord of the worlds, is the 
cause of our birth. How can a wicked-minded fellow (like 


1566 
N&rada Purdna 
you) chastise the person who observes fast on his (Visnu’s) 
day ? 
10. That you have not been ground down into powder, 
that you have not been tightly bound by them, is due to the 
honour bestowed on us. You are not trying to understand the 
real point from me. 
11. The employee who does not know the most excellent 
and loyal devotees of the king on the Earth is subjected to 
arduous exertion and is again kept captive by them. 
12. Persons favourite with the king should not be appre¬ 
hended as culprits by an employee (a servant of a king). 
Achieving their objects through the favour of the master, they 
may get the employee dismissed. 
13. Similar is the position of the sinners who bow down 
to Janardana. How will you restrain them out of foolhardiness, 
O son of Bhaskara ? 
14. O son of Divakara (Sun-god), O son of Bhaskara 
I may help you with the devotee of Siva or Bhaskara 
(Sun-god) or my own devotees, but never with the devotees of 
Hari. 
15. Piirusottama is the Primordial deity among all 
Devas. 
16. Restraining the devotees of Madhusudana (God 
Visnu) is not proper even if they fraudulently observe the 
holy rite of Ekadasi during the lunar fortnight. 
17-18. If they have slighted you, I cannot help you. 
O son of the Sun, if any help is rendered to you that will be 
injustice to me. It may even destroy my body. There 
may even be reversion from the post of Brahma that is attained 
through high merit which I have achieved during the course 
of my life in the company of Visnu’s devotees. 


Uttarabhdga 7.1-9 
1567 
CHAPTER SEVEN 
The statement of Brahma 
Tama submitted : 
l-2a. Dear grand-sirc, in bowing down at the feet of 
the Veda, the benefit has been achieved by me. O Lord of 
the Universe, I shall not go again and join my duties while the 
king called Rukinaiigada is ruling over the world, 
2b-3. O e.xcellent one among the deities, if when the 
day of Ilari arrives, you are able to shake him from his 
courageous resolve, I shall be your servant. O Lord, he is my 
great foe. My cloth (account of merits and sins) has been 
rubbed (and erased) by him. 
4. By making him take his food on the day of Krsna 
(i.c. Ekadasi), I shall feel as if I have accomplished all my 
objects like a person who has offered balls of lice to the 
manes at Gaya. 
5. From today onwards, those persons cannot be rest¬ 
rained by me—those persons by whom Hari, the Lord of the 
Devas, is remembered or eulogised or by whom the fast is under¬ 
taken on his day. 
6. 7’hose men who burst into ejaculation, even frau¬ 
dulently, with the word ‘Hari’, arc liberated from the path 
leading to the mother’s womb. They are clever people. They 
do not enter the sphere of writing on my cloth (of virtue 
and sins). They are worthy of being bowed down to by the 
excellent groups of heaven-walkers (i.c. gods). 
Sauti said : 
7. In connection with the affair (problem) of the son of 
Vivasvan (i.e. Yama), the Kusa-emblemed god Brahma had a 
desire to do something in his honour. He therefore pondered 
thus. 
8-9. The Lord, adorned by the Bhutas (living beings) 
pondered for a moment. The omnipresent Lord thereafter 
assumed a form that would terrify all living beings. He, there¬ 
after, procreated therein a young woman who fascinated 
the worlds. That gentle lady, mentally created by him, the 
most excellent of all beautiful women, appeared splendid. 


1568 
Ndrada Purina 
lO-Il. Fully bedecked in all ornaments, she stood in 
front of him. On seeing her fully endowed with the wealth of 
beauty, he (Brahma) spoke to his own people w'^ho being 
deluded by lust for her, were ogling at her. Brahma closed 
his eyes for fear of committing a sinful offence. 
12-13. He who looks with lustful eyes or thinks about 
with lascivious mind, at one’s own mother, or daughter, 
daughter-in-law or brother’s wife, preceptor’s wife or the king’s 
wife falls into the terrible hell; by thinking about a Candala 
woman also, the man falls into a hell. 
14. The man who becomes perturbed on seeing these 
young women, loses all his merits acquired in the course of 
various births. His merits thus become futile but not otherwise. 
15. If he indulges in sexual intercourse with them, ten 
thousand merits of his are wasted away. As the merit goes on 
diminishing he becomes more and more sinful and eventually 
he is born as a rock-rat. 
16-17. Hence no intelligent man should think about 
them or see them with lustful eyes. Once the sons have 
attained their twelfth year, they must not stroke the feet of 
even their mother. The mother should not get herself applied 
with oil over her body by sons who have reached the age of 
youth then. A clever son may engage his mother whose age is 
more than sixty, in anointing his body with oil. 
18. Whether an old man ora young man, no one shall 
ask his daughter-in-law to massage his feet. It is proclaimed 
that both of them will fall into the Raurava hell full of burning 
coal. 
19-20. O king, the daughter-in-law who shows her 
uncovered limbs to her father-in-law shall be knocked and 
kicked and will be eaten by worms therein in the hell. 
The same goal awaits that sinful man who gets his feet cleaned 
by the hands of his daughter-in-law or makes her bathe him or 
smear oil over him. In the hell, he shall be eaten by worms 
with needlelike snouts and black faces, for a period of one full 
Kalpa. 
21. Hence no man shall glance at other’s women, or 
one’s own daughter or daughter-in-law with lustful eyes and 
thoughts. Immediately the man falls or incurs sins. 


Uttar a Bhaga 7.22-33a 
1569 
22-23. It was because he thought over like this that he 
looked at her, with a subtle, penetrating view-point. It is 
nothing but a mere skeleton (lit. cage) of bones covered 
with flesh and skin that appears a face, lofty, circular and 
splendid. The shining eyes seen present in women comprise 
suet and flesh. 
24. The extremely protruding mass of flesh has been 
piled up over the breasts. The three folds of skin on the upper 
part of the belly (which are regarded as a mask of beauty) 
show lesser (distribution of) flesh. 
25. In the buttocks again, more flesh has been stacked. 
This is the passage for urine. It is a private part, of which 
the three worlds are enamoured. 
26. It is joined with the Apana wind (i.e. this wind 
functions there). It is always vile (with bad odour) and 
contemptible always. More flesh is heaped up than the swollen 
bellows in the part of the buttocks. 
27. Just as a log of wood is sawn into two (half way 
through), so also is the region of shanks (thighs ? ). It (the 
body) is filled with semen, flesh, bone, fat and marrow. 
How can it be beautiful ? 
28. What is there by way of essence, in the body of 
men wherein the main constituents are flesh, fat and marrow ? 
Tell me which man will be enamoured of the body, nourished 
and grown plump by means of faeces, urine and other dirts. 
29. Virifici (God Brahma) pondered thus, after seeing 
everything with his vision of knowledge. He took courage and 
spoke to that lady whose gait was like that of a female elephant. 
30. “O fair-complexioned lady, since you have been 
created by me mentally you have become a lady of beautiful 
limbs, competent to madden the minds of men.” 
31-33a. Then she bowed to the fourfaced God and said : 
“O Lord, see the entire universe consisting of the mobile and 
immobile beings deluded and falling unto senselessness. It 
includes even the Yogins who are totally sinless. O lotus-born 
deity, keeping you in the beginning (inclusive of you), there 
is no man in the three worlds who does not get agitated and 
perturbed on seeing me. 


1570 
Ndrada Purdna. 
33b-34. Boasting about oneself should not be indulged 
in by one who wishes for one’s own auspicious welfare. Even an 
extremely pure man falls into hell due to selfpraise. Still, O 
Brahma, the glorification or self-praise must be stated to 
achieve some special end. 
35. O Brahma, indeed, it must be to make some one 
excited and perturbed tliat I have been created by you. O Lord 
of the Universe, command me. Mention who he is. I shall 
definitely make him excited. 
36-37. O Lord, on seeing me even a mountain becomes 
infatuated. What then of an ordinary man endowed with 
consciousness who inhales and exhales ? The description of 
the powerful impact of a woman’s glance is described in the 
Puranas. It causes madness in men and is destructive of all 
holy vows and rites difficult to be observed. 
38. Till then the man treads the path of the good, till 
then the man has perfect control over his sense organs, till then 
he retains his humility and sense of shame, till the shaft-like 
glances of dalliance-minded damsels pieice his heart 
and destroy his fortitude. The shafts that are discharged 
fiom the well-drawn bow of the eye-brow, the eyes having 
blue lashes, roach up to the ears.^ 
39. Fie upon the poetry of that stupid ill-informed poet 
who equates the face of a lady to the moon. Is there any of 
these in the moon—viz. the knitting of the eyebrow, the side- 
glances expressing the wounding look, fury, pleasure and 
laughter ? 
40. O Lord, only when it is drunk does the spirituous 
liquor cause delusion in the mind of a clever man. But a youth¬ 
ful maiden excites delusion even when she is seen or remembered 
by a man. So she is more powerful than the spirituous liquor. 
41. O great grand sire of the world I have been created 
1. Just as an archer bends his bow stretching the bow-string up to 
his ear and discharges the arrow winch pierces the heart of the enemy, the 
shaft-like glances are discharged from the bow-like bent eye-brows of women 
with blue eye-lashes—eyes which are long upto the ears. Such longish eyes, 
were traditionally regarded beautiful. 


Uitara Bk&ga 7.42-52 
1571 
by you for fascinating men. Command me. Who is it ? I shall 
enchant even the three worlds. 
Brahma said : 
42. O Lady with thighs like the trunk of an elephant, O 
fortunate one with the gait like that of an elephant in rut, the 
truth has been expressed by you. There is nothing that cannot 
be achieved by you in the three worlds. 
43. O fair-complexioned lady, you are defiling even my 
mind also although I control and steady it by means of the goad 
of perfect knowledge. 
44. Such being your charm how then will you not 
captivate the minds of people ? O large-eyed lady, truly your 
beauty of form is seductive. 
45. I find that the entire Universe including the immor¬ 
tal being, is motionless. O excellent-faced lady, achieve that for 
which you have been created. 
46. O auspicious lady, on the earth, in the city of Vidisa^ 
there is a king named Rukmahgada whose wife Sandhyavali is 
comparable to you in beauty.^ 
47. His son Dharmahgada was born of her. The son 
surpasses the father. He is endowed with the strength of a 
hundred elephants. He is like the sun in exploits. 
48-52. In forbearance he is equal to the Earth; in pro¬ 
fundity he is comparable to the ocean; like the fire, he shines 
with his brilliance, he is comparable to Vaivasvata Yama, 
God of Death in fury; he is like Bali in munificence; he is 
comparable to the wind god in mobility; in gentleness he is 
equal to the moon; he is as handsome as Manmatha the god of 
love; the prince is equal to Jiva (Brhaspati) and Bhargava 
1. A few years back (under the British) it was called Bhilsa. Now 
its old name Vidiu has been adopted. In the NP. here and in the Devi 
Pur&^ (Ch. 76) it is called Vidisa. 
2. VV. 46-73 contain instructions and guidance given by god 
Brahmi to Mohini how to make king Rukmangada break his Ek&dasi Vrata 
and thereby make people go to the region of Yama. This plot in a nutshell 
is developed in details in subsequent chapters. The denouement is very 
interesting. 


1572 
Ndrada Purdna 
(Sukra) (preceptors of Devas and Daityas) in statesmanship. O 
fair-faced lady, the entire Jambudvipa alone is enjoyed by his 
father (Rukmahgada). But the other Dvipas (continents) 
are conquered by Dharmahgada. He has not yet known the 
thrill of a contact with a youthful maiden due to his bashfulness. 
Thousands of women come to him of their own accord but they 
are avoided by him. He does not move astray from his pledged 
word. 
53. O fortunate lady with sweet smiles, in his father’s 
house three hundred mothers look upon him equally without any 
difference in their affection, O lady with gold-like complexion ! 
54. O woman of beautiful limbs ! On the excellent mount 
Mandara, approach the King to whom Dharma is of prominent 
importance and who is adorned with the jewel of a son. 
55. The king carried away to that place by his horse will 
stay there enamoured of your song, O woman of beautiful 
limbs, even leaving off his horse. 
56-57. Climbing on to the top of the mountain he will 
come into contact with you. On meeting the king there, O gentle 
lady, you must say thus ; — O king, undoubtedly, I will become 
your wife. But O lord, whatever I say must be definitely carried 
out by you. 
58-62. Enamoured of your beauty the king will promise it to 
you. Thereupon, after a few days have elapsed you shall hold him 
by the right hand with imprecations. O woman of lovely eye¬ 
brows and charming limbs, when the king appears to be raptu¬ 
rously eager for cohabitation with you, you shall laughingly 
remind the king of his earlier words : “O King, you have 
sworn that you will abide by my word. Hence, O king, keep 
your promise. I think the time has now come for the same.” 
When this is said by you, the king will certainly say thus on 
account of the high value and importance of the promise. “There 
is no doubt about it, I shall keep it. Tell me what shall I give 
you?” When he replies thus, O auspicious fair-faced lady, Ruk¬ 
mahgada, the king and father of Dharmahgada must be 
addressed thus by you. 
63-68a. “Never should the fast be observed on the 
Ekada^i day of Hari. O my darling, your fast is & hindrance to 


Uttara BfUlga 7.68b-73 
1573 
my sexual intercourse with you. He who does not attend to his 
own wife who is charming and who is endowed with youthful 
virility, he who expects another opportunity (i.e. he who post¬ 
pones) is a man of wicked actions. Certainly, he goes to hell. 
Due to your fasting, I am abandoned by you for three nights. 
But actually I am incapable of staying even a moment without 
you. When the time of Sraddha has come and the Brahmanas 
sit and wait (for the performance), if the wife solicits the 
husband for cohabitation, she must be enjoyed at the very 
same time.” 
O woman of sweet limbs, even after being urged thus, if 
the king does not carry out your request, you shall say thus 
thereafter: 
68b-69. “O King if you do not abandon your fast on the 
day of Hari, cut off the head of your own son Dharmahgada 
with an excellent sword, and place it on my lap. 
70. O king if you do not carry out this loving wish of 
mine, you shall become deficient in virtue, merits and you will 
undoubtedly fall into hell.” 
71-72. O excellent lady, if, on hearing your words, he 
does not injure his son who is like his own vital breath unto him, 
he shall pay heed to the advice of the Brahmanas and shall 
take food on the day of Ekadasi. Thereupon, the people will 
go near Yama as before after being tied with ropes by the 
attendants. Taking the writing (of Chitragupta) as authority, 
there will be persons occupying hell. Thus what you do will 
be splendid. 
73. Or if the glorious king, abiding by the promise, really 
kills his son he will go to the region of Padmanabha, that is 
worthy of being worshipped by the immortal beings 
wholly. 


1574 
N&rada Purdm 
CHAPTER EIGHT 
The description of Mount Mandara 
Sauti said : 
1. On hearing the words of Brahma, that lotus-eyed 
woman said—“Give a name unto me with which I should go 
to Mandara mountain. 
2. O Lord of the Universe, children must be named by 
the father. The name is said to be destructive of sins. O Ku^a- 
emblemedGod, kindly do so.” 
Brahma said : 
3. Since, O beautiful woman, the entire universe is 
■enchanted by you. O gentle lady, Mohini (enchantress) as your 
name shall be true to your attributes. 
4. O woman of lovely eyebrows, if he comes into a plea¬ 
sure-giving contact with you, thanks to a clear vision of yours, he 
will have to experience all the ten states of a love-lorn 
lover). 
5. On being thus commanded, the fair lady bowed down 
to the lotus-seated deity and set off to the mountain Mandara 
wistfully gazed at on the way by the immortal ones (gods). 
6. By the third Muhurta (one Muhurta— => 48 minutes) 
she reached the summit of the mountain. It had been impossi¬ 
ble for Vasuki to go round it once (i.e. to encircle it bodily),^ 
7. It was this mountain that was formerly lifted up by 
Hari (in the form of Divine Tortoise) and used for churning 
(the milk ocean) by the Devas and Danavas. Sindhu (the 
■ocean) which extends to six hundred thousand Yojanas is the 
<leep pit made by this mountain. 
1. This refers to the churning of the ocean by gods and demons for 
attaining nectar. Mount Mandara was used as the churning rod and 
.serpent Vasuki as the string to wind round it for churning (Mbh-i4di-Gh.l8). 
The Mbh. regards mount Mandara of the Himalayan range as the real 
Mandara. The claim of a hill 30 miles to the south of Bhagalpur in 
Bhagalpur district, with grooves of artificial chiselling to indicate the 
impression of the coils of a serpent, disqualifies its claim of being the real 
Mandara—De. 124-125. 


Uttara Bhdga 8.8-17 
1575 
8. This great mountain was not broken even when it rub¬ 
bed against the physical body of the Divine Tortoise. O lead¬ 
ing king, when it fell into the ocean all the hidden parts of 
the ocean were exposed by this mountain. 
9. O Brahmanas, water gushed out from this mountain 
went up through the path of the Brahmanda (Cosmic Egg). 
Great fire was generated by this mountain due to attrition when 
it came into contact with the bony shell of the (Divine) 
Tortoise. 
10. It is on this mountain that Lord Digambara (naked 
deity i.e. Siva) resides along with his goblins, but, O exellent 
Brahmanas, he is not visible either to the Devas or to the 
Danavas. 
11. It was for a great period of time viz. ten thousand 
years that this mountain ground and rubbed the armlets 
of the discus-bearing Lord.^ 
12. This is a veritable mansion of jewels equipped 
with many kinds of minerals. 
13. It is the sporting ground of the heaven-dwellers; it is 
the place for penance of the sages, it enhances the zest of the 
divine maidens for sexual dalliance; this great mountain is the 
source of jewels and medicinal herbs. 
14. Its girth at the root is ten thousand Yojanas, its 
width at the top is also that much. With the length too being 
as many Yojanas, it rises up as the measuring rod of the three 
world. 
15. It illuminates the surface of the Earth and the sky by 
means of its golden peaks full ofjewels and gems. On reaching 
it the son of Kasyapa (i.e. Sun) loses his splendour. He 
becomes devoid of rays. 
16-17. The lady of golden splendour reached the Man- 
dara mountain whose parts are the abodes of gold (ingots). 
Endowed with her own splendour she made the mountain Man- 
dara the destroyer of the brilliance of the sun, (i.e. surpass it) 
1. The description of the churning for Amjla differs slightly in the 
Mbh and other Puranas in minor details. But the object of the NP. here is 
to describe the glory of mount Mandara and not the churning of the 
nectar. 


1576 
Narada Purdm 
with her own lustre. For the purpose of exciting the lustful pas¬ 
sion of the king, she sat on the rocky surface of the mountain 
that extended to seven Yojanas and that had a divine bluish 
splendour. 
18. O leading king,^ there stands on that rocky 
surface an adamantine Lihga, ten Hastas in height as well as 
in girth. 
19. It is famous by the name of Vrsalihga. It appeared 
like a great palace among the clouds. O excellent Brahmanas 
that girl gave a sweet and excellent performance of music, 
20. That charming lady sat near that Lihga and played 
on the strings of the lute beating time harmoniously. Her 
songs were exquisitely destructive of tedium. 
21-22. It had the Murcchana (the regulated rise and 
fall of sounds) and the Tala (beating time). It had the 
Gandhara note inits composition. O leading king (?), when 
the song that heightened passionate love flowed forth from her 
like this, O leading sages, even the immobile beings began to 
desire it. Neither divine nor non-divine music had ever been 
like that before, 
23-24. On hearing that sweet note flowing out of the 
mouth of MohinI, the note that enchanted all living beings. 
Lord ^iva became lustful and wanted to enjoy her in that very 
form of Digambara (nakedness). But, on being seen by Parvati 
he felt ashamed. 
1. Wc are to suppose that the worck of address ‘O king’ in such 
contexts, are addressed to King Mandhata by Vasiftha. 


Uttara Bhdga 9.1-11 
1577 
CHAPTER NINE 
A dialogue between Rukmdngada 
and Dharmangada 
Sauti said : 
1-3. O Brahmanas, the leading king Rukmahgada enjoy¬ 
ed all human pleasure. In diverse ways he worshipped the 
yellow-robed Lord Hari. He had already plat ed his feet on the 
heads of his enemies who dared to fight him. By making the 
pathway leading to Yama’s land empty he conquered Yama, 
the son of Vivasvat (Sun). He made the path of Visnu’s 
world thronged with human beings. At the proper time, he 
called his son Dharmangada and spoke thus : 
4. “O son, protect this earth full of wealth all round, 
with your own rnigfit. B'' firmly resolved in your own duties. 
5. If the father does not hand over the kingdom when 
the son has become competent, there is no doubt in this that 
his merits and fame perish. 
6. The father who does not feel happiness, thanks to his 
efficient son, must be certainly known as the greatest sinner 
in the three worlds. 
7. The son who, after becoming strong enough to do so, 
does not take up the burden of his father, is no better 
than the excrement of his mother. He is a two-tongued serpent 
devoid of poison. 
8. He is the real son who becomes more famous than the 
father on this Earth and illuminates the places like the sun 
with his rays. 
9. If the father keeps awake during the night due to the 
sorrow resulting from the misdemeanour of the son, the son 
stays in hell till the final dissolution of all living beings. 
10. He who honours the words of his father and carries 
out his behests in the house, attains Sayujya with the deity, 
while he will be eulogised by the gods stationed in the 
heaven. 
11. O son, as for me, I have been attracted by holy 
actions in the world for the sake of subjects. Stationed 


1578 
NSrada Purdna 
in the activity of protection (i.e. abiding by my duty as their 
protector) I have never enjoyed or slept of my own accord. 
12. O son, As long as you were unable to shoulder the 
responsibilities of the kingdom, ease and happiness was 
not attained by me, as I was determined to restrain those 
who partook of food on the day of Lord Visnu (i.e. on 
Ekadasi days). 
13. Among the people some (i.e. J^aivites) followed the 
path of the devotees of Siva. Some abided by the path of the 
Sun, others were the followers of Brahma, while others (i.e. 
iSaktas) stood in the path of Parvati.^ 
14-16. (Many excuses were offered by people for eating 
food on Ekadasi day). “In the morning and in the evening, we 
are sitting up and performing the Agnihotra (Fire-worship) 
rites. Moreover a small boy, a young man, an old man, a 
pregnant woman, a small girl, a sick man or a physically 
handicapped person cannot undertake a fast.” When people 
protested like this, I refuted them everywhere by means of 
words mentioned in the Puranas. I spent many days over 
this. For the purpose of abiding happiness of the subjects, I 
enlightened them in various ways. 
17-18. I chastised them and made them desist from 
taking food. The scholars were made to refrain from food (on 
the authority of sacred scriptures (i.e. they were convinced 
that sacred texts prescribed the Ekadasi rite). The ignorant 
people were made to refrain from taking food by chastising 
them by means of deterrent punishment. Thus all were forced 
to observe fast on the day of Hari. Thereby being thus 
engaged I did not enjoy any personal happiness on the 
Earth. 
19. O dear son, the king who wishes to protect his sub¬ 
jects shall not inflict on them miseries from himself or from 
others (from his own people or officers or through enemies). 
1. This shows that at the time of the NP, the sects of god Brahma 
and Sun were equally prominent like the Vaisnava, Saiva and Sakta 
sects. 


Utiara Bhaga 9.20-30 
1579 
20, To such a king ever-lasting worlds have been declared 
(as a reward) in the Puranas. I exist for the sake of the subject 
O gentle boy, and never for myself. 
21. I wish to enjoy the pleasures derived from hunting 
and other strenuous exercises. O son, I never desire the pleasures 
of drinking bouts and gambling. 
22-23. Dear son, a king indulging in these vices will 
perish ere long. Through your favour, my dear son, I wish now 
to roam about the mountains, forests, rivers and lakes of 
diverse kinds under the pretext of hunting. Aftfer entrusting you 
with the burden of kingdom, I am desirous of enjoying 
covetable pleasures. 
24. All these things which I had in my mind have been 
disclosed to you. If they are carried out, you will earn a great 
fame; if they are not done, you will fall into hell. 
Dharmangada said : 
25. “I shall do all these things. Enjoy the plea¬ 
sures that appeal to your mind. O dear father, I shall bear 
the heavy burden of kingdom with pleasure. 
26. No other holy virtue except the execution of your be¬ 
hest is acceptable to me. A son who does not act ac¬ 
cording to the directives of his father incurs fall, though he 
may be performing holy rites. 
27. Hence, I shall carry out your order : Here have I 
joined my palms (in reverential promise).” When these words 
were spoken, the king became delighted. 
28. Learning again the availability of the game, Ruk- 
mahgada became desirous of going to the forest. Dharmah- 
gada was delighted in his mind. He summoned his subjects 
and said : 
29. “I have been commanded by my father to strive 
for your protection and welfare. My father’s behests must be 
carried out in every respect by me who wish for the attain¬ 
ment of Dharma. 
30. O subjects, a son has no other Dharma (holy duty) 
except the execution of the directives of his father. When I 
hold the rod of justice, even Yama cannot be the chastiser. 


1580 
N&rada Purdna 
31. After realising this, the Garu^a-cmblemed Lord (i.e. 
Visnu) should be remembered by you all. Janardana is to be 
worshipped by you after dedicating the fruit thereof to the 
Brahman. 
32. You must eschew the sense of my-ncss, and 
the feeling of possessiveness). You must worship in the manner 
laid down for your caste. Thereby, you will gain everlasting 
worlds. There is no doubt about this. 
33. O subjects, something in addition to the path of mv 
father has been pointed out to you, since you will be endowed 
with the rite of dedicating the fruit to the Brahman. May all of 
you be adapts in perfect knowledge. 
34. You must not take food on the day of Hari. This 
is the permanent path in accordance with the injunction of my 
father. A special additional thing has been mentioned to you by 
me viz. abidance in the Brahman. 
35. This adherence to the Brahman is to be practised by 
persons who know the truth. It is rare to be achieved. There is 
no return therefrom. As for the observance of the fast, the sti¬ 
pulation is that it must be observed necessarily.” 
36. Dharmahgada had no rest or sleep by day or at night. 
He spent his day in consoling and cajolling his subjects again 
and again. 
37. He used to tour everywhere, through his heroic 
valour. He weeded the earth of all the thorns (undesirable 
elements). The following loud proclamation used to be announced 
daily with the beating of drums placed on the heads of 
elephants : 
38-41. “O people of the world, may Hari the Lord of 
the Devas, be contemplated while engaged in the threefold ac¬ 
tivities (?) Refrain from taking food on the Dvadaji day; be 
free from the feeling of possessiveness. The Lord partakes of 
oblation offered to gods and manes. He alone is the Sup¬ 
reme person. The Lord of the worlds is to be remembered in 
the Sun, in the Krsakasa (in the minutest of Ethereal space) 
and in the Visarga (subsidiary creation) by all men who are 
desirous of accomplishing virtue, love and wealth. Worship 
of Visnu has been enjoined among the duties of one’s 


Uttara BhSga 9.42-50 
1581 
own caste. It is in the path of the good. Madhava himself is 
the Enjoyer and (the object of enjoyment. He alone is the 
supreme Man (Purusottama). Employment of him alone in 
all holy rites is the proper thing. 
42-43. Thus it proclaimed to the people by means of 
beating of drums with the rumbling sound of the cloud, O lead¬ 
ing Brahmanas. Thus the father of Dharmahgada realised the 
virtue of his son. O Brahmanas, on realising that his son was 
equipp)ed with the practical holy rites even more than himself, 
the delighted king said to his wife who stood there like another 
Laksmi. 
44. “O fair-complexioned Sandhyavali, I am blessed. 
You too are blessed. To both of us is bom as son white 
as the moon on the Earth. 
45. Salvation has never been seen by anyone anywhere. 
Much about it has been heard by the ears. But the birth of 
our good son is the super-salvation that has been attained by 
us. 
46. O fair lady, if the son is richly endowed with humi¬ 
lity, good conduct and heroism, if he is valorous, certainly it is 
salvation obtained by the father in his very house. 
47-48. Bliss is the form of the Brahman. Hundred such 
blisses are acquired by the father through his son, O woman 
of beautiful limbs, by his auspicious and holy rites, 
49. O gentle lady, there is nothing on a par with this in 
the whole world consisting of mobile and immobile beings, 
if the good son takes over the burden of his father and lifts it 
himself. 
50. So, I am delighted now. I shall go to the forest for 
hunting the deer and have some good sports. O woman of wide 
eyes, I am freed of my sins by affording protection to the j>coplc. 
I shall now freely move about. 


1582 
Ndrada Purina 
CHAPTER TEN 
The dialogue between Rukmangada 
and Vamadeva 
Vasiffha continued : 
1-2. On hearing the words of her husband, the wide-eyed 
lady said : “O king, the truth has been spoken by you. O lead¬ 
ing king, just as the sages say, there cannot be a greater happi¬ 
ness than that of a son. In this world it is equal to that of 
the greatest being named Visnu. 
3-4. The burden of responsibility arising out of the 
administration of the seven continents has been placed on the 
son by you. Abstaining from the violence to the deer, worship 
Janardana by means of sacrifices; abandon desire for worldly 
pleasures; serve the celestial river; this is the proper and justi¬ 
fiable course of life to you but not the killing ofthedeer. 
5. O king, resorting to worldly pleasures by fathers hav¬ 
ing grown up sons is like leaving the amorous marks with the 
nail on the breasts of an old woman. 
6. O ruler of the Earth, worship Lord Hisikesa (Visnu) 
in the house. It is not proper on your part to kill innocent 
herds of deer. 
7-8a. Non-violence has been glorified as the greatest vir¬ 
tue in the Puranas. One who maintains himself through violence 
pursues holy rites in vain. He who follows the path of violence 
docs not gain anything, even if he follows the righteous path. 
O king, good men do not enjoy those things polluted and hurt 
by others. 
8b. Violence to living beings is said to be of six types, O 
king. 
9. The first man responsible for violence is the person 
who approves of it; the second one is the actual killer; the third 
one is the person who believes in it (who has faith in it) ; the 
fourth man (guilty) of violence is he who eats (the meat) ; the 
fifth man is the person who cooks and O king the sixth one is 
the person who is a participant in it. Learned men know the 
Dharma connected with violence is Adharma. 


UUara Bhiga 10.10-21 
158S 
10. O king, a father who resorts to Dharma and who has 
become old in age, does not commit sins after entrusting the 
burden to the son. 
11. Eschew the emotional feeling connected with the 
violence done to the deer. O king, hundreds of kings addicted 
to the vice of hunting deer have perished. 
12-13. Hence I consider the act of striking down deer as 
wickedness. Excellent deep sympathy and mercy towards deer is 
seen in the righteous kings. It is with the earnest desire for your 
welfare that you are being prevented by me.” To his wife who 
repeatedly urged thus, the king spoke these words : 
14. O gentle lady, I do not wish to hurt or kill the 
deer. Under the pretext of hunting deer, I will wander in the 
forest weeding out thorns (undesirable element) with the 
bow kept ready in the hand. 
15. May my son be among the people, O fairfaced lady, 
and may I be in the forest. The subjects must be protected from 
both the beasts of prey and the robbers, by the king. 
16. O auspicious lady, the subjects must be protected by 
oneself or through one’s son. The king who docs not protect his 
subjects faces downfall, though he may be virtuous or 
religious. 
17-20. O beloved lady, it is with the protection of 
people in view that I will be going to the forest. I am devoid 
of false emotions and feelings. After saying this to her, the 
king climbed on to an excellent horse like the sun on the peak 
of the Meru mountain. The horse was defectless, lustrous like 
the moon, and was as it were the ornament unto the Earth. It 
was like the celestial horse Uccaihsravas in respect ofits beauty; 
it was like the Wind God in its speed. Paying respect to the 
Earth the king offered his right hand (?) which had given 
gifts of thousands and crores, which used to press and rub the 
breasts of beautiful ladies, which had the shape and appearance 
of the tender sprouts of the Asoka tree and which bore the 
marks of a thunderbolt and goad. 
21. The ruler of the Earth set off on his journey making 
the ground quake (beneath him). The excellent king passing 
many lands reached the forest. 


1584 
Ndrada Purdna 
22. Elephants, horses and chariots were shaken eff due 
to the velocity of the horse. The foot soldiers fell unconscious on 
the surface of the Earth. 
23. O king, after traversing hundred and eight Yoja- 
nas (one Yojana= 12 kins.) that king all at once reached the 
great Asrama (hermitage) of the sages. 
24-27. He entered the beautiful hermitage abounding in 
trees such as clusters of plantain trees, Asoka, Bakula Mimusops 
Elengi), Punnaga (nut-meg), Sarala (pine trees), Matulihga 
(citron trees), Kapittha (feronia elephantum), date palms, 
jack trees, [coconut palms, palmyra, Ketakas, Sinduvaras, 
Sandalwoods, Tamalas (Xanthochymus epictorius), Pippalas, 
Campakas, Areca palms, Dadimas (pomegranates), thousands 
of embylic myrobalans, margoas trees, mango trees, Lodhras 
(a tree with red-white flowers) and many other trees full of ripe 
fruits. They bent down due to the weight of fruits and many 
birds perched on them. 
28-29. Sweet smelling wind gently blew, wafting the frag¬ 
rance of the flowers. Searching for the sages therein the king 
saw Vamadeva^, the most excellent Brahmana who had the 
lustre of fire and who was surrounded by many disciples. On 
seeing him the king got down from his horse and bowed to him 
with great respect. 
30. The king was honoured and greeted with Arghya and 
other things by that sage. Sitting on the Kusa grass scat he 
said in a delighted tone :- 
31. “On seeing today the lotus-like feet of yours who are 
ever engrossed in deep meditation, my sins have been eliminat¬ 
ed and fruition of my meritorious deeds has been achieved.” 
32. On hearing the words of king Rukmangada, sage 
Vamadeva rejoiced much. After enquiring about his health and 
welfare he said thus: 
i. This is not the Vedic scer V&madcva but some other sage of the 
same name. A number of sages of thU name are mentioned in the AfM. 
(SaiAd. 7. 17, Vana. 192. 43 H, 92-94) and VJt. (I. 7. 4. II. 
67. 3 etc.) 


UttaraBhdga 10.33-45 
1585 
33. O highly blessed king, my hermitage visited by 
you, a highly meritorious devotee ofVi§nu, has become the 
most sanctified on the surface of the Earth. 
34. Which other king on the Earth can attain equality 
with you by whom Yama has been vanquished and the path 
leading to his abode has been broken. 
35. O king, by compelling them to observe fast on the 
DvadasI day that is destructive of sins, the entire world has been 
led to the imperishable region of Vaikurifha. 
36. After controlling and restraining the subjects on the 
surface of the Earth soundly through the four splendid Upayas 
(means of success, viz. Saman, dana, danda, bheda) they have 
been led to the region of the slayer of Madhu (i.e. of Visnu) 
whether they abide by their duties or carry on the duties of 
others. 
37-38. O king, you have come within our view and we had 
been desirous of seeing you. O king, even a Cantjala who is a 
devotee of Visnu is superior to a Brahmana. Even a Brahmana 
devoid of devotion to Visnu is inferior to a Ganqlala. O king, 
rare indeed are those kings who are devoted to Visnu on the 
surface of this Earth. 
39-40. No king who is not a devotee of Visnu can be 
the person who embellishes the glory and splendour of the 
Earth. If the king is not devoted to Hari but is devoted to 
other Deities, that king is like a woman who has abandoned her 
husband and is attached to her paramour. Certainly this kind 
of adverse behaviour affects that king. 
41-43a. His behaviour will be contrary to virtue, wealth, 
love, intelligence and salvation. 
Hence, the worship of Visnu that is reasonably laid down 
has been performed by you. Hence, O king, you arc blessed. We 
too arc blessed since we have seen you. 
Even as Vamadeva spoke thus to him, the excellent king, 
naturally endowed with humility bowed down humbly and 
said : 
43b-45. O excellent Brahmana, I crave your forgiveness, 
O holy Lord, I am not like this. O Brahmana, I am not equal 
to even the dust of your feet. Never can even the Devas be 


1586 
N&rada Purdna 
superior to Brahmanas. A creature (i.e. the individual soul) 
becomes devoted to Madhava through the Brahmanas who are 
satisHed. If they are furious he becomes worthy of being hated 
(by Madhava). This is the truth that has been stated by me. 
46. Vamadeva then asked him— Tell me. What shall 
I give you? O king, there is nothing that cannot be given to you 
who have come to my house as my guest now. 
47. O king, if he gives anything on the earth, it must 
be that which is the most pleasing to him like the announce¬ 
ment through drums on the day of Visnu which prevents 
people from taking food. 
48. The king thereupon joined his palms in reverence 
and said to him— I have achieved everything by the sight of 
the pair of your feet. 
49. O Brahmana, I have a doubt that has persisted for 
a long time. I am asking you the same since you are a lead¬ 
ing Brahmana, who dispel all doubts. 
50. By what meritorious deed has my wife become the 
most beautiful lady in the three worlds. She looks upon me as 
though I am superior to Manmatha. 
51. Wherever the fair-complexioned gentle lady sets her 
foot, the earth reveals its great treasures. 
52. Her limbs are devoid of the symptoms of old age. 
There arc neither wrinkles nor greying hairs. O excellent sage,, 
she shines always like the lustre of the autumnal moon. 
53. O Brahmana, even without fire she prepares dishes 
of six tastes. Grores of men take their meal out of the little 
quantity of food that she cooks. 
54. She is a chaste woman. She is by nature munificent; 
she causes happiness to all living beings. O Brahmana, dis¬ 
respect is not expressed by her through words even when she is 
asleep. 
55. My son who is born of her abides by my behest 
always. O excellent one among the leading Brahmana, on the 
surface of this earth, I am the only one who have a son in the 
sense of the term. 
56. My son is a great devotee of his father. He 
surpasses me by means of his attributes. It is well known 


Uttara Bhdga 10.57-68 
1587 
on the surface of the Earth that I am only the ruler of a single 
continent. 
57-58a. My son has surpassed me in this respect as he 
is the protector of all the seven continents. O leading Brahmana, 
for my sake, the princess well-known by the name of Vidyul- 
Ickha, had been brought by him after conquering many kings 
in the battlefield. 
58b-59a. In the course of six months that Lord equipped 
with the wealth of beauty conquered those kings and made 
them stripped of their weapons. 
59b-60. He went to the realm of damsels and conquered 
them in the battle. He brought eight excellent ladies from among 
them with force and presented them to me with repeated 
obeisances. 
61. Urged by his mother, my son brought and handed 
over to me the divine and exquisite garments and jewels on 
the surface of the Earth. 
62. Within a day he takes a round of many Yojanas 
over the Earth and returns to me by nightfall for the purpose of 
massaging my feet. 
63. After ma.ssaging my feet, he stands at the threshold 
at midnight with his coat of mail on. He wakens and pulls up 
the attendants and servants who are overwhelmed by drowsi¬ 
ness. 
64. That is why, O excellent sage, this physical body of 
mine is free from sickness and ailments. My happiness is im¬ 
measurable. My beloved in the house is fully subservient to me. 
65. I have numerous horses and elephants. The food- 
grains and riches I possess are infinite. All the people on the 
Earth obey my behests. 
66. My present happiness is infinite. What is that 
meritorious action thanks to the power of which I possess it ? 
Is it what has been performed in the course of this birth or the 
previous one ? 
67-68. O Brahma^, recount to me about my merit after 
pondering over it in your mind. There is no ailment in the 
body: the beloved wife is submissive; there is affluence in the 


1588 
Nirada Puribta 
house, devotion to Hari and reverence to scholars as well as 
capacity to give liberally lo the Brahmanas. I consider this as 
originating from my merits. 
CHAPTER ELEVAN 
Rukmdngada meets Mohini 
Vasiffha said : 
1. On hearing the words of the king, the excellent sage 
of sound and perfect knowledge thought for a moment. He 
understood its real cause and said thus : — 
Vdmadevasaid : 
2. O king, formerly you were born of the iSudra caste.^ 
You were oppressed by poverty and harassed by a wicked wife. 
3. You sustained yourself by serving others and receiving 
wages. O king, thus you continued to live for many years, 
distressed due to misery. 
4-5. Thanks to your coming into contact with some 
Brahmanas, once, your honour went on a pilgrimage to holy 
centres. O king, after going over all holy centres you reached 
the holy centre Mathura and became interested in serving 
Brahmanas. There, in the company of Brahmanas, you took 
bath in the waters of the Yamuna. 
6-8. At the holy centre named Vifranti which is the 
most excellent of all holy centres, in the temple of the Divine 
1. The motif of re-birth as an explanation of events in the present 
birth has been very popular in ancient and mediaeval Indian literature. 
The soul-denying Buddhists have extensively used it in J&taka tales on the 
authority of the Buddha. Jtunas used it widely in their Sanskrit-Pr&krit- 
Apabhraihia narrative literature. Brahmanical Purai>as are no exception. 
The NP. used it in Part-I Chs. 20, 23 with reference to Fi/pii Vratas. Here 
too the same device is used to explain the exceptional luck of RukmShgada. 


UttaraBh&ga 11.9-14 
1589 
Boar (Varaha), O king you heard the Puranic story being 
recounted. The holy riteof Alunya Sayana,* was being explain¬ 
ed. As the Vrata is to be observed for four months on the 2nd 
tithi of the dark half of each month from l^ravana onwards, 
there are, for the completion of the Vrata four parai^—one 
breaking of fast per month. Hence for its conclusion there are 
four Paranas (breaking of the fasts). By its observance the Lord 
of the Devas, Hari, with the lustrous complexion like the cloud 
who is the Lord of the worlds and the consort of goddess Laksmi 
and the destroyer of all sins, is pleased. 
9. Coming again to the temple that holy rite was 
performed by your honour. This observance called A^unya- 
§ayana (non-vacant bed) is highly conducive to prosperity at 
home. 
10-1 la. If any one continues the life of a house-holder 
without observing this rite that destroys sins, O great king, his 
life is rendered ihiitless like that of a barren woman. It appears 
to me that a happiness of this sort is very rare. 
lib. O king, this holy rite must be undertaken on the 
Dvitiyaday** in the month of Sravana.lt is destructive of 
rebirths, death and old age. 
12. O king, on this day the Lord of the Universe should 
be worshipped in the company ofLaksmI with fruits, flowers, 
incense, sweet-smelling red unguents, charitable gifts of beds 
and clothes as well as by feeding Brahma^as. 
13. O king, everything of this Vrata has been performed 
by you though they were difficult. O king, this is the full 
fruition of the same holy rite called Affinya. Listen to the 
other sacred rites mentioned (or observed) by you in detail. 
14. It is certain that these results will not have 
taken place, if the Lord of the Universe had been displeased. 
The Lord of the Devas had been worshipped by you in the 
previous birth through the observance of A^unya rite. 
*(Fonnerly this was menUoned n^Aioka i^ajwaa, mtk supra 1.111.13. 
**In the region of the author of the NP a month is PAittmAila. Hence 
tbe word 'dark half* is not probably used. 


1590 
Ndrada Purd^a 
15. O leading king, in this birth, you arc worshipping 
Hari by means of the holy rite of Dvadaii. Surely you will 
attain the identity with Visnu. 
16. O king, thus your enquiry of auspicious nature has 
been explained by me regarding the origin of your affluence 
and leading to prosperity of your kinsmen. 
17. O king, what else shall I give you or do for you ? 
By all means you are worthy of everything, as you are a 
devotee of Janardana. 
The king submitted :— 
18. O excellent Brahmana, I am eagerly desirous of 
visiting the Mandara mountain. With your permission , I wish 
to see the various miraculous things there. 
19-20. O excellent Brahmana, after transferring the 
weighty burden of administering the kingdom that other kings 
find unbearable, to my son, I have become light(less burdened). 
I am free to roam about as I please. My duty will be looked 
after by my son. On hearing the words of the king, Vamadeva 
spoke thus : 
21. O prominent king, this is the highest duty of the 
son that he should always extricate his father from distress, out 
of affection. 
22. He who carries out the order of his father to the 
best of his mental, verbal and physical capacity, shall derive the 
benefit of having a holy dip in Gaiiga every day. 
23. It is heard mentioned in the Vedic text that if the 
son goes to Ganga for a holy dip against the expressed 
desire of his father, he will not attain the usual purity and 
sanctity. 
24. O king, you are contented and blessed. Go as you 
please. Thanks to the favour of Hari, a meritorious son has been 
born in your family. 
25. After this had been spoken by the sage, the glorious 
king mounted his horse and rode swiftly like the Wind God 
himself. 
26-27a. Looking at and observing all the mountains, 
forests, rivers and the wonderful lakes and parks, the king 
ere long reached the mountain Mandara. 


UttaraBhOga ll-27b-37 
1591 
27b-28a. On his way he went round the white mountain 
'‘Gandhamadana’,^ crossed the Mahameru and saw the 
northern Kurus. 
28b«30. He reached the Mandara mountain refulgent with 
the splendour of a hundred suns and covered in gold all round. 
On being rubbed with the hands of Hari it had generated liquid 
gold. The whole region there was full of trees and decorated with 
many metals and minerals. With many fountains over it, it was 
embellished with many caves. It was full of ten thousand 
rivers and was washed by the auspicious waters of the river 
Gahga. 
31>32a. It was frequented by bevies of youthful maidens 
with rendezvous for serving their lovers. 
The mountain was adorned with ripe, sweet smelling, 
potlike big fruits of trees which resembled the breasts of 
youthful damsels. 
32b-33. The place was resonant with the buzzing sound 
of the bees and was reverberating with the cooing of cuckoos. 
On seeing the mountain resound with the cries of many living 
beings all round, the king entered the great mountain. 
34-35. He desired to climb on to the top of the mountain. 
He was curious to find out the path whereby he could climb up. 
As he spied allround, he saw fiocks of birds from the trees 
moving out attracted by the charming voice of an enchanting 
lady. He saw the birds fiying quickly over the trees and he 
too went swiftly alongwith them. 
36-37. The enchantingly sweet sound coming out of the 
mouth of that bewitching beauty entered his ears also. 
Fascinated by it, he left off his horse that had crossed the 
path as if in three steps. The whole path of the moun- 
1. The location of Gandhamadana is disputed. M. Ali {Thi Geography 
cf the Purdpas, Fig. 7—the sketch of the Hindukush Range) shows it to be the 
Khwaja Mohammad Range while De identifies it with Rudra Himilayas—a 
part of the Kailasa range. But in either case it is difficult to understand why 
a traveller from India (Vidiji, in the case of King Rukm&hgada) need 
cross or visit in passing Uttara Kuru ^modern Kiighizia, Samarkand and 
Turkemenistan-t;i<ik D.P. Mishra's Studies tn Proto-history of India, pp. 17:18 
and the map of Uttarakuru facing p. 17) and Mah&meru (the Pamirs) to 
reach Gandham&dana. It appears that the author of the NP. had some 
vague ideas of the locations of these places. 


1592 
Ndrada Purdna 
tain was spell-bound by the sweet song of the enahantress. 
Instantaneously^ the king saw a lady stationed on the mountain. 
She had the lustre of molten gold. She was created like the 
staff of Kama. 
38-40. She was worshipping the Lihga that rose 
high into the sky, for the welfare of the world. She was 
like the embodied form of the Earth and she was as it were 
the culmination of beauty like a Parvati, the daughter of 
the mountain Himalaya. She had the beauteous form of the 
seashore. Her body could be called the very mansion of sexual 
pleasure. She appeared to drag even the three-eyed lord 
stationed in the Linga, suddenly for the pleasure of the Lord. 
She was the personified form of the mental wish of a 
meritorious person. On seeing the beautiful form ofMohinI, the 
king was enamoured by the enchanting arrows of the god 
of love and the king fell down senselessly. 
41. Regaining consciousness again as if his body 
was seized with a very high fever, he moved swiftly to her 
presence. The lady of beautiful eyes noted the approaching king 
with her side-glances. 
42-44. She stopped singing and kept lute aside. She 
thought of her duties for the occasion. She drove off the flocks 
and herds of birds and animals. She covered her cheeks and arms 
with a fine cloth. She shook off the bees that were attracted by 
the fragrance of her breath. The gentle lady then went near the 
king after leaving off the worship-worthy Lihga. After going 
near him, the enchanting lady of elegant movements and eyes 
like the petals of the lotus spoke these sweet words to Rukmah- 
gada who had already been scorched by the arrows of Kama— 
O king, get up, I am under your control. 
45-47. Why do you waste this body of yours by falling 
in a swoon. You are a person who bear the burden of the 
Earth as though it was only a blade of grass. Why do you, on 
seeing my enchanting form, lose sense, like a weak cow sinking 
beneath the mire ? Be steady and firm. You are bold. You are 
a brave warrior. Why do you make yourself ridiculous ? You 
of elegant activities. O Lord of kings, if you have any desire to 
have extremely pleasant and favourable sexual intercourse with 


UttaraBhdga 11.47—12.7 
1593 
me as a willing partner, after giving charitable gifts with 
due rites, you' can do so. You can freely enjoy me like 
your own slave. I am an adept in the sexual act. 
CHAPTER TWELVE 
Stipulation of the conditions 
Vasiftka said : 
1-3. When these splendid words were uttered by Mohini, 
the leading king opened his eyes resembling a lotus. Deluded 
by the sight of Mohini, he uttered the following words in a 
faltering tone “O young woman, many ladies with 
faces like the full moon have been seen and enjoyed by me. 
But I have never seen such a beautiful person like yours; such 
personal beauty as you have, fascinates the whole world. 
4. O fair-faced lady, by your sheer sight I have been 
struck and hit by the arrows of Cupid. I have suddenly fallen 
on the Earth. O gentle lady, I prattled much on being fascinated 
by your brilliance. 
5. O lady of beautiful thighs resembling the trunk of 
an elephant, be favourable to me. I shall grant you whatever 
you have in mind. My mind has been bound by your love and 
as such there is nothing in the three worlds that is not worth 
giving to you. 
6-7. O lady of beautiful eyebrows, I am ready to give 
you this entire Earth whose limbs are bedecked in the 
mountains, whose garments are the oceans, whose eyes are the 
moon and the sun, whose bosom are the clouds (or is supple 
and firm), whose body is well set with the firmament (?), whose 
face is a gold coin, whose nature is beautiful, whose private 
parts are the nether worlds, whose hair is constituted by many 
trees and who has seven mountain lips (?). O beautiful lady I 
will give you the Earth alongwith my treasury, elephants, horses 
and cities accompanied by the ministers and therefore hearty. 


1594 
Marada Purina 
8. O Mohini of charming limbs, for a contact with you 
I will give even my soul; what then about wealth, gems etc ? 
Be favourable to me. 
9. On hearing the words of the king Mohini smiled, 
raised the king up and said in sweet voice. 
10. O king, I do not wish to choose the Earth along- 
with the mountains and oceans.. Whatever I say on a certain 
occasion must be carried out without hesitation. 
11-12. I will resort to you. There is no doubt about it. 
Enter into this agreement with me. 
The king said : 
O gentle lady, I will enter into that agreement whereby 
you shall be satisfied. For want of the sexual contact with you 
my body has attained well nigh the tenth state (of a loveborn 
person). 
Mohini said : 
13. Give unto me your right hand that has practised 
many holy rites, whereby I will be able to believe in your 
words, O king. 
14. You are a king. You practise religious and holy 
rites regularly. You have won fame for truthfulness in the three 
worlds. You will never utter a lie on any occasion. Still this is 
a worldly convention of making you promise which has been 
followed by you. 
15. When Mohini said these words, the king who was 
overwhelmed with mental agony said with a delighted heart. 
16. O beautiful lady, I have never uttered a lie since 
my birth. O fair-complexioned lady, even in the course of fun 
and sports I have never spoken a lie. 
17. Or of what avail are these words uttered by me by 
way of convincing you in so many words ? Look that my right 
hand, marked by merits, is offered to you. 
18. O beautiful woman, of lovely thighs, if I do not 
carry out your words, whatever merit has been accumulated by 
me ever since my birth shall become yours. 


UttaraBhiga 12.19-30 
1595 
19. (In case I fail to carry out your words) my virtue 
and piety have been given in exchange to you. O lady become 
my wife. I have been forcibly and extremely perturbed and 
excited by your beauty. 
20. I am a king by name Rukmahgada, the son of 
Rtadhvaja, bom in the race of Iksv^u. Dharmahgada is my 
son. 
21. O lady of charming eyes, under the pretext of 
hunting the deer, I have entered the forest. Then the pleasant 
hermitage of Vamadeva was seen by me. 
22. Something was mentioned by that sage. Thereafter 
I was bid adieu by him. Riding on my excellent horse I came 
here to see mount Mandara. 
23. With my mind curious and enthusiastic I was roaming 
over the excellent mountain, when the sweet song emanating 
from your mouth reached my ears. 
24. Attracted by that song, I have approached you, O 
lady of charming eyes, you have come within the range of my 
vision. 
25. Thereafter, O gentle lady, I fell unconscious on the 
ground. Now I have regained consciousness, thanks to your 
nectarine words. 
26. O enchantress of the worlds, I consider myself as a 
person born again. It behoves you to favour me by replying to 
me suitably. 
27. On being requested by the king thus, Mohini spoke 
in reply :— 
O king, I am born of God Brahma and have come here 
for your sake. 
28. On hearing about your fame, I was overwhelmed by 
Cupid. I have forsaken all gods, the chief of whom was Indra, 
and come to the golden mountain of Mandara. 
29. With my mind in concentration, I stayed here engaged 
in penance. I am worshipping God Sankara, the Lord of the 
Devas, by offering (singing) songs unto him. 
30. I consider presentation of music is the great favourite 
of the deities. O king, it is superior to all other Danas 
(charitable gifts) and it is the bestower of endless salvation. 


1596 
NArada PurA^ 
31 >32. Pa^upati (god Siva) is satisfied with it and has 
immediately granted me the boon. You, |he king of the Earth 
have been attained by me and this was what I had liked. O 
king you are loved by me and I am loved by you. 
33. After saying thus to him, Mohini caught hold of 
the hand of the king and quickly lifted him up even as he was 
lying on the ground like the thunderbolt of Indra. 
CHAPTER THIRTEEN 
The Fascination of Mohini 
Vasiffha said : 
1. Lifting up the king, Mohini spoke these words : O 
leading king, do not entertain any doubt. Know me to be a 
virgin without sins. 
2>3a. O king, marry me in accordance with the injunc¬ 
tions laid down in the Grhyasutras. If an unmarried virgin 
becomes pregnant, she delivers of a son of ill fame who will be 
despised by the people of all castes. 
3b-4. In the Purana, the wise know (i. c. say) that 
there are three types of Ca^d^l^s. One is the child bom of an 
unmarried virgin; the second type is the progeny of Sagotra 
marriage (i.e. marriage between a man and a woman of the 
same Gotra or lineage). O leading king, the third type of 
Candala is the progeny of a Brahmatia lady begot by a 
Sudra.^ 
5-6a. For this reason, O king marry me a virgin.” 
Thereafter, King Rukmangada married that lady of tremulous 
1. Cf Veda~Vj>dsa Smrti I. 9-10 
Kumdrf-Sambhavas tvtkah sagotrdy&m doitiyakafi / 
Brdhmaoydm Sudra-janitai cip^Uu trividhah smxtah // 


Uttara Bhiga 13.6b-16 
1597 
side-glances, on that mountain itself, in accordance with the 
(Grhya-sutra) injunctions. United with her the king said 
smilingly : 
The king said : 
6b-7a. O fair-faced lady, attainment of heaven is not as 
much conducive to happiness as winning you, O gentle lady, 
on this Mandara mountain. It does not please me so much 
as this meeting with you. 
7b-8. O gentle lady, even though I am on this Earth 
I consider myself superior to Purandara (god Indra) since I 
have obtained O fair-eyed lady, you, the most beautiful lady 
in the three worlds as my wife. Hence I shall do whatever is 
favourable to you. Command me. 
9. Tell me whether you wish to sport about here itself, 
O young lady, or in my palace or on the Malaya mountain or 
on the top of the Meru or in the Nandana park. 
10. On hearing the words of the king that were indi¬ 
cative of his close attachment to her, Mohini spoke these sweet 
words that increased the pleasure of the king :— 
11. O king, in your capital city I shall be the 
victim of wounding side-glances of my co-wives. How can 
I, therefore, go over to your city ? 
12. Let there not be, in the whole of the Earth, any 
woman who will be facing the misery originating from co-wives, 
throughout her life (till death). 
13. O king, I have been obtained by you. From the 
bottom of my heart, I am subservient to you. It was after 
understanding that there would be the misery from co-wives 
that you have been wooed as my husband by me. 
14. I will be able to reside on the excellent mountain 
that contains many miraculous features. But, O leading king 
the only thing is you cannot stay anywhere without 
Sandhyavali. 
15. On being separated from her and her son, you will 
be de6nitcly unhappy. Your sadness, O king, will increase 
my sorrow. 
16. I shall establish myself soundly wherever you will 
derive sufficient happiness. O king, where you are happily 


1598 N&rada Purdtfa 
diverted, I shall also be happy, feeling that your place of 
residence is mount Mandara to me. 
17. The wife must live in the place where her husband 
stays, even if it is not an affluent one. They say (i.e. wise 
people say) that, in the proximity of her husband that place 
is the veritable mountain Meru of gold, 
18. O Lord, where you feel happy is surely my Meru, 
the place of my desire. Staying in the place of one’s father 
after eschewing that of one’s husband, is to be avoided. 
19. A woman interested in staying permanently in the 
abode of her father sinks in darkness of hell. All her holy 
rites shall be fruitless and she shall be born as a sow. 
20. I know such evil consequences. How, then can I 
stay on in the Mandara mountain ? I will go along with you. 
You are the Lord of my happiness and misery.” 
21. On hearing the words of Mohini, the king was 
delighted in his mind. After embracing the beautiful, lady, 
he spoke these words : — 
22. You will be above all my wives. O lady of beautiful 
thighs, do not have any doubt that you will have to face 
misery ! 
23. O lady of beautiful eyebrows, in my house you will 
be far superior to my own life. O lady of slender frame, come 
on. We shall proceed to the city for our mutual happiness. 
24. O my beloved wife, staying there, enjoy freely all 
the worldly pleasures along with me. 
25. It was eventually for his own destruction that 
Rukmahgada told her thus. Mohini whose face was as white 
and fair as the moon, started from there producing the tinkling 
sound of her anklets. It seemed that she even dragged the 
beauty of the mountain too after her. 


UttaraBhdga 14.1-13 
1599 
CnHAPTER FOURTEEN 
The salvation of GodhS, {the lizard) 
Vasiffha continued : 
1. O king, both of them set off from the top of the 
mountain towards the surface of the Earth, surveying the 
various features of the mountain that captivated their mind. 
2. Some of the regions resembled corals, some were white 
like silver, some had the blue lustre of sapphire and some 
regions had golden hue. 
3. Some of them were crystal-coloured and others 
resembled the yellow orpiment. All the immobile beings were 
as if closely knit together. 
4. After reaching the foot of the mountain (ground 
level), the king saw his excellent horse scrapping the ground 
with his powerful hoofs that resembled the thunderbolt. 
5. As it scrapped and dug up the Earth with its sharp 
hoofs, a domestic lizard that had been beneath the ground came 
out. 
6. While coming out, O king (?) it was crushed beneath 
the hoof of the horse. The kind-hearted king saw it being 
crushed. 
7-8. Crying out to his beloved wife *‘Alas it is crushed !’* 
he rushed to it. Then, with the tender leaf of a tree the king 
scrapped it from the hoof and threw it on a plot of grassy land. 
Seeing that it had become senseless he spoke to Mohin! :— 
9. “O lady of beautiful limbs and lotus-like eyes ! Bring 
some water immediately so that I can sprinkle it on the lizard 
that has become unconscious due to its being crushed. 
10. At the instance of her husband, she brought some 
cool water immediately. With that the king sprinkled the 
unconscious domestic lizard. 
11-13. O king. Being sprinkled with cold water the 
lizard regained consciousness. In all cases of smiting blows, 
sprinkling with water is recommended. Or it is beneficial if it is 
immediately bandaged with a damp cloth. O king (?), af^er 
regaining consciousness the lizard spoke these words. Seeing the 
king in front of her, though it was distressed with (acute) pain 


1600 
NSrada PurQm 
it (the lizard) spoke out slowly : “O mighty-armed Rukmah- 
gada, listen to my story of life. • 
14. O Lord, I was the wife of a Brahmana, in the beauti¬ 
ful city of iSakala,^ I was endowed with beauty and youth. But I 
was not liked much by him. 
15. O king, that husband of mine did not hate anyone 
else, but he was always full of hatred towards me. He invariably 
spoke harsh words to me. 
16. I was furious on account of this. In order to attain 
the power of Va^I-karana (attraction), O king I consulted those 
young women who had been abandoned by their husbands, 
(but who later on controlled them). 
17. O king, I was informed by them—“Your husband 
will be subservient. We have been convinced (because once) we 
too had been abandoned and slighted by our husbands. 
18. Indeed our husbands became meek and submissive 
through the medicines and potions given by an ascetic woman. 
O beautiful lady, you too ask her. She will give you the 
auspicious medicines. 
19-20. You need not entertain any doubt. Your husband 
will be obedient like a slave. O king, at their instance I 
started from the place immediately. As I asked the people on 
the way, they pointed out her palace consisting of hundred 
columns and white-washed in a shining form. 
21. After entering it, I saw the brilliant woman under the 
vow of celibacy. She had covered herself with a long cloth. She 
had the tawny coloured complexion like that of the dusk. 
22. The refulgent lady wore long matted hairs; a num¬ 
ber of attendants were waiting upon her; she was being fanned 
gently by them. 
23. With a rosary of beads in her hand, she was repeat¬ 
ing the Mantra that was Vasyakara (conducive to attract and 
subdue people), that could cause excitement which could be 
verified (and hence was convincing.) She had the garland of 
happiness giving beads (?) round her neck). 
1. S&kala—Capital of Madra desa of Mahabharata fame, and also of 
Indo-Greek King Menander alias Milinda of the Buddhist work Milinda- 
PatMha. Identified with mod. Sialkot in Pakistan. 


Uttara BhSga 14.24-35 
1601 
24-25. Thereafter, I placed a soft lustrous ring of fine 
gold with superb brilliance at her feet and bowed to her. On 
seeing the ring placed at her feet she become delighted. Even 
before being asked, she had understood the disrespect to me by 
my husband. 
26-27. Then, O king, I was advised by the ascetic lady 
when I bowed to her and stood by. “This medicinal powder 
alongwith this amulet brings all living beings under control. The 
powder must be given to your husband (for being taken in) and 
the amulet must be worn round the neck. Certainly the hus¬ 
band will become submissive. He will not go to any other 
beautiful woman. 
28. Taking the medicinal powder and the amulet, I soon 
reached the house of my husband. At nightfall, the powder 
was mixed with milk and given to my husband. 
29-30. The amulet was tied round the neck and I ceased 
to be anxious over anything. O excellent king, when my hus¬ 
band drank the potion with the medicinal powder, the consump¬ 
tive disease took possession of him the same day. My husband 
became weaker and weaker day by day. Worms originating 
from cuts and putrefying wounds abounded in his private 
parts. 
31-32. Within a few days, he became pale and dim like 
a lamp when the sun has risen. My husband became agitated 
and perturbed in his sense organs. Lamenting over his lot day 
and night he told me : O splendid lady, I am your slave. I 
seek refuge in you. Save me. I will never approach another 
woman. 
33. O king, on hearing his lamentation I became much 
terrified. I informed the ascetic lady about everything and asked 
her. How shall my husband be happy ? 
34. A second course of medicine was given by her for 
subduing the burning sensation. When the medicine was ad¬ 
ministered, my husband attained normal health instantaneously. 
35. The burning sensation originating from the previpus 
powder was nullified by that medicine. Thereafter, my husband 
became subservient to me. He abided by my words and 
advice. 


1602 
Ndrada Purdna 
36. In due course of time, I passed away and^fell into 
the hell called Tamrabhrastra (Copper frying pan) where I 
underwent torture for the period of fifteen Yugas. 
37. Pieces as subtle and minute as gingelly seeds were 
cut off from my body and I was tortured; When a little of my 
sin remained still, I was born on the Earth. 
38. The form of a lizard was given to me by Yama (the 
son of the Sun). Thus, O king, I have been here for the last 
ten thousand years. 
39. Oking, if any young maiden were to perform Vasikarana 
rite to attract and control her husband, all her holy rites will be 
futile; she will be considered wicked and sinful in action and 
she will be burned and tortured in Tamrabhrastraka (hell). 
40. To a lady the husband is the Lord, he is the goal; 
he is the deity and he is the preceptor. If she were to perform 
the Vasikarana rite in respect of him, how can she attain 
happiness? 
41. She is born among hundreds of species of 
animals and creatures including the germs of leprosy. Hence, O 
king, the behest of the husband must always be carried out by 
a woman. 
42. O king, unless you redeem me who have sought 
refuge in you, I shall have to be born again as a despicable 
creature with all my sins. 
43-44. You can redeem me by giving me the merit acquir¬ 
ed by you by observing the holy rite of Vijaya Dvada^P asso¬ 
ciated with the constellation (Naksatra) Sravana at the 
confluence of Gahga and Sarayu. This confluence is 
destructive of sins. The holy rite is conducive to the redemption 
of ghosts. It is the bestower of all mentally cherished desires. 
45. On that day, O king, even if Hari is remembered 
in their own house by men, there is no doubt about it that he 
enables them to attain the merit accrued by visiting holy centres. 
46. O king, whatever meritorious act like charitable 
gifts, oblations to fire, worship of gods, is performed on the 
day of Vijaya it has ever-lasting beneficial effect. 
1. There are eight kinds of Dvadasis, Vtjayd Dv&iail has Srava^ux 
Naksatra vide Hemadri on KSla, pp. 260-263, Smrti Kaustubha, pp. 250-.54. 


UttaraBhiga 14.47-58 
1605 
47-49a Please do grant unto me that merit. If one obser¬ 
ves fast on the Dvadasi day and performs Parana on the Trayo- 
daii day, one acquires the benefit of observing fast for twelve 
years. O king, take pity on me and pass on that merit tome. 
On the Earth, you are the very physical manifestation of 
Dharma (virtue). You are the destroyer of the path of Yama. 
O save me. I am utterly miserable. 
49b. On hearing the words of the lizard, MohinI spoke 
these words : 
50. O Lord, whether happiness or misery one experi¬ 
ences, it has the result of his own actions. Hence, what have 
you to do with this sinful creature who had been wicked to her 
own husband ? 
51. O king, by means of amulets, medicinal powder and 
other things she gained control over her husband. O king, 
whatever is given to good men may be conducive to fame and 
heavenly pleasure. 
52-53. What is rendered as a gift etc to the sinners 
causes downfall of both (the giver and the receiver). It falls off 
both the worlds. If milk mixed with sugar is given to a serpent, 
it will certainly increase its poison. Similar indeed is the help 
rendered to the sinners. Leave off this sinful creature. Let us 
go to the city. 
54. If one delves into the births and dealings of others 
one’s happiness perishes. 
Ruhningada said : 
O daughter of Brahma, how is it that these things were 
uttered by you ? O fair-faced lady, how can you say that this is 
not the conduct or way of life of good men.^ 
55. O fair lady, those who arc opposed to helping others 
are sinners. They do everything for their own happiness 
and harass others. They are opposed to rendering obligation 
to others. 
56. The moon, sun, cloud, earth, fire, water, sandal, 
trees and good men are always for helping others. 
57-58. O fair-faced lady, it is heard that there was a 
king named Hariicandra. Afraid of uttering a lie he experienced 


1604 
Mdrada PurOiyi 
various miseries one after the other. He had to stay ^in the 
house of a Can^Ma. He had to sell his wife and son. Thanks to 
his steadfast adherence to truth, §akra and other Devas became 
satisfied. 
59. They asked Hariscandra^ the king to choose any boon. 
Brahma and other Devas were given this reply by that truthful 
king—If the Devas are satisfied it behoves them to grant this 
boon : 
60-62. May this entire city alongwith its trees, reptiles, 
children, young men, old men, women, and quadrupeds go to hea¬ 
ven. Even if it had committed sins, I shall take over the entire sins 
of Ayodhya and would like to go to hell. I do not wish to 
go to heaven alone after leaving people on the Earth. O 
great Devas, this is the truth, I utter. 
63. On seeing his steadfastness, Indra and others permit¬ 
ted it. The entire city went to the heavenly world alongwith 
him. 
64. The king is stationed in heaven in the company 
of his city. He moves about in the aerial chariot that goes wher¬ 
ever he pleases. He is being worshipped even by the immortal 
beings. 
65. O gentle lady, on hearing that the Devas had been 
defeated by the Daityas, the gift of his own bones was made by 
Dadhici for helping the Devas. 
66. O fair lady, his own flesh was given to the hungry 
vulture by king $ibi formerly, for protecting a dove. 
67. Formerly, there was a king over this earth named 
Jimutavahana*. O fairfaced lady, his own life was given up by 
him for the sake of serpents. 
1. Son of King Trisahku of the solar-race. His truthfulness and 
harassment by Viivamitra mentioned here is described in details in DB. VII 
Chs. 20.27. The readiness of Hariscandra to go to hell for the sins of others 
probably discloses the influence of Buddhist ideal expressed through 
B odhisattvas, 
2. The story of Jimutavahana's self-sacriBce probably formed a part 
of Gui>d4hya*s Brhat-KathS, a Paiiief work now lost forever. It is recorded 
in its Sanskrit version KathdsariU&gara (Sa^hkavati Lambaka, Taranga 23). 
Har^ selected him as the hero of his play Nig&nanda for propagating the 
Buddhist ideal of self-sacrifice. 


UttaraBkiga 14.68—15.1 
1605 
68. Hence, O gentle lady, a king should be kind-hearted 
and sympathetic. O splendid lady, the cloud showers its 
waters equally on an unholy and pure spot. 
69-70. The moon should delight even the Gani^alas and 
the fallen persons through his rays. Hence, O fair lady, I shall up¬ 
lift this distressed lizard by means of my own merits in the same 
way as Nahu|a through his daughter’s descendant (?).* Dis¬ 
regarding the enchantress thus, he spoke to the lizard, 
71. My merit originating from the holy rite of Vijaya 
is given, (I repeat) is given unto you, by me. Be free from all 
sins and go to the world of Visnu. 
72-74. O king, on his uttering this, she eschewed the 
old and emaciated form of the lizard and became a beautiful 
lady bedecked in celestial ornaments. She took leave of the king 
and went away brightening the ten quarters and making (as 
if) a wonderful boundary line to the region of Visnu, It is the 
place approachable only by Yogins. It is an excellent region 
brilliant like fire. It is the greatest Atman. Hence she is also like 
the lamp of fire for the illumination of the universe and was 
transformed by the king. 
CHAPTER FIFTEEN 
The dialogue between thefather 
{Rukmdhgada) and the son {DharmdAgada) 
Vasiftha said : 
1. After setting the lizard free from the sin, the delighted 
king laughingly said to Mohini—May the horse be mounted 
instantaneously. 
1. Dauh^aib^Mx.. by dau|^tcr’i sons. Nahufa after his fall from 
heaven, was redeemed by Yudhi?tlura (Mbh. Vana, Ghs, 179-181). Yudhijt- 
hint was not exactly his daughter’s son but the tcitn is used here loosely 
to express a descendant. 


1606 
Ndfada Purdifa 
2-3. Like Krsna’s horse (?) this can go ten thousand 
Yojanas in a moment. On hearing the words of the* king, 
Mohini, the ardently passionate lady, climbed on to the horse 
which was as swift as the wind, alongwith her husband. The 
lady of sweet smiles spoke these words to the king her husband. 
4. O king, drive this horse towards your city. My desire 
to see the face of your son is intense. 
5. O excellent king, I am at your disposal. You may go 
wherever you are inclined to go. On hearing the words of 
Mohini, he started towards his city. 
6-9. With great delight he observed the trees, the moun¬ 
tains, the rivers, the different kinds of forests, the animals of 
various sorts, villages, forts, lands, splendid cities, lakes of 
variegated nature and the charming plots of lands on the way. 
On seeing the hermitage of Vamadeva soon, the king who was 
in a hurry, bowed down from the firmament itself. Again the 
king proceeded on his way on his horse that was as swift as the 
wind-god. Observing many lands fully endowed with riches and 
food grains. 
10-12. The king reached Vidisa (a city in Madhya 
Pradesh) that was under his control. His son Dharmangada had 
already heard through his spies that the king, his father, 
was coming. With great delight he spoke these words to 
the vassal kings :— O excellent kings, this northern quarter is 
becoming brighter on being illuminated by his splendour and 
on being occupied by my father’s horse. Hence, let us all go to 
greet the king face to face. 
13. If the son does not come face to face with (i.e. does 
not personally go to receive) his father immediately on his 
arrival, he falb into the terrible hell and stays there as long as 
fourteen Indras reign. 
14. The Brahmanas well-versed in the Puranas say ihat if 
the son goes ahead to receive hb father face to face, (personally 
^he derives the fruit of a Yajfia for every step he takes). 
15. Get up. I shall go to greet him lovingly surrounded 
by you all. He is my deity of deities. 
16. When the king approved of hb words saying **So 
be it,” the prince accompanied by all of them went on foot for 


Uttar a Bh&ga 15.17-28 
1607 
a distance of a Krosa (3 km.) to greet his father personally 
face to face. 
17. Appearing like the embodied form of Manmatha 
and accompanied by a thousand kings, he went a long 
distance and met the king on the way. 
18. Meeting his father, he prostrated to him by falling 
at his feet on the ground affectionately. Alongwith the vassal 
kings, he bent his head down and made obeisance. 
19-20. With great love the king observed his son falling 
at his feet immediately after arrival along with the vassal kings. 
The king got down from the horse. With his brawny arms he 
lifted up his son and warmly embraced him closely. Sniffing at 
his head the king then spoke to his son. 
21. O son, I hope you are protecting your subjects. I 
also hope you are punishing the enemies. 1 presume you fill the 
treasury only with such amounts as are earned by justifiable 
means. 
22. I hope, never failing maintenance amounts that are 
more than sufficient have been handed over to the Brahmanas. 
1 hope you practise attractive and pleasant manners, and that 
you do not speak harsh words. 
23. 1 hope cows are now milked in the houses of Ca^- 
dalas and sons carry out the behests of their fathers always. 
24. I hope the daughter-in-law obeys the mother-in-law 
and her own husband. O son, I hope you never enter into 
verbal disputes with the Brahmanas. 
25. I hope the cows are not restrained in the land and 
are fed on different kinds of grass. I hope you scrutinise the 
weights and balances of foodgrains and other things. 
26. O son, I hope you do not impose too much of a 
burden on the householder by means of taxes. I believe game 
of dice and over-addiction to liquor are not present in your land. 
27. I hope there are people of different tastes and 
different opinions expressed in words in your city. I (further) 
hope the men do not maintain themselves on liberal gifts of 
others and do not wear old ragged clothes. 
28. O son, 1 hope you personally survey the elephants 
and horses in your army and protect them. I hope you look 
after all your mothers without partiality. 


1608 
Ndrada Purina 
29. O son, I hope men do not take food on the day of 
Visnu(on the EkadasI day). I hope men are interested lin per¬ 
forming Sraddha when the moon is waning (on the New Moon 
day). 
30. I hope you always eschew slumber in the latter 
halves of the nights. Slumber is the root of sins. 
31. Slumber is the mother of poverty. It is destructive of 
prosperity and welfare. No king who is a slave unto slumber 
rules over the Earth for a long time. 
32. Just as an unchaste woman destroys both the worlds 
of her husband so also slumber destroys both the worlds of the 
king. 
When the father said all these things, the son spoke these 
words. 
33. The son Dharmahgada bowed to the king again and 
again and said. 
O dear father, all these things have been done by me. I 
shall again carry out your behests. 
34. In all the three worlds those sons who carry out the 
instructions of their fathers, are blessed. O king, what is more 
sinful than not carrying out the directives of one's own father? 
35. If the son disobeys his father and goes to Gahga 
for his holy dip, he does not attain the benefit of the holy river. 
He who does not carry out his father’s directives does not enjoy 
the fruits of pilgrimage to holy centres. 
36. My body is subservient to you; my life is at your 
disposal.^ My duty is subservient to you. You are my great 
deity. 
37. A son cannot free himself from indebtedness to his 
father even by making a gift of the three worlds. O Lord, what 
then by means of physical strain, monetary gift and other 
things. 
38-39. Even as his son surrounded by many kings said 
thus, Rukmahgada embraced the son and spoke these words : O 
1. Henceforth every now and then Dharmdiigada and Sandhy&vali 
unknowingly and unintentionally huit the future tragedy—Dharmangada’s 
death at the hands of his father. 


Uttara Bhdga 15.40-47 
1609 
son, you have spoken the truth. You are the knower of virtue. 
There is no othdr greater deity for a son than his father. If the 
son disrespects the father, even the gods turn their faces from 
him. 
40. Since you have conquered the Earth consisting of 
many continents and possessing many kings and since you pro¬ 
tect that Earth, I have been held by you on your head. 
41. This is the greatest happiness in the world, certainly 
this is the heavenly region on the surface of the Earth, that the 
son is superior to the father. 
42. O son, I liave been made contented by you who 
traverse the path of good qualities and who make all the kings 
observe holy rite on the auspicious day of Hari. 
43. On hearing these words of his father, Dharmahgada, 
the son said 
‘‘O father, where did you go after depositing all the riches 
in me ? 
44. At what place was this lady with the lustre of ten 
thousand suns attained by you? I think, after creating her Praja- 
pati (Brahma) had become disgusted with the world and de¬ 
tached from it. 
45. O king, in the whole of the three worlds there is 
no other woman with this form and beauty. I think she is born 
of the mountain or originated from the ocean. 
46-47. Or she may be the Maya (illusion) of the Daitya 
Maya, with the form of a young woman assumed by her. OLord, 
indeed, Brahma by whom she has been created is very clever. 
There is no slightest defect even to the extent of a hundred 
part of the tip of a hair. O Lord of the kings of the Earth, she 
is worthy of being the heroine of your house since she is as 
pure as gold. If I were to have a mother of such a type, which 
man is more meritorious than I ?” 


1610 
N&rada PurSm 
CHAPTER SIXTEEN 
The Anecdote of a chasle Lady 
Vasiftha said ; 
1. On hearing the words of Dharmahgada, Rukm^gada 
became delighted and said : It is true, O son, your new 
mother has been obtained by me on the Mandara mountain. 
2. She is the daughter of Vedasraya (support of the 
Vedas i.e, Brahma). Formerly, O dear son, she had been 
performing a terrible penance on the divine mountain Mandara, 
with the determination of attaining me. 
3. Some fifteen days before I started from here, riding 
on the horse I reached the Mandara, the most excellent of the 
mountains, containing many metals and minerals. 
4. This damsel of comely appearance was seen by me 
seated on the top of the mountain, propitiating Mahesvara 
and engaged in singing. 
5. Hit by the arrows of Anaiiga (the God of Love), I 
became unconscious and fell on the ground like the deer hit by 
a hunter. 
6. Thereafter, I had been shaken (and revived into) con¬ 
sciousness )by this gentlelady of charming eyes; with some impor¬ 
tunity I have been chosen as her husband. 
7. I too have taken the pledge with offering of my 
right hand. This lady of large eyes has been made my wife 
by me on the top of the mountain. 
8. Descending to the ground level (at that foot of the 
mountain), we got up on to the horse. Hurried (travelling 
therefrom) we have come to you within three days. 
9. -11. On my way I had the pleasure of seeing 
mountains, different lands, lakes and rivers. O son, she is your 
mother. She would heighten your pleasure. Make obeisance to 
this lady of charming limbs as though to your own natural 
mother. On hearing the words of his father, the son, the 
suppressor of his enemies, bent down his head as far as the 
ground level and spoke these words :— O gentle lady, O dear 
mother, favour me. I am your son, servant and slave. 


Uttara Bh&ga 16.12>2 7 
1611 
12-13. Accompanied by many kings I make obeisance to 
my mother. On seeing the son prostrating on the ground and 
thanks to the chivalry of her husband, the king, Mohini got 
down from the horse, raised up the son and embraced him with 
her hands. 
14-16a. Embraced by his mother, he saluted her once 
again. He adorned her with nice clothes and charming orna¬ 
ments. Dharmahgada, the son with eyes like lotus, requested 
her to place her legs on his back and mount the horse. In the 
same manner, he made his father too mount the horse. 
16b-17a. He himself walked on foot surrounded by the 
vassal kings. On looking at his step-mother he was delighted 
and had his hair standing on their ends. Praising himself in a 
resonant voice like the rumbling sound of the cloud he said. 
17b-21a. Blessed is the son who has many mothers in 
the world, new, fresh and charming beloved wives of his father. 
If one has only one mother, one’s father is miserable. If the 
father is miserable what happiness can the son have in the 
heart ? By saluting one mother the son has only the merit of 
bowing to one earth. By saluting many mothers I will have 
greater benefit day by day. 
2lb-22. Saying thus he entered the city surrounded by 
the vassal kings. He entered the beautiful city ofVaidila 
endowed with (i.e. abounding inj all prosperity. Seated on 
the horse alongwith Mohini the king too followed instantaneously. 
23. Then he entered the excellent mansion. On being 
greeted and honoured by the people, the king got down from 
the horse and spoke these words to Mohini. 
24. O charming one, go to the house of Dharmangada 
our son. In accordance with his attributes, he will render 
service to you as befitting an elderly person. 
25. Neither a chaperon nor a servant can render such a 
willing service ! On being thus advised by her husband, 
she started for the mansion of their son. 
26-27. She was seen entering the mansion by Dharman¬ 
gada, at the instance of her husband’s words. He thereupon 
left the vassal kings saying—“All of you stay here. At the 


1612 
N&rada Purdifa 
behest of my father, I shall render personal service unto her. 
On saying this he entered the mansion an^ grasped the • hands 
of his step-mother. After walking fifteen steps, they reached 
the cot. He made Mohini sit there. 
28-29. It was made of gold with silk cloth spread over. 
It was soft and firm. A soft bed-sheet was spread over it. It 
was bedecked in gems and jewels. Many jewelled lamps having 
the refulgence of the sun, were fitted on to it. Thereafter, the 
prince who had virtue as his ornament (i.e. Dharmahgada) 
offered water for washing the feet of Mohini. 
30-31. The prince considered her even elderly to 
Sandhyavali. His mind did not have any ignoble feelings 
towards Mohini. Though he was beautiful and graceful and 
she a charming lady with plump and stout thighs, buttocks 
and breasts, he considered her a lady ten thousand years old 
and himself a boy of three years. 
32. After washing her feet, he applied (sprinkled) that 
watet on his head. With the head bent down in humility he 
said : Mother, I am meritorious (with you as my mother). 
33. After saying this, he dispelled her fatigue by his own 
efforts and by those of men and women (servants). With great 
joy he placed all means of pleasures at her disposal. 
34-35a. At the time of the churning of the milk ocean 
two earrings were produced. They used to emit nectarine 
juice. These were acquired by Dharmamurti.^ After con¬ 
quering Danavas in the Patala (nether worlds). Vrsangada 
(i.e. Dharm^gada) himself put these in the ears of Mohini. 
35b-36a. A necklace of a thousand and eight auspicious 
white pearls each like the fruit of the embylic myrobalan was 
put on the bosom of the gentle lady. 
36b-37. Then the prince offered her a subsidiary light 
necklace of gold coins of a hundred Palas inset with ten 
thousand diamonds to his mothers. He gave her twice eight 
1. W. 34-46 contain reference to the history of some rare ornaments 
acquired by Dharm&hgada and gifted to Mohini. 1 could not trace it in 
other purai;ias. 


Uttara BhSga 16.38-50 
1613 
bangles (i.e. sixteen) studded with diamonds for both the 
hands. 
38-43a. They were made by men who knew their value. 
For each of the hands, a crore of gold coins was spent. The 
prince gave invaluable armlets and anklets to the beloved wife 
of his father as ornament. They had the refulgence of the sun. 
The girdle of fiery refulgence that Sarvani (Parvatl) had, fell 
off as she was extremely terrified in the course of the fight 
called Tarakamaya (pertaining to the demon Taraka) while 
Kalanemi was ruling over the kingdom. It then fell into 
Mulapacana (original fire), Thereafter, it was picked up by 
the demon Maya who wielded his power of illusion over the 
whole world. Dharmangada had killed that Daitya on Mount 
Malaya although he had been surrounded by a crore of Daityas. 
At the instance of his father, he had killed him in the course 
of a terrible war that lasted for a year (on the mountain 
Malaya). He got the girdle that the beloved of the king of 
the Daityas had on her person. The king gave that to his 
father’s beloved great queen with his hair standing on their 
ends out of delight. 
43b-46. Formerly, HiranyakaiSipu’s queen who was an 
outstanding beauty in the world, had a crest jewel that had 
the refulgence of lightning. She immolated herself in her 
husband’s funeral pyre. Before dying, the extremely distressed 
lady had cast her crest-jewel into the sea. The sea collected 
the excellent jewel and presented it to Dharmangada on being 
delighted at his prowess. The delighted prince now gave that 
jewel which had the brilliance of a crore of suns to his step¬ 
mother. 
47. He gave MohinI two auspicious clothes sanctified in 
fire and two charming bodices, a thousand crores in value. 
48-49. Dharmangada then gave the gentle lady Mohini, 
the divine garland and the sweet-smelling divine unguent that 
was very rare and had been acquired from the accomplished 
hands of the preceptor of all the Devas by the heroic Dharman¬ 
gada in the course of his conquest of all the continents. He gave 
her the unguent that enhanced her love. 
50. After embellishing her with great devotion, he fed 


1614 
Mdrada Purd^o 
her with meals consisting of dishes of six tastes and brought 
by his natural mother herself 
51. Even before this, he had addressed his natural 
mother and enlightened her by means of many words. There 
is no doubt about this that the behest of the king must be 
carried out by me as well as by you. 
52-53a. O gentle lady, she who is the king’s beloved is 
a highly respectable woman for us. The wife who acts wickedly 
against the lady-love of the king, her husband, falls into 
hell and stays there till fourteen Indras reign. 
53b-54. She who nurses feelings of enmity against the 
lady-love of her husband and tries to separate them in their 
love, is fried in Tamrabhrasfa hell (the frying pan made of 
copper.) Everything that is conducive to the happiness of her 
husband, should be done by the wife. 
55. O fair-complexioned lady, she must view her as she 
views her husband. She must do what is favourable and 
beneficent to the lady-love of her husband. 
56a. Even if she (the husband’s lady-love) happens to 
be of a lower caste, the wife who renders service to her, goes 
to heaven. 
56b. Afterwards she will occupy the same loving place 
in the mind of her husband. 
57. After acceding to the wish of her husband she 
derives all worldly pleasures. By eschewing the feelings of 
malice and jealousy, she attains the region of the Lord of 
every one. 
58. On seeing a cowife to be the most beloved of her 
husband, if a woman renders service to her, she will attain an 
eternal place in heaven. 
59-60. There was a very wicked man of the Sudra caste. 
He had abandoned all holy rites.^ He had a wife and also a 
1. W. 59-89 give an illustration of a chaste I^Qdra lady who served 
her depraved husband and his keep who when be was ailected by fistula 
left him penniless. This chaste lady borrowed money from lather, gave 
medical treatment to him, personally nursed his wound. When he died, 
she immolated herself on his funeral pyre and washed off her husband’s 
dns by her merits; both of them went to heaven. 


Uttara Bhdga 16.61-71 
1615 
beloved lady, a prostitute whom he kept in his house. The 
wife who wante'd to please her husband served him as well as 
the prostitute. She washed the feet of both of them. She 
partook only of the leavings of the food of both of them. 
61. Though she was prevented from doing this by the 
prostitute, she continued her activities of service. She ever 
remained in the path of the good. She was engaged in what 
was beneficent for both of them; while both of them lay on 
the cot, she used to lie down beneath on the bare ground. 
62. Thus she served her husband alongwith the 
prostitute for a long time, wading through the ocean of 
misery. 
63-64. Without caring for the advice of the chaste wife 
the man committed many blunders in the matter of his diet 
etc. He drank the milk of the buffalo alongwith radish. The 
foolish fellow ate the winnowings (of corn) mixed with oil. 
As a result of this he had a terrible fistula in the anus. 
65-66a. He was extremely distressed by day and night. 
The prostitute took everything valuable that the house con¬ 
tained and went over to another young man. The lustful 
woman gave him all the wealth. 
66b-67. Now the Sudra man became much ashamed. 
With distress evident in his face, he lamented and spoke thus 
to his wife : O gentle lady, save me though I had been very 
cruel to you and much attached to a prostitute. 
68. O beautiful lady, the sinner that I am, I have 
never done a good thing to you. O lady of slender waist, for 
many years I sported about alongwith the prostitute. 
69. The sinful haughty man who does not console his 
wife who bows down to him, attains all inauspicious things in 
the course of fifteen rebirths. 
70. O gentle lady, since I had disrespected you, 1 shall 
attain the despicable birth in the house of a Gaigt^ala. But your 
mind has not been turbid despite insults. 
71. On hearing these words of her husband, the wife 
spoke to the husband. It is the sins committed in the previous 
births that yield miseries. A learned man who bears them 


1616 
M&rada Purdna 
with fortitude, should be known as the most excellent ^among 
men. 
72. I had been sinful in the previous births. Now I 
experienced the fruits thereofin this birth. Hence, I have neither 
sorrow nor misery. 
73. By saying this she consoled and cautioned her 
husband. The fair-complexioned lady brought some money from 
her father and other kinsmen. 
74-75. The chaste lady considered her husband a Visnu, 
the resident of the milk ocean. She cleaned his anus and other 
private parts assiduously by day as well as by night, by means 
of turmeric juice and water. She scraped the germs and worms 
in the body of her husband, by means of her nail. 
76. She fanned him with peacock feathers. O gentle 
lady, the fair-faced lady slept neither during the day nor at 
night. 
77-78. Distressed by the misery of her husband, she felt 
that the whole universe was blazing (?) . She said—If there is 
goddess of earth, if there arc manes, if there arc deities, may 
they make my husband free from ailments. May he be free 
from sins. I shall give unto Goddess Candika blood mixed 
with flesh. 
79. I shall offer the flesh of goats, buffaloes and even 
human beings for the well being of my husband. With great 
respect I shall observe ten fasts. 
80. I shall place my body on a bed of sharp-pointed 
thorns. I shall not take sweet things. I shall not take ghee. 
81. I shall remain for days together without anointing 
the body externally with oil. May my husband live for a 
hundred years without any ailment. 
82-83a. As day followed day, she blurted out like this 
in her agony. Within a short while, all the three humours 
in his system were upset. With great effort she gave her 
husband the three astringent medicines (black and long pepper 
and dry ginger). 
83b-84. Once due to chilliness the man was quaking 
and shivering. His jaws suddenly came together and the finger 
of the wife was bitten off by the teeth coming;^ together. O 


Uttarabh&ga 16.85—17.4 
1617 
queen of the Lord of men, the piece of finger remained within 
the rigid mouth. 
85. She sold off her bangle and brought a great deal of 
fuel. She prepared the funeral pyre. After placing her dead 
husband on it, she poured ghee over the pyre (fuel). 
86-89. She too climbed on the funeral pyre joining her 
face to his face, her heart near his heart and O gentle lady, her 
buttocks near his buttocks. With her foot she dragged the fire. 
The auspicious lady of charming limbs set fire to the ailing 
body of the husband alongwith her body. As the fire blazed 
brightly, she cast off her body and went to the world of the 
Devas taking her husband with her after annihilating many 
of his sins by means of her holy rites very difficult to be 
performed. 
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 
The statement of Mohini 
The son (Dharmdfigada) said : 
1. Hence, O Mother, eschew jealousy and feed Mohini. 
A holy rite (dharma) like this cannot be attained in the three 
worlds. 
2-3. The wife who, with her own hands, feeds the beloved 
lady love of her husband, the co-wife who gives a little quantity 
of cooked rice to the co-wife shall, O gentle lady, O dear 
mother, become immortal—So says god Brahma. O Mistress (of 
the Mansion) be favourable to me carry out what has been 
related by me. 
4. O fair-complexioned lady, what is conducive to the 
happiness of my dear father must be performed by both of us. 
The sins shall be exterminated perfectly. Similarly, the attain¬ 
ment of heaven shall be everlasting. 


1618 
N&rada PufSa^a 
5-6. On hearing the words of her son then, the queen 
Sandhyavali invited* her son and embraced him a|[ain and 
again. She sniffed at his head and spoke these words : *‘0 son,. 
I shall carry out your words pregnant with dharma (virtues). 
7. Eschewing jealousy and false prestige I shall feed 
Mohini. I have the pleasure of being the mother of a hundred 
sons, O son, with you as my only son. 
8. It was after observing many holy rites and restraints 
causing bodily exertion, that you were born. Since I observed 
the holiest of holy rites, the ‘king’ of holy rites, you were 
attained by me as my son. 
9. In this world there is no other holy rite that is seen to 
be yielding benefits like this. This gives convincing proofs 
immediately. This is destructive of great sins. 
10. Of what avail is it if many sons who cause sorrow 
and distress are born ? It is better to have one son, as the main 
prop of the family, where the entire family takes comfortable 
rest. 
11. On attaining you as one stationed in my womb, I 
have reached the top of the three worlds (I am above the three 
worlds). Osinless one, blessed are those pains of labour where¬ 
by you are born as rny son. 
12. You are the son who delight both father and mother, 
you are the heroic son who have become the Lord of seven 
continents; you have carried out the words of your father. 
13-15. Poets (Learned Philosophers) call only that 
person real son—the person who delights both the father and the 
mother. Others are only ‘so-called’ sons. 
After saying these words, queen Sandhyavali just 
glanced at the pots and utensils for the purpose of a meal consis¬ 
ting of dishes of all the six tastes. By her very glance the uten¬ 
sils were full of dishes that would be pleasantly warm and that 
would be as tasty as Nectar, which she wished that Mohini 
should partake of. 
•A better emendation : abhirumdya ‘‘praised”, ‘approved of’ in stead of 
ahhi-mantrya in the text. 


UttarabhSga 17.16-28 
1619 
16. She took a golden ladle studded with jewels. Smiling 
sweetly, she served food to Mohini without any pertur¬ 
bation. 
17. She slowly ate the desired and well cooked food in a 
polished excellent vessel, all round which beverages and edible 
dishes had been placed. 
18-19. The gentle lady, the daughter of Brahma, sat on 
an auspicious golden seat and took food that was compar¬ 
able to nectar. While taking food, the fair lady was fanned with 
a fan of peacock feathers held by Dharmahgada, in accompani¬ 
ment of music. 
20-21. After washing with cool water (her hands and 
mouth gurgling four times), she accepted the fragrant Tambula 
(chewing betel leaves) given by her (step)-son. The fair-com- 
plexioned lady took it with her hand over which excellent sandal 
paste had been applied. Then O king, she laughed and said 
slowly to Sandhyavail. 
22. “O gentle lady, are you the mother of king Vr$^- 
gada (i.e. Dharmahgada) ? O auspicious lady, due to perspiring 
tiredness you cauld not be recognised by me.” 
23. O king, while the daughter of Brahma was 
speaking thus to Sandhyavali, the son of the king bowed to her 
and spoke these words. 
24. ‘*I had been held in her belly (womb) by this gentle 
lady for three years. I flourished thanks to the favour of your 
husband. 
25. O Beautiful lady, 1 have hundreds of mothers. 
But much milk flowing out from the breasts of this lady out of 
(motherly) affection has been drunk by me. 
26. That severe pain which more or less amounts to 
old age has been endured by her. It was after giving birth to 
me that she had become disjointed in her limbs. 
27. A son has nothing in possession in all the three 
worlds by giving which he can be free from the indebtedness to 
his mother. O lady of sweet limbs, this is the truth that has 
been pronounced by me. 
28. I am the most blessed one in the world. No man is 
superior to me. Everyday I sit on the lap of groups of mothers. 


1620 
Ndrada Purina 
29. If anywhere the son does not sit on the lap of his 
mother, he does not become aware of the happiness of 
motherly affection like a virgin who remains unaware of the 
love of a husband. 
30. A son who has climbed on to the lap of his mother 
may become very proud, and wish to snatch the necklace from 
the excellent body of his mother, with his hand. 
31. Maternal milk is .so powerful that even if any body 
is bereft of his father, he desires to seize the whole world on 
being duly reared and brought up by his mother. 
32-33. (?) My love toward this lady is due to the contact 
of the belly. My love towards the other mothers is due to the 
contact of the lap. If it be true that I do not cherish any 
difference (or partiality) between this (mother) and (my) 
other mothers may my father live for hundred years, thanks to 
that truth.” When her (step) son said thus Mohini was wonder- 
struck. 
34-37. ‘‘Ruthless as I am by nature, how can I strike 
him who is so humble and sinless. This would have been proper 
in the house of a tinner (?) If a boy is regularly rendering 
service to his father, there is no one on Earth on a par with him. 
It is for perpetrating a despicable act with regard to such a 
boy so superb in virtue (as compared with others) and by nature 
so virtuous and inclined to religion that I have become a step¬ 
mother unto him, in this world.” After reflecting like this in 
various ways, Mohini the most beautiful woman in the world 
spoke to her step-son : “Fetch my husband quickly. Without 
him I cannot stay even for a Muhurta (i.e. 48 minutes). 
38-39. Then, O king (?), he hastened to his father and 
bowed to him. He said—O dear father, the younger mother 
desires to see you immediately. Be favourably disposed 
towards her. May Brahma’s daughter be greeted and honoured** 
At the instance of the son the king got ready to go instan¬ 
taneously. 
40-42a. With pleasure evident in his face, the king 
entered the apartment of Sandhyavali and saw Mohini the 
enchanting lady having the luster of molted gold lying on the bed 
and being served slowly by his beloved Sandhyayali eschewing 


Uttarabhdga 17.42b-54a 
1621 
at the advice of her son the natural anger and jealousy felt 
towards a co-wife. 
42b-43. On seeing Rukmahgada come, the beautiful 
lady on the bed, Mohini, delightedly said to the king who had 
a great deal of chivalry—” O husband, be pleased to sit here 
on the cot spread with soft cotton (cloth). 
44. O king, the affairs of the kingdom have been looked 
after by you for a long time and in their entirety. Still your 
desire for the administration of kingdom does not cease. 
45. O king, I consider you the most sinful one on the 
surface of the Earth since you yourself look after the royal 
glory (affairs of the state) although you have been aware 
that your son is efficient. 
46-47a. Hence, there is no one more miserable than you in 
all the worlds. O king, the time of those fathers who have good 
sons passes happily and that of the experiencers of the fruits of 
sins, whose mind is drawn towards worldly pleasures passes in 
misery. 
47b. All the Prakrtis (the elements of the statecraft) 
(or subjects), O king, are fond of you. This is the result of 
your full meritoriousness. 
48. When Dharmahgada is protecting this kingdom 
and the subjects, why should you also see to it now after 
eschewing the pleasure of your beloved wife like a weak 
niggardly fellow. 
49. If you are going to look after the kingdom, of what 
use am I to you ? In vain have I been brought from the head 
Mandara, the churning rod of the ocean of milk (?) 
50a. Just as flesh is to birds I shall be turning food 
to faeces (?) 
50b-52a. If any foolish person, too much interested in 
carrying out his duties, does not take to his wife endowed with 
blooming youth, whence can he expect to have the beloved ? 
If the wife is not enjoyed, she may go away; if the wealth is not 
given in charity, it may go (disappear); if the kingdom is not 
protected well it may go (to ruins); if the learning is not recited 
and revised, it may (be forgotten and vanished). 
52b-54a. Learning is not acquired by idle persons; a wife 
is not acquired by persons always observing holy vows; good 


1622 
N&rada Purina 
fortune is not obtained without regular and assiduous per¬ 
formance (of good deeds); glory is not attained by persons who 
are not devotees, an industrious man docs not get happiness; a 
person who has no wife cannot obtain children, an impure 
person does not attain virtue (dharma) and a Brahmana of 
unpleasant words does not attain wealth. 
34b-56. Without asking no one understands things; 
without walking (i.e. moving forward) no one reaches 
destination; a person who is not a disciple does not understand 
the holy rite; a wakeful person knows no fear. Why should you, 
Oking, leave me alone in the splendid house of Dharmahgada 
and look after the affairs of your kingdom, O lord, when your 
son is competent (to do it himself) ? 
57. When the daughter of Brahma, who was fond of 
sexual intercourse and who had large charming eyes spoke thus, 
the king who was standing by the side of his son became 
ashamed. He spoke thus to his beloved. 
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 
Honouring the Mothers 
7^he king said : 
1-3. “O timid lady, I did not assume authority to take 
up the duties of the king. Since I was very tired, I was over¬ 
powered by a pleasing slumber. 1 told Dharmahgada thus : 
“Take Mohini to your apartment that is bedecked in all jewels, 
that could be ventilated or controlled (and protected from) 
wind (at will) and that is pleasing in all the seasons. O son of 
beautiful eyes resembling the petals of a lotus, worship her duly. 
She is my most beloved wife.” 
4. After commanding my son thus, I went to sleep after 
reaching the bed with great difficulty like a man of ill-luck 
attaining wealth. 


Uitarabhdga 18.5-15 
1623 
5. The moment I woke up I have hastened to your 
presence at once. O gentle lady, there is no doubt about this 
that I shall carry out whatever you say.” 
Mohini said: 
6. O leading king, appease these wives of yours who are 
very miserable. They are dejected by your marrying me. 
They have lost all hopes of satisfying their passionate desire for 
worldly pleasures. 
7-8. O king, O Lord of the subjects. If any one were 
to strike and pierce into the heads of the Senior wives of comely 
appearance, the wedge known as the younger wife, he will not 
have salvation nor will she attain the final beatitude. What 
peace can I have when I have been burnt in the scaldii^ 
tears of chaste women ? 
9. O king, the gentle and chaste ladies may reduce even 
my procreator (Brahma) to ashes. What then about an ordinary 
persons like you or me ? 
10. O king, there is no woman like Sandhyavali in all 
the three worlds. With all her limbs bound by love towards 
you, she had been feeding me with food-stuffs having all the six 
tastes. 
11-12. Thanks to the honour and weightage given to you, 
she spoke pleasing and coaxing words to me. There are hundreds 
of women like these in your abode and O king, I am not even 
equal to the dust of their feet.” 
On hearing these words of Mohini, the king became 
ashamed. 
13. The king was then standing near the eldest wife who 
was accompanied by her son. The son who was a person 
understanding the inner feelings of other persons, knew that the 
king had gone through all the ten states of love-lorn persons. 
14. He understood that his father was overwhelmed by 
passionate love and was fascinated by Mohini. He called 
together all the mothers, (i.e. the queens of Rukmangada) 
beginning with SandhyavaU. 
15. With palms joined in reverence, he spoke to them 
these pleasing words—Mohini, the daughter of Brahmi and 
the newly wedded wife (of my father) is my (step)' mother. 


1624 
Nirada Purina 
16. O gentle ladies, she yearns for a secret meeting with 
the king for dalliance with him. Hence delightfully approve 
of it. 
The Mothers said : 
17. O son, who will approve of and encourage the 
swallowing of oneself by a serpent? O foremost one among 
embodied beings, who will place fire over himself and kindle it ? 
18. Who will swallow the terrible poison ? Who will cut 
off one’s own head ? Who will tie a terrible stone round one’s 
neck and try to cross the sea ? 
19. Who will enter the jaws of leopards. Who will try to 
pluck hairs from the manes of a fierce lion ? Who will sit 
over the sharp edge of a sword that dazzles in the sky. 
20. Which lady will approve of the dalliance of her co¬ 
wife with her husband (?) One would rather give everything 
that one has than entertain thoughts about this in the mind. 
21. Which woman will see with her own eyes her husband 
respected (and openly loved) by another woman ? It would be 
by far the better that her head is cut off with an excellent 
sharp-edged sword. 
22. Who is that lady, if at all any one is like that any¬ 
where, who will be able to bear that her husband whom she 
considers her own vital breath is pressing and caressing the 
breasts of another lady ? 
23-25a. Much less who will be able to see it with her own 
eyes. This is the most miserable of all miseries bringing in end¬ 
less grief if a woman is compelled to sec with her own eyes her 
husband enamoured of another woman. O son, it is even 
better if all your mothers die simultaneously; but the king, our 
husband, should not be seen united with Mohini. 
DharmShgada said : 
25b-26a. O ladies of splendid faces, If you are not pre¬ 
pared to accord happiness to my father, I will mix poison and 
drink it. After I die you can have the happiness. 
26b-27a. If any lady were to carry out anything mentally, 
verbally or physically causing misery to my father, she is my 


Uttarahhdga 18.27b-38 
1625 
enemy, she deserves to be killed by me even if she were 
Sandhyavali, 
27b-28a. That gentle lady Mohini is superior to all. She 
is the most beloved of my father. The maiden has come from 
her abode on the mountain Mandara for the purpose of 
dalliance. 
28b-29. On hearing these words of their step-son, the 
mothcr-(jueens trembled with grief In a faltering tone they 
spoke wishing for the benefit of their step-son. 
“Your statement must of necessity be executed. It is 
reasonable by all means. 
30-32. But your father may approach Mohini after giving 
gifts duly to his other wives. If any husband wishes to marry a 
second or a subsequent wife, he must give the eldest wife twice 
the amount (ofdowry received from her ?) Otherwise he is a 
debtor. If the husband takes the permission of the eldest wife 
and marries another lady, he must give what the eldest wife 
desires and demands—so opine the persons who know the tradi¬ 
tional customs and manners. The excellent man must perform 
Istapurta (i.e. sacrifices, digging of wells and charitable rites) 
in the company of the eldest wife. 
33a. This is the Dharina (religious practice). Otherrwise 
it will be injustice and there will be complete destruction of 
Dharma as well. 
33b-34. On hearing the words of the mothers the son 
(i.e. Dharinahgada) gave with a delightful heart each of them 
many presents. The prince gave them more than a crore each. 
He gave away a thousand cities and a thousand villages to 
them as well. 
35. To each of them he gave eight chariots fitted with 
garlands of gold and yoked to four female mules. 
36-37. He gave them ten thousand garments the price of 
each of which was more than a hundred coins. To each of 
his mothers the prince gave a hundred thousand pure gold 
pieces of everlasting (lustre) excavated from Mount Meru. 
The son of the king gave each of them more than a hundred men 
servants and women slaves. 
38. To each of them he gave ten thousand cows, each of 
which yielded a big potfull of milk (at a time). He gave them 


1626 
N&rada PurSna 
a thousand good poles to which the yokes are to be fixed, 
severally. • 
39. The son of the king gave each of them ten kinds of 
grains. Laughingly he gave a hundred thousand gardens. 
40. He gave ten thousand pots of ghee and oil separately. 
To each of them he offered inumerable goats and ewes. 
41. The highly devoted son presented them (the queen- 
mothers) thousands of gold ornaments studded with diamonds 
(and precious stones). 
42. He gave them necklaces made of brilliant pearls of the 
size of embylic myrobalan fruits. He gave them five and seven 
(a dozen) bangles each. 
43. Sandhyavali was already wearing on her person two 
hundred and fifty pearls resembling the moon. 
44. The son presented each of them two necklaces that 
captivated the mind. He gave them Prastha measures of 
Saffron, sandal paste and camphor. 
45-46. The son gave them huge quantity of musk. Desi¬ 
rous of the happiness of his father he impartially distributed to 
them different kinds of vessels, water pots, ghee pots, milk pots, 
and pots for different kinds of beverages, 
47. The prince gave them gold plates, pots and vessels 
one thousand and fourteen hundred in number (?) 
48. To each of them he gave three hundred to five 
hundred she-elephants of great speed with muscular and fleshy 
shoulders. 
49. He gave them twenty she-camels each and hundred 
palanquins with brawny men with excellent dress (uniform). 
50-51. To the mothers he gave seventy horses of happy 
pleasing trot. After giving thus to tliem much wealth, the blessed 
prince who had the affluence and brilliance ofKubera circum¬ 
ambulated them. With palms joined in reverence he addressed 
these words. 
52-53. 1 bow down to you with my head bent low. It 
is my importunity to you all that all of you should say thus to 
my father.— O king, enjoy Mohini freely. We have no trace 
of malice towards you nor should you be malicious towards us. 
Sport with Mohini the good natured daughter of Brahma, with 
hundreds of secret pleasures from her. 


Uttarabhiga 18.54—19.6 
1627 
54. On hearing the statement of the son, all of them 
were thrilled with delight,.They spoke to their husband the 
king. “Sport with the daughter of the self-bom deity for a long 
time like the leading scion of the family of Raghu, (Rama) with 
the daughter of the king of Videha (i.e. Sita ). 
55. There is no doubt about it that the daughter of 
Brahma cannot be a cause of poignant grief to us because of her 
sexual connection with you. Know that these words are uttered 
by us without any heart-burning misery. Thanks to the brilli¬ 
ance of your son. 
CHAPTER NINETEEN 
The love-making of Mohini 
Vasiffha continued: 
1. The king who was passionately fond of his lady¬ 
love, on being permitted by his wives, derived incomparable 
delight. He spoke to Dharmangada thus :— 
2. “O son, protect this Earth consisting of seven 
island-continents after slaying the wicked at the outset. Be ever 
vigilant and alert and active. 
3. Always make use of the best opportunites. Be a super¬ 
visor of good conduct. Be always conscious of everything and 
alert, be favourable to good business transactions. 
4. Be moving continuously; always be interested in 
charitable gifts; always eschew crookedness, be always engaged 
in the disciplined life of the good. 
5. O son, listen to another thing which should be pursu¬ 
ed by you now. Lack of trust and confidence in everything and 
everyone is recommended in the case of kings. 
6. O popularly loved one, (you must possess) the accu¬ 
rate knowledge of the treasure and of the (assets of the) people. 


1628 
Ndrada Purdna 
You should elicit money (taxation) like the (absorption of) 
flowery juice by a bee gathering honey (fr<^m flowers). * 
7. Through you as my son, I feel that youth has been 
regained by me. 
8. After delightfully entrusting you with the burden of 
the earth with its seven oceans and continents and having 
obtained this moon-faced wife of excellent and rare beauty and 
seductive charms, I shall enjoy myself in dalliance. 
9. In the human world, a father overcome with wrinkles, 
shaking old teeth and white greying hairs becomes a cause of 
shame and (derisive laughter) if he is desirous of sexual inter¬ 
course, when the son has attained maturity and is competent. 
10. Though aged, I am not weak and infirm; I am flou¬ 
rishing in happiness, I desire this fair lady the most beautiful 
in the world, who for my sake has forsaken even the Devas; 
this lady of sweet and charming eyes, who has been smitten by 
the arrows of Cupid, has come to me (of her own accord). 
11. I will engage myself at will in sexual dalliance with 
this lady of the lustre of molten gold, my mind shall then be full 
(thanks to the realisation of my cherished desires). After hiding 
myself on the banks of rivers of divine beauty as well as sylvan 
fountains and rivulets (I shall enjoy myself with this lady). 
12. This lady is dearer to me than my life. She is the 
sole lady ofheaven who can easily be held by me. For her sake 
even the Devas lost their sense like groups of kings over Rama 
(goddess LaksmI). 
13. On hearing these words of his father, the prince of fine 
intelligence devoutly bowed down to the excellent king who was 
in the company of his step-mother and gave him much wealth 
for the sake of enjoying pleasures. 
14. For the happiness of his father who was distressed, 
thanks to the activities of the fish-bannered deity (i.e. Cupid), 
he engaged men-servants who would comply with the commands 
and women-servants who had gold necklaces. 
Thereafter, the son protected the Earth. 
15. Dharmavibhusana (i.e. Dharmaiigada) was eulogis¬ 
ed by the kings who surrounded him. He moved about in the 
whole of the Earth consisting of many continents. At that time, 
O king, (?) the people had no inclination towards sins. 


Uttarabhiga 19.16-24 
1629 
16. The trees were never devoid of fruits and flowers; the 
fields were never devoid of barley and rice grains. Cows yielded 
potfulls of milk sweet like sugar and productive of ghee. 
17. Under his rule Milk was a good beverage, des¬ 
tructive of all distress, dispelling sins and increasing the deve¬ 
lopment of the body. No man saved and hoarded wealth 
(for his selfish purpose); no wife spoke harsh or bitter 
words. 
18. The son was humble (all sons were humble) engaged 
in carying out the behests of his father; the daughter-in-law 
remained perfectly obedient and submissive to the mother-in- 
law; the common people abided by the advice of Brahmanas; 
excellent Brahmanas performed holy rites mentioned in the 
Vedas. 
19. People never took food on the day of M^hava 
(Visnu) i.e. on the Ekadasi day; the rivers never went dry; riches 
did not get exhausted although they were enjoyed by men 
in the course of their enjoyment of pleasures. 
20. When Dharniahgada engaged himself in the pro¬ 
tection of his kingdom, the people were contented, as the 
Durva grass flourishes when watered well and a fine grassy 
plain is evolved, so people flourished. 
21. By observing fast etc. on the day ofHari, men 
enjoyed pleasures and attained the region of Hari. People, 
not being afraid of robbers (due to security measures and 
police protection prevalent then), did not bolt their doors 
even in dark nights. 
22. Cows did not give extra trouble to the cowherds in 
looking after them; they went to graze according to their own 
wish and returned to the abodes as usual. They yielded 
potful of milk in plenty. They were fond of their calves and 
they spread peace everywhere. 
23. The Earth grew plenty of grains etc. without being 
ploughed. All plants and trees grew up without the use of 
ploughshare. Infants were nourished by the breast-milk of 
their mothers. Young damsels were developed and nourished 
thanks to the activities of their husbands. 
24. The people well protected by the king, were fully 
developed. Virtue in the company of truth was fully developed; 


1630 
Ndrada Purdna 
when the people who were endowed with devotion to Hari 
and who had the great interest in virtu? were being protected 
by the king's son, time passed on causing happiness to all. 
25. The king was free from ailment. He was endowed 
with riches; showering much (i.e. spending a great deal) he 
celebrated great festivals; he was much enamoured of Mohini 
and all her activities gave him happiness. 
26. Neither of the day nor of the night was he aware. He 
was not conscious of the fortnights and months that passed by; 
even years went by unnoticed; he was so enamoured of the 
sexual dalliance of the daughter of Brahma of auspicious 
activities. 
27. The king’s virility increased with the loving union 
with Mohini; the more he resorted to her with the backing of 
Kama (God of Love), the sexual potency increased all the 
more like the moon in the bright half of the month; it never 
got exhausted by the frequent indulgence in sex. 
28. Just as the Devas become stronger and stronger by 
imbibing the nectar juice, so also the more he touched her the 
fresher he became. Drinking charming beverages and listening 
to sweet songs consisting of melodious tone (he increased in 
virility and strength). 
29-32. Even while glancing at the beauty of the 
(attendant) women, he touched and caressed the moon-like 
face of Mohini. With delight he pressed and caressed her stout 
breasts resembling gold pots and covered with necklaces and 
other ornaments. The three curly lines of hair that grew round 
her navel app)eared splendid and charming. On seeing the all¬ 
round beauty of the breasts of the fair-limbed lady of splendid 
eyes, the king thought thus (?) “No other women has a beauty 
like this. It is charming and pleasing to mind. The way in 
which the features of Mohini have been created by Brahma 
(is not found elsewhere). It is very fascinating to look at her 
calves that have the lustre of molten gold, that resemble the 
paws of a lion and that have no hair on them.” 
33-34. The row of her teeth had the lustre of the moon. 
Her hidden ankles had been created for fascinating the 
people. After seeing the beautiful form, from head to foot of 


Uttarabhiga 19.35—20.5 
1631 
the lady of large charming eyes, the king considered himself 
superior to the Devas. He was delighted and considered him* 
self blessed much—O ! whatever this lady of slender frame 
and large eyes may request me should be given to her. 
35-36. For the sweet and charming sexual intercourse 
with this splendid lady, I will give her in the end all the wealth 
I possess. Even rare things should be given to her, those things 
which cannot be given by others, I will give her even those 
things which should not be given. For example, my life should 
not be given. But if the gold-complexioned lady requests for it, 
I will definitely give it to her. I will never think over it 
hesitatingly. Excepting my son, there is nothing which should 
not be given to her. 
CHAPTER TWENTY 
Dkarmangadd*s conquest of quarters (world) 
Vasiftha said : 
1. Thus eight years passed on happily during which 
king Rukmahgada was deluded by the sexual intercourse with 
Mohini. 
2-3a. In the course of the ninth year, the king’s power¬ 
ful son Dharmahgada attacked and conquered five Vidyadharas 
on the Malaya, the excellent mountain. He brought as booty 
five splendid jewels that bestowed all cherished desires. 
3b-5. One of the jewels yielded crores and crores of gold 
pieces, and was very auspicious. The second jewel bestowed 
lakhs and crores of garments, ornaments etc., the third jewel 
exuded nectar that rejuvinated the people: the fourth jewel 
could erect assembly halls and present cooked accomplished 
food and the fifth enable one to move about anywhere in the 
three worlds and range through the sky. 


1632 
Mdrada Purdna 
6-7. Taking with him those five jewels, tl^e prince 
instantly came near his step mother and father Rukmaiigada 
accompanied by those defeated Vidyadharas and their women 
folk whose eyes were filled with tears. He bowed down to them 
and dedicated the five jewels at their feet. With the head bent 
down in humility he said :— 
8. “O king, O dear father, these five Vidyadharas have 
been defeated by me in battle by the miraculous missile 
pertaining to Visnu, on the Malaya, the excellent mountain. 
9. O excellent king, these (Vidyadharas) and their 
women folk have come here as your servants. Please present 
the jewels to MohinI as ornaments for her arms. 
10-11. They arc the bestowers of all cherished desires; 
they cause rejuvination. By wearing the jewels, old shaky teeth 
become stronger once again. They yield garments, mansions, 
gold pieces, movement through heaven and nectar. I had to 
fight them for a month and thanks to your brilliance, these 
jewels were obtained by me. 
12. With great difficulty, O king, the seven island conti¬ 
nents were won by me and thanks to your brilliance the people 
there arc compelled to pay tributes. 
13. A year elapsed since I entered into the ocean, and 
the city Bhogavati surrounded by serpents has been conquered 
by me. 
14. Serpent virgins numbering to ten thousand have 
been brought over by me. Necklaces and jewels are brought 
by me in plenty. 
15-17a. Thereafter, O dear father, I went to the great 
city of Danavas. After defeating them, eight thousand 
beautiful girls of great splendour are brought by me. O king, 
ten crores of jewels that carry on the duty of illumination at 
nightfall have been brought into your mansion. 
17b-19. Then I went to the world of Varuna situated 
beneath Rasatala (netherworlds.) There Lord Varuna who 
was puffed with pride of his power and influence, although he 
deserves to be the servant of your feet, was intimated by me 
thus — “Stay under the control of my father, King Rukmangada 


Uttarabhaga 20.20-30 
1633 
if you wish to remain alive. At my words Varuna was infuriated 
and he came to fight with me. 
20. Then a fight ensued with him terribly at Rasatala 
and continued for a year. The leader of aquatic forces was 
defeated by me by means of the miraculous missile pertaining 
to Narayana. 
21. At the supplication of young women (his wives), 
he was not killed. For the protection of his life, ten thousand 
horses as fast as the wind were given (as tribute) by the defeated 
(lord). 
22. These horses were white in colour with the refulgence 
of the moon but had one of their ears dark in colour. With¬ 
out grass and water they could live for many years. 
23. A beautiful and fully bedecked virgin was presented 
to me. Varuna gave her to me as my wife. That auspicious 
girl also has been brought by me. 
24-25. The girl was brought by me alongwith much 
wealth. O dear, there is no spot in the three worlds which 
had been difficult of access to me and which had not been con¬ 
quered by me because of the merit of serving your feet. Hence 
get up and inspect carefully the great fortune earned by me 
through your grace. 
26-27. O Lord of the subjects, myself, all my riches, 
everything is subservient to yo^ The son who says “This 
fortune has been earned by me, it shall not be given to 
Brahmanas,” will fall into hell. O dear father, self-esteem 
should not be indulged in by the son. 
28-30. In regard to the hoarded wealth, the son is like a 
dagger or a sickle. It is thanks to the heroism of the father that 
the hoards of wealth of the son increase. Taking a sharp- 
shining sickle, one cuts off clusters of grass. 
If the cloth (mast) is filled with wind, one is enabled to 
cross a river etc. in a boat. (The sails filled with wind (i.c. 
the force of wind enables the man in the boat to cross the 
river (lit. water). Just as the wooden doll of a woman 
moves and dances in accordance with the desire of the (wire¬ 
pulling) juggler, so also the sons are instilled with brilliance and 
strength through the virility of the father. 


1634 
Ndrada Purdna 
31. Hence this good fortune that has been brought by me 
may be viewed at by you. You may distribute or preserve 
your riches as you wish or they may be given to the most 
excellent one among the groups of mothers. 
CHAPTER TWENTYONE 
Dharmangada*s marriages and his 
order as a Ruler 
Mdndhdtd enquired : 
1. What did the king do on hearing the words of his 
son ? O Brahmana, what did the daughter of the creator, 
Mohini, the beloved of the king, do ? 
2. A particularly wonderful and holy narrative that is 
comparable to the nectar and is destructive of all doubts has 
been told by you. 
Vasiffha said : 
3. On hearing the words of his son, the prominent king 
became delighted. He got up alongwith his beloved wife and 
surveyed the wealth (the booty brought by Dharmahgada). 
4-6a. Instantaneously, O king, the delighted king who 
was a great devotee of Visnu, joyfully and lovingly gave to his 
son Dharmahgada, all those serpent-girls alongwith the 
daughter ofVaruna, for the purpose of becoming his wives. All 
the remaining things, the king who was overwhelmed by the 
arrows of Kama gave to Mohini along with many jewels and 
the D^ava women (?) 
6b. Thus the father distributed the wealth brought by 
Dharm^gada. 
7-8. At an opportrme time, the king called his priest 
and said this : *‘0 Brahmana, may my son take in marriage 
the hands of all the virgins in accordance with religious rites* 


Ultarahhdga 21.9* 19 
1635 
under the ascendancy of the star propitious for marriages and 
on the Muhurta that confers all cherished desires. 
9. Having performed the initial religious rite of the 
proclamation of propitiousness (known as Svasti-Vacana) through 
Brahmanas and after propitiating them with the gifts of cows, 
gold, clothes, celebrate the rite of marriage ceremony of my son 
Dharmahgad a. 
10. The foolish father who does not celebrate the 
marriage of his son, will sink down in the terrible bottomless 
hell and remain there for ten thousand Yugas. 
11. Hence, the father endowed with (i.e. following) 
religious rites should celebrate the marriage of his son. He who 
has settled his son, has also established his own self. 
12. O god on the earth (Brahmana), when the marriage 
of a son is celebrated, a person derives the benefit of all sacri¬ 
fices irrespective of the son being endowed with good attributes 
or devoid of attributes. 
13-15a. The marriage of the son must be celebrated 
by the father who wishes for gaining merit and piety. If the 
father does not unite (i.e. endow) his sons with wealth and a 
spouse, he is despised both here and hereafter, and he should 
not be considered a good man. Hence sons must be settled 
in avocations and be provided with wives, (they must be given 
these facilities) so that the sons are satisfied and well honoured 
and are able to sport (spend their life) happily.” 
15b-16a. On hearing these words of the king, the 
Brahmana his priest, exerted himself assiduously for the 
celebration of the marriage of Dharmangada, with great, 
delight. 
16b-17a. Though he did not crave for the happiness of 
contact with women, on account of his bashfulness, the son 
accepted the betrothal ceremony at the behest of his father. 
17b-18a. The prince of mighty arms, unequalled on the 
Earth in beauty, married the charming serpent-virgins along- 
with the daughter of Varui^. 
18b-19. After marrying all of them in accordance with 
the injunctions of the sacred texts, he joyously gifted wealth, 
cows and jewels to the Br^manas. After the marriage rite, he 
joyously bowed down to the feet of his mother and father. 


1636 
N&rada Purdna 
20. Then the son Dharmahgada spoke to the gantle lady 
Sandhyavali—“O gentle lady, my marriage rite has been 
celebrated at the instance of my father. 
21. I am not retaining the memory of this fact in my 
mind that my marriage has already been celebrated by my 
father. O gentle lady, I shall serve as before my unchanging 
father who is a man of perfect wisdom. 
22. I have nothing to do with divine enjoyment of 
pleasures. I don’t have any use even for heaven. Service must 
be rendered by me to my father as well as to you both by day 
and at night. 
Sandhydvali said : 
23. O son, live long. Live happily. Enjoy all pleasures 
in accordance with your mental inclinations (i.e. as you 
please). May you be long-lived, thanks to the grace of your 
father. O my son, delight my mind. 
24. O son, with you as my son of good qualities, I have 
become Suputrini (mother of a good son). I have got a special 
place in the hearts of all my co-wives (i.e. all of them love 
me).” 
25. After saying this, the lady embraced him, sniffed 
many times the crown of his head and finally discharged him 
to resume his duty of looking after the administration of the 
kingdom. 
26. After being discharged by his mother, he bowed 
to all the other mothers. Abiding by the advice of his father, 
the prince looked after the problems of government adminis¬ 
tration. 
27. He chastised and restrained the wicked ones; he 
protected the good and the well-disciplined men of virtues; 
he toured over all his lands and personally looked into all 
affairs. 
28. He inspected all the affairs in each place once in a 
month; he looked after the breeding and rearing of elephants 
and horses; he surveyed the troops of spies. 
29. He observed the arguments (going on in the courts 
of justice); everyday he examined the measures and balances; 
he protected men in every house. 


Uttarabhdga 21.30-35 
1637 
30. No infant in the arms accustomed to suck the breasts 
cried for want of breast milk; nowhere did a mother-in-law 
lament and complain of being disrespected by the daughter-in- 
law, 
31. No competent and efficient son begged of his father; 
there was no mixing and mingling of castes in any group 
again. 
32. No man kept any concealed income; no man blamed 
Dharma; no woman remained without bodice if her husband was 
alive. 
33. “May not there be the coming out of women from 
their houses in my country. May not the widow keep her tresses 
in tact,^ May not the ladies with their husband alive be 
devoid of hair on their heads. 
34. May not the devotee observing holy rites be one who 
reviles always; may not the forest-dwellers permanently dwell 
in the city. Let there not be any ruthless person who does not 
give even ordinary maintenance. 
35. Let these not stay in my kingdom—A cowherd 
desirous of urban life; an advisor devoid of good attributes; a 
Rtvik who has not learned the sacred texts. 
1. This reference to tonsure of widows shows the lateness of this 
portion of NP. in date (not earlier than the 10th Cent. A.D.). There 
is no injunction or reference to such tonsure in the Vedas, the Grhya and 
Dharma Sutras or in the old Smrtis like Manu & Yajhavalkya. The 
prohibition of widows from “adorning the hair, chewing the betel-nut, using 
perfumes or decking in flowers and ornaments 
{keia-raf^jana-tdinb ula-gandha-pufpddisevanam ) 
in the Vjddha~Hd.rUa VIII. 203, shows that tojisure of widows was not 
in vogue then. References to K^atriya widows of the Kaurava and Yadava 
families in the AfM. 17.25, 21.6; Afdujra/a 7-17) shows no reference to 
their tonsure. Vijhanesvara, on Yajflavalkya III. 32S, approvingly quotes in 
the Mitdkfard Manu’s prohibition of tonsure of women : 
uidvad-vipra-n(pa-stTividin rutfyaU ktSa-vipanam / 
A late work or a late interpolation in the Sk. P. gives us its first 
indication in AViif Kha^i^ 4*75 ff. 
hraso vapamm tasmdt k&tyam oidhavayd sadS) 
Restriction on wearing on bodice along with this shows that both NP 
& Sk. P. record a period when widows came to be looked upon as Tatis 
(NP. II. 24.15). Kane conjectures that this shows a society in the 10th or 
11th cent. A.D. (H.D. II. i. P. 592). 


1638 
Mdrada Purdna 
36. The man who grows the indigo plant, the m^in who 
sprinkles profusely, the blue colour; these two sinners must 
be banished and so also the man who brews the liquor. 
37. A back-biter, a slanderer who is fond of eating the 
fish on the back—may he not find a residence in my kingdom. 
So also the man who forsakes his own wife. 
38. These persons are to be punished and given capital 
punishment—he who eschews Visnu the foremost among the 
gods and worships any other deity; he who cohabits with a 
pregnant woman and he who has sexual intercourse with a 
young woman who has recently delivered of a child. 
CHAPTER TWENTYTWO 
The glory of the month of Kdrttika 
Vasiffha said : 
1. Thus, O leading king, at the behest of his father, 
Dharmangada ruled over the kingdom on the earth, observing 
fast on the day of Hari. 
2. There was no such man as was not stabilised in virtue, 
no one was unhappy, no one was devoid of issues, O king, 
there was no leper in the kingdom. 
3. The Earth yielded treasures to the people who were 
joyous and well-nourished. O king, even after the calves were 
fully satisfied, the cows yielded pots full of milk. 
4. In every leafy cup there was honey; every tree 
yielded a Drona measure of honey ? The earth being highly 
delighted, all kinds of grains were produced. 
5-14. It was the Dvaparayuga at the end ofTretabut 
It vied with Krta age (in piety). The danger due to clouds 
disappeared; the sky and the house became free from clouds or 
impurities. The fragrant rice grains had ripened. The 
star Canopus (Agastya) surveyed the world (was in ascendancy). 


Uttarabhdga 22.15-18 
1639 
Everywhere the rivers had medium flow of water currents 
(neither too much nor too little). With the white Kasa flowers 
growing on the banks, the rivers appeared like whitehaired 
ladies, the whole world was whitened by the rays of the moon, 
the sun was not very fierce; the people in variegated dresses 
and features thronged rivers and tanks for their holy ablutions; 
everywhere the kings were eager to go on campaigns of con¬ 
quests; at the end of Alvina month, during the period of 
wakening of Visnu, the preceptor of the Universe, Mohini the 
beautiful lady who had delighted the king with nice feelings 
and different kinds of pleasures (acts of service) was oppressed 
by mental yearnings. She delighted the king in the forests, on 
the peaks of mountains, in the confluences of rivers, in the 
different kinds of lakes, abounding in lotus flowers, on the 
mountains of Malaya, Mandara, Vindhya, Mahendra, the 
abode of the Devas, the Sahya, the Himalayas and the 
auspicious mountain of the sky-clad (naked) God viz. 
Siva—i.e. Siva’s mountain of Kailasa. She gave delight to 
the king in the heavenly abodes, and other places. O 
leading king, assuming her divine form, she delighted him day 
by day. On obtaining Mohini, the king forsook all holy rites 
but not the observance on the day of Hari (i.e. the Ekadasi) 
that is destructive of births and deaths. Though excessively 
enamoured of her, the king did not forsake this Vrata. 
15-16. The king used to eschew sexual dalliance for 
three days beginning with Daiami (the tenth day). Even as he 
sported like this, one full year elapsed and the auspicious 
month of Karttika, the most excellent one in the view of those 
who know time, arrived once again. This month is highly 
meritorious, because it puts an end to the slumber of Vi?nu. 
17. O king (Mandhata), whatever is done in this month 
is meritorious; the holy rites performed by those men who arc 
the devotees of Visnu shall yield everlasting benefits; they take 
one to Vi§nu’s world. 
18. There is no other month equal to K^ttika; there is 
no other Yuga equal to Kpta; there is no other holy rite that 
is equal to mercifulness; there is no other Jyotis (luminary) 
equal to the eye. 


1640 
Ndrada Purdna 
19. There is no sacred text equal to the Veda»; there is 
no holy river equal to Gahga; there is no other charitable 
gift equal to that of lands; no other pleasure is equal to that 
derived from one’s wife. 
20. There is no other valuable possession equal to agri¬ 
cultural lands; there is no other profitable acquisition equal to 
a good cow; there is no greater austerity than abstaining from 
taking food; there is no other auspicious thing on a par with 
self control. 
21. No other gratification is equal to that of the palate; 
no one is equal to a Brahmana; there is no other friend on a 
par with Dharma (virtue) and there is no other fame equal to 
that of truthfulness. 
22. No other Aisvarya (prosperity and glory) can be 
equal to the freedom from ailments, no other deity greater than 
Kesava. The learned and wise men know of no other thing as 
sacred as the month of Karttika in this world. 
23-24. Karttika is the most excellent of all months of 
which God Visnu is always fond. He who passes this favourite 
month of Damodara without the observance of holy rites, is 
reborn in the wombs of animals and other creatures. He is 
excluded from all holy religious rites. 
Mandhata enquired :— 
25-26. O sage, when the month of Karttika arrived, how 
did king Rukmahgada enjoy Mohini of highly fascinating 
features ? Tell me. The excellent king was a devotee of Visnu, 
a follower of the Vedas and the foremost among kings. What 
did he do in that holiest month ? 
Vasifiha replied : 
27. On seeing that the month of Karttika had arrived 
for the awakening of Hari, the excessively enamoured prominent 
king spoke these words to Mohini. 
28. O gentle lady, I have had sexual dalliance with 
you for many years, but nothing against you had been 
mentioned to by me so far because I had been afraid of being 
disrespected by you, 


UUarabh&ga 22.29-39a 
1641 
29. I am desirous of telling you now. O splendid 
fair-faced lady, know it. O gentle lady, many Karttika months 
have gone by since my infatuation over you. 
30. I did not observe any holy rite except the single 
holy vow of the day of Hari. But now I wish to observe the 
holy vow of the month of Karttika. 
31. If mortal beings spend the Karttika (month without 
observing the holy vows, O daughter of Brahma, all their 
righteous activities and the Isjapurtas (cliaritablc rites such 
as digging wells, tanks etc. and sacrificial rites) are futile. 
32. O blessed lady, even those kings, who are addicted 
to non-vegetarian diet and who are too much engaged in 
hunting have eschewed meat in the month of Karttika and have 
gone to Visnu’s abode. 
33. If the aspirant abstains from those foodstuffs to 
which he is addicted in the month of Karttika, certainly he 
attains the form of Visnu. 
34. O fair-complexioned lady, let alone the charitable 
gifts involving the expense of great amounts of wealth and causing 
great mental strain, one can go to heaven merely by means of 
the charitable gift of lamps. 
35. If that is not available, O blessed lady, one shall 
kindle the lights offered by others with great devotion. It is 
superior to all charitable gifts. 
36. If one were to weigh all the charitable gifts placed 
on one side and the charitable gift of lamps on the other side. 
Lord Karttikeya has said that the charitable gifts of lamps and 
the kindling of lamps are on a par with each other. 
37-38a. This kindling of lights must be performed with 
the feelings of devotion. Then it is superior to all kinds of 
charitable gifts. There is no doubt about this that, by 
observing the holy rite (by fasting etc.) on the full moon day 
in the month of Karttika, in the holy centre of the umbilical 
lotus of Visnu (i.e. Puskara), one is liberated from the sins 
committed ever since the birth. 
38b-39a. He who observes holy vows, fasts and other 
restraints throughout the month of Karttika shall become a 


Kdrada Purdva 
Deva with an aerial chariot and he attains the hjghest 
beatitude. 
39b-41a. Hence, O Mohini^ eschew your delusion and 
fascination over me; command me immediately. I shall per¬ 
form the holy rite of Karttika Vrata. O lotus-eyed lady, I 
shall desist from the worship of your breasts and I shall observe 
the vows for the worship of Hari. 
Mohini said : 
4Ib-43. Narrate in detail the greatness of Karttika. O 
excellent king, this month is said to be the receptacle of all 
merits. O highly intelligent one, what are the special features 
mentioned and where ? After hearing about the greatness of 
Karttika, I shall perform it as desired. 
Rukmdngada said : 
44. O fair-faced lady, I shall tell you the greatness of 
this month,' whereby you will have devotion (engendered in 
you) for the performance of the worship of Hari. 
45-46. The man who performs the Kfcchra penance or 
the Prajapatya rite2 in the month of Karttika or observes fast on 
alternate days or once in three days, or for ten days, or for a 
fortnight or for the whole of the month, O fair-complexioned 
lady attains the greatest region of Visnu. 
1. The month of K.arttika is regarded as the holiest month, holier 
than all TwAoj (sacred places) and great sacrifices. The glory of Karttika 
is detailed in Pd. P. VI. Ghs. 92-95. A number of vratas are prescribed 
for performance in this month, vide CG. Vrata II. 769-784, Smrti-Kaustubha 
358-427, Nir^faya Sindhu 192-208. For their alphabetic list HD V. 1. 283-285. 
2. The Pr&jdpatya Vrata consists of donation of a cow at the end of 
Kruhra penance and feeding Brahmanas according to one’s ability. Fruit— 
a place in god Siva’s region. 
Kfcchrante gopradab kurydd bhojanarh iaktitah padath 
Viprdpdih SdAkaram ydti Prdjdpatyam idarh vratam 
- Mt. P. 100.66 
It may be noted that this Vrata is different from Pregdpati Vrata which 
(according to Prainopattifad 1. 15) means 'indulging in sexual intercoune 
only at ni^t’. ^ 


UttarabhUga 22.47-55 
1643 
47. If in this month one takes only one meal per day 
or takes food at night only, or takes only what is received 
unsolicited, the whole Barth consisting of a series of continents 
is obtained by the vow-observing men. 
48. This month is said to be the bestower of devotion 
through Vratas, charitable gifts, worship etc. especially in the 
holy centre of Puskara, the city of Dvaravati and in !§aukara 
(Soron on the Gahga near Itah). 
49-50a. In this month the day of Hari is sacred; so also 
the five days called Bhismapaficaka^ (i.e. from the eleventh 
day to the full moon day of the Karttika). If the Prabodhini 
(wakening, the eleventh day or Ekadasi called the “wakening 
of the Lord”) day is spent by observing fast alongwith keeping 
awake at night, even a sinful man will never stay in the womb 
of a mother. 
50b-51a. O fair lady, a person who sees a Mandala 
(halo, disc of the sun) on that day attains the greatest region 
without having recourse to the systems of Sarhkhya and Yoga. 
51b-52a, O auspicious lady, by seeing Mandala in the 
month of Karttika, or Sukara in the holy centre of Saukara or 
by seeing Kokavaraha (the Boar incarnation of Visnu) one 
does not become a son once again (i.e. one attains Moksa). 
52b-53. O lady of unsteady side glances by seeing 
Mandala or Sridhara in Kubjaka, men are liberated from the 
three types of sins. One shall avoid oil and honey in the month 
of Karttika. 
54-55. One should avoid meat in the month of Karttika,^ 
one shall also abstain from women in the month of 
1. Bhlfma-pafUaka is a special Vrata to be performed for five days 
from the Karttika Su. 11 to the Full moon day. The performer has to take 
three baths per day, perform Tcarpajfay Japas or 108 umes repetition of the 
mantra, 0th namo bhagavaU Vdsudtvdva, worship of Vi?i^u and Noma with the 
mantra Orh namo Vifnaoe and partake of the five components of Pattca- 
gaoya resi>ectively on each day of the Vrata: feeding of Br^ma^ias and 
giving of religious fees. 
2. Abstindice from flesh-eating in K&rttika is regarded as equivalent 
to performance of severe penance for one hundred years {ICftya Ratndkara 
397-99). Abstinence of meat-eating during the Bhifma paficaka period is 
cadled Balut-PaSeaka {K^tya-ratnikara 425). 


1644 
J{drada Purity 
Karttika. O gentle lady, in the month of Kai%dka a 
person devoted to Vis^u shall avoid Nispava (? the bran 
blown away by the winnowing siev). He shall instantaneously 
be liberated from the sins committed in the course of the year. 
By taking a meal once a day the devotee attains royal womb 
(i.e. is born in a royal family). 
56. The foolish person who partakes a bacon in the 
month of Karttika is cooked (or roasted) in the Raurava hell 
for sixty thousand years. 
57-58. Having been liberated from it, the sinner is bom 
as a rural pig that eats faeces. No man shall eat fish or the 
flesh of a tortoise or a dear in the month of Karttika. O gentle 
lady, by eating flesh in the month of Karttika one is born as 
a Gandala. Even if one observes a minor Vrata, Karttika 
destroys all sins. 
59. The initiation undertaken in the month of Karttika 
is destructive of births of men. Hence, one shall assiduously 
undertake initiation in the month of K^ttika. 
60. O lady of beautiful thighs, every thing performed 
by one who has not undergone initiation is futile. A man 
devoid of initiation attains the womb of an animal. 
61. The Karttika Vrata shall not be performed at home 
especially on the eleventh day of the Karttika month. A man 
who performs the Karttika Vrata in a holy centre attains the 
region ofHari. 
62. A man shall observe fast on the eleventh day in the 
bright half of the month of Karttika and on the next day, in 
the morning, he should give auspicious pots whereby he 
attains the abode of Hari. 
63-65. The conclusion of all the Vratas in the course of a 
year is laid down in smrtis in the month of Karttika. In the 
holy centre of Pu^kara marriages are seen performed even 
without insisting on Uttarayana (northern transit of the sun) 
and the auspiciousness of Lagna (astrological division of 
time) especially during these four days in this month, O 
lady of fair complexion. The connections entered into during 
that period cause the increase of sons and grandsons. Hence, O 
MohinI, I shall perform the holy rite in the montH^of Kkrttika 


Uttarabhdga 22.-66-74 
1645 
for the destruction of all sins and for the crease of your 
love”. 
Mohini said : 
66-67. O The incomparable greatness of the month 
of Karttika has been described by you. Kindly recount the rules 
of procedure of the concluding rites of Caturmasya Vratas (holy 
rites during the four months of the rainy season) O Lord of the 
earth, whereby the Vratas shall be complete and there will not 
beany deficiency or omission in the Vrata or in the benefit, 
thereof. 
The king said : 
68. O beloved wife, the devotee who performs the Nak- 
tavrata (i.e. taking food only at night) should feed a Brahmana 
with food-stuffs consisting of all the six tastes. 
69. If he performs the rite of Ayacita (not begging for 
anything) he shall give a bull as gift along with gold. A person 
who does not eat flesh ( meat) shall give a cow as gift alongwith 
Daksina. 
70. In the rite of ablution with embylic myrobalan, the 
man should give curds and milk-puddings. If the person observes 
the vow of abstaining from fruits, O lady of good eyebrows, he 
should make gifts of fruits. 
71. If one has eschewed oil, one shall make gifts of ghee 
and if one has eschewed ghee, one shall make gifts of milk. If 
there is a vow restricting the eating of grains, one should give 
Sali (rice) or the respective grains of corn. 
72. If the vow is for laying down on the bare ground, 
he should make gift of a mattress filled with cotton alongwith four 
cowries as Daksina. If the devotee has vowed to take food on 
leaves, he shall give a vessel full of ghee. 
73. If the devotee has vowed silence, he should give 
either a bell or gingelly seeds alongwith gold. He should feed 
a couple and give beds for both. 
74. Theenjoyment of pleasures shall be alongwith Dak^i- 
nas for the sake of completion of the Vrata. If the rite is regular 
morning ablution, he should offer a horse; if the vow is for es¬ 
chewing oily stuff, he shall offer ghee and barley. 


1646 
Ndrada Pwrd^ 
75. If the rite is for growing nails and hair hgi should 
give a mirror as a gift. If the rite is for eschewing foot-wear he 
should give a pair of shoes. 
76. If one has vowed to forsake salt, a good cow is to be 
given; if one has eschewed meat eating, one should give a tawny 
coloured cow with its calf. 
77-78. If one has vowed the offering of the lighted lamp 
in one’s favourite temple every day, one should give a lamp 
made of gold or copper alongwith ghee. O beloved one, for the 
completion of the Vrata he should give an umbrella to a devo¬ 
tee of Visnu alongwith a cloth. One who has undertaken fast on 
alternate days, should give silk-garment as a gift. 
79. If one has undertaken fast once in three days one 
should give a fully bedecked bed accompanied by gold. In the 
fasts such as one for six successive days etc., one should give a 
palanquin alongwith umbrella. 
80. If the vow is for a single meal per day, one should 
give stout bull alongwith a man to look after the same, or goats 
and sheep. If one has vowed for a fruitarian diet, one shall give 
gold as gift. 
81. If one has vowed vegetable diet one shall give fruit 
as gift alongwith gold and ghee. If one has eschewed all tasty 
beverages, one shall give even what is not mentioned here as a 
gift. 
82-84. One must give silver or gold vessel as gift in accor¬ 
dance with one’s capacity. If one does not follow the injunc¬ 
tions in the performance of these riles or if one does give 
things mentioned as gifts (one will incur sin). O beautiful lady 
of good eyebrows, one must abide by the advice of the Brah- 
mana priest and perform the rite with the remembrance of 
Visnu. O auspicious lady, if one considers the statement (i.e. 
advice) of the B^ahmana futile and does not give Daksinas, one 
certainly falls into hell, if there is omission or deficiency in the 
Vrata the man becomes a leper and a blind fellow. 
85-86. The heaven-dwellers, the group of holy centres, 
the sacrifices of all these are well established in the words of 
Br^mai^s. O beautiful lady, who will transgress their words, 
if he desires welfare and if he is a sensible scholar and knowl- 
edgeable person. 


Uttarabhdga 22.87—23.8 
1647 
87. This is the secret of Dharma (holy rites) that has been 
mentioned to you in the same manner as it had been mentioned 
to Brahma by Lord of Sri (Visnu). It should not be divulged to 
others. It is beneficial and it is the cause of Madhava’s 
satisfaction. 
CHAPTER TWENTYTHREE 
The dialogue with RukmMgada 
Mohini said : 
1. The statement made by you about the observance of 
fast in the month ofKarttika is quite excellent. But the obser¬ 
vance of Vrata etc. by kings is not found anywhere in the 
sacred texts. 
2. In fact, excepting for a Brahmana, it has not been 
prescribed for anyone else; not for the Sudras and the Vaisyas 
too. (As the duty) of the kings, charitable gifts, protection (of 
subjects) and fighting are laid down (in Smrtis). 
3. If you wish to retain me as your beloved, the Vrata 
should not be observed by you. O leading king, I cannot remain 
without ou even for a Muhurta. 
4-5a. O dear king having the lustre of god Brahma, 
how can I remain separated for a period of month ? O ruler 
of the Earth, where you think of observing fast, food should 
rather be offered in lieu of it to Brahmanas of noble souls. Or 
may the eldest of all your wives observe the Vratas. 
5b-6. When this was argued by Mohini, Rukmabhu^na 
(i.e. Rukahgada) called his auspicious and beloved wife Sandhya- 
vali. The instant she was called, she came near the king who 
was one who had distributed religious gifts and fees in plenty. 
7-8. He was seated on a divine like splendid bed clasp¬ 
ed between the arms of Mohini. The tip of her breasts resem- 


1648 
Mirada Purina 
bled golden pitcher when rubbing against him. ,0 king 
(Mandhata) he was seated on the mattress of the lustful lady of 
charming eyes. With the palms joined in reverence, Sandh- 
yavali stooped down her neck in bowing down to her husband. 
9. She said to the king, “ O darling, why have I been 
called ? Being completely free from the jealousy usual among 
co-wives, I have always abided by your order. 
10. There is no doubt about this, O king, that the more 
you indulge in sexual dalliance with Mohini the more my 
pleasure increases. 
11-12. O king, the woman who becomes miserable at 
the personal pleasure of her husband is reborn as a shc-falcon 
for eight years (?). Command me, O king, do not get abashed 
due to your lustfulness. 
Rukmangada said ; 
13. O fair lady, I know your good conduct, and the 
nobility of your birth. It was at your instance that sexual dalli¬ 
ance with Mohini for a long time was indulged in by me. 
14. Many Karttika months have gone by while I indulged 
in sexual dalliance. Though I have been enamoured of the 
happiness derived from my beloved, the day of Hari (i.e. Eka- 
dasi) did not slip by. 
15. By my frequent enjoyment of lustful pleasures I have 
achieved satiety. This month of Karttika is known to be the 
destroyer of all sins. 
16. O gentle lady, I am desirous of observing the holy 
vow of Karttika Vrata that yields great merit. But O 
auspicious lady, this daughter of Brahma prevents me from 
observing it. 
17. O fair-complexioned lady, by no means should any¬ 
thing displeasing to her be committed. Hence you take up 
my Vrata called Krechra that dries up the body. 
18. On being urged thus by her husband, the lady whose 
complexion was like that of newly burnished gold, whose breasts 
and other limbs were plump and whose face resembled the moon 
spoke these words :— ‘*I shall observe the holy Vrata for your 
satisfaction.*’ 


Uttarabhdga 23.19-29a 
1649 
19. O Lord of rulers of men, I shall perform only those 
things whereby you will have fame and renown, whereby you will 
have happiness without prejudice to your good reputation. I 
shall even cast off my tender body into the fire for your 
sake. 
20. O king, at your instance, I will even kill my son. 
I will not consider it as something that should not be done. 
All the more, O ruler of men, I shall perform this simple holy 
rite.” 
21. After saying this and after bowing to the king who 
was the enemy of the son of the sun (i.e. Yarna), the gentle 
lady of charming large eyes performed holy rite for the 
destruction of sins. 
22. When the excellent holy penance called Krcchra was 
begun by his beloved wife, the king derived much pleasure. He 
spoke these words to the daughter of the Kusa-emblemed deity 
(Brahma)—“O lady of beautiful eyebrows, your suggestion has 
been carried out in accordance with your desire. 
23. O beautiful lady with thighs resembling metacarpus, 
sport as you please with the gladness of your heart. Leave off 
your cares and concentrate your ambitions and desires in 
me. O lady of sweet eye-brows, for your sake I have eschewed 
my duties. There is no other woman to give me happiness.” 
24. On being thus addressed by her Lord, she attained 
great pleasure. She spoke to the king thus :— “O Lord, It was 
after knowing that you are exceedingly loving (and tender) 
that 1 had come to you from the heaven. 
25. * I had forsaken the immortal ones, the groups of Dait- 
yas, Gandharvas, Yaksas, serpents and Riiksasas, who were 
awaiting me. Overcome with love, I approached you at the 
mountain of Mandara. 
26. The like-mindedness of both (husband and wife) is 
the real fruit of passion. Passionate union with the mind else¬ 
where is no better than the union of two corpses. 
27. Fruitful is my body. Fruitful is my beauty. O lover, 
with you full of love towards me, I have acquired that which 
is very rare in the three worlds. 
28-29a. When the heart clasped within plump protrud- 


1650 
Mirada Purina 
ingbreasts does not relent (break), I think it is certainly like 
Indra’s thunderbolt. The nectarine juice from the lips of 
beautiful ladies is the very ambrosia in the world. It is being 
drunk with the breasts pressed close to the heart.” 
29b-30a. After saying this, the lady of slender limbs em¬ 
braced the king who was in the secluded spot and delighted him 
in accordance with the injunctions of Vatsyayana^ the author of 
erotic science (Kama-sutra). 
30b-31. Even as he was diverting himself in the company 
of Mohini, the sound of drums which were placed on an 
intoxicated elephant according to the decree of Dharmahgada 
reached his ears. 
32. “O people, the day of Hari dawns tomorrow. Remain 
with only a single meal.^ All shall eschew alkaline salts, taking 
in only Havisya (cooked rice soaked in ghee). 
33. You must lie down on the bare ground. You must 
avoid sexual union with your beloved wives. Remember the 
Lord of the Chief of the Devas, the ancient and excellent 
Purusa. 
34-3.5a. Either take a single meal or observe fast. You 
will thereby be able to go to the region of Sri Hari without per¬ 
forming a series of Sraddhas, without oifering or taking Pinzas 
and even when your sons have not gone to Gaya.® 
1. Vatsyayana (Circa 300-400 A.D.) is the author of the famous treatise, 
Kama Sutra. The instructions on erotics mentioned here are given in the 
Adhikarana (section) on Sdmprayogika. For dcinih vide Kama sutra ■widx com. 
Jayamarigald. (Ghowkhamba, 1912.) 
2. Compare the procedure of the Ekadasi Vrata Supra I. Ch. 23. 
3. A famous sacred place in Bihar. It is supposed that by performing 
Srdddha and offering Pindas on Visnupada at Gaya one redeems one 
thousand generations and takes them and himself to the world of Visnu. 
The sacredness of the place and its efficacy to redeem the ancestors of 
the pilgrim is glorified in many other Puranas like AP., Vdyu etc. Thus the 
Vdyu 105.30 states he who performs Sraddha at Gaya repays his debts to 
his ancestors. 
Sraddha-krdyo Gayd-kfetre pitrndm anrpo hi sah j 
For details vide infra Chs. 44 to 47 with annotations. 


Uttarabhdga 23.35b-47 
1651 
351>38a' This is the eleventh day in the bright half of the 
month of Karttika, which dispels the slumber of Hari. The 
EkadasI dawns tomorrow. Do not take food at all. If one observes 
fast on the Prabodhini Ekadasi day, all the sins such as the 
slaughter of a Brahmana and the like which one might have 
committed wilfully, disappear. This is called Prabodhini Ekadasi 
because it enlightens virtuous persons and those who practise 
just activities. Also it wakens Hari from slumber. 
38b-39a. The man who at least once observes the fast on 
this day that dispels the slumber of Hari, does not become a 
son once again. He is not reborn in any womb. 
39b-40. O men, perform the worship of the discus-bearing 
Lord with your own wealth, clothes, flowers, incense, lights, 
excellent sandal paste, saffron, sweet fruits and scents. All of you 
worship the feet of^ri Hari. 
41. He who does not carry out my instructions, conducive 
to the attainment of piety and salvation (attainment to the 
vision of Visnu), is liable (lit. deserves) to be killed, banished 
from the realm or certainly punished (otherwise) by me.” 
42. While the drum that had the sound of the clouds was 
being beaten to proclaim as before, the most excellent king 
dropped down the chewing betel along with camphor from his 
hand. 
43. Withdrawing his chest that was in contact with the 
breasts of Mohini, the king (though) of enhanced appetite for 
sexual pleasure, stood up from his bed. 
44. With bland speech he consoled Mohini who was 
afflicted with delusion and passion :— ‘‘O gentle lady the day 
of Hari that is destructive of sins dawns tomor ow. 
45. I will be observing restraints. May I be forgiven. 
May I be excused. At your behest the Krcchra penance is 
being caused to be performed by Sandhyavali. 
46. But this Ekadasi vow that is called Prabodhakarani 
should be performed by me. It cuts off bonds of all sins. It 
bestows salvation. 
47. To all the three worlds, it is the cause of celebrating 
great festivities. Hence, O lady of elated gait, I will partake of 
only Havisya invariably. 


1652 
Ndrada PurOna 
48. O lady of large eyes propitiate Adhoksaja (Visnu) 
Hrsikesa along with me, by being engaged in the observance of 
fast. Thereby, you will attain salvation devoid of burning 
sensation and dissolution. 
Mohini said : 
49. O king, you have spoken pertinently. At your behest, 
I shall perform the worship of the discus-bearing deity, that 
dispels births, deaths and old age. 
50-52a. The time of fulfillment has come for that vow 
(promise) that had been undertaken by you formerly on the top 
of (he Mandara mountain, along with the offering of the hand. 
It was marked by staking your merits. Hence, may that be 
given to me. If you do not grant me that boon, all the merits 
tlu't you have accumulated since your birth with great difficulty, 
ulll perish instantaneously. 
Rni mdngada said : 
52b-r.3. Come on, O lady of charming limbs I will carry 
out whatever you entertain in your mind. There is nothing 
which should not be given to you. Even my life shall be given 
to you, O beautiful lady—what then of villages, wealth etc. 
including the earth. 
Alofiini said : 
.ll-o?. O Lord, C) love, O powerful king, O Lord of my 
life fond of'sexual intercourse, if I, your beloved wife, am to be 
enjoyed, no fast should be observed on the day of Visnu. 
O king, am I not your beloved wife ? I do not wish to spend 
even a Muhurta without contact with you, O excellent one. So 
O king, devoted to truth, if you wish to enjoy me, give up this 
vow of fast. May food be taken on the day of Hari. 
57-58a. It is this boon that should be granted to me. 
This is what had been requested for by me formerly. O leading 
king, if you do not grant it (this boon) to me, you will become 
a man of falsehood. You will fall into a terrible hell (and 
remain there as long as all living beings are dissolved, (upto 
the end of the world). ^ 


Uttarabhdga 23.58b-70 
1653 
The king implored : 
58b. O auspicious lady, please do not speak like this. 
This is not proper on your part ? 
59. Why do you, though a daughter of god Brahma, 
create obstacles in the observance of holy rites. Ever since iny 
birth I have never taken food on the day of Hari. 
60-6la. O auspicious lady, now that my hairs have begun 
to turn grey, how shall I take food ? Having recourse to the 
heavenly river (i.c. the Gahga) or the worship of Hari is proper 
in case of a man who has gone beyond the prime of youth and 
the power of whose sense-organs has dwindled. 
61b-62a. This (i.e. taking food on the Ekadasi day) is 
what has not been committed by me whether in boyhood or in 
youth. It is a despicable act. How can I perform it now, when 
I have become feeble and am lacking in virility ? 
62b-63. Be pleased, O lady of roving side-glances, be 
pleased, O fair-complexioned lady. Do not create obstacles in 
my Vrata. I shall give you the riches of the kingdom. O lady 
of beautiful eyes, if you do not wish for it, I shall do another 
thing. 
64. 1 shall make you seated in a palanquin that is very 
splendid and resembling the aerial chariot. Accompanied by 
my wife, I shall walk on food and take you wherever you wish. 
65-66. If you do not like the aerial chariot made by me, 
I will make two pillars of gold adorned with corals. O my 
beloved wife, I will prepare a swing of pearls for your sake. I 
shall swing you therein day and night for many months. 
67-68. O my beloved lady, O beautiful one, do not 
create obstacles in the performance of my holy rite. If food is 
taken on the day of Hari, O fair-faced lady, it is more 
despicable than eating the flesh (from the hands) of a Candala 
or that of a dog. If one indulges in sexual intercourse when the 
moon dwindles (i.e. on the New Moon day), one incurs the sin 
of destroying the three worlds. 
69-70. A man incurs sins in the following circumstances: 
—if he gets himself shaved on the Bhuta day (i.e. the fourteenth 
day in the dark half of the month of Karttika); if he takes food 
on the day of Visnu; if he takes oil bath on $asthi (sixth day of 


1654 
J^drada Purd^a 
a lunar fortnight); if he takes salt, O auspicious lady, on 
the Trtlya (third) day and meat on the Saptami (seventh) day 
if he takes in ghee on the full moon day and drinks liquor 
during the transit of the sun from one sign of zodiac to another. 
71-73. On the day of Hari, food (to be taken in)contains 
the sin accrued in the following acts viz.—if one sp>oils the pasture- 
land of cows., if one commits perjury; if one misappropriates a 
deposit, if one causes hardships to a virgin (e.g. making her mar¬ 
riage impossible), if one commits breach of trust; if one milks a 
cow the calf of which is dead; if he does not give an excellent 
Brahmana what he solemnly promises to give saying ‘I will give 
you”, in Manikuta (fraud committed in regard to a precious 
gem), in Tulakuta (in using false weights), in Kanyanrta (in 
uttering a lie about a virgin) and in Gavanrta (in uttering a 
lie over a cow). Hence, O fair-eyed lady, how shall I take food 
knowing that it is a great sin? 
Mo hint said : 
74-77. While I was in the mountain of Mandara, 
Gautama told me thus : O leading king, one shall not pass 
an Ekadasi day by taking in single meal throughout the day 
or a nocturnal meal or unsolicited food^ or by observing fast. 
Observance of fast is not proper for women advanced in 
pregnancy, for Grhasthas (worshippers) of domestic sacrificial 
fires), Krsas (worn-out weaklings), sick men, Sisu (children) 
and the wrinkled worne-out bodied (old people). O leading king, 
those who are engaged in Yajfias and their enjoyment, those who 
serve the Earth, those who fight and the Pativratas (chaste 
ladies) must not observe fast. 
1. This verse is found in other Pura^as e.g. Mk. P. quoted by 
Hcmadri otiKdla p. 170, Gd, P. 1. 136. 2-3. The snag in Mohini’s argument 
is that she applies these to an ablebodied person like Rukmahgada. Manu 
X 1.28 & 30 forbids an able-bodied capable person to resort to these 
alternatives. Mbh. ^inti 165.17 supports this. The terms ekabhakta or abhukta 
(taking meal after mid-day-</tnjr</Aa-sama)vtfte), noAta (taking food after the 
appearance of stars after the sun-set) and aydeita (subsistence on food not 
obtained by begging or soliciting) were used formerly mth rderence 
to Prdyakittas like Kfcchra. They came to be applied to fasts in Puri^as 
later on. 


Uttarabhdga 23.78-88 
1655 
78. O excellent man, the day ofVisnu must not be spent 
without the observance of Vrata. Those Brahmanas who have 
maintained the sacred fire should be known as Grhasthas 
(householders). 
79. Those who abide by the duties of protecting the sub¬ 
jects should be known as Rajas (kings). Gurvini is the lady who 
is pregnant for eight months. Sisus are children upto their eighth 
year. 
80. Ksinas arc those who observe too many fasts. Vali- 
gatras are those old men (whose body contains wrinkles) 
Mahotsavas are those who arc busily engaged in auspicious 
rites such as marriage etc. 
81-82. Those who arc engaged in Yajiias arc the persons 
who refrain from worldly activities. (Defective) The woman 
who is engaged in the welfare of her hnsband by means of the 
three Karanas(organs etc) (i.c. mind, body and speech) shouKl 
be known as Pativrata (chaste lady). So also the woman who 
protects her vaginal passage. O king, of what avail arc the 
many utterances I may indulge in ? 
83. I will be pleased if you take food on the Ekada.si day 
but I won’t by pleased even if you cut off your own head and 
give it to me. 
84. O king, if you do not take food on the day of Hari, 
I will not touch the body belonging to you who are untruthful 
in your words. 
85. O leading king, truthfulness is revered among people 
of all stages of life and castes. O king, especially it is so among 
rulers of kingdom like you. 
86. It is through truth that the sun blazes;^ the moon 
shines through truth. O king, the Earth is established in truth. 
It is the truth that upholds the universe. 
87. The wind blows through truthfulness and the fire 
burns through truth. This entire Universe consisting of the 
mobile and the immobile beings has truth for its support. 
88. It is through truth that the ocean does not move 
1. It appears that in W. 86-89 the Vcdic concept of is extended 
to Satya (Truth). 


1656 
Narada Purina 
(away from its place). O king (for the same reason) the Vindhya 
mountain does grow (rise) up. Never does a yonng woman 
carry the child in her crossing the time limit (i.e. beyond a 
stipulated period of about ten months, she does not hold it.) 
89. It is only when they are abiding by truthfulness that 
trees put forth flowers and fruits. O king, the means of Divine 
judgement, etc. of men has for its basis, truthfulness alone. 
90. Truthfulness surpasses thousands of horse-sacrifices. 
Through falsehood you will be tainted with such a sin as that of 
drinking liquor. 
CHAPTER TWENTYFOUR 
Questions of MohinV- 
The king said : 
1-2. You mention that it had been recounted to you by 
Gautama on the excellent mountain Mandara that food be taken 
on the day of Hari. But this is contrary to the opinion of the 
Puranas. O fair-faced lady, it has been mentioned by that Brah- 
inana who indulges in spreading the insignificant sacred texts 
out of greed. 
3-5. The following decisions have been proclaimed in the 
Puranas by learned men viz—one should not drink water with 
1. This chapter describes a typical conflict between parochical 
VedisLs and Vaifijiavas. This part of the NP. is meant for the glorification 
of the Ekadasi Vrata. Though this topic is discussed in Part I Ch. 23 (and 
elsewhere), a detailed description and importance of this Vrata is found 
(sometimes repeated in this part also. This chapter emphasizes the import- 
tance of complete fasts of Ekadasi and the acceptance of the authority of 
Puranas in interpreting the Vedas. The medieval writers who compiled 
treatises on Ekadas'i (e.g. Sulapani’s Ekddaii Viveka, Raghunandana’s Ekddaii- 
tattva) and on JTd/a (e.g. Hemddri on Kdla, M&dhava on Kilanirjfaya) have 
profusely quoted the NP as an authority on Ek&dasi. Hence the importance 
of these chapters. 


Uttarabhdga 24.6-10 
1657 
a conch shell; one must not kill* ‘tortoises’ and ‘pigs;’ food 
should not be.taken on the eleventh day in either half of 
the month. The sin of taking food on that day, O gentle lady, 
is the same as that of the sexual intercourse with a forbidden 
woman or that of eating forbidden food or that of doing a pro¬ 
hibited act. It is also equal to the slaughter of a thousand cows. 
O, gentle lady, how can I take food on the day of Hari in 
spite of my knowledge of this ? 
G. O lady of charming thighs, when the dayofllari 
has dawned, even the Purodasa (the sacrificial oblation of 
ground rice) is declared to be equal to the forbidden food. 
What then about the (ordinary) food taken in by way of 
regular meal ? 
7. O fair-complexioned lady, roots, fruits, milk and 
water are mentioned by leading sages as favourable foodstuffs 
of feeble men. They can be eaten. 
8-9. But taking full meal on the Ekadasi day has not 
b(‘en recommended by anyone, .\bslinence from food is recom¬ 
mended iii ihe ca^e of persons .suffering from fever, and obser-: 
vance of full fast in the case of righteous persons, when the day 
of Hari has dawned. 'I’his is auspicious and conducive to the 
attainment of salvation. Even if Pathya (wholesome) food is 
taken in the middle of fever, it is likely to result in death. 
10. If food is taken on the day of Visnu (Ekadasi) it 
leads only to a fall in hell. O lady of beautiful thighs, please 
don’t insist, let there be no breaking of my holy vow. If there 
is anything else that appeals to you I shall undoubtedly 
do it. 
*Khddel slu^ulcl be the reading in the NP. as it is found in this verse in 
KP- and Dcvala Smrti. For discussion vide note below. 
This verse is attributed to the KP and Devala Smrti in the 
j^ir^aya Sindhu, p. 35, and to Vimudharmottara P. by Hemftdri in Kdla. But 
those verses read 
tui khddet Kufvux-Sukarau 
The reading na khddet is better as Kurma and Sukara are the bulbous 
roots called Kadgar and Kon in Marathi and the question of ‘killing* bulbous 
roots does not arise. Moreover, the reading in the NP. will amount to a 
license in killing other animals including cows. But the reading should be 
decided on the MS evidence of the NP. 


1658 
JfSrada JhtrSrut 
Kfohinl insisted : 
11-12. “O king, nothing else appeals to me except your 
taking food. No purpose of mine is served even by your dedica¬ 
tion of life. Moreover, the observance of fast on the day of 
Hari is not found in the Vedas. 
13. The Brahmanas maintaining the holy sacrificial fires 
do not accept the observance of fast. How is it that you wish to 
practise a rite that is outside the pale of the Vedas. ?” 
14. O King (Mandhata), on hearing the words of MohinI, 
the king who was the most excellent one among the knowers of 
the Vedas said laughingly though he got furious in mind. 
15-17, “O MohinI, listen to my words. The performance 
of sacrifices has its procedure in the Veda (Kriya Veda) and in 
the stage of life of a householder the Smrtis are like the Vedas. 
The Vedas in the form of Smrtis and the Kriya Vedas are based 
on the Puranas. Just as this wonderful universe is born of Pura- 
napiirusa (the ancient Purusa or Being) so also the whole range 
of literature undoubtedly originates from the Puranas. O fair¬ 
faced lady, I, therefore, consider the meanings of the Puranas 
superior to the meanings of the Vedas,^ 
18. All the Vedas are ever established in the Puranas, 
The Veda is afraid of a man of deficient learning, thinking “O, 
this man will strike me.” 
1. VV. 15-22 establish the authoritative nature of the Puranas and their 
relation vis-d~vis the Vedas. The NP regards Puranas as the essence of all 
the Vedas (supra I. 1. 61-62), nay their import ss superior to the Vedas. 
And the NP is not the only Purana to hold this view. For example, theSk. P. 
repeats the very wording of these verses : c.g. 
Vedah pratiffAitdti saroe purd^ ndtra sarhi(^ah / 
bibhetyalpa~irutdd Vedo mdm ayam praharifyati Ij 
yan m dxftam hi Vedtfu tad dTffam smrtibhih kUa / 
ubhibkyam yan na dxftaih hi tat purifiefu glyatt If 
purSpuh sarm-t&trii^am prathamam Brahnuu^i smTiamJ 
—Rtod Kkatf^a I. 20-23. 
The equivalence of Puranas with the Vedaa has been stated in the 
Bxhad-drapyaka Up. (11. 4. 10) where both of them are regarded as the 
exhalation of God. This authority of Puri^ias is confirmed by V&tsyiyana in 
his com. on Ny&ya Sutra IV. 1.62, Kumirila in Tantra-VurtHka. On Jaimini’s 
Purva-mtmSmsi siitra I. 3. 1 and Sahkara on Br. Sutra 1.3.33. 


UttarabhUga 24.19-28 
1659 
19. There is no mention about the movements of the 
planets in the Vedas there is no indication of the time that is 
endowed with purity; nor (can we find these things therein) 
viz. the increase and the decrease of the Tithis nor the decision 
about the Parvans (New Moon and full moon) or the position 
of the planets. 
20. Formerly, these had been decided by means of the 
Itihasas and the Puranas ; what is not seen in the Vedas is 
observed fully in the Smrti. 
21. What is not seen in both of these is explained by the 
Puranas, as for example, the expiatory rites in the cases of kill¬ 
ing. O beloved wife, it is like the medicine in the case of a 
seriously ill patient, 
22-25a. (If the Puranas had not explained the expiatory 
rites)it would not have been possible to have purification from 
sins in one’s own case or in the case of others. O lady of beauti¬ 
ful eyebrows, what is sung about by the Vedas, what is recount¬ 
ed by the Vadahgas (ancillaries) is explained in detail by the 
Puranas and Smrtis. O fair-faced lady, the Puranas repeat often 
like this—“when the day of Hari has arrived, food should not be 
eaten, food should never be eaten.” By disregarding the Pura¬ 
nas one will attain the womb of animal. Even if one has taken 
holy ablutions, even if he has perfect self-control he will not 
attain salvation if he disregards the Puranas. 
25b-26. Who will not salute his father ? Who will not 
worship his mother ? Who will not go to Ganga the 
holiest of all rivers. Who will eat food on the day of Hari ? Who 
will slander the Vedas ? Who will cause the downfall of a 
Brahmana. 
27. Who will have sexual intercourse with another man’s 
wife ? Who will take food on the day of Hari ? 
28. O beloved one, there is no other sin for a creature 
of muddleheaded nature, than taking food on the day of Hari. 
O lady of bright eyes, it is the cause that makes one fall into 
the pit (hell) of Yama. 
1. W. 19-22 state what topics are not mentioned in the Vedas but 
are decided in Puranas. Hence their superiority in some respects. 


1660 
Ndrada Purina 
Mohini said : 
29. “O Ghurnika (the name of,the female attendant) 
bring here immediately those Brahmanas who arc the masters 
of the Vedas. It is likely that on being convinced by means of 
their words, the king may take food.” 
30. On hearing her words she (i.e. Ghurnika) brought 
Gautama and the other Brahmanas who were masters of the 
Vedas, near Mohini. 
31. On seeing the Brahmanas, the experts in the Vedas 
and the Vedahgas come, Mohini who was interested in her own 
affairs saluted them in the company of the king. 
32. O king, all of them had the refulgence of the blazing 
fires. They sat on seats made of gold. 
33-34a. Gautama who was the oldest among them spoke 
these words :“0 queen, we experts in the different branches of 
sacred literature who dispel all doubts, have come here, for the 
purpose wc have been called by you.” 
34b-35a. On hearing the words of those (Brahmanas), 
Mohini the daughter of Brahma, spoke to them who were engag¬ 
ed in doing what was impossible for others. 
Mohini said : 
35b-36. The doubt here is whether this man is stupid or 
deficient in intellect (?) The king says—‘Twill not take food 
on the day of Hari.” (But) this entire universe consisting of the 
mobile and immobile beings has food as its support. 
37-38a. Even the dead persons, the Pitrs (manes) in 
the heaven are delighted with cooked food. O excellent Brah¬ 
manas, the Devas desire for cooked rice, the Puroda^a [sacri¬ 
ficial oblations with ground rice) of the size of Jujube fruit. 
Hence cooked rice is the greatest nectar. 
38b-39. Even the hungry man takes a bit of rice in its 
mouth and enters its crevice with great strain. To whom 
does not the food appeal ? But this king docs not eat cooked 
rice and other edibles, when the day of Hari has arrived. 
40. He has forsaken his own holy duties and abides by 
other peoples’ Dharma. It is but proper on the part of widows 
and ascetics to observe Vratas. 


Uttarabhdga 24.41-51 
1661 
41. The man who is devoted to other peoples’ Dharma 
and averse to his own Dharma, sinks deep down into blinding 
darkness of hell and remains there as long as fourteen Indras 
reign. 
42. It has not been mentioned anywhere that kings 
should abandon their legitimate duty of protecting their sub¬ 
jects that bestow on them the fourfold aims of life, and perform 
the vow of fasting. 
43. (The following arc the legitimate duties of the con¬ 
cerned persons). Service to their husbands by women; service 
to their parents by sons; service to the twice-born by the ^udras 
and the protection of the world by the kings. 
44. If out of blunder or ignorance, a person forsakes his 
duties and applies his efforts elsewhere, he shall undoubtedly 
face a downfall, 
45. O Brahmanas, this king of good intellect and of 
excellent conduct practises Dharma of ascetics and forsakes 
w'hat his dharma is laid down in the Vedas, 
46-47a. O Brahmanas, the following fall into hell : 
viz.—a woman who behaves according to her own sweet will, 
an impudent son, a king who practises isolation, a servant 
who shirks work, and a person who has no steadiness and 
stability. 
47b-48. Suppose the king is engaged in the worship of 
Hari and maintains all observances and also suppose some one 
cries out in distress. At that time, if he does not rush out leav¬ 
ing aside his worship of Hari, he will surely incur the sin of a 
Brahman a-slaugh ter. 
49-50. n the day of Hari, if he is weak in the body, how 
can he restrain (his enemies) ? It is from the food that the 
Prana (vigour) is evolved. The activities of the body are based 
on the Pranas, The destruction of the enemy is through the 
activities of the body. If one is devoid of them, one is harassed 
and overpowered. I have realised this. Though I try to en¬ 
lighten the king, he does not wake up, or realise it. 
51. If the king protects his subjects that alone constitu¬ 
tes his Vrata. O excellent Brahmanas, a king has no other holy 
Vrata (except this). 


1662 
Ndrada PurdJfa 
52. Of what avail are devotion and worship of 
gods to a king after spreading disaffectioo and wrath among 
his subjects staying in the realm. If there is no bloodshed in his 
kingdom that alone is on a par with Yajfias, Homas and 
services to gods. 
CHAPTER TWENTYFIVE 
The story of Mohini 
Vasiftha said : 
1. On hearing the words uttered by Mohini the 
Brahmanas said—‘True’, and addressed these words to the 
king. 
The Brdhmanas said : 
2-3. O king, you have taken up the holy vow that food 
should not be taken in on the Ekadasi day in both the fortnights 
(of every month). This vow is not taken from the point of view 
of the scriptural texts. It is evolved out of your own intellectual 
fancies. It has been laid down that those who maintain holy fires 
should take in (the food offered as oblation) during both the 
junctions of a day. (i.e. morning and evening.) 
4. Three castes are glorified as the partakers of the leav¬ 
ings of Homas. Hence, how shall it be considered proper if 
they observe fast, particularly in the case of kings ? 
5-6. The kings, O lord, are always up in arms. They 
are the persons who restrain the wicked. Whether with the 
backing of the scripture or without it, may the vow that you 
have taken up be concluded today through the words of the 
Brahmanas. You will not incur (the sin of) breaking the holy 
vow. Eat in the company of the Brahmanas. 
7-8a. You need not regret or repent it. The wprds of a 
Brahmana are impiortant (weightier) and valuable. O excellent 


Uttarabhdga 25.8b-19a 
1663 
king, he who disregards the statements of a Br^mana takes 
birth as a Raksasa fifteen times. 
8b-9a. On hearing those words the king became terribly 
furious but with throbbing lips, he spoke to the Brahmanas in 
soft and bland speech. 
9b-ll. ‘‘O Brahmanas, you are the guides for all living 
beings. You have cited a verse regarding ascetics and widows. 
But when you say that observance of fasts is not laid down for 
kings, it is but the opinion of those who traverse the wrong 
path and not that of the Vaisnava persons. In that connection 
listen to the statements in the sacred text book “Vaisnavacarala- 
ksana” (or pertaining to the characteristics of the conduct of 
life of a devotee of Visnu)— 
12. “One shall not drink water by means of a conch 
shell; one shall not kill “tortoises” and “pigs”, in both fortnights 
food should not be taken on the Ekadasi day. 
13. Liquor should not be drunk; nowhere should a Brah- 
mana be killed; a knower of Dharma shall never play the game 
of dice; no one should take food on the day of Hari. 
14. Eating of the forbidden food is sinful; violating the 
chastity of another man’s wife is sinful; taking food on the 
Ekadasi day is definitely the cause of downfall. 
15. Should any one live fora hundred years after per¬ 
forming an action that should not be performed. Which active 
man takes food on the day of Hari ? 
16. Fodder should not be given even to the quadrupeds 
on the day of Hari by the Brahmanas staying in the northern 
4«gion who are devoted to the holy rites of Visnu (Vaisnava 
rites). 
17. How can I eat the forbidden food today ? I am not a 
man physically weak and feeble.‘ O excellent Brahmanas, I am 
not afflicted by dyspepsia. 
18-I9a. How can I therefore eschew the holy vow merely 
at the instance of the Brahmana following the wrong path. When 
1. In W. 17-20, the king is perfectly right on Gastric grounds, 
(vide Manu XI. 30.) He hit the week point correctly in the arguments of 
Gautama and Mohini. 


1664 
Ndrada Purdm 
the whole earth is being protected by the king^ Dharma- 
bhusana (i.e. Dharmaiigada) I am not without sufficient protec¬ 
tion. I have no enemy. 
19b-20a. After knowing all these things, O excellent 
Brahmanas regularly practising the holy rites pertaining to Visnu, 
it is not proper on your part to speak against me decrying my 
holy vow. 
20b-21a. The Brahmanas who observe (give) expiatory 
rites without carefully examining (the case) will incur sin 
due to the breaking (of injunctions of) the Smrtis. 
21b-23a. I will not take food on the day of Hari even if 
the following persons urge me to do it viz. — devas, 
Danavas, Gandharvas, Raksasas, Siddhas, Brahmanas, 
my own father himself, Hari, Hara, the father of Mohini, the 
sun or any of the guardians of the world’s quarters. 
23l)-25. O Brahmanas, the king who is well-knowm on 
the Eartli as Rukmahgada will never make his truthful pledge 
fruitless. Even the refulgence of the sun may vanish, even the 
Himalayas may crumble, even the ocean may dry up, even the 
fire may eschew its heat; still, O Brahmanas, I will not break 
my Vrata on the day of E.kadasi.^ 
26-28. O Brahmanas, this is well-known in the three 
worlds. This is being proclaimed by the beating of drums 
—“Those who take food on the clay of Hari, which is the 
most important of all Yajfias, which dispels sins, increases 
piety, bestows salvation which is called the severer of 
the chain of births, which is the receptacle of refulgence 
and is popular and established among all people in th^ 
villages and lands of Rukmahgada and others deseryj^, 
to be killed or punished (otherwise) alongwiih their sons. 
They will not be allowed to reside in the whole of the realm.” 
When this has been announced loudly, if I were to take food, 
I would be committing a sin. 
29-30a. It would be as though the drum was tarnished 
with filth or muffled with a blue cloth. The creature that has 
1. W. 2Ib-25 show the firm determination of Rukmahgada which 
acts as a challenge to Mohini to demand the head of his only son 
DharmShgada. 


Uttarahh&ga 25.30b-39 
1665 
earned renown but spoils it by itself committing sin due to 
the fear of life stays in the hell called Krmidarh^a for sixty 
Yugas. 
30b-31a. As soon as I break my solemn vow of the holy 
rite, the delivery of my mother would be futile; the Brahmanas, 
the Pitrs and the Devas would be disappointed and Vaivasvata 
(Yama) would be delighted alongwith his scribe namely 
Citragupta. 
3lb-32. Of what avail is the birth of that evil-minded 
being who delights the beautiful wives of his enemies (by 
refraining from killing their husbands). He takes delight in 
sins by means of evil actions; he is no better than a man of 
low caste; he is the destroyer of every thing. He is unclean 
and foolish. He does not have regard for the Vedas, 
Puranas and scriptures. In the end, he goes to the city of 
the son of the Lord of the day (i.e. Yama). 
33-.34a. He who breaks his pledged word or solemn 
vow is no better than one who vomits his food and eats it 
again. Neither the Vedas, nor the. scriptures, neither the good 
men nor the Puranas and Smrtis advocate the act of 
taking food on the pure day worthy of holy rites pleasing to 
Madhava. 
34b-35. If Sraddha is performed on the day of Hari, 
the Pitrs will not be satisfied thereby. The Ekadasi Vrata is 
one that bestows the region of Visnu. Only foolish persons 
will mention it alongwith Ksayaha (the new moon day when 
3raddha is to be performed). 
36. On hearing his words Mohini burned within herself. 
With eyes turned red with anger, she retorted to her husband 
37. “If you do not act in accordance with my advice you 
will be out of the pale of Dharma. A man excluded from 
Dharma shall be no better than dust. 
38-39. The dust, at least, fills a pit whereas this sinner of 
a man is the digger of a pit. O king, for the purpose of 
granting the boon you extended your hand and offered it to 
me (by way of taking a pledge). You have now broken that 
pledge. If you do not keep up that promise my responsibility 
is over. I shall go away, I have obtained your Dharma (i.e. 
you are deprived of it.) 


1666 
Ndrada Purdija 
40. I am not your beloved wife any more. O king, you 
are no longer my husband. I shall have my own arms as my 
head-rest and not yours; (even) in case of fighting (I shall not 
depend on your protection.) 
41. Fie upon you the destroyer of piety, the breaker of 
your own promise. Even among the MIecchas (alien outcastes) 
a heretic like you cannot be seen. 
42. I will forsake you today since you have moved away 
from the truth sinfully.” After saying this the fair lady hurriedly 
stood up. 
43. Just as Satl went away leaving off Hara, so also 
the slender-bodied lady bedecked in divine ornaments started 
from there accompanied by those Brahmanas. 
44. “Better to touch liquor than have contact with 
this king. Better to wear the blue cloth, rather than have the 
touch of this king who has swerved from virtue.” 
45. Lamenting thus, the infuriated MohinI cried much 
and went out of the abode accompanied by Gautama and 
others. 
46. “O father, O Lord of the Universe, the cause of 
creation, maintenance and dissolution (of the worlds),” cried, 
the mentally created daughter of Brahma. 
47. In the meantime, Dharmangada who was seated on 
an excellent horse returned to the palace after touring over 
the entire Earth. 
48-49. Coming in a hurry, the renowned Prince 
Dharmangada the son of Rukmangada, a prince devoid of 
rivalry and favourite with his father, the very embodiment of 
virtue came face to face. The words coming out of the 
mouth of MohinI, endorsed by the words of the Brahmanas 
reached the ears of the prince. 
50. Dismounting hurriedly from the horse, he went near 
his father and fell at his feet. Getting up again he bowed down 
to the leading Brahmanas with palms joined together in 
reverence. 
51-52. Then, observing that MohinI was mentally furious 
and she was hurrying out, he went over to her and with 
folded palms, he said to her in reverence. “Q Mother, O 


UttarabhAga 25.53-63 
1667 
gentle lady, O beloved wife of my father, by whom have you 
been insulted ? Why are you angry ? Where have you set off 
now alongwith these Brahmanas ?” 
53. On hearing the words of Dharmahgada, MohinI 
spoke these words : 
**0 dear son, your father is a liar. Falsely did he offer 
his (right) hand (to me). 
54-55. The hand that always performed holy rites, has 
the shape and features of red Asoka tree, the glorious right 
hand wearing gold armlet and is marked with lines in the 
form of a banner and a goad is by your father Rukmahgada 
withdrawn—Hence I am not enthused to stay here.” 
DharmMgada said : 
56. O gentle lady, whatever you say, I shall do. There 
is no doubt about it. O mother, do not be angry. O beloved 
wife of my father, return. 
Mohini said : 
57. By this father of yours, I have been made his 
wife on the mountain Mandara with this (certain) stipulation; 
jSiva, the Lord of the Devas, was standing witness thereof. 
58. Your father, Rukmahgada, has gone astray breaking 
those stipulations. He does not give me what should be given 
to me. It is not his flourishing prosperity that I am thinking 
about. 
59. O prince, I do not beg for gold, nor for foodgrains 
nor for horse, elephants, villages nor clothes whereby he might 
incur any loss. 
60. O foremost one among embodied beings, O son, 
only that was requested for by me whereby he could please his 
own body. But out of delusion, he does not give it to me. 
61. O prince, the excellent king was requested for by 
me to help his own body for his own happiness. 
62. The Lord has now landed himself in a terrible 
mess of falsehood on a par with imbibing liquor. 
63. I will have to forsake your father who has fallen 
off from truthfulness, who speaks harsh words, has eschewed 


1668 
Ndrada Purdna 
and is false, roguish and base. My stay alongwith him is 
impossible. 
64. On hearing the words of Mohini, the son Dharmah- 
gada said : 
“As long as I am alive, my father cannot be false in 
respect of anything. 
65. O fair lady, return. I shall do whatever is desired 
by you. O gentle lady no falsehood has ever been uttered 
before by my father. 
66-67. How can that king speak falsehood, now that I 
his son, am here ? The whole world consisting of the Devas, 
Asuras and human beings is established in his truthful¬ 
ness; the abode ofVaivasvata (Yama) has been made void of 
sinners and cleared of sinners by him. His fame spreads every¬ 
where. The whole sphere of the Cosmic egg has been pervaded 
by his fame. 
68. How can that king get involved in false utterances. 
I have not heard my father’s words. How can I believe in an 
indirect (reported) statement (said to have been uttered in 
my absence) ? 
69-70. O splendid-faced lady, take mercy on me and 
return.” 
On hearing these words of Dharm^gada, O king, 
Mohini returned with (her hands) resting on the shoulders of 
her son to the place where Rukmahgada, as refulgent as the 
sun, was lying down as though dead. 
71-72. She made her son sit on the bed of Rukmahgada 
which was equipped with gold, was brightly illuminated by 
gemset lamps, and decorated in variegated forms by corals; its 
extremely tender (soft-looking) legs were fashioned out of 
adamantine jewels. It was long and wide and charming beyond 
comparison. 
73-75. With palms joined in reverence, he spoke to his 
fath er with bland speech. “O dear father, this mother of 
of mine, here says that you are a liar. How can you be, O 
king, a liar on this Earth ? When the kingdom consisting of 
the treasury hoarded with gems, possessing el^hants, horses, 
chariots, etc., extending over the whole world containing the 


UUarabhAga 25.76-82 
1669 
seven oceans is being ruled by you, O Lord, give everything 
to her, everything whatever has been promised to her. 
76. O dear father, as long as I hold the bow who can 
act against you ? Give even the post of Indra to the gentle 
lady. Know that Indra has been defeated. 
77. The region of Brahma, which is difficult of access, 
is unsullied and can be approached only by Yogins. I am 
willing to give that too to her after propitiating the lotus- 
deity born by means of penance. 
78. After conquering human beings, Devas and 
Danavas, I will give whatever my mother wishes for in 
the nether worlds, on the Earth, in the heaven or in any 
other region. 
79. O king, since I am your slave, I may even be sold. 
If I am considered insigniheant, may I be entrusted to a sinful 
Gandala.* I shall be his servant and be fed by him. 
Or 
79. O king, since I am your slave, sell me or my mother 
and propitiate the daughter of Ku.sa-emblemed deity (i.e. 
Brahma) lest there should be, O Lord of men, the (stigma) of 
falsehood on you in the world. 
80. O Lord of the Earth, there is nothing in the three 
worlds, which is difficult for me to do and which hence cannot 
be given to her, should she like it. O leading king, give her 
even my life or that of my mother. 
81. O Lord of kings, by that very thing, be endowed 
with good renown for ever. You can illuminate the groups of 
kings with your attributes (like the moon) that brightens the 
sky by means of its rays. 
82. It is true what Manu has said that there will be sin 
in the destruction of one’s reputation as killing of one’s own 
progeny (or the subjects). But O king, how can I otherwise, 
wipe off the pure (stainless) fame and be happy ? Hence this 
course is proper. 
!. This it mn obvious reference to king Hariicandra who for sage 
Viivkmitra sdd his wife and ton to stick to the truth. 


1670 
JfitFad^ Pur^ 
CHAPTER TWENTYSIX 
The story of Mohini 
The king said : 
1. O son, may my fame perish. May I be called a liar. 
May I even fall into a terrible hell. But how should I take 
food on the day of Hari ? 
2-3. O son, let this gentle lady, Mohini go to the abode 
of Brahma. This lady says to me foolishly and childishly for 
many times. “Excepting your taking food on the day of Hari 
that is destructive of sins, I do not wish for anything else such 
as kingdom, Earth, wealth, etc.’* 
4. Even If I am to be born in the despicable species of 
a germ, I will not take food on the day of Hari. 
5. This Dundubhi (drum) has loudly proclaimed (my 
views) and has instructed the people. How can it be made 
false ? 
6. Is it desirable to live for a hundred years after taking 
the forbidden food, after approaching a forbidden woman and 
after drinking the prohibited beverage ? 
7. Even if I were charged with falsehood and have 
strayed away from the royal policy and am insulted and 
rebuked by the people, I will not take food on the day of 
Hari. 
8. Even if I were to die due to the separation from the 
lady of tremulous side-glances, that is preferable, but I will 
never take food on the day of Hari. 
9. How can I give excessive delight to Yama by 
making the miserable men proceed alongwith the path 
leading to hell ? 
10. O dear son, the rows of hell which had been made 
empty by me, will be filled with people if I take food. 
11. Let not any lady bear in her womb such a son as 
would cause delight to the enemies though he is efficient 
enough to destroy them. 
12. She requests only for this viz : taking food on the 
day of Vi^u. I shall not grant the request of Mohini even if 
I am requested for it by the Devas and Asuras. 


UttarabkSga 26.13—27.5 
1671 
13-14. He may even drink poison, he may enter fire, he 
may jump down from a lofty mountain; he may cut off his 
head with an excellent sword that brightens the sky; but king 
Rukmangada will never take food on the day of Hari, on 
this Earth. My name Rukmangada is famous in the three 
worlds. 
15. How can I, by taking food on the Ekadasi day, 
destroy the reputation earned by me—accumulated by me 
through the observance of fast on the Ekadasi day. 
16. Even if it dies, goes off, falls down, perishes, breaks 
into pieces, my heart shall not desist from this for the sake of 
Mohini. 
17. I may even forsake my life along^ith the worlds, 
my wives and servants. But I will never resort to the taking 
of food on the auspicious day of Visnu. 
CHAPTER TWENTYSEVEN 
The story of Kdsfhild* 
Vasiftha said : 
1-2. On hearing the words of his father, the son 
Dharmahgada called his mother named Sandhyavali who was 
auspicious, lustrous like ten thousand suns, of beautiful breasts 
and who protected the entire earth by the pacing of her steps 
over it. 
3. At the instance of her son, she immediately reached 
the presence of the king. The words of Mohini as well as those 
of his father were repeated to her. 
4-5. Get an agreement effected between these two—con¬ 
sole Mohini who tenaciously clings to (the stipulation of) 
*Standard dictionaries like SKD, MW, give a ‘plantain tree” as the 
meaning of Kaff/nii but the story shows it to be a worm in the wood. 


1672 
Ndrada PurSna 
taking food by the king on the day of Hari. Let something be 
done so that my father does not swerve from truth and 
also does not take food. Let there be happiness to both. 
6. O king, (Mandhata), on hearing the words of her son 
the gentle lady Sandhyavali spoke these soft words to Mohini, 
the daughter of Brahma ; 
7. O beautiful lady, do not be importunate. By no means 
will the king taste the sinful food (cooked rice when the day of 
Hari has arrived. 
8-9a. Closely follow the king. He is the eternal preceptor. 
Just as the worlds of Savitrl were free from impurities, 
so also will be the worlds of that woman who always 
carries out the directions of her husband. 
9b-l0a. O gentle lady, formerly, he was overwhelmed by 
passion and beguiled. If then, he had offered his hand to 
you, on the mountain, that should not be thought much of 
(no capital be made out of it). He does give what should not 
be given. Do not beg for what should not be given. 
10b-12. Even an adversity is beneficent to one who 
strictly adheres to the path of the good. O blessed lady, even 
during his boyhood, food has not been taken by him during 
the day of Hari. How will he then take food now on the day 
of Visnu (EkadasI). O lady of sweet and charming thighs, 
you may very well choose some other boon for something 
rare. 
13-14. The king will definitely give it to you. Desist 
from the insistence on the taking of food. If you are convinc¬ 
ed, O gentle lady, that it was I who brought up Dharman- 
gada, choose the kingdom alongwith our own lives, O lady of 
auspicious holy rites. (Choose the entire worlds) consisting of 
seven continents and many rivers, forests and mountains. 
15. O lady of large eyes, and slender waist, for the sake 
of my husband I shall bow down to your feet though I am the 
eldest and you are the youngest. 
16. The woman who traps and gets her husband involved 
in the faults due to the verbal pledge and makes him do what 
should not be done is sinful and she will stay in the hell. 
17. After falling off from the terrible hdl, she takes 


Uttarabhdga 27.18-27 
1673 
twelve successive births as a sow. Thereafter, she is born as a 
Can(^alL 
18. It is after knowing this aberration resulting from 
sins, that O gentle lady, O lady of beautiful thighs, O charming 
lady, you have been prevented by me with the feelings of a dear 
friend. 
19. Good counsel must be given to an enemy by one who 
wishes for piety. What then, O lotus-faced lady to you who 
remains as a friend of mine ? 
20. On hearing the words of Sandhyavali, Mohiiii the 
fascinating lady spoke to the eldest wife of her husband whose 
complexion was lustrous like gold. 
21-22. Mohini said—“O lady of beautiful eyebrows, 
you are worthy of being honoured by me. I shall carry out 
your instructions. If the king does not wish to do what is 
being sung about by Narada and other scholarly sages, viz taking 
food on the day of Hari, O gentle lady, may another thing, 
greater than your death, (?) be pursued. 
23. O ble.ssed lady, this is indeed painful to me also, but 
I prattle thus, thanks to divine intercession. Who likes self- 
slaughter? Who desires to swallow poison ? 
24. Who wishes to fall down from the lop of a mountain ? 
Who wants to play with snakes living in burrows ? Who likes 
to rush at lions and tigers ^ Who wants to swim across the sea ? 
25. Who wants to indulge in harsh words and false state¬ 
ments? Who is fond of outraging the modesty of another man’s 
wife ? Who likes to eat unwholesome food ? Who desires to eat 
the forbidden food in the world ? 
26-27. Who wants to go hunting deer ? Who likes to 
play the game of dice ? Who likes to enter into risky adventure? 
Who wants all these such as cutting of grass and hewing of 
wood; trampling and holding of clods of earth, harassing of minor 
deities* (?), playing in water or with fire and similar things ? 
Yet O beautiful lady, urged by the deity (or Fate) a man does 
all these things. 
* In the reading deh&nitn instead oi dev&nam, it means‘'minor beings- 
(such as poor worms, etc.) 


1674 
N&rada Purdna 
28. A man who deserves to be in the hell, does all 
inauspicious things that destroy his body in the form of fame 
and that make him fall off from the three aims of life. 
29-31. I am naturally sinful and wicked in my eviP 
actions. I am desirous of saying extremely harsh words. The 
child is born with the same emotions and feelings as the 
progenitor has at the time of discharging semen into the 
vaginal passage. I have been created by the lotusborn 
deity Brahma who had his emotions disturbed by arguments 
against king Rukmahgada. I have the form of a fair- 
complexioned lady but defiled in emotions. I shall be the per¬ 
petrator of some evil action in regard to the king. 
32-34. O gentle lady, it is neither the Lagna nor the 
planet, nor the Hora (the hour, the rising of the zodiacal sign) 
that can indicate the future nature. The emotional feeling at that 
time (i.e. the time of conception) should be taken up (for con¬ 
sideration) The son is also born with the same emotion. In a 
son born with that ill feeling, there is no courtesy or kindness, 
there is neither shame nor affection nor any Dharma (piety) 
also, O gentle lady. In spite of his knowledge about his 
evil tendencies he pursues the same feelings. 
35. I am going to say something that will take away 
your life, that of our husband and that of all women folk along- 
with the world. It spoils my merits (dharma) and may cause 
slander against me. O timid lady, it is impossible to conceive 
mentally about it. 
36. If you do according to my suggestion, your fame in 
the world will be great. It will cause the fame of your husband 
to spread; it is conducive to the attainment of heaven; your 
son will be praised and thereby my lot will be controversial 
and full of condemnation. 
Vasiffha said : 
37. O Lord, on hearing the words of Mohini the gentle 
lady Sandhyavali (screwed up all her courage) and urged that 
young woman saying “Tell me, Tellme”^. 
1. This sinister confession of Mohini—the pangs of conscience 
(whether sincere or hypocritical) prepares the tense background for the 
terrible catastrophe which U impending. 


Uttarabhdga 27.38-47 
1673 
38. “Of what nature are the words you are going to 
speak which will cause sorrow to me ? In making my husband 
truthful, misery cannot be caused to me by any means. If it 
is done for the name of my husband, I am not distressed at my 
death, or at the death of my son or at the destruction of my 
kingdom. 
39. If the wife is affluent but sinful, and hence, O fair- 
complexioned lady, the husband is miserable (it is proclaimed 
that) she will have a downfall (in hell). 
40. That sinful lady falls into hell called Puya (of 
foetid things) and remains there for seventy Yugas. Thereafter, 
she is born as female musk-rat in the Bharata land for seven 
births. 
41-42. Then she is born as a female crow and then a 
female jackal* and mungoose. After taking the birth of a cow, 
she becomes purified. O beautiful lady, she who does not give 
wealth she possesses or her own life for the sake of her husband, 
is born as a worm in the faeces. O splendid lady, after being 
released from the womb of a worm, she is born as a 
Kasthila^ (plantain tree ?) 
43. This happened during my girlhood days. A splitter 
of wood at my father’s place was chopping the wood for fuel 
for a long time. 
44. Inclined to play alongwith my girl friends, I went 
near him as he was splitting the wood. 
45-46. O lady of fair eyebrows, there a worm was seen 
by me coming from between the wood. Its body resembl¬ 
ed butter and it had the lustre of collyrium. It had the length 
of the little finger and the thickness of a finger. On seeing it 
fallen on the ground, a crow came there to peck at it. 
47. Even as the hungry crow was about to peck at it 
with its beak, it was prevented by me instantaneously with a 
lump of clay. 
is a hyper-Sanskritisation of Pkt. Siydti. SK. Srgiili' 
1. A Prakritic formation in Sk. meaning “one who lives in a log 
of wood {kdffhay\ 


1676 
Ndrada Purdrut 
48. O fair lady, it was let off by the crow that was thus 
hit; but it had been pecked at by the beak and wounded. It 
was not able to run away, 
49. It began to tremble. It was about to die. But 
sprinkled with water a little, it regained its normal health. 
50. Then O fair-complexioned lady, the Kasthila spoke 
to me in human voice. She addressed me bymy name Sandhya- 
vali, while I was in the midst of my friends. 
51. “O splendid-faced lady in my previous birth I 
was the daughter of the sage named Sumantu who was omni¬ 
scient. 1 was the wife of Kaundinya. 
.52. I lived in Kanyakubja (Kanauj in U.P.). I was 
affluent, hence, very arrogant. I was the favourite darling of 
my mother, father and other kinsmen. 
53. Then I was given in marriage to the noble-souled 
Kaundinya who was born of a noble family, was celibate (lit. 
who had no physical contact with any other women) and 
befitting me in every respect. 
54. Bed and other things were given to me by my father 
as dowry and present. Ten thousand gold pieces too were given 
to me at the outset by my father-in-law. 
55. I was fully satisfied with the wealth obtained from 
my father as well as father-in-law. I had cows, buffaloes etc. 
I was endowed with affluence (wealth) and foodgrains. 
56. I was liked by my parents-in-law and the common 
people, on account of my good conduct. In due course of time, 
my father-in-law, the knower of the real meaning of the Vedic 
texts, passed away. 
57. Taking the dead body of her husband my mother-in- 
law entered the funeral pyre. Thereafter, my husband offered 
water libations to his parents and performed their Sraddha. 
58. Within two months of that, O gentle lady, my 
husband went to the Royal palace out of curiosity but was 
afterwards overwhelmed by love passions of the heart. 
59. Beautiful courtesans in the prime of their youth 
were seen entering the royal palace by that Brahmana. 
60. With gifts of profuse wealth two of them were taken 
from there and brought to his house. My evil-minded husband 
retained them in his house for dalliance. 


UUarabh&ga 27.61-74 
1677 
61. Using it up the entire wealth of my husband was 
wasted by both of them. O gentle lady, by the time three years 
elapsed, my husband became indigent. 
62. Then he requested me “Give me your ornaments”. 
Those were not given to my husband by me as he was addicted 
to vice. 
63-65. O blessed lady, I took everything and went to 
my father’s abode. (He too followed me there). At my house he 
sold the slaves and other possessions and the money (received 
thereby) was given to the two courtesans. That also was 
exhausted. Whatever was left such as the fields, grains, etc. was 
sold off at throw-away-prices alongwith the garments, utensils 
and other personal effects. My husband thereupon entered the 
great ocean by means of a boat. He went oversea. 
66. He went a long distance seeing wonderful things 
and miracles on the way. O splendid lady, he saw many animals 
of the sea and all their activities. 
67. By the time it had gone a hundred Yojanas, the boat 
was caught in a violent storm. It broke into pieces and all others 
on the boat were killed. 
68-69a. As providence would have it, and urged by his 
Karmans of the previous births, my husband clung to 
a long piece of wood. O gentle lady, led by the wind he reached 
a mountain bedecked with adamantine peaks. 
69b-70. That mountain contained many rivulets and 
fountains, many birds and many trees full of fruits and flowers. 
With its three prominent peaks, it scraped the middle of the 
sky. 
71. O lady of beautiful eyes, on seeing the divine, 
wonderfnl mountain my husbund left off the piece of wood 
(that brought him there) and jocously climbed on to it, as he 
was eager to earn some wealth. 
72. He rested there for a while. When he was over¬ 
whelmed with hunger and thirst, he got up in search of food 
and surveyed the trees all round. 
73-74. He saw ripe grape vines there and ate the grapes 
joyfully. He was a bit assuaged and he saw a very clean big Sida 
tree with a thick shade and its thick foliageTesembling the 


1678 Ndrada PurH^o 
spreading clouds, and had the height of fifty men. Spreading 
his upper cloth he went to sleep under its shade. 
75. Overcome by fascinating sleep his eyes began to roll. 
By the time the sun had set the excessively tired (Brahmana) 
went to sleep. 
76. When the sun had set and the night had set in, a 
terrible Raksasa roaring like the cloud came there rushing in. 
77. Like the ten-headed Ravana who had abducted 
Sita, he had carried the slender-1 imbed auspicious daughter of 
the ruler ofKaii, named Ratnavali on his lap. 
78. Without washing her feet, she had gone to sleep with 
her head directed towards the north. The virgin of beautiful 
buttocks was desirous of obtaining a husband, but did not obtain 
one befitting her. 
79. That girl was the foremost among all women. Over¬ 
whelmed by slumber she was crying. In the matter of giving 
her in marriage, her father had been extremely anxious day 
and night. 
80. O lady ofslender limbs, this beautiful girl, occupying 
a bed spread in the shadow of the lamp was seen by the sin¬ 
ful demon who was roaming about. 
81-83. He saw her in the light of gems and jewels 
that were shining like lamps. She was wearing two 
bangles well studded with bright gems and jewels. In each 
bangle there were ten jewels, and in the necklace of gold 
coin (?) there were fifteen jewels. On the crest, there were 
seven jewels. On the armlets there were eight and five 
(thirteen) jewels. The demon abducted such a virgin bedecked 
in jewels and with gold-like lustrous complexion. He carried 
away the girl of sweet smiles from the palace of the king. 
Through the aerial path he reached his own abode in a 
moment. 
84-87. He came to that mountain where my husband 
(was sleeping) beneath the l§ala tree. There she saw his cave 
that had the lustre of gold. Unable to bear the terror struck 
by him, she entered the cave even as he was looking on. The 
cave had been beautified by many jewels and itdiad mansions 
of variegated colours. Many articles lay scattered here and 


Uttarahh&ga 27.88-98 
1679 
there. It contained beds and seats. Pols of beverages and 
edibles with various kinds of dishes had been kept there. After 
entering the cave, the demon placed that weeping girl of lily¬ 
like eyes, the excessively frightened girl of plump bosom and 
buttocks, on to a bed. 
88. On hearing the weeping of the girl, his wife the 
ogress hurriedly came to the place where the demon was 
standing. 
89. On seeing that girl whose lustre was like that of 
molten gold and everyone of whose limbs was beautiful, she 
became infuriated. Rebuking her husband she asked thus : 
90. “O ruthless one, why is this girl brought here when 
I am alive ? Do you wish for another wife ? I will no longer 
be your wife then. 
91. That demon joyously spoke to his beloved wife of 
beautiful eyes, the ogress of black eyes who had spoken to him 
thus. 
92. “O splendid-faced lady, this pabulum (eatable) 
prey has been brought by me from Kasi for your sake. A 
second one is standing at the gate. It has been brought to me 
by providence. 
93. O fair-faced lady, a Brahmana is lying beneath the 
Sala tree. Bring him here quickly so that I can make a meal 
of him. 
94. On hearing the words of the Raksasa that virgin 
spoke thus :— “O Raksasi, out of his fear for you, your 
husband utters a lie. 
95-96. He knows that you are old in age, hideous in 
form and torturous in your gait. At night when I was soundly 
sleeping in my father’s house, he came to me passionately. O 
gentle lady, since I am not married he has brought me here 
to make me his wife in spite of my cries.” 
97. On hearing these words uttered by the princess, the 
ogress became extremely infuriated. On seeing the beautiful 
form (of the princess), she decided that it was the truth. In her 
anger she hurled words (at her husband). 
98. She thought thus—“She has been brought here to 
be made his wife. Of necessity, this demon will strike a wedge 
in my head. 


1680 
NOrada Purdna 
99. Let there not be any woman in the tj^ree worlds 
who undergoes the misery of having a co-wife. There will 
hardly be any woman in the three worlds who will survive the 
harassment due to the misery of being a co-wife. 
100. There is no doubt about this that it is the greatest 
of all miseries when there is another woman to have a share 
in the wealth and enjoyment of pleasures.” 
101. After thinking much like this, she spoke these 
words to her husband, “This girl is mine, as this lady of 
charming eyes has been brought by you as food for me. 
102-103a. I shall bring that Brahmana to be your prey, 
O Suvrata (one of holy rites)”. Then the Raksasa urged “Go, 
go quickly. The corner of my mouth drips too much of saliva 
due to my desire to eat him.” 
103b-104. Thereafter, on hearing the words uttered by 
her husband, the terrible Raksasi set out with infinite hope. She 
saw the excellent Brahmana endowed with comely features and 
blooming youth as well as adorned with the jewels of 
learning. 
105. On seeing him she was overwhelmed with love 
pangs in the heart. Through her Maya (power of illusion), she 
became a beautiful maiden of sixteen years and approached 
him. 
106. The maiden of large buttocks spoke to the 
Brahmana with great pleasure—“Who are you ? Whence have 
you come here ? Why do you stay here ? 
107. I ask you this as I am desirous of making you 
my husband. I am an ogress overcome with pangs of love. 1 
have been abandoned by my husband. I have come here to 
make you my husband.” 
108. On hearing her words my husband was frightened. 
O splendid lady, yet he emboldened himself. The intelligent 
(Brahmana) spoke these words :— 
109. “O Ogress, how can there be the copulation of a 
Rak$asi and a human being ? There is no doubt about this 
that men are remembered as the prey of Rak?asas.” 
110. On hearing those words she spoke to him again 
respectfully—“The impossible is made possible, thanks to the 
intercession of the Providence. 


Uttarabhdga 27.111-120 
1681 
111: This is heard in the Parana. This is a future in¬ 
cident mentioned in the Bharata, O Brahma^, Hidamba an 
ogress will become the wife of Bhima.^ 
112. The son procreated by a human being will be 
Ghatotkaca. He will be one who cannot be killed by any 
other weapon. He will attain death through the weapon 
called Sakti (of Indra, hurled by Karna against Ghatotkaca). 
113. Hence, O Brahmana, do not grieve. It is through 
Providential intercession that I have become your wife. Fate 
is indeed very powerful. 
114-115. When Indra went to the mortal world to meet 
Bali, my husband, the terrible Raksasa had a convenient 
opportunity. He stole Sakti from his abode as though it 
were the blazing flame. And that Sakti belonging to Indra 
has been kept here in the Sala Tree. 
116. O excellent Brahmana, without killing at least 
one it does not go back to Indra. The person for 
whose slaying it was hurled will perish even if he be immortal. 
117. Hence, I shall climb up to the top of this Sala tree, 
bring the shining l^akti to you and hand it over to you with 
a desire for the death of my husband. 
118. If you do not hit and injure the night-prowler 
with this l§akti, there is no doubt that the evil-minded one 
will swallow you as well as me. 
119. He is a great enemy of yours as well as that of me, 
O scorcher of enemies, since, by that foolish fellow, a virgin 
has been brought here for being made his wife. 
120. Hence, an enmity (inimical feelings) has been 
generated in me against my husband of the wicked soul. If 
he is killed, it will be possible for both of us to have sexual 
dalliance. 
1. The future tense in W. Ill and II2 regarding Bhima’s marriage 
with Hidambi and the birth of their son Ghatotkaca and his death by a 
8akti in the Bh&rata war is used to show that this Kk;thil& incident (csp. her 
previous birth) is more ancient than the Mahabh^rata-history-(mentioned 
only as Bhdrata in the N.P.). 


1682 
KdradaPurdna. 
121. O Rativardhana (one who intensihes, lustful¬ 
ness) if I am making a false statement to you, may I not 
be the partaker of benefits of the merit performed by 
myself. 
122. If this were to be a lie, may I attain that condition 
of a despicable nature which is attained by men on committing: 
Brahmana slaughter. 
123. O Brahmana, may I get that state, the terrible 
state that is laid down in the case of an evil-minded Brahmana 
who drinks liquor. 
124. By uttering a lie, may I attain that fate, O- 
excellent Brahmana, of that creature that is engaged in 
seducing the preceptor’s wife and that resorts to sinful 
actions. 
125-126. If I tell a lie, may I incur that sin which the 
following undergo viz he who steals gold and misappropriates 
the sum given on trust; he who forcibly occupies another 
man’s land; he who commits suicide; he who cats meat on. 
the Paftcami (fifth) and Astami (eighth) day, of a lunar 
fortnight. 
127. The man who commits the sin of cutting off a 
tree or cohabiting with a woman on the new moon day, the 
sin acquired by taking in ghee while one is defiled by Ucchista,. 
the sin of sexual intercourse during the day time. 
128. The householder Brahmana who does not perform 
the holy rite of Vaisvadeva, the person who does not give alms 
to the mendicant, the widow who takes meal twice a day.' 
129. The person who uses gingelly oil on the day of 
Samkranti (the transit of the sun from one sign of Zodiac tO' 
another), the person who goes to the holy centre along with 
the cows (?), the person who takes bath in another man’s tank 
without taking out mud therefrom. 
130. The person who chews the tooth stick twig from a 
forbidden tree; the person who docs not serve cows, but binds 
them; the person who treads the heretic’s path. 
1. Formerly, widows were looked upon as Yatis and all the 
reitrictions of a Sannyisin were imposed on them. Hence this restrictioffc 
of limiting to one meal for widows. 


UttarabhUga 27.13U141 
1683 
131. The person who performs the worship of the Pitrs 
and the Devas standing on a piece of wood or rock (?), the 
person who keeps only a buffalo without a cow also, the 
person who takes food off a bell metal vessel that is broken. 
132. The person who performs holy rites clad in un¬ 
washed or tom clothes or those belonging to others. The 
person who stares at a naked woman and the person who 
partakes of forbidden food. 
133. O Brahmana, if I tell you a lie, may I be tarnished 
with the same sin as that of a perscm who creates obstacles in 
the discourse about !§iihari. 
134. O Brahmana, if I tell a lie, may I be the person 
who incurs all these sins^ that 1 have mentioned and also those 
I have not mentioned.’* 
135. O gentle lady, my husband who was thus addressed 
by that sinful woman was deluded by the inevitable future, 
and he decided accordingly, saying "So be it." 
136. That indigent Brahmana who had been indulging 
in vices and so perturbed extremely due to my harsh words 
spoke thus to the ogress. His words (proved to be) the best- 
ower of all achievements. 
137. "Bring that ^akti quickly. I shall carry out your 
directions. When the Raksasa is killed, all these things should 
be given by you to me. 
138-139a It is with a keen desire for wealth that I 
undertook (the voyage) through the sea full of whales and 
sharks". On hearing these words, the ogress brought the Sakti 
that was on the top of the tree and that emitted brilliant lustre. 
She gave it to my husband for the realisation of their desire. 
139b-140. In the meantime, the Raksasa who was over¬ 
whelmed by passion attempted to rape the virgin. She became 
terrified and spoke these words—"O Raksasa, there is a great 
sin in cohabiting with a virgin. 
141. While I was sleeping 1 had been fraudulently 
brought here from my father’s house at Kaii. It is not your 
fault in this regard. My fate is evidently of this nature. 
1. W. 122*134 record a eeriet of acts which were regarded as sin» 
or undesirable ones in the riite Indian society of the NP-Period. 


1684 
Mibrada Pur&ifa 
142. I am in the middle of a cave. Who v^ll be the 
protector here ? It is through fate that one gets a husband. It 
is through fate that one gets a wife. 
143. Fate alone plays the chief part in the matter of 
acquiring learning, house, happiness, wealth and nobility of 
birth. It is urged by the fate that man goes anywhere. 
144. O night-prowler, of necessity you alone will be my 
husband. When the path is traced out by fate, what will (even) 
a schcilar do ? 
145. Hence bring that Brahmana who has resorted to 
that Sala tree. Fetch ghee, water, Ku^a grass and fire. 
Celebrate marriage in accordance with the injunctions. 
146. Even without the Darbha grass, water and fire, 
even without the traditional rites laid down, a marriage may 
be fruitful if it is blessed with the permissive statement of a 
firldimana. 
147. O R^sasa, if that Brahmana has not already been 
killed (bring him here quickly). When the holy rites of Homa 
have been performed, you will be able to eat him up. 
148. When these words were addressed by that princess 
the Rak^asa had full belief in his mind. He set out proudly. 
149. Afflicted by pangs of love he hastened out to bring 
that Brahmana. 
150. O gentle lady, as he was setting out he himself 
sneezed, his left eye throbbed and his own clothes dropped 
down. 
151-153. Unmindful of everything, he set out from the 
cave. There he saw his wife in human form engaged in that form 
of union as is usual between a husband and a wife. She said— 
*T am abandoning you, a sinful Raksasa of ruthless action. 
You are enamoured of a young woman of human species. 
You are the defUer of my body.” On hearing these terrible 
words uttered by his wife, the night-prowler (demon) became 
infuriated and malicious. He rushed at her. 
154. He lifted up his arms. He kept his mouth wide 
open. He rushed at them to devour both of them. Uttering 
curses of harmful nature, he rushed at them like a violent 
storm, that blows in the proper season. 


Utlarabhdga 28.1-12 
1685 
C3I1APTER TWENTYEIGHT 
Kdfthild's story {Contd.) 
Kdsthild said : 
1. On seeing the Raksasa, comparable to the black anni- 
hilator Yama, rushing at them, the Ogress became afraid and 
spoke thus to my husband. 
2. “Hurl this Sakti that is as refulgent as fire and 
bedecked in gold. May this husband of mine die and become 
the beloved ofDigambara’s enemy (i.e. Yama). 
3. At her instance, my husband assumed great manliness 
and hurled the massive l§akti at the chest of the Raksasa. 
4-5. The Sakti that blazed brilliantly like fire and illu¬ 
minated the ten quarters, the point of which was sharp and 
emitted divine rays and was jingling with hundreds of tinkling 
bells fitted into it, the body of which was smeared with red san¬ 
dal paste, and was beautified with (the covering) of red cloth. 
It went off from the hands of the Brahmana, pierced into the 
heart of the Raksasa. 
6-7. After reducing the Raksasa to ashes, it went up into 
the sky. After felling (killing) her husband through the hands of 
the Br^mana, the ogress considered herself as having achieved 
her goal. Hairs stood on end due to her delight. The delighted 
ogress then spoke to the splendid-eyed Brahmana. 
8. “O my lover, come on. Enter freely my beautiful 
cave. Enjoy all the great pleasures, divine as well as human, in 
my company.** 
9. “So be it’* said my husband who was extremely de¬ 
lighted. Then she took my husband and entered her cave joy¬ 
fully. 
10. Without caring to look at the ashes to which her 
husband's body had been reduced, she clasped my husband 
with her protruding breasts. 
11-12. She pointed out to him that maiden ofslender body 
who was lying down on the bed.—“O excellent Brahmana, 
this lady of black side-glances, with lips red like the Bimba 
ihiit and of gold-like lustrous complexion had been brought (by 


1686 SSrada PurSm 
my husband) to make her his wife, from Varanasi, the city 
whose limits arc not transgressed by all sins. 
13. That city is called Sakti Ksetra (the sacred 
place of Divine Power) and is holy and destructive of sins. It is 
the abode of Tripurari (God Siva) and it extends to five 
Gavyutis (i.e. fifteen Kilometers). 
14. Men who die therein are never reborn into any 
womb. Kindly take this lady of bright eyes to her father’s 
house. 
15. These jewels, beds and seats are at your disposal. If 
you wish you can sell all these things including myself. 
16. O Brahmana, for your sake the terrible Raksasa was 
slain by me who am enamoured of your comely features. He has 
been sent to the abode of Yama. 
17. Hence, O Lord, have confidence in me. O large- 
eyed one, I am your devotee. I can assume any form I like. 
‘Enjoy me.’ 
18. O lady of beautiful eyes, on hearing these words of 
the love-lorn ogress, my husband spoke these words to the 
Rak^sl in the presence of that virgin. 
19. As he was guarded and suspicious he spoke sweet 
words— 
“O blessed lady, (it is mentioned) in the treatises on polity 
and ethics that women should not be trusted. 
20-21. How will she not injure me, she who kills her 
husband ever since her girlhood days ? Considering another 
man more handsome, this lascivious woman (may cause my 
death). O fair-faced lady, still I continue to believe in you. 
22. O beautiful woman, I have sought refuge in you, 
kill me, if you please, to-day or tomorrow or after a fortnight 
or a month or a year. 
23-24. This must be done by you only thus (as though) 
I have not helped you today (?) For the sake of vengeance 
(help in return ?) the soul must be offered by you. (You must 
give yourself up). Since you unhesitatingly killed your husband 
for my sake, O lady of good eyes, I do not say anything 
more.’* 
25. On hearing the words of my husband, she sp>oke 


Vttarabhiga 28.26-32 
1687 
thus : *‘0 Brahmana, killing some one who has trusted in one 
is on a par with the slaughter of a Brahmana. 
26. If, on account of this, you consider me a cruel Rak- 
sasi, the destroyer of her husband (my reply is) I hate my 
husband. How will I kill one who confides in me and believes 
in me? 
27. The way of Dharma (virtue and piety) is very subtle. 
It cannot be understood by any means, by any one anywhere, 
whether Daitya or Raksasa or others. But some men are 
clever in thinking about the subtleties of Dharma. 
28. (Those who know Dharma) attain Naiskarmya 
(freedom from the Karmans i.e. Moksa) through their perishable 
physical body. This is heard in the Pur^as. Same thing is being 
mentioned here. 
29. It is through the favourable nature of Dharma that 
Visnu the powerful God could assume ten incarnations. But 
in them much misery was experienced by him.* 
30. Where is Rama, the abode of Sri, who for the sake 
ofSita, accompanied by Laksmana lamented in the course of the 
events and they were bound by the serpentine nooses ? 
31. Where is Vasudeva’s son, the lord of Devas, of the form 
of perfect knowledge ? And where is the fully worldly man who 
sheds tears saying “O what a pity ?” who makes signs and ges¬ 
tures with his eyes and who acts as servant unto Partha (i.e. 
Arjuna), Ugrasena and others ? (What a lot of difference there 
is !) 
32. O Brahma^, the activities of the Lord are beyond 
human scrutiny* though he abides by the favourable Dharma. 
Vy^a® the son of Paraiara, is himself the classifier of the Vedas. 
He was a man of truthful vision. His very form is worthy of being 
worshipped. (But) he was born of the semen virile of one who 
destroyed the virginity (of a woman). Hence he is called a 
Kanina (son of an unmarried girl). Moreover, he had sexual 
intercourse with the wives of his younger brothers.® 
1. VV. 29-47 give instances of adkama passed on as Dharma. The 
Rikfost describes the power of fate over all beings. 
2. Hiis refers to the births oH Dhrtar^9tra and from the 
queens of Vicitraviiya, the son of Satyavatl and Santanu. To have a heir 


1688 
Ndrada Puram 
33. i^ntanu was a Parivettr (one who had married before 
his elder brother Devapi). He was the second husband of a lady 
(Satyavati who married twice). At first he was the husband of 
the heavenly river. His son was the veritable Vasu (Bhisma), the 
unmarried elder brother (whose younger brother vicitra-Virya 
was married before him); he attained death due to the argu¬ 
ments of a woman (Amba) who became Sikhandin in the next 
birth. 
34. The Pandavas were born of adultery (as each was 
born from a different person other than their legal father 
Pandu. Thus they were actually bastards. All of them cohabit¬ 
ed with the same woman, viz. Draupadi. Still their glorification 
is considered holy and sacred. It is destructive of sins. 
35-37. Visnu whom people meditate upon and truly 
remember, who is called Yogamurti ( Embodiment of Yoga) 
and who is eternal, was enamoured of courtesans. Srinrsimha 
who advised Prahlada and others and who destroyed Asuras is 
considered as the deity and Lord of the Dcvas (Defective). He 
is the destroyer of even the impression of worldly existence, he is 
the deity and Lord of the Devas. He was the destroyer of 
Hiranyaksa (Hiranyakasipu ?) but he stayed in his abode (?) 
38. The son of Jamadagni(Para5urama) had realised his 
soul himself. He had destroyed his sins by means of his austeri¬ 
ties. He was Lord himself. But he was the perpetrator of such 
deeds as massacres of Ksattriyas and killing of children in the 
womb. 
39. He himself was a leading Yogin. He was a Brah¬ 
ma^ engaged in educating people, but acting within the 
p)crview of Dharma, he became one who brought agony into the 
world. 
40. Narada was a Narada (destroyer of groups of men)^ 
again and again. Narada was devoted to N^ayana. Nara 
to the Throne, Satyavati requested Vyasa who was bom of her from 
Parasara, to have sons from the queens of his younger brother Vicitravirya. 
{Mbh-Adi). 104 and 105). 
1. These difierent connotations of Nirada are peculiaP. 


Uttarabhdga 28.41-48 
1689 
means one who is a benefactor of men and also one who is 
immortal. 
41. Gautama was Gotama (most timid like a cow). O 
Brahmana, he was devoted to the activities of a cowherd. He 
had written a treatise (i.e. Nyaya sutra) the topics of which are 
beyond the pale of the Vedas; (but he is called) one who helps 
the Vedas. 
42-44a Vasistha and even Agastya, who were born of 
Urvasi, are considered to be masters. By Vasistha a sacred trea¬ 
tise of excellent nature named Vasisthasmrti had been com¬ 
posed for helping the whole world. In that work the Puranas 
and the Vedas are considered to be equal. He was himself 
the preceptor of iSri Rama who was none other than the 
Almighty (Visnu). Why was he cursed by Gadhija (Visva- 
mitra) ?* Why was he born in the womb of a lower animal ?* 
44b-45a The powerful Agastya had overpowered the Vindhya 
mountain, the demon Vatapi and also the ocean. How is he 
the receiver of hire money (?) ® He served in the way that 
is difficult for others to do. 
45b-46a. The creator is worthy of being worship¬ 
ped by the sun etc. and is the honourable grandsire of the 
world. How did he become enamoured of a lady of fascinating 
beauty and give up his body ? 
46b-47a. God Siva, the bestower of auspicious things, is 
the lord of Prakrti. He is greater than the greatest. How 
did he carnally approach the wives of the Devas ? How does 
he pursue inauspicious activities in the cremation ground ? 
47b-48. Hence, O Brahmana, it is the prescribed rule 
that good conduct must be pursued duly. He who is the foremost 
among the knowers of things shall not abandon good conduct 
by having the egotist feeling, (then) he will obtain the highest 
peace conducive to virtue here and hereafter. 
1. when Vasistha learnt how Visvimitra persecuted his patron- 
disciple Hariscandra, he cursed Vi^vamitra to be a stork. In retaliation 
Visvamitra cursed him to be a kingtisher, (DB. VI. 13. 34-47). 
2. This refers to ^astya’s employment as a bearer of the palanquin 
of Nahu$a while he was in the position of Indra. Agastya however cursed 
Nabu?a who was then transformed into a serpent. 
Mbh. Udyoga ch. 17; Sdnti 342-51. 


1690 
Ndrada Purina 
49. Dharma is remembered as conducive to Apavarga 
(salvation). Wealth is the only thing through which Dharma 
can be achieved. That Dharma I have achieved in the form of 
wealth that is the greatest of all. 
50-51. O Brahmana, listen. In this connection, I shall 
recount to you the subtle way of Dharma. Abducting a girl, 
my husband was coming this way. He saw you were involved 
because you were brought there by your Karman. That was 
not his fault. He was asked by me—“Why was this girl 
brought ?“ 
52-53. Then a lie was uttered by him that it was for his 
food. On hearing that, the girl in bondage told me everything 
pointing out his desire. Those who say that in wedded life the 
wife is a hindrance to salvation, cannot be understood as 
knowers of reality. Since the wife is not an obstacle. 
54. Only she is the real wife who is able to uplift a 
husband falling into the hell. Any other woman is like a 
twining creeper of Karman, the bestower of worldly bondage. 
55. What is sinful in this you hear from me, O my 
bridegroom who have come to me by yourself. Even if the vital 
breaths come to the throat, falsehood should not be uttered. 
56. One must always be truthful. Dharma is directly 
based on Truth. God Brahma is based on Truth. All good 
men abide by Truth. 
57. The entire universe is established in the Truth, the 
universe consisting of the mobile and the immobile beings is 
always based on Truth. The words “One shall always speak the 
Truth”^ are proclaimed in the Vedantas. 
58. The Truth is of the form of Brahman. We call 
Brahman by the word Truth. O Brahmai^, the Truth is 
always auspicious. It is the bestower of everything that 
is auspicious. 
59. Untruth is the bestower of self destruction though 
immediately it may breed the confidence of belief. But 
1. In various Upani$ads such commandments are found e.g. 
Taittiriya I. 11.1, Kau^itald 1.6. 


Uttarabhiga 28.60-69 
1691 
Truth should not be spoken to women. Listen to the reason 
thereof. 
60. In such directives as *‘Do not reveal to the woman 
(the extent of) the treasury”, it prevents future faults. That 
is said to be the cause of Dharma which reveals the subtlety of 
Dharma. 
61. That is called wedded life where the witnesses of 
marriage had been Ku^ grass, Brahmanas, water, fire, Vedas, 
Earth, time, space and Devas. 
62. The rite of acceptance is laid down -in the celebra*- 
tion of marriage. If the woman and the man are consecrated 
by Brahmanas, they are regarded as the teacher and the 
disciple. 
63. Hence, the bride and the bridegroom are mutually 
related as teachers and disciples. No difference at all, even 
to the minutest extent, should be understood by a discriminating 
man as existing between these two. 
64. The importance of women and employees is in ac¬ 
cordance with the difference in rites. If there is the defect of 
contrariety (in relations etc.) anywhere, the cause of it is fate 
alone. 
65-66. The entire universe consisting of gods, Asuras, 
and human beings is subservient to Fate. Fate is the accumula¬ 
tion of impressions of Karmas in the previous births. He 
who enjoys and experiences whatever comes to his lot, whether 
auspicious or inauspicious and behaves spontaneously with both, 
is called a quiescent p>erson by the learned knowledgeable 
men. 
67. A quiet person whose activity is based on the Truth 
enables the world to cross mundane existence. It is by knowing 
such and other details that my husband was prevented from 
falling into hell. 
68. He was sanctihed by me by preventing him from 
committing the sin of violating virginity. That is the help 
rendered by me. He has now attained the goal of the 
virtuous and lucky men after having been struck down by you. 
69. My husband was helped by me who know the sub¬ 
tlety of Dharma. O excellent Brahmana, I have acquired merit 
(Dharma) in saving your life. 


1692 
Nirada PurSna 
70-71 a. What has been achieved by that Dharma > Know 
it properly from me. I who am born in the species of an 
ogress, I who have been the wife of a Raksasa, have now become 
a Brahmana woman who can assume any form, the reason 
being Dharma. 
7lb-72. Dharma is the wish-yielding cow (K^adhenu). 
Satisfactions the heavenly Nandana park. Vidya is the cause 
of salvation and Trsna (insatiable thirst) is the river 
Vaitaranl. My husband who was about to fall into Vaitarani 
has been redeemed by me. 
73. O Brahmana, I have helped this fair-faced girl also 
because she has been placed near a person who is the highest 
of all castes. She will be your wife in her father’s house. 
74-75. I will be guarding her and you for ever enlighten¬ 
ing you with Dharma. Before my contact you had a wife, O 
Brahmapa, who will be born as a being in lower animal species. 
Later on, as a result of my blessings, she will be released. 
76. O Brahmana, in my previous birth I was the most 
beautiful woman in the world well-known as Kandali. I was the 
daughter of the sage Aurva. 
77. By the power of penance I was born as one of a 
twin. My brother born along with me, was suppressed by 
Aurva himself for the cause of Dharma. 
78-79. I was educated and given in marriage to Durvasas. 
O leading Brahmana, it was a result of my previous Karman 
that I attained him as my husband. I quarrelled with my 
husband. Hence, I was cursed by him and reduced to ashes. As 
a little of my sins remained, I was bom as ogress. 
80. In that birth this brilliant leader of demons Gobhila 
was attained by me as my husband but he has been struck 
down by you. 
81. O excellent Brahmana, in his youth he had incurred 
a curse “Your death will be initiated by your wife on account 
of a certain princess.” 
82. As a result of my previous Karman, I have been 
bereft of the nature of an ogress. Being powerful on account 
of the auspicious actions, 1 become your helpmate. ^ 
83. At the outset my husband abducted a virgin and I 


Uttarabhdga 28.84—29.3 
1693 
had been made miserable by him. Hence, O Brahmana, 
he has been killed by me. 
84. O lover, since you put trust in me with all your 
heart and soul in every respect I shall protect you in every 
respect. 
85. This is my binding by oath with five elements as my 
witness and uttered in the presence of the all-pervading person. 
It is the truth. 
86. O excellent Brahmana, you will not alter this agree¬ 
ment in any respect. O bestower of honour, you must abide by 
me in all activities.” 
87. On hearing the words uttered by the ogress, the 
noble Brahma^ carried out all instructions and she did 
accordingly. 
88-89. Thereafter, the demoness gathered together all 
wealth from the cave. She assumed the form of a she-elephant 
and kept my husband on her back along with Ratnavali, the 
large-eyed girl. Joyously she went through the path of 
firmament, O lady of good eyes, towards Kasl. 
CHAPTER TWENTYNINE 
The description of Kiii 
Kdffhild said : 
1. Thus, O lady of beautiful eyebrows, that ogress who 
had assumed the form of a she-elephant, reached the temple of 
Vi^veia at Kaiil within three Muhurtas. 
2. On reaching that city, the lady of black eyes spoke 
to her husband—“O Lord, this (city) is glorified as the 
axe for the cutting of the tree of sin. 
3. O beloved, this is said to be the dice box for the gold 
of six types of distresses (?) It is destructive of all seeds of 
Karmans, and it is the bestower of salvation on all. 


1694 
Ndrada Purd^ 
4. The Puranas say that it was at first the abpde of 
Visnu.^ No one can ever have salvation in a holy centre not 
belonging to Visnu. 
5. O excellant Brahma^, this was formerly a city of 
Visnu, the bestower of salvation on all creatures and the 
destroyer of every one’s sin. 
6. Once Lord Sankara went there to see Pitamaha (god 
Brahma) the sole creator of all worlds, shining with his own 
splendour. 
7. After going there, Mahadeva bowed down to Brahmi. 
the preceptor of the worlds. He stood in front of him listening 
to the recital of the Vedic lore. 
8. He was delighted on seeing the Lord of the Universe 
joyously reciting the four Vedas by means of the four wonder¬ 
ful faces. 
9. Thereafter, the leader of goblins saw the fifth face of 
Brahma. On observing him to be impudent and arrogant, he 
became malicious instantaneously. 
10. O leading Brahmana, the three-eyed deity, born of 
anger could not brook his audacity. Hence with the tip of 
his nail he cut off the head stationed above in the 
firmament (?) 
11. O excellent Brahmana, the head of Brahma that had 
been severed, stuck up to the sproutlike left hand (of Siva). It 
did not fall off though shaken frequently. 
12. Brahma became sad. He stood there staring at l§iva. 
Siva became ashamed and he hurriedly went out of the place. 
13. Though he tried in many ways impatiently to cast 
off that head, he could not get rid of it. It was a great mystery. 
14. Being perturbed and worried he remembered Vis^u, 
the Garuda-emblemed deity. The moment he was remembered, 
Visnu manifested himself. 
I. 'rhe claim that K&was originally an abode of Vi^^u and that 
Siva begged of him to give that place to himself as a permanent residence 
as a protection against Brahma-hatyd is a Vaifij^avite tilt in the NP. The 
assertion that liberation in sacred place is possible only if it is presided over 
by Visnu u a part of sectarian propaganda. It is also an explanation why 
a particular Tirtba at K&fi was called Kapila-mocana. 


Uttarabhdga 29.15-26 
1695 
15. O Brahmana, on seeing the omnipresent Visnu the 
Lord of the chiefs of the Devas, the bull-emblemed deity who 
had turned pale became humble and bent down his head. 
16. On seeing (Siva) the antagonist of Brahma, sick and 
frightened, Hari consoled him and spoke these words that made 
him satisfied. 
17. “Inasmuch as the head of Brahma had been cut 
off, O Sambhu, the omniscient one, you have committed a sin. 
Experience the fruit thereof for a short while. 
18. O beloved one, a Karman performed by one, whether 
auspicious or inauspicious will yield its fruit which one must, 
of necessity, experience. Even if hundreds of births are to be 
taken, a Karman does not perish without being experienced. 
19. What Can I do ? Where shall I go ? On seeing you 
miserable, O Sambhu, at the sight of your misery, my Pranas 
are agitated and dispirited. 
20. It is my opinion that even the most heinous of all 
great sins are not equal to Brahmana-slaughter. 
21. You are the preceptor of the whole world. You are 
the instructor in Dharma. But, overpowered by the sin of 
Brahmana-slaughter you are incapable of remaining quiet even 
for a moment. 
22. This extremely terrible Hatya (the sin of Brahmana- 
slaughter) emits fish odour; she is senile and sick; she has put 
out her tongue. O Lord of Devas 1 She is running after you 
to catch you. 
23. Hence you must not stay in any single place for a 
while. For the sake of your benefit you have to be wander¬ 
ing (continuously) for twelve years, with the desire for the 
destruction of sins. 
24-25. You must wander for twelve years with the skull, 
begging for alms, washing your left hand in the holy rivers and 
tanks. Then, O Lord of the Devas you will become pure and 
be liberated from this sin.” O Brahmana, on being advised 
thus by Visnu, Siva went over all the places. 
26. In order to get rid of the skull he washed his left 
hand in every sacred water. Wandering thus for three years he 
reached the penance grove of Badarikaframa. 


ie96 
Ndrada Purdm 
27. O bestower of honour, for the sake of alms he stood 
at the threshold of Dharmaputra,^ the lord of the Devas and 
repeatedly said—‘‘Visnu, give me alms.” 
28. On seeing Siva stationed at the threshold, Lord 
Narayana said—“Take the alms”. After saying this he offered 
his right hand. 
29. On seeing Hari attempting to give the alms, O excel¬ 
lent Brahmana, Siva struck his right hand with his trident. 
30-33. Through the three wounds inflicted by (the three 
points of) the trident, three streamlike jets came out. They 
were terrifying to the worlds. They had different colours; they 
were twelve Hastas high. One of the streams was of blood. It 
fell on the skull. The second, a milky stream, reached his face; 
the third, a stream of water came up to Siva in front of him, 
for the sake of saving Siva. Siva resorted to these three 
streams in accordance with the injunctions for the duration 
of three years. Becoming a little delighted, O Brahmana, he 
went to the holy centre of Kuruksetra. Having gone there, he 
became a pillar and fell down. 
34. In the holy centre of Brahma-hrada, he lay immersed 
in the waters of Brahmahrada. When a period of three years 
had elapsed he came out with half of his body wounded (?) 
35. He eulogised Visnu the Lord of the Devas, abiding 
in the cavity of the heart of everyone, for a long time. Then 
the Lord of the Universe who was pleased with him granted 
him the boon, 
36-38. “O Hara, after wandering over many holy centres 
go to Kasi.” 
Thereafter, he bowed down to Hari and circumambulating 
him wandered over many places. Making his pilgrimage duly 
he reached the city of Avimukta (Ka^i). After entering the 
limits of Avimukta, when Dhurja^i (Siva) observed, he did not 
see Brahmahatya following him. She was standing outside. 
Knowing that it was a holy centre belonging to Visnu and 
1. N&rayaqa was the son of Dharma and Murti. 
(Bh. P. I. 3.9, II. 7.6, Mbh. Santi 334.9-12). 


Uttarabh&ga 29.39-43 
1697 
destructive of sins he became satished in mind and enthusiasti¬ 
cally eulogised Vi§nu, the Lord worthy of being saluted. 
39. “Be victorious, be victorious, O Lord of the universe 
O Lord Visnu, the storehouse of bliss of the entire universe, 
knowable only through the Vedas; O suppressor of demon 
Madhu, O Nrsimha, O yellow-robed one, O One riding on 
Oaruda, O Madhava, O primordial Lord. 
40. O liOrd of Rama, the lover of Vrajas, (cowherd’s 
colony), Lord of Radha, Lord of the Devas, the fulfiller 
of the desires of all, O Krsna, O foremost among the Devas, O 
ocean of kindness, O destroyer of anguish, O lotus-eyed, O 
Lord of the greatest beings. 
41. O Ornament of the family of Yadu, O resident of 
the milky ocean, O Sauri, O archer, O expert in the art of 
uplifting the mountain (Govardhana), O deity having a 
pair of the lotus-feet that destroy the sin of Kali age, O deity 
who bestow favour on those who eulogise thee, O Kurma 
(Divine Tortoise), O son of Kasyapa (Vamana). 
42. O Parasurama—the fire for the forest of wicked 
kings, O Buddha with a saffron cloth that cleaned off blood 
from all sacrifices, O Kalkin, O remover of the fear of worldly 
■existence, O deity governable by (i.e. under the influence 
of) the devotees, O cowherd, who lift up those who bow 
down to you, O Lord of sacred fame and name. 
43. O remover of the burden of the Earth, O Lord 
worthy of being worshipped by the enemies of Asuras, O Lord 
of Prakrti, O residential abode of the whole universe, O Rama, O 
Lord of the mobile and immobile beings shining with many 
attributes, O Lord who are beyond the three Gunas., O eternal 
one, O Lord worthy of being worshipped at the head of all, 
O Lord who protect the enemy of the annihilator Yama 
through your own people, O Lord with lotus-like feet, O 
beautiful Padmanabha, O lotus-palmed Lord, O Lord favour¬ 
ite of the resident of the lotus (i.e. God Brahma), O Lord, 
worthy of being saluted by the destroyer of Kama and the Lord 
■of three worlds (.^) 


1698 
Ndrada Purd^ 
44. O remover of sins, O Lord of the Raghus, O Lord of 
the Yadavas, one who are fond of Brahmanas, O greater than 
the greatest one, O Lord worthy of being worshipped by the 
immortal beings, O wielder of the ploughshare, O remover of 
sins, O Lord, worthy of being bowed to ; O Lord pervaded 
by the three Gunas, O cleverest one in the three worlds and 
three units of Time. ‘ 
45. O Lord with the sole duty of destroying the hosts 
of demons, O sinless one, O Lord lying on Sesa, the king 
of serpents, O destroyer of Kaihsa, O Lord having the sun and 
the moon as eyes, O Lord of powerful activities, O Lord hav¬ 
ing the lustre of fresh clouds, O Lord of the Goddess of 
Fortune. 
46. O sacrifice, O Lord maintaining sacrifice, O Lord 
who were bound with a rope by your mother, O Lord fond 
of fresh butter, O Lord of groups of cowherd lasses, O destroyer 
of demons Agha, Baka, Vrsa, Kesin and Putana, O destroyer 
of Trisiras, Bali and the ten-headed Ravana. 
47. O destroyer of Naraka and Mura, O Lord who cut 
off the hands of Bana, O Lord worthy of being worshipped by 
the enemy of the Tripuras, O friend of Sudaman, O Lord 
worthy of being served, O Lord whose lotus-like feet constitute 
a raft that takes one across the ocean of worldly existence, O 
Lord whose Aisvarya (Lordship and prowess) is manifest, O 
ancient one, O One whose arms are full. 
48-49, O Lord who can be attained only through the 
merits of many births, O Lord worthy of all auspicious things, 
knowable through the Vedas, O receptacle of Srutis (Vedas), 
O quiescent, pure, bestower of boons, I seek refuge in your 
excellent pair of feet; it destroys sins, protect me. 
50. There is none who can grant salvation to me 
other than the ancient Purusa. Be pleased with me with this 
request.*’ The Lord of the universe, who was thus eulogised 
with great devotion by Lord Sambhu, Visnu favourably 
disposed towards the devotees manifested himself suddenly. 
51. On seeing Hari, Hara fell on th^ ground like a staff. 
O leading Brahmana, he got up again and with palms joined in 
reverence he bowed down to him. 


Uttarahh&ga 29.52-63 
1699 
52. Visnu spoke to that leader of Bhutas (goblins) who- 
had bowed to him—“Choose a boon, I will give it to you. I am 
pleased with your eulogy.*' 
53. On hearing the words of the Lord, Bhuteia, Lord 
of the goblins who had been harassed by the evil of the slau¬ 
ghter of a Brahmana spoke this to Hari who is the bestower of 
worldly pleasures and liberation. 
54. “O wielder of discus and iron club, I wish to stay 
in your holy centre since the ‘brahmana-slaughter’ is seea 
stationed outside the limits of your holy centre. 
55. O Garuda-bannered deity, be merciful to me by the 
gift of this holy centre. On my going out, the evil of Brahmana- 
slaughter will harass me again. 
56. Stationed in your holy centre, I will derive worship 
in all the three worlds.” 
After saying this to the Lord of the Devas the bull-bannered 
deity kept quiet. 
57. The lover of Laksmi, the daughter of the milk ocean, 
said “So be it” and accepted the proposal. O leading Brah¬ 
mana, ever since then, this place is mentioned as the holy centre 
pertaining to Siva. 
58-59. But poets knew this as the ancient holy centre of 
Kclava. O excellent Brahmana, water (tears) gushed out of the 
eyes of Visnu overwhelmed with sympathy. Thereby the 
lake called Bindusaras originated. At the behest of Visnu, 
the bull-bannered Lord took his ablution there. 
60. No sooner did Hara take his holy dip therein, then 
the skull of Brahma fell down from his hand. That sacred 
lake became famous by the name of Kapalamocana. 
61. Bound by the emotional feelings of devotion of iSam- 
bhu, Visnu is stationed there by the name of Bindu-Madhava after 
giving his own abode to the Trident-bearing Lord. 
62. He was resorted to by the Sky-clad Siva; he had 
the lustre of ten thousand suns. In this manner, Brahma and 
other Devas residing in Heaven ever see him. 
63. O darling (husband), obstacles are put by the tri> 
dent-bearing Lord (in the lives of people) so that they will serve 
him. People who are overwhelmed by these obstacles will eulo¬ 
gise Visnu and then worship l^iva. 


1700 
N&rada Purd^a 
64-65. All those people dwell here thinking “Lord is 
Siva: the city is Kasi. O Brahmana, by thinking about Siva, 
the devotees of Siva are free from perturbation. They go to 
Siva’s world devoid of old age and death. Good men endowed 
with many merits stay here free from ailments. 
66-67. O lover of Kali, those who partake of the leav¬ 
ings of sacrifice become endowed with prosperity. O excellent 
Brahmana they do not extol ablution here nor Japa, nor the 
worship of the Devas nor charitable gifts. Excepting the aban¬ 
doning of one’s physical body nothing else is praised. After 
courting death here a man certainly becomes contented and 
blessed. 
68. O Brahmana, such a city full of palaces, has been 
reached by us. It is conducive to the salvation of even those who 
indulge in worldly pleasures: what then of those who observe 
holy vows. 
69. May this maiden who had been formerly separated 
from her parents by that wicked Rak^a be left in the palace 
of the Lord ofKasi. 
70-72. This virgin who had been practising observances 
had been abducted by that Raksasa for sexual intercourse. 
Thus the power of this holy centre has been described, O excel¬ 
lent Brahmana. All Karmans auspicious and inauspicious, of 
past, present and future, perpetrated knowingly or un¬ 
knowingly do perish here. It is for the destruction of Karmans 
that this city was formerly built by (Visnu). Men who die 
therein never experience fierce and endless misery nor the 
tortures of Yama. 


Uttarabhdga 30.1-10 
1701 
CHAPTER THIRTY 
The story of Kdffkild (Contd.) 
Kdfthild said : 
1. On hearing these words based on (and approved by) 
Dharma of his wife, the ogress, the Brahmana and girl descend¬ 
ed from the back of the ogress who had assumed the form 
of ashe-elephant. 
2. When the Brahmana got down, that ogress became 
once again a beautiful young woman with her face resembling 
the moon and with plump and protruding breasts. 
3. On reaching the splendid city of her own father, that 
virgin spoke to the city governor who had come there in 
the course of his duty of guarding the exterior limits of the 
city. 
4-7. O city Governor, go to my father the king Sudyumna 
and tell him that I Ratnavali alias Ratnasala* who had been 
abducted from his city, from my bed, have come back. O 
Brahmana, (you remember) that I had been abducted though 
I had been considered the jewel of the king Sudyumna. His 
daughter has come back alive and safe and sound. (You te]l 
him as though I say) *‘0 dear father, be consoled. Do not 
feel sorry on my account, O leading king, I have never been 
ravaged. I am like the pure water of the Gahga. I have brought 
about your fame (I have not marred your fame). I am the 
index of the good nature of my mother.** 
8. On hearing the words of the virgin, the city-governor 
who was well known as Abahu reached the presence of Sudyu¬ 
mna in a hurry. 
9-10. He made obeisance and on being asked spoke to 
the king respectfully. **0 king, O bestower of honour, your 
daughter well known as Ratnavali, who had been lost has 
come back. She is accompanied by a Brahmana in the company 
of a woman. She was seen by me standing outside the city limits 
but could not be recognized. 
in the Text. It should have been rather Rataa-iSl&yah 
who was abducted from RatHo-iUA. She was sleeping in RatnattU. The 
Accusative is used for Ablative in the text, [vide v. 17 below] 


1702 
Nirada Pur&na 
11. Urged by her, O Lord, I have come to * report 
the matter to you. She says “I am unravaged. May my father 
Jcnow that I have come back. 
12-13a. O father no doubt need be entertained in respect 
to my good action.” On hearing these wonderful words of the 
city Governor, the king instantaneously set offalongwith his wife, 
ministers and the Brahmana priest. 
13b-14a After going out of the city the king saw his 
<laughter comfortably seated on the banks of the Gahga. She 
was as refulgent as the sun. She was accompanied by a Brah¬ 
mana alongwith a woman. 
14b-15. She was bedecked in her natural dress though 
she was fond of ornaments. She had the lustre of unfading 
flowers. She was refulgent like molten gold. After seeing 
her from a distance, the king hurriedly went near her and 
embraced her. 
16. Over-joyed she too embraced her father and bowed 
down to him. Then she met her mother with great delight 
within her heart. 
17-18. Addressing her father, the king, the large-eyed girl 
spoke these words. “Surrounded by my female friends I was 
sleeping in the Hall of Jewels. O dear father, without washing 
my feet I lay with my head directed towards the north on the 
couch anxiously pondering over a possible alliance with a 
husband. I was abducted during the middle of the night. 
19. Taking me with him, the demon went to his city 
beyond the ocean on a mountain full of different kinds of jewels. 
I was confined in a cave. 
20. There he was thinking deeply within himself about 
the means of a marriage with me. This lady of beautiful eye¬ 
brows and slender waist who stands here, is his wife. 
21-22. She is an ogress who has assumed a human form. 
She had been the wife of that demon. O King, using the Sakti 
of god Indra intelligently she caused the death of her own husband 
of ruthless actions, at the hands of the Brahmana. It was through 
the intercession of fate that even before me the Brahmaria had 
reached the mountain. 
23-24a. This ogress found that her husband was a 
defiler of virtue. Moreover, she became enamoured of the hand- 


Uttarabhdga 30.24b-34 
1703 
some features of the Brahmana. Urged by her own Karman) 
she entered into an agreement with the Brahmana, for wedded 
Jife (with him) and brought about the death of the Raksasa. 
24b-26. Thus, after having made the Brahmana her 
husband, she assumed the form of a she>elephant. The wealth 
.got in exchange of all the articles of the house was kept on 
her back alongwith the Brahmana and myself. O king, she 
has now come here to your mansion. O king, it was by this 
RaksasI that I had been saved from that demon. Hence, 
honour and worship her alongwith the Brahmana. 
27. With her permission give me in marriage to this 
Brahmana. I shared the same seat with him. Hence he has 
become my husband. 
28. “He alone shall be the husband of a woman, 
with whom she shares the same seat. No one else, so we 
hear in the Puranas and Agamas. 
29. 1 had occupied her back with delight alongwith 
this Brahmana. Hence, in my opinion he must be my husband, 
according to Dharma. 
30. Hence, dear father, console this lady and give me 
to the Brahmai^a in accordance with the injunctions in the 
Agamas and other scriptural texts. 1 do not wish to choose 
any other husband.” 
31. On hearing these words of his daughter, Sudyumna 
the king, consoled the ogress in the form of the lady of slender 
waist. He stood bowing down with humility. 
[Sudyumna requested : ] 
32. “This, my daughter, afraid of losing her merits 
(Dharma), has sought refuge in you alone. For that reason O 
chaste woman, your previous husband was killed by you. 
33. Hence, O gentle lady, she has become one subservient 
to you. This, my daughter wishes to have as her husband the 
same gentleman who had been made by you your husband. 
34. O Ogress, you have been requested by me by means 
of obeisances and gifts. O lady of beautiful eyes, give your 
consent to my daughter by extending your help to her. 


1704 
Ndrada Purdna 
35. At your instance, may ray daughter be even the 
hand-maid of the Brahmana. Eschew the feelings of rivalry 
common among co-wives and protect my daughter. 
36. There is no doubt about this that you are the 
mistress of myself, my daughter, my wife, my army, my people, 
my city and even the whole of my kingdom. 
37-38. She will always abide by your instructions.’* On 
hearing these words of Sudyumna, the ogress approved his 
statement with a pure conscience mentally (deciding to be) 
her co-wife. She spoke thus to the king who was ready to give 
her in marriage. 
39. “O excellent king, since you bowed to me with 
pure feelings, may this lady be the second wife of the 
Brahmana. 
40. In the bright half of the month of Phalguna, 
I must be worshipped in the temple by you alongwith all the 
citizens. 
41. Beginning with AstamI, the eighth day and ending 
with Caturdasi, the festivities must be conducted by means of 
songs and instrumental music alongwith actors and dancers. 
42-43a. Oblations of intoxicating beverages, meat, blood, 
etc. must be given in the course of worship. If you continue 
to do in this manner I shall always be the cause of your welfare. 
O leading king, keep your own words.” 
43b-44. On hearing these words of the ogress, Sud¬ 
yumna, the king, accepted everything that had been proposed 
by that delighted lady. When it had been agreed to by the 
king, the ogress became satisfied. 
45. She lovingly spoke to the Brahmana *‘0 excellent 
Brahman.';, make this splendid princess also your wife in the 
manner laid down in the Grhya texts. 
46-47. I shall eschew jealousy and malice and be a 
sister to this large-eyed girl.” At the instance of the ogress, the 
Brahma];ia, married the daughter of the king who had been 
endowed with much wealth. Seated on the ogress who assumed 
the form of a she-elephant, he went to the city of Mahodaya 
(KanauJ) instantaneously. 
48. Then 1 heard thus—gentle lady, yow husband 


UttarabhAga 30.49-59 
1705 
has returned with plenty of wealth and jewels with two wives 
also in the bargain,” 
49. Thereupon, I was rebuked and cursed by the 
kinsmen, parents and friends with harsh and wounding 
words. 
50. “O lady greedy of money, how will you go to your 
husband who is endowed with fortune now, but who had 
been abandoned by you before since he was indigent and 
wretched ? 
51. O blessed lady, in case of woman the riches in¬ 
herited from parents are fickle and unsteady. It is stated that 
the riches earned by her husband are permanent. 
52. He had once been rebuked by you with harsh 
words. How can you dare to speak to him now ? Your entry 
into his house is also difficult. 
53. Granting that you are able to go there, O woman 
of evil actions, sharing the bed with your husband can never be 
conducive to your happiness. 
54. If out of fear for the public censure your husband 
accepts you (once again), he will never have intercourse with 
you, because he is devoid of affection in the heart. 
55. There is nothing else in the world so miserable as 
the coming together of a man and wife who are mentally far 
apart. It is exceedingly agitating and crippling.” 
56. I heard these and many other similar words uttered 
by the kinsmen. On hearing these I became extremely grief- 
stricken. With tears filling the eyes, I kept my face bent 
down. 
57-58. I thought within myself thus :— “Formerly, I 
had been deluded by greediness. Hence neither the bangle of 
the hand nor the girdle round the waist nor the anklets round 
the legs were given up so that my husband could be satisfied. 
The husband is regarded in the world as the master of both 
wealth and life. 
59. That wealth has been taken away by me. What 
will be my future ? How can I go to his abode ? How shall 1 
speak to him again ? 


1706 
Narada PurUna 
60-62a. How can he who had been wickedly al^andoned 
by me believe me now.” Even as I was 4hinking thus in my 
perturbed mind, the palanquin surrounded by kinsmen arrived 
there. It was tender and elegant. It shone with an umbrella, 
resembling the moon in lustre. Deer skins were spread within 
it. Stout men bore it on their shoulders. 
62b-63. Those men came in and requested me again and 
again: “O splendid lady, you have been invited by your husband. 
Hasten there with glee and joy. Your husband has returned 
endowed with plenty of wealth and jewels as well as two 
other wives. 
64. O fair-faced lady, we had been sent by your husband 
immediately after his arrival, to fetch you who have been 
staying in the house of your parents.” 
65. O gentle lady, on noting that act of my husband I 
became ashamed. I did not say anything in reply to them. I 
remained silent. 
66. Thereafter I was urged and enlightened again and 
again by the kinsmen. “You have been called by your husband 
with due honour. Hence go back to him. 
67. O daughter, if the wife does not rejoin her husband 
when invited (to do so) she is born as a female crow for 
fifteen births.” 
68. They said thus and assuaged my grief. They took 
me hurriedly and made me sit in the palanquin with affection, 
they repeatedly said, ‘Go*. 
69. Thereafter those men placed the palanquin on their 
shoulders and started immediately with speed. They reached 
the city ofMahodaya where my husband was staying. 
70. That his house had been surrounded by gold (i.e. 
full of articles, pots etc. of gold) was seen by me. It 
was fully equipped with furniture, foodstuffs, riches and 
raiments. 
71. Then, O beautiful woman, that ogress and the 
gentle lady, the princess bowed to me with love and devotion. 
72. I was befittingly greeted and honoured with love 
by those two ladies. Respected, and so delighted with the 
Avords of my husband, I took my bath and maal. 


Uttarabh&ga 30.73-85 
1707 
73. Thereafter, soon after sunset my husband called me 
% 
and immediately clasped me within his arms. He made 
me sit on the couch and kept me within his embrace for a 
long time. 
74. Then he called the ogress and the princess and said ; 
■“Service to this lady’s feet should be rendered by both of you 
with due devotion. 
75. She had been my wife previously. Hence she is 
certainly the eldest and senior-most to both of you.” Then at 
the instance of our husband, my feet were touched by those two 
ladies. 
76. O lady of beautiful eyes, they eschewed (completely) 
the jealousy and malice originating from the feeling that I am 
a cowife. Then, my husband called the servants and spoke those 
words. 
77-78. “O servants, whatever wealth had been acquired 
by me at the outset from the possessions of the Raksasa, what¬ 
ever had been received by me when I wedded the daughter of 
the king, bring these things respectfully. Do not delay. This 
lady is the mistress of everything of those riches.” 
79-81. O splendid lady, at his words the wealth was 
immediately brought by the servants. My husband offered the 
entire wealth to me with love and mind untarnished by decep¬ 
tion. He honoured me with ornaments and garments, even as 
the two ladies, the ogress and the princess were looking on. 
82. O splendid lady, he kissed my lips and embraced me 
as I was seated on the couch. On seeing this wonderful dedi¬ 
cation of his self and wealth unto me by my husband, (and on 
hearing) his words that thrilled me and (feeling excited) be¬ 
cause his hands pressed my breasts, I fell down dead like a cow 
struck down by a sword. My vital breaths left me. 
83. Then 1 attained the torture in the hell assigned to me 
by Yama. O splendid lady, after covering that period I experi¬ 
enced anguish and misery and was born as a Ka^lhlla. 
84-85. I shall have to be born in the animal kingdom 
thousands of times. O splendid-faced lady, the woman who does 
not dedicate her wealth and life to her husband will undoubtedly 
attain this state. By understanding this, one should save the 
wealth and life of one’s husband. 


1708 
N&rada Purdna 
86. Husband is both father and mother, wealth and life, 
preceptor and salvation. 
87. With a gfreat deal of merits the woman goes to the 
region of Visnu alongwith her husband if her body is cremated 
alongwith him. But a woman greedy of wealth and of her 
body (?) attains Yama’s torture and the affliction of being bom 
in base wombs in lower species. 
CHAPTER THIRTYONE 
The Glory of the month of Mdgha 
Vasiffhasaid : 
1-4. On hearing the words of that Kasthlla, the lady of 
pure smiles named Sandhyavali became extremely surprised 
and addressed her with respect. “O Kasthila, by your words 
I am much surprised now. Why at all did I happen to see 
you attaining the base mode of existence ? By what Karman 
can your liberation be effected from this base birth ? O, one 
of large limbs, please tell this to me. On seeing you I have 
become miserable. O excellent one, pity is roused in my heart, 
on seeing your body resembling a lump of meat that is smooth 
and comparable to a lump of butter. 
Kdsthildsaid : 
5. O lady of charming eyebrows, even if you arc going 
to give the entire earth for my sake, I cannot all of a sudden 
extricate myself from this base birth. 
6. O blessed lady, listen, I shall point out that holy rite 
(from which accrues merit) that bestows the great goal, 
whereby I can liberate myself from the bondage of Karmas. 
7. What is called the month of Magha is remembered 
as the most excellent of all months. In it, Br&hma^i-slaughter 


UUarabhdga 31.8-18 
1709 
and other sins cry out in distress (as they arc annihilated 
therein). 
8. Rare indeed is the month of Magha; rare indeed is 
the human birth; rare indeed is the ablution early in 
the morning and rare indeed is the opportunity to serve 
KfS^. 
9-12. Rare still is the day of Visnu (ie. the Ekada^I 
Tithi) that is duly observed as the day of fast. Their own 
splendour has been cast off into the water by gods during the 
month of Magha. Here water is very particularly sacred 
during this month. The goal that is obtained by persons 
who maintain regular observances by means of bathing 
into the water early in the morning, is the bestower of happi¬ 
ness, and is never attained by even heroic warriors (after death) 
in the battle. If one takes one’s bath in the waters of rivers, 
lakes or tanks it is called the most excellent. If the bath is 
taken in the well water kept in a vessel, it is of mediocre bene¬ 
fit. If water that is warmed in fire is taken for bath, it is of 
the least benefit. Merit cannot be attained through pleasures. 
It is obtained only through distress and exertion. 
13. Bath is taken for the purpose of observing holy and 
virtuous rites and not merely for the sake of purity and 
cleanliness of the limbs. Fire is resorted to for the purpose 
of performing Homas and not for removing chillness, 
14. Bath should be taken before the sunrise. If the sky 
is overcast with clouds, one should pray and request the sun 
who is going to rise. 
15. If rivers etc. are not available, water should be kept 
over-night in a fresh mud-pot. Wind must blow over it during 
the night. People know such water to be equal to the Gahga 
for the purpose of holy ablution. 
16. O fair lady, a person who regularly takes bath in 
the month of M%ha, never sees misery and misfortune. There 
exists no such sin as cannot be wiped off by the holy bath 
during the month of Magha. 
17-18. Taking the holy dip into water in the morning 
during the month of Magha is better than entering fire (?) 
Misery is experienced if one survives (after entering fire) but 


1710 
Ndrada Vurdxia 
if one dies one enjoys happiness. For this reason, O ggntle lady 
the bath during the month of Magha is of special significance 
Everyday gingelly seeds along (or coated ?) with sugar must 
be given as charitable gifts. 
19. O lady of slender waist, Homa should be performed 
with cooked rice as white as hail or with barley grains foil wed 
by the oblation of cow’s ghee on the full-moon day in the 
month of Magha. 
20. At the end of the holy observance of (pre-sunrise) 
bath in the month of Magha one shall give food consisting 
of the six tastes (such as sweet, sour and others) and say “May 
the lord, the sun-god be pleased with me—Lord sun who is 
unsullied and the embodiment of Visnu. 
21. To a Brahmana couple, clothes should be given 
along with seven kinds of food. Thirty sweet-meats too must be 
given as well as gingelly seeds and cooked rice along with sugar. 
22. The gingelly seeds and sugar must be in the ratio of 
three to one. The devotee who knows the procedure must give 
Tambula (betel leaves) and other sources of enjoyment with 
devotion. 
23. One should face the current when one bathes in a 
river, if it be in any other place (tank etc.), one should face the 
sun. There he must invoke Gaiiga and other holy rivers from 
the disc of the sun (and then take bath). 
24-25. “There are thousands of sins originating in the 
course of many births, some knowingly committed, some un¬ 
knowingly committed. But may all those be dispelled by your 
brilliance, O sun, O Lord of the worlds, O Prabhakara (cause of 
lustre), obeisance be to you. O Acyuta, make my (observance 
of) holy dip in the month of Magha well accomplished and 
complete.” 
26. O fair lady, the devotee who takes bath in the holy 
centres gets lesser benefit than the devotee who takes holy dip 
in the month of Magha. One may go to heaven by means 
of baths in the holy centres. One goes to the highest region 
(Moksa) through the bath in the month of Magha. 
27. The eleventh day in the bright half of the month of 
Magha is the destroyer of great sins, if it coincides with a 
Sunday. 


Uttarabhdga 31.28-41 
1711 
28-36. Even without the conjunction of the constellation 
Pleiades, the eleventh day in the bright half of Magha burns 
the sins of men in the same manner as a base king spoils the 
kingdom, or as a bad son the family, or as a vicious wife the 
husband, or as sin the virtue, or as the wicked minister ruins 
the king, or as ignorance disp>els (i.e. vitiates) knowledge, or as 
complete uncleanliness mars purity, or as untruth dispels truth, 
or as a controversy spoils a conversation or as heat dispels snow 
or as misfortune spoils fortune, or as a sin mars fame or arro¬ 
gance vitiates austerity. Just as Rasas (medicinal potions) 
destroy great ailments, just as l§ahkara (fixing of rendezvous) 
spoils sraddha (?), so also the Dvadasi, if properly observed, 
destroys heaps of sins. The day of Hari (Ekadasi) quickly 
destroys the great sins such as Brahmana-slaughter, imbib¬ 
ing of liquor, stealing, and outraging the modesty of the 
preceptor’s wife. The collections of these sins are not quelled by 
bath in Puskara. Neither the holy centre of the Naimisa 
forest nor Kuruksetra nor Prabhasa, Gaya, Reva, Sarasvatl, 
Gahga, Yamuna, Prayaga nor the river Devika nor the 
lakes nor rivers nor Homas, gifts and austerities (can dispel 
these sins). Excepting the only (auspicious) day of Hari i.e. 
Ekadasi no other day can destroy the multitude of sins; no 
other merit is clearly mentioned in the Purana O lady of 
charming eyebrows, for the purpose of destroying aggregates of 
sins. 
37-40. O gentle lady, by observing fast even for once, 
heaps of sins do perish. On one side of the balance the gift 
of the whole Earth and on another side the day of Hari, it is 
declared by Brahma that they are not equal. The day of Hari is 
superior. On that day, the devotee should make a gold image 
of the Lord in the form of a Boar. An auspicious new copper 
vessel shall be kept over a jar. Into that vessel the image of 
the lord should be placed, so also all the seeds. It must be 
covered with a white cloth. Gold pieces, bright lamp etc. 
should be placed, and the vessel be decorated with flowers. The 
observer of the holy rite should worship the Lord in accordance 
with the injunctions and keep himself awake. 
41. In the morning, the devotee should gift away the 
jar alongwith the Boar image and all the things within it and 


1712 }{Q.rada Purina 
also the Naivedyas and other ancillary articles to a Sr^mana 
householder who is a devotee of Visnu. 
42. After feeding Brahmanas, he should break his fast 
surrounded by his friends. O fair lady, if this observance is 
performed, he is never born again anywhere. 
43. The sin accumulated in the course of many births 
whether knowingly or unknowingly committed, is wholly 
destroyed like the darkness at sunrise. 
44. O splendid lady, the holy rite of Ekadali has been 
recounted to you by me in accordance with the (description 
of the same in the) scriptural texts. O gentle lady, this is the 
same as had been performed formerly by you in the course of 
another birth. 
45-46. As a result of this holy rite, you have derived 
incomparable nourishment. It will be enhanced further later 
on. It is the bestower of happiness on your husband and son 
always. If, out of that merit a fourth part is willingly and 
respectfully given to me, I will become delighted and will go to 
the greatest region of Visnu. 
47. O beautiful woman, I had incurred a sin due to the 
denial and concealment of the wealth. In order to sanctify it 
(i.e. in order to dispel it and sanctify me) kindly give me one 
fourth part of your merit as I just now requested for. 
48. The woman who deceives her husband with regard to 
the life or wealth undergoes hundred births in the wombs of 
germs and is reborn ultimately as a Pulkasi (Candala woman). 
49. O honourable lady, the woman of perverted mind who 
does not yield herself up for sexual intercourse when the hus¬ 
band requests for the same or does not give him wealth (when he 
needs it) certainly is reborn as Kasthila (a worm ?). 
50. If you have any mercy on me, give me a fourth part 
of y'our merit accruing from the observance of the holy rite of 
Ekadasi for the purpose of dispelling the sin, which I had 
incurred. 
51. O lady of good eyes, on hearing the words of that 
Kasthila, I took water in my hand and gave the (required) 
merit to her. 
52. “By one-fourth of the merit accrued to me former¬ 
ly by observing a fast on the Ekadasi day, may this Kasthila be 


Uttarabh(lgM^\.b2h—32.1 1713 
liberated from the sins committed by her in the previous birth. 
What I have averred is truth and nothing but the truth.” 
53b-54a. When those words were uttered by me, she was 
seen going to the region of Visnu seated in a divine aerial 
chariot. Her lustre was like that of lightning. 
54b-55. The husband is a deity in the visible world. He 
should not be deceived by the wife either through her body or 
through her wealth, if she wishes for splendid existence (in the 
next birth). Hence, you speak out. I shall give you what is 
desired by you for the sake of our husband. 
56-57. O fair-faced lady, I shall give up wealth, body, 
my own son or anything else (if you desire it). Who else 
is a deity unto the women in this world except her own husband ? 
O lady of beautiful eyes, the woman who sacrifices her wealth 
or life for his sake, is honoured in the world of Visnu for the 
duration of a hundred crores of Kalpas and more. 
58. The wife of the Brahmai^ saw her husband, who 
had wooed her with fire etc. as witness, indulging in terrible 
vices. So she became ruthless. Although she was requested, she 
did not give him wealth, as a result of that sin she became 
a worm. 
59. During my girlhood days this flag-staff of Kama was 
seen by me when I was at my father’s place. After knowing 
that it is beneficial to the husband, I give up everything. O lady 
of beautiful eyebrows, take it. 
CHAPTER THIRTYTWO 
The Narration by Sandhydvali 
Vasiffha continued : 
1. On hearing the words of Sandhyavali, Mohini the 
daughter of Brahma who was Mohakararw^M (a box of delu¬ 
sion ?) said thus, as she was interested in her own mission. 


1714 
J^arada Purdna 
2-3. “O splendid lady, if thus you know the ways of 
Dharma and Adharma, and if for the sake of your husband you 
will readily give up your wealth and life, I beg of you then, O 
splendid lady, a wealth that is superior to life. Give me the head 
of your son which is liked by you more than the heart. 
4-8a. If your husband, the king does not take food on the 
day of Hari (Ekadasi), may he take the sword in his hand and 
cut off the beautiful head of Dharmahgada, which is splendid, 
which is comparable to the disc of the moon, which is decorated 
with two ear-rings and in which the moustache has not yet 
grown. O lady of beautiful eyes, may he cut it off and let it 
fall on to my lap. If he does not take food, O gentle lady, at 
least do this on the day of lord Visnu, that is destructive of 
heaps of sins.” 
On hearing these words of Mohini couched in bitter 
words, (Sandhyavall) the gentle lady shivered for a short 
while like the plantain tree blasted by chillness. 
8b-14. Thereafter, Sandhyavall, the fair-complexioned lady 
mustered courage and composure and spoke these words to 
Mohini, smilingly and preserving gentle expression on the face, 
—“O lady of beautiful eyebrows, these verses are heard mentioned 
in the Puranas. They are connected with Ekadasi. They are the 
bestowers of heavenly bliss and salvation. (They are as follows :) 
“One should abandon wealth, one should eschew one’s wife, life 
and house. One should abandon one’s land, king, heaven, 
friends, and preceptor. One may leave off the holy centre, 
Dharma and whatever one is most fond of. One shall eschew 
Yoga, charitable gifts, perfect knowledge and holy rites. One 
should leave off austerities, Vidya (learning), Siddhi (achieve¬ 
ment of supernatural powers) and even salvation, O splendid 
lady. But one shall not leave off the holy Ekadasi rite in both 
fortnights. Sons, brothers, friends and beloved ones, all are but 
persons with whom we come in contact only here (in this world). 
But Ekadasi is remembered, O gentle lady, as the means of 
achievement of pleasures both here and hereafter (in this 
world and the other world). Thanks to the power of Ekadasi, 
everything will become beneficent. 
15. O blessed lady, I shall make him give you the head 


Uttarabh&ga 32.16-24 
171S 
of Dharmaflgada for your satisfaction. O splendid lady, believe 
in my statement and be happy. 
16. In this matter, O gentle lady, this traditional mytho¬ 
logical story is heard. I shall tell you, O gentle lady, listen with 
attention. 
17. Formerly, there was a Daitya devoted to virtuous 
activities. (His name was) Virocana.^ His wife, a lady of large 
eyes, was interested in the worship of Brahmanas. 
18. O lady of beautiful eye-brows, every day in the 
morning, she used to worship a sage in accordance with the in¬ 
junctions. With great devotion and a delighted mind, she used to 
drink the water with which his feet had been washed. 
19-21. (Defective) The Devas became apprehensive of 
the son of Prahlada (i.e. Virocana) in the same manner as they 
were, while Hiranyakasipu of fierce valour was ruling over the 
kingdom. Even when he was dead, they moved about on the 
Earth with great anxiety when the son of Prahlada (i.e. Virocana) 
was himselfdelighted. Once those Devas the chief of whom was 
Indra, consulted Brhaspati, the preceptor of the Devas 
and said ; “We arc oppressed by the enemies. What is it that 
should be done by us ?” On hearing those words of the 
Devas, the preceptor Brhaspati said : 
22-23. “Visnu must be respectfully informed by the 
Devas (gods) who have become miserable.” On hearing 
the utterance of their preceptor, the Devas of unmeasured splen¬ 
dour went to Vaikuntha for securing the death of Virocana. 
After going there, they eulogised Visnu, the most excellent of 
all Devas, by reciting hymns. 
The Devas said : 
24. Obeisance to the overlord of the Devas, to Visnu of 
unmeasured splendour. Repeated salutes to the destroyer of 
obstacles of devotees, to Vaikuntha (Visnu). 
1. Virocana was Bali’s father. As such he preceded Visnu’s incarna¬ 
tion as VSmana. Strictly speaking, reference to V’isnu calling him by his 
future incarnation as Paras'urama, Kffpa, Buddha etc. is anachronic. But 
the Purina-writers have not developed that sense. To the author of the NP.^ 
Visrtu is Para-Brahman. Hence addressing him as Siva, the universe, Kala 
etc., is natural (vide VV. 30-40 below). 


1716 
Ndrada Purdna 
25. Obeisance to Hari, the miraculous lion. H&il to the 
noble-^uled V^ana. Bow to the deity of the form of a Boar. 
Obeisance to the Divine Fire, the resident of the ocean (at the 
time) of dissolution of the universe. 
26. Obeisance to the Tortoise, the upholder of the Man- 
dara mountain. Kail to Bhargva; obeisance to the deity lying 
in the ocean; Bow to Rama the lord of all; obeisance to the 
lord of the universe, the cosmic witness. 
27. Obeisance to Dattatreya, the pure one; obeisance to 
Kapila, the remover of distress; Bow to the sacrifice the upholder 
■of Dharma; obeisance to the deity of the form of Sanaka and 
others. 
28. Hail to the deity who granted boons to Dhruva; 
to Prthu of plenty of activities; to Rsabhathe pure one; obei¬ 
sance to the Atman bearing horse’s head. 
29. Bow to Hamsa (the swan), the embodiment of Agama, 
to the deity holding the vessel of nectar; obeisance to Krsna, to 
Vasudeva, to the deity who assumes the form of Saihkarsana. 
30. Obeisance to Pradyumna, to Aniruddha, to Brahma, 
Sankara, to Kumara, to Gane^a, to Nandin, to Bhrngin. 
31. Obeisance to the deity staying on the mountain 
Gandhamadana, obeisance to Nara and Narayana. Bow to the 
lord of the universe; obeisance to R^esvara. 
32. Hail to the resident of Dvaraka; obeisance to the 
resident of Tulasi grove. Obeisance to the deity having the 
lotus in umbilicus. Bow to you the lotus-footed. 
33. Obeisance to the Lotus-handed deity; obeisance to 
you, the Lotus-eyed one. Hail to the protector of Kamaia 
(Lak§mi). Repeated obeisance to Ke^ava. 
34. Bow to the deity having the form of the Sun; obeis¬ 
ance to the deity assuming the form of the moon; obeisance to 
the deity having the form of the guardians of the worlds (quar¬ 
ters). Hail to the deity assuming the form of Prajapati. 
35. Obeisance to the deity of the form of the groups of 
■elements (or mass of living beings); obeisance to the splendour 
in the form of the Jiva (individual soul); obeisance to the Vic¬ 
tory, to the victorious, to the leader, to the dei^ in the form of 
observances and holy rites. 


Uttarabhdga 32.36-45a 
1717 
36. Obeisance to the deity devoid of attributes, to the 
deity without desires, to the deity the knower of ethics, to the 
Atman devoid of motion, to Buddha, to the deity of the form of 
Kalki, to Ksetrajha; obeisance to the imperishable. 
37. Obeisance to Govinda; to the lord of the universe, 
to the infinite one, to the primordial one; obeisance to the deity 
having the bow l^arnga; to the deity wieldii^ the conch and the 
iron club. Bow to the deity holding the discus. 
38. Hail to the deity having the sword; obeisance to the 
Trident-bearing deity: obeisance to the deity striking with all 
weap)ons and missiles; Bow to the deity worthy of being a refuge; 
obeisance to the transcendental deity. Bow to the great Atman. 
39. Obeisance to Kpsikesa; to the deity identical with the 
universe; obeisance to you of the form of the universe. Hail to 
the deity having the Time as his umbilicus; salute to Kala 
(Gk)d of Death, Time). Bow to the deity having the moon and 
the sun for his eyes; obeisance to the perfect one; obeisance to 
the deity worthy of being served. Hail to the deity who is 
greater than the greatest. 
40. Obeisance to the maker of the universe, to the uphol¬ 
der of the universe, and to the annihilator of the universe; obeis¬ 
ance to one who fascinates, to one who agitates, to one who assu¬ 
mes the form as he desires; obeisance to the unborn, to the poet 
(the wise one). 
41. O lord, on being oppressed by the Daityas, we have 
sought refuge in you. Hence, O supporter of everything, do that 
whereby we may be happy. 
42a. May we sport about accompanied by our sons, 
friends, wives and others.” 
42b.-45a. On hearing their hymn of praise, Vaikuntha 
(god Vi^nu) was delighted in his mind. He granted personal 
vision to those Devas who were distressed and harassed by the 
Daityas. On seeing Vaikuntha (God Vis^u), the lord of the 
chiefs of the Devas very affectionate at heart, they respectfully 
prayed to him for the destruction <»f Virocana. On hearing the 
main task of those Devas the chief of wbnm was Indra, the 
lord who is the foremost among those who know their duties, 
consoled the Devas with Love and let them off fully delighted and 
joyous. 


1718 
Ndrada Purina 
45.B-48. When the groups of the Devas had gone, the 
lord who is the foremost among the knowers of all expedients, 
assumed the form of an old Brahmana and went to the abode of 
Virocana. He, the achiever of the missions, reached the place at 
the time of the worship of the Brahmanas. On seeing him, 
VisalaksI (a lady of large eyes) became delighted in her mind. 
After greeting and honouring the extra-ordinary Brahmana 
with devotion, she gave him the seat. Without accepting the seat 
given by her, he told her :— “O splendid and gentle lady, I am 
not accepting the great seat offered by you. 
49-50.A Listen. The mission for which I have come here 
is incomparable. O woman of honour, he who understands the 
task kept in my mind must agree to its fulfilment. Then, O 
fairfaced lady, I will accept his wor hip.” 
50.B-51.A On hearing the words of the old Brahmana the 
lady (though) an expert in understanding the deep significance 
of expressions, was deluded by the Maya of Visnu, as she was a 
woman. She spoke with great delight. 
Viidldkfi said 
51-55. A “O Brahmana, I shall give you whatever may 
be in your mind. Take it from me. Here is the seat. Here is 
the water for washing the feet. Give unto me the desired object 
(viz. the water where-with you wash the feet)”. On being 
requested thus, the Brahmana said, “I do not believe in the 
words of a woman. If your husband says it I can believe.” 
On hearing the words spoken by the Brahmana, the mist¬ 
ress of the abode of Virocana invited her husband there itself, 
in the presence of the Brahmana. 
At the instance of the messenger, the delighted son of 
Prahlada came to the harem where his wife VisalaksI was 
present. 
55.B-57.A On seeing her husband arrived, the lady 
engaged in holy rites got up, bowed to the leading Brahmana 
and offered the seat. When he did not accept the seat offered 
respectfully, she informed her husband, the king of the 
Daityas. 
57B-61.A. On coming to know of the incident, Virocana, 
the king of Daityas, was swayed by his love for his"^ wife. With 


Uttarabhdga 32.61-68 
1719 
mind deluded, he accepted the (proposal of the Brahmana). 
After understanding the mental idea when the Daitya accepted 
the suggestion, the Brahmana became delighted and said, 
Offier me your age and longevity”. Then the couple became 
deluded due to the grief caused by themselves. After medita- 
ing for a short while and joining the hands together, they spoke 
to the Brahmana, “O Brahmana, accept our life. Give us the 
water from your feet. We shall make your utterance true. Be 
delighted”. 
61.63 A. Janardana who was delighted by their devotion, 
gave her the water from his feet. Visalaksi became joyous by 
washing the feet of the Brahmana. Along with her husband, she 
sprinkled water with which his feet were washed, over her 
head. 
63.B. 65. O lady of beautiful eyebrows, the couple 
thereupon suddenly assumed divine forms, climbed into the 
excellent aerial chariot and went to the region of Visnu.i There¬ 
after, the lord became delighted by uprooting the cause of grief 
to the Devas. He went to his abode in Vaikuntha. He was 
eulogised by all the groups of Devas. Thus, O gentle ledy, 
what has been promised to you must be given to you by me. 
66, O gentle lady, I will not make my husband 
Rukmahgada move away from truth. It is truth alone that has 
been glorified as the bestower of salvation on men. 
67-68. They know that the man who has fallen off from 
truth is baser than a Candala”. After speaking thus to MohinI, 
the daughter of the lotus-born deity (Brahma), Sandhyavali as 
refulgent as gold, and having beautiful eyebrows touched the 
feet of her husband with both of her hands, the feet that were 
copper-coloured with red toes. 
1. The account of the deatli of Virocaua given here—the self-sacrifice 
of Virocana and queen Vi^lak$i—is not complimentary to Vi^i^u. In the 
Mbh. Sinti. 98. 49-50, he was killed by Indra in the battle with demon 
Tiraka. This second version of Virocana's death is supported by Mt. P., 
Pd. P. and Brahm5i[»d<t P« 


1720 
Ndtada Pur&na 
CHAPTER THIRTYTHREE 
The Submission of Dharmdngada 
Vasiffha said : 
1. Thereafter, O king, Sandhyavali clasped the feet of her 
husband. The gentle lady spoke these words about the (immi¬ 
nent) death of Dharmahgada (at his hands). 
Sandhy&vali said : 
2. “O king, just as by you, so also by me, this lady has 
been advised in many ways. But nothing else appeals to Mohini, 
the very embodiment of delusion. 
3. She wants you to take food on the day of Visnu or to 
kill your son. O lord striking the son down is better than 
violating the holy observance. 
4. O king, the affliction of the father is not as severe as 
that of the mother in giving birth to the son. 
5. Since the mother undergoes misery in holding the 
son in her womb, O king, her affection is excessive. O king, the 
affection of the father cannot be as much as that of the 
mother. 
6. In the world, O leading king, the father is said to be 
the person who sows the seed, the mother is the porson who 
holds it within her womb. In protecting and nourishing the 
child, the mother is sujDerior to the father. 
7. The affection of the mother is hundred times more than 
that of the father. It is in view of this abundance of love and 
affection that they recognise that the mother is greater. 
8. In spite of that, I have become devoid of affection to¬ 
wards the son, O leading king, because of my desire to win the 
other world through the maintenance of the truth of the words 
uttered. 
9. Eschewing all your affectionate feelings O king, kill your 
son. Do not transgress the truthfulness of the words uttered. On 
my very soul, you are bound by an oath. 
10-14. Hr^ikeSa will be the bestower of fruits (after test¬ 
ing persons) on touch-stones (of holy rites), if, after observing 
them, O kin^, no pain is felt in the body. There is no doubt about 


Uttarabhiga 33.15-23 
1721 
this that it is through Adharma that a man falls off from 
heaven. The man who takes off his life or that of his son or sacri¬ 
fices his possessions O king, and follows fate, is sung about 
as a great man. O king, blessed are those adversities which make 
men truthful. In viewof their purpose of keeping up truthfulness, 
they may be the bestowers of salvation on men. In order to 
spread and guard their fame, holy rites must always be perform¬ 
ed by men in the manner mentioned in the scriptures, with¬ 
out being swayed either by love or by hatred. Hence, O king, 
enough of your distress and anguish. Keep up the truth. 
15. O king, by keeping up the truth, a man becomes 
united with Visnu’s person. This Mohini (enchantress) is a 
touchstone created by the Devas for you. 
16. O king, I consider that she has been made your wife 
(for this purpose), but you do not understand that. By your act 
of killing your son, the Devas will hang down their heads (in 
shame). 
17. Placing your foot on their heads, you will attain the 
highest region. The Devas are the antagonists of those who have 
devotion towards Visnu. 
18-19. What has been made clear is that there will be 
blindness in the world. O king, the Devas along with the deities 
are antagonistic to you. With their activities, they break (obs¬ 
truct) your path towards salvation. They cause you to drop 
down your resolve. Hence, O king, be steady and firm. Kill 
your dear son. 
20-21. Garry out the directions of Mohini by way of keep¬ 
ing up your own vow. O lord of kings, if the directives are un¬ 
heeded, you will incur a terrible sin equal to that of Brahmaria- 
slaughter. O ruler of the earth, you will be going to the world 
of Samana (i.e. Yama) and there will be damage to your 
reputation on the earth.” 
Vasiftha said : 
22. O king, on hearing the words of his wife, the king 
Rukm^gada spoke those words to Sandhyavali in the presence 
of Mohini :— 
23. “O beloved wife, the slaughter of one’s own son is 
an exceedingly sinful act. It is worse than Br&hma^a- 


1722 
Ndrada Purina 
slaughter. What will be my future destiny in the worlci after 
killing my own son ? 
24. Wherefore did I go to the Mandara mountain ? 
Wherefore did I meet with Mohini ? O gentle lady, this is verit¬ 
able Kala or god of death in the form of the beloved (Mohini), 
for the destruction of Dharmangada. 
25. What will be my future state by killing my son who is 
conversant with Dharma, who is endowed with humility, who 
reconciles and delights the people and who has no issue of 
his own ? 
26-31. O gentle lady, the father incurs great misery 
even by killing a vicious son. What then if he happens to be by 
nature righteous and rendering regular service to his elders ? O 
fair-complexioned lady, this continent of Jambudvipa alone is 
enjoyed by jne. But all the seven continents are being enjoyed 
by your son now. O fair lady, he is a part of Visnu. He will 
surely be superior to his father. O fair lady, this son of mine, 
Dharmangada who has been highly extolled in Puranas by poets 
(O wise sages) is superior to all on this earth. 
O lady of charming limbs, he is the bestower of honour on 
my family as well as on me. Alas ! In this matter I am faced 
with a greater misery than even my son. O fair lady, with your 
auspicious utterances speak again to Mohini who is deluded and 
so who gives me much grief” 
32. After saying thus to his beloved wife Sandhyavali, 
the king came near Mohini and spoke this :— 
33-34. “O splendid lady, I will not take food on the day 
of Visnu nor will I injure my son in any way. I would rather 
tear up my own self or the gentle lady Sandhyavali. At your 
behest, I may even do any other terrible deed. But, O lady of 
charming eyebrows, leave off your stubbornness in regard to my 
son. 
35. What benefit will you attain by killing my son Dhar¬ 
mangada ? What do you gain by compelling me to take food on 
the day of Visnu ? Tell me. 
36. O fair-faced lady, I am your servant. I am your 
slave. I am subservient to you. O blessed lady request for 
some other boon, I submit to you. 
37-40. O lady of beautiful limbs, your feet are equal 


UUarabh&ga 33.41-48 
1723 
to the red ASoka flowers. I am absolutely obedient to you. I 
shall carry out some other purpose of yours. 
I am subservient to you. O genth lady, be pleased with me. 
Give me the alms in the form ofmv own son’s life. A virtuous 
son is very rare to be obtained. TliC day of Hari (Ekadasi) is 
a rare day of holy rites. Rare indeed is the water of 
Gahga. Rare is a beloved mother on the Earth. Rare is the 
birth in a noble family. Rare is the beloved wife bprn of a good 
family. Rare is the charitable gift of gold. Rare is the facility 
(o worship Hari. Rare is the initiation pertaining to Visnu. 
Rare is the collection of Smrti texts ? 
41*45A. Rare is the residence in the holy centre ofSauk- 
ara.* Rare is the opportunity to meditate on Hari; rare is the 
holy rite of keeping awake on the day of Visnu; rare Is the 
purification of the self (or getting honour to oneself); rare is 
the attainment of the birth of a son; rare is the holy water of 
Puskara; rare is the contact with virtuous eminent people; de¬ 
votion is said to be rare; rare is the charitable gift of a Kapila 
(tawny) cow; rare is the (facility to) set a blue (calf) free. O 
fair-faced lady, rare is the Sraddha performed on Trayoda^i 
(Thirteenth day). Rare is the Earth (as an object of charitable 
gift). Rare is the observance of holy rite that destroys sins. 
O woman of sweet eyebrows, rare is the replica of cow made of 
gingelly seeds and given over to a Brahmana. O fair lady, rare 
is the bath with the embylic myrobalan. Rare is the day of Hari. 
45B.-46. Rare indeed is bath in cold water at the aus¬ 
picious time of the passage (Parva-kala) of the moon, especially 
at the auspicious time of dawn in the month of Magha. O 
queen, rare is the performance of a religious rite punctiliously 
in conformity to Gastric injunctions. 
47. Rare indeed is the wholesome diet and efficacious 
medicine that dispels sickness. Rare is the procedure along the 
path of scriptures. 
48. Rare is the remembrance of Visnu at the time of 
death, O fair-complexioned lady. Thus, O fair lady, carry out 
my words that protect Dharma. 
*\fod. Soron on the Ganga, 27 miles NE ofltah (U.P.). Vif^u in the 
Sukara (Boar) form killed Hiranyakfa here—DE 195. 


1724 
N&rada PurSna 
49. O lady of beautiful limbs, of what advantage is the 
killing of my son to you ? It behoves you to be pleased. The 
worldly pleasures have been duly enjoyed. The kingdom has 
been made free of thorns. 
50A. I have placed my foot on the heads of those (i.e. 
surpassed those) who protect Devas, cows and Brahmanas. 
50B-51. A. I will never injure with my hands my son 
who is the object of my destiny.** 
Mohtni said : 
52-53. Dharmahgada is not my enemy, nor do I kill 
your son. I have told you at the outset, “Eat on the day of 
Hari*’. O king, rule over the earth as you please, for many 
years. I do not kill your son. My object of accomplishment lies 
in your taking food. O king, I have no interest in the death 
of your son. 
54. O king, if the son is dear to you, may the food be 
taken on the day of Hari. O king, of what avail are these laments 
which are beyond the pale of Dharma. 
55-56. Keep the truth assiduously. Carry out my word. 
“Dharm^gada who was standing in front, observed Mohini, the 
lady with slender waist, speaking thus. After bowing to her he 
said. It is this (here). Take it. Do not entertain any fear or 
suspicion, O beautiful lady. 
57-60. He drew out his stainless glistenting sword and 
placed it in front of the king. He placed himself too in front of 
the king and said with a steady resolve in truth and virtue. 
DharmSAgada requested : 
*‘0 my father, delay should not be made by you in striking 
me down. O king, make my mother’s words true. Keep up your 
promise. The Atman should be protected even at the sacrifice of 
wealth, wives or sons. 
To a king who is desirous of welfare, the progeny is for the 
purpose of preservation of Dharma. Death for your sake is the 
bcstower of ever-lasting salvation on me. You too will attain the 
pure worlds in virtue of your keeping of your own promise. 


Uttarabhdga 33.61-69 
1725 
61-62A. Eschew the deep overwhelming sorrow originat¬ 
ing from killing your own son. O lord, (even if) this body 
is abandoned, it will lead to the creation of another body, that 
is devoid of all sorts of ailments and equal to that of Indra. 
62B-64. Those who are killed for the cause of their 
fathers, or for their mothers, or for cows, Brahmanas, young 
women. Earth, king, or the deities, or for the sake of their 
children or the handicapped, attain the excessively brilliant 
worlds. Hence enough of your worries and anxieties. Kill me 
with your excellent sword. 
65. O leading king, stick to your vow. Do not take food 
on the day of Hari. O king, one may kill one’s own son or wife 
for the sake of Dharma. 
66. It is heard in the Vedic texts : A person (i.e. a king) 
who sits consecrated for the performance of horse-sacrifice 
may kill his son in that excellent sacrifice and no sin is 
incurred thereby. 
67. O king, whatever, Mohini, my mother, says must be 
carried out unhesitatingly by you. 
68. O leading king, be pleased. Garry out the suggestions 
made by me, in regard to my own death. O king you will then 
release yourself from the terrible utterance of falsehood through 
the interference of Mohini. 
69. O king, as a result of the killing of your own son, your 
fame will be illuminated. Thanks to the splendour of your fame, 
your reputation and esteem will be very high and ever-lasting. O 
dear father, no doubt should be entertained in this matter.” 


1726 
Ndrada Purdna 
CHAPTER THIRTYFOUR 
The Visions of the Lord 
Vasif}ha said :— 
1-4. On hearing the words of his son, the king Rukmah- 
gada glanced at Sandhyavali’s face resembling a lotus and 
became glad. (It seemed as though her face urged) : “listening 
to the words of Mohini, do not take food. Kill the boy born of 
your body. Do not take food. Rather kill your son”. This 
importunity was evident in her face. In the meantime, the 
Lotus-eyed Lord (Visn.’,) came there and stood in the sky but 
in an invisible state. He began to watch the courage and for¬ 
titude of the three persons—the heroic king, Sandhyavali and 
Dharmahgada. O leading king, the unsullied lord Visnu having 
the colour of the cloud, seated himself on the Lord of birds 
viz. his vehicle Garuda. 
5-9. When the words “Eat, Eat” were uttered by 
Mohini, the king took up the stainless (bright) sword to kill 
his son Dharmahgada, With a delighted mind, he made obei¬ 
sance to the Garuda-emblcmed lord. On seeing his father armed 
with the sword, Dharmahgada bowed down to his parents and 
to the discus-bearing Lord without any feelings of sorrow, he 
looked at the face of his mother, O great king. * 
Dharmahgada who was endowed with devotion to his 
father and who was superior to all in his devotion to his mother, 
kept his neck close to the ground. His neck resembled a 
conch-shell. It was tender with tite lustre of gold. It was plump 
and it contained many lines. He placed his neck on the path of 
sword. 
10. O king, (Mandhata), when the son offered his ntck 
with delight in the face that resembled the beautiful moon, and 
when the lord of the Earth (i.c. Rukmahgada) took up his sword, 
the entire Earth along with the mountains began to quake. 
11. Immediately the ocean tides arose as if to submerge 
the three worlds. Hundreds of meteors fell on the Earth with 
*Nrpa-Pufigavah in the text has no predicate, hence taken in the Voc. as 
Nrpa-PuAgava (Mandhata) “O king” is repeared even out of context in 
this part of the NP. 


Uttarabhdga 34.12-22 
1727 
violent gusts of wind and thunder-bolt’s stroke from the middle 
of the sky. 
12-14. Thinking (to herself) : “O the mission of the 
Devas has not been accomplished by me. My birth has been 
thus fruitless. It has been made so by the fate that had created 
the universe. My enchanting beauty has been only a fraud, 
since the food is not taken in by the king on the day of Hari— 
the day that dispels the fear of sins. In the Heaven, I will be 
treated as equal to grass. 
He who has abundance ofSattva qualities will go along 
the path of salvation. But I, the sinner, will fall into the terri¬ 
ble hell.” 
15. O leading king, when the sword was lifted up by the 
king, MohinI endowed with delusion over-came with swoon 
fell on the ground. 
16-18. Shining with that sword, the king attempted to 
cut off the neck of his son Dharmahgada. When the courageous 
king Rukrnahgada, with great delight, was to cut off his son’s 
head alongwith the ear-rings the head that was beautiful, 
had the brilliance of the moon that was shining. But im¬ 
mediately the king was caught in his hand by Visnu, the 
lord of the daughter of the Milk-ocean”. I am pleased I am 
delighted. There is no doubt about this. Olord of the people, go 
to my region. 
19-20. O king, establish on the Earth your fame that is 
worthy of being worshipped in the three worlds and that is 
white and pure. Set your foot on the head of Yama. O king, 
thereafter, accompanied by your beloved wife and son you go to 
my residence called after my body (i.e. Vaikuntha)”. The 
moment he was touched with the hand of the discus-bearing 
lord, the king became free from sins in the company of his wife 
and his son. 
21-22. Approaching quickly, the noble-souled king 
entered the divine body of the lord, leaving off the Royal glory 
originating from the Earth abandoning the slaves, riches and 
treasury, elephants, horses, chariots, wives in the harem and 
the kinsmen. He became one with the body of Visnu. Then a 
shower of flowers fell from the sky. 


1728 
Ndrada Furdna 
23. O king (Mandhata), the large drums callod Dundu- 
bhis were sounded by the delighted Siddhas, and the guardians 
of the divine world. The celestial ladies sang sweet songs and 
danced joyously. 
24-26. The daughters of the Gandharvas were satisfied 
with the action of the king. The son of the sun (i.e Yama) too 
observed this wonderful phenomenon viz. the king entered the 
divine body of Visnu accompanied by his wife and son after 
wiping off the writings of Yama. He placed all the people in the 
path leading to the world of Hari. The people followed the 
path pointed out by the king and were grateful to him. Yama 
became frightened again. He came to the four-faced lord 
Brahma and spoke to him crying “O lord, I will not be a 
mere employee without the power to command. O lord of 
Devas, create another post for me. I shall do my best. Let not 
my baton of punishment be a thing of mere show.” 
CHAPTER THIRTYFIVE 
Mohini incurs a cause 
Tama said : 
1. “O lord of the Devas; O lord of the universe ! O 
lord and preceptor of the mobile and immobile beings 
Mohini has become unsuccessful like a barren woman in the 
matter of giving birth (to childern). 
2. O Kula-emblemcd one the entire world goes to 
Vaikunfha along the path advocated by Rukmangada. No one 
comes to me. 
3. Although the lord of kings entered the body of the 
discus-bearing lord (Visnu), the mind of all the living beings 
has not changed. 
4. O grand-sire of the universe, after observing fast on 
the day of Vifi^u, all men including young children, go to the 
greatest world with their sins dispelled. 


Utiarabhdga 35.5-23 
i729 
5. Your daughter, Mdiiiii, the gentle Udy is iA«firi#d 
and has been in swoon. She is not coming near you because 
she is despised by the world. She does not even take food. 
6. 1 have become jobless, what am I to do?Guide me.*' 
On hearing the words of Yama the lotus-seated deity said: 
7-8A ‘*We all shall go together to bring Mohini to con¬ 
sciousness. Afler she has got up (regained normalcy) O son 
of the sim, we shall perform your task. There is no doubt about 
it. May excitement and agitation be eschewed. 
8B-9. Then all the groups of Devas led by Indra 
and others accompanied by Brahma, came down to thh 
Earth in their aerial chariots as refulgent as the sun, in order 
to rouse that woman to consciousness O king (M^dhata). 
10-23. With their aerial chariots they surrounded the 
auspicious (beautiful)-faced lady (who was in a swoon then). 
She was devoid of brilliance and bliss. She resembled (the 
following) : a river the water of which had dried up, the night 
without the moon, a holy rite Without the Rtvik priest, a man 
who is defeated in a battle, a flower that has faded, the date 
where-ftom the celebration of the festival has ceased, the Coral 
that has become white and colourless, the grain-field irom- 
where the grains have been removed, the light that is dim, thC 
churning rod O king, when the butter is taken out,* the speech 
that is not refined, the army that has been crushed (severely 
defeated), a young woman whose husband has been killed, the 
subjects deprived of food grains, the sacred-rite without Mantras, 
the war waged in violation of its prescribed code and without 
mercy, the Earth without a king, the king without a minister, 
O excellent king, the house devoid of wealth and food-grains, 
the pot without water, the lordly bull stuck in mire, the 
householder without his wife, the king banished from hte 
kingdom; the physician whose medical treatment has failed, 
the tree whose branches have been cut, the house without 
fire, the cloud without water, the fire with plenty of smoke, 
the sun without his rays, the man who has gone out of his 
senses, the man who indulges in sexual intercourse on Parvan 
*Here the text is defective. 


1730 
Ndrada PurSna 
days (the new moon, the full moon days etc), a lover wh<i is not 
satisfied with his beloved, (or with no favourable response from 
his beloved), the serpent deprived of its poison, the bird 
whose wings have been clipped, the Brihma^ who has no¬ 
means of sustenance; the garland that has been dropped down 
from the head, the mountain without metals and minerals, 
the scriptural text the script of which is distorted, the Rk and 
Yajus Mantra that is recited in wrong notes, the Saman verse 
recited with a discordant note, a lake devoid of lotuses, the 
pathway overgrown with grasses, the lotus devoid of petals, 
knowledge (vitiated) by the feelings of egotism, the Puru§a 
without Prakrti, the Sahkhya philosophy minus the Tattvas- 
(principles), and the Dharma (Virtue, piety) (tarnished) 
with arrogance, thus the heaven-dwellers saw Mohini devoid 
of brilliance. 
24-25. The Devas, on arrival, spoke to that fierce lady' 
who was meditating (brooding) and lacking in enthusiasm; who- 
was viewed by the people as one with (the stigma of) the 
murder of her son; who was criticised in cruel rebuking terms 
as a woman of bad conduct; who had been abandoned by the 
virtuous people; who had been stubborn in clinging to her own. 
words and had been defrauded by those very words (?) 
26. “O fair lady, do not feel aggrieved; you have put 
in manly efforts. Indeed, there is no question of wounded 
prestige in regard to the devotees of Visnu. 
27. O fawn- eyed lady, it is for the fulfilment of the 
work of the Devas that you have come (here). O fair lady, 
that is not fulfilled, now that he (king RukmMgada) has. 
attained absence of birth (i.e. salvation). 
28-29. (Defective) O Mohini, the Ekada^i in the 
bright half of the month of Vail^ha has been previously 
observed by Rukmangada (as a day of fast). It destroys all 
obstacles, and it is highly meritorious. O lady of large eyes, 
he observed the rite continuously for a year with very great 
strain. The fact that he did not swerve from truth is an act 
without a parallel. 
30-31. A woman is described as the queen of obsta¬ 
cles (except in your case). The king decided on killing his 
son without reservation in mind, thought or "^spccch. He 


Uttarabhiga 35.32-43 
173t 
cast off his affection and lifted his sword. The lord Vi?nu 
observed that (the king’s steadfastness had been proved) 
on that touch-stone. 
32-33. For he was prepared to kill his son but he would 
not take food on the day of Hari. Hari (Visnu) saw the real 
feelings of the king, his wife and his son. He was extremely 
pleased (with them) and so all the three were taken to his own 
abode along with their physical bodies like coals deposited 
(ignited) with fire, as their Karmans were exhausted. 
34. O blessed and gentle lady, if the work is begun in 
earnest and performed assiduously but the fruit is not derived, 
what is your fault in it now ? 
35. For this reason, O splendid lady, Devas have 
come as granters of boon. Whether it fructifies or not, one 
should engage oneself in an activity. One must not remain 
idle. 
36-38. All his attendants must be properly maintained 
by a king, who wishes for piety. If, even after an honest effort, 
the servant is not able to accomplish the task, at least the 
remuneration must be paid. There may not be any gratuity. If 
a man (i.e. the master) does not give the (servant) living 
sustenance, he attains the sin of a cow-slaughter. There is no 
doubt about this. Hence, O fair lady, O excellently beautiful 
woman, what is desired by you must be given. 
39-40A. (Defective) the task of heaven-dwellers had 
been to create the obstacle. Since you have endeavoured with 
sincerity what is it that the Devas will not do. But O fair¬ 
faced lady, along with you, they toO have been frustrated by 
the brilliance of fast which they call the destroyer of 
obstacles.” 
40B-4I. On being told thus by the Devas, Mohini the 
enchantress of the worlds, who was bereft of her husband and 
so was cheerless and extremely distressed, spoke thus ‘*Fie 
upon this life of mine, inasmuch as the entrusted work was 
not achieved. 
42-43. O lords of the immortal beings, the path of the 
world of Yama has not been rendered thronging with people. 
The vow of the day of Hari was not violated. Food was not 
taken by that king. His own son was executed by that hero 


1732 Ndrada Purdrfa 
joyously. After placing his foot on my head, Rukman^ada has 
attained Visnu. 
44-47. He has attained Visnu of immeasurable attributes, 
who is free from impurities, who is the support of pure ones, who 
is called Hariisa, Sucipada (of pure region), Vyoman (firma¬ 
ment), Pranava (OM) the imperishable seed; who is formless, 
without any appearances; transcendental to the universe; 
perfectly pure and unsullied and of the nature of void (firma¬ 
ment), who is worthy of being meditated upon; who is beyond 
contemplation; whom they call both the Existent and the non¬ 
existent, who is neither far off nor close by; who is the great 
splendour and capable of being grasped only by the mind; who 
is identical with the universe and is called Purusa; who is 
abiding in the lotus of the heart; who is the embodiment of 
splendour and eternal. When the king has already dissolved 
himself in the lord, what benefit do I derive from life ? 
48. The man who accepts his salary when the (appoint¬ 
ed) work is not accomplished, goes definitely to the hell 
leaving off his master. 
49. O heaven-dwellers, the servants who do not accom¬ 
plish the tasks of their masters but still enjoy the salary, are 
reborn in the Earth as horses. 
50. I am the destroyer of my husband as well as of my 
son. I am not successful in accomplishing the task. How can I 
accept the boon from you, the dwellers of Heaven ?” 
The Devas promised : 
51. “Speak out, O Mohini, I [we] shall give what is 
desired by you in your heart of hearts. After helping you, we 
shall free ourselves from indebtedness to you, 
52. O gentle lady, endeavour has been made by you 
in motivating the king to take food. O gentle lady, when 
such task has been accomplished, you deserve a share in the 
benefit.” 
53. O king (Mandhita) ! When the Devas were 
speaking thus, the priest of the king (Rukmangada) resplen¬ 
dent like fire, arrived there. 
54. The sage who had been engaged in Pranayama, 
had been living under water. When the twelve-year-period of 


Uttarabh&ga 35.55-61 
1735 
this penance was completed, he came out of the water. 
55. O king (Mandhata), as soon as he came out of 
water, the actions of Mohini were heard by him. The in¬ 
furiated prominent sage approached that group of the 
Devas. 
56. He condemned all those Devas who were about 
to grant boons to Mohini. “Fie upon this (woman) ? Fie 
upon this group of Devas ! Fie upon this action that should 
be called a sin. 
57. The boon that is desired by Mohini and that you 
are about to give her is detrimental to your very existence (or 
feeling of devotion about you) and promotes that growth of 
Purusartha * (Kama ?). 
58. She who has killed the son of her husband (and her 
husband as well) is no better than one who has killed ten 
thousand persons. She is like a man-eating ogress of the meanst 
conduct (?). O Devas, even by immolating herself into a well- 
kindled fire, she cannot gain in purity. 
59. These three have been considered equal to one- 
another by the ancient excellent Brahmanas, Viz. Killing ten 
thousand persons; slaughter of the husband, and the slaughter 
committed without any purpose. O Devas, even by falling into 
a well-kindled fire, she cannot purify herself. She had with 
her nectar-like sweet words deluded Rukmahgada, and 
Dharmangada. Rukmahgada killed his son and attained 
salvation accompanied by his beloved wife. She (Mohini) 
has made the Earth bereft of its rulers, the protectors of 
men. 
60. She cannot have her residence even in the hells, O 
Devas. How can she, who is intellectually deficient (and per¬ 
verse) stay in heaven ? O Devas, nor can she stay near 
the king; she may not attain the eternal region of Visnu. 
61. Nowhere in the worlds can she have her residence 
since she has been defiled (and condemned) by the public 
*The text parufArtha-prarohakam is obscure as pra-rohaka means 
‘causing to grow’ (MW. p. 689). How could the boon to Mohini promote 
the germination of any Puruf&rtha except K&ma ? 


1734 
J^drada Furdna 
censure. Fie upon the life of this lady of despicable activities 
who was always Indulging in sinful actions, O Devas. 
62. After killing her husband, after taking away the 
life of her son, after murdering her co-wife who was just like a 
mother unto her and after destroying the entire Earth, O 
Devas, what sort of existence or fate will she attain ? 
63-64A. (Defective) O Devas, this lady is a greater 
sinner (than others). She has destroyed the holy observances 
of Hari. She always advocated “May food be taken on the day 
of Hari.” Downfall is suffered even by those who take food (to 
relish it and not) for the sustenance of life. (?) 
64B-65. How can one get residence in heaven by 
propagating “May food be eaten on the Ekadasi day. May 
a cow be killed along wifh Brahmai^. May undrinkable 
liquors be drunk”. Such is spoken by the ignorant. This is 
not the decision of the learned. 
66. If out of ignorance the statement viz :— “May the 
food be taken on the day of Hari*^’ is made, there is an expi¬ 
ation for it with a hundred Pranay^as. 
67-68A. O heaven-dwellers, they can atone for it by 
observing fast on the Ekadasi day, or by taking a bath in the 
lake Puskara when the star under which one is born is asso¬ 
ciated with it (?), or by touching the Deity (Visnu) in the Boar 
form or by the worship of God. 
68B-69A. This expiation has been recounted by the 
Brahmanas if the words arc uttered (as mentioned before). 
This lady was ruthlessly engaged in sin. She insisted on food 
being taken on the day of Visnu which is difficult of perfor¬ 
mance to sinners. 
69B-70. She did not pay heed to the words of her 
husband. She got the favourite son killed—the son who knew the 
fitting words, who abided by the advice (of elders) and who 
was engaged in suctivities beneficial to his mothers. This 
woman has violated the Dharma of Visnu. She is burdened 
with many sins. 
71. O lords of the Devas, she is not worthy of even 
being touched. How then 'can you bestow boons on her ? 
Indeed your excellencies are interested in persons endowed 
with the qualities of justice and piety. 


Uttarabhiiga 35.72-84 
1735 
72. Heaven-dwellers do not accord protection to 
sinners. Devas are remembered as the supp>orters of Virtue. And 
Virtue (Dharma) is enshrined in the Vedas. 
73. Service unto the husband is glorified as the duty 
of woman by the Vedas. Whatever the husband says must be 
carried out unhesitatingly by her. 
74. If the husband says that anything is wliite she must 
also say that it is while. If he says that it is black, she must 
also say that it is black. This is to be known as real Susru^ 
(service) and mere menial action of attendance is not 
^usrusa. 
75-77. O Devas, her husband’s orders were disobeyed 
by her with a view of her desire to establish her own command. 
Hence there is no doubt that Mohini is the most sinful of all 
women. In order to achieve truthfulness, the king, who had 
been restrained by imprecations, said different kinds of words 
(i.e. offered various proposals). But this lady, the murdress 
of her son, did not like them. Hence the king relegated the 
sins to her and attained salvation. Thus she is indeed a 
woman of sinful physical body responsible for ten thousand 
murders. 
78-83. This woman of evil activities had repudiated the king 
who was the donor of various charitable gifts; who was a patron 
of Brahmanas; whose deity was Hari; who invai'iably delighted 
his subjects; who regularly observed fasts on the days of Hari; 
who cherished no indecent Love towards the wives of others; 
who had no desire for worldly pleasures; who eschewed his 
passionate love for the sake of others; who always performed 
sacrifices; who continuously maintained the suppression of the 
wicked ones on the Earth, and who was never overwhelmed by 
the seven terrible vices. How can she be worthy of being granted 
the boons ? O excellent Devas within a trice I shall reduce to 
ashes the person who is likely to side with her, whether he is a 
Deva or Danava. O gods, if anyone endeavours to protect 
Mohini, he incurs that sin which is fixed in Mohini.” 
84. O king (Mandhata), after saying this and taking up 
water in his hand, the eminent Brahmana furiously looked at 
the daughter of Brahma and violently hurled it on her head. 
The water then shone like fire. 


1736 
JVdrada Purina 
85. O king, no sooner was the water cast on her, her 
body blazed like a bundle of straw licked up by the flames of 
fire, even as the residents of heaven were (helplessly) looking on. 
86. “O Lord, check your anger; check your anger,’* 
even as these words of the Devas rose up in the sky, that 
(violent) fire created by the utterance of the Brahmana reduced 
that young woman to ashes. 
CHAPTER THIRTYSIX 
Brahma intercedes for Mohini 
Vasiffha continued'. 
1. Recovering herself from her unconscious senseless 
condition, Mohini went to the mansions of the Devas, (the 
Heaven), She was then rebuked by the messenger of the Devas, 
“You are a sinning woman and you have no place here. 
2. O foolish woman, a habitual sinner, O woman 
indulging in censuring your own husband, you have no place 
for staying in the heaven, since you have violated the day of 
Hari (the Ekadasi Vrata). 
3-5. It is in the hell that the residence of those averse 
to Dharma is recommended.” Vayu said thus to her in 
cruel and unexpected words. Beating her with a baton, he 
pushed her to (the place of) torture. O king, beaten thus by the 
celestial messenger and completely over-powered by the 
Brahmadan<^a (the baton i.e. curse of a Brahmana), Mohini 
reached the hell. There, at the behest of Dharma (i.e. Yama), 
she was beaten by the messengers for a long time. 
6-7A. She was taken to hells in the order and made 
to fall therein. They rebuked her, “O sinful woman, your 
son Dharmangada had been killed by you through the hands of 
your husband. Hence experience here the evil effects of the 
sinful actions perpetrated by you. 


Uttarabhdga 36.7B-18 
1737 
7B-8A. You are the experiencer of such fruit as this, inas¬ 
much as you have brought about the death of your son who was 
a benefactor of the subjects, whose intellect was stable and firm, 
who was comparable to Mahendra and Varuna and who was 
the overlord of seven continents. 
8B-9A. If one violently injures even an uncultured son, 
one becomes the murderer of a Brahmana. What then, O sinful 
woman, if one injures a son like Dharmahgada endowed with 
all piety ?” 
9B-10A. O excellent king, she was thus expostulated by 
the messengers of lord Yama. She experienced one by one all 
the tortures suggested by that lord. 
1 OB-11. Since she had already been struck down by 
Brahmadandn (the curse of a Brahmana), the tortures (or the 
hells)themselves became scorched due to their contact with her. 
They became unable to detain her (within themselves). Then, 
O king, those hells approached Dharmaraja. 
12. They were afflicted due to the contact with her limbs. 
They were frightened. With palms joined in reverence, they 
said, “O Lord of the Devas, O Lord of the universe, O Dharma¬ 
raja, be merciful. 
13. Take away this lady from the place of tortures im¬ 
mediately for the sake of our relief. O lord, at her very touch, 
we are being instantaneously reduced to ashes. 
14. Hence banish her from all hells.” On hearing 
their words, Dharmaraja was mnch surprised. 
15-16A. Dharmaraja then commanded his messengers, 
“This woman is to be banished from my mansion. Tortures (in 
my hell) do not wish to have any contact with that sinner who 
is burned by aBrahmana’s imprecation, whether such a sinner is 
a man or a woman or even a thief (?) 
16B. Hence banish from here this excessively sinning 
woman, who had disobeyed her husband’s words, who had 
caused the death of her son; who has destroyed Dharma and who 
is already struck by Brahmadan<^a. Even my body burns at her 
sight”. 
17-18. O king, thus commanded by Dharmaraja, those 
emissaries struck her with weapons and missiles and threw her 
out of Yama’s abode. 


1738 
Nirada Purina 
19. Thereafter, O king, the distressed woman of delusion, 
Mohini went to the nether-worlds. She was prevented (from 
entering the region) by the people there. 
20. Extremely ashamed due to this, Mohini, the daughter 
of Brahma, went to her father’s presence and intimated her own 
grief to him. 
21. “O father, there is no place of rest for me in all the 
three worlds consisting of mobile and immobile beings. Wher¬ 
ever I go they throw me out after rebuking me. 
22. I have been banished by the people of the world who 
struck me hard with weapons. It was at your behest that I had 
gone to Rukmahgada at the outset. 
23-24A. (For the same reason) this sinful activity was 
indulged in by me though that course of action was despi¬ 
cable to the entire world. I had caused distress to my husband; 
I had got my son killed with sword; I had made Sandhyavali 
perturbed. Hence, O father, I am reduced to this plight. 
24B-25A. O lord, there is no redemption at all now, for 
me who am the sinner. Particularly due to the curse of the 
Brahmana I have had to experience the misery. 
25B-26. O father, the celestial river (Gaiiga) is the besto- 
wer of liberation to those who have been struck down by the 
imprecation of a Brahmana, to those who have been 
burnt by fire, to those who are killed by a Cant^ala, to those 
who are eaten by animals etc. and to those who have been struck 
dead by lightning. 
27. If out of love for me, you, accompanied by gods, can 
propitiate and persuade the Brahmana who had cursed me, 
then alone any better state of existence can be brought 
about.” 
28-29. O king, when she said thus, Brahma, the grand¬ 
father of the worlds, started from there accompanied by Siva 
Indra, Dharma, Sun, Fire, and other lords of Devas, and sages. 
With Mohini at the head (of deputation) he went to the 
presence of the Brahmana. 
29B-30. After going there, O king, god Braljma, surround¬ 
ed by gods, paid obeisance to the Brahmana with great dignity, 


Uitarabh&ga 36.31A-42 
1739 
even though it is true that god Brahma, the creator (of the 
universe), is the grandsire of the world and is worthy of respect 
and worship by all gods of whom Rudra was prominent. 
31A-32A It was out of his affection for Mohini (and for 
her consolation and pleasure) that god Brahma got perplexed 
and presented his solution. O king, when a great work is at 
hand and if it is impossible to get it accomplished in the three 
worlds, the obeisance offered to a younger person is not 
censured, 
32B-33. On seeing the creator of all the worlds arrived 
there alongwith the Devas, that Brahmana who was a master 
of the Vedas and the Vedahgas and who was absorbed in per¬ 
forming austerities, got up and bowed down to god Brahma, 
those sages and the Devas. 
34, With great devotion, he made all of them sit and 
eulogised the lotus-born deity. Then the lord and creator of the 
worlds, the preceptor of the universe became delighted. 
35. 36A On behalf of Mohini, they requested the 
Brahmana who had been honoured by the king before, “O dear 
one, O Brahmana of good conduct, O helper of the other 
world, O Ocean of mercy, please show some compassion. Be the 
bestower of salvation on Mohini. 
36B-38. O Brahmana, it was for deluding Rukmahgada 
that she had been deputed by me. She is my daughter. O besto¬ 
wer of honour, on seeing the world of Yama empty and Vaiku- 
ntha full of unperturbed people this gentle lady, the benefactress 
of the Devas, was mentally created by me. O Brahmana, listen 
to what I am explaining to you. 
39-40. The way of Dharma is verysubtle.lt brings about 
the welfare of the entire world. I had tested Rukmahgada 
through this lady who acted as the touch-stone. Thus along 
with his wife and the son, O Brahmana, he was enabled to at¬ 
tain Hari*s abode through the unflinching and imobstructable 
devotion and the observance of fast on the day of Hari. 
41-42. Yama's abode was made empty by the activity 
of wiping off the lines in the record of Citragupta—^Yama*s 
accountant of human deeds. O Brahmana sage, it is not proper 
on the part of a Ksatriya to be critical and antagonistic to the 


1740 Mirada Purity 
Devas. Particularly to the Brahmana they render .great 
assistance. 
43. It (the place in Vaikuntha) is attained neither by 
the knower of Sariikhya, nor through the Yoga system consist¬ 
ing of eightfold paths.lt is to be attained only through devotion. 
O Brahmana, the husband who was the king (Rukmangada), 
the son (Dharmarigada) and the cowife (Sandhyavati) were 
enabled to reach it. 
44. What she had done against the crestjewel of a king 
who was extremely meritorious was a sin by which she was 
cursed and reduced to ashes by your imprecations. 
45. This woman strove for the Devas, for the 
increase of worldly existence and for rendering help to the 
king. She is not selfish. O Brahmana, how can she incur dis¬ 
respect ? If at all there is any disservice on her part, kindly 
forgive it. 
46. Be merciful, resort to tranquillity and quiescence, 
the grinding of the pounded flour (i.e. superflous exertion) is not 
justifiable. This woman was struck down by your cursing her. 
Be pleased. Be the bestower of salvation. O Brahmana, if this is 
performed, this Mohini will eschew her cruel grudge against 
you, who are worthy of being worshipped.” 
47. On being urged thus by the lotus-seated deity, he 
(the Brahmana) thought intelligently and abandoned his anger. 
Then the leading Brahmana said to the lord of the Devas 
(Brahma) who created the body of Mohini. 
48. “O lord, inasmuch as your daughter Mohini is 
burdened with so many sins, she has no place in this world teem¬ 
ing with living beings. 
49. *‘It is out cf my affection for you that I shall 
state before you what has been thought of by me after much 
critical deliberation in the case of Mohini, and you are certainly 
worthy of respectful worship by me all the more. 
50-53A O lord of Devas, I shall see that your words 
turn out to be true as well as those of mine. The affairs of the 
Devas and duties of Mohini must go on. Hence let Mohini 
stay in such a spot as has not been occupied by any 


Uitarabh&ga 36.53B-60 
1741 
living being. The Earth consisting of seven continents is 
inhabited fully by the mobile and immobile beings for ever. 
The nether-worlds are occupied by the Daityas and others. The 
firmament has been occupied by the birds etc., heaven is 
occupied by the meritorious beings. Hells are teeming with 
persons of sinful actions. The oceans have been full of the fish 
and other animals. Hence it is not possible for this woman 
to stay in these, as she is not worthy of being touched. 
53B-54A Then, O exceellent king, Brahma took coun¬ 
sel with the Devas and spoke to Mohini. “Gentle lady there is no 
space anywhere for you”. 
45B-58. On hearing the words • of her father Mohini, 
the obedient lady who wanted to destroy the observance of 
the day of Hari bowed down to all and said “O leading 
Devas, I hereby join my palms in reverence to you all includ¬ 
ing the priest, and to the Devas who are the witness of the 
worlds. O Devas, with delighted heart, thanks to the hundred 
obeisances, what has been requested for should be granted to 
me. It is conducive to the pleasure of everyone. Salvation of 
all the sinners is achieved through the power of Ekada^i. My 
purpose is to increase it further. I have enabled my husband, 
co-wife and the son to go to Vaikun^ha. 
59-60. I shall stay behind in the world of Earth, the 
widow that I am. I shall stay there for your sake, so that, O 
bestowers of honour, the day of Hari associated with me may 
not become defiled. For the sake of gaining my own selfish 
end I request for this. Not otherwise. Kindly grant it.” 


1742 
MSrada Purina 
CHAPTER THIRTYSEVEN 
Mohini regains her physical body 
Mohinl said : 
1-2A. “O Devas, there cannot be anything else so sancti¬ 
fying as the Ekada^i (Vrata). Even great sinners go to the 
abode of Hari, on being sanctified by it. It seems to me proper 
to have my abode in its vicinity. Let this proposal be 
considered.” 
Devas said : 
2B-3.1 O Mohini, the Vedha (overlapping of the previous 
Tithi) at mid-night or at the Sunrise is conducive to the help 
of the Devas as ordained by Hari. The breaking of the fast on 
the Trayodasi day is destructive of the benefit of the fast. 
4. The eight days, remembered in the Agamas (Scrip¬ 
tures), of the devotees of Visnu as ‘Mahadvada^is’ are those 
days wherein Ekadasi is also present. They are observed as the 
days of fast by the devotees ofVisnu. 
5. This observance of Ekadasi is different in regard to 
the noble souls, the followers of Visnu. In both the fortnights, 
it is observed alike for three days together. 
6. In the evening of the previous (i.e. Dasami) day and 
in the morning of the following (i.e. Dvadasi) day meal is 
missed. (Of course, both the meals are eschewed in the middle 
day i.e. Ekadasi day). But if Ekadasi is overlapped (by the 
previous Tithi), the observance of full fast is on the next day. 
The holy rite, in that case, should be performed on the Dvadasi 
1. VV, 2B*18 discuss the proper Tithi for observance of Ekadasi. 
This topic has been treated in detail in the Purvdrdha of the NP. Shorn of 
mythological paddings, it means that an Ekadaii when affected by 
Aruvodqya-Vedha should not be observed i.e. if the 10th Tithi, Daicani, extends 
on a civil day beyond 56 ghafikis from sunrise and Ek&daS follows and 
continues for the whole of the next day, there is Arupodaya-Vedha and 
such affected or penetrated (itiddhd) Ekadasi u not to be observed. This 
period of two muhurtas before the sunrise (i.e. Aruvodaya Vedha) is assigned 
to Mohini for occupation and the merit of people observing Arunodaya- 
Viddh& EkadaiO goes to Mohini. (vv. 8>18 also V. 22). 
The Smdrtas (non-Vai:;navas) however, are not govemed^^by the doctrine 
of Arupodaya-Vedha. 


1743 
UttarabhAga 37.7-17 
day by fasting and even by eschewing water. 
7. Those who are physically incapable of observing full 
fast can take water, vegetables, fruits, milk or the Naivedya offer¬ 
ings of Hari. In any case the quantity must not exceed a fourth 
of the usual diet. 
8. O chaste lady, the Smartas (those who follow Smrtis) 
eschew the EkadaJi that is overlapped (by DaSan^) at sunrise. 
Those who are devoid of any desire (from this Vrata) leave off 
(the EkadasI) that is overlapped by Dasami even at midnight. 
9. It is wellknown in all the worlds that the DaiamI 
Tithi belongs to Yama. O sinless lady, you must station your¬ 
self in its vicinity on the border. 
10. O splendid lady, thanks to this, even the task of the 
Devas can be realised. Staying along the border of Dasami, you 
will traverse along with the Sun and the Moon too. 
11. In order to dispel your sins, you move about the 
various sacred places on the Earth. You can have the benefit 
of the rite of Ekadasi witliin the period of time between Aruno- 
daya (dawn) and sunrise. 
12. If any one observes the holy rite of Ekadasi on the 
day when it has been occupied by you, he will be the person 
assisting you, O beloved one of the Devas. The period of two 
Muhurtas of the dawn should be known (as your period of 
occupancy). 
13-14. The number of Muhurtas of the day and of the 
night are remembered to be fifteen for each. They vary when 
the extent of time of the day and the night varies becoming 
short and long (by turns). This extent of time should be 
understood by the process of TrairaiSika (Rule of Three) . 
15. You come (and occupy your place) after the thir¬ 
teenth Muhurta of the night. O lady of pure smiles, deriving the 
merit of those who observe fast on that day, be happy. 
16-17 O Mohini, the time marked by the early dawn has 
been assigned as the abode to you for the purpose of re-establish¬ 
ing Yama, to destroy the path to Vaikutilha, to increase the 
number of heretics and to accumulate sins. 


1744 
Ndrada Pur&m 
18. O splendid lady, enjoy the benefit of the merit of 
those persons who assiduously observe the holy rite of Ekadasi 
on the day of your occupancy and overlapping. Be gracious 
unto this Brahmana (?) 
19. Thus advised and guided by the lotus-seated deity 
(Brahma) and others, Mohini became inuch more delighted. 
She considered her life contented and blessed by the opportu¬ 
nity to resort to holy centers for wiping off her sins. 
20. “Although my body had been reduced to ashes, this 
task of the Devas has been achieved. Although the body is 
reduced to a mere mass of ashes and consciousness of aerial 
nature (Linga-Sarira) remains, the path made by the king is 
swept clean. 
21. What has been stated by me when I was delighted 
has been carried out by myself” After thinking thus, the 
delighted lady bowed down to the Devas, who protected the 
earth as well as the priest. 
22. For the delusion of the people, she stationed herself 
in the transition period of time of Dasami (that is called Surya- 
vihlna (devoid of the Sun or Arunodaya Vedha). She enjoys 
the whole day (?) in the form of Krcchranta for the downfall 
into hell of men (?) 
23-24. On seeing her staioned on the border (of his Dasami 
Tithi) the son of Sun (Yama) became delighted as (was) 
evident from his face. He spoke these words r- “O lady of beauti¬ 
ful eyes, my re-establishment here, in this world, has been pro¬ 
perly made by you. The sound of the drum placed on an 
elephant belonging to Rukmaiigada has been silenced, (i.e. no 
longer do they announce the necessity of observing fast as 
before) . Now all people place their faith only in the affairs they 
see. 
25. If Dasami touches Ekadasi at the time of Sunrise 
what is called Suryodaya Vedha it is always condemned. The 
sunrise that is not touched will be conducive to the fasci¬ 
nation of men. 
26-27. (Defective) That Daiami day must be eschewed 
even if it extends to a fourth of the period and is also in¬ 
visible (?) if enjoyment of the favourable Yoga is desired (?) O 
large-eyed lady, your name Mohini, as people call you, is 


UttarabhUga 37.28A—36 
1745 
significant indeed. After deluding the people you get them 
recorded on the canvas (i.e. the record of their acts kept by 
Citragupta.) ” 
28A. After saying this, the son of Vivasvat (i.e. god 
Yama) bowed to the daughter of Brahma. Delightfully, he 
went to the heavenly world along with the Devas holding 
his scribe, Citragupta by the hand. 
28B-29. After the Devas had departed, Mohini approach¬ 
ed Brahma, the lord of Devas and Asuras, and entreated him 
thus : O father, this priest is fiercely angry with me, O lord of 
the worlds, my body has been burnt by him. Do something 
whereby I shall regain my physical body. 
30. By stationing myself on the border of Yama’s Tithi, 
the universe has been deluded by me. O dear father, thanks to 
your power, Yama who had been formerly conquered by the 
king is now made victorious. 
31. O dear father, now it is your duty that I should 
become one who am embodied. O lord of the universe, appease 
the Brahmana.’*^ 
32. On hearing those words of Mohini, god Brahma 
the ordainer of the worlds, mollified the Brahmana once again 
for the sake of his daughter. 
33. “O deer one, O Vasu, understand this that I speak 
which is beneficial to this lady. O blessed one, this is conducive 
to the benefit of all the worlds. 
34. Out of anger, this Mohini was reduced to ashes by 
you. She requests you for the restoration of her physical body 
once again. O bestower of honour, give commands for the 
same. 
35. She is my daughter and your Yajya (one on whose be¬ 
half you must perform Yajftas). O dear one, she has attained 
misfortune. This pitiable lady who has accomplished her task 
(assigned to her by me) must be protected by you. 
36. O bestower of honour if with pure feelings you 
inform me, I shall, thereupon create her physical body 
again. 


1746 
Nirada Purd^a 
37. But she became a sinner inasmuch as she was* anta¬ 
gonistic to Visnu’s day. O leading Brahmana may something 
be done immediately so that she is sanctified.” 
38. On hearing god Brahma’s words of request, the 
sacrificial priest (ofMohinl’s family) delightfully passed orders 
for reunion of the physical body (after its creation) with (the 
jiva) of his Yajya. 
39. On hearing the words of the Brahmana, Brahma, 
the gfrandfather of the worlds, sprinkled water from his waterpot 
on the ashes of the body of Mohini. 
40. When the ashes were sprinkled with water by 
Brahma, the maker of the worlds, Mohini was endowed with a 
physical body. After bowing down to her father, she humbly 
bowed down to Vasu, the priest and grasjjcd his feet. 
41. Then Vasu, the Yajaka (priest) of the king, became 
joyous. He spoke these words to (Mohini) who was the wife 
of his Yajya (one on whose behalf he had to perform a Yajfta), 
whose prowess was wellknown and who had been abandoned by 
her husband and son. 
42. Vasu said:- “O gentle lady, anger has been abandon¬ 
ed by me at the instance of Brahma. I shall facilitate your 
salvation by means of such rites as visiting holy centres and 
taking holy dips’*. 
43. Afler saying this to Mohini, the Brahmana joyously 
bowed down to Brahma, the lord of the worlds, and the father 
of Mohini, and bade goodbye to him. 
44. Bidden farewell by Mohini and Vasu out of affection 
Brahma went to the world beyond darkness through the 
unmanifest path. 
45-46. Vasu the excellent Br^mai^ who was the priest 
of Rukmangada considered Mohini worthy of being blessed 
and pondered. After meditating for a Muhurta he understood 
the way to her salvation.' 
1. This chapter serves as. a. background ibr the Twkm TtMt (PUfrimagie 
to holy places) section that follows. ^ 
