ANCIENT INDIAN 
TRADITION & MYfHOLOGY 
Translated by 
A BOARD OF SCHOlARS 
Edited by 
DR G.P. BHATI 
" 
VoLUME 62 


ANCIENT INDIAN TRADITION AND 
MYTHOLOGY SERIES 
[VOLUMES REL EA SED] 
VOLUMES 
SIVA 1-4 
LINGA 5-6 
BHAGAVATA 7-11 
GARUJ;>A 12-14 
NARADA 15-19 
KURMA 20-21 
BRAHMANJ;>A 22-26 
AGNI 27-30 
vARAHA 31-32 
BRAHMA 33-36 
VAYU 37-38 
PADMA 39-48 
SKANDA, PARTS I-XIV, 49-62 
VOLUMES UNDER PREPARATION 
SKANDA, PARTS XV-XXIII 
BHAVI!:)YA 
BRAHMAVAIVARTA 
DEViBHAGAVATA 
KALIKA 
MARKADJ;>EYA 
MATSYA 
VAMANA 
VI!:)DU 
VI!:)DUDHARMOTTARA 


THE 
SKANDA-PURANA 
. 
Translated and Annotated by 
DR. G.V. TAGARE 
PART XIV 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE LIMITED e DELHI 


First Editiun: Delhi, 1999 
C MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBUSHERS PRIVATE UMITED 
All Rights Reserved 
ISBN: 81-20S-1698-6 
Also availabk at: 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 
236 Sri Ranga, 9th Main ill Block, Jayanagar, Bangalore 560 011 
41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007 
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, Warden Road, Mumbai 400 026 
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004 
Sanas Plaza, 1302, Baji Rao Road, Pune 411 002 
8 Camac Street, Calcutta 700 017 
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004 
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 
UNESCO COLLECTION OF REPRESENTATIVE WORKS-Indian Series. 
This book has been acapted in tlu Indian Translation Series of tlu UNESCO 
Collection of Rejrresmtative Wmfcs, jointly sponsured by tlu United 
Nations Educatitmal, Scientific and Cultural . Organizt.Jtion 
(UNESCO) and tlu Government of India 
PRINTED IN INDIA 
BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS, 
A-45 NARAINA, PHASE I, NEW DELHI 110 028 
AND PUBLISHED BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE UMITED, 
BUNGALOW ROAD, DELHI 110 007 


PUBUSHERS NOTE 
The purest gems lie hidden in the Ԗattorn of the ocean or in the 
depth of rocks. One has to dive into the ocean or delve into the 
rocks to find them ouL Similarly, truth lies concealed in the language 
which with the passage of time has become obsolete. Man has to 
learn that language before he discovers that truth. 
But he has neither the means nor the leisure to embark on that 
course. We have, therefore, planned to ·help him acquire knowl­
edge by an easier course. We have started the series of Ancient 
Indian Tradition and Mythology in English Translation. Our goal 
is to universalize knowledge through the most popular interna­
tional medium of expression. The publication of the Purar;tas in 
English Translation is a step towards that goal. 
Acknowledgements 
It is our pleasant duty to put on record our sincere thanks to 
Dr. R.N. Dandekar and the UNESCO authorities for their kind 
encouragement .and valuable help in the publication of the 
volumes in this series. 


PuBLISHERs NoTE 
ABBREVIATIONS 
CONTENTS 
SKANDA-PURAëA 
BooK V: A VANTYA-KHAëI;>A 
SECTION III: REV A-KHAëI;>A 
v 
xi 
1. Pural)a Texts Described 
1 
2. The Greatness of Reva 
6 
3. Markai)Qeya Rescued in the Pralaya 
10 
4. Boons to Narmada 
13 
5. Naming the River Narmada 
1 7 
6. Epithets of Narmada Explained 
21 
7. The Advent of Kiirma Kalpa 
25 
8. The Advent of Baka Kalpa 
27 
9 . The Origin of Narmada 
30 
10. The Benefits of Bath in Narmada 
34 
1 1 . The Greatness of Narmada 
40 
12. Eulogy of Narmada 
48 
13. The Story of Twentyone Kalps 
50 
14. Kalaratri Annihilates the Universe 
53 
15. Turbulence of the Annihilation (Pralaya) 
58 
16. Eulogy of Siva by Brahma 
62 
17. Annihilation by Twelve Suns 
64 
18. Glorification of Narmada 
68 
19 
.. Varahakalpa 
69 
20. Varahakalpa (continued) 
74 
21. The Origin of the River Kapila 
81 
22. The Origin of Visalya 
87 
23. The Greatness of the Confluence of Visalya 
89 
24. The Greatness of the Confluence of Karanarmada 
91 
25. The Greatness of the Confluence of Nilagailga 
91 
26. The Observance Called Madhiika Trtiya 
92 
27. Creating Agitation in Tripura 
106 
28. Destruction of Tripura: Glorification of Jvale8vara 
and Amare8vara Tirthas 
107 


Skanda Purii:T)a 
29. The Greatness of the Confluence of Kaveri 
and Narmada 
30. The Glory of Daru Tirtha 
31. The Greatness of Brahmavarta 
32. The Greatness of Patresvara Tirtha 
33. The Greatness of Agni Tirtha 
34. Description of Ravi Tirtha 
35. Glorification of Meghanada Tirtha 
36. The Glory of Daruka Tirtha 
37. Glorification .of Deva Tirtha 
38. The Greatness of Narmade8vara Tirtha 
39. The Greatness of Kapila Tirtha 
40. The Greatness of Karaiije8vara Tirtha 
41. The Greatness of Kur:tQ.ale8vara Tirtha 
42. The Greatness of Pippalada Tirtha 
43. The Greatness of Vimale8vara Tirtha 
44. Eulogy of Sulabheda 
45. Andhaka Gets a Boon 
46. Abduction of Saci 
47. Devas Return to Svarga 
48. Andbaka Blessed 
49. Glorification of Sulabheda 
50. Rules about the Eligibility for Dana 
51. Glorification of Danadharma 
52. The Story of Dirghatapas 
53. :\U.asp'lga Goes to Svarga 
54. Dirghatapas Goes to Heaven 
55. KaSiraja Attains Moka 
56. Fruit of Dana Described 
57. The Sahara Goes to Svarga 
58. The Greatness of Siilabheda Tirtha 
59. The Greatness of Aditya Tirtha 
60. The Greatness of Adityesvara Tirtha 
61. The Greatness of Sakresvara Tirtha 
62. The Greatness of KaroQ.isvara Tirtha 
63. The Greatness of Kumaresvara Tirtha 
64. The Greatness of Agastyesvara Tirtha 
65. The Greatness of Anandesvara Tirtha 
66. The Greatness of Matrtirtha 
67. The Greatness of Lmi.ke8vara Tirtha 
117 
121 
122 
123 
125 
129 
131 
133 
135 
137 
143 
146 
148 
i51 
156 
159 
162 
165 
168 
170 
177 
181 
185 
190 
191 
195 
200 
203 
214 
217 
219 
220 
226 
227 
229 
230 
231 
232 
233 


Contents 
68. The Greatness of Dhanada 
69. The Greatness of Marigalesvara Tirtha 
70. The Greatness of Ravi Tirtha 
7 1. The Greatness of Kamesvara Tirtha 
72. The Greatness of Mal).inagesvara Tirtha 
73. The Greatness of Goparesvara Tirtha 
74. The Greatness of Gautameiivara Tirtha 
75. The Greatness of Sarikhaciiqa Tirtha 
76. The Greatness of Pareiivara Tirtha 
77. The Greatness of Bhimeiivara Tirtha 
78. The Greatness of Naradesvara Tirtha 
79. The Greatness of Dadhiskanda and 
Madhuskanda Tirthas 
80. The Greatness of Nandikeiivara Tirtha 
81. The Greatness of Varul).eiivara TI;tha 
82. The Greatness of Pafica Tirtha(s) 
83. The Greatness of Haniimanteiivara Tirtha 
84. Kapi and Other Tirthas 
85. The Greatness of Somanatha Tirtha 
86. The. Greatness of Pirigaleiivara Tirtha 
87. The Greatness of \b:la-tray-mocana Tirtha 
88. The Greatness of Kapilesvara Tirtha 
89. The Greatness of Piitikesvara Tirtha 
90. The Greatness of Jalasayi Tirtha 
9 1. The Greatness of Cal).c;laditya Tirtha 
92. The Greatness of Yamahasya Tirtha 
93. The Greatness of Kalhoqi Tirtha 
94. The Greatness of Nandikesvara Tirtha 
95. The Greatness of Narayal).a. Tirtha 
96. The Greatness of Kopsvara Tirtha 
97. The Greatness of Vyasa Tirtha 
98. The Greatness of Prabhasa Tirtha 
99. The Greatness of Nageiivara Tirtha 
100. The Greatness of Markal).qeiivara Tirtha 
ix 
242 
243 
244 
245 
245 
25 1 
253 
254 
254 
256 
257 
260 
26 1 
262 
263 
264 
274 
279 
288 
290 
290 
29 1 
292 
30 1 
302 
305 
306 
306 
308 
309 
325 
328 
33 1 


ABBREVIATIONS 
Common and self-evident abbreviations such as Ch (s) -Chapter(s) , 
p-page, pp-pages, v-verse, vv-verses, Ftn-Footnote, Hist. Ind. 
Philo.-History of Indian Philosophy are not included in this list. 
AGP 
AIHT 
AITM 
AP 
AV 
Bdp 
BG 
BhP 
Br 
BsP 
BVP 
cc 
cvs 
DB 
De or 
GDAMI 
DhS 
GP 
GS 
HD 
JP 
KA 
KP 
S.M. Ali's The Geography of Puril7J.as, PPH, New Delhi, 
1973 
Ancient Indian Historical Tradition, F.E. Pargiter, Motilal 
Banarsidass (MLBD) , Delhi 
Ancient Indian Tradition and !vtythology Series, MLBD, 
Delhi 
Agni Pura7J.a, Guru Mandai Edition (GM) , Calcutta, 
1957 
Atharoa Veda, Svadhyaya MaԘ:tcJal, Aundh 
Brahmii:rJ4a Puril7J.a, MLBD, Delhi, 1973 
Bhagavadgita 
Bhagavata Pura7J.a, Bhagavat Vidyapeeth, Ahmedabad 
Brilhma7J.a (preceded by name such as Satapatha) 
Bhavirya Puril7J.a, Vishnu Shastri Bapat, Wai 
Brahma Vaivarta Pura7J.a, GM, 1955-57 
Caturoarga Cintiima7J.i by Hemadri 
Cara7J.a Vyitha Sittra by Saunaka, Com. by Mahidasa. 
Dedi Bhiigavata, GM, 1960-61 
The Geographical Dictionary of Ancient and Medieval 
India, N.L. De/Dey, Oriental Reprint, Delhi, 197 1 
Dharma Sittra (preceded by the author's name such 
as Gautama) 
Garu4a Pura7J.a, ed. R.S. Bhattacharya, Chowkhamba, 
Varanasi, 1964 
Grhya Sittra (preceded by the name of the author 
such as Apastamba) 
History of Dharma Siistra, P.V. Kane, G.O.S. 
Puril7J.a Qoumal of the Kashiraj Trust) , Varanasi 
Kautilya ArthaSiistra 
Kitrma Puril7J.a, Venkate5vara Press Edn., Bombay; also 
Kashiraj Trust Edn., Varanasi, 197 1 


xii 
LP 
Manu 
Mbh 
MkP 
MN 
MtP 
MW 
NP 
PdP 
PE 
PR or 
PRHRC 
ħv 
Sat Br 
SC or SMC 
Skp 
SP 
VaP 
VR 
VdP 
VmP 
VP 
VrP 
Skanda Puriz1J.Q 
Linga Puriz7J.a, GM, 1960; also MLBD, Delhi, 1981 
Manusmrti 
Mahabharata, Gita Press, Gorakhpur, VS 2014 
Mizika1J.4eJa Puriz7J.a 
Mahizbhizrata Nizmiznukrama1J.'i, Gita Press, Gorakhpur, 
vs 2016 
Matsya Puriz1J.a, GM, 1954 
M. Monier-Williams' Sanskrit-English Dictionary, MLBD, 
Delhi, .1976 
Nizradiya or Nizrada Puriz1J.a, Venkatdvara Press, 
Bombay 
Padma Pura7J.a, GM, 1957-59 
Puriz1J.iC Encyclopaedia, V. Mani, English Version, 
MLBD, Delhi, 1975 
Puranic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs, 
R.C. Hazra, Calcutta, 1948 
IJg Veda, Svadhyaya MaQ.<;lal, Aundh 
Satapatha Brizhma7J.a 
Smrti Candrikiz by Devanna Bhana 
Skanda Puriz1J.a 
Siva Puriz7J.a 
Vizyu Puriz1J.Q 
Vizlmiki Riimizya7J.a 
Vi¹1J.udharmottara Puriz1J.a 
Vizmana Puriz1J.Q 
Vi¹'TJ.U Puriz1J.a 
Varizha Puriz1J.Q 


SKANDA PURA.rǒA 
BooK V: AVANTYA-KHAëJ;)A 
SECfiON III: REV A-KHAëJ;)A 
CHAPTER ONE 
Purii:r.ta Texts Described 
Obeisance to Sri Gar;te5a. 
Om obeisance to Sri Puru¢ottama. 
Om obeisance to Sri Narmada. 
Om obeisance to Hari, Hanԗ and Hirar;tyagarbha. 
Obeisance to Vyasa, Valmiki, Suka and Parasara. 
Obeisance to Preceptors, Cows and Brahmar;tas. 
I. 
May the waters of Narmada protect ye all-the waters 
which inebriate the swarms of bees with the fragrance of ichor 
washed off from the temples of elephants taking a dip in her, 
which are made tawny-coloured due to the -saffron dissolved 
(and washed away) from the pairs of breasts of Siddha women 
while they take their holy bath in her, of which trees on either 
bank are strewn over with the flowers offered by sages every 
morning and evening, (the waters) the force of the waves of 
which is checked by alligators and trunks of elephants. 
2. )fay Narmada with sacred places on her both banks, 
who has washed off the masses of sins of all the worlds and is 
worthy of being venerated by Devas, sages and human beings, 
always dispel (our) sins. 
3. 
Narmada is possessed of meritorious waters. She has sanc­
tified the ·entire earth. May she destroy all sins past, present 
or future, of the people taking birth on the earth. 
4. 
Even ·ascetics desire her sandy banks. May Reva with Siva 
as her deity, ever rendering service to multitudes of sages, be 
conducive to my welfare. 
5. 
Mter bowing down to Narayar;ta and Nara, the most ex-


2 
Skanda Pura7J-a 
cellent one among men, to Goddess Sarasvatl and to Vyasa one 
should recite Jaya1• 
6-1 6. In the meritorious place of Naimiᤁa which was resorted 
to by many sages, Saunaka who began a Satra (a sacrifice of 
long duration) , asked Suta in detail: "0 Suta, I believe that 
mastery of Dharma (holy rites and activities of piety) has been 
greatly esteemed always by you. As a disciple of Vyasa, you 
alone are the propounder of the divine, nectarine stories of 
the PuraQ.as. Hence, 0 Kavi (the seer of things beyond) , I ask 
you something pertaining to piety and holy places. There are 
many holy spots and shrines. They have been heard by me too. 
The divine river pertaining to Brahma (Sarasvatl) , as well as 
the river pertaining to ViᤁQ.u (Ganga) have been heard by me. 
The third excellent river (Narmada) pertaining to Rudra has 
never been heard by me. 0 highly intelligent one, narrate 
unto me the details about that holy river having the Vedas as 
her sustaining basis-a river honoured and adored by the mul­
titude of Devᦚs and consecrated by (the presence of) excellent 
Tlrthas. What is that land which Reva has occupied? How has 
she originated from Sri Rudra? Tell me all those Tlrthas which 
have resorted to Reva. " 
Suta said: 
0 Kulapati (Head of the families) of sages, you have put a 
pertinent question as to the nature of Narmada. She is won­
derful, sacred, deStructive of faults when described or listened 
to, 0 excellent one. The son of Satyavatl, who had a sense of 
fulfilment after analysing, redacting and compiling the Vedas, 
Upavedas, Vedarigas etc. is the expounder of the eighteen 
PuraQ.as. After bowing down to him, I shall narrate the PuraQ.as 
in due order. By giving discourse on them, there will be wel­
come incᦠease in piety and longevity. The Sruti and Smrti texts 
have been proclaimed as the eyes of Vipras (BrahmaQ.as) . One 
bereft of one of these two is a one-eyed man and one bereft 
of both is loudly proclaimed as blind. The Srutis, ᦡmrtis and 
I. 
]AYA: This was the title of Mahabharata. It was at first restricted to that 
epic but ,was adopted by the Purai;as like Vayu and Brahma7J4a. Finally 
Kalpalaru, on the authority of Bhav4ya Pura7;1a, conceded it to Valmiki 
Riimaya1;1a (VR), 18 Mahapural)as and Manusmrti. 


V.iii.l . 1 7-28 
3 
Purat:tas are the three eyes of learned men. He who sees through 
these three is considered as part and parcel of Mahe5vara. 1 
1 7-28. 
The Vedic Vidya (lore) of the Atman was created 
by Isvara himself. Then there is Saunaklya lore (the Mantra 
lore such as Rgvidhana, etc.) . Then there is the Paurat:tikl lore 
in the form of Dharmasastra (treatises on ethics, piety and 
good conduct) . These three lores are very important ones in 
taking definite decisions about all scriptural matters. This is 
the command of Brahma that Purat:ta is (to be taken as) the 
fifth Veda. He who does not know the Purat:ta does not under­
stand anything here, whether it is a holy rite or piety or an 
item of knowledge of any sort or anything else worthwhile. 
What is there tl;lat is not found in the Purat:ta? 
The Vedas have been well-ensconcep formerly in the Purat:ta. 
There is no doubt about it. The Veda is terribly worried about 
one with incomplete mastery of the Vedas apprehending, "He 
will distort me. " 
This is the conclusiᦜn arrived at earlier by Itihasas and Purat:tas 
that the Purat:ta constitutes the soul of the Vedas; the well­
known six Ailgas (ancillary subjects) are the different limbs; 
what is found in the Vedas is seen in the Smrtis and what is 
seen in both is narrated in the PuraQ.as. Among all scrjptural 
treatises it was the Purat:ta that was remembered at the mᦝtset 
by Brahma. Thereafter the Vedas issued forth from his mouths. 
In this Kalpa and Manvantara there was only one Purat:ta, 0 
sage. It was the means of acquiring the three aims of life. The 
meritorious text consisted of a hundred crores of verses. The 
Four-faced Lord remembered it and proclaimed it to the sages. 
Thereafter the Purat:ta functioned as the source of all the 
scriptural treatises. As time passed on the sage noticed the 
inability of the people to comprehend the Purat:ta (due to 
their deficient intellect) . The Lord assumes the form of Vyasa 
during every Dvapara Yuga always and abridges the Purat:ta to 
eight hundred thousand verses. This again is classified into 
1. 
W 16-28 describe the importance of Pura)Jas. It is possible that originally 
there was one compendium called Pura)Ja. Due to later accretions, the 
original Pura)Ja was divided into many independent works, now known 
as eighteen Mahapura)Jas. But the exorbitant ci'aim that the original Pura)Ja 
consisted of a hundred crore of verses and is retained in heaven is an 
exaggerated glorification of Pura!Jas. 


4 
Skanda Purii7J.a 
eighteen (separate Pural).as) and put into currency in the world 
of mortals. Even to-day the Pural).a extends to a hundred crore 
(verses) in Devaloka (world of immortals). 
29-45a. 
Further, here it has been still abridged into four 
hundred thousand verses. These eighteen Pural).as extant now 
are being enumerated here. 1 0 excellent sage, listen; I shall 
mention them each by name. 
The Pural).a has five characteristic features, viz. creation, 
subsidiary creation, dynasties, Manvantaras and genealogical 
legends (of kings). 
There in the collection, the first Pural).a is Brahma. There 
are ten thousand verses therein. It has a number of meritori­
ous stories. Padma Pural).a is cited as consisting of fifty-five 
thousand verses. The third Pural).a is ViZl).u Pural).a with twenty­
three thousand verses. The fourth Pural).a was originally pro­
claimed by Vayu. It is remembered as Vayaviya Pural).a. Since 
devotion to Siva has been propounded in it, the other name 
for it is Saiva. 0 Saunaka, there are twenty-four thousand verses 
in it. The fifth Pural).a is cited as BhaviZya Pural).a containing 
four Parvas (Books). There are fourteen thousand five hun­
dred verses in it. The sixth Pural).a contains nine thousand 
verses and it is glorified as Markal).c;leya Pural).a. Agneya Pural).a 
is the seventh one and it contains sixteen thousand verses. The 
eighth one is mentioned as Naradiya Pural).a. It consists of 
twenty-five thousand verses. The ninth one is Bhagavata having 
two parts. The nmpber of verses therein is eighteen thousand. 
The tenth Pural).a, Brahma-vaivarta, has been mentioned as 
containing the same number of verses. Linga Pural).a should 
be known as the eleventh Pural).a. It has eleven thousand verses. 
0 eminent sage, that Linga Purat:ta has two parts. They know 
that the twelfth Pural).a is Varaha Pur:iil).a with twenty-four thousand 
verses. 0 most excellent one among the illustrious ones, Skanda 
Pural).a is divided into seven Khal).c;las. It is observed that the 
number of verses in it is eighty-one thousand. Then the four­
teenth Pural).a is Vamana by name. 0 Kulapati, ever since early 
days it is declared to consist of ten thousand verses. Kaurma 
1. 
In this list of eighteen Purat)as, Vayu and Saiva Pural}a are regarded as 
one and the same, though actually they are separate (Tagare, Intro. to 
Vayu Pura7Ja, pp. XIX-XXV) . Matsya (53.1'8-19) , Agni (272. 4-5) regard 
Vayu (and not Siva) as a Mahapural}a. 


V.iii. l. 45b-53 
5 
PuraQ.a, the fifteenth PuraQ.a, they say, has two parts. In Kali 
age, 0 Lord of Sarikhyas, it has seventeen thousand verses. 
Matsya PuraQ.a, the sixteenth one in the order, was narrated 
to Manu by die Fish (Lord in that incarnation) . 0 most elo­
quent one, the verses number fourteen thousand. Garuc;la PuraQ.a 
is remembered as the seventeenth PuraQ.a. It has nineteen 
thousand verses. The eighteenth PuraQ.a is BrahmaQ.c;la having 
two parts. The number of verses is twelve thousand eight hundred. 
45b-53. Similarly there are UpapuraQ.as which have been 
narrated by Vedhas (Brahma) . 
The excellent Saura UpapuraQ.a is a part of Brahma PuraQ.a. 
It has two versions. It is an easily accessible UpapuraQ.a based 
on the meritorious story of Siva. The first version is propounded 
by Sanatkumara and the second one has been uttered by Surya. 
0 great sage, it is well known by the nalfle of Sanatkumara. 
The second UpapuraQ.a is Narasirhha. It forms a part of Padma 
PuraQ.a. Saukeya (that of Suka) is the third and is considered 
as a part of ViᤁQ.u PuraQ.a. The fourth one is Barhaspatya; it 
is always honoured as an ancillary to Vayu PuraQ.a. The fifth 
UpapuraQ.a is Daurvasasa. It is always ancillary to Bhagavata. 
N·arada UpapuraQ.a is mentioned by poets (learned men) as an 
ancillary to Bhaviᤁya. (Then there <;_re) Kapila, Manava and 
one narrated by Usanas. VaruQ.a and the two Kalika UpapuraQ.as 
are ancillary to BrahmaQ.c;la. Samba and Saura UpapuraQ.as with 
the collection of all topics are Mahesvara (pertaining to 
Mahesvara-Siva) . Then there are Parasara, Bhagavata and Kaurma 
the eighteenth. These eighteen UpapuraQ.as have been enu­
merated by me in due order. He who listens to or recites this 
PuraQ.asarhhita becomes sharer of infinite merit. On death he 
goes to the city of Brahma. 


6 
Skanda Purii:r;,a 
CHAPTER TWO 
The Greatness of &vii 1 
Sitta said: 
1-8. Kn:r:ta Dvaipayana recounted the greatness of Narmada. 
It was what you asked me and I shall fully narrate it to you. 
0 excellent sage, with the exception of Lord Brahma who is 
competent to recount the details of the holy spots on Narmada? 
Formerly Janamejaya put this very question to a disciple of 
Dvaipayana named Vaisarilpayana. It has the meritorious ref­
erence to the Tlrthas on Reva. I shall mention it to you, 0 
Sa unaka. 
Formerly King Janamejaya, the son of Parlkᤁita, was initiated 
in the holy rites concerning Yajiia. All the articles for Havis 
(sacrificial offering) had been gathered together. The rites 
were going on. Eminent Brahma:r:tas were seated around and 
the sacrificial fire had been kindled with the holy offerings 
consigned to it. Everywhere pious discussions and discourses 
were being .held. Day and night, 0 Kulapati, the words "Let it 
be given. Let it be consumed" were being uttered by the people, 
in the phice of sacrifice. Those who were relaxed were indulg­
ing in different pastimes. Thus the Yajiia was being performed 
in the chamber that was on a par with the heavenly assembly 
hall. Janamejaya then put this question to Vaisarilpayana who 
was seated there: 
Janamejaya said: 
9-1 2. 0 Vaisarilpayana, it is known to me that by the grace 
of Dvaipayana, you have acquired knowledge. Hence, in the 
presence of the sages I am putting this question to you. Do tell 
me the events of the past regarding the holy pilgrimages of my 
forefathers. I have heard that they had experienced many kinds 
of painful calamities for a long time. After being defeated in 
the game of dice, the sons of Prtha, my grandfathers, began 
to wander all over the earth girt by the ocean, with a strong 
desire to visit holy spots. How did they fare in their wander-
I. 
This Purat:J.a identifies Revi with Narmada. But as De (p98) points out, 
some Pural}.as like BhP, Vamana, treat Revi as an independent river. 


V.iii.2. 1 3-28 
7 
ings, 0 BrahmaQ.a? By whom were they accompanied, 0 dear 
one, in their travels over many parts and regions of the earth? 
You have been considered by me as omniscient. Do tell me 
these detailS. 
Vaisampiiyana said: 
1 3-1 6. 
0 Lord of the earth, 0 sinless one, after making 
obeisance to Lord Virfipakᤁa (Siva) and the great poet Vedavyasa, 
I shall tell you what you have been asking. 
The five PaQ.<;lavas, your grandfathers, spent some time in 
the excellent Kamyaka forest1 along with Draupadl and BrahmaQ.as·. 
In that forest where the chief person was Uddalaka, the highly 
intelligent Kasyapa, VibhaQ.<;laka, the great sage, Guru, Pulastya, 
Lomasa and others including their soᤨs lind grandsons lived. 
There they had their holy ablutions in all the Tlrthas, 0 em­
inent king. Then they went to the Vindhya mountain. 
1 7-ᦞ8. 
There they saw a holy hermitage surrounded by 
trees such as Carhpaka, KarQ.ikara, Punnaga, Nagakesara, Bakula, 
Kovidara, Da<;lima, etc. It was rendered beautiful by Arjuna 
.trees in full bloom, Bilvas, Paᤃalas, Ketakas, Kadambas, Amras, 
Madhukas, Nirhbas,Jamblras, Tindukas, Nalikeras (coconut trees), 
Kapitthas, Kharjfiras and Panasas. ᦟIt was crowded and over­
spread with various kinds of trees and creepers. It was spread 
over by various winding tendrils. The whole park was full of 
flowers and fruits. It was a big garden shining like Caitraratha 
forest. It was adorned with extensive ponds and tanks. It was 
embellished by clusters of lotuses. It was (as if) concealed by 
white, blue, yellow, whitish pink lilies, etc. It was scattered with 
Harhsas (swans) , KaraQ.<;lava geese, Cakravakas (ruddy geese), 
etc. which enhanced its beauty. It was resorted to by many 
types of birds such as A<;tis, Kakas (a kind of raven) , cranes, 
cuckoos, etc. It abounded in many types of beasts such as lions, 
tigers, boars, great elephants in their rut, huge-bodied buffa­
loes, deer, Citrakas, rabbits, GaQ.<;lakas (rhinoceros) , jackals, 
antelopes, bears (Bhallakas), bipeds as well as quadrupeds. It 
was resplendent and pleasing to the mind. There were many 
cuckoos too. Many kinds of birds such as Jlvafljlvaka flocks 
I. 
One Kamyaka Vana was on the banks of Sarasvati while another was in 
the district of Mathura (De 88) . 


8 
Skanda Purii:r;ta 
adorned it. The place was free from miseries and grief. It was 
highly charming with smart and active animals. People were 
free from hunger and thirst and devoid of all ailments. The 
whole place attracted everyone. Here the deer used to suck at 
the udders of lioness with great affection. Cat and mouse licked 
each other with faces lifted up. The same was the case with 
lions and elephant cubs, serpents and peacocks. On seeing 
that beautiful forest the sons of PaQ.QU entered it. 
29-36. 
Dharmaputra saw there Sage MarkaQ.c.leya1 who had 
the lustre like that of the midday Sun. He was attended upon 
by sages who were mast᤼rs of the different scriptural texts. 
They belonged to noble families. They had the Sattva qualities 
and they strictly followed the conventions regarding cleanli­
ness and good conduct. They performed Japa thrice everyday. 
They were endowed with great intelligence, patience and for­
titude. They were particular in performing Japa three times a 
day. They were interested in regular performance of Homa 
with the chanting of the Mantras of ᤒk. Yajus and Sarna Vedas. 
Some of the attending sages were performing penances sitting 
in the midst of five fires. Some preferred to stay in secluded 
spots; some kept their arms raised up. Some remained without 
any support. Others kept on moving along with the movement 
of the Sun. Others took food in morning and evening. Still 
others took only one meal per day. Some took food once in 
twelve days. Some had food once a fortnight. Still others took 
food on every new-moon day. Some used to eat moss. alone 
from ponds. Still others regularly took in only PiQ.yaka (oil­
cake) . Some ate Palasa leaves. A few had restricted regular 
food. Some took in only air or water. The sage was attended 
upon by eminent old sages of the types mentioned above. The 
glorious son of Dharma entered the hermitage and saw the 
quiescent, excellent sage, engaged in meditating on the great­
est Being (Brahman) . After circumambulating, he prostrated 
before him like a log of wood. 
37-46. 
On seeing Dharmaputra fallen at his feet with devotion, 
the intelligent sage glanced at him for a long time and asked, 
"Who are you?" 
1. 
MarkaJ:Ic;leya: A great sage who witnessed seven Kalpas. He was associated 
with YudhiHhira as a member of his Sabha (Mbh, Sabhii, chs. 4-15) and 
in his exile in the forest (Mbh, Vana, chs. 186-232) . He is the narrator 
of Revii-Miihiitmya. 
· 


V.iii.2.47-58 
9 
On hearing his words, a boy near him said, "Here is Dharmaraja 
who has come to meet you. " 
On hearing the words uttered by the boy, he respectfuVy 
said, "0 dear one, 0 dear one, do come, do come. " After 
moving a little from his seat, the sage lovingly sniffed at his 
head and made him seated. After he had been seated in the 
assembly, he honoured him duly by offering cereals grown in 
tlte forᦖst, fruits, roots and juices of various kihds. All the 
PiiQ.<;lavas along with the BrahmaQ.as (accompanying· them) were 
suitably honoured. 
After resting for a short while, YudhiHhira, the son of Dharma, 
asked the excellent sage with curiosity: "Sir, it is known to me 
that you are the most long-lived one of all the people. 0 sinless 
one, narrate unto me the relevant events {;If all the seven Kalpas. 
Even when a Kalpa ends and when the mobile and immobile 
beings perish, you do not (perish) , 0 eminent BrahmaQ.a. How 
is this? What is the reason therefor? 0 sage, there are many 
rivers including Ganga. All of them flow into the seas. Among 
them which are those rivers that survive the Pralaya? What are 
those that become dissolved? Which of thQse rivers are always 
full of sacred waters? Which of them never get perished? 0 
dear one, do tell me this with a delighted mind. I wish to hear 
it entirely along with the sages and kinsmen." 
Sri Marka7J.4eya said: 
47-58. 
Very well, 0 highly intelligent Yudhinhira, 0 son 
of Dharma! I shall narrate duly what you have eagerly asked 
for, 0 sinless one. This is the ancient meritorious legend re­
counted by Rudra. It dispels all sins. Listen to the merit of one 
who listens devoutly to it. 0 king, there is no doubt about this 
that he will obtain that merit which is ordinarily obtained through 
a thousand Asvamedhas and a hundred Vajapeyas. According 
to the statement of Rudra, a Brahmana-slayer, a liquor-imbib­
er, a thief, a cow-slayer-all these men become freed from all 
SillS. 
These rivers are remembered (i.e. traditionally ᦗnown) as 
those that dispel all sins: Ganga, the most excellent one of all 
the rivers, Sarasvati, Kaveri, Devika, Sindhu, Salakup, Sarayii, 
Satarudra, Mahi, Carmila, the meritorious Godavari, the river 


10 
Skanda Purii:rJ.a 
Yamuna, PayoᤁQi, Satadru and the splendid Dharmanadi. There 
are other rivers too. 
0 excellent king, I shall tell you the reason. The seas and 
all the rivers get destroyed in every Kalpa. But even when 
seven Kalpas passed away Narmada has not perished. 0 great 
king, Narmada is the only excellent river that stays for the 
longest time filled with water and eulogized by groups of sages, 
0 blessed one. Ganga and other rivers become destroyed at 
the end of every Kalpa. This divine river has been seen since 
long. This I shall explain to you, 0 sinless one. 0 great king, 
it is a miraculous river well-known in all the three worlds. 
CHAPTER THREE 
Miirkar:uf-eya Rescued in the Pralaya 
Yudhi${hira said: 
1-1 1 . 0 great sage, the terrible annihilation of seven Kalpas 
has been witᦘessed by you. There is no one else here, 0 holy 
Sir, who is so long-lived as you. Padmanabha (ViᤁQU with a 
lotus in the navel) , the slayer of Asuras, who has a thousand 
feet1, eyes and bellies has been seen by you when he was lying 
asleep in the vast expanse of water. When the mobile and 
immobile beings were being burnt, it was through the grace 
of that Lord that you were not destroyed. It was due to the 
boon granted by the Noble Soul. 0 sinless one, what were the 
miracles seen by you, as you were wandering about? 0 holy Sir, 
mention this. My curiosity is great. When the terrible end oi 
the Yuga was imminent, when there was excessively terrible 
destruction, when all the worlds were formerly afflicted with 
drought extending to more than a hundred years, when the 
destruction of vegetation and medicinal herbs was awful, when 
there were neither the Devas nor the Danavas, when every­
thing was devoid of vigour, when there was no u-tterance of 
Vaᤌaᤍ, when everything was defiled much by Kali, when the 
rivers, lakes, ponds, puddles and par-ks became dried up, when, 
1. 
An echo of Puruda-siikta (RV X.90) . Here Vigm is identified with the 
Primeval Man. 


V.iii.3.12-22 
1 1 
0 holy Sir, Maharloka merged into Janaloka, where were the 
noble-souled sages, the BrahmaQas, the ᤧ
atriyas, the Vaiiiyas, 
etc. and the sages equipped with divine splendour? 0 great 
sage, when all beings are destroyed, which of the living beings 
remained stable (alive) ? Did they disappear altogether? Do 
mention, 0 highly fortunate one, all these things severally. 
What are the elements? 0 eminent BrahmaQa, how can one 
atᦙain Siddhi when the terribly hideous Kala had caught hold 
of .even Brahma, ViᤁQu, Indra and Rudra? 
On being enquired thus by Dharmanlja, the wise Sage Markan<;la 
surrounded by groups of sages, said thus: 
Sri MiirkmJ4eya said: 
1 2-22. 
0 king, let all the sages along with you listen to 
the great PuraQa narrated by Sarilbhu to the Vayudevata1• This 
ancient work was heard by Skanda from Vayu. VasiHha heard 
it from him and Paraiiara from him. From him (Parasara) it was 
heard by JatiikarQya and by the great sages from the latter. 
Thus it was traditionally narrated by hundreds of excellent 
BrahmaQas. The Sarilhita consisting of a hundred thousand 
verses was narrated by Sarilbhu indeed by thoroughly explor­
ing earlier all the Sastras and the deeper meaning of the Vedas 
in fact. Later it was classified into four, in accordance with the 
four Yugas, after due consideration by great sages, of the deficiency 
in the intellects of men. Mter propitiating Paiiubhartr (i.e. 
Paiiupati-Siva) , the great Lord, I heard this PuraQa which · I 
shall narrate entirely to you. On hearing this, 0 king, all the 
creatures are freed from all sins, mental and physical, accumu­
lated in the course of seven births. With the favour of ViᤌQU 
Parameᤁthin, the Lord of Devas, I have repeatedly witnessed 
the terrible destructions of seven Kalpas. When the whole universe 
was utterly burnt by the twelve Adityas and everything was 
turned into a vast expanse of water, I had to swim through the 
ocean with the movement of my arms. Wandering (swimming) 
thus, I became utterly exhausted. Then, 0 king, I saw in the 
water the ancient Puruᤌa, the Lord without beginning and 
1 . 
W 1 2-14 give the Text-transmission ofReva KhaiJ.<Ja through Gum-parampam 
as follows: Sambhu-+Vayu-+Skanda-+Vasid!ha-+PariSara-+Jatiikarr}.ya-+Vyasa-+ 
Suta. 


1 2 
Skanda Purii:rJ.a 
destruction, having lustre like that of the Sun. He had bright­
ened the peak of the Lord of Mountains and all the ten quarters. 
A second person, Manu, was seen, accompanied by his sons 
and grandsons. 
23-32. 
He too was drifting in the great deep sea envel­
oped in darkness. He was whirling round and round as though 
perched on the rim of a wheel, without resting even for a short 
while. 
Swimming in the great sea with the movements of the arms, 
I became afraid and dispirited. Stationed there, I saw the great 
Fish in an inebriated state. 0 descendant of Bharata, he spoke 
to me on seeing me: "Do come; do come. " He was Mahesvara 
in the form of a fish, the most important and the chief of all. 
Thereupon, 0 Lord of men, I hurriedly proceeded near the 
mouth of that Lord. I lost consciousness and became utterly 
exhausted and disgusted. Then I saw at the extremity (end) 
of the ocean, a meritorious river meandering as it wished1• She 
had many whirlpools and eddies. Waves were set in motion in 
the waters and she seemed to laugh boisterously by means of 
the foams. Fishes of diverse kinds swimming therein made the 
waters agitated. There was a young woman of comely appear­
ance in the. middle of the river. She was dark in complexion 
like the petals of a blue lotus. The current of the river was 
quite agitated with ripples. Her bodily limbs had the divine 
golden colour. She shone remarkably like molten gold. She 
had kept a big boat pressed on either side by the pair of her 
knees. Manu asked her: "0 divinely excellent lady, who may 
you be? 0 celestial lady of great beauty, what may be the 
purpose for which you stand here? When both Suras and Asuras 
have perished, you are moving about in the ocean gracefully! 
The rivers, the oceans and the mountains have perished. 0 
chaste lady, how is it that you .alone among these many stay 
behind? t wish to hear the great reason therefor. 0 goddess, 
tell me without omitting anything. " 
The Abalii (the frail lady) said: 
33-41 . 
I am the sin-destroying meritorious river well known 
by the name Amrta. I have originated from the limbs of Isvara. 
1 . 
Six Kalpas are described to affirm the imperishability ofReva. Sage Marka1.1¾eya 
is a witness as he too was with her in those Pralayas. 


V.iii.4. 1-6 
1 3 
Whence is fear if you resort to me? 0 Brahma:Q.a, I have brought 
this boat for your sake. Sankara is stationed therein. Hence it 
will not get destroyed. 
On hearing her words, my eyes became dilated with wonder. 
I got into the boat, 0 great king, along with Manu. With palms 
joined in veneration, I bowed down to the Lord, the all-per­
vading great Isana, the bestower of freedom from fear, and 
eulogized · him: 
"Obeisance to Lord Sadyojata and Vamadeva. Obeisance unto 
you in every birth. Obeisance to you who are attainable through 
devotion. Obeisance to BhuQ. and BhuvaQ.. Obeisance to the 
Lord senior to Rama (Viᤁ:r:tu) . Obeisance to you, 0 fair Lord 
Kala; obeisance to one in the form of Kali. Obeisance to the 
incomprehensible one, the one of unmanifest form; to the 
great Lord and abode of brilliance. We do know the Lord of 
Lords, 0 Rudra. Obeisance, obeisance . to you. Obeisance to 
the cause of the creation and annihilation of the universe. 
Obeisance. ,; 
Thus eulogized by me before the creation (of the world) , 
the great Lord became pleased with me. Then he said: "0 
devotee of excellent holy rites, choo·se a boon. "1 
CHAPTER FOUR 
Boons to Narmada 
Sri Mqrkar.u!eya said: 
1-6. Then I alighted from the sea (the boat) along with 
Manu and bowed to the pair of feet of Mahadeva saluted by 
all Devas. He was stationed on the peak of Trikuᤃᦚ2 having the 
lustre of gold and comprising rocks of various colours. The 
Lord was seated on a great peak. He was accompanied by a 
crore of Rudras. The unborn, immutable Lord of the noble 
soul identical with all living beings was ᦛaluted by us both. 0 
1 . 
This seems to be an abrupt end of the chapter. 
2. 
A lofty mountain to the north of Panjab and south of Kashmir, the Tri· 
kakud of the Atharva Veda (De 1 06) . 


14 
Skanda Purii1Ja 
king worthy of esteem, 0 scion of the family of Kuru, I stayed 
in that terrible, vast expanse of water along with Rudra for a 
thousand Yugas. 
Yudhi¸!hira said: 
0 dear Sir, on hearing this a great deal of curiosity has been 
aroused in my mind. Hence even as I listen along with my 
kinsmen, please tell in detail who was that lady of eyes resem­
bling lotus leaves? She was wandering like a Ybgin in that vast 
ocean-like expanse of water enveloped by darkness. She intro­
duced herself as the daughter of Rudra. 
Sri Miirka1J,tf,eya said: 
7-1 2. 
Formerly Manu was asked by me this same ques-
tion. 
I shall recount the origin of that lady. The night of 
Brahma Parameᤁthin passed off and the bright day dawned. 
The creatures were being created. Then I bowed down my 
head to Manu, 0 Yudhiᤁthira, and put to him this question: 
"Who is this lotus-eyed, dark-complexioned lady with a coun­
tenance resembling the Moon? She declares herself to have 
been born of Rudra and wanders in the vast expanse of waters. 
Is she Savitri, the mother of the Vedas? Or is she Sarasvati? Is 
she Mandakini (Ganga) , the most excellent one of all the 
rivers? Is she Lakᤁmi? Or is she Uma? She may be Kalaratri 
herself or she may-be Prakrti worthy of happiness. Do tell me 
this, 0 holy Sir. She is indeed Amrtasarhbhava (origin of nectar, 
or originated from nectar) . She wanders in the vast sea-like 
expanse of water of terrible appearance, where serpents and 
Rakᤁasas have perished. " 
Manu sail 
1 3-19. 
Listen, 0 dear one, I shall duly explain her origin, 
how this lady of excellent complexion originated from Rudra. 
Formerly Siva Sankara of quiescent body performed ·extensive 
penance along with Uma for the sake of the welfare of all the 
worlds. The Lord of self-control, the immanent soul of all 
living beings, climbed the Mountain Rkᤁasaila1 and performed 
I. 
§a-iaila-§a-paroata: The eastern part of the Vindhya range extending 
from the Bay of Bengal to the source of Narmada and SoQa. (De 168-169) 


V.iii.4.20-33 
1 5 
a severe penance. H e was invisible to all living beings. As that 
Lord was performing penance, perspiration issued forth from 
his body. The (drops of) sweat originating from Rudra flooded 
that mountain. The highly meritorious, excellent river was born 
of it. It was she of long eyes resembling the petals of a lotus, 
whom you saw in the sea-like expanse of water. Formerly in the 
first Kftayuga, she assumed the form of a woman and propi­
tiated Rudra for ten thousand years. 
Thereupon Sankara, the great Lord, was pleased. Accompa­
nied by Uma, he spoke to her: "0 highly fortunate lady, speak 
out whatever there is in your mind. " 
The Sarit ( The River) said: 
w 
20-33 
By your grace, 0 Lord of Devas, let me be imper-
ishable at the advent of Pralaya when all mobile and immobile 
beings are destroyed. When the rivers, oceans and mountains 
have perished, 0 Lord of Devas, let me be holy and imperish­
able, with your favour. Devout persons who have taken bath in 
me should be rid of all their sins, even if they have committed 
major and minor sins, 0 Sankara. Jahnavi destroys great sins 
in the northern region. I should become so in the sou.thern 
region. Then only I shall be worshipped by gods. Just as the 
celestial river coming down from Svarga became well-known 
on the earth as Ganga, 0 Lord of Devas, so let me be the 
Dakᤁil).aganga (Southern Ganga) . A man who devoutly takes 
his holy bath in me, 0 Mahesvara, should acquire that merit 
which is usually obtained by taking holy bath in all the Tirthas 
of the earth. 0 Lord, may the sin of Brahmal).a-slaughter and 
others like that which have remained accumulated be destroyed 
by taking the holy plunge for the period of a month. My desire 
is that, due to the holy dip in me, 0 Sankara, one shall get 
all those benefits that accrue frcm the study of all the Vedas 
and performance of all the Yajiias. From my water, 0 Sankara, 
let there be that benefit which usually arises from all sorts of 
Danas and fasts and the holy plunge in all the Tirthas. Those 
who adore Mahdvara on my banks should repair unto your 
Loka, 0 Siva. Let this happen, 0 Lord, Q Mahesana; 0 Lord 
of the world, this alone is the boon. I desire that you do stay 
always on my banks along with Uma and other deities. Let 
every living being that dies in my waters go to Amaravati, whether 


16 
Skanda Purii7J.a 
they have done excellent Karmas or ignoble Karmas, whether 
they are mentally calm with full control over the sense-organs 
or not. 0 Lord of the chiefs of Devas, if you are pleased and 
if you consider it proper, let me be well-known in all the three 
worlds as the destroyer of great sins. 
0 excellent king, the Bull-vehicled Lord was requested for 
these and other divine boons by Narmada. On being pleased 
he said: 
Sri M.ahesa replied: 
34-43a. 
0 uncensured (i.e. praiseworthy) lady, 0 illustri­
ous one, let what has been said (requested) by you, happen 
thus. 0 lotus-eyed one, excepting you, there is none else de­
serving the boon in all the worlds. 0 lady of excellent coun­
tenance, undoubtedly you have become one liberating devo­
tees from all sins ever since the time you issued forth from my 
body. At the period when Kalpas come to a close, and specially 
at calamitous times, those men who reside res<,>rting to your 
northern bank, and even insects, worms etc., trees, hedges, 
creepers etc. do attain excellent goal, 0 fair lady, after the fall 
of the bodies .. Those BrahmaQ.as of great regard for piety and 
holy rites who resort to the southern bank and reside there till 
death, do go to the place of the Pitrs. At your instance, as well 
as for some other᥾reason, I shall always stay with Uma on your 
banks. 0 fair lady, 0 great lady, undoubtedly everything will 
happen thus. The deities will live on your northern bank along 
with Vil?Q.U, Brahma, Indra, Candra and VaruQ.a and also Sadhyas, 
at my behest. Similarly, 0 celestial lady of great beauty, the 
others will stay on the southern bank along with me and the 
Pitrs. This is your boon. Do go (hurry up) , 0 blessed one; 
redeem men from sins. Do go there accompanied by the groups 
of sages, Siddhas, Suras and Asuras. 
43b-54. 
After saying this, Lord Mahadeva, duly bowed down 
to by me and Manu, vanished along with Uma. Therefore this 
highly meritorious river is mentioned as the destroyer of great 
sins. This is the lady about whom yo᥿ asked. Let there be no 
amazement on your part. This is (on a par with) Ganga of 
great merit, well-known in all the three worlds. With her 


V.iii.5. 1-1 4 
1 7 
fifteen different branches i t floods all the ten quarters. They 
are: SoQ.a, Mahanada, Narmada, Surasa, Mandakini, DasarQ.a, 
Citrakiita, Tamasa, Vidasa, Karabha, Yamuna, Citrotpala, Vipasa, 
Rafijana and Valuvahini. All these are born of the feet of Rkᤁa 
mountain. All originated from Rudra. All are meritorio1,1s, auspicious 
and bestowers of welfare. They destroy all sins. She is eulo­
gized by the masters of the Vedas, by these divine names as 
well as by the illustrious knowers of the PuraQ.as, by Ajyapas 
and Soma pas (varieties of Pitrs) . 0 excellent one among men, 
everything has been narrated. That which is conducive to good 
fortune and uttered by Manu is splendid. The origin of Amrta 
is incomparably sacred, since it is spoken by Rudra, 0 scion 
of the family of Bharata. Those men who glorify these fifteen 
names after getting up early in the mog1ing, will attain the 
entire benefit of a holy plunge into the river. Mter casting off 
their human form, they will attain the highest place by riding 
an aerial chariot of solar lustre, reverberating with the sound 
of a hundred bells. 
CHAPTER FIVE 
Naming the River Narmada 
Yudhi¸thira said: 
1-1 4. 0 excellent BrahmaQ.a, the enᦀire story recounted is 
wonderful. The groups of sages along with me are extremely 
wonder-struck. It is very assuring that this divine, meritorious 
Narmada, that has issued forth from the body of Rudra and 
hence has no human source of origin, causes the destruction 
of great sins. 0 sage of good holy rites, when seven Kalpas have 
come to a close (even as you have been a witness) , this aus­
picious river along with you has not become dead. What else 
can be a more excellent merit? What are those Kalpas referred 
to, the seven ones, which come to an end, if this divine lady 
and you too, 0 great sage, have not become dead. When the 
whole universe had been converted into a vast expanse of waters 
without any trace of the flocks of birds, at the close of the 
Yuga, what was the form assumed by Mahadeva? How does he 


18 
Skanda Purii1_1,a 
annihilate the universe? How does he remain in the great sea 
of waters? How does he create the universe? How does he 
sustain the subjects? What form does the divine river assume 
when everything has been converted into a single sea-like expanse 
of waters? Why is she called Narmada? How is she remembered 
as Reva? Why this name Aiijana (or Raiijana) ? Why Surasa? 
Why was she called Krpa? Why the name Mandakinl? Why 
should she be (called) SoQ.a? Why (is she called) Trikuta? Why 
Valuvahinl? Crores and crores of Tirthas have entered the great 
ocean. How many crores of these rivers serve Narmada? How 
is she served by the sages with sacred threads and by the dei­
ties? 0 excellent sage, why is it heard that she is divided sev­
erally? Why is she called VaiᤄQ.avi by those conversant with the 
PuraQ.a? What are those Sthanas and Tlrthas where the excel­
lent river has to be adored? Do mention the different Tirthas 
separately where Hara is present. What is the size and magni­
tude of the divine river as created by Rudra? Of what nature 
are the Karmas (rites) mentioned by Rudra to you? 0 excel­
lent BrahmaQ.a, how did this region become over-run by Mlecchas? 
0 highly intelligent MarkaQ.<;leya, 0 holy Sir, narrate this unto 
me. 
Sri Miirka1_1,r!eya said: 
1 5-26. 
May all the sages, and you too, 0 YudhiHhira, lis­
ten to the PuraQ.ic legend regarding Narmada as recounted by 
the Trident-bearing Lord. It was heard by me from the Vayu 
Devata and he had heard it from Mahesvara. Since human 
beings are incapable, the sages abridged it formerly. The first 
one is Mayura.1 0 dear one, Kaurmya comes thereafter. Then 
Pura, Kausika, Matsya and Dvirada; _Yaraha is what was seen by 
me. VaiᤄQ.ava is the eighth one. Then what was called Nyagrodha 
was evolved; then the excellent Akamkᤄa. Then Padma, Tamasa, 
Samvarta, Udvarta and Mahapralaya. These, the thinkers on 
the Vedas mentioned in regard to the PuraQ.a. 
These are the abridged versions condensed by those noble 
souls. They have been divided into four parts by Brahma and 
others and the great sages. That I shall expatiate upon, 
0 
knower of the contents of Pural).as. The highly terrible seven 
I. 
These are later considered as names of Kalpas. 


V.iii.5.27-37 
1 9 
Kalpas during which this river did not die (had these charac­
teristics) : All mobile beings became enveloped in darkness without 
distinguishable characteristics and were not known clearly. The 
rays of the Moon and the Sun vanished. The living beings 
disappeared. At the extremity of the darkness, the Puru!ia, the 
preceptor of the universe, was known under his great name. 
The eternal one was both manifest and unmanifest. He moved 
about therein alone. Then the one consisting of Omkara passed 
off and Dvija (the second-born from the original) created Gayatri. 
Then Isana, the Vira! (Cosmic) Puru!ia, sported about with 
her. From his own body he created the universe consisting of 
and named after the five elements. Sportingly he created the 
universe consisting of and named after the five elements. The 
being called Vira! sportingly created Hi,rar:tmaya (golden be­
ing) along with the Bija (seed) . That became the divine egg 
resembling the twelve Adityas (Suns) (in brilliance) . 
27-37. 
Breaking it (the egg) the four-faced being, Pitamaha, 
was born . He created thus the universe consisting of Devas, 
Asuras and human beings, animals, creatures and birds, the 
sweat-born, egg-born and the embryo-born ones. This egg is 
proclaimed as the first one in the Purar:tas. 
0 excellent king, ParameHhin Rudra sported about with 
Uma in the vast expanse of. sea-like water. A splendid girl was 
born out of the sweat of Uma due to her delight. When Sarva's 
chest pressed against the breasts of Uma, a great girl of lotus­
like eyes issued forth from the sweat. This is the second birth, 
0 YudhiHhira. That (lady, river) whirled around the worlds of 
Devas, Asuras and human beings. Unrivalled in beauty of form 
as she was, she maddened the three worlds. On seeing her, the 
leaders of Devas and Daityas were enchanted. They wondered: 
'How is she· to be obtained?' 0 scion of the family of Bharata, 
they searched for that girl here and there. She fascinated the 
entire universe through her seductive and graceful charms and 
coquettish manners. She moved about in her divine form like 
a lightning streak in the middle of clouds. The most excellent 
one among all maidens, she shone in her lustre. Then all the 
Suras, Daityas and Danavas who were enamoured of that girl 
and overcome with Kama (lust) requested Rudra for that girl 
to be given to them. Then Mahadeva said: "Of the two, Devas 
and Danavas , h e who will prove superior in ᦁtren gth 


20 
Skanda Purii:rJa 
and splendour will attain this girl, not otherwise, 0 excellenᦂ 
Suras. " 
38-44. 
Then all the Devas and Asuras approached the girl 
saying, "I shall seize her, I shall seize her. " Even as all were 
watching her, the girl vanished. Then they saw her stationed 
a Yojana away. All of them then rushed to the place where she 
was seen. Then they saw her stationed three or four Yojanas 
away. Then the lady of elephantine gait vanished and stationed 
herself hundreds and thousands of Yojanas away. On account 
of her lightness she was seen hundred thousands of Yojanas 
away. They saw her sometimes ahead and sometimes behind in 
different directions and intermediate quarters. The . beautiful 
lady appeared in one direction and many directions. Thus they 
were forced to wander about by her for a period of a thousand 
divine years. But that girl born of Mahadeva's limbs was not 
attained by them. Thereupon the Lord laughed boisterously 
along with Uma. 
45-52. 
The Gar:tas joyously danced in accordance with the 
beating of the time. Suddenly the girl was seen very near Sail.kara. 
On seeing her the wonder-struck Devas returned with faces 
turned away. Then the Pinaka-bearing Lord himself gave her 
a name: "Since you humoured them by means of your pranks 
and gambols, 0 beautiful girl, you will become the excellent 
river Narmada (Narma, humour+dii, giver) . " The Lord resumed 
his form and joked. This river of cool water and auspicious 
features was called Narmada by him. When the destruction of 
the seven Kalpas, as was said by Sarilbhu before, took placᦃ, 0 
great king, she did not die. She became well-known as Narmada. 
Then he gave that well-behaved, splendid girl to the great 
Ocean. The Lo.rd, the Lord of Devas, the Lord of all living 
beings and goblins gave her to the Ocean. Thereafter the divine 
river Narmada laughing boisterously through the foams de­
scended from the great mountain Rkᤁa and entered the Ocean, 
the Lord of rivers. Thus she was born of i'svara in the Brahma 
Kalpa and was seen by me in Matsya Kalpa. Listen as described 
by me. 


V.iii.6. 1-7 
21 
CHAPTER SIX 
Epithets1 of Narmada Explained 
Markar.u!-eya said: 
1-7. 
Again, 0 excellent king, when the end. of the third 
Yuga approached, Lord Nilalohita assumed the forms of the 
twelve Suns and burnt the entire ocean-girt earth along with 
the mountains and forests. Mahe§vara then was in the form of 
Kala, the destroyer. Thereafter he became an enormously big; 
cloud and flooded the entire earth with water. His body as­
sumed a dark physical form and the earth was marked with 
lightning and Moon as though hit with a weapon and flooded 
with water. The entire universe was tur-ned into a vast expanse 
of water. By means of his Maya, he withdrew the universe into 
himself and slept in the translucent water. In the ocean envel­
oped i-n darkness, when the element of Vayu (Wind) assumed 
the activity of Mahesvara, I wandered about for a period of a 
thousand divine years. 0 great king, I meditated upon the 
Lord in the form of Orilkara, the Lord by whom everything was 
rendered impenetrable. I was meditating in the pure water 
when the mobile arid immobile beings got merged in that ter­
rible ocean. I suddenly espied a Mayiira (peacock) embellished 
with golden feathers with wonderful eyelike marks of various 
colours. The peacock was blue-throated and had excellent eyes. 
1 . The following are the epithets of Narmada: 
(i) 
Trikilli: The river descended from Mount Trikii˨ (vv 16-17) . 
(ii) 
Mahati: (i) The river lifted up to Mount ˩Ąa (vv 26-27) : (it) Of speed-
ily flowing current (vv 30-31) . 
(iii) Soita: That in which drops from Siva's trident fell (v 28) . 
(iv) 
Surasii: A river of excellent Rasa or water (v 32) . 
(v) 
K.rpii: A bestover of freedom from Sariuara (vv 32-34) . 
(vi) 
Mandiikini: A slow-flowing river (v 34) . 
(vii) REVA: Reverberating all the quarters with sound (&va) while flowing 
(vv 37-38) . 
(viii) Mahiin;avii: Who broke away from the Ocean (v 39) . 
(ix) 
Vipiipii : Remover of sins (v 39) . 
(x) 
Vipiisii : Remover of the bond of Sarhsara (v 40) . 
(xi) 
Vimalli : With clean, splendid waters (vv 41-42) . 
(xii) Karabhii .: Of lustrous hands (waves) (vv 42-43) . 
(xiii) &njanii : Delighter of th e world (vv 43-44) . 
(xiv) Viiyu-viihini: Carrier of every resident on her bank to heaven (v. 44) . 


22 
Skanda Purii:TJ,a 
8-20. 
Then the Mayura (peacock) of great prowess moved 
about within the ocean-like expanse of water which it agitated 
much through its great shrill cry. T9e three-crowned peacock 
was Siva, the protector of the three worlds. He agitated the 
waters in the form of a peacock. He saw the river of great flow 
of current, whirling within the great ocean. On seeing her 
whirling rapidly with waves after waves, Mahadeva in the form 
of Mayura asked her: "Who are you, 0 splendid lady with a 
permanent physical form? In the course of the great annihi­
lation you have not become destroyed, even when the multi­
tudes of Devas and Asuras have perished in the great ocean­
like expanse of rivers and lakes. Who are you, 0 lotus-eyed 
one, who continue to move about? How is it that you did not 
get destroyed?" 
Narmada said: 
With your favour, 0 Lord of Devas, I have no death. Do 
create the universe once again, 0 Lord. The night has come 
to an end. 
On being told thus, Mahadeva shook the cage-like plumage 
of feathers. Then from the middle of the cage, from the plum­
age issued forth all these: The great Daityas and Devas were 
born of his wings. The river Narmada began to flow in between 
those two groups. Thereupon another great mountain was seen, 
0 eminent scion of the family of Bharata. It had three huge 
peaks and it appeared like a horned bull. It was well-known by 
the name Trikuᤃa. It was embellished with all jewels. The river 
descended from Trikuta and flooded the earth. Hence she 
became well known as Trikitti. She is the greatest saviour of the 
Pitrs. 
From the second peak Ganga spread over the surface of the 
earth. The third peak split into seven pieces. They became the 
seven Kulaparvatas in Jambudvlpa. 
All the 
things of the world were born, such as planets, 
constellations, moon, villages, rivers, four types of living be­
ings, viz. the oviparous, the viviparous, the sweat-born and the 
germinating ones (i.e. trees and plants that pierce through the 
ground and grow) . Thus the entire universe issued forth from 


V.iii.6-21-34 
23 
the Mayiira formerly. Everything, 0 tiger among men, was born 
of Mahadeva. 
21-27. 
Then the Lord of Devas separated the rivers and 
oceans and said to Narmada: "You go to the ,southerp. quarter. 
Just as in the northern country Jahnavi is the meritorious sacred 
river, destroyer of great sins, you shall be the splendid river 
in the South. Just as Ganga originating from my head is highly 
meritorious, so also indeed better than Ganga, you shall be 
meritorious undoubtedly. With a part of mine I .shall be by 
your side. You shall be a panacea for those who are defiled by 
great sins. " 
O n being told thus by the Lord, she became the Southern 
Ganga and destroyer of great sins. She hurriedly went to the 
southern region of the country. With the blessings of the Moon­
crested Lord, she went to the ᤥkᤁa mountain whence she, 
being urged by Mahadeva, proceeded with the full comple­
ment of the currents of water. She was called Mahat'i by Mahadeva, 
0 Lord of the earth, because she was lifted up with great 
speed. 
28-34. 
While the Lord was performing the penance, drops 
fell down from the tip ef the trident. Hence she became known 
by the name So7J.a. 
Those rivers are seventeen in number. Of all the rivers, 
Narmada is the most meritorious, since it had issued forth 
from the body of Rudra and also through the grant of the 
boon by the noble soul. 
Due to the blessings of Sankara, the divine river is the destroyer 
of great sins. She is ·called Mahati also, because she was seen 
in the terrible, great ocean. Her limbs were prominent and she 
is huge in size. Hence also she is called Mahati. 
On being stirred and agitated by the elephants of the quar­
ters comparable to clouds (in size) , the waters became turbid, 
but she has excellent Rasa (water) . Hence she is (called) Surasii. 
Bestowing freedom from fear, she is sympathetic to all the 
worlds immersed in the ocean of worldly existence. Hence she 
is remembeJ;ed - as Krpa. 
Formerly in the meritorious l{rtayuga she was embellished 
with the divine Mandara flowers strewn from the Kalpa trees. 
The river is full of Rohitaka fish. So she flows slowly. Hence 
she is remembered as Mandiikini. 


24 
Skanda Purii:rJ.a 
35-45. 
She came ᦄo this world quickly piercing through 
the great ocean. She is worthy of being adored by Suras and 
Siddhas. Hence she is Mahii:r1Javii. 
She has clusters of lilies of various colours. She is agitated 
by Rkᤁas (bears) and Dvipas (elephants) . She breaks through 
the large mountain and proceeds to the great ocean. With 
great Rava (sound) she makes all the quarters reverberate, 
flooding all places and shining ·everywhere. Hence she is re­
membered as Revii. 
She makes those miserable (ones) on account of the suffer­
ings of wives and children due to the curses, wherewith they 
are overwhelmed, free from sins. Hence she is remembered as 
Vipiipii. 
She redeems and liberates from harassment due to bondage 
and the great misery . caused by faeces, urine etc., aᦅ well as 
dust and mire and blood. Hence she is called Vipiisii. 
She is the redeemer from the ocean of worldly existence. 
Narmada has waters free fro"m impurities. Her face is as splen­
did as the clear moᦆm. In the great, awful envelopment of 
darkness, she is highly lustrous. For all these reasons, she is 
called Vimalii by learned men, 0 excellent king. 
Her hands (waves) are as lustrous as the rays of the sun and 
moon. As she flows the whole universe rejoices. For all these 
reasons, she is called Karabhii. 
Merely by her sight, she delights the worlds, 0 descendant 
of Bharata. The meaning of the root ...JRaiij is to delight, 0 
excellent king. Hence she is called Raiijanii. 
She takes even grass, creepers, hedges, creatures and birds 
to heaven (once they grow nearby) . Hence she is called Viiyuviihini 
He who knows the (meaning of) names in this manner and 
particularly the way she flows, goes undoubtedly to Rudraloka 
after being liberated from sins. 


V.iii. 7.1-20 
25 
CHAPTER SEVEN 
The Advent of Kurma Kalpa1 
Sri MiirkatJ4eya said: 
1-9. 
Again there was the advent of a vast expanse of ocean­
like water with horrible features in which mobile and immobile 
beings perished. The whole world was submerged in water. 
Darkness enveloped everything and there was no Jjght at all. 
Brahma alone assumed the form of a Khadyota (Firefly, Glow­
worm) . For the period of a thousand divine years, he moved 
about in the great ocean enveloped in darkness. He then saw 
in the terrible expanse of ocean, the Lord asleep in the form 
of a tortoise. The excellent Lord, the iacomprehensible, ex­
tended to a thousand Yojanas. He resembled the twelve Adityas 
(Suns) in splendour. He had a thousand feet and eyes. On 
seeing him, Brahma was surprised and roused him slowly by 
means of auspicious hymns tak!!n from the Vedic and Vedailga 
texts: "0 Vacaspati (Lord of Speech) , do wake up. 0 Supreme 
Being, obeisance to you. 0 Parame5vara (Supreme Lord) , the 
entire universe is stationed in your belly. Hence, 0 Mahasattva 
(huge being of immense inner strength and good qualities) , 
release what was withdrawn within by you. The night of Brahma 
has passed off. The day has dawned. 0 Lord of all worlds, have 
a view, whereby the universe can take birth . " 
O n hearing his words, Parame5vara (Great Lord) got up 
ejecting the three worlds that had been swallowed at the time 
of the close of the Kalpa. Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Yak11as, 
Uragas (Serpents) and Rak11asas along with the Moon, the Sun 
and the planets, issued forth from his body. 
1 0-20. 
Mter dividing the entire ocean-like expanse of wa­
ter, Parame5vara espied the earth consisting of trees, medici­
nal herbs and puddles, extensively abounding in stones and 
flood of water and full of rivers and lakes. He saw Himavan the 
great mountain, Sveta the excellent mountain, the great mountain 
Srngavan as well as other Kulaparvatas. (He espied) the Dvipas 
1 . 
This describes Narmada in the form of a beautiful lady who survived 
Pralaya in Kflrma Kalpa. 


26 
Skanda Purii:r:ta 
such as Jarhbii Dvlpa, Kusa, Krauiica, Gomeda, Sal mala, ending 
with Puᤁkara and the seven great oceans, the great mountain 
Lokaloka- all these were stationed in front. That Mahesvara 
saw the entire universe consisting of the mobile and immobile 
beings with the fourfold Prakrtis that had come out at the 
beginning of the Yuga. The Lord saw the earth with scattered 
pieces of rocks. The goddess (divine · lady) was in the great 
ocean perched on the back of the tortoise. On the top of the 
shattered rocky hill where there was neither a river nor a lake, 
the waters of the ocean were moving in waves with agitated 
whirlpools and eddies. The medicinal herbs were shedding 
lustre on the surface of the earth where there were various 
rocks and stone slabs. The great Lord saw the river reverber­
ated with warbling of birds and teeming with fish and tortoise. 
The divine river resembled an excellent cloud. She had divine 
charm and a number of incomparable eddies (stores ofwater) . 
The divine river Narmada was in the form of a woman in 
the middle of the ocean and she had dark complexion like the 
colour of a cloud. The thighs, buttocks and the breasts were 
thick and huge. She had inimitable gorgeous garments and 
she was bedecked in ornaments. She had anklets and girdles 
of excellent chains. She was bedecked in necklaces and brace­
lets. 
21-27. 
He saw Narmada of unmanifest limbs and noble 
features. She was beautified by various orqaments of magical 
origin. The young woman had just risen above the watᦇr with 
half raised arms eulogizing the Lord of the chiefs of Devas. 
Her eyes were large like the petals of a lotus. On seeing that 
splendid lady, I was overwhelmed with surprise in the heart. 
I took my holy dip in her splendid water. I began to eulogize 
joyously by means of Mantras taken from the Vedic Scriptures. 
In front of her I saw the mobile and immobile beings created 
along with Devas, Asuras, Gandharvas, Pannagas and great Uragas. 
I saw that the highly esteemable lady did not undergo destruc­
tion before because she was born of the body of Mahadeva. 
With his favour she did not get dissolved. She was seen by me 
again and again. 0 excellent king, it has been recounted to 
you. Those excellent Brahmal).as who study this manifestation 
pertaining to Kiirma and the learned men who listen to it, are 
liberated from all sins. 


V.iii.8.1-22 
27 
CHAPTER EIGHT 
The Advent of Baka Kalpa 
MiirkmJ4eya said: 
1-1 0a. 
When the world was destroyed again and envel­
oped with water, I was caught in the middle of the great ocean 
and so I crossed the waters with my arms. When a hundred 
divine years elapsed, 0 excellent king, I was completely ex­
hausted. I began to meditate on the Lord who could take me 
across the great ocean. 
At that time, as I was meditating, I saw a great bird resem­
bling a pearl necklace, Kunda flower, and the moon (in com­
plexion) . I saw a Baka (crane) white tiŔ cow's milk. 
On seeing that crane, I was dismayed: 'Whence can there 
be the existence of a bird in this terrible, great ocean?' I 
thought. Untiringly I went on swimming (to it) and asked that 
crane: "0 Lord endowed with divine Yogic soul! Assuming the 
form of a bird you seem as if to enchant me. Who may you 
be, wandering in this vast expanse of waters? Do naᦤ;rate this 
to me completely. Whoever you are, I do obeisance to you. " 
He told me: "I ain Mahadeva, Brahma and Vil)Q.U. 0 dear 
one, don 't you understand that the entire universe has been 
annihilated (or taken within) ? 0 great sage, I am the father 
and mother of the universe as well as of yours. Seeing every­
thing submerged in the great ocean, I was moved with sympa­
thy. Hence I have come here in the guise of a bird. Why are 
you getting agitated? Why do you wander like this in the great 
ocean? Quickly come within the fold of my wings, 0 BrahmaQ.a, 
so that you can rest. " 
1 0b-13. On being told thus by that Lord, 0 king, I en­
sconced myself within his wings and began wandering in the 
water. At the end of even a thousand Yugas I was not tired and 
I continued to be in the middle of the ocean. Then, 0 virtuous 
king, I suddenly heard in all the quarters an excellent, mys­
terious sound mixed with the sound of anklets. All of a sudden 
the entire mass of water in the ocean shrank in size. 'What 
could this be? ' Thinking thus I looked in every direction. 
1 4-22. 
Ten girls from all the. quarters came to the ocean . 
They were clad in gorgeous garments and bedecked with anklets 


Skanda Purii1J.a 
and other ornaments. One of them had the lustre resembling 
that of the moon. Another had the radiance of the sun. A 
certain girl had the lustre of a mass of collyrium. One of the 
maidens had the brilliance of a red lotus. They had different 
forms. All of them were gentle and they were bedecked in 
various ornaments. Those holy maidens worshipped the crane 
with Arghya, Padya and garlands. The self-refulgent mountain 
entered that immutable, very terrible bird of mountain-like 
size. It became enlarged into thousands of Yojanas and hun­
dreds of Yojanas. There was a distance of thirty thousand Yojanas 
from the terrestrial zone. 
Then the earthly zone assumed a divine refulgence abound­
ing in five kinds of gems. There was a divine flight of stairs of 
crystal rendered very charming with golden pillars. (The city 
built there) extended to a thousand Yojanas. Twice that was 
its length. It had a great many tanks and wells, palaces and 
towers. Kalpa trees abounded in the place. It was decorated 
with sixty flags. 
In that beautiful, excellent city there was another beautiful 
city embellished with various kinds of gems. The altar was 
brilliant with flags and banners. The city was two hundred 
Yojanas in length and a hundred Yojanas in width. 
23-3 1 . 
There was a very splendid river in the middle of 
the city. It had meritorious waters and rocky banks studded 
with gems. It was a great river. On its bank I saw a great Linga 
too. It had the lustre of lightning and the Sun. All round, it 
was set with blue sapphires. In some places it resembled fire. 
In some other places it was smoke-coloured, yellow in some 
places, red in other places and white elsewhere. The Linga of 
diverse colours was very wonderful to behold. It was surrounded 
by Brahma, Vil1Q.U, Indra and Sadhyas. It was surrounded by 
Nandisvara and other GaQ.adhyakl1as, Indra and Adityas. I stared 
at that great Linga of Isana alone. 
Thereafter I saw Devas and Danavas with closed eyes lying 
asleep all round it. They were bedecked in divine jewels and 
ornaments. 
Then after taking their holy bath in the waters of that river, 
those highly esteemed, excellent, ten young maidens duly of­
fered Arghya, Padya to the Linga along with that bird and 
worshipped them with divine flowers. Like lightning vanishing 


V.iii.8.32-48 
29 
behind a cluster of clouds, all those ladies disappeared within 
that excellent city. 
32-38. 
Neither the king of birds was there nor those women 
nor the Devas. The Liilga alone which was being worshipped 
(by me?) remained there. I was surprised. On account of the 
grief, I was fainting as it were. I thought everything was an 
illusion created by Rudra. Then those girls emerged (from the 
water) brightening the entire universe with the divine gar­
ments and ornaments they were wearing, like lightning streaks 
brightening a cluster of clouds. After adoring the Liil.ga with 
divine, golden lotuses those ladies of splendid countenances 
and excellent ornaments soon entered the water. 
In the other eᦈcellent city I repeatedly saw a divine (immor­
tal) girl adoring Mahdvara. Thereupqn J asked that beautiful 
lotus-eyed girl: "Who may you be, 0 goddess staying in this city 
worshipping Siva? Where have all those ladies gone? Where are 
those leaders of Gat:tas? I do obeisance to you, 0 illustrious 
Mahdvarl. 0 lady of holy rites! I wish to know this with your 
favour. Take pity on me, 0 great goddess! 0 sinless one, do 
tell me this. " 
The Stii ( lady) replied: 
39-48. 
0 BrahmaQa, how is it that I have been forgotten 
by you? You had seen me in the previous Kalpa. Let there be 
no forgetfulness on your part. I am the same Kalpavahini well­
known as Narmada; I was born of Rudra's body. The girls seen 
by you adoring Mahesvara, the girls who have brought you 
along with the king of birds, 0 excellent sage, are the quarters. 
Mahayogin Mahesvara has been brought here by these, Nandisvara 
and others from Sivapura, 0 BrahmaQa. The same deity, Mahadeva, 
has established himself here in the form of a Liilga. The preceptor 
of the Suras and Asuras is being worshipped by Brahma, ViᤁQu 
and Indra. It is called Liilga by the great sages conversant with 
the Purat:tas, because the entire universe consisting of mobile 
and immobile beings, becomes merged therein. Formerly, all 
the groups of Devas were taken together and dissolved by the 
Lord through Maya. They are not seen now. On being created 
by the Self-born Lord, they will be seen 'again. I am engaged 
in adoring the Liilga. My name is Narmada. I have been the 
maid in attendance of Rudra for a period of a thousand Yugas. 


30 
Skanda Purii'T}a 
0 eminent Brahmat:J.a, you have become immortal with his 
favour. By worshipping Siva, you have become a Siddha equipped 
with truth, straightforwardness and kindness. 
After saying this the goddess vanished there itself. 
49-55. 
The women, the Lord of Devas, Mahesvara in the 
form of a Baka-all vanished. On hearing her words I got 
down into the great river and took bath, with the recitation of 
Mantras duly worshipping the Liri.ga. But when I rose up from 
the river I could not see the Liri.ga or the river, 0 king. At that 
time itself all the worlds were born and also the earth with all 
forests. The same firmament became spangled with the stars, 
moon and sun. As before, what was rendered unseen was seen 
again. I mentally bowed down to the Lord and worshipped 
Mahe§vara. 
It was thus that in the previous Baka Kalpa, this immutable 
lady (Narmada) was seen by me. Narmada, the destroyer of the 
great sins of human beings, (was seen by me) . Hence this 
esteemable (divine river) should always be resorted to by all 
Brahmar:tas, ᤏatriyas, Siidras, Vaisyas and others of righteous 
nature if they wish to get piety increased. Those who devoutly 
take their bath in the waters of Narmada even once and wor­
ship Mahesvara get all their sins dissolved undoubtedly. 
CHAPTER NINE 
The Origin of Narmada 
Sri MiirkaTJr!eya said: 
1-'7. I shall recount to you another subsequent Yuganta (ending 
of a Yuga) . Listen. 
Formerly when the world consisting of the mobile and im­
mobile beings was burnt by the Suns, when everywhere the 
rivers, lakes and oceans were completely dried up and de­
stroyed, when the utterance ofVa!!at became non-existent among 
men, when people began to transgress bounds of decorum, the 
entire sky was filled with clouds of various forms shining with 


V.iii.9.8-18 
31 
rainbows and the world was filled with floods of water. There­
upon it formed a vast ocean-like water expanse. Lord Hara 
kept the entire universe within his belly and went to sleep. 
Supporting his own Prakrti that Lord of subjects, the Vogic 
soul, entered the ocean and lay down for a period of a thou­
sand Yugas. 
All the 11ages beginning with Bhrgu and those beginning 
with Sanaka, all those who reside in Brahmaloka saw the Bull­
emblemed Lord lying asleep along with his wife on a splen­
didly pure couch covered with many sheets. 
8-1 8. That lady is omniformed. Mahesvara is also omniformed. 
I saw the immutable Lord who closely embraced her and lay 
asleep. At the foot of the Lord I saw that dark-complexioned 
girl characterised by lotuses, with well-shaped buttocks, mas­
saging the feet of the Lord. That Syama (Dark-complexioned 
one) was clad in pure, spotless garments. She had a python for 
the sacred thread. Her eyes resembled the petals of a lotus. 
She was bedecked in all sorts of ornaments. This knowledge­
able Narmada of excellent complexion serves and attends upon 
the sleeping Lord of the chiefs of Devas for the entire period 
of a thousand Yugas. 
Brahma, the great Lord too, eulogizes the immutable Sari.kara 
along with his mental sons, Bhrgu and others, by means of the 
four Vedas held by him, 0 king. With great devotion they 
eulogized Sarilbhu free from ailments. With the Mantras origi­
nating from Isvara, they continued the eulogy of the Lord of 
Devas there. All of a sudden, all those four Srutis got sub­
merged into the sea. With the Vedas got lost thus, the Lord 
(Brahma) became enveloped with the darkness of ignorance. 
He approached Lord !sana who was asleep and began to wake 
him up. "0 Hara, 0 tawny-eyed one, get up, 0 Mahadeva, 0 
Mahdvara. All my Vedas have been taken away. Hence I am 
attempting to eulogize (you) . The entire universe consisting of 
the mobile and immobile beings, whether divine or non-divine 
had been pervaded by the Vedas. It is due to them that I could 
remember the past and the present and performed the duty 
of creation. Without them I feel isolated. I am no better than 
a dumb, blind and senseless one, always. Without them there 
is no hope of any movement, vigour, strength or ardour. 0 


32 
Skanda Purii'T}a 
Lord of the chiefs of Devas, I cannot recollect anything with­
out them. 
1 9-28. 
It behoves you, 0 Lord of the chiefs of Devas, to 
give them (back) to me quickly. The entire universe consisting 
of the mobile and immobile beings is insentient, blind andᦉ 
deaf. 0 Lord of Suras, the fourteen worlds do not shine. Deprived 
of the Vedas, 0 Lord of Suras, I have become deficient in 
vigour and vitality. Hence I bow down (arden_tly) . Whatever 
there is, whether mobile or immobile, is entirely born of the 
Vedas. 0 preceptor of the universe, the entire range of scrip­
tural texts shines well only as long as the eternal treasure of 
the Vedas has not been removed. By keeping up and holding 
steadfast to the Vedas one can quell all sins as in the case of 
the darkness that is destroyed by the rising sun. 
The eternal Brahman is the subtle mystery in the Vedas. 0 
Lord, I used to know it as seated in the heart. It has gone now 
due to the roar of the Vedas. 0 Sankara, I was reciting the 
Vedas before you to•day. All of a sudden, those Vedas have 
gone away. 0 Lord, I shall not be in a position to create the 
earth. All of them (the Vedas) have entered the ocean in 
front. They are being requested for by me. Let them stay in 
my memory. 0 Sarva, this daughter of wide eyes knows every­
thing. 0 Bhava, no one else is like her. She has been in existence 
for a thousand Yugas. This illustrious sage MarkaQ.<;la is the 
most excellent one among intelligent ones. 0 Mahadeva, he 
attends upon you \,n every Kalpa. He performs excellent Vratas 
for the sake of the welfare of the three worlds. " 
29-39. 
On being told thus by Brahma Parameᤁthin, the 
Lord of Devas spoke to Narmada, the most excellent one among 
rivers, in sweet and smooth words: "0 blessed one, tell Brahma 
what he is asking for? By whom have all the Vedas of Brahma, 
the preceptor of the universe, been taken away? " On being 
told thus by Rudra, the fawn-eyed one said: "0 Mahdvara, 
while you were asleep, Brahma was reciting the Vedas. In this 
terrible expanse of water, two terrible Danavas, Madhu and 
Kaitabha, spotted out a vulnerable point. These two Asuras 
were already born in the previous Kalpa. They could not be 
defeated by Suras. 0 Mahadeva, formerly it was you who had 
created thetn. Hence they were invincible to Suras and Asuras. 
They had all the glory and fortune. They became subtle like 


V.iii.9.40-50 
33 
wind. They snatched off all the Vedas even as the Grandfather 
was reciting them. Thereafter they entered the great ocean. "1 
On hearing these words of Amrta that highly refulgent one 
remembered the Conch-discus-club-bearing Lord of Devas2• 0 
great king, that excellent Sura, the Lord capable of bringing 
about the death of the Danavas; the Lord adored by all the 
deities, came to the surface of the earth. The Lord then as­
sumed the form of a fish and stirred up the ocean. There the 
Lord saw the Vedas kept in Patala. The Slayer of Madhu saw 
the two Daityas of great vigour and vitality. By means of his 
power he slew the two mighty-armed Daityas of great vigour 
and terrific strength. The Lord of the cosmos bedecked by the 
discus brought the Vedas kept hidden there in water and handed 
them to the Four-faced Lord. 
40-50. 
Thereafter, having regained the Vedas Lord Pitamaha 
became delighted. He again began the creation of the entire 
universe consisting of the mobile and immobile beings. The 
maid in attendance of Rudra, the meritorious divine river, the 
sanctifier of all living beings, diverted her water there. 
Thereᦊpon· Devas and sages, with penance as their sole asset, 
began with highly delighted mind the worship of the Three­
eyed Lord on her banks. The single form of Mahe§a became 
for another reason triple arid began to function in the forms 
of Brahma, ViᤁQU and Isvara. 
Those who are deluded enough to emphasize absolute dis­
tinction among these are of sinful activities. How can they h ave 
piety and spiritual fulfilment? 
· 
In the same manner these three rivers born of Rudra are 
one and the same in the different forms of Ganga, Reva and 
Sarasvati. Ganga is the form of ViᤁQU and is conducive to the 
destruction of all sins. Narmada originating from the body of 
Rudra is also like that. The form of Brahma, Sarasvati, is well 
known in all the three worlds. The divine form of the goddess 
I . 
The role of Narmada as the reporter ofVeda-snatchers, Madhu and Kaitabha, 
to Siva who was lying asleep on the ocean of cosmic waters is meant for 
the glorification of Narmada and Siva. BhP, Mbh and other Pun1Qas do 
not attribute this (ViĄQu's) role to Siva. 
2. 
The credit of killing Madhu and Kaitabha and restoration of the Vedas 
is not denied to ViĄQU. But it is said that he was commanded to do so 
by Siva. This is a Saivite twist to the episode. 


34 
Skanda Purii:T}a 
can go wherever she desires. She stands for the richness (i.e. 
powers) of speech. 
Narmada is specially greatest and most auspicious form di­
vinely bestowed with the power of going wherever she pleased. 
Everywhere she is adored by Suras. She is remembered as the 
subtlest of all subtle forms pervading all living beings. This is 
the immortal, everlasting, excellent flight of stairs leading to 
heaven (Svarga) . She was created by Rudra as the redeemer 
of people from the ocean of worldly existence. 
5 1-56. 
Those who drink the water of this river become 
liberated from the mass of great sins. They leave off the state 
of mundane existence that existed without beginning and attain 
the pure and permanent salvation. 
As is Ganga, so is Reva and Sarasvati too is so. The merit 
acquired from holy bath, visiting and meditation is mentioned 
as equal. Due to the boon granted, the blessed one (Narmada) 
is mentioned as superior by learned men. By the mercy (of the 
Lord) she does not get defunct. If she is approached ( the 
devotee is liberated) . Hence people are liberated from sins by 
due performance of holy ablution and other auspicious rites, 
if they bow down to the Three-eyed Lord on Narmada, 0 
excellent king. Since this great river has originated from the 
limbs of Uma and Rudra, she has become highly meritorious 
and she takes the devotees to Svarga. 
He who listens to the activity of the divine river (after getting 
detached from the body of the excellent Isana) goes to Rudra, 
being sung about loudly by Gandharvas and Yakl!as. 
CHAPTER TEN 
The Benefits of Bath in Narmada 
Yudhi${hira said: 
1-1 2. 
0 excellent BrahmaQ.a, in which Kalpa was this highly 
eᦋeemable Narmada divided by all the noble-souled sages en­
dowed with the power of penance? Narrate this in detail, 0 
most excellent one among eloquent persons. 
What calamities have the people to face at the end of the 


V.iii.l 0. 13-20a 
35 
Kalpa? 0 Sir, describe the arrangement as existed in the last 
Kalpa? 0 sinless one, how was this in the earlier Kalpa that 
preceded it? 
On being requested thus in the midst of the assembly, Marka:r:tQa 
spoke these words: 
Miirkar.uj,eya said: 
I shall narrate (it) . Let this be listened to by all. This story 
has been successively heard from the earlier days. This is the 
special story of the the great Kalpa beyond this one, when 
Kala (Time, god of destruction) was terrible and hideous, caus­
ing the destruction of the worlds. Even in that highly terrible 
situation, this (river) did not die. Hen'ce she was divided by the 
delighted (sages) . Listen to that story. In the three days of 
Pitamaha, when the Yuga was about to come to an end, the 
mental sons of Brahma, excellent persons like Brahma himself, 
viz. Sanaka and other noble souls, and those who were called 
Vaimanika Ga:r:tas (groups of people moving about in aerial 
chariots) , the Guardians of the quarters, Yama, Indra, Varu:r:ta 
and others-all these remained awaiting Kala (god of death) . 
They were interested in the events of the world. Then; when 
the Kalpa came to a close, they had excellent knowledge that 
the life span of everyone comes to a close in accordance with 
the nature of the Yuga. They then left Bhiirloka (earth) and 
came to Bhuval). world. Then they gradually (moved) to Svarloka, 
Mahal)., Jana and Tapas Lokas (regions) . After all the other 
Lokas, they resorted to the excellent Satyaloka. For a period 
of a thousand Yugas, they remained in Satyaloka, accompanied 
by their sons and grandsons till the Cosmos was created again. 
1 3-20a. 
Such of those sons of Brahma as do not exist at the 
beginning of the Kalpa, leave off the three worlds and remain 
without any supporting base. The Brahma:r:tas who _ were with 
them and the ascetics as well, Yakᤁas, Rakᤁasas,· Pisacas, the 
other Vaimanika Ga:r:tas, the highly esteemable sages, the dif­
ferent kinds of Var:r:tas -all these undergo suffering on the 
earth along with others dwelling on the surface. 
A great drought extending to a hundied years happened to 
befall them. It was extremely terrible, bringing about the de­
struction of the worlds, causing trees and creepers also to perish. 


36 
Skanda Purii:r;a 
It brought about a great agitation in all the three worlds and 
· dried up the seven oceans. All the people were overpowered 
by hunger. They began to wander in all the ten quarters. In 
their miserable condition, they sustained themselves with fruits 
and roots and bulbous roots. The rivers, wells, oceans and 
sacred Tlrthas as well were resorted to. These too-all the 
oceans and rivers, got dried up. Thereat living beings of very 
poor intrinsic strength got perished at the outset, being de­
prived of a great quantity of water. 
20b-27a. When the rivers and oceans got destroyed, sixty 
thousand sages living in Kurukᤁetra, Vaikhanasa BrahmaiJ.as, 
Dantoliikhalins (who just bit grains with their teeth making 
them their threshing and pounding rods) , ascetics who lived 
in secret caves of Himacala -all these ascetics who were dis­
tressed due to hunger and thirst approached me. With palms 
joined together in veneration all said: "0 great sage, we are 
in anguish. 0 Brahmal).a, the whole universe consisting of rivers, 
oceans and mountains has completely dried up. Where will we 
_all go together until the times change? 0 eminent Brahmal).a, 
you are long-lived. You did not die even at the close of the 
Yuga. Everything of the past, future and present is retained in 
your heart (memory) . Hence you know everything. 0 BrahmaiJ.a 
of great holy rites, do tell us. How long will we have to spend, 
0 highly esteemable sage of good Vratas? All the mobile and 
immobile beings are distressed on being assailed by drought. 
Save us from utter annihilation, 0 highly esteemable one." 
27b-33a There upon, I mentally pondered and spoke thus 
urging those Brahmal).as: "All of you leave this Kurukᤁetra along 
with your wives and sons. Leaving this northern quarter, let us 
go to the excellent southern region, abounding in towns, vil­
lages and milkmen's colonies, and beautified by cities and met­
ropolitan . areas. Let us go to the banks of Narmada resorted 
to by many Siddhas. Let us see that highly meritorious (river) 
born of Rudra's limbs, conducive to the destructim1 of all sins, 
the highly esteemable one surrounded by Nyagrodha trees. 
Her waters have ripples and whirlpools; she abounds in frogs 
and fish. The chirping sound of different kinds of birds rever­
berates. Crores of sages resort to her. She is ardently attended 
upon by the devotees of Mahe5vara, Sankhyas and Siddhaᦌ. We 
are afraid of droughts but on both of her banks we shall build 


V.iii. l 0.33b-52 
37 
our hermitages without difficulty. We can successfully perform 
holy rites. " 
33b-36. 
On being told thus tpey came to the banks of Narmada 
accompanied by their followers. They settled there without any 
fear from anyWhere. They remembered the tqmmon. difficul­
ties at the beginning of a Kalpa . They came to ·the banks of 
Narmada at the very beginning· of Kali Yuga. 
Then for a complete period of a hundred divine, years they 
stayed on · the banks of Reva. 0 king, I witnessed the Ipiracle 
of ihe stay of the sages there for a period of thirtyĮsix thousand 
human years. 
37-52. 
When (the other parts of} the world were assailed 
by drought, when the mobile and immobile beings became 
dried up, when all the reckonings of the beginning of the Yuga 
had been changed, when there was loss of "' consciousness fol­
lowed by a hue and cry, when the classification of the four 
Vaqtas became extinct, when the . order of Balis (oblations) 
and Homas became defunct, when the utterance of the phrases 
Svaha and VaEat ceased, when ' the purity of personal cleanli­
ness and good conduct was no longer maintained, then this 
excellent river alone was resorted to by crores of sages. No· 
other river was as beautiful as this in all the three worlds, 0 
king. This region with the meritorious water shone like the city 
of Amaravati of Indra. The divine river Narmada shone like 
Ganga in Svarga. 
The temples and shrines were splendid and the hermitages 
were well-planned . There were as many shrines adorning both 
the banks as there w.ere trees and mountains up to the spot 
where she meets the otrean. When Agnihotras were performed, 
the sacrificial offerings and the smoke issuing forth gave the 
region around Narmada the appearance of a night during rainy 
season . 
Shining splendid with the adorations and consecrations in 
the many shrines, the area with many rivers blazed like the 
cities of Indra and of Bhaskara. 
Sorne pįrforİed austerities in the midst of five fires. Some 
performed Agnihotras. Some of them were engaged in austere 
penance and they took in (inhiiled) the columns of smoke . 
Some were engaged in Atmayajfia (meditation on the self) . 
Others were engaged in devotional practiceı. Some followed 
the VaiZQava tenets and others the Saiva observances of vows. 


38 
Skanda Purii:r:ta 
In taking food also, they had varieties: Intake of food once 
in a day, once in two days, once in six days etc. Some practised 
Candraya:r:ta; some Krcchra and some Atikrcchra. Thus they 
worshipped Lord Sarikara and Lord Ke5ava by means of these 
and similar kinds of austerities elaborately practised on the 
banks of Narmada. 
They worshipped the great Lord as a single entity or in 
different forms. In the extremely terrible Kali Yuga, they at­
tained excellent Siddhi. Lord Isa granted Siddhis to the differ­
ent devotees in accordance with the .nature of their devotion, 
extent of knowledge and the aspect of the deity adored with 
devotion. In accordance with the natural urge they attained 
Siddhi and got dissolved (in the deity?) . 
Those people who resort to different deities, wallow in the 
ocean of worldly existence. They are persons who leave the 
great tree of !sana and cling to the branches. They come back 
to the world and are born frequently. In the course of the four 
Yugas, they wander successively in various kinds of births as 
Devas, immobile beings etc. 
53-6 I. Re-birth, off to Svarga and down to the terrible Raurava­
that will be their lot. On the other hand, those who devoutly 
worship Bhava, Lord !sana, on the banks of Narmada, are not 
born again. Some of those who had been adoring till their 
death had attained the greatest goal; some in twelve years; 
other ascetics in six years; some in three years; some in a single 
year. Some have become Siddhas in six months and others in 
three months. These sages had resorted to the Lord and Narmada 
of great renown. After cutting off all the defects of the worldly 
existence, they have attained the eternal Brahman. 
Thus in Kali ·Age, hundreds and thousands of sages have 
resorted to the banks of Narmada and merged into Rudra. 
Those Brahma:r:tas who resort to the banks of Narmada and put 
in effort to perform the Saiva Vrata, devoutly take their holy 
bath thrice a day and adore the Lord, attain Siva. Or those who 
constantly remember Naraya:r:ta along with meditations, adora­
tions, Japas and Mahavratas cross to the other shore of the 
ocean of worldly existence like royal swans with' their white 
wings well-washed. 
It is the truth. It is the truth. Again it is the truth. It is being 
proclaimed with raised hands. This has been excellently decided 
and concluded that Narayal}a should be meditated upon always. 


V.iii. l0.62-75 
39 
62-68. 
He who conquers his self, 0 king, resides for a 
month or a fortnight resorting to Reva and worships Hara, 
becomes a man of great esteem. He shall become identical 
with the Pinakaᦍbearing Lord of Devas. 
Even worms, insects and ants that die in the waters of Narmada, 
attain divine forms. They are born in noble families living for 
a hundred years engaged in pious rites. 
Those trees whose roots have been eroded by the great 
waves and rapid currents and fall down in due course, get their 
sins destroyed through the waters of Narmada. They shine 
refulgently and proceed to heaven. 
Even senseless, deaf and mute ones having no vested inter­
ests and ardent desires or those who earnestly desire things, 
when they die on the banks of Reva, do '"go to heaven. Why 
should one doubt then about the Brahmar:tas endowed with 
emotional fervour with Bhava as their object of worship? 
The devotees who perform the_ worship of Siva and direct 
their mental feelings towards Ke8ava and get their bodies purified 
by the waters of Reva, do attain, on being liberated from their 
bodies, that goal which those others who subject their limbs 
to desiccation through monthly fasts do not attain. 
Those who resort to the banks of Narmada and adore Siva 
of immutable splendour or NarayaQ.a with mental purity, do 
not taste the breast-milk of mothers again. There are other 
great sages wh<;> resort to the banks of Narmada eulogized with 
hymns by Devas, and sustain themselves through grains of Nivara, 
Syamaka, Yava, Iilguda etc.; they do not meet with death. 
69-75. 
Those who approach the banks of the divine river 
and get themselves truly purified by the worship of the Lord 
thrice a day, do not lie down again within the belly of a young 
woman with faeces, urine, skin, bones and veins as their pillows. 
Of what avail to them are the many kinds of sacrifices and 
Dana or the entire range of excellent Tirthas resorted to by 
them? They resort to the northern or southern banks of Narmada 
travᦎrsed previously by Rudra himself. Those men who do not 
resort to Reva who originated from Rudra's body and who 
functions like a flight of stairs unto heaven, have been cheated, 
are lame, sluggish and blind and are on a par with" brutes. 
The eminent Brahmar:tas who never wish to see Kaliyuga 
again shall approach the banks of Narmada, eschew associa-


40 
Skanda Purii:IJa 
tion with all the others and worship Sarva. In spite of being 
overwhelmed by innumerable obstacles ᦏhose who never leave 
the banks of Narmada are worthy of being honoured: They 
should be venerated by all the people. They do what is ben­
eficial to all the peopl«:!. 
Bhrgu, Atri, Gargeya, VasiHha and Kanka along with hun­
dreds of other persons have taken bath in the waters (of this 
river) , have attained the greatest of Siddhis and have gone to 
the worlds of Maruts (Devas) , not to others. 
Those who are always pure in their "inner thoughts and read 
this holy and highly meritorious narrative that yields wisdom, 
are really men of great esteem. They attain the greatest goal. 
Indeed the statement of Rudra himself is a valid testimony 
thereof. 
CHAPTER ELEVEN 
The Greatness of Narmada 
Yudhi$thira said: 
1-6. It is pleasantly wonderful that this river is very signifi­
cant and highly meritorious as she has not been destroyed at 
the end of the Yuga. Hence she is the worthiest of being re­
sorted to by leading sages eagerly interested in meditation, 
adoration and holy bath. 
The sages earnest in pious rites attained salvation by resort­
ing to that river: I understand from your statement that the 
rules and observances based on the Vedic passages and evolved 
by the sages, are conducive to the attainment of salvation. The 
different kinds of observances along with the adoration of the 
Lord of Devas, enable them to become liberated from the 
defects of Kali. They may be liberated in twelve, ten, eight, six, 
four or three years or even months. Undoubtedly one who 
adores Brahina, the most excellent one of Suras, or· Kesava, the 
preceptor of the universe, dispels all sins. Mention all these in 
detail, 0 sinless one. All the creatures are deeply immersed in 
the dense mire of worldly existence. How do they attain Svarga? 
This is my doubt. Do clarify it. 


V.iii. l l . 7-19 
41 
Sri Miirka7J4eya said: 
7-1 3. After a number of births human state is obtained. 
With great difficulty devotion to Sailkara is generated. This 
attainment is rendered possible through Tlrthas, Danas, fasts, 
Yajfias, adorations Qf Devas and Bn'ihmaQas and through great 
faith, 0 king. Hence faith has to be maintained by men fond 
of pious rites. Isvara is also attainable by Sraddha (faith) . Hence 
faith is considered specially significant. Otherwise, if it is devoid 
of Sraddha, everything is fruitless, 0 descendant of Bharata. 
Hence one should resort to devotion to Rudra Parameᤁᤃhin. 
Only the life of those is fruitful who have unswerving devotion. 
Bhakti (devotion) is of three kinds, namely Sattvikl, Rajasl and 
Tamasi and the benefit derived by all tMe people is also of 
three kinds. Men are reborn again and again as a result of 
their Karmas. After hundreds of births, wise worshippers of the 
deities obtain devotion to the three deities when sinful Karmas 
are destroyed. 
1 4-19. 
Through (the kindness of) Isana, salvation is ob­
tained thereafter without any doubt. Those excellent BrahmaQaS 
who resort to the banks of Narmada and follow the Rath of the 
Vedas, attain the greatest goal undoubtedly. Those excellent 
Brahmat:Jas who resort to the banks of Narmada, who ardently 
follow the path prescribed in the three Vedas reach the high­
est goal. Those people who are of concentrated minds and 
who ardently worship the immutable Siva attain spiritual progress 
quickly. 
Embodied beings attain spiritual progress after · lapse of a 
great deal of time in places other than the banks of Narmada, 
but here the spiritual progress is attained quickly. Men con­
versant ·with Sankhya (path of knowledge) attain Siddhi in six 
years. VaiᤁQavas richly endowed with knowledge, also achieve . 
progress before that. Like rivers joining the ·ocean, all those 
who know and practise Yoga become unified in the Mahe5vara 
Yoga at the end of the Kalpa. 
Of all the Yogas Mahe8vara Yoga is the most excellent. Resorting 
to it, even those of sinful origins cease to have rebirths by 
adoring Siva on the banks of the river. 
This type. of progress is very difficult to accomplish. It de­
stroys all sins. By resorting to Reva all creatures are liberated 
quickly. 


42 
Skanda Purii:r_ta 
20. 
Even if they belong to sinful species, by worshipping 
Siva on the banks of Narmada they are not born again in (any 
of) the species. 
2 1 . 
This goal is difficult to attain. She destroys all sins. 
Beings get liberated from Sarilsara ' after resorting to Reva. 
22. 
Hence one should as a habit take the holy bath and 
smear oneself with holy ash. By approaching the banks of Narmada, 
one shall quickly attain Siddhi. 
23-32. 
A man who calmly and respectfully adores the Liil.ga 
thrice a day, shall become freed from all ailments and attain 
the greatest goal. 
Even if he be a sinner, he will attain Siddhi in six months. 
Those who have great purity of mind attain Siddhi in three 
months. 
Just as sno.w touched by rays of the Sun breaks into frag­
ments and vanishes from the top of a mountain, so also sin 
when touched by the splendid particles of holy ash gets de­
stroyed. 
Those BrahmaQ.as devoted to Rudra who are sprinkled with 
holy ash charged with the Mantra Sadyojata1 etc. shine like the 
Sun without impurities. 
Just as serpents afraid of Garu<;la, perish, so also the sins 
when sprinkled with ash, perish. 
Those who smear themselves with the holy ash sanctified by 
the waters of Narmada, are immediately ri'd of masses of sins. 
There is no doubt about it. 
Those who observe Pasupata Vrata devoutly in the manner 
enjoined without eatiᦐg Sudra food attain the greatest goal. 
BrahmaQ.a's food is (regarded as) Amrta (Nectar) ; ᤏatriya's 
food is remembered as milk; Vaisya's food is mere food, and 
Sudra's food is proclaimed as blood. 
Those excellent BrahmaQ.as who get nourished with Sudra's 
food and juice and later die, become deprived of Tapas and 
knowledge and are born as crows and vultures. 
I. 
The following are the sources of the Mantras: 
i) agnimi!e purohitam (RV I. 1 . 1 .) 
ii) ibetvo (KS 3-6) . 
iii) agna ayahi vitaye (RV VI. 16.10) . 
iv) .ianno devi abhiblaye (RV X.9.4) . 


V.iii. l l .33-50 
43 
Sinful action of men remains based on their food. If one 
takes anyone's food, he takes the latter's sin too. 
33-40. 
Sankara has declared that, more particularly so, in 
the case of those who are unsteady in the performance of 
austerities despite the fact that they have resorted to the holy 
rites of ascetics. Undoubtedly they go to Naraka,. 
Brahmar:tas of this type, if they are well established in Pasupatya 
Vrata, do undoubtedly burn the great mass of sins. 
This has been urged by Sruti that those who associate with 
a cheat and are afflicted by avariciousness should not be talked. 
to or associated with (accommodated in the party of the good) . 
People are ruined due to the faults committed by their parents; 
others are ruined as a result of their own actions; and still 
others a•·e ruined due to vanity born of knowledge and egotism. 
Those who have been excluded through the orders of the 
Smrtis but still adhere to Sailkara's pious rite, undergo suffer­
ings, but in due course they attain the greatest goal. 
Fools, men who have no faith, those with increasing hypoc­
risy, wicked souls and those who glorify a bad doctrine do not 
attain Siddhi. 
Those who adhere to Sankara Vrata and are highly fortu­
nate in practising the rites of Tirtha, are born undoubtedly in 
base wombs, if they are avaricious. 
Evil action is not quelled by Tirthas and Danas. But sins 
committed due to inadvertence or ignorance become dissolved. 
41-50. 
After knowing this, all Brahmar:tas should act in 
accordance with the injunctions (of religion) . They must fre­
quently recite in a low voice the great Brahman (the Vedic 
passages) . He who recites the passages connected with Lord 
Viriipakᤁa (Siva) pf the highest form and also the Rudra Mantras 
sees isana directly within six months if he avoids undue attach­
ment (to the world) . He who has perfect self-control and recites 
the Sarhhitas ten times on the banks of Narmada shall be 
liberated from all sins. 
He who reads the Purar:ta Sarhhita whether pertaining to 
Siva or Viᤁt:J.u, before a Sivalinga on the banks of Narmada 
becomes identical with Siva. Until the destruCtion of all living 
beings, he is . honoured in Svargaloka. 
This Nandigita was formerly uttered by Nandin . in order to 
dispel the sufferings of worldly existence. 


44 
Skanda Puro:r;ta 
He uttered this in a Siva shrine in the assembly of celestial 
sages, Siddhas and Gandharvas. Listen to this splendid Nandigita, 
0 king, with full concentration of mind. It is meritorious. It 
gives heavenly pleasures and salvation. It destroys the fear of 
worldly existence. 
"0 people distressed at every step by worldly sufferings, if 
you wish to avoid the deep abyss of worldly existence, 0 people 
bound with different kinds of bonds of Karmas perpetrated by 
yourselves, listen for the sake of your own happiness to this 
beneficial thing recounted by me. 
0 Sakra, do not go along the crooked path. 0 Yama, do not 
torture me. 0 Pracetas (Varul).a) , subdue your own mind. 0 
Vittapa (Kubera) , eschew avariciousness. 
If you are sick and disgusted with the tossings and upheavals 
of the waves of the ocean of worldly existence, distribute your 
entire wealth among the distressed and helpless peᦑple and 
also the people of distinguished characteristics. 
51-60. 
The Pinaka-wielding holy Lord protects the man 
who is disgusted with birth, is afraid of death and is over­
whelmed by lust etc., but who does not slip from Yama (re­
straints) , . Niyama (observances) etc. 
0 Kinasa (god of death } , do not be arrogant. If you inflict 
injury on a creature that has sought refuge in Sarva (Siva) , you 
will be laughed at. That alone will be your refuge. 
What can cause fear unto men devoted to Siva and Viᤁl).u? 
The terrible Kala is but a child. Who is Mrtyu (god of death) ? 
Who is base Yama? (They are negligible. ) 
Unto the creature distressed by the burden of mundane 
existence (but) habitually residing on the banks of Reva, Bharga 
and Bhagavan (Viᤁl).u) are destroyers of the fear from worldly 
existence. 
0 pitiable fellow, if you wish for (spiritual) knowledge and 
salvation, resort to Siva, meditate upon Siva, eulogize Siva, 
worship Siva and bow down to Siva. Recite the scriptural text 
of Paiicanana (Pasupata Path) ; perform the Japa of the five­
lettered Mantra ( namaQ siviiya) . Meditate on the Tattvas con­
sisting of five; worship the great Paiicanana (Siva) . 
Of what account are those series of rites which have been 
differentiated due to diversity of nature, if the glorious Paiicanana, 
Siva, is served exclusively? 


V.iii.l l .61-70 
45 
Of what avail are the confident, maddening, trumpeting 
sounds of the elephant of worldly existence, if Lord Paiicanana 
(Siva; a lion) is resorted to with the positive fragrance of faith 
and devotion? 0 foolish, deluded one, why do you grieve after 
seeing the futility of Karmas? Perform the Japa of Bhlma ( the 
terrible one) , the consort of Bhavanl, the destroyer of fear. 
0 deluded one, resort to Bharga, the Lord of Suras, the 
bestower of heavenly pleasures and salvation-Bharga who has 
his abode on the banks of Narmada and who is the cause of 
the destruction of numerous miseries. 
61-70. 
0 deluded one, why do you go to distant quarters 
like a mad person (or) like one devoid of any feelings, after 
abandoning Reva worthy of being attᦒnded upon by even the 
celestial river, and where Lord Hara aiJd Lord Hari are sta­
tioned on her banks? 
Resort to the meritorious waters of Reva; worship the eter­
nal Rudra; perform the japa of the five-lettered Mantra ( namaiJ, 
siviiya) and go to the desired region. 
Why torture your own body by pursuing innumerable means 
of Mokl;ᦓ? Resort to Reva. After attaining Siva the greatest 
region is easily achievable. " 
What Nandin sang i n the presence of Siva i n this manner 
after going to Kailasa and meeting the Guardians of the Quar­
ters, has been recounted to you now. 
Miirkarpf,eya said: 
He who always protects pious rites and is devoted to the holy 
bath and Dana after reaching the banks of Narmᦔda is rid of 
all sins. 
One may recite all the Vedas for a hundreᦕ years disregard­
ing the injunctions or perform the Japa of Mrtyulaitgala 
(Mrtyufijaya) Mantra, namely tryambakam yajiimahe, etc. (RV 
Vll.59. 1 2) . This may equal the other or may be even superior 
to it in GuQ.as (merits) . 
Just as a person who is not pure either in Blja (semen i.e. 
Father) or in Yoni (mother) does not obtain (the be1:1efit of) 
Rudra Mantra, so also Laitgala (Mrtyufijaya Mantra) does not 
stand by (save) the person bereft of life span. 
A person of great self-control who performs the Japa of 


46 
Skanda Puriir.ta 
Gayatrl is superior in good qualities. Stationing himself on the 
banks of Narmada, he who recites Mantras beginning with 
( I ) agnimzle, (2) i$etvo, (3) agna iiyiihi and (4) sanno devz, is rid 
of sins. 
One would perform Brahma Yajiia. One who always per­
forms, with concentration, the Japa of the Vedas along with 
the Angas and Upangas, does not obtain that benefit which a 
man of self-control obtains by the Japa of Gayatrl. 
71-80. 
A Brahmat:ta equipped with the (knowledge of) Veda 
is rid of all sins by performing once the Japa of Rudriidhyiiya. 
He goes to Viᤁt:tuloka. 
By performingjapa of another Sarhsthana, Siikta or Arat:tyaka 
one is rid of all sins and goes to ViᤁQuloka. 
Whatever Japa is performed and whatever Dana is offered, if 
done so on the banks of Narmada, shall become everlasting. 
Those who always resort to Narmada with Vratas of this sort go 
to the VaiᤁQava region or the immutable Saiva region after death. 
Some men go to Satyaloka and others go to Siiryaloka. There 
they remain surrounded by groups of heavenly damsels till all 
the living beings are annihilated. While this was the situation 
in this world, 0 great king, ten crores of sages, original inhab­
itants of Kurukᤁetra, resorted to the banks of Narmada along 
with me, 0 blessed one. They had their diet restricted to fruits 
and roots and they continued to adore Siva. 
The period of time extended to a hundred divine years 
which according to human reckoning comes to thirty-six thousand 
(years) . 
When the Sandhya period elapsed, 0 excellent king, the 
remainder stood at a hundred years of human reckoning. Then 
there was a drought that destroyed all people, whereby everything 
met terrible destruction. 
81-90. 
Due to the power of those sages who had mastered 
the Vedas and attained Siddhi earlier, Lord Indra. the slayer 
of Bala and Vrtra, showered rain. 
All round there was the downpour with profuse supply of 
water. As a result of the rain, their sustenance became possible. 
A long period of time was spent by those desirous of great 
Siddhi (sustaining themselves) with Syamaka, lnguda, Bilva and 
other things growing on the banks of Narmada. 
Again when there was the advent of the closing period of 


V.iii. l 1 .91-96 
47 
the Yuga and oniy a small part of Kali Yuga remained, all the 
mobile and immobile beings became entirely dried up. 
The entire surface of the earth became denuded of trees, 
medicinal herbs and hedges, grasses and creepers too, as it was 
affected by drought. 
Thereupon thousands of those · sages became distressed due 
to hunger ·and thirst. As befitting the nature of the Yuga, 0 
king, they became bereft of Sattva (intrinsic strength) . 
When the end of the Yuga was imminent, when people ceased 
to utter Svadha and perform Homa, they were unable to de­
cide: "What should be done? Where will we go? Who will be 
our refuge?" 
I told them repeatedly: "Do not be af.-aid. Many such changes 
of times have been witnessed by me. " 
They were brought to the banks of Narmada by m e . "This 
divine (river) alone is our refuge when the close of the Yuga 
is imminent. 0 excellent Brahmal).as, we do not have any other 
refuge. This is the mother of all living beings, 0 excellent 
Brahmal).as. 
91-96. . It was by resorting to this great river that our grand­
fathers and great-grandfathers and other forefathers-all of 
them, went to heaven. 
. 
Seven of my earlier grandfathers beginning with Bhrgu, 
DhaumrQ.i, my wife, the highly virtuous lady of pure smiles, 
Manasvatl, my mother, Bhargavas, Ailgiras-s, Pulastya, Pulaha, 
VasiHha, Atreya, Kasyapa and other highly glorious ones prac­
tising vows and observances numbering hundreds of thousands 
attained Siddhi here. 
Hence this highly esteemable river should never be aban­
doned. No other river is capable of giving the benefit of the 
three worlds. 
The residents of the banks of Narmada are rid immediately 
of many Dvandvas (mutually conflicting things) and also the 
great fear of hunger and thirst. Hence the excellent river should 
be resorted to with all endeavour by those who desire great 
welfare here in this world and hereafter. " 


48 
Skanda Purii:r_ta 
CHAPTER TWELVE 
Eulogy of Narmada 
Sri Miirkar.uf,eya said: 
1-6. 
On hearing this, 0 king, the sages became highly 
delighted. With palms joined together in veneration the BrahmaQ.as 
began to eulogize .Narmada. 
"Obeisance to you, 0 divine river of meritorious waters. 0 
alligator-gaited one, obeisance. Obeisance to thee, the redeemer 
from sins. Obeisance, 0 goddess of excellent countenance. 
Obeisance to you, 0 splendid one, 0 reservoir of meritori­
ous waters. 0 river of pure Sattva quality, served by Suras and 
Siddhas, obeisance to you, the excellent one originating from 
the limbs of Rudra. 
Obeisance to you, 0 divine river, flowing towards the sea, 
0 auspicious one, 0 bestower of boons. Obeisance to you, 0 
bestower of the happiness of the two worlds (here and here­
- after) , 0 sinless one to whom many groups of living beings 
have resorted. 
0 excellent one among rivers, 0 remover of sins, 0 river 
of diverse varieties, your limbs have been resorted to by Gandharvas, 
Yakᤁas and Uragas; 0 eternal onP., you have mercy on groups 
of living beings; 0 bestower of salvation, 0 divine one, do what 
is beneficial to us. 
0 divine one served and attended upon by big multitudes 
of huge elephants, buffaloes and boars! You have great waves 
as garlands. 0 bestower of boons, 0 bestower of happiness, all 
of us bow down to you. Release us from the bondage of the 
(category) of Pasus. 
7-1 5. Men wander through the various Narakas because they 
are fettered with many kinds of inauspicious sins. But their 
sufferings torment them only till they do not touch. your waters 
emerging from the waves set in motion by violent gusts of 
winds. 0 lotus-faced one, you are the goal unto those who are 
tortured by the fear of many series of miseries, who are envel­
oped by many sins and overwhelmed by many Dvandvas ( mu­
tually opposing pairs e.g. pleasure-pain) . 
0 divine river, there is no doubt about this that after attain-


V.iii. l2.16-18 
49 
ing you all the rivers become sanctified and free from impu­
rities. You gra,nt freedom from fear to those who are distressed 
due to miseries. You have been honoured by many excellent 
and noble men. 
The stones in you when touched by rays of the Moon and 
the Sun, shall grant the greatest region. On being flooded with 
your sacred waters, they attain great welfare and holiness. What 
wonder can there be here? 
Men wander through hells, become distressed with miseries 
and their bodies become infested with sins only so long as they 
do not resort to your waves and ripples set in motion by great 
gusts of winds. 
Mlecchas (barparians) , Pulindas (hunters) and Yatudhanas 
(demons) who drink your meritorioi.tᥧ water, 0 divine river, 
become liberated from terrible fears, undoubtedly. What won­
der is here! 
All the lakes and rivers have become defunct in this terrible, 
defiled Kali Yuga; but,_ you, 0 divine river, shine with the full 
complement of water like Ganga in heaven, the pathway of the 
constellations. 
0 excellent one, 0 giver of boons, we have waited so long. 
Now, with your favour, we shall go to Rudra. Do grant uᥨ your 
favour. 
You are our goal like a mother or father who protects the 
sons; proteCt us till the end of the Yuga. With your excellent 
favour, we shall cross the adverse period when everything is 
overwhelmed by a severe drought. " 
1 6-18. 
The eminent BrahmaQ.as who read this eulogy and 
the quiescent men who listen to this attain Rudra by means of 
a vehic;le drawn by a bull. They shall be adorned with divine 
garments too. 
Those who read this prayer always after taking the hofy bath 
in the waters of Narmada, will ultimately be granted the purest 
goal by this excellent river. 
A devotee shall get up in the morning everyday and recite 
this prayer. He may even recite it lying down on bed. He shall 
be liberated from sins and becomes purified in body. He at­
tains the abode of Mahe8vara. 


50 
Skanda Purii:r;ta 
CHAPTER THIRTEEN 
The Story of Twentyone Kalpas1 
Sri Markatttf.eya said: 
1-8. 
On being eulogized thus by the leading sages, the 
divine, meritorious river thought thus: 'I shall grant excellent 
boon unto all. ' 
Thereafter, o n coming to know that they were asleep during 
the night, the Divinity of sweet smiles appeared before every 
sage in dream. 
When it was midnight, she arose from the midst of the water 
(in the guise of a woman) clad in clean garments and be­
decked in divine garlands. She was a lady of excellent waist: 
She had an umbrella raised aloft. She was adorned in rubies. 
To each of them she severally said: "Do not be afraid. Do 
reside near me banishing the fear arising from hunger etc." 
Mter saying thus to those great sages in the course of dream, 
the divine one entered her own waters and disappeared. 
Later, in the morning, the sages joyously said to one an­
other: "The Divinity was seen by me in such and such form in 
the course of a dream. She was excellent to look at. Freedom 
from fear has ·been granted to us (and its) fulfilment too ere 
long. Undoubtedly the vision of Narmada is remarkable." 
9-1 5 
Another day, 0 king, they witnessed along with the 
members of their family in the vicinity of their own hermitages 
fishes of excellent form. 
On seeing the fishes there, the great sages became struck 
witl: wonder. Without being excited they worshipped the dei­
ties with Havya and Kavya. 
Mter obtaining shoals of fishes with the favour of the great 
goddess, they sustained themselves day "by day along with their 
wives and sons.2 Still there were further shoals of fishes, on 
ᥩeeing which they became struck with wonder.. 
There were the dead Paᤃhina variety of fishes with well-
1. 
This chapter gives a list of twenty-one Kalpas (vv 42-45) . Narmada survived 
all these Kalpas but MarkaQ¾eya lived for seven Kalpas from Mayiira to 
Varaha (the present Kalpa)_. 
2. 
The sages do not obs˪rve strict vegetarianism. Probably fish was a staple 
food of North Indian Brahmal)as then. 


V.iii.l3.16-31 
51 
nourished limbs. 0 Yudhiᤁ!hira, at every threshold of the hermitages 
of these ascetics, these fishes were seen dead. 
Thereupon all the residents of the banks of Narmada be­
came well-nourished and delighted. All the sages eschewed 
every fear arising from hunger and thirst. 
0 leader of the descendants of Bharata, they stayed on 
performing penances andjapa. Resorting to the banks of Narmada, 
they worshipped the Pitrs and Devas. 
1 6-23. 
With those excellent BrahmaQ.as performing Japa 
and penance for ever, the excellent river shone like the firma­
ment with stars and planets. 
Formerly Narmada, the bestower of piety, was duly demar­
cated by numerous brilliant BrahmaQ.as who had mastered the 
Vedas. Narmada; the bestower of welfar(',.. on men, was demar­
cated by ten crores of sages residing on the banks of Narmada, 
the Divinity of well-defined limbs. 
With resplendent sacred threads and rosary strings spread 
on both the banks, 0 descendant ofBharata:, the highly meritorious 
Narmada proceeding "towards the ocean shone remarkably. 
There were several shrines with splendid Lingas made of 
sand and clay, with which the excellent river shone like the 
night that shines by means of stars. 
Propitiating the Suras and Pitrs thus, all those sages resided 
on the banks of Narmada till the ultimate annihilation of all 
living beings. 
Thereafter, a little more than a hundred terrible years elapsed, 
0 descendant of Bharata. Then at midnight, a girl with reful­
gence like that of a mass of lightning streaks rose up from the 
water. She had a python serving as the Yajiiopavita. She was 
gentle in appearance yet. In hand she grasped a trident. She 
spoke ·to them then: 
24-31 . 
"0 ye groups of sages, do come. I am never born 
of a womb. Do merge unto me along with your sons and wives. 
Thereby you will achieve Siddhi. I shall grant you the several 
wishes each one has. I shall take you unto ViᤁQ.u, Brahma, 
Isana or any other excellent Sura. Indeed I am the bestower 
of boons and am pleased. Be engrossed in PraQ.ayama ('re­
straint of breath ') and enter with concentration along with 
your sons and wives. Leave off your herᥪitages. You must not 
waste time. Pralaya is imminent. It is the annihilation of all 


52 
Skanda Purii:r,ta 
living beings. The Kalpa conflagration is extremely terrible. I 
was the only one when there was the highly terrible destruc­
tion of people. All the remaining rivers and all the seas have 
become ( dried up and) defunct. Due to the boon granted by 
Mahe5a, I am not annihilated. Stha:r:tu, the Lord, is immortal, 
the eternal Lord. }'Vhat is it that he will not grant, 0 excellent 
Brahma:r:tas, if he is duly adored and prayed to?" 
Mter saying this to the sages, Reva, that Divinity who had 
grasped a trident with her hand and who had the python serv­
ing as a sacred thread, entered the water. 
32-39. 
On hearing her words their minds were overwhelmed 
with wonder. All of them venerated me and repeatedly craved 
for my pardon: 
"While residing with your support we had uttered certain 
things which may kindly be forgiven. " 
All those highly fortunate ones abandoned their abodes along 
with their kinsmen and disciples. They recited the Japa of the 
sole imperishable Brahman (the single-syllabled OM) and meditated 
on Mahe5vara in their hearts. They took their holy ablution in 
the waters sanctified through Mantras. Mter having success­
fully performed their holy Vratas, they entered the waters of 
Narmada like winged mountains (entering the sea) 1 • With Kusa 
grass i:n their hands and holding the sacred fires, they bright­
ened all the quarters. 
0 great king, I alone remained there after their departure. 
I reached Amare5ᥫ and adored the river Narmada. The seven 
Kalpas beginning with Mayiira were experienced by me, Q 
king, 0 descendant of Bharata, due to the favour of Vedhas 
(god Brahma) . I spent all those years along with Reva. 
But ever since my birth till to-day, I do not know (the nature 
of) her former existence. This Narmada is the Sakti of Sailkara, 
the · Kala n.amed lla of Sarilbhu. She destroys all sins and re­
deems people from worldly existence. 
40-47. 
0 son of Pa:r:t<;lu, in the fourteen earlier Kalpas, 
when I too was not born, this (divine river) was happily present. 
In those fourteen earlier Kalpas too Narmada never ceased to 
exist. I shall recount them as that Divinity narrated to me. 
1 . 
I t appears that Brii.hmaJ)aS living on the banks were washed away i n the 
flood of Narmada. 


V.iii.l4.1-10 
53 
The list of Kalpas: 
Know that the first one is Kipila; the second one is Prajapatya. 
Thereafter the following: Brahina, Saumya, Savitra, Barhaspatya1 
Prabhasaka, Mahendra, Agnikalpa, Jayanta, Maruta, Vaiᤌr:tava, 
Bahuriipa and Jyautiᤌa is the fourteenth. These Kalpas which 
I enumerated are those in which Narmada never ceased to be. 
The fifteenth Kalpa is Mayiira; the sixteenth is Kaurma. Then 
co.me the Kalpas: Baka, Matsya, Padma and Vatakilpa, 0 de­
scendant of Bharata. The twenty-first current Kalpa· is Varaha. 
These seven Kalpa-s were lived through by me along with Reva. 
Thus the twenty-one Kalpas lived through by Narmada born 
of Siva have been spoken by me in various ways. 
0 excellent king, they have been mentioned to you. What 
more shall I tell you? 
CHAPTER FOURTEEN 
Kalaratri Annihilates the Univƨse 
YudhiEthira asked: 
1-1 0. Then all those illustrious sages with austerities as their 
asset went to the·highest world. What miracle did happen thereafter? 
Sri MarkaTJ4eya replied: 
Mter those residents of the banks o_f Narmada had gone, 
there ensued the terrible annihilation causing the destruction 
of all living beings. 
By means of Ħ. YajuQ. and Sarna passages, Brahma and 
others eulogized Lord Siva, the eternal great ·Lord seated on 
the peak of Kailasa: 
"0 Lord, annihilate the universe along with Devas, Asuras 
and human beings. The end of a thousand Yugas has arrived: 
It is capable of destroying (them) . 
Adopting my form, all these visible worlds have b"een cre­
ated by you. Assuming the form of Viᤌr:tu these have been 
sustained. The same form has become trichotomized as Brahma, 


54 
Skanda Pura:T}a 
Siva and ViᤁI).u for the purpose of creation, sustenance and 
annihilation, 0 great Lord. " 
O n hearing these truthful words of ViᤁI).u - ParameHhin, the 
great Lord Siva pierced through the Cosmic Egg, greater than 
the greatest, beginning with Bhiirloka and ending with Brahmaloka. 
He was then accompanied by those two (Brahma and ViᤁI).u) 
and Uma and all his retinue. Lord Nilalohita pierced through 
the seven worlds and entered the beginningless divine region 
of Siva along with them. 
There was no wind there; there was no firmament there; 
there was no fire; no surface of the ground where Sail.kara, the 
Lord, was present along with Uma. There was no sun, no planets, 
neither constellations nor the quarters. 
1 1-22. 
There were no Guardians of Quarters, 0 excellent 
king, nor even pleasure and pain. Wise men called it the region 
of Brahman; they call it the region of Siva. Others call him isa 
and ᥬetrajiia (the immanent soul) . Sail.khyas praise him as 
the · primordial liberation (Adimokᤁa) . 
Some call it the pre-eminent Brahman. Some call him Sarva, 
the age-old unborn isana. Some call him single-formed; some, 
many-formed, the first and Avyaya (the immutable one) . It is 
an entity having no colour, no name or lineage; the wise knowers 
call it the fourth state ( Turyam Padam) 
It is of the nature of Vijiiana (perfect knowledge) , the qbject 
of meditation. It is the subtlest one resting in Atman, the most 
excellent isana, the greatest one. 
Then all those three came up to Lord isa and amalgamated 
themselves into one form. They alone in their separate forms 
protect the entire universe. 
In the form of Rudra, the Lord causes the annihilation of 
all living beings; in the form of ViᤁI).U he protects the worlds; 
he is the cause of creation in the form of Brahma. 
The great Lord becomes Kala on being united with Prakrti. 
The multiformed, esteemable Prakrti abides at his side. 
People conversant with it, who know the meanings of words, 
call it Prakrt.i. It is Parame5vara who is the cause (of the dis­
tinction between) Prakrti and Puruᤁa. 
From him issued forth the entire universe, the mobile and 
immobile beings. When the end of the Yuga arrives, it gets 
merged in to him. 


V.iii.l4.23-33 
55 
Everything marked by Bhaga and Liilga is pervaded by 
Parameᤌthin: Viᤌr;tu is in the form of Bhaga and Mahesvara is 
in the form of Linga. 
Viᤌr;tu is remembered as Bhagal because he shines ( Bhati) in. 
all the worlds and is sung about ( Giyate) in the worlds. He has 
penetrated all the living beings in BhiiQ. and Bhuvar Loka. 
He is said to be Viᤌr;tu because of Vis ana (en trance) . He is 
the great Lord identical with all the Devas. The appellation 
Bhaga is proclaimed due to Bhasana (shining) and G_amana 
(moving about) . 
· 
23-33. 
Learned men know it as Linga2 because it is that 
in which everything in the world beginning with Brahma and 
ending with a blade of grass gets merged and unified. 
Thereupon Mahadeva said to the ·goddeᥭ who was standing 
nearby:· "0 splendid lady, do not delay. Annihilate the entire 
universe. Eschew this gentle form, resplendent like the white 
rays of the Moon. Assume a terrible form and annihilate the 
mobile and immobile beings. 
0 lotus-eyed goddess, be surrounded by the terrible and 
hideous groups of goblins and devour the entire world of liv­
ing beings. 
Thereafter I shall destroy the universe and make it flooded. 
After converting everything into a vast expanse of water I shall 
happily go to sleep along with you." 
Sri Devi said: 
0 highly brilliant Lord, I would rather not annihilate this 
universe. Having been its mother I would not devour it as l.t 
is motionless and extremely distressed. Due to the innate womanly 
nature, my heart melts with pity. 0 Lord of the universe, how 
can I burn down this universe? Hence, 0 Sailkara, you yourself 
do annihilate this universe. 
On being spoken thus, Dhiirjati Nilalohita became angry. 
He rebuked the godd.ess Mahdvari with a gruff, hissing HUM 
sound·. With his eyes blazing with anger, he said thus: "Om hum 
1 . 
A popular etymology of 'Bhaga' and 'Vi¨©u. ' 
2 . 
A popular etymology o f the word 'Linga'. This i s accepted i n Virasaiva 
Texts. 


56 
Skanda Pura:IJ.a 
phat tvam sal],"1 0 descendant of Bharata, on being slighted 
with Hurhkara, the wide-eyed goddess of plump thighs and 
hips became instantly hideous like Kalaratri {Nightmare) . Pro­
ducing hissing, gruff sounds of loud report, she made the ten 
quarters reverberate. Like a lightning streak of excessive hid­
eousness, she increased in size. 
34-46. 
She was too dazzling to be seen, like a lightning 
streak. She was swiftly moving as clusters of lightning streaks. 
She was excited and enraged like the flames {streaks) of light­
ning. Her eyes resembled the fiery lightning. 
Her hairs were dishevelled and her eyes were wide; her neck 
and her belly were lean . . She was clad in the hide of a tiger 
and a python served as the. sacred thread. She was bedecked 
with scorpions and lizands blazing like the mass of flames. In 
height and magnitude she covered the three worlds. Her limbs 
shone and the black serpents served as earrings. She kept a 
stout stick of various colours raised aloft. She had covered 
herself with the hide of a tiger. Causing the destruction of the 
universe the highly terrible deity increased in size, licking the 
corners of the mouth. She hissed making the sound Hum. She 
opened her mouth wide making gruff sounds and causing 
excitement un to the entire universe. The goblins following her 
began to gambol and frisk. She took deep breaths exhibiting 
her anger. Laughing boisterously, she distorted the nostrils. 
Her eyes resembled a pit of fire. Making shrill sounds she 
burned the entire universe. 
Being burnt thus, Suras fell on the earth. So also did Yakᤁas, 
Gandharvas and Kinnaras along with the great serpents .. The 
multitudes of Bhiitas crying Hiihii and Hai-Hai fell down. They 
tumbled down with loud lamentations and cries of distress. 
The entire universe with all the three worlds became filled 
with these howls and squeals. All the world became filled with 
these falling, flying and ·blazing beings. The entire earth was 
covered with the tumbling peaks of mountains making noise 
like Catacata {crackling sound) . In that violent festival, she 
heightened .the delight of Rudra. 
Injuring and torturing the living beings, munching and 
· I. 
These are the "Seeds" of Mantras (Mantra-bijas) of a destructive nature. 
Using these Mantra-bijas, Sankara transformed the motherly Uma into a 
devouring ogress in order to destroy the universe. 


V.iii.l 4.4 7-66 
57 
crunching the immobile beings, she inhaled the odour arising 
from the various things that were consumed by the fire. She 
howled like a vixen. 
In that violent destructive activity of annihilating the uni­
verse, CaQc;li became all the more ferocious with the face rendered 
gory with streams of blood oozing out and the entire body 
smeared with blood gushing in currents. 
47-57. 
Hundreds of the BrahmaiJ.as, ᥬatriyas, Vaisyas and 
others and the 'great sages beginning with Bhrgu who had 
reached the Mahar Loka began to perish. Devas and Asuras 
became terrified. So also Yakᤁas, Uragas and Rakᤁasas. Some 
of them entered Patala and got them concealed in the caves 
and lakes. 
That goddess pervaded all the quarters and stationed her­
self like death personified. She had been engaged by the Lord 
in that period of destruction of the Yuga. 
Originally single, she transformed herself into nine and then 
into ten forms. Bursting into boisterous laughter she assumed 
sixty-four forms and then a hundred forms. Siva, the goddess, 
became thousand-formed and then assumed millions and crores 
of bodies, Her forms were numerous, her sizes were diverse 
and she had innumerable weapons. Her movements were of 
various sorts. At the behest of Siva the goddess assumed these 
forms, 0 king. The groups of the followers of Mahdvara wielded 
hideous weapons in the firmament i.n all the quarters checking 
and restraining the fleeing beings. Armed with tridents and 
Panisas they wandered everywhere accompanying her. 
Then some of the excessively fierce groups of Matrs in the 
company of Vinayakas rose up in size and started the act of 
annihilating the universe. 
Thereupon her curved fang-like teeth resembling 1\.unda 
flowers and the moon lengthened into thousands, ten thou­
sands and billions of Yojanas. The rows of fangs and the nails 
were sharp and rough. They ruthlessly scraped the sky and the 
quarters and overspread the earth consisting of the seven 
continents. The forests and the mountains were smashed to 
smithereens when struck with those fangs. The rocks and boulders 
crumbled into thousands of pieces. 
58-66. 
Himavan, Hemakilᤍa. Niᤌadha, Gandhamadana, 
Malyavan, Nila, the great mountain Sveta, the centre of M;eru, 


58 
Skanda Purii:TJa 
IHipiᤃha, all the seven continents and the oceans and also the 
mountain Lokaloka trembled and quivered, 0 excellent king. 
Great trees became shattered on being hit with the curved 
fangs resembling thunderbolt. Terrible evil portents overshad­
owed the quarters around along with the stars, planets and 
groups of beings moving about in aerial chariots. Surrounded 
by thousands of vixen and the great MatrgaQ.as she wandered 
over the entire universe at the conclusion of the Yuga. 
They were whirling, shouting and howling. Some were thrashing 
and some were blazing. All the ten quarters were pervaded by 
the Prainathas. The extensive range of mountains became shattered. 
The main entrance to the palatial buildings became broken. 
Hairs and dry bones lay scattered in confusing masses. The 
villages and cities stood razed to the ground by the conflagra­
tion. Ashes lay in heaps above them. All the three worlds ᥮onsisting 
of the mobile and immobile beings were filled with the ashes 
of the funeral pyres. Laments and loud cries of Hiihii and 
Ahiihii spread everywhere. This universe lay helpless and bereft 
of refuge. 
· 
CHAPTER FIFTEEN 
Turbulence of the Annihilation (Pralaya) 
Sri Marka1;u!.eya said: 
1-I Oa. 
Then Kalaratri of blazing (very bright) eyes, sur­
rounded by thousands of terrible Matrs indulged in the de­
strl,lction of the entire universe. 
The fierce Mothers, the Saktis identical with (or pertaining 
to) Brahma, Vi11Q.U and Siva, the Saktis of Vayu, Indra, Anala 
(Fire) , Kubera, Yama, Toyesa (VaruQ.a) , Skanda, Kro<;la (i.e. · 
Varaha) and Nrsirhha moved about striking terror. 
In the course of that ultimate annihilation, the Mothers 
moved around armed with discuses, tridents, clubs, swords, 
thunderbolts, Saktis, ᥯ᤃis, Panisas, Khaᤃvailgas and blazing 
torches urgently prompted by Uma-all of them overran all 
the ten quarters. 
The entire range of the three worlds all over became com-


V.iii. l5.10b-30 
59 
pletely burnt, when they heavily trod over with hissing sounds 
of Hum and resultant outbursts. 
The entire earth all round became awful to look at, as skulls, 
variegated tresses of hairs etc., lay scattered all over along with 
hues and cries, laments and shouts of distress. The streets were 
split and cracked with the debris of the houses and ornamental 
gateways lying shattered. 
The entire Jarhbu Dvlpa that is said to have hundreds and 
thousands of sectors, lay demolished per force. People residing 
in Jarhbu Dvipa and (other) Dvlpas like Saka, Kusa, Krauiica, 
Gomeda, Salmali and Puᤌkara and those residing in moun­
tains, were all .seized by death and by goblins and groups of 
Mother-goddesses who were decked with the skulls of great 
Asuras. They were drunk with suet, marrow, blood and flesh. 
They were giving out terrific shouts. They"'were inebriated with 
smell of wine. 
1 0b-1 3a. Mahamaya appeared surrounded with thousands 
of flames. Her earrings were dazzling like lightning. Her body 
became red with the blood gushing forth. She was very terrible 
(to look at) . Fond of human flesh and suet, she was drinking 
blood there. With a skull in hand, the terrible (Mahamaya) was 
devouring Suras and Asuras. Dancing, boisterously laughing, 
shouting loudly, taking somersaults, she struck terror in the 
three worlds. Her laughter was like the peals of thunder. 
1 3b-1 4. Mter having swallowed up the earth ending with 
seven seas, she came to the place where Lord Mahesvara lived 
on the bank of Narmada, along with Mother-goddesses. 
15. 
Laughing loudly, (the goddess) danced on the stout 
bodies of Amaras (immortal ones = Devas) . The word 'Amaras' 
means 'gods' and ' Ka,a' means 'a body'.1 
1 6-1 7. 
0 excellent king, as this moun.tain is scattered over 
(enveloped) with bodies, heaps of shattered bones and bodies 
dripping with suet, fat and blood, so it is called 'Amarailkata' 
by the wise· ones. It is greatly sanctifying and sacred all over 
the world as it is created by Sarhbhu. 
18-30. 
Sailkara is ever present there along with Uma. Hence 
I too stationed myself at the tip of its foot, with steady obser­
vances. 
I. 
A popular etymology of mountain 'Amara-katlaka ', the source of Narmada. 


60 
Skanda Purii:fJ,a 
Humble with the fervour of obeisance I continued to eulo­
gize Nilalohita. 
Along with Mrtyu, the joyous Sailkara began to dance even 
as the Gal).as and the groups of Mothers started beating the 
time. 
The Gal). as joyously danced in groups with flesh, fat and suet 
in their hands. They had Khatvailgas, firebrands, Panisas and 
Parighas too. There were dwarfs, those with matted hairs, those 
with shaven heads and those with long neck, lips and hairs. 
Gal).as with long penises, protruding bellies and arms loosely 
suspended were dancing and laughing. The faces of some were 
hideously distorted. The arms, mouths etc. were fiercely con­
torted and twisted. 
When the transit of the (Yuga) period set in they made 
Amara as Kal).taka (thorn) . Among them, I saw the highly terrible 
Mrtyu, the cause of fright for the entire universe. 
I saw Mrtyu dancing there. His hairs were tawny-coloured 
iike a lightning streak. The goddess bedecked in clean gar­
ments was stationed near him. The earrings produced jingling 
sound near .her cheeks. She had serpents serving the purpose 
of the sacred thread. She was adoring Mahe8vara by means of 
diverse kinds of offerings. 
There I saw Mother Narmada revered and bowed to by the 
entire universe. There were waves and whirlpools therein. She 
resembled the ocean with excellent billows rising up. Invisible 
due to the great lake and the rivers falling therein, she had 
the visible form as well. 0 descendant of Bharata, shᥰ was 
being honoured by Suras, Siddhas and groups of sages. 
In the middle I saw the terrible aspect of Narmada called 
Saptasaptaka. She had great waves and foams. She flooded the 
entire universe. She was Mrgakrᤁl).arhbara (clad in the skin of 
a black an tel ope) . She was flowing in seven ways (currents) 
producing thunderous sound as of the rumbling sounds of 
smoking Asani (thunderbolt) . 
Thus I saw the incomparable havoc of destruction, 0 excel­
lent king. The rays of the sun and the moon disappeared from 
the world consisting of mobile and immobile · beings. 
31-36. 
There was a great evil portent. The stellar sphere 
had completely vanished. It caused everything to whirl con­
tinuously like Aliitacakra (circular movement of a firebrand) . 


V.iii.l5.37-42 
61 
It was scattered over with millions of air-chariots of Kinnaras 
and great Uragas. There was a terrible, roaring wind which 
shook the mobile and immobile beings. It was the well-known 
Sarilvarta issuing from the mouth of Rudra. It dried up the 
seven oceans. May Hara protect you all day by day-Hara with 
dust particles smeared all over his body, with eyes and hairs 
tawny in colour, with his matted hairs tied up. He held a large 
resplendent trident and shouted loudly. He held the big bril­
liant Sula (trident) and bow. There was a crown on his head. 
He had put on coat-of-mail. He had smeared all his body with 
the ashes of cremation ground. Garlands of skulls covered his 
neck. Great serpents were tied to the top of his head as though 
they were threads. Go'{'asas (lizard-like serpents) entwined his 
limbs. There were the celestial river, the .. crescent moon, the 
poison and fire on the head .. He was clad in the hide of el­
ephant. He played on the :Pamaru. The terrible Khatvariga and 
Pinaka were held in the hands. 
37-42. 
The divine being pervaded through the seven worlds. 
The great extending arms (serpents?) encircled all the limbs. 
His eye resembled the rising Sun with the centre like a tender 
sprout. It was pink in colour like the cloud at dusk, red lily, 
ruby, saffron and a streak of lightning. During the period of 
the conclusion of the Yuga, "he played with heated Liriga and 
blazing eye. Like Meru the Lord appeared as though he was 
discharging golden shafts. He walked there making the moun­
tain shattered to pieces through the kicking with the tips of 
his feet. He was desirous of annihilating the entire heaven. He 
was laughing hideously. The sole Lord of the universe desirous 
of annihilating Svarga burst out his boisterous laughter, agi­
tated and annihilated the entire heaven. 
On seeing the excellent unborn Lord, the great Lord en­
gaged in annihilating the universe, that Kalaratri accompanied 
by the Mothers and all the GaQ.as began to worship Siva. Nandin 
and Bhrngin and other GaQ.as bowed down to that Lord of all 
the living beings, the most excellent one in the universe, the 
cause of all, Hara the enemy of'Smara. They bowed to him day 
and night. 


62 
Skanda Purii:r:w 
CHAPTER SIXTEEN 
Eulogy of Siva by Brahmii 
Sri Miirkar;uf,eya said: 
1-7. 
The Trident-bearing Lord was surrounded by the terrible 
groups of goblins along with the Mothers. 
He continued his dance. Wearing two pieces of elephant 
hide he evinced his desire to annihilate the entire universe. 
Sarhbhu danced amidst the conflagration that consumed 
the three worlds. The entrails of all the leaders of Suras con­
stituted his garland. Their fat, suet and blood smeared his 
limbs. 
Accompanied by Kalaratri that noble-souled Lord annihi­
lated the entire region of the three worlds at the ·proper time. 
Named Sarhvartaka and having the state of the fierce Sun, the 
noble-souled Sarhbhu, the most excellent one in the universe, 
opened his mouth that resembled Batf,aviimukha (the entrance 
to the submarine fire) and laughed boisterously. It appeared 
like profuse outcome of sparks mixed with smoke or like the 
blow of a violent gust of wind wafting great firebrands and 
thunderbolts. 
All the ten quarters were filled with that loud outburst of 
laughter arising from Hara. It had the forceful impact of a 
thousand thunderbolts. All the great oceans became agitated. 
The loud sound reached the world of Brahma. The entire 
Cosmic Egg shook and quaked violently. The· sages became 
frightened and they worried wondering, 'What could this be?' 
All those frightened sages along with Suras and Asuras and the 
great Serpents bowed down to Brahma, the Lorᥱ _ of the great 
chiefs: 
8-1 1 . ·"Who is this being that sports about s.tationed on the 
surface of the earth? His limbs are terrible and they blaze like 
the refulgence of a lightning streak. His body resembles the 
Kalanala fire and due to his boisterous laughter the whole 
universe is bewildered. 
In a moment it has become utterly confused. Is it possible 
that he may wish to annihilate all the three worlds, along with 
you and all the seven oceans? Desirous of annihilating he proteeds 
towards Jana, Tapas and Satya worlds. 


V.iii.16.12-20 
63 
Who is this Lord? 0 incomprehe,nsible being, recount all 
this. Never before has this difficult situation been faced. You 
do know the truth. You an! considered by us as the greatest 
being. " 
On hearing their words, Brahma consoled rhe groups of 
Suras and others and said: 
Sri Brahmii said: 
1 2-15. 
He is Kala (Death) , the eternal Atman desirous of 
annihilating the entire heaven and the whole universe. When 
the whole work is complete, he will be lying down. The Lord 
Isana will be lying down in the future Parivatsaras (years) . It 
is not surprising. 
This Lord himself is Samvatsara, Pariv&.tsara, Udvatsara and 
Vatsara (different ways of reckoning years) . Though seen, he 
is invisible. He is the one who illuminates everything. He is 
adored by means of Homa. He is gross. He is subtle. He is the 
ultimate atom. 
There is nothing in this world here greater than this. He is 
the great-est .and greater than the greatest. The Lord is pro­
claimed as Atman. Of features similar to those Kala will be­
come pleased with me. 
Mter saying this, the holy Lord, the chief of Suras, propi­
tiated (Siva) in the company of Sanatkumara and others. He 
was of complete self-control. 
Brahmii said: 
1 6-20. 
Obeisance is done to Sarva of quiescent forms and 
features. Obeisance, obeisance to you in the. form of Aghora. 
0 Sarva, 0 immanent soul of all, obeisance, obeisance to you. 
0 Lord of goblins, obeisance to you, 0 great Atman. 
Obeisance, obeisance to you, 0 Svadha and Vᥲaᥳra, developed 
further into Omkara and Hurilkara. Obeisance to the Lord of 
the three Gu1,1as, to Mahdvara., identical with the Trayi (three 
Vedas) , the immanent soul of the three Gu1,1as. 
You are Sankara. You alone are Mahdvara. You have pen­
etrated into the foremost Pradhana. You are Vil[II,lU, Isa and 
Prapitamaha. You are the Fire-god with seven tongues of flames, 
with an infinite number of tongues of flames. 


64 
Skanda Puratta 
0 Lord, you alone are the creator and the creation; you are 
the entity worthy of being known by the universe; you are the 
greatest support of the universe. The Brahmat:tas who have 
mastered and understood the Vedas call you the most excel­
lent and the greatest. You are greater than -the greatest. They 
speak of you as subtler than the subtlest. The words along with 
the mind recede therefrom. 
Sri Mahadeva said: 
21-24. 
I have been eulogized by you through diverse kinds 
of Mantras. 0 Lotus-born One, I shall increase the .peace and 
calm in you. Look at me burning down this world, annihilating 
forcibly by means of many faces. 
Mter saying thus and consoling Pitamaha, the Lord of the 
universe vanished there itself along with the goddess. 
By listening to this great and meritorious hymn, people attain 
the blissful goal. Even those who are infested by many sins 
proceed towards Rudra by means of aerial chariots free from 
impurities. They will never experience any fear-the excellent 
Brahmat:tas who recite this, 0 dear one. There is no doubt 
about this that Siva will be their saviour in the course of war, 
theft, fire, forest and ocean. 
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 
Annihilation by Twelve Suns 
Sri Markattf/,eya said: 
1. 
On being eulogized thus by Brahma and others and by 
the leading sages who had gone to the world of Brahma, the 
Lord began the annihilation of the universe. 
2. 
Brahma saw the face of Mahadeva, the imperishable 
southern face (mouth) highly awful and hideous. Its great curved 
fangs produced loud reports while gnashing. The face resembled 
the abysmal depths of the nether worlds. 
3-5. The eyes were tawny like fire and lightning streaks. 


V.iii.l 7.6-15 
65 
The face was frightening and causing the hairs to stand on 
end. The fangs and the tongues were huge. The neck was 
covered by great serpents, and the necklace was constituted of 
the great heads of the Asuras. It caused great Pralaya. It swal­
lowed the Havis in the form of the waters and winds of the 
oceans. The face of Mahadeva resembled Ba<;lavamukha ( the 
open entrance to the submarine fire) . He saw him licking up 
the entire world by the tip of the tongue. 
6. 
It extended to thousands of Yojanas, nay hundreds of 
thousands of Yojanas. All the ten quarters appeared hideous 
with flesh, fat and suet abounding therein. 
7. 
Hundreds and thousands of the curved fangs grew large. 
Pitamaha saw Sqras, Gandharvas, Aᥴuras, Yakᤁas, Uragas and 
Rakᤁasas stuck up at the tips of the cur'\>'ed fangs. 
8-9a. 0 great king, I too saw the universe caught as if in 
a machine within the structure of the curved fangs, with the 
necks shattered and thereafter it was found to enter his open 
mouth. 
9b-10. 
Just as the rivers roaring due to the movement of 
different waves dashing against one another, with the confused 
· mass of great foams, fall into the ocean and get merged therein, 
so also the extensive range of the entire universe having. many 
living beings·, impenetrable like a vast ocean, entered the blaz­
ing spacious mouth of Rudra. It was terrible with rumbling 
sounds as of clouds. 
1 1 . From his mouth a huge column of flames and hideous 
sparks issued forth, scattering smoke everywhere. They had 
different forms and they illuminated all the quarters with the 
brilliance of fire. 
1 2. 
The face of Mahe5vara of myriad miraculous forms with 
curved. fangs and tremulous tongues seemed to be garlanded 
wit}:l thousands of solar flames. Though one and single he 
revealed himself in twelve ways. 
1 3. 
Twelve Adityas came out of the mouth of Rudra. Re­
sorting to the southern quarter, they began scorching the earth. 
1 4. 
All earthly creatures resting on the different trees and 
grass blades that had already been dried up earlier due to 
drought, became utterly confused over the entire range of the 
surface of the earth. 
15. 
Being burnt suddenly by those Suns coming out of 


66 
Skanda Purii:FJ-a 
Rudra, everything became enveloped in smoke. All the stars 
and planets got destroyed. 
1 6. 
The entire terrestrial sphere became suddenly kindled 
and it blaze.d forth. All the mobile and immobile beings be­
came enveloped in a garland of flames. 
1 7. 
In all the seven continents and oceans, rivers and lakes 
the fire consumed th<; entire universe as though it were the 
sacred clarified butter being consigned to it in the course of 
a sacrificial rite. 
1 8. 
The Adityas born from Rudra, refulgent with extensive 
fiery brilliance and overwpelmed with great flames burnt the 
whole universe. 
19. The rays of the Adityas got mutually entangled. Thus 
the Lord burnt the three worlds consisting of mobile and immobile 
beings. 
20. 
Mahe5vara became the fire itself of the size of the seven 
continents and burnt completely the entire earth consisting of 
the seven continents ·and encircled by the seven oceans. 
2 1 . Then it burnt the earth with Sumeru and Mandara as 
its limit. Thereafter it pierced through the seven Patalas and 
burnt Nagaloka. 
· 
22. 
0 Yudhiᤁᤃhira, the Agni continued to burn and blaze 
after completely burning down the seven Patalas beneath the 
earth along with the stars. 
23. 
When fanned with bellows a metal piece seems to blaze 
at night along with᥵the burning charcoal. In the same manner 
everything in the universe blazed forth on being kindled by 
Sarhvartagni. 
24. 
Bereft of trees, grass-blades, springs, lakes, and rivers 
and with the clusters of the peaks of mountains scattered, the 
ground became comparable to the back of a tortoise. 
25. 
Mt.er making the entire universe chaotically unsettled 
through the series of flames and sparks and merged in Cit (the 
conscious, sentient Being) Mahe5vara, Rudra, remained in his 
own great form. 
26. 
Accompanied by most of the MatrgaQas, Yakᤁas, Uragas 
and Rakᤁasas, the godde᥶s Harilocana ( ' having green eyes' , 
.'having leonine eyes' ) merged in Mahadeva. 
27. 
Like the flame of fire that has become quiescent, the 
goddess attained the ·state of extinction. 0 sinless one, the 


V.iii.l 7.28-37 
67 
entire universe along with the three worlds became completely 
burnt down. 
28. 
With the favour of Rudra, Narmada not born of a womb, 
and I were excluded from this annihilation. Ten thousand 
Yugas were thus concluded by me as though subsisting in water 
(of Narmada) . 
29-3 1. 
The Trident-bearing Lord was propitiated formerly 
by me. Hence I became immortal and free from old age. I had 
also recited the following scriptural passages: Aghamar6a1Ja, Ghora 
Mantra, Vamadeva Sitkta, Tryarhbaka Sitkta, ̎
abha Sitkta, Trisupar1Ja, 
Durga Sitkta, Savitra Sitkta, Brhadara1Jyaka, Brhatsaman and Uttara 
Saman. So also, the great Raudn Gayatn, Sivopani6ad, Pratiratha 
Sitkta and Mrtyuiijaya Sitkta. 1 
32. 
The earth extending to the rivt:rs and oceans was 
reduced to ashes. But the highly esteemable Narmada compa­
rable to Am:rta, was excluded (spared) . 
33᥷34. 
The following are the Kulaparvatas: Mahendra, Malaya, 
Sahya, Hemakiita, Malyavan, Vindhya and Pariyatra. These 
mountains were compietely burnt down by the twelve Adityas. 
(Due to heat) the rocks in them were severely shattered. They 
are seen reduced to ashes. But Narmada did not perish then. 
35-36. 
Himavan, Hemakiita, Nisadha, Gandhamadana, the 
excellent mountain Malyavan, Nlla, Sveta and S:rngavan_:these 
great mountains were resorted to by Devas and Gandharvas. 
All of them were completely burnt down by the Yugantagni 
(Fire at the end of the Yuga) . The great rocks and boulders 
of all these were shattered. 
37. 
Thus the utter annihilation of everything except that 
of the highly meritorious Narmada was earlier seen by me at 
the close of the Yuga, 0 excellent king. 
1 . 
The author has confused Vedic Siiktas, individual Mantraˣ and a Pural}.ic 
compendium of seven chapters called "Sivopani¿ad." 


68 
Skanda Purii1Jll 
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 
Glorification of Narmada 
Sri MiirkarJtf.eya said: 
1-7. 
When the world was completely burnt by the Suns 
originating from Isvara, with the seven oceans rendered dry 
along with (the burning of) the seven continents, huge clouds 
issued forth from his mouth. When the world was dried up by 
the Suns and burnt down by Kalagni, clouds issued forth from 
the mouth of Sarikara. Terrible clouds having features compa­
rable to the weapon of lndra (i.e. Rainbow) , urged by the most 
excellent !sana made the universe completely dark. Some of 
the clouds had the lustre of a blue lotus; somewhere they had 
the lustre of collyrium; . some resembled cow's milk, Kunda 
flower and the moon; others resembled the eyelets on the 
feathers of a peacock; and some had the lustre of smokeless 
fire. Some clouds had the forms resembling great mountains; 
some could be compared to shoals of great fishes; some had 
excellent forms of huge elephants; and some clouds resembled 
great peaks. Some were similar in form to the moving waves 
and billows; s᥸me were akin to the domes in a big city; some 
resembled great towers and ornamental gateways; others ap­
peared to be adorned at the extremities by comets·, firebrands 
and thunderbolts (:.haracterized by lightning streaks. A Gal).a of 
Rudra named Samvartaka got his limbs concealed. The Lord 
showered limitlessly and made the universe one vast expanse 
of water. 
Utterly terrified and flooded with the currents of the waters 
of Ganga, I dared not look at !sana increasing in size along 
with the great clouds and having limbs covered with Indra's 
thunderbolt. 
8-1 3. Devouring the burning universe all round repeatedly, 
the elephants (clouds resembling them) covered the ground 
completely. They filled the universe (with waters). and van­
ished all of them. 
The seven great oceans, the lakes, the continents, all the 
rivers, Bhiil). and Bhuval;l were filled with waves and waves of 
waters. Everything became a vast expanse of waters. 
In the entire range of mobile and immobile beings, devoid 


V.iii.l9.1-7 
69 
of fire, the Moon and the Sun, in the darkness caused by the 
disappearance of the stars, when all the winds subsided into 
a calm atmosphere, nothing -was visible. 
0 king, then, in that vast expanse of water I eulogized hiin 
(the Lord) with the purity of mind retainLd. Thereafter, I 
thought thus: 'In whom shall I seek a quiescent refuge?' 
I then remembered the Lord within my heart. Remaining 
within the water, I thought of the Lord as worth1 of seeking 
refuge iri . I bowed down to him, sought refuge i.n him and 
then I meditated upon him. Mter meditation, I forded the 
watery expanse, with his favour, never losing sense and forti­
tude. 0 son of a great man, due to the favour of the goddess, 
fatigue and anguish disappeared from me. 
CHAPTER NINETEEN 
Viiriihakalpa 
Sri Miirker:uf,eya said: 
1-7. 
I was about to die in that vast ocean-like expanse of 
water and was distressed. Muttering to myself and sighing, 0 
excellent king1 I swam across the water with my arms. 
Stationed in the middle of the sea-like expanse, when every­
thing was quiet and motionless, I heard an inimitable "Ambho" 
sound (the sound of a cow) causing reverberation in all the 
ten quarters. Despondent as I was, I saw_ a cow standing before 
me. She resembled a swan, a Kunda flower and the moon, 
white in colour like a pearl necklace and cow's milk. Her body 
was bedecked with many· gems of diverse colours. The horns 
were bedecked in gold. Her hoofs were covered with coral. She 
was fascinating with the tail lifted up and shining like a ban­
ner. With her snout stooping down she was making bellowing 
sound. She was crossing the ocean with her hoofs. She was 
encircled by golden strings of small tinkling bells and pearls. 
By the movements of her legs (when she waded through) in 
the water of the vast ocean-like expanse a mass of foams formed 
around her and she appeared to dance. She shouted loudly as 


70 
Skanda Purii'T_la 
she stirred up the ocean sending up columns of waters. 0 
fortunate one, in smooth and majestic voice she said to me: 
8-1 4 
"0 dear child, do not be afraid. 0 dear one, you have 
no death. With the favour of Mahadeva, neither you nor I have 
to face death . Support yourself holding on to my tail. I shall 
take you across this ocean. I shall save you, 0 Brahmal).a, from 
this fearful situation as long as the universe is flooded. In 
order to ward off hunger and quench thirst, suck at my udders. 
Be satisfied by drinking the divine milk with Amrta as its basis. " 
O n hearing her words, I joyously sucked at her udders. No 
sooner had the udders been sucked than hunger and thirst 
vanished. I had a divine strength and vitality capable of swim­
ming across the sea. Then I spoke to her: "Who are you wan­
dering here in this vast ocean-like expanse? Tell me the truth. 
There is a great curiosity in me. You alone are my refuge even 
as I wander here and there lashed about and on the point of 
death as it were. It was due to the residue of my good fortune, 
0 Divinity of holy rites. " 
The cow said: 
1 5-32. 
Have I been forgotten by you? I am Mahe8var1 (Great 
Goddess) of diverse forms. I am Narmada, the bestower of 
piety on men, the bestower of heavenly pleasures, happiness 
and strength. On seeing you distressed Rudra has despatched 
me saying: "0 noble lady, redeem that Brahmal).a. Let him not 
lose his life in the water. " At the instance of the Lord, I have 
come near you in the form of a cow. I hurried lest Sarhbhu 
should be one of false speech. 
On being told thus by her, I came to know that her tail was 
splendid and indestructible and comparable to Indrayudha (Vajra) . 
I held on to it with my arms. Resorting to the banner-like tail, 
I crossed the ocean. She told me that the deity therein was 
Lord Mahadeva. Thereafter, for a period of a thousand Yugas, 
I wandered about along with her in that darkened atmosphere 
encircled all · round by the waters of the great ocean. 
I continued wandering, holding on to the tip of the tail of 
the cow. There was no movement of wind. There was no light. 
There was darkness. It was free from ailments. 
All of a sudden, I saw Lord Isana asleep in the ocean-like 


V.iii.l9.33-43 
71 
expanse of water.1 He resembled a flower of Atasi, split collyrium 
and was free from impunties like the sky. He was dark like 
petals of a blue lotus. The imqmtable Lord was clad in yellow 
robes. His head was shining with a crown having the colour of. 
the sun and dazzling like lightning. He had excellent features 
like the sky. His cheeks were being brushed by the earrings 
and the chest illuminated by the necklace. He was rendered 
splendid by the divine golden ornaments. He was Jying on a 
couch of the serpent. The serpent served as pillow too. He had 
the splendour of a thousand suns. He had many arms and 
thighs.2 He had inimmerable faces. He was charming. He had 
a thousand eyes and necks. The heroic Lord was asleep in the 
ocean-like expanse (of water) . 
He had a great mass of matted hairs llaving the sparkling 
lustre of lightning. The Lord was stationed thus pervading the 
entire universe merged in a single expanse of water. The Lord 
had swallowed everything including Devas, Asuras and human 
beings. The omnipresent, unmanifest, infinite Lord had faces 
all round. 
Near the soles of his feet, there was Uma Visvarupa, the 
highly fortunate one embellished with golden bracelets. 
The goddess identical with Sri, Hri, Dhi (intellect) , Vak 
(speech) , wielding the Visvamayi (Universal Maya) , Siva, the 
goddess was identical with Siddhi, Kirti (renown) , Rati (god­
dess of love) , Brahmi, Kalaratri. She was not born of a womb. 
I saw her sitting very close to Isvara. I saw the moon-faced 
goddess of all, Uma identical with Dhrti (fortitude) .3 
33-43. 
I circumambulated Lord Isa who was quiescent and 
asleep. He had the col()ur of fresh gold. He was associated with 
Uma. He was meritorious and excellent but was enveloped by 
darkness. 
I then bowed down to him. 
At the close of the night, the excellent Lord who was asleep, 
naturally woke up. When he woke, he stirred up the waters of 
the ocean with his arms. Reflecting on the destruction of the 
universe in the water, he began to consider what should be 
1 . 
Here Siva is identified with Vidr.m-a syncretism. 
2. 
An echo of the Puruda-sukta (RV X. 90) . 
3. 
Uma and Lakdmi (all great female deities like Sri, Vak etc.) are treated 
as non-different. 


72 
Skanda Purii:r;ta 
done. The Lord of miraculous limbs assumed the form of a 
Boar.1 
His splendour was like that of a huge rain-bearing cloud. 
His garland consisting of gold coins (golden-coloured stars) , 
was hanging down. Adorned with a crown, the Lord held the 
conch, the discus and the sword. The noble-souled Lord iden­
tified himself with the Vedas and Vedarigas. The ancient Lord 
causing the origin of the three worlds holds the form of the 
three Vedas. 
The very same Rudra who annihilated became Prapitamaha 
for the purpose of creation. For the purpose of protection, he 
himself becomes Hari with the excellent discus, sword, club 
and lotus in his hands. 
Distinction among them is unbecoming.2 They are all noble­
souled ones having the same physical form. An ignorant per­
son who brings in distinction among them, albeit by means of 
apparently cogent reasons and arguments based on principles 
of reasoning, falls into terrible hell gradually. He who creates 
distinction (between these-Siva and Viᤁr:tu) is a wicked soul 
with a hostile motive. 
One may be devoted to any of these. Mter casting off the 
physical body, one certainly attains immortality through that 
devotion itself. 
The same Lord, the creator, the protector and the annihi­
lator presumably enchants the world by means of these physi­
cal forms. Hence one should avoid falling into delusion and 
entertain hatred in view of the different forms. 
For the same reason the excellent Isana, the creator of the 
universe, assumed the form of the Boar. When the three worlds 
became immersed in the waters of the ocean, the immanent 
soul was sought within the vortex of the waters. 
The Lord pierced through the water within the ocean and 
entered Patala in a moment. He touched the entire Earth sunk 
under water. By one of his curved fangs, Lord Viᥨr:tu of inimi­
table daring lifting up the Earth, the divine lady of lotus-petal­
like eyes; who had got submerged in the water at the time of 
1 . 
Vidt:m's Boar-incarnation is attributed to Siva here. 
2. 
Strong condemnation of treating Siva and VidJ}.U as different-a syncretic 
trend of that (PuraJ}.ic) age. 


V.iii.l9.44-53 
73 
Pralaya when the peaks of mountains and the rocks therein got 
shattered. 
44-53. 
With her body hanging, suspended at the tip of the 
curved fang (of the divine Boar) she shone like the moonlight 
sticking to the peak of KaiHisa. Of uneven form, she res᥹mbled 
the lightning sticking to the cusp or horn of the moon. 
The Lord of manifested Sattva quality (or power) and of 
incomparable prowess lifted up from the middle of the water, 
the Earth sunk within the waters of the sea in the same manner 
as an elephant lifting the sinking she-elephant with force or 
(like a sailor) lifting the boat that has been shattered. 
The noble Lord raised up the Earth from the great mass of 
watery expanse and then divided the whole range of the ocean 
as well. He deposited, as it were, the watel"!! of the great ocean 
into the oceans and then into the rivers (also) . 
He re-created the mountains that had been shattered ear­
lier. He created all the continents and seas. In the Kalpa he 
created the ranges of rocky mountains that had been arranged 
with the boulders. 
Mter having assumed physical forms of various features he 
created groups of Devas and of Indras. Suddenly issued forth 
the Fire-god from his mouth, the Moon from the mind and the 
Sun from the eye. 
As that Yogdvara (Yoga personified) began to meditate, the 
group of Suras and Indra, the Vedas, the different Varr:tas, all 
the medicinal herbs, juices, everything issued forth. From his 
mind was evolved the entire universe consisting of immobile 
beings, oviparous beings, viviparous beings, sweat-born beings, 
plants etc. that split the ground and grow up, in fact every­
thing including i᥺sects, ants etc. 
Then the great Lord mentally transformed himself into a 
multiformed being. The Lord of immutable soul pervaded 
everything by means of his eight Miirtis (Cosmic forms) and 
thereafter sported about gracefully. He had richly flourishing 
splendour even as I was witnessing everything. He sported gracefully, 
0 Brahmar:tas (?) . 0 king, I witnessed everything for the periocl 
of a Muhiirta. 
Mter creating ,everything sportingly, the Lord of Devas, the 
creator of the Cosmos, omnipresent and having eyes. all round, 
the primordial creator, vanished. 


74 
Skanda Purii:T}a 
54-61 . 
(In that short span of time) All those things con-
sisting of names and forms, the entire universe was witnessed 
by me . They were surrounded by oceans and continents. 
Everything was overspread by the stars and constellations. 
Everything appeared wonderful with the sky, clouds and the 
system of planets full of different kinds of living beings. Yet I 
could not see the Sarvasuresvarl (the goddess of all Suras) in 
the form of the cow, the divinity of great esteem. 
My mind became agitated thinking, 'Where can she be now? ' 
I surveyed the various parts of the quarters. Excepting that 
Isvararigl (born of the limbs of the Lord) how was it that I 
could see all? 
Thereafter I saw the splendid river here with crystal-clear 
waters. She had the blue hue of a big cloud. Her limbs were 
rendered splendid by many trees and she was surro᥻nded by 
elephants, horses and birds. As before, I resorted to the banks 
of the divine river. I stationed myself in Amarakat;ttaka and 
found myself happily resting. My soul was rid of excitement. 
It attained happiness. After having seen the river full of meri­
torious water, free from impurities even at the close of the 
Kalpa, I felt as though I was seeing my own mother looking 
at me compassionately. I was free from ailment and sorrow. 
Those leading Brahmal).as who read and listen to this meri­
torious narrative of the Mahavaraha Kalpa everyday become 
pure. They will get rid of all inauspiciousness and go to heaven 
inhabited by Amaras, Siddhas and Gandharvas. They will attain 
heavenly pleasures in the company of the celestial damsels 
resembling the pure · moon and endowed with different kinds 
of charms. 
CHAPTER TWENTY 
Viiriihakalpa (continued) 
Yudhi6thira said: 
1-2. 
Various acts and destructions have been heard by me, 
with your favour, 0 sinless one, that were done by Lord Sarva 
and seen by you. Now I wish to hear about the prowess of the 


V.iii.20.3-16 
75 
Lord wielding the Sani.ga bow. 0 eminent Brahmal}.a, it behoves 
you to tell me whatever has been seen by you (about ViᤁI}.U) . 
Sri Miirka'l}-tf,eya said: 
3. 
Hereafter, I shall recount the characteristic (prognos-
tic) features of the destruction of the subjects, the significant 
(portentious) mark that is seen and how the Kalpa is recycled. 
4. 
There are falls of firebrands and meteors along with 
thunder. There is earthquake; a dust-storm as well as terrible 
loud report. 
5. 
Yakᤁas, Kinnaras and Gandharvas, Pisacas, Uragas and 
Rakᤁasas-all these undergo annihilation when the close of the 
Yuga is imminent. 
6. 
Mountains, oceans, rivers, different.types of lakes, trees, 
creepers and grasses-all get dried up. 
7-8. Thus when everything was under turmoil, when all re­
gions·were bereft of all medicinal herbs and water, when the 
three worlds consisting of mobile and immobile beings resembled 
a dry log of wood, at midday, when the time for ablution 
arrived, I saw the three worlds becoming inaccessible and in 
a form of fire too dazzling to be viewed. 
9. 
Two Suns were seen in the east, 0 dear one. So also 
in the north and in the west. Similarly in the south too, two 
radiant Suns were seen. 
10. 
Two Suns were stationed in Nagaloka and two in the 
middle of the sky. Thus twelve Adityas began to blaze in all the 
quarters. 
1 1 . They burnt the entire earth including mountains, parks 
and forests. Nothing was seen unburnt except Reva and myself. 
1 2. 
When the earth was being burnt, the smell of ghee and 
sacrificial offerings issued forth. Thereupon my body became 
parched. Unbearable thirst too overwhelmed me. 
1 3. 
I did not find water. Everything was dried up by the 
Suns. I looked into the Kamal}.c;lalu (waterpot) . That too was 
dry. 
1 4. 
Then I was distressed with grief, particularly overwhelmed 
by thirst. I jumped up into the sky from the earth looking 
around. 
1 5-1 6. 
Then I espied a house in the firmament beautifully 
furnished. 0 excellent king, desirous of seeing it, I passed 


76 
Skanda Purii:T}a 
through the ramparts of diverse types and wonderful features 
and reached the portals embellished with panels with bolts. 
The turrets and their tops were quaint and amusing. 
1 7. 
Its height was eighty-six thousand Yojanas. Half thereof 
was separately embellished with gold and jewels. 
18. 
0 excellent king, in the centre thereof I saw a huge 
bed. A Being of divine tresses of hairs was lying on the bed. 
19. 
He was lying down stretching a full Yojana long with 
curly hairs. His splendour was heightened by a wonderful crown 
of refulgent lustre. 
20-2 1 a. 
He was dark in complexion and had the lustre of 
lotus petals. His nose was excellent. His face was majestic like 
that of a lion. His arms were long. Excellent moustache and 
beard marked his cheeks. He was handsome with Trivau (curly 
hairs near the navel) and his ears were adorned with earrings. 
21b-23. He appeared to be stout with chubby fleshy limbs. 
His sides were embellished with Avarta (eddy-like curves) . His 
hips were extremely splendid. The knees and calves were well 
rounded. His palms were marked with the outline of a lotus. 
His excellent nails and fingers were slightly reddish. His voice 
appeared to resemble the thunder of clouds. He was hand­
some in every limb. Thus I saw Lord Puruᤄottama in the middle 
of the bed. 
24-25a 
He had a conch, a discus and a club in his hands. 
He was lying on his right side. His hand was lifted up with the 
rosary string suspended therefrom. His brilliance was like that 
of ten thousand Suns. On seeing him I became devoted to him 
and got ready to eulogize him. 
[Prayer] 
25b-29. "Be victorious, 0 Isa; be victorious, 0 Vagi:Sa (Lord 
of Speech) ; be victorious, 0 Lord bedecked with divine orna­
ments of the limbs. Be victorious, 0 Lord of Devas. 0 glorious 
one, 0 eternal one, you are Brahman itself. All the worlds are 
stationed in your body, 0 Parameiivara. You are our goal. 
Indeed, 0 Lord of Devas, all the worlds have you as the 
support as they are stationed. 
1 . 
This eulogy emphasizes the identity o f Siva and VidQ.U. 


V.iii.20.30-42 
77 
You are the most excellent one of all beings. You are the 
creator and the support of the Earth. You are the Hautra (function 
of the Hotr Priest) of the Agnihotras. You alone are the Sutra 
Mantra. You are the Gokarr:ta (shrine) , Bhadra Karr:ta (a Siva 
shrine Karnali on Narmada) . You are the Mahesvara region. 
You are the Kirti (fame) of all the Kirtis, the destroyer of 
wretchedness and sins. You are (the sacred place) Naimiᤄa. 
Kurukᤄetra and the great Viᤄr:tupada at Gaya 
30. 
0 Lord, the earth was sportingly covered with (one) 
foot (by you) . 0 Lord, Bali was bound by you. Indra was re­
instated in his position by you. 
31-34. 
0 Lord, you are the Yugas like Kali, Dvapara, Treta 
and Krta. You are the suppressor of Pralamba. You are the 
creator. You are the destroyer. You suppᥢrt the worlds. You are 
Kala, the destroyer of all. All the clans of Devas were created 
by you alone, 0 God. You are the path of all the worlds. You 
are salvation, the greatest goal. Brahma, the eternal one of the 
Rajas form is the Lord born from you. Rudra originating from 
(your) Krodha (Anger) is also so (born from you) . You are 
established in Sattva. 0 Lord, the mobile and immobile beings 
have been created by you for the sake of sport. " 
Thus the Lord was eulogized by me, when my entire body 
was scorched. 
35. 
0 king, the Lord of all living beings was thus eulo­
gized by me with great devotion. Even as I was eulogizing the 
Lord, I saw there pots filled with water. 
36. 
Thereupon the thirst that had been forgotten by me 
became increased. I approached the side of that Puruᤄa. 
37-38. 
I thought thus when I was desirous of drinking 
water: 'He never saw me. He was asleep. He never woke up. 
He who is deluded by sin and tries to wake up a sleeping 
person incurs the great sin of Brahmar:ta's slaughter. ' 
39-40. 
Even as this was being thought by me, a second 
being came there. He did not utter anything. He did not see 
anyone. He had worn an antelope skin on his left shoulder. 
He had matted hairs. He held a KamaQ.Q.alu (waterpot) ·and a 
staff. A girdle encircled him. He was three-eyed. He had smeared 
ash all over the body. He was of great lustre. 
41-42. 
Even as I was desirous of eulogizing him and gazed 


78 
Skanda Purii1Ja 
at him with clear eyes, a woman embellished in all ornaments 
was seen. She was of excellent beauty in every limb. On seeing 
her I prostrated on the ground saying "Be victorious". 
43-44. 
Be victorious, 0 goddess originating from the limbs 
of Rudra. Be victorious, 0 eternal Brahmi. Be victorious, 0 
Kaumari, 0 Mahendri, 0 Vai!?Qavi, 0 Varul).i, be victorious, 0 
Kauberi, 0 Savitri; be victorious, 0 Dhatr1: of excellent coun­
tenance. In this world consisting of mobile and immobile beings 
protect my body that has become scorched with thirst. " 
Sri Devi said: 
45. 
0 tiger among Brahmal).as, I am delighted by your splendid 
speech. 0 excellent Brahmal).a, what is in your mind has been 
understood by me. 
46. 
Listen, 0 Brahmal).a, I too have adopted this severe 
vow. Due to the levity common to all women, an austere vow 
has been adopted by me who am deficient in intellect. 
47-48. 
If a righteous son well-known all over the world is 
to be born to me, I will first breast-feed a Brahmal).a and then 
alone my son. 0 great sage, such a son has been born to me. 
0 eminent Brahmal).a, if you wish to be alive suck the breasts. 
Sri MiirkaTJ4eya said: 
49-51 . 
In the case of Brahmal).as this (namely sucking the 
breasts) is something not to be done. 1 Again a boy has to be 
invested with a sacred thread. Otherwise the Vrata cannot be 
fulfilled. 0 lotus-eyed one, Brahmal).a-hood is difficult to ob­
tain in all the three worlds. Listen now how one becomes a 
Brahmal).a and by means of whicᥣ Sarilskaras (consecratory 
rites) . First there is . the rite of Bijavapana ( 'sowing of the 
seed' ) in women through sacred rites. It is called Bijak!?epa too 
since the seed is thrown (sown) . 
52-59. 
0 lady of high esteem, at the end thereof the sec­
ond one, Garbhadhana (impregnation) , takes place. Purilsavana 
rite is the third. Simanta is the fourth one. The fifth one is 
I. 
VV 49-58 give a list of 48 Samskaras. The list contians the names of 
sacrifices like Agni¿ˤoma, SautramaQi etc., which can hardly be called 
'Samskaras'. Old Smrtis like Manu or Yajiiavalkya do not specifY the n˥mber 
of Samskaras. P.V. Kane in HD II.i deals with 16 Samskaras which are 
regarded as essential. 


V.iii.20.60-70 
79 
Jitakarma (post-natal rite) . Namakarma (Naming) is called the 
sixth rite. Ni11krama (taking out the baby in open air for the 
first time) is the seventh rite. Annaprasana (formal feeding 
with food) is the eighth rite. Ciic,lakarma (cutting the lock of 
hair) is the ninth rite. The tenth one is Maufijlbandhana (in­
vestiture with the sacred thread) . Thereafter the rites of Ai11ika, 
Darvika, Sa\lmika, Bhaumika, Patnlsarhyojana (marriage) are 
performed. Then follows Daivakarma (offering oblations to 
gods) . Then come Manu11yaka (rites in regard to human be­
ings) and Pitrkarma (propitiation of the ancestors) . 0 splen­
did lady, these rites are performed on the tenth or eighth 
lunar days. Then follow the rites of Bhiita, Bhavya, lga, ParvaQ.a, 
Sraddha, AgrayaQ.a on the SravaQ.I d:'.y, during the Darsa and 
PaurQ.amasl of the months of Caitra and 1svayuj, Niruc,lhapasu­
savana, SautramaQ.i, Agni11toma, Atyagni11toma, ᤅoc,lasl, Vajapeya, 
Atiratra, Aptoryama, Dasavajapeyas, forbearance towards all living 
beings, Anasiiya (absence of jealousy) , Sauca (purity) , Mailgala, 
(auspiciousness) , AkarpaQ.ya (absence of miserliness) and Asprha 
(absence of desire) . One becomes a BrahmaQ.a by consecration 
through these forty-eight Sarhskaras. 
60. 
After realizing this, 0 highly esteemed lady, it does not 
behove you to compel me to drink breast-milk. 0 gentle lady, 
how can one like me drink breast-milk? 
61-70. 
On hearing these words of mine, the lady spoke 
these words: "If you do not drink the breast-milk, the boy will 
die. It is heard in the three worlds, in the Vedas and in the 
Smrtis that one is rid of all sins but _cannot be rid of the s.in 
of infanticide. The sin of killing will be incurred by you. Even 
a great devotee of the Lord has to suffer the consequences of 
infanticide in a hundred births. On death he incurs the state 
of a dog extending to three hundred years. At the close thereof 
he is born in the womb of a crow. There too he suffers the 
consequences of the sinful act during eight hundred births. 
He becomes a pig during ten births, at the close of which he 
is born as a worm. Then he has a gradual rise in the births of 
cow, elephant, horse and human being. Thus it is heard in 
Srutis, Sastras and the Vedas. 0 scorcher of enemies, 0 excellent 
BrahmaQ.a, the killing of a child brings about a sin more heinous 
than all other sins. A BrahmaQ.a committing the slaughter of 
a boy, is certainly cooked in Naraka. He undergoes torture at 


80 
Skanda Pura7J.a 
the hands of Yama for eight hundred years. If you drink my 
breast-milk, the fault is less severe. If you do not drink the sin 
shall extend to many years. In case you drink the milk there 
will be much merit besides the alleviation of hunger and thirst. 
Hence do not entertain in your mind any doubt. Do come, 0 
Brahma:Qa; for the sake of the boy drink the milk from my 
breasts." 
. 
71-74. 
On hearing those words I became ready to drink 
the milk from the breasts. I was never satisfied in the course 
of drinking the excellent breast-milk. 0 descendant of Bharata, 
thirty-three thousand years thus elapsed. Deluded by the deceptive 
slumber for a long time I woke up in the lap. Mter the delusion 
of sleep had vanished, 0 son of PaQ<;iu, I looked around and 
could not see the sleeping being or the boy. 0 descendant of 
Bharata, I saw those four waterpots. Nor was that goddess to 
be seen. All of them had gone somewhere. 
75. While I was reflecting thus and standing there pondering 
over everything, the goddess spoke these words with slight 
laughter. 
Sri Devi said: 
76-80. 
That sleeping person was KrᥨQa. The second being 
that came was Hara. The four pitchers were the oceans, 0 
excellent BrahmaQa. The boy seen by you was Brahma, the 
grandfather of the worlds. I should be known as Prthivi con­
sisting of the seven continents and mountains. Here, 0 BrahmaQa, 
you see the excellent river Narmada who left you dn the ground 
where she is well-established. She of auspicious features flows 
for the good of all living beings. She is well-known as River 
Reva. Hence Narmada has not become defunct. Mter realizing 
this be calm and normal, 0 great sage. 
Mter saying this to me that Divinity vanished there itself. 
8 1 . 
It is thus that the Lord stationed in Sattva used to lie 
always during Pralaya-the great Lord in the form of Sattva on 
whose support the universe is sustained. 
82. 
Thus the great and excellent miracle was seen and 
experienced by me. It is meritorious and destructive of all sins. 
83. 
0 excellent one among men, it has thus been nar­
rated and it was this that you had asked for. 0 king of mighty 
arms, what else do you wish to hear? 


V.iii.21 . 1-l l 
81 
CHAPTER TWENTYONE 
The Origin of the River Kapilii 
Yudhi6thira said: 
1-2. 
0 excellent BrahmaQa, with your favour different 
narratives of miraculous import have been heard by me. I wish 
to hear further, 0 BrahmaQa, about good holy vows. Do tell 
me. How did this meritorious river named Narmada, the most 
excellent one among all the rivers, become well-known? Tell 
me again, 0 sinless one. 
Sri Miirka7J,f/,eya said: 
. 
3. 
Narmada is the most excellent one among all rivers. It 
is destructive of all sins. It shall redeem all living beings, both 
mobile and immobile. 
4-5. 
I shall recount to you the greatness of Narmada which 
has been heard by rrie from my predecessors. 0 king, listen 
with concentration of mind. Ganga is auspicious in Kanakhala; 
Sarasvati in Kurukᤁetra; but Narmada is auspicious everywhere, 
whether it be a village or a forest. 
6. 
The .water of Sarasvati sanctifies one in three days; the 
water of Yamuna in seven days; the water of Ganga sanctifies 
one immediately; but the water of Narmada does so through 
the very sight. 
7-8. 
It is meritorious and beautiful at every step, in all the 
three worlds. In the region to the west of Kalingadda on the 
mountain Amarakar:ttaka, 0 great king, Devas, Gandharvas, sages 
and ascetics have performed penance and attained great Siddhis. 
9. 
Mter taking his holy bath there, strictly controlling the 
sense-organs and scrupulously observing restraints and observ­
ing fast for a night, a man shall redeem a hundred members 
of his family. 
1 0. 
0 dear one, since the mountain Amarakar:ttaka is a 
great Siddhi-kᤁetra, it has been resorted to by all the Devas and 
served by sages. 
1 1 . Siddhas, Vidyadbaras, Bhiitas and, Gandharvas both vis­
ible and invisible, desirous of Siddhi, serve and resort to this 
excellent holy place. 


82 
Skanda Purii:r_ta 
1 2. 
Ever since then I too have resorted to the great holy 
spot. Indeed in this holy spot the Consort of Uma is stationed 
in the form of Prar:tava. 
1 3. 
Srlkar:tᤃha (Siva) and his Gar:tas have been served by 
groups of all living beings. 0 king, I shall recount the details 
of this Tlrtha extending from this excellent mountain. 
1 4-1 5a. 
0 excellent king, even Brahma is not competent to 
fully extol all the meritorious Tlrthas situated on either side 
of Narmada. 
1 5b. 
0 leading king, it is heard that the excellent river is 
more than a hundred Yojanas long. 
1 6-17. 
It is half a Yojana in width. There are sixty crore 
sixty thousand Tlrthas undoubtedly on both the banks of the 
river from the mountain upto the sea. 
18. 
The Wind-god has mentioned that the Tlrthas number 
sixty-seven crore sixty-seven thousand sixty-seven hundred. 
19. 
But, only in Krtayuga they become visible, 0 king. All 
pious-minded men see them always. 
20. 
As Kali becomes severe and terrible, men become short 
in stature and deficient in intrinsic strength. 
2 1 . They say, 0 king, that Jaldvara and other Tlrthas on 
this mountain accord satisfaction to the Pitrs on whom they as 
well bestow heavenly pleasures and salvation. 
22. 
The holy spot Daruvana1 is very excellent. There the 
confluence of Caruka is auspicious. On the north (bank) of 
Narmada the holy .spot of Carukesvara is the most excellent. 
23-25. 
DarukeS\rara Tirtha, Vyatlpate8vara, Pataldvara Tirtha, 
Koᤃiyajfia-these, 0 excellent king, are on the northern bank 
of Reva. Near the side of Amaresvara there are one hundred 
eight Lirigas, the chief whereof is Varur:tdvara. They dispel all 
sins. 
26. 
Near Mandhatrpura are Siddhdvara and Yamdvara. 
To the east of Orhkara is the excellent Tlrtha of Kedara. 
27-28. 
Near it, 0 great king, is Svargadvara ( 'Gateway to 
Heaven' ) that dispels sins. It is the meritorious Tlrtha named 
Brahme§vara. In front of it is Saptasarasvata. 
1 . 
I t is some local spot on the bank of Narmada. I t i s different from Daruvana 
(area round the famou_s jyotirliilga Avan¾hya Naganatha) in Marathwada 
region of Maharashtra. 


V.iii.21.29-46a 
83 
Then there are the Rudragaka, Savitra and Somatlrtha. These 
are the Liilgas, 0 Bull among the descendants of Bharata, on 
the southern bank of Reva. 
29. 
0 dear one, crores of Rudras are stationed on this 
mountain. They can be propitiated through ablutions, scents, 
garlands and unguents. 
30. 
0 king, the Rudras shall undoubtedly become pleased 
here. Sins can be wiped off by means of Japa. One attains 
infiniteness (Mokᤄa) through meditation. 
31 . 
One obtains worldly pleasures through Dana: So said 
Sailkara. In the region towards the west of the mountain, Lord 
Mahe§vara himself, the eternal Lord, the primordial cause of 
the Cosmos, is stationed in the form of Pral).ava. 
32. 
A devotee should control hiĥ @ense-organs and re-
main celibate. Mter taking his holy bath, he shall remain pure 
and perform the libation and other rites of the Pitrs as en­
joine(l by scriptures. 
33. 
He should propitiate Pitr-gods with the water mixed 
with gingelly seeds. 0 son of PaQ.9u, members of his family up 
to seven generations including himself rejoice in heaven. 
34. 
He remains happy and enjoys different kinds of worldly 
pleasures. He rejoices for sixty thousand years (in heᥤven) 
duly adored by Suras. 
35-36. 
He rejoices for a long period. Mter coming down 
from heaven, he is reborn in a family devoid of impurities, 
when he shall be rich, liberal in gifts, devoid of ailments and 
honoured by laymen. Again he remembers the holy spot and 
makes pilgrimage thereto. 
37. 
During the second birth he will be very enthusiastic 
(in eagerly resorting to the eddy) in the performance of the 
Vrata with celibacy, observance of fasts and subduing of sense­
organs. 
38-46a. 
Withdrawing from all forms of violence he attains 
excellent merit. 0 kirig, know the meritorious benefit of the 
devotee who practises piety in this manner and gives up life . 
0 son of PaQ.9u, he rejoices in heaven for a hundred thousand 
years full of groups of Apsaras and reverberating with divine 
words and sounds. He shall be smeared wᥥth divine scents and 
unguents and adorned with divine ornaments. He plays about 
along with gods. He will be eulogized by Siddhas and Gandharvas. 


84 
Skanda Purii:r.ta 
After coming down (again) from heaven he becomes (is born 
as) a very powerful king possessing elephants, horses, chariots 
and other vehicles. He shall be conversant with holy rites and 
eagerly devoted to scriptural texts. He will dwell in a house full 
of gold and silver supported by hundreds of columns. It will 
have seven or eight storeys with excellent doorways and abounding . 
in male and female servants and slaves. 
Like the world of Indra, his abode shall be astir with the 
sighs and deep breaths of elephants in rut and the neighing 
sounds of horses. He shall be a glorious leader of kings of 
kings and a dear lover of all womenfolk. He shall stay in such 
a house for more than a hundred years enjoying pleasures and 
amusements. He shall be devoid of all ailments. 
This is what will happen in case of those who die in Amare5vara: 
46b-47a. He who devoutly enters into funeral pyre on 
AmarakaQtaka shall attain heaven after death (ultimately) reaching 
the greatest goal. 
4 7b-49 
It is known from the PuraQa that everything re­
garding holy ablution, Dana, Japa and Homa, whether auspi­
cious or inauspicious, shall have a crore of times more of its 
benefit. The trees also growing on her banks and falling down 
after a lapse of time attain the greatest goal on being touched 
by the waters - of Narmada. His departure (death) thereto is 
without return (to Samsara) like that of the wind in the fir­
mament. 
50-52. 
0 king; if the devotee falls down (offers his body) 
into the Tirtha, he will enjoy pleasures in Patala. Three thou­
sand maidens stand in waiting in his abode seeking errands 
from him. Richly endowed with divine enjoyment of pleasures, 
he amuses himself for as long as he wishes (to do) . On the 
whole of the earth stretching upto the sea, 0 excellent one 
among men, there is nothing like mountain AmarakaQtaka. 
53. 
To the west of the mountain, it should be known that 
there is a Tirtha; the eddy named Jalesvara wellᥦknown in all 
the three worlds. 
54. 
By offering balls of rice there and performing Sandhya 
prayers, the Pitrs become' propitiated and satisfied for a period 
of twelve years. 
55-57a. 'On the southern bank o( Narmada there is the 


V.iii.21 .57b-68 
85 
great river Kapila1 overgrown with Sarala (pine) and Arjuna 
trees, rendered beautiful by Khadiras and adorned by the creepers 
of Madhavi and Sallaki. 0 }sing, it is always delightful with 
roaring beasts of prey, other beasts like jackals, monkeys etc., 
and chirping of diff<::rent kinds of birds. 
57b-58a. We have heard that there are more than a hun­
dred crores of sages there. After performing penance there 
they have attained liberation. They have no rebirth. They never 
came bat:k (to Samsara) . 
58b-60a. Since the noble-souled Kapila performed penance 
there, a meritorious Tirtha has sprung up there. It was re­
sorted to formerly by the sages following Kapila; it has been 
praised by the name of Kapila. It is destructive of all sins. 
60b-62a. There in Amare5vara there are more than hundred 
w 
crores of Tirthas. One who stays for a night and day there, is 
rid of all sins after offering Dana duly to an excellent BrahmaQa 
in accordance with one's capacity .. Due to the favour of Isvara 
everything shall become a crore of times more meritorious. 
62b-64a. 0 descendant of Bharata, here the form of PraQava 
is Anakᥨara (not in the form of a syllable) . It is in the form 
of Siva himself. It will be one made with syllables and Matras(?) . 
Creatures and animals, trees, hedges, creepers etc. meeting 
with death there undoubtedly attain heaven. 
64b-65a. There itself is a great river named Visalya. By tak­
ing holy bath and offering Dana duly there also, one will become 
meritorious. 
65b-66. All the groups of Devas along with K.innaras, great 
serpents, Yakᥨas, Rak᥼asas, Gandharvas, sages and ascetics come 
there and visit her in. Amaresvara. 
67a. 
Those two auspicious Ka᥽s (ridges) were bowed down 
to by all of them after coming there. 
67b-68. In the earlier awful Yuga that terrifies all the worlds, 
the son of Narmada, who had been Sasalya (one with a. dart 
within, i.e. one who suffers from pain) was rendered Visalya 
(free from Salya) by all the Devas and sages. Hence it is re­
membered as Visalya.2 
1 . 
D e (p.4) states that Kapila i s an aflluent (tributary) o f Narmada. This 
Pural).a traces the name to Sage Kapila who is said to have performe<l 
penance on the banks of Narmada. 
2. 
A popular etymology. Another such etymological episode is given in vv 
7 1-77 below: 


86 
Skanda Purii:t:ta 
Yudhi6thira said: 
69-70 
How did Visalya rise up, 0 dear one. How did Kapila? 
0 sage, how did the son of Narmada become one with Salya? 
This is something mysterious to the people. 0 sage of good 
holy rites, I wish to hear. 
Sri Miirkat;uf,eya said: 
7 1 . 
Formerly, 0 king, the daughtt';r of Dakᤄa i.e. DakᤄayaQ.i 
(Gauri) sported about in the waters of Narmada with great joy 
along with the Trident-bearing One. 
72. 
After rising up suddenly from the water she changed 
her clothes. The wet clothes of the goddess were sportingly 
squeezed and pressed by the attendants. 
73-74a. 
When the clothes were being squeezed dry, drops 
of coloured water resembling a rainbow fell down. Hence the 
great river named Kapila issued forth. 
74b-77. The tawny-coloured water issuing from the clothes 
got mixed with the unguents. Due to the Kapila colour the 
river became Kapila by name too. The water was mixed with 
the scented Rasas (unguents) of different kinds of flowers and 
rendered fragrant. Splendid hands as tender as sprouts squeezed 
the clothes and the water that issued forth became tawny-coloured 
with mixtures of different colours. 
78. 
Hence the excellent river is called Kapila by persons 
conversant with the topics of the PuraQ.as. This excellent river 
Kapila originating from the waters of Narmada dropping from 
the clothes should be considered highly meritorious. 


V.iii.22.1-20 
87 
CHAPTER TWENTYTWO 
The Origin of Visalya 
Sri Marka1J,tf,eya said: 
1-8. 
Henceforth I shall recount how it came to be Visalya,1 
one that is miraculous unto the people, the destrQyer of all 
sins. 
Agni, a mental son of Brahma, was born. He was Mukhya 
Vahni. He was a highly righteous saᤋe. 
Svaha who is remembered as a daughter of Dakᤁa became 
his wife. 0 great king, three sons were born to her: ( 1 ) Ahavaniya 
Agni, (2) DakᤁiQ.agni, and (3) the third Garhapatya. All the 
three worlds are sustained by these threi 
This Garhapatya Agni begot two splendid sons named Padmaka 
and Sanku. Both of them were ex€ellent Agnis. 
Garhapatya Agni stayed on the banks of Narmada and per­
formed great penance and propitiated Rudra. He had great 
concentration and self-control. 
He thus performed severe austerities for ten thousand years. 
The delighted Bull-emblemed great Lord spoke to hiin: "0 
highly esteemed one, tell me what you have in your mind. 
Even if what you desire is something very difficult to get, I shall 
undoubtedly be-stow it on you." 
The Agni said: 
9-1 0. 0 Mahe5vara, may this highly esteemed Narmada and 
the sixteen other rivers be my wives with your favour. 
I shall beget excellent sons of them in accordance with my 
desire. 0 Mahdvara, let this boon alone be granted to me. 
lsvara said: 
1 1-20. 
These excellent rivers named DhiᤁQ.i, of large eyes, 
1 . 
Kiipila Hrada removed the darts from the body of Dhi˦l).indra, the son of 
Narmada born from Garhapatya Agni. 
This episode is not found in any other Pural)a and as such it is a special 
contribution of this author. 
The main emphasis is on the efficacy of Narmada in removing darts in 
the form of sins from human bodies by mere bath in Kapila. 


88 
Skanda Purii:T}a 
shall be your wives. Undoubtedly they are well-known in the 
Vedas. 
The Agriis remembered in Adhvara (sacrifice) shall become 
their sons. They will become very famous by the name of DhiᤁQya 
until the annihilation of all living beings. 
Mter saying this Mahadeva vanished there itself. The excel­
lent river Narmada became his wife. 
The following sixteen rivers too were duly declared as his 
wives: Kciveri, KrᤁQaveQi, Reva, Yamuna, Godavari, Vitasta, 
Candrabhaga, Iravati, Vipasa, Kausiki, Sarayu, Satarudrika, Sipra, 
Sarasvati, Hradini and Pavani. 
That highly lustrous (Fire-god) divided himself among those 
DhiᤁQis. Due to the transgression of the husband Suds (fires, 
called Suds) were born as the sons of Narmada and other 
DhiᤁQis. All these are remembered as DhiᤁQyapas. 
The well-known one named DhiᤁQindra became the son of 
Narmada. He was powerful and unequalled in beauty of form, 
0 king. 
Thereafter a fight between Devas and Asuras broke out causing 
horripilation. It became famous in the three worlds as Mayatciraka. 
The Suraᥟ were attacked by the extremely terrible Daityas, 
the chief of whom were Maya and Tara. They became terrified 
and they sought refuge in ViᤁQU. 
. 
21-30. 
"Save us, 0 Hrᤁikesa, from this awful calamity. 
Annihilate all the Daityas, the leaders whereof are Maya and 
Tara. " On being told thus, the Lord surveyed the ten direc­
tions. At that time Pavaka (Fire) and Maruta (Wind) were seen 
in the battle by the Lord. 
On being summoned by ViᤁQu both of them went near him 
instantly. They stood bowing down before the intelligent Lord 
of Devas. 
Then the leading Pavaka (Fire) DhiᤁQi was told by the noble­
souled Lord: "0 son of Narmada, burn down these extremely 
terrible Asuras. " 
O n being told thus, those two gods, Pavaka ᥠnd Maruta, 
burned down all the Daityas, the leaders of whom were Maya 
and Tara. 
While being burnt they surrounded Agni by means of divine 
weapons resembling fire and sun. They were hundreds and 
thousands in number. 


V.iii.23.31-V.iii.23.6 
89 
Along with groups of weapons Agni too burnt those great 
Asuras. Everything was enveloped in circles of flames by the 
wind. 
Thus scorched and enveloped by flames of fire, the Daityas 
entered Patala and concealed themselves under water in thou­
sands. 
Thereafter all the Suras adored and honoured Agni, the 
immutable young son of Narmada, and returned to heaven. 
The son of Reva of excessive splendour and surrounded by 
fire (gods) , full of darts as he was, hurriedly came to Narmada 
eagerly to visit her. 
31-36. 
On seeing her son, extremely wounded by a mass 
of weapons, Narmada of meritorious waters got up struck with 
a shock. With her breasts excited due tᥡ Y..e secretion of milk, 
she embraced him with both the arms. Taking the weapon­
wounded son with her, she entered the Kapila Hrada. 
lmii}.ediately after the entry into the Kapila Hrada that destroys 
sins, she instantly made the Sasalya one Visalya (with darts 
removed) . 
Since he became Visalya (dartless) after entering her aus­
picious water, the river Kapila is called Visalya too by learned 
men. 
Others too who are pure, clean and have concentration of 
mind are rid of Piipa-Salyas (darts in the form of sins) . On 
death, they go to heaven. 
Thus everything that was asked earlier by you as to the cause 
of the origin of Visalya has been recounted, 0 Lord of men. 
CHAPTER TWENTYTHREE 
The Greatness of the Confluence of Visalyii 
Miirka7Jf/-eya said: 
1-6. 
0 king, those mortals with great devotion who cast off 
their lives at the confluence, attain the highest state. 
He who goes to Amare§vara, abandons all cherished desires 
and gives up his life there shall invariably dwell in heaven. 


90 
Skanda Purii:r;ta 
A man who goes to the great mountain and gives us his life, 
shall go to Amaravati -by means of an aerial chariot resembling 
the sun. 
On seeing the man falling down from the moun tain 
Amarakaᦣ:ttaka, all the Apsaras say, "He shall be my husband. " 
Those conversant with piety say that the water of Sarasvati 
is on a par with that of Ganga: Men of enlightenment who 
know these things better, say that the water of Reva is far 
superior to it (i.e. the water of Ganga) . There is no doubt in 
it. 
The place of one who keeps the water of Reva upon his 
head, is near the Lord of the leading Suras, because it is occupied 
for residence by many Vidyadharas, Kinnaras and others and 
is the abode of the greatest of merits. 
7-1 5. 0 king, of what avail is the verbose talk? If one does 
not wish to see again the terrible ocean of worldly existence, 
one should always resort to Narmada. 
It is remembered as one that sanctifies all the three worlds. 
Even if one dies elsewhere he attains the goal of Gaᦣ:tdvara. 
This river is surrounded everywhere by many places of Yajfias. 
There is nothing here which is not a Tirtha. As has been 
spoken by you, sinning men, whether they have performed 
penance or not, who die on her banks, go to Svarga like lead­
ing Amaras. 
Thus, 0 excellent king, it is with a desire for the welfare of 
all the worlds that Kapila and Visalya were created formerly by 
Isvara. 
By taking his holy bath there along with the observance of 
fast and control of the sense-organs, a man shall undoubtedly 
attain the benefit of a great Asvamedha. 
He who refrains from eating at this Tirtha shall be rid of 
all sins and attain Siva's place. 
By taking the holy bath once in the confluence of Visalya, 
one attains that benefit which one attains through Snana and 
Dana done all over the earth extending to the seas. 
Thus, 0 king, the meritorious and sacred river has been 
extolled to you. I shall narrate again whatever you may ask. 


V.iii.24. 1-V.iii.25.3 
91 
CHAPTER TWENTYFOUR 
The Gr_eatness of the Confluence of Karanarmadii 
Sri Miirkar.ujeya said: 
1-3. 
The confluence of Kara1 and Narmada in Mandhatrpura 
shall take the Pitrs to ViᤁQ.upura if one goes to the place, takes 
bath and propitiates the Pitrs. 
With a desire to kill the Daityas, ViᤁQ.U formerly rubbed his 
hands and took up the discus. From his perspiration the ex­
cellent river began to flow and joined Reva. By taking the holy 
ablution there, one is rid of all sins. 
CHAPTER TWENTYFIVE 
The Greatness of the Confluence of Mlagangii 
Sri Miirkar.uf,eya said: 
1-3. 
0 excellent king, to the eastern side of Orilkara is the 
confluence, well-known all over the world, where Nllaganga 
meets Reva. 
By taking the holy bath there and performing Japa, what 
objective in the world will be impossible to get? One shall stay 
in the city of NllakaQ.fha for sixty thousand years. 
By propitiating the Pitrs in Sraddha through water mixed 
with gingelly seeds, one shall redeem twenty-one generations 
including oneself. 
1 . 
The rivulet Kara, a tributary of Narmada, is so named as i t issued from 
the perspiration of Vi˧˫;m's hand. 


92 
Skanda Purii:r;a 
CHAPTER TWENTYSIX 
The Observance Called Madhitka Trtiyii1 
Yudhi6thira said: 
1-7 
0 excellent Brahmat:J.a, JaleS.vara too has been men-
tioned earlier by you. How is it meritorious? How is it resorted 
to by R11is and Siddhas? 
Sri Miirka7J¢eya said: 
A greater Tirtha than Jalesvara was never there before nor 
will there ever be (in future) . 0 son of Pat:J.<;iu, listen as I 
recount its origin. 
Formerly all the groups of sages along with groups of Maruts 
and lndra were extremely tormented by all the Asuras and 
were led to destruction in many ways. 
On being killed and assailed by many Asuras headed by 
Bat:J.asura and having Jambha and Sumbha as .their leaders, 
they sought - refuge in Brahma. 
They wt;nt by means of aerial chariots as huge as mountains, 
horses comparable (in bigness) to elephants, chariots of the 
size of cities drawn by lions and tigers and also by tortoises and 
crocodiles. Others went on foot. 
After reaching the great region inaccessible to unrighteous 
persons, they saw the Lotus-born Lord, the benefactor of all 
the world. All of them went there and eulogized with concen­
tration and mental purity. 
I . 
This Vrala is observed on the 3rd day in the bright half of Phalguna. ll 
is meanl for women. h granl5 conjugal felicity and sons and is an insur­
ance against widowhood. An observer of the Vrala is lo fast on this day. 
The next day she is lo worship Goddess Gauri on a Madhiika tree and 
pray for Saubhagya (conjugal felicity) . Brahmal)a women whose husbands 
are alive are honoured with flowers, garments and edibles (Hemadri, 
Vrata I. 4 1 3-415) . According lo Bhavidya Pural)a, the Vrala is lo be ob­
served on the 3rd day in the dark half of Phalguna. Our lexl prescribes 
this Vrata on the 3rd day of bright half of Cailra and also the riles lo be 
observed throughout the fortnight. 
Madhiika ( Cinometra ramijlora, Moh in Maralhi) is useful for distilling 
intoxicating liquor. 


V.iii.26.8-23 
93 
The Devas prayed: 
8-1 5. Be victorious, 0 immeasurable Lotus-born One. Be 
victorious, 0 cause of creation. 0 most excellent one among 
Suras, we have sought refuge in you. 
On hearing the words of the Devas of purified souls, the 
Grandfather replied in words as deep-sounding and resonant 
as the rumbling of clouds: "Wherefore have you come, 0 Devas? 
Why this paleness in everyone? By whom have you all been 
insulted? 0 immortal ones, do tell me quickly. " 
The Devas said: 
There is a Danava of great vigour and ᥍rowess named Bai).a. 
He is arrogant on account ·of his strength. Everything belong­
ing to us has been taken away by him. We have been deprived 
of all our wealth and jewels. 
On hearing the words of the Devas, Brahma, the grandfa­
ther of th᥎ wo'rlds, the Lord of Devas, pondered: "What is the 
means for his destruction? The sinful Danava cannot be killed 
by any of the heaven-dwellers excepting Lord Saiikara. He cannot 
be killed by me or ViᤁI).U. We shall go there alone where Lord 
Maheiivara is present. He is the resort unto all. There is no one 
else." 
After saying this, Brahma, the most excellent one among 
the knowers of the Vedas, went to the place where Maheiivara 
was present. He was accompanied by learned Brahmai).as. 
1 6-23. 
He eulogized Parameiivara through richly-worded 
prayers. 
The Devas said: 
Be victorious, 0 Lord of the chiefs of Devas. Be victorious, 
0 one half of whose body is shared by Uma, 0 bull-seated one, 
0 mighty-armed one having the Moon as the ornament. 
Obeisance to the one holding in his front hand the t_rident. 
Obeisance to the wielder of Khatvailga. Be victorious, 0 Lord 
of goblins, 0 destroyer of Dakᤁa's Yajiia. 
Obeisance, 0 Lord having (i.e. worshipped with) ᥏he five-


94 
Skanda Purii:IJa 
syllabled ( namaiJ, siviiya) Mantra, 0 Lord having the five ele­
ments for physical form, 0 Isana having five faces. You are 
being sung about by the Vedas. 
Obeisance to you who are always engaged in the activities 
of creation, sustenance and annihilation. 0 AHamurti (one 
having eight cosmic forms) , 0 destroyer of Smara! Remember 
the truth as eulogized. 
0 Lord, your person is praised by the Brahma:r:tas as being 
constituted of five bodies, viz. Sadyojata, Vamadeva, Aghora, 
Isa and Tatpuruᤁa. (These are the opening words of Mantras 
from 1 7. 1-5 Mahiiniiriiya'T_la Upani6ad. ) In an extensive expanse 
of gold, 0 Hara, you coo like a swan. 
On being eulogized thus by the groups of sages beginning 
with Brahma and by the Suras and Asuras (?) the Lord became 
delighted in his mind and said to the groups of Devas: 
lsvara said: 
24-34. 
Welcome unto the Devas and Vipras (Brahma:r:tas) . 
The night has dawned well today. What shall we do? Tell me 
quickly. Who else is to be resorted to by Suras and Asuras? 
What is the misery? What is the distress? Whence has fright 
arisen? Do tell me, 0 blessed ones, the cause thereof which 
you have been thinking of. 
On being told thus by Rudra, the leading Suras replied 
displaying their respective bodies shyly with faces turned down­
wards: "There is a terrible Danava of great virility and arrogant 
of his strength. He is well known by the name BaQ.a. He has 
three great cities.1 
He has performed severe penance for a thousand years. 
Brahma was delighted by his Dama (control over the sense­
organs) and Niyama (restraints) . 
I . 
The Purat:ta regards Bat:ta as the king of Tripuras (three cities made of 
three metals) . But Mbh, KarJa, Ch. 33 names Kamalakda, Tarakda and 
Vidyaunmali as the masters of these three cities. Those cities were created 
by Maya, the architect of Asuras and not by Brahma as in this text. The 
capital of Bat:ta was Sot:titapura (in Kumaun) . 


V.iii.26.35-45 
95 
He granted him three impenetrable cities that can go wher­
ever he wishes to go. They are made of steel, silver and gold. 
The set of three cities has been created by Brahma. It can 
move and go wherever one wishes to go. The Danavas highly 
powerful due to it, stationed themselves in the three cities. 
The great Asuras harass the entire region of the three worlds. 
Staff, noose, sword and other weapons are used to harass unagitating 
persons. The set of the three cities occupied by the Danavas 
moves about like a wheel. As in the case of a mirage, it is visible 
at some places and invisible at others. 
Wherever that great set of cities of the arrogant Danava 
descends neither Brahma1_1as nor Devas, neither cows nor other 
creatures are seen there. Nothing is seen where the three citie 
fall. Rivers, villages and many countries have been reduced to 
ash. 
35-45. 
Gold, silver, jewels, pearls, the beautiful jewel-like 
women-all these he seizes forcibly. 
0 Hara, it is not possible for the groups of Devas to slay him 
with any weapon or missile either during day or at night. Hence, 
0 Mahadeva, do burn him down. You alone are our last resort. 
Thus, 0 -Lord of Devas, it behoves you to do this favour unto 
all of us. 
0 Lord, it behoves you. to do everything whereby Devas, 
Gimdharvas, sages and ascetics attain utmost courage. " 
lsvara said: 
I shall do all these things. Do not _get dejected. Ere long I 
shall do what is conducive to your happiness. 
Mter consoling all those Devas with Indra as their leader, 
the Lord of Devas thought about the means of the destruction 
of the three cities. 
'How, in what manner, should the set of cities be destroyed 
by me? Excepting Narada no other remedy is possible. ' 
Mter steadying himself thus, he meditated upon Narada. At 
the very instant, the sage of excessive penance came like wind. 
The holy Lord had a Kamal).c;lalu (water-pot) held in his hand 
and three staffs tied together. He was endowed with perfect 
knowledge. He was resplendent with the Yogapaga (upper cloth) 
and rosary of beads as well as an umbrella. The matted hairs 


96 
Skanda Purii1J,a 
were kept tied upon his head. He had the splendour resem­
bling that of fire and the Sun. He circumambulated the Lord 
three times and prostrated on the ground like a log of wood. 
Narada, the holy sage, joined his palms in veneration. He 
then eulogized Sarva, the lofty-minded Lord, with a great prayer. 
Niirada said: 
46-55. 
Be victorious, 0 Sarhbhu, 0 Viriipakᤁa (odd-eyed 
that is three-eyed one) . ᥐe victorious, 0 thr_ee-eyed Lord; be 
victorious, 0 Sail.kara, 0 !Sana, 0 Rudra, 0 ISvara. Obeisance 
to you. 
You are ·the Lord protector. You are the creator of the universe. 
0 Lord, you alone are the annihilator. You are the protector 
of the worlds, the slayer of the wicked god of Death. 
0 Surdana, save us, 0 eternal Lord with the Vedas for your 
form, 0 eternal Bhava-miirti, 0 enemy of worldly existence; be 
the bestower of freedom from fear on those who resort to you. 
For the sake of the destruction of the possibility of being 
(born) in the world, I seek refuge in you. 
Why have I been thought of, 0 Lord? May the command be 
given, 0 Lord. 
Whose mind am I to agitate and excite? Who should tumble 
down on to the ground? Whom shall I instigate for a quarrel, 
0 Lord, 0 foremost one among the victorious ones? 
On hearing the words of Narada, Mahadeva, the Lord of 
Devas, became glad with eyes in full bloom and spoke these 
words: "Welcome unto you, 0 sage par excellence, always fond 
of quarrels. 0 eternal son of Brahma, conversant with the 
principles of playing on the ViQa, ·O Narada, hasten to the 
great set of three cities of BaQa, the Lord of Danavas. It causes 
great fright among all the worlds. The husbands there are on 
a par with the Devas and the wives are equal to the Apsaras. 
The great set of the three cities moves by the refulgence of 
those ladies. It cannot be split up by any means, 0 excellent 
BrahmaQa. You do go there quickly and enchant everyone by 
means of several rites of diverse characteristics." 


V.iii.26.56-67 
97 
Niirada said: 
56-67. 
At your behest, 0 Lord of Devas, I shall get the 
excellent city broken up (by dissension) though it is impen­
etrable by diverse means on the part of the Devas including 
Vasava (Indra) . 
Mter saying this, 0 king, the sage went to that excellent city 
of Bal)a endowed with increasing prosperity and extending to 
a hund,red Yojanas. All fanciful things had been stacked there. 
Different kinds of minerals gave it variegated, wonderful fea­
tures. It was teeming with many mansions. It is (was) rendered 
brilliant with many buildings. It was equipped with ornamental 
gateways. It was· rendered beautiful with panels with sliding 
bolts. It was equipped with many mechanicᥑl contrivances. It was 
sparkling with ramparts and moats. It abounded in tanks, wells 
and lakes as well as shrines of deities. It was embellished with 
lotus-ponds teeming with swans and KaraQ.<J.avas. It was rich with 
many birds. The excellent city of Bal)a had all these features. 
Bal)a's huge palatial residence was in its centre. It had seven 
storeys and was resplendent. It was embellished in gold with 
divine workmanship. It was rendered beautiful with pearl strings, 
diamonds and lapis lazuli. The ground was paved with gold 
plates and made splendid with jewels. Various sounds such as 
the breaths (trumpetings?) of elephants in rut, chariots, the 
neighing sounds of horses, the jingling sound of the anklets 
of women etc. made the atmosphere resonant. 
The palace was guarded by Danavas of awful features, arro­
gant due to their strength. They were armed with Kha<J.gas 
(swords) and Tomaras. They had various weapons such as 
thunderbolts, goads and arrows. The excellent palatial resi­
dence of Bal)a had these characteristic features. It was {amous 
like the peak of Kailasa and was comparable to the abode of 
Mahendra. 
Narada hurriedly proceeded towards that city by the way of 
sky. Mter going up to the gate he spoke these words to the 
ᤏattr (the officer in-charge) : "0 gatekeeper, 0 very wise one, 
0 one expert in discharging royal duties! Be quick and inform 
Bal)a that Narada is waiting at the gateᥒ" 


98 
Skanda Pura7Ja 
68-77. 
He bowed down to the feet of Narada quickly. Then 
he began to submit to Bar:ta who was in the centre of the Royal 
Court. All his limbs began to tremble. He covered his face with 
the hand. Even as all the soldiers were listening he spoke these 
words: "There stands at the threshold, Narada who is honoured 
and adored by Devas, Gandharvas, Yakᤁas, Kinnaras and Danavas. 
He is fond of (instigating) quarrels and is very difficult to 
pacify. " 
Ba7Ja said: 
Usher in the blessed son of Brahma, the brilliant one who 
cannot be transgressed and who is unbearable. Why has he 
been stopped outside? 
On hearing these words uttered by the Lord, he went there 
in great hurry and made Narada step in. 
On seeing the celestial sage Narada adored by Suras, enter­
ing, the delighted Daitya got up at once and saluted the feet 
of the sage. He offered the sage a seat, formal Arghyapadya 
and adoration duly. Then he dedicated to him his kingdom 
and himself along with the kinsmen. Bar:tasura himself enquired 
of the sage about his welfare. 
Narada said: 
78-89. 
Excellent! Excellent! 0 mighty-armed one causing 
Danu's race to flourish! Who else excepting you is praise-worthy 
in the whole range of the three worlds? 0 leading scion of the 
family of Danu, 0 most excellent one among the descendants 
of Danu! I have been honoured with wealth and jewels of very 
excellent <JUalities; also by the offer of _your kingdom as well 
as your own self. Who else will adore (me) ? 
I have nothing_ to do with the enjoyment of worldly plea­
sures. Enjoy your own unimperilled kingdom. l have come 
here aftᥓr visiting Mahesvara only with an eagerness to see you. 
I have heard that the $et of your three cities moves about 
due to the chastity of your wife. 0 Lord of Danavas, I have 
come here to see that celebrated wife of yours. If you consider 
it proper, do not delay; let me see her. 
* 
* 
* 


V.iii. 26.90-96 
99 
On hearing the words of Narada, he looked at the Kaiicukin, 
the elderly staff-bearing officer of the womens' inner apart­
ment, endowed with good qualities. Delighted in his heart, the 
king made the quarters reverberate with his voice and told 
him: "0 Kaiicukin, may the chief queen accompanied by all 
the attendants of the inner apartment unhesitatingly grant an 
audience to Narada. " In view of the command of his master, 
he grasped the hand of Narada, entered the apartment and 
said to the queen: "This is Narada who has come to see you." 
On seeing the excellent sage, she bowed down to his feet and 
offered an excellent golden seat, Arghyapadya and other things. 
The holy sage who was pleased offered her the greatest bless­
ing and said: "0 queen, in the entire range of the three worlds, 
no other woman like you is seen, who •is chaste, well-behaved 
and endowed with truthfulness and cleanliness. It is by your 
power that the set of the three cities always whirls like a wheel." 
Ori hearing those words joyously uttered by Narada, the 
queen who was the most excellent one among righteous and 
pious ladies, devoutly asked the sage about the sacred rites: 
Riijiii (the queen) said: 
90-92. 
0 holy Sir, what are those Vratas in the world whereby 
Devas become pleased? What are the Danas (religious gifts) 
offered which yield great benefits? What are those holy obser­
vances of fasts included by learned ones among the holy rites 
meant for women, by the performance whereof virtuous ladies 
go to heaven? 0 highly esteemed one, mention all these things 
truthfully. I wish to know everything. Do speak unhesitatingly. 
Niirada said: 
93. 
Excellent! Excellent! 0 highly blessed lady, you have 
put such a question as will enable all ladies to get their piety 
increased by paying heed to it. 
94. 
By fasts and Danas husband and sons come under 
control. I shall tell you those rites which when performed always 
bring about ·honour from kinsmen. 
95-96. 
0 beautiful lady, I shall menti'on those rites which 
bring good results if performed and bad results if not per­
formed. If they are performed a Durbhagii (unfortunate woman) 


1 00 
Skanda Purii:r.ta 
becomes Subhaga (fortunate) . If they are not performed a Subhaga 
becomes Durbhaga. A woman without a son shall be blessed 
with a son if performed and cursed (on non-performance) . A 
virgin obtains a husband and another becomes deprived of the 
husband (when not performed) . 
97-99a. 
Those who offer these things do not go near Varna: 
Tiladhenu (a cow made of gingelly seeds) , gold, silver, cows, 
clothes, beverage, plot of land, scents, incense, unguents, sandals 
of wood or leather,· umbrella, meritorious fans, oil for foot 
massage, oil for head, bathing requisites, beds and seats. Those 
who give these (as Dana) do not go to Varna (- loka) . 
99b-l 00. If the following are offered to couples on Lalitadina 
(the day of Lalita, probably 5th day in the bright half of Asvina) , 
there shall be conjugal felicity in this world and hereafter; 
Honey, black gram, milk, ghee, salt, jaggery, medicine, bever­
age, plot of land, paddy, sugarcane juice and smooth red clothes. 
1 01-1 02a. 
The following things should be offered to a 
meritorious and handsome Brahmaᤂa of good conduct: I shall 
tell you, 0 queen, how these things should be given and on 
what Tithis: 
[ Tithis and Danas:] 
1 02b-1 04a. 
I Lunar day: A woman should observe the Vrata 
of purity on the Pratipada day and offer fuel to a Brahmaᤂa 
in the forenoon, reciting the Mantra: "May Hutasana (fire) be 
pleased with me. ,.;.0 beloved one of the king, in the course of 
her twenty-six births she will never experience either ailment 
or distress in her limbs and joints. 
1 04b-1 05a. 
II Lunar day: A woman who joyously offers butter 
to an important Brahmaᤂa on the second lunar day, shall become 
one endowed with a smooth, stender body. 
1 05b-1 07a. 
III Lunar day: Listen to the meritorious benefit 
of the woman who, on the third lunar day, offers salt to an 
excellent Brahmaᤂa, uttering the Mantra: "May Goddess Gauri 
be pleased with me. " A virgin will attain a husbanᥔ and will 
sport about with him likᥕ Uma (with Siva) . She will never be 
a widow. She will obtain great fame. 
1 07b-l 09,a. 
IV Lunar day: After observing the Vrata of Naktam 
(i.e. taking food only at night) on the fourth lunar day she 


V.iii. 26.1 09b-121 a 
1 01 
should offer sweetmeats (Modakas) to a BrahmaQa. She should 
utter the Mantra: "May the Lord of Devas, GaQanatha, Vinayaka 
be pleased." As a result of her act, 0 beautiful lady, there will 
never be any obstacle in any rite. So says the Grandfather (i.e. 
Brahma.) 
109b-1 1 0a. 
V Lunar day: A woman who offers gingelly seeds 
to a BrahmaQa on the fifth lunar day shall become endowed 
with beauty like Tilottama. 
1 10b-1 1 2a. 
VI Lunar day: A devout lady shall alwa.ys offer 
a fruit of Madhiika on the sixth lunar day with the Agni-born 
Lord (i.e. Karttikeya) in view to a BrahmaQa who has mastered 
the Vedas. Her son will become a great king like Skanda who 
is the most excellent one among the groups of Devas. He will 
be adored in all the worlds. 
1 1 2b-1 1 5a. 
VII Lunar day: With the Lord of the Cosmos, 
the Lord of Devas, Divakara (Sun-god) in view, a devout lady 
should honour an excellent BrahmaQa with gold. The merito­
rious benefit of that sacred rite has been extolled by excellent 
BrahmaQas. 0 queen, I shall mention it to you. Listen with 
concentration of mind, 0 chaste lady. None of these skin diseases 
will occur in (affect) her limbs even if the sins of prior births 
happen to be in force: Scabies, leprosy, (leucoderma, white 
patches, pachydermia etc. 
1 1 5b-1 1 7a. 
VIII Lunar day: On the eighth lunar day a de­
vout, beautiful lady should offer a black cow to a BrahmaQa 
with good conduct, uttering the Mantra, "May Mahdvara be 
pleased. " Her sin incurred in the course of many births per­
ishes. She will become endowed with riches. There is no doubt 
about this because th.e Dana is very excellent. 
1 1 7b-1 1 9a. 
IX Lunar day: A woman should devoutly offer 
to a BrahmaQa, scents and incense with Katyayanl in view on 
the ninth lunar day. Listen to its benefit. If her brother, father, 
son or husband were to enter the battlefield, they shall never 
become overwhelmed because they are protected by that Dana 
rite. 
1 19b-12 1 a. 
X Lunar day: 0 queen, a woman should offer 
sugarcane juice on the tenth lunar day to a BrahmᥖQa other 
than one with deficient limbs, with the Lokapalas (guardians 
of the worlds) in view. Due to that Dana, she becomes the most 


102 
Skanda Purii:r,.ta 
endearing one for all the worlds. There is no doubt about this: 
So said Sailkara. 
1 2l b-1 23a. 
XI and XII Lunar days: On the eleventh day, a 
woman should observe fast and should offer water to a BrahmaQ.a 
devoted to ViᤁQ.u on the twelfth day with NarayaQ.a in view. She 
will make people delighted with her touch and talk. She should 
purify people too. Since the gift of water will be of infinite 
benefit, it is considered great. 
1 23b-1 25a. 
XIII Lunar day: With great devotion, a woman 
should offer to a BrahmaQ.a oil for foot-massage and oil for the 
head with Kama (god of love) in view on the thirteenth lunar 
day. Mter death she may be born in any womb. In all those, 
she will never be separated from her husband. 
1 25b-126a. 
XIV Lunar day: A woman should offer to a 
BrahmaQ.a on the fourteenth lunar day, with Dharma in view, 
a utensil and sandals. In regard to her all the worlds are never 
imperilled. 
1 26b-127. 
XV Lunar day: Thus in the course of Sraddha 
at the close of every fortnight, she shall propitiate excellent 
BrahmaQ.as. 0 queen, her line of progeny shall always be unbroke:l). 
Thus the efficacy of the Tirthas and Dana offerings has been 
recounted to you. 
[Propitiation of Plants and Herbs:] 
1 28-1 30. Also, listen to the propitiation of Vanaspatis (plants 
and herbs) . One will attain heaven by approaching (devoutly) 
the following trees: Jarilbii, Nirilba, Tinduka, Madhiika, Amra, 
Amalaka, Salmali, Vata, Pippala, Sami, Bilva, Amalivrkᤁa, Kadali, 
Patali and other: meritorious trees. 
Niirada said: 
1 31-1 34a. 
If a Vrata is performed in the month of Caitra 
by a woman, other Vratas are not on a par with even the 
sixteenth fraction thereof. 
If it is listened to, 0 lady of good fortune, one will never 
see misfortune. Just as snow disappears when sunlight falls on 
it, so also misery and misfortune become dispelled due to this 
Vrata. 


V.iii.26.1 34b-142 
103 
Listen now to the procedure of propitiation of Lalita called 
Madhuka, 1 0 lady of good fortune. Even as it is being re­
counted it is conducive to ha,ppiness. 
1 34b-1 39. 
On the third lunar day of the bright half of 
Caitra a woman takes holy bath and keeps het mind pure. The 
image of Sarikara along with that of Uma is to be made out 
of the trunk of a Madhuka tree. They have to be duly installed 
by an excellent BrahmaQ.a. With scented flowers, incenᥗe, camphor 
and saffron, she adores the Lord with due utterance . of the 
Mantras. The feet are adored uttering the Mantra: "Obeisance 
to $iva. " The penis is worshipped uttering "Obeisance to 
Manmatha. " The belly is worshipped by uttering "Obeisance to 
Kalodara. " The neck is worshipped by uttering "Obeisance to 
NilakaQ.ᤃha. " The head is worshipped by '!ttering "Obeisance 
to Sarvatman (one identical with all, one who is the soul of 
all) . " 
She then adores Uma. The belly i s worshipped with the 
utterance "Obeisance to ᤏamodara ('one who has a lean belly') . 
The neck is worshipped by uttering the Mantra "Obeisance to 
SukaQ.ᤃha ( 'one with excellent neck'). The head is worshipped 
by uttering "Obeisance to Saubhagyadayini ·( 'One who grants 
conjugal felicity' ) . " The Arghya is offered later. 
[Arghya Mantra:] 
1 40. 
"Obeisance to you, 0 Lord of the chiefs of Devas, 0 
consort of Uma, 0 Lord of the cosmos. 0 Lord, accept this 
Arghya and destroy all my misfortunes. " 
1 4 1 . 
After the offering o f Arghya, the Karaka (waterpot) 
is offered. It is filled with water and it- is covered with a leaf 
of Madh uka and is offered along with a gold piece in accor­
dance with the capacity of the devotee. 
[ The Mantra for offering the Karaka:] 
1 42. 
"0 Lalita, the Karaka filled with water and endowed 
1 . 
Vv 1 34-1 50 give details of a different variety of Madhiika Trtiya. Goddess 
Lalita is identified with Madhiika tree. The Vrata begins on the 3rd day 
of the bright half of Caitra and is t.o be continued every month and is 
to be concluded on 3rd day of the bright half of Phalguna. 


104 
Skanda Purii:r.ta 
with Saubhagya (conjugal felicity) is offered to you. It should 
increase conjugal felicity etc. " 
1 43-1 52. 
Uttering this Mantra, the excellent Karaka is 
offered to a Brahmal).a. Till the next third lunar day of the 
bright half of the month the devotee should avoid salt. After 
praying for the forgiveness of the Goddess and the Lord of 
Devas the devotee should eat only the Havis at night. This 
procedure should be adopted every month . The Vrata is con­
cluded on the third day of the bright half of Phalguna. 
Salt is to be offered in the month of Vaisakha and Ghee 
should be offered in the month of Jyeᤁtha. In the month of 
ᥘa<;lha Niᤁpava (variety of rice) is to be offered. Milk is to be 
offered in Sraval).a. Mudgas (green gram) are to be offered in 
the month ofNabhasya (Bhadrapada) . Paddy is offered in .ASvayuja. 
A vessel of Sarkara (sugar) is offered in Karttika and also a 
Karaka filled with juice. In the month of Margasirᤁa. Karpasa 
(cotton) is offered along with a Karaka filled with ghee. Kumkuma 
(saffron) is offered in the month of Pauᤁa and in the month 
of Magha a vessel filled with gingelly seeds is offered. In the 
month of Phalguna a vessel filled with sweetmeats is to be 
given. What is to be offered in the succeeding Trtiya should 
be avoided in the course of the current month. The procedure 
in the case of these later rites is the same as before, 0 beloved 
one to mind. The same image made of Madhuvrkᤁa i& to be 
worshipped regularly. Ultimately everything is handed over to 
the Brahmal).a preceptor. 
Listen to the rite of Udyapana1 (ritualistic conclusion of a 
Vrata) . The devotee goes to the Madhuvrkᤁa with all requisites 
kept ready. The image is fixed in the centre of Madhuka and 
Sarva stationed there as Uma sharing half of his body is to be 
worshipped. 
1 53-1 59. 
Sarva is to be worshipped with profuse offer-
ings of the adoration and repeatedly with Kurilktima, and garlands 
of very tender flowers as well as Kusurilbha flowers and Kesara. 
Twelve couples should be offered pairs of Kausumbha (red in 
hue) cloths. resembling the flowers of Atasi for Wl'!aring. Each 
<. - these pairs should be given pairs of sandals, umbrellas, necklaces, 
1 . 
The Udyapana (concluding procedure of the Vrata) i s described i n vv 
1 50-1 69. 


V.iii.26.160-169 
1 05 
chains, bangles, rings and beds with splendid sheets covering 
them. They should be smeared with Kurhkuma and adored 
with many flowers. They are made to stay in the Madhiikavasaka 
(grove of Madhiika trees) and offered various jewels and fed 
duly. After they have taken food, they are to be made to rest 
on the beds and forgiveness is requested for since everything 
is rooted in the Guru. The Guru should be known as Mahesvara. 
If the Guru is pleased, the entire world consisting of Suras and 
Asuras is pleased. If one wishes for one's welfare, one should 
offer unto the Guru whatever one likes the most in the world, 
whatever endearing thing one has in the house. These things 
are to be offered by the rich, well-to-do people. What should 
be given by others is as mentioned below: 
1 60-1 69. 
Others should worship two> couples duly, the 
first couple being any and the second that of Guru and his 
wife. In adoring them, one should avoid Vittasiithya (over-scru­
pulousness in the expenditure) . Then forgiveness is craved 
from the Goddess, the Lord, the BrahmaQa and the Guru: "0 
Goddess Lalita, just as you are never separated from Sarhbhu, 
so also grant me non-separation from my husband and sons. " 
It is by performing the observance of Madhiikatrtiya in 
accordance with this procedure that IndraQi attained the sta­
tus of the wife of Indra and also an excellent son. She attained 
conjugal felicity and good fortune in all the worlds and also 
excellent happiness with all prosperity. 
A virgin who performs this Vrata in accordance with this 
procedure attains an excellent husband like IndraQi who got 
Indra. 
An unfortunate one attains good fortune; a fortunate one 
begets a son . . A lady with a son gains everlasting happiness. She 
never sees grief ·anywhere. 
Misfortune accumulated in the course of many births cer­
tainly perishes. The lady after death goes to heaven and re­
joices along with Uma. 
Mter enjoying the worldly pleasures for more than hun­
dreds of crores of years she is born into the world again when 
she gets a king as her husband. 
The lady of good fortune then becomes richly endowed with 
beauty and bears a son destined to become a king. 
Thus the Vrata that is the most excellent one of all Vr;at?.s 


1 06 
Skanda Pura:T_ta 
has been narrated to you completely. 0 lady of good fortune, 
whatever desire you have within your heart do ask for it. 
CHAPTER TWENTYSEVEN 
Creating Agitation in Tripura 
Sri Miirkar.uf,eya said: 
1-6. 
On hearing the words of Narada, the queen said: "Be 
pleased, 0 eminent Brahmal).a. Accept whatever Danas you 
wish. I shall offer you gold, jewels as well as different kinds of 
garments. Other rare and valuable things too I shall offer. to 
you. " 
O n hearing the words of the queen, Narada spoke thus: "0 
fair lady, let it be given to others, to the Brahmal).as who lack 
_ means of sustenance. We are richly endowed with everything 
acceptable and accessible always through devotio_n." 
On being told thus the queen invited poor Brahmal).as who 
were masfers of the Vedas and Vedari.gas and began distribut­
ing gifts as would be conducive to Saubhagya (conjugal bliss 
and fortune) . "May Hari and Sari.kara be always pleased with 
me due to this Dana rite that increases Saubhiigya (conjugal 
felicity) as instructed by Narada. " 
Thereafter the queen said · to the great sage Narada: 
The Queen said: 
7-1 3. Dana has been made as instructed by you. It is done 
with my husband in view. 0 excellent Brahmal).a, in every birth 
of mine may Bal).a alone be my husband. 0 dear excellent 
Brahmal).a, I don't have any other deity excepting Bal).a. On 
the strength of this truth, may my husband live for a hundred 
years. Women need not perform any other holy rite as the 
husband alone is their deity. Still at your instance the Dana has 
been duly offered. 0 honourable Sir, now let us do our duty. 
I to my husband, 0 Brahmal).a Sage, go now. May blessing be 
granted (to me) . 
* 
* 
* 


V.iii.28. 1-12 
107 
Then, 0 excellent king, Narada took leave of her saying "So 
be it," captivated the hearts of all and vanished from there 
with his mind dwelling on another matter. The BriihmaQ.a was 
duly adored by sky-walkers. 
Then, 0 descendant of Bharata, all of them (the wives of 
BiiQ.a) turned their minds towards their husband. Deluded and 
enchanted by Niirada all of them became pallid and devoid of 
lustre. 
CHAPTER TWENTYEIGHT 
Destruction of Tripura: 
Glorification of Jviilesvara and Ama1'f!svara 1irthas 
Miirka'P-4-eya said: 
1 . 
In the meantime Rudra occupied the banks of Narmada. 
While he was sporting in the company of Uma, Narada arrived 
there. 
2. 
Mter bowing down to the Lord of the chiefs of Devas, 
Sankara along with Umii, he submitted to the Lord the details 
of what happened then at Tripura: 
3-4. "At the behest of my Lord (you) , I went to the place 
where BiiQ.a's palace was situated. Mter meeting BiiQ.a as per 
formalities, I went to the great Antal).pura. There I saw thou­
sands of the queens of BiiQ.a, the intelligent. one. Then I stirred 
up that city in a befitting manner and in the way it had been 
desired and have now returned. " 
5. 
On hearing the words of Narada, the Lord gave his 
approval saying, "Well done! Well done! " Then the Lord of 
Devas pondered over the whirling of Tripura. 
6-7. He thought: 'Tripura moves like the discy.s whirled 
from his hand by ViᤁQ.U, the powerful one. It has great velocity 
and it is extensive. It has been preserved by my splendour. 
BiiQ.a is reputed all over the world as one devoted to me. Word 
has been already given by me particularly to the BrahmaQ.as. '· 
8-1 2. Thus Mahe§vara, the Lord of Devas, the L.;>rd of the 
people, thought for a long time regarding the successful completion 


1 08 
Skanda Purii1Ja 
of the task. 1 The Three-eyed Lord meditated upon Mandara as 
the bow, the earth as the bow-string, the eternal Lord ViᤄQu 
as an arrow with the blazing Fire-god with faces (mouths) on 
all sides as the sharp arrowhead, the excellent-feathered GarU<;Ia 
in the centre of the two feathers at the tail-end. Then he made 
the Earth as the chariot and the two Asvins as the yoke. (He 
fixed) god Indra as axel, Kubera (the Lord of wealth) at the 
front. Yama (was posted) at the right side, while terrible Kala 
on the left; the Sun and the Moon were the wheels and Gandharvas 
spokes. 
1 3-20. 
SurajyeHha (Brahma) was made the charioteer; the 
Vedas were made the excellent horses. The Vedailgas were 
turned into the iron bits in the mouth and the Chandas-s 
(Metres) were made the reins. The orally uttered Omkara was 
made the whip by Mahdvara. Dhata was placed at the head 
and Vidhata behind. The Marutas (Winds) gathered from all 
the quarters were placed in the Urdhva Yantra (the overhead 
mechanical device) . All the following ones were fixed to all the 
joints: great Serpents, Pisacas, Siddhas, Vidyadharas, GaQas and 
groups of Bhiitas. Meru was stationed in the centre of the pole; 
the great mountain (Mahagiri) was beneath the pole. The terrible 
serpents were stationed in the mechanical device; VaruQa and 
Nairrta in the Samya (part of the chariot) . Gayatri and Savitri 
were stationed at the place where the rein was fastened. All 
round in the flagstaff of the chariot were placed Satya (truth) , 
Sauca (cleanliness) , Dama (control of the senses) and Rakᤄa 
(protection) . After making the chariot (embellished with) all 
the Devas, Mahdvara, the Lord of Devas, stood ready (for 
battle) wearing the coat of mail and holding the sword with 
the fingers having protectors made of leather of Godha (mountain 
lizard) . After adjusting his garments and binding the matted 
tresses of hair, he got his divine bow ready and fitted his excellent 
chariot. Stationed in the centre of the chariot, 0 Yudhiᤄthira, 
the Lord shone brilliantly. 
21-34. 
With the twang of the bow, he made the three 
worlds quake. After making the Vaisakha-Sthana (? special warrior 
posture) , Hara remained steady there. After surveying for a 
1 . 
The description of the Chariot .and other preparations against Tripura 
are reminiscent of similar preparations given in Mbh, Kan:ta, Chs. 33-34. 
Here the enemy is BaQ.a, a devotee of SiVa. 


V.iii.28.35-44 
1 09 
long time, the Lord became angry with the eyes turning red. 
He then controlled himself and meditated on the great Man­
tra. With a desire to destroy the set of three cities, he released 
(shot) the arrow when all the three of them stood together in 
the space. For the period of a split half of a moment, he saw 
the group of the three cities and smote them with an arrow 
having three joints and three blades. 
In regard to the set of the three cities, 0 most excellent one 
among the descendants of Bharata, all the people became highly 
frightened. The terrible ones in the form of Kala began to 
laugh boisterously for the destruction of all Asuras. The men 
experienced pain and distress. They remained motionless with 
eyes not at all winking as though they •vere drawn in a picture. 
The Devas in their abodes prattled and laughed loudly. They 
(Asuras?) saw themselves adorned in red garments in dreams. 
With the red garlands round their heads, they fell into muddy 
whirlpools. They saw themselves with oil smeared on the heads. 
0 excellent king, they saw themselves riding in the vehicles 
drawn by donkeys. The great Samvartaka wind, resembling the 
final destructi·on of the Yugas, uprooted many of the houses 
and groups of trees. There were earthquakes with loud thun­
der-like reports. Thousands of meteors fell down. The Lord 
showered blood mixed with · much rough gravel. In the sacri­
ficial fire-pits of the Brahmal).as, the fire, though properly oblated, 
burned with smoke and sparks. The elephants were rid of the 
stage of rut. The horses became deprived of their Sattva ( in­
trinsic strength) . Even when not played upon, there came sound 
from thousands of instruments. Though not shaken, the flag­
staffs and various kinds of umbrellas fell down. The trees and 
the leaves began to burn. Everything was upset and there was 
much of hue and cry. 
35-44. 
The violent gust of wind demolished the gardens 
of various kinds. Induced by it, all the flames and sparks blazed. 
The trees, hedges, creepers and houses all round were envel­
oped by the fire that blazed in all the directions. Everything 
that burned was seen blazing with the lustre of a Kimsuka leaf. 
On account of the smoke, it was impossible to go from house 
to house. All the people in Tripura began, to wail and lament 
on being completely burned by the fire of the anger of Hara. 
The whole city of Tripura enkindled in all the quarters, began 


1 10 
Skanda Puriir.ta 
to burn. The tops and peaks were shattered in thousands and 
they fell down. The smoke-enveloped fire was seen blazing all 
round. It spread from quarter to quarter, dancing as it were. 
It rushed through forests, temples, all the houses and turrets. 
Urged by Kala himself, the fire blazed everywhere in the city. 
Burning furiously as though enkindled by the anger of Hara, 
it burned everything in the worlds. The whole region around 
the three cities consisting of children and old people burnt 
along with the vehicles, forests and doorways of the houses. 
Some were engaged in taking food. Others were engaged in 
drinking liquor. The courtezans were engaged in dancing and 
singing. Distressed by the flames of fire, they embraced one 
another. 0 excellent king, all those who were being burnt 
became senseless. 
45-60a. 
Other Danavas there were burned and deluded by 
the fire. With their faces overwhelmed with the smoke, they 
could not go elsewhere. The lotus ponds abounding in golden 
lotuses and stirred up by the swans and Karal).c,iava birds and 
_the different kinds of tanks and wells blazed there. The parks 
in the cities and the lakes were seen burnt by fire. They were 
covered by faded lotuses. The extensive buildings and palaces 
over a range of eight Yojanas, resembling huge peaks of mountains, 
originally rendered splendid by jewels, were seen now com­
pletely burnt down and shattered on the ground. When the 
men, women, children and old people were being burnt every­
where, the ruthless fire went on burning. There was loud 
lamentation and wailing. 0 excellent king, some woman was 
sleeping soundly. Another was in intoxicated state. One lady 
of distinction had been sporting about and lying on her large 
bed. A woman of large eyes bedecᤰed in a number of neck­
laces, who had been asleep, became distressed due to the smoke. 
The wretᤱhed woman too fell into the fire. A certain woman 
fond of her son had been closely embracing her S<?n. She too 
was burnt by the blazing fire in Tripura. A certain golden­
complexioned lady bedecked in sapphire saw her husband fallen. 
She too fell over him. A certain lady of solar lustre was lying 
asleep on her lover. When distressed by fire, 0 king, she embraced 
his neck still more closely. Another lady of cloud-like complex­
ion had a loose girdle of gold and white upper cloth. Shᤲ fell 
down on the ground. A certain lady had the lustre of the moon 
and a Kunda flower. She was adorned in sapphires. She was 


V.iii.28.60b-79a 
l l l 
found praying to the fire with palms joined i n reverence and 
kept over her head. While the clothes of a certain woman were 
burning the tresses of hair of another woman were seen blaz­
ing, 0 descendant of Bharata. All were frightened by even 
golden vessels, that resembled the blazing fire. A certain ex­
cellent lady distressed by too much of misery, lamented like a 
female osprey on seeing the husband reduced to ashes. She 
fell down on his head and embraced him closely. Another 
woman saw her husband reduced to ashes in her own house. 
She was distressed very much and lamented like a female osprey. 
A certain woman saw her mother and father senseless. She 
trembled and fell down on the ground in utter distress like an 
exhausted mare. A certain excellent woman on being burned 
ran about here and there. When a woman turned her face she 
could not see her son who h.ad been in her lap. 
60b-64a. 
Kurilbhila's house was burnt and it fell on the 
ground. So also the ruthless fire burnt the houses of Kiiᤄmar:u;la, 
Dhiimrᤳ. Kuhaka, Baka, Viriipanayana, Viriipakᤄa, Surilbha, 
:Pirilbha, Raudra, the excellent Asura Prahlada, DaQ.«;lapaQ.i, 
VipaQ.i, Sirilhavaktra, Dundubha, Sarilhrada, J)iQ.«;ii, MuQ.«;ii, 
Kravyada, Vyaghravaktra, BaQ.a's brother and BaQ.a. So also the 
houses of other Danavas, arrogant due to their strength. 
64b-70. In every house the women who were being burnt 
began to lament uttering piteous words. They found them­
selves without support. They approached Siva: "0 Pavaka, if 
you have any enmity towards the menfolk of the demon, what 
offence has been committed by the women who are like a 
cuckoo in the cage of domesticity. You are not ruthless. You 
are not too wicked. What anger do you cherish towards the 
womenfolk? Have you not heard this in the world that women 
should not be killed at any cost? But in your case you have the 
additional power in burning when you are induced by the 
wind. Mercy has not been shown by you. You do not have any 
chivalry towards women. Even barbarians (Mlecchas) show mercy 
on hearing the words of women. But a barbarian of barbarians 
is insensitive. He can not be restrained. " Even as the women 
were lamenting thus, there, 0 descendant of Bharata, the fire 
continued to blaze with profuse flames and sparks. On seeing 
all these, BaQ.a who also felt scorched said: 
71-79a. 
"I have been a sinful soul in having slighted Hara 


1 1 2 
Skanda Purii:IJa 
and so I am doomed. Sinful and foolish that I have been, my 
(future) worlds have been destroyed. 
Cows and Brahmat:tas in this world as well as hereafter have 
been slain. Foodstuffs and beverages have been destroyed, so 
also Mathas (religious institutions) , parks and penance-groves. 
The hermitages of the sages, the parks of deities, the abodes 
of Gat:tas etc. have been demolished. Due to that sin my pen­
ance and power have been upset. What shall I do with my 
.wealth? With my kirigdom? With my Antal).pura? I had been of 
deluded intellect. I would rather seek refuge in the feet of 
Sail.kara. Neither mother nor father, neither kinsmen nor othᤴr 
people excepting Mahe§ana can be the dispeller of· the great­
est distress. The fruit of the sin committed by oneself is to be 
tasted by oneself. I shall also get burned along with all those 
good men . " Mter saying thus he kept the Sivalinga on the 
head and hurriedly went out of the house. He was enveloped 
by fire. Utterly distressed, with all the limbs sweating profusely, 
faltering frequently he began to eulogize Hara with words choked 
and sought refuge in him. 
-
79b-82. "0 Sankara, if I am to be killed, I have already 
been completely burned by the fire of your anger. 0 Mahadeva, 
let not this Linga be destroyed by you with your favour, 0 
Great Lord. I have adored, 0 most excellent one among Suras, 
I have meditated with devotion, 0 Lord. Hence it behoves you 
to guard this which is dearer to _me than my life. If I am to 
be blessed by you, 0 most excellent one among Suras, or if I 
am to be killed, 0 Mahadeva, let my devotion to you be con­
stant in every birth, whether among animals, insects or birds, 
in any of the brutish creatures as a result of my own Karma; 
let my devotion to you be firm and unshakeable." 
83. 
Mter saying thus the highly
. 
esteemed Bat:ta, the most 
excellent ᤵme among devout persons, propitiated the Lord of 
the chiefs of Devas by means of a hymn as follows: 
[Eulogy of Siva:] 
Ba7Ja said: 
84-1 00. 
0 Siva, 0 Sankara, obeisance to the annihilator of 
everything. Obeisance to the one that dispels the distress of 
those who are afraid of the worldly existence. Obeisance, 0 
Lord, 0 destroyer of the body of the Flower-weaponed One 


V.iii.28.84-l 00 
1 1 3 
(Manmatha) , the person who likes to please young women. Be 
victorious, 0 Lord of Parvati; be victorious, 0 essence of the 
ultimate truth. 0 Lord who have made a necklace of terrible 
serpents, be victorious, 0 Lord who have applied pure ashes 
on his limbs. Be victorious, 0 root-cause of all Mantras, the 
sole deserving person in the universe. Be victorious, 0 Lord 
with clusters of matted hairs rendered tawny by the venomous 
serpents. Be victorious, 0 Lord whose bow Pinaka is held (ready) 
by Bhairava. Be victorious, 0 odd-eyed one, 0 Lord without 
attachment. Be victorious, 0 Sarikara wearing the waves of 
Ganga. Be victorious, 0 Lord with terrible forms, with the 
Khatvariga in the hand, 0 moon-crested one. Be victorious, 0 
most praise-wortJ-ly one in all the worlds. Be victorious, 0 Lord 
of the most excellent ones among ᤶuras, 0 essence of the 
world of Suras. Be victorious, 0 Sarva, who have burnt down 
all essential things. Be victorious, 0 Lord worthy of being glorified, 
the purest one of all the worlds. Be victorious, 0 Bull-emblemed 
One, with conducts '?f diverse kinds. Be victorious, 0 Lord 
with well-arranged garland of human skeletons, 0 Lord, 0 
Kala unto the skeleton of the body of Aghasura. Be victorious, 
0 blue-throated one, 0 Lord with the gait of an excellent bull. 
Be victorious, 0 suppressor of the sins of all the worlds. Be 
victorious, 0 Lord whose feet have been bowed to by Siddhas, 
Suras and Asuras. Be victorious, 0 Rudra who take one across 
the terrible ocean of worldly existence. Be victorious, 0 Girisa 
worthy of being honoured by the Lord of Suras. Be victorious, 
0 Lord of subtle form, 0 Lord worthy of being pondered over. 
Be victorious, 0 Lord by whom the Tripura has been burned, 
0 intrinsic strength of the universe. Be victorious, 0 truth of 
all scriptures. Be victorious, 0 Lord difficult to be compre­
hended. 0 redeemer from worldly existence, 0 redeemer of 
devotees from the terrible, big ocean of worldly existence full 
of the sins of Kali. Be victorious, 0 Lord of the groups of 
Suras, Asuras and Devas. Obeisance, 0 Lord with faces of horse, 
monkey, lion and lordly elephant. 0 Lord of great shortness, 
stoutness and great length! It is impossible for Amaras to perceive 
you, 0 Nira·iijana (one devoid of afflicting attachment) . I bow 
down to your feet. Be victorious, 0 Lord a,:companied by Arilba 
(Mother goddess) , 0 Lord Hara having the splendour of ex­
cellent eyes. What is it that one 'Vho reaches the greatest height 


1 1 4 
Skanda Pura7Ja 
does not destroy by not attaining you? Then, even penance will 
be one that disturbs mostly; though great, it is very terrible. 
Neither sons nor kinsmen, neither wives nor all the friends of 
the world will approach one in difficulties, one who moves 
about alone. Whatever has been done by one, auspicious or 
inauspicious, that alone will accompany him like a caravan 
when he goes ahead. There is no fear unto a person who 
moves about without much wealth about him. A rich man will 
not be rid of fear. Hence I shall forsake wealth. Greedy per­
sons commit sins. Even after hearing all about righteousness, 
after having comprehended it, men are not pure in every detail. 
You are ViᤄQU, the Lord of the universe. You are the eternal 
Lord in the form of Brahma, 0 Lord of the chiefs of Devas. 
You are Indraᤷ 0 Lord of Suras. Obeisance to you. You are the. 
Earth; you are VaruQa; you are the wind; you are the Fire-god; 
you are the initiation; you are the householder performing 
the sacrifice; you are the firmament; you are Soma (the Moon, 
the Soma juice) ; you are the Sun; you are the Lord of wealth; 
you are Varna; you are Guru Uupiter) ; the entire universe is 
pervaded by you in the same manner as the three worlds are 
enveloped by the refulgent splendour of the Sun. 
101. 
On hearing this hymn composed by B;iQa, Lord Mahe5vara 
eschewed his anger. Delighted within himself he spoke these 
· words: 
lsvara said: 
1 02-103. From now onwards, 0 Danava, you need not be 
afraid. Stay in your golden abode or by my side along with your 
sons, grandsons, kinsmen and wife. From now onwards, 0 dear 
one, you are one who cannot be killed by any enemy. 
Marka7Jt!eya said: 
104-105a. 
0 descendant of Bharata, again a boon was 
granted by the Lord of Devas: "Honoured and adored by Suras 
and Asuras, do reside happily at your pleasure in heaven, mortal 
world and the nether regions, without perishing and without 
changing. " 
105b-1 12. 
Thereafter, Rudra restrained the fire. His third 
Pura was saved by Lord Sarilbhu. The other two engulfed by 


V.iii.28.1 1 3-121 
1 15 
the clusters of flames fell down on the ground. Rising half 
above the flames reached heaven (?) . The sound Hii-Hii uttered 
by the groups of sages was great and loud. So also the lamen­
tations of the gods of great esteem, Siddhas, Vidyadharas and 
others. One piece fell on Srisaila. 0 king, the second one fell 
on the mountain Amarakar).taka. Since it fell down blazing it 
is remembered as Jvaldvara1 • When the Tripura was burnt 
down, 0 king, when the excellent piece fell down, Lord Rudra 
stayed there as the person restraining the clusters of flames for 
the sake of protecting the sages continuing lamentations of 
Hii-Hii. Mahdana stood there accompanied by Uma and Vrᤄabha, 
his own form. He who at least remembers mentally Amarakal).ᤸka 
with devotion, shall undoubtedly attain more merit than that 
of Candrayal).a. 
1 1 3-1 20. 
Since, 0 most excellent one among the de-
scendants of Bharata, the excellent mountain is highly meri­
torious, it shall always be destructive of all sins. It is overgrown 
with various kinds of trees and creepers. It is rendered splen­
did by different kinds of flowers. Various kinds of hedges and 
creepers abound therein. It is overspread by various creepers. 
It is infested by lions and tigers. It is adorned by herds of deer. 
It is always joyously filled with the roaring sound of the beasts 
of prey. There on that mountain Sarikara, the Lord of the 
chiefs of Devas, is served by thousands of gods, the chiefs of 
whom are Brahma, Indra and ViᤄI).U. He who falls off the precipices 
of this mountain Amarakal).ᤃaka, sports about successively in all 
the fourteen worlds, 0 king, i.e. the worlds2 of Indra, Vahni, 
Kubera, Vayu, Yama, Niqti, Varul).a, Soma, Siirya, Brahma (whose 
region is devoid of pain) , ViᤄI).u, Umarudra and thereafter that 
of Isvara. The greatest world is that of Sadasiva. It is quiescent, 
subtle; the luminosity that is beyond all sense-organs. An in­
telligent devotee gets merged into it undoubtedly in accor­
dance with this procedure. 
Yudhi6!hir(l said: 
1 2 1 . 
0 excellent sage, is there any special procedure envisaged 
I . 
The Tirtha Jvale5vara is etyhJologically connected with the burning o f the 
second city out of Tripuras. 
2. 
A list of 1 4 Bhuvanas. 


1 16 
Skanda Purii:fJ,a 
in regard to falling down the precipice? 0 great sage, I have 
a great doubt in this regard; do tell me everything. 
Sri Miirka1J4eya said: 
1 22-1 32. 
Listen, 0 son of Pai).QU, I shall tell you that 
procedure. Mter performing a rite at the outset, a devotee 
shall fall down the precipice. He shall at first perform three 
Krcchra rites after performing the Japa a million times. He 
should take in only vegetables (greens) and barley water. He 
should take ablutions three times (a day) and remain clean. 
He should worship Isa, the three-eyed Lord of Devas, three 
times. 0 great king, the number of Homas shall be one-tenth 
thereof(?) He should perform the Japa of the Lord a hundred 
thousand times and worship with scents and garlands. At night 
he shall in dream see himself seated in an aerial chariot. Thereafter 
he should hurl himself. One who hurls himself in accordance 
with this procedure .shall attain the heavenly world and sport 
about along with Devas. Mter enjoying soul-stirring pleasures 
for thirty crore thirty thousand years, he shall return to . the 
earth and enjoy the whole earth under his single· umbrella. He 
will be adored by the people. Freed from ailments and grief 
he will live for a hundred years. That Tirtha is well-known in 
all the three worlds as Jvaleiivara. 0 son of Kunti, the river Jvala 
created by Siva flows there. Mter extinguishing the fire in the 
city of Bal).a, it joins Reva, 0 great king. The devotee should 
take his holy batli. there in accordance with the injunctions. 
Duly uttering the Mantras he shall propitiate the Pitrs and 
deities with water mixed with gingelly seeds and offerings of 
balls of rice. He shall attain the benefit of Paul).<;iarika sacri­
fice. 0 king, he who performs Anasaka ( 'no destruction', ' not 
taking food') in that Tirtha is rid of all sins. He goes to Rudraloka. 
1 33-1 42. 
He shall become the Lord of Amaras (Devas) 
served by hundr᤹ds of Devas and attended upon by groups of 
sages. So he shall be excessively meritorious. The Amarakal).taka 
. Tirtha _extending to a Yojana all round is very meritorious. It 
is excellent and meritorio,us, because there are crores of Rudras. 
If a devotee circumambulates that lofty mountain, it is un­
doubtedly ,as good as though the entire earth has been 
circumambulated. The three kinds of sins incurred through 


V.iii.29.1-14 
1 1 7 
mind, words and deeds become destroyed: So said Sarikara. 
0 king, by the side of Amare8vara is the Tirtha Sakresvara. 
Formerly it was installed by Sakra after performing penance. 
The auspicious Tirtha name"d Kusavarta has been created bY. 
Brahma. It is well known as BrahmakuJ:l<;ia. Beyond that is 
Harhsatirtha. So also Arhbariᤄa Tirtha and Mahakalesvara. To 
the east of Kaveri is the Tirtha Matrkesvara. These are on the 
southern bank of Reva, 0 great scion of the family of Bharata. 
They dispel sins if they are resorted to, bathed in or if the 
Dana rite is performed. Siva is famous as Bhairava on Bhrguturiga, 
0 great king. To the south thereof is the Tirtha Capalesvara. 
These are situated on the northern bank of Reva. They dispel 
misery. By worshipping them and bowing to them, one shall 
attain the benefit of the pilgrimage. They cause obstacles to 
men, if they are not visited or adored. 
CHAPTER TWENTYNINE 
The Greatness of the Confluence of Kiiveri and Narmada 
YudhiElhira said: 
1-5. 
0 excellent one, KaverP is well known in the three 
worlds. 0 MarkaJ:l<;ia, I wish to listen to her .1'eCll greatness. 
What is the mode of visiting that river? 0 Lord, what is the 
benefit of the touch thereof? 0 Sage, what benefit accrues 
from ablution, Japa,· Dana and Upavasa (observance of fast 
there at the confluence of Kaveri) ? Do narrate, 0 highly es­
teemed one. I have heard that any holy rite heard, seen, narrated, 
performed or approved of does sanctify one. It is the Vedic 
statement, 0 sage, that as in the case of Dharma, so in that 
of heaven and hell too. 
Sri Miirka7J4eya said: 
6-1 4. Excellent! Excellent! 0 highly esteemed one, since 
1 . . 
This is a small tributary of Narmada and not the famous river of Karnatak. 
The attainment of the Kingship of Yak¿as is attributed to the sacred 
efficacy of the confluence of Kaveri and Narmada. 


118 
Skanda Pura1YJ 
you have asked me, listen with concentration to the excellent 
benefit of Kaveri. There is a Yalqa of great intrinsic strength, 
well-known by the name Kubera. By the power of the Tirtha, 
0 king, he became the king of Yak¢as. 
Hence listen to it along with the proper procedure (of bath 
etc.) with great devotion, 0 king of great esteem. He attained 
Siddhi through (the merit accrued from bath in) the confluence 
of Kaveri. 
In the confluence, well-known in the world, of Kaveri and 
Narmada, Kubera who was really valourous, took his holy bath 
and became cleari. He · dufy observed all the restraints (and 
instructions) based on the injunctions of the sacred scriptures, 
0 excellent one among men. He propitiated the eternal Mahadeva 
with single'-minded concentration. He spent a month taking 
food orice a day. Then he spent some time taking food on the 
sixth day only? Then he spent some time, 0 excellent·king, by 
observing fast for a fortnight. The sensible one, thereafter, 
spent some time by taking· in only roots, greens and fruits. 
Then for some time he stayed in the Tirtha with moss for his 
food. He spent some time with the observancԑ of expiations 
called Paraka and Krcchra, 0 honoured one. Then (he spent) 
some time with the observance of CandrayaQa and then some 
time with wind and water as food. Thus, 0 excellent one among 
men, eschewing lust and attachment, he stayed there for more 
than a hundred years torturing his body .and making it ema­
ciated. 
1 5-25. 
At the end of a hundred years, Mahe5vara, the Lord 
of Devas, became pleased with his great devotion and spoke to 
him smilingly: "0 Yalqa of great strength and excellent holy 
rites, choose a .boon. I have become pleased with your devo­
tion. I sԒall grant you what you wish. " 
The YaRa said: 
If you are pleased, : 0 Lord of Devas along with Uma, 0 
Saiikara, let me be the Lord of all the Yak¢as from to-day 
without an erid and free from any change and reduction, with 
devotion unto you duly kept before me. 0 Paramesvara, grant 
unto me the inclination for righteous · actions. 


V.iii.29.26-37 
1 19 
i.fvara said: 
What has been requested for by you is the fruit of your own 
righteousness? The same is granted. 
· 
Mter saying this Hara vanished. 
He too had his holy ablution in accordance wit_h the injunc­
tions. He propitiated the Pitrs and deities. Taking leave of the 
Tirtha, he went Ԋorne with his objectS achieved. Honoured by 
Yak¢as, he had his coronation in accordance with the injunc­
tions. He ruled over the extensive excellent kingdom. 
0 sinless one, there many other Suras, Siddhas, Yak¢as, 
Gandharvas, Kinnaras, groups of celestial damsels .and sages 
have attained spiritual perfection. Hence , they know that the 
confluence of K.averi is ·destructive of a.ll slgs. It is the gateway 
unto all heavenly worlds, 0 Yudhi¢Ɔhira. If people take their 
holy bath in the Kaveri confluence and offer libations with 
gingel!y seeds, they are blessed. They are noble-souled and 
they have led their life excellently, 0 dear one. Ten earlier 
and ten later generations on the mother's side as well as those 
on the father's side of the devotee are redeemed by him from 
the hellish ocean. 
26-37. 
Hence, a man must make every effort to have his 
holy ablution there. He should worship Lord Isvara if he seeks 
the eternal state (i.e. Mok¢a) . 0 king, Snana, Daria and Arcana 
(adoration) performed devoutly by men (there) have · more 
benefit than a horse-sacrifice, 0 excellent one among men. 
Everlasting heavenly pleasure is obtained through Homa; the 
life-span gets increased due to ]apa; one attains the eternal 
region characterised by Sivakala(?) through meditation. 
0 Lord of men, one who enters fire in that Tirtha, shall stay 
in Agniloka until the annihilation of all living beings. 
0 excellent one among men, listen to the. meritorious benefit 
of that person who observes the rite of fasting in the Tirtha. 
He will rejoice with deities in an aerial chariot resembling the 
sun and fully occupied by Gandharvas and Apsaras. He will be 
fanned by excellent women. 
. 
For sixty thousand years and sixty centuries he sports about 
stationed in Rudraloka. At the end he comes to the earth born . 
as a king enjoying all pleasures and engaged in munificent 
gifts. Freed from anguish and grief, he shall live fot a hundred 
years. 


120 
Skanda Purii:r;a 
0 king, River Kaveri has all these good qualities. She is well­
known in all the three worlds at the confluence of Narmada. 
Those who have controlled their speech, body and mind and 
those who are engaged in the meditation on one worthy of 
being meditated upon, at the confluence of Kaveri, 0 dear 
one, shall also attain salvation. 
Listen, 0 excellent king, I shall recount another miraculous 
thing. What other (river) is on a par with the river in all the 
three worlds? 
There is no doubt about this that ·those who have reached 
Narmada, those who circumambulate her, and those who drink 
her water ·are meritorious. 
38-43. 
For another fifteen births there will not be any 
break in the line of their succession. Their sin gets dissolved 
like snow at the time of sunrise. A man who takes his holy . 
ablution in Kaveri obtains the benefit usually attained at the 
confluence of Ganga and Yamuna. It is remembered as eight 
times more beneficial when Tuesday coincides with the four­
teenth lunar day, during Vyatipata, during the transit of the 
Sun and when Rahu and the Moon come in conjunction (lu­
nar eclipse) . 
If at the ᤺
onfluence of Ganga and Yamuna the merit of 
ablution is equal to the weight of Yavas (barley grains) eighty 
in number, at the confluence of Kaveri and Narmada th᤻ same 
is remembered as eight times more. Ganga is honoured by 
sixty thousand ᤐetrapalas (Guardians of holy shrines) . Other 
Tirthas are guarded by half that number. There is no doubt 
about it. The confluences of the rivers mentioned in Amardvara 
are guarded by eighty thousand ᤐetrapalas. 
44-48. 
So also to the south of Amardvara, two Lingas guard 
the Tirtha, one being Linga Capaleiivara and the second 
Ca:t:t<;lahasta. They were formerly installed by Siva as the guard­
ians of Kaveri etc. The divine Narmada existing over many 
Kalpas, is guarded by a hundred thousand (ᤐ_etrapalas) . The 
mountain is guarded by a hundred thousand Orilkaras, the 
persons engaged ·by Iiia and equipped with sixty bows. A sin 
committed in other places perishes in this holy spot. A sin 
committed in this Tirtha becomes fixed forever. 
Thus 0 dear one, Kaveri, the most excellent one among 
rivers, has been recounted to you. She has originated from 
Rudra's body. Hence this most excellent river is meritorious. 


V.iii.30.1-10 
CHAPTER THIRTY 
The Glory of Diiru 1irtha 
Sri Miirkar.uf,eya said: 
121 
1-5. 
On the northern bank of Narmada, there is the ex­
cellent Darutirtha where an excellent BrahmaQ.a performed 
penance, 0 highly esteemed one, and became a Siddha. 
Yudhi$!hira said: 
Who is this most excellent BrahmaQ.a Daruka who became 
a Siddha there, 0 great sage? Whose son was he? It behoves 
you to recount this to . me. 
Sri Miirka1J,f/,eya said: 
In the great Bhargava family was born a highly fortunate 
BrahmaQ.a named Daru as the son of the intelligent Devasarman. 
He was a master of the Vedas and Vedailgas. He became a 
celibate student, a householder and a forest-dwelling hermit 
consecutively. (Ultimately) as a world-renouncing ascetic he 
performed severe austerities in accordance with the injunc­
tions in regard to the sacred rites of Sannyasa. 0 YudhiHhira, 
he meditated on Mahadeva, abstaining from food intake. He 
stayed at that Tirtha till the end of his life. 
6-1 0. That Tlrtha became well-known in all the three worlds 
after his name. One should take the holy bath there, in accor­
dance with the injunctions and adore the Pitrs and deities. He 
should be truthful in speech and subdue anger. He should be 
engaged in what is beneficial to all living beings. 0 king, here 
itself he will obtain all desires in every respect. If one is en­
grossed in truth and purity and performs the rite of Upaviisa 
(fast) , he shall undoubtedly attain the benefit of the SautramaQ.i 
sacrifice. A follower of ᤒgveda should recite ᤒk passages; a 
master of Sam a veda Sam an hymns; and a follower of Yajurveda 
should perform the ]apa of Yajur Mantras. They will obtain 
excellent benefit. Sailkara said that if a person abandons hi,s 
life in that Tirtha in accordance with the injunctions, he will 
attain the ultimate state from which there is no return. 


122 
Skanda Puratw 
CHAPTER THIRTYONE 
The Greatness of Brahmiivarta 
Sri MarkaStf,eya said: 
1-6a. Thereafter one should proceed to the Tirtha well­
known in all the three worlds as Brahmavarta1• It is destructive 
of all sins. There, 0 Yudhil;lƆhira, Brahma is always present as 
a perpetual worshipper. With the arms lifted up and without 
any support he continues to move around perpetually. For 
twelve years he remained as a Mahavrati (observer of great 
holy vows) , taking food only once (a day) . He remained in this 
Tirtha . meditating on Mahesvara in accordance with the in­
junctions. Hence, 0 Lord, that meritorious Tirtha came to be 
called Brahmavarta. One should take one's ablution there in 
accordance with the injunctions and propitiate the Pitrs and 
deities. He should worship Isana, the Lord; or Vil;IԋU, the great 
Lord. By the power of that Tirtha he obtains that benefit which 
usually accrues from all Yajfias performed with due monetary 
gifts; 
6b-10. 
Every Tirtha becomes well. known in the world after 
the name of a Deva, Danava or Dvija who has attained spiritual 
enlightenment there. It is also great. Neither water nor ground, 
neither fertile field nor arid ground attain sanctity without the 
(spiritual) efforts of men. People achieve spiritual perfection 
through their power, resoluteness and fortitude, 0 king. 
Due to blunders as well as covetousness people certainly fall 
into hell. Wherever a sage resides after restraining his sense­
organs, there springs up a Kurukl;letra, Naimil;la or Pul;lkara. 
I . 
This is not the famous Brahmavarta, the region between Sarasvati and· 
Dr.;tdvati, which later became known as Kuruqetra. The author wants to 
brin1 all famous sacred places to the banks of_ Narmada. 


V.iii.32.1-15 
CHAPTER THIRTITWO 
The Greatness of Patreivara Tirtha 
Sri Mii.rkarpf,eya said: 
123 
1-8. 
From there a pilgrim should go to Patre5vara that is 
destructive of all sins. It is there that the highly esteemed, 
powerful .son of Citrasena became a Siddha (spiritua!ly per­
fect) . 
YudhiEthira said: 
0 holy Sir, I wish to know who was this Siddha of great 
austerities, who attained spiritual perfecti'on in that Tirtha? 
Whose son was he and what was the cause (of his perfection) ? 
Sri Mii.rkaTJ-4eya said: 
0 excellent king, there was a former intimate friend 9f 
Indra called Citra. He had great splendour. His son was well­
known as Patre5vara. He was handsome and .fortunate. He was 
a terror unto all enemie.s. He was so close a friend of Indra 
as though he was another Jaya (Jayanta) . 
Once in the middle of the Royal Assembly where all the 
Devas had gatQ.ered together, he became much infatuated by 
the dance and songs of Menaka for a long time. He trans­
gressed all bounds of decency. It was as though his life had 
become extinct. The Lord of Suras cursed him who had no 
control over his senses: "Though you are staying in Svarga, yet 
you have succumbed to weaknesses like a mortal. Hence you 
will certainly spend a long time in the mortal world." 
On being cursed thus by the Lord of Suras, Ԍhe youthful son 
of Citrasena began to tremble. With palms joined in reverence, 
he spoke to the excellent one among Suras: 
Patresvara said: 
9-15. I have been sinful, infatuated and lost control of the 
mind and senses. I, therefore, reaped the fruit thereof. But it 
behoves you to be pleased. 


124 
Skanda Purii7Ja 
Sakra said: 
Resort to the banks of Narmada and prop1t1ate the quies­
cent Siva for twelve years with the senses under control. You 
will attain a good state. The scriptures declare that this world 
(i.e. Svarga) belongs to pious persons having self-control, truth­
fulness and purity, and not to people who are sinners. 
When this was told by the intelligent Thousand-eyed One, 
the sensible son of the Gandharva bowed down to him and 
went to the earth. 
He took his holy bath in the pure waters of Reva near 
Brahmavarta. After performing Japa in accordance with the 
injunctions, he adored Sailkara by means of air, water, oilcake, 
fruits, flowers and leaves. He maintained himself by eating 
roots and drinking barley water. He performed severe austeri­
ties with five fires around him. Thereupon, the Lord became 
pleased. 
He saw the Trident-bearing Consort of Uma, the bestower 
of boons. He had the Pinaka bow in his hand. The Destroyer 
of Andhaka (Siva) had the crescent moon for his crestjewel 
and elephant hide as his cloth. On seeing the Lord in front, 
he fell down (at his feet) . 
lsvara said: 
1 6-25. 
Welfare unto you. Choose your boon. 0 sinless one, 
I shall grant you the boon. Whatever you wish, I shall give you. 
No doubt need be entertained in this. 
Patresvara said: 
If you are pleased, 0 Lord of Devas, if a boon has to be 
granted to me, 0 Lord, be stationed here for ever in the 
Tirtha after my name. 
On hearing this, Mahadeva in words choked with joy said: 
"So be it". Then the delighted Lord Sailkara went away along 
with Uma. 
When the Lord went to heaven, he took his holy plunge in 
the Tirtha, propitiated the Pitts in accordance with the injunc­
tions regarding the Japa and installed the Lord of Devas duly, 


V.iii.33. 1-7 
1 25 
0 descendant of Bharata. It became well known in all the 
three worlds as Patresvara. 
After being rid of his curse, 0 king, he went to the beautiful 
Indraloka. He was received with the utterances of "Be victori­
ous" etc., and was highly delighted thereby. Thus, 0 Yudhil?thira, 
the question you had put has been clarified. One is rid of all 
sins by a single holy ablution there. He who after holy ablution 
and adoration of the Pitrs and Devas shall worship Mahadeva 
in that Tlrtha, 0 Yudhil?thira, obtains the benefit of a horse­
sacrifice. After death he will sport about in the city of Siva for 
more than a hundred years and then be born among mortals 
as a king or someone of the same status as that of a king. He 
will be conversant with the truth of the Vedas and Vedangas 
and live a hundred years without sickness or grief. Again he 
shall remember that water (t:he Tirtha i.e. Reva) . 
CHAPTER THIRTYfHREE 
The Greatness of Agni Tirtha 
Sri Miirkattrf,eya said: 
1-7. 
Thereafter one should go to the excellent Agnitlrtha, 
0 great king. It is there that Agni went on being enchanted 
by Kama. 
Yudhi$/hira said: 
How was the Lord (Agni) , the sustainer of the universe, 
defiled by Kama? How can there be perpetual residence (of 
Agni) in single places? This is unparalleled and mysterious, the 
most excellent in all the worlds. Do tell me, 0 highly esteemed 
one, I have very great curiosity. 
Sri Miirkattr!eya said: 
Excellent! Excellent! 0 highly intelligent one! An excellent 
question has been put by you, 0 sinless one. I shall mention 
(the answer to it) as was heard from Mahesvara. 


126 
Skanda Pum'l'}a 
There was a great king named Duryodhana 1 in Krtayuga. He 
was fully equipped with elephants, horses and chariots and he 
duly protected the earth. On seeing the king richly endowed 
with handsome features and youthful figure and enjoying rich 
and divine pleasures, Narmada sought him.2 The highly de­
lighted king of Mahi!}mati abandoned other young maidens 
and loved that girl. 
8-14. 0 excellent .king, he (that king) sported with her and 
at the proper time Narmada gave birth to a lotuԍyed girl. 
Richly endowed with beauty in every limb and joint, she be­
came well-known in all the worlds. The father and the mothe.r 
had affectionate attachment to her. Mter a long time the excellent 
girl reached the prime of her youth, 0 king, but even when 
wooed she never wished to offer hersel[ 
On another 4ay, Vahni (Fire-god) assumed the form of a 
BrahmaQ.a of great austerities, slowly approached the king and 
requested him secretly: "0 excellent scion of the family of 
Raghu, I am a BrahmaQ.a deficient in progeny, poor and helpless. 
I woo her (your daughter) to become my wife. Your daughter 
named Sudarsana is unrivalled all over the earth in her physi­
cal beauty. She lives (grows) in your palace; 0 highly esteemed 
one, do give her to me. I am alone. I have become disgusted 
with long celibacy. I am now affiicted with love. 0 dear one, it 
behoves you to do me this favour, since I earnestly- beg for it." 
Raja ( The King) said: 
15-23. 
0 excellent BrahmaQ.a, I will never give my splen­
did daughter to one who belongs to another caste and is also 
devoid of wealth; you may go. 
On being told this, Vahni (Fire-god) became excessively afflicted. 
Without siying anything further to the king, he vanished there 
itself. 
1: 
The story i s borrowed from Mbh, Anu.Sasana Ch. 3 . This king Duryodhana 
is different from the Mahabharata hero, Duryodhana, son of·Dhrtar½¾­
This PuraJ].a utilises the episode for the glorification of Agni Tirtha on 
Narmada. 
2. 
Narmada seems to be enamoured of even human beings. Before meeting 
her consort, the Sea, she married Agni (domestic fire) and got a son. Now 
she marries King Duryodhana and gave birth to a daughter who was given 
to Agni in marriage. 


V.iii.33.24 -34 
127 
Mter the Brahmar:ta had gone away, the king took counsel 
with his mini-sters and priests. Highly delighted, he occupied 
his seat in front of the sact:ificial pit. Even as he was devoutly 
performing the sacrifice in the company of the Brahmar:tas, 0 
descendant of Bharata, Vahni vanished fr<>m the place even as 
all of them were watching. The Brahmar:tas became disappointed. 
They went to the palace of the king with disappointment in 
their minds and spoke to the king: 
The Briihma7J.as said: 
0 great king Duryodhana, may this mysterious event be heard. 
This miraculous thing has not been heard or seen before, 0 
excellent king. 0 king, all of us began dulԓ our sacrificial rites 
in the fire. For some reason the fire is neither seen nor does 
it burn. 
On hearing this terribly unpleasant thing issuing from the 
mouths of the BrahmaQas, the king fell down from his seat on 
the ground like a tree, the root of which has been cut. He soon 
.recovered and became composed in a short while, but looked 
all round as though he had become mad and spoke- these 
words: 
24-34. 
"0 excellent BrahmaQas, what is this mysterious 
incident? Consider this from the standpoint of the scriptures 
and do tell me the reason hereof. What is the reason for the 
disappearance of fire? Is it any of my sins or yours, whereby 
the Fire-god has vanished from the hall of sacred fire. WaS 
there any loophole in the Ԕourse of the recitation of the Man­
tras? Was any rite performed without the requisite Daԕir:ta? 
Was there any omission of the due rites? Why is Vahni not to 
be seen? There is no enemy like Yajfta. If there is any fault in 
the cooked food served, it will burn the nation. If it is· without 
the utterance of the requisite Mantras it will burn the ].ttviks. 
If it is deficient iri Dak¢iQas it will destroy the Datr (donor) ." 
The Briihma1J.as said: 
We are not guilty of the omission of the Mantras. Nor, 0 
king, are we negligent in our Vratas. You are not .sh<>rt of the 
Dravyas (money, sacrificial requisites) . Please · reflect whether 
there is any other fault. 


128 
Skanda Pura:IJa 
The King said: 
Yet, all of you join together and think about the means of 
remedy whereby there will be all-round welfare always in this 
world as well as hereafter. 
On being told thus, all those Brahmai:las came to a final 
decision. They, observing fast, stationed themselves at the place 
where the fire had vanished. Then in their dream the exces­
sively refulgent Fire-god said to the Brahmai:las: "May ye all 
hear the cause of my disappearance. The king was requested 
by me to give his daughter to me, but he does not wish to give. 
Therefore, I have vanished from the sacrificial hall, 0 excel­
lent Brahmai:las. If only the king is prepared tQ offer his highly 
honoured daughter to me, then will I be present burning brightly 
in his abode. Not otherwise. " 
O n listening to these words issued from the mouth of the 
Fire-god, those Brahmai:las, struck with wonder causing their 
eyes to glisten, spoke these words to the king: 
35-46. 
"Mter knowing your view all of us went to the sacrificial 
chamber, observed fast and stayed there for the night. Then 
we saw the Fire-god. We were told by him: 'If the king is 
prepared to give his daughter to me, I shall continue to stay 
in his palace and blaze; not otherwise, 0 Brahmai:las.' Mter 
coming to know of this, it behoves you to give your daughter, 
0 great king. " 
The King said: 
Your words and those of that god should be kept in mind 
by me. I wish to stipulate an excell᤼nt condition in regard to 
the offer of my daughter. May the Fire-god be present always 
in my abode. I shall give my daughter of charming side-glances; 
not otherwise. 
On hearing this, the Brahmai:las hurriedly approached the 
Fire-god and got the marriage performed. Hutasana (Fire-god) 
became delighted on getting Sudarsana. 0 YudhiHhira, there­
after he remained ever present in Mahiᤁmati and continued to 
blaze. Ever since then the people call that Tirtha 'Agnitir:tha'. 
Those who became purified by means of holy ablutions and 
Dana at the juncture of the two halves of the month and 


V.iii.34.1-9 
1 29 
propitiate the Pitrs and Devas became possessed of the ben­
efits of a horse-sacrifice. 
If gold is offered as gift at that Tlrtha, 0 king, one acquires 
the merit of gifting plots of land. There is no doubt about this. 
If one observes the vow of non-intake of food in that Tlrtha, 
one becomes able to sport about in Agniloka after death and 
is honoured by Suras. 
Thus the origin of Agnitlrtha has been recounted to you by 
me. It is conducive to the destruction of all sins. Merely on 
being listened to, it is meritorious, 0 most excellent one among 
men. It is conducive to wealth and destructive of sins for ever. 
So said Satikara. 
CHAPTER THIRTYFOUR 
Description of Ravi 1irtha 
Sri Miirkarpf,eya said: 
1-9. 
There itself is another Tlrtha of the noble-souled Aditya 
(Sun-god) . I shall glorify it, 0 excellent one among men, if 
you are interested in listening. 
Yudhi6!hira said: 
On hearing this incomparable mystery coming out of your 
mouth, I am struck with wonder and I experience horripilation, 
0 excellent sage. 
The Thousand-rayed Lord is the annihilator, creator and 
free from any contamination. He caused the uplift of the worlds 
through his incarnation on the bank of Narmada. Is the Lord 
in the form of a man? Or does he redeem as a result of penance? 
In whose family did he take his birth? Under whose control did 
he come to be? 
Sri Miirka7J,Q.cya said: 
A devout, pure Brahmar:ta born in the family of Kulika made 
preparation for pilgrimage to that Tirtha thinking, 'I shall visit 
the Sun-god'. 


130 
Skanda Purii.1J,Q 
He made the journey of more than a hundred Yojanas without 
taking food and without drinking water;. He was verily pre­
vented from the journey in a dream: "0 sage of great Sattva 
quality, enough of your Vrata of this sort. Look at me, I have 
pervaded everything, the mobile and immo'bile beings. I blaze. 
I withhold rain and I then release it too. He who sees me not 
dead but as Mrtyu (cause of death) sees reality. Choose any 
fair boon whatever has been desired by you." 
The Brahma'T}a said: 
1 0-1 7. 
If you are pleased, 0 Lord, if the boon is to be 
given to .me, be present for ever on the northern bank of 
Narmada. 0 Lord, be the bestower of boons to those persons 
who are self-controlled and remember you with great devotion, 
though staying a hundred Yojanas away. 
Be the bestower of boons to those who are hunchbacked, 
-blind, deaf and dumb, or those who have some defect in some 
limb or sense-organ and bow unto your feet. Without delay," 0 
-Lord, show mercy to those whose noses are shattered, whose 
intellects are retarded and of whom there remain only bones 
and skin. 
Be the bestower of boons, 0 Lord of the universe, to those 
who worship you everyday after taking the holy bath in Narmada 
water. 
0 unswerving Lord, grant the desired boons to those who 
euiogize you in the morning through Vedic and secular prayers. 
0 Lord, this is my final boon that boons should be granted to 
those meri on the earth who get their haircut or shaving when 
yoԎ are in full view. 
Out of pity the Lord thereupon told the sage, "Let it be so". 
0 great king, he stationed himself there with a hundredth part 
and then vanished. 
18-24. 
A man should go to that Tirtha with great devotion 
and perform the holy ablution. He should propitiate the Pitts 
and .Devas. He shall thereby derive the benefit of Agni¢ԏoma. 
He who immolates himself by entering fire at that Tirtha, 
0 king, goes to Agniloka brightening all the quarters. 
He who gives up his body after reaching that Tirtha, shall 
go to the world of Varul}.a. So said Saiikara. 


V.iii.35.1-7 
131 
He who abandons worldly life by adopting Sannyasa at that 
Tirtha and quits life, is honoured in the heavenly world where 
groups of Apsaras are (in attendance) and divine (musical) 
sounds reverberate. Mter staying there he returns to the mortal 
world and becomes well-conversant with the Vedas and Vedarigas. 
He shall be rid of ailments and grief and shall be the Lord of 
crores and crores. Accompanied by sons and wife he shall live 
a hundred years. 
· 
He who gets up early in the morning and remembers the 
Sun-god there becomes undoubtedly rid of the sins committed 
throughout the life. 
CHAPTER THIRTYFIVE 
Glorification of Meghaniida Tirlha 
YudhiEthira said: 
1-7. What_"is the reason for which Mahadeva stands in the 
middle of water, 0 excellent Brahmat:ta. after avoiding the 
northern and southern banks? 
Sri MiirkatJ.t/.eya said: 
This narrative, 0 dear one, is unparalleled, meritorious and 
pleasing - to the ears. I shall recount to you entirely what has 
been heard in the Purat:tas. 
0 highly esteemed one, in Treta Yuga Ravat:ta who was an 
enemy of Devas, conqueror of the three worlds, terrible, fright­
ening to both Sura:s and Asuras, impossible of being killed by 
Devas, DaԐavas, Gandharvas, sages and ascetics, was going around 
the earth by means of his aerial chariot. 
At that time, a haughty Danava named Maya staying within 
a cave was performing penance iii · the middle of the Vindhya 
range of mountains. The RakԙJasa (i.e. Ravat:ta) approached 
him humbly on the ground. He was adored and honour.ed with 
reverence, Danas etc. (Ravat:ta) asked: "To whom does this girl 
with eyes resembling lotus petals and countenance like the full 
moon belong? What is her name? 0 Sir, why does she ,perform 
the severe penance?" 


1 32 
Skanda Purii1Ja 
Maya said: 
8-1 1 . 
I am the excellent Lord of Danavas and am called 
Maya. The name of my wife is Tejovati. Her splendid daughter 
is well known as Mandodari. She is engaged in penance for the 
sake of a husband and hence she is adoring the splendid Husband 
of Uma. 
On hearing those words Raval).a who had been deluded due 
to arrogance, becam'e humble and spoke to Maya: 
"I am born of the family of Pulastya. I have humiliated the 
pride of Devas and Danavas, 0 highly esteemed one. I request 
you. It behoves you to offer your daughter. " 
1 2-1 6. 
Mter realizing his connexion with Pitamaha (Brahma) 
the noble-souled Maya honoured Raval).a duly and offered his· 
daughter. The Rakᤄasa was duly honoured by the night-stalkers 
(i.e. demons) . He took her in an aerial chariot and began to 
sport about in the celestial garden with her. 
Mter some time, 0 descendant of Bharata, Raval).a who could 
make people cry, begot a son and became the most excellent 
one among those who had sons. 
Even as he was born, the child of huge body gave out a loud 
cry (sound) like that of the Sarhvartaka cloud, whereby the 
worlds· became benumbed. Mter hearing that terrible roar, 
Brahma, the grandfather of the worlds, named him Meghanada. 
1 7-25. 
Having been named thus he took up a great Vrata 
and propitiated Sailkara, the Lord of Devas, along with Uma. 
He made his body lean through Vrata, Niyama, Dana, obser­
vances, Homa, Japa in accordance with the injunctions and by 
performing Krcchra and Candrayal).a. On a certain day he went 
to Mountain Kailasa, took up two Liilgas and proceeded to­
wards the South. Mter coming to the banks of Narmada, the 
mighty Danava became desirous of taking a holy bath. He placed 
the Liilgas down and performed Japa and adored the Lord, 0 
᤽ing. The night-stalker became contented by the stay in the 
shrine, holy ablution and Homa in the fire. When he wished 
to go back to Lanka, 0 excellent king, he took up one of the 
Liilgas with his left hand and the other one with the other 
hand with due devotion. By the time the son of Raval).a could 
take up the Mahaliilga it fell down in . the waters of Narmada. 
He uttered "Go, Go" and installed it in the middle of the 


V.iii.35.26--V.iii.36.6 
water. After bowing down to Lord Parameᤄthin, the son of 
RavaQ.a went away by the aerial path duly honoured by the 
demons. Ever since then the Tirtha became well known as 
Meghanada. 
26-31 . 
The roar had been heard before and it was the 
cause of the destruction of all sins, 0 great king. One who 
takes his holy bath in that Tirtha well-known as Garjana and 
stays there for' a day and a night shall obtain the merit of 
performing a horse-sacrifice. 
If a person performs the rite of offering balls of rice in that 
Tirtha, 0 king, there is no doubt about this that the merit that 
accrues from a Sattrayajila will accrue to him. He has propi­
tiated the Pitrs for twelve years. If a person feeds a BrahmaQ.a 
with the food of all six tastes, 0 descendant f>f Bharata, at that 
Tirtha, 0 excellent one among men, the devotee obtains ev­
erlasting merit. 
He who brings his life to an end with a purified soul shall 
stay in·Sankara's world until the destruction of all living beings. 
Thus, 0 tiger among men, the excellent origin of Garjana 
Tirtha has been recounted to you due to ties of affection. It 
causes the destruction of all sins. 
CHAPTER THIRTYSIX 
The Glory of Diiruka Tirtha 
Sri Miirkǎ uf,eya said: 
1-6. 
Thereafter, 0 great king, one should go to the excel­
lent Daru Tirtha1 where Indra's friend Daruka became a Siddha 
formerly. 
Yudhi6!hira said: 
0 sinless one, how was the penance performed formerly by 
Daruka? I wish to hear the procedure thereof from you, 0 
excellent BrahmaQ.a. 
1 . 
As noted i n Chapter 231 infra. Daruka Tirtha i s repeated four times 
( catviiro diirukeivariiM in this text. 


134 
Skanda Purii'T}a 
Sri Miirka'T}qeya said: 
Well, I shall recount to you the wonderful incident that 
occurred long back in the celestial assembly of the sages of 
purified souls. The name of the favourite charioteer of Indra 
was Matali. Once for some reason he cursed his son. The son 
affected by the curse quaked and fell at the splendid feet of 
Indra with his head touching them. He submitted to the Lord 
of Devas (the full details) . The Lord of Suras told the accursed 
one how and by means of what rite could the terrible curse 
come to an end: 
7-1 3. "Go to the banks of Narmada and stay there till the 
end of the Yuga propitiating Mahesvara. Then you will have a 
rebirth. In this birth you will be well known by the name Daruka1 
in the form of a human being. Mter serving the great Lord 
holding the conch, discus and club you will attain Siddhi." 
On being told thus by the intelligent thousand-eyed Indra, 
(the son of Matali) who had lost his senses, bowed down to 
him and came to the banks of Narmada. By means of Vratas 
and fasts he moᥙtified his body. He was always engaged in japa 
and Homa and propitiated the trident-bearing, noble-souled 
Mahadeva·, the bestower of boons. He adored with great devo­
tion, 0 king, till the ultimate annihilation of all living beings. 
The excessively wise son of Matali became a charioteer of a 
partial incarnation ofViᤁIJ.U. Propitiating the Lord of the Cosmos 
he attained the good state (i.e. Mokᤁa) . 
1 4-19. 
Thus, 0 dear one of good holy Vratas, the origin 
of Darutlrtha has been recounted in the manner it was nar­
rated to me by Sailkara. 
On hearing it, Yudhiᤁthira was struck with great wonder. He 
saw his brothers with hairs standing on end repeatedly. 
Sri Miirka'T}f/,eya said: 
A man who takes his holy ablution there duly, says the Sandhya 
I . 
Daruka was a trusted charioteer of Knl)a and is mentioned many times 
in Mbh. Before his death, KrdI:la sent Daruka to Pal)c;iavas with the news 
of the catastrophic destruction of Yadavas (Mbh, Mausala 4.2-3) . This 
Pural)a writer claims the greatne_ss of Daruka's career to this Tirtha by 
naming it Daruka Tirtha. 


V.iii.37. 1-8 
135 
prayers, worships Sailkara, the Lord of Devas, and begins the 
repeated recitation of the Vedas with concentration, shall 
undoubtedly attain the merit of a horse-sacrifice. One who 
devoutly feeds Brahmat:tas at that Tirtha with great purity at­
tains the merit of feeding a thousand Brahmat:tas (elsewhere) . 
Whatever has been performed with pure intention, vii. Snana 
(holy bath) , Dana (offering gifts) , Japa, Homa, self-study of the 
Vedas, adoration of the deities etc. shall be fruitful. 
CHAPTER THIRTYSEVEN 
Glorification of Deva Tirtha 
. 
Sri Miirkar.ujeya said: 
1-8.- Therefrom, 0 eminent king, one should go to the ex­
cellent Tirtha called Devatirtha where thirty-three Devas took 
their holy bath and attained great Siddhi. 
Yudhi6'hira asked: 
How did all the Suras attain the great Siddhi, 0 dear one? 
All of them had been conquered by the powerful Danavas. 
How did they get highest salvation by taking the holy bath in 
the Tirtha? 
Sri Miirkar;ujeya said: 
Formerly, 0 king, Indra along with the groups of Devas, was 
ousted from his kingdom by the awful hordes of Daityas of 
great might in the course of a battle. 
Their army was shattered by the divisions of elephants, horses 
and chariots. On being annihilated and smashed and dissi­
pated by the onslaughts they fled along the roads. Assailed by 
Jarilbha, Surilbha and Nisurilbha, Kii!jmaQ<;ia, Kuhaka and oth­
ers, they trembled with fear and all of them approached God 
Brahma. The Devas with Vahni as their leader bowed down. 
their heads to Brahma Parame!jthin and submitted thus : "See, 
see, 0 highly esteemed one, we have been smashed to smithereens 
by the Danavas. We have been separated from our sons ·and 


136 
Skanda Purii:T}a 
wives. Hence we have sought refuge in you. Save us, 0 Lord 
of Devas, 0 grandfather of all the worlds. 0 Lord of Suras, 0 
Paramdvara, barring you we have no other refuge. " 
Brahmii said: 
9-1 7. 
For the sake of the destruction of the Danavas, 
station yourselves on the banks of Narmada and perform pen­
ance in the place with composure. Penance is the greatest 
strength. 
There is no other means of remedy; there is no Mantra or 
rite excepting the meritorious waters of Reva, the cause of the 
destruction of all sins. It is my opinion that poverty, ailment, 
death, imprisonment and other difficulties are the results of 
sin. After realizing this, perform severe penance. 
On hearing those truthful words of Brahma Parameᤄthin, all 
the Suras with Agni as their leader came to Narmada. 
There they performed severe penance and attained Siddhi. 
Ever since then that Tlrtha is being sung about as the excellent 
Devatlrtha i"n all the three worlds. It is conducive to the de­
struction of all sins. 
A man who has controlled his sense-organs duly and goes 
there and devoutly takes the holy bath, shall obtain Mauktika 
(pearl, salvation) . 
He who feeds a few Brahmal).as at that Tlrtha shall obtain, 
0 king, the merit as though he has fed a thousand Brahmal).as. 
Devasila ( ' the Rock of Gods') there is very beautif..ul and is 
conducive to the increase of great merit. 
1 8-22. 
Those who die after renunciation shall obtain ev­
erlasting state (i.e. Mokᤄa) . He who enters burning fire there 
at that Tlttha, 0 Lord of men, shall stay in Rudraloka until the 
annihilation of all living beings. 
Thus Snana, Japa, Homa, self-study of the Vedas, adoration 
of the deities, good and evil deeds done at that Tlrtha shall 
be everlasting. 
Thus the origin and procedure of the pilgrimage to Devatlrtha 
has been entirely recounted to you as was heard from Sankara. 
Those who read this story of Devatlrtha that destroys sins 
and redeems devotees from all miseries do go to Devaloka. 


V.iii.38. 1-12 
1 37 
CHAPTER THIRTYEIGHT 
The Greatness of Narmadesvara Tirtha 
Sri Miirkar_uf,eya said: 
1-1 2. Therefrom, 0 great king, one should go to the excel­
lent Tlrtha named Guhavasl where Mahadeva spent millions of 
years as a Siddha staying in a cave. 
Yudhi$thira said: 
For what reason, 0 dear one, did Mahadeva, the preceptor of 
the universe, spend so long a period in the cave, 0 excellent 
BrahmaQa? 0 sinless one, narrate thi:s completely in detail to me. 
I wish to hear everything in full. I am extremely interested. 
Sri Miirkar_uf,eya said: 
Excellent! 0 great king, an excellent question has been put 
by you. This is fully explained in the Pural)a. Now that I am 
pretty old, it is difficult for me to expatiate upon it. It occurred 
pretty long back. It is a matter of hoary antiquity. Hence I shall 
succinctly tell you, 0 dear one. Know it from me. 
Formerly, 0 king, in Krtayuga, there was a great forest named 
Daruvana. It was overgrown with many trees and creepers. It 
was splendidly' beautified by various tender creepers. It was 
resorted to by lions, tigers, boars, elephants and rhinoceroses. 
There were many birds there. 
It was like the divine park 
Caitraratha. 
There some highly wise men of very severe austerities lived 
devoutly, strictly adhering to the system of four Asramas (stages 
of life) , viz. celibate student, householder, retired hermit and 
recluse. All of them desired the greatest state (Mokᤄa) . They 
strictly practised their own respective duties. 
Once, during spring, for some undisclosed reason, Mahadeva 
was proceeding in an aerial chariot along with Uma. There he 
saw a hermitage· in water reverberating with the Rk., Saman and 
Yajus hymns. The way in and out could not be seen. It was 
conducive to the destruction of all sins. On seeing it, the goddess 
was delighted. She asked the Lord of the chiefs of Devas with the 
moon for his crest jewel, in words choked with excessive delight: 


1 38 
Skanda Puriir_ta 
The Devi said: 
1 3-22. 
0 Lord, whose is this hermitage echoing with the 
sounds of the Vedic texts? On seeing this one becomes rid of 
all tiresome feelings of hunger, thirst etc. 
Mahesvara said: 
0 goddess, have you not heard about this great Daruvana? 
Many Brahmal).as dwell here as householders. All the women­
folk there are engaged solely in attending on their husbands. 
0 Daughter of the Mountain, no other deity is known to them. 
No other sacred duty is practised by them. 
On hearing this excellent statement uttered by the Lord of 
Devas, she became overcome by curiosity and said to Sari.kara 
again: "0 Lord, 0 Mahadeva, it has been stated by you that 
the women are engaged in the sacred duty of attending on 
their husbands. Be like Madana (god of love) and upset their 
fidelity. " 
lsvara said: 
0 my beloved, I do not approve of what has been spoken 
by you. Indeed the Brahmal).as are great beings. One should 
not act antagonistically to them or displease them. Anger: is the 
striking weapon of Brahmal).as. Discus is the striking weapon 
of Hari. (Their) Anger is more ruthless than the discus. Hence 
one should not infuriate a Brahmal).a. 
Neither Devas nor common people, neither Nagas nor Asuras 
in all the three worlds, have survived from being destroyed 
after being (angrily) looked at by them. 
Sa1vation, Svarga (heavenly pleasure) , earthly benefit and 
welfare in the mortal world all come only to those towards 
whom the highly esteemed Brahmal).as, the deities of the earth, 
are well-disposed. 
By realizing this, 0 highly esteemed lady, leave your im­
proper insistence on the proposed act. That wherewith Brahmal).as 
become angry is antagonistic to the other world as well. 
The goddess said: 
23-38. 
0 Lord, the honour of those ladies IS highly es-


V.iii.38.23-38 
1 39 
teemed by the Suras unless you suppress it and keep it low. I 
am not your beloved nor am I subservient to you. 0 Mahadeva, 
in the Lokaloka there is nothing which cannot be accomplished 
by you. 0 most excellent one among Suras, may at least this 
single task (request) of mine be carried ou't .. 
On being told thus by the goddess, Mahadeva who is favourably 
disposed towards the inclinations and behests of tl}.e goddess, 
adopted the form of a Kapalika and went to Daruva,na. He 
adjusted the dishevelled matted hairs and retained only the 
moon as his crest-jewel and a chain round the neck along with 
the earrings. He wore the hide of a tiger and was bedecked 
in girdle and necklaces. He seemed to cause tremor in the 
earth through the loud jingling sounds of the anklets. The 
matted hairs were tied up and the great ᤾ord had smeared his 
body with holy ash. In his hand he retained the skull of the 
noble-souled Brahma. He played on his big l;)amaru (drum) 
causing the earth to quake. He reached Daruvana in the morning. 
By that time all those meritorious people who desired (to 
collect) flowers, leaves and fruits went with others. The wind 
was blowing. On seeing the miraculous form of the Lord, 0 
descendant of Bharata, the minds of those young women became 
defiled by Kama (God of Love) . 
On seeing the splendid male, all those excellent ladies, the 
womenfolk of . Daruvana, experienced exudation of perspira­
tion in their bodies due to exhilaration. 
On seeing the miraculous Lord, there were various types of 
outbursts of emotional excitement among those ladies, 0 best 
of men. (Those wives. of the BrahmaQ.as were upset emotion­
ally.) Some of them could not know where their garments 
were. Others lost their upper garment on seeing the wonderful 
form of the Lord. They were extremely enchanted and fasci­
nated. The tresses of hairs of some of them got dishevelled. 
Some stood up from their seats desirous of offering alms but 
could not even stir. One lady who was overproud of her beauty 
and youthful form forgot to breast-feed her son lying on her 
lap. On seeing Mahadeva, another lady became struck by the 
arrows of Kama. She pressed down her protruding breasts with 
her arms. Sighing and expelling hot breaths, she ceased to 
talk. Thus Paramesvara made all those womenfolk excited in 
a wonderful way and went off. 


140 
Skanda Purii:r.ta 
39-46. 
By that time, all those Brahmal).as after wandering 
all over the great forest came back to their abodes and saw 
their wives weak and for splendour. Those ladies who had 
great devotion towards their husbands formerly had now slipped 
down from chastity. On coming to know of this, those excel­
lent Brahmal).as came out. They consulted one another and 
understood that Lord Mahdvara had vanished after upsetting 
the minds of their ladies. One infuriated BrahmaiJ.a lifted a 
stick and ran. Another raised up a KalmaᤄayaHi (spotted stick?) 
and still others a handful of Darbha grass. They ran about here 
and there in the forest, 0 king; the noble-souled ones gath­
ered together and said in anger: 
"If we have performed any Homas, if we have propitiated 
our preceptors, then, by the strength of that truth let the 
excellent Liri.ga (Penis) of the Lord fall down. If we have gone 
from one Asrama (stage of life) to another in the due order 
as laid down in the scriptures, then by the strength of that 
truth, let the Liri.ga of the Lord fall on the ground. Thus, by 
the power of the truth of the Brahmal).as repeated thrice, even 
as Siva stood seeing, his Liri.ga fell down on the ground.1 
47-54. 
In Lokaloka there was a great lamentation, 0 
descendant of Bharata, when the Liri.ga of the Lord fell down 
and the great destruction of the whole universe became immi­
nent. 
The sound of the Liri.ga falling down was extremely terrible. 
There were terrible earthquakes and falling of comets and 
1 . 
Mter the Vedic period, people seem to have forgotten the identity of 
Rudra and Agni. They forgot that the Linga is a symbol of blazing flame 
of sacrificial fire. Though the procedure of Linga-worship and Fire-wor­
ship was the same (G.B. Dandage, Yajiia, Rudra and Sivalinga) people in 
the Pural).ic period identified the Pil).¾i of Siva with phallus. And to 
explain separateness of the Linga from Siva's body a story for its fall was 
created. 
There are different versions of the fall of Siva's penis: 
i. 
Parvati instigates Siva to tempt the wives of sages in Daruvana-an 
indecent act for which sages fˢrced him to drop his penis. 
ii. 
Mter self\immolation of Sati (Siva's first wife) Siva in his bereave­
ment went a-begging in Daruvana-a colony of sages. Wives of sages 
went after him and as a penalty Siva was made to drop his 
penis. 
iii. 
Siva of his own accord cut down his own penis (Mbh, Sauptika 7.2 1 ) . 
As Siva is adorable, his penis too was regarded adorable. Versions 
· (i) and (ii) above hint at the superiority of sages over Siva. 


V.iii.38.55-68 
1 41 
meteors when the Liilga of the Lord fell down. The tops of 
mountains fell down and the seas became dried up. The Devas 
became moody and dispirited. 
All of them collected together and approached Brahma 
ParameHhin. With their palms joined in reverence they eulo­
gized him with different kinds of hymns. The Lord of the 
universe with four lotus-like faces became delighted. He said 
to the distressed Suras: "Do not be grief-stricken. The Three­
eyed Lord of Devas has been affected by the curse of BrahmaQ.as. 
When those BrahmaQ.as endowed with penance are pleased, he 
will become free (from the effect of the curse) again." 0 suppressor 
of enemies, on hearing this the Devas went back. All of them 
and the sages thought together, 0 descendant of Bharata. Along 
with Visvamitra, VasiHha, Jabali, Kasyapa and others they said 
to the Slayer of Tripura: 
" 
55-59. 
"0 Lord of Suras, the spiritual splendour of the 
twice-born is extremely powerful. Endowed with forbearance 
and performing the penance, you shall become devoid of fatigue. 
Since it was due to the resentment of the sages that the ex­
cellent Liilga of yours, 0 Mahadeva, fell down, it will not become 
worthy of being worshipped. The merit that men attain by 
worshipping the Liilga cannot be obtained either by perform­
ing Agnihotra or AgniHoma. By the words of Devas, Danavas, 
Yakᤄas, Gandharvas, Uragas, Rakᤄasas and the BrahmaQ.as it 
will be worthy of being worshipped. It will be worthy of being 
worshipped by Brahma, ViᤄQ.u, Indra and Candra. It is the 
benefit of your Liilga in this world as well as in the other." 
60-68. 
On being told thus, the Lord of the cosmos bowed 
down to the excellent BrahmaQ.as. Endowed with great delight 
he joiqed his palms in reverence and spoke: "BrahmaQ.as are 
mobile Tirthas bereft of water. They can be desired by all. 
Dirty (sinful) people become purified by the water of the words 
of these BrahmaQ.as. There is no holy spot, no Tirtha where 
after causing the anger of a BrahmaQ.a one can go and get 
purified. Even Puᤄkaras (holy places) are Dᤄaras (arid lands) . 
That which is not composed by BrahmaQ.as is no Sastra; that 
which is not offered to a BrahmaQ.a is no Dana; that which is 
no outcome of the favour of a BrahmaQ.a,is no happiness; and 
that which is not caused by the anger of a BrahmaQ.a is no 
misery. All the Tirthas throughout the earth and also Ganga 


142 
Skanda Puriir.ta 
and other rivers do not deserve even a sixteenth part of one 
sentence of a BrahmaQ.a. " 
Mter duly honouring all the BrahmaQ.as, after being permit­
ted by the great sages, the Lord went to the excellent bank of 
Narmada. 
The Lord observed the great Vrata, became engaged in Japa 
and Snana and performed the penance for an Arbuda (many 
millions) of years residing in a Guha (cave) . When the obser­
vance was concluded, the Lord installed Mahe5vara. Being saluted 
by the Suras, the Lord went to Kailasa along with them. 
Since Paramesvara had been installed on the banks of Narmada 
by him, for that reason he is called Narmade5vara. 1 
69-75. 
A Yati who has conquered all the sense-organs, who 
takes his holy bath and worships Mahadeva, Narmadesvara (Lord 
of Narmada) , shall obtain the merit of a horse-sacrifice. 
If anyone offers to the Pitrs gingelly seeds, water, Kusa grass 
and flowers, 0 son of 
PaQ.QU, his ancestors of twenty-one 
generations rejoice in Svarga. 
He who feeds BrahmaQ.as in that Ti:rtha with milk pudding 
mixed with ghee, 0 king, obtains the merit accruing from a 
crore (i.e. feeding a crore of BrahmaQ.as elsewhere) . 
0 YudhiHhira, he who stands in the middle of the water and 
offers gold or. silver to BrahmaQ.as shall obtain the merit of 
AgniHoma. He who approaches Narmade5vara and stays there 
without food on the eighth or fourteenth lunar day shall attain 
the fruit of the (fulfilment of) birth. 
He who enters burning fire in that Tlrtha, 0 king, shall be 
free from the fear of ailments for seven births, 0 descendant 
of Bharata. 
He who abstains from food intake in that Tlrtha his goal 
shall be Rudraloka from where he will never return. 
76-77. 
Thus the procedure of the pilgrimage and the origin 
thereof have been recounted to you, 0 excellent one among 
men. In the Purat:ta it has been laid down in detail. A man who 
glorifies the origin of Narmadesvara and who listens to it with 
devotion shall obtain the merit of the holy ablutidn. 
I . 
The Linga was installed by Lord Siva himself on Narmada and came to 
be called Narmadesvara. 


V.iii.39.1-19 
143 
CHAPTER THIRTYNINE 
The Greatness of Kapila Tirtha 
Sri Markarpf,eya said: 
1-9. 
From there, one should go to the excellent Tirtha 
called Kapila Tirtha. By the holy ablution alone with devotion 
(in it) , a man is liberated from all sins. 
Yudhi6thira said: 
0 excellent BrahmaQ.a, the greatness of Narmadeiivara, the 
cause of great w᤿nder in all the worlds, has been recounted. 
Now do narrate to me Kapila Tirtha, ᥀t what time, in what 
connection did that excellent Tirtha originate? 0 holy Lord, 
how was the meritorious Tirtha that destroys all sins, origi­
nated? 
Sri Markarpf,eya said: 
Listen, 0 king, 0 descendant of Bharata, I shall extol the 
excellent Kapila Tirtha, on hearing which your surprise shall 
vanish entirely. Formerly in the beginning of l(rtayuga, Brahma, 
the grandfather of the worlds, created the entire range· of 
living beings of four types. He was engaged in Japa and Homa 
thereaft᥁r devoutly. He meditated for a short while and stayed 
there at the sacrificial pit. From the blazing sacrificial pit, 
Kapila (a tawny-coloured cow) rose up. Her horns were as 
refulgent. as the flames of fire. The cow yielding good milk had 
three eyes. She was entirely fiery (in form) with a fiery back 
with all the limbs fiery. She had all the (good) characteristics. 
Her voice was as sweet as the jingling sound of a bell. On 
seeing that highly esteemed Kapila in the centre of the sacri­
ficial pit, Brahma, the preceptor of the worlds, bowed down 
and spoke thus: 
1 0-19. 
"0 meritorious Kapila, obeisance to you. 0 auspi­
cious one bowed down to by all the worlds, 0 divine one, you 
are conducive to all auspiciousness, inimitable and incompa­
rable in all the three worlds. You are La'k᥂mi; you are Smrti; 
you are intellect; you are fortitude. 0 lady of excellent coun­
tenance, you are well-known as Goddess Uma. You are Sati. 


144 
Skanda Purii:r:ta 
There is no doubt in this. You are the great Goddess VaiᤄQ.avi; 
you are Mahadevl. 0 lady of excellent countenance, you are 
BrahmaQ.i. 0 highly esteemed one, you are Kumari. You are 
Bhakti (devotion) as well as Sraddha (faith) . You are Kalaratri 
unto living beings. You are the maiden Paramesvarl. You are 
the units of time: Lava, Truᤃi, Muhiirta, Lakᤄa, year, month, 
ᤐaQ.a, entire Kala. In the whole range of the three worlds 
consisting of mobile and immobile beings, there is nothing 
without you . " 
O n being eulogized thus with honour by ParameHhin, Kapila 
said to the highly esteemed Lotus-born Lord: "0 Lord of Devas, 
0 preceptor of the universe, I am pleased with your words 
(Eulogy) . What should I do to please you? (Lit 'what task tleasant 
to you can I do for you today?) . Tell me everything, 0 Grand-· 
father. " 
Brahmii said: 
0 Parame§vari, you have been created by me for the sake 
of the welfare of the world. Hence, go to the mortal world 
from heaven with a desire for the welfare of all the worlds. You 
contain within you all the Devas. You are identical with all the 
worlds, If people offer (you) in accordance with the · injunc­
tions, they will have their residence in heaven. 
Mter saying this1 to Brahma Goddess Paramdvari came to 
the surface of the earth, duly venerated by Suras and Siddhas. 
Yudhi6thira said: 
20-26. 
When, 0 dear one, at the instance of Brahma, the 
splendid one came here, how were the Devas and the worlds 
stationed ln her limbs? 0 excellent BrahmaQ.a, how did Kapila 
settle herself in the Dᤄara (arid) ᤐetra? Tell me this. 
Sri Miirka1J4eya said: 
On being told by Brahma, the creator of the world, from 
I. 'evam uktt¥ii' tato devi brahmiitam,': This text is corrupt. If emended as 'evam 
uktii tato devi brahma7Ja paramdvari 'When addressed thus by God Brahma 
etc ' , the meaning becomes clear. 


V.iii.39.27-38 
145 
Brahmaloka she went to the meritorious Narmada, the sanc­
tifier of the worlds. She performed extensive austerities on 
Narmada resorting to the banks. Then she wandered all over 
the earth, including the mountains, forests and parks. Ever 
since then, 0 great king, it became well known as _the excellent 
Kapila Tlrtha, destructive of all sins and resorted to by the 
groups of sages. 
If one takes the holy bath in that Tlrtha in accordance with 
the injunctions and offers a Kapila (tawny-coloured) cow, it is 
as good as the entire earth along with mountains, forests and 
parks has been gifted by him. 
He who devoutly watches that cow being gifted to an excel­
lent BrahmaQa, finds his sins accumulated in the course of a 
hundred years, perished. There is no d᥃ubt about this. 
27-33a. 
Those Lokas, viz. BhiiQ., BhuvaQ., SvaQ., MahaQ., Jana, 
Satya and Tapas are stationed on her back, 0 excellent king.1 
The Fire-god is stationed in the mouth; the serpents in the 
teeth; Dhata and Vidhata on the lips; Sarasvatl on the tongue; 
the thousand-rayed Lords, the Sun and the Moon, in the eyes; 
the Wind-god. is stationed, 0 excellent king, at the centre of 
the nostrils. Mahadeva is on the forehead; Asvins in the ears; 
Nara and NarayaQa in the horns; the Grandfather in the middle 
of the horns; Karil.bala and the noose-holding VaruQa are sta­
tioned beneath. Yama, the holy Lord, has resorted to the belly 
and stationed there. The serpents are stationed in the hoofs; 
the rays of the Sun at the tip of the tail. Those who keep such 
a Kapila in their houses, the Kapila identical with all the Devas, 
are really blessed. There is no doubt about this. 
33b-38. If anyone circumambulates a Kapila after getting 
up early in the morQing, it is as good as circumambulating the 
earth including mountains, forests and parks. One should bathe 
Sankara with Kapila-Paiicagavya (five milk-products from a tawny­
coloured cow) ; he should observe fast at that Tlrtha. Mter 
taking the holy bath in accordance with the injunctions he 
should propitiate the Pitrs and deities. All the members of his 
family including ten ancestors and ten successors become satisfied 
and ascend to heaven with his wishes in mind. 
1 . 
VV 27-37a describe how various parts o f cow's body are occupied by 
Devas. Hence she is said to be "Constituted of Devas". 


1 46 
Skanda Purii:r;ta 
Thus the procedure (of pilgrimage) and the origin of Kapila 
Tirtha has been narrated to you as well as the benefit or the 
merit thereof, 0 excelient king. It is conducive to the attain­
ment of wealth, fame and long span of life. It is an excellent 
one destroying all miseries. On listening to -it, one is liberated 
from all sins. There is no doubt about it. 
CHAPTER FORTY 
The Greatness of Karaiijesvara Tirtha 
Sri Miirkar.uf,eya said: 
1-9. 
Therefrom a person should go to the excellent Tirtha 
Karafije8vara, 0 great king, where a Daitya became a Siddha 
and well-known in all the worlds. 
Yudhi6thira said: 
0 highly esteemed one, a person of great penance became 
a Siddha in that Tirtha. Whose son was he? How and at what 
time did he become a Siddha? Tell me, 0 BrahmaQa. 
Sri Miirkarpf,eya said: 
Formerly in Krtayuga, 0 king, a mental son of Brahma named 
Marici was born. He was conversant with the principles of the 
Vedas and Vedailgas. 
He was a storehouse of penance. He too had a mental son 
after a great deal of time. His mental son was like another 
Brahma. 
Marici ·had these qualities: forbearance, self-control, com­
passion, munificence, truthfulness, cleanliness and straight­
forwardness. 0 descendant of Bharata, the son too had all 
these qualities. 
On seeing Kasyapa, the excellent Brahmar:ta endowed with 
all these good qualities, Dakᤄa. the Prajapati, gave him his 
daughters as wives. They were Aditi, Diti, Danu and ten others. 
They had sons and grandsons, 0 eminent descendant of Bharata. 


V.iii.40. 1 0-26 
1 47 
Aditi gave birth to sons, the leader of whom was Indra. They 
were born of Kasyapa, the Prajapati, 0 mighty-armed one. 
All the three great worlds including the mobile and immo­
bile beings were pervaded by them. A highly esteemed son was 
born to Danu. He was named Karaiija. 
1 0-18. 
He was richly endowed with all good features. Even 
as a boy, he performed great penance after resorting to the 
banks of Narmada. His penance was excellent and very severe. 
It continued for a thousand divine years. It consisted of Krcchra, 
CandrayaQ.a etc., 0 king. 
· 
His diet consisted of greens, roots and fruits. He regularly 
had holy bath and performed Homa. Mahadeva was pleased 
thereat and (came there) along with Uma. 
The Lord, the Slayer of the Tripuras, offered him boons as 
he pleased: "0 Karaiija of great strength, I am pleased with 
you. 0 sinless one, choose a boon. I shall grant it except that 
of immortality. " 
Karanja said: 
0 Mahadeva, if you are pleased, if I am to be given a boon, 
then let my sons and grandsons be inclined towards righteous­
ness. 
Saying "So be it" and accompanied by Uma, the bull-vehicled 
Mahadeva vanished there itself along with his GaQ.as. 
When the Lord had vanished, the Daitya installed Mahadeva 
after his name and joyously went home. 
Ever since then that Tlrtha became the most exc;ellent one 
of all the Tlrthas. Merely by taking his holy bath there a man 
is rid of all sins. 
19-26. 
He who takes his bath in that Tlrtha and propiti­
ates Pitrs and deities shall undoubtedly attain the merit of 
Agni!jtoma Yajiia. 
He who abstains from food-intake there in that Tlrtha, 0 
king, goes to Rudraloka and never returns from there. 0 son 
of Dharma, he who abandons his life in its waters or in fire, 
dwells in the place of Siva for twenty thousand years. When the 
merit is exhausted, he is born in a pure family. He becomes 
conversant with the Vedas and Vedari.gas and efficient in all 
Sastras. As a king or one of royal nobility he will live for a 


148 
Skanda Purii:TJa 
hundred years accompanied by sons and grandsons and devoid 
of all ailments. 
Thus whatever was asked by you, 0 sinless one, has been 
recounted regarding the benefit of the Tirtha as well as of the 
Snana and Dana there, 0 descendant of 8harata. 
This story is meritorious, destructive of sins and evil dreams 
of those who read or listen to the excellent greatness of the 
Tirtha. Sailkara has said that the merit is everlasting if a devotee 
reads this at the time of Sraddha with devotion to the Pitrs. 
CHAPTER FORTYONE 
The Greatness of KU1:uf,alesvara 7irtha 
Sri Miirkar:uf,eya said: 
1-9. 
From there, a person should go to the excellent 
Kui)Qalesvara Tirtha where the great Yakᤄa Kui)Qadhara be­
came a Siddha, 0 excellent king, after performing severe penance 
that caused fright to Suras and Asuras. He sported about in the 
palace of Paulastya, 0 excellent king. 
Yudhi$thira said: 
In which Yuga was he born? Whose son was this highly intelligent 
one by whom Sailkara was propitiated by performing severe 
penance? 0 dear one, 0 sinless one, tell me this in detail. I 
don ' t feel satiated by listening to the excellent nectarine story. 
Sri Miirkar:uf,eya said: 
Visravas, son of Pulastya, was born in Treta Yuga as son of 
Bharadvaja's daughter. He was on a par with Brah᥄a. He was 
much satisfied by his devout wife. He begot a son, Dhanada 
who (later on had lots of grandchildren) and was character­
ized by all good features. 
As soon as he was born, Brahma, the grandfather of the 
worlds, came to know of it and was delighted along with the 
sages and the Devas. He named the boy: "As you are bor.n of 
Visravas and became .my grandson, 0 sinless one, the name 


V.iii.41 . 1 0-21 
149 
VaisravaQ.a has been given to you. You will become the protec­
tor of the wealth of all the Devas. As the fourth guardian of 
quarters, you will be free from old age and death . " 
1 0-1 5. 
0 great king, his wife was a s well known a s Isvari. 
The Yakᤄa became the excellent Lord of Yakᤄas. His son was 
KuQ.<;la. 
He attained excellent physical form. With the permission of 
his parents, he went to the banks of Narmada and performed 
severe penance. During summer he performed the penance in 
the centre of five fires; during rainy season he slept on bare 
ground; during Hemanta he stood in the middle of water; for 
a hundred years he took in only air (as food) . When a hundred 
years were completed, he stood on a single toe, 0 king. There­
after, as a mere skeleton, he raised his arms and stood thus .. 
KuQ.<;lala controlled his breath and perfornfed the penance, 0 
leader among the descendants of Bharata. In the fourth century 
of the years (of penance) , the Bull-vehicled Lord became pleased 
(and said) : "0 dear one, choose a boon whatever you may wish 
for in your mind. I shall undoubtedly grant you the same." 
Ku7J.4ala said: 
1 6-2 1 . 
I should be invincible to all the enemies. Let me 
move about in the city of the Lord of Yakᤄas with his favour. 
Let me move about as his attendant. 
Saying "So be it", Mahadeva, venerated by all the worlds, 
went through the sky to Mountain Kailasa. 
When the Lord vanished, the Yakᤄa installed the Lord of 
Devas, the excellent KuQ.<;lalesvara, joyously. 
He adorned the Lord of the cosmos with flowers, unguents 
and incense, vehicles ( vimiinaiQ> , chowries and umbrellas and 
things causing satisfaction to the Liliga 1 • 
After propitiating the Brahmar:tas well with food, drink, 
ornaments etc., and pleasing Mahadeva he went to his abode. 
Ever since then, that Tirtha became well known in all the 
three worlds by the name KuQ.<;laldvara. It is excellent and 
exceedingly meritorious. 
I. Pura"Qa 'satisfaction' MW 642. 


150 
Skanda Purii:TJ-a 
22-29. 
Anyone who is engaged in the observance of ritu­
alistic fast at that Tirtha and worships Isana, the Lord, be­
comes rid of all sins. 
He who offers to Brahmal).as gold, silver, jewels or pearls 
and feeds them becomes happy. He rejoices in heaven. 
One may belong to the ᤒk, Yajus or Sarna Sakha of the 
Veda. If one takes the holy bath in the Tirtha and recites a 
ᤒk Mantra, he enjoys the entire benefit (of reciting the Veda 
completely) . Listen, 0 son of PaQ.<;lu, to the benefit of one who 
offers a cow to Brahmal).as. He is honoured in Svarga Loka for 
as many thousands of years as there are hairs in it and in its 
progeny. He will attain residence in Svarga in the company of 
his sons and grandsons. The man of great esteem shall dwell 
in Svarga for so many years along with sons and grandsons. 
A man who offers food there, goes to the world of Mahe§a 
and dwells there for numerous years. There is no doubt about 
it. He becomes happy and rejoices in Svargaloka where Gandharvas, 
Siddhas and Apsaras sing. 
Thus, 0 son of Dharma and Prtha, the whole of the power 
of the Tirtha has been recounted to you. He who listens and 
eulogizes is rid of all sins and again comes back to these three 
worlds due to its prowess. 


V.iii.42.1-7 
151 
CHAPTER FORTYfWO 
The Greatness of Pippaliida Tirtha 
Sri Miirka7J4eya said: 
1-7. 
Therefrom, one should go to the excellent Pippalesvara 
where Pippalada, a great Yogin of austerᥚ penance, became a 
Siddha. 
Yudhi6!hira said: 
0 holy Sir, I wish to hear the story of Pippalada1 and the 
greatness of that Tlrtha where the great ascetic became a Siddha. 
Whose son was he? 0 highly esteemed onᥛ. why did he per­
form the penance? 0 sinless one, narrate this in full detail. 
Miirka'T)tf,eya said: 
The highly venerable Yajfiavalkya who had mastered the Vedas 
ᥜnd Vedari.gas performed an excellent penance while he was 
at Mithila. The sister of the intelligent Yajfiavalkya became a 
widow unfortunately in her seventh year itself. As a result of 
her previous Karma, she was also an orphan without her par­
ents. In her husband's family too there was no one. Hence she 
was alone. 
Wandering over the earth, she gradually came near her brother 
who was performing a penance with a desire for the other 
world and its happiness. 
I . 
PippaHi.da was an ancient sage who, according to Prasna Upani¦ad, imparted 
spiritual knowledge to sages such as Sukesa, Saibya and others. He visited 
Bhidma while the latter was on the bed of arrows (Mb]J, Santi 47.9) . 
The author of Skanda l.i. l 7 records him to be the son of Dadhica and 
Suvarcas. When Dadhica handed over his body to Devas Suvarcas placed 
the new-born baby under the shade of a Pippala tree which nursed it on 
its fruits. Hence the name. 
The author of Reviikha7Jtf.a, in his enhusiasm to glorify a KJetra on Reva 
is insensitive to the reputation of the great sage Yajfiavalkya, the court 
philosopher of Janaka of Mithila. 
He makes Pippalada a bastard born of Yajfiavalkya and his widowed sister. 
Pippalada creates a l<ftya (Female Ogress) to kill Yajiiavalkya who is shown 
to have run from Janaka and other gods. 
Popular etymology of Pippalada gave rise to such stories. 


152 
Skanda Purii:T}a 
8-1 3. She attended to his needs and stayed there perform­
ing penance. On a certain occasion, she had her monthly course 
during the day when she took her bath. She saw a rag kept 
concealed and so wore it as her undergarment. In the mean­
time, at night Yajfiavalkya had an erotic dream in a place where 
there was none. As a result of the dream, there was an emis­
sion of semen in his loin cloth. It resembled a drop of blood. 
Since he was refulgent with his austere penance, it had the 
lustre of fire. The poor Brahmal).a woke up and found the 
piece of cloth defiled. He thought it not worthy of being touched 
and so cast it off and washed himself clean in accordance with 
the injunctions in the Smrti texts. Bath at night has been 
prohibited. So the Brahmal).a went to sleep again. At midnight 
the woman took this cloth and covered her vaginal aperture. 
In the morning the sage searched for his loin cloth here and 
there. Thereupon the Brahmal).a woman said: "Dear Sir, what 
are you searching for? What do you want? Tell me the fact. " 
Yiijiiavalkya said: 
1 4-23. 
I had an unholy dream at night, 0 fair lady. My 
loin cloth became wet, which I kept aside. It is not to be seen 
now. 
On hearing this statement, the Brahmal).a lady became excessively 
frightened, 0 king. She said: "0 Brahmal).a; that piece of cloth 
was worn as an undergarment by me after my menstrual bath . " 
O n hearing her words the great sage burst out: "Alas! Alas! " 
and fell on the ground like a tree the root of which had been 
cut. Pure like the sky, the innocent lady asked: "What is this? " 
Consoling the Brahmal).a, she spoke thus: "Tell me the reason 
even if it · were to be the uttermost secret, so that we shaH 
ponder over it and get the remedy carried out. " After reflect­
ing for some time, he found it possible to speak. With a fright­
ened mind, he spoke out. Listen to what he said, 0 king: "0 
lady of auspicious Vratas, it is none of your faults nor mine. 
Of the foetus in your womb, fate alone is the cause. It has to 
be carefully preserved by you forever. It should not be de­
stroyed. It should be awaited till the whole period is over. " The 
chaste lady was ashamed. Yet she said in distress, "So be it" . 
. She nurtured the child in the womb till the normal delivery. 


V.iii.42.24-45 
153 
As soon as the child was born, the Brahmal).a lady came to the 
root of a banyan tree. Abandoning the child there she spoke 
thus: 
24-33. 
"May all those living beings in all the worlds, mobife 
a::J.d immobile, protect this child abandoned · by me. " 
Mter saying this, the Brahmal).a lady went away, 0 excellent 
king. 
The child in that plight lay still for a short while. Then it 
threw up the hands and legs winking the splendid eyes. Then 
it opened its eyes and cried making shockingly awful sounds. 
Due to the sound the mobile and immobile beings became 
frightened. The earth shook violently along with its moun­
tains, forests and parks. On taking that hungry Brahmal).a child 
to be some great spirit, the tree continued to spread its shade 
over him. For the sake of drinking, the child had its nectarine 
exudation, 0 descendant of Bharata. Thus the boy grew up 
there. He delightedly pondered: 'What is the state of Planets 
in my case?' Thereupon the Planet of cruel movements (i.e. 
Saturn) was angrily looked at and Sanaiscara, the Planet of 
slow motion, fell suddenly on to the ground. Utterly fright­
ened he joined his palms in veneration and said: "0 Brahmal).a, 
0 Pippalada, 0 great sage! What is my offence, pray? I was 
moving in my orbit in the space. Why have I been caused to 
fall on the ground? " On being asked thus by the son of the 
Sun (i.e. Saturn) , Pippalada, the great sage, spoke these words 
angrily. Hear it, 0 king: "0 Sauri (son of the Sun) , 0 evil­
minded one, why do you harass me, a child bereft of father 
and mother? Explain to me thoroughly. " 
Sanaiscara said: 
34-45. 
Ruthlessness is my innate nature. My viewing is also 
likewise. Leave me free. I shall undoubtedly do what you ask 
me to do. 
Pippalada said: 
From now onwards, children upto the age of sixteen should 
not be tormented by you. This condition has been stipulated, 
0 Planet. 
He said "Let "it be so". Mter saying this, he went away and 


154 
Skanda Purii:IJa 
returned. The Slow-moving One (Saturn) bowed down to the 
excellent sage and took the celestial path. 
When he vanished, the boy of great tenacity thought of his 
father and was overwhelmed with anger. He concentrated his 
mind on fire and created fire there. He uttered Krtya Mantras 
and performed Homa in the fire uttering "May the Krtya issue 
forth". At once that girl adorned with clusters of flames and 
resembling fire came out and said: "What shall I do? Shall I 
dry up the seas? Shall I smash down the mountains? Shall I 
envelop the earth? Shall I make the firmament tumble down? 
On whose head shall I fall? 0 Brahmal).a, whom shall I slay? 
Let the task be mentioned quickly. Do not cause waste of time 
for me." 
O n hearing her words, Pippalada of great austerity, got his 
eyes red in colour and spoke these words: "0 auspicious lady, 
it was with great paroxysm of anger that you have been thought 
of by me. My father is Yajiiavalkya. Fall on him. Do not delay. " 
On being told thus, she went hurriedly exploding the firma­
ment. Yajiiavalkya, the noble-souled, highly intelligent, great 
sage was performing penance staying at Mithila. The highly 
refulgent sage looked around at the various quarters when he 
saw the great spirit having the lustre of fire and the sun, present 
there. 
46-58. 
On seeing it arriving suddenly, the great sage became 
very frightened. Pursued by the spirit he went to King Janaka. 
"Know that I, ordinarily a refuge to others, have come to you 
(for protection) , 0 excellent king. If you are capable, 0 king, 
save me from the terror of the great spirit. " The king spoke 
these words: 'The spirit has originated from Brahmal).ical splendour. 
It cannot be restrained. It is difficult to overcome. I cannot 
prot<:ct you. " 
Thereafter the great ascetic went to another excellent king, 
seeking refuge. Abandoned by him, he went to the abode of 
lndra out of fear. The trembling Brahmai.J.a repeatedly said: "0 
king of Devas, I offer obeisance to you. Save me from the fear 
of the great spirit. " 
On hearing his words, the King of Devas said· this: "I am 
unable to save you from the fury of a Brahmal).a. " 
Then that Brahmal).a, the most excellent one· among the 
knowers of Brahman, went to Brahma's ab.ode and then to 


V.iii.42.59-66 
155 
Viᤄl).uloka. He was addressed by him too in the same way. 
Then, 0 king, the sage became distressed and lost hope of 
remaining alive. Pursued by the spirit he wenL to the abode of 
Sankara. Yajiiavalkya who was endowed with the power of Yoga, 
0 son of Pal).<;lu, concealed himself in the middle of the flesh 
and nail (of Lord Siva) so much so that even the Lord could 
not see. 
At last the spirit arrived there blazing with the ll;lstre of fire 
and the sun. It said to Mahe5vara, the Lord of Devas: "Leave 
off, leave off the person. " On being told thus by that spirit, 0 
descendant of Bharata, Mahadeva showed the leading Yogin 
between the nail and the flesh. The Lord of goblins subdued 
the spirit and said to the sage who had been in great danger: 
"0 great sage, 0 Brahmal).a, do not be. afraid. Come out. " 
Thereafter on seeing the spirit settled in a very subtle body, 
he asked thus: "0 great spirit, what will you do with him? Tell 
me. 
.. 
The Krtya said: 
59-66. 
0 Lord of Devas, I have been thought of by Pippalada 
overwhelmed with anger. I shall destroy hi·s body. 0 Lord, I 
have been invoked for doing this act of violence. 
On hearing these words that had escaped from the mouth 
of the spirit, Mahadeva, conversant with Mantras whispered 
᥅orne Mantras to Yajiiavalkya who was stationed in his waist. 0 
Yudhiᤄthira, he gave the Brahmal).a the name Yogisvara. The 
Lord of Devas discharged him and vanished there itself. 
Pippalada had sent away that spirit. But he was gloomy on 
account of his parents. He resorted to the bank of Narmada 
and performed penance standing on a single toe and abstain­
ing from food till his sixteenth year. 0 king, he thus propiti­
ated the Lord of Devas, Sail.kara along with Uma. Thereafter 
Sankara who was pleased with him spoke these words: 
lsvara said: 
0 Brahmal).a of good holy rites, I am pleased with your 
penance. Choose a boon wished for by you mentally. I shall 
grant it. 


156 
Skanda Purii:rJ.a 
Pippaliida said: 
If the Lord is pleased with me, if a boon has to be granted 
to me, 0 Lord Mahe5vara, be present in this Tirtha here. 
67-74. 
On being told thus, the Lord said to PippaHida, the 
great sage, "So be it" and vanished along with the groups of 
goblins. 
Mter the Lord had gone Pippalada took his holy bath in the 
great waters, installed Mahadeva and went to Uttara Parvata 
(Northern Mountain) . A person should take his holy bath devoutly 
in the Tirtha there, uttering the relevant Mantras, 0 king, 
propitiate Pitrs and Devas and worship Mahe5vara. He shall get 
the excellent benefit of Asvamedha Yajiia (horse-sacrifice) . On 
death he goes to the city of Rudra. No doubt should there be 
in this connection. 
With the Pitrs in view, the devotee should feed BrahmaQas, 
0 descendant of Bharata. They will rejoice in heaven for twelve 
years. 
If any one adopts Sannyasa and abandons his body in the 
Tirtha, his goal (destination) shall be Ruc!raloka from where 
he will never return. 
Thus everything that was asked by you (i.e. the greatness 
and the origin of the Pippalada Tirtha) , 0 sinless one, has 
been explained. 
This is meritorious, destructive of sins, conducive to wealth, 
dispelling evil dreams and all the sins of those who read or 
listen to shall be dispelled. 
CHAPTER FORTYfHREE 
The Greatness of Vimalesvara Tirtha 
Sri Miirka7J-4eya said: 
1-8. 
From there, 0 great king, a pilgrim should go to the 
excellent Vimale5vara. There ·the divine rock (Devasila, the 
divine slab) is beautiful, made by Devas themselves. The per­
son should take his holy bath there with devotion and adore 


V.iii.43.9-18 
157 
Brahmal).as. 0 king, even with the least of Dana he will gain 
much. There is no limit thereto. 
Yudhi$thira said: 
0 great Brahmal).a, what are those Danas considered praise­
worthy in the world, on offering which devoutly a man be­
comes liberated from all sins? 
Sri Markar:ttf.eya said: 
Gold, silver, copper, jewels, pearls, plots of land and cows 
gifted liberate a man from inauspiciousness. 
He who abandons his life in that Tirtha shall reside in Rudraloka 
as long as the ultimate destruction qf alJ. living beings. 
From there he should go to Puᤄkaril).i that is destructive of 
all sins. Mter taking the holy bath there, he should adore Lord 
Divakara (Sun-god) , a mass of splendour. 
He should recite a ᥆k or a Saman hymn. He shall attain the 
benefit of reciting Samaveda. 
By uttering a Mantra of Yajurveda or ᤒgveda he will attain 
the benefit of reciting (the whole of) Yajurveda or ᤒgveda 
similarly. 
Meditating on Divakara he should recite the Mantra or even 
a syllable thereof. By the Japa of Adityahrdaya one is liberated 
from all sins. 
9-1 8. The devotee should take his holy bath in that Tirtha 
and duly adore Brahmal).as. His merit becomes a crore times 
more. There is no doubt about it. 
One who dies in that Tirtha through abstention from food­
intake, or by entering fire, or falling into the waters or by 
jumping from the rocky precipice attains the great goal (Mokᤄa) . 
0 excellent king, a Brahmal).a, or a I<Jiatriya, or a Vaisya or a 
Siidra performing the duties laid down, shall attain the greatest 
goal (Mokᤄa) . 
Yudhi$thira said: 
Tell me the means whereby all the different Varl).as (castes) 
become freed from all sins after knowfng ailments, loss of 
energy and delusion. 


158 
Skanda Purii:IJa 
Sri Miirkm;uf,eya said: 
A Brahmal)a devoid of lust and anger, forsaking his life 
through fasts, obtains the goal of the good by making use of 
gingelly seeds mixed with water (for libation) and gingelly oil 
for head bath. A ᤐatriya shall attain the goal of the good by 
courting death in battle. In case there is no war, 0 highly 
intelligent one, he shall obtain the same through service. One 
suffering from a chronic illness or under the adverse influence 
of evil Planets or a very old man or one whose sense-organs 
have been impaired, should burn himself in fire duly and obtain 
the goal of the good. 
A Vaisya too abandoning his life in this manner shall attain 
auspiciousness. With purity of feelings, he should abandon 
himself into the waters and attain the status of Siva. 
A Sudra too obtains good goal by serving Brahmal)as and 
propitiating Mahdvara. Otherwise he is not liberated. The sinner 
falls certainly into hell. 
Or if he is unable ·to make use of Pral)ava, or to offer gifts 
to Brahmal)as as well as the preceptor, he should dry up his 
body in the five fires after taking leave of excellent Brahmal)as. 
1 9-26. 
He should take leave of Brahmal)as who are quies­
cent, have self-control, have controlled anger and who have 
mastered scriptures and are very efficient. He should prepare 
Kariljagni (fire of dry cowdung) with their advice (to burn 
himself) . 
Thus the Varl)a᥇become deluded by arrogance, by following 
wrong methods (?) Just as a blind man falls into the cave of a 
mountain so also they fall into a terrible hell. 
Those who eschew the injunctions of the scriptures and 
behave as they please, are born as worms. No balls of rice are 
offered to them nor need they be offered libation and other 
rites. 
Those who resort to activities according to their whims and 
fancy, abandoning the pious rites mentioned in the Sruti and 
Srnrti do fall into hell. 0 Yudhighira, there are tw᥈nty-eight 
crores of Narakas (Hells) . They may fall into any or all of these 
hells. Human birth is rarely achieved, 0 king. It is acquired 
by means of many pious rites. 
Being born as a maQ, one who eschews arrogance and malice, 


V.iii.43.27-V.iii.44.8 
159 
con trolling himself always, he alone can be called Jniinacak,m̍ 
('Knowledge-eyed' i.e. wise) 
If one is blinded by the Timira (disease of the eye, dark­
ness) of ignorance and one's eye is not opened by the appli­
cation of collyrium of perfect knowledge, one should be known 
as congenitally blind. 
0 excellent king, thus everything that was asked by you has 
been explained. 
27-33. 
As uttered by Rudra himself, Narmada is the most 
excellent of all rivers and has issued forth from Rudra's body. 
She shall redeem all living beings, mobile and immobile. This 
highly meritorious river has been made to come down for the 
benefit of all the worlds, by the noble-souled Isvara, the pre­
siding deity of all the Devas. 
The sins committed mentally, verbally and physically perish 
as a result of the holy bath. This river has come out of Rudra's 
body. Hence she is highly meritorious. Everyday a devotee should 
get up in the morning and step on the ground devoutly. Then 
he should recite this Mantra. 0 dear one, he attains the ben­
efit of the holy bath: "Obeisance, 0 divine one of meritorious 
waters. Obeisance to one that flows towards the ocean. 0 redeemer 
from sins, I make obeisance to you. Obeisance, 0 excellent­
countenanced divine one. Obeisance to you who are served by 
groups of excellent sages. Obeisance to you who have issued 
forth from the body of the Three-eyed Lord. Obeisance to you 
who are the most excellent one of those of holy activities. 
Obeisance to you who are the perpetual sanctifier of all holy 
ones. " 
CHAPTER FORTYFOUR 
Eulogy of Sitlabheda 
Sri Marka?j.rf,eya said: 
1-8. 
Listen, 0 king, to that Tirtha which is the most ex­
cellent one of all the Tirthas. It has been created by the Trident­
bearing Lord on the southern bank of Reva. It has been cre­
ated, 0 excellent king, for the salvation of all great men. 


1 60 
Skanda Purii:r;ta 
Yudhiţthira said: 
0 excellent Brahmar:ta, various pious rites have been heard 
by me with your favour. All the Danadharmas and different 
kinds of Tlrthas also have been heard. I wish to hear about 
another thing whereby Saril.sara (worldly existence) is cut off 
and salvation is attained and there is no rebirth. Do recount 
all these things. Please do me this favour, 0 excellent Brahmal)a. 
Sri Miirkar;tf/,eya said: 
Listen with single-minded attention to the Tlrtha greater 
than the other Tlrthas. On hearing its power, one is rid of the 
sins committed during a year, whether the sins be verbal or 
mental or particularly physical. By glorifying that Tlrtha one 
is liberated from all sins. 
The Tlrtha extends to five Krosas, 0 king.. It bestows worldly 
pleasures and salvation. It is divine and beneficent to the living 
beings that commit sinful deeds. 
On the southern bank (of Reva) there is a mountain named 
Bhrgu. It is on its top that the Tlrtha has been established by 
Sarilbhu. 
9-20. It is well known as Siilabheda in all the three worlds, 
0 king. The trees that grow there in all the four quarters of 
the Tlrtha undoubtedly go to the abode of Rudra when they 
fall down. 
The creatures and birds on the earth that die there in that 
Tlrtha go to the greatest world. There is no doubt about it. 
The Ganga that issues from Patala is called Bhogavatl. She 
has come out through Siilabheda. She is destructive of all sins. 
There is another great meritorious river named Glrvar:ta flow­
ing there into the middle of the Kur:tc;la which has been dug 
up by th᥉ Trident-bearing Lord by piercing with it (i.e. his 
trident) . 
Then the ancient river Sarasvatl issued forth, 0 king, which 
redeems one from all sins. 
In the place where these three including Bhasvatl flow and 
where there is the rock called Glrvar:ta there is a Tlrtha the like 
of which was never before nor will there ever be (hereafter) . 
Kedara, Prayaga, Kurukᤄetra, Gaya and other excellent Tlrthas 
do not merit even a sixteenth fraction of that Tlrtha. Five holy 


V.iii.44.21-34 
161 
places are separate Tirthas. I shall recount them in aggregate 
succinctly and then each one separately. 
Just as Gaya is meritorious in Nabhi, Cakratirtha is on a par 
with it. Just as Kupa (Well) in DharmaraQ.ya is meritorious, 
Sulabheda is on a par with it. Just as Brahmayupa is merito­
rious, the case of Devanadi is of that sort. Just as Gayasiras is 
meritorious, so also is the Sila (Rock) of the Suras; just as the 
Puliikara shrine, so also is MarkaQ.<;lahrada. Offering balls of 
rice and libation of water to Pitrs there is everlasting to the 
Pitrs. He who performs Sraddha there and drinks the water 
everyday is liberated from all sins like a serpent which is lib­
erated from its slough. The devotee should honour unblamable 
BrahmaQ.as bereft of arrogance and anger. 
21-28. 
A Dana rite extending to thirteen days shall be 
thirteen times more meritorious. 
By visiting the venerated God GaQ.anatha with a counte­
nance resembling that of an elephant, all obstacles perish after 
seeing the Lord of Karilbala ᤐetra. One should worship with 
great devotion, Mahdvara with the trident in his hand. Uma 
has to be carefully adored to the east of the Lord. Thereafter 
the person shall devoutly worship MarkaQ.<;lesa residing in the 
cave. He is liberated from all sins committed knowingly and 
unknowingly. 
One who has entered the centre of the cave should recite 
the three-syllabled Sukta (or Sukta beginning with tri-ambakam 
yajiimahe) . He will obtain a sixth fraction of the merit accruing 
from Nilaparvata. Trinaras (? three men) stand there with the 
Adityas and Maruts. 
Excellent is the Kotiliri.ga Sthana full of all the Devas. Just 
as all the rivers ultimately get merged in ocean, so also the sins 
perish by visiting Sulabheda, the proof of which is directly 
perceived even today, 0 king. 
29-34. 
Sparks appear in the centre of the Liri.ga when 
bathed. The second proof there is that a drop of oil does not 
spread. This is the proof originating from the power of Sulabheda. 
He who remembers Sulabheda everyday three times shall 
become purified internally and externally, 0 king. 
Though I had been asked even by Suras, it was not men­
tioned to anyone by me. The Tirtha has to be treated as the 
greatest secret of all secrets. 


1 62 
Skanda Purii:TJa 
It should always be considered secret. It is destructive of all 
sins, of all defects. It is meritorious and excellent, 0 Lord of 
people. Siilabheda is the Tirtha full of all Tirthas. When its 
power is heard one is rid of all sins. 
0 dear one, Siilabheda has been succinctly narrated to you. 
A man who devoutly listens to it is rid of all sins. 
CHAPTER FORTYFIVE 
Andhaka Gets a Boon 
Sri Miirka'T]tf,eya said: 
1-8. 
This very question was put to Mahe§vara formerly by 
King UWinapada in the assembly of sages and Devas. 
Uttiinapiida said: 
This Tirtha is extremely meritorious and full of all Devas. 
It is considered as more secret than others so much so that no 
other more secret place has been heard or seen. How did 
Siilabheda come into being? By whom has it been created? 0 
Lord, tell me in detail the greatness of that Tirtha. 
lsvara said: 
Formerly there was a Danava of great vigour, arrogant of his 
strength. No man was great in strength like him. He was son 
of Brahma's son. He was irrepressibly arrogant and his name 
was Andhaka. Staying in his own abode, he, the sinner, ruled 
his kingdom bereft of thorns (opponents) . He was well nour­
ished and highly delighted. He stayed in the mortal world but 
he could not be assailed by the Suras. The abode of that sinner 
was as though a garden of fire. 
In the meanwhile, 0 descendant of Bharata, he thought 
thus on a certain occasion: 'I shall propitiate Mahadeva whereby 
he will bless me. I will request him for a divine boon which 
is in my mind. ' 
After resolving thus, Andhaka went out of his house. 
9-1 7. He reached the bank of Reva. The Danava performed 


V.iii.45.18-26 
1 63 
a fierce and severe penance that caused hairs to stand. He 
abstained from food for a thousand divine years. The second 
thousand of divine years, he spent taking in only water. In the 
third thousand, he was engaged in inhaling smoke. For the 
fourth space of thousand years, he practised Yoga. No one 
before had performed an extremely fierce penance of this 
sort. 0 descendant of Bharata, (his) only the bones and skin 
(in his body) remained. 
A column of smoke rose from his head, 0 king, which went 
beyond Devaloka and remained pervading Kailasa. 
Then Uma who was seated near the Lord spoke these words: 
"Who is this engaged in fierce penance in the human world? 
0 Paramdvara, four thousand years have elapsed. Such a pen_ance 
has never been performed by anyone. A penance like this has 
not been seen or heard. 0 Lord, why are· you indifferent in 
regard to this devotee endowed with regular observances. 0 
Lord, you grant boons quickly to all others with less penance. 
0 Mahe᥊vara who are reputed to be a lover of devotees, until 
this Danava is raised up (from penance) I would rather not 
play the game of dice with you. " 
lsvara said: 
1 8-26. 
Excellent! Excellent! 0 great goddess marked with 
all auspicious characteristics, I do not know that the great 
Danava is undergoing sufferings. 0 fair lady, he has estab­
lished himself in the Yogic practice meditating on the greatest 
position (Brahman) . Come with me to the place where he is 
performing his penance. 
After saying this, Lord Mahesvara went there accompanied 
by Uma. He was seen by Lord Saril.bhu as one reduced to mere 
bones and_ skin. The delighted Mahesvara, the Lord of Devas, 
said: "Oh ! A strenuous feat has been displayed by you, terrible, 
awe-inspiring and causing horripilation! Why have you, 0 dear 
one, performed such a terrible penance? I shall grant you the 
boon, 0 dear one, whatever may be in your mind. " 
Andhaka said: 
If you are pleased with me, 0 Lord, if you wish td grant a 


1 64 
Skanda Puriir_ta 
boon, 0 Sailkara, 0 Mahesvara, I shall vanquish all the Suras 
with your favour. 
isvara said: 
The Devas should never be fought with, even in dream. 
What is impossible should not be mentioned-what is not ap­
pealing to the mind. Request for something else which may be 
in your mind. You will enjoy different kinds of pleasures in the 
mortal worlds or Patalas on a par with the pleasures of Svarga. 
Do rule the kingdom without impediments, like the Lord of 
Devas in Svarga. 
27-33. 
On hearing the words of the Lord, Andhaka stood 
there disappointed and gloomy. He said: "My painful struggles 
and austerities have become futile. Nothing has been achieved 
by me. " He took a deep sigh and fell on the ground like a tree 
the roots of which have been cut. He lay breathless. 
On seeing him senseless, the Goddess spoke these words: "0 
Sankara, grant this (Danava) whatever he desires. If you ne­
glect your devotees, it will result in your disrepute. " 
isvara said: 
0 goddess, if I grant him the boon in accordance with his 
wish, then he will never care for ViᤄI).u, Brahma, even for me 
and also other Suras. 0 goddess of Devas, having attained the 
height of power, he will slight and disregard all. 
The Devz said: 
0 Mahesvara, lift him up by some means. Let a boon be 
granted like "Conquer all the Suras except ViᤄI).u." 
isvara said: 
34-41 . 
This is the same splendid way, 0 fair lady, as has 
occurred to my mind. I shall grant him the boon as has been 
suggested by you. 
Then being sprinkled with nectar, he became normal and 
peaceful in a moment. He was refreshed with all the litnbs 
having regained their splendour. 


V.iii. 46. 1-1 3 
165 
The Lord said: 
Listen with concentrated mind. Accept the excellent boon. 
shall grant you what pleases you excluding the operation 
thereof against ViᤄI).u. Everything shall be successful in your 
case. Let not your righteousness be otherwise. 0 Asura, if you 
are inclined (to accept) I shall grant you the boon. You will 
conquer all. the Suras, excluding ViᤄI).U and me. 
A ndhaka said: 
Let it be so. Relying on my strength alone, 0 Mahesvara, I 
shall conquer (all) excluding ViᤄI).u. I have become contented. 
0 Lord, do go along with Uma to the excellent peak of KaiHisa. 
After this riding on his great buli, the- Lol;d who had granted 
him the boon, vanished there itself along with Uma. 
CHAPTER FORTYSIX 
Abduction of Saci 
Sn MiirkarJ4eya said: 
1-4. 
After getting the boon, the Danava went to his city. 
It had quadrangles of diverse types. There were many gardens 
full of plantain groves, jackfni'it trees, Bakulas, mangoes, Amratakas, 
Carhpakas, Asokas, coconut trees, pomegranates, citrons and 
various other kinds of fine trees. There were .many lakes beau­
tifying the gardens. The temples of divine features were deco­
rated with a series of banners and festoons. The whole place 
reverberated with the sounds of the chanting of the Vedas and 
other auspicious passages and musical notes. 
5-1 3. He entered his divine abode made of gold and golden 
strings and saw his sons, wife, ministers, servants and slaves. 
Then he saw many persons shouting cries of victory and run­
ning about here and there. With ensigns and banners raised 
up, they revealed the radiance of their hearts. Some of them 
tied festoons and raised arched doorways. Some of them scat­
tered flowers. Others rushed towards Andhaka to greet ᥝim 
with citrons in their hands. Some people in the city were seen 


166 
Skanda Puriir_ta 
holding vessels filled with cooked food. There itself many people 
were seen with hands full. There hundreds and thousands of 
women held pots filled with raw rice-grains. The BrahmaQ.as 
recited Mantras and the women (sang) auspicious songs. The 
Ministers and the servants brought elephants as presents. Everyone 
of the citizens felicitated him. He saw all including the cavalry 
and infantry in motion. He saw the treasuries filled with gold. 
He saw she-buffaloes, cows, bulls and umbrellas. 
In this way Andhaka lived in the mortal world for some time 
with feelings of elation and satisfaction. He was never attacked 
by Suras. 
1 4. 
Mter coming to know that he had secured great boons 
the heaven-dwellers began to feel apprehensive. They collected 
together and sought refuge in Indra. 
Sakra said: 
1 5-23. 
How is it that all the heaven-dwellers have come 
here? Wherefrom has fear arisen in your case? Why have you 
come seeking refuge? 
Thereupon all the Devas spoke these words to Sakra: 
The Devas said: 
0 Lord of Suras, there is a Daitya named Andhaka. He has 
become all the more powerful on account of the boons granted 
by Sarilbhu. He is invincible unto all the Devas. What should 
be done now? 0 Lord of Devas, consider this yourself. What 
means should be employed? 
Thus the Devas spoke to Sakra. Then they had mutual 
consultation. While they were doing so, the Danava came to 
know of it through the reports made by the spies. On coming 
to know about the congregation of the Devas, the Danava came 
out of his abode alone, seated in his chariot and equipped with 
inany weapons. 0 king, he passed over the impassable upper 
ridge o᥋ Meru sportingly. It had been strengthened with golden 
ramparts. The upper surface of Meru was rendered splendid 
through different kinds of hermitages. It was very difficult for 
the hordes of enemies to gain access to that place, 0 excellent 
king. The Asura however entered that place sportingly (and 


V.iii.46.24-38 
1 67 
without effort) as though it was his own abode. The Slayer of 
Vrtra (i.e. lndra) became afraid and he offered his own seat. 
Andhaka sat there on the splendid seat of Sakra himself. He 
surveyed the entire place full of the Devas all round. 
Sakra said: 
24-33. 
What is the purpose of your visit to this place? Do 
tell me. 0 Danava, whatever we:1lth we possess, I shall hand 
over to you. 
A ndhaka said: 
I do not desire the wealth, nor elephants, 0 Lord of Suras; 
show me your great elephant Airavata embellished with all 
heavenly ornaments. Show me the horse·uccai):lsravas, the jewels 
(beauties) beginning with Urvasl. 0 Lord of heaven, show me 
the flowers of Parijataka and the many varieties of trees. 0 
Consort of Sacl, show me all the kinds of musical instruments. 
On hearing these words of his, Sakra thought thus (in his 
mind) : 'I don 't see at all anyone who can kill this sinner. (If) 
the heavenly world is miserable, there is no one to accord it 
protection. ' Frightened thus, he gave the musical instruments 
and other things. After making the Asura seated on the stage, 
he made the groups of Apsaras perform the Tat:u;lava dance. 
All the Suras including Yama, Maruta and Kinnaras also sat 
there. 0 king, one by one all the Apsaras beginning with Urvasi 
danced before him to the accompaniment of songs and musical 
notes of the instruments. His mind was never at rest. (His 
mind was not satisfied) after witnessing the Apsaras, 0 king; 
his mind became enamoured of Saci. He seized Sakra's wife 
and proceeded towards his city. Thereupon the war between 
Andhaka and the Stiras ensued. 
34-38. 
With different kinds of weapons such as discus, 
thunderbolt and other heavy means of fighting all the groups 
of the Devas were smashed, 0 excellent king, in the war. All 
the Suras became distressed. They were destroyed in many 
ways. All the Maruts were broken down at the war front. Just 
as a single lion walks (triumphantly) through the forest after 
killing all the elephants, so also he, single-handedly defeated 
all of them and routed them. Just as the immature lord of a 


1 68 
Skanda Purii:r:ta 
village may harass all the people and seize wealth and gar­
ments and never feels the harassment of subjects for himself, 
so also that great Danava seized Sakra's wife and went away. 
CHAPTER FORTYSEVEN 
Devas Return to Svarga 
Sri Miirkar.u!eya said: 
1-3. 
All the GirviiQ.as (Devas) sought refuge in Brahma. 
They reached the world of Brahma, riding on their elephants 
having the size of excellent mountains, horses comparable · to 
elephants, chariots having the size of a city fitted with lions 
and tigers, and also on tortoises, buffaloes and crocodiles. The 
Devas reached the world of Brahma with Sakra as their leader. 
On seeing the Lotus-born Lord, the Suras prostrated them­
selves with the eight ·limbs touching the ground. 
The Devas said: 
4-6. 
Be victorious, 0 Lord worthy of being respected by 
the whole universe. Be victorious, 0 cause of the worldly existence. 
0 most excellent one among Suras, 0 (Lord) having lotus as 
your source of origin, we have sought refuge in you alone. 
On hearing the distressful words of Devas of purified souls, 
he (Brahma) spoke to Devaraja (lndra) in a voice deep and 
majestic like the rumbling of clouds: 
"Why have you come here, 0 Devas? Wherefore is this pallor 
seen on the face of everyone? By whom have all of you been 
insulted. May this be reported to me quickly. " 
The Devas said: 
7-1 1 . 0 Lotus-born Lord, the great Daitya named Andhaka 
is enormously powerful. By him all the groups of the Devas 
have be᥌n deprived of their wealth and jewels. Mter killing 
groups of Devas by means of sword, discus and axe, that Danava 
abducted Sakra's wife forcibly and went away. 
* 
* 
* 


V.iii.47.12-19 
1 69 
On hearing the words of the Devas, Brahma, the grandfa­
ther of the worlds, began to ponder, 0 great king, about the 
means of slaying the Danava: "The sinful Danava cannot be 
killed by you all the heaven-dwellers. He (i.e. ViᤄQ.u) is the 
saviour of all the worlds. There is no one else." 
Thus all the Suras were addressed by Brahma. Thereafter, 
keeping Brahma at the head, all of them went to the place 
where Kesava was present. They (Brahma and others) eulo­
gized the Discus-bearing Lord by means of hymns of prayer. 
The Devas said: 
1 2-19. 
0 Lord of the chiefs of Devas, 0 Lord whose bosom 
has been resorted to by Lakᤄmi, be victorious. 0 Lord of Devas, 
0 destroyer of Asuras, we have sought refuge in you. 
On being eulogized by all the Suras beginning with Brahma, 
Janardana became pleased in his mind and said to the groups 
of the Suras: 
, 
Sri Vasudeva said: 
Welcome unto the Devas and Vipras. Today the night has 
dawned very well (by your arrival) . What is your task on hand? 
Let it be mentioned quickly. With whom are the heaven-dwell­
ers angry? What is your misery? What is your distress? Whence 
has terror originated? 0 highly blessed ones, mention the cause 
thereof and whatever lurks in your minds. Today let that person 
'who has caused discomfiture (to you) go to the abode of Yama. 
On being told thus by KrᤄQ.a, they all said, shyly pointing out 
their bodies and bowing down their heads: "0 Lord, we have 
been deprived of our kingdom by Andhaka and hence ren­
dered lustreless and lacking all radiance. 0 Lord, protect us 
like a father protecting the son. Slay the enemy of Indra along 
with his sons and grandsons." The Lotus-seated One (i.e. Brahma) 
also said thus. Thereupon the great Lord whose lotus-like feet 
have been bowed down to by Suras and Asuras, and who was 
equipped with the conch, discus, club and bow, got up from 
the couch of serpent. He stood in front of the Devas. 


170 
Skanda Purii:r:ta 
Sri Vasudeva said: 
20-22. 
I will kill that sinner by whom the Suras have been 
harassed, (wherever he happens to be) whether he stays in 
Patala, mortal world or in heaven itself. May the Devas go to 
their own abode contented with enhanced energy. 
On hearing those words of Vi!;QU, all of them beginning 
with Brahma and including Vasava, bowed to Hari delightedly 
and went to heaven by means of their respective vehicles. 
CHAPTER FORTYEIGHT 
Andhaka Blessed 
Uttanapada said: 
1-6. 
0 Lord, in which place did that Andhaka, the great 
Daitya, stay? After conquering all the Devas which place did he 
resort to? 
Sri Mahesa said: 
0 king, I shall tell you the place which the Danava resorted 
to after reaching Patala. He began to ravish girls. Kdava came 
to know that the Danava was staying there. He took up the bow 
and discharged an Agni missile, intending, 'Let him (Andhaka) 
be burned.' 
When he was. scorched by fire, he (Andhaka) discharged a 
Varul)a missile. The Agneya missile was subdued by the great 
VaruQa missile. 
Then he began to think, 'By whom has this arrow been 
discharged? Whose is this manly power? Who will (hence) go 
to the abode of Yama?' 
Thereupon the demon Andhaka, infuriated in the battle, 
set out along the path of the arrow and saw Janardᤩna with the 
bow kept ready in his hand. 
Andhaka said: 
7-1 4, You will not be happy any more, that you have been 


V.iii.48.15-24 
1 71 
seen by me. Just as an elephant cannot escape from the sight 
of a tiger, so you too cannot go. When a mouse falls a prey 
to a cat, it cannot get away. You are in a similar plight in front 
of me. 
I am goinᤪ to send you along the terrible path of Yama. I 
have been searching for you and was about to proceed towards 
your abode. But, 0 Kesava, you have been brought into a 
straight fight with me by Kala. All those many Danavas who 
were defeated earlier by you were not men, they were only 
women, 0 Kesava. But I will not fight with you by means of 
any weapon. 
Even as the great Danava spoke thus, Kesava did not become 
angry. On seeing him not caring to fight, t}le Danava thought 
thus: 'I shall have a (wrestling) duel with him.' After resolving 
thus, 0 king, he fought. He was kicked down to the ground 
by KrᤁQ.a with his foot. 
Within a short while he composed himself and got up. Realizing 
that he was incompetent for a full-fledged duel, he began to 
employ the expedient of Saman (peaceful overtures) . He brought 
together the palms with pure intentions and prostrated him­
self with eight limbs touching the ground. 
Andhaka said: 
15-24. 
Be victorious; obeisance to KrᤁQ.a, Hari, ViᤁQ.u, the 
_victorious. Be victorious, 0 Hpᤁlkesa. Obeisance to the creator 
of the universe, to the noble-souled Acyuta. Obeisance to the 
lotus-navelled one. Obeisance to the Lord having lotus gar­
lands, to Srlsa (Lord of Sri) , to Janardana, to the yellow-robed 
one. 0 Srlpati, be victorious. Perpetual obeisance to Govinda. 
Obeisance to the Lord lying down in the ocean. Obeisance to 
the roaring Narasirilha of a hideous face. Obeisance to Sanigin, 
of dark complexion, holding the conch, discus and club. Obeisance 
to you, the Lord in the form of Vamana, to the Lord in the 
form of Yajiia. Obeisance to the Lord in the form of Varaha; 
to the Lord who measured the three worlds with (three) steps. 
Obeisance, obeisance to Kesava who has pervaded all the quarters. 
0 Vasudeva, obeisance to you. Obeisance to the destroyer of 
Kaiᤍabha. Obeisance to you, 0 most excellent one among Suras, 
0 leader of Suras, 0 resort of Lakᤁmi. I bow unto all those who 
pay respects to ViᤁQ.U, the Lord of Devas, to Prajᤫpati, the 


1 72 
Skanda Purii:1Ja 
creator of the universe. I bow unto all those who make obei­
sance to the intelligent Vasudeva, the Lord of the entire range 
of living beings. I bow unto all those who make obeisance to 
Vi1;iQU of immeasurable brilliance, the Yajii.avaraha (the boar of 
sacrificial features) . Again and again I make obeisance unto 
you, the storehouse of all Gur:tas. 0 Lord, 0 ocean of mercy, 
0 Lord fond of all devotees and all forms of devotion ! 
Sri Bhagaviin said: 
25-28. 
0 great Danava, I am pleased with you. Choose any 
boon as desired. I shall grant you a boon even if it be some­
thing rare in all the three worlds. 
A ndhaka said: 
0 Lord, if you are pleased with me and are willing to grant 
me a desired boon, 0 Lord, then do grant me the favour of 
a fight with you that is extremely splendid. Thereupon, sanc­
tified by your hands, I shall go to splendid worlds. 
Sri Bhagaviin said: 
How can l fight with you now that I have been propitiated 
by you? My anger cannot be aroused against you, 0 Andhak(!, 
How will I then fight? You are undoubtedly inclined towards 
combat. If so, do go to fight with Lord Mahesvara. 
Andhaka said: 
29-36. 
There my objective is not ·achieved. 
Sri Bhagaviin said: 
Son, go and shake the peak (of Kailasa) with all your might. 
When the peak is shaken the Lord of Devas shall become 
terribly infuriated. 0 Danava, the enraged Sankara shall grant 
you the favour of a terrible fight. 
At the instance of Vi1;iQU, the sinful Danava went to the place 
where Mahesvara was present. After reaching the Kailasa peak, 
he shook it frequently. When the peak was shaken, all the 
three worlds too shook. The many summits of the peaks shook 


V.iii.48.37-44 
1 73 
and fell down . 0 king, soon the four oceans became one. 
Meteors fell and many trees tumbled down. In the company 
of Uma, the Lord became surprised. Goddess Girija closely 
embraced the Lord and spoke these words: "0 Lord, why does 
this mountain shake? Why does this earth quake? Why do the 
serpent Seᤁa. the mortal world and the nether worlds shake? 
Is this the utter annihilation of the Yuga? It behoves you to 
narrate it to me. " 
lsvara said: 
37-44. 
Whose mind has become wicked? Who has put his 
hand into the mouth of the serpent? On whose forehead Varman1 
(coat of mail?) h,as been put? He will go to the abode of Yama. 
I have been asleep after resorting to Kai}'.isa. Undoubtedly if 
anyone wakes me up and comes face to face with me I will kill 
him. 
The Lord of Devas further thought, 'There is no doubt 
about this that this is Andhaka. ' Thereafter he considered the 
means whereby he could be easily killed in an instant. 
All the Suras headed by Brahma came along with the Vasus. 
He made a chariot consisting of all the Devas. 2 Some of the 
Devas stationed themselves in the wheel; some at the tip and 
the sides of the snout. Some of the Devas stationed themselves 
on the navel and some on the Dhuryas (forepart of the poles 
of the chariot) . Some remained steady on the Dhuris (foremost 
part on the chariot) and some on the Yupas. Some of them 
were the supporting pillars of the Syandana (chariot) . Some 
were Syandanave${akas (serving as cover of the chariot) . Others 
stationed themselves on Amalasiiraka (a part of the chariot) 
and still others stationed themselves on its pot-like dome. Thus 
the divine chariot rendered splendid by the banners, garlands 
etc., became terrifying to the enemies. After making this chariot 
consisting of the Devas, Mahdvara, the preceptor of the uni-
1 . 
Probably 'Karman' as Va ("') and Ka (q;) are similar in Devanagari script. 
If emended thus it means 'On whose forehead is this act imprinted (i.e. 
to whom has this act been allotted by Destiny) ?' 
2. 
An echo of the chariot prepared for killing Tripurasura. Here the names 
of gods so employed are not given. 


1 74 
Skanda Purii:r;a 
verse, ascended it. With anger the Lord set out to the place 
where the Danava was present. 
45-58. 
He said, "Stop! Stop! 0 evil-minded one, where do 
you go?" Taking up the bow in his hand, he discharged arrows 
at the Danava. When the Danava stood firm in the battle, the 
Lord cut off his arrows. Andhaka was then covered (with a 
volley of arrows) . Neither the sun nor the sky, nor the moon 
were to be seen there. The Danava then discharged the Agneya 
(pertaining to the Fire-god) missile on Siva. All the Devas trembled 
with fear on being scorched by the smouldering charcoals dropping 
from the arrows. (They cried:) "0 Mahadeva, save us, save us. 
We are being burnt by the Danava. " 
Thereupon the Lord of Devas fitted a Varuᤂa missile on his 
bow. Within a moment the Agneya missile was destroyed by the 
Varuᤂa missile. Thereupon in the battlefield a Vayavya (per­
taining to the Wind) missile was discharged by the Danava. 0 
dear one, the Varuᤂa missile vanished on being destroyed by 
the Vayavya missile. With infuriated mind the Lord then dis­
charged a Sarpa (serpentine) missile. Undoubtedly the Maruta 
(Vayavya) missile was destroyed by the serpentine arrows. Thereat 
a Garu<;la missile was sportingly discharged by the Danava. On 
seeing the Garu<;la missile the Sarpa missile disappeared. Thereupon 
a Narasirhha missile was discharged by the Lord of Devas. The 
Garu<;la missile was destroyed by the Narasirhha missile. Thus 
one missile was suppressed by another missile. They did not 
affect either of the'm. 0 dear one, the great war became equally 
terrifying unto the Suras and the Asuras. Various weapons were 
employed such as discus, dart, arrow, Tomara, sword, Mudgara, 
Bhalla and the splendid Karᤂikara. Yet the Danava could not 
be killed by those diverse kinds of weapons. Then swords, darts 
and Tomaras, all terrible with flames issuing forth were dis­
charged by the Bull-emblemed Lord in the battle against the 
Danava. But like a Gau<;la maiden the missile never touched 
the body (of the Danava) . 
· Thereupon Siva and Andhaka abandoned the weapons and 
engaged themselves in hand-to-hand fight (wrestling) . They 
caught hold of each other's hands and began to hit with fists. 
Thus Siva and Andhaka fought employing all the means of a 
regular war. 


V.iii.48.59-74 
1 75 
Sri Miirka7J,tf,eya said: 
59-65. 
The Lord of Devas began to think about the means 
of restraining Andhaka. "There is no doubt that I will kill the 
evil-minded one." 0 excellent king, when he was hurled by 
Siva the Danava fell on the ground face down and hands lifted 
up. Then the enemy of Devas became furious. The Lord of 
Devas was kept in the armpit, pressed and afflicted. Lord Mahesvara 
became motionless and he swooned. On seeing him senseless 
the Danava thought thus: 'Alas, an evil action has been per­
petrated by me, a sinner. What shall I do? Where can I get rid 
of the Karma? ' 
He carried the Lord in his arms (in the particular position 
called Utsanga) and went to the Kailasa mountain. The king 
of Daityas placed Sankara on the bed ana went out. The Lord 
who fell on the bed began to feel the pain. He saw himself in 
his own abode. 
66-74. 
"How was this discomfiture brought down upon me 
by that evil-minded wretch?" Saying this he was overwhelmed 
with anger and he rushed against the Danava after seizing an 
iron bar weighing a thousand Bharas. On seeing the Danava, 
the Lord hurled it on to the head of the Danava. 
Then the Danava laughingly cut it with his sword. There­
upon in the great battle the missile named Kaucchera ·was 
recollected by the Lord. Even as it blazed, it was hurled hitting 
the Danava in his chest instantly. On being hit with that, the 
Danava vomited blood. He fell face-down and was pierced with 
the trident. Again he was split into two by the Lord · of Devas 
with his trident. Fixed at the tip of the trident the sinful wretch 
was whirled like a wheel. Every drop of blood that fell on the 
ground from his body gave rise to Danavas with weapons in 
their hands. Thereupon the Lord became utterly afflicted on 
account of the energetic Danava. 
At that time Durga, Camut:t<;la of terrifying countenance, was 
remembered by the Lord. Presently she came on the scene 
shining with different kinds of weapons and striking terror 
with her very appearance. She had long curved fangs, a huge 
body, tawny-coloured eyes and the earlobes hanging loose. She 
said, "0 Lord, may the command be given. Who is to go to the 
abode of Varna?" 


1 76 
Skanda Purii'T}a 
lsvara said: 
75-85. 
0 fair lady, drink the blood of this Danava as much 
as you please. 0 Durga, lap up the blood that drops on to the 
ground. Do not delay. 0 fair lady, extend a helping hand so 
that I can kill the Danava. 
On being told thus, that Goddess Durga drank the blood. 
All the Danavas numbering many thousands were killed by the 
Lord of Devas. On seeing those Danavas brought down to the 
ground Andhaka eulogized Mahesvara, the Lord of Devas: 
Andhaka said: 
Be victorious, 0 Lord of the chiefs of Devas having half of 
Uma's body as part of your own body. Obeisance to you, o' 
Lord of the chiefs of Devas. Obeisance to Sarva, possessing 
three Gm.tas within him. 
0 Lord seated on .the bull! 0 Lord with the moon for your 
crest jewel! Be victorious, 0 Lord with the Khaᤃvailga in the 
hand. Obeisance to you, 0 Gangadhara. 
Obeisance to you holding I;>amaru in the harid. Obeisance 
to the Lord having the garland of skulls. Obeisance to Mahda, 
the destroyer ᤬f Smara's body. Obeisance to you, to Mahda. 
Obeisance to the Lord who shattered the teeth of Puᤁan. 
Obeisance to you, the Lord of Ga1_1as. Be victorious, 0 Lord 
with a handsome body. Obeisance to the Lord without form, 
to the multi-formed Lord. 
0 Sankara, obeisance to the destroyer of the head of Virifici. 
Obeisance to you, the Lord who reside in the cremation ground 
and have terrifying forms. 
You are omnipresent. You are the creator. You are the destroyer. 
No one eJse. You are the earth. You are the quarters. You are 
Guru Uupiter) and Bhargava (Venus) . 0 Lord of the chiefs of 
Devas, you are Sauri (Saturn) and also the son of the Earth 
(Mars) . All those visible things, the stars, the planets etc., are 
you yourself. 
Mter eulogizing the Lord thus, the Danava bowed down to 
Mahesvara with palms joined together. 


V.iii.48.86---V.iii.49.9 
1 77 
lsvara said: 
86-90. 
Well! Well! 0 Danava of great intrinsic strength, 
request for a boon . I am the donor and you are the suppliant. 
I shall grant whatever is desired. 
Andhaka said: 
0 Lord of Devas, if you are pleased, if a boon is to be 
granted to me, then I should be made one on a par with 
yourself. No other boon. I shall be Bhasmt (one smeared with 
ash) , ]ati (one having matted hairs) , Trinetii (having three 
eyes) , Trisult (having a trident) , Caturbhuja (having four arms) , 
having a tiger hide as the upper garment and serpents for 
Yajiiopavita. 0 Mahe§vara, if you are pls:ased, I shall desire 
these. 
lsvara said: 
I shall grant you the boon as requested by you, 0 sinless 
one. Dear son, stationed among my GaQ.as you shall become 
Bhpi.gisa. 
CHAPTER FORTYNINE 
Glorification of Sulabheda 
Sri Miirkarpf,eya said: 
1-9. 
After subduing Andhaka, Mahesvara, the Lord of Devas, 
Rudra, went to Kailasa mountain along with · uma. 
Then the Devas too led by Brahma and including Vasava 
came there. Delighted and contented,. all of them bowed down 
to the Consort of Parvati. 
lsvara said: 
0 Pitamaha! May all those who have come, sit here. For the 
sake of the Devas, the Danava has been killed. On account of 
his blood my trident cannot be free from impurities. 0 Brahma, 
one engrossed in a splendid Vrata, penance and Japya (utter-


1 78 
Skanda Purii:TJ,a 
ance of holy names) has been killed. 0 Four-faced Lord, I wish 
to perform an elaborate pilgrimage. All those of you who have 
assembled here may come along with me. 
After saying thus, the Lord of the chiefs of Devas set out 
towards Prabhasa. Beginning with Prabhasa, he took bath in all 
the Tlrthas between Ganga and the ocean. Still, 0 king, there 
was no clearance from impurity. Then the Lord went to Narmada 
along with the Devas. He, fond of austerity as he was, took bath 
on the northern as well as southern bank. He then went to a 
spot named Bhrgu on the mountain on the southern bank. 0 
king, staying there along with the Devas, Mahadeva wandered 
over many places. Getting dejected ultimately he sat down. 
10-1 6. 
Since that spot appeared fascinating to all the heaven­
. dwellers, Lord Mahdvara considered it a special Tlrtha (of 
unique features) and stayed there. 
He pierced the mountain with his trident. Thereby Rasatala 
too got split then and the trident became free from impurities. 
No stain or pollution was seen anywhere. 
The highly meritorious Bharatl was invoked there by the 
Devas. The highly meritorious Sarasvatl issued forth from the 
mountain. Here, there is a second confluence like that of white 
and black (waters) at Vet:-1 (Prayaga) . Brahma himself installed 
the excellent Brahmda Liil.ga. It is highly meritorious and 
destructive of all miseries. Lord Janardana himself is stationed 
to the south thereof. The river is ever present there at the tip 
of the foot of Viljt:J.U. There was no outlet to the water as it 
stood held up within the walls of the pit. With the tip of the 
trident, a line was drawn. Thereupon, 0 king, the water began 
to flow and it fell into the great river Reva. 
1 7-28. 
The Jalalinga is the highly meritorious Cakratlrtha, 
0 excellent king. The Lord of Devas himself duly performed 
the holy ablution at the spot Sulabheda. He considered him­
self pure as if no sin had been committed. To the northern 
quarter thereof the Lord of Devas, the preceptor of the uni­
verse, the trident-bearing Lord of the chiefs of Devas estab­
lished himself. 
Among all the Tlrthas that alone was the holiest place and 
consisted of all Devas. It is meritorious and destructive of all 
sins and miseries. The preceptor of the universe installed the 


V.iii. 49.29-39 
1 79 
Lord of Devas in that Tirtha and released1 ( app.ointed) one 
hundred eight guardian-deities, the one hundred eight Vinayakas. 
Those one hundred eight ᤏetrapalas cautiously guard it. 
Obstacles hinder one who wishes to stay there. Some people 
are engrossed in domestic worries; some, in agriculture; some 
organize meetings; some are engaged in earning money; some 
indulge in indirect allegations; some are always engaged in 
violence; some are infatuated with other men 's wives; some 
destroy the means of sustenance of others. Others offer ex­
cuses like: "How can we go to the Tirthas? The wife is afflicted 
with hunger and so the sons and servants and others. " The 
men are kept entangled in the nets of illusion by the groups 
of Devas. 
Men who are habitual sinners do not get,. the opportunity for 
the holy ablution (here) . Groups of the servants of Devas always 
protect that Tirtha. Men who are blessed and meritorious do 
get the opportunity for the holy ablution in Sarasvati, Bhogavati 
and especially in the celestial river (Ganga) . This confluence 
is meritorious like that of white (Ganga) and blac.k (Yamuna) 
currents at the Ve61 (Prayaga) . On seeing the Tirtha, all the 
Devas became delighted in their minds. 
29-39. 
They went to the presence of the Lord and began 
to extol: "0 Lord of Devas! This Tirtha is on a par with your 
Gayatirtha. Another Tirtha, the most secret of all secret Tirthas, 
like this was never there nor will there ever be." The Trident­
bearing Lord was worshipped by lndra and others, the groups 
of Apsaras, Yakᤁas, Kinnaras, Gandharvas, the Guardians of the 
Quarters and of the worlds. Through dances and songs and 
prayers, he was worshipped by all the Suras and Asuras, by 
GaQ.as and by all the Siddhas, Nagas and others. Mahdvara was 
worshipped by them. 0 king, the spot was pierced by the Lord 
with the tip of his trident. Even today the eddy filled by the 
Suras is seen in three distinct ways. The group of three KuQ.c.Ias, 
0 tiger among men, is great and is' always full of confused 
noise. It is destructive of all sins. It dispels all miseries and it 
is excellent. 
1 . 
The reading "rak¦apiilim muktvii" (releasing the guardians or guards) ap­
pears defective. If ' muktvii " is emended as · yuktvii ', "appointing guard­
ians", it makes better sense. In Devanagari script 'yu' ('!) and ' mu" ('!) 
in MSS appear alike. Hence ' muktvii" might have been read (composed) 
for 'yuktvii". 


180 
Skanda Purii:T}a 
A person who takes his holy bath there after observing fast 
duly, is rid of a year's sins even if he has not received initiation 
{Dikᤁa) and knows no Mantras. 
Those who duly take the holy ablution with (the utterance 
of) five Mantras mentioned in the Vedas along with auspicious 
pots filled with gold, or with ten syllables, siᥞ syllables or three 
syllables (they attain better fruit) . 
0 king, twice-born ones should perform the requisite rituals 
separately in the Tlrtha. In the case of BrahmaQ.as, Kᤁatriyas 
and Vaisyas as well as of women and Siidras (the mode is the 
same) . They should duly perform the holy bath after meditat­
ing upon the three generations. Men who drink water uttering 
the ten-syllabled Mantra, go to the great world of Lord Mahdvara. 
Water drunk from RudrakuQ.Qa is like that drunk in Kedara. 
40-48. 
The syllable 4a used in conjunction with five Rephas 
(letter Ra) is honoured by Suras ( "Rak$a, Rak$a" repeated five 
times) used along with Omkara (ten-syllabled Mantra) should 
be known as praiseworthy. 
A person who controls his sense-organs and duly performs 
the holy ablution and offers libations to the Pitrs and the 
deities with water mixed with gingelly seeds, shall redeem the 
members of his family upto twenty generations, ten before and 
ten after him. 
One who performs Sraddha in the Siilabheda Tlrtha shall 
undoubtedly obtain that merit which a man who performs Sraddha 
in the five holy spots including Gaya gets. 
If the devotee makes Dana duly, the merit is everlasting. 
Even his Du$krta (evil) turns to be Sukrta (merit) . 
Just as Gayasiras is always meritorious in regard to the rites 
unto the Pitrs. so also Siilabheda Tlrtha is meritorious by means 
of holy baths, libations and Danas. A ᤏatriya should make the 
following thirteen gifts to a BrahmaQ.a who has mastered the 
Vedas, is of noble parentage, who has controlled his sense­
organs, is clean, who is richly endowed with scholarship and 
mastery of the Vedas, is free from hypocrisy and who regularly 
performs his duties. The gifts shall be made on thirteen days 
and the merit thereof shall be thirteen times more. The gifts 
should be in the form of gold, cow, earth (plot of land) , gingelly 
seeds, seat, a pair of shoes, bed, excellent horses, a pair of 
clothes, grains, a furnished house, a plough with the tie to the 
yoke and a cultiVated field. 


V.iii.50. 1-8 
181 
CHAPTER FIFTY 
Rules about the Eligibility for Dana 
Uttiinapiida asked: 
1-5. 
0 Lord, what type of Brahmat:tas are worthy of being 
adored? What type are proclaimed as not worthy of being adored, 
especially in connection with Sraddha rites, Dana rites and 
rites connected with marriage celebration? Kindly let me know 
whether the faith in regard to Sraddha and other rites arises 
by the intercession of divine beings or Destiny. 0 Lord, to 
whom is Dana not offered? 
lsvara said: 
An elephant made of wood, a deer made of hide and a 
Brahmat:ta who has not studied the Vedas-all these three are 
so by name only. Just as a eunuch is useless (unproductive) for 
women, just as a cow is useless for a cow, just as a gift made 
ro an ignorant person is useless (meritless) , so also a BrahmaQ.a 
without the knowledge of Rk (Rgveda) is useless. 
Just as a sower who sows seeds in an arid place, does not 
reap the fruit thereof, so also a donor making a gift unto one 
without the knowledge of Rk does not derive any merit. 
6-8. 
The following Brahmat:tas should always be avoided I 
after due consideration: a chronic patient; one deficient in 
organs or having extra limbs; one-eyed; a son (born) of a 
widow; one who violates the vow of continence; one with black 
teeth; a gluttonous one eating everything (pure, impure) ; a 
paramour of a Sudra woman; one who betrays friends; a slan­
derer; one who sells Soma juice; one who censures others; one 
who abandons father, mother and the preceptor; one who 
always censures Brahmat:tas etc. 0 king, a Brahmat:ta who eats 
the cooked food of a Sudra though consecrated with Mantras 
is a Karmacat:t<;lala (Cat:t<;lala by acts as against one born as a 
I. 
Compare the lists of undeserving donees given in Mbh, Vana, 300.5-9. 
The list given here is similar to infra SkP VII.i.205.58-72. The list of 
undeserving donees is similar to that of ineligibles for invitation to Sraddha. 
M:anu III. 1 50-1 66 gives a long list of such persons, which has been adopted 
by this text. 


182 
Skanda Puriir_ta 
Cal).<;iala) . If one touches him, one should take bath. He is not 
worthy of being even touched. 
9-14. After a careful enquiry these Brahmal).as should be 
abandoned: one with defective nails; one associating with a 
Siidra woman; a thief; a bastard; one who depends upon great 
gifts and one who indulges in self-destruction; one who teaches 
on wages; a eunuch; a ravisher of a virgin and an accursed one. 
If a Brahmal).a accepts a gift and trades therewith, one should 
not offer him gifts. It shall be futile. 
There are Brahmal).as well-endowed with learning and regu­
lar study of the Vedas. They are of excellent conduct as well. 
A gift given unto them becomes everlasting. 0 king, make gifts 
to poor people and not flourishing ones. A medicine gives 
relief to the sick. Of what avail are medicines given to one 
devoid of illness? 
Uttiinapiida said: 
What is the procedure thereof? What are the rites regarding 
Ti:rtha Sraddha? How is a gift to be made? 0 Sankara, describe 
this to me. 
lsvara said: 
15-26. 
A person should control all his sense-organs with 
great purity and devoutly perform Sraddha at home. He should 
circumambulate the preceptor after feeding him and silently 
follow him till he reaches the boundary (of the village) (and 
bid farewell to him) . Then he should go to Siilabheda and duly 
perform the holy ablution. If a devotee performs Sraddha with 
Havya, Kavya etc., in due order in five holy spots and then 
offers balls of rice along with milk pudding, honey and ghee, 
the Pitrs are propitiated for seventeen years. 
· If a devotee performs the Sraddha with raw rice grains, 
Badaras, Ingudas, honey and ghee in this Ti:rtha, he too shall 
obtain the merit thereof. There is no doubt about it. He who 
assiduously offers shoes to Brahmal).aS shall undoubtedly attain 
heaven, riding on a horse. 
He who offers a bed, a horse and especially an umbrella 
shall go seated on an aerial chariot, surrounded by groups of 
celestial damsels. 


V.iii.50.27-36 
183 
He who gives an excellent house along with seven kinds of 
grain shall reside in a golden house in my world as he pleases. 
He who gives a Tiladhenu (a cow made of gingelly seeds) 
covered with a cloth and accompanied by a calf shall dwell in 
heaven until the ultimate annihilation of all living beings. 
0 king, if the person gives water and cooked food in his own 
house, or in a forest or on the path to a pilgrim-centre, he 
shall never see the world of Yama. He will attain the merit as 
though all the types of gifts have been given (by him) . 
One should make gift of water, cooked food and freedom 
from fear. There has never been a greater gift than cooked 
rice nor will there ever be any. 
If a devotee makes the gift of a virgin, or that of a bull, his 
residence shall be there where I am pre᤭ent. It cannot be 
otherwise. 
Uttiinap_iida said: 
27-29. 
0 Lord, how is the gift of a virgin to be made by 
righteous persons? How is a wife to be nourished (taken care 
of) ? How is the marriage rite of a virgin to be performed? 0 
Lord of Devas, I have one more thing to ask. To whom is a 
virgin not to be given? 0 Lord, where should she be offered? 
By giving to whom will it be of everlasting merit? What is the 
criterion for considering something as best, middling or base, 
0 Lord? How can (a gift) be Rajasa or Tamasa or one having 
no better (i.e. Sattvika) ? 
lsvara said: 
30-36. 
Of all Danas, Kanyii Diina (gift of a virgin) is the 
best. A parent should give his daughter after approaching a 
boy of noble birth, handsome features, learning and discre­
tion. The father should give his well-adorned daughter on an 
auspicious Lagna and Muhurta. If he offers horses, elephants 
and garments in accordance with his capacity, his stay shall be 
in the region where there is no ailment. 
If the daughter dearer than one's own life is given away, it 
is as though all the three worlds have been given away along 
with the mobile and immobile beings. If anyone begs for wealth 
for the sake of a virgin, he shall be a KarmacaQ<;lala (a CaQ<;lala 


1 84 
Skanda Pura7Ja 
in action) and he shall become a woodworm after death. If, 
out of food-greediness, anyone takes food in his house, he will 
become pure only by means of the expiation called Candrayaᤂa 
or Taptakrcchra. 
Uttanapada said: 
If one has no wealth in one's house but has a daughter to 
be given away, how can he celebrate her marriage if he does 
not beg? 
lsvara said: 
37-46. 
0 king; one should celebrate the marriage of a 
daughter, even if one has no wealth, merely by repeating the 
name of the virgin. It does not bring about any defect. 
Without begging if the Dana is made after approaching (a 
groom) , it is the most excellent Dana. Even if the Yuga comes 
to a close this (benefit of Dana) does not become ineffective. 
The Uttama (excellent) Dana is after approaching (the groom) . 
If the groom is invited (and given the daughter) , it is pro­
claimed as· middling; if he is begged of it is base; if (he) makes 
the request "Give ! Give! " it is the meanest. 
If a stone is tied to another and dropped into water, both 
of them (sink down and) perish. So also is the gift of cooked 
food given to one not deserving. 
Hence a gift (Dana) is not to be made to one who is incom­
petent. It brings down the donor and especially oneself. One 
who is competent takes both across like dry wood put in water. 
Just as a boat, so also a learned man takes one to the other shore. 
If an Ahitagni (a Brahmaᤂa maintaining perpetual sacrificial 
fire in the family) accepts gifts from Sudras, he is no better 
than a Sudra here in this birth. After death he becomes a dog. 
Accepting gifts from indecent people secretly and despica­
bly is a futile effort in regard to a Brahmaᤂa who is an Agnihotrin. 
That man is unworthy of being fed. He is burned with Kari![la 
fire (fire of cowdung cakes) . Afterwards for seven births he is 
undoubtedly born as a mat-maker. The Dana made through 
sense of shame or for the desire of being considered chival­
rous or because of importunity or through restraint and the 
Dana made to servants-all these are futile. 


V.iii.51. 1-9 
185 
CHAPTER FIITYONE 
Glorification of Danadharma 
Uttanapada said: 
1-9. 
0 isvara, at what time is Sraddha and Dana to be 
performed and on what lunar day should pilgrimage be done? 
Tell me quickly. 
lsvara said: 
Just as Pitrtirtha (i.e. Gaya) is meritorious, excellent and 
conductive to the fulfilment of all desires, so also this Tirtha 
is meritorious for the performance of holy bath, giving Dana, 
offering libations etc. One should perform special Sraddha in 
all the Yugadis (days on which Yugas began) . 0 dear one herԆ 
are the names etc. of the Manvantaras: 
Month & Tithi on which a Manvantara 
N a tn e 
o f t h e 
started 
Man van tara 
Asvayuj 
Bright half, Ninth day 
Siiryasavaq1i 
Karttika 
Bright half, Twelfth 
Svayambhuva 
Caitra 
Bright half, Third 
Uttama 
Bhadrapada 
Bright half, Third 
Tamas a 
Aac;lha 
Bright half, Tenth 
Cakua 
Magha 
Bright half, Seventh 
Vaivasvata 
Sraval).a 
Dark half, 
Eighth 
Dakasavarl).i 
ԇac;lha 
Full Moon 
Rudrasavarl).i 
Phalguna 
New Moon 
Svarocia 
Paua 
Bright half, Eleventh 
Raivata 
Karttika 
Full Moon 
Indrasavarl).i 
Phalguna 
Full Moon 
Brahmasavarl).i 
Caitra 
Full Moon 
Raucya 
JyeHha 
Full Moon 
Dharmasavarl).i 
The first days of the Manvantaras are proclaimed as those 
according infinite benefit. o king, Sraddha is to be performed 
in Ԉhe course of both the transits of the Sun viz. no.rthern as 
well as southern. The following are the occasions for the per­
formance of Sraddha: the third lunar day in the months of 
Karttika, Magha and Vaisakha; the full-moon day in Caitra and 


186 
Skanda Purii'T}a 
J 
Jyeᤁᤃha; the AHakas (seventh, eighth and ninth lunar days) ; 
the Sailkranti day (transit of the Sun in the signs of zodiac) ; 
and the Vyatipata day. What is offered during these days is 
proclaimed as everlasting. 
1 0-1 6. 
One should observe fast on the eleventh day in the 
bright half of the month of Madhu (Caitra) . At night he should 
keep awake near the feet of ViᤁI).u. Those who perform the 
adoration of ViᤁI).u with incense, light, Naivedyas (food offer­
ings) , flower garlands, agallochum, sandal etc. and read the 
old legends (Pural).as) and a Brahmal).a who repeats the Siiktas 
from the Rk, Yajus or Sarna Vedas shall be rid of all sins. He 
goes to the world of ViᤁI).u. 
In the morning after assiduously worshipping Brahmal).as, 
he should perform Sraddha and should make gifts (within his 
capacity) of cow, gold, cloth etc. His Pitrs become pleased 
until the annihilation of all the living beings. The performer 
of the Sraddha shall go there where Lord janardana is present. 
On the thirteenth lunar day he should start from there for 
the Liilga stationed in the cave. By seeing Lord !sana named 
Markal).<;la, he is rid of all sins. 
Uttiinapiida said: 
0 Mahadeva, by whom was the highly splendid Liilga in­
stalled within the cave? 0 Lord, it behoves you to narrate it 
to me. 
lsvara said: 
1 7-28. 
The eminent sage Markal).<;leya is well-known in all 
the three worlds: He performed severe austerities for a period 
of one thousand divine years. He entered the cave and prac­
tised Yoga there. The Liilga named Markal).<;lesvara was installed 
by him. A pilgrim should take his holy ablution there devoutly, 
observe fast and control the sense-organs. Keeping awake at 
night, he should assiduously offer lamps. The Lord should be 
bathed in Paiidl.mrta in accordance with one 's capacity. Mter 
anointing the Lord therewith, he should duly perform the 
adoration. Brahmal).as should perform Japa (chanting of Man­
tras) of the Mantras current in their Sakhas (branch of their 
particular Veda) . They should also recite Savitri Mantra one 


V.iii.5 1 .29-43 
187 
thousand eight or one hundred eight times. By doing this, 0 
excellent king, the person shall attain the fruit or'his birth. On 
the fourteenth day he should again take his holy bath and 
perform the adoration duly. Gifts should be made after testing 
the worth of the recipient, if one wishes for one's own welfare. 
Undoubtedly the Pitrs are pleased with him for twelve years. 
The donor goes to that place where the enjoyment is eternal. 
After entering the middle of the cave the pilgrim should wallow 
oil the ground as much as he can. The merit that is .derived 
from the Ni:la Mountain is entirely attained by them. Listen to 
the meritorious fruit of the person who performs Sraddha at 
every Parva at Sulabheda, especially at the end of the month 
of Caitra (on the New-Moon day). He shall obtain the PuQ.ya 
derived at Kedara, at the confluence of Ganga and the ocean, 
at the confluence of black and white (i.e. Ganga and Yamuna) 
or in other Tirthas, especially the PuQ.ya (Merit) that is derived 
from Arbuda and Amara mountain. One should propitiate the 
Pitrs and deities in accordance with the injunction and with 
due utterance of the Mantras. The man thereby attains the 
fruit of all the Tirthas beginning with Gaya. 
29-43. 
He would redeem twenty generations of his family, 
ten before him and ten after him. Thereafter the person should 
remain pure and with a mind fully concentrated perform Nyasa 
on the southern idol as mentioned before and offer eight 
flowers. These are the eight mental flowers mentioned in the 
scriptures: Listen. They are: ( 1 ) Varija, (2) Saumya, (3) Agneya, 
"(4) Vayavya, (5) Parthiva, (6) Vanaspatya, (7) Prajapatya, and 
(8) Sivapuᤄpa. Now listen to the meaning of these: ( 1 ) Wirija 
should be known as water; (2) Saumya means honey, ghee and 
milk; (3) Agneya means incense, light etc. ; ( 4) Viiyavya means 
sandal paste etc.; (5) Piirthiva means roots, bulbous roots etc.; 
(6) Viinaspatya means fruits; (7) Priijiipatya means reading and 
recitation; and (8) Sivapu6pa is vasana (imagination, knowl­
edge through intuition etc.) . 
(Alternatively: ) Non-violence is the first Puᤄpa. Control of 
sense-organs is the second. The third Puᤄpa is Dayii (compas­
sion) . ᤏama (forbearance) is the fourth Puᤄpa; then Dhyiina 
(meditation) is a Puᤄpa; then Tapa/J, ( austerity) and the sev­
enth is jiiiina Pu6pa. Truth is the eighth Puᤄpa. The deities are 
pleased with these. Ascetics and wise ones should be pleased 


188 
Skanda Purii:r:ta 
through devotion, 0 king. An umbrella, a covering cloth and 
a pair of sandals should be offered. If one is adored with these, 
three persons (generations) are adored. The person shall stay 
in the heavenly world until all the living beings are annihi­
lated. Men should perform ]iipya with d-evotion to the Trident­
bearing Lord. They should anoint the Lord of Devas with 
Paiidimrta, Paiicagavya, Yakᤁakardama and Kmikuma as well as 
Srikhar.u;la, agallochum and sandalpaste. They should perform 
the worship of the Trident-bearing Lord with different kinds 
of flowers, keep awake at night an<l offer lights assiduously. 
Incense and Naivedya should be offered and Purar:tic legends 
should be read. Men who stay there should perform Japa de­
voutly. Snsukta, Pauru6asukta, Piivamiina, Vr6iikapi and other 
Vedic Mantras should be chanted. Then the Rudrasukta of various 
sorts should be recited. He shall adore the Brahmar:tas devout­
ly. The devotee adoring and bowing to them with various kinds 
of offerings is honoured in the world of Siva. 
44-55. 
A follower of ᤥgveda chants the Suktas agnimile 
etc. A follower of Yajurveda should chant Rudra Sukta, Puru6a 
Sukta, Slokiidhyiiya, Sukriya, the groups of Mantras beginning 
with i6etvii, etc., ]yotir B1'iihma7Ja, Giiyatrya, Madhu and Ma7J4ala 
Briihma7Jas. 
A follower of Yajurveda should recite the Suktas of Devavrata, 
Viimadevya, Puru6ar6abha and Brhadrathantara. These devotees 
shall proceed to that place where Lord Mahesvara is ptesent. 
If a devotee performs Piidasauca (cleansing of the feet) and 
Abhya1iga (oil bath) here with great devotion, he undoubtedly 
obtains the merit that accrues from the gift of a cow. He should 
feed Brahmar:tas with honey and milk-pudding. If a single Brahmar:ta 
is fed, it is as though ten millions have been fed. The devotee 
should with great devotion give to an excellent BrahmaQa, 
gold, silver or a garment. Thereby Devas, human beings and 
Pitrs become propitiated. 
At the time of a lun;u or solar eclipse, men should take their 
·holy bath with great devotion, worship the deity and perform 
Japa and Homa. They should make gifts in accordance with 
their capacity, to a Brahmar:ta who has mastered the Vedas. 
The following gifts should be made to a deserving person: a 
horse, a chariot, an elephant, a vehicle, Tulapuruᤌa (things 
equal to one in weight) , a cart filled with seven types of food-


V.iii.51.56-62 
1 89 
grains, a plough along with the tie of the yoke and mature 
bullocks bearing the yoke, cows, plots of lands, gingelly seeds, 
gold etc. The re'cipient should be duly adored. 
Nothing should be given to an undeserving person by a 
sensible person desirous of prosperity. Since the earth holds 
all living beings, a plot of land producing all kinds of vegeta­
tion should be given to a BrahmaQ.a. 
Now, 0 great king, listen to the benefit of gifting cows. 
56-62. 
When two legs and the face of the calf are seen at 
the vaginal outlet of a cow, she should be known .as the very 
earth, so long as she does not release the calf from the womb. 
Somehow the devotee should offer her to a BrahmaQ.a. The 
merit thereof is as though the earth consisting of mountains, 
forests and greal parks has been gifted. On being gifted the 
cow shall redeem twenty-one generations of the family. 
When the Sun or the Moon is eclipsed, then blessed ones 
shall give a milch cow with her hoofs covered with silver, along 
with a cloth and a brass vessel for milking. 
I do not .know the · amount of the merit thereof even after 
the lapse of hundreds of years. 0 king, there is numerical limit 
to the merit earned for every gift made on other occasions but 
for a gift made at the time of lunar or solar eclipse there is 
no such lim.it. 
Where a cow is seen, 0 king, all the Tirthas are there. One 
should understand that Parva (period of holy festivals) too 
exists there. There need not be any doubt in this respect. If 
a man remembers the Tirtha and goes there or dies there, he 
shall become an attendant of Rudra. 


190 
Skanda Purii'T}a 
CHAPTER FIITYfWO 
The Story of D'irghatapas 
lsvara said: 
1-10. 0 king, I shall narrate another story that happened 
long ago. A sage of great austerities went to heaven along with 
his family. 
Uttiinapiida said: 
How did the BrahmaQa, the great sage, go to heaven along 
with his family? 0 Lord, I am very much eager to know. Kindly 
tell me, 0 Lord. 
lsvara said: 
Formerly there was a king of Kasi well known as Citrasena. 
He was a brave warrior, a liberal donor and highly righteous. 
He had realised all his desires and he possessed great wealth. 
The city was well-populated. It was full of different kinds of 
gems. It was situated on the banks of Ganga and was well­
known as VaraQasl. 
It resembled the autumnal moon in splendour. It was well­
adorned by !_earned men. Indrayaᤄ!is (Flag-staff of Indra) were 
seen all over it. It was full of cows and cowherd colonies. There 
were many banners (fluttering over it) . It reverberated with 
sounds of Vedic recitation. Various kinds of merchants en­
gaged themselves in buying and selling. It was rendered re­
splendent by mechanical devices, well laid streets and many 
other lofty towers. Temples of divine features and majestic 
hermitag«s abounded there. It was beautified with trees, jack­
fruit trees, Bakulas, Talas, Asokas, Amrakas, Rajavrkᤄas, Kapitthas 
and Da<;limas. Auspicious chants of Vedic recitations sanctified 
everything. It was beautiful with many varieties of fruits and 
flowers. It was embellished with clusters of KadaH (plantain) 
trees. 
On the northern side of that city there was a splendid hermitage. 
It is well-known in all the three worlds by the name Mandaravana. 
1 1-1 7. 
It contained many Mandata trees. Hence it came 
to be known by the name Mandaraka. 


V.iii.53. 1-7 
191 
A Brahmat:ta named Dlrghatapas lived there. In view of his 
prolonged severe austerities, he is remembered as Dlrghatapas. 
He resided there along with his wife, sons and daughters-in­
law. His five sons always served him diligently. His youngest 
son Rkᤄaspiga was also a man of great austerities, richly en­
dowed with Vedic study, celibate and endowed with good qualities. 
He always practised Yoga and took in bulbous roots, roots and 
fruits. He used to assume the form of a deer and move among 
the herds of deer. Everyday in the evening he used to come 
back to his parents. With great devotion, the son of the sage 
made obeisance to them and went again to forests and moun­
tain caves. Thus the son of the sage sported about with young 
fawns everyday . . 
Once by chance that Rkᤄaspiga passed away. 
CHAPTER FIFTYTHREE 
]J.k̋ asrnga Goes to Svarga 
Uttiinapiida said: 
1-7. 
0 Lord, how did the younger son of Sage Dlrghatapas 
who was residing in the hermitage, meet death? 
lsvara said: 
Listen with concentration to the divine story, 0 king. Merely 
by listening to it, one is rid of all sins. 
The king of K.asl was well-known on the earth, 0 king, as 
Citrasena. He was mighty, had great energy and was great in 
exploits. Righteousness always prevailed in his kingdom. There 
was no impiety anywhere. Engaged always in the Vedic rites, he 
protected the subjects righteously. He strictly adhered to his 
duty. He was fond of war as well as of hospitality to guests. Abiding 
by the conventional duties and rights of ᤐatriyas; he enjoyed 
worldly pleasures as he pleased. There is (was) no limit to the 
wealth in his treasury. He possessed elephants, horses, chariots 
and foot-soldiers. He used to discuss and discourse with the scholars 
well-versed in Itihasas and Purat:tas. The king shone like Lord 
Sarikara in Kailasa. While he was ruling the kingdom like this 
·(once) the king spoke to the minister: 


192 
Skanda Puriitta 
8-1 7. "I shall go ahunting. Stay here you all attending to 
the protection of the kingdom. " When the ministers said, "You 
may go", the ruler of the land went off. 
His vassal kings following him hurriedly riding on their re­
spective horses even as their royal umbrellas got brushed with 
one another. Thus they followed him to the forest. Dust from 
the ground was kicked up by the hoofs of the horses and the 
elephants. Thereby the solar disc and the quarters were com­
pletely covered. Neither the sun nor the moon, neither the 
quarters nor the trees nor even the peaks of the mountains all 
round could be seen. They could not even see one another as 
if it were a mid-night in the rainy season. 
There he espied a great herd of deer. Accompanied by all 
those princes, the king rushed at them. The herd was dis­
persed and the deer ran helter-skelter in various directions. 
King Citrasena alone took a path and reached the place 
where those deer were present. He entered the impenetrable 
forest and the dark .caves of the mountains completely over­
grown with creepers and hedges. He stopped in a place where 
he could scarcely be seen. Thinking that the deer had disap­
peared, the king looked around and thought: 'lri which direc­
tion shall I go? Where can I be in touch with the soldiers of 
the army? ' Thus King Citrasena was in a great predicament. He 
resorted to the shade of the trees and took rest. 
1 8-29. 
l)istressed with hunger and thirst, he wandered all 
round in the forest and caves of the mountains. Then he saw 
a divine lake adorned with clusters of lotuses. It was full of 
swans and KaraQ.<;fava variety of cranes. The Cakravaka birds 
rendered it splendid. On seeing it, the great king felt his hairs 
standing on ends. He gathered the lotuses and took his bath. 
Mter offering libations to the Pitrs, Devas and human beings 
duly, he cpvered Sail.kara with the lotus᤮s and adored him. He 
drank the pure water adequately with mental concentration 
and purity. He came out of the water and saw a tree nearby. 
He spread his upper cloth on the ground and sat down. Then, 
as he sat there he began to think, 'What shall I do now?' Even 
as he was sitting there, he saw many deer in the forest region. 
Some were facing the east; others the south; some faced the 
west and a few the northern direction. Some deer were asleep. 
Others stood with their cars lifted up: In the centre of those 


V.iii.53.30-45 
193 
deer, was standing .Rkᤁaspiga, the Yogin of great austerities. 
On seeing the deer, the king thought about his food intake, 
'I shall kill one from these deer and eat as I please. By eating 
the venison, I shall become normal in my physical state. I shall 
return to Kasl assiduously enquiring about the pathway. ' Mter 
thinking thus the king who was at the foot of the tree raised 
his bow and fixed an arrow therein. He discharged the arrow 
into those deer that had been herded together. That .Rkᤁaspiga 
of great austerities who was in their midst was hit. 
30-38. 
All those forest-dwellers (deer) became frightened 
and went from there crying. The sage who fell down cried 
"Krᤁr:ta! Krᤁr:ta! " and continued: "Alas! something horrible has 
been committed by him who has killed me now. Who is that 
evil-minded wretch, in whom this sinful thought has occurred? 
I was stationed amidst th᤯ deer. I do not harass or obstruct 
anyone. " On hearing that human voice, the king was struck 
with dismay. Hurrying there he saw the BrahmaQ.a shining with 
Brahmar:tical splendour. 
Citrasena said:· 
Alas! Something horrible has been committed by me be­
cause the BrahmaQ.a was slain. 
He then said to the Brahmar:ta: "You have been unwittingly 
killed by me, 0 sinless one, because I mistook you for a deer. 
I shall now gather together much wood and immolate myself. 
Among things seen and unseen, there is nothing like the slaughter 
of a BrahmaQ.a. Unless I immolate myself, I will not be rid of 
the sin of BrahmaQ.a-slaughter. " 
.IJ.k6asrnga said: 
At my death you will not attain Sid<Jhi (object desired) . Now 
when I die, there will be many killings. On my death my mother, 
the aged father, the saintly brothers and their wives will die. 
When these deaths occur how can there be purity in you? If 
you are inclined to do so, I shall tell you a means. 
Citrasena said: 
39-45. 
May the means which is in your mind be men-


194 
Skanda Puriir_ta 
tioned. 0 great sage, I shall do everything even if I have to 
exert myself. 
!Jk$a.Srnga said: 
I shall ask you something regarding yourself. Who are you? 
From where have you come? How did you come here? Who are 
you? One among Brahmal).as, K§atriyas or Vaisyas? Or are you 
Siidra-born? 
Citrasena said: 
0 dear one, I am not a Siidra. I am neither a Vaisya nor 
a Brahmal).a. 0 Brahmal).a, I am not low-born. 0 great sage, 
I am a Kᤑatriya. I know my duties. I am aware of what has been 
done by me. I am engaged in the welfare of all living beings. 
Unwittingly a sin has been perpetrated. What is the means of 
becoming purified? 
]Jk,m.5piga said: 
Take me to the hermitage where my parents are present. 
Introduce yourself as the slayer of their son and say that you 
regret it. On seeing me, perhaps they may have compassion for 
you. They will tell you the means whereby there can be (men­
tal ) peace. 
After hearing his words, 0 excellent king, Citrasena took 
the Brahmal).a on his shoulder and went to the hermitage. 
46-49. 
When he became unable to carry he began to take 
rest frequently. Presen tly he saw that the Brahmal).a had lost 
consciousness anrl that all his sense-organs had become im­
paired. Citrasena kept him in the shade of a banyan tree. He 
folded his cloth four times and began to fan him therewith 
frequently. Even as he watched, 0 great king, Rkᤄasp'lga of 
great austerities quickly passed away by means of Dhyanayoga 
(meditation ) because he was fully conversant with Yoga. He 
cremated the Brahmal).a according to the rites that have been 
enjoined. After taking his bath, he lamented with great sorrow. 


V.iii.54. 1-1 7 
195 
CHAPTER FIFTYFOUR 
Dzrghatapas Goes to Heaven 
lsvara said: 
1-5. 
Thereupon the king became greatly anguished. (He 
thought: ) 'How can I go back to my abode in Varat:J.asi? Af­
flicted by the sin of BrahmaQ.a-slaughter, I shall consign my 
body to fire. Or at the instance (of the son of the sage) l shall 
go to the hermitage and recount to the great sage everything 
in the way it had happened. ' 
After thinking thus, the king went to the hermitage taking 
the bones of Rkᤄasp:iga. The excellent king stood within · the 
range of the vision of that great sage of putified soul. 
Dirghatapas said: 
Do come. Welcome unto .you. May you be pleased to sit here 
on the seat so that I can offer you Argha and Madhuparka 
along with the seat. 
Citrasena said: 
6-1 7. 0 great sage, I am not worthy of being received with 
the offerings of Argha (materials of worship) or even being 
spoken to. Your son, the BrahmaQ.a stationed in the middle of 
the deer, was killed by me. Rkᤄasp:iga, a BrahmaQ.a of great 
austerities, was killed as a result of the wrong impression that 
he was a deer. Know that I am the slayer of your son. Punish 
me with the severest form of punishment. Having consider­
ation for my delusion and confusion, 0 excellent sage, do what 
is befitting in this regard. 
The mother of the dead son became highly perturbed on 
hearing those words. She came out of the house and lamented, 
"Alas! I am killed. " She fell on the ground and lamented with 
the profundity of her grief and affliction. "I am doomed, " she 
lamented and cried in affliction very piteously like a female 
osprey. "0 my son ! My son ! Reveal your face unto me. Honour 
me, your mother. 0 my son, when will I see you again at the 


196 
Skanda Purii:r:w 
threshold arriving there with the fullness of your Vedic study 
and eagerness for the performance of Japa and Homa. There 
is a popular saying that sandalpaste is cool but the embrace of 
the limbs of the son is cooler than sandalpaste, if the body 
becomes the subject of the close embrace of one's own son. 
Of what avail is sandal paste or a drop of nectar? Of what avail 
is even the moon? 0 my beloved son ! I wish to embrace you. 
Separated from you and grief-stricken I will surely die . " La­
menting thus in her affliction and wretchedness due to having 
been bereaved of the son, she fell into a swoon on the ground. 
On seeing his- wife fallen due to the affliction and grief for her 
dead son, the sage became extremely furious at King Citrasena. 
Dzrghatapas said: 
1 8-28. 
Go away, get away, 0 great sinner. Do not show me 
your face. Why was my son, a BrahmaQ.a, killed without any 
purpose? 0 king, many sins of many Brahmar:ta-slaughters will 
befall you. You alone are the cause of the death of me along 
with the entire family. 
After saying this, the sage thought over the matter again. 
Then he eschewed his fury as a true sage and said: 
Dzrghatapas said: 
0 dear one, shed off your anguish. I have been rather very 
harsh. You have been reprimanded, 0 bestower of honour, by 
me who have been scorched by misery and assailed by the be­
reavement of my son. What does a wise man do when impelled 
by his own Karmas. Even at the outset, the intellect of men 
follows the Karmas. It is in accordance with this that death has 
been enjoined for me. Undoubtedly the (sin of) slaughters will 
befall you as uttered by me before. Among Brahmar:tas, ᤢ
atriyas 
and Vaisyas, among the castes of Siidras and Car:t<;lalas who are 
you? Tell me the truth. Why was a Brahmar:ta killed? 
Citrasena said: 
I shall submit, 0 Brahmar:ta- sage, you must forgive me. I am 
not a BrahmaQ.a. 0 dear one, I am neither a Vaisya nor a 


V.iii.54.29-45 
197 
Sudra, neither a hunter nor a base-born one. 0 great sage, I 
am a ᤏatriya. I am the king of Kasl. I have come to this 
excellent forest to hunt deer. By mistake, this sage in the guise 
of a deer was shot down . I have incurred sin. Now I am resort­
ing to your feet. What should be done by me, 0 BrahmaQ.a? 
Tell me the true means. 
Dirghatapas said: 
29-34. 
0 Lord, even a single sin of BrahmaQ.a-slaughter 
cannot be redeemed. How can eleven such sins be redeemed? 
Listen, 0 king. On account (of the death) of ᤒkᤄaspi.ga, my 
four sons, their wives, the mother and I - all these will die. 
0 dear one, I shall tell you a splendid way-out. Listen to it. See 
whether you can carry out that easy task, 0 king. Cremate the 
entire family including me in funeral pyre; 0 king, cast off the 
bones at Sulabheda in the waters of Narmada. On the south­
ern bank of Narmada is the well-known Tirtha named Sulabheda: 
It is an excellent Ti:rtha that destroys all sins and all miseries. 
Be clean (physically and mentally) and cast off our bones into 
the Tirtha. You will be rid of all sins undoubtedly. That is my 
word. 
The King said: 
35-45. 
0 dear one, let the command be given. I shall 
undoubtedly carry it out. Whatever I have, the entire kingdom, 
the treasury, the friends and sons, 0 great BrahmaQ.a, all of 
them are yours, at your disposal. I shall give them to you. Be 
pleased ( to accept it) . 
0 king (Uttanapada) , even as the BrahmaQ.a and the king 
were conversing thus, the wife of the sage, whose heart broke 
into two died there. The woman assailed by the grief for the 
son fell on the ground, devoid of life. All the sons met with 
death on account of the bereavement of their mother. Along 
with the husbands all the daughters-in-law also died. 0 excel­
lent king, all those saintly souls attained death. The king called 
together all those Brahmar:tas, the residents of the hermitage. 
The excellent king informed them of everything in the way it 
had happened. On being permitted by them, he gathered firewood 


198 
Skanda Purii:T}-a 
assiduously. King Citrasena performed the cremation and collected 
the bones of all the sages beginning with Rkᤄaspiga. 0 king, 
that king (Citrasena) proceeded towards the southern quarter 
on foot. When he could not walk, on being pressed down by 
the weight, he took rest and then proceeded after a short 
while. At every stage he set down the bones and took bath 
along with his garment. Without taking food but taking in 
water only, he thus proceeded facing the southern quarter. 
Before long he reached the banks of Narmada. On seeing the 
Brahmar:tas staying in the hermitage the king asked: 
Citrasena said: 
46-55. 
0 excellent Brahmar:tas, 0 highly blessed ones, may 
the path leading to Sulabheda be shown to me, so that I can 
go there for the fulfilment of my task. 
The sages said: 
Within a Krosa (3 Kms) distance from here there is the 
highly splendid Ti:rtha. You will see it on the southern bank 
of Narmada. 
At the instance of the sages the king went on hastily and ere 
long saw the Tirtha full of many Dvijas (birds, Brahmar:tas) , 
overgrown with a number of creepers and trees and rendered 
splendid by numerous flowers. There were many bears and 
lions too and splendid devotees observing many kinds of vows. 
Some of them were standing on a single foot. Others had their 
eyes turned towards the sun. Some were standing on a single 
big toe. Others were standing with the arms lifted up. Some 
took a single meal a day. Some took in as food bulbous roots 
and fruits. Some took in food only once in three nights. Others 
observed the vow of Paraka. Some were engaged in Candrayar:ta 
expiation. Some observed fast for a fortnight. Some observed 
fast for a whole month. Some broke fast at the end of a Rtu. 
Some were engaged in the practice of Yogic exercises. Some 
meditated upon ' That' ( Tat-pada i.e. Supreme Brahman) . Some 
took in, as food only withered and decaying leaves. Some ate 
ᤓJitter and estringent things. Some took in mosses · for food. 
Some took in air as food. Some were householders and some 
were Agnihotrins. On seeing the Brahmar:tas like these, the 


V.iii.54.56-73 
1 99 
king knelt down on the ground, bowed down his head and 
spoke these words, 0 king: 
Citrasena said: 
56-64. 
0 Brahmat:tas, in which part of the land is that 
Tirtha? Tell me the truth so that the thing desired may be 
made possible. 
The sages said: 
Go a distance of a hundred Dhanvan taras (Dhanus=four 
Hastas) . On the peak of Bhrguturi.ga you will see that large 
Tirtha full of water. It is holy. 
On hearing their words, he went near the Kut:t<;l.a. On seeing 
that Tirtha, the king became confused again. He was struck with 
wonder and began to think over and over again. Then the king 
saw a flesh-eating Kurara (osprey) in the sky. It was hovering 
round holding a snake but was being attacked by those (birds) 
without a piece of flesh. Desirous of the piece of flesh they 
fought with one another. Struck by the beaks the osprey fell into 
the water where formerly the Trident-bearing Lord had split the 
ground. By the power of that Tirtha, he immediately became a 
man. He (the king) saw that person in divine form seated in an 
aerial chariot. As he went ahead, Yakᤄas, Gandharvas and Apsaras 
eulogized him. Even as he was being sung about by the Apsaras, 
he vanished on the top of the Sun. Citrasena was extremely 
surprised. He decided that the same was the Tirtha as mentioned 
by the holy sage. On seeing the power of the Tirtha, he expe­
rienced horripilation. 
65-73. 
He thought, 'This is my blessed day since I have 
come here.' He then placed the bones down and took his holy 
bath in accordance with the injunctions. With water mixed with 
gingelly seeds he propitiated the Pitrs and deities. Then the king 
took the bones and cast them into the water. For a moment, the 
king stood looking up witb the face lifted up. He saw all of them 
(members of the family of Dirghatapas) in divine forms and 
splendid features. They had divine garments and were adorned 
with divine ornaments. They were seated in various kinds of 
aerial chariots attended upon by celestial damsels. On seeing 
them separately seated in the aerial chariots, the king was de­
lighted. 


200 
Skanda Purii:r}a 
Then the sage seated on the aerial chariot spoke to Citrasena: 
"0 gentle soul, 0 King Citrasena, 0 excellent king, thanks to 
your favour. I had this divine goal. Your task has been carried 
out excellently. Even a son cannot do like this unto his Pitrs. 
0 dear one, by the power of my utterance you will be free from 
sins. 0 great king, you will realize your cherished desires, whatever 
be in your mind. " After blessing the intelligent Citrasena, sage 
Dirghatapas went to heaven along with his sons. 
CHAPTER FIITYFIVE 
Kiiszriija Attains Mok$a 
Uttiinapiida said: 
1-5. 
On seeing the great efficacy of the Tirtha, what did 
King Citrasena do? Where did he stay? What was his food? 
lsvara said: 
After climbing on to the Bhrguturiga peak and resorting to 
the north-eastern quarter the excellent king performed an elaborate 
penance in the Ku:r:u;la there. Then he meditated upon all the 
Devas, Brahma, ViᤁJ.lu and Mahesvara and hurled himself down. 
Presently, Rudra and Kesava appeared before him and held 
him by the hand. Rudra spoke these words to the king: 
lsvara said: 
0 great king, do not unnecessarily abandon your life pre­
maturely. You are still very young. It is not proper for you to 
die now. Hasten back to your abode. Enjoy all desired and 
desirable pleasures. Like another Sakra of heaven, rule your 
kingdom free from thorns (enemies) . 
Citrasena said: 
6-1 2. 0 Lord, I desire neither the kingdom nor the sons 
nor kinsmen, neither the wife nor the treasury, neither el­
ephants nor horses.· Leave me, leave me, 0 great Lord, let 


V.iii.55. 1 3-21 
201 
there be no obstacles put in my way. With your favour, 0 
Mahe8vara, heaven has been attained by me today. 
lsvara said: 
Of what avail is Svarga unto him, before ·whom there are 
Brahma, ViᤁQ.u and Sarilbhu? What will he do by going there? 
We three gods are pleased. Choose an excellent boon as you 
please. 0 great king, that shall undoubtedly be true. 
Citrasena said: 
If you, the three Lords: Brahma, ViᤁQ.u and Mahesvara, are 
pleased, it behoves all the three of you to stay here perma­
nently. In the same way as Gayasiras has been rendered meri­
torious by all of you, this SUlabheda also shcruld be made sacred. 
I shall stay wherever all the three of you stay. Further, grant 
me the over-lordship of all the GaQ.as. 
lsvara said: 
1 3-2 1 . 
0 king, we the three Devas, shall stay in Siilabheda 
from today onwards in all the three divisions of time by means 
of a fraction. You shall certainly be the Lord of the GaQ.as. By 
the name 'Nandin' staying near me you shall be worshipped 
before I am. Mter your casting off the hones, as Dirghatapas 
went to heaven seated in an aerial chariot along with the members 
of his family, so you too shall do. 
Thus, 0 king, the Devas granted boons to Citrasena and 
stationed themselves on the top of the KuQ.Q.a in the southern 
quarter. They said to one another, "This is a great meritorious 
Tirtha. Just as Gayasiras has already been cited as meritorious, 
so also on the banks of Reva this Siilabheda is undoubtedly 
meritorious. " 
lsvara said: 
This Tirtha is as meritorious as Gayasiras. By offering balls 
of rice and libation even once a man shall attain p1,1rity. Ex­
cepting only Gayasiras, 0 king, no Tirtha is equal to even a 
sixteenth fraction of the SUlabheda Tirtha. From north to south 
the KuQ.Q.a extends to ten Hastas and from north-east to west 


202 
Skanda Puriir.ta 
twenty-one Hastas. In regard to the rites of offering balls of 
rice and the like, that Tirtha has these dimensions. Those who 
are engaged in impiety do not get a chance of offering Dana 
here. 
22-31 . 
Viᤄl).U stationed himself in the form of Pitr (i.e. 
father) , Brahma in the form of Pitamaha (grandfather) and 
Rudra as Prapitamaha (great-grandfather) . Thus the three deities 
got themselves stationed, 0 king. The Pitrs are always waiting 
like this: "When will my son visit the Tirtha? When will he 
redeem us? " If a devotee takes the holy bath in Sulabheda and 
visits but once Suladhara (Trident-bearing Lord Siva) he shall 
not be without sons or wealth for seven births. He will never 
become sick. He shall redeem twenty-one generations of his 
father's family, twenty-one generations of the mother's family 
and ten generations of his wife's family. 0 king, if a single 
Brahmal).a is fed in the Sulabheda Vana with even greens, 
roots and fruits, it amounts to the feeding of ten million persons 
elsewhere. A devout man who performs Sraddha at the five 
spots shall redeem all the members of the family, who have 
become Pretas (ghosts) , with the favour of Brahmal).as and deities 
as well as of the Pitrs. A person who of{ers Sraddha should stay 
there where Lord Mahesvara is present. If a devotee performs 
Sraddha with devotion in that Tirtha, the following persons 
shall attain liberation undoubtedly for a Yuga: They are: those 
who commit suicide, those who have killed cows and Brahmal).as, 
those who have been killed by animals with curved fangs, or 
drowned in water, or struck down by lightning, those who were 
not cremated or on whose death Asauca1 was not observed or 
libation not offer_ed. 0 king, merely by taking bath all the sins 
committed through ignorance or childish nature will be dis­
pelled. 
32-40. 
Just as a cloth washed by a washerman becomes 
pure and clean, so also a sinner who takes his bath in that 
Tirtha becomes free from impurities. One who adopts Sannyasa 
(life of a recluse) in this Tirtha in accordance with the injunc­
tions and meditates upon Mahadeva always shall- attain the 
highest position. He shall sport about as he pleases and wishes 
1 . 
Non-performance of auspicious rites due to impurity caused by certain 
inauspicious happenings such as death etc. 


V.iii.56. 1-8 
203 
for in the palace of Siva and is later born in an auspicious 
family as one conversant with the principles of the Vedas and 
Vedangas. He shall be endowed with handsome features and 
comeliness. He shall be devoid of all ailments, He may be boni 
as a king or prince. He shall be endowed with piety and good 
conduct. Thus, 0 king, the excellent benefit of the Tirtha has 
been recounted to you. On hearing this a man shall always be 
riᤣ of all sins . 
.If one reads this narrative always to leading Brahmat:tas, at 
the time of Sraddha or in a temple during festival days, Devas 
become pleased with him. So also human beings along with 
the Pitrs. All the sins of those who read or listen perish. He 
who writes the 'Greatness of the Tirtha ', and gives it to Brahmat:tas 
attains the ability to recollect previous birtlf and also gets the 
desired benefit. He shall stay in Rudraloka as long as the written 
syllables stay on. 
CHAPTER FIFITSIX 
Fruit of Dana Described 
Uttanapada said: 
1-8. 
I wish to know some more. By whom was Ganga brought 
down? How did the holy River which was stationed on the head 
of Rudra, happen to come here? What is the efficacy of the 
holy Devasila? 0 Sankara, if you are pleased, describe these 
things to me. 
lsvara said: 
Listen with mental concentration as to how the highly es­
teemed Ganga was brought down by all the Devas for the sake 
of the welfare of all the worlds. 
0 king, in the southern quarter, there is a mountain named 
Vindhya. All the Devas went to the top thereof , 0 ·king. 
Mter adoring Isa, the Lord of the universe, Lord of Devas, 
the preceptor of the universe, they requested him: "Release 
to the ground Ganga stationed in the middle of your matted 


204 
Skanda Purii.TJ-a 
hairs." Thus Ganga was invoked by all the Suras led by Brahma. 
Thereupon the brilliant river was released to the earth by Rudra 
from his head. 
This has been created as a highly meritorious river there in 
that spot by the Devas themselves. Therefore she has become 
Devanadi (divine river) for the welfare of men on the earth. 
Those who always live on her banks, those who take their 
holy bath with devotion and those who always drink her water, 
do not go to the abode of Varna. 
9-1 8. Praci Sarasvati is to the west of the celestial river, 0 
king, in the Km:u;la of Siilabheda where she had fallen. 
There is an excellent Tirtha to the south of Siilabheda. It 
is there that the meritorious Devasila was created by the Lord 
himself. 
If one takes his holy bath there with devotion and propiti­
ates the Pitrs and deities, they will become contented until the 
time of the annihilation of all living beings. 
A person should feed Brahmal).as there with great devotion 
after taking a holy dip there. Even if a small quantity of cooked 
food is offered, there is no end thereof (in regard to efficacy) . 
Uttanapada said: 
What are those Danas which when offered are highly es­
teemed in the world? By offering which devoutly is a man rid 
of all sins? Tell me the greatness "of Devasila, the benefit that 
accrues from the holy bath, Dana and the like and the good 
that would be attained through Vrata, Upavasa (fast) and Niyama 
(restraints and observances) . 
lsvara said: 
0 king, formerly there was a very powerful king of Cedi well­
known as Virasena. He was the Lord of a vast region and he 
was superbly vigorous. There was no enemy throughout the 
land nor was there any pestilence. No thieves ravaged the land 
nor was th ere any impiety. Only righteousness prevailed ev.ery­
where and at all times. 
The king had many sons and he was always joyous in the 
company of his wives. He had a single daughter as beautiful 


V.iii.56. 19-35 
205 
as the Daughter of the Mountain (Parvati) . The girl was a 
darling of the parents and all the kinsmen. At the proper time 
her marriage was· duly celebrated. 
19-26. 
Thereafter the king of Cedi began a Yajiia (a sac­
rifice) lasting for twelve years. In the meantime the husband 
of his daughter met with his death. 
Seeing his daughter widowed the king became grief-stricken. 
He told his wife who too was afflicted with misery: "My dear, 
a great misery has befallen us. It shall be unbearable through­
out our life. This girl is proud due to her beauty and youth. 
It is very difficult to keep her under restraint. Perhaps she may 
even spoil the family. How can this girl be guarded? There is 
no means whereby Bhanumati (name of the girl) can be kept 
safe . " On hearing the mutual discussion oi the parents, the girl 
said: 
Bhanumati said: 
0 dear father, I am pever ashamed to say what follows before 
you. Verily no defect or default shall assail you, 0 king, on my 
account. From now onwards I shall cease to have my tresses of 
hairs. At your place I shall wear half (of the usual length) of 
a coarse cloth. I shall observe the Vratas laid down in the 
Purar:tas. I shall cause myself to wither up and thus propitiate 
Janardana. This is what I think, dear father, if you allow me 
to do so. 
On hearing the words of Bhanumati, the king became highly 
delighted. 
27-35. 
In view of her intended pilgrimage, the king placed 
a vast amount of wealth at her disposal. To guard her he engaged 
many old men to accompany her. He sent Brahmar:tas and 
priests, slaves and servants as well as foot-soldiers capable of 
protecting her. 
Thus with the full consent of her father the chaste lady went 
to the banks of Ganga, 0 king. She took holy dips in both the 
shores1 of Ganga. Honouring excellent Brahmar:tas everyday 
with sweet scents, garlands, ornaments etc., she spent twelve 
years on the banks of Ganga. 
I . 
This probably implies that she performed a circumambulation o f the 
river. 


206 
Skanda Purii:TJ,a 
Thereafter, the princess left Ganga and proceeded towards 
the South and arrived at the great river Reva along with her 
attendants and ministerial followers. At Orhkara at Amarakarnaka 
she stayed for five years. She went from one Tirtha to another 
Tirtha both on the north as well as on the south bank (of 
Reva) . Taking many holy ablutions and adoring Brahmar:tas 
devoutly and without lethargy, she went to the West reaching 
the confluence of the celestial river. 
There she saw a holy hermitage full of the congregation of 
sages. On seeing the saintly concourse she bowed down and 
said: "What is the greatness of this Tirtha? What is the name? 
I may be favoured by ye, 0 venerable ones. Let this be spo­
ken. " 
The sages said: 
36-47. 
This is well-known as Cakra Tirtha. It was here that 
the discus was granted to Hari by the Trident-bearing Lord of 
Devas, the delighted Mahdvara. 
If a person takes his holy bath in the Tirtha here and pro­
pitiates the Pitrs and deities, he will undoubtedly reach that 
destination from where there is no return at all. 
0 Tapasvini {ascetic woman) , the next day the person should 
go to Sulabheda and duly perform the holy ablution in accor­
dance with the injunctions mentioned before. 
He will undoubtedly be rid of sins committed in the course 
of three births. Three cavity-fuls of water and gingelly seeds 
(Aiijali 
= cavity of palms joined together) alone should be 
offered as libation (to Pitrs) . There is no doubt that the Pitrs 
thus become satiated for twelve years. 
He who performs Sraddha devoutly through Brahmar:tas well­
versed in l!he Vedas, 0 king, should avoid usuriousness. What­
ever is offered to the Pitrs becomes everlasting in its benefit. 
The next day, he should go to the splendid and meritorious 
Devasila. There the meritorious Jahnavi formerly created by 
Devas, is visible. 
0 king, one should take holy bath there and offer water 
mixed with gingelly seeds (to Pitrs) . Merely offering balls of 
rice once, one is rid of the sin of Brahmar:ta-slaughter. 
The person should. observe fast on the eleventh day in er-


V.iii.56.48-57 
207 
ther half (of the month) and keep awake at night. He should 
also read the story from a PuraQ.a. He should perform the 
adoration of ViᤄQ.u with flowers, incense and Naivedya offer­
ings. He should feed Brahmat:J.as in the morning and make 
gifts in accordance with his capacity. 
On the fourth day he should go to the place where Pracisarasvati 
(flows) issuing forth from the body of Brahma, for the purpose 
of sanctifying embodied beings. After taking bath the man 
should devoutly propitiate the Pitrs and deities. 
After duly performing the Sraddha he should feed uncensurable 
(praise-worthy) BrahmaQ.as. Undoubtedly the Piqs become satiated 
for twelve years. 
48-57. 
This spot consists of all Devas and all Tlrthas. The 
place is full of crores of deities and is the most excellent of 
all excellent Tlrthas with ten million Lirigas. 
If a person who is pure and has controlled his sense-organs, 
takes his bath for three nights, a fortnight, a month, six months 
and (sometimes) a year, he is sure to dwell in heaven. He will 
never be born again in the mortal world. 
Strictly observing the restraints he will be rid of sins accu­
mulated in the course of three births. 
A woman of pure vows who remains there for a period of 
twelve years without a male associate, is honoured in Rudraloka 
for all times. 
On hearing the words of the sages, she went ahead with 
great joy. She took holy bath in the Tlrtha and remained active 
and alert day and night. 
On seeing the power of the Tirtha she said again, "0 BrahmaQ.as 
including the priests, may my words be listened to. I will not 
forsake such a holy spot as this either in the day or at night 
as long as I live. Kindly tell my mother and father these words: 
'Your daughter is staying at Sulabheda, regularly observing the 
vows.' " 
After saying this, 0 king, Princess Bhanumatl continued her 
stay there. She began the observance of fast on alternative 
days. Gradually she increased the duration of the fast to a 
month. She always stationed herself at Devasila and meditated 
upon the Discus-bearing Lord. She burned incense day and 
J:tight; offered sandalpaste and lights. She herself washed the 


208 
Skanda Purii:r:ta 
feet and fed BrahmaQ.as. That queen (Princess) thus observed 
her vows and stayed there for twelve years. 1 
lsvara said: 
58-68. 
Now, 0 king, listen to another story showing the 
greatness of Devasila. I shall narrate, 0 mighty-armed one, an 
old legend along with the historical background. 
There was a hunter, a forest-dweller of the Sahara tribe. 
Afflicted by famine he went to the forest accompanied by his 
wife for procuring some meaL He did not see birds or animals 
or fruits. Ultimᤤtely he espied a lake beautified with clusters 
of lotuses. 
On seeing the excellent lake, the Sabarl (Sahara's wife) 
spoke these words: "Take these splendid lilies (lotuses) for the . 
sake of getting the money for our food. Righteous and pious 
persons will be coming to Sulabheda for the adoration of the 
Lord. The flowers can be sold." 
On hearing the words of his wife, he gathered the lotus 
flowers. After coming out of the water he saw a Srlvrkᤁa (Bilva 
tree) in front of him. He plucked ripe fruits of Srlphala and 
reached Sulabheda where he saw a great number of people. 
On the eleventh day in the bright half of the month of 
Caitra, even children, old men and women should not eat 
anything. 
He saw a pavilion erected there over the DevaSila rock. It 
was divinely exquisite, embellished with flower garlands and 
covered with cloths. 
The sages who lived in the hermitages came there. They 
undertook their fasts and holy observances. All of them had 
the holy fires with them and their wives too were there. 
The entire bank of the Devanadl appeared very charming 
with the uowds of sages. 0 excellent king, the whole path was 
blocked by visitors. 
69-79. 
On seeing the entire country present there, the 
Sahara said to his wife: "Go and ask someone as to why they 
1 . 
Upto verse 57 the story of Bhanumati is narrated. The remaining part of 
her story will be told later. In the meanwhile the story of Sabari, which 
is a part of Bhanumati's, is told by isvara. The story is told to emphasize 
the Mahatmya of DevaSila and is not a break in Bhanumati's story. 


V.iii.56.80-89 
209 
are having the holy bath. Is it any of the Parvas (holy festival 
days) about which we hear? Is it the lunar or solar eclipse? Is 
it the transit of the Sun or the Akᤁayatrtlya?" 
Thereupon, at the instance of her husband the Sabarl set 
off. She saw a woman there to whom she gave two splendid 
lotus flowers and asked: "What is the Tithi (lunar day) today? 
What is the Parva today? Do tell me. Why do the people take 
the holy ablution? What is the reason for the holy bath? " 
The woman said: 
It is the holy Ekadasl (eleventh day) today. It causes destruc­
tion of all sins. If even once anyone observes fast today, he will 
attain heaven. 
On hearing her words, the Sabarl recounted to the Sahara 
without excitement, 0 excellent king, the entire statement of 
the woman. "It is a meritorious Ekadasl today. It is named 
Madanaikadasl. Even children and old men observe fast today. 
All sins will be destroyed thereby. It is heard that there is a 
splendid ·princess, regularly observing holy vows and restric­
tions in diet. The chaste lady is Bhanumatl by name. No woman 
on a par with this lady has been heard of in all the three 
worlds. She appears to be some divine lady incarnated on the 
earth. " 
O n hearing the words of his wife, the Sahara said to her: 
"Sell the lotuses for whatever you get immediately and get your 
food. But this is my firm determination that I should not eat. 
0 fair lady, evil-minded that I am, nothing auspicious has been 
done by me. " 
Saban said: 
80-89. 
As far as I remember, L did not eat before you 
(have eaten) . Whatever was left after your meal only that was 
eaten by me. 
On coming to know of the resolute decision of his wife, the 
hunter went away to have his holy bath. Wearing half of his 
upper garment he devoutly took his holy bath. He paid re­
spects to all the Devas and then went to Devasila. Though 
diffident (about results) he stood there bowing down tojanardana. 


210 
Skanda PuriirJ,a 
The queen (Princess) was informed by that woman to whom 
the Sabari had given the two lotus flowers. On seeing the pair 
of lotus flowers, she (Princess) said to the servant: "Wherefrom 
were the lotus flowers obtained by you. Do tell me presently. 
Go quickly and bring more such lotus flowers. Bring the lotus 
flowers in exchange of food grain or cash. " 
O n hearing the words of Bhanumati, she (the servant woman) 
went to the Sahara. "Give me more of the Sriphalas and flowers." 
Saban said: 
Go and tell the queen that I shall give you the Sriphalas 
along with the flowers. I do not covet anything nor do I wish 
for anything in return. 
She hastened back and told the princess everything just as 
it happened and the words of the Sabari in full detail. 
On hearing her words, the queen herself went there and 
spoke lovingly to the Sabari: "Give me the lotuses for the price. " 
Saban said: 
90-97. 
0 queen, I do not desire to get (any) price of the 
flowers and the fruits. Sriphalas and flowers may be taken from 
me as you please. Do perform duly the adoration of Vasudeva, 
the Lord of the umverse. 
The queen said: 
I will not accept the lotuses from you without g1vmg the 
price thereof. I shall give you a Kharika (sixteen Drol).as) of 
food-grain. May it be accepted. 
Accept ten, twenty, thirty, forty or even a hundred Kharikas 
and go across the ocean of famine. 
For the sake of the lotuses, I shall surely give you money, 
jewels, gold or anything else desired by you. 
Saban said: 
0 lady of fair countenance, I do not think of foodstuff now. 
Excepting the Lord, I do not think of anything else. My mind 
is not inclined to anything other than the thought of the Lord, 
0 fair lady. 


V.iii.56. 98-1 10 
21 1 
The queen said: 
Food should not be discarded by ᤔ·ou. Everything is estab­
lished in food. Hence, by all means accept the foodstuff given 
by me. Sages of great esteem, those who dwell in forests-all 
diligently come and beg at the portals of householders. 
Saban said: 
98-1 1 0. 
It has been rejected earlier. Everything is estab­
lished in Satya (Truth ) . It is due to Satya that the sun blazes. 
It is because of Satya that the fire burns. Through Satya the 
ocean stands (firm) . The wind blows through Satya. Through 
Satya crops ripen and cows yield milk. The entire universe 
consisting of mobile and immobile beings has Satya for its 
support. Hence by all means, one should pᤕotect Satya through 
abiding by Satya. Excepting the task pertaining to the Lord, 
my mind is not inclined in regard to anything. Take the flow­
ers, 0 queen, and perform the adoration of the mace-bearing 
Lord Viᤄt:tu. 
It is learnt through the statements of Brahmat:tas that there 
is no harm at all in accepting Kusa grass, greens, water, fish, 
scents, flowers, raw rice-grain (for rituals) , meat, bed, seat, 
corn etc., and water. These should not be rejected. 
The queen said: 
Flowers are of four types: those plucked from gardens; flowers 
(collected) from forest; flowers which are bought and flowers 
obtained as gift. The best one is a flower from the forest plucked 
by oneself. The middling is a fruit (flower) gathered from a 
garden. That which is bought is the base one. Learned men 
know that what is obtained as a gift is futile. 
Purohita (Priest) said: 
0 queen, take the flowers and perform the adoration of the 
mace-bearing Lord Viᤄt:tu. Under some pretext you should render 
help in return at some other time. 
lsvara said: 
Accepting the Sriphalas given by the Sahara along with the 


212 
Skanda Purii:r.w 
lotus flowers, the queen performed the auspicious adoration. 
She listened to the Purai_lic story and kept awake at night. 
Thereupon the Sahara spoke these words to his wife: "0 beau­
tiful lady, let the oil be taken as much as can be obtained for 
the lamps. " Thereafter they lighted a lamp and performed the 
auspicious adoration of Hari. 
They meditated upon the Upholder of the Earth and kept 
awake at night. At dawn they saw the people eager to take the 
holy bath. Some were bathing in Siilabheda and others in the 
Devanadl. Some men took bath in Sarasvati and others in the 
whirlpool of MarkaQ<;la. 
1 1 1-1 20. Some went to Cakratirtha and took the holy bath 
in accordance with the injunctions. All those pure persons 
performed Sraddha assiduously and faithfully on the Devasila 
rock after their holy bath. Their mind remained pure. 
On seeing them, the Sahara too offered Pi1.1<;las with the 
Bilva fruits. 
Similarly Bhanumati offered the Pi1.1<;las to her husband. 
Uncensurable (praiseworthy) Brahmai_las who were devoid of 
hypocrisy and practice of usury were fed. 
The queen fed them with Haviᤁya (cooked rice) , curd, sugar, 
honey and ghee, milk pudding made out of cow's milk and 
especially with Krtanna (rice mixed with condiments etc.) . Mter 
feeding them, the queen made monetary and other gifts in 
accordance with the injunctions. The gifts were sandals and 
shoes, umbrella, bed, cow, bull, various kinds of jewels, gold 
and cash too. 
0 great king, if a person makes a gift of a tawny-coloured 
cow at Cakratlrtha, it is on a par with a gift of the whole earth 
along with the mountains, forests and parks. 
Uttiinapiida said: 
0 Lord of Devas, be favourably disposed towards me and 
recount to me all those esteemed gifts to be made over (in the 
name) of the Lord of the universe. 
lsvara said: 
He who makes the gift of gingelly seeds obtains desired 
progeny; he who gives lamps gets excellent visual power; he 


V.iii.56. 121-1 34 
213 
who gives plot of land attains heaven and he who gives gold 
gets longevity. 
The giver of a house becomes free from ailments; he wno 
gives silver becomes handsome; he who gives clothes attains 
the world of the Moon; and he who gives horses becomes 
identical with the Sun-god. 
One who gives a bull attains well-attained glory and fortune; 
a giver of cows goes to heaven; one who gives vehicles and bed 
obtains a (good) wife and one who gives succour from fear 
obtains prosperity. 
1 2 1-1 29. A person who gives foodgrain attains permanent 
happiness; one who gives Vedic text attains the eternal Brah­
man. Of all Danas, viz. water, food, earth, clothes, gingelly 
seeds, gold and ghee, Brahmadana (gift of learning) is the 
best. 
" 
The donor gets correspondingly adequate return in accor­
dance with the intention or the degree of emotional fervour 
with which he makes the gift, whatever it may be. 
0 king, listen to what the Sahara said to his wife on seeing 
the various gifts made by the queen: "0 fair lady, I have heard 
entirely the Purar;ta as read by the Brahmar;tas who have mas­
tered the Vedas. The benefit of the Danadharma is auspicious. 
The sin accumulated in the previous births has been wiped off 
through the holy bath, Dana, Vrata etc. After casting off the 
body, that cannot be ordinarily cast off, one attains excellent 
goal. I am afraid of the ocean of worldly existence, 0 fair lady. 
I speak the truth unto you. I have committed many sins, 0 fair 
lady. Many animals have been killed by me. I have always burnt 
down many hills. I am scorched by those sins. Poverty never 
leaves me. The sinner that I am, I have never taken the holy 
bath in a Tirtha. Therefore, 0 fair lady, I am miserable . I have 
incurred poverty that cannot be removed. You go to your mother's 
house. Cease to have love and affection for me. I wish to climb 
on to the peak of the mountain and hurl myself to death." 
Saban said: 
1 30-1 34. I have nothing to do with my mother or father. I 
have nothing to do with kinsmen and relatives. 0 my Lord, I 
shall attain the same goal as you. Women's Dharma does not 
allow that they should continue to live without their husbands. 


214 
Skanda Purii'f}a 
In such a life many defects are possible as proclaimed by 
Dharmasastra texts, 0 Lord of Bhojas (i.e. Sahara clan) . Do 
make the ritualistic breaking of the fast, lest the Vrata should 
be defective. Whatever is desired by you, you should dedicate 
to Vigm. 
On hearing the words of his wife the Sahara was pleased. He 
took the Sriphala and duly performed the Homa. Mter bowing 
down to all the deities he took food with her. Coming to know 
that there was Viᤄuva (Equinox) on the full-moon day of Caitra 
he stayed there for three days. 
CHAPTER FIITYSEVEN 
The Sabara Goes to Svarga 
lsvara said: 
1-8. 
Mter feeding Brahmal).as, Bhanumati ate what was 
left after feeding them. Mter eating she took rest with plea­
sure, while the food got digested. On the Madanakhya Trayodasi 
day (thirteenth of the bright half named Madana) , she took 
bath in the Hrada (whirlpool) of Markal).<;ia and adored Lord 
Guhasaya (Siva) (stationed in a cave as abode) . She observed 
fast as enjoined. She bathed Mahesvara with PaiicaiTlrta and 
sweet scents. Incense, lamps, Naivedyas were offered. She adored 
(the Lord) with different kinds of flowers and excellent Naivedyas. 
She kept awake in the night hearing Pural).ic stories and wit­
nessing dances and hearing songs and prayers. She meditated 
upon Lord Mahdvara. The entire quantity of cooked food was 
duly spread in front of the Lord. All the people belonging to 
all the four castes were fed along with their attendants. 
On the fourteenth day the whole day was spent in worshipping 
the Bull-emblemed Lord. She kept awake in the night keeping 
conchs blowing and drums and other instruments continuously 
being plᤖyed. The sound of Paᤃahas echoed everywhere. Many 
devotees thronged there. Then the whole night was spent in 
dancing and singing songs and prayers. At dawn the Brahmal).as 
were fed with milk-puddings, honey and ghee. 


V.iii.57.9-23 
215 
9-1 6. Gifts were made to BrahmaQas in accordance with 
own capacity as well as the qualifications of the ones. The Lord 
was adored with sweet-smelling flowers such as Madana and 
the like, and clothed all round with delicate clothes of various 
colours. Many garlands were kept hanging down and many 
lamps were kept blazing. There were various kinds of sweet 
cooked foods such as Modakas etc., round in shape. 
Then all those BrahmaQas engrossed in the study of the 
Vedas glorified that Parva by the name Padmaka. Today is the 
day of the Sun (Sunday) . The Tithi (lunar day) is fifteenth. 
The constellation is that pertaining to Tvam·. Today is the day 
of the transit of the Sun, the equinoctial time. Vyati:pata is the 
Yoga and ViHi is the KaraQa. This Parva named Padmaka has 
four times more benefit than that of Ayana etc. Whatever is 
offered, consigned to the sacred fire, or r-epeated as Japa be­
comes everlasting. 
Those BrahmaQas went to Sulabheda along with Bhanumati. 
They saw the Sahara standing at the KuQc;la along with his wife. 
0 king, the Sahara went in the north-eastern direction. He 
climbed on to the Bhrgu mountain along with his wife in order 
to leap down therefrom. 
Bhiinumati said: 
1 7-23. 
0 noble-minded one, stop, stop. Listen to my words. 
Why do you give up your life? You are still a youth. What is 
your distress? What is the cause of your dejection? What is your 
misery? What is your ailment? You seem to be a child now. 
Pray, let the reason be mentioned. 
Sahara said: 
I have no reason to offer. I have no sorrow. I am afraid of 
the worldly existence and my intellect does not intend to do 
anything else. It is with very great difficulty that one fortu­
nately obtains human birth. If, even after getting the human 
birth, one does not practise piety, 0 beautiful lady, one defi­
nitely falls into a terrible hell solely due to one's own defect. 
Hence I wish to hurl myself down into this Tirtha that is destructive 
of sins. 


216 
Skanda Puriir;ta 
The queen said: 
You have yet ample time to acquire piety. Whether one has 
done one's duty well or ill, one becomes pure through Vrata 
and Dana. I shall give you food-grain or clothes or adequate 
cash. Perform righteous actions always. Always meditate upon 
Mahdvara. 
Sahara said: 
24-3 1 . 
I desire no money, no food-grains, no garments. If 
anyone accepts food from another, he accepts his sins as well. 
The queen said: 
One who has bulbous roots, roots and fruits for food. or 
wanders begging for excellent alms or takes the holy- bath in 
the excellent Tirthas, is rid of all sins. Whatever the pure man 
does, he shall be free from sins. You will become pure through 
your holy rites and will certainly attain beatitude. 
Sahara said: 
Intake of food has been abandoned by me today, but I will 
not eschew Satya (Truth ) which is greater even than my vital 
airs. 0 fair lady, do this favour to me. Excuse me. 
After saying this the Sahara bound himself with half of his 
upper cloth, meditated upon Hari and fell down along with his 
wife. 
When he fall down from the top of the mountain, 0 king, 
he died. They were seen smashed to smithereens over the 
Kur;u;la. Kithin a period of three Muhiirtas the Sahara climbed 
on to an aerial chariot along with his wife and attained the 
excellent state (i.e. beatitude) . 


V.iii.58.1-13 
217 
CHAPTER FIITYEIGHT 
The Greatness of Sulabheda Tirtha 
Uttiinapiida said: 
1-8. 
Thereafter, 0 Lord of the chiefs of Devas, what did 
Bhanumati do? This is my doubt. 0 Lord, do me the favour 
of mentioning this. 
lsvara said: 
Mter reflecting for a short while, she went near the Kul)c;la. 
Observing the greatness of the Kul)c;la, the queen became filled 
with delight. 
She invited many Brahmal)as and adore·d them duly at the 
same moment. The princess duly made gifts to the Brahmal)as. 
Mter making firm resolve, she stayed with calmness of mind. 
Then, 0 king, she adored the Pitrs and Devas. She spent a 
fortnight of the month of Madhu remaining there. Then on 
the new-moon day, the queen went near the mountain. 
She climbed on to the peak of the mountain, joined the 
palms of the hands together and spoke these words of request 
to all those Brahmal)as: "May my mother, father, brother and 
all other friends and relatives be requested to forgive me. Let 
them be told these words of mine: 'Your daughter performed 
penance at Siilabheda in accordance with her capacity. She 
cast herself into that Tirtha and has gone to heaven. "' 
The Briihma'T}as said: 
9-1 3. 0 lady of splendid vows, we shall convey the message 
given by you to your mother and father. 0 lady of excellent 
hips, let there be no doubt in your mind. 
Mter dismissing those people, she, stood on the peak of the 
mountain and girdled herself with half of the upper cloth 
firmly. Then, 0 king, with concentration she hurled herself 
down from the top of the mountain. 
When she fell down (half the distance from the mountain) 
the celestial damsels were delighted. They said: "0 dear Bhanumati, 
0 highly esteemed fortunate lady of great penance, be pleased 


218 
Skanda Purii:TJ.a 
to get into the divine aerial chariot and proceed towards Kail:"isa. " 
Even as they were all watching, she went to heaven. 
Miirkarpf,eya said: 
1 4-24. 
Thus the full details regarding Siilabheda have been 
recounted to you as heard earlier from Sankara in the assem­
bly of sages and Devas. 
He who devoutly reads this at a Tirtha or in a divine shrine, 
is released from great sins incurred in the course of a hundred 
births. 
All these (following) sinners are released from the sins by 
the power of Siilabheda: Sinners such as a BrahmaJ.la-slayer, a 
drinker of spirituous liquor, a thief, a defiler of his preceptor's 
bed, a killer of cows, a murderer of women, a misappropriator 
of the property of gods (temples) and BrahmaJ.las, a traitor to 
his master, a killer of friends, a committer of breach of trust, 
one who takes away the deposits of others, destroyer of other 
people's treasures (or pawned things) , a diluter of wine, a user 
of false weights, a usurer (with high rates) , a creater of impediments 
(with regard to marriages etc.) of girls, a seller of girls, one 
who indulges in sexual intercourse with wives of others or a 
brother, cows, daughter-in-law, daughters, a hater of others 
and defiler of piety. If anyone reads this at the time of Sraddha, 
0 king, while the BrahmaJ.las take their food, the Pitrs become 
overjoyed with him. 
One who devoutly listens to this when it is being read and 
has self-control shall be rid of all sins. He shall enjoy all plea­
sures and niceties of life. 
This is conducive to great fame and longevity; this is sacred 
and excellent. It increases the life span and glory of those men 
who read and listen. 
Thus the meritorious greatness of Siilabheda has been re­
counted to you. It is not listened to by sinners. This Siilabheda 
is situated on the southern bank of the river of the enemy of 
Madana (i.e. Ganga) . It is like a spade that digs up and uproots 
the bulbous roots of powerful sins. 


V.iii.59. 1-14 
219 
CHAPTER FIITYNINE 
The Greatness of .Aditya Tirtha 
Miirka7J-4eya said: 
1-8. 
Thereafter, a person should go to Pu11karil).i that is 
destructive of all sins. When its power is listened to, one is rid 
of all sins. 
There is a highly splendid Tlrtha on the northern bank of 
Reva, where Lord Divakara (Sun-god) is always present as Vedamiirti 
(the Veda incarnate) . 
This Tirtha is meritorious and bestower of all desires just as 
Kuruk11etra is meritorious, excellent aild conducive to the fulfilment 
of all desires. 
• 
0 Lord of the Earth, just as Dana increases in benefit at 
Kuruk11etra, so also undoubtedly it increases in Pu11kariQ.i as well. 
If a person gifts a grain of Yava at Pu11karil).1, the place (in 
heaven) that he attains is proclaimed as the same as when one 
offers gold over the head, 0 king. 
One should take his holy ablution at the time of solar eclipse 
and make duly gifts of elephants, horses, chariots, jewels, a 
house, cows, bullocks bearing the burden of the yokes etc. 
If a person gives gold or silver to Brahmal).as till the thir­
teenth day, it shall give thirteen times the benefit. 
He should propitiate the Pitrs and deities by means of liba­
tions of water mixed with gingelly seeds. The person shall 
cherish love for that Tirtha in the twelfth year, 0 king. 
9-1 4. If a person performs Sraddha there with milk-pud­
ding, honey and ghee, the performer of Sraddha attains heaven. 
Everything given to the Pitrs shall be everlasting. 
One attains never-fai!ing benefit by offering raw rice grains, 
Badaras, Bilvas or oil extracted from higuda along with sesamum 
in that Tirtha. 
There is no doubt about it. The devotee shall take his holy 
ablution in the Tirtha, worship Lord Divakara, perform the 
Japa of Adityahrdaya and again worship the Sun-god. He shall 
attain the greatest world honoured even by Devas. 
If a person makes the Japa of even a single Mantra from the 
Rgveda, Yajur Veda or a Saman hymn, 0 king, he attains the 
benefit of (reciting) the entire Veda. 


220 
Skanda Purii:rJa 
One who meditates upon Divakara and repeats the three­
syllabled Mantra (i.e. Aditya) after the Japa of Adityahrdaya, is 
released from all sins. 
0 excellent king, one who duly gives up his life there, shall 
go to the greatest region where Lord Divakara is present. 
CHAPTER SIXTY 
The Greatness of Adityesvara Tirtha 
Sri Markat;tf!,eya said: 
1-8. 
I shall further describe (the greatness of) the excel­
lent Aditye5vara which is destructive of all miseries and all 
obstacles, 0 son of Prtha. The Tirtha is always conducive to 
longevity, increase in glory and prosperity. It grants sons, welfare 
and heavenly pleasures. 
0 scion of the family of Kurus, other (Ravi) Tirthas have 
not attained the glory of this Tirtha, whether in heaven, or 
mortal world or in Patala. 0 excellent king, all these Tirthas, 
viz. Kurukᤁetra, Gaya, Ganga, Naimiᤁa. Puᤁkara, Varar:tasi, Kedara, 
Prayaga, Rudra-nandana, Mahakala, Sahasrakᤁa and Sukla Tirtha 
do not merit even a sixteenth fraction of Ravi Tirtha. 
0 excellent king, listen to what happened in Ravitirtha. 
Though I am extremely distressed due to old age, I shall narrate 
it to you out of affection. May all the sages of great vigour 
engaged in austerities listen. 
This has been heard by me in the presence of Rudra along 
with Nandin, Skanda and the Gar:tas. Sambhu was asked by 
Parvati as to the benefit of Ravitirtha. What was narrated by 
Sambhu enthusiastically, everything sung about by Rudra, was 
heard by me with concentrated attention. 
9-1 6. I shall recount it to you. Listen to it with caution. 
Brahmar:tas oppressed by famine resorted to Narmada. They 
were: Uddalaka, Vasiᤁᤃha, Mar:tc;lavya, Gautama, ¥ajftavalkya, Garga, 
Sar:tc;lilya, Galava, Naciketa, Vibhar:tc;l.a, Valakhilyas and others, 
Satatapa, Sankha, Jaimini, Gobhila, Jaigiᤁavya, Satanika. All those 
came there. 


V.iii.60. 17-37 
221 
Pilgrimage was performed by them around Narmada. Inci­
dentally the leading sages came to the Aditydvara shrine too. 
It was splendid and was covered with various trees such as 
Dhava, Tinduka, Patala, jarhbira, Arjuna, Kubjaka, Sami, Kesara, 
Kirhsuka etc. That Tirtha of highly meritorious nature was full 
of fragrant flowers. There were the trees of Punnaga, coconut, 
Khadira and Kalpa trees as well. The holy spot was infested by 
many beasts of prey, deer and cats. It was rendered splendid 
by bears, elephants and Citrakas (hunting leopards) . All the 
sages entered the forest full of flowers. 
1 7-23. 
At the end of the forest, they saw women of red 
complexion wearing red garments. They had smeared them­
selves with red sandalpaste and worn red-coloured ornamen ts. 
They were holding nooses in their hand!' and were terrifying 
(to look at) . Near them were men resembling black clouds. 
Their faces (mouths) were large and they had huge bodies. 
They had nooses in their hands and they could be compared 
to AnavHti (Drought) . They had tawny-coloured eyes. 
0 most excellent one among the descendants of Kuru, another 
old woman was seen by the leading sages. She had a long 
tongue. Her face was hideous and her curved fangs were sharp. 
She was unassailable. 0 descendant of Bharata, the old woman 
was very near that group. The BrahmaQas engaged in their 
self-study of the Vedas were seen by those people of evil ·ac­
tions. 
They collectively spoke to the BrahmaQas engaged in aus­
terities: "All our masters are standing in the midst of the Tirtha. 
Those highly esteemed ones should be urged to start hurriedly 
by all means. " 
On hearing those words of theirs, all of them hurriedly went 
to the marshy land in Narmada and the excellent BrahmaQas 
surveyed Reva. 
24-37. 
Then some of the others began to eulogize: "Be 
victorious, 0 divine one, (we make) obeisance to you. Obei­
sance to you, 0 (river) resorted to by groups of Siddhas. Obeisance 
to you, the most auspicious and sacred one among all. Obei­
sance to you, the most excellent one issuing forth from the 
person of Rudra. 
Obeisance to you, the holiest and the most sanctifying one 
of all. Obeisance to you, 0 divine one, 0 auspicious bestower 


222 
Skanda Purii:tJa 
of boons. I bow to you, 0 excellent one among the rivers, 0 
bestower of happiness, 0 destroyer of sins, 0 river of diverse 
features and cool waters. Obeisance to you whose limbs (wa­
ters) are respectfully attended to by many groups of living 
beings. (Bow to you) whose waters have purified Gandharvas, 
Yakᤄas and Serpents, one whose waters are drunk by herds of 
great elephants, buffaloes and boars; (to you) who wear water­
waves as garlands. I bow down to you, the most excellent one 
among all, the bestower of happiness. Do release us fettered 
by the nooses of sins. 
Men do wander through the hells only as long as they do 
not resort to your waters, touched by the rays of the moon and 
the sun. 0 divine one, if it is touched (by the devotees) it shall 
bestow the highest region. 
0 divine one with a face resembling a lotus, you are the 
ultimate goal unto the people harassed by many a fear of the 
worldly existence, en.veloped by many sins and many Dvandvas 
( mutually opposing pairs like pain-pleasure etc.) . There is no 
doubt about this, 0 divine one, that rivers become sanctified 
and free from impurities after having resorted to you. You 
bestow freedom from fear on those who are afflicted by mis­
eries. You are adored by many SiHas (men of good conduct) . 
Men with their physical forms submerged in faeces and urine, 
wander in h.ells as long as they do not touch this water, the 
waves whereof are scattered with great power. 
Even Mlecchas (barbarians) , Pulindas (hunting tribe ) , 
Yatudhanas (demons) who drink thy meritorious water, 0 di­
vine one, become released from terrible fear. More so in the 
case of the BrahmaQ.as afraid of the noose of worldly existence. 
In this terrible Yuga brought in by Kali, lakes and rivers get 
decreased, but you, 0 divine one, shine with the waters full to 
the brim ·like Ganga in the heavenly path of the galaxy. 
0 bestower of boons, 0 excellent one, after waiting this 
much of time we will, with your favour, attain liberation. Do 
this favour so that we will attain salvation. 
Those who have resorted to you, those who have sought 
refuge in you, have you as the ultimate goal. You protect them 
like a mother or like a father who protects the sons. Protected 
by you, we pass off the terrible period of oppression due to 
drought. " 


V.iii.60.38-59 
223 
Eulogized thus, 0 Yudhiᤄᤃhira, the divine river Narmada, 
the most excellent one among the rivers, became visible to 
those BrahmaQas in the most excellent form. 
Miirka7Jr:f,eya said: 
38-46. 
0 king, those who rea<f and listen to this prayer 
with great devotion and mental calmness, attain Rudra by means 
of a vehicle yoked with a bull. Their limbs will be embellished 
with divine garments. 
If persons take bath in the waters of Narmada and repeat this 
prayer always, this excellent river shall ere long bestow on them, 
at the close of their life, the purest state (in the other world) . 
One should get up in the morning and cepeat this excellent 
hymn everyday. When one goes to bed then also one should 
repeat this. Thereupon the holy River grants him the dissolu­
tion of his body in her own waters. 0 king of great esteem, she 
accords him support as well. They will be rid of sins and will 
rejoice in heaven enjoying all pleasures. Not otherwise. 
The divine river Narmada, on being propitiated by this hymn, 
0 descendant of Bharata, nourished those Brahmat:J.as by means 
of her waters. She flowed through the southern tract of land. 
The River said: "I shall grant you Amrtatva (immortality) which 
is not obtained even by Yogins. It is very difficult even for all 
the Suras to attain. You will get it with my favour. " 
Mter receiving this very excellent boon the BrahmaQas were 
delighted in their minds. As they were going, they saw a great 
miracle: 
Sri Miirka7Jr:f,eya said: 
0 son of Kunti, persons stationed on the banks of Narmada 
were seen by them. They were very powerful and engaged in 
holy ablution and adoration of the deity. They were five in 
number. 
They were seen by all the BrahmaQas who had mastered the 
Vedas and Vedail.gas. Understand, 0 great king, how they were 
enquired after by them: 
The Briihma7Jas said: 
47-59. 
At the end of the forest was a pair of women extremely 


224 
Skanda Purii:fJ,a 
terrible and awe-inspiring. These old men too with nooses in 
their hands were terror-striking. They were unassailable, diffi­
cult to look at and moving about here and there. They spoke 
auspicious words: "There is no salvation there. " 
All of them began to look about here and there again and 
again, but not at each other. May the words uttered by them 
be narrated in full. "0 excellent men, our five men (husbands) 
stay there. 0 blessed ones, they should be made to proceed 
promptly and hurriedly by all means. " 
Then those five men after hearing these auspicious words, 
looked at one another and began to say again and again: ''Where 
are they? Whose? Where did they go? What was said by those 
terrible ones?" 
The men said: 
By all (of us) Tirthavagahana (bathing in the holy waters) 
was performed with great devotion in all Tirthas in eastern, 
southern, western and northern directions. But the sin has not 
been dispelled by them. But they (we) became free from sins 
by the power of this Tirtha. May all the sages, the Brahmar;tas, 
comparable to fire and god of Death (in brilliance) listen: 
Their sins were terrible, unthinkable unto the embodied ones. 
The wife of the preceptor was resorted to by one of the sin­
ners. The wealth of a friend, gold and other assets·, was taken 
away by another. The sin of Brahmar;ta-slaughter, the highly 
terrible sin, was committed by another. Another unwittingly 
committed the sin of imbibing spirituous liquor. The slaughter 
of cows was committed by another sinner unwittingly. 0 king, 
the sins of all these were committed unintentionally. On hear­
ing those words of the Brahmar;tas they became surprised. Instantly 
all the sinners became rid of sins by the power of this Tirtha, 
the power' of Narmada. 
60-70. 
Nowhere can sins gain access here. All those sin­
ners thought after consulting one another. Citrabhanu (Sun) 
was remembered by them after thinking about Hari in the 
heart. Mter taking the holy plunge in the auspicious waters of 
Reva, the Pitrs and deities were propitiated by them. Mter 
meditating on Lord _Ftnardana in the heart and bowing to 
Lord Bhaskara (Sun-god) they circumambulated the blazing 


V.iii.60.71-78 
225 
fire with devotion. 0 king, 0 excellent one among the sons 
of Pal).<;lu, they who were distressed due to the sins and were 
fallen, now regained the sattvikt bhavana (mental predilection 
of Sattvika type) and abandoned Rajas and Tamas. 
On the northern bank of Narmada everything was destroyed 
by them in the fire. Then, 0 Yudhi!jthira, they were seen seated 
in an aerial chariot. 
An incomparable miracle was seen by the sages on the banks 
of Narmada. Ever since then all of them were bereft of Riiga 
(attachment) and Dve6a (hatred) . The Brahmal).as who were 
delighted resorted to Ravi Tirtha with a desire for salvation. 
0 king, listen to the auspicious merit of this Tirtha. I am 
afflicted by old age, 0 king, but happy due to the devotion. 
I am stationed within two Krosas ( 1 Krosa = 3 Kms. ) . Hence 
I shall describe in a general way Ravitirthi that is as auspicious 
as Kuruk!jetra. It is what was recounted by Isvara formerly to 
ᤅal).mukha and heard by me. It was heard by them all from 
Rudra and I was present nearby. 
lsvara said: 
When a solar eclipse takes place, 0 ᤅa<;lanana, the (meritorious) 
benefit in Kuruk!jetra and Ravitirtha is on a par with each 
other. In regard to the holy bath, Dana, Japya and Homa in 
particular the benefit in Kuruk!jetra is the same (as here at 
Ravi Tirtha) . No doubt should be entertained in this connection. 
71-78. 
Whether it is a village or a forest, Narmada is aus­
picious and meritorious everywhere. Especially at Ravi Tirtha 
Reva is the bestower of meritorious benefits. 
Persons with the sense-organs under control should visit the 
Tirtha on a sixth lunar day, Sunday, Vyatipata, Vaidhrti, Sari.kranti, 
eclipse day and new-moon day. They should be free from lust 
and anger as well as Raga (attachment) and Dve6a (hated) . 
They should observe fast before the deity with great devotion . 
They should keep awake at night and offer light unto the 
deity. They must listen to the story of Vi!jl).U or, 0 son of Kunti, 
they should repeat Vedic Mantras, whether they be from ᤥgVeda, 
Yajurveda, Samaveda or Atharveda. One who recites even one 
ᤒk shall obtain the benefit of (the recitation of) the whole 
Veda and by the reciiation of the Gayatri the benefit of the 
recitation of all the four Vedas is obtained. 


226 
Skanda Purii:T}-a 
At dawn the persons should adore BrahmaQ.as with the gifts 
of cooked food and gold, or by giving plots of land, garments 
and cooked food in accordance with their capacity. 
0 son of PaQ.<;lu, they may make gifts of umbrella, shoes, 
beds and houses. There shall be freedom from fear through 
the gifts of an elephant, a virgin, a horse, learning, a bull 
capable of bearing a yoke, vehicle etc. 
79-86. 
Enemy becomes friend; poison becomes Amrta. The 
Planets become highly pleased and the Sun becomes pleased. 
Thus the entire merit-giving benefit of Ravitirtha has been 
recounted to you, 0 king. Men who devoutly hear the auspi­
cious benefit of Ravitirtha shall be rid of sins. They reside in 
the world of Ravi. He who gifts a pot of gingelly seeds gets the 
benefit that accrues from the gift of a cow, by viewing Bhrgu, 
by drinking the water in Kedara and also the worship of an 
Asvattha tree for a year. By glorifying Adityesvara one gets all 
these (above-mentioned) benefits. On listening to the efficacy, 
0 prince, one ceases to be born again i.e. gets liberated. I shall 
mention all these to you, 0 king, out of devotion. All sins 
disappear like water when the pot (containing it) is broken. 
One should undoubtedly be face to face with the Tirtha. There 
is no doubt about it. The greatest secret of the Tirtha has been 
mentioned to you, 0 son of PaQ.QU. 
The auspicious narration of the Tirtha should be kept con­
cealed from all sinners, persons who kill masters, friends etc. 
This should be guarded always by sensible persons. 
CHAPTER SIXTYONE 
The Greatness of Sakreivara Tirtha 
Sri Miirkar.uf.eya said: 
1-1 0. Thereafter one should go to the well-known merito­
rious Sakratirtha on the southern bank of Narmada. It is destructive 
of all sins. 
Formerly a very severe penance was started by Sakra at that 
Tirtha itself. With great devotion he performed penance ᤗith 
Lord Mahe5vara in view. 


V.iii.62.1-7 
227 
Propitiated thereby, 0 king, the Lord, the Consort of Uma, 
granted him the over-lordship of Devas, the excellent kingdom 
and the destruction of Danavas. 
It (the boon) was acquired by Sakra, 0 king, by the power 
of Narmada Tirtha. Thereafter the Tirtha became the most 
meritorious one on the earth. 
By observing fast on the thirteenth lunar day in the dark 
half of the month of Karttika with devotion, one is rid of all 
sins. 
0 dear son of Pat:«;lu, the devotee is released from the sins 
(evil effects) caused by inauspicious dreams, ill omens, malefic 
Planets and Sakini (a kind of evil spirit) . 
0 great king, there is no doubt that congenital sins of those 
who devoutly visit Sakre5vara, perish. Undoubtedly sins accrued 
due to a sexual approach to a woman wno should not be so 
approached, marrying one who should not· be married and 
killing one 's master or a friend, perish. The auspicious gift of 
a cow should be made to a leading Brahmat:a. Or a yokable 
bullock beautiful in every limb should be given, 0 king. This 
should be given with great devotion by one who desires resi­
dence in heaven. Thus the entire benefit of Sakre5vara has 
been recounted to you, 0 king. 
CHAPTER SIXTYfWO 
The Greatness of Karor#svara 1irtha 
Sri Markar:t4eya said: 
1-7. 
Then, one should go to the excellent Tirtha named 
Karo«;li:Svara, 0 great king. 0 dear one, it was there that Danavas 
along with their followers were killed by the delighted Devas 
led by lndra who always thought of victory. The Danavas were 
killed in battle by the infuriated groups of Devas. Remember­
ing again and again the previous enmity, sons and grandsons 
(of Danavas) too were killed. 
Remembering the kinship (with them) all the Devas includ­
ing lndra gathered together their heads and cast them into the 
waters of Narmada. All the Suras took their holy bath there 


228 
Skanda Purii:rJ,a 
and installed Umapati (Siva) . All the Suras delighted in their 
minds went to their region in the firmament. 
0 blessed one, an excellent crore of the Danavas was slain. 
Ever since then that Tirtha is well known over the earth as 
Karo<;fi. 0 son of PaiJQU, it is destructive of sins. 
A devotee should observe fast devoutly on the eighth and 
fourteenth days of either half of a month and keep awake 
before the Trident-bearing Lord at night, engaged in reading 
(listening to) the stories of the good (meritorious stories) and 
in reciting and studying the Vedas. 
8-1 6. In the morning he should then worship Tridasesvara. 
The idol (Liilga) should be bathed in Paiicamrta and smeared 
with sandalpaste. He should with concentration offer worship 
with excellen t sprouts (of Bilva tree) and flowers. 
Facing the southern direction, he should recite the Mantras 
of various types. In accordance with the injunctions a handful 
of gingelly seeds should be offered by way of libation to the 
dead in the water coming upto the navel. Turning towards the 
southern direction, he should control his sense-organs and 
offer Sraddha to the (departed) BrahmaiJa. Sraddha should be 
performed through Brahmal)as of uneven number eagerly en­
gaged in the study and recitation of the Vedas. The Brahmal)as 
should be propitiated with gold, cows, foodstuffs, betel leaves, 
ornaments and a pair of sandals, 0 son of PaiJ<;iu. His rite shall 
be effective a crore-fold more. No doubt need be entertained. 
0 king, listen to the merit that accrues to one who duly casts 
off his body in the Tirtha. 
That man of righteous soul resides in the rarely accessible 
Sivaloka as long as the bones remain in the waters of Narmada. 
After a long time, he may fall down therefrom and be born 
as a human being here. He shall then be glorious and owner 
of a lot of wealth. He shall be honoured by kings. 
1 7-23. 
He shall be endowed with all piety. He shall be 
intelligent and have sons to perpetuate his line. The man shall 
be well-known all over the earth and long-lived. He will re­
member the Tirtha once again, 0 excellent king, will go to 
that Tirtha, worship Karo<;le5vara and attain the greatest goal. 
Tridasesvara was installed by Indra, Candra, Yama, Rudra, 
Adityas, Vasus and Visvedevas on the northern bank of Reva 
with a desire for the welfare of all the worlds. 


V.iii.63.1-9 
229 
If a man endowed with devotion erects a palace (shrine) in 
that Tlrtha, 0 excellent one among men, he shall attain the 
goal of the good. 
He should erect the same by means of timber, stone and 
bricks, all with wealth legitimately acquired. 
Whether he be a BrahmaQa, a ᤏatriya or a Vaisya or a 
Siidra or even a woman, he should do everything within his 
capacity. When Sail.kara is duly worshipped all those men too 
go to their respective goals. 
If a person always listens to the greatness of the Tlrtha with 
devotion , his sins perish within six months. 
CHAPTER SIXTYTHREE 
The Greatness of Kumiiresvara Tirtha 
Sri Miirkar:uf,eya said: 
1-9. 
Then, 0 great king, one should go to the excellent 
Kumaresvara. It is the most famous of all the Tlrthas. It is in 
the vicinity of Agastyesvara. 
Formerly, 0 king, spiritual power was achieved by ᤅar:tmukha 
after propitiating the destroyer of all sins, with great devotion. 
By resorting to the Tlrtha, he became the commander-in­
chief of the army of Devas. He destroyed all the enemies. That 
noble-souled one became endowed with fiery brilliance by resorting 
to the Tirtha. Ever since then, that spot on the banks of Narmada 
became a Tlrtha. 
A person should go to that Tlrtha with concentration of the 
mind and control over the sense-organs. Especially on the four­
teenth day of Karttika and also on the eighth day, one should 
bath the Lord of the Daughter of the Mountain, with curds, 
milk and ghee. 
There should be performance of music and the due offering 
of balls of rice. 
Whatever is given by Brahmar:tas who have mastered the 
Vedas and are duly engaged in the six holy rites, becomes 
everlasting, 0 son of PaQQU. 


230 
Skanda PuraTJ,a 
This Tlrtha consisting of all other Tlrthas was created by 
Sikhivahana (Skanda) , 0 king. 
Thus the entire benefit of (a visit to) Kumaresvara has been 
narrated to you. 
By visiting Kumaresvara merit is obtained, 0 son of Par:t<;lu. 
On death, he attains heaven . What has been spoken by Isvara 
is the truth. 
CHAPTER SIXTYFOUR 
The Greatness of Agastydvara Tirtha 
Sri MarkaTJ-4eya said: 
1-4. 
Then, 0 great king, one should go to the highly splendid 
Tlrtha, the excellent Agastyesvara (created) for the sake of the 
destruction of the sins of men. 
By taking the holy ablution there, 0 king, one is rid of the 
sin of Brahmar:ta-slaughter. 
On the fourteenth day in the dark half of the month of 
Karttika the devotee should control his sense-organs and be 
engaged in meditation. He should bathe the Lord with ghee. 
Accompanied by twenty-one generations of his family he shall 
(not1 ) slip down (?) from the region of Isvara. 
He shall then make gifts of wealth, shoes, umbrella, ghee, 
blanket and food to all. All (the gifts) shall have crore-times 
more benefit. 
1 . 
'na' (not) is not printed i n the text due to oversight. 


V.iii.65.1-l l 
231 
CHAPTER SIXTYFIVE 
The Greatness of Anandesvara Tirtha 
Sri Miirka7J-4eya said: 
1-1 1 . 0 great king Yudhiᤄᤃhira, then one should go to the 
excellent Anandesvara where Rudra had the greatest delight. 
I shall describe that Tirtha which destroys all sins. 
Yudhi6!hira said: 
0 excellent BrahmaJ.la, Rudra had the greatest delight? May 
the entire episode be recounted to me succinctly even as I am 
accompanied by my kinsmen. 
Sri Miirka7J-4eya said: 
I shall describe the excellent Ananddvara, 0 great king. 
After slaying the Danavas, Mahdvara, the Lord of Devas, was 
adored by all the Devas, Kinnaras, Yakᤄas and Pannagas. The 
highly delighted Bull-vehicled Lord danced. 
He had assumed the Bhairava (terrible) form with Gaur! 
stationed in half of his body. This Bhairava was surrounded by 
terrible Bhiitas (goblins) , Vetalas (vampires) and Kari.kalas (skel­
etons) . 0 son of PaJ.lQU, he danced on the southern bank of 
Narmada. The Lotus-seated One was installed by all the de­
lighted groups of Maruts. Ever since then that Tirtha is men­
tioned as Anandesvara. One should duly adore the Lord on 
the eighth, fourteenth and fifteenth (i.e. full-moon) lunar days, 
0 king. He should smear him with sweet scents. 0 Yudhiᤄᤃhira, 
according to one's capacity he should adore BrahmaJ.las. A gift 
of cows should be made. A gift of garments causes prosperity 
and happiness. On the thirteenth day in Vasanta, he should 
perform Sraddha too by means of Iri.gudas, Badaras, Bilvas, raw 
rice-grains or water. At the excellent Ananddvara Tirtha the 
devotees should perform the Sraddha unto the departed ones. 
They shall be delighted until the destruction of all living 
beings. There shall be no snapping of the family-line in the 
course of seven births. 0 descendant of Bharata, bliss shall 
certainly come to them in every birth. 


232 
Skanda Purii:TJ.a 
CHAPTER SIXTYSIX 
The Greatness of Matrt'irtha 
Sri Markarpjeya said: 
1-9. 
Then, 0 great king, a person should go to the excel­
lent Matrtlrtha. It is situated on the southern bank of Narmada 
very near the confluence. 
The Mothers gathered together on the bank of Narmada, 
0 great king. The Lord of Devas, wearing a Vyala (python) as 
his Yajfiopavlta and with Uma as half of his body, was present 
there. The group of Yoginls said: "0 Hara, it is a pity indeed, 
0 Mahe!ivara. That we are invincible to all Devas is due to your 
grace, 0 Mahe!ivara. (But now) may this Tlrtha be well-known 
by this procedure all over the earth." Siva said: "0 Yoginls, let 
it be so. " Mter saying this, he vanished. 
Sri Markarpjeya said: 
The devotee should be invariably pure and observe fast at 
that Tlrtha with great devotion on the ninth lunar day. He 
should adore Matrgocara (Lord Siva) . The Mothers will be 
pleased with him. The Bull-vehicled Lord too will be delighted. 
An excellent scholar well-versed in the Mantrasastra should 
preside over the ritualistic holy ablution of a barren woman 
and of a woman whose dear child is dead or one who has no 
son, 0 YudhiHhira. 
They should offer a water-pot with gold and five kinds of 
jewels therein. 
The preceptor should bathe the woman desirous of a son 
with a brass-pot. That woman shall bear a vigorous son en­
dowed with good qualities. 
Whatever one desires shall be achieved by him, 0 king. 
There has never been a Tirtha greater than Matrtlrtha and 
never shall be. 


V.iii.67.1-14 
233 
CHAPTER SIXTYSEVEN 
The Greatness of Lunkesvara Tirtha 
Sri Mii.rkarpf,eya said: 
1-8. 
The Tirtha well-known as Lurikdvara is situated in 
the middle of water beyond (the previous Tirtha) . It is bowed 
to by Suras and Asuras. 
This Tirtha is highly meritorious and renowned as very 
miraculous all over the earth, 0 descendant of Bharata. Listen 
to the origin and greatness of this Tirtha. 
Formerly there was a demon of great power, who was arro­
gant due to (his) great strength. He was well-known as Kalaprᤁtha. 
He was a grandson of Brahma. 
• 
He resorted to the bank of Ganga and performed a very 
severe penance. Remaining in topsy-turvy position he began to 
imbibe smoke day and night. The Lord happened to stand 
nearby in the company of Uma. On seeing him engaged in 
fierce penance, Parvati said: "See, see, 0 Mahadeva, there is 
a man imbibing smoke. Be pleased. (Make him happy. ) 0 
Lord, grant him a boon quickly. " 
lsvara said: 
The words spoken by you do not appeal to me. One's own 
affair should always be thought of. One should disregard other 
people's affairs. He who follows the whims and pleasures of 
fools, women, children and enemies invariably falls into a terrible 
distress. This is the truth that has been uttered. 
The Devi said: 
9-1 4. It is stated in scriptures that when a husband requested 
(for something) by the wife speaks of various causes (pleads 
excuses) that woman becomes humiliated. "If you do not honour 
me (my request) , I shall commit suicide. " 
Thus urged by Parvati, the Lord went towards the Danava. 
lsvara said: 
Why do you imbibe smoke? Why do you perform these 


234 
Skanda Pura:IJa 
austerities? What is your sorrow? What is your distress? Tell me 
the desired object. You still seem to be only a youth about 
twenty years old. Hence tell me the great cause or purpose of 
this penance. 
The Diinava said: 
May unflinching devotion to you and steadfastness towards 
you be granted to me. Another period of one thousand years 
has gone unobstructed, 0 Lord. 0 Lord, already two thousand 
days have· been completed by me doing this penance. 
lsvara said: 
1 5-23. 
Do request for whatever has been desired by you, 
0 devotee of good Vratas. I am pleased with you. 
On hearing the words of the Lord, the Danava thought, 
' Shall I request for heaven? Or shall I request for the entire 
earth?' Thus he thought on being afflicted by the arrows of 
Kama. 
The Diinava said:1 
If you are pleased with me, 0 Lord, you will kindly grant 
me this boon, 0 Lord. I am not pleased with wars since I have 
no strength. 0 Lord, if I touch anyone on the head, whether 
he be a Deva, Danava or Gandharva, let him be reduced to ash 
instantly. 
lsvara said: 
Whatever has been thought of by you shall be fruitful. Get 
up. Go quickly to your abode, 0 Danava. 
The Diinava said: 
0 Lord of the chiefs of Devas, be pleased to stay so that I 
shall test your boon by placing my hand on your head. I can 
have the satisfaction and conviction. 
1 . 
This story seems to be a special contribution of Reva KhaJ:u;la. As PE 1 27A 
notes, it is not traced in any other Pural).a. 


V.iii.67.24-36 
235 
Thereupon Mahesvara began to worry. 'Neither Skanda nor 
Hari nor Brahma can be competent to deal with this situation 
now. ' After coming to know that the calamity had overtaken 
him, the Lord requested his bull, "Now, fight with this sinful 
one. " 
The Daitya extended his hand and was about to touch the 
Lord's head. By that time he was lashed with his tail by the bull 
and so he fell down distressed. 
24-36. 
Accompanied by Uma, the Lord went in the. south­
ern direction. Extremely frightened, he turned his neck fre­
quently to look back ( to see how far he followed) . When the 
Lord vanished from the scene, the Daitya fought with the bull. 
Both of them were very powerful, the most excellent ones 
among the mighty. They fought each other for three Ghatikas, 
striking each other with thunderbolt-like tiits and the Daitya 
could not get the chance to touch the head of the bull with 
the hands. 
Striking him with a lash of his tail, the bull came away. The 
Daitya too got up and closely followed the bull. 
With the speed of wind, he came to the place where Lord 
Mahesvara was present. On seeing the Danava coming, the bull 
spoke these words: 
"0 Lord, be pleased to ride on my back and go ahead quickly." 
Accordingly the Lord got on to his back along with Uma and 
sped ahead. 
Then the Lord reached heaven and entered the palace of 
Sakra; but the Danava in his arrogance due to his might did 
not leave off the pursuit of the Lord. 
Leaving the world of lndra, he went to Brahma's world. 
Wherever the Lord went in fright along with the heaven-dwellᤘ 
ers, he saw the Danava following closely his back. 
Mter wandering in all the worlds the Lord was overwhelmed. 
with surprise. There was no place where he could rest even for 
a moment. 
On coming to know of a fierce fight between the Lord and 
the Danava, sage Narada became highly delighted in his soul. 
He began to dance saying, "I am blessed today. My birth and 
my life has been excellently lived. " On seeing the great quarrel 
his satisfaction reached the maximum. Leaving them aside the 
Brahmal).a Narada came to the place where Mahesvara, the 
Lord, was present. 


236 
Skanda Pura:IJ-a 
On seeing the Bn'ihmat:ta the Lord adored him and spoke 
thus: 
37-44. 
"0 Narada, 0 most excellent one among sages, do 
you know where Kesava is? Go there and inform Kesava about 
this. " 
Niirada said: 
The Lord of Devas certainly dispels the disaster of Devas, 
Danavas and Siddhas, Gandharvas, Uragas (Serpents) and Raᤦasas. 
The impossible should not be uttered, not even mentally thought 
of, 0 Lord; I am not aware of such calamity in your case. 
lsvara said: 
0 Narada, do go quickly to the place where Lord janardana 
is present. Everything done by the Danava has been already 
known to you. This Danava cannot be slain by groups of Maruts 
even assisted by Indra. 0 great sage, go and intimate (this) to 
Lord Kdava. 
Niirada said: 
0 Lord, I am not going now. Kdava is in sound sleep in the 
Ocean of Milk. For urging him, behest has to be given by you 
to these-mother, sister or daughter. One should not wake up 
a sleeping king, master or preceptor. 
lsvara said: 
If a great fire catches the house and wise men do not wake 
up the people there, they will perish. 
Niirada said: 
45-52. 
Hurry up, Mahadeva; my good Lord, save yourself. 
No doubt, I shall go to the place where Lord Janardana is 
present. 
Thereupon the extremely terrible Nandin and Mahakala took 
up weapons in their hands brawny like pillars and struck the 
Danava with weapons like Mudgara etc. 


V.iii.67.53-60 
237 
All the three had huge bodies measuring seven palm trees 
in height. While .they were fighting one another there was no 
question of subduing or resting at all. 
Thereafter the Brahmat:ta went towards Kesava who was asleep 
in the Ocean of Milk. He saw him lying on the couch of the 
serpent Seᤁa. The pair of his feet were held by Lakᤁmi and 
kept on her thigh. Kesava was devoutly sung about by the 
Apsaras. 
Mter bowing down devoutly (Narada said:) "Today my birth 
has become fruitful. My life has become excellent one. 0 Lakᤁmi, 
do wake up the Lord of Devas unhesitatingly. " 
On hearing the words of Narada Lakᤁmi pressed the big toe 
of the Lord and said, "Narada is at the threshold. Do wake up, 
0 Slayer of Madhu. " 
On seeing Narada the Lord was highiy pleased and said, 
"Welcome, 0 excellent one among sages. The night has well­
dawned today. " 
Niirada said: 
53-60. 
0 Lord, this morning is fruitful unto me, thanks 
to thy vision. The Devas have ceased to be in good condition 
and safe. Get up and proceed to them. 
Sri Vi,St'U said: 
It behoves you to recount the cause of the disaster to Brahma, 
Indra, Rudra and the others, groups of Maruts. 
Narada said: 
A great and severe penance was performed by a Danava. A 
boon was granted by Rudra enabling (him) to reduce to ash 
(by the touch of his hand any one) as desired by him mentally. 
On the strength of the boon so granted, he attempts to kill 
the Lord. On coming to know such an attempt, the Lord has 
been brought here along with the Devas. 
On hearing the words of Narada, Hari went along with the 
sage and saw Isana going to the northern direction. 
On seeing the Lord (Hari) Rudra embraced him again and 
again. Madhusildana also bowed to the Lord (Rudra) . 


238 
Skanda Purii7J-a 
V(51J-U said: 
0 Lord Mahesvara, may the cause of fear be mentioned. I 
shall send the Devas, Danavas and Yakᤄas to the abode of Yama. 
There is profuse perspiration on your forehead, 0 Mahdvara, 
undoubtedly breaking through the head, the limbs and the 
sense-organs (which are tired) . 
lsvara said: 
61-69. 
Fools have no happiness. Patients have no happi­
ness. One who is not free has no happiness. Particularly a hen­
pecked husband (dependent on another i.e. wife) has no happiness. 
0 ViᤄQU, urged by a woman a boon has been granted to the 
Danava by me: "If you place your hand on anyone's head he 
will be reduced to a heap of ashes. " Told thus by me he has 
become invincible and immortal, 0 Kesava. The sinner wishes 
to kill me. Have you any means of remedy? 
Vi,s-7J-u said: 
0 Sailkara, I shall find out some means of killing the Danava. 
May you and all the Devas go and stay on the banks of Reva. 
You must not delay. 0 Lord, hurry up. 
A Tirtha like that cannot be seen in the mortal world, a 
Tirtha where there is Ganga, the great river Reva and Praci 
Sarasvati tlowing to the south. 
If holy ablution is taken there and Dana is performed de­
voutly, the sin committed in the course of seven births perishes 
undoubtedly. This Tirtha is highly meritorious and destructive 
of all sins. 0 Lord of Devas, do go to the Luilkesa Tirtha there 
along with the Devas. 
At the instance of ViᤄQU he (Siva) entered the excellent 
Hrada (whirlpool) . 
70-78. 
He diverted himself very much along with the groups 
of Maruts. Thereafter Lord (KrᤄQa) employed his Maya _in various 
ways. He created the month of Vasanta beautified with splen­
did gardens and forests abounding in the following trees: Asoka, 
Bakula, splendid Brahmavrkᤄa (i.e. Palasa) , Srivrkᤄa, Kapittha, 
Siriᤄa, Rajacampaka, Sriphala, Tala, Kadamba, Udumbara, A.Svattha 


V.iii.67. 79-88 
239 
and various other trees. They had profuse collection of flowers 
of sweet scent with humming bees hovering round. 
In the centre thereof there was a great splendid Nyagrodha 
tree. Many birds perched thereon. It was reverberated with the 
cooing of cuckoos. KpᤄQ.a instantly assumed the form of a girl 
of such physical charm as there was no other girl on a par with 
her (in beauty) in the three worlds consisting of mobile and 
immobile beings. A group of seven girls also (was created) . 
They were very beautiful with splendid eyes. All of them had 
divine forms embellished with divine ornaments. They were 
desirous of a man. 
A swing was tied to bamboos and decorated with beautiful 
garlands of pearls_, jewels, rubies and splendid lapis lazuli. Those 
great girls sat on it and began to sing sweetly. 
79-88. 
A cool breeze blew gently over the splendid forest. 
Sweet fragrance was wafted by wind and it tickled the sense of 
smell of the Danava. 
He was very much astonished by the sweet scent of flowers. 
He thought, ' Smelling it, I feel that such a (fragrant) flower1 
has been never seen or heard by me. ' 
Even as h e was reflecting thus, a splendid sound of music 
(was heard by him) . On hearing the sound of music he became 
deluded by the Maya of Hari. 
Just as a deer falls into the great snare of a hunter, so also 
the KalasprHa (one who is touched by Kala) Daitya fell into 
the trap of KrᤄQ.a. 
On seeing the girl the Daitya swooned and fell on the ground. 
Even as he fell down he saw a girl standing at the foot of a 
banyan tree. 
Seeing the faces of the girls, he was again afflicted by the 
god of Love. He lifted up a golden staff and wished to topple 
her down. 
The girl said: 
No. No. Do not touch me. I am a virgin of an excellent 
family. Oh, leave me off so that I can go home quickly! 
I. 
pu$pam is probably the original reading and not puJJ.yam. 


240 
Skanda Purii.7J.ll 
The Danava said: 
0 splendid girl, I wish to marry you. Thus, undoubtedly you 
shall become the queen of the entire earth. 
The girl said: 
In childhood father protects her (a woman) . In youth husband 
protects her. In old age son protects her. Hence a woman does 
not deserve being independent. I am not free. I am born of 
a noble family. Either my father, brother or mother should be 
approached with the request. 
The Danava said: 
89-96. 
0 lady of splendid eyes, if you are not going to act 
independently, if you do not wish me (to be your husband) , 
it will end in my death today. It is true. 
The girl said: 
Trust cannot be placed (indiscriminately) on every man. 
Men behave with women curiously. They are lascivious and 
infatuated with love. You may very well marry me and enjoy all 
pleasures with me. Later my whole life may be ruined. Neither 
you nor anyone else will be mine. 
Whether one is a BrahmaQ.a girl, a ᤧ
atriya girl, a Vaisya girl 
or a Siidra girl, she cannot have a second husband. She will 
have to remain single throughout her life. 
The Danava said: 
The statement made by you has been kept in mind by me. 
Whatever _you may think of, I shall offer for convincing you. 
The girl said: 
Understand that I am a cowherd lass. I am playing with my 
companions. Only take the solemn oath taken in our family. 
It is not the ordeal known as 'poison' 'Kosa' or 'Tula' (Bal­
ance) . In all cowherd families the hand is placed on the head. 
The hand was then placed on his own head by the Daitya, 


V.iii.67.97-109 
241 
blind with passionate love, 0 great king. Immediately he was 
reduced to ash. He was burnt down like a bundle of hay. 
97-1 09. An auspicious shower of flowers was heaped upon 
Ke5ava by the Devas. Delighted and free from feverish mental 
anguish, all the Devas went to their respective abodes. 
Kesava went to the Ocean of Milk after Kalasprᤄta had been 
struck down. 
He who devoutly listens to the story of the Danava shall 
always be victorious as Sarikara had uttered already. For this 
reason it is well-known as Lirige5vara (Lurikesvara) . (The sin) 
that is lying latent within perishes merely by the holy ablution. 
All the sins pertaining to the skin, bone, blood, flesh, suet, 
nerves, marrow and semen virile perish even if they had been 
perpetrated in the course of a crore birWl.s. 
If a devotee devoutly drinks three cavity-fuls of the water at 
Lurike5vara, 0 great king, all his sins become split into a thousand 
smithereens. Particularly on the eighth and fourteenth days of 
either half of a month a man should observe fast, 0 son of 
.PaQ<;lu, and perform the Sraddha for the Pitrs. All the Pitamahas 
(grandfathers i.e. ancestors) condemned to hell become re-
deemed. 
If a person offers even a KakiQI (worthless small coin) to a 
BrahmaQa who has mastered the Vedas, he attains thereby all 
the benefits of the Dana rites performed in Kurukᤄetra etc. 
It is not otherwise. 0 king, it is Sarikara who says this. 
0 king, this Liriga is Sparsa Liriga (a Liriga to be touched 
in adoration) made by Sarikara himself. Merely by touching it 
men attain residence in Rudra Loka. The same is the case with 
regard to the benefit of Dana etc. performed here., as in the 
case of Kurukᤄetra etc. 
It is for this reason that the Lokapalas (Guardians of the 
Quarters) are made protectors. Durga ·.n an auspicious form 
having four hands is also created fm the sake of protection. 
Dhanada, the chief of the Lokapalas, is the bodyguard of 
Isvara. He always protects through the activities of the Planets. 
Lurikesvara is not left off even today, 0 great king, by the 
Devas who have assumed the forms of sons, brother, or some­
one related to the master. 


242 
Skanda Purii7J-a 
CHAPTER SIXTYEIGHT 
The Greatness of Dhanada 
Sri MiirkaTJ-f!eya said: 
1-1 1 . Then one should go to the Ti:rtha of Dhanada, 0 
Yudhiᤄᤃhira. It is on the southern bank of Narmada and it 
causes the destruction of all sins. There is no doubt about this 
that the benefit of all the Ti:rthas is obtained there. 
A person with the sense-organs under control should ob­
serve fast with great devotion on the thirteenth day in the 
bright half of the month of Caitra and keep awake at night. 
A wise man should bathe Dhanada with Paiicamrta, 0 great 
king. A Dipa (lamp) supplied with ghee should be given. 
Arrangement for vocal and instrumental music should be made. 
Desirous of the welfare of himself, he should adore Brahmar;tas 
in the morning. They should be persons deserving Pratigraha 
(religious gift) and expounders of the principles of various 
lores. They must be persons regularly performing rites en­
joined in Srauta and Smarta Texts. They should be indifferent 
towards the wives of others. They should be adored with gifts 
of cows, gold, garments, shoes, foodstuffs, umbrellas and beds. 
All sins shall thus be destroyed. The sins acquired in the course 
of three births shall be destroyed by the power of Dhanada. 
It is the giver of heavenly pleasures to the arrogant and sal­
vation to the humble. It shall give food to the poor in every 
birth. Destruction of misery and birth in a good family shall 
be had naturally by the man. 
By resorting to the waters of Narmada, there shall be de­
struction of ailments. He who imparts Vidya (learning) at the 
Ti:rtha of Dhanada attains Bhaskara Loka (world of the Sun) 
which is free of all ailments. 
Those who arrange a large procession of idols in accordance 
with their capacity, 0 son of PaQQU, on the southern bank of 
Reva, go to the wᤙrld of Sati.kara bereft of all miseries. 


V.iii.69.1-16 
243 
CHAPTER SIXTYNINE 
The Greatness of Mangalesvara 1irtha 
Sri Miirka1J¢eya said: 
1-8. 
Then one should go to the excellent Mailgaldvara 
installed by the Son of the Earth (i.e. Mars) with a desire for 
the welfare of all people. 
The moon-crested Lord Sailkara was propitiated (by Mailgala) 
with great devotion. On the fourteenth day, the Lord and 
preceptor, Mailgaldvara, manifested himself (and said) : "Tell 
me, dear son, the splendid boon (you wish to have ) . I shall 
grant it to you, 0 Maiigala. " 
Mangala said: 
0 Saiikara, 0 Sambhu, do me this favour: May I be born of 
the sweat of your limbs and stay in every birth in the middle 
of the Planets. 
0 Isana, with your favour I am worthy of being worshipped 
by all the Devas. Today I have become blessed due to your 
appearance before and conversation with me. Stay at this holy 
spo t, 0 Lord of the chiefs of Devas , afte r my name 
(Maiigalamahesvara) . 
The Lord said, "Let it be so, dear son " and vanished. 
Maiigala, the noble soul, installed Mahesvara by means of 
his own Yogic power and worshipped the Trident-bearing Lord. 
The Liiiga named Mailgalesvara is the destroyer of all mis­
eries. A wise devotee should propitiate Brahmat:tas at that Tirtha. 
He shall propitiate the Brahmat:tas along with their wives. 
9-1 6. 0 excellent king, (he should observe) the Caturthi:­
ailgaraka-vrata, at the conclusion of which a cow along with 
bulls capable to carry the yoke is given to a Brahmat:ta couple 
(man and wife) . The Brahmat:ta should be learned and a master 
of the Veda. The gift should be given with God Siva in view 
saying, "May Mahadeva, the bull-emblemed Lord, accompa­
nied by his wife be pleased. " 0 son of Pat:t<;lu, gift of a pair of 
red clothes should be made. The bearers of yoke (bulls) may 
be red in colour, or white or black. An umbrella, auspicious 
bed, red garlands and unguents should be given with a pure 
heart, 0 excellent son of Pat:t<;lu. 


244 
Skanda Puriir;ta 
Sraddha too should be performed on the fourth and eighth 
days of both the fortnights, the dark and the bright. There 
should not be any hesitation in spending money. Thereby the 
departed souls become well-pleased, 0 king, for a period of 
one Yuga. In every birth the man becomes blessed with sons, 
0 excellent king. 
By the power of the Tirtha, the devotee shal·l be handsome 
in every limb, 0 king. There shall be well-being in the family. 
There can never be any evil thing anywhere. The sin of the 
devotee who glorifies the Lord everyday is destroyed. 
CHAPTER SEVENTY 
The Greatness of Ravi Tirtha 
Sri Miirkar_uf,eya said: 
1-4. 
There is a highly splendid Tirtha on the northern 
bank of Reva. It was inaugurated by Ravi. 0 son of Kunti, it 
causes the destruction of all sins. 
There, on the northern bank, Bhaskara (the Sun-god) stays 
with his sixteenth part. He is installed on Narmada as an eradi­
cator of all the ailments of men. 
0 excellent king, on every sixth, eighth and fourteenth lunar 
day, if a man bathes (the deity) and devoutly offers Sraddha 
unto the departed, 0 son of Kunti, his sins will be destroyed. 
He is honoured in the world of the Sun. 
Falling down from heaven (later) he will be born in a family 
free from impurities. In every birth he shall live free of all 
ailments and will be wealthy. 


V.iii. 71 .1-V.iii. 72.5 
245 
CHAPTER SEVENTYONE 
The Greatness of Kame5vara Tirtha 
Sri Markatt4eya said: 
1-4. 
Thereafter, 0 excellent one among the sons of PaQᤚu, 
listen to another Tirtha named Kamdvara. It was here that 
Gar:tadhyakᤄa (Gar:tesa) , the highly powerful son of Gauri, became 
a Siddha (i.e. one who had achieved spiritual perfection) . 
In that Tirtha, a devotee should control his sense-organs, 
bathe the idol with Pafi.camrta with great devotion and offer 
incense, Naivedya and other articles of adoration. By propiti­
ating the Lord of the worlds thereby, he will be rid of 1all sins. 
0 YudhiHhira, a devotee should take his holy bath there on 
the eighth day in the month of Margasirᤄa. Whatever be his 
desire in performing the adoration, he shall certainly attain it. 
CHAPTER SEVENTYfWO 
The Greatness of Mattinagesvara Tirtha1 
Sri Miirkatt4eya said: 
1-5. 
Thereafter, 0 great king, one should go to the aus­
picious Mar:tinagesvara on the northern bank of Narmada. It 
causes the destruction of all sins. It has been installed by Mar:tinaga 
with a desire for the welfare of all the worlds. 
Yudhi6lhira said: 
How was Isvara propitiated by a serpent with venom in the 
fangs? Even though they may be very small, venomous reptiles 
strike terror unto the world. 
May everything conducive to the destruction of all sins be 
recounted to me. My misery due to the distress caused by 
1 . 
Herein the legend of Vinata's enslavement and release {from Mbh, Adi 
chs 19-20) is adapted for the glorification of this Tirtha. 


246 
Skanda Purii:r.ta 
Duryodhana, that originating from Karra and Bhi!!ma and the 
terrible distress caused to Paficali is washed away by the cur­
ren t (of sane advice) from your lotus-like mouth and (thus) 
I have attained great peace (of mind) . We have heard the sin­
destroying story that issued forth from your mouth, 0 Brahmal)a. 
Still, it is unreasonable that our pain has not subsided. 
6. 
Or, 0 dear one, the benefit (fruit) that is derived from 
Vidyadana (imparting learning) is obtained by always listening 
to the stories or episodes concerning Hari. 
Sri Miirka'T}.f/,eya said: 
7-1 5. As and when you go on speaking (by way of request) , 
0 king, fluency of speech comes to ine naturally. Neither the 
laxity of limbs due to my old age nor your friendship becomes 
diminished, 0 dear one. Hence in the company of your kins­
men listen to this praiseworthy story that destroys sins. 
I shall narrate to you the old legend in the manner it happened. 
It has been traditionally handed down by the ancestors, 0 
descendant of Bharata. 
Kasyapa had two wives, the most excellent ones in all the 
worlds. Vinata gave birth to Garu<;la and Kadru to serpen ts. 
0 dear one, they stayed on contentedly in the abode of 
Kasyapa. Both the ladies Kadru and Vinata were always de­
lighted. Kasyapa, the patriarch, sported .along with them. 
One day, the slender-limbed wife of Kasyapa, who was stay­
ing in the hermitage and whose countenance was splendid, saw 
the horse UccaiQ.sravas that had the speed of mind and was 
white all over. He was running non-stop with his speed com­
parable to that of mind. On seeing the horse she (Kadru) 
jealously spoke these words: 
Kadril said: 
Tell me, fair lady, of what colour is the horse of Sahasrarilsu 
(the Sun) . (This is evidently a mistake, as the horse belonged 
to Indra?) I say it is black. What do you say? Tell me. 
Vinatii said: 
1 6-25. 
Is it not that you see only black (things) with your 
eyes and not white one.s? 0 fair lady, by speaking the untruth 


V.iii. 72.26-34 
247 
you will go to the world of Varna. With regard to the truth or 
otherwise of (our) statement it is a wager between you and me. 
(If my statement turns out to be untrue) I shall be a slave in 
your palace for a thousand years. If my words prove to be 
untrue and Uccaissravas turns out to be black, then I shall be 
a slave in your palace. 0 mother of serpents. 
Kadru then said: "If Uccaissravas is white, I shall be your 
slave. " Thus the dispute between the two increased. 
The young lady in the hermitage was worried throughout 
the night. All her activities were reported to the kinsmen . She 
spoke to her sons, 0 son of Kuntl, "I have made a bet. " 
On hearing that a bet was made by their mother the Ser­
pents shouted loudly: "There is no doubt' that you have be­
come a slave. The vehicle of Bhaskara (? of Indra) is white. 
The horse Uccaissravas is white, it is not black at all. " 
Kadrft said: 
Now think of a means to prevent my becoming a slave. Do 
enter the hair-pores of the horse Uccaissravas, only for a short 
while, till he appears black. Within a moment she can be made 
my slave. After making the lady Vinata who is proud of being 
true, my slave, you all will be back at your own places happily. 
The serpents said: 
26-34. 
0 mother, you are our mother and hence worthy 
of being worshipped by us. In the same manner she is worthy 
of being worshipped (by her sons) . Hence one should be particular 
in not deceiving mothers. Verbally, mentally and physically 
one should do whatever is conducive to the benefit of the 
mother, father's wife (step-mother) , maternal and paternal grand­
mothers. 
Kadrii became furious at their words. She blazed like the 
fire of death. "If there are serpents on the earth not willing 
to carry out my behest, all of them will unexpectedly get into 
the mouth of fire. " 
All the serpents heard those words of their mother. Some 
of them penetrated the pores of the hairs of the horse Uccaissravas. 


248 
Skanda Purii:IJa 
Some vanished in the ten different quarters because they were 
afraid of the curse of Kadrii. Some of them disappeared under 
the waters of Ganga; some in those of Sarasvatl. Some of them 
hid themselves in the great ocean. Some entered the caves of 
Vindhya. The excellent serpent Mal).inaga resorted to the waters 
of Narmada and performed extensive penance on the north­
ern bank of Narmada. 
0 son of Kunti, to save himself from the fear of the curse 
of his mother, he meditated upon the destroyer of Kama. He 
meditated on the Lord who is indivisible (impossible to be 
divided) , incomprehensible and devoid of birth and death. For 
more than a hundred years he subsisted himself on air; for half 
of that period he fixed his eyes on the Sun. While he was thus 
engrossed in meditation, the Lord, the destroyer of Tripuras, 
appeared before him. 
35-43. 
"Excellent! Excellent! 0 highly esteemed one. 0 
serpent, you have intrinsic strength. I have been resorted to 
by you with devotion. I am pleased with you, 0 Lord of serpents. 
Request for any boon from me whatever may be in your mind. " 
Ma7Jinaga said: 
0 Lord, it is out of fear from the curse of my mother that 
I subjected myself to austerities on the banks of Narmada. May 
my mother's curse be ineffective in regard to me, with your 
favour, 0 my Lord. 
lsvara said: 
0 dear one, at my behest you will never get into the jaws 
of fire. 0 son, you will also reside in my world. 
Ma7Jinaga· said: 
0 Mahadeva, may you be pleased to stay by a part of yours 
in this spot. May you be pleased to stay in the waters of Narmada 
by a thousandth fraction of yours for the sake of obliging the 
worlds. 0 Sankara, stay here after my name. 
lsvara said: 
0 serpent, install my great Linga here at my behest. 
After saying this, the Lord vanished and went away with 
Uma. 


V.iii. 72.44-53a 
249 
Miirkarpf,eya said: 
Those who go to that Tirtha with pure and clean minds on 
the fifth, eighth or fourteenth day, whether it be bright half 
or dark half of the month, and always adore the Lord, do not 
go to Yama, 0 son of Kuntl. 
They must bathe with curds, honey, ghee or milk, Lord 
Virupakᤄa. half of whose body is that of Uma, the Lord who 
burned down the body of Kama and who slew the demon Agha; 
ot they rnust witness the great Lord being bathed with great 
devotion. They will therefore go to the great world devoid of 
all sins. 
44-5 1 . 
Sraddha for the departed should be performed, 0 
son of Kunti, on the fifth and eighth lunar days through well­
qualified Brahmar:tas-those who study and" ponder over Vedic 
passages, who are devoted to their own wives with scrupulous 
avoidance of other men's wives, who are gentle and polished, 
who invariably perform the six enjoined rites and who avoid 
sending Sudras on errands (of spiritual nature) . 
Dear son, the following persons should never be employed 
in Sraddha: lame ones, lepers, impotent ones, those who live 
on usury, husbandmen and those of an avocation different 
from the decent rites. 
0 king, in Vratas and Sraddhas, that Brahmar:ta should be 
avoided from afar, a Brahmar:ta who keeps a Siidra wo"llan in 
his abode or who keeps buffaloes. 
In the auspicious MaQ.inagesvara Tirtha the following Brahmar:tas 
should never be honoured, if one wishes for upward progress 
of oneself along with the Pitrs: one-eyed ones, mumblers ( those 
who utter meaningless, indistinct words) , mentally disordered 
and those devoid of self-study of the Vedas. 
One who makes a gift of a cow beautiful in every limb, to 
a BrahmaQa, goes to the greatest world {and stays there) until 
the annihilation of all living beings. Thereafter, slipping down 
from the heavenly world, he will be born in a family devoid 
of impurities. 
0 king, if persons visit Mar:tinagdvara with great devotion, 
there shall be no fear from serpents in their family.. 
52-53a. 
By visiting MaQ.inaga shrine devotees appear to groups 
of serpents in the forms of GarU<a and so the serpents are 
suspicious (afraid) of them. 


250 
Skanda Purii:IJa 
Henceforth, 0 king, listen to the benefits of Danas (gifts) 
made here. 
53b-65. 
0 great king, those excellent men, if desirous of 
their welfare (final beatitude) , should give to a deserving 
(BrahmaQa) cooked rice with all condiments, water, bed, an 
umbrella, a virgin and a sweet-speaking maidservant (slave) . 
Fragrant flowers, scents and garments, lamp, food-grains, a 
splendid well-furnished house should be given. Those who give 
with great devotion go to heaven. 
Whatever gift is given at MaQinaga, residence in heaven 
becomes certain as a fruit of that Dana. All sins disappear like 
water in a mud-pot not yet annealed and baked. 
One who gives unto a BrahmaQa foodstuffs cooked and pre­
pared in the waters of Narmada becomes rid of all sins and 
sports about with Devas. 
Hereafter I shall mention the characteristics of those who 
slip down from the heavenly worlds: They are long-lived. Their 
sons will be alive. They will be alive. They will be devoid of all 
types of ailments. They will be endowed with sons and servants. 
They will be persons ready to renounce. They will enjoy plea­
sures. They will always be engaged in the narration of pious 
stories. They will be devotees of Devas, BrahmaQas and precep­
tors. They will relish pilgrimages. They will be obedient to 
mothers and fathers. They will be devoid of hatred and anger. 
0 son of PaQQU, all the people having these characteristics 
have truly come down from heavenly worlds and they will go 
to heaven again. 
0 excellent king, MaQinaga is a Ti:rtha which is the most 
excellent one alJ!ong Tirthas. One who reads or listens to this 
narration about the Ti:rtha shall be rid of all sins. He is honoured 
in the world of Siva. No poison affects them. They move about 
as they please. By listening to this narrative one gets that benefit 
which one gets by viewing Bhaskara ( the Sun-god) on the sixth 
lunar day in the month of Bhadrapada. 


V.iii.73.1-15 
251 
CHAPTER SEVENTYTHREE 
The Greatness of Gopiireivara 7irtha 
Sri Miirka7J,tf,eya said: 
1-5. 
0 son of Kunti, there is an extremely splendid Tirtha 
on the southern bank of Narmada. The excellent Gopardvara 
is destructive of all sins. A meritorious Liilga issued .forth from 
the body of a cow on the surface of the earth there, 0 king. 
Yudhi$thira said: 
How did it come to happen thata Liilga that causes destruc­
tion of sins issued forth from the body of a cow on the south­
ern bank of Narmada very near MaQ.inaga? 0 BrahmaQ.a, may 
the origin of the Goparesvara Liilga be narrated succinctly. 
Sri Miirka1J-4eya said: 
Formerly, 0 son of Kunti, Kamadhenu performed a pen­
ance there. She meditated on Mahesvara, the Lord of Devas, 
with great devotion. 
Mahdvara, the Lord of the worlds, became pleased with the 
tawny-coloured cow. From within her body Paramdvara, the 
indivisible Lord, came out. 
Mahesvara said: 
0 tawny-coloured one, 0 Paramesvarl, 0 mother of the uni­
verse, I am pleased with you. 0 one of fair countenance, say 
quickly why the propitiation was carried on. 
Surabhi said: 
6-15. I have been created by Parameᤁᤃhin for the sake of 
helping the worlds. It is with my favour that all the affairs of 
the world come to fulfilment. 0 Sailkara, if people will pro­
ceed towards heaven, it is due to my favour. 0 Sarilbhu, do stay 
in my Tirtha with a desire for the welfare of the wᦥ;>rlds. 
Saying "So it shall be", the Lord stayed there joyously. Ever 
since then, that Tlrtha became well known all over the earth. 


252 
Skanda Purii'T}a 
By means of a single bath, 0 great king, one dispels a great 
mass of sins. The gift of a cow at Goparesvara should be made 
with great devotion. A suitable cow should be given to a de­
serving excellent Brahmal).a along with gold and calf. 
The cow should be young, white in colour and yield profuse 
milk. It shall be given along with cloths also. 
The gift should generally be made on the eighth or four­
teenth lunar day in the dark half of a mon th. 
Of all the months, the month of Karttika is of special sig­
nificance. The gift should be made over to a Brahmal).a eager 
to continue the self-study of the Vedas. 
The gift is to be made with great devotion. One who makes 
the gift duly, he who accepts it gracefully and duly-both of 
them are meritorious. One who witnesses this also earns merit. 
One should offer balls of rice to the departed ones with due 
reverence and devotion. Thus, 0 great king; the departed ones 
attain the great goal (heaven) . 
The sins of those who make devoutly obeisance everyday to 
Rudra become dissolved like water in a broken pot. 
One who releases a bull ritualistically in that Tirtha is honoured 
in Sivaloka. The Pitrs are redeemed by him. 
Yudhi$thira said: 
1 6-23. 
0 excellent Brahmal).a, quickly explain assiduously 
the benefit that accrues to men when Vpᤄotsarga (ceremonial 
and ritualistic releasing of a bull) is done. 
Sri Miirka'T}f/,eya said: 
Listen, 0 son - of Dharma. I shall explain fully the benefit 
that is attained when a bull fully endowed with all excellent 
characteristics, 0 king, is let loose on the full-moon day in the 
months of Karttika and Vaisakha. A person should take his 
holy bath and remain clean with all the sense-organs controlled. 
He should make the Vr11otsarga in the presence of Rudra uttering, 
"May ᤛara be pleased". Dear son, he should keep nearby four 
excellent female calves. After offering these possessing all essential 
features to a leading Brahmal).a, he shall say: "May Mahadeva 
be pleased. May Brahma, Vil?I).U and Mahesvara be pleased. " 
He will be honoured in Sivaloka, 0 king, for as many years 


V.iii.74. 1-6 
253 
as there are hairs on all the limbs. After staying in Sivaloka, 
when he is reborn in the mortal world, it shall be in a great 
family richly endowed with wealth and food-grains. He shall be 
endowed with handsome features and excellent learning. He 
shall be clean and truthful. He shall be devoid of ailments. 
0 Yudhighira, the greatness of Gopare5vara has been nar­
rated by me. The Linga had issued forth from the body of the 
cow on the southern bank of Narmada. 
CHAPTER SEVENTYFOUR 
The" Greatness of Gautamesvara"Tirtha 
Sri Miirkarpf,eya said: 
1-6. 
There is an excellent Tirtha on the northern bank of 
Reva. It is destructive of all sins in the mortal world. It is 
(known) by the name Gautamesvara. It has been established 
by Gautama himself, with a desire for the welfare of all the 
worlds. 0 Yudhighira, this Tlrtha is in the form of a flight of 
stairs unto heaven for all men. Go there with great devotion 
to the place where the Lord, the preceptor of the universe, is 
present for the sake of the destruction of sins. He is also the 
bestower of a residence in Svarga. 
The Tlrtha is conducive to the augmentation of blessedness. 
It bestows victory. It is destructive of miseries. By means of a 
single offering of balls of rice there a devotee shall redeem 
three generations of his family. 
At the behest of Gautama, everything that is given with devotion, 
whether meagre or much, shall become a hundred thousand 
times (more beneficial) as stated by Rudra. This is the greatest 
Tlrtha of all Tlrthas. 


254 
CHAPTER SEVENTYFIVE 
The Greatness of Sankhacit4a Tirtha 
Sri Miirka7J4eya said: 
Skanda Purii:FJa 
1-5. There is a great and beautiful Tlrtha on the southern 
bank of Narmada. It is well-known in the terrestrial sphere by 
the name of Sankhacii<;la, 0 son of Pal).<;iu. Sankhacii<;la is himself 
present there on the pleasant bank of Narmada, due to the 
fear of Vainateya (Garu<;la) . 
A person should remain clean with mental concentration 
and purity and bathe Sankhacii<;la with milk, honey and ghee. 
He should keep awake at night before the Lord. After honouring 
Brahmal).as of esteemed holy vows, with cooked rice soaked in 
curds, a cow should be gifted to an eminent Brahmal).a. Thereby 
all sins will be destroyed. 
Libation should be offered . ( to the Pitrs) killed by serpent 
bite. He shall go to the greatest world, as said by Sankara. 
CHAPTER SEVENTYSIX 
The Greatness of Piiresvara Tirtha 
Sri Miirka7J4eya said: 
1-7. Thereafter, one should go to the excellent Pare5vara 
(Tlrtha) , 0 great king. The noble-souled Parasara performed 
on the splendid banks of Narmada a severe penance for the 
sake of a son, 0 son of Pal).<;iu. 
Gaur!, the daughter of Himavan, was propitiated by him 
with great devotion on the northern bank of Narmada. 
The great goddess, the sharer of half of the body of Sankara, 
became pleased with him. "Oh ! 0 excellent sage! I am pleased 
by your devotion. 0 Brahmal).a, request for a boon . from me, 
0 highly intelligent Parasara. " 
Pariisara said: 
0 goddess, if you are pleased with me, if a boon has to be 


V.iii. 76.8-24 
255 
given to me, 0 goddess, grant me a son who is endowed with 
the qualities of truthfulness and cleanliness, who regularly studies 
the Vedas and is an expert in all scriptural texts. 1 0 goddess, 
thanks to the boon; may there be your presence in this Tirtha 
here. 0 Daughter of the Mountain, for the sake of helping the 
worlds, may you be pleased to stay on the southern bank of 
Narmada by the name of Parasara. 
Sri Devi said: 
8-1 7. So be it, 0 Brahmal).a. 
She vanished there itself. The noble-souled Parasara installed 
Parvati. He established Sarikara, bowed down to by Suras and 
Asuras, the Lord who cannot be comprehe'!lded in an adequate 
manner, who cannot be divided and approached even by Devas. 
0 king, Parasara, the noble-souled one, became contented. 
The Tirtha there should be resorted to devoutly by a pure 
person with a controlled mind. Whether a woman or a man, 
she or he should be free from lust and anger. 
The month may be Magha, Caitra, Vaisakha, Sraval).a or 
Margasirᤄa. but invariably it should be (visited) in the bright 
half of the month. There the devotee stays in a splendid place 
on the ·southern bank. 
After observing fast with great devotion, he should perform 
the following Vrata. He shall keep awake during the night and 
offer lights in accordance with his capacity. There should be 
dance, vocal and instrumental music etc. The devotee should 
be devoid of lust and anger. 
In the morning, Brahmal).as should be honoured in accor­
dance with one's capacity, 0 son of Kunti, by means of cash 
gifts, gold, garments, umbrellas, quilts, betel leaves and food. 
The devotee should propitiate Brahmal).as of esteemed Vratas. 
0 excellent king, Sraddha should be performed with libations 
of water or cooked or uncooked food. 
1 8-24. 
In the case of women and Siidras, Ama-sraddha 
(Sraddha with uncooked food) is recommended. 
0 YudhiHhira, four times the usual quantity should be given 
in case it is uncooked food to be given to the Brahmal).as. 
1 . 
Birth ofVyasa as a son i s suggested to be the fruit of this boon to Parasara. 


256 
Skanda Purii:r;ta 
The BrahmaQ.as should be assiduously honoured in accor­
dance with the injunctions of the Vedas, by means of Kusa 
grass a Hasta (forearm, a cubit) in length as well as gingelly 
seeds and raw rice-grains. 
The BrahmaQ.as should sit facing the north and the per­
former of Sraddha himself faces the south. Uttering the fol­
lowing Mantra, the food should be placed on Darbha(?) before 
the BrahmaQ.a: "May the departed ones go to the great world 
by the power of this Tirtha. May my sin be subdued. May 
auspiciousness always increase. 0 excellent BrahmaQ.a, may the 
family and the groups of kinsmen ( always) flourish . " 
Mter uttering this, gifts should b e made to the BrahmaQ.as 
in accordance with one's capacity. Cow, plot of land, gingelly 
seeds, gold etc., cooked food, garments etc. should be given, 
0 excellent son of PaQ.<;iu, in the splendid hermitage of Paresvara. 
Those who devoutly listen are rid of all sins. 
CHAPTER SEVENTYSEVEN 
The Greatness of Bhime.Svara Tirtha 
Sn Markar:uf,eya said: 
1-7. 
Thereafter, one should go to the Bhimeilvara Tirtha, 
which destroys all sins. It is resorted to by the groups of sages 
who are splendid and regular performers of severe Vratas. 
A person controlling the sense-organs and observing fast, 
should take his holy bath in the Tirtha. Raising his arms up 
towards the Sun, he should utter the single-syllabled Mantra. 
The sins accrued to him in the course of that birth perish 
instantly. 
By (the recitation of) Gayatri, the sins acquired in the course 
of seven births perish certainly. A hundred repetitions destroy 
the sins committed before in the course of ten births. Gayatri 
destroys the sins arising in the course of three births by means 
of a thousand repetitions. 
The Mantra whether Vedic or secular (non-Vedic) in origin 
that is repeated, 0 king, instantly burns down all sins like fire 
that burns blades of grass. 


V.iii. 78. 1-9 
257 
One should not wilfully commit sins on the strength of the 
power of a deity. If the sin is committed due to ignorance, it 
perishes quickly, but not the other one at any time. 
A person should offer gifts at that Tirtha according to his 
capacity. 0 son of PaQQU, everything yields everlasting benefit. 
CHAPTER SEVENTYEIGHT 
The Greatness of Niiradesvara Tirtha 
Sn Miirka7J-4eya said: 
1-9. 
Thereafter, a person should go _to the excellent 
Naradesvara Tirtha, 0 great king. It is the greatest of all Tirthas, 
established by Narada. 
Yudhi6thira said: 
0 excellent one among sages, why was this Tirtha estab­
lished by Narada? 0 excellent one, narrate all this to me if you 
are pleased. 
Sn Miirka7J-4eya said: 
Narada, the son of ParameHhin, the excellent sage, 0 son 
of Kunti, performed penance on the northern bank of Reva 
formerly. The control of the nine NaQis1 (blood vessels?) reached 
its extreme limit and Pasubhartr (i.e. Siva) was thus propiti­
ated by Narada. 
lsvara said: 
0 eminent BrahmaQa, 0 Lord of Yogins not born of a womb, 
I am pleased with you. 0 dear one, request for a boon, what­
ever desire you may have been cherishing in your mind. 
] _ 
In human bodies, there are ten NaQ.is. Out of them IQ.ii,, Pingala and 
Sudunn:ta are the main ones. SudUIJ1IJ.a is the most important as it leads 
to God-realization. There is no appropriate equivalent term in E.nglish 
as some of the NaQ.is carry life breath and not blood. 


258 
Skanda Purii:r;ta 
Niirada said: 
With your favour, 0 Sarhbhu, may my practice of Yoga be 
successful. Let my devotion to you be firm in me for all time. 
0 Lord, I should be the master of the Vedas and Vedarigas and 
should have power of moving about as I wish. 0 Lord of the 
worlds, I should be one conversant with the events of the three 
divisions of time (past, present, future) and expert in music. 
Whenever a battle takes place among Devas, Danavas and human 
beings, 0 Mahesvara, whether it be in Patala, mortal world or 
heaven, I should be competent to see the same everyday with 
your favour. I may also (be able to) see you and Parvati. Let 
this Tlrtha be well known as the destroyer of all sins. 
lsvara said: 
1 0-1 4. 
0 Narada, undoubtedly everything shall occur thus. 
What has been thought of by you will be achieved. There is 
no doubt about it. 
You shall be one roaming about wherever you wish, whether 
it be in Svarga, Patala or in human habitation. You wander 
everywhere and you will not be stopped by anyone. 
With my favour, you shall certainly have (mastery over) the 
seven Svaras (notes) , the three Gramas (gamuts in music) , the 
twenty-one Murcchanas (melodious keys) and forty-nine Tanas 
(protracted notes) (i.e. all the details of the Science of Music) 
Your dance and divine music will be pleasing to me. Every­
day you shall watch the quarrel among Devas, Danavas and 
Kinnaras. 
With my favour, your Tirtha on the earth shall become 
meritorious. With my favour, you will be a singular master of 
the principles of the Vedas and Vedarigas, an adept in all 
branches of knowledge and yet, 0 Narada, you shall be free 
from undue attachment. 
1 5-23ᤝ 
After saying thus, the Lord vanished. Narada in­
stalled the Trident-bearing Lord there, 0 great king. The Tirtha 
renders help to all living beings. Installed by Narada, it has 
become the most excellent Tirtha in the world. 0 excellent 
king, one who visits that Tlrtha, should have control over all 
sense-orgari'ᤜ. 0 son of Kunti, with great devotion- he should 


V.iii. 78.24-32 
259 
observe fast on the fourteenth day in the dark half of the 
month of Bhadrapada and keep awake at night. 
An umbrella should be given to a Brahmai).a of auspicious 
characteristics. Sraddha should be offered to those who were 
killed with weapons. By the power of the balls of rice offered, 
they will go to the greatest world. 
With the Pitrs in view, 0 descendant of Bharata, a tawny­
coloured cow should be offered to a Brahmai).a after saying 
this Mantra: "Due to the purity of this Sraddha and with the 
favour of the Brahmai).a, let them attain the greatest goal . " 
Monetary gift should b e given to the Brahmai).a in accor­
dance with one's capacity, uttering this Mantra: "Due to the 
purity of the waters of Narmada, the power of the wealth legitimately 
acquired and their own intrinsic worth , let,.the departed ones 
go to the highest goal. " 
0 wide-eyed one, Haviᤄya rice should be given to Brahmai).as. 
the light should be given devoutly and there shall be dance 
and music. He who carries out these activities in the holy temple 
shall acquire everything. He attains the vicinity of Rudra-so 
said Rudra himself. 
By the gift of learning alone, one shall attain everlasting 
goal. 
24-32. 
Yoked bulls and arable land should be gifted, 0 
king. There the devotee should propitiate Fire-god devoutly 
with auspicious Mantras, using plenty of ghee and other ar­
ticles of Homa. 
They should worship devoutly and perform dance in all the 
three parts (of the day) . 
In the Tlrtha named after Narada on the northern bank of 
Reva, Fire-god is worthy of being propitiated. Devas have Fire 
for their mouth. The sage is identical with all the Devas. All 
are delighted by the sage. When Havyavaha (Fire-god) is worshipped 
poverty is averted. 
With wealth there is happiness in every birth. Men of noble 
birth and excellent clothes will always be endowed with wealth. 
The following revive and resuscitate youth that goes on receding: 
raft that of rivers, husband that of women, king engaged in 
good conduct that of the subjects, wealth that of men and 
seasons that of trees. 
It was at that Tirtha that Dhanadatva (status of being a giver 


260 
Skanda Purii:r:ta 
of wealth) was obtained by Dhane5a (Kubera) , the power of 
restraining (Vamatva) was obtained by Varna, Indratva by the 
Thunderbolt-wielding Lord, and the status of being a king was 
obtained by other kings. By the efficacy of Narade5vara Dhruva 
attained stability (fixed position) . 
A Tlrtha that is the most excellent one among all the Tlrthas 
was created by Narada on the northern bank of Reva on the 
ocean-girt earth. That is the most excellent one of all Tlrthas. 
CHAPTER SEVENTYNINE 
The Greatness of Dadhiskanda and Madhuskanda 1irthas 
Sri Miirka7J.4eya said: 
1-7. 
Then, 0 great king, one should go to two excellent 
Tirthas that destroy all sins, viz. Dadhiskanda and Madhuskanda. 
If the devotee takes his holy bath in Dadhiskanda and offers 
curd to Brahmal).as, 0 descendant of Bharata, neither sickness 
nor old age, neither grief nor jealousy assail him in the course 
of seven births. He is born in a pure family and stays there as 
long as a thousand Moons last. 
One should offer gingelly seeds mixed with honey in the 
Madhuskanda Tlrtha. He will never see Lord Vaivasvata (Varna) 
for a period of seventy births. If the person offers balls of rice 
mixed with honey there shall be no poverty in the family till 
(the birth of) . grandsons of his grandsons. 
In the Tirtha the man shall take his holy bath duly facing 
the south and offer balls of rice mixed with curd. His father, 
grandfather and great-grandfather will be contented for twelve 
years. No hesitation need be felt in this regard. 


V.iii.80. 1-l l 
261 
CHAPTER EIGHTY 
The Greatness of Nandikesvara Tirtha 
Sri Markar.ujeya said: 
1-1 1 . Then a person should go to the excellent Tirtha called 
Nandikesvara, 0 great king. It was here that Mahanandin became 
a Siddha (enlightened one) . I shall narrate everything to you. 
Formerly Nandin, the Lord of GaQas, faced Reva and pro­
ceeded from Tirtha to Tirtha performing austerities and achieving 
victory• . When he left Dadhiskanda and Madhuskanda, Mahadeva 
became pleased and spoke to Nandinatha. 
lsvara said: 
0 Nandisa, I am delighted. Choose any boon that you desire. 
I am pleased with your penance performed in the course of 
your pilgrimage. 
NandHvara said: 
I do not covet wealth nor do I desire a family and progeny. 
Excepting your lotus-like feet, I do not desire anything else. 
Whether I am born amidst worms, insects and locusts or as a 
brute of lower order, let my devotion be steady towards you in 
all my births. 
Saying "So it shall be" with great tenderness, 0 king, Mahadeva 
held that enlightened one by the hand and went to his abode. 
A man who takes his holy bath in that Tirtha with great 
devotion and worships the Three-eyed Lord, attains the ben­
efit of Agniᤄtoma Yajfia. 
If a person bathes in the Tirtha and casts off his life, then 
he becomes Siva's attendant and rejoices for everlasting Kalpas. 
After a great deal of time, he will be born in a pure family well-
1 . 
Here ']aya' seems to be a misprint for ']apa' . There is no propriety of 
'achieving victory' as there is no enemy to be defeated. In Devamigari 
script pa ('1) and ya (lf) appear alike and the printed text if emended as 
'japam kuroan, 'performing Japa' is more suitable in the context. 


262 
Skanda Purii7J-a 
conversant with the principles of the Vedas and Vedail.gas. He 
will live for a hundred years. 
Thus, 0 dear one, the excellent greatness of the Tirtha has 
been narrated to you. It is difficult of access for human beings 
but it destroys all sins. 
CHAPTER EIGHTYONE 
The Greatness of Varu7J-esvara 7irtha 
Sri Miirka1J,f/,eya said: 
1-8. 
Then, 0 great king, one should go to the excellent 
VaruiJesvara where the great Lord VaruiJa became a Siddha. 
0 excellent king, subsisting on oil-cakes, vegetables and leaves, 
he observed K.rcchra, CandrayaiJa and other austerities and 
propitiated the Lord of the Daughter of the Mountain. Thereby 
he attained great Siddhi. 
One who takes his holy bath there in that Tirtha, offers 
libations to the Pitrs and deities and devoutly worships Sail.kara, 
attains the greatest goal. 
Listen to the meritorious benefit of that person who offers 
along with cooked rice a KuiJcJika (pitcher) , Vardhani (pot) or 
a big water-pot. He attains that .benefit which a man is likely 
to get by means of a Sattra (sacrifice) lasting for twelve years. 
No hesitation need be felt about it. 
Of all Danas, the gift of cooked rice is remembered as the 
greatest. 0 excellent king, water and cooked rice cause instant 
delight. . 
Men who die there in the Tirtha attain residence in the city 
of VaruiJa until all the living beings are annihilated. 
Mterwards, when the period is completed, he is reborn in 
the mortal world. A man who gifts cooked rice always lives for 
a hundred years. 


V.iii.82. 1-15 
263 
CHAPTER EIGHTYfWO 
The Greatness of Paiica Tirtha(s) 
Sri Miirka1J-4eya said: 
1-7. 
Thereafter, 0 king, one should go to the excellent 
Vahni Tirtha where the highly refulgent Hutasana performed 
penance and became a Siddha. Formerly he had been made 
one that eats everything by a (certain) sage in Dar:u;laka. But 
Hutasana resorted to the banks of Narmada and became pu­
rified. 
One who bathes there in the Tirtha, worships Mahesvara 
and enters a blazing pyre attains identity with Agni. One who 
devoutly takes his holy bath there and offers libations to the 
Pitrs and deities, undoubtedly obtains the benefit of Agnigoma 
Yajfl.a. 
The excellent Kaubera Tirtha is next to it, 0 king. It was 
there that Kubera, the Lord of Yakᤄas, formerly became a great 
Siddha. 
A man who takes his holy bath there in the Tirtha and 
devoutly worships the Lord of the universe accompanied by 
Uma, becomes rid of all sins. 
There one who, after taking bath and standing in water 
upto the navel, gives gold (as Dana) to a Brahmal).a, will obtain 
a hundred million times the usual benefit. 
8-1 5. The benefit that is obtained in Dadhiskanda, Madhu­
skanda, NandiSa, Varul).alaya and Agneya is obtained merely by 
taking holy bath in that Tirtha. Those by whom the five exces­
sively meritorious Narmada Tirthas have been visited, are worthy 
of being saluted. They are blessed in the world of human 
beings and their wishes have been- fulfilled. 
They go to the world of Bhaskara, that is extremely great 
and destructive of sorrow. From Bhaskara's world they go to 
the Loka of Isvara and from Aisvara Loka they go to Anivartaka 
world (that from which there is no return to Sarhsafa) . He is 
taken to the greatest world and stays there till fourteen lndras 
complete their reign. Thence slipping down from Svarga, the 
man becomes a righteous king. Free from all sins he will enjoy 
the entire world consisting of the mobile and immobile beings. 


264 
Skanda Purii:r;ta 
Those residents who always resort to the Narmada Tirtha 
and have Vi!iJ:.lU as their deity will undoubtedly be born as 
heroes with unbroken glory. 
Ganga is meritorious at Kanakhala; Sarasvati in Kuruk!ietra; 
but Narmada is meritorious everywhere whether in village or 
in forest. 
One should always reside on the banks of Reva. He shall be 
on a par with one who has bathed in all the Tirthas and imb(bed 
Soma juice everyday. 
All the rivers beginning with Ganga, seas and lakes perish 
at the end of the Kalpa. But Narmada does not perish thereby. 
CHAPTER EIGHTYTHREE 
The Greatness of Hanumantesvara Tirtha 
Sri Miirkar.t4eya said: 
1-8. 
Then, 0 great king, one should go the extremely 
splendid Tirtha reputed as destructive of the sin of Brahmai_la­
slaughter. It is installed on the banks of Reva. Here is an 
excellent Linga named Haniimanta1 • 
Yudhi$thira said: 
Do tell me, how the Tirtha named Haniimantesvara origi-· 
nated (was established) on the southern bank of Reva and it 
is capable of destroying the sin of Brahmai_la's slaughter. 
Sri Miirka1J4eya said: 
Well! Well! 0 mighty-armed king adorning the lunar race! 
I. 
Here the RamayaQa hero, Hanuman, is charged with the sin of BrahmaQa­
slaughter for killing RavaQa's army of Brahma-rakdasas in battle. Killing 
in battles is no sin and Hanuman did it as per Rama's order. But accord­
ing t? this PuraQa, he accrued the sin of BrahmaQa-slaughter from which 
he was redeemed by performing penance on the bank of Reva. He in­
stalled a Linga in honour of Siva. It became known as 'Haniimantesvara' 
in his memory. Neither RamayaJ.Ia nor Mbh nor other PuraQas know this 
story. 


V.iii.83.9-16 
265 
This Tirtha which is to be kept more secret than other secret 
Tirthas, has never been disclosed to anyone else by me. It is 
due to my love unto you that I tell you. Further I have now 
been afflicted by old age. 
Formerly, there was a great battle between kama and RavaQ.a. 
Pulastya was the son of Brahma and Visravas was his son. RavaQ.a 
was born of him. He was a Brahmarakasa with ten heads. With 
the favour of the Trident-bearing Lord, he became the con­
queror of all the three worlds. All the Devas were conquered. 
Rama's wife was abducted, though prevented by KurhbhakarQ.a 
urging "Release, release Sita. " The sinner was implored again 
and again by VibhiaQ.a and Mandodari: "You have been con­
quered by Kartavirya who was defeated by the Son of ReQ.uka 
(i.e. Parasurama) . That Parasurama has"' been defeated by 
Ramabhadra. How can you have victory over him in battle?" 
Rava7J.a said: 
9-1 6. I can never be conquered by monkeys, men, bears, 
boars etc. devoid of arms, nor by groups of Devas and Asuras. 
Sri Miirka7J.4eya said: 
But he was defeated by Ramacandra with the assistance of 
Sugriva, Haiiuman, Kumuda, Angada and others. The power­
ful Paulastya was killed in battle by Ramacandra. The garden 
was demolished and heroes killed by the son of Prabhaiijana 
(Vayu) . RavaQ.a's son Akakumara was killed in the battle. The 
huge and terrible army of the Rakasas was threshed by the 
Monkey. 
Thus the main activity of Rama was over and Sita was set 
free. When Rama went to Ayodhya, Haniiman, the great monkey, 
went to the mountain named Kailasa for paying obeisance to 
Mahesvara. 
That excellent monkey was then addressed by Nan din: "Stop! 
Stop! Due to the slaughter of the Rakasas you have incurred 
the sin of BrahmaQ.a-slaughter. Hence, 0 monkey, Bhairava's 
assembly certainly should not be witnessed by you.ԉ 
Hanumiin said: 
0 Lord Nandin, ask Hara the expiation for the suppression 


266 
Skanda Purii:T}-a 
of the sin. Why I, a monkey, have become a sinner? What is 
the cause thereof? 
Nandin said: 
1 7-27. 
Was not (the river) born of Rudra's body and sta­
tioned in the earth heard of by you? By listening to her name, 
the sin incurred in the course of a birth perishes. By glorifying 
her twice the sin is destroyed. By taking bath in Reva, the sin 
acquired in the course of thirty births becomes annihilated. 
Hence go to the banks of Narmada and perform a severe penance. 
On hearing what was said by Nandin, the son of Wind-god 
went to the banks of Narmada, to the southern confluence on 
the earth. He meditated upon the very auspicious Lord, the 
odd-eyed (three-eyed) , trident-bearing one endowed with matted 
hairs as crown and python as the sacred thread, the Lord who 
smeared all his limbs with the holy ash, the Lord producing 
the reverberating sound of I;>amaru, the quiescent sharer of 
half of Uma's body, who is seated on the bull-vehicle. 
He adored the Lord for many many years. Ultimately the 
great Lord was pleased and he arrived along with Uma and 
spoke sweet words with the majestic rumbling sound of clouds. 
The Lord said: "Well! Well! 0 dear one, severe penance has 
been performed by you. Formerly by killing RavaQ.a (and his 
followers) sin has not been committed by you. Indeed you 
were engaged in the task of your master. You have become a 
Siddha by seeing me. " 
O n seeing Hara, the eternal Lord, · the partner of half of 
Uma ' s body, Hanuman prostrated before him with eight limbs 
touching the grou"nd and said: "Be victorious, 0 Sambhu, obeisance 
to you. Be victorious. Obeisance to the destroyer of Andhaka. 
Be victorious, 0 bearer of Ganga 'on the head." 
On being eulogized thus, Mahadeva, the bestower of boons, 
spoke these words: "0 dear one, 0 son of the Wind-god, choose 
a boon from me. " 
Sri Hanumiin said: 
0 Mahesvara, due to my conversation with you just for a 
moment, let not the sin arising frcm the slaughter of the 
Brahmarakᤄasa be effective (in my case) . 


V.iii.83.28-45 
267 
lsvara said: 
28-33. 
Dear Son, undoubtedly you are free from sins, due 
to the greatness of the Narmada Tirtha, the power of Dharma 
and Yoga and of seeing me. 0 great monkey, I shall grant you 
another boon. The following names of yours shall be condu­
cive to the welfare of the worlds: Maruti (Son of Wind-god) , 
Hanuman, Anjanisuta ( Son of Anjani) , Vayuputra, Mahabala 
(Extremely powerful) , Riime${a (Darling of Ramah Phalguna, 
Gatra, Pingiik$a (Tawny-eyed) , Amitavikrama (Of uᤨmeasured 
valour) , Udadhikrama7J.a-Sre${ha (Excellent due to feat of cross­
ing of the ocean) , Da5agrivasya Darpaha (Destroyer of the arrogance 
of the Ten-headed One ) , Lak$ma7J.apra7J.adata (Bestower of life 
on Lakᤁma1.1a) and Sttasokanivartana (On& who has dispelled 
Sita's sorrow) . 
Mter saying this, Lord Sailkara vapished along with Uma. 
Haniiman installed Isvara there devoutly. 
That Liilga is a bestower of cherished desires by the favour 
of Isvara, by the power of his Brahmacarya (celibacy) and the 
strength of his Yogic soul. The Liilga cannot be chopped off 
nor can it be comprehended adequately and is devoid of origin 
and destruction. 
Sri Marka7J.4eya said: 
34-45. 
Dear son, listen to the directly perceived proof of 
the efficacy of Hanumantdvara. 0 son of Paf.l<Ju, it occurred 
at the end of Treta and the beginning of Dvapara. 
There was a king named Suparvan on the earth. The king 
enjoyed perpetual happiness. The men (subjects) had a long 
span of life. He was endowed with sons and wealth and his 
reign was free from the harassment caused by thieves. Satabahu1 
of terrible valour was his son. 
0 Lord of men, this prince always indulged in sinful activi­
ties. He wandered all over the earth, mountains and forests. 
For hunting herds of deer he came to the Vindhya mountain. 
He was sporting about in the forest where different kinds of 
trees grew sprawling and herds of elephants wandered about. 
I . 
The stories of Subahu and Sikhal)¾in are contributed to illustrate the 
greatness of Hanumantesvara. 


268 
Skanda Purii:!J.a 
It was full of beautiful lions and leopards. It was infested by 
wild boars and deer. Mter sporting there, the king (prince) 
arrived at a certain place on Narmada. 
He arrived at the forest of Haniimanta that extended to a 
hundred Krosas. It was splendid with groves of tamarinds. It 
was full of Kadamba trees. It was rendered splendid always on 
account of Palasa, Jarhbira, Karaiija, Khadira, Paᤃala, Badara, 
Sami and Tinduka trees. It was crowded with herds of deer. It 
reverberated with the sounds of peacocks. Droves of pigeons 
cooed all round with exquisite notes. 
The king sported about there in autumn and during the 
dark half of the month of Asvina. Arriving at the centre of the 
forest he saw a tawny-coloured Brahmal).a moving about. The 
restless Brahmal).a with a book in his hand was asked: 
Satabiihu said: 
0 excellent Brahmal).a, with a book in your hand you wan­
der alone in the forest looking this way and that. Why do you 
wander thus? 
The Briihma7J.a said: 
46-5 1 . 0 king, I have come from Kanyakubja. I have been 
sent here by the Princess to deposit the bones (ashes) in the 
water of the Hanumante5vara Tirtha. 
The king said: 
0 Brahmal).a, why is the throwing of the bones carried out 
in HanumanteSvata? What is the purpose? It is something wonderful. 
Let it be explained to me. 
The son of Suparvan left his vehicle and (got down on the 
ground) . Mter bowing down, he joined his palms in reverence 
to the Brahmal).a, 0 king. Then he (the Brahmal).a) narrated 
his earlier story in full. 
The Briihma7J.a said: 
There is a powerful king named Sikhal).<;lin in Kanyakubja. 
This king has no son. As a result of his long-cherished desire, 
a daughter was born to him. 


V.iii.83.52-61 
269 
By the power of Narmada the girl of beautiful limbs could 
remember the previous births. Once the question of her marriage 
was raised by the father: 
"Dear daughter, this worldly existence is not permanent. I 
wish to perform the rite of Kanyadana (gifting away a virgin) . 
One should perform tomorrow's task today itself, and the work 
of the afternoon in the foremoon itself. Death does not wait 
to see if one has completed his tasks or not. " 
The Virgin said: 
52-61 . 
Dear father, I must be given in marriage at the 
time when I wish for it. 
! 
The king was surprised at the statement of his daughter. 
Sikha?J4in said: 
0 highly esteemed. girl, what you have stated is surprising. 
Let it be fully explained. 
On hearing what her father said, the excellent girl came 
near him, 0 king, and recounted what had happened in 
Han urn an tesvara. 
"Father, at that time, I was a female peacock (peahen) . My 
name was Kalapinl and I lived with my husband on the south­
ern bank of Reva very near the confluence of Reva and Aurvya. 
Once it chanced that I was sporting about in the meritori­
ous Hanumantavana. At night I was asleep in the company of 
my husband on a Sarala tree. Hungry hunters came to that 
excellent forest. 
I was seen by those sinners who thought of killing me even 
as I was in the company of my husband. I was tied up with a 
cord along with my master (husband) . They wrung my neck 
and cracked the tail. Along with my husband they baked our 
flesh in fire and ate it as they pleased. Contented they went 
to sleep and the night came to a close. 
In the morning the remnant of my flesh and the bones from 
(my) body covered with nerves and flesh were seized by one of 
those birds of prey. One piece fell down from the sky from the 
birds. On seeing the piece of flesh other birds too flocked there. 


270 
Skanda Purii:r_ta 
62-73. 
On seeing the flock of birds the bird dropped down 
the piece of hones even as the entire flock of birds moved 
about and watched. 
0 king, it fell into the waters of Narmada in Hanumantesvara; 
It was a piece of my bone that fell into the waters of Narmada. 
By the power of the meritorious nature of the Tirtha I was 
born as your daughter. I became a princess with moon-like 
countenance. 
Born into your royal family, I became endowed with the 
power of remembering previous births. Hence I do not desire 
marriage. 0 excellent king, even now my husband is in a difficult 
situation among the birds and animals there. 0 great king, the 
remnant of his bones is sure to be in that Tirtha. Dear father, 
despatch an excellent Brahmai).a to cast off those bones. Thus, . 
0 excellent king, the explanation has been given to you in full. 
My husband is in a tight spot among birds and animals. If 
you do send someone, dear father, to the banks of Narmada, 
I shall make him know ( the bones) as indicated by the places 
and signs. " 
[ The Briihmana said:] 
I was summoned there by Sikhai).<;lin, 0 king. (He had said: ) 
"I shall give you twenty villages. Go to the banks of Narmada. " 
Thus my despatch was announced by him. I was afflicted by 
absence of glory and wealth. 
The Virgin said: 
You go to the meritorious Narmada that destroys all sins. To 
the south-east of Somanatha is the great deity Hanumante8vara. 
Within half a Krosa from Reva, there is a well-grown banyan 
tree. In the vicinity of the banyan tree, .there is a Karaiija and 
a Kaᤃaha tree. You will see the minute pieces of the bones very 
near the root of the banyan tree. 0 excellent Brahmai).a, carefully 
look out for them under the tree and collect them and go to 
Reva. 
74-83. 
In the dark half of Asvina on the lunar day pertain­
ing to Tripurari (i.e. 1 4th day) bathe the Trident-bearing Lord 
devoutly and keep awake at night. In the morning stand in the 
water upto your navel", 0 excellent Brahmai).a, and say "Let his 
liberation take place " and cast them off. 


V.iii.83.84-90 
271 
After casting off the bones, you must take the holy bath that 
is destructive of sins. 
[ The Briihma7J.a said:] 
As mentioned by the girl, 0 great king, by doing thus he 
will have his liberation. Everything that was narrated by the 
girl was recorded in the book (notebook) . Then I came here, 
0 great king, to this Tirtha that annihilates sin. 
After seeing the signs (remnants of bones) , 0 king, I took 
the bones and scattered in the waters of Narmada in accor­
dance with the injunctions mentioned before. 
There was an immediate shower of flowers, 0 son of Pa:t:t<;fu, 
followed by the shout "Excellent! Excellent! " There came a 
divine aerial chariot and the peacock assumed a divine form 
and went to heaven. 
After seeing this convincing proof, 0 king, in Hanumantdvara, 
the Brahmar.ta and the king, Satabahu, undertook a fast. En­
gaged in propitiating Isvara, they reduced their own bodies by 
drying them up. The excellent Brahma:t:ta and Satabahu stayed 
meditating on the Lord. 
Within half a month, Satabahu, the noble-minded king, died. 
An aerial chariot with splendid tinkling bells came there. · (A 
voice spoke out:) "Excellent! Excellent! 0 excellent king, get 
into the aerial chariot. " 
Satabiihu said: 
84-90. 
I will not come along the path to heaven as long 
as the Brahma:t:ta is also not present. The excellent Brahma:t:ta 
is my very preceptor because he imparted instructions to me. 
The celestial damsels said: 
This Brahma:t:ta is overwhelmed with greed. Sins are gath­
ered through covetousness. 
0 king, only men characterised by Sattva quality, who die 
in Hanumantesvara go to the world of Sankara that destroys 
all sins. 
There is no destruction of the sin of this Brahma:t:ta, 0 king. 
The house and the housewife dominate the mind of this Brahma:t:ta. 


272 
Skanda Purii:rJ-a 
Thereupon Satabahu said to the Brahmal}.a politely: "Leave 
off covetousness, the cause of all disaster, 0 excellent BrahmaQ.a." 
Mter saying this the king went to heaven surrounded by the 
celestial girls. 
Mter a few days the BrahmaQ.a went to heaven accompanied 
by panegyrists. 
By the power of the Tlrtha, the peacock was reborn as son 
of the king of Kasl. He recollected the previous birth given to 
him by the girl. Seeing him become major (in age) the chaste 
princess, with the leave of her father attained the prince as her 
husband in Svayarhvara. 
Sri Miirka1}-tf,eya said: 
91-1 0 1 . This is the event that took place in that Tlrtha, 0 
excellent king. For this reason this Tlrtha is always very sacred. 
The time of visit to this Tlrtha may be any month but the 
(lunar) eighth and the fourteenth days are good, especially so 
the fourteenth day in the dark half of the month of Asvina. 
A devotee shall bathe the deity · with great devotion with 
honey, milk or ghee. Again the Lord is bathed with curds 
mixed with sugar-candy and ultimately witp the water sprin­
kled with Kusa grass. 
The devotee should smear Mahe5vara with sandalpaste and 
sweet scents, Then he should adore with sweet-smelling flowers 
and Bilva leaves. 
The devotee should further adore with great devotion Siva 
named Hanumante5vara by means of various kinds of flowers 
available at the time and season such as Unmattamuni, Jati, Ka.Sa, 
Kusa etc., or by means of bulbous roots or fruits ofMucukunda tree. 
The lamp should be lighted with ghee or, if it is not avail­
able, wit)J. gingelly oil. 
Sraddha should be performed through BrahmaQ.as who are 
householders and masters of the Vedas. They should have all 
the essential characteristics and possess nobility of birth. 
Uttering the words: "May those who are detained in Naraka 
(Hell) proceed to heaven," he should bow down to the Brahmal}.as. 
He should propitiate the Brahmal}.as devoutly with garments, 
cooked food and gold. 
All the fallen BrahmaQ.as should be avoided, especially one 
who has a Vpᤁall as his housewife. Devas call a woman Vrᤁall 


V.iii.83.1 02-1 1 1 
273 
if she is libidinous and carnally approaches other · lustful men 
in addition to her own husband. A Siidra woman is not Vrᤄali. 
Sankara said that through Sraddha all sins of BrahmaQ.a­
slaughter, imbibing liquor, resorting to preceptor's wife, steal­
ing gold, acting treacherously towards friends and mis-using 
deposits entrusted, are destroyed. 
Sri Miirkm:uf,eya said: 
1 02-1 1 1 . Of what avail is my prattling, 0 dear one? Why 
should I recount much? Anyone having comnitted all kinds of 
sins should make gifts to a Brahmat:J.a. 
Particularly at this Tirtha, the gift of a cow should be made, 
because, 0 son of Kunti, such a gift is far superior to all other 
kinds of gifts. 
• 
Cows are full of all the Devas and all the nevas are identical 
with a cow. 0 king, Sakra dwells always on the tips of the 
horns; Skanda occupies the chest; Brahma the head; the Bull­
emblemed Lord is in the forehead; the deities Moon and Sun 
are the two eyes. Sarasvati dwells in the tongue. All the Sadhyas 
and groups of Maruts are her teeth, 0 king. One should know 
that all the four Vedas with the Angas and duly arranged words 
are in the Hurilkara (bellowing of cow) . Sages, the innumer­
able ascetics, dwell in the pores of the hairs. Yama stands at 
the back always scrutinizing the auspicious and the inauspi­
cious. He has a huge body. He is armed with a big staff. He 
is dark-complexioned and has a buffalo for his vehicle. The 
four meritorious oceans are the flowing currents of milk from 
her udders. Cow should be honoured by a sensible person 
always, because Ganga who originated from the feet of Viᤄ:r:tu 
and destroys sins merely by her sight is stationed in the flowing 
milk. 0 son of Pa:r:tc;lu, the sacred and all-auspicious Lakᤄmi is 
always present in cowdung. Hence smearing with cowdung should 
be done. Gandharvas, Apsaras and Nagas are well-established 
at the tips of the hoofs. Know that cow is identical with all the 
Tirthas that are present on the ocean-girt earth. Hence Gavya 
(milk product) is sacred. 
Yudhi$thira said: 
Dhenu (cow) full of all Devas is embellished with the Devas 
and others. Why have they resorted to cow? 


274 
Skanda Purii:fJ-a 
Sri Miirka7J-4eya said: 
1 1 2-1 18. ViᤄQU is identical with all the Devas. Cows are born 
of ViᤄQu's body. On account of these two things, the different 
Devas are attributed by the people (to the different limbs of 
cow) . 
Before the deity Hanumantesvara a cow should be gifted 
with great devotion to a Brahmal).a, 0 son of PaQQU. She should 
be a milch cow. She may be white or tawny-coloured. She 
should be accompanied by her calf and should be well-behaved. 
She should be covered with a white cloth. She should be well 
adorned with gold fitted to the horns. A milk pot made of 
brass should also be gifted along with the cow. 
She should be given in front of Hanumantesvara by one 
observing rules and regulations and desirous of heavenly plea­
sures and everlasting status. 
Those who give cows to the indigent and the feeble go to 
the world of ViᤄQu. After slipping down to the world, 0 king, 
he is born in the abode of a BrahmaQa. He becomes an able 
son of the family with all good qualities, learning, wealth and 
prosperity. 
The Hanumantesvara Tirtha destroys all sins, 0 king. One 
who hears about it becomes rid of sins resuhing from admix­
ture of castes. 
There is no doubt about this that even one who sees it from 
far or thinks about it becomes free from sins and is liberated. 
CHAPTER EIGHTYFOUR 
Kapi and Other Ttrthas 
Sri Miirka7J-4eya said: 
1-8. 
In this context they cite an ancient legend. On the 
Kailasa Mountain this was recounted by Siva to ᤅal).mukha who 
had devoutly asked him. 
lsvara said: 
Formerly, 0 Skanda, in Tretayuga, Raval).a was killed by Rama. 
At that time fourteen crores of Brahmarakᤄasas were killed. 


V.iii.84.9-1 7 
275 
When they were killed for the sake of according protection to 
heaven-dwellers, dear son, there was a great deal of joy and 
merriment in all the three worlds. 
After redeeming Slta, Rama came to Ayodhya along with the 
leading monkeys. Bharata, the elder brother of Lakᤄmar;ta, arranged 
for a great festival and handed over the kingdom to him. Thereafter 
Ram a began to rule the kingdom from which all thorns ( en­
emies) had been eradicated. Hanuman who had completed his 
task, went to Kailasa. Nandin, the door-keeper, did not allow 
the monkey, though he was a part of Rudra, to meet Rudra, 
the destroyer of a heap of sins. 
Nandi was thereupon asked by him: "What sin has been 
committed by me? Wherefore am I denied the pleasure of 
seeing the meritorious body of Rudra accompanied by Arhbika?" 
Nandin said: 
0 leader of monkeys, you had taken up (this) incarnation 
for the sake of the Devas. Yet the sin committed can be de­
stroyed only through suffering the consequences thereof. 
Hanumiin said: 
9-1 7. 0 Nandin , was it any sin that I committed, when I was 
carrying out the task of Devas? Of course the wicked Rakᤄasas 
who desecrated the Yajiias of the Brahmar;tas were killed. 
Curious to hear their conversation, Hara peeped through 
another door and saw the monkey of terrible strength, who 
happened to be a part of himself. Afterwards, he saw the Lord 
of monkeys standing before him. 
The Lord said: 
lsvara said: 
0 monkey, Ganga, Gaya, Reva, Yamuna and Sarasvatl are 
the rivers that destroy all sins. Take the holy baths in them. 
On the southern bank of Narmada there is an extremely 
splendid Tlrtha situated very near Somanatha. 0 monkey, do 
go there. At my behest your great sin will perish by taking a 
holy plunge there. 
* 
* 
* 


276 
Skanda Purii:TJ,a 
Leaping up from there, Hanuman roared loudly and went 
to the southern bank of Reva. He performed a very severe 
penance there. Mter a short period, with the favour of Isa, 0 
son of Kunti, the sin resulting from the slaying of the Rakᤁasas 
became dissolved even as he performed the penance. 
Thereafter, Lord Hara went to that Tirtha along with the 
Devas. He embraced the monkey and granted him a boon: 
"Henceforth this shall undoubtedly be your Tirtha. " 
Thenceforth it became Kapitlrtha and Hara himself remains 
stationed there by the name Hanumantdvara. He dispels all 
sins resulting from all sorts of killings. 
1 8-27. 
All the sins of that person who takes his holy bath 
there devoutly and worships the Liil.ga, perish as averred by 
Hara himself. 
If the bones are dissolved there and if Pir:u;las are offered 
there, there is everlasting benefit. Whatever is gifted there has 
a crore times benefit. 
Hanuman went to Ayodhya to see Rama. He recounted to 
him what transpired in regard to himself in the course of their 
pleasant dialogue. 
Sn Riima said: 
As you carried out the task of the Devas as well as that of 
mine (you incurred sin ) . So I too have become a sinner. Un­
doubtedly I have to and I shall perform penance. 
Thereafter Raghava performed penance for twenty-four years 
there on the southern bank of Reva that destroys sins.1 
He stayed in the city of Jyoti!)mati and took a holy plunge in 
Reva. At his bidding Lak!)mai_la rendered him regular service. 
Both of them, Rama and Lak!)mai_la installed Liil.gas there. 
By the power of the genuine penance on the banks of Reva 
the two heroes of great intellect, Rama and Lak!)mai_la, at­
tained relief from sins. 
Then Hara, the leader of Devas, came to the Tirtha along 
with the meritorious sages. After releasing his own Kala (Part) 
into the Tirtha he granted a boon. 
I . 
There is no confirmation of this in the text of Ramayal)a. This is for the 
glorification of that Tirtha. 


V.iii.84.28-44 
277 
Potfuls of water of all the Tlrthas were poured on the ground 
by the sages. Gathering together it became a Linga by the 
name Kalakurhbha. 
The Lord became well-known as Kurhbhe5vara; he was adored 
by the groups of Devas. Rama too worshipped that Linga that 
was resorted to by the Devas. 
28-36. 
ln order to enhance the glory of Rama, the Lord 
granted another boon. On the twenty-fourth year of his pen­
ance, Rama attained relief from sins, when Saturn was in Kanya 
(Virgo) Zodiac along with Jupiter (Guru) . Hence the Devas 
proclaimed gladly that the Devayatra (divine procession) shall 
be conducted at that time. 
Just as one obtains the benefit of all the Tlrthas in the 
Godavari Tlrtha, so also 
.
men get the benefit through the holy 
ablution in Reva and also by visiting the Lingas. 
[Siva said:] 
0 Saᤂmukha, listen to the benefit of those who remain in 
the vicinity of Kurhbhe5vara on the banks of Narmada and 
perform the Sraddha of Pitrs. The Pitrs will have the never­
failing goal for as many years as there are pores of hairs in the 
body of all human beings. 
By seeing the three Lingas men obtain that benefit which 
is usually obtained by visiting all the deities on the earth and 
taking ablution in all the Tlrthas. 
A man without a son obtains a son. An impoverished man 
obtains wealth; a sick person is freed from ailments. No hesi­
tation or doubt need be entertained in this respect. 
0 Skanda, in the vicinity of Kurhbhesvara the benefit ob­
tained is twelve times that of the bath taken in Godavari when 
Jupiter is in Sirhha (Leo) Zodiac. 
Those who know but do not visit Kurhbh asarhbhu, the con­
sort of Uma, on the southern bank of Narmada, have their very 
birth fruitless. 
37-44. 
This is spoken by the Lord, that the Devayatra should 
be conducted in the twenty-fourth year as in the case of Godavari 
Yatra as per bidding of the sages. 
The Dana made in the vicinity of Reva in Kurhbhe5vara is 
everlasting in its benefit as long as the Moon, the Sun and the 
stars are oresent in the firmament. 


278 
Skanda Purii7Ja 
There all great Diinas should be made by wise and learned 
people. They praise the Dana of cows, gold and silver here. 
When a mass of sins perishes by a mere remembrance of the 
Tirtha, what doubt is there, 0 Skanda, that it destroys the sin 
of Brahmal).a-slaughter through holy bath? 
He who takes the holy bath there in the Tirtha and per­
forms the Sraddha, 0 YudhiHhira, shall redeem one hundred 
one generations of his family at the bidding of Siva. 
Whatever Tirthas, lakes and oceans there are, they do not 
deserve even a sixteenth fraction of the adoration of the Sivaliilga. 
Thus the Devas with Hari and Isvara as their leaders granted 
the boon , left their excellent names and went to their respec­
tive abodes. 
After granting the boon to this Tirtha, Rama, the elder 
brother of Lakᤄmal).a, entered Ayodhya freed from sins by the 
waters of Narmada. 
45-50. 
Accompanied by sages, people, deities and the 
members of his family, and after making a gold idol of Sita, 
he performed a sacrifice there at that Tirtha. That Tirtha was 
created formerly in Tretayuga, and named after Skanda. Hence 
the Liilga should be regularly visited by people. 
Sins accrued due to great evil deeds affect the bodies only 
until a creature visits the Tirtha resorted to by Devas. 
Those who visit the great Lord Hara installed in the city of 
Jyotiᤄmati are noble-souled and blessed. Their birth and life 
are excellent. 
Hence getting rid of ignorance, the Tirtha named Kurhbhdvara 
should be respectfully approached by people for the sake of 
obtaining all benefits. 
Sri Miirka7J,rf,eya said: 
After hearing these words of Sarhbhu, ᤅal).mukha respect­
fully bowed to the pair of lotus-like feet of his father, reached 
· the southern bank of Siva's river and visited (Liilgas of) the 
leading monkey, Rama and Kurhbhasarhbhu. 


V.iii.85. 1-10 
279 
CHAPTER EIGHTYFIVE 
The Greatness of Somaniitha 1irtha1 
Sri Miirkar:tcf,eya said: 
1-10. Then, 0 great king, one should go to the age-old 
Tlrtha of Narmada that destroys even the sin of Brahmar:ta­
slaughter. It is on a par with Varar:tasl. 
Yudhi${hira said: 
0 Brahmar:ta, let the wonderful thing that happened on the 
banks of Narmada be recounted. 0 venerable Lord, how is it 
on a par with Varanaᤄl? Do tell me. My kingdom is taken away 
from me. I have sunk in the ocean of misery, 0 excellent 
Brahmar:ta. Along with my kinsmen I have become rid of sor­
rows after having bathed in the water of your speech. 
Sri Miirkaryjeya said: 
Excellent! Excellent! 0 mighty-armed one who are .an orna­
ment unto the lunar race, I have been asked about a very rare 
and inaccessible Tlrtha that has to be kept as the utmost secret. 
At first there was the Pitamaha (Grandfather Brahma) , the 
Lord of the entire universe. Ten leading sages were mentally 
born unto him, viz. Marlci, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, 
Kratu, Pracetas, VasiHha, Bhrgu and Narada. 
The highly refulgent Prajapati named Pracetas begot Dakᤄa. 
It is well-known that fifty daughters were born to Dakᤄa. 
He gave ten of them to Dharma and thirteen to Kasyapa. 
The illustrious one gave twenty-seven to Moon-god (lndu) . 
Among those girls there was one named Rohir:tl. She was the 
greatest beloved of Moon-god. Due to his compassion for the 
remaining ones, Dakᤄa cursed Moon. 
I . 
The story of Dakda·s curse to Soma (Moon-god) for his special attention 
to Rohil)i and neglect of other wives and his redemption from it by a bath 
in the conf)uence of Sarasvati and Western Sea is given in Mbh, Salya 
35.45-86. Here the credit of the redemption is given to a bath in Narmada 
to commemorate which Somanatha was installed. 


280 
Skanda Purii:T}a 
By the power of the curse of Dakᤄa. the Prajapati (Patri­
arch) , Candra (Moon-god) , the Lord of the night, became 
afflicted by consumptive disease and lost all splendour. 
1 1-20. 
Soma (Moon-god) , the nectar-rayed one, went trem-
bling to Pitamaha and prayed: "0 Lotus-born One, obeisance 
to you. 0 Vedagarbha (having the Vedas in the womb} , obei­
sance to you. I have sought refuge in you. Protect me, 0 Lotus­
seated One. " 
Brahmii said: 
0 Lord of the night, you appear to be bereft of your Kalas 
(digits) and hence lacking lustre. 0 dear one, what is the 
reason for which you have become dejected in mind? 
Soma said: 
"0 Brahma, 0 Lord of the universe, lack of lustre in me is 
due to the curse of Dakᤄa. 0 Pitamaha, may the expiation for 
this curse be suggested to me. 
Brahmii said: 
Reva is easily accessible everywhere but at three holy spots 
viz. Orhkara, Bhrgukᤄetra and the confluence with Aurva it is 
difficult of access, 0 Lord of the night, go_ there where Reva 
has its bank (i.e. go to the banks of Reva) . 
He hurriedly went to the place where there is the confluence 
of Reva and Aurvi. 
Soma who was at the terminal stage of sickness meditated 
upon the Enemy of Tripuras. When a hundred years were 
complete Mahe§vara became pleased (with him) . The Bull­
seated Lord, the Consort of Uma, appeared before Somaraja 
who prostrated before the Lord and prayed loudly: "Be victo­
rious, 0 Sarhbhu, I make obeisance to you. Be victorious, 0 
Sailkara; obeisance to the destroyer of sins. Be victorious, 0 
Isvara, 0 Lord of the universe, obeisance to you. Be victorious, 
0 Lord having Vasuki as an ornament. Obeisance. Be victori­
ous. Obeisance to the Lord holding trident and skull. Be vic­
torious, 0 destroyer of the body of Andhaka. Obeisance to the 


V.iii.85.21-35 
281 
slayer of the groups of Danavas. Be victorious, 0 Niᤄkala (with­
out Kalas, parts) . Obeisance to the Sakala (with Kalas) . Be 
victorious, 0 Kala. Obeisance to the burner of Kama. Be vic­
torious. Obeisance to the one having blue neck. Be victorious. 
0 subtle one, 0 unsullied one, 0 Lord of sound! Obeisance 
to you. Be victorious, 0 primordial one, 0 beginningless one, 
0 endless one. 0 Sankara, obeisance. Be victorious, 0 Isa, save 
me, the servant. " 
· 21-25. · 
On being eulogized thus by Somaraja, 0 son of 
PaQ.<;lu, 0 excellent king, Mahadeva was pleased with him along 
with Siva. Sankara said: 
lsvara said: 
0 fair one, request for a boon from me, whatever may be 
in your mind. Very good! Very good! Or mighty one, I am 
pleased with your penance. 
Soma said: 
0 Mahe5vara, I am burnt by the curse of Dakᤄa and have 
become feeble without intrinsic strength. 0 Lord, stop the 
effect of the curse. 0 Lord, grant me welfare. 
lsvara said: 
I have been captivated by your devotion. I, along with Uma, 
have been propitiated. You are Somanatha devoid of sins. By 
resorting to the Tirtha you have become so (sinless) . 
Thus the Lord of the chiefs of Devas spoke ( to Moon-god) . 
Mter meditating for a while, the great Linga was installed by 
Indu. It is the bestower of cherished desires on all living beings 
in the world. It is destructive of all miseries.· It Is destructive 
of the sin of BrahmaQ.a-slaughter. 
Yudhi$lhira said: 
26-35. 
0 venerable Lord, tell me succinctly the ,power of 
Somanatha. You have come to us, 0 excellent BrahmaQ.a, .as 
the saviour of those who are submerged in the ocean ofmisery. 


282 
Skanda Purii:r:ta 
Sri Miirkar.ujeya said: 
Listen to · the efficacy of the Tlrtha. 1 I shall briefly recount 
to you what happened on the northern bank at the confluence 
of Reva and Uri. 
There was a king named Sarhbara. Trilocana was his son and 
KaQva was the son of Trilocana. He was given to sinfulness. 
He used to wander in forest everyday and looked for herds 
of deer. A herd of deer was killed by the son of Trilocana. 
A Brahmal)a was wandering in the midst of the deer in the 
guise of a deer in the desolate forest. Due to his association 
with the herd of deer, the excellent sage was incidentally killed 
by KaQva. 
KaQva who had thus incurred the sin of BrahmaQa-slaughter 
roamed over the earth lustre less and feeble. In the course of 
his wanderings he reached Narmada at the confluence of Uri. 
It abounded in trees like Kirhsuka, Asoka, Jamblra, Panasa, 
Kadamba, Pa!ala etc. The beauty was enhanced by Bilva and 
Narailga trees. There were tamarind and Campaka trees too. 
An Agasti tree spread its shadow there. 
The forest teeming with many living beings was splendid 
everywhere with beasts of prey like leopards, deers, cats, Sarhbara 
and Sukara (wild boars) . It was full of rabbits, Gavayas (blue 
oxen) , peacocks and wild asses. 
Hardly did he enter the forest when KaQva was overwhelmed 
with thirst and extreme fatigue. He then took his holy bath in 
the meritorious waters of Reva at the confluence that destroys 
sins. 
36-40. 
With great devotion, SomaniHha was adored by him, 
0 YudhiHhira. He drank the excessively pure waters that destroy 
all sins. 
· 
Along with his servants, he tasted various kinds of fruits. 
l::hterly tired due to the hunting of deer, he slept soundly in 
the shade of the trees. 
In the meantime a certain Brahmal)a came to that confluence 
in the excellent Tlrtha for bathing. The Brahmal)a wayfarer 
was urged by delight with (his) mind resting therein'. 
1 . 
The story of Prince Kai;va to illustrate the efficacy of this Tirtha, is a 
special contribution of this author. · 


V.iii.85.41-54 
283 
A woman said to him: "0 excellent BrahmaQ.a, stop, stop ! " 
Even as the frightened BrahmaQ.a looked all round in every 
direction, 0 king, he saw a woman clad in red garments, wearing 
red garlands, smeared profusely with red sandalpaste. She held 
a noose in her hands. 
The woman said: 
41-46. 
0 BrahmaQ.a, may this message be heard. If you 
are going towards the confluence, my husband is staying there. 
Send him to me quickly saying, "Your wife is waiting alone in 
the middle of the forest. " 
On hearing thus, the BrahmaQ.a repaired to the holy confluence, 
rare even to Suras. Kar:tva who was restinlr in the cool shade 
of the trees was seen by the BrahmaQ.a. Thereupon the excel­
lent BrahmaQ.a spoke these words to him: 
The Briihmar_ta said: 
A certain lotus-eyed maiden was seen by me in the middle 
of the forest. The maiden is clad in red garments. She has 
smeared her body with red sandalpaste. Wearing red garlands 
she appears highly splendid. The fawn-eyed damsel has a noose 
in her hands. Seated on the top of a tree, she spoke to me 
these words: " May my husband be sent. " 
Kar_tva said: 
0 eminent BrahmaQ.a, in which holy spot is that fawn-eyed 
damsel? To whom does she belong? For what reason is she 
staying there? Tell me all this. 
The Briihmar_ta said: 
47-54. 
She is in the park itself half a Krosa away from the 
confluence. 
The king could not understand (who she was) merely through 
these words of the BrahmaQ.a. 
Thereupon, King Kar:tva commanded his own messenger. 


284 
Skanda Pura:r;a 
Kar.tva said: 
Do go there and ask her from which place she has come and 
where will she go. 
The messenger thus sent hurriedly went near the woman. 
He saw the maiden seated on the tree and told her, 0 
excellent king: "My master asks you who you are and where will 
you go?" 
The girl said: 
A preceptor instructs and trains those who possess Atman 
(i.e. those who are good) . A king chastises those with an evil­
Atman (i.e. the evil-minded ones) . Here, Varna, the son of 
Vivasvan (Sun-god) is the chastiser of those who commit sins 
secretly. The sin of Brahmal).a-slaughter has befallen through 
the killing of the Brahmal).a in the guise of a deer. Though 
possessed by me, your king is liberated by the power of -the 
Tirtha. 
Within a distance of half a Krosa the sin of Brahmal).a-slaughter 
cannot gain entry. Such is the power of Somanatha. It is re­
membered as one on a par with Varal).asi. 
Do go; let the king be sent here quickly and without any 
hesitation. 
The servant hurriedly came back trembling and greatly agitated. 
He recounted everything that happened earlier. At the state­
ment of the servant the king fell on the ground. 
The servant said:. 
55-63. 
0 Lord, why do you grieve? Whether it is auspi­
cious or inauspicious, it has already been acquired. 
On hearing his words the king spoke these words: "I will cast 
off my life in the vicinity of Somanatha. May fire and plenty 
of fuel be brought. " 
Presently everything was brought by the servants who were 
under his control. The king took his holy ablution in the splendid 
water at the confluence that is destructive of sins. He adored 
Somanatha with great devotion. He circumambulated three 


V.iii.85.64-70a 
285 
times the blazing fire. Mter meditating in his heart upon Janardana, 
the Lord clad in yellow garments and wearing matted hairs (?) 
and a crown, Ka::r.tva, the king, jumped into the fire. 
He meditated upᤞn the Lord who was accompanied by Sri 
and was seated on Garmᤚa, the Lord who held conch, discus 
and club and who invariably slew Asuras. (He prayed:) "May 
beatitude be attained by me. " 
A voice said: "Excellent! Excellent! 0 prince! " and a shower 
of flowers fell. 
The servants witnessed the unprecedented miracle-and looked 
at one another. They too meditated on Gadadhara (Lord ViᤁI).U 
holding a mace) in their hearts and died by jumping into the 
fire. Thereafter, 0 son of Pal).<;lu, all of them were seen seated 
in aerial chariots. 
By the power of Somanatha they were 'freed from sins and 
went to heaven as the Brahmal).a was meditating on the Bull­
emblemed One. 
Sri Miirkar;uf,eya said: 
64-70a. 
This is the power Somanatha. 
Listen with attention to the ritual (of worship) . The days for 
observance of fast are the eighth and the fourteenth lunar 
days. At all times the fast can be undertaken on Sundays- es­
pecially in the bright half if Sunday coincides with the seventh 
lunar day. The man should observe fast and at night he should 
devoutly keep awake. 
He should bathe Parame8vara with milk products and Paiicamrta. 
Thereafter he should apply sandal paste and offer flowers, incense 
etc. The lamp shall be lighted with ghee therein and there 
should be dance and music. 
In the morning of Monday and the eighth lunar day, Brahmal).as 
should be honoured. They should have great control on anger 
and be self-possessed. They should have avoided censuring 
others. They should be handsome in every limb. They should 
be worthy of being praised. They should be those who looked 
after their wives very well. They should be regularly reciting 
Gayatri. They should never indulge in prohibited rites. If a 
remarried widow, Vpᤁali and Siidri frequent anyone's abode, 
he (such a Brahmal).a) should be abandoned even frorn a distance 
by one who wishes for one's welfare. In the course of Vrata, 


286 
Skanda Puriir_ta 
Sraddha and Dana, the following should be avoided even from 
a great distance: those deficient in any limb, those who have 
additional limbs and those who have no proper antecedents. 
70b-78. 
Brahmal).as bereft of Vedic study are like maidens 
of steel. Undoubtedly they cause the downfall of themselves 
along with those on whose behalf they perform holy rites. 
Brahmal).as regularly performing the six Karmas are on a 
par with the rafts made of Salmali tree (silk-cotton tree) . They 
themselves cross and enable the donor too to cross (the ocean 
of existence) . 
One who performs a Sraddha at Some5vara (of the departed 
ones) without feeling of jealousy, his ancestors, the departed 
ones, become deeply satisfied until the annihilation of all liv­
ing beings. 
This is my truthful statement that he who gifts cooked food, 
garments and gold to a Brahmal).a goes to the world of Sarikara. 
One should gift a full-fledged horse, young and white in 
colour. It may be red ·or yellow but shall have all characteristic 
features. The Brahmal).a as well as the horse should be smeared 
with Kurhkuma, adorned with garlands and covered with a 
white cloth. 
He should tell the Brahmal).a, "Keep your feet on my shoul­
ders and get on to the horse. " 
When the Brahmal).a is comfortably seated after mounting, 
the devotee should say, "May Bhaskara (Sun-god) be pleased. " 
He shall be rid of all sins and go to the world of Sarikara. 
79-89. 
If a person with his sense-organs under control 
goes to Somatirtha on a day of eclipse, he shall become a 
righteous king even after falling down from Satyaloka. His residence 
shall always be there. It never perishes. His son becomes long­
lived. His wife is always favourably disposed towards him. He 
shall be free from all miseries and shall live more than a hundred 
years. 
A person should observe fast and eschew anger and (then) 
offer a cow to a Brahmal).a along with her calf. The cow should 
be a milch one and should be covered with a white doth. The 
cow may be of any of these colours: variegated, yellow, smoke­
gray, blue and spotted, tawny etc. She should be embellished 
with bells and ornaments. The hoofs should be covered with 


v. iii.85. 90-99 
287 
silver. A pot made of brass should be given for milking. 0 king, 
the horns should be capped with gold. 
By offering a white cow a donor gets the family increased; 
a red cow increases good fortune. Variegated and yellow ones 
are reputed as destroyers of misery. 
A tawny-coloured one destroys sin acquired in the course of 
seven births. The donor of a cow attains Satyaloka, 0 king. 
At the end of a fortnight, during Vyatipata and Vaidhrti, at 
the time of the transit of the Sun, when the day comes to a 
close, when there is the Gajacchayaparva (?) , solar edipse etc., 
the noble-souled devotees should go to the confluence rare 
even unto the Suras. After smearing oneself with clay he enters 
the water. With water upto the level of the heart, he shall 
perform the Japa of Gayatri, of Viᤄl)u, Sup-god or Siva as he 
pleases and perform Prar:tayama. They too are relieved of their 
sins. Thus spake Sari.kara. If one circumambulates the area 
around Somanatha, it is as though the entire earth consisting 
of the seven continents has been circumambulated by him. 
90-99. 
There is no doubt that a slayer of a Brahmal)a, an 
imbiber of liquor, one who resorts to the wife of the preceptor, 
a killer of foetus, one who steals gold-all these are rid of their 
sins. A person with the sense-organs subdued, who listens to 
this narrative of the Tirtha, becomes rid of the ailment if he 
is sick and if he is not sick attains happiness. 
If your mind is burning with trouble you will do well, 0 
YudhiHhira, to listen to me. In this world, 0 king, even a single 
foeticide is very difficult to get rid of. It is much more difficult, 
0 son of Kunti, in the case of Moon who was guilty of twenty­
six sins of foeticide (due to his negligence of twenty-six wives) . 
He too came to this Tirtha, performed a very severe penance 
and became rid of all sins. 
The Cool-rayed One thus became happy. 0 king, this an­
cient Gatha (verse) is heard as sung by the great sages: "A 
single Liri.ga installed duly shall dispel ten foeticidal sins." Hence, 
0 descendant of Bharata, Soma (Moon-god) installed three 
Lingas: The first Liri.ga was installed at the confluence of Reva 
and Uri; the second one at Bhrgukacchaka; after attaining 
great Siddhi he installed the third one at Prabhasa. 
Thus I have told you entirely the greatness of the Tirtha. 
It is conducive to piety, good fame, long life and heavenly 
pleasures. It sanctifies men. 


288 
Skanda Purii:r_ta 
He who seeks sons, gets sons and one without desire attains 
heaven. Mter performing the pilgrimage to the Tirtha, 0 king, 
one becomes relieved of all sins. Thus the entire benefit of 
Somanatha has been narrated. Undoubtedly one who listens to 
this gets a son and one who bathes, eight sons. 
CHAPTER EIGHTYSIX 
The Greatness of Pingalesvara Tirtha 
Sri Miirkar;uf,eya said: 
1-8. 
Thereafter, 0 great king, one should go to the excel: 
lent Piilgalavarta. It is on the northern bank in the vicinity of 
the confluence. 0 leading king, Piilgaldvara was installed by 
Havyavahana (Fire-g_od) . 
Yudhiţthira said: 
0 venerable one, how was Isvara installed by Havyavaha? 
Narrate everything to me. It behoves you to recount it as a 
favour. 
Miirka1J4eya .said: 
0 king, Retas (semen virile) was sprinkled over Havyavahana 
by Sarilbhu who had attained the height of orgastic excitement 
while gleefully sporting with Gaurl. 
The Retas was cast into the mouth of Havyavaha by Rudra 
of unmeasured lustre. Scorched by the Retas of Rudra, he became 
eager to undertake a pilgrimage. 
Crossing the oceans and rivers he gradually came to Reva. 
Fire-god then performed a severe penance with great devotion 
᤟nd meditated. 
Hutasana (Fire-god) solely lived on air and conᤠinued the 
penance for more than a hundred years. Ultimately Mahadeva 
became pleased and was ready to grant boons to Jatavedas 
(Fire-god) . Approaching him (Fire-god) , he spoke these words: 


V.iii.86.9-15 
289 
lsvara said: 
0 Havy;Ha (Fire-god) , choose a boon, whatever may be m 
your mind. 
Vahni (Fire-god) said: 
Obeisance to you, 0 Lord of all the worlds. 0 Lord of fiery 
form, I make obeisance to you. Scorched by your Retas, I have 
become leprous, 0 Mahdvara. Be compassionate, 0 Mahadeva; 
destroy (heal completely my) ailmen ts. 
lsvara said: 
9-15. 0 Havyavaha, be free from ilhtess quickly with my 
favour. Taking your holy bath in the Ti:rtha here, you will 
regain your original form. 
After saying thus, Mahadeva vanished there itself. Thereaf­
ter Havyavaha hurriedly took his bath in the waters of Reva. 
Instantly he became completely free from ailments and at­
tained a divine form. Vahni (Fire-god) thereafter installed the 
Lord of Devas, named Pingale§vara. 
He worshipped him joyously and eulogized through prayers. 
Thereafter Havyavahana went back to his own land, the land 
of Devas. 
0 king, it was thus that Pingalesvara was installed by Havyavaha. 
Only he who has subdued anger should observe fast there. He 
will attain the benefit of the Yajiia called Atiratra. In the end, 
he shall attain the status of Rudra. 
0 descendant of Bharata, one should offer a tawny-coloured 
cow with her calf to a BrahmaQa. She should be adorned in 
accordance with one 's capacity. 0 great king, he who gives this 
shall attain the greatest goal. 


290 
Skanda Purii:r.ta 
CHAPTER EIGHTYSEVEN 
The Greatness of f.l7J.a-tray-mo.cana Tirtha1 
Sri Marka7J-4eya said: 
1-5. 
Thereafter, 0 king, one should go to the highly excellent 
Tlrtha which was established by the groups of sages born of the 
family of Brahma. 
It is called Rr:tamocana. It is situated on the banks of Reva. 
A person should devoutly offer libations to the Pitrs and de­
ities for six months. 
Instantly the debt to Devas, Pitrs, and human beings owed 
by himself becomes redeemed as soon as the man takes his 
bath in the waters of Narmada. 
There the sin is actually and directly seen as the result. If 
a person who has subdued his sense-organs takes his bath with 
concentration of mind in that Tlrtha and performs charity and 
worships the Consort of Girija (Uma) , he becomes free from 
the three kinds of debts and remains resplendent in the heav­
enly world. 
CHAPTER EIGHTYEIGHT 
The Greatness of Kapile5vara Tirtha 
Sri Marka7J-4eya said: 
1-7. Thereafter, 0 son of Kuntl, a person should resort to the 
Kapila Tirtha installed by Kapila. It is destructive of all sins. 
0 king, on the eighth and fourteenth days of a bright fort­
night, the person should bathe the Lord, with great devotion, 
with the milk of a tawny-coloured cow or ghee. Then he should 
smear Mahdvara with sandalpaste and sweet scents. Then , 0 
excellent king, he should adore with white, sweet-smelling flowers. 
Those who have conquered their anger and adore (Siva) thus, 
never go to the abode of Yama. 
1 . The belief that everyone owes the obligations of and has to repay the 'debt' 
to parents or ancestors, to gods and to society is certainly noble. Dharma5astra 
works specified Sraddha, performance of sacrifices etc. for this. But this 
text advises to take a bath in this Tirtha and wash off the debts. 


V.iii.89. 1-5 
291 
By adoring Kapilesvara, wise persons never see the terrible 
hell of Asipatravana and the fierce Yamaculll (Oven of Yama) . 
After taking the holy bath in the meritorious Reva waters, the 
devotee should feed auspicious BrahmaQ.as, 0 descendant ofBharata, 
and gratify them with the gifts of cows, garments, gingelly seeds, 
umbrella and quilts. He is reborn as a pious king. 
His splendour will be dazzling but he will not be terrible 
(i.e. he will be quiescent) . His sons will live long. He will speak 
pleasing words. 0 son of PaQ.<;lu, he will never face hosts of 
enemies. 
CHAPTER EIGHTYNINE 
The Greatness of Putikesvara Tirtha 
Sri Miirkm:u!eya said: 
1-5. 
Thereafter, 0 great king, a person should go to the 
excellent Putike§vara which is destructive of all sins. It is situ­
ated on the southern bank of Narmada. It was installed by 
Jambavanta who sought the welfare of all the worlds. 
There was a king named Prasenajit. The jewel from his1 
chest was taken out, where a wound had been caused, which 
had become foul and putrid. He performed a penance there 
at the Tlrtha and the wound healed. 
The excellent Putikesvara Linga was installedᤡ by him. 0 
most excellent one among the descendants of Bharata, the 
man who devoutly takes his holy bath there attains all cher­
ished desires after worshipping Paramesvara. 0 king, on the 
eighth and the fourteenth days in the dark half of a month 
and at all times, devotees should adore the Lord. They never 
go to the abode of Yama. 
I . 
Here the reading should have been ' tasya' and not ' tasyam' as i t cannot 
be construed in this contex't which refers to King Presenajit. 
2. 
There appears some confusion of the author. According to BhP X.56. 1 3-
l 4 a lion killed Prasenajit and took away the dazzling Syamantaka gem 
from him; Jimbavan killed the lion and took away the gem. Here jambavan 
is said to have taken the gem from the chest of Prasenajit; so it was 
Prasenajit who was wounded and the wound was healed at this Tirtha. So 
here ' lena' stands for Prasenajit and notjambavan unless we imagine that 
seeing the healing effect of the water of the Tirtha in the case of Prasenajit, 
Jambavan installed the Linga. 


292 
Skanda Purii:T}a 
CHAPTER NINETY 
The Greatness of jalasiiyt Tirtha 
Sri Miirkar.uf,eya said: 
1-1 1 . On the northern bank of Reva, there is an excellent 
Tirtha dedicated to ViᤁQ.U. It's name Jalasiiyt is well-known all 
over the earth. 
Mter slaying DanavasJanardana went to sleep there. The discus 
was also washed by the Discus-bearing Lord of Devas. By resorting 
to the waters of Reva, Sudarsana became free from sins. 
Yudhi$!hira said: 
Do recount the details of the Cakratirtha bowed to by groups 
of sages, so also the inimitable prowess of ViᤁQ.u as well as the 
benefit accruing from Reva. 
Sri Miirkar;uf,eya said: 
Well! Well! 0 highly intelligent YudhiHhira, you are indeed 
one without any attachment (for worldly pleasures) . The Tirtha 
that has to be kept as a great secret has been created by the 
Discus-bearing Lord himself. Hence I shall recount to you the 
story that is destructive of sins. 
Formerly there was a great Daitya well-known as Talamegha.1 
All the Devas were conquered by him, 0 king. Their kingdom 
was taken away. He claimed: "I am ViᤁQ.U. There is no doubt 
about it. " He himself partook of the shares in the Yajiias. The 
wealth of Dhanada was taken away. The elephant of Sakra was 
snatched. The sinner coveted even IndraQ.i and the excellent 
horse of Sun-god. 
0 son of Kunti, afraid of Talamegha, Ravi, Rudras, Indra, 
Yama, Skanda, VaruQ.a, Fire-god, Wind-god, Lord Dhanesvara, 
Vakpati (Brhaspati) and Mahesa became morose. They went to 
Brahmaloka and met Pitamaha. The Suras beginning with Vagisa 
(Brhaspati) eulogized with various hymns of prayer: "Obei­
sance to the Lord carrying out the differentiation of the three 
GuQ.as and thereafter acquiring differentiation." 
* 
* 
* 
1 . No such demon is known to Mbh, VR, and PE. This appears to be a new 
legend to glorify the Tirtha. 


V.iii. 90. 12-24 
293 
On seeing the Devas devoid of enthusiasm and pallid in 
face, 0 king, the delighted Lord replied to the heaven-dwell­
ers: 
Brahmii said: 
1 2-24. 
Welcome unto the group of Suras. Why? Your earlier 
brilliance has vanished? Your faces resemble the luminaries 
under the painful influence of overhanging mist and fog? The 
weapons of the Suras remain unmanifest due to the disappear­
ance of their lustre. The Kulisa (thunderbolt) of the Slayer of 
Vrtra appears as though its glory has been checked and mit­
igated. Further, the noose in the hand of Pracetas (VaruQ.a) 
which used to be impossible to ward off to the enemies has 
reduced to the helplessness of a serpent.whose vigour and 
vitality has been checked by a Mantra (magic spell) . 
The mental gloom of Kubera seems to proclaim his discom­
fiture. Vayu (Wind) with controlled gait appears like a tree 
with broken branches. 
Though never-failing, Yama too, now goes on scratching the 
ground with his staff devoid of its intrinsic brilliance, bringing 
out the dimness of an extinguished firebrand. 
How have these Adityas (Sun-gods) unfortunately have be­
come cool through the loss of their brilliance ( They can be 
seen at pleasure like those painted in a picture. So, tell me, 
dear ones, why you have come here and wl;J.at you seek from 
me. What is the pur!JOSe oi your visit, 0 Suras? Tell me 
unhesitatingly. Only the creation of the worlds is vested in me. 
The onus of guarding it lies in you. 
Thereupon Vrtra's Slayer nudged his Guru as though by 
means of his thousand eyes that exhibited the lustre of a lotus­
pond gently wafted by mild wind. 
Indeed he was the eye (the seer) on behalf of Indra. Though 
he possessed only two eyes, they were more powerful than h is 
(Indra's) thousand eyes. Vacaspati (Brhaspati) spoke thus to 
the Lotus-seated Lord with hands joined in deference. 
"0 dear father, the mighty Talamegha born of your family, 
harasses the Devas like a comet that has come up. 
All the groups of the Devas are miserable on account of that 
Danava. Talamegha, the powerful Lord of the Daityas, tor-


294 
Skanda Purii1J,a 
ments all of us. Hence we have sought refuge in you. 0 Vidhi 
(Brahma) , be our shelter and resort. " 
Thereupon the delighted Lord Brahma spoke these words 
to them: 
Brahmii said: 
25-35. 
0 Suras, except Lord Madhava, there is no one 
among you who is on a par with that Talamegha. That Danava 
cannot be controlled by me too. 
Thereupon, 0 king, all the groups of the Suras with Viriiici 
(Brahma) as their leader started towards the Ocean of Milk. 
Utterly miserable on account of that enemy, the Devas hur­
riedly set off with a desire to see Kesava. After reaching the 
Ocean of Milk, they eulogized Lord Jalasayin (i.e. Viᤄr:tu) . 
The Devas said:' 
You are beginningless and the universe takes its origin from 
you. You annihilate the universe but you yourself are endless. 
The universe constitutes your form; otherwise you are form­
less. Be victorious, 0 Lord adored by the Devas. 
Be victorious, 0 Lord lying in the Ocean of Milk. Be victo­
rious, 0 Lord who are always wooed by Lakᤄml. Be victorious, 
0 son of Devakl, for the purpose of the· destruction of the 
Danavas. Be victorious, 0 Lord having the conch and the club 
in the hands. Be victorious, 0 Lord holding the discus. 
On hearing this eulogy sung by the Devas, Jalasayin woke 
up. He uttered sweet words with the majestic rumbling sound 
of clouds: "0 Brahma, why have I been awakened by your Suras 
and Asuras (?) , though they are themselves powerful. " 
Brahmii said: 
0 Krᤄr:ta, they have come to your abode due to their fright 
of Talamegha. 0 Janardana, the sinner Talamegha cannot be 
killed by anyone. Do kill that wicked fellow. Otherwise he will 
not die. 


V.iii. 90.36-45 
295 
Sri Kr6r:ta said: 
0 Devas, return to your own abodes and take up the work 
of your own subjects. I shall kill the evil-minded, mighty Talamegha. 
But let the Devas tell me the place where that Danava stays. 
The Devas said: 
36-45. 
That Lord of Danavas dwells in the caves of Himalaya 
surrounded by twenty-four thousand maidens and by innumer­
able horses and chariots, 0 Krᤄ:r:ta. 
Actors1 (? warriors) are of various kinds there, 0 Hari, and 
their qualities cannot be counted. The elephants are as huge 
as mountains and the horses are comparable to elephants. The 
mighty giant inspiring fear into the Devas stays there. 
" 
On hearing the words of those Devas who were extremely 
agitated within, the Lord thought about Garu<;la, the destroyer 
of multitudes of enemies. 
The Lord wielding club and discus, took up the discus in the 
hand. With his other hands janardana held the bow, the pestle 
and the plough2 and mounted the Lord of birds for the pur­
pose of slaying the Danava. 
At that time evil portents, terrible in form, began to occur 
in the city of the Danava. 
Jackals entered the middle of vultures along with pigeons. 
Even when there was no wind blowing, his flagstaff fell down. 
There was a fight between serpents and mice as well as lions 
and elephants. Rivers deviated from their path and flowed with 
a mixture of blood. Untimely and off-season flowers were seen 
on the trees all round. Then the Lord of the universe reached 
Himalaya, the Lord of mountains. In the vicinity of the city, 
the conch, Pafi.cajanya, was blown suddenly. 
Due to that loud report, the Lord of Danavas became highly 
infuriated. Then the mighty Talamegha spoke these words: 
1. The reading should be emended as Bha!ii/} (oro:) , soldiers, as Na!ii/}, actors, 
is irrelevant here. 
2. A pestle and a plough as weapons of war are associated with Balarama, 
Kr¿Q.a's elder br6ther. They are shown to be Vi¿Q.u's weapons here! 


296 
Skanda Pura7J.a 
Talamegha said: 
46-55. 
0 Dhundhumara, who is it that has unwittingly 
fallen into the clutches of Death without being aware of my 
power? 0 Dhundhuniara, at my behest, go quickly, surrounded 
by your own army; bind that professedly mighty one and bring 
him to me forcibly. 
Dhundhumara said: 
Undoubtedly, I shall bring him whether he be a Sura, Yakᤁa 
or Kinnara, even if he be fully equipped with multitude of 
chariots, elephants, horses and foot-soldiers. 
Thereupon the source of origin of the universe, the power­
ful Lord, was seen seated on GarucJa. 
"Let him be caught. Let him be caught. " The servants were 
ordered thus by him. As they ran about in the four directions 
all round, they were burned like locusts by Suparr;ta (GarucJa) 
of fiery form. 
Dhundhumara was hit hard with an arrow by Krᤁr;ta. Struck 
on his chest the sinful fellow fell on the chariot in a state 
similar to that of the dead. Thereupon all the Danavas became 
excited an.d raised a great cry. 
Thereafter the infuriated Talamegha got into a chariot and 
set out. 0 son of Kunti, he saw Kdava holding the conch, 
discus and club. 
Talamegha said: 
0 Krᤁr;ta, these other Danavas who were killed by you in 
battle are on a par with Hirar;tyakasipu. 0 Acyuta, they were 
not manly enough. 
After saying thus, 0 son of Kunti:, the Danava discharged a 
volley of arrows like a heavy downpour. Keii ava cut and split 
the arrows discharged by the Danava. 
GarucJa slew that part of the army that was indestructible by 
the Suras and Asuras. Twice the number of his (T2.lamegha's) 
arrows was dfscharged by Krᤁr;ta. 
56-65. 
The Danava discharged twice the number further 


V.iii.90.66-78 
297 
(increasing) two-fold. Krᤁr:ta cut them off with arrows eight 
times that number. 
Thereupon an excellent Agneya (pertaining to Fire) arrow 
was discharged by the angry Daitya. Krᤁr:ta discharged VaruQa 
(pertaining to Varur:ta) and the Agneya missile was suppressed 
by the Varut:J.a. Talamegha then countered it by discharging 
Vayavya (pertaining to the Wind) . Hrᤁikda discharged Sarpa 
(pertaining to the serpent) for suppressing the Vayavya. Nrsirilha 
(.Krᤁr:ta) discharged the Narasirhha arrow, 0 son of Par:t<;lu. 
On seeing the Narasirilha, the highly powerful Talamegha 
got down from the chariot quickly. He then seized a sword and 
shield and said, "0 Krᤁt:J.a, I shall send you along the terrible 
path of Varna. " Saying this, 0 son of Kunti, the Danava ap-
proached Kesava. 
• 
The Daitya struck with his sword the club-wieldingjanardana. 
Delighted in his mind, Kdava caught hold of the tip of the 
Mar:t<;lala (Disc?) and struck Talamegha on his chest in the 
course of that great battle. Thereupon the Daitya struck Hari 
andjanardana struck the Daitya in that battle. On thatjanardana 
became all the more infuriated. 0 descendant of Bharata, he 
then took up the never-failing discus and hurled it on the head 
of Talamegha. His head rolled down. Mountains quaked. The 
oceans became agitated, 0 ·son of Kunti, and rivers deviated 
from their regular courses. 
66-78. 
Then the Devas let down a shower of flowers on 
Kdava (saying) : "0 Kesava, one who could not be killed by the 
groups of Suras, has been killed by you ! " Then the Devas became 
normal and happy when Talamegha was felled down. 0 son of 
Kunti, Janat:dana resorted to the banks of Narmada. 
He considered Narmada, the Ocean of Milk itself. Accom­
panied by Lakᤁmi, Krᤁr:ta lay down on the serpent, Ananta, on 
the northern bank of Narmada. 
The terrific Cakra (discus) with the garlands of flames and 
sparks fell into the waters of Narmada in the mortal world very 
near Jalasayin. 
Due to the contact with the waters of Narmada, it became 
rid of sins that had been acquired due to the killing of Talamegha, 
0 son of royal personage. The entire sin was immediately washed 
off in Narmada waters, 0 descendant of Bharata. 
Thereafter, 0 king, this Tirtha became well-known as]alaiay"i 


298 
Skanda Purii:r:ta 
1irtha; some call it Kiiliighaniisana and others Cakra 1irtha. The 
Tirtha on Narmada is very famous in Bharatavarᤁa. 
May the power of that Tirtha be listened to, 0 king. Just as 
Ananta is the most famous of all the serpents, Janardana of all 
the Devas and Margasirᤁa of all the months, so also is Narmada 
the most famous of all the rivers. 
In the month of Margasirᤁa. on the eleventh day in the 
bright half, a man devoid of lust and anger should, meditating 
on Viᤁᤂu. go to Jalesa. 
One who takes a single meal at night and that too unsolic­
ited, who observes fast, feeds Brahmaᤂas and offers gifts to 
them does not go to the abode of Varna. 
Those people who are afraid of the world of Yama, 0 son 
of PaᤂQU, should visit the Lover of Sri lying on the couch of 
the Serpent. He is encircled by cowherdesses, has resorted to 
Yoganidra (Yogic slumber) and is Cosmic-formed. He is the 
Lord of the universe and destroyer of the fear of worldly existence. 
79-89. 
With great devotion, one should bathe the Lord 
with honey, milk, ghee or with water mixed with sugar candy. 
Those people bereft of jealousy who visitjanardana, the source 
of origin of the universe, the deity as being bathed, go to the 
greatest world bowed to by Suras and Asuras. 
A lamp should be lighted with ghee or with gingelly oil. The 
devotees should keep awake at night before the Lord, keeping 
themselves free from envious tendencies. 0 excellent ·king, 
with devotion they should listen to the story of Viᤁᤂu. There 
is no doubt that sins like that of Brahmar:ta-slaughter perish. 
If the men circumambulate the preceptor of the universe, 
Jalasayin, it is as good as if the earth consisting of the seven 
continents is circumambulated. 
When the night dawns, with purity a person should propi­
tiate the Pitrs with the libations of water. 0 son of PaᤂQu, the 
men should perform Sraddha there through well-qualified 
Brahmaᤂas always devoted to their own wives, quiescent and 
avoiding other men 's wives. They should regularly recite Vedic 
passages. They should be auspicious and be strictly engaged in 
their own duties and rites. They must regularly perform Yajiias 
everyday. They must perform Sandhya rites twice a day. If one 
wishes for one's welfare, one should perform Sraddha with 
great faith. 


V.iii.90.90-101 
299 
Those men are blessed in the mortal world, who, worthy of 
being saluted on the earth, always abide resorting to the lotus­
like feet of Hari. Those who visitJalasayin, the leader of Suras, 
directly, those who perform holy rites, such as fortnightly fast; 
Paraka Vrata, the splendid CandrayaQa rites, the terrible monthly 
fast, eating only once in six days and the Paficama Vrata, at 
that Tirtha, shall get the everlasting goal. 
Sri Marka1J4eya said: 
90-1 01 . 
Henceforth I shall explain the benefit of Tiladhenu1 
(a cow made of gingelly seeds) , the procedure thereof, the 
time and the auspicious benefit of the gift. 
This meritorious anecdote was former!f heard from Sage 
Dvaipayana by Narada and others on various occasions at the 
site of the holy Naimiᤁa, 
This is highly conducive to longevity and auspiciousness. It 
augments glory. A wise man who narrates this to Brahmar:tas 
attains infinite benefit. 
A cow, a house, a quilt, women etc. should not be gifted to 
many (i.e. more than one) : On a gift being divided (among 
many) ( vibhaktadak$ina!J?) these do not attain (go back to) the 
donor. 
One of these should be given, 0 YudhiHhira. If it is distrib­
uted among many, it will be subjected to sale and shall burn 
down the family (of the donor) upto the seventh generation. 
Gingelly seeds are of various colours-some are white, some 
black and some resembling cow's urine. A person should make 
a cow and its calf with all these diverse kinds of gingelly seeds. 
The cow should be made of four Dror:tas (a measure of 
quantity of approximately 60 or 30 Kgs) of the gingelly seeds 
as much of each colour as are available. The calf should be 
made of one Dror:ta of gingelly seeds or more if desired. 
The cow of gingelly seeds can be made by the measure or 
weight current in the particular region and doing so a devotee 
attains everlasting benefit. 
It should be placed comfortably on a clean ground strewn 
with flowers, incense and raw rice-grains. Two Ratnas ·(jewels) 
I. This topic is not directly related to this Tirtha. It is probably an interpo­
lation out of context. 


300 
Skanda Purii:TJ.a 
should be placed in the ears and two lamps in the eyes. A piece 
of sandal should be placed in the chest and gold at the navel. 
Honey and ghee should be given above and mustard seeds will 
constitute the hairs. A blanket should be thrown on the back 
and honey and ghee on the hips. Vavasa (fodder) , milk-pud­
ding and ghee along with honey also are to be given. 
The horns are bedecked with gold and the hoofs with silver. 
The tail is also bedecked in gold. Ratnas are placed on the back. 
A brass vessel as one intended for milking should be given. 
102-1 1 1 . Tiladhenu purifies from all the following sins: those 
committed in the childhood; those unwittingly committed; ver­
bal ones; physical ones; mental ones; the sins of spitting into 
water, crossing over a threshing rod, carnally approaching a 
Vpᤁali:, the wife of the preceptor, a virgin etc.; stealing gold; 
and imbibing liquor. ·other sins too are quelled. 
After 6bserving fast for a day and a night, the devotee should 
gift it in accordance with the injunctions. 
The various obstacles in the path towards the abode of Varna 
are easily countered by this gift: for example, the river Vaitarar:ti 
in the terrible city of Varna; the sandy expanse , the iron pieces, 
the rocky region etc. where a sinner is roasted and fried; the 
hell Avici, the Yamala mountains, where there are steel-beaked 
crows and terrible hounds; the hell Asipatravana where there 
is the Kuᤃasalmali: etc. The devotee shall easily cross over these 
and proceed towards the abode of Dharmaraja. 0 descendant 
of Bharata, on seeing him, Dharmaraja speaks pleasing and 
wholesome words: "There is an excellent, befitting Vimana 
(aerial chariot) embellished with gems and jewels. 0 excellent 
man, get into it and attain the greatest goal." Do not give this 
to a clever soldier; do not give it to a mere priest; do not give 
it to a squint-eyed one or an ugly one, one deficient in limbs 
and one who lives on shrines. Do not give it to a Brahmar:ta 
not familiar with the Vedas, nor to one who sells everything, 
one who is treacherous towards friends, one who is ungrateful, 
and one devoid of Mantras. 
1 1 2-1 1 7. It should be given to one who has mastered the 
Vedanta, to a Srotriya having a large family. It should 'be given 
to a son of a master of Vedanta, to a householder, to a Brahmar:ta 
of handsome features in all limbs, one of good conduct and 
pleasing words. 


V.iii.91. 1-9 
301 
The full-moon days of Magha, Karttika, Vaisakha, Margaslrᤄa. 
Aᤄa<;lha and Caitra are good for the gift. The Ayana (transit of 
the Sun) , Viᤄuva · (equinox) , Vyatlpata, at all times on the holy 
occasion ofᤅa<;la81ti etc. and the holy period/moment ofHasticchaya 
(also are good) . 
Thus the Kalpa of Tiladhenu has been recounted to you by 
me. 
They go to the world of ViᤄI).U after placing the foot on 
Yama. After the extinction of life, they go undoubtedly to the 
world of Viᤄl).u. They break through the solar zone and go. No 
hesitation need be entertained. 
Thus the benefit of Cakratlrtha has been entirely recounted 
to you, 0 king. On hearing this devoutly, a man is rid of all 
SinS. 
CHAPTER NINETYONE 
The Greatness of Car.uf,iiditya Tirtha 
Sri Miirka'T}r/-eya said: 
1-9. 
Thereafter, 0 king, one should go to the highly splendid 
Tirtha called Cal).<;laditya. 0 excellent king, it was established 
by Cal).<;ia and Mul).<;la. 
Formerly there were two great and terrible Daityas named 
Cal).<;ia and Mul).<;ia. Resorting to the banks of Narmada, they 
performed very severe penance. 
They meditated on Lord Bhaskara (Sun-god} , the destroyer 
of darkness in all the three worlds. Pleased with their penance, 
the Thousand-rayed Lord said: "Excellent! Excellent! Request 
for a boon, 0 heroes, as you wish, whatever has been desired 
by your mind. " 
Ca'T}r/-a and Mu'T}r/-a said: 
0 Divakara, we should be invincible to all the Devas. We 
should be mentally very alert. At all times, we should be be­
yond the reach of all the ailments. 


302 
Skanda Purii:TJ,a 
"Let it be so", said Bhaskara, the stealer of waters. Mter 
saying so, Bhanu (Sun-god) vanished. With great devotion Bhaskara 
was installed there by them. One should go there for the fulfilment 
of oneself. There one should propitiate by means of libations 
etc., Girval).as (Devas) , human beings and the Pitrs. He shall 
stay in the world of Bhaskara for a period of a day of Viriiici 
(Brahma) , 0 king. 
He should light a lamp on the sixth lunar day, 0 king. He 
is liberated from all sins. He goes to the city of Ravi (Sun-god) . 
He who listens to the origin of CaQ.c;labhanu (i.e. Bhanu 
installed by CaQ.c;la) , 0 leading scion of the family of Bharata, 
shall be always victorious. He shall be free from mental suffer­
ing and physical ailment. 
CHAPTER NINETYfWO 
The Greatness of Yamahasya Tirtha 
Sri MiirkaTJ.4eya said: 
1-5. 
Thereafter, one should go to the excellent Vamahasya 
Tirtha which dispels all sins. It is situated on the banks of 
Narmada. 
Yudhi$thira said: 
0 eminent Brahmal).a, how did this Vamahasya come into 
existence on the earth? Narrate this entirely to me. I have got 
great curiosity about it. 
Sri Marka7J4eya said: 
Well! Well! 0 highly intelligent one! I have been pertinently 
asked, 0 prince. Formerly your father (Varna/Dharma) came 
to the sacred Narmada for taking his holy bath. Just ᤆs a cloth 
washed by a washerman becomes free from impurities, so also, 
0 VudhiHhira, Dharmaraja (Varna) became free from impuri­
ties. On seeing his body devoid of impurities, he was surprised 
and he laughingly said: 


V.iii.92.6-24 
303 
Yama said: 
6-1 8. How do men loaded with sins come to my city? Merely 
through a single holy bath in Reva, the position in the world 
of Viᤁr:tu is obtained. 
Those who are physically fit but do not visit the auspicious 
Reva of meritorious waters, should be known as persons con­
genitally blind or on a par with dead and lame men. 
0 king, it is for this reason that the chastiser of the worlds 
laughed: Those who are physically fit, yet do not visit the river 
Reva of meritorious waters! 
Yama installed the Lord there and went to heaven. 0 king, 
a devotee who has conquered anger and sense-organs should 
devoutly observe fast, particularly on the f;urteenth lunar day 
in the dark half of the month of Asvina. He shall be liberated 
from all the sins. 
He should keep awake at night and light the lamp of the 
Lord with ghee, 0 gn;at king. Listen to the benefit thereof. 
He is redeemed of all sins such as those resulting from 
carnally approaching a prohibited woman, from eating prohib­
ited foodstuffs and from drinking prohibited beverages. 
The sin that results from riding what should not be ridden 
and by milking what should not be milked, is dispelled merely 
by the holy ablution. Thus all types of sins do perish. 
That man never sees the world of Yama. 0 king, this is the 
greatest secret of the Pitrs on the Earth. 
Undoubtedly, to those who make gift at Yamahasya every­
thing becomes everlasting. A devotee should subdue anger and 
adore Brahmar:tas on a new-moon day by means of various gifts 
such as gold, plot of land, gingelly seeds, skin of a black an­
telope, cow of gingelly seeds etc. 
Those who gift in accordance with what is laid down in the 
scriptures, a horse, an elephant along with ploughshare, a girl, 
a cow, a buffalo that yields good quantity of milk etc. do not 
go to the world of Yama. 
1 9-24. 
Yama becomes delighted at every birth, 0 Yudhiᤁthira. 
Buffalo is the vehicle of Yama and buffaloes are the mothers 
of his vehicle, buffalo. Certainly Yama becomes pleased as a 
result of their gift. 
Even if one is surrounded by sins, one does not go to Yama. 


304 
Skanda Pura:IJ-a 
For this reason the gift of a buffalo here is excellent. Water 
should be sprinkled on its horns. The buffalo should be cov­
ered with a smoke-coloured cloth. Hoofs should be made of 
iron and copper (red cloth?) should be placed on the back. 
On the east there shall be a hillock of salt; on the south-east 
there shall be a mountain of jaggery. Cotton constitutes the 
portion of the south; butter on the south-west; seven food­
grains on the west. Rice grains should be placed on the north­
west. Gold is placed on the northern side and ghee on the 
north-east. These things should be offered uttering "May Vamaraja 
be pleased with me. " 
25-30. 
Before the Brahmal).a, one shall utter these words: 
"Varna's world is highly frightening. Asipatravana is terrible. 
Vamaculli is extremely terrifying. Vaitaral).i is horrible. Kumbhipaka 
causes terror. Kalasiitra is extremely terrifying. So also the 
Vamala mountains, Krakaca (scissors) , Tailayantra (oil-extract­
ing machine) , the hounds, the vultures are hideous. Nirucchvasa 
is highly noisy, Raurava is excessively terrible. 0 excellent Brahmal).a, 
we hear that all these are present in the world of Varna. With 
your favour and by the power of this Tirtha, let them be gentle. 
By the power of this Dana and with the favour of Vamaraja, 
may I not go to Naraka in any birth whatsoever. " 
Men who listen to this account of Vamahasya shall be rid of 
sins. They will not see the abode of Varna. 


V.iii.93.1-10 
305 
CHAPTER NINETYTHREE 
The Greatness of Kalhotf,i 1irtha 
Sn Miirkar:uf,eya said: 
1-10. Thereafter, one should go to the excellent KalhoQi 
Tirtha which is well-known all over Bharata as destroyer of the 
sins of (even) Ganga. 
It is difficult of access to men, 0 son of Kunti, and is situated 
on the banks of Reva for the sake of destruction of the sins 
of living beings like the Oᤁara1 (arid) Puᤁkara. "That is the 
Tirtha. This is meritorious. " These are the words of the Trident­
bearing Lord. 
Ganga came there in the form of a cow -for the purpose of 
holy ablution. Hence it became well-known as the excellent 
KalhoQi Tirtha. 
Three nights should be spent there around a full-moon day, 
0 Yudhiᤁᤃhira. If a person eschews Rajas and Tamas GuQ.as as 
well as anger, hypocrisy and jealousy, 0 son of Kunti, the 
benefit of salvation is obtained by him. 
The devotee shall bathe the Lord three times a day on all 
the three days. The milk should be that of a cow and the cow 
should have its calf aiive. The milk is to be kept in a copper 
vessel. Honey should be mixed therewith. 
Uttering "om namalj. snsiviiya" ( Om, obeisance to Lord Siva) , 
the deity is to be bathed. He goes to heaven surrounded by 
celestial damsels. 
The person should duly take his holy ablution and offer 
Dana on behalf of the departed ones. He should make gift of 
a white cow to a BrahmaQ.a of great cleanliness who is always 
devoted to his wife. He should say, "May my grandfathers be 
pleased. " 
The devotee should adopt Sattvika qualities. The cow shall 
be accompanied by her calf and should be covered with a cloth 
and placed on gold. Such a donor shall attain the world of 
Sambhu. 
I. O$ara seems to be a special name of the sacred places, such as ReQ.uka 
Tirtha (Panjab) , Sukara, Kasi, Kalifljara, Mahakala (Ujjain ) . According to 
Padma Pura1)a they are nine in all. (De 1 02) 


306 
Skanda Purii:TJ-a 
CHAPTER NINETYFOUR 
The Greatness of Nandikesvara Tirtha 
Sri Miirkarpf,eya said: 
1-4. 
Beyond that itself, 0 king, one should go to the aus­
picious Nanditirtha that is destructive of all sins of men. It was 
formerly created by Nandin. 
It accords salvation to creatures overwhelmed by masses of 
sins. It is on the banks of Narmada. A devotee should observe 
fast for a day and a night, 0 Yudhiᤁthira, there at Nandinatha. 
He should adore Nandikdvara with the full complement of 
the five Upacaras. 0 son of Dharma, he should gift gems to 
Brahmar:tas. 
He should then go to the greatest place where the Pinaka­
bearing Lord resides. He will be endowed with all types of 
comforts and ease and will rejoice along with celestial damsels. 
CHAPTER NINETYFIVE 
The Greatness of Niiriiya7J.a Tirtha 
Sri Miirka7J.4eya said: 
1-1 0. Thereafter, one should go to the excellent Badaryasrama, 
0 great king. It has been formerly mentioned by Sarhbhu as 
the most meritorious and excellent Tirtha of all Tirthas. 
Kiritin (i.e. Arjuna) , your brother, also called Phalguna, 
became a Siddha there for the sake of the descendants of 
Bharata. Know that he is Nara with divine features. 
Both of them, Nara and NarayaQa came to the banks of 
Narmada. Knowledge is attained only by him who is devoted 
to Janardana. 
One who is impartial towards all beings, mobile as well as 
immobile, Brahmar:ta as well as Car:t<;lala, gets the favour of 
Janardana. He is pleased with him. 
0 son of Kunti, see the identity between me and other 
Atmans. There never is any difference. The Badarikasrama 
penance-grove has been made by Nara and NarayaQa. 


V.iii.95.1 1-21 
307 
For the purpose of blessing the worlds, Sari.kara was installed 
there. The Liri.ga installed by the triad of deities opens the 
path to heaven and then to salvation. 
After going there, a devotee should remain clean and ob­
serve fast for a night. Eschewing Rajas and Tamas, he should 
adopt Satt_vika attitude. At night he should keep awake. The 
festival days are the eighth day in the month of Madhu and 
the fourteenth day of either half. Particularly that of Asvina 
month has been spoken to you, 0 son of PaQ.QU. With great 
devotion he should bathe the Bull-emblemed Lord with milk 
along with honey. This mixed with curds and sugar-candy to 
which ghee is added, is the holy Paiicamrta with which the 
Lord is to be bathed. 
1 1-21 . 
If a devotee perceives Siva bei.ng bathed duly, and 
he has devotion and absence of envy, his residence is near Siva 
in the world of Sakra. There is no doubt at all. 
If obeisance is made to the Trident-bearing Lord even in­
sincerely, it shall act as the unraveller of the bondage of the 
worldly existence. 
If the practice of reciting the Mantra "om nama/], siviiya" is 
stabilised by the devotee, it is as good as everything is studied 
and heard and performed by him. 
The devotee with sense-organs subdued should take one 
meal a day and devoutly bathe the Lord. 0 son of Kunti, I shall 
mention a bit of the benefit he is sure to attain. 
Though afflicted by old age I shall speak out of my affection 
for you. They pierce the solar zone and enter the greatest 
place (supreme position) . 
He and people like him become full of all happiness in the 
world. The fact that they are the abodes of pions rites shall be 
a surprise to the kinsmen. 0 Lord of the earth, they are en­
dowed with the fulfilment of all desires on the earth. 
The devotee shall perform Sraddha there itself with the 
mixture of the waters of Narmada throug;h well qualified BrahmaQ.as 
of noble birth and mastery over the Vedas, who are of hand­
some features and good conduct, who are virtuous and de­
voted to their own wives, who have been born in the Aryadda, 
who are adepts and possess excellent physical forms. 
The offering of the balls of rice should be done when the 
Sun is in the last Muhiirta of the day, if the person wishes for 
the greatest world of the Pitrs, 0 son of Dharma. 


308 
Skanda Purii:r:ta 
A person should cautiously avoid those BrahmaQ.as who are 
squint-eyed, wicked and hypocritical, who are ruthless men, 
eunuchs and those who slander BrahmaQ.as. One shall avoid 
these BrahmaQ.as if one wishes for one 's welfare. 
22-28. 
Hence with all efforts one should resort to a de­
serving, well-qualified BrahmaQ.a. He shall then redeem the 
departed ones from hells, the chief whereof is Kurhbhipaka. 
Thus there shall be salvation of all the Pitrs, 0 Prince. Uttering 
"May my Pitamaha be pleased" the devotee should give gold 
to BrahmaQ.as. 
To them he should give cooked rice, and garments with 
devotion. He should give a cow, bullock, land and an umbrella, 
all of good qualities. That man attains Svarga. So said Lord 
Sankara. 
One who gives up his life through fire, water or starvation 
shall go to Siva's palace. 
On the banks of NaranarayaQ.i or in DevadroQ.i, 0 king, one 
should perform holy rites. He dwells in the presence of Isvara 
as long as fourteen Indras complete their reign. Slipping down 
again from heaven he becomes a powerful king endowed with 
all prosperity and good qualities and alert in protecting the 
subjects. Then he remembers that Tirtha and comes back to 
the same Tirtha. 
CHAPTER NINETYSIX 
The Greatness of KotHvara 1irtha 
Sri Miirkar_uf,eya said: 
1-6. 
Thereafter, 0 great king, one should go to the great 
KoᤃiSvara Tirtha where, 0 descendant of Kuru, a crore of sages 
came there for the sake of the welfare of KrᤁQ.advaipayana. 
The eminent sages took counsel with all the BrahmaQ.as who 
recited auspicious Vedic passages. Sankara, the cause of the 
destruction of bondage, was installed there. The Lord causes 
severance from the worldly existence (Sarhsara) and destroys 
the distress of all living beings. 


V.iii.97.1-8 
309 
It is called KoᤃiSvara on the earth, 0 prince. One who bathes 
the Lord devoutly, on a full-moon day, especially of the month 
of Sraval)a, 0 Yudhiᤁᤃhira, after offering libations of water and 
balls of rice to the manes in accordance with the injunctions 
will give everlasting satisfaction to the Pitrs until the _ annihi­
lation of all living beings. 
This is the greatest secret of the Pitrs that have resorted to 
the banks of Reva. It accords salvation to all creatures. It has 
been created by the excellent sages. 
CHAPTER NINETYSEVEN 
The Greatness of Vyasa 1irtha 
Sri Mqrkar;uf,eya said: 
1-8. 
Thereafter, a person should go to the excellent 
Vyasatirtha, 0 king. It is rarely accessible to men. It is meriᤇ 
torious and is stationed in the air-space between heaven and 
earth. 
Yudhi6lhira said: 
Why is that Vyasatirtha well-established in the atmosphere? 
Recount this succinctly. Do avoid verbose details. 
Sri Markar;uf,eya said: 
Well! Well, 0 mighty-armed one! You are a favourite with 
good men and pious too. You are engaged in your own duties, 
0 son of Kunti, and you have respect and interest in pilgrim­
age. 
Vyasatirtha .. is well-nigh inaccessible to all the creatures, 0 
king. Mflicted by old age, 0 prince, I have become incapable. 
Having lost alertness, my mind is out of tune and devoid of 
the power of recollection. This great secret Tirtha has not 
been divulged to anyone by me. 
Kali cannot enter that region, 0 great king, because it is the 
place of rest of Vyasa. It came to be established in the atmosphere 
due to the activity of Reva. 
· 


310 
Skanda Purii7Ja 
Even Virinci is incapable of glorifying adequately the good 
points of Reva. How can I then know the excellent greatness 
of Reva? 
, 
Hence I recount a bit of (the greatness) of Vyasatirtha. 
Here there is direct, convincing evidence seen in the Kali age. 
9-1 7. No bird crosses beyond the terrible trident. 0 prince, 
I shall succinctly mention its region. 
Formerly there was, 0 king, an honoured sage named Parasara. 
A fierce penance of great benefit was performed by him in the 
waters of Ganga.1 
He entered the waters of Ganga and stayed therein restrain­
ing his breath. When the twelfth year was complete, he came 
out from within the water. 
Seeking alms he roamed about in the village. In a certain 
place he saw a boat in which he saw an extremely charming 
woman too. 
On seeing her he became overwhelmed with love and so 
spoke to her sweetly: "0 lady seated in the boat, you agitate 
my mind. 0 fawn-eyed one, on the banks of the river who may 
you be? Take me to the other bank. " 
On being asked thus by him, she bowed down to the emi­
nent sage. On seeing him infatuated with love, she told about 
herself: 
"I am a slave in a household of fishermen. I am a virgin , 0 
excellent Brahmat:ta. 0 venerable one, I have been directed by 
my master to look after the boat. It behoves you to know that 
the entire fact concerning me has been revealed to you. " 
On being told thus by her, he meditated for a short while 
and spoke thus: 
Pariisara said: 
1 8-28. 
0 fair lady, by my knowledge (insight) I know your 
nativity. You are not the daughter of a fisherman. 0 beautiful 
woman, you are the daughter of a king.2 
I. VV 1 0 ff describe the story ofVyasa's birth from Parasara and Satyavati. The 
story is the same as in Mbh, Adi 63.50-85. 
2. VV 1 8-49 describe how Satyavati, though a daughter of King Vasu (called 
Uparicara Vasu in Mbh ) , was born of a fish as the tube of Vasu's semen 
fell in the river while it was being carried to his queen. 1'his story is the 
same as in Mbh, Adi. 63.7()-83. 


V.iii.97.29-35 
31 1 
The girl said: 
0 BrahmaQ.a, who is my father? Let it be mentioned. In 
whose womb was I born? In which family was I born? How did 
it happen that I became known as the daughter of a fisher­
man? 
Pariisara said: 
I shall narrate everything that has been asked by you. There 
was a king named Vasu who was an ornament unto the lunar 
race. 
He was the overlord of Jarhbudvlpa, 0 fair lady, and he 
heightened terror in the minds of the enemies. He had seven 
hundred wives and a thousand sons. l{e righteously protected 
the people and he was honoured always like a god. Mlecchas 
(Barbarians) , the residents of Kl?lradvlpa, did not recognize his 
suzerainty. 
Accompanied by his sons and attendants noted for their 
valour, he went beyond the ocean in order to exterminate 
them. The battle with Vasu was started by the Mlecchas. 0 
fawn-eyed one, the entire host of Mlecchas was overpowered· 
by Vasu and made to pay tribute. The whole host inclusive of 
the sons, vehicles and army was subdued. The chief of his 
queens was your mother, 0 fawn-eyed one. 
While the king was away, she had her monthly course. Usually 
the emotion of love in women is inordinate at all times. Espe­
cially during the days of menses, they are pierced by the arrows 
of the god of Love. 
On being tormented by the god of Love that splendid-eyed 
lady thought, 'I shall send a messenger to King Vasu now. ' The 
messenger was called and instructed "0 messenger, go imme­
diately to the king. " 
The Messenger said: 
29-35. 
King Vasu, the chastiser of enemies, has gone to 
the other shore. 0 splendid lady, without boats it is impossible 
to go there. All the boats are taken to the other shore. 
The love-lorn queen became all the more upset at the words 
of the messenger. Her companion told her: "Why are you worried? 


312 
Skanda Purii7J.a 
May your own letter expressing your state of mind correctly, 
be sent through a courier parrot. 0 beautiful lady, birds do go 
across the sea. " 
At the words of her companion the queen regained peace 
(of mind) , 0 king. A scribe was instructed: "At my behest write 
the letter: '0 King Vasu, it is impossible for Satyabhama to 
continue to live without you. The days of menses have started 
already. ' 0 scribe, do write the letter. " When the letter was 
duly written on a Bhiirja leaf by the scribe, the parrot kept in 
a cage was immediately brought near. 
Satyabhiimii said: 
36-47. 
Take this letter and go quickly to the presence of 
King Vasu. 
Pariisara continued: 
The- bird bowed down, took up the excellent letter, flew up 
into the sky, 0 king, and went through the firmament. Soon 
the bird reached the vicinity of King Vasu. 
When the letter was dropped down by the parrot, the king 
took it with his hand and understood that it was sent by Satyabhama. 
Thinking over the purport of the letter, the king squeezed out 
his never-failing semen virile and put it in a tube. He entrusted 
it along with a letter in reply stating, "Go- to the queen." The 
bird took the tube of semen, bowed down to the king, and flew 
away. The parrot was flying over the sea when it was spotted 
by a hawk. 
Thinking that the parrot had some meat with it the falcon 
attacked it. It was pecked with the beak and killed by the 
vulture, 0 descendant of Bharata. When the parrot swooned 
the semen virile fell into the waters of the sea. The semen 
virile of King Vasu was swallowed by a fish. A girl appeared 
within the womb of the fish, 0 beautiful lady. 
That fish was caught by fishermen who brought it home. 
-When the fish was cut open, 0 excellent girl, you were seen 
there rᤈsembling the Moon in lustre and having the dazzling 
brilliance of the Sun. On seeing you all the fishermen on the 
banks of Ganga became delighted. 
All the delighted people went to the abode of the chief of 


V.iii.97.48-64 
313 
the fishermen and said: "There is a jewel of a girl whom you 
do take. She is highly brilliant. " As he had no issue he adopted 
the fawn-eyed maiden. He said to his wife, "0 fair lady of fawn­
eyes, bring up this girl." 
Sri Markar;uf,eya said: 
48-56. 
Then she (the girl with the boat) reflected upon 
thᤉ words. of Parasara and said: "Well, 0 dear BrahniaQa, there 
is the odour of fish emanating from me. " After saying this, 0 
king, she was willing to surrender herself. 
Thereupon, the girl was rendered divinely fragrant by the 
sage by means of his Yogic power. By the same power, he 
enkindled fire and circumambulated it aDJi duly married her 
out of love. 
Then the sage began to touch the erotic centres of the girl 
in the boat itself. On coming to know that the BrahmaQa was 
eager to make love, she became afraid, 0 son of Dharma. She 
laughingly told him: "0 Lord, 0 wise one, in the presence of 
the public you are on the verge of doing what the rustic people 
are accustomed to do. How is it that you are not ashamed ! " 
The sage then meditated for a short while and remembered 
the Tamasi Maya in his heart., The dark Maya arrived and the 
entire world of mobile and immobile beings was enveloped by 
her. 
The girl was dismayed thereby but was highly humoured. 
The happiness of being ith a woman was attained by the sage 
who had been tormented by the compulsion of celibacy for 
long and he sported about diverting himself. 
The girl was afflicted by the burden of conception instantly 
and she quickly delivered a boy holding a staff and having 
matted hairs. He was quiescent and held a waterpot too. A 
girdle embellished his waist. There was an upper cloth over his 
shoulder. (Apparently,} he was unafflicted by ViᤁQu's Maya. 
57-64. 
On seeing that boy of her own family, 0 SOJ? of 
Kunti, the maiden became suspicious and nervous. Tremblingly 
she sought refuge in the sage saying: "0 excellent sage, save, 
save my son, the wonderful son with a loin cloth and excellent 
girdle, holding a staff, having matted hairs and embellished 
with an upper cloth. " 


314 
Skanda Purii7Ja 
Pariisara said: 
Do not be afraid. Even when your son is born you will still 
be a virgin and you will be known by the name Yojanagandha 
(one whose fragrance reaches a Yojana) and Satyavatl. 
A king named Santanu will be your husband. You will be his 
chief queen and a crest-jewel of the lunar race. 
Go back, 0 blameless lady, to your resort and remain there 
as before. Do not be sad. Here you have seen the power of my 
knowledge. 
[Sri Miirka7Jr!eya continued:] 
After saying this, the BrahmaQ.a went away. The maiden 
approached her son. He humbly bowed down and prostrated 
with great devotion to his mother and said: 
"0 mother, I may be forgiven for what I am going to say. 
Be pleased with me. 0 my mother, I will make efforts at the 
propitiation of the Lord. " 
Upset at the words of her son she spoke these words: 
Yojanagandhii said: 
65-76. 
0 dear son, do not go away now abandoning me, 
your sinless mother. Due to separation from you, there is no 
doubt, I will die soon. 
No one is more affectionate than a son, no greater kinsman 
than a brother, no greater pious activity than truthfulness, and 
no greater sin than falsehood. 
In spite of your childhood, dear son, you will be my support. 
I have no husban_d; (and if you go) I will have no son. See the 
mockery of Karmas. 
Vyiisa said: 
Do not be vexed within. What is uttered by me is the truth. 
0 divine lady, at the time of any danger I may be remembered 
for the accomplishment of a task. I shall redeem yqu from 
danger. My haughty reply may be pardoned.1 
I . Cf. Mbh, Adi 63. 84-85 


V.iii.97.77-85 
315 
Sri Miirkarpf,eya said: 
Mter saying thus, Vyasa went away. That maiden too went 
home. At the close of Tretayuga and the beginning of Dvapara, 
0 king, the son of Parasara was in a predicament in the middle 
of a forest. The Devas with Sakra as the leader thought about 
Vyasa (i.e. about his consecration etc. ) . It was told by Narada 
himself: "He (Vyasa) is the son of Parasara. He was born of a 
daughter of a fisherman on the bank of Ganga. He Is endowed 
with (spiritual) knowledge. " Then at the instance of Narada, 
the excellent Suras too came there. Rama, Pitamaha and Sakra 
were surrounded by groups of sages. Seats were offered to all 
separately. They said, "Excellent! Excellent! " 
Garbhadhana (the rite of conception). and other consecra­
tory rites of the boy were performed by Pitf.maha (god Brahma) . 
He was named Dvaipayana because he was born in an island. 
He was called Parasarya because he was born of Parasara. Since 
he was a part of KrᤁQ.a, he was named KrᤁQ.a. He would be 
arranging the Vedic texts. Hence (he is named) Vyasa. 
He was given the sacred ablution by Viriiici and blessed 
again and again by the groups of sages. "You are Vyasa in all 
the worlds." Mter saying thus the Devas went away. 
Pilgrimage was begun by KrᤁQ.a Dvaipayana. 
77-85. 
He took bath in Ganga. Kedara and Puᤁkara were 
visited by him. So also Gaya, Naimiᤁa. Kurukᤁetra and Sarasvati. 
He visited Mahakala at Ujjayini and Somanatha at Prabhasaka. 
The great sage took his holy ablution everywhere on the earth 
girt by the ocean. 
Ultimately he reached the immortal, splendid Narmada that 
originated from Rudra's person. On seeing Narmada, he be­
came glad and obtained peace of mind. 
He performed an elaborate penance after resorting to the 
banks of Narmada; In summer he stood in the midst of five 
fires; in rainy season he lay on bare ground; in Hemanta (early 
winter) he stood wearing wet cloth and meditated upon Mahe5vara. 
He meditated 
on Paramdva-ra abiding in the lotus of his 
heart. He meditated upon the splendid bestower of boons, the 
Lord who is the cause of creation and is indivisible. Engross­
ed in meditation he worshipped the Siddhdvara Linga every­
day. 


316 
Skanda Purii7J,a 
Due to the adoration of Siddhesvara Liilga, and the power 
of Dhyanayoga, Sankara became directly visible to Krᤁr:tadvaipayana. 
lsvara said: 
0 dear one, I am pleased with you. Choose a splendid boon. 
Vyiisa said: 
0 Lord, if you are pleased, if a boon has to be given to me, 
then (I ask) you will become directly visible on the banks of 
Narmada. Let me be the knower of the past and thᤊ future, 
0 Consort of Uma, with your favour. 
isvara said: 
86-96. 
Let it be so in your case, dear son, undoubtedly 
with my favour. I have been captivated by your devotion. I shall 
be visible on the banks of Narmada by a half of one-thou­
sandth part in your hermitage. 
[Sri Miirka7J,tf,eya continued:] 
After sayinᤋ so the Lord went to the excellent Kailasa moun­
tain. 
Krᤁr:tadvaipayana duly took a wife1 and he protected his wife 
in accordance with the injunCtions in the scriptures. The son 
of Parasara who had no son before begot a son. He was nour­
ished and brought up by all the Devas, the leaders of whom 
were Viriflci and Indra. 
At the time of the birth of the son Vasiᤌᤍha and other eminent 
sages came there: So also those led by Parasara, in the course 
of their pilgrimage. Manu, Atri, Viᤌr:tu, Harita, Yajflavalkya, 
Usanas, Ailgiras, Yama, Apastarilba, Sarilvarta, Katyayana, Brhaspati 
and thousands, hundred thousands and hundred crores of sages 
of estimable conduct came with their disciples and camped on 
the banks of Narmada. 
1 . But MbJ:t does not mention Vyasa's marriage. It was at the sight of the 
celestial lady Ghrtaci that Vyays had emission of semen and Suka was born. 
(Mbh, Santi 324. 4-10) 


V.iii.97.97-1 12 
317 
All came to the splendid hermitage ofVyasa with great pleasure, 
0 king. On seeing the eminent Bnihmaᦢ:tas, he stood up by way 
of welcoming them. At the outset he bowed down to the feet 
of his father and then to all the others duly. He gave them 
seats with devotion and then offered Padya and Arghya. Mter 
keeping the palms joined together in deference he spoke these 
words: 
"There is no doubt. I have been elevated (to a higher position) 
by the conversation and adoration of all of you. With great 
pleasure, I shall offer you all the vegetables and fruits available 
i!l the forest. " 
97-1 02. . He bowed to them severally and invited all of them. 
On seeing the sage Krᤌᦢ:tadvaipayana humbly bowing down, 
they blessed hi:rn with benedictions for Jntcess and looked at 
one another. All of them then looked at Parasara. 
The eminent sages said to him, "0 dear one, reply suitably 
to Krᤁᦢ:tadvaipayana. " On being told thus by all of them, the 
venerable Parasara spok_e to his son Vyasa about what was decided 
by the sages to be done. 
Sri Parasara said: 
The sages do not wish to partake of your hospitality on the 
southern bank lest it !'hould cause a break in their Vrata. Particularly 
they wish to partake of food in a Sraddha. 
Vyasa said: 
I shall do what you say. Kindly stay here for a short while. 
I shall propitiate the River and perform the excellent rite. 1 
[Sri Marka1J4eya continued:] 
Mter saying this and remaining pure, he resorted to the 
bank of Narmada. He recited the following prayer promptly. 
Know . it, 0 kir.g. 
1 03-1 1 2. "Be victorious, 0 venerable goddess. Obeisance to 
you, 0 bestower of boons. Be victorious, 0 destroyer of sins 
1. The miracle of change in the course of· Narmada is found only in this 
Pura1_1a. 


318 
Skanda Purii7Ja 
and bestower of many benefits. Be victorious, 0 you who hold 
the skulls of Surilbha and Nisurilbha. I bow down to you, 0 
destroyer of the distress of Devas and human beings. 
Be victorious, 0 divine form having the moon and the suri 
as eyes. Be victorious, 0 excellent one of divine form with the 
face embellished by Fire-god. Be victorious, 0 great one sub­
merged in Bhairava's body. Be victorious, 0 divine form drying 
up the blood of Andhaka. 
Be victorious, 0 suppressor of Mahiᤁa (demon in the form 
of a buffalo) with trident in the hand. Be victorious, 0 de­
stroyer of the sins of the entire world. Be victorious, 0 goddess 
bowed down to by Rama and Pitamaha. Be victorious, 0 divine 
form bowed down to by the heads of Bhaskara. and Sakra. 
Be victorious, 0 divine lady eulogized by Sat:tmukha and Isa, . 
the armed one. Be victorious, 0 divine river flowing towards 
the ocean, 0 divine one eulogized by Sarilbhu. Be victorious, 
0 destroyer of misery and poverty. Be victorious, 0 divine 
form causing increase of sons and wives. 
Be victorious, 0 goddess adopting all bodies. Be victorious, 
0 guide unto Naka (heaven) , 0 destroyer of misery. Be vic­
torious, 0 destroyer of ailments, 0 cause of salvation. Be vic­
torious, 0 bestower of all desired things, 0 most excellent one 
among those who have achieved spiritu<l perfection . " 
[Sri MiirkaTJrf-eya continued:] 
Vyasa will be pleased and so also the Bull-vehicled Lord with 
one who reads in the presence of Siva this prayer composed 
by Vyasa, or in the house with pure feelings devoid of lust and 
anger. The divine river Narmada will also be pleased. She is 
the destroyer of all sins. 
Those on the earth by whom Narmada is eulogized will never 
come with.in the sight of Varna. 
"0 goddess, in the matter of glorifying your good qualities, 
even Pitamaha will be at a loss. 0 Narmada, even Vakpati 
(Brhaspati) does not know how to eulogize your form al;lequately. 
How then can I endeavour to comprehend your good qualities, 
0 divine river. " 
In view of these, the divine river Narmada understood the 
state of purity (of Vyasa) verbally, mentally and physically and 
became pleased with him. Then she spoke these words: 


V.iii.97. 1 1 3-1 30 
319 
1 1 3-1 2 1 . "0 Vyasa, 0 great sage, I am delighted with your 
truthful utterance. If at all you desire to be granted any boon, 
I shall fully grant it to you. " 
Vyasa said: 
0 divine one, if you are pleased with me, if a boon has to 
be granted to me, it behoves you to provide hospitality unto 
the sages on your northern bank. 
Narmada said: 
An improper boon has been requested for, 0 Vyasa, that of 
deviating from the path. Even by Indra, Candra and Yama, it 
is not possible to make me flow through. a wrong path. Dear 
son , request for another boon even if it be difficult of access 
on the earth. 
[Sri Markarpf,eya continued:] 
On hearing these words of the divine river Vyasa fell into 
a swoon. Thinking 'My arduous ehdeavour has become futile', 
he fell down. 
The entire earth consisting of mountains, forests and parks 
trembled. On seeing Vyasa fallen into a swoon, the Devas including 
Vasava raised a loud cry of lamentation and came there · in 
thousands. 
. 
They lifted up Vyasa who was engaged in arranging the 
Vedic text. They said: "0 excellent River, he is straining him­
self for the sake of BrahmaQ.as and not for his own sake. He 
would presently cast off his life for the sake of cows and BrahmaQ.as." 
Thus Narmada was told by the excellent Suras beginning with 
Brahma. 
Reva who became afraid, sprinkled him with her own waters 
and fanned him with many cool gusts of wind. The son of 
Satyavati, who regained consciousness, bowed down to the Devas 
and said to the river: 
Vyasa said: 
1 22-1 30. Benefit has been indicated by all the Tirthas for 
resorting to them; yet due to my deficiency of fortune, 0 divine 
river, my meritorious hope has become futile like forest-flowers 
in the case of people. 


320 
Skanda Puro:r:ta 
Narmada said: 
0 sage of great esteem, wherever on the surface of the earth 
. you may desire to lead me I shall follow your path closely 
behind you even as you may hold the staff and proceed along 
with Vindhya. 
[Sri Markar;uf,eya:] 
On being told thus, Vyasa, the highly refulgent son of Satyavati, 
made the excellent river flow on the southern side of his hermitage. 
The highly brilliant sage wielding the staff made a Hmhkara 
(gruff sound) . On being afraid of the Hurhkara of Vyasa the 
daughter of Rudra quietly moved on. 
With his staff he pointed out the path. The divine river . 
became active there. The divine river was seen going along the 
path of Vyasa by Devas with Sakra as their leader. Then the 
Devas along with Kinnaras made a shower of flowers. 
The Brahma1,1as, the chief of whom was Parasara, became 
glad with blossoming eyes. (They said:) "Dear son, tell us what 
we have to do. We have been delighted by your act. " 
Vyasa said: 
Performing an elaborate penance and making gifts attended 
with great be_nefits, men should do what is conducive to the 
happiness of good people. 
If the highly fortunate ones (like you) are pleased, if I am 
to be blessed, may all of you unhesitatingly stay in my hermit­
age. 
My hospitality through greens and leaves with an admixture 
of Revamrta (nectarine water of Reva) should be accepted by 
you all with Parasara as the chief guest. All of you do stay in 
my hermit-;.ge on the northern bank of Reva. 
Markar;uf,eya said: 
1 3 1-142. 
Holy ablution, libations and the Nitya rites (de­
scribed as daily rites) were performed by the excellent Brahma1,1as. 
Thereafter they went to VyasakUI,lQa and performed Homa by 
means of Sriphalas and Bilva leaves in the holy fire. 
More than a thousand sages performed the Homa in the 


V.iii.97.143-152 
321 
holy fire. They were: Gautama, Bhrgu, Mat:tc;lavya, Narada, Loma8a, 
Parasara, Sankha, Kausika, Sage Cyavana, Pippalada, Vasiᤌtl).a, 
Naciketa of great austerities, Visvamitra, Agastya, Uddalaka, 
Yama, SaQ.c;lilya, Jaimini, KaQ.va, Yajiiavalkya, Usanas, Angiras, 
Satatapa, Dadhici, Kapila, Galava, Jaigiᤁavya, Dakᤁa. Bharata, 
Mudgala, Vatsyayana of great brilliance, Sarilvarta, Sakti,Jatukarwa, 
Bharadvaja, Valakhilya, AruQ.i etc. etc. 
They had Akᤁamala (rosary) in their hands and they were 
engaged in meditative absorption. 
All the BrahmaQ.as performed the Homa rite with full con­
centration. Thereupon a Linga destructive of ailments and 
bestowing salvation rose up there. 
On seeing the greatest deity that is indivisible, Vyasa be­
came delighted. The Devas showered flo\ters and the excellent 
BrahmaQ.as pronounced benediction. 
On seeing the Three-eyed Lord, Vyasa prostrated with eight 
limbs touching the ground and adored the BrahmaQ.as with 
greens, roots and fruits. 
After feeding the Pitrs at the outset, all the BrahmaQ.as were 
duly served meals, 0 son of PaQ.c;lu. Mter pronouncing holy 
blessing, the BrahmaQ.as went away. Ever since then that Tirtha 
is called Vyasatirtha by learned men. 
Yudhi6!hira said: 
1 43-1 52. 
Do tell me in its entirety, whatever is merito-
rious as associated with Vyasatirtha. At what time do Snana, 
Dana and the other rites yield great benefit? 
Sn Miirkm;uf,eya s̊ id: 
I shall speak everything to you in the company of your brothers, 
0 son of PaQ.c;lu. 
A person should observe fast on t!te fourteenth day in the 
bright half of .Karttika. Remaining pure and controlling the 
sense-organs, he should keep awake at night with great devo­
tion. 
He should devoutly bathe the Lord with honey, milk and 
ghee, curds mixed with sugar candy and finally with water 
poured through Kusa grass. He should then smear Paramesvara 
with sweet-smelling sandalpaste. Thereafter he should perform 


322 
Skanda Purii:TJ,a 
worship with fragrant flowers and Bilva leaves, and also .with 
various flowers such as Mucukunda, Kunda, Kusa,Jati, Unmattamuni 
flowers and other seasonal flowers. 
He should adore Dvipesvara, the excellent deity, with great 
devotion. Paramesvara is pleased by the gift of jaggery made 
of sugarcane. By gifting eight Gac,lukas (pieces of jaggery?) sin 
acquired during the day is dispelled. By gifting eight hundred 
Gac,lukas sin acquired in the course of a month is dispelled; by 
twice that sin of a year is destroyed; by ten thousand Gac,lukas 
sin of the whole life ever since the birth is destroyed. By twice 
that ailment is destroyed and by thrice there shall be acqui·· 
sition of wealth. By six times that number one becomes elo­
quent in speech and by twice that one becomes a Siddha. 
There is no doubt that the status of Rudratva is achieved by 
one million (Gac,lukas gifted) . 
1 53-164. 
0 great king, one should devoutly take the holy 
ablution on a full-moon day in accordance with the injunctions 
while uttering the prescribed Mantras. It destroys all sins. 
The Varut:J.a, Agneya or Brahmya type of holy ablution causes 
everlasting benefit. A sensible man should duly offer libation 
to Devas, Pitrs and human beings. 
If a Rk verse is recited, he shall obtain the benefit of (re­
citing the whole of) Rgveda. If a Saman verse is recited he 
shall get the benefit of Sarna Veda recitation. By reciting a 
Yajur Mantra he gets the benefit of (reciting) Yajurveda and 
by reciting Gayatri he obtains everything (benefits of reciting 
all the Vedas) . He should recite the single-syllabled Mantra 
( Om) or the Saura (pertaining to the Sun-god) Mantra or the 
Mantra with Siva as the deity or the Vaiᤄr:tava Mantra known 
as twelve-syllabled Mantra, namely "om namo bhagavate viisudeviiya. " 
With great devotion he should adore Brahmar:tas marked 
with all characteristic features of Brahmar:tahood, devoted to 
their own wives and devoid of hypocrisy or covetousness. 
The following Brahmar:tas shall be excluded: those following 
different occupations, sinners, fallen ones, those who serve 
Siidras, those who have accepted a Siidra woman (as wife) , 
those in whose house a Vnali is always present, backbiters, 
wicked ones, those who censure preceptors and elders, those 
who habitually hate the Vedas, those who argue endlessly and 
those with cunning behaviour characteristic of cranes. Such 
persons should be excluded in Sraddha, Dana and all Vratas. 


V.iii.97. 165-1 78 
323 
A Brahmar;ta of great self-control is better even if he knows 
only the essence of Gayatri. He is better than a master of all 
the four Vedas, should he be bereft of self-control, eating 
indiscriminately and selling everything. 
One should honour deserving Brahmar;tas by gifts of cooked 
food and gold. One who makes the gift of shoes, garments, 
quilt, umbrella, seat etc. to a Brahmar;ta with devotion is honoured 
in heaven. 
A real cow, or a Jaladhenu, or Ghrtadhenu, Tiladhenu or 
buffaloes also should be given (as religious gift) . 
A man who gifts antelope skin, gingelly seeds and ghee, a 
virgin and a book shall obtain the everlasting world. 
1 65-1 71 . 
I have made a true statement that he who desires 
heavenly pleasures should make the gift df bullocks with well­
adorned hoofs (with silver plate) along with food-grains and 
sundry articles of daily use. 
The devotee should (symbolically) tie a thread round a Dvipa 
(continent) or the auspicious earth, a temple or even the great 
Lord (Liilga) with devotion. 
If the man performs circumambulation in accordance with 
the injunctions, it is as good as circumambulating the seven 
continents viz. Jarhbu, Plakᤁa. Salmali, Kusa, Krauiica, Kasa 
and Puᤁkara which are encircled by seven oceans. 
0 great king, the devotee shall perform the rite of Vrᤁotsarga 
(ceremonial release of a bull) at the shrine of Dvipdvara. By 
means of reddish-coloured bull the devotee attains the world 
of Mahe5a. 
A bull that has grey face, forehead and legs and is white in 
the tail is a guide (leads) to heaven. A blue one also is said 
to be like this. One who makes thus dedication in the Dvipdvara 
shrine, lives in heaven for as many years as there are hairs on 
its body, 0 descendant of Bharata. 
1 72-1 78. By the power of VyasatiJ;tha he successively goes 
to the worlds of Sun-god, Sailkara, Viriiici and ViᤁQU and enjoys 
the pleasures there as he pleases. 
Then the devotee should honour devoutly a Brahmar;ta and 
his wife together. White and red garments are presented to the 
Brahmar;ta. The couple should be circumambulated uttering 
this Man tra: "May the preceptor of the universe be pleased 
with me. " 


324 
Skanda Purii:t;ta 
There is no other kinsman in this world or in the other 
world on a par with a BrahmaQ.a. It is he who saves from falling 
into the highly horrible world of Yama. 
The devotee should, with great devotion, adore a BrahmaQ.a 
who is conversant with Itihasas and PuraQ.as,' is a devotee of 
Vi!jQ.U, who has subdued his sense-organs and who has mas­
tered the Samaveda in particular. 
If people remember Dvipesvara with devotion even while 
. staying at home, ·neither grief nor loss nor sin harasses them. 
At the outset the devotee should adore the Siddhesvara Liilga 
and thereafter the shrine where the illustrious Vyasa, the son 
of Satyavati, became a Siddha. 
It is by adoring this (Liilga) that the highly intelligent Dharasarpa 
became a Siddha. 
1 79-1 85. 
0 king, one who casts his life in that Tirtha 
goes to the presence of Siva after piercing the world of Sun. 
The goal attained after casting life at the Tirtha varies thus: 
If a devotee gets drowned in the water there, he lives in the 
world of Siva for seven thousand years. If he immolates himself 
into the fire, he lives in the other world for eleven thousand 
years. If he falls from a precipice, he lives in the other world 
for sixteen thousand years. If he dies in a great battle-, he lives 
for sixty thousand years in the world of Siva. If he dies as a 
result of the attack of a cow, he lives in Sivaloka for eighty 
thousand years. 0 descendant of Bharata, if he dies fasting, his 
goal is everlasting. 
The father, the grandfather, and the great-grandfather look 
at the scion of their family arriving in the form of air. They 
fondly yearn: . 'Who is such a son in our family as offers us 
gingelly seed water as libation in that Tirtha on the full-moon 
day of Karttika or Vaisakha months?' 
By resorting to that Tirtha we will attain heavenly pleasures. 
Thus the excellent Dvipesvara has been recounted to you entirely. 
One who reads this with great devotion or listens with due 
attention thereto shall be rid of all sins. He rejoices in the 
palace of Siva. 
The Arid land ( OEara) of all Tirthas has been created by the 
leading sages. 0 excellent king, there is no doubt that Vyasatirtha 
bestows all desires. 


V.iii.98.1-7 
325 
CHAPTER NINETYEIGHT 
The Greatness of Prabhii.sa Tirth.o.J 
Sri Mii.rkar:t4eya said: 
1-7. 
Thereafter, 0 great king, one should go to the excel­
lent Prabhasesvara which is well-known in all the -three worlds 
as an excellent flight of stairs unto heaven. 
Yudh#thira said: 
0 dear one, do recount to me, how did Prabhasa originate 
as the bestower of a flight of stairs unto heaven and as a visible 
one having great beneftts. Do describe it tQ me succinctly with­
out delay. 
Sri Mii.rkar:t4eya said: 
The wife of Ravi well-known as Prabha was unfortunate. 
Sarilbhu was formerly propitiated by her through a very severe 
penance. 
For a year she stood taking in only air and for another year 
she was engaged in meditative absorption. Thereupon, 0 son 
of Par:t<;lu; Mahadeva was pleased with Prabha. 
lsvara said: 
Why do you undergo suffering, 0 maiden? What is desired 
to be said may be spoken. Indeed I am one with Bhaskara. 
There is no duality between us. 
Prabhii. said: 
0 Lord Sariibhu, excepting her husband no woman has any 
other Lord anywhere. He may or may not have good qualities; 
he may be wealthy; he may be amenable to love or prone to 
hatred; husband is a deity unto women. 
But, 0 Lord of Sure8vara, it is my misfortune that I am 
1. 
This is different from the Prabhasa which i s o n the western coast of 
Kathiawar and is famous for its Somanatha temple. This one is a sacred 
place associated with Reva. 
· 


326 
Skanda Pura7J.a 
scorched and distressed in the midst of my companions as I 
do not get the happiness due from a husband. Hence I un­
dergo very great distress. 
lsvara said: 
8-1 5. With my favour you will be a darling unto Bhaskara. 
Parvati said: 
If Bhaskara does not take your word as an authority, the 
sufferings (i.e. penanceԂ of this Prabha would become futile, 
0 Parame5vara. 
The dispeller of darkness was thought about (mentally sum­
moned) by Mahe5a at the instance of Uma. Bhanu (Sun) came 
down from the sky on to the bank of Narmada. 
Bhanu said: 
0 slayer of the demon Aghasura, 0 Lord, why have I been 
summoned? . 
· 
lsvara said: 
0 Bhanu, protect Prabha according her the greatest con­
tentment. 
Uma said: 
0 destroyer of fog and mist, may you be pleased always to 
stay in the palace of Prabha. 0 Ravi, let her be made the chief 
wife among all the wives. 
Bhii.nu said: 
0 lady of excellent countenance, 0 goddess, I shall carry 
out your words of advice. 
On hearing this, Prabha was summoned. She requested 
Mahe5vara: 
Prabha said: 
0 Lord, 0 Consort of Uma, 0 slayer of Manmatha, may you 


V.iii. 98.16-35 
327 
be pleased to be present here permanently by a part of yours. 
Let one part be placed here for opening the Tirtha. 
Sri Miirka7J.f/,eya said: 
1 6-25. 
A Linga constituted by all the Devas was installed 
there, 0 son of Pat:tc,lu. It is a rare Linga well-known in all the 
worlds as Prabhasesa. 
All the other Tirthas yield benefit in due course, . but, 0 
great king, Prabhasesa bestows the . desired benefit immedi­
ately. 
Especially on the seventh day in the bright half of the month 
of Magha, a devotee should offer a horse to a Brahmat:ta of the 
qualities mentioned before. Indratva (stitus of lndra) or the 
region of Bhaskara is obtained by him, 0 king. 
One should make the gift over to a Brahmat:ta after taking 
holy bath with great devotion. A donor of cow attains heaven 
or Satyaloka, 0 king. 
The cow should be auspicious, beautiful in every limb. She 
should be young, splendid and yielding plenty of milk. She 
should be adorned with a bell. She should ·have her calf with 
her (in that Dana) . A brass pot for milking should be given 
along with her. Those who make this gift, 0 excellent king, do 
not go to the abode of Varna. 
One who bathes the deity with great devotion attains the 
highest world and stays there until the annihilation of all living 
beings. Merely by the bath all wretchedness is dispelled, 0 
Pat:tc,lava. 
A person who devout]y offers at this Tirtha a virgin in marriage 
to a Brahmat:ta of the proper age and on a par with him in 
respect of nobility of the family, character and financial status, 
0 great king, even if he is a great sinner, gets his sins dissolved 
like salt in water. 
26-35. 
All these sins (mentioned below) are dissolved, 0 
son of Pat:tc,lu, through the gift of a virgin (in marriage) : sin 
resulting from an act of treachery against the master; that of 
one who misappropriates mon-ey deposited; that of a slayer of 
a friend; that of an ungrateful person; sin arising from perjury; 
sin arising from demolishing a park in a village; carnally ap­
proaching other men's wives; sin due to usury; sin due to committing 
a theft; sin of destroying a well; sin of one guilty of Bic,lalavrata 


328 
Skanda PuriirJ,a 
(vow of a cat i.e. hypocrisy) ; arrogance; sin of felling trees; sin 
of prohibiting marital alliance; sin of cutting down a tree in 
a park; sin of cohabiting with a woman of the prohibited type; 
sin of coveting other man's wife after forsaking one's own wife; 
sin due to misappropriating a Brahmal).a's wealth; sin of a 
person administering poison; that o-f a cow-killer; sin arising 
from selling learning; sin in associating (with sinners) ; the 
terrible sin of killing dogs and cats, serpents and Siidras; sin 
of a person unlawfully possessing landed property after taking 
it by force; sin of prevention of gifts· to Brahmal).as; and mis­
deeds against cows and fire etc. 
Mter going to the world of Bhaskara, he proceeds to the 
auspicious Rudraloka. He sports about in Rudraloka for a period 
of the reign of fourteen Indras. When all the sins are dis­
solved, the faith in Siva is generated in him. One who visits this 
Prabhasa Tirtha, 0 son of Pal).c;lu, attains the benefit of all the 
Tir_thas and that of a horse-sacrifice. 
Gift of a cow is highly meritorious and destructive of aU sins. 
It is praiseworthy on every occasion but particularly on the 
fourteenth lunar day. 
CHAPTER NINETYNINE 
The Greatness of Nagesvara Tirtha 
Sri MarkarJ,f/.eya said: 
1-5. 
Thereafter, 0 great king, a person should go to the 
Vasukisa Tirtha that destroys all the clusters of sins and that 
was established on the southern bank of Narmada. 
YudhiE'hira said: 
0 dear one, for what reason was the deity Vasukisa installed 
on the southern bank of Narmada? 0 my preceptor, do nar­
rate it in detail. 
Sri MarkarJ,f/.eya said: 
Mter creating and stabilising all these (visible) worldly objects, 


V.iii.99.6-21 
329 
Sarhbhu began to dance. Due to excess of activity sweat issued 
forth mixed with the waters of Ganga coming out of the head 
(matted hairs) . As it fell down, a serpent began to lick it. 
Thereupon, 0 descendant of Bharata, Mandakini became 
angry with the serpent and cursed: "0 serpent, 0 insignificant 
creature, you will become a python. " 
Vasuki said: 
6-1 1 . 0 divine river duly honoured by Hara, I am a sinner 
guilty of misdemeanour but worthy of being blessed by you. 
You are the meritorious, splendid river sanctifying the three 
worlds. You are the deliverer from mundane existence and the 
destroyer of the · distress of the distressep ones. You are sta­
tioned at the threshold of heaven (Sᤎarga) , 0 goddess, take 
pity on me. 
Ganga said: 
Perform an elaborate penance on Vindhya with Sail.kara in 
view. Thereafter you will regain your original position and the 
state of a serpent at my behest. 
Sri Marka7J¢eya said: 
Then the serpent hastened to the splendid mountain Vindhya 
and engaged in the propitiation of Sail.kara. He began to perform 
the penance. 
Everyday he meditated upon the three-eyed Mahadeva en­
gaged in playing the I;)amaruka (hand-drum) . When a hun­
dred years were completed, the preceptor of the universe was 
moved ·(with pity) and approaching him spoke these soft, loving 
words, "0 dear serpent, with due deference, choose your boon 
from me." 
Vasuki said: 
1 2-21 . 
0 Lord, if you are pleased with me, 0 Sankara if 
you grant m:e a boon, 0 Lord of Devas, let there be redemp­
tion from sin unto me. Do mention any 'Firtha that is destruc­
tive of all sins. 


330 
Skanda Puro:IJ.a 
lsvara said: 
0 serpent of great might, do go to Reva, the bestower of 
welfare. Take your holy ablution in accordance with the rel­
evant injunctions on its meritorious southern bank. 
Mter saying so, the Lord vanished. Vasuki in great haste 
entered the waters of Narmada in his python: form. 
The excellent current of Jahnavi flowed along with his path; 
he became a serpent again redeemed of all his sins in the 
waters of . Narmada. 
Sankara was installed there in Narmada, 0 Yudhi¢ԃhini. 
Thereafter, the Nagesvara Linga became famous as the de­
stroyer of sins. 
A devotee should bathe Siva with honey on the eighth or 
fourteenth day. Undoubtedly he ·will become rid of sins imme­
diately. 
0 son of Kunti, those men without sons who take their holy 
bath at the confluence will get an excellent and splendid son 
comparable to Kartavirya. 
One who observes fast and performs Sraddha there itself, 0 
Prince, shall release the departed ones from hell. 
Neither in the family nor among his kinsmen shall there be 
fear from serpents. With the favour of Nagas his _family shall 
be free from defects and hence rejoice. 
Thus, 0 excellt;nt king, everything has been recounted to 
you due to my affection for you. 


V.iii.l 00. 1-9 
331 
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED 
The Greatness of Marka7J.4esvara 1irtha 
Sri Marka7J.4eya said: 
1-9. 
Thereafter, 0 king, one should go to the extremely 
splendid Tirtha on the southern bank of Narmada, well-known 
as MarkaĨ<;lesa. 
Dear son, it is the most excellent of all the Tirthas, saluted 
by Devas. It is to be kept as the utmost secret of all secrets. 
It has not been told to anyone by me. 
It was installed by me formerly and it is like a flight of stairs 
unto heaven. Knowledge dawned upon me there itself, with 
the favour of Sankara. 
! 
Anyone else who goes there. and recites the Drupada prayer 
under the waters becomes liberated from all sins, verbal, mental 
or physical, 0 son of PaĨ<;lu. Clasping the PiĨ<;li (of Siva Linga) 
the devotee should face the southern quarter and devoutly 
worship the Trident-bearing Lord with a form having thirty­
two handԄ. I _am sure, 0 king, that after the fall of the body 
ԅe will go to Siva. 
At night on the eighth lunar day, 0 descendant of Bharata, 
he .should light lamps (filled) with ghee and he will attain the 
heavenly world. So said Sankara. 
0 prince, thereby the Pitrs become contented until the time 
of the annihilation of all living beings and they become pleased 
with him too. 
· 
A person should offer libations there with Inguda, Badara, 
Bilva, raw rice-grains or mere water to the ancestors of his 
family. He shall obtain the benefit (fruit) of his birth. 
