APASTAMBA 



Dharma & Grihya Sutras 




Translated by various Scholars 
Edited by Sri Rama Ramanuja Acari 
srimatham.com 



CONTENTS 




Introduction to Apastamba — page 4 
Dharma Sutras — page 12 



Grhya Sutras — page 195 




3 



INTRODUCTION TO APASTAMBA 



~ pastamba's aphorisms on the sacred law of the Aryan Hindus possess a special interest 



beyond that attaching to other works of the same class because Apastamba's work is free 



1. \.from any suspicion of having been tampered with by sectarians or modern editors, and 
that it has an intimate connection with the manuals teaching the performance of the great and 
small sacrifices, the Srauta and Grihya-sutras, by the same author. Thus in spite of its 
comparatively late origin, it is entitled to the first place in a collection of Dharma-sutras. 

The Apastambiya Dharma-sutra forms part of an enormous Kalpa-sutra or body of aphorisms, 
which deals with the teaching of the Veda and of the ancient Rishis regarding the performance 
of sacrifices and the duties of the twice-born, and which, being chiefly based on the second of 
the four Vedas, the Yajur-veda in the Taittiriya recension, is primarily intended for the benefit 
of the Adhvaryu priests in whose families the study of the Yajur-veda is hereditary. 

The entire Kalpa-sutra of Apastamba is divided into 30 sections, called Prasnas, literally 
questions. 

The first 24 of these teach the performance of the so-called Srauta or Vaitanika sacrifices, for 
which several sacred fires are required, beginning with the simplest rites, the new and full 
moon offerings, and ending with the complicated Sattras or sacrificial sessions, which last a 
whole year or even longer 1 . 

The 25 th Prasna contains the Paribhashas or general rules of interpretation 2 , which are valid for 
the whole Kalpa-sutra, the Pravara-khanda, the chapter enumerating the patriarchs of the 
various Brahmanical clans, and finally the Hautraka, prayers to be recited by the Hotraka 
priests. 

The 26 th section gives the Mantras or Vedic prayers and formulas for the Grihya rites, the 
ceremonies for which the sacred domestic or Grihya fire is required. 

The 27 th the rules for the performance of the latter 3 . The aphorisms on the sacred law fill the 
next two Prasnas; and the Sulaba-sutra, teaching the geometrical principles, according to which 
the altars necessary for the Srauta sacrifices must be constructed, concludes the work with the 
30 th Prasna. 

The Hindus are, no doubt, unscrupulous in adding to the works of famous teachers. But such 
additions, if of considerable extent, are usually not embodied in the works themselves which 
they are intended to supplement. They are mostly given as seshas or parisishtas, tacked on at 
the end, and generally marked as such in the MSS. 

In the case of the Apastamba Dharma-sutra it is, however, not necessary to rely on its position 
alone, in order to ascertain its genuineness. There are unmistakable indications that it is the 
work of the same author who wrote the remainder of the Kalpa-sutra. 

Who was Apastamba? 

Who this author really was, is a problem which cannot be solved for the present, and which 
probably will always remain unsolved, because we know his family name only. For the the 




4 



name Apastamba, just like those of most founders of Vedic schools, e.g. Bharadvaja, 
Asvalayana, Gautama, is a patronymic name. 

The History of the Apastamba School 

Regarding both the school which has been named after Apastamba and the works ascribed to 
him, some information has been preserved by tradition, and a little more can be obtained from 
inscriptions and later works, while some interesting details regarding when and where the 
Sutras were composed. 

The data, obtainable from these sources do not enable us to determine with certainty the year 
when the Apastambiya school was founded, and when its Sutras were composed. But they 
make it possible to ascertain the position of the school and of its Sutras in Vedic literature, their 
relative priority or posteriority as compared with other Vedic schools and works, to show in 
which part of India they had their origin, and to guess at their probable antiquity. 

As regards the first point, the Karana-vyuha, a supplement of the White Yajur-veda which 
gives the lists of the Vedic schools, informs us that the Apastambiya school formed one of the 
five branches of the Khandiklya school, which in its turn was a subdivision of the Taittiriyas, 
one of the ancient sections of the Black Yajur-veda. Owing to the very unsatisfactory condition 
of the text of the Karana-vyuha it is unfortunately not possible to ascertain what place that work 
really assigns to the Apastambiyas among the five branches of the Khandikiyas. Some MSS. 
name them first, and others, last. They give either the following list, 

1. Kaleyas (Kaletas), 

2. Satyavanins, 

3. Hiranyakesins, 

4. Bharadvajins, 

5. Apastambins, 

or, 

1. Apastambins, 

2. Baudhayanins or Bodhayanins, 

3. Satyashadhins, 

4. Hiranya-kesins, 

5. Aukheyas 

But according to current and ancient tradition the Apastambiyas are younger than the school of 
Baudhayana, and older than that of Satyashadha Hiranyakesin. Baudhayana, it is alleged, 
composed the first set of Sutras connected with the Black Yajur-Veda, which bore the special 
title 'pravacana,' and he was succeeded by Bharadvaja, Apastamba, and Satyashadha 
Hiranyakesin,who all founded schools which bear their names. 

This tradition has preserved two important pieces of information. 

■ First, the Apastamba school is a Sutra-karana, i.e. a school whose founder 
did not pretend to have received a revelation of Vedic Mantras or of a 
Brahmana text, but merely gave a new systematic arrangement of the 
precepts regarding yajnas and the Dharma. 



5 



■ Secondly, the Sutras of Apastamba occupy an intermediate position 
between the works of Baudhayana and Hiranyakesin. 

In Apastamba's own works, we find clear proof that he laid no claim to the title Rishi, or 
inspired seer of Vedic texts. For (Dharma-sutra I, 2, 5, 4-5 says distinctly that on account of the 
prevalent transgression of the rules of studentship no Rishis are born, among the Avaras, the 
men of later ages or of modern times, but that some, by virtue of a residue of the merit which 
they acquired in former lives, become similar to Rishis by their knowledge of the Veda. A 
person who speaks in this manner, shows that he considers the holy ages during which the great 
saints saw with their mind's eye the uncreated and eternal texts of the Veda to be past, and that 
all he claims is a thorough acquaintance with the scriptures which had been handed down to 
him. 

The same spirit which dictated this passage is also observable in other portions of the Dharma- 
sutra for Apastamba repeatedly contrasts the weakness and sinfulness of the Avaras, the men 
of his own times, with the holiness of the ancient sages, who, owing to the greatness of their 
'lustre,' were able to commit various forbidden acts without diminishing their spiritual merit. 

These utterances prove that Apastamba considered himself a child of the Kali Yuga, during 
which, no Rishis can be born. If, therefore, in spite of this explicit disclaimer, the Samhita and 
the Brahmana of the Black Yajur-veda are sometimes called Apastamba or Apastambiya, i.e. 
belonging to Apastamba, the meaning of this expression can only be, that they were and are 
studied and handed down by the school of Apastamba, not that its founder was their author, or 
actually received a revelation. 

The fact that Apastamba confined his activity to the composition of Sutras is highly important 
for the determination of the period to which he belonged. It clearly shows that in his time the 
tertiary or Sutra period of the Yajur-veda had begun. The conclusion being that the origin of the 
Apastambiya school cannot be placed in the early times of the Vedic period, and probably falls 
in the last six or seven centuries before the beginning of the Christian era. 

Apastamba and Baudhayana 

That Apastamba is younger than Baudhayana may be proven by the following considerations. 
First, Baudhayana's and Apastamba's works on Dharma have a considerable number of Sutras 
in common. 

Apastamba holds in several cases doctrines which are of a later origin than those held by 
Baudhayana. With respect to this point the puritan opinions which Apastamba puts forward 
regarding the substitutes for legitimate sons and regarding the appointment of widows (niyoga), 
and his restriction of the number of marriage-rites, may be adduced as examples. Like many 
other ancient teachers, Baudhayana permits childless Aryans to satisfy their craving for 
offspring by the affiliation of eleven kinds of substitutes for a legitimate son. Illegitimate sons, 
the illegitimate sons of wives, the legitimate and illegitimate offspring of daughters, and the 
children of relatives, or even of strangers who may be solemnly adopted, or received as 
members of the family without any ceremony, or be acquired by purchase, are all allowed to 
take the place and the rights of legitimate sons. Apastamba declares his dissent from this 
doctrine. He allows legitimate sons only to inherit their father's estate and to follow the 
occupations of his caste, and he explicitly forbids the sale and gift of children. 

Thus he protests against the custom of handing over childless widows to brothers-in-law or 
other near relatives in order to obtain sons who are to offer the funeral oblations to the deceased 
husband's manes, while Baudhayana has as yet no scruple on the subject. Finally, he omits from 



6 



his list of the marriage-rites the Paisaca vivaha, where the bride is obtained by fraud; though it 
is reluctantly admitted by Baudhayana and other ancient teachers. 

On several occasions, it appears, Apastamba controverts opinions which Baudhayana holds, or 
which may be defended with the help of the latter's Sutras. The clearest case of this kind occurs 
in the chapter on Inheritance, where the treatment of the eldest son on the division of the estate 
by the father is discussed. There Apastamba gives his own opinion that the father should make 
an equal division of his property 'after having gladdened the eldest son by some (choice portion 
of his) wealth,' i.e. after making him a present which should have some value, but should not be 
so valuable as to materially affect the equality of the shares. Further on he notices the opinions 
of other teachers on this subject, and states that the practice advocated by some, of allowing the 
eldest alone to inherit, as well as the custom prevailing in some countries, of allotting to the 
eldest all the father's gold, or the black cows, or the black iron and grain, is not in accordance 
with the precepts of the Vedas. In order to prove the latter assertion he quotes a passage of the 
Taittirlya Samhita, in which it is declared that 'Manu divided his wealth among his sons,' and 
no difference in the treatment of the eldest son is prescribed. He adds that a second passage 
occurs in the same Veda, which declares that 'they distinguish the eldest son by (a larger 
portion of) the heritage,' and which thus apparently countenances the partiality for the first- 
born. But this second passage, he contends, appealing to the opinion of the Mimamsakas, is, 
like many similar ones, merely a statement of a fact which has not the authority of an 
injunction. 

If we now turn to Baudhayana, we find that he allows of three different methods for the 
distribution of the paternal estate. According to him, either an equal share may be given to each 
son, or the eldest may receive the best part of the wealth, or, also, a preferential share of one 
tenth of the whole property. He further alleges that the cows, horses, goats, and sheep 
respectively go to the eldest sons of Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras. As authority 
for the equal division he gives the first of the two Vedic passages quoted above; and for the 
doctrine that the eldest is to receive the best part of the estate, he quotes the second passage 
which Apastamba considers to be without the force of an injunction. 

The fact that the two authors' opinions clash is manifest, and the manner in which Apastamba 
tries to show that the second Vedic passage possesses no authority, clearly indicates that before 
his time it had been held to contain an injunction. As no other author of a Dharma-sutra but 
Baudhayana is known to have quoted it, the conclusion is that Apastamba's remarks are 
directed against him. If Apastamba does not mention Baudhayana by name, the reason 
probably is that in olden times, just as in the present day, the Brahmanical etiquette forbad a 
direct opposition against doctrines propounded by an older teacher who belongs to the same 
spiritual family (vidyavamsa) as oneself. 

A similar case occurs in the chapter on Studentship where Apastamba, again appealing to the 
Mlmamsists, combats the doctrine that pupils may eat forbidden food, such as honey, meat, and 
pungent condiments, if it is given to them as leavings by their teacher. Baudhayana gives no 
explicit rule on this point, but the wording of his Sutras is not opposed to the doctrine and 
practice, to which Apastamba objects. Baudhayana says that students shall avoid honey, meat, 
pungent condiments, &c; he further enjoins that pupils are to obey their teachers except when 
ordered to commit crimes which cause loss of caste (pataniya); and he finally directs them to 
eat the fragments of food given to them by their teachers. As the eating of honey and other 
forbidden substances is not a crime causing loss of caste, it is possible that Baudhayana himself 
may have considered it the duty of a pupil to eat any kind of food given by the teacher, even 
honey and meat. At all events the practice and doctrine which Apastamba blames, may have 
been defended by the wording of Baudhayana's rules. 



7 



8 



Apastamba and other texts & teachers. 

As the Dharma-sutra names no less than nine teachers in connection with various topics of the 
sacred law, and frequently appeals to the opinion of some (eke), it follows that a great many 
such auxiliary treatises must have existed in Apastamba's time. The acaryas mentioned are Eka, 
Kanva, Kanva, Kunika, Kutsa, Kautsa, Puskarasadi, Varsyayani, Svetaketu, and Harita. Some 
of these persons, like Harita and Kanva, are known to have composed Sutras on the sacred law, 
and fragments or modified versions of their works are still in existence, while Kanva, Kautsa, 
Pushkarasadi or Paushkarasadi, as the grammatically correct form of the name is, and 
Varshyayani are quoted in the Nirukta, the Pratisikhyas, and the Varttikas on Panini as 
authorities on phonetics, etymology, and grammar. Kanva, finally, is considered the author of 
the still existing Kalpa-sutras of the Kanva school connected with the White Yajur-veda. It 
seems not improbable that most of these teachers were authors of complete sets of Angas. Their 
position in Vedic literature, however, except as far as Kanva, Harita, and Svetaketu are 
concerned, is difficult to define, and the occurrence of their names throws less light on the 
antiquity of the Apastamblya school than might be expected. Regarding Harita it must, 
however, be noticed that he is one of the oldest authors of Sutras, that he was an adherent of the 
Maitrayanlya Sakha, and that he is quoted by Baudhayana, Apastamba's predecessor. The 
bearing of the occurrence of Svetaketu's name will be discussed below. 

Of even greater interest than the names of the teachers are the indications which Apastamba 
gives, that he knew two of the philosophical schools which still exist in India, viz. the Purva or 
Karma Mimamsa and the Vedanta. As regards the former, he mentions it by its ancient name, 
Nyaya, which in later times and at present is usually applied to the doctrine of Gautama 
Aksapada. In two passages he settles contested points on the authority of those who know the 
Nyaya, i.e. the Purva Mimamsa, and in several other cases he adopts a line of reasoning which 
fully agrees with that followed in Jaimini's Mimamsa-sutras. 

As to the Vedanta, Apastamba does not mention the name of the school. But Khandas 22, 23 of 
the first Patala of the Dharma-sutra unmistakably contain the chief tenets of the Vedantists, and 
recommend the acquisition of the knowledge of the Atman as the best means for purifying the 
minds of sinners. Though these two Khandas are chiefly filled with quotations, which, as the 
commentator states, are taken from an Upanishad, still the manner of their selection, as well as 
Apastamba's own words in the introductory and concluding Sutras, indicates that he knew not 
merely the unsystematic speculations contained in the Upanishads and Aranyakas, but a well- 
defined system of Vedantic philosophy identical with that of Badarayana's Brahma-sutras. 

Of non- Vedic works Apastamba mentions the 'Purana'. The Dharma-sutra not only several 
times quotes passages from 'a Purana' as authorities for its rules, but names in one case the 
Bhavisyat-purana as the particular Purana from which the quotation is taken. References to the 
Purana in general are not infrequent in other Sutras on the sacred law, and even in older Vedic 
works. But Apastamba is the only Sutrakara who specifies the title of a particular Purana, and 
names one which is nearly or quite identical with that of a work existing in the present day, and 
he is the only one, whose quotations can be shown to be, at least in part, genuine Pauranic 
utterances. 

There is yet another point on which Apastamba shows a remarkable agreement with a theory 
which is prevalent in later Sanskrit literature. He says (Dh. II, 11, 29, 11-12), 'The knowledge 
which Sudras and women possess, is the completion of all study,' and 'they declare that this 
knowledge is a supplement of the Atharva-veda.' 

The commentator remarks with reference to these two Sutras, that 'the knowledge which Sudras 
and women possess,' is the knowledge of dancing, acting, music, and other branches of the so- 



9 



called Arthasastra, the science of useful arts and of trades, and that the object of the Sutras is to 
forbid the study of such matters before the acquisition of sacred learning. 

Apastamba's remark that 'the knowledge of Sudras and women is a supplement of the Atharva- 
veda,' proves that he knew the division of Hindu learning which is taught in Madhusudana 
Sarasvati's Prasthdnabheda. For Madhusudana allots to each Veda an Upa-veda or 
supplementary Veda, and asserts that the Upa-veda of the Atharva-veda is the Arthasastra. The 
agreement of Apastamba with the modern writers on this point, furnishes, an additional 
argument that he belongs to the later Vedic schoolmen. 

The geographical location of Apastamba 

We do possess some statements as to the part of India to which Apastamba belongs, and these, 
as it happens, are of great importance for fixing approximately the period in which the school 
arose. According to the Brahmanical tradition, which is supported by a hint contained in the 
Dharma-sutra and by, information derivable from inscriptions and the actual state of things in 
modern India, the Apastamblyas belong to Southern India and their founder probably was a 
native of or resided in the Andhra country. The existence of this tradition, which to the present 
day prevails among the learned Brahmans of Western India and Benares, may be substantiated 
by a passage from the above-mentioned commentary of the Karanavyuha ,which, though 
written in barbarous Sanskrit, and of quite modern origin, possesses great interest, because its 
description of the geographical distribution of the Vedas and Vedic schools is not mentioned 
elsewhere. 

The verses from a work entitled Maharnava, which are quoted there, state that India, is divided 
into two equal halves by the river Narmada and that the school of Apastamba prevails in the 
southern half (ver. 2). It is further alleged (ver. 6) that the Yajur-veda of Tittiri and the 
Apastamblya school are established in the Andhra country and other parts of the south and 
south-east up to the mouth of the Godavari (goddsdgara-dvadhi). According to the Maharnava 
the latter river marks, therefore, the northern frontier of the territory occupied by the 
Apastamblyas which comprises the Maratha and Kanada districts, the Tamil country and the 
western coast. 

The indigenous Brahmanas of Gujarat, such as the Nagaras, Khedavals, Bhargavas, Kaphas, 
and Motalas, belong, if they are adherents of the Yajur-veda, to the Madhyandina or Kanva 
schools of the White Yajur-veda. The same is the case with the Brahmanas of Rajputana, 
Hindustan, and the Punjab. In Central India, too, the White Yajur-veda prevails; but, besides 
the two schools mentioned above, there are still some colonies of Maitrayanlyas or Manavas. It 
seems, also, that the restriction of the Apastamblya school to the south of India, or rather to 
those subdivisions of the Brahmanical community which for a long time have been settled in 
the south and are generally considered as natives of the south, is not of recent date. For it is a 
significant fact that the numerous ancient land-grants which have been found all over India 
indicate exactly the same state of things. 

Among the southern land-grants there are several on which the name of the school appears. 
Thus in a edict of king Harihara of Vidyanagara, dated Saka-samvat 1317 or 1395 A.D., one of 
the recipients of the royal bounty is 'the learned Ananta Diksita, son of Ramabhatta, chief of the 
Apastamblya sakha, a scion of the Vasishtha gotra.' Further, the eastern Kalukya king 
Vijayaditya II, who ruled, according to Dr. Fleet, from A.D. 799-843, presented a village to six 
students of the Hiranyakesi-sutra and to eighteen students of the Apastamba-sutra. Again, in the 
above mentioned earlier grant of the Pallava king Nandivarman, there are forty-two students of 
the Apastamba-sutra among the 108 sharers of the village of Udaya-candra-mangalam. 



10 



Finally, on an ancient set of plates written in the characters which usually are called cave- 
characters, and issued by the Pallava king Simha-varman II, we find among the donees five 
Apastambhlya Brahmanas, who, together with a Hairanyakesin, a Vajasaneyin, and a Sama- 
vedi, received the village of Manjadur, in Vengorashtra. This inscription is, to judge from the 
characters, thirteen to fourteen hundred years old, and on this account a very important witness 
for the early existence of the Apastamblyas in Southern India. 

Apastamba, in describing the Sraddhas or funeral oblations says (Dh. II, 7, 17, 17) that the 
custom of pouring water into the hands of Brahmanas invited to a Sraddha prevails among the 
northerners, and he indicates thereby that he himself does not belong to the north of India. 

The south of India and the nations inhabiting it, such as Kalingas, Dravidas, Andhras, Cholas, 
and Pandyas, do not play any important part in the ancient Brahmanical traditions and in the 
earliest history of India, the centre of both of which lies in the north-west or at least north of the 
Vindhya range. The south and the southern nations are not mentioned in any of the Vedic 
Samhitas. In the Brahmanas and in the Sutras they do occur, though they are named rarely and 
not in a complimentary manner. Aitareya-Brahmana gives the names of certain degraded, 
barbarous tribes, and among them that of the Andhras, in whose country, as has been shown, 
the Apastamblyas probably originated. Again, Baudhayana, in his Dharma-sutra I, i, quotes 
song verses in which it is said that he who visits the Kalingas must purify himself by the 
performance of certain sacrifices in order to become fit for again associating with Aryans. The 
same author, also, mentions distinctive forbidden practices (acara) prevailing in the south (loc. 
cit.). 

Further, Panini's grammatical Sutras and Katyayana's Varttikas thereon contain rules regarding 
several words which presuppose an acquaintance with the south and the kingdoms which 
flourished there. Thus Panini, IV, 2, 98, teaches the formation of daksinatya in the sense of 
'belonging to or living in the south or the Dekhan,' and a Varttika of Katyayana on Panini, IV, 
1, 175, states that the words Chola and Pandya are used as names of the princes ruling over the 
Chola and Pandya countries, which, as is known from history, were situated in the extreme 
south of India. 

The other southern nations and a fuller description of the south occur first in the Mahabharata. 
Asoka in his edicts, which date from the second half of the third century B.C.E, calls the 
Cholas, Pandyas, and the Kerala-putra or Ketala-putra his pratyantas (prakanta) or neighbours. 
The same monarch informs us also that he conquered the province of Kalinga (Orissa) and 
annexed it to his kingdom, and his remarks on the condition of the province show that it was 
thoroughly imbued with the Aryan civilisation. 

There can be no doubt that the south of India was conquered by the Aryans, and has been 
brought within the pale of Brahmanical civilisation much later than India north of the Vindhya 
range. During which century precisely that conquest took place, cannot be determined for the 
present. But it would seem that it happened a considerable time before the Vedic period came 
to an end, and it certainly was an accomplished fact, long before the authenticable history of 
India begins, about 500 B.C.E, with the Persian conquest of the Panjab and Sindh. It may be 
added that a not inconsiderable period must have elapsed after the conquest of the south, before 
the Aryan civilisation had so far taken root in the conquered territory, that, in its turn, it could 
become a centre of Brahmanical activity, and that it could produce new Vedic schools. 



11 



The antiquity of Apastamba 

The name of Apastamba and of the Apastamblyas is not mentioned in any Vedic work, not 
even in a Kalpa-sutra, but the Dharma-sutra contains a remarkable passage in which its author 
states that Svetaketu, one of the Vedic teachers who is mentioned in the Satapatha-Brahmana 
and in the Chandogya Upanishad, belongs to the Avaras, to the men of later, i.e. of his own 
times. It has been stated that according to Sutra 4, 'No Rishis are born among the Avaras, the 
men of later ages, on account of the prevailing transgression of the rules of studentship;' and 
that according to Sutra 5, 'Some in their new birth become similar to Rishis by their knowledge 
of the Veda (srutarshi) through a residue of merit acquired in former existences.' In order to 
give an illustration of the latter case, the author adds in Sutra 6, 'Like Svetaketu.' The natural, 
and only admissible interpretation of these words is that Apastamba considers Svetaketu to be 
one of the Avaras, who by virtue of a residue of merit became a Srutarshi. This is also the view 
of the commentator Haradatta, who, in elucidation of Sutra 6, quotes the following passage 
from the Chandogya Upanishad (VI, 1, 1-2): 

'Verily, there lived Svetaketu, a descendant of Aruna. His father spake unto him, "O 
Svetaketu, dwell as a student (with a, teacher); for, verily, dear child, no one in our 
family must neglect the study of the Veda and become, as it were, a Brahmana in name 
only." 

'Verily, he (Svetaketu) was initiated at the age of twelve years, and when twenty-four 
years old be had learned all the Vedas; he thought highly of himself and was vain of his 
learning and arrogant.' 

There can be no doubt that this is the person and the story referred to in the Dharma-sutra. For 
the fact which the Upanishad mentions, that Svetaketu learned all the Vedas in twelve years, 
while, the Smritis declare forty-eight years to be necessary for the accomplishment of that task, 
makes Apastamba's illustration intelligible and appropriate. A good deal more is told in the 
Chandogya Upanishad about this Svetaketu, who is said to have been the son of Uddalaka and 
the grandson of Aruna (Aruneya). The same person is also frequently mentioned in the 
Satapatha-Brahmana. In one passage; of the latter work, which has been translated by Professor 
Max Miiller, it is alleged that he was a contemporary of Yagnavalkya, the promulgator of the 
White Yajur-veda, and of the learned king Janaka of Videha, who asked him about the meaning 
of the Agnihotra sacrifice, Now, as has been shown above, Apastamba knew and quotes the 
White Yajur-veda and the Satapatha-brahmana. 

The fact, therefore, that Apastamba places a teacher whom he must have considered as a 
contemporary of the promulgator of the White Yajur-veda among the Avaras, is highly 
interesting and of some importance for the history of Vedic literature. For even if the term 
Avara is not interpreted very strictly and allowed to mean not exactly a contemporary, but a 
person of comparatively recent times, it will not be possible to place between Svetaketu and 
Apastamba a longer interval than, at the utmost, two or three hundred years. Svetaketu and 
Yagnavalkya would accordingly, at the best, find their places in the fourth or fifth century 
B.C.E, and the Satapatha-Brahmana as well as all other Vedic works, which narrate incidents 
from their lives, must have been composed or at least edited still later. Though little is known 
regarding the history of the Vedic texts, still it happens that we possess some information 
regarding the texts in question. For we know from a statement made by Katyayana in a Varttika 
on Panini IV, 3, 105, and from Patanjali's commentary on his words that the Brahmana 
proclaimed by Yagnavalkya, i.e. the Satapatha-brahmana of the White Yajur-veda, was 
considered to have been promulgated by one of the Ancients, in the times of these two writers, 
i.e. probably in the fourth and second centuries B.C.E. These considerations will show that it is 
necessary to allow for Apastamba a much higher antiquity than the first century B.C.E. 



12 



The occurrence of many grammatical irregularities in so small a treatise as the Dharma-sutra, 
proves clearly that the author did not follow Panini's grammar, and makes it very unlikely that 
he knew it at all. The majority of the irregular forms are peculiar to Apastamba. He must have 
either been unacquainted with Panini or have considered his teachings of no great importance. 
In other words, he must either have lived earlier than Panini or before Panini's grammar had 
acquired general fame throughout India, and become the standard authority for Sanskrit 
authors. On linguistic grounds it seems Apastamba cannot be placed later than the third 
century B.C.E, and if his statement regarding Svetaketu is taken into account, the lower limit 
for the composition of his Sutras must be put further back by 150-200 years. 

History of the Dharma-sutras & their commentary 

It now is necessary to say, in conclusion, a few words about the history of the text of the 
Dharma-sutra, and about its commentary, the Ujjvala Vritti of Haradatta. The oldest writer with 
a known date who quotes the Apastambiya Dharma-sutra is Sankaracarya, c. 800 A.D. Even 
somewhat earlier Kumarila, c. 750, refers repeatedly to a law-book by Apastamba. But it is 
improbable that he had our Dharma-sutra before him. For he says, p. 138, that Apastamba 
expressly sanctions local usages, opposed to the teaching of the Vedas, for the natives of those 
districts where they had prevailed since ancient times. Now, that is just an opinion, which our 
Dharma-sutra declares to be wrong and refutes repeatedly. As it seems hazardous to impute to a 
man, like Kumarila, ignorance or spite against Apastamba, one can assume that the great 
Mimamsaka refers to some other work, attributed to Apastamba. 

Among the commentators on Smritis the oldest, who quote the Dharma-sutra, are 
Medhatithi, the author of the Manubhashya, and Vijnanesvara, who composed the 
Mitaksara, the well-known commentary on Yajnavalkya's Dharma-sastra during the 
reign of the Calukya king Vikramaditya VI, of Calukya towards the end of the 11 th 
century. From that time downwards Apastamba is quoted by almost every writer on law. But 
the whole text is vouched for only by the commentator Haradatta, who wrote his Ujjvala Vritti, 
at the latest, in the 15 th century A.D. or possibly 100 years earlier. Haradatta was, however, not 
the first commentator of the Dharma-sutra. He frequently quotes the opinions of several 
predecessors whom he designates by the general expressions anyah or aparah, i.e. another 
(writer). The fact that the Ujjvala was preceded by earlier commentaries which protected the 
text from corruption, also speaks in favour of the authenticity of the latter, which is further 
attested by the close agreement of the Hiranyakesi Dharma-sutra, mentioned above. 

As regards the value of the Ujjvala commentary for the explanation of Apastamba's text, it 
certainly belongs to the best commentaries existing. Haradatta possessed in the older Vrittis 
abundant and good materials on which he could draw; he himself apparently was, well versed 
in Hindu law and in Sanskrit grammar, and distinguished by sobriety and freedom from that 
vanity which induces many Indian commentators to load their works with endless and useless 
quotations. His explanations, therefore, can mostly be followed without hesitation, and, even 
when they appear unacceptable, they deserve careful consideration. 



13 



APASTAMBA DHARMA SUTRAS 




Prasna 1 . Patala 1 . Khanda 1 . 

athdtas-sdmaydcdrikdn dharmdn vydkhydsydmah 1 1 7 1 1 

1 . Now, therefore, we will teach the Dharmas which form part of the duty 
of daily life, as they have been decided by the agreement [of those who 
know the law]. 

Now, therefore — after the study of the srauta and grhya sutras. 

Dharma — 'acts productive of merit,' usually translated by 'duty or law,' is more 
accurately defined as an act which produces the state called apurva, the cause of 
heavenly bliss and of final liberation. 

Sdmaya — 'agreement, decision of men who know the law,' is threefold = vidhi - 
injunction, niyama - restriction or guidelines, and pratisedha - prohibition. 

dharmajna samayah pramdnam 1 1 2 1 1 

2. The authority [for Dharma] is the agreement of those who know the law. 
(Manu 2:6, 12; Yajn. 1:7; Gautama 1:1:] 

The Dharma teachings arise from the consensus of those learned scholars who have 
studied the Scriptures. 

veddsca II 3 II 

3. And [the authorities for the latter are] the Vedas alone. 

The knowers of the law are authorities for us and the Vedas alone are their authority. 
The Vedas are therefore the root authority in matters of dharma and adharma. 
[Gautama 1;1:2] 

Catvaro varna brahmana ksatriya vaisya sudrah 1 1 4 1 1 

4. [There are] four castes — brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas, and sudras. 

All four are entitled to practice the Dharma set forth by the agreement of the Law-givers. 

tesdm purvah purvo janmatas-sreyan 1 1 5 1 1 

5. Among these, each preceding [caste] is superior by birth to the one 
following. 

asudrdndm adusta-karmdndm updyanam vedddhyayanam agnyddheyam 
phalavanti ca karmdni 1 1 6 



14 



6. [For all these], excepting sudras and criminals, [are ordained] the 
initiation [upanayana], the study of the Veda, and the setting up of the 
sacred fire; and [their] works are productive of rewards [in this world and 
the next]. (Manu 2:35.) 

If one omits the 'a' prefix in asiidranam the meaning would be — "those sudras who 
are of impeccable behaviour may also be initiated etc." 

suslsa sudrasyetaresdm varnanam 1 1 7 1 1 

7. To serve the other [three] castes [is ordained] for the sudra. (Manu 1:91, 
8:410 and 9:334 Yajn. 1:120.) 

purvasmin purvasmin varne nisreyasam bhuyah 1 1 8 1 1 

8. The higher the caste [which the sudra serves] the greater is the merit. 
upanayanam vidydrthasya srutitas-samskarah 1 1 9 1 1 

9. The initiation [upanayana] is the confirmation in accordance with the texts 
of the Veda, of a male who is desirous of [and can make use of] sacred 
knowledge. 

The deaf and dumb who cannot make use of the sacred knowledge are thus excluded. 
The stipulation of 'male' excludes women for the reason that their domestic duties 
precludes them from making use of the scriptural knowledge of the Vedas. Although 
women are required to use certain texts during agnihotra etc. it is recommended that 
they be taught at the time of performance only. 

sarvebhyo vai vedebhyas-sdvitryanucyata iti hi brdhmanam II 10 II 

10. A Brahmana text declares that the Gayatri is learnt for the sake of all 
the [three] Vedas. 

This statement is to remove the doubt whether the ceremony of initiation is to be 
repeated for each of the Vedas. Only if the Atharvana Veda is to be studied is a 
separate initiation required. 

Tamaso vd esa tamah pravisati yam avidvdn upanayate yascd avidvdn iti hi 
brdhmanam II 11 II 

11. A Brahmana text declares that one who's initiated by a guru unlearned 
in the Veda indeed enters darkness, and he who initiates comes from 
darkness. 

The one who conducts the upanayana ceremony should himself be learned in the Veda. 
Nowadays it is customary for the father to do the teaching of the gayatri even though 
unlearned in the Veda. 

Tasminnabhijan avidyd samudetam samdhitam samskartdram ipset II 12 II 

12. One who desires initiation shall seek to obtain a teacher in whose 
family sacred learning is hereditary, who himself possesses the knowledge 



15 



of the 6 angas of the Veda [along with the meaning], and who is diligent [in 
following the law] . 

a teacher in whose family sacred learning is hereditary — it must be remembered 
that at the time of the sutras, books were not widely available and learning was 
confined within families and not institutes of learning. 

Samahita means avoiding the proscribed acts and diligently following the prescribed 
acts. 

Tasminscaiva vidydkarmd ntam avipratipanne dharmebhyah II 13 II 

13. And under him the sacred science must be studied until the end, 
provided [the teacher] does not fall down from the ordinances of the law. 

If the teacher does happen to fall from the practice of Dharma then the student has 
the right to tactfully upbraid him, if he continues in malpractice the student should 
leave and find another teacher. 

Tasmdd dharmdn dcinoti sa dcdryah 1 1 14 1 1 

14. He from whom one gathers [dcinoti] [the knowledge of] Dharma is 
called the acarya [teacher]. (Manu 2:69, Yajn. 1:15.) 

tasmai na druhyet kaddcana 1 1 75 1 1 

15. The teacher should never be offended in any way. (Manu 2: 144.) 
sa hi vidydtastam janayati II 7611 

16. For he gives a second birth to the student by [imparting to him] sacred 
learning. (Manu 2:146-148.) 

tacchrestham janma II 7711 

17. This [second] birth is the best. 

Because it procures spiritual advancement and the means to liberation. The guru is 
considered a "father" and the students are considered as spiritual sons. The disciples 
between themselves have the relationship of "guru-brothers." 

sariram eva mdtd-pitarau janayatah II 18 II 

18. The father and the mother produce the body only. (Manu 2: 147) 

The body is a mere product of matter and is a vehicle for the jlvatman. 

vasante brdhmanam upanayTta grisme rdjanyam saradi vaisyam 
garbhdsthamesu brdhmanam garbhaikddasesu rdjanyam garbha- 
dvddasesu vaisyam II 79 II 

19. Let a Brahmana be initiated in spring, a Ksatriya in summer, a Vaisya 
in autumn, a Brahmana in the eighth year of age, a Ksatriya in the eleventh 
year and a Vaisya in the twelfth year. (Manu 2:36.) 



16 



atha kamyani \ \ 20 \ \ 

20. Now [follows the enumeration of the ages to be chosen] for the 
fulfilment of some [particular] aim. 

Saptame brahma-varcasa kamam II 21 II 

21. A person desirous of excellence in sacred learning [should be initiated] 
in his seventh year. (Manu 2:37.) 

asthame ayus kamam 1 1 22 1 1 

22. A person desirous of long life in his eighth year, 
navame tejas kamam II 23 II 

23. A person desirous of sexual vigour in his ninth year, 
dasamennadya kamam II 24 II 

24. A person desirous of well-being in his tenth year, 
ekadasa indriya kamam II 25 II 

25. A person desirous of strong sense-organs in his eleventh year, 
dvadasame pasu kamam 1 1 26 1 1 

26. A person desirous of wealth [cattle] in his twelfth year. 

a sodasdd brahmanasya-anatyaya , a dvdvimsdt ksatriyasya-a caturvimsad 
vaisyasya yatha vratesu samarthah sydt-yani vaksyamah II 27 II 

27. There is no dereliction [of duty, if the initiation takes place], in the case 
of a Brahmana before the completion of the 16 th year, in the case of a 
Kshatriya before the completion of the 22 nd year, in the case of a Vaisya 
before the completion of the 24 th year. [Let him be initiated at such an age] 
that he may be able to perform the duties, which we shall declare below. 

The meaning is, that the initiation shall be performed as soon as the child is able to 
begin the study of the Veda. If it is sufficiently mentally developed at eight years, the 
ceremony must then be performed; and if it be then neglected, or, if it be neglected at 
any time when the capacity for learning exists, the expiation prescribed in the 
following Sutras must be performed. The age of 16 in the case of Brahmanas is the 
latest age until which the ceremony may be deferred, in case of incapacity for study 
only. After the lapse of the 16 th year, the expiation becomes also necessary. (Manu 
2:38; Yajn. 1:37. 

atikrante savitryah kala rtum traividyakam brahmacaryam caret 1 1 28 1 1 

28. If the proper time for the initiation has passed, one shall observe the 
duties of a student for a period of two months, as observed by those who 
are studying the three Vedas. 



17 



The meaning is, he shall keep all the restrictions imposed upon a student, such as 
chastity, etc., but that he shall not perform fire-worship or service to a teacher nor 
actually study. (Manu 2;39; 11:192, Yajfi. 1. 38; 

atha-upanayanam II 29 II 

29. After that he may be initiated. 

tatah samvatsaram udaka-upasparsanam \ \ 30W 

30. After that he shall bathe [daily] for one year. 

Haradatta comments that if he is healthy he shall bathe three times a day — morning, 
midday, and evening from the time of initiation. 

atha-adhydpyah II 31 II 

31. After that he may be instructed [in the Veda]. 

atha yasya pita pitdmaha iti anupetau sydtdm te brahmaha-samstutdh 1 1 32 
II 

32. He, whose father and grandfather have not been initiated, [and his two 
ancestors] are called 'slayers of the Brahman.' 

Brahman here means 'Veda,' and those who neglect its study may be called 
metaphorically 'slayers of the Veda.' To be initiated implies to also study the Veda. 
If a person' s father and grandfather have not been initiated and have not studied the 
Veda then they are demoted to the level of Sudras. This would apply to the vast 
majority of "Brahmins" — it is very rare to find one in whose family Vedic learning 
is still current. 

tesdm abhydgamanam bhojanam vivdham iti ca varjayet \ \ 33 \ \ 

33. Intercourse, eating and intermarriage with them should be avoided. 
(Manu 2; 40; Asv. Gri:Su. 1:19:8:9.) 

tesdm icchatdm prdyascittam 1 1 34 1 1 

34. If they wish it [they may perform the following] expiation: — 
yathd prathame- 'atikrama rtur evam samvatsarah \ \ 35 \ \ 

35. In the same manner as for the first dereliction [of the initiation, a 
penance of] two months [was] prescribed, so [they shall do penance for] 
one year. 

Compare above, 1:1:1 ;28 

atha-upanayanam tata udaka-upasparsanam 1 1 36 1 1 

36. Afterwards they may be initiated, and then they must bathe [daily], 



18 



Prasna 1. Patala 1. Khanda. 2. 

Prati piirusam sahkhydya samvatsardn ydvanto-anupetdh syuh 1 1 7 1 1 

1. For as many years as there are uninitiated persons, reckoning [one year] 
for each ancestor [and the person to be initiated himself], 

saptabhih pavamanTbhir "yad anti yac ca duraka" iti etdbhir yajus 
pavitrena sdma pavitrena-dhgirasena-iti 1 1 2 1 1 

2. [They should bathe daily reciting] the seven Pavamanis, beginning with 
'If near or far,' the 'Yajus-pavitra, ['May the waters, the mothers purify us,' 
etc.] the Sama-pavitra, ['With what help assists,' etc.], and the Arigirasa- 
pavitra ['A swan, dwelling in purity'], 

The seven Pavamanis are seven verses which occur Rig-Veda 9;67;21-27. Yajus- 
pavitra is the Taitt. Samh. 1:2:1:1. The Sama-pavitra is found Sama-Veda 1, 2, 2, 3, 
5. Ahgirasa-pavitra-Rig-Veda. 4; 40, 5. 

api vd vydhrtTbhir eva II 3 II 

3. Or also reciting the Vyahrtis [om, bhuh, bhuvah, suvah]. 
atha-adhydpyah 1 1 4 1 1 

4. After that [such a person] may be taught [the Veda]. 

atha yasya prapitdmaha ddi na-anusmaryata upanayanam te smasdna 
samstutdh 1 151 1 

5. But those whose great-grandfather's [grandfather's and father's] initiation 
is not remembered, are called "cremation-grounds." 

tesdm abhydgamanam bhojanam vivdham iti ca varjayet tesdm icchatdm 
prdyascittam dvddasa varsdni traividyakam brahmacaryam caret I atha- 
upanayanam tatas- udaka upasparsanam pdvamdnT ddibhih 1 1 6 1 1 

6. Intercourse, dining, and intermarriage with them should be avoided. For 
them, if they like, the [following] penance [is prescribed] . [Such a person] 
shall keep for twelve years the rules prescribed for a student who is 
studying the three Vedas. Afterwards he may be initiated. Then he shall 
bathe, reciting the Pavamanis and the other [texts mentioned above, 1. 1, 2, 
2]. 

atha grha-medha upadesanam 1 1 7 1 1 

7. Then he may be instructed in the religious duties of a householder. 
na-adhydpanam 1 1 8 1 1 



19 



8. He shall not be taught [the whole Veda], but only the sacred formulas 
required for the domestic ceremonies. 

tato yo nirvartate tasya samskdro yathd prathame- 'atikrame 1 1 9 1 1 

9. When he has finished this [study of the Grhya-mantras], he may be 
initiated [after having performed the penance prescribed] for the first 
neglect [1. 1. 1. 28]. 

tata urdhvam prakrtivat II 10 II 

10. Afterwards [everything is performed] as in the case of a regular 
initiation. 

The commentators say that for those whose great-great-grandfather or remoter 
ancestors were not initiated, no penance is prescribed, and that it must be decided by 
the learned. 

upetasya deary a kule brahmacari vasah II 11 II 

1 1 . The initiated one shall dwell as a Brahmacarin in the house of the 
teacher, (Manu 2:164) 

astdcatvdrimsad varsani II 12 II 

12. For forty-eight years [if he learns all the four Vedas], (Manu 3;1, and 
Yajn. 1:36) 

Pddunam II 13 II 

13. [Or] a quarter less [ ie. for thirty-six years], 
ardhena 1 1 14 1 1 

14. [Or] less by half [ie. for twenty-four years], 
tribhir vd 1 1 15 1 1 

15. [Or] three quarters less [ie. for twelve years], 
dvddasa avara ardhyam II 16 II 

16. Twelve years [should be] the shortest time [for his residence with his 
teacher]. 

The commentator declares that in (Manu 3;1, the expression 'until he has learnt it,' 
must be understood in this sense, [that the student may leave his teacher, if he has 
learnt the Veda after twelve years' study, never before. But compare also Asv. Gri. 
Sutra. 1, 22, 3. 

na brahmacdrino vidyd arthasya para upavdso- 'asti II 7711 

17. A student who studies the sacred knowledge shall not dwell with 
anybody else [other than his teacher]. 



20 



The commentator states that this rule refers only to a temporary, not to a professed 
student [naisthika]. He also gives an entirely different explanation to the Sutra, 
which, according to some, means, 'A student who learns the Veda shall not fast in 
order to obtain heaven'. This rendering also is admissible, as the word para may 
mean either a 'stranger' or 'heaven', and upavasa, 'dwelling' or 'fasting.' 

atha brahmacarya vidhih II 18 II 

18. Now the rules for the studentship. 

Acdrya adhinah sydd anyatra patanTyebhyah II 19 II 

19. He shall obey his teacher, except [when ordered to commit] crimes 
which cause loss of caste. 

Regarding the crimes which cause loss of caste [pataniya], see below, 1,7,21;7 
hitakdri guror apratilomayan vdcd II 20 II 

20. One shall do what is beneficial to the teacher, and shall not contradict 
him. (Manu 2;108, and Yajn. 1.27.) 

adha dsana sdyi II 21 II 

2 1 . One shall always occupy a couch or seat lower [than that of the 
teacher]. (Manu 2; 108, 198) 

na-anudesyam bhunjlta 1 1 22 1 1 

22. One shall not eat food offered [at a sacrifice to the gods or the Manes], 
tathd ksdra-lavana madhu mdmsdni II 23 II 

23. Nor pungent condiments, salt, honey or meat. 

Regarding the meaning of "ksara" — 'pungent condiments,' see Haradatta on 2:6, 
15, 15. Other commentators explain the term differently. (Manu 2;177; Yajn. 1, 33; 
and Asv. Gri: Su. 1. 22, 2. 

adivd svdpT 1 1 24 1 1 

24. One shall not sleep in the day-time. 
agandha sevT 1 1 25 1 1 

25. Nor use perfumes. (Manu 2; 177; Yajn. 1:33.) 
maithunam na caret 1 1 26 1 1 

26. Nor engage in sexual activities. (Manu 2; 180.) 
utsanna sldghah II 27 II 

27. Nor embellish oneself [by using ointments and the like]. (Manu 2; 178; 
Yajn. 1;33.) 



21 



angani na praksalayTta 1 1 28 1 1 

28. Nor wash the body [with hot water for pleasure], 
praksalayTta tv asuci liptani guror asamdarse 1 1 29 1 1 

29. But, if the body is soiled by unclean things, one shall clean it [with 
earth or water], in a place where one is not seen by a Guru. 

Here, in the section on the teacher, the word guru designates the father and the rest also. 
Haradatta. 

na-apsu slaghamanah snayad yadi snayad dandavat plavet 1 1 30 1 1 

30. One should not frolic about in the water whilst bathing; let him float 
[motionless] like a stick. 

The gist of this sutra is that bathing, which is normally done in a river or public place 
should be done with restraint and not cause irritation to others using the same ghat 
for bathing and washing clothes etc. 

Another version of the first portion of this Sutra, proposed by Haradatta, is, 'Let him 
not, whilst bathing, clean himself [with soap powder or the like].' Another 
commentator takes Sutra 28 as a prohibition of the daily bath or washing generally 
ordained for Brahmanas, and refers Sutra 29 to the naimittika snana or 'bathing on 
certain occasions,' and takes Sutra 30 as a restriction of the latter. 

jatilah II 31 II 

31. One shall wear all the hair tied in one knot. (Manu 2;219.) 
sikha jatas va vapayed itaran \ \ 32 \ \ 

32. Or let one tie a knot of the lock on the crown of the head, and shave the 
rest of the hair. 

MaunjT II 33 II 

33. The girdle [mekhala] of a Brahmana shall be made of Munja grass, and 
Consists of three strings if possible, [the strings] should be twisted to the 
right. (Manu 2;42-44; Yajn. 1;29; Asv. Gri:Su. 1;19;12.) 

jya rajanyasya II 34 II 

34. A bowstring [should be the girdle] of a Kshatriya, 
maunjT vd'yo-misrd II 35 II 

35. Or a girdle of Munja grass to which some pieces of iron have been tied. 
AvT sutram vaisyasya II 36 II 

36. A wool thread [shall be the girdle] of a Vaisya, 



22 



sain tamah vetyeke II 37 II 

37. Or a rope used for yoking the oxen to the plough, or a string made of 
Tamala bark. 

palaso dando brdhmanasya naiyyagrodha skandhajo- 'avahgro 
rdjanyasya, bddara audumbaro vd vaisyasya, varkso danda ity avarn- 
asamyogena-eke-upadisanti 1 1 38 1 1 

38. The staff carried by a Brahmana should be made of Palasa wood, that 
of a Kshatriya of a branch of the Banyan tree, which grows downwards, 
that of a Vaisya of Badara or Udumbara wood. Some declare, without any 
reference to caste, that the staff of a student should be made of the wood of 
a tree [that is fit to be used at the sacrifice]. (Manu 2;45; Yajn. 1;29; Asv. 
Gri:Sutra 1;19;13;20,1) 

vasah \ \ 39 \ \ 

39. [One shall wear] a cloth [to cover the loins]. 
sani ksauma ajindni II 40 II 

40. [It shall be made] of hemp for a Brahmana, of flax [for a Kshatriya], of 
the skin of a [clean] animal [for a Vaisya]. (Manu 2:41) 

Clean means here and everywhere else, if applied to animals or things, those which are fit 
to be used at the sacrifice. 

kasayam ca-eke vastram upadisanti II 41 II 

41. Some declare that the [upper] garment [of a Brahmana] should be dyed 
with red Lodh. (Asv. Gri: Sutra 1;19;11) 

Prasna 1 . Patala 1 . Khanda 3 

mahjistham rdjanyasya 1 1 7 1 1 

1. And that of a Ksatriya dyed with madder (a red dye). 
haridram vaisyasya 1 1 2 1 1 

2. And that of a Vaisya dyed with turmeric. 

harinam aineyam va krsnam brdhmanasya II 3 II 

3. [The skin] worn by a Brahmana shall be that of a common deer or of a 
black doe. (Manu 2:41; Yajn. 1:29; Asv. Gri: Sutra. 1:19:10) 

krsnam ced anupastTrna asana sayTsyat II 4 II 



23 



4. If one wears a black skin, let it not be spread [on the ground] to sit or lie 
upon it. 

rauravam rdjanyasya 1 1 5 1 1 

5. [The skin worn] by a Kshatriya shall be that of a spotted deer. 
basta ajinam vaisyasya 1 1 6 1 1 

6. [The skin worn] by a Vaisya shall be that of a he-goat. 
dvikam sdrva varnikam 1 1 7 1 1 

7. The skin of a sheep is fit to be worn by all castes, 
kambalasca 1 1 8 1 1 

8. And a blanket made of wool. 

brahma vrddhim icchann ajindny eva vasTta ksatra vrddhim icchan 
vastrany eva-ubhaya vrddhim icchann ubhayam iti hi brdhmanam 1 1 9 1 1 

9 One who wishes the increase of Brahma (Spiritual power) shall wear 
skins only; one who wishes the increase of Kshatra (worldly power) shall 
wear cloth only; one who wishes the increase of both shall wear both [skin 
and cloth]. Thus says a Brahmana. (See also Gopatha Brahmana 1. 2, 4.) 

ajinam tv eva-uttaram dhdrayet II 10 II 

10. But [I, Apastamba, say], let only a skin be worn as the upper garment. 

According to 1;1;2;39 — 1;1;3;10, the rule of dress for students is the following: — 
according to Apastamba, a student shall wear a piece of cloth to cover his nakedness 
[langoti], and a skin as upper garment. Other teacher's allow, besides, an upper dress 
of cloth, coloured differently for the different castes, with or without the addition of 
a deer-skin. 

anrtta darsTW 11 II 

11. Dancing should not be watched [by the student]. (Manu 2:178.) 
sabhdh samajams ca-aganta II 12 II 

12. nor should [a student] attend assemblies [for gambling, etc.], nor join 
crowds [assembled at festivals]. 

a janavdda silah II 13 II 

13. nor should one be addicted to gossiping. (Manu 11:179; Yajn. 1:33.) 
rahas silah 1 1 14 1 1 

14. [He should always] be discreet. 

guror uddcaresv akarta svairi karmani 1 1 75 1 1 



24 



15. [a student] should not do anything for his own pleasure in places which 
his teacher frequents. 

'Anything for his own pleasure,' ie. having conversations with friends, making his toilet, 
'hanging out' etc. 

strTbhir ydvad artha sambhasT II 16 \ \ 

16. Let him talk with women as much [only] as is necessary. 
mrduh II 7711 

17. One should be gentle. 
santah II 18 II 

18. One should refrain from unsuitable pursuits (or be peaceful). 
ddntah II 79 II 

19. And be tireless in fulfilling one's duties; 

The explanations of the last two terms, santa [Sutra 18] and danta [Sutra 19], are 
different from those given usually. Soma is usually explained as the exclusive 
direction of the mind towards God,' and dama as 'the restraining of the senses' or 
self-discipline. 

Hrimdn II 20 II 

20. [He should be] Modest; 
drdha dhrtih \ \ 21 II 

21. Self-controlled 
agldmsnuh II 22 II 

22. Energetic; 
akrodhanah II 23 II 

23. Free from anger; (Manu 2: 178.) 
anasuyuh II 24 II 

24. Free from envy. 

sarvam labham dharan gurave sdyam prdtar amantrena bhiksd caryam 
cared, [bhiksamdno- 'anyatra-apapdtrebhyo- 'abhisastdc ca] II 25 II 

25. Bringing all he obtains to his teacher, he shall go begging with a vessel 
in the morning and in the evening, [and he may] beg [from everybody] 
except low-caste people unfit for association [with aryas - apapdtra] and 
Abhisastas. 

Regarding the explanation of the term Abhisasta, see below, 1 ;7;21 ; 17. Haradatta — 



25 



Apapatras are called those born from a high-caste mother and a low-caste father, 
such as washermen. For their cooking vessels etc. are unfit for the use of the four 
castes.... Since Apastamba says, "In the evening and in the morning, food obtained in 
the evening must not be used for the morning meal, nor food obtained in the morning 
for the evening meal." — Manu 2:182, 183, 185; Asv. Gri: Su. 1:22;4 See also 
Gopatha-Brahmana 1:2;6 

strTnam pratydcaksdndndm samahito brahmacarT-istam dattam hutam 
prajdm pasun brahmavarcasam annddyam vrhkte I tasmdd u ha vai 
brahmacdri sahgham carantam na pratydcaksTta, api ha-esv evam vidha 
evam vratah sydd- iti hi brdhmanam 1 1 26 1 1 

26. A Brahmana verse declares: — Since a devout student takes away from 
women, who refuse [to give him alms, the merit obtained] by [srauta] 
sacrifices, by gifts, [and] by burnt-offerings [offered in the domestic fire], 
as well as their offspring, their cattle, the sacred learning [of their families], 
therefore, indeed, [a woman] should not refuse [alms] to a group of 
students; for amongst those [who come to beg], there might be one of that 
[devout] kind, one who thus [conscientiously] keeps his vow. 

na-anumdnena bhaiksam ucchistam drsta srutdbhydm tu\\27\\ 

27. Alms [shall] not [be considered] as leavings [ucchistha] [and be 
rejected] by inference [from their appearance], but on the strength of ocular 
or oral testimony [only]. 

ucchistam = 'residue of food' — refers to (a) food left on a plate after some one has 
eaten, (b) food from which a portion has already been served to someone before the 
other diners eat. (c) liquid in a bottle from which someone has drunk thus containing 
their 'backwash'. 

To eat the residue of the meal (ucchista) of any person except that left by the teacher 
and other Gurus, is not permitted to a student; see also below, 1:1:4:1 seq.; Manu 
2:56; Yajn. 1:33. 

bhavat piirvayd brdhmano bhikseta 1 1 28 1 1 

28. A Brahmana shall beg, prefacing [his request] by the word 'Lady'. 

"Bhavati bhiksdm dehil " 
bhavat madhyayd rdjanyah 1 1 29 1 1 

29. A Kshatriya [inserting the word] 'Lady' in the middle [between the 
words 'give alms'], 

"Bhiksdm bhavati dehil " 
bhavat antyayd vaisyah II 30 II 

30. A Vaisya, adding the word ' Lady' [at the end of the formula]. 



26 



"BhTksdm dehi bhavati!" 
tat samahrtya -upanidhaya-acaryaya prabruya II 31 II 

3 1 . [The student] having taken those [alms] shall place them before his 
teacher and offer them to him. 

— Saying "idam ittham ahrtam!" 
tena pradistam bhunjita 1 1 32 1 1 

32. He may eat [the food] after having been ordered to do so by his teacher. 

— "saumya tvam eva bhunksva! " 
vipravdse guror dcdrya kuldya \ \ 33 \ \ 

33. If the teacher is absent, the student [shall offer the food] to [a member 
of] the teacher's family. 

tair vipravdse- 'anyebhyo- 'api srotriyebhyah 1 1 34 1 1 

34. If the [family of the teacher] is [also] absent, the student [may offer the 
food] to other learned Brahmanas [srotriyas] also [and receive from them 
the permission to eat]. 

na-dtma prayojanas caret \ \ 35 \ \ 

35. One shall not beg for selfish purposes. 

If no one is there to give permission the student at home should follow the rule given in 
42. 

bhuktvd svayam amatram praksalayita 1 1 36 1 1 

36. After eating, one should clean one's own bowl. 
na ca-ucchistam kurydt II 37 II 

37. And leave no residue. 
asaktau bhumau nikhanet 1 1 38 1 1 

38. If he cannot [eat all that he has taken in his dish], he shall bury [the 
remainder] . 

apsu vd [pravesayet II 39 II 

39. Or he may throw it into the water; 
dry ay a vd paryavadadhydt 1 1 40 1 1 

40. Or he may place [all that remains in a pot], and put it down near an 
[uninitiated] arya 

A boy of the upper three castes who is not initiated. Children, before initiation are 



27 



kama-bhaksah ie. allowed to eat whatever they like. 

antardhine vd sudrdya II 41 II 

41. Or [he may put it down] near a sudra servant [belonging to his teacher]. 
prosito bhaiksdd agnau krtvd bhunjita II 42 II 

42. If [the student] is on a journey, he shall offer a part of the alms into the 
fire and eat [the remainder] . 

This rule holds good if no srotriyas (Vedic scholars) are near to give permission for 
hime to eat. If srotriyas are to be found, Sutra 34 applies. Agni, the god of fire, is 
considered to be of the Brahminical caste, and hence he takes the place of the teacher 
or of the srotriyas. (See also Manu 2:247, 248) 

bhaiksam havisd samstutam tatra-dcdryo devatd arthe \ \ 43 \ \ 

43. Alms are declared to be sacrificial food and the acarya [is in the 
position which] a deity [holds in regard to food offered at a sacrifice] . 

dhavaniya arthe call 44 II 

44. And [the teacher holds also the place which] the ahavaniya fire 
occupies [at a sacrifice, because a portion of the alms is offered in the fire 
of his stomach]. 

tarn bhojayitvd yad ucchistam prdsndti \ \ 45 \ \ 

45. To him [the teacher] the [student] shall offer [a portion of the alms], 

Prasna 1 . Patala 1 . Khanda 4 

yad [ ucchistamutsis ] prdsndti 1 1 7 1 1 

1 . And [having done so] eat what is left. 
havir ucchistam eva tat II 2 II 

2. For this [remnant of food] is certainly a remnant of sacrificial food. 

The remnants of offerings to the gods is known as prasddam and is taken as a 
sacramental meal. 

yad anydni dravydni yathdldbham upaharati daksind eva tdh II 3 II 

3. If he obtains other things [besides food, such as cattle or fuel, and gives 
them to his teacher] as he obtains them, then those [things hold the place 
of] the gratuity [daksina — given to priests for the performance of a 
sacrifice]. 

sa esa brahmacdrino yajno nitya pratatah 1 1 4 1 1 



28 



4. This is the sacrifice to be performed daily by a religious student. 
na ca-asmai sruti vipratisiddham ucchistam dadydt 1 1 5 1 1 

5. And [the teacher] shall not give him anything [to eat] that is forbidden by 
the Vedas, [not even as] leavings, 

yathd ksara lavana madhu mdmsdni - iti 1 1 6 1 1 

6. Such as pungent condiments, salt, honey, or meat [and the like]. 

These items are permitted to householders but forbidden to students. 

etena-anye niyamd vydkhydtdh 1 1 7 1 1 

7. By this [last Sutra it is] explained [that] the other restrictions [imposed 
upon a student, such as abstinence from perfumes, ointments, etc., are 
likewise not to be broken] . 

See above, 1:1:2:24 seq.: — According to Haradatta, teachers were in the habit of 
giving ointments and the like forbidden substances to their students, and Apastamba 
gives this rule in order to show his dissent from the practice. 4 

srutir hi balTyasy dnumdnikdd dcdrdt 1 1 8 1 1 

8. For [explicit] Vedic texts have greater force than custom from which [the 
existence of a permissive passage of the revelation] may be inferred. 

'Anumanika means "able to be inferred from." The existence of a Vedic text or 
tradition [Smrti] is inferred from an established custom. But, a visible Vedic text has 
greater weight than an age-old custom from which the existence of a text may be 
inferred. By this sutra Apastamba shows that the rule forbidding a student to eat 
pungent condiments, salt etc. is based on the existing text of a Brahmana.' — 
Haradatta. 

drsyate ca-api pravrtti karanam II 9 II 

9. Besides [in this particular case] a [worldly] motive for the practice is 
apparent. 

The text forbidding the use of pungent condiments, salt, meat etc. refers to such 
substances if they are not sacrificial left-overs — if they were sacrificial left-overs 
then they could be taken as prasdd. 

pntirhy upalabhyate II 10 II 

10. For pleasure is obtained [by using or eating forbidden substances]. 
pitur jyesthasya ca bhrdtur ucchistam bhoktavyam II 11 II 

1 1. A residue left by a father and an elder brother may be eaten. 



The Mimamsa says: prapti-purvaka pratiseddha bhavati — the existence of a prohibition 
indicates its practice. 



29 



dharma vipratipattav abhojyam 1 1 72 1 1 

12. If they act contrary to the law, one must not eat [their leavings]. 

If by eating their leavings one should commit a sin because they contain salt etc, he 
shall not do so — Haradatta. 

sayam prdtar udakumbham dharet 1 1 7 J 1 1 

13. In the evening and the morning one shall fetch water in a vessel [for the 
use of the teacher]. (Manu 2:182) 

The purpose of this is to free the teacher from daily chores so that he can apply 
himself to teaching the Dharma. 

sadd-dranydd edhdn dhrtya adho nidadhydt II 14 1 1 

14. Daily one shall fetch fuel from the forest and place it on the floor [in 
the teacher's house] 

The reason for placing it on the floor is fear of causing some injury to the children or 
animals of the teacher, if it fell down from a shelf or the like. 

na-astamite astami samid dhdro gacchet 1 1 75 1 1 

15. One should not go to fetch firewood after sunset. 

agnim iddhvd parisamuhya samidha ddadhydt sayam prdtar yathd 
upadesam II 76 II 

16. After having kindled the sacred fire, and having wiped the ground 
around the altar, one shall place the sacred fuel on the fire every morning 
and evening, according to the prescription [of the Grhya-sutra]. 

sayam eva-agni pujd-ity eke II 7711 

17. Some say that the fire is only to be worshipped in the evening. 

Evening means just before sunset. 

samiddham agnim pdnind parisamuhen na samiihanyd II 18 II 

18. one shall wipe the place around the fire after it has been made to burn 
[by the addition of fuel], with the hand, and not with the broom [of kusa 
grass]. (Ap. Grh. Su. 11:22.) 

prdk tu ydthdkdmT 1 1 79 1 1 

19. But, before [adding the fuel, one is free to use the broom] at his 
pleasure. 

na-agni udaka sesena vrthd karmdni kurvita -dcdmed vd 1 1 20 1 1 

20. One shall not perform non-religious acts with the residue of the water 



30 



employed for the fire-worship, nor sip it. 

During the fire-worship water is used for sprinkling the altar in various ways. 

pani samksubdhena-udakena-eka pani dvarjitena ca na-dcdmet II 21 II 

2 1 . One shall not sip water which has been stirred with the hand, nor such 
as has been received into one hand only. 

One should receive holy water in two hands - the right held above the left. 

svapnam ca varjayet 1 1 22 1 1 

22. And one shall avoid sleeping [whilst the teacher is awake]. 
atha-ahar ahar acaryam gopdyed dharma artha yuktaih karmabhih 1 1 23 1 1 

23. Then [after having risen] he shall assist his teacher daily by acts tending 
to the acquisition of spiritual merit and of wealth. 

Acts tending to the acquisition of merit are here — collecting sacred fuel, Kusa grass, and 
flowers for worship. Acts tending to the acquisition of wealth are — gathering fuel for 
cooking, etc. (Manu 2:182) 

sa guptvd samvisan bruyad dharma gopayam ajugupam aham iti \ \ 24 \ \ 

24. Having served [the teacher during the day in this manner, one shall say 
when going to bed]: — "I have protected the protector of the Dharma" [my 
teacher]. 

Another explanation of the words spoken by the student is, "O law, I have protected him; 
protect thou me." (See also Gopatha-brahmana 1.2.4) 

pramadad acaryasya buddhi purvam va niyama atikramam rahasi 
bodhayet 1 1 25 1 1 

25. If the teacher transgresses the law through carelessness or knowingly, 
one shall point it out to him in private. 

This is a very interesting guideline — all teachers are also humans who are subjected 
to the same errors and faults of others. The student should not expect the teacher to 
be perfect. Vide Taittiriya Upanisad — convocational address. 

anivrttau svayam karmany arabheta 1 1 26 1 1 

26. If [the teacher] does not cease [to transgress], one shall perform those 
religious acts [which ought to be performed by the teacher] ; 

This refers to the obligatory acts of daily living of which the acarya has been negligent. 

nivartayed va II 27 II 

27. Or one may return home. 

The Sutra refers to a naisthika brahmacarin or professed student, who never leaves 
his teacher's family, and never enters any other order; and it declares his merit to be 



31 



equal to that of one who becomes a householder. (Manu 2:243, 244; Yajn. 1;49.50) 
The purpose of living with the teacher is to obtain an education, if this contract is not 
being fulfilled then the student may leave the acarya and return home. 

atha yah purva utthdyi jaghanya samvesT tarn ahur na svapiti-iti \ \ 28 \ \ 

28. Now of one who rises before [the teacher] and goes to rest later, they 
say that he does not sleep. 

sa ya evam pranihita atma brahmacary atra-eva-asya sarvani karmani 
phalavanty avaptani bhavanti yany api grhamedhe 1 1 29 1 1 

29. The student who thus entirely fixes the mind there [in the teacher's 
family], has thereby performed all acts which yield rewards [such as the 
Jyotistoma], and also those which must be performed by a householder. 

The student who remains focused and mindful while in the house of the teacher is 
hereby praised as being completely accomplished. 

Prasna 1. Patala 2. Khanda 5. 

niyamesu tapas sabdah 1 1 7 1 1 

1. The word 'austerity' [must be understood to apply] to [the observance 
of] the rules [of studentship] . 

The term tapas has many meanings - all of which indicate a 'generation of internal 
heat'. It can refer to austere yogic practices, self-discipline and meditation as well as 
the fulfillment or rules and obligations. 

tad atikrame vidya karma nihsravati brahma saha-apatyad etasmat 1 1 2 1 1 

2. If the rules are transgressed, study drives out the knowledge of the Veda 
acquired already, from the [offender] and from his children. 

The meaning of the phrase, "Study drives out the Veda, which has already been 
learnt from him who studies transgressing the rules prescribed for the student," is, 
"The Veda recited at the Brahma-yajna [daily study], and other religious rites, 
produces no effect, ie. gains no merit for the reciter." Manu 3:97. Haradatta gives 
also the following three explanations of this Sutra adopted by other commentators: — 

a. If these [rules] are transgressed, he loses his capacity for learning, because the 
Veda forsakes him, etc. 

b. If these rules are transgressed, the capacity for learning and the Veda leave him, 
etc. 

c. From him who studies whilst transgressing these rules, the Veda goes out, etc. 

garta-patyam anayusyam ca 1 1 3 1 1 

3. He will fall into a ditch, and his life will be shortened. 



32 



By not becoming educated one falls into a metaphoric ditch and becomes ruined 
through stupidity. 

tasmad rsayo- 'avaresu na jdyante niyama atikramdt 1 1 4 1 1 

4. On account of that [transgression of the rules of studentship] no rsis are 
born amongst the people of later ages. 

Amongst the avaras means "amongst the people of modern times, those who live in 
the Kaliyuga." "No rsis are born" means there are none who see [receive the 
revelation of] Mantras i.e. Vedic texts." — Haradatta. 

sruta rsayas tu bhavanti kecit karma phala sesena punah sambhave 1 1 5 1 1 

5. But some in their new birth, on account of a residue of the merit acquired 
by their Karma [in former lives], become [similar to] rsis by their 
knowledge [of the Veda], 

How is it then that men in our days, though they transgress the rules prescribed for 
students, learn the four Vedas with little trouble? [The answer is], By virtue of a 
residue of the reward [due] for the proper observance of those rules [of studentship] 
in a former Yuga. Therefore Apastamba says, Sutra 6, — 'But some,' etc. New 
existence means 'new birth [life].' — Haradatta. 

So according to Apastamba the title "rishi" that may be given is honorific only and 
does not indicate one who has transcendental cognition. 

yatha svetaketuh 1 1 6 1 1 

6. Like svetaketu. 

An example of this [follows, Sutra 6]: — 'Like svetaketu. For svetaketu learned the four 
Vedas in a short time; as we read in the — Candogya Upanishad (Prapathaka 6:1) — 
Haradatta 

yat kim ca samahito brahma py acaryad upayunkte brahmavad eva tasmin 
phalam bhavati 1 1 7 

7. And whatever else, besides the Veda, [a student] who obeys the rules 
learns from his teacher, that brings the same reward as the Veda. 

Whatever else besides the Veda, such as charms against poison and the like. — Haradatta. 

atha-u yat kinca manasa vdcd caksusd va sankalpan dhydyaty aha abhi- 
vipasyati va tatha-eva tad bhavati-ity upadisanti II 8 II 

8. Also, if desirous to accomplish something [be it good or evil], he thinks 
it in his mind, or pronounces it in words, or looks upon it with his eye, even 
so it will be; thus teach [those who know the law]. 

By following the rules of studentship and applying oneself to study and self- 
development one can become psychic. 

guru prasadaniyani karmani svastyayanam adhyayana samvrttir iti 1 1 9 1 1 



33 



9. [The duties of a student consist in] acts to please the spiritual teacher, the 
observance [of rules] conducive to his own welfare, and industry in 
studying. 

'Acts to please the teacher are — washing his feet and the like; observance [of rules] 
conducive to welfare are — obedience to the prohibition to cross a river swimming, 
to eat pungent condiments, and obedience to the injunction to beg.' — Haradatta. 

ato- 'anyani nivartante brahmacdrinah karmdni II 10 II 

10. Acts other than these need not be performed by a student. 

'Acts other than these, such as pilgrimages and the like.' — Haradatta. 

svddhydya dhrg dharma rucis tapsvy rjur mrduh sidhyati brahmacdriW 11 
II 

1 1 . A religious student who retains what he has learned, who finds pleasure 
in the fulfilment of the law, who keeps the rules of studentship, who is 
upright and forgiving, attains perfection. 

What this 'perfection' is has been declared in Sutras 7, 8. — Haradatta. 

sadd mahdntam apara rdtram utthdya guros tisthan prdtar abhivddam 
abhivddayTta-asdv aham bho iti II 12 II 

12. Every day he shall rise in the last watch of the night, and standing near 
his teacher, salute him with [this] salutation: — "I so-and-so [salute thee.]" 
(Manu 2:121 Yajn 1:26] 

samdna grdme ca vasatdm anyesdm api vrddhatardndm prdk prdtar dsdt 1 1 
13 II 

13. And [he shall salute in a similar manner] before the morning meal also 
other very aged [learned Brahmanas] who may live in the same village. 

prosya ca samdgame 1 1 14 1 1 

14. If he has been on a journey, [he shall salute the persons mentioned] 
when he meets them on his return. 

This formal salutation is to be performed only when the occasion requires it. The 
formerly mentioned salutation [Sutras 12, 13] is to be performed daily. In the next 
Sutra follows that by which the fulfilment of a wish may be obtained. — Haradatta. 
Manu 2:121 Yajn 1:26 

svargam dyus ca-Tpsan II 75 11 

15. [He may also salute the persons mentioned at other times], if he is 
desirous of heaven and long life. 

daksinam bdhum srotra samam prasdrya brdhmano- 'abhivddayTta-urah 



34 



samam rajanyo madhya samam vaisyo nicaih sudrah pranjalim II 16 II 

16. A Brahmana shall salute holding his hands at his ears, a Kshatriya 
holding them on a level with the breast, a Vaisya holding them on a level 
with the waist, a sudra holding it low, [and] stretching forward the joined 
hands. 

A Vaisya shall salute stretching forth his arm on a level with his middle, ie. the 
stomach; others say, on a level with his thigh; the sudra stretching it forth low, ie. on 
a level with his feet.' — Haradatta. 

pldvanam ca ndmno- 'abhivddana pratyabhivddane ca purvesdm 
varndndm II 7711 

17. And when returning the salute of [a man belonging] to the first [three] 
castes, the [last syllable of the] name [of the person addressed] is produced 
to the length of three moras, (vide Manu 2:125.) 

udite tv dditya dcdryena sametya-upasangrahanam II 18 II 

18. But when he meets his teacher after sunrise [coming for his lesson], he 
shall touch [his feet]. (Manu 2:71) 

sadd-eva-abhivddanam 1 1 19 1 1 

19. On all other occasions he shall salute [him in the manner described 
above]. 

upasamgrdhya deary a ity eke 1 1 20 1 1 

20. But some declare that he ought to touch the [feet of his] teacher [at 
every occasion instead of saluting him] . 

daksinena pdnind daksinam pddam adhastdd abhy-adhimrsya sa kusthikam 
upasamgrhnTydt 1 1 21 

21. Having massaged the teacher's right foot with the right hand below and 
above, one takes hold of it and of the ankle. 

ubhdbhydm eva-ubhdv abhipTdayata upasamgrdhydv ity eke 1 1 22 1 1 

22. Some say, that one must press both feet, each with both hands, and hold 
them. (Manu 2:72) 

sarva ahnam su yukto 'adhyayandd anantaro- 'adhydye \ \ 23 \ \ 

23. One shall be very attentive the whole day long, never allowing the mind 
to wander from the lesson during the [time devoted to] studying. (Manu 
2:191) 

tathd guru karmasu II 24 II 



35 



24. And [at other times one shall be attentive] to the business of the 
teacher. 

One should help the teacher in whatever other business he is engaged in. 

manasa ca-anadhydye 1 1 25 1 1 

25. And during the time for rest [one shall give] his mind [to doubtful 
passages of the lesson learnt]. 

ahuta adhydyi ca sydt 1 1 26 1 1 

26. And one shall study after having been called by the teacher [and not 
request the teacher to begin the lesson]. (Yajn. 1 :27; Manu 2: 191.) 

Prasna 1. Patala 2. Khanda 6. 

sadd nisdydm gurum samvesayet tasya pddau praksdlya samvdhya 1 1 7 1 1 

1 . Every day he shall put his teacher to bed after having washed his 
[teacher's] feet and after having massaged him. (Manu 2:209.) 

anujndta samviset 1 1 2 1 1 

2. One shall retire to rest after having received [the teacher's permission]. 
(Manu 2:194.) 

na ca-enam abhiprasdrayTta 1 1 3 1 1 

3. And one shall not stretch out the feet towards him. 
na khatvdydm sato-'bhiprasdranam asti-ity eke II 4 II 

4. Some say, that it is not [offensive] to stretch out the feet [towards the 
teacher], if he be lying on a bed. 

'But, in Apastamba's opinion, it is offensive even in this case.' — Haradatta. 

na ca-asya sakdse samvisto bhdset 1 1 5 1 1 

5. And one shall not address [the teacher], whilst one is in a reclining 
position. (Manu 2:195.) 

abhibhdsitas tv dsTnah pratibriiydt 1 1 6 1 1 

6. But one may answer [the teacher] sitting [if the teacher himself is sitting 
or lying down]. (Manu 2:196.) 

aniitthdya tisthantam 1 1 7 1 1 

7. And if [the teacher] stands, [one shall respond] after having risen also. 



36 



gacchantam anugacchet anugam 1 1 8 1 1 

8. One shall walk behind, if he walks. 
dhavantam anudhdvet 1 1 9 1 1 

9. One shall run after him, if he runs. 

na sa updnah vestitasird avahita pdnir avadhd vd-dsTdet II 10 II 

10. One shall not approach [the teacher] with shoes on, or the head 
covered, or holding [implements]. 

adhvd-dpannas tu karma yukto vd-dsTdet II 77 II 

11. But on a journey or occupied in work, one may approach him [with 
shoes on, with his head covered, or holding implements], 

na ced upasldet II 12 II 

12. Provided one does not sit down quite near [to the teacher]. 

devam iva-dcdryam updsTta-avikathayann avimand vdcam susrusamdno- 
'sya II 12 II 

13. One shall approach his guru with the same reverence as a deity, without 
telling idle stories, attentive and listening eagerly to his words. 

anupastha krtah 1 1 14 1 1 

14. [He shall not sit near him] with one leg placed on the other. 
anuvdti vitah II 75 II 

15. If [on sitting down] the wind blows from the student towards the guru, 
he shall change his place. (Manu 2:203) 

apratistabdhah pdnind II 16 II 

16. [He shall sit] without supporting himself with his hands [on the 
ground], 

anapasrito- 'nyatra II 7711 

17. Without leaning against something [as a wall or the like]. 
yajnopaviti dvi vastrah II 18 II 

18. If the student wears two garments, he shall wear the upper one after the 
fashion of the sacred thread at the sacrifices. (Manu 2:63, Taitt Aran. 
2:1;3.) 

At sacrifices the sacred thread passes over the left shoulder and under the right arm. In 
other words the garment shall be worn to expose the right shoulder. 



37 



adho nivitas tv eka vastrah II 79 II 

19. But, if one wears a [lower] garment only, one shall wrap it around the 
lower part of his body. 

abhimukho- 'nabhimukham II 20 II 

20. One shall face the teacher though the latter does not face him. (Manu 
2:197.) 

anasanno- 'natidure II 21 II 

21. One shall sit neither too near to, nor too far [from the teacher], 
ydvad dsino bdhubhydm prdpnuydt 1 1 22 1 1 

22. [But] at such a distance, that [the teacher] may be able to reach him 
with his arms [without rising] . 

aprati vdtam II 23 II 

23. [He shall not sit in such a position] that the wind blows from the 
teacher, towards himself. 

See Sutra 15 and Manu quoted there. 

eka adhydyT daksinam bdhum praty upasTdet II 24 II 

24. [If there is] only one student, one shall sit at the right hand [of the 
teacher]. 

The formality is to prostrate when coming into the presence of the acarya and then sit to 
his right. 

yathd avakdsam bahavah 1 1 25 1 1 

25. If there are many, [they may sit] as it may be convenient. 
tisthati ca na-dsTta -andsana yoga vihite 1 1 26 1 1 

26. If the master [is not honoured with a seat and] stands, the [student] shall 
not sit down. 

When accompanying a teacher on a visit, if a seat is not offered to the teacher, the 
student should not sit down either. 

dsine ca na samviset II 27 II 

27. [If the teacher is not honoured with a couch] and sits down, the 
[student] shall not lie down on a couch. 

cestati ca cikirsan-tac chakti visaye 1 1 28 1 1 

28. And if the teacher tries [to do something], then [the student] shall offer 
to do it for him, if it is in his power. 



38 



na ca-asya sakase- 'nvak sthaninam upasamgrhniyat 1 1 29 1 1 

29. And, if his teacher is near, one shall not touch [the feet of] another 
Guru who is inferior [in dignity] ; 

The term Guru includes a father, maternal uncle, etc. [see above], and these are 
inferior to the teacher. Manu 2:205. 

gotrena vd kirtayet II 30 II 

30. Nor shall one praise [such a person in the teacher's presence] by 
[pronouncing the name of] his clan (gotra). 

na ca-enam praty uttisthed aniittisthed vd 1 1 31 II 

3 1 . Nor shall one rise to meet such an [inferior Guru] or rise after him, 
api cet tasya guruh sydt II 32 II 

32. Even if he be a Guru of his teacher. 

'The student is not to show the mentioned marks of respect to any of his own inferior 
Gurus, even if the person is the Guru, eg. the maternal uncle, of his teacher. — 
Haradatta. 

desdt tv dsandc ca samsarpet \ \ 33 \ \ 

33. But he shall leave his place and his seat, [in order to show him respect.] 
ndmnd tad antevdsinam gurum apy dtmana ity eke 1 1 34 1 1 

34. Some say, that [he may address] a student of his teacher by 
[pronouncing] his name, if he is also one of his [the student's] own Gurus. 

'But Apastamba's own opinion is that he ought not to address by name a [maternal 
uncle or other] Guru [who visits his teacher].' — Haradatta. 

yasmims tv andcdrya sambandhdd gauravam vrttis tasminn anvak 
sthdnTye- 'py dcdryasya 1 1 35 

35. But towards such a person who is generally revered for some other 
reason than being the teacher [eg. for his learning], the [student] should 
behave as towards his teacher, though he be inferior in dignity to the latter. 

bhuktvd ca-asya sakase na-anutthdya-ucchistam prayacchet 1 1 36 1 1 

36. After having eaten in his [teacher's] presence, one shall not give away 
the remainder of the food without rising. 

According to 1;1;3;40 seq., a student shall give what he is unable to eat to a child, or 
to a servant. If one has eaten in the presence of the teacher, one shall not give the 
food away without rising for the purpose. 

dcdmed vd II 37 II 



39 



37. Nor shall one sip water [after having eaten in the presence of his 
teacher without rising] . 

kim karavdni-ity dmantryauttisthet tusnim vd II 38 II 

38. [He shall rise] addressing him [with these words], "What shall I do?" 

Prasna 1. Patala 2. Khanda 7. 

uttisthet tusnim vd 1 1 1 1 1 

1. Or one may rise silently. 

na-apaparydvarteta guroh pradaksini-krtya-apeydt 1 1 2 1 1 

2. Nor shall one [in going away] walk around the teacher with the left hand 
turned towards him; one shall go away after having walked around him 
with his right side turned towards him. 

One should always circumambulate a venerable and auspicious object in a clockwise 
direction. 

na prekseta nagndm striyam 1 1 3 1 1 

3. One shall not look at a naked woman. (Manu 4:53; Yajn. 1 : 135) 
osadhi vanaspatindm dcchidya na-upajighret 1 1 4 1 1 

4. One shall not cut the [leaves or flowers] of herbs or trees, in order to 
smell them. (Gopatha-brahmana 1:2.) 

updnahau chatram ydnam iti ca varjayet 1 1 5 1 1 

5. One shall avoid [the use of] shoes, of an umbrella, a vehicle, and the like 
[luxuries]. (Manu 2; 178.) 

na smayeta 1 1 6 1 1 

6. One shall not grin. 

Especially in an unrestrained manner and with the mouth open in front of the teacher. 

yadi smayeta-apigrhya smayeta-iti hi brdhmanam 1 1 7 1 1 

7. If one smiles, one shall smile covering [the mouth with his hand]; thus 
says a Vedic text. 

na-upajighret striyam mukhena 1 1 8 1 1 

8. He shall not touch a woman with his face, in order to inhale the 
fragrance of her body. 



40 



na hrdayena prarthayet 1 1 9 1 1 

9. Nor shall one desire her in his heart. 
na-akaranad upasprset II 10 II 

10. Nor shall he touch [a woman at all] without a particular reason. (Manu 
2:179) 

A proper reason to touch a woman would be when trying to help her, support her, 
help her up, steady her from falling etc. Or in the case of a health service provider, 
for diagnostic or therapeautic purposes. 

rajasvalo rakta danta satya vddTsydd iti hi brdhmanam II 11 II 

1 1 . A Vedic text declares, 'He shall be covered in dust, have dirty teeth, 
and speak the truth.' 

This sutra affirms that a student should not pay much attention to his physical 
appearance but should focus on the cultivation of higher qualities — like speaking 
the truth - it is said that all the virtues rest upon the principal of truth. 

yam vidydm kurute gurau te- 'py asya-dcdryd ye tasydm guror vamsydh 1 1 
12 II 

12. Those teachers, who instructed his teacher in that branch of learning 
which he [the student] studies with him, [are to be considered as] spiritual 
teachers [by the student]. 

The term vamsyah, 'ancestor,' for the teacher's teacher is explained by the 
circumstance, that Hindus consider a 'school,' consisting of a succession of 
teachers and students, as a spiritual family, and call it a vidydvamsa, vidyd- 
parampara. (Manu 2:205.) 

ydn any an pasyato- 'asya-upasamgrhnTyat tada tv ete- upasamgrahyah W13 
II 

13. But if [a teacher], in front of his [student], touches the feet of any other 
persons, then he [the student also] must touch their feet, [as long as he is] in 
that [state of student- ship]. 

'Another [commentator] says, "He, the student, must touch their feet [at every 
meeting] from that time [when he first saw his teacher do it]." Because the word 
"but" is used in the Sutra, he must do so even after he has returned home [on 
completion of his studies].' — Haradatta. 

guru samavdye bhiksayam utpannayam yam anubaddhas tad adhina bhiksa 
II 14 II 

14. If [a student] has more than one teacher, the alms [collected by him] are 
at the disposal of him to whom he is [currently] bound. 



41 



'More than one teacher,' ie. several, who have taught him the several Vedas. Each 
Brahmin generally knowing one Veda only. This passage shows, that the young 
Brahmins in olden time, just as now, went from one teacher to the other, learning 
from each what he knew. The rules, which seemingly enjoin a student to stay with 
one and the same teacher, refer only to the principle, that the student must stay with 
his teacher, until he has learnt the subject which he began with him. 

samavrtto mdtre dadydt II 75 II 

15. When [a student] has returned home [from his teacher], he shall give 
[whatever he may be given as alms] to his mother. 

Here the sutra doesn't refer to food but rather money received as alms or a donation. 

mdtd bhartdram gamayet II 16 II 

16. The mother shall give it to her husband; 
bhartd gurum II 7711 

17. [And] the husband to the [student's] teacher. 
Dharma-krtyesu vd-upayojayet II 18 II 

18. Or he may use it for religious ceremonies. 

'Religious ceremonies', ie. the wedding and the like. For them he may use it 
optionally. He, ie. on failure of the teacher; the father, on failure of the father; the 
mother, on failure of all [the student] himself. — Haradatta. 

krtvd vidydm ydvatim saknuydd veda daksindm dhared dharmato yathd 
sakti II 79 II 

19. After having studied as many [branches of] sacred learning as he can, 
he shall procure in a righteous manner the fee for [the teaching of] the 
Veda [to be given to his teacher], according to his power. (Manu 2:245 & 
246; Yajn. 1:51) 

The honorarium due to the teacher is paid only once the graduate has started earning. 

visama gate tv dcdrya ugratah siidrato vd-dharet 1 1 20 1 1 

20. But, if the teacher has fallen into distress, he (the student) may take [the 
fee] from an Ugra or from a sudra. 

'The word Ugra denotes either the offspring of a Vaisya and of a sudra woman, or 
a twice-born man, who perpetrates dreadful deeds.' — Haradatta. 

The Ugra can also refer to a person who is a butcher or hunter by trade, or works in 
a undharmic profession. Normaly one would not accept anything from such people 
but in order to assist his teacher he may accept money from him. 

sarvadd sudrata ugrato vd-dcdrya arthasya-dharanam dhdrmyam ity eke 1 1 
27 II (dharmyam ) 



42 



21. But some declare, that it is lawful at any time to take the money for the 
teacher from an Ugra or from a sudra. 

datva ca na-anukathayet 1 1 22 1 1 

22. And having paid [the fee], one shall not boast of having done so. 
krtva ca na-anusmaret 1 1 2 J 1 1 

23. And one shall not remember what one may have done [for the teacher]. 
atma prasamsam para garham iti ca varjayet 1 1 24 1 1 

24. One shall avoid self-praise, blaming others, and the like. (Manu 2:179) 
presitas tad eva pratipadyeta 1 1 25 1 1 

25. If one is ordered [by the teacher to do so something], one shall do just 
that. 

sastus ca-anagamad vrttir anyatra 1 1 26 1 1 

26. On account of incompetence, [one may go] to another teacher [and] 
study [there]. 

See above, 1:1:1:13, and note. The purpose of the connection with the teacher is 
education, if the teacher is incompetant then he should be abandoned. 

Here also Haradatta states that the permission to leave the teacher is to be restricted 
to those who have not solemnly bound themselves to their teacher by undergoing 
the ceremony of initiation. 

anyatra-upasamgrahanad ucchista asanac ca-acaryavad dcarya dare 
vrttih II 27 II 

27. One shall behave towards his teacher's wife as towards the teacher 
himself, but shall not touch her feet, nor eat the residue of her food. (Manu 
2:208 -212) 

tatha samadiste 'dhydpayati \ \ 28 \ \ 

28. So also [shall he behave] towards one who teaches him at [the 
teacher's] command, 

'The use of the present tense - "adhyapayati," shows that this rule holds good only 
for the time during which he is taught by such a person.' — Haradatta. 

vrddhatare ca sa brahmacarini 1 1 29 1 1 

29. And also to a fellow- student who is superior [in learning and years]. 

Because [an older fellow-student] is of use to him, according to the verse: — One- 
fourth [of his learning] a student receives from his teacher, one-fourth he acquires 



43 



by his own intelligence, one-fourth from his fellow-students, one-fourth he is 
taught by time. — Haradatta. 

ucchista asana varjam dcdryavad dcdrya-putre vrttih 1 1 JO 1 1 

30. He shall behave to his teacher's son [who is superior to himself in 
learning or years] as to his teacher, but not eat the residue of his food. 
(Manu 2:207-209.) 

samdvrttasya-apy etad eva sdmaydcdrikam 1 1 31 II 

3 1 . Though he may have returned home, the conduct towards his [teacher 
and the rest] which is prescribed by the rules of conduct settled by the 
agreement [of those who know the law, must be observed by him to the 
end]. 

Prasna 1. Patala 2. Khanda 8. 

yathd brahmacdrino vrttam 1 1 7 1 1 

1. Just as by a student [actually living with his teacher]. 

Haradatta does not connect this Sutra with the preceding one. He explains it by 
itself: — '[We will now declare] how a student [who has left his teacher, but is not 
married] ought to behave.' 

mdlya dlipta mukha upalipta kesa smasrur upalip akto- 'bhyakto vestity 
upavestiti kdncuky updnahi pddukl II 2 II 

2. He may wear garlands, anoint his face [with sandal-paste], oil his hair 
and moustaches, smear his eyelids [with collyrium], and [his body] with 
oil, wear a turban, a cloth round his loins, a shawl, sandals, and wooden 
shoes. 

uddcdresu ca-asya-etdni na kurydt kdrayed vd 1 1 3 1 1 

3. Within the sight of his [teacher or teacher's relations] he shall do none of 
those [actions, as putting on a garland], nor cause them to be done. 

svairi karmasu ca 1 1 4 1 1 

4. Nor [shall he wear garlands etc. whilst performing] acts for his own 
pleasure. 

yathd danta praksdlana utsddana avalekhandni-iti 1 1 5 1 1 

5. As, for instance, cleaning his teeth, massaging himself, combing the hair, 
and the like. 



44 



tad dravyanam ca na kathayed atma samyogena-acaryah 1 1 6 1 1 

6. And the teacher shall not mention the possessions of the [student] with 
the intention to obtain them. 

'If the teacher comes to the house of his [former] student [who has become a 
householder], he shall, for instance, not say, "Oh, what a beautiful dish!" in such a 
manner; that his desire to obtain it becomes apparent. ' — Haradatta. 

sndtas tu kale yathdvidhy abhihrtam ahuto- 'bhyeto vd na pratisamhared 
ity eke II 7 II 

7. But some declare, that, if a student who has bathed [after completing his 
studies] is called by his teacher or has gone to see him, he shall not take off 
that [garland or other ornaments] which he wears according to the law at 
the time [of that ceremony] . 

This opinion is contrary to Apastamba's view given in Sutras 2 and 3 above. 
uccaistaram na-asTta 1 1 8 1 1 

8. He shall not sit on a seat higher [than that of his teacher]. 
tatha bahu pade 1 1 9 1 1 

9. Nor on a seat that has more legs [than that of his teacher]. 
sarvatah pratisthite II 10 II 

10. Nor on a seat that stands more firmly fixed [on the ground than that of 
his teacher]. 

'When he gives to his teacher a wooden seat [with legs], he shall not sit on a cane- 
seat [without legs], for the latter touches the ground on all sides.' — Haradatta. 

sayya asane ca-acarite na-avise II 11 II 

11. Nor shall one sit or lie on a couch or seat which is used [by the teacher]. 
(Manu 2:119.) 

yanam ukto- 'dhvany anvarohet 1 1 72 1 1 

12. If he is ordered [by his teacher], he shall on a journey ascend a carriage 
after him. 

This rule is an exception to 1. 2. 7, 5. Manu 2:204. 

sabha nikasa kata svastarams ca 1 1 13 1 1 

13. [At his teacher's command] he shall also enter an assembly, ascend a 
roller [which his teacher drags along], sit on a mat of fragrant grass or a 
couch of straw [together with his teacher] . 

'The roller is an implement used by farmers, with which the ploughed land is made 



45 



even. If one person ascends it and another drags it along, the ground becomes even. 
If that is dragged by the teacher, the student shall ascend it at his command. He 
shall not disobey from fear of the unseemliness of the action.' — Haradatta. 

na-anabhibhasito gurum abhibhaseta priydd anyat \ \ 14 \ \ 

14. If not addressed by a Guru, he shall not speak to him, except [in order 
to announce] good news. 

vyupatoda vyupajdva vyabhihdsa uddmantrana ndmadheya grahana 
presandni-iti guror varjayet II 75 II 

15. He shall avoid touching a Guru [with his finger], whispering [into his 
ear], laughing [into his face], calling out to him, pronouncing his first name 
or giving him orders and the like [acts]. 

(Manu 2:199.) regarding the term Guru, see above, 1. 2. 6, 29. 

dpady artham jndpayet II 7611 

16. In time of need he may attract attention [by any of these acts]. 
saha vasan say am prdtar andhuto gurum darsana artho gacchet II 7711 

17. If [a student] resides [in the same village as his teacher after the 
completion of his studies], he shall go to see him every morning and 
evening, without being called. 

This and the following Sutras refer to a person who has finished his studentship, 
while the preceding ones, from Sutra 8, apply to the time of studentship also. 

viprosya ca tad ahar eva pasyet II 18 II 

18. And if he returns from a journey, he shall [go to] see him on the same 
day. 

dcdrya prdcdrya samnipdte prdcdrydya-upasamgrhya-upasamjighrksed 1 1 
7911 

19. If his teacher and his teacher's teacher meet, he shall touch the feet of 
his teacher's teacher, and then show his desire to do the same to his teacher. 

desdcdryam, pratisedhed itarah 1 1 20 1 1 

20. The other [the teacher] shall [then] forbid it. 
lupyate pujd ca-asya sakdse \ \ 21 II 

21. And [other marks of] respect [due to the teacher] are omitted in the 
presence of the [teacher's teacher]. 

If one is in the presence of both his guru and his guru's guru (parama-guru) then all 
the protocol of respect should be paid to the parama-guru and not to the guru. Out 
of courteousy one may "attempt' to do the same to his own guru but the guru 



46 



should restrain him. 

muhums ca-acarya kulam darsana artho gacched yathdsakty adhihastyam 
dddya-api danta praksdlandni-iti 1 1 22 1 1 

22. And [if he does not live in the same village], he shall go frequently to 
his teacher's residence, in order to see him, and bring him some [present], 
with his own hand, be it even only a stick for cleaning the teeth. Thus [the 
duties of a student have been explained]. 

tasmin guror vrttih 1 1 2 J 1 1 

23. [Now] the conduct of a teacher towards his student [will be explained]. 

putram iva-enam anukdhksan sarva dharmesv anapacchddayamdnah su- 
yukto vidydm grdhayet 1 1 24 1 1 

24. Loving him like his own son, and being attentive, he shall teach him the 
sacred science, without hiding anything in the whole law. 

na ca-enam adhyayana vighnena-dtma arthesu-uparundhydd andpatsu 1 1 
25 II 

25. And he shall not employ him for his own purposes to the detriment of 
his studies, except in times of distress. 

antevdsy anantevdsT bhavati vinihita dtmd gurdv anaipunam 
dpadyamdnah 1 1 26 1 1 

26. That student who, attending to two [teachers], accuses his [principal 
and first] teacher of ignorance, remains no [longer] a student. 

Another commentator says, "That student who offends his teacher in word, 
thought, or deed, and directs his mind improperly, ie. does not properly obey, no 
longer should remain a student." — Haradatta. 

deary o- 'apy andedryo bhavati srutdt pariharamdnah II 27 II 

27. A teacher also, who neglects the instruction [of the student], no [longer] 
remains a teacher. 

aparddhesu ca-enam satatam updlabheta 1 1 28 1 1 

28. If the [student] errs, [the teacher] shall always reprove him. 

abhitrdsa upavdsa udaka upasparsanam adarsanam iti dandd 
yathdmdtram a nivrtteh 1 1 29 1 1 

29. Threatening, fasting, bathing in [cold] water, and banishment from the 
teacher's presence are the punishments [which are to be employed], 
according to the greatness [of the fault], until [the student] stops 



47 



[offending]. 

The first sanction should be threatening, if this doesn't work then the student 
should be made to fast or bathe in cold water, or if the student is still not corrected 
then he should be banished from the class for a certain time. [See also Manu 8:299, 
where corporal punishment is permitted but apparently Apastamba doesn't approve 
of it.] 

nivrttam carita brahmacaryam anyebhyo dharmebhyo- 'nantaro bhava-ity 
atisrjet II 30 II 

30. He shall dismiss [the student], after he has performed the ceremony of 
the Samavartana (graduation ceremony) and has finished his studentship, 
with these words, 'Apply thyself henceforth to other duties.' 

Prasna 1. Patala 3. Khanda 9. 
Rules for Vedic Study 

sravanyam paurnamasyam adhyayam updkrtya mdsam pradose na- 
adhiyita II 7 II 

1 . After having performed the Upakarma for studying the Veda on the full 
moon of the month Sravana [July- August], he shall for one month not study 
in the evening. 

The Upakarma is the ceremony which is performed every year at the beginning of 
the course of study. It is in fact the solemn opening of the Brahmanic term. 
Because Apastamba uses the word evening [ie. first part of the night] it is not a 
fault to study later in the night. — Haradatta. Manu 4:95; Yajn 1:42. 143; 

taisydm paurnamasyam rohinyam va viramet 1 1 2 1 1 

2. On the full moon of the month of Pausa [December- January], or under 
the constellation Rohini, one shall leave off studying the Veda. 

The term lasts therefore for five months; [ie. latter half of Sravana, Bhadrapada, 
Asvina, Karttika, Margasirsa, and the first half of Pausa.] The Rohini day of Pausa 
is meant. 

ardhapancamdms caturo mdsdn ity eke II 3 II 

3. Some declare, [that he shall study] for four months and a half. 

According to this latter opinion the Upakarma should be performed on the full 
moon of Bhadrapada, as has been taught in another work (Manu 4:95): the [time of 
the] Utsarjana, [the solemn closing of the term] should be advanced; and after the 
Utsarjana has been performed, one may study the Veda during the bright nights of 
each month until the full moon of Sravana, in order to fix in one's mind the part 
learned already and in the dark fortnight of each month one may study the 
Vedahgas, ie. grammar and the rest (Manu 4:98). On the full moon of Sravana the 



48 



Upakarma should be performed once more, and that part of the Veda should be 
studied which has not yet been learned. — Haradatta. 

nigamesv adhyayanam varjayet 1 1 4 1 1 

4. He shall avoid studying the Veda on a high-road. 

Nigamah, 'high-roads,' are squares and the like. — Haradatta. 

dnaduhena vd sakrt pindena-upalipte- 'dhiyita 1 1 5 1 1 

5. Or he may study it [on a high-road], after having smeared [a space] with 
cow-dung. 

smasdne sarvatah samya prdsdt 1 1 6 1 1 

6. He shall never study in a cremation- ground nor anywhere near it within 
the throw of a Samya. 

The Samya is either the pin in the bullock's yoke or the round stick, about a foot and a 
half in length, which is used for the preparation of the Vedi, (Manu 4:116; Yajn. 1:148.) 

grdmena-adhyavasite ksetrena vd na-anadhydyah 1 1 7 1 1 

7. If a village has been built over [a cremation-round] or its surface has 
been cultivated as a field, the recitation of the Veda [in such a place] is not 
prohibited. 

If one has not been informed that it used to be a cremation-ground. 

jndyamdne tu tasminn eva dese na-adhiyita 1 1 8 1 1 

8. But if that place is known to have been [a cremation-ground], he shall 
not study [there] 

'Nor anywhere near it within the. throw of a Samya.' This must be understood from Sutra 
6. 

smasdnavac-sudra patitau 1 1 9 1 1 

9. A sudra and an outcast are [included by the term] burial-ground, [and the 
rule given, Sutra 6, applies to them]. (Yajn. 1:148.) 

samdna agdra ity eke II 10 II 

10. Some declare, that [one ought to avoid only, to study] in the same 
house [where they dwell] . 

siidrdydm tu preksana pratipreksanayor eva-anadhydyah II 11 II 

11. But if [a student and] a sudra woman merely look at each other, the 
recitation of the Veda must be interrupted, 

tathd-anyasydm striydm varna vyatikrdntdydm maithune II 12 II 



49 



12. Likewise, if [a student and] a woman, who has had sex with a man of a 
lower caste, [look at each other] . 

Brahma adhyesyamdno malavad vasasa-icchan sambhasitum brahmanena 
sambhasya taya sambhaseta I sambhasya tu brahmanena-eva sambhasya- 
adhiyita I evam tasyah prajd nihsreyasam 1 1 7 J 1 1 

13. If he, who is about to study the Veda, wishes to talk to a menstruating 
woman, he shall first speak to a Brahmana and then to her, then again 
speak to a Brahmana, and afterwards study. Thereby the children [of that 
woman] will be blessed. 

The last part of the Sutra may also be interpreted: 'Thus she will be blessed with 
children.' — Haradatta. 

antah savam \ \ 14 \ \ 

14. [He shall not study in a village] in which a corpse lies; (Manu 4:108; 
Yajn. 1:148.) 

antas candalam II 75 II 

15. Nor where candalas 5 live. 
abhinirhrtanam tu simny anadhyayah II 76 II 

16. He shall not study whilst corpses are being carried to the boundary of 
the village. 

samdarsane ca-aranye II 7711 

17. Nor in a forest, if [a corpse or candala] is within sight. 
tad ahar agate su ca gramam bahyesu \ \ 18 \ \ 

18. And if outcasts have entered the village, he shall not study on that day. 

Haradatta explains Bahya, 'outcasts,' by 'robbers, such as Ugras and Nisadas.' 

api satsu II 19 II 

19. Nor if worthy men [have come]. (Yajn. 1:150) 

'Worthy men" are notable personages that should be received and treated with honour. 

samdhavanu stanite ratrim 1 1 20 1 1 

20. If it thunders in the evening, [he shall not study] during the night. 
(Manu 4:106; Yajn. 1:145.) 

5 The only caste that is said by the most ancient Dharma surras to be untouchable by birth is that 
of candalas and the word candala has a technical meaning in these works as stated above (p. 81) 
under candala. Gaut. (IV. 15 and 23) says that the candala is the offspring of a sudra from a 
brahmana woman and that he is the most reprehensible among the pratilomas. 



50 



This rule refers to the rainy season. [For thunder] at other [seasons] he orders 
below a longer [cessation]. — Haradatta. 

svapna parydntam vidyuti II 21 II 

21. If lightning is seen [in the evening, he shall not study during that night], 
until he has slept. 

upavyusam ydvatd vd krsnam rohimm iti samya prdsdd vijdniydd etasmin 
kale vidyotamdne sa pradosam ahar anadhydyah 1 1 22 1 1 

22. If lightning is seen about the break of dawn, or at the time when he may 
distinguish at the distance of a Samya-throw, whether [a cow] is black or 
red, he shall not study during that day, nor in the following evening. 

dahre- 'para-rdtre stanayitnund 1 1 23 1 1 

23. If it thunders in the second part of the third watch of the night, [he shall 
not study during the following day or evening] . 

urdhvam ardhardtrdd ity eke 1 1 24 1 1 

24. Some [declare, that this rule holds good, if it thunders], after the first 
half of the night has passed. 

gavdm ca-avarodhe 1 1 25 1 1 

25. [Nor shall he study] whilst the cows are prevented from leaving [the 
village on account of thieves or predators] . 

vadhydndm ca ydvatd hanyante 1 1 26 1 1 

26. Nor whilst they [criminals] are being executed. 
prstha driidhah pasundm na-adhiyita II 27 II 

27. He shall not study whilst he rides on beasts [of burden]. (Manu 4:20; 
Yajn. 1:151) 

ahordtrdv amdvdsydsu 1 1 28 1 1 

28. At the new moon, [he shall not study] for two days and two nights. 
(Manu 4:113; Yajn. 1:146.) 

"For two days," ie. on the day of the new moon and the preceding one, the 
fourteenth of the half month.' — Haradatta. 

Prasna 1. Patala 3, Khanda 10. 

cdturmdsTsu ca 1 1 7 1 1 



51 



1. [Nor shall he study] on the days of the full moons of those months in 
which the caturmasya sacrifice may be performed [nor on the days 
preceding them]. 

The three full-moon days are Phalguni [February -March], Asadhi [June- July], 
Karttika [October-November]. 

Caturmasya is the period of the rainy season lasting for 4 months. 

vairamano gurusv astdkya aupakarana iti try ahah 1 1 2 1 1 

2. At the time of the Vedotsarga, on the death of Gurus, at the Astaka- 
sraddha, and at the time of the Upakarma, [he shall not study] for three 
days; 

The construction is very irregular, the first noun standing in the nominative and the 
rest in the locative A similar irregularity occurs below, 1:3:11:31. The Vedotsarga 
is the ceremony which is performed at the end of the Brahmanic term, in January. 
'In the case of the death of a Guru, the vacation begins with the day on which the 
death occurs. On the other occasions mentioned he shall not study on the day 
preceding [the ceremony] , on the day [of the ceremony] , nor on the day following 
it.' — Haradatta. (Manu 4:119; Yajfi. 1:144.) 'The Gurus' intended here, are fathers- 
in-law, uncles, etc. 

tathd sambandhesu jnatisu II 3 II 

3. Likewise if near relations have died. 

'This rule applies to a student only. It is known from another work that those who 
have been tainted by impurity [on the death of a relation] , must not study whilst the 
impurity lasts.' — Haradatta. Yajn. 1. 144. 

matari pitary acarya iti dvadasa ahah 1 1 4 1 1 

4. [He shall not study] for twelve days, if his mother, father, or teacher 
have died. 

tesu ca-udaka upasparsanam tavantam kalam II 5 II 

5. If these [have died], he must [also] bathe for the same number of days. 

anubhavinam ca parivapanam 1 1 6 1 1 

6. Persons who are younger [than the relation deceased], must shave [their 
hair and beard] . 

The word anubhavinah, is interpreted by Haradatta as 'persons who are younger than the 
deceased.' 

na samavrtta vaperann anyatra viharad ity eke 1 1 7 1 1 

7. Some declare, that post-graduate students who have returned home shall 
never shave, except if engaged in the initiation to a srauta sacrifice. 



52 



Regarding the Diksha 'initiation,' see Aitareya Brahmana 1:1 

atha-api brdhmanam, rikto vd eso- 'napihito yan mundas tasya-etad 
apidhdnam yac-sikhd-iti II 8 II 

8. Now a Brahmana also declares, 'Verily, an empty, uncovered [pot] is he, 
whose hair is shaved off entirely; the sikha [topknot] is his covering' 

Hence it follows that the top-knot should not be shaved off, except in the case 
mentioned in the following Sutra. 

satresu tu vacandd vapanam sikhdydh 1 1 9 1 1 

9. But at sacrificial sessions the topknot {sikha) must be shaved off, 
because it is so enjoined in the Veda. 

Sattras, 'sacrificial sessions,' are sacrifices which last longer than twelve days. 

deary e trin ahordtrdn ity eke II 10 II 

10. Some declare, that, upon the death of the teacher, [the reading should 
be interrupted] for three days and three nights. 

But in his opinion it should be twelve days, as declared above, Sutra 4. — 
Haradatta. It appears, therefore, that this Sutra is to be connected with Sutra 4. 

srotriya sains t hay dm aparisamvatsardydm ekdm II 11 II 

1 1 . If [he hears of] the death of a learned Brahmana [srotriya] before a, full 
year [since the death] has elapsed, [he shall interrupt his study] for one 
night [and day]. 

Because the word "death" is used here, death only is the reason [for stopping the 
study], in the case of Gurus and the rest [ie. the word 'died' must be understood in 
Sutra 2 and the following ones — Haradatta 

sa brahmacdrini-ity eke II 12 II 

12. Some declare, [that the deceased srotriya must have been] a fellow- 
student. 

srotriya abhydgame- 'dhijigdmsamdno- 'dhTydno vd- anujhdpya- adhiyita 
II 13 II 

13. If a learned Brahmana [srotriya] has arrived and he is desirous of 
studying or is actually studying, [or if he is desirous of teaching or is 
teaching,] he may study, 

adhydpayed vd 1 1 14 1 1 

or teach after having received permission [to do so from the srotriya]. 
guru samnidhau ca- adhihi bho ity uktvd adhiyita 1 1 75 1 1 



53 



15. He may likewise study or teach in the presence of his teacher, if [the 
latter] has addressed him [saying], 'Ho, study!' (Manu 2:73) 

adhydpayed vd II 16 II 

16. or, 'Ho, teach' ! 

ubhayata upasamgrahanam adhijigamsamanasya-adhTtya ca II 7711 

17. When a student desires to study or has finished his lesson, he shall at 
both occasions touch the feet of his teacher. (Manu 2:73) 

adhTyanesu vd yatra-anyo vyaveydd etam eva sabdam utsrjya-adhTyTta 1 1 
18 II 

18. Or if, whilst they study, another person comes in, he shall continue his 
recitation, after those words ['Ho, study!'] have been pronounced [by the 
newcomer]. 

Haradatta states that the plural ['they study'] is useless, the use of the verb in the 
singular may be excused thereby, that the advice is addressed to each of the 
persons engaged in study. (Manu 4:122.) 

sva gardabha ndddh saldvrky ekasrka uluka sabddh sarve vdditra sabdd 
rodana gita soma sabdds ca 1 1 79 1 1 

19. The barking of [many] dogs, the braying of [many] donkeys, the cry of 
a wolf or of a solitary jackal or of an owl, all sounds of musical 
instruments, of weeping, and of the Saman melodies [are reasons for 
discontinuing the study of the Veda]. 

The ekasrika, 'solitary jackal,' is now called Balu or Pheough, and is considered to 
be the constant companion of a tiger or panther. Its unharmonious cry is, in the 
present day also, considered to be an evil omen. (Yajn. 1. 148; Manu 4:108, 1 15 & 
123) 

sdkhdntare ca sdmndm anadhydyah 1 1 20 1 1 

20. If another branch of the Veda [is being recited in the neighbourhood], 
the Saman melodies shall not be studied. 

sarvesu ca sabda karmasu yatra samsrjyeran II 21 II 

21. And whilst other noises [are being heard, the recitation of the Veda 
shall be discontinued], if they mix [with the voice of the person studying]. 

chardayitvd svapna antam 1 1 22 1 1 

22. After having vomited [he shall not study] until he has slept. (Manu 
4:121) 

Obviously eating food begged from many strange houses had a frequently deleterious 



54 



effect upon the poor students ! 

sarpir vd prdsya 1 1 2 J 1 1 

23. Or [he may study] having eaten clarified butter [after the attack of 
vomiting] . 

puti gandhah II 24 II 

24. A foul smell [is a reason for the discontinuance of study]. (Manu 
4:107; Yajn. 1:150) 

suktam ca- dtma samyuktam 1 1 25 1 1 

25. Heartburn or indigestion, [is a reason for the discontinuance of the 
recitation, until the heart-burn ceases]. (Manu 4:121) 

pradose ca bhuktvd 1 1 26 1 1 

26 [Nor shall one study] after having eaten in the evening, 

'Therefore he shall dine only after having finished his study.' — Haradatta. 

prodakayos ca party oh II 27 II 

27. Nor as long as his hands are wet. (Manu 4:121; Yajn. 1:149.) 

preta samklrptam ca-annam bhuktvd sa pradosam ahar anadhydyah 1 1 28 
II 

28. [And one shall discontinue studying] for a day and an evening, after 
having eaten food prepared in honour of a dead person [for whom the 
Sapindi-karana has not yet been performed], (Manu 4:112; Yajn. 1 .146) 

a ca vipdkdt 1 1 29 1 1 

29. Or until the food [eaten on that occasion] is digested. 

'If that food has not been digested by the end of that time [ie. in the evening], he 
shall not study until it has been digested. ' — Haradatta. 

asrdddhena tu paryavadadhydt 1 1 JO 1 1 

30. But he shall [always] eat in addition [to the meal given in honour of a 
dead person], food which has not been given at a sacrifice to the Manes. 

Because in this Sutra the expression "food not given at a sraddha" occurs, some 
think that the preceding Sutra refer to "food eaten at a sraddha." — Haradatta. 

Prasna 1. Patala 3. Khanda 11. 

kdnda updkarane ca-amdtrkasya 1 1 7 1 1 



55 



1 . [The recitation of the Veda shall be interrupted for a day and evening if 
he has eaten], on beginning a fresh Kanda [of his Veda], food given by a 
motherless person, 

The Black Yajur Veda, to which Apastamba belongs, is divided throughout into books 
called Kandas. 

kdndasamdpane ca-apitrkasya 1 1 2 1 1 

2. And also if he has eaten, on the day of the completion of a Kanda, food 
given by a fatherless person. 

manusya prakrtTndm ca devanam yajne bhuktvd-ity eke Mill 

3. Some declare, that [the recitation shall be interrupted for the same period 
of time], if one has eaten at a sacrifice offered in honour of gods who were 
formerly human. 

Haradatta names as such gods, NandTsvara and Kubera. Other commentators, 
however, explain manusya-Prakrti by manusya-mukha, 'possessing human faces.' 
A similar rule occurs Gautama 16. 34, where a Manusya-yajna is mentioned as a 
cause for discontinuing the recitation of the Veda. In his commentary on Gautama, 
also, Haradatta is in doubt. He first refers the term to the sacraments like the 
Simantonnayana, and then adds, that some explain it to mean 'a sacrifice to gods 
who formerly were men', but since such gods are few and sacrifices to then even 
rarer it makes more sense to interpret it as referring to ceremonies which are of a 
purely human interest such as saraments. 

paryusitais tandulair dma mdmsena ca na-anadhydydh 1 1 4 1 1 

4. Nor is the recitation interrupted, if he has eaten rice received the day 
before, or raw meat [though these things may have been offered in honour 
of the dead], 

This Sutra is an exception to 1:3:10:28 

tathd-osadhi vanaspati mula phalaih 1 1 5 1 1 

5. Nor [if he has eaten at a funeral dinner] roots or fruits of herbs and trees. 

yat kdndam updkurvlta yasya ca-anuvdkyam kurvlta na tat tad ahar 
adhiyita 1 1 6 1 1 

6. When he performs the ceremony for beginning a Kanda, or when he 
studies the index of the Anuvakas of a [Kanda], he shall not study that 
[Kanda] on that day [nor in that night] . 

Haradatta's commentary on this Sutra is very meagre and he leaves the word 
anuvakyam unexplained. I am not certain that my explanation is correct. But it is 
countenanced by the statements of the Grhya sutras regarding the order of 
studying. 

updkarana samdpanayos ca pdrdyanasya tarn vidydm 1 1 7 1 1 



56 



7. And if he performs the ceremonies prescribed on beginning or ending the 
recitation of one entire Veda, he shall not study that Veda [during that day]. 

Yajn. 1. 145. This Sutra is a jnapaka or 'such a one which indicates the existence of 
a rule not expressly mentioned.' Above [1:3:9:1] the yearly performance of the 
Upakarma and Utsarga ceremonies for the beginning and end of the Brahmanic 
term has been prescribed, In this Sutra the performance of the Upakarma and 
Utsarga at the beginning and completion of the Parayana or the vow to go through 
a whole Veda is incidentally mentioned. Thence it may be inferred that these 
ceremonies must be likewise performed on the latter occasions, though no absolute 
rule to this effect has been given, Such jnapakas are of frequent occurrence in all 
Sutras, and constitute one of the chief difficulties of their interpretation. 

vayur ghosavan bhumau va trna samvaho varsati va yatra dharah 
pravahet 1 1 8 1 1 

8. If the wind roars, or if it whirls up the grass on the ground, or if it drives 
the rain-drops forward during a rain-shower, [then the recitation shall be 
interrupted for so long a time as the storm lasts]. (Yajn. 1:149; Manu 
4:102. 122.) 

grama aranyayos ca sandhau 1 1 9 1 1 

9. [Nor shall he study] on the boundary between a village and forest, 
mahdpathe ca II 10 II 

10. Nor on a highway. 

viprosya ca samadhyayanam tadahah II 77 II 

11. If [some of his] fellow- students are on a journey, he shall not study 
during that day, [the passage] which they learn together. 

Others explain the Sutra thus; "If he meets fellow-students after they have come 
home from a journey, he shall not study with them on that day." 

svairi karmasu ca 1 1 72 1 1 

12. And whilst performing recreational acts. 

yatha pada-praksalana utsadana anulepanani-iti II 13 II 

13. Such as washing his feet, massaging or anointing himself, 
tavantam kalam na- adhiyita - adhydpayed va 1 1 14 1 1 

14. He shall neither study nor teach, as long as he is thus occupied. 
sandhyoh II 75 II 

15. [He shall not study or teach] in the twilight, (Yajn. 1:145; Manu 4:113) 
tatha vrksam ariidhah II 16 II 



57 



16. Nor whilst sitting on a tree, (Yajn. 1.151; Manu 4: 120.) 
apsu ca- avagddhah II 7711 

17. Nor whilst immersed in water, 
naktam ca- apdvrte II 18 II 

18. Nor at night with open doors, 
diva ca- apihite 1 1 79 1 1 

19. Nor in the day-time with shut doors. 

avihitam anuvdka adhyayanam dsddha vdsantikayoh 1 1 20 1 1 

20. During the spring festival and the festival [of Indra], in the month of 
Asadha [June- July], the study of an Anuvaka is forbidden. 

According to Haradatta, Apastamba uses the word Anuvaka in order to indicate 
that smaller portions of the Veda may be studied. Others think, that by Anuvaka, 
the Samhita and the Brahmana are meant, and that the study of the Ahgas is 
permitted. The Vasantotsava, or spring-festival, which, according to the Dramas, 
was, in olden times, kept all over India, falls, according to Haradatta, on the 13 th of 
the first half of Caitra, about the beginning of April. 

nitya prasnasya ca-avidhind \ \ 21 II 

21. [The recitation] of the daily portion of the Veda [at the Brahma-yajna is 
likewise forbidden if done] in a manner differing from the rule [of the 
Veda]. 

Hence, if one has forgotten it and eaten one's breakfast, a penance, not the Brahma- 
yajna, must be performed. — Haradatta. 

tasya vidhih 1 1 22 1 1 

22. [Now follows] the rule [for the daily recitation] of that [Brahma-yajna]. 

akrta prdtardsa udaka antam gatvd prayatah sucau dese- 'dhiyfta yathd 
adhydyam utsrjan vdcd 1 1 2 J 1 1 

23. Before taking his morning-meal, he shall go to the water-side, and 
having purified himself, he shall recite aloud [a portion of the Veda] in a 
pure place, leaving out according to [the order of the] texts [what he has 
read the day before] . 

See Taittiriya Aranyaka 2:2:1 and 2; Asv. Gri. Sutra. 3:2:12. In our days this rule 
is usually not observed. Brahmanas mostly recite at the daily Brahma-yajna, a 
'Veda-offering,' the first verse, which symbolically comprises the whole Veda. A 
few learned Brahmans, still recite the whole of their sakha every year according to 
this rule of Apastamba. 

manasd ca-anadhydye 1 1 24 1 1 



58 



24. If a break in study is enjoined [for the day, he shall recite the daily 
portion] mentally. 

vidyuti ca-abhyagrayam stanayitndv aprdyatye preta anne nThdre ca 
manasam paricaksate II 25 II 

25. If lightning flashes continuously, or, thunder rolls continually, if a man 
has neglected to purify himself, if he has partaken of a meal in honour of a 
dead person, or if frost lies on the ground, [in these cases] they forbid the 
mental recitation [of the daily portion of the Veda]. (Yajn. 1:149; Manu 
4:106, 120, 127; Taitt. Ar. 2:15:1) 

srdddha bhojana eva-eke 1 1 26 1 1 

26. Some forbid it only in case one has eaten a funeral meal. (Manu 4:109, 
116.) 

vidyut stanayitnur vrstis ca-apartau yatra samnipateyus tryaham 
anadhydyah II 27 II 

27. Where lightning, thunder, and rain happen together out of season, the 
recitation shall be interrupted for three days. (Manu 4, 103 and 104.) 

ydvad bhumir vyudakd-ity eke II 28 II 

28. Some [declare, that the recitation shall stop] until the ground is dry. 
ekena dvdbhydm vd-etesdm a kalam 1 1 29 1 1 

29. If one or two [of the phenomena mentioned in Sutra 27 appear, the 
recitation shall be interrupted] from that hour until the same hour next day. 

suryd candramasor grahane bhumi cale- 'pasvdna ulkdydm agnyutpdte ca 
sarvdsdm vidydndm sdrva kdlikam a kalam 1 1 30 1 1 

30. In the case of an eclipse of the sun or of the moon, of an earthquake, of 
a whirlwind, of the fall of a meteor, or of a fire [in the village], at whatever 
time these events happen, the recitation of all the sacred sciences [Vedas 
and Angas] must be interrupted from that hour until the same hour next 
day. (Yajn. 1:145; Manu 4, 105, 118.) 

abhram ca-apartau suryd candramasoh parivesa indradhanuh pratisurya 
matsyas ca vdte put! gandhenThdre ca sarvesv etesu tdvantam kalam II 31 II 

3 1 . If a cloud appears out of season, if the sun or the moon is surrounded 
by a halo, if a rainbow, a parhelion or a comet appears, if a [high] wind 
[blows], a foul smell [is observed], or frost [lies on the ground, at all these 
occasions [the recitation of all the sacred sciences must be interrupted] 



59 



during the duration [of these phenomena]. (Manu 4, 104 and see above.) 
muhurtam virate vote 1 1 32 1 1 

32. After the wind has ceased, [the interruption of the recitation continues] 
for one muhurta (48 minutes). 

salavrkyam ekasrka iti svapna paryantam \ \ 33 \ \ 

33. If [the howl of] a wolf or of a solitary jackal [has been heard, he shall 
stop the reading] until he has slept. 

naktam ca-aranye- 'nagndv ahiranye va 1 1 34 1 1 

34. At night [he shall not study] in a forest, where there is no fire nor gold. 
ananiiktam ca-apartau chandaso na- adhiyita 1 1 35 1 1 

35. Out of term he shall not study any part of the Veda which he has not 
learnt before. 

pradose ca 1 1 36 1 1 

36. Nor [shall he study during term some new part of the Veda] in the 
evening. 

Other commentators interpret the Sutra in a different sense. They take it to 
mean: — 'And during the night [from the twelfth to the thirteenth of each half of the 
month, he shall not study at all, be it in or out of term].' 

sdrvakdlikam dmndtam II 37 II 

37. That which has been studied before, must never be studied [during the 
vacation or in the evening] . 

'What has been studied before, must not be studied [again] at any time in the 
vacation nor in the evening.' — Haradatta 

yathd uktam anyad atah parisatsu 1 1 38 1 1 

38. Further particulars [regarding the interruption of the Veda-study may be 
learnt] from the [teaching and works of other] Vedic schools. 

Haradatta thinks that by 'Parisad' Manu's and other Dharma sastras are meant. This 
explanation is, however not exact. Parisad, 'assemblage,' means, in the language of 
the sastras, either a Pahkti, an assemblage of learned Brahmans called together to 
decide some knotty point of law, or a Brahminical school, in which one studies a 
particular redaction of the Veda. The latter meaning is that applicable to this Sutra. 
By 'Parisada' are here intended the Vedic schools, and their writings and teaching. 
Gautama also says, 16:49, Pratividyam yan smaranti smaranti, [he shall observe 
the stoppages of the Veda-study] which they teach in [the writings belonging to] 
each of the Vedas.' 



60 



Prasna 1. Patala 4. Khanda 12. 

tapah svadhyaya iti brahmanam 1 1 7 1 1 

1. A Brahmana declares, 'The daily recitation [of the Veda] is Tapas' 

It procures as much reward as penance. — Haradatta. Manu 2:166; The phrase 
occurs frequently in the Brahmanas, e g. Taitt. Ar. 2:14:3 

tatra sriiyate I sa yadi tisthann dsTnah saydno va svddhydyam adhite 
tapa eva tat tapyate tapo hi svadhyaya iti 1 1 2 1 1 

2. In the same [sacred text] it is also declared, 'Whether he recites the daily 
portion of the Veda standing, or sitting, or lying down, he performs 
austerity thereby; for the daily recitation is austerity.' 

Regarding the proper position at the 'Veda-offering,' or daily recitation, see above, 
1:3:11:23 and Taitt. Ar. 2:11:3. Passages similar to the first part of the sentence 
quoted in this sutra occur Taitt. Ar. 2:12:3, and 15:3. It ought to be observed, that the 
Taitt. Ar. in both places has the word 'vrajan,' which is also read in the P. and P. U. 
MSS. The second part is taken apparently from the same work, 2:14, 2. 

atha-api vajasaneyi brahmanam I 

brahma yajho ha va esa yat svadhyayas tasya-ete vasat kara yat stanayati 
yad vidyotate yad avasphiirjati yad vato vayati I 

tasmat stanayati vidyotamane- 'vasphurjati vote va vayaty adhiyita-eva 
vasat karanam acchambatkaraya-iti II J II 

3. Now the Vajasaneyi Brahmana declares also, 'The daily recitation is a 
sacrifice at which the Veda is offered. When it thunders, when lightning 
flashes or thunderbolts fall, and when the wind blows violently, these 
sounds take the place of the exclamations Vasat [Vausat and Svaha]. 
Therefor he shall recite the Veda whilst it thunders, whilst lightning flashes 
and thunderbolts fall, and whilst the wind blows violently, lest the Vasat 
[should be heard] in vain.' 

See Satapatha Brahmana 11:5, 6, 8, where a passage very similar to that quoted by 
Apastamba occurs. Vasat and the other exclamations, which are pronounced by the 
Hotri priest, serve as signals for the Adhvaryu to throw the oblations into the fire. 

tasya sakha antare vakya samaptih 1 1 4 1 1 

4. The conclusion of the passage from that [Vajasaneyi Brahmana is found] 
in another sakha [of the Veda]. 

atha yadi vatova vayat stanayed va vidyoteta va- avasphurjed vd-ekdm 
va-rcam ekam va yajur ekam va sama- abhivyahared bhur bhuvah suvah 



61 



satyam tapah sraddhayam juhomi-iti va-etat I teno ha-eva-asya-etad ahah 
svddhydya updtto bhavati 1 1 5 1 1 

5. "Now, if the wind blows, or if it thunders, or if lightning flashes, or 
thunderbolts fall, then he shall recite one Rik verse [in case he studies the 
Rig Veda], or one Yajus [in case he studies the Yajur Veda], or one Saman 
[in case he studies the Sama Veda], or [without having regard to his 
particular Veda, the following Yajus], "Bhuh Bhuvah, Suvah, in faith I 
offer true devotion." Then, indeed, his daily recitation is accomplished 
thereby for that day. 

'Some suppose that the words Bhuh Bhuvah and Suvah etc. [are to be used only] if 
one studies the Brahmana portion of the 'Veda, not everywhere.' — Haradatta. 

evam satydrya samayena- avipratisiddham 1 1 6 1 1 

6. If that is done, [if the passage of the Vajasaneyi Brahmana is combined 
with that quoted in Sutras, the former stands] not in contradiction with the 
decision of the aryas. 

Haradatta explains Ksatriyas by visistah, 'excellent ones,' i. e. persons who know 
the law, and he gives Manu as an instance. 

adhydya anadhyayam hy upadisanti I tad anarthakam sydd vajasaneyi 
brahmanam ced avekseta 1 1 7 1 1 

7. For they [who know the law] teach both the continuance and the 
interruption [of the daily recitation of the Veda]. That would be 
meaningless, if one paid attention to the [passage of the] Vajasaneyi 
Brahmana [alone]. 

dry a samayo hy agrhyamana karanah 1 1 8 1 1 

8. For no [worldly] motive for the decision of those aryas is perceptible; 
[and hence it must have a religious motive and be founded on a passage of 
the Veda]. 

See above, 1. 1, 4, 9 and 10, and notes. 

vidyam praty anadhyayah sriiyate na karma yoge mantranam 1 1 9 1 1 

9. [The proper interpretation therefore is, that] the prohibition to study 
[given above and by the aryas generally] refers only to the repetition of the 
sacred texts in order to learn them, not to their application at sacrifices. 

brahmana ukta vidhayas tesam utsannah pathah prayogad anumTyante 1 1 
70 11 

10. [But if you ask, why the decision of the aryas presupposes the existence 
of a Vedic passage, then I answer]: — All precepts were [originally] taught 



62 



in the Brahmanas, [but] these texts have been lost. Their [former existence] 
may, however, be inferred from usage. 

How then is their existence known? 'They are inferred from usage.' "Usage" 
means the teaching of the law-books and the practice. From that it is inferred that 
Manu and other [authors of law-books] knew such texts of the Brahmanas. For 
how could otherwise [Rishis like Manu] teach in their works or practise [such 
customs] for which no authority is now found? And certainly they were intimately 
connected with the revealed texts [ie. saw them]. — Haradatta. 

yatra tu priti upalabdhitah pravrttir na tatra sastram asti II 77 II 

11. But it is not [permissible to infer the former existence of a [Vedic] 
passage in cases where pleasure is obtained [by following a rule of the 
Smrti or a custom]. 

Compare above, 1:1:4:8- 10 

tad anuvartamano narakdya rddhyati II 12 II 

12. He who follows such [usages] becomes fit for hell. 
atha brdhmana uktd vidhayah II 13 II 

13. Now follow [some rites and] rules that have been declared in the 
Brahmanas. 

The consequence of the introduction of these rules into a Smrti work is, that their 
omission must be explained by a Smarta penance and not by a srauta one. 

tesdm mahd yajnd mahd sattrdni-iti samstutih II 14 II 

14. By way of praise they are called 'great sacrifices' or 'great sacrificial 
sessions.' 

Because they are called 'great sacrifices,' by way of laudation only, the particular 
laws binding on performers of real Soma-sacrifices cannot be transferred to the 
performers of these ceremonies, regarding the term 'great sacrifices,' see also Taitt. 
Ar. 2:2:10, 1 seq., and Satapatha Brahmana 11:5:6, 1. 

ahar ahar bhuta balir manusyebhyo yathd sakti ddnam II 75 11 

15. [These rites include]: — The daily Bali offering to the [seven classes of] 
beings; the [daily] gift of [food] to humans according to one's power; 

Prasna 1. Patala 4. Khanda 13 

devebhyah svdhd kdra d kdsthdt , pitrbhyah svadhd kdra d-uda pdtrdt 
svddhydya iti 1 1 7 1 1 

1. The oblation to the gods accompanied by the exclamation Svaha which 



63 



may consist even of a piece of wood only; the offering to the Manes 
accompanied by the exclamation Svadha, which may consist even of a 
vessel with water only; the daily recitation. 

Taitt. Ar. 2:10, 2 and 3, and Satapatha Br loc. cit. 2. Haradatta observes, that some 
consider the Deva-yajna, mentioned in the Sutra, to be different from the 
Vaisvadeva, but that he holds it to be the same. Further he mentions, that some 
prescribe this Vaisvadeva to be performed even if one has nothing to eat. 

The panca-maha yajnas are the daily duties to be performed by the householder for 
the rest of his life. They are the requiting of the spiritual debts (rnas) occurred 
through taking birth on this planet: — 

1. Pitr rna — pitr yajna = debt to the parents and ancestors, requited through 
honouring parents and performing their cremation and the memorial rites for them 
and the ancestors after death. 

2. Deva-rna — deva-yajna = debt to the gods requited by performing the homa 
and other periodic ceremonies in their honour. 

3. RsT-rna — brahma-yajna = debt to the sages requited through study and 
teaching. 

4. Manusya-rna — manusya-yajna = debt to society requited through feeding of 
strangers and caring for their needs. 

5. Bhuta-rna — bhuta-yajna = debt to the environment and other creatures by 
ensuring their food supply. 

puja varna jydyasdm karya 1 1 2 1 1 

2. Respect must be shown to those who are superior by caste. 

'Namely, by allowing them to walk in front on the road and by giving them 
perfumed garlands and the like at festive occasions.' — Haradatta. 

vrddhataranam ca 1 1 3 1 1 

3. And also to [persons of the same caste who are] venerable [on account of 
learning, virtue, and the like]. 

hrsto darpati drpto dharmam atikrdmati dharma atikrame khalu punar 
narakah \ \4\\ 

4. A person elated [with success] becomes proud, a proud person 
transgresses the law, but through the transgression of the law hell indeed 
[becomes his portion]. 

na samavrtte samddeso vidyate 1 1 5 1 1 

5. There is no provision for orders to be given [by the acarya] to a graduate 
student. 

Haradatta gives as an example the order to fetch water, and adds that a voluntary 



64 



act on a former student's part ought not to be forbidden. In other words once a 
student has graduated the teacher has no authority to issue orders to him — he is 
completely independent but may if he wishes he may perform voluntary acts to 
please the teacher. 

om kdrah svarga dvdram tasmdd brahma- adhyesyamana etad ddi 
pratipadyeta 1 1 6 1 1 

6. The syllable 'om' is the door of heaven. Therefore he who is about to 
study the Veda, shall begin [his lesson] by [pronouncing] it. (Compare also 
Taitt. Ar. 1:2:4 and Manu 2:74.) 

vikatham ca-anydm krtva-evam laukikyd vdcd vydvartate brahma 1 1 7 1 1 

7. If he has spoken anything else [than what refers to the lesson, he shall 
resume his reading by repeating the word 'Om']. Thus the Veda is 
separated from profane speech. 

yajnesu ca-etad adayah prasavdh 1 1 8 1 1 

8. And at sacrifices the orders [given to the priests] are headed by this 
word. 

loke ca bhuti karmasv etad adiny eva vakyani syur yatha punya aham 
svasti rddhim iti 1 1 9 

9. And in common life, at the occasion of ceremonies performed for the 
sake of welfare, the sentences shall be headed by this word, as, for instance, 
'[om] an auspicious day,' '[Om] welfare,' [Om] prosperity.' 

The example given in the Sutra is that of the Punyaha-vacana, which precedes 
every Grhya ceremony, and at which the sacrificer requests a number of invited 
Brahmanas to wish him success. The complete sentences are, The sacrificer: — Om 
karmanah puny aham bhavanto bruvantviti, 'Om, wish that the day may be 
auspicious for the performance of the ceremony.' The Brahmanas: — Om punyaham 
karmana iti, Om, may the day be auspicious for the ceremony.' In the same 
manner the Brahmanas afterwards wish 'welfare,' svasti, 'prosperity,' vriddhi 
'advancement' to the sacrificer. 

na-asamayena krcchram kurvita trihsravanam trihsahavacanam iti 
parihapya II 10 II 

10. Without a vow of obedience [a student] shall not study [nor a teacher 
teach] a difficult [new book] with the exception of [the texts called] Tri- 
sravana and Tri-sahavakana. (Manu 2:112) 

avicikitsa yavad brahma nigantavyam iti haritah II 11 II 

1 1 . Harita declares, that the [whole] Veda must be studied under a vow of 
obedience until there is no doubt [regarding it in the mind of the student]. 



65 



The meaning of Harita is, that the vow of obedience is required for the Trih- 
sravana and Trih-sahavdcana, which Apastamba exempted in the preceding Sutra. 
It follows from this rule that the Ahgas or works explanatory of the Veda need not 
be studied under a vow of obedience. 

na bahir vede gatir vidyate II 12 II 

12. No obedience is due [to the teacher for teaching] works which do not 
belong to the Veda. 

samadistam adhydpayantam ydvad adhyayanam upasamgrhnTyat \ \ 13 \ \ 

13. [A student] shall touch the feet of a person, who teaches him at the 
request of his [regular teacher], as long as the instruction lasts. 

This rule is a supplement to 1. 2. 7, 29. 

nityam arhantam ity eke 1 1 14 1 1 

14. Some [declare, that he shall do so] always, [if the substitute is] a worthy 
person. 

'A worthy person,' ie. on account of his learning or character. — Haradatta. 

na gatir vidyate II 15 II 

15. But obedience [as towards the teacher] is not required [to be shown 
towards such a person] . 

vrddhanam tu II 16 II 

16. And [students] older [than their teacher need not do him obedience]. 

According to some, this rule refers only to the time after the instruction has been 
completed; according to others, to the time of studentship.' — Haradatta. But see 
Manu 2:151 seq. 

brahmani mitho viniyoge na gatir vidyate II 7711 

17. If [two persons] each teach each other mutually [different redactions of] 
the Veda, obedience [towards each other] is not ordained. 

brahma vardhata ity upadisanti II 18 II 

18. [For] the [wise] say, 'The Veda-knowledge [of both of them] grows.' 

nivese vrtte samvatsare samvatsare dvau dvau masau samahita dcarya 
kule vased bhuyah srutam icchann iti svetaketuh II 79 II 

19. Svetaketu declares: — 'He who desires to study more, after having 
settled [as a householder], shall dwell two months of every year in the 
house of his teacher. ' 

etena hy aham yogena bhuyah piirvasmat kalat-srutam akurvi-iti 1 1 20 1 1 



66 



20. [And he adds], 'For by this means I studied a larger part of the Veda 
than before, [during my studentship.]' 

tat-sastrair vipratisiddham II 21 II 

21. That is forbidden by the Shastras. 
nivese hi vrtte naiyamikani sruyante II 22 II 

22. For after the student has settled as a householder, he is ordered by the 
Veda, to perform the daily rites. 

The housholder has duties towards his family and society and thus should not be 
staying away from his family for 2 whole months in order to continue his studies. 

Prasna 1. Patala 4. Khanda 14. 

agnihotram atithayah 1 1 7 1 1 

1 . [That is to say] the Agnihotra and hospitality, 

The Agnihotra, i.e. certain daily oblations of clarified butter. Atithayah is the daily 
feeding of strangers and travellers who happen to pass through the village. 

yac ca-anyad evam yuktam 1 1 2 1 1 

2. And whatever else of this kind [is ordained]. 

adhyayana arthena yam codayen na ca-enam pratyacaksTta II 3 II 

3. One whom [a student] asks for instruction, shall certainly not refuse it; 
(Manu 2:109-115.) 

na ca-asmin dosam pasyet 1 1 4 1 1 

4. Provided he does not see in him a fault, [which disqualifies him from 
being taught]. 

Rules for Saluting 

yad rcchayam asamvrttau gatir eva tasmin 1 1 5 1 1 

5. If by chance [through the student's stupidity the teaching] is not 
completed, obedience towards the [teacher is the student's only refuge]. 
(Manu 2:218.) 

matari pitary deary avat-susriisa 1 1 6 1 1 

6. Towards a mother [grandmother and great- grandmother] and a father 
[grandfather and great-grandfather] the same obedience must be shown as 
towards a teacher. (Manu 2:228, 235.) 



67 



samavrttena sarve gurava upasahgrahyah 1 1 7 1 1 

7. The feet of all Gurus must be touched [every day] by a student who has 
graduated. 

The word Gurus, 'venerable persons,' includes besides the teacher and persons 
mentioned in the preceding Sutra, an elder brother, a maternal uncle, and all others 
who are one's betters or elders. See above, 1. 2. 6, 29-35 

prosy a ca samagame 1 1 8 1 1 

8. And also on meeting them, after returning from a journey. 

That is to say, whether he himself or the venerable persons undertook the journey. 
— Haradatta. 

bhratrsu bhaginTsu ca yatha purvam upasahgrahanam 1 1 9 1 1 

9. The feet of [elder] brothers and sisters must be touched, according to the 
order of their seniority. (Manu 2:133.) 

nitya ca piija yatha upadesam II 10 II 

10. And respect [must] always [be shown to one's elders and betters], 
according to the injunction [given above and according to the order of their 
seniority]. 

See above, 1. 4, 13, 2. 

rtvik svasura pitrvya matulan avara vayasah pratyutthaya- abhivadet II 11 

ii 

11. He shall salute an officiating priest, a father-in-law, a father's brother, 
and a mother's brother, [though they may be] younger than he himself, and 
[when saluting] rise to meet them. (Manu 2: 130.) 

The term used for "salutation" is abhivddanam — which is a formal salution in 
which one introduces oneself, mentioning one's clan, Vedic school and the branch 
of Vedic studies that one has completed. 

tusnim va- upasahgrhnTyat 1 1 72 1 1 

12. Or he may silently touch their feet. 

The commentator adds that the mode of salutation must depend on their learning and 
virtue. 

dasa varsam paura sakhyam panca varsam tu caranam I 
tri varsa purvah srotriyah abhivddanam arhati II 13 II 

13. A friendship lasting for ten years with fellow citizens [is a reason for 
giving a salutation, and so is] a friendship, contracted at school, which has 
lasted for five years. But a learned Brahmana [known] for less than three 



68 



years, must be saluted. (Manu 11:134.) 

jhdyamdne vayo visese vrddhatardya- abhivddyam II 14 1 1 

14. If the age [of several persons whom one meets] is exactly known, one 
must salute the eldest [first]. 

visama gatdya-agurave na- abhivddyam 1 1 75 1 1 

15. One need not formally salute a person, who is not a Guru, and who 
stands in a lower or higher place than oneself. 

anvdruhya vd-abhivddayTta II 16 II 

16. Or he may descend or ascend [to the place where such a person stands] 
and salute him. 

This Sutra, like the preceding, refers to those who are not 'Gurus.' 

sarvatra tu pratyutthdya-abhivddanam II 7711 

17. But every one [Gurus and others] he shall salute, after having risen 
[from his seat]. (Manu 2:120.) 

aprayatena na- abhivddyam II 18 II 

18. If he is impure, he shall not greet [anybody]; 

'Impure,' ie. unfit for associating with others on account of the death of relations or 
through other causes, see below, 1.5,15,7 seq. 

tathd-aprayatdya II 79 II 

19. [Nor shall he greet] a person who is impure. 
aprayatas ca na pratyabhivadet 1 1 20 1 1 

20. Nor shall he, being impure, return a salutation. 
pati vayasah striyah II 27 II 

2 1 . Married women [must be saluted] according to the [respective] ages of 
their husbands. 

na sa updnah vestita sird avahita pdnir vd- abhivddayita 1 1 22 1 1 

22. One shall not salute with shoes on, or head covered, or hands full. 
sarva ndmnd striyo rdjanya vaisyau ca na ndmnd II 23 II 

23. In saluting women, a Kshatriya or a Vaisya one shall use a pronoun, not 
his name. 

He shall say, 'I salute you,' not 'I so-and-so salute you.' Manu 2:123. 

mdtaram deary a ddram ca-ity eke II 24 II 



69 



24. Some [declare, that one shall salute in this manner even] one's mother 
and the wife of the teacher. 

Apastamba, of course, holds the contrary opinion. Manu 2:216. 

dasa varsas ca brahmanah sata varsas ca ksatriyah I 

pita putrau sma tau viddhi tayos tu brahmanah pita II 25 II 

25. Know that a Brahmana of ten years and a Kshatriya of a hundred years 
stand to each other in the relation of father and son. But between those two 
the Brahmana is the father. (Manu 2:135.) 

This verse, which is found with slight variations in most Smrtis, contains, 
according to Haradatta, an instruction given by a teacher to his student . 

kusalam avara vayasam vayasyam vd prcchet 1 1 26 1 1 

26. A younger person or one of equal age he shall ask, about his well-being 
[employing the word kusala]. (Manu 2: 127.) 

Of course, in case the person addressed is a Brahmana. Kulluka quotes under this 
verse the above and the following, Sutras. But his quotation has only a faint 
resemblance to our text. 

andmayam ksatriyam II 27 II 

27. [He shall ask under the same conditions] a Kshatriya, about his health 
[employing the word anamaya]. 

anastam vaisyam \ \ 28 \ \ 

28. A Vaisya if he has lost anything [employing the word anasta]. 

That is to say in these terms 'I hope that you have not lost any cattle or property!' — 
Haradatta 

drogyam sudram 1 1 29 1 1 

29. A sudra, about his health [employing the word arogya]. 
na-asambhdsya srotriyam vyativrajet 1 1 JO 1 1 

30. He shall not pass a learned Brahmana without addressing him; 
aranye ca striyam 1 1 31 II 

31. Nor an [unaccompanied] woman in a forest [or any other lonely place]. 

He shall address a woman in order to reassure her, and do it in these terms: — 
'Mother, or sister, what can I do for you? Don't be afraid!' etc. — Haradatta. 



70 



Prasna 1. Patala 5. Khanda 15. 
Acamanam — sipping of water for purification. 

At the commencement of every sacred rite or after certain activities one is 
required to sip water 3 times from the palm of one's right hand while 
reciting certain mantras determined by one's lineage. Srivaishnavas and 
Smarta recite: — om acyutaya namah, om anantaya namah, om govindaya 
namah. This is followed by ahga sparsa — touching various parts of the 
body while reciting the names of Vishnu. 

upasane guriinam vrddhanam atithTnam home japya karmani bhojana 
dcamane svddhydye ca yajhopavitT sydt 1 1 7 1 1 

1 . When he shows his respect to Gurus or aged persons or guests, when he 
offers a burnt-oblation [or other sacrifice], when he does japa at dinner, 
when sipping water and during the [daily] recitation of the Veda, his 
garment [or his sacrificial thread] shall pass over his left shoulder and 
under his right arm. (Taitt. Ar. 2:1:2 seq.; Manu 4, 58.) 

bhumi gatdsv apsv dcamya prayato bhavati 1 1 2 1 1 

2. By sipping [pure] water, that has been collected on the ground, he 
becomes pure. 

Pure water is that which a cow will drink. Yajn. 1. 192; Manu 5:128. 

yam vd prayata dcdmayet 1 1 3 1 1 

3. For he, whom a pure person causes to sip water, [becomes also pure]. 

The ceremony of 'sipping water' may be performed in two ways; either the 'person 
sipping' may take the water out of a river, pond, etc., or he may get the water 
poured into his hand by another person. But, according to Apastamba, he must not 
take a pot or gourd in his left hand and pour the water into his right, as some Smrtis 
allow. The reason for this rule is, that Apastamba considers it essential that both 
hands should be used in conveying the water to the mouth; see also above, 1. 1.4, 
21. This agrees with the custom now followed, which is to bend the right hand into 
the form of a cow's ear, and to touch the right wrist with the left hand while 
drinking. 

na varsa dhdrdsv dcdmet 1 1 4 1 1 

4. He shall not sip rain. 

Some think, that this Sutra is intended to forbid also the drinking of rain-water. 
Other commentators declare that, according to this Sutra, it is allowed to use for 
'sipping' drops of water which fall from a vessel suspended by ropes because the 
Sutra emphatically excludes "rain-drops" only. — Haradatta. 

tathd pradara udake 1 1 5 1 1 



71 



5. [He shall not sip water] from a [natural] cleft in the ground. 
taptabhis ca-akaranat 1 1 6 1 1 

6. He shall not sip water heated [at the fire] except for a particular reason 
[as sickness]. (Manu 2:61.) 

Because the term 'heated by fire' is used, there is no objection to water heated by 
the rays of the sun. In the same manner the use of "hot" water only is usually 
forbidden in the Smrtis. — Haradatta. 

rikta panir vayasa udyamya-apa upasprset 1 1 7 1 1 

7. He who raises his empty hands [in order to scare] birds, [becomes 
impure and] shall wash [his hands]. 

Because the phrase 'with empty hands' is used, he commits no fault if he raises his 
hand, holding a stick or a clod. Some declare, that the term 'touching water' 
[rendered by 'washing'] means "sipping water."- Haradatta. 

sakti visaye na muhurtam apy aprayatah syat 1 1 8 1 1 

8. If he can [find water to sip] he shall not remain impure [even] for a 
muhurta. 

A muhurta is a period of 24 minutes. 

nagno va 1 1 9 1 1 

9. Nor [shall one remain] naked [for a muhurta if it can be helped]. 

na-apsu satah prayamanam vidyate II 10 II 

10. Purification [by sipping water] shall not take place whilst he is 
[standing] in the water. 

uttTrya tv dcdmet II 11 II 

11. Also, when he has crossed a river, he shall purify himself by sipping 
water. 

Haradatta considers that Apastamba holds 'crossing a river' to cause impurity. The 
natural and probably the right interpretation, however, is that rejected by Haradatta, 
'But he shall sip water after having come out [of the river or tank].' 

na- aproksitam indhanam agndv ddadhydt II 12 II 

12. He shall not place fuel on the fire, without having sprinkled it [with 
water]. 

"On the fire used for Vedic or Smarta sacrifices or for household purposes." . . . 
Some declare, that [the fuel need not be sprinkled with water] if used for the 
kitchen fire.' — Haradatta. 

mudha svastare ca- asamsprsann anydn aprayatdn prayato manyeta 1 1 13 



72 



II 

13. [If he is seated in company with] other unclean persons on a seat 
consisting of a confused heap of straw, and does not touch them, he may 
consider himself pure. 

tatha trna kdsthesu nikhdtesu \ \ 14 \ \ 

14. [The same rule applies, if he is seated] on grass or wood fixed in the 
ground. 

Haradatta's commentary is of little use, and I am not quite certain that my 
translation is correct. Manu 5:118. 

proksya vasa upayojayet 1 1 75 1 1 

15. One shall put on a garment, [even if it is clean] only after having 
sprinkled it with water. 

suna upahatah sa celo- 'vagdheta II 16 II 

16. If one has been touched by a dog, one shall bathe, with the clothes on; 

praksdlya vd tarn desam agnind samsprsya punah praksdlya pddau ca- 
dcamya prayato bhavati II 77 II 

17. Or he becomes pure, after having washed that part [of his body] and 
having touched it with fire and again washed it, as well as his feet, and 
having sipped water. 

This second proceeding is adopted in case the dog has touched the hands or the 
lower parts of the body, as may be learnt by the comparison of a verse of Manu. 

agnim na-aprayata dsTdet II 18 II 

18. Unpurified, one shall not approach fire, [so near that the heat can be 
felt]. (Manu 4.142; Yajn. 1.155) 

isu mdtrdd ity eke 1 1 79 1 1 

19. Some declare, [that one shall not approach nearer] than the length of an 
arrow. 

na ca-enam upadhamet \ \ 20 \ \ 

20. Nor shall one blow on fire [to extinguish it]. (Manu 4, 53.) 

Haradatta mentions other explanations of this Sutra. Some say, that the srauta fire 
may be kindled by blowing, because that is ordained particularly in the 
Vajasaneyaka, but that the domestic fire is not to be treated so. Others again 
consider the rule absolute, and say, that a hollow reed or bellows must be used for 
kindling the fire, lest drops of saliva should fall upon it. 

khatvdydm ca na-upadadhydt \ \ 21 II 



73 



21. Nor shall one place fire under one's bedstead. (Manu 4, 54.) 

prabhuta edha udake grdme yatra-dtma adhinam prayamanam tatra vdso 
dhdrmyo brahmanasya 1 1 22 1 1 

22. It is lawful for a Brahmana to dwell in a village, where there is plenty 
of fuel and water, [and] where he may perform the rites of purification by 
himself. 

The last condition mentioned in the Sutra indicates, that the place must have a river 
or tank, not wells only, as the purification by sipping water (acamanam) cannot be 
performed without help, with water from wells. 

mutram krtvd purTsam vd mutra purTsa lepdn anna lepan ucchista lepan 
retasas ca ye lepas tan praksalya padau ca- acamya prayato bhavati 1 1 23 
II 

23. When one has washed away the stains of urine and faeces after voiding 
urine or faeces, the stains of food [after dinner], the stains of the food eaten 
the day before [from his vessels], and the stains of semen, and has also 
washed the feet and afterwards has sipped water, one becomes pure. 
(Manu 5:138.) 

Prasna 1. Patala 5. Khanda 16. 

tisthann acamet prahvo va 1 1 1 1 1 

1. He shall not drink water standing or bent forwards. 

Haradatta takes acam here to mean 'to drink water,' and thinks that it is forbidden 
to do this standing or in a bent position. Others refer the prohibition to 'sipping 
water for the sake of purification,' and translate, He shall not sip water standing or 
in a bent position [except in case of necessity],' ie. if the bank of the river is so 
high that he cannot reach the water sitting down and in this case he shall enter it up 
to his thighs or up to his navel. 

asTnas trir acamed-dhrdayangamabhir adbhih 1 1 2 1 1 

2. Sitting he shall sip water [for purification] thrice, the water penetrating 
to his heart. (Manu 2:60 and 62; 5: 139; and Yajn. 1. 20 and 27) 

Haradatta observes, that the further particulars regarding purification by sipping 
water must be supplied from other Smrtis. The rule quoted by him is as follows: — 
'The performer should be sitting in a pure place, not on a seat, except when sipping 
water after dinner, and should sip thrice from his hand, water which is free from 
bubbles and foam, and which he has attentively regarded, in such a quantity as 
would cover a Masa bean. The water sipped by a Brahman should reach his heart, 
that sipped by a Kshatriya the throat, and that sipped by a Vaisya the palate. A 
sudra sips once as much as to wet his tongue.' 



74 



trir osthau parimrjet 1 1 J 1 1 

3. He shall wipe his lips three times. 
dvir ity eke 1 1 4 1 1 

4. Some [declare, that he shall do so] twice. 
sakrd upasprset 1 1 5 1 1 

5. He shall then touch [his lips] once [with the three middle fingers]. 
dvir ity eke 1 1 6 1 1 

6. Some [declare, that he shall do so] twice. 

daksinena pdnind savyam proksya pddau siras ca-indriyany upasprsec 
caksusT ndsike srotre ca 1 1 7 1 1 

7. Having sprinkled water on his left hand with his right, he shall touch 
both his feet, and his head and [the following three] organs, the eyes, the 
nose, and the ears. 

The eyes are to be touched with the thumb and the fourth finger, either at once, or 
one after the other, the nostrils with the thumb and the second finger, the ears with 
the thumb and the small finger. 

atha-apa upasprset 1 1 8 1 1 

8. Then he shall wash [his hands]. 

Rules for Eating 

bhoksyamdnas tu prayato- 'pi dvir dcdmed dvih parimrjet sakrd 
upasprset 1 1 9 1 1 

9. But if one is going to eat, one shall, though pure, twice sip water, twice 
wipe [the mouth], and once touch [the lips]. (Manu 5:138.) 

sydva anta paryantav osthdv upasprsya- acdmet II 10 II 

10. One shall rub the gums and the inner part of the lips [with the finger or 
with a twig] and then sip water. 

na smasrubhir ucchisto bhavaty antar dsye sadbhir yavan na hastena- 
upasprsati II 11 II 

1 1 . He does not become impure by the hair [of his moustach] getting into 
his mouth, as long as he does not touch them with his hand. (Manu 5: 141.) 

Haradatta observes that this Sutra shows, that every other foreign substance 
brought with the food into the mouth, makes the food 'leavings' and the eater 
impure. 



75 



ya asyad bindavah patanta upalabhyante tesv acamanam vihitamW 12 II 

12. If [in talking], drops [of saliva] are perceived to fall from his month, 
then he shall sip water. 

Manu 5:141 declares sipping to be unnecessary in this case. 

ye bhiLm.au na tesv dcdmed ity eke \ \ 13 \ \ 

13. Some declare, that if [the saliva falls] on the ground, he need not sip 
water. 

svapne ksavathausrhkhdnikd asrv dlambhe lohitasya kesdndm agner gavdm 
brdhmanasya striyds ca-dlambhe mahapatham ca gatvd-amedhyam ca- 
upasprsya- aprayatam ca manusyam nivim ca paridhdya-apa upasprset 1 1 
14 II 

14. On touching during sleep or while sneezing the effluvia of the nose or 
of the eyes, on touching blood, hair, fire, cattle, a Brahmana, or a woman, 
and after having walked on the high road, and after having touched an 
impure [thing or person], and after having put on his lower garment, he 
shall either bathe or sip or merely touch water [until he considers himself 
clean]. (Manu 5:145.) 

drdram vd sakrd osadhir bhumim vd 1 1 75 1 1 

15. [Or he may touch] moist cow-dung, wet herbs, or moist earth. 
himsd arthena-asind mdmsam chinnam abhojyam II 16 II 

16. He shall not eat meat which has been cut with a sword [or knife] used 
for killing. 

The knife used for killing the animal should not be used also in it's preparation. 

dadbhir apupasya na- apacchindydt II 7711 

17. One shall not bite off — with the teeth [pieces from] cakes [roots or 
fruits]. 

The polite way of eating would be to break or cut off bite size pieces. 

yasya kule mriyeta na tatra-anirdase bhoktavyam II 18 II 

18. One shall not eat in the house of a [relation within six degrees] where a 
person has died, before the ten days [of impurity] have elapsed. (Manu 
4.217) 

The term "ten days" is used in order to indicate the time of impurity generally. In 
some cases, as that of a Kshatriya, this lasts longer. In other cases, where the 
impurity lasts thirty-six hours only, [the abstention from dining in such houses is 
shorter.)' — Haradatta. 



76 



tatha-anutthitayam sutikayam 1 1 79 1 1 

19. [Nor shall one eat in a house where a woman having given birth has not 
[yet] come out [of the lying-in chamber], (Manu 4.217) 

A woman after giving birth is impure, and must not be touched during the first ten 
days after her confinement. During this time, she exclusively occupies the Sutika- 
grha or lying-in chamber. 

antah save ca 1 1 20 1 1 

20. [Nor in a house] where a corpse lies. 

Haradatta remarks that in the case of the death of a person who is not a relation, it 
is customary to place at the distance of 'one hundred bows' a lamp and water- 
vessel, and to eat [beyond that distance]. 

aprayato- 'pahatam annam aprayatam na tv abhojyam II 21 II 

21. Food touched by a [Brahmana or other high-caste person] who is 
impure, becomes impure, but not unfit for eating. 

Food which is simply impure, may be purified by putting it on the fire, sprinkling it 
with water, touching it with ashes or earth, and praising it. ' — Haradatta. 

aprayatena tu sudrena-upahrtam abhojyam 1 1 22 1 1 

22. But what has been brought [be it touched or not] by an impure svidra, 
must not be eaten. 

Others say, that the food becomes unfit for eating, only, if in bringing it, the sudra 
has touched it. — Haradatta. 

yasmims ca-anne kesah syat 1 1 2 J 1 1 

23. Nor that food in which there is a hair, (Manu 4, 207; Yajn. 1;167.) 

'But this rule holds good only if the hair had been cooked with the food. If a hair 
falls into it at dinner, then it is to be purified by an addition of clarified butter, and 
may be eaten. ' — Haradatta. 

any ad va-amedhyam II 24 II 

24. Or any other unclean substance. 

Haradatta quotes a passage from Baudhayana, which enumerates as 'unclean 
things' here intended, 'hair, worms or beetles, nail-parings, excrements of rats.' 
The rule must be understood as the preceding, ie. in case these things have been 
cooked with the food. 

amedhyair avamrstam 1 1 25 1 1 

25. [Nor must that food be eaten] which has been touched with an unclean 
substance [a substance which can not be offered in a yajna]. 

kito va-amedhya sevl \ \ 26 \ \ 



77 



26. Nor [that in which] an insect living on impure substances [is found], 
(Manu 4, 207; Yajn. 1.167, 168.) 

This Sutra must be read with Sutra 23 above. 

miisakaldngam vd II 27 II 

27. Nor [that in which] excrements or limbs of a mouse [are found], 
padd vd- upahatam \ \ 28 \ \ 

28. Nor that which has been touched by the foot [even of a pure person], 
sicd vd 1 1 29 1 1 

29. Nor what has been [touched] with the hem of a garment, 
sund vd-apapdtrena vd drstam 1 1 JO 1 1 

30. Nor that which has been looked at by a dog or an Apapatra, (Manu 4, 
208; Yajn. 1. 167.) 

Apapatras are persons whom one must not allow to eat from one's dishes, eg. 
Candalas, Patitas, a menstruating woman or during the ten days of impurity after 
confinement. See also above, 1:1:3:25 

sicd vd- upahrtam 1 1 31 II 

3 1 . Nor what has been brought in the hem of a garment, [even though the 
garment may be clean], 

ddsyd vd naktam dhrtam 1 1 32 1 1 

32. Nor what has been brought at night by a female servant. 

Haradatta thinks, that as the Sutra has the feminine gender, dasl, it does not 
matter if a male servant brings the food. But others forbid also this. 

bhunjdnam vd 1 1 33 1 1 

33. While eating 

Prasna 1. Patala 5. Khanda 17. 

yatra sudra upasprset 1 1 7 1 1 

1 . If during his meal, a sudra touches him, [then he shall leave off eating] . 

Some say, that this Sutra indicates that the touch of a sudra does not defile at any 
other time but at dinner, whilst others hold that a sudra' s touch defiles always, and 
that the Sutra is intended to indicate an excess of impurity, if it happens at 
dinnertime. ' — Haradatta. 

anarhadbhir vd samdna panktau 1 1 2 1 1 



78 



2. Nor shall he eat sitting in the same row with unworthy people. 

'Unworthy people are those who are neither of good family, nor possess learning 
and virtue. ' — Haradatta. 

bhunjdnesu va yatra- aniitthaya-ucchistam prayacched dcdmed vd II 3 II 

3. Nor shall he eat [sitting in the same row with persons] amongst whom 
one, whilst they eat, rises and gives his leavings to his students or sips 
water; (Manu 4.212.) 

According to Haradatta a person who misbehaves thus, is called 'a dinner-thorn.' 
This point of etiquette is strictly observed in our days also. 

kutsayitvd vd yatra-annam dadyuh 1 1 4 1 1 

4. Nor [shall he eat] where they give him food, reviling him. (Manu 4.212; 
Yajn. L.167) 

manusyair avaghrdtam any air vd-amedhyaih 1 1 5 1 1 

5. Nor [shall he eat] what has been smelt at by others or other impure 
[beings, as cats]. 

As the text has avaghrata, "smelt at," it does not matter if they smell the food from 
a distance — Haradatta. 

na ndvi bhunjita 1 1 6 1 1 

6. He shall not eat in a ship. 
tathd prdsdde 1 1 7 1 1 

7. Nor on a wooden platform. 
krta bhumau tu bhunjita 1 1 8 1 1 

8. One may eat sitting on ground which has been purified [by the 
application of cow-dung and the like]. 

andprite mrn maye bhoktavyam 1 1 9 1 1 

9. [If he eats] out of an earthen vessel, he shall eat out of one that has not 
been used [for cooking]. 

dpritam ced abhidagdhe II 10 II 

10. [If he can get] a used vessel [only, he shall eat from it], after having 
heated it thoroughly. 

parimrstam lauham pray atom II 11 II 

1 1. A vessel made of metal becomes pure by being scoured with ashes and 
the like. (Manu 5:114.) 



79 



It must be understood from other Smrtis, that brass is to be cleaned with ashes, 
copper with acids, silver with cow-dung, and gold with water.' — Haradatta. 

nirlikhitam daru mayam II 72 II 

12. A wooden vessel becomes pure by being scraped. (Manu 5:115.) 
yathd agamam yajne 1 1 7 J 1 1 

13. At a sacrifice [the vessels must be cleaned] according to the precepts of 
the Veda. 

na- apaniyam annam asniydt 1 1 14 1 1 

14. He shall not eat food which has been bought or obtained ready prepared 
in the market. 

tathd rasdndm amamsa madhu lavanani-iti parihdpya II 75 II 

15. Nor [shall he eat] flavoured food [bought in the market] excepting raw 
meat, honey, and salt. 

taila sarpisitu- upayojayed udake- 'avadhdya II 16 II 

16. Oil and clarified butter [bought in the market] he may use, after having 
sprinkled them with water. 

Having sprinkled them with water and purified them by boiling; or, according to 
others, mixing them with so much water as will not spoil them — Haradatta. 

krta annam paryusitam akhadya apeya anadyam II 7711 

17. Prepared food which has stood for a night, must neither be eaten nor 
drunk, (Manu 4:211; Yajn. 1.167) 

The Sanskrit has two terms for 'eating;' the first 'khad' applies to hard 
substances, the second 'ad' to soft substances' 

This rule is obviously applicable in a hot climate when fridges are unavailable. 

suktam ca II 18 II 

18. Nor [should prepared food] that has turned sour [be used in any way]. 
(Manu 4, 211; 5:9; Yajn. 1. 167.) 

phanita prthuka tandula karambharuja saktu saka mamsa pista ksTra 
vikara osadhi vanaspati mula phala varjam 1 1 79 1 1 

19. [The preceding two rules do] not [hold good in regard to] the juice of 
sugar-cane, roasted rice grains, porridge prepared with whey, roasted 
barley, gruel, vegetables, meat, flour, milk and preparations from it, roots 
and fruits of herbs and trees. (Manu 5: 10, 24 and 25.) 

suktam ca-apara yogam 1 1 20 1 1 



80 



20. [Substances which have turned] sour without being mixed with 
anything else [are to be avoided]. 

According to Haradatta, Apastamba returns once more to the question about sour 
food, in order to teach that dishes prepared with curds and other sour substances 
may be eaten. 

sarvam madyam apeyam II 21 II 

21. All intoxicating drinks are forbidden. 
tatha-elakam pay ah 1 1 22 1 1 

22. Likewise sheep's milk, (Manu 5:8; Yajn. 1. 170.) 

ustnksTra mrgiksira sandhini ksTra yamasu ksTrani-iti II 23 II 

23. Likewise the milk of camels, of does, of animals that give milk while 
big with young, of those that bear twins, and of [one-hoofed animals], 
(Manu 5:8, 9; Yajn 1:170.) 

'Sandhini', translated by "females that give milk while big with young," means, 
according to others, "female animals that give milk once a day.'" — Haradatta. 

dhenos ca-anirdasayah 1 1 24 1 1 

24. Likewise the milk of a cow [buffalo-cow or she-goat] during the [first] 
ten days [after their giving birth to young ones], (Manu 5:8.) 

tatha kilala osadhinam ca 1 1 25 1 1 

25. Likewise [food mixed] with herbs which serve for preparing 
intoxicating liquors, 

karahja palandu pararikah 1 1 26 1 1 

26. [Likewise] red garlic, onions, and leeks, (Manu 5:5; Yajn 1.176) 
yac ca-anyat paricaksate II 27 II 

27. Likewise anything else which [those who are learned in the law] forbid. 

Haradatta observes that Apastamba, finding the list of forbidden vegetables too 
long, refers his students to the advice of the (worthy people) Sistas. The force of 
this Sutra is exactly the same as that of 1. 3, 11, 38. 

tyaktva bhojyam iti hi brahmanam 1 1 28 1 1 

28. Mushrooms ought not to be eaten; that has been declared in a 
Brahmana Text; (Yajn. 1:171) 

ekakhura ustra gavaya gramasiikara sarabha gavam 1 1 29 1 1 

29. [Nor the meat] of one-hoofed animals, of camels, of the Gayal [wild 
cow], of village pigs, of Sarabhas, and of cattle. 



81 



One-hoofed animals are horses, donkeys and mules. The camel, Gayal, and 
Sarabha are mentioned as 'forbidden animals,' Satapatha Br. 1. 2. 1, 8; Aitareya 
Br. 2:1:8; see also Manu 5:11:18 Yajn 1:172. 176 

dhenu anaduhor bhaksyam 1 1 30 1 1 

30. [But the meat] of milch-cows and oxen may be eaten. 
medhyam anaduham iti vdjasaneyakam \ \ 31 \ \ 

31. The Vajasaneyaka declares 'bull's flesh is fit for offerings.' 
kukkuto vikiranam \ \ 32 \ \ 

32. Amongst birds that scratch with their feet for food, the [tame] cock 
[must not be eaten]. (Yajn. 1.176.) 

plavah pratuddm \ \ 33 \ \ 

33. Amongst birds that feed thrusting forward their beak, the [heron, 
called] Plava [or Sakatabila, must not be eaten]. (Manu 5:12; Yajn. 1:172.) 

kravya adah 1 1 34 1 1 

34. Carnivorous [birds are forbidden], (Manu 5:12 Yajn. 1:172) 
hamsa bhdsa cakravdka suparnas ca 1 1 35 1 1 

35. Likewise the swan, the Bhasa, the Brahman! duck, and the falcon. 
[Yajn. 1:172.) 

krunca kraunca vardhranasa laksmana varjam 1 1 36 1 1 

36. Common cranes and Saras-cranes [are not to be eaten] with the 
exception of the leather-nosed Laksmana. (Manu 5:12; Yajn. 1:72.) 

Other commentators take the whole Sutra as one compound, and explain it as an 
exception to Sutra 34. In that case the translation runs thus: — ['Carnivorous birds 
are forbidden] except the Krunca, Kraunca, Vardhranasa, and Laksmana. — 
Haradatta. This translation is objectionable, because both the Kruncas, now called 
Kulam or kunc, and the Kraunca, the red-crested crane, now called Saras [Cyrus], 
feed on grain. Kruncakrauncau is a Vedic dual. 

panca nakhanam godhd kacchapa svdvit salyaka khanga sasa putikhasa 
varjam 1 1371 1 

37. Five-toed animals [ought not to be eaten] with the exception of the 
iguana, the tortoise, the porcupine, the hedgehog, the rhinoceros, the hare, 
and the Putikhasa. 

Manu 5:18; Yajn. 1. 17 7. Putikhasa is, according to Haradatta, an animal 
resembling a hare, and found in the Himalayas. 

abhaksyas ceto matsyanam 1 1 38 1 1 



82 



38. Amongst fishes, the ceta ought not to be eaten, 

sarpa sir si mrdurah kravya ado ye ca-anye vikrtd yathd manusya sirasah 
II 39 II 

39. Nor the snake-headed fish, nor the alligator, nor those which live on 
flesh only, nor those which are misshaped [like] mermen. 

Haradatta closes this chapter on flesh-eating by quoting Manu 5:56, which declares 
flesh-eating, drinking spirituous liquor, and promiscuous intercourse to be 
allowable, but the abstinence there from are of greater merit. He states that the 
whole chapter must be understood in this sense. 

Prasna 1. Patala 6. Khanda 18. 

madhv amain mar gam mams am bhumir mida phaldni raksd gavyutir 
nivesanam yugya ghdsas ca-ugratah pratigrhydni 1 1 7 1 1 

1. Honey, uncooked [grain], venison, land, roots, fruits, [a promise of] 
safety, a pasture for cattle, a house, and fodder for a draught-ox may be 
accepted [even] from an Ugra. (Manu 4, 247) 

Ugra denotes either a bad twice-born man or the offspring of a Vaisya and of a 
sudra-woman. Other persons of a similar character must be understood to be 
included by the term.' — Haradatta. 

etdny api na-anantevdsy dhrtdni-iti hdritah II 2 II 

2. Harita declares, that even these [presents] are to be accepted only if they 
have been obtained by a student. 

am am vd grhnTran II 3 II 

3. Or they [Brahmana householders] may accept [from an Ugra] uncooked 
or [a little] unflavoured boiled food. 

krta annasya vd vi rasasya 1 1 4 1 1 

4. [Of such food] they shall not take a great quantity [but only so much as 
suffices to support life]. 

Also this rule seems to belong to Harita, on account of its close connection with the 
preceding two. 

na su bhiksdh syuh II 5 II 

5. If [in times of distress] he is unable to keep himself, he may eat [food 
obtained from anybody], 

svayam apy avrttau suvarnam dattvd pasum vd bhunjita 1 1 6 1 1 



83 



6. After having touched it [once] with gold, 
na-atyantam anvavasyet 1 1 7 1 1 

7. Or [having touched it with] fire. 
vrttim prapya viramet 1 1 8 1 1 

8. He shall not be too eager after [such a way of living]. He shall leave it 
when he has obtained a [lawful] livelihood. 

Haradatta quotes, in support of the last Sutras, a passage of the Candogya 
Upanishad, 1.10. 1, and one from the Rig Veda, 8.13, according to which it would 
be lawful to eat even impure food, as a dog's entrails, under such circumstances. 
Other commentators explain this and the preceding three Sutras differently. 
According to them the translation would run thus: — 'If he himself does not find 
any livelihood [in times of distress, he may dwell even with low-caste people who 
give him something to eat, and] he may eat [food given by them] paying for it with 
[some small gift in] gold or with animals.' This second explanation is perhaps 
preferable. 

trayanam varnanam ksatriya prabhrtTnam samavrttena na bhoktavyam 1 1 
9 II 

9. [A student of the Brahmin caste] who has returned home shall not eat [in 
the house] of people belonging to the three tribes, beginning with the 
Kshatriya [i.e. of Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, and sudras]. (Manu 4:218, 219, and 
223) 

prakrtya brahmanasya bhoktavyam karanad abhojyam II 10 II 

10. He may [usually] eat [the food] of a Brahmana on account of [the 
giver's] character [as a Brahmana]. It must be avoided for particular 
reasons only. 

yatra-aprayascittam karma- asevate prayascittavati II 11 II 

1 1 . He shall not eat in a house where [the host] performs a rite which is not 
a rite of penance, whilst he ought to perform a penance. 

If a Brahmana who has been ordered to perform a penance, performs a Vaisvadeva 
or other rite without heeding the order of his spiritual teacher, then a student who 
has returned home ought not to eat in his house, until the enjoined penance has 
been performed.' — Haradatta. 

carita nirvesasya bhoktavyam II 12 II 

12. But when the penance has been performed, he may eat [in that house]. 

The use of the part. perf. pass, "performed" indicates that he must not eat there, 
whilst the penance is being performed.' — Haradatta. 

sarva varnanam svadharme vartamananam bhoktavyam sudra varjam ity 



84 



eke II 13 II 

13. According to some [food offered by people] of any caste, who follow 
the laws prescribed for them, except that of sudras, may be eaten. 

tasya-api dharma upanatasya 1 1 14 1 1 

14. [In times of distress] even the food of a sudra, who lives under one's 
protection for the sake of Dharma, [may be eaten]. (Yajn. 1.166.) 

suvarnam datva pasum vd bhunjlta na-atyantam anvavasyed vrttim 
prdpya viramet II 75 

15. He may eat it, after having touched it [once! with gold or with fire. He 
shall not be too eager after [such a way of living]. He shall leave it when he 
obtains a [lawful] livelihood. (Manu 4, 223) 

sangha annam abhojyam II 7611 

16. food from a multitude of givers must not be eaten, (Manu 4:209) 

If many people have contributed food (pot-luck) one should avoid eating because 
one cannot be sure how the food was prepared. 

parikrustam ca II 7711 

17. Nor food offered by a general invitation [to all comers]. (Manu 4;209; 
Yajn. I;168.) 

sarvesdm ca silpa djivdndm II 18 II 

18. food offered by an artisan must not be eaten, (Manu 4;210, 215; Yajn. 
1. 162-164.) 

ye ca sastram djivanti II 19 II 

19. Nor [that of men] who live by the use of arms [with the exception of 
Kshatriyas], (Yajn. 1. 164.) 

ye ca-ddhim 1 1 20 1 1 

20. Nor [that of those] who live by letting lodgings or land. 
bhisak \ \ 21 II 

2 1 . A [professional] physician [is a person whose food must not be eaten] . 
(Manu 4, 212; Yajn. 1. 162.) 

vdrdhusikah \ \ 22 II 

22. [Also] ausurer, (Manu 4.210; Yajn. 1.161.) 
diksito- 'akrita rdjakah \ \ 23 \ \ 



85 



23. [Also] a Brahmana who has performed the Diksaniyesti [or initiatory 
ceremony of the Soma sacrifice] before he has bought the king [Soma]. 

'That is to say, one who has begun, but not finished a Soma-sacrifice.' — 
Haradatta. Manu 4, 210, and Gopatha Brahmana 3, 19. 

agmsomiya samsthayam eva \ \ 24 \ \ 

24. [The food given by a person who has performed the Diksaniyesti may 
be eaten], when the victim sacred to Agni and Soma has been slain. 

hutayam va vapayam diksitasya bhoktavyam 1 1 25 1 1 

25. Or after that the omentum of the victim [sacred to Agni and Soma] has 
been offered. (Aitareya Brahmana 2:1:9) 

yajha arthe va nirdiste sesad bhunjlrann iti hi brahmanam \ \ 26 \ \ 

26. For a Brahmana declares, 'Or they may eat of the remainder of the 
animal, after having set apart a portion for the offering.' 

klibah II 27 II 

27. A non-reproductive male [is a person whose food must not be eaten], 
(Manu 4, 211; Yajn 1:161.) 

rdjndm praisa karah 1 1 28 1 1 

28. [Likewise] the [professional] messenger employed by a king [or 
others], 

The village or town messengers are always men of the lowest castes, such as the 
Mahars of Maharasthra. 

ahavirydji 1 1 29 1 1 

29. [Likewise a Brahmana] who offers substances that are not fit for a 
sacrifice, 

For example, he who offers human blood in a magic rite.' — Haradatta. 

can 1 1 30 II 

30. [Likewise] a spy, 

Haradatta explains carl, translated by 'spy,' to mean 'a secret adherent of the sakta 
sect' [gudhacari saktah]. The existence of this sect in early times has not hitherto 
been proved. 

avidhind ca pravrajitah 1 1 31 II 

31. [Also] a person who has become an ascetic without [being authorised 
thereto by] the rules [of the law], 

Haradatta gives the sakyas or Bauddhas as an instance. But it is doubtful, whether 



86 



Apastamba meant to refer to them, though it seems probable that heretics are 
intended. 

yas ca-agnm apdsyati 1 1 32 1 1 

32. [Also] he who forsakes the sacred fires [without performing the 
sacrifice necessary on that occasion]. (Yajn. 1:160) 

yas ca sarvan varjayate sarvannT ca srotriyo nirakrtir vrsali patih \ \ 33 \ \ 

33. Likewise a learned Brahmana who avoids everybody, or eats the food 
of anybody, or neglects the [daily] recitation of the Veda, [and] he whose 
[only living] wife is of the sudra caste. 

Who avoids everybody, ie. who neither invites nor dines with anybody Haradatta. 

Prasna 1. Patala 6. Khanda 19. 

matta unmatto baddho- 'anikah pratyupavisto yas ca pratyupavesayate 
tdvantam kdlam 1 1 7 1 1 

1 . A drunkard, a madman, a prisoner, he who learns the Veda from his son, 
a creditor who sits with his debtor [hindering the fulfilment of his duties], a 
debtor who thus sits [with his creditor, are persons whose food must not be 
eaten] as long as they are thus engaged or in that state. (Manu 4:207; Yajn 
1:161, 162) 

Another commentator explains anika, translated above 'he who learns the Veda 
from his son,' by 'a money-lender,' and combines pratyupavistah with this word, 
ie. a money-lender who sits with his debtor hindering him from fulfilling his 
duties.' This manner of forcing a debtor to pay, which is also called acarita [see 
Manu 8:49], is, though illegal, resorted to sometimes even now. 

ka asya annah 1 1 2 1 1 

2. Who [then] are those whose food may be eaten ? 

The object of this Sutra is to introduce the great variety of opinions quoted below.' 
— Haradatta. 

ya Tpsed iti kanvah 1 1 3 1 1 

3. Kanva declares, that it is he who wishes to give. 
punya iti kautsah 1 1 4 1 1 

4. Kautsa declares, that it is he who is virtuous. 

'virtuous' means not only 'following his lawful occupations,' but particularly 
'practising austerities, reciting prayers, and offering burnt-oblations.' — Haradatta. 

yah kas cid dadyad iti varsyayanih 1 1 5 1 1 



87 



5. Varsyayani declares, that it is every giver [of food]. 

yadi ha rajah sthavaram puruse bhoktavyam atha cet-calam danena 
nirdoso bhavati 1 1 6 

6. For if [it is said that] guilt remains with the sinner [who committed a 
crime, then food given by him] may be eaten [because the blame cannot 
leave the sinner]. But if [it be said that] blame can leave [the sinner at any 
time, then food given by the sinner still may be eaten because] he becomes 
pure by the gift [which he makes] . 

suddha bhiksa bhoktavya-eka kunikau kanva kutsau tatha puskarasadih 1 1 
711 

7. Offered food (alms) which is pure may be eaten, according to Eka, 
Kunika, Kanva, Kutsa, and Puskarasadi. 

sarvatopetam varsyayaniyam 1 1 8 1 1 

8. Varsyayani's opinion is, that [food] given unasked [may be accepted] 
from anybody. 

punyasya- Tpsato bhoktavyam 1 1 9 1 1 

9. [Food offered] willingly by a holy man may be eaten. 
punyasya-apy anipsato na bhoktavyam II 10 II 

10. Food given unwillingly by a holy man ought not to be eaten. 

Another commentator explains this Sutra thus: — 'He need not eat the food offered 
by a righteous man, if he himself does not wish to do so.' — Haradatta. 

yatah kutas ca- abhyudyatam bhoktavyam II 11 II 

1 1 . Food offered unasked by any person whatsoever may be eaten, 

In other words — if food is offered spontaneously by a person, whatever it may be 
one, may eat it. 

na-ananiyoga purvam iti haritah 117211 

12. But not if it be given after an express previous announcement; thus says 
Harita 

atha pur one slokav uddharanti II 13 II 

udyatam ahrtam bhiksam purastad apraveditam I 

bhojyam mene prajapatir api duskrta karinah 1 1 
na tasya pitaro- 'asnanti dasa varsani pahca ca I 
na ca havyam vahaty agnir yas tarn abhy adhimanyata iti 1 1 



88 



13. Now they quote also in a Purana the following two verses: — 

The Lord of creatures has declared, that food offered unasked and brought 
by the giver himself, may be eaten, though [the giver be] a sinner, provided 
the gift has not been announced beforehand. The Manes of the ancestors of 
that man who spurns such food, do not eat [his oblations] for fifteen years, 
nor does the fire carry his offerings [to the gods].' (Manu 4:248 and 249) 

cikitsakasya mrgayoh salya krntasya pasinah I 

kulatayah sandhakasya ca tesam annam anadyam 1 1 14 1 1 (sandakasya ) 

14. [Another verse from a Purana declares]: — 

'The food given by a physician, a hunter, a surgeon, a fowler, an unfaithful 
wife, or a non-reproductive person (sanda) must not be eaten.' (Manu 
4:211, 212.) 

atha-apy uddharanti II 75 11 

anndde bhrunahd mdrsti anend abhisamsati I 

stenah pramukto rdjani ydcann anrta samkara iti I 

15. Now [in confirmation of this] they quote [the following verse]: — 

'The murderer of a Brahmana learned in the Veda heaps his guilt on his 
guest, an innocent man on his calumniator, a thief set at liberty on the king, 
and the petitioner on him who makes false promises.' 

Regarding the liberation of the thief see Apastamba 1;9, 25, 4. A similar verse 
occurs Manu 8:317, which has caused the confusion observable in many MSS. 

Prasna 1. Patala 7. Khanda 20. 

na-imam laukikam artham puraskrtya dharmdms caret II 7 II 

1 . One shall not fulfil the sacred duties merely in order to acquire material 
gains [such as fame, gain, and honour]. 

nisphald hy abhyudaye bhavanti 1 1 2 1 1 

2. For when they ought to be rewarding, [duties thus fulfilled] become 
fruitless. 

tad yathd-amre phala arthe nirmite chdyd gandha ity anutpadyete I 
evam dharmam caryamanam artha anutpadyante 1 1 J 1 1 ( nimitte ) 

3. [Material benefits] are produced as accessories [to the fulfilment of the 
law], just as in the case of a mango tree, which is planted in order to obtain 



89 



fruit, shade and fragrance [are the accessory advantages]. 
na-u ced aniitpadyante na dharma hdnir bhavati 1 1 4 1 1 

4. But even if there are no such [material gains, then at least] the sacred 
duties have been fulfilled. 

anasuyur duspralambhah sydt kuhaka satha ndstika bdlavadesu 1 1 5 1 1 

5. One should not become irritated at, nor be deceived by the speeches of 
hypocrites, of rogues, of atheists and of fools. 

na dharma adharmau carata avam sva iti I na deva gandharva na pitara 
ity dcaksate- 'ay am dharmo- 'ayam adharma iti 1 1 6 1 1 

6. for Virtue and Sin do not go about and say, 'Here we are'; nor do gods, 
Gandharvas, or Ancestors say [to people], 'This is Dharma, that is 
Adharma.' 

yattv aryah kriyamdnam prasamsanti sa dharmo yad garhante so- 
'adharmah 1 1 7 1 1 

7. But that is Dharma, the practice of which wise men of the three twice- 
born castes praise; what they blame, is Adharma. 

The Sutra is intended to show how the law should be ascertained in difficult cases. 
Haradatta quotes here the passage of Yajn. 1. 9, on Parisads, and states that the 
plural aryah shows that three or four must be employed to arrive at a decision. See 
also Manu 12:108 seq. 

sarvajanapadesv ekanta samahitam aryandm vrttam samyag vinTtanam 
vrddhanam atmavatam alolupanam adambhikanam vrtta sddrsyam 
bhajeta 1 1 8 1 1 

8. One shall regulate the course of action according to the conduct, which 
in all countries is unanimously approved by those of the three twice-born 
castes, who have been well-educated, who are mature, self-controlled, free 
from greed and hypocrisy. (Manu 1:6.) 

evam ubhau lokdv abhijayati 1 1 9 1 1 

9. Acting thus one will gain both worlds. 
avihita brahmanasya vanijya II 10 II 

10. Trade is not lawful for a Brahmana. 

dpadi vyavahareta panydnam apanydni vyudasyan II 11 II 

1 1 . In times of distress he may trade in lawful merchandise, avoiding the 
following [kinds], that are forbidden:— (Manu 4:6, 10:82, Yajn. 3:35) 



90 



This Sutra, which specifies only one part of a Vaisya's occupations as permissible 
for Brahmanas in distress, implies, according to Haradatta, that his other 
occupations also, as well as those of a Kshatriya, are permissible. 

manusyan rasan ragan gandhan annam carma gavam vasam slesma udake 
tokmakinve pippali mar ice dhanyam mam sum dyudham sukrta dsdm ca 1 1 
12 II 

12. [Particularly] slavery, condiments and liquids, dyes, perfumes, food, 
skins, heifers, substances used for gluing [such as lac], water, young 
cornstalks, substances from which alcohol may be extracted, red and black 
pepper, corn, meat products, weapons, and the hope of rewards for 
meritorious deeds. (Manu 10:86-89; Yajn. 3:36-39) 

'the hope of rewards for meritorious deeds' — this refers to the trading in 
'indulgences' — i.e. receiving money for chanting mantras, taking ceremonial 
baths and doing pious deeds for others — in these cases the merit is said to be 
transferred to the sponsor. 

tila tandulams tv eva dhdnyasya visesena na vikriniydt II 13 II 

13. Among [the various kinds of] grain one shall especially not sell sesame 
or rice [except he have grown them himself] . 

The exception stated above, is given by Haradatta on the authority of Manu 10;90; Yajn. 
3:39. 

avihitas ca-etesdm mitho vinimayah 1 1 14 1 1 

14. The exchange of the one of these [above mentioned goods] for the other 
is likewise unlawful. 

annena ca-annasya manusyanam ca manusyai rasanam ca rasair 
gandhanam ca gandhair vidyaya ca vidyanam II 75 II 

15. But food [may be exchanged] for food, and slaves for slaves, and 
condiments for condiments, and perfumes for perfumes, and learning for 
learning. 

A brahmana may thus earn a commission obtained through fascilitating an 
exchange of the stock mentioned. 

From the permission to exchange learning for learning, it may be known that it is 
not lawful to sell it — i.e. teach for a wage.' — Haradatta. (Manu 10:94) 

akrita panyair vyavahareta II 16 II 

16. Let him trade with lawful merchandise which he has not bought. 



91 



Prasna 1. Patala 7. Khanda 21. 

munja balbajair mula phalaih 1 1 7 1 1 

1. With Munja-grass, Balbaja-grass [and articles made of them], roots, and 
fruits, 

trna kasthair a vikrtaih 1 1 2 1 1 

2. And with [other kinds of] grass and wood which have not been worked 
up [into objects of use]. 

Since it is known that Munja and Balbaja are kinds of grass, it may be inferred 
from their being especially mentioned [in Sutra I] that objects made of them [may 
be also sold] ' — Haradatta. 

na-atyantam anvavasyet 1 1 3 1 1 

3. One shall not be too eager [after such a livelihood]. 
vrttim prapya viramet 1 1 4 1 1 

4. If one obtains [another lawful] livelihood, one shall leave off [trading]. 
(Yajn 3:35) 

na patitaih samvyavaharo vidyate 1 1 5 1 1 

5. Social interaction with fallen people is not ordained. (Manu 11:180.) 
tatha-apapatraih 1 1 6 1 1 

6. Nor with Apapatras. 

Regarding the definition of the word Apapatra, see above, 1:5:16:29 

atha patanTyani 1 1 7 1 1 

7. Now [follows the enumeration of] the actions which cause loss of caste 
[Pataniya]. 

steyam abhisastyam purusa vadho brahma ujjham garbha satanam matuh 
pitur iti yoni sambandhe saha-apatye strT gamanam surd pdnam asamyoga 
samyogah 1 1 8 1 1 

8. [These are] (a) stealing [gold], (b) crimes whereby one becomes an 
Abhisasta, (c) homicide, (d) neglect of the Vedas, (e) causing abortion, (f) 
incestuous connection with maternal or paternal uncles or aunts, (g) and 
with the offspring of such persons (cousins), (h) alcoholism, and (i) 
socializing with persons the interaction with whom is forbidden. 

The crimes by which a person becomes Abhisasta are enumerated below, 1:9:24:6 
seq. where an explanation of the term will be given. 



92 



gurvi sakhim guru sakhim ca gatva-anyams ca para talpan 1 1 9 1 1 

9. That man falls who has sex with a female friend of a female Guru, or 
with a female friend of a male Guru, or with any married woman. 

Regarding the 'male Gurus ' see above. By 'female Gurus' their wives are meant. 

na-aguru talpe patati-ity eke II 10 II 

10. Some [teachers declare], that he does not fall by having sex with any 
other married female except his teacher's wife. 

ie. He need not perform so heavy a penance if the sex is consensual. 

adharmdndm tu satatam dcdrah II 77 II 

11. Constant commission of [other] sins [besides those enumerated above] 
also causes a man to lose his caste. 

atha-asuci karani II 12 II 

12. Now follows [the enumeration of] the acts which make people impure 
[Asucikara]. 

sudra gamanam dry a strindm II 13 II 

13. [These are] aryan women having sex with sudras, 
pratisiddhdndm mdmsa bhaksanam \ \ 14 \ \ 

14. Eating the meat of forbidden [creatures], 

suno manusyasya ca kukkuta sukardndm grdmydndm kravyddasdm 1 1 75 1 1 

15. for example: — a dog, a human, village cocks or pigs or carnivorous 
animals, 

manusydndm mutra punsa prdsanam II 16 II 

16. Eating the excrements of humans, 

sudra ucchistam apapatra agamananca drydndm II 7711 

17. Eating what is left by a sudra, aryans having sex with Apapatra 
women. 

etdny api patanTydni-ity eke II 18 II 

18. Some declare, that these acts [causing impurity] also cause a man to 
lose his caste. 

ato- 'anydni dosavanty asuci karani bhavanti 1 1 79 1 1 

19. Other acts besides those [enumerated] are causes of impurity. 



93 



dosam buddhva na purvah parebhyah patitasya samakhyane syad 
varjayet tv enam dharmesu \ \ 20 \ \ 

20. He who learns [that a man has] committed a transgression, shall not be 
the first to make it known to others; but he shall avoid the [sinner], when 
performing religious ceremonies. 

That is to say, he is not to invite the culprit to feasts given during religious 
ceremonies. ' — Haradatta. 

Prasna 1. Patala 8. Khanda 22. 
Knowledge of the Self 

adhydtmikdn yogdn anutisthen nydya samhitdn anaiscarikan 1 1 7 1 1 

1. One shall strive by all means to acquire [the knowledge of] the Atman, 
which results in the [destruction of the passions, and] which prevent the 
wandering [of the mind from its ideal, and fix it on the contemplation of the 
Atman] . 

The knowledge of the Vedanta and the means which prepare one for the knowledge 
of the Atman, the 'Self, the universal Self,' are taught in this Patala before the 
penances, because they are most efficacious for the removal of all negativity. The 
means are absence of anger etc., which are enumerated 1.8.23.6. 

dtma labhdn na param vidyate 1 1 2 1 1 

2. There is no higher [objective] than the attainment of [the knowledge of 
the] Atman. 

Haradatta gives in his commentary a lengthy discussion on the Atman, which 
corresponds nearly to sahkara's Introduction to and Commentary on the first Sutra 
of Badarayana. 

tatra-dtma labhiydn-slokdn uddharisydmah II 3 II 

3. We shall quote the [Vedic] verses which refer to the attainment of [the 
knowledge of] the Atman. 

According to Haradatta, the following verses are taken from an Upanishad. 

puh praninah sarva eva guhd sayasya I ahanyamdnasya vikalmasasya I 
acalam cala niketam ye- 'anutisthanti te- 'amrtah 1 1 4 1 1 

4. All living creatures are the abode of Him who lies enveloped in matter, 
Who is immortal and Who is taintless. Those become immortal who 
worship Him who is immovable and lives in a movable dwelling. 

The taintless one etc. is the Paramatman. The taints are merit and demerit which, 



94 



residing in the Manas, the internal organ of perception, are only falsely attributed 
to the Atman. To become immortal means 'to obtain final liberation.' 

yad idam id iha-id iha loke visayam ucyate I vidhuya kavir etad 
anutisthed guhd say am 1 1 5 1 1 

5. Renouncing all material objects [of the senses] a wise person shall strive 
after the [knowledge of the] Atman. 

dtmann eva-aham alabdhvd-etad dhitam sevasva na-ahitam I atha-anyesu 
pratTcchdmi sadhusthanam anapeksaya I malum tarn tejasas- kdyam 
sarvatra nihitam prabhum 1 1 6 1 1 

6. "O student, I, who had not recognised in my own self the great self- 
luminous, universal, [absolutely] free Atman, which must be realised 
directly without the mediation of anything else, desired [to find] it in others 
[the senses]. [But now as I have obtained the true knowledge, I do so no 
more.] Therefore, follow also this good road that leads to welfare 
[liberation], and not the one that leads into suffering [new births]". 

The verse is addressed by a teacher to his student according to Haradatta, but his 
interpretation is open to many doubts. 

sarva bhutesu yo nityo vipascid amrto dhruvah I anango- 'asabdo- 
'asarTro- 'asparsas ca mahan-sucih I sa sarvam paramd kasthd sa 
vaisuvatam 1 1 7 1 1 

7. It is That which is the eternal essence in all creatures, whose essence is 
wisdom, immortal, unchangeable, devoid of parts, of expression, of the 
[subtle] body, [even] of touch, exceedingly pure; That is the totality of 
Being, That is the highest goal; [he dwells in the middle of the body like] 
the Visuvat day [which is in the middle of a Sattra-sacrifice]; That indeed, 
is [accessible to all] like a town intersected by many streets. 

The Sutra contains a further description of the Paramatman. 

tarn yo- 'anutisthet sarvatra prddhvam ca-asya sada- acaret I 
durdarsam nipunam yukto yah pasyet sa modeta vistape 1 1 8 1 1 

8. He who meditates on That, and everywhere and always lives according 
to Dharma and who, full of devotion, sees That which is difficult to be 
seen and subtle, will rejoice in [his] 'heaven'. 

Haradatta explains the word vistap, 'heaven,' by 'pain freed greatness,' apparently 
misled by a bad etymology. The heaven of the Atman is, of course, moksa — 
liberation, that state where the individual Self becomes merged in the Brahman or 
Paramatman, which is pure essence, consciousness and joy. 



95 



Prasna 1. Patala 8. Khanda 23. 

atman pasyan sarva bhutani na muhyec cintayan kavih I atmanam ca- 
eva sarvatra yah pasyet sa vai brahma naka prsthe virajati 1 1 7 1 1 

1. That Brahmana, who is wise and sees the Atman in all creatures, who 
pondering [thereon] does not become confused, and who recognises the 
Atman in every thing, shines, indeed in heaven. 

Shines in heaven — i.e. becomes a beacon of light to others. 

nipuno-'anTydn bisornaya yah sarvam avrtya tisthati I varsTydms ca 
prthivya dhruvah sarvam arabhya tisthati I sa indriyair jagato- 'asya 
jhdndd anyo- 'ananyasya jneydt paramesthT vibhdjah I tasmdt kdydh 
prabhavanti sarve sa mulam sdsvatikah sa nityah 1 1 2 

2. That which is consciousness itself and subtler than the thread of the 
lotus-fibre, pervades the universe, and which, unchangeable and larger than 
the earth, contains the entire universe; That which is different from the 
worldly knowledge, obtained by the senses and identical with its objects, 
possesses the highest [form consisting of absolute knowledge]. From That, 
which divides Itself, spring all [created] forms. That is the primary cause, 
That is eternal, That is unchangeable. 

This Sutra again contains a description of the Paramatman. 

Character Faults and their avoidance 

dosdndm tu vinirghdto yoga mula iha jivite I 

nirhrtya bhuta ddhiydn ksemam gacchati panditah 1 1 J 1 1 

3. But the eradication of the faults (dosa) is brought about in this life by the 
means [called Yoga]. A wise person who has eradicated the [faults] which 
destroy the creatures, obtains liberation. 

atha bhuta ddhiydn dosan udaharisyamah 1 1 4 1 1 

4. Now we will enumerate the faults which tend to destroy the creatures. 

krodho harso roso lobho moho dambho droho mrsodyam atydsa parivdda 
avasuyd kdma manyu anatmyam ayogas tesdm yoga mulo nirghdtah II 5 II 

5. [These are] anger, exultation, anger, covetousness, delusion, 
maliciousness, hypocrisy, lying, gluttony, calumny, envy, selfish desire, 
secret hatred, neglect to keep the senses in subjection, neglect to 



96 



concentrate the mind. The eradication of these [faults] takes place through 
the means of [liberation called] Yoga. 

akrodho- 'aharso- 'aroso- 'alobho- 'amoho- 'adambho- 'adrohah satya 
vacanam anatyaso- 'apaisunam anasuya samvibhagas tyaga arjavam 
mdrdavam samo damah sarva bhutair avirodho yoga aryam dnrsamsam 
tustir iti sarva asramanam samaya padani tany anutisthan vidhina 
sarvagamT bhavati 1 1 6 1 1 

6. Freedom from anger, from exultation, from anger, from stinginess, from 
delusion, from hypocrisy [and] hostility; truthfulness, moderation in eating, 
silencing slander, freedom from envy, self-denying generosity, avoiding the 
acceptance of gifts, straightforwardness, affability, tranquility, self- 
discipline, peace with all created beings, concentration [of the mind on the 
contemplation of the Atman], chilvalry, absence of maliciousness and 
contentment; — these [good qualities] have been settled by the agreement 
[of the wise] for all [the four] orders; one who, according to the precepts of 
the sacred law, practises these, participates the universal Being. 

Prasna 1. Patala 9. Khanda 24. 
Fines, Compensation & Penances 

ksatriyam hatvd gavam sahasram vairayatana artham dadyat 1 1 7 1 1 

1 . He who has killed a Kshatriya shall give a thousand cows [as a fine] for 
the expiation of his sin. (Manu 11:128; Yajn. 3:266) 

Others explain the phrase vairayatanartham 'for the expiation of his sin,' thus: — 
He, who is slain by anybody, becomes, in dying, an enemy of his slayer [and 
thinks], "O that I might slay him in another life," for the removal of this enmity!' 
— Haradatta. Another commentator translates vairayatanartham,'' in order to 
remove the enmity.' This fine is similar to the law permitting compensation for 
murder which was in force in ancient Greece and among the Teutonic nations. 
With the explanation adopted by Haradatta, it is impossible to find a reasonable 
interpretation for prayascittartham, Sutra 4. Haradatta, seduced by the parallel 
passage of Manu, takes it to be identical with vairayatanartham. 

An alternative translation of our Sutra thus: — 'He who has killed a Ksatriya shall 
give a thousand cows [to the relations of the murdered man] in order to remove the 
enmity.' 

According to Baudhayana 1.10.19.1 the cows are to be given to the king. Others 
say they should be given to the brahmanas. 

satam vaisye 1 1 2 1 1 

2. [He shall give] a hundred cows for a Vaisya, (Manu 11:130; Yajn. 



97 



3:267) 

dasa sudre 1 1 3 1 1 

3. Ten for a sudra, (Manu 11:131; Yajn. 3:267) 

rsabhas ca-atra-adhikah sarvatra prayascitta arthah 1 1 4 1 1 

4. And in every one [of these cases] one bull [must be given] in excess [of 
the number of cows] for the sake of expiation. 

strTsu ca-etesam evam 1 1 5 1 1 

5. And if women of the [three castes mentioned have been slain] the same 
[compensation must be paid]. 

Here Apastamba proposes a hierarchy of social value for the payment of 
compensation. The women of all social categories are equal in value to the men. 
Ksatriyas are the rulers, administrators and defenders of the society and are thus 
considered to be the most valuable. The Sudras, being the majority and the unskilled 
labour force are considered the most expendable. Even in modern society such a 
hierarchy of value is recognized — the sons of the poorer and less educated classes 
being sent to war as 'cannon fodder'. The sons of the rich are more likely to get off a 
crime for which a poorer person would be jailed for. 

purvayor varnayor veda adhyayam hatvd savana gatam vd- abhisastah 1 1 6 
II 

6. He who has slain a person belonging to the two [first-mentioned castes] 
who has studied the Veda, or had been initiated for the performance of a 
Soma-sacrifice, becomes an Abhisasta. 

Manu 11:87. Abhisasta means literally 'accused, accursed,' and corresponds in 
Apastamba' s terminology to the mahapatakin of Manu and Yajnavalkya, instead of 
which latter word Manu uses it occasionally eg. 2;185. Killing a person who was a 
repository of Vedic knowledge was the equavalent of destroying a library. 

brahmana mdtram ca II 711 

7. And [he is called an Abhisasta] who has slain a man belonging merely 
to the Brahmana caste [though he has not studied the Veda or been initiated 
for a Soma-sacrifice], 

garbham ca tasya- avijndtam 1 1 8 1 1 

8. Likewise he who has caused an abortion of a [Brahmana, even though its 
gender be] undistinguishable. 

atreyTm ca striyam 1 1 9 1 1 

9. Or a menstruating woman [of the Brahmana caste]. 

Others interpret atreyi not as menstruating but as "belonging to the clan of Atri." 



98 



— Haradatta. But this makes no sense as there is nothing in particular which 
distinguishes women of one clan from another. 

tasya nirvesah II 10 II 

10. [Now follows] the penance for him [who is an Abhisasta]. 

aranye kutim krtvd vag yatah savasira dhvajo- 'ardhasdm paksam 
adhondbhy uparijdnu- dcchddya II 77 II 

11. He [himself] shall erect a hut in the forest, observe a vow of silence, 
carry [a staff on which] the skull [of the person slain] is placed like a flag, 
and cover the space from his navel to his knees with a quarter of a piece of 
hempen cloth. 

Others say that he may carry any skull. This Sutra is to he construed with Sutra 14, 
sutras 12 and 13 being inserted parenthetically. — Haradatta. Manu 11:72-78; 
Yajn. 3:243. 

tasya panthd antard vartmanT II 12 II 

12. The path for him when he goes to a village, is the space between the 
tracks [of the wheels of the carts]. 

drstvd ca-anyam utkrdmet \ \ 13 \ \ 

13. And if he sees another [arya], he shall step out of the road [to the 
distance of two yards]. 

khandena lohitakena sardvena grdme pratistheta 1 1 14 1 1 

14. He shall go to the village, carrying a broken bowl, of metal of an 
inferior quality. 

ko- ' abhisastdya bhiksdm iti sapta agdrdni caret 117511 

15. He may go to seven houses only, [crying] Who will give alms to an 
Abhisasta ? 

sd vrttih II 16 II 

16. That is [the way in which he must gain] his livelihood. 
alabdhd-upavdsah II 7711 

17. If he does not obtain anything [at the seven houses], he must fast. 
gas ca rakset II 18 II 

18. And [whilst performing this penance] he must tend cows. 
tdsdm niskramana pravesane dvitTyo grdme- 'arthah II 79 II 

19. When the cows leave and enter the village, that is the second occasion 



99 



[on which he may enter] the village. 

dvddasa varsdni caritvd siddhah sadbhih samprayogah 1 1 20 1 1 

20. After having performed [this penance] for twelve years, [he must 
perform] the ceremony known [by custom and usage], through which he is 
re-admitted into the society of the good. 

'ie. after having performed the penance, he shall take grass and offer it to a cow . If 
the cow approaches and confidingly eats, then one should know that he has 
performed the penance properly, not otherwise.' — Haradatta. Manu 11:195 and 
196. 

The usual ceremony for readmittance to caste is the "udaka santih" ceremony. 

aji pathe vd kutim krtvd brdhmana gavya upajigTsamdno vaset trih 
pratirdddho- 'apajitya vd muktah II 21 II 

21. Or [after having performed the twelve years' penance], he may build a 
hut on the path of robbers, and live there, trying to recover from them the 
[stolen] cows of Brahmanas. He is free [from his sin], when thrice he has 
been defeated by them, or when he has vanquished them. (Manu 11:81.) 

Thus Haradatta, better, 'when thrice he has fought with them. 

dsvamedhikam vd-avabhrtham avetya mucyate 1 1 22 1 1 

22. Or he is freed [from his sin], if [after the twelve years' penance] he 
bathes [with the priests] at the end of a horse-sacrifice. (Manu 11:83) 

dharma artha samnipdte- 'artha grdhina etad eva \ \ 23 \ \ 

23. This very same [penance is ordained] for him who, when his duty 
{dharma) and economic interest {artha) come into conflict, chooses the 
gain. 

Or the Sutra may have reference to unrighteous gain acquired by false testimony 
and the like.' — Haradatta. 

gurum hatvd srotriyam vd karma samdptam etena-eva vidhind-uttamdd 
ucchvdsdc caret 1 1 24 

24. If he has slain a Guru or a Brahmana, who has studied the Veda and 
finished the ceremonies of a Soma-sacrifice, he shall live according to this 
very same rule until his last breath. 

Guru means 'the father and the rest." — Haradatta. 

na-asya-asmiml loke pratydpattir vidyate kalmasam tu nirhanyate 1 1 25 1 1 

25. He cannot be purified in this life. But his sin is removed [after death]. 

His sin is removed after death — the meaning is that his sons or other [relations] 



100 



may perform the funeral ceremonies and the other propitiation ceremonies. But 
others think that the first part of the Sutra forbids this, and that the meaning of 
pratyapattih [can be purified] is "connection by being received as a son or other 
relation." — Haradatta. 

Prasna 1. Patala 9. Khanda 25. 

Guru-talpagdmi sa vrsanam sisnam parivdsya-anjaldv ddhdya daksindm 
disam andvrttim vrajet 1 1 7 1 1 

1. He who has had sex with a Guru's wife shall cut off his penis together 
with the testicles, hold them in his joined hands and walk towards the 
south without stopping, until he falls down dead. 

Haradatta's explanation of a 'Guru's wife' by 'mother' rests on a comparison of 
similar passages from other Smrtis, where a different 'penance' is prescribed for 
incestuous intercourse with other near relations. (Manu 11:105 Yajn. 3:259.) 

jvalitdm vd surmim parisvajya samdpnuydt 1 1 2 1 1 

2. Or he may die embracing a heated metal image of a woman. (Manu 
11:104; Yajn. 3:259.) 

surd dpo- 'agni sparsd surdm pibet 1 1 3 1 1 

3. A [regular] drinker of alcohol shall drink exceedingly hot liquor so that 
he dies. (Manu 11:91:92; Yajn. 3:253.) 

stenah prakirna keso- 'amse musalam dddya rdjdnam gatvd karma- 
dcaksTta I tena-enam hanydd vadhe moksah 1 1 4 1 1 

4. A stealer [of gold] shall go to the king with flying hair, carrying a club 
on his shoulder, and tell him his deed. He [the king] shall give him a blow 
with that [club]. If the thief dies, his sin is expiated. 

ie. who has stolen the gold of a Brahmana. Manu 8:314, 316; 11:99-101; Yajn. 3:257 

anujndte- 'anujndtdram enah 1 1 5 1 1 

5. If he is forgiven [by the king], the guilt falls upon him who forgives him, 
(Manu 8:317.) 

agnim vd praviset tiksnam vd tapa dyacchet 1 1 6 1 1 

6. Or he may throw himself into a fire, or perform repeatedly severe 
austerities, (Manu 11:102.) 

bhakta apacayena vd-dtmdnam samdpnuydt 1 1 7 1 1 

7. Or he may kill himself by diminishing daily his portion of food, 



101 



krcchra samvatsaram va caret 1 1 8 1 1 

8. Or he may perform Krcchra penances [uninterruptedly] for one year. 

According to Haradatta this Sutra refers to all kinds of sins, and it must be 
understood that the krcchra penances must be heavy for great crimes, and lighter for 
smaller faults; see also below, 1. 9, 27, 7 and 8. 

atha-apy uddharanti 1 1 9 1 1 

9. Now they quote also [the following verse]: 

Haradatta states that the verse is taken from a Purana. 

steyam krtvd surdm pitvd guru ddram ca gatvd brahmahatydm akrtvd 
caturtha kdld mita bhojandh syur apo- 'abhyaveyuh savana anukalpam I 
sthdna dsandbhydm viharanta ete tribhir varsair apa pdpam nundate 
steyam II 10 II 

10. Those who have committed a theft [of gold], become alcoholics, or had 
sex with a Guru's wife, but not those who have murdered a Brahmana, 
shall eat every fourth meal-time a little food, bathe at the times of the three 
libations [morning, noon, and evening], passing the day standing and the 
night sitting. After the lapse of three years they are absolved of their guilt; 

prathamam varnam parihdpya prathamam varnam hatvd samgrdmam 
gatvd- avatistheta I tatra-enam hanyuh II 11 II 

1 1 . [ A man of any caste, excepting the first, who has slain a man of the first 
caste, shall go on a battle-field and place himself [between the two hostile 
armies]. There being killed in battle [he thereby becomes pure]. (Manu 
11:74; Yajn. 3:248.) 

api vd lomdni tvacam mamsam iti hdvayitvd-agnim praviset 1 1 72 1 1 

12. Or such a criminal may tear from his body and make the priest offer as 
a burnt-offering his hair, skin, flesh, and the rest, and then throw himself 
into the fire. 

The Mantras given in the commentary, and a parallel passage of Vasistha 20:25-26, 
show that this terrible penance is not altogether a mere theory of Apastamba. Yajn. 
3:247. 

vdyasa pracaldka barhina cakravdka hamsa bhdsa mandiika nakuladerika 
asvahimsdydm sudravat prdyascittam \ \ 13 \ \ 

13. If a crow, a chameleon, a peacock, a Brahmani duck, a swan, the 
vulture called Bhasa, a frog, an ichneumon, a musk-rat, or a dog has been 
killed, then the same penance as for a sudra must be performed. 

The penance must be performed if all these animals together have been slain none 



102 



of these creatures individually has the same socialy equivalent value of a sudra . 
Manu 11:132, 136; Yajn. 3:270-272. 

Prasna 1. Patala 9. Khanda 26. 

dhenv anaduhos ca-akdrandt 1 1 1 1 1 

1. [The same penance must be performed], if a milch-cow or a full-grown 
ox [has been slain] without a reason. 

'A reason' for hurting a cow is, according to Haradatta, anger, or for meat. 

dhurya vdha pravrttau ca-itaresam prdnindm 1 1 2 1 1 

2. And for other animals [which have no bones], if an ox-load of them has 
been killed. 

Manu 11:141; Yajn. 3:269. That 'animals without bones,' ie. insects or molluscs, 
are intended in the Sutra is an inference, drawn by Haradatta from the parallel 
passages of Gautama, Manu, and Yajnavalkya. 

andkrosyam akrusya-anrtam vd- uktvd trirdtram aksTra aksdra alavana 
bhojanam II J II 

3. He who abuses a person who, [on account of his venerability] ought not 
to be abused, or speaks an untruth [regarding any small matter] must 
abstain for three days from milk, pungent condiments, and salt. 

A person who ought not to be abused, ie. a father, a teacher, and the like.' — 
Haradatta. 

sudrasya sapta rdtram abhojanam 1 1 4 1 1 

4. [If the same offences have been committed] by a sudra, he must fast for 
seven days. 

strindm ca-evam 1 1 5 1 1 

5. And the same [penances must also be performed] by women, [but not 
those which follow]. 

The same penances, ie. those prescribed 1:9:24 -1:9:26, 4. According to Haradatta 
this Sutra is intended to teach that women shall not perform the penances which 
follow. Others, however, are of opinion that it is given in order to indicate that the 
preceding Sutras apply to women by an atidesa, and that, according to a Smarta 
principle, applicable to such cases, it may be inferred, that women are to perform 
one-half only of the penances prescribed for men. 

yesv dbhisastyam tesdm ekdngam chittvd-aprdna himsdydm 1 1 6 1 1 

6. He who cuts off a limb of a person for whose murder he would become 



103 



an Abhisasta [must perform the penance prescribed for killing a sudra], if 
the life [of the person injured] has not been endangered. 

andryavapaisuna pratisiddhdacdresv abhaksya abhojya apeyaprdsane 
sudrdydm ca retah siktvd-ayonau ca dosavac ca karma abhisamdhi 
purvam krtvd-anabhisamdhi purvam vd-ab lingdbhir apa upasprsed 
vdrunTbhir vd-anyair vd pavitrair yathd karma abhydsah 1 1 7 1 1 

7. He who has been guilty of conduct unworthy of an aryan, of defaming 
others, of actions contrary to the rule of conduct, of eating or drinking 
things forbidden, of sex with a woman of the sudra caste, of unnatural sex, 
of performing magic rites with intent [to harm his enemies] or [of hurting 
others] unintentionally, shall bathe and sprinkle himself with water, reciting 
the [seven] verses addressed to the Waters, or the verses addressed to 
Varuna, or [other verses chosen from the Anuvaka, called] Pavitra, in 
proportion to the frequency with which the offence has been committed. 

The Anuvaka is Taitt. Samh. 2:5:12. 

'Unnatural' sex is defined by the text as ejaculating into anything other than a vagina. 

(retah siktva ayonau) 

gardabhena- avakirnl nirrtim pdkayajnena yajeta II 8 II 

8. A [student] who has broken the vow of chastity, shall offer to Nirriti an 
ass, according to the manner of the Paka-yajna-rites. 

Taitt. Ar. 2:18, and Manu 11:119 seq.; and Yajn. 3:280. Regarding the Paka-yajna- 
rites, see Asv. Gri: — Su. 1:1:2. 

tasya sudrah prdsniydt 1 1 9 1 1 

9. A sudra shall eat [the remainder] of that [offering]. 
mithyd adhTta prdyascittam II 10 II 

10. [Now follows] the penance for him who transgresses the rules of 
studentship. 

samvatsaram dcdrya hite vartamdno vdcam yacchet svddhydya eva- 
utsrjamdno vdcam dcdrya dcdrya dare bhiksd carye ca II 77 II 

1 1 . He shall for a year serve his teacher silently, sppeaking only during the 
daily study [of the Veda, in dealing with necessary business to] his teacher 
or his teacher's wife, and whilst collecting alms. 

evam anyesv api dosavat sva patanTyesu-uttardni ydni vaksydmah II 72 II 

12. The following [penances] which we are going to teach, may be 
performed for the same offence, and also for other offences, which do not 



104 



cause loss of caste. 

Regarding the Pataniya-crimes which cause loss of caste, see above, 1. 7, 2 1,7 seq. 

kdma manyubhyam vd juhuydt kdmo- 'akdrsin manyur akdrsid iti japed 
vd II 13 II 

13. He may either offer oblations to Kama and Manyu [with the following 
two mantras], 'Kama [passion] has done it; Manyu [anger] has done it.' Or 
he may mutter [these Mantras] . 

According to the greatness of the crime the number of the burnt-oblations must be 
increased and the prayers be repeated. 

parvani vd tila bhaksa uposya vd svo bhuta udakam upasprsya sdvitrim 
prdndydmasah sahasra krtva dvartayed aprdndydmaso vd 1 1 14 1 1 

14. Or, after having eaten sesame or fasted on the days of the full and new 
moon he may, on the following day bathe, and regulating the breath 
{prdndydma), repeat [the Gayatri mantra] one thousand times, or he may do 
so without prdndydma. 

Prasna 1. Patala 9. Khanda 27. 

srdvanydm paurnamdsydm tilabhaksa uposya vd svobhute mahd nadam 
udakam upasprsya sdvitryd samit sahasram ddadhydj japed va 1 1 7 1 1 

1 . After having eaten sesame or having fasted on the full moon day of the 
month Sravana [July/ August], he may on the following day bathe in the 
water of a great river and offer [a burnt-oblation of] one thousand sticks of 
sacred fuel, whilst reciting the Gayatri, or he may repeat [the Gayatri] as 
many times. 

The oblations of sacred fuel [samidh] are not to be accompanied by the 
exclamation svaha. ' — Haradatta. 

isti yajna kratun vd pavitra arthdn dharet 1 1 2 1 1 

2. Or he may perform Istis and Soma-sacrifices for the sake of purifying 
himself [from his offences]. 

Istis are the simplest forms of the srauta-sacrifices, ie. of those for which three fires are 
necessary. 

abhojyam bhuktvd naispurisyam 1 1 J 1 1 

3. After having eaten forbidden food, one must fast, until the bowels are 
completely empty. 

For some particular kinds of forbidden food the same penance is prescribed, Manu 



105 



11:153-154. 
tat sapta ratrena- avapyate 1 1 4 1 1 

4. That is [generally] attained after seven days. 

hemanta sisirayor va-ubhayoh samdhyor udakam upasprset 1 1 5 1 1 

5. Or he may during winter and during the dewy season [November-March] 
bathe in cold water both morning and evening. 

krcchra dvadasa rdtram vd caret 1 1 6 1 1 

6. Or he may perform a Krcchra penance, which lasts twelve days. 

tryaham anakta asy adiva asT tatas tryaham tryaham ayacita vratas 
tryaham na-asnati kimcana-iti krcchra dvadasa ratrasya vidhih II 7 II 

7. The rule for the Krcchra penance of twelve days [is the following]: — For 
three days he must not eat in the evening, and then for three days not in the 
morning; for three days he must live on food which has been given 
unasked, and three days he must not eat anything. 

The same penance is described, under the name Prajapatya Krcchra, the Krcchra 
invented by Prajapati. Manu 1 1:212 & Yajn 3:220 

etam eva- abhyaset samvatsaram sa krcchra samvatsarah 1 1 8 1 1 

8. If he repeats this for a year, that is called a Krcchra penance, which lasts 
for a year. 

atha-aparam\ bahuny apy apataniyani krtva tribhir anasnat parayanaih 
krta prayascitto bhavati 1 1 9 1 1 

9. Now follows another penance. He who has committed even a great many 
offences which do not cause him to fall, becomes free from guilt, if, 
fasting, he recites the entire sakha of his Veda three times consecutively. 
(Manu 11:259.) 

anaryam sayane bibhred dadad vrddhim kasayapah I 
abrahmana iva vanditva trnesv asTta prsthatap II 10 II 

10. He who has sex with a non-aryan woman, who lends money at interest, 
who drinks [other] spirituous liquors [than Sura], he who praises everybody 
in a manner unworthy of a Brahmana, shall sit on grass, allowing his back 
to be scorched [by the sun] . 

According to Khanda 26:7. One who has sex with a sudra woman must bathe and 
sprinkle himself with water, reciting the [seven] verses addressed to the Waters, or 
the verses addressed to Varuna, or [other verses chosen from the Anuvaka, called] 
Pavitra. 



106 



yad eka ratrena karoti papam krsnam varnam brahmanah sevamanah I 
caturtha kala udaka abhyavayi tribhir varsais tad apahanti papam II 11 II 

1 1 . A Brahmana atones for the offence which he has committed by serving 
one day and night [a man of] the black race, if he bathes for three years, 
eating at every fourth meal-time. 

The expression krsna varna, 'the black race,' is truly Vedic. In the Rig Veda it 
usually denotes the aboriginal races, and sometimes the demons. 

If a brahmana commits any of the afore mentioned offences in verse 10 he may be 
atone for them by serving a sudra for 24 hours, or by taking ceremonial baths at 
specific astrological timings or by fasting by eating at every 4 th meal for 3 years. 

Thus a number of options are given which are either up to the indivdual to choose, 
or if he presents himself to a parisad for resolution, the parisad will ordain 
according to the severity of the offence. 

Prasna 1. Patala 10. Khanda 28. 

yatha kathd ca para parigraham abhimanyate steno ha bhavati-iti kautsa 
harTtau tathd kanva puskarasadT 1 1 7 1 1 

1. One who, under any conditions whatsoever, covets [and takes] another 
person's possessions is a thief; thus [teach] Kautsa and Harita as well as 
Kanva and Puskarasadi. 

santy apavdddh parigrahesv iti varsyayanih 1 1 2 1 1 

2. Varsyayani declares, that there are exceptions to this law, in regard to 
some articles. 

samyosa yugya ghdso na svaminah pratisedhayanti 1 1 3 1 1 

3. For example — seeds ripening in the pod, food for a draught-ox; [if 
these are taken], the owners [ought] not [to] forbid it. 

It is not a crime to steal food to feed onself or ones' family or to feed a draught-ox 
which is being used for work. The same rule Manu emphatically ascribes to himself, 
Manu 8:339. But see also 8:331. 

ativyapahdro vyrddho bhavati 1 1 4 1 1 

4. To take even these things in too great a quantity is immoral. 

One is permitted to take only that which one absolutely needs but not in excess. 

sarvatra-anumati purvam iti harTtah 1 1 5 1 1 

5. Harita declares, that in every case the permission [of the owner must be 
obtained] first. 



107 



na patitam acaryam jnatim va darsanartho gacchet 1 1 6 1 1 

6. One shall not go to visit a fallen teacher or blood relation. 
na ca-asmdd bhogdn upayunjita 1 1 7 1 1 

7. Nor shall he accept the [means for procuring] enjoyments from such a 
person. 

Haradatta remarks, that this Sutra implicitly forbids to accept the heritage of an 
outcast. But it seems that the intention of Apastamba is that only that which is 
conducive to enjoyment and recreation and not to one's livelihood is to be rejected. 

yadrcchd samnipdta upasamgrhya tusnim vyativrajet 1 1 8 1 1 

8. If he meets them accidentally he shall silently touch [their feet] and pass 
on. 

mdtd putratvasya bhuydmsi karmdny drabhate tasydm susrusd nityd 
patitdydm api 1 1 9 1 1 

9. A mother does very many acts for her son, therefore he must constantly 
serve her, though she be fallen. 

No matter what offence a mother is guilty of she is never to be neglected or 
shunned by her sons — everything must be done to care for and support her. 

na tu dharma samnipdtah sydt II 10 II 

10. But [there shall be] no inclusion [of a fallen mother] in acts performed 
for the acquisition of spiritual merit (dharma). 

Although she is never to be shunned socially or excluded from general ceremonies 
and celebrations such as births or marriages, she may not be included in ceremonies 
and acts which are performed solely for the aqquisition of merit — such as the 
dedication of a park, well, hospital etc. 

adharma dhrtdn bhogdn anujndya na vayam ca-adharmas ca-ity 
abhivydhrtya-adho ndbhi-upari jdnu-dchddya tri savanam udakam 
upasprsann aksira aksdra alavanam bhunjdno dvddasa varsdni ndgdram 
praviset II 11 II 

11. All unrighteous enjoyments should be given up; he shall say, 'I and sin 
[do not dwell together].' Clothing himself with a garment reaching from 
the navel down to the knee, bathing daily, morning, noon, and evening, 
eating food which contains neither milk nor pungent condiments, nor salt, 
he shall not enter a house for twelve years. 

Unrighteous enjoyments are those which are condemned by the sastra but are 
different for each social group. For example — hunting for pleasure, drinking 
binges, sexual excesses and gambling although legal are to be eschewed by caste 
Hindus. (Manu 7:50) Nothing is forbidden to sudras who may eat, drink and enjoy as 



108 



long as it is not illegal. 

A similar but easier penance is prescribed, Manu 1 1 : 194. 

tatah siddhih II 72 II 

12. After that he [may be] purified. 
atha samprayogah sydd dryaih \ \ 13 \ \ 

13. Then he may socialise with aryans. 
etad eva-anyesdm api patanTydndm 1 1 14 1 1 

14. This penance may also be employed in the case of the other offences 
which cause loss of caste [for which no penance has been ordained above]. 

guru talpa gdmitu susirdm surmim pravisya-ubhayata ddTpya-abhidahed 
dtmdnam II 75 II 

15. But the violator of a Guru's bed shall enter a hollow iron image and, 
having caused a fire to be lit on both sides, he shall burn himself. 

[This penance, which had been prescribed above, 1, 9, 25,1 is enjoined [once 
more], in order to show that it is not optional [as might be expected according to 
Sutra 14].' — Haradatta. 

mithyd-etad iti hdrTtah II 16 II 

16. According to Harita, this [last-mentioned penance must] not [be 
performed]. 

yo hy dtmdnam param vd-abhimanyate- 'abhisasta eva sa bhavati II 7711 

17. For he who takes his own or another's life becomes an Abhisasta. 

A person who attempts suicide but fails becomes an outcaste. Here Apastamba 
extends the previous definition of an abhisasta to include all those guilty of pre- 
meditated murder, for what is common to both these crimes is "intent". The previous 
definition was applied to those who killed brahmanas — either learned or unlearned 
or one initiated for a Soma-yaga. Nowadays the extended definition would apply i.e. 
all murderers would be considered as abhisastas. 

etena-eva vidhind-uttamdd ucchvdsdc caret I 

na-asya-asmiml loke pratydpattir vidyate I kalmasamtu nirhanyate II 18 

18. He [the violator of a Guru's bed] shall perform to his last breath [the 
penance] prescribed by that rule [Sutra II]. He cannot be purified in this 
world. But [after death] his offence is taken away. 

ddra vyatikramT khara ajinam bahir loma paridhdya ddra vyatikramine 
bhiksdm iti sapta agdrdni caret I sd vrttih san mdsdn 1 1 79 1 1 



109 



19. He who has unjustly abandoned his wife shall put on an ass's skin, with 
the hair turned outside, and beg in seven houses, saying, 'Give alms to him 
who abandoned his wife.' That shall be his livelihood for six months. 

And then he should take her back as before. 

striyas tu bhartr vyatikramekrcchra dvddasa rdtrdbhydsas tdvantam kdlam 
II 20 II 

20. But if a wife abandons her husband, she shall perform the twelve-night 
Krcchra penance for as long a time [i.e. 6 months]. 

atha bhrunaha sva ajinam khara ajinam vd bahir loma paridhdya purusa 
sirah pratTpdna artham dddya II 21 II 

21. He who has killed a Bhruna [a man learned in the Vedas and Vedangas 
and skilled in the performance of the rites] shall put on the skin of a dog or 
of an ass, with the hair turned outside, and use a human skull for his 
drinking-vessel. 

Prasna 1. Patala 10. Khanda 29. 

khatva ahgam danda arthe karma ndmadheyam prabruvdnas 
cahkramyeta ko bhruna ghne bhiksdm iti I grdme prdna vrttim 
pratilabhya sunya agdram vrksa mid am vd- abhyupdsrayen na hi ma 
dryaih samprayogo vidyate I etena-eva vidhind-uttamdd ucchvdsdc caret 
I na-asya-asmiml loke pratydpattir vidyate I kalmasam tu nirhanyate 1 1 

1 . And he shall take the foot of a bed instead of a staff and, proclaiming the 
nature of his deed, he shall go about [saying], 'Who [gives] alms to the 
murderer of a Bhruna?' Obtaining thus his livelihood in the village, he shall 
dwell in an empty house or under a tree, [knowing that] he is not allowed to 
socialise with aryans. According to this rule he shall act until death. He 
cannot be purified in this world. But [after death] his offence is taken away. 

yah pramatto hanti prdptam dosa phalam 1 1 2 1 1 

2. Even if it is unintentional homicide, nevertheless one reaps the result of 
his crime. 

saha samkalpena bhuyah 1 1 3 1 1 

3. [His guilt is] greater, [if he murders] intentionally. 
evam anyesv api dosavatsu karmasu 1 1 4 1 1 

4. The same [principle applies] also to other sinful actions. 
tathd puny a kriydsu 1 1 5 1 1 



110 



5. And also to good works. 

Haradatta gives, as an example, the case where a warrior saves the property of a 
traveller from thieves. If the traveller turns out to be a Brahmana, and the warrior 
did not know his caste before rescuing his property, his merit will be less than if he 
had rescued knowingly the property of a Brahmana. 

pariksd artho- 'api brahmana dyudham na-adadita II 6 II 

6. A Brahmana shall not take a weapon into his hand, though he be only 
desirous of examining it. 

yo himsd artham abhikrantam hanti manyur eva many urn sprsati na 
tasmin dosa iti purane 1 1 7 1 1 

7. In a Purana [it has been declared], that one who kills an assailant does 
not sin, for [in that case] wrath meets wrath. 

There any act of violence in self-defence or the defence of another — women, 
children and the weak is not considered as a sin. The fact that Apastamba mentions it 
as coming from a Purana i.e. a commonly held teaching — seems to suggest that he 
himself has some undefined reservations. 

atha- abhisastah samavasdya careyur dharmyam iti samsitya-itaretara 
yajaka itaretara adhyapaka mitho vivahamanah 1 1 8 1 1 

8. But Abhisastas shall live together in dwellings [outside the village]; 
considering this their lawful [mode of life], they shall sacrifice for each 
other, teach each other, and marry amongst each other. 

marry amongst each other — this assumes that they are living with women who are 
related or dependant upon them i.e. wives and daughters who joined them in their 
social exile, or that they have taken women of non-aryan community as wives or 
consorts. 

putran samnispadya bruyur vipra vrajatata-asmad evam hy asmatsv 
drydh sampratyapatsyata-iti 1 1 9 1 1 

9. If they have begot sons, let them say to them: — "Go out from amongst 
us, for thus the aryas, [throwing the guilt] upon us, will receive you 
[amongst their number]". 

It is impossible to agree with Haradatta' s explanation of the words to be addressed 
by Abhisastas to their children. No Vedic license can excuse the use of the second 
person plural instead of the third. The following is a preferable translation — 'Go 
out from among us; for thus [leaving the guilt] to us, you will be received [as] aryas.' 
It is, however, not improbable that our text is disfigured by several very old 
corruptions, compare Baudhayana 2:1:2:18 

atha-api na sa indriyah patati II 10 II 

10. For the organs do not become impure together with the person. 



Ill 



tad etena veditavyam I anga hino hi sa ahgam janayati II 11 II 

11. [The truth of] that may be learned from this [parallel case]; one 
deficient in limbs begets a son who possesses the full number of limbs. 

In like manner a person who has lost his rights, [can] beget a son, who possesses 
the rights [of his caste]. For the wife is also a cause [of the birth of the son], and 
she is guiltless.' — Haradatta. 

mithyd-etad iti hdritah II 12 II 

12. Harita declares that this is wrong. 
dadhi dhdnTsa dharmd stri bhavati II 13 II 

13. A wife is similar to the vessel which contains the curds [for the 
sacrifice]. 

The statements now following are those with which Apastamba agrees. Those 
contained in Sutras 8-1 1 are merely the purva-paksa 

yo hi dadhi dhanyam aprayatam paya atacya manthati na tena dharma 
krtyam kriyate I evam asuci suklam yan nivartate na tena saha 
samprayogo vidyate II 14 II 

14. For if one makes impure milk curdle [by mixing it with whey and 
water] in a milk- vessel and stirs it, no sacrificial rite can be performed with 
[the curds produced from] that. Just so no socialising can be allowed with 
the impure seed which comes [from an Abhisasta] . 

abhicara anuvyaharav asuci karav apataniyau 117511 

15. Sorcery and curses [employed against a Brahmana] cause one to 
become impure, but not loss of caste. 

pataniyav iti hdritah II 76 II 

16. Harita declares that they cause loss of caste. 

patanlya vrttis tv asuci karanam dvadasa masan dvadasa ardhamasan 
dvadasa dvadasa ahan dvadasa sapta ahan dvadasa try ahandvadasa 
aham sapta aham try aham eka aham I 

17. But crimes causing impurity must be expiated, [when no particular 
penance is prescribed,] by performing the penance enjoined for crimes 
causing loss of caste during twelve months, or twelve half months, or 
twelve twelve-nights, or twelve days & nights, or twelve times three days, 
or twelve days, or seven days, or three days, or one day. 

ity asuci kara nirveso yatha karma abhyasah II 18 II 



112 



18. Thus acts causing impurity must be expiated according to the manner in 
which the [offending] act has been committed [whether intentionally or 
unintentionally]. 

Prasna 1. Patala 11. Khanda 30. 
The Graduate 

vidyayd snati-ity eke II 7 II 

1. Some declare, that a student shall bathe after [having acquired] the 
knowledge of the Veda, [however long or short the time of his studentship 
may have been] . 

The bath is taken at the end of the studentship, and forms part of the Samavartana- 
ceremony. From this rite a student who has completed his course of study derives 
the name Snataka, 'one who has bathed.' 

tathd vratena-astacatvarimsat parimanena 1 1 2 1 1 

2. [He may] also [bathe] after having kept the student's vow for forty-eight, 
[thirty- six or twenty-four] years, [though he may not have mastered the 
Veda]. 

vidyd vratena ca-ity eke II J II 

3. Some declare, that the student [shall bathe] after [having acquired] the 
knowledge of the Veda and after [the expiration of] his vow [or 
studentship] . 

tesu sarvesu sndtakavad vrttih 1 1 4 1 1 

4. To all those persons who have bathed in accordance with any of the 
above rules must be shown] the honour due to a Snataka. 

samddhi visesdt-sruti visesdt-ca pujdydm phala visesah 1 1 5 1 1 

5. The reverence [shown to a Snataka] brings, however, different rewards 
according to the degree of devotion or of learning [possessed by the person 
honoured]. 

atha snataka vratani 1 1 6 1 1 

6. Now follow the observances of a Snataka. 

purvena graman niskramana pravesanani sllayed uttarena va\\ 711 

7. He shall usually enter the village and leave it by the eastern or the 
northern gate. 



113 



samdhyos ca bahir gramad asanam vag yatas ca 1 1 8 1 1 

8. During the morning and evening twilight, he shall sit outside the village, 
and not discuss anything [referring to worldly matters] . 

vipratisedhe sruti laksanam balTyah 1 1 9 1 1 

9. [But an Agnihotri, who is occupied at home by oblations in the morning 
and evening, must not go out; for] in the case of a conflict [of duties], that 
enjoined by the Veda is the more important. 

If the snataka is also an agni-hotrin observing the morning and evening homas then 
he should not go out of the village. This verse assumes that the unmarried can also 
be agni-hotrins. 

sarvdn rdgdn vdsasi varjayet II 10 II 

10. He shall avoid all dyed dresses, 

The rule to wear white garments is given Yajn 1:131; Manu 4:35, 

krsnam ca svdbhdvikam II 77 II 

11. And all naturally black cloth. 
aniidbhasi vdso vasTta II 12 II 

12. He shall wear clothing that is neither shining. 
apratikrstam ca sakti visaye \ \ 13 \ \ 

13. Nor contemptible, if he is able [to afford it]. (Manu 4.34) 

diva ca sirasah pravaranam varjayen mutra purTsayoh karma parihdpya 
II 14 II 

14. And in the day-time he shall avoid wrapping up his head [with a 
turban], except when voiding faeces. 

siras tu pravrtya mutra purTse kurydd bhumydm kimcid antardhaya 1 1 75 
II 

15. But when voiding faeces, he shall envelop his head and place some 
[grass or the like] on the ground. (Manu 4.49) 

chdydydm mutra purTsayoh karma varjayet II 16 II 

16. He shall not void faeces in the shade [of a tree, where travellers rest]. 
svdm tu chaydm avamehet II 7711 

17. But he may discharge urine on his own shadow. 

na sa updnah-miitra purise kurydt krste pathy apsu ca II 75 II 



114 



18. He shall not void faeces with his shoes on, nor on a ploughed field, nor 
on a path, nor in water. (Manu 4.45, 46; Yajn. 1:137) 

tathd sthevana maithunayoh karma-apsu varjayet II 19 II 

19. One shall also avoid spitting into, or having sex in water. (Manu 4.56.) 

agnim ddityam apo brahmanam gd devatds ca-abhimukho mutra purTsayoh 
karma varjayet 1 1 20 1 1 

20. One shall not void faeces facing the fire, the Sun, water, a Brahmana, 
cows, or [images of] the gods. (Manu 4:48, 52; Yajn. 1.134.) 

asmdnam lostham drdrdn osadhi vanaspatin urdhvdn dcchidya mutra 
purTsayoh sundhane varjayet 112711 

21. One shall avoid cleaning oneself after defecating or urinating with a 
stone, a clod of earth, or with green [boughs of] herbs or trees which one 
has broken off. 

agnimapo brahmanam gd devatd dvdram prativdtam ca sakti visaye na- 
abhiprasdrayTta II 

22. If possible, one shall not stretch out the feet towards a fire, water, a 
Brahmana, a cow, [images of] the gods, a door, or against the wind. 

The prohibition to stretch the feet towards a fire occurs also Manu 4, 53; Yajn. 1:137. 

atha-apy uddharanti II 23 II 

23. Now they quote also [the following verse]: — 

Prasna 1 . Patala 1 1 . Khanda 3 1 . 

prdti mukho- 'anndni bhuhjita uccared daksind mukhah I 
udah mukhah- mutram kurydt pratyak pdddvanejanam iti 1 1 7 1 1 

1. One shall eat facing the east, void faeces facing the south, discharge 
urine facing the north, and wash the feet facing the west. 

drdc ca-dvasathdn mutra purise kurydd daksindm disam daksind pardm vd 
II 2 II 

2. One shall void faeces far from the house, having gone towards the south 
or south-west. (Manu 4:151; Yajn 1:16) 

astam ite ca bahir grdmdd drdd dvasathdd vd mutra purTsayoh karma 
varjayet 1 1 3 1 1 



115 



3. But after sunset one must not void faeces outside the village or far from 
the house. 

devata abhidhanam ca-aprayatah \ \4\\ 

4. And as long as one is impure one [shall avoid] mentioning the names of 
the gods. 

purusam ca-ubhayor devatdndm rdjnas ca 1 1 5 1 1 

5. And one shall not speak evil of the gods or of the king. (Manu 4.163) 
brdhmanasya gor iti pada upasparsanam varjayet 1 1 6 1 1 

6. One shall not touch a Brahmana, a cow, nor any other [venerable beings] 
with his foot. 

hastena ca-akdrandt 1 1 7 1 1 

7. [Nor] with the hand, except for particular reasons. 
gor daksinanam kumaryas ca parTvdddn varjayet 1 1 8 1 1 

8. One shall not mention the blemishes of a cow, of sacrificial presents 
(daksina), or of a girl. 

In the section on transcendental knowledge [1, 8:23; 5], "speaking evil" has been 
forbidden, in connection with the means of liberation. And below [Sutra 25] the 
[author] will declare that the sins which destroy creatures are to be avoided. But 
this precept [is given in order to indicate that] in the case of cows and the rest an 
extra penance must be performed.' — Haradatta. 

strhatim ca gam na- acaksTta 1 1 9 1 1 

9. And one shall not report it [to the owner] if a cow does damage [by 
eating corn or grass in a field]. 

samsrstam ca vatsena-animitte II 10 II 

10. [Nor shall one call attention to it] if a cow is together with her calf, 
except for a particular reason. 

na-adhenum adhenur iti bruydt I dhenu bhavya-ity eva bruyat II 77 II 

11. And of a cow which is not a milch-cow one shall not say, 'She is not a 
milch-cow.' One must say, 'This is a cow which will become a milch-cow.' 

na bhadram bhadram iti bruyat I punyam prasastam ity eva bruyat 1 1 72 1 1 

12. One shall not call "auspicious" that which is "auspicious". One shall 
rather call it "meritorious" {punyam), "Divine grace" (prasadam). (Manu 
4.139.) 



116 



vatsa tantim ca na-upari gacchet 1 1 7 J 1 1 

13. One shall not step over a rope to which a calf [or cow] is tied. (Manu 
4.38) 

plenkhav antarena ca na- atiyat 1 1 14 1 1 

14. One shall not pass between the posts from which a swing is suspended. 

Or according to others, 'He shall not pass between pillars supporting an arch."- Haradatta. 

na-asau me sapatna iti bruyat I yady asau me sapatna iti bruyad 
dvisantam bhrdtrvyam janayet 1 1 75 1 1 

15. [In company] One should never say, 'This person is my enemy.' If one 
says, 'This person is my enemy,' an enemy will be created, who will show 
his hatred. 

na-indra dhanur iti parasmai prabriiyat II 16 II 

16. If one sees a rainbow, one must not say to others, 'Here is Indra's bow.' 
(Manu 4.59.) 

na patatah sahcaksitah II 7711 

17. One shall not count [a flock of] birds. 

Others explain [the Sutra thus]: — He shall not announce it to others, if he sees 
jivas [as falling stars] falling from heaven on account of the expenditure of their 
merit, [ie.) he shall not call attention to them.' — Haradatta. 

udyantam astam yantam ca-adityam darsane varjayet II 18 II 

18. One shall avoid looking at the sun when it rises or sets. (Manu 4.37.) 

divd-ddityah sattvani gopayati naktam candramas tasmad amavasyayam 
nisayam svadhiya atmano guptim icchet prayatya brahmacaryakale 
caryaya ca 1 1 79 1 1 

19. During the day the sun protects the creatures, during the night the 
moon. Therefore let one eagerly strive to protect oneself on the night of the 
new moon by purity, continence, and rites adapted for the season. (Manu 
4.153.) 

saha hy etam ratrim surya candramasau vasatah 1 1 19 1 1 

20. For during that night the sun and the moon dwell together. 

na kusrtya gramam praviset I yadi pravisen namo rudraya vastospataya 
ity etam ream japed any am va raudrim 1 1 20 1 1 

21. One should not enter the village by a by-path. If one does, one shall 
mutter this Rik- verse, 'Praise be to Rudra, the lord of the dwelling,' or 



117 



some other [verse] addressed to Rudra. (Manu 4.73 Yajn. 1:140) 

na-abrahmanaya-ucchistam prayacchet I 

yadi prayacched dantdn skuptvd tasminn avadhdya prayacchet 1 1 22 1 1 

22. One shall not [ordinarily] give the left-over food to a person who is not 
a Brahmana. When one gives it [to such a one], one shall clean the teeth 
and give [the food] after having placed in it [the dirt from the teeth]. 
(Manu 4.80) 

This prohibition [given in the first part of the Sutras refers to sudras who are not 
dependents; to dependents the following [exception applies].' — Haradatta. 

krodhadims ca bhuta dahTyan dosan varjayet II 23 II 

23. And let one avoid the faults that destroy sentient beings such as anger 
and the like. 

See above, 1:8:23:4 and 5, and Manu 4, 163 

Prasna 1. Patala 11. Khanda 32. 
Teaching 

pravacana yukto varsa saradam maithunam varjayet 1 1 7 1 1 

1. Let one who teaches, avoid sexual intercourse during the rainy season 
and in autumn. 

mithuni bhuya ca na toy a saha sarvam ratrim sayita II 2 II 

2. And if one has had sex [with his wife], he shall not lie with her during 
the whole night. (Manu 4:40) 

say anas ca-adhyapanam varjayet 1 1 3 1 1 

3. One shall not teach whilst lying on a bed. 

na ca tasyam sayyayam adhyapayed yasyam sayita 1 1 4 1 1 

4. Nor shall one teach [sitting] on that bed on which he lies [at night with 
his wife]. 

anavihsrag anulepanah syat 1 1 5 1 1 

5. One shall not display oneself adorned with a garland, or anointed with 
ointments. (Manu 4.72.) 

sada nisayam daram praty alamkurvita 1 1 6 1 1 



118 



6. At night one shall always adorn oneself for one's wife. 
sasira vamajjanam apsu varjayet 1 1 7 1 1 

7. One should not submerge the head together with the body [in bathing], 
astamite ca snanam 1 1 8 1 1 

8. And [one should avoid] bathing after sunset. 

In the days of Apastamba there were no bathrooms and all bathing took place in the 
local river which was a dangerous place after sunset. 

palasam asanam pdduke danta praksdlanam iti ca varjayet 1 1 9 1 1 

9. One should avoid using a seat, clogs, sticks for cleaning the teeth, [and 
other utensils] made of Palasa-wood. 

stutim ca guroh samaksam yatha su snatam iti II 10 II 

10. One should avoid self-praise in front of the teacher, saying, 'I have 
properly bathed or the like. ' 

a nisaya jagaranam II 77 II 

1 1 . One should awake from midnight. 

This is an interesting sutra — one is advised to sleep for 6 hours which would 
mean that one has gone to be bed just after sunet. 

anadhyayo nisayam anyatra dharma upadesat-sisyebhyah II 72 II 

12. One shouldn't study [or teach] in the middle of the night; but [may 
instruct] students in their duties. 

One should not teach the Vedas but one may teach the students about their other 
duties and obligations relating to their Vedic studies. 

manasa va svayam II 13 II 

13. Or [one may] personally mentally [repeat the Veda]. 
urdhvam ardha ratrad adhyapanam \ \ 14 \ \ 

14. After midnight one may teach. 

na-apara ratram utthaya-anadhyaya iti samviset 1 1 75 1 1 

15. When one has risen [at midnight, and taught] during the third watch of 
the night, one shouldn't lie down again [saying], 'Studying is forbidden.' 

If the following day is a forbidden day, eg. an astami. See also Manu 4, 99. 

kdmam apas sayita II 7611 

16. At one's pleasure one may [sleep] leaning [against a post or wall]. 



119 



But not returning to bed - lying on a bed creates impurity and requires one to bathe 
when arising but leaning against a wall etc. does not incur impurity. 

manasa va- adhTyita II 77 II 

17. Or one may mentally repeat [the sacred texts]. 
ksudran ksudra caritams ca desan na seveta II 18 II 

18. One shouldn't visit inferior people nor countries which are inhabited by 
them. (Manu 4.60 and 61.) 

sabhah samdjdms ca 1 1 79 1 1 

19. Nor assemblies and crowds. 

samajam ced gacchet pradaksinT krtya- apeydt 1 1 20 1 1 

20. If one has entered a crowd, one shall leave it, turning in a clockwise 
direction [around the crowd]. 

nagara pravesanani ca varjayet \ \ 21 II 

21. Nor shall one frequently enter towns. 
prasnam ca na vibruyat 1 1 22 1 1 

22. One should avoid answering directly a question [that is difficult to 
decide]. 

atha-apy udaharanti 1 1 23 1 1 

23. Now they quote also [the following verse]: — 

mulam tulam vrhati durvivaktuh prajam pasun ayatanam hinasti I 
dharma prahrada na kumalanaya rudan ha mrtyur vyuvaca prasnam iti 1 1 
24 II 

24. [The foolish decision] of a person who decided wrongly destroys his 
ancestors and his future happiness, it harms his children, cattle, and house. 
'Oh Dharmaprahrada, [this deed belongs] not to Kumalana!' thus decided 
Death, weeping, the question [addressed to him by the Rishi]. 

Haradatta tells the story to which the second half of the verse alludes, in the 
following manner: — 'A certain Rishi had two students, called Dharmaprahrada and 
Kumalana. Once they brought from the forest two great bundles of firewood and 
threw them negligently into their teacher's house, without looking. One of the 
bundles struck the teacher's little son so that he died. Then the teacher asked his 
two students, "Which of you two has killed him "Both answered, 'Not I, not I." 
Hereupon the teacher, being unable to [come to a decision in order to] send away 
the sinner and to keep the innocent one, called Death, and asked him, "Which of 
the two has killed the boy?" Then Death, finding himself involved in a difficult law 
question, began to weep, and giving his decision, said, "Oh Dharmaprahrada, not to 



120 



Kumalana [the dative has the sense of the genitive], this sin is none of kumalana's 
!" Instead of declaring. "Dharmaprahrada, thou hast done this," he said, 'The other 
did not do it." Still from the circumstances of the case it appeared that the meaning 
of the answer was, "The other has done it." "This was the decision which he gave 
crying,"- The reading of the text rendered in the translation is, dharmaprahrada na 
kumalanaya. 

gdrdabham ydnam arohane visam arohana avarohanani ca varjayet 1 1 25 

25. One should avoid travelling in a carriage yoked with donkeys; and one 
should avoid ascending or descending from vehicles in difficult places. 

bahubhyam ca naditaram 1 1 26 1 1 ( naditaranam ) 

26. And [One should avoid] crossing a river by swimming. (Manu 4.77.) 
ndvdm ca samsayikim II 27 II (navam ) 

27. And [avoid also] boats of doubtful [solidity]. 

trna cchedana losta vimardana sthevanani ca-akaranat II 28 II (vimardana 
)' 

28. One should avoid cutting grass, crushing clods of earth, and spitting, 
without a particular reason, (Manu 4.70 and 71.) 

yac ca-anyat paricaksate yac ca-anyat paricaksate 1 1 29 1 1 

29. And whatever else they [the wise] forbid. 



Prasna 2. Patala 1. Khanda 1. 

pani grahanad adhi grhamedhinor vratam 1 1 7 1 1 

1 . After marriage the rites prescribed for a householder and his wife [must 
be performed] . 

According to Haradatta, this rule is intended to refute the opinion of those who 
hold that the sacred household-fire may be kept, and the prescribed offerings 
therein may be performed, either from the time of the marriage, or after the 
division of the family estate. He also states that the use of the dual grha-medhinoh 
indicates that husband and wife must perform the rites conjointly. Manu 3:67. 

kdlayor bhojanam 1 1 2 1 1 

2. One shall eat at the two [appointed] times, [morning and evening]. 

Haradatta thinks that this Sutra is intended to prevent householders from having 
more than two meals a day, and to keep them from gluttony. Others are of opinion 
that its object is to keep householders from excessive fasting, and to make them 
perform the Pranagni-hotra at either meal. At the Pranagni-hotra the sacrificer eats 
five mouthfuls invoking successively, whilst he eats, the five vital airs. At the first 



121 



mouthful he says, 'To Prana Svaha;' at the second, 'To Apana Svaha,' etc. 

atrptis ca-annasya 1 1 3 1 1 

3. And one shall not eat to repletion. 
parvasu ca-ubhayor upavdsah 1 1 4 1 1 

4. And both [the householder and his wife] shall fast on [the days of] the 
new and full moon. 

aupavastam eva kala antare bhojanam 1 1 5 1 1 

5. To eat once [on those days] in the morning that also is called fasting. 
(Asv. Grh: Su. 1:10:2.) 

trptis ca-annasya 1 1 6 1 1 

6. And they may eat [at that single meal] until they are quite satisfied. 
yac ca-enayoh priyam syat tad etasminn ahani bhunjiyatam 1 1 7 1 1 

7. And on [the anniversary of] that [wedding] day they may eat that food of 
which they are fond. 

Haradatta holds that the words 'on that day' do not refer to the days of the new and 
full moon, the Parvan-days, mentioned in Sutra 4. His reasons are, first, that the 
permission to eat food, of which the householder may be particularly fond, has 
already been given in Sutra 6, by the term trptih, 'satisfaction'; and, secondly, that 
the singular 'on this day' does not agree with the plural 'on the Parvan-days.' 
Hence he comes to the conclusion that the words 'on that day' must refer to the 
wedding-day, mentioned in Sutra 1. as well as to its anniversary. Haradatta is, 
probably, right in his explanation, though the reasons adduced here are very weak. 
A stronger reason for detaching this Sutra from Sutra 4 will be brought forward 
below, under Sutra 11. Mahadeva, the commentator of the Hiranyakesi-dharma, 
adopts the view rejected by Haradatta. 

adhas ca sayiydtdm 1 1 8 1 1 

8. And [on the night of that day] they shall sleep on the ground [on a raised 
heap of earth]. (Asv. Grh: Sutra. 1:3:10.) 

maithuna varjanam ca \ \ 9 II 

9. And they shall avoid having sex. 

svo bhute sthdlTpdkah WWW ( svo bhute ) 

10. And on the day after [that day] a Sthalipaka must be offered. 

A Sthalipaka is an offering at which rice cooked in a pot, sthali, is offered in the 
fire A full description of this kind of sacrifice occurs, Asv. Gr,:l:10:seq. 

tasya-upacdrah pdrvanena vydkhydtah II 11 II 



122 



11. The manner in which that offering must be performed has been 
declared by [the description of the Sthalipaka] to be performed on the days 
of the new and full moon [the Parvana] . 

The Parvana Sthalipaka has been described by Apastamba in the Grhya sutra, 3:7. 
Again, Haradatta returns to the question whether the words on that day [Sutra 7] 
refer to the Parvan-days, or the marriage-day and its anniversaries. He now adds, in 
favour of the latter view, that the word parvanena, 'by the rite to be performed on 
Parvan-days,' by which the Sthalipaka on Parvan-days is intended, clearly proves 
the impossibility to refer the preceding rules to the Parvan-days. He adds that 
some, nevertheless, adopt the explanation rejected by himself. 

nityam loka upadisanti II 12 II 

12. And they declare [that this rite which is known] amongst the people [must 
be performed] every [year] . 

They, ie. the Sistas, those learned in the law. 'Another commentator says, the rite 
which will be taught [in the following Sutra], and which is known from the usage 
of the learned, is constant, ie. must be performed in every case. That it is what the 
"learned" declare. — Haradatta. The latter explanation of the Sutra is adopted by 
Mahadeva. 

yatra kva ca-agnim upasamddhdsyan sydt tatra pracTr udTcTs ca tisras tisro 
lekhd likhitvd-adbhir avoksya-agnim upasamindhydt 1 1 7 J 1 1 

13. At every [burnt-offering], when he wishes to place the fire on the altar 
[called Sthandila], let him draw on that [altar] three lines from west to east and 
three lines from south to north, and sprinkle [the altar] with water, turning the 
palm of the hand downwards, and let him then make the fire burn brightly by 
adding [fuel]. (Asv. Grh:Su. 1:3:1-3.) 

utsicya-etad udakam uttarena purvena vd-anyad upadadhydt 1 1 14 1 1 

14. He shall pour out [the remainder of] this water used for sprinkling, to the 
north or to the east [of the altar], and take other [water into the vessel]. 

nityam uda dhdndny adbhir ariktdni syur grhamedhinor vratam II 15 II 

15. The water- vessels in the house shall never be empty; that is the duty to be 
observed by the householder and his wife. 

Haradatta states that the objection of the repetition of the words 'the householder and his 
wife'is to show that they themselves must fill the water-vessels, and not employ others 
for this purpose. He adds that, according to another commentator, the object of the 
repetition is to show that Sutras 13 and 14 apply not only to householders, but also to 
students, and that hence students, when they offer the daily oblations of sacred fuel 
[above, 1:1:4:14 seq.), should also perform the rites taught in the preceding Sutras. 



123 



Sexual Relations 

ahany asamvesanam II 76 II 

16. One should not have sex in the day-time, 
rtau ca samnipato darena-anuvratam II 17 II 

17. But let him have sex with his wife at the proper time, according to the 
rules [of the law]. (Manu 3:46-48; Yajn. 1.79.80.) 

antarale- 'api ddra eva II 18 II 

18. Let him have sex in the interval also, if his wife [desires it]. (Manu 
3:45; Yajn. 1:81) 

Interestingly enough the Dharma sastra confers conjugal rights on women but not on 
men. It is for the women to instigate sexual intercourse and to decide when and how 
often to have sex. 

brahmana vacandc ca samvesanam II 79 II 

19. [The duty of] having sex [follows from] the passage of a Brahmana, 
[Let us dwell together until a son be born.'] 

See Taittiriya Samhita 2:5:1:5. 

strl vdsasd-eva samnipdtah syat 1 1 20 1 1 

20. But during sex he shall be dressed in a particular garment kept for this 
purpose. 

yavat samnipatam ca-eva sahasayyd \ \ 21 II 

2 1 . And during sex only they shall lie together, 
tato nana 1 1 22 1 1 

22. Afterwards separate. 
udaka upasparsanam 1 1 2 J 1 1 

23. Then they both shall bathe; 

Prasna 2. Patala 1. Khanda 2. 

api va lepan praksalya- acamya proksanam anganam 1 1 7 1 1 

1. Or they shall remove the emissions with earth or water, sip water, and 
sprinkle the body with water. 

sarva varnanam sva dharma anusthdne parama parimitam sukham 1 1 2 1 1 



124 



2. People of all castes, if they fulfil their [assigned] duties, enjoy [in 
heaven] the highest, imperishable bliss. 

tatah parivrttau karma phala sesena jatim rupam varnam balam medham 
prajham dravyani dharma anusthanam iti pratipadyate I tat-cakravad 
ubhayor lokayoh sukha eva vartate 1 1 3 1 1 

3. Afterwards when [one who has fulfilled his duties] returns to this world, 
he obtains, by virtue of a remainder of merit, birth in a distinguished 
family, physical beauty, beauty of complexion, strength, aptitude for 
learning, wisdom, wealth, and the gift of fulfilling the laws of his [caste 
and order]. Therefore in both worlds he dwells in happiness, [rolling] like a 
wheel [from the one to the other] . 

yatha-osadhi vanaspatTnam bijasya ksetra karma visese phala parivrddhir 
evam 1 1 4 1 1 

4. As the seed of herbs [and] trees, [sown] in good and well-cultivated soil, 
gives manifold returns of fruit [even so it is with those who have received 
the various sacraments]. 

etena dosa phala parivrddhir ukta 1 1 5 1 1 

5. The increase of the results of faults has been explained hereby. 

steno- 'abhisasto brahmano rdjanyo vaisyo va parasmiml loke parimite 
niraye vrtte jayate cdnddlo brahmanah paulkaso rdjanyo vaino vaisyah 1 1 
6 II (parimitam ) 

6. Thus after having undergone a long punishment in the next world, a 
person who has stolen [the gold of a Brahmana] or killed a [Brahmana] is 
born again, in case he was a Brahmana as a Candala, in case he was a 
Ksatriya as a Paulkasa, in case he was a Vaisya as a Vaina. 

Manu 12:55; Yajn. 3:206, 207. A Paulkasa is said to be the offspring of a Nisada 
and a Kshatriya woman. A Vaina is a rope-dancer, or an acrobat. 

etena-anye dosa phalaih karmabhih paridhvamsd dosa phalasu yonisu 
[jayante varna paridhvamsdyam 1 1 7 1 1 

7. In the same manner others who have become outcasts as a result of their 
negative actions are born again, on account of [these] actions in the wombs 
[of various animals] — losing their caste. (Manu 122. 52.) 

yatha candala upasparsane sambhasayam darsane ca dosas tatra 
prayascittam 1 1 8 1 1 

8. As it is forbidden to touch a Candala, to speak to him or to look at him. 



125 



The penance for these [offences will be declared] . 

avagahanam apam upasparsane sambhdsdydm brahmana sambhdsd 
darsane jyotisdm darsanam 1 1 9 1 1 

9. [The penance] for touching him is to bathe, submerging the whole body; 
for speaking to him to speak to a Brahmana; for looking at him to look at 
the lights [of heaven] . 

Prasna 2. Patala 2. Khanda 3. 

drydh prayatd vaisvadeve- 'anna samskartdrah syuh 1 1 7 1 1 

1 . Pure men of the first three castes shall prepare the food [of a householder 
which is used] at the Vaisvadeva ceremony. 

'The food which is used at the Vaisvadeva, i. e. the food prepared for the daily 
meals of the householder and of his wife. ' — Haradatta. 

bhdsdm kdsam ksavayum ity abhimukho- 'annam varjayet 1 1 2 1 1 

2. The [cook] shall not speak, nor cough, nor sneeze, while facing the food. 
kesdn angam vdsas ca-dlabhya-apa upasprset 1 1 3 1 1 

3. He shall wash his hands if he has touched his hair, his limbs, or his 
garment. 

drya adhisthitd vd sudrdh samskartdrah syuh 1 1 4 1 1 

4. Or sudras may prepare the food, under the superintendence of people of 
the first three castes. 

tesdm sa eva-dcamana kalpah 1 1 5 1 1 

5. For them is prescribed the same rule of sipping water [as for their 
masters]. 

This Sutra is a jnapaka, as it indicates that Apastamba also recognises the different 
rules which are usually prescribed in the Smrtis for Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, 
and sudras. See above, 1:5:16:2. 

adhikam ahar ahah kesa smasru loma nakha vdpanam 1 1 6 1 1 

6. Besides, the [sudra cooks] shall daily trim their hair, their beards, the 
hair on their bodies, and their nails. 

udaka upasparsanam ca saha vdsasd 1 1 7 1 1 

7. And they shall bathe, keeping their clothes on. 

Usually in bathing both aryas and sudras wear no dress except the langoti. 



126 



api va-astamisv eva parvasu va vaperan 1 1 8 1 1 

8. Or they may trim [their hair and nails] on the eighth day [of each half- 
month], or on the days of the full and new moon. 

paroksam annam samskrtam agnav adhisritya-adbhih prokset I 
tad deva pavitram ity dcaksate 1 1 9 1 1 

9. [The householder himself] shall place on the fire that food which has 
been prepared [by sudras] without supervision, and shall sprinkle it with 
water. Such food also they state to be fit for the gods. 

shall place on the fire — in other words whatever food is prepared by unsupervised 
sudra cooks should be reheated on the fire and then sprinkled with water and the 
recitation of mantras. 

siddhe- 'anne tisthan bhutam iti svdmine prabruydt II 10 II 

10. When the food is ready, [the cook] shall stand before his master and 
announce it to him [saying], 'It is ready.' 

tat su bhutam virad annam tan ma ksayi-iti prativacanah II 11 II 

11. The answer [of the master] shall be, 'That well-prepared food is the 
means to obtain splendour; may it never fail !' (Manu 2:54.) 

grhamedhinor yad asaniyasya homd balayas ca svarga pusti samyuktdh 1 1 
72 II (grhamedhino) 

12. The burnt-oblations and Bali-offerings made with the food which the 
husband and his wife are to eat, bring [as their reward] prosperity, [and the 
enjoyment of] heaven. 

Balis are portions of food which are thrown before the door, or placed in a special 
sequence on the floor of the house. See below, Sutra 16 seq. 

tesdm mantrdnam upayoge dvadasa aham adhah sayya brahma caryam 
ksara lavana varjanam ca\ \ 13 \ \ 

13. Whilst learning the sacred formulas [to be recited during the 
performance] of those [burnt oblations and Bali-offerings, a householder] 
shall sleep on the ground, abstain from sexual intercourse and from eating 
spicy condiments and salt, during twelve days. 

Others explain this Sutra thus: — "After having used for the first time these sacred 
formulas [which are to be recited in offering the burnt-oblation and the Balis, the 
householder and his wife] shall sleep," etc. 

uttamasya-eka ratram upavasah 1 1 14 1 1 

14. [When he studies the Mantras] for the last [Bali offered to the goblins], 



127 



he shall fast for one [day and] night. 

Regarding the use of ekaratra in the sense of 'a [day and a] night,' see above. The 
'last' Bali-offering is that described below, 2:2:4:5. 

balindm tasya tasya dese samskdro hastena parimrjya- avoksya nyupya 
pascdt parisecanam 1 1 75 1 1 

15. for each Bali-offering the ground must be prepared separately. [The 
performer] sweeps [the ground] with his [right] hand, sprinkles it with 
water, turning the palm downwards, throws down [the offering], and 
afterwards sprinkles water around it. 

They say that the word "afterwards" is used in order to indicate that perfumes, 
garlands, and other [Upacdras] must be offered between [the last two acts].' — 
Haradatta. 

aupdsane pacane vd sadbhir ddyaih pratimantram hastena juhuydt II 76 II 

16 [At the Vaisvadeva sacrifice] he shall offer the oblations with his hand, 
[offering them] into the kitchen-fire or into the sacred [Grhya]-fire, and 
reciting [each time one of] the first six Mantras [prescribed in the Narayani 
Upanishad]. 

It is a disputed point with the commentators whether every Brahmana may offer 
the Vaisvadeva in the common kitchen-fire, or those persons only who do not keep 
a sacred domestic fire. 

The six Mantras, which are given in Taitt. Ar. 10:67:1 are: — 1. Agnaye Svaha, 'to 
Agni Svaha'; 3. Somaya Svaha, 'to Soma Svaha'; 3. Visvebhyo devebhyah Svaha, 
'to all the gods Svaha'; 4. Dhruvaya bhamaya Svaha, 'to Dhruva Bhima Svaha'; 5. 
Dhruvaksitaye Svaha, 'to Dhruvaksiti Svaha'; 6. Acyutaksitaye Svaha, 'to 
Acyutaksiti Svaha.' Haradatta adds that some add a seventh formula, addressed to 
Agni svistakrt, 'to the fire which perfects the performance of the sacrifice,' while 
others leave out the second Mantra and give that addressed to Agni svistakrt the 
sixth place. This latter is the order given in the Calcutta edition of the Taittiriya 
Aranyaka. 

ubhayatah parisecanam yathd purastdt II 7711 

17. He shall sprinkle water all around both times [before and after the 
oblations], as [has been declared] above. 

'Above, ie. Grhya-sutra, 1:2:3:8.' — Haradatta. The Mantras recited are: — 1. at 
the first sprinkling, Adite 'numanyasva, 'Aditi permit'; Anumate 'numanyasva, 
'Anumati permit'; Sarasvaty anumanyasva, 'Sarasvati permit'; Deva Savitah 
prasuva, 'Divine Savitri permit'; 2. at the second sprinkling, the same as above, 
anvamamsthah and prasavlh, 'thou hast permitted,' being substituted for 
anumanyasva and prasuva. 18. This Sutra is a restriction of Sutra 15. 20. 

The first six offerings constitute the Devayajna or Vaisvadeva which is offered in 
the fire. Now follow the bali-offerings, which are merely placed on the ground, 
'behind the fire' means to the east of the fire; for the sacrificer must face the east. 



128 



evam balinam dese dese samavetanam sakrt sakrd ante parisecanam II 18 

18. In like manner water is sprinkled around once only after the 
performance of those Bali-offerings that are performed in one place. 

sati su upasamsrstena kdrydh 1 1 79 1 1 

19. [If a seasoning] has been prepared, [the Bali-offering should consist of 
rice] mixed with that seasoning. 

aparena-agnim saptama astamabhyam udag apavargam 1 1 20 1 1 

20. With the seventh and eighth Mantras [Balis must be offered to Dharma 
and Adharma] behind the fire, and must be placed the one to the north of 
the other. 

uda dhdna samnidhau navamena 1 1 27 1 1 

21. With the ninth (Mantra a Bali offered to the waters must be placed] 
near the water- vessel [in which the water for domestic purposes is kept]. 

The Mantra is, Adbhyah Svaha, "to the Waters Svaha". 

madhye- 'agdrasya dasama ekddasdbhydm prdg apavargam 1 1 22 1 1 

22. With the tenth and eleventh (Mantras, Balis, offered to the herbs and 
trees and to Rakso-deva-gana, must be placed] in the centre of the house, 
and the one to the east of the other. 

The Mantras are, Oshadhi-vanaspatibhyah Svaha, "to the herbs and trees Svaha"; 
Rakso-deva-ganebhyah svaha, "to the Raksasas and the servants of the gods 
Svaha." 

uttara purvadese- 'agarasya-uttarais caturbhih 1 1 2 J 1 1 

23. With the following four (Mantras, Balis must be placed] in the north- 
eastern part of the house [and the one to the east of the other]. 

These four Balis are sacred to the Grahas, to the Avasanas, to the Avasanapatis, 
and to all sentient beings. 

Prasna 2. Patala 2. Khanda 4. 

sayya dese kdma lingena 1 1 7 1 1 

1. Near the bed [a Bali must be offered] with [a Mantra] addressed to Kama 
Deva. 

dehalydm antariksa lingena 1 1 2 1 1 

2. On the door-sill [a Bali must be placed] with [a Mantra] addressed to 



129 



Antariksa [the air]. 
uttarena-apidhanyam 113 II 

3. With [the Mantra] that follows [in the Upanishad, he offers a Bali] near 
the door. 

Others explain apidhana, "the panels of the door," to mean the bolt of the door. — 
Haradatta. The offering is made to Ndma, the name, or essence of things.' 

uttarair brahma sadane 1 1 4 1 1 

4. With the following [ten Mantras, addressed to Earth, Air, Heaven, Sun, 
Moon, the Constellations, Indra, Brhaspati, Prajapati, and Brahman, he 
offers ten Balis, each following one to the east of the preceding one], in 
[the part of the house called] the seat of Brahman. 

Haradatta gives two explanations of the word Brahma-sadana, 'the seat of 
Brahman.' According to some, it is an architectural term, designating the centre of 
the house; according to others, it denotes the place where, at the time of the burnt- 
oblations, the Brahman or superintending priest is seated, ie. a spot to the south of 
the sacred fire. 

daksinatah pitr lingena prdcTna dvity avdcTna pdnih kurydt 1 1 5 1 1 

5. He shall offer to the south [of the Balis offered before, a Bali] with a 
Mantra addressed to the Manes; his sacrificial cord shall be suspended over 
the right shoulder, and the [palm of his right hand shall be turned upwards 
and] inclined to the right. 

Balis and water for the Manes are placed or poured into the palm of the hand and 
thrown out between the thumb and forefinger. That part of the palm is, therefore, 
sometimes called 'the tlrtha sacred to the Manes.' See Manu 2:39. 

raudra uttaro yathd devatdbhyah 1 1 6 1 1 

6. To the north [of the Bali given to the Manes, a Bali shall be offered] to 
Rudra, in the same manner as to the [other] gods. 

'That is to say, the sacrificial cord shall not be suspended over the right shoulder, 
nor shall the Bali be thrown out between the thumb and forefinger.' — Haradatta. 

tayor nana parisecanam dharma bhedat 1 1 7 1 1 

7. The sprinkling with water [which precedes and follows the oblation] of 
these two [Balis, takes place] separately, on account of the difference of the 
rule [for each case]. 

In sprinkling around an offering to the gods, the sacrificer turns his right hand 
towards the oblation and pours out the water, beginning in the south and ending, in 
the east. In sprinkling around an offering to the Manes, exactly the opposite order 
is to be followed. 



130 



naktam eva-uttamena vaihayasam 1 1 8 1 1 

8. At night only he shall offer [the Bali to the elementals] throwing it into 
the air and reciting the last [Mantra]. 

At night, i. e. before the evening meal. The Mantra is, 'To those beings which, 
being servants of Vituda, roam about day and night, desiring a Bali-offering, I offer 
this Bali, desirous of prosperity]. May the Lord of prosperity grant me prosperity, 
Svaha.' Haradatta adds, that according to another commentator, no other Bali but 
this is to be offered in the evening, and that some modify the Mantra for each 
occasion, offering the Bali in the morning to 'the Bhutas that roam about during 
the day,' and in the evening 'to the night-walkers. Compare for the whole section 
Manu 3:90-92; Yajn. 1:102-104. 

ya etan avyagro yatha upadesam kurute nityah svargah pustis ca 1 1 9 1 1 

9. He who devoutly offers these [above-described Balis and Homas], 
according to the rules, [obtains] eternal bliss in heaven and prosperity. 

agram ca deyam II 10 II 

10. And [after the Balis have been performed, a portion of the food] must 
first be given as alms. (Manu 3:94 seq.) 

Hospitality 

atithin eva-agre bhojayetW 77 II 

11. One shall feed guests first, (Manu 3:1 15; Yajn. 1. 105.) 
bdldn vrddhan roga sambandhdn strTs ca-antarvatnTh 1 1 72 1 1 

12. And infants, old or sick people, female [relations, and] pregnant 
women. (Manu 3:114; Yajn. 1.105.) 

kale svaminav annarthinam na pratya caksTyatam 1 1 7 J 1 1 

13. The master [of the house] and his wife shall not refuse one who asks for 
food at the time [when the Vaisvadeva offering has been performed] . 

abhave bhumir udakam trnani kalyanTvag iti I etani vai sato- 'agare na 
ksTyante kadacana-iti 1 1 14 1 1 

2:2:4:14. If there is no food; [then] earth, water, grass, and a kind word, 
indeed, never fail in the house of a good person. Thus [say those who know 
the law]. (Manu 3:101; Yajn. 1:107.) 

In the event of there being no food in the house then the minimum that should be 
offered to guests is a grass-mat to sit upon, water to drink and kind words. 

evam vrttav ananta lokau bhavatah II 75 II 

15. Endless realms are the reward [of those householders and wives] who 



131 



act thus. 

brahmanaya-anadhTyaanaya-asanam udakam annam iti deyam I na 
pratyuttisthet II 16 II 

16. To a Brahmana who has not studied the Veda, a seat, water, and food 
must be given. But [the giver] shall not rise [to show him respect]. (Manu 
3:99) 

abhivddandya-eva-uttisthed abhivddyas cet II 7711 

17. But if [such a person] is worthy of a salutation [for other reasons], he 
shall rise to salute him. 

rdjanya vaisyau ca II 18 II 

18. Nor [shall a Brahmana rise to receive] a Kshatriya or Vaishya [though 
they may be learned]. (Manu 3:110-112; Yajn. 1:107) 

sudram abhydgatam karmani niyunjydt I atha-asmai dadydt\\19\\ 

19. If a sudra comes as a guest to a Brahmana], he shall give him some 
work to do. He may feed him, after [that has been done]. (Manu loc. cit.) 

A small token work is prescribed such as fetch water, chop some wood, sweep a path, set 
the table, etc. 

ddsd vd raja kuldd dhrtya-atithivat- sudram pujayeyuh \ \ 20 \ \ 

20. Or the servants [of the Brahmana householder] shall fetch [rice] from 
the royal stores, and honour the sudra as a guest. 

nityam uttaram vdsah kdryam II 21 II 

21. [A householder] must always wear his garment over [his left shoulder 
and under his right arm]. 

api vd sutram eva- upavitdrthe 1 1 22 1 1 

22. Or he may use a cord only, slung over his left shoulder and passed 
under his right arm, instead of the garment. 

These 2 sutras indicate that the wearing of the sacred thread (yajnopavltam) was 
optional in the time of Apastamba and originally was used as a substitute for the 
actual garment {anga-v astro). 

yatra bhujyate tat samiihya nirhrtya- avoksya tarn desam amatrebhyo 
lepdn samkrsya-adbhih samsrjya-uttaratah sucau dese rudrdya ninayet I 
evam vdstu sivam bhavati 1 1 23 

23. One shall sweep together [the crumbs] on the place where one has 
eaten, and take them away. One shall sprinkle water on that place with the 



132 



palm downwards, and remove the remnants [of food from the cooking- 
vessels with a spoon], wash them with water, and take their contents to a 
clean place to the north [of the house, offering them] to Rudra. In this 
manner the house will become prosperous. 

brahmana acaryah smaryate tu\\24\\ 

24. It is declared in the Smrtis that a Brahmana alone should be chosen as 
teacher [or spiritual guide] . 

The reference in the context is to Vedic study. 

Manu 2:241, 242. From here down to 2:3:6:2 Apastamba again treats of the duties 
of students and teachers, a subject which appears to have in his eyes a greater 
importance than any other. The rules given now apply chiefly to householders. It 
would seem that they have been inserted in this particular place, because the 
reception of a former teacher is to be described 2:3:5:4 - 11 and that of a 'learned 
guest' 2:3:6:3 seq. 

apadi brahmanena rdjanye vaisye vd-adhyayanam 1 1 25 1 1 

25. In exceptional circumstances a Brahmana may study under a Ksatriya 
or Vaisya. 

anugamanam ca pascdt 1 1 26 1 1 

26. And [during his discipleship] he must walk behind [such a teacher]. 
tata urdhvam brahmana eva-agre gatau sydt II 27 II 

27. Afterwards the Brahmana shall take precedence before [his Ksatriya or 
Vaisya teacher]. 

Prasna 2. Patala 2. Khanda 5. 

sarva vidydndm apy upanisaddm updkrtya-anadhyayanam tad ahah Mill 

1. On the day on which, beginning the study of the whole sacred science, 
the Upanisads [and the rest, he performs the Upakarma in the morning], he 
shall not study [at night] . 

This rule refers to the Upakarma, to be performed yearly by householders. 
Nowadays, too, the custom is observed, and the whole Brahminical community 
change their yajnopavitas or sacrificial cords on this occasion in the month of 
Sravana. The adherents of the various sakhas of the Vedas, however, perform the 
ceremony on different days. According to Haradatta, the Upanisads are named, in 
order to show that they are of the highest importance. See also Satapatha- 
Brahmana 10:3:5:12. 

adhitya ca-avikramanam sadyah 1 1 2 1 1 

2. And he shall not leave his teacher immediately after completing the 



133 



study. 

Others consider that this Sutra refers to the annual Upakarma of the householder. 
In that case the translation would be, 'And after having performed the Upakarma,' 
etc. Probably Apastamba means to give a general rule, applicable both to 
householders and to students who have returned home. 

yadi tvareta guroh samiksdydm svddhydyam adhTtya kdmam gacchet I 
evam ubhayoh sivam bhavati II 3 II 

3. If he is in a hurry to go, he shall perform the daily recitation of the Veda 
in the presence of his teacher, and then go at his pleasure. In this manner 
good fortune will attend both of them. 

samavrttam ced dcdryo- 'abhydgacchet tarn abhimukho- ' abhydgamya 
tasya- upasamgrhya na bibhatsamdna udakam upasprset puraskrtya- 
upasthdpya yathd upadesam pujayet 1 1 4 1 1 

4. If the [former] teacher visits him after he has returned home, he shall go 
out to meet him, and touch his [feet], without washing afterwards showing 
disgust. He shall let him enter the house first, and then fetch [the materials 
necessary for a hospitable reception], and honour him according to the rule. 

Though he may suspect that the teacher had been defiled by the touch of a Candala 
or the like, still he shall not show disgust nor wash himself.' — Haradatta. 

Regarding the rule of receiving guests, see below, 2:4, 8, 6 seq. 

dsane sayane bhaksye bhojye vdsasi vd samnihite nihTnatara vrttih sydt 
II 5 II 

5. If [his former teacher is] present, he himself shall use a seat, a bed, food, 
and garments inferior to, and lower [than those offered to the teacher]. 

tisthan savyena pdnind- anugrhya-dcdryam dcamayet 1 1 6 1 1 

6. Standing [slighty bent], one shall place the left hand [under the water- 
vessel, and bending with his other hand its mouth downwards], he shall 
offer to his teacher water for sipping. 

According to Haradatta, the repetition of the word acaryam, 'the teacher,' in this 
Sutra, indicates that the rule holds good not only when the teacher comes as a guest 
to his former student, but on every occasion when he receives water for sipping. 

any am vd samudetam 1 1 7 1 1 

7. And [he shall offer water for sipping in this manner] to other guests also 
who possess all [good qualities] together. 

He is called samudeta, "possessed of all [good qualities] together," who is 
endowed with [good] birth, disposition, behaviour, [great] learning, and a 
[venerable] age.' — Haradatta. 



134 



sthana asana cankramana smitesv anucikirsan 1 1 8 1 1 

8. He shall follow [his teacher] in rising, sitting, walking about, and 
smiling. 

In other words he shall do these acts only after his teacher has done them. 

samnihite mutrd purTsa vata karma-uccair bhasa hdsa sthevana danta 
skavana nihsrnkhana bhruksepana tdlana nisthydni-iti 1 1 9 1 1 

9. In the presence [of the teacher] one shall not defecate, fart, speak aloud, 
laugh, spit, clean the teeth, blow the nose, frown, clap hands, nor snap 
fingers. 

dare prajdydm ca-upasparsana bhdsd visrambha purvdh parivarjayet 1 1 
70 11 

10. Nor shall one tenderly embrace or address caressing words to his 
spouse or children. 

vdkyena vdkyasya pratTghdtam dcdryasya varjayet II 11 II 

11. One shall not contradict what the teacher says. 

Contradict out of insolence or cheek, but if there are inconsistencies in the teaching 
one may make these known and seek clarification. 

sr eyas dm ca II 12 II 

12. Nor those that are one's superiors. 
sarva bhuta parivdda dkrosdms ca 1 1 13 1 1 

13. [One shall not] blame or deprecate any sentient being. 

Haradatta states that 'deprecating' is forbidden here once more in order that it 
should be particularly avoided. 

vidyayd ca vidydndm 1 1 14 1 1 

14. [One shall not revile one branch of] sacred learning by [invidiously 
comparing it with] another. 

For example, one shall not say, "The Rig Veda is sweet to the ear, the other Vedas 
grate on the ear," or "the Taittiriya Veda is a sakha consisting of leavings," or "the 
Brahmana proclaimed by Yajnavalkya is of modern origin." — Haradatta. 'The 
second sentence refers to the story that Yajnavalkya vomited the Black Yajur 
Veda, and his fellow-students, becoming partridges, picked it up. Regarding the 
third sentence, see Varttika on Panini 4, 3, 105, 

yayd vidyayd na viroceta punar deary am upetya niyamena sddhayet II 15 

15. If one does not achieve perfection in a [branch of] the Veda [which he 
studied formerly], he shall again go to the [same] teacher and master it, 



135 



observing the [same] rules as [during his first studentship]. 

updkarandd d-utsarjanddadhydpayitur niyamah I loma samharanam 
mams am srdddham maithunam iti ca varjayet II 16 II 

16. The restrictions [to be kept] by the teacher from the beginning of the 
course of [annual] teaching [updkarma] to its end [utsarjana - vide 1:3:9:2] 
are: to avoid cutting the hair on the body, partaking of meat or of food- 
offerings to the Manes, and sex. 

These things can be done again once the course has ended under the full-moon of 
Pausha — about 5 months. 

rtve vd jay dm II 7711 

17. Or [he may have sex] with his wife at the proper season. 

yathd dgamam sisyebhyo vidyd sampraddne niyamesu ca yuktah sydt I 
evam vartamdnah purva apardn sambandhdn dtmdnam ca kseme yunakti 
II 18 II 

18. He shall be attentive in instructing his students in the sacred 
knowledge, in such a manner that they master it, and in observing the 
restrictions [imposed upon householders during their teaching]. He who 
acts thus, gains heavenly bliss for himself, his descendants and ancestors. 

manasd vdcd prdnena caksusd srotrena tvak sisna udara drambhanana 
andsrdvdn parivrnjdno- 'amrtatvdya kalpate II 79 II 

19. He who entirely avoids with mind, word, nose, eye, and ear the sensual 
objects [such as are] enjoyed by the touch, the organ, or the stomach, gains 
immortality. 

Prasna 2. Patala 3. Khanda 6. 

jdti dcdra samsaye dharma artham dgatam agnim upasamddhdya jdtim 
dcdram ca prcchet 1 1 7 1 1 

1 . If any doubts arise regarding the caste and conduct of a person who has 
come in order to fulfil his duty [of learning the Veda], he (the teacher) shall 
kindle a fire [with the ceremonies prescribed for kindling the sacrificial 
fire] and ask [the prospective student] about his caste and conduct. 

The person desirous to study addresses his teacher elect with the following 
mantra: — Bhagavan maitrena caksusd pasya sivena manasanugrhana prasida 
mam adhyapaya, 'venerable Sir, look on me with a friendly eye, receive me with a 
favourable mind, be kind and teach me.' The teacher elect then asks: — Kim gotro 
'si saumya, kim-dcdrah, 'friend, of what family are you? what is your mode of 
conduct? 



136 



sadhutam cet pratijanTte- 'agnir upadrastd vdyur upasrotd-ddityo- 
'anukhydtd sadhutam pratijanTte sddhu-asmd astu vitatha esa enasa 
ity uktvd sdstum pratipadyeta 1 1 2 1 1 

2. If he declares himself to be [of] good [family and conduct, the teacher 
elect] shall say, 'Agni who sees, Vayu who hears, Aditya who brings to 
light, vouch for his goodness; may it be well with this person! He is free 
from blame.' Then he shall begin to teach him. 

agnir iva jvalann atithir abhydgacchati 1 1 3 1 1 

3. A guest comes to the house resembling a burning fire. 

The object of this Sutra is to show the absolute necessity of feeding a guest. For, if 
offended, he might burn the house with the flames of his anger. 

dharmena veddndm eka ekdm sdkhdm adhitya srotriyo bhavati 1 1 4 1 1 

4. A srotriya is considered to be one who, observing the law [of 
studentship], has learned one complete recension of the Veda. 

The object of this Sutra is to complete the definition of the term 'guest' to be given 
in the following Sutra. The literal sense of Apastamba's words is, 'He who, 
observing the law, has studied one recension of each [of the four] Vedas, becomes 
a srotriya.' Haradatta says this definition would be contrary to the current 
acceptation of the term. That argument proves, however, nothing for Apastamba's 
times. 

sva dharma yuktam kutumbinam abhydgacchati dharma puraskdro na- 
anya prayojanah so- 'atithir bhavati 1 1 5 1 1 

5. A guest (atithi) is one who, approaches a householder solely for the 
fulfilment of his religious duties (Dharma), and with no other purpose. 
(Manu 3:102, 103; Yajn. 1:111.) 

tasya pujdydm sdntih svargas ca 1 1 6 1 1 

6. The reward for honouring [such a guest] is immunity from misfortunes, 
and heavenly bliss. (Yajn. 1.109. Manu 3:101.) 

tarn abhimukho- 'abhydgamya yathd vayah sametya tasya-dsanam 
dhdrayet 1 1 7 1 1 

7. One shall go out to meet such [a guest], honour him according to his age 
[by the formulas of salutation prescribed], and cause a seat to be given to 
him. 

sakti visaye na-abahu pddam dsanam bhavati-ity eke II 8 II 

8. Some declare that, if possible, the seat should have many legs. 

Haradatta states that this is also Apastamba's opinion. 



137 



tasya padau praksalayet I sudra mithunav ity eke 1 1 9 1 1 

9. The [householder himself] shall wash the feet of that [guest]; according 
to some, two sudras shall do it. 

anyataro- 'abhisecane sydt II 10 II 

10. One of them shall be employed in pouring water [over the guest, the 
other in washing his feet]. 

tasya-udakam dhdrayen mrnmayena-ity eke II 77 II 

11. Some declare that the water for the [guest] shall be brought in an 
earthen vessel. 

According to Haradatta, Apastamba is of opinion that it should be brought in a jar 
made of metal. 

na-udakam dcdrayed(dhdrayed?) asamdvrttah II 12 II 

12. But water should not be fetched for [a guest] who has not yet completed 
his studies. 

It is unnecessary to offer water for washing the feet to a student. 

adhyayana sdmvrttis ca-atra-adhikd \ \ 13 \ \ 

13. In case a [student comes, the host] shall chant the Veda [together with 
him] for a longer time [than with other guests] . 

sdntvayitvd tarpayed rasair bhaksyair adbhir avardrdhyena-iti 1 1 14 1 1 

14. He shall converse kindly [with his guest], and please him with milk or 
other [drinks], with eatables, or at least with water. 

dvasatham dadydd upari sayydm upastaranam upadhdnam sa 
avastaranam abhyanjanam ca-iti 117511 

15. He shall offer to his guest a room, a bed, a mattress, a pillow with a 
cover, and ointment, and what else [may be necessary]. 

'Ointment, ie. oil or clarified butter for anointing the feet.' — Haradatta. Manu 3:107. 

anna samskartdram dhuya vrihin yavdn vd tad arthdn nirvapet II 16 II 

16. [If dinner has already been finished before the arrival of the guest], he 
shall call his cook and give him rice or wheat for [preparing a fresh meal 
for] the guest. (Manu 3:108.) 

uddhrtdny anndny avekseta-idam bhuyd3 idd3m iti 1177 II 

17. [If dinner is ready when the guest arrives], he himself shall serve out 
the food and look at it, saying [to himself], 'Is this [portion] greater, or 



138 



this?' 

bhuya uddhara-ity eva bruydt II 18 II 

18. He shall say, 'Take out a larger [portion for the guest].' 

dvisan dvisato vd na-annam asniydd dosena vd mimdmsamdnasya 
mimdmsitasya vd 1 1 19 1 1 

19. A guest who is at enmity [with his host] shall not eat his food, nor 
[shall he eat the food of a host] who hates him or accuses him of a crime, or 
of one who is suspected of a crime. (Manu 4, 213; Yajn. 1. 162.) 

pdpmdnam hi sa tasya bhaksayati-iti vijndyate II 20 II 

20. For it is declared in the Veda that he [who eats the food of such a 
person] eats his guilt. 

Prasna 2. Patala 3. Khanda 7. 

sa esa prdjdpatyah kutumbino yajno nitya pratatah 1 1 7 1 1 

1 . This reception of guests is an everlasting [srauta] sacrifice offered by the 
householder to Prajapati. 

'Prajapatya may mean either "created by Prajapati" or sacred to "Prajapati." — 
Haradatta. 

yo- 'atithindm agnih sa dhavaniyo yah kutumbe sa gdrhapatyo yasmin 
pacyate so- ' anvdhdryapacanah 1 1 2 1 1 

2. The fire in the stomach of the guest [represents] the Ahavaniya, [the 
sacred fire] in the house of the host represents the Garhapatya, the fire at 
which the food for the guest is cooked [represents] the fire used for cooking 
the sacrificial viands [the Daksinagni]. 

In the first Sutra the reception of guests had been compared to an everlasting Vedic 
sacrifice. This analogy is traced further in detail in this Sutra. One of the chief 
characteristics of a Vedic sacrifice is the vitana or the use of three sacred fires; 
Hence Apastamba shows that three fires also are used in offering hospitality to 
guests. 

urjam pustim prajdm pasun istd purtam iti grhdndm asndti yah purvo- 
'atither asndti II 3 

3. One who eats before the guests consumes the food, the prosperity, the 
children, the cattle, the merit which his family acquired by sacrifices and 
charitable works. 

paya upasecanam annam agnistoma sammitam sarpisd-ukthya sammitam 
madhund-atirdtra sammitam mdmsena dvddasa aha sammitam udakena 



139 



praja vrddhir ayusas ca\\4 

4. Food [offered to guests] which is mixed with milk procures the reward 
of an Agnistoma-sacrifice, food mixed with clarified butter procures the 
reward of an Ukthya, food mixed with honey the reward of an Atiratra, 
food accompanied by meat the reward of a Dvadasa, [food and] water 
numerous offspring and long life. 

Regarding the Agnistoma and the other sacrifices mentioned, see Aitareya 
Brahmana 111:8; 4:1:4. 

priyd apriyas ca-atithayah svargam lokam gamayanti-iti vijnayate II 5 II 

5. It is declared in the Veda, 'Both welcome and unwelcome guests procure 
heaven [for their host].' 

sa yat prdtar madhyamdine sdyam iti daddti savandny eva tdni bhavanti 
II (511 

6. When he gives food in the morning, at noon, and in the evening, [these 
gifts] are the Savanas [of that sacrifice offered to Prajapati]. 

The morning, midday, and evening offerings offered at the great Vedic sacrifices 
are called Savanas. The object of this Sutra is to prescribe the hospitable reception 
of guests at all times of the day, and to further describe the similarity of a guest- 
offering to a Vedic sacrifice. 

yad anutisthaty udavasyaty eva tat II 711 

7. When he rises after his guest has risen [to depart], that act represents the 
Udavasaniya- isti [of a Vedic sacrifice] . 

Regarding the Udavasaniya isti, see Aitareya Brahmana 8:5. It is the 'concluding isti.' 

yat sdntvayatati sa daksina prasamsa 1 1 8 1 1 

8. When he addresses [the guest] kindly, that kind address [represents] the 
Daksina. 

Daksina is the gratuity given to priests who officiate at a sacrifice. 

yat samsadhayati te visnu kramah 1 1 9 1 1 

9. When he follows [his departing guest, his steps represent] the steps of 
Vishnu. 

'The steps of Vishnu' are three steps which the sacrificer has to make between the 
Vedi and the ahavanlya-fire. 

yad upavartate so- 'avabhrthah II 10 II 

10. When he returns [after having accompanied his guest], that [act 
represents] the Avabhrtha, [the final bath performed after the completion of 



140 



a sacrifice.) 

iti hi brahmanam II 11 II 

11. Thus [a Brahmana shall treat] a Brahmana, [and a Kshatriya and a 
Vaishya their caste-fellows.] 

rdjdnam ced atithir abhydgacchet- sreyasim asmai pujdm dtmanah kdrayet 
II 12 II ' 

12. If a guest comes to a king, he shall make [his Purohita] honour him 
more than himself. 

'A guest,' ie. such a one as described above, 2:3, 6, 4 and 5 

dhita agnim ced atithir abhydgacchet svayam enam abhyudetya bruydt I 
vrdtya kva-avdtsTr iti I vrdtya udakam iti I vrdtya tarpayams tv iti II 13 II 

13. If a guest comes to an Agnihotrin, he himself shall go to meet him and 
say to him: — 'O faithful fulfiller of vows, where did you stay [last night] ? 
'[Then he offers water, saying]: — "O faithful fulfiller of vows, here is 
water". [Next he offers milk or the like, saying]: — "O faithful fulfiller of 
vows, may [these fluids] refresh [you]". 

An Agnihotrin is a Brahmana who offers certain daily burnt offerings called 
Agnihotra. The translation of the last clause renders tarpayantu, the reading of the 
Atharva Veda. 

purd-agnihotrasya homdd updmsu japet I vrdtya yathd te manas tathd- 
astu-iti I vrdtya yathd te vasas tathd- astu-iti I vrdtya yathd te priyam 
tathd- astu-iti I vrdtya yathd te nikdmas tathd- astu-iti II 14 II 

14. [If the guest stays at the time of the Agnihotra, he shall make him sit 
down to the north of the fire and] murmur in a low voice, before offering 
the oblations: — "O faithful fulfiller of vows, may it be as your heart 
desires;" "O faithful fulfiller of vows, may it be as your will is;" "O faithful 
fulfiller of vows, may it be as your wish is;" "O faithful fulfiller of the] 
vows, may it be as your desire is." 

According to some, all these sentences must be pronounced; according to 
Haradatta, one only, which may be selected optionally. 

yasya- uddhrtesv ahutesv agnisv atithir abhydgacchet svayam enam 
abhyudetya bruydt vrdtya atisrja hosydmi I ity atisrstena hotavyam I 
anatisrstas cej- juhuydd dosam brahmanam aha II 75 II 

15. If a guest comes, after the fires have been placed [on the altar], but 
before the oblations have been offered, [the host] himself shall approach 
him and say to him: — O faithful fulfiller of vows, give me permission; I 



141 



wish to sacrifice.' Then he shall sacrifice, after having received permission. 
A Brahmana text declares that he commits a sin if he sacrifices without 
permission. 

Haradatta states that the Brahmana mentioned in the text is the Atharvana 
Brahmana see Atharva Veda 15:11 - 12. 

eka ratram ced atithin vdsayet pdrthivdml lokdn abhijayati dvitTyayd- 
antariksydms trtiyayd divydms caturthyd pardvato lokdn aparimitdbhir 
aparimitdml lokdn abhijayati-iti vijndyate II 7611 

16. One who entertains guests for one night obtains earthly happiness, a 
second night gains the middle air, a third heavenly bliss, a fourth the world 
of unsurpassable bliss; many nights procure endless worlds. That has been 
declared in the Veda. 

asamudetas ced atithir bruvdna dgacched dsanam udakam annam 
srotriydya daddmi-ity eva dadydt\ evam asya samrddham bhavati\\17 
II 

17. If an unlearned person who pretends to be [worthy of the appellation] 
'guest' approaches, one shall offer a seat, water, and food, [thinking] "I 
give it to a learned Brahmana. ' Thus [the merit] of his [gift] becomes [as] 
great [as if a learned Brahmana had received it]. 

This illustrates the power of one's mental attitude and resolve. 

Prasna 2. Patala 4. Khanda 8. 

yena krta dvasathah sydd atithir na tarn pratyuttisthet pratyavarohed vd 
purastdt-ced abhivdditah II 7 II 

1. On the second and following days of the guest's stay, the host shall not 
rise or descend. 

If the guest is staying for a few days then formalities need to be observed only on 
the first day and not thereafter — the guest is treated as any other member of the 
household. 

sesabhojT-atithTndm sydt 1 1 2 1 1 

2. One shall eat after the guests. (Manu 3:117; Yajn. 1.105.) 

na rasdn grhe bhunjita-anavasesam atithibhyah 1 1 3 1 1 

3. One shall not consume all the flavoured liquids in the house, so as to 
leave nothing for guests. 

Flavoured liquids, ie. milk, whey, lassi, juices etc. 



142 



na-atma artham abhirupam annam pacayet 1 1 4 1 1 

4. One shall not have sweets prepared for his own sake. (Manu 3:106.) 

Madhuparka 

Madhuparka is a procedure for formally welcoming certain types of 
distinguished visitors 

go madhu parka arho veda adhyayah 1 1 5 1 1 

5. [A guest] who can repeat the [whole] Veda [together with the 
supplementary books] is worthy to receive a cow and the Madhuparka, 
(Manu 3:119 and 120; Yajn 1:110.) 

A guest is also called goghna, 'cow-killer,' because formerly a cow used to be 
killed on the arrival of a distinguished guest. The rite is described by Asvalayana 
Grhya-sutra 1:24, 31-33. 

deary a rtvik snatako raja va dharma yuktah 1 1 6 1 1 

6. [And also] the teacher, an officiating priest, a Snataka, and a just king 
[though not learned in the Veda]. 

Nowadays the only time Madhuparka is offered is at the time of marriage to the 
son-in-law (who is supposed to be a snataka i.e. vedic graduate). In lieu of the cow 
a coconut is offered which he rolls away with a request not to kill the cow for him 
but to let it roam about and eat grass and drink water. 

deary ay a-rtvije svasurdya rdjna iti parisamvatsarad upatisthadbhyo gaur 
madhu parkas ca 1 1 7 1 1 

7. A cow and the Madhuparka [shall be offered] to the teacher, to an 
officiating priest, to a father-in-law, and to a king, if they come after a year 
has elapsed [since their former visit]. 

dadhi madhu samsrstam madhu parkah payo va madhu samsrstam 1 1 8 1 1 

8. The Madhuparka shall consist of curds mixed with honey, or of milk 
mixed with honey. (Asvalayana Grhya sutra 1:24, 5 and 6.) 

abhava udakam 1 1 9 1 1 

9. In the absence [of these substances] water [mixed with honey may be 
used]. 

sadahgo vedah II 10 II 

10. The Veda has six Ahgas [auxiliary works]. 

This Sutra explains the term, vedddhydya '[a guest] who can repeat the [whole] 



143 



Veda,' which occurs above, Sutra 5. - Haradatta. 

chandah kalpo vydkaranam jyotisam niruktam siksd chando vicitir iti II 77 
II 

11. [The six auxiliary works are] the Kalpa [teaching the ritual] of the 
Veda, the treatises on grammar, astronomy, etymology, phonetics, and 
metrics. 

sab da artha drambhandndm tu karmandm samdmndya samdptau veda 
sabdah 1 1 72 1 1 tatra samkhyd vipratisiddhd I 

12. [If any one should contend that] the term Veda [on account of its 
etymology, implying that which teaches duty or whereby one obtains 
spiritual merit] applies to the complete collection of [works which contain] 
rules for rites to be performed on the authority of precepts, [that, 
consequently, the Kalpa sutras form part of the Veda, and that thereby] the 
number [fixed above] for those [Ahgas] is proved to be wrong, 

This Sutra and the following one are directed against those who consider the Kalpa 
sutras to be a part of the Veda, the revealed texts. 

angdndm tu pradhdnair avyapadesa iti nydyavit samayah 1 1 7 J 1 1 

13. [Then we answer], All those who are learned in Mimamsa agree that 
[the terms Veda, Brahmana etc., which are applied to] the principal 
[works], do not include the Ahgas [the Kalpa sutras and the rest]. 

atithim nirdkrtya yatra gate bhojane smaret tato viramya- uposya 1 1 14 1 1 

14. If one recalls at any time during dinner, that one has refused [hospitality 
to] a guest, he shall at once stop eating and fast for the rest of that day. 

Prasna 2. Patala 4. Khanda 9. 

svo bhuteyathd manasam tarpayitvd samsddhayet 1 1 7 1 1 

1. And on the following day [he shall search for him], feast him to his 
heart's content, and accompany him [on his departure]. (Yajn. 1.113.) 

ydnavantam a ydndt 1 1 2 1 1 

2. [If the guest] possesses a vehicle, [he shall accompany him] as far as 
that. 

ydvat-na- anujdnTydd itarah 1 1 3 1 1 

3. Any other [guests he must accompany], until permission to return is 
given. 



144 



apratibhayam simno nivarteta 1 1 4 1 1 

4. If a guest forgets [to give leave to depart], the [host] may return upon 
reaching the boundary of the village. 

sarvan vaisvadeve bhaginah kurvita-d sva cdnddlebhyah 1 1 5 1 1 

5. To all [those who come for food] at [the end of] the Vaisvadeva he shall 
give a portion, even to dogs and chandalas. 

na- anarhadbhyo dadydd ity eke 1 1 6 1 1 

6. Some declare that he shall not give anything to unworthy people [such 
as Candalas]. 

upetah stnndm anupetasya ca-ucchistam varjayet 1 1 7 1 1 

7. A person who has been initiated shall not eat the leavings of women or 
of an uninitiated person. 

After a long discussion on the object of this Sutra, Haradatta comes to the 
conclusion that it is given against the improper custom to dine out of the same 
vessel with one's wife and uninitiated children, which prevails in some countries. 

sarvdny udaka purvdni ddndni 1 1 8 1 1 

8. All gifts are to be preceded by [pouring out] water. 

Consequently a gift of food also. The custom is to pour water, usually with the 
spoon called Darvi; [Palll], into the extended palm of the recipient's right hand. 

yathd sruti vihdre 1 1 9 1 1 

9. [But gifts offered to priests] at sacrifices [are to be given] in the manner 
prescribed by the Veda. 

ye nityd bhdktikds tesdm anuparodhena samvibhdgo vihitah II 10 II 

10. The division of the food must be made in such a manner that those who 
receive daily portions [servants & dependants] do not suffer by it. 

kdmam dtmdnam bhdrydm putram vd- uparundhydn na tu-eva ddsa karma 
karam 1 177 1 1 

11. At his pleasure, the householder may stint himself, his wife, or his 
children, but by no means a servant who does his work. 

tathd ca-dtmano- 'anuparodham kurydd yathd karmasv asamarthah sydt 
II 72 II 

12. And he must not stint himself so much that he becomes unable to 
perform his duties. 



145 



atha-apy udaharanti — 

astau grasa muner bhaksah sodasa-aranyavasinah I 
dvatrimsatam grhasthasya- aparimitam brahmacdrinah 1 1 
dhita agnir anadvdms ca brahmacdrT ca te tray ah I 
asnanta eva sidhyanti na-esam siddhir anasnatam iti 1 1 7 J 1 1 

13. Now they quote also [the following two verses]: — Eight mouthfuls are 
the meal of an ascetic, sixteen that of a hermit living in the woods, thirty- 
two that of a householder, and an unlimited quantity that of a student. An 
Agnihotrin, a draught-ox, and a student, those three can do their work only 
if they eat; without eating [much], they cannot do it.' (Manu 4:28; Yajn. 
3:55.) 

Prasna 2. Patala 5. Khanda 10. 

bhiksane nimittam acaryo vivaho yajno mata pitror bubhursa-arhatas ca 
niyama vilopah 1 1 

1. The reasons for [which] begging [is permissible are], [in order to collect 
the fee for] the teacher, [to celebrate] a wedding, or a srauta-sacrifice, in 
order to support one's parents, and the [impending] interruption of religious 
ceremonies performed by a worthy man. (Manu 4;251; 11:1 seq.; 
Yajn.1.216) 

By the term arhat, "a worthy person," a Brahmana is here designated who has 
studied the Veda and performs an Agnihotra. 

tatra gunan samiksya yatha sakti deyam 1 1 2 1 1 

2. [The donor] must examine the qualities [of the petitioner] and give 
according to his means. 

indriya prity arthasya tu bhiksanam animittam I na tad adriyeta II 3 II 

3. But if persons solicit donations for the sake of sensual gratification, that 
is improper; one should disregard them. 

svakarma brahmanasya-adhyayanam adhyapanam yajno yajanam danam 
pratigrahanam dayad yam silonchah 1 1 4 1 1 

4. The lawful occupations of a Brahmana are, studying, teaching, 
sacrificing for himself, officiating as priest for others, giving alms, 
receiving alms, inheriting, and gleaning corn in the fields. (Manu 1:88, 
Yajn. 1:118.) 



146 



anyat-ca- aparigrhitam 1 1 5 1 1 

5. And [he may live by taking] other things which belong to nobody. 

ie. wild roots and fruits. 

etany eva ksatriyasya-adhyapana yajana pratigrahanani-iti parihapya 
danda yuddha adhikdni 1 1 6 1 1 

6. [The lawful occupations] of a Kshatriya are the same, with the exception 
of teaching, officiating as priest, and receiving alms. [But] governing and 
fighting must be added. (Manu 1:89; 10:77, 79; Yajn. 10:1.118, 119.) 

ksatriyavad vaisyasya danda yuddha varjam krsi go raksya vanijya 
adhikam 1 1 7 1 1 

7. [The lawful occupations] of a Vaishya are the same as those of a 
Kshatriya, with the exception of governing and fighting. [But in his case] 
agriculture, the breeding of cattle, and trade must be added. (Manu 1:90, 
10:78, 79; Yajn. loc. cit.) 

na- ananucanam rtvijam vrnite na panamanam 1 1 8 1 1 

8. He [shall] not choose [for the performance of a srauta-sacrifice] a priest 
who is unlearned in the Veda, nor one who haggles [about his fee]. 

aydjyo- 'anadhTyanah 1 1 9 1 1 

9. [A priest] shall not officiate for a person unlearned in the Veda. 
yuddhe tad yoga yatha updyam upadisanti tatha pratipattavyam II 10 II 

10. In war [Ksatriyas] shall act in such a manner as those order, who are 
learned in that [art of war]. 

nyasta ayudha prakirna kesa pranjali parah avrttanam arya vadham 
paricaksate II 11 II 

1 1 . The aryas forbid the killing [in war] of those who have laid down their 
arms, of those who [beg for mercy] with loose hair or joined palms, and of 
fugitives. (Manu 7:91 seq.; Yajn. 1:325.) 

sastrair adhigatanam indriya daurbalyad vipratipannanam sasta 
nirvesam upadised yatha karma yatha uktam 117211 

12. The spiritual guide shall order those who, [whilst] participating 
according to sacred law [in the rights of their caste], have gone astray 
through the weakness of their senses, to perform penances proportionate to 
[the greatness of] their sins, according to the precepts [of the Smrti]. 

Haradatta explains the words sastrair adhigatanam, 'who whilst participating, 



147 



according to the sacred law, [in the rights of their caste,] 'by' who have been 
sanctified according to the law by the sacraments, such as the Garbha-dhana, and 
are entitled [to the rights and occupations of their caste].' 

tasya cet-sastram atipravarteran rajanam gamayet II 13 II 

13. If [such persons] transgress their [acarya's] order he shall take them 
before the king. 

raja purohitam dharma artha kusalam 1 1 14 1 1 

14. The king shall [send them] to his domestic priest (purohit), who should 
be learned in the law and the science of governing. 

sa brahmanan niyunjyat II 75 II 

15. He shall order [them to perform the proper penances if they are] 
Brahmins. 

bala visesena vadha ddsya varjam niyamair upasosayet II 76 II 

16. He shall reduce them [to reason] by forcible means, excepting corporal 
punishment and servitude. 

Probably this Sutra is meant to give a general rule, and to exempt Brahmins in 
every case from corporal punishment and servitude. Manu 8:379-380. 

Prasna 2. Patala 5. Khanda 11. 

itaresdm varnanam a prana viprayogat samaveksya tesam karmani raja 
dandam pranayet 1 1 7 1 1 

1. In the cases of [men of] other castes, the king, after having tried them, 
may punish them even by death. 

na ca samdehe dandam kuryat 1 1 2 1 1 

2. And the king shall never punish on [mere] suspicion. 

su vicitam vicitya-a daiva prasnebhyo raja dandaya pratipadyeta II 3 II 

3. But having carefully investigated [the case] by means of cross- 
examining [witnesses] and even of ordeals, the king may proceed to punish. 
[See also below, 2:11:29:6] 

evam vrtto raja-ubhau lokdv abhijayati 1 1 4 1 1 

4. A king who acts thus, gains both [this and the next] world. 
rajnah pantha brahmanena- asametya 1 1 5 1 1 



148 



5. The road belongs to the king except if he meets a Brahmin. 

Manu 2:139; Yajn. 1. 117. According to Haradatta this Sutra is given, though the 
precedence among the various castes has been already settled, in order to show that 
common Ksatriyas must make way for an anointed king. 

sametya tu brahmanasya-eva panthah 1 1 6 1 1 

6. But if he meets a Brahmin, the road belongs to the latter. (Manu 2:138; 
Yajn. 1.117.) 

yanasya bhara abhinihitasya-aturasya striya iti sarvair datavyah 1 1 7 1 1 

7. All must make way for a [laden] vehicle, for a person who carries a 
burden, for a sick person, for a woman and others [such as senior citizens 
and infants]. 

varna jyayasam ca-itarair varnaih II 8 II 

8. And [way must be given], by the other castes, for those men who are 
superior by caste. 

asista patita matta unmattdndm atma svasti ayana arthena sarvair eva 
datavyah 1 1 9 1 1 

9. And for their own welfare everyone must make way for fools, outcasts, 
drunkards, and madmen. 

dharma caryaya jaghanyo varnah purvam purvam varnam apadyate jdti 
parivrttau II 10 II 

10. In successive births people of the lower castes are born in the next 
higher one, if they have fulfilled their duties. (Manu 10:64, 65; Yajn. 
1:96.) 

adharma caryaya purvo varno jaghanyam jaghanyam varnam apadyate 
jdti parivrttau II 11 II 

1 1. In successive births those of the higher castes are born in the next lower 
one, if they neglect their duties 

dharma praja sampanne dare na-anyam kurvita II 12 II 

12. If one has a wife who [is willing and able] to perform [her share of] the 
religious duties and who bears sons, he shall not take a second. (Manu 
9:95; Yajn. 1:76.) 

anyatara abhave karya prag agnyadheyat \ \ 13 \ \ 

13. If a wife is deficient in one of these two [qualities], he shall take 
another, [but] before he kindles the fires [of the Agnihotra]. (Manu 9:80, 



149 



81; Yajfi. 1:73.) 

adhane hi sati karmabhih sambadhyate yesdm etad ahgam 1 1 14 1 1 

14. For a wife who assists at the kindling of the fires, becomes connected 
with those religious rites of which that [fire-kindling] forms a part. 

A wife who assists at the kindling of the fires for any sacrificial rite, becomes 
connected with that rite like any priest, and in that rite no other woman can take her 
place. Hence in the case of an Agnihotra, which lasts during the performer's 
lifetime, or at least as long as he is a householder, the performer cannot take 
another principal wife after he once has begun his sacrifice. If the wife of an 
Agnihotrin dies, he must marry again, and also kindle his fires afresh. Manu 5:167, 
1 68; Yajn. 1. 89. 

sagotrdya duhitaram na prayacchet 117511 

15. He shall not give his daughter to a man belonging to the same Gotra, 

The term Gotra means a clan and may be of two kinds, Vaidika for Brahmanas and 
Laukika, 'worldly,' for others. In the first case it denotes 'persons descended from 
the same Rishi;' in the second, 'persons distinguished by the same family name, or 
known to be descended from the same ancestor. ' In our days Brahmanas also have 
Laukika Gotras, which form subdivisions of the very large Vedic Gotras. Manu 
3:5; Yajn.l:33; 

mdtus ca yoni sambandhebhyah II 16 II 

16. Nor to one related [within six degrees] on the mother's or [the father's] 
side. 

The term yoni-sambandha, 'related [within six degrees],' corresponds to the more 
common Sapinda of Manu, Yajnavalkya, and others; see the definitions given 
below, 2:6:15:2 In Apastamba's terminology Sapinda has probably a more 
restricted sense. It seems very doubtful whether Haradatta's explanation of ca' 
translated by 'or,' is correct, and whether his interpolation of the fathers ought to 
be admitted. Probably Sutra 15 refers to the father's side, and Sutra 16 to the 
mother's side. 

brdhme vivdhe bandhu sila sruta arogyani buddhvd prajd sahatva 
karmabhyah pratipadayet-sakti visayena- alamkrtya II 7711 

17. At the Brahma-marriage, he shall give away [his daughter] for 
procreation and performing the duties that must be performed together [by 
a householder], after having investigated [the bridegroom's] family, 
character, learning, and health, and after having given [to the bride] 
ornaments according to his ability. (Manu 3:27; Yajn. 1:58) 

arse duhitrmate mithunau gdvau deyau II 18 II 

18. At the wedding called Arsa, the bridegroom shall present to the father 
of the bride a bull and a cow. (Manu 3:29; Yajn. 1:59). 



150 



daive yajna tantra rtvije pratipadayet 1 1 79 1 1 

19. At the wedding called Daiva, [the father] shall give her to an officiating 
priest, who is performing a srauta-sacrifice. (Manu 3:28; Yajn. 1:59) 

mithah kdmdt samvartete sa gandharvah 1 1 20 1 1 

20. If a maiden and a lover unite themselves through love, that is called the 
Gandharva-rite. (Manu 3:32; Yajn. 1:61) 

Prasna 2. Patala 6. Khanda 12. 

sakti visayena dravydni datvd vaheran sa asurah 1 1 7 1 1 

1. If the suitor pays as much money [for his bride] as he can afford, and 
marries her [afterwards], that [marriage is called] the Asura-rite. (Manu 
3:31; Yajn. 1:61.) 

It must be understood that, at this rite, a regular sale of the bride must take place. If 
a suitor merely gives presents to the bride, that is not an Asura-marriage. 

duhitrmatah prothayitvd vaheran sa raksasah 1 1 2 1 1 
(prothayitvd^dvaheran ) 

2. If the [bridegroom and his friends] abduct [the bride] after having 
overcome [by force] her father [or relations], that is called the Raksasa-rite. 
(Manu 3:33; Yajn. 1:61.) 

Haradatta points out that the other law-books enumerate two additional marriage- 
rites, the Prajapatya or Kaya and the Paisaca. But Vasistha 1:29-35, like 
Apastamba, gives six rites only. 

tesam tray a adyah prasastdh purvah purvah sreyan 1 1 3 1 1 

3. The first three amongst these [marriage-rites are considered] 
praiseworthy; each preceding one better than the one following. (Manu 
3:24, 25; Yajn. 1:58-60.) 

yathd yukto vivdhas tathd yuktd prajd bhavati II 4 II (yathdyukto ) 

4. The quality of the offspring is according to the quality of the marriage- 
rite. 

ie. from praiseworthy marriages virtuous children are born, and from blamable 
marriages bad ones. Manu 3:42. 

pdni samudham brahmanasya na-aproksitam abhitisthet 1 1 5 1 1 

5. One shall not step on a spot which has been touched by the hand of a 
Brahmana, without having sprinkled it with water. 



151 



agnim brahmanam ca-antarena na- atikramet 1 1 6 1 1 

6. One shall not pass between a fire and a Brahmana, 
brdhmandms ca\\ 711 

7. Nor between Brahmanas. 
anujnapya vd- atikramet 1 1 8 1 1 

8. Or one may pass between them after having received permission to do 
so. 

agnim apas ca na yugapad- dhdrayita 1 1 9 1 1 

9. One shall not carry fire and water at the same time. 

nana agnindm ca samnivdpam varjayet II 10 II (sannipdtam ) 

10. One shall not carry fires [burning in] separate [places] to one [spot]. 

Another commentator says, 'He shall not throw [brands taken from] one fire into 
another fire. ' — Haradatta. 

pratimukham agnim dhriyamdnam na-apratisthitam bhumau pradaksini 
kurydt 1 177 1 1 

11. If, whilst he walks, fire is being carried towards him, he shall not walk 
around it with his right hands turned towards it, except after it has been 
placed on the ground. 

The Sutra implies that under other circumstances he must show this respect to a fire. 

prsthatas ca-dtmanah pdni na samslesayet II 72 II 

12. One shall not join one's hands behind the back. 

While standing in company one should keep one's hands visible — i.e. standing 
with one's arms folded is respectful. 

svapann abhinimrukto na- dsvdn vdg yato rdtrim dsita I svo bhuta 
udakam upasprsya vdcam visrjet II 13 II 

13. If the sun sets whilst one's sleeping, one shall sit up, fasting and silent, 
for that night. On the following morning one shall bathe and then raise his 
voice [in prayer]. (Manu 2:220) 

svapann abhyudito na- dsvdn vdg yato- 'ahas tisthet \ \ 14 \ \ 

14. If the sun rises whilst one is asleep, one shall stand during that day 
fasting and silent. 

a tamitoh prdnam dyacched ity eke II 75 II (dtamitoh ) 

15. Some declare that he shall restrain his breath (prdndydma) until he is 



152 



tired. 

svapnam va papakam drstva II 16 II 

16. And [he shall restrain his breath until he is tired] if he has had a bad- 
dream, 

artham va sisadhayisan II 7711 

17. Or if he desires to accomplish some object, 
niyama atikrame ca-anyasmin II 18 II 

18. Or if he has transgressed some other rule. (Manu 1 1:200.) 
dosa phala samsaye na tat kartavyam 1 1 79 1 1 

19. [If one is] doubtful [whether] the result [of an action will be negative or 
positive], one shall not do it. 

evam adhydya anadhyaye 1 1 20 1 1 

20. [One shall follow] the same principle [if one is in doubt whether one 
ought] to study or not. 

na samsaye pratyaksavad bruyat \ \ 21 II 

2 1 . One shall not talk of a doubtful matter as if it were clear. 

See above, 1:11, 32, 22. 

abhinimrukta abhyudita kunakhi syavadagradidhisu didhisupati paryahita 
parista parivitta parivinna parivividanesu ca-uttara uttarasminn asuci kara 
nirveso gariyan gariyan 1 1 22 1 1 

22. In the case of a person who slept at sunset, of one who slept at sunrise, 
of one who has discoloured nails or teeth, of one who married a younger 
sister before the elder one was married, of one who married an elder sister 
whose younger sister had been married already, [of a younger brother who 
has kindled the sacred Grhya-fire before his elder brother,] of one whose 
younger brother has kindled the sacred fire first, [of a younger brother who 
offers a Soma- sacrifice before his elder brother,] of an elder brother whose 
younger brother offered a Soma sacrifice first, of an elder brother who 
marries or receives his portion of the inheritance after his younger brother, 
and of a younger brother who takes a wife or receives his portion of the 
inheritance before his elder brother, — penances ordained for 
misdemeanours causing impurity, a heavier one for each succeeding case, 
must be performed. 

These sinners are enumerated in nearly the same order in Taittiriya-Brahmana 3:2, 



153 



8:11 and 12, and Ap. srauta-sutra 9:12, 11. See also Manu 11:44-49. Regarding the 
crimes causing impurity, see above, 1:7,:21:12 - 19. 

tat-ca lingam caritva- uddhdryam ity eke \ \ 23 \ \ 

23. Some declare, that after having performed that penance, one shall 
remove its cause. 

Its cause, ie. the black nails, etc. According to another Smrti, one shall not put 
away a wife or extinguish a fire, for the taking or kindling of which the penance 
had to be performed.' - Haradatta. But see Vasistha 20:7 seq. 

Prasna 2. Patala 6. Khanda 13. 

savarndpurva sdstra vihitdydm yatha rtu gacchatah putrds tesdm 
karmabhih sambandhah 1 1 7 1 1 

1 . Sons begotten by a man who has sex in the proper season with a woman 
of equal caste, who has not been married to another man, and who has been 
married legally, have a right to [follow] the occupations [of their castes], 

' sastra-vihita [translated by "who has been married to him legally"] means either 
married according to the rites prescribed in the sastras," or "possessed of the 
qualities [which have been described] by [the rule of] the Shastras, He shall not 
give his daughter to a man of the same Gotra," and in similar [passages]. - 
Haradatta. 

ddyena-avyatikramas ca-ubhayoh 1 1 2 1 1 

2. And to [inherit the] estate, 

piirvavatydm asamskrtdydm varna antare ca maithune dosah II 3 II 

3. Having sex with one who has been previously married to another, with 
one who is not legally married, and with one who is of a different caste 
constitutes an offence on both their parts. 

tatra-api dosavdn putra eva 1 1 4 1 1 

4. Off-spring of such a union is blameworthy. 

In that their ability to inherit is obstructed. 
utpddayituh putra iti hi brdhmanam II 5 II 

5. A Brahmana text declares that the child belongs to the begetter. 

(See also Manu 9:32 seq., where the same difference of opinion occurs.) 

6. atha-apy udaharanti — 

( s) iddnim eva-aham janaka stnndm Trsydmi no purd I 



154 



yadd yamasya sadane janayituh putram abruvan I 

6b ( s) reto dhdh putram nayati paretya yama sadane I 

tasmdd bhdrydm raksanti bibhyantah para retasah I 
6c ( s) apramattd raksatha tantum etam ma vah ksetre parabTjdni 

vdpsuh I janayituh putro bhavati sdmpardye mo g ham vettd kurute 

tantum etam iti I 

6. Now they quote also [the following Gatha from the Veda]: — '[Having 
considered myself] formerly a father, I shall not now allow [any longer] my 
wives [to be approached by other men], since they have declared that a son 
belongs to the begetter in the world of Yama. The giver of the seed carries 
off the son after death in Yama's world; therefore they guard their wives, 
fearing the seed of strangers. Carefully watch over [the procreation of] your 
children, lest stranger seed be sown on your soil. In the next world the son 
belongs to the begetter, an [imprudent] husband makes the [begetting of] 
children vain [for himself].' 

According to Haradatta this Gatha gives the sentiments of a husband who 
neglected to guard his wives, and who had heard from those learned in the law that 
the sons of his unfaithful wives would in the next world belong to their natural 
fathers, and that he would not derive any spiritual benefit from their offerings. He 
adds that this verse does not refer to or prevent the appointment of a eunuch's wife 
or of a childless widow to a relation. He also quotes a passage from the srauta-sutra 
1. 9, 7, in which the dvipita, the son of two fathers is mentioned But Haradatta's 
opinion cannot be reconciled with the statements made below 2:10:27: — 2-7 where 
the Niyoga is plainly forbidden. Baudhayana, who 2, 3, 34 quotes the same Gatha, 
reads in the first line the vocative 'janaka' instead of the nominative 'janakah,'' and 
in the fifth line 'pare bijam 7 instead of 'parabijani.' The commentator 
Govindasvamin adds that the verses are addressed by the Rishi Aupajahghani to 
king Janaka of Videha. The translation of the first line must therefore run thus: — 
'O Janaka, now I am jealous of my wives, [though I was] not so formerly,' etc. 
Baudhayana' s readings are probably the older ones, and Govindasvamin' s 
explanation the right one. 

drsto dharma vyatikramah sdhasam ca purvesam 1 1 7 1 1 

7. Transgression of Dharma and severity of action are found amongst the 
ancient [sages]. 

tesdm tejo visesena pratyavdyo na vidyate 1 1 8 1 1 

8. But because of the greatness of their spiritual attainment — such actions 
are not considered as culpable. 

tad anviksya prayuhjdnah sidaty avarah 1 1 9 1 1 

9. A person of later times who seeing their [example] emulates them, falls. 
ddnam kraya dharmas ca-apatyasya na vidyate II 10 II 



155 



10. The gift [or adoption of a child] and the right to sell [or buy] a child are 
not recognised. 

Haradatta opines that, as most other Smrtis enumerate the 'adopted son', and 'the 
son bought' in their lists of substitutes for natural sons, Apastamba's rule can refer 
only to the gift or sale of an eldest son, or to the gift or sale of a child prompted by 
a woman. Though it is possible that he may be right in his interpretation, it remains 
a remarkable fact that Apastamba does not mention the 'twelve kinds of substitute 
sons,' which are known to other Smrtis. 

vivahe duhitrmate dan am kamyam dharmartham sruyate tasmdd 
duhitrmate- 'adhiratham satam deyam tan mithuya kurydd iti I tasyam 
kraya sabdah samstuti mat ram I dharmdd-hi sambandhah II 11 II 

11. It has been heard that at the time of marriage, a groom may give a 
present to the father of the bride, as an act of Dharma or personal pleasure. 
Therefore he should give a hundred [cows] and a vehicle; which the father- 
in-law should return to him. In reference to those [marriage-rites], the word 
'sale ' [which occurs in some Smrtis is only used as] a metaphorical 
expression; for the union [of the husband and wife] is effected through the 
practice of Dharma only. 

This Sutra seems to be directed against Vasistha 1:36. 

eka dhanena jyestham tosayitvd II 12 II 

12. After having gratified the eldest son by the gift of some [choice portion 
of his wealth] 

Prasna 2. Patala 6. Khanda 14. 

jivan putrebhyo day am vibhajet samam klibam unmattam pat it am ca 
parihdpya II 7 II 

1 . [The householder] should, during his lifetime, divide his wealth equally 
amongst his sons, excepting the kliba (non-reproductive or gay), the insane, 
and the outcast. 

The last Sutra of Khanda 13 and the first of Khanda 14 are quoted by Colebrooke, 
Digest, Book 5: Text xlii, and Mitaksara, Chap. 1. Sect, iii, Par. 6. Colebrooke 
translates, jivan, 'during his lifetime,' by 'who makes a partition during his 
lifetime.' This is not quite correct, Apastamba intends to exhort householders to 
make a division during their lifetime, as later they ought to become ascetics or 
hermits. 

Haradatta introduces into his commentary on this Sutra the whole chapter on the 
division of a father's estate amongst his sons, supplementing Apastamba's short 
rule by the texts of other lawyers. No doubt Apastamba means to lay down, in 



156 



these and the following Sutras only the leading principles of the law of inheritance, 
and he intends that the remaining particulars should be supplied from the law of 
custom or other Smrtis. 

putra abhave yah pratyasannah sapindah 1 1 2 1 1 

2. On the absence of sons the nearest Sapinda [takes the inheritance]. 

Haradatta gives in his commentary a full summary of the rules on the succession of 
remoter relations. One point only deserves special mention. He declares that it is 
the opinion of Apastamba, that widows cannot inherit. In this he is probably right, 
as Apastamba does not mention them, and the use of the masculine 'sapindah' 
precludes the possibility of including them under that collective term. It seems to 
me certain, that Apastamba, like Baudhayana, considered women, especially 
widows, unfit to inherit. 

tad abhdva dcdrya dcdrya abhave- 'antevdsT hrtva tad arthesu dharma 
krtyesu va- upayojayet 1 1 3 1 1 

3. On their absence the guru [inherits]; on the absence of the guru a student 
shall take [the deceased's wealth], and use it for religious works for the 
[deceased's] benefit, or [he himself may enjoy it]; 

duhita va 1 1 4 1 1 

4. Or the daughter [may take the inheritance]. 

'Some say "on the absence of sons," others that the rule refers to the preceding 
Sutra (ie. that the daughter inherits on failure of students only).' — Haradatta. 

sarva abhave raja day am hareta 1 1 5 1 1 

5. On absence of all [relations] let the king take 

'Because the word "all" is used, [the king shall take the estate] only on failure of 
Bandhus and Sagotras, ie. gentiles within twelve degrees.' — Haradatta. 

jyestho dayada ity eke II 6 II 

6. Some declare, that the eldest son alone inherits. 

The other sons shall live under his protection.' — Haradatta. Mitaksara, Chap. 1. 
hi, Par. 6. 

desa visese suvarnam krsna gavah krsnam bhaumam jyesthasya 1 1 7 1 1 

7. In some countries gold, [or] black cattle, [or] black produce of the earth 
is the share of the eldest. 

Black produce of the earth," ie. black grain, or according to others black iron.' — 
Haradatta. Compare for this and the following Sutras Colebrooke, Mitaksara, 
Chap. 1. Sect, hi, Par. 6, 

rathah pituh paribhandam ca grhe 1 1 8 1 1 

8. The vehicle and the furniture in the house are the father's [share]. 



157 



Mitaksara, Chap. 1. Sect, iii, Par. 6. Both the P.U. and Mr. U.MSS. of the Ujjvala 
read rathah pituramso grhe yat-paribhandam upakaranam pithadi tadapi, 'the 
chariot [is] the father's share; the furniture which [is] in the house, that also.' 

To this reading Mahadeva's Ujjvala on the Hiranyakesi Sutra points likewise, which 
gives pitur antah. The N.U.MS, of the Ujjvala, according to which I made the 
translation given in the Appendix to West and Buhler's Digest [1st edition], leaves 
out the word amsah and therefore makes it necessary to combine this Sutra with the 
preceding one, and to translate, 'The father's chariot and the furniture in the house 
[are] also [the share of the eldest].' This latter translation agrees nearly with that 
given by Colebrooke, Digest, Book 5: Text xlviii, where this and the preceding Sutra 
have been joined; but the chariot is not mentioned. A further variation in the 
interpretation of this Sutra occurs in Colebrooke's Digest, Book 5: Text lxxxix, and 
Mitaksara, loc. cit., where the words 'the furniture in the house' are joined with 
Sutra 9, and the furniture is declared to be the wife's share. Considering that Sutra 9 
is again quoted in Colebrooke's Digest, Book 5: Text cccclxsii, and is not joined 
with the latter part of Sutra 8, it is not too much to say that Gagannatha has not 
shown any greater accuracy than his brethren usually do. 

alamkaro bharyaya jnati dhanam ca-ity eke II 9 II 

9. According to some, the share of the wife consists of her gold-ornaments, 
and the wealth [which she may have received] from her relations. 

The Mitaksara, loc. cit., apparently takes the words 'according to some' as 
referring only to property received from relations. The former interpretation is, 
however, admissible, if the Sutra is split into two. 

tat-sastrair vipratisiddham II 10 II 

10. That [preference of the eldest son] is forbidden by the Shastras. 

The sastras are, according to Haradatta, the Vedas. 

manuh putrebhyo day am vyabhajad ity avisesena sruyate II 11 II 

1 1 . For it is declared in the Veda, without [marking] a difference [in the 
treatment of the sons]: — "Manu divided his wealth amongst his sons". 
(Taittiriya Samhita 3:1:9:4) 

atha-api tasmat-jyestham putram dhanena niravasayayanti-ity ekavat- 
sruyate II 12 II 

12. Now the Veda declares also in conformity with [the rule in favour of 
the eldest son] alone: — They distinguish the eldest by [a larger share of] the 
heritage. 

'Athdpi [now also] means 'and certainly." They distinguish, they set apart the 
eldest son by wealth: — this has been declared in the Veda in conformity with [the 
rule regarding] sons [heir, Sutra 6]. He denies [Sutra 13] that a passage also, which 
agrees with the statement that the eldest son alone inherits, is found in the Veda.' 
— Haradatta. See Taittiriya Samhita 2:5:2:7. 



158 



atha-api nitya anuvadam avidhim dhur nydyavido yathd tasmdd ajdvayah 
pasundm saha caranti-iti tasmdt sndtakasya miikham rebhdyati-iva tasmdd 
bastas ca srotriyas ca stri kdmatamdv iti II 13 II 

13. [But to this plea in favour of the eldest I answer]: — Now those who are 
acquainted With the interpretation of the law declare a statement of facts 
not to be a rule, is for instance [the following]: — 'Therefore amongst 
domestic animals, goats and sheep walk together', [or the following], 
'Therefore the face of a learned Brahmana [a Snataka] is, as it were, 
resplendent', [or], 'A Brahmana who has studied the Vedas [a srotriya] and 
a he-goat evince the strongest sexual desires'. 

Those who are acquainted with the interpretation of the law are the Mimamsakas. 
The translation of the second Vedic passage is by no means certain, as the root 
ribh, translated by 'to be resplendent,' usually means 'to give a sound.' Haradatta 
thinks that Apastamba means to show that the passage 'Manu divided his wealth 
among his sons' is likewise merely a statement of facts, and cannot be considered a 
rule. This is probably erroneous, as Sutras 10 and 11 distinctly state, that the 
practice to allow the eldest alone to inherit, is forbidden by the above mentioned 
passage of the Veda. 

sarve hi dharma yuktd bhdginah 1 1 14 1 1 

14. Therefore all [sons] who are virtuous inherit. 

yas tv adharmena dravydni pratipddayati jyestho- 'api tarn abhdgam 
kurvita II 75 II 

15. But him who wastes money unrighteously, he shall disinherit, though 
he be the eldest son. 

The translation of pratipddayati, 'expends,' by 'gains,' which is also proposed by 
Gagannatha, is against Apastamba's usage, see 2:5:11, 17, and below, 2:8:20:19 

J ay a patyor na vibhdgo vidyate II 16 II 

16. No division takes place between husband and wife. 

According to Haradatta, this Sutra gives the reason why, in Sutra 1, no share has 
been set apart for the wife. 

panigrahanad-hi sahatvam karmasu II 7711 

17. For, from the time of marriage, they are united in religious ceremonies, 
tatha puny a phalesu II 18 II 

18. Likewise also as regards the rewards for works by which spiritual merit 
is acquired, 

dravya parigrahesu 1 1 79 1 1 



159 



19. And with respect to the acquisition of property. 

na hi bhartur vipravdse naimittike done steyam upadisanti \ \ 20 \ \ 

20. For they declare that it is not a theft if a wife expends money on 
occasions [of necessity] during her husband's absence. (See below, 2:2:29, 
3.) 

Prasna 2. Patala 6. Khanda 15. 

etena desa kula dharmd vydkhydtdh 1 1 7 1 1 

1. By this [discussion] the law of custom, which is observed in [particular] 
countries or families, has been disposed of. 

Customs are to be followed only if they are not opposed to the teaching of the 
Vedas and Smrtis. 

mdtus ca yoni sambandhebhyah pitus ca-d saptamdt purusdd ydvatd vd 
sambandho jndyate tesdm pretesu-udaka upasparsanam garbhdn 
parihdpya-aparisamvatsardn 112 

2. On account of the blood relations of his mother and [on account of those] 
of his father within six degrees, or, as far as the relationship is traceable, he 
shall bathe if they die, excepting children that have not completed their first 
year. (Manu 5:60; Yajn. 1. 53; Manu 5:60; Manu 5:58; Yajn .3:3.) 

mdtd pitardv eva tesu 1 1 3 1 1 

3. On account of the death of the latter the parents alone bathe. 
hartdras ca 1 1 4 1 1 

4. And those who carry them out. (Manu 5:69 and 70). 
bhdrydydm parama guru samsthdydm ca-akdlam abhojanam 1 1 5 1 1 

5. If a wife or one of the chief Gurus [a father or acarya] die, besides, 
fasting [is ordained from the time at which they die] up to the same time 
[on the following day] . (Manu 5:80.) 

dtura vyanjandni kurvTran 1 1 6 1 1 

6. [In that case] they shall also show the [following] signs of mourning: — 

kesdn prakirya pdmsun opyekavdsaso (pdmsun opya-ekavdsaso ?) 
daksind mukhdh sakrd upamajjaya- uttTrya-upavisanti 1 1 7 1 1 

7. Dishevelling their hair and covering themselves with dust [they go 
outside the village], and, clothed with one garment, their faces turned to the 
south, stepping into the river they throw up water for the dead once, and 



160 



then, ascending [the bank], they sit down. 

evam trih 1 1 8 1 1 

This [they repeat] thrice. 

tat pratyayam udakam utsicya-apratTksa gramam etya yat striya ahus tat 
kurvanti 1 1 9 1 1 

9. They pour out water consecrated in such a manner that the dead will 
know it [to be given to them]. Then they return to the village without 
looking back, and perform those rites for the dead which the women 
declare to be necessary. 

Yajn. 3:5:7 seq. The Mantra to be spoken in throwing the water is, T give this 
water for you N.N. of the family of N.N.' The water ought to be mixed with 
sesame. 

According to Haradatta those who know the correct interpretation, declare that the 
word 'women' denotes in this Sutra 'the Smrtis.' But I fear these learned 
interpreters will find few adherents among those who pay attention to the last Sutra 
of this work. 

itaresu ca-etad eva-eke- upadisanti II 10 II 

10. Some declare, that these same [observances] shall also be kept in the 
case [of the death] of other [Sapindas]. 

sucin mantravatah sarva krtyesu bhojayet II 11 II 

11. At all religious ceremonies, he shall feed Brahmanas who are pure and 
who have [studied and remember] the Veda. (Manu 3:128) 

desatah kdlatah saucatah samyak pratigrahTtrta iti ddndni pratipadayati 1 1 

12 II 

12. One shall distribute his gifts at the proper places, at the proper times, at 
the occasion of purificatory rites, and to proper recipients. (Manu 3:98.) 

yasya-agnau na kriyate yasya ca-agram na diyate na tad bhoktavyam 1 1 

13 II 

13. That food must not be eaten of which [no portion] is offered in the fire, 
and of which no portion is first given [to guests]. 

na ksara lav ana homo vidyate \ \ 14 \ \ 

14. No food mixed with pungent condiments or salt can be offered as a 
burnt-offering. 

That [substance] is called ksara, "of pungent or alkaline taste," the eating of which 
makes the saliva flow.' — Haradatta. 



161 



tatha-avaran na samsrstasya ca 1 1 15 1 1 

15. Nor [can food] mixed with bad food [be used for a burnt-oblation]. 

Avaranna, 'bad food,' is explained by kulittha which is a kind of vetch which is 
considered low food, and eaten by the lower castes only. The meaning of the Sutra, 
therefore - ' If anybody has been forced by poverty to mix his rice or Dal with 
kulittha or similar bad food, he cannot offer a burnt-oblation at the Vaisvadeva 
ceremony with that. He must observe the rule, given in the following Sutra. 

ahavisyasya homa udTcTnam usnam bhasma- apohya tasmin juhyat tad- 
hutam ahutam ca-agnau bhavati II 16 II 

16. If [he is obliged to offer] a burnt-offering of food unfit for that purpose, 
he shall take hot ashes from the northern part of his fire and offer the food 
in that. That oblation is not offered in the fire. 

na stri juhuydt II 7711 

17. A female shall not offer any oblation into the fire. 
na- anupetah II 18 II 

18. Nor a child, that has not been initiated. 

a-anna prasanad garbha na- aprayata bhavanti 1 1 79 1 1 

19. Infants do not become impure before they receive the sacrament called 
Annaprasana [the first feeding] . 

a parisamvatsarad ity eke 1 1 20 1 1 

20. Some [declare, that they cannot become impure] until they have 
completed their first year. 

yavata yd diso na prajanTyuh \ \ 21 II 

2 1 . Or, as long as they cannot distinguish the points of the horizon. 
a-upanayanad ity aparam 1 1 22 1 1 

22. The best [opinion is, that they are not subjected to rules of purity and 
impurity] until the initiation has been performed. 

atra hy adhikarah sastrair bhavati \ \ 23 \ \ 

23. For at that [time a child] according to the rules of the Veda obtains the 
right [to perform the various religious ceremonies]. 

sa nistha 1 1 24 1 1 

24. That ceremony is the limit [from which the capacity to fulfil the law 
begins]. 



162 



smrtis ca 1 1 25 1 1 

25. And the Smrti [agrees with this opinion]. 

Haradatta quotes Gautama 2:1-3, on this point, and is apparently of opinion that 
Apastamba alludes to the same passage. But he is probably wrong, as all Smrtis are 
agreed on the point mentioned by Apastamba. 

Prasna 2. Patala 7. Khanda 16. 

saha deva manusyd asmiml loke purd babhuvuh I atha devdh karmabhir 
divam jagmur ahiyanta manusydh I tesdm ye tathd karmdny drabhante 
saha devair brahmand ca-amusmiml loke bhavanti I atha-etan manuh 
srdddha sabdam karma provdca 1 1 7 1 1 

1 . Formerly humans and gods lived together in this world. Then the gods in 
reward of their sacrifices went to heaven, but humans were left behind. 
Those who perform sacrifices in the same manner as the gods did, dwell 
[after death] with the gods and Brahma in heaven. Now [seeing humans left 
behind], Manu revealed a ceremony, which is designated by the word 
srdddha (a post-mortem-oblation). 

Intending to give the rules regarding the monthly sraddha, he premises this 
explanatory statement in order to praise that sacrifice. ' — Haradatta. 

prajd nihsreyasd ca\ \ 2 II 

2. And [thus this rite has been revealed] for the liberation of humankind. 

The reading 'nihsreyasa ca' apparently has given great trouble to the 
commentators. Their explanations are, however, grammatically impossible. The 
right one is to take nihsreyasa as a Vedic instrumental, for nihsreyasena, which 
may designate the 'reason.' If the dative is read, the sense remains the same. 

tatra pitaro devatd brdhmands tv dhavaniya arthe 1 1 3 1 1 

3. At that [rite] the Manes [of one's father, grandfather, and great- 
grandfather] are the deities [to whom the sacrifice is offered]. But the 
Brahmanas, [who are fed,] represent the AhavanTya-fire. 

The comparison of the Brahmanas with the Ahavanlya indicates that to feed 
Brahmanas is the chief act at a sraddha.' - Haradatta. 

mdsi mdsi kdryam 1 1 4 1 1 

4. That rite must be performed in each month. (Manu 3:122, 123; Yajn. 
1:217.) 

apara paksasya-apara ahnah sreydn 1 1 5 1 1 



163 



5. The afternoon of [a day of] the latter half is preferable [for it]. (Manu 
3:255, 278) 

tatha-apara paksasya jaghanyany ahani 1 1 6 1 1 

6. The last days of the latter half [of the month] likewise are [preferable to 
the first days]. 

sarvesv eva-apara paksasya-ahassu kriyamane pitrrn I kartus tu kala 
abhiniyamat phala visesah 1 1 7 1 1 

7. [A sraddha] offered on any day of the latter half of the month gladdens 
the Manes. But it procures different rewards for the officiator according to 
the time observed. (Manu 3:277; Yajn. 1:264, 265.) 

prathame- 'ahani kriyamane strTprayam apatye jdyate 1 1 8 1 1 

8. If it be performed on the first day of the fort-night, the progeny [of the 
sacrificer] will chiefly consist of females. 

dvitTye- 'astendh 1 1 9 1 1 

9. [Performed on the second day it procures] children who are free from 
thievish propensities. 

trtTye brahma varcasinah II 10 II 

10. [If it is performed] on the third day children will be born to him who 
will fulfil the various vows for studying [portions of the Veda] . 

caturthe ksudra pasuman II 11 II 

11. [The officiator who performs it] on the fourth day becomes rich in 
small domestic animals. 

pancame pumamsah I bahu apatyo na ca-anapatyah pramTyate II 12 II 

12. [If he performs it] on the fifth day, sons [will be born to him]. He will 
have numerous and distinguished offspring, and he will not die childless. 

sasthe- 'adhvasilo- 'aksasTlas ca 1 1 13 1 1 

13. [If he performs it] on the sixth day, he will become a great traveller and 
gambler. 

saptame karse raddhih \ \ 14 \ \ 

14. [The reward of a sraddha performed] on the seventh day is success in 
agriculture. 

astame pustih II 75 II 



164 



15. [If he performs it] on the eighth day [its reward is] prosperity 
navama ekakhurah II 16 II 

16. [If he performs it] on the ninth day [its reward consists in] one-hoofed 
animals. 

dasame vyavahdre raddhih II 7711 

17. [If he performs it] on the tenth day [its reward is] success in trade. 
ekadase krsna ayasam trapu sisam II 18 II 

18. [If he performs it] on the eleventh day [its reward is] black iron, tin, and 
lead. 

dvddase pasuman 1 1 79 1 1 

19. [If he performs a sraddha] on the twelfth day, he will become rich in 
cattle. 

trayodase bahu putro bahu mitro darsaniya apatyah I yuva marinas tu 
bhavanti 1 1 20 1 1 

20. [If he performs it] on the thirteenth day, he will have many sons [and] 
many friends, [and] his offspring will be beautiful. But his [sons] will die 
young. 

Others read the last part of the Sutra, ayuvamdrinas tu bhavanti, 'they will not die 
young.' — Haradatta. If the two halves of the Sutra are joined and 
darsaniyapatyoyuvamarinah is read, the Sandhi may be dissolved in either manner. 

caturdasa ayudhe raddhih II 27 II 

21. [If he performs it] on the fourteenth day [its reward is] success in battle. 

Manu 3:276, and Yajn. 1. 263, declare the fourteenth day to be unfit for a sraddha, 
and the latter adds that sraddhas for men killed in battle must be offered on that 
day. This latter statement explains why Apastamba declares its reward to be 
'success in battle.' The nature of the reward shows that on that day Ksatriyas, not 
Brahmanas, should offer their sraddhas. 

pahcadase pustih 1 1 22 1 1 

22. [If he performs it] on the fifteenth day [its reward is] prosperity. 
tatra dravyani tilamasa vrThi yava apo mula phalani 1 1 2 J 1 1 

23. The substances [to be offered] at these [sacrifices] are sesame, masa, 
rice, barley, water, roots, and fruits. (Manu 3:267 Yajn 1:257) 

snehavati tv eva-anne tivratara pitrrnam pritir draghTyamsam ca kalam 1 1 
24 II 



165 



24. But, if food mixed with animal-fat [is offered], the satisfaction of the 
Manes is greater, and [lasts] a longer time. 

tatha dharma ahrtena dravyena tirthe pratipannena 1 1 25 1 1 

25. Likewise, if money, lawfully acquired, is given to worthy [persons]. 
samvatsaram gavyena pritih 1 1 26 1 1 

26. Beef satisfies [the Manes] for a year. (Manu 3:271) 
bhuyamsam ato mdhisena II 27 II 

27. Buffalo's [meat] for a longer [time] than that. 

etena grdmya aranydndm pasundm mdmsam medhyam vydkhydtam 1 1 28 
II 

28. By this [permission of the use of buffalo's meat] it has been declared 
that the meat of [other] tame and wild animals is fit to be offered. 

Prasna 2. Patala 7. Khanda 17. 

khadga upastarane khadga mdmsena-dnantyam kdlam 1 1 7 1 1 

1. [If] rhinoceros' meat [is fed to Brahmanas seated] on [seats covered 
with] the skin of a rhinoceros, [the Manes are satisfied] for a very long 
time. (Manu 3:272; Yajn. 1;259). 

tathd satabaler matsyasya mdmsena 1 1 2 1 1 

2. [The same effect is obtained] by [offering the] flesh [of the fish called] 
satabali, 

See Manu 5:16 where Rohita is explained by satabali. 

vdrdhrdnasasya ca 1 1 3 1 1 

3. And by [offering the] meat of the [crane called] Vdrdhrdnasa. 

prayatah prasanna mandh srsto bhojayed brdhmandn brahmavido yoni 
gotra mantra antevasT asambandhan 1 1 4 1 1 

4. Pure, with composed mind and full of ardour, he shall feed Brahmanas 
who know the Vedas, and who are not connected with him by marriage, 
blood relationship, by the relationship of yajamana-purohita, or by the 
relationship of [teacher and] student. (Manu 3:128-138, and 149, 188; Yajn 
1;225). 

guna hanyam tu paresam samudetah sodaryo- 'api bhojayitavyah 1 1 5 1 1 



166 



5. If strangers are deficient in the [requisite] good qualities, even a full 
brother who possesses them, may be fed [at a sraddha]. 

etena-antevasino vydkhydtdh 1 1 6 1 1 

6. [The admissibility of] students [and the rest] has been declared already 
[in 4]. 

atha-apy uddharanti — 

sambhojani noma pisdca bhiksd na-esa pitrrn gacchati na-uta devdn II 7 
II 

7. Now they quote also [in regard to this matter the following verse]: — 

The food eaten [at a sacrifice] by persons related to the giver is, indeed, a 
gift offered to the ghosts. It reaches neither the Manes nor the gods. 

iha-eva sd carati ksina puny a said antare gaur iva nasta vatsd 1 1 8 1 1 

8. Losing its power [to procure heaven] it wanders about in this world as a 
cow that has lost its calf runs into a strange stable. 

See Manu 3:141, where this Trstubh has been turned into an anustubh. 

iha-eva sambhuiyatT daksind kuldt kulam vinasyati-iti II 9 II 

9. The meaning [of the verse] is, that gifts which are eaten [and offered] 
mutually by relations, [and thus go] from one house to the other, perish in 
this world. 

Charity which is given between families is simply a social transaction and does not 
give the rewards of charity done to the needy strangers. 

tulya gunesu vayo vrddhah sreydn dravya krsas ca-Tpsan II 10 II 

10. If the good qualities [of several persons who might be invited] are 
equal, old men and [amongst these] poor ones, who wish to come, have the 
preference. 

purvedyur nivedanam II 11 II 

1 1 . On the day before [the ceremony] the [first] invitation [must be issued] . 
(Manu 3:187; Yajn. 1:225.) 

According to Haradatta the formula of invitation is, svah sraddham bhavitd, 
tatrahavanTyarthe bhavadbhih prasadah kartavya iti, 'tomorrow a sraddha will 
take place. Do me the favour to take the place of the Ahavanlya-fire at that. ' 

apare dyur dvitTyam II 12 II 

12. On the following day the second invitation takes place. 

The formula is, Adya sraddham, 'to-day the sraddha takes place.' 



167 



trtiyam amantranam II 13 II 

13. [On the same day also takes place] the third invitation [which consists 
in the call to dinner] . 

The call to dinner is, siddham agamyatam, 'the food is ready; please come.' 

trih prayam eke srdddham upadisanti 1 1 14 1 1 

14. Some declare, that every act at a funeral sacrifice must be repeated 
three times. 

yathd prathamam evam dvitTyam trtiyam ca 1 1 75 1 1 

15. As [the acts are performed] the first time, so they must be repeated] the 
second and the third times. 

sarvesu vrttesu sarvatah samavaddya sesasya grdsa avardrdhyam 
prdsniydd yathd uktam II 16 II 

16. When all [the three oblations] have been offered, he shall take a portion 
of the food of all [three], and shall eat a small mouthful of the remainder in 
the manner described [in the Grhya-sutra]. 

Apastamba Grhya-sutra 8:21,9. He shall eat it pronouncing the Mantra, "Prane 
nivisto'mrtam juhomi." Taitt. Ar. 10:34:1 

udicya vrttis tv dsana gatdndm haste su-udapdtra dnayanam II 7711 

17. But the custom of the Northerners is to pour into the hands of the 
Brahmanas, when they are seated on their seats, [water which has been 
taken from the water-vessel.) 

The North of India begins to the north of the river Saravali. The rule alluded to is 
given in Yajn 1:226, 229; Manu 3;210. 

uddhriyatdm agnau ca kriyatdm ity dmantrayate II 18 II 

18. [At the time of the burnt-offering which is offered at the beginning of 
the dinner] he addresses the Brahmanas with this Mantra: — "Let it be taken 
out, and let it be offered in the fire." (Yajn. 1:235.) 

kdmam uddhriyatdm kdmam agnau kriyatdm ity attisrsta uddharet- 
juhuydt-ca 1 1 79 1 1 

19. [They shall give their permission with this Mantra]: — "Let it be taken 
out at thy pleasure, let it be offered in the fire at thy pleasure." Having 
received this permission, he shall take out [some of the prepared food] and 
offer it. 

svabhir apapdtrais ca srdddhasya darsanam [paricaksate II 20 II 



168 



20. They blame it, if dogs and Apapatras are allowed to see the 
performance of a sraddha. (Manu 3:239). 

svitrah sipi vistah para talpa gamy ayudhiya putrah sudra utpanno 
brahmanyam ity ete sraddhe bhunjanah pankti dusana bhavanti II 21 II 

21. The following persons defile the company if they are invited to a 
sraddha, viz. a leper, a bald-man, an adulteror, the son of a Brahmana who 
follows the profession of a Ksatriya, and the son of [a Brahmana who by 
marrying first a sudra wife had himself become] a sudra, born from a 
Brahmana woman. 

Manu 3:152 - 166, and particularly 153 and 154; Yajn. 1. 222 - 224. 

Haradatta's explanation of the word "sudra" by a Brahmana who has become a 
sudra' is probably right, because the son of a real sudra and of a Brahmana male a 
Candala, and has been disposed of by the preceding sutra. 

trimadhus trisuparnas trindciketas caturmedhah pancagnir jyestha samago 
veda adhyayy anucanaputrah srotriya ity ete sraddhe bhunjanah pankti 
pdvana bhavanti 1 1 22 1 1 

22. The following persons sanctify the company if they eat at a sraddha, 
viz. one who has studied the three verses of the Veda containing the word 
"Madhu," each three times; one who has studied the part of the Veda 
containing the word "Suparna " three times; a Tri-naciketa; one who has 
studied the Mantras required, for the four sacrifices [called Asva-medha, 
Purusa-medha, Sarva-medha. and Pitri-medha] ; one who keeps five fires; 
one who knows the Saman called jyesta; one who fulfils the duty of daily 
study; the son of one who has studied and is able to teach the whole Veda 
with its Ahgas, and a srotriya. 

Compare Manu-3: 185, 186;.Yajn.l:219-221. 

The three verses to be known by a Trimadhu are, Madhu vata ritayate, etc., which 
occur both in the Taitt. Samh; and in the Taitt. Ar. The explanation of Trisuparna is 
not certain. Haradatta thinks that it may mean either a person who knows the three 
verses catus-kaparda yuvatih supesa, etc., Taittiriya Brahmana 1:2:1:27 etc., or 
one who knows the three Anuvakas from the Taittiriya Aranyaka 10:48 - 50, 
beginning, Brahmam-etu mam, etc. The word "Tri-naciketa" has three 
explanations: — . A person who knows the Naciketa-fire according to the 
Taittiriya Kathavalli, and the Satapatha, ie. has studied the portions on the 
Naciketa-fire in these three books, b. A person who has thrice kindled the 
Naciketa-fire. c. A person who has studied the Anuvakas called Virajas. "Catur- 
medha may" also mean he who has performed the four sacrifices:' enumerated 
above. 

na ca naktam sraddham kurvita 1 1 23 1 1 

23. He shall not perform [any part of] a sraddha at night. (Manu 3:280). 



169 



arabdhe ca-abhojanam a samapanat II 24 II 

24. After having begun [a sraddha], he shall not eat until he has finished it. 

The sraddha is stated to begin with the first invitation to the Brahmans. -Haradatta. 

anyatra rahu darsanat II 25 II 

25. He shall not perform a sraddha at night], except if an eclipse of the 
moon takes place. 

"The Northerners do not generally receive this Sutra, and therefore former 
commentators have not explained it.' — Haradatta. 

Prasna 2. Patala 8. Khanda 18. 

vilayanam mathitam pinyakam madhu mam sum ca varjayet 1 1 7 1 1 

1 . He shall avoid butter, buttermilk, oil-cake, honey, meat. 

Sutras 1-4 contain rules for a vow to be kept for the special objects mentioned in 
Sutras 3 and 4 for one year only. 

Haradatta [on Sutra 4] says that another commentator thinks that Sutras 1-3 
prescribe one vow and Sutra 4 another, and: — that the latter applies both to 
householders and students. A passage from Baudhayana is quoted in support for 
this later view. 

krsna dhdnyam siidrdnnam ye ca-anyena asya sammatah 1 1 2 1 1 

2. And black grain [such as kuluttha], food given by sudras, or by other 
persons, whose food is not considered fit to be eaten. 

ahavisyam anrtam krodham yena ca krodhayet I smrtim icchan yaso 
medham svargam pustim dvadasa-etani varjayet 1 1 3 1 1 

3. And food unfit for oblations, speaking an untruth, anger, and [acts or 
words] by which he might excite anger. He who desires a [good] memory, 
fame, wisdom, heavenly bliss, and prosperity, shall avoid these twelve 
[things and acts] ; 

adho nabhi-upari janu-acchadya tri savanam udakam upasprsann anagni 
pakva vrttir acchaya upagahl sthana asanikah samvatsaram etad vratam 
caret I etad astdcatvarimsat sammitam ity acaksate 1 1 4 1 1 

4. Wearing a dress that reaches from the navel to the knees, bathing 
morning, noon, and evening, living on food that has not been cooked at a 
fire, never seeking the shade, standing [during the day] and sitting [during 
the night], he shall keep this vow for one year. They declare that [its merit] 
is equal to that of a studentship continued for forty-eight years. 



170 



nityasraddham 1 1 5 1 1 

5. [Now follows] the daily sraddha. (Manu 3:82 seq.) 
bahir grdmdt-sucayah sucau dese samskurvanti 1 1 6 1 1 

6. Outside the village pure [cooks] prepare [the food for that rite] in a pure 
place. 

The term "pure [men]" is used in order to indicate that they must be so 
particularly, because by 2:2:3:1 purity has already been prescribed for cooks. 

tatra navdni dravydni 1 1 7 1 1 

7. New vessels are to be used. 

For the unusual meaning of dravya, 'vessel,' compare the term sita-dravyani 
meaning implements of husbandry. (Manu 9:293) 

yair annam samskriyate yesu ca bhujyate 1 1 8 1 1 

8. In which the food is prepared, and out of which it is eaten. 
tdni ca bhuktavadbhyo dadydt 1 1 9 1 1 

9. And those [vessels] he shall present [as gifts] to the [Brahmanas] who 
have been fed. 

samudetdms ca bhojayet II 10 II 

10. And he shall feed [Brahmanas] possessed of all [good qualities]. 
na ca-atad gunaya-ucchistam prayacchet II 77 II 

1 1 . And he shall not give the residue [of that sraddha dinner] to one who is 
inferior to them in good qualities. 

evam samvatsaram II 72 II 

12. Thus [he shall act every day] during a year. 
tesam uttamam lohena-ajena karyam II 13 II 

13. [The last of these sraddha] he shall perform, sacrificing a red goat. 
(Yajn. 1:259, and Manu 3:272) 

The red goat is mentioned as particularly fit for a Sraddha. 

manam ca karayet praticchannam 1 1 14 1 1 

14. And let him cause an altar to be built, concealed [by a covering and 
outside the village] . 

tasya-uttara ardhe brahmanan bhojayet 1 1 75 1 1 

15. Let him feed the Brahmanas on the northern half of that. 



171 



ubhayan pasyati brahmanams ca bhunjanan mane ca pitrrn ity upadisanti 
II 7611 

16. They declare, that [then] he sees both the Brahmanas who eat and the 
Manes sitting on the altar. 

krta akrtam ata urdhvam II 7711 

17. After that he may offer [a sraddha once a month] or stop altogether. 
sraddhena hi trptim vedayante pilar ah II 18 II 

18. For [by appearing on the altar] the Manes signify that they are satisfied 
by the sraddha. 

tisyena pusti kdmah 1 1 19 1 1 

19. Under the constellation Tisya he who desires prosperity, 

Prasna 2. Patala 8. Khanda 19. 

gaura sarsapanam curndni karayitva taih pani pddam praksalya mukham 
karna prasya ca yad vato na-ativdti tad asano- 'ajinam bastasya 
prathamah kalpo vag yato daksina mukho bhuhjita 1 1 7 1 1 

1. He shall have white mustard seeds ground, his hands, feet, ears, and 
mouth are to be rubbed with that, and he shall eat [the remainder]. If the 
wind does not blow too violently, he shall eat sitting silent and facing the 
south, on a seat — the first alternative is the skin of a he-goat. 

The ceremony which is here described, may also be performed daily. If the reading 

prasya is adopted, the translation must run thus: and he shall scatter [the 

remainder of the powder]. If the wind,' etc. 

andyusyam tv evam mukhasya bhojanam matur ity upadisanti 1 1 2 1 1 

2. But they declare, that the life of the mother of that person who eats at 
this ceremony, facing in that direction, will be shortened. 

Therefore those whose mothers are alive should not perform this ceremony.' — 
Haradatta. 

audumbaras camasah suvarna nabhah prasastah 1 1 3 1 1 

3. A vessel of brass, the centre of which is gilt, is best [for this occasion]. 

Nowadays this is usually a silver plate with a gold drop in the center. 

na ca-anyena-api bhoktavyah 1 1 4 1 1 

4. And nobody else shall eat out of that vessel. 

If the masculine bhoktavyah is used instead of bhoktavyam, the participle must be 



172 



construed with camasah. 

ydvad grasam samnayan 1 1 5 1 1 

5. He shall make a lump of as much [food] as he can swallow [at once]. 

The verbum finitum, which according to the Sanskrit text ought to be taken with 
the participle samnayan, is grasita, Sutra 9. 

askandayan 1 1 6 1 1 

6. [And he shall] not scatter anything [on the ground]. 
na-apajahTta 1 1 7 1 1 

7. He shall not let go the vessel [with his left hand]; 
apajahTta vd 1 1 8 1 1 

8. Or he may let it go. 

'Why is this second alternative mentioned, as [the first Sutra] suffices? True. But 
according to the maxim that "restrictions are made on account of the continuance 
of an action once begun," the meaning of the second Sutra is that he shall continue 
to the end to: — handle the vessel [in that manner in which] he has handled it when 
eating for the first time.' — Haradatta. 

krtsnam grasam grasita saha-angustham 1 1 9 1 1 

9. He shall swallow the whole mouthful at once, introducing it, together 
with the thumb, [into the mouth.) 

na ca mukha sabdam kurydt 1 1 10 1 1 

10. He shall make no noise with his mouth [whilst eating]. 
pdnim ca na-avadhunuydt II 11 II 

11. And he shall not shake his right hand [whilst eating]. 
dcamya ca-urdhvau pdni dhdrayed a prodaki bhdvdt II 12 II 

12. After he [has eaten and] sipped water, he shall raise his hands, until the 
water has run off [and they have become dry] . 

tato- 'agnim upasprset \ \ 13 \ \ 

13. After that he shall touch fire. 

diva ca na bhunjita-anyat-miila phalebhyah \ \ 14 \ \ 

14. And [during this ceremony] he shall not eat in the day-time anything 
but roots and fruit. 

sthdlTpdka anudesydni ca varjayet 1 1 75 1 1 

15. And let him avoid Sthali-paka offerings, and food offered to the Manes 



173 



or to the Gods. 

sa uttaracchadanas ca-eva yajnopaviti bhunjita II 16 II 

16. He shall eat wearing his upper garment over his left shoulder and under 
his right arm. 

Haradatta remarks that some allow, according to 2:2,4.22. the sacred thread to be 
substituted, and others think that both the thread and the garment should be worn 
over the left shoulder and under the right arm. 

naiyyamikam tu sraddham snehavad eva dadydt II 7711 

17. At the [monthly] sraddha which must necessarily be performed, he 
must use [food] mixed with fat. 

sarpir mamsam iti prathamah kalpah II 18 II 

18. The first [and preferable] alternative [is to employ] clarified butter and 
meat. 

abhdve tailam sakam iti 1 1 79 1 1 

19. On failure [of these], oil of sesame, vegetables and [similar materials 
may be used]. 

maghdsu ca-adhikam sraddha kalpena sarpir brahmanan bhojayet \ \ 20 \ \ 

20. And under the asterism Magha he shall feed the Brahmanas more [than 
at other times] with [food mixed with] clarified butter, according to the rule 
of the sraddha. 

Prasna 2. Patala 8. Khanda 20. 

mdsi srdddhe tilanam dronam dronam yena-upayena saknuyat tena- 
upayojayet 1 1 7 1 1 

1. At every monthly sraddha he shall use, in whatever manner he may be 
able, one drona of sesame. 

A drona equals 128 seers or seras. The latter is variously reckoned at about 1kg. 

samudetams ca bhojayen na ca-atadgunaya-ucchistam dadyuh 1 1 2 1 1 

2. And he shall feed Brahmanas endowed with all [good qualities], and 
they shall not give the remnants [of the food] to a person who does not 
possess the same good qualities [as the Brahmanas]. 

udagayana apuryamana paksasya-ekaratram avardrdhyam uposya tisyena 
pusti kdmah sthalTpdkam srapayitva mahdrajam istva tena sarpismata 
brahmanam bhojayitva pusty arthena siddhim vacayTta 1 1 3 1 1 



174 



3. He who desires prosperity shall fast in the half of the year when the sun 
goes to the north. Under the constellation Tisya, in the first half of the 
month, for [a day and] a night at least, prepare a Sthalipaka-offering, offer 
burnt-oblations to Kubera [the god of riches], feed a Brahmana with that 
[food prepared for the Sthalipaka] mixed with clarified butter, and make 
him wish prosperity with [a Mantra implying prosperity. 

The reason that the constellation Tisya has been chosen for this rite seems to be 
that Tisya has another name, Pusya ie. prosperous', This sacrifice is to begin on the 
Tisya-day of the month called Taisa or Pausa [December- January], and to continue 
for one year. 

evam ahar ahar a parasmat tisyat 1 1 4 1 1 

4. This [rite he shall repeat] daily until the next Tisya[-day]. 
dvau dvitiye 1 1 5 1 1 

5. On the second [Tisya-day and during the second month he shall feed] 
two [Brahmanas]. 

trims trtiye 1 1 6 1 1 

6. On the third [Tisya-day and during the third month he shall feed] three 
[Brahmanas] . 

evam samvatsaram abhyuccayena 1 1 7 1 1 

7. In this manner [the Tisya-rite is to be performed] for a year, with a 
[monthly] increase [of the number of Brahmanas fed]. 

mahantam posam pusyati 1 1 8 1 1 

8. [Thus] he obtains great prosperity. 
ddita eva-upavasah 1 1 9 1 1 

9. But the fasting takes place on the first [Tisya-day] only. 
dtta tejasam bhojanam varjayet II 10 II 

10. One shall avoid to eat those things which have lost their strength. 

Often processing of food causes it to lose some of it's nutritional value. 

bhasma tusa adhisthanam II 11 II 

11. One shall avoid to tread on ashes or husks of grain. (Manu 4:78.) 
padd pddasya praksdlanam adhisthanam ca varjayet II 12 II 

12. To wash one foot with the other, or to place one foot on the other, 
prehkholanam ca padayoh 1 1 7 J 1 1 



175 



13. And to swing one's feet, 

januni ca-atyadhanam janghayah 1 1 14 1 1 

14. And to place one leg crosswise over the knee [of the other], 
nakhais ca nakha vddanam II 75 II 

15. And to pare the nails [in front of others] 
sphotanani ca-akaranat II 76 II 

16. Or to make [finger joints] crack without a [good] reason, 

Good reasons for cracking the joints are fatigue or rheumatism.' — Haradatta. 

yac ca-anyat paricaksate II 7711 

17. And all other [acts] which they blame. 

All other acts which are socially unacceptable. 

yd-uktd ca dharma yuktesu dravya parigrahesu ca II 18 II 

18. And let him acquire money in all ways that are lawful. 
pratipddayitd ca tirthe II 19 II 

19. And let him spend money on worthy [persons or objects]. (Manu 11:6, 
and passim). 

yanta ca-atTrthe yato na bhayam syat 1 1 20 1 1 

20. And let him not give anything to an unworthy [person], whom he does 
not fear. 

samgrahTtd ca manusyan \ \ 21 II 

21. And let him conciliate people [by gifts or kindness]. 
bhoktd ca dharma avipratisiddhan bhogan 1 1 22 1 1 

22. And he may enjoy the pleasures which are not forbidden by the holy 
law. 

evam ubhau lokdv abhijayati 1 1 2 J 1 1 

23. [Acting] thus he conquers both worlds. 

Prasna 2. Patala 9. Khanda 21. 

catvdra dsramd garhasthyam acdrya kulam maunam vanaprasthyam iti 1 1 
1. There are four orders, viz. the order of householders, the order of 



176 



students, the order of ascetics, and the order of hermits in the woods. 
(Manu 6:87.) 

Though four [orders] are enumerated, he uses the word "four," lest, in the absence 
of a distinct rule of the venerable teacher, one order only, that of the householder, 
should be allowed, as has been taught in other Smrtis. — Haradatta. 

tesu sarvesu yatha upadesam avyagro vartamanah ksemam gacchati 1 1 2 1 1 

If he lives in all these four according to the rules [of the law] without 
allowing himself to be disturbed [by anything], he will obtain 
Liberation. (Manu 6:88.) 

sarvesam upanayana prabhrti samdna deary akule vdsah II 3 II 

3. The duty to live in the teacher's house after the initiation is common to 
all of them. (Manu 2:247 - 249, and above.) 

sarvesam anutsargo vidydydh 1 1 4 1 1 

4. Not to give up sacred learning [is a duty common] to all. 
buddhvd karmdni yat kdmayeta tad drabheta II 5 II 

5. Having learnt the rites [that are to be performed in each order], one may 
perform what one wishes. 

yatha vidyd arthasya niyama etena-eva-antam anupasTdata dcdrya kule 
sarTra nydso brahmacdrinah 1 1 6 1 1 

6. Practicing until death [and living] according to the rule of a [temporary] 
student, a [professed] student may leave his body in the house of his 
teacher. 

atha parivrdjah 1 1 7 1 1 

7. Now [follow the rules] regarding the ascetic [Samnyasin]. 
ata eva brahmacaryavdn pravrajati 1 1 8 1 1 

8. Only after [having fulfilled] the duties of that [order of students] he shall 
go forth [as an ascetic], remaining chaste. 

The meaning of the Sutra is, that the studentship is a necessary preliminary for the 
Samnyasin. If a man considers himself sufficiently purified by his life in that order, 
he may become a Samnyasin immediately after its completion. Otherwise he may 
first become a householder, or a hermit, and enter the last order, when his passions 
are entirely extinct. (See also Manu 6:36; Yajn. 3:56 - 57.) 

tasya-upadisanti II 9 II 

9. For him [the Samnyasin]] they prescribe [the following rules]: — 



177 



anagnir aniketah syad asarma asarano munih I svadhyaya-eva- 
utsrjamano vacant grdme prdna vrttim pratilabhya-aniho- 'anamutras 
caret II 10 II 

10. He shall live without a fire, without a house, without pleasures, without 
protection. Remaining silent and uttering speech only on the occasion of 
the daily recitation of the Veda, begging so much food only in the village 
as will sustain his life, he shall wander about neither caring for this world 
nor for heaven. (Manu 6:33, 42 - 45; Yajn. 3:58 seq.) 

tasya muktam acchadanam vihitam II 77 II 

11. It is ordained that he shall wear clothes thrown away [by others as 
useless]. 

sarvatah parimoksam eke 1 1 72 1 1 

12. Some declare that he shall go naked. 

Another [commentator] says, "Some declare that he is free from all injunctions and 
prohibitions, ie. he need neither perform nor avoid any [particular actions] ."- 
Haradatta. 

satya anrte sukha duhkhe vedan imam lokam amum ca parity ajya-dtmdnam. 
anvicchet II 13 

13. Abandoning truth and falsehood, pleasure and pain, the Vedas, this 
world and the next, he shall seek the atman. 

He shall seek, it. Meditate upon the Atman or Self, which has been described in the 
section on transcendental knowledge [1. 8].' - Haradatta. 

buddhe ksema prapanam 1 1 14 1 1 

14. [Some say that] he obtains Liberation if he [theoretically] knows [the 
atman]. 

tat-sastrair vipratisiddham 1 1 75 1 1 

15. [But] that [opinion] is opposed to the Shastras. 

Haradatta apparently takes the word Shastras to mean 'Dharma-sastras. 

buddhe cet ksema prapanam iha-eva na duhkham upalabheta II 16 II 

16. [For] if liberation were obtained by the [theoretical] knowledge of the 
atman alone, then one ought not to experience suffering even in this 
[world]. 

etena param vyakhyatam II 7711 

17. Thereby that which follows has been declared. 



178 



That which follows are the Yogas, which must be employed in order to cause the 
annihilation of suffering, after the knowledge of the atman or self has been 
attained. 

atha vdnaprasthah II 18 II 

18. Now [follow the rules regarding] the hermit living in the woods. 
ata eva brahmacaryavan pravrajati 1 1 79 1 1 

19. Only after [completing] that [studentship] he shall go forth, remaining 
chaste. 

tasya-upadisanti I 1 1 20 1 1 

20. For him they give [the following rules] : — 

eka agnir aniketah sydd asarma asarano munih I svddhydya eva- 
utsrjamdno vacant II 21 II 

21. He shall keep one fire only, have no house, enjoy no pleasures, have no 
protector, observe silence, uttering speech on the occasion of the daily 
recitation of the Veda only. 

But which is that one fire? Certainly not the Grhya-fire, because he must remain 
chaste. Therefore the meaning intended is, "He shall offer a Samidha morn and 
evening in the common fire, just as formerly, [during his studentship]." Another 
commentator says, 'Gautama declares that he shall kindle a fire according to the 
rule of the sramanaka Sutra. The sramanaka Sutra is the Vaikhanasa Sutra. Having 
kindled a fire in the manner prescribed there, he shall sacrifice in it every morning 
and every evening." ' — Haradatta. (See also Manu 6:4; Yajn. 3:46.) 

Prasna 2. Patala 9. Khanda 22. 

tasya-aranyam dcchddanam vihitam 1 1 7 1 1 

1. A dress of materials procured in the woods [skins or bark] is ordained for 
him. (Manu 6:6.) 

tato mulaih phalaih parnais trnair iti vartayams caret 1 1 2 1 1 

2. Then he shall wander about, sustaining himself by roots, fruits, leaves, 
and grass. (Manu 6:5, 21 Yajn. 3:46.) 

antatah pravrttdni Mill 

3. In the end [he shall live on] what has become detached spontaneously. 
tato- 'apo vdyum dkdsam ity abhinisrayet 1 1 4 1 1 

4. Next he shall live on water, [then] on air, then on ether. 



179 



'Then he shall live on ether, i. e. eat nothing at all.' - Haradatta. (Manu 6:31; Yajn.3:56) 

tesam uttara uttarah samyogah phalato visistah 1 1 5 1 1 

5. Each following one of these modes of subsistence is distinguished by a 
[greater] reward. 

atha vdnaprasthasya-eva-anupurvyam eke- upadisanti 1 1 6 1 1 

6. Now some [teachers] enjoin for the hermit the successive performance 
[of the acts prescribed for the several orders]. 

'The word atha, "now," introduces a different opinion. Above, it has been declared 
that the life in the woods [may be begun] after the studentship only. But some 
teachers enjoin just for that hermit a successful performance of the acts. 

vidydm samdpya ddram krtvd-agnTn ddhdya karmdny drabhate soma 
avardrdhydni ydni sruyante 1 1 7 1 1 

7. After having finished the study of the Veda, having taken a wife and 
kindled the sacred fires, he shall begin the rites, which end with the Soma 
sacrifices, [performing] as many as are prescribed in the revealed texts. 

grhdn krtvd sa ddrah sa prajah saha-agnibhir bahir grdmdd vaset 1 1 8 1 1 

8. [Afterwards] he shall build a dwelling, and dwell outside the village with 
his wife, his children, and his fires, (Manu 6:3 seq.Yajn3;45) 

eko vd\\ 9 11 

9. Or [he may live] alone. 
silonchena vartayet II 10 II 

10. He shall support himself by gleaning corn. 

Haradatta thinks at this rule refers both to the hermit who lives with his family and 
to him who lives alone. Others refer it to the latter only. 

na ca-ata urdhvam pratigrhnTydt II 11 II 

11. And after that he shall not any longer accept gifts. 
abhisiktas ca juhuydt 1 1 72 1 1 

12. And he shall sacrifice [only] after having bathed [in the following 
manner] : — 

sanair apo- 'abhyaveydd abhighnann abhimukham ddityam udakam 
upasprset II 13 II 

13. He shall enter the water slowly, and bathe without beating it [with his 
hand], his face turned towards the sun. 



180 



iti sarvatra-udaka upasparsana vidhih 1 1 14 1 1 

14. This rule of bathing is valid for all [castes and orders]. 

tasya dvamdvam dravydndm eke- upadisanti pdka artha bhojana artha vdsi 
parasu ddtrakdjdndm 1 1 75 1 1 

15. Some enjoin [that he shall prepare] two sets of utensils for cooking and 
eating, [and] of choppers, hatchets, sickles, and mallets. 

According to Haradatta, the word kaja appears to designate 'a mallet; in the 
passage from the Ramayana quoted in the Petersburg Diet, the commentator 
explains it by pitaka, basket. ' 

dvamdvdndm eka ekam dddya-itardni datvd-aranyam avatistheta II 76 II 
(dvanddndm ) 

16. He shall take one of each pair [of instruments], give the others [to his 
wife], and [then] go Into the forest. 

tasya-aranyena-eva-ata urdhvam homo vrttih pratTksdt-chddanam ca II 77 
II 

17. After that time [he shall perform] the burnt oblations, [sustain] his life, 
[feed] his guests, and [prepare] his clothes with materials produced in the 
forest. (Yajn. 3:46). 

yesu karmasu puroddsds caravas tesu kdrydh II 18 II 

18. Rice must be used for those sacrifices for which cakes mixed with meat 
[are employed by the householder] . 

sarvam ca-updmsu saha svddhydyena 1 1 79 1 1 

19. And all [the Mantras], as well as the daily portion of the Veda, [must be 
recited] inaudibly. 

na-aranyam abhi-dsrdvayet 1 1 20 1 1 

20. He shall let the inhabitants of the forest hear [his recitation]. 

This Sutra explains the word upamsu, 'inaudibly.' 
agni artham saranam \ \ 21 II 

2 1 . [He shall have] a shelter for his fire [only] . 
dkdse svayam 1 1 22 1 1 

22. He himself [shall live] in the open air. 
anupastTrne sayyd dsane 1 1 23 1 1 

23. His couch and seat must not be covered [with mats]. 



181 



nave sasye prapte puranam anujamyat II 24 II 

24. If he obtains fresh grain, he shall throw away the old [store] . (Manu 
6:15; Yajn. 3:47) 

Prasna 2. Patala 9. Khanda 23 

bhuydmsam vd niyamam icchann anvaham eva pdtrena sdyam prdtar 
artham aharet 1 1 7 1 1 

1. If he desires [to perform] very great austerities, he [shall not make a 
hoard of grain, but] collect food every day only, morning and evening, in 
his vessel. 

The following rules apply to a solitary hermit. 

tato mulaih phalaih parnais trnair iti vartayams cared antatah pravrttani 
tato- 'apo vayum dkdsam ity abhinisrayet tesdm uttara uttarah samyogah 
phalato visistah 1 1 2 1 1 

2. Afterwards he shall wander about, sustaining his life with roots, fruits, 
leaves, and grass [which he collects]. Finally [he shall content himself 
with] what has become detached spontaneously. Then he shall live on 
water, then on air, [and finally] upon ether. Each succeeding mode of 
subsistence procures greater rewards. 

These Sutras are repeated in order to show that, according to the opinion of those 
who allow hermits to live with their families, the end should be the same. 

atha purane slokav uddharanti II 3 II 

3. Now they quote [the following] two verses from a Purana: — 

astdsTtisahasrdni ye prajdm Tsira-rsayah I 
daksinena-aryamnah panthdnam te smasdndni bhejire 1 1 4 1 1 

4. Those eighty thousand sages who desired offspring passed to the south 
by aryaman's road and obtained cremation grounds. 

This verse and the next are applied to disparage the order of householders. 
Haradatta explains 'cremation-grounds' by 'new births which lead to new deaths; 
but see below sutra 10, also Yajn. 3:186-187 

astdsTtisahasrdni ye prajdm na-Tsira-rsayah I 
uttarena-aryamnah panthdnam te- 'amrtatvam hi kalpate 1 1 5 1 1 

5. Those eighty thousand sages who desired no offspring passed by 
aryaman's road to the north and obtained immortality. 



182 



ity urdhva ret as am prasamsa 1 1 6 1 1 

6. Thus are praised those who keep the vow of chastity. 
atha-api samkalpa siddhayo bhavanti 1 1 7 1 1 

7. Now they accomplish also their wishes merely by conceiving them, 

yatha varsam praja danam dure darsanam manojavata yac ca-anyad evam 
yuktam 1 1 8 1 1 

8. For instance [the desire to procure] rain, to bestow children, second 
sight, to move quick as thought, and other [desires] of this description. 

tasmat-srutitah pratyaksa phalatvdc ca visistan dsramdn etan eke bruvate 
II 9 II 

9. Therefore on account of [passages] of the revealed texts, and on account 
of the visible results, some declare these orders [of men keeping the vow of 
chastity to be] the most excellent. 

traividya vrddhdndm tu veddh pramanam iti nistha tatra yani sriiyante 
vrThi yava pasu ajya payah kapala patni sambandhany uccair nicaih 
karyam iti tair viruddha acaro- 'apramanam iti manyante II 10 II 

10. But [to this we] answer: — It is the firm opinion of those who are well 
versed in the threefold sacred learning, that the Vedas are the highest 
authority. They consider that the [rites] which are ordered there to be 
performed with rice, barley, animals, clarified butter, milk, potsherds, [in 
conjunction] with the wife, [and accompanied] by loud or muttered 
(Mantras], must be performed, and that [hence] a rule of conduct which is 
opposed to these [rites] is of no authority. 

yat tu smasanam ucyate nana karmanam eso- 'ante purusa samskaro 
vidhTyate II 11 II 

11. But by the term cremation-ground [in the text above given] it is 
intended to ordain the last rites for those who have performed many 
sacrifices, [and not to mean that dead householders become demons and 
haunt cemetaries.) 

The Sutra is intended to remove the blame thrown on the order of householders by 
the verse quoted. Haradatta seems to have forgotten his former explanation of 
Smasdndni. 

tatah par am anantyam phalam svargya sabdam sriiyate II 12 II 

12. The revealed texts declare that after [the burial follows] a reward 
without end, which is designated by the term 'heavenly bliss.' 



183 



Prasna 2. Patala 9. Khanda 24. 

atha-apy asya prajatim amrtam amnaya aha I 
prajdm anu prajayase tad u te marty amrtam iti 1 1 7 1 1 

1. Now the Veda declares also one's offspring to be immortality [in this 
verse]: — 'In you offspring you are born again, that, mortal, is your 
immortality.' 

atha-api sa eva-ayam virudhah prthak pratyaksena-upalabhyate drsyate 
ca-api sarupyam dehatvam eva-anyat 1 1 2 1 1 

2. Now it can also be perceived by the senses that the [father] has been 
reproduced separately [in the son]; for the likeness [of a father and of a 
son] is even visible, only [their] bodies are different. 

te sistesu karmasu vartamanah purvesdm samparayena kirtim svargam ca 
vardhayanti II 3 

3. 'These [sons] who have, fulfilling the rites taught [in the Veda] increase 
the fame and heavenly bliss of their departed ancestors' 

evam avaro- 'avarah paresam 1 1 4 1 1 

4. 'In this manner each succeeding generation increases the fame 'and 
heavenly bliss of the preceding ones.' 

a bhuta samplavat te svarga jitah 1 1 5 1 1 

5. 'They [the ancestors] live in heaven until the [next] general destruction 
of created things.' 

punah sarge bija arthd bhavanti-iti bhavisyat purane 1 1 6 1 1 

6. At the new creation [of, the world] they become the seed. That has been 
declared in the Bhavisya Purana. 

'They become the seed,' ie. 'The Prajapatis.' 

atha-api prajapater vacanam 1 1 7 1 1 

7. Now Prajapati also says, 

trayim vidyam brahmacaryam prajatim sraddham tapo yajnam 
anupradanam I 

ya etdni kurvate tair it saha smo rajo bhutva dhvamsate- 'anyat 
prasamsann iti 1 1 8 1 1 

8. 'Those dwell with us who fulfil the following [duties]: — the study of 
the three Vedas, the studentship, the procreation of children, conviction, 



184 



meditation, sacrifices, and the giving of charity. He who praises other 
[duties], becomes dust and perishes.' 

'Other [duties], ie. the order of ascetic and the like.' - Haradatta. 

tatra ye papakrtas ta eva dhvamsanti yatha parnam vanaspater na paran 
himsanti 1 1 9 1 1 

9. Those among these [sons] who transgress, perish alone, just as the leaf of 
a tree [which has been attacked by worms falls without injuring its branch 
or tree]. They do not hurt their ancestors. 

na-asya-asmiml loke karmabhih sambandho vidyate tathd parasmin karma 
phalaih II 10 II 

10. [For] the [ancestor] has no connection with the acts committed [by his 
descendant] in this world, nor with their results in the next. 

tad etena veditavyam II 77 II 

11. [The truth of] that may be known by the following [reason]: — 
prajapater rsTnam iti sargo- 'ayam II 72 II 

12. This creation [is the work] of Prajapati and of the sages. 

tatra ye punya krtas tesdm prakrtayah para jvalantya upalabhyante 1 1 7 J 1 1 

13. The bodies of those [sages] who stay there [in heaven] on account of 
their merits appear visibly most excellent and brilliant [as, for instance, the 
constellation of the seven Rishis]. 

As the Rishis have not lost heaven through the sins of their sons, the dogma 
according to which ancestors lose heaven through the sins of their sons, must be 
false. 

sydt tu karma avayavena tapasa vd kascit sasariro- 'antavantam lokam 
jayati samkalpa siddhis ca syan na tu taj jyaisthyam asramanam II 14 II 

14. But even though some [ascetic], whilst still in the body, may gain 
heaven through a portion of [the merit acquired by his former] works or 
through austerities, and though he may accomplish [his objects] by his 
mere wish, still this is no reason to place one order before the other. 

Apastamba's own opinion is apparently against pure asceticism. 



Prasna 2. Patala 9. Khanda 25. 

vyakhyatah sarva varnanam sadharana vaisesika dharmah I rajnas tu 



185 



visesadvaksyamah II 

1. The general and special duties of all castes have been explained. But we 
will now declare those of a ruler in particular. 

daksina dvaram vesma puram ca mdpayet 1 1 2 1 1 

2. He shall have built a town and a palace, the gates of both of which [must 
look] towards the South. 

antarasyam puri vesma 1 1 3 1 1 

3. The palace [shall stand] in the heart of the town. 

'In the heart of the town, i. e. in that town which is surrounded by all the walls. — 
Haradatta. (Compare Manu 7:76). 

tasya purastdd dvasathas tad dmantranam ity dcaksate 1 1 4 1 1 

4. In front of that [there shall be] a hall. That is called the hall of invitation. 

daksinena puram sabha daksina udag dvard yatha-ubhayam samdrsyeta 
bahir antaram ca-iti 1 1 5 1 1 

5. [At a little distance] from the town to the south [he shall cause to be 
built] an assembly-house with doors on the south and on the north sides, so 
that one can see what passes inside and outside. 

sarvesv eva-ajasra agnayah syuh 1 1 6 1 1 

6. In all [these three places] fires shall burn constantly. 

According to Haradatta, the fires are to be common, not consecrated ones. 

agnipujd ca nitya yatha grhamedhe II 7 II 

7. And oblations must be offered in these fires daily, just as at the daily 
sacrifice of a householder. (Manu 7:78; Yajn. 11:313). 

avasathe srotriya avarardhyan atithin vasayet 1 1 8 1 1 

8. In the hall he shall put up his guests, at least those who are learned in the 
Vedas. (Manu 7:82 seq.) 

tesam yatha gunam avasathah sayya anna pdnam ca videyam 1 1 9 1 1 

9. Rooms, a couch, food and drink should be given to them according to 
their good qualities. 

gurun amdtydms ca na-atijivet II 10 II 

10. Let him not live better than his Gurus or advisors. 

'The Gurus are the father and other [venerable relations].' — Haradatta. 



186 



na ca-asya visaye ksudha rogena hima atapabhyam va-avasided abhavad 
buddhi purvam vd kascit II 11 II 

11. And in his realm no [Brahmana] should suffer hunger, sickness, cold, 
or heat, be it through want, or intentionally. (Manu 7:134.) 

'Or intentionally; with reference to that the following example may be given. If 
anybody is to be made to pay his debts of taxes, then he is to be exposed to cold or 
heat, or to 'be made' to fast [until he pays]. The king shall : — punish [every one] 
who acts thus.' — Haradatta. 

sabhdyd madhye- 'adhidevanam uddhatya-avoksya-aksan nivaped yugmdn 
vaibhTtakdn yathdarthdn II 12 II 

12. In the midst of the assembly-house, [the superintendent of the house] 
shall raise a play-table and sprinkle it with water, turning his hand 
downwards, and place on it dice in even numbers, made of VibhTtaka 
[wood], as many as are wanted. 

aryah sucayah satyasila divitarah syuh \ \ 13 \ \ 

13. People of the first three castes, who are pure and truthful, may be 
allowed to play there. 

Having played there, they shall give a fixed sum to the gambling-house keeper and 
go away. The latter shall, every day or every month or every year; give that gain 
to the king. And the king shall punish those who play elsewhere or quarrel in the 
assembly -house.' — Haradatta 

dyudha grahanam nrtta gita vaditrani-iti raja adhTnebhyo- 'anyatra na 
vidyeran II 14 II 

14. Contests of martial arts, dancing, singing, music, and the like 
[performances] shall be held only [in the houses] of the king's servants. 

At festivals and the like occasions [these performances] take place also elsewhere, 
that is the custom. — Haradatta. 

ksemakrd raja yasya visaye grame- 'aranye va taskara bhayam na vidyate 
II 15 II ' 

15. That king only takes care of the welfare of his subjects in whose 
dominions, be it in villages or forests, there is no danger from thieves. 
(Manu 7:143, and passim; Yajn. 1:335.) 

Prasna 2. Patala 10. Khanda 26. 

bhrtyanam anuparodhena ksetram vittam ca dadad brahmanebhyo yatha 
arham anantaml lokan abhijayati 1 1 7 1 1 



187 



1. A [king] who, without detriment to his servants, gives land and money to 
Brahmanas according to their deserts gains endless worlds. (Manu 7:83, 
84, 88; Yajn. 1:314) 

brahmana svany apajigTsamano raja yo hanyate tarn ahur atmayupo 
yajno- 'ananta daksina iti 1 1 2 1 1 

2. They say [that] a king, who is slain in attempting to recover the property 
of Brahmanas, [performs] a sacrifice where his body takes the place of the 
sacrificial post, and at which an unlimited fee is given. 

According to Haradatta the king's body represents the post [yupa], his Self the 
sacrificial animal, the recovered property the reward for the priests or fee. 

etena-anye sura vyakhyatah prayojane yudhyamanas tanu tyajah 1 1 3 1 1 

3. Hereby have been declared [the rewards of] other heroes, who fall 
fighting for a [worthy] cause. (Manu 7:89; Yajn. 1:323, 324). 

gramesu nagaresu ca-aryan-sucin satyasTlan prajaguptaye nidadhyat 1 1 4 1 1 

4. He shall appoint men of the first three castes, who are pure and truthful, 
over villages and towns for the protection of the people. (Manu 7:115 - 
124; Yajn. 1:321). 

tesam purusds tatha guna eva syuh 1 1 5 1 1 

5. Their servants shall possess the same qualities. 
sarvato yojanam nagaram taskarebhyo raksyam 1 1 6 1 1 

6. They must protect a town from thieves in every direction to the distance 
of one yojana. Yajn. 2:271 - 272. 

A yojana is a distance of 4 krosa, [kos] 

kroso grdmebhyah 1 1 7 1 1 

7. [They must protect the country to the distance of] one krosha from each 
village. 

A krosa, kos, or gau, literally; 'the lowing of a cow' is variously reckoned at 1.5 - 4 
miles . 

tatra yat-musyate tais tat pratiddpyam 1 1 8 1 1 

8. They must be made to compensate for what is stolen within these 
boundaries. (Yajn. 1:272.) 

dharmyam sulkam avaharayet 1 1 9 1 1 

9. The [king] shall make them collect the lawful taxes [sulka] 

According to Haradatta, who quotes Gautama in his commentary, the sulka is the 



188 



1.20th part of a merchant's gains. On account of the Sutras immediately following, 
it is, however, more probable that the term is here used as a synonym of 'kara,' and 
includes all taxes. 'Lawful' taxes are, of course, those sanctioned by custom and 
approved of by the Smrtis. 

akarah srotriyah II 10 II 

10. A Vedic Scholar is exempt from taxes, (Manu 7: 133.) 
sarva varndndm ca striyah II 77 II 

11. And the women of all castes, 
kumdrds ca prdg vyanjanebhyah II 12 II 

12. And boys before the marks [of puberty appear], 
ye ca vidyd arthd vasanti 1 1 7 J 1 1 

13. And those who live [with a teacher] in order to study, 
tapasvinas ca ye dharma pardh \ \ 14 \ \ 

14. And those who perform austerities, being intent on fulfilling the sacred 
law, 

'Why does he say "intent on fulfilling the holy law?" Those shall not be free from 
taxes who perform austerities in order to make their magic charms efficacious.' — 
Haradatta. 

sudras ca pdda avanektd 1 1 75 1 1 

15. And a sudra who lives by washing the feet, 
andha muka badhira roga vistas ca II 16 II 

16. Also blind, dumb, deaf, and diseased persons [as long as their 
infirmities last], 

ye vy arthd dravya parigrahaih II 7711 

17. And those to whom the acquisition of property is forbidden [as 
Sannyasins]. 

abuddhi purvam alamkrto yuvd paraddram anupravisan kumdrim vd vdcd 
bddhyah II 18 II 

18. A young man who, decked with ornaments, enters unintentionally [a 
place where] a married woman or a [marriageable] damsel [sits], must be 
reprimanded. 

The ornaments would indicate that he was bent on mischief. Compare above, 1:2:32:6. 

buddhi purvam tu dusta bhdvo dandyah 1 1 79 1 1 



189 



19. But if he does it intentionally with a bad purpose, he must be fined. 
(Manu 8:354; Yajn. 2:284.) 

The punishment must be proportionate to his property and the greatness of his 
offence. The term "with a bad purpose" is added, because he who has been sent by 
his teacher [to such a place] should not be punished.' — Haradatta. 

samnipdte vrtte sisna cchedanam sa vrsanasya 1 1 20 1 1 

20. If he has actually committed adultery, his penis shall be cut off together 
with the testicles. 

kumdrydm tu svany dddya nasyah II 21 II 

2 1 . But [if he has had intercourse] with a [marriageable] girl, his property 
shall be confiscated and he shall be banished. 

atha bhrtye rajna II 22 II 

22. Afterwards the king must support [such women and damsels], 
raksye ca-ata urdhvam maithundt 1 1 2 J 1 1 

23. And protect them from defilement. 

nirvesa abhyupdye tu svdmibhyo- 'avasrjet II 24 II 

24. If they agree to undergo the [prescribed] penance, he shall make them 
over to their [lawful] guardians. 

ie. a married woman to her husband or father-in-law, an unmarried damsel to her 
father or to her brother.' — Haradatta. 

Prasna 2. Patala 10. Khanda 27. 

carite yathd puram dharmdd-hi sambandhah 1 1 7 1 1 

1. If [adulteresses] have performed [the prescribed penance], they are to be 
treated as before [their fault]. For the connection [of husband and wife] 
takes place through the law. 

sagotra sthdnTydm na parebhyah samdcaksTta 1 1 kuldya hi stri pradiyata ity 
upadisanti 11:2,311 

[A husband] shall not hand over his [wife], who belongs to his own gotra, 
to others [than to his blood-line], in order to beget children for himself, for 
they declare, that a bride is given to the family [of her husband, and not to 
the husband alone]. 

This Sutra refers to the begetting of a surrogate or ksetraja son, and gives the usual 



190 



rule, that only the Sagotras or clansman who is related by blood, a brother, a 
cousin, brother-in-law, etc. shall be employed as sperm donors rather than 
strangers. A woman is given to a family rather than an individual and therefore, in 
a pre-industrial agrarian society, it was in the interests of the whole family that 
procreation occurs some how or other. 

tad indriya daurbalydd [ vipratipannam 1 1 4 1 1 

4. That is [at present] forbidden on account of the weakness of [men's] 
senses. 

For now-a-days the senses of men are weak, and therefore the peculiar [law 
formerly] in force regarding blood-lines is so no longer, lest husband should be set 
aside under the pretended sanction of the Shastras. — Haradatta 

avisistam hi paratvam pdneh 1 1 5 1 1 

5. The hand [of a sagotra is considered in law to be] that of a stranger, and 
so is [that of any other person except the husband]. 

tad vyatikrame khalu punar ubhayor narakah 1 1 6 1 1 

6. If the [marriage vow] is transgressed, both [husband and wife] certainly 
go to hell. 

niyama arambhano hi varsTyan abhyudaya evam arambhanad apatydt 1 1 7 
II " 

7. The reward [in the next world] resulting from obeying the restrictions of 
the law is preferable to offspring obtained in this manner [by means of 
Niyoga] . 

nasya dry ah sudrayam 1 1 8 1 1 

8. A man of one of the first three castes [who commits adultery] with a 
woman of the sudra caste shall be banished. 

vadhyah sudra dry ay am 1 1 9 1 1 

9. A sudra [who commits adultery] with a woman of one of the first three 
castes shall suffer capital punishment. (Manu 8:374 Yajn. 2:286.) 

According to Haradatta, this refers to a sudra servant who seduces a woman 
committed to his charge In other cases the punishment prescribed, 2:10:26:10 is to 
take effect. The same opinion is expressed by Gautama. 

daram ca-asya karsayet II 10 II 

10. And he shall emaciate a woman who has committed adultery with a 
[sudra, by making her undergo penances and fasts, in case she had no 
child]. 

savarnayam any a purvayam sakrt samnipate padah patati-ity upadisanti II 



191 



77 II 

1 1 . They declare, that [a Brahmana] who has once committed adultery with 
a married woman of equal class, shall perform one-fourth of the penance 
prescribed for an outcast. 

This refers to the wife of a srotriya, as Haradatta states according to Gautama. The 
penance is three years' chastity. 

evam abhyase padah pddah II 12 II 

12. In like manner for every repetition of the crime], one-fourth of the 
penance must be added] . 

caturthe sarvam II 13 II 

13. [If the offence be committed] for the fourth time, the whole [penance of 
twelve years must be performed]. 

jihvd dcchedanam sudrasya-dryam dhdrmikam dkrosatah 1 1 14 1 1 

14. The tongue of a sudra who speaks evil of a virtuous person, belonging 
to one of the first three castes, shall be cut out. 

vdci pathi sayydydm dsana iti samTbhavato danda tddanam 1 1 75 1 1 

15. A sudra who assumes a position equal [to that of a member of one of 
the first three castes], in conversation, on the road, on a couch, in sitting 
[and on similar occasions], shall be flogged. 

In conversation, ie. addressing aryas familiarly, with tvam, 'you,' etc. 

purusa vadhe steye bhumi dddna iti svdny dddya vadhyah II 76 II 

16. In case [a sudra] commits murder or theft, appropriates land [or 
commits similar heinous crimes], his property shall be confiscated and he 
himself shall suffer capital punishment. 

caksu nirodhas tv etesu brdhmanasya II 7711 

17. But if these [offences be committed] by a Brahmana, he shall be made 
blind [by tying a cloth over his eyes] . 

Haradatta states expressly that the eyes of a Brahmana must not be put out by any 
sharp instrument. He should be kept blindfold all his life. 

niyama atikramanam anyam vd rahasi bandhayet II 78 II 

18. He shall keep in secret confinement him who violates the rules [of his 
caste or order], or any other offender, until [he promises] amendment. 

a samdpatteh asamdpattau ndsyah 1 1 79 1 1 



192 



19. If he does not amend, he shall be banished. 

acarya rtvik snatako raja-iti tranam syur anyatra vadhyat 1 1 20 1 1 

20. A spiritual teacher, an oficiating priest, a Snataka, and a prince shall be 
able to protect [a criminal from punishment by their intercession], except in 
case of a capital offence. 

The intercession is to take effect in this manner: — mutilation is commuted to a 
fine, a fine to a flogging, a flogging to a reprimand - Haradatta. 

Prasna 2. Patala 11. Khanda 28. 

ksetram parigrhya-utthana bhdvdt phaldbhdve yah samrddhah sa bhdvi 
tad apaharyah 1 1 1 

1. If a person who has taken [a lease of] land [for cultivation] does not 
exert himself, and hence [the land] bears no crop, he shall, if he is rich, be 
made to pay [to the owner of the land the value of the crop] that ought to 
have grown. 

avasinah kinasasya karma nyase danda tadanam 1 1 2 1 1 

2. A servant in tillage who abandons his work shall be flogged. 

Another commentator, quoted by Haradatta, connects this Sutra with the preceding, 
and refers it to a poor lessee of land, who cannot pay the value of the crop which 
was lost through his negligence. A third explanation refers the Sutra to a cultivator 
who neglects to till his land. Gagannatha's authorities, the Cintamani and 
Ratnakara, agree with Haradatta' s first explanation. 

tatha pasupasya II 3 II 

3. The same [punishment shall be awarded] to a herdsman [who leaves his 
work] ; 

avarodhanam ca-asya pasunam 1 1 4 1 1 

4. And the flock [entrusted] to him shall be taken away [and be given to 
some other herdsman] . 

hitva vrajam adinah karsayet pasun na-atipatayet 1 1 5 1 1 

5. If cattle, leaving their stable, eat [the crops of others, then the owner of 
the crops, or the king's servants], may make them lean [by impounding 
them]; [but] he shall not exceed [in such punishment]. (Manu 8:240; Yajn. 
2:159 s 161) 

avarudhya pasun marane nasane va svamibhyo- 'avasrjet 1 1 6 1 1 



193 



6. If [a herdsman] who has taken cattle under his care, allows them to 
perish, or loses [them by theft, through his negligence], he shall replace 
them [or pay their value] to the owners. (Manu 8:232; Yajn. 2:164.) 

pramadad aranye pasun utsrstdn drstvd grdmam dniya svdmibhyo- 
'avasrjet 1 1 7 1 1 

7. If [the king's forester] sees cattle that have been sent into the forest 
through negligence [without a herdsman], he shall lead them back to the 
village and hand them over to the owners. 

punah pramdde sakrd avarudhya 1 1 8 1 1 

8. If the same negligence [occurs] again, he shall once impound them [and 
afterwards give them back] . 

tata urdhvam na surkset 1 1 9 1 1 

9. [If the same fault be committed again] after that [second time], he shall 
not take care [of them] . 

paraparigraham avidvdn ddaddna edha udake mule puspe phale gandhe 
grdse sdka iti vdcd bddhyah II 10 II 

10. He who has taken unintentionally the property of another shall be 
reprimanded, in case [the property be] fuel, water, roots, flowers, fruits, 
perfumes, fodder, or vegetables. 

viduso vdsasah parimosanam II 11 II 

11. [If he takes the above mentioned kinds of property] intentionally, his 
garment shall be taken away. 

adandyah kdmakrte tathd prdna samsaye bhojanam ddaddnah II 12 II 

12. He who intentionally takes food when he is in danger of his life shall 
not be punished. 

prdpta nimitte danda akarmani rdjdnam enah sprsati \ \ 13 \ \ 

13. If the king does not punish a punishable offence, the guilt falls upon 
him. (Manu 8:308; Yajn. 1:336). 



Prasna 2. Patala 11. Khanda 29. 

prayojayitd mantd kartd-iti svarga naraka phalesu karmasu bhdginah II 1 
1. He who instigates, he who assists in, and he who commits [an act, these 
three] share its rewards in heaven and its punishments in hell. 



194 



yo bhuya arabhate tasmin phala visesah 1 1 2 1 1 

2. The one amongst these who contributes most to the accomplishment [of 
the act obtains] a greater share of the result. 

kutumbinau dhanasya-Tsate 1 1 3 1 1 

3. Both the wife and the husband have power over [their] common 
property. 

It is the duty of the wife to spend and manage the finances of the home. 

tayor anumate- 'anye- 'api tad-hitesu varteran 1 1 4 1 1 

4. By their permission, others also may act for their good [in this and the 
next world, even by spending money] . 

'Others, ie. the sons and the rest.' — Haradatta. 

vivdde vidyd abhijana sampannd vrddhd medhdvino dharmesv a 
vinipdtinah 1 1 5 1 1 

5. Men of learning and pure descent, who are aged, clever in reasoning, and 
careful in fulfilling the duties [of their caste and order, shall be the judges] 
in lawsuits. (Yajn. 2:2) 

samdehe lingato daivena-iti vicitya II 6 II 

6. In doubtful cases [they shall give their decision] after having ascertained 
[the truth] by inference, ordeals, and the like [means]. 

'And the like, ie. by cross-examination, etc' — Haradatta. 

punydhe prdtar agndv iddhe- 'apdmante rdjavaty ubhayatah samdkhydpya 
sarva anumate mukhyah satyam prasnam bruydt 1 1 7 1 1 

7. A person who is possessed of good qualities [may be called as a witness, 
and] shall answer the questions put to him according to the truth on an 
auspicious day, in the morning, before a kindled fire, standing near [a jar 
full of water, in the presence of the king, and with the consent of all [of 
both parties and of the judges], after having been exhorted [by the judge] to 
be fair to both sides. (Manu 8:87 seq.; Yajn. 2:68 s 75) 

anrte raja dandam pranayet 1 1 8 1 1 

8. If [he is found out speaking] an untruth, the king shall punish him. 
(Manu 8:119 seq.) 

narakas ca-atra-adhikah samparaye 1 1 9 1 1 

9. Besides, in that case, after death, hell [will be his punishment]. (Manu 
8:89 seq.) 



195 



satye svargah sarva bhuta prasamsa ca II 10 II 

10. If he speaks the truth, [his reward will be] heaven and the approbation 
of all created beings. (Manu 8:81 seq.) 

sd nisthd yd vidyd strTsu sudresu ca II 11 II 

11. The knowledge which sudras and women possess is the completion [of 
all study]. (Manu 2:223.) 

The meaning of the Sutra is, that men ought not to study solely or at first such 
sastras as women or sudras also learn, but that at first they must study the Veda. 
See Manu 11. 168. The knowledge which women and sudras possess is dancing, 
music, and other branches of the Arthasastra. 

dtharvanasya vedasya sesa ity upadisanti II 12 II 

12. They declare, that [this knowledge] is a supplement of the Atharva 
Veda. 

krcchrd dharma samdptih samdmndtenal laksana karmandt tu samdpyate II 
13 II 

13. It is difficult to learn the sacred law from [the letter of] the Vedas 
[only] ; but by following the indications it is easily accomplished. 

tatra laksanam I sarva jana padesv ekdnta samdhitam drydndm vrttam 
samyag vinTtdndm vrddhdndm dtmavatdm alolupdndm addmbhikdndm 
vrtta sddrsyam bhajeta I evam ubhau lokdv abhijayati 1 1 14 1 1 

14. The indications [for these doubtful cases] are: 'He shall regulate his 
course of action according to the conduct which is unanimously recognised 
in all countries by people of the three twice-born castes, who have been 
properly obedient [to their teachers], who are mature, of subdued senses, 
neither given to avarice, nor hypocrites. Acting thus he will gain both 
worlds.' (See above, 1:7:20:8 and 9) 

strTbhyah sarva varnebhyas ca dharma sesdn pratiydd ity eke- ity eke 1 1 75 
II 

15. Some declare, that the remaining duties [which have not been taught 
here] must be learnt from women and those of all castes. 



II samaptam ca-idam apastambiya dharmasutram II 



196 

APASTAMBA GRHYA SUTRAS 




Introductory Note 

The short treatise of Apastamba on the Grhya ritual forms one Prasna of the great 
corpus of the Apastambiya Kalpa-Sutra and stands, among the Grhya texts, in closest 
connection with the Hiranyakesin Grhya Sutra, these two Sutras, both belonging to the 
Taittiriya School of the Black Yajur-Veda. The difference between them is that 
Apastamba gives only the rules for the performance of the Grhya rites without the 
Mantras, which are contained in a special collection, the Mantrapatha, standing by the 
side of the Sutras: Hiranyakesin, on the other hand, follows the more usual practice, as 
adopted by sankhayana, asvalayana, Paraskara, of interweaving the description of the 
ceremonies with the text of the corresponding Mantras. 



Patala 1: Section 1. 

1 . Now [follow] the ceremonies [the knowledge of] which is derived from practice [and 
not from the sruti] . 

2. They should be performed during the northern course of the sun (uttarayana), on 
days of the first fortnight (sukla-paksa), on auspicious days, 

3. With the sacrificial thread suspended over [the sacrificer's] left shoulder (upaviti). 

4. [The rites should be performed] from left to right. 

5. The beginning should be made on the east side or on the north side. 

6. And also the end. 

7. Ceremonies relating to the Ancestors [are performed] in the second fortnight (krsna- 
paksa). 

8. With the sacrificial thread draped over the right shoulder (pracTnaviti) 

9. From right to left. 

10. Ending in the south. 

11. Ceremonies occasioned by special occurrences [are performed] according as their 
occasions demand. 6 

12. Having kindled the fire, one strews eastward-pointed Darbha grass around it, 7 



The Paribhasas for the Pakayajiias. 7-10. Comp. 7 with 2, 8 with 3:9 with 4,10 with 6. 
Description of the regular form of a Pakayajna. 



197 



13. Or eastward-pointed and northward-pointed [darbha grass]; 

14. Southward-pointed at sacrifices to the Ancestors, 

15. Or southward-pointed and eastward-pointed. 

16 To the north of the fire one strews Darbha grass and [on that] one places the vessels 
[required for sacrifice] upside-down, in pairs, if during ceremonies related to the gods. 

17. All at once, if to humans. 

18. One by one, if to the Ancestors. 

19. The preparation of the [blades used as] "purifiers," the measure of their length, the 
preparation of the Proksani water, and the sprinkling of the vessels are the same here [to 
the Ancestors] as at the sacrifices of the new and full moon, [but are performed] in 
silence. (Comp. srauta-Sutra 1: 11, 6 seq.) 

Preparation of the pranita water 

20. To the west of the fire one pours water into a vessel over which one has laid [two 
grass blades called] pavitns, purifies [the water] three times with two northward- 
pointed pavitrTs, raises it to the level of the nose and mouth, places it to the north of the 
fire on Darbha grass, and covers it with Darbha grass. 

Invocation of the Brahman 

21. On the south side he invites a Brahmana to sit down on Darbha grass. 

Preparation of the Ghee 

22. One melts the ajya 8 , pours it, to the west of the fire, into the ajya-sthali, over which 
he has laid two purifiers, draws coals [out of the sacrificial fire] from the north, puts 
[the ajya-sthali] on them, throws light on it by means of a burning [grass-blade] throws 
two Darbha points into it, moves a firebrand round it three times, takes it from the fire 
towards the north, sweeps the coals back [into the fire], purifies [the ajya] three times 
with two northward-pointed purifiers, moving them backward and forward, and throws 
the purifiers into the fire. 

Patala 1: Section 2. 
Preparation of the Sruk-sruva 



There are two types of clarified butter used in yajnas — Ajya is made from goat's milk and ghrta is 
made from cow's milk. 



198 



1. One warms the [two] sacrificial ladles over the fire, wipes them with Darbha blades, 
warms them again, sprinkles it [with water], puts it down, touches them with Darbha 
blades with water, and throws [the blades] into the fire. 

Placing the Paridhis 

2. As paridhis [pieces of wood laid round the fire] yoke -pins are used at the marriage, 
the Upanayana, the Samavartana, the parting of the [wife's] hair, the tonsure of the 
child's hair, the cutting of the beard, and at expiatory ceremonies. 

Sprinkling Water 

3. He sprinkles water round the fire, on the south side from west to east with [the 
words], "Aditi, give thy consent !" on the west side from south to north with "Anumati, 
give thy consent!" on the north side from west to east with "Sarasvati, give thy 
consent!" all around with "God Savitri, please impel us!" 

4. At ceremonies belonging to the Ancestors [water is sprinkled] only all round [the 
fire], silently. 

o o 

The Aghara and Ajya-bhaga Oblations 

5. Having put a piece of wood on the fire, he offers the two aghara oblations 9 as at the 
sacrifices of the new and full-moon, silently. 

6. Then he offers the two ajyabhaga oblations, over the easterly part of the northerly 
part [of the fire] with [the words], "To Agni Svaha!" over the easterly part of the 
southerly part [another oblation] exactly like the preceding one, with [the words], "To 
Soma Svaha!" 10 

The Pradhana Homa 

7. Having offered the chief oblations [belonging to each sacrifice] according to 
prescription, one adds the following oblations, viz. the Jaya, Abhyatana, Rastrabhrt 11 
oblations, the oblation to Prajapati, the Vyahrtis one by one, the oblation to [Agni] 
Svistakrt with [the following formula]; "What I have done too much in this ceremony, 
or what I have done here too little, all that may Agni Svistakrt, he who knows, make 
well sacrificed and well offered. Svaha !" 

8. The sprinkling [of water] round [the fire is repeated] as above; the Mantras are 
altered so as to say, "Thou hast given thy consent", "Thou hast given thy impulse." 

9. The designation "Paka-yajna" is used of ceremonies connected with material life. 

10. There the ritual based on the Brahmana [holds good]. 12 



9 The srauta rules on the two agharas are given srauta-Sutra 11:12, 7; 14,1 One to prajapati - streaming 
the ghee from the North-west corner to the South-east corner of the kunda. The one oblation to Indra 
from the South-west corner to the North-east corner. 

10 Comp. srauta-Sutra 11:18 5; Hillebrandt, loc. cit., p. 106, note 3 

11 On the Jaya, Abhyatana, Rastrabhrt formulas, comp. Paraskara 1. 

12 According to Haradatta, this Sutra would imply that wheresoever the ritual described in the preceding 
Sutras holds good, another ritual based on the Brahmana, and more especially on the treatment of the 
Agnihotra in the Brahmana, may be used in its stead. 



199 



11. [To which the words allude], "He sacrifices twice; he wipes off [his hand] twice; he 
partakes twice [of the sacrificial food]; having gone away he sips [out of the sruk] and 
licks off [the sruk]." 

The Wedding Ceremony 

12. All seasons are fit for marriage with the exception of the two months of the sisira 
(flower) season, and of the last summer month. 

13. All Naksatras which are stated to be faultless, [are fit for marriage]; 

14. And all [other] auspicious performances. 

15. And one should learn from women what ceremonies [are required by custom]. 

16. Under the Invakas [Naksatra], [the messengers who go to the girl's father] are sent 
out: such messengers are welcome. 

Patala 1: Section 3. 

1. Under Magha [Naksatra] cows are given; 

2. Under Phalguni [Naksatra] marriage is celebrated. 

3. A daughter whom he wishes to be dear [to her husband], a father should give in 
marriage under the Nishtya [Naksatra]; thus she becomes dear [to her husband]; she 
does not return [to her father's] house: this is an observance based on a Brahmana. 13 

4. The word Invakas means Mrgasiras; the word Nishtya means Svati. 14 

5. At the wedding one cow [is given]. 

6. In the house one cow [is given]. 

7. With the [first cow] he should prepare an Arghya reception for the bridegroom as for 
a guest. 

8. With the other [the bridegroom should do so] for a person whom he reveres. 15 

9. These are the occasions for slaughtering a cow: [the arrival of] a guest, [the Astaka 
sacrifice offered to] the Ancestors, and marriage. 

10. Let [the wooer] avoid in his wooing, a girl that sleeps, or cries, or has left home. 16 

11. And let him avoid one who has been given [married to another], and who is over 
protected [by her relations], and one who looks wicked [?], or who is a most excellent 
one [?], or [who is like the fabulous deer] sarabha [?], a hunch-back, a girl of 
monstrous appearance, a bald headed girl, a girl whose skin is like a frog's [?], a girl 
who has gone over to another family [?], a girl given to sensual pleasures [?], or a 



13 Comp. Taittiriya Brahmana I;5;2;3 

14 Comp. Sutra 3, and above, Section 2, Sutra 16.) 

15 5-8. Comp. Sankhayana-Grhya 1 ;12; 10. It is clear that with the first cow the bride's father has to 
receive the bridegroom. The "house" mentioned in Sutra 6 seems to be the house of the newly married 
couple. In the expression "whom he reveres," "he", according to the commentaries, is the bridegroom. 

16 This Sutra forms a half-sloka.) 



200 



herdess, or one who has too many friends, or who has a fine younger sister, or one 
whose age is too near to that of the bridegroom [?]. 17 

12. Girls who have the name of a Nakshatra, or of a river, or of a tree, are objectionable. 

13. And all girls in whose names the second to last letter is r or 1, one should avoid in 
wooing. 

14. If possible, he should place [the following] objects hidden before the girl, and 
should say to her, "Touch [one of these things]." 

15. [The objects are], different kinds of seeds mixed together, loose earth from [the 
sacrificial altar called] vedi, an earth-clod from a field, cow-dung, and an earth-clod 
from a cemetery. 

16. If she touches one of the former [objects, this portends] prosperity as characterized 
[by the nature of what she has touched] . 

17. The last is regarded as objectionable. 

18. Let him marry a girl of good family and character, with auspicious characteristics, 
and of good health. 

19. Good family, a good character, auspicious characteristics, learning and good health: 
these are the required qualities of a bridegroom. 

20. A bride who is pleasing to his mind and his eyes, will bring happiness to him; let 
him pay no attention to the other things: — such is the opinion of some. 



Patala 2, Section 4 

1. Let him send out as his wooers friends who have assembled, who are versed in the 
Mantras. 

2. He should recite over them the first two verses (Mantrap. 1;1;1;2). 

3. When he himself has seen [the bride], let him recite the third mantra (M. 1:1;3). 

4. With the fourth (M. 1: 1:4) let him gaze at her. 

5. Let him seize with his [right] thumb and ring-finger a Darbha blade, and let him 
wipe [therewith] the forehead between her eye-brows with the next Yajus (M. 1:1:5), 
and let him throw it away towards the west. 

6. If a negative omen occurs [such as the bride's or her relations' weeping], let him 
recite the next mantra (1:1:6). 

7. With the next mantra (1:1:7) let him send an even number of persons who have 
assembled there, and who are versed in the Mantras, to fetch water. 



17 11. Most expressions in this Sutra are quite doubtful, and their translation rests on the explanations of 
the commentators [see pp. 44:45 of Dr. Winternitz's edition], which are evidently for the most part only 
guesses. 



201 



8. With the next Yajus (M. 1:1:8) he places [a crown of] Darbha grass on her head; on 
that, with the next mantra (M. 1;1;9) he places a right yoke-hole; on this hole he lays 
with the next mantra (M. 1:1:10), a piece of gold, and bathes her with the next five 
verses (M. 1:2, 1-5), [So that the water runs over that gold and through the yoke-hole]; 
with the next mantra (M. 1:2,6) he causes her to dress in a new garment, and with the 
next (Ml:2,7) he girds her with a rope [made of darbha grass]. 

9. Then he takes hold of her with the next mantra (M.l;2;8) by her right hand, leads her 
to the fire, spreads a grass mat to west of the fire, so that the points of the blades in it 
are directed towards the north, and on this mat they both sit down, the bridegroom to the 
north. 

10. After the ceremonies have been performed from the putting of wood on the fire 
down to the ajyabhaga oblations, he recites over her the first two [verses of the third 
Anuvaka] . 

1 1 . Then he should take with his right hand, palm down, her right hand which she holds 
palm up. 

12. If he wishes that only daughters may be born to him, he should seize only the 
fingers [without the thumb] ; 

13. If he wishes that only sons may be born to him, the thumb. 

14. He takes [her hand] so as just to touch her thumb and the little hairs [on her hand], 

15. With the four verses, "I take your hand " (l;3;3-6). 

16. He then makes her step forward with her right foot, to the north of the fire, in an 
easterly or northerly direction, with [the formula], " One step for nutrition" (M. 1;3;7) 

17. At the seventh step 18 he recites, "You're my friend in life " (1;3;14) 

Patala 2, Section 5. 

1 . Having before the sacrifice circumambulated the fire, in a clockwise manner. 

2. They sit down in their former position, and while she touches him, he offers the 
oblations [indicated by the] next mantras, with [the Mantras], "To Soma, the acquirer of 
a wife, Svaha!" (M. 1:4,1-16), one oblation with each Mantra 

3. He then makes her tread with her right foot on a [mill-] stone, to the north of the fire, 
with [the verse], "Tread upon this stone" (M. 1:5.1). (See below, rv,10, 9.) 

4. Having sprinkled ajya into her joined hands, he pours puffed grain 19 twice [into 
them], and sprinkles ajya over it. 

5. Pours the grain [into her hands]. 



18 The seventh step is the point at which the marriage becomes fixed and irrevocable. Ed. 

19 Some prayogas have the brother of the bride perform the function of pouring puffed grains into the 
bride's hands. Ed. 



202 



6. He 20 sacrifices [that grain] with [the verse], "This woman " (M. 1:5:2). 

7. Having circumambulated the fire, in a clockwise direction, with the next three verses; 
(M. 1:5:3-5) he makes her tread on the stone as above (M. 1:5:6). 

8. And the oblation [of puffed rice is performed] with the next mantra (M. 1:5:7). 

9. [Then follow] again the circumambulation (M. 1:5:8-10), the injunction to tread on 
the stone (M.l:5,ll), and the oblation with the next mantra (M.l;5,12). 

10. [Then] the circumambulation again 21 (M. 1:5, 13-15). 

1 1. He then undertakes the performance of the J ay a and other oblations. 

12. Having performed [the rites] down to the sprinkling [of water] round [the fire], and 
having untied the rope with the next two verses (M. 1:5,6.7), he should then take her 
away [from her father's house in a vehicle], or should have her taken away. 

13. Having put that fire [with which the marriage rites have been performed, into a 
vessel], they carry it behind [the newly-married couple]. 

14. It should be kept constantly. 

15. If it goes out, [a new fire] should be kindled by attrition, 

16. Or it should be fetched from the house of a srotriya. 

17. Besides, if [the fire] goes out, one of them, either the wife or the husband, should 
fast. 

18. Or he may sacrifice with the next mantra (M. 1:5, 18), and not fast. 

19. The next mantra (M. 1:6,1) is for putting the chariot [on which the young couple is 
to depart], in position; 

20. With the next two verses (M. 1:6,2,3), he harnesses the two animals to the chariot; 

21. First the right one. 

22. When she mounts [the chariot], he recites over her the next mantras (M. 1:6,4-7). 

23. With the next mantra (M. 1:6,8), he spreads out two threads in the wheel-tracks [in 
which the chariot is to go], a dark-blue one in the right [track], a red one in the left. 

24. With the next verses (M. 1:6,9) he walks on these [threads]. 



20 "The action of sacrificing belongs to the bridegroom; the hands of the wife represent the sacrificial 

vessel." Haradatta. — "It is the bridegroom who sacrifices the grain with the verse, "This wife " 

Sudarsanarya. 7. See above, Sutra 3. 

There is a controversy over who exactly offers the grains — husband or wife. Some acaryas direct the 
husband to simply hold the wife's cupped hands like a vessel while she pours the grains into the fire, 
others opine that the wife receives the grains and then offers them into the hands of he husband who is the 
one to actually pour them into the fire. Ed. 

21 There is also a controversy about how many times the couple circumambulate the fire. Some say that 
this verse indicates a separate and fourth round, some say it applies to the last of the group of 3 rounds. 
The prayogas usually direct 4 rounds - the first 3 are lead by the bride and the last by the groom. Ed. 



203 



25. And when they pass by bathing-places, posts, or cross-roads, let him recite the next 
mantra (M. 1:6,12). 

Patala 2, Section 6. 

1. The next mantra (M. 1:6,13), he recites over a boat [with which they are going to 
cross a river]. 

2. And let the wife, when she is crossing, not look at the crew. 

3. When they have crossed, let him recite the next mantra, (M. 1:6,14). 

4. If they have to pass by a charnel ground, or if any article [which they carry with 
them], or their vehicle breaks, the ceremonies from the putting of wood on the fire 
down to the djyabhdga oblations are performed, and while she touches him, he offers 
the oblations [indicated by the] next (Mantras; M. 1:7. 1-7) then he offers the Jaya and 
following oblations, and performs [the rites] down to the sprinkling [of water] round 
[the fire] . 

5. If they pass by trees with milky sap or by other trees that serve as marks, by rivers or 
by deserts, he should recite the next two verses (M. 1:7,8.9), according to the 
characteristics in them [which refer to these different cases]. 

6. With the next [verse] he shows her the house (M. 1:7, 10). 

7. With the next two verses; (M. 1:7, 11-12) He unyokes the two animals; the right one 
first. 

8. Having, with the next mantra (M. 1:8,1), spread out, in the centre of the house, a red 
bull's skin with the neck to the east, with the hair up, he makes her recite the next 
mantra (M. 1:8,2), while he makes her enter the house, [which she does] with her right 
foot. 

9. And she should not tread on the threshold. 

10. In the north-east part of the house the ceremonies from the putting of wood on the 
fire down to the djyabhdga oblations are performed, and while she touches him, he 
offers the oblations [indicated by the] next Mantras; (M. 1:8, 3-15); then he offers the 
Jaya and following oblations, and performs [the rites] down to the sprinkling [of water] 
round [the fire]. Then they sit down with the next mantra (M. 3; 1.1:9,1) on the [bull's] 
hide, the bridegroom to the north. 

11. He then places with the next mantra (M. 1:9,2), the son of a woman who has only 
sons and whose children are alive, in her lap, gives fruits to the [child] with the next 
Yajus (M. 1:9,3), and recites the next two verses; (M. 1:9, 4-5). Then he [and his wife] 
observe silence until the stars appear. 

12. When the stars have appeared, he goes out [of the house with her] in an easterly or 
northerly direction, and shows her the polar star and [the star] Arundhati with the next 
two verses (M. 1:9,6-7), according to the characteristics [contained in those verses. 



204 



Patala 3. Section 7. 

1 . He then makes her offer the sacrifice of a Sthalipaka sacred to Agni. 

2. The wife husks [the rice grains out of which this Sthalipaka is prepared]. 

3. After he has cooked [the Sthalipaka], and has sprinkled [ajya] over it, and has taken it 
from the fire towards the east or the north, and has sprinkled [ajya] over it while it 
stands [there near the fire], [the ceremonies] from the putting of wood on the fire down 
to the ajyabhaga oblations [are performed], and while she touches him, he offers 
oblations of that Sthalipaka. 

4. The "spreading under" and the "sprinkling over" [of ajya are done] once; two 
Avadanas [or cut-off portions are taken]. 

5. Agni is the deity [of the first oblation]; the offering is made with the word Svaha. 

6. Or he may sacrifice after having picked out, once, a portion [of the sacrificial food 
with the Darvi spoon]. 

7. Agni Svistakrt is the second [deity]. 

8. [At the Svistakrt oblation] the " spreading under" and taking an Avadana are done 
once, the sprinkling over [of ajya] twice. 

9. The Avadana for the first deity [is taken] out of the middle [of the Sthalipaka]; 

10. It is offered over the centre [of the fire]. 

11. [The Avadana] for the second [deity is taken] from the northern part [of the 
Sthalipaka]; 

12. It is offered over the easterly part of the northerly part [of the fire]. 

13. Having silently anointed [a part of] the Barhis [by dipping it] into the remains both 
[of the Sthalipaka and the ajya] in the way prescribed [in the srauta ritual] for the [part 
of the Barhis called] Prastdra, he throws [that part of the Barhis] into the fire. 22 

14. [The rule regarding] the second sprinkling [of water round the fire] is valid [here]. 

15. He gives [the remains of] that [sacrificial food] with butter to a Brahmana to eat — 

16. — whom he reveres. To that [Brahmana] he makes the present of a bull. 23 

17. In the same way, with the exception of the dakshina, they should offer a Sthalipaka 
from then onwards, on the days of the new and full moon, after having fasted. 

18. Some say that a vessel full [of grain] is the honorarium. 

19. From then onwards he should offer morning and evening 24 with his hand these two 
oblations [to Agni and to Agni Svistakrt] of [rice] grains or of barley. 



22 Comp. srauta-Sutra 111:5:9 seq. — See 1:2, 8. The upahomas prescribed above,l:2, 7, are not 
performed here, but the second parisecana is. 

23 Comp. Hiranyakesin 1:7, 23:5-6 

24 The two regular daily oblations corresponding to the Agnihotra of the srauta ritual. 



205 



20. The deities are the same as at the Sthalipaka [just described]. 

21. Some say that the first oblation in the morning is sacred to Surya. 

22. Before and after [those oblations] the sprinkling [of water] round [the fire is 
performed] as stated above. (See 1:2 3. 8.) 

23. By the sacrifice of the new and full moon the other ceremonies have been explained 
[the knowledge of] which is derived from practice. 

24. The deities [of those rites] are as stated [with regard to each particular case], having 
their place between Agni (Sutra 5) and Svistakrt (Sutra 7). 

25. The slaughter [of a cow] on the arrival of a guest [should be performed as stated 
below] without alterations. 25 

26. [The deities] of the Vaisvadeva ceremony are the Visve-devas, 26 

27. Of ceremonies performed on full-moon days, the full-moon day on which they are 
performed. 27 



Patala 3, Section 8. 

1. At the opening and concluding ceremonies of the Vedic study, the Rishi who is 
indicated [as the Rishi of the Kanda which they study, is the deity to whom the 
ceremony belongs], 28 

2. And in the second place Sadasaspati (cf. Mantrap. 1:9, 8). 

3. They reject a yajna performed by a wife [alone] or by one who has not received the 
Upanayana initiation, and a sacrifice of salt or pungent food, or of such food as has an 
admixture of a despised sort of food. 

4. Sacrifices connected with special wishes and Bali sacrifices should be performed] as 
stated [even against the clauses of the last Sutra] . 

5. Whenever the fire flames up of itself, he should put two pieces of wood on it with the 
next two [verses; M. 1:9, 8-10), 

6. Or with [the two formulas], "May wellbeing come me! May wellbeing come me! 

7. Let him notice the day on which he brings his wife home. 

8. [From that day] through three nights they should both sleep on the ground, they 
should refrain from having sex, and should avoid salt and pungent food. 



25 See below, V,13,16. 

26 See Apastamba Dharma-Sutra 11:2 3:1 [S.B.E., vol. ii p. 103) 

27 For instance, the sravani- paurnamasi is the deity of the ceremony described below, VI 1:18, 5 seq 7,1 
seq. Hiranyakesin 1:7, 23:2 seq. 6. As to the technical meaning of upahatya or upaghatam, comp. the note 
on Gobhila 1:8, s2; Grhya-sangraha 1: 

28 1 ; Haradatta observes that at the kandopakarana and kandasamapana the Rishi of that kanda, at the 
general adhyayopakarana and samapana all kandarsis, should be worshipped. 



206 



9. Between their sleeping-places a staff is interposed, which is anointed with perfumes 
and wrapped round with a garment or a thread. 

10. In the last part of the fourth night he takes up the [staff] with the next two verses 
(M. 1:10,1-2), washes it and puts it away; then [the ceremonies] from the putting of 
wood on the fire down to the ajyabhaga oblations [are performed], and while she 
touches him, he offers the oblations [indicated by the] next mantras; (M.l:10, 3-9); then 
he offer the Jaya and following oblations, and performs [the rites] down to the 
sprinkling [of water] round [the fire]. Then he makes her sit down to the west of the 
fire, facing the east, and pours some ajya of the remains [of those oblations] on her head 
with the [three] Vyahrtis and the word Om as the fourth (M. 1:10, 10 — 13). Then they 
look at each other with the next two verses (M. 1:11:1 — 2), according to the 
characteristics [contained in those verses]; with the next verse (M.l:ll:3) he besmears 
the region of their hearts with remains of ajya; then he should recite the next three 
verses (M.l: 11:4-6), and should recite the rest [of the Anuvaka; 1:11:7-11] when 
cohabiting with her. 

11. Or another person should recite [the rest of the Anuvaka] over her, [before they 
cohabit]. 

12. During her [first] monthly period he instructs her about the things forbidden [to 
menstruating women], contained in the Brahmana, in the section, "A menstruating 
woman with whom," &c. (Taittiriya Samhita 2:5,1:6 seq.) 29 

13. After the appearance of her monthly period, he should, when going to cohabit with 
her after her period, recite over her, after she has bathed, the next verses (M. 1:12, 1 — 
13:4). 



29 ii. 5. 1. Visvarupa, son of Tvastr, was the domestic priest of the gods, and the sister's son of the Asuras. 
He had three heads, one which drank Soma, one Sura, and one which ate food. He promised openly the 
share to the gods, secretly to the Asuras. Men promise openly the share to every one; if they promise any 
one secretly, his share is indeed promised. Therefore Indra was afraid (thinking), 'Such an one is diverting 
the sovereignty (from me).' He took his bolt and smote off his heads. (The head) which drank Soma [1] 
became a hazelcock; (the head) which drank Sura a sparrow; (the head) which ate food a partridge. He 
seized with his hand the guilt of slaying him, and bore it for a year. Creatures called out upon him, 'Thou 
art a Brahman slayer.' He appealed to the earth, 'Take a third part of my guilt.' She said, 'Let me choose a 
boon. I deem that I shall be overcome through digging. Let me not be overcome by that.' He replied, 
'Before [2] a year is out it will grow up for thee.' Therefore before the year is out the dug-out portion of 
earth grows up again, for that was what she chose as a boon. She took a third of his guilt. That became a 
natural fissure; therefore one who has piled up a fire-altar and whose deity is faith should not choose a 
natural fissure, for that is the colour of guilt. He appealed to the trees, 'Take a third part of my guilt.' They 
said, Let us choose a boon. We deem that we shall be overcome through pruning [3]. Let us not be 
overcome by that.' He replied, 'From pruning shall more (shoots) spring up for you.' Therefore from the 
pruning of trees more (shoots) spring up, for that was what they chose as a boon. They took a third part of 
his guilt, it became sap; therefore one should not partake of sap, for it is the colour of guilt. Or rather of 
the sap which is red or which comes from the pruning one should not partake [4], but of other sap at will. 
He appealed to a concourse of women, 'Take the third of my guilt.' They said, Let us choose a boon; let 
us obtain offspring from after the menses; let us enjoy intercourse at will up to birth.' Therefore women 
obtain offspring from after the menses, and enjoy intercourse at will up to birth, for that was what they 
chose as a boon. They took a third of his guilt, it became (a woman) with stained garments; therefore one 
should not converse with (a woman) with stained garments [5], one should not sit with her, nor eat her 
food, for she keeps emitting the colour of guilt. Or rather they say, 'Woman's food is unguent, and 
therefore one should not accept (from her) unguent, but anything else (can be accepted) at will. 



207 



Patala 3, Section 9 

1. Each following night with an even number, from the fourth [after the beginning of 
her period] till the sixteenth, brings more excellent offspring to them, if chosen for the 
[first] cohabiting after her period; thus it is said. 

2. If he sneezes or coughs while going about on business, he should touch water and 
should recite the two following verses; (M.l:13;5 — 6) according to the characteristics 
[which they contain]. 

3. In the same way with the next Mantras (M. 1:13,7 — 10) — he should address the 
following objects], according to the characteristics [which those Mantras contain]: a 
conspicuous tree, a heap of excrements, the skirt [of his garment] which is blown 
against him by the wind, and a shrieking bird. 

4. One [for instance, the wife's father] who wishes that the hearts of both [husband and 
wife] may be in accord should observe chastity through at least three nights and should 
prepare a Sthalipaka. Then [the ceremonies] from the putting [of wood] on [the fire] 
down to the ajyabhaga oblations [are performed], and while the wife touches him, he 
sacrifices of the Sthalipaka the oblations [indicated by the] next Mantras; (M.l:14;l — 
7); then he offers the Jay a and following oblations, and performs [the rites] down to the 
sprinkling [of water] round [the fire]. [The remains of] the [sacrificial food] with butter, 
he should give to eat to an even number of Brahmanas, at least to two, and should cause 
them to pronounce wishes for his success. 

5. When the moon, on the following day, will be located in the naksatra of Tisya, she 
strews three times seven barley-grains around [the plant patham] Clypea Hernandifolia 
with [the formula], "If you belong to Varuna, I redeem you from Varuna. If you belong 
to Soma, I redeem you from Soma." 30 

6. On the following day she should set upright [the plant] with the next mantra (M. 
1:15,1), should recite the next three [verses; M. 1:15,2-4) over it, should tie [its root] 
with the next mantra (M. 1:15,5) to her hands so that [her husband] does not see it, and 
should, when they have gone to bed, embrace her husband with her arms, with the verse 
alluding to the word upadhdna ["putting on"] (M. 1:15,6). 

7. Thus he will be controlled by her. 

8. By this [rite] also [a wife] overcomes her co-wives. 

9. For this same purpose she worships the sun daily with the next Anuvaka (M.l:16). 

10. If a wife is affected with consumption or is otherwise sick, one who has to observe 
chastity, should rub her limbs with young lotus leaves which are still rolled up, and with 
lotus roots, with the next mantras (limb by limb] according to the characteristics 
[contained in those formulas]: (M. 1:17, 1-6), and should throw away [the leaves and 
roots] towards the west. 

11. With the next verses (M. 1:17,7- 10) he should give the wife's garment [which she has 
worn at the wedding ?] to [a Brahmana] who knows this [ceremony]. 



Comp. Gobhila 11:6:6 seq. 



208 



Patala 4, Section 10 

1. We shall explain the Upanayana (initiation of the student). 

2. Let him initiate a Brahmana in the eighth year. 

3. A Raj any a in the eleventh, a Vaisya in the twelfth year. 

4. Spring, summer, autumn: these are the [fit] seasons [for the Upanayana], 
corresponding to the order of the castes. 

5. [The boy's father] serves food to Brahmanas and causes them to pronounce 
auspicious wishes, and serves food to the boy. [The teacher] pours together, with the 
first Yajus [of the next Anuvaka, warm and cold] water, pouring the warm water into 
the cold, and moistens [the boy' s] head with the next mantra (M. 11:1:2). 

6. Having put three Darbha blades into his hair [on each of the four sides of the head] 
one shaves the hair with the next four verses; (M. 2: 1:3-6) with the different Mantras, at 
each of the different [four] sides [of the boy's head] 31 . 

7. With the following verse (M.2:l,7) somebody addresses [the barber] while he is 
shaving 32 . 

8. In the southern direction, his mother or a Brahmacarin strews barley-grains on a lump 
of bull's dung; with this [dung] she catches up the hair [that is cut off], and puts it down 
with the next [verse ; M. 2:1:8) at the root of an Udumbara tree or in a tuft of Darbha 
grass. 

9. After [the boy] has bathed, and [the ceremonies] from the putting [of wood] on [the 
fire] down to the ajyabhaga oblations [have been performed], he causes him to put a 
piece of Palasa wood on the fire with the next mantra (M. 2:2,1], and makes him tread 
with his right foot on a stone to the north of the fire, with [the verse], " Tread" (M.2:2, 
2). 

10. Having recited the next two verses; (M. 2:2,3,4) over a garment that has been spun 
and woven on one day, and has caused him, with the next three mantras (M. 2:2,5-7), to 
put it on, he recites over him, after he has put it on, the next mantra (M. 2:2,8) . 

11. He ties thrice around him, from left to right, a threefold-twisted girdle of Munja 
grass 33 with the next two verses; (M.2:2, 9. 10), and [gives him] a skin as his outer 
garment with the next mantra (M.2,1 1). 

12. To the north of the fire [the teacher] spreads out Darbha grass; on that he causes [the 
boy] to stand with the next mantra (M. 2:3,1), pours his joined hands full of water into 
[the boy's] joined hands, makes him sprinkle himself three times with the next mantra 



31 In actual practice the teacher or the father holds the darbha blades to the four sides of the boys head - 
front, back and sides — the mantras and the blades of darbha are cut. The barber then shaves the head 
leaving the topknot. 

32 Haradatta: The teacher addresses the barber, &c. — Sudarsanarya: The mother of the boy or a 
Brahmacarin [comp. Sutra 8) . . . addresses the teacher who shaves him. 

33 Comp. Apast. Dharma-Sutra 1:1:2, 33; 1:3:3 seq. 12. As to the words, "he initiates him" [upanayati], 
comp. Sankhayana 11:2,11. 12; asvalayana 1:20,4 &C. 



209 



(M. 2:3,2), takes hold of his right hand with the next formulas; (M. 2:3:3- 12), gives him 
with the next formulas; (M.2:3, 13-23) in charge to the deities [mentioned in those 
Mantras], initiates him with the next Yajus (M. 2:3,24), and recites into his right ear the 
(Mantra], "Blessed with offspring be". (M.2:3,25). 

Patala 4, Section 11. 

I. The boy says, "I have come to lead the life of a student" (M:2:3,26). 

2 The other [ie. the teacher] has to ask; the boy has to answer (M. 2:3:27-30). 

3. The other recites the rest [of the Anuvaka]. 

4. And causes the boy to repeat [the Mantra] which contains wishes for himself 
(M.2:3:32). 

5. [The rites] down to the ajyabhagas have been prescribed. 

6. Having then caused him to sacrifice the oblations [indicated in the] next mantras; 
(M.2:4:l-ll), following oblations. 

7. Having performed [the rites] down to the sprinkling [of water] round [the fire], he 
puts down, to the west of the fire, a bunch of northward-pointed grass; on that [the 
teacher] who performs the initiation, sits down with the next Yajus (M. 2:4,12. 

8. The boy, sitting to the east [of him], facing the west, seizes with his right hand [the 
teacher's] right foot and says, " Recite the Savitri, Sir !" 

9. He recites [the Savitrl] to him, "That [glorious splendour] of Savitrl" [Taitt. Samh. 
1:5:6:4; M.2:4,13); 

10. Pada by Pada, hemistich by hemistich, and the whole [verse]. 

II. [When repeating the Savitrl Pada by Pada, he pronounces] the Vyahrtis singly at the 
beginning or at the end of the Padas; 

12. In the same way [the first and the second Vyahrti at the beginning or at the end] of 
the hemistiches; the last [Vyahrti, when he repeats] the whole verse. 

13. With the next Mantra (M. 2:4,14) the boy touches his upper lip; 

14. With the next (M.2:4,15) both his ears; 

15. With the next (M.2:5:l) he takes up the staff. 

16. The staff of a Brahmana is made of Palasa wood, that of a Raj any a of a branch of 
the Nyagrodha tree, so that the downward-turned end [of the branch] forms the tip [of 
the staff], that of a Vaisya of Badara or Udumbara wood. 

17. Some state [only], without any reference to caste, that the staff should be made of 
the wood of a tree. 34 



These Sutras are identical with Dharma-Sutra 1:1:2, 3 [S. B. E., vol. ll:p. 9). 



210 



18. After [the teacher] has made him repeat [the formula], "My memory" (M. 11:5:2), 
and he has bestowed an optional gift on his teacher, and [the teacher] has made him 
arise with [the formula, M2:5,3), "Up, with life!" [the student] worships the sun with 
the next (Mantras; 11:5,4). 

19. If [the teacher] wishes, "May this [student] not be estranged from me," let him take 
[the student] by the right hand with the next mantra (M. 2:5:6). 

20. They keep that fire [used at the Upanayana] three days, 

21. And [during that time] salted and pungent food should be avoided. 

22. Having wiped [with his hand wet] around [the fire] with [the formula], "Around 
thee" (M. 2:6,1), he should put [twelve] pieces of wood on that [fire] with the next- 
mantras (M.2:6:2-13). 

23. In the same way also on another [fire, when the Upanayana fire is kept no longer], 

24. Fetching fuel regularly from the forest. 

25. With the next formula (M. 2:6, 14) the teacher instructs [the student in his duties]. 

26. On the fourth day [after the Upanayana the teacher] takes the garment [of the 
student] 35 for himself with the next mantra (M. 2:6, 15), having made him put on another 
[garment] . 

Patala 5, Section 12. 

1 . Having studied the Veda, when going to take the bath [which signifies the end of his 
studentship], he enters a cow-shed before sunrise, hangs over its door a skin with the 
hair inside, and sits there. 

2. On that day the sun should not shine upon him. 13:2. See above, 4,11:7. 

3. At noon, after [the ceremonies] from the putting [of wood] on the fire down to the 
ajyabhaga oblations [have been performed], he puts a piece of Palasa wood on [the fire] 
with the next mantra (M. 2:7,1), sits down to the west of the fire on a mat or on eraka 
grass, recites the next mantra, (M.2:7, 2) over a razor, and hands it over to the barber 
with the next Yajus (M.2:7, 3). [The rites] beginning with the pouring together of 
[warm and cold] water down to the burying of the hair are the same as above (comp. 
M.2:7,4). 

4. He sits down behind the cow-shed, takes the mekhala off, and hands it over to a 
Brahmacarin. 

5. The [Brahmacarin] hides it with the next Yajus (M. 2:7,5) at the root of an Udumbara 
tree or in a tuft of Darbha grass. 36 



35 The garment which the teacher takes for himself is that mentioned above, IV, 10, 10. 12, 3. See above, 
IV, 10, 5-8. 6. See IV, 10, 5. 

36 Comp. asvalayana-Grhya 1:24,11. 12, 



211 



6. With water of the description stated above he bathes with the six next [verses; 
M2:7,6-ll), and with the next (M. 2:7, 12) he brushes his teeth with a stick of Udumbara 
wood. 

7. Having bathed and anointed his body with such ingredients as are used in bathing, 
[aromatic powder, &c], 

8. He puts on with the next Yajus (M. 2:7 13) a fresh under garment, and anoints himself, 
after having given the unguent in charge of the deities with the next mantras, 
(M. 2:7, 14), with the next mantra, (M. 2:7, 15) with sandal paste which is scented with all 
kinds of perfumes. With the next mantra, (M. 2:7, 16) he moves about a gold bead with 
its setting, which is strung on a string, three times from left to right in a water-pot; with 
the next mantra, (M. 2:7, 17) he ties the [bead] to his neck; in the same way, without 
Mantras, he ties a bead of Badara wood to his left hand, and repeats the rites stated 
above with a fresh upper garment, with the [verses], " May the rich" 37 . 

9. To the hem [of that uttarlya] he ties two earrings, puts them into the [sacrificial spoon 
called] Darvi, offers the oblations [indicated by the] next (Mantras; M.2:8, 1-8), pouring 
the ajya, over [the ear-rings], and offers the Jaya and the other oblations. 

10. Having performed [the ceremonies] down to the sprinkling [of water] round [the 
fire], he should fix [one of the ear-rings] with the same [verses] to his right ear, and 
with the same [verses one] to his left ear. 

11. In the same way he should with the following mantras, (M.2:8, 9-9,5), according to 
the characteristics [contained in them], [put] a garland on his head, anoint [his eyes], 
look into a mirror, [put on] shoes, [and should take] an umbrella and a staff. 

12. He keeps silence until the stars appear. 

13. When the stars have appeared, he goes away towards the east or north, worships the 
quarters [of the horizon] with the next hemistich, and the stars and the moon with the 
next (M.2:9, 6). 

14. Having spoken with a friend he may go where he likes. 



Patala 5, Section 13. 

1. Now this [is] another [way for performing the Samavartana]. He bathes silently at a 
bathing-place and puts silently a piece of wood on [the fire] . 

2. He sits down on a bunch of grass, as stated above (comp. M. 2:9,7), at a place where 
they are going to honour him [with the Argha reception] . 

3. A king and a chieftain [sit down] in the same way [as a Brahmana], with the next two 
mantras (M. 2:9, 8. 9), according to the characteristics [contained in them]. 

4. [The host] announces [to the guest], "The water for washing the feet!" 



comp. above, 4,10,10; M.2:7,18 



212 



5. [The guest] should recite the next mantra, (M. 2:9, 10) over [that water] and should 
stretch out the right foot first to a Brahmana, the left to a Sudra. 

6. Having touched the person who washes him, he should touch himself [ie. his own 
heart] with the next mantra (M. 2:9,1 1). 

7. [The host, taking the Argha water] in an earthen vessel which he holds with two 
bunches of grass, announces [to the guest], "The Argha water!" 

8. [The guest] should recite the next mantra (M. 2:9, 12) over [that water] and should 
recite the next Yajus (M. 2:9, 13), while a part [of the water] is poured over his joined 
hands. 

9. Over the rest [of the water] which is poured out towards the east, he recites the next 
mantra, (M.2:9,14) 

10. [The host] mixes together yoghurt and honey in a brass vessel, covers it with a 
larger [brass cover], takes hold of it with two bunches of grass, and announces [to the 
guest], "The honey-mixture!" 

11. Some take three substances, [those stated before] and ghee. 

12. Some take five, [the three stated before], and grains, and flour. 

13. The guest recites the next two mantras (M. 2: 10, 1.2) over [the honey-mixture] and 
sips water with the two Yajus (M. 2: 10,3.4) before [eating] and afterwards; with the next 
mantra, (M. 2: 10,5) he should partake three times [of the drink] and should give the 
remainder to a person towards whom he is kindly disposed. 

14. A king or a chieftain should only accept it and [give it] to his Purohita. 

15. [The host] announces the cow with [the word], "The cow!" 

16. After the guest has recited the next mantra, (M. 2: 10,6] over [the cow, the host kills 
it and] cooks its omentum, and having performed the 'spreading under" and the 
sprinkling over [of ajya], he sacrifices it with the next verse (M. 2; 10,7) with a palasa 
leaf from the middle or the end [of the stalk] . 

17. If the guest chooses to let [the cow] loose, he recites the next mantras (M.2:10, 8- 
11) in a low voice [and says] loudly, "Om! Let it loose!" (M.2: 10,12). 

18. [In this case] he recites the next mantras (M. 2:10,13-17) in a low voice over the 
food which is announced to him [instead of the cow], [and says] loudly, "Om! Make it 
ready!" (M.2:10,18). 

19. For his teacher, for a Ritvig, for his father-in-law, for a king he ought to perform 
this [Arghya ceremony] as often as they visit his house, if at least one year has elapsed 
[since they came last]. 

20. For a renowned teacher [of the Veda the ceremony should be performed] once. 



213 



Patala 6, Section 14. 

1. The Simantonnayana [or parting of the pregnant wife's hair, is performed] in her first 
pregnancy, in the fourth month 38 . 

2. [The husband] serves food to Brahmanas and causes them to pronounce auspicious 
wishes; then, after [the ceremonies] from the putting [of wood] on the fire down to the 
ajyabhaga oblations [have been performed], he offers the oblations [indicated in the] 
next mantras (M.2:ll,l — 8), while [the wife] touches him, and enters upon the 
[performance] of the Jay a and following oblations. 

3. Having performed [the rites] down to the sprinkling [of water] round [the fire], he 
makes her sit down to the west of the fire, facing the east, and parts her hair upwards 
[i.e. beginning from the front] with a porcupine's quill that has three white spots, with 
three Darbha blades, and with a bunch of unripe Udumbara fruits, with the Vyahrtis or 
with the two next (verses, M.2:ll:9.10). 

4. He says to two lute-players, "play!". 

5. Of the next two (verses, M. 2:11:11. 12) the first [is to be sung on this occasion] 
among the [people of the] Salvas. 

6. The second [is to be used] for Brahmanas; and the river near which they dwell is to 
be named. 39 

7. He ties barley-grains with young shoots [to the head of the wife]; then she keeps 
silent 40 until the stars appear. 

8. When the stars have appeared, he goes [with his wife] towards the east or north, 
touches a calf, and recites the Vyahrtis; then she breaks her silence. 

9. The Pumsavana [ie. the ceremony to secure the birth of a male child] is performed 
when the pregnancy has become visible 41 , under the constellation Tisya. 

10. From a branch of a Nyagrodha tree, which points eastward or northward, he takes a 
shoot with two [fruits that look like] testicles. The putting [of wood] on the fire, &c, is 
performed as at the Simantonnayana (Sutra 2). 

11. He causes a pre-pubescent girl to pound [the Nyagrodha shoot] on an upper mill- 
stone with another upper mill-stone, and to pour water on it; then he makes his wife lie 
down on her back to the west of the fire, facing the east, and inserts [the pounded 
substance] with his thumb into her right nostril, with the next Yajus M.2: 11:13). 

12. Then she will give birth to a son. 

13. Here follows the ceremony to secure a quick delivery (ksipram-suvanam). 

38 The pumsavana sacrament is to be performed before the slmantam — it is unclear why both Apastamba 
and Hiranyakesin describe the slmantam first. Nowadays both sacraments are usually done on the same 
day for convenience. 

39 asvalayana 1:14:7; Paraskara I;15,8. 

40 Sudarsanarya mentions that instead of the singular 'she keeps silence, she breaks her silence', some 
read the dual, so that the husband and his wife are referred to. 

41 Usually in the 3 rd month. This is actually the time at which the gender of the foetus is decided — having 
been female up to this point. 



214 



14. With a shallow cup that has not been used before, he draws water in the direction of 
the river's current; at his wife's feet he lays down a Turyanti plant; he should then touch 
his wife, who is soon to be delivered, on the head, with the next Yajus (M.2:ll:14), and 
should sprinkle her with the water, with the next [three] verses (M. 2:1 1:15-17). 

15. If she miscarries then with the recitation of the 2 mantras (M.2.1 1;18,19 42 ) she 
should be sprinkled with water. 

Patala , Section 15. 

1. After he has touched the new-born child with the Vatsapra hymn [Taitt. Samh. 4:2;2 
M.2: 1 1 :20), and has taken him on his lap with the next Yajus (M.2: 11:21], with the next 
[three] [verses — M. 2:11:22; 12;1,22 — one by one] he addresses the child, kisses him 
on his head, and recites [the third verse] into his right ear. 

2. And he gives him a Naksatra name. 

3. That is secret. 

4. He pours together honey and ghee; into this [mixture] he dips a piece of gold which 
he has tied with a noose to a Darbha blade. With the next [three] formulas (M.2: 12, 3-5) 
he gives the boy [by means of the piece of gold, some of the mixture] to eat. With the 
next five [verses, M.2: 12, 6-10) he bathes him. Then he pours curds and ghee together 
and gives him this [mixture which is called] "sprinkled butter" [prisadajya] to eat out of 
a brass vessel, with the Vyahrtis to which the syllable "Om" is added as the fourth 
(M.2: 12, 11- 14). The remainder he should mix with water and pour out in a cow-stable. 

5. With the next mantra, (M.2: 13:1] he places [the child] in the mother's lap; with the 
next (M.2: 13:2) he causes her to give him her right breast; with the next two [verses, 
M.2: 13:3. 4) he touches the earth, and after [the child] has been laid down, [he touches 
him] with the next mantra (M.2: 13:5). 

6. With the next Yajus (M.2: 13:6) he places a water-pot at [the child's] head, sacrifices 
mustard seeds and rice-chaff with his joined hands three times with each of the next 
mantras (M.2: 13:7- 14:2), repeating each time the word Svaha, and says [to the people 
who are accustomed to enter the room in which his wife lies], Whenever you enter, 
strew silently [mustard seeds with rice-chaff] on the fire. 

7. This is to be done until the ten days [after the child's birth] have elapsed. 

8. On the tenth day, after [the mother] has risen and taken a bath, he gives a name to the 
son. The father and the mother [should pronounce that name first]. 

9. [It should be a name] of two syllables or of four syllables; the first part should be a 
noun; the second a verb; it should have a long vowel [or] the contain a semi-vowel. 

10. Or it should contain the particle 'su', for such a name has a firm foundation; thus it 
is said in a Brahmana text. 



"tila deva padyasva..." and "niraitu prasni sevalam ..." 



215 



11. A girl's name should have an odd number of syllables. 

12. When [the father] returns from a journey, he should address the child and kiss him 
on his head with the next two [verses, M. 2: 14,3-4), and should recite the next Mantras 
(M. 2: 14,5) into his right ear. (Comp. above, Sutra 1.) 

13. With the next Yajus (M. 2: 14,6) he addresses a daughter [when returning from a 
journey]. 

Patala 6, Section 16. 

1. In the sixth month after birth he serves food to Brahmanas and causes them to 
pronounce auspicious wishes; then he should pour together curds, honey, ghee, and 
boiled rice, and should give [the mixture] to the child to eat, with the next [four] 
Mantras (M.2: 14:7-10); 

2. [He should feed him] with the flesh of a partridge, according to some [teachers]. 

3. In the third year after his birth the Caula [or tonsure is performed] under [the 
Naksatra of] the two Punarvasus. 

4. Brahmanas are entertained with food as at the initiation [Upanayana]. 

5. The putting [of wood] on the fire, &c. [is performed] as at the Simantonnayana. 

6. He makes [the boy] sit down to the west of the fire, facing the east, combs his hair 
silently with a porcupine's quill that has three white spots, with three Darbha blades, 
and with a bunch of unripe Udumbara fruits; and he arranges the locks in the fashion of 
his ancestral Rishis, 

7. Or according to their family custom. 

8. The ceremonies beginning with the pouring together of [warm and cold] water and 
ending with the putting down of the hair are the same [as above; comp. M.2: 14, 11). 
(SeeIV,10, 5-8.) 

9. He puts down the razor after having washed it off. 

10. The ceremony is [repeated] three days with the [same razor]. [Then] the rite is 
finished. 43 

11. [The father] gives an optional gift [to the Brahmana who has assisted]. 

12. The Godana [or the ceremony of shaving the beard, is performed] in the sixteenth 
year, in exactly the same way or optionally under another constellation. 

13. Or he may perform the Godana sacred to Agni. 44 



43 I translate as if the words tena tryanam and karmanivrttim formed two Sutras. 

44 "Having performed the same rites as at the opening of the study of the Agneya-kanda, he performs an 
Upasthana to the deities as taught with regard to the Sukriyavrata." Haradatta. — "After the ceremonies 
down to the ajyabhagas have been performed, one chief oblation of is offered with the formula, "To Agni, 
the rsi of the kanda svaha. Sudarsanarya 



216 



14. Some prescribe the keeping of a vow through one year in connection with the 
Godana. (Compare the statement given in Gobhila III;1;1). 

15. The difference [between the Caula and the Godana] is that [at the Godana] the 
whole hair is shaven [without leaving the locks] . 

16. According to the followers of the Sama-Veda he should " touch water." 45 



Patala 7, Section 17. 

1. The ground for building a house should be inclined towards the south-west. 46 He 
elevates the surface and sweeps [the earth] with a broom of Palasa wood or of sami 
wood, with the next mantra, (M. 2: 15:1), in the same [south-west] direction; 

2. In the same way three times. 

3. He touches the ground, which has thus been prepared, with the next mantra, 
(M. 2: 15:2). Then he has the pits for the posts dug from left to right, throws the earth 
[from the pits] towards the inside [of the building-ground], and erects the right doorpost 
with the next two verses, (M. 2: 15:3. 4); 

4. In the same way the other [door-post]. 

5. Having erected after [the door-posts] the other [posts] in the same order in which [the 
pits] have been dug, he recites the next Yajus (M. 2: 15:5) over the ridge-pole when it is 
placed [on the posts], 

6. The next [six] Yajus mantras, (M. 2:15:6-11) over the [house when it is] finished, 
according to the characteristics contained in the single formulas. 

7. He offers a piece of Palasa wood or sami wood on fire, takes the fire up [in a dish] 
with the next verse (M. 2: 15,12), carries it to the house with the next Yajus (M.2:15,13), 
and places the fire in the north-eastern part of the house with the next (M.2:15,14). 

8. The place for the kumbha (water-vessel) is to the south of that spot. 

9. He strews there Darbha grass, so that its points are turned in every direction, pours 
rice and barley-grains over the [grass] with the next mantra, (M.2:15,15), and thereon 
he places the water- vessel. 

10. With the next Yajus, (M.2: 15,16) he pours four potfuls of water into it. 

11. If [the kumbha] breaks, he recites the next mantra, (11:15,17) over it. 

12. After the ceremonies from the putting of wood on the fire down to the ajyabhaga 
oblations have been performed, he offers the [four] oblations [indicated by the] next 
(Mantras; 1 1: 15,18-21); then he offers the Jaya and following oblations. 



45 The udakopasparsana according to the rite of the Samavedins is described by Gobhila, 1:2, 5 seq. 

46 This does not accord with vastu principles which suggest that the house should incline either to the 
north, north-east or east. 



217 



13. Having performed [the rites] down to the sprinkling [of water] round [the fire], he 
should sprinkle [water] with a water-pot around the house or the resting-place on the 
inside, with the next Yajus (M. 2: 15:22) three times from left to right; then he should 
serve cakes, flour, and boiled rice to the Brahmanas. 

Patala 7 Section 18. 

1. When a boy is attacked by the dog-demon [pisaca], [the father or another performer 
of the ceremony], having devoted himself to austerities [such as fasting], covers him 
with a net. Then he causes a gong to be beaten or a bell to be rung, takes [the boy] by 
another way than the [main] door into the gambling-hall, raises [the earth in the middle 
of the hall] at the place in which they gamble, sprinkles it [with water], casts the dice, 
lays [the boy] on his back on the dice, and besprinkles him with his joined hands with 
curds and salt, with the next [eleven] mantras (M. 2:16, 1-11), in the morning, at noon, 
and at night. 47 

2. Then he will get well. 

3. Over a boy who suffers from the "sankha disease" 48 , [the father, &c] having devoted 
himself to austerities, should recite the next two [verses, M. 2:16, 12-13), and should 
pour [water] on his head with a water-pot with the next mantra, (M.2:16,14), in the 
morning, at noon, and at night. 

4. Then he will get well. 

5. On the day of the full moon of [the month] sravana after sunset a Sthalipaka [is 
offered] 49 . 

6. After the ceremonies down to the ajyabhaga oblations have been performed in the 
same way as at the fortnightly sacrifices, he sacrifices of the Sthalipaka, and with each 
of the next mantras (M.2: 16, 15-17) he offers with his joined hands Kimsuka flowers. 50 

7. With the next [three] verses (M.2: 17, 1-3) [he offers] pieces of aragvadha wood 
[Cathartocarpus fistula]; 

8. Then the ajya oblations [indicated by the] next mantras (M.2: 17,4-7). 

9. Then he offers the Jay a and following oblations. 

10. Having performed [the rites] down to the sprinkling [of water] round [the fire], he 
silently takes the objects required [for the rites which he is going to perform], goes out 
in an easterly or northerly direction, prepares a raised surface, draws on it three lines 
directed towards the east and three towards the north, pours water on the [lines], and 
lays [an offering of] flour [for the sarpas] on them, with the next mantra (M.2: 17,8). 

11. Silently [he lays down] whole grain, roasted grain, collyrium, ointment, [the 
fragrant substance called] Sthagara, and Usira root. 



Comp. Paraskara 1:16:24; Hiranyakesin 11:2, 7. 

sankhin is a person attacked by such a disease makes the sound of a conch — sankha. Haradatta. 
Here follows a description of the Sarpabali. 
Comp. above, 3:7, 2-3. 



218 



12. With the next mantras (M. 2: 17,9-26) he should worship [the serpents], should 
sprinkle water round [the oblations], should return [to his house] silently without 
looking back, should sprinkle [water] with a water-pot from left to right, thrice around 
the house or the resting-place on the inside, with the two verses, "Beat away O white 
one, with thy foot" (M. 2: 17,27,28), and should offer food to the Brahmanas. 

Patala 7, Section 19. 

1. The whole grain [which is left over, see above, 7:18,1 1] they give to the boys to eat. 

2. Let him repeat in the same way this Bali offering of whatever food he has got or of 
flour, from that day to full moon of [the month] Margaslrsa. 

3. On the day of the full moon of Margaslrsa after sunset a Sthalipaka [is offered as 
above, 7:18, 5). 

4. In the Mantra for the Bali-offering he changes [the word "I shall offer" into] "I have 
offered." 

5. Then he does not offer [the Bali] any longer. 

6. [Now follows] the agrayana sacrifice [or partaking of the first-fruits] of one who has 
not set up the [srauta] fires. 

7. He prepares a Sthalipaka of the fresh fruits, sacrifices to the deities of the [srauta] 
agrayana sacrifice with [Agni] Svistakrt as the fourth, fills his mouth with grains, 
swallows them, sips water, forms a lump of the boiled [sacrificial] food, and throws it 
up with the next Yajus (M. 2:18,1) to the roof of the house. 

8. [Now follows] the sleeping arrangements in the winter. 

9. With the next Yajus (M. 2: 18,2) they "descend" [or take as their sleeping-place a 
mattress of straw instead of the high beds which they have used before]. With the next 
Yajus formulas (M. 2: 18,3-7) they lie down on a new layer [of straw] on their right 
sides. 

10. The father to the south, the mother to the north [of him], and so the others, one after 
the other from the eldest to the youngest. 

11. After he has arisen, he touches the earth with the next two verses. (M.2;18;8;9). 

12. In the same way the lying down, &c, is repeated thrice. 

13. Having prepared a Sthalipaka for Isana 51 and one for Ksetrapati, he goes out in an 
easterly or northerly direction, prepares a raised surface, [and then follow the 
ceremonies] beginning with the putting of wood on the fire. 

14. To the west of the fire he builds two huts. 



51 The description of the sulagava sacrifice, which here follows, agrees in most points with the statements 
of Hiranyakesin 11:3, 8 



219 



Patala 7, Section 20. 

1. With the next mantra, (M. 2: 18,10) he invokes Tsana in the southern [hut]. 

2. With worldly words [he invokes] the midusi devT ("bountiful goddess") in the 
northern [hut]. 

3. To the middle [between the two huts] jayanta ("the conqueror.") 52 

4. He offers them water to drink in the same order in which they have been invoked [to 
their places], takes three portions of boiled rice [from the Sthalipaka prepared for Isana], 
takes [these portions of rice] to the fire, makes [the three gods] touch them with the next 
mantras (M. 2:18, 11-13), sacrifices of these portions, to each god of the portion which 
belongs to him, with the next mantras (M.2: 18, 14-30), cuts off [Avaddnas] from all 
[portions], and sacrifices with the next Yajus (M. 2:18,31) to Agni Svistakrt. 

5. Having worshipped [the god Isana] with the next Yajus (M.2: 18,32), he distributes 
with the next mantras (M.2: 18, 33-39) leaves together with portions of boiled rice, two 
[leaves] with each [Yajus], then ten to the divine hosts (M.2: 18, 40), and ten to the 
[divine hosts] that follow [and are referred to in the next Yajus. (M.2: 18,41). 

6. With the next mantras (M.2: 18, 42-45) he does the same as before [ie. he distributes 
two leaves with each Mantra] . 

7. Having formed a lump of boiled rice, he puts it into a basket of leaves, and with the 
next Yajus (M.2: 18, 46) hangs it up on a tree. 

8. Here he should recite the Rudra texts (Taitt. Samh. 4: 5), 

9. Or the first and last [Anuvaka]. 

10. He places his cows around the fire so that the smoke [of the sacrifice] may reach 
them. 

11. With his firmly shut fist full of Darbha grass he sprinkles [them] with scents; the 
bull first. 

12. He should perform a sacrifice to Ksetrapati, without a fire, in the path used by his 
cows. 

13. He has [the Ksetrapati] brought to his place in the same way as the Tsana (see above, 
Sutra 1). 

14. He puts [portions of boiled rice] into four or seven leaves, naming [the god]. 

15. Let him sacrifice quickly; the god is impatient 53 . 

16. With the next two verses, (M.2:18, 47. 48) he offers worship [to Ksetrapati]. 

17. The Sthalipaka [belonging to Tsana] he gives to the Brahmanas to eat. 



52 verses 1 — 3. Comp. Hiranyak. 11:3:8, 2 — 4. Haradatta explains the isana, the midusi, and the jayanta 
as images of the three gods. 

53 The Ksetrapati is like a child — unable to sit for very long without getting fidgety and moving off 
elsewhere. 



220 



18. That belonging to Ksetrapati his blood relatives eat. Or as is the custom in their 
family. 

Patala 8, Section 21. 

1. The times for the monthly sraddha are in the Dark Fortnight [of the month], as they 
are stated. 

2. Let him feed, without ulterior motives, pure Brahmanas, versed in the Mantras, who 
are not connected with himself by blood or by Gotra or by the Mantras [such as his 
teacher or his pupils], an odd number, at least three. 

3. He makes oblations of the food [prepared for the Brahmanas] with the next verses, 
(M.2:19, 1-7); 

4. Then the ajya oblations [indicated by the] next mantras, (M. 2:19, 8-13). 

5. Or in the opposite manner (i.e. he offers ajya with the verses referred to in Sutra 3c 
and food with those referred to in Sutra 4). 

6. Let him touch the whole [food] with the next mantras (M.2:19,14 — 16). 

7. Or the [single] prepared [portions of food destined] for the single Brahmanas. 

8. Having caused them with the next mantra (M. 2:20,1) to touch [the food, he gives it to 
them to eat]. 

9. When they have eaten [and gone away], he goes after them, circumambulates them, 
turning his right side towards them, spreads out southward pointed Darbha grass in two 
different layers, pours water on it with the next mantras (M.2:20, 2-7), offers the Pindas, 
ending in the south, with the next mantras (M. 2:20,8-13), pours out water as before with 
the next mantras (M.2;14-19), worships [the ancestors] with the next mantras 
(M. 2:20,20-23), sprinkles with the next mantra, (M. 2:20,24) water three times from 
right to left round [the Pindas] with a water-pot, besprinkles the vessels, which are 
turned upside down, repeating the next Yajus (M. 2:20,25) at least three times without 
taking breath, sets up the vessels two by two, cuts off [Avadanas] from all [portions of 
food], and eats of the remains at least one morsel with the next Yajus (M. 2:20,26). 

10. Of the dark fortnight that follows after the full moon of Magha, the eighth day falls 
under [the constellation of] Jyesta: this day is called Ekastaka. 

11. In the evening before that day [he performs] the preparatory ceremony. 

12. He bakes a cake of four cups [of rice] 

13. [The cake is prepared] in eight dishes [like a Purodasa], according to some 
[teachers]. 



221 



Patala 8. Section 22. 

1. After the ceremonies down to the ajyabhaga oblations have been performed in the 
same way as at the fortnightly sacrifices, he makes with his joined hands oblations of 
the cake with the next mantra, (M. 2:20,27). 

2. The rest [of the cake] he makes ready, divides [it] into eight parts and offers it to the 
Brahmanas. 

3. On the following day he touches a cow with a Darbha blade, with the words, "I touch 
thee agreeable to the Ancestors." 

4. Having silently offered five ajya oblations, and having cooked the omentum of the 
[cow], and performed the "spreading under" and the "sprinkling over" [of ajya], he 
oblate s [the omentum] with the next mantra, (M.2:20 — 28) with a Palasa leaf from the 
middle or the end [of the stalk] . 

5. [He oblates] boiled rice together with the meat [of the cow] with the next verses. 
(M.2:20,29— 35). 

6. Food prepared of meal (Pistanna) with the next mantra. (M.2:21:l). 

7. Then the ajya oblations [indicated by the] next mantras. (M. 2:21:2 — 9). 

8. [The rites] from the Svistakrt down to the offering of the Pindas are the same [as at 
the sraddha]. 

9. Some [teachers] prescribe the Pinda offering for the day after the Astaka. 

10. Here [follows] another [way for celebrating the Astaka]. He offers yoghurt with his 
joined hands in the same way as the cake (apupa). 

11. Having left over from the meat of the [cow], (see above, 3.4) as much as is required, 
on the day after [the Astaka] [he performs] the rite of the Anvastaka. 

12. This rite has been explained in the description of the monthly sraddha. 

13. If he goes out in order to beg for something, let him recite the next mantras 
(M.2:21: 10-16) and then state his desire. 

14. If he has obtained a chariot, he has the horses harnessed to it, turns it to face the 
east, and touches with the next mantra, (M.2:21:17) the two wheels of the chariot or the 
two sides. 

15. With the next Yajus (M. 2:21: 18) he should mount, and drive with the next mantra, 
(M. 2:21: 19) towards the east or north, and should then drive off on his business. 

16. Let him mount a horse with the next mantras (M. 2:21:20-30), 

17. An elephant with the next mantra (M.2;21;31) . 

18. If any harm is done him by these two [beasts], let him touch the earth as indicated 
above. 

19. If he is going to a dispute, he takes the parasol and the staff in his left hand. 



222 



Patala 8. Section 23. 

1. Having sacrificed, with his right hand, a fist full of chaff with the next mantra, 
(M. 2:21:32), he should go away and recite the next mantra. (M. 2:2 1:33). 

2. Over an angry person let him recite the two next mantras (M. 2:22, 1-2); then his anger 
will be appeased. 

3. One who wishes that his wife should not have sex with other men, should have big 
living centipedes ground to powder, and should insert [that powder] with the next 
mantra (M. 2:22, 3), while she is sleeping, into her secret parts. 

4 For success [in the procreation of children] let him wash [his wife] with the urine of a 
red-brown cow. 

5. For success [in trade] let him offer with the next mantra, (M. 2:22,4) — some [portion] 
from the articles of trade which he has in his house. 

6. If he wishes that somebody be not estranged from him, let him pour his own urine 
into the horn of a living animal, and sprinkle [it] with the next two mantras; (M. 2:22,5- 
6) three times from right to left around [the person] while he is sleeping. 

7. In a path which servants or labourers use to run away, he should put an inva (an 
instrument for holding a hot sacrificial pan) on [a fire], and should offer the oblations 
[indicated by the] next mantras (M. 2:22,7- 10). 54 

8. If a fruit falls on him from a tree, or a bird shits on him, or a drop of water falls on 
him when no rain is expected, he should wipe that off with the next mantras 
(M. 2:22,13), according to the characteristics [contained in these Mantras]. 

9. If a post of his house puts forth shoots, or if a hive is made in his house [by bees], or 
if the footprint of a dove is seen in the kitchen, or if diseases arise in his household, or 
in the case of other marvels or omens, let him perform in the new-moon night, at dead 
of night, at a place where he does not hear the noise of water, the rites from the putting 
[of wood] on the fire down to the ajyabhaga oblations, and let him offer the oblations 
[indicated in the] next mantras; (M. 2:22, 14-23), and perform the Jaya and following 
oblations. 

10. Having performed [the ceremonies] down to the sprinkling [of water] round [the 
fire], he puts out towards the south with the next mantra (M. 2:22,24) a stone as a 
barrier for those among whom a death has occurred. 

II End of the Apastamblya-Grhya-Sutra. II 



Comp. Paraskara 3:7; Hiranyak. 1:4,13,19 seq. 



