of Sri Sankaracarya 
With Text and English 
Translation 


SRIMAD BHAGAVAD 
GITA BHASYA 
OF 
SRI SAMKARACARYA 


WitH TEXT IN DEVANAGIRI & ENGLISH RENDERING, 
AND INDEX OF First LINES OF VERSES 


Translation by 
Dr. A.G. KRISHNA WARRIER 


SRI RAMAKRISHNA MATH 
Madras-600004 INDIA 


Published by : 

© The President, 

Sri Ramakrishna Math, 
Mylapore, Madras 600 004. 


All Rights Reserved 
Third Impression 
II-2M 1C-5-93 
ISBN 81-7120-269-1 


Printed in India at 
Sri Ramakrishna Math Printing Press, 
Mylapore, Madras 600 004. 


CONTENTS 


Preface 
Introduction . 
List of Abbreviations 


Gita Dhyanam . 


Commentator’s Introduction . 


Chapter I 
Arjuna’s Despondency . 


Chapter I 

Samkhya Yoga . 

Chapter MI 

Karma Yoga . 

Chapter IV 
Jnana-Karma-Samnyasa Yoga . 


Chapter V 

Yoga of Renunciation . 
Chapter VI 

The Yoga of Meditation . 


Chapter VII 


The Yoga of Knowledge and Realisation . 


Chapter VIII 
The Yoga of Concentration 


Chapter IX 
The Yoga of the Royal Science of the 
Royal Mystery . be oe at. l 


16 


92 


134 


18] 


213 


252 


214 


295 


vi Contents 


Chapter X 
The Yoga of God’s Manifested Powers. . . . . . 32l 
Chapter XI 
The Yoga of the Vision of the Cosmic Form 346 
Chapter XII 
The Yoga of Devotion. ............ 384 
Chapter XIII 
The Yoga of the Field and the Field-knower . . . 402 
Chapter XIV 
The Yoga of the Three Constituents. . .... . 468 
Chapter XV 
The Yoga of the Supreme Spirit 490 
Chapter XVI 
The Yoga of the Division of Attributes, 

Divine and Demoniac. ........... 5L 
Chapter XVII 
The Yoga of Threefold Faith. . ........ #529 
Chapter XVIII 
The Yoga of Liberation and Renunciation . . 548 


Appendix: Index to First Lines of Slokas . . 641 


PREFACE 


There has been a persistent demand from our readers for an 
edition of Simad Bhagavad Gita containing Sri Samkara- 
carya’s commentary on it in the original with a lucid transla- 
tionin English. We have, therefore, great pleasure in presenting 
this volume with the Sanskrit original edited and translated 
into English by Dr. A.G. Krishna Warrier, Curator, Adayar 
Library, Madras. Dr. Warrier, who is an accomplished 
Sanskrit scholar and also well versed in philosophy both 
Eastern and Western, has worked in several centres of learning 
and has to his credit a number of outstanding works like ‘God 
in Advaita’, ‘Concept of Mukti in Advaita’, and a Malayalam 
rendering of Sri Sankara’s Brahmasiitra Bhashya. The discerning 
reader will note how the English translation in this book makes 
pleasant reading without loss of precision or fidelity to the 
original. We are extremely grateful to Dr. Warrier for this 
labour of love. 

A charming feature of the Sanskrit language consists in the 
linked sweetness of its Samdhis—words run together euphoni- 
ously to form long rolling phrases. This, however, poses a 
problem to most of the readers who cannot be expected to be 
familiar with the intricacies of Sanskrit grammar and so are 
put to the trouble of having to delink the words carefully in 
order to understand their purport. We have, therefore, thought 
it expedient to split the long phrases, so that each word stands 
by itself as in English and other modern languages. We crave 
the indulgence of the sticklers for Paninian grammar for this 
innovation meant for the convenience of the many. 

May Sri Samkara’s dauntless exposition of the nature of the 
Ultimate Reality strengthen in us the conviction that man is 
essentially Spirit and it is the forgetfulness of this truth that 
causes all our misery. 


Sri Ramakrishna Math, Publisher. 
Mylapore, Madras 600 004. 
May, 1983. 


INTRODUCTION 


Samkara’s commentary on the Bhagavad Gita, more than 
even his commentaries on the Upanisads and the Brahma- 
sutras, has aroused heated controversy among commentators, 
interpreters, and thinkers all the world over. After long- 
fought battles among them, there is a sort of consensus among 
scholars today that the text of the Bhagavad Gita, Samkara 
fixed long ago, viz: 700 verses—is a unitary work! Some 
modernscholars, both Ind‘an and foreign, as a matter of course, 
pay tribute to Samkara’s scholarship, intellectual power, and 
supreme insight; they hope thus to make their attack on his 
commentary look asifit is their scrupulous regard for objective 
facts that has obliged them to indulge in it. For instance, Tilak 
observes : “Sri Samkara was an extraordinary scholar and sage, 
who by virtue of his supernatural powers . . . established the 
system of Advaitic thought on the firm foundation of the 
Religion of the Vedas.’’ “It is no exaggeration to say that the 
world has not known a sage and philosopher as eminent as 
Samkara.”3 He remarks that Jaanesvara has written his cele- 
brated commentary on the Bhagavad Gita in Marathi in the 
light of Sarnkara’s Advaitic doctrines. Nevertheless, Tilak 
rejects Samkara’s interpretation of it as sectarian and deems 
as objective his own view that the Gita establishes the pre- 
eminence of Karma as an independent means to win moksa or 
the summum bonum. 

In like fashion W. D. P. Hill, a much-admired translator of 
the Gita, writes: ‘The famous founder of the Advaita school 
of Vedanta philosophy, Samkara, was a brilliant scholar, 
gifted with one of the acutest intellects in history. His Gita- 
bhasya is full of keen argument; but not even the subtlety ofa 
Samkara can conceal the fact that the Advaita and the Gita 


'R.C.Zaehner writes: “After teaching the Gita for a number of years it appeared 
to me to be a far more unitary work than most modern scholars... concede.” The 
Bkagavad Gita, Oxford, 1969, Introduction, p.2. 

2B.G.Tilak, The Gita Rahasya, Hindi Translation, Puna, 1917; Visayapravesa, p.13. 

3Ibid; p.19. 


x Introduction 


systems are not at one. Nor is he able, in face of plain texts to 
the contrary, to make good his claim that the Gita severs 
action from knowledge, the latter alone qualifying the as- 
pirant for release.”4 Hill speaks of undue emphasis on the 
power of knowledge. But it may be noted that Hill refuses to 
face the force of texts’ like BG.4.37 and 38. He concludes his 
critical remarks thus: The Philosophy of the Bhagavad Gita 
more nearly approximates to that of the Visistadvaita, though 
he demurely protests in the words, ‘Ramanuja errs perhaps in 
excessive emphasis on Bhakti’.° 

We may also note at this juncture a very recent and subtle 
attempt to extol Ramanuja’s interpretation of the Gita— 
that of R.C. Zaehner, Spalding professor, who succeeded 
Dr. Radhakrishnan in that chair. He talks of the founder of 
the extreme school of Vedantic non-dualism, Samkara, and 
of the commentary of the “modified non-dualist Ramanuja, 
so much nearer in spirit to the Gita.’’’? Zaehner however has 
his own fears that he may be taken as “‘trying to read only his 
own interpretation into the Gita.” A careful reader of his own 
voluminous work may easily find out that his object is to find 
a common ground between the Bhagavad Gita and the 
Catholic theology on the basis of personal mysticism—eternal 
jwas and a Personal God being the basis of love or Bhakti. 

In the confusion naturally caused by this multiplicity of 
interpretations, the independent reader who seeks to under- 
stand the Gita as a well-knit text based on reasoning and spiri- 
tual insights has no other alternative than to study Samkara’s 
commentary in its entirety. The present situation as regards 
Gita scholarship is intriguingly paralleled by the one which 
confronted Samkara when he took up for explication this 
universal text of religious philosophy.* Witness Samkara’s 

4 The Bhagavadgita, London, 1928; pp.273 ff. 

5 Jnanagnih sarvakarmani bhasmasatkurute. ... 

na hi jnanena sadrsam pavitramiha vidyate. 

6 Hill, Ibid; p.274. 

"Ibid; p.3. 

8 cf: A.Huxley, Introduction, The Song of God =BG; Translated by Swami Pra- 
bhavananda; p.13: “The Bhagavad Gita is one of the clearest and most comprehensive 


Introduction xi 


remarks in the Introduction to his commentary on the Gita: 
“. .. but its sense is difficult to grasp. Many have striven to 
elucidate. its words, their imports and their totality as a 
reasoned treatise. The public, however, has got it as a mass of 
self-contradictory ideas. Noting their plight, I shall set forth 
its contents, briefly elucidating the text with due discrimina- 
tion.” Therefore now, as in Samkara’s days, the discriminating 
student has no option but to turn to the guidance offered by 
him. Hence it is of the utmost importance to follow Sarmkara’s 
‘subtle arguments as painstakingly and loyally as possible to 
get at the heart of the perennial philosophy embodied in the 
Gita. 

The aim of the Gita is not to exalt the way of Karma, as 
Tilak would have us believe, over the ways of Jnana and 
Bhakti. Sarnkara makes this clear at the very out-set :—‘‘Suc- 
cinctly, the purpose of the science of the Gita is to set forth 
(the nature of) the summum bonum consisting in the total cessa- 
tion of transmigratory life and its causes.”’? Note that, in con- 
trast, Tilak writes that the aim of the Gita is to set forth Karma- 
yoga which is rooted in Jnana, in which Bhakti is dominant and 
which ultimately leads to moksa—fnanamulaka-bhaktipradhana- 
Karmayoga.!? Tilak does not seem to have attempted a formal 
definition of moksa, though he has devoted several pages in 
his Gita@rahasya to the repudiation of Sarnkara’s ideas on this 
pivotal concept. We shall examine briefly, in due course, 
Samkara’s attempts to substantiate his well thought-out doc- 
trine of moksa in the light of Gita’s statements on it. 

In this connection, it is of the utmost importance to re- 
member the Advaitic emphasis on the doctrine of adhikara or 
eligibility and competence. An elaborate elucidation of it may 
be found in B.S.B., 1.1.1 whose upshot is that he alone is 


summaries of the Perennial Philosophy ever to have been made. Hence its enduring 
value, not only for Indians, but for all mankind.” It is perhaps the most systematic 
scriptural statement of the Perennial Philosophy.” p.22. 


9 BGB, Introduction. 
10 Tilak, Ibid; p.12. 


xii Introduction 


eligible for moksa who is equipped with the sadhana catustayam. 1! 
or fourfold discipline. In its briefest form adhikara is that state 
of mind which wholeheartedly prays, “‘asato ma sadgamaya, 
tamaso ma jyotirgamaya, mrtyorma amrtam gamaya.” !2—“‘lead 
me from the false to the true, from darkness to light and from 
death to immortality.” That the Gita seeks to liberate man, to 
make him free, by revealing the light of Truth, is indisputably 
clear from its carama-sloka or valedictory verse!3 whose climax 
is moksayisyami—‘I shall liberate you.’ Whether this verse is 
taken to stress bhakti or jnana is a matter of detail; it points to 
emancipation, or Brahmabhava or attaining the nature of 
Brahman. 

Equally important and decisive is the pre-eminence of 
Jnana in the Gita’s scheme of moksa: “Nothing exists here as 
purifying as knowledge, whose content is Vasudeva sarvamiti— 
Vasudeva is all existence.!4 Here is Gita’s style of affirming 
sarvam khalvidam brahma—all this is Brahman.!> The function 
of this saving knowledge is to reduce all activities to ashes, to 
lift the mukta or liberated above the sphere of space, time, and 
causes.!6 The mukta can no longer work in the way the em- 
pirical man works—1.e. with a sense of egoistic agency. This is 
the core of Samkara’s phrase in his Introduction to his com- 
mentary—samsarasyatyantoparamalaksanam}' i.e., characterized 
by the utter subsidence of the transmigratory cycle. 

The concept of the saving knowledge may be elucidated a 
little more. As has just been said it is the knowledge of God 
in the Gita, who has, at once, “the attributes of a full-fledged 
monotheistic deity and those of the Upanisadic!® Absolute”. 
Verses like 13.12-17 leave no legitimate room for doubt on 


11 BSB 1.1.1. 

12 BU 1.3.28. 

13 BG 18.66 

14 BG 7.19 

15 CU 3.14.1. 

16 BSB 1.1.4. 

17 BGB, Introduction. 

18 Edgerton, BG Translation, London, 1977; p. 132. 


Introduction xiii 


this score. So much so that an objective scholar like Edgerton 
is obliged to set down his well-considered view in the following 
words: “Thus through its God the Gita seems after all to 
arrive at an ultimate monism.” 19 The impersonal Brahman 
in the Bhagavad Gita is granted all the dignity which the 
Upanisads claim for It, while, of course, Krsna representing 
the saguna Brahman is claimed to be Its pratistha or ground?® 
Samkara says Brahman is the paramatma (Supreme Self) that 
abides in the pratyagatma (percipient Self). So by right know- 
ledge the identity of the two is perceived. Alternatively, he 
adds: Brahman may also be taken as conditioned or savikal- 
pakam. “I am the ground of that Brahman and am Myself the 
unconditioned or nirvikalpakam.”’ 

To explain the saving power of Brahmajnana, it is vital to 
note that He is not, being hidden?! by the power of Maya, 
known to the non-adhikarins (the unqualified). Maya, of course, 
is the power by which the Absolute appears as the world in 
space-time which is neither non-existent nor immutable. 2? 
Tilak apparently accepts this Sarnkarite view.23 When he 
goes on to identify that power with the divine play or Alā, he 
seems to be in accord with Samkara’s explication of Maya. 
In varying degrees does Maya delude jivas according to the 
dominance in them of sattva, rajas and tamas, or, in other words, 
to their different adhikara. This decisive Advaitic doctrine has 
been lucidly expressed in the Pancadasi in the verse, 

tuccha’nirvacaniya ca vastavi cetyasau tridha | 

jneya maya tribhirbodhath srautayauktskalaukikath | | 24 
Therefore when the Gita says that the fire of knowledge 
reduces the empirical realm of works to ashes making it neither 
possible nor necessary for the knowerof God to work any more, 


19 Ibid; pp. 146-47. 

20 BG 14.27. 

2! BG 7.13, etc. 

22 BSB 2.1.14. 

23 Vide his commentary on BG 7.24. 

24 PD. 6.130:- Maya is the object of three kinds of knowledge: according to revealed 
knowledge it 1s unreal; according to reasoning it is indescribable; according to the 
perceptions of the empirical man, it is real. 


xiv Introduction 


it has the uttamadhikarin (the most competent aspirant) in 
view, for whom nothing is real except God. 

Tilak’s contention that the Gita never envisages a situation 
in which all work drops off, that its final teaching is the con- 
tinuation of Karma till death, violates sruti, smrti and the ex- 
perience of the perfected sage or vedvadanubhava.?> What about 
formulations like, tasmddasaktah satatam karyam karma samacara; 
karmanaiva hi samsiddhimasthita janakadaya, etc2°(Therefore, 
ever perform unattached action that has to be done; by action 
alone Janaka and others attained perfection)? A point of ut- 
most importance in Advaitic theory and practice in solving 
the problems of pravrtti (work) and nirtti (withdrawal) has 
to be adverted to here. Samkara writes:—In the case of the 
knower who has, after purifying his mind through the per- 
formance of Karmayoga, won the knowledge of the primal 
Reality, the knowledge whose content is “‘all this is Brahman, 
the non-agent’’, there is no more work to do; nothing remains 
for him to gain through it. Still he is diligently active for the 
welfare of the world. This, apparently, is activity on his part. 
But with this kind of activity, knowledge can’t be combined. 
An instance of this kind of activity and agency is the Lord 
Krsna and His activity as a Ksatriya. Combination is ruled 
out; for, His activity is not a means of realizing moksa; He is 
already perfect. The knower of God is like Him, since common 
to the two are the absence of the desire for perfection and the 
egoistic sense. A Karmayogin works without craving for work’s 
fruits, or by dedicating the fruits to God for mental puri- 
fication. Karmayoga is never an end in itself: it is only the first 
step towards gaining the knowledge that liberates.27 Arjuna 
has been exhorted, as his nature is largely rajasic, to work 
without craving for fruit, without kama, to achieve czttasuddhi 
(purity of heart) and the ultimate saving knowledge. That 
achievement of kazvalyam, the flight of the ‘alone’ to the Alone, 


25 cf. BG 2.69; 6.3-4, etc. 
26 BG 3.19,20 etc. 
27 BGB 2.11. 


Introduction xv 


can be achieved only through samnyasa, undivided consecra- 
tion to God. Gita itself affirms: 
asaktabuddhth sarvatra jitatma vigatasprhch | 
naiskarmyasiddhim paramam samnyasenadhigacchau | | 28 

—He, whose understanding is unattached throughout, whose 
mind is under control, who is devoid of craving, attains through 
renunciation that supreme state of freedom from action. 
Tilak’s mockery of the Advaitin who insists on exclusive con- 
secration to God for gaining the saving knowledge is mis- 
conceived. In view of the theory of adhikara, not every worker 
is called upon to renounce;?? Gita itself underscores this 
truth.3° 

Samkara’s detailed discussion on the purvamimamsa’s claim 
on behalf of its scheme of works alone as leading to liberation, 
without full-fledged renunciation at any stage, is set forth in 
his Gita commentary on 13.2 and 18.66; it serves to disillusion 
the unwary student regarding the possibility of achieving 
liberation without Jnana. Another point however has to be 
noticed in this brief Introduction—the way Samkara deals 
with bhakti and Jnana in the Gita’s scheme of liberation. Those 
who talk of Ramanuja being nearer to the intention of the 
Gita conveniently forget that the Bhagavad Gita is a unified 
work that has arrived at an ultimate Monism; that its God is 
personal-impersonal combining the attributes of a mono- 
theistic deity and those of the Upanisadic Absolute. Devotion 
to the God of the Gita is logically capable of being synthesized 
with Knowledge of nirguna Brahman. Devotion?! is only a 
means, may be an indispensable means, to the winning of the 
saving knowledge. The two, devotion and knowledge, have 
been intimately blended as means and end in the Gita. Among 
the four kinds of devotees or bhaktas, Fnani has been singled out 
as the very Self of the Lord— fnan: tvatmaiva me matam.32 Thus 


22 BG 18.49. 

29KU 4.1, 

S0BG 7.3. 

31 Edgerton, Ibid, p.168; p.173. “Devotion to God is an auxilliary means of gaining 
knowledge of Him.” 

32 BG 7.18. 


xvi Introduction 


when tne contents of the Bhagavad Gita are logically synthe- 
sized and integrated, the paths and the goal, Yogas and salva- 
tion, fall into harmony; the paths lead the uttamadhikarin (one 
of full competency) out of the realm of samsara or empirical 
life to the realization of unitary consciousness.as stated in 
Vasudevah sarvamiti or sarvam khalvidam brahma ... Let it be 
noted and assimilated that it is Jnanadipena bhasvata33—by the 
lighted lamp of knowledge—that ajnanajam tamah or the dark- 
ness born of ignorance is destroyed, and not by karmayoga or 
bhaktiyoga. 34 

Once this basic stand of Samkara is grasped, the inter- 
pretation he gives to the most controversial verses of the Gita 
will be seen to be inevitable. For instance in 4.18, both karma 
and akarma according to Samkara are acts of super-imposition, 
due to avidya on the ineffable ground or Absolute, of perceptions 
like “I am the agent” and “I am no agent”. The seeker after 
liberation is instructed to perceive the peaceful Ground as 
behind and beyond all forms of empirical activities. “I am no 
agent” is an egolstic ascription of actionlessness to the trans- 
phenomenal Ground that is strictly connoted only as neti 
neti.3° This perception alone yields kaivalyam, the supreme 
goal of life. Equally intelligible becomes the exhortation in 
5.8.—‘‘nawa kimcit karomitt yukto manyeta tattvavit—The knower 
of Truth should have the conviction, ‘I am not doing any- 
thing’. The metaphysical Truth is that, being timeless and 
spaceless, the Self or the Ground cannot and does not act. 36 

Before concluding these introductory observations it should 
be added that in the Sanskrit text of Samkara’s commentary 
printed in the present edition the laws of euphonious com- 
binations or samdhi have not all been strictly followed according 


33 BG 10.11. 

34 BG 10.11. 

35 BU 2.3.6; 3.9.26, etc. 

36 Those who talk of the Visistadvaita as nearer to the spirit of BG do not ask how 
there can be a multiplicity of ‘selves’ or cits. Multiplicity can pertain only to things in 
space-time. cit is spirit, timeless and spaceless; that is why it is non-dual, and not even 
one. cf. Russell, H.W.P. 1946, p.783. How can action such as Kaimkarya, etc, pertain 
to the timeless and spaceless spirit? 


Introduction xvii 


to Panini’s aphorisms. The aim has rather been to enable 
the readers, not so well versed in the intricacies of Sanskrit 
grammar, to get familiar with the original text of the com- 
mentary. 

It may also be noted that none of the intricacies of Samkara’s 
subtle arguments have been ignored. A conscientious effort 
has been madc in the translation here offered to put his subtle 
arguments in intelligible English; some notes and summaries 
have also been appended to give the readers an insight into 
the Master’s mind. Perhaps this fact may serve as an adequate 
reason for translating anew Samkara’s Gitabhasya despite the 
availability of Sri Mahadeva Sastri’s well-known translation. 


A. G. KrRIsHNA WARRIER 


The abbreviations used : 

. BG The Bhagavadgita 

BGB Samkara’s Commentary on BG. 

. BS The Brahmasutras 

BSB Samkara’s Commentary on BS 

BU The Brhadaranyaka Upanisad. 

CU The Chandogya Upanisad. 

. KU The Kathopanisad. 

PD The Pancadasi. 

. HWP Bertrand Russell’s History of Western Philosophy, 1946. 


OMIRDORWNH — 


* * x 


THE LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 


Ait. A. Aitareya Aranyaka 

Anu G. Anu Gita 

A.P.S. Apastambasitra 

Asva Asvamedhaparva 

B.D.S. Baudhayanadharmasutra 

B.G. Bhagavadgīta 

B.G.B. Samkara’s Bhagavadgitabhasya 

B.S. Brahmasutras 

B.U. Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 

C.U. Chāndogya Upanişad 

G.D.S. Gautamadharmasutras 

H.W.P. B. Russell’s History of Western Philosophy, 
London, 1946. 

I.U.B. Samkara’s Isavasya Upanisad Bhāşya 

Jal.U. Jabala Upanisad 

K.U. Katha Upanisad 

Kai.U. Kaivalya Upanisad 

Ke.U. Kena Upanisad 

Manu. Manu Smrti 

M.B. Mahabharata 

M.U. Mundaka Upanisad 

Nar.Pari.U. Narada Parivrajaka Upanisad 

P.D. Pancadasl 

P.U. Prasna Upanisad 

R.V. Rg Veda 

Santi. Santiparva 

S.U, Svetasvatara Upanisad 

Sk. Skandha 

T.A. Taittirīya Aranyaka 

T.B. Taittiriya Upanişad Bhasya of Samkara 

T.S. Taittiriya Samhita 

TFU. Taittirīya Upanisad 

Vana Vanaparva 


V.P. Vişņu Purāņa 


Š 
N TEATAR 1 

mata saatii ma amaA cag 
ada afai gorfa MARETATAA | 
adanan maaana aA 

aa ATTA maa aE 11.211 
ams at aa famea peor aaa ATANA | 
at aT amag: maa MARA: TAT NRN 
TUSACATATA ATAAAHATIA | 

AAAS HOTT aA AA: ust 
aatafawat Wat shear ISAAA: | 

qat aa: FATATSHT gei aaa AST uv 

O BN wererocesirey | 
SARAH AS FO Art TEA ULI 


ATA AS West Cal dadh: Hara: NGN 
qanda ALAA MATT HHS 
AATSTAHHAL SCHATA TAA ANAATT | 
TTR ATHATTTSCETE: ATTA AAT | 
mrga nonoa a: stares NoN 
WHAT AME Ad MAARTI CNN 
AQ aaan: tqrated fred: eae: 
ae: aiana a FATA: | 
amaaa Aaa Tate FT aiat 
qaa a fag: Fagen say AEH AA: NRN 


THE COMMENTATOR’S INTRODUCTION 


AAT: TSA AWAIT HAKAIT | 
WISN AN Aa: Acagtat a Afzal a 


“Narayana is beyond the Unmanifest (Prakrti); the 
Cosmic Egg is born of the Unmanifest. Within the Cos- 
mic Egg are. these worlds as also the earth with its 
seven isles!.” 


L q Wary gA wd, der a fafa frat: rin at qa 
ward, wafreert af wmearaa Fahey | aa: wa FT AAT- 
arated sare, aR wt madaan urearara 1 fafa 
fe aa wt: — sqfreern:, faafaa, are: ferfeercory 1 fòrt 
LLALA phage a a at: werd: ator: afa. AN- 
fat: asama: i ahr area saver aTargard Aaaa aA- 
samage ardor ange vd, sate a aed, ote: feria 

a: arfenat arcane: fay: whrer wer: NAA 
wmi saat agqeard waa Hor: feo are | Mercer fe cert 
ca: aa atest t, aetna anita tl 


1. Having created the cosmos and seeking to ensure its exist- 
ence, the Lord brought forth in the beginning the Progenitors 


! At the beginning of his commentary, instead of composing a verse of benedic- 
tion or Mangala, Samkara quotes an ancient verse extolling Narayana, “the In- 
dweller immortal” (antaryami) who is also the supreme source of the world (vide 
Anandagiri on ‘Samkara’s Introduction to his Gita Bhasya’). The seven isles consti- 
tuting the earth are known as Jambu, Plaksa, Kuga, Krauñca, Saka, Salmala, and 
Puskara. 


2 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam 


(Prajapatis)2 Marici and the rest. Then he imparted to them 
the Vedic law of works. Later, bringing forth others like 
Sanaka and Sanandana3, He imparted to them the law of 
cessation of work (nivrtti), marked by knowledge and detach- 
ment. Indeed, the Vedic law making for the world’s stability 
is two-fold: (i) embracing works; (ii) embracing cessation. 
The law of righteousness (Dharma) is what directly promotes 
the prosperity and emancipation of living beings. It is culti- 
vated in the pursuit of progress by classes of men, set in different 
stations of life. Due to the lapse of long periods of time, the 
practitioners of the law of righteousness came to be dominated 
by cravings. Then lawlessness, arising from the decline of 
discriminative knowledge, overcame righteousness and be- 
came dominant. Therefore, with a view to ensuring the well- 
being of the world, the primal and all-pervading Agent, cele- 
brated as Narayana, is held to have been born of Vasudeva 
from Devaki’s womb by an aspect of Himself as Krsna in order 
to safeguard the spiritual power in the world or the state of 
Brahmanhood. Once the dominance of spirituality is assured, 
the survival of the Vedic law of righteousness is guaranteed ; 
for, on it depends the multiplicity of the human classes and 
life-stations. . 


2a 3 wag makane: war aera: fairy 
Sordi cai mat es ate, ae sem: wart fac fre. 
qaqaqecaurdistt aq, cara feat wt we et aT ata 
JA wert 1 eas warren af wise ata 


TA frat sefete, gored: fe qa: waar at. 


? Prajāpatis are the progenitors of living beings. Manu applies the names to ten 
sages, the mind-born sons of Brahma. They are Marci, Atri, Angira, Pulastya, 
Pulaha, Kratu, Vasistha, Pracetas or Daksa, Bhrgu, and Narada. According to some 
authonities there are only seven Prajapatis identified with the Saptarsis. The Satapa- 
thabrahmana names them as follows: Gotama, Bharadvaja, Visvamitra, Jamadagni, 
Vasistha, Kasyapa, Atri. The list in the Mahabharata is: Marici, Atri, Angira, Pulaha, 


Kratu, Pulastya, Vasistha. Samkara seems to follow the Mahabharata list. 
3 The reference is to the eternal Kumaras, the non-procréating sages who remain 


in eternal and holy adolescence. They are Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatana, and Sanat- 
kumara. 


Introduction 3 


waa fraa 1 at wt waar werefase aaa: ada: wrary ATÈ: 
aca: wre: sATA | 


2. The Lord is in eternal possession of knowledge, lord- 
liness, executive power, strength, energy and splendour. He 
has under His control His all-pervasive Maya (Illusive Power) 
or material Nature, whose essence is the three constituents. 4 
Thus, though unborn, immutable, Lord of beings, and, in 
essence, eternally pure, conscious and free, He appears, by 
virtue of His Maya, to be embodied and born as man, for 
ensuring the welfare of the world. Though he has no private 
end of His own to promote, in order to further the well-being 
of all living beings, He imparted to Arjuna, submerged in a 
sea of grief and delusion, the two-fold Vedic law of righteous- 
ness; for, when espoused and practised by men rich in excel- 
lences, it is bound to flourish. The Vedic Dharma, as it was 
imparted by the Lord, has been set forth by the omniscient 
and venerable Vedavyasa in seven hundred verses, celebrated 
as the Gita. 


3 a0 Be Aaea aHeaartanrdesend sada, aatar oa 
ah: faaan anaa aa aft acrdacgrraricat ott: TR- 
amt sora ag fated: aat aed: faao afen i 


3. This science of the Gita is the quintessence of all that 
goes under the name of the Vedas, but its sense is difficult to 
grasp. Many have striven to elucidate its words, their imports, 
and their totality as a reasoned treatise. Men in general, how- 
ever, have got it as a mass of self-contradictory ideas. Noting 
this predicament, I shall set forth its contents, briefly expli- 
cating the text with due discrimination. 


4. Te Hey amaA aaa: sat at faa RIA Tay 
AOA | Toe aiaa aaae «Tate 


4'The three Gunas, Sattva. Rajas and Tamas, constituting the Samkhyan Prakrti, 
are referred to vide SK, verses 11-13. 


4 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam 


waft | aa ee ua tard ad sige wad Ua SH — 

“a fe wh quate? wer: gear” un [marae], sa 
HIMAT | TA F THT — 

‘aq att a aredt a aa fe werent 1” [a ar ar. 23.8. ], 
q amaa str: get fafafa 1” nr ee 
“art aaa [A aT. or. 3.24.) aft 7 
vert Fart I iU — 

“aimi ofa arte aot at” [etc &&.] aft a 


4. Succinctly, the purpose of the science of the Gita is to set 
forth the summum bonum, which consists in the total cessation 
of the transmigratory life and its causes. This is brought about 
by the law of implementation of Self-knowledge, preceded by 
the renunciation of all works. Pointing to this sense of the Gita 
—the law of life which it inculcates—the Lord Himself has 
declared: “This Dharma is indeed adequate to lead one to 
the status of Brahman” (MB. Asva. 16. 12). ‘The same context 
says: “Neither pursuing Dharma nor Adharma, neither good 
nor evil” (Ibid. 19. 7); “Whoever is quiescent, firmly seated, 
silent, not thinking any thought” (Ibid. 19. 1); also, ““Know- 
ledge marked by renunciation” (Ibid. 43. 25). In the Gita 
itself, at the end, Arjuna is bidden: ‘“‘Giving up all disciplines, 
seek refuge in Me alone” (18. 66). 


5. manise a: sake: wy: ant a vies fafer: a 


aqaa 4 fage aft seed 1 ae ang ua dq afire 
qeafa—‘aerarara wat [4o], ‘ait: at gdh ag a 
Reg [4] aft i 


5. The Vedic law of works, prornoting prosperity in the 
world, and enjoined on the classes and life-stations, promotes 
the purification of the mind when it is observed with a sense 
of dedication to God and without expectation of rewards; 
though normally i.e., when done with desire for fruits, it leads 
its practitioners to the higher stations of heavenly beings and 


Introduction 5 


so forth. It also, indirectly, subserves the attainment of eman- 
cipation (when performed without desire for fruits), since 
such work purifies the mind and the purified mind becomes fit 
for practising the discipline of knowledge which, in due course, 
generates the liberating knowledge itself. Keeping this idea in 
mind, the Lord declares in BG 5. 10 and 11: “The Yogins 
work without attachment for purifying the mind.” 


6 aa fara wt frac, marae a agqeaet TT- 
aR fave: ahrasswaq fares a- 
meq | Ua: mama maa Ra., aa: aat act: frac 
HAT 1| 

aa a yas Vara — ARA gef | 


6. The science of the Gita, thus elucidating especially the 
two-fold law of the Vedas, is aimed at emancipation; also, it 
sets forth the ultimate Truth that is synonymous with Vasu- 
deva, the content of Supreme Brahman. Hence it is equipped 
with a specific goal, relation and content.’ Since its mastery 
yields all values of life, I am endeavouring to explicate it. 


5 The four anubhandhas entailed by a Sastra are visaya, prayojana, adhikart, and sam- 
bandha—subjcct matter, necessity foi its study, competency of the student, connection 
of subject matter with the book (cf the Vedantasara). 


VARISENTA: 
CHAPTER I 
ARJUNA’S DESPONDENCY 


qare Tas : 
TAIT Fett aANT WAT: | 
areal: Tsang feapad ASAT NRIN 


Dhrtarastra said: 

1. On the field of Righteousness, on the grounds of 
Kuruksetra, marshalled for war, what did my men and 
Pandavas do, O Sanjaya! 


qt Sais : 
PLAT g MUSA OYE FATTETAT | 
AAAATA SET UAT TAATAAAT URW 

Sanjaya said: 

2. Then seeing the marshalled army of the Pandavas, 


King Duryodhana approached the preceptor (Drona) 
and spoke the following words: 


Tea WVSTAMTATAT Ast AAT | 
asi Tagan aa fret atta si 


3. O Preceptor! Observe the immense army of Pandu’s 
sons, marshalled by your perceptive disciple, the son 
of Drupada. 


HA BAT Aaa ATATAATAAT BT | 
wT Aea DA ATLA: NVN 


1-9] Arjuna’s Despondency 7 


4. In this army are present brave and mighty bowmen, 
equal to Bhima and Arjuna in battle. There are Yu- 
yudhana, Virata and the mighty car-warrior Drvpada. 


qeg: Baris AATA | 
gea grana tems ACTS a: UY 


5. Dhrstaketu; Cekitana; the heroic King Purujit of 
Kasi, Kuntibhoja and Saibya, a hero among men; 


aurea aaa Saar AATA | 
Alaa Waar Aa Wal RETTENT: Uti 


6. The valiant Yudhamanyu; the formidable Utta- 
maujah; the son of Subhadra and the sons of Draupadi 
—all indeed great lords of mighty chariots. 


aem g fafie & atfaate ENTA | 
mam AA Aaa dart ary aAA FT nN 


7. As for the distinguished leaders on our side, note 
them,.thou, best of the twice-born! I mention the leaders 
of my army to bring them to your notice. 


Wary Wises BT HoT atataswa: | 
ararat fama aaa: ici 


8. Yourself; Bhisma; Karna; Krpa, victorious in bat- 
tles; Asvatthama; Vikarna; as well as Jayadratha, the 
son of Somadatta, 


Wa a Aga: WT Hed aAA: | 
AATATCATSLMT: Aa IATE: WR 


8 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. I 


9. Many other brave warricrs, too, there are who have 
staked their lives for my sake and are armed in mani- 
fold ways—ail adepts in war. 


wate azn ger eaaa | 
qale kaaa ge Aaa 2011 


10. This force of ours, under the protection of Bhisma, 
is inadequate; but the Pandava force, protected by 
Bhima, is quite adequate. 


IAT A aAA AITAMTAaeAAT: | 
Aaaa Ward: Aa va fe Vz 


11. Stationed at all points of entry and exit, with due 


regard to order, all of you must provide protection to 
Bhisma. 


aa UAT Et peaa: frag: | 
taga faceted: aye a aT RN 
12. Delighting him, the grand old man of the Kurus, 


the mighty grandfather (Bhişma) roaring aloud like a 
lion, blew his conch. 


ad: ETA har qwraraityan: | 
ACAAVAK TT A MeCeTASATT WL 3k 


13. Then conchs, kettle-drums, cymbals, double-drums 
and trumpets were sounded together. That din was 
tumultuous. 


aa: AAAA Age ered ferat | 
maa: qeda fret amet Wee: NLLN 


9-19] Arjuna’s Despondency 9 


14. Then stationed in a large chariot, yoked with white 
steeds, Krsna and Arjuna blew their divine conchs. 


maara TAHA daai TSH: | 
qs amt Here ARAT aT: ULI 


15. Krsna blew the Pancajanya; Arjuna the Devadatta; 
Bhima, of formidable action, blew the mighty Paundra. 


maaa WaT Heargat fafs: | 
AGS: AKA FMNAAVTGTAT WGI 
16. King Yudhisthira, son of Kunti, blew his conch the 


Anantavijaya, while Nakula and Sahadeva blew the 
Sughosa and the Manipuspaka. 


areal ATE: fravst FASTA: | 
yeaa fates arertararretata: Wii 


17. The supreme bowman King of Kasi, the great 
charioteer Sikhandi, Dhrstadyumna, Virata and the 
unsurpassed Satyaki; 


zaa sedans waar: qfar | 
Arar ARIAS: WMT TA: TTR TH Ci 
18. Drupada, the sons of Draupadi, the mighty son of 


Subhadra—these, O King! from all sides, severally 
blew their several shells. 


a ANAT mieri gafa Saad | 
waa yfai aa Taal Saag RRN 


10 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. I 


19. That uproar tore up the hearts of the Kauravas and 
resounded on earth and in the sky. 


ary cratered gea Ae AA: | 
THA AEAATA THETA TET: Roll 
Ewer cat aang NATA | 
20-21. Then, seeing the followers of Dhrtarastra in 
battle-array, when the missiles started to fly, the 


monkey-bannered Arjuna lifted his bow, and spoke, 
O King! as follows to Sri Krsna. 


AIT TATA : 

Aaa TT CATAT ASA 1221 

UTASA AA ACHAT AAT | 

PAI aE aerate CAAT RRN 
Anjuna said: 
21-22. Station the chariot, Krsna! between the two 
armies, that I may behold them standing, bent on 


doing battle—those with whom I have to fight in this 
warlike endeavour. 


MAATAAN T VASA HATTAT: | 
ade iene Aafaa: 12311 


23. I shall observe them who have massed here and are 
about to commence the war, eager to please the wicked 
Duryodhana in this enterprise of war. 


QNI Sais: 


vant FAEM MEENA ATTA | 
gaea eaan ANARA RLN 


19-29] Arjuna’s Despondency 11 


Sanjaya said: 
24. Thus bidden, O King! by Arjuna, Krsna stationed 
that best of chariots between those two armies, 


AAAI: Ada A AeA | 
vara ort maa AMAA Fefafa nuu 


25. In front of Bhisma and Drona as well as of all those 
rulers, and said: Behold, Arjuna! those massed Kaura- 
vas here. 


amaa feratry art: aaa frases | 
Waals masa Way FATT WATT AAAI RRN 
WMI Fear AAATAAAT | 


26-27. There Arjuna saw standing, fathers, grand- 
fathers, teachers, uncles, brothers, sons, grandsons 
and comrades, as well as fathers-in-law and friends 
in the ranks of the two armies. 


ary aden a alta: aa aaa Ww 
Saat Wwarsstacel fawtafaerrarg | 
THT Jas | 


qda Catt FO Bary TAIETAT WV 


27-28. Seeing them, his kith and kin, Arjuna was over- 
whelmed by supreme compassion, and sorrowing, 
he said: 

Arjuna said: 

Beholding these relations of mine, in battle posture, 
ready to fight, 


ated AA wrath Aa a feaa | 
ATT AUS A MART AAT RRM 


12 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. I 


29. My limbs droop, my mouth dries up, my body 
trembles, and hairs stand on end. 


meia Bad gea aa aitage | 
Ta mamae wadla WA RA: N3 


30. My bow, Gandiva, slips from my grip; my skin is 
afire; I cannot stand steady and my mind wanders, as 
it were; 


fatratia a sate farara sere | 
a a Masa Real ARARE 113 UN 


31. Also I see contrary portents. In killing one’s kin in 
a war, I can see no good at all. 


a area fara For a a UT gait J | 
fe at usda atlas fe atisttfactst at 32 


32. I don’t seek victory, Krsna! I want neither kingdom 
nor pleasures, O Govinda! How can kingdom, enjoy- 
ments or even life profit us? 


a aiteert at User ar: Gara a | 
a gasaferat as miea warty AW 33N 


33. Those for whose sakes are the kingdom, enjoy- 
ments and pleasures sought—those very persons stand 
here to fight, surrendering life and possessions. 


aramat: frac: yaterta a fraag: | 
ATG: MAAC: AAT: VATS: daaa uF 


29-39] Arjuna’s Despondency 13 


34. Preceptors, fathers, sons, grandfathers, uncles, 
fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law, relatives. 


Vata saiaeorts aas RIEA | 
ate aarearisued sat: te 7 AFA UBM 


35. These I do not wish to slay, though they may slay, 
O Krsna; nay, not even for dominion over the three 
worlds, much less for this earthly kingdom. 


faga miara: aT site: EATR | 
mandaa gAn AA: USS 


36. What pleasure shall be ours in killing Dhrtarastra’s 
sons? O Krsna! only sin will accrue to us in killing 
these lawless foes. 


aerat AT Fel Aea CAAA | 
cant fe wa gat fat: SATA ATIT FVII 
37. Therefore, we ought not to slay our kinsmen, the 


sons of Dhrtarastra. How can we, Krsna! be happy, 
once we kill them? 


waa 7 wate SANTAT: | 
goag ate fats A WAHT 3211 
38. Blinded by greed, though they do not see the evil 


that threatens our family with decay, or the sin in being 
treacherous to relations, 


ee a HIRE: maraena ag | 
HoAIHA AGT TTA arated 3RN 


14 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. I 


39. How can we fail to turn away from sin—we who 
recognise the evil that threatens our family with down- 
fall, O Krsna? 


FoR WTA FTA: HAAAT: | 
ae aot HS HAAS AAAI Voll 


40. With the downfall of the family, the eternal laws of 
righteousness fostered in the family will perish. When 
righteousness perishes, unrighteousness will over- 


whelm the entire family. 


AIA TAATHN sevahe Hofer: | 
TA eT Avg Had BAST: 18 V1 


41. Due to the sway of unrighteousness, Krsna! the 
women of the family will be ruined. From their ruina- 
tion, confusion of classes is bound to ensue. 


ASU AH FOMA FON F | 
qafa fact gat aeaea fka: usr 


42. Such confusion will land in hell the wreckers of the 
family and the family itself. Then the ancestral spirits 
must indeed fall, robbed of the obsequial rites due to 
them. 


ALA: GSMA AAS CHIH: | 
seared Brera: goab Wat: NEN 
43. By these flaws of the wreckers of the family causing 


confusion of classes, the eternal laws of the community 
and the family are nullified. 


39-47] Arjuna’s Despondency 15 


TAAPSTAMT AISI AATST | 
wea frat aval Aaa USI 


44. O Krsna! We have been told that men whose family 
principles are nullified have necessarily to dwell in 


hell. 
Het Aa Aga HI wala ary | 
UJEN AA Fed ARARAT: WSU 


45. Alas! we seem determined to commit a grievous 
sin, since due to greed for a kingdom and its pleasures, 
we are up in arms to slaughter our kinsmen. 


Ute MAAAR MEATA: | 
aAa LH gaa AMAL AAT uve 


46. If in battle the sons of Dhrtarastra, weapons in 
hand, were to kill me unarmed and undefending, it will 
be better for me. 


qed SATA - 

vagas: aA TaEr satfaardq | 

fama wart are MAATTE: vi 
Sanjaya said: 
47. Throwing away his bow and arrows, his mind con- 


sumed with grief, Arjuna spoke thus in battle, and 
sank into the seat of the chariot. 


AAAI SIT: ATT ANSATT: 1121 


fransa: 
CHAPTER II 
THE SAMKHYA YOGA 


GIT SATA : 


at AUT paassa ESATTE | 
famtaraiad agaa RIJEI: NLN 

Sanjaya said: 

1. To him thus overpowered by compassion, tearful, 


distressed and desponding, Krsna spoke (the following) 
words: 


~ 


ATATATTATS i 
gaen manaa aA aqateraq | 
MATATSTAEPATH NAH CAAT URW 


The blessed Lord said: 
2. Whence, Arjuna! has this timidity, unwelcome to 
noble spirits, unheavenly, and disgraceful, come upon 
you in this crisis? 


Fo AT CT TA: A Aaa | 
ae gaada Aaathass TAT ws 


3. Yield not to unmanliness, O Arjuna! It does not be- 
come you. Shake off this petty weakness of the heart 
and stand up, O terror of your foes! 


AIT Tae : 
we WIA ag AT A ATA | 
sufa: staatcearta qogan ivi 


1-7] The Samkhya Yoga 17 


Arjuna sad: 
4. How shall I, Krsna! fight back with shafts, in war, 
Bhisma and Drona who deserve my reverence? 


RESILI at afire WI 


5. Indeed it were better for me to live on alms in the 
world and avoid slaying my honoured elders. Killing 
these people who seek to gain ends of their own, I 
should be tasting blood-stained enjoyments. 


a adie: Racal Wear 
uel wan ate at at WaT: | 
arta gear a faifan- 
esaka: TAA ATT: gN 


6. Nor do we know which is better for us—victory over 
them, or their victory over us. The very persons, des- 
troying whom we should not care to live, are standing 
in front of us—the followers of Dhrtarastra. 


mee Ghanian: 
rainy enfatad afg at 
freaeasg aft At cat TTT NoN 


7. My inborn nature has been overwhelmed by the 
bame of faintheartedness, and I am confused as regards 


18 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. II 


the law of righteousness. So I am asking you: Tell me 
for certain what shall prove beneficial. I am your dis- 
ciple. Teach me who have surrendered myself to you. 


HAT WATAAITTS 
ma Ferra MAAR ci 


8. I do not see that an unrivalled and prosperous king- 
dom on earth and overlordship over the denizens of 
heaven will dispel the grief that has scorched my 
senses. 


vanea TAHA TETRAN: MAT: | 
a Na sft maana go aa g Ne 


Sanjaya said: 

9. Having spoken thus to Krsna, the valiant Arjuna 
added, “I shall never fight.’? Then he maintained 
silence. 


aara CAH: gafa Aa | 
aaaea fagteds Ta: Qo 


10. To him, who sat despondent between the two 
armies, spoke Krsna mockingly, as it were, O King! 


11.0.2 4a gea J merda [2.2.] eft area araq ‘A aeT 
gfe wrayer get aye gol [2.8.] eadaera: safest attra. 
stladaratraaagaarrsararatcad sare: wee | aa R 


8-10] The Samkhya Yoga 19 


fasaa raeg aafaa aaa. maea seatarat ‘eer AR- 
a a [3x] Ra i menera fe Airaa. eaa: 
u aai as aA aea aaa m, mead a Prerana 


ad saad | an a aA MaRa aeaa aaa: wa 
SiT eA a AA E T 


aA TEIT: — -adam [32] n n 


11.0.a. The text beginning from “Seeing the army of the 
Pandavas” (1.2) and ending with “Telling Govinda ‘I shall 
not fight’, he remained silent” (2.9)—must be explained as 
designed to elucidate the origin of flaws like grief and delu- 
sion, which form the defects constituting the seed of the trans- 
migratory life of all living beings. This may be explained as 
follows: In regard to the kingdom, teachers, descendants, 
allies, friends, kinsmen and relatives, both remote and inti- 
mate, Arjuna displayed his grief and delusion, born of the fear 
of a breakdown of his affection. This affection itself was a pro- 
duct of the illusory cognitions, “I belong to them” and “they 
are mine”. Vide: “How shall I (oppose) Bhisma in battle?” 
(2.4) etc. It was because his discrimination and practical know- 
ledge were undermined by grief and delusion that Arjuna re- 
frained from fighting, though he had voluntarily undertaken 
to fight his opponents as the duty of the Ksatriya, and instead 
got ready to live a mendicant’s life, conforming to an alien 
law of life (paradharma). Thus all living beings, whose minds 
are gripped by defects like grief and delusion, might readily 
forsake the law (of their life) and embrace forbidden courses 
of action. Even when they live according to the proper law of 
their life (svadharma), the activities of their speech, mind and 
body are surely impelled by their desire for the fruits of those 
very activities which emanate from egoism. In these circum- 
stances, owing to an accumulation of righteousness and un- 
righteousness, transmigratory life continues unabated. There- 


20 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. II 


fore, the seeds of the transmigratory lije are grief and delusion. They 
can be exhausted only by the knowledge of the Self, preceded by the 
renunciation of all activities, and not by any other means. Therefore, 
in order to impart that knowledge for the well-being of the 
entire world, Lord Krsna says, making Arjuna but an occa- 
sion for it: “Those for whom one should not grieve” (2.11). 


Oe Oe te A ee eee ee 
Sas aai a werd wa 1 fH ate ? atagrarfestredtadateard 
maa fact: afa vate ware fafa: ot sft 1 ath 4 arg: 
ae aie — ‘ay arafaa vet aut a afeorfa [3.33], mid- 
athrareed [3x9] ‘ge waa amean [%.24.] Zefa 1 fearie- 
reed afer at areata safe saq aft area a sat | Hay? 
ant wt agent aag A aft ent fà 
Ha 7 MIA, aAcecyt q— ‘aq: cauy atta a fecar maara | 
[333] ef gan mmaa aeaa a 
ai mia a eiaa gaa sm waa — fa | 


11.0.b. In regard to this matter, some argue as follows: 
Objection: Aloneness (katvalyam) is surely not won by mere ad- 
herence to unaided Self-knowledge preceded by the renuncia- 
tion of activities; on the contrary, the indubitable sense of the 
entire BG is that aloneness has to be won by means of know- 
ledge combined with the system of activities like the fire-sacri- 
fice (agnihotra) ordained by Sruti and Smrti. They also point out 
the following passages that indicate this sense of the BG: “On 
the other hand, if you do not wage this righteous war” (2.33) ; 
“To perform action alone have you the obligation” (2.47); 
“Therefore, perform action alone” (4.15) and so forth. It 
need not be apprehended that Veda-enjoined actions entailing 
infliction of pain and so forth will promote unrighteousness. 
Why not? War, the activity of the Ksatriya entailing the 
slaughter of even one’s teachers, brothers, children, etc., though 
cruel in the extreme, will nevertheless not make tor unright- 
eousness, because it is the proper law of a Ksatriya’s life. On 
the other hand, it is declared that by refusing to fight “‘sacri- 
ficing both the law of your life and your reputation, vou will 
‘incur sin” (2.33). Therefore, making these affirmations, the 


10] The Samkhya Yoga 21 


Lord emphatically asserts that the Veda-oriented, life-long 
activities, though they entail the slaughter of animals and so 
forth, cannot conceivably be sinful; for they are obligatory in 
their nature. 


11.0.c. qq Haq; maia: fearraaara qfar. 1 aN- 
amq [2.22.] saka waa araq ‘caudate araem’ [2.32] 


` 


qama mA aaaea ae pa, Tq area | aaa afe: 
maa: Rasaan aa ae A seede at 


wad, aT arerafg: 1 ar a maa sfa wafa, d are: | Ae: 
ag: weet: sR aaa: Raa nandana: aii 
fangs: AATAS. at | afevar afe: aafe: 

ar afro sfam wate a othr: a? ue eS 
fare ‘vet Ashira aret afeatt Rami ay’ [3.32.1] eff) ama 
asaya aaa fase areearat fai aenfa ‘ga Farrar 
wat steer [33] aft i war a aeaa sear facet ferret 
Shlain ae Pe al [33] eft 1 wt meag afa q 
aa = fads fè mam va IÈ mArÅN riar ARNA- 
waaga: AIT TAJAAN TAT | 


11.0.c. Reply: All tkat has been said above is vacuous. For, 
the discipline of knowledge and that of action, rooted in two 
kinds of understanding, have been clearly distinguished from 
each other. The content of the text beginning from—‘“Those 
who should not be grieved for” (2.11) and ending with “‘And in 
view of the law of one’s life” (2.31), where the Lord elucidates the 
eternal Truth of the Self—is the Samkhya. This teaches that the 
Self, being free from the six-fold transformation like birth and 
so on, is a non-agent. This knowledge, generated by the study 
of the relevant context (prakarana), is the Samkhya knowledge. 
Those for whom this knowledge is appropriate are the Sam- 
khyas. Prior to the birth of this knowledge is the state of Yoga 
characterised by the performance of activities instrumental to 
liberation. Such peformance is based on the discrimination 
between righteousness and unrighteousness; it depends on the 
notion that the Self is other than the body, etc., and is an agent 
of actions, a reaper of the fruits thereof and so forth. This kind 


22 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. II 


of knowledge is the Yoga-knowledge. Those for whom it 1s 
appropriate are the Yogins. Accordingly, the Lord has made 
a clear distinction between these two kinds of knowledge—the 
knowledge of the Samkyas rooted in the understanding of the 
Samkhya, and that of the Yogins rooted in the understanding of 
the Yoga. Thus realising the incompatibility, at one and the 
same time in one and the same person, of Jnana (knowledge) 
and Karma (action), and also with due regard to the under- 
standing of Samkhya and Yoga, the Lord has discriminated 
between the two disciplines. The incompatibility (above re- 
ferred to) is due to the fact that knowledge and action are 
rooted respectively in the notions of the non-agency and of 
the agency of the Self, and in the perception of unity and of 
plurality in the world. 


11.0.d. war Ua aoma ate af maA srant—‘vada 
sara olafaesent aver: sasttea” ala adata fear qed 
“fr sorat afesarat A atsaarearsa wm” [3.3.8.3] R 
aaa aoe areata ‘ges.’ ‘area gaT: Aaaa SA- 
maa — a, fesart a faa maS, ‘eq’ a; aa aay Teed 
aaaea, frat a ad fret Anami AT <tr 
afrararaad: va aati waif stadt ata 1 cer (aaa, 
Tata eft) seat aca va ale geod: ware fateqq acaq 
amaai wart era, afe standart: aaa: aftia and 
ATI: I 


11.0.d. This declaration of distinction between knowledge 
and action in the BG corresponds to the following demonstra- 
tion of the same in the Satapathabrahmana: “‘Desiring only this 
world of the Self, mendicant Brahmanas wander forth.” Here, 
having laid down the renunciation of all actions, to it has been 
affiliated the idea contained in the following passage: “Of 
what profit is progeny to us, who have this Self, this world?” 
(BU 4.4.22). In the very same text has also been highlighted 
the fact that all actions pertain only to those who are subject 
to nescience and desire; for, before marriage the human self 
is ‘unregenerate’ (prakria). After an investigation into the 


10] The Samkhya Yoga 23 


science of Veda-enjoined actions, man, becoming ‘regenerate’, 
desired (akamayata) the means to secure the three worlds viz., 
a son and the two-fold wealth, human and divine. The ‘human 
wealth’ consists in activities by which the world of the manes 
is attained. The ‘divine wealth’ is knowledge by which the 
world of the gods is attained. The transcending of the sphere 
of all activities and the pursuit of a life of mendicancy have 
been laid down for one who seeks only the world of the Self 
and who is rid of all cravings. Now this pronouncement on 
the distinction between knowledge and action will be illogical, 
if the Lord had intended to combine Vedic activities and 
knowledge of the Self. 


Oe. TW Heer wea: Gora: wats sa ae [ 2.2. | 
gare: | egaa afari: wired GF sate FY Aste: 
war afe:’ [3.2.] aft an 


11.0.e. Nor in that case could Arjuna’s question —“‘If, ac- 
cording to You, knowledge is superior to action etc... >?” 
(BG.3.1)—be logical. How could Arjuna super-impose on the 
Lord, falsely, what He has never so far affirmed, viz., the im- 
possibility of combining knowledge and action? Again, how 
could he ascribe to Him what He had never clearly stated viz, 
the superiority of knowledge to action? The fact that Arjuna 
ascribes both these views to the Lord shows that he had under- 
stood the Lord as affirming both. 


11.0.£. fea—afe afart: adi ayeag: oh: A, oo. 
aq: om ua gf, wear ute at ae aaa | | xfr 
Dict Ge oe actin ai a ae ee ee 
dA wat ald wa tne ea safes ‘aaa 
ate’ <fa ser: duet | apr anfrer wagered a aaro: 
wet: Hoard, gash waar seared sitet ea, ‘war afer: 
ayers: oth: Feary get at uredisfa eft i a g ga: aaae 
Ger aq wa È fas wa go NÈ [33] eft aah ae | 


11.0.f. Again, if the combination of knowledge and action 


24 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. II 


had been universally laid down, it would of course have been 
valid for Arjuna also. How then, when both were taught, 
could he make a request regarding only one of the two, in the 
words, ‘“Tell me, for certain, that one of these two, which is 
superior to the other” (5.1)? When, for instance, a doctor 
has prescribed a diet, which is both sweet and cooling, for a 
patient suffering from bilicusness, the patient’s request, “‘Please 
tell which of these two will cure my malady”, is clearly im- 
possible. Even if Arjuna’s query is supposed to be due to his 
inability to grasp the distinction stated by the Lord, the latter 
should have given a reply like this suited to that query: “I 
bade you combine knowledge and action. Why are you con- 
fused in regard to it?” It is not proper for Him to have given 
an unsuitable reply, unrelated to the query, in the words “‘Of 
old, two disciplines were laid down by Me” (3.3). 


11.0.g. aft carta ator ae: aqeaashrsd faaara aay 3T- 
ad fet afer ag and at cont eft ora ‘af miir at at 
Frater’ [ 2. 2] aft INEF: ATATA: | 


11.0.g. Nor is the distinction in its totality reasonable if the 
combination proposed related only to knowledge and action 
enjoined by Smrtis. Besides, knowing as he did that fighting is 
the law of the Ksatriyas according to Smrtis, Arjuna’s com- 
plaint, “Why do you bid me plunge into this dreadful action?” 
is not in order. 


11.0.h. aema aar SoeATAUTT stay CATT AT PASSANTA 
aqaa: a afara WaT: | 


11.0.h. Therefore, none can possibly demonstrate that in the science 
of the Gita there is the slightest proposal to combine knowledge of the 
Self with action laid down by Sruti or Smrti. 


11.0.. Ter g Aatavarifeateat ar Hah water AAA, AAA, TWAT 
ar faaeaea AAA méara aAA ad ag aad F 
afa, ver adi ata a faasa oani aag gar waft: 


10] The Samkhya Yoga 25 


qà aif sacar acafaet ger a amd aa qe: AA. |; 
aay Wad: i sano gl lagi 


ames at ata aA aA a aera afan 
wate | awa a aetafe war ‘paste a food’ [4.9.], ‘a wea a 
fore [23.32.] aft at aa wea ‘ot dat way [v.24], 
‘ate fe afateartera maa: [3.20.] afa, ta ara AN | 
amq? afe maq aa: aratae: af aaa: a, A NT- 
amet ‘ToT g ad [33] sft mA afafeq me: | 
piid MA aft mA aga afafeq maT: a Hdd FIA: 
zas | wy a a mafaa: — eaaa stor maA afate 
arate, maea at afena: saa: gfe TA | 
Àa af aaa wna ‘acaqed at gf’ [4] sf a- 
ator areret fate faf maa: [ec.ve.] aaa fats maa a 
ga: mAs aeata ‘fate smear aan war [euo] scarfear 
Te Aaea Has VA Aras Ma: +a HAA 
ata frat: ae: | aa a He at ae secre: faa aa aa aa- 
fram: 1 


11.0.1. On the other hand, when either due to nescience or 
flaws like attachment, a person proceeds to act and his mind is 
in the course of it purified by means of sacrificial rites, the 
giving of gifts, austerities etc., then the knowledge of the 
supreme Truth dawns. The content of that knowledge is ‘All 
this world is the one Brahman, a non-agent.’ For him both 
activity and its goal cease to operate. Still, for the well-being 
of the world, that Brahman-knower may be observed to persist 
in his activity, purposefully, as of old. The form of activity 
observed in his case is not real action with which Self-know- 
ledge (buddhi) can be combined. An instance is the warrior- 
like activity of the divine Krsna. This is not action combined 
with Self-knowledge for winning the summum bonum. The same 
is the case with any knower of the Self, as he, like the Lord 
Himself, is free from the egoistic sense and the desire for the 
fruits of activities. On the contrary, the knower of the Truth 


26 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. II 


of the Self maintains: “I act not’’; and he does not seek the 
fruits of his actions. His position is similar to what happens to 
a householder who commences the fire-sacrifice for winning 
the desired objects, namely heaven and the like, but who, 
after going through half of the rite, ceases to desire them and 
yet carries the ceremony through. Now, of course, the sacri- 
ficial rite ceases to be desire-prompted. Accordingly does the 
Lord, in different contexts, affirm: ‘Though working, ,the 
agent is not stained” (5.7), “He neither works nor gets stained” 
(13.31) etc. As for utterances such as the following: “As your 
progenitors performed of old” (4.15), “Janaka and others 
achieved perfection by means of action alone” (3.20)— 
these have to be distinguished and grasped. How? If, at 
the outset, it is held that enlightened people like Janaka per- 
formed action in bygone days, they did so, aiming at perfection 
and to promote the world’s well-being; for they knew that 
‘“Gunas operate in the medium of Gunas”’ (3.28). That is, it 
was appropriate for them to renounce all action; nevertheless, 
they sought that perfection through the medium of action; 
they did not renounce action. Such is the import of this passage. 
On the other hand, if it is held that they were not enlightened, 
the passage may be explained to mean that Janaka and others 
like him achieved samsiddhi, purity of mind, by means of ac- 
tions dedicated to God; or, samsiddht here denotes the dawn 
of Self-knowledge. The same idea will be conveyed by the 
Lord in the words: “They act to purify the mind” (5.11). 
Having stated, ‘‘Worshipping Him by means of his own ac- 
tions, man achieves siddhi or pre-eminence” (18.46), for one 
who has (thus) achieved pre-eminence, He prescribes the dis- 
cipline of knowledge or jnananistha saying, “The way that the 
pre-eminent one attains Brahman” and so on (18.50). There- 
fore, according to the science of the Gita, the attainment of liberation is 
by means of the unaided knowledge of Truth alone. This ts the indu- 
bitable doctrine. That this is the (the right) doctrine, we shall 
demonstrate with reference to the various contexts of the 
Bhagavadgita. 


11] The Samkhya Yoga 27 


11.0j.7a Ua mimea: feaa: wefa strat faaea 
WATT AAT AHA Va ARI Wa aged: at PAT 
ait seaca: array Haas TE — 


11.0.g. Convinced that the redemption of Arjuna, whose 
mind was confused in regard to the law of righteousness, 
swayed by nescience, and sunk in a vast sea of sorrow, is im- 
possible except through the knowledge of the Self, Lord Krsna, 
seeking to save him, introduces to him the theme of Self- 
knowledge. 


ATTaTTaTa : 
ateata TATA TAT ATT | 
TATA Ararat rsat: ng 


The blessed Lord said: 

11. You grieve for those who call for no grief; at the 
same time, you utter words of wisdom. The wise grieve 
neither for the dead nor for the living. 


1.1. aaa ecarfe TTT: aaa: Aeages:, aga- 
car, Tem ere a freon | ary a areata: A AT 
aft a foot fafi, ag à faama: fe sheers waga 7 
ea | a waaa a qfar arm a aaa FT wre | 
qaa mea misa a fees areas aa sera: za eft afro: | 
BEAT TATTT TAMU AAA, STAT ATA aT: a A aata 
qsar: aaam: | ger efaa afg: aut a fe ofesar:, ‘after 
fafa’ [55 3.4.2.) ofa ad | teaming am fac waar 
aqaa, ad: Ae: afa efa ah: 1 


11.1. Not meriting grief (asocyan) are Bhisma, Drona, etc; 
for, their conduct is virtuous. From the point of view of tran- 
scendental Truth, they are eternal. For them, who call for no 
grief, you have grieved, thinking, “They will die on account 
of me; what shall I, deprived of them, do with the happiness 
that the possession of kingdom, etc., will bring me?” And at 


28 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. II 


the same time, you utter words befitting the wise—those who 
have wisdom (prajna) or intellect. Thus at once combining an 
air of wisdom with misplaced grief, you display in yourself, 
like one demented, confusion and wisdom that are mutually 
contradictory. This is the idea of the Lord. For, both for those 
whose vital airs have departed (the dead), and for those 
whose vital airs have not, (the living), the knowers of the 
Self (atmajnah) do not grieve. Panda is knowledge of the Self. 
Those who have it are panditah. Vide the śruti: “Securing the 
status of Self-knowers” (BU.3.5.1). Transcendentally speaking, 
you grieve for those who are eternal, and, as such, do not call 
for grief. Therefore you are demented. This is the Lord’s idea. 


12.0. Ht: à T? aa: fac 1 FIA? — 


12.0. Why do they not call for grief? Because they are 
eternal. How? 


Tage mg Aa A cal AM TATTTT: | 
a aa a afacarea: aad aaa: TTT ULI 


12. Never, at any time, have I been not; neither you nor 
these rulers of men. And never shall we all cease to be. 


121. TT Ba ua g Us. we Farhad ae a a, fed sraq 
wa ul adtay agicfafaaera werfey faag ga feo: wa ae ave sta 
afore: | war — a a at oath, fe go ae: wa | ana gA, sa- 
firm: 4 area, fe J aa va | ana a ua a aam: fe J 
maam: wa ad aa wa: sear aaam I sacarestt | Parafa 


req fac: araered sat: | Aae agaaa, T eÀ- 
arhrsTanr | 


12.1. Never, at any time, was I not; on the contrary, I 
certainly ever was. Though My bodies originated and perished 
in the past, in them all, like space in pots and the like, I re- 
mained an eternal entity. This is the idea. Similarly you were 


12-13} The Samkhya Yoga 29 


not non-existent; on the contrary, surely, you too existed. So 
also these rulers of men were not non-existent; they too existed, 
to be sure. So, too, we all shall not cease to exist, but continue 
to be in the future as well, after the disintegration of the body. 
The idea is that in all the three divisions of time we are eternal 
as identical with the Self. The plural number in verse 12 refers 
to differences in respect of bodies; it does not point to a plurality 
of Selves. 


13.0. Ta Hata face: aent fa? gera se — 


13.0. In what manner is the Self eternal? An example is 
offered: 


cteatstery wart 2g Brae dai AT | 
an araa A Aes ULF 


13. Just as the embodied Self has, in the body, child- 
hood, youth, and old age, so does it win another body. 
An intelligent man is not bewildered by it. 


13.1. a: afr u te: wen afer aft eat cea afer: gaa. areas: 
afar adm ae war aa sare ala parea: eaaet, stad 
WT: Aa: mamae, He aea. ortae, sf war: foe: saree: 


aaaf: | ATA aaaea Far: atara a TAT 
arent: | fe ate ? afafa wa ume fedtaqdtaraearsritr: arc: 


Set | Ta aed Wa Ser ser ee sere, ger ora: eraf: 
afar wa area: geet: | ihe: dda, aa wd afa, a qari a 
ate wad i 


13.1. The embodied Self, dehi, is what owns a body. For 
the embodied Self, in the present body, there are childhood, 
the condition of a child, or the early stage of life; youth, the 
condition of a young man, the middle stage; and old age or 
decline due to age, the stage of disintegration. These three 
stages are different among themselves. When the first among 


30 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. II 


them ends, the Self does not end. When the second comes 
into being, the Self is not born. On the contrary, it is observed 
that to the one immutable Self the second and the third stages 
accrue. Just as in the example cited, so the undoubtedly im- 
material Self wins another body, different from the present 
one. This is the sense. An intelligent person, dhirah; is not 
bewildered in these circumstances. 


14.0. Fafa areataararfatad: are: a awafe faa: acer efa fasraa: 


14.0. ‘Though for one who knows the Self to be eternal, it 
is impossible to be bewildered by the notion that the Self 
perishes, still bewilderment due to cold and heat, pleasure and 
pain, is commonly noticed. So too is noticed bewilderment 
due to separation from the joys of life and grief arising from 
contact with pain. The Lord anticipates that Arjuna may 
raise this question and says: 


aarete ataa Miga: | 
amenar aA faaearaa ATTA NLN 


14. O son of Kunti! Contacts of senses with their 
objects cause cold and heat, pleasure and pain. These 
come and go—they are fleeting, O Bhārata prince! 
Endure them. 


14.1. meat: ga ou m: A: ataet maa: ef NAA 
gfaairm at: aAa: aa: | à aoga: aar: ata 
sr ga ga a aAA | aaar — aA eft aT: AAT: ATT: 
maa aata angaa aa: — aa aa ae, maf aq | 
va sry aft aeae | gA ga: faae a aa: | 
aa: area gee AN: wey | wea A maA: rara AA: 


14-15] The Samkhya Yoga 31 


ATTA: TEATS Aha: | aa: aT aadA fafaeea wages | 
ay ev fase ar ar a: scat: N 


14.1. Matras are the senses like the ears etc., by which 
are measured, i.e. determined, objects like sounds. Touches 
(sparsah) of these senses are their contacts with objects like 
sounds. They generate cold and heat, pleasure and pain. The 
root da in the text refers to the idea of giving rise to cold, etc. 
Alternatively, what are “touched” are the objects like sound 
and so forth. The senses and their objects, matrah and sparsah, 
are the yielders of cold and heat, pleasure and pain. Cold is 
sometimes pleasant, sometimes unpleasant. So heat, too, has 
no stable form of its own. Pleasure and pain, on the contrary, 
never lose their identity. Hence they have been mentioned 
apart from the former two. As these senses, objects, etc., by 
their very nature, appear and disappear, they are imper- 
manent. Therefore, endure these objects, cold, heat and so 
forth. The sense of the verse is: Feel neither pleasure nor pain 
in respect of them. 


15.0. ater age: fe era ef ? aT— 


15.0. What happens to one who endures cold, heat, etc.? 
Listen: 


a fe a aaa Jee Faas | 
aag aga UL Asawa Ferg NLN 


15. O hero! The man whom these do not agitate, who 
is the same in pain and pleasure, and who is wise, be- 
comes fit indeed for immortality. 


15.1. 4 fe eft wt fe gee aagage ad gage ged agi 
gagar evfasrected ot dat a aafaa a areata faa- 
created Ud seater: attra, a: aeaaeae aS: aN: 


32 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. II 
ayaa aa Area Heat Aas: watt iN 


15.1. Wise, indeed, is the man to whom pain and pleasure 
are the same, who is devoid of elation and dejection when 
pleasure and pain accrue. These do not agitate him; he is not 
jolted out of the perception of the Self. Devoted to the vision 
of the essence of the eternal Self, enduring all dualities, he 
becomes fit for liberation, moksa, the state of immortality. 


16.0. 30a MaA ap efaa ah, aeng — 


16.0. What happens to one who endures cold, heat, etc? 
Listen: 


ma farad ma ararat fard aa: | 
THAT gAs eaaa A: NRN 


16. The unreal comes not into being, the real never 
lapses into non-being. The truth about both these has 
been perceived by the seers of Reality. 


16.1. maa: aft n a waa: aaa atone: ONA T 
faat ma ma wat afa i 

q R Aoa ao À: aean ag aq wala 1 faara 
R a, fiama ahaa 1 oer eRe aa aean gga- 
fra aqs: aq, a aat faa: aoa N: 
Ia aaa E Sed a aga HHT e: garfan 
F aAA AAA: AACA II 

qaa abrag. aft qa, ada qfar, agafa: 
wage: fa 1 Ron afe: a anac, aq aa, aa aaa, 
a waq—sfa maom afeast fend, ada è? qd ad soe 
amaa — a eaa, -aq Te, Aq Te, aq ge, afr 1 wa 
way | wat: Fear: serfegte: ahracs | aa a a | a g afe: | 
amg werfeafefaua: waq, ara, a I aaafefaua:, aofi 
ATT Ni 


16.1. The unreal i.e. that which has no being, such as cold 


15-16] The Samkhya Yoga 33 


and heat as well as their cause, has no true existence. Effected 
statés like cold and heat are observed to be unreal in them- 
selves when tested by means of valid cognition. They are only 
inconstant transformations. Take, as an example, effected 
entities like a pot. When scrutinised, they are not seen apart 
from clay and the like, their material causes. Therefore, as 
effects, they are unreal. In the same way, all transformations, 
not being cognizable apart from their causes, are unreal. 
Unreal are effects like pots, for they are unknown before their 
origination and after their destruction. The same holds good 
for things like clay, the cause of pots and the like, for these 
causes too are not known apart from their causes. 

Objection: If the totality of causes and effects be unreal 
there arises the contingency of an absolute vacuum. 

Answer: No; throughout the sphere of cognitive experience 
we have to deal with two cognitions: (1) the cognition of the 
real and (ii) the cognition of the unreal. That alone is real 
whose cognition is not mutable, and that is unreal whose cogni- 
tion proves mutable. Thus the distinction between the real and 
the unreal rests on cognitions. Throughout the sphere of experi- 
ence the two cognitions with an identical substratum are avail- 
able to one and all. Note that this case is different in nature 
from the cognition of ‘ʻa blue lotus”. Right examples are ‘“‘the 
pot is”, “the cloth is”, “the elephant is”? and so on throughout 
the whole sphere of cognitive experience. Of these two cogni- 
tions, the one whose content is the pot and the like, is mutable. 
And so it is demonstrated. Not so the cognition of reality or sat. 
Therefore, being mutable the objects of the cognitions of pot 
and the like are unreal; not so, the object of the cognition of the 
“real”, it being immutable. 


16.2. WÈ Rae mad areca aaafe: aft aha gf 
aq—a7; veret aft aafaa 1 aAa wa at agafa: 1 
agqs weafe: aft werent geod eft Aq — a; Jaret A i 

aaa: aie ae ae a ga aft aq—a; faster | aaafs: 
faama adt aaa aaan fafavar eq ? a g 
Ja: aga: favararard | 


34 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch, H 


16.2. Objection: When the pot perishes and the cognition 
of the pot proves mutable, the cognition of the real, sat, too 
proves mutable. 


Answer: No, the cognition of the real is still available in regard to 
other objects like the cloth. The cognition of the real has, as its con- 
tent, only th : adjective. 

Objection: Like the cognition of the real, that of the pot also is 
available in regard to another existent pot. 

Answer: No; it is not available in regard to the cloth. 

Objection: The cognition of the real, too, does not occur in regard 
to the pot that has perished. : 


Visesanavisaya eva sa sadbuddhih. 

The question being discussed dialectically, both from the points of Sanskrit gram- 
mar and metaphysics, relates to the status of “is” in cognitions like “‘the pot is”, “the 
cloth is” etc. Para 15 cited these examples. The metaphysical proposition is: when 
the content of a cognition does not change, it is sat or real. What changes is either 
empirical or illusory. The distinction between sat and asat, thus depends on the con- 
cerned cognitions. Cognitions of pot etc., change; not so the cognitions of sat or being. 
The reference of the cognition of isness in the compound cognition “pot is” does not 
change. 

Even when the pot perishes, isness, qualifying it, does not, for, it manifests itself 
with reference, say, to a cloth, vide ‘‘Patah san’. In the examples, zsness is grammati- 
cally an adjective, as it refers to what qualifies substantives or nouns like pot and 
cloth. Its cognition is not on a par with that of pot and cloth. For, though the cogni- 
tion of a given pot may perish with reference to other pots, the cognition of the pot 
may very well continue. On the other hand, the cognition of a pot is impossible with 
reference to objects like cloth. But the cognition of zsness—sadbuddhih—does not 
perish even when the given pot has perished; it may be had in relation to a cloth, 
for example. True, the cognition of isness is ruled out in relation to the pot that has 
perished; yet the fact that it may be had in relation to cloth etc., shows that it is im- 
perishable, unlike the individual pots. The answer to the objection that zsness is not 
experienced with reference to the individual that has perished, is that it nevertheless 
continues to be available with reference to surviving pots and non-pots like cloth 
etc. [sness appears as an adjective only (in the grammatical sense) in cognitions relating 
to individual objects. Whereas the substantives perish, the adjective, isness, just 
ceases to be experienced; it does not perish. Only, being an adjective qualifying indi- 
viduals, in the absence of the latter, it cannot manifest itself. 

There is the further question: Can the cognition of a real entity and that of an un- 
real entity inhere in a common ground? Look at the cognition ‘this is water’ with 
reference to a mirage, where ‘this’ alone is given, while the water is absent. The 
entire-world of dualities is like the water in the mirage; it inheres in the Eternal Ground, 
the ultimate Reality or Brahman that timelessly persists unsublated, unlike the world 
that inheres in it. 


16] The Samkhya Yoga 35 


Answer: No; your remark sounds plausible only because the sub- 
stantive is absent. The cognition of the real, whose content is the 
adjective sat, will not have that as its referent; for, an adjective with- 
out a substantive is illogical. The non-occurence of the cognition 
of the real, then, is not due to the absence of the real. 


16.3. aaora eraa a gea q-a; ‘se vary’ 
eff rÂ aaas arararfirecoqestare | 

qea R: goer A aA saa: a aed wma: za | aa 
aq: aq ma: sara: aaea a fae, ada aana gf 
aAa | Ut amema aN N A que: IS: Het: 
fria:, aq ma waq a ga g saat a: aeaa: | 


16.3. Objection: Dependence on the same substratum of 
both the cognitions is illogical, since the substantives like the 
pot are, in truth, not there at all. 

Answer: No; in fact one observes that the cognition’ of 
light and so forth expressed in the proposition, ‘there is water’ 
refer to an identical substratum, though one of the two com- 
ponent elements, water, is not there at all. Therefore, on the one 
hand, unreal and caused entities like the body and dual entities 
like heat and cold do not come into being; on the other hand, 
a real entity like the Self never lapses into non-being. For, as 
we observed, it is everywhere present. Thus has the unshakable 
truth about the Self and the non-Self—the real and the unreal 
-—namely, that the real is ever real and the unreal ever unreal, 
been perceived by the seers of Reality. 


16.4. aq eft aiam; ad a Fa; TH WA ad aft Tea: A, 
TIT: AIM | ad we ats Aat a aaa, à aeaea: | 
raat araatarat gie maa ate ate a facar amea faaarte- 
area gara, farsa va wifareaq fre aama — ofa 
wate friar fafaera sf. afro: 


16.4. Tatin the word tattva is the name of the ‘all’, and the all 
is Brahman. Those who habitually perceive it are the seers of 
Reality. By them has the above Truth been perceived. Relying 


36 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. Il 


on this perception of the seers of Reality, you must endure 
grief and delusion. Giving up both grief and delusion and 
firmly holding that uncertain dualities like cold and heat are 
unreal transformations or effects that, like a mirage, illusorily 
appear, you should endure them. This is the idea. 


17.0. fe Jr aI aq aq wa ada efa ? sear— 


17.0. What then is that which 1s eternally real? Listen: 


afafa g afafa aa avatars aay | 
Ranma a nanga ell 


17. On the contrary, know that to be imperishable by 
which all this is pervaded. None can destroy that which 
is immutable. 


17.1. afaarer ea uo afaarr a faqs atte ser eft t I we: 
aaa: faaam: | aq fafe fasta i faq ? aa ad ee m ad 
ares Hee TAIT AHA, Baraat ga eaa: | faa Haale, 
aag | aaa a ata sTaarraat + arta str aA, TA AAT | 


17.1. What does not habitually perish is the imperishable. 
Tu, on the contrary, distinguishes It from the unreal. Know 
that. What? Brahman or Sat, i.e. Being, by which the whole 
world, together with the sky, is pervaded, just as pots and the 
like are pervaded by the sky. Destruction is non-perception or 
non-being. The immutable is that which neither increases nor 
decreases. 


17.2.4 Wad ma Fa cag Say atfa, ahrach faaata, 
araa 1 athe mA, arcdtarararq «1 ear eaad: wagrear AfA, 
TU wa wo at i we wear we sem: feat a ahaq ad 
eta, 7 Shaq omea faararfad aentfa SAA 1 area fe war; 
ema a fearfacera N 


16-18] The Samkhya Yoga 37 


17.2. This Brahman known as sat does not change Its own 
nature, 1.e. does not forfeit it; for, [tis partless, unlike the body, 
etc. Neither in respect of Its properties does It change; for, It 
has no property. For example, Devadatta decays through loss 
of his wealth; but Brahman does not. Therefore, none can 
bring about the destruction of this immutable Brahman. 
None, not even God, may destroy the Self. Indeed the Self is 
Brahman and any transitive activity of the Self (the Self acting 
on Itself) is inconceivable. 


18.0. fe Ga: aq Haq aq earaact areca aft ? seat — 


18.0. Again what is that which, being unreal, has but an 
inconstant existence? It is thus set forth: 


maaa SA Set faer: ATT: | 
AAAAMSTAT ACAI ATTA WLI 


18. These bodies that perish are said to pertain to the 
eternal Self that is embodied—the eternal Self, that is 
imperishable and indeterminable. Therefore, fight, O 
scion of the Bharatas! 


18.1. Ata: Za uo wet: fase: fast A a asta: | aT 
mai wade: aa mae ARA, a cer aT; 
ajar et er AANER ATTA: feaa Af: TIT. 
amha: amaa aaa: Hetaed sta sr: fafana: ga: 1 farae 
watt: eft a ge, aaa aaa ath, A a 1 gT 
ee: weet: weet we awe: Sead | aes ger aera afore: 
arene: St: ase: Sead | at aer ‘ara: ef fafaa 
alt aiaga eat: | aera ofrenfeaq aft frat aq araa:, 
td aT wa sta aaa ‘aaa: scare 


18.1. The perishables are things which have an end or anta. 
For instance, the idea of reality, associated with things like a 
mirage, snaps when tested by means of right cognition. This is 


38 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. H 


its ‘end’. Likewise, these bodies of the eternal and indeter- 
minable Self are as perishable as the bodies seen in a dream 
or projected by a magician. Men of discrimination affirm this 
truth. The expressions ‘eternal’ and ‘imperishable’ (nztyasya, 
anasinah) are not tautologous; for, eternity and perishability 
are of two types. For instance, a body, reduced to ashes and no 
longer perceptible, is said to have perished. It is also said to 
have perished when, though existent, it has undergone a great 
transformation due to diseases, etc. The two expressions 
nityasya and anasinah rule out both these forms of destruction 
as regards the Self. Otherwise, the eternity of the Self may be 
held to be similar to that of objects like the earth. To exclude 
this possibility the text says, “‘of the eternal” and ‘of the im- 
perishable.” 


18.2. aaa aT Aa aR: aadA eat: i aa 
amia ae Ra, safa a qig l a, ara. aa gaa | 
fag fe maf aR ta: sA wa i a fe gi ‘sca 
ae far ara aaa Marq mAn aa aAA i a fe n aa 
safa afaa: waft | amet g a war aaga- 
fada maa aeia: saad, a g amA | aN F 
afa:— ‘aq maA Fal a eT aaa: [FF 3.) sft N 


18.2. “Of the indeterminable’’ means “‘of that which is not 
measurable by the means of right cognition like perception 
and so forth.” 

Objection: The Self is measured or determined by Revela- 
tion, and, earlier, by perception and so forth. 

Answer: No; for the Self is self-established. Indeed it is only 
when the knower, the Self, is given, that there arises the search 
for the means of right cognition on the part of the seeker after 
knowledge. Without knowing the Self earlier as ‘such and 
such am 1”, none attempts to secure determinate knowledge 
of the object of knowledge. To none at all is the Self altogether 
unknown. The final means of right cognition, the sastra or 
scripture, acquires validity as regards the Self by setting aside 
the non-attributes of the Self superimposed on It, and not by 


18-19] The Samkhya Yoga 39 


revealing what was altogether unknown. Thus the śruti de- 
clares: “That which is immediately present is Brahman, the 


Self in all” (BU.3.4.1). 


18.3. aeaTa va faa: aafaa ae ae TAA, qaq IT 
m Bret: gari: N 

a fe wa yanda farad, ae saa: wa fe sat aeaa: 
qt aed i ae: ae piona wraar fead | qed 
qaa sta qanana, a fafa: n 


18.3. Since the Self is thus eternal and immutable, you must 
fight, and not withdraw from battle—this is the sense. Here 
fighting is not enjoined as a duty. For, Arjuna has already 
addressed himself to fight. But he remains immobilised due 
to grief and delusion. Therefore, the Lord removes the im- 
pediment in his path to the performance of his duty. Hence 
the term “‘fight”’ is only a restatement of a given position and 
not an original injunction. 


19.0. Merete arent, 7 wads, fa war 
weer arferadt wA [F 3. 2.20.28.) afar ama i 

aq aad ‘aes eaaa: war gA, wey va aat aa aft wat 
afs: mia à l wo? 


19.0. The Lord has cited two mantras (KU.2.18.19) that 
testity to the fact that the science of the Gita purports to 
remove the cause of transmigratory life consisting of grief, 
delusion etc., and not to compel anyone to initiate action of 
any kind. It tells Arjuna: Your notion that people like Bhisma 
are slain by you in battle—that you are their slayer—is indeed 
false. How? 


a vi att Bat Mat Ad EAA I 
Sat at aT fasted ara gia a get NR 


19. Both he who takes It for the slayer and he who 


40 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. II 


takes It to be the slain know not (the truth); It neither 
slays nor is slain. 


19.1.4 wt Ba nu a wt sad eet ate fafa eat gaa- 
fara: eat, a q Ut we: Ae sd ga ‘at: g ela ga- 
afar: why, at sat a fase: a ma afaada TAT, | 
T ee, ee afer age eft Reena are eaa at 
fasta: at maea geri 1 gem a ad ar eft a 
gafan: Hat Wala, a sud 7 a HA wadieas:, afatwacnq N 


19.1. He who takes the embodied Self in question for the 
slayer or the agent of the action of slaying and he who deems 
It the slain or the object of that action, crying out “I am slain” 
when the body 1s slain—both these do not know aright the Self 
due to their lack of discrimination. The sense is that both these 
are ignorant of the proper nature of the Self, because this Self 
is neither the agent nor the object of the action of slaying. The 
reason is that the Self is immutable. 


20.0. wa afafa mem eta fedta: Aer: — 
20.0. The second mantra (from KU.) explains how the Self 


is immutable. 


a grat germ TÄ? RoN 


20. This Self is never born; It never dies either. Having 
been born, It never ceases to be, again. Unborn, eternal 
and everlasting, this ancient One is not slain when the 
body is slain. 


20.1. 4 wad sft a Had a Sead, afro aeqfatHar a ATRA: 
fara scat: | aa a fad at area: at 1 a faa a of ae 


19-20] The Samkhya Yoga 41 


faasa fafrar sfafread 1 wafaa ase: adfafearsfaed: a- 
gud —a afaa wad, + Harfaq faa, gaq | AeA Ha TENT 
year waafinat arate afar aed we AW A TeATT 
a foot À f& wart a aaa a fad cf vert oth aaa 
TTT AT AAT sacar ar ufaar sea FT Wa GT: | AeA A 
wad 1 at fe aracar wfaat a sad eft Sead | Ad AAT | OA: a 
mat | AeA Wa AeA aT | Ae a faad aca faa: = 


20.1. This Self is not born i.e., It does not come into being. 
The sense is that the transformation of things known as birth 
does not happen to the Self. Similarly It does not die either. 
‘Either’, va, has the sense of ‘and’. And It does not die. The final 
transformation known as destruction is negated of the Self. 
The phrase “at any time” (kadacit) is associated with the nega- 
tion of all transformation. It means: at no time whatsoever 
is It born, at no time whatsoever does It die and so on. Because, 
having been, i.e. having experienced the state of being, this 
Self does not again reach the state of non-being. Therefore, It 
does not die. In the world one who, having been, ceases to be, 
is said to die. Due to the force of words “‘either’’ and “not”, it 
follows also that the Self, having ceased to be, does not again 
come into being, like the body. Therefore “It is not born”. 
That which, having been non-existent, comes into being, is 
said to be born. The Self is not an entity like that. Hence It is 
not born. Since, It is such, therefore, It is unborn. Since It 
does not die, therefore, It is eternal also. 


20.2. waft maat: fafeaat: AA aat. fafaa. safaat: wafa, 
aaa mafaa fafai aa: va aað. aa: adem: gf 
aaa aft Aaaa aaa aA: an ae gag: 
garam 1 aad: gA maaan fafear saaa 1 Prga: 
art: | a aa aA, araa 1 Poea a aà qoreraor 
aqaa: 1 aaa aft afeeern fafan sfafreat gor: gf | 
am R aaam sa a add, ahaa: eft a ead | ad g ATCAT 
faaan Go af aa: wa A g: a aed wast | an 
aq ead | afer: aa fanftorarat mea: agaecmadt 1 a farce 
aay: | gama faafeoreraraste rÂ? 1 aR Ae GS Avatar: 


42 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. II 


saraga: maa sfafeead 1 aawarctateareted: Tear 
aft aami | gear ws cen ‘sat at at faite’ [2 2e] ofa 
qa AT He aay: I 


20.2. Though by the negation of the first and the last trans- 
formations, all transformations are in effect negated in regard 
to the Self, still it is meet that the intermediate transforma- 
tions also are negated specifically. Therefore, to negate trans- 
formations like youth, not specifically mentioned, expressions 
like ‘everlasting’ are used in the text. By the term ‘everlasting’ 
is negated the transformation consisting in decay. What exists 
for ever is everlasting. In Itself the Self does not decay; for It 
is impartite. Being devoid of attributes, It does not suffer decay 
through that of the attributes, either. The term ‘ancient’ 
denies also the transformation of growth, the opposite of 
decay. What develops through the accession of parts is said to 
grow. It is also called new. But this Self, being impartite, was 
new even in times of yore. So it is ancient, purana, i.e. It grows 
not. Similarly It is not slain. The root han in this context must 
be taken in the sense of decay, to avoid redundancy. The 
sense 1s that the Self does not decay, though the body is slain 
1.e., undergoes decay. In this mantra are repudiated, in respect 
of the Self, the six transformations which affect empirical 
objects. The sense of the proposition is that the Self is free 
from all kinds of transformation. Such being the case, this 
verse must be understood in conjunction with the previous one 
(2.19), “both of them know not”. 


21.0. 4 wa Afa ga [2.28.] maA nA gafa: wat 
ey 4 a vata afa aaa, a oad casa afafeae aq sacar 
samari sagda — 


21.0. Having affirmed, in verse 2.19, that “‘the Selfis neither 
the agent nor the object of the action of slaying”? and pointed 
out in 2.20 the reason for Its freedom from mutability, the 
Lord concludes the argument already set forth: 


20-21] The Samkhya Yoga 43 
aafaa fret a AARAA | 
ey a Fea: mÅ a maafa shat HT N? 


21. How can a man, O Arjuna! who knows It as the 
imperishable, the eternal, the unborn, the undecaying, 
cause anyone to be slain? Whom can he slay? 


21.1. ARAR a 1 ae fase aaaea srecooratasrected 
frat facfoorracfedt a: aa aft aa: | Ut Ga Ae THe aT 
wated wut Aai PA FT THOT a: oo ara: 
ofa, gafa acta ? at ar araata amt santa ? a wate 
afaq efa, 7 sifa afaa arate ef Sart MAT: Te ae, TRATAT- 
award | tate a afaferae gear fags: adat: wa 
yas: aha: wrad: | et: g AT: sagoi afar: N 


21.1. He who knows the Self as imperishable, i.e., as free 
from the last transformation, and as eternal, 1.e., as free from 
decay—thus are these two words, anasinam, niam. to be con- 
strued—how can such a knower of the unborn and imperish- 
able Self slay or cause to be slain when he fights as a matter of 
duty? In no manner does he slay; in no manner does he cause 
to slay. The upshot is the repudiation of the two suggestions 
of slaying and causing to slay. The idea that two questions 
are here being asked is impossible in this context. The reason, 
namely, the immutability of the Self, being the same for 
negating all actions on its part, the Lord here conveys the 
idea of negation of all actions by a knower of the Self. The 
negation of slaying has been chosen as an example. 


21.2 fage: E aatia RAS Ta Fati a a i 
ager gA aq oem wa ama: fafaa ainar onfa: | 
aa Bh aga rA: aaa fagu: aafaa ea: ete | 
T fe afafet e faRaa: wt a aA eft aaa, A: 
ma a a ia Reet i a: RAT ster e 
fasta fafa: ga aver fags: aaa AT: om: ‘et a gay’ 
sft | 


44 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. II 


21.2. In the light of what specific reason for ruling out all 
activities, does the Lord negate them in the words, “How can 
a man who knows. ... 2”? That has been mentioned already. 
It is the immutability of the Self. This is the reason that makes 
all action impossible for the Self-knower. True, it has been 
mentioned ; but it cannot be the specific reason; for, the knower 
of the Self is different from the immutable Self. For example, 
action is not impossible for one who has known that a post is 
actionless. The case in question, however, is different, because 
the Atman is the Self of the knower. The state of being a knower 
does not, of course, pertain to the conglomerate of the body, 
senses, etc. Therefore, after their elimination whatever re- 
mains—the non-composite Self—is the knower, free from all 
actions. Thus actions being impossible for the knower, it is 
appropriate to negate all of them in the words, “How can a 
man who knows. .. . ?”’ 


21.3. 4a qaaa were afar wa aq afeqeate- 
aama afaarar STS eT Head, Ua Va earna Anaa 
qfgqrar fanaa wa wear: afafea: wa ae faar 


sad | fags: maaa as sat me fades afa 
afagy: fafeattr sft waa: fasaa i 


21.3. Through nescience the immutable Self is deemed a 
knower both of the sense-objects and of the Self itself. In the 
former case, the immutable Self is supposed to know objects 
like sound presented to the intellect and so forth, because 
there is a lack of discrimination of the Self from the modifica- 
tions of the intellect. In the latter case, the Self is said to know 
by virtue of the intellect’s modification of discrimination 
between the Self and the non-Self. This knowledge by discri- 
mination, too, is unreal, metaphysically. On the basis of the 
Lord’s teaching that it is impossible for the Self-knower to act, 
whatever actions have been enjoined by the Sastras have 
reference only to the non-knower. This may be taken to be the 
settled doctrine of the Lord. 


22] The Samkhya Yoga 45 


21.4. aq faarft afage: wa fated, faafaa freag fren- 
Ramada | at afagy: aa faea a fage: sfa fare: a 
m et Aq — To agaa manaf: | rea- 


ag, ma ater Adara. faga: a qa Walt a 
g an m aa aa fafa gè 


EEEE hee a E aadaaT 
q: aafaa eft a sft aat afa 1 a a afan, ‘sat Aa 
fama: [2.°°.] aff aa, aAa a fags. patag F 
‘ot a qey: Ro a aaa afafa: fags: qaaa 
adipin wa aaa | wa: Va war aN: eA SAGN, 
aaga afar: aa a a oeafa — amaa ean Haart 
ARa [33] sf i an a ga ae am area:— afaa 
qarat [m m. mi. Rx] gare 1 aera ada T 
qaq aAa [À aT. 20.3.2 maga: | gea. 3. RAT, 
Ta È. I. g mea] eft) cada fai qa: ga: afaa aTa — 
aaefa ‘agarcfaqercar satefafa werd,’ aafaa g a ae Hate’ 
[3.20-2¢] eft i ar a ainat ma derenred’ [4.23] aa 


21.4. Objection: But knowledge also has been enjoined on 
the non-knower only. On one who has acquired knowledge, 
the enjoining of knowledge is pointless like the grinding of corn 
already ground. Therefore the distinction that actions have 
been enjoined only on the non-knower and not on the knower 
is not logical. 

Answer: No; the distinction between existence and non- 
existence is sound only as regards what has to be accomplished. 
After knowing the sense of an injunction regarding rites like ag- 
nihotra (fire-sacrifice), which require the assemblage of numer- 
ous accessories, they have to be performed by the non-knowers 
of the Self, each of whom thinks, “I am an agent; I have to 
perform this.” But different is the case of one who masters the 
sense of propositions like ‘“This Self is never born”, which set 
forth the real nature of the Self. After acquiring the knowledge 


46 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. II 


he has no ritualistic act to perform. On the dawn of knowledge 
that the Self is one, a non-agent, a non-experiencer and so 
forth, no action supervenes. A distinction like this is thus 
logical. On the other hand; for him who thinks of his Self as 
“I am an agent”, the inevitable thought follows: “I must per- 
form this.” As regards such actions, he is obliged to play the 
role of the agent. In respect of him actions are performablie. 
And he is a non-knower in the light of the verse 2.19: “Both of 
them fail to know.” Besides, the words, “How can a man... ?” 
(2.21) repudiate actions in respect of the knower, who has 
been distinguished from the non-knower. Therefore, both the 
Self-knower perceiving the immutability of the Self, and the 
seeker after liberation, are called upon exclusively to renounce 
all Veda-enjoined works. It 1s for this reason that the Lord 
Krsna, distinguishing the Samkyas, who are Self-knowers, 
from the ritualists, who are non-knowers of the Self, enjoins on 
each group a distinctive discipline—by the Yoga of knowledge 
for the Samkhyas, and by that of works for the Yogins (3.3). 
Accordingly Vyasa tells his son: “Two are the paths here” 
(MB.12.240.6). Also, “First the paths of works, then renun- 
ciation” (7A.10.62.12; cf JUB.2; KeUP.1). The same distinc- 
tion will be drawn by the Lord repeatediy: the non-knower of 
the Self, with a mind confounded by egoism, deems, “I am an 
agent”, but the Seif-knower holds “I act not” (BG.3.27.28). 
Again, “He, the Self-knower, is seated, mentally renouncing 
all works” (5.13), and so on. 


21.5. aa faq mesana: aafaa — ‘aearfaneuratataaretec: afa- 
fra: amai wa: ag amen’ ef a wert a vere, af aft 
adpan: soferad, aft | ad a; ‘a a aeaa- 
PITT ST | FUT st Meare Tareas Hp gA- 
dafam Gerard, Ta Wea ae wa arena: afahwacaradcdacar- 
fafaaTa Feat J Vad efa seem: t aoaea ea Aq — T, 
adarissceay [q 3. x.x] afr ah 1 aeararatreaenearfe- 
deed wa arnt FO | ae a acho aaa amd a afa 
ma a voud sft aeqart wad | 


21] The Samkhya Yoga 47 


21.5. In this context some self-styled scholars affirm: None 
can acquire the knowledge “I am the Self”, that is, the one 
who is a non-agent, is immutable, and free from the six trans- 
formations like birth and so forth—the knowledge by virtue of 
which the renunciation of all works is enjoined. This affirma- 
tion is untenable; for, it will stultify the Sastraic (scriptural) 
teaching regarding the Self that “It is not born etc.” (2.20). 
If, on the strength of Sastraic teaching, the knowledge of the 
existence of righteousness and unrighteousness and of the 
relation of the agent’s self with future bodies can arise, why will 
not, similarly from the fsastra, arise the knowledge of Self’s 
immutability, non-agency, unity and so forth? When this 
question is put to these so-called scholars, they reply, “Because 
the Self is beyond the range of the senses.” But this won’t do. 
For, the śruti teaches that ‘by the mind alone is the Self to be 
perceived’ (BU.4.4.19). The mind, purified by the teachings 
of the Sastra and the teacher, and by the control of itself and of 
the senses, is the means of Self-perception. Also, when inference 
and scripture are available for winning Self-knowledge, the 
bare assertion that such knowledge won’t arise is merely pre- 
sumptuous. 


21.6. at q sada afer aad wae ared eft ware 

aq ad A aad afar ‘sea ae, aa: ane gA, ‘Sat at a fara: 
[2.28] eft | aa a ane ga. ade, wie, tae 
q waged stray | aq a adang aft ward aA: ANETA, 
afafa aea: | fafwarary fe Fat aera: a ae sata 
‘ge gf —aq wad afar fags: adag det taeda a fN- 
att weary aged: fage: eataa Aafaa acid ey 
a gay: garfear | 


21.6. It must be granted that the dawn of knowledge of the 
Self is bound to sublate its opposite, namely, ignorance. The 
content of that ignorance, “I am the slayer, I am the slain. . .” 
(2.19), has already been set forth. It was elucidated there that 
the states of the Self as agent, object and causal agent in 


48 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. II 


regard to the action of slaying are the products of ignorance. 
The fact of the agency etc., as. products of ignorance applies 
to all actions, because the Self is immutable. Only a mutable 
agent can cause another, its object, to act. To clarify the 
absence of any obligation to act for a Self-knower, in verses 
like 2.21 the Lord repudiates alike the agency, direct and 
causal, of the knower in respect of all actions. 


21.7. 74 Ja: fag: afar aft ? ad F qa ‘ara Ti- 
emma [33] eft | an a adhi aA adan waar 
[4.23.] zaf | 

vq maa A aa a aaa aaa a iaa. A A, 


ma deren aft AI—a, ‘Aa Hae mAT [43] aR aoa | 
amA: aa waa sm afer, q waa: ht Aq — aq, aaan 


a afrrcntecad, TANT I dee | aydeq areas a 
ammi: aq fread: | Tea Whareaes aeaa: Aaa Us arferarc:, 
a vat ca at at safer maaa afar: i 


21.7. Objection: In regard to what, then, is there an obli- 
gation on the part of the knower of the Self? The answer has 
already been stated thus: “By means of the discipline of know- 
ledge as regards the Samkhyas” (BG.3.3). Accordingly -the 
Lord enjoins the renunciation of all works in 5.13: ‘Renoun- 
cing all works, mentally, etc.” It may be objected: The term 
‘mentally’ shows that the renunciation in question does not 
apply to the activities of speech and body. ‘‘No; for the 
term ‘works’ is qualified by the word ‘all’’’. “But this may 
mean only ‘all mental activities’’’. “No, the activities of speech 
and body also are preceded by those of the mind in the absence 
of which the former are inconceivable.” ‘The verse, then, may 
be construed thus: renouncing mentally all activities other 


22] The Samkhya Yoga 49 


than the mental causes of the fastraic activities of speech and 
body.” “No, the Lord’s statement has been qualified as 
follows: ‘Neither performing nor causing to perform.” A new 
objection may be raised: “The Lord enjoins renunciation of 
all works on one about to breathe his last, and not on the 
living.” “No, in that case, the description, ‘the embodied Self 
is seated in the nine-gated city’ (5.13), will prove incompa- 
tible. One who dies after renunciation of all works cannot 
possibly be seated in his body.” It may be objected: “The way 
the words are to be construed is not ‘seated in the body’, but 
‘depositing (samnyasya) in the body the sense of acting and 
causing to act.’”’ 

Reply: “Not so; for both in the BG and the Upanisads 
the Self has been determined to be immutable. The act of 
sitting requires a place while that of renunciation does not. 
The term nyasa preceded by the preposition sam means 
abandonment and not depositing. Therefore, in the science of the 
Gita, the Self-knower 1s obliged to renounce and not to perform works 
of all kinds.” This doctrine will be further demonstrated 
wherever the topic of Self-knowledge is discussed. 


22.0. Tet J TATR: | aa arent: aaa samaa 1 aq fara 
aa? sà — 


22.0. Let us however discuss what is immediately relevant. 
What has been asserted is the imperishability of the Self. What 
is it like? The answer follows: 


araifa sitet aut faga 
attr qaa mAs | 
war miair faga sitett- 
aaa aara anfa Set RRN 
22. Just as a man puts on fresh clothes after discarding 


worn-out ones, so does the embodied Self, discarding 
worn-out bodies, proceed to take up new ones. 


50 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. H 


22.1. arate sfa uu areata aearhr sttoift gioa wert a ars 
fagra eaa aara ahaaa aera sared ae: Fae: aar arfa, 
anr aq va ade faa strife sents ware areata varia 
wat amet a afafa: wa scat: Rt 


22.1. As in the world, discarding worn-out clothes a man 
puts on new ones, so, discarding worn-out ‘bodies, the ‘em- 
hodied Self’—the immutable Spirit—proceeds to take up 
fresh bodies. This is the meaning. | 


23.0. req afatear vate ? ag — 
23.0. Why qualify the Spirit as ‘immutable’? Answer: 


aa feratea seat aa agfa ma: | 
qT aq Foegearay a stata Ared: V3 


23. Weapons do not cut It; fire does not burn It. Neither 
does water wet It; nor does the wind dry It. 


23.1. ta forefer eff l wt wad tft a fsafa seat, fara- 
waa a vanaf Hata 1 ara genet 1 aa a wa agfa 
qar, ah: aft a wettecdfa 1 aar—a a wt amauta am: | 
mn fe arama aca: adhranc squafagerred a | 
aq a fraa aruit avafa | aa Mead xe aera areas 
ame 1 Ut g area + aA mea: aft 

ad: Ut Wear — 


23.1. ‘It? means the embodied Self under discussion. 
Weapons do not cut It. Being impartite, It has no parts to be 
severed. Weapons—-swords and so forth. Similarly, fre does 
not burn It, 1.e., even fire does not reduce It to ashes. So, too, 
water does not wet It. Water has the power to wet or decom- 
pose only objects having parts. This process cannot apply to 
the partless Self. Likewise the wind destroys an oil-soaked 
material by drying up that oil. But this Self even the wind 
cannot dry up. 


22-24] The Samkhya Yoga 51 


Therefore, 


THM SAAT NSRS NA TT A I 
faa: AAMT: TAT TASS ANAA: UV 


24. This Self cannot be cut, burned, wetted or dried. 
Eternal, all-pervasive, stable, immovable and ever- 
lasting is It. 


24.1. wot safe u sen wetted wars wa scare 
ara 7 seated Tea fre: | fread adres: | Aaa SINT: 
eq e stad | fered wae: Ha ATH, Aa: AAA: FAAA, 
aq paoa gahaq farora:, arava: gerd: | 


24.1. As the elements that ruin one another cannot destroy 
this Self, therefore It is eternal. Being eternal, It is all-perva- 
sive. Being all-pervasive, It is stable like a pillar. Being stable, 
this Self is immovable. As such It is everlasting, i.e. ancient, 
and not produced by any cause whatsoever. The sense is—lIt 
is ever new. 


24.2. T WAG Wry aad aedtay, Ad: Uh Va Wrst ACH: 
faa afaa Ae ‘a aad feet ar genfa | aa aaa aree- 
faoa fafaq seat aq waenq wrarata a afafcerd, fafaa maa: 
gaem fated ania: ef 1 gdleenq aera: OT wee ara 
Tera ag aeg fracas wrard argea: He aq ara seam aarti 
[aaarieca-] afetracat area aq amaaa end aft i 
fra — 


24.2. No objection may be raised against the verses (21-24) 
on the score of their redundancy, though it may be said that 
the eternality and immutability of the Self are affirmed in 2.20. 
Repetitions are obvious in 2.24. The explanation is that the 
Lord recurs to the theme of the recondite Self in order to 
elucidate it still more; for, He is anxious that even the empiri- 
cal man should grasp the abstract truth about the Self and 
overcome the state of transmigratory life. 


52 Bhagavad Gita Bhasvam [Ch. II 


Further, 
C KAIEN baL SZL DALE GAI LNU b: STS | 
aema fafaa mafagagfa nN 


25. This Self is said to be unmanifest, imponderable 
and immutable. Knowing It to be such, you ought not 
to grieve for Ít. 


25.1. JARA sr u adron a aead sa a A 
aem | aT: wa aaa: way 1 aq fe faama: aq faafaa 
aad l at g are aafaa afaa: afa: aay, IAT 
at aaaf faer, + an aa e 1 aaa a afa- 
Pra: 1 a fe faa faPaq fafaa ge 1 afafa afai: 
wa aen Sead | aea Ue aa Ua aA faar a a 
aqfaa seta ‘aa ae Us, Har ud ead’ sft 1 


25.1. Being beyond the ken of all the senses, the Self is not 
manifest; so It is unmanifest. For the same reason, one cannot 
ponder on It. Only what is accessible to the senses becomes an 
object of thought. Being beyond their ken, the Self is im- 
ponderable. It is immutable also. Unlike things like milk that 
change into curds, the Self does not undergo changes. Also 
because It is impartite, It is immutable. Nothing partless is 
known to mutate. As impartite, the Selfis said to be immutable. 
Knowing the Self thus, you ought not to grieve thinking, “I 
am their slayer, by me are they slain.” 


26.0. ANa: ara mary ee Tea — 


26.0. Granting for argument’s sake the non-eternality of 
the Self, the following observation is made: 


wy aa faama fret at Aare HAR | 
watt a weal va faqs wei 


26. Even if you think that the Self is perpetually born 


25-27) The Samkhya Yoga 53 


and perpetually dies, still, O hero! you ought not to 
grieve for It thus. 


26.1. aa at Ste uo ae a aft seat: i Ut sad acs 
fama Aaaa waar A Aaa wal ame: gfe at aera, aur 
saama fret ar were ad Aat aa: ef; aafe amàs 
arate ct maA a Ua wha wea, Heat: ATT ATA: TH F 
afa udt aaa aft e N 

an a ata — 


26.1. The words atha ca have the sense, ‘granted’. On the 
basis of popular notion if you think that this Self is perpetually 
born with the birth of the bodies It indwells, and that It per- 
petually dies with their destruction, still, O hero! you ought 
not to grieve with regard to It, because what takes birth under- 
goes destruction and what is destroyed necessarily takes birth. 

Therefore: 


maa fe al AQHA WaT AAT a | 


gc Vu 8S 


amaaa a cat magaga ure 


27. Death is indeed certain for one who is born; and 
for one who dies, birth, too, is certain. Therefore, as 
regards this unavoidable sequence, you ought not to 
grieve. 


27.1. wet ft | eer fe vaa: ga: wearer qa: 
ROT ga AH AIT a  aea aah Tera: ae: | TEA 
-amq sake wi a a ahd ad | aA arr maa 
way aft a carifaaaq softer: a at: 1] afar acter asf 
qa a wag wef i 


27.1. For one who is born, i.e. who has taken birth, death is 
an inevitable concomitant; so too is birth for one who dies. 
Therefore the sequence of birth and death is unavoidable, and 
is a matter of course. Hence you ought not to grieve for it. 


54 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IF 


28.0. arog aa aft wyatt RA ate: a am: Fe, 


ad: — 


28.0. It is not reasonable to grieve for beings who are mere 
bundles of causes and effects, because, 


werenratta watts crenata ATT | 
AAHAITAA TA BT ALATA URC 


28. The beginning of beings is unmanifest, O Bharata 
prince! Their middle state is manifest. Their end, too, 
is unmanifest. In these circumstances, why lament? 


28.1. aaa sft n aadA stern seated, aqrefer: aria: 
at warat «yafearfeartacreerarcnarar | arf OTTER qafa 
TE were: | gerarht a a moa aA 1 aT wa 
qa. aa aeii, fi, moi t ah arna | mea ae 
sama, Ua Raa gat | an Ae aaan: JAT- 
walt ma: | aA aa a aa a ae ar RaT” n [e 2. g] 
eau aa a Ra A a sem: gegee ANT wy 
say: 1 


28.1. ‘Unmanifest’, i.e., unperceived or unknown, is the 
beginning of beings such as one’s sons, friends, etc. These seem 
to be nothing but bundles of means and effects, organs and 
bodies. Before their appearance in time, these beings are un- 
manifest. Having appeared, their intermediate state, till their 
death, is manifest. Again, their end in death is ‘unmanifest’, 
unperceived. The idea is that after death they arrive at a 
state of unmanifestedness. So it has been affirmed in the MB 
(Strz,2.13): “He has come from an unseen state and has re- 
turned to that state again. He does not belong to you nor do 
you, to him. Why, then, this vain lament?” In these circum- 
stances where is the room for lamentation or vain speech as 
regards beings whose very essence is a delusion-—who are 
unseen, then seen, and finally wiped out? This is the idea. 


27-29] The Samkhya Yoga 55 


29.0. giaa: wa Set: MENT, fe wary Ue UH VASA ma 
afaa? aa efasa: at are et ? awa g — 


29.0. The Self in question is hard to comprehend. Why 
should I blame you alone when the cause of the delusion is 


universal? For, how hard it 1s to comprehend the Self! The 
Lord affirms: 


arava de a da ha NIQ 


29. One beholds It as a marvel. Similarly, another 
talks of it as a marvel. Yet another hears of It as a 
marvel. Even after hearing, none indeed knows It 
aright. 


29.1. amataq eft i amada maA agg AFAA APENT FIN- 

ami at ga amad adfa wt ame maa ahaq | adag 
Ud qa waa a aa, aada a A aA A | a gaT 
saa ate ut maa aq a da pT | 


29.1. As a marvel: a marvel is what is unseen before, a 
wonder, that is unexpectedly seen. So, as a marvel, one be- 
holds the Self. Similarly another talks of It as a marvel and 
yet another hears of It as a marvel. Having heard, seen, and 
spoken, too, none at all comprehends this Self. 


29.2. waT—4: at arent Tafa a arate: 1 a: ae a OT 
mfy, a Asaga ahaca wate 1 ae: gate: area gah: 1 


29.2. Or, he who sees the Self is, as it were, marvellous, 
He who speaks and he who hears about the Self is but one in 


56 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. II 


in many thousands. Therefore the idea is that the Self is hard 
to comprehend. 


30.0. HX zart THe sree — 


30.0. Now the theme in hand is wound up: 


tat fanas R AAT ATLA | 
aeaa watt a at magaga igo 


30. This embodied Self (dwelling) in the bodies of all, 
O Bharata prince! is eternally indestructible. Therefore 
you ought not to grieve for any being at all. 


30.1. tat afr n aét wed fat adar aataeng aae: fraa- 
wad frat 4 at aA at A aden adnan eraufay 
feratstt | acer mimaa ee aeaaraste aa edt a qeq: a 
amq Amir watt warts ska a a ahr ete i 


30.1. ‘Eternally’—at all times and in all states—the em- 
bodied Self is indestructible, because It is impartite and ever- 
lasting. The Self dwelling in no body may be slain. Being all- 
pervasive, the Self present even in stationary objects like trees 
is indestructible. Even when the bodies are slain, the Self 
remains indestructible; so you ought not to grieve for beings 
like Bhisma and the rest. 


31.0. 3 [2.20.] Tealarartenar ast ar Al ar a avata 
eae | a ham máa wa faq— 


31.0. In 2.30 it is stated that in the light of the ultimate 
Truth neither grief nor delusion is possible. Not only in the 
light of ultimate Truth is this so, but also, 


aada ataen a faaferquete | 
Tate yaesu atrrer 7 fred 320 


30-32] The Samkhya Yoga 57 


31. Having regard to the law of your own life, you 
ought not to be perturbed. A Ksatriya cannot have a 
greater good than a righteous battle. 


31.1. cart A ou ced aft a: ot: aaa A. ag aA ade 
a a aeg vafed agi mai afer cantar wate TN- 
caren safe: | tea ag qed waht sore F 
afs vet ei | ai aadi aeiq | cen seri gard Ao aaa 
ahaa a fared fe aeg il 


31.1. ‘The law of your life’-—your law is the Ksatriya’s law 
of battle. With due regard to that, you ought not to be per- 
turbed or upset. The righteous law of battle is what is natural 
to, is the very nature of, a Ksatriya. Such is the purport. And 
battle is for the sake of righteousness and people’s security, 
through the conquest of the world. Hence it 1s eminently 
righteous, dharmya, which means what is not divorced from 
righteousness. Than. a righteous battle, no greater good can 
accrue toa Ksatriya. This is the reason for the assertion in 2.31. 


32.0. HIM Ad as Hae sir ? sad- 
32.0. What additional reason is there for fighting? Answer: 


ugo BAATA eA | 
gaa: afro: at wart gaT 11321 


32. An open gateway to heaven has, by a happy chance, 
offered itself to you. O Arjuna! For, fortunate Ksatriyas 
alone gain an occasion to wage a war like this. 


32.1. ag aft | an a aaa sae anid eae 
adi safa à wad sear as wad afar: g met! fe a afar: 
T? 


32.1. ‘By chance’, i.e., what has come unsought. An open 


58 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. II 


gateway to heaven is this war. Are not Ksatriyas happy to get 
a chance to wage a war like this? 


33.0. Te FdeTATITA sty — 
33.0. This war has offered itself to you as your duty; still, 


wy arate wet aaa a ateoate | 
aa: cae atta a fecat arrerareeate 113311 


33. On the other hand, if you refuse to fight this 
righteous war, sacrificing both the law of your life and 
renown, you will incur sin. 


33.1. wa gA i wT Aq a sa wet ada fafed aura ag 7 
aefa Ud, at deacon card att aw ngaa afaa 
feat Sas ot aafia 1 


33.1. ‘On the other hand’ if you do not fight this war that 
is righteous, i.e. the war that conforms with the rules of righte- 
ousness, for that very reason, abandoning the ‘law of your life’ 
and forfeiting the ‘renown’ gained in your duel with Siva and 
the like, you will incur sin. 


34.0.7 Han caqeatfagtecan:— 


34.0. Not only will vou have given up the righteous law of 
your life and renown — 


atta arf warts mafra I | 
amaa arattaneoratatrerd 3 


34. All will recount your everlasting infamy! For one 
honoured, infamy is worse than death. 


34.1. aAa sft uo arate a ate ware raaraa A aa aat 
Adro 1 water ae: Aaa: ae eaaa a arate: Ao 


32-36] The Samkhya Yoga 59 


anrea, amaaa a a at ae sae: 
faz — 


34.1. All will recount your everlasting ‘infamy’ for a long 
time to come. For one honoured so far for virtues like righteous- 
ness, bravery and so forth, infamy is worse than death. The 
sense is that for an honourable man death is preferable to 
infamy. 

Besides, 


maamaa Hele CAT ARIAT: | 
aot a cat agAat wat areata STA NINN 


35. Great heroes will deem that out of fear you with- 
drew from battle. You will fall in the esteem of those 
very heroes who have honoured you (so far). 


35.1. Wa sft uu war safes: wd Fs vad faga weed 
fafafa + gra sft cat ngen: giaa: | [è Aare? afa 
ae—| at a a galm agua: aghy wh am aid Aa, 
aga: T Yt: et aera oa STAN i 


35.1. Due to fear of Karna and others you have withdrawn 
from battle and not due to compassion—so will mighty heroes 
like Duryodhana think. Who will think so? Those very heroes, 
Duryodhana etc., who esteemed you as very rich in virtues. 
Now you will become light in their esteem. 

Also, 


aaraa iDa aga aeaa aartgar: | 
faaea aad a gaat a fT 3RN 
36. Your foes will hurl many unmentionable insults 


at you—foes bent on downgrading your competence. 
What can be more painful than that? 


60 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. II 


36.1. HarTaTA ft Wo aaan Hawes aad A ag 
mrad Rafa aa safe: aaa: freed: Heat: aa ada 
amei frarrnaatfagetatray i dat: dead farmer: Gard gT 
qa fe ? aa went ge afer cork n 


36.1. ‘Many unmentionable insults’-—they are of many 
sorts that your foes will hurl at you, pouring scorn over your 
competence, established by your encounters with Nivata- 
kavaca and others. Is there any pain worse than suffering 
such insults? That no pain can be more miserable is the sense. 


37.0. a Ja: feaart ortfa :— 


37.0. On the other hand in the battle with Karna and the 
rest, 


gat at sreeata cat farcat at wtewa Fete | 
aegis alata Teta pARPAT: wit 


37. Getting slain, you will gain heaven; victorious, 
you will enjoy this world. Therefore, O son of Kunti! 
stand up, determined to fight. 


37.1. gA at ef uu aa ar sreeafa eat, ea: aq cat maA | 
Rra ar ata Ay eA AeA | Taras aa STA: va ecahraT: | 
at: Ua aa vase aia! qe safes: Safa aaa, 
at fa frat sear seat: i 


37.1. If you are slain you will win heaven. Victorious over 
heroes like Karna and others, you will enjoy this world. In 
either case, you stand only to gain—this is the Lord’s idea. 
Such being the case, O son of Kunti! Get up, determined to 
fight i.e., having resolved, “I shall either conquer my foes or 
perish.” This is the idea. 


38.0. TT As aah Bs BAA ser we PI 


38.0. Listen to this instruction of Mine addressed to one 
who fights with the idea, ‘fighting is the law of my life’. 


36-39] The Samkhya Yoga 61 


FATA AA HAT STATA HATTA | 
aan Waa qea aa maefa 3 


38. Looking with an equal eye on pleasure and pain, 
gain and loss, victory and defeat, strive to fight; thus 
will you incur no sin. 


38.1. Tage aa u gage ay ger Fear, cael [aft] weer 
ead | TMT ore Tarra wT AAT HAT Ad: Tarr AA sees | 
q Ua aS Faq m sareafa [afr] we sore: orate 


38.1. ‘Looking with an equal eye’ on pleasure and pain, 
i.e., without attachment to the former or aversion to the latter. 
Similarly in respect of gain and loss, victory and defeat. Thus 
strive to fight. Fighting thus, you will not incur sin. This 
counsel is incidental. 


39.0. Mamen [Arar] otfea: =e: aA are gard: 
wa: TH, TT aed | cede J Bs THAT | AeA BH IN- 
sh pet le A nobel gle i Pl 

meaa sors ‘aati aterat sear attra’ 
E ab anal act ae aed savor faafia 
qe mafa sft — aa: ate — 


39.0. Considerations of worldly wisdom in (2.31-36) were 
cited with a view to dispelling grief and delusion, and not as 
ends in themselves. But what is relevant in this context is the 
perception of the ultimate Reality. What has already been 
remarked about it is concluded here (2.39) in order to set forth 
clearly the valid divisions of the Sastra. For, once this division 
is set forth here, the later recurrence to it in 3.3 will easily 
make this Sastra, comprising the two disciplines, fully opera- 
tive, and the listeners will grasp it smoothly in all its details. 
Hence the Lord says: 


vat Asfan ater afeatt ferat a7 | 
TSU eR AIT ATT pai wETETT 3RN 


62 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. II 


39. This knowledge of the Samkhya has so far been 
imparted to you. Now, listen to (a statement of) the 
knowledge of Yoga by acquiring which, O Arjuna! you 
will discard the bondage of works. 


39.1. UT à aft uw a ge area ser are reag fa- 
fast qf art ma atenerfedaregetetratrarey, ay g 
Taran Fraga eggi fect FNA eaters 
aaa a eat aaa va soma als a i at a ats ata 
mAai — qen an Aan ae: è mi | pia HY UVa 
Tarte: qa pia at ga paaa faaam wa 
gaha: 

fra aq — 


39.1. This knowledge of the Samkhya or discrimination of 
metaphysical reality has been imparted to you. It is the cause 
of the removal of that flaw, attachment, aversion and so forth, 
which engenders the transmigratory life. Yoga leads to the 
knowledge of the Samkhya. Yoga is Karma Yoga whose im- 
mediate purpose is the worship of God. It is to be performed 
after discarding, by the force of detachment, the pairs of 
opposites like heat and cold. Also it includes the achievement 
of samādhi or concentration. Now listen to the immediately 
following exposition of the knowledge of Yoga. This knowledge 
of Yoga is lauded to heighten the interest of the listeners. 
Acquiring this knowledge, O Arjuna! you will surely cast off 
the bondage of works. Note that action, righteous or unrighte- 
ous, is bondage and that Arjuna was to discard their bondage 

by virtue of knowledge attained through God’s grace. This is 
the idea. 

Moreover, 


ahnas srerarat + fererct | 
ATH THEN ATA AEA AATY Vo 


40. Herein the sphere of Karma Yoga there is no loss of 


39-41] The Samkhya Yoga 63 


good beginnings; nor is there any sin involved. Even a 
little of this righteous law delivers one from great peril. 


40.1. 48 Bir u at ag area sda aaa: afiwant afir- 
Fa MEN: ae ae: a fer aT seme: | aÀ MEA A 
atanan sat: 1 fe a—a aft fafecaraq serara: fared | 
fe g aa aft wer ater aprender aafted aad walt wet: WaT 
AACA AAACN I 


40.1. Here, in Karma Yoga, the path leading to liberation, 
there is no loss of the good beginnings one makes; unlike in the 
case of agriculture etc., the effects of these beginnings are con- 
served. And unlike what may happen in undergoing a medical 
treatment adverse reactions will not result from the practice 
of Karma Yoga. On the other hand, even a little of this Yogic 
discipline delivers one from the great peril of transmigratory 
life with its births, deaths and so forth. 


41.0. a eat ater gfe: sar at a awa aT — 


41.0. In regard to the knowledge of Samkhya already set 
forth, and of Yoga about to be set forth, note the following: 


mamara aging HET | 
TSM Maa gasa AATA wv eV 


41. The conviction as regards this (twofold Yoga), 
marked by resolution, is single; the convictions of the 
irresolute are indeed many-branched and endless, 
O Arjuna! 


41.1. aA ett uw aaar aaaea war wa afe: IA- 
tartegteareartaer arfrar, weary sarratsacard, se watart È 
eee ee 
wore: aT: AaTe: faa: fared: wafer, 

Ffin SINE RAFI sarah sent at gaa: WETE: 


64 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. II 


Tea We: seat a agave, agra saad 1 anea fF 
war Tea: 1 ay? aaa, oaaae gaa 
ga: I 


41.1. Regarding the path to the supreme good, know O 
Arjuna! that there is only one conviction, marked by a firm 
resolution. It abolishes the plurality of other and opposed 
notions, because this conviction has been engendered by the 
right means of cognition. Many-branched are these opposed 
notions. Because of the pursuit of this play of multiplicity has 
arisen the infinite, shoreless, and ceaseless transmigratory life 
perpetually spread out before us. But upon their cessation, due 
to the discrimination that the right means of cognition en- 
genders, transmigratory life comes to a halt. The differences 
among them being a legion, those opposed notions are many- 
branched. Each branch gives rise to infinite notions. For whom 
does this hold good? For the irresolute, who lack the convic- 
tion marked by discrimination and born of the means of right 
cognition. 


42.0. at aaar afe: af F— 


42.0. Regarding those who lack resolute conviction: 


afar gii ara waaraf aA: | 
aaa: West aaaea atest: us QW 


42. They are the unwise who utter flowery speeches, O 
Arjuna! They revel in the letter of the Vedas and de- 
clare, “There is nothing else.” 


42.1. afam sf n at eat aera gferar gaan: sa arava 
sri ara aaron saat | hb ? aaa: aeatae:, 
aaa: cart: | azarae: TE RAIET AATA Tar: 
s mi! a wad miRNA: ae: afer sft wa arfea: 
aaao: I 

q F— 


41-43] The Samkhya Yoga 65 


42.1. They utter speech pleasant to hear and splendid like 
a tree in flower. Who are they? The unwise, men of feeble 
minds who lack in discrimination. They are addicted to the 
Vedic words which glorify or condemn and set forth works as 
well as modes of their implementation. They maintain there 
is nothing in the Vedas other than rites which promise heaven, 
cattle, wealth and the like. 

And further: 


BATH: TANI AAHAHOTATH | 
frarfastaaget aúna sft uy zi 


43. Desire-ridden, heaven-bent, they utter words which 
lead to births and actions replete with specific rites 
that yield enjoyments and power. 


43.1. PAETA: sft ou area: sree, aaa: get: | 
rarer, Tat: TE Tear: Fat st cao: eaters: | Were Hey, 
aay: Ge ath, tT we ate: ae wen aq aA safe 
waaay, a aaq—ysaetat sit aaa 1 fearfaetvagert, 
fammi faster: fearfaerer:, A ager wert arf at, eigara: 
wa ara aga warad 1 Nada A, wen wad a aÑ, 
ad: afer: sift: Miad, ar str arena: & fearfasran:, cage 
a art wae: yer wart fada sah: 1 

ai q — 


43.1. They are ‘desire-ridden’, i.e., they are embódiments 
of cravings. That they are enslaved by cravings is the sense. 
They are “heaven-bent”, for their supreme goal in life is 
heaven. Heaven comes first in their scheme of things. Their 
speech points to ‘births’ which are the fruits of Veda-enjoined 
actions. That speech enjoins specific acts by which are won 
things like heaven, progeny and animal wealth. Again these 
specific acts are the means by which enjoyments and power 
are won. The idea is that these deluded persons, who utter 
Vedic words laying down rites, flounder in transmigratory life. 

The fact is: 


66 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. II 


Madran AISTATATATT | 
aaaea ate: ware a farà uv 


44. Inthe case of those who have given themselves up to 
pleasures and power and whose minds have been en- 
slaved by the words of the Vedas that command rites, 
there is no chance of the resolute mind addressing 
itself to concentration. 


441. aT eff uo Madaan, were ade wat a ef M- 


akna amà a fra a wat ga: i 


44.1. Of those who love enjoyments and power that con- 
stitute the very substance of their selves, over whose sense of 
discrimination has fallen the shroud of Vedic words enjoining 
specific rites, the resolute mind or the conviction in respect of 
samkhya or Yoga does not influence the inner sense (antah- 
karana). Samadhi in the text means the inner sense, since all 


things are reflected therein for promoting the experience of 
the self. 


45.0.4 wa farnafacteat: ast aae aq FH AT g — 


45.0. Next is set forth the fruit accruing to these desire- 
ridden people devoid of discrimination: 


ayataqar sat faeit waT | 
fea raaa frat aerate usu 


45. The scope of the Vedas embraces the three-fold 
force of nature, O Arjuna! Go beyond these three forces. 
He who has mastered the self rises beyond all dualities, 


44-46] The Samkhya Yoga 67 


beyond acquisition and all states of welfare, and rests 
in eternal placidity. 


45.1. ape eta ou Apafaga:— Ayer ware: faa: sarafan: 
aa T ae: Aafaa: | a g frets: wa ate, foarte: wa got: 
ffa, gaza acsivet qerat gearecareat, aa: fata: fade: 
wa aaae. var acai: wa 1 oer frat: aaa 
gna N, STMT Ta aa | Aree Fafa safer: ger 
eft wa: faha: wa) away AAT: FT We | UT TT Bee: 
carat agao: i 


45.1. The scope of the gunas (Nature’s forces or constitu- 
ents) covers all transmigratory life. It is what the Vedas set 
forth. On the other hand, you, Arjuna, must go beyond their 
scope i.e., rise above all desires. Dualities are mutually opposed 
to each other, causing pleasure and pain. Go beyond them 
all. He who always resorts to the Sattva-constituent of nature 
rests in eternal placidity. Yoga here means the securing of 
what has not been made one’s own, and ksema the securing 
and guarding of what has been acquired. Bent upon acquiring 
and preserving, one will find it hard to strive for spiritual well- 
being. Therefore go beyond seizing and guarding. Master the 
self, and be vigilant. This is the instruction for you who are to 
discharge your duty. 


46.0. Tay Farag arg ar serfs aaa wort at 7 ad- 
ert aq, fart aft face sf aqetad afa ? ser, yy 


46.0. If the countless fruits of actions laid down by all the 
Vedas are not to be gathered by the agent, why should those 
actions be performed at all as offerings to God? Listen to the 
answer: 


mamà san Aad: Acadia | 
man aay aa arerrey faa: uve 


46. For a knower of Brahman who has realised the 


68 Bhagavad Gité Bhisyam (Ch. II 


ultimate Truth, there is as much profit from all the 
Vedas as there is profit from reservoirs when all 
around there is an inundation. 


46.1. m aft un wa als aeaa sary ffa 
he ee A ee ae E ay, ade: 
dak meg TT Are, IT eae were: | Wa aa ma- 


afc wa ava aig aq INAT wig T ae, aq wie T: 
amt: mama aafaa: romii fama: a: ag: i ee 
wag: taana afer aay wa aad — aaa: | 
‘ad aq afreafa aq fer sor: arg gata meade Aq a ae [ST 
wz Y. A ee oe a 33.] aft a aaa | 
wea sa masana: aif afaa paeas 
af at ater i 


aa a — 


- 46.1. Just as in the world, various purposes like bathing 
and drinking are served by reservoirs of water like a well, a 
tank and so forth, and they are all, in the same measure, served 
by a widespread flood, so too is the case as regards the purpose 
of the Vedas. Here ‘Vedas’ means the actions enjoined by 
them. The fruits of such actions are all included in the fruit of 
the realization of Truth won by an all-renouncing mendicant, 
a Brahmana. This latter fruit corresponds to the wide-spread 
flood of waters. Vide the śruti: So whatever good thing 
creatures do, all that goes to him who knows what he knows 
(CU.4.1.4). BG (4.33) also declares “All works in their tota- 
lity. . . .” Therefore, before acquiring the fitness for practising 
the discipline of knowledge those who are called upon to 
work, must do such works as promote limited ends, like those 
served by wells, tanks, and so forth. 

As for you: 


padaran AT HOY PITAA | 
m MATa I asea uso 


46-48] The Samkhya Yoga 69 


47. To work alone have you the right and never to the 
fruits (of works). Don’t be impelled by the fruits of 
works; (at the same time) don’t be tempted to withdraw 
from works. 


47.1. wah afr uo safer va afeare: + amaaa a aa aa 
qa p Haq: aT Gey afa seg, HAGE AT Yq Feraq Heaifaq 
af aena rt 1 Aer HAH FON A SMT aa PARNA: A: 
em, Ut mM miaa: T | aa fE aagos: safe vada 
aa woe wT Wat eg: wWaq | ate HAS 7 gerd, fe FAT 
zaer? eft aa aa ae: weg wedi wHet Sth: AT ATI 


47.1. You have right only to perform work and not to 
undertake the discipline of knowledge. While doing works, do 
not think you have the right to claim their fruits. Never, in any 
state of life whatsoever, should you crave for the fruits of your 
works—this is the idea. When you crave for the fruits of your 
works, you make yourselves liable to reap those fruits; (but) 
you should never be the cause of such fruit-gathering, for 
when one works, impelled by the craving for fruits, one has to 
reap the fruits of such works, namely, birth in the world. ‘If 
the fruits of works are not to be desired, why should painful 
works be undertaken at all?’ This thought should not tempt 
you, Arjuna, to withdraw from all works, either. 


48.0. afe atmos T Hart HH, we aie mi aft ? saat — 


48.0. If work, impelled by the desire for its fruit, is not to be 
performed, how should it, then, be performed? Listen: 


UNMET: FE BAN TS AIM MASNA | 
fagufagut: vat qcat aad AKT Tors Xi 
48. Giving up attachment and established in Yoga, 


with evenness of mind in success and failure, perform 
works, O Arjuna. This evenness is Yoga. 


70 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. II 


48.1. aren. eft uo MA. aq ee eater tan Sart; amt 
Sard A ger xt ay wR war 1 Heras frat afer 
aeaf arta fafa., ceca afafa, an: aafaa: 
aft am: Ger yea Fe Hai 1 AA T a ge et Tay ? 
et ua aq — fagufaga ant am: ved 


48.1. Established in Yoga, do works, O Arjuna! just for the 
sake of God. Give up even the desire to please God with such 
work. ‘Success’ here is the attainment of knowledge born of 
mental purity, which, performance of works without craving 
for their fruits produces. ‘Failure’ is due to works of the oppo- 
site sort. As regards both these, let there be evenness of mind 
and then do works. What is this Yoga, established in which 
Arjuna is asked to do works? It is this very same thing—even- 
ness of mind, both in success and in failure. 


49.0. aq Ft: aafaa Sacra wt [TH] Taearg HAT :-— 


49.0. Compared with this sort of work, performed with 
evenness of mind, as an act of worship of God. 


ey Wart SA afa NMIN | 
Tet Wat aes FATT: PERIT: uit 


49. Work impelled by the desire for the fruit is indeed 
far inferior, evenness of mind being far above it. 
O Arjuna! Take refuge in the evenness of intelligence. 
Pitiful are those impelled by the desire for the fruits of 
works. 


49.1. aT sf u ater afafarady fe wat ae fra at qenfear 
fraai afgarnd maafa FAT: ANARA | È TSW, 
aq: Ua aa: afc aa aafaa ar aterqet aot at 
anafaa stares måga, TATA: wa Ê | aa: 
wat FH HAT: HIT: star: Heda: POIT: aed: ‘Al at 


48-50] The Samkhya Yoga 71 


Udeat wmadfafecasearcaarst a p: [q 3. 3o] aff 
gA: 

49.1. Indeed, far inferior is work done by one impelled by 
desire for its fruit, compared with work inspired by the intellig- 
ence of evenness (Karma Yoga), because the former is the cause 
of birth, death and so forth. Therefore, Arjuna! resort to the 
intelligence of this Yoga of evenness, or to that of Samkhya, 
the mature form of the former. It will produce fearlessness. 
‘Seek refuge in the knowledge of the supreme Reality’’—this 
is the idea. Those who do inferior work are pitiful. Impelled 
by cravings for the fruits of works, they have to reap them i.e., 
undergo transmigratory life. Vide: “Gargi! Pitiful is he who 
departs from this world before knowing that imperishable 
Atman” (BU.3.8.10). 


50.0. amaai. aq cra aaa aq we sata aq Fy — 


50.0. Know what fruit 1s gained by him who conforms to 
the law of his life with the intelligence of mind’s evenness: 


qfaqet were St grag | 
TTI WAT UT: HA BATT UL 


50. With the intelligence of evenness one discards (in 
this world) both good and evil works (i.e. the merits 
and demerits of works). Therefore strive to secure this 
Yoga; Yoga is skill in works. 


50.1. fe aft u afeam: mafaa qa am: afaqm: a 
inal Claes a ie ak ak ee SEA 
maa aq, AeA aAcagigaria asad weet i att: fe wg 
are mmg rig ada a fagufaeat: maafa: Saafi- 
qadedar aq sae grea: | afs are aq aeaa aft 
Hat arcagqgar cara fradet | dear aacadfgqe: Wa AT I 
aeng — 


72 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. II 


50.1. Rich in the intelligence of evenness, one discards in 
this world both good and evil works, i.e. merit and demerit, 
by the process of purifying the mind and attaining knowledge. 
Therefore, strive to win this intelligence of evenness. Yoga is 
skill in the performance of works. That skill consists in main- 
taining the evenness of mind in success and failure in the per- 
formance of works as one’s duty, with the mind dedicated to 
God. With such dedication should one work, conforming to 
the law of one’s life. That indeed 1s skill by which works that 
bind cease to do so due to the intelligence of evenness. There- 
fore, unite with the intelligence of evenness. 

For, 


wae afaq fe we aracat atten: | 
eraser: TS THM UY 


51. Wise men, united with the intelligence of evenness, 
discard, indeed, the fruits of works; they are liberated 
from the bondage of birth and attain the status which 
is free from all sufferings. 


51.1. weet tf ou ‘at ae waar afr aaga dary: gerf- 
carter: att we ater: ond gfe: ancagqfeqer: ant: fe a 
wo wa oer ater: stir: yar, wHaufafrtar war wa 
ay: aaa, at faie: sila: ee ee = 
w om fa: araret efa amag, aaraa gat 


51.1. “Discarding the fruits of works”—thus these separate 
words (in the verse) have to be construed. The fruit of works 
is pleasant or unpleasant embodiment; karmaja (born of works) 
means that which works yield. “Wise men” are those who 
possess the intelligence of evenness; they discard the fruits of 
works, and, liberated from the bondage of birth-—for birth is 
bondage—attain the supreme status of Visnu, i.e., emancipa- 
tion. This status is free from all kinds of sufferings. 


50-52] The Samkhya Yoga 73 


51.2. aaa — gfse gaea meia Ua ade: 
aanas siaaa anan afe: aa, mag FAZ- 
saeg II 


51.2. Alternatively, in verses from 49 onwards, what is set 
forth is knowledge, the realization of the metaphysical Reality, 
consequent on the purification of the mind through Karma 
Yoga. This knowledge corresponds to “the inundation all 
around” (2.46), because it is held to obliterate all deeds, good 
and evil, alike. 


52.0. Amsa gfe: wer wad af ? sa — 


52.0. When shall this intelligence (or knowledge), born of 
mind’s purification, be won, mental purification itself being 
the product of Karma Yoga? Listen: 


Tat at Mentos qgar | 
Mat Wetter fada steerer AST TXAM 


52. When your intellect goes beyond the mist of delu- 
sion, you will win detachment from both what is to be 
heard and what has been heard. 


52.1. Fat aft u wer afeaq wre a aa aigafes merna afa- 
ret aw, a amean paste fase sft aA- 
aut sada, aq aa afe: afafa arferefirertt, aarye art 
argent sat: | aa aa are wera seca fade aura N- 
Tey sae a, aa Mae at a a a sfonia [aae] 
Saha: i 


52.1. When your intellect goes beyond the mist of non- 
discrimination, whose essence is the delusion obscuring the 
distinction between the Self and the non-Self, and drives the 
inner sense towards the sphere of objects, 1.e., when your in- 


74 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. II 


tellect is thoroughly cleansed, you will reach detachment 
from both ‘what is to be heard and what has been heard’. In 
other words, both knowledge already gained and that which 
remains to be gained will strike you as unprofitable. This is 
the idea. 


53.0. ESOT sarafa ARa. HAT HAA He TATIAHT 
aaea eft Aq, aq WW 


53.0. If you ask when, having won the discriminative 
knowledge of the Self through the destruction of the mist of 
delusion, you will attain to Yoga proper (paramarthayoga), 
which attainment is the real fruit of Karma Yoga—here is the 
answer: 


sfafanfarar at aar eareata frat | 
AAAS gfe AVTTATSTAT X31 


53. You will win this supreme Yoga when your intel- 
lect, bewildered by Vedic texts, becomes firm and un- 
wavering in concentration. 


53.1. afafasfarar afa n qaam Anara TET- 
maa: wat: saaa. faaan maaa | afafaste- 
r] fafacat adt l aa afe aar afeaq ae ena farar 
afar frost faasa adt aaret—aardiadt faery afa 
afr amfa: me, aferq menfa Aaa 1 [ar aft] aac, varie 
faaan Aa | gfe: ceremony | cer afery are ant aefa 
faasi wart mefa i 


53.1. “Bewildered by Vedic Texts’ refers to the intellect 
distraeted by the manifold directions of the Vedic texts. These 
elucidate the links between the various ends and means, in- 
volving activities and abstention therefrom. Becoming stable 
and stirless, it rests in concentration (samadhi). Concentration 


52-54] The Samkhya Yoga 75 


is the Spirit, the Self, in which the mind is concentrated. It 
(the concentrated mind) is unwavering or free from all dis- 
tractions. Intellect (buddhi) is the inner sense. Then will you 
win union, the wisdom born of discrimination. This is con- 
centration, the content of the Spirit. 


54.0. aa Shera ate: Sa Sa AA SANAAT — 


54.0. Here arose an occasion for a question. Wishing to 
know the characteristics of (the sage) who has won the wisdom 
that concentration yields. 


wat Tas : 
feared ST ATaT aarfacaey NA | 
feraet: te sarad famea acta frg uy 


Arjuna said: 

54. How can a man of stable wisdom, anchored in con- 
centration, be described, O Krsna? How does a man 
of steadfast intelligence speak? How does he sit? How 
walk? 


54.1. asama aft u ferat sfatteat ‘ne afee ot gar A 
yar oer a aaa, TT AT ATT ATT aaa, HT Hal Tt: aad 
meaa mÀ feraer = aaa 1 fered: eaa: cat ar fe 
mAT? fe arta ? ase fe ? aad are a qe ae? sao | 
fraser wet att Bret qT l 


94.1. A man of stable prajna (wisdom) is he who has the 
assured wisdom born of the experience, “I am the Supreme 
Brahman.” Of such a man, what is the description? How is he 
spoken of by others? O Krsna! How would he himself speak? 
How would he walk? In what manner does he sit or move 
about? What is requested in this verse is a definition (of the 
sage) of stable wisdom. 


76 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. II 


55.0. fe afer: va dara watt maaa aa: war 
waar, aa: ‘sore eft arc at aearauicaare: frasa 
ard a wifead | adda fe anA pardoa af ata 
aaa siferaed, aetaregearae | arf aerareatfa aA sofa 
q wate oft array vara — 


55.0. In the verses from 2.55 to the end of the chapter are 
taught the characteristics of, and the means employed by, 
the sage of stable wisdom who concerns himself with the dis- 
cipline of knowledge. He does so either after renouncing 
actions right from the beginning, or he may have become a’ 
sage practising Karma Yoga. For, in all texts on the science of 
the Spirit, the very characteristics of the perfected sage have 
been set forth as means, too, to be cultivated by the practi- 
tioner of the life of the Spirit. Thus, indeed, are these charac- 
teristics acquired through directed effort. The blessed Lord 
recounted these characteristics that are at once the means, 
demanding efforts on the part of the aspirant, and also the 
marks of the accomplished sage. So the Lord said: 


wae Wat Bray Aaty WT TATA | 
aeran Fst: feraraedatert WL Xb 

The blessed Lord said: 

55. When one wholly discards desires of the heart and 


becomes exclusively content with the Self, one is called 
a sage of stable wisdom. O Arjuna! 


55.1. wai eft n eR safer seri aA war afe 


54-56] The Samkhya Yoga 77 


AA: aar mearan: — arene: — aaa: ga. N 
fra — 


55.1. One “wholly discards” when, in an eminent degree, 
one gives up all desires, i.e. all forms of desire which fill the 
heart. It may be objected : ‘‘But when all desires are discarded, 
causes of satisfaction dry up, still there would remain the need 
to sustain the body. What follows then may well be aimless 
movements as of a person deranged.” So it is stated: “Content 
with the Self.” The idea is that contentment should be due to 
the Self alone, independently of external gains. Since he has 
tasted the immortalizing nectar of the knowledge of supreme 
Reality, he is indifferent to everything else. His wisdom, born 
of discrimination between the Self and the non-Self, has be- 
come stabilized. Such a sage is said to have stable wisdom. Tne 
idea is that the monk, who has renounced the desire for pro- 
geny, wealth, and reputation, who rejoices and revels in the 
Self, is the sage of stable wisdom. 

Besides, 


zanan: gaa farag: | 
arenas: fernitytreart we 


56. The silent sage is said to have stable wisdom when 
sufferings no longer perturb his mind, when he ceases 
to cling to pleasures, and he is rid of attachment, fear 
and wrath. 


56.1. Fay sft u gay arentrarfeq [say] ok ali nt 
Zar a: ea ast safer: | aa Fay say fara ayer 
qo wen, a afa ee gaen, garfa aqfaa a faaea: | 
Aaaa: We wea serpy ata: fava: genq a: dtr: 
ane: Rari: faa: aft aa dar vert N 
fra — 


56.1. He whose mind, even amidst the threefold suffering, 


78 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. II 


stays unperturbed is the anudvignamanah. When pleasures 
come, he does not crave for them, his mind being unlike the 
fire fed on fuel. From him have departed attachment, fear and 
wrath. He, the silent sage and renouncer, is said to be the man 
of stable wisdom. 

Moreover: 


a: AAATAAASETASATA TATA | 
ahaaa a efee aea wat wafa nyo 


57. His wisdom is stable who clings to nothing good 
or evil when these occur to him; he neither seeks nor 
shuns them. 


57.1.0: aaa sft u ow aft ada an aft aA: 
hagia: I Tq WT YAY IT A TH AYA A sea F 
ahaa a of, pt sro a gaf a gate, wat a ore a Pf 
eat. | acer va aafaureatacey faaan sar sfafsear i 

fra — 


57.1. The silent sage does not care even for his own body, 
life-style and so forth. He is devoid of all attachment and 
aversion when good and evil occur to him. He neither seeks 
the one nor shuns the other. The discriminating wisdom of 
such a sage, free from gaiety and depression, is stable. 

Also: 


Wat Weta Ba pasga Aaa: | 
sfraiera eaaa sat sfafesat wycit 


58 .When he wholly withdraws his senses from their 
objects, just as a tortoise does his limbs from all sides, 
his wisdom is stable. 


58.1. Tat gA sft i Aer aged aeH saseed = wa maae 


57-59] The Samkhya Yoga 79 


Tad: afa, we agit ga — ae at war earit aretha sadec 
ada. qda, wt arafass: afaarf staat: adfaeaey: sq | 
aver sat rafa sta set AR N 


58.1. Actively engaged in the discipline of the Yoga of 
knowledge, when he withdraws aright his senses from their 
objects, just as a tortoise tucks up, due to fear, its limbs on all 
sides, his wisdom is stabilised. This idea has already been ex- 
plained. 


59.0. 073 aom amga: mga aft faar [fraded gai- 
pia] aferd, a g awa: ur 1 a ae dead eft ? vera 


59.0. The senses even of a sick man who does not react to 
objects become indrawn; but his attachment to them does not 
cease. How can that attachment be withheld? Answer: 


faa fared facrercer afer: | 
Tat Taser at gean frada xsi 


59. Objects, but not the taste for them, fall off as 
regards the man who feeds not on them. When he in- 
tuits the supreme (Reality), even this taste wanes. 


59.1. favor eff un aefe favor: faasa favaeecarearta 
efexart [aaar fava: va] froercer anf gamfa ae | aTse- | 
oe fermen ia ote fatradet ster: Seat: Cras Ta: TT: faery 
q: a astfacar 1 care: wt sfag: aAa sae, ‘fae, ‘cae’ 
zarea 1 a: aft te: TNA: qq: Ae Ad: qt Tota 
wel say Grea aAa aq’ ata adaa fada fadia fanafana 
aad srt. | + wate aa Cae sa: | ae aeaa- 
rar: Sarat: etd adder af afr: 1 


59.1. Though the objects, meaning the senses related to 
them (or the very objects themselves) cease to operate as 
regards the man who rejects tbem—and this happens even if 


80 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. H 


the practitioner of severe austerities be but a fool-—the taste or 
joy in the objects may, nevertheless persist. This taste or rasa 
is the attachment to the objects concerned, vide usages such 
as ‘‘active due to specific attachment”, ‘enjoyer’, ‘knower of 
taste’ etc. Even that subtle joy which makes objects attractive 
retreats from the disciplined sage, once he realises the supreme 
Reality as “I am verily That”. The sense is that, then, the 
source of objective awareness dries up. In the absence of this 
realization, ‘‘the taste? won’t be obliterated. The import is 
that the stability of wisdom whose essence is right knowledge 
must be secured. 


60.0. amman far aret sfesarfr a enara- 
anfa, aema aaae A ats — 


60.0. One who seeks stability of wisdom, defined as right 
knowledge, must, first, control the senses. Otherwise evil may 
ensue: 


uat git aAa gaea faafaa: | 
strat marfa gea wet RA: oll 


60. The impetuous senses, Arjuna! of even a learned 
man who strives, forcibly drive the mind astray. 


60.1. Fat: Sf u aaa. wat Hae: R aea aAa, gaa faafaa: 
faa: a ga safer daa: 1 efearf sari marara 
aora fe ga aaraa araciedte, mgpa a gefa 
wad wae sere wa wad: fafana HA: N 

qa: FATT — 


60.1. “Since the impetuous senses of even a learned man, 
intelligent man, who strives’’— this is how these separately 
placed words have to be construed. The impetuous senses 
drive him towards objects and agitate his mind. Thus, per- 


59—62] The Samkhya Yoga 81 


force, they carry it away, though he has clear perception or the 
right knowledge of discrimination. 
Therefore, 


afa aaf aaa g ma ATT: | 
a fg aeataarter aa sar waT ng 


61. Controlling them all, one should sit integrated, 
deeming Me supreme. Stable is his wisdom who bas 
brought his senses under control. 


61.1. af gr ou att aati ama dani setae Feat Ach: 
amfa: aq mia AE: He arate: AAMT IT. ET A OAT, 
a ad aearq’ efe arate eat: | wet ama ad: aet fe ae 
efaarfr ade were [aera] cer sar sfafsoar N 

61.1. “Controlling them ali’’, establishing dominion over 
all of them, “integrated” i.e. concentrated, one should sit. 
“Deeming Me supreme”, means that for him Vasudeva, the 
inner Self of all, is supreme. The idea is that he should sit, 
thinking, “I am not different from Vasudeva.” The wisdom 
of that Yogin, seated thus, is stable. Through the force of 
repeated efforts he has brought his senses under control. 


62.0. wy gar Tafa: wales ez TI — 


62.0. Now is pointed out the root of all disaster betiding one 
who fails in his efforts at self-control. 


carat faa Fa: THC | 
agras BTA: BTATSHTASH AHA WE Vi 


62. Attachment to objects is born when one ponders 
on them. Of attachment is born desire, and of desire, 
wrath. 


82 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. II 


62.1. maa: A u eared: aaa: fawarq mad faafaa 
mAT. a gaa ay: rafen. Me: aq fdg soared seat | 
aga We: amt aged ae Fem | qenq sar Fahad 
Rema ere: ahora 


62.1. In the case of the man who “‘ponders on” 1.e.; who 
thinks of or contemplates, particular objects like sounds, 
“attachment te them”, pleasure in them, arises. Of that plea- 
sure is born desire or craving. From this craving, when ob- 
structed somehow, wrath arises. 


HIT gata amg: agree: | 
S LGE CUCC IGLE afgarrrerraatat ne 3 


63. From wrath arises delusion; from delusion, failure 
of memory. Due to this latter, intelligence perishes, and 
from its loss total destruction ensues. 


631. ra af n Ara afi atte: afaa: sraterifawe: | et 


akim afearr: .afgarr: ql: ma: | araterdtfasafaararaar 
ree as ae Feat | fsa woah 1 arate fe gee: 
Wad ACH Tay HratHafayataaHarag | dear Ae Ua TAU: 
waft | We: Tera qs: and soeafa geareaiara: wafer 
say: 


63.1. From wrath arises delusion or lack of discrimination 
between what ought and what ought not to be done. Indeed 
an angry man, being deluded, rails even at his teacher. Due to 
delusion confusion of memory reuslts, 1.e. the fading of those 
impressions constituting memory which the fastras and the 
instructions of teachers have engendered. In other words even 
when the causes of its appearance are present, that memory 
fails to arise. Due to this failure, Buddhi, the competence of 
the mind to discriminate between right and wrong, perishes. 


62-64] The Samkhya Yoga 83 


Through the loss of this discrimination, one is wholly destroyed ; 
for a man retains self-identity only as long as he retains his 
power to discriminate between right and wrong. Where this 
power fails, the man in question perishes, indeed. The sense is 
that with the destruction of the organ of discrimination man 
perishes; he becomes unfit to realise the ends of life. 


64.0. aatia Ae sm faaea 1 aa ga maT St 
sad — 


64.0. The contemplation of objects (of desire) has been 
pointed out as the root of all evil. Now is pointed out the 
cause of liberation: 


maaari fanfara | 
OC EPICE VIGN saantia Thad) 


64. Approaching objects with senses free from attach- 
ment and aversion, and controlled by the mind, the man 
who has mastered his mind wins serenity. 


64.1. UTsT sf i meaa: UT sw UME, aga fe 
afar safe: aa i aa a: aya: wate a: are fag: A- 
RA: sft: far wast TA sre: arenash: AENA: 
qaar aaitearfs [amfa] efexarfr a: maa: fada geet: 
AA AA HUOT WA FT HT Ware areas | Wars: Wea, TATRA 11 


64.1. Indeed, the normal activities of the senses are impelled 
by ‘attachment and aversion’. One who seeks liberation, how- 
ever, approaches unavoidable objects by means of his senses, 
ear, eye, etc., which are free from attachment and aversion. 
Besides, these senses are under the sway of the disciplined 
mind. He whose self, the inner sense or mind, has been disci- 
plined, attains serenity, which is placidity or Self-abidance. 


65.0. ware afa fe enq ea ? sar— 
65.0. What happens when serenity 1s won? Listen: 


84 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. I 


ware riga eifacentastrad | 
merat Mra ate: mda wei 


65. Serenity won, sufferings come to an end; the reason 
of that man, whose mind is serene, soon becomes 
steadfast. i 


65.1. Ware aft u ware aag-arat reanna arta: aaa: ea 
ae. soared i fer saraae yet [erer-] arora fe wend 
ary at afe: wiafrsed ararery aa of aaa safased, ANEA- 
ey ug hadaa gat: iu wt saadaa: aR: Hagar 
aq, Ted magja A: ates: areafaeey satay am: aa 
eta aTi: N 

ar ga saaat TAT — 


65.1. In serenity the three kinds of sufferings of the disci- 
plined sage come to an end. Also, the reason of the sage, 
whose inner sense has been purified, soon becomes steady like 
the sky in all circumstances. The sense is that it becomes im- 
mutable, having been assimilated to the Self. Since he, whose 
mind is serene and reason immutable, has achieved his life’s 
goal, he may approach the unavoidable sense-objects, per- 
mitted by the sastras, with senses free from attachment and 
aversion. This is the upshot of the verse as a whole. 

This serenity is lauded: 


afer ARA A ATH ATaAT | 

a AAA: Aaa HA: FST NET 
66. The unintegrated mind has no wisdum; nor can 
such a person have yearning (for Self-knowledge). 


Without such yearning, no peace (is possible). For one 
lacking peace, how can there be happiness? 


66.1. area safe u a afer a faad a wafa sort: 1 afe: n- 


65-67] The Samkhya Yoga 85 


rrerfanar A aaatfearer sore i at a aft A TAAT 

Lema TA ss ee MAMTA Ta, THAT: 

mf: TIT: | wearer ga: gay ? afar fe fardaga: 

faf. ar aq ga, a fama aor) gag wa fe a i a Fear 
qai geen maaa af sa[n aed seat: 


66.1. There is not, i.e., there cannot exist buddhi or Wisdom 
born of the perception of the real Self, for one whose inner 
sense 1s ‘unintegrated’, or unconcentrated. Neither can such a 
one have yearning for Self-knowledge. Without this yearning 
one cannot gain peace or quietude. How can there be happi- 
ness without quietude? The turning away of the senses from 
the craving for enjoyment of object is happiness; it is not the 
craving for objects. The latter indeed 1s pain. So long as there 
is craving, there cannot be even the remotest semblance of 
happiness. This is the sense of the passage. 


67.0. AAMT HEAT afs: afer afr ? sar — 


67.0. Why can’t the unintegrated man gain wisdom? Listen: 


staat fe aai aasa | 
qa ga Wat amatamea ngon 


67. The mind that conforms to the roving senses robs 
(one) of perception, just as the wind sweeps the boat 
off its course at sea. 


67.1. efaarot ef nu faai fe aeg wear aaa wad- 


mam aq aa: afar aad aq oefxafanafancata sad 
aa: wer ad ath sat eaaa areata | ee? ava: aay 


gq arafe vet fafa apna amiq sae sant wer ara: 
ara sadaf, we arcafaaat sat gear vat favafagar wea N 


67.1. The mind that follows the senses in their pursuit of 
their proper objects destroys the ascetic’s perception, born of 
discrimination between Self and non-Self; for, it is a slave to 


86 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. II 


these senses and their objects. How? As the wind blows off 
its course a boat (at sea), so the mind, suppressing Self-percep- 
tion, causes one to hurry after objects. 


68.0. Maat afr [ 2.0.) ear aa ater soata saat 
aa at sare sae — 


68.0. Having discoursed in manifold ways on the rightness 
of the view advanced in verse II.60 and supported it with 
reasoning, the Lord winds it up: 


aema Aetater farda aAa: | 
sfranitrortaarcaea wat wafa Nge 


68. Therefore, O hero! his wisdom is stable whose 
senses have been withdrawn on all sides from their 
(respective) objects. 


68.1. aema ga u gfa aa ate: sra: gear ae FET 
at: @ meam! adafa ada. ait: maara: sfexarfr 
afrartey: aaraa: cer sar sfafsear n 


68.1. The evil caused by the activities of the senses has been 
set forth. Therefore, O hero! that ascetic’s wisdom becomes 
stable, whose senses have been withdrawn totally from their 
objects such as sounds etc., on all planes of activity. 


69.0. NA Sias: afer wag: a: soafaanarre fraga 
afearartcara afaarfrqat fada, afaarar: a aera, frafe:, 
Ad ot eggi ATE — 


69.0. For the sage of stable wisdom who has won the 
knowledge of discrimination, all works, secular and Vedic, 
cease, since nescience, their cause, has been sublated. Nesci- 
ence, too, is sublated as it 1s opposed to knowledge. Clarifying 
this idea, the Lord says: 


67-69] The Samkhya Yoga 87 


at frat adaa aeat wT aae | 
meat arate aa aT frat Tet AA: NGU 


69. The restrained ascetic (the sage) is awake in what 
is night for all living beings, while, when these latter 
are awake, it is night for the silent sage who perceives. 


69.1. aT fran eft i aT fren Uta: airaa aaa Trea 


amai aena -anlat ga ws amet wat sft sare 
[à], wear faima sae za aaa, ar fran afaarencatq TT- 
mira werd: at sft i 


69.1. The supreme Truth, the sphere of the sage of stable 
wisdom, is night for the rest of the world. At night things 
cannot be distinguished because of darkness. Just as what is 
day to nocturnal creatures is night for others, so the supreme 
Truth is, as it were, ‘night’ for all ignorant beings who cor- 
respond to these nocturnal creatures. The supreme Truth, 
of course, does not fall within the range of their understanding. 
Into that (day of) ultimate Truth, the ascetic sage, the Yogin 
who has mastered his senses, wakes up from the sleep of 
nescience. Sunk in the sleep of nescience, marked by the 
plurality of subjects and objects, the rest of the world is said to 
be awake like dreamers in their sleep. But this is night for the 
sage who has grasped the ultimate Truth. 


69.2. Hat: Hath safraraearar wa Aled, + faeraerary | faerat 
fe Sea Sled MATIC ISS St aH, wrt sores afer 1 we 


TRAPATT: 
yaa aan wa Afad miai a fe fe ifr wat sade, a afanar 
ad frat ea aft 1 wer g oa: aafaa ad Aag aft 


88 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. I 


at Tessas adata vara. 7 vant 1 aa aw arafa 
TIRATA: [4.29] Zearfear arafqcorary wa er TPT i 

69.2. Therefore, works are enjoined (on man) only in his 
state of nescience and not in that of knowledge. When know- 
ledge dawns, nescience perishes like the darkness of the night 
when the sun rises. Before the dawn of knowledge, the deliver- 
ances of nescience in its varied forms of action, accessories and 
fruits are entertained as valid. When known to be invalid, 
nescience stops its operations. An agent acts under the im- 
pression that valid Vedic injunctions have enjoined actions on 
him; he cannot do so when he judges the world to be (a sort 
of night)—a mere structure of nescience. On the other hand, 
he who knows the whole sphere of objects to be nothing but 
nescience is the knower of the Self. What is ncumbent on him 
is to renounce all actions and not to perform them. This 
the Lord will elucidate in the verse 5.17: “Their intellect 
anchored in It, having That as their Self’ etc. The exclusive 
obligation of the sage is the pursuit of knowledge. 


69.3. Tf sadana saaa: fa Awa—a, aren- 
farang arcafasraea 1 a fe aera: carats aAA, MT- 
Hea Ua daca A aaa warraeyr 1 + fe amean aÀ 
aft Ga: warnsaaergere: avata | wage fe arena: fada aa 
wary | fradaq va a amaA cacao za valet | als 
q aan safadgqearestarcramey | arg a nfa: afr 
afrere: fa gq i 


69.3. Objection: He cannot address himself even to the 
discipline of knowledge in the absence of a valid source of 
knowledge that prescribes it. 

Reply: No, for Self-knowledge is directed to one’s own 
Self. The Self does not need an (alien) source of knowledge to 
Initiate activity in regard to Itself, the goal being the realiza- 
tion of the Self. Once Self-realization is won, it is no longer 
possible to discuss the distinctions between the means of know- 
ledge and their objects. ‘The last means of knowledge indeed 


69-70] The Samkhya Yoga 89 


liberates the Self from [Its status as a knower. Doing this, it 
ceases to be a valid means, resembling in this respect the means 
of knowledge in a dream. In the state of supreme enlighten- 
ment and in the empirical world, once the reality is known, 
the means of knowledge is not experienced as leading to 
further activity of any kind. In this world, too, means of 
right cognition yielding right knowledge ceases to cause any 
further activity. Therefore it follows that the Self-knower 1s 
under no further obligation to perform work. 


70.0. fags: aAa Raa ad: va aera: + g aiara: 
areata: xara art gera saaa ate — 


70.0. In order to elucidate with the help of a simile the 
idea that emancipation can be won only by the ascetic sage 
cf stable wisdom who has renounced all desires, and not by 
a non-renouncer pursuing objects of desires, the Lord affirms: 


ATTAATOH TA TAS 

aman: stata wed | 
aam a saana aa 

a mranata A ATATAT nvon 


70. He wins peace into whose mind objects of desires 
enter as waters flow into a full and stable sea that is 
being filled; and not he who yearns after objects of 
desire. 


70.1. aq afr) agm afg: aesa aasar waor afea: 
ga ay AS BARA T: aA aT: sheaf ea afafa 
y ad mq cece: faai aft aaa: soa: a gay 
[af], wary za n, afagea: staat ad areata wa sett 
q carnal Hater a waist Ata afa, a eae HASTA — Hae 
sfa are: fawn: avy arafad aie wer a aa, a aa seat 
gaq: | 

qq Ut FEAT — 


90 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. II 


70.1. Though being filled on all sides by waters, the sea 
remains unchanged; for it is stable. These waters flow into it 
from all sides, while the sea abides in itself, unaltered. Thus all 
forms of desire, all around, like the waters into the sez., enter 
the sage’s mind. He contains them all, and is not enslaved by 
them. Only he wins peace or liberation, and not any other 
who habitually yearns after objects of desire. 

Such being the case, 


faga aeq a: aata gahacta fagz: | 
fria frar: a maania ne? 


71. The man who, giving up all objects of desires, 
moves about seeking nothing, and rid of all sense of 
‘mine’ and T’, wins peace. 


71.1. faza ofa on aga eaa ara a: a ga atA 
aA: mea a aaae: AeA got: 1 frag: mA- 
Aam faia eer aa a: Aag aq fete: Aaaa- 
faira m ze ga Rira, faceare: faeracarte- 
ffram: Aaa 1 a: a: Rasa: aafaa mf ad- 
iag Aaaa faimei aaa mA agaa: water geek: 1 
a WaT mafao aA — 


71.1. Giving up, i.e. having renounced objects of desires 
in their totality, the renouncer moves about. His efforts have 
been reduced to securing just what sustains life—this is the 
sense. ‘Seeking nothing’—he does not desire even to keep the 
body alive. So he is free from all sense of ‘mine’—he has no 
sense of possessions even in regard to those few things needed 
to maintain his body alive. Neither has he egoism, being free 
from all feelings of self-esteem based on his scholarship etc. So 
circumstanced, the sage of stable wisdom, the knower of 
Brahman, attains peace—the cessation of all forms of transmi- 
gratory sufferings. This is Nirvana. He becomes assimilated 
to Brahman. 


70-72] The Samkhya Yoga 91 


This discipline of knowledge is eulogised. 


vat mai ferfa: må vat ser agfa | 
ferasearraarest? aeara NRN 


72. This is the status of Brahman, Arjuna!; attaining 
it, none gets deluded (any more). Abiding in it, at least 
at the hour of death, one gains super-consciousness in 
Brahman. 


ata Aaa aaga daai Aafaa ANT agoa- 


qig saa afana eA aaa 
arerarn ara fedtatseara: i 


72.1. WIT arent sft n war ae arent sah war ea ferfa: ad 
ay Aue aeleqeqy va sae ectaq i se ast ! a wat feria 
sry zea fagerfa ate mA | fercat seat ferctt aga aurea 
waaay ser ager wefan serrata ater w A | 
faq amet aaa wa area qasite a waht wa Hafased R: 
agat wela afar ? 


72.1. The status engendered in Brahman is brahmi. It is 
the status as Brahman, won after renouncing all works, O 
Arjuna! Having worrit, one is no longer deluded. Stationing 
oneself in it, as described above, at least in the final stage 
of one’s life, one achieves super-consciousness in Brahman— 
the bliss of Brahman. It goes without saying that he who 
renounces works right from the station of celibacy (a Brahma- 
carin) and remains anchored in Brahman throughout his life, 
attains Brahmic super-consciousness. 


HA qsa: 
CHAPTER III 
KARMA YOGA 


01. wera safafrqfafasrya ¢ qgt man fafest, aret afa: 
amt afg: af a1 aa ‘saree ger aa [2.44.] eft areer at 
rare: aage aad adet saat afasadar wa 
a garin ser — ‘usr areal ferfa:’ [2.92] eff 1 astra a ad- 
Aafa... m a agiscandty [2.29] r a acer oar 
amas aaa, q aq wa Aaf THAT 1 aa aaea atg- 
siala ia: vara m wena AAA aq aa Aana 
arergfgfrsat mafaa ar wafer gerah mea a aA- 
afara maS aasa sft am: aAa. AAA, deere 
TAa: ‘Sarrat Aq’ |3. Q. | sere: EARO A waar q[-3-]@ 
ee tie BS 


0.1. In the science of the Gita the Lord has pointed out, as 
causes of action and abstention from it, two kinds of intellig- 
ence pertaining to Yoga and Samkhya. Now, beginning from 
the verse 2.55 upto the end of the second Chapter, the duty of 
renunciation has been laid down for those who resort to the 
intelligence of Samkhya and it has been taught that they 
achieve life’s goal; vide verse 2.72. The Lord told Arjuna to 
perform works as a matter of duty depending on the intelligence 
of Yoga; vide verse 2.47, but He did not affirm that through 
such performance alone, he would secure the highest good. 
Noticing this, in a dejected state of mind, Arjuna spoke. 
Arjuna’s dejection was in place: having introduced to him the 
subject of the discipline of the intelligence of Samkhya, the 
direct cause of the highest good for a devotee and seeker after 
the highest good, which Arjuna admittedly was, the Lord bade 
him plunge into works, the well-known source of numerous 
evils, which, at the same time, was no certain means to the 
achievement of the highest good. The question Arjuna raised 
has been appropriate; vide 3.1; and equally appropriate has 


Karma Yoga 93 


also been the Lord’s answer to that question, once the two- 
fold division of this science is given. 


0.2. afrq—antrer seat aera acafirear aafras maa: fA- 
qai atata, mar a aca daraaet ata: frefta: aaae 7 
Se p aaa. ant feaa | at ? ay dara ag — 
ade aration arate: aqeag: atarerest fara: [eia] art: 
eared; Ja: faatfadt a arassite afratfaats satir eara Paoa UF 
WATT Ale: mà stad waragt wa states aft | ee g maafa 
mia aanid Aa ws ato ofc ge 1 aq ae Saat 
fang af aia Faq Arad, war ar we fares arf aaureaq ? 


0.2. However, some commentators put a different con- 
struction on Arjuna’s question and make it out that the Lord’s 
response is contrary to its spirit. Further, they contradict 
themselves, as their explanation of Arjuna’s question, as also of 
the Lord’s response thereto, does not harmonise with the sense 
of the BG as set forth by themselves at the beginning of their 
commentary while discussing the structure of that'sense. How? 
They said that in the analysis of that structure, the firm doc- 
trine of the science of the Gita is the synthesis of knowledge 
and works as regards all people occupying the various stations 
of life. Again, they have specially asserted that the Gita 
absolutely repudiates the view that emancipation may be 
attained through knowledge alone, once the rites prescribed 
as valid for the entire life-period of a man have been renounced. 
Here, on the contrary, pointing to optional courses (of re- 
nunciation or performance of works), what is taught is the 
renunciation of those very rites taught as valid for the whole of 
the life-period. How can the Lord impart instruction riddled 
with such contradictions to Arjuna? How can thé latter com- 
prehend such contradictory notions? 


0.3. TT Ud MI — Teeny va starcartadafrarta Fav UT 
arg ater: safra, + amama str | va yatacfaegaa | 
CES SI Ae ene, rey ae as NG ices 
ae wy dees Faq wa Wa A VA aaa ? 


94 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. III 


ay ad — sana vagad —‘daareg ara staHdcfeara 
gemi Fret: Sfafeera’ git; at aera aama aff cord 
aq oafaramaq 3 [sa-] Yer mma Fact afa sera g | 
uas fasg 1 at ? qeerer va carded ante ara Are: 
Ria, 3 J mama zit we faafefe wat sweurefagy ? 
fea—afe mamada crate sath Aaa agea, cer 
qam aft gaa eared: wa aA: T AA: N 


0.3. An explanation may be advanced as follows: the repu- 
diation of the view that the way to emancipation is through 
mere knowledge preceded by the renunciation of works pre- 
scribed by śrut: and smrti, is applicable to householders alone. 
But even this position involves a contradiction between what 
had been affirmed and what is now being affirmed. How? 
Having already stated that the indisputable doctrine of the 
Gita is-the synthesis of knowledge and works, a synthesis 
valid for the occupants of all stations of life, can it be stated 
here that the non-householders may win emancipation through 
knowledge alone? Perhaps you may argue as follows: Emanci- 
pation cannot accrue to the householders through knowledge 
alone, divorced from the rites enjoined by the Sruti. The 
phrase ‘through knowledge alone’ is not to be literally under- 
stood; it has been used, ignoring the fact that these house- 
holders have, nevertheless, to perform works enjoined by the 
Smrti. Even this argument is self-contradictory. How can men 
of discrimination accept the position that to householders 
alone emancipation won’t accrue frorn knowledge though 
combined with Smrti-enjoined works, but not so to the non- 
householders? Besides, if, as means to emancipation, Smrti- 
enjoined works are to be combined with knowledge in the case 
of celibate aspirants, in the case of householders, too, let only 
such works be combined with knowledge and not Sruti-en- 
joined works also. 


Karma Yoga 95 


[az 3.4.2] qea vat wat arat artifice amg: [mam 3. 2.2. | 
ware aaa [ASAT 3. 22.2.] af A et 7 wT TAT 


aaa aama: [AAT 3. 20.4, 45.2.) sf 4, araa 
way [war vv | e: a 


TH TUT waa At aA Aq AT I 
| srfrTs 32R.Wo, 33R.¥W. | 
dara frat gea aretegear | 
TAAUFA STS: TX TATA HAT: 11 
sta aeerta: |? maaf. 3. 3.24. ], 
Ha aa seq: faar a faga | 
qeq wt a gafa aaa: oat: 1 
sfa aama [fant eve. ] 
rà a ‘adaatfr aaa HA lN. ¢3.] sfà n 


0.4. If, however, the emancipation of the householders 
alone calls for a synthesis of knowledge and works, both Sruti- 
enjoined and Smrti-enjoined, while that of the celibates may 
leave out Sruti-enjoined works, the result would be a heavier 
burden of painful labour for the householders to bear. This 
latter position may not be readily accepted, because in all the 
Upanisads, Itthasas, Puranas and Yoga-texts renunciation of 
works, as such, has been laid down as obligatory on all who 
seek liberation, and because Sruti and smrti teach either a 
combination of, or choice among, the various stations of life. 
It does not follow from this that the occupants of all stations of 
life must combine knowledge and works; for, the seeker 
after liberation must needs renounce all forms of works, Sruti- 
enjoined: or Smrti-enjoined: vide: “Overcoming the desire for 
sons, wealth, and worlds, they take to a life of mendicancy”’ 
B.U.3.5.1; “Therefore they say that renunciation exceeds 


96 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam {Ch. HI 


these austerities”; Maha.Nar.U.24.1; “Renunciation alone 
excelled’ Ibid. 21.2; “Not by works, not by progency and 
wealth, (but) by renunciation, they say, some won immorta- 
lity’ Ibid. 10.5; Xai.U.2; “One shall renounce from the 
station of celibacy itself”? 7al.U.4.; “Give up (works) righteous 
and unrighteous; give up the true and the false; having 
given up the true and the false, give up that which prompted 
you to give up” Santi parvan, 329.40, 331.44; “Beholding 
the transmigratory life as void of all contents, and desiring to 
vision the Essence, the celibates, in a mood of supreme detach- 
ment, go forth into a life of mendicancy’’ Naradaparn. U.3.15; 
‘Work binds the living being; knowledge liberates. ‘Therefore 
the ascetics, the beholders of the Supreme, refrain from work” 
Santi parvan 241.7. Here, in BG also occurs, in 5.13 etc., 
‘*Renouncing all works, mentally.” 


0.5. Aer A aia Haat: Barter i frets seraraqfe 
areata aaaf efa Aq—a, aaraa nA: a fe afa- 
Rma ate [ata] 1 a carafe sac aaa wa wa- 
ot eee eee PARUT: aad [BT 3. R. 

2.) aft a: mwaa: 1 afe faar imag af 
at aan aasa aa za eq, fafarer PO- 
FOR EARRA | aT Tae Me T aay eft aTi 
ahead Sq | 7 A Utd Bey 1 dea a aanfaat satfr 1 aa: 


mari: AASTATTT TAT: | 


0.5. Also because emancipation is not an effect, its seeker 
stands to gain nothing from works. The argument that works 
have to be done to avoid the sin of omission is futile; for only 
the non-renouncers may incur that sin. The sin of omission 
may not be ascribed to a renouncer who omits the performance 
of the fire sacrifice and so forth; while the matter is different 
as regards the non-renouncing celibate students who will incur 
that sin due to non-performance of enjoined works. Again it 
is impossible to assume that a positive entity like the sin of 
omission will spring from a state of non-existence, namely the 


Karma Yoga 97 


non-performance of obligatory Vedic works. Witness the CAU. 
6.2.2: “How can being arise from non-being?’’ This authori- 
tatively denies the birth of aught positive from a state of non- 
being. If, however, the Veda were to assert the birth of the 
inconceivable sin of omission from the non-performance of 
Veda-enjoined work, it wouid be tantamount to the assertion 
that the troublesome Veda is no source of valid knowledge; 
for, what it prescribes, whether carried out or omitted, 1s a 
source of pain only. Further, there would result the false 
doctrine that the authoritative scripture forces one to work, 
and does not merely supply information. This is not accept- 
able. Therefore, ritualistic works are not binding on the 
renouncers. So, the plea for the synthesis of knowledge and 
works is untenable. 


ie} aka Sea wae ee at a atu: carat 
afe: aft ger va sla ‘afer miir At ar frirafe aera’ [3 2] 
aft VISA A WAT aT HAT BITE | TA Adela saat afe: 
q aaa afa waar om yay str mafa am, at ‘Saad Aq’ 


ofa wet: BATT | 


0.6. Again, this conclusion is strengthened by the unreason- 
ableness of Arjuna’s question formulated in BG 3.1; “If, in 
your view, knowledge is superior to work.” In chapter IT, if the 
the Lord had affirmed that Arjuna should practise synthesized 
knowledge and work, his question would obviously be un- 
reasonable. If Arjuna was personally bidden to practise synthe- 
sized knowledge and work, the knowledge that is superior to 
work has also to be practised, of course. There is thus no room 
for the reproach expressed in the words, ““Why, Krsna! do 
you bid me do this dreadful work?” BG 3.1. Nor is this ques- 
tion itself reasonable. To make this question reasonable, it is 
not to be supposed that the Lord had asked Arjuna alone not 
to practise this knowledge, so superior to works. 


98 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. ITI 


0.7. afe ga: THe gaa area: faced gaq + awata 
r Waa Yay BH Sd, ads wet: A: ‘sare 

aq m: Aaa: setaccarary ate firrgearqsdacaa MTA- 

miN: waa. siesta saad | a a amaaa aaa 

Hera | aeea es arradtrssat: wad: Sfr- 

Tara mar: ASTI: | 

TTT HATTA Vs Ara Ate sta wsisat frat: g aafaa 


qI 


0.7. To make the question reasonable, the Lord may be 
taken to have stated that the opposing disciplines of knowledge 
and works cannot be practised by one and the same person 
simultaneously; only different persons may practise them. 
Even if the question of Arjuna is held to have sprung from 
lack of discrimination, the Lord’s reply that the disciplines of 
knowledge and works pertain to different agents does not 
stand to reason. Nor may the Lord’s reply be set down to His 
ignorance. Also from the nature of His reply that different 
agents should practise the two disciplines, the incompatibility 
of the synthesis of knowledge and works follows. Therefore, 
the indubitable doctrine of the Gita and the Upanisads is that 
emancipation ensues from the self-sufficient knowledge alone. 


0.8. mart: w ae fair [3.2.] af a faan wa må- 
cs aaa, la ‘ge pa mea [X 4] af a 
mafasia sree aatfirerter | 


0.8. If knowledge and works could possibly be synthesized, 
the request in verse 3.2 ‘to point out the one sure means’ would 
be inconsistent with reason. In 4.15 the Lord will emphatically 
rule out the discipline of knowledge as far as Arjuna is con- 
cerned: “‘Therefore you must perform work.” 


wat Tara : 
maA Seated Aa Gastar i 
afer mfr att at faafia Pare en 


1] Karma Yoga 99 


Arjuna said: 

1. O Krsna! If your view is that kuowledge is superior 
to work, why do you bid me undertake this fearful work 
of war? 


an 


11. sma Aq ata uu saree Aadt aq afe wr: warn J aa 
wat aAa afe: mi & wares 1 afe qfardo aqfead ge aar 
we aa ea air: a gfe: afa misaa q: 
wa wit FI ad; a fe ata aenq tea afate eng | 
aa 4, ato: AA waar ser afs:, wroent w at He sft at 
sfaareafe, aq fe area sf wad: sorerafaa gda aq fe reg 
auf at at feareent ar fraprafs saa cia Taq we aq aa 
sÀ I 

wy ma HHT aaa: adel aa ww: seta a aaf- 
wad, ‘aq fe a art at aaa a wt qm aaa? 

fra i 


1.1. “In relation to works, if your view or opinion is that 
knowledge is superior to works...O Krsna.” If knowledge 
and works were sought to be combined, the means of the 
supreme good or emancipation would be just one only; and 
Arjuna would be unreasonable in treating knowledge as some- 
thing over and above works. Indeed, one and the same thing 
cannot exceed itself with reference to the effect it produces. 
Therefore, what the Lord had declared was that knowledge 
contributes to a greater good in comparison with works. Still, 
He tells Arjuna to perform works that produce but little good. 
Reproaching, as it were, the Lord for doing it, Arjuna asks: 
why do you bid me do this fearful work—this cruel slaughter? 
This procedure of Arjuna is unreasonable, On the other 
hand, had the Lord taught, and Arjuna clearly understood, 
that the synthesis is with works enjoined by Smrti, how can 
his reproach, “‘Why do you bid me, etc.,”” be deemed reason- 
able? S 

Moreover, 


_- 


100 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. II] 


afea aaa ate aerate R | 
den ad faaea aa ANEMA zi 


2. By words that seem confused, You bewilder my 
intelligence, as it were. Therefore set forth one sure 
course by 'vhich I may attain the highest good. 


2.1. arise eft n ara za, waft fafa wag 
a an ma: anfery ea wna sft 1 aa wa afe 
areata <a, AA ma: aTAleaa fe saa: A g wy gaa ? 
ae: aAa afe meaa za A an afew g fraadaat: MARAN: 
uyo oe aaa, wa ust af aq aa: ws afte et aT 
way Ut ares ate feae sft aa ac ae, Aa 
ma SANT aT aera Aa ag areqar sreqary aft [ag aafia 
amaA] i 


2.1. Though the Lord spoke distinctly to ‘me’, Arjuna, 
who am feeble in intelligence, His words seem to be confused. 
With them, “You bewilder my intelligence, as it were.” How 
can you, who sought to dispel the confusion of my dull wits, 
bewilder me, instead? So I say, “You bewilder my intelli- 
gence, as it were.” But if You think that the disciplines of 
knowledge and works, meant for different agents, cannot be. 
observed by one and the same person, then affirm with certi- 
tude which one of these two would suit me, i.e. be in accord- 
ance with the power of my intelligence and my standing in 
life. Thus by either knowledge or works I shall achieve the 
highest good.” ee this plea is not reasonable. — 


2.2. Had the Lord assigned to knowledge even a sub- 
ordinate place in the discipline of works, how could Arjuna 
seek instruction in ‘one of these two’? Surely He did not say 


2-3] Karma Yoga 101 


earlier that He would speak only about one of the two disci- 
plines of knowledge and works, and not about both of them. 
Were that the case, thinking that instruction on both was 
impossible, Arjuna might request instruction in one 


3.0. Teer wa vara Ahead vara— 

3.0. In conformity with the question the Lord replied: 
ATTA ATS: 
Aasa fafan fror get rent RATSA | 
ATA AIT BAA RTTA 3N 


The blessed Lord said: 

3. O sinless one! Two kinds of disciplines in this world 
were set forth by Me in times of yore—for the Samkhyas 
the discipline of knowledge, and for the Yogins, that of 
works. 


31. oe afer xf on ote a meaa Aa- 


war adaa Pat È ete aT | aT wT at ffar Pres et ? ae — 
TA Waa AMAA Vs AT: AT Arenal sareraratavataaatanraraar 
eaat Va Had Ma Farce Tagana aTa- 
ee ee ee ee 
aq ata afar afro fror sre gee: 


3.1. In this world, in times of yore, 1.e., at the beginning of 
creation, after bringing forth mankind, a two-fold discipline 
was promulgated by Me for the members of the first three 
classes, who are entitled to carry out the injunctions of the 
§astras,—by Me, the omniscient Lord. O sinless prince! I 
sought to reveal a tradition for implementing the Vedic 
scheme of life whose goals are worldly prosperity and emanci- 
pation. What is this two-fold discipline? Listen: (i) The dis- 
cipline of knowledge. Knowledge of the Self itself is the Yoga 
or discipline meant here. This has been promulgated for the 


102 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. III 


followers of Samkhya who have the discriminative knowledge 
between Self and non-self. From the stage of celibacy itself, 
they have embraced the life of renunciation. Through their 
mastery of the Vedanta they have acquired an unshakable 
grip over the principles of that Sastra. They are the renouncers 
of the Paramahainsa order who have established themselves 
in the ultimate Reality. (ii) The discipline of works, wherein 
works constitute Yoga, has been promulgated for the Yogins 
or the performers of works. 


3.2. afe a Us TaN Het ganai wet aH a afaa aS 
WaT BS TH aaa aT tag aay ArH FG e wha Bras 
fau fafrseRrageradh va mata gar ? ate ga: ‘aot: 
ma we q ga Aca waaay wa aqvereata, aA g aage haai 
qaf aft Ad Wad: Heda, aa UVa AATTYAT Wray 
akaa: MI | AC FT HAHA | Te Hal Aaa FT agaa: MA- 
HAT: I 


3.2. If, according to the Lord, both knowledge and work 
are to be practised in combination by one and the same person 
and therefore have been set forth or are going to be set forth in 
the Vedas and the Gita, how can He say to Arjuna here, His 
beloved and confiding disciple, that these disciplines are 
meant for differently qualified agents? It may be suggested 
that the Lord’s idea is as follows: After listening to Me, of his 
own accord, Arjuna will practise both knowledge and works; 
for others, I shall teach that they are to be practised by different 
agents. A suggestion like this, however, makes the Lord guilty 
of partiality and antipathy ; He can no longer be an authorita- 
tive teacher. Of course, this is an unreasonable procedure. 
Therefore, by no line of reasoning whatsoever, is it possible 
to combine knowledge and works. 


4.0. Tl ata GH HA: saad qs, aq a fend, afraHoneg | 
qama pafas: daa wa aaaea, agenasa aa | 
wad: wate a sft A | 

at at ara aya frarrafe’ eta fase att ‘at acy’ 


3-4] Karma Yoga 103 


aft Ue Aa ae Me Wa — aA HAT Aare sia | seat — 
ARAR Wav Nee Fe ee es eas a 


g 
eran RRT, aN, eft ud ant A ang wa — 


4.0. The superiority of knowledge to works that Arjuna’ 
affirmed remains, since it has not been repudiated by the Lord. 
The world-renouncers alone may practise the discipline of 
knowledge, since the Lord has stated that the two are to be 
practised by different agents. That this position alone has the 
Lord’s sanction may be understood. To Arjuna who grieves, 
saying to the Lord, “You enjoin on me work alone that 
binds”, and who, therefore, proposes to avoid works, the Lord 
says, ‘not by refusing to work at all’ (BG 3.4). Alternatively, 
since one and the same person cannot address himself to the 
opposed disciplines of knowledge and works at the same time, 
it should follow that they can promote the ends of life only 
independently of each other. Even so, the discipline of works 
may promote life’s ends by endowing the agent with the 
fitness to adopt the disciplines of knowledge, and not indepen- 
dently, by itself, whereas the discipline of knowledge, generated 
by that of works, is a totally independent means to life’s 
supreme end. In order to elucidate this view, the Lord says: 


a HANTAACEATACHE FETISTAT | 
q a duane fate aatrresta nN 


4. Man does not achieve freedom from works by 
abstention from them. None attains perfection through 
the mere renunciation of works, either. 


4L a AUT sft NT RUT ATCT aT BHT fea 


104 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. I 


maaa fror ffrae aae aft araq, gee: 7 seat 
a seater gai: | 


4.1. By abstention from—the mere non-initiation of— 
works like sacrifices, man cannot achieve freedom from them 
i.e., the discipline of knowledge or existence as pure Self. 
Works performed in this life or past lives serve to attenuate 
the sins incurred and to purify the mind; thus they give a start 
to the discipline of knowledge by generating knowledge. Vide, 
the Smrti: “Due to the exhaustion of evil deeds there springs 
up knowledge. As in a mirror, in the mind one perceives the 
Self (SGnti-parvan, 204.8). ‘Abstention’ means non-initiation. 
Freedom from works is the state of one who performs no 
works; it is the utter absence of works or the discipline of 
knowledge. It is restful being, the very essence of the Self that 
works not. Man may not achieve this state by merely abstaining 
from works. This is the sense of the verse. 


42 sto waren avert geutseqe fe aa aferdarg 
wi meq A wed Wet | HEAT: FT HATHA 


TÀ geo at aftercare 1 À araq weet arse seer aaa 

mada ‘aad teresa aren fafafesfa ada [F 3. ¥. ¥. 22] 

center seater mA R | eer — 
aA Heat garga: [4.§. | 


oa aaa sea teea 1 [ara wee.) nA 

pianti att tsetse aaa 1 ale A Ht sare 
avert afr aara 1 aa atia. fe water ? — eft 
TAY | Ad: amga A aeraareg sa 1 ate Parga vs Fao 
airan wa artfead fate tarioa — araarta fri — 
aafaa + seta 1 


4] Karma Yoga 105 


4.2. “Man does not attain freedom from works by absten- 
tion from them,” these words suggest that by its opposite i.e., 
by the performance of works man may attain such freedom. 
Why does he fail to attain freedom by abstention from works? 
Because, the means to such freedom is the performance of 
works. An end cannot be attained without the employment of 
means. To the discipline of knowledge, whose characteristic 
is freedom from works, Karma Yoga is the means. So has it 
been taught both in the śruti and in the Gita. The śruti states the 
means of knowing the sphere of the Self, the contextual object 
of knowledge, thus: ““Brahmanas seek to know this sphere of 
the Self through the study of the Vedas, through sacrifice.” 
(B.U.4.4.22), which makes the Karma Yoga instrumental to 
the discipline of knowledge. Here in B.G.5.6 too, this idea will 
be set forth thus: “‘It is hard, O mighty armed! to achieve re- 
nunciation without Karma Yoga.” “Unattached, the Yogins 
perform works for purifying the mind” 5.11; “Sacrifice, gift- 
giving, and penance purify the intelligent” 18.5. But the at- 
tainment of freedom from works through the renunciation 
of works has also been laid down, Vide: “Ensuring freedom 
from fear to all living beings, practise abstention from all 
works”? (Asvamedha-parvan 46.18). Besides, the world is more 
familiar with the freedom from works resulting from the non- 
commencement of works. Therefore, why should one perform 
works at all, when the aim is freedom from works? “‘Because, 
none attains perfection through renunciation alone.” That is, 
through the non-performance of works alone, without know- 
ledge, none attains perfection, freedom from work, establish- 
ment in the discipline of knowledge. 


5.0. FEAT TA: BUN HAA AAA va Faarq aracfeara fate 
aero ger: 7 ahnrests ? afr scararserat are — 


5.0. Due to what reason does a man fail to attain perfection 
or freedom from the obligation to work, by renunciation of 
works, sans knowledge? The answer to this demand for reason 
follows: 


106 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. II 


a fe ahaq anata ag saniga tt 
Bat Wat: HA Aa: Tater yt: WAI 


5. None indeed, even for a moment, remains without 
doing work. All, being dependent, are made to work by 
the constituents of Prakrti. 


5.1. 7 fe ef ua fe aa amaa are ong aafaa shaq fasta 
waded at | HEAT 2 Had aA fe ae war: Va MATA: 
va wt aa: mi safast: sata: ord: aaaea: qh 1 T: 
afr amA., aa: seater A a+ feraread [ ev. 23.] ef) atearat 
gare [3 3] aaam va fe aAa: a afar i afta g 
Th: aaraa Fa: AoATATAaT FANT: A FMT | TM A are 
qarflar [2.22 | sear i 


5.1. Because, not even for a moment, does anyone remain 
without doing work. Why? Being dependent, all living beings 
are made to work by Prakrti’s constituents, sattva, rajas and 
tamas. This applies to the ignorant only, for in 14.23, a refer- 
ence is made to “‘one who is not pushed about by the consti- 
tuents’. The verse 3.3 places the Samkhyas, the followers of 
the discipline of knowledge, in a separate class. So Karma 
Yoga 1s prescribed for the ignorant alone, and not for those 
who know. These latter, not subject to Prakrti’s constituents, 
stir not of their own accord; so Karma Yoga would not suit 
them. Thus has it been elucidated in the commentary on 2.21. 


6.0. We warns: atfed we arcud eft aq waq aft ag — 


6.0. The non-knowers of the Self, who refuse to do work pre- 
scribed by the scripture, are in error. This is pointed out here: 


Satara AIT T A ATA STAT | 
qtaaraty faqeten faearart: a Feat gU 
6. Controlling the organs of action, he who lets his 


mind dwell on their objects has a confounded mind; 
he is said to be a hyprocrite. 


5-8] Karma Yoga 107 


6.1. wafexattr sa n aafexarfr gaa a dear a: A 
aefa waar ma faa saaa aaa faner faaea pt: 
Faa: ANA: TATT: A FEAT I 


6.1. The organs of action are the hands etc., ‘Controlling 
them’ i.e., immobilizing them, ‘he who lets his mind dwell or 
think of their objects’ —his ‘mind’ or inner sense, is confounded. 
His conduct is false; he is said to sin. 


afecataartr nam frarearcaeasstt | 
eafaa: Aaaa: a fafaa non 


7. Controlling the sense organs with the mind, he who 
commences the Yoga of action with the organs of 
action, unattached, is held to excel, O Arjuna! 


ag at ou ag ge attr afaa as qda naa 
loge ti cik aki, E a ee? See 
ayant sac: ay Horhrateratora: a: fafrerct caceara freararared I 


l. But, Arjuna! the ignorant man, called upon to act, 
who mentally controls the organs of cognition and begins the 
Yoga of action with the organs of action, 1.e., tongue, hands, 
etc. ‘unattached’ or without desire for fruits of actions, 1s 
superior to the hypocrite (vzde verse 6). 


8.0. ad: Va Ha: — 


8.0. Such being the case, 


frat He HY a HA TIA WHAT: | 
maiaa aa a sagdar AN: n cil 


8. Always do prescribed work; work is superior to 
inaction. Indeed, even life in the body is impossible 
without working. 


108 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. II] 


8.1. Raa afr u frat fret [areatefese], at afer afer fapa: 
wo a wad aq frat at, aq ge te ata, aa: HA sara: afa- 
eat paa, fe ae wer: AHN AAA | HT ? ATAT 
råda: aff aa aa a sfagaq sfafe a m aH. aH | 
we: gee: Huta: fae: ate N 


8.1. Work prescribed by the Sastras is obligatory, is to be 
done always by one called upon to do it; no fruit is associated 
with it. That work, Arjuna! you must do, because work is 
superior to inaction or non-doing as regards consequences. 
How? ‘Life in the body’, even its continuance, cannot be 
secured without working. Thus has the distinction between 
working and non-working been marked in this world. 


9.0. TT AUS aude sy 7 Hdat afa aq aft aaq 1 Hey ? 


9.0. Also your notion that work makes for bondage and so 
must not be done is wrong. How? 


ARARAS AA SHS BATT: | 
aai HH aA WHS: AATAT NRN 


9. This world is bound by works other than those done 
as sacrifice, O son of Kunti. Free from attachment, do 
work as sacrifice. 


9.1. aaratq aft u ‘wat + fac’ [at a 2. 9. wv.) aft ae: ae: 
at: ced aq feat aq ant we 1 ae FAT: ATA Aes HAT 
are: aa fasa: aig wha: at aed Te a: at aH, AT 


mara | aa: ae aah at alta, ame: stor gatad: a 
fardda ii 


3 


9.1. ‘Sacrifice is indeed Visnu’ (7S 1.7.4)—this makes 
sacrifice equivalent to God. What is done for Him is work as 
sacrifice; through works other than those done as sacrifice are 
people called upon to work,bound.by works. Through non- - 
sacrificial works this world is bound, such works proving a 
bondage; but never through sacrificial works. Therefore, 


8-11] Karma Yoga 109 


Arjuna! free from attachment to the fruits of works, perform 
works as sacrifice. 


10.0. Za faga at t — 


10.0. For the following reason also work has to be done by 
one entitled to do it. 


gaat: TAT: qea glaa SATATA: | 
Hat mafra saen NoN 


10. Bringing forth creatures together with sacrifice, 
the Lord of creatures said of old: Multiply by means of 
sacrifice; let it yield whatever you seek. 


10.1. ag ef u agam: maT: wom: aa: ai: a: gE IAE 

ga qå mtd sara saaa safa: saat aver aAa aA Tafaered 
waa: gafa: gate: m pag | UT ae T QNE J Wag XS- 
E E A T rene A T ERR 
Te 


10.1. “Together with sacrifice’ i.e., the creatures were 
brought forth together with sacrifices. ‘Creatures’ point to the 
classes. ‘Bringing them forth’ or generating them, ‘of old’, at 
the beginning of creation, ‘the Lord of creatures’, the creator, 
said: By means of the sacrifice do you multiply or increase. Let 
this sacrifice prove to be the cow that yields all that you seek, 
the specific fruits you seek. 

How? 


tary maansa A Sat MAIG T: | 
GLI AAMT: NT: TAA 112 21 


11. By means of this sacrifice nourish the Devas; let 
the Devas nourish you. Mutually nourishing, may you 
win the supreme good. 


11.1. Vary Fit ue q Teasley Bragg iaa wag AA l J Azar: 


110 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. Til 


maag gemaan wrasse T: away | UT TRE Fa Aaa: 
aq: at Were aaa saree | cat aT at AT: TA II 
fra — 


11.1. ‘Nourish the Devas’ i.e., Indra and others, by means 
of sacrifice, and let the Devas, by means of rains etc., ‘nourish’ 
you, i.e. cause you to flourish. Thus, mutually nourishing, 
achieve the ‘supreme good’ or emancipation by gaining 
knowledge. 

Besides, 


gery wry fe at at ateaed aafaa: | 
ATAATATAA Wt ASh AA VS S UVa 


12. The Devas nourished by sacrifices will give you the 
enjoyments you seek. Verily he is a thief who enjoys 
without giving back to the Devas (a share of) the gifts 
given by them. 


12.1. Ber weg ea u wer ahrxarq weg fe a Area ear: 
area faafafa erage aafaa: wat: afr: AAT: ga: | 
t: A: aaa APM AITA AAT, MA AFAT ZAA: THT: STAT:, N: 
ee T 

a 


12.1. The Devas will give you the enjoyments you seek— 
wives, cattle, children etc., that you seek, since they have been 
‘nourished’ or pleased, by you through sacrifice. Without 
giving back a share of these enjoyments granted by the Devas 
i.e., without discharging the debts owed to them, whoso 
enjoys or pleases his body and sense organs, is verily a thief; 
he has misappropriated the wealth of the Devas. 

On the contrary those 


aaaea: Att Hered vatican: | 
asad A AT WIT A Ta HTLTT 112 31 


11-14] Karma Yoga i111 


13. Good men who partake of what remains after 
offering sacrifices are liberated from all sins; whereas 
the sinners who cook for their own sake live on their 
sins. 


13.1. aH afr nu amA frå af art arqaret aftr site 
wi a aaea. aa qa adfafeat: ad: at qoaa- 
qed: smesa: a wet 1 aT wea, War FT F 
ae at aaa mar: A vate ora fradater amaaan arene: N 


13.1. Those who habitually feed on the ambrosial food that 
remains after sacrificing to the Devas are partakers of the 
sacrificial leavings. These good men are liberated from all the 
sins involved in the five-fold killing, connected with the hearth 
etc., and also from other sins incurred through heedless 
slaughter, etc. On the contrary, those sinful self-seekers eat sin 
who cook only for feeding themselves. 


14.0. IA afas at acer, wreaeratied: fe wt 1 we af ? 
sal— 


14.0. For the following reason, too, work must be done by 
one called upon to do it; for, work is what operates the wheel 
of the universe. How ? Listen: 


WAT ated anfa TWreaqwsaqataa: | 
anga Weal AH: HAAS: Uv 


14. Living beings are born of food; food is produced by 
rain. Rain is due to sacrifice. Sacrifice is the offspring 
of work. 


A, SI AY AT I, Me Sen, eae, ae 


ated aa: sa afta cae: [aq 3.6.) | am TÅR | aw oF 
ata gs: ATTAR aaa ant, a: ase WT WAT 
Hyde A: UA: FAAS: N 


112 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. HI 


14.1. Living beings, obviously, are born of the consumed 
food that is transformed into blood and semen. Food is pro- 
duced by rain which is a product of sacrifice; vide Manu, 3.76. 
The oblation, properly placed in the fire, goes up to the sun. 
Rain is due to the sun, and food due to the rain. Of food are 
born living beings. ‘Sacrifice’ means the unique power engen- 
dered by the activity of the priests and the sacrificer. This acti- 
vity is the work whence the ‘unique power’ the apurva, is born. 


15.0. tea vafat wt Ha: Sa — 


15.0. Whence is this sort of ‘work’ or energy born? Answer: 


at weg fate were gay | 
aeaii wer frat at stator eu 


15. Know that this work is born of the Vedas, and that 
the Vedas are born of the imperishable Reality. There- 
fore, the all-pervading Veda is eternally rooted in 
sacrificial work. 


15.1. P ofa un wt agga ge ae @ See are wars: 
aa aq tH wera fate fai | we Ge e sera ga 
Hat FT WAT ANS TA aq ARAA | wer Ae: gers: | 
Fea, ATT EATER AUC, TEN PATA AT MAT TET 
ward; award aft aq frat wer aafaa 

aa sfaftery 1 


15.1. Work is born of Brahman, Brahman is the Veda. ‘Born 
of Veda’ means revealed by the Veda. Work, in this context, 
is of this description. Again, Brahman or Veda is born of the 
Imperishable or Brahman, the supreme Self. That Brahman 
here means the Veda is the sense. Since Brahman, the Veda, 
is directly derived from the supreme Self—the imperishable 
Spint—like the vital breath, therefore, the all-revealing and 
eternal Veda is established for all times in sacrificial work, the 
latter being a dominant theme of the Vedas. 

So, 


14-16] Karma Yoga 113 


Ua salad ae maada T: | 
wararehararerat Are art a statis ue 


16. He who fails to conform to the cycle of functions 
thus established is, Arjuna! a sinner; he revels in the 
sphere of sense-life; he lives in vain. 


16.1. WH St u Us cet Say argia Wreqw wad 7 q- 
adafa ze aie a wif fapa aq wera: ae mt ay: Sad 
JA a: HAT:, masaa: sf araq afara: fet arene: arr 
maer fasag ae a: efaaraa: are garg od, a: state i 


16.1. The cycle of cosmic functions, preceded by the Vedas 
and sacrifices, has been set in motion by God. In the world, he 
who, being competent only to do work, fails to conform to this 
cycle of functions, leads a life of sin. He delights in sense- 
contacts with objects, Arjuna! He lives in vain. 


16.2. Ter wat aapa adery va wet afr ai: (3. VRR) 
We aenarfrsraraaeare: aed ada afaa sacar 
ada wa eta ‘A wae [3 x] Far ares ‘ate 
ara a at a aedi: [3 c] sdaneta sf arat 
edie [3 2] serfear ‘art ot a state [3 ¢&.] saan 
af wea orate apaa saree: watqeart ag FTO IPR, 
THCY FT Aaa FIT 1 


16.2. Therefore the upshot of this context in this BG 3.4-16, 
is that the ignorant man, called upon to work, must do it. Be- 
fore gaining competence to address oneself to the discipline 
of Self-knowledge, one, who is ignorant of the Self and called 
upon to work, must undertake the discipline of Karma Yoga. 
This idea has been elucidated in the BG from 3.4 to 3.8. A 
variety of reasons in support of it has been advanced in the 
verses 3.9 to 3.15—reasons that are valid for one ignorant of 
the Self and called upon to work. The errors involved in 
ignoring the call to work have also been stated. 


114 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. II 


17.0. Ta fered fe wa safai we ade agada ? ametfeaq qat- 
mamaoa anafaa | -z: | maana Frat ATER- 


17.0. In this context is raised the question whether all 
should conform to the established cycle of activities or only he 
who is ignorant of the Self and has failed to rise to the level of 
the discipline of knowledge i.e., the sphere of the Sarmkhyas 
who know the Self, the performance of Karma Yoga, set forth 
earlier, being but the means to attain this discipline of know- 
ledge. In anticipation of this question on Arjuna’s part, and in 
order to facilitate a discriminating grasp of the contents of the 
sastra, the Lord unfolds the imports of the sastra which the 
Gita also seeks to convey. 

The following is that teaching: 


aeara CATATH TAT ATA: | 
Mea a HJE Fe A frat wwii 


17. For the man who delights solely in the Self, who is 
content with the Self, who finds satisfaction alone in 
the Self, there is no duty to perform. 


17.1. aq sft uo we ater meaa: aren: anata ua 

ta: + fasaq aq a: areacfa: wr eM Waq see: TF enaA 

a et eee a 
aay: fg meade adder wate, q ater aah wa 4 age: 

ada. dagen: etaq | a fee: aang cer anh woi a fae 

afa gad: I 

fra — 


17.1. That Samkhya or man of knowledge, devoted to 


17-18] Karma Yoga 115 


Self-knowledge, who delights solely in the Self, and not in 
objects; who is content exclusively with the Self and not with 
pleasing the palate etc.,—that man is the renouncer who finds 
satisfaction in the Self. All people are generally pleased with 
external possessions. Disregarding them, the renouncer finds 
satisfaction in the Self alone; he is detached from all else—this 
is the import. The idea is that for such a Self-knower there is 
no duty to perform. 
Moreover, 


ta TEN Feast pAg BAT | 
a ateq aAA RATAAN: ci 


18. He has nothing to gain from work done or left 
undone. On no heings does he depend as regards any 
interests of his own. 


18.1. tt of na Va aa Tomer: Fat FA at: yaa 
afer 1 seg ate watt wae yeraravey: are: ? a HHT ae BTS 
aaa ahaefe aaae: arene: ar aq afer i a 4 
wey aay aanfeeracdy wey shaq ater: aafaa- 
froma: aura: aapray [na] afaq wafers ania a 
arg: pha at: afta aa aat fear aqeéar ang N 


18.1. He who is in love with the supreme Self has no pur- 
pose of his own to accomplish through any work done. Does 
he, then, incur the sin of omission or pratyavaya by not doing 
any work? Here in this world, surely, he does not incur the sin 
of omission by his failure to do work, either—a sin entailing a 
loss to his Self. Again, on no particular being, from Brahma to 
stocks and stones, does he depend for gaining any end through 
his activity. Only if he did so, would he have had to perform 
such activity. 


18.2. 4 @ Watery aad: toanen [3.x] mai ada | 
qaq vqa— 


18.2. However, you have not won this status, comparable 


116 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. HI 


to the all-round inundation’ (vide BG 2.46), namely the height 
of right perception. 
This being the case, 


TATRA: Add BT FHA AATAT | 
HA gaa BY TATA FET: NLN 


19. Therefore, unattached, always do the work that has 
to be done; for, doing work with detachment, man 
attains the Supreme. 


19.1. TEN a TENT a: gaa: Aad Adar set Ader 


19.1. Therefore, unattached, i.e. without clinging to the 
fruits of works, always do the work that calls for the doing— 
the obligatory work. Because, by doing works for the sake of 
God, man attains supreme liberation, through the purifica- 
tion of the mind. 

Also because, 


wana fe afatgarterat HARTAT: | 
eaaa ATIIT BACT RoN 


20. Janaka and others achieved perfection through 
works alone. At least, to promote the welfare of the 
world, you ought to do works. 


20.1. Pda ght 1 ator wa fe qt afar: facie: afafa are 
we mam: samt: 1S ? Trae: aaa: 1 ate J A- 
TIA, TI Aag mea BAT Aer wearer va HA 
afafa arferat: set: 1) rr INARA: HAPA, Tar HAUT 
mafea wan afafeq anferar sfe areata: gre: i 


20.1. Itis well known that wise Ksatriyas in the past sought 


19-21] Karma Yoga 117 


perfection or liberation by means of works alone. Who were 
they? Janaka and others like him, for example, Asvapati. If 
they are held to have attained right perception due to their 
past operative works (Prarabdha-Karma), directed to world’s 
welfare, they attained perfection while still doing works i.e., 
without renouncing them. This is the sense of this verse. If, 
however, Janaka etc., had not attained right perception, the 
verse may be taken to mean that they sought perfection through 
the process of working, the means of mental purification. 


20.2. 77 Aaa — as: aft [maA] a: wa afer ag 
od, Waa a wae aay ai aaraiaaa Hara eft ? ante 
mesata: at oper wa aft Aa vamisafatrarcr stwaug:, 
aaa aft saat ameaq ad dA N 


20.2. Now you may think that even these ancient Ksatriyas, 
Janaka and so forth, discharged their duties because they were 
ignorant of Self, and, therefore, that another, a perfect man 
with the right perception, need not follow suit. Still, being 
subject to operative past works, you ought to work in order to 
promote world’s welfare 1.e., to safeguard people from falling 
into wrong paths of conduct. 


21.0. Aang: feat ade: fa ? sary — 

21.0. Why should world’s welfare be promoted? Listen: 
uaea VOSctaAeaAgey Wa: | 
a USAATH pe Sea NRN 


21. Whatever is done by the best of men, others also 
do; the world conforms to the standard that he sets. 


21.1. Taq ea u aaq at maA wera as: wa: aq wa FF 
maA fat: Wa: aaa: | fe Wa Mes aq warm Hed SaF 
aa at ate: aq wqadd aaa varied gerd: I 


21.1. Whatever work the best, the foremost man, does, other 


118 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. IT 


men also, following him, do. Again only the standard the best 
man sets up, secular or Vedic, the world accepts as authorita- 
tive. 


22.0. afe anf olnaagaderarar a fasfacte:, afg at fe a maafa ? 


22.0. If you question even this obligation to promote world’s 
welfare, why don’t you observe the example I set? 


a à mata ria faq stag fra | 
qaare Ad VA a HAT VV 


22. I have, Arjuna! no duty whatever to discharge in 
all the three worlds; there is nothing I have not won, 
and nothing remains to be won by Me; still I ceaselessly 
work. 


22.1.4 ofa ue aa ot a afer a feat ade faq af aay 
ear Fataehr | os na aah 
ad wa a wat Hey it 


22.1. In all the three worlds, Arjuna! no duty whatsoever 
exists for Me to discharge. Why? ‘There is nothing unobtained, 
and nothing yet to be obtained, by Me. Nevertheless I cease- 
lessly work. 


Still, 


ule gg A ada mg rwaf: | 
AA qnada ASAT: WT AFT: NRIN 


23. Indeed O Arjuna! if at any time, I do not work 
tirelessly, men will in all possible ways, tread that 
path of Mine. 


23.1. afe ef n afe fe ga: ae a ada ma arfaa Haft aafaa: 
wave: aT AA Moe ad: ah ant aadA Aqua: F et, AAT: 
AarHTe: 11 


22-25} Karma Yoga 119 


23.1. Again, if at any time, Arjuna! I do not tirelessly, 
without indolence, work, men will follow, in all possible ways, 
that path of the best of men, narnely of Myself. 


24.0. Ta TH: AN: aft ? mg — 
24.0. What harm is there if they do so? Answer: 


sel ST a Fat wt AH | 
ag a Hat ANAT: SAT: NVN 


24. If I don’t work the worlds will perish; I may cause 
confusion, and may ruin these living beings. 


24.1. 3A: eft u sa: fada: A ad ater: Safa- 
faima at: aaa a pa wt Aq aga | fea ag a Fat 
amq AT HTT sga TAT. T: | So agaa Waa: agaga 
[srert] gat ahr a aa age AT | 


24.1. If I work not, all the worlds ‘will perish’—will be 
ruined, in the absence of the work that maintains their equili- 
brium. Also I shall cause confusion, and thus destroy these 
living beings. Seeking to confer a blessing on them, I might 
work their ruin. It will ill accord with My character as God. 


25.0. afe oa: agfa ot Hartafe:, afaq ser: ar, vere aca: 
piana Taye: TI pia: gag — 

25.0. Like Me, if you think you have reached life’s goal of 
being a knower of Self in your own right, you may have no 


duty to perform; still you should work to promote others’ 
well-being. Says the Lord: 


awm: mafai wat gifa ATL | 
sateen san aAA URI 


25. Prince of the Bharata line! just as the ignorant 
work with attachment to that work, so should the wise 
work, unattached, seeking the world’s integration. 


120 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. I 


25.1. aor. Sf ou ae: afr “ore ator: oe aa aaaf” aft 
faq afasra: war gifa area, gaia faery mafa qa wach: 
aq i aed feet woe ? aq yy — frat: ad see: atHae7 I 


25.1. ‘With attachment to that work’ the ignorant work, 
thinking that the fruit of the work will accrue to them; so, the 
wise man, a knower of the Self, should work ‘unattached’. 
Why should he do so? Listen! Out of eagerness to work for the 
world’s integration. 


26.0. Wa Aaaa fart: + wa sreafae: acter afd, AAA qr, 
Ara Ama | [aa] cer arenfae: ez voter — 

26.0. For Me, the Self-knower, thus eager to promote the 
world’s well-being or for any other like Me, there 1s no duty 
other than the promotion of that well-being. Hence is this 
instruction addressed to the knower of the Self: 


a afgad madam RAIER | 
malada faa Ah: TATA NRN 


26. The integrated man of wisdom should not bewilder 
the mind of the ignorant attached to works; performing 
them all, let him cause them (also) to do so. 


26.1. 4 afr un qe: Ae qfar. “wor se pdi N aren ar: 
ao” tf aaea: «2: Aad ma fovea: ta Waa A Vorsaq 
wart faafaa nafga afer aama arrgaar | fray gatq ? 
waa mA adnate fas cag ata afagat at ae: aha: 
TATACT 1 


26.1. Bewilderment of the mind is a split in, a jolt to, the 
conviction, “I must do this work and enjoy its fruit’. The 
man of wisdom should not cause it to the ignorant who do not 
discriminate and are attached to works. What then should he 
do? He should cause them to do all works by doing them 
himself, integratedly. 


27.0. IATA aa: we HAA asd ef ? are— 


25-28] Karma Yoga 121 


27.0. How does the unwise man, ignorant of the Self, get 
attached to works? Answer: 


wae: frama aor: nat aÅ: | 
aegra satsaa maA NRN 


27. Works are being done in all ways by the consti- 
tuents of Prakrti. He whose mind is deluded by egoism 
thinks, ‘I am the agent.’ 


27.1. Wed: Bf uo wad: safe: Tart aana Treat aran- 
qe dem: wad: wh fat mro. faia matr Afa- 
ar mear a ada. ait aggre ardacreeraca- 
yaa: aggre a fafai mafai as area AARO A a A 
påsarna minoa afaa ai mefa aera: AT- 
tor ag sat gA wed 1 


27.1. Prakrti is Pradhana the state of equilibrium of the con- 
stituents, sattva, rajas and tamas. These constituents are trans- 
formations of Prakrti as effects and instruments. By these are 
works, secular and scriptural, done in all possible ways. Egoism 
is the conceit of selfin the complex of effects and instruments— 
the body and sense-organs. He whose inner sense is deluded 
in manifold ways by egoism, who identifies himself with the 
body and its instruments due to ignorance, ascribes works to 
the Self, thinking, “I am the doer of works.” 


28.0. 4: Ja: frerq— 


28.0. As for the wise man: 


aafaa ngae qyorwafaarrat: | 
TO yore acted Et Aca A A URC 


28. O Hero! on the contrary, the knower of the truth of 
the distinction between constituents of Prakrti and. 
their operations does not attach himself to works 
knowing that constituents operate amidst constituents. 


122 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam - [Ch. Il 


ation: — farmer aA a acafaq srt 1 TT: 
aurea: TI faaara adet, T Hear, alt Heat 7 asad ath 
a Hate I 


ù ga: — 


28.1. On the contrary, O hero! ‘the knower of the truth’? 
i.e. —the distinction between Prakrti’s constituents and their 
works. The idea refers to the knower of the truth of the class of 
constituents and the class of works. The constituents of Prakrti 
are the essence of the instruments of works; the same consti- 
tuents operate amidst themselves as objects. The Self does not 
operate at all. So deeming, the truth-knower does not get 
attached. 

Again, 


IFANE: Asset TH, | 
aapea Weary peaa aramda NRN 


29. Those who are deluded by Prakrti’s constituents 
cling to the works of these constituents. The knower of 
the whole ought not to destabilize the dull and partial 
knowers. 


29.1. Tad: fa ou weet: at qer: afaa: aa: aA oai 
aig Weg “at Ht HF: nan” Se ae oie ae 
PAHOA IT: AA AVIAN pafa fag cag a aada — 
qadar Ua aed, TT A Hat seas: | 


29.1. Those who are wholly deluded bv Prakrti’s consti- 
tuents cling to the works of these constituents, thinking, “We 
work for the fruits of works.” The knower ‘of the Whole’, 
of the Self, should not destabilize the dull-witted, partial 
knowers who cling thus to works. The splitting of their under- 
standing is destabilization. That this ought not to be attempted 
is the idea. 


28-31] Karma Yoga 123 
30.0. P4 ga: wafer afaa sat WET at adet zit ? sea 


30.0. How should work be done by the ignorant who seeks 
liberation and who is called upon to work? Answer: 


afa aati waif HARARET | 
freia aeat qeaea Rasa: 13011 


30. Surrendering all works to Me in a spiritual frame 
of mind that craves naught, and free from all sense of 
possessions, fight with unconcern. 


30.1. aà R u aft argea cepat ade aatcats aati sator 
eft amar gear 1 fra faa: am, fete: aries fia: 
wea aa a: ot fray ae qeaeq faa: faaan: fara: 
aq gad: I 


30.1. Surrendering or offering all works to Me, Vasudeva, 
the supreme and omniscient Lord and Self of all, ‘in a spiritual 
frame of mind’ i.e., with the discriminating perception, ‘I, the 
agent, work for the Lord as His servant’; and also, ‘craving 
naught’ i.e., giving up all desires, being free from all sense of 
possessions, or ownership—you should fight, ‘with unconcern’, 
or free from worry or sorrow. 


31.0. aq Vdd Aa ad “HA i afr aA SH AT Ta 


31.0. This doctrine of Mine, based on scriptural authority, 
that work must be done, remains valid: 


aa mafai fraraaqfacstear area: | 
Tease Porat AST HALA: 132i 


31. Those men who invariably conform to this doctrine 
of Mine—men faithful, unenvious—are also liberated 
from works. 


124 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. Il 


31.1.4 È afr ua a wate xe ad fret agaofa aga ara: 
ATM: FETTA: ENN: Haga: Hat a ae TATÀ aged agded:, 
qa l af van: safe atai: 1 


31.1. Those men who invariably conform to this doctrine 
of Mine—men ‘faithful’ or confiding, and ‘unenvious’ or not 
envying Me, the supreme teacher Vasudeva—are also liberated 
from the sway of works righteous and unrighteous. 

On the contrary, 


Y aaga aratassta A aay | 
admain fate aeetraaa: NIUN 


32. Know them to be an inert and a ruined iot, who, de- 
luded in respect of all knowledge, carp at this doctrine 
of Mine and refuse to conform to it. 


321.4 7 af u a g afer: waq A Aa Ad aera: fare: 
aq wafasafa arated [A wat] aay aay fafa yer a adama- 
frar: aa fafe arte werd are wary aaa: afar: 1 


32.1. But, in contrast, those who carp at or scorn this 
doctrine of Mine and fail to conform to it are variously de- 
luded in respect of all forms of knowledge. Know them to be a 
ruined lot lacking in discrimination. 


33.0. FEAT FT: BTU wate ad naaa: [-fer] mei 
aifasofa, carat a a agada, aaa we a fret a- 
anaman ? amg — 


33.0. Why do they fail to conform to Your doctrine and 
follow alien laws of conduct, rejecting those proper to their 
nature? Why don’t these opponents of Yours shrink from the 
sin of transgressing Your commandments ? 


aqi Asst aen: THA: ATTA | | 
sata afa afa frog: fe afafa 1330 


31-34] Karma Yoga 125 


33. Even a man of knowledge behaves according to his 
nature. All living beings conform to nature. What can 
repression avail ? 


33.1. Aer fa u age aged wed Berar aA | Fe? qa: 
aAa: wed: | safe: amt Ydamrarraticdenra: adarraaret 
afer, aT vata: | tear aga wa aa: We aay aft eA, 
fe ga ae? sear vata afer profa aa orf: 1 fag: 
fared: fr afafa aa ar serena? [afaa sata: sf arerety: | 


33.1. ‘Behaves accordingly’—according to what? One’s 
own nature. Nature means impressions of work, righteous and 
unrighteous, done already, which manifest. themselves in the 
present life and later. According to that nature, every living 
being—even one who has knowledge—behaves; let alone the 
foolish. Therefore, all living beings conform to nature. What 
will repression or prohibition, either by Me or by someone else, 
avail? It follows that nature is hard to repress. 


34.0. af ad: eg: amea: saftey wa aed —a Fy EANNA: 
ahaq afta — aa: gerareen fagarqaad: wearer ez Tard — 
34.0. The following objection may be raised: If all living 
beings behave according to nature—and there is none devoid 
of his own special nature—there remains no scope for indivi- 
dual initiative, and the Ssastra is thus reduced to futility. 
Answer: 


efaretfaceard a rafet | 
aai arate Mer arate w3vi 


34. Senses have attachment and aversion to their res- 
pective objects; none should be swayed by them. They 
indeed are obstacles in man’s path. 


34.1. faa aff ou gaa efxaee at adfa wat aa- 
Ran — st m: afte au: — setae octet mn srazaarfaat 
wT Ht Fauna wear a faye gerd 1 west vad: yaaa 
mm: at m 1 a fe gever safe: ar mT wa 


125 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam -[Ch. HI 


rane get sadafa: aa adafa: maiS a waa 1 wer gA: 
mm aerfarer faafia aa meagf: ca gee: wate, + vefaaer: | 
aema TA: Wasa: sat 7 araq, aa: al fe wer ga afar 
ma famat send ca of scot: 3x 


34.1. The senses have attachment and aversion in respect 
of their objects such as sound—attachment to what pleases 
and aversion to what repels. Thus attachment and aversion 
are inevitable for each sense. In this context, the scope of 
individual initiative and that of the mandate of the Sastra are 
being indicated. Submitting to the mandate of the fastra at the 
very outset, one should refuse to be swayed by attachment 
and aversion. Human nature indeed forces man to work under 
the urges of his attachment and aversion. Thus result the 
abandonment of the laws of one’s conduct and conformity 
with those of alien conduct. On the other hand when attach- 
ment and aversion are restrained by countervailing forces, 
man’s vision becomes that of the Sastra; he ceases to be Nature’s 
thrall. Therefore none should submit to attachment and 
aversion; for those are stumbling blocks on the path to better- 
ment, like robbers infesting the public road. 


35.0.07 UTI: Ad arate aft aera ‘cert: safe A- 
CAT aga: Wa Ete, AT TAT — 


35.0. Moved by attachment and aversion, man may mis- 
construe the contents of the śastras and maintain that even 
an alien law of conduct, being a law, after all, has to be 
observed. This is wrong. How? 


aa carat fay: meena caqfeoara | 
aa frst Sa: THAT AAR: N 


35. Superior is the law of one’s own nature, though 
lacking in merits, to that of another even though well- 
observed. Death in working out the law of one’s nature 
is superior; but an alien law is fraught with risk. 


34-36] Karma Yoga 127 


35.1. sary g i sary aaa: ea ot: cent: far. afr fara- 
mm: af asama: voraiq eaqiteatq areata aaa aft | 
card ferrer fret won aff aa: conf ferrer Naa | rea ? 
qa: wade: acarfacey wa aragfa g [aa] u34u 


35.1. Superior—more admirable—is the law of one’s own 
nature, though wanting in merits, if it is worked out aright, to 
the law of another’s nature, however meritoriously worked 
out. Death while adhering to the laws of one’s own nature is 
superior to a life devoted to the law of another’s nature. Why? 
An alien law brings fear in its train—the fear of hell, etc. 


36.0. waft ami ‘earadt fawary ga: [2 93] aft m 
wer offers? [3 3%.] ea wom; fated saat = aq 
wm; aq afer fafaa a gq ua efa ae See aT Vary, mA 
fe aferq agaa act gat! sf — 


36.0. Though the root of all evil has been pin-pointed in 
BG.2.62 and 3.34, there have been both diffusion and lack 
of emphasis there. Seeking to know it concisely and with 
certitude, Arjuna asked as follows, in order to extirpate i 
wholly: F 


AAT sara : 
ma FT masa ITT Achat Fou: | 
raaa area aortas fafaa: 13 E11 


Arjuna said: 
36. Now, impelled by what does man commit sin? O 
Krsna!, though loath to sin, he is driven to it forcibly, 
as it were. 


36.1. wT ofr u we He ATT Ga: AT Ua Sa Ae ae aT 
at ada araca ges: gev: cag afa ate & area qonga, 
wa sa faafaa. car sa aft oe Gert: i 


128 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. II 


36.1. Impelled by what cause, O Krsna, does a man sin, 
compelled as a servant is by his master the king, though, left 
to himself, he is loath to do so? It is as if he were bidden, as by 
a king, to do it. This is a simile. 


37.0. Ty a t afer aati a a Geos aft way yary— 


37.0. Hear who that foe, the author of all mischief, is, ot- 
whom you ask—the Lord spoke giving him the required in- 
formation: 


ARTTaTTaTA i 
BTA UT BIT OT TANTS: | 
wernt aera fagaatag Afoa zt 


The blessed Lord said: 

37. This is craving, this is wrath, born of the consti- 
tuent Rajas. He is voracious, a great sinner; know him 
to be the foe in this context. 


37.1. Daea warmer shea zara: fort: | 
maana Arey ToT aT ster n [fag €.4.9¥. | 
dataa afer aged frat aada maA a add — 
sata saa aq qararan TI | 
afa frerafret a @ arent rara 1 [frg 4.9. ] 

a nn ee aren: Wray att — 

737, l. Bhagavan i is the Lord. Bhaga, according to VP.6.5.74, 
Ee the six attributes—full lordliness, energy, renown, 
glory, detachment, and emancipation. Vāsudeva in whom 
those six exist eternally, unimpeded, and in full measure, is 
the Bhagavan. Or, according to VP.6.5.78, He is the blessed 
Lord as He knows ‘the origin, dissolution, appearance and 
disappearance of living beings, and is aware also of knowledge 
and ignorance’. 


37.2. PTR: Eft are Ue: adara: afafa aatri: TA | 


36-39] Karma Yoga 129 


aus are: sfted: tafaq Pada oA | ae: wre: aft we: wa | 
CHITA ST: CM AT TT TANT: ATS: | TA OT TATT- 
WSs: WITT a aga: are: fe sour: wT adaa gaa sada; 
qom fe ag mia: sft ganii wat Aart squat yer: 
gat | mera weg auch wer xt WENT: At: Wa AeA; BAT 
fe ofa. weg: ot aca I aa: fafe ct art ge Aart afer i 


37.2. The foe of the whole world is this craving that proves 
disastrous to all living beings. Craving, impeded by some one 
or other, changes into wrath. So wrath, too, 1s this very thing 
born of rajas. When it arises it activates rajas and drives man to 
act. Those who suffer, busy in servitude, due to rajas, lament, 
“We are made to work due to craving.” It consumes much, 
and is a great sinner. Incited by rajas man sins. Therefore 
know craving to be the foe in this empirical life. 


38.0. FA At? fe qer: waaa — 


38.0. By means of analogies, how craving is the foe is incul- 
cated: 


ARa afedussatt RSA T | 
aaa TWACTAT AARTEITA 321 


38. Just as fire is obscured by smoke, a mirror by dirt 
and embryo by the womb, so is knowledge by craving. 


38.1. Aa A u a aa aat afa IAAF: NIPT- 
ma TAT A mT: a a, TIT Beat a aag Miavedy ATGA: 
aara: we: aa AT Bz aT 1 


38.1. Just as luminous fire is obscured by the non-luminous 
smoke, born together with fire; or a mirror by dirt; or the em- 
bryo by a sheathing membrane—so is this knowledge by it 
i.e., by craving. 


39.0. fe Ga: aq aaan aq aaa aad aft ? sad 


39.0. What is the thing denoted by the word ‘this’ and 
obscured by craving? Answer: 


130 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IH 


Wad mada maA frerateor | 
STASI HleaAT WTA TW Fil 


39. Knowledge, O son of Kunti, is obscured by this 
persistent foe of the knower, i.e. by craving, as by an 
insatiable fixe. 


29.1. Hae Bf ul aad Uda aa maa: facadtom, art fe yay 
va wera ‘att ae art sam: eft 1 ae gat a wate fray 
wa | aa wat attra: aadd, ag Ader a fe ae aera faa 
aq mea aA ge ard ara aera ag ga mfa: ete, 
q qiq wa | wa: maa: wa farà | feet ? are a gN 
va eq xen sft RET: aa, TT Tea TT wey sft FT aA, 
ried a wey we sate: feat sf wan: AF TF i 


39.1. Knowledge is obscured by this persistent foe of the 
man of knowledge. The man of knowledge already knows: ‘“‘I 
have been flung into this trouble by this craving.” So he always 
suffers. Thus is it the persistent foe of the knower, and not of 
the ignorant. The latter, in the grip of craving, indeed may 
look upon it as a friend. But when its effect, pain, overtakes 
him, he realizes: “I have been made to suffer through craving” ; 
but not till then. So it is the persistent foe of the knower alone. 
What form does this foe assume? Of craving or desire. It is 
hard to satisfy, being a fire that nothing can quench. 


40.0. nRT: q Ot BTA: WAST aAa AM Ader N ? 
afr adaa are, ait fe war afro gaa frag ad wert ef — 


40.0. Abiding in what does craving, obscuring knowledge, 
prove a foe of the whole world? The reply follows. Once the 
base of the foe is known he may be easily destroyed. 


graa wat qfaia | 
Udtartgraey mamaa seas voit 


39-42] Karma Yoga 131 


40. His abode is said to be the senses, mind, and in- 
teliect. By means of these he obscures knowledge and 
deludes the embodied man. 


40.1. efaarfr sfa u afaarfr wa: qifa a ae are afar 
aq. seat | ud: efcarfehy. are: faea fates ateafr we: 
are ma qe area eet wife vol 

ad: Taq — 


40.1. Senses, mind and intellect are said to be the abode of 
this craving. By means of these abodes obscuring knowledge, 
this foe deludes the embodied Spirit in manifold ways. 

Such being the case, 


acareatafzararel faa RANT | 
qama saa maama uy tl 


41. Therefore, mighty prince! first controlling the 
senses, give up this wicked craving that destroys know- 
ledge and realization. 


41.1. Taq A n a a fanar m gia aa aaf- 
ge wen, cron rere AE fe FET Afo 


41.1. Therefore, at the outset, controlling the senses, O 
mighty prince! give up, this wicked craving, this foe, who 
destroys knowledge won from the Sastras and the teacher and 
also the specific realization thereof. These two lead to supreme 
well-being. This is the idea. 


42.0. sfearfor aret froer area aa wetfe sia seq i aa fears: 
ara wed ete ? seat — 


42.0. It has been stated that, first, controlling senses, the foe 


132 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. IH 


craving, must be given up. Resorting to what may one give it 
up? Answer: 


staat qaga: at Aa: | 
maag TM afeat Ts: Weg A usa 
42. They say that the senses are noble; nobler than the 


senses is mind. Intellect is even nobler than the mind. 
Weat is nobler, still, than the intellect is He, the Self. 


42.1. efexarft sft u sfxarf aAa war eg eee ara efi 
q meq dreereaferrcaearfacararerar Ar spera arg: TET: | 
qai—afaren. TÅ We: AAPA | TM — RAE: g TA ata: faa- 
aR | an — a: ARNA ITA MAT, A gA afa- 
mR: À: ae S ER A E, G TA: 
FJ TIT gl WT R AAT il 


aa: faq? — 


42.1. The senses, ear etc., in relation to the gross and finite 
external body, are held by the sages to be noble; for, they 
are subtle, internal, and wider in scope. Similarly mind, im- 
aginative and analytic, is nobler than the senses. So too the 
intellect, whose essence is discrimination, is nobler than the 
mind. Finally He (the embodied self) who is inner to every 
object and instrument of perception up to the intellect, whom 
‘craving’, resorting to those instruments, namely, the senses, 
mind and intellect, deludes by obscuring knowledge—He is 
nobler than even the intellect. He, the beholder of the in- 
tellect, is the supreme Self. 

What follows ? 


Ud q: WC Fal AETAMTATAATATAT | 
Wig WA ARATE RAEI FIAT wv Ri 


43. Thus knowing Him as nobler than the intellect, and 
restraining the inner senses through the Self, O mighty 


42-43] Karma Yoga 133 


armed! destroy the enemy—the craving, so hard to 
reach. 


aa gasa: nN 


43.1. Ue Sf u Wa TS: Wl eA JaN EN GaN AH AENA 
HA ACH Cada ACHAT AeHdT Ata ARH sara zor: i ae 
Ut mi SF Aelatel, BAST gaa TAA sae: arated swift: eA 
at goed gfain sft i 


43.1. Thus knowing the Self beyond the intellect, and con- 
trolling the inner sense by means of the purified mind, Le. 
by properly concentrating it, O mighty-armed! destroy the 
enemy, craving, that is so hard to reach; for it assumes nu- 
merous forms that are scarcely intelligible. 


cfr ft af ee arenira 
zA Magin ANANN ary AASTA: 1311 


CHAPTER IV 
JNANA KARMA SAMNYASA YOGA 


0.1.%: 4a aT sear se: aafasrmen:, ade: PAA- 
Tra, afer vert: wferarea:, safaeen: faafaa, aha 7 
qatg wa ua arn faafaa: ma 1 aa: oftaard dar aT: a 
area tifa oaa — 


0.1. The Yoga set forth in the two previous chapters, 
characterized by dedication to the discipline of knowledge 
accompained by renunciation and implemented by the Yoga 
of Action——a teaching in which the contents of the Vedas, 
both activistic-and quletistic, culminate-—is the same that the 
Lord seeks to inculcate in BG as a whole. Therefore, deeming 
that the sense of the Vedas has already been set forth in its 
entirety, the Lord lauds the same with reference to the line of 
teachers through whom it has been handed down to posterity. 


PTT ars 


RS . 


aa faacad ati sma | 
faacaraaa wig AqicearHmasaaty 1211 


The blessed Lord said : 

1. This immutable Yoga I imparted to the Sun (Vivas- 
van) who declared it to Manu. Manu proclaimed it to 
Iksvaku. 


11. 34 eft u et seared se a faaeat afer aniet 
weary ag maaa afar aaa i dat fe apace 
ae: aat: wate ger feag | aay farofa aeg i weg 
warped | a fe wea area aerate Ae Ge 
aft 1 aa fara Aaa We | A: gea Taqary artes saat 11 


1-2] Jnana Yoga 135 


1.1. This Yoga or way of life set forth in the two previous 
chapters I imparted to the Sun in the beginning of creation 
in order to confer strength on the Ksatriyas, the rulers of the 
world. With the strength of this Yoga they became competent 
to protect the Brahmana class. The Brahmanas and Ksatriyas 
are competent to protect the whole world. This Yoga is im- 
mutable as its fruit does not decline; for, the fruit of this Yoga, 
namely, emancipation characterized by the discipline of right 
perception, is unfailing. And the Sun declared it to Manu, 
who, in his turn, proclaimed it to his son, the first king, Iksvaku. 
Further: . 


Ue TET aia fag: | 
a Hots AFA ATT AST: ATAT Ui 


2. Royal sages have known this Yoga thus traditionally 
transmitted. O valiant prince! Due to lapse of long 
time, this Yoga has perished in this world. 


2.1. Ut Sf u wa afar et Uae: wa A AIT: 
a ofa a asda: fag: ot ae | a: ae: Brea ee Ae ahh ae: 
fafeorasera: aga: |e Tay, aaa: fare: co: aft sea, 
amy stearate: art: ga arate af ota: aaa: Scat: 1 


2.1. The royal sages came to know this Yoga, thus tradi- 
tionally handed down. Due to lapse of a long stretch of time, 
the tradition of its transmission has perished in this world. 
Para in Paramtapa denotes adversaries. By means of the rays of 
courage and energy, like the sun, Arjuna scorches them; he is 
the scourge of his foes. 


3.0. gioa afadiaar sre aS at eA Gear aH FT NTE- 
méara — 
3.0. Noting that this Yoga has perished, since its practi- 


tioners have been weak and sensuous, and that the world is 
severed from life’s supreme values: 


136 Bhagavad Gita B..asyam [Ch. IV 


a yai AAT AST ANT: Mle: FAA: | 
aesa A a ata Wet Dagar isi 


3. The same ancient Yoga has now been proclaimed to 
you by Me; for, you are a devotee and My comrade. 
Knowledge of this Yoga, indeed, is the highest mystery. 


3.1.8. Sit u & Va wa wa a Gat we aA AT: IIH Joan, 
we: afe a war a ofa ea | wer fe weg wad Sar aba 
gag: I 


3.1. That same ancient Yoga has been related to you now 
by me; because you are my devotee and friend. As it is secret, 
knowledge of this Yoga is the highest. 


4.0. ma aaa um safe ar a verfaq afe: eft ferri 
WI ft Haq AIT: Vara— 


4.0. “Let none deem that the Lord is guilty of self-contra- 
diction’’—as if to drive home this point, Arjuna spoke, posing 
a question, as it were. 


WAT Jars : 
WIL Aaa Het Te Te faaeaa: | 
HAAA AAA AAA THAT us 


Arjuna said: 

4. Your birth has been later; that of the Sun (Vivasvan) 
earlier. How then am I to take it that You imparted 
this Yoga in the beginning ? 


41. wot Bf i wat wate agaa waa: wer 1 at od i 
wa vata: faa: mka 1 aq at waq aa afaegriaar, 
q: ada areal Na A aT a: Ua gai wer Naa ae afer n 


4.1. Laterin time, in the house of Vasudeva, your birth took 
place. Earlier, in the beginning of creation, was Vivasvan (the 
Sun) born. Therefore, how am I to understand, as free hae 
contradiction, the assetto that You, who in the beginning 
ofcreation imparted this Yoga, have now proclaimed it to me? 


3-6] Jnana Yoga 137 


5.0. a aged adbacadarrg: wate, at oie nagara, 
aed: fe area yea: — 


5.0 In order to remove the scepticism of the dull-witted as 
regards the power and omniscience of Vasudeva, the Lord 
spoke. Indeed, this is the purpose served by Arjuna’s question: 


ATTA ATs $ 
agfa a ataa wert aa ast | 
mag Ae AAT A aT AT TAT Wy 


The blessed Lord said: 

5. Numerous births of Mine have already taken place, 
as also those of yours, Arjuna! I know them all, but O 
scourge of foes! you do not. 


5.1. agfr eft u agfe a aa ctf afer wert aa a 
owt | aft ag ae oe gafr a a ae a Tate, atantes- 


GE-ELGEL DST Is | Ae GARRE S EIE EER RIGGER GICEAEIGEL DSE 
q aq ae è TAT II 


5.1. Numerous births of Mine have already taken place, 
occurred, as also those of yours, O Arjuna! I know them all, 
you don’t, as your powers of cognition have been impeded 
by merits, demerits, etc. On the contrary, being eternally 
pure, awake and free, and endowed with unimpaired cogni- 
tive powers, I know them all, O scourge of foes! 


6.0. i afg aa araa maea aff a af? sa — 


6.0. If so, even in the absence of merit and demerit, how is 
it that You, the Lord eternal, have birth at all? Answer: 


asà aaar aaa ASA TT | 
WHat AnS AAATHUTCAATAAT WEI 


6. Though unborn and though the immutable Self and 


138 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. IV 


the Lord of all living beings, resorting to My power of 
becoming, through My Maya, I take birth. 


6.1. arse aft un ae aft were: aff aq, aa weqarear 
MATA HET ATA: aft aq, var wart wenfeerrantenat gat 
smaa. aft aq safe cat wa o art anaa, ger: at 
ad [ae] sa add, am atfed aad aq | sara arged 4 rari, 
a seta cat aaea aiea aware @earm sa ware ara: za 
MAA AHA: AAA, A Wea: wTHaq tl 


l. Though I am the unborn and immutable Self, i.e., 
though My cognitive power never wanes and I am the master 
of all beings from Brahma down to a tuft of grass, resorting to, 
i.e. mastering, My ‘power of becoming’, I take birth or appear 
to become embodied. My power of becoming is all-pervasive ; 
it consists of the three constituents. The entire world is subject 
to it. Deluded by it, the world does not know its own Self, 
Vasudeva. Thus am I born, as it were, by virtue of My power 
of becoming and not in fact, as is the case with the world. 


7.0. aq a WH Har feat a efe’? Fur— 
7.0. When, for what purpose, does that birth of the Lord 


occur? Listen: 


wat wat fe ater enfada are | 
MATUMAATACT TASS TAMA NON 


7. Whenever, scion of Bharatas! righteousness declines 
and unrighteousness prevails, I project Myself. 


7.1. a ofa waar aer fe ate wit af: anise 
mmi areata wate AIM, wed Tea: ante 
aar TAT arena BofA Hs ATAAT Ii 

fry ? — 


7.1. Whenever righteousness declines or withers—righteous- 
ness as embodied in the order of classes, life-stations etc., which 
promotes the prosperity and makes for the emancipation of all 


6-9] Jnana Yoga 139 


living beings—and unrighteousness prevails, ‘flourishes’, then, 
through Maya, | project Myself. Wherefore ? 


afar maa fana a FFAA | 
THACATTATAA TAA TH TT cN 


8. For the protection of the virtuous, the destruction of 
the wicked, and to secure establishmeat of righteous- 
ness, I am born in every age. 


8.1. Tarn ea uo stern cee ma aantemt, 
framma a gp mo, fea, siaaa ater aera 
ama miem aA aware at À ATTA N 


8.1. For the all-round protection of the virtuous—i.e., of 
those who tread the path of morality—for the destruction of 
sinners, and also for the secure establishment of righteousness, 
J am born in every age. 

Further: 


we HH GA foad at afar aca: | 
waa tg gaan ata mA Msa NRU 


9. Whosoever thus truthfully knows My divine birth 
and work, is not reborn after giving up his body; he 
reaches Me, O Arjuna! 


91. wR Sf uw aq wee mae, et a area aeaf A aq 
feat amgi Wat —we warn a aft aad: aAa qaraq ARAT 
a st ot wee gafa a cfs seat 1 at ufa ma a: 
Wad FAT I | 


9.1. My birth, having the nature of an appearance, and My 
work, viz., the protection of the virtuous, etc., both of which 
are divine and lordly, and not material,—whosoever knows 
these truly, as set forth by Me, is no more reborn; he reaches 
Me, he is liberated, O Arjuna! 


140 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IV 
10.0. 7 UH: mean: gai ga: fe afg ? qaafe — 


10.0. This path to emancipation has not been opened up 
just now; on the contrary, it existed in the past, too. 


TALTATHRTT AAT ATTTTTAT: | 
AA AMAATA FAT MARTAT: wot 


10. Free from passion, fear, and wrath, filled with My 
power, dependent on Me, and purged by the austerity 
of knowledge, many have attained My status. 


10.1. Haart “eft ou aan: wr wT eps ata: 
frar: eq: A wena: aafaa: Faraar: at va a Tapat afaa 
Hamas. est: | Ags: HAH ATAATaT Ala Ca BT eenaa 
aa: at maana Fat: Te Als WaT: aad: Ae Src Ate arte: 
eae: 1 aAA. aa fg ‘aera eft 
FATE it 


10.1. Those whom passion, fear and wrath have left free, 
filled with My power—i.e., those who are knowers of Brahman, 
who perceive their non-difference from the Lord, who depend 
solely on Me, the Lord supreme, who are affiliated to the dis- 
cipline of knowledge—many such men, purged through the 
austerity consisting in the knowledge of the supreme Self and 
raised to the highest level of purity, have won emancipation 
or the status of the Lord. The qualifying expression, ‘through 
the austerity of knowledge’, points to the fact that these em- 
ancipated men need no other austerity than knowledge. 


11.0. qa afe weet a:, 2a paaa senna yawola a ada: 
afar? seaat— 


11.0. “Then You have attachment and aversion; for, to 
some only You vouchsafe the status as Yourself; not to all”. 
Listen: 


9-11] Jnana Yoga 141 


YUAN At Wet AAMT ANTHEA | 
AA aataid AIM: TT AAT: 112 21 


11. Whatsoever the manner in which they approach 
Me, in that very manner I resort to them; for, O Arjuna! 
on ail sides, men tread paths leading to Me. 


11.1. ù oar ef 1 a aa at yarn aa wat eoa At 
Tat mq ade dened waft aap wen, ae we ofa 
aaa i a fe une qq goed a ad arvata | ad a 
anata: a ached, A saree: J aaa. yeaa 
TA MANEA, x mfa. aafaa: TAA TA AETA, GRIJ 
aa iag — gad gar A A aq ada fa cork | 
sor cea TA Wr ine eee) Sea eee 
ay na ad mi mad wae: —aeHeieaar afeaq PANT 
aag: & vated t WAST: aT Te —s WA, Ade. ATÈ: II 


11.1. Whatsoever the manner in which men approach Me, 
and whatever fruits they have in view to gain, in that very 
manner I resort to them, i.e., I bless them granting them 
those very fruits, for they do not seek emancipation. Indeed 
one cannot at once seek a finite fruit and emancipation 
together. So in view of their varying aims, I sanction their 
gains. To the eligible few, on the other hand, who cherish no 
other aims, and seek emancipation, I grant knowledge; to the 
knowers who have renounced the world for winning eman- 
cipation, I grant emancipation. To those who suffer, I grant 
relief by removing their sufferings. Thus do I resort to My 
devotees in the very way they approach Me—this is the idea. 
I resort to no.one due to attachment, aversion, or delusion. 
In all conceivable ways, men tread paths leading to Me, the 
Lord, in My countless states. Here the reference is to men 
called upon to work with various goals in view. 


12.0. af da Saa aR aAa ana aRt geai 
airosa a cate ata aa aay” [9 g] a maa 


142 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IV 
Waa: aT: HEAT ATA Ua ad a aA aft ? Py at ar — 


12.0. If You, the Lord, free from flaws like attachment etc., 
are ready to bless all alike and are thus competent to vouchsafe 
all forms of success, why don’t all devotees, aiming at libera- 
tion through the knowledge “all is Vasudeva’ (BG 7.19), 
approach You alone? Listen to the reason thereof: 


ated: HAM fate aad FE sac: | 
fast fe m ote fatatata was ue 


12. People in the world offer sacrifices to gods, desiring 
the success of their works. For, in this human world, 
quick is the success born of works. 


12.1. preter: sft uo maa mia: [iaa] actor fafs P- 
froafa art se afeaq are aa. ANT: ‘AT 7: Heat aat 


12.1. ‘Desiring’ i.e., praying for, seeking to obtain, success 
in their works, people offer sacrifices in the world to Devas 
like Indra and Agni. “Now one who worships a different 
Deva, thinking, ‘that Deva is other than Myself and ‘I am 
different from that Deva,’ does not know; he is like a sacrifi- 
cial animal for those Devas” (B.U. 1.410). In this world of men, 
success is quickly gained in respect of the works done by men 
who offer sacrifices to alien deities, prompted by desire for 
their fruits. The special feature of this world of men is the 
eligibility to undertake works prescribed by scriptures for 
those who conform to the order, classes and life-stations. This 
points to the fact that, in other worlds also, works yield their 
fruits. ‘Born of works’ means fruits resulting from works. 


11-13] Jnana Yoga 143 


13.0. man Ua als anisartesattuare:, 7 wer atay sta faq: 
frfa: eft ? arat—anterarfesfarrintar: Adee: aA aah aai 
aT: TAH | HATTA: HLT fada ada ah aqaded 7 aay 
aft ? seat — 


13.0. “Why is competence to work, based on the order of 
classes and life-stations, confined to this human world? Why 
should it not prevail in other realms as well?” Or, it was 
remarked that members of the classes in various life-stations 
tread the Lord’s paths in all possible ways. Why do they tread 
only His paths and those of none else? Answer: 


agave HAT ast THAT: | 
aa Hateaty at fags 123 


13. The fourfold class-system according to the divi- 
sions of Prakrti’s constituents and works, has been 
ordained by Me. Though I am its author, know Me to 
be the immutable non-agent. 


13.1. agi eft n aa wa aut: aga war Srey g 
safa “ararniser yam [Fe E. 20.80.22, HAT 3.22.22. 
saree: | taa: aorta: wafer | TOT: AANA- 
are | aa arframer arava arerrer ‘sat AT: [XR] 
sarees wath, meaa serra afar ‘atta: atA 
eat [8¢.¥3.], meaa aA ae ‘serrata = Hatfir 
[34.8%], Greve A BT wa HH [eY], waa 
Traders: aga wa awe wast | ad aT ee aa a Ay 
MIST, Ht: AAT aH [¥. 22.) efa aa | 


13.1. The fourfold class comprises the four Varnas. They 
have been ordained by Me, the Lord, vide: “The Brahmana 
was His face etc.” (RV.10.90.12, 7A.3.12.13), ‘according to 
the divisions of Prakrti’s constituents and works’, or in keeping 
with the divisions of constituents and works—the constituents 
being sattva, rajas and tamas. The works of the Brahmanas, in 
whom sattva dominates, are quiescence of mind, control of 


144 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyar [Ch. IV 


senses, austerity and so forth (BG.18.42); those of the Ksatri- 
yas, in whom rajas dominates subordinating sattva, are heroism, 
power, and so forth (BG.18.43); those of the Vaisyas, in 
whom rajas dominates subordinating tamas, are tilling and so 
forth (BG.18.44); and those of the Sidras, in whom tamas 
dominates subordinating rajas, are forms of menial service 
(BG.18.44). The order of classes has been established by Me 
according to the division of constituents and works detailed 
above. In other realms the order of classes does not exist; 
hence the qualified expression ‘in the human world’ (BG.4.12). 


13.2 ea ! afe arate ane: ato: ara acho YT, 
at: a a hane faepros fa ? sed aa arrearage 
qa at: Hare aft ad at aearta: fafa anak 1 aa wa 
waa wear a ar fafa i 


13.2. Objection: “Well, then: You being the author of 
actions like the ordering of the classes, etc., their friits will 
accrue to You. Therefore, You are not eternally free; nor are 
You the Lord eternal.” 

Answer: Though, according to the usage current in the 
sphere of Maya, I am the author of all this work, metaphysi- 
cally, know that I am no agent; for the same reason know 
that I am immutable, or trans-empirical. 


14.0. ùi J HAT HA Aas Tease: ANT Hat Ua ae, at: — 


14.0. Metaphysicaliy, I am not the agent of those works of 
which you deem Me the agent; for, 


a at aati forata a a AGS TET I 
ofa at apfasrarta ated a aà eri 


14. Works do not taint Me; I desire not their fruits. 
Whoso knows Me to be such, is not bound by works. 


141.4 aff uo a at aa aao fona eena, gT- 


13-15] Jnana Yoga 145 


waa 1 a a aT HAT GS A AR Be FT | ast g afi 
“ag wat’ gaha. Ag, Ser a achey, aq aati fanfa af 
qmq, Tara a at wathr forata—eta va a ara: ate at areca 
Arara “at ae wal, TA HAH oper” sa a HA 7 aga, 
aan a eerareevart watt wate gai: i 


14.1. Those works do not taint Me by originating a body 
etc., for Me, as I am not egoistic. Nor have I any desire or 
yearning for their fruits. It stands to reason that those trans- 
migrating persons, who have the conceit of being agents in 
respect of their works, and who yearn for their fruits, are 
tainted by them. But in the absence of both these, works taint 
Me not. Even another, who knows Me to be the Self of all, a 
non-agent without yearning for the fruits of works, is not bound 
by works. In his case, too, works do not originate a psycho- 
physical organism. 


15.0. “a ag Hal a À aoe eer” sf — 


15.0. ‘How? I am not an agent; I desire not. the fruits of 
works’ — 


Ud ate Fa HA Gaeta Beata 
kapa a aie 


15. Knowing thus was work done by ancient seekers 
after liberation. Therefore you too do only work, as 
was done by the ancients in bygone days. 


15.1. Ut a u g m at A ga: a aa a. | 


15.1. Knowing thus was work done even by the ancients, 
who have passed away and who sought liberation. Therefore 
do only work. Don’t sit inactive; neither renounce. So, since 


146 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam - [Ch. IV 


even the ancients worked, work for mind’s purification if 
you are ignorant of the Self; but if you know the Truth, work 
for the world’s well-being, as was done by the ancients such as 
Janaka in excellent style. 


16.0. q7 FF aq ria aaa wa HO ga fH faafia 
‘gd: yit pag A? sad — aa ng A adi | wey? — 


16.0. Objection: If work is to be done, I shall do it at Your 
bidding. Why recommend it in the words ‘done by the an- 
cients in by-gone days’ ? 

Answer: Because, great confusion prevails as regards work. 
How? 


fa at franda naasa MIZAT: | 
aA HT aefa aee EASTA NRN 


16. What is work? What is non-work? In respect of 
these questions the sages even are deluded. Therefore, 
I shall elucidate the nature of work, by knowing which 
you will be delivered from evil. 


16.1. fe at cfr n fe at fe a aed aft sag: afar: fà 
aa aferq sataa M: ale wat: | aq aa: A Te ae TF 
wad a yaaa, aq areat fafacar watfe wrewst aera Parad 1! 


16.1. Even the sages of powerful intellects are deluded in 
respect of the questions what work is and what non-work is. 
Therefore, I shall elucidate for you work and non-work, by 
knowing which you will be delivered from ‘evil’ or the empirical 
life. 


17.0.4 3 Va waar ater — at am serfeacer aa, aad 
ara aaf gent aa; fe aa atget ? —efa | wear ? sea — 


17.0. Don’t think: “Work is well-known in the world. 


15-18] Jnana Yoga 147 


Exertion of body etc., is work, while non-work is its absence 
or immobility. What is there to know about them?” Why? 
Listen: 


eam ete atger aA a faa: | 
AHA GWT TEA BAM Tht: wot 


17. Indeed you ought to know about work; also you 
ought to know about bad work; and, besides, you ought 
to know about non-work. Profound is the course of 
work. 


17.1. Say: sf u wr: areatateaer fe aearq afta ater area, 
ae a rede faa: saaga, car aad: «quit ager 
afer afa fava sreqrere: acter: | wear Tear favar gaT — wan: 
aa sian aaifeaq—aarediaado—ate: arereet art ser: 


17.1. Indeed, one ought to know about the work enjoined 
by the Sastra and also of ‘bad’ or forbidden work. Similarly 
of non-work, or immobility, also one ought to know. ‘Is’ has 
to be understood after the expression boddhavya used thrice in 
the verse. Because, the course of work is ‘profound’—hard to 
understand. ‘Work’ connotes the three—work, bad work and 
non-work. ‘Course’ means the truth. 


18.0. fe Ga: art Hate: aq ate sears eft stoma? seaI— 


18.0. What is the truth about work etc., that has to be 
known, and which the Lord has promised to elucidate? 
Answer: 


HATHA FT: Aae A Hy N: | 
a agar IAN A WH: PARATA Ui 


18. Whoso beholds non-work in work and work in non- 
work is wise among men; he is integrated; he does all 
works. 


148 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. IV 


18.1. Saf aft uo par, feat sfa wet aaa, afeaq war 
yay pata a wad, sedi a sahra adaracar safatracat: 
—aq asa wa fe aa: wa faaara afsaryat wa— 
ay oO: wad af, a: afsart ÀN, a am: aN a, perie 
amami a a, sf ead maA: gataeeeit 1 


18.1. Any action done is work; whoso beholds in it ‘non- 
work or absence of work’, and in ‘non-work or absence of work’, 
work—is wise among men. Action and cessation therefrom 
depend on the agent. All references to action, its accessories 
and so forth take place on the plane of nescience before Reality 
is attained. A man of such attainment is not only wise but 
also integrated, a Yogi; he does the totality of works. Thus 
is extolled the one who beholds work in non-work and non- 
work in work reciprocally. 


18.2. aq fw ee fares Sead ‘adi wet a: gata’ ata, atf 
aay cf? a fe et aed and, aed at at ag faeg we Tea 
meet ? —a, wae wg meri: aq FAad Hanrad Aegee: wwe, 


qa at Us Heda | aT auras ae Wray — “Hava A: 
mead sare 1) ae: a faga l afena | ‘ateea’ [20] gf 


a arid Gert | a a farting sand ARM end; ‘ad 
mear medan [24] ahr A SH 1 aera sated fara 
Tete morr: adana waa: cat ‘Heed a: gè | 


18.2. Objection: What is the sense of this self-contradictory 
proposition about the perception of non-work in work and 
vice versa? Work, of course, can’t be non-work, nor non-work, 
work. How can the beholder see contradictory states ? 

Answer: Not so. What in truth is non-work appears, to a 
deluded man, as work; and, similarly, work appears as non- 
work. The Lord is pleading for veridical perception in 4.18. 
So no self-contradiction is entailed. This follows also because 
it alone would make sense of the claim of wisdom on behalf of 
such a beholder. The passage 4.17 also speaks of veridical 
perception in the expression ‘it ought to be known’. Contradic- 
tory perception cannot deliver any from evil; vide 4.16. There- 


18] Jnana Yoga 149 


fore the Lord’s utterance in 4.18 seeks to abolish the contra- 
dictory perception, by the ignorant, of work and non-work. 


18.3.7 4 aa wate sat afer, gus acaty eq i are aF- 
aia at, pataa sad: 1 aa: aadA wa mateo 
oleh, war yaaa sea, qaaa ar way | 


18.3. Note that there is no non-work contained in work as 
Jujube fruits (Badari) are contained in a bowl. Nor is there 
work in the container, non-work; for this latter means the 
absence of work. Therefore, the empiricists mistakenly appre- 
hend work and non-work as water is apprehended in the mirage 
or silver in nacre. 


18.4. aq eH HAG aaa a aafaq afrada—aq 4, aterer ara 


TI Tea, vs set aati aaa wife a PARNA, 


ma atacand sad ‘ature a: weaq gare i 


18.4. Objection: Is not work just work for all alike? It never 
forfeits its nature. 

Answer: No. To a man in a moving boat, the stationary 
trees on the banks seem to move in the opposite direction; 
remote moving objects seem to be stationary. Similarly in this 
context, too, must be understood the perception of work in 
non-work and vice-versa. Therefore, to correct this mistake 
is advanced the proposition in IV.18. 


18.5. aq Uda sess saa aaa Aana N- 
aami Areata aft GT Gt sat ae wa, gaa a arse 
aga: | aafaa, ‘a aad faa [ 2.20, 24.) genfa 
areata Fara: gaea faa: seh: aera | afeaq Harare 
amir Afaria NATET, aa — “Ra at fraai raisa 
atfgat:” (3 &) | gemi ant maA seater “ag wal, wT wad 
oc exe A e E 
we fra: seat gA ery” sh areca rÀ acd T 


150 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IV 


ore | at Be orp faaata ae ward — ‘Hauge T: 
Tea gafa 1. 


18.5. The same objection has been often stated and ans- 
wered. But due to the impact of repeated and inveterate mis- 
apprehension, the plain man is totally deluded. He forgets the 
truth, though he has often heard it afhrmed. So he erroneously 
repeats the objection and demands an answer. In view of the 
inherent difficulty of this truth, the Lord repeatedly answers 
the objection. The negation of work as regards the Self, estab- 
lished by Sruti, Smrti and reasoning is stated in BG.2.20 and 
25; and it will be stated again. In that negation of work in 
respect of the Self, the perception of its opposite, namely work, 
has become an inveterate habit. Hence the statement in BG. 
IV.16 ‘even the sages are deluded’. The plain man super- 
imposes on the Self the work of the psycho-physical organism 
and maintains, “I am the agent, this work is mine; its fruit 
must be reaped by me.” Similarly he superimposes on the 
Self the cessation from work of the same organism, and the 
resultant satisfaction and maintains, ‘I do nothing; I rest com- 
fortably.’ In order to correct this contrary perception of the 
plain man of the world, the Lord affirms, ‘Whoso beholds 
non-work in work’ and so forth. 


18.6. IF a aH Ha aq miron sicfad afafea meaa ad: 
wea, aa: ea: aft “ag ech” ca aed 1 wa: areqanaaaar 
adafa pitt pA eq aay afar aad Hapa 
Gad ee ee eee 
ee sears @ aan a ene ee ee 
a: afar mea. TAY, & am: anit pei 4, & apn” 
maa: papa: wate gari: N 


18.6. Also note. in this context that the work of the psycho- 
physical organism of course remains as such; but it is super- 
imposed by all on the immutable Self that works not; for, 


18] Jnana Yoga 151 


even the learned man thinks, ‘I work’. Therefore, the wise 
man is he who perceives non-work in what all the world be- 
lieves to be work inherent in the self, even as he is aware of 
the non-movement of the trees on the river-bank despite their 
apparent movement. Contrariwise, he perceives work where 
the world superimposes non-work on the self mistaking the 
psycho-physical organism itself for the self, when the psycho- 
physical organism ceases to work. The consequence of the 
second superimposition is the egoistic affirmation, ‘I am happy, 
doing nothing.’ He is wise among men as he grasps the real 
distinction between work and non-work; he is the discrimi- 
nator, the integrated Yogi, who accomplishes all work. He is 
delivered from all evil. He has discharged all his duties. This 
is the upshot of this verse. 


18.7. aa rH: sea arena: Shaq | wary? faai feo any 
Saada ws Heravar saaHatfer atta Ferd T Fear | 
at A aH wet, aa VaHo FH Ted Aa Fe | 
aa fret aif wat a Taq Gerad, sear aq: ate at amt: 
eta goad Aa ae a a afer, deq | car frcaraet g aaah 
a at a waq aaron saeota sa — 


18.7. This verse has been interpreted differently by others. 
How? In a secondary sense; obligatory works enjoined by the 
scriptures, done for the sake of God, may be styled non-works, 
since they yield no fruits of their own. Their non-performance 
is non-work, which entails the sin of omission or pratyavaya. 
As such, this non-performance may be, secondarily, styled 
work. In this context, whosoever beholds non-work in obliga- 
tory work on account of its fruitlessness, is wise (work being 
non-work), just as a milch cow that yields no milk is a ‘no-cow’, 
as it yields not the reward namely, the milk for which it is kept. 
Similarly, whoso sees work in ‘non-work’, the non-performance 
of the obligatory work due to which results hell—the fruit of 
the sin of omission—is wise. 


18.8. 7 Udd Ah AMAA | Vasa ae ATT: AT 


152 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. IV 


Mewar (24) sa waa om aad areata 1 ae ? faai 
TTS AAT SMT ATA AR, J g A roaa ? a fe 
fart mona seprafiwnacdar a, fant ai a 4 
waa wa se BHT | Uda waft ada so 1 a fe aati 
“aq” oft att adem we ard fra g aderaarmy i a a 
aroq freer seraa: wate’ efa aama fafaq fe Sg | 
MUA Ala, afsard, aH, peadra FT ae sarad, eqfeat | 
Feared Ua fe Aa AYAETST | FI. AATEATT p AAT? 
a fe aa: ana: frada waft n 


18.8. The above interpretation is not rational; for release 
from evil cannot reasonably come from this kind of knowledge. 
It runs counter to the Lord’s utterance in BG 4.16. How? From 
performing obligatory works release from evil may, con- 
ceivably, result, but not from knowing that ‘they yield no 
fruits’. Sruti has not decreed that the knowledge of the fruit- 
lessness of obligatory works, or that of the latter, shall release 
one from evil, nor has the Lord maintained that position in the 
Gita. This should refute this theory of the perception of work 
in non-work. What has been enjoined here is not the duty of 
perceiving work in non-work; but only the duty of per- 
forming the obligatory work. No worthwile result may follow 
from the knowledge that the non-performance of obligatory 
work entails the sin of omission. The non-performance of 
obligatory work has not been enjoined as something to be 
known. From the erroneous perception ‘work is non-work’ 
there cannot follow release from evil, wisdom, Yogic integra- 
tion and the state of being a performer of all works; it deserves 
no laudation. Erroneous cognition itself is an obvious evil. 
How can it release one from other evils? Darkness cannot 
dispel darkness. 


18.9. 7 waft aq andes, saat ar ada, a aq fraa- 
amd, fe afe ? wt: serena —a, patta aft 
Tog Heer axa 1 ate agaaa ahaa faery: 


18] Jnana Yoga 153 


a i raa: eq’ A aa aA maA pA q: 
ata fm fire ? aa wd aÀ waa ara sraa 
aft ag afer ed 1 TF Wad Saet aaa A seq: arf 
WTI FATT: TIA Fatt CM Sela awh THA t HAVA yar: 
[3.x9.] ear fe a eReat oe ah a ga: ame: wala | aaa a 
weed tiga a ade va i a a foward stget eft sea | a a 
fram ager wafa, acrermentad at RNT, O| 


18.9. It may be urged that the perception of non-work in 
work or of work in non-work is no erroneous cognition but a 
form:of secondary knowledge, due to the fruitlessness or fruit- 
fulness of the obligatory work and its non-performance. But 
this is unavailing; for the śrut: does not teach any result as 
accruing from a secondary knowledge of work and non-work. 
No merit may be claimed for a supposition that rejects what. 
has been positively stated and sets up what has not even been 
alluded to. The view now being repudiated could very well 
have been directly stated as follows: Obligatory works yield 
no fruits; their non-performance entails fall into hell. Why 
then, was a misleading subterfuge adopted in the expressions, 
‘‘Whoso beholds non-work in work” etc? An interpretation 
like the objector’s amounts to the statement that the Lord’s 
words are intended to confound the world. The truth conveyed 
by Him is not anything to be concealed in deceptive words. 
Nor are they in order just because what they convey will 
become easy to grasp when repeatedly restated in other words. 
The idea conveyed in BG 2.47 is extremely lucid; it calls for 
no repetition at all. Everywhere what is lauded and what offers 
itself as the object of knowledge calls for performance. Nothing 
unprofitable may be said to be worth knowing. No erroneous 
cognition needs to be known; neither its content, which is but 
an appearance. 


18.10. ame aai sac arava Serarrarateata: ‘araat faerct 
area: [3 2%.) aft, ‘at wee: wart’ [ot ot 2 2.) aaa 
aft sae: arash | Aad: Agata Taal — waste Bq waa, 
aa aft wad aq — sae SM | aa ST A, Adearrfacnne | 


154 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IV 


a a fans free at med, pacer, Gam a gfain 
ETÀ: I EÀ A ETTA areas wa Sora af 
eu a aA a mA a afad era; araa a faa 
faes ae” sft aa MAT sft gaT: | ae ANTAA: 
va a ‘ava gore: | am a arena: eA: WH: ec 


18.10. From a mere negation like the non-performance of 
obligatory works a positive entity like the sin of omission cannot 
arise, vide BG II.16 and CU VI1.2.2, which deny the birth of a 
positive entity from non-being. To affirm the birth of aught 
positive from non-being is equivalent to saying that non-being 
may become positive being and being non-being. This is un- 
reasonable, as it repudiates all means of right cognition. A 
Sastra may not enjoin futile work as this is but pain. Pain may 
not be consciously striven for. Since the non-performance of 
obligatory work is held to lead to a fall into hell, both its per- 
formance and non-performance promote only evil. The Sastra 
that teaches it is construed as unprofitable. This position also 
implies self-contradiction on the part of its sponsor. Having 
maintained that obligatory work yields no fruit, he is now 
driven to hold that it makes for liberation. Therefore the verse 
IV. 18 means what we have explained. 


19.0. aq Vad Harel anata wad — 


19.0. The perception of non-work etc., in work and the 
like, is extolled: 


TET Ad AAEM: BAAHCTAAAT: | 
maaana TATE: TST TIT: ues 
19. Him the wise call a man of discrimination, all of 
whose undertakings are free from desire-prompted 


imaginations and all of whose works have been con- 
sumed in the fire of knowledge. 


19.1. ea fe uo wea gare: ad maa. aware: aati 


19] Jnana Yoga 155 


patter, award sft ame, aaia: art: acerca 
weet: atin: qa Berar: wasted; Tada Aq aleduert faa 
aq aera | at manant patel aetati ad ala 
afia: dt aria aara aam eatin ger i ag: Toate: 
qet qr: agra: 1 


19.1. All his undertakings or works of him who has the 
perception set forth in IV.18 are free from desires and imagi- 
nations prompted by them. They are performed without 
egoistic motives, being mere motions. If the agent is an activist 
his works promote the world’s welfare. If he is a quietist they 
just keep him alive. The knowledge or the perception of non- 
work in work etc., is like a fire. He, all of whose works, good 
as well as evil, are consumed in this fire, is the real man of 
discrimination—so think the wise, the knowers of Brahman. 


20.0. 49 Pai aanta a aenta va fosni daet 
aana ae: aq Haft a ia; wats mg farsa: svat: | aeg 
mpat GL VATS saaana: cd, a ad yat- 
samaa aaa Te Theos wai a Hahaq shaer afa 
Hay ache a amaaa eaaa stave Gad wafer 
vanity va fafaq sA, manaa alt at wat wa 
drad eft vay ot atag ae — 

20.0. He who habitually perceives non-work, etc., in work 
and so forth is, for that very reason, beyond all works; he is a 
renouncer and his stirrings are meant just to maintain life in 
the body. He does not work though, before the dawn of dis- 
crimination, he was an activist. But he whose operative works 
have begun to bear fruits and who, later, achieves the right 
perception of the Self will, of course, renounce works with all 
their auxiliaries; he sees no profit in any work whatsoever. If, 
for some reason or other, works have not been wholly re- 
nounced by such a sage, due to his detachment from works 
and their fruits, his persistent performance of works is for the 
world’s welfare. He has no private end to serve. In truth, he 
works not ai all. All his works have been burnt up in the fire 


156 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. IV 


of knowledge and so his work has become non-work. To set 
forth this idea, says the Lord: 


waa nanos frat fre: | 
aafaa ta fafaa atta a: Rott 


20. Giving up attachment to the fruits of works, etern- 
ally content, independent, the man, engaged in works 
as he is, does nothing at all. 


20.1. ARA Bt u waa Hey aA Tomes Fah TAT 
faqa: faari fasay geet: i aaa. aafaa, ara: AA 
aq afaa geared aaa, gerep T: srt: | 
faar fanm wet Teia seed ua, aA fanaa | 
dt gaa eaaa aaa wet aaa wa sft NA, 
aq: aimara Aangaande aefa aAa ar qaq 
aif Anas fraa ta fataq wera a I 


20.1. He does nothing who gives up conceit in all works 
and attachment to their fruits; who is ever content by virtue 
of the knowledge already set forth. The idea is that he does 
not desire objects of any kind. He is free from all dependence. 
Dependence refers to the external means, relying on which, 
goals are sought to be reached. The sense is that he has no 
reliance on means to ends, seen and unseen. Work done by the 
knower is, in reality, non-work; for he has already achieved 
the realization of the Self that acts not. What ought to follow 
is that such a sage, having -no private ends to serve, should 
give up all work and their auxiliaries. But due to the desire to 
promote world’s welfare, he finds no way out of activity. Or, 
may be, he wants to avoid the censure of righteous folk. So he 
may, as was his wont before Self-realization, continue to 
work. Still, he works not; for he knows his identity with the 
work-free Self. 


21.0. 4 Oa: pima. mia sare sehr aata sem- 
cafe fafert aanta: a gere faaata gerer 


20-21] Jnana Yoga 157 


eat m a a ae ae Aaa AE. A: 
mas qal R a at aag mg — 


21.0. On the contrary, the ascetic who, prior to any under- 
taking, has had the realization, as his Self, of the work-free 
Brahman that is the innermost indweller, remains loyal to the 
discipline of knowledge; he desires no objective good, seen or 
unseen, and notes that all work directed to ends, seen or 
unseen, is unprofitable. He renounces all actions while main- 
taining a bare bodily existence, and is liberated. To elucidate 
this idea, the Lord says: 


farrattdataaran amada: | 
MU Fas HH gifa fafaa 112 211 


21. Free from expectations, controlling mind and self, 
renouncing all possessions, one who does but an ex- 
clusive form of bodily work incurs no sin. 


21.1. froatt: A ou fret: fta: aris: aeg a: frcett,, 
aafaa fad weer area ae: iroi: at sat aft 
aati da at a, amada: ae: ad: fag: aa a, Ae rå- 
tearm, tae: cate attarated, at dq a arcitia 7 
create frka aa afee of a 1 iA wae: fatearq wa 
TTT TH AT | AAT ATT aH: wale, Aare. am: wate gaT: N 


21.1. He from whom all expectations have departed is 
‘free from expectations’. The ‘mind’ is the inner sense. Here 
‘self means the external psycho-physical organism as a whole. 
He who has controlled both these is referred to here. He has 
given up all possessions. The sole aim of his bodily work is the 
maintenance of his body, and he has no conceit in that work 
even. He incurs no sin that is adverse to his interests; he reaps 
no merit. Even merit, for the seeker of deliverance, is a sort of 
sin; for it will entail bondage. So he is delivered from sin and 
merit or in other words, delivered from empirical life. 

t2 


158 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IV 


21.2. fea MÙ aaa ay scam fe mAd mA at afa- 
Sat ? aeaa amA ak ad ef ? fe a aa: —afe 
Toad m at, afe a rarnana amt sa ? 
sad — mer mAd at at aha eg, aa gerea 
at sfafesy aft rA gi a anette fread sf aaa: farat 
md | aed want gers adie adq areata fatten 
eat qaa. woes gy: | UIT aH FAT she faa Faa- 


HATH CATT | TI g Tea TAT ATA are iil afri WT, 
à wa aAa: maaa aa ‘we Afa’ 
sahaa: ARA AN pda a aAA faa | 
uya maaa annaaaa faea aart a wate; 
mafaia aaa qed wa A amaaan- 
qr: wa wy: | wa mÅ sae wt soe wher f fac 
wate ii | | 
91.2. By the expression ‘an. exclusive form of bodily work 
what is meant? Is it work to be accomplished by the body only 
or is it work whose sole aim is the maintenance of the body? 
What does the distinction between these two interpretations 
amount to? Listen: The first interpretation will involve a con- 
tradiction. Though even a prohibited bodily work is done 
leading to results seen or unseen, no sin will be incurred, 


according to the Lord. Further, it will have to be maintained 
that any course of work, prescribed by scriptures to be per- 
formed physically, with seen or unseen ends in view, cannot 
entail a sin. This is a position not maintained even by the 
opponent and therefore needs no refutation. The qualification 
in the expressions, ‘doing a bodily form of work’ and ‘exclu- 
sive’ implies that works, enjoined or prohibited, righteous or 
unrighteous, when performed by word or in thought entails 
sin. In this case is involved the further contradiction that an 
enjoined work, verbally or mentally performed, entails sin. 
Even as regards the performance of a forbidden work, the 


21-22] Jnana Yoga 159 


statement of the entailment of sin is futile, being too obvious to 
require it. On the other hand, when the expression ‘a bodily 
form of work’ is taken to denote work aimed at the mainten- 
ance of the body, the passage means as follows: Working from 
the point of view of the plain man, with the body, words or 
mind, without the conceit of agency and according to in- 
junctions and prohibitions, in order to keep up bodily exist- 
ence and avoiding all other similar works, one incurs no sins. 
Such a person cannot possibly sin at all; he won’t come by 
‘sin’ or sink into empirical life. For all his works have been 
consumed in the fire of knowledge. Of course he is delivered 
without obstacles of any kind. This is but a restatement of the 
fruit of perfect perception already set forth. Such an inter- 
pretation of the expression, ‘an exclusive form of bodily work’ 
is faultless. 


22.0. amarante at: ware: aiiferfaeat: wf sera 
maara Aafaa sara, — 


i agesar [ate T RR l. 3 agin 


22.0. An ascetic who has renounced all possessions will not 
have the food etc., needed to maintain his body; this requires 
that he lead a mendicant’s life. Utterances like BDS.22.5.19 
and Anugita 45.19 ‘what chance brings, unasked, uncon- 
trived’, permit certain sources of food and so forth for the 
maintenance of the ascetic’s body. The Lord prescribes the 
same in the verse that follows: 


UTGSTAAGR Carta FAACAT: | 
aa: fagrafagt a geans a fraeadt 12211 


22. Content with what is gained by chance, beyond 
dualities, rid of competitive spirit, equanimous in gain 
and loss, one is not bound in spite of working. 


160 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IV 


22.1. Wg Bt ul aaea: anasto: ATATA: 

aq aga: assess: geardta: ged: amA: ganas 
aafaa: gaa: seat 1 farce faa: fratafe: am: 
ga: agesrorver fast aftet a1 a: A afa: ware: afer 
fred: orem: wa: gifami: atA anatfecet TAIATA- 
qias: aq wiferfaarasar frerearfeadtin Aad “Aa 
fafaq weer [4 cl “wor wry adet” [3 2¢.] eat aar 
[aar ie i a E Ria, aie 
eH pA, Anaa g oae: Afrar araea 
eat wat wate | eaaa g meaa weal wa | a: Ua 
mreana: maamaa frereates at seat aft a 
raged mN ater: agra Arata sacar sft Beare: 
ua we [X 8% R2] N 


22.1. What is gained by ‘chance’ 1s what comes unsought. 
‘Content with that’ means that one feels he has had enough. 
When the mind is untroubled, though assailed by dualities 
like cold and heat, and so on, one is said to be ‘beyond all duali- 
ties’. ‘Rid of the competitive spirit’ is he who is not competi- 
tive, who sets himself against none. ‘Equanimous’ refers to 
the sameness of mind whether one gains what chance brings 
or fails to bring. An ascetic whois ‘the same’, is devoid of elation 
and depression, whether he gains or fails to gain food, etc., to 
support his life. He perceives non-work in work and so forth. 
He is established in the vision of the real Self. In respect of 
work like mendicancy involving the psycho-physical] organism, 
he is always convinced, “I do nothing” BG V.8; “The con- 
stituents subsist among constituents” BG III.28. Perceiving 
the non-agency of the Self he knows that he performs no work 
such as mendicancy etc. Only men of the world, when they 
note the usual forms of worldly activities, ascribe agency to 
him. Only thus a sage ‘becomes’ an agent vis-a-vis mendicancy, 
etc. His own experience, occasioned by the Sastras, the source 
of right cognition, is that he is but a non-agent. Seeing him 
apparently working as a mendicant with the sole aim of the 
up-keep of the bodily life, others may ascribe agency to him, 
but the sage is not bound. For, the source of bondage, namely, 


22—23] Jnana Yoga 161 


work along with its cause, has been consumed in the fire of 
knowledge. Thus this verse affirms what has already been 
declared in BG 4.19.21. 


23.0. ARA PARAT [X.20.] A Aa Wiss A EAT Aq 
ner ARRATE: SM det A AA FRÅN- 
PR A We ee oe 
pir anaa aft ‘Aa fafaq wofa a [¥.20.] fa maa: 
vata: | wer we aaa: aa. Teta— 


23.0. ‘Giving up attachment to the fruits of works’ (IV.20) 
—-in this verse is set forth ‘the absence of work’ for one who, 
due to operative work, continues to work as some occasion 
or other for it arises. He does this in spite of his realization 
that the inactive Brahman 1s his Self and, as such, renuncia- 
tion of all works is appropriate for him. In fact he has had the 
perception that there is neither a real agent, nor work, nor 
purpose to be served by it. In spite of his continuing to work, 
‘he does nothing at all’ (BG IV.20). Of such a sage as this: 


THA HHT Araraercada: N 
UAT: HH AAT aa NRIN 


23. Whose attachment has vanished, who has been 
liberated, whose mind has been established in know- 
ledge and who works as a sacrifice, all works are dis- 
solved. 


23.1. TPT Ba uo maga ada: faoa, amex faga- 
caudate: mamaaa: aA va aaferd At: wer ata 
maaana: wea, aaa agat ara: faidaan: ad aaa ag 
mI Geogr add sft aay we aq and vfaciad-farsate gost: 1 


23.1. ‘Whose attachment has vanished’ means of one who is 
attached to nothing whatsoever. He has been liberated, all 
bondage due to righteousness and unrighteousness having 
fallen off. His mind has been established in knowledge. He 


162 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IV 


works as a sacrifice. Hence together with ‘ends’ or fruits all 
his works ‘are dissolved’—they perish. This is the idea. 


24.0. FEAT TA: Br Pera at aa agd aay sfa- 
aad sfa sad? qa: — 


24.0. Why does the work that is done fail to produce its 
result, and instead get wholly dissolved? Because, 


wei ae lateral AIT FAT | 
Mela Aa Weed ACIHAATATTAT UVTI 


24. The means of the sacrificial offering is Brahman; 
Brahman is the oblation placed in the fire of Brahman 
and by Brahman is the sacrifice made. This sacrificer, 
who concentrates on the act that is Brahman, reaches 
Brahman alone. 


24.1. He oft u wer at at Hey garfaq afa: aeat stata aq 
wanna waft, aad ata adfa, sar aq cat aq alma ws 
afr 1 ‘waar at ofa sane oe | ad deN Fad BH Aq A 
welfae: wala grt: | we ga awa aq gaden qami aq ala 
wey | Ta Ha eh aAed eq | afta: aft ada; aa gad Ter 
eal, Tela Hat sores: | aq at ed gaafe aq ada i aq a WIT 
we daft aga | averedtaahier—agda at aA afeaq afa: 
rma a seater: —aq soetanfier ade waa 


24.1. The means by which the Brahman-knower offers the 
oblation in the fire, is seen by him to be Brahman only. He sees 
it as nothing but Brahman, just as in the nacre one sees the 
total absence of silver. Thus is affirmed the fact that the instru- 
ment of offering is Brahman alone, as one may say that what 
seems to be silver is only nacre. The words Brahman and 
arpana are uncompounded. The sense is: that which the plain 
man takes to be the instrument is Brahman only for the 
Brahman-knower. So is oblation Brahman—i.e., what is taken 


23-24] Jňāna Yoga 163 


to be oblation is only Brahman for him. ‘Brahman-fire’ is a 
compound. The fire in which the oblation is offered by the 
agent is also Brahman. That agent, the sacrificer, too is 
Brahman. His action, namely, the sacrifice or hutam, is also 
Brahman. The fruit he has to reap too is Brahman. The action 
of offering is Brahman. He who concentrates thereon, is the 
agent who repairs to Brahman. 


24.2. UE sangam aft Prat at reia: aad, ARI- 
ACTH 1 HATS AERA ATTA, aigat aN- 
mere aga riea: sft 1 an ader werd atordtariag 
feted: ager arte arg | cen ada et aay aft ae: 
fags: saba, arteqgaarared | a fe aresafacted ame aa 


24.2. Thus even the work performed by one seeking the 
world’s welfare is, metaphysically, no work at all; for, the 
knowledge of Brahman has wiped out all his Karma. The 
picturing of :nowledge as a sacrifice, even in regard to the 
renouncer of all works, all of whose works have ceased to be, 
is eminently in order. Its object is the laudation of right percep- 
tion. This laudation takes the form of identifying auxiliaries, 
well-known in the context of sacrificial rites, with Brahman 
in the spiritual context of the sage who has won the realization 
of the supreme Truth. Otherwise, the exclusive description of 
these auxiliaries alone as Brahman will be pointless since all 
things, in reality, are Brahman. Therefore, for the sage who 
knows all the world to be Brahman there is no work to per- 
form. All ideas of auxiliaries of work have ceased to hold good 
for him. A work like sacrifice is unthinkable in the absence of 
ideas relating to auxiliaries. The normal experience is that 
works like the fire-sacrifice are invariably preceded by notions 
conveyed by Sruti, of deities to whom offerings are made, and 
also by the conceit of agency and the desire for the fruits of 


164 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IV 


works. They are not preceded by: the dissolution of these 
distinctive ideas or the absence of the conceit and the desire 
referred to. 


24.3. Tat aati k a ae tain, ee 
Ue aq | aa a ata ‘HHH g: Gea [¥. ee. 
aq faaam a: [¥.20. ], aor Tag ade [¢.2 
wits am ata arafaq [4.¢.] A a 


mead ge | anr Re aaa rafeartorfearentarne- 
wage: | areraceraray wet aft fage: set aad i ae: sw ‘AAT 
sasaa [33] afr n 


24.3. But the text refers to work marked by the disappear- 
ance of ideas relating to fruit, work, and auxiliaries due to 
all-dissolving Brahman-knowledge. Therefore this is no work 
at all. Thus has it been elucidated in 4.18, 20; 3.28; 5.8; etc. 
To demonstrate this, the Lord dissolves in these texts the ideas 
of difference among work, auxiliaries, and fruit. And in the 
context of the fire-sacrifice prompted by desire, its character 
as ‘desire-prompted’ is seen to be wiped out when the desire 
in question is dissolved. Also, it is a matter of experience that 
deliberate or spontaneous works produce distinctive results. 
In the present context also, for the sage whose sense of differ- 
ence among auxiliaries, work, and fruit has been dissolved by 
Brahman-knowledge, work or apparent movements of limbs 
cease to be work. Hence the statement ‘all works are dissolved’ 


(4.23). 


244 HF STAY gaa we aq amA, ata fee am- 
fer mafaa area oraferdt aq dea at Hoa | aa a ad- 
urfegfg: fada, fe g aima maafa: mAd, war sami 
fawarfeagtg:, an ar aÀ a@afe: — aAa [er ze 2 4] 4 
24.4. Some interpreters assert: Brahman is the auxiliaries 
of sacrifice. It seems that Brahman alone assumes a five-fold 


24] Jnana Yoga 165 


character as the auxiliaries and performs work. The idea of 
being instrument etc., of work does not cease; rather the idea 
of being Brahman 1s instilled into them, just as in an image 
the idea of being Visnu is instilled, or in a name, the idea of 
being Brahman (vide CU.7.1.5). | 


24.5. aed, way aft eq ale ware wa a Vd | WF 
3 aerated maaa ara aaetfecaa feria sore 
‘Tar TAA MAAT: [¥.33.] afe at att | wr a ang 
ae aad ‘wey sare wae aaa Bam 1 aT adag 
mamai aongea aag: aad ararfey za a aft gad a aut 
Ra ser ze haaa era, atonfefayacaq MAA | 


24.5. Well, this might have been the case, if the context 
had not, as its theme, the glorification of knowledge as sacri- 
fice. Of course here knowledge as sacrifice refers to right percep- 
tion, and relatively to numerous activities as sacrifice. The 
Lord lauds knowledge in the words, ‘““Knowledge as sacrifice 
is superior to material sacrifice” (4.33). The articulation. in 
4.24 secures the character of sacrifice for knowledge as already 
explained. But, for those who hold that just as in the case of 
the idea of Visnu vis-a-vis an image, the idea of Brahman too 
has to be instilled into the sacrificial auxiliaries, the theme 
of the context will cease to be Brahman-knowledge either 
expressly or by -implication; for them knowledge will refer 
only to sacrificial auxiliaries. 


24.6.4 4 gamam Arne sad | ‘aga aa watery aft 
q geud | feed a aaraa sere are sere eft | wHafacrnz; 
amat a sad maA a: AT |e] sara, wat WT aA- 
TY VE BAS | MI WIAA Aas: TeaT [33.], ‘ATT 
wea Tet mg [3°.] aRar waned wa Haq soe: 
eae: | TA HHA AA aag. arent, sfrararq za fao- 
gf, sa ef aaa 1 AeA aaen: va we We: N 


24.6. Nor can the fruit of emancipation be secured by 
means of a cognitive construction. On the other hand the text 


166 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IV 


asserts, ‘“By him will Brahman be attained.” The achievement 
of emancipation without right perception is self-contradic- 
tory. This stance also runs counter to the contextual theme 
which is right perception, vide 4.18. The conclusion, too, rests 
on this theme. This chapter concludes with the laudation of 
right perception in 4.33 and 39. Therefore it is illogical to 
argue that, all of a sudden, the instilling of the ideas of Brah- 
man in sacrificial auxiliaries is taught as that of Visnu in an 
image. Hence the meaning of the verse 4.24 is as set forth by 
us. 


25.0.77 aT waren mat ae ayant wat aft oar: 
saad aAa scarfeat— 


25.0. Now having high-lighted right perception as sacrifice, 
other sacrifices too are introduced for belauding that percep- 
tion in the verses that follow: 


Aana? aa ARa: wiae | 
samaa? ui aiaa A RLN 


25. Some Yogins offer sacrifices to deities; others sacri- 
fice in the fire of Brahman by means of the sacrifice 
itself. 


25.1. àa gf n lAa ear aA Aq aAa wal eat aa. Àa 
at ast airs: aa: iaa Hatters: Spee aia 
wa [ẹ 3. 3 2], amaaa wer [F 3 3 & 2¢.] ‘At n- 
aAa HAT A eT AATATT’ [3. 3. 2] qarferatte aa- 
] ‘aft afr [a 3. ¥. 
xX. 22.] A areas aaa sa | wal a aq afr a: 
Amaron war afta: aft wart saat set warfac: 
TAY — aaar: T ATH ae TST — THT 
at ward: wa wa at qena aada 
wefret att wa arama seen aga afa, afar 
arent: faafaa Toae wa aq ata a afenq ate: a Haft 
wenctacqastttassr: aafaa: Fort: 1 


24-26] Jnana Yoga 167 


25.1. ‘Sacrifice offered to deities’ is that by means of which 
the deities are propitiated. To that alone some ‘Yogins’ or 
activists attend. This is the sense. ‘In the fire of Brahman’— 
Brahman being what the following passages affirm: Truth, 
knowledge, the Infinite is Brahman (7U 2.1); experiential 
knowledge, bliss, is Brahman (BU.3.9.28); that direct and 
immediate entity is Brahman, the Self innermost (Ibid.3.4.1). 
These and similar passages affirm that Brahman is beyond all 
empirical attributes like hunger and thirst (BU.3.5.1)—“Not 
so, not so” (BU.4.4.22). That which is Brahman the fire—the 
receptacle of oblation—is Brahmanfire, in which ‘some’ Brah- 
man-knowers offer ‘sacrifice’. Sacrifice here means the Self. 
Metaphysically this Self is the supreme Brahman. But it is 
conjoined to adjuncts like the intellect. On it are superimposed 
the attributes of all these adjuncts. It takes on the character 
of an oblation. Some activists deliberately cast it in ‘that fire’. 
The sacrifice in that fire means the perception of the self with 
adjuncts as the supreme Brahman devoid of all adjuncts. This 
sacrifice they perform. The idea 1s that the renouncers devote 
themselves to the perception of the identity of Brahman and 
Atman. 


26.0. M4 waren: aa: aam aay voted aT 
[v¥.2v.] mR È: sede: ‘Mar Ferma wad MAAT: Taq 
[¥.33.] xerfear gat — 


26.0. This sacrifice of right perception introduced in verse 
4.24 etc., is subsumed under sacrifices to deities in order to 
glorify it in the verse 4.33: ‘‘Scourage of foes! the sacrifice by 
knowledge is superior to material sacrifice.” 


NAAA iania wea | 
madaan shear waft ue 


26. Others sacrifice the senses, hearing, etc., in the 
fires of restraints; yet others sacrifice objects like 
sound in the fires of the senses. 


168 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IV 


26.1. sraratfa str ou ararette far at Na: aaa — 
octet dat frac a agaaa — aaa va ama ay Walt 
ae ee ee 
arf wa aaa: ay efaafay wefa— strate: safaegteuarer 
Sq Aad I 

fra — 


26.1. Some Yogins sacrifice senses, hearing etc., in res- 
traints. The plural is used because each sense has a correspond- 
ing restraint. The restraints are the fires. The meaning is that 
they practise restraint alone. Others sacrifice objects, sound 
and so forth, in the fires of the senses. Cognition of objects by 
means of senses they deem a sacrifice. 

And, 


aafaa Woah ast | 
WMATA Tats ATTA wert 


27. Yet others sacrifice all sense-activities and all acti- 
vities of vital breaths in the fire of self-restraint, 
kindled by knowledge. 


27.1. watt aft n aati sfexaeatiy sfeart aati, ef 
Baio, sar moata srr: ary: eaS: acpatfor gaa- 
met aft a aat amaaan arate aan: aaa: a We 
aria: teat maiaa wets sfc maA caer za 
wet faaara gra RA vata aana sere: N 


27.1. ‘Activities of the senses and those of vital breaths’— 
the vital breath is air in the living body. Its activities are 
bending, extending and so forth. A set of Yogins, sacrifice 
1.e., Offer these in the Yoga-fire of self-restraint, self-restraint 
being deemed the Yoga-fire. As a lamp of light is kindled with 
oil, so is the Yoga-fire by discriminative knowledge. ‘Offering 
there’ means total dissolution. 


TUAATRANAAT AVTAATSAATISTT | 
AMATAR WAT: HAAAT: WII 


26--29] Jnana Yoga 169 


28. Other ascetics, subject to severe disciplines, sacri- 
fice their material possessions, their penances, spiri- 
tual exercises, prescribed lessons, and knowledge. 


28.1. zA ea u geo: ahi cafe araga gata a d 
TMA: | Ta: TT: ae: A aafeaar A aaa: | ATTA: MON- 
masega: ANT: ae: AMT A Aha: | Ta ATL aAA ATA- 
aa: a rareara: warfafs semana: ae: eT A AAA: | ATA- 
am: ma menda Raa ae: ast a wags: a 1 Ada: aaa: 
afaa: aera frat aaa eaaa warts sar d afaa: 1 


28.1. “Those who sacrifice materials’ expend, in the spirit 
of sacrifice, their wealth in holy places. The ascetics who 
deem their penances as sacrifice constitute the next group. 
Those who deem breath-restraints, withdrawals etc., as sacri- 
fices, sacrifice their spiritual exercises. Similarly others deem 
their methodical prescribed study of the RgVeda and so forth 
as a sacrifice. Those reckon knowledge a sacrifice who deem 
their masterly knowledge of Sastras itself as such. They are 
tireless in application; their disciplines are ‘sharp’, i.e. shar- 
pened to the utmost severity. 

Besides, 


AAT Wala AT MASTA TATSTT | 
WITT TA SAT ATTATATTANT: NRN 


29. Some intent on breath-control, blocking the move- 
ment of the in-breath and out-breath, sacrifice the in- 
breath in the out-breath, and, similarly, sacrifice the 
out-breath in the in-breath. 


29.1. wat Sf ul aad aaa Wala anfa sro mafa, 
qed a maA Hater Scat: | IM sat TMT at ela, tanet 
a sare åf ai 1 ma ganfart ara: farted 
seg ma: aadA aaa aaa aia: F soa Ud raea 


170 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IV 


29.1. In ‘the out-breath’, in its movements, they ‘sacrifice’ — 
cast—the movements of the in-breath; they practise a phase 
of breath-control, called the in-filling. So in the in-breath they 
sacrifice the out-breath, they practise the phase called the 
emptying out. The movement of in-breath refers to its exit 
through mouth and nostrils. In contrast, the downward move- 
ment is that of the out-breath. Restraining these two move- 
ments, those who are devoted to the practice of breath control 
perform the kumbhaka, the immobilization of breath. This is 
the idea. 

Also, 


wat Fran: WT ste Tata | 
wasalt aataat aaeattaaeran: 1301! 


30. Yet others, with strictly regulated diet, sacrifice 
vital breaths in vital breaths. All those are conversant 
with sacrifice, having destroyed their sins by acts of 
sacrifice. 


30.1. wat ef wo wat faama: faa: faa: mgr: A d 
faamaga: aed: ma aa A wa qg, wer A ara: 
wa: feat gay amaa ae aR agf, d aa as: ga 
wafa | ağ A aafaa: aaae: at: ae: afta: arfa: 
FN: AIT A AaAlIaHeAay: N 
ta ae aaa fardet — 


30.1. Those who have strictly restricted their diet, sacrifice 
vital breaths in those very breaths. In the breath that is 
mastered, other vital breaths are ‘sacrificed.’ i.e., these appear 
as though they entered into it. All these whose sins have been 
attenuated by these sacrifices are conversant with sacrifices. 

Having performed the sacrifices thus enumerated, 


29-32] Jnana Yoga 171 


anea fa a AATAAT | 
mA AASER PASA: PETA 113 21 


31. They partake of the ambrosial remains of these 
sacrifices and repair to the eternal Brahman. The non- 
performer of sacrifices does not own (even) this world; 
why then, O best of Kuru princes! speak of another? 


31.1. at aft u aaaea: aarat ae aa, aaa a aq 
aad a aae, aq yew sft aah 1 aie oa 
gar æa aot aurfafrated aa aqared yard a a aah- 
sya: mfa mafa aa amai faced aq: Aq; Po- 
aAa afr aaa Ted | a Ha ola: aasrfrararcoisty aft 
rater aarat watt ar: wer ae a wat: Ta | a AAT: 
fafrscarrtares: GTT ? N 


31.1. The remains of sacrifices are what is left over; it is 
ambrosia. The sacrificers partake of it. Having performed the 
sacrifices enumerated above, they eat, according to Vedic 
injunctions, the ambrosial food and they repair to the eternal 
Brahman, in case they seek liberation. From the logic of the 
situation it follows that this happens in course of time. Even 
this world of human beings is not won by him who performs 
not even one of these sacrifices. How then, O the best of the 
Kuru princes, can he win the other world, to win which 
special causal collocations are called for? 


va agfa aa fa wert Ae | 
HAMAS ATT Atta Area fae 132M 


32. Thus have many sacrifices been spread out in the 
pages of the Veda. Know them all to be born of works. 
Knowing thus will you be liberated. 


32.1. Ut gf u water: agfa: agvare: agar: faa: fae: 
TIT: TET HA srt | Acer Hara: Fa: Fa fade: Joa; 
aaa ‘aha fe srg wea: [È aT. 3.2.%.] gare | ara arfa- 


172 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IV 


afara tga fats at vary aeaa, froatare: fe scar | 
aa: Ua aca aea a | A ASAI: Ua, farg sara: 
zA Alea HEAT ARMA Alas sear Aaraeqard Fas: 


32.1. As stated, many sorts of sacrifice have been ‘spread 
out’—set-forth—in the Vedic path. Those which are known 
by means of the Vedas are said to be ‘spread out’ in ‘the face’ 
of the Vedas; for example, “we sacrifice the vital breaths in 
speech” (A7zt.A.3.26). Know all of them to be born of works— 
born of the exertions of the body, word and mind, and not of 
the Self. For the Self works not. Therefore, thus knowing, you 
will be released from evil. Knowing “‘these are not my activi- 
ties; I exert not, I am indifferent’’—due to this right percep- 
tion, you will be released from ‘evil’ or the bondage of empiri- 
cal life. This is the idea. 


33.0. ‘set sores aerate gated ARTA i aaa 
aap safest: 1 ot: fasygeartsairt: amt ead i war ? — 


33.0. In verse 4.24 right perception has been identified 
with sacrifice; and many sacrifices have been laid down. By 
means of them all, which help man to secure his goal, know- 
ledge is extolled. How? 


HA TAA AMAA: TAT | 
ad natas må ara trana 113 31 


33. The sacrifice of knowledge, O scourge of foes! is 
superior to the sacrifice of materials. All works, with- 
out exception, Arjuna! culminate in knowledge. 


33.1. Far st n Aa aa Aaa AAT MAAT: 
@ away | ARA: R Ae: HOST FRR., T MAAA PSA ays, 
We: FATT WTA: | HT ? Ua: ad ae amet afas antag mf | 
m maa aad: toeren AÀ [2 x] Raana seniafe 
gay: | ar Hara aRar: aada ag aaa aq fra 
wae: ary gata a aq a ae [ses v8. x] ft et 


32-34] Jnana Yoga 173 


33.1. Superior to ‘the sacrifice of materials’ —sacrifices done 
with materials—is the sacrifice of knowledge. For, a material 
sacrifice engenders fruit; not so the sacrifice of knowledge. 
Hence its superiority. How? All works, unobstructedly ‘cul- 
minate’ i.e., are included in, knowledge that leads to libera- 
tion and that corresponds to the ‘inundation all around’ 
(2.46); Vide the Sruti: “As the lower throws of dice go to the 
highest throw, to the winner, so whatever good creatures do 
all go to him, who knows what he knows” (CU.4.1.4). 


34.0. TY Va fafarse ait ate sa maA g? Tert— 


34.0. By what means, then, is this superior knowledge won? 
Listen: 


date simaa afonda aaa | 
waeeufa a ara atfaacacaatara: n3 KN 


34. Know it by means of obeisance, exhaustive ques- 
tionings, service to the (teacher). Knowers who have 
realised the truth will impart to you that knowledge. 


34.1. afefe sft u aq fafe fast] aa fafar ma af 
aaa aa, strc vedo att: cad sf: AART: 
aa, “wrt TA: ? ay ater: ? ar fae? ara afar ?” afa aAA, 
eat qea waarfear 1 waa arate: ararat: sreeater PA- 
arafa à m aAa ara 1 maas afaq aag aea- 
aaor, aa a; aa: aaaf acaefars: cfs 1 à qaia: 2: 
aR mi pi wafa, + aA aft aa: aay II 


34.1. Know it—the procedure by which knowledge is won. 
Approaching teachers, lowly prostrating the whole body 
before them—this is obeisance—and exhaustively questioning 
them, learn it. Learn it by putting questions such as these. 
‘How comes bondage? How, liberation? What is knowledge? 
And what, nescience?’ The teachers, the knowers of Brahman, 
thus won over through humility, will instruct or impart the 


174 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IV 


knowledge described above. Some among them alone are 
well-established in truth as it is; others are not. Hence the 
qualification ‘who have realised the truth’. Only the know- 
ledge imparted by those who have realised the truth is effec- 
tive, not aught else. Such is the Lord’s doctrine. 


35.0. Tar a ata gay ate aay qaaa — 


35.0. In these circumstances, the following utterance be- 
comes significant: 


uq men A yanga aera TWIST | 
QT WATARAT TVET TAT AT NIN 


35. By grasping that knowledge, O Pandava prince! 
you will no longer be deluded as you now are; and 
through that, you will behold all beings in the Self and 
then in Me. | 


35.1. aq eft u aq ma aq wat t votes afer ga: we: 
me Ut aa sari ale wa: ats Tr: us a arena % ove | fea — 
aq atta ya aAA aa aandaa seufa arenq aeaf 
samena aae aft; a att a aga Ana a fa” 
aft; Amata adafafa eA ga. N 


35.1. By grasping—mastering—that knowledge imparted 
by them, you will no longer be deluded as you now are. 
Further, by virtue of it you will behold all beings, from the 
creator down to stocks and stones, directly in the inner Self. 
‘They all dwell in Me,’ will be your realization. Also you will 
see them in Me, Vasudeva; i.e., you will realise: “They also 
are in the supreme Lord.’ The idea is that Arjuna will realise 
the identity of Self and God, which all Upanisads have estab- 
lished. 


36.0. faar—udeq ATA AeA — 
36.0. Also note the majesty of this knowledge: 


35-37] Jnana Yoga 175 


ata aa ater: adder: AFAR: | 
aa mawia ated aafaa ui sei 


36. Even if, among all sinners, you are the very worst, 


by this raft of knowledge you will go beyond sin. 


36.1. aff aft u af aq afe wee: mage: ade: afar 
Mad Wade: ad Aad UF AAA Ua cod Feat afd qfaia 
at qafa | wat aft ee ARE: oe sea I 


36.1. Even if, among all sinners, you are the worst sinner, 
you will cross the sea of sins by means of this raft of knowledge 
alone. This knowledge is the raft. Even religious merit, for the 
seeker after liberation, is said to be a form of sin (as it, too, 
causes bondage). 


37.0. m4 He aerate mafaa? agera Goad— 


37.0. How does knowledge destroy sin? The answer is 
proffered with an example. 


drifa afrgistatararcHedsstt | 
mafia: adeat meae EA TAT ZVN 


37. As a kindled fire reduces all fuel to ashes, so, 
Arujuna! does the fire of knowledge reduce all works 
to ashes. 


37.1. war eft n aa viR aora afara: mag ga: Aa: afia: 
wa wera Fed F asta, mada afa: maa: adent 


aaao sr afar: | amai ar ator Ta me aq aA- 
eB a qa arate fat maa fanretsy aq’ 
sit ey. 2.) str ati ae: ara agara arated: wT 

Saf maaga a ainean a aft wa aati wena 
eed | 


aa. Wt a 


176 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IV 


37.1. Just as fire well-kindled reduces faggots to ashes, O 
Arjuna! so the fire of knowledge reduces all works to ashes, 
i.e., robs them of their power to produce effects. Of course, 
literally, the fire of knowledge does not reduce works to ashes 
as though works constituted fuel. Hence the idea is that right 
perception robs all works of their power to generate effects. 
Propriety suggests that the works that have effected the 
present body of the knower are exhausted through experi- 
ence of the fruits they have borne; vide the Sruti: ‘He has 
to wait only as long as he is unreleased; then, he attains per- 
fection’ (CU.6.14.2). Hence only those works, which were 
done in countless prior lives before the dawn of knowledge, 
and which have not begun to bear fruits, as well as those which 
coexist with knowledge, are burnt up. 
On account of this, 


a fe ara aan ofaaing faa | 
aeai ameafag: soana faafaa 3c 


38. Nothing exists here as purifying as knowledge. 
Perfected in Yoga, in course of time, one wins it in 
one’s own Self. 


38.1.4 fe aa ou a fe ama aga ga aa na afeat g 
fart | aq at Aag wa aae. are ada arf F 
afaa: dea: a amare: aT AT: area Ret areata fafa 
wat Tt: II 


38.1. There is nothing here comparable to knowledge as 
purifier. One ‘perfected’, i.e. purified and made competent 
and intent on liberation through the practice of Yoga, meaning 
Karma Yoga and the Yoga of concentration, wins it (this 
knowledge) in the Self after the lapse of a long time. This is 
the idea. 


39.0. at Wateda aaaf: wate a: sorg: sofesqa— 


38—39] Jňāna Yoga 177 


39.0. The means by which knowledge is won unfailingly is 
pointed out: 


MAGalesaa MA aat: daN: | 
Wea san Tet maafana n3 


39. The man of faith, who has mastered his senses and 
who is intent on it, wins knowledge. Winning know- 
ledge, he attains without delay the peace supreme. 


39.1. saq sf o sera aaa: sad ma | aaa wate 
aha Ae, Ae: ME —Aae TeTaarel [-araatel|] aha: 
MATÀ TTA | Tee ahr aa ham: eT Tae: are iA: 
aaah faa: frat oer fani a aaaf Pea 
vera wat: aad a wat at sat 1 aaa [ 
aranstarfeanisty wate, ea eee cee 
SIRI: MASTA: | 


39.1. The ‘man of faith’ or one endowed with faith wins 
knowledge. Though faithful one may proceed slowly; hence 
the qualification, ‘intent on it’. He applies himself to the 
means of winning knowledge such as approaching a teacher 
etc. Though ‘intent’, his senses may not have been mastered; 
hence the further qualification, ‘who has mastered his senses’ 
i.e., who has withdrawn his senses from their objects. Such a 
man, faithful, intent on knowledge and master of his senses, is 
bound to gain knowledge. Prostration and so forth (4.34) may 
very well be external and uncertain of result as he may be 
hypocritical. This however is out of question where faith etc., 
are present. They constitute the unfailing means to knowledge. 


39.2. fe Fa: TATA Sng afr ? seat — wa Sear Ta Ahr 
mfa sata afr fay va aasa 1 aata aAa Aree: 
wate aa adenereanrastes: gaa: ort: 


39.2. What follows from the gain of knowledge? Winning 


178 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IV 


knowledge, the peace supreme, liberation or withdrawal is 
attained ‘without delay’, immediately. That liberation im- 
mediately follows from right perception is the unshakable 
doctrine established by all the fastras. 


40.0. IF aaa: + Hder:, MAA fF dea: 1 He fe? sa — 


40.0. No doubt is admissible in this respect; doubt is most 
despicable, in ‘eed. How? 


WAPI AaraTeaT faafaa | 
aa arated TIM A FS AMAA: voll 


40. The ignorant, the unfaithful, the doubting self 
perishes. Neither this world nor the next nor happiness 
accrues to the doubter. 


40.1. AMA FA i ae ANAA wear PENATAN AfA- 
qaaa a aaae a aafaa faasata 1 aaea verte fara: 
a an, an ane 1 a g a: ada 1) wet ? are arareo 
Ssa | a a oe: ate: afer i a ge, aaa aaa: ANATRA: 
amfa | ae aaa: A PAT: 

aeq? [aema] — 


40.1. He is ignorant who knows not his Self. ‘The unfaith- 
ful’ reposes no faith in the words of the teacher and in the 
śastras. The doubter has a mind that entertains doubts. All 
these perish. Though the ignorant and the unfaithful perish, 
they do not do so to the same extent as the doubter. He is the 
worst sinner. How? Even this work-a-day world he can’t 
claim; so, too, the next world to come. Neither is happiness 
his, about which also his mind may doubt. Therefore, doubt 
must be discarded. Why? 


rei = neina | 
meaa a Halt faafia ASRA NLN 


40-42] Jnana Yoga 179 


41. Arjuna! works bind not him who is vigilant, who, 
through Yoga, has renounced works and who has slain 
doubts with knowledge. 


41.1. ae aft ou aera maiaa atte aA 
ant ay ceartefara warratent] ¢ Maaa | ay NT- 
aama fa? wae — mafaa aaa mAai 
afer: aaa: wet a: aTaafeaaa: | T: wd MEANA A ana 
wat paee avery suit a fracaha afrerfeed ge a 
word, = wast ! 1 


41.1. Works do not bind him, who, through the Yoga of 
realisation of the supreme Reality, has renounced all works, 
righteous and unrighteous. How does he renounce works 
through Yoga? By means of knowledge—by the perception 
of the identity of Selfand God—he has cut through all doubts. 
This renouncer of works, who is vigilant, works not, as the 
operation of the constituents does not bind in his case; i.e., 
they do not generate for him effects adverse, favourable, etc. 


42.0. wea sAm afsaag: a fread 
waht: arated, aera aT HA ora graan farsa 


42.0. Since he, whose doubts have been slain with know- 
ledge caused by the attenuation of impurities due to the prac- 
tice of Karma Yoga, is not bound by the works consumed in 
the fire of knowledge and since the doubter of the efficiency of 
knowledge and works perishes, 


aea NAAA TEA AAAS: | 
fsa dara anrarfacetiees area NLN 


42. Therefore, O Bharata prince! with the sword of 
knowledge slay the doubt in the heart born of nescience; 
resort to Yoga and stand up. 


180 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IV 


gfe Aaga Ucar agaat Anfa ateaqdfor 
Agaa serfaaray ay omiaa MA- 
Aaa ATA ATCASEATT: 11 


42.1. Tea Sf u ae wits aarraryd aaa afaaarq ae 
afa: agr: aa maa ances: aa, areafanacarg aaraer i a fe 
TT ATT: HTT Sra wed, At carer ata aAA | aa: eA- 
fares aAa wafa 1 fara wt aaa aang, ant mA- 
Terra pa stfass He ers. | Shaws a gard gaa, F wea 
ate it 


42.1. Therefore slay this most wicked doubt in the heart or 
intellect, born of nescience or lack of discrimination. Slay it 
with the sword of knowledge or right perception. Knowledge 
of the Self is the sword,.and doubt has the Self for its object. 
None may slay another’s doubt. He who doubts about the Self 
is the slayer thereof. Destroying this doubt that may work one’s 
destruction, practise Karma Yoga, the means of right percep- 
tion. Stand up to wage this battle, O Bharata Prince. 


ata 
fal raaa ma-a- agaaa] arr 
ATASEATT: WS 


Waar: 


CHAPTER V 
YOGA OF RENUNCIATION 


0.1. ‘whet a gad [Xc] AA A TH pine) 
[xee], mfime [vee |, mret dae ant ade’ [%3] 
J merit wer af’ [ev], m 


FO [4.8] Sate Ni 


0.1. In the utterances beginning from 4.18, including 4.19, 
21,22, 24, 32, 33,37 and 41, the Lord has taught the renuncia- 
tion of all works. In 4.42 He also teaches Yoga whose charac- 
teristic is the performance of works. These two mutually con- 
tradictory courses, the performance and the renunciation of 
works, like rest and movement, cannot be undertaken at once 
by one and the same person. Nor have they been prescribed 
for pursuit at different times. In other words, only one of the 
two courses may be practically pursued. Of these that which 
is better must be taken up and not the other. So thinking, 
and desiring to know which of the two is the better, Arjuna 
said: “Renunciation of works, Krsna, etc.” (5.1). 


0.2. 7 a arenfae: arate fast sfatrorefrerq yatered: aa: 
ma aden À, A G TAA | one PASA AT- 


wa eft aera: 1 wey ? qatar? aaa: wmaar PANTEA adore 


182 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. V 


faaan STAY, HAT FT Hat ae HdercaTarwarg, srarcafaq 
noite wat Us; 7 Ft: maara va Aae 

frafad, cad wearer anfrer saluted: AAAA 
aft afea cfr R a A verdict aera dare 
mÀ wee A piq, T AA sla wereracfafafaqar wea: a q- 
TTA: II 


0.2. Objection: “Now, in the utterances cited above, the 
Lord has enjoined renunciation of all works in order to teach 
the discipline of knowledge for the Self-knower, and not for 
one who is not a Self-knower. Therefore, since the perform- 
ance of works and their renunciation refer to different types 
of persons it 1s irrational to ask which of these two courses is 
better.” Reply: “True, according to your thinking, the query 
may be irrational; but in the light of the enquirer’s own 
thinking, it is quite rational, we should say. How? The affirma- 
tions quoted above show that the Lord teaches the importance 
of the renunciation of all works as a necessary duty. Without 
an agent, of course, it cannot be performed. So it is implied 
that even a non-knower of the Self may conceivably renounce 
works. It is not as though only a Self-knower can do it.” 

Thinking on these lines, Arjuna felt that the renunciation 
of works and their performance may very well be undertaken 
by a non-knower of the Selfalso. Therefore, as has been pointed 
out, a contradiction is involved: only one of these lines of 
conduct is practicable and, of course, the more meritorious of 
the two must be adopted. Hence the question, prompted by 
the desire to know the more meritorious course, is not irra- 
tional. 


0.3. Raana aea aft see: ahs: vay ua ef Tea | 
ray ? “iaai fated vate atari farara” is 2. | 


carrera: aq sat seat ? aft 1 fra aa: — afk arere- 
amt iiaa: AR, aiteq mii mE 


Yoga of Renunciation 183 


fafrseed gerd; ale ar aafaa aerate: aq waa 
vad ? — ofa. wa seat — mafaa: aerator: MACN- 
ad am: frana, aaa piia wearer fafersecar- 
frat gaat wet AIAR | afe AAE: aides, aries 
anita, aint: deter, aan aa: Prati: iTe 
a paaa aaea Aa sat sA | arcafaaeg 
amasi: warra aa: Aaaa, sf aaa 
arate: fafa sft a TTA I 


0.3. An analysis of the reply, too, shows that this idea 
prompted the questioner. To explain: “Both renunciation 
and Karma Yoga promote liberation; of the two, Karma 
Yoga is better,” (5.2)—this is the Lord’s reply. This demands 
critical analysis. Does this reply affirm that, while renuncia- 
tion of works and Karma Yoga, performed by a Self-knower, 
promote liberation, Karma Yoga is for some reason or other, 
the better of the two? Or, do these two features pertain to the 
renunciation and Karma Yoga performed by the non-Self- 
knower? “Pray, what follows from these alternatives? Irra- 
tional is the affirmation that the renunciation of works and 
Karma Yoga each has the power to promote liberation, and 
yet Karma Yoga is superior to the renunciation of works. This 
affirmation is irrational. For, it 1s impossible for the Self- 
knower to renounce and, at the same time, to perform works. 
Only if both renunciation and performance of works together 
were possible would such a statement become rational. Incredi- 
ble is the proposition that the Self-knower may either renounce 
works or perform them, i.¢. practise Karma Yoga. Were this 
possible, it might have been rational to maintain that both 
courses subserve liberation and that still Karma Yoga is 
superior. But since the Self-knower cannot undertake both 
renunciaticn of works and Karma Yoga, it is irrational to 
hold that liberation may be won by either the one or the other, 
and that the latter is the better of the two. 


0.4. aa ame — fe amefa: daana: sear aft aaa: ? 
Weller wearer ANT: ? Aer A Harare AANA: gar fH PA- 


184 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. V 


MHA ISM ATSTT HAT se Marea aT aT maafa- 


0.4. In this context one may ask: “Are both, the renuncia- 
tion of works and Karma Yoga, equally impossible for the 
Self-knower or only one of them? In the second alternative— 
is renunciation impossible or is Karma Yoga impossible ? Also, 
the reason for the alleged impossibility must be advanced”. 
Since the nescience of the Self-knower has been abolished, he 
cannot undertake Karma Yoga that is rooted in error. He is 
the Self-knower who knows his Self as immutable and devoid 
of all transformations like birth, etc. Right perception has 
routed his errors. It has been stated that his is the course of 
renunciation of all works 1.e. the status as the workless Self. 
Now, in the science of the BG., in the various contexts eluci- 
dating the nature of the Self, it has been explained that, since 
there is incompatibility between right knowledge and error, 
and among their varied consequences, for the Self-knower 
there can be no Karma Yoga which implies the status as the 
active self and conceit in Selfs agency. Therefore it is rational 
to maintain that Karma Yoga rooted in error is out of question 
for the Self-knower whose nescience has been abolished. 


0.5. ST FY TA: areaeaeriqeqyyey efaa: Harare: saae 
ea ? aa sad afana g ad [3.29] ee sear Fw ata 
eat [2.28], Aaaa freer [33] A at am arcafac: 


aT a Haars sarcacaetineqyeay at aa wfaqed wa; aq 
mar aeg Gears Arta’ [R.c], aadA araew (2.32. ], mi- 


arfrareed [3x9] mA, aa ar arcafae: ator way: 


Yoga of Renunciation 185 


` 


faz: menaa aA at a faad [329] A adeare- 


magma: [44 ] aa a maaa faar- 
mq, Mmea aAa WH: OAT [3] aa W saaana- 
ma pirmaa, MA Fas at frka [¥.22. | 
ea a wicericarcrfatemer ate: faaea, Aa 

reat AT acafaq [4.¢. | RATT a riaka a aaa- 


yamai maamaa: “a ag with” A aaa aarfac- 
Jam m aa aeaa: amaaa: farea- 
T e T a A ee a 


0.5. Objection: “Which are the contexts in the BG. referred 
to above where the Self-knower has been said to be workless?” 
Reply: “Starting with the affirmation, ‘On the contrary know 
that to be imperishable’ (2.17), in 2.19, 21 and so forth, work 
has been negated in respect of the Self-knower.” Objection: 
“Now in these very contexts Karma Yoga has been enjoined 
also. Vide 2.18, 31, 47 and so forth. How then can it be main- 
tained that Karma Yoga is impossible for the Self-knower?” 
Reply: ‘“There is a contradiction between right perception and 
false cognitions as well as between the consequences of these 
two. In 3.3 the discipline of knowledge, abidance in the Self 
that works not, has been isolated, vis-a-vis the Self-knowing 
Samkhyas, from the discipline of works pertaining to the non- 
Self-knowers. The Self-knower, having discharged all duties, 
has no further purpose to fulfil. 3.17 states that he has no more 
duties to discharge. 3.4, 5, 6 etc., lay down Karma Yoga as 
an accessory of the Yoga of knowledge. 6.3 states that to one 
who has won right perception Karma Yoga is no longer rele- 


186 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. V 


vant. 4.21 rules out, in regard to him, work other than what 
ensures the maintenance of his body. 5.8 teaches that even in 
regard to works like sight, hearing, etc., meant to ensure the 
body’s maintenance, the agent who knows the truth about the 
Self must cherish the idea ‘I work not’, through mind’s con- 
centration. Since, then, the knower of the truth of the Self 
cannot even dream of Karma Yoga that runs counter to right 
perception and 1s rooted in false cognition, the affirmation that 
renunciation and Karma Yoga equally promote liberation 
refers to the non-Self-knower. Superior to the non-Self- 
knower’s act of renunciation of works, which is quite distinct 
from the total renunciation of a Self-knower, is the former’s 
Karma Yoga; for it is easier to accomplish. For, renunciation 
will be hard for him as it depends on self-restraint and disci- 
pline. Further, it is bound to be partial. Thus the analysis of 
the Lord’s statements in reply to Arjuna reinforces what was 
affirmed above to be the idea inspiring Arjuna’s query.” 


0.6. ‘Sarat Aq HAE [ 3.2.) TaT maA: ag wewa “A 
aq waa: Ta A Pe” ead gAs wary aera daaa AA- 
arr fraser, ga: ada athrar fasar sre ala facta wart | “aA a 
gaama tard fate aaferesta” [3x] af aaa maaa 
aa fafaa ese; pna a faa [¥.v>.] 1 arrcferer 
dam: Faq ? fH ar wearer: say ? xt Waal: a TT: — 


0.6. Due to the impossibility of the co-existence of know- 
ledge and works, Arjuna asked the Lord in 3.1, ‘Say which of 
these two is better?’ and the Lord decidedly stated that the 
discipline of knowledge is meant for the Samkhyas, the re- 
nouncers, and that of works is for the Yogins. This was the 
doctrine inculcated in that context. According to the affirma- 
tion, ‘By mere renunciation none attains perfection’ in 3.4, 
it is taught (by implication) that renunciation accompained 
by knowledge is the means to perfection. For Karma Yoga, 
too, has been enjoined (4.42). In order to know which of the 
two, renunciation and Karma Yoga, is better for the non- 
knower, Arjuna said: 


1-2] Yoga of Renunciation 187 


AIT Jars : 
AUS FATT HOT Frat a swale | 
ee Uda aa ate gf 2 


1. The renunciation of works, Krsna, and again, their 
performance you praise. Tell me for certain which of 
the two is better. 


1. Geared aft ou dered ofa aot meta adafa 
wate serafa, weafe Aa | ot aT FT A Ua Aer Ha 
ai wae | wa: A Fad 8a: sft aaa: —fe water Aa ? 
fe at dam aff ? ei a S | ae aq Fa saat 
Ua: piaraanana, Aes Nasa: AA Tq sft AAT, 
a Us Aad, ae wsgesrqseucaaraaq A ae gfahad ahd 
Tae U8 


1.1. Renunciation or the giving up of works enjoined by 
the Sastras to be performed, You praise or affirm. Again, Yoga 
or the unfailing performance of these very works is com- 
mended by you. So I wonder which of these two is the better— 
whether performance of works is better or their renunciation. 
The better ought to be done. So, of these two, the renunciation 
and performance of works, that which is better according to 
you, doing which I may attain the Good—state that for certain 
as Your view; for, both c7:nnot be done together by one and 
the same person. 


2.0. arRo aren: foia Soara — 
2.0. Setting forth His view definitely, the blessed Lord spoke: 


Sagara : 
daa: BAIT faUa TAT | 
aate maaana faferert RN 


188 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. V 


2. Both renunciation and Karma Yoga promote the 
supreme good; but of the two, Karma Yoga is superior 
to the renunciation of works. 


2.1. Aare: f 1 aera: ator ofa: Heat: a AMT agota 


2.1. Renunciation, the giving up of works, and Karma 
Yoga, their performance—both these bring about the highest 
good or liberation, since they generate knowledge. Though 
both lead to the highest good, still, of these two causes of the 
highest Good, Karma Yoga is superior to mere renunciation 


3.0. BEATA aft ? aTE— 
3.0. Thus the Lord commends Karma Yoga. Why? 


aa: a aaan at a gies a nafa | 
fadeat fe Agraret ga arrest 11311 


3. Know him to be a perpetual renouncer who neither 
shuns nor seeks. O mighty-armed! One who is above 
such contraries is easily liberated from bondage. 


3.1. 3a: fa uw Ha aaa: a wdanh freed eff a: a Pf 
fafaq a area ge ga ar acared a a Cato: a, Hah adats, 
a faaam afr aren: gerd: | frees: gaala: fe aema nanay 
ga TNT ATATA WAT I 


3.1. Know the Karma Yogin to be a perpetual renouncer; 
he neither shuns nor seeks anything—whether it be pain or 
pleasure or the means to attain them. Such a person, though 
working, must be taken to be a perpetual renouncer. This is 
the sense. For, O mighty-armed! one who is above such 
contraries is released easily, 1.e., without much effort. 


2-4] Yoga of Renunciation 189 


4.0. aaan: Pragearassaay. fawgat west face am, 
a g oa. fda va aft set ee Ferd — 


4.0.“‘The mutually opposed renunciation and Karma Yoga, 
performed by different types of persons, ought to be opposed 
as regards their fruits, too. Normally, these ought not to pro- 
duce an identical result viz., the supreme Good’’—the fol- 
lowing is affirmed negating this normal position. 


aera Tare: seater a RETT: | 
uaaa: aeaa GIT Uv 


4. The thoughtless—not men of discrimination—affiirm 
that Samkhya and Yoga are different. Properly re- 
sorting to either of them, one wins the fruit of both. 


4.1. aera ef 1 aterm gee fasghranet aot: aafaa a 
afar: | teat: a attra: us Fo afaeg gofa 1 we ? oaf 
Tera: aaa aera: aasa seat: | Saat: fad Hey | 
sam: aaa fe fA Ge; awe: a oe face: af i 


4.1. The thoughtless affirm that Samkhya and Yoga are 
‘different’, i.e., they bear opposed and varied fruits; discrimi- 
nating men don’t sav so. These latter are men of knowledge 
who maintain that these fruits are one and unopposed. How? 
Of Samkhya and Yoga even one, properly resorted to, i.e., 
if even one is properly observed, the fruit of both is won. The 
fruit of both is indeed the same supreme Good. So there is no 
antagonism in regard to their results. 


4.2. 9% aaan WIT areata: Tas BT se AN- 
et watt 2 ay ae: —aae asst dees ata wT hae ahr 
Tet: pa, Ward aaea va casa a fate gaa ma- 
qaaa Strat eet ‘areca ef 1 at wr daada aA- 
agaaa faa aerated aft wWrad: AAT | at: A 
asgasfaa sft 


190 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. V 


4.2. Objection: ‘Beginning with the terms renunciation 
and Karma Yoga, why does the Lord speak of the unity of the 
results of Samkhya and Karma Yoga. Is it not irrelevant?” 
Answer: This is no flaw; for, though Arjuna’s question had 
only renunciation and Karma Yoga in view, without rejecting 
these and adding His own characteristic view, the Lord 
answered, using the terms Samkhya and Karma Yoga. His 
idea is that renunciation, and Karma Yoga together: with 
knowledge and its means, namely, equality of visicn, are de- 
noted by Samkhya and Yoga. Hence this diseussion is not 
irrelevant. 


5.0. upa AAT Cor TE Baa wes fad ea ? sad 


5.0. How can one win the fruit of both by performing 
either of them aright? Answer: 


Tear: WT Sara arty werd | 
UH Aer a amt aa: afa a maa yt 


5. The status won by the Samkhyas is attained by the 
Yogins also. Only he perceives who perceives that 
Samkhya and Yoga are one. 


5.1. aq aft u aq aret: arafasd: aaraa: sre era aae 
aq at: aft maada Sat aaet waif aera: Ge NA- 
freee aqfrestt à a arm: — afr: à aff medaia- 
afaa were eft aAa: | aad: ue aret a amt a a: wats 
Rona 8 waht aH seafa sore: 1 


5.1. The status, i.e., liberation, achieved by the all-re- 
nouncing Samkhyas, established in knowledge, is reached by 
the Yogins, too. The Yogins are those who, without seeking 
fruit of works for themselves, perform them, dedicating them 
all to God as a means to winning knowledge. The Yogins 
reach the state of liberation through the knowledge of the 
supreme Reality and renunciation of all works. This is the 


4-6] Yoga of Renunciation 191 


idea. Therefore, only he who perceives Samkhya and Yoga 
to be one, due to the identity of their fruits, perceives aright. 
This is the meaning. 


6.0. Ut ale arma are: va fared, aa ate seq om ‘Tate 
miia aati fafaa [2] afr ? yy amr areca yee — 
oqo adda sda qT aha at waa we Aa — she | 
qeqed waaa wat oe aiaa PANT: faferert af wa water 
arated aurea: areafata war RT: | Toda a ua | ae 
adam: afer: a a aeeaig am: — aera: —afa a orada | a 
mt ef ? saa 


6.0. If this is the case, renunciation is better than Yoga. 
Why then is it affirmed that ‘of the two, Karma Yoga is 
superior to the renunciation of works’ (5.2). Listen to the 
reason: “You asked with reference to mere renunciation of 
works and Karma Yoga, which of these two 1s better. Ac- 
cordingly I replied, without reference to knowledge, that 
Karma Yoga is superior to renunciation of works. But I hold 
that renunciation with knowledge is Samkhya. That alone is 
real Yoga. As regards the Vedic Karma Yoga, it is Yoga only 
because it leads to the real Yoga. Figuratively, it is renuncia- 
tion also.” How does the Vedic Karma Yoga lead to real 
Yoga? Answer: 


ENE EÀ JANGAN: | 
aA afia aarme uci 


6. Indeed, renunciation, mighty-armed! is hard to win 
without Karma Yoga. With Yoga, the silent sage 
attains Brahman without much delay. 


6.1. arava: gA i aag oreafas: & aeravel | Ga arg weg 
ware: att fear 1 ange: afta atone paani FF- 
farce ae: aft: — aa EAE — Aft, FAI — TARATA- 
frssroertrcay Tha: A. He ead, ‘aa efa wan wan fe a’ 


192 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. V 


[ag 3. 32.3] ea aeaa a a mariaa aTa 
ahr faq va aaraa mA i aa: aa oe Haar farai 
fa [43] 


6.1. Real renunciation, O mighty-armed! is hard to win 
‘without Yoga’. With the Vedic Karma Yoga, consisting in 
the dedication cf works to God without craving for their fruits, 
the silent sage, who meditates on God’s essence, wins Brahman. 
Renunciation relevant to this context and consisting in the 
discipline of knowledge of Supreme Reality is styled Brahman. 
Vide: “Renunciation is Brahman who is the Supreme” (Maha. 
Na. U.2\.2.) This Brahman, real renunciation, the discipline 
of knowledge of the Supreme Reality, the silent sages win, 
without delay, i.e., quickly. Hence, I said, “Karma Yoga is 
superior” (5.2). 


7.0. JAT JA: HA Tena AT — 


7.0. What follows when the Yogi uses Karma Yoga as a 
means to attain Self-knowledge? Answer: 


maat faaam fatsratert fafaa: | 
adaa aae pia a raa non 


7. Established in Yoga, his mind purified, his self and 
senses controlled, his Self becomes the Self of all living 
beings, he is not tainted though he works. 


7.1. age: A u atta g: a: faar faagare:, fafa- 
aem fafaaeg:, faifan: a, adea ad aA ara- 
Gaeta y ATA: TAT MARAT: AA A ATTA 
amma sare, a aa wt ada: adver at dq aft a foot — 
a Hay: Ted ga: | 


7.1. Established in Yoga, his mind purified, his self, i.e., 
body and senses controlled, his Self identified with the Self of 


6-9] Yoga of Renunciation 193 


all beings ranging from Brahma to clumps of grass i.e., having 
become the right percipient, and living and working for the 
world’s well-being, he is not tainted or he is not bound by his 
works. This is the idea. 


8.0. 1 4 wat crarta: Hoa saa: — 


8.0. And since he does not, in reality, work— 


aa fafacactatta get aAa acatac | 
TTT TTT AAAT TIO TT NC 


soma fart teaa | 
qfaia acted Stat ATTA NRN 


8—9. Let the integrated sage who knows the truth think 
‘I work not at all’ even when he sees, hears, touches, 
smells, eats, walks, sleeps, breathes, talks, evacuates, 
grasps, opens and closes the eyes, knowing that the 
senses operate vis-a-vis their objects. 


8-9.1. ta aft u aa fafaa wore eft am: amfa: aq wate fada 
aafaa IRT: uap a a K 
wer pi aT act aaa Aa a? sa naa 1 Aaa 
ata qA aA: 1 

aa Ud aafaa: adair OA ay A Wa, maa: Aaah: 
qa adadaare wa ara, wa: aaa | a fe gafot 
saraan Was Wad: saaa at vs Wawa sad 1 


8—9.1.*I work not at all’—let the integrated sage, the knower 
of Truth, of the reality of the Self, 1.e., the percipient of ulti- 
mate Reality, think so. When and in what way knowing the 
truth, shall he think so? Listen: when he sees etc., let him 
think—thus construe the words. The knower of truth who 
sees only non-work in all works of the psycho-physical orga- 
nism, i.e., the right seer, is alone fit to renounce all works; for he 


194 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam -[Ch. V 


he sees the negation of works. None indeed striving to drink the 
water in the mirage will continue to do so even after grasping 
the absence of water there. 


10.0. J FA: Hacafaqd yaaa HAT 


10.0. However the non-knower of truth who practises 
Karma Yoge — 


Mera BAH Ay aaat Het a: | 
feared a a ma AAAF NoN 


10. Reposing all works in Brahman, he operates with- 
out attachment; he is not stained by sin as a lotus is 
not by water. 


10.1. wert eft ou aar Sat anna fafa “aed at aoe’ 
af wer. ga carerd aati sath atest ae at waa Fafa a: 
waaay, fod 7 4, Wat a area, TITAN sq Hevea Vasa | 
pas Uraygaragq Us Fe AT AHAT: ANT N 

TAT — 


10.1. Reposing all works in Brahman i.e., God, and be- 
heving, “I work for the sake of God, as a servant for the 
master, without attachment even to the fruit of liberation” ,— 
he who works thus is not stained by sin; he is not in touch with 
it. He is like the lotus leaf unstained by water. Of the works 
done thus the only fruit is purification. Because, 


Ha AAT FEU HAeieeaaety | 
ARa: A pafa At Maas N? Vi 
11. With body, mind, intellect and mere senses, Yogins 


perform work without attachment, for the purification 
of the self. 


10-12] Yoga of Renunciation 195 


11 mAT a WS RT m qa a Fae: afd: afa 
anata: “pada at ate, a aa wom” eft maafa: 
afext: aft Fane: maA: aft saa dea — adeno WA- 
masa 1 ffir afro: at ade at eer pofa aerqet 
arrayed yard: | cen waa aa ofeare af Fe wae il 
ena — 


11.1. With body, mind, intellect and mere senses, devoid 
of the sense of ownership, and thinking, “I work for God’s sake 
alone and not for my profit’’, and thus excluding the sense of 
ownership, the Yogins, who are workers, work. The term 
‘mere’ may be held to qualify all the words like body etc., 
in order to rule out the sense of ownership over any of them. 
The Yogins work without attachment to the fruits of works to 
win self-purification i.e. purification of the mind-stuff. There- 
fore, you are called upon to work only; do work. Also because: 


Th: BARS Ua maA ASE | 
ATH: BAHL Gor Aca faaara RN 


12. Giving up the fruits of works, the Yogin attains 
disciplined peace; the non-Yogin, attached to fruits by 
the force of cravings is bound. l 


12.1. 7m: tau am Paaa ar woh a we poa gedd 
amig: aq mia a aeaa mA aren A Misr 


T E E: RE: ENR TC, TAR ATC T 
are, at paN aAa get, “aa wer at perf ae” 
aft vt we am: fraead | at: a oh we get N 


12.1. The Yogin, concentrating on the thought, “I work 
for the sake of God and not for fruits”, and giving up fruits, 
attains the peace called liberation. This is ‘disciplined peace,’ 
being born of the discipline, whose stages are mental purifica- 
tion, achievement of knowledge, renunciation of works, and 


196 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. V 


consecration to the discipline of knowledge. The verse 12 
leads to this conclusion. The non-Yogin who is not so consec- 
rated is swayed by the force of cravings. He thinks: “I work for 
its fruit”, and gets attached to it, and he is bound. Therefore 
be a Yogin—this is the sense of the verse. 


13.0. aeg Teria a — 


13.0. On tae other hand, the percipient of the supreme 
Reality — 


adan ATA ATeIMed FI At | 
maaa Ft Vet Aa pia PTA F311 


13. Mentally renouncing all works, and self-controlled, 
the embodied being happily sits in the nine-gated city, 
neither working nor causing others to work. 


13.1. åsa st n aati patr adaaif are qea 
fret afas arer afaa a afa aat satr waar faamaaa, 
PAIS ARGS A, area Refr ge | erga ATTA 


13.1. ““Renouncing’’—giving up—all works viz., the obliga- 
tory, occasional, desire-prompted and forbidden works; “‘men- 
tally’’—by discriminative intelligence, by perceiving in works 
non-works, etc., (Vide 4.18)—the sage happily sits. Giving up 
the activities of speech, mind and body, unconstrained, peace- 
ful, and seeking no profit outside the sphere of the Self—this is 
the sense of the expression, ‘happily sits’. Self-controlled 
means that the sage has conquered his senses. Where and 


13] Yoga of Renunciation 197 


how does he sit? ‘In the nine-gated city.’ The seven openings 
in the head by which objective knowledge is gained and the 
two below, the rectum and the urinary passage, are the nine 
gates of the body that resembles a city. Its Lord is the Self; it 
is inhabited by its subservient citizens, the objects of the senses, 
mind and intellect that generate knowledge and its numerous 
consequences. In that city the embodied being resides, having 
given up all works. 


13.2. fe farts ? —aat fe eat am waar at ae va 
ard, aa wate faafaa ? ged —aeq wet: eet Raad- 
qanar a aats "N À, mar a ara’ MAA wad a 
R gmna. R za R nA a aa. avata | grama- 
fafcerenatarreg “ag ara” sft sera: sA 1 read a eA 
arent afaa areqratarat faerar faaara Arar aaa: SITET | 
saaana ainteas we ee ee Va Faget Ft Haq, 
merapi gT ee va afama: | ee wa ard 
ala aeda faae, fagefagercuarvartercarg N 


13.2. Objection: “Why this qualification? For, all embodied 
beings, whether renouncers or otherwise, dwell in their bodies; 
so the qualification is otiose”. Answer: the embodied being 
who Is ignorant, taking the complex of body and senses alone 
for the self, thinks invariably “‘I dwell in the house here in the 
world; I sit on the seat”. One who takes the body alone to be 
the Self cannot think, “I dwell in the body as in my house.” 
On the contrary, he who desires the Self as other than the 
complex of body etc., may properly think ‘I dwell in the body’. 
Proper is the mental renunciation, due to discriminative 
knowledge, of the works of body etc., superimposed on the 
Supreme Self through nescience. Also, the renouncer of all 
works, who has gained discriminative knolwedge, may dwell 
in the nine-gated city of the body as in a house; for, a specific 
knowledge (“I am other than the body”) has accrued to him 
while dwelling in his body due to the force of the persistent 
impressions of operative works. Thus the qualification is 
significant viz., the sage dwells in the body; it points to the 


198 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. V 


difference in the ideas entertained by the sage and an ignor- 
amus. 


13.3. wate párar afaa meaa aearaftarta A- 
aA wam, Ta paa mA g ade arefaqe 
q en fe mrga E — aul at =o oe ee 
frag sadaq | fe aq aq ade mega a afer: careranaria 
aq aaa 7 ovate, ser aesat ate: [aaraa 7 ang 
aaq| ? fe ar waa: va area: a afes ofa ? at sada afer 
ana: waa: ade arf a oe fe ‘afraratsaqerd’ [ 2.24. J, 
Tae aAa a Hes a foad [| 23.32.] fa, ‘ead Saa- 
fa’ [q 3. ¥.3.8.] ofr a ae: | 


13.3. Though it was remarked that the sage ‘dwells’, 
having renounced the works of the body-complex, ignorantly 
superimposed on the Self, one may deem that even the re- 
nouncer treats his self as either an agent or cause of agency. 
On this point it is said—neither working nor causing to work. 
Doubt: “Is it maintained that due to renunciation, direct 
agency or Causative agency inherent in the self becomes im- 
possible, as movement becomes, for one who ceases to move? 
Or, do these not naturally belong to the Self?” Answer: 
“Naturally, the Self has neither direct nor causative agency. 
Indeed it has been remarked: ‘the Selfis said to be immutable’ 
2.25; ‘Though dwelling in the body, Arjuna! the Self neither 
acts nor gets tainted’ 13.31; ‘Meditates, as it were; moves, 
as it were’ BU.4,3.7” 

Moreover, 


a wea A Hath otwer att TA: | 
A RAHAT CANACT aAA Wee 


14. The Lord creates neither agency nor objects for the 
world; nor contact with the fruits of works; rather, 
the nature of things operates. 


13-15] Yoga of Renunciation 199 


141.7 pa ofa ua aia cag: He A a af matr re- 
maada Saara are ast sereafa oy areata aft 
wale Haat: aeea FANT Aaaa saa 1 ate fafref wag 
a wee at areata. a eet, wm: ate Haq area sade af ? set — 
raed eat Aa: cara: —afaereeror safa:, arar yadda ‘eat 
Am qa [9 ev.) gerfear aeaaro i 

TATA ET 


14.1. “Neither agency’—-the Lord i.e., the Self, impels 
not the world to do work; nor does He create objects of such 
work, does not generate the objects that are sought after viz., 
chariots, pots, mansions, etc: neither the contacts of agents 
making chariots, etc., with the objects made. Doubt: If nothing 
whatsoever the embodied self does or causes to be done, 
who then operates, both as direct agent and causative agent? 
Answer: Nature, Prakrti as nescience, Maya, operates as will 
be affirmed in BG 7.14: “Indeed this divine Maya consisting 
of the constituents.” 

But in reality, 


wed wafa a aa qed fry: | 
Aaa ATT ST gafa aa: ULM 


15. The mighty Being accepts nobody’s sin or merit. 
Knowledge is shrouded in ignorance; therefore are 
living beings deluded. 


15.1. Aad eft | 7 ated a a Teta wes Heafaq maT | 
T aa mà gad wh am fy a fend ate ah priae am- 


H 
ai 
14 
ab 2 
ar 
P 
4 
| 
PE 


15.1. The mighty Being (Vibhu can also mean the Atman) 
accepts not the sin even of a devotee, nor merits offered by 
devotees. Doubt: “Why then do devotees offer meritorious 


200 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. V 


deeds like worship, sacrifice, gifts, oblations in the fire, etc.?”’ 
Answer : ‘“‘Discriminative knowledge is shrouded in ignorance ; 
so the non-discriminating and transmigrating beings are de- 
luded into thinking, “We work, cause others to work, enjoy 
and cause others to enjoy the fruits of works.” 

On the contrary, 


Wat g aami Bat ahaa: | 
MATA ATATA THAT TTT ULE 


16. For them whose ignorance has been destroyed by 
knowledge, that very knowledge, like the sun, illumines 
the supreme Reality. 


16.1. wat Bf uo wat g At aT ara Fara waa: aq 
wont mkaa wear afer: amet aegerd [end] aaaraata, 
qaq ma aa aeq ad waraafa aq ot Teadaraq i 


16.1. However, for those living beings whose ignorance of 
Self, shrouding and deluding them, has been destroyed by the 
discriminative knowledge of the Self, that very knowledge, 
like the sun lighting up all objects, illumines all that is to be 
known, even that Supreme Truth. 


17.0. aq Wt Toae array — 


17.0. That Supreme Truth beyond, illumined by know- 
ledge, is further characterised : 


ATS ACAATATACAT AOSTEAALTATT: | 
magana ATTA ARARAT: ULI 


17. With the intellect set on It as the Self, perceiving It 
as the Self, devoted to It, It being the supreme abode, 


16-18] Yoga of Renunciation 201 


the sages, their sins routed by knowledge, proceed to 
that status whence there is no return. 


17.1. qaqa: str u aea aah vat afa: Ai A agaaa., TATATA: 
ma Wt Far sre A A aara: afar: fror afafa: aari 
wat aati dearer aa ada aena Ai A afaver:, tera: 
q qa R aaa a A: A wala A aaan: Raoa: sore: 
[ast atta mR mea. aaa) a fa vafa: ASEN 
aiga maaa: waht aAa fria. faga: aria: Pena: 
maramara: A t mariaren: aaa: eat: | 


17.1. With the intellect dwelling on Brahman, having that 
supreme Brahman as their Self, devoted to It i.e., renouncing 
all works, established in Brahman alone single-mindedly, It 
being their supreme refuge and goal—in other words, de- 
lighting solely in the Self, their ignorance of the Self having 
been destroyed by knowledge, these self-restrained ascetics 
will have no more embodiments; for, as set forth above, 
knowledge has destroyed the flaw—sins etc.—that engenders 
the transmigratory life. This is the sense. 


18.0. t waa afi aena ward à qier. ar qaa mafa 
aft ? sad 


18.0. How do the sages whose ignorance of the Self has been 
destroyed by knowledge perceive the Truth? Answer: 


frenar arart nfa ateatt | 
aft aq crore a ofesat: ameter: ecu 


18. The sages perceive the same truth in the Brahmana, 
rich in knowledge and culture, a cow, an elephant, a 
dog and a dog-eating outcaste. 


18.1. faar ete n fanfaar faan a faaara faarfaaat, faa: suare:, 
area faattaqareant ara: fafana: fagra facts at ag: afer 


202 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. V 


arary whe eftatr aft aa crore a en: anata: —faerfararare 
BAGERA Se ee eee 
wer arth teat, IAA weeps wa TE affine we ae wee 
aie aar a fem. aaf. | 


18.1. “Knowledge and culture’’—culture consists in res- 
traint—rich in these is the brahmana who knows and is cultured. 
In him, in a cow, elephant, dog and outcaste the sages behold 
the same Reality. In the sāttvika brahmana, endowed with 
knowledge and culture, who has the best latent impressions of 
life’s experiences, in an intermediate being like the cow that 
is rajasic without such impression, and in the low merely 
tamasic beings like an elephant etc., the sages are trained to 
perceive the same, single, and immutable Brahman, wholly 
unaffected by constituents like the sattva and by the latent 
impressions they generate. / 


19.0. Tq wasarAat: A aeaed:, ‘AaTaarant fase gare: [at 7 
°9.20.] afr aad: 1 at a stead: | HA ? — 


19.0. Objection “Now, is not the food offered by such tainted 
individuals forbidden?’ Vide, the smriti: The food should not 
be accepted from him who invidiously treats equals as unequals 
and unequals as equals GDS. 17.20. Answer “No; they are not 
tainted.” How? 


wea Aa: ant aet avert fei wa: | 
faata fg aa war aega a ferat: ies 


19. Even here is birth vanquished by them whose mind 
abides in equality. Flawless indeed is Brahman, the 
same; hence they abide in Brahman. 


19.1. Zea gf u ae wa Mafra 4: anetarfe: tied: far aaga: 
at aa, A ar aca wafer aaa feed fash Aa: aeT:- 


18-19] Yoga of Renunciation 203 


Poq | fratt—aaty aa aag ae: aA Aaa aa fa- 
ma, aay AA: a r a Aaa fe ae, aft 


apaia, aiaa aa | aa a aaa ad AA- 
mia [234], aeania [23.32] p S 
fàn mad Aa: afa, Raar t act TA: 
e a dins nee aol 
amy arate, aRar aaa AT, | 


19.1. Birth is vanquished “even here’’—while yet alive— 
by the sages who look on all alike. Their ‘mind’—the inner 
sense—abides, stilled; in ‘equality’, in Brahman, that is identi- 
cally the same in all beings. ‘Flawless’-—1.e., untouched by 
defilements, though the deluded deem Brahman defiled in 
tainted beings, like the dog-eaters. So flawless—free from all 
defilements—is Brahman. Nor is Brahman variegated due to 
Its own diverse attributes; for Spirit is beyond all attributes. 
The Lord will declare that attributes like desire pertain to the 
‘field’, BG 13.6.—also “‘As It is without beginning and attri- 
butes” 13.31. Nor are there the ultimate pluralizers to dif- 
ferentiate the Self: for, there is no proof to establish their 
reality in respect of the Self in each body. Therefore Brahman 
is one and the same. So they abide in Brahman alone. Hence 
even a suspicion of taint cannot touch them. They are free 
from the conceit of Self in regard to their psycho-physical 
organisms. 


19.2. eerfererarcnarrarhrariaesa J aq qt ‘aaraarean farar 
pa: M, painaa fag | ead fe aafaa, vegfad, 
agia eft gaat rfaai: arom 1 we g addy: 
eared sad: agr A fora: afr a 1 aa a aman- 
rar gee | Be I adatira sed, ‘adaatf aaa AEA 
aT reaf aar: 11 


19.2. The Dharmasutra quoted above refers to those who 
have such conceit; for, it refers to those who are cremoniously 
respected. As regards the measure of such respect offered, the 
determining causes are the degrees of merit of the persons 


204 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. V 


concerned—one being a knower of Brahman, another, a 
knower of the six limbs of the Vedas, and yet another, a 
knower of the four Vedas etc. As for Brahman, It is unrelated 
to merits and demerits of all kinds. So it is affirmed—they 
abide in Brahman. The aphorism refers to works. On the other 
hand, the matter under consideration from 5.13 to the end of. 
the chapter refers to the renunciation of works. 


20.0. TeATA facts aA Tal AAT, TeATT— 


20.0. Since the same taintless Brahman is the Self, 


a gA sry attest aria | 
fexcafaraaet aafagaartr feta: noi 


20. With a steady intellect, undeluded, knowing and 
abiding in Brahman, one should neither be elated when 
gaining the pleasant nor shrink wher meeting with the 
unpleasant. 


20.1. 7 esq ett u a weg vet a Haig frat ee srt wea | 
a vfgaq sma a afer afr seat | garara & aaraa 
afad gat, a daora: ger aaraa 1 fea — 
“ady ws: aa: faete: arcar” afa Raa fafafafacnr gfe: wer a: 
fercafg: aaae: Aalst aq aaa aa aa fert:, Teta 
adpan TTT: | 


20.1. One should not be elated—should not rejoice—upon 
gaining the pleasant; nor shrink upon meeting with the 
unpleasant. The incidence of the pleasant and that of the 
unpleasant causes pleasure and pain only for those for whom 
the Self is the body alone, and not for one who perceives the 
pure Self. The latter can’t have contact with anything pleasant 
or unpleasant. Moreover, ‘one whose intellect is steady’ —free 
from all doubts, who is convinced that in all beings abides 
the flawless Self, and who is undeluded or free from all delu- 


20-21] Yoga of Renunciation 205 


sions, knows Brahman as already set forth, and abides in 
Brahman. He works not; he has renounced all works. This 
is the idea. 


21.0. fe 4, wert fera:— 


21.0. Moreover, abiding in Brahman, 


agaaa faa aeqgay | 
A AAAI FAAATATTT R Vi 


21. The sage whose inner sense is unattached to objec- 
tive contacts wins bliss in the Self; his inner sense is 
united with Brahman; he enjoys inexhaustible bliss. 


21.1. ae sft u areeaty arena A eri arererat: | eared 
eft erat: maa: fa, A areerty sam: AAT aaa 
qa a wt ware fad aaa: aq facie out mafa aq 
ga aq fats Aa | a aage sehr ate: aA: TeTATT:, 
aq wera am: amaa: afer aga: N AR WET R: 
wen Be eH EGY STEHT | Tee sTUfenst efi 
erat. efeaarfr fradaq menfa serge gard: | 


21.1. “Objective contacts” are the external objects which 
are contacted—sounds and so forth. With an inner sense 
unattached to them, he does not delight in objects. Thus he 
wins bliss in the Self. “United with Brahman” refers to con- 
centration on Brahman. “‘Contact with that? means engage- 
ment in that concentration. With an inner sense so con- 
centrated, the sage wins inexhaustible bliss. Therefore, one 
should withdraw one’s sense-organs from the momentary 
objective pleasures; for he seeks the inexhaustible bliss in the 


Self. 


22.0. awa fradaq— 


206 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. V 


22.0. For the following reason, too, one should withdraw 
them: 


a fe dexter Atm gaara Va a | 
manaa: Bear TAT THA TT: UR 


22. Enjoyments born of objective contacts, indeed, 
cause pain only. Son of Kunti! they have a beginning 
and end; the sage does not delight in them. 


22.1.4 fe ef u & fe wenq aa. favafeadenhe: ora: 
We WHA: Faas: wa a, aaea 1 seat fe meara 
gar afafrartr cr i wa ae als ae Terai sf werd, vaa- 
aI | a dart gar qeraraat afer afa qaan faaara: 
faair fradaq 1 a Fas gadaa: wa, Madea: q — are: 
favafaadart: wrt, ae afar: wa; ae: areata: afr: 
ee k a S a 
a mai; a a fe ag R gad, a T- 
i 


22.1. Because, the enjoyments born of contacts between 
objects and senses cause only pain, as they are brought about by 
nescience. Indeed bodily sufferings are seen to be exclusively 
occasioned by such contacts. As is the case in this world, it 
may be inferred, so is the case in the world to come, also. This 
is the sense of the expression ‘only’. Knowing that in this 
transmigratory life there is not the remotest shadow of genuine 
joy, one should withdraw the senses from the mirage of objec- 
tive enjoyments. Not only do ‘contacts’ cause pain; they also 
have a ‘beginning and end.’ The beginning of enjoyments is 
the contact of senses and their objects; ‘the end’ is their 
separation. So they are ephemeral—they exist only in the 
interval. Son of Kunti! the sage, man of discrimination, 
having known the supreme Reality, does not delight in ob- 
jective enjoyments. Only the extremely deluded souls are 
observed to delight in objects as beasts etc., do. 


22-23] Yoga of Renunciation 207 


23.0. wa a Amia seeds: ate: watered: sfrarcw 
fa aerftert afar adert aft are wrar— 


23.0. And this is the most disastrous impediment in the 
path to the supreme Good, the cause of all sufferings that is 
hard to escape. Therefore, great effort must be made to avoid 
it. Says the Lord: 


Wetted A: AS WH Afaa | 
SAN ga at A AH: A Fal AT: URI 


23. The man, strong enough to resist in this world— 
before the fall of his body—the urge of lust and wrath, 
is integrated; he is happy. 


23.1. wet sa ou weit seared sta ada a: ale vated 
we od Tieng a AON at: | monim MaS- 
ware fe araarrgal at, aaa fe a sft araq aor 
maq a aaan get 1 ar shearer ge aà yout 
ai a eee Ge nae ee eon 


gnag: 
ae wafed, a: qA NA gA a ae AÈ AT N 


23.1. Here, in this very life, the man who strives to resist in 
this world, before his body’s fall, i.e. before the moment of 
his death, alone is integrated, etc. The limit of death implies 
that the urge in question is unavoidable for any living being; 
it is occasioned by numerous causes. The sense is that there 
is no room for complacency till one dies. Lust is the craving 
or greed for what occasions pleasure—i.e., any loved object 
of the senses previously experienced—when it is heard about, 
or remembered. Wrath is the aversion felt for things causing 
pain and obstructing one’s interests, when they are seen, 


208 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. V 


heard of, or remembered. The urge born of these two, lust 
and wrath, is referred to here. The lust-born urge is marked by 
horripilation, beaming eyes and face etc. Its essence is an 
agitation of the inner sense. The wrath-born urge is marked by 
the trembling of the body, sweat, the biting of lips, reddened 
eyes etc. He who strives to resist the urge born of lust and wrath 
is integrated; he is a happy man here below. 


24.0. PT gear feat: gar stati stat? ae wrarq— 


24.0. Abiding in Brahman how does one attain It? The 
Lord replies: 


TSA: FAISAMCACTT ISAT TT T: | 
a ant aafaa weraaistrresta wei 


24. With joy within, sporting within, and likewise, with 
light within, the Yogin becomes Brahman and wins the 
peace of Brahman. 


24.1% feu T weg: we ara ged wear a AA: 
an Herta mna ATA: areca HST WI F Aaa: aM wa 
wet: Ut arene safe: wart wer a swaatfata, a: feu: R: 
maf i 
fra — 


24.1. The Yogin is ‘with joy within’, i.e. with joy in the 
Self, ‘sporting within the Self’, and likewise, ‘with light within’ 
—1.e., in the Self. While living here below he wins ‘the peace 


of Brahman’, having become Brahman. 
Also, 


SAA aAa: ANRERAT: | 
fsan amema: AaaSyt TAT: NRN 


24-26] Yoga of Renunciation 209 


25. The seers win the peace of Brahman, their sins 
attenuated, doubts cut through, the inner sense con- 
trolled; they are busy promoting the welfare of all 
living beings. 


25.1. wre gA o mrad agfa at awe: aafaa: HA- 
faa: Aaen: oa: faater: al: aaar: aema: qA- 
faa: adafa car. adat aai fet aA car: aga ger: 1 

a — 


25.1. “The seers with right perception’, i.e., the renouncers, 
win ‘the peace of Brahman’, i.e. liberation. Their sins have 
been ‘atter.uated’—they are flawless. Their doubts have been 
cut through. Their senses have been controlled. They are busy 
promoting the welfare or the good of all living beings. That 
they injure none, is the sense. 

And, 


SMB ATHA Talat TeATATT | 
afat wafat ada fafana wee 


26. On both sides, the peace of Brahman is there for 
the self-restrained ascetics, who are released from lust 
and wrath, and have known the Self. 


26.1. PA gA n maea a A AANA ar 
faqerat adtat aaa aaa aaa aa: saaa: ai 
q a aaa A ace, fafearerat aa: sre: me Ai 
fafearcara: i faaam aafaa get N 


26.1. From lust and wrath those renouncers have been 
released. Their ‘self’ —the inner sense—has been disciplined. 
‘On both sides’, both when they are alive and dead, ‘the peace 
of Brahman’ or liberation is there for them. They have known 
the Self—they have had the right perception. This is the idea. 


210 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. V 


27.0. maaa dafa AT: ae Seca 
afaina fat waft area frat: 

aara Aer sft war we ye aerate, aoe oe wert 
sara aerate ace frat ae <hr cer grea 
wre safar cr — 


27.6. Instant liberation has been affirmed for the renouncers 
who are under the discipline of right perception. The Lord has 
also repeatedly affirmed—and He will do so again—the need 
for the practice of Karma Yoga dedicated to God or Brahman 
with total mental dedication to the Lord, the object being to 
win liberation through mind’s purification, knowledge and 
renunciation of works. In this context, for elucidating the 
Yoga of meditation, the direct means to right perception, He 
utters the following verses constituting the basic aphorisms of 
that Yoga: 


CIMT Heat akaoa Aare Wal: | 
mmi AAT HAT ATATHAATATLIT WI 


ataandaa Aata: | 
frisar a: Wat A Va A NLN 


27-28. Keeping out external contacts, fixing the eye 
between the eye-brows, and equalising the in-breath 
and the out-breath that move within the nostrils; 

Controlling the senses, mind and intellect, and free 
from desire, fear and wrath, the silent sage intent on 
liberation is eternally emancipated, indeed. 


27-28.1. Say ga u aaa a Hea afe: maa — Aa- 
amw aa: qA Aa: maa: Aa, amy AAAA: wearer: 
mer. q: wa gar: afaa wa aR: Fear waa aa wal: 
wea sf aa | Ta maA arareaeacarfent aat Hear, Af- 
arigtg: ware daaa afari wa: qfar oer a: adfxardtafe:, 
wr aft: aaa, ATT: gena ATTA: — ae: UF 


26-29] Yoga of Renunciation 211 


wT wat To we wer a—ae Aerrcay: afr waq i aran- 
WITT: FST A wa WT HTT graa: F fara: wag a: fand- 
SNA: A Us add aa qaqa, Ac: Va A—aA aT Ate: Har: 
pig: aT 1 


27-28.1. “The contacts’ are the objects, sound etc., that were 
admitted into the intellect within via the ears and so forth. 
For one who dwells not on them mentally, the outer sounds 
etc., remain external alone. Thus expelling them, and fixing 
the eye between the eye-brows and likewise equalizing the 
in-breath and out-breath that move within the nostrils, and 
having controlled the senses, mind and intellect, the silent 
sage, the thinker and renouncer, shall become intent on libera- 
tion; for him liberation is the final refuge and goal. From him 
have departed desire, fear, and wrath. A practical renouncer 
who lives thus is indeed liberated; no other liberation is there 
for him to accomplish. 


29.0. a amaaa fe fata eta? sear— 
29.0. With mind thus concentrated, what ought to be 
known? Answer: 


Ae AMATAT HÅNTE | 
agi aaa men at maA NRR 


29. He attains peace knowing Me, the partaker of 
sacrifices and penances, the supreme Lord of the whole 
world and the friend of all living beings. 


aama ATA TASAA NSII 


29.1. Met f n WHI aa AMAT a a AET taa- 
way a adonat adt staat Aged Hat, Fee adai ad- 


212 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. V 


mat eaaa saa — adaa gA ARAROA, 
adaa at amaa aea afer adara wa sate | 


29.1. ‘The partaker of sacrifices and penances’ i.e., both as 
the agent and the Deity related to sacrifices and penances, the 
Supreme Lord of the worlds and of all living beings—their 
friend and helper—, regardless of any benefit in return for 
services rendered. It is Myself who dwells in the hearts of all 
living beings, who is the superintendent of the fruits of all works 
and who is the witness of all ideas in the mind. Knowing Me, 
Nārāyaņa thus, one attains peace or the cessation of the 
transmigratory life. 


afer eat 


A _ eae a | 
Sarain sara (ET) ary aS: Wt 


GSTS: 
CHAPTER VI 
YOGA OF MEDITATION 


0.1. Aaa aa Fares sit wate qA- 
wat: rar: aa Hea ate’ (429-28) gaa saet: 1 Aai 
qfrearta: aa sasaa MEA + aa earaatrey aferg at afa, 
aad arama: aad Tear afeada ader we sae: aq 
atta —aratiara: Stet N 


0.1. At the end of the preceding chapter were set forth 
verses 5.2729 that constitute the basic aphorisms of the Yoga 
of Meditation, the direct means of right perception. Now is 
commenced the chapter that forms a gloss on them. Since the 
preliminary accessory of the Yoga of meditation is work, tll 
one becomes fit to embark on meditation, the eligible house- 
holder must do work. So it is commended in verse 6.1. 


0.2. aq fret aAa, araat a ua fated at 
amanta? —a, ‘arena at areorqerd | &.3.] ght featur, 
HSS TWAT Va ATH | EN. areca Tw TH FT 
sag aera ahs Aq ea caer TERN, ‘arecey a A A- 
fainoa fasta fam a aaa ea N 

aa orator shat ara mea: waft, areca aha, wat a 
ITERATA: TT ASST: — ATT Ate, TERT, ‘arecen’ a eta faar 
fome a sored wa sft aq—a, ‘ae aft wad GA: i- 
azma Amea aft; a: aia Gt any ares: acta eee 
A Ua pia: sre ane wf Sead aft 1 ae: a Arai raa- 
ma: serrate PAT: 1) 


0.2. Objection: Why is the fitness to undertake the Yoga of 
meditation made the limit of the period for doing work? Work 
prescribed by the scriptures must be performed as long as life 
lasts. 

Answer: No; vide the qualification in 6,3. Work has causal 
force for the ascetic who seeks to scale the peak of Yoga; he 


214 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam 


who has scaled it is concerned only with quietude. If both he 
who seeks to scale Yoga’s peak and he who has done it have 
necessarily to cultivate quietude and do works, according to 
the Lord, pointless indeed would be the qualification and dis- 
tinction based on the difference between ‘seeking to scale’ 
and, ‘having scaled Yoga’s peak’. It may be argued that 
among the pccupants of life’s stations, some one. may seek to 
scale Yoga’s peak and another may in fact do it, while others 
may neither care to scale nor succeed in scaling. In relation 
to these, the qualification and the distinction are applicable. 
But this won’t do. For, the expressions yogarudhasya tasyaiva 
mean that the very person who sought to scale Yoga’s peak is 
he who has achieved it: he, then, has only to cultivate that 
quietude which contributes to the final fruit of Yoga. There- 
fore no kind of work has to be performed throughout life by 
him. 


0.3. Maaar aAA aq afro: att: fafa: wed sea, 
a: afar: aft atria ada srenta eft cer area ATAT 
car | ward fe ad at ara frat at—aterer face eA — 
a Ge aad wai fraser + ato: aaaea tes afaa 
afa vara l [xe] wern aaa amaaa A fa 1 7 a 
aftr aff mafaa daq, aio: fraser: 1 

ay gt Sat deren gua: adhe at ae aro fa Fq—a, Hat 
aura faraha: tt 

mara wa ofa Aq—caadt Haat Hat Aare: aAA a oraa 
arrafed:; anna a frsee:, gare: a ofa arerer aha eft aq—a, 
takt gafara fraag: [&.%o. ], safa Ra: [&. ev. ] 
ee Eee ees ee a 
vafa aad 1 a a qeerer faafaa: [&.20.] amaa 
wR | suafaweerearqrda [3] i 


0.3. This follows also from the reference to the lapse from 
Yoga in 6.38. If in Chapter VI Yoga is prescribed for the 
householder who has to do works, despite his lapse from Yoga, 
he is bound, as a matter of course, to reap the fruits of his 
works; the fear that he may perish does not stand to reason. 


Yoga of Meditation 215 


Indeed, inevitably, the works he has done have to be either 
desire-prompted or obligatory, which will bear their appro- 
priate fruits. (Liberation, being eternal, is no product of work). 
We have already stated (vide BGB.4.18) that the obligatory 
work, prescribed by the authoritative Vedas, must bear fruit; 
otherwise, the Veda would prove to be merely futile. So long 
as there are works to the credit of the householder, all talk of 
his lapse from both heaven and Yoga is senseless; works cannot 
reasonably cause such lapse. The suggestion that the work 
done, having been dedicated to God, may not bear any fruit 
is improper; indeed such dedication should make work more 
fruitful. Futile is the argument that dedication of works to God 
promotes liberation, but won’t yield other fruits. So the fear 
that the agent of works may perish is not in place. Verses 6.10 
and 14 enjoin renunciation of works. ‘Alone’ in 6, 10 (ekakz) 
does not refer to the practitioner of Yoga, the Yogi being 
unaccompanied by his wife; there is no room for any help at 
the time of meditation that a wife may render. That the refer- 
ence here is not to the householder follows also from the ex- 
pressions ‘free from yearnings’ and ‘rid of all possessions’ in 
verse 6.10. This view is strengthened by the unreasonableness 
of Arjuna’s reference in 6.38, to lapse from both the path of 
works and meditation. 


0.4. ‘warfra:’ [2] sara afar: wa aarfacdt ated a oe, 
wifes a free: nfecer = denfinet hire aft eq q, maahi 
ofa aR aa: ea: aiaga i a tac fecha: 
afer: va anA anit ai fe ate? —aat aft, amore aver 
erat aare aaga, a aaa a anit a waiter ga [€.2.] | 
Ta Utd ae Hino geueadi: wuss wera | 
a a sfag free: afer mediaa: afaeqiageociceraa- 
mAg fafed Ria a a sfarefe ararq 1 caraafacrnd 
a—‘adentir aver aur... ta ada maq are’ [4 R], 
“att agqet aq tafaq afta: Raaf: [ 22.28. ], faa ararq 
g wat garada free: [2.9%.], ‘aatcractcani? [ 22.2%. ] 
aft a aa ma aaa anfa; à faved squire — RE: | 
qa At aM arava: aaaea afagreiient wot 


216 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. VI 


aS arava arate watvag xa ‘a aauret 
a art a sft ead — 


0.4. Unsound is the argument that 6.1 with its expression 
‘not depending on the fruits of works’ refers to a householder 
who also renounces and meditates. Renunciation and medita- 
tion have been ruled out for one who does not maintain the 
household fires and who does not work, because 6.1 just com- 
mends the renunciation of cravings for the fruits of works that 
constitutes an external means to the Yoga of meditation. The 
sense is: Not he alone, who has renounced the household fires 
and works is a renouncer and meditator, but also he who works 
without attachment to the fruits of work—i.e., who performs 
Karmayoga in order to purify his mind. Verse 6.1 is only 
a commendation of such an agent. One and the same sentence 
cannot both praise renunciation of attachment to the fruit of 
works, and also repudiate the fourth station of life. The Lord 
does not thereby repudiate the status of being a real re- 
nouncer and Yogin to the man who has rejected the house- 
hold fires and works. For, such a status has been recognised 
by Sruti, Smrti, Puranas, Itihasas and the authoritative texts 
on Yoga. Were He to do so, He would contradict His very 
words such as 9.13, 12.19, 2.71 and 12.16, which reveal His 
doctrines, and with which the repudiation of the fourth life- 
station will come in conflict. Therefore, in the case of the ascetic 
who seeks to scale Yoga’s peak and who is occupying the 
station of the householder, works like the fire-sacrifice, per- 
formed without desire for fruit, prove, due to their power to 
purify the mind, to be a means to rise to the heights of the 
Yoga of meditation. Hence the commendation in the words: 
“He is a renouncer and a Yogin.”’ 


GIR UCIGEIE | 
WAT: BIH BY Hr wera R: | 
a aural a arm a a fachad aries: ngu 


1] Yoga of Meditation 217 


The blessed Lord said: 

1. Not depending on the fruits of it, whoever performs 
the work that has to be done is the renouncer and Yogin; 
not he who has rejected the household fires and is a 
non-worker. 


11. wafer eff ou aware: a aria: aware: —fa? — ane 
at we aq aq aaa, sinaeg: gaT 1 at fe wwe 
Toa a: ate afer: wale, at g aferae, aa: HAT: HAHAH | 
via: at art wiag fret araara afiadtarfea ant ade faida 
a. ahaq gam: wat a Hetero: fared Aani ga: dam 
a anit a sft 1 dare: ofan, qa mea af a aad a, anit 
qq: faaan, a ger afer a att qatar: aa 
ATM, a dae facia: afer va det anit a sf ae | fifa: 
ama: eater: memg a facia: ates anaa aft afa- 
zara: fat: agreratfear: aer wat afer: i 


1.1. Not depending on what? ‘The fruit of work’, 1.e. he 
who is free from the craving for the fruits of works. One who 
craves for the fruit of work depends on it. The renouncer in 
question is different; so he does not depend on it. As such, he 
does what has to be done—obligatory rites like the fire-sacri- 
fice that are other than desire-prompted works. Such a worker 
excels other workers, says the Lord: he is the renouncer and 
the Yogin. Renunciation consists in giving up; one who gives. 
up is the renouncer. Yoga 1s mind’s concentration: one who 
has it is the Yogin. One who has such attributes as these is to 
be considered renouncer and Yogin, and not the person who 
has merely given up the sacred household fires and rituals. 
One ‘rid of fires’ is he who has given up the fires that are 
auxiliaries to rituals. Rid of works is he also who is free from 
activities like penance, charity, etc., that are not associated 
with the sacred fires. 


2.0. aq a frat afaa va sfeeaioarrnesy darted aired 
a fagy 1 ae oe are: afeaea a dented attic a asfag set 
efa—ay ae:, warfaq wae saaer afenetatwacand | aq Hay? 


218 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. VI 


eE a E — 
a frafaeced: eama afte a afr at sag; a oF Fe 
aaa mira a ahi stand ataqare— 


9.0. Now in Sruti and Smrti and authoritative Yoga texts he 
only is declared to be a renouncer and Yogin who has dis- 
carded the sacred fires and who works not. Why then is de- 
clared here this unheard-of doctrine, viz., that he who main- 
tains the sacred fires and performs works is a renouncer and 
Yogin? This is no flaw; for the doctrine sought to be established 
is secondary only. How? The renouncer is secondarily said to 
be one who has discarded mental clinging to works’ fruits; 
such a person too is a Yogin, as he performs works as part of 
the discipline of Yoga and as he has given up the distracting 
addiction to the fruits of works. Thus these two are secondary; 
they are not to be taken in their primary signification. To set 
forth this idea the Lord says: 


a aafaa sigart t fate mea | 
qT Daaedanent anit aaa RIT NRN 


2. That which they call renunciation, know to be Yoga, 
O Pandava Prince! None indeed who has not discarded 
mental constructions can become a Yogin. 


2.1. 0 ft uo adadan eama aiia dearest sft og: 
afraqtataa:, ant pagoa t raria fate AR {WET | 


saat ata at gator: wa pofara aa daa a ud at 
aaia ae—a fe a iaag: wae: RA: Re- 
fina: ara: afafa: Aa a: aaa: aaa paaa wt anit 
amaa wafa, a aea a, noina aafaa, | 
THY a: SMT HAT ATHsdHey: Wad F abil aaa fA- 


2] Yoga of Meditation 219 
aafaa. waq, frafaeaedt: wedacter deren eft ahora: 1 


2.1. Know that what is genuine renunciation, according 
to the scholars of Sruti and Smrti, characterized by the re- 
jection of all works and their fruits, is Yoga, the performance 
of works, O Arjuna. On the basis of what common charac- 
teristic are identified these two opposed states, Karma Yoga, 
a state of activity, and real renunciation, a state of cessation 
therefrom? The answer follows: Indeed there is similarity 
between real renunciation and Karma Yoga in respect of the 
agent. The real renouncer discards craving, the cause of acti- 
vity and mental constructions as regards works and their 
fruits. These, at the back of all-works, he has discarded. The 
Karma Yogin, too, while performing works, gives up mental 
constructions as regards their fruits. This is the idea set forth 
in the second half of the verse; for, an agent of activity, who 
has not discarded mental constructions and attachment to the 
fruits of activity, cannot be a Yogin, a concentrated man. This 
is the sense of the passage. Mental clinging to the fruits of works 
distracts. Therefore any doer of works who has given up 
mental clinging to the fruits of works is a Yogin; his mind is 
concentrated, not being distracted. He has discarded the cause 


of distractions, viz., mental clingings to the fruits of works. 
This is the idea. 


3.0. Ua Teaia iaat: Hiss Aaaa ateq ‘A HAT- 
afafa srgatt a fafe mea sfa starrer aad daa TA | 


3.0. Thus as a commendation of Karma Yoga, its parity 
with renunciation has been affirmed in 6.2 on the basis of the 
common element of ‘rejection’ by the agent—common to 
genuine renunciation and Karma Yoga. Now, Karma Yoga 
characterized by unconcern for fruits is an external auxiliary 
of the Yoga of meditation; so Karma Yoga has been com- 
mended and its relation to the Yoga of meditation 1s set forth: 


220 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. VI 


ARAN BA PTOA | 
AMESA AEST TAT: PTOA 11311 


3. Work is said to be the cause in the case of the silent 
sage who seeks to scale the peak of Yoga; as regards 
this very sage who has scaled it, quiescence is said to 
be the cause. 


3.1. ast: ft uo meN: ang Per ae, aANT 
HHI HAHA wa eas: | He TET areeat: ? A, apoia EA: 
qed. | fae amet? an | ee HTT are Gerd 1 areca TA: 
qa we wa: sare adhe: fagfa: are, ea aad Ted 
za Wad aad HAT aa, aad avaq fraser fafaa 
fad aaritad i ae ate a afer ates: wate | car a aaa — 


aaam: rarer” a [a T. 294.3¢.] stat 


3.1. For the sage seeking to scale—but who has, as yet, not 
scaled—being unable to establish himself in the Yoga of medi- 
tation—, work is the cause. Of this sage, who seeks to scale 
Yoga’s peak and who has discarded the fruits of his works, 
work is said to be the cause, 1.e. the means. Of the same sage 
who hasscaled that peak, ‘quiescence’, cessation, or withdrawal 
from all works is said to be the cause or means. In the measure 
in which an unperturbed sage, who has conquered his senses, 
has withdrawn from works, to that extent his mind becomes 
concentrated. Quickly thus he reaches Yoga’s peak. Vyasa has 
affirmed this: A Brahmana has no wealth equal to unity, 
equality and truthfulness; character, firmness, amiability, 
gentleness and withdrawal from works of all kinds (Santi- 
parvan 1795.38). 


4.0. HT Feral Har anes: wafa efe serIr— 


4.0. Now may be raised the question—when is the peak of 
Yoga scaled? Answer: 


3-4] Yoga of Meditation 221 


ual fe ama a TAEA I 
AAAHCTA ATA ANITSSEaAatoag S11 


4. When the sage is no longer attached to sense objects 
and works, he discards all mental constructions; then 
he is said to have scaled the peak of Yoga. 


4.1. Ter aft n wet aaretaarafeat anit fe sfeardy efron 
wot: mara: aq ari aq at afara T- 
amaaa T asad wet aderaaie + Hila sas: | ad- 
a aiiin ares: MANT: aad, qa aferq ares Tea | 
adirar sa tad vata ara aathr a wath aera 
sas: | APAT: fe ad ara: — 

“acre: FAT À ast: ARARAT: [ATT 3.3. | 

“ara sata a qe aafaa wae | 

a cat ance aqet + fara” [ar T. 290.24] 

qeartacad: | 

1. Concentrating his mind, when the sage ceases to be 

‘attached to’—gives up—the sense objects like sound etc., 
when heis no longer attached to works, obligatory, contingent, 
desire-prompted and forbidden, as he has no purpose of his 
own to be realised by means of them, and ceases to pursue 
them, then, trained to discard all mental constructions, the 
cause of desires here and hereafter, he has scaled the peak of 
Yoga. By virtue of the expression, ‘discarding all mental con- 
structions’, it follows that one must discard all desires and 
works. Indeed all desires are rooted in mental constructions. 
Vide: “Desire is rooted in mental constructions; sacrifices are 
said to be born of mental constructions”? (Manu 2.3). “‘De- 
sire! I know in what you are rooted; you are born of mental 
constructions. I shall not set you up mentally; then you will 
have no root to support you”’ (Santi Parvan 177.25). 


4.2. qaaranicant a adnia: fag: waft “a a wate 
agafa, aega det ged” fag x] sarfeqfrs, 


222 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. VI 


qafa yet wed: Taq sre Afe [RTE 3] Taree 
frag | ara —a fe adinan shaq cafeqaq aft am: | 
qa ‘adda a aaa aa, aay afar a watt 
a WTATT I 


4.2. Once all desires are discarded, renunciation of works 
follows. Vide: “He wills according to his desire; he acts ac- 
cording to his desire; he acts according to his will’ (BU.4.4.5), 
and similar Upanisadic utterances. Also, passages like the 
following state this: “All that a living being does is the work 
of desire” (Manu 2.4). Reasoning, too, supports this view. 
None indeed may so much as stir, once mental constructions 
are discarded. Therefore, the Lord’s expression ‘discarding 
all mental constructions’ obliges all to give up all desires and 
works. 


5.0. Wat Ud Mez. Tat Ag seat arena Jaa: vata aareeadar- 
aq | At: — 


5.0. Thus, Yoga’s peak being scaled, the self becomes 
lifted up by the self above all empirical turmoils. So, 


THATCHAM ATHTAATATAAT | 
AAT Wier aAa FTA: WI 


5. Elevate the self by the self; do not weaken the self. 
Self is indeed the friend of the self. Self alone is self’s 


4-6] Yoga of Meditation 223 


5.1. Elevate the self sunk in the sea of transmigratory life’ 
by means of the Self. Pull it upwards from the sea, make it 
scale the peak of Yoga. This is the idea. Do not weaken or 
push it down. For the Self alone is the self’s friend; no other 
friend is there who may promote one’s liberation from this 
trarsmigratory life. Even a relation, being the seat of emotions 
like attachment etc. which make for bondage, may prove 
adverse as regards liberation. Therefore, the stress in the ex- 
pressions ‘the Self indeed ìs the friend of the self, the Self alone 
is the foe’ or adversary, is appropriate. Any other external 
adversary, too, is impelled a the self. Hence the stress in the 
expression “‘Self alone is. . .” is right. 


E let ak ial ti A 
aA area: ary: 2 fae: ar ae aeaa: fey: afa ? seat — 


6.0. It has been affirmed that the self alone is the friena 
and the self alone is the foe, of the self. What sort of self is the 
friend and what sort, the foe of the self? Answer: 


TUM ASSEN Aaa FST: | 
AATAACT WAC adaa WIT Ei 


6. The Self is the friend of that self by which the self 
has been subdued. The Self alone operates as the foe of 
one unsubdued by the self. 


6.1. ary: SAT nN aA STAT ae: TET, TET ae: A ATANT 
aie wane ee oe ek ara pinoia: Aa aettac:, 
fafaa: gari: | amena: I aana: J WaT WTA ada eT 
UT TAT, TAT ANT A: AAT: AIP, TMT AAT AAA: ATHTL 
ada sored: N 


6.1. Self is the friend of that self which has been subdued 
by itself. The subdued self is the conglomerate of ‘effect and 
instruments’ (body and its organs). The reference is to the 
Jiva who has mastered his body and sense organs. Of the 


224 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. VI 


unsubdued self the foe is the self alone. As non-self is self?s foe 
or adversary, so, this very self that is unsubdued will operate 
as the foe. This is the idea. 


faa: saaa TATA AaTtEa: | 
MANGA Ay TAT ATATTATAAT: NON 


7. The supreme Self is concentrated for one who has 
subdued the self and is quiescent, in cold and heat, in 
pleasure and pain, and in honour and disgrace. 


7.1. Rama: ofr ou Raama: areca: arcat fa: aa a: 
Reem qa feared, sera SINA [Sear ec aa: 
aearfat: ] eae aarfedt: avata aeda add garth: | far — 
MaATTZAs ST TIT AT ATA FT ATATIATAaT: paaa: FA: AMT II 


7.1. The supreme Self is ‘concentrated’-—exists as one’s 
immediate Self—for one who has subdued the self or the con- 
glomerate of ‘effects and instruments’, and who is quiescent. 
(The reference is to the renouncer whose inner sense has been 
tranquillized.) This is the idea. Moreover, he will be the same 
in states like cold and heat, pleasure and pain, as well as in 
honour and disgrace. 


mafiaa Hees fafadfan: 1 
TH FTA ANT AAS AIT: UCI 


8. That yogin is said to be integrated whose self is 
content with knowledge and experience, who is im- 
mutable, who has subdued his senses and to whom 
clod, stone and gold are all alike. 


8.1. at ga ou mAg art meaa | afar, 
fam I meaa. Aaa ata caves, area afar TA: 
AMATI: AAT ART ATO Ter a ATAPI CET. eTATT:, 


7-9] Yoga of Meditation 225 


wafer seat, fafrafea: a 1 a: goer: om: aarfed: ce a rea 


ead ait | a aasterqarad: sreryaragata aaa ger a: 
TANS AT: 1 
fra — 


8.1. ‘Content with knowledge and experience’—‘know- 
ledge’ means conversance with the principles enunciated in 
the Sastras; on the other hand, ‘experience’ means the exact 
realisation of whatever has been learned from the Sastras. Con- 
tent with these two is the self—the inner sense—of the Yogin. 
He becomes immutable or unshakable; for, he has subdued 
the senses. Whoever answers to this description is ‘integrated’, 
is said to be concentrated. To this Yogin a clod, a stone and a 
piece of gold are all alike. 

Moreover: 


FEAST | 
maa Fag anafaa ngu 


9. He excels whose intellect is the same in respect of 
good men, friends, foes, indifferent persons, neutrals, 
antagonists, relations, the righteous and the unrigh- 
teous. 


9.1. gga A u ‘aga’ searfegrerd va geq | aga sfa sera 
aada opal, fat aga, aft wa, ger: a pafa cet we, 
mae: g: faegat: Sat: RAN, ger area: afsa:, ay, eR | 
say ary menai aft stg ifea aay way afa: 
“ap. Farry” aft womqaaty: gant: | fafnir ‘faery eft ar 
Teratq—AMTSsrt AAT AT BAA: STF: I 


9.1. The first half of this verse is a single compound word. 
The ‘good man’ helps, regardless of any requital. “The friend’ 
is one affectionate. ‘The foe’ is the adversary. ‘The indif- 
ferent’ takes no sides. “The neutral’ seeks the well-being of 
both of those who oppose each other. “The antagonist’ is he 
whom one does not like. “The relations’ are the kith and kin. 


226 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. VI 


In regard to all these, as also to the righteous who conform 
to the sastras and the unrighteous who do evil, he excels 
whose intellectual attitude is the same, who does not bother 
about what another is and does. Another reading for ‘excels’ 
is vimucyate, meaning ‘is liberated’. The idea is that this kind 
of person is the foremost among all those who have scaled 
Yoga’s peak. 


10.0. Ha: Ua BAAR — 


10.0. Therefore in order to reap the best fruits: 


arnt ysa maane ga fer: | 
uat sateen farata: wor 


10. Living in solitude, alone, with controlled mind and 
self, free from cravings, owning nothing, the Yogin 
ought to apply himself to Yoga incessantly. 


10.1. anit uo anit am qos aareerq aad ada areca 
aaau tee card aA fers: aq caret sag: — ‘veh 
Raa: ua a afr aama ara seat gerd: — afam fad 
HTH Beat tea aadt wear a aaae, frat: Aago: 
safer: weer eat: 1 aafaa amada: aq qaa 
zeae: II 


10.1. Let ‘the Yogin’, the meditator, ceaselessly concen- 
trate ‘the self’, the inner sense, ‘in solitude’ i.e., stationing 
himself in mountain caves, etc. ‘Alone’-—unaccompanied. 
The qualifications, living in solitude and unaccompanied, 
mean ‘having renounced’. ‘With controlled mind’ i.e. the 
inner sense, and the ‘self’ or the body. “Free from cravings, 
owning no possessions’? mean without mental clingings and 
possessions of any kind. A true renouncer that he is, he must 
own literally nothing and apply himself to Yoga. 


11.0. ay A at gaoa araarercfagradtar arara 


10-12] Yoga of Meditation 227 


fran: AHST:, MANTA oe, Tenors A, KAT: ATCA | TT ATA 
u maq Wa Sead — 


11.0. Now begins the section that lays down regulations 
regarding the posture, diet, recreation, etc., of the practising 
Yogin; for, these constitute the means to Yoga. It also enu- 
merates the characteristics of the perfected Yogin and Yoga’s 
fruits and so forth. First 1s described the posture: 


Wat sat ora fercaraaarers: | 
aafaa maa draa N? Lu 


11. Setting one’s firm seat in a clean spot, neither too 
high nor too low, covered with a cloth, or hide, and 
Kusa grass, one over the other; 


111. JA f aA as fafat emaa: aearea: a, A ena 
maaa far aas amea: a a aag a aa sfa a fà 
mai sorfrarparraey mea farde: aa wa: AAT i 

afroa frq — 


11.1. ‘In a clean spot’, solitary, either by its very nature 
or made so by appropriate means; having set up one’s ‘firm 
seat’ which is neither too high nor too low, and covered with 
cloth, hide and kuśa grass arranged in the reverse order to 
the one given in the verse; 

Having set up a seat there—what follows? 


TARA AA: Heat aatadtaratHa: | 
safara TSTUTANTAT Aa SA ULM 


3 


12. Sitting on it, making the mind one-pointed, con- 
trolling the activities of the mind and the senses, let 
the practitioner apply himself to Yoga for self-purifi- 
cation. 


228 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam  [Ch. VI 


121. 7a Sf u at aaq aad aaa an qg? — 
watery: siga wart wa: Heat aafaa: fad a afxarhr 
a afani ast fro: ager wer a: aafaa: 1 a frat 
amt qa aft ? ae—arafared aerncrer faggat saad | 


12.1. There seated, one should apply oneself to Yoga. 
How? Withdrawing the mind from all objects, making it one- 
pointed, and controlling the activities of mind and senses. 
What is the aim of this application to Yoga? Self-purifica- 
tion or the purification of the inner sense. 


13.0. are sat THT aa AA arent ee aft 2 Fert — 


13.0. The external seat has been described. Now is answered 
the question how the body is to be held: 


aa arterial maaa fer: | 
ala atta ca PaA 12311 


13. Holding the body, head and neck evenly and stea- 
dily, the resolute Yogin fixes his gaze on the tip of his 
nose, not looking around. 


13.1. a8 aft u am paR are roa grat a arate 
a TA wa wae a aA aa: aed Avata; ae: faferafe— 
aaa aft | fers fertt aca art: et area aed were yet 
at Hea ea ata; aA ot: seo: | a fe aaam se 
fafafa | fe ate ? sept fEAT: |e a AETAT. 
facta: 1 eaaa aa aq faafaa, wa: ata aad, 7 
amaf | arcata fe wae: ware aea nae aa: Hear’ |N. | 
aft 1 ae gareaata went: gaa: wa ‘ayer saad | 
Raa saad feat a vase AAU AS BAA I 

fra — 


13.1. ‘The body, head and neck: holding these three evenly 
and steadily — there may be movement in spite of even hold- 
ing; to exclude it 1s added the qualification ‘steadily’. ‘Reso- 


12-14] Yoga of Meditation 229 


lute’ i.e., becoming resolute and ‘fixing the gaze on’—looking 
at—the tip of one’s nose. Understand this to mean ‘looking 
at the tip’, as it were. The expression “as it were’ is understood. 
What is sought to be enjoined is not the gazing at the tip of 
the nose; rather it is the convergence of sight. This depends 
on the concentration of the inner sense. Were the gaze at the 
tip of the nose sought to be enjoined, the result would be 
mind’s concentration thereon, and not on the Self: In 6.25 
what will be enjoined is concentration on the Self—‘the 
centering of the mind on the Self’. So by the expression ‘as 
it were’ implicit in this context what is affirmed is the con- 
vergence of sight. ‘Not looking around’ means not looking in 
various directions, every now and then. 
Moreover, 


warden fanaa: werathrad fer: | 
aa: AIT Asa Ah Arete ATT: ULV 


14. With the inner sense tranquillized, fear gone, estab- 
lished in the vow of chastity, controlling the mind, 
thoughts anchored in Me, the integrated Yogin should 
sit, intent on Me. 


14.1. dared zf n aeae Seay wed: AH aA AT 


Ti | fea—na aot ame: ad: iga ead, aT. afr 
qa fred wer aise fa ae: aR. at area sofa | 
HaT, HE TA wer arg aa wala | shaq uit aa, 7 g 
i wa owas wera; fe ate? ase, weed ati ad g afer 
ACTOR II 


14.1. With the inner sense eminently tranquillized and fear 
dispelled, let the Yogin sit. The vow of chastity implies waiting 
upon the teacher, eating the food collected through men- 
dicancy, etc. Let him stick to this course. Controlling the 


230 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. VI 


moods of the mind, thoughts directed to Me, the Supreme 
Lord, integrated, i.e. concentrated, let him sit, intent on Me 
or deeming Me the Supreme Reality. This contrasts with a 
man who may direct his thoughts to a woman, for example, 
but who may not deem her supreme; for him the king or the 
Deity may be supreme. Here the Yogin directs his thoughts 
to Me and deems Me the supreme Reality. 


15.0. TY Sarat arr sa — 
15.0. Now is stated the fruit of Yoga: 


qsad Tass ANT AAT: | 
mia fratrarat acdeurafinresta wey 


15. Thus applying himself unintermittently, with a 
disciplined mind, the Yogin wins peace, which is abid- 
ance in Me, and whose climax is emancipation. 


15.1. TTT Ba uu Fr ward Haq va Aarts fanda Tear 
areas Ader att faamaaa: frat dad arta at: eT aise fraa- 
maa: mia sata frati frat ater: aercar faror wea: ard: 
a fratrrcn at fati ne wedtat aferreata orem 1 

15.1. ‘Applying’, concentrating, ‘thus’, unintermittently 
as stated, the Yogin with a disciplined mind wins ‘peace’— 
withdrawal from the sphere of objects that culminates in 
emancipation. The discipline of ‘peace’ has nirvana or emanci- 


pation as its climax; it is abidance in Me and being subject 
to Me. 


16.0. zari afia: merana: seat — 


16.0. Now is set forth the regulation of the Yogin’s diet, etc. 


maag artiste A aH: | 
a arema Ararat Ag MAA NRN 


15-17] Yoga of Meditation 231 


16. He has no Yoga who eats too much or who eats not 
at all; who habitually sleeps too much or who keeps 
always awake, O Arjuna! 


16.1. 4 Sf n a aera: amefa aaa adie: NAAT: 
Toate: afer | tt Cate areata: aT: are | aq & a maafa 
wa qa, aa ferfea, aor feafer aq sataisa a aaafa’ | a. 
taint a ae | wear arnt a areraferar ararq arfire 
qi a aed | aaa. wA ana aafaa 
Raama amaa: an: afer i oem fe— 
Ht TASHA FAITH F | 
ara: aac J aga 1 —[? | 
zarafa | tar—a a afacacritoer art a oie eubel 
maA art wats A sassy 1 


16.1. For him who ‘eats too much’—who exceeds the 
measure of food that suffices for him, there is no Yoga; nor for 
one who eats not at all. “The food, in sufficient measure, pro- 
tects and does not hurt. What exceeds it, hurts. What is less, 
protects not” (Sat.Bra. 9.2.1.2). Therefore, the Yogin shall eat 
neither more nor less than what suffices for himself. Or ‘the 
Yogin who eats more than what has been prescribed in the 
Yoga texts cannot have Yoga. Vide the following: ‘Half of the 
stomach, fill with food and condiments; the third quarter is 
for water; leave the fourth for the movement of air.’ So, too, 
there is no Yoga for him who habitually sleeps too much; nor, 
for him who keeps awake too long, O Arjuna! 


17.0. FF Yaa wadag — 

17.0. How then is Yoga achieved? Answer: 
UME THasey HA | 
qaaa ANT nafa FAT wv 


17. One who in proper measure eats and plays, applies 


232 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. VI 


himself to works, sleeps and keeps awake, achieves 
Yoga that destroys all pains. 


17.1. aH eft u arena afgad ef mg: wa, fago 
fagre: Trew, at get a aera: generar: Te; 


17.1. What is taken in is food. Play is movement, walk. 
To him who has these two in proper measure, to him whose 
application to works is in due measure and whose sleep and 
wakefulness are of measured duration, accrues Yoga that 
destroys all pains—all the pains of empirical life. This is the 
idea. 


18.0. TT AAT Fat AH waa ef ? sad — 


18.0. Now arises the question: When does one become 
integrated? Answer: 


qa. fafaa fad sieaatarataced | 
feg: TARN GE TTA TAT WLC 


18. When the well-controlled mind abides solely in the 
Self, rid of cravings for objects of desires, one is said 
to be integrated in Yoga. 


18.1. Fat aft u wer fafaa faor faai aad oaa area fad 
feat mendami mafa wa tae wafased, carafe feafa oat 
ay: | free: vader: fai genee: eer am aT 
atin: a am: aR: efa seat aar afeay are i 


18.1. When the mind is marked by control and is made 
one-pointed, giving up all thoughts of external objects, when 
it abides in the pure Self alone, i.e., is anchored in the Self, 


17-20] Yoga of Meditation 233 


at that time one is said to be integrated or concentrated, For, 
he has no more cravings for objects of desires, seen or unseen. 


19.0. vex Nfa: aarfed aq fad Tea GTA Sead — 


19.0. A simile of the’ concentrated mind of the Yogin is 
offered: 


mat stat frarert Awa ATA SAT | 
Na aafaa GST ARTATATT: RN 


19. As light in a windless spot stirs not—this is the 
simile of the Yogin whose mind is controlled and who 
applies himself to Yoga. 


19.1. a A n anr ate: veto: aaaea: aad maafa ear 
Ra: a gett a a, a a sa saat gA atta: fad- 
saaa. apa fafan aftr aaaea aana gai 
am agaa: amena aA aafaa: gaT: il 


19.1. As a light in a windless spot does not stir—this is the 
simile, the object to which the Yogin is likened by the knowers 
of Yoga who are conversant with the movements of the mind. 
The Yogin’s mind—the inner sense—is controlled and he 
practises Yoga i.e., concentration. 


20.0. Ut amana varity aaa aq — 


20.0. Thus the mind becomes one-pointed, very much like 
the light in a windless spot, due to the power of Yoga-practice. 


auaa fad reg maaan | 
TA AAAS TTA FEAT RoN 
20. When through the practice of Yoga the motionless 


mind withdraws (from objects) and rejoices in the 
Self, beholding the Self by one’s inner sense; 


234 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. VI 


20.1. aF aft n aa afeaq are soca fad soda maa fred 
add frarftasart aan apace, at a wa afer Fe 
aam aaa ST AHO sea TK Aa Aae TIT 
gya: A we areata ga gfe ward 

fra- 


20.1. When the mind withdraws, being checked from all 
external movements by the practice of Yoga, and when he 
rejoices in his own Self, beholding the Supreme Spirit—the 
All-pervasive Light—by means of the inner sense purified 
through concentration. 

And, 


Faaratars agafa nga ANTR | 
afa ua a dara faasa TAA: NR 


21. When the Yogin experiences the endless bliss, 
beyond the senses, that may be grasped only by the 
intellect, becomes steadfast and does not move away 
from the Truth; 


21.1. JA ZA u ga nafaa aa wa wafa afa a 
Sof aq aq qfeme qeda faf a eft afeare n- 
faa faamaaa aaaf grt: afa aq gaa ge aquata aa 
afar ae, +t a wa ae faery areneaed fea: gerd aa wale 
Tad: AAS T Tad sears: 1 
fra— 


21.1. ‘Endless bliss’—bliss that knows no end—is ever- 
lasting. 1t may be grasped by the intellect only, independent of 
sense organs, it being beyond the senses, i.e. since it is not 
generated by objects. When this kind of bliss is experienced 
and the Yogin is anchored in the Self’s essence, he, the knower, 
does not move away from the Truth—does not slip from the 


nature of Truth. 
And, 


20-23] Yoga of Meditation 235 


G gamt BIT ora nA RE aa: | 
afea feaat a gaa Tweets frateat NRN 


22. Thai prize, winning which one deems no other 
greater; established in which, one is not overpowered 
even by grievous pain; 


22.1. 4 Sf WW a Bea A ACHAT Sea MA FT at oT raa] 
smat aa: afre aftr er a aad a farts 1 fea—aferq 
arena fers: gaa weatroraiacerta Tao wed aft at aara i 


22.1. Having won that prize—the gain of the Self—,one 
thinks that there is no prize greater than it. Established in the 
truth of the Self, one is not overpowered even by ‘grievous’ 
or great pain due to weapons etc. 


23.0. That Yoga, described ın verses 6.20 etc., and con- 
sisting in a certain status of the Self, is defined: 


a famragaaatifaart apretarry | 
a fade amat antistatavreacdar 230 


23. Know that to be styled Yoga which consists in dis- 
junction from experienced-pain. This Yoga has slowly 
got to be practised with an undejected mind. 


23.1. a eft u a ama aoa gadaa ga: Aart: 
pada, dt faa: gadda: d gadaa an: Farag 
afia farttacenrs frarq fasta gerd: | anaes siga FA: 
ray aerator Sead foaartrdear: aaraa aTi — F: 
aaa: an: frat aada ater: faaan a fafat 
affani fe aq? —ad: aa Aded soar fda eet: i 
fra- 


236 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam  [Ch. VI 


23.1. Know that to be styled Yoga which is a disjunction 
from experienced-pains. This knowledge is aimed at a process 
of knowing through exclusion. Having concluded the discus- 
sion on Yoga’s fruit, once more is set forth the propriety of 
undertaking Yoga, in order to teach that determination and 
non-dejection are its instruments. Yoga with its fruit, as 
already set forth, must be pursued with determination and a 
mind rid of dejection. 

Besides, 


AHUIAAT ATARI MAANA: | 
maiaa fata wade: Wee 


24. Giving up wholly all desires born of mental con- 
structions and controlling, on all sides, the senses with 
the mind; 


24.1. APA sft i WHat AFA: sve: AT sara’ a AF- 
STAT: BAT: ATT war aeaa salty sara: adda 1 fe 7 
Aaa: AAMT Il 


24.1. ‘Giving up’ or renouncing desires born of mental 
constructions—all of them, leaving not a trace behind, and 
controlling with the discriminating mind itself all the senses 
from pursuing their objects on all sides; 


at: THETA S Rra | 
aaae At: Beat a fafaa fada nun 


25. Withdraw gradually, with the help of the resolute 
intellect; anchoring the mind in the Self, think of 
nothing whatsoever. 


25.1. IA: SA n wh wt a Aga a a pat — aa 


23-26] Yoga of Meditation 237 


—qeu—fatafrecat? —yfaygtaat year dato dan forda 
aay qar gai: | aede efa afer “arta ad a aa: aed 
fata afer” sea amaa aa seat a fafaa aft fada | ug 
aren oem: fate: i 


25.1. ‘Gradually’, not impetuously, one should withdraw. 
With the aid of the resolute intellect, perceiving that Self alone 
is all this. This is the supreme injunction concerning Yoga. 


26.0. TA UF anget Aa: Hd aa ait — 


26.0. Striving thus to anchor the mind in the Self— 


ai wat facta RAAR | 
aaa faaan aa AAT NRN 


26. The Yogin should bring the fickle and unsteady 
mind under the sole control of the Self, withdrawing 
it from all causes whatever that make it sally forth. 


26.1. at: eft i aa: aa: qma aema fafaa aeare: faea 
fne carifandtarq aa: tae seat ae, aa wa afer, aq: aa: 
AAS Aga FA Wad Aa: areata wa saat adq enaa 
area | vat araa athe: aefa wa aA wa: i 


26.1. ‘From all causes whatever’, such as sounds etc. 
Controlling the excessively fickle and unsteady mind that 
sallies forth due to its innate flaws, through a rational consi- 
deration of the truth of their causes and reducing them to 
empty appearances and thus resorting to detachment, let him 
bring the mind under the control of the Self. 

Thus by the strength of Yogic practice, the mind of the 
Yogir. becomes quiescent in the Self alone. 


238 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. VI 


TAA Ba ATT JATAN | 
SAA AACA AETATAHCATT URW 


27. Indeed the bliss supreme accrues to this sinless 
Yogin whose mind has been stilled, Rajas supressed, 
and who has become Brahman. 


27.1. Tet St ul Wada THT Ae Aa: eT a: WATKAT: 
at wade fe ut ara ga saa frase site soreefa mA- 
framed aes aaen antaa i 


27.1. To the Yogin whose mind has been thoroughly 
stilled, the best i.e., peerless bliss accrues—to the Yogin whose 
rajas, delusion and other afflictions have dwindled away; 
who has become Brahman i.e., who is liberated in life; who is 
convinced that Brahman alone 1s all this; and who is ‘sinless’, 
beyond good, evil, and so forth. 


yews nassi anit farce: | 
FAT AMIAAAAAA FAATTA UVC 


28. Thus integrating himself always, the sinless Yogin 
easily achieves contact with Brahman or infinite bliss. 


28.1. Try fa u wary Us Bah WAT AN aaaf: 
aa aden ma famaren: faa: get aaa aerderet 
aaa sears fraai ga mad orate i 


28.1. Thus integrating the Self, according to the sequence 
of steps already set forth, the Yogin, rid of all impediments to 
Yoga, and sinless, easily achieves infinite i.e., elevated and 
unsurpassed bliss, in which there is contact with supreme 
Brahman. 


27-30] Yoga of Meditation 239 


29.0. art ae aq we ageaatdt address aq 
Tet — 
29.0. Now is elucidated the fruit of Yoga viz., the percep- 


tion of the unity of Brahman, the cause of the cessation of all 
empirical life: 


adaa ATA ATT | 
Seu dierent ada arte: WRI 


29. With equality of vision everywhere, he whose inner 
sense has been attuned to Yoga beholds the Self in all 
beings and all beings in the Self. 


29.1. at eft u aAa ady yay fer es area aduait 7 
arent aaa anA + aayaria mafa waat wart sed 
wea aaa aR: aT ada aRarie: ady aE- 
qag fag aia an fafaa sanctacafaed att aq ger R: 
waa anaa: i 


29.1. He ‘whose inner sense has been attuned to Yoga’ — 
i.e., whose inner sense is concentrated—beholds his Self ex- 
isting in all beings and ‘all beings’, from Brahma down to a 
blade of grass, ‘in the Self’, i.e., has become one with the 
Self; for, he has ‘equality of vision everywhere’—which means 
that all unequal beings from Brahma down to a blade of grass, 
are to his vision or knowledge the same or undifferentiated, 
that vision having as its object the identity of Brahman and 
Atman. 


30.0. Vaa mikaa GG sA- 
30.0. The result of this vision of unity of the Self is set forth: 


at at wala aaa ad a ata aA | 
aami A THAT a a A a TIAA Nort 


240 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. VI 


30. I am not lost to him who beholds Me everywhere 
and beholds everything in Me; neither is he lost to Me. 


30.1.4 ef u a: at maa aged ade amar ada adyq wy 
aå a aR ata aata mafa, aa wa mAT: 4g 
Sat a mafa a Aat afro 1 a a a a aR a a fae 
m agaa a aA a AA: wate, aA a AA a MARAT; 
erm fe ara amena: sare: [fra] va wate i 


30.1. To him who beholds Me, Vasudeva, the Self of all 
things, ‘everywhere’, 1.e., in all beings, and ‘everything’ i.e., 
the multitude of entities from Brahma downwards, in Me, the 
Self of all—to him, the perceiver of Selfs unity, I, namely 
God, ‘am not lost’, or never cease to be immediate; and he, 
the knower, is not ‘lost to Me,’ Vasudeva, i.e., does not cease 
to be immediate. For, he and I, as Self, are one. And one’s 
Self is always dear to one. 


31.0. FEAT A Agaa aair gA gaya qanypest ArT 
aaa Art: azhritad — 


31. Restating the sense of the preceding verse i.e., right 
perception, in other words, that the perceiver of the unity of 
the Self of all is Myself, its consequence or liberation is now 
affirmed : 


adatai at At Aerated: | 
waa adasa a anit ats ada 13201 


31. Conforming to unity, the Yogin who adores Me, 
present in all beings, lives in Me, no matter how he 
appears to live. | 


31.1. a4 sft u ader advert: adit aenea anit air dort 
Ty We add, frag: Us a, a Ate ht sahaq ofreead scot: I 


31.1. Though living in all manner of ways, the Yogin with 


30-32] Yoga of Meditation 241 


the nght perception lives in Me, the supreme status of Visnu. 
He is eternally liberated. Nothing can obstruct his liberation. 
This is the idea. 


32.0. Pa aarq— 


32.0. Yet another point: 


MATA AAT AA Tala Alster | 
Ga at ate at Fa A ANT TAT Aa: UF 


32. Arjuna! He, who sees alike pleasure or pain in all 
beings, on the analogy of his own self, is deemed the 
supreme Yogin. 


32.1. areata sft ou areata area Àa sodtad ata 
aft STAT qe STRAT: Ara: HATA aa area ade Tay 
am gat mafa a: att i aoa fe am wate fa? saa am 
gä ese am aati ga RS | are: art | ate at aoa 
ga m a af oa, aa ani ga af sian aaa 
meanest gage aqqorfaae erat aduty aa weala, a wafa 
seas ara, ates gat: 1 a: wa ages: amaS: a 
amt oy: seas: wa: aha: adata wet 


32.1. ‘On the analogy of the self’-—one’s own self is the 
analogue. On the basis of this analogy, he ‘who sees alike’— 
in the same manner—in all beings, O Arjuna! Sees what? 
Answer: ‘As I like pleasure, so do all things’. Or means and. 
‘As I am averse to pain and shun it, so do all living beings.’ 
He, the real Yogin, does not act against any one, does not 
injure any one. Thus he who injures none, and adheres to right 
perception, is deemed supreme among Yogins. 


33.0. Ure ware aaa ATT Tea KTS 
way: [wat] dors awit: vara— 

33.0. Noting how hard it is to secure this Yoga of right per- 
ception and seeking a sure means of winning it, Arjuna said: 


242 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. VI 


WaT Sars : 
Usa ANTEaaT Wi: AAT ATTA | 
ei a ana aaen feta ferry 331 


Arjuna said : 

33. O Krsna! Of this Yoga, elucidated by You as con- 
sisting in sameness, I do not see firm certitude, the 
mind being fickle. 


33.1. MA gA n a: aa ANT: aa N: AA AA F NEA | 
qa area ae a aA a aa, wae aea? eari 
aasi ATT i 


33.1. Of the Yoga set forth by you as consisting in same- 
ness or equality, O Krsna! I do not see, i.e. know, a firm 
certitude, because of mind’s fickleness. 


34.0. YRA vaq— 


34.0. It is well-known that 


was fe at: Fo sary Traqgeq | 
emg fag wat aratica YET NIV 


34. The mind is indeed fickle, O Krsna! a tormentor, 


powerful and hard. I deem its control as extremely 
difficult as that of the wind. 


34.1. wae A u was fe aa: Ho | ‘Hon’ gA Had: avaaride 
SIA | aaa aAa ST:, cer adie: a Hor 1 fF wang 
Wt: Fae a Aaa wert aas, safe a maa, saeatia TAT 
faair a fafauq aq maA 1 fea—aeaq sad, + daa 
fag wet, gfrareeanq | frag agartad ses | Ter TAA 
wae: ae frag aA wet ara: eq ae nA: gene: freer: asf 
aaa: geet ae ANTA: tl 


33-35] Yoga of Meditation 243 


34.1. Krsna! The mind is fickle. The word Krsna is derived 
from the root krs, meaning to cut through. Krsna is so styled 
because He cuts off taints, sins etc., of His devotees. Hence He 
is addressed Krsna in the vocative case. Because the mind is 
fickle, and, in addition, ‘a tormentor’—robs one of freedom, 
tormenting the body and the senses. Besides, it is ‘powerful’ 
and by no means is it possible to control it; for, it is irresistible. 
Also ‘hard’—it can’t be cut to pieces, being like a tantunaga 
(a kind of shark). The control of this mind I deem to be like 
that of the wind. The control of the wind is difficult; even 
more difficult is that of the mind—this is the idea. 


35.0. braaa ta Vad sar wathy— 
35.0. The blessed Lord said: Yes, it is as you say— 


ATTA ATS : 
HANA ARTERY AAT FTAs AHA | 
MUTT F HAT ACTA a TRS ug 


The blessed Lord said: 

35. Doubtless, O hero! the mind is difficult to control 
and fickle. But by means of practice and detachment, 
son of Kunti! it may be held in check. 


35.1. Ware sf u wae afer aaa: a Aerael “Aa: Gira ae’ 
qaqa | feq—awere g, were: am fart werifaq aA- 
sama: Farrer | aerator, Ara ar age AATA- 
ad iqq | at aT rA Tad freer: ware: Faq | Wa aq AA: 
Tad farad frsert ert: i 


35.1. There is no doubt, O hero! that the mind is difficult 
to control and that it is fickle. But by means of practice it can 
be controlled. ‘Practice’ means making an unchanging idea 
to prevail on a given plane of mind. ‘By detachment’—detach- 
ment means freedom from craving, by driving out the desire 


244 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. VI 


for covetable experiences in the spheres of the seen and the 
unseen, through the practice of discovering flaws implicit in 
them all. By means of this detachment the distractions of the 
mind are arrested. Thus is mind ‘held’ or checked. 


36.0. T: JA: aaae, TT — 


36.0. As regards the man without self-control : 


siaaa A ga gA A ata: | 
TAAN g Aa MNS HATA: 3RN 


36. I hold that for the man whose self is uncontrolled, 
Yoga is hard to achieve. On the contrary, it can be won 
by him who has disciplined it by employing appropriate 
means. 


36.1. Aaaa str n aane aeaa NAAT AEAT 
AP TT A Ht iaae AT AA AMT: FT: Faq 
sad sf A n: | ae Gt sea sree aad a AA: 
AAT WA: We a HT RATA AA THAT g Ada WAIST yar 
HAA WHT: TAT ANT: TTA: BAHT TATA N 


36.1. For the man whose self, i.e. the inner sense, is not 
controlled through application and detachment, Yoga is ‘hard 
to win’—it is won painfully—this view I hold. On the contrary, 
for him who has brought the self or mind under control through 
application and detachment, with ‘effort’ or repeated exer- 
tion, Yoga may be secured, using the means already indicated. 


37.0. 7a ATT Saar sarrearanrtaataahs sath aa- 
caf, anfafens a Maa aerett a srt afe, anit anta 
mares afoatad: sft Ter ART rT: wei: VaTT— ; 

37.0. Now, in resorting to the practice of Yoga, man’s 


activities, leading to high positions in this world or the world 
to come, get renounced ; and at the same time right perception 


36-38] Yoga of Meditation 245 


that is the fruit of perfected Yoga and the means to liberation 
is not attained. Therefore, such a Yogin’s mind, at the time of 
death, slips from the path of Yoga, due to which he may be 
ruined. This fear made Arjuna ask: 


AIT Jars : 
waa: WeAta Ansara: | 
sory afata at ata HoT Testa us 


Arjuna said: 

37. What fate, Krsna! is in store for the lax practitioner 
of Yoga whose mind is rich in faith but who fails to 
reach perfection in Yoga? 


37.1. Haft: ef u swat: asa apart wear aaae 
a Bd: aNd Hearse a afad AMAA AA: ACT a: Wea: TE- 
agfa: a: area aafe ats anaa at aia Ss HoT | Tels ? 1 


37.1. The lax practitioner of Yoga, who does not adequa- 
tely strive after Yoga, who, yet, 1s rich in faith 1.e., is convinced 
of Yoga’s validity, and whose mind, at the time of death, has 
‘slipped from Yoga’ or whose Yoga-consciousness has deserted 
him—what is his fate? What goal does he reach, O Krsna! 
having failed to attain perfection in Yoga? 


afeaaraataacchearatad watt | 
afaa ngaa faat ware: ah sci 
38. Having fallen off from both (Karma and Yoga), 


confounded and unestablished in the path of Brahman, 
O hero! does he not pcrish, like a scattered cloud? 


38.1. fa ea ou afearq—-fe a saafawee: a AI 
a fame: aq fear aa aaf, frat a mafa a: frea: 2 
maaa! faye: aq aar: qfar aaraa 1 


38.1. ‘Fallen off from both’ i.e., the way of works and that 


246 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam -[Ch. VI 


of Yoga. Like a scattered cloud, does he not perish ‘unestab- 
lished’ or lacking a firm hold, O hero! and confounded in the 
‘path of Brahman’—the path leading to the attainment of 
Brahman. 


Ua ATT FO SIAN: | 
ATT: AHI SAT A WATT 13811 


39. O Krsna! You ought to dispel this doubt of mine 


in its entirety. None but You can possibly dispel this 
doubt. 


39.1. Utd afr u wag A wa aaa Ho ! Sa aaa adfa ad- 
TT | aan aa we we: te: a oa aaa aaa we 7 
fe qwenq word + avafa 1 aa aaa Sa dA sah: I 


39.1. This doubt of mine, O Krsna! You ought to dispel, 
i.e. remove in its entirety, because, other than You, neither 
seer nor celestial may prove to be its dispeller. Therefore, You 
alone should dispel it—this is the idea. 


Sagara : 
må vag area faaara fa | 
a fe namga agia aa mA nwon 


The blessed Lord said: 

40. Arjuna! neither in this world nor in the world to 
be does he come to ruin; for no evil betides the doer 
of good, My son! 


40.1. 7H F ues |! a a we ats a aa me aT aH 
fma: qa feat ma to a ara gie Aaaa: | a aA 
maea aa i a fe a aea yaad shaq gifa pfa 
wa — 2 ae! aA ame gae a frat ma: sad, far wa 
ga: chr gsf ata: sad; frs grag xfer agafà are: say — 
aa a THOT 


39-42] Yoga of Meditation 247 


40.1. O Arjuna! Neither indeed in this world nor in the next 
does ruin await him. ‘Ruin’ means the occurrence of a birth 
inferior to his previous one, because no doer of good comes to 
a deplorable course of life, My son! The term tata means 
‘father’, as the latter manifests himself in .the form of the son. 
Thus the father is the son and the latter is called tata. A disciple 
is like a son; so literally though not a son, he too is called 
‘father’. 


41.0. fe g wer wate ? 
41.0. What happens, then, to him? 


ma gaga star Bacar weal: AAT: | 
Watat staat te waes 1 211 


41. Reaching the spheres of the meritorious, and after 
sojourning there long-lasting years, the one who has 
slipped from Yoga is born in a home of pure and 
prosperous householders. 


41.1. The renouncer, striving on the path of Yoga, due to 
his competence reaches the spheres of the meritorious per- 
formers of horse-sacrifice, etc. Having lived there long-lasting 
years, at the end of such experiences, he is born—the man who 
has slipped from Yoga is thus born—in a home of house- 
holders who conform to Vedic ordinances and who are rich 
in resources. 


wat atitaaa gor wate eras | 
vafa TAAL AÈ WaT ATTA NLN 


248 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. VI 


42. Or, he is born in a family of wise Yogins. This sort 
of birth, however, is far rarer in the world. 


42.1. wa eft u aaa threat gore sweater TATA wa cre 
Ho, Gat gaai Tq ateq ats we aq feat Aa 
FF I 


42.1. Or he is born in a family of indigent Yogins, ‘wise’ 
i.e. intelligent, as distinct from the home of the prosperous. 
Indeed this kind of birth in a home of poor Yogins is more 
difficult to gain in this world compared to what was men- 
tioned earlier. 


43.0. FEAT F— 


43.0. Also because, 


wa a afgaat waa NAMETA | 
add Saat wa: afagt peA uv gi 


43. There he acquires memory of the ideas relating to 
his previous body, and he labours harder, O Bharata 
prince! to achieve perfection. 


43.1. aF Sta uaa afta ge a qfaia qs aa oad AR- 
ferq qaferq ae wa Nda 1 add a sad ala a ad: aea 
qisma seared wa: agat afaat afafatafad 3 peaa! n 


43.1. In the family of Yogins he acquires memory of ideas 
cultivated in his previous body. And he strives harder, due to 
his earlier impressions, for winning perfection, O Arjuna! 


44.0. HY Yateatedart: sf? aq seadt— 


44.0. How does the memory of ideas in his earlier body 
come to the Yogin? Answer: 


42—44] Yoga of Meditation 249 


qita ada feud gamfa a: | 
fama anrer maaana uve 


44. Though not a master of himself, he is attracted by 
his prior discipline. Even he who desires to know about 
Yoga goes beyond the sphere of Vedic injunctions. 


44.1. atena aa ou a gaa ga were & qatara, aq 
wa asa fead iaa fe aera wae af a anraee:; aa ad 
qada sear aifsad; Aes: Ad asad: Ha:, Aa ANT Ten: 
amad wa, qad J ant: deere: aAa art mA, a ah 
meea faa: wea afer eat: | ae: Aang: ate ane aet 
m pot aft apart saian apres, mai asf 
Tate satanatqeorns aad afrarafa—anateata fra 


aga a ant afao: wee gpa i 


44.1. Because of the potent Yogic discipline of his previous 
life, one who has slipped frum Yoga is drawn towards per- 
fection, though he is not wholly free. If he has performed 
righteous works, he is attracted by their impressions in his 
mind; if unrighteous works have been performed, indeed 
they will subdue his impressions of Yoga practice. When the 
more potent impressions weaken, the Yogic impressions assert 
themselves in the results they produce. The Yogic impressions 
do not perish even when held up for a long period—this 1s 
the idea. Therefore even he who seeks to comprehend the 
essence of Yoga and begins to tread the path of Yoga—.e., 
the world-renouncing Yogin who has slipped, as logic im- 
plies in this context—goes beyond the sphere of the fruits of 
Vedic works; i.e., he sets them aside. What then to speak of 
one who fully understands Yoga and is devoted to its practice? 


45.0. Eta athtea sa: zfs ? — 


45.0. An additional reason for Yoga’s superiority : 


250 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. VI 


samean Ait Agafa: | 
arated are Tt af neun 


45. The Yogin who strives hard and who has been per- 
fected in the course of many lives attains the supreme 
goal, all his sins having been washed away. 


45.1. Tae sf uo wae adare:, afat aaa: zat: 
aa amt faea ayqefateas: faqafateay: ayaa: ‘aie 
aat ng fafafa aaron sofa at safada Arapa 
dfaa. wrens: aa: sanaa: aq arf T pe wT I 


45. ‘Who strives hard’ 1.e., who labours much. The Yogin 
is the knower whose sins have been washed away and who has 
perfected himself through the accumulation of good impres- 
sions in small measures in many lives. He has attained per- 
fection by virtue of all these accumulated impressions that 
lead to right perception. Thus he achieves the supreme goal. 


46.0. FEAT Va TTI — 
46.0. Such being the case, 


atteraristirnt anit athraatsty aetistire: | 
nirna anit TATE AAT USE 


46. The Yogin is superior to the performers of austeri- 
ties; he is deemed superior even to the knower of the 
Vedas; he excels those who do works. Therefore, O 
Arjuna! be a Yogin. 


46.1. anferer. eft un asf: afa ari, maras, aa arr 
merine, aeg aa: ave: afa: aes: ef 1 afer, afia- 
grave eH, cage: aa: anit faf: | gen Teg Ait wa A I 


46.1. The Yogin is superior to the performers of austerities 


45-47] Yoga of Meditation 251 


and even to knowers. By knowledge here is meant mastery of 
the Sastras. The Yogin is held to be superior even to those who 
have such mastery. The works are the Vedic rites like the fire- 
sacrifice. The Yogin excels those who do those works. There- 
fore, be a Yogin, O Arjuna! 


athrarata ad RATATAT | 
Tea Aad At AT A A gwat At: voi 


47. Among even these Yogins, he who, full of faith, 
worships Me, his inner self, absorbed in Me,—him I 
deem the most integrated. 


AEri Saray ATT ASAT: AI 


47.1. Aaaa sft u Naaa afr ad eraren wet 


aAa afr areata aA wee ARH TET AETA: 
aq aad aad a at, aA Aa gaa: aAa Ae: Aa: aha: sf 


47.1. Among all the Yogins who meditate on Rudras, 
Adityas etc., he who ‘worships Me’—-serves Me with his inner 
selt or whose inner self is absorbed in Me, Vasudeva, and who 
is full of faith i.e., who is a believer—is considered by Me the 
foremost or the best of the integrated. 


ata strercagartrarsrararenn farsa eysa aa TA- 
MaeSsH CTA: FAT aaan A ara areara | 
ATA FSSA: WEI 


ACTHISEUTT: 
CHAPTER VII 


THE YOGA OF KNOWLEDGE 
AND REALIZATION 


‘arate ai wandaraceat | Teta Wa AT AT a 
O EN [wo] eft mi e eria ‘Sat Watt 
ara, UF AQTATATUCAT TUT qaa frag: fhe saa — 


0.1. Having given room for a question in BG VI.47 and 
desiring to state such and such is the truth concerning Him, 
the blessed Lord spoke: 


ATTA ATA : 
RATATAT: TT ANT THAT: | 
HAN AAT Al TAT AeA THT 11211 


The blessed Lord said: 

1. With mind set on Me and dependent on Me and per- 
forming Yoga, O Arjuna! hear how you will know Me 
wholly without any doubt whatsoever. | 


1.1. marama sfa uo afs aerarrfasra cetat ara AAT aT 
a wearer, = ws! aM ww AAA Haq Hara: agaa 
qa: aa: Tey a a: | at fe shaq gda dafaq set 
waft a acarat ae aaan aa: ad at fafaa ara ofa; aa 
g anit ara arse sfarad, ferar werd MAA ÀA AAAA: 
vata | a: a Cae: ay Hae aaT aaa aaar A aa aora 
at wa at warty mafa irat | ‘vata wary” eft, aq I 
Saat AAT | 


1.1. With the mind set firmly on Me, the Supreme Lord 
(who will be described later), O Arjuna! and achieving its 
stability through exclusive dependence on Me, hear (what I 


1-2] The Yoga of Knowledge and Realization 253 


say). Whoever seeks to achieve a human goal resorts to a 
means to reach that goal such as the fire-sacrifice, austerity, 
gift-giving etc., but the Yogi here resorts exclusively to Me as 
his refuge. Giving up all other means he fastens his mind on 
Me alone. Doing thus, hear, as I state, how indubitably you 
will know Me ‘wholly’ i.e. together with My glory, power, 
energy, lordliness and so forth. This knowledge is a conviction 
that the Lord is such and such. 


2.0. TT Asya — 


2.0. That knowledge in respect of the Lord is described: 


Wa ase afafa aeureastaa: | 
asea AE aasan aAA we 


2. Exhaustively I shall set forth that knowledge to- 
gether with its realization; once it is grasped, nothing 
more will remain to be known. 


21a aa u wa t ga ag afama famaangi qaae 
ae aqaa maaar aated: areeia | aad att aafaa etfa stg: 
aPC —Aq Aca AC A AAT TB A YA: He wast 
geardarad Raa a safe wafa—eht maa a, a ada 
waded: 1 adt aaeoa geat AAT 1 


2.1. That knowledge together with its experience I shall 
set forth in its entirety. In order to secure the attention of the 
listener, the Lord extols that knowledge. Once it is grasped, 
nothing else will remain here to be known as means to any 
human goal. The idea is that one who knows the truth about 
the Lord becomes omniscient. Yielding excellent fruit, this 
knowledge is extremely rare. 


3.0. PA ata? sad — 


254 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. VII 


3.0. How so? Listen: 


aT agay aharata faa | 
maaa fagrat nhai Afa aeaa: 3M 


3. Just one man among thousands strives to win it; 
among those who know and strive, only one comes to 
know Me in truth. 


3.1. aga gf 1 aga wea agay eg afaq aaf aA 
Aa agd faaata i ast aa aft fari — faar: va fe a 
y ma maA, aiaa va fe ar afa aeaa. aag tt 


3.1. Among men, one in many thousands strives to win 
(the saving knowledge). Even among those who know and 
strive—all those who strive for release are knowers—only one 
rare soul indeed comes to know Me, in truth. 


4.0. Tat Tera aT Hears — 


4.0. Securing the listener’s attention by exciting his interest, 
the Lord says: 


afarraisast aa: @ aA afata T | 
Agate sara a Far spa uvi 


4. The earth, water, fire, air, space, mind, intellect and 
the ego-sense constitute My distinctive eight-fold na- 
ture. 


4.1. af aft ou ‘ute: fa gaama gerd, a ero, ‘rar 
yatrcsear aft aaa | car aareaisht aÀ sere —ann:, 
was, TA, aA Aa She Aas: Bre Hae Ted | ‘afte: sft 
HETIL Hara | HEHE: ale farg searny ! Tay farig 
wa fary aft seat, wd aaa He AOTC ASHIK: 


3-5] The Yoga of Knowledge and Realization 255 


ead, sada asa | agare wa fe aia afa gee 
ar | adta aah wate: 4 wa wrt arate: aen fra 2 
ATTA 1 


4.1. The earth refers to the rudimentary earth-element, 
and not to the gross earth, for the phrase that follows is ‘the 
distinctive eight-fold nature’. Similarly water, etc., also refer 
to the rudimentary elements of water, fire, air and space. 
‘Mind’ refers to the cause of the mind, viz., the ego-sense. 
‘Intellect’ refers to the cause of the ‘ego-sense’, the mahat (of 
the Samkhya philosophy). The ‘ego-sense’ in the verse is the 
-unmanifest-cum-nescience. The latter is so styled even as 
food mixed with poison may be called poison. The root- 
cause, the Unmanifest, impelled by the impressions of the 
ego-sense, is styled the ego-sense since the ego-sense is what 
causes activity. In tùis world, the seed of activity everywhere 
is observed to be the ego-sense. This nature of Mine, thus 
described, is the-civine power of God and it is eight-fold. 


aaaf watt fats A TIR | 
Maa Aglatel WAS MA WT WU 


5. This is the lower nature; but My higher nature, 
know to be other than it. That constitutes, mighty 
armed! the living being by which this world is upheld. 


5.1. HTT sft ul are a Te frat weer aAA AAT- 
frat gaq | ea: HEMT: Aaa: g wea fagei sata Aa angat 
fafa A oat spei Slava aaa streets è agne, 
aT wea ee Ms wT aaa I 


5.1. “The lower’—inferior, impure, troublesome, whose 
essence is bondage. But other than it—pure—is My essential 
nature, the higher living being, the field-knower, the cause 
leading to the assumption of vital force, O hero! ‘This world is 
penetrated and upheld by it. 


256 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. VII 


vaa aA Aaron N 
NE FRAT MA: TAT: AHAETAT NRN 


6. Know all beings to be born of this My dual nature. 
I am the source of the entire world as well as that into 
which it is dissolved. 


6.1. vaq sft u aa wd aeaa Aaaa sadt ahr: Ae 
vara aft aa yarht eather efa ust samra arte | gen 
aa aA aia: SI aia, At: HE HAMM AAI WII: Wa: 
seate:, som: fT. va | sefaguerte ag ade: fac: aaa: art 
gai: | 


qena Ua aema — 


6.1. These two, the lower and the higher (natures), con- 
stituting the field and the field knower, are the womb of all 
beings. Do know this. Such being the case, the birth and dis- 
solution of the entire world are due to Me. I, the omniscient 
Lord, am the world-cause through the medium of My two 
natures. Hence, 


Wa: WaT Ae afafa TATA | 
ata adfa stat at aterm ga non 


7. Nothing whatsoever is beyond Me. All this is strung 
on Me like clusters of gems on a thread. 


7.1. Ae ft ul At Te Tat ae mena fafaq a 
afer a fad, seta were r, = uta | ged wa aA 
aà mA vation wate aad ac aq Met aa sara (aafaa) 
aaa say: dA weaq, qa yw af: ss 9 


7.1. Beyond Me, the supreme Lord, there is no causal stuff. 
The sense 1s: I alone am the world-cause, O Arjuna. Such 
being the case, on Me the Supreme Lord, all beings, this 


6-9] The Yoga of Knowledge and Realization 257 


entire world is strung—woven or held together—as a cloth 
on the warp or clusters of gems on a thread. 


8.0. tt Ha oto faferse afa adfa Met spear ? — 


8.0. On You, distinguished by what all traits, is this entire 
world woven? Answer: 


Tasearg Bley msaa mgA: | 
ma: adag ma: A N AGT cN 


8. I am the essence of water, O Arjuna! as also the 
light of the moon and the sun. (I am) the sacred syllable 
AUM in all the Vedas, the sound inherent in space, 
and the manhood in men. 


8.1. tt df u W: a, ai ae a w, a ane nfa 
aT: TAT: Seas: | Us ada | a ag a wa, Va OM a afar- 
qin: | we: argre: adaey, aferq maA afe ad AAT: star: | 
Ta Se areal Wee: acd: der afe @ May | aa wee gave 
ara: trea —aa: Jafe:—qa aferq afs gear wet: 1 


8.1. The essence of water is its flavour—that I am. On Me, 
the essence, are the waters woven. This is the idea. The follow- 
ing statements also may be thus understood. Just as I am its 
essence in water, so I am the light of the moon and the sun. 
In all the Vedas I am the sacred syllable AUM. Across Me, 
the AUM, are all the Vedas woven. So in space its essence is 
sound, and across Me, as such, is the space woven. Similarly 
across man’s being or manhood, due to which rises the idea 
that one 1s a man, are men woven. 


great wer: girat a tenna faaraat | 
Wat ada aan aR NRN 


258 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. VII 


9. Iam pure odour in the earth; splendour in the fire; 
life in all beings; and austerity in ascetics. 


9.1. Jor: eft n ga: geht: weer: qfi a wey, der ate aera 
qiri stat | gaa Tere eauraa: wa ga afad ag care: 
params | aad J werdtat afaearrarrtet afo afa- 
avant wat 1 ae: ater a afer faoa A 1 an silat 
aayay, a staat aati waht aq steamy i at: a afer auftay, 
afaq ante nfà areas: NAT: 1 


9.1. ‘Pure odour in the earth’—that I am. Across Me as 
that odour is the earth woven. As a matter of course, in the 
earth the purity of the odour has been pointed out in order 
to stress the purity of essence etc., in water and so forth. The 
impurity of odour etc., is contingent on nescience, demerit 
etc., of the transmigrating Jivas and caused by contact with 
particular elements. ‘Splendour’ means the luminosity in the 
fire ; ‘life in all beings’ is that by which they all are alive. Also 
I am the austerity in the ascetics—across Me, as such, are the 
ascetics ‘woven’. 


att at aayarat fafe wet aarara | 
qfaia antares ot 


10. Know Me, Arjuna! to be the eternal seed-power in 
all beings; of intellectual beings I am the intellect; of 
those who are splendorous, I am the splendour. 


10.1. at aft u att steerer ar fate adani & wet aaa 
facaayq | fea—afe: aaao: acracner gfenat faaearaa 
aR, ot ones deat danaa agg | 


10.1. Know Me to be ‘the eternal seed-power’, the cause of 
germination, of all beings, O Arjuna! Moreover, I am also 
the intellect—mind’s power of discrimination in respect of 


9-12] The Yoga of Knowledge and Realization 259 


those who discriminate. I am ‘the splendour’, the power, of 
those who are endowed with it. 


as asaan aafaa | 
aata aAa aS ALATA 2 i 


11. Also ofthe mighty I am the might, devoid of appetite 
and attachment. Foremost Bharata prince! in beings 
I am appetite not opposed to righteousness.’ 


11.1. a Sa | ae ares Na: aoai ag, aq A as PTT- 
fated, arr wr PaA: qe wafaesey faway, TT: 
Tart mA aara araerren faataa geroari 
qs art ae aR; a g aq sare qorar  feea—aaifaeg: 
wa areata afaa: a: orf way ATA, Tar TOATE: 
rata: a aa: afer =F wey! i 

fra — 


11.1. I am ‘the might’—the force, the energy—of the 
mighty; that might is devoid of appetite and attachment. 
Appetite is the craving for objects that are not presented, and 
attachment is the pleasure felt once the objects become 
available. Devoid of both these is the might that I am, and not 
that which generates craving and pleasure in the Fivas. It just 
suffices to sustain the body. Moreover, the appetite of living 
beings that is sufficient to sustain the body, and directed to 
eating and drinking, and that is unopposed to righteousness 
i.e., to the content of the ‘sastras—that appetite I am, O fore- 
most Bharata prince! 


Q aa arfeanr aval MANARA R | 
wa vata ary fafa a ag ae A ate ea 


12. Whatever things are sattvic, rajasic and tamasic, 


260 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. VII 


know these to proceed from Me alone; I am notin them; 
they are in Me. 


121.4 fa ua a ua mam: aafia: maT: varat:, User: 
waa: azar: aAA, + afaq mii emda maA 
aa: a AT: Ua WA sf us fate aay mae wa | Taft 
awe: wad an a g ae Aq aa: aaa, war darter: 1 A gA: 
nfr wear: ACHAT: 1 


12.1. Whatever objects are constituted by sattva, rajas, and 
tamas, (Vide ch.14) and generated by the Karmic forces of 
living beings—know them all to be born of Me alone. Though 
they are born of Me, nevertheless, I am not in them—.e., 
I am not subject to them as the transmigrating Jivas are. On 
the contrary, they are subject to Me. 


13.0. gh ap gl ltt E 


13.0. The Lord evinces His pity for the world that fails to 
know Him intimately, the supreme Lord above described, 
whose nature is eternally pure, enlightened, and free, who is 
the Self of all beings, beyond all attributes and who burns up 
the seeds of evil in transmigratory life. And what is the cause 
of the world’s nescience? Answer. 


fatapraatatte: adfa srg | 
Afai afna ATT: TATR LIN 


13. Due to these three (kinds of) objects, consisting of 
(Prakrti’ s) constituents, this whole world is deluded; 
it fails to cognise Me, the immutable (Reality) beyond 
them. 


12-14] The Yoga of Knowledge and Realization 261 


13.1. Fr: af n Aaa aà: fat: eaat: ara: 
a wht: aè: ad et mi a a afafa ara 
aq a aAa at we: aN: pre n aa a a 
seg aR Radara geet: I 


13.1. Due to the transformation of these constituents as 
attachment, aversion, delusion and so forth, this entire world 
of living beings is ‘deluded’ —deprived of the power to dis- 
criminate—and so fails to cognise Me as beyond and as other 
than the constituents. I am immutable—devoid of states like 
birth that mark all contingent beings. 


14.0. FY Ga: eat wat faman der? arat afaarata afar’ 
Tort — 


14.0. Now, how do people go beyond this divine all-per- 
vasive power of delusion consisting of the three constituents? 
Answer: 


fat DAT ma AT AAT FCAT | 
aaa A Weed ATaTAaT Atha T UL 


14. Indeed this divine delusive power of Mine is hard 
to cross over. Those who surrender themselves ex- 
clusively to Me pass beyond this Maya. 


14.1. tat ef u tat caer aq Hare fast: enraya fe wend 
r aay TAA AA AAT ZANT Taq aay: AAN Fe: aT 
gwar | aa wa aA adana eara at ua mafaa era 
wale à wed AF Arat wat adyaatiadt acta aaaf; q 
aaa Heat Bs: 1 


14.1. “Divine’—pertaining to Me, Lord Visnu, being My 
very nature. As such, this Maya of Mine consisting of the con- 
stituents is hard to cross over. In these circumstances, those 
who, renouncing all conventional norms of life, wholeheartedly 


262 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. VII 


surrender themselves to Me, the wielder of Maya, and their 
very Self, pass beyond this all-deluding power. The idea is 
that they are liberated from the bondage of transmigratory 
life. 


15.0. a wat STAT: BTaT Vat athe, HEAT cay wa ad F Wat 
ea? sad 


15.0. If those who surrender themselves to You pass beyond 
this Maya, why don’t all surrender to You? Answer. 


TAT GORA AST: ATK ATTA: | 
AAAS CAAA ATYL ATAATATAT: UVM 


15. Base, deluded, evil-doers do not surrender to Me; 
due to Maya, they have been robbed of knowledge and 
they assume a demoniac attitude. 


15.1. 7 At sft u a at Teper area gaa: maT. AGT: 
Weed mam: TUT wet seat. freer A A AMAT ARANA: 
afar: g wea fearqarfeser AAT: N 


15.1. To Me, the Supreme Lord Narayana, ‘the evil doers 
—the sinners, the deluded—don’t surrender. They are ‘base’ 
or the lowest among men. ‘Of knowledge’ they are deprived 
due to Maya. So they assume or resort to the attitude of 
demons marked by violence, falsehood etc. 


16.0. FFA: TAT: JPA: — 
16.0. On the contrary the best among men are those who 
do good. 


aglan maA At HAT: GHAI | 
mat amga art a ATATA NRN 


15-17] The Yoga of Knowledge and Realization 263 


16. Arjuna! Men of righteous acts are four-fold. They 
resort to Me, O best of Bharatas! They are the afflicted, 
the knowledge-seeker, wealth-seeker and the knower. 


16.1. agn sft u agan. sewer: ward Fad AT WAT: gF- 
fa. yasat: 3 ait 1 and: rfaoddi. cenafan RTA: 
ara: o Rag: maaa ma so a: 1 a aTa: 1 A 
fon: qafa, a} wai 1 


16.1. Offour kinds are the men who ‘resort to—serve—Me. 
Their acts are righteous or meritorious, O Arjuna! ‘The 
afflicted’ are those in the grip of suffering, being threatened 
by robbers, tigers, snakes etc. “The knowledge-seeker’ is he 
who desires to know the truth of the Lord. The wealth- 
seeker desires wealth. ‘The knower’ is he who knows the 
truth of Visnu, O best of Bharatas! 


ai aA fraga afeta | 
frat fe masada a a ae fra: oN 


17. Of them all, the knower, ever integrated and ex- 
clusively devoted, excels; for I am exceedingly dear to 
the knower and he is dear to Me. 


17.1. t A n i ag wea att acafaq aeaaea faea- 
ae: wafa Ra, aAA AA AT; aa: a wate: 
fafarsra fears after me, afafcert eet 1 [244 are] 
foo: fe wena ae me maa, ae: aea ae wort fier, aa fe 
ara ‘arent fir: wate’ ofa i aa aa: mea araea: fo: 
wadteast: | TT AAT AA aTaeaer area ua ata WA aca fer 


17.1. Of the four types, ‘the knower’ knows the truth and 
therefore is ever integrated and ‘exclusively devoted’; for 
none else is seen deserving of devotion. So he is exclusively 
devoted to the Lord. He ‘excels’—surpasses all others (Cf. 
BGB. XVITII.55). To him ‘exceedingly dear I am’, being the 


264 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. VII 


Self of the knower. That the Self is dear is a fact established 
in the world. Thus Vasudeva, being the Self of the knower, 
is dear. This is the idea. Again, the knower is Vasudeva’s Self, 
and as such, is exceedingly dear to Me. 


18.0. 4 afg avatar: aa: arqgaeq foot: ? a; fH ate ? — 


18.0. “Then are not the first three, the afflicted, etc. dear to 
Vasudeva?” Not so, yet, 


saar: AS Vat AAT Aiea A AAT | 
maa: a fe gae areargaat way UCI 


18. All these (four) are noble; but the knower, I deem 
to be My very Self; for, with an integrated self, he has 
resorted to Me alone, the goal without parallel. 


18.1. Gara: eff ut Jara: SFNT: ad wa ud, zat aa fia: 
waaay: | + fe shaq am: aA ageqer afta: wate i art J 
quad fra: waa fae: 1 aq aeg eft ? aa: ae —arit J 
area Ua, T ae AT: sf A aa aa faa: 1 afer: ares sae: 
a: mÅ fe wera “neta wrary araea: a ar: afen” eels qerent 
anafaa. aq ATA Va Wt al Teal aaa alt We Waa: Tes: 1 


18.1. All these are indeed noble; even the first three. are 
dear to Me. No devotee ot Mine is other than dear to Vasu- 
deva. But the knower is exceedingly dear. This is the distinc- 
tion. Why? The answer is that the knower is the very Self— 
not different from Me. This is My settled doctrine. The knower 
seeks to ascend the peak of knowledge: “I myself am the Lord 
Vasudeva, I am none else.” With a mind concentrated on 
this knowledge, he strives to reach Me, the Supreme Brahman, 
the goal without parallel. 


19.0. mA Fate ead — 


18-20] The Yoga of Knowledge and Realization 265 


19.0. Once more the knower is extolled: 


TEM maA MAN ITA | 
agla: aatatt a nge FSR: NLN 


19. At the end of many births, the man of knowledge 
directly reaches Me, realizing, ‘Vasudeva is all”. Such 
a magnanimous soul is extremely rare. 


19.1. agat gA uo agat a maiaa ad aÀ 
maa Serato: AT avast Tea Tere: TTI — Ha? 
—argea: ad aft | a va Baler at areran staged, a: HgTe; 
q aam: ea: afd, afew: at aa: age: ‘ATT aga’ [V.2. | 
ofa fe THAT I 


19.1. At ‘the end of many births’, devoted to self-purifica- 
tion resulting in greater knowledge, ‘the man of knowledge’ 
gains full illumination and directly reaches Me, Vasudeva, 
the inner Self of all. How? Kealizing that ‘Vasudeva is all’. 
Whoso thus directly reaches Me, Narayana, the Self of all, 
is ‘magnanimous’. There is none like him or excelling him. 
Hence is he extremely rare. Vide BG.7.3 above. 


20.0. aeH#a Ha: aga: seta afar are sa — 


20.0. The cause of the failure to understand ‘Allis Vasudeva, 
the Self? is stated: 


HARA ANN: ATAU: | 
a a faaanrear sae faat: cat Roll 
20. Deprived of knowledge by a variety of cravings, 


(people) resort to other deities; they adopt other dis- 
ciplines, being constrained by their inborn nature. 


266 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. VII 


20.1. PÈ: eft n art È à gavaeantfefawd: gaat: aag- 
afaa: Wet RaT: wafer Bata STAT: AUT: SaaT:, 
q a fart aana sia: a a: fees: a at were aya sea 
amd wearerafaadenrefaaraor faar: fafa: am amcdtaar i 


20.1. ‘Deprived of knowledge’—the knowledge of discrimi- 
nation——by a variety of cravings for progeny, cattle, heaven 
etc., they resort to deities other than Vasudeva the Self, 
following well-known disciplines of worship. They are con- 
strained by their own inborn nature—by specific impressions 
acquired in other lives. 


21.0. ast a arfaary— 


21.0. To those desire-ridden people: 


a at at at aq we: weanstagfaeete | 
qa qarami Tet aaa fare NRN 


21. I give unswerving faith to each devotee who seeks 
to worship with faith whatever divine form (of his 
choice). 


21.1. at a: sft ua: a: Bret at ar aaa gN Aah: WH: 7 
fanfar Rrra [ate ga sat] uu 
21.1. Whoever among the seekers of the objects of desire 


seeks to worship with faith the divine form of his choice, I 
make the faith with which he started ‘unswerving’—steadfast. 


22.0. AT: T: q: qt at ana Wear afag eeofa— 


22.0. Whoso, as a matter of course, seeks to worship with 
faith a divine form. 


21-23] The Yoga of Knowledge and Realization 267 


a amn MEAT yaara aag | 
TAA a aa: Bary Aaa fateara ETA NRN 


22. Possessed of that faith, be desires the worship of 
that form. From that divinity he secures the objects of 
his desires; for, I Myself have ordained them. 


22.1. 4 dar eft n a: a aean wear am: aq TAT: a- 
aaa: WIT add sed Bed | oad A da: Te: area: 
zamar: BATT Elta] AAT UA Tay ada PARANA 
faran fafana, art fe aeara a maa fafat: at: aen ata 
yaa oad sae. 1 fa a ma faa pai saN Fem, 
a R ara: Ra: rafa I 


22.1. Possessed of the faith accorded by Me, he attempts to 
worship that divinity. Thence—from the divinity worshipped 
—he wins the desired objects, fashioned by Me, the omni- 
scient Lord, who knows the classes of the fruits of Karma. As 
the fruits of Karma have been ordained by Me, the devotee 
will assuredly gain them. If the word is taken as ‘hitān 
meaning ‘favourable’, the favourableness of fruits has to be 
taken as merely figurative; for, objects of Kama do no good to 
anyone. 


23.0. FATT aaar: afaatea: afar a, ar: — 
23.0. Since desire-bound people and undiscriminating indi- 


viduals operate with finite means, their operations must come 
to an end. 


WaT BS AT TATATATA | 
amq saat athe Ag eat atta Aras RIN 


23. (So) the fruit (of Karmas) that accrues to those 
small-minded men must come to an end. The worship- 


268 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. VII 


pers of gods proceed to the gods; My devotees come 
to Me. 


23.1. Hered sf wu aaa faa g we aur aq wafe Herter 
FIAT | Tar Sage: ata tary Dod sft Faas, A zarq arta, 
weer: aha ary aft | ud aay aft aad a wa a wae 
HATHA, Hel AH Heat add, A satahr wart i 


23.1. But the fruit that they of small minds—of feeble 
understanding—gain must come to an end. Those who wor- 
ship i.e., offer sacrifice to the gods proceed to the gods. My 
devotees come to Me. Thus though the exertion involved 1s 
similar in these two cases, they do not reach Me and gain an 
inexhaustible fruit. What a pity! The Lord thus evinces pity 
for the worshippers of gods. 


24.0. fefafad at va a maA ofr? sear — 
24.0 Why do they not resort to Krsna only? Answer: 


HUH UGATA Axed AAT: | 
UC AAAATM AATUTATARA URI 


24. They, the undiscriminating and witless ones, con- 
sider Me, the ever-present Lord, who is unmanifested 
or unrevealed, as become manifested or revealed now. 


24.1. Herm sa ul aa ara ate are wert aa gardi 
aod at aasa Sat aft ad aqaa: afafa: ot wre TOT- 
meae ward: fafaa: wa wera crated aaqan facia, adhe 
Wes WATT: ATT FAT: II 


24.1. The unmanifest or unrevealed, now become manifest 
or revealed—so, they deem Me, the ever-present Lord—they, 
those who do not discriminate. They are ignorant of My 
supreme aspect as the higher Self which is immutable and 


23-25] The Yoga of Knowledge and Realization 269 


unsurpassed. Not knowing this aspect of Mine they deem Me 
to be now manifest—this is the idea. 


25.0. qaaa fatafad ga? sad — 


25.0. What is the cause of their ignorance? Answer: 


TTS THT: ATT ANART: | 
aas ahaa AA ATTA RY 


25. Veiled by the delusive power of My Yoga-Maya, 
I do not stand revealed to all. This deluded world 
knows not Me, unborn and immutable. 


25.1. Ae St uA ae WHT: ade e, saifaq wa Wey 
ware: we gafa: 1 arrararaarad: att: q afm: wea, aa 
ma APTATaT — aaa, wWraad: faaara A: aewaT AT abana 
aa ana aaa: wea: zat | AT wa AE ale: Ht 7 
Aaaa at aot AAAA 1 


25.1. I am not revealed to the whole world; only to a few 
devotees of Mine am I revealed—this is the idea. ‘Veiled by 
the delusive power of Yoga-Maya’— Yoga being the com- 
bination i.e., fabrication of Prakrti’s constituents, and this 
combination being Maya. Being veiled by that power the 
world is deluded, su that it does not know Me, unborn and 
immutable. 


26.0. aaT Amaan aarad at ate: athraata, 7 a abraar 
eta adt wa Sacer ararfaa: aa ofaaearie ae aerenrte ararfaa: 
maT WT Seq | At: UE aT: — 


26.0. The delusive power, veiled by which the world fails 
to know, does not impede the knowledge of the Lord himself; 
for, it belongs to Him. Just as a magician’s delusive power 
does not delude him. Such being the fact, 


270 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. VII 


aai andaa adafa ATs | 
afara a afa at g ae a HAT REI 


26. I know, Arjuna! the beings past, present and 
future; but none knows Me. 


26.1. aa oft n we g Ae mA aAa anaa wets, aa 
adana a at wa a yas ae ga | AT g ae a Pa 
TE FSM UH AAT, maaa F At wT II 


26.1. But I know the beings who have passed out already; 
also those who exist now, Arjuna! and again, those who will 
come into being in future, though none knows Me except My 
devotee who has sought refuge in Me. They do not worship 
Me due to the very lack of knowledge of My truth. 


27.0. @F Ja: maaana aa ata mamafa ad- 
yar at a fact gadna ez aE — 


27.0. “What impedes the knowledge of My truth due to 
whose absence beings coming into existence fail to cognise 
Me?” Here is the answer: 


Torga SaAlat ALT | 
adaa Aas at fa TAT NVI 


27. O Bharata prince! scourge of foes! All beings in 
creation get confounded due to the delusion of dualities 
born of attachment and aversion. 


27.1. J Tht N RMIT Se A ew eee aT 
aafisadta maa: dq georevaqer | tifa faaraterat a 
we—semed safe 1 dfaa: we dette aa i at wa ran 
Tarra wercacet ga aaga waa ad: aran 


26-27] The Yoga of Knowledge and Realization 271 


SST AMA i T AT N Sa T etre 


amaian sorard afaa; fey amet aren fage: aycer 
erent agaa art aA eft | aa: GT FHSAA FATA, 
ma wera, adyatt RA ata ante dei at seater 
—vafrares saaq—aea mafa F Ta 1 eana wa ad- 
wart srr seed afaa: | aa: ws at at gente f- 
Texas arya aaa At aad A aaa; Aa: Ta ATN- 
wet ATT WIT I 


27.1. ‘Born of attachment and aversion’—what is born? 
The delusion caused by dualities. These two, attachment and 
aversion, mutually opposed like cold and warmth, and oriented 
to pleasure and pain and their causes, affect, in course of time, 
all living beings. They are called dualities. As soon as these 
two come into existence due to the occurrence of pleasure and 
pain or their causes, they subjugate the intelligence of all 
beings and give rise to the delusion that impedes the dawn of 
knowledge of the real Self. Right knowledge of even external 
objects, won’t rise if the mind is swayed by the flaw of attach- 
ment and aversion. Needless to say that the knowledge of the 
inner Self, hard to gain in any case, won’t rise if one’s intel- 
ligence is in the grip of delusion. So, scion of the Bharata line! 
due to the delusion of dualities all beings at their very birth 
get confounded. That beings are subject to this delusion is the 
idea. Therefore, with knowledge impeded by this inborn delu- 
sion, all beings get confounded and fail to know Me, their 
very Self. Hence they do not worship Me, their veritable Self. 


28.0. & ga: Aaa seated fede: act: cat fafecat aaaea ATH- 
wat maA gafa af aaa g — 


28.0. Who, then, are the persons, who, being free from 
delusion and knowing You according to the śāstras, worship 
You as their Self? The Lord sets forth as follows this logically 
consequent truth: 


272 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam {Ch. VII 


Qo CAAT WT HATAT JARANA | 
a Pater maA At AAT: URC 


28. But those men who have no more sins, who act 
righteously and who are liberated from the delusion 
of dualities, worship Me with a steadfast will. 


28.1. ai sft wat g ga: aai aai A TE aat go- 


28.1. But those whose sins have practically been wiped 
out, whose acts are righteous and productive of mental 
purification, and who are liberated from the delusion of 
dualities—they worship Me, the Supreme Self, with a stead- 
fast will. As their knowledge—that the truth of the supreme 
Reality is .-ch and such, and not otherwise,—is unerring, 
they resolutely follow the path of total renunciation. So they 
are said to have a steadfast will. 


29.0. a feat wad sf? sa — 


29.0. With what goal in view do they worship? Answer: 


WTA Ararat wafa R | 
a wer aag: pen FA METS NRN 
29. Resorting to Me, those who strive for release from 


old age and death come to know that Brahman in Its 
wholeness, as also the self and all the works. 


29.1. WT g n moa N: tare aT A 
afaa nana fa: aa: afa aA a, a aq war WX aq fag: 


28-30] The Yoga of Knowledge and Realization 273 


ge m, aean maa aeq aq fag, et a afas anei 
fag: u 


29.1. Those who strive for release from old age and death, 
resorting to Me, the Lord supreme i.e., with concentrated 
minds, come to know that Brahman in Its wholeness, the 
reality of the inner Self and work in its entirety. 


afani at arfaa a a fag: | 
mas a at a fagyeada: ott 


30. Those who know Me together with My manifesta- 
tion in elements, divinities and sacrifices, know Me 
also at the time of departure from this world, their 
minds being concentrated. 


mafaa ATT ARSA: S 


30.1. mfa ga n amoa afia a aaia a aiaa, 

ae afinari ada sft arfinn q att faz, anai 4 aE 
aaa arf & Fre: wares Acar aft zat at fag: THA: 
aareataar: gf i 


30.1. Amidst elements and amidst divinities I exist. Those 
who know Me as such and also as existent in sacrifices, know 
Me also at the time of ‘departure’, death, their minds being 
concentrated. 


af saaan anaana a aaa anaa MASSON: 
g sharers maama ara ARATTA: 11911 


ARISEN: 
CHAPTER VIII 
THE YOGA OF CONCENTRATION 


0.1. ‘3 we a Fe, [9.39] Ra ma AA NA- 
Aafa sofeserfr 1 aa: aoai AA: saa — 


0.1. In VII.29 the Lord placed before Arjuna moot points 
that provoked questions. Hence Arjuna spoke raising appro- 
priate questions: 


IAT SATS | 
fe agag frae te et qearaa | 
ata a te stem aia feed ei 


Arjuna said: 

1. What is that Brahman? What is the inner self? What 
is work? O highest Spirit! What is said to be the ele- 
ments? What is said to be the divinities? 


ata: wy Hise sesferaraqqas | 
Warrares waar aorta faaara: 1211 


2. Slayer of Madhu! Who, im this body, operates the 
sacrifices and how? At the time of departure how are 
You to be known by the self-controlled (Yogins) ? 


3.0. UT maa Gare faa shear sarq— 


3.0. In order definitively to answer these questions in their 


order, the blessed Lord said: 


1-3] The Yoga of Concentration 275 


HAL Al WA CAAA ASA | 
qa gare fret: viaf: NN 


The blessed Lord said: 

3. The supreme Brahman is the imperishable; the 
inner self is Spirit as subject. Work is manifest crea- 
tion, bringing beings into existence. 


3.1. wet aft ul wert a aA wert Tears, UAA ar AAT 
smar att [ao 3.¢.%.] aft ad: | ater a A 
we [¢.23.] af ter faetong aera 1 Tom afa facie agr 
wert smaa fay 1 ate weg ger MAE serena: 
cag: Ta We: Ta: ETA ea | area ee afara A- 
Tada Tad modaga ae AT: MA Fed — ANTR- 
eed ahead 1 agaa waTat wa: ATs: sinus 


sa: Sinn SAAN Glue ¢ alee Hk eee Cen 
anaga warts Sgatet 


3.1. What does not perish, ‘the imperishable’, is the 
Supreme Self. Vide: ‘Gargi! by the command of this Im- 
perishable... BU.3.8.9. The syllable AUM mentioned in 
VIII.13 is not to be understood here as aksara; for it is qualified 
as ‘Supreme’ (here). This qualification better suits Brahman, 
the imperishable, thac is unsurpassed. The ‘inner self is the 
reality that in each body is the subjective spirit whose cul- 
minating aspect is the ultimate Brahman. What is called 
‘work’ is the offering of prepared oblation directed to divini- 
ties; here it denotes creation that brings all beings into ex- 
istence; for, this offering is held to be the seed whence, as rain 
and so forth, all beings, immobile and mobile, come into 
existence. 


276 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. VIII 


airna att ara: geoi | 
afrasa g ga aT vi 


4. ‘Elements’ constitute perishable existence; the divi- 
nities are the Spirit. Thou, best of men! in the body I 
alone am related to sacrifices. 


4.1. Raa eft an aaa maoa afa [ger] wadtir 1 sa ? 
a: aca at: faa, we: afafa aan aeq grt: | Tew: 
qt aaa ady efa, gf wana at gee, maaa: fect: 
aaa agag: a: ahreaay aiaa. adana fwar- 
eM aa, a + fao: [aa ox] st a a & fa ea 
va, wa afer R a aw caer ag afaa; ae fe addaa 
aganara sfa afan: wate, gi aT tl 


4.1. ‘Elements’ refers to what comes to be, depending on 
living beings. What is that? The perishable entity or whatso- 
ever is born. The ‘Purusa or Spirit’ is that which fills all or 
what reclines in the city—i.e., the Hiranyagarbha installed 
in the sun who protects instruments of action and cognition. 
What ‘relates to sacrifices’ is the Deity styled Visnu who 
claims all sacrifices as directed to Himself. Vide: ‘Sacrifice 
indeed is Visnu,’ TS.1.7.4. And that Visnu is none but Myself. 
I am related to the sacrifice performed by the body. Sacrifice, 
as such, is inseparably related to the body, existing in the 
body, O best of men! 


WAHT A AAT CACY RAT BATT | 
a: watt a Agia aris aes Aaa: KI 
5. At the end, whoso departs giving up his body, and 


remembering Me alone, proceeds to My status; of this 
there is no doubt. 


5.1. Heras St uo wears ATH A ATT Va Tea fao 


4-6] The Yoga of Concentration 277 


wae Aa Teese Feat WE a: sara afa, aT wera doa 
acd nA i a afer a feed oa afeaq ae aa, aA a a ar 
ate i 


5.1. ‘At the end’—at the time of death, ‘remembering Me 
alone’—the Supreme Lord Visnu alone. Whoso gives up the 
body thus and passes on, proceeds to the truth of Visnu. In 
respect of this matter there is ‘no doubt’, i.e., as to whether he 
proceeds or not to that truth. 


6.0. + na: wa aa from: 1 fH afte? — 


6.0. This law has no exclusive application to Myself. On the 
contrary, 


Uo ast Se Ae User BHAT | 
a adia atta aa agraattad: ei 


6. Remembering whatever being one gives up the body 
at the end, that very being one reaches, O Arjuna! ever 
conforming to that being. 


6.1.0 aft uaa an a a wea aaa carey faa aoa 
ahaa wed aera maS pot Ut A AT Va waa 
wa we ua a ay ataa ! aa ader agaaa: afeaq ara: 
Tare: a: waa: mém weet: At a Teale: aT N 


6.1. ‘Remembering’—thinking of—whatever being or par- 
ticular deity, one leaves the body ‘at the end’—at the time of 
death—one reaches that very remembered being and not 
another, O Arjuna! For, one conforms oneself to that re- 
peatedly remembered being. 


7.0. FEAT Ua Aa ATAAT Saray Bry — 


7.0. Since thus the final recollection causes the assumption 
of a new body, 


278 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. VIII 


TEATAT BIST AAT TT F | 
MANTA AA A SATAART ETAT: Wit 


7. Therefore, at all times, remember Me and fight. 
Dedicating mind and intellect to Me, rid of all doubts, 
you will reach Me, indeed. 


7.1. qeq Stat i AAT FAY ROY AT Arar NEA | WA 
q ag a ai He | Af argea ated a ae aa a: a af 
aaas: aq ay wa anea safe amifaerta, wae: 7 aa: 
aa frat tl 
fra— 


1. Therefore at all times remember Me as the sastras 
prescribe; and ‘fight’, performing your duty. With mind and 
intellect dedicated to Me, Vasudeva, you will reach Me 
alone as recollected. There is no doubt about this. Moreover, 


marana ATA ATLATATAT | 
qe gee fa arta mafaa uci 


8. O Arjuna! Steadily thinking with an unswerving 
mind, disciplined in the Yoga of repeated practice, one 
proceeds to the supreme, divine Spirit. 


8.1. mare sft u wera — ate fraaatofasayd TR- 
faq gasaan: faoa aaa RA: ATA: a arat ar: 
at am aAa aga aia: aa:, tt a mama a aaa farara 
Ta ate aAa anA aa afa, qq feaa gan faai 
fafa gime) wa arfa raa g met | afaa meara 
agama FATT | 


8.1. “Repeated practice’ is the flow of the same ideas in 
regard to Me, the sole object to which the mind is directed, 
uninterrupted by dissimilar ideas. This flow is the Yoga. The 


7-9] The Yoga of Concentration 279 


Yogin’s mind is addressed to it, i.e., is engaged in it. With 
that mind seeking no other object, O Arjuna! he dwells on— 
contemplates—the instructions of the Sastras and teachers 
and ‘proceeds’—repairs—to the supreme, divine Spirit, the 
Person in the sun. 


9.0. fafa a gay arta ata? serdt— 


9.0. What are the attributes of the Spirit to whom the 
Yogin proceeds? Answer: 


BLT FTTTAHAATRATM LNA: | 
ada Tarrafacreqaraarat TAA: TATA St 


9. Whoso remembers the wise, ancient Ruler, subtler 
than the subtle, the Upholder of all (things), imponder- 
able of form, resplendent like the sun beyond dark- 
ness; 


9.1. afa eft u ata areca ade, goo fated, agaaa 
ada ma: sarfaart, arom: qeara aft stare qenat sae 
wird a: ahad, qder aioa ware fae fafaacar 
mhra: frre, [farsa arate] afaecred + seq et faa farara 
aft tafaq aaa werd efa aaae: ¢ mat afer 
eq aeaa: at: oer a RA aaa: Tee ATARI 
meraq wt a aafaa arta’ sta geo aa: 1 
fra— 


9.1. “The wise’—far-sighted or omniscient. ‘Ancient — 
Eternal. ‘Ruler’ —ruler of the whole world. Subtler than the 
subtle. ‘Whoso remembers’—recollects Him who is (also) 
the ‘Upholder’ or dispenser of the fruits of all works done by 
living beings, in appropriate and varying measures; whose 
form, though eternally existent, none indeed can ‘ponder’ 
aright; who is ‘resplendent’ like the sun, being luminous with 
the timeless light of consciousness and who is ‘beyond the 


280 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. VIII 


darkness’ of nescience and delusion. Construe this with the 
earlier expression ‘whoso remembers.’ And, 


TAHT ATRIA AAT Te TTA AT | 
WaT moraa a A at Te gerar fro 112 ot 


10. ‘At the hour of departure whoso with steady mind, 
and with devotion and the power of Yoga, sustains 
aright the life-force between the brows (and remem- 
bers), reaches the Spirit supreme, divine. 


10.1. Wary gA n ARS ROS AAT wae aoaaa 
WOT Och: wat wih: Ta ge aaa a va AMET qe aS 
anaie aaae e aad at a oH: zat, qå 

qapa fad aa: simaa me aA AT 
mA ITT amaa ea aa BAT: aA, a: Us faa anit ‘ate 
gag (<3) xakam i ot [ma] gee vita sfavead few 
DAATAHA 11 


10.1. ‘At the hour of departure’—at the time of death, 
‘with a steady unswerving mind, with devotion and the power 
of Yoga,—‘the power of Yoga’ means mind’s steadiness born 
of accumulated impressions which concentration produces. 
First master the mind in the lotus of the heart; then, causing 
the life-force, prana, to enter the space ‘between the eye-brows’, 
viz., the vertical artery, by stages, and vigilantly conquering 
the planes of Yogic experience, the Yogin who knows, reaches 
the supreme Spirit of Light. 


11.0. Free aerate sora fafafa ser: tefagearfataaranr- 
fraa ara wits wrarq — 


11.0. Again the Lord elucidates Brahman sought to be 
known by the means presently to be set forth and distin- 
guished as the sole theme of the Veda-knowers: 


10-11] The Yoga of Concentration 281 


mat Aafaa aafaa faa maat AAT: | 
aRt Arad Viet Tt Ti ATS Tae V2 


11. That Imperishable which the Veda-knowers set 
forth, which ascetics, devoid of attachments, enter, 
and, seeking which, they live a life of continence—that 
goal, briefly, I shall declare to you. 


11.1. aq Sf ui ae set a eredifa wert afar setae: saree: 
afracha ‘seq [q 3. 3.¢.¢.] sara 1 fa — șa faafaa 
amaian aa aq aaa: Faaatter: arated: Aaa: ata: far: 
um meat ate: | ad Tet see aT eft aT: — 
qaa TO acta aracha, aa a oe aq Hace We sedi a Tae 
amen ame aaa: aa aaa yaad paa | 


11.1. What does not lapse is ‘the Imperishable’, the in- 
destructible; which the knowers of the contents of the Vedas 
declare, Vide: “This indeeu is that Imperishable, Gargi! 
which Brahmanas declare” (BU.3.8.8); they declare It as 
free from all limitations: “Not gross, not subtle” (BU.3.8.8). 
And once right vision is won, the ‘ascetics’ or the renouncers, 
free from ‘attachments’, striving to know It ‘enter’ It. ‘Seeking’ 
the Imperishable i.e., to know It they observe celibacy; under 
the guidance of a teacher they live a life of continence. That 
‘goal’ named the [mperishable, I shall briefly “declare’—set 
forth. 


12.0. ‘A Ñ z å Tera mAg mamang aeaa HAA are 
a A ate aAA 1 aed a Aaa wad aaa TM a a FAT 
Tere: eae a gaa faataa at yer rara 
-a amA aaa [N.34] aR aaa aaa 
meam sat a aea ‘ad aar aama | aia watfir 
q agafa | aR aaa afa | aA a aa aada 1 
[o. 3. 3.28.24] gearfehne aa: mea ag: aae, saaa 
Are ar, maaana manaa faafaa ATEA 


282 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. VIII 


‘qeat aafaer acta’ ef a ARA A gam: Yate sf- 
samga A afefaq, staat sat we acd — 


12.0. ‘Holy Sir! among men which world does he win who 
meditates on AUM as long as he lives?’ To him spoke he: 
‘Satyakama! AUM is both the higher and the lower Brahman’ 
(PU 5.1.) Starting thus, the following utterances set forth the 
adoration of AUM. ‘‘Whoso meditates on the Supreme 
Spirit by means of the syllable AUM with its three elements, 
is led up to the world of Brahma. (PU 5.5.)”” Also KU 2.14, 15: 
“Apart from righteousness and unrighteousness, the goal that 
all Vedas proclaim, that all penances declare, seeking which 
they lead a life of continence—I utter that briefly for you, 
viz., AUM”. AUM is the word that declares the supreme 
Brahman. Like an image or a representative symbol, it serves 
as a means for inquirers of slow and medium understanding 
to know the Supreme Brahman. Such knowledge yields libera- 
tion in the fulness of time. Here too that very meditation has 
been set forth in BG 8.9, 11. Meditation on AUM with the 
practice of Yoga that later leads to liberation has to be taught 
as also certain related matter. The following verses serve this 
purpose. 


aaah aaa wat gle freer a | 
UTA: TTOTATSTAT ALTATLITT RN 


12. Controlling all gateways of the senses, confining 
the mind in the heart, fixing the life-breath in the 
crown and intent on the maintenance of Yoga; 


12.1. aå gf n aderar aati a aft arate a aderaty ss- 
sat, attr aati dae an Hea aa: Efe geagvedts fa farcry 
wet area afer area arent: sot aaa: Sat: are arefagy 1 
wag a Tay — 


The Yoga of Concentration 283 


12.1. ‘Controlling all gateways’ of cognition; ‘confining 
the mind in the heart’, the lotus of the heart, and immobili- 
zing it there; and having mastered the mind, ascend by means 
of it the nerve going up from the heart. Holding the life-breath 
in the crown, one commences the practice of Yoga. 


Holding the life-breath right there, and, 


MPAAHTAL AE UT AATCC | 
a: satta aaa ag a ati Tear nAaR esi 


13. Uttering the monosyllable AUM representing Brah- 
man, and remembering Me, whoso goes forth leaving 
the body, he proceeds to the highest goal. 


13.1. Hq eft u S eft e war var: ahead gT 
Me Saad, Tew AT Sat aden aaqfardaq a: sara faa 
a: ord thea eg rit — ‘aq ae sf aaam, gama 
Ta AHA: 7 AEA gery: — a: Ve aa ara aesfa Tot 
THT TT I 

fra — 


13.1. ‘Uttering the monosyllabic AUM’, the verbal expres- 
sion of Brahman, and ‘remembering Me’, the Lord, its con- 
tent; whoever ‘goes forth’ or dies, leaving the body, proceeds 
to the exalted goal (of moksa). The idea is that the passing 
forth involves only the giving up of the body and not the 
destruction of the Self. Moreover, 


ATTA: Ada at at arctat aaa: | 
TEATS For: wy fragma atts: weve 
14. To the single-minded Yogin in perpetual com- 


munion, who constantly remembers Me, I am easily 
accessible, O Arjuna! 


284 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. VIH 


14.1. AAAA: sft wu AAA: a AAA Aq: A a: aa MAA- 
am: Mi Aad adar a: AT Tea eae faa: | ‘Aad sa ai 
sere, ‘fra: fe Adae Sead 1 a aa aacat ar — fa ate? 
—arassite act a: at crete cork: 1 cen ath: ae aot: Tea 
my: l må, framed vet aareafaaer atta: | aa: Ua, ad: 
AAT: aq ata aar aarfad: WaT eri 


14.1. ‘Single-minded’—without directing the mind to any 
other theme. A Yogin without interruption always remembers 
Me, the supreme Lord. The terms ‘without interruption’ de- 
note continuity, and ‘constantly’, length of time. Not just for 
six months or a year, but as long as one is alive, and ‘con- 
stantly’ remembering Me—this 1s the sense. To such a Yogin 
I am easily accessible as he is in perpetual communion. Such 
being the case, single-mindedly one must be always in com- 
munion with Me. 


15.0. qa ator fe eq efa? vert; a aq aa aloe aq 
waft — 


15.0. “What is the use of your easy accessibility?” Listen 
as to what it yields: 


ATI FAM TASATAAPIAT | 
maafa agema: datg TAT WaT: eK 


15. Reaching Me and winning supreme perfection, 
magnanimous sages no longer suffer rebirth—this 
ephemeral abode of all sufferings. 


15.1. AT Seer xf uu AT eat GIT Were ams gate rete 
a aafaa a maafa 1 fafaferse gada a maafa afar? afaa 
We — Fast Tart meaa area ara, aA afer 
gare sf pared TH | AT Hae Tees aap ARATAT FT | 
qaaa Seer yia Herat: saa: afafa meei cat TERT 
Tat: seat: 1 a oe AT a aafaa at oa: made I 


14-16) The Yoga of Concentration 285 


15.1. ‘Reaching Me the Lord’, having been assimilated 
into My being, they are not reborn. What sort of rebirth is it 
that they avoid? It is characterised as follows: It is “the abode’, 
the locus, of all sufferings due to causes, etc. Birth is the abode 
of sufferings which inhere in it. Besides, it is also ephemeral. 
No longer do they undergo this sort of rebirth—the ‘magnani- 
mous’ and disciplined sages; for, they have won supreme 
perfection, i.e. they have been liberated. On the other hand, 
those who fail to reach Me are re-born. 


16.0. fe ga: ae: Hea WAT: FA: avadea ef? sA — 


16.0. Do those who have reached goals other than You 
return to this earth? 


ATACIAAA CHB: FACTA TAS AT | 
arate g aAa Faster a fart Ven 


16. Worlds upto and including Brahma’s are repeatedly 
won and lost, O Arjuna!; but, on reaching Me, there is 
no more rebirth. 


16.1. aaa sft ou amaa water afer wath sft 
qai, TAN Yar ei, IAE: ET | AANA AE TANYA 
AT: ad garafan. gaada: I ast 1 at UH BIT g shar 
gaia greats: a frag i 


16.1. That in which beings appear is a world. Brahma’s 
world is what pertains to him. Upto and including his world, 
all worlds Lave the feature of recurrence, O Arjuna! But on 
reaching Me, rebirth ceases. 


17.0. agara: stat: Fea gafa: ? moea | 


PIR ? 


17.0. Why do worlds including Brahma’s recur? Because 
they are finite in time, How? 


286 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [(Ch. VIII 


AEATTTIATALATARIT 
i i al, Tracy 


17. Men who know about day and night hold that a day 
of Brahma consists of a thousand ages, and that night 
also is of a thousand ages. 


17.1. aga Bat u agaga agar amit wed waged wea 
He. A He gagni sar: seared: face: fag, ats afa q- 
agar agaa wa 1 è faafaa? amg—a wet afa: P- 
aeaa: wat: JAA: | oe: Us PoR SN: q, Ha: Grrafat: Brae: N 


17.1. They know that a day of Brahma—of Prajapati or 
Virat extends to the limit of 1000 ages; the night too is of the 
same extent. ‘Who knows all this’ — those who know the extent 
of day and night, or the knowers of the measure of time. Thus, 
since the worlds are limited in time, they recur. 


18.0. wT: Hele aq wate wat a, aq FerI— 


18.0. Now is stated what happens during Prajapati’s day 
and night: 


AARAA: Tal: THAT | 
THUR Tet AAA HATH ULC 


18. At the break of day, all individuals are born of the 
Unmanifest; when the night falls, they are dissolved 
in the same Unmanifest. 


18.1. Tere sft uo Hea Aerh WI: TAIT, AENA 
Wea at: cased slr che: ANEA: Aal: ToT: 
mafa Rea, ae: ane: avec: a weet are FEIT: 
JAURES | TAT AÀ AMT: ARS Wola aal: Be: TA 
Ud Yah Houma | 


17-19] The Yoga of Concentration 287 


18.1. From ‘the Unmanifest—the state of Prajapati’s 
sleep—‘individuals’ or determinate beings mobile and im- 
mobile, 1.e., all creatures, are ‘born’, become manifest. The 
dawn of the day is the day-break. At that time, when Brahma 
wakes up, all creatures are born. Similarly, at night-fall when 
Brahma sleeps, all individuals are dissolved in what was 
earlier called Unmanifest. 


19.0. apara paaa eA, eNA ATRAST- 
aia, ARRASAR aA ear: AANA: Acat e AA 
qaa: Tat Aaaa a gag ATE— 


19.0. What follows serves to exclude the flaw of ‘the inci- 
dence of the uneffected and the destruction of the effected’; 
to demonstrate the fruitfulness of action according to śastraic 
instructions about bondage and liberation; and to evoke a 
sense of detachment from the empirical world in which, help- 
lessly, hosts of beings get entangled due to Karma, impelled 
by afflictions like nescience, etc. 


AAI: A a a AcaT AA | 
TAAS: WT TAAL ULSI 


19. This same host of beings, after repeated births, get 
dissolved, helplessly, O Arjuna! at the time of nightfall 
and are born at day-break. : 


19.1. ara: eft on ATH: SOTA: g qR acd 
area a Ut Ha AT: Yea Yea HATTA, Weta Ga FT TTT 
We: AT AAMT: ACA: Wa, J WF, WHat Wad Haw: Va ATOM 11 


19.1. “This host of beings’ is the multitude of mobile and 
immobile beings that existed in a prior age. The very same, 
at day-break, are obliged to come into being repeatedly, and, 
at nightfall, get dissolved helplessly, O Arjuna! Again at day- 
break they are born. 


288 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. VIII 


20.0. aq ga aat a me fafa: aA gar’ 
[c23] Ra 1 ae ai aa aeaa RaT i yard, 
aaa aa eq ma fA —. 


20.0. The means of attaining the Imperishable has been 
indicated in 8.13 in the words ‘Brahman the monosyllabic 
AUM’, etc. Now is affirmed the following in order to deter- 
mine the true nature of the Imperishable. The aim is to 
specify the path of Yoga by which to reach it. 


mearen ATASMISSA HSA HICAATAT: N 
a: a vag ag asaya faafaa Qo 


20. But beyond that Unmanifest is another eternal 
Unmanifest Being; It perishes not (even) when all 
beings perish. 


20.1.9 fa ou ce aAa: aaga: —aeaq gate | 
‘gq wea: ama faafaa wean Aaaa: | Ara: aTe 
qt wai afatceca aah aeenasegiedtia afefracat ate — 
aa: aft | aver: fase: | a a were: ARNA: 1 ‘Teena’ 
sah; EAT Ta: oe: 2 Gah AA aaea 
ward wea: fro: we: sara: | aaraa: facet: a: a ATA: 
ai way senfey azacy a faafia ii 


20.1. ‘Another’—distinct and different—from what? From 
what was referred to earlier. ‘But’ serves to stress the distinc- 
tion of the eternal Being, sougnt to be affirmed, from the un- 
manifest source of matter. The eternal Being is the higher im- 
perishable Brahman. “Though distinct, possibly. It may be 
similar’—to rule out this possibility the Lord speaks of 
‘another’, meaning, ‘with other characteristics’. It is Unmani- 
fest, being beyond the range of the senses. 

It is said to be “beyond that’. Beyond what? Beyond what 
was earlier described as the seed state of the host of material 
things, called also the Unmanifest, meaning nescience. ‘That 


20-22] The Yoga of Concentration 289 


Brahman is a Being with other characteristics’ —this is the 
idea. That eternal or everlasting Being perishes not when 
all others like Brahma do perisn. 


AaS gag: TAT TAT | 
qo wea a fada ag WA RA NRM 


21. The Unmanifest is said to be ‘the Imperishable’; 
they say that He is the supreme goal. My supreme abode 
is that, attaining whick none returns. 


21.1. were: A i Alsat serch: wat: Bea: TF Va Aas 
Ho WA AE TA wHset way | Fat Aes sya aay a fad 
MATA, AT AA CMs TA sHe aa, ‘fast: wea wey’ [TT 4.20] 


ga: WRN 


21.1. That unmanifest called the Imperishable they declare 
to be the supreme goal. That Supreme Being beyond, reaching 
which they no longer return to empirical life, is My ‘Supreme 
abode’, the exalted being of Visnu. 


22.0. Test: BIT: JAA — 


22.0. The means of winning it is laid down: 


Fey: TIL: MÅ ARM THAT | 
TATA ea Att At AAAS TTT URW 


22. That supreme Spirit, O Arjuna! may be won by 
means of unswerving devotion—the Spirit in whom all 
beings dwell and by whom all this is pervaded. 


22.1. Fea: af ui gem: The waar Geicarey, a: ae: as, Te: freferara:, 
wea Fear a Tt fafa | a WRT See AAMT FATT 
aafaa [9 29] 1 wer ger arent aeqeafr wart 


290 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. VIII 


arnt; ard fe arcneg adfa wate 1 ar get ad at AIT 
aa are mA efa it 


22.1. That supreme Spirit is so styled as He abides in the 
city of the body or as He is a plenum. He is supreme, Arjuna! 
being unexcelled. Nothing excels Him. He may be won through 
devotion which is characterized by knowledge, and which 1s 
‘unswerving’—solely directed to the Self (Vide 7.17) Within 
Him dwell all effected beings. Effect indeed falls within the 
cause. By the Spirit all this world is pervaded, just as effects 
like pot, etc., are by space. 


23.0. Ya Ra mandaa A meaa aer- 
Tad Tae m acer: gA ‘aa are gaa faaferartaatorsd gaa 
—arafeartiqare: Zacanhegers: — 


23.0. The Northern Path has to be described so that, in due 
course, through liberation in stages, Brahman may be won by 
those Yogins who have set their intellecton AUM, Brahman’s 
symbol, and to whom reference has already been made (Vide 
8.13). Hence the verses from 8.23 onwards. The description 
of recurrence implies laudation of the other way that excludes 
recurrence. | 


WA ae aafaa Aa ATA: | 
Tara ater as Hrs seu ALATA 23h 


23. Best of Bharata princes! I shall declare the time 
departing in which, the Yogins do not return and also 
that, departing in which, they return. 


23.1. TF aft n wa sre aat: eta aR areca: | ae afe 
are g aqa agate arate aara ta 1 aha: afa aira: 
ary seared, tg qro—adane attra [33] <fa 


FÒ T IIT: aaf arf, i ares anfa T i 


22—24] The Yoga of Concentration 291 


23.1. ‘The time in which departing’—thus with the remote 
word ‘prayata’ have the first words to be construed. The time 
in which going, there is ‘non-return’, non-rebirth, and ‘re- 
turn’, its opposite rebirth, happen. The term yoginah denotes 
both Yogins and the agents of works. These agents, too, by vir- 
tue of quality are Yogins; for 3.3 lays it down that ‘the disci- 
pline of Karma’ has been prescribed for the Yogins. The time in 
which ‘departing’ or dying, the Yogins do not return and the 
time in which departing they return—-that time I shall des- 
cribe O best of Bharatas! 


24.0. 7 FT AE — 
24.0. He describes the time: 


RaR: Yes: TATA TACIT | 
TA VATA Wester ser Aalfaatl Wat: wer 


24. The fire, light, day, the bright fortnight, the six 
months of the northern solar movements, departing in 
time marked by these, Brahman-knowers reach Brah- 
man. 


24.1. ofa: afr ou af: aeaa aa 1 cer—saria: ate 
vada aroha 1 rat — Raa ary va ead 1 waar 
aq facet ‘wa are’ ‘a are’ aft, amaaa | qa ae: aT Her 
raft; Yao qaaa; Taran satay, aay saat wa mT- 

wat eter fee: a ag ae S| ao art: 1 aa ae 


TRAAT: wa À wera: ARIAT: VA È 1 


24.1. The fire is the deity, presiding over time. Similarly 
light too is such a deity. Or fire and light are, as formulated, 
just deities. The expression, ‘the time in which’ is based on the 
principle of the dominance of the majority as in the expression 


292 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. VIII 


‘a forest of mango trees’. So, too, ‘day’ is the deity governing 
day. ‘Light’ is the deity governing the bright fortnight. The 
six months of the northward course of the sun refer to the 
deity constituting the way of the gods. (Vide BSB. 4.3.4.) 
Going forth on this way, the departed Brahman-knowers, 
i.e., Brahman-worshippers, reach Brahman. The expression 
‘by stages’ is understood, for movement and return are 
unthinkable for those who are instantly liberated and dedicated 
to right perception. Vide: ‘His vital breaths do not depart’ 
(BU 4.4.6.) Their breaths merge in Brahman; they are in large 
measure Brahman. They become Brahman, indeed. 


TAY UTI FON: o LATARA | 
Ta aana vatfratt ma aadA nN 


25. Smoke, night, the dark (fortnight) the six months 
of the sun’s southern course—passing away during 
time marked by these, the Yogin reaches the lunar 
light and returns. 


25.1. oF aon g: we araa waa a eaar | 
an HM: pona | a aaa eft a Ydad lat wa | 
qa aana wt maana AA we gera ant P svar amar 
Tea se TA: fada i 


25.1. ‘Smoke’ and ‘night’ are deities presiding over these; 
so too is the ‘dark fortnight’ the deity presiding over it. The 
next phrase too, as in earlier cases, refers to the deity only. 
Departing, during periods marked by these the Yogin who has 
pertormed sacrifices, etc., experiences the fruits of his actions. 
When these decay, he returns from the sphere of the lunar 
light. 


meg Tat We Wa: Wert Ac | 
UHRA maaana FT: URE 


25-27] The Yoga of Concentration 293 


26. These two are indeed the light and the dark courses 
held to be eternal for the world. By means of the first 
one goes and does not return; by the other one comes 
back again. 


26.1. Yaw A i EPA A FT SOT a E, MANET- 
aa qen, aaa FT, Ud qep fe Aea: a aaa. 
mAr, T Wid: ada Va Ud Wet aaa ara fra, Ar 
fracarad, ad ahead 1 aa waar yao arta aaa, evar gaT 
arad FT: WA: II 


26.1. The ‘light and the dark’—light because it manifests 
knowledge, while its absence makes the other dark. These 
are the two courses. The expression ‘for .the world’ refers to 
those who are eligible to tread the paths of knowledge and 
works and not to the entire world. These courses are deemed 
eternal; for, the empirical life is eternal. By means of the one 
viz. the ‘light course’, one achieves non-return; by means of 
the other, ‘the dark course’, one returns once more. 


aad aA WT Atay ALT Agia Beas | 
TEATAAT BIST ANTTCH AATAT URI 


27. Knowing these courses, Arjuna! no Yogin falls into 
delusion. Therefore, at all times apply yourself to Yoga. 


27.1. ta aft u aT Ut aa gA art ort | aa “dara war, 
war Ae a” afa, ant a qerfa wart pa | ae aay Fray 
ana: aaa: Wa str I 

TT ay Arey AeA — 


27.1. ‘Knowing these two courses’ or paths, i.e., knowing 
that one of them leads to the empirical state and that the other 
to liberation, no Yogin falls into delusion. Therefore, at all 
times, apply yourself to Yoga—be concentrated, O Arjuna! 

Note the majesty of this Yoga: 


294 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. VIII 


aaq wag ag aa arg ARA wae | 
areata aerated fafaa anit ot enaA STENT NLN 


28. The meritorious fruits (of learning) the Vedas, of 
sacrifices, penances and gifts—all these the Yogin 
transcends by knowing this, and he also reaches the 
supreme Primal State. 


TAA ATA ASSAISEATT: 11 


28.1. Fay aag ay T aaa aqedy aq a TAN, 
aag a amma, Ag aq Pans wast wean, aaa adter mefa 
aq ad Hooray, ec fatecar maata oh art are aur 
rer anh, wt wae tat ena safe a RA ae ant va, 
FTL FAI SIT: 1 


28.1. The auspicious fruit, laid down by the Sastra, regarding 
the Vedas well-mastered, sacrifices nghtly performed, pen- 
ances well-undergone, and gifts duly offered—all this the 
Yogin, properly knowing and practising what has been stated 
here in the course of answering the seven questions, surpasses 
and reaches the primal divine status, i.e., Brahman the first’ 
cause. This is the idea. 


af raa aaar anaana fret — 


* HATATA TE E E S — arerereargreht — e 
an — amda aaa IIA | 


AaAAISEATT: 
CHAPTER IX 


THE YOGA OF THE ROYAL SCIENCE 
OF THE ROYAL MYSTERY 


0.1. AeA artery ONT: aT: IH | TT A GS nafa- 
qm moa refai wa warafred AeA | ae | ‘arta 


ware aera: we ahead, + wearer” sfa aerrgreataadiirear 
aT Tat — 


0.1. In the eighth chapter has been set forth the Yoga of 
retention with its characteristics, effected by means of the 
arteries. Its fruit, the eventual attainment, by stages along the 
path of fire, ight, etc., of Brahman, whence there 1s no return, 
also has been indicated. In order to obviate the apprehension 
that achievement of liberation is possible only in this manner 
and no other, the blessed Lord said as follows: 


AT ATATTATA : 
qe g A A TATAA | 
ma famaafgd aeaea MEAST 1211 


The blessed Lord said: 

1. Now I shall reveal to you, who carp not, this most 
recondite knowledge and its realization by mastering 
which you will be liberated from evil. 


L1. g% Shr n g aaa, aa, GH a Tay Àg | aq qat 
afara ‘ze’ me | gT aA fafati: — eae. A 
maq mafaa, aala: adafa (9.23. ] amA ad [at 
9.24.2.] galar [or 3 L] RaRa; maa 
aa l Asas fag: aaa. A aa wate’ [BT 3. 9.24.2. | 
qarag 1 a gat teat Tere aA PaA aq 
aqaa 1 fe aq ? ma fafafise ? faamaaa qag, 


aq WA WaT Ser AUVs HMI Aaa | 


296 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. IX 


1.1. “This knowledge’ of Brahman, presently to be set forth, 
and already expounded in previous chapters—the term ‘this’ 
is used to refer to this idea present in His mind. ‘Now’ serves 
to stress a certain distinctiveness—only this right knowledge 
directly leads to liberation, Vide the utterances in smrti and 
śruti: “That Vasudeva is all this (BG 7.12); ‘Self is all this’ 
(CU 7.25.2); ‘One only without a second’ (CU 6.2.1). No 
knowledge other than this will liberate. Also there are the 
following passages: “‘Now those who cognize otherwise are 
subject to other rulers; their worlds perish” (CU 7.25.2); 
‘I shall reveal to you this most recondite and hidden know- 
ledge’; for you don’t carp, are no fault-finder. What is 
indicated by ‘this’? Knowledge and its realization or ex- 
perience. Mastering it, you will be ‘liberated from evil’—the 
bondage of empirical existence. 


utter tere faafaa | 

SANATA TY FGA PARAI N 
2. It is the sovereign science, the sovereign mystery, 
the best of purifiers. Its apprehension is immediate; 


it is righteous, imperishable and exceedingly easy to 
achieve. 


21. mafa str a maae ae a, daaa; dag 
fe wt Rada wafer ada an wee Tera wT | 
qaa Wad ef Gas, adi Waar qfar wt HMA BHAA | 
warHaeearad a atat aa at era wa weda 
qed: fe ar Waa amen | fra yerrard sare Gare: 44 
Waa: Tey Aq Teresa | apas Aasa Ge, 7 AMT 
aera Aafa, fag wef wale watay i vanf, eng Faqs 
zaa ae — aaa ad, ae cafaaataay | at aera aANT 
FH FATA ATH, WHT A vernon qefats, wt J 
yaaa Tea afr a set wae—set sai a vex 
wed: piq ae weds A | ae: Tet ANTA N 


1-3] The Royal Science of the Royal Mystery 297 


9.1. It is called ‘the sovereign science’ because it is rich in 
exceeding splendour. Among sciences, this science of Brahman 
is exceedingly resplendent. Similarly among mysteries it is 
‘sovereign’. This is ‘the best of purifiers’; for, this Brahman- 
knowledge is the foremost cause of purity. Why should one 
elaborate the sanctifying virtue of Brahman-knowledge that 
burns up all works and their causes, both righteous and un- 
righteous, accumulated in the course of thousands of lives? 
Besides, its apprehension is ‘immediate’—it is apprehended 
like pleasure, etc., immediately. Things mch in numerous 
merits may yet be opposed to righteousness. But this know- 
ledge of the Self is not opposed to righteousness; it con- 
forms to ‘righteousness’. Nevertheless it may prove very hard 
to achieve. No, it is exceedingly ‘easy to master’, as is the lore 
of gems. It may be objected: ‘Other easy activities yield but 
little profit, while hard jobs may yield much profit. This Self- 
knowledge too, being easy to acquire, may yield only epheme- 
ral fruit and prove fleeting.’ Not so, for it is ‘imperishable’. 
Like all activity it does not wear away in respect of its fruit. 
Therefore Self-knowledge merits close attention. 


MACATAT: FOOT THENTET TAT | 
wT At fraded qadama 3N 


3. Men who have little faith in this spiritual law, O 
hero! return to the way of repeated deaths, failing to 
reach Me. 


3.1. waeaTaT sft uo aaa: werfaxtear: areas eter seq 
raed aches a atfeaar: mao, aque sa gamana 
SATAT:, AFTT WIT: Feat: AT: TeaT | swear ar Tat — 
nord aq aag str aamir aaa ase Zor: — 
faiq fada ated A? -yaa qaqa: Aare: T 
am: Tear aA aema. aferta ade gard: 


3.1. ‘Who have little faith’—are those devoid of faith in the 


298 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam {Ch. IX 


nature and fruit of this spiritual law of Self-knowledge. They 
are negationists and sinners who resort to the esoteric doctrine 
of asuras, viz., the body is the self; they are the vitalists. Failing 
to reach Me, the supreme Lord, they ‘return’ or stick to the 
path leading to empirical life and death, the path leading to 
the status of animals or to life in hell. They ‘return’ without 
gaining even devotion, the kind of spiritual practice that leads 
on to Me. 


4.0. ea att ahaa are — 


4.0. Having drawn, by means of this laudation, Arjuna’s 
attention, the Lord declares: 


Ra aafaa AS WITHA | 
aefa adafa a are Aaaf: us 


4. The entire world has been pervaded by Me in My 
Unmanifest form. All beings dwell in Me, but I dwell 
not in them. 


4.1. WaT gA n war aa a À a: aa ad a ad SE WT 
aama 7 ae Ait: ST We AA a He Hermaia: AA AAT 


aaga waned | we Ae war ara araaeay fanfa, 
am: aà faa xi seat 1 det yarat weve are waa: Ay 
faa: adaq ayerarad areca aracaat fe weq 1 7 fe waar 
ag afa mada sraferd wate 1 


1. ‘By Me’—by that supreme form of My being all this 
world has been pervaded. That form of My being is Unmani- 
fest—beyond the range of the senses of perception. This is the 
idea. In Me, with that Unmanifest form dwell all beings 
from Brahma to a blade of grass; for no being devoid of 
the Self can empirically exist. Therefore, they are said to 
exist or have Me as their Self. That is how they are said to 


4-5] The Royal Science of the Royal Mystery 299 


exist in Me. Since I alone am the Self of beings, to deluded 
minds I appear to dwell in them. Hence I affirm that I do not 
dwell in contact with them, as, unlike a concrete body, I am 
not held in them. Indeed I am the inmost principle even of 
space. No objects without contacts may have a contained 
existence in any receptacle. 


5.0. aa Va aafaa AA — 


5.0. Not being in material contact with anything — 


Ta areata watt war A APTT | 
ATTA A ATEN AACA ATA: Ui 


5. Neither do beings exist in Me—behold My sovereign 
Yoga! My Self brings beings into existence and sustains 
them, yet does not dwell in them. 


5.1.7 a eft ou a a ena warts aAA 1 oer a att ate 
Wet Wa Wat Saez Vat AM, smeqat maA TT: | TAT 
a aft iaag aga Aa ‘org a R ay [Fz 
2.3.28.) 1 Tat weaq Ta — A, wash aq writ 
frat; a 3 ae, Taha wae afer eTA. «| FT 
Got Feud “sat aa area” eft ? fre aaa, aferq seg 
waa, seas aqacq eaters ‘aa arcat aft, 7 Ya ATRA: 
ae aa: Bf wad aA 1 ae Yat: «Yate wraafa — 
sereata -adafa eff ar wat tl 


5.1. ‘Beings’, Brahma, etc., do not exist in Me. Behold the 
manner of My creative power or of fashioning of beings by Me 
as the Lord, 1.e. the truth of the Lord’s creative process. Thus 
the Veda also points out the detachment of the Lord as Self, 
that is unassociated with all things: ‘Detached, the Self cleaves 
not’ (BU 3.9.26). And behold another marvel: though deta- 
ched, My Self sustains all beings; yet it does not dwell in them, 
as has already been explained above. Reason shows Self to be 
no content. Why then is it stated ‘My Self? Analysing the 


300 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IX 


conglomerate of body, senses and so forth, and super-imposing 
the I-sense on it, the Lord uses the expression ‘My Self? as in 
common parlance, and not, like the deluded world, due to 
failure to note that Self cannot have another as /ts Self. This 
Self gives rise to beings or multiplies them. Hence the expres- 
sion ‘brings beings into existence’. 


6.0. waar yagda SH wef gerda soos we — 


6.0. Illustrating and explaining the idea expressed above in 
the two verses the Lord declared: 


aanse fret ay: ATA ARTs | 
TAT AST eT AAAI G1 


6. Just as the vast (expanse of) air, eternally subsists 
in space while moving everywhere, even so know that 
all beings exist in Me. 


6.1. war aft uo ae ate arererfera: araret fera: fret Aer ara: 
aay mada adam wer oaa, wa aeaa aià af 
wager wa Raaf gaa sra fag 1 


6.1. Just as in the world ‘the air’ subsists in space, and always 
moves everywhere—air that is vast in its dimensions—so, 
know that all beings exist in Me, without cleaving to Me, who 
am omnipresent like space. 


7.0. Ua, ay: TA za, ate fafa adafa ferfaares; arf — 


7.0. Thus like the air in space, during the period of their 
existence, all beings subsist in Me. 


adafa Bley Teter atta MARTE | 
HeTAA gaera Heater fTIAAATET iit 


7. All beings, Arjuna! at the end of a cycle repair to My 


6-8] The Royal Science of the Royal Mystery 301 


nature; again, at the beginning of the (next) cycle, I 
loose them forth. 


7.1. a4 gA u ant ata safe amaai are [fpei] 
afer mfa adtat Heresy sera | ga: we: aft warts safar 
oral fagorfa saaa wey yaad 1 


7.1. All beings, Arjuna! repair to my lower nature, con- 
sisting of the three constituents, at the end of the cycle or the 
period of cosmic dissolution. Again, at the time of origination, 
in the beginning of the next cycle, I ‘loose them forth’—1.e., 
originate them, as in previous cycles. 


8.0. Ut afas — 


8.0. Thus to My Nature, nescience: 
wala caraaseey faga ga: JA: | 
AMAA FATA EAT Ci 


8. Resorting, again and again, I loose forth this entire 
multitude of bound beings, swayed by and dependent 
on that nature. 


8.1. watt aft u seta car ediat aaea arf [aster] fag- 
aft ga: oa pad set a waged eet ada get sat 
wat aeaa, afaaricart: maea, vad: aad Aaa, l 


8.1. “Resorting to-—subduing—My Nature and depending 
on it, I ‘loose forth’ this nature-born multitude of dependent 
beings in their entirety. They are ‘dependent’ because they 
have been overwhelmed by flaws like nescience; for, they are 
swayed by their in-born tendencies. 


9.0. ae aa à Terre, word am aa faea: aafaa 
qatata aay: carfats ? es ae wary — 


9.0. ‘If so, You, the supreme Lord, fashioning beings un- 


302 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IX 


equally, are subject to righteousness and its opposite, the causes 
of these inequalities’. In explanation, the Lord deciares: 


qaa n ata sath fracatear waar | 
saraaa AAA AT BAZ Us 


9. Those actions, Arjuna! bind Me not; I am as it were, 
indifferent (to them all), being unattached to them. 


17 7 feu aw a gat ate aoe aniani 
eater freed sar | aa HA aaa Fre are—vsarttad 
aaa, Fat garda: ster: ahaq deq area, area: afafa, 
FUCA BICATHATATATS: HOTA BTA ATA THT, AT HAA: 
TAA as. PATA sahara: N 


9.1. ‘Those actions of Mine’ such as the creation of hosts of 
beings, ‘bind me not’, the Lord, O Arjuna! The reason for 
it is this. ‘I am indifferent as it were’. As one unconcerned 
I subsist, for the Selfis immutable; ‘unattached’ — not clinging 
to the fruits of actions. I don’t have the conceit of agency in 
regard to those creative works. The thought, ‘I do them’ does 
not occur to Me. In the case of others, too, the cause of dis- 
sociation is the absence of the conceit of agency and the non- 
clinging to fruits of works. Otherwise, deluded man, like a 
silk-worm, will get bound by his works. This is the idea. 


10.0. aa yaa ea faf (l.c), saraaa man (l3) 
q a faeg a, sa aanert ang — 


10.0. The statements ‘I loose forth this multitude of beings’, 
and ‘I am indifferent, as it were’ are contradictory. To obviate 
this contradiction, the Lord says: 


AMSAT THt: It NATAT | 
ggasi ataa argad wo 


9-10] The Royal Science of the Royal Mystery 303 


10. Due to Me, the Supervisor, Nature gives birth to the 
world of mobile and immobile (beings). For this reason, 
Arjuna! it revolves in manifold ways. 


10.1. Fat ef uo wat adat gaaer afafa sree 
war, wa are fafa aaea sats: gad sereafa aat 
WT | Ta a Aaa: — 

Uhl SF: aAA We: adar AAAI | 

PATIA: SEE GUCCILE me am Fact finia i [A3 RR. | 
eft maA agar AAT att AA AT | ma aai 
amaa farttadd mateng 1 aaan fe ma: 
aat safa: a se wed, aa g, A ed, ‘qe afa, 
gza areata, vaia PRA, g areata’ — gan satfatacar 
aama | ‘At eA A T [FE a 00.2289; A N. 
2.¢.%.] maa nea want alata | aa wae aA aAA- 
wats Ta: aaa aaa aA aa TA 
wie: aaa aaa | aafaa ea gi: gaa maaa ASTA, 
‘Hl HET Aa F FE A | Ht ama ga sa faafee:’ [H E. 20.3., 


a. aT. 3l] aRar: 1 aft a ma — aaa TA 
qa gafa aaa: [424] aft it 
Ud At 


10.1. ‘Due to Me, the Supervisor’, the immutable, whose 
essence 1s pure perception, My maya, consisting of the three 
constituents or nescience, gives birth to the world of beings, 
mobile and immobile. Vide the mantra S.U. 6.11: Ihe one 
God is hidden in all beings, all-pervading, the inner Self of 
all beings, the supervisor of works, dwelling in all, Witness, 
Apprehender, Alone and beyond constituents.” Due to this 
reason—1.e., My status as ‘Supervisor —O Arjuna! the world 
revolves in all its states. All activities in the world—(contents 
of propositions like) ‘I shall enjoy this’, ‘I see this’, ‘I experience 
pleasure’, ‘I suffer pain’, ‘I shall do this to get at this’, ‘I shall 
cognize this’ and so forth—consist of, and culminate in, 
knowledge only. Vedic verses demonstrate this idea: “He the 
Supervisor of this world in the supreme sky”, (RV.10.129.7; 
TB.2.8.9). Thus the one Lord the Supervisor of all, who is 


304 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IX 


pure consciousness, is in reality unrelated to all empirical ex- 
periences. In the absence of any other conscious being, there 
is no other experiencer. So it is unreasonable to ask why there 
is this variegated creation or offer an answer, Vide: “Who 
knows, in fact, who has ever elucidated here, why and whence 
this varigated creation has come into being?’ RV.10.129.6, 
TB.2.8.9). The Lord also elucidates this: ‘‘Knowledge is 
shrouded in ignorance; therefore living beings are deluded”’ 
(BG.5.15). 

Nevertheless, the omniscient Self of all beings, ever pure, 
awake and free though I am, 


AAA Ate AT AST AIA TTATTATT 1 
OC AAA eal AT AARETE 12 Vl 


11. Fools deride Me, who have assumed a human body; 
for, they are unaware of My transcendent status as the 
great Lord of beings. 


lla. aaaf sf u sasha avast foa gifa at wer afa- 
ay yanga Aa Hela SS AMA | A AT AA 
TIATATAAATSSSAT: TAHT | 

way? — 


11.1. ‘Fools deride’-—show contempt and aversion for Me, 
since they fail to discriminate. As I have assumed a human 
body, I function as a human being. They know nothing about 
My ‘transcendent —exalted—status, the truth of the Supreme 
Self that is immense like space and subtler than it. I am the 
great Lord of all beings, their very Self. Therefore are those 
unfortunate ones smitten by their attitude of contempt towards 
Me. 

How? 


11-13] The Royal Science of the Royal Mystery 305 


anem meni meaa fracas: it 
qama aa water mA frat: nN 


12. Futile are their desires, futile their works, and 
futile their cognitions! they are mindless; (for) they 
have resorted to the delusive nature of monsters and 
demons. 


AA AR E a GI Ue ee le eel 


Fera ena 1 fae faafaa & wate aah 
Pom cu ue ar ot aaah ac a ee 
Wet Aaaa: Rea: Parte: | “agat arma gd ANT: 
[$ 3. 3.) R ae 


12.1. ‘Their desires are futile’ or unprofitable ; so are works 
like the fire-sacrifice performed by them fruitless; for, they 
have spurned the Lord and are ignorant of their real Self, the 
Lord Himself. So also are their cognitions; their knowledge 
too is devoid of fruit. They are mindless or lacking in discrimi- 
nation. This is the import. They have also resorted to the 
nature of monsters and demons—a nature that deludes. For, 
it treats the body as the Self and they habitually shout: “‘Cut, 
shatter, drink, eat, rob.” Their works are ruthless. Vide: 
“There are the worlds called the demoniac” (1U.3). 


13.0. ù ga: sear: Wreaghsert Aart saa: — 


13.0. On the contrary, the faithful, treading the path of 
deliverance marked by devotion to the Lord, are described: 


Aerated At ast sat spama: i 
MAARA ATCAT ARAARA 112 311 


306 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IX 


13. But magnanimous persons, resorting to a nature 
that is divsie, O Arjuna! adore Me single-mindedly, 
knowing Me to be the imperishable source of beings. 


13.1. agema: gA o aaea: J efa: at Sat ot | eat 
carat Sata Waenearsartemant faa: aed: wafa Aa AAA: 
aaa: mea watie favaretar m arsste are aera I 

may? — 


13.1. ‘But magnanimous persons’ having capacious minds 
adore Me the Lord, Arjuna! ‘resorting to a nature that is 
divine’—marked by restraint of mind and senses, compassion, 
faith, etc. They are ‘single-minded’—having a mind given to 
nothing other than Me. They know Me to be ‘the imperish- 
able source’-—the eternal cause, of things like space, etc., and 
of living beings. How? 


Ada pda At Aarts Waar: N 
Tee AT WaT fA STAA We 


14. Incessantly glorifying Me, striving with steadfast 
vows; prostrating; eternally united, they worship Me 
with devotion. 


14.1. Aad aft wu aad Adal Wraed wereaeg At alta: Aare: 
a feaa amna RAA: yada geaan: a feat aTe 
a i à gaT AAA A AT gA A ARAT PATAT: 
qa: saad ade ti 


14.1. ‘Incessantly —always, they glorify Me, the Lord, 
whose essence is Brahman; and striving—cultivating virtues 
like the withdrawal of sense-organs, restraint of mind and 
senses, compassion, non-violence, etc. Their vows are ‘stead- 
fast’—unshakable. Prostrating, they worship Me, the Lord 
dwelling in the heart, with devotion; they are in eternal union 
with Me. 


13-16] ‘The Royal Science of the Royal Mystery 307 


15.0. & Aq WHT Barad sfa’? sà — 


15.0.In what all varied ways do they worship? Answer: 


maA BAA WHat AVTITAT | 
Uraa yarda ager fara NN 


15. And others, worshipping Me with the sacrifice of 
knowledge, wait on Me looking up to Me as one with 
themselves or as different, in manifold ways—Me with 
face turned everywhere. 


15.1. aaa sft i maA TAA waa aa, AA AMAT 
weet: Ged: at Sat a aft ae aaa aaa yaad | 
Tear att Unda ‘vata ot ager” eft Teale Ged: sora | 
Aaa yr “atfeeracatfeved a va ara a safera:” 
gla am | afaq “ager wafer: a va ara adda: fared.” 
af a fret adore ager gI sorad 11 


15.1. ‘The sacrifice of knowledge’—the knowledge whose 
content is ‘the Lord is the sacrifice’. Some worship Me, the 
Lord, with this sacrifice, giving up all other forms of worship. 
That knowledge treats Me as one. ‘The supreme Brahman is 
one only’—this metaphysically right perception is the means 
of their worship. Others treat Me ‘as different’, holding ‘Lord 
Visnu is manifest as the sun, the moon etc.’, and worship. Yet 
others worship, in manifold ways, Me ‘with face turned every- 
where’, holding: the same Lord exists in manifold ways; all 
forms are His. 


16.0. afe ag: wart: sorad, we aAa sad aft ? at ame — 


16.0. ‘If they worship in many ways, why do they worship 
only You?’ Answer: 


ag FAG Ta: NÄ | 
asengar RAE FAT ULE 


308 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. IX 


16. I am the elaborate Vedic rite; I am the sacrifice; 
I am the ancestral oblation; I am the edible herb; I am 
the incantation; I am the lustrated butter: I am the fire; 
I am the oblation. 


16.1. ag eft u ae wy, ae. aeta 1 we ae cad: | faa 
war wa 4g, fren aq dad | ag atey, adrift aq wad aq 
Aaaa [area] Aaaa 1 arar—‘eaar aft 
ars i 


à iqa: aaea efa: Aa | ag wa are gfaw | ag ate: 
afea gad afa: a: af: aga | He Et gaT T l 


fra — 


16.1. Kratu is a complex Vedic rite, which I am. Also am I 
the sacrifice enjoined by Smrti. I am the offering of food made 
to the ancestral spirits. I am the herbs on which living beings 
feed, including rice, barley etc. Or, svadha may denote the 
food ofall living beings whereas ausadha denotes healing herbs. 
I am the incantation with which offerings are made to the 
manes and gods. Also, I am the lustrated butter and oblation. 
I am the fire in which the offerings are placed, as well as the 
act of offering. And, 


frasana m m at aag: | 
aa Aa ERTA AAT T oil 


17. The Father of this world am I: (its) Mother, sus- 
tainer, and grandsire; I am the holy object of know- 
ledge; the sacred syllable AUM; Rk, Sama also Yajus. 


17.1. frat afa u Aa aaa ag wer ma: Arar waft, aT 
ayn mra: frarar, frame: fog: frat, aa afra, afar aA, 
WATT, WH, AA, AT: UT Tl 

fra — 


17.1. “The Father’—the generator, of this world am I; its 


16-18] The Royal Science of the Royal Mystery 309 


Mother or matrix; sustainer or the regulator awarding to 
living beings fruits of their actions. Grandsire—father’s 
Father, the sacred object of knowledge; AUM, Rk, Sama, 
and Yajus. Moreover, 


miat Ta: atatt faa: act YE | 
Waa: Toa: CUT frat ARAR NEN 


18. The Goal, the Support, the Lord, the Witness, 
Abode, Refuge, Friend, Source, Dissolution, Existence, 
Treasury, and the indestructible Seed. 


18.1. Wher: str n whe: BAHT, WaT Teer, TE cava, a fat 
gaa, faa: aferq ofa: faafaa, wer matai — scart 
ade: Fed WarHead: at rÂ, waa: vate: wrt: we: 
wie wea a fe adit fafaq seta; frat a Aga 
areata: + ate sf Tae 

fra — 


18.1. ‘The ‘goal’ is the fruit of actions. The ‘support’ is He 
who sustains. The ‘Lord’ is the owner. He is the ‘Witness’ of 
both what is done and left undone. He is the ‘Abode’ ; for, all 
living beings dwell in Him. He is the ‘Refuge’ of those who 
suffer—the dispeller of the sufferings of those who have sought 
‘Refuge. He is the ‘Friend’ who aids irrespective of any service 
in return. He is also the ‘Source’ or the world’s origin. He is 
the ‘Dissolution’—that in which the world is dissolved. He is 
‘Existence’ as the world exists in Him; also the ‘Treasury’ of 
fruits which the living beings reap in future. He is the ‘Seed’ — 
the cause of sprouting of all that sprouts. It is ‘indestructible’ 
as it coexists with the world. Nothing seedless sprouts. The 
process of sprouting is always observed; so it follows that the 
chain of seeds is never terminated. | 

Besides, 


310 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. IX 


AAAS aT STATA A I 
WAI AT HIT aag AAA ULI 


19. I cause heat; I arrest and send forth rain; I am im- 
mortality and death; both being and non-being am I, 
O Arjuna! 


19.1. afa sft u aoe aa aria: ucat shaq cafe: gead: | 
ag at Afaq aar: venta; saa oa) farara Shaq cate: 
aera: aÀ: ga: saa maf | wad a Ua aai, Acq: A neat- 
mo q a aq aaa aea ad, aferdita aa 4 wa ae 
HIT | a ga aaa HAT WAM, AA HAST aT aaa | 


19.1. Becoming the sun, with some scorching rays I cause 
‘heat’, and with others I ‘send forth rain’. Again for eight 
months I ‘withhold’ it, sending it forth, in the rainy season, 
once more. I am the ‘immortality’ of the gods and the death 
of the mortals. ‘Being’ is what exists in relation to some, 1.e., 
its cause; its opposite is ‘non-being’, which does not so exist. 
Both these I am—i.e., both cause and effect, O Arjuna! The 
Lord is never absolutely non-existent; nor is effect existent 
while cause is non-existent. 


19.2. & Jatch: faar: vpcaquacarfefasrt: ast: AT Grae: IT- 
ad mafaa, t aarfasrd aa wa sreqater | A Gt BT: HATTA: — 


19.2. Those knowers who worship Me elaborately as stated 
earlier, ‘by sacrifice’ or forms of cognitions of unity, diversity, 
etc.—and these are forms of cessation from desire-prompted 
activities—-do attain Me alone according to their perceptions. 
But regarding the ignorant, clinging to objects of desire, 


staat AT ATaaT: qarat 
aike Tala WATT | 


at yaaa Aerts 
mafa frearteata Sa NoN 


19-21 | The Royal Science of the Royal Mystery 311 


20. Conversant with the lore of the triple Vedic texts, 
drinkers of the Soma-juice, cleansed of sins, crave 
attainment of heaven after having sacrificed unto Me. 
They reach the meritorious world of Indra and enjoy 
there divine felicities. 


20.1. Afar: sft A see erates: T US 


20.1. ‘Conversant with the lore of the ‘triple Vedic texts’ 
are those who know the Rg, Yajus and Sama. They ‘drink 
the Soma juice’ and are cleansed of sins by that very drink. 
Thus they worship Me, who have assumed the forms of super- 
human beings like Vasus etc., with sacrifices like the agnistoma 
and crave ‘attainment of heaven’—1.e., passage to paradise. 
Heaven is their goal. Attaining ‘the world of Indra’, the fruit 
of religious merit, they enjoy divine felicities—supernatural 
pleasures appropriate to gods. 


a at Weal cantons fears attet gut Batata fafa | 
va AMATHATTTAT TATA BTAHTAT TAKA WR U 


21. Having enjoyed the vast world of heaven, their 
merit spent, they enter the world of mortals. Thus 
conforming to the law of the three Vedas and desiring 
objects of pleasure, they achieve movements to and 
from (heaven). 


21.1.0 € Bat ud a waa mto fare faith ett gue wed- 
orm fata maafa 1 va aah sare ade tan Afa pA 
ATTA: Ta At A AMT A AAA WANTAA BATA: BA 
are She RART: HART TaTTATAS, ag carat aaa ore gore: 11 


21.1. Having enjoyed the vast—the extensive—world of 


312 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IX 


heaven, they enter the ‘world of mortals’ when their ‘merits 
are spent’. Thus, in the manner set forth, ‘conforming solely 
to the laws of the three Vedas’ and performing the Vedic 
rites, these seekers of desired objects gain only ‘movements to 
and from heaven’—but not freedom anywhere. This is the 
idea. 


22.0. ù ga: frsarat: ware: — 


22.0. But what about men of right perception who cherish 
no desires? 


wear At A AAT: TITAS | 
Ai aeaa aes aera RRN 


22. To men who exclusively meditate on Me and 
elaborately worship Me, who apply themselves inces- 
santly (to meditation), I bring prosperity and security. 


22.1. HAM: JA N AAMT: AT: TÅ Sq araa aAA TAT: 
aa: fara: at à a: aafaa: iad, a eiaa faar- 
Aam aaraa armas, w aA A, AM: ARAT, 
aged agi mnà ER, mA aAa A mR, ‘A a m a 
[v.22 09] eg, T A we T: fem eft 1 

A aA aft a A gA wa maA | act, ag wa; 
frag aa far: —aet a ower A a aA A gad; 
maaa 7 araret apr ged; a fe a stfad At ar areas: 
qe Hata; Faqs va wrasse: J, Ha: ware va det aay 
agda i 


22.1. ‘Exclusive’ —as non-different—are they who resort 
to ‘Mc’, the supreme deity Narayana as their Self; they are 
the renunciants who worship Me in all conceivable ways. 
I ‘bring’—grant—to them, who are perpetually attuned to 
Me and who behold the metaphysical Reality, well-being or 
both the gift of what has been unattained and its security, 
because I deem the knower of the Self to be Myself, Vide: 


22-23] The Royal Science of the Royal Mystery 313 


“And he is dear to Me” (BG.7.17.18). Such worshippers are 
Myself and are dear. But does the Lord bring prosperity 
and security to other devotees also? Yes, He does; but there 
is a distinction. These other devotees seek prosperity and 
security by means of their own efforts also. But those who 
do not see themselves as different from the Lord do not seek 
them for themselves. They cherish no selfish cravings either 
in life or death. They have sought refuge in the Lord only. 
So the Lord Himself brings them both prosperity and security. 


23.0. aT Hem: aft saat: aAa Ad, Tem aM Wied | a 
Tq — 

23.0. ‘Now if other divinities also are You yourself, their 
devotees are Your devotees as well.’ Yes, this is true: 


DATUsaaA Ach Wied AAS ATT: | 
ase area atta asecutatrqany 2311 


23. Those also who are the devotees of other divinities, 
who worship them with faith, are worshipping Me only, 
Arjuna! but not according to Vedic injunctions. 


23.1. X g u ast aaar. seg aay WaT: AAAA: 
aa wat pafa sear mamae afaa: aaa, ast aa 
wa aida ! aa fagia, afafa: sad, ada sary 
rat STF: I 


23.1. ‘Those also who are the devotees of other divinities’ — 
of other deities—and ‘who worship them with faith’—1.e., 
convinced of the reality of the world to come,—they also 
worship Me only; but ‘not according to Vedic injunctions’. 
That is, they worship in ignorance. The idea 1s that they are 
My ignorant devotees. 


24.0. PENA A afataqaa oat sf? serd—aeaq{— 
24.0. Why do they worship ignorantly? Answer: Because 


314 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IX 


He fe adami Aka A TANT F | 
Tg rata acaataraated TUR 


24. I indeed am the enjoyer and master of all sacri- 
fices; but they do not recognise Me in truth. Therefore 
they lapse. 


24.1. HE aft u we fe adai Marat emat a adot agaat 

zaa Wich Aw wa a Acearfaat fe aa, afaisan 
[<x] eft fe seq waa g at ahaaa acer amag | aa: 
a aagi gea armed eat aa A N 


24.1. ‘Of all sacrifices’ enjoined by the Vedas and Smrtis, 
I, as the deity to whom they are offered, am indeed the en- 
joyer and master. The sacrifice indeed has Me as its master: 
Vide BG.8.4: I also am the supervisor of sacrifices in the 
body’. But ‘in truth they do not recognise Me’. So, having 
sacrificed in violation of injunctions they ‘lapse’—fall off from 
the fruit of sacrifices. 


25.0. ast aereaaratHarad atatagde oad, doe aft ans 
aana | Hy ? — 


25.0. Inevitably the fruit of sacrifices accrues even to them, 
who, prompted by devotion to other divinities, offer sacrifices, 
violating injunctions. How? 


afa aam tara fray fa faaan: | 
wets afa yA fa neas aT nN 


25. To gods repair their devotees; to the manes go 
those devoted to the manes. The worshippers of the 
elementals go to these elementals. My worshippers 
come to Me. 


25.1. afa Aa n ara mefa aam. ag ad faam: afea 
Ai t aa: aa | afa aaa haard afa fagat: arat- 


24-26 | The Royal Science of the Royal Mystery 315 


ffan: faqueer | aa aaaea Aaea arta was: 
waa goer: oath Refs: Haat: aera: AT we | amà 
aft arava AT Ue A Mae HAA; GA A HeTHS ATT: Water Teas: 1 


25.1. To ‘the gods’ go the devotees of gods whose discipline 
and devotion are oriented to the gods. To the ‘manes’, agnis- 
vatta etc., go those devoted to the manes and engaged faith- 
fully in obsequies. To the ‘elementals’, vinayakas, the mother 
spirits, the four sisters, etc., go ‘the worshippers of the elemen- 
tals’. My worshippers—habitual devotees of Visnu—come to 
Me alone. Though the labour involved is the same, due to 
their ignorance they fail to worship Me exclusively; therefore 
they gain but petty results. This is the idea. 


26.0. 7 Fas WECM agasan AAR, FETT AeA | 
Hayy? — 

26.0. Not only do My devotees reap the eternal fruit of 
non-return to empirical life; but they also accomplish this 
easily, as My worship is easv to accomplish. How? 


qa GOT Go AT At A ARQ Wea | 
Tae argana A AAT: UREN 


26. Whoso with devotion offers Me a leaf, a flower, a 
fruit, or water, I enjoy what has been thus offered with 
devotion by that pure-hearted worshipper. 


26.1. TF gA n i GT PS ae ver a À we we aA, 


(en 


26.1. Whoso offers Me a leaf, flower, fruit or water, I enjoy, 
i.e., accept it as offered or given with devotion by that pure- 
hearted devotee, that pure-minded person. 

This being the case, 


316 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. IX 


uana aaa asaetta carta aq | 
TATA aAa AHA ATT WRI 


27. Whatever you do, eat, sacrifice, offer as gift, per- 
form as austerity, O Arjuna!—do all this as a dedica- 
tion to Me. 


27.1. aq Bt u aq Fee eae sid, aq aA, aq a gad 
fradata stat card a, aq zara saeofa aaa: fecararsare, 
aq aera at: aca ata | aq pea Rat RATATAT I 


27.1. Whatever you do spontaneously, whatever you eat, 
offer as sacrifice according to Vedas and smrti, whatever you 
give to holy men etc.,—be it gold, food, lustrated butter, 
etc.,— whatever penance you perform, O Arjuna! do all these 
as offerings to Me. 


28.0. Va Had: qa aq wala, tq WT — 


28.0. Hear what will happen to you who do thus: 


TARTAR MA TATTA: | 
Auraria faa ATTICA WRC 


28. Thus will you be released from the bonds of works 
with their fruits, good and evil. Liberated, with the 
Self integrated by the Yoga of renunciation, you will 
come to Me. 


28.1. [aT sf u wae: was swerfast He Ast aft T- 
rae Far t mE: start: patr va apart Fd- 
arnt t: pia: va wat Haq MAA | As Aaa: ATA, 
aurea wat aerate, sacar army sal efa; aa aaraa 
qm ATCAT HOT ae aa a a aaae aq faye: 
miart faq ua, wat a afa wat at stories amrfrerfe i 


27-29 | The Royal Science of the Royal Mystery 317 


28.1. ‘From the bonds of works with their fruits, good and 
evil’ 1.e. pleasant and unpleasant, you will be released. These 
very works constitute bondage. Dedicating all works to Me 
you will be released. This is called the Yoga of renunciation. 
Being a dedication to Me, it is renunciation, and being a work, 
itis Yoga, too. The self or the inner sense being integrated by 
this Yoga of renunciation, you are liberated from bonds of 
works even when alive; when the body drops off, you will 
come to Me. 


29.0. Wa ate Wa, aa: Wer Ayia, a eae ate | 
Iq t= 
29.0. ‘If so, the blessed Lord is partial—He blesses the devo- 
tees only ; not others’. No, not so: 


AAs dag TA sfa a fr: | 
a wata g at aaa ate at Ag TARA Rei 


29. Towards all beings I am the same: I hate none, 
nor hold any dear. Those who worship Me with devo- 
tion live in Me and I in them. 


29.1. aH: ft u ae Ter ae IAT 1 a a ser afer a fe 
aiaa we— Zeer wer af ate + maaa, add yeaa 
mrad, TAT He AH apes, a eae 1 A waa g AT Har 
wear nà à — aaa: wa, a aN Uff —adet | ag a oat 
He eaa: wa ad, a FACT | a VATA AY By: AF II 


29.1. ‘The same’—equal, am I towards all beings: I hate 
none, nor hold any dear. Like fire am I. As fire does not re- 
move cold frorn those remote from it, but does so from those 
drawing near, so do I bless devotees and not others. Those who 
worship Me, the Lord, with devotion dwell in Me of course, 
and not due to My partiality. And thus, of course I dwell in 
them and not in others. This implies no hatred for them. 


318 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. IX 


30.0. TT AA: Aran — 


30.0. Note the grandeur of devotion to Me: 


MT ATTA At ARANT | 
amna a Arter: aeeuatadt fg a: Foi 


30. Despite his extremely wicked conduct, if a man 
worships Me exclusively he must indeed be deemed 
worthy; for his resolution is right. 


30.1. aff ef u aft aq aae qgaae aes gee: ata gf- 
aadA wad at waenma waar: aq, are wa aena. Ua 
q ade: wae, aa wraq wafer fe a, aera afa: 
q it 


30.1. Though one’s conduct has been ‘extremely wicked’ 
i.e., most reprehensible, still if one worships Me with exclusive 
devotion, his conduct must be reckoned worthy indeed; for 
his ‘resolution’ or determination, is appropriate. 


31.0. FIST FT AWA FATA Hearsay — 


31.0. Due to his right inner resolve, rejecting his wicked ex- 
ternal behaviour, 


fast wafa water maata farresta | 
atta sang a a wen: worst 113 211 


31. Soon he becomes essentially righteous and attains 
lasting peace. Know for certain and proclaim, Arjuna! 
that My devotee never perishes. 


31.1. fart aft ou fet ater wafa water Afaa. va | mag frat 
ma a sree araa seat 1 ar cart — arta |! af 


30-33 | The Royal Science of the Royal Mystery 319 


fafai sofas ee, + A aA we: Als aaae Aa: a Soa 
afd i 
fra — 


31.1. Soon his mind becomes wholly righteous; he attains 
‘lasting peace’ or eternal quietude. Note this supreme truth, 
Arjuna! Be absolutely assured and proclaim that My devotee 
who has dedicated his inner self to Me will never perish. 

And, 


at fe art ana asta eq: aaa: | 
feral daran aaredste aria cet afer 3RN 


32. Seeking refuge in Me, Arjuna! those even of low 
birth—women, artisans and serfs—attain the supreme 
goal. 


32.1. at fe fa u at fe a wet aire at aada ater 

ast wag: maaa: aT ata: aa a maa: WIAA: — 
$ o zeae fea sear amt ae at aft aa mafa Te HRT 
afaa n 


32.1. ‘Seeking refuge in Me’, depending on Me, even people 
of low or sinful birth—women, artisans, and serfs—achieve the 
supreme goal of life. 


fH FART: a ART TAATAAN | 
MaAAAgGa Sefai MA RRA ATT 113 311 
33. How much more certainly do so those of merito- 


rious birth and the devout royal sages! Having come 
to this transient and unhappy world, worship Me. 


33.1. fe ga: aft ou fe gt arene: Gear: paaa: wer: cry, 
TH War A we st wada: | ae: Ua, ae: afaa aoe 


320 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam - [Ch. IX 


aga a gaai mi ote aA ser giaa Fs Aer 
saa WAT AIA HTA |I 
pag? — 


33.1. All the more surely will those of meritorious birth and 
devout royal sages attain the supreme goal of life. Such being 
the case, having come to this ‘transient’ or fleeting, ‘unhappy’ 
world of men, i.e., having won the means to reach the goal of 
life, namely, the rare status of a human being, worship Me. 

How? 


WIA AT Agehl Asal Al AACHS | 
Aaa TATRA ASIAN: 1311 


34. Set your mind on Me; be My devotee; sacrifice unto 
Me; pay obeisance to Me. Being wholly intent on Me, 
thus uniting your self, you will surely come to Me. 


34.1. WHAT A n aA aged wa Get aa a St AAT: Wa) TT 
WE: AT | AAT Aaa: We 1 AT Ua a aE | AT Ua Sat 
were faa gaat aurea fad; ud area amq—ag fe 
waar yaar sear, TO a The, TH aaa 1 a AT Vad — aA 
afa aAa dary: — Hera: aT ETT: 11 


34.1. Set your mind on Me, Vasudeva; so too, be My 
devotee. Habitually sacrifice to Me; to Me alone pay obeis- 
ance. With Your mind united thus, you are sure to come to 
Me, the Lord. Be wholly intent on Me; for I am the Self of 
all beings, the goal supreme—the supreme destiny. To Me 
so understood you will come—thus has the construction to 
be made, for you are wholly intent on Me. 


EUIR RGEC IRGIEL HIEEE UEI GU EICIEIS icik eas ONT aT: 
zA aonan maan- aaa ATA ANSATT: 11811 


SSTAISEATA: 
CHAPTER X 
THE YOGA OF GOD’S MANIFESTED POWERS 


0.1. AIH sea wat: act fay eT, wate 71 wT 
mri ay aq wag far wary, A A WaT. ame, TT TF Wra: 
ame senate, gata, sara: whrrary vara — 


0.1. In the seventh and ninth chapters the truth of the Lord 
and His powers have been revealed. Now those phenomena 
in which the Lord has to be contemplated, are going to be set 
forth as revealed. The truth of God also, in view of its abstruse- 
ness, has to be restated, though it has been already affirmed. 
Therefore the Lord said: 


ATTA ATS : 
T Te ARTY TY A T Ta: | 
qas amoa aefa AETAT NRN 


1. Once more, O hero! listen to My supreme word 
which, seeking your good, I shall speak to you who 
delight in it. 


1.1. Ya: eft un ye a a: Tt aA! r A nA T pE 
freama: Tare aa: aay, Aq TM A ga ama —agaard 
sà a aa aafaa faq, aa: — aA aaran IAT en 


1.1.‘Once more’—again—O hero, mighty-armed !—listen to 
‘My supreme word’—an exalted utterance, which reveals the 
Reality that has nothing superior to it. Desirous of your good 
‘I shall speak that word’; for you delight much in My speech 
as though you are tasting ambrosia. 


322 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. X 
2.0. feat ag aefa efa ? ae: ag — 


2.0. ‘Why should | speak ?’—listen to the reply: 


aR fag: Gore: waa a Heda: | 
aenttate aai AEM a Aaa: Wz 


2. The hosts of gods know not My origin; neither do 
great seers; for in all respects, Iam the origin of gods 
and the great seers. 


21. 79 af uaa fag: a mafa Gorm: seem: | fe da fag: ? wa 
wa ma mera, azar sea — sad — uta i ot ate 
ee ee ag anf: are 
fe and carat ng a ade: WATT: N 

fra — 


2.1. “The divine hosts know not’-—what is it that they do 
not know? My exceedingly lordly might or ‘origin’—coming 
into being. Nor do the ‘great seers’, Bhrgu and the rest, know. 
Why don’t they know? For, ‘I am the origin’—the cause of 
gods and great seers in all respects. 

And, 


at amaai a ate NEPITA | 
HAAS: T AMY AIT: TST 11311 


3. Whoso knows Me as unborn and beginningiess and 
as the great Lord of all the worlds is released from ail 
sins; for he is undeluded among men. 


3.1.0 ou a ar ast aware a — sea ag ante: aai ngoi 


q,a q wer anf: feat; we: ae aw warfen; ware wane 
a: —a at ae aR aoa: aft faoa Agat area ag 


1-4] God’s Manifested Powers 323 


gat [aði amaaa] sea: aeaa. a: A TAN, 
aià: ad: mÀ aadA mA eA 1: 


3.1. ‘Whoso knows Me as unborn and beginningless’—as 
I am the origin of the gods and the great seers, I have no origin. 
So I si unborn and beginningless. The reason for My being 
unborn is that I have no beginning. He who knows Me as 
such, i.e. as, the great ‘Lord of the worlds---the Fourth or the 
Transcendent devoid of nescience and its effects—is, among 
mortals, undeluded ; for he has no more any delusions. From 
all sins, consciously or unconsciously committed, he will be 
released. 


4.0. ZTA AF ASAT: BHATT — 


4.0. Here is another reason why I am the great Lord of all 
the worlds: 


qatni: AAT Ae TA: MA: 
ya ga tale 


4. Intelligence, knowledge, non-delusion, endurance, 
truthfulness, sense-control, mind-control, pleasure, 
pain, being, non-being, fear and fearlessness; 


41.afe fa ou ae were graa, age 

afeartata fe afa | art arearfacaratar aaa. | seme IAA 
AeA faafaa safe: 1 emt arascer afar ar aaraa | 
aa, WaT TITIES aT ea aA Teafgasaray ata sand- 
AMT are AT Sead | aa: areas | TA ATSC FIT: | 
qa were: | ga [at] am 1 we Tee 1 are: aada: 1 wat a 
aa, marae a aera: [afertaq] n 


4.1. ‘Intelligence’ is the power of the inner sense to grasp 
ideas, which are subtle, etc. He who has it is intelligent. ‘Know- 
ledge’ is cognition of entities like the self. ‘Non-delusion’ is 


324 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. X 


discriminating action as regards things that call for under- 
standing. ‘Endurance’ is mind’s freedom from agitation when 
abused or belaboured. ‘“Truthfulness’ consists in utterance 
aimed at informing another exactly of one’s experience of 
things seen or heard. ‘Sense-control’ is dama and ‘mind control’ 
Sama. ‘Pleasure’ is joy and ‘pain’, agony. ‘Being’ is birth and 
‘non-being’ its opposite. ‘Fear’ is trepidation, its absence being 
‘fearlessness’. 


AAT AMAT geet ATT ASST: | 
safa arat waa wa va Tafa: ny 


5. Non-violence, equanimity, contentment, penance, 
charity, renown, ill-fame—from Me alone these mani- 
fold states accrue to all beings. 


5.1. agar xf 1 afer acter maag | aaa aafaaar 1 afte: 
Say: Targa: STAT | aT: gfain Acea | at aerate 
aft: 1 ae: Afaa Ata: 1 ware: J afafa ata: 1 water 
Wray: ware: qama: Yaar ma ae: va Har gafar: maT- 
frat: arae 1 

fra — 


9.1. ‘Non-violence’ is non-infliction of injury on living 
beings. ‘Equanimity’ is mind’s steadiness. ‘Contentment’ is 
the sense of adequacy as regards gains. ‘Penance’ is body’s 
constraint preceded by sense-control. ‘Charity’ is distribution 
of wealth etc., according to capacity. ‘Renown’ is fame due to 
righteousness. ‘Ill-fame’ is disrepute due to unrighteousness. 
The said states intelligence etc., accrue to living beings from 
Me, the Lord, alone in manifold ways according to their 
deeds. 

And, 


ACAI: AT Fa AA AACA | 
WAT AMAT ATaAT AGT StH TAT: TAT: weit 


5-7] God’s Manifested Powers 325 


6. The seven great seers, the first four, and also the 
Manus were mind-born, endowed with My powers. 
These beings are their progeny. 


6.1. agfa: eft n mge: aa waar, gt atamaran: 
Ware: ma Tat mah efa aT: 1 FT A Wear RNT: 
woa maea 3da, maa: adda verfeat. wart Wat: IAAT: ; 
aa mat ngi a gf: [m] A AT enaA AT: TT: N 


6.1. The ‘seven great seers’, Bhrgu etc., the first four, and 
Manus—are all famed as belonging to by-gone ages and 
famed as sāvarnas. Their meditations had reference to Me. 
They were endowed with the power of Visnu. They were, all, 
generated mentally by Me. The creatures in this world, 
stationary and mobile, are the progeny of these Manus and 
these great seers. 


vat fraia ant a aa at Afa aaa: | 
Msama AIT AeA ATT ATT: Wil 


7. Whoso knows this vast power and Yoga of Mine 
truly, will be endowed with the steady state of integra- 
tion; there is no doubt about this. 


7.1. Uat af uo wat aera fia faet at a gis a ser: 
wet [%4] — aar, Madan ada ait am sad — an 
aaa ao: aft aaa: aa aerafactaq, a: afaarta aafaa 
ata wera ud dard | a we ae a aferq art 
aaa: afer i 


7.1. This ‘vast power’, as indicated and ‘Yoga’—i.e., My 
nature (Vide BG.9.5). Or, by Yoga is meant omniscience and 
power due to mastery of Yogic attainments. Whoso knows 
this Yoga of Mine truly, i.e., as it is or objectively, will come 
in possession of steady Yoga consisting in unshakable, right 
perception. There is no doubt about this. 


326 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. X 
80. alee afaa atta asad afr? gard — 


8.0. ‘What kind of unshakable Yoga is it with which he 1s 
endowed’ ? Listen: 


WE AACN Waa WA: At Tada | 
gta nat Aaed AT Tet Araaataanr: uci 


8. ‘I am the source of all things; all things proceed 
from Me’—so holding with deep loyalty to truth, the 
wise adore Me. 


8.1. ag afr u As We We nga ader wna: sa: Verh: | 
ma va ferfrarafsarssteireent fated ad aq wadd — af 
Ud Aca Wad Fad AT TET. HaTaTTAAAca:, aaga faa: we. — 
waar — Tariana: tt aaa: aan: sere: I 

fra — 


8.1. I, the Supreme Brahman styled Vasudeva, am ‘the 
source’ or origin of the entire world. From Me alone does the 
entire world—a system of changes like existence, destruction, 
experience of fruits of works—proceed. Holding this view, 
the wise who have grasped the nature of the supreme Reality 
adore Me with deep Joyalty. Loyalty means mind’s attach- 
ment to the Supreme Reality. The idea is that they ado 
with such attachment. 


And, 


ASAT ATAMOT ATTA: TET | 
ayaa wt frat ga A a cafe wei 


9. With minds fixed on Me, life surrendered to Me, 
enlightening one another, speaking (only of Me), they 
find contentment always and rejoice. 


&—10 | God’s Manifested Powers 327 


a1. Afra aft ul afer: nfà fad aet a afer, wera: 
uff [at] war war water: som: ast t wer: vfs sreg- 
aac: gat | AMT — Handa: aata: edad | ahead: 
HATTA: TAT NT, HII aa. fates ai, qafa 
ae seats a cafe a ta a maafa frre saz 


G.1. ‘With minds fixed on Me’ means mentaily dwelling in 
Me. Their vital powers like sight, have been oriented to Me, 1.e. 
those whose means of cognition have been given over to Me. 
‘Enlightening one another’ and ‘speaking’ of Me as endowed 
with attributes like knowledge, strength and vigour, they find 
contentment and Gelight as though they have met with their 
beloved. (Tne second expression in the verse—madgailapranah 
---may mean those whose life has been dedicated to Me). 


10.0. X were. wart: wad RT wet: weg: — 


10.0. These devotees who worship Me thus are further 
characterised: 


AT AeA Waal Mifaqaay | 
aaa afgart a aa maafa R ngon 


10. To them who are uninterruptedly united with Me 
and who lovingly adore Me, I grant that intellectual 
union by which they draw nigh to Me. 


10.1. qt ef n q aaga feara | aadar | 
at Samar | fe afaarear TOA ? AT - - fagis Nfa: 
Ag aads at aai 1 ta aara qfi afe aani 
qaaa, at arr: afeam: a afeart aa gfe maata 
at Ai aang arena sours ATA 1 R? & a afeartcat- 
faat: (xQ) At wat i 


10.1. I grant to them, who are ‘uninterruptedly’—per- 
petually—united with Me, who have renounced yearnings 


328 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. X 


for all kinds of objects, who ‘adore’, or serve Me, not in order 
to gain some object or other, but moved by love or attach- 
ment—I grant them ‘intellectual union’. ‘Intellect’ means 
right knowledge of the truth of the Lord. ‘Union’ with such 
knowledge is what I give them. By means of it ‘they draw 
nigh to Me’—reach Me as their Self—Me the supreme Lord. 
Who do so?—those who adore Me with their minds fixed 
on Me, etc. 


11.0. feat, wer ar, aorftanfracagat: area afeatt set gery 
agafa ? gaea ate — 


11.0. “Why, and for removing what obstruction on the way 
leading to You, do you grant intellectual union to Your 
devotees?” The answer is offered: 


ALEG CLES cha LRO Ba Feia FALAIS TA: 
marenea aae MANAA MTAA 11-2 211 


11. Moved by compassion for those (devotees) and 
dwelling in their mental states, with the lustrous flame 
of knowledge, I destroy the darkness of ignorance. 


11.1. At gf un aAa Fa q a Aa: Eg A sewers cared: 
a ware aaa: wa rasaae ea at aA, 


IATa: RT: a: eH: aAa faa: aa, maT 
EEEH LES b GEAG GURIGEECIDIEGGE MELIS 
Ramadaan farea faaeaga aa- 


11.1. “How can I promote their well-being?”—thinking 
thus ‘compassionately’ due to benevolence, I destroy the 
‘darkness of delusion born of ignorance’ or non-discrimination. 
This delusion consists of wrong cognitions. Dwelling in their 
‘mental states’ or within their inner-sense, I destroy nescience 


11-12] God’s Manifested Powers 329 


with the ‘flame of knowledge’—1.e., discriminating cogni- 
tions. This flame is fed on the oil of clear devotion and en- 
livened by the breeze of intense love of contemplation on Me. 
Its wick is the intellect strengthened by impressions of strivings 
to cultivate celibacy, etc. It is ensconced in the sense of detach- 
ment where the gusts of attachment and aversions do not blow 
as the mind has withdrawn from the sphere of objects and 
has the ‘lustre’ of right perception born of ceaseless one- 
pointed meditation. 


12.0. aet wrad: fafa ant a sar ast: Vara — 


12.0. Listening to the statement of the Lord’s power and 
Yoga, 


AIT Jars : 
qt Wel TX MTA Wat I WaT | 
gat mmaa feeraticcana fry ue 


Arjuna said: 

12. You are the supreme Brahman, the supreme abode, 
the supreme sanctification; You are also the ever- 
lasting divine Spirit, the primordial God, unborn and 
all-pervading; 


12.1. The ‘supreme Brahman’ is the supreme Self; the 
‘supreme abode’ is the ‘supreme effulgence’. The ‘supreme 
sanctification’ is the highest purifying power of the Lord. The 
‘everlasting Spirit’ is the eternal divine—the heavenly ‘pri- 
mordial God’ who was before all gods, unborn and all-per- 
vading. 


330 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. X 


MERANA: At SATA Tae | 
afat cast sare: waa aa aati 23 


13. Thus have all seers hailed You; likewise, too, the 
heavenly seer Narada, Asita, Devala and Vyasa, and to 
me You yourself declare the same. 


13.1. ag: Sf i ang: mafa cat mua afassrea: ad afa: 
are: aa, afaa: tam: f vadaag, ara: 4, aa Aa aT Fate R 


13.1. All seers, Vasistha, etc., have hailed You thus. The 
heavenly seer Narada, Asita, Devala and Vyasa say so; and 
the same You yourself affirm. 


waked mA Gant aafia Hara i 
a fga maa cated fagia a atta: evi 


14. Krsna! All this that you tell me I deem true. Neither 
the gods nor the demons know, O blessed-Lord! Your 
manifestation. 


14.1. aå ser ou waar warn wiht ca a, Vad A aada 
wed, aq aT ofa aafae wd & ata a R a aa ma | ote 
waa fag: 2a, A STAT: I 


- 14.1. All that has been stated by You and the seers, I deem 
true, indeed Neither the gods nor the demons know, O blessed 
Lord! Your ‘manifestation’ or origin. 


15.0. 4a: w Radiat anfe:, aa: — 

15.0. Because you are the source of gods, etc; therefore, 
TATAATRAISCATA ACT TA JENAR | 
mamaa AdA Sata HATTA VU 


13-17 | God’s Manifested Powers 331 


15. Supreme Spirit! the cause of all beings! the Lord of 
all beings! God of gods! the world’s Lord! Only You 
Yourself know the Self, by Yourself. 


15.1. aq sft u cade area aren Aer avarfa a farcfer- 
maaadaaa Sat Tay | wah araadtia TAA | 
yaa! wart fa 1 ye taeda TTT 1: 


15.1. Only Yourself, threugh self, know the Self---You 
with unexcelled knowledge, lordliness, strength, vigour and 
so forth know the Self, the Lord, O Supreme Spirit! He is the 
cause of ali beings. As He brings them all into being, Hc is their 
Lord, the God of gods and the Lord of the world. 


agreement treat DAIT: | 
ufataatatratartratecdt cater fafa eat 


16. You ought indeed to recount, in their entirety, 
Your powers divine, by means of which You abide, 
pervading all these worlds. 


16.1. aH St u aag weafag aefs sere, fee fe aruforns., 
area fayaat ar: at: vag adfa i arf: faa: aa arercrr- 
faat sar oma a rey asf ii 


16.1. You ought to set them forth wholly—Your divine 
powers. Those far-reaching powers of Yours, You ought to 
recount, by means of which, in expansive grandeur, You pen- 
vade and abide in these worlds. 


wy raag attrecat aar oftfaraas | 
eq ey a vray farsa waar uu 


17. O Yogin! How shall I, ever contemplating, know 


332 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. X 


You? O blessed Lord! In what all objects am I to medi- 
tate on You? 


17.1. PA Be u we fear fasta ag è attr | cat aa of 
frma 1 Sy ay a wag aeqy fara: afs eam: ofa wraq | aT i 


17.1. O Yogin! Always contemplating, how shall I know 
You? In what all objects am I to meditate on You? O blessed 
Lord! 


freama art faata a wares | 
qa: way qia ya afa ASAR uci 


18. O Janardana! Once more recount at length Your 
Yoga and powers; for I am not sated as I listen to this 
ambrosial (account). 


18.1. aew a ou aea ma ant adana fafa 
a faem Aai o aAA — yet: maA: Eg — agi 
L a i li gs areqeate: Naage- 
arta at at: a eft ari ye: gd senate ae; afta: 
is i ee tke ar Gee Pe 


18.1. Your ‘Yoga’—the unique power of Yogic lordliness— 
and ‘power’—the scope of objects worthy of meditation—O 
Krsna! set forth at length once more, though, earlier You 
did set them forth. ‘Janardana’ is derived from the root ard 
meaning ‘to send’, since the Lord sends the demons, the 
adversaries of the gods, to hell, etc., or, from the root meaning 
‘to beg of’, since all people pray to.Him for the human goods 
of prosperity and salvation. I have had no sense of full satis- 
faction as I listen to the ambrosial utterances flowing from your 
lips. 


TTTATTATS : 


ea a naff feet grerfaaqaa: | 
TATA: pe ATS AATA TH us 


17-20] God’s Manifested Powers 333 


The blessed Lord said: 

19. Well, the more prominent of those divine powers 
of Mine I shall enumerate for you, chief Kuru Prince! ; 
for there is no end to a detailed account of them all. 


19.1. Ba Sf u aa Zarit a aa fear: fete war arenfayaz: 
arent: Wa fagara. a ot: wafer sataq MAT: TA TT NATAT 
ator faytea: at at serat aa: aA ae FES | alway 
avait a went aad, at aft ae aeaa A aA fai 
gaT: I 


19.1. Well, now, I shall enumerate for you those ‘divine’ — 
heaven-born powers of Mine. With reference to their ‘pro- 
minence’—whatsoever prominent powers are there I shall 
enumerate, Kuru Prince! In their entirety, even in a hundred 
years, they cannot be enumerated; for, there is no end to the 
extent of My powers. This is the idea. 


20.0. TF WIAA ara I — 


20.0. Now in the first place, listen: 


ASAT STRAT aia EA: | 
agmo AWA A aA TT T RoN 


20. Master of sleep (Arjuna!) I am the Self resident 
in the inner sense of all beings; also, I am the beginning, 
the middle and the end of all beings. 


e E a E 
S. qea, aafaa: gas, water: eft n — adaa: ada 
wart aà adf fa: age e fret eta: | cede F 
TAY Way fas a TTT He TI ale a FT, TAT 
ae a RaR, ae seo N 


20.1. I am the Self—the Subject, O master of sleep! 
Gudaka is sleep; its lord is he who has vanquished sleep. Or 


334 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. X 


the term may mean thick-tressed. As ‘resident in all beings — 
as residing in the hearts of all beings, I, the Self, the Subject, 
am to be meditated on, always. One not competent to do it 
may meditate on Me as dwelling in objects to be set forth 
below; for, I alone am the beginning, the cause, of beings; 
so too their ‘middle’, the state of existence, and their ‘end’ or 
dissolution. 


21.0. Va a AT: AZA — 


21.0. I may also be meditated on as follows: 


afaa farsa TA | 
aûfateanmafa aaan mA RN 


21. I am‘ Visnu among the Adityas. Of the luminaries 
I am the radiant sun. Of the gods, I am Marici; among 
stars I am the moon. 


21.1. atfecarat sft ou aR amam fa: ara T: NE, 
sifai fa aaa aa aa 1 Afa: ara mei NRR- 
qaa afer | aera a m ARAT: N 


21.1. Of the twelve ‘Adityas’ I am Visnu, Aditi’s son. Of 
the ‘luminaries’ that illumine, I am the radiant sun. I am 
Marici among the storm ‘gods’, and among the ‘stars’ I am the 
moon. 


aai araaisfer zararated area: | 
faai aea aaraTater Aaa UR 
22. Among the Vedas I am the Sama Veda. Of the gods 


I am Indra. Among the senses, I am the mind, and of 
beings, I am intelligence. 


22.1. tarat Bafa tl aerat wed araae: afey 1 carat sareat 


21-24] God’s Manifested Powers 335 


qaa: ga afer i Rai aama aaa a afer aofa- 
pear aaa i a aa aa méros frcarhrercer 
qfagfa: Iam 1| 


22.1. Among the ‘Vedas’, I am the Sama Veda. Of the 
‘gods’, Rudras, Adityas etc., I am Indra. Among the eleven 
‘senses’, like the sense ofsight, etc., I am the mind that is essen- 
tially imagination and construction. Of ‘beings’ I am ‘intel- 
ligence’-—the mental modification ever manifest in the con- 
glomerate of body and senses. 


Tarte agona fatal NATTE | 
aaa maman ae: frafon 112311 


23. And I am Samkara among the Rudras. Of Yaksas 
and demons Iam Kubera the Lord of wealth. Of Vasus, 
I am the purifying fire and among the mountains I am 
Meru. 


23.1. wart eft n ear waren weer afer 1 fade Haz: 
TACT TA LAT a o ag ae Wawa afer afta: 1 Ae: 
Rafo frataat agg 1 


23.1. Among the eleven ‘Rudra’ I am Samkara. Among 
“Yaksas’ and demons I am Kubera, the lord of wealth. Of 
the ‘eight Vasus’, I am the purifying fire, and among the 
‘mountains’ I am the Meru. 


gri a qea at fate at agafa | 
AAAS THe: ATA ATTT: UV 
24. Arjuna! Know Me to be Brhaspati, the chief among 


the priests. Among the war-lords I am Skanda and 
among lakes, I am the sea. 


336 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam . [Ch. X 


24.1. JA aft u gA a AR a g sera at fate 
mAAR @ wt ! gaa i a fe mAAR ga ar A | 
aaa Aaa ae THe: Sasa: 1 acar arf aana ata 
Yet acat ani: arfeq wart i | 


24.1. Among the ‘priests of rulers’, know I am the chief, 
Brhaspati. Indeed he is the chief of Indra’s priests. Among 
the ‘war-lords’, I am Skanda, the leader of the armies of gods. 
Among the ‘natural lakes’, I am the sea. 


agit wig fremestsaary i 
Tart aN Tatacot fea: NRN 


25. I am Bhrgu among the great seers; the mono- 
syllable among utterances; the sacrifice of muttered 
prayers among sacrifices and the Himalayas among 
immobile objects. 


25.1. Fest sf u west wy: ae o fret aai oaoa ws 
wet sarge: afer | waar was: afer, eaa ferferrat ferro: 1 


25.1. Among great seers I am ‘Bhrgu’; among ‘verbal 
utterances’ I am the mono-syllable AUM. Among ‘sacrifices’ 
I am that of the muttered prayer (Japa). Among immobile 
objects I am the Himalayas. 


WIT: AATATT SAG FT ATTA: | 
maat frarca: farai afret aft: nec 


26. Among trees I am the holy fig; among divine seers, 
Narada; among divine minstrels, I am Citraratha; 
and among perfected sages I am the sage, Kapila. 


26.1. aes: aft n wae: adage, ai a area: ear. wa 
aa: aAa sa: aaa ada, aa are: afey 1 Tera 


24-28 ] God’s Manifested Powers 337 


faama: ara wad: af 1 agi wate adara 
maai aa aha: 1 


26.1. Among ‘trees’ I am the holy fig and among the 
‘divine sages’ Narada. Though celestial by birth, some gods 
(like Narada), too, attain the status of seers, being the seers 
of hymns. So they are ‘divine seers’. Among them I am Narada. 
Among the ‘divine minstrels’, I am the one named Citrara- 
tha. I am Kapila among ‘the perfected’—1.e., those who have 
attained, from the very birth, a high degree of virtues, know- 
ledge, detachment and lordship. 


samara fate MANGAR | 
Cera miai TUT a TTT NVN 


27. Among horses, know Me to be Uccaithsravah born 
of ambrosia; among lordly elephants, Airavata; and 
among human beings, their ruler. 


27.1. Tt: SA u Twas sara seta: ATA soa: Tt OAT 
fafe aR mga aqafafraaeatgay i trad gaa: 
wat wa geai, a “ar fate” afa aqadt | aut a 
ara Ufa Ue AT fate mA i 


27.1. Among the ‘horses’ know Me to be their king named 
Uccaihsravah who was born of the sea when it was churned 
for ambrosia; ‘Airavata’, the offspring of Iravati, among 
lordly elephants. ‘Know Me to be’—this expression is to be 
understood as having reference to every attribute. And among 
‘human beings’ know Me to be their ruler. 


AAAAAE AA IATA PATR | 
maa Heat: aiman agfa: uci 


28. I am (Indra’s) thunderbolt among weapons; the 


338 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. X 


wish-granting cow among cows; I am the begetter, 
Kandarpa; among serpents I am Vasuki. 


28.1. area sft n arrears ast aafaa 1 Aaa 
are afar arya afar adararat A, amare ar PTA- 
qe | wae afer afer seat: are 1 ast aó afer arate: 
ada: 1 


28.1. Among the weapons I am the ‘thunderbolt’ forged 
from the bone of Dadhici. Among the cows I am the ‘wish- 
granting cow of Vasistha, yielding objects of all desires, 
or, a ‘wish-granting cow’ in general. I am Kandarpa the god 
of love, ‘the begetter’ of off-spring. Among ‘serpents’, a class 
of reptiles, I am Vasuki their king. 


MATA ATTA THVT ATTATHSA | 
ammm MRR Ta: ATAATASA NRI 


29. And among the naga-snakes, I am Ananta their 
king. Of the creatures in water, I am Varuna; among 
the manes, I am Aryama. Among the subduers, I am 
Yama. 


29.1. art FA n aa afa a ma an: | 
N mai Ae aaa we weq 1 aa waar ara faao: 
q ofa 1 am aaa aaa Fda FEA N 


29.1. Among the Nagas’ or snakes (with human heads) I 
am Ananta their king. Of the ‘creatures in water’, I am 
Varuna, the king of the water spirits. Of ‘the manes’, I am 
Aryama the king of the ancestral spirits. Of ‘those who subdue’, 
Iam Yama. 


Teeter Carat His: POURRA | 
mmi a Aas Faces aero 113011 


28-32] God’s Manifested Powers 339 


30. Among the demons, I am Prahlada; among rec- 
koners, Iam Time. Of beasts, I am the lion, their king. 
Of the birds, I am Garuda, the son of Vinata. 


30.1. Tere: Sf u aA ara a afer a fefaaearara | are: 
Soa Hot We Haat aga | PIT A Alea: fast nA at seq 
Adara meaa farargea: wero cats 1 


30.1. Among ‘those born of Dit, I am he who is called 
Prahlada. Among ‘those who reckon’, I am Time. Of ‘beasts’, 
I am their king, lion or tiger. Of the ‘birds’, I am Garuda, the 
son of Vinata. 


Cat: THAT WTA: WeAAATHSA | 
Harr wacarter Aaaa mgA 13 i 


31. Among purifiers, I am the wind; among the bearers 
of weapons, I am Rama. Among aquatic creatures I 
am the shark, and among rivers, I am the Ganges. 


31.1. Tat eft u vat aa: qai wafaqe afer 1 we Tena 
aga TET area ara: WA AA AIT Acasa AHL ATA 
marfa. Haq 1 Ma aati afer maA THT 1 


31.1. Among the ‘purifiers’, I am the wind. Among ‘those 
who bear weapons’ I am Dasaratha’s son. Among ‘fishes, and 
other aquatic animals’, I am the shark. Among ‘the rivers’, I 
am the Ganges. 


antorartaceey Ae MATT | 
sear feet ate: WATATASA 132 


32. Of creations, I am the beginning, the end and the 
middle, O Arjuna! Among the sciences, I am the science 
of the Self. Of those who discuss, I am the dialectic. 


340 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. X 


32.1. attr afr ou ai asta aria: ae wer da we IA- 
faferfawar: ae ast 1 aa sttarfrfeeararaa ante: separ FAH 
sry (20); R g adeda ators sft fare: 1 seorenfaen frat 
Maria wart afer i ae: Aaga sacar wad wa: T: 
ata i 


32.1. ʻO Arjuna! I am the beginning, the middle and the 
end of creations—i.e., the origin, existence and dissolution of 
contingent beings. Earlier, in verse 20, the reference was to the 
origin and end of living beings; here the reference is to creation 
as a whole. Of the ‘sciences’, the science of the Self, promoting 
liberation is pre-eminent—I am that. Being the cause of 
determination of facts, discussion is pre-eminent as regards 
‘those who discuss’; so I am that sort of discussion or dialectic. 
The phrase, ‘of those who discuss’, refers to varieties of dis- 
cussion like dispute, prattle and wrangling. 


HALTS Ga: ATAAHET T | 
agaaa: BIST ATasE PaT: uF 3 


33. Among letters I am ‘a’; among the compounds I am 
the Dvandva (the additive); I alone am Time imperish- 
able; I am the dispenser, facing all directions. 


33.1. Wao af n wear ai aT aot: RR l ga: ware: 
afer ararfaner a aaraayeer | fear —aeka sera: sett: ATs: 
taa: amna: swzaT TEPAT at aroerts are: ARA aa ae 
aimee fara adore: fae: ada: it 


33.1. ‘Among the letters’ I am ‘a’; I am the compound 
Dvandva among ‘the grammatical compound:*. And I alone 
am “Time imperishable’, well-known as moments, etc. Or, 
I am Siva, the Lord Supreme, being the destroyer of Yama 
himself. I am ‘the multifaced dispenser’ of the fruits of works of 
the entire world. 


32-35] God’s Manifested Powers 341 


qq: AARC aw ATUNA | 
atta: stated arti eqfadter ata: ar sé 


34. I am Death, carrying all away. Of things yet to be, 
Iam the origin. Of women, I am the fame, glory, speech, 
memory, intelligence, endurance and patience. 


34.1. qq: afr u Aer: fefar:, aag sewer | TT a WMTET, 
a agt Tad; T Hey Tt | Asa, Te Paw yar waar 
a4et, T: We | Tee sors: wae anaes: a wey — sat? 
— wast maraa, seater get: i alia: at, ae 
a ardor af, re, afr, var — qatar. saat. eit ae afer, 
Treat anaes aH: HAT ATCA ART I 


34.1. Death is twofold; the first is the destruction of wealth, 
etc., and the second that of life. The second is described as 
‘carrying all away’. I am that. Or the supreme Lord is said to 
‘carry all away’ in the state of dissolution. I am He. ‘The 
origin’ is the rise of prosperity—I am the cause of achieving 
it. Of what all things? Ofall forms of ‘future prosperity’ which 
deserve enhancement. Of women, fame, glory, speech, me- 
mory, intelligence, endurance, patience at their best—I am 
these. Contact with a mere semblance of any of these excel- 
lerices fills people with a sense of fulfilment. 


TEA TAT ATH MTA SANER | 
AAA ATTN EAA FFATHT: W3Vi 


35. Among the Saman-chants I am the Brhat; among the 
Vedic metres Iam the Gayatri; among the months, Iam 
the Margasirsa, and among the seasons, I am spring, 
the abode of flowers. 


35.1. Fecara Bf n qecara aa Arar sad aft 1 wat wat 


342 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. X 


we, Tasafeesatfakrsert Bar wast aa we afer gers: 1 Ararat 
AMT: As, ATA PINE: TAT: 11 


35.1. Similarly I am the Brhat-saman, chief among the 
Saman-melodies. Among metres I am the Gayatri, 1.e. among 
the verses composed in Vedic-metres, I am the Gayatri-verse. 
Among the months I am the Margasirsa and among the 
seasons, spring when flowers abound. 


Tat soraater astedsatieqargs | 
waster serait Area AATATAST NIRU 


36. Of the tricksters I am the game of dice; of the 
vigorous I am the vigour; I am victory, I am resolu- 
tion; of the virtuous I am the virtue. 


36.1. Fa sf u at maaa seat soa ado afer | 
aaa at wey 1 we: af aqui, aaa: af aaa, 
aed qaaa arfrawrat Hey II 


36.1. Of the tricksters who cheat, I am the game of dice, 
etc. I am the vigour of the vigorous. Of conquerors, I am the 
victory. Of men of resolution, I am the resolve. Of men of 
virtue, I am the virtue. 


qomi aglasin mesai STASA: | 
Aana sara: AT Fla: UF 
37. Among the members of the Vrsni-clan, Iam Vasu- 
deva; among the Pandavas, I am Arjuna. Among the 


contemplative sages, I am Vyasa; among the seers 
I am the seer, Usanah. 


37.1. goa gf n goa maa argea: afer sada ae ANAT | 


35-39] God’s Manifested Powers 343 


qea maaa: aAa | g nao addaa aft ag 
aara:, Halal maaa Barat pfa: Af i 


37.1. Among the Yadavas, I am Vasudeva—I who am your 
companion. Among the Pandavas, you yourself am I. Among 
professional thinkers who know about all objects, I am Vyasa. 
Among the farsighted men of vision, I am Usanah, the seer 
(the sage Sukra). 


quel qagaratern atfacter farag i 
ait aaa WAT ATA ATTAATHSA NIN 


38. Of those who chastise, I am the rod; of those who 
seek victory, I am the tactics. Of secrets, I am the 
silence, and of the learned, I am the knowledge. 


38.1. avs: sft n avs: quaai anaq afer ar TATTOO | 
ata. afa Raia aara i aA aa aR qe MATTA, | 
Wat maai gA N 


38.1. I am the rod of the chastisers who subdue the tur- 
bulent. I am the tactics of those who seek victory. I am the 
silence of the ‘secrets and the knowledge of the learned. 


Tsay aia ATH ACSA | 
a aated fat aeeaTerat Ad TAT 11381 


39. And that which is the seed of all beings, I am, 
Arjuna! That which is without Me, mobile or sta- 
tionary, exists not. 


39.1. wear sft u aq a af, adyara att sugary, ad we 
wit | oaa faa ate—a aq afer yt aaa A 
wat ar war faat aq eq wad | wo awe ofa fro wt 
fe dq Pq | ae aaa ad gare: N 


344 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. X 


39.1. I am that which is the seed of all beings which causes 
them to multiply, O Arjuna! In order to conclude the topic 
in hand, the Lord summarises His powers. There is nothing 
moving or unmoving, that exists without Me. What is not 
uplifted by Me or is abandoned by Me-will be without a Self— 
indeed, null and void. Therefore all have Me as their Self— 
this is the idea. 


aasia wa freaat fara TAN | 
UE qa: wren farala AAT vot 


40. Scourge of foes! There is no limit to My divine 
powers. What has been stated by Me is only illustrative 
of the extent of that puissance. 


40.1. Aree: Sf ou a aa aft aa feet faa fai 
gear i a fe face sates: feet fai eam wet aa ard 
a aafaq | wy g vere: Aa stm: faye: faere wat 1 


40.1. To the extent of My divine power there is no end. 
Indeed, none may either know or express the measure of the 
divine powers of God, the Self of all. However, what has been 
offered here only illustrates the extent of My powers. 


aaaea strata aT | 
AAATAT SS TT AA AM MAAAT NE VI 


41. Whatever being has power, glory, or energy, know 
(each of them) to be born of a part of My splendour. 


41.1. Taq fa un aaq wh fayfanq feyfaqe art aq ata 
saada ar at: wed aa afed, gered a, qaea wanes 
write wa Sacer sara Aes: AT THe: Ae: We aq NNA- 
aua aft wares ATI 


39-42 | God’s Manifested Powers 345 


41.1.‘ Whatever being or thing in the world has power, 
glory or energy’, 1.e., is potent, know each such being to be 
derived from a fragment of My lordly splendour. 


era ages fH AAT TATA | 
frega perdana feral TT NRN 


42. Or, Arjuna! Wherefore should you know so much 
of all these? Encompassing this entire world by a 
fragment of My power, do I abide, eternally. 


Argaia aaaea re iaaa 
faafaa ara eerertseara: 11 


42.1. wat Sf ul azar agar ude waarfear fH arta da aie | 
Ta aaa | sett: aA saa at ao — faseey farted: areas 
[qe] Hear St Het WI Cael aada water — aAa EAT 
saad; aa a axa: ‘greats fat war [T—ar 30.22; 
F. a. %0.%0.3] afr — feag: ae sha i 


42.1. Or, why should you know much of all these with so 
much left unsaid? The expression is bound to be incomplete. 
Listen to this comprehensive summing up. Steadying the whole 
world with but a part—a quarter—that has assumed the form 
of all that exists, do I abide for ever. Vide: ‘All beings form 
but a quarter of Him’ (R.V.10.90.3; TA.30.12). 


fe thrercagar tarred area EE ae TTA THOTT TT: 
edt Agaa fafaa Ary SATT: 118 of 


CHAPTER XI 


THE YOGA OF THE VISION OF 
THE COSMIC FORM 


0.1. ma aaa set: | at a ‘fascerefae pedia ferat 
WT (%o.¥2.) sft mman art year aq maae are War 
qaq Aah, FoI AIT: Tas — 


0.1. The powers of the Lord have been enumerated. 
Hearing His affirmation (10.42) “encompassing the entire 
world with a fragment of My Self, do I abide,” and desiring 
to behold directly that primordial and divine cosmic form, 


at Tas : 


WATT ILA TETAaTHaaAAg | 
Taga aada Atgtsa fatal AA 2 


Arjuna said : 

1. By the words You have spoken, supreme, occult and 
spiritual, in order to bless me, this delusion of mine 
has gone. 


Li aq eft n aeea maag e frefret qei Ni earen- 


afia meman faaan aq an om aa n, Aa A aa Ae: 
awa fanat, wa afaaaafg: a gerd: 1 
fra — 


1.1. ‘In order to bless me’ i.e., for conferring a blessing on 
me, You gave utterance to what is ‘the supreme’ or unexcelled, 
‘the occult’ or the mysterious, and ‘the spiritual’ or pertaining 
to the distinction between the Self and the non-Self. By that 


1-3] The Vision of the Cosmic Form. 347 


utterance this delusion of mine has gone—my perplexity has 
vanished. This is the idea. 
And, 


waren fe Aatat wet facet war | 
CAA: HASTA ASTIN MATA 1211 


2. About the birth and dissolution of beings I have 
heard from You at length, O Lotus-eyed! as also about 
your immutable grandeur. 


21. a4 Ba u wae [Sea] —vefa; seam yom at wart 
fe yarat wal aaa: 7 A AMT cat TERM HATA | 
PASA TH HAST dad aero ey aa A A PATATA., F FASTA 


werent: Wie: meran wa aoa sera, ‘aa’ sft aqadd i 


2.1. “The birth’—the coming into being or origin of beings; 
‘dissolution’ is their passing away. Those too I have heard ‘at 
length’, not too briefly, fron. You, O Lotus-eyed! The Lotus- 
eyed is one having eyes resembling lotus petals. Your magna- 
nimity is Your grandeur, which is immutable. ‘About this too, 
I have heard’—it is to be understood here also from the first 
half of the verse. 


UARATAISS CAATHTT TAIT | 
meaa A SAIL Fea 131 


3. Supreme Lord! Highest Spirit! It is even as You 
have described Yourself. Yet I would like to see this 
lordly form of Yours. 


3.1. Ut aff uw vata aera aa aq vary sre afa 
aeai Tapa gay we aa A aa madansa: 
ara Wat Fog ST FAVA | 


348 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam {Ch. XI 


3.1. ‘Thus itis’, not otherwise. The way You have set forth, 
Supreme Lord! about Your Self, I wish to see,—Your all-per- 
vading form characterized by knowledge, power, strength, 
vigour, heroism and glory. 


wae afe a aa acetate vat | 
UPI Tat A A AATA ei 


4. If You think, Lord, that I may see it, then, Master of 
Yogas! reveal to me that immutable Self of Yours. 


4.1. Fae Sf wu aes faerafa afe war aa aq wet ge gf 
wa! carfaq ! area ! arial ani, ai Sac: arpa, è apa | 
TEA we aa wet see, qa: Tea A nad aaa a ATCT NTN N 


4.1. If You think, Lord, that I, Arjuna, may see it, master- 
Yogin! reveal to me Your immutable Self for my sake ( Yoges- 
vara means Master of Yogins, as Yoga, in the term Yogesvara, 
means Yogins). I desire to see it very much. 


5.0. Ut Afar: aaa shar vara — 
5.0. Thus urged by Arjuna, 


Saqar : 
qa A ATT SIT maS MEAN: | 
aaraa fraa manya a uy 


The blessed Lord said: 
5. Behold then, Arjuna! hundreds of My forms, nay, 
thousands, varied, divine, variously coloured and 
shaped. 

5.1. Ta ofa u wear a ot ! wor aa ae agar, AAF: 
eae: | ate a maaa aaa, fefa warft frana a- 


3-7] The Vision of the Cosmic Form 349 


gaa, atarautadt w arr fase: Aoa: ant car 
agaaa waraaearafaan: sat wat aa araraniadif a i 


5.1. Behold Arjuna! then ‘hundreds, nay, thousands’, of 
My forms i.e., in their multiplicity. They are of ‘various kinds’, 
‘divine’ or shaped in heaven, i.e., they are not of Prakriti or 
Matter, and ‘varied in colour’—blue, yellow, etc.,—and 
shaped in many ways. 


6. Behold Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, the two Asvins and 
forms hiterto unseen. 


61 cer eft u cer maq ates, aga acl, wary UTENT, 
apart ot, Fer at aa: A aq | aa a aght aerate ag- 
qafir aerate aa, ae: ale at tata, cer amaa saya 
ATT tt 


q Fas uaaa — 


6.1. Behold the twelve ‘Adityas’, the eight ‘Vasus’, the 
eleven ‘Rudras’, the two ‘Asvins’ and the seven groups of 
‘Maruts’. Also behold many marvels hitherto unseen by you 
in the world of human beings or by any one else, O Bharata 
prince! 

Nay, more, 


IREA MG WAT TATA | 
Wa ag Tere enaga fafa 91 


7. Here now behold the entire world with beings, 
moving and unmoving, extant in ‘one abode’, in My 
body, O subduer of lethargy! and also other things you 
fain would see. 


350 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XI 


71. R ea ou we me aa feat a get and oa 


. 7.1. Now behold ‘here’, situated just in one place i.e., in My 
body, ‘the entire’, the whole, world, together with ‘the beings 
that move and those that move not’, O subduer of lethargy! 
(i.e., Arjuna) And the ‘other things’ 1.e., victory, defeat, etc., 
about which you entertain doubt. You asked: ‘Shall we win 
or shall we be defeated?’ (2.6); that, too, You can see if you 
seek to see. 


But, 


ag At WHT Wea CAAT | 
fact catia & aq: Tar A AET cN 


8. You, however, cannot see Me with just this eye of 
yours. I shall give you a divine eye; behold My sove- 


reign Yoga. 


8.1. a 3 Str n ag at aoea Tas me ate sTHdT CARAT 
caged TAT | aT T Wer we, feta, aq feat care a Tat aa | 
a Tae a wat Hare aa wat am areata sad: N 


8.1. But you cannot see Me in My cosmic form with just 
this normal eye of yours. But an eye with which you may see, 
a ‘divine eye’, I shall give you. With that see My Yoga that is 
sovereign, 1.e., whose power is supreme. This is the sense. 


ENA SATs : 


VATA Tal Way AgTatPat gi: | 
qaaa Waly TT SPIT RN 


7-10] The Vision of the Cosmic Form 351 


Sanjaya said : 

9. Then, thus speaking, O King! Hari, the great master 
of Yogas, revealed to Arjuna a transcendent and 
sovereign form. 


a1. ud sft nud ARA yarto IRN, aa AR TA | ga- 
we | mia wat a aa: aft arc: adaa afa- 
qary mai pga T e fed WATT I 


9.1. Having spoken thus, as stated, O king Dhrtarastra! 
Hari, ‘the great master of Yogas’, or Narayana, revealed to 
Arjuna His transcendent and cosmic form, 


AARATATAATAAH TT ATT ATT $ 
sAr RNA Ngon 


10. With many a mouth and many an eye, with many 
marvellous aspects, with many a divine ornament, with 
many weapons, uplifted ; 


10.1. are Se un ater a seater aaa Tape 


10.1. A form with many mouths and eyes, with many 
aspects, rousing a sense of wonder, with many divine orna- 
ments and, similarly, with many divine and uplifted weapons 
like swords, etc. Construe all this with ‘He revealed...’ in 
verse 9 above. 

And, 


352 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XI 


framerate fTAN | 
Aaa Saeed PPIE 12 V1 


11. Wearing divine garlands and vestments, smeared 
with divine scents, full of marvels, an infinite God with 
faces turned everywhere. 


11.1. fear eft uu kamara foana arearfr gorr sreaerfer 
aeni a aA Aa STMT d aeara, framen freq 


11.1. He revealed Himself ‘wearing divine garlands’, 
flowers and robes, and having ‘a smear of divine scents’ and a 
glory infinite, endless and wondrous, and facing all beings, 
as their Self. Or, here the expression ‘Arjuna beheld’ may 
be added. 


12.0. a a: maa: frever ar, Tea: sa yer — 


12.0. As regards the splendour of the blessed Lord in His 
cosmic form an analogue 1s offered: 


fafa qaagaeca waerragierar | 
ute Al: Teal AT CATTATaACATET ARIAT: URI 


12. If in the firmament the simultaneous splendour of 
a thousand suns were to explode, it will have a sem- 
blance to that of that mighty Being. 


12.1. fafa eft uu fefa archer qaei a fefa gat aga qå- 
wea Te Gras tage at gaga AT:, aT 

ear wer agaa: fanda wre 1 afe a a anq aatste faa- 
aAa m: afaftead serio: N 

fra — 


11-14] The Vision of the Cosmic Form 353 


12.1. ‘In the firmament’, i.e., in the sky or in the third 
sphere of heaven where there 1s the simultaneous splendour of 
a thousand suns risen all together—it would be similar to the 
blazing light of that mighty Being in His cosmic form. Or 
maybe it is not similar; as the light of that Being will surpass 
it. This is the idea. 

And, 


TARE WIHT MARARA | 
ATASTSACT WLS WUSaAETANT 1231 


13. Then the Pandava prince beheld the entire world 
residing in the body of that God of gods, variegated in 
manifold ways. 


13.1. 7% Sf ou aa afer fred uafeaq fart cre aq Het 
Sarat warner eafiqaqerfede: sara gea aA gt Tet 
qusa: at: AT Ul 


13.1. There, in that single being with cosmic form—in the 
body of Hari, the God of gods—the Pandava prince Arjuna 
beheld ‘the entire world, variegated in endless ways’, as gods, 
manes, humans, etc. 


aa: a faeratfaset ZEAN TAS: | 
mea rat 2a HatTSafocarad wert 


14. Then filled with amazement and with hairs 
standing on end, Arjuna spoke to the Lord, his head 
bent and hands folded. 


141. ae: ef ou ae at gear a: aeda arfase: faeqarface: 
ger Anr wer a: wat gA A awa TASHA | TT THE 
Tmt Sear vehi: aq fear ea aae garate: areas 


354 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XI 


14.1. ‘Then’, on beholding Him, Arjuna was filled with 
amazement; his hairs stood on end. ‘Head bent’, i.e., very 
humbly, and ‘hands folded’ to pay obeisance, he spoke to the 
Lord in His cosmic form. 


15.0. F4? aq waar ated faae, aq ae wears cared afa- 
HIT WA: sara — 


15.0. How? Affirming his own experience in the words such 
as ‘I see Your cosmic form as revealed by Yow’ etc. 


AIT Jars : 
wate taeda 2a ag aatan adtateasunre | 
sam HASTAATeTTG aT aatar faa UV 


Arjuna satd : 

15. Lord! in Your body I see all gods, as also groups of 
contingent beings—the mighty Brahma seated in the 
lotus, all the seers, and all the celestial serpents. 


15.1. ee ee E Ta R cary aa, Ta A- 


15.1. I ‘see’, cognize, O Lord! in Your body all the gods; 
also groups of particular beings, moving and unmoving, 
in varied shapes; the ‘four-faced Brahma seated on the lotus- 
throne’, the Lord of the creatures who resides on Meru, the 
pericarp of the earth-lotus. Also all the ‘seers’, Vasistha and 
the rest, and the ‘celestial serpents’, Vasuki and the rest. 


maga Teast cat KANAAT | 
ara a ae a gaeat qafa friar freq gI 


15-17] The Vision of the Cosmic Form 355 


16. I behold You with many hands, bellies, faces and 
eyes, with a form infinite in all directions. No end, 
middle or beginning for You I see, Lord of the Universe! 


ee ee 
warty a AT Te a OS AARAA: A AARET | 
qara ear wat aaa: aaa aaae aaa Sah ser ata ARTET: 
Tt HATS | AT Met, Ae: Aaa, T AEM, Wet aT gar: Flea: 
Hat, a ga. aa ate — a aa Aaa aed Tear, a wea afa, + TA: 
atte mafa è? fraa ! 2 fared i 

fra — 


16.1. I see You having numerous hands, bellies, faces and 
eyes, everywhere possessing infinite forms. No end, no middle, 
i.e. the space between two extreme points, and, again no 
beginning for You, Lord! do I see. I see neither end, middle 
nor beginning, O Lord of the universe! Omni-formed Being! 

And, 


17. I see you (adorned) with diadem, mace, and discus; 
a massed splendour, blazing in all directions—daz- 
zling all around with the light of blazing fire and sun, 
immeasurable. 


17.1. fedfer f ou fetter fate arr freeones: aq e 
Ra a: FAA a fatter, amn afet wer wer frat aft wet a 
Tera, Tar aie we ser aAa wat a afer a, astro ar- 
Goa, aiana addr ata: wer weit idana, q ad- 
dAn gears cat gaia gaq ft: girth: a fated 
Tra aad: deaa sama aha aroret dat aaorat 


356 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam {Ch. XI 


aearorat aay: ttarreréar: afafea ofa: aa: ger aa a at ama- 
aia: at Aaaa, wad at waa aan eta | 


17.1. ‘Diadem’ is a head-ornament; one having it is the 
‘diademed’ ; similarly, one having a mace and having a discus; 
‘a mass of splendour blazing in all direction’—I see You have 
all these and on all sides You are dazzling ; (so You are) hard 
to behold. Again, I see You have a light like that of a ‘blazing 
fire’ and of ‘the sun’ ‘immeasurable’, undeterminable. 


18.0. <a wa l aafaa ahr — 


18.0. In view of the power of Your Yoga, I infer: 


wana Ie Afaa camer fred at ATR | 
AAT: THTATAMNA AAT FEAT AAT A ULC 


18. You are the supreme Imperishable, worthy to be 
known; You are ithe ultimate ground of the universe. 
You, the immutable, are the guardian of eternal righte- 
ousness; I deem You to be the everlasting Spirit. 


18.1. a@ ta un a wat a aedtie sat cea wer afer ma 
aaah: | a wer fore anerer ora: ot eS fro friad 
aferfafa fra, ce ara: ger 1 fea—a vem: a aa an 
fad sft wera, apart wags: apa: fre: wt: ger Tra 
TPIT | Aad: faa. a yee: ToT Aa: aha: A AA II 

fra — 


18.1. What does not perish is ‘the Imperishable’, the 
supreme Brahman; who, for the seekers after liberation, is fit 
to know. Of this entire universe, You are ‘the ultimate’, or 
the exalted ‘ground,’—the receptacle in which it rests, i.e., 
its final support. Besides, You, the 1mmutable, who wither 
not, are the guardian of eternal righteousness. I deem You 
the Supreme Spirit, to be the everlasting One. 

And, 


17-20] The Vision of the Cosmic Form 357 


TAT AACA eA aaa a- 


maaa Wearysaay | 


qafa cat dagaa 
gda faratire aaa NRN 


19. I see You, who have no beginning, middle and end, 
endowed with inexhaustible energy, and numberless 
arms, with the sun and moon for Your eyes, the blazing 
fire for face, burning the universe with Your radiance. 


19.1. aa aft n aRar Ra wer a aera a faa aea 
a: wa aRar: i cat aR, aaa a aa AAA A: 
Ra qir aadA: t aA, aa aaa AAA: MRA: TET aa 
a a maag: TF wa aag, aada aag A a aa a: 
a magiaa. a ct magda a aaraa a cat Aag- 
aoa a idea qi qa qa a a oatgarraaes: d 
ca Aaga, cata fd et a A aay 


19.1. You have neither beginning, middle nor end; Your 
energy is endless and arms numberless. The sun and the moon 
are Your eyes. I see You thus, whose face is a blazing fire 
causing this universe to burn with Your radiance. 


maghire fe caret water fama aat: | 
eased Saas cal srHas erty ARIAT Roll 


20. Indeed this space between the firmament and the 
earth has been pervaded solely by You, as also all points 
of space. Beholding this marvellous, menacing form 
of Yours, magnanimous Being! the three worlds are 
overwhelmed. 


20.1. aar eft uo araryfreat: et aa fe anf ard wa 
firem. wha, fea aah: are: | gear sae way faea 


358 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XI 


eT ee aa TT RC SET sara Aa sera Ae wafod at È 
ARIAT MARANT | 


20.1. ‘This space between the firmament and the earth’— 
the atmosphere and beyond—has been pervaded by You 
alone, O Bearer of the cosmic form! So also, all the points of 
the compass. ‘Beholding’, perceiving, this ‘marvellous’, ama- 
zing, form of Yours that ‘menaces’ or terrifies, these three 
worlds are smitten with fear or are shaken, O ‘magnanimous‘ 
i.e., mighty Being! 


21.0. TT ayn ga Bar wan afe at at dg: | Sk Cainii 
a ae mig, ataa meaai waren ators aft sae: 
WATT, T TIT ATE — 

fear — 


21.0. Now, in order to resolve Arjuna’s earlier doubt, 
‘whether we shall conquer or they will conquer us’ (BG.2.61), 
the Lord wishes to reveal the decisive victory of the Pandavas. 
Seeing Him thus engaged, Arjuna says: 


eaf cat tafata: amet TERA 


21. Verily these hosts of gods enter into You; some 
frightened and with folded hands extol. Groups of 
eminent seers and perfected souls, exclaiming ‘Let 
there be prosperity’ extol You with hymns rich in 
contents. 


21.1. wat aft u wat fe gaa: a ater: wT wat grasa: a 
wT WATT aad: acarfetaarser: agen: A cat faafaa 
wera: aad 1 ae afaq ater: maa. at qa gafa at 


20-22] The Vision of the Cosmic Form 359 


wy Goraash ware: at: | as Terrfest verfafafrah sasex 
afa we ore: af sac aeiefagaser: vedio Rra a ase: 
water cat gafa: gemaa: agot: 1 

fraag — 


21.1. Vasus and other celestials, who have taken human 
form and are now fighting in order to lessen the earth’s burden, 
enter into You—they are seen to do so. Among them are some 
‘frightened’ ones, who, with ‘folded hands, extol’, being 
powerless even to flee. When the battle is about to begin, 
noting evil omens, ‘hosts of great seers and perfected souls’ 
extol You, saying, “May the world prosper”, and chanting 
hymns ‘rich in content’—complete in all respects. 


Besides, 


afan aaat a a area fepasPaat EPNER | 
madugangan stated cat faferamdta at NRN 


22. Rudras, Adityas, Vasus, lesser perfected souls, 
Visvedevas, the two Asvins, Maruts, the ancestral 
spirits, hosts of celestial minstrels, Yaksas, demons, 
and perfected souls gaze at You; and they are all 
amazed. 


22.1. warfecat: af u sarfeer saat a a arem: earem: wo: fad 
eam, NY A SA ASS, ST ITE, TATA CASAS: — 


am: fremt sma. een a ue at i 
enq — 


22.1. ‘Rudras, Adityas, Vasus, and lesser perfected souls’— 
of these, Rudras, etc., are ogre groups; the Visvedevas, and 
the two Asvins are deities. Then there are the Maruts and the 
ancestral spirits. The celestial minstrels are Haha, Huhu, 
etc., Yaksas are Kubera and so forth; demons, Virocana, etc. 


360 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XI 


‘The perfected souls’ refer to Kapila and others like him. The 
hosts of all these gaze at You and are amazed. 


For, 


SI RET aga RA AFATRTTMAA | 
agat AKAVSTH CS PLAT GVH: TSTPATATETATSSA NRN 


23. Seeing Your immense form with its many mouths 
and eyes, Mighty-armed! Your many arms, thighs, and 
feet, and bellies, terrifying because of many tusks, the 
worlds are consternated; so am I. 


23.1. St aft u et Req afaa a aq agaaa agfa aaaf 
wath var safe a afery et aq St agaa, o mA | 
agAgee seal amga: Hea: Taras afg ST aq agargene, fra — 
agat aga seater afenfata aq agat, agigas aati: dearf: 
Hue fad aq agira — qeear ed gaat ata: otha: rf: 
safara: wafeat: wat; Ta aE ats n 

TAS FTO — 


23.1. Your form exceeding all measure, with its many 
mouths and eyes, O Mighty-armed! with its many hands, 
thighs and feet seeing it the world’s living beings are ‘con- 
sternated’—shaken with terror; so am I. 

Here is the reason for it: 


GEE EUL GEN hij 
aaa AAMAR | 
qen fg eat serfraraere 
qia a fafa at a fa NXN 


24. On seeing You touching the sky, blazing, many- 
hued, with open mouths and eyes distended and 
flaming, my inner self is deeply troubled, O Visnu!; 


23-25 | The Vision of the Cosmic Form 361 


I have neither courage nor inner calm. 


24.1. Tee sf uu weep Gert gard: det seafood, serra 
aah ant: WET: mien: aferq cafe t wart aa, sara 
areata aaaf amaaa gafa aferq cafe a maT aea, AA- 
framma dette mafaa fare faeta vari aferq afa 
a cat Aaaama gear fe cat afanan serfaa: saree 
wat: Ter a a: ae aaa ag ofa at a faerie a ot aH 
q IIIA nag, 3 fact ii 


pea ? — 


24.1. ‘Touching the sky’ —the firmament; ‘blazing’ — 
flaming; ‘with many terrifying hues’ or dispositions; ‘mouths 
wide-open, eyes flaming and distended—seeing You thus, my 
inner self or mind is deeply troubled. I can find no courage; 
nor have I inner calm, i.e., peace of mind, O Visnu. 

Why? 


daaa aa gaa qeda aoaaa | 
feat a mA a oA a Te Tele a faa NRN 


25. On just seeing Your mouths terrifying due to 
tusks, glowing like the all-consuming fire of Time, 
I can’t find my bearings; I can’t find peace. Be gracious, 
God of gods! abode of worlds! 


25.1. 4era sft n deaa derf: aata fasaa d 


fer. aia a ot eq one: afer | ae a wet aÀ 
q at geg wa vale veal wa è tae) afaa 


25.1. On just seeing Your mouths ‘terrifving due to tusks’, 
distorted and ‘glowing like the all-consuming fire of Time’ at 
the dissolution of world, I fail to know the distinction between 
directions like east and west, i.e., I have lost my bearings. 


362 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XI 


Therefore, I can’t get peace of mind. So, God of gods! Abode 
of worlds! Be gracious. 


26.0. Tar AA meaag at [sa] areata at wT aT | Ad: — 


26.0. All those children of Dhrtarastra, at whose hands 
I had a fear of defeat—a fear that has now gone. 


wat A AT aA Gat: ad AParatratsae: | 
AISA AUT: FATAEAAISA ACTEHAACT ATTA: UREA 


26. All those children of Dhrtarastra together with the 
hosts of earth’s rulers, Bhisma, Drona, and the chario- 
teer’s son, as also the leading warriors on our side (rush 
into Your mouths); 


26.1. WaT Sf uo art a cal gaea gar. gatwasmyaa: — ‘at 
are: cat Rafar (2%) ofa aaa araa:—ad aga afgan: 
safrretet: salt Geet creat aafaa: cet ast, faa — 
vier: xT, Taga: wet wear wat, ae aerate yscepamyfahr: 
areqget: aera Tart: AE N 

far — 


26.1. “Those children of Dhrtarastra’, Duryodhana and the 
rest—construe this with the phrase ‘rush into your mouths’, 
remotely placed in verse 27. All of them with the hosts of 
earth’s rulers and also Bhisma, Drona and Karna, as well as 
the leading warriors on our side, Dhrstadyumna, etc. 


arate à am fasta demana warrattt | 
Stag BATA Aqsaed WMNASAATS: NVI! 
27. Rush into Your awesome mouths, terrifying due to 


their tusks. Sticking between the teeth are observed 
some, with their heads crushed. 


26-29 | The Vision of the Cosmic Form 363 


27.1. ar sf uu ae gafa A aa AAT: ACA: AAT: 
fafa — fafafirserfa gara ? —acerecretiy wartaris wargerfir | 
fea — Afaa qerfs sfaserat aed fara: IINA eee ATT 
sa wfad aged sored ard: ited: samre. Rra: i 


27.1. Rushing they enter into Your mouths, awesome due 
to the terrifying tusks in them. Also, among those who have 
thus entered are found some sticking between the teeth, like 
remnants of eaten flesh, their heads crushed to powder. 


28.0. a4 saaa gara af? ae — 


28.0. Like what do they enter the mouths? Answer: 


Ua ade agaisedam: aqraarhrqar rated | 
TUT aan acarHare fasta aeaa aaraa Vit 


28. As the multitudinous streams of rivers rush to- 
wards the sea alone, so these heroes among men enter 
your blazing mouths. 


28.1. war aft n war acta aaediat aga: HAH Hea AMT: seq: 
aafaa: ayaa afrqer: sire: cafe staat, cat dad aa 
at Aia: acatedia: aqerate yo: fafa anfa afrfase- 
sfa. THTTATATET I 


28.1. As the many torrents of rivers rushing exclusively 
towards the sea enter it, so these human heroes, Bhisma and 
the rest, enter Your ‘blazing’ or luminous mouths. 


29.0. X feat ofa aa a sf? ae — 
29.0. Why and how do they enter? 


Ta wate sad Tat faeries area ATTA: | 
ada area faariet Seea sear STAT: WAS 


364 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam -[Ch. XI 


29. Just as moths, with accelerated speed, enter a 
blazing fire for self-destruction, just so, to perish, 
people too enter Your mouths with accelerated speed. 


29.1. Tar aft war sata seed ater carer: taor. fate arena 
fana, ayer: aye: soy: am aftr: ce wae 
area faerie ore: sito: cart a ayer: | 

a ya: — 


29.1. Just as winged insects enter a blazing fire for destruc- 
tion with enhanced speed, just so, to perish, ‘people’, i.e., 
living beings, enter Your mouths with enhanced speed. 

And You, 


Sfora wma: aaaea AAI aada g: | 
aag ATT AAT aaa: saa a fa 113011 


30. Repeatedly lick, swallowing on all sides, with 
blazing mouths entire worlds (of living beings). O 
Visnu, filling the entire universe with luminous 
energy, Your dreadful radiations scorch. 


30.1. Sfeere fa u Sad areareafe wama: aa AAT 
aad: ala aa ane aat: aet: afg Aam: ane: 
ays ATT WIT AAT Ae AMT ANE stad | fea — wre: sta: 
aa Im: Re: Saas wat gifa, & fae ama i 


30.1. You ‘repeatedly lick’, enjoy, ‘swallowing’, gobbling 
up, on all sides, all living beings with mouths ‘blazing’— 
glowing and ‘filling’, pervading, the entire world with lumi- 
nous energy. Also Your dreadful radiations or flames, scorch, 
O Visnu, all-pervading Spirit! 


31.0. JA Va JAeqTa:, AT: — 


31.0. Being so menacing in Your attitude, please, 


29-32] The Vision of the Cosmic Form 365 


areata A Ft AaTqTET aS A aa wets | 
fagia warcere a fe corres aa safa 113 21 


31. Tell me who You are with Your awesome form. 
Salutation to You, Chief of the gods! be gracious. I wish 
to know You, the primordial Being; for I understand 
not (the nature of) Your activity. 


31.1. ree af u arenfe PaA we HF Wa wa VW- 
Bq RUPT: | AM We FT TR, F tage Vara wera, wate sare 
gel fam fare ag zeae wat are set wa ae; 
werd sara aa adai vata IE tt 


31.1. Tell me who You are with Your ‘awesome form’— 
form dreadful to behold. Salutation to You, O Chief of gods! 
the Leader of the gods! Be gracious. I ‘wish to know’, to under- 
stand, specially You as primordial Being; for I do not under- 
stand ‘Your activity —Your doings. 


ATATATT ATS: 

aesa anaapa 
TAHT Ag TTA: | 

wasa cat a afacafa ad 
Asafa: SAAR ATT: WFR 


The Blessed Lord said: 

32. Dominant Time am I, wreaking the dissolution of 
the world. Here I am active, gathering the worlds unto 
Me. Even without you, these warriors marshalled in 
these opposing forces will cease to be. 


32.1. are: Sf un are: afer eaa staat aa AA SR- 
maq Wye (Nate wa | wet sqa: aq pa weg 
ved we aa wre saa: | wA faerie car cat a faerie ater 


366 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XI 


aretha: wt, a: aa arg, A aaferar sae ater 
ofa searitag sfrrenay ae ara: ETT: 1 
wag Say = 


32.1. As ‘dominant Time’, I am wreaking the dissolution 
of the worlds. Hear why I am active in destroying the worlds 
now. Even without You, all these warriors will cease to be— 
Bhisma, Drona, Karna, etc., who rouse your fear and are 
marshalled in these opposing ranks. 

Such being the case, 


aeneae Tat Tae fac MAARA TIT ATTA | 


A VA 


mht fagan: qda fifama aa aafaa 113 311 


33. Stand up therefore; win renown, conquering 
your foes. Enjoy this opulent kingdom. Already have 
these been slain by Me, skilful bow-man! be but an 
occasion (for the end of your foes). 


33.1. Tea sft ou ae a sta “Mises: AIET: 
(aafera:), star. gaze, aa frat.” sft aa sued, Fac 
qa: fe aq svat 1 face ray e Yess TH AAS TAIT 
weary | wat wa wad fagar: fader gar srt: feat: gaa | 
ffirma wa a è? aafaa! — ada aA seca ae aad 
aaa sft Fad ATT: 1 


33.1. Therefore stand up; win renown due to the fact that 
you, Arjuna, have vanquished heroes, Bhisma, Drona, etc., 
whom even gods can’t beat. Through religious merit alone 
may such renown be achieved. Conquering foes like Duryo- 
dhana and the rest, enjoy this kingdom, unopposed by adver- 
saries. By Me, indeed, have all these been ‘slain’—despatched 
already. Be but an occasion, skilfull bowman! Arjuna is so 
styled (savyasacin), as he shoots arrows even with his left hand. 


32—34 | The Vision of the Cosmic Form 367 


zy a aed a Wat a 

wo ansaa Ana | 
wat gaia afg AT arfaa 

qara Hatta Tt aT 3N 


34. Kill Drona, Bhisma, Jayadratha, Karna and simil- 
arly other heroic warriors too, slain by Me; don’t 
worry. Fight, you will conquer in war. 


34.1. BT gA u amt aA Ay AMY aaa aag eA 
cee ere, war ga | ay deny ara HS ATT 


Wea MASSA: Ramer RAN gegi STAT, TẸ 
qaa: | aa aa, wer frat aa ae “wa gaa fare a 
faafaa a, verte fare: oferta” sft i worst aaar waar 
amaan aes: quga: arta: a, aa: TF area fafaa | wat garg 
a safe afram i ar afar, ter: wa ar aret: i gered Sara 
gaara UY As WITT WAT N 


34.1. Those warriors who have roused Arjuna’s fear the 
Lord singles out as already slain by Him. It is well-known why 
Drona and Bhisma caused fear. Drona is the master of the 
science of archery and of supernatural weapons; he is the 
highly honoured teacher of Arjuna himself. With his power 
to withstand death till he himself chooses to die, Bhisma 
too 1s a master of supernatural arms who was not vanquished 
even by Parasurama with whom he fought a duel. Similarly 
Jayadratha was formidable because his father had embarked 
on penance to cause his son’s slayer’s head to fall. Being the 
son of the sun-god and the virgin, Karna, too, equipped with 
the unfailing dart gifted by Indra, is just mentioned. These, 
slain by Me, just despatch, you being but the occasion of their 
death. Have no fear on their account. Fight; you will conquer 
your foes, Duryodhana and the rest, in this battle. 


368 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XI 


ENA Sas: 
Uae aad Hae peada: factet | 
THA AT UATE HO aad ater: TTT uF 


Sanjaya said: 

35. Listening to Krsna’s words, trembling, with folded 
hands, Arjuna saluted Krsna; falling prostrate and 
quite nervous, he spoke to Him falteringly as follows: 


35.1. Trae eft Ut AT aad Faget Gate, saaa: 
aq ma: aera: FAA m, We GT Ul ae sway For 
aie wife ga, Safer x R, way 
ma ait Yor PaA: AT ara: aaea AM Aq 7 TaN: 
at ae ada eft 1 “anette aaa are” eft aafaa aq 
Weis: tr Ft: aaaea: aq wer TE: Year, ‘are’ afr afa 
qma: Il 


35.1. Arjuna spoke ‘falteringly’ ; for, he was in the grip of 
fear and also influenced by his love for Krsna. Being tearful, 
phlegm choked his throat. So his words were indistinct and 
low in pitch. ‘Falteringly’ qualifies Arjuna’s speech or act of 
speaking. Repeatedly seized by fear, he bowed low and spoke. 
So construe the remotely placed words of the text. 


35.2. aF wat asa Aaa 1 we ? mR aiaa 
fga md aq, frase: gates: faga: va sft aa youre: WT 
ofa farce: aq afer afeata, aa aa sA waaa aftr | 
weft + ad youse:, waaraan 1 


36.0. At this juncture Sanjaya’s words were motivated. 
How? Once the unconquerable four, Drona etc., are slain by 
Arjuna, Duryodhana is as good as slain. Thus thinking, 
Dhrtarastra willceaseto hope for victory and will ask for truce. 
Thence will follow peace between the two forces. But, being 
a victim of fate’s decree, Dhrtarastra did not pay any heed. 


35-37 | The Vision of the Cosmic Form 369 


easy aie qa vata AAA T | 
catfa afa fa cater ad areata a fagi: 3RN 


Arjuna said: 

36. Indeed it is proper, Krsna! that the whole world iĝ 
extolling You, should rejoice and be gratified. The 
demons flee frightened, away into space, and all groups 
of perfected souls do reverence. 


36.1. eat str n eat ge fe aq ? aa satel cararercer- 
ated Fatt, J eter | aq aa secata set sofa, aq wy TH 
zat: | weat—fauafaaer ema aft i am: gta: wary, 
qa: sat. Tara aayagera sft | aa aqead aqeat a safe; 
aaa fone eft amA | fea — cif Aaa warfacerft faxr: 
rata rafa, aot cat aà 1 ad mafa aaeart gaia 7 
fagasa: ai aea: afferdtat; aa ert i 


36.1. ‘It is proper’—what? That in extolling Your gran- 
deur the worlds should rejoice. Or, the term ‘proper’ may be 
taken as qualifying the object of praise, namely, the Lord. 
It is proper that the Lord is the occasion for rejoicing ; for He 
‘is the Self of all, the friend of all living beings. So rightly is the 
world also gratified. This too 1s a right explanation. Moreover, 
‘the frightened demons flee away into space. This too is proper; 
groups of all perfected souls, Kapila, etc., are doing reverence. 
‘This again is proper. 


37.0. Wrad: sutfafawaca eq tafa — 


37.0. Here is given the reason why the Lord should occasion 
(rejoicing : 


meea tT ANTI Maa TAIT TH | 


wert sa was AAA AeA Aq Zvi 


370 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XI 


37. Great Being! Why shouldn’t they salute You, the 
pre-eminent, primal creator of even Brahma? Infinite, 
Lord of gods, the world’s abode, You are the imperi- 
shable, at once being and non-being, and also what is 
beyond beth. 


37.1. EAT Sf u Fee Feat FT PA 7 AA A amA. 2 
weraq | rÀ aaa — aa: agr: fewer aft faat PT 
We: Tea — atleast Hy ud a AMEE: a: gA AMET FT 
ami a ag: fauna: get. 1 g aaa) cae! & afaa |! Sf mat 
aq i, Aq TAT l fe aq ? ma eft 1 aq fara, aq 
a oF 


aver afr afz 1 a mfa — [sara —] wd aeadt wer 
TAT, UT arty acadt sft sradd | Tata Acad: W aq 
met, aq wart Aafaa: aafaa | aq aaa, a aaa efa ahem: 1 


N 


gaca fa — 


37.1. Why should they not bow down to You, great Being! 
who are greater than they all? You are the primal creator of 
Brahma even—of the Hiranyagarbha. So, why should they 
not salute You? Therefore, You are the right occasion for 
feelings like delight, and the fit object of salutation. O infinite 
One! The Lord of gods! The abode of the worlds! You are 
the transcendent Imperishable that the Vedantas set forth. 
What is that? Being and non-being. Being is the existent and 
the non-being, what engenders the idea of non-existence. 
These are the adjuncts of the Imperishable due to which arises 
the empirical usage of the expressions, being and non-being. 
In truth, however, the Imperishable which the knowers of 
the Vedas declare is beyond being and non-being. You alone 
are that and none else. 

Again, Arjuna extols: 


amfa: Fea: Gum: aaa freq at aTa | 
asia ax a It a ae cau ad Paa 13¢11 


38. You are the primal Lord, the ancient Spirit, the 


37-39] The Vision of the Cosmic Form 371 


supreme Abode of this universe. You are the knower, 
the object to be known, the transcendent abode, O Being 
of infinite forms! The universe has been pervaded by 
You. 


38.1. 4 g n a ma: ma: aea | Tee: gR aa gT: 
fraa: a a aa faa wt vee faa fra afe mg aa 
anen aft 1 fara — A af, afear afa ada wa AINTE | 
aq a i a Tears, KT a T I ag | a ad an 
fog ane, = AAEN! aa: a a aq ETTA | 

fra — 


38.1. “You are the ‘primal Lord’, being the Creator of the 
universe; ‘Spirit or Purusha’ dwelling in the city of the body; 
‘ancient’—everlasting. Of this universe You alone are the 
supreme or exalted Abode, that in which, at the time of the 
great dissolution, etc., the universe is resolved. Moreover, 
You are ‘the knower’ of all that there is to know. Besides 
whatsoever is ‘fit to be known’ 1s You, as also the transcendent 
status of Visnu. The entire universe has been pervaded by 
You, O Being of infinite forms. Of your forms there is no end. 

And, 


iai: amg: safare AREA | 
TÀ AS MAFA: Oa ashe AA TRÈ 38 


39. The wind, the god of death, the fire, Varuna the god 
of waters, the moon, the lord of creatures, and the 
grand sire—You are. To You salutations, salutations a 
thousand times; again, repeatedly, salutations to You. 


39.1. ary: AA un are: A, ae q, afer, ae ai, NTA: 
SEAT, aca ok wa, ae e ee ce 
a oy | a FR: Bat Tayi Bally 


372 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XI 


39.1. You are the wind-god and the god of death, the fire- 
god, Varuna the god of waters, the moon, the progenitor (of 
creatures), like KaSyapa, and the father even of creation’s 
author. That You are the father even of Brahma is the sense. 
Salutations to You a thousand times; again, repeatedly, 
salutations to You. The repeated acts of salutation are ex- 
pressed by the suffix krtvasuc. The use of expressions like ‘and 
again’, ‘once more’, shows the sense of inadequacy felt by 
the speaker because of his reverence, love and sense of wonder. 

Similarly, 


AA: yga Yoded AHiseG A Add Va aa | 
aadatan Aa AATAT as Ad: uo 


40. Salutations in front of You and behind You; saluta- 
tions be on all sides of You, the all. Your power is in- 
finite and Your energy unmeasured. You achieve all 
and so You are the all. 


40.1. 7H Shr 1 aH Freq yaar far Ter, wer Foor: T gT: 
aft ad aa: aed, q aaa: va aate faq aan faama g ad | aA- 
dataa. aaa art sea, afaa. famn. ser ah araed, farn: 
quer: | atta ahaq wraerfefana + cosa, AeTUHA: aT t 
a J wade: saaana sf aacdiaifrafaee: 1 ad ane 
WIT AAAS AH TdT amea aA aa., aa: aeara safe wafa 
aa: od, waar faiaga a fafaq afer ga ahora: 1 


40.1. ‘In front’, may also mean in the east, salutations to 
You; also behind You let salutations be. ‘On all sides’—in all 
points of the compass, salutations ‘to you’, the resident in all 
places, to You who are ‘all’. Your powers are infinite and 
energy unmeasured. ‘Power’ means ability, and ‘energy’, 
heroic action. Even a powerful being may fail to exercise it to 
exterminate foes; or may prove to be sluggish. But Your power 
is infinite and energy unmeasured Therefore You are styled as 
such in the text. Since You alone pervade the entire universe, 


39-42] The Vision of the Cosmic Form 373 


You are ‘the all’. The idea is that there is nothmg divorced 
from You. ~ 


41.0. 4q: AE Aerercearatare AMT:, NT: — 


41.0. Inasmuch as I have erred, unaware of your majesty, 
therefore, 


ata man THA ATH F FO g aaa g Afa | 
AAMATA AEA AAT AAT WATATSHN MAT SA E 21 


TSATASTATAAAH AS a ART TALATAT AAT Ai 
URSA AKAN AAA ATEATATT WRI 


41.-42. Taking you for a comrade, I have addressed you 
as Krsna, cowherd, friend. Unaware of this majesty 
of Yours and out of affection or thoughtlessness I have 
treated you unceremoniously, in privacy or in public, 
while resting, sitting, dining or playing games. I beg 
You, the Immeasurable, to forgive all this. 


41.1. wer ef uu aa aaa: afr ae are fardaqea sey 
ahr vee aq om ee! Zara! g aAa a sora sara 
yea —fe maam aft? mganga were aa wt face 
frg 1 “aa et afeart aa af afaro aa: | ‘aaa’ 
afa oat afe af, ver aaraa | war sarang fafercafaraaar, 
wag arte, surat ara Agafa: frac, Farle area aq Twa 
afer 1 


41.1. ‘Deeming You comrade’—-of the same age as myself— 
due to ignorance, I spoke hastily addressing You Krsna, scion 
of Yadus and comrade. Ignorance of what? of this majesty of 
Yours—this universal form of the Lord. The expressions zdam 
and mahimanam in the text are non-appostional. If the reading 
imam is available, they become appositional. My speech was 
hasty due to carelessness or affection. ‘Affection’ means the 
sense of confidence born of love. 


374 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XI 


42.1. ora eft aoa wagrart afterasanraa waa: woe: 
afe wafa a —aa? — fagreroreniny, fago fag: weearae:, 
ua: Tet: aq wacee: afe afore: safe; awash 2 aaa |! aq 
aaa — coos: faafaa: —seret at aaa: af aq ad NT- 
Teast ae eat aa aT ae aA AR, 1 

aT: a 


42.1. In jest I treated You with lack of respect—i.e., with 
scorn. ‘Where?’ in sport, etc. ‘Sport’ refers to walking for 
exercise ; ‘rest on a bedstead; ‘sitting’ on chairs, etc. ; ‘dining’— 
in all these activities and places I scorned You in Your absence 
or presence, O Unlapsing one! All these offences I beg You 
to pardon, You the Infinite—beyond all determination. 

Because, 


fransia Sea BUA AT TT THAT | 
TATA IMT: HANSA HAAS MATT ATT MS RU 


43. You are the father of the world of beings, moving 
and unmoving; You are worthy of its worship, being 
its pre-eminent Teacher. There is none equal to You. 
‘How can there be one greater in all the three worlds ? O 
You of matchless might! 


43.1. fret <fa ou fear afa wafer afa steer ofr a- 
RA PTAA A 1 a Fae a we ITT: fra, Wom Ge: Aa: 
Ts: Tar Tart: | wer Tere wt eft? g Aa aN: AMT: 
wea: ae at fe Sawa daf AA agra: | ACH Wa 
aad wer: aaNet; Ha: Us ser: spears: eq AASA aafarq ? 
astaasara ! sfratadt oar ar sfaar, a faaed ofa wer aa raat 
a a astra: g afar ! facfaroma ! gar i 

aa way — 


43.1. Of this world, of all beings moving and unmoving, 
You are the ‘father’, the generator. Not only are You the father 


42-45] The Vision of the Cosmic Form 375 


of this world, but also worthy of worship; for You are the pre- 
eiminent teacher. In what way are You that? ‘None is equal 
to You’. 

Of course it is impossible that there should be two Gods. 
Empirical activities will become impossible in case there 
are more than one God. None else can be even equal to 
You, not to speak of any one being greater in all the three 
worlds, O You, of ‘matchless might!’ An analogue is what is 
similar. Your might has no analogue. Hence are You of ‘match- 
less might’—of unsurpassed power. This is the import. 

Such being the case, 


TEATS TTT HTT TATE CATACH SA | 
firda year aaa ae: fra: aaga 2a MA uve 


44. Therefore, saluting and prostrating my body, I 
crave Your grace, adorable and mighty Being! Lord! 
You should bear with me, as father does with his son, a 
comrade with comrade, a lover with the beloved. 


44.1. Te Bf uo aang swore anepar, sfrara sad Ar: 
aot gre aro frat ae and ad, wer ea A Ae ATTY, TT 
av fora: aaar. aaa ead, Ud dfa g ea ale Safed, ad gare: I 


44.1. Therefore having saluted, keeping my body very low 
in the act of prostration, I crave Your grace, mighty Lord 
worthy of adoration. And You, O divine Being, ought to 
forgive my transgressions even as a father forgives a son’s 
transgression, a comrade a comrade’s, and a lover the beloved’s. 


agyi giadister qecat Waa a seutad AAT R | 
ada A aaa eq eq sete sag maaa wey 


45. Seeing what hitherto has been unseen, I am thrilled 


376 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XI 


and my mind is smitten with fear, Lord! Reveal that 
familiar form; be gracious, God of gods! Abode of the 
worlds! 


45.1. agy afr n gegi a pafa get ec fret aa 
war adat, aq n gen gia: af 1 Aa a afaa Aa À 
aa: aa À aM ada a ta et aq aeq | mia aa | rfaaTa, 
wre frarat maaa: 2 maA 1 


45.1. ‘Seeing what has never been seen before’, i.e., Your 
cosmic form, either by men or by others, I am thrilled. Also, 
fear smites my mind. Therefore, resume the familiar form 
You display as my friend. Be gracious, God of gods! Abode of 
the worlds! 


feted maa aagana cat meas aaa | 
ata Sty agustt agaarel wa frag uve 


46. (Your form) with the diadem, mace, and discus in 
hand, I wish to see in the way I am used to, O thousand- 
armed Being with the cosmic form! Assume that form 
with the four arms. 


46.1. fattfet afr u fattet fateaat, aa afedt wera, amet 
gafa cay waa ca aM ae ata, Ydaq garth: | Aa: Ud, Ang 


qt SIT aqeqgzeqy wos, agaael—adatata faaretnr, 
wa fragd; saga fared, ata ety wa gas | 


46.1. ‘I wish’—pray—to see You as before with the diadem, 
mace, and discus in hand’. Such being the case, O thousand- 
armed! withdrawing the cosmic form, resume Your four- 
armed form as the son of Vasudeva. 


47.0. aft Mit sae, Greet fered, Bara amaaa 
array Sarg — 


45-48 | The Vision of the Cosmic Form 377 


47.0. Knowing that Arjuna is fear-struck, the blessed Lord 
withdrew His cosmic form and spoke affectionate words con- 
solingly: 


ATTA ATS 
AMT sada AAAS ST TL SANAATATATTT | 
aaa PITTA GH aAA TA Wea voi 


The blessed Lord said : 

47. By the power of My Yoga, O Arjuna! in a gracious 
mood, I have revealed to you this supreme form of 
Mine, effulgent, cosmic, infinite and primal, which 
none but you ever beheld before.. - 


47.1. WaT St n WaT aAa, ware: ame cafe aqueate:, agar 
wart aa aa g asa |! ee at eT feared afar rea areas: 
water mma 1 aaa ase fed amet aaat aercfed TÀ 
Wa a aq ST A AN aes cad: ala Safad A Bey 11 


47.1. ‘Grace’ means the mood of benevolence towards you; 
in that mood this supreme cosmic form has been revealed to 
you by the power—the competence—of My Yoga. ‘Effulgent’ 
—made of brilliant power. ‘Cosmic’—universal. ‘Infinite’-— 
endless. ‘Primal’—what was in the beginning. This form of 
Mine, none other than you ever saw before. 


48.0. HHT: AA eai Hat: va a age: afa aq ata — 


48.0. You have gained life’s goal having seen this form of 
Mine, universal Self. The vision is now extolled: 


a aaant aad a feared aarhres: 
qie: TRY HE ATH Te ety Female vei 


48. By means neither of the Vedas, sacrifices, studies, 


378 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XI 


nor of the making of gifts, neither by ritual acts nor by 
severe austerities can I, in this form, be seen in this 
world of men by anyone other than you, O hero of the 
Kurus! 


48.1.0 Ag sft on a aama: aquiatt ai aA: gaT- 


ganfan: sttarfehr:, a aft Afa: en aaam: MÈ, Taer: 
agafi fei A a AE AET: TWAT Hs TSH AN ge 
aada cat: aAa EA II 


48.1. By means of studying all the four Vedas and by the 
correct performance of sacrifices and by studies and the 
making of gifts of gold equal to the weight of the givers, etc; 
by means of ritual acts like the fire-sacrifice enjoined by the 
Vedas and Codes; and by means of severe penances like the 
Candrayana, I can’t be seen in this cosmic form (as you have 
seen) in this world by men, by any other than you. The study 
of the Vedas includes that of sacrifices. 


i R ae TIFT WSR 


49. Don’t be fear-stricken and confused due to the 
vision of this awesome form of Mine which you have 
had. Rid of fear and glad at heart, behold again that 
(familiar) form of Mine. 


49.1. AT A rer gf ua A aT, aT ya A a, aT a faaea: 
faqefarat, gea sera eT a fgg anafaa AA ga 1 IAT: 
fart: fara: strat a aq FA: We a na wat eT Ng- 
qama TT FS VT FF TT II 


48-51] The Vision of the Cosmic Form 379 


49.1. Have no fear and confusion in mind, on account of 
having seen My awesome form revealed to you. With fear 
gone and a gladdened mind, behold again that four-armed 
form of Mine which is dear to you—the form marked by the 
conch, discus, and mace. 


qt Jays : 
zat ngaa Cas ST ANNTA AT: | 
APAAATAT a aA ACA ga: Aaa oN 


Samjaya said: 

50. Having thus spoken to Arjuna, Vasudeva once more 
revealed His familiar form; assuming His gentle form, 
once more, the mighty Being consoled Arjuna in his 
terror. 


50.1. seat aft n eft ws att argea: TaN aad va, waa 
aga We Wt ST aa ada WT TT | Paaa F 
wpattadary wet Ut, wear qa: Aag: sweats: were IN 

50.1. Thus speaking to Arjuna, Vasudeva revealed that 
form of His with which He was born in Vasudeva’s home. And 


He, the mighty Being, consoled Arjuna in his terror, having 
once again assumed a gentle human form. 


TT SATs : 

gedd AMAT ST aq AAT Wares | 

qaaa Aaa: Aaa: THA Ma: UYU 
Arjuna said: 
51. O Krsna! Seeing this, Your gentle human form, 


now I have regained my equanimity; I have been 
restored to my proper nature. 


51.1. gag aft i gea Fe AT ST AeA Tas Ag ATT Taree | 


380 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XI 


carat yay fa aaa: aaa: — fe? —aae: waafaa: safe 
eae Ta: a afer i 


51.1. Seeing this gentle friendly form of Yours, Krsna! now 
I have won back my equanimity and regained my normal 
nature. 


ATTA ATS: 
gadaa VT gaaf URR | 
a ere E fa AATE: NLN 


The blessed Lord said: 

52. That form of Mine, extremely hard to behold, which 
you have seen—that form even the gods perpetually 
crave to see. | 


52.1. aget aft u gA ae gaa ait wer aft ggi et eg 
gea ofa aq wa, tar: aft wer aa EA fret ader aatrarigerr., 
aias a afaa geam., + meat a af safes: N 

peq? — 


52.1. That form, whose vision is extremely hard to obtain, 
and which you have seen—that form of Mine even gods crave 
to see. Though desirous, they have not, unlike you, seen it; 
nor will they see it. This is the idea. 

Why? 


TE A ATA A AA A ART | 
aaa qifa get qaaa AT TAT YR 


53. Not by the Vedas nor by penance, nor by gifts nor 
by sacrifice may I be seen, thus, as you have. 


53.1. até aft u 7 He Ae: aami “Safe. aft a are 
srr inamfaa, + aa aofa, a a BIA AAT TAT aT 


51-54] The Vision of the Cosmic Form 381 
wen. vifaa: qeareferasare: ge, gea afa wT aM aR II 


53.1. Not by the ‘four Vedas’ Rg, Yajus, Sama and Atharva 
or by hard penance, candrayana, etc; nor by the gift of cows, 
land, gold and the like, nor by sacrifice—sacrificial worship, 
may I be seen ‘thus’—in the way you have seen Me revealed. 


54.0. HY Ja: WaT: Sa? Tad— 


54.0. How then is it possible? 


ARNT TAT TAT WAT gafas | 
ATI WE a aAa Waste TW ITAT UAV 


54. But by undivided devotion may I be known, truth- 
fully seen, and entered, Arjuna! scourge of foes!; for, 
My nature is such. 


54.1. wear ef uu wear y—fatafeeecar aft ? are — aaa 
ATI — wad: Aa TR a aaaf (ar) waft (m g aaar 
af) 1 a art act: qalana a Breed yar, ar waa afm, 
au aaa wa wae ag wafer freer: 2 ae |! ag 
meq: — A Has A Wheat: — wes FT ach Atay aeaa., Wave 
a ae FT Td, AT I 


54.1. ‘By devotion’—of what kind? ‘undivided’, i.e., not 
directed to aught else than the Lord, at any time. When by all 
means of cognition nothing but Vasudeva is known, there 
results undivided devotion. By that means I may be known 
according to the sastras in this manneras endowed with the 
cosmic form. Not only may I be known according to the 
Sastras but also seen truthfully and ‘entered’—be liberated, 
O scourge of foes! 


55.0. THAT ada iame arom: ah: faari. agbada 
afaa Jord — 


382 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XI 


55.0. Now is stated the essential import of the entire science 
of the Gita aimed at liberation and summarised for practice: 


AHAPAMAITA Age: gai: | 
frat: adada a: a arate mea Uy 


55. Whoso does My works, makes Me his supreme 
goal, becomes My devotee, rid of all attachments, is 
free from malice towards all beings, will come to Me, 
O Pandava Prince! 


frasea MARTNA: 1 


55.1. Heme gf n nakaa Het HA nah, aq Hedtia mA | 
Aare: — He Wer: afat, a g aes: ToT Wear Tater afateta 
cated Re; aa g ae aaa oeat ata sfavead sfa 
HAT, ae TO Ta at: Te a wt Aer: | TM Aa: Aaa 
aim: aan adienet a wad aa am | agate: qA- 
giaro agate: ag: tf: —ae:—astre 1 frat: 
friad. adug maaca. mena: aera aTeradeaty 1 a: Faz: 
Aa: & a Ufa, aga ger oe ate, + wer ate ahaa wate | 
wa qaa Sree: wwe: war g: è mmea ! sft 1 


55.1. Work for My sake is ‘My work’; whoso performs it. 
A servant does his master’s work but does not reach him as his 
supreme goal to be attained after death. Here not only he does 
My work but he also comes to Me as his supreme goal; for, I 
am his supreme goal. Similarly, he is My devotee, as he 
worships Me in all possible ways, with all his heart-—with 
total enthusiasm. He is free from all ‘attachrnent’ to wealth, 
progeny, friends, wife and relations. ‘Attachment’ is due to 
pleasure or affection—he is devoid of it. Free from ‘malice 
‘towards all beings’—free from all feelings of enmity even 


55] The Vision of the Cosmic Form 383 


towards those who have wronged most. He who answers to this 
description comes to Me, I being his supreme goal. He has no 
other goal. This is My counsel for you, Arjuna! 


eta ERREI carrera aera erage AA THOMA: 
Ba aaa iar faaea aT MARTENSEN: 112 211 


ZEMSTA: 
CHAPTER XII 
YOGA OF DEVOTION 


mà Area aa a Wed aa aa s o faery (22) J 
TAa afaa sea atp (22.44.) g | wa: He a: 
gad: gent: faaea a aa A aA wara — 


0.1. In the chapters from the second to the tenth which deals 
with the divine powers, has been set forth the worship of 
Brahman the supreme Self, the Imperishable devoid of ad- 
juncts. In certain contexts, worship addressed to You, God 
with the adjuncts of Yogic powers and marked by the Sattvic 
power of omniscience has also been discussed. In chapter 11, 
entitled the Cosmic Form, has been revealed, for the purpose 
of this very worship, Your cosmic form, primordial and lordly, 
the very Self of the entire world. After revealing it, You said, 
‘“‘Whoso performs My works, etc.” (11.55). Therefore, desiring 
to know which of these two approaches is superior, I, Arjuna, 
ask You: 


AAT SATA : 
Us Adaya I wees TATE | 
Darter ATT H aaa: wei 


Arjuna said: 
1. Of those devotees, who, ever integrated, worship 


1] Yoga of Devotion 


You thus elaborately, and those who worship the Un- 
manifest, the Imperishable,—who among them know 
Yoga best? 


11. Ut of n ‘wa ga adtarardoges oe at aA ‘Acta’ 
(22.44.) gearfea 1 wa aaaqer: tease wracHaiel aard ae 
ama: aa: Waa: ee: | A We AAMT: Ae: ca aafaa 
fre aA afa 1 tat at aft aada: aera: 
OS ROMA A Ah Fad, xt adh aia; a I wat 
aferdta—firster Sarat: feat: faren, aq à are coat — Ai 
sae wea è Maa, F aada fa: ? sors: i 


1.1. ‘Thus’ refers to the ideas set forth in the immediately 
preceding verse (11.55). “Thus ever integrated’ are those who 
unintermittently apply themselves to God’s works—works for 
God’s sake, etc., as already explained. There are on the one 
hand those devotees, whose sole refuge is Yourself and who 
meditate on You in Your cosmic form. And there are, on the 
other, those who have renounced all cravings and all works, 
and worship the imperishable Brahman described earlier— 
Brahman who is unmanifest, being adjunctless and beyond 
the range of the senses. What falls within the range of the 
senses is said to be manifest. The root anj refers to the act of 
manifestation. This Imperishable is other than the manifest 
and, further, is distinguished by the adjectives set forth in this 
context. Of these two groups of devotees, who is it that under- 
stands Yoga better? This is the import. 


20. ù g Amam: aerate fader, F avaq fase; 
ad sft aq aaa aq wart aaa: (BIH P2-Xo) AT m 


_ 2.0. Let us leave alone for the moment the worshippers of 
the Imperishable whose perceptions are valid and who are 
free from all cravings. What may be said about them will be 
stated later (verses 12—20). As regards the others— 


386 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XII 


Sarga : 
aandaa Aat A mi fag VATA | 
TEM maA A THAAT AAT: NRN 


The Blessed Lord said : 

2. Setting their minds on Me, ever integrated, those 
who worship Me with absolute faith, I deem the best 
integrated. 


21. af ef u A fret Aaa Aa aA wa: A WT: 
q: Aaaa SANAA aa: Aad: SNA WAT 
qar spea Stat: À, X A AA gram: Aa: aT: qaa: afer 
ad fe a fen aaa agafa (aAa aama at 
amaf), aa: ge ary A ga: af aT I 


2.1. The best integrated are those devotees who ‘setting’ — 
concentrating—their minds on Me, worship Me, the supreme 
Lord with the cosmic form, the supreme Master of all those 
who have mastered Yoga, the Omniscient lifted above all per- 
ceptions due to afflictions like attachment and so forth. This 
is My view, for, they are always integrated in the sense of the 
last verse in Chapter 11. Their faith is ‘absolute’-—pre-eminent. 
They spend their days and nights fixing their mind on Me 
without a break. So it is poper to describe them as the best 
integrated. 


3.0. fe gat aera: a wafer’? vy, fad am sft aq amet aq 
T — 
3.0. Are not the others best integrated as well? Not that 


they are not. But listen to what may be remarked in regard to 
them: 


l aafaa TITAS | 
AAMT aa A peaa MAT NN 


2-3] Yoga of Devotion 387 


3. But those who elaborately worship the Imperishable, 
the Ineffable, the Unmanifest, the Omnipresent, the 
Imponderable, the Immutable, the Immobile, the Un- 
wavering; 


3.1.4 g A n a g wat ada ama aa gA a 
frase amd, aa. afad, were a eA aAA aa A a 
qma of aaa saad | Sai A A SIT AT 
wad, Aq Bat araat 1 swerreq fae ae yarera—adat 
amaa ary afer a—aq fe aoa aq aaah fara, afg- 
ee ee ae ee 
‘Rearend A Hewes: fag: ath 1 car a afara 


I APY (È. 3. ¥.2o.), ma Ara gear (9.2%) zÀ sofas 
aq aq qe, aa ae Raa tera aaraa 1 aaraa fea 
PEE | AT VA HAGA | FEAT aS, ae wa, fact seat: 


3.1. ‘But those who worship the Imperishable, the In- 
cffable’; being unmanifest, It is beyond the range of ia 
and is nel capable of being described. It is ‘Unmanifest’, 

It is not revealed by any means of cognition. Those who A 
borately worship? means—worship in all possible ways. 
‘Worship’ means a prolonged state characterised by the flow 
ofan identical idea, like a flow of oil, after the mind takes up a 
theme as its object (of meditation) in conformity with the 
‘Sastraic prescriptions. Another adjective of the Imperishable 
is offered—the Omnipresent like space spread everywhere. The 
‘Imponderable’ : what is within the range of the senses is, also, 
an object of thought, its opposite is the Imponderable. ‘The 
Immutable’ (kutastha) : what is attractive outside and defective 
inside is kuta, as borne out by expressions like, “‘having a false 
form”, “false evidence”, etc. these illustrate the well-known 
sense of the term kita. Similarly what is variously named maya, 
avyakta, etc., and what has, within it, numerous seeds of em- 
pirical life like nescience and so forth is also kuta. Vide the 
scriptural texts (SU.4.10; BG.7.14) bear out this sense. What 


388 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XII 


is present in kita as its presiding Power is the Immutable. Or, 
it is what stands as a mass (kita). Hence It is the Immobile. 
Being Immobile, It is the Unwavering, i.e. Eternal. 


afafa AAT ANTE: | 
a maafa Ae adag Tat: wei 


4. Controlling all sense organs fully, with the cogni- 
tion of sameness at all times, devoted to the welfare of 
all beings, they attain Me, indeed. 


4.1. afer eft n afar aera fro siga faaan gf- 
aqai, waa adteaq Hr TAGE: TAT Tem afe: Aer gerrena 
at angen: 1 a a wafer: d mafa ary wa aduafed um 1 ag 
at amet fafa “at a maaa” fa, ‘art carta A ad (9.2) af 
fe ser a fe Wraeaeq sal Hae, HATHA AT ATRUF I 


4.1. ‘Controlling fully’ i.e. withdrawing all sense-organs, 
and at all times, with ‘the cognition of sameness’, in pleasures 
and pains alike, the sages attain Me, indeed; they are devoted 
to the welfare of all beings. However, no remark about them 
is called for. It has already been stated (7.18) that the knower 
is verily My Self. Remarks about their level of integration are 
inappropriate; for they are entirely one with the Lord. 

But, 


FMS HATH ACCA SA HAH ATA 
werent fe ahaa eect is 


5. Their toil is harder, their minds being set on the 
Unmanifest ; embodied beings find it hard to tread the 
path of the Unmanifest. 


5.1. For: Ba u rea: ahrrac:—aeafe qepatfaqaot afin: wa 


4-6] Yoga of Devotion 389 


PA, afraaceg aan Toreaefra eerhraraaiccanrfafire:— 
YoU AHAda AM Aah At: AaT Fy yseacrawmada: av AAT- 
waaay | eer fe aema (at) aha: aana ga (ar) eats: 
eerhrarrata: aA, aa: seer: AAPA: | 


5.1. ‘Their toil is harder’. Though the toil of those who do 
My work and so forth is great, greater is the toil of those 
whose Self is the Imperishable, 1.e., those who behold only 
the Self; for, they have had to renounce conceit in the body. 
Their mind is attached to the Unmanifest. So their toil is 
harder. The goal (gati) whose essence is the Imperishable, 
being Unmanifest, is attained painfully by the embodied who 
have conceit in the body. 


60. Tae Ad adt aq safeserq (BT 22. 23-20) 
AUT: I 


6.0. The life and works of the worshippers of the Imper- 
ishable will be set forth later (in verses 13—20). 


ag aattr watt ata EA RATT: | 
Waray WT Al calaed Varad we 


6. Those, however, who surrender all works to Me, 
making Me their supreme (goal) and worship Me, 
meditating on Me in a state of undivided union; 


61.4 g aa ua g aattr sath ate Sat aay qa: aE IT 
ast J AIT: at: waa va aa wad saerad freq aq 
aqa: fragt: SIA N 

aur fey ? — 


6.1. Those who surrender all works to Me, the. Lord, 
regarding Me as their supreme goal, meditating on Me, or 
thinking about Me in a state of undivided union, or concen- 
tration, without having any object of thought other than the 


390 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XII 


Lord with the cosmic form, and worship Me—what happens 
to them? 


ARE ATTA HAANEN | 
ware a fared menaira iit 


7. Of them (all) who have set their thoughts on Me, 
I shall soon be the deliverer from the sea of empirical 
life leading to death, O Arjuna! 


7.1. tot aft n det maA we Hat: aRgat—Ha: zfa ? 
MSHA ATTA FAH: AAT: ATT, F UT AMT FT AMT, 
zaq, TENT FTAaTLaTIU HE avr agal ware a froq—fe 
afg ?—fasta tort | afa avatar nfa fered nafaa anga 
at: i dt raaa: AIT 1 

aq: Ua, TeATI— 


7.1. I, the Lord, shall deliver them who are solely engaged 
in worshipping Me. Deliver from what ?—the sea of ‘empirical 
life leading to-death’. Being hard to cross, it is called a sea. 
Thence shall I deliver them. Not after a long time, but ‘soon’, 
indeed O Arjuna! for they have concentrated their thoughts 
on Mein My cosmic form. 

This being the case, therefore, 


maa at ataecd ala ate free | 
frafacata nda aa Hed A ATT: ic 


8. Fix your mind on Me alone; let your understanding 
be absorbed in Me; henceforth, doubtless, in Me alone 
will you dwell. 


8.1. Tata aft ui afa wa fret Sat wa: agafar FATT 
ema | af va aaa pii ate a maea fra i aa: a fF 
aq of ? ay—frafata fracafa fata nearest fa am 
afafa va aa attra FA | a dar, dae aa A ade: 


7-10] Yoga of Devotion 391 


8.1. ‘On Me alone’—1.e., the Lord in the cosmic form; fix 
your mind with its characteristics of doubt and imagination 
on that form. Let your ‘understanding’—whose function is to 
decide—‘get absorbed in Me’. ‘What will all this mean to 
you?’ Listen: Surely you will dwell as one with Me and in Me, 
‘henceforth’—after the body’s fall. Have no doubts on this 
issue. 


aa fad amei a nfa ata ferry | 
MAA Tat ma TISHAT SI 


9. If you are unable to concentrate your mind stead- 
fastly on Me, seek, Arjuna! to reach out to Me through 
the Yoga of repeated efforts. 


9.1. wa Bf uu wT we aa ware aa ata fad aarng errata 
fet was a wetfe aq, dt tarq were, fare vaferq 
Moray AAT: TACT FETT: SINT SAT: Tes AT: AAS THAT: 
aT weareatty at fasted gee seized arg è ara! tt 


9.1. In the manner described, if you are unable to con- 
centrate your mind steadfastly on Me, then through the Yoga 
of ‘repeated efforts’ —repeated efforts consist in fixing the mind, 
after withdrawing it from all else, on a single object, and 
Yoga means the concentration resulting from such efforts— 
‘seek to reach out to Me’ in My cosmic form. 


MAASAI ACHAT AT | 
miaa watt Faq fatararceata oi 


10. If you cannot make even these repeated efforts, 
devote yourself wholly to My works. Even by doing 
works for My sake you will achieve perfection. 


10.1. were eff 1 snare aft saad: aft ae: afa, afg nea- 


392 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XII 


wae: wa, Wet ay ued, dere: AHA, AHA: gar: | 
ater srarceata | 


10.1. Ifyou cannot even make repeated efforts, are too weak 
to do so, devote yourself wholly to My works. Work for My 
sake is ‘My work’. Devote yourself to that, let the doing of such 
work become the main thing for you. This is the idea. In the 
absence of repeated efforts, even by the doing of My works 
you will achieve perfection through mental purification and 
attainment of the knowledge of Yoga. 


HATTA By nea TA: | 
TARAHGAM Ad: FE AATHATT W221 


11. Now if, resorting to union with Me, you are unable 
to do even this, then, with self-control, renounce the 
fruits of all works. 


11.1. aag afr uu ae ga: wad aft aq oH ada ad Fd 
arch: afa, wart arhre:, ata faama sath area aq eer aut 
ase a: AAT, a aha: aq—adadtaoam ade Ht Hoque 
adatai At: Ada He Dacha daaa: aq srs: N 


11.1. Again if what has been stated—devotion to the doing 
of My works—is beyond your ability, then, resorting to union 
with Me, and endowed with self-control, renounce the fruits 
of all works. ‘Union with Me’ means performing works with a 
sense of surrender to Me. ‘Self-control’ means a disciplined 
mind. 


12.0. zari Wantqaocarmt cfs — 


12.0. Now is lauded the renunciation of the fruits of all 
works: 


11-12] Yoga of Devotion 393 


aa fe maranana faterert | 
CATATHA HAAS UAC AAC WL 


12. Knowledge is superior to repeated efforts; superior 
to knowledge is meditation. Renunciation of the fruits 
of works is superior to meditation. Of this renunciation 
is peace born, immediately. 


12.1. Aq: sft u Aa: fe maaa marea ?—(a) aari 
mara sear aft arate magis ecard fated | aaa: ear 
aft amor: ‘fared ea aqysad 1 wd adorn qaw- 
faaora: (22) mA: SUA: ACTH AAT AAT WA AME, 
TT BoA AMAT I 


12.1. ‘Superior’ or more praiseworthy is knowledge—than 
what? Than repeated efforts without discrimination. Better 
than knowledge is meditation guided by knowledge. It is 
understood that superior to the meditation of the man of 
knowledge is the ‘renunciation of the fruits of works’. Thus is 
peace born of the renunciation of the fruits of works, qualified 
as stated in verse 11. Then takes place the quiescence of em- 
pirical life and its cause; it is not postponed to a later hour. 


12.2. wae HAT sacar yatafescrrrarqssrararcnt aAA PATT: 
aged sft sofas, a aAa apr ‘May fe aA gaa- 
fafirsccareart adatom: cad, AHTHATIATASATA AA- 
meat aca | HT TA eafaca ? ‘ma ad a [F5 v. &.2¥.] 
sft adamga BAe TH; ad wf (23. X.X. S) 1 area 
aq aeda weft) ae a fay: erate waa wa 
mfa: 1 sft aiamaa aeons aft afer efa aa- 
maa ASHHHSA MT: Bt ITAA | TMT sett aa AE: 
ta: af garter: aff aren: aearedaravreanq eqaed | ud pA- 
Read HAI Aaaa aT 1 


12.2. The renunciation of the fruits of works has been pre- 
scribed as the means to spiritual well-being in respect of the 
ignorant man engaged in works who is unable to undertake 


394 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XII 


the spiritual discipline set forth above; it was not commended 
right at the start. And so this renunciation is extolled as a step 
in which the series of means set forth in the words ‘Knowledge 
is superior’, etc., culminates (12.12). It is prescribed as fit for 
one who cannot take up the richer complex of means. On the 
basis of which attribute is this passage a commendation of 
renunciation of the fruits of works? According to KU.6.14 
‘When all desires are rejected. ...’ immortality is held to 
result from the renunciation of all desires. BU.4.4.6 has aiso 
proclaimed this truth. Objects of desires are the fruits of works 
enjoined by ‘sruti and smrti. On renouncing them, the knower, 
established in meditation, indeed wins immediate peace. This 
general feature of renunciation of all desires is shared by the 
ignorant man’s rencunciation of fruits also. Hence this praise 
of the renunciation of the fruits of all works is meant to create 
a zest for it. For example the statement that the Brahmana 
Agastya drank up the sea extols the modern Brahmana, too, 
Brahminhood being the common factor. Similarly owing to the 
renunciation of fruits, it 1s declared that Karma Yoga pro- 
motes spiritual well-being. 


13.0. at @ separate afar fered Sat Aaa: 
am sw, Sart safer = | daaraf (23.22) aft 


(22.¥) eee Sees sare Oe oe 
Ta Sarda aaa Aag aqaa? (22.9) ef 1 ate fF 
PICT ACHAT: à wat: Aee, AENT: va & eft ETT- 
piana aa sft aes er | 

sa ae aT oa RA war aa arataa aa 
arta Aaga va safer | a a AKT Sat TATA: Fear 
safa wri frfasta sha, fact | aea AATA 


13.0. Here, assuming the distinction between self and God, 
Yoga, or the concentration of mind on the all-pervasive God, 


13] Yoga of Devotion 395 


has been praised: also has been praised the performance of 
works etc., for the sake of God. In 12.11 1t is suggested that the 
worshipper of the Imperishable, who perceives no difference, 
cannot reasonably perform Karma Yoga, as this is an offspring 
of nescience. Similarly the Lord shows the impropriety of a 
Karma-yogin betaking himself to the worship of the Im- 
perishable. The verse 12.4 (they reach Me alone) states that 
the worshippers of the Imperishable freely attain ‘Aloneness’ 
while 12.7 (J am their deliverer) shows the dependence of others 
on the Lord. If the worshippers of the Imperishable have been 
assimilated to the Lord—have become His very Self since they 
see no difference whatsoever—it will be improper to suggest 
that they are the objects of an act of deliverance. 

Also because the Lord, very much concerned with Arjuna’s 
well-being, instructs him only in Karma Yoga, that is un- 
related to right perception but is entrenched in the per- 
ception of difference. None who has, through the right means 
of perception, known the Lord as his very Self, seeks to sub- 
ordinate himself to any one else or thing. That will be self- 
contradictory. Therefore the uord begins to set forth the group 
of characteristics (verses 13ff) which directly immortalizes the 
worshippers of the Imperishable who have secured right per- 
ception and who have renounced all desires. 


HIT ALAA AT: HET Ua T | 
fade freegre: aag aga: eat 23h 


13. He hates no beings, is friendly and compassionate; 
he is rid of all sense of possession and of egoism; he 
is the same in pleasure and pain and is long-suffering. 


13.1. aT eft n aget adyarat adi wart aA set, AAA: 
Saega a fafaa fæ, water waht mada vente l ta:—firrara: 
aa, faaan add SA ÀA: 1 eer: wa a, He ET fa aa, 
carl Pan, aAa, Aare zat: 1 fda masaa: | 
frage friars: | aaga., aa Gage N: aA TET 


396 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XII 
a: aaz: aga: | gat etarary aE: atfreat ar afaa: war sect I 


13.1. ‘He hates no beings’, not even what causes pain to 
him ; for he sees all beings as his Self. ‘Friendly’—he maintains 
friendliness, or the attitude of a friend, to all. ‘Compassionate’ 
—compassion is kindness to those who suffer. He who has 
compassion extends freedom from fear to all living beings; he 
is the world-renouncing mendicant. He is ‘rid of all sense of 
possession and egoism’. He looks upon pain and pleasure with 
detachment. He is not moved to act by pain and pleasure. 
He is long-suffering, i.e., reacts without emotion even when 
abused and smitten. 


age: Add ANT uae seta: | 
matana Age: a A fra: uevu 


14. He is happy without a break, integrated, self-dis- 
ciplined and of steadfast resolve; He is My devotee who 
has steeped his mind and intellect in Me; he is dear to 
Me. 


14.1. eqs: St u aque: aad fa, eefericarorey ort sont 7 
SAAS: | TAT praca fardd a aeqes: | wad avi aarfeatac: | 
Tara Aaaa: | gefa., ge: fer: frame: AA: Ter ATN- 
qaf a: gefa: | maaadaaa: agafar HA, IAA- 
amsa afg, nà wa aft enaA cer anaa a mafia- 
ata: | a: ta: Am a A fro i frat fe masat a a 


c 


an fea: (9.29) ofa aca seam afad aq ge wea 1 


14.1. ‘Heis happy without a break’ i.e., always; both when 
he gains and when he fails to gain sustenance for the main- 
tenance of his body, he has sense of sufficiency. So too is he 
happy both when he gets goods things and when he fails to do 
so. He is ‘integrated’ without a break, his mind being con- 
centrated. He has a ‘disciplined mind’—a disciplined nature. 
His mind and intellect are steeped in Me. Essentially the mind 


13-16] Yoga of Devotion 397 


imagines and doubts; the intellect is the organ of decision. 
The reference here is to the renouncer who has fixed both his 
mind and intellect on Me alone. My devotee who answers to 
this description is dear to Me. What was hinted at in 7.17 is 
elaborated here. 


GAAtigadd Brat Staratigsta A A: | 
ganda AR a: ae a A fra: ue 


15. From him the world does not shrink, nor does he 
shrink from the world. He is free from elation, intoler- 
ance, fear and agitation. He is dear to Me. 


15.1. Ferg eft u wenq iaaa: + vient a vet weet a 
Arad, 7 daa ate: Ta star + sent Ta, wiahatet,, 
aia wah wi a year È asthe: qeg faent a- 
moa sear: Aaaa Sg., wat: xafesyar, wr ava:, ST: 
Serr, È: AH: q: q: q À faa: n 


15.1. From that renouncer ‘the world does not shrink’-—- 
the world is not agitated by him ; ‘nor does he shrink from the 
world’. He is free from the feelings of elation, intolerance, 
fear and agitation. Elation is the mind’s upsurge when any- 
thing pleasurable is won; it is marked by horripilation, tears, 
etc. Intolerance is impatience. Fear is the emotion due to 
alarm. Agitation is the state of the antagonised mind. He is 
devoid of all these and is dear to Me. 


amda: fada SrA MATA: | 
aatem at agen: a A frat: ween 


16. Dear to Me is My devotee who craves not, is pure, 
an adept, indifferent, unworried and who shuns all 
undertakings. 


398 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XII 


16.1. water: aft n ster: faafaa ater wer arfed 
a wage: free: | ae, aAa amaa a AAA aera: ot er, 
TAAA BAY AT: marad wad wat laada. + Heafaq fare: 
qe waa a: a Aaf: | AT: aa: | aaeoa, 
arom sf area: zerqanewnrais armed Fair wate: 
avy Tham ate ser efa aaam a: wee: a: A fer 

fra— 


16.1. He ‘craves nothing? of what concerns the body, 
senses and objects—he cherishes no .desires. He is ‘pure’, 
having cleanliness both external and internal. ‘An adept’ is 
he who is competent to grasp factually and at once all kinds 
of developments. He is ‘indifferent’, for he takes no sides with 
friends, etc. He is ‘unworried’ or fearless. He ‘shuns all under- 
takings’. Undertakings are activities aimed at pleasures here 
and hereafter and prompted by cravings. My devotee habitu- 
ally renounces them all and 1s dear to Me. 

Besides, 


a a gafa a gfo a strata a areata | 
yarpaatcearn afena a: A A HA: uo 


17. He is not elated, does not hate or grieve or desire. 
He has given up both good and evil—such a devotee is 
dear to Me. 


17.1. N a Sf ua: a goats sees, a she aena, + anata 
frafaart, a a ard areata, are ade aea ate sre sfa 
qanan wna a a A fre 


17.1. He is not ‘elated’ when good falls to his lot; he does 
not ‘hate’ when evil befalls. He “grieves not’ when the pleasant 
is lost and does not desire what has not been gained. Habitu- 
ally he gives up both good and evil acts. (i.e. abandons the 
egoistic sense of doing good or evil.) Such a devotee is dear 


to Me. 


16-19] Yoga of Devotion 399 


an: wat a A a aN MANTRA: | 
Maga: A aa: agaaa: ngen 


18. He is the same towards friend and foe as also in 
honour and dishonour; the same in cold and warmth, 
pleasure and pain; for, he is detached. 


18.1. AA: Shr uw ae wat a PA a, ca maaa: Gorafcwaa4r, 
aaa ag a, ada agfa: 1 
fra— 


18.1. Towards ‘friend and foe’ the same, as also ‘in honour 
and dishonour’ or adoration and scorn. He is the same in cold 
and warmth, and scorns pleasure and pain’ ; for he is detached 
in all circumstances. 


gafara arquet at afaq | 
afata: afarie frat ae: ues 


19. He treats alike contempt and praise; is silent, con- 
tent with whatever accrues; he is homeless and stead- 
fast—such a devotee is dear to Me. 


19.1. Ter sf uu geatrearegéa: frat a gaa fret t get 
mea a: gaera: 1 AA array saree | ag: Ga Haha 
Aafaa; Tay SHA 

aa dafaret at dafar: | 

qa Fray Wat TATA ear ara fag: 
— [mfi 264. 22.] eft fea—ateta: frea: ara: fara: 
frag: a fart wer a: aada, ‘arm? gerfeeqeraaq 1 fercafe: 
fera vordaegqfavar ae ate: a fercafa: | afa A fra ae n 


19.1. He treats ‘contempt and praise’ in the same way; he 
is ‘silent’, having controlled his speech. He is content with 
watever means is available to him to maintain physical exist- 


400 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XII 


ence. Thus has it been declared: “Clad somehow and fed 
somehow; resting anywhere—such a one the gods reckon a 
veritable Brāhmaņa (M.Bha. 12.245.12) 

Besides, he is homeless—having no fixed abode to dwell. 
‘He is a liberated soul who has no attachment to a room, 
water, clothing, sacred tanks, houses, seats and even food.’ 
(quoted by Anandagiri). His understanding about the Real 
is firm. Such a devotee is dear to Me. 


20.0. aae adai [2323] Ra mra faga- 

Amai danii an an A Ao 

20.0. The Lord concludes the list of characteristics, begun 
in verse 12.13, of the worshippers of the Imperishable, the 


renouncers who have shed all desires and are consecrated to 
the knowledge of the Real: 


ag matafi qate Tara | 
TEMA ACTTAT AeHledsata A frat: nol 
20. Those devotees who nurture, indeed, those immor- 


tal virtues set forth above, with faith, deeming Me the 
supreme Being, are exceedingly dear to Me. 


20 | Yoga of Devotion 401 


ara Se Taya BRET aera: sass, fact: fer at ara farfar 
— ofa area: ii 


20.1. Those renouncers who ‘nurture’—live upto—‘the 
immortal virtues’ or immortalizing virtues as set forth above— 
i.e., the righteous monks, ‘with a faith that deems Me as the 
supreme Being’, are exceedingly dear to Me. I, the imperi- 
shable Self, am their final or unsurpassed goal;/they have 
resorted to the devotion distinguished by the knowledge of 
the Real. In the words ‘those devotees are exceedingly dear 
to Me’ has been concluded, after due explication, the prin- 
ciple laid down in 7.17 (‘I am indeed extremely dear to the 
knower’). As one becomes dear to the Lord Visnu, God 
Supreme, by practising the immortal virtues recounted here, 
the seeker after liberation who would attain to the beloved 
abode of Visnu should practise them. This is the sense of the 
entire context. 


Saaana: FIT aaar afe- 
AN ATA NST: RN 


AAYSSTISEUTA: 
CHAPTER XIII 


THE YOGA OF THE FIELD AND 
THE FIELD-KNOWER 


oi wart reat go ai ght Sacer Preprint seca firat 


Aaaa a ‘aetet aaaray [ 22.23.] searfear araq ar- 
aafe: qma emaa ifa freer mar à ade A 
THY | ST ga: l aama gr. aaa wrad: far: wafa ? 
—ef wart: a at aa: AA safe a Ppa aderd- 
porfa ofr ger Amantia frare 
agat | asad aaa: ee TATA | a a aa saa — 


0.1. In chapter VII two prakrtis, natures, of God have been 
mentioned. The first, an inferior one, consists of the three 
constituents and is eight-fold; it is the cause of the empirical 
life. The second is a superior one, living and cognizant of the 
field, whose essence is God. By means of these two natures, 
God is the cause of the origination, sustentation and dissolu- 
tion of the world. The present chapter on the field is begun to 
determine the truth about God by means ofa study of the two 
powers, viz., the field and the field-knower, since God is the 
owner of these two powers. In chapter XII immediately 
preceding the present chapter, in verses 13—20, was set forth the 
discipline of the renouncers who know the Truth. Of what 
kind is the knowledge of that Truth, whose possession together 
with the practice of the characteristics mentioned, makes 
one dear to the Lord? Chapter XIII is begun also in order 
to answer this question. The power consisting of the three 
constituents is transformed into all kinds of effects, instru- 
ments, and objects. Thus it assumes the form of the human 


1]. The Field and the Field-knower 403 


body, sense-organs etc., in order to promote man’s empirical 
life and liberation. The human body is this conglomerate. 
The blessed Lord sets this forth: 


Sonagar : 
ga mA Bide aafaatadiad | 
Uden Afa a sig: aaa stat age: neu 


1. O son of Kunti! this body is called the field; him 
who knows this field, its knowers designate as the field- 
knower. 


1.1. g ofa ul ‘se’ efa adaren ser faferafee ‘ara’ af 1 2 ata ! 
ATA AAT, ACG, Aaa ar aferq athofaerd: ax sfr—‘afa’ 
yee: vaare AA sit wa ahriad sed 1 wad Wat AF 
x: afa fasratfa, masna ma fandtecia, <arnfata A- 
area ar aera faadttacia frre: i afeart sre: saaa ‘eae’ 
sfa—‘sf’ wea: aai wa qiq Aaa. sf way arg: | 
p? afge: at areca faafaa fate 2 ates n 


1.1. What is denoted by the pronoun ‘this’ is specified as 
the body, O son of Kunti! It is called ‘the field’ as it protects 
from injury; or, as it perishes or disintegrates; or as it gives 
rise to fruits of works just as a field does. ‘Jt?’ in the text means 
‘thus’. Him who knows this field—this body ‘from the foot to 
the head’—makes it an object of knowledge, either sponta- 
neous or acquired, they describe as the knower of the field. 
Here too ‘It? means ‘thus’. Who are they? The knowers 
thereof—i.e., of the field and of the field-knower. 


2.0. Va areas set 1 fe waaay area ma aft ? a fa 
sad— 


2.0. Thus have been mentioned the field and its knower. 
Is it all that 1s to be known? The answer is ‘no’: 


404 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XIII 


aaa ate at fafa aAA Ate | 
AIAAAA Ala Tsay At AT UU 


2. Know Me, O Bharata prince! as the field-knower 
also, present in all fields. I deem real knowledge to be 
the knowledge of the field and of the field-knower. 


21. Aaa sf u Aaa aioe a aft ar rapt aimo fate 
mAAR | aay a: aa wenfeerartarmernrtastarn J 
Frea aaraa fats eft afer: 1 2 area! 
Ta aes T MTA warq wafers safe, 
Te AÀ: Frit aq a, aAa aa att feet rae, 
ql wa are a sta aa ahs: wa Sacer fast: 1 


2.1. Know Me, the supreme Lord, who is not subject to 
transmigration, also to be the field-knower as stated above. 
The idea is that the field-knower, present in and variegated 
by these countless fields beginning from Brahma and ex- 
tending down to clumps, is devoid of all differences derived 
from the adjuncts and is beyond the range of expressions like 
being and non-being. Since there is nothing to be known other 
than the truth of the fields, field-knowers and God, My view— 
the view of Lord Visnu—is that the content of right know- 
ledge is fields and field-knowers. 


22. 4 waaay us: wa Hae, a wer agafafem: aren faa 
aq, at: a daft mi; Saa at d: area 


2.2. Objection: Now, if in all fields there is present but 
the one Lord-—none other than He—as the experiencer or 
subject of knowledge, He becomes an empirical agent or 
transmigrator. Or, the sohere of empirical life would cease to 


2] The Field and the Field-knower 405 


exist as there are no empirical agents other than the Lord. 
Both these contingencies are unwelcome since they entail the 
futility of the sastras that teach the doctrines of bondage, 
liberation and their causes, and since they run counter to the 
evidence of perception and so forth. Perception reveals the 
sphere of empirical life marked by pleasures, pains and their 
causes. The sphere may also be inferred as the consequence of 
virtue and vice; for the world’s variety stares one in the face. 
All this becomes inconsistent if man’s self and God are one. 


at a faefa mar [F 3. 3. x] 1 ware oat: fansat: modets 
facg: afe: Aa aa [Fs 2.2.] anaa. Aa: Soa 
afearava gf i an a aa- ‘arfaaree ea [afar 2x0.. | 
zar, ‘gat graa aat [2] sara wi ze ag farses a o aaen 
a arty ag aaa afa aaraa: warerd | yaa: aad—‘se 
ada anf a wfegradieradt faafe: [F3 34], aaa 

ae wate | are: gem aaa [JÈ Ñ. a. 2.22; 
șa. z. 3.¢.], faera fatfa goa’ [Ñ 3.3.2] 1 afage: gaa 
qa wa wate’ [4 3. 2.9.], ‘afaeraraert adarat:’ [F5 3. x4. |, 
‘war aq ada wa’ (Av. 3.2.°.], ‘Aetseraaenaitfa 7 a a 
ra waa etary [q 3. v.¥.20.] | areafagq a: ‘a ae ad wafer’ 
[FF 8.¥.20.], ‘wer wa [WT &.20.] eM: MAT: i Hypa: 
a—‘sartarad art aa gafa wera: [4.24], ‘Sea Aa: ant aur 
ary Rat wa: [4 28.] ‘ae cera fe ade’ [23.2¢.] sare: | 


2.3. Reply: Not so; for, it is proper to distinguish between 
knowledge and ignorance. Vide K.U.2.4: “The two known as 
ignorance and knowledge are in sharp contrast to each other; 
they point in opposite directions.’’ Accordingly, the difference 
between the opposed fruits of knowledge and ignorance has 
been noted as “the good and the pleasant” (K.U.2.2.). The 
good is the sphere of knowledge; the pleasant is the effect of 
ignorance. Vyasa confirms this: “Now these two paths”, etc. 
M.Bha.12.240.6. Also, “These two alone are the paths.” And, 
here in BG, the two disciplines have been set forth. From the 
ruti, Smrti and reasoning it may be known that ignorance 


406 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XIII 


with its effects must be rejected. Here are the Sruti texts: “If 
one knows it here, the Truth is affirmed; if one fails to know, 
great is the loss”, K.U.2.5; “Knowing Him thus one becomes 
immortal here; there is no other path that leads to progress’, 
Purusasukta: Tait.Ar:3.12; SU.3.8; “The knower is afraid 
of nothing”, T.U.2.4. In contrast, “For the ignorant, there is 
fear”, T.U.2.7; “Living within the sphere of ignorance”, 
K.U.2.5; ‘“Whoso knows Brahman becomes this very Brah- 
man’, MU.3.2.9; “He does not know (who deems) he is one, 
I am another; he is like a beast of the gods”, BU.1.4.10; “He 
who is a Sele knower. he becomes all this”, Ibid; “When like 
a hide” ....SU.6.20 and many other Sruti texts in their 
Mousaads: So also passages in the Smrti: “Knowledge is 
shrouded in ignorance; therefore living beings are con- 
founded”, BG.5.15. “This order of creation has been van- 
quished by them whose mind is fixed in equality”, BG.5.19; 
“Seeing the same Brahman everywhere”, BG.13.28, etc. 


2.4. AAT: T— 

aad Hara aaa mear Awa: ofcastatesg | 

WAMATA afa Afama He seq war faferweq i [arf 202. 2«. | 
an a—eerfaq maga: afaa LETETTE: 

A sft ware; agrafa ee A. IETA 

aata aeaa aA aA a Haha een WRT ATAT: | 

qa Ua aa, Aaaa aa wa aa: aapa: aara 

za yaf, an geena mena: | adaa fe Ag: arg neng 

aeaa: fafaa: aaen: tar eÀ gafa: | a a vaa 

gers: eat: wa, emi: ar Gaver | an a aat: ge, 

ami: aT aa | Us gazanar: ea: a gn, afa- 

saaana maga | 


2.4. This also accords with reasoning. ‘“‘Recognising the 
nature of snakes, blades of kuśa-grass and reservoirs of water, 
men avoid them; due to ignorance a few fall victims. Note 
this destination of knowledge as regards its fruits”, Ma.Bhā. 
12.201.16. The fact is that the ignorant, mistaking the body 
and so forth for the Self and impelled by attachment, aver- 


2] The Field and the Field-knower 407 


sion, etc., and conforming to righteousness and its opposite 
undergo birth and death; but those who see that the Self is 
other than the body and the like, eschew attachment, aversion 
and so on, as well as the activities issuing from them; they are 
liberated. None may reasonably repudiate this account. Such 
being the case, the field-knower who metaphysically is God 
Himself, due to differences of the adjuncts of nescience be- 
comes, as it were, the transmigrator, even as the Self (Atman) 
is identified with the body and so on. It 1s well known that all 
living beings unhesitatingly treat non-self like body as the self 
due to ignorance, just as a stump is mistaken unhesita- 
tingly for a man. In this process, of course, human characte- 
ristics don’t get lodged in the stump or. vice versa. Similarly 
the characteristics of the Spirit do not attach themselves to the 
body nor do those of the body to the Spirit. Therefore it 1s not 
proper to predicate of the Self pleasure, pain, delusion, etc., 
for these two are exactly like old age and death, products of 
nescience. 


2.5.4, agaaa; aft aq—enygedt sat wa att ara aN- 
afer seredt afam, eat: g daar: va eatacena:, ofa 
a aa: gea: | wa: seat: safe ag: mena: wala A Aa— 


2.5. Objection: “No, the two cases are not parallel. The 
stump and the man are wholly objects and are mutually 
superimposed due to ignorance by the subject (who superim- 
poses). But in the case of the body and the Self the former is 
object and the latter subject, and yet they get mutually 
superimposed. Thus the two cases are not parallel. So, the 
attributes of the body, though falling within the sphere of 
objects of knowledge, may be predicated of the knowing 
subject.” 


26.7, aiana | wie fe a gn: ary wal gag:e- 
wees maa: mg: area: wafer, aa “Hae arg sat afaq 
ana: water afaarearcftan:, mna: g a aa” afa frèg: 
ama: | a wafer” eft afer aqart— —aferearafracang serra. 


408 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XII 


feaq a, aa, semen a r 1 at ws ate, aerate 
zan: Fat: AaeT: arate afasar weardfia: qf, a aa ag: fata 
gift, qa are: seared area aeafeacariear N 

Ua a afd, aAA att aa: waa: ease Hace A ATETA. 
af + mg i a fe vafaett até aaa at afaa 
IIP: ATH: AT FW: II 


2.6. “Not so, for, then will arise, through mutual super- 
imposition, the contingency that the Self will turn out to be 
inert, etc. If the subjective self can acquire the attributes of 
cognised objects such as the body, etc., that constitute the 
field—attributes like pleasure, pain, delusion, desire, aver- 
sion, and so forth—, a special reason must be furnished for the 
fact that only certain attributes of the field come to be asso- 
ciated with the self. due to nescience-prompted superimposi- 
tion, while others like old age and death do not. That they do 
not may be inferred; for, those attributes are superimposed 
only through ignorance and (not) others like old age, as these 
are to be rejected”. 

In these circumstances, transmigratory life, marked by 
agency, experiences pleasant or painful, etc., pertains only to 
the known object. It is superimposed on the cognizer due to 
nescience. Still, the cognizer cannot be adversely affected in 
any way by superimposition just as the sky is not through 
superimposition on it of impurities, etc., by the ignorant. 
Therefore one cannot even remotely ascribe a transmigra- 
tory status to the divine Being who is also the field-knower, 
present alike in all kinds of fields or embodiments. In actual 
life no advantage or disadvantage accrues to an entity by 
means of a feature ignorantly superimposed on it. 

7 OQ Th A aM: Geert: aa, aq waq 1 se ?—ataens- 
amana fe querer ray: aei faafaay 1 aq a oafracte | 
aq “arate araa” sft ward, aren aft ater feared afer afafa: 1 

afarer aaa aea sit Aq— 

7; aaea: maaa i area: fe ea: oaea atfear 
PaTAAaTSH:, HINNER: AT, ATSIC: aT; AAPISEN TENATA, 


2] The Field and the Field-knower 409 
arma a maon fafrafeete afr augore: afaarazer saree: 11 


2.7. To elucidate it further: The above remark that the 
cases are not parallel is improper. Why? The intended paral- 
lelism is confined to the fact that in both the examples and the 
exemplified, an act of superimposition due to nescience is 
involved. This remains valid. Your contention that it is in- 
valid as regards the cognizer has been shown to be inconclu- 
sive by referring to characteristics like old age and the like. 
It may be contended that due to the nescience, the field- 
knower must transmigrate. Our reply is ‘no’, for, nescience is 
tamasic. Indeed nescience is a tamasic notion; for, basically it 
is what obscures. It gives rise to misapprehension, doubt, or 
non-apprehension. It does not exist where there is the light 
of discrimination. Only where there are flaws due to tamas 
whose essence is obscuration, there operates the three-fold 
nescience such as non-apprehension, etc. 


2.8. TT ae—va ate arqet: afan ? 
a, Hoy A dfatcacared gras: i aq g AA Age afar, 
Tea a aeda aa Tales, TT aa P: aa, 


afai aha, a ag: Sawer | RTA aut NAET + arated 
—aaaeard wa carcnonfatcmaaad ; adacrfaart a dae adarfefi: 
aaea aaa | aena: ae aaa aera  at:, 
at: a pafa aft aa fear: enq i afaferer 4 aa aaa 
pis meat: faa aaan, fee vara frag ue 
paced; ‘atarfecarfartorcarey’ [23.88] ga Saraqaareq N 


2.8. In this context it may be held that nescience is an 
attribute of the cognizer. It is not right. Flaws like blindness 
pertain to the eye, the cognizer’s instrument of cognition and 
not to the cognizer as the objector maintains; so it cannot 
constitute the cognizer’s transmigratory life. So God alone is 


410 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam  [Ch. XIN 


the kshetrajna and not the transmigrating Jiva. Your conten- 
tion that this is illogical is not correct. The defect leading to 
misapprehension, etc., exists in the eye, the instrument of 
cognition, and not in the cognizer. When the eye is cured by 
right treatment, the cognizer’s vision ceases to be defective. 
Similarly non-apprehension, etc., are due to the defects of 
instruments of perception and not of the field-knower who 
perceives. Besides, being objects of knowledge, these defects 
cannot pertain to the perceiver in the way that light pertains 
to the lamp. Being knowable, these defects have to be cog- 
nised by a principle other than themselves; for, all disputants 
agree that in the state of freedom or mukti, where instruments 
of cognition no longer exist, the perceiver has no flaws like 
nescience, etc. If any attributes pertained to the Self who is 
also the field-knower, as, for instance, heat does to the fire, it 
would never be free from it. And it is unreasonable to hold that 
the Self, incorporeal, immutable and all-pervading like space, 
has contact with, or disjunction from, aught else. Hence it is 
established that the teld-knower is the eternal Lord. Vide 
also Krsna’s words (13.31) “Being beginningless and beyond 
the constituents...” 


2.9. a wa afa career meade: are efa Aa 
a; aa: anma at: fe arerarfefe: aa: ae: a weet 
fede: waft 1 ay sere: A? aen fe aarian eea- 
maga: a4: va meaa: gerd 1 a a Al menada ANN- 
ma: aaa 1 TMT a, SATA Saa ata, mendi waz; 
afaa a aaqa gaarfeat aA enaena wa MENT- 
afata, T geaen, TAT I! 

TT WAT: TAHA Tear: va aequd [Ad] gaarfeat AT | 
Wt: amaaa a wera aq | aefaat ga, sae 
qaia, afangar araraewanay ea: arcartea fafaa 
aemeiRi sft Faq 


2.9. Objection: “But in these circumstances drawbacks like 
the futility of the sastras will follow.” Reply: “No, for this 
position is common to all disputants. All who uphold the 


2] The Field and the Field-knower 411 


doctrine of the Self are obliged to maintain this position of 
alleged error. Why then should one of these disputants, 1.e. 
the Advaitin, bother to remedy it?’ Objection: “How is it 
common to all disputants?”’ Reply: “All who uphold the 
doctrine of the Self grant that the liberated selves go beyond 
the sphere of distinctions like the states of transmigration and 
of transmigrator. For this reason, they have not been held 
to reduce the Sastras to futility, etc. Similarly the Advaitin 
grants that his position entails the futility of the Sastras in the 
state of liberation, since the fiva has realised he is one with 
God. However the sastras continue to be relevant in the sphere 
of nescience, of course. All dualistic schools, similarly, hold 
that the fastras are relevant only in the state of bondage, and 
not in the state of liberation also.” Objection: ‘“‘But for the 
dualists of all schools the states of bondage and liberation are 
real in the most ultimate sense. Therefore, as there are good, 
evil, and their respective means, the sastras become signifi- 
cant. On the contrary, for the Advaitins duality is unreal. The 
state of bondage being a product of nescience will have no 
reference to anything real. The self or fiva. also is unreal; 
hence the futility of Sastras is inevitable.” 


2.10.4; Wat: HaeTreacarqart: | ate aaq areas: qA- 
aay TIT CATA, aim at? ama ma fete + aea: 
Rafai sa usta 1 maa a, aiee, afai ar? 
fiia ahaaa: 1 a [aa] fafaaca a, caq: aang, 
araia: | car a ats aA: 1 faaeaea: 
dahare surge yt see, aafeadt aa 4; TA 
qafasga | cat Araceae arfendt sae a warrfaeat wa A- 
ma | a A waa: HAeITA Teed: fread sored wR | 
aa afaa era aearqcraeara: a ofcaead, aa: faafia 
menada: aagi: vat; eft aaa a adaartear gdan: 
are: 1 


2.10. Reply: We disagree; for it is not reasonable to ascribe 
to the Self different states. These states may be predicated of 
the Self as existing either simultaneously or in sequence. Their 


412 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XII 


simultaneous existence is impossible as they are mutually 
contradictory like rest and movement in the same object. As 
for their existence in sequence, are they caused or uncaused? 
If uncaused, there arises the contingency of non-liberation. If 
caused, not being natural to It, liberation ceases to be su- 
premely real. Thus you are obliged to abandon a doctrine 
already accepted by you. Moreover, in regard to the order 
of the states of bondage and liberation, the state of bondage 
has to be thought of as prior, beginningless, and terminable. 
This runs counter to all means of proof—a state of liberation 
with a beginning but without an end! The eternity of an entity 
with states and mutability cannot be rationally maintained. 
To escape from defects like impermanence, if the distinction 
between the states of bondage and liberation is not upheld, the 
futility of Sastras, etc., becomes unavoidable for the dualists 
also. Thus, being common, the defect in question need not be 
remedied by the non-dualists alone. 


211 7 4 wear, ansaa aaa aera 1 afager 
fé Heel: amaa amag; a fagi, faai fe ragt amena 
aaae att at: agfa mea: 1 a fe AAA: IA- 
ae: af ara: saaa: at a aa, feat faaet 1 
qeq T faraka aa, Tagai MAT: aaia: AAA | 
a fe a) ot ee RR’ ef afera mir Prag faofa: ’ Ed 
fem: sf aver: frat quaafa sfacae 1 faafafa 
q srr sfaata:, Tar Pogat: afr i 


2.11. In fact the defect of the sastras’ futility is non-existent; 
for the sastras will remain applicable to the well-known cate- 
gory of the ignorant. Indeed it is the ignorant who mistake 
for selves ‘the ‘fruit and its cause’ (the sense of agency and of 
enjoyership), which are non-selves; the enlightened never do 
so. Perceiving the otherness of the Self from ‘the fruit and its 
cause’, it is inconsistent for the enlightened to mistake the 
latter for the real Self. Even the densest minds—for example 
mad men—do not identify water with fire or shade with light. 
How then can a man of discernment do it? Therefore, the 


2] The Field and the Field-knower 413 


§astras, enjoining and forbidding appropriate lines of work are 
not relevant to one who perceives the Self as other than ‘the 
fruit and its cause’. Indeed, when the order to act in the words, 
“Devadatta! do this’, goes out, Visnudatta, present at the 
spot and listening, does not take it to refer to himself! But a 
mistaken understanding of this kind is in order, provided there 
is a failure to distinguish between him who is enjoined and 
another who is not so enjoined. The same holds true of ‘the 
fruit and its cause’. 


212 a Satara ar wa afa: mearifavar—qe- 
agen amaaa aft—sseneedt wafad: afen, afa- 
weed faafaa: vette; war faqgaretat sataacaeacaeia aay 
aaa Raard: [FF 2.4.29.) n 

a; aafaa. ma va aa meaa faga | 
tinaaa fe magai aa: aaa ae a qia 
[a g. 2.¥.28-20] 1 ama fafaa afafa sfr faga i 

aq IA AT [a.t | 0.2], a Soot d |? | 


a; wasfefar: wa safaia: 1 Siaa aafaa 
aad a waded i aan aceeraret afe “arfer TEAR: aft 7 vada | 
aafaa faistrrrnersanrerensqrten aafaa RA: ATR- 

feist: minsaa: gaT wz wadt gf adai a: 
VAA | Aa: T MENTÁTY |I 


2.12. Objection: “‘But even where there is a perception of the 
otherness of the Self from ‘the fruit and its cause’, legitimate is 
the understanding of the śāstras directions to act for securing 
well-being and to desist from action for avoiding disagreeable 
results in respect of the agent. This is similar to the case where 
a father and his son, knowing themselves as separate from 
each other, still assume as relevant to themselves injunctions 
and prohibitions addressed to them separately.” Reply: No 
because only before the dawn of the perception of the Self’s 
otherness, the conceit of the Self regarding ‘the fruit and its 
cause’ will operate. Only he who has already grasped the 


414 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XIU 


sense of the injunctions and prohibitions perceives the other- 
ness of the Self (cf. B.S.3.4.26, 27). Therefore it is established 
that the sastra, which enjoins and prohibits, addresses itself to 
the ignorant.” Objection: “But for those who perceive the 
otherness of the Self injunctions and prohibitions such as “The 
seeker after heaven shall sacrifice’ (Ap.SS 10.2.1), ‘Don’t 
consume poisoned food’, etc., will not hold good. Similarly it 
will not hold good also for those who identify the self with the 
body. Thus the sastras will remain futile for lack of appro- 
priate agents to act in conformity with them.” Reply: “No; 
for appropriate action and inaction will follow the course of 
established practice. He who perceives the identity of God 
and the field-knower, 1.e., the knower of Brahman, of course 
won't act. So also he who maintains that there is no Self at all 
and no future world, will not act according to the fastras. But 
in accordance with established practice, one who infers from 
the Srutis the existence of the Self and the need for the injunc- 
tions and prohibitions, and who, at the same time, has no 
intimate knowledge of the Self and yearns for the fruits of 
works, will initiate works through faith in the Sastras. This 
fact is clear to all. Therefore, there does not arise the contin- 
gency of the futility of the sastra.”’ 


2.13. faafeat aRt egaa aA wearer afer 
aa— 

a, weafaq va aaa: 1 aaayq fe mag shaq wa feast 
wad, ata gery 1) a a faater aqaded gar; aaa 
wat, afrrcret a aRt, carrer sat:— AN 
sada’ [42x] afr fe ser n 

aed afaa aa: angefaa: wa | + aan daaa afar 
cat q o a a frat cera gia qi 1 a fe aye 
eet Telag wettfa ateqesg | aa afar Aaaa a fafaa ag 
wea | ad: Th se Aaa arte at fafa, (2), amga ae’ 
[4:24.] str au 


2.13. Objection: “But those who discriminate between the 
real Self and the unreal world refrain from Sastraic activites; 


2] The Field and the Field-knower 415 


their followers, imitating them, will also refrain. Thus will re- 
sult the dlie of the Sastra”. Reply : “No; such discrimination 
is very rare. Among numerous beings, rare is he who discri- 
minates, as the case is at present. Deluded human beings, in 
fact, do not conform to the ways of one who discriminates. 
For, activity is governed by flaws like attachment. This is 
borne out by people’s indulgence in activities like sorcery. 
And, at the same time, activity is spontaneous. Indeed it has 
been declared: ‘But one’s own nature acts,’ (BG.5.14).” 
Therefore the transmigratory sphere, samsara, is but nesci- 
ence as experience substantiates. The field-knower, in himself, 
has neither nescience nor its effects. Nor is false knowledge 
competent to infect ultimate Reality. The water of the mirage 
can’t possibly wet the desert or make it miry. Even so is 
nescience incompetent to affect the field-knower. Hence the 
declaration: ‘Also know Me, as the field-knower’ (BG. 13.2), 
and, ‘Knowledge has been shrouded in ignorance’ (BG.5.15). 


2.14. we fa et afon ga “og wa” “Atad” sfa tiea 
afr ? 

JT; sf aq Wiese, aq ay va amaran i ale ga: aaa fafana 
Tea: TTT AMT BA ASHER: fe ie ah Paine, 
mad l are wa ate, ee ee ee 
frarcaatart: 


are wa faye: 1 a J ward get gat a 1 wardvam aq 
Her: areata, Saray a Hat Haw arare acaqeqraewraae | 
qa Ud qà, ma Nafa, aret are: eft i 

Ud Wart: q. a: Wfearqae:, Tareas: Mena wT aaa HOA: 
arener (4;) Tt We see aga mendara aA, 
qaga aaraa a Haq | Tea, earserafaq adaneafaats naa 
SVT: Ii 


2.14. Objection: “But among the learned as much as among 
the transmigrating jwas prevails a notion whose content is the 
judgement: ‘I am so and so; this is mine only.’ Why is this 


416 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XIII 


notion?” Reply: “Listen. Their ‘learning’ consists in seeing 
the Self exclusively in the field (body)! Had they perceived 
the immutable field-knower, they would not have hankered 
after worldly experience and activity seeking to make it their 
own. Experience and activity are nothing but mutation. This 
being the case, hankering after the fruits of action, the ignorant 
man acts. On the other hand, with the knower who perceives 
the immutable Self and who is free from hankerings after 
fruits of actions, activity is inconsistent. When his body and 
organs cease to operate, he is figuratively said to withdraw 
from the sphere of activities.” 

There is yet another type of learning. They affirm: ‘“‘The 
field-knower is God alone. The field is entirely different from 
Him, and is the object of His perception. But as for me, I am a 
transmigrator, happy or unhappy. My duty is to withdraw 
from the sphere of transmigration by means of an experiential 
knowledge of the field and the field-knower by means of 
realising the field-knower through meditation and getting 
assimilated to Him.’’ He who knows thus and teaches thus, 1s 
not a real field-knower. He who thinks thus is the meanest 
type of a scholar who egoistically assigns a novel sense to the 
states of bondage and liberation and to the Sastra.; he also is a 
self-destroyer. Himself deluded, he confounds others; for he 
has had not the discipline of right traditions of scriptural 
knowledge. He is guilty of rejecting what is taught and dogma- 
tically constructing something novel. Hence, one who is thus 
ignorant of right traditions, even though versed in all sastras, 
deserves to be rejected as an ignoramus. 


2.15. Tay “Say Aaa dated sat; aaa a pat- 
ra Fa: waar iaasa: sfa—vat set werent ‘“faeas- 
fart: trara eft i ary? —afrearcfenferrarenr afora 
ag maS + gaa 1 aur a geared: ata: aera HIT: 
q AfA ef 1 eather: sera Faraway Fare 
arto: afaaraferacarracar Seah: | 

aq afaeracay va Aaa aarfteaats: | aa a afarag:facarte 
yaa sad sa AI 


2] The Field and the Field-knower 417 


q aarti 1 a a aa ase: goats, Haq arg: datà: | af fe 
wat: amq, Aag wa area 1 ate areas: at: afaeraca qfar 
lp al e Piata Males, Nanded 
el gir agile i 


2.15. The two objections raised above, viz.,. (l) due to 
identity with the field-knower, God becomes transmigratory 
and (11) there ceases to be a transmigratory state as there is 
none to transmigrate, the field-knower being one with God,—. 
these have been rejected when we distinguished knowledge 
from ignorance. How? It was pointed out that by a flaw 
superimposed due to ignorance, its object, viz., the ultimate 
Reality, is not vitiated. And an analogy was offered to illu- 
strate this—how a desert is not made miry by the waters of a 
mirage. The contingency of*the disappearance of transmigra- 
tory life in the absence of a real transmigrator was set aside on 
the ground that both transmigrator and transmigratory life 
may very well be there as products of nescience. 

Objection: “But the field-knower’s taint of being a trans- 
migrator is just this subjection to nescience; its consequences 
—pleasure and pain and so forth—are directly perceived.” 

Reply: “No; for, whatever is known pertains to the field ; the 
field-knower cannot reasonably be affected by the flaws of the 
field. Whatever non-existent flaws are ascribed to the field- 
knower are, properly, cognised objects and, as such, are 
attributes of the field and not those of the field-knower. How 
then can the field-knower be stained by them? The known 
cannot reasonably be related to the knower. If the relation 
were there, they would not have been known at all. If nescience, 
pain and pleasure were the Self’s attributes, how could they 
be directly -perceived and still be deemed the field-knower’s 
attributes? Once it is established that what is known consti- 
tutes the field, and that the field-knower is only the knower, it 
would be contradictory to state that nescience, pain, etc., are 


418 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XIII 


adjectival to the field-knower and are, yet, directly perceived. 
A statement like that has only nescience as its support.” 


2.16. I3 Me—ar afaar ser? sta 
TY Fad TT Ua | 
wer sad afa? 
wa salafan wer qead ?” efa seq: aAa: 1 wet? — 
grad Fa afaen, aaa aa 1 a a daft raa “ar HET?” 
afr set: ah: 1 at fe areata Soest “aa: wer?” gA sea: 
adaa wate i 
aq fam: gera age verdad daracdish sort: fr 
qa: frets: o a car aaen cere sere, aa: sea: fred: Bq N 
area afaaraat afxearacaeed aid, fe ae arg ” 


mafa, a F IANT | 

aama Aq mfa, ea me ? a fe aa ag: AAN 
aaea aae maa: a ward, aae: aada wa (afa- 
mfainA wa) mg: Bama | a a ae: aaa array 
a: welt, mi a aaa afeva aevafa, wraersre: 1 afte mens 
Neary, AAT, AT WaT HeT: aq aes wer, Terk wer: 
aft aaen afgaat 1 ate ga: aaen aa, weet AA, HART | TUT 
mas arta, a Hat water | wer a wa afaeng-facard: a mg: AAT 
fefaq gafa 1 


2.16. Objection: One may ask here: whose is this nescience? 
Reply: His, by whom it is seen. 
Objection: Who sees it? 
Reply: Senseless is the question, whose is nescience? How? 
If nescience is perceived by you, him also you perceive who 
has it. And, perceiving him, the question who has it, 1s sense- 
less, just as the question whose are the cows is senseless after 
perceiving the owner of the cows. 

Objection: This analogy is inappropriate. Both the cows 
and their owner, being directly visible, the relation between 


2] The Field and the Field-knower 419 


the two also is visible. So the question whose are the cows is 
senseless. But nescience and its owner being imperceptible, 
the question whose is nescience, is not senseless. 

Reply: How does the knowledge of the relation of nescience 
with its imperceptible owner profit you? 

Objection: Being the cause of mishaps, nescience has to be 
eschewed. 

Reply: “He who is affected by it will eschew it.” 

Objection: “Now, that nescience is mine.” 

Reply: “So you know nescience and its owner, the self.” 

Objection: “Yes, I know but not directly.” 

Reply: “If you know inferentially, how is the relation 
grasped? Indeed, it is impossible for you, the knower, to 
cognise your relation with nescience also at the same time; 
for, nescience, the object of the cogniser’s cognition, fully 
engages him. He who is the cogniser of the relation between the. 
cogniser and nescience cannot have an independent cognition 
of that relation alone. That will unavoidably result in an in- 
finite regress. If the relation of nescience is knowable to the 
knower, he has to be conceived as a different knower. This 
latter too with reference to the second knower and so on. Thus 
regress becomes unavoidable. If, however, nescience or aught 
else is knowable, it must remain as knowable alone. This 
being the case, the field-knower, or the cogniser, is not adverse- 
ly affected in any way by nescience, pain, etc.” 


2.17. 7 Wag AN., we Aaaama, sf aqa, famae- 
era wa afafwaer va amgaang; Fat sA WA: 
afafa: aq | wa a aT ata ANERON: 
areata waa: wa afra:—afaarearated: wa Peavercarfe: areata 
sad; Tar aa aa ‘a ow Afa aa (2.2%.), ‘wee: fnaf 
qå: safir ada: (3.29.), ‘area mafai (4.24.) qarferacitg 
daa: aAa a arend werht: | sag a yaar afer: 1 

ed! ate mafa feararcamercnam: cia: ara, afar a 
aariaa, “waif afagesderta, a fager’ sfa m i 


aa wt ma, vata a a fe Aaya wey (20.22) aT ai- 


420 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XIN 


fram: | aderearatragreavactt w ‘aqarata atta ! fresr are 
ar qa (¢¢.40) gare fatten: afro: | ae ee ager, aft 
sqafgaà ıı 


2.17. Objection: “But there is this defect—that the field- 
knower cognises the defective field.” Reply : “No, this cogniser- 
ship is only figuratively ascribed to the immutable essence of 
cognition, as the action of burning is only a figurative ascription 
to the fire that is nothing but a state of burning. Or, it is again, 

just as in contexts like 2.19, 3.27 and 5.15, where the Lord has 
demonstrated the absence in the Self of activity, its accessories 
and fruits, these being only superimposed on the Self due to 
nescience; they are only figuratively imputed to It. So has all 
this been explicated by us. In future contexts also it shall be 
similarly demonstrated.” Objection: “Well then, if the Self is 
naturally devoid of activities, accessories and fruits and thcse 
are but super-imposed on It due to nescience, it follows that 
the agents of activities are the ignorant only and not the 
wise.” 

Reply: “Indeed it is so and we shall demonstrate it in our 
comment on 18.11. In particular we shall demonstrate it in 
our comment on 18.50. To avoid prolixity this topic is con- 
cluded here.” 


3.0. ‘ee wat [2] mR mne area aes: 
wa sa ‘acest meq [2] gente, anfrentfacer fe ater ang- 
Tare: are: sfr— 


3.0. The contents of the chapter on the Field set forth in 


13.1 is summarised in verse 13.3, since it is but proper to put 
in a nut-shell the contents sought to be elucidated :- 


aaa Gea agra afaa wer Aq | 
a aN Weary ACTA A IT 3A 


3. Listen to Me as I briefly set forth what that field is, 


3-4] The Field and the Field-knower 421 


what it is like, how it is transformed and the cause of 
such transformation; also what the field-knower is 
and His powers are. | 


3.1. Tq sft u aq fafa ‘ee ae af aq mea Taare | 
qa xe fafa at, aq age are cate: oy | A wre: agaa: | 
afgarf a: faare: wea aq afgarfe, aa: Gea a ad, “are sere’ eft 
ae: | aaa: aan: faea: w ame: À ra sored: 
THT: TT a: THs: Taq area: areca qarfaatiad qaray 
wary Ha TAT: WN, Feat Haare sears: 1 


3.1. The word tat, ‘that, refers to what was denoted by the 
expression ‘this body’. What this field thus referred to is like 
as regards its attributes—listen to it now. Ca, ‘and’, adds up 
the mentioned items. What its transformations are and 
which effects derive from which causes, and the powers of the 
field-knower (are going to be noted). These powers are derived 
from the adjuncts. Hear from My brief utterance the truth 
about the field and the field-knower thus qualified, and 
hearing, know about it for certain. This is the sense. 


4.0. aq area faafaa cifa aqqfarcrrarty— 


4.0. The truth of the field and the field-knower sought to 
be set forth, the Lord lauds in order to stimulate the listener’s 
intelligence: 


afafrager iat oatfatafat: gee | 
werqataad ganf fafaa: wv 


4. It has been sung variously by seers in varied hymns; 
as also stated in the reasoned and definitive words of 
the Brahmasutras. 


4.1. fA: sft ou acter afasarfehe: ager agwart att SATA | 
orate: gaa amia +: athe fafa aan: maaa: gaa 


422 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XIII 


fama: Taq 1 fea—wseqar: + ua, va: qaarha area wa 
cant & Gab es Gk eae ak ee es © eo 
area: aan atte’ af arqada 1 aAA (F. 3. 2.x.. ) 
sAr. werqaqé: area aaa, gaaf: afar: fatrfat: faa- 
maet: frasana: ert: 11 


4.1. By seers like Vasistha, in various ways, it has been 
sung. The hymns are those of the Rg Veda, etc. By means of 
these varied Vedic hymns it has been sung distinctively. 
Besides, in the words of the Brahmasiutras has it been stated. 
The Brahmasutras are statements pointing to Brahman. Being 
the means to know, 1.e. to attain, Brahman, they are called 
padaih, steps, by which Brahman is reached or known. It 
follows that by means of them also the truths of the field and 
of the field-knower have been stated. “One should worship 
with the thought that He is just one’s Self’? (BU.1.4.7). By 
means of words constituting Brahman-utterances like these, 
the Selfis known. These words are reasoned and definitive— 
are free from doubts and generative of veridical knowledge. 


5.0. ear ahha aa are Wrarq— 


5.0. To Arjuna whose attention has been secured the Lord 
says: 


AETAATUSSTU faama T 
steaarfr asta a oa afratracr: wy 


5. The great elements, the ego, the intellect and the 
unmanifest too, the ten senses and one and the five 
objects of the senses; 


rae er eae ee cee 
carrera | watfa a qearfo (a aoa) | aefa g afaa- 
TH ATTA | AEGIS: AENYTATL ALTA: | ATG LATLT 
as: TTA | AHI AHA UT A, A MH HN ead 


5-6] The Field and the Field-knower 423 


Sarcafe: aa ava gT [9.ev.] A | aaa: THT ETON: 
-a wa acer frat vata: 1 a wee: Acaqeaart: 1 afzarfir 
aAa ot qeeqenemearq aAa, mema ter 
aidin sfa, arf ar; we a—fa aq ?— aa: caret 
gA | Te a faa: aaa: favor: 1 af cart 
agua: agira art i 


5.1. The elements are ‘great’ or pervasive. They per- 
vade all transformations of Prakrti. The elements in this 
expression are subtle. The gross ones will be referred to as 
sense-objects. The ego is the cause of the great elements and 
it is marked by the I-sense. The cause of the ego is the intellect 
whose characteristic is determination. Its cause is the unmani- 
fest or what is not manifest, i.e., the unevolved, the state of 
Prakrti that is devoid of modification or God’s power, de- 
noted in 7.14 by the expression, ‘My maya is hard to cross 
over’. The word eva (too) serves to delimit Prakrti. So far only 
is the realm of the eight-fold Prakrti. And (ca) adds up the 
different items. The ten senses are the ear, etc. Those that 
generate the five-fold cognition are called the cognitive senses. 
The five such as tongue, hand and so forth are the organs of 
action since they serve to accomplish actions. These add up to 
ten. There is ‘one’ more, namely, the mind as the eleventh. 
This eleventh has, as its essence, conception, etc. Then follow 
the five objects of the senses such as sound etc. The Samkhyas 
designate all these together as the twentyfour principles. 


6.0. WT erat am: ef arg araad aatfear:, A afte Aat 
wa, TT Arve sft sae ATaTq— 


6.0. Now the Lord says that what the Vaisesikas call the 
qualities of the self also are the attributes of the field only and 
not those of the field-knower: 


TON SA: Fa FA inada afer: | 
vaa AAT AlaHreyaEay ust 


424 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XIII 


6. Desire, antipathy, pleasure, pain, the group, aware- 
ness, sustentation—these, briefly, are said to be the 
field and its transformations. 


6.1. eT eft uu east gerne anf aa Ya, TF: 
ars aT: Ft at ama sofa qeeafea; ar sa sear 
wee A, TIT AIT | TT ewan at Tae 
wa, FA: asda at soar: a ef; apa ge aa 
aAa | an gaap aaaea, aa aaAa | gaa- 
poraa; maq defy A | aga: fa agit: | aena 
a rere RART: ret slats afta ga, mardana cafat 
am; ST A A, Hac | ah: Tar aaare scarfs farr fra; 
aa HaCaT SAA | aaao Fearless | AT IH 
TI Trae Tay AT aAa Arar ae fano meak seared 
THA II 


6.1. Here ‘desire’ is taken as an attribute of the inner sense. 
Due to it one seeks to acquire, once more, the object that 
yielded pleasure earlier. Being an object of knowledge, it is 
part of the field. So too ‘antipathy’. The kind of thing which 
was once experienced as a source of pain is hated when it is 
met with again. This is ‘antipathy’ ; it too is part of the field, 
being an object of knowledge. Similarly ‘pleasure’ or that 
which is agreeable and essentially, sattva, is also field only for 
the same reason. What is antagonistic, i.e., pain too is field, 
being knowable. “The ‘group’ refers to the body and the 
senses. ‘Awareness’ is a modification of the inner sense mani- 
fested within the ‘group’. Like fire manifest in heated metal, 
the ‘group’ is pervaded by the quintessence of Self’s intellig- 
ence as ‘awareness’. That, too, being a knowable is field. 
‘Sustentation’, by which are upheld the depleted body and 
the senses, also, being a knowable, is field. Desire, etc., are 
cited here to connote all the attributes of the inner sense. 
What was stated is concluded in the words: ‘briefly thus has 
been set forth the field together with its transformations like 
the universal mind’. 


6-7] The Field and the Field-knower 425 


a tas ae eae Gd aq at 
arent weraferetrs germ (4-5) Aaa: aerar aANT: — 
rea araraey easter aa aaa wate, a ‘va aacraearih’ 
[23.22] aRar afasten equa qeait ward | wea g aA- 
array [-p] warfare —aterq aff aaam ara: 
afsaa: wafa, ae: aeardt maar: sed, a amara, wA- 
aaa maaar, faaara wrarm— 


7.0. Already has been set forth in 13.1—6 the field, namely, 
the group of transformations comprising the gross elements, 
etc., and other attributes upto sustentation. 13.5,6. The field- 
knower’s characteristics will now be set forth. The Lord Him- 
self in 13.12 will elucidate the field-knower and his charac- 
teristics. The knowledge of the field-knower and his potency 
yields immortality. But now are enumerated the traits, non- 
egoism, etc., which, as means to knowledge, is styled know- 
ledge, by possessing which one becomes eligible for grasping 
the knowable and due to intentness on which the renouncer is 
said to be dedicated to knowledge. 


AAUAAAEAAA SAT maria | 
araara ara Aiamaa: NoN 
7. Humility, unostentatiousness, non-violence, endur- 


ance, simplicity, service to the teacher, purity, per- 
sistence, self-control ; 


71. aafaa sfa n amama: ma: arfact arena: TUR, 
qaa: aag | aaie fa, TNTA: NT- 


426 Bhagavad Gité Bhasyam [Ch. XIII 


ATTA a Meee acres fame: carat aad: 
aa ami wa rA: areafatrag: N 
fra— 


7.1. Pride is the state of a conceited person who is boastful ; 
its absence is ‘humility’. Showing off one’s righteousness is 
ostentation, whose negation is unostentatiousness. ‘Non-viol- 
ence’ consists in not harming living beings. ‘Endurance’ 1s 
the non-agitation of mind even when subjected to wrong. 
‘Simplicity’ is straight-forwardness, absence of crookedness. 
‘Service to the teacher’ consists in waiting on him who in- 
structs as regards the means to salvation. ‘Purity’ results from 
the washing away of body’s defilements with earth and water 
externally, and internally, from the removal of defilement 
like attachment by cultivating their opposites. ‘Persistence’ 1s 
firmness, the exclusive pursuit of the way leading to salvation. 
‘Self-control’ is the discipline imposed on the body and the 
senses when they.function against our real interest and the 
confinement of their activities to righteous paths. 

Moreover, 


8. Aversion to sense-objects, as well as absence of 
egoism ; the perception of evils in birth, death, old age, 
diseases and pains; 


81. fami af n faan wearfeq qerqey faerie far- 
AA AMY, AACE. ACSI: Va FT Hyeqacrearyg-aarerqasr 
—FH TA TT FT area gala a ay aarfag-ardy Wears 
Amataq | eet marar arao Ve: TAT ATTA ATTN | 
var y Aaea | aa wear sarafdstfacreetarqeria, qf- 
GRRE Se Balas a “ong sat agi gs hear 
aafaa | wrat—pera as: gaa: aay warteyq 
qi aig WH, Ta ACT, aa T, Zea are: | gE- 


7-9] The Field and the Field-knower 427 


fafa wearer: gat, 7 ot: caente ge aft 1 va aR 
zaam faaan try ysoaad | da: aen 
waft, aura A | ud amiga an vert IRGA- 


GUIE CENE tt 
fra — 


8.1. ‘Aversion to sense objects’ like sounds and so forth, 
including direct and indirect objective experiences, as also 
the ‘absence of egoism’. ‘Perception of evils’ in each of the 
following: birth, death, old age, diseases, pains. The evil in 
birth consists in confinement to the womb and the exit there- 
from. Its perception means reflection on the evil thereof. 
Similarly perception of evil in regard to death, old age, viz., 
the decline of intellectual power and enfeeblement of energy— 
their overthrow. So too the perception of evil in diseases like 
affliction of head, and in bodily pains due to alien beings, 
elemental and supernatural. Or, the evil in question is this 
very pain. Birth is pain, and so too death, old age and disease. 
All these are pains, because these occasion pain. They are npt 
so in themselves. Due to sucn perception of evils arises aver- 
sion to them all—body, senses, objects and objective experi- 
ences. Thus takes place a movement of senses in the direction 
of the inner Self in order to perceive that Self. As engendering 
knowledge the perception of evils itself is styled knowledge. 

Further, 


watarhere: gaara | 
fra a aafaacatacertrsctaatag <i 


9. Non-clinging, lack of excessive love for children, 
wife, home, etc., unfailing equanimity in circum- 
stances pleasant and unpleasant; 


91. wath: eft ou wefe—ate: agtfaag fad stray, 


qama: sate: | aag: haga: | farg ae afafa 
va maamaa: mer aa gaa gfafr ar “aeta ae, 


428 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XIII 


wena set a,” safe at ar “aera Aafa afore a” ef i a 
aft l mge FAY TRY Ry ‘arf ae afè 
MAIS aseanifey | TT THA arate wat sad 1 frat 7 
aafaa gafara — qa? gerrena gerai afrert T 3T- 
qaa: amaa: arg geena faa qerfraar 1 genfa 7 
gaf, + gafa a aaa a wad fret aafaa MAR | 
fra— 


9.1. Clinging is feeling pleasure in objects that attract; its 
absence is ‘non-clinging’. ‘Lack of excessive love’—excessive 
love is indeed a form of pleasure that treats what occasions it 
as identical with oneself. For example, when another is glad 
or sad, the feeling ‘I am glad or sad’, or when another is alive 
or dead, the feeling ‘I am alive or shall die’. In regard to what? 
To children, wives, homes, etc. Etc. refers to others like 
dependants who are also causes of it. Both these, non-clinging 
and lack of excessive love, are called knowledge as they pro- 
mote it. And ‘unfailing equanimity’ or sameness of mind 
when good or evil happens. One is not elated when good 
befalls nor gets angry when evil betides. This ‘unwavering 
equanimity’ is knowledge. 


And, 


afta maaa afenar | 
fafamerretacarctastreaate 12011 


10. Unwavering devotion to Me without attachment 
to aught else; resort to solitary spots and avérsion to 
human crowds; 


10.1. Af efa u af a Sat aaa —aqegaarteet “a a 
I Me a a T aft.” gda fafaa aat- 


xT, ot Mfg ees area ef T TET Ae: fafana fT | 


9-11] The Field and the Field-knower 429 


fafad fe eat fad Aafa aa, aa: eaman fafa aad | 
aa: fafamesafacd ma sera | acta: aca aaaf, SATA mga 
aera aaa aad AAT: a, a Aearcaat fatai 
aad, ae: mAn ae: spares aef: mmia 
WAT |I 
fra— 


10.1. Devotion to Me, the Lord, ‘without attachment to 
aught else’ i.e. with unfailing concentration. The conviction 
that ‘there is none other than the Lord Vasudeva; so He alone 
is our refuge’ is devotion with non-attachment to aught else. 
Devotion inspired by conviction that wavers not, is ‘unwaver- 
ing devotion’. This devotion is knowledge. ‘Solitary’ in the ex- 
pression ‘resort to solitary spots’ refers to spots like forests, 
river banks, temples, etc., naturally free from or rendered free 
from unwelcome intruders like serpents, thieves, tigers and so 
forth. He who habitually dwells in such spots is referred to. 
In such a spot the mind is peaceful and the thought of the Self, 
etc., is generated. Hence habitual resort to such spots is styled 
knowledge. Aversion to crowds of people who are unregene- 
rate, unrefined, uncultured is what is mentioned in the text, 
and not the groups of cultured disciplined men; these latter 
promote knowledge. Hence aversion to uncultured crowds, 
which promotes knowledge, 1s called knowledge. And, 


MATA AAATATATATT | 
vasaa Nena USATA 12 2 


11. Unfailing cultivation of spiritual knowledge, per- 
ception of the content of philosophical knowledge—all 
this is said to be knowledge. What is other than this is 
ignorance. 


11.1. een sft n aeara aaa amefa art srearensia, 
aaa faaara: faaan 1 afaa (9) maaana araara ft- 
qafiri aeaa, aA aA: MA: ANAT: aca AA ac- 


430 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XIII 


mami, draamrnorerad fe acarsarcert safe: earfefa | cad 
aafaa oe at sft she, avatar | wart 7a 
weg: wae warned sere facta —arfaed, feud, fear, searte:, 
sata carte wart fasta eoma, darcvafrerercar fA i 


11.1. ‘Unfailing cultivation of spiritual knowledge’: Spiri- 
tual knowledge is that of the Self, etc; constancy in cultivating 
it. What is born of mature meditation on the means of know- 
ledge such as humility, etc., (13.7 ff) is philosophical know- 
ledge. Its content is liberation or the cessation of empirical 
life. Meditation on it is the ‘perception of the content of phi- 
losophical knowledge’. Indeed, only when there is such medi- 
tation may one cultivate the means thereof. The group of 
components from ‘humility’ upto the ‘perception of the 
content’ is said to be knowledge since it promotes knowledge. 
Ignorance 1s what 1s other than this group and opposed to it, 
viz., conceit, vanity, violence, impatience, crookedness, etc. 
Know these to constitute ignorance in order to avoid them; 
for these set empirical life in motion. 


12.0. aAa art wget fag ? gaea are—‘sa aad’ 
zarfa (82) | 

qq wat: faama sarfacarea: | at at: a aad 1 a fe srarfacarfa 
pafa sega: weeses qeq | adda a, Na aM, ata ae WT 
afer seat 1 a fe aaa ama aaa Vasa, sar yefauanr 
mAT afr: | 

ay: A, avafafracarg ara werd efa fe watara; maaga- 
PTCA ST II 


12.0. The question what is to be known by the knowledge 
stated above is answered in verses 13.12 ff. Objection: “Are 
not ‘humility’, etc. (cf. 7 to 11), restraints and observances? 
By means of them what ought to be known cannot be known. 
Indeed, humility and so forth do not precisely determine any 
object. It is universally understood that knowledge alone 
determines its objective content. Knowledge of one object 
does not lead to the apprehension of what is different from it. 


11-12] The Field and the Field-knower 431 


By the knowledge of a pot, fire is not grasped.” Reply : “This 
is no flaw. We have already pointed out that humility, etc., 
are called knowledge because they lead to knowledge and also 
because they cooperate with the direct cause of knowledge”. 


aa ELLAR R EELS LES Ghici GA 
AAAI aA A AAATAGSAT NRN 


12. I shall (now) set forth the knowable by grasping 
which one attains immortality—the supreme Brahman 
without a beginning. It is said to be neither existent nor 
non-existent. 


12.1. Ao ofa n aa maa aq aq saenfa sad aaa eA | 
fans aq afa aa aig: aAa ae—aq Aa aay AAT 
agaa aqd, q ga: Frat seas: | sarang arte: sea aefa arfanq 
a atfeaq aarfeaq—fe aq | ? oe fraa war Sa ef SETA l 


12.1. The knowable is what ought to be known. I shall set 
it forth truthfully and clearly. To rouse the attention of the 
listener, the fruit of such knowledge is indicated. The knowable 
is that by grasping which one attains immortality ; there is no 
more death for the knower of it. That which has no origin is 
the supreme, is Brahman, the theme of this discussion. 


12.2. IF dfaq akna eft ce facta, agate sa af 
aay: aai afa ead efa 1 aaa a aeafa—ag arqearerr 
qa Mth: eT aT Wat zfs i 

act US age arg, ork: Ay aeaf | a g ork aerate, sar 


12.2. In this context some explain the expression ‘without 
a beginning, the supreme’ otherwise, breaking up the com- 


432 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XIII 


pound into anadi and matparam, ‘treating of Me as the supreme’. 
They argue that when the sense is expressed by an adjectival 
compound or bahuvrihi, the possessive suffix that follows is 
uncalled for. The sense yielded, according to them is: I, 
Vasudeva, am Its (Brahman’s) pre-eminent Power. True, 
redundancy may be avoided were the sense admissible; but 
the latter is not the case. What is sought to be taught is Brah- 
man by repudiating qualifications of all kinds. Vide: “It is 
neither the existent nor the non-existent.” This pointing to a 
special power owned by It and the repudiation of all determi- 
nations are incompatible. Therefore, the possessive suffix and 
the adjectival compound yield the same sense; they are em- 
ployed in the interest of metre. 


12.3. aqaa AA wat gout ea Aaa aAA e—a 
aq aq aa sead, + afe saq aq seq | 

aq vert (irada) suc yam ‘Aa aefa efa, aqet 
se A Aaaragead’ sft | 

a agem Ua THT | ey? —aatg fe satay aa wa Afa 
af (3.3.33), Heer (fo. 3.¢.¢.) gara 
vq fafaa “a ee aq’ ofa, ara: anrarearq |N 

TI a ad aa, aq acg ‘ated’ aa a geod | ae ‘ated’ weer a 
saad, aed aq aay 1 fasfafes a“ a aq”, “afta aa tread” 
ofa 7 | 

a7 aaa, aferqgufasararc i 

aq wat: aga: aanas: va 1 aa wa afa sag aff 
aaga fa ar EA, qafas a aT A | 
a, aia aapa aa | aq fe sheet ag 
qafas, aq aaas aaa eng, afer gaas a at 
art | ee aiaia al sw 
qeuas, sad: ‘A anaraq’ sft Fea 1 

qa om farg saa, ELIGE eae ee EEEE) 
afma afafearefy ($3. L3) sft ah 1 

ie ak vet <i esi ane on ee 
ata aff (44 6.0.0.) Aafaa aq — 

a; fakafana: saeafasartufameraecad | ‘werafer’ 
sarf g fafeare: Aa: | 


12] The Field and the Field-knower 433 


12.3. “The knowable, the fruit of whose knowledge is irn- 
mortality, is going to be stated by Me’’—-with these stimulating 
words attention was aroused; then it is said:- The knowable is 
neither the existent nor the non-existent. Objection : “After the 
loud proclamation, ‘I shall set forth the knowable’, what is 
stated, namely, that it is neither the existent nor the non- 
existent, is inconsistent”. Reply: “No, what is stated is quite 
consistent. How? In all the Upanisads the knowable or Brah- 
man has been expounded in terms that repudiate all determi- 
nations. Vide; ‘not this’; ‘not this’ (BU.2.3.6); ‘not gross, not 
subtle’ (BU.3.8.8). The reason is that Brahman transcends all 
verbal expressions”. Objection : “Surely what is not denoted by 
the expression ‘it is’ does not exist. If it is not so expressed, it is 
to be known as non-existent. It 1s self-contradictory to assert 
that something is knowable and yet is not denoted by the ex- 
pression ‘it is’. Reply: “It is not non-existent, of course; for it 
is not the content of a cognition of non-existence.” Objection : 
“All cognitions, surely, must conform to the concept of exist- 
ence or of non-existence. Therefore the knowable also must 
conform either to the concept of existence or to that of non- 
existence.” Reply: “No, being supersensible, It transcends both 
these concepts. Sensible objects like a pot indeed conform 
either to the concept of existence or to that of non-existence. 
But the knowable in question, being supersensible, may be 
cognized exclusively by means of revelation. Unlike pot, etc., 
It cannot conform to the concept of existence or non-existence. 
Hence It is said to be neither existent nor non-existent. As for 
the remark that the two statements, ‘It is a knowable’, and 
that ‘It is neither existent nor non-existent’, are contradictory, 
we observe that they are not; vide Sruti Ke U.1.3—‘It is other 
than the known and also beyond the unknown.’ If, however, 
you maintain that this Sruti also is self-contradictory—as is 
the statement in TS.6.1.1, ‘whether in that world it is or it is 
not’ (i.e. whether the rituals yield any fruit at all), the reply 
is: not so; for the Kena passage advances a truth that ought to 
be known, whereas the TS passage is merely glorificatory in 
character, an arthavada.”’ 


434 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XII 


12.4. Taw maaa: gar atead efa 1 aat fe wee: md- 
Tara sah, wa, sar: saat aAA- 
Ternary: at aaa; A AMAT, Hevea | AT TAT— ‘At “pT 
aft ar maa, ‘vata’ ‘sofa’ afa ar firave:, ‘qa.’ ‘Hor’ aft at 
ma, ‘att Tay afa ar ma: | a a we maq, aa: a aR- 


maaa | arf qraq — ae pra sA finena | arf fr- 
qaaa, farfttaacarq ‘frowns fafa ma (A. F. g.) eft at 1 a 
q qaei, weed | aeaead, afawacarq, arcacarea at Safad Weed 


sae sf aq; ‘at arat aada (A 5.2.2.8.) gearfesiohrer i 


12.4. Reason supports the view that Brahman cannot be 
expressed in terms like existence and non-existence. All words 
used in a discourse are meant to convey sense to the listeners 
by means of their link with notions of class, acts, attributes and 
relations. There 1s no other means to convey sense except this 
conventional link. For example, terms like cow and horse 
convey sense through their link with genera; terms like ‘cooks’ 
and ‘reads’ via activities; ‘white’ and ‘black’ va qualities; 
‘wealthy’ and ‘cow-owning’ via relation. On the other hand, 
Brahman has no genus; so It cannot be denoted by words like 
sat; nor has It attributes. Again It cannot be expressed by 
verbs as It is actionless. Vide SU.6.19—‘Partless, actionless, 
quiescent.’ It is unrelated, for It is one only. Being non-dual, 
non-objective, and spiritual, it is appropriate that all words 
should fail to describe It. Hence such Sruti as ‘Whence words 
recoil’ (TU.2.9.9). 


13.0. Peers «waraergrar aaa airon a- 
aren aafaa staan qarag aTa — 


13.0. Being beyond the range of the word sat or existent, 
there arises the doubt that the Knowable is non-existent. To 
remove this doubt Its existence is affirmed as borne out by 
the sense-organs, the adjuncts of all living beings: 


adari aq aAA TAER | 
adaga adaa fafa n3 


13] The Field and the Field-knower 435 


13. On all sides It has hands and feet; on all sides, eyes, 
heads, and mouths. It has ears on all sides here in this 
world; It stands encompassing all things. 


13.1. ada: Sf n ada: mane ada: moa. mara aA SA ada:— 
mima aq q 1 aihe: Aaaa afaa faa | 
qama Aafaa: sa 1 A a raaraa: aaar aag 1 A- 
miai a aAa fran va Aaaa, A aaa aad g 
a amaga ea 1 sa aaen aft aafaa AA- 
qia aa sa adana gcarfe 1 an fe aaaf aaa 
— sarma faa aA | aft | ada adaga 
ma: maaa: waaa gaara: str wage frais 
qa” eff aama: Teast | aa aA a | adana aq 
aa ads, aaa: r arifa wart a aa aq aaatsfer- 
Rroga, adaa ate: aA, aq se aq ean wt 
mirma, aa ara ad ory fassfe feat wat i 


13.1. The Knowable has ‘hand and feet’ on all sides. The 
existence of the field-knower is apprehended by the sense- 
organs, the adjuncts, of all living beings. It is designated field- 
knower due to Its adjunct, the field. The field is variously 
pluralised due to hands, feet, etc. The multiplicity of the parti- 
culars due to the plurality of the adjuncts like the bodies, is 
unreal regarding the field-knower. Therefore, Its status as the 
Knowable was affirmed through the abolition of the unreal in 
the words: ‘It is said to be neither existent nor non-existent’. 
Even the unreal form due to adjuncts, as it leads to the know- 
ledge of Its reality, is posited as if it were an attribute of the 
Knowable in the affirmation ‘on all sides It has hands and 
feet’ and so forth. Vide'the assertion of traditional scholars: 
“The acosmic (Nisprapanca) is objectified through the process 
of superimposition and sublation.’’ ‘Hands and feet’, cognised 
universally as parts of bodies and each operating in its own 
way, due to the potency of the Knowable inherent in them, 
are the signs of the existence of the Knowable. They are 
ascribed to the Knowable but figuratively. The rest of the 
attributes may also be explicated similarly. That Knowable 


436 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XIII 


has hands and feet on all sides; also eyes, heads and mouths; It 
has ears in the whole sphere of living beings. ‘Encompassing’— 
pervading—all, It affirms Its existence. 


14.0. sorkrearforererataarearT ATT TEATS AT AT gA- 
ani: SIRTE: — 


14.0. The doubt may arise that the knowable has in fact 
organs like hands and feet. To ward off this doubt and show 
that they are only adjuncts due to superimposition, the next 
verse is set forth: 


adaa adteaataatsrery | 
rae chee fn Tora Tuya 


14. Apparently possessing all sense-organs and their 
properties, but in truth devoid of them all: unattached 
and veritably sustaining all; beyond all constituents 
and yet experiencing them; 


14.1. adfa ofa un adana aati a attr frar sareta 
qafat area, aaa wy gfe qearcarq— 
adfa Tard | aft a, aaa wa sadly aft 
sae eae: aaraa. aden: aaar gA- 
qaaa: wanrad str adaa, adfexqearat: gA 
wa aq aa wi; amada seria [as vas.) fa aa 
FATT GA: BUM T aga wa g Tad sa ? wa: ate—adfaa- 
faatat adao sat: | wa: a HCI: aa aT AAA O| 
eT HT AT: — oe eee [a s. 


aq NA, T wei aih aT | weft Ti, a what T Ua 
maeti fe ad, ada agaga | a fe prgfianea: aft frererar: 
wate 1 wea ada ad frais eft | eq a 4 Haq ATT Ara 


14] The Field and the Field-knower 437 


firmer — fni aeaaea qo: a: ated aq aa, cart qa 
q Ta aane aR gaz agrara aat ate a 
sry q aq AT eae: II 

fra— 


14.1. ‘All sense-organs’ are ear, etc., (both cognitive and 
conative) ; the inner organ consists of intellect and mind. All 
these, constituting the adjuncts of the Knowable, are to be 
understood by the expression ‘sarvendriya’. Moreover, the senses 
become the adjuncts of the knowable only through the media- 
tion of the inner sense. Therefore, through these adjuncts, 
constituted of the powers of all sense-organs, internal and 
external, such as determination, imagination, audition, arti- 
culation, etc., the Knowable appears. It apparently operates 
by means of all sense-organs. Vide: “It meditates, as it were, 
moves about, as it were” (BU.4.3.7). Why not then take it that 
in truth It operates? It is devoid of all sense-organs, i.e., It 
owns nothing like instruments at all. Therefore know that the 
knowable does not operate by means of the senses. Vide SU 
3.19: “Devoid of hands and feet, He is quick, a grasper. Eye- 
less, He sees; earless, He hears.” This conveys the idea that 
the Knowable 1s endowed with the power of conforming to the 
characteristics of all adjuncts—i.e., all sense-organs—and not 
that It directly performs functions like movements, etc. The 
sense of this mantra is like that of T.A.1.11. “The blind man 
won a gem.” Since the Knowable is devoid of all sense-organs, 
It is ‘unattached’—free from all kinds of contacts. Neverthe- 
less It sustains all; for, all things are rooted in the Existent, 
and the idea of existence pervades all things. Even pheno- 
mena like mirages are not ungrounded. Hence the knowable 
sustains all. There is an additional factor leading to the appre- 
hension of the existence of the Knowable. Itis beyond the range 
of the three constituents, sattva etc. At the same time It ex- 
periences them all via the perception of their transformations 
like pleasure, pain and delusion. 

And, 


438 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam {Ch. XIII 


Ece AMAA ACAT T | 
qaare gea AThaH a AT LL 


15. Itis both outside and inside beings; it is what moves 
not and what moves. Being subtle, It is hard to know; 
It is far off as well as near. 


15.1. q: efa uw ate: marae ee areacaa safari ater aq 
wa wate Heat ate: Ferd | aa eaea ated gA Va Hate Hear 
aq: sud | ‘afecma eam AeA wg ord et Ferd — wat AA 
wa a, aq aaa aa af, aq wa Ha, Ge wearhra: | ate 
wat AH Wa a Ea waerefana ad aa, feet “ae” cafe ad. a 
fase ef ? sada aaa; aaa aa qenq | Ad: gea 
A wa aq vag aft afada afagery 1 faget q—‘arctad aay’ 
[a 3 r¥.%.], ‘weet aay (q. 5.2.4.2.) georferarra: fret fam- 
TA | afama ge avagaateuste afager areca | afa 
4 da, areecara fageray i 

fra— 


15.1. With reference to the body including the skin, that is 
mistaken for the Self due to nescience, the term ‘outside’ is 
used. Similarly in relation to the inner self, regarding this very 
body as a limit, the term ‘inside’ is also used. These terms 
suggest a vacuum in between. Hence the terms ‘what moves 
not and what moves.’ The physical appearance, resembling 
the illusory rope-snake, is also that very Knowable. If both 
what moves not and what moves—all empirical phenomena— 
are that Knowable, why are they not grasped as such by all? 
The answer is: True, It alone appears as everything; still like 
the sky It is subtle. Being subtle, though Knowable in Itself, 
to the ignorant Itis unknowable. To the enlightened, however, 
Itis eternally known. Vide: “Self alone is all this.” (BU.2.4.6) ; 
“Brahman alone is all this,” (BU.2.5.1) etc. As unknown It is 
far away, beyond the reach of the ignorant even for millions of 
years. To the wise, being their very Self, It is near. 


Also, 


15-17] The Field and the Field-knower 439 


afar a aay aaefa a RATA | 
Aaa a aaa waoy satay zee 


16. In all It abides undivided; yet It seems divided; the 
knowable is the sustainer of being, their consumer, 
and generator, too. ‘ 


16.1. afar ea ou afar a siete aaa aq UA 1 Ad 
aini aa za a feat, tay ca forana | wd F 
waft frais afa aq aa ard a festa | yeaa a ofa 
mami | vafrares safe a maa, war «wearfe: aie: 
frearaferaer 112 


16.1. In each body It is undivided and one like space. In 
all living beings It abides, but, as it were, divided ; for, only in 
bodies It appears. That knowable is what sustains beings 
during their existence; in dissolution It consumes them, and 
at the time of manifestation, It originates them illusorily, as do 
ropes, etc., the rope-snake and so forth. 


17.0. fea—ada faem aff aq a sao aa, aa ae: ale? 
71 fa afte? 


17.0. And if it is not apprehended though universally pre- 
sent, is that Knowable anv better than darkness? No, on the 
contrary, 


miraa assatitedte: WSIS | 
aa aa arate gfe aden fasaa ngon 


17. It is the Light of all lights; It is said to be beyond 
darkness. The knowable is knowledge, accessible 
through knowledge, and entrenched in the hearts of all. 


17.1. vatfast sft ou satfest afer aff aq aa varfa: | 


440 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XIII 


eraser sett fe arfecaretta sardife Aad, ‘aa qefa 
ames: [Aa 8.228], Fee we ade faf Pas bey] 
warfare: ey Ra ‘warfare Fe’ [243] TMNT TAT: 
Ma Wt Hees God | AAS gamae MAATTE 
saai gai ararfrearfe [239-22]; Ji ‘Ht aq aq Ta- 
ef [23.23-29.] sara Teh; MATA, Hay TA MA AT MARON 
sf maa sa, waa g aa AIA | AC Vad aaa gfe aa 
ada mimaa fafi fase fag 1 aaa fe vad aa fared i 


17.1. That knowable is the Light of all lights such as the 
sun. These latter shine only when they are kindled by the 
spiritual fire of the Self. Vide the following mantras : ‘Kindled 
by which splendour the sun burns (TB.3.12.9). All this shines 
by Its light (SU.6.14).’ Also there is smrti in our text: ‘That 
splendour presentin the sun’ (BG.15.12). Itis said to be beyond 
the darkness of ignorance, 1.e., untouched by it. In order to 
encourage Arjuna who was dejected at the thought that know- 
ledge, etc., are hard to win, the Lord says: Knowledge 
(13.7-11), the knowable (13.12-10) and what is accessible to 
knowledge (the knowable as known)—all these three are 
entrenched in the hearts of all. The heart is the intellect; 
these three factors are rightly distinguished only in the intel- 
lect. 


18.0. aea aara: sat wry: acer — 


18.0. The following verse concludes the topic on hand: 


Sfa Aa aut ata RA Aes TATA: | 
Wee Unies agaaa i 


18. Thus have the field, knowledge, and the knowable 
been briefly set forth. Knowing this, My devotee be- 
comes fit for assimilation to Me. 


18.1. ofa ae sf u gf va Aa ngena get [ 23.4-«], TT 
ma amfa aama aadA [ 23.0-22], HF a ‘HG aq aq 


17-19] The Field and the Field-knower 441 


[23.23] gare ‘ame coped’ [2329] aAa, sh eA: 
ee ee ee | afer amg- 


18.1. Thus have the field (13.5-6), knowledge (13.7—11) 
and the knowable (13.12-17) been briefly set forth. So far the 
entire contents of both the Vedas and the Gita have been 
briefly stated. Who is fit to grasp this right perception? “My 
devotee—he who has surrendered his self in its totality to Me, 
the supreme Lord, the omniscient and supreme Teacher, 
Vasudeva; he who has the intellectual conviction that what- 
ever is seen, heard, or touched is the blessed Lord Vasudeva. 
Winning the perception thus set forth, My devotee becomes 
fit to be assimilated to My status, the status of the supreme 
Self; he attains liberation. 


19.0. TT ACA seara Haceyg F wat aA Tet swears, 
vaa wars [9.¢.] afr a say | Aaaa ae 
waar eft? ae ah aT Ferd — 


19.0. In chapter VII, two prakrtis or powers of God were 
formulated, a superior and an inferior one, constituting the 
field and the field-knower. Further, it was affirmed that all 
beings are born of them. (7.6) The question how all beings are 
born of these two powers—the field and the field-knower—is 
answered below: 


wala gea da faguaret saafi | 
feria qorida fate safraraars esi 


19. Know both Prakrti and Purusa—Power and Spirit— 


442 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XIII 


to be beginningless; also know that transformations 
and the constituents are born of Prakrti. 


19.1. watt aft un safe ges a va Hacer A, at vafagest 
sat aff aarat fafe, + fad ante: amt at ami l fraa 
dawg apr aft am aada ufagy 1 safasaacaq wa fF 
preg fac, avait vafren Sac wagafaferfasened: 1 A È 
ai Aca AACA FTO 1 


19.1. Know that both prakrti and purusa are God’s powers 
and that they are without beginning. Since God 1s eternal, 
His powers should also be without beginning. The godhood 
of God consists in His having these powers by means of which 
He originates, sustains and dissolves the world. These begin- 
ningless powers cause the world. 


19.2. “A m ware” ef acgewanra tfaq tafa i aa fe faa 
haces 


fray 4 A F wer fear IENE ETRA TT F 
gas amean o meaa, fafe wate wafracrars, 
spia Sacer farrera: Pasporferat aTa, a ama: aT 
fast war a amy fasroq qq a fafa mR srra 
pff i 


19.2. Some construe the compound andadi as a tatpurusa, mean- 
ing without beginnings. They hold that thus only can God be 
posited as the cause of the world. “If prakrti and purusa, in them- 
selves, are without beginning, and the world, their product, 
God won’t be the maker of the world.” This argument is not 
sound ; for, before these two, Power and Spirit, arise, God won’t 
be God, as there won’t be anything of which He 1s the Lord; 


19-20] The Field and the Field-knower 443 


thus He won’t be God at all. Thus also arises the contingency 
of non-liberation, since transmigratory life becomes uncaused. 
The sastras thus become futile and finally there would be 
neither bondage nor liberation. On the other hand, when 
both God and His power are held to be eternal, all this will 
become consistent. How? “Transformations and constitutents’ 
to be recounted presently; intellect, etc., up to ‘body and 
scnse-organs; apprehensions of pleasure, pain and delusion 
which are the transformations of gunas—know these to be born 
of prakrti. Prakrti is God’s causal power to produce transfor- 
mations; it 1s maya whose essence is the three constituents. 
This power gives rise to the transformations and gunas. These 
latter are born of the transformations of prakrti. 


20.0. È ga: ù fara: Tor: q safraerar: eft? are— 


20.0. Now, what are these Prakrti-born transformations and 
constituents? Answer: 


HARLTHA Vf: THAT | 
Gey: FASTA Alacer ATMA RoN 


20. Prakrtiis said to be the cause that accomplishes the 
effects and the instruments (in the form of the body 
and the senses); Purusa (spirit) is said to be the cause 
of the experience of pleasures and pains. 


20.1. Fre sft un ainoaa at wa, Hef aena NET | 
aerar efa, qa fa SEIAT. FAET: JAT. ze FÅ- 
aga Ted | a pT: GA AEAT: PONANA PO- 
TE Tat | A stews ia seara aq aq PARRA, 
akaa aison eg. aT eA sata: Feat | we rd- 
parida aared aren vata: 1 aiaa gaa as— 
ara, aq wer foa: aq dex art faarc:, faarfe area, aat: faarc- 
father: aiai aqaa att wa arteritis sored | 
aaea fare: ard, aca spaga: arem, aet sede aq: 


444 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XII] 


Wait: Fad, aeaa UT | RO AAT FM AA ANI AA 
zalga: site: aa: Are ef wate, gaa ara Wades 
Sse FI: IA i 


20.1. The ‘effect’ is the body; the ‘instruments’ are the 
thirtecn senses lodged in the body. The five elements forming 
the body, the five objects, in fact all the Prakrti-born transfor- 
mations mentioned earlier, are here referred in their toality 
as ‘effect.’ The Prakrti-born constituents, which are essenti- 
ally of the nature of pleasure, pain and delusion, are men- 
tioned as the ‘instruments’, as these are grounded in the 
senses. To produce ‘effects’ and ‘instruments’ 1s what is meant 
by being their cause. Prakrti is said to be the ‘cause’ that 
produces them. Thus by producing effects and instruments, 
Prakrti is the cause of transmigratory life. If the reading is, 
“being the cause of effects and causes’’, ‘effect’ will be the trans- 
formation of that which is its cause. What is transformed is 
the cause. As the maker of these two—effect and cause—the 
very same Prakrti is set forth as cause. Or, the sixteen transfor- 
mations (consisting of the ten senses, the five sense objects and 
the mind) are the effects; the seven transformations of prakrti 
(like Mahattatva, Ahankara and the five sense objects) are the 
causes. Prakrti is said to be the cause, being the maker of them 
all. How the Purusa or Spirit is the cause of transmigratory 
life, is being explained. The Purusa, the fiwa, the field-knower,: 
the experiencer—all these are synonymous. He is said to be 
the cause of experiencing or of knowing objects, i.e. pleasure 
and pain. 


20.2 FÈ JA AA PAROA gagedaqa a IEIET: 


HT Fat — RAR TEN IRAN see: ofr’, gare 
q waren wala aga, Fa Aare: Eq ? wal Ga Hay. 
Weaaeqy sera serdar werar waar gener afara 
Naaa afaareq: aa: Bg, a Aare: Sa sft | Hat: AI NF- 
Ryant: areca qaqa FT Aaa IH, aq 
Th IPH II 


20-21] The Field and the Field-knower 445 


20.2. How can Spirit and Power (purusa and prakrit) be said 
to cause transmigratory life by experiencing pleasures and 
pains and by accomplishing ‘effects and instruments’? It i$ 
explained as follows:- If prakrti is not transformed as effects 
and instruments or body, sense-crgans, pleasure and pain, 
and if Spirit does not cognize them, how can there be transmi- 
gratory life? But when therc is the nescience-born contact 
of the subject or experiencer (Purusa) with the opposite factor, 
namely the object or Prakrti which transforms into various 
experienceable effects,—then transmigratory life may ensue. 
Hence it is reasonable to affirm that prakrti and purusa accom- 
plish effects and instruments on the one hand, and the experi- 
ence of pleasures and pains, on the other. Thus they become 
causes of transmigratory life. Now, what exactly is this trans- 
migratory life? It is the experience of pleasure and pain. 
Spirit’s status as transmigrator consists in his experience of 
pleasures and pains. 


21.0. aq Fea gage weqa efa saree gH, aa aq 
fafafa eft? sad — 


21.0. Why does Purusa experience pleasures and pains and 
suffer transmigration? 


ges: peN fe yee verry Toy | 
BTL WAS Arata, Wi 


21. Purusa lodged in Prakrti experiences the consti- 
tuents born of Prakrti. The cause of his birth in wombs, 
good and evil, is his clinging to these constituents. 


21.1. JPS: sft uo gay wre vafaer sadt afaercermat ari- 
soe cfu fer: sefrer—safa araaa qe: saaq—fe 


446 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XIII 


wea AAT ASh—Voowd gaa wafaa: war YE- 
zanga Na we ‘get, get, ae, qea: we” gA | 
aay aft afaa gagag WE waaay a AR: AMT, 
a wad are ser ere wera: ‘A nA wate agta 
[ao ¥¥.4.] RA: | aad area Aq TIA": Wy ay: 
mea Tey Wag: aca, Ged Hara Teal, Ta alas a- 
famm FT TIS: | aaaea ser TaN FT 
qag, sf dare seedy i aaa zarfeatay | weer: 
oara: | area maaa. aaa safest: TEAT: II 


21.1. Purusa, the experiencer lodged in prakrti, which is 
nescience and which is transformed into effects and instru- 
ments, experiences or cognises the constituents; for, he mis- 
takes prakrti for his very self. The constituents manifest them- 
selves as pleasure, pain and delusion. He thinks, “I am happy, 
miserable, deluded or learned.” In this context of nescience, 
the main cause of the Spirit’s birth or embodiment is attach- 
ment or conceit of being the self regarding the constituents ex- 
perienced as pleasure, pain and delusions. Vide: “According 
to his desires he wills (BU.4.4.5).”’ The idea is expressed in the 
words—‘the cause of his birth in wombs, good and evil, is the 
clinging to constituents.’ Or, stressing on empirical life, it may 
be interpreted that the cause of empirical life resulting in 
births in wombs, good and evil, is the clinging to the consti- 
tuents. ‘Good wombs’ means birth as Devas or Celestials; 
‘evil wombs’ means birth as beasts, etc. ‘Partly good and partly 
evil wombs’ may point to human births too. 


21.2. Vad oH wafa—vafrerare safe, Wy A ag. FM, 
ama aofa | dea faa seat | wer a frafaarer— 
mAT iA ANTA whe | TA a Gee seared 
qaaa ‘aq MASARA [2323] sft | oH a aes 
aaga az [ 23.23.) 1 


21.2. The gist of itis as follows: The cause of empirical life 
is nesclence meaning lodgement in Prakrti and the clinging to 


21-22] The Field and the Field-knower 447 


the constituents or desire. This is mentioned so that it may be 
shunned. What dispels it is knowledge and dispassion together 
with renunciation. This truth has been proclaimed in the 
Gita’s system of thought. The relevant knowledge has already 
been set forth (13.12) as referring to the field and the field- 
knower—-knowledge through which immortality is won. It has 
been set forth through passages that first reject all entities 
other than that Truth, and next by passages superimposing 
on It attributes not Its own. 


22.0. qa Ga: ara fader: feae— 
22.0. Again He, the Spirit, is directly described: 


SUAVSTSTAAT A AAT AteHT API: | 
ATA Aa Sesfery Fea: TT UVR 


22. Close Observer, Giver of sanction, Sustainer, Ex- 
periencer, the pre-eminent Lord, supreme Self—thus is 
styled the supreme Spirit in (the human) body. 


22.1. JT sta n Teese, PAT: ay weet cag AAJA: | TAT 
BRITA AARAA TET: AT: Heya: AafaarHae: aA- 
WATS ATTA Sea, Tad a BAH CTSA Hea: NA: 
sven, Se selena! Seinen Seley tet a | SN 
Seo ee ae ica wet at. We weacaa: afer geet; a: 
afrrranitart mera SIERT EM | aaa aT adfa 
TET | AT IA aad, FÅ ATI sheds, aat 
aqa A) aaa, aaa aa aa aat vad: 4 
qapo: farad, tt aaqa | aan- a aea: 
mafaa a frarcaf N aae |. aio are Rfid 


eq mam. fre. amerà ser A e FÀ | RTT — 
qana aaaea ga wal Daa ef aD 1 rT — 


448 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XIII 


ARST: ae SA ATT | A: at: AET TAAA NRA F 


aff om AT A O a a? aR a g oe aA. 
“SAR JRA: AET: [| 24.29.] SA a aAa: I 


22.1. ‘Close Observer —one who, though inactive, sull 
observes, standing by. Just as, while the officiating priests and 
the sacrificer busy themselves with sacrificial activities, an- 
other, an expert in the science of sacrifice, observes their merits 
or flaws, without participating in them, Hc observes them 
all, being close to them. Or, the observers are the body, the 
cye, mind, intellect and self, the body being the outermost. 
Proceeding inwards therefrom, the innermost observer is the 
Self, none else being closer or more inward. Thus this most 
inward observer is styled ‘close Observer’. Or, like the observer 
in the sacrificial ceremony, He observes all objects. Also He 
accords sanction or approval to those who perform and to their 
actions. Hence He is their approver. Or, though He does not 
participate in the activities of the bodv and its instruments, He 
seems to do so, promoting them all. Hence He is the ‘Sanc- 
tioner’. Or, never thwarting those who act, but witnessing 
them all—He is the ‘sanctioner’. ‘Sustainer’—sustentation is 
the maintenance of the apparently intelligent forms of body, 
senses, mind and intellect held together to subserve the Spirit. 
It is accomplished by the intelligent Self; so He is called the 
‘Sustainer’. The Self is styled “Experiencer’, because due to It, 
the mental states like pleasures, pains, and delusions, which 
refer to objective forms, gct intelligised as it werc at the source 
itself and are apprehended distinctively. As He is the Self of 
all and independent, He is at once pre-eminent and Lord. He 
is supreme and the close observer of entities like the body, etc., 
which are mistaken, due to nescience, for the Self. In scrip- 
tures He is also styled the supreme Self. ‘Who?’-—the supreme 
Spirit dwelling in the body ;: He is bevond the Unmanifest. In 
chapter 15, verse 17, He will be described as the supreme 
Spirit, the Other, the supreme Self. 


22-23] The Field and the Field-knower 449 


23.0. ‘aaa arte at fafe [23.2.] ef seared, aera saga, 
qa Ua gma AAT — 


23.0. In 13.2 the Self was introduced in the words, ‘Know 
Me also as the field-knower’ and, later, fully explicated. This 
Self thus set forth, 


a ua Afa ged vata a TÀ: ag | 
adn AAAI TA AASAAAT URI 


23. Whoso knows thus the Spirit and His power to- 
gether with the constituents, is no more born, no matter 
how he fares (in the world). 


23.1.0 Ua sft uw a va aera wart aft gee area MTR- 
mAT aa ag afer” efa, vais a aut afaeroero at afam: 
ae fafai sora mri faa, adar raa ada: aft a4 
a wae: ot: ofadt ater fase sere a aaa a sera. 
Sarat A rafa sat: | ahr aa fey amet aaa. + ard ? — 
sfa afro: ti 


23.1. Whoso knows, as has been set forth, the Spirit directly 
as Self—as ‘here am I’—and also the power or Prakrti as 
nescience, together with the constituents that are its own modi- 
fications is no more born, is no more embodied after the fall of 
the knower’s body. Ap: (‘though’, ‘no matter how’) implies 
that for one who does noat deviate from his proper being, the 
question of re-embodiment does not arise at all. 


23.2. TAO AAAI FATA Sm, Tash TH AAT- 
aed: Kaa Heo, saaa a. ara a aana wants 
aut a. we Herat are: a am: fa, =a At sen, pafarmo 
R a am aft, wa te saa aera Sty ay HT 
fase: aara 1 aea fasarerfer aie aati afr seat area; 
agafa ar aay cH wee ATCT | Hara Hafod AAA IAT- 


450 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XIII 


aay: Wert FT NT | eae: ee HEH BH A a watshy- 
ma aft i 

qa, MAA wer waif [F33] we ae wea waft’ 
[4 3. 3.2¢ |, wea cada fad’ [ais Y.R], agea watfir 
ear seed’ [Bi 3. 4.2¥.3. ate: aaqare:| gerfeafaacrear: oH: 
faza: adang: | ger a om: adi [v.39.] sara aina: 
auf a [2c] sota—aferamaardiofatratr fe sratfr 
WAPAUSHE mAN; sere as megaa Fathi porene, 
a sat eft Ta TT ATA GHA | 
Amaaan a Cet Ta FA: | 
mean ikem aA gr: n [aa 200.880. | af 7 II 
[Av 3.2.%.], wer aaa fat’ [or s. &.e6.2.], egea aathr 

23.2. Objection: As regards the absence of rebirth after the 
dawn of knowledge, it may be argued that even for the knower 
three births are inevitable; for, itis not reasonable to hold that 
actions done before the dawn of knowledge, actions done after 
it, and actions done in the many past lives will all perish with- 
out producing their appropriate results. The principle in- 
volved is that nothing done can be blotted out. The case is 
similar to those actions which have produced the current life 
and have started to yield their results. In this respect no dis- 
tinction may be drawn among actions. Therefore, the three 
kinds of actions adverted to must generate three births, or, 
jointly, they may produce one birth. Otherwise, due to the 
violation of the principle of imperishability of accomplished 
actions, faith in law will suffer and the sastraic mandates may 
prove futile. Hence it is unreasonable to hold that he is born 
no more. 

Reply: No; that all actions of the knower are wholly con- 
sumed has been inclucated in hundreds of passages in the 
Srutt. Vide: ‘and his actions perish’ MU.2.2.8; ‘whoso knows 
Brahman becomes Brahman’ (Ibid.3.2.9) ; ‘he waits only till’ 
(CU.6.14.2); ‘all actions are consumed like a reed’ (CU.5. 
24.3). In BG, too, it has been affirmed that all actions are 
burned up like fuel (4.37), and the same will be reaffirmed in 
18.66. Besides, reason supports this view. Only those actions 
that are caused by the seeds of nescience—desires, afflictions— 


23] The Field and the Field-knower 451 


generate the sprout of a new birth. On several occasions the 
Lord has declared in the Gita that only egoistic and desire- 
prompted actions originate fruits and not others. Vide: ‘Just 
as seeds consumed in fire do not germinate, afflictions con- 
sumed in the fire of knowledge no longer lead to the self’s 
embodiment’. (Vanaparva 200.110). 


23.3. HEY AAC MAAA: sap FAT MAAT g:, MA- 
menaa 1 a g ee aA A: e FATA At dtan- 


Te Ith “nar aiaa satin a afta ma aaa 

va waft mA, aa aeaa aot aa: a ae: ef aq 
wad | we? —aar Aaya TaTHa | wa Ye wera Ach: 
ay ayy: seon areca watt wa fadd, wa 
Toes ae Aaaa frat ate, ar aearcamerad yaad 
aad va | aa a: wa ay: Wafafahrararcerated aren: aA atsa 
safga, an aaeanoa aati <arraents] wa arcana fadt- 
fare r, tft aferq aea ‘a a waishrnad’ afa, Hq 
wa sey fa Izq i 


23.3. Objection: “Let us grant that actions done after the 
dawn of knowledge are consumed in the fire of knowledge 
since they are accompanied by knowledge; but those done 
before that dawn in this life and in the numerous by-gone 
lives ought not to perish.” Reply: “No; vide BG.4.37: ‘All 
actions (are consumed)”, Objection : “But the expression may 
refer only to all actions done after the dawn of knowledge.” 
Reply: “No; there is no reason to narrow the scope of the 
operation of knowledge. Unsound is the argument that as the 
actions leading to the present embodiment do not perish 
despite knowledge, so too should not perish those actions which 
have not started yielding their fruits. How? The former are 
like discharged arrows; they have already started their opera- 
tions. As an arrow shot at the target will keep moving even 


452 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XIII 


after hitting the target till its momentum is exhaused, so also 
though the purpose of the body has been accomplished, still 
the actions that have originated the present body will keep 
operating till the object of embodiment is realised, and their 
momentum is exhausted. An undischarged arrow, though 
set on the bow-string, may well be withheld. Similarly actions 
not yet operative may be rendered barren by the power of 
knowledge. So it is reasonable to hold that when the body of 
the knower falls “he will not be born again’.”’ 


24.0. WT aaa aga sarafsHear: TA ANT: Jered — 


24.0. Several alternative paths to Self-realisation like medi- 
tation are enumerated now: 


aA Wate BPACCATAATATAT | 
HN WaT at Beaty Brat evi 


24. Some perceive the Self, in and by the self, by 
means of meditation; others by the Yoga of Samkhya, 
and yet others by means of Karmayoga. 


24.1. Saat ga i emma- am wearfeean fas: wore 
aq am, wer, earadta ar, “eqradta ofadt... earaxita var.” 
[or 5.9.8.2.) afr sore dourcaq ade: ASANA: ear, 
Fa ade wearer sfaq ahs: | wet area TAA 
are SÀ CRT, QO: WaT EMT: FÈ Te: AAT. TTMTATCATPETT 
free. msan: ae” aia fad; us ater art, at ‘cata 
seat arena’ sft ada 1 edana—ata or, saadaa aq- 
qma mae a INT: sa a, at aafaa 
q I? I 


24.1. ‘By means of meditation’: meditation is one-pointed 
thought after withdrawing into the mind sense-organs like the 


24-25] The Field and the Field-knower 453 


ear from their respective objects like sounds and fixing the 
mind on the inner self. Hence the following usages: The stork 
meditates as it were; the earth meditates as it were: the 
mountains meditate, as it were (CU.7.6.1). From these analo- 
gies it follows that meditation is incessant thought in an un- 
broken stream like a current of oil. By means of it, in the self, 
i.e. in the intellect, some Yogins perceive the self through the 
instrumentality of the inner organ, purified by meditation. 
‘Others by means of the Yoga of Samkhya’: Here Samkhya 
means analytic thought in the following way: These are the 
constituents, sattva, rajas and tamas, the Self is their opposite, 
being the wintess of their operations. This thought is a Yoga by 
which they see ‘the Self by the self, the last phrase being 
understood. ‘Karmayoga’: here Karma itself 1s the Yoga, it 
being performed as an offering to God. It 1s done for securing 
Yoga; hence it is styled Yoga, qualitatively. By it, through 
mind’s purity and the resulting knowledge, yet others perccive 
the Self. 


WA AAA: ASAA Jara | 
astr faaea m afar: NRN 


25. Some, however, not knowing thus, hear from others 
about the Self and worship; they also, intent on hearing, 
overcome death indeed. 


25.1. JA g Ba u aA g Ag farag aaa aft wa aN 
aeni wart: aAA aa: gear ‘ee ua faa” sf ser: 
saad sanm: aed: faafaa 1 ast a aaa wa aaaf 


Ua yaya Fart saaq—Afaraam: Ahr: way WW Ast WA 
meaning wt aad A a garam, Haara: aT 


fasca: gaha: 1 fq acer sarot sft carat: fafaa: Aer 
afraratear ? sft i 


25.1. However, not knowing the Self described in any of the 
ways mentioned above, and taking instructions trom ‘others’ 


454 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XIII 


or teachers, others (other aspirants) think about IJt thus, 1.e. 
worship or meditate with reverence. They also overcome 
‘death’ or transmigratory life whose end is death. They are 
‘intent on hearing’—have ‘hearing’ as their sole form of 
endeavour on the road to liberation. They seek right cognition 
through the instruction of their teachers. The point is that 
they do not themselves discriminate. Of course, those who do 
discriminate and independently pursue right cognition, do 
overcome death. 


26.0. ‘eat aft at fafe [23.2] eft Aata aa 
mama ‘A masan [23.23] ma, aq Fer satfeta ? 
qag wre: arcerd | wen — 

26.0. In 13.2 it was stated that the means to liberation is 


the knowledge of the identity of the field-knower and God. 
Why is it so? The next verse states the reason:- 


maama infaa Ua SAT | 
eaea fa ALATA NIRU 


26. Whatever being is born, either unmoving or moving, 
know it to be due to the union of the field and the field- 
knower, best of Bharatas! 


26.1. maq eft n araq aq fefaq aad anced act aeq—fa 
aaa aft? a REAM SA Sat WHA A, Aaaa 
ee ee T 


26] The Field and the Field-knower 455 


maga [232] saa freama ad gae q: 
weafa, at a mafana [zma] aaea [a0] ma- 
daraka “aaa afer aaa gA wa fafaa. a, ae 
aAa aA aaa aA | A R: NTA 
‘a wa fa gee waft a at: ag [2333] ma “faery a: a 
Aad aft aq FH Aq VITA ITH II 


26.1. Whatever particularised being is born, unmoving or 
moving, know that it does so due to the union of the field- 
knower and the field, best of Bharata princes! Objection: 
“What is meant by this union? Surely a relation like that ofa 
cord and a pot through contact of parts cannot happen in this 
case; for the knower is partless like space. Nor can it be a case 
of inherence since the field and its knower are not related as 
cause and effect.” Reply : The answer is that the union in ques- 
tion is a case of superimposition of the two and their attributes 
due to the absence of discriminative knowledge of the field and 
the field-knower—the object and the subject—that are essenti- 
ally different. This union resembles that of the rope, nacre, etc., 
on the one hand and, on the other, the snake, silver, etc., super- 
imposed on them due to lack of discriminative knowledge of the 
ground and what is superimposed on it. This union that is a 
form of superimposition is essentially nescience that will perish 
in the case of him who discriminates between the field-knower 
and the field. Being opposed to right perception, this nescience 
will vanish when, in the light of BG. 13.12! and other Sastraic 
assertions, one perceives the Knowable as Brahman devoid of 
all attributes and discriminates It as different from ‘the field’, 
just as its pith is grasped as different from the reed”. Then he 
sees the field as he does magical elephants and mansions or 
objects in a dream or cities in the sky—as non-existent. When 
the cause of birth disappears, the statement in 13.233, that the 


1 “It is neither existent nor non-existent” 

2 Cf. “Him one should draw out from one’s body like an arrow-shaft froma reed...” 
KU.6.17. 

3‘‘Whoso knows . . . is no more born”. BG. 13.23. 


456 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XI 
knower is born no more is proved to be reasonable. 


27.0. ‘4 a ysha | 23.23.) off aerate afan- 
Aara eR sana: Te A | afeenfafaae: AT- 
AANA: Ser: |aqt:| sa: cea: afea: feats aera SN 
afr ga: Tare TIT — 


27.0. The fruit of right perception, viz., the absence of birth 
owing to the abolition of the seed of transmigratory life, 1.e., 
nescience, has been stated in 13.23. Also has been set forth the 
cause of birth, the union between the field and field-knower. 
Once more, in tresh words, is here pin-pointed the right know- 
ledge that abolishes nescience: 


aa aay aay faced TATA | 
farsueafarsaed a: trata a asafa wen 


27. He alone perceives who sees Him, the supreme 
Lord, dwelling alike in all beings and not perishing, 
when they perish. 


27.1, aa ef arm fafaa feai feats gaat — aa ? — Say SAY 


aqua: aq mafas: sfafar: wafa ag aË | aeg 
Aad: teeny aay wa TUParcea fag, fafana, va FT 1 TF: 
Ue wat TA wats, a Tata 1 


27.1. ‘Alike’—without distinction of any kind. ‘Dwelling’ 
where? Inall beings—all living beings, extending from Brahma 
to things stationary. Whom ?-—the supreme Lord in relation 


26-27] The Field and the Field-knower 457 


to body, senses, mind, intellect, the unmanifest and the indivi- 
dual self. He who rules is the supreme and the Lord. He 
dwells alike in all beings who are characterised as ‘perishing’. 
He is distinguished as ‘not perishing’ to stress the total differ- 
ence between these beings and the supreme Lord. Whence 
this difference? The root of all transformations to which 
beings are subject is birth; other transformations follow it. 
The last transformation is destruction; nothing remains after 
it to suffer further transformations. Attributes presuppose 
substance. Therefore, by affirming the absence of the last 
transformation, all prior transformations and their conse- 
quences have been repudiated. Thus follow the total other- 
ness of the supreme Lord as against all contingent beings, the 
absence in Him of all adjuncts and His unity. He only sees, 
who perceives the supreme Lord as set forth above. 


27.2. aq aai aH: Teather, fe faama ? sft 

aa naa, fag fart wate 1 sa: fafarrite—a va cea | 
mar fafacetee: aan at mafa, a ada aaa fafa — a 
wa madf; var w wm sfa a aea a: af, a: 
oe gp aP a a gig ail 
qafa, ariaa wrnaecataraq eco: | 


27.2. Objection: “All people in the world do see, don’t they? 
Why this qualification then?” Reply: ‘True, they see but con- 
trarily. Hence the perceiver is rightly qualified. For example, a 
man of defective vision sees many moons; in relation to him 
the man who sees but one moon is qualified as one who alone 
sees. Similar is the present case. In respect of those who see 
many disparate selves, he who perceives the single undivided 
Self has been qualihed. Others do not see, since their seeing is 
erroneous, as of the man who sees many moons.” 


28.0. Tare aaa Horas fe: aden, sf yrs: aoa — 


28.0. To praise right perception as described above with 
reference to its consequences, the following verse is set forth: 


458 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XIII 


aa qaa fe aaa aaea PIT | 
a gasaan aat aAa cet A RCN 


28. For, behoiding alike the Lord dwelling everywhere, 
one injures not the Self by the self; thus one reaches 
the highest goal. 


28.1. am A u a Taq gaa. fe ae ada adydy N- 
afert gerd wafer Sat, sadly grt | aA 
qaq fe ?—a ferfer feat a wet sia cada S| TAN, | 
aa: aagana arf ve spi ate MANETTA | 

aq ta afaq soit ca et area fear, | eet Ted ard a 
Raf ef? oer ‘a hira arate a fanaa: [T q. 4.2.9.8 | 
gafa i 


mam, fr ad aaga: wa afagte: IE Fax TAHA, q: 
S ae o sme E a E E ae 
we qa wats gard: ii 


28.1. ‘For beholding alike’ i.e. cognizing, ‘everywhere’, in 
all beings, the Lord dwelling equally—the Lord deseribed in 
verse 27. What does that beholder do? He injures not the 
Self ty the self. ‘Thus, —by this abstention from injuring-—he 
reaches the ‘highest goal’ called liberation. Objection : “Surely 
no man injures himself. Why then is this imposible contin- 
gency mentioned at all? This resembles the statement in the 
Tait. Samhita (5.2.7.1.) ‘neither on earth nor in the sky nor 
in the firmament should a fire be built up’.”’ Reply: “This is 
no flaw; for the ignorant may very well repudiate the Self. 
Indeed all ignorant people repudiate this most explicit and 
immediate Self, resort to the non-self as the Self proper, go on 
repeatedly choosing and rejecting selves, and act righteously 


28-29] The Field and the Field-knower 459 


and unrighteously. Thus the Self gets hurt. Thus all ignorant 
people are Self-destroyers. As regards the metaphysical Self, 
even that always gets hurt, as it were. So the non-knowers of 
the Self are Self-destroyers; they do not reap the real fruit of 
that Self.” Opposed to these, the perceiver of the real Self, as 
explained above, does not injure the Self by the self in any 
wav—does not destroy It. Thus he reaches the highest goal; 
the fruit of spiritua! life accrues to him. This is the idea. 


29.0. ‘Hayat Sat an weaq a fear area arama za 
we — 


29.0. It was affirmed that ‘seeing alike the Lord dwelling 
in all beings, one does not injure the Self by the self. Some 
characterise this as unreasonable regarding the selves, which 
aré inherently different in themselves due to their varying 
‘qualities and actions’. In reply it is stated as follows:- 


ga a watt feasts aaa: | 
q: qafa AAISSHTMAAHAe A Gas RRN 


29. He alone sees who, on all sides, sees actions solely 
performed by Prakrti and sees, also, the Self as a non- 
agent. 


29.1. TecaT eft un span- wad: m amaa, “aai 
gq watt faa [Wo x.o] aft aeraniq, am yaa wa qa 
ada —Aeatearsacrrareatereday wath aaaea fra- 
mA fidda waar: aiT: a: aA Ged, TMT sca AAA 
went aatrfafaafaa, a: vata, a mera gaia: frforer 
weg: fafaa ararerer aq Ae aaaf: gers: 1 


29.1. Prakrti with the three constituents is the maya of the 
Lord; for SU.4.10 teaches: “Know maya to be prakrti.”’ By 
that prakrti, solely, that has transformed itself into effects and 


460 Bhagavad Gita Bhasvam [Ch. XIII 


instruments such as mahat, etc., are the activities of speech, 
mind and body performed, ‘on all sides’—in all manner of 
ways. He who sees this and, also, that the Self or the field- 
knower devoid of adjuncts is a non-agent, alone sees the 
supreme truth. This is the idea. An entity devoid of attributes, 
like space, is a non-agent; it cannot be proved to have differ- 
ences. 


30.0. Trt ata ae mara WSIS — 


30.0. Once more the theme of right perception is explicated 
in yet other words: 


wat Gi 
aa va a faeatt Ag AIA aT Fol 


30. When one sees the multiplicity of beings as abiding 
in the One and plurality as proceeding from that One 
alone, he becomes Brahman. 


30.1. wat eft uu aa afd ares Yaya waa Yara Faas 
saaa wats “arta g ad” [q 3. 2.¥.¢.] of, aa wa a aea 
qa facart szafa fara “sera: rT achat ara AEAT: ENT ATCT 
aaar AAA BTA sry arn arfentafacrarararcadisa’” [ Br. 
J.9.28.%.| Aamar: fret aa maa, war avad ada wate 
aar afery Bre zeae: 11 


30.1. He who directly perceives, according to the instruc- 
tions of the sastras and teachers, ‘the multiplicity of beings as 
abiding in the one Self’—perceives ‘that all this is Self alone’ 
(BU .2.4.8)—and as proceeding from that very Self, becomes, 
at that very time, Brahman. This is the idea. 


31.0. UH AAT: aiaa TETAS set se FoI — 


31.0. As Self?s contact with the flaws of the bodies, of which 
It is the self, 1s a possibility, the following statement is made: 


30-31] The Field and the Field-knower 46! 


aafaa oaa ATSAN: | 
miea Stata a woth a frat zen 


31. Due to His beginninglessness and freedom from 
attributes this imperishable and supreme Self, though 
dwelling in bodies, neither acts nor gets stained. 


31.1. aR sofa un watfacatq—aare: wre: srarfacd, arfe: are, 
qq mea area aq ware i afg aa aq Aa area atta; wa 
gq amka aaa: af gear a attr 1 cer faia 1 aq: fe 
mrad atte; wa g feta a ati; str Weare aa seam, 
q wey cay: frat sta wera: | aa: va, ae aires: aft, wey 
arena: safer: wade ateer sere; aA a wera wt i az- 
pama ached A fort i at fe sat, a aoa fad | at 7 
Hea, Ha: T Hea fora set: I 

bak ed USNR at CS at 
fod q, qq: sf aq eH Aaa aa ‘eae art at fafa [ 23.2. | 
seats | are fa Sra wer: SA, a waft foot a? sft aver: 
cat at nfa sft 1 ada gai gata a sf amass afa 
aaa ofeach aae., arergaar I 


31.1. ‘Beginninglessness’ is the state of what is devoid of 
‘beginning’ or cause. What has no cause is beginningless, of 
course. What has cause undergoes essential change. This Self, 
being uncaused, is impartite; so It does not change. Similarly, 
being ‘attributeless’, too, It does not change. What has attri- 
butes changes through the erosion of these attributes. Thus the 
supreme Selfis imperishable. He does not diminish. This being 
the case, though abiding in all bodies—for the Self is known 
in them all-—, He does no work, and is not stained by their 
fruits. “Who then is the agent in these bodies?; who gets 
stained? If some embodied being other than the supreme 
Self works and gets stained, then the identity of the Lord and 
the field-knower laid down in 13.2 becomes untenable. If, 
however, there is no embodied being other than the Lord, 
who works and gets stained?” Being hard to grasp and state, 


462 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XIII 


this Upanisadic philosophy proclaimed by the Lord has been 
rejected by the Vaisesika and Samkhya philosophers as well 
as by the Jainas and the Buddhists. 


31.2. qa wa far man Aa smana Tadd’ [4.2% | 
A afaararaerarat fe attr aal a sft crag waft, 4 7 
ee en a AA 
vary Tortarerats feat maae weargacitarsrarat faces- 
afaareragrerent safar arfer eft ax aa faa wraar N 


34.2. The Lord Himself has offered an answer in the words: 
‘The nature of things, however, operates”? (B.G.5.14). The 
empirical expression “some one acts and gets stained’’ is no 
more than an expression of nescience; in truth such acting 
and getting stained does not exist in the supreme Self. Precisely 
for this reason the Lord has stated in several contexts that the 
renouncers of the order of Paramahamsas, who are established 
in the philosophy of the sages and have risen above all em- 
pirical activities, are not called upon to do any work. 


32.0. fefra + Af a ford eft ? aa gerang — 


32.0. Whom does He resemble in not working and not 
getting stained? An analogy is offered. 


Val Aan AeratarHray atafsard | 
aimata Ae aas arafoaras 11321 


32. Just as all-pervading space, due to its subtlety, is 
not stained, so is the Self, present in the body every- 
where, not stained. 


632.1. aT aft un an adn aiana aft aq de Gerad 
wera a a sofa + arread, ada wafera: Ae Tar area 4 
saad II 
oo 


31-34] The Field and the Field-knower 463 


32.1. Just as space, though all-pervading—i.e., present in 
all places—, due to its subtlety is not stained, or does not get 
related to anything, so, though present everywhere in the body, 
the Selfis unstained. Also, 


TIT WHI: Het rata ca: | 
ae vat aa Heer warerafa Ata 11331 


33. Just as the one sun illumines this entire world, so, 
Arjuna! the Owner of the field illumines the entire 
field. 


33.1. wat af u wer saaa sauraate wa: Heed ale aa xia: 
afam atfeer:, Tat aad Weremaeraarle yerd at wH: aq Tareait 
F: ? A rae gai: ara! | AETR: aa MA: FA- 
mats waft—cfaaq AAA TF ca eT, IA sft IN 


33.1. Just as the single sun lights up this entire world, so the 
entire field from the ‘great elements’ (mahabhita) etc., upto 
‘sustentation’, dkrti—(vide 13.5-6), He lights up. Who? The 
Owner of the field, the supreme Self, O Arjuna! The analogy 
of the sun serves two purposes: (1) like the sun the Self is one 
only in all bodies; (2) He is unstained. 


34.0. TARATEATAT TART: AA Wl: — 


34.0. The following verse concludes the theme of this whole 
chapter: 


MANAA AC MAARN | 
qarana aa fagatta A T usr 


34, Thus those who see, with the eye of wisdom, the 
difference between the field and the field-knower and 
the way of release from Prakrti, the cause of materi- 
ality, repair to the supreme goal. 


464 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. IH 


34.1. Aaa: sft n Aaaa Aweqresqraar: wa aurefete- 
THR seat satatdwavafay ITA earar aaa AA 
areata A WA, ST ATTA, rsi F, warat EIGE 
ASAT AEAT, TEM: HATHA: e a a À faz: 
faafa, afa refa À ot Tmi wa, A JA: Ag ed TTE: 1 


34.1. Of the two, the field and the field-knower, as already 
elucidated, whoso with the eye of wisdom born of the Sastras, 
the grace of teachers, and one’s own experience, directly 
perceive the distinction as also the ‘release’—the extermina- 
tion of prakrti or nescience-—repair to the supreme goal, the 
Truth of the supreme Self or Brahman. No more 1s there em- 
bodiment for them. 


ATONE. pa PO AT- 
Aaa ATT ANNISA: 1123 


A NOTE ON THE COMMENTARY ON 13.2 
Us 

In the commefitary on B.G. 13.2. Samkara discusses and 
refutes the Objections that may be brought up against his 
doctrine of identity between God and Jiva, the field-knower 
(Ksetrajna); for he takes the assertion ‘ksetrajnam capi mam 
viddhi’ as pivotal to his metaphysics and ethics. Note that God 
i.e. Krsna, is also the Absolute, or nirguna brahman. He esta- 
blishes the metaphysical] identity of the contents of the three 
terms nirguna brahman, saguna brahman, and fiva. Is the Supreme 
God, Paramesvara, then a transmigrator also? fwa has body as 
his empirical upadhi or adjunct; in truth, God has no upadhi 
at all and, so, terms like sat and asat can’t be applied to Him. 
Valid knowledge has no content other than satyam, jnanam 
and ananda. 

Does not this position imply that God is subject to transmi- 
gration? Also, since there is no real transmigrator, won't em- 
pirical life get abolished? Both these are unwelcome contin- 
gencies, because, in this case, Sastras, scriptures, will turn out 
to be futile. These Sastras teach bondage, release and their 
causes. Other means of valid cognition also point to the facts 
of empirical life, based on dharma and adharma. 

Samkara’s answer points out that the Advaitic theory of 
nescience and saving knowledge takes care of all the above 
objections. On these themes consult Mahabharata ete., 
quoted in the bhasya text on BGB 13.2. Sufferings fall to the 
lot of the ignorant only; the knowers, the wise, do not suffer, 
but get liberated, instead. Ignorance leads to superimposition 
which consists in the ascription of qualities, good and bad, to 
the ground of superimposition, which in fact is devoid of them. 
But ascribed traits never get lodged in their ground; e.g. the 
rope does not become snaky. Similarly, Brahman docs not 
become transmigratory. Evils of ignorance and the advan- 
tages of knowledge are detailed in the bhasya text at this stage. 

What has been stated has the support of reasoning. In the 


466 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam 


light of reasoning, it is seen that superimposition 1s the source 
of samsara and that the pure Spirit remains wholly unaffected. 
When the Self, the pure Spirit, is seen as other than body etc., 
all motives for action disappear and liberation ensues. Thus 
the transmigrator is the Spirit on which the psycho-physical 
organism has been superimposed, or the Spirit having body 
etc., as upadhis. But superimposition can never materialise 
Spirit or spiritualise matter. 

The objection that only objects and their attributes get 
mutually superimposed is not valid. It has already been noted 
that nescience is the cause of superimposition and that no real 
transference of objects and attributes happens. Factors of 
transmigratory life like agency, pain, pleasure etc., pertain to 
objects (vide 2. para 6). Their transference, by superimposition 
to the field-knower leaves the latter intact. Thus the Spirit 
(or God, the field-knower, the Self) does not and cannot 
transmigrate. | 

Whose 1s nescience, the cause of superimpositon? It does 
not belong to the cognizer just as flaws like short sight pertain 
only to the instruments of perception (the eye, etc.,) and not 
to the percepient. If nescience did belong to the cogniser, 
liberation would have proved inaccessible, just as coolness is 
out of question for fire, as its very nature is heat. 

This situation ought not to revive the fear that śastras may 
prove futile. All disputants hold that at some state (e.g. in 
liberation) the sSastras become irrelevant. The non-Advaitins 
make bondage and liberation products, thus 1mpermanent 
and illogical. Bondage without a beginning ought not to 
cease, and liberation with a beginning might not be eternal. 
Advaita holds that the sastras will continue to be relevant to 
the ignorant many, though not to the wise few. 

Pretensions to knowledge would do no good. Each embodied 
Self is not exclusively identified with the Supreme Spirit. The 
claimants to knowledge falsify themselves through cravings 
or esanah and matching activities. Activity is impossible for 
the full-fledged knower, only mvrtt:, cessation from activity, 
and renunciation are open to him. Beware of the meanest 


The Field and the Field-knower 467 


among scholars, the panditapasadas, who maintain the following 
propositions: The field-knower is indeed God. He perceives 
the field as different from Himself. But ‘I’, the empirical self, 
transmigrate and suffer. My duty is to wind up samsara 
through knowledge of the field and field-knower, and through 
meditation to realise God and get assimilated to Him. This 
type of ‘scholar’ advances novel interpretations based on 
delusions. His worst offence is his total alienation from sound 
Vedantic traditions. Shun him. 

Para 16. faces the vital question—whose is nescience? It 
is, of course, his who feels he is ignorant. To perceive ignor- 
ance implies the perception of the victim of ignorance also. 
‘‘But nescience and its owners are imperceptible”. The know- 
ledge that one is ignorant is not indirect or merely inferred. 
At any given instant the object of perception or ignorance 
fully engages the percipient. He cannot be, and is not, dis- 
tracted by any other object of perception, such as the victim 
of ignorance. To introduce a relation between ignorance and 
its victim (or owner) entails infinite regress (vide 2. para 16). 
Cognizership of ignorance is only figurative; it is a product of 
superimposition only. Activities and the factors involved in 
them are constructions of the nescient mind. For further light 
study BGB 18.11 and 18.50. 


CHAPTER XIV 
THE YOGA OF THE THREE CONSTITUENTS 


0.1. mi STATA a a xfer Te | aq Hahah! 
aom ‘ot wa: ge: WATA: arose | IIN- SIAR: 
aaa: mea, a g ea aAa: stant, TF- 
fread wy a ag: A A [233] mR wT a7 
aq? è a a? ae n a aafaa? raa ae TT aT! 
EPA AoA ame, gAn T Wray Farqg— 


0.1. It has been declared that every being takes birth due to 
the union of the field and the field-knower. How does it 
happen? In order to demonstrate it, is begun the chapter 
opening with the words “Again the supreme, etc.” Or it is to 
show that the cause of the world is the field and the field- 
knower depending on God, and not, as the Samkhyas aver, as 
independent entities. Further, it was stated that the cause of 
empirical life is man’s involvement in prakrt: and attachment 
to its constituents (BG.13.21). How does this attachment 
happen and to what constituents? Which are the constituents? 
How do they bind? How is one released therefrom? How is 
the liberated individual defined? With all this in view the 
Lord spoke as follows: 


ATTTATT ATA: 

Ut Wa: Tae ATATAT ATTA | 

amet Aaa: Aa Tet fafat wat: ngu 
The Blessed Lord said: 
1. Again I shall elucidate that highest and best know- 
ledge among all forms of knowledge, by mastering 


which all silent sages have attained supreme perfec- 
tion beyond this (empirical sphere). 


1-2] The Three Constituents 469 


L1 Tom sft ou wa’ sft wager ae: gt dy 
aay eÀ seed sa aft, sane | wea ot Teaegfauacangq | 
fe aq? -aa adi aaa SAH, Sa HSa | ATATAT Sf A aT- 
freada [239-20]; fe afg? —aarftaaegiaware sft 1 ath 
q Wea, eg aera efa Taare att aafaa | 
a AAT At ATA AAT ITT earls: maT: ad TU fats Ararat 
za: wer seat Hed Ta wear: T 


1.1. ‘The highest’ is related to the term ‘knowledge’ that 
occurs after many other words. ‘Again’—indicates that it has 
been repeatedly mentioned in all previous chapters ; but still, 
I shall elucidate it. It is ‘the highest knowledge, because its 
content is the highest reality. What is it? This ‘knowledge’ is 
called the best among all (forms) of knowledge, because its 
fruit is the best. The forms of knowledge do not refer to the 
virtues enumerated in BG.13.7—10, but to the knowledge of 
sacrifices and other knowables. These do not lead to libera- 
tion; but the highest knowledge does. So it is extolled by 
means of the adjectives, ‘the highest and best’, in order to 
excite the listener’s interest. By mastering it, all contemplative 
renouncers achieve ‘supreme perfection’ named liberation, 
beyond and above the bondage of embodiment. 


2.0. IEMA fad: faa sa — 
2.0. The certitude of this perfection is affirmed :- 


Se maA AA MÁTT: | 
asta aaa eat A crated TUR 


2. Resorting to this knowledge, they have achieved My 
own nature; they are not born at the time of the mani- 
festation (of the world); nor are they distressed at the 
time of its dissolution. 


2.1. 33 sft ul g aed wet sar a-a aaa era — AA 
Tae ATRL ATS BTA: STAT: Sere: | A g AAMT 


470 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XIV 


mi, aasprat: Ferra ATEA | Hoare aa ward 
sat 1 ais gfe + sored a versa 1 yea aara 
amars a said a aa a weed, a afa ger: N 


2.1. ‘Resorting to this knowledge’ as set forth, i.e., having 
taken the steps leading to this knowledge, they have achieved 
‘the same nature as Mine’ or identity with Myself—identity 
with the supreme Lord. This is the idea. It is not a matter of 
being similar to Me; for, in the science of the Gita, difference 
between the field-knower and God is not recognised. The 
following declaration about the final end of this knowledge is 
meant to be eulogistic: ‘Even at the time of manifestation of 
the world they are not born’, nor ‘at the time of dissolution’, 
when even Brahma perishes, ‘are they distressed’. That is, 
they do not lapse from the state of release. 


3.0. QAANT: SIT: WRT FATT — 


3.0. It is next explained in what manner the union of the 
field and the field-knower causes the generation of all beings: 


wa afrig die we TTEA | 
arma: ATAATAT TAY Aah ATCT ust 


3. My womb is Brahman, the Mahat; I cast the seed 
therein. Thence, O scion of the Bharatas! are born all 
beings. 


3.1. aa aft nu wa caer nA Arar faan safe: ath: 
AANA A FIT | AHA: HRA BUA Fereareq ra E] 
efai, Faq wer eft att: wa farad 1 ag nefa merh 


afrensning a 
a (doe: tat wikeent Geendiate 
amr a: ae MPa wafer g area! i 


3.1. My Maya—the Maya that belongs to Me. It consists 


2-5] The Three Constituents 471 


of the three constituents. It is My Prakrti, the womb or cause 
of all beings. “My womb” (Prakrti) is described as mahat- 
brahma, because it is vast in relation to all its effects, and 
because it is their cause and controller. In this great Brahman 
I cast the seed of Hiranyagarbha’s birth—the seed of the birth 
of all beings. I cast it as the Lord with My two-fold power of 
the field and the field-knower. The idea is that I bring about 
the union of the field with the field-knower who is associated 
with the adjuncts of nescience, desires and aetions. The birth 
of all beings vza the origination of Hiranyagarbha proceeds 
from this casting of the seed by Me, O Arjuna! 


waaay atta ada: aeaf at: | 
ai Ael mga arora: frat ws 


4. Son of Kunti! Whatever forms spring up from all 
kinds of wombs, their womb is this great Brahman, 
and I am the father, the supplier of the seed. 


4.1. wang af u afana adaiag atta ! ada: 
ee ee ee arat Adar wer 
mg wataet a: aren, ag Sac ahve: frat waa Fat 
frat u 


4.1. In all wombs, i.e., among the gods, manes, men, 
animals and beasts whatever organized forms spring up, of 
them all this great Brahman (Prakrti) with all its states is the 
womb or cause, and I, the Lord, am the seed-supplying father, 
the impregnator. 


5.0. & ToT: ? we aA? sert— 


5.0. Which are the constituents? How do they bind? 
Answer: 


aed THe shat We: wHfraeaar: | 
faafaa agraret R tierra yi 


472 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XIV 


5. Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, the Prakrti-born consti- 
tuents, bind the embodied and immutable (Spirit), O 
mighty-armed! 


5.1. ara ft uo act wt am eft amaa: 1 ‘ao: sfa of 
WIIF: MA:, a ena anfa: T. | at a AN: se A 
faa 1 aema am: a ATEAN: aad of, afera 
aa faerie 1 at areréteet arama A eft ‘frente’ ofa 
sa 1 a a pfa: wraenraraevar: faaeafa za è ngae, 
Feral vata arrays ag ser a: Aeratg:, è Aeraret! ae 
Tat eet seat aaa qs aa [ 23.32. | 
Salary I 


aq at at ea [233] samy 1 aq, wa te arafa, 
ft wearer sera ? 


aftad aema: gaa faafaa ga’ ate N 


5.1. The constituents (Guņas) are named ‘sattva, rajas, and 
tamas.’ The word constituents, gunah, is technical; it does not 
denote qualities like colour, etc., inhering in substances. Nor 
is any distinction intended between the constituents and what 
is constituted by them. Like qualities they are eternally 
dependent, being related to the field-knower. Being essentially 
nescience, they bind the field-knower, as it were. Resorting to 
Him, these constituents posit themselves and so they are said 
to bind. Born of prakrti—-i.e., of the maya of the Lord—, they 
bind, as it were, the imperishable embodied Spirit. ‘Mighty- 
armed !’—Thou whose powerful arms extend to the knees. 
Spirit’s imperishability has been elucidated in the verse 13.31, 
where it was stated that the embodied Spirit is not stained. 
Objection: Why then is it said, discordantly in the present 
verse, that ‘they bind Him’! Reply: This objection has been 
met by the expression, ‘they bind, as it were’. 


6.0. TT Ararat Acaey wa aa say sad — 


6.0. Among these constituents sattva is being defined: 


5—6] The Three Constituents 473 


aa aed fadoa THRTHAATATT | 
FACSA AAA AAAS A ATT We 


6. Among them Sattva being stainless, illumines and 
heals, sinless prince! It binds with the clinging to 
pleasure and to knowledge. 


6.1. Ta aed sh u aiea anfora vara aaa faced 
aed aq seat | ar? —qeasta “get ag” sf aaa qaer 
fasfafr ancaft asermed ata ge aswaq | aur afaay i a fe 
faat. faao: waft 1 aR a yard Aaa fare ad: ef 
sm waT [23.%.] 1 we: aada aaan faafafa- 
FoaATAM wearayd ya aSaata za, avaHfaa sci, wag anya 
sA, safer giaa | an maae a—arafats gaeat 
qa aaa space TA, a aa, eA gT: 
TATAA | gA a A ae: AA: | Aa) AAA 1 


6.1. ‘Being stainless’ like a crystal, sattva is luminous and 
pleasant. It binds—how? Wiia the clinging to pleasure. In the 
experiencc of pleasure, the object, pleasure, induces in the ex- 
periencing self a futile clinging to that pleasure. This is nesci- 
ence; for, the characteristic of an object cannot pertain to the 
subject. Qualities like ‘desire (vide 13.6) upto sustentation’ 
pertain to the object as the Lord has already affirmed. There- 
fore through its attribute, nescience, which consists in the 
non-discrimination between the object and the subject, sattva 
engenders in the self a clinging to the pleasure that is alien to 
it. Sattva makes the self attached, as it were—the self that is, 
in fact, detached and free of objective pleasure, is made gay 
as it were. Similarly, it generates in the self ‘clinging to know- 
ledge’. This knowledge, mentioned together with pleasure, is 
an attribute of the inner sense and therefore objective; it is 
not an attribute of the Self. Were it so, clinging to it would be 
irrational, just as bondage is irrational. The clinging to know- 
ledge must be understood in the same way as clinging to 
pleasure. ‘Sinless’ means free from addiction to vice. 


474 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XIV 


TH Tree fafa qemssapaqeay | 
afara ahaa paga fga ws 


7. Know that Rajas is essentially attachment; it is the 
source of craving and passion. O Son of Kunti! It binds 
the embodied Spirit with attachment to works. 


7.1. T: Sf u GH ama ea wT: Aaaama fate 
ne ake Gee eee ae aag: mA farà 


7.1. Know that rajas is essentially attachment. What stains 
is raga, i.e. attachment, just as ochre, etc., do. It is the source 
of craving and passion. Craving is the desire for what, as yet, 
is unattained, while passion is mind’s fondness for an object 
already secured. Son of Kunti! This rajas binds the ‘embodied 
Spirit with attachment to works’ aimed at goals, seen and 
unseen. 


qacan fate ated AETA | 
Waravseataaifacarraeanta ATLA cil 


8. Know Tamas to spring from nescience; it deludes all 
embodied beings, O Bharata prince! It binds with 
error, indolence, and sleepiness. 


81 ar ef on ae ade: Tr sare sara and sar fate, 
Wet went afet adie ater Beran, | warermerfrarhi: 
wae maw a frat a sararoenfrar: arf: saarea: aq 


8.1. Tamas is the third constituent. Know that it springs 
from nescience. It deludes all embodied beings causing non- 


7-10] The Three Constituents 475 


discrimination. With error, indolence and sleepiness, tamas 
binds, O Arjuna! 


9.0. Gt: TAT aa: AAI: Feat — 


9.0. Again is briefly set forth the operation of each of these 
constituents: 


Wea Fe Asana TH: RAT ATL | 
AMARA FJ AM: WATS ASHAATT 11811 


9. Sattva causes clinging to pleasure; Rajas to works, 
while Tamas, shrouding knowledge, causes clinging to 


error. 


91. wea fae u at ga aswnatr ageata, ce: wf = are! 
asaf sft aad | at acted fees ager are J TT: AA 
AACA TAS ASH GI WATS: MARATONY | 


9.1.°O Arjuna! Sattva causes clinging to pleasure, and rajas 
to works’. ‘Causes clinging’ must be understood here. And 
shrouding knowledge or discrimination arising from sattva, 
tamas with its essentially enveloping operation makes one 
cling to error. ‘Error’ is the failure to perform one’s proper 
duty. 


10.0. 3m art Fer gifa qo: afr? seaI— 


10.0. When do the constituents operate in the way men- 
tioned above? 


wema ae Aatt ATLA | 
TH: ACS AAW AT: ACT TAAA 1 2oll 


10. Subjugating Rajas and Tamas, Sattva comes into 
being, O Arjuna! Subjugating Sattva and Tamas, does 


476 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XIV 


Rajas do so; and similarly, subjugating Sattva and 
Rajas, Tamas comes into being. 


10.1. Creare: eft wT wT a Sat aft wn act wafa sgt 
aad aar, aa somcnh ard cand sarrgarfe arcad, F Ard! 
wa TT TT: act aa va sat aft aoa aid ger, aa aa 
qos maA OA | aa Ua NA: TT: art Up Tat ay 
apr add wer, aar aavacorie waar ATA 


10.1. Subjugating both rajas and tamas, sattva comes into 
being-—i.c. becomes dominant. Positing itself thus, it produces 
its effects, knowledge, pleasure, etc. Similarly subjugating sativa 
and tamas, rajas dominates and produces its effects—-work, 
craving, etc. Likewise when tamas becomes dominant over 
sattva and rajas, it produces its effects, viz., the shrouding of 
knowledge and so forth. 


11.0. Fat a: WT: Gaye: wala, sat aaa fa fog afr’? gad 


11.0. What are the marks of the domination of each of these 
constituents? Answer:- 


adana sestery waar saad | 
ma wat aat aeaa aafaa n? 211 


11. When the light of knowledge shines at all the 
openings of the senses in this body, one may know that 
Sattva is dominant. 


11.1. adeny gf n adena arena: saara anA watr 
HUTT, AT AAT seg aA Fs: ata: THA: ee RAT IPTA- 
maaa: aA BaRTAd | Ata ATA | Bal Ua WHT: MATA: 
saad, Fat maA fsa faa faqa youd aca gafa va aie i 


11.1. The expression ‘the openings’ refers to the gate-ways 


10-13] The Three Constituents 477 


of cognition—the ear, etc., forming the sense-organs. The 
‘light’ referred to here is the modification of the inner organ, 
the intellect. When it shines out at all the openings of the body, 
it is knowledge. When the light of knowledge shines thus, 
taking it as a mark, one may know that the sattva is predo- 
minant. 


12.0. TE: Toe Be faa— 


12.0. The mark of the predominance of rajas is as follows: 


VA: IATER: RAAR: ETET | 
TAa maA faal ATTA nN 


12. Greed, activity, commencement of works, disquiet, 
desire—these appear when Rajas predominates, O 
thou, the best of the Bharatas! 


121. AN: fa ou opr omens, Safa: sada MAAT, 


12.1. ‘Greed’ is the desire to grasp others’ possessions; 
‘activity’ is effort in general, ‘Commencement’ is starting of 
works. ‘Disquiet’ consists in the effort induced by pleasure, 
attachment, etc; ‘desire’ is directed to all kinds of ordinary 
objects. These mental states become evident when rajas pre- 
dominates. 


ATHTA STAT TATAY Ale TT T | 
aAa maA frags PATA NIN 


13. Gloom, inaction, error and delusion, too, O thou 
scion of Kurus! come into being when Tamas increases. 


478 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XIV 


13.1. ASPTT: sft n aaa: aa, seed agi senna: 
ad, ware: alg: Ua aw [acer] afaaa: qeor gerd: 1 aafa qt 
faqe watt feg ara, X FARA! 1 


13.1. ‘Gloom’ is lack of discrimination; extreme ‘inaction’ 
is its effect. ‘Error’ and ‘delusion’ too are its effects. Lack of 
discrimination is ‘delusion’. When the constituent tamas in- 
creases, these signs become evident, O Arjuna! 


14.0. maT aT aq He werd, aes gan~ ad Thy Ta 
aha adag ae 


14.0. Even the consequence after death is due to attach- 
ment and clinging alone: it is derived from the constituents. 
This is now shown:- 


wal wea Was g Tea mfa 
aataataat arerraary Ssa wv 


14. Passing away when the Sattva dominates, the em- 
bodied self attains the unstained worlds pertaining to 
the best knowers. 


14.1. Far eft u war ar was J yaus g soa wor aris RA- 
Tat wey wea, ser Baafaary—agerfeacafaat yataq—arary 
waar noca rera setter stad i 


14.1. Ifa man dies when sattva ‘dominates’ or has full play, 


he attains the ‘unstained worlds’ of the best of knowers or the 
Samkyas, those who know the evolutes like the mahat. 


wita sea mn nafga maA | 
Ta Watters Heatly ATTA UVM 


15. Dying when Rajas is dominant one is born among 


13-16] The Three Constituents 479 


those addicted to works. Likewise, dying in Tamas one 
is born amidst the deluded. 


15.1. cafe fa uu crf Wr sas g soa Het wear wa pi- 
aferg satafeqeay aay aad | TUT aeea sete: Aa: Tae WIS 
qaf parfeairy wae 1 


15.1. Dying in a state of “dominant rajas’, one is born among 
men ‘addicted to works’. Likewise dying in a state of dominant 
tamas, one is born in the wombs of animals and so forth. 


16.0. aasar A va aay: aI — 


16.0. The gist of the ideas expressed in the foregoing verses 
is set forth:- 


RAT: FRaeaE: maa fats THT | 
CHAT HS ZARA AAA: BHT NLRI 


16. They say that stainless and Sattvic fruit proceeds 
from meritorious works; but of Rajas the fruit is pain; 
and of Tamas the fruit is ignorance. 


16.1. way: gfe uo sar: qHaer—arraser gort:—arg: freer: 
Ras ca frie ae eft 1 Wee Fe Tease Hi gore, 


16.1. Of ‘meritorious work’, i.e. of sattvic work, the virtuous 
maintain, the fruit is sattvic and stainless, exclusively. But of 
rajas or rajasic work ‘the fruit is mere pain’. We talk of rajasic 
work as the present 1s the context of works. Due to conformity 
with the cause, the fruit also is rajasic. Likewise, ‘ignorance’ 
is the fruit of tamasic work, i.e. of unrighteous work. 

What else emanates from the constituents? 


480 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XIV 


aca ad A Tat SA UT TI 
WANS AAA AWaahaAAReT DW 2911 


17. Of Sattva is born knowledge; and of Rajas, greed. 
Error, delusion and ignorance are born of Tamas. 


17.1. Acar ST uu Arad Sarea aaad watt AA, We: 
art: Ut a, Waele TATeM Alea Wareatet Gal aaa: qd Aact:, 
amA Ua a wala tl 


17.1. Of dominating sattva ‘knowledge ‘is born’—it springs 
up from sattva. ‘Greed’ is born of rajas. ‘Error, delusion, and 
also ignorance’ result from the constituent tamas. 


And, 


Tea Tested aeaeat aed facsfet eran: | 
HATTA TAEAT TIT Tested ATTA: ULC 


18. Those confirmed in Sattva go up; the Rajasic abide 
in the middle zone, while the Tamasic folk, abiding in 
the ways of the lowest constituent, go down. 


18.1. Hea Shr un Het Testa aAa sod arqem: TA- 
pame: | wer fsf mAg vost Uae: | WANA: 
wea sat War Tee: aH, cer Ad fratssmearfe, afer feaa: 
TIMTTTTEM: Aer: sey: Tooter Parfeatry Gerd — (È?) aman: Il 


18.1. “To go up’ means to be born in the worlds of gods 
(Devas), etc. Those who are confirmed in sattva—who live as 
men of sattva should—do so. Rajastc natures are born among 
human beings. Abiding in the ways of the lowest constituent, 
iumas—those whose life is marked by sleep, indolence, etc., 
who are deluded, ‘go down’. They are born in animal wombs. 
Who do so? The tamasic folk. 


17-19] The Three Constituents 481 


19.0. “Ten yatrerareqy fray ger wag wry gag:a- 
ee ee ee 


19.0. In the preceding chapter it was briefly stated that the 
cause of man’s empirical life, marked by births in good and 
evil wombs, is attachment, which consists in the experience 
‘I am happy, I am unhappy, I am deluded’ with reference to 
the constituents whose essence is pleasure, pain and delusion, 
respectively. These experiences accrue to a man subject to 
nescience by being caught in the clutches of the constituents. 
Such a man is apt to think that he is involved in prakrti. In 
this chapter, that brief statement is expanded into the verses 
from the fifth onwards in which are set forth the nature of the 
constituents, their operations, bondage and the destiny of the 
bound man. Now is the time to explain the nature of deliver- 
ance through right knowledge. Therefore the Lord says: 


AT TOT: BAe Tat meqa | 
Thar It Afa agra Afira Wes 


19. When the percipient sees no agent other than the 
constituents and knows My status beyond them, he 
attains My status. 


19.1. ATT ft uu a wet Anoan a AA: Wray: Hair 
wa wat aver fag aq a aqueafa— qm: va aaae: aan 
watt aa maf, Tre a ot Terman af, wera AA 
ma agaa agla. aay’ [9.2%] eed werd aq a zeer afa- 
TfT 1 


19.1. When the ‘percipient’, i.e., the enlightened man, 


482 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XIV 


sees ‘no agent other than the constituents’ that have trans- 
formed themselves into body, organs and objects of percep- 
tion—sees that only the constituents in their varied states are 
the agents in all works, and sees, also, what is beyond these 
constituents, viz., the witness of their operations—, then he 
attains My status as Vasudeva; for, he sees that everything is 
Vasudeva (vide BG.7.19). 


20.0. FA a: afaresfa sfa? sara— 
20.0. How does he attain that status? Listen: 


qrara Aly Bet WaT Gas | 
sar ATMA URN 


20. Transcending these three constituents whence the 
body has sprung up, the embodied self is liberated from 
birth, death, old age and pains and attains immorta- 


lity. 


20.1. Try fe u Try wary wary adie stave afew 
maf A eet tera aR Tans A: 
TH Ta TTT Tae wT waa t tare fare: 
aq faery aad aaa, wa werd are gerd: i 


20.1. Transcending, while alive, these three constituents, 
these adjuncts of maya, the seeds whence the body has sprung 
up, the embodied self, in this very life, is released from birth, 
death, old age and pains. Thus the enlightened sage attains 
immortality, My status. 


21.0. aAa pr ada aad aad sfa a Aa, apa: 
vara — 


21.0. Noting a point that provokes a question in that state- 
ment, Arjuna asked: 


20-22] The Three Constituents 483 


AAT SATA : 
Atoe rmana na TAT | 
frma: wy Ariea afai nR 


Arjuna said: 

21. By what signs is he distinguished who has tran- 
scended the three constituents? O Lord! How does he 
behave? How does he get beyond the constituents? 


21.1. fot: sa u & fost fee: A qa oa arena 
adie: Raa: wate sar! fearare: w wer arare: afa frararc: 
ry dt FT ware wary Ay Ay aadA adhe ade i 


21.1. By what ‘signs’ or marks is ‘he distinguished who has 
transcended the constituents’, the nature of which has been 
described already? How does he ‘behave’? How does he live 
after going beyond the three constituents? 


22.0. pria wa yrds A wT gee: afer WTS 
meteor iaa wrt varq—aq avaq “A: foe gent Forder 
wate” afr, aq PI 


22.0. Arjuna wanted a definition of the sage who has passed 
beyond the constituents and also asked how the sage passed 
beyond them. The Lord replies in this verse: 


ATATAT TATA: 

TH A wala a Aaa FT MVEA | 

a dhe asana a frala areata NRN 
The blessed Lord said: 
22. Pandava prince! That sage neither hates light, 


action and delusion when these spring up, nor seeks 
them when these disappear. 


484 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XIV 


22.1. wart fa u wer a aea, safe a ura, wey wat 
q omar, Aaa a ef maaa aafanmnad senfa — na 
AAA: TIT: MA: A AE E, Tar aA aA: wa serar FART, 
at ag Creat yafaa: wafea: AE; PE A add T: wa NAA- 
emama Sa; an mas Wr: sare ar faafeet aaea 
aAa a aaa ae sta afa afte aafaa | aq ws TOMA: 
a fe ma i an a meag. aat aea sft 
gaa faa areata, a an qa: faaara aeaa gerd: | 
Tad a Toe few fe afg? erana eaaa wa 
uq saq | at fe carenfasa ae saree ar ox: eae 1 


22.1. Light is the effect of sattva; action, of rajas ; and delu- 
sion, of tamas. The sage does not hate these when they spring up: 
“A tamasic mental state has arisen, so am I deluded; a rajasic 
action, essentially painful, has sprung up which drags me down 
from my real nature. This sip from my real nature as Self is 
tragic. Likewise an essentially luminous sattvic state, inducing 
discrimination and promoting pleasure has arisen.” Only he 
whose vision is defective hates these states; not so the sage who 
has transcended the constituents. Unlike the sattvic, the rajasic 
and the tamasic man who desires these states when they lapse, 
the sage does not desire them when they disappear. This is 
the idea. The sage’s attitude to these states is not obvious to 
the outsider; rather, being evident only to the Self, the sage 
alone may perceive his inner marks. An outsider, of course, 
cannot discern the inwardly felt aversion and attachment. 


23.0. aa r qnia: feararc?” efa sere aaa are— 


23.0. Now is given the reply to the question how the tran- 
scendent sage behaves: 


saree What + fracat | 
THT added Fete asafacofs AHA NRIN 


23. Seated as if indifferent, he is not disturbed by the 


22-24] The Three Constituents 485 


constituents: he stirs not but remains steadfast, 
holding that constituents alone prevail. 


23.1. verdad sft saraa sar serait: a pafa Ta wae, 


qea: — a e cht a qemi—a ogi a aofi 
aena: va wate seat: i 
fra — 


23.1. ‘As if indifferent’—as an indifferent man does not 
take sides, so too is the transcendent sage who is seated or set 
on the path leading beyond the constituents. He is the knower 
of the Self, he is the renouncer. He is not disturbed from his 
discriminating vision by the constituents. This fact is clari- 
fied: He stirs not who is established in the knowledge that the 
constituents are transformed into the body, senses, and objects, 
and that they conjointly exist. He abides as pure Self. To 
maintain the metre intact the active voice is used instead of— 
avatisthate, the middle voice. Or, the reading may be taken as 
anutisthate. 

And, 


AAG AGA: CCT: AAS RART TA: | 
geatrartrat wireqeatrarnaegia: wave 


24. Pain and pleasure are one to him who abides in 
his Self. He treats alike clod, stone, and gold. To the 
wise, the pleasant and the unpleasant are alike; so too 
censure and praise. 


24.1. Wage Ba N gaga. at Taga Wa a AE., TACT: 
A arafa fa: Taa, AEAT A, SIS A WAT TF AT OF 
aera aa ae a aaeernaray gaaaf: frat 
q aha a farsa get at ger a: aa geafsartee:, ate dh, 


486 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam {Ch. XIV 


ee eee gA faar- 
pa | 


24.1. To this sage pain and pleasure are equal. He abides 
in his Self calmly, undisturbed by such experiences. A clod, 
stone and gold are the same to him. So also the pleasant and 
the unpleasant, blame and praise. And, 


araTaaTaategeaegen fanfaar: | 
gaeaf THT: A JAA NAUN 


25. He is equal in honour and disgrace; equal towards 
friend and foe. He does not initiate any action. Such a 
one is styled the transcendent sage. 


25.1. At gf n ATATTATaal: Jer: aa: fraa: ga: fanfaar: — 
weft serdar: wafer Shaq arado, aar cored frarfcoerar: 
wa water eft 1 wat g ger: fafao: zene | aateerafcarnt— 
gerent sath arcerd afr aren, aalq area aia 


afeantt gork ) quidta: & seme 


25.1. ‘Honour and disgrace’ are the same to him; he is 
serene. He is the same towards ‘friends and foes’. Though 
some may consider themselves disinterested, others may view 
them as partial, friendly or inimical. But this transcendent 
sage is ‘the same to friends and foes’, says the Lord. Actions 
are works undertaken to promote purposes, seen or unseen. 
The nature of the sage is such that ‘he does not initiate any 
action’ 1.e., renounces all actions except what 1s meant to 
support life in the body. Such a one is called the transcendent 
sage. 


26.0. saaa gearfe pea: a sere’ [23-24] Aan TH 


24-26] The Three Constituents 487 


maq reared aad ia: a a g, ferthyt 
g aidi aq pia at oa wate afr a “at a A 
qr afraid ?°” gaa aA saa mg— 

26.0. The characteristics set forth in the verses 14.23-25 
demand effort to achieve. The renouncer, the seeker after 
liberation, has to cultivate them, they being the means leading 
to the state of transcendence. Once secured, these characteris- 
tics become directly discernible in the transcendent sage as 
his unique marks. Now is given the reply to the question how 
one is to transcend the three constituents. 


mi a Asaan afena Aà | 
a TT anA ATA PAA NRN 


26. He who, with the unwavering Yoga of devotion, 
serves Me, transcends these constituents and becomes 
fit for the status of Brahman. 


26.1. mi ef u at aq Sat aaa aiaga a. afa: aif at 
aAa + safa a: aaa aaea — aa aR: Aa ar: — 
aa [Rasimant] winartr—[a fe e. wraaquevares: 
wafa |—aad, a Try andthe wary Gala NAAT, wat wT, 
wera wentaaa Arar Head aNd: watt zat: 1 


26.1. And he, the renouncer or worker who serves, with the 
Yoga of love, of undeviating devotion, Me, Lord Narayana 
dwelling in the hearts of all beings, transcends the consti- 
tuents. Love here means devotion, and the Yoga of love has, as 
essence, discriminative knowledge resulting from divine grace. 
Such a sage becomes fit, 1.e. competent, for winning liberation. 
Brahmabhuya means status as Brahman. 


27.0. $a wafafa ? sarr— 
27.0. What is the rationale of this? 


488 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XIV 


wernt fe ASEAN T | 
WPI FA TAT FaatHeawey A Ui 


27. Indeed I am the ground of Brahman, immortal 
and immutable, as also of eternal righteousness and 
unfailing bliss. 


27.1. Tern: aft n ag: Tearena: fe aera faor ag sfafassta 
afna sf sfaser ae sere | atenrrer ser: ?— aaqaer afa- 
afa, saaa afsaricr:, maa a fre, wer ware 
TTT Tee mae warfare aaO: g- 
fea maae Td: seme waT, wena 
qaan faia | ad wad ‘war ware Here’ (2%) A se | 
I a SIRT werenerarraa sar sfafassd sada, ar ate: 
ada we afeerferat: sacrcaq sah: | 


27.1. For, I, the inner Self, am the ground in which dwells 
Brahman, the Supreme Self. What is the nature of this Brah- 
man? It is the immortal and immutable sustainer of etefnal 
righteousness, i.e. of knowledge, of righteousness and of 
unfailing bliss, attainable through the Yoga of knowledge 
and righteousness. The inner Selfis the ground of the Supreme 
Self whose essence is immortality, etc., and the highest bliss. 
This inner Self is ascertained to be the Supreme Self through 
right knowledge. This truth has already been affirmed in 14.26, 
‘becomes fit for the status of Brahman.” That power of God 
by means of which Brahman functions to promote well-being, 
etc., of the devotees is the same as Brahman or Myself; for 
power and its possessor are one. This is the idea. 


27) The Three Constituents 489 


27.2. WIA —FaTecaTSaa AfaHows gal 1 Tee Tar: fafanors: 
wena area. sa arava: | car—fatatarccer ? arqaer aore 
ware a mates | fea—ardea a faa, wer maT- 
wee gee mafaa aA varia a, ‘wfacsr ag 
aft aadA II 


27.2. Or, ‘Brahman’ here refers to Brahman with attributes 
as It is the denotation of the term Brahman. Of this Brahman, 
I, who am beyond all attributes, alone am the ground, and 
none else. The qualifications of Brahman with attributes are-— 
‘immortal and immutable’. I am also the ground of ‘eternal 
righteousness and of unfailing bliss’ which are marked by 
steadfastness in the knowledge generating unfailing bliss. 
‘I am the ground’—this expression is implied in this context. 


qf Aaaama amagana RTA- 
Aaaa: Hat MATTIAS qrad- 
aoma ara IJESA: NXN 


qA SATA: 
CHAPTER XV 
THE YOGA OF THE SUPREME SPIRIT 


0.1. aem maa afro A, afar a maa, wea: afea 
at à AA a m a maar a: at fa 1 fey 
qaa aa: aeaa aa aaa: eft | aa: Wary Aa arqeershr 
meat: a fray: vara SAS ARN | aa a JAER HTT 
taat: darea aiaa — anea fe iara aaam AARTI; 
T aaf tt 


0.1. Since I control the fruits of works of those. who do them 
and the fruits of the knower’s knowledge, those who devote 
themselves to Me, conforming to the Yoga of devotion, 
achieve liberation after they transcend the constituents of 
Prakrti through knowledge won by My grace. Where is the 
need, then, to speak of those who have mastered the truth of 
the Self? Therefore, the Lord, though unasked by Arjuna,- 
seeking to set forth the truth about Himself, uttered the 
following verses of this chapter. In the first place, to generate 
detachment, He describes, employing the metaphor of the 
tree, the nature of empirical life; for only one detached from 
empirical life is competent to grasp the truth about the Lord; 
none else. 


APTA ATA E 
PATHAT MAPA AFCA | 
gaia aa ants aed az a Aafaa wei 


The blessed Lord said : 

1. They speak of the eternal fig tree whose roots are 
above and branches below. Its leaves are the Vedic 
hymns. He who knows it knows«he Vedas. 


1] The Yoga of the Supreme Spirit 491 


qaaa ST aeai GA: | 
[ama]. TH 34. R033; WH. 73-24. | 


1.1. Being subtler than time and being the cause, eternal 
and great, Brahman the unmanifest, who is endowed with the 
power of Maya, is said to be ‘above’. That Brahman is the root 
of this tree of transmigrating life. Srut: affirms the same. ‘With 
root above and branches below’ this fig tree is eternal, (KU. 
3.2.1). In the Puranas it is affirmed: “The eternal tree Brah- 
man has sprung from the unmanifest root; it rises high due to 
His blessing ; it consists largely of the branches of the intellect, 
the hollows of the sense-organs, the varied twigs of material 
elements. Its leaves are sense-objects. Its glorious flowers are 
righteousness and unrighteousness. Fruits borne by this tree 
are pleasures and pains. On it depend all beings. This is also 
the forest of Brahman, consisting of that Brahman-tree. Having 
cut it and split it with the supreme sword of knowledge, and 
gaining the bliss of Self, none returns therefrom, (Asva.parvan, 
35.20—22; 47.12-15, etc.). 


1.2. gure | a Hedy Aart Ararat ae sre: | MEZA- 
amaa: WaT: eat ae ae: waddle asd wee, A NTEN | 
q aisha carat eft space: i aafaa spret sig: seater | d- 
amaaa: aega asd Aaa: AAA: — ANTAA- 
kaama: fe qufae:—d aag | aAa ANGA et A 
ferorq—safe aa a safe sea waaa wT 


492 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam _[Ch. XV 


amaaa Tate cots 1 wer qaa ferata Toth, cat ART: 
amaaa, maagaas a | TATSATeATA AAT 
aye a at ae a: afaa, aarifaq cere: 1 a fe aq TATA 
weary Aa: aT: aA safe: afer sare: ade: adaertfatete 


riara KAT i 


1.2. They say that this tree of transmigratory life with its 
root above is a riddle. ‘Its branches are below’, consisting of 
the mahat (the principle of the intellect), egoism, the rudimen- 
tary elements and so forth. This tree does not last till the next 
day even ; hence it is called aśvattha. Every moment it perishes, 
they (sages) declare. It is eternal as well, since the riddle of 
transmigratory life has been there from beginningless time. It 
is well-known as the ground of a beginningless and ceaseless 
stream of body, etc. Here is an additional attribute of this 
tree—‘its leaves are the Vedic hymns’. The term chandas means 
the Vedic hymns that cover this tree of samsara, which 1s 
meant to manifest righteousness, unrighteousness, their causes 
and their effects. He who knows this tree as explained is ‘the 
knower of the Vedas’, i.e., one who knows the sense of the 
Vedas. Indeed there is nothing else left, not even an iota, to 
be known other than this tree of samsara and its root. Hence 
the knower of all Vedas is omniscient. This declaration 
eulogizes the knowledge of the tree of samsara and its cause. 


2.0. TA UAT FATE ATT ARANT FaI— 
2.0. Another way of picturing the parts of this tree is offered : 


Teas Tear TAT TIS frase: | 
AIT FOTUTA AA maaa AANA WRI 


2. Both below and above spread its branches flour- 
ishing because of the constituents; sense-objects are 
its shoots. Below in the world of men extend its roots 
that link up actions. 


2) The Yoga of the Supreme Spirit 493 


21. oer she uu oe: agea: wad SAL, Aa: Set ATA 


2.1. ‘Below’ is the sphere of living beings from men to 
stationary objects like trees, and ‘above’—up to the sphere 
of the creator Brahma—extends the region of the fruits of 
knowledge and work conforming to works and the teachings 
of śruti. ‘The branches of this tree’, like those of any tree, ‘ex- 
tend’: “They flourish fed by the constituents’, sattva, etc., their 
material causes. ‘Sense-objects’, sounds and so forth, are ‘the 
shoots’; for, like shoots, they grow from the branches, viz., 
the ae of the actions of body, speech, mind. So the branches 
of this tree are said to have sense-abjects as their shoots. The 
ultimate root, the material cause of this tree of samsara, has 
already been mentioned. Now are pointed out the inter- 
mediate roots or causes, namely, impressions left in the mind 
by the fruits of actions, viz., attachment, aversion etc., those 
impressions being the causes of other actions, righteous and 
unrighteous. These extend below the ranges of beings like the 
roots: They conform to other righteous and unrighteous acts 
and engender consequences of a like nature. Appearance of 
beings in the human sphere, especially, is a result of these acts. 
It is well-known that human beings are here to do works con- 
tinuing from prior works. 


3.0. Weg He afr: Aarcger:— 


3.0. Of this tree of transmigratory life as described ; 


494 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XV 


qT SAE TVET Aral A atfad a aesfacsr | 
wierd Glaeser ATAN Fea Fat 311 


3. The form here is not known as such; it has no end 
and no beginning, and no foundation. With the strong 
weapon of detachment, having split this fig tree with 
its well-nourished roots; 


ee a S 

, qaca fe a eft | aa 
ao o for, amfa: ar fart | aa a a anfe:, 
“ea: arc aa ga: af a Fafaq sare 1 at a aesfacer frie: 
ma wey tafe sod | wae wd aul gfare ae frees 
face vari gaara yore ae a Ud gres, wae Fay: 
Pfaraernry aad, at weerrean get merear iren aaa- 
mds Ta: Ta: faaararaa fara fara dare aati seu N 


3.1. Its form as described is not known for certain here at 
all; for it is like a dream, water of the mirage or a city in the 
sky. It is fugitive. Therefore, it has no end, fixity or conclusion. 
Similarly it has no beginning. None knows it as having a firm 
existence or middle state. Having split or eradicated this fig 
tree with its stout roots by means of ‘the strong weapon of 
detachment’, consisting in the absence of desire for children, 
wealth, renown, and fame; then seek that Status. The ‘strength 
of the weapon’ is derived from the sure orientation of mind 
towards the supreme Self. It has to be sharpened by repeatedly 
rubbing it on the whetstone of discriminative knowledge. 


aa: we aafe afary wat a fadia aa: 
aAa BTS FT ee Aa: safa: Ta Fe uv 


4. Then that Status has to be laboriously sought after 
reaching which there is no return. It should be sought 


3-5] The Yoga of the Supreme Spirit 495 


(feeling), ‘I take refuge in the Primeval Spirit whence 
has emanated this ancient process’ (of creation, etc.) 


4.1. 7a: MA u ae: Taq aq ve Aone aq fenira, qfeanio 
wayyy, areata: | aferq oe war: faer: a fread a aada 
qe: oa daraa i ae ffa ? meaa a oo ena 
wh: we mÀ wa are gee weet seta oferta, esea 
reat: iow wet gen sft? saaa: weg gear darag- 
agfa: saat ag, afoma arr, got Pert i 


4.1. Then that all pervading ‘Status’ must be laboriously 
sought. This seeking is a search for knowledge—the Status 
has to be known. Once it 1s attained there is no more return 
from it to this transmigratory life. How is it to be sought? 
Seek for it in that ‘Primeval Spirit’, termed ‘Status’. ‘I take 
refuge’ —with such an attitude oné surrenders oneself to that 
Spirit and seeks refuge. Who is this Spirit? “That from which 
has emanated the ancient and everlasting process’ of the growth 
of the tree of transmigratory life as a magical show from a 
wizard. 


5.0. PUY: Aq Te west? TIT — 


5.0. Equipped with what virtues do they attain to that 
Status? Answer: 


fatate faia earnan fafrgerarar: | 
Saal: FATAAA: MERAT: TIRA AT XI 
5. Devoid of egoism and delusion, overcoming the 
flaws of attachment, firm in spirituality, free from 
lusts, released from dualities called pleasures and 


pains, the undeluded (sages) repair to that imperishable 
‘Status’. 


5.1. fratar: aff ou aatar: aro ate arene, at fnat 


496 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam {Ch. XV 


rey: 3 faaie: magaan: Raan: age va ate: aPaly,, 
fara: aware 4: 8 Raag: | aaraa: meae 
fam: were: 1 fafaga. fa facta faar. arat: A a 
fafrqearat: aaa: defer: ae: fearfrarfefe: a: gaz aad: 
qfar: Testa waa: Areata: Te sera aq TATA II 


5.1. “Devoid of egoism and delusion’ are they from whom 
these qualities have departed, and thus are free from both. 
Attachment is the flaw they have overcome. They are.intent 
on the contemplation of the Essence—the Supreme Self. 
Without leaving a trace, passions have left them. Such ascetics, 
renouncers, are released from dualities like the pleasant and 
the painful. ‘Undeluded’, they repair to the imperishable 
‘status’ already described. 


6.0. axa Te ga: fahrerg— 
6.0. That very ‘status’ is further distinguished : 


q agea Tal A WATST A TAR: | 


wane + fada ASTA TA AA Ell 


6. The sun does not illumine it; neither does the moon 
nor does the fire. That is My abode supreme, after 
reaching which none falls back. 


6.1.4 aq aa u aq aa aa aaa are araead—aq aa 
qaret që a waaa qå: arfar: TAT ATA ATA ACA HT afa | war 
T WUE: We: q Tae: a aa | aq are Aer ye Acar say a 
fada, wea gatz: + maal aq ama ce oH fact: wa Ta, aq 
meat a rated IARR II 


6.1. “That abode’—these sundered terms must be asso- 
ciated with each other. ‘That abode’ is a mass of splendour. 
‘The sun does not illumine it’, though the sun is potent to 
illumine all things. Similarly, also ‘the moon and the fire’. 


5-7] The Yoga of the Supreme Spirit 497 


That all-pervasive ‘status’ after reaching which none falls 
back and which the sun and the rest cannot illumine is ‘My 
supreme Abode’—the abode of Visnu. 


7.0. 7 wat fe ah: ma, ‘aarm: fava: [e 2.2; 
WRIT. 29.32; 330.30; AT. UW. Har. 204.04. Feral] eta Aq | 
ry sad “aq ara warat afer frafa:” sir? yy ae arorq— 


7.0. “Now, all movement entails an eventual return. ‘Unions 
end in severance’ (MBha. Ra). Why then is it affirmed that 
those who repair to that Abode do not return?” Listen to the 
reason: 


Aaa MaN Wert: TATA: | 
naasia searen Hats iii 


7. An eternal part of Myself alone has become the fiva 
in the world of living beings. It pulls the senses together 
with mind as the sixth that are set in Prakrti. 


7.1. WA Shr Wl AA VA TRAST: ATTA, AW: AT: HAT: WHAT: 
afr aaa, taste saat wh aart stay: sat wre fe 
saa: wart: feeds; an weqéa: gale woffa aaa 
Tet + frada—ata ararat wets, vada; wea at eraa: 
menena: arava: aq verfefafraraa arent srr a farada 
zaag | wa: sata TH ‘aang a fad [24] Sr ul 


7.1. Of Me the Supreme Self, Narayana, ‘a part’, a limb, 
has become a Jiva in the world of living beings. The Jiva is 
well-known as the eternal agent and experiencer. As the sun 
reflected in water is a part of the sun that goes back to the sun 
and does not come back when the water, the medium of re- 
flection, is no longer there; or as the pot-ether, etc. determined. 
by the pot and so forth, 1s a part of ether and ceases to exist 
when the conditions of such determination cease to exist, but 
go back to ether and do not fall back from it, so the jzvas too 


498 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XV 


become one with Me, once they attain Me. Thus the declara- 
tion—‘after reaching which none falls back’—in 15.6 is all 
right. 


22 A] VRID ANT: EN: SAT: ONAN: AT: MG! ANAT 


7.2. Objection: “But the supreme Spirit is impartite. How 
can He have a limb, part or portion? In case He has parts 
they may get separated and He may perish.” Reply: “This 
danger is not there; for the portion or part is only imagined as 
such due to limitations imposed by nescience. This idea has 
already been elaborated in chapter 13. 


7.3. 8 q Sta: miaa aera: Fr daca serrate 4 efa ? seaa— 
ares staat srretis safrents caer maan saat 
fata atta arate i 

afer are ? — 


7.3. How does the Jiva, (the living being), postulated as 
My part, transmigrate leaving the body? “The Jiva pulls the 
sense-organs, namely, ear and so forth, with the mind as the 
sixth’—all firm-set in prakrti, their proper abodes being the 
auricle and so forth. 

At what time? 


MU Teal ASAT SH AAT: | 
mida aarta anqtearfrarsrart cit 


8. When the patent Jiva gains a fresh body and moves 
out of it, it takes these (the sense organs), just as air 
does the scents from their abodes. 


8.1. TO aft n aq a aft aer aie sA Sax: terfeasea- 


7-10] The Yoga of the Supreme Spirit 499 


carat sita:, var ‘anita’ sf aa fedan: riaa MIAA TAA | 
aa a gie Weta aAa aara aar ea warts naaa 
of-carfor aarta TAR atfa weafa—fatag ota ° me-a. TAT: 
wq ga maag È: 1 

arfa ga: arts afr? — 


8.1. And when the potent fwa, the master of the psycho- 
physical organism, moves out of it, he takes these sense-organs. 
The second line of the previous verse must be syntactically 
connected as the first term of verse 8. From the previous body 
when the Jwa reaches out to a fresh one, ‘taking the sense 
organs, with the mind as the sixth’, he moves forth.. Like 
what ?—‘like the air, taking scents from their abodes —flowers, 
etc. 

Which sense organs are referred to? 


ma aq: A A at IAT T | 
aries amaa farararetad RII 


9. The ear, the eye, the skin, the tongue and the nose 
as well as the mind—resorting to these, the Jiva experi- 
ences objects. 


9.1. art a uo a we: a a afaa aa frat arm wa 
q, ma: a S sae aA ag, aaron ga: aoa ward 
zuad || 

qi i R — 

9.1. Dwelling in the body and ‘resorting to the five sense- 
organs’, ear etc., the mind being the sixth, the Jiva experiences 


objects. | 
The dweller in the body while leaving it, 


sena ai afa gsi at qaaa | 
faqar aaaf afa MATR: 201! 


500 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XV 


10. The deluded do not perceive him, going out or 
staying or experiencing through association with the 
Gunas. Only those who have wisdom’s eye perceive 
him. 


10.1. Geaarrdt str u veered @¢ gator oft feet arsh 
ae fred Wat a vert sew qa gqag-anteret: 
Tw: afaa apr agente: 1 aA wt aaa T 
fma: gegeman eaaa waar yer. a aaqTeatea— 
ee ee ee ee ar eee 
a wt afa maan: fafanga: gard: 1 
afrq— 


10.1. As the fva gives up a body previously tenanted, or 
when it dwells there experiencing objects like sounds and so 
forth, it is in contact with constituents whose essences are 
pleasure, pain and delusion. It is fit to be perceived vividly, 
yet the deluded fools fail to perceive it ; for, their minds, in the 
grip of varied objective experiences, are distracted. The Lord 
expresses His pity for their sad plight. In contrast, those who 
have the eye of valid knowledge, yielded l: the right means of 
knowledge, are clear-eyed and do see the fwa. 

But some 


Gam ater Tears | 
VAMISAPATATAT AA TTT ATT: 12 211 


11. Those who persevere, endued with Yoga, see the 
Jiva dwelling in the inner self; but they of unpurified 
minds, not having mastered the inner self, fail to see 
despite perseverance. 


11.1. Geet: Sf n aad: saet Heed: afr: A oe Ua 
safer 1 aasa arearfesrAreh:, saATCATA: areata TTaT 


10-12] The Yoga of the Supreme Spirit 501 


11.1. ‘Persevering’---striving hard. Such Yogins with con- 
centrated minds see the Jwa, knowing, ‘here I am, the self’. 
The content of their knowledge takes the form, ‘here I am’. 
This perception occurs in the inner self, the intellect. Though 
‘striving hard’, employing the means of knowledge, there are 
others who, ‘not having mastered the inner sense’, or purified 
it by means of penance such as sense-control, not having 
abstained from the wicked ways of life, and not having aboli- 
shed vanity—do not see the Self (the fwa). They are the 
mindless or undiscriminating. 


12.0. aq Te ada aeaa maafa sata: a ITTA, 
aq eama qa: ga: aaraa: + fada, aa a aa araa 
aq fad: Aane: so MAAN, A A 


warned adaa a faa. agia: Ne: faoa mara — 


12.0. That Status which, while illuminating all, itself needs 
no illumination by the light of fire, sun, etc., after attaining 
which seekers after liberation no more return to transmigra- 
tory life, in accordance with whose varying adjuncts living 
beings are fashioned as Its parts just as the pot-ether, etc., 
are fashioned according to the adjuncts of the ether enclosed— 
that Status is set forth in four verses as the Self of all things 
and the ground of all empirical activities. Also, these verses 
summarise the powers of the Status in question. The blessed 
Lord said: 


mafai sat maA aT | 
asaan Gear aA fafa ATAFE N?N 


12. The luminous energy of the sun illuminating the 
entire world, the same that is in the moon and fire— 
know that radiance to be Mine. 


12.1. qara a n wa meaa maaa aq? — A: 
Afa: wart: a amaA aaa afaa an, aq aefa agfa 


502 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XV 


aT. aanas add, aq a amt grag. aq oo: fafo faite ane 
wera wer fae aa sorte: 1 

aana afer aH: daana sA, aq acuta, wea aay 
ade aq aa. fafa mas neta fao: aq safe: | 

TT VARY TAT FT aq aa Aaarens vata: | aT HA we 
ay ate, ararhreard arfaeacearrae: | anfecnfay fe art a- 
TH aaaea aa: ata srfarat satfa: sf aq fafererd, q 3 
aaa aq afas afa 1 mer fe are. gAs wader, 7 aroge 
qe mintaa, matà g cares aan a ara naaf, 


aeq Ii 
fra — 


12.1. That luminous energy, the splendour, the light of the 
sun which illumines the entire world, the same as that which 
exists in the moon and the fire,—know that to be Mine who am 
Visnu. Or, the luminous conscious light in the sun as also in 
the moon and fire—know that to be Mine, i.e., of Visnu. 
Objection: “Now, both in objects unmoving and moving is 
equally present the light of consciousness; then why qualify 
it as what is present in the sun, etc?” Reply: “This is no 
flaw ; for, due to the excess of the luminous power it is reason- 
able to hold that there are differing degrees of its manifesta- 
tion. In the sun and so forth, sattva with its excess of light 1s 
extremely resplendent; so light is more manifest there. There- 
fore, the sun, the moon, etc., have been selected to qualify that 
light, and it is not suggested that it is confined to them. This 
case is similar to the reflection of one’s face that vividly shines 
forth in mirrors of varying degrees of clarity and not in opaque 
materials like wood and stone. 

And, 


mafa Baath MENRE | 
gonfia teeth: aat: AA AN TAAR: 3N 


13. Entering into the earth, with prowess I sustain all 


12-14] The Yoga of the Supreme Spirit 503 


beings; becoming the moon with its essence of sap, I 
foster all plants and herbs. 


13.1. 7 ef uo at ai maa sfaea areata wars aq He 
weet wea, aq as arronfaatad wat eq wager gira 
afa, ta gfi wat a are: vata, a facia a am a ATA: — 
‘aa aro fai a ger [ta xc] afa, ‘@ are gara [À A. 
x.g] zR 1 aa: annfae a yah aaa arora sfa 
aera | fea—gfrert rar: ated: aat: Afaan: qearfa gead: 
wenza: THO AAT: Yea LATHH: AV: AT CATH: THETA: | 
vaca are: are. i a fe adna: wat weet: aera 

fFa— 


13.1. ‘Entering into the earth’ I sustain all beings-—i.e. the 
whole world—with My prowess, free from cravings and attach- 
ments. The reference is to the divine form present in the earth 
for its sustenance. Due to it the earth does not collapse and 
splinter. Hence the affirmation in the TS: ‘By which the firma. 
ment and the mighty earth are held steadfast, (4.1.8) ; ‘He up- 
held the earth’ (Ibid). Hence also has it been declared aright. 
‘I sustain the beings, moving and unmoving, having entered 
the earth.’ Moreover, plants and herbs—i.e., barley and so 
forth—I sustain, becoming the sapful moon; I make them 
juicy and sweet. The moon is the abode of all essences; it 
instils their respective saps in all plants and herbs. Thus I 
foster them. 


Besides, | 
AE Parra Aeat mfra sear: | 
maang: TATA AAT evi 
14. Becoming the fire (of hunger) and dwelling in the 


bodies of living beings, together with the inbreath and 
the outbreath, I digest the four-fold food. 


14.1. We Bt uo we wa Marae: yarer af: year—‘serafe- 


504 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam .[Ch. XV 


Sara Nana: Tet Aaa ead’ [3.3.4] searfert:— 
para: aq frat moai ee arta: ae: maaan. MO- 
caren ara: ie: Tafa ates ÀA ara ort afer TEN — 
Wea, Wea, Wis, Sew CATT Daa: afta, WA Whoa SA ATA: 
aad sat andthe ade” sfa wea: aANT: a waft i 
faz 


14.1. Becoming the fire in the stomach, the Vaisvanara, 
and dwelling in the bodies of living beings, conjointly with the 
inbreath and the outbreath, I digest the four kinds of food. 
Vide: “This fire is Vaisvanara who is inside man and by whom 
food is digested” (BU.5.9.1). The four kinds of food are : what 
is masticated, swallowed, licked and sucked. He who per- 
ceives that the eater is Vaisvanara fire and what it consumes, 
its food, is Soma,—those two, the fire and Soma, constituting 
all that exists—is never affected by the defects of food. 

And, 


ada ale gfe afafacel aa: eafaaiaacied T | 
ae adaga At aarcdgdlaeg BST uel 


15. I dwellin the heart of all; from Me spring memory, 
knowledge, and forgetfulness. By means of all the 
Vedas, I alone am to be known. I am the maker of the 
Vedanta as well as the knower of the Vedas. 


15.1. aden sfa wader a ofa ag area aq ete gat 
afafa: | aa: Wa: area: aia ea: art aaNet A T, 
at wa pratt qantas mae wad:, car maafa 
maare faa: wed A wad wT a 1 at: a ae: 
wey wa Toa ae: Afaa: | Aaaa Arara euws:, 
qafa aartfaq wa F IgA I 


15.1. Being the Self, I dwell in the heart—in the intellect— 
of all living beings. Therefore, due to Me, the Self, take place 
their memory, knowledge, and the disappearance of these two. 


14-16] The Yoga of the Supreme Spirit 505 


In the case of meritorious beings, according to their acts of 
merit, knowledge and memory happen; in the case of the 
wicked, according to their evil deeds, there occurs the dis- 
appearance, the slipping away of these two. By means of all 
the Vedas, I, the supreme Self, alone am to be known. I am 
the Maker of the Vedantas—He who establishes the tradition 
of Vedantic teachings, and the knower of the contents of the 
Vedas, too. os 


16.0. Wad: Saver areraoreney feats: oe: faferserarhras: 
‘Warford am: [24.23] na | oe agar ada rf- 
taamaan afara Fancy acq-(cqeq-) fafearcfayat sat 
aT: amea | aT adaa adamant fro mA 
ATE — 


16.0. In the verses of 15.12, etc. has been offered a summary 
of the powers of God Narayana, the Lord, due to His excellent 
adjuncts. To determine the principle of the pure unqualified 
nature of the same Lord, who has also been distinguished by 
His perishable and imperishable adjuncts, the subsequent 
verses are offered. Collecting in three groups the contents of 
all the previous and the following chapters, the Lord says: 


gafant yeut ata ONAT Ua F | 
a: aat warts Tees Fert NRN 


16. In the world are these two Persons, the perishable 
and the imperishable. The perishable consists of all 
beings, the imperishable is the immovable. 


16.1. atfaat gf n st mt pama g fa gerd ars aart— 
aoa aea ac: faa sf vat T; aa: gN: a: afsrde:, 
wad maaf, aa gua safada ara- 
PARETA, AT: gN: Tod 1 Ht at g fa? g aÀ 
wrarq—ae: aar anfa. maa faroa geet: | pA He: 


(a 


affa fara: | aage: m, aa, Rgn, gaa xf Tat. | 


506 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XV 


aaraa saara fer: acer, aara a act aft 
TAC: Ft 1 


16.1. In the world of transmigratory life there are ‘two 
Persons’—grouped as two: ‘the perishable’ consisting of all 
that perishes or wears away is the first group. The second is 
‘the imperishable Person’ opposed to the first, the Lord’s power 
of maya, the seed whence the first group springs up, on which 
depend the cravings, acts and impressions of the numerous 
beings that transmigrate. The Lord Himself points out which 
these two persons are: the ‘perishable person’ consists of all 
beings; the entire body of transformations. “The immovable’, 
the stable group, resembles a heap—kuta. Or kuta is maya, 
deception, tortuousness, crookedness of will—all these being 
synonymous. It is what stands forth as the manifold maya of 
deception; for, the seeds of transmigratory life are ‘inexhaus- 
tible’. So it 1s styled ‘imperishable’. 


17.0. Tea aera ter. fasar: aAa egee: 
PAT ST SAHA: — 


17.0. Other than these two, the perishable and the imperi- 
shable, untouched by the taints of these two groups of ad- 
juncts. and eternally pure, awake, and free is the Supreme 
Spirit. 


TAA: FATA: TATRA: | 
a amanan farada Paz: 112911 


17. Distinct from these is the Supreme Spirit known 
as the Supernal Self. Having entered the three worlds, 
the mighty Lord upholds them. 


17.1. JAR: Sta Ta: IPTA: Gere ae. AAAA: 
arent Taree sfa—Toe sel raana, arent A Ta yATAT 
TAATA, gaa: Tara efa—veret: Ue: A 1 a wa fanr 


16-18] The Yoga of the Supreme Spirit 507 


—q: maa iaaa aan Aaaa aaa afaa feat 
a ate ive wey: + wey aaa: faad gaa raa: 
— ar: ada: maama: Saran: 


17.1. The ‘Supreme Spirit’, on the other hand, is ‘the other’, 
altogether different from the first two. It is beyond these two 
persons—body, etc., postulated through nescience. It is also 
the Self, the inner Self, of all beings. It is called the ‘Supreme 
Self? in the Upanisads, dealing with the quintessence «f the 
Vedas. Again He is characterized as the one who upholds, by 
His presence, the three worlds—the earth, the middle region 
and the heavens—by virtue of His spiritual potency and 
strength. He is immutable, for He knows no diminution. Who 
is He?—the omniscient Lord, called Narayana who rules, as 
a matter of course. 


18.0. arare Sarey eaa: saad ara sfasa i ae 
aeaa ataa wrard— 


18.0. The celebrated name of the Lord as explained above is 
the ‘Supreme Spirit’ (Purusottama). Etymologizing the name 
to reveal its dcrotative power, the Lord presents Himself as 
the unsurpassed Sovereign: 


aema ALAA ASEAAMTAT ATA: | 
waster are at a fra: Feataa: EN 


18. Since I surpass the perishable and am exalted above 
the imperishable, both in common speech and in the 
Vedas, I am celebrated as the Supreme Spirit. 


18.1. aeg het n AEA AL setter: We aaraa sracarey 


508 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XV 


age arm fracater geatan saarna i 


18.1. Since I surpass the ‘perishable—the magic fig tree of 
transmigratory life—and exceed even the ‘imperishable’, the 
seed of this tree, I am ‘the supreme’, the highest. Being above 
these two, the perishable and the imperishable, ‘I am cele- 
brated in common speech and the Vedas’. The devotees call 
Me the Supreme Spirit. The poets employ this name in their 
poems and so forth, extolling Me. 


19.0. WH zarit afana, HATHA Al Az, aT Fe HS Gead— 


19.0. Now is stated the reward of one knowing the Self as 
described above: 


Ut maani AAT FRAT | 
a adfan At adda ATLA NRN 


19. He who, undeluded, knows Me thus as the Supreme 
Spirit is all-knowing; he adores Me, O Bharata prince! 
in all possible moods. 


19.1. q: gf n a: at pat aa ws Taha I ATE: 
amgafaa: aq arfa aa ag afer” ga gean, a: atfaq—aaterar 
ad ada ada: — (ada) watt at aida aate (faa-) aa 
è ma I 


19.1. He who, ‘undeluded’—shorn of all delusions—knows 
Me with the attributes already set forth, knows the Supreme 
Spirit as “He is P ; he is the all-knower. He knows all as the 
Self of all. He is omniscient. He adores Me as dwelling in all, 
as the Self of all, O Bharata prince! 


20.0. aR sede aaea As SRNT wey ga aq 
eatfa — 


18-20] The Yoga of the Supreme Spirit 509 


20.0. Elucidating the knowledge of the truth of the Lord, 
this chapter now extols it: 


fa maan mefa AUST | 
vaggan Asay AFA A ATA RON 


20. Thus has been set forth by Me this most occult 
Sastra, O sinless Bharata prince! Knowing this, one 
becomes wise; he will have done all his duties. 


20.1. afa aft n afe waq Wear Waray, Horace stad i fH 
aq? me | vate waver aed “aed” seat; qa wate NATA: 
we “met” efe sort wet, seo | aat fe warmest: afearq 
way aaa seh: a Fae Aae wa, frg ada aad: oF 
qram: | ‘aed ae a Aafa [24.2] Adar aaeeda ae’ [24.24 | 
aft a omy) et oe afd ware aa! acre! 1 waq set ga- 
damt qe afemray aq wadq—a wer—Hapea wea! FA 
FU pi wa a: papa., faferseaenvgesy amaa aq dat aq ad 
wade fafet et waq aA, a a wer adder ofan aeafaq 
gafi: | ‘ad snas ot ! art anad [v.33] eft a 
THT | 

vafa mamaaa (are) ararren fasta: | 

srdacwapeat fe feat wafa area n [aA °2.93.] ofa a 
maa TAA | Aa: Ua eiaa aa: aaa af, wa: Fas: aA 
wa! Sf n 


20.1. Thus this ‘most occult, most hidden, śastra’ has been 
set forth. Though the entire Gita is held to be a Sastra this 
chapter by itself is here styled sastra by way of eulogy. This is 
clear from the context, because the import of the entire Gita 
has been briefly set forth here. Not only the import of the Gita 


510 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XV 


but also the entire import of the Veda has been given here in 
summary. Whoso knows it, is the knower of the Vedas (15.1); 
I am to be known by means of all the Vedas (15.15). This has 
been set forth by Me. Knowing this sastra with its import as 
explained ‘one becomes wise’; not otherwise. Such a knower 
‘will also have performed all his duties’—1i.e., he will have 
discharged his duties. What is to be done by a Brahmana with 
his high birth gets done, once the truth of the Lord is known. 
By no other means 1s any one’s duty fully discharged. (Vide 
BG.4.33 and Manu 12.93.) “In this consists the fruitfulness of 
human life, especially in the case of a Brahmana. Acquiring 
this, the twice-born fully discharges his duty. There is no other 
way”. Since you have received from Me this transcendental 
Truth, you, O Bharata prince! have realized life’s purpose. 


eft | 
TASH OATTAT: Hat AAG TIgMATATSA 
gaa ATA ANSATT: LI 


NIMMST: 
CHAPTER XVI 


THE YOGA OF DIVISION OF ATTRIBUTES, 
DIVINE AND DEMONIAC 


0.1. tat amg ma a sta m yaaa: vat aÀ afaa: | 
avat faem etaa ‘aa aafe sea wera: OAA | 
aa amaaa eat afa., faama ag meat a aft oan: aaraa 
yaaa fad, saat: aaia F | 


0.1. In the ninth chapter a reference was made to the division 
of the nature of living beings into the divine and the demoniac. 
The present chapter beginning with the verse ‘‘Fearlessness,. 
mental purity and so forth... .’ is begun to elucidate them 
in detail. The divine nature promotes release from trans- 
migratory life ; the demoniac and the monstrous nature binds; 
the divine has to be cultivated while the demoniac and the 
monstrous are to be shunned. 


CUG OCIG CIE E 
TAT aafaa aanraai: | 
STA SAM AAMT CATATACAT ATTA NRM 


The blessed Lord said: 

1. Fearlessness, mental purity, persistence in the prac- 
tice of knowledge, charity, sense-control, sacrifice, 
study of scripture, penance, uprightness; 


aes aka eae ee ee 
daa maaa a, EANA aaa: 
aie SARE a a 


aama., aana sfa uama RATA ATT, 
aqt: araarrat: aafaa: aaa afassat i wer saa tat aaa 


512 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam. (Ch. XVI 


aq | aa aet aaa a safe: aevata, arfcaat ar saad | 
art aerate afao: sraretary | TART ATRIA STA: — ad: 
sora saad ater aes (%¢.2-3.), ara ate: afagrria,, 
eda aam: ea: ATAA eerie | aT: qe 
må mia waa Arar 1 

fra— 


1.1. ‘Fearlessness’, is the negation of cowardice. Mental 
purity is the untainted state of the inner sense, the eschewing 
of deceit, wiles, falsity, etc., in behaviour, i.e. candour in 
dealings. ‘Persistence in the practice of knowledge’: know- 
ledge here means understanding of entities like the self, 
gathered from the Sastra and the teacher—the one-pointed 
and vivid realization of these truths preceded by Yogic intro- 
version. Devotion to all these is meant here. This is the most 
important among divine attributes. Sattvic nature manifests 
itself when eligible persons address themselves to their voca- 
tions. ‘Charity’ 1s the sharing of food, etc., according to one’s 
resources. ‘Sense-control’ refers to the disciplining of external 
senses; that of the inner sense will be referred to later (i.e., in 
16.2.3). ‘Sacrifice’ refers to the performance of rites enjoined 
by śruti and smrti, agnthotra and so forth and the worship of 
celestial beings, respectively. ‘The study of scriptures’ means 
the study of the Vedas, Rg, etc., to secure a supernatural end. 
‘Penance’ points to the disciplining of the body, etc. ‘Upright- 
ness’ consists in candour at all times. And, 


AAT ARRET: ATAT TTT | 
TAT aaaea Ales GICAIGT UR 


2. Non-violence, truthfulness, freedom from wrath, 
renunciation, tranquillity, absence of envy, kindness 
to living beings, uncovetousness, gentleness, modesty, 
dignity ; 


21. afger afr u agar afgai softer ferata 1 act fiara- 


1-3] Division of Attributes, Divine and Demoniac 513 


aai aiaa | sare ot amascer afteder ar mae 
wT STAT | RT: aT: — os aA eT | it: AT 
Porgy sare: 1 why afar; Tet meee fed, acura: 
mA | zara wag gifa | acted fa faut 
afafa | ard yee aah | St ae t ware safe sat 


2.1. ‘Non-violence’ consists in non-injury to living beings. 
‘Truthfulness’ is served by giving expression to facts avoiding 
falsehood and shock to the listener. ‘Freedom from wrath’ 
denotes suppression of anger when abused or hit by others. 
By ‘renunciation’ is meant tya@ga, not charity that has already 
been mentioned. ‘Tranquillity’ is inner peace. ‘Absence of 
envy’ marks him who won’t expose others’ weaknesses to their 
adversaries. ‘Kindness’ is pity towards the suffering. ‘Uncovet- 
ousness’ consists in freedom from agitation of the senses, when 
exposed to their objects. ‘Gentleness’ points to softness, ab- 
sence of anger. ‘Modesty’ is a sense of shame. ‘Dignity’ is the 
absence of vain activity of tongue, hand, feet, etc. 

Moreover, 


aa: eat ofa: aheraatet aafaa | 
vafa aeqe satafasraer ATTA 3N 


3. Splendour, patience, vigour, cleanliness, benevolence, 
non-haughtiness—these pertain to one inheriting divine 
-attri S. 


3.1. am: ga ou ae me, a aa athe: | a ER 
aaa at afafa saaa fafaa sA APTA: 
aft aam | eet aT: a a fa: 1 fa: Rgfadg aaa 
mAg ma aA: aoaaa, A safari sone 
za a wadieta 1 ate faas, gaasi ae, ma a N: 
ater arareifearscara:; wa fafai araq 1 aae: mearainsaa: 
agaaa | arfrarfrar aa ara: arfrara:, a: wer fae a: afearat, 


514 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XVI 


agma: afafa, acura: arferatftat—arert: qeuarsfasrraraarsara 
say: | wafer sanda caer am afhronaer—fafafareet aT- 
aq? —édt, carat a arg at afeea maa aaaea mfa- 
rere gay, F wea ! i 


3.1. ‘Splendour’ is executive ability, not the lustre of.the 
skin. ‘Patience’ is the absence of mind’s agitation when abused 
or beaten ; the quelling ofsuch agitation when roused is freedom 
from anger as noted above (16.2). Thus patience may be dis- 
tinguished from ‘freedom from anger’. ‘Vigour’ is mind’s 
energy that pushes aside the weakness of the body and the 
senses, and maintains them unenfeebled. ‘Cleanliness’ is of 
two kinds—the external, induced by earth and water, and the 
internal, the purity of mind and intellect or the negation of 
flaws like guile, craving, etc. ‘Benevolence’ is the negation of 
the will to injure ; it is non-violence. ‘Non-haughtiness’ negates 
excessive pride ; it 1s the absence of the notion that one is more 
respectable than all others. Excellences like fearlessness pertain 
to him who has inherited the wealth of divine attributes and 
who is destined to reap future good fortune. This is the sense. 


4.0. TY Fart ag ag Tad — 


4.0. Now is stated what the demoniac attributes are: 


arat aaisa wre: EAA T | 
AAT fama ANT gA NVN 


4. Hypocrisy, arrogance, excessive vanity, anger, harsh- 
ness and ignorance, Arjuna! are his who has inherited 
demoniac attributes. 


41 cer gR ou aa meai 1 oat farara: 
sear: | afama: gate: | ere, meaa q esaa aN FMT 
“qqa, faeq “ecary”, stared Sanaa: gcarfe 1 saat a 
ware raanda anafanana: | wRrmaer art ! —fa afr 


3-5] Division of Attributes, Divine and Demoniac 515 


maaf? mg—a ag aga amq aad at Prae 
gari: ii 


4.1. ‘Hypocrisy’ is ostentatious religiosity. ‘Arrogance’ is 
elation due to knowledge, wealth, strength of relations, etc. 
‘Excessive vanity’ or natimanita, has been explained under 
verse 3 above. ‘Harshness’ is blunt speech like references to a 
one-eyed man as a man with bright eyes, to a plain man as 
handsome, to one of low birth as high-born, etc. ‘Ignorance’ 
is non-discriminative cognition, erroneous notions regarding 
duties and other actions. These are his who has inherited de- 
moniac attributes. 


5.0. WIA: amat: Hr Joar— 


5.0. The effects of these two types of attributes are pointed 
out: 


cat anra fracarargyt war | 
m Wa: arr tAn Wess yi 


5. The divine attributes conduce to liberation; the 
demoniac attributes, to boudage. Pandava prince! 
grieve not; you have inherited divine attributes. 


5.1. tat ef un tat aerq ar, a aa aareeera i frau 
faa: acy: faa: aed aga aerq wat afrxaT | aa cea J | 
TA Ua Bh ata setter aata wre “fa ag gangem: ? fH ar 
danan: Aa aE ae aE WTA —AT Wa: As 
m a, ae za} afore: afa aea masa, waren: a 
afa zad: J Wee! i 


5.1. The host of divine attributes conduce to liberation from 
transmigratory life; and the demoniac ones to sure bondage. 
This is the doctrine. So too do the monstrous (rāksasī) atiri- 
butes. Noting that on hearing this Arjuna must be wondering 
whether his attributes are the divine or the demoniac, the Lord 


516 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XVI 


remarks: Don’t grieve, you have inherited divine attributes. 
Good fortune is in store for you, O Pandava! 


at aaant orestery ta gT Wa Z| 
dat area: Tree AAT TTT È aT uel 


6. Two orders of beings have been created in this 
world—the divine and the demoniac. The divine has 
been set forth in detail; listen, Arjuna! to a statement 
of the demoniac. 


6.1. A afr ou at Raama yoaat yar sacar ant get 
qrat—asaa cfs aif, wre goaa targe afer 
A waai xf ead, ‘garg è maT aT [gv 2.3.2] 
aft A afer, wart ai: adt rA: 1 at at aa 
ofa? sadpada Aa: TAT Wa WI Gea TT aAA 
wme—ea: yet: ‘nrg aiga: [23.2] Ra faerce: fre- 
wart: sr: afar, a J age: faeren: afa 1 aa: aafaa arg 
må! m aaa sora faerer: Fo Aaa 11 


6.1. Two orders of beings, i.e., of human beings, have been 
created. Beings created with the divine and demoniac attri- 
butes are called the orders of creation. Vide BU 1.3.1—‘‘Two 
sets of Prajapati’s progeny—gods and demons.” They are here 
in this empirical world. All things may reasonably be put in 
two groups. Relevant to the context are the divine and the 
demoniac. Of these the first, the divine order, has been detailed 
in verses 16.1, etc. Not so the second, the demoniac. Therefore 
to facilitate its eschewal, listen to a detailed enumeration of it. 


7.0. aT seqranfraarce: arg aerq raaa wad, NEA- 
atau wt werd sem: atai aqfrfr— 


7.0. Till the end of this chapter the demoniac attributes are 
set forth as qualifying living beings; they are vividly pictured 
so that they may be eschewed. 


6-8] Division of Attributes, Divine and Demoniac 517 


sate a frat a oar a agga: | 
a ata ata arart a aver ag fae non 


7. Demoniac men don’t distinguish between action 
and inaction; they are not clean. They have no obser- 
vances, no truth. 


7.1. Taft xf un safa a sada, aferq geartaray ri sqft: 

a, fafa a aa, aema adt: fafaa ar fafa: at 
a 4, WaT: ager: a fag: a mafa | a tac vaffa vr a 4 
fag:—a ate ait a arare a am ay aadA: saTarer:, 
ararfat:, wyatt fe are: 1 


7.1. ‘Action’ is effort to cultivate the means to reach human 
values. ‘Inaction’ is its opposite, a turning away from the means 
to disvalues. The demoniac folk know nothing of these. Not 
only of these two are they ignorant; they don’t know cleanli- 
ness, right observances or truth. They are indeed unclean, ill- 
conducted, deceptive and untruthful. 

Moreover, 


saaa TF WTATETAPTTH | 
AIA PRATIT CI 


8. They declare that this world is untrue, ungrounded, 
and Godless, and is born of mutual union; it is nothing 
but lust-born. 


8.1. wat aft i AAT TIT aa NNT: Ta sz WIT at aw, 
airs a—a area mat sfacsr, wa: aA a—efe A ara: 
WaT: WI ag: aaqa ay aahteerters: wer afar Har: 
frat xf va: aatat wag ang: | feq—arcercary srg: 
oie: sree wr at aay i fe a areqa— 


518 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XVI 


Tae: Us PTER; fe aaa wre: aren? a fafaa wee mat- 
quif aena fart wre: 1 “arr wa ma aren” efa ARTA- 
farefte: sayz 1 


8.1. Just as we are, for the most part, false, so this entire 
world is untrue’; it has no ground. For, righteousness and 
unrighteousness are not its foundation. Such is the declaration 
of the demoniac folk. It is “Godless’. There is no God to take 
into account righteousness and unrighteousness. There is none 
to rule the world—hence it is ‘Godless’. Besides, the whole 
world is born of sexual relation between man and woman. It 
is lust-born. What other cause has it? No transcendent cause 
like righteousness and unrighteousness prevails. This is the 
materialist philosophy of lust alone being the source of living 
beings. 


Udi qierraqursy MENASA: 1 
MAARA: AAT Aras TAT: NRN 


9. Depending on this view, having lost their souls, and 
equipped with puny intellects, these enemies exert 
themselves fiercely to destroy the world. 


9.1. Vat aft ovat afee ae afer aera: AANA: 
fraen: wevaga: fayafayat seta gfe: ast a ae- 
qaa: mafa seaha arai: Hewat: fearerar: | aaa wT: — 
‘swat’ oft aay: | wma: afgat: ara: gat: M 
+ a 


9.1. Relying on this philosophy, having lost their proper 
nature, falling away from practices leading to the next world, 
their puny intellects oriented to objects, they sally forth, 
fiercely violent, and work to destroy the world; they are the 
enemies of the world. 

And they, 


8-11] Division of Attributes, Divine and Demoniac 519 


HTH FOYC arataa AAT: | 
ABIATIASATATENT wads aaa: oN 


10. Resorting to lust insatiable, with hypocrisy, vanity, 
and euphoria, deludedly clinging to dogmas, they work 
with unclean resolve. 


10.1. Tt Ba u ara gora faa aA Get aT 
anana aT: eer ATT AST aranranar: A afa: FR- 
maafa: ater afaa: gan smaa aaa aaa 
waded are aafaa: aara aara Ai A aafaa: N 
fra 


10.1. ‘Resorting to lust’, a particular craving hard to satisfy, 
with hyprocrisy, etc., ‘deludedly’ or through lack of discrimi- 
nation, ‘holding false dogmas’, they strive in this world with 
unclean resolves’. Besides, 


faama a eaen TAT: | 
aenaran warateta fafaa: ng 


11. Depending on endless speculation till their dissolu- 
tion, intent on the enjoyment of objects of desire, sure 
‘that much’ alone is true; 


111. faai sft n a aA q, a fog ard en: faar: 
zam, m annA, at waaa yearat mo aaf aaT:, aar 
Aana: set: a aerarorraear:, aAA ofa PT: ANANT: sreatem:, 
TIT: ‘ATAT TTR: gÝ q: PNT: sera frfararears:, 
vara oft fafaa: T 


}1.1. Resorting to ‘speculation’ that may not be measured— 
that is limitable—till the moment of death, 1.e., ever specu- 
lating; “intent on the enjoyment of sense-objects’ like sounds, 


520 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam. [Ch. XVI 


etc.; assuring themselves that this enjoyment is the supreme 
goal of life, that this 1s the truth; 


ASET: STATATLTT: 
SEA Ah E LELLE bi GALE GLR Li bo D LE UW VAI 


12. Bound by a hundred cords of hopes, given up to 
lust and wrath, they seek unjustly heaps of wealth to 
enjoy the objects of their lusts. 


12.1. amarar Sf n aaa: T Ua T: TE T- 
qat: agr. faafaa: aa: Tat: MPAAN:, PARTITO: ARTEI 
qi Hat WAT: ANT FT HrawBTaATTINT:, SA AeA Hrs PTA- 
wrap + wart wendy meega zart:—fe ? —arf- 
aay TITTY NI 

Sara ae ahr: — 


12.1. The very hopes are the ‘cords’; bound by hundreds 
of them and pulled in all directions are they whose main props 
are ‘lust and wrath’. To indulge in these two they strive, and 
not to promote righteousness. ‘Unjustly’ i.e., by seizing others’ 
property, etc., they accumulate wealth. 

Their idea is as follows: 


TINT AQT Teas MY HATTA | 
qanedianta A afafa grey 23 


13. Today I have won this; I shall fulfil that hope soon. 
Now this is; this wealth, again, shall be mine. 


13.1. ZA Sfa u ee wet wer A WaT wer) EST He MA 
wae mager | et a afer seq af 2 ufacrfa mafa 
wat Yt: wat, TT ae oat aena. wana xfs i 


13.1. This wealth I have gained now; I shall fulfil that hope 


12-15] Division of Attributes, Divine and Demoniac 521 


to gratify my mind. This is in my possession, and this wealth, 
too, shall be mine next year. That will make me wealthy and 
famous. 


wat WAT Fa: Wehr BIT | 
Pada ArT fesse asama Fat evi 


14. That foe I have slain; other foes, too, I shall slay. 
Iam the mighty lord, the enjoyer. I am all right, strong 
and happy. 


14.1. wat WaT aft u wat aaa AAT aa: gee: Wy: | gf 
q mq weary aay ate | fe ud aaaf after: ? adersfy 
are Aer: | we ?—Sae: ag, as Wt 1 adwarty a faz: 
me wea: TH: ace, a Fas AG, War Fat FT wea 11 


14.1. That formidable foe, say Devadatta, has been slain 
by me; other petty foes I shall slay. What can these puny 
fellows do? In no wise can any one equal me. How? I am the 
‘mighty lord, I the enjoyer’. In every way, I am all right—as 
regards children, grand-children etc. No ordinary man am I. 
I am very strong and happy. (Other men are but burdens for 
the earth). | 


Meastaatrartted Assa ATT AAT | 
aed areata atfacr geratataatigar: wey 


15. I am wealthy, high born; who is there equal to me? 
I sacrifice, give gifts, and make merry—so, deluded by 
ignorance, they deem. 


15.1. wee: Sit uo are: waa, ahora aage aN- 
ferera:—aarft a aa gee: afer afaq | a wer otfer age: Tew: 
mat? fe wat ata aa afrrfaent, aenfe aerfrer., 


522 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XVI 


aifest ef a aaa marfa, eft. va aafaa: serra fagan: 
fafay afama TAAT: 1 


15.1. By virtue of riches I am ‘wealthy’ ; ‘high-born’, having 
been born ina family of noted Vedic scholars all through seven 
generations. For this reason none equals me. Who is there 
equal to me? Besides, by sacrifices, too, I shall surpass others. 
I shall give gifts to actors, etc. I shall make merry to the 
utmost. Thus are they ignorantly deluded, having lost all 
powers of discrimination. 


AAHAAMATATAT AEM SATATAAT: | 
TAH: BTA Taha THs wei 


16. Distracted by myriad fancies, caught in a net of 
delusion, chasing lustful enjoyments, they fall into un- 
clean hell. 


16.1. wan eft i Aafaa: s: ah: fad: fafai 
ara: aafaa: Aenea: Ale: fads: sat, aaa 
mefa mamara, At aaa: | WaT: NA ata fervor: 
aa: aa gaara: cata ach oral Aaaa 1 


16.1. Distracted by ‘numerous fancies’, as stated above; 
shrouded by ‘delusion’ or non-discrimination, which, since it 
covers, is a veritable net; addicted to ‘lustful enjoyments’ 
whereby, multiplying sins, they fall into an ‘unclean hell’ such 
as the Vaitarani. 


arerarattadt: aN wraraaartaan: | 
Gated amaA arifa 1 29 


17. Self-exalted, stubborn, rich, conceited and arro- 
gant, they hypocritically offer nominal worship, de- 
fying sacred rules. 


15-18] Division of Attributes, Divine and Demoniac 523 


17.1. are Sf n areraeariaar: adfa farea areata efaa: 
aeaea, FT aaa: o ere: aaa: 1 TATA aTheaar: 
qafir: ma: Wea, areal waaranerean afa: | oat aaa: 
aaah. at: a aa ateafrrar afafirgds fafefafearstandar- 
arefery tt 


17.1. They ‘exalt themselves’ claiming to possess all ex- 
cellences; but no good men would praise them. ‘Stubborn’, 
nct meek; being ‘rich’, they are ‘conceited and arrogant’. 
Their sacrifices are ‘nominal’ only and ‘hypocritical’, meant 
to show off their religiosity. They neglect the accessories 
prescribed by ‘scriptural rules’. 


HERI AH qÅ HTH HTT AT A: | 
ATARI Mga SATS: ULI 


18. Relying on egoism, power, pride, lust and wrath, 
spurning Me in themselves and others; they are mali- 
cious. 


18.1. Heat gf u weg aggre aegre:—faeart: afaria 
TH: ma aAA: faem “ae” sh werd a gT: 
aaee: pear, ai as aaea a, an as Tah 
yafaa aafaa | af- ama ae sea a aafaa 
a aa aama: sefaery: | ara carfefagay | wre afrsecfaqay 
eae ae aq afar: | fe aa at Sat array 

È TA a ag famti at SETAR: maaa Tey, 
a pia AAT: EA WT AACA: 1 


18.1. They exalt themselves ‘egoistically’ in regard to quali- 
ties real or fancied, which they have imputed to themselves. 
This ‘egoism’ or nescience is their worst flaw, the root of all 
failings as well as of sinful activities. ‘Power’ is conjoined to 
greed and leads to the overthrow of others. ‘Pride’ is that fault 
of the mind that leads to the disregard of righteousness. ‘Lust’ 
has reference to women, etc. ‘Wrath’ refers to what is disliked. 


524 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XVI 


These traits and other gross faults they resort to. And they 
spurn Me, the Witness of thoughts and acts in their own 
bodies as well as in those of others. To spurn is to defy My 
ordinances. They are malicious, as is evident from their com- 
ments on the virtues of the righteous. 


Mag FTA: WIT AAG ALTA | 
frora anga athe esi 


19. Those who hate and are wrathful, who are the 
vilest among men in this transmigratory life, and who 
are impious—I perpetually fling. into demoniac wombs. 


19.1. AE Sf un aT ae amien eA: fea: a AT 


19.1. Those who are the adversaries of the righteous; who 
are ‘wrathful’ and who ‘hate’ the virtuous; who are the 
lowest among men, living worldly lives leading to hells—them 
I fling perpetually into ‘demoniac wombs’. They are impious 
as they do evil works. These ‘demoniac wombs’ are the wombs 
of violent beasts like tigers and lions. 


ma fanm wat wafa mafa | 
manà Aa Ta meaa TTT RoN 


20. Born in a demoniac womb, deluded in repeated 
births, never reaching Me, Arjuna! they proceed, there- 
fore, to an ignoble state. 


20.1. age sr n mg Aa mm: sfarar:,. T: arfarafar: 
wate afa raa agoa ary ma: N A: aT: 
m Sat ama aaraa wa, = Aa aa: aea fa aat ofa 


19-21] Division of Attributes, Divine and Demoniac 525 


fasean why | ‘at aAa sfa—a aer aa arg afea, 
aa: — afasia A A: 


20.1. Born in a ‘demoniac womb’, the deluded--—-those 
lacking discrimination---, being born every time in wombs 
predominantly darksome, downwards they plunge, failing to 
reach Me, the Lord, O Arjuna! Thence they proceed to the 
very nadir. ‘Failing to reach Me’ suggests that, had they 
reached Me, of course there would have been no more worry. 
But without taking to the right way taught by Me they suffer. 
This is the sense intended. 


Se ee es ie atina fafat mA: 


agii: afa iaa | aafe weer wafa, 74 
qm qia water aq vad sA 


21.0. Here is a summary of all the conceivable demoniac 
attributes; in this threefold evil: the endless demoniac attri- 
butes are entailed. They could all be avoided by avoiding the 
three evils to be presently mentioned, these constituting the 
very root of all misfortunes. 


fafaa aA GX ATTA: | 
HT: BUTEA GTACAEATAAAT AAT NRUN 


21. Threefold is the gate of hell, destructive of self— 
lust, wrath and, likewise, greed. Therefore one should 
reject them. 


21.1. afas afa n Afas anar acHeq grat ee art ard TAA :, 
ad srt yaara mafa aen, sefa gearata areata wate sca 
sare ‘ert arraay arena: a fe aq? —are: ae: aa are: | 
AAT Va FA AMT | Ad: Ua srt aA aea: aeara aA 
Wag ATT 1 


amegata — 


526 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XVI 


21.1. ‘Gateway leading to hell’ is of three kinds; each is 
destructive of self. As soon as one enters it, the self perishes, 
becomes unfit for achieving any human goal whatsoever. 
Such is the force of the expression ‘destructive of self. What is 
this ‘three-fold gate’ ? ‘Lust, wrath and, likewise, greed’. There- 
fore must one reject those three, lust and so forth. | 

Here is a laudation of such rejection: 


Uda: Brett aneta: | 
ATA: NAT Akt TT THAT UR 


22. Released from these three doors of darkness, 
Arjuna! man attends to what promotes his good; thus 
he proceeds to the supreme goal. 


22.1. Ud: Safa n ud: faq: aa! antett: aaa: MRA FA- 
Marre aif pea: à ud: fafa: faa: ave areca a 
fasofa—fa ? mena: A: | aafaa: qå a ATTA, TTT aracta | 
aa: aera arfa cet wa, manfa fa i 


22.1. Released from them, ‘the doors of hell’ whose essence 
is suffering and delusion, man does—-what? He does what 
‘promotes his good’. Blocked by them before, he could not 
do so; now that they are no more there, he can. Doing what 
promotes his good, he proceeds to the supreme goal, even 
emancipation. 


23.0. aa Uae mga Raa AAAI FT WEA FTL | 
WMATA SHS WT FY, A AMIN | At: — 


23.0. The cause that brings about rejection of demoniac 
attributes and promotes action leading to the good is the 
fastra. Due to the authority of the sastra both may be accom- 
plished. There is no other way. So, 


22-24] Division of Attributes, Divine and Demoniac 527 


q: Weary Ada BAHL: | 
a a fafenarnta a g@ a oe AA ean 


23. Rejecting the prescription of the Sastra and living 
a desire-ridden life, one does not achieve fulfilment, 
happiness, or the supreme goal. 


23.1. a: sfa u a: meafair mea ae: aca fate aderademn- 
aren fafasfaeurer serra cqarat adel STAs: SAA: Aa, A 
q fats giaa ware, a aft afer AÈ qe, a aft Ti 
Taser wht cat wet ar i 


23.1. The ‘satra’ is the Veda. Rejecting its positive and 
negative ordinances regarding the ought and the ought not, 
he who lives according to the promptings of lust, does not 
achieve fulfilment or fitness for the goals of life; nor happiness 
in the world, nor, of coursc, the supreme goal—heaven or 
emancipation. 


amtaa TAT A HatHaeraterat | 
ma Westar Bt naag uv 


24. Therefore the Sastra shall be your guide as regards 
what should or should not be done. Knowing the work 
prescribed by the Sastra, you ought to perform it here. 


24.1. AeA sfa ut TET Wet TAT ATA A aa malar. 
aaa riana | at: Meat agar afana fate: 
oh aay aq aq ad oe adfa sta safaras sft i 


528 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XVI 


24.1. Therefore fastra shall be your guide or means of 
acquiring valid knowledge about ‘oughts’ and ‘ought-nots’. 
Knowing sastraic prescriptions—the commands and the prohi- 
bitions of the Sastras—do your work. ‘Here’ reveals the field of 
duties to those called upon to perform them. 


EUDAIL REGEL EIEC IGENEA MACERIE GERICIEU É iE: baz EAG 
Wad: Fal Agaa tgif aa 
ATT MENSA: 112 E11 


ACTIATTSENTA: 
CHAPTER XVII 
THE YOGA OF THREEFOLD FAITH 


0.1. Test ca a sf wasted wera: att: aTT— 


0.1. Seizing from the Lord’s expression, ‘‘Sastra shall be your 
guide’’—a point that prompts a query, 


AIT Fars : 
a arcatateqera aed gS AT: | 
qai fasst g BT HON ACANTSNY TAAA: 11211 


Arjuna said: 

1. What, O Krsna! is the status of those who sacrifice 
with faith while ignoring sastraic injunction? Is it 
Sattvic, Rajasic or Tamasic? 


nw a tft oun a faq afaa: meaa mafaa qefa- 
mean sas afcasy aad carey pafa agar afaa: wear 
aeraqgat afam: aaa: aa:—afaeernt cafe at afaq 


< 


mafa aa: agaa ma ea A ard qrafa 
tag à mafaia gad anfa: Ai TA | A ga: 
afaq meafar saa wa a sepa aafaa aAa pafa 


Pu plies 2 taped sta a aA | meg? —reaT 


Hera aema, Tear gaier wa “A meafair asd agara: 
Saat Teed | aa cays fsa g aen sr ao |! —acd e 
TH wT; fe act fase: wae, sretiad <r, aan am: afar? | 
cat ae waft a i zarfefawar gor, at fe moa eaa 
Uae, St ama ata? i 


1.1. The discussion is general about whosoever ignores 


530 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVil 


Sasiraic injunctions, i.e. prescriptions of śruti and smrti, and yet 
offers sacrifice-—-worships gods, etc.,—faithfully conforming to 
current traditions. The people meant are those who are un- 
aware of injunctions in śruti and smrti and yet, due to faith in 
the practices of their elders, worship deities ; and not those who, 
despite their awareness of scriptural injunctions, choose to 
ignore them and worship deities in their own way. Why? 
Because of the qualification ‘with faith’. It is impossible to as- 
sume that persons with faith can address themselves to wership 
while ignoring scriptural injuctions in regard to the method of 
such worship. What is the status of these worshippers with 
faith, O Krsna! what is their ‘status’, sattvic, rajasic or tamasic? 


2.0. ararafayaisa wma: a afore saaa addife shea 
Tara — 


2.0. To what category does their worship belong? 


TATA ATs : 
fatae wate stat g at eae | 
afa Ural aa area Afa aT TT RN 


2. Three-fold is the faith of embodied beings according 
to their by-gone impressions; it may be Sattvic, Rajasic 
or Tamasic. Listen to the following classification. 


21. fafrat sft ou fafaer aaa wats wa-a fast a 
qesta—ateat Afa aT ea — aaa Hae eT: ALOT SS 
area: ea: Feat, aa aT eas | oarfeaat aratadar 
zaqarfefawar 1 a oaa aera gaa | area aaar 
Jaara oR 1 vt afat at sa MST FT TA I 


2.1. Faith is ‘threefold’ —of three kinds—regarding the dis- 
cipline pertaining to which you have raised this question. It is 
inherent in human beings. ‘Impressions’ are the resultants of 
acts, righteous, etc., done in previous lives. It becomes mani- 
fest at the time of death. Faith is what is born of these resultants. 


2-4] The Yoga of Threefold Faith 531 


Sativic is the faith fashioned by sattva and devoted to the wor- 
ship of gods and so forth. Rajasic is the faith fashioned by rajas, 
its object being the worship of superhuman beings—yaksas, 
monsters, etc. Tamasic faith is fashioned by tamas and directed 
to the worship of ancestral spirits, ghosts, etc. Threefold thus 
is the faith which is being elucidated; pay heed. 


3.0. at sa fafa wafer— 
3.0. This faith is three-fold: 


aaen AAT WET Aala ATLA | 
SERSA FEA At THT: A UA A NIN 


3. In the case of all men faith conforms, Arjuna! to 
their inner sense. Predominantly, man consists of his 
faith; he is what his faith makes of him. 


3.1. Trargent eta ui acarqear faaeaea Aana aaae aie 
nima set wat wre! \afe wa aa: fe antefa’? seara— 
FFA: AETAT: AT FHT: Aare sta: | HT? —T g, A WaT 
rey ae a: Gees: A Va TeHSTTET Wa a: Sta: I 


3.1. The faith in all living beings, O Arjuna! is shaped by 
the mind according to the specialised impressions it is endowed 
with. So what? Hear: Man here, in this transmigiatory life, 
is largely determined by his faith. How? The nature of his 
faith shapes him according to itself. 


4.0. aoa arty fsa sarfeqaar ararfefaser AT sang — 


4.0. Therefore based on the effect of the worship he offers 
to gods, etc., may be inferred his devotion to sattva and the 
rest: 


aa afam Savy wercetifa Waar: | 
TAY AMT aA ATTA AAT: ui 


§32 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVH 


4. Those of Sattvic faith offer sacrifice to the gods; 
those of Rajasic faith to supernatural beings and 
monsters. Others, the men of Tamasic faith, offer 
sacrifice to ancestral spirits and hosts of ghosts. 


4.1. aed thr un ard grater maam: aafaa: a, aeria 
mam. TAT AT ACTA aTa tT RAT ae AAT: AAT: I 


4.1. Those of sattvic temperament, i.e., those established in 
sattva, offer sacrifice to deities. The rajasic ones do so to super- 
natural beings and monsters. Others, the people of tamasic 
temperament, sacrifice to ancestral spirits, hosts of ghosts, the 
seven mothers, etc. 


5.0 va arte: facts: ararfefacsr: areafaeqent 1 aa aaa 
ites E aide: sede, ann aie ane 
mfa: wafa n en? — 


5.0. The adherence to sattva, etc., has been determined 
with regard to these effects bv śastraic prescriptions. But only 
rarely, say one among thousands, do people address themselves 
to worship of deities, taking thcir guidance from sattva; the 
vast majority of beings are attracted to rajas and tamas. How? 


amefa i aar BAT WAT: | 
AERA: aeaa: N 


5. Full of force of lust and greed, and moved by hypo- 
crisy and egoism, those who do terrific penance, un- 
ordained by the sastras. 


5.1. met ste ou ameaga a meaa at thereat sofia 
AAT AT Tad faddata a Wat: À a see: Taw 
+a Ue ara, api ae paS, aa AAT, PTA- 
astfeaar.: aramas. ay afaa: | 


4-6] The Yoga of Threefold Faith 533 


5.1. ‘Unordained by the fastras’---not moved by their injuc- 
tions—and ‘terrific’ or painful to living beings as well as to 
themselves, is the penance done by the people who are im- 
pelled by hypocrisy and egoism. They are supported by ‘the 
force of lust and greed’. This may also mean that they are full 
of lust, greed and force. 


HAT: MULT AARRE: | 
mt darted ava AR TA ne 


6. Such senseless fools enfeebling the organs of the 
body, and persecuting also Me dwelling within the 
body, know them to be demoniacally resolved. 


6.1. wad: St uo Relat: Hailed: wA WMA Forage 
aaqa: afaafer: at a va aatan saami meaa 
PAA: mamao a fats ATA, aac: 
fraa: ast a mafaa: arm emi fafe sta IT: N 


6.1. Such undiscriminating persons who enfeeble the sense- 
organs of the body and also Mc, Narayana, the witness of 
their activities and those of the intellect, by failing to carrv 
out My commands,—know them to have demoniac resolves. 
Know them in order to shun them. 


7.0. Teron a afanar frarat waren maara- 
amaaa saasa te frad—veafarariag erfa ATR: 
Sanan forga anara aaa a qg TAS g Aer 
qaad aah aT a smaig | TAT aaia aeaf- 
veq fafaa se aa agar wat a ara aA, 
afama aag Aani 1 ate 


7.0. Three kinds of food are discriminated here, each distin- 
guished by characteristics like relishability, oiliness, etc. They 
pertain respectively to the three groups, saftvic and so forth, 
being pleasant to people who are sattvic, etc. From the fond- 


534 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XVII 


ness one has for these kinds of food one may know oneself to 
be sattvic and so forth. The sāttvic food may be sought after 
and the others rejected. The same is the case with the division 
of sacrifice, etc., also. In the three groups the s&ttvic types are 
to be chosen and the others shunned. 


aercecaty ada fafat water fora: | 
UACATEAAT ATA AGT AIA AT non 


7. Similarly three kinds of food prove dear, as also do 
sacrifice, penance and charity. Listen to their distinci- 
tions. 


7.1. Here: ef uu are: g ats ager wag: sofa: fafaa. wale 
fa: ge, TAT aa, TAT AT, TMT AAA 1 ANT grad Ae TA 
STAT BT 


7.1. And three kinds of food are dear to all who eat—to all 
living: beings. So too are sacrifice, penance and charity. Listen 
to their distinctions presently to be set forth. 


MT ACIS NAFAT ATTA: | 
cea: farer: feast get sare: atfeaetrar: cit 


8. Foods promoting longevity, strength of mind, power, 
health, comfort and pleasure, which are delectable, oily, 
firm and appetising,. appeal to men of Sattvic tem- 
perament. 


8.1. aa: eft n aa art Tas FT A a qe a A 
MTA Nagas: ATA aaan feats: meaa- 


Magaii, F A TAM: cata: fara: AETAT, fara: fax- 
arora: ee, gat: erator: sree: arfeaafyar: arfeawer ser: 1 


8.1. The foods which promote the complex of longevity, 


7-10] The Yoga of Threefold Faith 535 


mental strength, power, health, comfort and pleasure, which 
prove delectable, and which are oily, firm and appetising, 
attract people of sattvic temperament. 


HEAPS AN ION A STS sansr: i 
ATRIA MAET FAAMHTAATAT: NR 


9. The foods which please the Rajasic temperaments 
are excessively bitter, sour, saltish, hot, pungent, harsh, 
burning; they cause pain, suffering and ill-health. 


9.1. Ff Ba uo Heqrmoamreyondereataatter:—qaa ANA: 
azarfey ada ater, afe: , aaen: eda — Few ae oa 
HCO A dina wena fret = È amar: WHAT BST: ga- 
amram. FE 4 ae a ard = yeaa Gesiteraasar: T 


9.1. The term ati meaning ‘excessively’, must be taken to 
qualify each of the terms bitter, sour, etc., thus signifying ex- 
cessively bitter, etc. These kinds of foods, pleasing to the 
rajasic temperament, cause or yield pain, suffering and ill- 


health. 


maa Tare gta cated a ae | 
Soca arteq wht arratsrery oi 


10. The food dear to the Tamasic temperament is ill- 
cooked, tasteless, smelling, decayed, refuse and im- 
pure. 


10.1. araara eft o ma eared, frat maA I- 
card | ware aaa, ofa athe, taa + vet aq ws a 
ad, sfa aff were sro, ater waar, Wert far maa- 
freq ii 


10.1. The food pleasing to the tamasic mind is inadquately 


536 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVII 


cooked, and is ‘tasteless’, gatarasa, lacking in sustaining powcr. 
What is unpalatable fails to sustain. It is tasteless. The smelling 
food, cooked and kept throughout the night, and what is left 
over aftcr eating, ‘impure’—-unfit for use in worship—such is 
the food that pleases the tamasic temperament. 


11.0. TI zari os: fafaa: zad — 


11.0. Now is set forth the threefold sacrifice: 


anoraga fafaa a grad | 
qecemaata Aa: amea a maT: 112 201 


11. Sattvic is the sacrifice offered without desire for its 
fruit and according to scriptural prescriptions with 
the unshakable thought, ‘The sacrifice has to be 
offered.’ 


Ho. was eft un anosa: amoraa: an: fafaga: mA- 
aaa: q: aa: sad faded asa va ef aaaeaii 
ara sta aa waa, “A ata Gearat aA adeq:” sara fafaa, q: 
afar: at: Tad i 


11.1. A sacrifice is called sattvic when it is laid down by 
§astraic prescriptions and offered by those who seek no rewards, 
with the unshakable thought that ‘the sacrificial ceremony 
has to be performed though I have no end of my own to 
secure through this’. 


arama g ae arate aa aq | 
gad arate a om fate TARR NIN 
12. But know, best of Bharata princes! that sacrifice to 


be Rajasic which is hypocritically offered with desire 
for its fruit. 


11-14] The Yoga of Threefold Faith 537 


121. aR eft uu ahracaa g sa oe ai aft a wg 
aq asad werass ! a ast fafa TARA 1 


12.1. Ifa sacrifice is offered with an eye on its reward and 
hypocritically, know, best of Bharatas, that sacrifice to be 
Ragasic. 


fafine nadana | 
satacga aa amaa fraa 1231 


13. They say that sacrifice is Tamasic, which is not 
scripturally enjoined, in which no food is offered, which 
is done without sacred chants and the giving of priestly 
fees and is uninspired by faith. 


13.1. afaa sfa u ffad aarnfeafarda, agea aA: 
TOS a ad aA R ast a ETA: TF ATTA, MARA ATA: 
qa: ar farm mada, aaa safaat, saraci ai aai 
qee aada pafa 


13.1. ‘Not scripturally enjoined? means in opposition to 
what has been enjoined. ‘In which no food is offered’ refers to 
the feeding of holy men, the poor, etc. ‘Without sacred chants’ 
refers to chants defective as regards accents and consonantal 
sounds. ‘The priestly fees’ refers to the prescribed fees for 
priests officiating in the sacrifice. Also the sacrifice that is not 
inspired by faith—-sacrifice such as this, they say, is effected by 
tamas. 


14.0. 7a gardi aa: Aafaa zA — 


14.0. Now is described the threefold penance: 


daaag taiag | 
agada a mÂ AT Feat nV 


538 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVII 


14. Reverence to the Devas, the twice-born, the precep- 
tors, and wise scholars, cleanliness, guilelessness, con- 
tinence, and non-violence—these constitute the penance 


of the body. 


14.1. 3a eft i cane fear poaa wae afea, TT 

gaat aeaea, ws, ante wa, wera afar a mA- 
Aged arate eÀ adta—araaet: wath: ara MA az: 
sa —Taa ser era: [2¢.24.] ofa fe aeata i 


14.1. ‘Reverence shown to the group of Devas, the twice- 
born, the preceptors, and wise scholars’—this constitutes the 
first factor. Then follow cleanliness, guilelessness or simpli- 
city, continence and non-violence. These, together, constitute 
bodily penance, because the body, the psycho-physical organ- 
ism including agents, etc., is dominant in its achievement. 
Vide 18.15 which declares ‘these five are the causal factors in 
regard to it’. 


asa aa aad fated a ad | 
eaaa AT ASAT AT FoIT NLN 


15. An utterance that does not offend, is truthful, 
pleasing, good, and the habitual reading of scriptures 
constitute verbal penance. 


15.1. HAST Sf uu aa sfrat agent amet aca frafed = 
nq—frafed gerer | aea: af avert aad 1 faster 
miaa: ae: | Toward somea aren aafaa- 
aca aerate great fatal drat eaf, q aq arena a: | 
aa amare ai aaa great fafat fada a arga- 
ae 1 an aaar aa aaa erat fafat fada a 
asmane | aur aaar aa aaa grai fafvat 
fda a ngaa | fe ga: aa aT: ? aa aed A ATT 
fra fet a aq aT: agaa, TAT A wa aal, aa ant = 


14-16] The Yoga of Threefold Faith 539 


agas, wat a sat wfacata”’ sft 1 ~areqrararad 4 va afafa 
agaa aT: Sead II 


15.1. Words that do not pain living beings, truthful, 
pleasing and good. The last epithets refer to results, visible 
and invisible. ‘Words’ are qualified by attributes such as 
inoffensiveness. ‘And’ links together all such attributes. If 
words uttered to evoke belief in the listeners are lacking in one 
or more of these attributes, they won’t constitute verbal 
penance. To achieve verbal penance, all tnose attributes 
must be present in the utterances. What then is such penance? 
An utterance truthful, etc., ‘Child! be quiet, do your pre- 
scribed scriptural reading or pursue Yogic practice. Thus will 
prosperity accrue to you”. This scriptural reading according 
to injunctions is also verbal penance. 


WTA: aeaa Ramena fang: | 
Aaa SATAN IGLE Een VE 


16. Mental calmness, gentleness, silence, self-control, 
extreme emotional purity—these constitute penance 
of the mind. 


16.1. At: St n Aa: Ware: wae: sarrfer:, epoca a 
Ama aaaer are:—aarfesararfearataar aA aft: 
sarees aos was sft ir sere gor eo 
atafata 1 areafafare:—aatiacrey: ada: ararereq: arenfafaag:, 
afayreta wae: aay: ata, ef fasta: 1 aaaf T: agra 
amaaa wraeiS: | Seda AT: ATT Ta | 


16.1. ‘Mental calmness’ is its profound quietude. ‘Calm- 
ness’ refers to the reduction of the mind to extreme purity. 
Gentleness is otherwise styled ‘goodwill’. It is the mental state 
inferred from its effects like the composure of face, etc. ‘Silence’, 
restraint of speech achieved through mind’s restraint; again 
itis a reference to the cause from its effect. ‘Self-control’ is the 


540 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVII 


control of the mind, in general, whereas ‘silence’ is mind- 
control as regards activities of speech alone. ‘Extreme emo- 
tional purity’ consists in candour, freedom from hypocrisy, in 
dealing with others. All these make up the penancc of the 
mind. 


17.0. Taree Fifa afaa aaa Faw: aad at: ararfenies FA 
fafi wafa? seaa— 


17.0. What form docs the threefold penance, physical, 
verbal, and mental, take when people who are sattvic ctc., 
address themselves to it? Listen: 


sgat TAT Ac aeaa at: | 
anore aai: ma aa ui 


17. They say that this threefold penance, practised 
with supreme faith, by integrated men free from 
desire for reward is Sattvic. 


17.1. seat sfa n wea aRar Tea yHezar act aaisa 
aT: aq wed fated fawart afia at: aaora: arenornTeter ha: 
porse: Ah: aafed:—aq seat ay: aa mfa mafai 
qaad aerate freer: 11 


17.1. ‘Faith’ is intellectual assent to traditional wisdom. 
When the threefold penance is performed with total faith by 
integrated men, devoid of desire for rewards, that is styled as 
sattvic by savants. 


THAT AT aaa AT Aq | 
frac afg sree Cite ATT Ci 


18. Penance performed hypocritically to win respect, 


17-20] The Yoga of Threefold Faith 541 


honour, and reverence is classed here as Rajasic; it is 
fickle and uncertain. 


18.1. Meare Sher uy a: ATpHTE: “ANY: aT aes RT: gA- 
aad, ma Arad ean: aed, Ga merada- 
qearfe aa a at: araga, aea aq va aq feat aT: aq Fe 
wie afd ma as aafaa saya I 


18.1. ‘Respect’ is gratulation expressed as follows: ‘This is 
indeed an ascetic, holy man’. ‘Honour’ is active expression 
like getting up to receive and paying of obeisance. ‘Rever- 
ence’ consists in washing the feet, offering flowers, and feeding. 
To win all this, penance is done by some hypocritically—and 
itis called as Rajasic here, its fruit being occasional and uncer- 
tain. 


\ 


Asura neten feat AT: | 
Eea AT TATAAAATSAT RRN 


19. Penance that is performed obstinately or that which 
tortures the self and aims at injuring others is Tamasic. 


19.1. Fe ef u yemen aada mea: teat aq feat 
a: Trex sani faa at aq area qa: IgA I 


19.1. ‘Obstinately’ with firmness due to lack of discrimina- 
tion. It tortures the self or is aimed at injuring others, i.e., for 
destroying others. Such sacrifice is said to be tamaszc. 


20.0. zar aafaa Seat — 
20.0. Now is three-fold charity described: 


qaaa wert araasqrattest | 
at BS VTA a ae ma SAT Roll 


20. A Sattvic gift is one made at the right place and time 


542 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVII 


with the thought ‘It is good to make a gift’, to a deser- 
ving recipient, who cannot make a return for it. 


20.1. aaa ofa i maafa wd wa: Heat aq at dae aaa 
wearers, aaa afr aAa eta, A guy geaarct, HTS 
iÀ wi + eg NTA, qq art maas SAA 1 


20.1. ‘Sattvic charity’ is one offered to a person who is 
unable to make a return for it or to one to whom, though com- 
petent to make a return, the gift has been offered without 
such consideration. ‘At the right place’ means in places like 
Kuruksetra, etc., and ‘right time’ the junction of months and 
the like. It is offered to the ‘right recipient’—a Vedic scholar, 
a master of the Vedas with all their six limbs. 


TI MATH RSA AT JA: | 
stat a ii agit Ute STAT NRR 


21. Itis said to be rajasic when offered unwillingly, with 
expectation of a gift in return, or with an eye to some 
advantage. 


21.1. 7a eft u wa aa ATS, are g wat aT aaaf- 
fears, wer at, wer ae 4 wfasrfa wae sfa, aq RA gH: 
aad aw fesi Aad, Aq aa Use FAT Il 


21.1. ‘A gift with expectation of a return’ is made with the 
hope that in due course the recipient will do a good turn to the 
giver of the gift; or hoping that his gift will produce a favour- 
able unseen result. The gift made regretfully, to the accom- 
paniment of such thinking, is held to be rajasic. 


MATHS AMAA sat | 
AAHAAAA A TATHATSTSAT WR 


20-23] The Yoga of Threefold Faith 543 


22. A Tamasic gift is what is improperly and insultingly 
offered at the wrong place and time, to undeserving 
recipients. 


22.1. HEM St i Aaa Het arya aaa, sare 
gaged went aeaa, sare: 4 ydaepateer, 
akarat at aag aaaea gofa gt saad maaf- 


qh a Aq aa, AC AAA IRAN, IN 


22.1. ‘The wrong place’ is an unrighteous spot inhabited 
by barbarous, unclean people. “The wrong time’ is a period 
not known to favour accumulation of religious merit such as 
the period of transition of the sun from month to month. “The 
underserving recipients’ are fools, robbers, etc. Even if the 
place and time favour gift-giving 1t may be unaccompained 
by pleasant speech, washing of feet, obeisance, etc., and may 
be made insultingly. This sort of gift-giving is tamaszc. 


23.0. FASTAATT ITAA ASTTHLITT at JIS: TAA — 


23.0. To enrich sacrifice, gifts, penance, etc., with excel- 
lences, the following counsel is offered: 


% acateta facet aaaf: cya: | 
mamma aera aaa fated: FET Vs 


23. It is held that reference to Brahman is three-fold 
as AUM, Tat and Sat. Thus of yore were fashioned 
Brahmanas, Vedas and sacrifices. 


23.1. % g u Š aq aq afa wa fader: fafesad arate fede: 
fafa: mafaa: agm: cya: fafa: tery agafa: 1 warm: aa 
fda fafaa Jena wane fagar: fatwa: go y¢4—eafa frigi 
Tas II 


23.1. ‘AUM, tat, sať traditionally constitute the three-fold 


544 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XVII 


designation of Brahman in the Vedantas, according to the 
knowers of Brahman. In this three-fold manner were set up 
Brahmanas, Vedas and sacrifices. ‘Of yore’ is added to extol 
the designations. 


aeaa URAA: fran: | 
Waded fandt: aai aT RLN 


24. Therefore, always, those who maintain the doctrine 
of Brahman, commence ordained rites like sacrifices, 
gift-giving and penance, after uttering the syllable 
AUM. 


24.1. TEA ZA uu aea S A saga sead qaaa: RANT: 
amaer: fan: waded aaar: meaa: aad ada aararfeat 
CRECGRIGAGIR GAI 


24.1. So after uttering aum the acts of sacrifice, etc., scrip- 
turally prescribed start. This is the unbroken practice of all 
who maintain the doctrine of Brahman. 


araara Ger aaa: fra: | 
arafeana faf: frat aterarefarha: ney 


25. Various rites of sacrifice, gift-giving and penance 
are begun after uttering the term Tat by the seekers 
after liberation without thought of rewards. 


25.1. aq eta u ‘aq ea safra-ara—‘aq aft sanhrrat sea, 
aaiae a aaferiy: oo, qaaa f: aafaa aafin 
aaas: fear: aafe: a fafan: Aago: feast fadia 
measa: meara: qaa: i 


25.1. After uttering the word tat denoting Brahman and 
not desiring the fruits of works, sacrificial actions, penance, 


24-27) The Yoga of Threefold Faith 545 


and various kinds of gift-giving including plots of ground and 
gold are performed by seekers after liberation. 


26.0. 3» qwa: fafa: sem: 1 wa sartt meaa fafa: 


26.0. The practical use of aum and tal has been stated; now 
follows that of the term sat: 


agra mamà a afda | 
e aA TAT aega: TT AA RRN 


26. The word Sat is used to denote existence and righte- 
ousness; also, Arjuna! it is used to denote a ncble deed. 


26.1. agra sa n agra waar: aga, a aaea JaA 
mafa, THT mga a aaga aN: agar arga: afea arpa 
q ‘aq Aa aara agr: sga Nara 1 are fàr faareret 
q an aes: mi! aad aA AT | 


26.1. The existence of something yet to be, like the birth 
ofa non-existent son as well as the righteousness of one hitherto 
wicked, is denoted by the word sat, the designation of Brahman. 
It is also used, Arjuna! with reference to noble acts like 
marriage. 


aa nRa aa a fafa: afefa aè | 
SY aq aadi aeaaaee 20911 


27. Also does Sat denote devotion to sacrifice, penance 
and gift-giving; so, too, the work promoting all these 
is styled Sat. 


27.1. aa eft n av asad m feria, afa a ar feafa., aa 
a ar fecfa:, at ‘aq’ af a veut fasfg: | wet a ua aada qa- 


546 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XVII 


aq saa aire i 
aq wad maaana at amea fap segir ag: 
ahr m aas afa wate i 


27.1. Devotion to the act of sacrifice, penance, and gift- ` 
giving is also styled sat by scholars. So too work promoting 
these, or work dedicated to God, whose three designations 
constitute the present context, is again designated sat. The 
idea is that non-sattvic, unmeritorious acts of sacrifice, penance, 
gift-giving, etc., become meritorious and sativic when they are 
preceded by the faithful utterence of these designations of 
Brahman. 


28.0. 71 A ada sga ad Aad ACA, aAcATA— 


28.0. Since in these activities everything may be secured 
by the predominant virtue of faith, 


WIG FA TA ATA Ha A AT | 
water Wet a a Ae AT TE URC 


28. What is sacrificed, given as gift, performed as 
penance, or done, without faith is said, O Arjuna! to 
be Non-sat; it is effective neither here nor hereafter. 


28.1. AJEA aft iu AAPA Bt wat Ha, AMSAT At A ararrar:, 
WTA AT: TH aed, TT area wa Hd A aq gaara, 
aq ad ‘saq’ ef serd—aorfraraantarercar—art ! a 4 ad 
agorarad aft ser wars, ash cert, mafa: fafaa afer i 


28.1: Whatever is offered as oblation, given as gift to holy 


27-28] The Yoga of Threefold Faith 547 


ones, etc., performed as penance or work accomplished— 
work of laudation, prostration, etc.,—all these if done without 
faith, are termed asat; for they fall outside the way leading to 
Me, O Arjuna! Though these may entail much labour, they 
prove futile after death as well as here; they have earned the 
censure of the righteous. 


Wad: Fat Aaaa anA eraataarragyn ATT 
ACTSATISEATA: 1 AA 


SCLTIATISEATT: 
CHAPTER XVIII 


THE YOGA OF LIBERATION 
AND RENUNCIATION 


0.1. Tate Aaaa at: afer meat saga aaa Aart: 
amen: staat: ay ree: aed | aay fe aAA À Te: 
ay: aferq wear amaA | ag aearrrarmrearaar: wa fa- 
ayy: SATA — 


0.1. In order to conclude here the contents of the entire 
science of the Gita as well as those of the Vedas, is begun the 
present chapter. The ideas expressed in all the previous 
chapters may be grasped from this chapter alone. But Arjuna 
seeks to know the distinction between renunciation and relin- 
quishment (tyaga) ; so he said: 


wat Tas : 


aama Aglatel aeatasarta Afg | 
carrer a eater Tee Heritage ei 


Arjuna said: 

1. Mighty armed! Lord of the senses! slayer of Kesin! 
I should like to know the distinction between the truth of 
renunciation and that of relinquishment. 


Ll. wearer sft n aera —aaearte stad ngA ! 
qa aT Wa: aed, Aare edad, zeae afed ad; aM a 
amaai Za, Taha ! qa S ITTE, Aafa! Afa- 
am aN Bhd AAT: a fafaa WA aT: ‘aa aam 
amaA ATA II 


l. Omighty armed! I desire to know the truth of renuncia- 
tion, or the content of the term sannyasa, as also that of the term 


1-2] Liberation and Renunciation 549 


tyaga or relinquishment. I desire to know their distinction. 
Kesin was a demon disguised as a horse; the Lord Vasudeva 
slew him; so He is addressed as the slayer of Kesin. 


2.0. aaam at aH faf, a facifecral, yay srearag | 
qt: wear yea afattar war vara — 


2.0. The terms renunciation and relinquishment have been 
employed in a number of passages in the previous chapters, 
but their meanings have not been clearly explicated. Hence the 
Lord answered Arjuna who queried, in order to give him a 
decision in this matter. 


GIG UCIRGIR 
SAAT BAN a Aaa Haat fag: | 
AAHAHSUNT MEANT FTAA: UI 


The blessed Lord said: | 

2. Sages know renunciation to be the rejection of works 
prompted by desire for their fruits. Experts declare 
relinquishment to be the giving up of the fruits of all 
works. 


2.1. PAA eff i arena aan ator are ofa aan 
aurea, wae WAT arsed, sag: e: Afaq fag: 
frmafa 1. facrtfafearat aaan adati ancaaraferaar 


afar RAA deren: wa: ok: eng, + NÀ wa 
WTAATOTATAT 1 


2.1. Works prompted by desire for their fruits may be 
exemplified by sacrifices like the Asvamedha. The sense of 
the term renunciation is ‘the relinquishment’ of such works. 
Some sages know that when an occasion for doing such work 


550 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVII 


arises, in their non-performance consists renunciation. Ex- 
perts (however) with special knowledge declare the relinquish- 
ment of the fruits of obligatory and occasional works, when 
they accrue, to be tyaga. It is not a question of relinquishing 
desire-prompted works or the fruits of work in general. Were 
it so, no clear-cut difference would emerge between renuncia- 
tion and relinquishment such as, for example, there exists 
between a pot and a cloth. 


Ze ee ee ee er 
qe PSAT, TIT AAT: Fact: ? 


2.2. Objection: “Now the purva mimamsa maintains that 
obligatory and occasional works have no fruits of their own 
at all. How, then, can one talk of relinquishing their fruits? 
It will be like a barren woman abandoning her son.”’ 


2.3. ay: are:, frearary aa aor aaa woaraer ssecarq | seater fF 
ara ‘afacefac ft a [2e] ofa, ‘ag aanfaar [2.22] 
eft a) dnima R tad miro ai infaa fre 
SHH ‘waerarfirar ser [8¢.22.] ef aa N 


Reply: “No; the Lord holds that even obligatory works yield 
fruits; vide B.G.18.12; only, these fruits do not accrue to the 
renunciants (ibid.). Thus, according to Him, the fruits of such 
works accrue to the non-renunciants.”’ 


casa aAA BA mgA: | 
Qaeda a ceapafafa art w3it 


3. Some intellectuals maintain that faulty work must 
be relinquished ; others, that the work of sacrifice, gift- 
giving, and penance ought not to be relinquished (at all). 


3.1. ae ef u at ame aeaq ae: wer wedi eaq— 
fe aq ? ah, aregeard aay Ua) aezaT—ate: ae uefa: eT, 


2-3] Liberation and Renunciation 551 


an aa A È at mg A. ie: mga arfsrar:, 
afas saa aft sf | waa amaaa aA a und eft T N 1 


3.1. Work that is faulty must be relinquished ; for, all such 
work binds. Dosavat means having faults or faulty. Or, just as 
faults like attachment are relinquished, so should work, as 
such, be relinquished. This is the view of some wise men who 
adopt the philosophic view of the Samkhyas. This should apply 
even to those who are called upon to work. Others however 
exclude the works of sacrifice, gift-giving and penance from 
what has to be relinquished. 


3.2. afm: va afrear:, aq weer ud farem:, a I maA 
Pa a ae ee a 
[33] sf satirerca egar: 4, 7 arg ofa fer 

aq ‘eda afr’ [3.3.] ef afirsar gf farar: aft a 
admedia aur frarted, car area ate mafao: frartar 
ate | 

7, a Mgala: 1 a aaa gt agar: 
aafaa wear, Soar Aaaa war aaa | At: I A PAN- 
zamma Ft oferta 1 ae a water arch cad, aa fra 
ay Ate afer: | ara ae ‘Aa fafaq Afr [4c] af fe 
I aerated | ‘aqeair wear ET [4ta] Raat: areata: 


-AA ager ar tated i afaa: eara: [22.2¢-2°] ofa 
gorditas + romia: fafa | aaf a fror maA 
a ra [}c40.] ef 1 am maar: aaa: a ae faafaa: | 
pipoa: wa afar a aaaea aera: AA, T HST: 
åp: I 


3.2. These alternatives apply only to activists, karminah, 
and not to those who pursue the path of knowledge, who have 
gone out of the sphere of works. The discussion under way 
does not apply to those who have transcended the sphere of 
activities according to the statement in 3.3: I have declared 


552 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVITI 


of yore the discipline of knowledge for the Samkhyas. Objection: 
“Just as in this concluding section of the Gita activists are 
discussed, though their sphere also was demarcated in 3.3., 
why not deem that the Samkhyas, the pursuers of knowledge, 
also are proposed to be discussed here?” Reply “No; because 
it does not stand to reason that they would any longer be 
called upon to relinquish the cause of delusion and sorrow; 
for, the Samkhyas don’t perceive in the Self sorrow occasioned 
by the troubles of the flesh. Desire, etc, have already been 
shown to be attributes of the field (cf. Chapter XIII). Hence 
the question of their relinquishing works for fear of sorrow 
arising from the frailties of the body does not arise. Neither 
do they behold works in the Self. Hence they cannot relinquish 
obligatory work, which is entailed by delusion. They re- 
nounce the works of the gunas, convinced, ‘Never do I per- 
form any work whatsoever’ (vide B.G.5.8). The way of 
renunciation of works by the knower of Truth has been set 
forth in 5.13. Therefore, the relinquishers of works censured 
here are the non-knowers of the Self. In 12.16-19 have been set 
forth the marks of the full-fledged renouncers in the context 
describing the transcenders of the gunas. Another reference to 
them will be made laterin XVIII-50. Therefore in the present 
context, the renouncers whose discipline is knowledge, are not 
referred to. Hence the relinquishing of the fruits of works 
is described as sattvic renunciation, qualitatively, in relation 
to the rdjasic and tamasic relinquishment. The unqualified 
total renunciation is not the current theme.” 


3.3. ainina a ‘a fe teyar [2c] aft sarang 
yer a eft AI 


q, gatang | an amaaa? [?3.?3.] afer 


aqaa: Aafaa aag wet | aea wf afaa Aa wey: Aa- 
warfare: 1 A g meda. argar:, aut mafoa wa ad- 
PHS MASAIT AET: T aaa, gf a a farangi: | aaa soured 


3--4] Liberation and Renunciation 553 


aema: Aafaa [3.32] geaferq seat, adtaret w 
aa ug fracrtey— 


3.3. Objection: “The theme here ought to be total renuncia- 
tion; for, a reason has been advanced to explain why such 
renunciation is impracticable. Vide 18.11: It is not possible 
for an embodied being. . . etc.” Reply: No, the reason advan- 
ced is meant only to extol. Just as in 12.12, the proposition, 
‘from relinquishment follows immediate peace’, only extols 
the giving up of the fruits of works in view of the fact that it 
has been propounded to nescient Arjuna, who is in no position 
to act upon the numerous alternatives set forth there, here, too, 
18.11 extols the giving up of the fruits of works. None indeed 
can point out a negation of the position stated in 5.13. ¢... 
neither doing nor causing to do.’ Therefore, the alternatives 
stated as between renunciation and relinquishment in the 
present context are addressed exclusively to those directed to 
perform work. Those wedded to knowledge, the Samkhyas, 
who have realised the supreme Reality, are called upon to 
devote themselves to the discipline of knowledge marked by 
total renunciation of all works, and not to aught else. There 
are no alternatives before them. In the context of 2.21, we 
have elucidated it as well as in the prelude to Chapter III. 

As for these alternatives :- 


fora ay A aa UT Aaa | 
cart fe gaara fafaa: ataa: ei 


4. With reference to this theme, best of Bharatas! listen 
to my decision. O hero! relinquishment has been cele- 
brated as being threefold. 


4.1. frat eft u frat ay waar À we aaa aa aT T- 
Tirafeaet were were | waa aA toa: fz 
amaaan: fe a at: a up vate ahr ae ‘am fF 
sfa—qevearra | afaa: aaa: anrarfeart: afaa: mA aaa 


554 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


afaa. | werq amarfeder aana: at: afar afar: 
saree fafaa: arafa, a Tadaa., gaani. gata. AeA AA 
art a aa a aA | aeara aaa marirea aaa 
wat Fat AT i 


4.1. Grasp My decision as I state it in regard to this dis- 
tinction between relinquishment and renunciation, you, best 
of Bharata princes! In this context it is affirmed that the con- 
tents of both these expressions are identical. Threefold— 
tamasic, etc.— 1s this ‘giving up’, according to the scriptural 
texts. As far as the non-self-knower is concerned, ‘the giving up’ 
or relinquishment, is three-fold such as the tamasic, rajasic 
and sattoic. It is irrelevent to the self-knower. The subtle truth 
of this matter, being hard to comprehend, none else than the 
Lord can pronounce a decision. Therefore, in regard to this 
scriptural truth bearing on the metaphysical reality, listen to 
My decisive view as I set it forth. 


5.0. $: ot: wat foam: ? aft are— 


5.0. What is this decisive view ? 


TATA TATA BARAT Tq I 
amt at ae mafa ator UM 


5. The work of sacrifice, gift-giving, and penance should 
not be relinquished ; it must necessarily be accomplish- 
ed; for, sacrifice, gift-giving, and penance purify wise 


men. 


5.1. at at u aa: aa ao: gA fated at a cag a ae, 
are BONG Us AC | BEAN 2 ae: aa aT: a Ua ora farfara 
aaron poah stad 


5.1. The three-fold work ofsacrifice, gift-giving and penance 
should not be relinquished, but accomplished. Why? They 


4-6] Liberation and Renunciation 555 


purify the wise—bestow purity on those who expect no re- 
wards. 


vara g aai ae ARN Gott a | 
aiaa A mA fahad ATTA eI 


6. But even these works, Arjuna! must be done without 
attachment to them and to their fruits: this is My 
firm and most valid decision. 


6.1. vna afr n warts aft gq aati averracifa maafa seria 
ag arate aq aaa soft a aut Raa ataa afr adafa 
afa A na fafai Ad SAAT II 

fra my aay [cv] Kiet afa, Tas a et SAAT, 


erage sere: sagen: eet at ety yet: eer of 


6.1. But even these purifying works must be done after 
giving up attachment to them and their fruits. This is My 
firm and most valid view. This is no novel affirmation, but only 
the concluding statement of a position earlier propounded in 
18.4 as the decision going to be offered. The reason for it is the 
purifying power of these works. The words, ‘even these’ ought 
to link up with what is immediately relevant. Api, means that 
even such works, which bind when their agents have attach- 
ment and desire for their fruits, have to be performed without 
attachment by the agent who seeks liberation; It does not 
imply that there are some types of work to be performed. 


6.2. at g atata—frarat ato Gerad ‘ag waa Heh a’ 
aa a a | ae: ‘waver afa ofa arene matr fram: 
aata, waft aft stafa, faye aaaf fret ef a 
qr aaa garter asada i frente af atir agarga 


556 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


AeA. Hye. Ha: TAY way: 2 ger Tat wy [eve] ae a 
abba qma Amsar [3.°.] sf a area qugqaer 

fafsrreara, Aafaa ager’ [2.v4)], ‘Afaer ar arm: [x.o] 
‘arr gA mi fafa [¢.22.] ft a, a 7 
mAg ‘warerfy safe arrest: i 


A?! 


6.2. Others however explain it as follows: ‘“‘Obligatory 
works bear no fruits at all. So reference to giving up attachment 
to them and their fruits makes no sense. Hence ‘even these’ 
must mean occasional works that are other than obligatory 
works. If occasional works have to be done, obviously ‘sacri- 
fice, gift giving, etc.’, must be performed, too.” This explana- 
tion is unsound; for we have already explained how even obli- 
gatory works do bear fruits. The proof is the affirmation that 
‘sacrifices, etc., purify’. The seeker after liberation would fain 
give up even obligatory works lest they bind; how then can he 
do occasional works? ‘Work’ has been censured in 2.49. That 
occasional works bind has already been established in 3.9. 
Vide also passages like 2.45, 9.20, and 9.21. “Even these” 
cannot include occasional works, for the present context is 
far removed from the cited passages discussing desire-prompted 
works. 


7.0. TAT wae afiHqer AAT: — 


7.0. Therefore, for one who is nescient and called upon to 
work, 


fuaa g Aura: HAT ATTA | 
mercer freama: aeta: non 


7. It is unreasonable to renounce obligatory work. Its 
renunciation due to delusion is well-known to be 
Tamasic. 


7.1. aaa eft n faaea g fare aaa: ofa: at a 
SUT, AAMT Warren Weearq | Alar satay acer faaara shear: 


6-9] Liberation and Renunciation 557 


—frad 4 wane aden, asad a, eff fasfafes; ac: atefarfire: afea: 
—arra: faa: Nga ae: ef i 
fr z— 


7.1. The renunciation of obligatory works, which should 
always be done, is not reasonable; for, the nescient agent would 
seek purification. Its relinquishment can be due only to de- 
lusion. That the obligatory work which must inevitably be 
done, is sought to be given up is a contradiction in terms. 
So its relinquishment is traced to delusion. Therefore it is 
tamasic also: delusion is darkness. 

Moreover, 


gafada TH PUNATA | 
a Ha Tat UM AT UNG TAT cit 
8. Due to bodily fatigue, if work is given up as trouble- 


some, such relinquishment is Rajasic; the fruit of such 
relinquishment won’t accrue to the agent. 


81. ga eu ga aa wa aq ae are TMM 
aa wears, a Fear wat oai ae a va are MA- 
qå adadame ts were a wa AT wag I 


8.1. Fearing bodily fatigue—bodily sufferings—as trouble- 
some if one gives up work, that act is rajasic relinquishment—a 
result of rajas; one doing so won’t reap the fruit of relinquish- 
ment that 1s preceded by knowledge, implying the surrender 
of all works as such. The fruit in question is liberation. 


9.0. % ot: aterm: cart: aft ? are— 


9.0. What then is säāttvic relinquishment? Answer: 


arated wear faa fractsayet | 
ag UAT GS AT aT UM: maA Aa: NR 


558 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


9. Holding that work is to be done without break, O 
Arjuna, and giving up both attachment and fruit, the 
relinquishment (entailed) is deemed Sattvic. 


9.1. art aft u art adder efa wa aq at fran fret frad facie 

2 oaa |! ag wa te FT wa) waq—far sa Toad 
magai TAT aatara | ae ar—aatt ae a qad face HA, 
ansi fret at gat maae seraraatcart ar Ge Hea areas: 
sft paa wa wa 1 aT ame aft sera frarecafa ‘ae crac’ 
wat | Wat: ay BH APG aa te W ef 1 a wr facaradg 
agrafa: maas: arated: wa: aR (A) aT 1 


9.1. Suppose duty is performed without break, O Arjuna! 
giving up attachment and fruit. We have already stated that 
the Lord’s affirmation is proof of the fruitfulness of obligatory 
works. Or, though Sruti does not state that obligatory works 
yield fruits, nescient man imagines that their performance 
stores up right impressions or serves to ward off the sin of omis- 
sion. Even such an imagination has to be shunned according 
to this text. Hence “giving up both... .’’ is in place. This 
relinquishment of attachment and of fruit is sattvic, 1.e. is 
effected by the constituent sattva. 


9.2. a weufeam: fates: aera: eft a Wet: 1 TT ATA: | 
WAA BH: UT | HT Be ARH: Flaca Fert ? qa az: 
ae: arrat:, TT Teptaet A, afaa: qa. fa, agar N 

ay ae, ara gaia | afta fe stare Ro- 
Nafaa a aaa | aa maaa Piafa 
aipa: marda ead ‘a a: maA ad’ A i 


9.2. Objection: The matter under discussion is the three- 
fold renunciation and the relinquishment (of work). Their 
tamasic and rajasic varieties have been set forth. But how can 
this verse talk about the renunciation of fruit and attachment 
as the third variety ? Itis like the statement that three Brahmins 
have arrived, two being versed in the ‘six vedic limbs’, and the 
third being a ksatriya. Reply: This may be thus explained. 


9-10] Liberation and Renunciation 559 


The relevant theme may be taken to be the praise of relinquish- 
ment in general. Both in renunciation of works and in that of 
the desire for fruits is present the common characteristic of 
relinquishment. Condemning relinquishment of work as rajasic 
one extols as sattvic relinquishment of attachment to fruits. 


10.0. ag afar: ag waa Ferrata a fret at wits, ca 
pofan anafaa seater fra athe: aaa farerte | 
aq far vat ararerarea wafa 1 aer va fania fa- 
qerara meaa HAT GMT afassr Marq Aq away 
aft ae— 


10.0. The mind ofan eligible man who does obligatory work 
without attachment to work and its fruit is not agitated; it 
gets purified. Thus purified and clarified, it becomes fit to 
ponder over the Self. Here is explained how it gradually be- 
comes devoted to the knowledge of the Self, now that it has 
already been purified through the performance of obligatory 
works and oriented to Self-knowledge. 


A PSUHMS BT HAT ATTA | 
want Acaaatfacet Murat STETA: wot 


10. The renouncer, well established in Sattva, intelli- 
gent and rid of doubts, neither hates unmeritorious 
work nor clings to meritorious work. 


10.1. 7 of f.n a sf age at a ad, MATTEA- 
arty aaraa, ‘fe aa? ga 1 Hae aA fret Hafer “arags- 
maafana array ge" sede T aod, aq Wa 7 
eu saad |e ot wet ? wnt, gata agnor ary ani, 
a: aa ag waa ache a faranto a: cami | wer gA: 
wat were et a afte, pe aa aaa fa ? sadaa- 
watfase: wat Arad eaen amag aarfase: NA: GAH: 
add | ad Ua ay AnA AIT maaa wa ATH: AEM 
aural 1 afara wa faaam. fea: afferea: aaa: A ATN- 


560— Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


aenema we ot faa, a wauq fefaq’ aaa fora 
foaaya: 1 
a: free: gee gate wart Agea AT ARTA AT 


eataq | Vater ahiner waite atta glee TA 


10.1. The renouncer does not hate unmeritorious—un- 
attractive and desire-prompted—work which causes trans- 
migratory life by entailing embodiment. ‘Does not hate’ means 
‘does not seek to avoid’ such work. ‘Does not cling to’ means 
does not take pleasure in meritorious obligatory work that 
emancipates through the generation of devotion to knowledge 
preceded by mental purity. Who is the person concerned ? The 
renouncer, who has given up attachment and fruits of works, 
and who performs obligatory works. In what circumstances 
does he do so? When he is pervaded by sattva that generates 
the discrimination between the Self and the non-Self. He is 
‘Intelligent’ who has such knowledge, which dispels all doubts. 
He is convinced that the means to the summum bonum is 
nothing but Self-abidance. The competent man thus gradually 
purifies himself by means of Karma Yoga. He realises his 
stirless Self, free from all mutabilities like birth, etc. Having 
renounced all works mentally he dwells neither doing nor 
causing to do. This is devotion to knowledge which entails 
‘absolute worklessness’. This verse teaches the purpose served 
by Karma Yoga. 


11.0. What about that type of competent man who has the 
conceit of self in regard to his body, who bears the burden of 
his body? He is nescient and has not discarded the view that 
his Selfis a doer—he is obviously wedded to the notion “I am 


10-11] Liberation and Renunciation 561 


the agent’. Of course he cannot renounce all works. He is 
competent only to do the scripturally ordained works, while 
giving up the fruits of works. He cannot relinquish them. This 
idea is expressed as follows: 


a fe tea wear a PNA: | 
WEY BAHASA AT ATTA TTS n? LU 


11. Embodied man cannot indeed totally renounce 
works; but he who relinquishes the fruits of works is 
said to be the relinquisher. 


1.7 fe ef ou a fe wenq eqyar—ee faa sft eeyq— 
tere Re Fat fF a fe afana [2.22] 

fafaa: | ae dat Aaya aa A THT UH 
Cae aie ie ape ck sc on ee 
rai seq Seon minora aaan a cart sa afr 
aaa at aff aq efa—equfna 1 aenq oeartefar| <a- ar 
va Rea raa aerate: WI FIT I 


11.1. The embodied man is the man who bears the body. 
Since he has conceit in respect of his body, he is styled ‘the 
body-bearer’. Indeed, he has little discrimination. The dis- 
criminator has been taken out of the ranks of the doers of works. 
The non-discriminator cannot renounce or give up works in 
their totality. Hence the nescient individual, whose sphere is 
that of works, does obligatory works; but at the same time, 
discards their fruits. In spite of his doing works, he is called a 
relinquisher as he has given up the fruits of his works. The 
intention is to commend the giving up of the fruits of works. It 
follows that the percipient of the supreme Reality alone bears 
no body, 1.e. does not mistake the body for the Self, and can 
possibly renounce works in their totality. 


12.0. fe Jt aq wa, aq adetdanaq end aa sear— 


12.0. What purpose is realised through total renunciation? 


562 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


afefe fet a fafa PAN: RER | 
vara tear a a aarfaat afaa ue 


12. The fruit of work is three-fold—disagreeable, agree- 
able, and mixed. It accrues to the non-relinquishers 
after their death, but never to the renouncers. 


121. afr afr ou afr arafadinfemean, ae ao, frst 
qered aq aw, aq fafar fava ator aatre 
= , promt E Wri aai 
Taree yar ot watt maA ee noda 
eat waa: wt waft arent - xfer iaia dea 
wien sey 1 a I infaa erdia maga araa 
aama Fafaq ¢ a fe paaa afaenfedarcaty 
qa soa pafa got 1 wa: eieaa. va Aaaa 
arnaf, sfrarseardfracarg ancaft ENERET; 7 I INA 
ahresraratit fearaqarcertr areata cere: aAa. aerate i 


12.1. “The disagreeable’ refers to fruits like hell, life as sub- 
human creatures etc.; ‘the agreeable’ is life as gods, etc; ‘the 
mixed’ includes both the elements as in life as man. These are 
the fruits of works which are righteous or unnghteous. They 
are produced by the operations of several external factors. Of 
course they are of the stuff of nescience resembling magical 
shows. They cause delusion and apparently affect the inner 
self. The term phala points to something that gets liquidated 
and disappears, being petty. These fruits accrue after death 
to the nescient, unrelinquishing agents of works who are other 
than genuine renouncers ; but never to genuine renouncers who 
are exclusively devoted to the discipline of knowledge. This 
devotion never indeed fails to destroy the seeds of transmi- 
gratory life. Therefore total renunciation 1s possible only for 
the realizers of the Supreme Reality. Actions, its accessories, 
and fruits have been super-imposed on the Self through 
ignorance. Total renunciation is thus not possible for the 
ignorant who indentify the factors set forth in 18.13, as consti- 
tutents of the Self. 


12-14] Liberation and Renunciation 563 
13.0. aq Wad sat ye: etafr— 


13.0. This truth is elucidated in the next few verses: 


waar agaa arena Frater R | 
maA pA Nfa frsd ATATA 112 31 


13. Mighty-armed! know from Me the five causes, set 
forth in the Samkhya system, as promoting the accom- 
plishment of all works.. 


13.1. Ta aft uw we vat aeaarorft & aararar | araona fadd- 
afr 1 frara a R seer Vaan, aeqavervattart T a afr 
q aronfs acerca atift—arey, aide: aat aearaed  aferq 
mA q ia Aared:, Hard afar cela fartorq—asa afa wt yard, 
wer wea: often: wr a Faved, Fala: Fela! maA Yau’ 
[r.¥¢.], ‘ad maias ot arr often [x33] ef aren 
ana aaa fata ataf 1 ava aferq meam aret Hard 
aa Sarit ea farad fore THT N... 2 


13.1. The five causes accomplishing works are presently to be 
set forth. ‘Know from Me’—this expression is used to draw 
attention and direct it to that heterogeneity. They are now 
extolled. Samkhya is the science of Vedanta wherein are 
enumerated the principles to be known. Krtanta qualifies it; 
krta is work, and the science which elucidates its end is the 
Vedanta. BG.2.46 and 4.33 refer to the Self-knowledge that 
terminates all works. Thus in the science of Vedanta are stated 
the causes which promote the accomplishment of all works. 


140. aft aft ef ? za 


14.0. Which are the causes in question? Answer: 


afis TAT Hat HT ST qaa | 
fafaurr queacet da Bary IAT evi 


564 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XVIII 


14. (There are) the ground, the agent, various instru- 
ments, and manifold movement together with the 
supernatural as the fifth among them. 


141. asa eft u afar seareeqearreta afreath: srr: 
afr wo, aa sal saree: wre, eo a sre na- 
qsad gafa ara aq eae, fafa: aq qaracer: aaah: 
IMITATE, Aa A Ua tay Ua WHF Ag By Tae Tart qoi 
anfeonf TTT 1 

14.1. ‘The ground’ is the body. in which are manifested 
attachment, aversion, etc. (vide BG 13.6). The agent is the 
delimited self who is also the reaper of the fruits of works. 
The instruments are the sense-organs, twelve in number— 
ear, etc. which apprehend objects like sound. ‘Manifold move- 
ment’ refers to the movements of ‘the vital airs’—the in-breath, 
out-breath, etc. The supernatural element is the fifth in this 
list; it is the solar deity, etc., superintending and guiding the 
function of the sense organs such as the eye. 


TUCATSHAN AHA ATTA AT: | 
area at fana at wat Ter Baa: ULI 


15. These five are the five causes of whatever work, 
right or wrong, that a man initiates with his body, 
speech and mind. 


15.1. ae ef u wearer: aq ant ffir. wa: erent frddafir 
qT, ara a wet wet, farda ar ame aA aeq fà 
fafafeaateearfe Maag: aq aft qigani wa ary aft 
arate: Ul watt ytd, war wa wate: Ter Ader va FT: 
gaa: BIOTA 1 


15.1. Whatever work a man does with the three (instru- 
ments)—1.e., body, speech, and mind—., whether right or 
wrong—1i.e., in accordance with or opposed to the ‘sastras, 


14-16] Liberation and Renunciation 565 


righteous or unrighteous—, the causes are as stated above. 
Even the involuntary movements of the body entailed by 
living are determined by right and wrong done earlier. Hence 
the expression ‘right or wrong’ include dharma and adharma, 
merit and demerit. The five factors as stated above are the 
causes of all work. 


15.2. aq Watts afasoraratta ada fardda 1) wr ead A- 
asna aq at sro afr ? 

ay AN, fafasfataoe ad at Raan; agan aT- 
qam + Marea fer wa uated sed athe: read 
aft 1 woaresht aerart: arr: woud aft aa wa Age 7 fasead 
ata u 


15.2. Objection: “Now works as such are accomplished by 
the five causes. Why then specify saying work done by means 
of body, speech and mind?” Reply : “This is no flaw. All works, 
commended or forbidden, are dominated by one of these 
three. Seeing, hearing etc. are parts of these works and grouped 
into three with reference to body, etc. At the time of reaping 
their consequences they are experienced mainly through these 
three means. Hence the causality ascribed to the five factors 1s 
not inconsistent.” 


aaa ata Harcara Bae g T: | 
wanda A Tate gatas: Vet 


16. This being the case, whoever beholds, due to lack 
of disciplined reason, the pure Self as agent, sees not at 
all; his is misunderstanding. 


16.1. aa Ba u ar ata vada araeqd—uag af wa aa: Tai: 
ggr: frat ate adi 1 ‘ata afa afa gifacrer agra araead | 
wr uty aera afar ofeafert: ferro air: ‘aga 
ral aft sat seat tas Ys I a wats afeerq—sTenq ? 


—aaerararaeradt: sedge waesaqfecra—aistt gfo- 


566 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVITI 


Rafera arearaq wa aaa mat ma, wet aft sacafa:— 
wet: weedfecaq 7 a aA arena: act wa aT geht | Aa: 
gata, afar fatter ger awa waracnsfacfaegua ate: ser 
afa gifa: i a: ear aft a ceafa, oer Afa wae ae, Ta aT 
TAY Way we Wad, sa a aed Vafase: weary aay scars 
CUGIR: | 


16.1. “This’ refers to the present context “This being the 
case’ means—since work can be done only with the coopera- 
tion of the five causal factors. The cause of misunderstanding 
is set forth in this expression—‘this being the case’. As work 
is done cooperatively by the five factors deemed to be other 
than the Self, the ignoramus who looks upon the pure Self as 
the agent, due to nescience, fails to grasp the truth about the 
Self or about the works. This mis-perception results from the 
fact that his intellect has not been trained in the teachings 
of the Vedanta or of competent teachers or in the processes 
of reasoning. Even he who holds that the Self is other than the 
body, etc., is wrong if he deems the Self alone to be the doer 
of works; he has only misunderstanding. His ‘understanding’ 
merits censure, as it leads to ceaseless births and deaths. 
‘Seeing’ he fails to see, just as a man of defective vision sees 
many moons or a speeding moon when only the clouds stir. 
A man seated in a palanquin deems himself moving when 
people carrying the palanquin alone are moving. 


17.0. $: Gt: gate: a aera grata afr 2 sert— 


17.0. Whose understanding then is right? who sees aright? 
listen : 


Tey AEA Atal afer a fora | 
zansa a gatcntara gtd a frat uv 


17. He whose attitude is unegoistic, whose understand- 
ing is untainted, even after slaying all living beings, 
neither slays, nor is bound. 


16-17] Liberation and Renunciation 567 


17.1. Te Sir wu wer meaa aana: a. waft g- 
Ha. “He Fal’ Aa: We: wear war: —ud va Ta STATEN: 
afram areata afer: ada sat: a Ae, He g AIT 
ares: ‘ast waa: Yt Wawa: we (AT v2.2] sae: 
afafa. ata qeata eft waq—aqfe: aera wer area: so 
q foot a aaa wafr—“ed ag ward, at ag ace aA 
aq wet ate: a oada: gate, a weafa 1 ger ait a sat 
Say, Aa SAT ma. gak: a ate gaai a Hea, a frad 
aft acer, aera TA | 


17.1. He has the nght understanding, he sees aright, who 
does not deem himself the doer of works. His self has been 
purified by the teachings of the sastras and his teacher and by 
the processes of reasoning. The five factors (BG 18.14) super- 
imposed due to nescience on the Self are the doers of all work 
and not ‘I’. ‘I’am only the witness of their operations, Vide MU 
2.1.2: “Without vital breaths, indeed mindless, luminous, 
beyond the Imperishable, the Supreme, I am the Alone, the 
Immutable.’’ He knows all this. His intellect—the inner 
sense-—is untainted; it does not cling to thoughts such as ‘I 
did this, so I shall fall into hell.’ His thoughts are auspicious. 
He sees aright. Even after slaying all these living beings, he is 
no killer and is not bound—he is not related to its fruits, the 
fruits of unrighteousness”. 


17.2. aq Beas a afar afer fasfafes seat waft cafe: ? 

ay ay, otfearrcafeaqeertear aged: | eaaa ‘ea 
we ste Aa fee naa ‘erase fa ame; amefa oe 
maA gfe arbre a aha a fraead sfa—uaq sat sored wa 1 
vq arem: aaa wife wa aren, sai tay g 
[2¢.2%.] ofr ‘tae aerate | 

ay: AT, area: afafeacraraca afaa: agacarqaad: | 
ig pl pi ig vi ey Aap Se 
fear amaa: tafaq aged afer eit a Me ade TTA | aa: 
daa are: afa eet daa: ATTRA | fafai 
a arena: garana 1 afaa [ 2.24. |, =. 
anif feared” [3.29.], ‘retest + wea’ [2332] Zante 


568 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


win nl oA Sik y mada somaa [3.3 
o] amm | amaaa faa, aA, aaf aT 
a pa a uae wo oe 
wfag aéfa, + afasia mar amei ay 1 a fe Tea 
af gtr aed arg adfa 1 aq fen afd, Taq eT; wT 
Taa +t Ufa; war ar aeafere ars: faa afaerar + TETEA 
wer atfassrarfefatwarsts a Ua, A mea: 1 TERT AH THY 
“apaan fae a efa a fraeae” cfr | 


17.2. Objection: Though meant as commendatory only, this 
statement that though he slays he slays not is paradoxical. 
Reply: “This is no flaw; for it may be explained with reference 
to the distinction between the empirical and metaphysical 
view-points. ‘Having slain’ refers to the empirical view-point 
according to which body, etc., constitute the self. “He slays 
not’ refers to the metaphysical view-point, as has already been 
elucidated.” Objection: ‘“‘Surely the self together with the 
ground’ (i.e. body etc.), does the work; for 18.16 objects only 
to the view that the mere self works.” Reply: “Granting the 
immortality of the Self, It cannot combine with the ground 
(i.e. body etc). Combination with other factors 1s possible 
only if an entity is susceptible to modification; then only 
may It have joint doership. The immortal Self cannot combine 
with aught else and acquire a joint doership. Aloneness, then, 
is inherent in the Self. Mereness or aloneness is not predicative ; 
it points to the nature of the subject, Self. Itsimmutability is cel- 
ebrated in śruti and smrti and supported by reason. cf.BG.2.15, 
3.27; 13.21. Also BU.4.3.7, etc. Reasoning is as follows: The 
Self is impartite, independent, and immutable. Even if Self 
mutates, only Its own changes may occur in It. Some one’s acts 
cannot accrue to another who has not performed them. What 
is ascribed through nescience cannot belong to It. Note that 
silverness does not belong to the nacre; the murkiness of the 
ground cannot belong to the sky to which the ignorant attri- 
buteit. Similarly, the mutations of the ground, etc., belong only 
to them and not to the Self. Therefore, the observation, ‘being 


17-18] Liberation and Renunciation 569 


unegoistic and of untainted understanding, the knower 
neither slays nor gets bound,’ is in order.” 


17.3. mA ea a gad ef ama A wae 
afafeadt aera: caer, Aafaa Boray. af faga: 


va a afa rahaan anana. AAT- 

faat afer fafai ato F (c.23) 7 wale afr sods; 
afad a aat wafa aa waq a afet gf us: Aarnet: 
giga: | a w: adada: faquafate: aiet: feat fiaa: 
gfe a aa orama afte: sent: MATOT I 


17.3. Having affirmed, ‘he neither slays nor gets bound’, 
and set forth the reason for it in the words, ‘he is not born, etc., 
which elucidate the Selfs immortality, at the beginning of the 
Gita (2.19-21), and having shown also the reason for the 
knower’s withdrawal from the sphere of activities—the Lord 
concludes the Gita’s ideas oi: this topic in 18.17. These ideas 
have also been mentioned in various passages throughout the 
course of the Gita. In these circumstances it stands to reason 
that the three-fold fruit of works does not accrue to the renoun- 
cers who have no conceit in the body-mind complex, and have 
therefore given up all works. On the contrary to the non- 
renouncers the three-fold fruit inevitably does accrue. Thus also 
is concluded the theme of BG. With penetrating discrimination 
the scholars must ponder on the essence of this Vedic wisdom 
and master it. This view has been set forth by us in several 
contexts analytically, in harmony with the Sastra and reason. 


18.0. TT Fart HA sade sad — 

18.0. Now is stated the factor that impels all works: 
ma wa ofeara fafa AAEM | 
HU BA Hata fafaa: HATE: ec 


570 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


18. Knowledge, the knowable and knower—is the three- 
fold mandate to work. The instrument, work and agent 
constitute the three-fold summary of work. 


18.1. mA aft uo aa aad aaa ste adaa afaeran yard, 
Ta AT ma, cafe aaa va ad Gerd; sar amar sarira: 
afararafera: wea wad aa afar adedi safar fafa 
faaara sien i araretar fe warn afaad aratorerarfasanr: 
adpan: Sq | aa: Tate: afassrnfeht: me SAAPA- 
wear fro cathe faq sonfeq aye xf Taq sadr feat 
art aft ara sara, are qeurfe, at shea ad: fraa 
STATA, Fat HET A ITET: afer fafa: PFT: 

aaa: —ayea swe xr aye, FAT ae: sta: —at wy 
fe fry anata, aa aa fafa: siang: 1 


18.1. Knowledge in general is meant here; the distinctions 
among particular cognitions are ignored. Such is the case with 
the knowable and the knower. The knuower is bound up with 
adjuncts due to nescience—the experiencer in general. These 
three in their generality constitute the three-fold mandate to 
do work; for, only when these three converge, a beginning to 
work, directed to acquisition, rejection, etc., can happen. 
Then are noted three groups of work-factors. The instru- 
ment, that by which the work 1s done, 1s external sense-organs 
like the ear, and internal ones like the intellect. Work is what 
is most intently sought after and pervaded by activity. Agent 
is the wielder of instruments and his mark is adjuncts like mind 
and body. Indeed work inheres in these three factors. 


19.0. aa A fearercamor ade qs aar- 
qra: afa. we: amen: aft arcad— 


19.0. Now is set forth the three-fold distinction among 
these factors based on the constituents of nature like sattva, etc. 
For, work, instrument and fruit of work are, essentially, these 
constituents. 


18-19] Liberation and Renunciation 571 


aa wt a sat a fada Tora: | 
THAT THAT TATSSH ATATT UVR 


19. Knowledge, work, and doer are just three-fold 
with reference to the constituents as elucidated in the 
light of these constituents ; listen to a factual statement 
of these also. 


19.1. MA gf n ma Ht Tae fer, + ares Tories sears 
p—s a fadis. fear fa aaao pororaa- 
masei pa: aeaa set: | a Head eA 
mè mAai iea AAA S wa 1 T- 
mirdad ma faserd, caste a fe ae: qorin- 
fem ha: sf aor aft aama saa sft 
q aA: | amaa ana, aae amy A aft arate ag- 
carat Agaa wy, maA af aa He Fes: 1 


19.1. Knowledge, work—work means activity and not the 
technical part of speech defined (in 18.18) as what is most 
sought after—,and the doer, or he who accomplishes activity— 
thus has work a three-fold division. ‘Just three-fold’—rules out 
all generality apart from the constituents. This 1s based on the 
three-fold constituents, sattva, rajas and tamas. “As elucidated 
in the light ....” refers to the system of Kapila. This sastra 
is a valid source of knowledge about the constituents and the 
jivas who experience. Though it contradicts in respect of the 
non-duality of the metaphysical Real or Brahman, the fol- 
lowers of Kapila are adepts as regards constituents and their 
operations. Hence their system is cited as worthy of commenda- 
tion. Listen to their account, keeping reasoning in view. The 
distinctions drawn are based upon the differences among the 
constituents ; pay heed. 


20.0. maA gJ maq frfa sag — 
20.0. The three-foldness of knowledge is affirmed: 


572 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XVII 


GEE GE Its ATaAaTTAA | 
afram fray aeaa fate MRP gon 


20. Know that knowledge to be Sattvic by which one 
sees in all beings a single immutable existence though 
these beings themselves are divided. 


20.1. vaya zr u aAA serafeeracrdaqg wy a aA 
Uh We agaaa: aa, UH seal AAAA, a aft 
rary eae aT, Heer aA, sad sweat aa wea, FT a wa 


afara sfite, fori N a fers aq aera, aa free 
ery, Se iTS Arete onus since ees a 


20.1. In all beings from the unmanifest to stationary things, 
the knowledge by which is seen a single existence—the reality 
or the immutable Self—is sattvic. This reality does not mutate 
either by itself or through the mutation of its attributes; it is 
undivided in each of the divided bodies. This undivided Self 
is like the sky. The knowledge of this non-dual Selfis immediate 
and veridical and it is held to be sattvic. 


pc Ra i allel 
7 war dardfeeat wafer 


21.0. Perceptions of dualities are non-veridical—they are 
rajasic or tamasic ; they don’t directly terminate the life of trans- 
migration: 


qarda g aval atararary qatar | 
afa adq acy avert fafa crore Ret 


21. But know as Rajasic the knowledge by which one 
knows all beings as existents of various kinds. 


20-22] Liberarion and Renunciation 573 


21.1. Farad eft u gara g vet saws ada aq aA AAT- 
wary frame arena: fiam quararaq frase get, Afa 
fonaa aq at aay yay—arter Fycaraeward at aaa Afa 
say: —aq at fats usd oiia i 


21.1. Know as rajasic or as fashioned by rajas, the know- 
ledge by which, one knows varied beings as different in dif- 
ferent bodies. Of course, knowledge does not know, but by 
means of it one knows: 


uq pordan nA Ba AHA | 
AACA A ACTAATATTAT UV 


22. That is said to be Tamasic knowledge, which un- 
reasonably sticks to an object as if it were a whole, and 
whose content is unveridical and petty. 


22.1. aq aft u ad I wat Hevaq anedaqd adfagay za Uaf 
ard ee afeat sfrarel am ‘“Warataa area Sat: aT, 7 Aa: Te afeq” 
of, war maa [207 got Dyin elie linen Sat: 
ate ae aa A ah aami: a. He TAA: afet 
r aeartag, a ai iq — Ara UAI act F, HET- 
fama aaa aT | Ad aaa saga i araarar fe mai 
afaafeat seat art Rad 1 


22.1. But the knowledge that identifies the whole with the 
body or with something extended like an image, holding the 
Self or God to be only so much and nothing more exists— is 
tamasic. Witness the naked Jains who hold that the Self or 
jiva is of the size of the body it inhabits. God is only the image, 
stone or wood, and no more. There is no reasoning to support 
such views. [hey are false and petty, relating to a finite object. 
Jts fruit, too, is petty. Such knowledge is said to be tamasic. 
Only tamasic beings, lacking in discrimination, entertain such 
knowledge. 


574 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVII 


23.0. Ta rA way: Afa sà — 


23.0. Now is stated how work is threefold: 


fai agea: FAA | 
Irog BA MaaR NRN 


23. Sattvic is said to be the work that is obligatory, 
done without attachment, passion or aversion, by one 
who seeks not its fruit. 


23.1. frat sft un frat fot aged maraa sera: Fei 


23.1. Obligatory work done without attachment, passion 
or aversion by one who does not desire to secure its fruit—who 
does not hanker after its fruit—is said to be sattvtc. 


UI BAYA RA ERN AT FA: | 
frat agora AEETI 


24. The work done with passion for a desired fruit by 
an egoistic agent, which entails much labour, is said to 
be Rajasic. 


24.1. Aq aft u ad, J Hae PARAAN zarf:, ll pe 
efa a ammini afg? —olfeamnfrafreegrerern 

fe vortfrgr mafa, a aer i. abidan Se 
afer 1 aasa aft ate: aafaa aregre Fat, fear Ta- 
ammat: 1 art aana aft Naa: aege: seat fraag: 
wo ma: gA aea Aa va mN ay fA Tay | JANA: 
magos: | feat agoma at (Hat) mg maa fadó, aq 
FH UAT IZT l 


23-25} Liberation and Renunciation 575 


24.1. Rajasic is the work done by one who seeks its fruit, 
who is egoistic, who is devoid of even the prevalent know- 
ledge of truth: i.e. who is more than ordinarily egoistic. The 
reference is not to one whois rid of the principle of egoism ; for 
such an agent will be a knower of the Self with whom can 
never be associated passion for a desired fruit, etc. The agent 
even of sattvic work is egoistic, not to speak of rajasic and tama- 
sic works. A Vedic scholar, though not a knower of the Self, is 
widely deemed unegoistic of whom one says: “This Brahmana. 
is unegoistic’. Compared with him the agent of rajasic work 
is said to be egoistic. The term punah in the verse only completes 
the first half of the verse. This rajasic work is done with much 
labour by its agent. 


aqa aa EATA aw dreary | 
MTA BY TAA AAT STA ULI 


25. The work undertaken due to delusion and without 
regard for consequences, loss, violence involved, and 
competence is said to be Tamasic. 


25.1. wad Sa u wat wargifa aq aed a wqary: Fou 
qa aqai, ad aferq afer frat after: ater: at ang a 
aa, fear maa (-dtst) 4, water @ drag qevart ‘aaaifa ee 
arearearhr wer afaa: arcade at aq aq aaa aaia Seat 1 


25.1. Consequence is what follows the work. Loss is that 
which the work causes—loss of power or wealth. Violence is 
injury to life. Competence is confidence in one’s ability to 
accomplish the: work. Work undertaken without regard for 
these factors, through delusion or lack of discrimination, 1s 
tamasic—is done due to tamas. 


26.0. Zad pia: Forr— 


26.0. Now are set forth the different kinds of agents: 


576 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


TREA EEA AT: A 
fregare Nafas: wat arfean FTAA NIGN 


26. Sattvicis the agent devoid of attachment, unegoistic, 
rich in resolution and zeal, and changeless in success 
and failure. 


261. qm TN qeg: Ge ere: ay: ATT qrg: aT- 


fact afd a fagafrga fifserc—dad mesma sam: a 
Pfa T: a: AIER: TAA | UAT: wat a ew EaR: THAT II 


26.1. He who has given up attachment, is not pushing 
himself to the fore, rich in endurance and application, im- 
mutable in success and failure, i.e. who has been impelled by 
the Sastraic mandate and not greed for work’s fruit, is said to be 
sattvic. 


mÅ snot igarerHtsata: | 
gsm: Fat cera: afeatfaa: ion 


27. The agent whois attached, seeks the fruit of works, 
is greedy, violent, unclean, glad and sad—is known as 
Rajasic. 


27.1. Tt sft m T: rer aAa <M, FARSI: Fi- 
zea at; fea eres ce Se ae 
agm, Taha a ato: aafaa gi eae, area aa: T: 
eat a: were: efaa: n 


27.1. He who has attachment is ‘the attached’, i.e. one who 
seeks the fruit of his works; the ‘greedy’ is the one who is eager 


26—29] Liberation and Renunciation 577 


to seize the wealth of others or who won't give away his own 
wealth as charity in sacred places. The ‘violent’ 1s one hurting 
others; the ‘unclean’, one lacking in internal and external 
cleanliness; the ‘glad’, one of pleasant experiences, and the 
‘sad’, one without pleasant experiences. Or, when one’s work 
prospers he may be glad, and sad when it is ruined. An agent 
like this is known as rajasic. 


ATH: MFA: R: M AcHfaHtsea: | 
Rad Ad a wat area Teas NREN 


28. Unintegrated, uncultured, stiff, deceitful, malicious, 
indolent, downcast and procrastinating is the Tamasic 
agent. 


28.1. AAR sft ae: + ae: aefea:; sree: seredewaafs: 
aoay:; wer weaq a aval Fetfaq; we mai agar; 
asa maa: (Tegiteser:); aoe angie: iA 
aft, faaret ama ada maaana; deat a adders A- 
WALT: AAT AACINTS:, AT AT WM: aA Hist aq aay aft a Hela; 
qa wary: a at aaa: ead i 


28.1. ‘Unintegrated’, or unconcentrated ; ‘uncultured’, ex- 
tremely unregeneraté intellectually and childish; ‘stiff or like 
a stick, unbending before any one; ‘deceitful’ or tricky, hiding 
one’s strength; ‘malicious’ or undermining others or ruining 
others’ livelihood ; ‘indolent’ neglecting even one’s own duties; 
‘ever despondent’ always pessimistic in outlook; ‘ever tardy’, 
one who delays taking up an urgent work even after a month— 
this sort of agent is held to be tamasic. 


qeda ada pafa TOT | 
NAARAAN ARAA TANT RSI 


29. Also listen, O Arjuna, to the three-fold variety of 


578 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


intellect and of resolve with reference to the consti- 
tuents, as it is elucidated distinctively and fully. 


29.1. qA sf u qs Ae ad a ee We aeaa. fafaa 
wea wT: | Tea sera aera faceted: aa 
qra faama. wie ! —faftart arqy ea a wat wa faa, 
qa wat AA: ATA: N 


29.1. Listen to the distinctions of intellect and resclve, each 
three-fold, with reference to the constituents. This is an ap- 
horistic statement indicating the gist of what follows. ‘Dis- 
tinctively’ i.e. analytically elucidated without any loose ends. 
Arjuna is styled Dhanamjaya because he collected, during 
his victorious expeditions, immense wealth—both human and 
divine. 


vata a frat a arated RATAA | 
ay Ata a ot ata gfe: at ast arfeaat igor 


30. That intellect is Sattvic, Arjuna! which knows 
action and inaction, duty and non-duty, fear and fear- 
lessness, bondage and liberation. . 


30.1. Tafa a g u vata a safe: sade aang: PATI: MEA- 
fafeafana:, fafa a faf: Meg: aaant: —a 


eran generata mig | arad faf ena she wat renenfè, 
a a ai, We a a aÀ, gergef: waaa: PT 
sont | ai aga att a aE at a fa af: ar må ! 
afcaat | at art a2: aft; afeeq gaad 1 ofa: aft aqfaa: 
wa q2: I 


30.1. ‘Action’ is movement leading to bondage—the way 
of works enjoined by the Sastras. ‘Inaction’ is its opposite lead- 
ing to liberation—the way of renunciation. As these two terms 


29-32] Liberation and Renunciation 579 


occur in the same sentence, where also occur the terms bon- 
dage and liberation, we take them to mean the paths of works 
and of renunciation. ‘Duty and non-duty’ are works enjoined 
and prohibited by the sastras and related to the Vedic and 
secular spheres. Such works have results visible or invisible. 
‘Fear and fearlessness’ refer to their causes like thieves, tigers, 
etc. The reference is to the causes of fears in relation to visible 
and invisible goals. The sattvic intellect knows (about) ‘bon- 
dage and liberation’ with their causes. Knowledge is a modi- 
fication of the intellect to which it pertains. ‘Resolve’ too is 
only a particular modification of the intellect. 


qm way a Hs aHwaag a 
sanasana afg: AT APT TAT 13 V1 


31. Rajasic is the intellect, O Arjuna! by which one 
understands erroneously righteousness and unrigh- 
teousness, duty and non-duty. 


31.1. wa ofa uo war at meaa, art a sfafee. art q 
apiy Ua a Yat wa arated [e¢.30.], Tea A amag Add: 
friar a carafe, afe: m m ! wag 


31.1. ‘Righteousness’ is (action) enjoined by the Sastras 
while ‘unrighteousness’ is what is forbidden by them. ‘Duty’ 
and non-duty’ have already been explained in 18.30. Er- 
roneously, i.e. not after exhaustive examination and decision. 
The intellect doing this is rajasic. 


TT TAT AT AAA AHATSSAAT | 
watuty fardan ate: ar aed area 113.211 
32. Tamasic, Arjuna! is the intellect shrouded in Tamas 


(ignorance) which mistakes unrighteousness for righ- 
teousness and knows all kinds of things contrarily. 


580 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XVIII 


32.1. ret afr u arent sfafee ext faai ef ar wed mafa 
ara sarge adt, aataty aaty va aaa fata a farcry 
va fawarfa, qf: ar må | mag u 


32.1. The ‘intellect shrouded in ignorance’ that deems un- 
righteousness i.e., what is prohibited by the sastras, to be 
‘righteousness’ and knows all knowables ‘contranily’ is tamaszc. 


qar AMT Mad nafaa RAT: | 
Aeaf wf: at ort afeat 13 30 


33. The unfaltering resolve is Sattvic, Arjuna! by which, 
through concentration, one maintains the functions of 
mind, vital breaths and the senses. 


33.1. Fear sft u qe aar—seahrarfee aft aAa areea:— 
aad —fa ? -aa mfa: a sma efxartr a maA R- 
afr, cat frat: Aeer:, at. Veareraninged: arecad ereafa—ear fe 
aaa: sooresranttawar: + wafa—arr afaa, serhrafear— 
franean gaT: | wad se wafa—saerhrarfear year Aa: 
mfa: aaron: arr arate efa i ar veer gfo: at art | 
aricaat i 


33.1. The remote expression ‘unfaltering’ should be related 
to ‘resolve’ or dhrti. One ‘maintains—what? The functions 
the mind, vital breaths and the senses, preventing them from 
taking a path opposed to the Sastras. Thus are they made to 
conform to Sastraic ways. This is done through ‘concentration’ 
or samadhi. ‘Unfalteringness’ consists in accordance with un- 
broken concentration. The Sense is that the functions of the 
mind and so forth, maintained through unfaltering resolve, 
are in fact maintained through concentration. This kind of 
resolve is sattvic. 


WaT g MATA YT AASTA | 
TASA mome yf: At aed Tara Ir 


32-35] Liberation and Renunciation 581 


34. But the resolve, Arjuna! by which one upholds 
righteousness, sexual attachment and wealth while 
occasionally desiring fruits of works, is Rajasic. 


34.1. WaT aft u war g Aaa wha arpa ah ATTAT: 
ary maa Year Tar arcad wate fray va airea aaqercate 
ora ! aga wer TET wae: aay: aa AA aga naras 
a waft a: gee, wer yf: ar ar ot | usr | 


34.1. But the resolve by which one upholds ‘righteousness’ 
(Dharmah), sexual desire (Kamah) and wealth (Arthah), 
treating them as eternal oughts to be accomplished, and seek- 
ing their fruits as occasions arise is rajasic, O Arjuna. 


aa wat wa atts faai Hana FI 
a fapata geet ofa: at ort array 3 au® 


35. Tamasic is the resolve, Arjuna! by which a mean- 
minded man clings to sleep, fear, grief, dejection and 
indulgence. 


35.1. Tar eft n war caer fast, wa ara, ata, faare [aaan] 
fmi, we farada arena: NANA. at et we wa a nafa 
fay va adereqdar Haq a faqeafa areate wa seer: efter: 
yey: q, ser ofa: ar ar ort |! mi|a] n 


pe 

35.1. The resolve by which a ‘mean-minded man’ does 
not give up but ‘clings to sleep, fear, grief, dejection and in- 
dulgence in objective pleasures’, like one intoxicated—doing 
all this as a compulsory duty—is deemed to be tāmasic, O 
Arjuna! 


36.0. Teed far arava; a fafaa: We: Ge: 1 aa Fart 
psa gay fafaa: sory 


“aT aaa wWar—efa ae: | 


582 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XVIII 


36.0. The three-foldness of works and their accessories with 
references to the constituents has been set forth; now is stated 
that of fruits and pleasure. 


ga fart fafat ay a WATT | 
marana TA FaTea BT farsa uF ei 


36. Now listen, best of Bharatas! to (the elucidation of) 
threefold pleasure. That in which, through practice, 
one delights, reaching the end of pains; 


36.1. JE fa u qe g ai aai pana ge gA — À 
m oa! sa aa aa: A a Raa aa afea 
Tas Tard a gaa Farm a ara fada A i 


36.1. Now listen to ‘three-fold pleasure’ — focus your mind 
on it, as I state it. That experience of pleasure in which, 
‘through practice’, or repetition, one delights and surely 
‘reaches the end of pain’; 


aaa faafaa OASAN | 
aga mas Nenn ATETA 113911 


37. Which, in the beginning, is like poison, but, at the 
end, is like ambrosia—that is declared to be Sāttvic 
pleasure, born of the clarity of one’s intellect: 


37.1. aq eft u aq aq ge ax od mafa maaa- 
amene aenaragaaca fay ga garan wate, ofc 
afe: arenafe: ware: tert afoma fq ace, aa: Wd aaaf- 
smag 1 arenfayar ar arcarauraat at qf: amerafg:, acrare- 
read ai Way seta | ae aicay aq 1 


37.1. The pleasure which in the ‘beginning’—at the first 


36-39] Liberation and Renunciation 583 


contact, or at the start of knowledge, détachment, meditation 
and concentration—, is ‘like poison’ or painful due to the ardu- 
ousness involved ; which at the end, is ‘ambrosial’, being born 
of the maturity of knowledge, etc.—this pleasure is declared to 
be sattvic by the wise. It emanates from the ‘clarity of one’s in- 
tellect’—its purity resembles the purity of water. Knowledge 
whose content is, or depends on, the Self may alternatively be 
understood by the term datmabuddhi. Of its intensity is this 
pleasure born. Hence it is sattvic. 


frad. naa ASANA | 
afora faafaa aa JA MIA FIAT NIC 


38. It is held that Rājasic is the pleasure that in the 
beginning, due to contact between objects and senses, 
is ambrosial but is like poison, at the end. 


38.1. fava eff  favafaaaarng mad aq ga aq Fs AT mane 
atana anaana afore agmimaforard fary va, aq 
wa wT Fay il 


38.1. The pleasure born of ‘contact between objects and 
senses’, which, ‘in the beginning’—at the first moment— is 
‘ambrosial’, but is ‘like poison’ at the end of its experience 
leading to decline of power, vigour, beauty, intelligence, 
understanding, wealth and zeal, and (besides) is the source of 
unrighteousness and hell—this pleasure is held to be rajasic. 


Ut May A FA AAA: | 
fassas TAMAS W381 


39. Tamsic is said to be the pleasure that, both in 
the beginning and in its consequences, deludes the 
self and springs from sleep, sloth and error. 


584 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


39.1. AY ft u aq ay FT aq W Aaah FT Ge eA 
ment arena: faassen frat + weet FT wATeM Ter: af- 
sata afa fratssoersarerd, aq aaa IgA N 


39.1. The pleasure which, in its ‘beginning and consequen- 
ces’, its end and sequel, ‘deludes the self and arises from sleep, 
sloth and error’ is said to be tamasic. 


40.0. TT Za oiT YR: aC — 
40.0. The following verse now concludes the current 
theme:- 


a aafia ofaert at fafa Ag at ga: | 
aed wats seta: cara afi: won 


40. In this world, in heaven or again, among gods, no 
being is found that is free from these three constituents 
of Prakrti, 


40.1. 7 aq ef u a aq afer aq a gfrert a aqerfay acd 
mma, saq ar arf, fefa zaq ar ga: aed, wafast: safac: 
mA: uf: fate ah acafeft: qe cher aq ang waq—‘a aq 
afer M gd aver: it 


40.1. There are no living beings on ‘earth’ 1.e., among 
men, etc., or anything material in ‘heaven or among gods’ or a 
being ‘free from’—devoid of—these three-fold constituents of 
prakrti—sattva and so forth. 


41.0. Wa: Ware: FHIREAN: Aaa TT: nia 

after: aye: aah oh, JAETAAN F ‘segs’ | [ 24.8. ] 
sofa, “a a wager seq fsm at we aq fenia” 
[24.3,¥.] ef a oR at a aden faea aarcare- 
faaan srarat, war afafa: Sarg aa acme, Ader eTA: 
sqzi: uaa Wa WT adaaeqery geared geet: qT: eran 
aana afa gate: mea — 


í 


39-41] Liberation and Renunciation 585 


41.0. The entire empirical world consisting of actions, 
their accessories and fruits, all of which are transformations of 
the three constituents and postulated by nescience, has been 
set forth together with its cause; this world is a disvalue. 
In the metaphor of the tree with ‘the roots up’ (15.1) ‘after 
cutting which with the sharp weapon of detachment,’ ‘that 
Status has to be sought’ (15.3,4)—the same has been stated. 
Since all this is substantially one with the three constituents, the 
cause of empirical life may be regarded as unabolishable. Thus 
arises the need to indicate a way to abolish it. Also, the con- 
tents of the science of the Gita have to be concluded—the con- 
tents embracing the totality of those of the Vedas and Smrtis 
which have to be put into practice by those who aim at the 
goals of human life. Therefore is commenced the nex} theme 
beginning with 18.41. 


menea Batt a TTT | 
watt saarea Caras: NE 211 


41. Scourge of foes! The works of Brahmanas, Ksatri- 
yas and Vasyas, as also those of the Sudras have been 
allotted according to the constituents of their nature. 


a1 SET ET TET RPT FET agaf, qai 


aa? emamaa h, ea: Secer weft: Pofa a, ar 
wae: At a IF eaaa: A aAA Hatfor sfa ag- 
MATI 11 


41.1. Of Brāhmaņas, Ksatriyas and Vaisyas as well as of 
the Sūdras the works have been allotted—separately assigned— 
according to the constituents (The term Sudra has been drop- 
ped from the compound because, though the Siidras belong 
to tne saine genus, they are not entitled to learn the Vedas). 
Nature is God’s prakrti, maya consisting of the three consti- 


586 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XVIII 


tuents. Of this maya are the constituents born, with reference 
to which have the works, restraint and so forth, of the four 
classes been assigned. 


41.2. WAT AMMA ATA: Tea: HTT, Tar AAAA 
aaa CT Te: aaa TAT OT MAA: QAANT- 
ay WITT TH Tae, Tadbadigracareaaraatad ATT 11 


41.2, Alternatively, it may be explained that sattva is the 
cause of the nature of the Brahmanas. Rajas subordinating 
sattva is the cause of Ksatriya nature, while rajas, subordinat- 
ing tamas, is the cause of Vaisya nature. The cause of the 
Sidra nature is tamas subordinating rajas. Serenity, power, 
covetousness and delusion are observed as natural to each of 
these four classes. 


41.3. TIT — Harada: Mat aiaa caarathrreacadr 
afr: we: & wae aa Tra A AAAA: TOT: — T- 


mga frearcrcaryrd: | “equra: aren” aff a arerfqerat- 


41.3. Or, again, impressions accumulated in lives and mani- 
fested in the current lives leading to their respective fruits 
constitute the ‘nature’ mentioned in this verse. Of this nature 
are born the constituents. The manifestation of a constituent 
cannot be without a cause. ‘One’s nature is the cause’ (vide 
18.40)—this dictum makes it necessary to state the causes (of 
all phenomena). Thus according to these three constituents 
born of prakrti, restraint, etc., have been ascribed to their 
natural causes (present in the classes, Brabmanas, etc). 


41.4. Ty meaa area farfara marme waretia wath; 
ay sud acafaqustarnts afr ? 

ve: ate: Mea aft aerate ararfaqufaersrteray wa aaah 
attr starts, + qaaa, sft menaa aft natr 
pfa str Sort i 


41-43] Liberation and Renunciation 587 


41.4. “But are not restraint, etc., works assigned to Brah- 
manas and so forth, enjoined by the Sastras? Why is it declared 
that they have been allotted according to the constituents?” 
This is no flaw; for, even Sastras allot restraint etc., to the 
classes not without due regard for sattva and so forth. Hence no 
logical flaw is entailed in the expression ‘according to the con- 
stituents’. 

42.0. aft ga: attr wath aft? sert— 

e* 
42.0. Now, what are the works in question? 


WAT TACAT: sha fama T | 
mA amana wernt TATATA ERN 


42. Restraint (of mind), restraint of senses, penance, 
cleanliness, endurance, guilelessness, knowledge, real- 
ization, faith in the scriptures—these constitute the 
work of Brahmanas. 


42.1. MA: JA ou we aa a aenn 2R., ] aa: aar 
ardrerfe [29.9 ¥-28.], ate amena [23], arf ear, ata 
aaa Va a maA faa, anferet TERETA. TEAN ATTATAY, 
wart aera? ae carat —aq se aaa: qh aA 
[x2] f ata oe aaa eft i 


42.1. The words sama and dama have been explained 
(16.12); so too tapas, physical, etc. (17.14-16); also sauca 
(16.3). Endurance’ is patience; ‘guilelessness’ is straight- 
forwardness. ‘Knowledge’, ‘realization’; ‘faith in the scrip- 
tures’ or belief in the contents in the scriptural lore—these 
make up the work of the Brahmanas derived from their 
nature referred to earlier (18.41). 


ad ast afar az MATTAN | 
STARA ATS ATA BA CTATAMT NEZ 


588 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


43. Courage, power, resolution, skill, non-flight from 
battle, generosity, and might constitute the work of the 
Ksatriyas derived from their nature. 


43.1. ret efa ou at acer wea, ar me, gfe: are, wat- 
qeg aaa: wafa war qe saa, aed AA MA: AAT 
wA aay seared saft:, ae a aft sce ANTA: 
WN: WH A YAMA, PCTs: a, Hace we, aR- 
smio aaa ofa, art at afan: fafat wt art at 
ETIR | 


43.1. ‘Courage’ is what marks the brave; ‘power’ is ability; 
‘resolution’ is the will, supported by which one does not suffer 
from dejection in any condition of life ; ‘skill’ is resourcefulness 
in action in crises ; ‘non-flight from battle’ means facing the foe; 
‘generosity’ is free distribution of wealth; ‘might’ is the lordli- 
ness, the display of strength. towards dependents. These con- 
stitute the work of the Ksatriya class, enjoined on them and 
derived from their nature. 


pantera AAAA CATA | 
qfaia Ht areas ANTATTE USI 


44. Agriculture, rearing of cattle, and trade are the 
works of the Vaisyas born of their nature. The work of 
the Sudras born of Sudra-nature is menial service in 
essence. 


44.1. Efe ht u saeara afr aera afi 7 afy- 
Treratrsy—aey: ye: freed, areata: wade are ae areal 
Tred aaae at, afr afat wafamarfeoen—aeray Ar- 
wed: at Aast aaa | aai ea ae ager fà 
NTAN | 


44.1. ‘Agriculture’ refers to the ploughing of the land, etc. ; 
herding of farm-animals; purchase and selling of goods— all 


43—45]. Liberation and Renunciation 589 


these make up the work of the Vaiśyas. Personal service is 
the work that pertains to the Sudras; it is derived from their 
nature. 


45.0. waar aifafatgarat aot aenrafsarat AA we FA- 
maT, ‘ant mama anA: sear aimee ay da: AAT 
faea gom aaaea. sey wfared’ [at wg ee. 

28. ] garfenn: ; Foe a aai aah a aeaaeae- 


i pi lg cl i 


45.0. Of these works, allotted class-wise, the natural fruit 
is the attainment of heaven. Vide G.D.S.11.29. Classes and 
stations, devoted to their respective works experience their 
fruits after death; then by virtue of the residuum they take 
birth in particular places, classes, families, with (allotment of) 
merits, life-periods, knowledge, character, wealth, joys and 
intelligence. In the Puranas too statements have been made 
about the distinctive spheres and fruits of the different classes 
and stations. The fruit presently to be stated however has 
other causes. 


wa ea mafra: afate wat AT | 
eataa. fate aut faccta TA us 


45. Man achieves perfection through devotion to his 
allotted work. Listen how one wins perfection through 
such devotion. 


45.1. A ef uu a A Aarons afr Rra: cae afafa 
waar aA afe ma maeaea afafa 
out AR ac ET: gee | fie aanta. wa meng afate: ? 
—q 1 wy afte ? candied: fafa am aa sarer faa aq ay i 


45.1. Zealously devoted to the works whose distinctions 
have already been set :orth, man, the eligible candidate, wins 
perfection—the competence to devote himself to the disci- 


590 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


pline of knowledge after destroying the impurities of body 
and senses through the performance of his works. Can perfec- 
tion be won directly through the performance of works alone? 
No. How, then? Listen how, being devoted to one’s works, one 
wins perfection. 


ua: safari aa adhe AAN | 
wana amaA fate facta mAT: vei 


46. Through the performance of his works as worship 
man wins perfection—worshipping Him from whom 
all beings have proceeded anc by whom all this has been 
pervaded. 


46.1. 4q: Sf u aa: Teng safe: sofa: Ber ar wena aT AT: 
Saad Warat Mra arg, Ar Hay ad Bs Ad TWIT ATA, THAT 
qita sft t Sat aah gafaenr area Fan mafoa- 
asami fats fafa arta: WTA: N 

qq. Ua Ad: — 


46.1. That inner controller, God, from whom all living 
beings have originated and by whom all the world has been 
pervaded—by merely worshipping Him through the per- 
formance of each man’s works according to his class, man 
wins perfection consisting in the eligibility for the discipline 
of knowledge. 

Such being the case, 


aay carat fay: aerate caqfsoara | 
emaa eA Heart faery uv 


47. One’s own law of righteousness, though defective, 
is better than that of arother though well-observed. 
None incurs sin by doing the work ordained by his own 
nature. 


46-48] Liberation and Renunciation 591 


47.1. Aa Shr n Aa maaa: a: ot: aA: fa: afa — afa 
aiaa. zean aaa | aafaa aaa faa, aq 
oh emaa A aa s amaaa faan faa a FÀ: 
fa a At, an aafaa ae pdg a Aa ferat TR 1 


47.1. ‘One’s own law’ (of righteousness), though defective, 
is better than another’s law however well-observed. The 
term ‘though’ is understood here. Doing the work that nature 
has made obligatory (vide verses 43, etc.), none incurs sin, 
just as a worm born of a poisonous stuff is not injured by that 
poison. 


48.0. aafaa aH Fat, faa: eq pfa, feat a amfa 
sft seg, meta warag: aff, aaa a fe ahaq afa a- 
za asf [3.4.] f i aa:— 


48.0. It was observed that one doing work dictated by 
nature does not incur sin on the analogy of the poison-bred 
worm ; also that an alien law is a menace. Besides, in 3.5, it has 
been affirmed that a non-knower of the Self cannot remain 
for a moment without doing work. Therefore, 


agi HA aa aaaf a aAA | 
aaen fe aA arafa: nE cN 


48. Son of Kunti! work determined by nature, though 
defective, one shouldn’t abandon; for all activities are 
shrouded in flaws as fire is by smoke. 


48.1. ag sft i aga ag aen vq saia aa? at PAA |! 
aang af aeaaea a aa | aE: MAA Sit ATCT, 
adani Aasaa A afaq aren: aT. antaa ad 
fe amga aa gg apaa ae, Aa watt 
afia: ga, aa: | aeaa wer: ata aa mentaos fA 
ara ta qad, waga TMT a a Ta AT ah AAA 
ey ya, ae A aN ga N 


592 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XVIII 


48.1. What is ‘determined by nature’ is what is born with 
oneself. What is that? Work, though defective as it partakes 
of the three constituents, should not be given up. All works 
that are initiated—the context shows this means both one’s 
duties and those of others —, being made up of the stuff of the 
three constituents, are engulfed by defects, just as fire is covered 
by smoke. Thus giving up one’s duties, even if accompanied 
by the adoption of others’ duties, does not help one to get rid 
of flaws. Besides, others’ duties are a source of fear. Nor is it 
possible for the ignorant to give up work altogether. So don’t 
reject work. 


48.2. fe wate: wad aera ae sft a cast ? fH ar aaa HAT: 


afe maq aAa: crag seer ef a aed aes we, ua afg saree: 
Cary TUT: wa ara fa fire waft | 

aa Ua; saya, art: wa a srt eft a frasas: 
ges, Ta arearat qo: ? fH ar fear wa ares, Ter aTa Sheu: 
ansediaq: ? saree at: sated: wart: a aA | 

aa qasi ver: —aar Hera car afwa aeq | wer at Herta, aar fafa 
qa 1 ca Ud ate Tae HH wT: TAH | Ht g ater ada wa 
faars:—a frcarafad aeg, aft fear vq area—fa ate l? —aaferct 
cat afaearar fear gerard, faeravar a faaeata | ae aq rar aia 
watrssd—efa wa arg: PTOAT:, ata a are eft i aft at a 
ary: fa ? 


48.2, “What is the reason for non-rejection of work? Is it 
that—work cannot be wholly given up; or is it that—it is 
wrong to give up innate work?” What follows? “If the first 
is accepted, it will follow that total rejection of works is 
meritorious.”’ This is true. But the idea of a total rejection 
itself is unreasonable. Whether man (the spirit that is man) 
like the Samkhyan constituents, 1s deemed an eternal flux, or 
whether, like the Buddhist skandhas (or groups), they perish 
instantaneously, the idea of a total rejection of works is un- 
reasonable. Or, a third alternative may be considered: 


48] Liberation and Renunciation 593 


When work is being done an entity is active; when this is not 
the case, that entity 1s inactive. In this alternative it 1s possible 
to give up work altogether. But what distinguishes it is that the 
entity is not a flux in itself and its activity is not self-generated, 
but that a non-existent activity springs up ina stable entity and 
an existent activity ceases to be. That pure entity remains 
potent. This is the VaiSesika view. It may be asked—what is 
the flaw in this position? 


48.3. HAT Va F AN: Aa: ad Ad A HT WAT ? aa. aE 
maq ‘areal feed ma: [32.2] nR 1 moa fe waa: ara, 
aaa Ta: aft at ad waa | 

amaan (eat) amaA at are: ? afr Aq— 

sad st advamfaderq | et ?— afe araq suerte 
Tat WH GI: aa Ua Had, vera F ferd faq are GA: NAA 
u wart mea, qa A aft waed aq Wad, alg Hae aga, 
ware: wa: wala, wea wera: waft; aa wre: MAMA: MR 
sare: mafaa: arararanaratrarer Fret ster wad ate | 
TT Ud He: Varad, are wT ated, afr war aad; saat mafaa- 
mia Hata | aAA Fetea: seraare:, fafa aaraa 
are sey sored str war share | 

feq—waaa ag ada wag a wafaq 
foa. mafaa eq; ‘aq aaa, wad wae’ eft AATA: i 

fea—verad A Taare: rere aaa aE: 1 HTH 
SIA HAT, TAT PSII ster caaret: Tey: ada FT 
ammas Arad Argead | Aras Aq HMA aq waa | 
TT AHN HY Aad: MS PO Wad, aaa: at Fafaq and ? a fF 
TIA TS HM, Arar: at safaq, Tarra: Herfag wat 1 


48.3. The flaw, indeed, is that this alternative contradicts 
the Lord’s teaching. How? He has taught that the non-existent 
cannot come into being, etc., (vide 2.16). But the VaiSesikas 
hold the exactly contrary view—the non-existent comes into 
existence and the existent lapses into non-existence. But if 
reason supports that view, what does it matter even if it con- 
tradicts the Lord’s view? The answer is that the Vaisesika 
view is faulty, being contrary to all means of right cognition. 


594 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


To explain: If substances like the dyad are absolutely non- 
existent before their origination and after a brief existence, 
they lapse into non-existence, it follows that the existent 
becomes non-existent and that the non-existent emerges into 
existence. Before origination which depends on the material, 
immaterial and efficient causes, those substances like the dyad 
were like a hare’s horn. One, then, cannot really say that non- 
existence orignates depending on causes. Such a phenomenon 
is never experienced in regard to things like the hare’s horn. 
As for positive entities like the pot, they may causally depend 
on something for the sole purpose of manifestation. Besides, if 
novel existents come into being and the existents fall into non- 
being, one cannot rely anywhere on the validity of the means 
of right cognition or of objects cognised. There will thus be 
no basis for the conviction regarding existents and non- 
existents. To say that a dyad originates is to assert its connection 
with causes. It is non-existent before its origination; then, 
through the operation of causes it gets related to them, viz., 
atoms and existence, the link being samavaya. After such rela- 
tion it comes to inhere in its causes. How can a non-existent 
entity have zts cause? With what can it be related? A barren 
woman’s son has no cause of his own; nor does he get related in 
any valid sense of these terms. 


48.4. Tq Aa Afè: aa araey: Hog | TapHTataT fe errr 
CH UAAATIOAT: AIT: TAY Wa Bead ata I 

7, Ween we ara | oat fe Aae: HoTmavsawT- 
kama sre erat afer ser | Tt A Ae: We merena 
Tord | Aaa wat: wa araey: mA ae: wafer 1 


48.4. Objection: “The Vaisesikas do not thus relate non- 
existence. What they assert is the relation of existent dyads 
etc., with their causes viz., Samavaya.’’ Reply: “No, they do 
not grant that the dyads, etc. exist before getting related to 
their causes. They negate the existence of effects like pots 
before the operation of causal factors like the potter, wheel, 
and so forth. They do not hold that clay itself assumes the 


48 | Liberation and Renunciation 595 


form of pots, etc. This implies that what is related, in their 
view, is the non-existent pot, etc.” 


48.5. aq wat: why ATASAT: arara: a frag: | 

q; areargaratat ai | ere: Ua MAA THT Cara: 
wate, 7 aeeargare:, araraer geacasty, afa fase: aA ated: | 
UFA wara:, gat was: AAT ware: weMa:, Wears: ZA- 
wama, saaa: ef sera: a: Fafaq fara: aag wer | 
waft a fate weer sonia: va goea: wema arta, araead 
qT m aAA aa, aaa adeagrearam waft, 7 I 
va Ue weenie: waa aay, ea sedarenvamar + wafaq 
aaga, Ima wa gaoa saag 
TAA aa; aaa A Aaaa: TT N 

q Aa aema sopra wanta: SA | 

mwaa wa aie warts:; awa weer nfa, cee ar cera: | 
ver amaa mwaaa wa samrfaeey I 


48.5. Objection: “But it is not wrong to relate the non-. 
existent by means of samavaya or inherence.”’ Reply: “No; 
non-existents like the barren woman’s son are not seen to 
be so related. You may say that the prior non-existence of pot, 
etc. alone gets related to their causes, and not absolute non- 
existents like the barren woman’s son and so forth, though 
both are forms of non-existence. Thus a distinction has to be 
drawn among forms of non-existence. But this leads to a list 
of non-existences—of prior non-existence, post non-existence, 
mutual non-existence, absolute non-existence, etc. Now no 
factual distinction is available among these non-existences, as 
such. In the absence of such distinction, it has to be maintained 
that the prior non-existence of the pot alone becomes the pot 
via the activities of the potter, etc., and gets related to the 
existent particles of clay that form the cause of the pot; then it 
serves various purposes. Such a thing does not happen to the 
past non-existence of this very pot. This kind of distinction, 
according to us, is unreasonable, no essential distinction being 
available among forms of non-existence. The Vaisesika may 
reply; “The prior non-existence of a pot does not become a pot.’ 


596 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XVIII 


Then, it may be questioned: Are you holding that one ex- 
istence becomes another?—that a pot becomes a pot or a 
cloth?” This view is opposed to valid criteria, just like your 
earlier view, viz., non-existence becomes existence. 


waa moa us dead wearers gA af wT 1 
mA waq wa ag aen saana Ara 
qaq fanead sft 1 et maa ad oH mad faa ara’ [3.2] 
sa wrt, armen weahrarad, ara water fa ti 


48.6. The Samkhyan view of transformation also, in so 
far as it affirms the origination of novel attributes and their 
destruction, is no better than the Vaisesika view. The affir- 
mation of appearance and disappearance (of attributes) is, 
_as shown earlier, opposed to all means of nght cognition, since 
it involves the question whether this appearance and this 
disappearance had prior existence or not. Thus stands refuted 
the view that appearance, etc., are only the states of the cause. 
By this process of elimination the conclusion follows that 
reality is one only, which, like an actor, plays numberless roles, 
assuming attributes like appearance and disappearance due to 
nescience. This is the Lord’s view as stated in 2.16. The aware- 
ness of existence persists throughout, while that of all other 
factors fluctuates. 


48.7. FA ate mena: afafeaet saree: ater: aT: a Vad gf N 
afe aeqgyat: wr: afe at afaarafera:, wat: wt i aq areata 
afrarseratneny va afaa ‘a fe aha fà aire: crag aah’ 
[34] efa smq  fasreg gt fae aaa fram A 
wa waa: aH aar, afearsearetftaer AA: 1 a fe afafe 
aa searifraer fran: fafroaraste ae: aaRS i wa 4 
afr et qai wore ‘aaaaif Arar [4.23] gale, ca ee o- 
fara: afafa wat ac’ [ec.%4.], eat are fafa fafa 
maa: [2¢.ve.] afr Ft 


48-49] Liberation and Renunciation 597 


48.7. Thus if the Self is immutable, it 1s not unreasonable 
to maintain that activities must be renounced wholly. Whether 
the constituents are existent reals or set up due to nescience, 
action is their attribute. Through nescience it is superimposed 
on the Self. The ignorant man can’t wholly give it up (3.5). 
But the wise man, once nescience is dispelled through know- 
ledge, can indeed do so; for, there is no residue for an ignorant- 
ly precipitated super-imposition. The double moon, seen 
with the diseased eye, is not seen, once the disease is cured. 
Such being the case, the utterance in 5.13 may also be seen to 
be eminently reasonable, just as also others like 18.45-46. 


49.0. a water fafa: get maS, TMT PAT 
Anifa: masea a amen at wre: arcad— 


49.0. This verse sets down the attainment of that perfection 
which results from works and which consists in the fitness for 
the discipline of knowledge. The fruit of this 1s the winning of 
worklessness which is a feature of the discipline of knowledge. 
Both these concepts call for affirmation. | 


aama: aaa fiaren ferrereqg: | 
qeda TA tanani nR 


49. He whose intellect is unattached to objects, whose 
self is disciplined, and from whom all desires have 
departed, wins the supreme perfection of workless- 
ness by means of renunciation. 


49.1. aaga: f u aaf: a agen gfe ar 
qa a aama aay yaara maneg, faae faa: 
qa me aar wer a: faae, faaea: fanar eer qo 
ifam wea a: faae: a: aea: ma. a AcHnifate 
friar safir aema faaan a: fnt der ara: 


domed, Ad = aq fates at fomnifats,, fiaa at fafo- 
arneqraeqroaney fafa, frets, at acretfafe gear weet ph- 


598 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


vias werent aud atta, agita aT 
adrianna, aferesfa sna | am a sm—adanify waar 
way aq Haq BTA (4.23. ] afer i 


49.1. He whose intellect or inner sense is unattached to 
objects like children, wife and so forth which usually claim 
attachment, whose self, i.e., the inner self, is disciplined, whose 
clinging to body, life and enjoyments has departed—such a 
Self-knower wins the status of a total renouncer, all of whose 
works have left him due to the knowledge of the quiescent 
Brahman. This status is the perfection Naiskarmya-siddhi 
mentioned in this verse. Or, it may mean the emergence of the 
status of the actionless Self. This gain is different from the work- 
born perfection mentioned earlier. It is the same as instantane- 
ous liberation, and won through renunciation—a nght per- 
ception, leading to the giving up of all activities. This has 
been mentioned in 5.13. 


50.0. Jatt aaa taraa shat sepa fafa 
waa saamaan Aara tardo fae: a7 


ray wa aq ame afr ae— 


30.0. Now is set forth the sequence of steps leading the man 
of discriminative Self-knowledge to the perfection of quietude 
—the man who started from the initial fitness born of the per- 
formance of his duties as the worship of God: 


fafa me aa war assa Frater R | 
amaa Stay fest MA AT AT oN 


50. Know from Me briefly how one, made fit (for the 
discipline of knowledge), reaches Brahman—the sup- 
reme consummation of knowledge, O Arjuna! 


50.1. fafa eft u fafe sre: eat Sat mat aeai 
aafaa areata fate ma: —'fate ma., eft aqaa: 


49-50] Liberation and Renunciation 599 


SATS: 1 fH AT GA, Wed: aqaa: ef ? Sead—aM Aq var MA- 
arere gar Tore fa, aur a wart maformat A 
m aad aau a fada ware Aa i fe faa ? a afer 
ae—aaray va aay ws gs sleda ! 1 quer ae sata aa faata 
afr ara at sfasrar wersrfta: at ga afa are—‘frsar maea 
acd F 1 fas aa amfa. gA | wer? ae 
a oT | Heat aT? —areat TAR | alee aq ? —argar Bear | 
Hee: a: ? —argy: wraat eH: (229) SATAA, ara 1 


50.1. The seeker after perfection has won the fitness of 
the body and the senses for the discipline of knowledge—a 
fitness born of the grace of God due to His worship by the doing 
of one’s works. The reference here is to the initial fitness and 
not to the final attainment. It is only an introduction to the 
steps for the final attainment stated hereafter. This affirma- 
tion refers to the manner in which, through the discipline of 
knowledge, one attains Brahman, the supreme Self. Learn 
from My words the steps leading to the final consummation 
of knowledge, the establishment in the discipline of knowledge. 
It is but briefly that I shall speak. The attainment of Brahman 
promised above is directly specified in the words ‘the supreme 
discipline of knowledge.’ Nisthā or discipline of knowledge 
refers to a definitive achievement and a goal. Goal of what? 
The supreme goal of Brahman-knowledge. What is this goal 
like? It is like the knowledge of the Self. And what is this like? 
‘It is like the Self . ‘What is the Self like ?—Like what has been 
elucidated by the Lord (cf.BG 18.17), is affirmed by the 
Upanisads, and is in accordance with reason. 


50.2. Tq fanaa aay 1 a aatana:, aie ararcary scat guar 
afaq | 
aq: Raami [R 3. 3.¢.], ‘wren’ [Bt 3.e%.2.], crane’ 


[F5 3. 3.24.) eft a fatua confer 1 aaaea a det 
Res emea a war vente maA [È 3. ¥.20.], ‘srerecreref’ 


600 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


[F5 3. 3.04.) Beare: | Teng areavart at eft waa IN 
ey afe aad: aay ? ad fe aat aq aa, aq aat wafer | 
frasea arent aft seq | wares Tat: france at TRTA- 
arfasar afa ? 


(—arrr-) Jana: ATCA AUTH aaa: | eared wr, 
aama efexarf, saraa ag: | wa: Sae: ears wa eN- 
gf: frat | 


50.2. Objection: “Knowledge implies that the mind assumes 
the form of the object. But nowhere is the Atman held to be an 
object of knowledge; neither has Atman a form.” Tentative 
reply : “But look at the affirmations of śruti: ‘The sun-coloured’, 
(BU 4.2.9). These teach that the Self has a form.” Objection : 
“No, the purpose of these affirmations is to state that the Self 
is not mere darkness. When the Self is denied as a substance, 
quality, etc., there arises the contingency that it is mere dark- 
ness—this is denied in the statements quoted above from SU 
etc. KU.3.15 specifically affirms that the Self is formless. 
Also It is said to be no object. Vide: ‘Its form is not seen; none 
sees It with the eye, (SU.4.20) ; soundless, touchless’ (KU.3.15), 
etc. Therefore with reference to the Self the statement that 
knowledge conforms to Self’s form is erroneous. Then how 
does the knowledge of the Self arise? All kinds of knowledge 
conform to their objects. But the Self is held to be formless. If 
both Self and knowledge are formless, how can there be a 
discipline of contemplation on either? Final reply: This is 
no valid objection; for reasoning shows that the Self is abso- 
lutely pure, supremely transparent, and wholly. subtle. The 
intellect may reasonably resemble this Selfin these respects and 
share with It Its conscious nature. Further, the mind reflects 
the intellect; the senses reflect the mind, and the body reflects 
the senses. Therefore worldly folk look upon the body itself 
as the Self. 


50.3. daaa Aa. Aafa: ara: gee.’ AR: | 
qa ad afeadacrarfer:, aA aaa: wet afetaararfes: | 


50} Liberation and Renunciation 601 


THAT Beat ser aa afaaraqer areacag sfavar: shaq | 


amt a faamaaa | fe ate ?— arrecreaarcararcuntrate: wa rat, 


a madaan arty, faensen Aaaama: va fafescaar 
zama sft | at ua fe faafaa aa aq 
wa afer sta sfarra:, sarmerctrcterat a caafafeacarerrar | 
Te afenar aao waft acer, + gq gA ac, 
aaaea | wfaaafearamectarrarnngdaett scans 
gaai maai areryay safe, asfag gaa aftet wad ta 4 
sfrmfa afafa 1 ararantadgem g vergais A 
wt: 1% ga gafas glasvt maaa afer i aa a Im — NA- 
aaa e [°.2.] gafa | 


50.3. “The materialists, /okayatzkas, for whom the body is 
intelligent, aver man is body qualified by intelligence. So also 
are there others who declare that the senses are intelligent; 
for still others the intellect is intelligent. Other than those are 
the thinkers for whom an inner principle, the unmanifest called 
the un-differentiated (avyākrtam) sunk in nescience, is the self. 
In all these cases, from the intellect down to the body, the cause 
of the delusion, that the body etc. form the Self, is the reflec- 
tion of the Selfs intelligence in them. Hence in all these cases, 
itis not right to enjoin a knowledge of the Self. Rather, what is 
to be achieved is an abolition or sublation of the superimposed 
name and form that are other than the Self and not the know- 
ledge of intelligence that is the Self; for the Self appears, in all 
these cases, as qualified by the objects superimposed on It. 
This indeed is the reason why the idealistic Buddhists aver that 
nothing is real except cognitions. This knowledge does not 
depend on an independent means of cognition, for éach cogni- 
tion is self-cognised. Therefore, as regards Brahman, what is to 
be aimed at is only the repudiation of objects superimposed 
through nescience; no effort is needed to secure knowledge of 
Brahman that 1s absolutely evident. To those, however, who 
lack discrimination, who are distracted by appearances 
associated with name and form, the self-evident Brahman 
seems to be remote; though effortlessly known, seems hard to 


602 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVITI 


know; though the closest being, the very Self, seems alien. On 
the contrary, for those who have withdrawn their intellect from 
external objects, who have won the grace of their teacher, and 
whose mind has attained serenity, nothing is easier to under- 
stand or is closer than Brahman. Vide BG 9.2. etc. 


50.4. afaq qisin: freg aeg TST afa: a aa: 


faa zamen, madaat aeaa ot, TIT FT Vad 
way va, a were eft sata; THT waa ‘wer wate yar 
at fra ma Aa [249] st 1 mm arenarciteatsfrafe: 
Ue maae araa TOR | a fe acer are weafaq mafaa antag: 
mA: a, Ter: at. aa fe aferq aefa, carat: wat: saaa: 
ai AA | a a geam Aa at aA | 7 a ga ae, 
gari gaq memana ana aAa [F. J 3.3g, WW. ] 
qem an cateer aeaa a aaa, aA AA: AA- 
came aaa wf a ae | a arafa faafaa 


asfaat sft feq 


50.4. However, some self-styled scholars maintain that the 
Self, being formless, is unamenable to understanding and so 
the discipline of knowledge is difficult to acquire. This is true 
only of people devoid of the advantages of the nght tradition 
established by a real teacher; who have not been schooled in 
Upanisadic wisdom ; who are the thralls of the realm of objects 
and are untrained in the employment of the means of right 
cognition. But those who are of the opposite type (Advaitins) 
would find it very hard to deem as real the objects which lure 
the worldly minded; they don’t cognise anything other than 
pure consciousness that is the Self. We have already explained 
how this is so. The Lord too has declared:- ‘To the sage..... 
the wakeful state is night’ (2.69). Therefore what makes 
one resort to the Selfs essence is the mind’s withdrawal 
from the realm of objects. To none indeed, at any time, 1s the 
Self an alien, to be attained or rejected or accepted. Were that 


50] Liberation and Renunciation 603 


Self unknown, all self-regarding activities would turn out to be 
pointless. They cannot be supposed to subserve inert things 
like the body. Pleasure and pain don’t subserve themselves. 
All activities must ultimately subserve Self-knowledge (vide 
BSB 3.4.26,27). Hence just as there is no need to resort toa 
pramana to know one’s body, there is no need for a pramana 
to know the Self that is far more intimate than the body. So, 
to the discriminating, the discipline of knowledye is very well- 
known indeed. 


50.5. wary ate frami ma asea, Tareq aft maa wa AATA- 

wa: ea wat serasfag garfeaq wa sh rarer i 
—wfag aq aA, Haaq feaveta | aaT aa eT- 

weed | Tt a aq afer | aa: Aerated ara, mà aa: wa fag: 

ate i 

aeq mA aot: A aden: faq aaa nafaa va | TERT 

mafas FATT 1 


50.5. Even those who hold that formless cognition is not 
immediate must admit that the object of knowledge 1s known 
through that knowledge; so, like pleasure, etc., knowledge 1s 
immediately experienced. Nor can a desire to know knowledge 
be admitted. Were knowledge not directly known, it would 
be sought after like any other unknown object. As a pot, 
etc., is sought to be encompassed by knowledge, knowledge 
would have become an object of pervasion by another know- 
ledge. But this is not so, in fact. Hence knowledge is most 
readily apprehended; so too is the knower. No effort 1s neces- 
sary to know knowledge. The effort is directed to get rid 
of the notion that non-self is Self. Thus the discipline of know- 
ledge is easily cultivated. 


51.0. a 3a ma To fror sad, ey pat efa ? — 


91.0. How is the supreme discipline of knowledge to be 
accomplished ? 


604 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XVIII 


qg faqen get yeurssenta AA T N 
marda faaie N TST TNN 


51. Conjoined to the purified intellect, restraining 
the self with resolution, rejecting objects like sounds, 
and setting aside attachment and aversion; 


51.1. JEM aa uu gen aaan faea AARAA AR: 
ama, yar Ar amen aiaga faa a faai seat aaf- 
BU, adq wea: m at aq a aaa wiz 
TRT Faery WAT TA: afer GA aaa gored: — 
Aaaa IY Ua aed ated F I 

ad: — 


51.1. ‘Conjoined’ or united with the intellect, the faculty 
of decision that has been purged of all guile; restraining with 
resolution ‘the self? or the intellect and the psycho-physical 
organism, i.e. subduing it, rejecting objects like sound and 
reducing them to their indispensable limits, i.e. not seeking 
pleasure in objects; and ‘setting aside attachment and aversion’ 
to everything except in regard to the minimum needed to 
support life in the body; then, 


fafamadt meatal adatearanrad: | 
aan FAT ALTA AAT: UX 


52. Cultivating solitude; eating lightly; speech, body 
and mind controlled; ever intent on the Yoga of medita- 
tion ; resorting to dispassion; 


52.1. fafar sia fafamedt maada fafa 
ea afag wate wer af fafamedt, arava serrate: — fafan- 
Aaaa: frsttectatradacad faasaga wey —aaaraare- 
aaa: ATH a HIM Aaa a Aarts aaa sear arafasoey a: safes: 


51-53] Liberation and Renunciation 605 


aft: aaa AA | Va AON: Ay ANTT: T — 
aearcaettarda, Naena or, dt eaamt oda 
pi Fer a: aara: afaa waana Aarna Nai- 
Gim a a 
anfa. Aag wa gant | 

fpa — 


52.1. Habitually resorting to solitary spots like woods, 
riverbanks, hills and caves; ‘eating ':¢htly’—these two traits 
are mentioned as they diminish flaws like sleep and promote 
mind’s clarity—and having controlled speech, body and mind 
—the ascetic should be firm in the discipline of knowledge. 
Thus with all the instrumental senses stilled, he will be engaged 
in contemplation or investigation into the essential nature 
of Self and Yoga. Thus he will be dispassionate. Other activi- 
ties like japa are ruled out in his case. He has resorted to un- 
wavering dispassion or non-craving for objects, seen or unseen. 


And, 


HES Ts at are Ft TER | 
far fada: mA TATAaTT Heat UUs 


53. Renouncing egoism, force, pride, lust, wrath, and 
possessions, rid of the sense er ownership and tran- 
quil, one becomes fit for the Status of Brahman. 


53.1. agg Ba 1 Hse aggre aerfey a, as araet PTH- 
Galak Gee Sheed: eae eee ae 
ee ee ZA qaar aan hafa- 
a a E E ţa, PA seat, wT Y, 


ae sue a a R scree Ger ee. 
Aaaa fateraara: frie: aa: wa MA: SA: a Agag: 
aft: mafas: vara agaa werd aA: wala 1 

IAT FAT — 


606 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


53.1. ‘Egoism’ consists in treating the non-self such as the 
body as Self. ‘Force’ is capacity based on lust and greed and 
not the natural competence of body, etc. This latter, being 
natural, can’t be given up. ‘Pride’ is what, in the wake of joy, 
makes one transgress righteousness. Vide Ap.D.S. 1.13.4: 
“One delighted grows proud; the proud transgresses right- 
eousness.”’ ‘Lust’ is desire; wrath, is anger; also possession— 
even after giving up the flaws of the senses and the mind, one 
may have to maintain external possession to support bodily 
life and practise righteousness; this too has to be given up. 
In other words, becoming a mendicant of the Paramahamsa 
Order, discarding the sense of possession 1n respect of the means 
of supporting the body, and becoming tranquil, the asectic 
arrests all forms of turbulence, becomes disciplined in know- 
ledge, and acquires fitness for the Brahman-status: 

By this process, 


AeA: TATA A avatar A wreath | 
aa: aay wag gis SAA TOT UY 


54. Becoming Brahman, with a tranquillized mind, he 
neither grieves nor desires. The same towards aii 
beings, he wins supreme devotion to Me. 


54.1. TINT: St N AAA FANT: WATCH SSAA- 
wa: a arate, fafaq aiaa area: apa a ska a arate a 
aad, + arseft 1 a fe asrefagarater aafaa: soqed; NA: 
aaa ae cara: aad “A arate a arse’ efa 1 ‘a genta’ 
aft a maq | ae: aay way, arene ahs ge gat ar 
aang wate set. | a mana Se, TA eae ARAT 
maafa [2¢.44.] eft 1 wae: arafase: wate vfs tapat 
aie yat Ti SAAT Ae aul oud, agfa wad AT [9.2 | 
ofa fe THA I 


54.1. Having risen to Brahman’s status and won screnit: 
of mind, he does not grieve when some material concern gets 


53-55] Liberation and Renunciation 607 


upset or deterioration (vaigunya) supervenes; neither does he 
seek anything. A Brahman-knower can’t desire any ungained 
object. So the phrase ‘does not grieve nor desire’ is just a state- 
ment of fact about him. An alternative reading is ‘delights 
not’. On the basis of equality with the self, he sees others’ 
pleasures and pains as his own. Here what is meant is not the 
vision of the one Self in all. It will be mentioned in the next 
verse. This disciplined knower attains the highest devotion to 
Me, the supreme Lord, devotion marked by knowledge, 1.e., 
of the fourth kind of devotees (vide 7.16). 


55.0. qd: ATAMeT TAT — 


55.0. By means of this devotion marked by knowledge, 


ART maaa Atay WRR Aca: | 
a AT Teal me fast AATA UI 


55. He comprehends Me—what My extent is, who lam. 
Thus knowing Me in truth, he enters (into Me). 


55.1. wear gA n waar at ahora ara ae sorhraataercic:, 
a a owe afer faeaeraatofirde: sae gee: MAARA: T AT Hed 
amA sat saa afaa acad: ahrorarfa | aa: ar wa ara: 
ma faa aat aaa AAA | ATT Aad aatea Ara 
faafad ‘arcat fad deve afa fe afe?— weramnaq AA- 
Arana, ‘east aa at fafa’ [733] R seed i 


55.1. By means of devotion he knows Me—what My extent 
is, My extent being due to multifarious adjuncts, and who I am, 
i.e., as the supreme Spirit I am devoid of all adjuncts whatso- 
ever, like the sky. He truly knows Me who am non-dual, whose 
sole essence is consciousness, unaging, fearless, endless. Thus 
knowing Me, he enters into Me immediately. Two activities 
are not meant here—those of knowing and entering; for, there 
are not two results. Pure knowledge is what is meant. Vide 
13.2 “Know Me also to be the field-knower.”’ 


608 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


55.2. a fares se oH “ster ar oa fase cat at aaar” 
ofa 1 wa faeg cfr Aa, sadaa afena fant wat sera MG, 
qa a fava afraratta ma eft a arafaset maae ater 
af; apa ata a aaa, magen g atafresar afworartfe i 


seer eae E a a 
FT [9.29.] am WaT Waa aa acad: aaa, aaaea 
afe: sared: fada 1 aa: mafaa waT at arfi- 
marfa aat a fared | aa a ad frafafaarfa mea Arafa- 
groaa miaa wafa—‘fafear...aqrerare faat aef 
[T3 4L], ae aaaf eg: [agm 3. 3%.. |, 
‘ara aaa [ag 3. 22.2.|] ea | ‘Aare eat ATA: 
[¢¢.2.], ‘aera a aA a aaa [are T. 2.23.23. ], TT 
mae a [at T 33o; 3a¢.vv.] gare 1 wa [423] 
yaaa areas 1 a a A areal arate aH; A A slated, 


aea adetdartta safest arat str fired 1 


55.2. Objection: “Is this not self-contradictory ?—to say that 
by the firm establishment in Knowledge through disciplines 
like repetition (cf. 18.50), one comes to know Me. To explain: 
The moment one acquires knowledge of an object, the knower 
knows it immediately; there is no further need for a discipline 
of knowledge consisting in the repetition of that knowledge. 
Here however is affirmed not that by. knowledge one knows, 
but by its repetition, by the discipline of knowledge.” Reply: 
‘This is no flaw. By discipline what is meant is the definitive 
consummation of the experience of the Self, which is no longer 
exposed to doubts of any kind; for, it is the final fruit of the rise 
of Self-knowledge. The supreme discipline of knowledge that is 


55] Liberation and Renunciation 609 


relevent may be pin-pointed: it is the status of certitude of 
Self-experience accompanied by the renunciation of all works, 
consequent on the disappearance of plurality among accessories 
of action such as agent, instruments, etc. Of course, this follows 
from the perception of identity between the field-knower and 
the supreme Self, brought about by the instructions of the 
§astras and the teacher, and the cooperation of causal factors 
listed in 13.7 and the purity of intellect, etc. This discipline has 
also been styled in 7.17 as the fourth variety of devotion 
distinct from devotions marking the sufferer, the seeker of 
knowledge and the pursuer of possessions. By this supreme 
form of devotion, one knows the Lord truly, immediately after 
which the idea of difference between God and the field-knower 
vanishes. Therefore, there is no contradiction in the statement 
quoted above (‘by which one knows Me’).”’ In the light of this 
interpretation alone, all sastraic injunctions bidding cessation 
from work, in Vedanta, Itihasa, Purana and Smrtis can be 
seen to be consistent with reasoning and therefore significant. 
‘““Knowing...... go forth and become mendicants”? (BU. 
3.5.1); “So they say that renunciation excels all these aust- 
erities’ (Maha.Na.U. 24.1); “Renunciation alone excelled” 
(ibid.10.62.12); “‘Relinquishment of voluntary works is san- 
nyasa” (18.2); ‘““Giving up Vedas, this world and that” (AP.D. 
S.2.23.13) ; “Give up righteousness and unrighteousness” (San- 
ti.329. 40; 331.44), ete. In the Gita also such affirmations have 
been made (5.13). It is unreasonable to hold that these affir- 
mations are futile. Nor are they merely glorificatory ; for, they 
occur in their autonomous contexts. Besides, liberation hinges 
on the immutability of the inner Self. Of course, he who wishes 
to reach the eastern sea cannot follow the same route as he who 
wishes to reach the western sea. Discipline of knowledge is the 
zeal for the unbroken contemplation of the inner Self. It con- 
flicts with work just as the routes leading west and east. Their 
contrast 1s similar to that between a hill and a mustard seed, 
as all epistemologists recognise. Therefore, it follows that the 
discipline of knowledge must be achieved by means of the ren- 
unciation of all works. 


610 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


56.0. ator wad: seadtaafearrer fafana: we mafas- 
aaa, afafrar arate wrernoraara | a: wre fart: AT 
ad merania MN - Wrearesfrwaaereala— 


56.0. The gaining of ‘perfection’, i.e., of the fitness for the 
discipline of knowledge, is the fruit of the Yoga of devotion 
consisting in divine worship in the form of the performance of 
one’s allotted works ; this fitness leads to the discipline of know- 
ledge and culminates in liberation. Now this Yoga of devotion 
to the Lord (consisting in the performance of one’s allotted 
work as worship of Him) is extolled in this concluding portion 
of the Gita, the aim being the strengthening of the conviction 
regarding its doctrines. 


adana aa Hall AeqIPIT: | 
AAAS ATA AT APA TARATA 114 EI 


56. Though performing all works continuously, in total 
dependence on Me, due to My grace, one achieves the 
eternal and immutable status. 


56.1. adnate sft n adeat aft fafaa aft war Hater: 
Hares ASUITAT: He R Sa saat aI wT N: 
mama: maaana: cert: 1 atsht werara AA Sacre waren 
vara aad fra song qe IATA N 

AAT CIA — 


56.1. Though doing all works, even forbidden ones, depend- 
ing on Me, the Lord Vasudeva, all his emotional attitudes 
being oriented towards Me, he will, due to My grace, attain 
the eternal and immutable status of Visnu. 

This being the case, 


arent sana aft Arey AIT: | 
qizarar afea: aad AT ULM 


56-58] Liberation and Renunciation 611 


57. Mentally surrendering all works to Me, setting Me 
above all, and resorting to concentrated understanding, 
fix your mind unceasingly on Me. 


57.1. Aam gf u Am faasaga adeatf qerer aft 
SR aaa ‘aq Hite fa [%.29.] er smda, WIT we 
aged: WG wer aa a a Ae: ag maaana: afar am- 
ferafeca afar: à qfi nfa (sofia) sara: AAA- 
mua faa: fà wa faa zea aa a: a ATT: Aa AAT WT II 


57.1. ‘Mentally’ means through discrimination ; ‘surrender- 
ing’, in the spirit of verse 9.27 ‘all works’ aimed at results, seen 
and unseen, to ‘Me’, the Lord; ‘setting Me,’ Lord Vasudeva, 
above all, i.e. having spiritual attitudcs directed to Me; 
‘resorting to concentrated understanding —fix your mind, at 
all times, exclusively on Me, since I am your sole refuge. 


afea: adani aorararatcente | 
aT Bangers wmeata farses xc 


58. With your mind fixed on Me, you will overcome all 
obstacles due to My grace; but if, egoistically, you pay 
no heed, you will perish. 


58.1. afore: afr u afaa. adat aati gercfr aranana 
mamaa afa anaa 1 a aq ae a AE gA 
qhe: ag aft a safe a agteta, aa: at farsenfa faa 
Three i 


58.1. With your mind fixed on Me you will, due to My 
grace, overcome all obscacles that are hard to overcome, 1.e., 
the causes of this transmigratory life, in their totality. If, 
however, “egoistically’ thinking ‘I am wise’, you pay no heed 
to what has been said—do not accept and act on 1t—you will 
perish, come to ruin. 


612 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


59.0. 32 q Maa A Ade ‘aaa: ae, feat ce aioe 7’ 
afr— 


59.0. Don’t imagine “I am free; why should I do what 
another bids?” 


agga A ater shat Aare | 
frag caqaraed safcecat fraterfa xsi 


59. If egoistically you maintain ‘I will not fight’, this 
decision of yours is erroneous; your nature will con- 
strain you. 


59.1. WIR sft u ae aq a ager sha a ae afr a 
qe senfa eft awe fanaa fra aoe, fae wy: aaa: 
foam: à aa; wear safe: aaaea: cat faaea i 
Tears — 


59.1. Resorting to egoism if you think ‘I will not fight’— 
if you resolve thus—this resolve of yours is erroneous. ‘Nature’ 
—your nature as a ksatrizya—will constrain you to fight. 

Also because, 


tama Shed frag: AA BATT | 
Sd tofa uga rfaan aq gol 


60. Son of Kunti! What, through delusion you don’t 
desire to do, bound by your own work, born of nature, 
you will inevitably do. 


60.1. Aaa Ba ou eraser aaan aaa aida ! frag: 
fada ae: tag areas wae ad a seats aq wt Aled afaa: 
pfer war: aff maa. wa aq FF 1 

qeATY — 


59-62] Liberation and Renunciation 613 


60.1. Arjuna! swayed by heroism, etc., ‘born of your nature’ 
as already explained, and ‘bound by your work’ which, due to 
‘delusion’ or non-discrimination, you don’t desire to do—you 
will do that unavoidably. 

For, 


SIT: ATTA gesa faofa | 
amaa ATTA aeaea ATTAT Ue Vi 


61. God is in the heart of all beings, Arjuna! causing 
them all to revolve through māyā, as though they are 
mounted on a machine. 


61.1. aT: Ba ou fae Aa: maa: adaa aAa 
eed ga wT peraan | IST A FN- 
meet a [xE] sft ana-a Rafa oat 1 ay a: 
ay fassdtit ? ae—sraaq WaT Hreaq aati aearecrts aarti 
areata afisaa sa—efa aana: wa Teer: —AMT ampa gn 
aaea | aaa sara wraadq faceft efa ara: tl 


61.1. O Arjuna! Mighty God-Narayana dwells in the 
hearts of all beings. Arjuna is so called because his inner self 
is ‘white—pure’. Vide ‘The day black and the day white’ (RV 
6.9.1). How does He dwell there? Causing all those beings to 
revolve as though they are mounted on machines. The phrase 
‘as though’ iva must be understood here. They resemble 
wooden puppets set on machines, caused to revolve through 
Maya or illusion. Thus it has to be construed. 


THT MLC Wes ATATAT ATTA | 
AMAT Atte SATA rea TMT UE Rh 
62. O Bharata! seek refuge in Him alone with all your 


heart and all your soul. Due to His grace you will win 
peace supreme and status eternal. 


614 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


62.1. waa Bf u ay wa Sat Te aaa Aarafagemd ws 
waa aida vata = area ! | ae: aaa Saaga Te 
pei afar soda ena a aa fast: cor ce sreeata sped fre i 


62.1. Seek refuge with all your heart and all your soul— 
in your entirety. Rest in Him alone to save yourself from the 
sufferings of transmigratory life, O Arjuna! Then, due to His 
grace—divine blessings—you will win supreme peace or with- 
drawal and the eternal status of Visnu. 


gta at mame Wea TIAL AAT | 
frade Afa TUT HT Ug 


63. Thus has been declared to you knowledge most 
secret by Me. Taking full account of it, do as you deem 
fit. 


63.1. ef sfa u af wag a ga wat arene sft Terq Teg 
qaa afar Ter weet at, war aaa Sa i faa faa 
rae war Gea ware N S 
qafa TAT HF tl 


63.1. Thus has this knowledge been declared—an extreme 
secret, a mystery—by Me, the omniscient Lord. Taking full 
account of it and pondering over this mandate—1.e., this 
group of ideas in its entirety as set forth—do as you think fit. 


64.0. WaT AAT Fea TI — 


64.0. Listen again to what is going to be said: 


aAA AT: TT A WA Fa: | 
Asfa A gefail a anfa A fart ner 


64. Again listen to My supreme word—the most exalted 


62-65] Liberation and Renunciation 615 


mystery; for you are indeed dear to Me. So I shall say 
what is good for you. 


64.1. aitaan sft n aiaa ade: Tera: AAT NAA- 
Ter sey aT was A: TT: WY A AA T VER ae: MN, | 
qv ware mà aetarcorer aeurfa; fe afe ? ace: fra: afa A aq 
gz aaia eft Fear da: at are ae safer a aq 
fat cer maiaa, aq fe adai gaama i 


64.1. Listen to Mysupreme word, the most exalted mystery, 
the greatest secret, though often it has been declared. Not 
out of fear nor due to desire to gain some end, do I speak but 
because you are consistently dear to Me indeed. I shall say 
what is good—the best means of securing knowledge. This 
knowledge is the highest good indeed. 


65.0. fa aq afr ? ae— 
65.0. What is that? Says the Lord— 


AMAT AT Ach AMA AT AREFE | 
areacata aa at softest fraisfa R ngun 


65. Set your mind on Me; be My devotee; sacrifice unto 
Me; prostrate before Me; you will surely attain Me. 
Truly do I promise thus, for you are dear to Me. 


65.1. Hea: Bf n wea: wa AAT wa | WE Wa Wer: 
Wa | WaT Aas: AT 1 AT aa THAT ai Waa HH | TT 
Ud ada: aged va aaia Na: arm va usaf am- 
fasafa | aera aa ana, wear sft Afa wafer agfa sere: 
aa: fra: afe A o wa aa. aasa qeeqr Wrage: warts 
ARIAS aai wracsctaqeay: waq aft aay: tl 


65.1. Set your mind on Me; be My devotee—love Me. 
Sacrifice unto me habitually. Prostrate before Me—pay 
obeisance unto Me alone. Thus doing—seeing goals, means 


616 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


and profit in Vasudeva exclusively,—‘you will attain Me’— 
come to Me. I promise you this truly in regard to this matter 
of spiritual concern; for, you are dear to Me. The idea is that, 
knowing the Lord’s promise to be certainly true and the fruit 
of liberation sure to follow, one should dedicate oneself ex- 
clusively to the Lord. 


66.0. piana: TATE SILI GAT wy gar pH- 
artisans maa adderdatatad ame sft ae— 


66.0. Having thus concluded the supreme secret of the dis- 
cipline of Karma Yoga, namely, self-dedication to the Lord, 
He declares now the fruit of the discipline of Karma Yoga, or 
right perception which forms the quintessence of all Upanisads. 


adunia Wear ATH ALT TT | 
HE TAT Aaa Ararfaoarhs AT Wa Wea 


66. Giving up all Dharma (acts of righteousness), seek 
refuge in Me, alone; I shall liberate you from all sins; 
grieve not. 


66.1. aerate att n adnia ad aa wah adat: aq—aieeg 
wa aay: aft qed, taa faafaacara, ‘arfaeat gaa, [ae 
TVW. |, wa a q [aT 33x0; 33.8%] qan- 
qera: —ain aeaa aaa adaa Aa | Ar UH aat- 
wart wm aa fat [seat mioaa] aAa 
sagt Uh WM AT, 7 AT: i ile tenga a ga 
ca vafa adore: aatia: Mafra TN- 
maa | SHH A maraa maA AAT [ 20.22. ] 
gaa: AT ya: AH AT BT: Sas: I 


66.1. ‘All Dharma or acts of righteousness— Dharma 
(righteousness) here includes Adharma (unrighteousness) also. 
What is sought to be conveyed is the idea of freedom from all 


66] Liberation and Renunciation 617 


works. (Dharma here means Karma). From pronouncements 
in śruti and smrti like the following it is clear that the sense is 
the renunciation of all works. “Without withdrawing from 
evil conduct’, KU.2.24; “Give up righteousness and un- 
righteousness”, (Santi P. 329.40; 331.44). ‘In Me alone, in 
the Self of all, the same dwelling in all, God (the Unlapsing, 
beyond conception, birth, old age, and death)—seek refuge’ 
with the idea: “There is nothing but I,” “Know for certain 
nothing exists other than Me.” If you are firm in this intellec- 
tual conviction I shall liberate you ‘from all sins’—from the 
bonds of righteousness and unrighteousness (1.e. the bondage of 
all Karma) by revealing My status as the Self ofall. In 10.11 it 
has already been afhrmed— established as Self, with the shin- 
ing lamp of knowledge I destroy the darkness of nescience. 
Therefore do not grieve. This is the sense. 


66.2. fe aferq Aarne ot fadam fafaa? — fe aa, 
we at ? nea say aft ? 

ga: aaa —? 

‘Gq masana [2.33], a at acadt arcat faa ac- 
aat [2¢.44.] gearetfa arenta taam fracas ataa | 
mida [2.¥0.], ‘ge waa [v.24] saanret aha 
yaad staf | Ua aaa: daaa anfeqca: aft 
frre ead eft wag aa | 


66.2. Question: ‘‘In this science of the Gita whatis established 
as the means of attaining the supreme good or moksa? Is it 
knowledge, work, or both of them together?” Reply (tentative) : 
“Why entertain this doubt at all? Witness statements like the 
following: ‘Knowing which one experiences immortality’, 
(13.12); “Then knowing Me truthfully one immediately 
enters into Me,’ (18.55). These reveal attainment of immor- 
tality from unaided knowledge. There are other statements 
of an opposite nature: ‘Only to the performance of works 
have you the right, (2.47); ‘Do only work’ (4.15) etc.— 
These show that works have necessarily to be performed. Thus, 


618 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


since both knowledge and work have been ordained it 1s pos- 
sible that their combination may liberate. Hence the doubt 
mentioned above is in order.” 


66.3. fH ga: aa Aian ? 
qT Ut a aa To Aaaa; Aa: faret- 
Te Maie UAT | 
aA J tao tsa, yereatrataay Aaah- 
miraa | feararcanedagie: afar anfa frcasqar—'aa wy, 
xe wat, amet qe sé at foni ga et afan aT- 
vam | vem: afrara: frate—‘aa ag afer tan: aat afew: 
IPS; + Ae: we afer shaq —eaaged arcafana ara sora 
Reqd: AA | TR: cegsengent:—a FA- 
DA: ater, aa meia afa fanfa: aft maga 
fradata | aariaa fraa siaaa: 1 a R aa aeg 
pim mAT aT fad | 


66.3. Question: “What will be the result of this proposed 
inquiry?” Reply: “It is the conviction that one of the three 
alternatives is the means to the achievement of the summum 
bonum”. Therefore the question demands a wide-ranging 
investigation. 

“Only the unaided knowledge of the Self is the cause of 
liberation”, as it dispels all notions of plurality and produces 
the fruit of liberation. Nescience, the sense of difference among 
works, accessories and fruits, has always prevailed in regard to 
the Self, taking the form ‘my work’, ‘I am the agent’, ‘I do 
this work for that specific fruit’. etc. This nescience has been 
active from beginningless time. Its dispeller is Self-Knowledge 
whose content is—Here I am, alone, a non-agent; without 
work of any kind or fruit; there is none other than me.” It 
dispels nescience, because it abolishes the idea of differences 
that conditions all activity. Tu (or ‘only’ given at the beginning 
of this para)—-serves to rule out two of the three alternatives 
mentioned above. Moksa or liberation results neither from 
works alone nor from a combination of knowledge and works. 
As moksa is not a product, it is unreasonable to hold that its 


66] Liberation and Renunciation 619 


means is works. An eternal entity cannot be produced cither 
by works or knowledge. 


66.4. tasaa ahr ais afg ? 


a tat auc Sale ae aE a Taq, aur geraint 
aratasarfearat | ‘fafsrarat arafacarfearat’ fa, fafat STA- 
foa ga a nat] agaa maA meaa PATA 
safa: aaa afa a mafao aaafgar SA | 

T arg aft Aa — 


arasrtare an sored, ai ar ara | aea a ator: afè 
Aaaama 1 a a ma fÀ | arf maa Aae- 
poa pagra, safaatrataad faa | a fe aa: waa: 
fagdag i aa: aog va at aaa aft | 


66.4. Objection : “Then, is not unaided knowledge also point- 
less?” Reply: “No; for it abolishes nescience and is seen to cul- 
minate in liberation. Knowledge that abolishes the darkness 
of nescience is experienced as culminating in the fruit of 
moksa. It resembles the light of a lamp that dispels ignorance 
about the rope-snake, etc. The fruit of the lamp-light is the 
residual existence of the rope after the abolition of the super- 
imposed snake. Similar is the case of knowledge. Other 
examples too are available in this context. Activities like 
cutting of the wood and churning it for producing fire, in which 
the accessories like the agent operate, do not lead to any result 
other than separation of parts, blazing forth of fire, etc. 
(These results are immediately visible) Such is the case with the 
discipline of knowledge. Its result isimmediate and excludes all 
further object-directed operations. Here the knower is not 
involved in any of the further irrelevant activity; he is con- 


620 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


fined to the fruit of liberation solely. So the discipline of know- 
ledge is unaccompanied by work of any kind.” Objection: “Why 
not hold that this discipline is like the activity of eating or the 
performance of the fire-sacrifice (in which other consequent 
and collateral activities find a place?)” Reply: “‘No, the fruit of 
knowledge is moksa and the knower cannot reasonably look 
for any other fruits at all. When knowledge, whose fruit is 
but moksa, has been won, the position is as has been described 
in 2.46—no activity aimed at lesser ends is conceivable. 
None striving to secure an empire will waste his energy in 
seizing a petty field; his goal can’t be the ownership of that 
field.” Therefore work is no means to emancipation. Nor may 
combined work and knowledge prove a means. Again, know- 
ledge bearing moksa as its fruit needs no assistance from work; 
for, as the sublater of nescience there is conflict between know- 
ledge and work. Darkness does not abolish darkness. There- 
fore only pure knowledge is means to moksa. 


66.5. 1—facaraet yerarasredy:, Aaaa aw aaa | aq a 
aaa pacer: eidd, a wad; aa: frenat wort AA- 
mwa aH yeraa: acarfasasean: aTq— 

aq ud afe anton: er afer aft africa | 


a Geet ok | accu a ax aces 
ayant a Hot aA safes Farry aia | 


66.5. Objection: ‘No; the non-performance of obligatory 
works entails the sin of omission whereas moksa is eternal. 
The Advaitic proposition that the achivement of moksa is 


66] Liberation and Renunciation 621 


through pure knowledge is wrong; for the non-doing of 
obligatory works ordained by sruti entails the sin of omission 
leading to hell, etc. Further, if moksa does not result from works, 
there arises the contingency of non-emancipation. Reply: 
No such flaw needs to be feared. Moksa is eternal. Through 
the performance of obligatory works the sin of omission may be 
averted; through the non-performance of forbidden works 
unwanted embodiments may be warded off; through the non- 
performance of voluntary works, desirable embodiments also 
may be stopped. When the works that led to the present em- 
bodiment get exhausted through the due experience of their 
fruits, the body will fall. No fresh embodiment will follow. 
Emotions like attachment won’t be there and the Self will 
abide in Itself. This is moksa and it is effortlessly won. Objection : 
But it may be argued that the accumulated works of the past 
many lives won’t dwindle away without their agent experienc- 
ing their fruits. Reply: Such an apprehension is not in order; 
for, the troubles taken in the performance of obligatory works 
may be equated with the reaping of the fruits in question. 
This case is similar to the performance of expiatory rites. 
Obligatory works cause the dwindling of sins committed in the 
past. Works which have started to yield fruits wiil wear away 
through their experience itself. No fresh works will be under- 
taken. Thus effortlessly will moksa follow. 


66.6. 1; ‘aaa fafacasfyeqata aren: r faadsaara [wv 3.. ] 
fa fear ma: gem: area a feat eft A, adaarareracear- 
oap aen tr aaa ae maq Saerarentea’ 
afr a gme: [?] sarernorat qearat actor earqrata | TET 
gaara gftarat sarcomere RN ANA: TI Para HATTEN- 
a ee 
THAT a ae TAT AANA BTA: ATT ATS 
aaua: | frat a aa gaa: “aot array canter.” 
[A a. g. 88.23.) gerfeeqna aana: 1 


66.6. Final Reply: All this is erroneous. Sruti clearly teaches 
41 


622 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVH 


that no road other than knowledge leads to moksa Vidc: 
“Knowing Him alone one conquers death; no other road is 
available for going there” (SU.3.8). 

Further, 6.20 (ibid) teaches that the non-khower’s achieve- 
ment of moksais as impossible as the folding up of the sky likea 
hide. Puranas, too, teach that moksa is won through know- 
ledge. Note also that without knowledge meritorious works 
that have yet to bear fruits will not dwindle at all. The meri- 
torious and sinful acts producing their respective fruits stand 
on the same footing as far as Moksa is concerned. The possi- 
bility of meritorious works remaining without bearing happy 
fruits is as likely as that of the unmeritorious works with their 
unhappy fruits. These meritorious works should lead to fresh 
embodiment and moksa will remain unrealised. The extermina- 
tion of attachment, aversion and delusion which issue from 
righteousness and unrighteousness cannot be achieved except 
through self-knowledge. Thus will dharma and adharma survive 
in the absence of Self-knowledge. Besides Sruti teaches obli- 
gatory works to bear meritorious fruits; smrtis too do it (GDS. 
11.29). Thus works will survive undwindled. 


66.7.4 3 ae:—frarta sai gaera yaaaghardt Hoag, 
qg aw evan aa ve afta, aag, Saath a 


T maT eR TR | ae aaner ater ar FURASTA- 
za Me War, T aang st | wa adhe Yas shed TARN 
va sft wad yaqa: faaata wa ae afa fart 


66] Liberation and Renunciation 623 


fafad a faa, facarat Ai mafaa ipag anaana A: | 
afna manr fafa aq faa mafai, q I aa mA aq PR | 
ay aa va ma faia maaa ae, staafetafraste faa- 
auio aaraa va we sada, faamaaa: 
Aaaa 1 a aafaa A a RANN: ATST- 
mamaga gaa araea a wa ipa aA Foy 

ipl. a A i. 


awa a aft aaa romaa peti 
aa yaedgitane afa aR a agaa 1 wd aaraa- 
m: ATESTATA fraa l aAA; 


free a w safarim AAA A at: a A 
af aaa a va N: aaa ator p eft, faa ad: 
woma. ef fred seat 1 fea—areanfagerel aaron freq 
af Raa aa wa aaf wadtlr aararag:ad wa arena- 
safes Bay wg, Ads | awe aenfrerariens wag va 
ranifedeqearnarag-ay ate fra vast i aa aq afa, gefr | 
a fe aasman a taafrarssrarag-a fre grad 1 faa 
saq afaa asfafes + ad acarene, + I wmeratfad sofas 
aT acon Wa | dat camifay afr agreements FIR: T SII — 


mAN Sf | weaved a fret att aque: TATE af saree | 


66.7. Wrong is the argument of those who say, Obligatory 
works, being troublesome, constitute the fruit of evil works 
done in past; they bear no fruit other than their essential 
nature of entailing trouble. But the Sruti does not teach such a 
doctrine; they have been ordained to coexist with the entire 
life-period. It is not possible for works that cannot by nature 
bear fruits, yield any fruit. Further this doctrine does not ex- 
plain how specific troubles accrue from obligatory works. 
The statement that evil done in the past causes the sufferings in- 
volved in the doing of obligatory works, is not fair. It is un- 
reasonable to hold that in a life resulting from other causes 1s 


624 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVII 


experienced the result of works that have not yet started yield- 
ing fruits. Otherwise there would be nothing illogical if, in a 
life begun to yield the fruits of heavenly life, there occurred 
hellish sufferings. Nor can the troubles entailed in the doing 
of obligatory works be treated as the exclusive fruit of past 
evils. Such evils are numerous, of course. How can they all 
be held to cause just these troubles associated with the doing 
of obligatory works? This will keep unexplained numerous 
other ills of life. The sufferings ofa prisoner condemned to hard 
labour will, for instance, remain unintelligible. Besides, such 
contentions as these are irrelevant. How? What is relevant is 
the view that, without yielding their proper fruits, past evils 
won't dwindle away. What you aver is that the pains entailed 
in obligatory works are the fruits of works that have started 
to bear fruits, and not those of works not yet yielding fruits. 
Or, do you contend that all past evil deeds have begun to yield 
their fruits? Then the specification ‘troubles entailed by obli- 
gatory works’ becomes meaningless. Also, in this case arises the 
contingency that obligatory works have been unnecessarily 
prescribed; for, all past evils of course will get exhausted 
through the experience of their logical consequences 1.e. their 
fruits. As the strain of exercises is fully explained by the very 
exercises, the troubles of obligatory works also are explicable 
fully by their performance—there is no need to refer them 
to past evils of any kind. The obligatory works have been 
ordained to co-exist with life; it is improper to refer them, as 
expiatory rites are, to past evils. If the pains of expiatory works 
flow from these very works and their occasions, those involved 
in obligatory works will have to be referred to the causes of life 
itself; for, both obligatory and expiatory works are equally 
occasional—i.e. naimittika. One more point may be noted: since 
the troubles involved in obligatory and optional fire-churning 
rite are identical, what is the reason for referring the former 
alone to past evils? No such reason is forthcoming. However, 
there 1s room for inferring that obligatory works bear fruits 
other than the troubles they entail. Also, a contradiction is in- 
volved here: through the performance of obligatory works are 


66] Liberation and Renunciation 625 


reaped the results of entirely different prior acts. Experience of 
the troubles is the result of the mere performance of those works, 
which are at the same time held to be fruitless. Further, when 
the optional variety of obligatory works is done, obligatory 
work, as such, of course also gets done, tantrena, technically. The 
troubles undergone in this connection will exhaust the fruit of 
the obligatory work. It may not be argued that the results of the 
optional variety of the obligatory work, heaven, etc., are 
different. Were they different, the troubles also would have 
been differently experienced. This of course is not the fact. 
A work that is unprescribed and unforbidden yields only a 
a temporary result; what the sastras prescribe and forbid will 
not yield temporary results. Otherwise who would seek to 
secure heaven, etc., yielded by the supernatural force of 
§astraic works? No special pleadings may redeem this posi- 
tion. Therefore it is not reasonable to maintain that obligatory 
works never yield fruits through the forces of adrsta (unseen 
efficiencies) released by them. 


66.8. aan afaerqaner aay: fae va PST ATT A AAT 
TAIT:, A r afana fe ada at 1 cor annaa 
afasfera ad, aean adantdaragiaer arafassr—‘set at a 
fasta: [2.28. ], “aafaa farce’ [2.22.], ‘Taare anger 
waar array [3.3.], xara atatear [3.3%], ‘acafaq ng- 
amA. WN aded str Acar TA asad [3.2¢.], ainnir ava 
aam [4.23], Aa fehaq weritfa gear ata acafad [4.¢. | 
—waig an: ‘Hate sf; MN Ft Frc, areca aNTeTET WA 
va aT [€.3.]; ‘sere: washes aa: — ‘art caret a aa’ [9.2¢.]; 
am. ahr: Tarn PART: ord’ [3]; ‘areas aT 
akon mea cme akoi aa E [<.22.]; ‘aerfa 
ee a Qo. | — aaia a afar: aa: safe | 
wacarter: a ZH: ay ae am: I TIAMAT HST 


Pw. 33-3; V4, 3- 4) Uafesrmferertgendeteeren [ KA 
araara gama TEN mafaa atana Wraacataar fare- 


626 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVII 


fmia [2c] Tomarftarrarag wa senmacreqictaca- 
Tort a wafa; wafe wa seater wart afro aaanfaat—say: 
Traranreatadearser ATT: 1 


66.8. For the following reason also only knowledge can bring 
about the total dwindling of good and evil works born of 
nescience, and never the performance of obligatory work. 
Indeed, all work emanates from nescience and desire. This has 
already been explicated earlier, namely that works are done 
by the nescient while the discipline of knowledge is under- 
taken by the knowers who have renounced all works. Vide 
2.19,21 ; 3.3,26,28; 5.8,13; 6.3; 7.18; 9.21,22; 10.10; 12.6-11. 
The discipline of the devotees of the Immutable may be found 
set forth in 12. 13-20; 13.7-11; 14.22-26; and 15.3-5. The 
three kinds of works’ fruits—favourable, unfavourable, and 
indifferent—cannot accrue to the renunciants of the Param- 
ahamsa Order who have sought exclusive refuge in the Self, who 
possess the knowledge of the non-agency of that non-dual 
Self and who also are cognizant of the real nature of God. 
Only to the non-renouncing and nescient agents of activities 
can they accrue. Such is the broad divisions of the duties 
taught in the B.G. 


66.9. afegia ada ato: afa sf aq— 
7; agaaa | wate menaa faa a4; ans strana: 


F; e Whe dened a Ck aes | 
anaga maa: or, + frat fa aq— 

7; aaia AAA 1 arene RA aware: ahr: 
ra arent GF ‘areat à yaararsfa [À E. 2.22.) ofa, we a ‘AA 
wT we ae Tt SRG ab al Sia lai iG 
yeaa: aerfa: | a oaae 

Jaa samaa | a ‘feat Farad’, aT. ATOR oft fae 34, 


aaa set gerteararracang eaewamaartiaueqayy wd, q 


66] Liberation and Renunciation 627 


aaa mafas daar: sft Ae | 
afremmen araa, afaa anA: aaraa: 1 gT- 
Ram areathrara: afaarare: 1 a R ate RA: wer: ag, WaT 


way waren: sf ama a ‘ag sf aaa ahaq 1 ag ert 
gafa afaana: eerfered gat ‘ae aft sera, a faasa: 
mag 1 aeq e à gaararsfa [À a 2.22.) aft GY wesc, a 
3 maana fafaa. arr: 1 wer ay aa waa TATA 
a wed Fy, Aaea qefan 1 


66.9. Objection : Though obligatory work is inculcated by 
the śustras, it is operative only in the case of the nescient. 
Slaughter of holy men etc. are referred to as sources of sins in 
the prohibitions laid down in the Sastras; they are committed 
only by those who are smitten by flaws like nescience, lust and 
so forth; without these flaws none would perpetrate them. 
Similar is the case with obligatory, occasional and voluntary 
activities. 

The argument that without the knowledge of a transcendent 
Self none would address himself to obligatory works, etc., is 
defective ; for, work whose essence is movement, is found ego- 
istically associated with non-selves like the body. But the treat- 
ment of the body etc., as self or ‘I’, is not false or mithya; it is 
only secondary or gauna’’. No, one must discrimate here. The 
treatment of the body complex as ‘I’ is secondary even as those 


628 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVII 


of one’s son as one’s self is (Vide:- your son is yourself—T.S. 
2.11: this bull is my very self.) An error is entirely different. 
This occurs when there is failure to distinguish between two 
entities like a post and a man. Secondary notions don’t produce 
real consequences ; they are meant only to commend by means 
of implied similes. cf: Devadatta is a lion; the student is fire— 
these mean fierce and tawny like lion and fire. Those statements 
are not taken literally. Where errors occur troubles follow. 
In secondary usage there is no real confusion as between self 
and body. Even where praise is conveyed, the praised ones 
know: ‘Iamnolion; Iam no fire.’ In the casc of errors the work 
of the body is claimed by the self as its own. Wrong is the as- 
sertion that the self works due to the causes like memory, 
desire, exertion, etc.; these are consequences of prior errors, 
results of impressions of pleasant and unpleasant experiences. 
Just asin this birth righteousness and unrighteousness and their 
consequences are products of conceit in the body-complex, 
attachment, aversion, etc., in prior lives too, the case was 
similar. Thus transmigratory lives in the past and future are 
beginningless and nescience-born. Therefore, the definitive 
dwindling away of transmigratory life is possible only through 
the discipline of knowledge accompanied by total renuncia- 
tion. Note that conceit in the body-complex is essentially 
nescience. When this nescience is sublated, embodiment will 
cease and so too the transmigatory life. Treating the body- 
complex as self is obviously an act of nescience. One that 
knows himself as different from his possessions like cattle, 
etc, never mistakes them for his self—his ‘I’. Ignorant of this 
distinction due to non-discrimination, as of the post from a 
man, one may mistake the body-complex for self. Of course, 
treatment of one’s son as one’s self is secondary, because they 
are related as the begetter and the begotten. Of course one 
can’t eat through one’s son, etc., just as the student can’t 
operate like the lion and the fire. 


66.10. FesefayarsiearsTana sarcracder att: aefaarnty: fad 
wa att q 


66] Liberation and Renunciation 629 


7; aay |: a Am: mea: faama: fe 
aig ?— a aa ee maa ma, TAR 
Ward, amA a aaa | afaafHat fe amaS amo gat A: 
ae’, e we’ eft Rin aa: | a g faafe ‘or: ag 


ma stf | afe aa ‘atta: afer, EÀ ar eft, cars ariari 


at. faafat ma, Tes: 7 IT wards A- 
qaaa aT PAA | 


66.10. Vainis the insistence that due to the validity of Vedic 
injunction aimed at the generation of the force of apurva, 
one’s works may very well be performed by the body-complex. 
The body-complex functions as self not due to secondary use 
of words like atma vai putra namasi, but due to error which makes 
these non-selves appear as self. Only as long as the error lasts 
such functioning lasts. Ignorant children aver ‘I am tall, 
white’, etc., mistaking the body for the self; not so those who 
discriminate. A secondary usage is admissible only where the 
distinction between the particular and the universal is clearly 
grasped. This is the case in regard to the lion and Devadatta; 
the fire and the student. Where such distinction is not grasped, 
the secondary usage is not in order. The appeal to the infallibi- 
lity of the Vedic injunction is misconceived. The infallibility 
in question refers only to the unseen force or apurva, and is 
admissible only in regard to matters not confined to the sphere 
of direct perceptions, etc. The said infallibility is relevant to 
matters unseen. Therefore, the explanation of the conceit of 
‘T’ in regard to the body-complex—a matter of error—has 
nothing to do with secondary usage. Even a hundred state- 
ments of srutz to. the effect that fire is cold and non-luminous 


630 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVII 


won’t prove valid. Ifit does make such a statement, its import 
will have to be interpreted differently. Otherwise, validity 
won’t attach to it. Nothing in conflict with the means of valid 
cognition or with its own statements may be imputed to 'sruti. 


66.11. HAT: freasa naa Hq: wars Ad: aaa sft AI — 
4; aafaa aiae: 11 

atfatrsaad wetfaerfatrsd: aft aag: eft aq- 
7; araascarqrad: | wear wetfaarfatraca arcafs sand gz- 
amd wera: aread, aur ancafa wa mea: + wafaa Aafaa 
aafaa aft arhig wa, arr sand: sar afer: Sor: THT 


66.11. Objection: “Since works are enjoined on agents sub- 
ject to error, they will cease to be agents on the dawn of know- 
ledge and ‘śrutť will prove invalid”. 

Answer : “‘No; the validity of ‘śrut? will hold good in regard to 
the knowledge of Brahman. There is no danger that as in res- 
pect of prescriptions of work, in respect of the knowledge of 
the Brahman also it will break down, for, in respect of the 
knowledge of the Brahman no sublating cognition is available. 
Once the Self is known by virtue of Brahman-knowledge, the 
error of treating the body-complex as Self is abolished. Such 
abolition however cannot be shown, by anyone, at any time, in 
any manner whatsoever, to apply to the knowledge of the 
real Self as Self; for, there is total correspondence between 
fact and cognition, exactly as in the case of the cognition 
‘fire is hot and luminous’. Neither does this explanation entail 
the invalidity of scripture enjoining works; for, these mandates 
are meant only to arrest lower works and promote higher 
ones, to induce activity aimed at the realisation of the inner 
Self. The means may very well be erroneous; but what is 


66] Liberation and Renunciation 631 


sought after is true. Thus even the means turn out to be true. 
Cf. glorificatory passages subject to mandates. In empirical 
life, too, unveridical praise is employed to induce the ignorant 
and the sick to undergo medical treatment. In contexts other 
than that of Self-knowledge the validity of mandates is direct, 
just as sense-perception, etc., are valid before the dawn of self- 
knowledge. 


66.12. aq maA serrate e afafearter ata, 
wag aga afana va faa: tofsata, wear aaa: arta 
eof; franca Use: Fada we: | wa a wart qa- 
ma, TM wd FH ama Og, Hoey amaa | zr 


aT amra sewMfaqen weuryder va Wey Va FAY, Ta A 
area: g | 


FIA | ae sega PANAT a a ater xf ara 1 fe 
yet aa ied TMT A TIT UTTAR, TET 
afafa aft ada yer afte; war wraner sew, A 
Ta mamni KUTT: Ae | cea afaa acest 
wry wa) aa a ata acHoararaish ath: wa ang iT Ah Aer 
are faded | aca sata vad Wad A ara serge: 
area Hal Wr TS eft 1 wrfatafrd I at sored, war Aa; 
mami Ta TT aaa aaa aa gaara 
-at-a adenttaqearat: sra 1 aa arferscaafafre: 
Ut wa TAR: a g T, gA aa NAA Va ITN: 
ef za i 


66.12. Now the objector may argue as follows: the inactive 
Self may accomplish works by mere presence. This may be 
understood as Self’s agency, just as a king, though not fighting 
literally, is held to fight when his soldiers alone in fact fight. 
He is thus said to win or lose. A general operates through com- 


632 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


mands issued. Both the king and the general are related to the 
final victory or defeat. This is like the actual work of priests 
being credited to the performer of a sacrifice. Thus the work 
of the body-complex may be held to be done by the Self. Or, 
this is like the operation of a magnet; inactive physically, it 
produces results. This line of argument is false ; for what does 
not operate at all is treated as an accessory of work. ‘Are there 
not different kinds of accessories?’ The answer is that the king, 
etc., do have full-fledged activity also in regard to works. He 
can and does actually fight also. In causing his soldiers to fight, 
in remunerating them, etc., his agency is primary. Hence in the 
example cited above he is an agent only figuratively; it is 
secondary. If it were known that he could not be an agent 
in any other way, his mere presence could have been equated 
with his agency, as in the case of the magnet. This of course is 
not the case in regard to the king and the general. Therefore 
agency through mere presence 1s only secondary, in which 
case ownership of the results of such agency would also have 
to besecondary. The secondary agency cannot explain primary 
results. Hence the entire argument—that the activities of the 
body-complex may make an inactive Self agent and experi- 
encer—1is invalid. On the other hand, all this may be explained 
on the basis of an illusion, as the phenomena in a dream or 
magic show are. When such illusions are broken up in states 
of concentration or deep sleep, the vexations of agency, etc., 
are not experienced at all. The conclusion is that the illusion 
of transmigratory life is caused by an error; it is not real. 
Through right perception the said illusion will, once for all, 
dry up. 


67.0. adame siga aR sea, fara wa ee 
i eave, Vadert HEN, ae TEM Mrevevarafefer aE 


67.0. Having concluded the teachings of the Gita and 
reiterated them, the traditions of the sSastra are explained 
finally to strengthen these teachings. 


67] Liberation and Renunciation 633 


Zz A ATATEH IT ATTACH Hata | 
a aaa aei a a AT asta cull 


67. Don’t impart this to a non-ascetic (one without 
control of the senses), a non-devotee, at any time, nor, 
again, to one who seeks it not and to one who reviles Me. 


67.1. SF g u se met A ag oaa sar se aarcfafeara aaa- 
cara aaicieara a areg aft omafeda araead | aafaa snr 
qà a aq feda aaa aerifaq aft ae a areaq | 
we: aes aft aq sepa: a: wate get aft +e area Aa: aT 
an aaa A aed, wat ate sare, vet aft a arerq 1 aA 
saama mR aT Paes arg area ete arreaiq Tard | 


Se) 


aa Ara afa ar [?] a aa: farata qaranga 


67.1. This fastra, imparted to you for your good—for 
terminating your transmigratory travails—, don’t impart, 
in any circumstance to a non-ascetic. ‘Na vacyam’, not to be im- 
parted, must be read here, though remotely placed in the verse. 
To be an ascetic is not enough; one must also be a devotee— 
have devotion to God and teacher. Even asceticism and devo- 
tion don’t suffice, one must also have the desire to heed: The 
seeker should not, again, be a reviler, taking Me, Vasudeva, 
to be a mere man, accusing Me of boastfulness and other faults, 
not tolerating, through ignorance, My Godhood. He too 1s 
unfit to receive this instruction. Its fit recipient is a non- 
reviling ascetic devotee, anxious to listen to it. An alternative 
reading uses the expressions, ‘to an intelligent or ascetic person’. 
The right tradition here insits that the candidate, no matter 
how richly endowed, shall not be a reviler of God or one with- 


634 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVII 


out devotion and yearning to learn. Teach one who has the 
vcarning and devotion to God and teacher. 


68.0. Trae Fd: HH Tart are— 


68.0. Now is set forth the fruit accruing to one who follows 
the right tradition: 


TEA Aa Te ngafa | 
ates af cet Hear BATAAN: NREN 


68. He who imparts this transcendent secret to My 
devotee, nurturing utmost devotion to Me, will doubt- 
lessly attain Me. 


68.1.4 eH Sa n x Sa aa TH mafai Heras: 
aae TT Ta maa wea afe ulead afrererta aeaf, 
wed: ate amaaa sat, ar cafe wat i wh: Faded 
fama Aaa wearer wy wate ea werd | eet areren 
sft ? saaie vfs i Feat aT TON: seq TAT 
war fray ate gear eet. | der ee HAA wa UM qord 
va | Ha: aT aa: a ader i fa 


68.1. This ‘transcendent secret dialogue’ between Krsna 
and Arjuna which yields the summum bonum—whoever 
imparts it to My devotee, both in letter and spirit, as I did in 
your case, will attain Me indeed. How is it to be imparted ?— 
‘Nurturing the utmost devotion to Me’, i.e., in the spirit of 
service done to the Supreme Teacher, the unlapsing God. 
No doubt about this need be entertained. Reference to devo- 
tion a second time in the second half of this verse shows that 
eligibility for cultivating this fastra is bound up with devotion 
to God alone. Also, 


Ta aera shay frag: | 
afaat a a a aea: frat aia esi 


68-70] Liberation and Renunciation 635 


69. None among men, other than he, does a deed dearer 
to Me; nor is there in the world one dearer to Me. 


69.1. TT g n a a ae meaa: A aA AeA 
afaq a aa hagon: aada aat, wer apaa, mÀ gard: 
adam 1 a a Aa aaa are aea fedta: aa. faa: 
fasar qa Aes a afar u apfe— 


69.1. Among men, now, none does a deed dearer to Me 
than he who transmits the tradition of this sastra. Nor, in 
future, will there be another in this world who does aught 
dearer to Me. 

He, too, 


maga AA se Yet waana: | 
maaa aatetase: fafa A ata: ol 


70. Whoever shall study this righteous dialogue bet- 
ween us shall have offered Me a sacrifice wrought with 
knowledge—this is My view. 


70.1. IAA sft uo aA a oferta a wt wet anada 
ameet WY aaah, at Be HA SN | Hasta —fatasaayarsarar 
amai wea: maae faferseqa: gad: aq maaa iea 
aai TA ; gafar. wt at, tafeaga ser ae wach 
—aat weqaaa ag ase: ofa: car waa efa A am af: fa: 1 


70.1. Whoso shall study this righteous dialogue between us 
shall have offered Me a sacrifice consisting of knowledge. 
Among the many torms of sacnfice—ritual, muttering either 
aloud orin alow tone,and mental—the most sacred is mental. 
The study of the Gita is exalted as being equal to a mental 
sacrifice. Or, this may be taken to point to the fruit of such 
study. This fruit is equal to what is obtained by worship of 
deities. To study the Gita is to sacrifice unto Me most excellent- 
ly. I am sure it is so. 


636 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam (Ch. XVIII 


71.0. HI ME: FF HIT — 


71.0. The fruit of listening to the Gita is set forth here: 


Tear WTATAT AY AT: | 
AS Aes: PACH HTT MATARAE 1119 Vi 


71. Endowed with faith and unreviling, whoever listens 
to the Gita will be liberated, he will reach the happy 
realms reserved for the meritorious. 


71.1. Taree ft n Raa AVA: Haga: A agaaa: ay 
a re Ta aft a ac—afreanq feat aaa ? a ate 
mq A TAT we ala Tea Geared Raaf- 
avy ii 


71.1. Faithful and unreviling, whoso shall at least listen to 
this work will be liberated from sins and will reach realms 
reserved for the performers of rites like the agnihotra. Api— 
at least—shows what excellent fruits await him who under- 
stands also its sense. 


72.0. araa meniga AR aT Taf | aa we 
ga: mgar sararercor aft fa see: arora: 1 aerate a Tea 
frereq zarda rå efa arated: sefara: wate | 


72.0. The (following) question is meant to find out whether 
the disciple has grasped the contents of the fastra. If he has 
failed, he may be instructed again—such is the idea of the tea- 
cher. This also shows what the duty of a real teacher 1s. 


afeadad ya må aAA Arar | 
afea: TASTE TASAT NORN 


72. Have you, Arjuna! with concentrated mind listened 


71-73] Liberation and Renunciation 637 


to this? Wealth-winner! has your confusion, wrought 
by ignorance, been dispelled? 


72.1. Pq ef ou afeaq fe ward Fa GH Ad sat aaa 
ay! an wart aaa fade? fe at asared:? afeaq AAT- 
aag: amaaa: ante: afafa. [fafacara:| affads: eat- 
ma: fe a: ?— qed: aa AAAA: aa, AA A gA- 
ae: yqa: ae g aT | 


72.1. Have you grasped with concentrated mind what I have 
told you? Arjuna! Has your native non-discrimination, born of 
nescience, perished? It was for this that you took the trouble 
to listen to Me and I to impart this Sastra. 


HHT TATA : 
Tl Als: VAS aaa ANSA | 
faasien maag: PA tat Aq W931 


Arjuna said: 

73. Lord! Confusion has been dispelled, and memory 
(of truth) regained due to Your grace. I abide, unas- 
sailed by doubts. I shall do Your bidding. 


73.1. We: ofa i Ase: Ale aaa AAeTsaraated:, AM Fa 

gore: «| tafe: a amaaa sna wT aa eeaTeAT 
foma: aaa da sararq war cacware afar Aa | WAT 
Mema ieai Carat Ta ett that afra 
wate, at: arate Aleta: eA: FT sft 1 aa a À aR- 
Duet cts ee R a 
F983; 28.2] 1 frat gaaf: [Fo 22¢.], aT BT Ale: 
wate: Tacanqad: [E 3.9] ge a aera: | ay cart aT- 
at feat. an mag: Adare: | wheel aad aa i ae aaa 
Fay, 7 A pda aft gah: 1 


73.1. Destroyed is the nescience-born confusion, the cause 


638 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XVIII 


of all transmigratory ills—a veritable sea, hard to cross. Won 
is the memory of the Self’s truth by virtue of which all knots of 
the heart have been rent. All this has been due to Your grace, 
on which alone I depended, O Lord! This expression proves 
that the fruit of mastering this Sastra is the destruction of confu- 
sion and the winning of the memory of the Self. The śruti, after 
mentioning, ‘I, a non-knower of Self, am grieving,’ proceeds 
to show freedom from all bonds through Self-knowledge :— 

CU.7.1.3; 26.2. MU.3.2.8; IU.7. Now subject to Your 
discipline, I am no longer assailed by doubts. I shall do your 
bidding. I have fulfilled all my duties due to Your grace. 
Nothing more remains to be achieved. 


74.0. aaa: mesh | we wart eaaa aa: 
Jaa — 


74.0. Completed is the import of the śästra. Now its relation 
to the epic story is set forth by Sanjaya: 


ESKAI Says : 


TUE gA TET A ARIA: | 
VATS TTT AT TANT noX 


Sanjaya said: 

74. Thus have I listened to this dialogue between Vasu- 
deva and the high-souled Arjuna—a dialogue marvel- 
lous and thrilling. 


74.1. ae ea uefa ws we agaa ote a agers: Aare gA 
Tah wee yaar afer aed aaan Cast QMEIEA I 

Ta Tay 

74.1. Thus have I, as set forth above, listened to the dia- 


logue between Krsna and the high-souled Arjuna—extremely 
wonderful and hair-raising. And this, 


74-77] Liberation and Renunciation 639 


AAT SSAA AA TA | 
WNT APACHE AAT: TAMA NON 


75. Due to the grace of Vyasa, I heard of this most 
secret and supreme Yoga, directly from Krsna Himself, 
the Master Yogin who elucidated it. 


75.1. Sara Bat i arava aq: fresh wear sa AATA 
yea ot tiA west Arde at a wa aT 
aa SOT AAT FIAT: AA, A TTT I! 


75.1. Due to the favour of Vyasa, through the gift of the 
divine sight, I heard this dialogue, and of this most secret 
Yoga—the text which teaches this Yoga being itself Yoga. 
I heard it from Krsna, the master of Yoga, who spoke it forth 
directly, and not indirectly through disciples, etc. 


PTAA: FA COAT A AAG: NRN 


76. O King! Calling to mind again and again this 
wonderful and holy dialogue between Krsna and Arjuna, 
I repeatedly rejoice. 


76.1. Taq sft uF Us youre | dey aeyer sei aa 
wW ay Sarasa: Ga wt wae aff moet yar gery a 
Were: sherry 1i 


76.1. King Dhrtarastra! recalling this dialogue every mo- 
ment, wonderful and holy, of Krsna and Arjuna—merely 
to hear it is to dispel all sins— I repeatedly rejoice. 


aed AAT ASNT CATIA Fe: | 
fet 8 Aaa Tet GOA A IA: FA: rg 


640 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam [Ch. XVIII 


77. Repeatedly calling to mind that most wonderful 
form of Krsna, my amazement, O king! waxes; I re- 
joice without measure. 


77.1. TT Bau A A ae AeA wT Oa at: fared 
fara: F wey Te | gA aT gt TT N 
fa agat— 


77.1. Recollecting again and again that most marvellous 
form—the cosmic form—of Krsna, O King! my amazement 
waxes; I rejoice again and again. 


Why dilate! 


UA GPA: po AA ATT TTT: | 
aa stttasreat afartar Aaaa noc 


78. Where the master Yogin Krsna is, where the bow- 
man Arjuna is, there, I deem, dwell glory, victory, 
prosperity and stable order. 


gfir strana acrargerat afearar Afai Menai fir 
ATMA MHS AATUTTARTT ATT ASSTSRISEATT: N 


78.1. 7a ofa n aa aR Ta apa: ada Sax: aoa 
adada- pN, TT AT: afer ot aac: miaa, aa at. 
amq meari cet att: fer, via afa: fro: faa: fat fe: 
gar aaff att: am, zat nfa wa eft 


78.1. To the side where the master Yogin Krsna is—of 
whom are born all forms of Yoga—, and also Arjuna, the 
bearer of the bow Gandiva, is will go fame, victory, af- 
fluence, vast glory—-and stable order. Order means State- 
policy. This is my conclusion. 


ELGI GERERE RIEC IREJEE UNECE UCG EY bICIEIS Tse OTA: 
Hat Agaa maana ATA ASSTSRVSEATA: 112 CN 


l1 


642 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam 


Ho ato 


4 


So ayto 


13 


Index of Bhagavad Gita Slokas 643 


No WTo 


61 


srasretrearts 
JETSER A 


13 


14 
15 


22 


644 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam 


wresrettattt Ho Fto 
at 

Marar FET 8 13 
3% 

3% aeafafa frm 17 23 
F 
afeafe 6 38 
afsaag må 18 72 
azara o 17 9 
Fà a aaen: 1 39 
ey AoE At 2 4 
wa faena aire 10 17 
aAa afaq fë 2 5l 
HAT: FHATCAISSE: 14 26 
ava fe afater 3 10 
wat aie Nga 4 17 
HTK q: AA 4 18 
GN EUREIESS 2 47 
an atga fafa 3 15 
sAr aaen 3 6 
BATT: WCET 17 6 
Blea Jaa o 8 9 
eed AT aA o3 
read: samt afaa 4 12 
BTA UT HT UT 3 37 
HUT RTT aT HTT 5 26 
HIATT FOC 16 10 
BTA: FVATTT: 2 43 
PACA CAAT: 7 20 
aeai HAUT 18 2 
Hat AAA qN 5 ll 


Index of Bhagavad Gita Slokas 645 


Ho ato reeset ttt To Jlo 


4 13 TRA ea gra 13 3 


16 1l araara 17 25 
18 57 ATA SACARTTA: 5 17 

afafa tinaa 4 34 

aafeaarsfirat anit 46 
4 2 amg aq 19 
7 29 acanta fafg l4 8 
2 27 aqaa BATH: 2 10 
6 7 ART ALY Tes 18 62 
9 15 ACTS WATT T 16 24 
6 8 aeeoea sfram 11 44 
5 16 acarcatatezarearat 3 41 
18 19 ammeg ao 11 33 
Ta TNA FTON 7 
18 18 AEIR: AAAT 3 19 
5 3 AMAA ATA 4 42 


3 1 aeaa ngae 2 68 
13 17 ammat ai FIA 1 37 
TA HATA FAA 1 12 
a Ty BAAN 6 23 
15 4 a an pussaa 2 


1 26 AAT naaa 10 10 
11 13 wi mA faa: 7 17 


646 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam 


No aJt o 


THAT Het 


13 


Index of Bhagavad Gita Slokas 647 


Ho to Srana Ho To 


1 31 ga: FIC: Ay 8 22 
18 7 gaai a ei at 10 24 
3 8 qatana ara 6 44 
18 23 quad q aay 18 21 
4 21 war a waft a 14 22 
15 5 waft eaaa 9 8 
is 4 waft yew aa 13 19 


648 


10 
6 


Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam 


Ho Fto 


30 
41 


Index of Bhagavad Gita Slokas 649 


WH rata tet Ho Wo  xwrasedratty Ho to 


a Ud Afa grey 2 19 qagan 18 59 
u qa Afa year 13 23 waat Aafaa 1] 
acara aia 10 39 aar a mgao 2 52 
ucarana o 1 42 anfani A I5 12 


uafar 4 31 wat fafaa fara 6 18 
unfer: act 13 aar aa Tae g 14 14 
TATA CHANTS ATT 3 y Wat aera Bay 2 58 
aa afa at a 17 27 aa fe Iada 6 4 
UNEN A T 35 ate mara 1 46 
wat Ota sted 2 60 ufe gè a ada 3 23 
aat attra 15 11 UTN ATTAY 2 32 
Wa: saraaa 18 46 ugama 4 2 
aetrarattg tg: 23 maraca ates: 3 21 
uA aA fraca 6 26 makaan 10 41 
THU esata 27 aaa a quater 1 38 
ya faafia 18 37 am g miaa 18 34 
aq BAA TA 18 24 qa waa a 18 31 
aq pean 18 2 aT AA A NER 18 35 
aq 17 21 aferat maa 3 7 


650 


sree a ttt 


a a asty aT TAT 8 


4 Beal ATT STAT 
a aeareatata SITE: 
a fe a aadA 
u: mefa 
a: aina: 


MASIR NATUR 


Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam 


No to 


6 
22 


Index of Bhagavad Gita Slokas 


spH aH Tet Ho To CIEE GIGALGI Ho 


: 11 39 Ja ranan 4 
araifa Moa aut 2 2 aay maat faro: 3 


frrafarada 18 383 MMA I 
facatorsserat arry 10 18 à 

PT T: 2 71 
SAT TAT 4 10 a va Way àsa 4 


aai amaA 10 22 wefa man EaR l 
aafaa fraa 2 21 a stat ndera 1 
CEU GIGUGI 7 26 aaa stiu ATT 9 
g aay a7: 8 28 a AAT WAIT Ye: 7 
anamin ate 2 41 ARTATATATA 17 
anfa aA 3 2 ac THETA gia 14 
TATA TRS ATAT 18 75 aed qe esate 14 

a aaraa ay 14 


TART AHS taq 9 28 amts adan 9 
wird taataa 18 43 antore 10 
SEN RAT aaa 17 10 adent ma 5 
TATA BESI 18 71 adnata aat 18 
ETAT AAA 4 39 wa 18 


651 


652 Bhagavad Gita Bhasyam 


No ato 


spre tt 
adara aay 
aing sestery 
adaty oir 
AATACTATATTA 
adafa at AT 
agaaa ataa 
adaga At 
adata aAa 
adea ale gle 
aatotfranattor 
aa faa Ara 
agi SA aAa 
agam: TAT. TAT 


agamia 
any aAa 


12 
11 


WTR TAH Tet Ho to 
athraattied Any 7 30 
ASAT TAATSHT 5 4 
fate sre war 18 50 
Aafa wa arate 1 29 
Gaga aA HAT 2 38 
i TA 6 21 
qa far fafaa 18 36 
aata SIA 11 52 
TE aAaEaAT o 6 9 
ear BAHN aa 11 36 
fearna FT aANT 2 54 
emi pen aai 5 27 
cata amA 2 3l 
emaa atra 18 60 
EIUAAISSAAT 10 15 
A A aAA: 18 45 
[d 
gat at mefa 2 37 
ga a nafra 10 19 
l Fat TA 1 21 


ISBN 81-7120-269-1 


Some of Our 
Publications 


Vedanta in Practice 

Silence as Yoga 

Self Mastery 

Secret of Right Activity 
Re-Incarnation and Immortality 
The Problem of Life and Death 


Meditation (Monks of 
the Ramakrishna Order) 


Meditation: Its Process, 
Practice and Culmination 


Concentration and Meditation 
Paths of Meditation 


Bhagavad 
Gita Bhasya (Sankara) 


Rs.65.00 


SAYINGS 


eo ae s 
CF a , 
Kini 5 e 
$ 
a a al 


Ramakrishna 


