SHRI BRAHMAGUPTA VIRACITA 


BRAHMA-SPHUTA 
SIDDHANTA 


WITH 
Vasana, Vijriana and Hindi 
Commentaries 


Vol. I 


FOREWORD 
By 
DR. SAMPURNANANAD 


Governor-Rajasthan 


Edited By 


A Board of Editors headed by 
ACHARYAVARA RAM SWARUP SHARMA 
’ Chief Editor and Director of the Institute 


Published by 
Indian Institute of Astronomical and 
Sanskrit Research | 
2239, Gurudwara Road, Karol, Bagh, New, Delhi-5, 


Published by 

Indian Institute of Astronomical 

and Sanskrit Research 

2239, Gurudwara Road, Karol Bagh, 
New Delhi-5. (India) 


© 


Aided by 
Ministry of Education, 
Government of India 


® 


Editorial Board 

Shri Ram Swarup Sharma 

Chief Editor, Director of the Institute. 
Shri Mukund Mishra Jyotishacharya 

Shri Vishwanath Jha Jyotishacharya 

Shri Daya Shankar Dikshita Jyotishacharya 
Shri Om Datt Sharma Shastri, M.A.,M.O.L. 
Introduction by 

Dr. Satya Prakash D.Sc, 


0) 


Copy right by publishers 
1966 


@ 
Price Rs, 80.00 


{o 
ey 


Printed by © | 

Padam Shree Prakashan & Printers 
12, Chamelian Road. 

Delhi. 


Dedicated to 
Shri S. K. Patil 


Union Minister for Railways 


saayearaa-ariaar 


TTS CLAS Tea: 


eaefedarsat sranfsarracarcat aadga: aafeas) 


Saal ALT 


WTARAT : 
Blo AFFUPAPS-WSAAM A-TACATA 


TITATATa : 
mraat dfsa waecaey ant 
(aoaaa-ghear eedieus an tearifarne we dena feat) 


HTT 
gfesaqa delage aim teeriifawa ws cepa frat 
QRVe, TRaTer Vs, wrlerare, = Seatt-y 


THT 
gfeaa gediege are tearalfraa 
we dene faa 

RRQ, TRENT Us, Has TT, 

ag feeett-x (Te) 


© 


MITT ALEC BH fA AEATAT sre 
Tea ATATT F WHTTT | 


© 


Tet Wset— 
at TraeaTeT TAT ASarssH 
Tat AtqTeh 

Blo AUAAFT Flo WaA-to 
Teaaar Mea 

att garafaet safari 

at fasaaa wr saifrarad | 

ot zarstat dfta sifesrart 

oft aia sal seat 

UA. U., WA. OY. Ua. 


© 

TIA AHA 
288K 

© 


Feq Fo Fo.00 

© 

GRP : | 

oT att peta wes freed 
RRR oe, | 


aary : 

MTT Ao Fo atfeat 
gfraa fafacet wrt Mas 
ay 
at FATT 


Foreword 


The Indian Institute of Astronomical & Sanskrit Research 
has done a very useful piece of work by publishing the Brzima 
Sphuta Siddhanta. This is an original work on Astronomy 
written about twelve hundred years ago. Mainly devoting himself 
to Astronomy as was natural, the author, Brahma Gupta. has 
also given considerable space to such branches of Mathematics as 
in his opinion are particularly applicable to Astronomy. Brahma 
Gupta is not a mere theoriser. His work bears ample evidence of 
close observation of astronomical phenomena, though he did not 
have at his disposal any large and well equipped Vedhalaya or 
Observatory. He has had to find fault with some of his predece 
ssors. The main reason for his criticism was as stated by him: 


walien venus Aga HTagT ay eA TTT | 
afatge ege afsrsmgraayeas 1 


The creator Brahma himself had given certain calculations 
in his book namely Brahma Siddhanta. But in the course of many 
years these calculations have been found to have bocome inaccu- 
rate. Of course, in referring to calculations, the author is referr- 
ing to the bases of these calculations, the main data of astronomy. 
The excellent and fairly exhaustive introduction by Dr. Satya 
Parkash is of very great help in understending the book because 
it brings out clearly the various points on which Brahma Gupta 
has laid stress, particularly those on which he differs from other 
great astronomers. 


A great controversy still rages between two schools of Indian 
astronomers which for want of better names may be called the 
schools of Arya Bhata and Brahma Gupta. Some years ago the 
Indian Institute of Astronomical & Sanskrit Research published 
the Vateshwar Siddhanta which is supposed to be associated with 
the Arya Bhata School. It is therefore. in the fitness of things 
that it should now publish the present standard volume of the 
other school. 


To my mind the Publication of such books is of great value 
from two points of view. It helps to remove the ignorance of 
average educated Indian of today about the achievements of his 
ancestors. In the field of two important branches of science, 
Mathematics and Astronomy, it is really surprising how those 
ancient astronomers could reach such heigts of accuracy with the 
help of instruments which seem to be laughably crude compared 
to those that modern astronomers have at their disposal. At the 
same time a study of such literature is a very salutary corrective 


(2) 


to the vanity of those who feel that in astronomy as in certain 
other subjects the last word was said by those writers who have 
written in Sanskrit. We learn how far behind we are in certuim 
very important directions in the field of knowledge. 

It is interesting by the way to find that the author of this 
great work was a Vaishya. This shows how diffused knowled se 
even of the most abstract subjects was in those days and hiow 


Scholarship was honoured irrespective of caste. Mot one the 
critics of Brahma Gupta has taunted him on the ground of his net 


being a Brabmana. 


Sampurnanand 
Gorernar-Rajastian 


Raj Bhavan, 
Jaipur, 


Dated May 4, 1966. 


Observations 


of 


Dr. K. M. Munshi 


President of the Reception Committee 


The Author Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma has given to the 
world of scholars an excellent and valuable treatise on the tamous 
Astronom2t Brahma-Gupta, son of Jisaugupta, born in 589 A.D. 
in Bhillamala or Stimala now in Southern Marwad close to the 
northern frontier of modern Grajarat. The work is divided into 
13 chapters and at the end of each, the learned author has given 
reference t> other works and treatises for further study as also 
in support of his various conclusions. He has described Astro- 
nomy in Ancient India inthe light of the knowledge of the 
subject available in different countries in his time. 


After giving personal details of Brahma-gupta, the author 
starts on a critical study of the works of that Astronomer-parti- 
cularly his Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta and Khandana-Khadya, 
The author has also discussed the [ndian Luni-solar Astronomy, 
the Greek and Hindu methods in spherical Astronomy and the ° 
Epicyclic theory of ancient Indians. Discussing in detail the 
contribution of Brahma Gupta in Arithmetic, Algebra, in Astro- 
nomy and the Astronomical inscruments that he used, the author 
has brought out the various highlights of his work and achieve- 
ments in comparison with those of his predecessors, successors and 
contemporaries in other countries. 


The author deserves to be congratulated for this scholarly 
contribution on the subject of Ancient Indian mathematics and 
Astronomy. 


—K.M. Munshi 
Bhartiya Vidya Bhawan 


Bombay 


Publisher’s Note 


It is with pride and pleasure that the Indian Institute of 
Astronomical & Sanskrit Research brings out its second monumental 
work ‘Brahma Sphuta Siddhanta’. The Institute, set up on the card 
November, 1957, with the obiect of promoting research into anc nt 
Indian manuscripts on Astronomy and allied Sciences: started ats 
programme of publication with the preparation of a critical editian of 
Vateshwara Siddhanta running into more than 700 pages. It was far 
back in early forties that the idea of reviving the treasures of knw: 
ledge hidden in ancient manuscripts came to my mind. In 1945 7 cold 
succeed in editing and put lishing ‘Trailokya Prakasa’ of Acharya Heina 
Prabha Sari. 


Altruni’s Travel Accounts of India contain a reference to 
Vateshwara Siddhanta and this fact was responsible for prompting ine to 
arrat.ge publication of Vateshwar Siddhanta. It was rather dithe ult to 
search out this manuscript and the clue given by Mahamahovadhvava 
Sudhakar Dwivedi (a great Mathematician and Astronomer af [9th 
century) that the manuscript was available in Gwalior did not lead me 
to any results. I kept my search on and found a copy of this text in the 
collection of manuscripts inherited by a Brahman widow of Gujranwals 
District in west Pakistan. The same style of copy was later seen by me 
in the Panjab University Library at Lahore. 


Vateshwaracharya, the great writer of Vateshwara Siddhanta, lias 
criticised Brahma Sphuta Siddhanta of Brahma Gupta, in his work, 
This naturally aroused my curiosity to procure and pulilish Brahma 
Sphuta Siddhanta so es to provide right perspective tu the students ot 
ancient Indian Scientific literature. Morecver, in one of ny 
discussions with the late Dr. K. 8. Krishnan, Director, 
National Physical Laboratories New Delhi, be refex 
tred to Dr. Colebrook (a German Writer) as having translated jnty 
English two chapters of ‘Brahma Sphuta Siddhanta’, namely, Vyakti 
(Arithmetic )and Ayakta(Algetra). The late Dr. Krishnan showed keen 
interest in this manuscript and encouraged me in taking up preparation 
of a critical edition of this text. The Institute is grateful to the Gove, 
of India (Department of cultural Affairs) for meeting part of the 


epaiue on this publication and thereby enabling us to complete 
our task, . 


_ __Ishall be failing in my duty if Ido not mention the great and 
invaluable contribution made for the success of the Institute by its 
founder President’ the late Shri Brijlal Nehru. It was under his atle 
guidance that the Institute started functioning and its various progr 
Fa were finalised. His passing away has been a big and irreparable 
loss a = The Institute will keep his memories always alive by follow: 
ae ideals and by executing with zeal the programmes inspired by 


ie 


( it ) 


I must take this opportunity to express my heartfelt gratitudes to 
Shri B. B. Varma. Member Parliament, who has never shirked in 
shouldering the responsibilities of managing the affairs of the Institute 
first asa member of its Executive Council and now as its President. 
I am also thankful to Dewan Hari Krishan Das, Chairman of the Exe- 
cutive Ccuncil and Shri F.C. Bedi Treasurer of the Institute for their 
ungrudging support to the cause of the Institute. 


My thanks are also due to Dr. Sampurnanand, Governor Rajasthan: 
who has blessed the Institute by inaugurating it and has now been kind 
to write a foreword for the present book. I am also indebted to Dr. 
Satya Prakash, Head of the Deptt. of Chemistry, Allahabad University 
for his having spared time to write an introduction in English for this 
publication. He has always been cheerfully allowing usto draw on his 
rich experience and wealth of knowledge. I am also grateful to Pt. 
Mukund Mishra, Pt. Vishwa Nath Jha, Shri Daya Shankar Dixit and 
a Om a Sharma, the learned scholars who helped me in preparing 
this work. 


The book has been published in four volumes. Volume I includes 
introduction in English by Dr. Satya Prakash followed by the text as 
given in the copy of the manuscript obtain_d from the Bhandarkar 
Research Institute, Poona, with footnotes to collatethe various versions 
found in the copies of the manuscripts procured from the Royal Asiatic 
Society, Bombay, the Oriental Research Institute, Baroda and the 
Vishweshwaranand Vedic Research Institute, Hoshiarpur. The volume 
also contains a Sanskrit Bhumika from the Chief Editor and an Inde* 
of Shlokas. Volume II comprises of the first nine chaptcrs of Brahma 
Sphuta Siddhanta containing only those readings which we have 
considered as correct. It also includes Vasana commentary of Prthtdaka 
Swami and Vigyan Bhashya in Sanskrit with Hirdi translation. 
Volume III includes chapters 10 to 16. This volume also contains 
Nutan Tilak commentary of Sudhakar Dwivedi and Vigyan Bhashya 
in Sanskrit with Hindi translation. Volume IV ccmprises of chapters 
17 to 24 and also an Index of Shlokas contained in Volumes IJ. III and 
IV. It alsoincludes an: ppendix on Dhayana Grhaoradeshadadhyaya. 
Another appendix in this volume contains Vadsa14 commentary on 
Goladhyaya. 


The Institute has planned to add to its list of publications, 
shortly, Samrat Siddhanta (3000 pages and already in press). Brhad 
Yavan Jataka (2000 pages) and Panch Siddhaniika (1€00 pages). 


The Indian Institute of Astronomical & Sanskrit Research 
considers it a proud priviledge to dedicate Brahma Sphuta Sidhanta to 
Shri S. K. Patil, Union Minister for Railways. I am highly grateful to 
him for his having consented to this dedication. I am also grateful to 
Shri kK. M. Munshi and Shri Wadilal Chaturbhuy Gandhi for their 
kindly agreeing to my request to ke President and Chairman respect- 
ively of the Reception Committee. My heart felt thanks are also due 
to Shri Kanti Lal H. Shah. Hony. Secy. of the Organising Committee 
and to all the members of the organising and the Reception Committees 
for their help and cooperation in my work. I also owe a deht of grati- 


( iii ) 


tude to the Patronsof the Institute : His Majesty the King of Nepal, 
Abhinaya Samrat. Shri Prithvi Raj Kapoor, Shri Dhairyasinh, R, 
Morarji: Chairman Dharamsi Morarji & Co, Bombay. Shri Prantal 
Bhogilal, Patel Bombay for their invaluable help. Lam also dratetul to 
the life members of the Institute : H.H. Maharaja Manabendia Shah of 
Tehri Garhwal, Yuvraj P.C Dev, Shri B.N. Bhaskar, Shri RK. Batra. 
Shri Sada Jivatlal Chandulal, Shri Shiv Kumar Bhuvalka, Shri Jami 
Das H. Moorjani, Shri Shantilal K. Somaiya, Shri Kisonlal M. Diwanti, 
Solicitor, Shri N. K. Jalan, Shri D. R. Nayar, Shri Vadilal CL Gandhi, 
Shri Devi Prasad Khandelval, Shri Ram Prasad Khandelwal, Shri i. K. 
Jalan, Shri Amir Chand T. Gupta, Shri Laxman Vaman Apte, Sme, 
Padma Koregaonkar. Shri Yodh Raj Bhalla for their support to the 
Institute. 


I must make a special mention here of shri A.N. Jha, Chief 
Commissioner, Delhi, who has greatly encourage] me in my task of 
publishing old manuscripts. His help in solving the various problems 
faced by me, has been invaluable. Lam highly grateful to him for 
his support in my cause. I am also grate ul to H. He Maharata 
Manabedra Shah of Tehri Garhwal, Seth Sadajivat Lal Smen Palins 
Koregaonkar, Lala Yodh Raj Bhalla, Shri fA lazalbhai, Shri Morar J, 
Vaidya, Shri N.J. Aggarwal Shri P.S. Naulakha, Shri R. 1, 
Maheshwari, Shri I. N. Bhattacharjee, Shri P. Al Narinalewal. 
Shri P. M. Aggrawal, Shri Shiv Kumar Bhuvalka, Shri Navin 
Bhai Khandwala and Smti. Nirmala Gomte. Lali Jagan Nath Ji, 
Shri L.S, Aggarwal, Shri B.N. Saxena, Shri R.B. Shah, Shri 1.0. Joshi. 
Shri T.S. Krishnamurti, ShriR.S, Chitkara, Dr. Ram Karan Sharma, 
Shri V.P. Agnihotri, Shri K.L, Handa and Shri K.G. Somayya for their 
help and advice at various occasions. 


Ram Swarup Sharma 
Bombay 
17-5-1966. 


Pak eN o 


O22 SG) Ot a aN 


9, 


LN NPN NON ON NN ON saa 


fagargaaloat 


Nee Ned Nee Ne ee Seed Nae Se ae ee Se Stee eee 


) 
) 
Y 


(Or ) 


Foreword 
Observatlons of Dr. K.M: Munshi 
Publisher’s Note 


Index 

wat 

Introduction 1—344 
CONTENTS PAGE 

Astronomy in ancient nations 1—45 

Personal references of Brahmagupta. 47— 56 


Brahma Sphuta-Siddhanta & Khandakhadyaka. 57—94 
Brahmagupta’s Originality in the Khandakhadyaka. 95—104 


Indian Luni-solar Astronomy. 107—124 
Greek & Hindu methods in Spherical Astronomy. 125—145 
Epicyclic theory of Ancient Indians. 147—152 
Brahmagupta & Arithmetic. 153—187 
Brahmagupta as an Algebraist. 189—276 
Arabic & Indian divisions of the Zodiac. 277 — 288 
Brahmagupta’s Astronomy : its highlight 289—314 
Brahmagupta—a great critic. 317—330 
Brahmagupta and Astronomical Instruments. 331-344 
mMarKelagra | re me 2—322 

. weqarfrare: 9—22 

SCH CES QB ¥5 

. Parsaarfrate: ¥RE—192 

. SETSUTPT HTT: g2—WI9 
SUBEAUICEORS ieo—a¥ 
TAATEATAATT: SY —Lo 


aR Macatee: ~ 89-85 


(2) 


5. BRRVaTA TIT: 

a. megeafatz: 

go. WTSZA TA: 

92. TATATEATA 

92. afamareara: 

93. Heamfasealea TeaTs: 
Qv. THETA: 
ey. fayRarearereara: 

Qe. TAMTATEATA: 

Qi. YT BACAA ET: 
go. HEAeAra: 

98, THPOMATAMTATEATA: 
Qo. BAA PAMATT: 
QQ. WaATEATT: 

22. AFATEATA: 

QR. ATATEATA: 

Qv. AHA: 


8. earragrrsartearay ies das 
9, marafs weer sehetgra fore 


yoy - Zoe 
$90. Es 
$29 Wy 
Wye foe 
Pak CER 
gay 4es 
ee HY 
EER vee 
RO” VEN 
Vee YER 
VE gar Se 
vay WOU 
Vaan YS a 
VEG BPY, 
328 Fes 
Bee 2oN 
FRI— BAG 
3R0 RXR 


afaal 
AATAEA ATAGTATT: 


Saaatas TATATs TT WHTTATT | 
qemaagetiat: — wafaua: ul 
ara: egefaarea: aomamtraairaaenes | 
fag | PAA 


eft araegefearsiadaread ATTA HR0 THay-ATaT- 
seq (FIT) TH AAIRIT: TE faafa avg may da aTaeRe- 
fraradaal saifrafaarasat fafa: laseeret firrarea aA 
are varer aeMeAT agat Tae waATTAT feet | TALS 
sitfafact qeaardtstr frerrremisgar PHARTeATHAT sfaat a4 
carssataea wereaTt fareafcr | qaearaaaat ates (ATEaT<) 


Saat samen fafr mraraayaretae mers aTaTAR AST FTAA 
ATAT ATAISTAT METSISTET 


aoqadtaquurnd safearrtiga weERe fart 
gaa faePan: 1 aferarieaearty amfyaemit—vene aaa 
SrUreatt stafaard sate aad ataegefeared tfaTary 
Fay: | 
aad venfgd Hear BIT FG Farryay | 
afta wpe afm =u 
area | weet att aferarfametea: | 
aeepavers: «weet faataraat 


SUTRA CFE TAT | AA aqaararagaana freone hat 

Arar wfaaTsseg BISGAT AEGUTT mele ATTeTMAT | RAAF atga- 

aated: egal at dat (ARH FAT) THAT SSMATET WET area 

SETA TAA TTATA TATA MATA GATT: ORR array 

g. qarenareeageicrt Cainer aareaceaeen | waa fa fae 
arataafafa agat AAHteT 


ae 


(220 Searee) Ba aTTVAT 1 arr araregeferaracarfas Aa 
goonftar Mat: ated, Tal Tals g. HEAT: | 2 eqenfa: | 2. fanea- 
ENTE: |. AFRASUITEATA: LM. TAMTTEATA: |G. SAAT TAL T: 
o. FET SATA: | C. HL RGTATEATT: | 8. TAPTOTT:, Yo A 
qereara:, eft waremrar: afer Tee Tg. AT TPE | 
2. TfUaTEMA: |. HEMTOTM TENT bs, RAMA I 
uy, PANRAVATEMTT: |. TEMA: |. TTT ET 
CJA UATT: | %, BEATHTEATA: | 20. HAPMAP MTT: 1 VAT 
SMT: | QR. TATEATA: | QR. ATTTEITA: | 08. TATE TELE 
ear: aa, gatiacratematatiar agirafrterra wa wer abet | 
ag aarterenay fearug: | aa agararatat arnhy wile 
araraaifeafaaifa | taT— 


mere qaTATSl weariaere TTT 
aaga tageerfa Pract aararry wey 
graraaraaag = afeaarsaaafeeprtrary | 
aectgafett-1ra-Eqse tH TTT ATT AAT i 
seat yaar wasaaIaH: FA: TAT | 
wart | weleaTaifaat fae eT on 
aaatt weraete veariag wate eftenfintary | 
aeuaf aagarercnasegerent farareary uy 


uta: aia: Aoerartaat Cafagres:, faepzgaa cit 
atfaccfreraangauneta cemematararte aaanfer 1 
fealfaarat fia faye arefiierrataat gar. 
yaa: gana solfaufrarawearcatrarcraray yoo arTant Tay 
uuo THT Tat: (ater faoapwerth:) refs afr 
fraroafariqaeternrntate ert Fear fertteeqarssargm 
(Faryda) Meteor aErate segue’ frearfe Heas | wardazer 
feara: waa dorag vate aecararat (warycs:) agda agente 
eusfag: mer TATA | Tat yA aveaty— 


arorafet Het yate afe eat are HAVATTy | 
“Matas Ta AEST: RATA 


( & ) 


qfreareames waat fern ealaer— weterargha: caren 
oft qhreat Bao Head ara ueata-sraer aaah: | ARTA 
qa AAA Suga Tafsararay sya cay TT 


eqyaa ATT UTHATATAAeT eRe canfuTey | 
fag aaegecd weurdrat fararere ou 
wrareanare sat Taal TPTTHTATIATATT | 
THAT Tey AG! TAR TTR STUTAIMT | 
AAAI FAT aM FT TIT ALATT 
qearaaazert = gfamatsarfa arse far 


tag veTeUeaaat TATA: wTAATaaTASA ArT fafrsety 
velfearafadta afar safadier canary stele 
sfaareate — 


ae Bray wet yaiseafay geet afar: | 
TUT BRAT —- HETISAVSATATAA 11 
afe farar: faratear wren taereaatsfy Year: | 
a owe: qdeat fagaatedt = er 


gearfeat arecafrarciach: aaa aaa) fafase faaqarage 
frarmret tage vt <aaafgresrslfaa rary ae | 
‘edt safe fess masamgeta’ fefecafrerafroaaifiar- 
Say wR TaTaars Tels agaease aETCT- 
adiera Fras Tass TIT SaAsPiET saa 
TeMATTATS wea va efa welas | eased area fete 
TaAegefasran aad | saraadisafes: sega afisafa ead 
7a1— 


qurenifagard § ufharsatsaafraarzaa: | 
PIPE CUCCEC HIG MELD CCUGICC CRIME CG ap 


auefafetsrraarraraet afagrs arifefs ‘gat marae 
dae gaaeag eft anata araet | aearnasBararal arfaqra 
miafeeakaraie TAATTAT ATT HA FaTaawwarafy sarah | 


(ea) 


qsanteat ad: athaciar: sar Unda ofaafeerracfs asad TaeT- 
amararaa wate aah aaypdaaasad Treathis | avi 
aefaaet aa saryedt aTeegefoararcsraraat sahara a7 
queasy aang UTA GAT ATTA — 


sfager uged sagcfafafaraeay | 
qe SVSa SHAT AATAe TAHA II 


mauuer | eaaare: yfafaat aatseaT: | 
VESTA aay | TATA ATTA: 1 


sfa agmueroaictaaar aad aeaaa oaagIeHAT ATAATAT 

mea yafcariens froma aforartfafa—orrerargat- 
TFTA TATAHAAT ATT STAT ATARCH: BUTT: GSAT 
aaa that TATA | AAT’ sredleafearamay aa 
cRefaarad ARIST Waeaia aTat HLUTATATHTaeTATeA aT 
AAMATTTAT: TT AISaTTH BUY! WA TaTqratacgA- 
ataararfa wenraft facroifa’ ef storie areata aad 
Tees fager atanfud wea area see: Hah AreaT 
q aT aa | Aaya Us atta saa yT: | aTeEHefrstea- 
FaSaNaT: Tataarat aad ae eA: afecar sgarsaTT 
art va qgarareegrafurataa: stefan seqat wenycdies Wz. 
afud get aratwafrs cea wlay aofrengieaaed eaqesz. 
TaTHATISTT |TAAt Tatar (fstea Far) Barr, ara Farafy 
fasfagfa: | weacaararaet steafaaea seared wate |e saa 
fast waa at frat aa aaa Srey aalta faaater 
aft: arate ata aferarg 1 aegdt catieedt: (ararege 
fearafrerftafgeat:) ofeattert seat siveferar fraratreadt faa: | 
aTalege faart Asmraratat aah sama afer Fat araet 
| «fefeatefaeat: att frarararmfza: ater: stat ar werfrater 
wa, aut Shaq fromefrarrarearcgen’ | qeafearhearct 
avrefafeta stettseara oaratseareat: damefeare: afar 


oat . bo 2% ie 


—Reefaat ceagt actin: frarmdtafeente | 


( x ) 


aaa waart oeafrecaca aeastaTy | 
feya arafearel Hale BT TarAATT URW! 
an yeast aot fafa wareasera: | 
fegaart: aafaet aft afasaraq nan 
aITy Te Far aetausdtserat fafa: gar 
maey  eafeaar | Tt | TS ATFATEATAT: UII 
cafiaatgera: cafranea feautr aeaTTAe | 
fet oafacquad grad  feaaaray 4 


uTaqararsfeary gt ateagifay, AAT: =x x 22= fo | 
afamrat=2 | aA =e wa Paeeafverferatt:—=pago, Aa- 
arft=30, wat carfeaaatseta:= e230 Ef 1 


qa faarfaarat ctf fagien:’ ef ateat CHtsearat acta, 
qraege faaradrarat gaara agra dfrafeararaatta sara 
aaa of afta i aea fraracatag: area agi wareafa afee | 
quetetioatard saageug ysafrar area AaTAT- 
afeafaaatet | wat — 


FAVA AISA: AtarTarcat Framrafaeat: | 
arrmeat «frafa: «=o arama = aearfa i 


arneaafadies tafaara Gfarfaardterat sda 1 araTehe- 
faaracrarat gqarq ‘eareae Var a fray aaa’ EeqwMY | Tar sz 
gfaarata:— 


‘goafaat danger latrarareaTy l 
aarat Tet Tee THETA ETA TT uw 


secre faarta dtfaafaara: aqarg arditfete sferartat 
gerd fagra: aera arrervad ete | 


ee av frarea va stirrer: adem; faerarea eft agat fagui 
afrerennqates -farvcitsafeta AEaATE | 
gaaha Yearerararararaeaaqaq il’ - 


(ee) 


ahr sreracrar tag way a warea wahrar | mrEeayeT 
fasaisrafes aear (qafeart) satay | 


fare at wat awe ota ofeerae | 
TSPUTS HRT TTHTE ATUTATATAT 11” 
‘aatfereat osareaiat fastar saathrar: | 
THATS Taq wrfaeorar Ateefery 


watt santero aaegefaarofaatar sea aeT 
(maaan) wise aT GAT) Bt TATA aeaal a wafT a aa 
q frarreterenfemt ‘afafie agged eardtiswa aaa’ 
gerfaat ealfer aerarfia waar ga afearhe afta, wea sae 
gaatiat carat tear faa adtfea aerarat ad a wate Pret 
a taisaeaisa: § Fafagiterafastart vite: vfere, cf 
afeafacatta cenit afte | oreanfrart qafeatiaree Ge — 


mrearcaraayer: aTeY aaisfrerea: | 
WAST Tey aheas u 
Ua = aaa SETA 
RSL CO SMEG CoCo. aa 
TAT AATAAT AT SATS HHA: i 
WIS «| - ASSP TTR ARTATTEIT II 


eer Tafeaaars: adadfrrersgie | ara warrara- 
WaT seTent Kee erst Ashe | ear T— 


wie aifayacafadt gar | 


favafe dat oe: errearat famtara 1 


wararTifaea:  afacitsaigfarteatreht agar <fraezat: 
afr wares ay feare: Ta: RTT | Far Tenaafeey- 
ale aarferereararaeeey agararae ara arearara: caret | 


_ WaeRefarastr afatreram qifrardtmacetaay | 
frame? faaranid manatee ati Gfenfrveramy. 
NT armayfafireeadaaernre | aera watt fara 


( » ) 


aeararaaa aTaatafay gafe™s gaat aa Bey aa wha, 
magqafart = Gfenfacarreaa (aeReT eTSRTRAT ae) ATACHTA- 
qaaaaam (vafeqagtiaged safaraq mrcafaat aataarafecd 
vata aa faranearsarea: aed wadlerd: 1) avaq afafa: werea- 
Hiee: Tatar aaa: aya: | TET ye AeReT eqTRTAT 
VSAM GTeHMTATTATAY wala) ee ga: afkafeaey 
aratgianfey wenaaay farad got da) RafseaTaTy sadtara- 
ara. adrafed aegeanreed Sa ferad quart fafrafirie 
pfeagad afer —agaa aa seq | qafegrarfey waar 
wa TAS swe aa aT a ata wadifa, seeness 
frarararaaaera: go: 1 aa: Aefeuaral(weeeara) eatatais- 
fea | areeqe feared aearateeret athe 1 


wreatarat safsiaat wet artes wa aduam feared: wrea- 
ered ofteat aradtat waafa | war afearnaer seats afery 
WEFT YRQoooo WATT: WwsVsekoo Valaat wardify sea 
aaltea eereaartar yaaa 


agora: waa fata aq 
mamta wit aeq aathaamft agrary 


malt eelatiia | Tea fafrataeataad gerade epar- 
PY TATA SMTA WA: TTA Tera TeTATAS- 
sofa afrafrerarmangerat sara silage wat: aT 
faxfretad | caetaeg feataafay egy | eatcandae: — 


saaTeraa fafa fread saga argar fetca: | 
wgeataamt wat ara wate i 


ear WAU eres | aaeer wate fat 
aretag gfrat safe-aar safe | sayedtaryd seq ‘aaa’ ofa 
Tay | WaneaareyaTufe demte at fe eqewe: gar 
Tests a camiata: (weneita:) a aelsears aa meretaat wate | 
VaTenTs easeuel vfaquefa | camiiaeqens aaa deartaears 
ersenel Wate Tea SeaTRET ATA aaa” geTCTE: Ashe wear 
ararat waer (AaHAT:) ATAAS T HAART: | eRe freqea- 


(5) 


frdaatifgarearaes eqerfrart-caecatsaaa saTusfafer: 1 ‘yz: 
epelal want raleafatead fasgaat wae’ eft wrens 
reaeafaearal aay waft 1 wreRTTAT ATEse eso 
yefafed ayaaft ateenclraraea earqugtearemas way 
aa, Tt watUaeacaraea Preah fefaay | areata g fagiea- 
Teafaae ATCRU HANTS HTT GUST HAH | ALAA: 
araHUa Bst T THY 1 aaenchaard fasearfant 
ferarat ‘qainwilieg geassaraterrea: | gata: afar 
THER feat’ gay araanferarat sae Fe eas aes 
agar sugaarat waft ata ‘srnfrtaayasraaara- 
aafeasitareaciy crear stata, ag ‘aenraray sraratteg fares” 
eafeat areata A TTT RRMA aga Hangs s 
arena faeafe | aeera aresty cand a ofa aarft aexaeat 
eqetrraaaret ares firiefraq serea’ earfear waryca- 
wa ad aeafralt waydtetaaavrnier | aeararday ame 
aUTUTASITST a | TET «TT soe 
mehr sas weg wet Temerafaea- 
GAT AFIT TTT AAT’ THT | 


TTT: BSP: ATT: | 
vena Uae F eyfearet aeqeaa 1’ 
(ar@ege fratear weaTT 2) 


ef weyers’ sft seat art meafeearearersat- 
fafaat qearary Ueafrerat eae eft eae waft mtarsraiaat 
wet sat TEyT wa aad aveaft 1 auefatee daz 
faarandaeruretat agate frardtefararat aad edtacr 1 


rae Tefen AeA Has aq fartrray | 
fiat  aRoasygeanata on 


| RT setearata deers eget 1 atest greg 
a ratraratstoarttt alfete ferent | werqaeg— 
Rerrentaetisd aatgeta fraray | 

tet mR a ata seem 1’ 


(©) 


agrarsart watt faareatfarafa 1 araencfeared aes 
eray waited cae aarfe agal favar aa faaferar: afea, TeAT- 
wars aaeaerardisedtfonay a atfafanfarhr: sferaria | 
waa ‘Brahagaraesa: afer, 7a fafearat eeattarat eave 
cafes Sas THAT AY aTeet afseaaher aeet + Hae 
waeata, sder era ar ?, seaearal aveaisa washer 7 
TEMSAy farawIAgT | AT Ty HEmTEATAlA TS aTEMTATAT RAT: 
ware: aH gra feafaar: aft 1 aoravasat great wala faarea- 
wea fag wfguea | frarafrcered frat ‘stararst fata 
quasar HTT sefaeatagaya erg | azar TerHTA feat 
faatera WeVT — 


at: alfeanrefearfaen: aarraarercdtoaetts rere ffir: 
tT areravsyfia faga: wat g sarfataarhe wat yatfests y 


ate darft fafaaaiea arta ahage sat sarfafaar woraife- 
INUIT STITT A ATTN FATT RTH TAT TTT 
TTT — 
THRET MATTT «—- ATaATETATT ATA: | 
qeadigaad fairer = earewergfaar it 
ASTT TLAHATAT ASTATAT THe faa SATA: | 
weleaaaaaearaes THETA i 


QOCSATATAT TAA eT 


RSIS: TETRA R TTT: 
geesarregaearears «= fautftar = eu 
wafase: steud vag: datter aoarree: | 
ua safer wafe sara feat sara uy 








g. Pace wareisa strgadisenta satfafaet wet sfretsitr 1 ade 
TATARATTAMAALT | TTA TEMA TUTTAL aTazata aga: 
water fafafaan: | 


( % ) 


qaaget Ta ateacfrara aceasta ealararcistafer: 

fraradat ada std: aaa: sarasettatatfes, aaryatey- 
Fae UT BeisAy fefear: afea’ sera qeafaarhantat wait 
aafreatfreet afacsfrara: Tamefrarass Tea eT wT 
fafa aarft safaerataa afateag arfasofaata: qararhrarts I 
arate — 

aed aaenel weqfagey aextat 7 

sagaatteraeenta PITT ATATTTT FLATT 

aTaraay wT arfasorfasaateeae Wary 

aedtoanfefamreasel a cUeTATaMETA it 

sear qeear | waa: Ha: TAT: 

waa ada afesst fauara ol 


ef waar afassfrgracafaar fasmpaexaran: wher 
aa | armadtss famaeg: smd afassfeard weaaarfata 
‘varia year afasat faa’ eget eae waft | TAT 
TAisgat Hal Trarag | vada fasyaaey ad ay TT TT ATA- 
wereat ae TaTAT Ufosry | 


ae tyson 


2. wHeTETUT feerateae | fraratacer giaganfaan® | 

freqearg featransdia agar opal way 

gata wren: feafraet gat frararesey | 
THAT ATYAT farrouTaga4r 

wetaiagaaas oer terete on 
afar  weortarscafmercda waft 

water gt aatshrentany \ 
anafaatard guifedamdtserar ferfraer- 

Fee Fate gt 





aft saqstecert— 
aaa fromang feafrata drrgara 1 
mreoreyarertiina eat: 
oy fret castorate | 
. wrest setafeete = faci 
(RS ges 24 I) 


(su) 
oe steht faagdaftat aarerat weeacagrfararg 
Brisatay ata faaeq caaer cater fafeaarafia aqaafaai 
wear sa OA: | Tahara wreweraTaaMsSHs st at Oh Ss- 
fafa seareataree eacraater 
aa eR: — Teaser TeTTfsat PreraaaeretoT 


waa: aTeaea Fargra freq Fargrat aria aar~y safe: 
wearer sreret ava festa gadtatafa sat oeatsht ware BTA 


SEA TGA ATTNT TAT T THTTATLY ee feaks ea aragt slap, 
feqenetagara ofeeqefas: carearad Taaq 
arenas aeanfedt mae frat 


feaerta ofeegey afrattarferasaag 
afeearat aifsar: ferfres ca: eqeigaeat: eRe 


mea setae fact weal ad aie | wars aerate 
epefrermreersranangd ferepgagaatar t 
aeege feared feacutrgatreararg 
aeersefataeaerat eae farae fagirgqarg t 
eq faratqarapedt eget Frmaiey 1 
seq grefaaea i frarafertaat— 
frearanicamarg fahren fiercest 
TRAIT gente wa ferrets | 
ware afuamad aga at afar 
wat wetter aerate BATE weGNT 
wreacadaty wade aagerafet | ut freratea qf aera 
Wat eRe vate Tastee aad ae aoeta: STR gaTAaafe forea_aT 
wena aired shegey af Tag TEAT— 
eufqaad a waft aearg Taser <faEa | 
TRATAAT waat TAT saeurfs feearay 
So AEINT | ETT «wer aarfta araeareeaedata feafafefet 
satan ‘aforge feared frarrtreah’ weiteta cge wate 


(8 


gate: pateatarat ofearst: wat, wera war, gaat Aeardtat 
ararfe araifs a ae waagia: satwaaTa zeae aTaly AeA- 
aifrardad tod: areararearateeeatarat RaTTFATATARATHTTT 
afaat mearearat wraTtTSrra ag | a TRAIT A TT T 
faatarg saaaae siete: wat (MTeATEATS) TERT AT HAA | 
aeat meqarerecafe: cartzeimraad, Far mula airaafe- 
feat agarararatat aarfa, agzrageazearfaa tara aht 94a, 
megs aga qf saraerafa, weartrat aaaraftr 
aIat wenfereteanareneat agaist  tafapaardlaTa- 
faaror Tete 


maese fart agfata vated aeagiaraad = aaAl- 
yaa ao, aaimetraaTeaT UT Tafa HT TS PrgTA- 
aL SEIT ATALT FAT WAHT T FAT | WaT eAraa aA: 
aa: are ef wages softat a ahaa: | cata fatale TeeaT 
aratasfats fearafrdant onisarcriaasraaaeday fata fera- 
aft defa’cara arena: «waafe 1 acearfrerastt age: 
THT | weagtITAT A aTeMeTHAT Hanfea | Wee 
MAM Teer afaaeqrdtsHaata’ garfear, srq- 
araraad aaa faarfanafeafa aa’ seorfat say) wate aea- 
BITTY eales TTT TaTAAGs seg ofrofeay | atervaHe wea- 
eiviaad weeaefed afta, usefafead: svdtarsradatret aea- 
STUTATT TST NT BATH TT HreNTHTeTeaReTTAAAET 
QSANT FIN | THEME Tararergiyer aeoraraifafag a- 
saat aafsafa: easar semnsaTes TearRsT VAY Harageat aifray- 
TIA aT Heey TeTeT | PASAT Bs, TATTET GAPATT BQuofar 
fasar, sttafrar tafgrat axe Pasar getat aerrcatenaafefi: = 
yooo, WERT TeaTaafratraratat — gerart 
Tata = eeoussyl aftattafierT: geaer  aalfafafearar 
Waa = use, Ae =vege wrt warren swfararfearafer, 
Qiraris wreaiaatea, fraratet, frarafrdearatir 
YIRATEAY srTetaTaiwaeaiied, Tash ged feegranralar: 
ToTARTTRTT | 
OO . frenfier. cereargarferraiart amar agedt <earrt- 
Te wa abaaTEaTehT | adie Gdaiemay wafer 


( 2) 


aad wemeeaatd carla ca vate: araitt: afar HT, 
Ta SAT ATA — 

saifaeatariga farsa aararat | 

waaidt oo sraferter | garal | a aRT AL I 


amrafetrergaral egal THT saeayeT wat HET | aaiseaThata 
waa waa FAA | Malar awgefeaaer fasertt ferearaat- 
afar | wafe aqadt fasta’ cata craart aTeaT— 
maqasratadt verarsferat zara ararferat vata afanat facta 
wafer wate afendt ade gage: aaaat aaaferat 
ate saredtt off efaumesar aaf sax od eaTq) 
elt oo asediaa at fatter oo cafasrdife oe fae 


gat Moghafas teat FT TT WER TATT: — 
aifasat frearedt fararrsatgat ctsat 
Tagua wt aears: | yaTAASAT | 
WaTSRZT: TATST ATATAT AT S3T ALTATATT | 
mafarentt = wareqhareramaedat = veer 


RaraTaionaea Hfaaary tad “agPareatt earfafa’ fears 
array | Tea aTe  frareafercaratrtar- 
eaTashrfaay | weHa Tata: HAVTHTS: ovata: sash fesrea- 
Ta safrfasraaany wear weafrararsa faferaSsta 
cagautareaa, saat: 1 fearaaeafeas are oascafret 
qaaisferst ear facatfe sia vaatratan aateet fafacar 
FHATHT — 


mafag@ fed gam ada aa fel 
tad gata vancaat tae: 1 


eUdT went wages faery acga: ‘ada aTaat'fa 
BHSTHU CH AMAAsT 1 TC aaa TATUST stage aft aaarata 
Hien: | fesrratratearsreal saris sroTaeaaeargiasr satfafaat 
START TAT | afe Ta: TaTATT HIS TaTe: oases ATHETET 
mareeaey wafsar stofaraeata saat salfateat setararafaera 
a apishh aeag: | Hectad aaaq aafrsafad waafege casa 


( & ) 


RAT ATH ATTA Tea TATA AAT patatr | 
wares <vaaryat attafararfe, caraearra rar ea 
eqaara, war farataad, wreaTAaTaTaaa, PTET OAT EE:, 
sftaftar aeetrate a eIaRAATeTA fatoaat THaATAlea: | AAI 
waged va qaazurbsare: Matsa sa: aalareaeeth: | S<AeATAAT- 
amy amare stot det adit attafaransit arta 
Tea HaT— 


aadrafate: wHTEd TIA SRHTATIAT AAT | 
aqupamanafaiagd caste saad 


oa TERI TUT a, Urea meHTAaMT ‘a a 
TaRReGUT wEequiA’ afar ata | ARTETA AAT TAT 
favor: sfanfeat: ate, aeftar gy ateryaeeararaiat az: 
acter aqfeat: | aeqay arfer afeafezre: | Fae wee eqeeaTT- 
aay oaaqarargaaat a ageata sarceacfer egetacar farfia- 
ofa ofa | TuemeacaaTaRaaTaTaH AT TeTeeaa (7e- 
TSTeITA-TSAVTEAT AT) — 


maT cangiasiisenaa fagat BoA ATT 
aah: arg Ugareaaarss F ATaTaaT BAST: sea 


eT reget enfqteeq ate wees yaraz- 
mate area | fraser weswaauangyaad wa- 
argirarat waa sdlfeedte | geqeaaet sed staf te 
waaay frarear SaeaTATaT HAT | TAT A— 


Praftieraiieacyssa wraasfatredt warear fret 
waft aunere agua ated gagerfraifasrdreatar ie 
—TeaErrard Isat gaat afer Leceey Proratafrsse | cme. 
ferar defeat ar yVa-eReT UTR UTfraT PeTATSSCRT 11H 


attrac yidtigieng aged agearttad | 
wafe fz are smeaarfeaa menfqamad ay freafgc ne 







aaiastuita eafudend stata ae deere eae 
aft arate are aaa fearfadt aEa 1 Teh} 


(a8, 


serdtaraeatecat waar fear frat: | 
TU spHega: HM ETTS ATA: BATT 
wt TaTgIeraarcas == carat ay 
ET Ae Tt AAT TaTaTETT ASAI I 


qaMaET UT weedeat yeaa ‘ayaa ATA 
TT aha: | Tea: aera arate Aaa eszay TAT 
furdist afaa efe ofaarfa | logis TERT WER TATAUTaASS- 
sear faafracaa watoaafacaregia sfamarirat ‘atta’ 
ATTY TT: ye aeHeAS: fearahartfg carHag at — 


aaa atsras gat alana TU Mee | 

THIS Taras st cares sts AAT FATAT 11211 
qaft = gaat aatargenaTTaenfearr | 
Harada aaq eRe Fea TAH: URW 
equate: Ber: eA | TATAVT: | 

WI se TeeaTT ararfandrafaecat | ger 31 
UAT TACATH AHL SHTSATLATT SATHTTTT: TALS: | 
TaIPAHe feared fara fret fersaeasta ivu 
wares Taafaaaes ated fe ara favs ae: TATA 
ween fagfeqer faeaaa arrnafeeary iyit 
vat Tet fafaraerqaed satat afe weaasa: | 
SATATRAATA ST TATA Mat HAaTecallaAaT igi 


sarfeat faarafrdefaagrearasrafsal facfaa sfa 1 
waeTTETA— 


sare «= efeaq = turduefacqpaesreny | 
sfafeaqaase at a waft eafaattary ie 


WEMPeIeT aaa «afer | aearht 
emfuaat ea fasare Prdfeaear nen 


aft Taya ThseaqagHA | wats sare Gea AGU (wa- 
waite) ATTA: aegis eRStacatsafea: AraaaeT | 


( && ) 


mage ofendfaate: (gery, eaanfary. 
HACIA UAT | ATI, VT, STATA, AT, TARAR ) TAHMA:, 
sufaay, aearuitay, arhsy, aaueay, aang, ear 
eaufran, wossfa amg aft) afsarsfer, ayaa ayaeraraferr 
wera: (SeretaTa) afr 1 faarearatshy iPeadfaah: (afarar- 
Brat TUT A-aT-Ta-Ta-aT TATA Te &, PRAT eTAaT TTT EAT 
TUTTI STAT GOTAT TSG, AMT TANT ATTRA TATA T TOT 
alfa aqeay x, fratrad 9, Tuer 2, eet TTfTAT 2, TSA 
uafaay 9, eft) saat frat ofeay fara wera 
Ratshea afgaa: oft aft agar fara afer) arent 
sarifagn: (agfaadt wressfrared araq) area: eReK tT 
afarar: ofa a azar waar: ofendfaeegefarar 1 far 
Teg Taya aeTUet-aaaT os fey senha qreacatt 
faeat farar: aft | wamBl aaagra: (frre caagre:, Pet orazte:, 
aaa, araeraere:, fafa saaare:, wrafan erzare:, afreTa- 
Ae:, HIeFaIT:) aeHefeard, frgrewat arena aaa 
a afte, waersg caagreaft agdarqremcaates, mag aqazrty 
Fara gweTTat | aTeRCReaTETty-fararfaad-farca- 
shaman egeet arf, aearaar (qigegefeara:, fraratrac:, alar- 
act 4) aetarate eye wafa, wage geateatatsher oy TeANCTATTT 
tara:, RpeMega Trea: | Pameatearrema: | weitere: | TR 
FTV: | WAG Taga TEMay Aare: year: aha, weapardla 
fave: afa, Igremnta great alta salfaafrarafaaig-fagar 
Ragrefa saenaier: alacant: fefaq frfeaeteaz- 
frarcfrararet aramard | frarafirdeacaret art matsfear | 
wat serafer: Hzzareqraistea, Faye HTEaTA'  elhyey TH 
wreatterat faanfisanfer freq farraaaegeay WERTH 
aarfea, sata ag laaeras frafe-wrentaaratartta-fre ra 
Tats, TH: Tasateae Arata, arexdedsah elec 
setieratte | aa: cHAaaadtacodoafe, waqafranqg- 


rie 








steneeeraeneienemare nae ee 


2. meat FeCHEAM sea: MereMTERT: afta Aerpererilarssae- 


a Torreaaa Tenrecrcara feafa ag rearafasaret ufag- 
er \ 


( ge ) 


afea, aa facanarcafiar: afta, areata st 
fasarfaata afed frat | freq faaratatsdta eaet afgat | aria 
ate Taya HB TH cae wreRtien aes feat, eTAT WTes- 
Ue ara ada | vacat aivafactes, afass srsatgrat atraraar- 
saa FT TEA Hearssary Atefaar wrestar a fafefrar, 
qt stafaar araaieaeg a ofaarfagq i anieraraat afasastesat- 
uaaad Taye HAa stays wrewta fafarq re alafaar qea- 
raed feat + fofarq asgeararfanrarearal sayereargs Tey 
ade faaratrat wend wet saceqrater favar st ata, aeaat 
aadasareaa: | gafagarreamedareaister, waeagatatag- 
chat at sar agarensafcafeat saa sgatsarafe aeareatafiw 
ae at fafaat 1 tereqatapitadeard-eargeread-aa aaa 
sraeqenaat wawaufeata:, Fazearat ufsateaa-ararat zfa- 
arate, Wile Terardaearafaearaat fara: afet— 


aa hefaga art TSNPAETATA fafaaatg | 
weracaisadt = «yore: | gaara 


gaa wera wasqaanisad sia sarada 
Head, ATATATATA WreRTars: frarakraaaniaenas Freaza4rgq 
fafarteait waa? aff afarary, aarerariarad: creer ‘qS4- 
STMT, TAA, WATAT-ATaTacer agat fava: qafraredepttar- 
eng ata afa, wer wet sara (araratierea-qafagaredt- 
wares) fagarearcreahy afer, fagararacer Tareas sitafa- 
aise feat fara arate ga afer: 1 “aeqe agora 
wedfeaadaagaa: att ofefadt eareTaad qafagenriteT 
‘aetat saree offer eareiaantata ofthat eararaaaaaféa, 
stofrartt ‘ara: careafwaanifercre ¢ fae’ fa carcraggeta farsa 
fafagrfia vey framsettic treat wera ‘ears wararfia- 
aa farat aarugd: ofa: gqen’ sar earareafearat | aeat | 
cafentta ofthat eararaaat wag TX Herat eqrareafeearaqaa 
gfefaat eararaat oat aT aalet oat: (afeaeatett:) araeaea- 
ferzcattater | 

SUTRA AAT ATTA saat FE ata fraser. 
gat safer fearaktainioras weate a safaft see 


( ge) 
aebrarcenenfen | areata aecasetereay seat faerar: afaattgat: 
afer | 
eqenfraraarat—anaeTaaAT FUGA AHS TAA aat- 
afafe sor: Het aT HA FAT FIRIA— 


fasarren: ofefix: wargEt argatieqaare: | 
eae  TeHTTTA = ATARUTTSeATT I 


afaay | fratrarat— 


faoares: faye: oferta: area oT PgROIATAAsTHATT | 
eUTATEHTEaANS be dae wl: FA A ageafy aaTATT 


ef feepareats arrarat ( FarTRT )es eT HEATGATTET A, 
meacraTaft— 


TAUUTACATAGHAUS FU: Fa Als sale Shag 
Pasalgaa: Borger: Hash HY eye: caret aaaySA 
qaraged wee aeaTa wet: BAT Af a BPaTy: 
aT a ae feet act fafaar HeAaraasy 


ae SUA Feaadiad ate waAG | aeration eet 7 
HIATT aha Read AeeHty eRTTGelT ATA AAT 
aHATTTT (Fa Tat weal t a aeaafefar: qracisa: 7 fasarafeaa: 1 
masa suerrard ofearaa 1 afe fasargcst ofifaerar aaf- 
ad  afa eqenfeha: | aa: eared ofehear qormtfests wtarfeerteat 
TeROATTRaha afeasTTT Yd SUT TM Met HAGETTT 
RaSt TETTAT | ae aaa ofa: aT eae ate fr 
aTeaaify + safrarres aga: aafi—seraartet Marea 
| aefregaatafe 1 azar ae wettest fist ageafer arranger t 

aa: weareat fafaarsettfe | aad qasfantate | 


—- gayareatat—ereatictt sear Uged weet a wadtle acrE- 
ina ee 


( ¢ ) 


ata saafife safrear uged veut wader eyfe ard aearaet + 
sfafaay | gaat Used TET A waft | Te_ eHfag-guayg F2g 
a UgEd wen sfaafarreaaisa ca TM: TART: — 


ugeaTsaafe = osfaafe segarIsaaeTT 
yerataaeatawaraTq HATA 
FATTAA STA AaATHTATERTET AAT | 
graate afraat wgearafe aq afag: 


maa He: | fearakroay aay WERT WATHET 
PIETY | weed Tet sfans eefagaafeada ae 
aT — 


Ug: FUANTAT: TASH TaTSMTavaadls fray | 
aaa: |. MEYRUTATATaaT TATA eSATT 


aft sfaayq fearatet ugsameresaadaar ‘caefarz- 
ararema: arratseararster t Merararfrart weegarat (qalyeaa- 
manage fafangaidtat) aqaart (Aorfearearcreattaeatera- 
gata) wart fara ceraeaatareat: ered faa exataad Fa- 
ara, aasa Taegefaars TATA Taser: ofeorfeaeraa 
fearafraret afer vaattaat: ge ferraaft (qatrcy, 
area, fafaay, srvsay, fayaavsaa) eff sfafearfa, 
vais sarmosegentts sagas Tah | TETAt Aaah A 


TatseaTaia =o, Warelat Merdlaesgafasy 1 ARe- 
wfagait—e, atesfaait=4 waved, ERAT  ReTAVET 


2. frararet qraaitsuarraeraasts aaneyia cafes afz- 
arat aaa wae qar aeafeorena tea mead eeqy gar— 

faoygafrca: fea rgtecary aefiet cect | 
aaarafafaar «aa aftafearnattrageterat 1 
qaesrat sface: earafe fst qaareraert | 
ugr arate §«aafaraaeTae  sarager 
weary wef afermraateaatate far 

agead a arregaefeant caer aifeeadat: | 


( 20 ) 


Sfx qarat TEITIG=2z, Fareiat fase _ saat ANTRAA- 
gaa Tara aedfa, feared Tetstatarher Tat 


adeataaaata wafe aca stenfer soa a car afarosatis | 
zaag eeamnanfa se Barus fara agq oa fanoseifa i 
qsaragaatsara a avertft galt amrgatataet a 
anrat car fruaggrarfeert oa ferufe sfaaegy SaTTATA 


efe aeareaTa— 


UT RAIA aaa ALY 
uf: aegifesr sora art deg tl 
aes wasaara: BUrerat featetaatset: 1 
qT HT A ATATS ast aearraeacey 


RON aaa) Te | RAAT | afee:, TeR:, TATA | 
RTA | HT MAT | eds aay | afea (eA), WA: (ATA), 
HAAITA, SAH: TE HST, FATA, G:, eT: (TWAT) 
TARAS aaa are Geary afta, Aoi seat Tey afoarrsieaeet 
TaTaa yeaa af, frsratert Mews sey HHT YT HTTATT 
TARAT BUTAT | TS TER: eae vel afer TAY gerry fray 
aferaray aT 9 TTT, 2 aRIAY, 3 TTT 1 y HTT ATT 
TAT YSTT IAT Edits (HAH) FAT, © TE HAARIPTT | 
SaaS aay, cafe a | Yo TT (THE) ae Efe eaT- 
faarft ararfg stocgcarfa arditft 1 freaetafes art ater aeat- 
waaaih Tat 


cit wrasse’ eid ae qeraencl: | 
Tesqererer ater arate ee asEaT I 
BUSS eet Tae wea BA: aT eA | 
Berra oma agra 
areca fare freee aia aearegaerf | zat 
tht apterd afte geri vaq) 
amt gt cat. dite cronfaa gem eft 


(8G) 
qa faardie aration — 
Trivers Tears sas 
Treamasarnat wat wafes i 
aTaqaraaraia agar sear araaq 
uaTar asada aa faerrafefar 
Us Rafa SMTA ABT 
qyeasanfeatat eIoMAMA PT: UN 
TAA ARTT ATA A TATA AR: ] 
ATARTIT MTR BT ATIAT 
qaqa = yada FI 
atatta otaaerg sarretsh sear: 
aTTHTanakeg we HvssHATEAy | 
qfeeqsHegUa THe AeA HITT HL | 
awa gat arg fear aw faa vat 
Brat Fated: Mae HTSATT ATT II 


arareary— 


arait | atcarstetaraafa | warraaafar: | 
art: gag agfa: deqagriss  atreT 
. waa aac afar, ufata agfhrai- 
aaiferat eragret wafer | Fa Fra HH carat Tet ef aT 
sfaaricat: aft, ater’, feed, fed, srsncad, aréeqet, alt, ara, 
are, aTeafafa ava avait af, way aaaas agers ara- 
agar (ae ara aaArat). wtateaa, aaedta Aut sTaarcr 
aut | giftarafrarntacfrarcrtaeniay aay wag 
araTat aa ae at sficrfeaafer 1 wTeregefraeas- 
TEI Tees ATATAS ATHY efaferates | ; 


aaa —aaaaTsTeYT | fear wae warfta, afer 
qiftarnant fren: aif sftara wafrardteudsgenfies: 
aft ara, wWy-qifrercfrartearernray ga 
eae: | weqTaTaarUcga a: Tet fae: — ' 


(a2) 


aay aaa aeefat aferaca asHeT 
asgeaa aaafe astefe aft qt au 


afeatshea 7gat HUTT STUTATAA eReAted | 
aarearaaaea | feafe sated areata 
oa AVTTATETTARAEAS: BA aft T STATA: | 
eqTAMA AAT AAA ATATUTATATT | aaTat faarhan fafa 
TAA | MeATATAL aT | fare aPraieafahaepaet are. 
aaaq | sfaferarary | aeRaTaalafeatirerrasa | saree atts 
PRIA ATTASA FAT — 
farq aaawegirafafafarar | wereraraTara | 
aisareuerta = sara GT 
THAT TAVSH Aaa aH aT SSAA AT AT: ! 
aafres 9 gett reef 
eUraaresersiaaag == fara eafmar- 
eqraey eaeTfaart area: evenafaary: = Aoiefsed:’ zearfear 
wea afary | ATeRTATAT aTs-220 frat fasaT yztar, 
maraTaT afaht quo frat Feat qgat) eeniaafed aera 
sSrfrassaaiaaaaga wT gate fafaat: ce fe srzey 
aad wreesepinet + falar ar yTHedesre, feet 
waaay | Tea: wa Fagor. gyal: af) area } Faz 
pal fefam: afta qifeard faarerat, ferarafatant 4 
TI 
: aqVeaseag seat acaTara gto wao ato wEeaTAt 
AU FSM IMA ST WIAA TeaTAAT TATA 
west Tears: = satfeeraat: sttyeeafie:, 
asfaranrg at, Nearatacafaan:, afeay: Mellaararataey st war 
FH PATE TATA | CUT GETRRMTaTS Hel Me: GATE 
WIT VITA | 
Teer eat Carats warsafintag 
pp gelbapen ey WHT HATA TT | 
aT: TATA wee, Freqafy = ; 
eavdiertstey, sf EE TS 


ae Pagarega: 


weeey sat 


saarrarad frcfaa: 
fafarrorateacafzat 


TSB STA: 


CHAPTER I 


Astronomy in Ancient 
Nations 


Brahmagupta’s great works like the Khandakhadyaka and 
the Brahmac-sphutarsiddhanta took astronomy to Arabs through 
whom it spread to many countries of Europe. Al Beruni records 
this testimony in his great book on India. It is doubtful that 
astronomy had its birth in Greece and China. From remote ages 
China, India, Greece, Arabia and Egypt developed the entire 
system in close cooperation. This knowledge must have spread 
from their common cradle home where man for the first time 
developed his culture and civilisation. In this chapter we pro- - 
pose to give a review of astronomy as developed in many of 
these ancient lands, especially Arabia, people of which land 
came in close contacts with India much before any recorded 
time. 


Dawn of Astronomy 


The earliest man must have been the primitive astro~ 
nomer. The striking spectacles presented to him by the varied 
appearances of a sky covered with thousands of twinkling 
and fon-twinkling objects of different degrees of brightness, 
apparently revelving round the Earth, and the daily changing 
phases of the Moon must have raised strange feelings of 
the most primitive man also. Then he must have in course 
of time observed the bright morning and evening stars, and at 
a considerably late stage the comets and shooting stars and then 
on occasions eclipses of the Sun and the Moon. These phenomena 
not only raised feelings of admiration, but in different sections of 
human society often feelings of superstitious alarm. By and. 
by stars became guides for the traveller by landand sea. In 
the midst of these observations, one discovered various cycles : 
cycle of day and night, cycle of seasons and cycle of other 
details. Then there was a striking observatfon of the tides ina 
sea changing with the phases of the Moon, 


2 ASTRONOMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 
Earliest Discoveries 


We shall briefly sketch out the order of astronomical 
discoveries. The first phenomena to be noted must have 
been the regularly recurring dawn (for this ene mov refer 
to the Usa Sukta of the Rgveda), the sunrise : nd sunset (which 
led to pratah and sayam, i.e. morning and evening privers of 
the Vedic times), daylight, twilight and night concerning 
which we “have numerous Vedic hymns. Next it led tothe 
measurement of a day (which was of a short duration in 
winters and of along duration in summers). The Vedic Aryans 
also discovered the variations in the duration of the day along 
different latitudes, and the time of sunrise in places of different 
longitudes. In fact the idea of longitudes and Iatitudis came suffi- 
ciently afterwards. Mandiscovered month as related to the varia 
tion of light with the Moon’s phases. In temperate repions. where 
probably the first astronomical observations were systematically 
made, the changing length of the day or the direction of the Sun 
at rising or setting or the lengths of shadows cast at midday. 
would show that the Sun’s daily path in the sky altered through- 
out the year, a time interval which was already marked by the 
changing vegetaticn. According to Sir W.C. Dampier, “attempts 
were made to determine the number of months in the cycle of 
the seasons in Babylonia about 4000 B. C, and in the China soan 
after. About 2000 B.C. the Babylonian year settled dawn to 
one of 360 days or twelve months, the necessary adjustments 
being made from time to time by the interposition of extra- 
months.” In India, this concept is of even much earlier origin. 
The old inspired sages like Dirghatamas discovered for the 
observing man the Vedic Era and intercalation. I have 
described this discovery in a special chapter on the subject in my 
book the Founders of Sciences in Ancient India and a reference 
may be made to the Asya Vamasya Suktam of the Rgveda. It 
iy impossikle to assign an age to these old traditions, Round the 
Yaja, developed the science of astronomy, mathematics. 
anatomy and medicine in this ancient land of ours, which in 
fact was the common heritage of a large number of people of 
the modern world. oak ; 

es Z% . . 

_ rid ae also say that a considerable period might have 
“wen, Capsec’ Detore it was noticed-that at a particular season of 


ZODIAC : 3 


the year, the same stars are seen at corresponding hours of the 
night. Of course this circumstance was less conspicuous than 
the regular variation of the Sun’s altitude in the sky as the year 
progresses. It is the surmise that the striking naked-eye cluster, 
the Pleiades, must have been one of the earliest noted star- 
groups, and it became the first star-group for providing the first 
fairly close determination of the length of the year as approxim- 
ately 365 days. Therising of this cluster in the evening was a 
mark of the coming winter to primitive man; and the husband- 
man judged the time of reaping by itsrising, and of ploughing 
by its setting in very ancient times; Sirius, Arcturus, the Hyades 
and Orion were similarly equally useful to him. The passages 
in the Taittiriya Samhita and in the Satapatha Brahmana clearly 
indicate the confusion once created by following the concept of 
lunar months without further adjustments : 


“Now the seasons were desirous to have ashare in the 
sacrifice among the gods and said, ‘Let us share in the sacti- 
fice. Do not exclude us from the sacrifice ! Let us have a 
share in the sacrifice !’ The gods, however, did not approve 
of this. The gods, not approving, the seasons went to the 
Asuras, the malignant, spiteful enemies of the gods. Those 
(Asuras) then throve in such a manner that they (the gods) 
heard of it, for even while the foremost (of the Asuras) 
were still ploughing and sowing, those behind them were 
already engaged in reaping and threshing: indeed even 
without tilling, the plants ripened forthwith for them. 
(SBr. 1.6.1.1-3) 


The Zodiac 


It is difficult to say how much time it must have 
taken, but in fact, it was eventually noted that the Sun and 
Moon travel over very similar paths among the stars during 
their circuit of the sky. This led to the formation of the Zodiac 
and its constellativns, the centre of this zone, a belt about 16° 
broad, being the annual path of the Sunor Ecliptic. The divi- 
sion into twelve parts, each corresponding to a month of the 
Sun's movement, was made ; and their connection with the solar 
course during the year was found by observations of heliacal 
risings or settings. These were the times of the year when certain 
bright stars would first be seen to rise before the Sun, or when 


4 ASTRONOMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 


they were last seen to set after sunset. In the case of Sirius, the 
brightest fixed star, these would happen when the Sun was about 
ten degrees below the horizon. For the less bright stars the 
angle would be a larger one. 


It must have been almost simultaneously observed that the 
Moon in going like the Sun round the heavens always in the 
same direction from west to east (i.e., opposite to the diurnal 
motion which she shares with the other bodies), kept in general 
to the same track in the sky. After atime, however, it must 
have been noted by careful observers that this path was not con- 
stant, but deviated from the centre line of the Zodiac, getting 
away from that line up toa maximum deviation on either side 
but slowly returning to it. In the course of a number of years, it 
must have become-evident that the Moon’s path among the stars 
does not lie always in the same line on the celestial sphere, but 
in a zone or band about twenty moon breadths (10°) wide, occu- 
pying the middle of the Zodiacal zone itself. 

Among the bright stars Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter 
and Saturn (the first two of which are never seen very far from 
the Sun in the sky) soon must have been noted to be moving in 
the Zodiac with varying periods. The English name planet is de- 
rived from Greek planetes, meaning a wanderer, since the planets 
change their positions among the Zodiacal stars. 


There isa word Str which in the Rgveda always occurs in 
the instrumental plural, Strybhik. The English word star is de- 
rived from this word. Paraéara and Grtsamada, I have shown 
elsewhere, were the first amongst the great observers, inspired by 
the Rgvedic hymns, and Vamadeva identifled Brhaspati or the 
Jupiter planet and Vena Bhargava discovered tht planet Venus 
which still bears the mame of its discoverer. 


Constellations 

Long before the Zodiacal belt was divided into “signs” (700 

B. C.), a number of asterisms, or the configuration of stars in the 

sky had heen arranged, the brighter stars of these configurations, 

_ thus identified, proved very useful in indicating the seasons of the 

year by the times of their rising or setting, and also in locating 

the positions on the celestial vault of such moving objects as 

Planets, comets and shooting stars and in helping the traveller 
by land or sea to determine direction, _ 


CONSTELLATIONS 5 


These named constellations date back to very early period. 
In India, Gargya is the name of an astronomer who is associated 
with a hymn of the Atharvaveda which for the first time enume- 
rates constellations. In many of these constellations, the stars 
form a well marked group, clearly separated from other groups, 
and the names given to these formations are supposed to have 
been suggested by a resemblance to the shapes of certain familiar 
objects. Of course, the resemblance is usually very slight, and 
depended merely on a fancy. 


It is remarkable that different countries devloped almost 
similar notions regarding these constellations. The late Dr. A. C. 
D. Crommelin considered that there isa reason to believe that 
the stars may have been grouped to some extent by the Egyptians 
as early as 4000 B. C., and he remarked on their use of the then 
Pole Star for orienting the Great pyramid, Again, Chinese are 
said to have mapped out the sky into many divisions of stars by | 
2500 B. C., if one can rely on their records. 


The idea of constellations takes us to a date much earlier 
than 2500 B. C. even. In total forty-eight have come down from . 
extremely ancient times, but these do not cover the entire extent 
of the sky. The part not occupied by any of them evidently did 
not rise above the horizon where the early astronomers to whom 
we owe their naming lived; and the stars concerned were there- 
fore not included in their constellation schemes. The centre of | 
this part (near the bright star Achernar) must have been near 
the South Pole of the heavens of the time, and its angular radius 
from the Pole gives us roughly the latitude of their homes. The 
date appears to have been about 2800 B. C., when, owing to the 
precession of the equinoxes, the South celestial pole was in the 
position indicated. The latitude seems to have been about 38° 
North. These are the findings of E. W. Maunder (Astronomy 
without a Telescope, p.5, 102); hut from the same considerations 
Dr. Crommelin assigns a latitude of 36° and a date 2460 B.C, 
and Proctor 2200 B. C. Maunder also suggested that the presence 
of the Lion and Bear among the stellar configurations and the 
absence of Elephant, Tiger, Camel and Crocodile seem to ex- 
clude India towards the East and the countries towards the 
West, the latitude and the longitude indicated being those of 
Asia Minor or Armenia. The suggestion that the blank area in 


6 ASTRONOMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 


the sky referred to gave an approximate date for the formation 
of the constellations appears to have beeen first put forward in 
1807 by Carl Schwartz, for some time Swedish Consul at Baku. 


Indo-Greek Contacts. 


It is highly improbable that before Alexander, there had 
been absolutly mo contacts between India and the distant nations. 
Even in pre-Alexandrian era, there had been such migration is 
clearly evinced by the philological and mythological studies. But 
we do not pcssess historic record of it. 


The conquests of Alexander the Great made the Greeks 
acquainted with the Eastern world, which had up to that 
time been visited probably by very few Europeans, and it 
likewise spread Greek culture to all the countries which the 
victorious Macedonian had been able to reach. The Indian 
province of his Emfire became independent soon after 
Alxander’s death. and though the spread of Buddhism in the 
third century B.C. checked the progress of Hellenism in 
Northern India, the rise of the Greek kingdom of Bactria and 
its gradual extension south and east continued for a long time to 
keep alive the connection between India and the West. Not 
only (as has beeen asserted) the Greek and Indian drama and 
architecture have been strongly influenced by Hellenistic and 
Indian contacts, it is beyond a doubt that the entire astronomy 


of the two great nations is the offspring of these mutual 
contacts, 


. Inearliest times astronomy had only been cultivated in 
India and in no other country. Some idea had been acquired 
during those days of the periods of the Sun and Moon and the 
planet Venus and Brhaspati (Jupiter), which were used for chrono- 
logical purposes, the Junar motions being specially connected with 
the proper times for sacrificial acts. The Vedic era was discovered 
during this period by Viévamitra, and Gargya enumerated the 
Naksatras. Lagadha composed his Vedanga Jyotisa, which is the 
rst book on astronomy written in human literature, India dev- 
eloped her geometry in connection with the construction of sacri- 
ficial altars, and its account is found in the Sula Satras of 
Baudhayana,. Aévalayana and Katyayana. Aryabhata laid the 
_ foundations of algebra. One might still say that there ds no sign of 
A See, Peter'Deig + A Concise History of Astronomy, London, 1950, 





INDO-GREEK CONTACTS 7 


atcurate knowledge of the planetary motions earlier than about 
the century of the Christian era. From thenceforth astronomy, 
hitherto confined to rituals, appears asa science, treated in the 
course of the next thousand years in a series of text-books, 
the Siddhantas,’ the contents of which, though supposed to be 
derived from divine sources are strongly influenced by Greek 
authors. Prior to the Greek influence, we had ceremonies like 
dvadasaha (lasting for twelve days),sadaha (lasting for six days), 
tryaha Casting for three days) besides darga-parnamisa ceremo- 
nies connected with the New Moon and Full Moon. But the week 
of seven days (Saptzha) was unknown in India. This concept of 
week and the dedication of each day to the deity of one of the 
seven planets, now appears for the first time. It is difficult to say 
whether names of the planets were borrowed by Greeks from 
India or vice versa, but they became common, e.g,, Aévajit or 
Asphudit (Aphrodite). Dyugatih or dyaus or Jiva (Zeus), Heli 
(Helios), &c., while the zodiacal signs have superseded the earlier 
but totally different twelve star-groups connected with the 
Sun’s motion, and proclaim their origin by their names: 


Kriya, Tavuri, Jituma, Karkin, Leya, Pathena, Juka, Kaur- 
pya, Taukshika, Akokera, Hridroga, Ittha, 


corresponding to Kpeés, Toipos, AlByyos, Kapxtvos, Aton, 
i : a la Zuydv, Laoprios, Tokdrys, A lybeepus, ‘TSpoxdos, 
yous? 

A great many other Greek terms connected with geometry, 
astronomy and astrology have also been transferred from Sans- 
krit works to Greek and vice versa, This conclusively shows the 
mutual influence on astronomy. Indian authors never failed to 
acknowledge the ideas they borrowed from Greeks, e.g. Varaha~ 
mihira quotes the Yavanas or peuples of the west as authorities 
for some of the scientific statements he makes. The name of the 
Romaka Siddhanta (which is at least as old as A.ID. 400) also 
points in an unmistakable manner to its origin in one of the pro- 
vinces of the Roman Empire. 





4. The Romakaor Pauliga Siddhanta (before 400 A. D.), See Varahamihira’s 
the Paftcasiddhanteka (about 570 A,D., Varshamihire died in 587 A.D.), The 
original Strya-siddhanta was prior to Varihamihira, the mqadern edition is 

. perhaps of the 13th century. See J. Burgess ‘Notes on Hindu Astronomp” 
J. R. A. S,, October 1893, p..742, , 


8 ASTRONOMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 


° Earth as a Sphere 
The astronomers of the Siddhantas taught that the Earth 
is a sphere, unsupported in space, and they reject the ancient my- 
thological notion that it is supported by some animal like Sesana- 
ga (serpent), kacchapa (tortoise), or diggajas (elephants) which 
in turn rest on another, and so on, until the support of the last 
one after all has to be left unexplained. Bhaskara II, about 
AD. 1150, who comments on the absurdity of this, also rejects 
the idea that the Earth is perpetually falling, since it would fall 
faster than an arrow shot upwards, on account of being heavier, 
so that an arrow could never again reach the Earth.’ Round the 
Earth the planets are moving, all with the same linear velocity. 
The diameter of the Earth is 1600 yojanas, the distance of the 
Moon is 51,570 yojanas (or 64.5 times the radius of the Earth, 
nearly equal to Ptolemy’s greatest distance, 644), while the dis- 
tances of the other planets result from the assumption of 
equal velocities. The equation of centre of the planets 
is found by an epicycle and to this arrangment the Hindus 
add one of their own invention, by assuming that the epi- 
cycle had a variable circumference, greatest when the planet is 
at apogee or perigee and least at 90° from these, when the equa~ 
tion reaches its maximum. This contrivance of an oval epicycle 
was by some astronomers applied to all the planets, by others 
(Brahmagupta and Bhaskara) only to Mars and Venus, by others 
it was altogether rejected.®> Why they complicated the calculation 
in this way is not clear. Aryabhata I of Kusumapura or Parali- 
putra, born A.D. 476, made another deviation from the Alexand- 
rian doctrines, as’ appears in the Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta of 
Brahmagupta, wherein he quotes the following from Aryabhata: 
“The sphere of the stars is stationary, and the Earth, making a 
revolution, produces the daily rising and setting of stars and 
planets.” Brahmagupta rejects this idea, saying: “If the Earth 
moves a minute in a prana, then whence and what route does it 
proceed? If it revolves, why do not lofty ob‘ects fall?" But his 
commentator Caturveda Prthudaka Svami replies : “Aryabhata’s 









1. As. Res. XII. p. 229 (Essays, TI, p. 394). 

2, The distances are Proportional, to the orbital periods of revolution, but for 
Mercury amd Venus to the periods in the epicycles. 
; _3. For further -details see..As. Res, IL, p. 251 (Davis) and aus aoe 
(Colebracke; ‘also Essays, Thy Pe 401). ae if 


EARTH ROTATION 9 


opinion appears nevertheless satisfectory, since planets cannot 
have two motions at once: and the objection, that lofty things 
would fall, is contradicted; for every way the under part of the 
' Earth is also the upper; since wherever the spectator stands on 
the Earth's surface, even that spot is the uppermost spot, 


Earth rotation by a current of aerial fluid 


It is very interesting to see the theory once advocated by 
Herakleides of Pontus transplanted on Indian soil, especially when 
we remember that Seleukus, the Babylonian, had adopted that 
theory. From Babylon the theory might easily find its way to 
India, though it is of course equally possible that Aryabhata, 
quite independently of his Greek precursors, hit on the same 
idea. He appears to have accounted for the Earth’s rotation by 
a wind or current of aerial fluid, the extent of which, according 
to the orbit assigned to it by him, corresponds to-an elevation 
of little more than a hundred miles (114) from the surface of the 
Earth, or fifteen yojana's while he put the diameter of the Farth 
equal to 1050 yojanas (of 7.6.miles each”), This was in accordance 
with the general opinion of the Indians, that the planets are 
carried along their orbits by mighty winds with the same velo- 
city and parallel to the ecliptic (while one great vortex carries all 
stars round the Earth in twenty-four hours, but that the planets 
are deflected from these courses by certain invisible powers 
having hands and reins, with which they draw the planets out 
of their uniform progress. The power at the apogee, for. instance 
constantly attracts the planet towards itself, alternately with 
the right and left hand (like Lachesis in Plato's Republic), while 
the deity at the node diverts the planet from the ecliptic first to 
one side and then to the other. And lastly the deity at the con- 
junction causes the planet to move with variable velocity and to 
become occasionally stationary and even retrograde. This is 
gravely set forth in the Surya-Siddhanta ,and even Bhaskara gives 
the theory in his notes, though he omits it from his text. 
Similarly Brahmagupta, although he gives the theory of eclipses, 
affirms the existence of an eighth planet, Rahu, which is the 
immediate cause of eclipses; and he blames Varahamihira, 





1, Asiat. Res, XII. p. 227; Colebrooke’s Essays, II, p, 392, 5 
2. Colebieakes Notes and Illustrations to the Algebra of en: P. 
xxxvili.’ Essays, Il, p. 467, 





10 ASTRONOMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 


Ary abhata and others for rejecting this orthodox explanation 
of the phenomenon.' 


Indian astronomy some times appears to be a curious mix- 
ture of ‘old fantastic ideas and sober geometrical methods of 
calculation. But itis wrong to presume that these geometric 
calculations were derived from froeign contacts. Indians have 
always been fond of geometry (from the earliest times of the Vedic 
rituals), and they from the very beginning realised the impor- 
tance of applying geometry to astronomy, Side by side we find 
Greek contacts also. As remarked by Colebrooke, the absence 
of the most characteristic parts of Ptolemy’s system, the 
equant and the details of the theories of the Moon and Mercury 
seems to indicate that Greek planetary theory must have been 
introduced in India between the times of Hipparchus and Ptole- 
my; and with the exception of the epicycle from the circular 
form, the Hindus did not modify the theory or perfect it in 
any way. The precession of the equinoxes they held to consist 
in a liberation within the limits of 27° (Aryabhata says 24°) east 
and west of its mean position, but they came much nearer to 
the truth than Ptolemy did as regards the annual amount, as 
they supposed the space travelled over ina century to be1}°. 


Contacts with Arabs 

Notwithstanding some isolation of India from Europe 
during the Middle Ages, her astronomy was destined to 
exercise an indirect influence on the progress of astronomy, 
Through the conquest of Persia in the seventh century, 
the Arabs, like the Greeks a thousand years earlier, came 
in contact with India, from whence physicians and astro- 
logers found their way to the court of the Caliph already 
before the reign of Harun al Rashid. We possess a detailed 
account of the manner in which the Indian astronomy was 
introduced at Baghdad, from the. pen of the astronomer Ibn 
al Adami (who died before 920), confirmed by the celebrated 
memoir on India by Al Beruni, written in 1031% Inthe year 
156 of the Hijra (A. D. 773), there appeared before the Caliph 
Al Mansur a man who had come from India; he was skilled in 





1, Asiat, Res, XI, pp.. 233, 241; Essdys, I, pp. 398, 407, 


2 Hankel, Zur Geschichte . der Mathematik im Alterthum and Piastelaliars 
_Leipaig, 1874, p. 229; Cantor, Gesch. d, Math, L. p. 656, 


‘ARABS AND GREEKS MW 


the calculus of the stars known as the Sindhind (i. e. Siddhanta), 
and possessed methods for solving equations founded on the 
kardagas (i.e. kramajya, sines) calculated for every half degree, 
also methods for computing eclipses and other things. Al 
Mansur ordered the book in which all this was contained to be 
translated into Arabic, and that a work should be prepared 
from it which might serve asa foundation for computing the 
motions of the planets. This was accordingly done by Muham- 
med ben Ibrahim Al Fazari, whose works the Arabs call the 
great Sindhind, and from it an abstract was afterwards made for 
Al Mamun by Abu Giafar Muhammed ibn Musa al Kwarizmi, 
who made use of it to prepare his tables, whichobtained great 
renown in the lands of Islam. Eut when Al Mamun became 
Caliph, he promoted these noble studies and called in the most 
learned men in order to examine the Almagest and make instru- 
ments for new observations. 


Arabs and Greeks 


The account of which the above is an abstract shows us 
clearly the origin of the study of astronomy and mathematics 
under the Abbasid Caliphs. But though the first impulse came 
from India the further development of Arabian science was 
to a considerable extent founded on that of Greece and Alexandria. 
It was through the court physicians from the flourishing medical 
school kept up by Nestorian Christians of Khusistan that a 
knowledge of Greek Philosophy and science was first spread 
among the subjects of the Caliphs; and by degrees the works of 
Aristotle, Archimedes, Euclid, Apollonius, Ptolemy, and other 
- mathematicians were translated into Arabic. Fresh translations 
of Ptolemy were made from time to time inthe various king- 
doms into which the vast empire of the Caliph was soon split 
up,) and a thorough knowledge of Ptolemaic astronomy was thus 
eatead from the Indus to the Ebro. There were several special 
inducements for Muhamedans to pay attention to astronomy, 
such as the necessity of determining the direction in which the 
1, The earliest is probably that of Al Haggag ben Jusuf ben Matar early in the 

ninth century. See Suter, Die Mathematiker und Astronomen der Araber 
und ihre Werke, Leipzig, 1900 (p. 9), which valuable bibliograpical summary 
has been follwed by J. L. E. Dreyer as regards names and dates (J. L. E, 


Dreyez's A History of Astronomy, 1953; we have reproduced this account 
from his chapter XL) 


12 ASTRONOMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 


‘faithful had to turn during prayers, also the importance of the 
lunar motions for the calendar, and the respect in which judicial 
astrology was held allover the East. The Caliph Al Mamun, 
son of Harun Al Rashid (813-833) is the first preat patron of 
science, although the Omayyad Caliphs had much earlier an 
observatory near Damascus, and the Jew Mashallah (who died 
about 815) had already before the reign of Al Mamun won a 
name asan observer and astrologer. But the Damascus observa- 
tcry Lecame quite eclipsed by that erected at Baghdad in 829 
' where continuous observations were made and tables of the pla- 
hetary motions constructed while animportant attempt was made 
to determine the size of the Earth. Among the astronomers of 
Al Mamun and his successors one of the greatest was Ahmed ben 
Muhammed Al Fargani (afterwards known in the Westas Alfra- 
ganus), whose Elements of Astronomy were translated into Latin 
in the twelfth century and contributed greatly tothe revival of 
science in Europe.' Tabit ben Korra (826-901) was a most 
prolific writer and translator, but is chiefly known in the history 
of astronomy asa supporter of the erroneous idea of the oscilla 
tory motionof the equinoxes. A younger contemporary of his, 
Muhammed Al Battani (died 929), was the most renowned of all 
the Arabian astronomers and became known in the West in the 
twelfth century (under the name of Albategnius) by the trans- 
lation of the introduction to his tables? Already in his time 
the power of the Caliphs had commenced to decline, and they 
~ soon lost all temporal power. The study of astronomy was, 
however, not influenced by this loss of patronage, as the Persian 
family of the Buyids, who in 946 obtained possession of the post 
of Amir-al-Omara (corresponding to the Frankish Major Domus) 
took over the role. of patrons of science, so long and so 
bonourably carried on by the Abbasid Caliphs. Sharaf af Daula 
built in 988 a new observatory in the garden of his palace, and 
among the astronomers who worked there was Muhammed Abu 't 
Wefa al Buzjani (959-998), who wrote an Almagest in order to 


1 Sel printed at Ferrara in 1493, See the edition of Golius, Amaterdam, 


2, Translated by -Plato of Tivoli. First Printed in 2537 after the book of 
Alfargani, Dreyer has used the edition of Bologna, 1645, and a new edition 
‘which is now being published by C, A. Nallino, of which the Arabic and 


Latin translation of the text have already ap 
; peared (Pubbl, d. R, @. 
teria a Brera in Milano. No, 40, 1899-1903), , re 


WESTERN COUNTRIES UNDER ISLAM 13 


make the contents of Ptolemy’s work accessible to the less 
learned. In the nineteenth century this book gave rise to a 
long controversy, which we shall presently consider somewhat in 
detail. | 

Western Countries under Islam 


In the eleventh and twelfth centuries we do not find any 
names of conspicuous astronomers in Muhammedan Asia. 
But the western countries under Islam had in the meantime 
become ready to do their share of the work of keeping the 
mathematical ‘sciences alive. In the Fatimite kingdom of 
Egypt Ali ben Abi Said Abderrahman ben Ahmed bén Janis, 
generally called Ibn Jinis(died 1009), was distinguished both as 
an astronomer and a poet, At Cairo a liberally equipped 
observatory enabled him to’ verify the planetary theories which. 
had once been developed in the neighbouring Alexandria. and 
in token of his gratitude to the reigning sovereign, Al Hakim, 
he named his work the Hakemite Tables.! We have to pass to 
the farthest west’ to find the next astronomerof mark in the 
person of Ibrahim Abu Ishak, known as Al Zarkali (in Europe 
afterwards called Arzachel). He was a native of Cordova, lived 
akout 1029-1087, and edited planetary tables called the Toledo 
Tables” In the following century we find two celebrated 
astronomers of Seville, Gabir ben Aflah, known as Geber (died 
1145, often mistaken for the great alchemist, Gabir ben 
Haijan, in the eighth century)? and Nur ed-din al Betrugi 
(Alpetragius), both of _ whom raised objections to the 
planetary theories of Ptolemy, though they failed to produce 
anything better of their own. Spanish astronomy continued 
to flourish for a while, although the power of the Arabs in the 
Peninsula was rapidly declining, and it produced in the thirteenth 
century a very remarkable man, who, although a Christian 
king, must beincluded in this account of Arabian astronomy, 





1. Caussin has published an extractin vel. vii of the Notices et Extraits des - 
manuscrits (Le livre de la grande table Hakemite), Other Chapters, trans-* 
lated by the elder Sedillot but never published, are reviewed by Dalen bies 
Hist, def astr. du Moyer Age. Pp. 95 sqa. 

2, Never published. Delambre, lL c p 176, and Steinschneider, Btudés sur 
Zarkali, Bullettino Boncompagni T. xx. p.1. 

3 The word algebra has also sometimes erroneously been tonnedted wie. his 
mame. , 


14 ASTRONOMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 


as he owed all he knew about the science tothe example and the 
teaching of Muhammedans and Jews. King Alfonso X, of 
Castille named elSabio (1252-1284), followed the example of 
the Caliphs and called astronomers to his court to assist in the 
‘preparation of the renowned Alfonsine Tables. 


With Alfonso the study of astronomy disappeared from 
Spain, but not before it had been revived in the East. In 1258 
the still existing but shadowy Caliphate of Baghdad was swept 
away by the Mongol conqueror Hulagu Khan, grandson of Genghis 
Khan; but already in the following year this great warrior liste- 
ned to the advice of his new vazier, Nasir ed-din al Tusi (born at 
Tus in Khorasan in 1201, died in 1274), and founded a great and 
magnificient observatory at Meragha, in the north-west of 
Persia, In this observatory, which was furnished with a large 
numer of instruments, partly of novel construction, Nasir ed-din 
and his assistants observed the planets diligently and produced 
after twelve years labour, the “ Ilokhanic Tables,” Among the 
astronomers of Meragha seems to have been Juhanna Abu ‘1 
Faraj, called Bar Hebraya, or the son ofa Jew. He was a 
Christian, born in 1226 and from 1264, till his death in 1286 
Maphrian or Primate of the Eastern Jacobites. He left a well- 
known chronicle and an astronomical work, both written in 
Syriac, as well as other writings. The observatory at Meragha 
had not a long life, and Asiatic astronomy had to wait a century 
and a half, until the grandson of another terrible conqueror 
erected another observatory. Ulug Begh, grandson of Tamerlan, 
drew learned men to Samarkand and built an observatory there 
about the year 1420, where new planetary tables and a new star 
catalogue, the first since Ptolemy’s, were prepared. Ulug Begh 
died in 1449, he was the last great Asiatic protector of astro- 
nomy; but just as the Eastern countries saw the star of Urania 
setting, it.was rising again for Europe, 

' In this review of Arabian astronomers we have only men: 
tioned a few, omitting several names of distinction, whose 
1 Le.livre del’ ascension del’ esprit sur la forme du ciel et dela terre. Cours 

d’ Astronomie redige en 1279 par Gregoire Aboulfarag, dit Bar Hebraeus, 
Publie par F. Nau, Paris, 1899-1900 (2 parts, Syxiac and French), His 
chronicle istheschief authority for the fable abour the burning of the 


Alexandrian Library by order of the Caliph Omar. For a very thorough 


: refutation of this see Butler, The Arab Conquest of Egypt, Oxford, 1902 
| Pp 401-426, : 


FIGURE OF EARTH 15 


owners devoted themselves to other branches of astronomy. 
Though Europe owes a debt of gratitude to the Arabs for keeping 
alive the flame of science for many centuries and for taking 
observations, some of which are still of value, it cannot ke. 
denied that they left astronomy pretty much as they found it. 
They determined several important constants anew, but they 
did not make a single improvement in the planetary theories. 
It will therefore be sufficient to enumerate the improvements 
attempted and the opinions held by Arabian astronomers with- 
out keeping strictly to the chronological order, although we are 
here dealing with a period of about six hundred years and mn 
belonging to very different nations, who had little in common 
except their religion and the language in which they wrote. 


Figure of Earth 


Turning first to the question of the figure of the Earth, we 
find a remarkable contrast between Furope and Asia. In the 
world under Islam there was an entire absence of that hostility 
to science which distinguished Europe during the first half of 
the Middle Ages. Though we learn from Kazwini's Cosmo- 
graphy) that some of the earlier. Arabs believed the Larth to te 
shaped like a shield or a drum, still there is no record of any 
Arabian having been persecuted for asserting that the Earth is 
a sphere capable of being inhabited all over. Whether this was, 
in consequence of the warriors of the Caliphs having carried 
their arms to the centre of France on one side and to the borders 
of China on the other while their merchants travelled south- 
ward te Mazambique and northward tothe centre of Asia,’ is 
another question : anyhow, the fact of the Earth being a sphere 
of very small dimensions in comparison to the size of the uni- 
verse was accepted without opposition by every Arabian scholar, 
and the very first scientific work undertaken after the rise of 
astronomy among them was a determination of the size of the 
Farth. It was carried out by order of the Caliph Al Mamun 
in the plain of Palmyra. According to the account given by 
Ibn Junis, the length of a degree was measured by two observers . 
between Wamia and Tadmor and by two others in another loca- 
lity, we are not told where. The first measure gave a degree 





1. Zakarija Bin Muhammed Ben Mahmtd El Kazwini's Kosmographie, mee 
von H, Ethe, Leipzig, 1868, p. 295. 


16 ASTRONOMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 


equal to 57, the second one equal to 56% Arabian miles of 4000 
black cubits, and the approximate mean, 563 miles, was adopted 
as the final result, the circumference of the Earth being 20,400 
miles and the diameter 6500 miles. Another report, by Ahmed 
ben Abdallah, called Habash, an astronomer under Al Mamun 
(quoted by Ibn Junis), states that a party of observers (no names 
given) proceeded along the plain of Sinjar until they found a 
difference in meridian altitudes, measured the same day, equal 
to one degree, while the distance travelled over was found to 
be 64 miles. Probably two different determinations were made. 
Ifthe “black cubit” is the Egyptian and Babylonian cubit of 
525 mm, the mile would be=2100 m. and 563 miles=119,000 
meters, rather a large result. 

The doctrine of the spherical earth remained undisputed in 
the Muhammedan learned world, though the curious error of 
assuming that the level of the sea was higher on some parts of 
the Earth than on others appears to have found some adherents 
among Arabian writers -as well asin Europe? We may, there- 
fore, at once pass on to the motions of the heavenly bodies. Al 
Battani determined the Jongitude of the Sun’s apogee and found 
it=82° or 16° 471 more than Ptolemy had given. As he believed 





a. Caussin, Not. et Extraits, vii. pp. 94-96; Delambre, Hist. de laste 
du Moyen Age. pp. 78 and 97; Shems ed-din, Manuel dela cosmographie, 
‘traduit par Mehren, Copenhague. 1874 p. 6. Suter, p. 209, mentions 2 
third report (from Ibn Challikan’s Biographical Dictionary), according to 
which the sons of Musa first measured in the plain of Sinjar and 
afterwards as a testat Kufa, by order of Al Mamun. The eldesr 
of the sons of Musa died 41 years after Al Mamun, and the names of the 
observers in the first report are different, so that the third reportis not to 
be relied on. Al Fargani merely gives 56% miles as the result of Al Mamun, 
According to Shah Cholgii Astronomica .... studio et opera Ich. Gravii, Lon« 
* don, 1652, p. 95, Ala ed-din Al Kusgi (one of the Ulug Begh's astronomers) 
gives the circumference of the earth=8000 parasangs. As a persian parasang 
. =30 stadia (Hultsch, Griech u. Rom. Metrologie, p, 476) this would seem to 
_ be the value of Posidonius, 240,000 stadia. Kazwini (p. 298) gives the circu. 
mference = 6800 parasangs on the authority of Al Bertani. 

2. Hultsch p- 390, 

3. Itdeserves to be mentioned that Shems ed-din of Damascus (1256-1327) 
- explains the great Preponderance of dry land in the northern hemisphere 
, by the attraction of the Sun on the water, which is the greatest when the 

Sunis in perigee, at which time it is neatly at its greatest south declination. 
That this accumulation of water would not be a permanent one does not 
_ excur to him (Cosmographie, p. 4). 


MOON AND ITS ORBIT 17 


that Ptolemy's value had been found by hivaself,’ and as he 
adopted 54" (or 1° in 66 years) as the annual amount of pre- 
cession, there remained (assuming that 760 years had passed 
since the time of Ptolemy) an outstanding error of 79°—54"==25" 
per annum. In reality the annual motion of the solar apsides 
is 114" ; still we may say that the discovery of this motion is due 
to Al Battani, though he did not announce it as such ; in fact he 
merely gives his own value as an improvement on that of 
Ptolemy. Even Ibn Junis (who found 86°10’) did not suspect 
that the apogee was steadily moving but merely says that it 
must be corrected for precession (1° in 70 years), and remarks 
that the longitude of the apogee is very difficult to determine 
accurately? On the other hand, Al Zarkali found a smaller 
value, 77° 50’ and as he also found a smaller value of the eccen- 
tricity he thought it necessary tolet the centre of the Sun's 
eccentric orbit describe a smaller circle, after the example set by 
Ptolemy inthe case of Mercury.* The inclination of the ecliptic 
which the Greeks had found~23° 51 20° was by the astro- 
nomers of Al Mamun found—23° 33’ (in 830), by Al Battani 
Gn 879), and by Ibn Jumis 23° 35%. When Al Zarkali found 23° 
33’,he, and afterwards Abu °*l Hassan Ali of Morocco, concluded 
that the obliquity oscillated between 23° 53 and 23° 33’, an idea 
to which the prevailing belief in the “trepidation” of the equi- 
noxes Jent countenance.® . 
Moon and its orbit 

If we now turn to the Moon, we do not find that the 
Arabs made any advance on Ptolemy. Several of them noticed 
that the inclination of the lunar orbit was not exactly 5°, as 
‘stated by Hipparchus. Thus, Abul Hassan Ali ben Amagiur 
early in the tenth century says that he had often measured the 
greatest latitude of the Moon and found results greater than that 
1. Scient. Stell, Cap. xxviii. Bologna, 1645, p. 72; Nallino. p. 44. At the end 
of Cap. xlv. he says the apogees of the Sun and Venus.are both in 82°14," 
and Iba Janis also gives 82° 14’ as the value found by Al Battani (Caussin, 


p. 154) 

Caussin, pp. 232 and 238. Abu'l Faraj gives 89° 28’ for the year 1279 (p. 22), 

Sedillot, Prolegomenes aux tables astron, d’ Olough Beg (1847), pp. lxxx-luxxii, 

Riccioli, Almag. Novum, I. p: 157. 

4. Caussin. p. 56. For A.D. 900 Newcomb gives 23° 34’ $4”, with a diminution 
of 46” per century, so that the Arabian astronomers erred less theh 1’, 

5. Aboul Hassan Ali, Traite des Instruments astron. des Avabes: - Ap. 175; 
Sedillot, Memoive sur les instr. astr. des Arabes, p. 32. ; 





~~ 


18 ASTRONOMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 


of Hipparchus, but varying considerably and irregularly. Ibn 
Janis, who quotes this, adds that he has himself found 5° 3’ or 5° 
8’, while other observers aresaid to have found from 4° 58’ to 
4° 45’? Want of perseverance and of accurate instruments 
caused them to miss a remarkable discovery, that of the 
variation of the lunar inclination. 


Abu *] Wefa and his Almagest 


But an even more remarkable discovery has been claimed 
for an Arabian astronomer. In 1836 the younger Sedillot 
announced that he had found the third inequality, the variation, 
distinctly announced in Abu °*l1 Wefa’s Almagest. A fierce 
controversy raged for a number of years as to the reality of 
this discovery, Sedillot alone defending his hero with desperate 
énergy and refusing to listen to any arguments, while Biot, 
Libri and others as strenuously maintained that Abu 'l Wefa 
simply spoke of the second part of the evection, the prosneusis 
of Ptolemy. The fight had died out when, in 1892, Chasles 
suddenly took up the cudrels for Sedillot and pointed out what 
seemed to him to be some contradictions in Ptolemy's statement.? 
Nobody answered this until Bertrand did so in 1871; he called 
attention to several inaccuracies inthe text of Abul Wefa as 
we possess it now, and also showed that Abu ‘l Wefa didnot 
add his "mohazat” to the prosneusis, the latter not being 
included in his ‘second anomaly.”* It is unnecessary to enter 
into a more detailed account of the controversy; but to show 
that any weapon was considered good enough with which to 
defend Abu ‘1 Wefa, it may be mentioned that Sedillot and 
Chasles tried to prove that Tycho Brahe must have copied his 
discovery from Abu °1 Wefa, because he calls it hypothesis 
redintegrata. Tycho used this same phrase in speaking of his 
own planetary system, which he most emphatically claimed as 
I. Sedillot, Prolegomenes, p. xxxviii. M ateriaux pour servir al hist. des scienc= 
es chez les Grecs et les Orientaux, T. I. p. 283. The sons of Musn ben Sakir 
(about 850) seem to have been the first to find a value differing from that 
of the ancients. Abraham ben Chija,a Jewish writer who lived about A. 
D. 1100 says that Ptolemy found 5°, but that according to the opinion of 
the Ishmaelites it is 44° (Sphaera mundi, Baslé, 1246 p. 102). 

Lettre a M. Sedillot sur la question de la variation lunaire, Paris, 1862, 15 pp. 
4° and’Comptes Rendus, vol, 54, p. 1002. 


on ey Rendus. vol. 73, pp. .581, 756, 889 : Journal des Savants. 11 Oct. 


ABU L’ WEFA AND HIS ALMAGEST 19 


an original discovery, and which he vigorously defended against 
other claimants. In future it will be hopeless for anybody to 
claim the discovery for Abu "1 Wefa as the matter has now been 
thoroughly sifted, both by mathematicians and orientalists. 


The Almagest of Abu '] Wefa has never been published in 
full, but there are three translations of the chapters in question," 
which only differ in some trivial points. Inno part of the book 
does he make any advance on Ptolemy or claim to have made 
any new discovery, and in speaking of three inequalities he 
merely does what the other Arabian astronomers do." He begins 
by describing the first (equation of the centre) and the second 
(evection) and states when they reach their maxima. He then 
says that we have found*a third inequality, which takes place 
when the centre of the epicycle is between the apogee and the 
perigee of the eccentric, and which reaches its maximum when 
the Moon is about a tathlith or a tasdis from the Sun, while it is 
insensible in syzygy and quadrature. The maximum js }°. He 
explains that this is caused by a deviation of the line or apsides 
of the epicycle, and he describes quite correctly the construction 
adopted by Prolemy (whose name he does not mention), letting 
the line of apsides be directed, not to the Earth but to another 
point on the line of apsides of the eccentric. It is difficult for an 
unbiassed reader to understand how anyone could fail to see that 
Abu ’] Wefa is simply copying Ptolemy. Sedillot maintained 
that the words tathlith and tasdis mean the octants (where the 
variation reaches its maximum); but every other orientalist who 
has expressed an opinion, states that by their roots the words 
correspond to the numbers 6 and 3, in other words, to elonga- 
tions 60° and 120° from the Sun. This is in accordance with 





1. By Reinaud, Munk, and de Slane(for Biot}in the Journal des Savants, Mar- 
ch, 1845 (14 pp. the whole section on the Moon) ; by Sedillot, Materiaux, i. 
pp. 45--49; and by Carra de Vaux, “L’ almageste d’ Abu 'l Wefa 
Albuzdjani,’’ dournal asiatique, 8° Serie, T. xix. (1892), pp. 408--471 
(translation on pp. 443-44). Most of the chapters on the planets are lost. 


2. The unknown author of a short resume of astronomy (in the Bibl. Nationale) 
even calls the inequality of prosneusis the first equation (Carrade Vaux, 
lc. p. 460). This is not unreasonable, since the equation of the centre 

_ must be taken from the lunar tables, using as argument not the mean 
anomaly but the latter corrected for the effect of the prosneusjs. 


3. He uses exactly the same expression when speaking of the first and secoad 
inequalities. 


26 ASTRONOMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 


facts, as Biot has shown from the Ptolemy's numerical data that 
the deviation of the line of apsides reaches its maximum value 
of E 13° 8’ 9 in elongations 90° += 32° 57’.5.' But it must be 
acknowledged that the words in question are also used very 
vaguely, e. g. by Abu ‘1 Wefa himself, who says that the velocity 
of the superior planets after emerging from the Sun's rays dimi- 
nishes gradually till their distance from the Sun is about a 
tathlith, when they become stationary. It looks almost as if these 
words might be used to denote any elongation outside syzygy 
and quadrature? 


If Abu ’l Wefa had made a new discovery, we should have 
expected Jater Arabian astronomers to have alluded to it. But 
not one of them gives anything but interpretations of the lunar 
theory of Ptolemy, and in expressions very similar to those 
employed by Abu ’] Wefa. Attention was at once called to 
this fact, and Isaac Israeli of Toledo (about 1310) and Geber of 
Seville were quoted as examples,® though it would, of course, have 
been quite possible for these two writers to have remained 
ignorant of whatever progress astronomy might have made in 
the school of Baghdad. But this objectioa does not apply to 
Nasir ed-din al Tusi, in whose review of the Almagest and Mem- 
orial of Astronomy the inequalities known to Ptolemy and no 
others, are described and credited to Ptolemy‘; not to Mahamud 
al Jagmini (about 1300) , who wrote a compendium (mulachchas) 





1. dournal des Savants, 1843, p. 701 (“Sur un traite arabe relatif al’ dro. 
nomie,” Reprint, p. 47). This deviation does not represent “the amount 
of the correction to the Moon’s place as seen from the Earth, so that there 
is not any contadiction in Ptolemy's account. 


2, Cara de Vaux, 1.c. p. 466. The Arabs had no word for “octants.”” Nasiz- 
ed-din on one occasion wants to mention them, and has to call them “the 
Points midway between syzygy and quadratwre.” 


Isaac Israeli repéitedly speaks of these inequalities discovered by Ptolemy, 
two of which are not found at conjunction and cpposition, Liber Jesod, 
Olam seu Fundamentum Mundi auctore R, Isaac Israeli Hispano, section 
TIL. ch. 8 and sect. v,ch. 16, Part. p. xxiv Part IL, p. xxxi (Berlin, 1848 
and 3846 ; this publication is not mentioned by Carra de Vaux). 


C. de Vaux, “Les spheres celestes selon Nasiy Eddin Atttsi", Appendix 

“wm P, Tanhery’s Recherches sur I" astr. anc. p. 342, and sourn. asiat. 1892, 
(Ba: “The third anomaly is that of the prosneusis; it is called the 
eh. eqmation. of the proper motion” (i.e. of the motion onthe epicycle), 


ABU ‘'L WEFA AND HIS ALMAGEST 21 


of astronomy.! Nor can any objection be raised to Abu’! Faraj 

(Bar Hebraeus), and it would te impossitle to explain more 

clearly than he does the effect of the prosneusis. He says: ’’ The 

third inequality is the angle formed at the centreof the epicycle 
by two lines which are drawn, one from the centre of the univ- 
erse and the other from the point called the prosneusis, at the end 
of which is the apogee of the epicycle, at which commences the 
proper motion, and which is called the mean apogee. The apogee 
which is at the end of the line drawn from the centre of the uni- 
verse is called the apparent one. The point proseneusis ison the side 
_ of the perigee of the eccentric, 10 parts 17 minutes from the centre 
of the world? which is itself at the same distance from the centre 
of eccentric. The maximum value of this angle is 13 parts 9 minutes 
when the Moon is a crescent or ? gibbous, that is, near the hexagon 
or trigon with the Sun. In fact, when the epicycle is four or 
eight signs distant from the apogee of the eccentric, the Sun is 
itself two or four signs distant from [the centre of the epicycle] 
because it is half way between this centre and the apogee. In 
the tables, this inequality of the two apogeesis called the 
first angle and is included in the motion of the centre.”* While 
this describes the construction of Ptolemy as clrealy as 
possible, at the same time the aBreement of the account with 
that of Abu’ 1 Wefa is perfect. Abu’l Faraj even (ike Nasir ed- 
din) describes as a fourth inequality in longitude that caused 
by the motion along an orbit inclined to the ecliptic, so that he 
would not have neglected to describe the variation, if it had been 
found by an astronomer of Baghdad. We may add that the 

Jewish writer Abraham ben Chija (A. D. 1100), in his Sphaera 

Mundi, also describes the “aberration” of the apside of the epi- 

cycle, chiefly “in sextaet tertia parte mensis."* 

1, Translated by Rudloff and Hochheim, Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgen- 

land Ges, XLVII pp, 213-275, He describes {p. 249) how the line of 

apsides is directed toa point called “‘the coreesponding point,” and gives 

its pagition correctly, The inequality he calls the deviation, sk x 

Nasir ed-din gives 10° 9’, , wpe "i 

Le livre de l’ ascension, & c, T, II, PP, 29-30, Twe codices add altec® the} 

word prosneusis : “This is the point mohazat,”” 

4, Sphaera Mundi (1546, ed, Schreckentuchs), p, 75, Munstec’s commentary 
to the Hebrew text (p. 116) has *‘cum centrum est im sextili aut trino 
aspectu [id est, quando abest a sole duobus signis aut quatuor]” ;» the words 
in brackets are not in the Hebrew original, The words “sixth’’ and ‘‘third™ 


are unmistakable (shithith and shelishith), Apparently no one has hitherto 
thought of consulting Abraham ben Chija. . 


ep 


23 ASTRONOMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 


Abu ’l Wefa and Ptolemy 


Therefore, Abu *l Wefa did not know a single thing about 
the motion of the Moon which he had not borrowed from 
Ptolenty. But the prosneusis of Ptolemy is mot the variation 
discovered by Tycho Brahe. The latter depends golely on the 
elongation of the Moon from the Sun, as it iss? +39" .Ssin 2c, 
while it is beyond the power of mortal man to express eieeHie 
of the prosneusis without the anomaly. Ptolemy's exprssion tor 
all the inequalitiesin longitude assumed by him, when developed 
analytically, found to contain, in addition to terms represening 
the equation of the centreand the evection, the latter being 

+1°19'5 sin (2e—m), 
a very considerable term 


+178 sin 2¢ {cos (2e-+-1m) 4-2 cos (2e-- md], 
where & is the elongation and m the mean anomaly." 


Obviously this term has nothing in common with the varia- 
tion, except that it disappears in the syzygies and quadratures. 
Tycho Brahe did not hang his new term on to the unaltered 
Iunar theory of Ptolemy, and by doing that we should in faet 
only spoil the latter and make its maximum error rise to more than 
adegree® Owing to the insyfficiency of the observations at his 
disposal, Ptolemy could only perceive that there was some out- 
standing inequality after allowing for the evection, only appearing 
outside the syzygies and quadratures, but he was neither able to 
find the law which governed the phenomenon, nor was he aware 
what a large quantity it represented; he could only tinker up 
his constructions a little, and in this he was most faithfully 
followed by the Arabs, who added nothing to what he had done 
and left it to the reviver of practical astronomy to discover the 
third lunar inequality. 


_ Al Fargani and others on Planets 

Passing to the five planets, we find that, generally speaking, 

eng few attempts were made to improve the work of Ptolemy. 
‘But the Arabs were not content to consider the Ptolemaic system 


eae teereneenemaitnianictnatenptsa aetna TT? 
P. Tannesy, Recherches, p, 213, Another expansion of Ptolemy's lunar 
inequalities in @ series was given by Biot, Journal des Savants, 1843, p, 703 
(Reprint, p49). 


P. Kemp, Untersuchungen uber die Ptolemaische Theorie dey Mondbewegung, 
Berlin, 1978 CInaug. Diss.), p37, 


AL FARGANI AND OTHERS ON PLANETS 23 


merely as a geometrical aid to computation; they required a real 
and physically true system of the world, and had therefore to 
assume solid crystalspheres after the manner of Aristotle. Above 
the Moon is the Alacir, the fifth essence, which is devoid of light- 
ness and heaviness, and is not Perceptible to the human senses; of 
this substance the spheres and planets are formed.’ Already in the 
book of Al Fargani we find the principle adopted which we have 
seen dates from the fifth century (Proklus) and which became 
universally accepted in the Middle Ages, that the greatest distance 
of a planet is equal to the smallest of the planet immediately 
above it, so that there areno empty spaces between the spheres.” 
The semidiameter of the Earthis by Al Fargani given as 3250 
miles, which corresponds very nearly to Al Mamun’s 563 miles to 
a degree, ifwe put 7=32, Starting from Ptolemy’s distances of 





Greatest Distance of | Al Fargani) Al Battani | Abu ‘1 Faraj* 








Moon 2 64t 643 | 643 
Mercury | 167 166 174 
Venus | a0 1.073 1.160 
Sun . 1,220 1.1464 1,260 
Mars 8,876 8,022 8,820 
Jupiter 14,405 12,9248 14.259 
Saturn . 20,110 18,094 19,963 








the Moon and the Sun, it was easy to express the other distances 
in semidiameters of the Earth, the ratios between the greatest and 





1, Al Battani, cap. 50 (p. 195). 

2, Al Fargani, cap, 21 (ed. Golius, p. 860), Much later, Maurolycus in his 
Cosmographia (Venice, 1543, f, 20a) proves that Metcury and Venus must 
be below the Sun, by pointing out that there would otherwise be a large 
vacant space between the Sun and the Moon. 

pp. 189-191. 

So in Nallino’s ed. (Milan, 1903 p. 121) the ed. of 1645 has 1176. + 

The ed. of 1645 has 12, 420; obviously an error, as the ratio of greatest to 
smallest distance is given as 37:23 for Saturn 7:5 (misprinted 7:2), or ‘“‘quan- 
titas unius et duarum quintarum ad unum’ (p. 199). Nallino’s ed (Milan 
1903) has 12,924. Abraham ben Chija has 12,400. : 


APY 


24 ASTRONOMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 


smallest distances being in substantial agreement with the theory 
of Ptolemy, Al Battani also gives a similar set of figures, though 
with some slight differences. He does not mention peculiar treat- 
ment given by Ptolemy to the theory of Mercury. The above 
table gives the distance expressed in semidiameters of the Earth. 


Al Kusgi and diameters of planets 


Al Kusgi, one of the astronomers of Ulug Begh, gives a list 
of the semidiameters of the “concavities” of the planetary sphe- 
res (i.e. the smallest distances of the spheres) expressed in parar 
sangs, the diameter of the Earth being 2,545 parasangs.’ Expres- 
sed in semidiameters of the Earth, the figures turn out somewhat 
differrent from those given above, e.g. the smallest distance of 
the Sun being 1,452 and the greatest of Saturn 26,332, but he 
does not supply any means of making out how these figures were 
found. 


Before leaving this subject, we shall also give the diameters 
of the planets according to Al Fargani, as they became known in 
Europe at an early date and were quoted by Roger Bacon and 
others.? With trifling variations the same values are given by Al 
Battani, Abu ’l Faraj, and Abraham ben Chija. 


Apparent True Diameter 
Diameter (Earth’s==1) 
Moon in apogee © we we as 31y’ ‘ide 1: 3 


> Oy 
Mercury, mean dist. oe = wae Dy OF Sun's «ne ve 
Venus eT re Fe Wim ieee 1: 34 
Sun n ae ane wet a 31¥' as 5} 
Mars tes Ay “ees ws ove Py Of Sun’s . 1} 
Jupiter 4 sy se wees nes py OF Sun’ 4k + ahh 
DOME” ce) -e:aek) GA. sence yh: - ay 4h 
Al Kazwini, Abu’l Faraj and 


Al-Jagmini on Excentric Spheres of the Sun 

The system of the spheres is set forth in greatest detail in 
three treatises of later date, the cosmograpy of Zakarija ben 
Muhammed ben’Msahmud al Kazwini (about 1275), the astronomy 





1, Astronomica Shah Chelgii, pp. 95-97. 
2. Thexe axe some slight differences between the figures givenin the various 
editions (J.L.E. Dreyer bas compared those of 1493, 1546, and 16€9), but 
those gfivenadbeve agree with the cubic contents according to Al Fargani- 
- The figures of .Kazwini seem to have been greatly corrupted. 


ALKAZWINI—EXCENTRIC SPHERES 25 


of Abu ’l Farai, written in 1279, and that of Mahmud ibn 
Muhammed ibn Omar al Jagmini, whose date and nationality are 
equally uncertain, but who probably wrote in the thirteenth 
or fourteenth century. We find in these text-books an elaborate 
system of spheres designed to account for every particular of 
planetary motion, in perfect agreement with each other as to the 
general arrangement of the spheres, and offering nothing new as 
to lunar or planetary theory. The accompanying figures (taken 
from Jagmini) will illustrate the ideas better than a lengthy des- 
cription” The Sun is a solid sperical body, fitting between two 
excentric spherical surfaces, which touch two other surfaces, in the 





Fig. 1.—Planetary motions and system of spheres, 


1. The Sun. 2. Exscentric sphere. 3. The surrounding 
spheres. 4. The complement of the surrounding sphere. 
5. Centre of the world. 6. Centre of the excentric 
sphere. : 


common centre of which the Earth is situated, and which between 
them enclose a space (or intersphere, as Abu ’] Faraj calls it), named 
by Jagmini al-mumattal, or the equably turning sphere, which has 
the same motion from west to east as the fixed stars, i.e. precession. 
The spheres of the three outer planets and Venus are arranged 
on the same plan, except that the place of the body of the 
Sun is taken hy the epicycle-sphere of each planet, to the inner 
surface of which the planet (a solid spherical body) is attached or 
(as Abu’l Faraj says") “fixed like a pearl on a ring, touching the 
1, Al Kusgi gives very similar diagrams of the spheres of the Saturn, Mercury, 
_and the Moon, 
2, Precession is supposed to be included in this, ‘‘the first motion.” The second 
(Continued on next page) 


26 ASTRONOMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 


surface in one point.” The axis of the excentric sphere is incli- 

ned to that of the mumattal sphere, which causes the motion ia 

latitude. The lunar system comprises amt additional sphere outside 

the others, the centre of which coincides with the centre of the 

world, and which is called al-gauzahar, signifying the cosntella- 
1 





Fig, 2.—-Spheres of Mercury 


J. Upper Apsis, 2. Lower Apsis, Upper Apsie of deferent sph 
2 Deferent sphere, 4 Lower Apsis of deferent sphere. *s. Epieyele, 
; baled 8. Surrounding complement. 9, Surrounded part of 
umattal sphere, 10, Mudir sphere, 11, Centre of the world. 

12, Centre of Mudir, 13, Centre of deferent sphere, 

a Draco, as this sphere provides for the revolution of the lunar 
n es (‘the head and tail of the dragon”) round the zodiac. The 
reg one of the two concentric spherical surfaces, between which 
ie é excentric sphere lies, surrounds immediately the fire sphere of 
e Earth. The system of Mercury is more complicated, as a 


. space had to be provided forthe revolution of the centre of the 


(Continued from previows page) 





= is Nau of the concentric oblique intersphere (called the mail sphere ov 
a sp. wr badrarl reund the centre of the world, 11°O’ per day, by which 
Ai thé‘Tunar apogee moves towards the west, The third motion is 

t of the excentric, carrying the centre of the epicycle 24°22’ towards the 
sast. The fourth is the motion on the epicycle, Abu ‘l Fazaj, p. 27 


ALKAZWINI—EXCENTRIC SPHERES a7 


excentric sphere. The figure shows the excentric sphere enclosed 
in a sphere, al-midir or the turning one, which allows the upper 
apsis or apogee of the excentric or deferent sphere (3 in the figure) 
to move right round the outer surface of the ma@dir. The inner 
surface of the mumattal sphere immediately surrounds the 
gauzahar sphere of the Moon. 


It was a necessary consequence of the large solar parallax of 
3’ accepted by Ptolemy, that Mercury and Venus must be very 
near the Earth, since they are assumed to be nearer than the Sun. 
Thus Abraham ben Chija says that the shadow or the Earth ex- 
tends beyond the orbit of Mercury but does not reach that of 
Venus. Ptolemy never mentions the parallaxes of Mercury and 
Venus, as to which nothing was known, though they ought, of 
course, to be greater than 3’. But on the assumption that the 
smallest distance of Mercury is equal to the distance of the Moon 
at apogee, the parallax of Mercury ought to rise to 54’, which 
must have been felt to be too large a quantity, though it does 
not seem to have struck Al Battani as anything surprising, per- 
haps because Mercury cannot be seen when in inferior conjunc- 
tion. It may have been this necessarily large parallax of Mercury; 
which induced Ibn Junis (without any explanation) to reduce the 
solar parallax from 3to 2’, or rather to 1’ 572 Geber*® blames 
Ptolemy for having said that the parallaxes of the planets are 
insensible, and remarks that he ought, therefore. logically to bave 
placed Venus and Mercury above the Sun. He takes great pains 
to show that Venus may be exactly on the line joining the Sun 
and the Earth. Indeed, Geber neglects no opportunity of criticis- 
‘ing Ptolemy’s methods of finding the elements of the orbits,‘ and 
he is generally very unjust to him but he does not venture to 





1, Sphaera mundi, ed, Osw. Schreckenfuchs, Basle, 1546 pp, 84, 86, 


2. Unpublished chapters of Ibn Janis, reviewed by Delambre, Hist. de l’astr. 
du Moyen Age. p. 101, 


3. Instrumentum primi mobilis a P, Apiano, Accedunt ijs Gebri filii Affla 
Hispalensis. . , libri IX. de astronomia, Norimberge, 1534, fol. (Introd. p. 3 
and lib. VIL, p. 104), 


4. See the long indictment on pp, 2-3 of his introduction. He blames Ptolemy 
among other things for assuming that the centre of the deferentis half-way 
between the centres of the zodiac and of the equant, while he himself 
deduces this from the movements, 


28 ASTRONOMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 


substitute any other system and does not object to the general 
principles of the Ptolemaic system,} 


Three preat names : 
Ibn Badja, Ibn Tofeil (Abubacer) and Abu Welid (Averroes) 


Geber’s attempts to pick holes in the work of Ptolemy were, 
perhaps, not unconnected with the rapid rise of Aristotelean philo- 
sophy in Spain in the twelfth century, which, though not destined 
to last long, nevertheless exercised a considerable influence on the 
spread of knowledge of Aristotle in the Christian world, while it 
cast a halo round the Caliphate of Cordova, which at that time, 
under the enlightened rule of the Almohades, seemed to have 
reestablished the glory of the best days of the Moslem world. 
Three names are specially associated with this movement : 


G) Abu Bekr Muhammed Ibn Jahya al Sayeg, called Ibn 
Badja (of Saragossa, died 1139), known as Avempace 
among the Scholastics ; 


Gi) his pupil Muhammed ben Abdelmelik Ibn Tofeil (of 
Granada, died 1185-1186), called Abubacer by the 
Scholastics ; 


Giii) and finally the greatest philosopher of Islam, Ibn Rosd 
Abu Welid, known as Averroes (1126-1198), 


In studying Aristotle they laid special stresson his scientific 
works, and did not, like their Christian successors, think of 
little but dialectics. The acceptance of the system of homocentric 
spheres or some modification of it must, therefore, have seemed a 
necessity to the Arabian philosophers and this, of course, led 
them to reject the theory of epicycles.. The little we know of the 
opinions of Ibn Badja on this subject is found in the famous 
work The Guide of the Perplexed of the great Jewish scholar 
Moses ben Maimun of Cordova, better known as Maimonides, 
who tells us that he had his information from a pupil of Ibn 
Badja. Like Geber (with whose son he had been familiar), 
Maimonides doubted that Mercury and Venus were nearer than 





1. Copernicus possessed a copy of Geber's book; which is now in the Univer- 
: sity library at Upsala, On the title rpage, after the author’s name, he has 
written :“Egregii, Calumiatoris Ptolemaei,” while a number of marginal 


notes show that he has read the book carefully, Curtze, Mittheilungen des 
Coppernicus Vereins, 1, p. 37, 


THREE GREAT NAMES 29 


the Sun, though he would not venture to say how they actually 
moved. But what is more important, he declared the motion of 
a planet on an epicycle to be contrary to physical principles, be- 
cause there are only three motions possible in this world : around 
its centre, or towards it, or away from it; while he also main- 
tained that according to Aristotle circular motion can only take 
place round areal, central body.? Though Aristotle in reality 
did not object to epicyclic motion with a mathematical point as 
centre, for the simple reason that it had not been proposed when 
he wrote, while, as we have seen, his moving principle had noth- 
ing todo with the centre of motion, it is easy to see that Ibn 
Badja’s real difficulty was the same which afterwards produced so 
many obstacles to the advance of science in Europe: whatever 
could not be found in Aristotle's book must be unworthy of notice. 
According to Maimonides (who, however, makes the reservation 
that he had not heard it from disciples), Ibn Badja constructed a 
system of his awn, in which he only admitted excentric circles but 
no epicycles. We are not given any particulars as to this system 
but there can hardly be any doubt that its author confined himself 
to generalities and did not attempt to represent phenomena like 
the lunar inequalities by it. Maimonides remarks that there is 
nothing gained by Ibn Badja’s reform, since the excentric hypothe- 
sis is as objectionable as the epicyclic one, as it also supposes 
motion round an imaginary point outside the centre of the Earth. 
The centre of the excentric,on which the Sun is supposed to 
move, is outside the convexity of the lunar sphere and inside the 
concavity of that of Saturn’s excentric is between the spheres of 
Mars and Jupiter. He adds that the revolution of a number of 

concentric spheres around a common axis is conceivable, but not 
the revolution round different axes inclined to each other, as the 
spheres would disturb each other unless there are other spherical 
bodies between them. This attempt to revive and modify the sys- 
tem of (movable ?) excentrics did, therefore, not mend matters.® 





1. Rabbi Mosis Majemonidis Liber ... . Doctor Perplexorum. Basilez, 1629, 
Pars Il, cap, IX, 
2. Ibid., Pars IL. cap. XXIV. 


3. Maimonides also remarks (in the same chapter) that the supposed inclina- 
tions of Mercury and Venus in the Ptolemaic system are difficult or 
impossible to comprehend or imagine as really existing, Therefore, if what 


(Continued on next page) 


30 ASTRONCMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 
Ibn Tofeil 


Ibn Tofeil, the second of the three Moslem philosophers of 
Spain, vizier and physician at the court of Jusuf ben Abd el 
Mumin of Morocco, seems to have walked in the footsteps of his 
master ; but the only extant work of his, a kind of religious 
mystic romance about the emancipation of a soul from the 
trammels of this material world, does not give any clue to his 
ideas as tothe planetary system. But Averroes, who also objected 
to the excentrics and epicycles says in his commentary to Aristo- 
tle’s Metaphysics that Ibn Tofeil possessed on this subject excellent 
theories 2, and Ibn Tofeil’s pupil, the astronomer Al Betrugi, in 
the introduction to his theory of the planets, says of him : “You 
know that the illustrious judge Abu Bekar Ibn Tofeil told us 
that he had found an astronomical system and principles of the 
various movements different from those laid down by Ptolemy 
and without admitting either excentrics or epicycles, and with 
this system all the motions are represented without error.” Ibn 
Tofeil was therefore probat ly the real author of the fairly elabo- 
rate system, which his pupil worked out and handed down to us 
in a work on the planets, which was translated into Hebrew in 
the following century and from that again into Latin, and 
published in 1531 *. 


The object of this system was to explain the constitution of 
the universe as it really is, and not merely to represent the motions 
of the planets geometrically, so as to te able to foretell their 
places in the heavens at any time; and the author (be he Ibn 
Tofeil or Al Betrugi alias Alpetragius) specially disclaims any 
intention of testing the theory by comparing it with observations 


(Continued from previous page) 


Aristotle says is true, there is neither epicycle nor excentric, and every-~ 
- thing turns round the centre of the Eaxth. 


2, Munk; Melanges de philosophie juive et arabe. Paris, 1859, p, 412, 


3. Alpetragii Arabi Planetarum theorica phisicis rationibus probata, nuperrime 
latinis litteris mandata a Calo Calonymos, Hebreo Neapolitano, Venice 
1531, 28 ff. folio (published with Sacrobosco’s Sphaera), A translation by 
the famous Micheal Scot has never been printed, but is still exrant in 
Paris (Munk, Melanges, p, 519), The principle of the system is described 


by Isaac Israeli, who, however, does not mention the author's name (Liber 
esod Olam, II. 9. Part I, p, XI 


IBN TOFEIL 31 


or of accounting for minor details of the motions. The leading 
idea is that of the homocentric spheres, each star being attached 
to a sphere, and the motive power is the ninth sphere, the sphere 
outside that of the fixed stars. The Spanish philosopher ought, 
therefore, to have been content with the system of Eudoxus or 
its modification by Aristotle (whom he never mentions by name, 
but only as “the sage”), but unfortunately he became possessed 
with the notion that the prime mover must’ everywhere produce 
only a motion from east to west, and he had, therefore, to reject 
the independent motion of the planets from west to east. and 
revert to the old Ionian idea that the seven planets merely per- 
form the daily revolution with a speed slightly slower than that 
of the fixed stars. The true speed of the primum mobile is a 
little faster than this ;the eighth sphere performs a revolution in 
a slightly longer period (24 hours), and the effect of the prime 
mover is gradually weakened more and more, with increasing 
distance, until we find the sphere of the Moon, being furthest from 
the prime mover, taking nearly twenty-five hours to complete a 
revolution. This was the old primitive Ionian idea, but Al 
Betrugi (er his teacher) saw that this was not sufficient, as not 
only is the pole of the ecliptic different from that of the equator, 
which prevents the planets from moving in closed orbits, but the 
planets do not even keep at the same distance from the pole of the 
ecliptic but have each their motion in. latitude. as well as variable 
velocity in longitude ; and all thishad yet to be accounted for. 
The ninth sphere has but one motion, but the eighth has two, 
that in longitude (precession) and another which is caused by the 
pole of the ecliptic describing a small circle round a mean position, 
thereby producing the supposed oscillation or trepidation of the ~ 
equinoxes.? Similarly, the pole of each planet describes a small 
circle round a mean position (i. e. the pole of the ecliptic), thereby 
producing inequalities in longitude and motien in laritude® 
Whenever the actual orbit-pole of a planet is on the parallel 
of the mean pole, itis obvious that the planet will perform its 
daily revolution with its mean velocity, while the velocity is 
increased or lessened when the actual pole is respectively at ts 
minimum or maximum distance from the pole of the heavens 





1, Fol, 8 b, 2, Fol.9 b, 
3, Fol, 14 b;. sq. 


32 ASTRONOMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 


(the motion of the pole of the orbit being added to or subtracted 
from the motion of the planet), so that the epicycle is hereby 
rendered superfluous. The lengths of the radii of these small 
circles are not given, except in the case of Saturn, where the 
radius is 3° 3’. while the mean pole of the moon is 5° (the inclina- 
tion of the lunar orbit) distant from the pole of the ecliptic,* and 
the small circle is so exceedingly small as to produce no retrograde 
motion, which is also the case withthe Sun. The periods of the 
poles of the outer planets are given by the following figures 
Saturn makes 57 revolutions in 59 years and 14+ days, in which 
‘period the mean pole lags behind 2 revolutions 13°+#°. Jupiter 
makes 65 revolutionsin 71 years, the mean pole lagging behind 6 
revolutions. Mars makes 37 revolutions in 79 years and 3}+7’¢ 
days, the pole lagging behind 42 revolutions and 34% 


In other words, the motion on these small circles are com- 
pleted in the synodic periods of planets. Similarly, the pole of Venus 
makes 5 revolutions in the 8 years less 2id+z'> lagging 1§ revo- 
lutions in one year; and Mercury 145 revolutions in 46 years 
and lysd*. It is curious that Alpetragius alters the order of the 
Planets, placing Venus between Mars and the Sun, because the 
defectus (lagging) of Venus smaller than that of the Sun.5 He 
also says that nobody has given any valid reason for accepting 
the usually assumed order of the planets, and that Ptolemy is 
wrong in stating that Mercury and Venus are never exactly in 
a line with the Sun (a remark already made by Geber); and as 
they shine by their own light they would not appear as dark 
spots, if passing between us and the Sun. That they do not receive 
their light from the Sun is proved, he thinks, by the fact that 
they never appear crescent-shaped.® 


There is no need to dwell any longer on this quaint theory 





Fol. 16. 
Fol. 25a, 

. Fol. 16 a, 18 a, 19 b, 
Fol. 21 b, 24 b, 


es io 
. Ff 


Gy as wo 
* * . 


Nam reperimus defectum eius prithut minoreth defectu orbis solis et 


; maiorem defectu orbis mertis, et sequitur juxta radices nostias ut sit intex 
eos ansbas. 


: é Fol 21 2 


NASIR ED-DIN AL TUSI 33 


of spiral motion, as it has been rather improperly called It 
represented a retrograde step of exceedingly great magnitude, 
totally unjustified asthe theory could not seriously pretend to 
be superior to the Ptolemaic system, which had only become so 
very simple if one was content with representing only the princi- 
pal phenomena. We are told by the Jewish astronomer Isaac 
Israeli of Toledo, that the new system made a great sensation, 
but that it was not sufficiently worked out to be taken seriously, 
and that the system of Ptolemy, founded on the most rigorous 
calculations, could not be superseded by it2 Another Jewish 
author, Levi ben Gerson, in a work written in 1328, entered into 
a lengthy refutation of the hypotheses of Al Betrugi.? But the 
latter certainly represented a general desire on the part of the 
Spanish Aristoteleans to overcome the physical difficulties in 
accepting the Ptolemaic system; thus Averroes says that the 
astronomy of Ptolemy is merely a convenient means of compu- 
ting, and that he himself in his youth had hoped to prepare a 
work on the subject. 


Nasir ed-din Al Tusi 


While ineffectual attempts were being made in the far 
west. to devise anew astronomical theory, the astronomers of 
the east did not remain blind to the desirability of finding a 
system, in which the planets were not supposed to move unsup- 
ported in space in such a wonderfully complicated manner; and 
in the thirteenth century we find one of the greatest astronomers, 
Nasir ed-din Al Tusi, advocating a system of spheres which he 
supposed to be more acceptable than excentrics and epicycles.* 
In addition to a review or digest of the Syntaxis of Ptolemy he 
wrote ashorter work entitled Memorial of Astronomy, in various 


1, e.g. by Riccioli, Almag. Nov, T. I. p. 504, where Kepler’s figure of the real 
motion of Mars in space from 1580 to 1596 (supposing the earth to be at 
rest) is copied, as if that had anything to do with the “Swirals’” of Alpetra- 
gius, 

2, He adds that he was not qualified himself to sit in judgment onthe pro~ 
posed system (Liber Jesod Olam, IL 9, p. XI.) 


3, Munk, Melanges pp, 500 and 521, : 
4, ‘Less spheres celestes selon Nasir-Eddin Al ttisi. Par M, Carya*de Vaux.” 


Appendix VI. to Tannery's Recherches sur l’astr. anc. pp. 337—3€0. In- 
cludes a translation of the chapter in which the new theory is set forth, 


34 ASTRONOMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 


passages of which he shows his dissatisfaction with the Ptolemaic 
system, Inthe chapter on the Moon (to which we have already 
alluded } he counts upthe various anomalies, among which he 
mentions the anomaly of illumination, that is, the spots on the 
Moon, which he believes to be caused by other bodies moving in 
the lunar epicycle and unequally exposed tothe Moon's fight. 
He then says that we should expect in a simple theory to find the 
centre of the epicycle in equal times describing equal arcs on the 
deferent, and the diameter of the epicycle joining the pericentre 
and the apocentre pointing to the centre of the deferent. But 
neither of these conditions is fulfilled. In the theories of the 
planets he makes the same objections, which it must be said are 
very just, since the introduction of the equant was a very unna- 
tural arrangement. But this is nothing to the artificial machinery 
designed by Ptolemy to account for the motion in latitude of the 
five planets, especially of Mercury and Venus. Nasir ed-din des- 
cribes the marvellously complicated movements of the deferents 
and epicycles of these planets, and remarks that “these motions 
require the introduction of a system of guiding spheres, about 
which the ancients have not said anything”. He next proceeds in 


the following chapter to explain a system of his own which allows 
us to discard these combinations. 


First he proves that if there are, two circles in one plane, 
one touching the other internally and of a diameter equal to 
half that of the other, and if the greater one rotates, and 
a point moves along the circumference of the smaller one 
in the opposite direction with twice the velocity and starting 
from the pointof contact, then that point will move along a 
diameter of the greater circle. These two circles may now be 
assumed to be the equators of two spheres, and for the point we 
may substitute a sphere representing the Moon's epicycle (lin 
the figure), Nasir ed-din assumes another sphere (2) surrounding 
the epicycle and destined to keep the diameter from apogee to 
perigee in its place always coinciding with the diameter of the 
sphere (4) ‘let us give it asuitable thickness, but not too great, so as 
not to take up too much space.” He next assumes two more spheres, 
one (3) which corresponds to the smaller sphere in the distance 
of the centre of the deferent in the Ptolemaic system from the 


peenemeeermueneee 


es . A Compare Copernicus, De revolutionibus, TI. 4 Geculas ed. 1873, p. 166). 


NASIR ED-DIN AL TUSI 35 


centre of the Earth; and another sphere (4) with a diameter twice 
as great. Finally (4) is placed in the interior of a carrying sphere 
(5) concentric with the world and occupying the concavity of the 


co 
fo 


VEAL ABY 
uy 


Fig. 3,—Movements of deferents and epicycles of planets, 










The thickline is rot a circle. All others are circles, 


sphere (6), the equator of which is in the plane of the lunar orbit. 
(@) and (4) and (5) revolve in the same period, that in which the 
centre of the epicycle performs a revolution; (3) revolves in half 
that time, while (6) revolves in the opposite direction with the 
same speed as the apogee of the excentric. The figure now shows 
how the epicycle moves to and fro along the diameter of (4) and 
during the revolution of the circle (5) describes a closed curve, 
about which Nasir ed-din justly says that it is somewhat like a 
circle but is not really one, for which reason it is not a perfect sub- 
stitute for the eccentric circle of Ptolemy. He estimates the greatest 
difference between the lunar places given by the two theories as 
’ one-sixth of a degree, half-way between syzygy and quadrature. 
Except for the action of the guiding sphere (2), it would not be 
the centre of the epicycle but the point of contact of circles (3) 
and (4), which describes the curve resemblng acircle. The same 


36 ASTRONOMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 


method may be adopted for Venus and the three outer planets, 
and Nasir ed-din promises to explain the new theory of Mercury 
in an appendix, but this appears to have been lost. 


Nasir ed-din also endeavours to improve on the machinery 
proposed by Ptolemy to illustrate the manner in which the epicy- 
cle remains parallel to the plane of the ecliptic. He mentions 
that the celebrated Ibn al Haitham (afterwards known in the west 
as Alhazen, author of a well-known book on optics) had written a 
chapter on this subject, adding to each epicycle two spheres to 
account for the inclination of the diameter perigec-apogee, and 
two additional ones for the inferior planets for the diameter at 
right angles thereto" Nasir ed-din makes use of the same 
principle which guided him in his demonstration about the motion 
in longitude, and he shows how in this way we may by means of 
two spheres make the extremities of the diameter of the epicycle 
move backwards and forwards along an arcof a sphere.” He claims 
that this arrangement is superior to that of Ptolemy by not intro- 
ducing any error in longitude,® but he acknowledges that he has 
not been able to get rid of the strong objection to Ptolemy's 
auxiliary circle, viz. that the irregular motion in longitude with 
regard to the centre of the deferent necessitates the introduction 
of a corresponding irregularity in the motion on the auxiliary 
circle by letting the motion be uniform with regard to an equant. 
It baffled Nasir ed-din’s ingenuity to find an arrangement of 


spheres which could obviate the necessity of having recourse. to 
this expedient. 


All the attempts at rebellion against the Ptolemaic system 
had thus turned out failures. And they deserved nothing else, 
since it was impossible to find anything better than what Prolemy 
had produced, until it was perceived that where Ptolemy was 
wrong was not in his mathematical methods, which were pertect, 
but in the fundamantal idea of the Earth being at rest. The time 





1. Tbn al Haitham said that by using discs instead of spheres one might com-~ 
Plete the demonstration; but Nasir ed-din objects to the arrangement 
(about which he gives na details) that a non-spherical system is not in 


accordance with the principles of astronomy, 


2. Itis not quite clear whether this plan is his ownor is the same as Ibn al 


_Haitham's, ; 
3. Due to disturbance of the Position of the 


: bata diameter fram perigee to apogee, 
' from which the anomaly is counted, ; 


NASIR ED-DIN AL TUSI ‘37 


was apparently not ripe for a radical change with regard to this 
idea. Though the doctrine of the Earth's motion does not seem 
to have been mentioned by Arabian writers, we have evidence 
that the hypothesis of the daily rotation of the Earth was not 
unknown among them, a natural consequence of their familiarity 
with the writers of antiquity. One of Nasir ed-din’s fellow-workers 
at the Meragha observatory, Ali Negm ed-din al Katibi, who 
died in 1277, wrote a book, the Hikmat al-ain, on philosophy, in 
which he combats this opinion, which he attritutes to “some philos- 
phers.” “I do not,” he says, “advance as an argument against 
it that, if this were the case, a bird flying in the direction of the 
motion of the Earth would not be able to keep up with it, because 
the motion of the Earth would be much faster than that of a 
bird, inasmuch as it returns to its place in a day and a night. 
Such an argument is not conclusive, because it may be urged that 
the atmosphere which is close to the Earth partakes of its motion 
as the ether pattakes of the motion of the heavenly sphere. But 
I re‘ect this theory, because all terrestrial motions take place in 
a straight line, and therefore we cannot admit that the Earth 
should move in a circle.” | 


What reformation of astronomy could be hoped for, as long 
asthis kind of argument could be used 2? We cannot see from 
this remark of Katibi's whether there really were any: Arabian 
philosophers who believed in the rotation of the Earth. It is, 
however, stated in the Zohar, the great Kabbalistic work attribu- 
ted to Mosheh ben Shemtob of Leon (died 1305), that a certain 
Rabbi Hamnuna the Elder (otherwise unknown) taught that “the 
Earth turns like a sphere in a circle and that some people are 
above and others below.” Though this passage as well as others 
in the Zohar may have been interpolated much later, it would 





1, A, Sprenger, “The Copernican System of Astronomy among the Arabs.” 
_ Journ. Asiat. Society of Bengal, Vol. XXV. (1857), p. 189. Katibi’s con- 
temporary, Abu ‘l Faraj (II. p. 10) deems it necessary to prove that the 
Farth cannot be in motion, neither rectilinear’ nor circular, but his argu- 
ments (about birds and stones flung upwards) seem merely taken from 
Ptolemy, lib, 1. cap. 6, Kazwini (Kosmographie, p. 296) says that among 
the ancients there were some adherents of Pythagoras who majntained 
that the Earth continually moves round in a circle; but whether these 
adherents were Greeks or Arabians cannot be seen from the centext. 
2. Sohar, Amsterdam, 1718, T. III. f. 10a; Gunther, Studien 2. Gesch, 
d. math, Geogr,, p. 113, 


N 


38 ASTRONOMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 


after all not be very surprising if some learned Jews had been 
influenced by the opinion of Herakleides, since it is an established 
fact that the doctrines of the Kabbalists were intimately connec- 
ted with the later Greek philosophy. But any how nothing came 
of this isolated case, and the daily rotation of the heavens conti- 
’ nued to be universally accepted as a selfevident fact. 
Arabian astronomers and Ptolemaic system— 
Arabian astronomers who really wished to follow in detail 
the celestial motion were therefore obliged to adopt the Ptolemaic 
system altogether. New planetary tables had long been found to 
be a necessity, and this important work was at last undertaken by 
King Alfonso X. of Castille and several Jewish and Christian 
astronomers working under him at Toledo, who prepared the 
celebrated Alfonsine Tables, Apparently the King must have had 
‘his doubts about the physical truth of the system, judging from his 
well-known saying that if God had consulted him when creating 
the world, he would have given Him good advice. The tables 
were prepared under the direction of the Jew Ishak ben Said, 
called Hasan, and a physician, Jehuda ben Mose Cohen, and 
were finished in 1252, the year in which Alfonso ascended the 
throne of Castille. They continued in great repute for three hun- 
dred years as the best planetary tables; they were first printed in 
1483, but had been spread all over Europe long before that time 
in numerous MS copies, many of which are still in existence, 
‘Twenty-six codices are counted up in the Libros del Saber de 
Astronomia del Rey D. Alfonso X.de Castella, Madrid, 1863-67 
(5 vols..fol.). This compilation, a series of chapters on spherical 
and theoretical astronomy followed. by tables, must have been 
‘made up from several codices, as there are numerous repetitions 
even of very elementary matters. In the third volume the theo- 
ries of the planets are dealt with, but one looks in vain for any 
improvement on Ptolemy; on the contrary, the low state of astro- 
nomy in the Middle Ages is nowhere better illustrated. In gene- 
ral the elements of the orbits are these of Ptolemy, though some- 
times only approximations are given, while different values are 
given in different chapters, though Ptolemy places the centre of the 
deferent midway between the centre of the equant and the Earth, 
the Libros del Saber places the centre of the equant (cerco del 
alaux.')midway between the Earth and the centre of the deferent 


1, dl is'the Arbic atticle, aux (apside) is a corruption of the Arabic Ox aj 
os (Abul Faraj, IL.p.25). The equant is called the cerco del ¥ guador, 


ARABIAN ASTRONOMERS AND PTOLEMAIC SYSTEM 39 


(cer co del ievador"), as in Ptolemy’s theory of Mercury, which 
the authors would seem to have extended to the planets, omitting 
the motion of the centre of the deferent on a small circle; this, 
they have, however, correctly given in the case of Mercury 
There is a very curious figure*® of the deferent of Mercury in the 
form of an ellipse (the axes being as 6 to 5 nearly), with what 
looks like the Sun in the centre. This curve has been construc- 
ted from a number of small circular arcs,’ and it is obviously 
nothing but the curve described by the centre of the epicycle of 
Mercury in Ptolemy’s theory. For according to the latter the 
centre of the deferent describes a small circle with radius=2; of 
that of the deferent, in direction from east to west, in the same 
time which the centre of the epicycle takes to pass round the cir- 
cumference of the deferent from west to east: This makes the éen- 
tre of the epicycle describe a closed curve resembling an ellipse, the 
axes of which are in the ratio 11: 10, almost exactly the same asin 
the Spanish diagram, and there is’ therefore in the latter no antici- 
pation whatever of Kepler’s great discovery, since in the case of 
the inferior planets it isthe epicycle which is the real orbit.® 
The small sun-like object in the centre of the ellipse represents 
the centre of Ptolemy’s small circle, and it has either been inset- 
ted in the manuscript centuries after the essay had been written, 
or, more likely, it has been caused by asmall blot onthe place 
in the parchment where the stationary leg of the draughtsman’s 
compasses had made a small hole. An oval deferent of Mercury 
occurs in several books published in the sixteenth and seven- 
teenth centuries.® 





T. Vol. OI. pp. 246—253. 
2. Vol. III, pp. 253 and 278, In the the latter place the radius of the small 
circle is gy , as in the “Hypotheses” of Ptolemy, 
Vol. ITI, p. 282, ‘ 
See the lengthy description on pp, 278—280, 


5, The editor, Don Manuel Rice y Sinobas, on p, xxxiii, of his preface, 
even goes so far as to suggest that Kepler may have known of this great 
discovery of Alfonso's or rather of Arzachel’s, as the text attributes the 
construction tohim. This and. other similar diagrams were intended to 
be used instead of planetary tables inthe manner afterwards adopted by 
Apianus, 

6. First (about 1460) in Purbach’s Theoricae novae Planetarum ~(ed. of Basle, 
1573, p, 82): “Ex dictis apparet manifeste, centrum epicycle Mercurij, 


pe 


(Continued on next page) 


40 ASTRONOMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 


Though the somewhat confused collection of essays entitled 
the Libros del Saber would not, if published in the thirteenth 
century, have advanced astronomical science, it cannot be denied 
that the Alfonsine Tables were very useful in their day. The 
actual elements are not given, nor is any thing said about any 
observations by which somewhat more correct values of the 
mean motions must have been found.? 


Arabs on motions of fixed stars. 


Thus we finish our review of the planetary theories of the 
Arabs. Now we shall say a few words about their ideas as to 
the nature and motion of the fixed stars. The exaggerated 
notion which prevailed before the invention of the telescope 
with regard to the apparent angular diameters of the stars natu- 
tally, led to erroneous estimates of their actual size, founded on 
the. assumption that the sphere of the fixed stars (the eighth 
sphere) was immediately outside that of Saturn.2. The stars of 
the first magnitude were supposed to have an apparent diameter 
equal to 75 of that of the Sun, from which it followed that their 
actual diameters were about 42 times that of the Earth, or about 





(Continued from previous page) 


Propter motus supradictos non (ut in alijs planetis fit) circumferentiam 
deferentis circularem, sed potius figure, habentis similitudinem cumplana 
ovali peripheriam describere.’’ Next by Albert of Brudzew in 1482 in his 
Commentariolum super theoricas novas, printed at Milan in 1495 (ed, 
Cracow, 1900, p, 124), where itis remarked that the centre of the lunar 
epicycle describes a similar figure, This is also stated by E, Reinhold in 
his commentary to Purbach, 1542, fol. p. 7 verso (ed, of Paris, 1558, fol, 78.) 
by Vurstisius in his Questiones novae in theoricas, & c,, Basle, 1573, 
P. 233 ; and in Riccioli’s Almagestum novum T. Ip. 564. The last three 
writers (who give afigure) also take the equable angular motion round 
the centre of the equant into account, which centre lies on the point of the 
circumference of the small circle nearest the Earth, The curve described 
by the centre ofthe epicycle thus becomes egg-shaped, and not like an 
‘ellipse. 

The tables in vol.i v. of the Libros del Saber are quite different from the 
Alfonsine Tables, and are apparently only intended for astrological 
. Purposes, f 
Al Battani (cap, 50) gives the greatest distance of Saturn = 18,094, and the 
distance of the fixed stars =19,000 semidiameters of the Earth, Al Fargeni 
(p. 82) puts them exactly equal. Al Kusgi gives the diameters in parasangs, 
of the concavity of the stellar sphere=33,509,180 of the ninth sphere 
33,524,309, of its convexity ‘no one but God knows” (Shah Cholgi, p, 97). 


ARABS ON MOTIONS OF FIXED STARS 41 


twice that of Mars? Astothe nature of the stars, they seem 
generally to have been assumed self-luminous, being condensed 
parts of the sphere, though Abraham ben Chija says that the 
eighth sphere does not shine with a uniform light, but has denser 
spots, which are illuminated by the Sun and appear to us as the 
fixed stars.? 


To account for the apparent slow motion of the stars para- 
Ileled to the ecliptic, from west to east, whereby their longitudes 
increase while their latitudes remain unaltered, it became neces- 
sary to inroduce a ninth sphere (primum mobile), turning in 
twenty-four hours and communicating this motion to the eighth 
sphere, while the latter moved extremely slowly round its own 
axis forming an angle of 23° 35’ with that of the ninth.2 But the 
simple phenomenon of precession was by many Arabian astro- 
nomers complicated by being assumed variable. It may be 
mentioned that according to Theon and Proklus it had been 
assumed by some astronomers apparently before the time of 
Ptolemy, that the precessional motion of the stars’ was not pro- 
gressive, but was confined to an oscillation along an arc of 8°, 
along which the equinoctial points moved backwards and forwards 
on the ecliptic, always at the same rate of 1° in 80 years. The 
absurdity of the sudden change of direction must have become 
obvious as soon as astronomy began to be cultivated among the 
Arabs, for we find that one of the earliest astronomers, Tabit 
ben Korra, substituted a physically less ob’ectionable theory.* 


1, Al Fargani (p, 85, Golius) gives the cubic contents of the six spheres as 
107, 90, 72, 54, 36,18 times that of the Earth, Abul Faraj, p. 199, gives 
a similar series from 93 to 15} for the average star of each class, Shems 
ed-din of Damascus in his Cosmography (p. 3) merely says that the smallest 
fixed star is much larger than the Earth, 


2. According to Suter, p. 77. a writer called Ibn Zura wrote a treatise “On 
the cause of the light of the stars, though they and the spheres consist of one 
single substance.” 

3. The outermost sphere is by the philo-opher Ibn Sina (Avicenna) defined 
as a spherical, single (not composite) body, emanating directly from Gop 
and subject to dissoluticn, endowed innately with circular motion as an 
expression of its praise of the Creator (Mehrenin Oversigt, K. Danske 
Vid, Selskab, 1883, p. 70). 


4, The treatise “On the motion of the 8th sphere’ has never keén printed; 
an abstract is given in Delambre’s Hist, de Jlastr. du Moyen Age. p, 73. 
Compare a quotation by Ibn Junis, Caussin, Notices et Extraits, VIL, p, 116. 


42 ASTRONOMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 


He imagines a fixed ecliptic (in the ninth sphere) which intersects 
the equator in two points (the mean equinoxes) under an angle of 
23° 33' 30", and a movable ecliptic (in the x1 sphere), attached 
at two diametrically opposite points to two small circles, the 
centres of which are in the mean equinoxes and the radii of which 
are=4° 18’ 43". The movable tropical points of Cancer and 
Capricorn never leave the fixed ecliptic, but move to and fro to 
the extent of 8° 37’ 26", while two points on the movable ecliptic 
90° from the tropical points move on the circumferences of the 
small circles, so that the movable ecliptic rises and falls on the 
fixed one, while the points of intersection of the equator and the 
movable ecliptic advance and recede tothe extent of 10° 45’ 
either way, Thisis a motoinof the eighth sphere, common to 
all stars, and the Sun will, therefore, sometimes reach its 
greatest declination in Cancer, sometimes in Gemini. Tabit 
does notsay that the obliquity of the ecliptic is variable, and 
perhaps it did not occur to him that this would be a necessary 
consequence of his theory; he only notices the change in direction 
and amount of the motion of the equinoxes, which, he says, has 
increased since the days of Ptolemy, whenit was only 1” in 100 
years, while later observers have found 1° in 66 years. The 
erroneous value given by Ptolemy was, therefore, mainly responsi- 
ble forthe continuance of the imaginary theory. It is to be 
observed that Tabit expresses himself with a certain reservation, 
and seems to think that further observations are necessary to 
decide if the theory is true or not. His younger and greater 
contemporary Al Battani was even more cautious, for though he 
repeats the account of the trepidation given by Theon (which he 
says that Ptolemy manifeste in suo libro declarat®) he does not 
make use of it, but simply adopts 1° in 66 years (or 54”.5 a year), 
which he finds by a comparison between his own observations and 
some made by Menelaus. In rejecting the erroneous value of 
-Ptolemy, which Al Fargani alone had accepted,? Al Battani was 
followed by Ibn Janis, who came still nearer to the truth by 
adopting 1° in 70 years or 51".2 a year, and who does not allude 
to trepidation. It is greatly to the credit of several other Ara- 
bian writers that they were not led astray by this imaginary phe- 





1, Seen translation gives the period as 84 years, but Nallino’s 
2 +. 13, p49, 


3. Schjellerup, Descr, des etoiles fixes, p, 43, 


ARABS ON MOTIONS OF FIXED STARS 43 


nomenon; among them are Al Sufi, the author of the only urano- 
metry of the Middle Ages*, who followed Al Battani, also Abu ’] 
Faraj and Jagmini,? while Nasir ed-din mentions it but seems 
to doubt its reality.2, By others it was willingly accepted, for 
instance by Al Zarkali, who made the period of oscillation of 10° 
either way equal to 2000 Muhammedan years (or 1940 Gregorian 
years, i.e. 1° in 97 yearsor 37" a year). The motion is in a circle 
of 10° radius; at the Hijra the movable equinox was it 40’ in 
increasing precession, and in A: D. 1080 at 7° 25’, The diminu- 
tion of the inclination of the ecliptic, which the astronomers of 
Al Mamun had found=23° 33’, no doubt lent countenance to 
the idea of trepidation, and the next stepin the development 
of this curious theory was the combination of progressive and 
oscillatory motion. Al Betrugi, who gives a sort of history 
of the theory, beginning with a mythical H mes, makes 
out that Theon (or Taun Alexandrinus as he calls him) com- 
bined the motion of 1° in 100 years with the oscillation®, A 
century later thiswas actually done, and the theory received 
its last development by King Alfonso or his astronomers, who‘ 
perceived that the equinoxes had receded much further than 
Tabit’s theory allowed. The equioxes were now supposed to pass 
right round the heavens in 49,000 years (annual motion=26’.45), 
while the period of the inequality of trepidation was. 7000 years, 
so that in a sort of Great Jubilee year everything was again as it 
had been in the beginning.’ The progressive motion belongs to 


1, Abu ’l Faraj, p. 12, simply says that the motion is 1° in 100 years according 
to Ptolemy, or 1° in 66 years according to others. Buton p.18he says that 
ifthe ancient Chaldeans gave the tropical points a motion backwards and. 
and forwards, and if ancient astrologers adopted this, then the motion of the 
fixed stars must have been unknown to them, Jagmini (p, 229) says that 
most people adopt 1° in 66 solar years. 

2. Spheres celestes, p, 347. 
3. Sedillot, Memoire sur les instr. astr. des Arabes, pp. 31,32, Abraham 
ben Chija (p. 196 of Munster’s Sphaera mundi. Basle, 1546) gives the 
period as 1600 years without quoting any authority. He adds thatthe 
ancient Indians, Egyptians, Chaldeans, Greeks, and Latins first proposed 
the theory—Ptolemy neither approved nor GinePPiev ed of it, but Al Battani 
confuted it, 

Alpetragius, f, 12a, He says that Al Zarkali did the same. 

5, A later writer, Augustinus Ricius, De motu octave sphaere, Paris, 1521, who 
traces the theory back to Hermes, 1985 years before Ptolemy (!) credits: 


> 


(Continued on next page) 


44 ASTRONOMY IN ANCIENT NATIONS 


the ninth sphere; the annual precession varies between 26°.45- 
98°96, or from + 55%41 to —2".51.) It was now necessary to 
assume the existence of a tenth sphere, which as primum mobile 
communicated the daily rotation to all the others, while the 
ninth produced the progressive and the eighth periodical 
motion on the small circles, which are situated ‘in the conca- 
vity of the ninth sphere.” This wasanice and comfortable 
theory on account of the long periods involved and the slow 
changes it produced in the amount of annual precession; and 
oblivious of the fact that the theory had no foundation except 
the circumstance that the obiguity of the ecliptic was now about 
20’ less than it had been stated to be by Ptolemy, and that he had 
given the amount of precession as 36" a year instead of about 
50", and often shutting their eyes to several of the necessary 
consequences of it, such as the changes in the latitudes of stars 
which it ought to produce’, astronomersccntinued to accept the 
theory until at last a real observer of the stars arose and wiped 
it out by showing that the obliquity of the ecliptic had steadily 
diminished, and that the amount of annual precession had never 
varied. Wehave inthis place only alluded to it because it in- 
volved some rearrangement of the spheres and because it is 
eminently characteristic of the period during which no persistent 
observations were taken, and hardly an attempt was made to 
improve the theories of Ptolemy. The theory of trenidatio or 
titubatio, asit was sometimes called, was one attempt and it 
would have been better left alone. But itformsa not uninter- 
esting chapter in the history of astronomy. 





(Continued from previous page) 


this development to a Jew of Toledo, Isaac Hassan (see above. p. 38), 
adding that Alfonso four years after the completion of the tables became 
convinced of the futility of the theory by reading the book on the fixed stars 
by Al Sufi, Riccioli, Almag. novus, I. p. 166, 


1, Inthe Alfonsine Tables the maximum took place at the birth of Christ, In 
' Essler's Speculum astrologicum, p, 224 (appended to Purbach’s Theoricae 
novae, Basle, 1573) the epoch is A.D, 15, diebus 137 completis, Reinhold in 
his commentary to Purbach (Paris, 1558, f. 163b) explains that 267.45 is 
the space passed over by the Sun in 10 mins, 44 secs,, by which amount 

_ the Alfonsine Tables made the tropical year smaller than 3654 days, 
2, Abrakam ben Chija (p, 103, Schrackenfuchs) says that trepidation does 


not change the latitudes, ‘Perhaps he refers to the earliest form of the 
notion, that described by Theon of Alexandria, 


ARABS ON MOTIONS OF FIXED STARS 45 


Here we finish our review of ancient astronomy. We have 
omitted as not coming within our province several valuable 
contributions to science which did not deal with cosmology or 
planetary theory. Buteven with this limitation enough has 
been said to show that when Europeans again began to occupy 
themselves with science they found astronomy practically in the 
same state in which Ptolemy had left it in the second century. 
But the Arabs had put a powerful tool into their hands by alter- 
ing the calculus of chords of Ptolemy into the calculus of sines or 
trigonometry, and hereby they influenced the advancement of 
astronomy in a most important manner. 


References 
1. Peter Doig : ee History of Astronomy London 
1950, 
1. J.L.E. Dreyer : A History of Astronomy from Thales to 


Kepler Dover publications, 1953 (chapter 
XI reproduced). 


3, Satya Prakash : Founders of Sciences in Ancient India, 
Delhi, 1965. 


CHAPTER II 


Personal References of 
Brahmagupta 


‘ Sudhakara Dvivedi in his Ganaka Taranégini, a small book on 
biographical skethes of astronomers and astrologers of this 
country gives a brief account of Brahmagupta thus : 


Brahmagupta was born in 520 Saka (655 Vikrami or 589 
A.D.) in the reign of King Vyaghramukha, belonging to the Capa 
family ; his father was Jisnugupta ; and at the age of 30, he wrote 
— in 550 Saka (628 A.D.) his well known treatise on Astronomy 
known as the Brahmasphutasiddhanta, which is corroborated by 
the statement in the Visnudharmottara Purana, (Chapter on the 
Brahma-siddhanta), His other treatise, entitled the Khanda- 
Khadyaka, which is a karana book, was completed in 587 Saka (665 
A.D.). According to some authorities, Brahmagupta was the 
grandson of Visnugupta, and the family suffix (Gupta) indicated 
that he belonged to the Vaigya family, and he was in the service 
of the King of Rewah, known as Vyaghrabhata. 


Brahmagupta was a great critic ; he did not spare any of his 
predecessors like Aryabhata, Varahamihira, Srisena, Visnucandra 
and others. Later on, his influence on the writing of the succeeding 
generations has been immense. Bhaskaracarya II in his Bijaganita 
has acknowledged him as a great authority on algebra and has 
given him as the first place amongst the galaxy consisting of 
Brahmagupta, Sridhara, Padmanabha etc. The Eighteenth Chap- 
ter of the Brahmasphutasiddhanta, known as Kuttaka Chapter (on 
Pulveriser) has been translated by H. T. Colebrooke in English 
in 1817. The English translation of the Twelfth Chapter on 
Ganita or Calculations from the Brahmasphutasiddhanta is also 
available in English. (See Colebrook’s Algebra with Arithmetic 
and Mensuration from the Sanskrit of Brahmagupta and Bhas- 
kara, London, 1817). 


The Vasana Commentary on the Brahmasphutasiddhanta by 
Prthudakasvami (€60 A. D.) is also available though with diff- 
cult y (as indicated by Sudhakara Dvivedi) ; its incorrect manus- 


48 PERSONAL REFERENCES OF BRAHMAGUPTA 


cript is available in the Library of the King of Banaras (Kasira‘a) 
which has the colophony at the end as: 


aft araguriaera 2 sae at erHTTATT 

camdga aie: TART | 

aracqeltara: asoemeraemer ashe, 

Rzta sat Reugmeats | 
Bhaskara II has written the famous treatise Siddhantasiromani 
(1150), which is almost based on the Brahmasphutasiddhanta. It 
has been edited by the author’s own gloss (Vasanabhisya) by 
Bapu Deva Sastri (Varanasi); by Murlidhar Jha with the com- 
mentaries, Vasanavarttika of Nrsimha (1621) and Marici of 
Muniévara (1635), vol. I (containing chapter 1 of the Ganita- 
dhyaya) (Varanasi, 1917); by Girija Prasad Dvivedi with original 
commentaries in Sanskrit and Hindi, vols. I and II (Lucknow, 
1911, 1926); English translation of the text only by Bapu Deva 
Sastri and Wilkinson (Calcutta, 1861). 


In the very first Chapter (verse 2), Brahmagupta writes: 
The old calculations dealing with planets (i.e. the old astronomy), 
based on the system of Brahma have become erroneous in course 


of past ages and therefore, I, the son of Jisnugupta would like to 
clarify them. 


Brahmagupta was not a mere theorist, he based his calcula- 
tions on direct observations with the help of instruments or 
devices (nalikadi vantra); he was in favour of making correc~ 
tions on the basis of these observations. He was himself an 


expert observer. In his Khandakhadyaka also he has emphasised 
_ the need of direct observation. 


At many places, Brahmagupta has severely criticised the 
Romaka and Pauliga systems of astronomy which were introduced 
in this country by Latadeva and Srisena, There are many 


passages where this criticism would be available with vehe- 
mance. 


Brhamagupta was opposed to the system of Aryabhata I. 

He never spares the school of Aryabhata which was regarded as 

the most authoritative then. Sudhakara Dvivedi says that as 

Brahmagupta was opposed to the system of Aryabhata, so the 

VateSvara Siddhanta was opposed to that of Brahmagupta. The 

Institute has already published the Vatetvara Siddhanta and now 
“it has the privilege of publishing the Brahmasphutasiddhanta. 


A NOTEON BHILLAMALA ; 49 


A Note on Bhillamala 


It is said that Brahmagupta completed his Brahmasphuta- 
.siddhanta in Saka 550, and he has come to be known as Bhilla- 
malakacarya or ateacher residing in “Bhillamalaka.” In this 
connection, therefore, it would be interesting to reproduce a note 
on Bhillamala from G. Bhuler’s article on Gurjara Inscriptions, 
No. III, published in the Indian Antiquary, July 1888, vol. 17, p. 
192: 


With a single exception all the complete inscriptions call 
the princes enumerated above, scions of the Gurjara race; and 
Khe I. and II. highly extol the greatnessand wide extent of this 
family. Na. alone names the Maharaja Karna as their ancestor. 
With respect to this personage it is tor the present impossible to 
say whether the famous hero of the Mahabharata may be meant, 
or some real historical king. Butthe name Gurjara makes it 
evident that this dynasty belonged to the great tribe which is 
still found in Northern and Western India and after which two 
provinces, one in the Bombay Presidency and onein the Panijaba, 
have been named. The Gurjaras or Gijars are at present pretty 
numerous in the western Himalaya, in the Patjaba and in Eastern 
Rajputana. In Kachh and Gujarat their number is much smal- 
ler. It would, therefore. seem that they came into Western 
India from the north. Their immigration must have taken place 
in early times, about the beginning of our era or shortly after- 
wards. In Western India they founded, besides the kingdom of 

‘Broach, another larger state which lay some hundred miles 
further north. Hiuen Tsiang mentions in his travels' the 
kingdom of Kiu-che-lo and its capital Pi-lo-mi-lo. It has been 
long known that the former word corresponds to Gurjara. 


But the name of the town has been incorrectly connected 
by the French scholars with Balmer in the Jésalmir territory, and 
this ident ification has been accepted in Mr. Beal’s new transla- 
tion of Siyuki. AsI havestated already formerly? following 
Colonel. J. Watson, Pilomilo corresponds exactly to Bhillamala 


rere mi 


1, Beal, Siyuki, Vol. Il, p. 269f. Hiuen Tsiang assigns to the nor- 
thern Gurjara State an extent about double of that given for the kingdom of 
Broach, . 


9, Ante, Vol, VI. P. 63, 


50 PERSONAL REFERENCES OF BRAHMAGUPTA 


one of the old names of the modern Bhinmal or Srimal! in 
southern Marvad close ‘to the northern frontier of Gu'ariit. 
Another work, which was composed a few years before Hiuen 
Tsiang’s visit to Gujarat, contains likewise a notice of this 
northern kingdom of the Gurjaras. The astronomer, Brahma- 
gupta. who completed his Siddhanta in Saka-Samvat 550 or 628 
AD. calls himself Bhillamalakakacarya®, “the teacher residing 
in Bhillamalaka and is called so by his commentator Prthtida- 
kasvamin. He further states that he wrote under king Vyighra- 
mukha who was ‘an ornament of the Capa race.’ This family, 
whose name recurs in the Haddala grant of Dharanivaraha® 
prince of Vadhvan, thus seems to have been the reigning house 
of Bhillamala. Itis most probably identical with the Caudas, 
Cavétakes* or Chapétkatas, who from 756 to 941 A.D. held 
Anhilvad end still possess various small districts in northern 
Gujarat. The Gur‘ara kingdom of Broach was without a doubt 
an offshoot of the larger State inthe north, and it may te that 
its rulers, too, belonged to the Capa family. 


1. Bhillamala means etymologically ‘the field of the Bhil’? and Sri- 
mala ‘the field of Sri’, The latrer name must also be ancient, as the Sri- 
mali Brahman as are called after it. The Jainas narrate various, of course 
incredible, legends, which explain how Srimala came to be called Bhillamalo. 
Merutunga says that king Bhoja invented the latter name, because the 
people of Srimala let the poet Magha die of starvation. According to 
another authority, the town had a different namein each Yuga. It is in 
India very common for ancient towns to have two or even more names. 
Thus Kanauj was called, Kinyakubja, Gadhipura, and Mahodaya, 

2. See Professor A. Weber, Die Sanskrit und Prakrit Handschriften 
der Berliner Bibliothek Vol, Il. pp. 297-298, In the first passage the MSS. 
offers incorrectly Bhilamacarya; in the second which occurs in the commen~ 
tary on the Khandakhadyaka, we have Bhillamalavakactrya, a slightly cor- 
tupt reading, This latter varia lectio occurs also in other MSS., see 
Weber, Indische Streifen. Vol. III, p. 90, and has given rise to erroneous 
supPpositions regarding Brahmagupta’s. home, The GujarttiJoshis still pre- 
serve the tradition that Brahmagupta was a native of Bhinmala, 

3. Ante, Vol. XIL p.190f, The remark which Ihave made there 
that the Capas are not named elsewhere, of course requixes correction, 

4. The form Cavotaka, which occurs in Dr. Bhagavanlal’s grant of 
the Gujarat Calukya king Pulakesin of Samvat 490, is the immediate prede- 
cessor of the word Caudg. Its Sanskrit original is certainly not cipotkaga 
which probably has been coined in comparatively speaking modern times, 
in order to explain the difficult Prakrit word, just as the bards of Rajputana 
have invented Rastraudha as etymon tor Rathod, 


BRAHMAGUPTA’S OWN REFERENCES 51 
Brahmagupta’s own References 


In the Twenty-fourth Chapter CSafijfiadhyaya), of the 
Brahmasphutasiddhanta, Brahmagupta has made a reference to his 
own biography: In the reign of Vyaghramukha belonging 
to the family of Capa, inthe year 550 Saka the treatise 
Brahmasphutasiddhanta was composel for the benefit of benevo- 
lent astronomers by Brahmagupta, son of Jisnugupta at the age 
of 30. (BrSpSi. XXIV. 7. 8) 


Then again te says: The Brahmasphutasiddhanta has been 
written by Brahmagupta, son of Jisnu, in 1008 verses of Aryach- 
anda. (ibid 10 ) 

In the beginning of this Saiiifiadhyaya, he refers to the 
differences in fundamental notions created by the various existing 
systems of astronomy as the Sarya-siddhanta, Pulisa-siddhanta. 
Romaka-siddhanta, Vasistha-siddhanta and other Yavana-siddha- 
ntas, which have caused anomalies in the calculations of eclipses. 
He also refers to the anomalies dueto the calculations based on 
midni ght day-reckoning and sunrise day-reckoning. 

From the point of view of own references, the following 
would be of interest: 


Brahmagupta, son of Jisnugupta (Jisnusuta-Brahmagupta) : 
BrSpSi. I. 2; XVI. 35. 37; XXIV. 8. 10; XXV. 73. 


It is strange that in the Khandakhadyaka, Brahmagupta has 
not given his name nor his father’s name anywhere. At least the 
reading of the Khandakhadyaka as given by Prthtdakasvami does 
not contain this name. In the edition of Bhattotpala, there are three 
more chaptersin the Khandakhadyaka (Chapters IX, X and XD. 
In the Chapter XI (known as Patadhikara), we have 21 verses and 
in the last 21st verse we find the name of Brahmagupta,’ son of 
Jisnu mentioned : 

Those who are eeger to have the knowledge of the motion 

of stars and planets, for them and for the benefit of disciples 

in this field, Brahmagupta son of Jisnu has compos2d this 

Khandakhadyaka. 


1. quemaaftt ped cenfigquraiery | 
frenaf feat ste’ fryers | —KK. XI. 21 


52 PERSONAL REFERENCES OF BRAHMAGUPTA 


Reference to Aryabhata 


We have said that it appears that Brahmagupta was a bitter 
opponent of Aryabhata in his younger days (623 A. D.), but 
later on (in 665A. D.), heclimbed down to describe and teach 
one of the Aryabhata’s system of astronomy. Aryabhata was 
universally revered. and it was difficult for Brahmagupt: to have 
ignored him and thus he has to refer to this great authority some 
times to oppose some of his views and some times to expound his 
views. The following are the pasages in the Brahmasphutasiddha- 
nta, where the author has referred tothe name of Aryabhata. 
There are many other passages where the name “Aryab hata” 
does not occur but where Brahmagupta indirectly means to quote 
the views of this great master. . 


BrSpSi. I. 9. 12. 28. 32, 60. 61; IT. 33. 46, V. 21.25; 
VIL 13; IX10; X04. 9.10. 12. 25. 29.33. 41. 
42, 43, 44, 46, 47. 49, 62; XIII, 27; ATV. 45; XVI. 
37. 46; XXT. 39. 


The largest references are in Chapter XI, where Brahmagupta 
has made an attempt to show the discrepancies of the Aryabhati- 
aya system of reckoning astronomical observations and constants. 


In the Khandakhadyaka also there is areference to the 
name of Aryabhata but on very few occasions. In Chapter I, 
we have this reference at three places- 


Having made obeisance to God Mahadeva, who is the great 
cause of this world’s rise (i.e. creation), existence and destruc- 
tion, I shall declare the Khandakhadyaka (i.e. a short treatise 
on asttonomy. which is as pleasant as food prepared with 
sugarcandy),which will yield the same results as the great 
astronomical treatise of Aryabhata. As in most cases 
calculation by the great work of Aryabhata, for (the know- 
lege of time and longitude of planets etc. at ) marriage. 
nativity and the like. is impracticable for common use 


every day, this smaller treatise is made so as to yield the 
. same results as that. + 


1. signe aereg sage Rafinetag | 
en Bearaaaeaae se It 
aPURdass Bae: at aatseae: | 
SHETTY HIATT TAY am RE 1-2 


REFERENCE TO ARYABHATA 53 


These two verses show that Brahmagupta was not hostile to Arya- 
bhata when he wrote this Khandakhadyvaka ; he merely intends 
presenting the subject matter on simple lines and furnishing 
the results obtained by Aryabhata in a simpler way. 


In the following verse of the same chapter. he refers to 


Aryabhata’s midnight day-reckoning system : 


The mean Saturn diminished by 3 seconds, the Sighrocea 
of Mercury diminished by 22 seconds, the mean Mars 
increased by 2seconds and the mean Jupiter increased by 
4 seconds are equal to the respective mean planets of Arya- 


bhata’s “midnight-system’’.* 


In the Appendix of the Khandakhadyaka known as Khanda- 


' khadyakottara, we again find a few verses where the name of 
Aryabhata occurs; Three of these verses have been reproduced 
from the Brahmasphutasiddhanta (BrSpSi I. 62, 63; 11.47) : 


Aryabhata made the apogee of the Moon as moving more 
quickly and the node as moving more slowly than their 
actual motions; if his constants give correct results in rela- 
tion to the end of tithis [i. e. conjunction etc.] or eclipses, 
they must be considered as accidental as are the letters cut 
into wood by weevils. (KK. IX.1; BrSpSi. I. 62) 

On seeing me, who possess the most accurate knowledge 
of mean motions, men who have learnt from the works 
of Srisena, Visnucandra and Aryabhata, cannot face me 


in any meeting just like deer on seeing alion (KK. IX. 2: 
BrSpSi. I. 63) 


Asthe apparent planets beginning with Mars as derived 


’ from the works of Srisena, Aryabhata and Visnucandra, 


are far deviated from their true places, the works of these 
authors are therefore not valued among the learned? (KK. 
IX. 3; BrSpSi. I. 47) 


1. feat: ata afinen gaistiat sae | 


2. 


arena staise’ URaRETeTT {I —KK.1.7 
TET: TeMegat Te SAT | 

feat FEU FUat Ges STs: [10 

aentfad aha ature fears: | 

eae a wanahiganr: Re wear aut Eat: [RW 

Fae: TET: turer gy | E 

AHL TAA gat FarTeTATA | gil ~—KK. 1X. 13 


54 PERSONAL REFERENCES OF BRAHMAGUPTA 


In the Appendix of the Khandakhadyaka, there is another verse 
which also speaksin the same strain against Aryabhata (this 
verse does not occur in the Brahmasphutasiddhanta) : 

As the process of finding the apparent places of pla- 

nets as given by Aryabhata does not make them agree with 

observation, I shall, therefore, speak of this process. Of the 

Sun the apogee is at two signs and seventecn degrees (KK. 

IX, 4)* 7 

Brahmagupta opposed to Srisena— 
Visnucandra, Lata, Vijayanandi and others 

Brahmagupta was a great critic; he did not spare Aryabhata, 
and along with him he was vehemently opposed to the doctrine 
of Srisena, Visnucandra, Latadeva, Vijayanandi and Pradyumna 
also. He was opposed to the Romaka and Paulisa Siddhantas, 
which were the systems of foreign astronomy, derived from 
Greece, Babylonia and other centres of learning. He did his best 
to resist the foreign influences on astronomy. 

_ The following are the verses in the Brahmasphutasiddhanta, 
where Brahmagupta expressed his note of discord against the sys- 
tems or notions of Aryabhata, Srisena and Visnucandra : 

BrSpSi. 1.60; II 46, 47; X 13, 62; XI.31, 46, 47, 48-50, 55, 

XVI. 36, 46; XX1.39; XXII. 2. 
In two of the verses, he refers to Latasimha: 

BrSpSi. XI. 46, 48. 

In the following verse, he refersto Ankaciti, Vijayanandi, Prad- 
yumna and others: BrSpSi.XI. 58. 

In the Khandakhadyaka we do not find the names of these 
adversaries of Brahmagupta; we, however, have a reference of 
Srisena, Aryabhata and Visnucandra in the verses already quoted, 
occurring in the Appendix of the Khandakhadyaka (Khanda- 
khadyakottara), Chapter IX. 2 and 3. As we have said betore, 
these verses of the Appendix have been reproduced from the 
Brahmasphutasiddhanta. (1.62 and II.47). 


Reference to Romaka and Pauliga systems 


Brahmagupta speaks of his system as if expounded by Brahma 
himself for the first time, later on deteriorated, and then revived 
by Brahmagupta himself. The very second verse of the Brahma- 
1. 3 enepret cad qa at | 

age rated URE ST I —KR.IX. 4. 


REFERENCE TO ROMAKA AND PAULISA SYSTEMS 55 


sphutasiddhanta (I. 2) substantiates this view : 


The science of astronomy (or the calculations of heavenly 
bodies) in course of long duration became ineffective or erro- 
neous; this was revived by Brahmagupta, son of Jisnu.’ (BrSpSi. 
1.2). 


The system of astronomy which goes by the name Brahma 
(Brahmasiddhanta) has been handed down to us in three forms: 
(i) one is as treated by the Sakalyva Samhita, (ii) one as described 
in prose in the Vismudharmottara Purana, and (iii) the one des 
cribed by Varahamihira in the Pamtcasiddhantikd, which re- 
cognises the yuga of the duration of five years. Which of these 
three was accepted by Brahmagupta isnot clear. But from the 
measures of the number of revolutions performed by a planet in 
a given period (graha-bhagana) etc. itis clear: that Brahmagupta 
acknowledges the system as propounded in the Visnudharmottara 
Purana. In his chapter “Tantra-pariksidhydya or Dasana- 
dhyaya, he contradicts the notions of the Vedanga Jyotisa which 
accepts the yuga of five years. 


We may further emphasize the fact that Brahmagupta has 
not clearly detailed out the errors to which the Brahma-siddhanta 
succombed in course of time, and how these errors were eradi- 
cated by him. During the days of Brahmagupta, Romaka and 
Paulisga systems were getting currency in this country. Reference 
to these two are found in the Brahmasphutasiddhanta at several 
places as follows: 


ROMAK : 1.13; XI.50; XXIV.3 
PAULISA : XIV.45; XXIV.3 


In fact, BrSpSi. XXIV.3, we find the line “Sarvendu-Pulisa- 
Romaka-V asistha-Yavanadyaih’, where we havea reference to 
all the then existing systems: Sarya-siddhanta, Indu-siddhanta 
Pulisa-siddhanta, Vasistha-siddhanta, and other Yavana-siddha- 
ntas. Just as the Sun is one, so the astronomical system is also 
one; this is a different thing that calculations in different systems 
may vary according to different sunrises in different places. 


Brahmagupte refers at one place to Varahamihira in BrSpSi. 
XXI.39, where he has been spoken of in connection with a list*of 


8. ERR peated aaa arate a Peete | . : 
aida apd asygETT II —BrSpSi. I. 2. 


56 PERSONAL REFERENCES OF BRAHMAGUPTA 


anti-authoritative versions of astronomical systems : 
Evam Varahamihira-Srisenacaryabhata-Visnucandradyaih 


Lokaviruddhamabhihitam Veda-smrtisamhitabahyam. 
At one place, he mentions the difference between the calculations 
based on the system of Aryabhata and the Pafica-siddhintas 
(Five systems) : Pauliga, Romaka, Vasistha, Saura, and Paitamaha. 
(BrSpSi. XIV 46). 


Brahmagupta was also familiar with the Jaina systems of 
astronomy; for example, at one place he uses the term “Jinoktam” 
(i.e., one propounded by the Jainas): He repudiates the concept 
of two Suns and two Moons “Dvdvarkaindavau’(do canda do suija) 
(BrSpSi. X1.3) as enunciated by the Jainas. 


At several places we find a reference to the Vasistha-sid- 
dhanta (BrSpSi. X1.49, 50; XXIV.3) 


Wherever, Brahmagupta, has to press for his views in pre- 
ference to the views of others, he uses the words Brahma or 
Brahmokta : Br SpSi. 


Brahma : 1.32; X.62; XI, 61; XVI.37 
Brahmokta : IT.31, 33; X.63, 69; XV.53; XVI.33 


Reference 


Sudhakara Dvivedi: Ganaka Tarangimi 


G, Buhler ‘ : Gurjara Inscriptions, Indian Anti- 
quary, 1888. 


P, C. Sengupta : Khandakhadyaka, Calcutta, 1934, 


CHAPTER III 


Manuscripts of the 
Brahmasphuta Siddhanta 


Sudhakara Dvivedi has given an account of some of the 
manuscripts of the Brahmasphutasiddhanta in his Bhumika or 
Introduction appended to the edition published in the PANDITA, 
VolXXIV, 1902 (New Series) : (i) available in the Librery of the 
Government College, Kashi (Varanasi) i. e. Kagika-Rajakiya-Patha- 
laya,(ii) Dr. Thibaut’s Manuscript,(iii) the Manuscript in possession 
with Yajfiadatta Sharma, the Chief Astronomer attached to the 
Prince of Ayodhya. It is further mentioned that Dr. Thibaut's 
Manuscript was a copy of a Manuscript available in the Deccan 
College, Poona. The Manuscripts (ii) and (ii) were identical. 
The Manuscripts (iii) was very faulty and incorrect. 

The Manuscript from which Colebrooke translated out in 
English the Twelfth and the Eighteenth Chapters on Ganita or 
Mathematics and Kuttaka (the Chapter on Pulveriser) respectively, 
appeared to be different from the three Manuscripts described 
above. The readings differed considerably. The Kuttaka- 
Ghapter of that book is, writes Sudhakara Dvivedi, still available 
inthe India Office Library. (See Catalogue of the Sanskrit? 
Manuscripts in the Library of India Office, Part V.p. 995).1 


1. creer area of: atresia seed fader ste fad erie 
MEMTMTTR ATAPI HAT aeyT | sto alae 
Me yeaa Teahreghraeia (Deccan College, Poona) Sar qamq 
TeACL | at ge aa te at awa gerd Fangada | at qeaeeeriage 
ag a watad arte | 

FYMMGAT ST TATA ATMS: ATE 
fata erengeaatacran fratreday feria vata | agen gears: 
dof sfteqe-snrfhe-ctsdi war act (See Catalogue of the Sanskrit 
Manuscripts in the Library of India Office, Part V, Page 995) 

Tease Fara fer a aheaanafetay wea e gare as 
data arerant eteq-artke-aeaa Het aot Te UT Maa Sto 
SA ataretaaaa aft dae afantsha | set steq-wnite-ceat 


(Continued on next page) 


58 MANUSCRIPTS OF THE BRAHMASPHUTASIDDHANTA 


Colebroke procured a Manuscript of the Prthtdaka Svami’s 
Annotation on the Brahmasphutasiddhanta from somewhere in 
India. This is also available in the India office Library, London. 
Undoubtedly it appears that this Manuscript is a copy from one 
written in the Maithila script. Dvivedi describes a few character- 
istics of this Manuscript. For example, on the Folio 11. 7 (¥) is 
written. instead of 9 (a). Ata few other places also, the same has 
happened. Following a visarga, (kva 74) is inscribed instead of 
‘ha’ (4), for example refer to Folio 12, line 6. At some places 
instead of visarga (:) we find sa (9) inscribed, for example on Folio 
12, line 1. Sometimes we find a sandhi at the viraéma or end of 
a sententence; e.g. in the Goladhyaya, Folio 21, line 2: sarva- 
mupapannamuktamakhandena (waaTITTaTss). At some places 
we find nu (4) writtenin place of nta (). In one of the Folios, 
Sri Ganesava namah. Aiea: is written in Maithila script. 
Sudhakara Dvivedi prepared a copy of this Manuscript for Dr. 
Thibaut, and this copy was available with Sudhakara Dvivedi 
when he published his commentary with Text in the Pandita. 
During the course of binding, on account of carelessness, many 
of the Folios got misarranged, and many of them got fragmented. 
Sudhakara Dvivedi emphasises in his Introduction the need 
of careful research on the arrangement of these Folios and their 
readings. (See Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Lib- 
rary of India Office, Part Vip. 993-995). 

Sudhakara Dvivedi with considerable efforts could rearrange 
the Text: 


Goladhyaya-Bhasyam 1 to 45, mutilated at the beginning 
Madhyamadhikara-Bhasyam 45 to 59 
(Continued from previous page) 
Het AS PAHS TeTTTHASATTAAT TMA ara, aR after 
aata la ahgugararat qt ge Fei aemptect sah! (See 
_ Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Library of India 
. Office Part, V. Page 993-995) 


1. et gee satitateratintame gerne memacihe Redeet went 1 22 a, 
8 TET STA © Uf Beary | came | Aheatien ces fa? ere “a” Beare | 
Bar 22 wa, & dent | tat Pelee ‘a eff Bere, gat ek GH, aA aR 
faa abvarars | sat Tere 2208, 2 wal egress | 


gare ‘at met at eh Ber | cafe sd Sarat: of ade a 


MANUSCRIPTS OF THE BRAHMASPHUTASIDDHANTA - 59 


In this, the commentary is up to verse 31. In the 
Spastadhikara, the commentary begins from verse 29, Folio 60. 
At the top of the Folio, we have the old numbering 1 and 115. 


After this, 68 folios are mis-arranged, and there the old 
numbering is marked 9, 


After that, up to 87 folio, we have in the bound volume a 
commentary up to the verse 6 of Triprasnadhikara. Here the old 
numbering is marked 28. Then we have the commentary up to 
verse 27 of the Triprasnadhikara. Here the numbering of folios 
is marked 1 and 159 (old numbering) and 218 new. After this, 
then we havein the bound volume: commentary up to verse 33 
of the Triprasnadhikara. On the last folio, the old numbering is 
marked 5 and 163, the new numbering 222. After this begins the 
commentary on the Candragrahanadhikara from verse 4, old 
numbering 1 and 297 and new numbering 257. Then follows 
the commentary on Saryagrahana up to verse 23. The last old 
folio numbering is 36 and 232, the new numbering 292. This is 
the last folionumbering of the volume in the India Office Library. 
After this, begins the commentary on Grahayutyadhikara, verse 11, 
old numbering 1 and 164 and the new numbering 223. 


Then follows the Madhyagatyuttaradhyava up to verse 40, 
old folio numbering 119, and new numbering 178. Then we have 
the commentary of the Madhvagatyuttaradhyayva beginning from 
the verse 45; the old folio numbering 120 and the new numbering 
179. Then we have the commentary on Triprasnottaradhyaya 
up to verse 56. Here the last old folio number is 48 and 158, 
and the new numbering 217. 


In this way. we have the commentary on: the multilated 
Goladhyayva, mutilated Madhyamadhikara, mutilated Spasta- 
dhikara, mutilated Triprasnadhikara, mutilated Candra-graha- 
nadhikara, mutilated Sarya-grahanadhikara, mutilated Grahayu- 
tyadhikara, Bhagrahayutyadhikara, Tantra-pariksadhyaya (also 
known as Dusanadhikara), Ganitadhyaya (Arithmetic), mutilated 
Madhyagatyuttaradhyaya, Sphutagatyuttaradhyaya, mutilated 
Triprasnottaradhyaya.* 


1. war aeassaraa aene-mreaa es fraira: | 


MATTEL e-vy, sal waftecry | . 
HATTA AT YU-RE | 





(Continued on next page) 


60 MANUSCRIPTS OF THE BRAHMASPHUTASIDDHANTA 


Sudhakara Dvivedi says that nowhere in the Brahma- 
Sphutasiddhanta, Madhyamadhikara, 1s found the verse: 

Samsadhya spastataram bijam nalikadiyantrena. 

Tat-sansrtagrahebhyah kartavyau nirnayddesau. 


(This verse has been quoted by Dvivedi in the Ganaka- 
Tarangint page 19). 


This verse has been quoted by Dvivedi from the Trans- 
lation of Grahalaghava by Mallari. 


- Dvivedi further says that in the Manuscripts available, 
there is mentioned a Twenty-fifth Chapter under the title “Dhya- 
nagrahopadesadhyaya”. Dvivedi thinks that this Chapter docs not 
constitute the B-ahmasphutasiddhanta proper, which ends in fact 
with twenty-four chapters? In bis commentary and Edition in 
the Pandita, he has published it as a separate treatise of Brahma-~ 
gupta. Thus he has named his Edition as: 


FA WIAA 32 Vala ATL | 
Ba: ETAT Re RatHTAISSTAT Yo was ara Tea wa 2, aT 
ey | 
BSA 8s TTL , TA Ui PEM e | 
aa: oO Ta daraeehaeafawer 9 retarded Star | eT MTT 
=| Tafa 20 valmaeaT, THAT NAT 2 TAT eu, FAT RULE I 
sa dara ae Bora 33 vataried Antari y aay 288, 
AAA GN FW RRR aTETEUae ¢ vata Aenea ate ear 
R89 | AT PVN A QVO | aa: waETe xe welaeded Gar) weer oe os 
GAT 24 TAT 232, aa ae TaN | Rtearentha yesh Bonar | 
am seqahane 92 ralsadanen ay alae 2 aa vay, adi ae 
Re | aa HeMTTNgRTATST | 
vo mane dame) anemic Gen 228 aa PRA A evs | 
Tet ARTO vy Reta | eT TTT 2Ro BATA | 208 | 
Taf RTT TATA xa vettaeg deat | sonata a aa ous, adler 
GET F 2LVV | 
aktemerae | ufterremirenea | aftereerfemce | after 
Pantera | eterno | afterdorutece | afkeaegeft- 
ake | aregemerma | aentererre (granite) | aftrareare afta 
ia ala etal STR | afteaiorabrereena a 
1 
aah 1. waa Gry ‘aerer went det afew” enh wer 
o a aa arerearaaarn sake (xe sonata 


MANUSCRIPTS OF THE BRAHMASPHUTASIDDHANTA 61 


Brahmasphutasiddhanto Dhyanagrahopadesadhyayasca or 
Brahmaphutasiddhanta and Dhyanagrahopadesadhyaya by Brahma- 
gupta (1902)? 

The manuscript of this small treatise was also mutilated, 
and Dvivedi took special pains in editing it. and he revised the 
calculations also incorporated in this treatise. 


The small treatise. Dhyanagrahopadesadhyaya must have 
been composed prior to the Brahmasphutasiddhanta, since we 
find a verse in the last Chapter (the 24th Chapter also known as 
the Satjradhyaya of the Brahmasphutasiddhanta), verse 9, a 
reference to this book: 

How could this result be obtained in a simple way has been 
shown by me in the Dhyanagrahopadesadhyaya of 72 Arya verses, 
and therefore, it is not repeated here. BrSpSi. XXIV. 9) 

In the Dhyanagrahopadesadhyaya, we have a verse 61, 
which is also found in the Khandakhadyaka (KK. I. 21): 

Navatithayah (159) divided by asti (16), paficarasah (65) 
divided by vasu (8), 10 divided by 3, each multiplied by the 
equinoctial shadow are the (tabular differences of) ascensional 
difference expressed in vinddis. (KK. I. 21; DhGr. 61) 


This verse then indicates that the Dhyanagruhopadetadhyaya 
has been composed after the Khandakhadyaka. It may also be 
possible that the Brahmasphutasiddhanta and the Dhyanagraho- 
padesadhvaya were simultaneously written, and the above verse 
(DhGr. 61) was repeated again in the Khandakhadyaka. 


Sudhakara Dvi vedi has taken the help from the commentary 
of Prthtdaka Svami in the Chapters on P&tiganita (Arithmetic), 
and has quoted the examples from this commentary. At many 
places he has corrected the readings which were mutilated in 
manuscripts. 


1. samen faery ad ATE aT TMT 
atsH was Tata eae sa: | aga wafer al af afta dates 
gaara giirsst faPrcaih | 

am Rare saofamshat dea (go vor) 
afta ce fail eae aatsaTy | 
ame facaticaiat a fafadtsa aati 

var SR CARE WT Pat ws 

TREATY BsrIRTAT CTE Ta Beale sar ‘aahieattefegar’ xerle- 
RT GUase: Tea Rea | 


62 MANUSCRIPTS OF THE BRAHMASPHUTASIDDHANTA 


Reference 


Sudhakara Dvivedi : His Bhumika on BrSpSi., Pandita, 
Vol. XXIV, 1902 (New Series) 


Chapter IV 


Subject Matter Classified in the 


Brahmasphutasiddhanta 
& Khandakhadyaka 


It needs noemphasis that Aryabhata commanded a great 
influence as an astronomer not only prior to Brahmagupta but 
during his days also, and we have seen how Brahmagupta quoted 
this great authority in his writings, sametimes borrowing from 
him and sometimes contradicting him or improving upon his 
calculations. Aryabhata’s great work is known as the Aryabh- 
ativam written in 499.A.D. Aryabhata was bornin 476 A.D. 
(Kaliyuga Samvat 3577). The Arvabhatiyam is also known 
asthe Aryasiddhanta. For details about Aryabhata the reader 
is referred to the -Chapter entitled* Aryabhata lays Foundations 
of Algebra’ (Founders of Sciences in Ancient India, 1965, Chapter 
X) . This great work was written in Kusumapura, (modern Patna, 
Bihar). 
Divisions of Aryabhatjyam 
The Aryabhativam is divided into four chapters called 
Pada: Gi) the Gitika Pada, with ten verses; (ii) the Ganita Pada 
with 33 verses; (iii) the Kalakriya Pada with 25 verses and (vi) 
the Gola Pada with 50 verses. 


In the Ganita Pada, a chapter on mathematics, we have 
such subjects: squares (varga),:+ cubes ( ghana ) ( verse 3), 
square-root (vargamiula) (4). cube-root (ghanamila) (5) ; area of 
atriangle, volume of a prism (6), area of a circle, volume of a 
sphere (7), area of a quadrilateral (visamacaturasra) (8); circumte- 
rence of a circle (10), Rsine (radius x sine) (iva) (11); determina- 
tion of the Rsine of the zenith distance, the base (bahu) of a right- 
angled triangle, and the upright (kofi) of a right-angled triangle 
~ (16) ; hypotenuse (karna) of a right-angled triangle and ardhajya 
(17), Reversed-sin: (Sara) (18), areas of series-figures (sredhiphala) 
(19), rule of three (trairasika) (23),-reduction of fractions (savar- 
nikarana of bhinna) (27); inverse-rule of three (vyasta) (28); 


64 BRAHMASPHUTASIDDHANTA & KHANDAKHADYAKA 


evaluation of unknown values (milya-pradarsana of avyakta 
miulya (30) ; and the theory of pulveriser (Kuttaka) (32, 33). In 
this chapter, Aryabhata givesthe solutions of quadratic equa- 
tions, and thus he earnsfor himself the credit of founding the 
science of algebra. 


(iii) The Kalakriya Pada with 25 verses: which enumerates 
the units of time [1 year (varsa)=12 months (masa) ; 1 month== 
30 days (divasa) ; 1 day =60 nadis ; 1 nadi=60 vinadi ; vinadi or 
vinadika is the same as vighatika equivalent to our 24 seconds; 
nadi or nadika or ghatiis equal to 24 minutes]'; correlation of 
time division with the ksetra—division or angular division,” 
Twelve signs of Zodiac or rasis go to constitute a bhagana® ; solar 
day (ravimasa), lunar day (Sasi ma&sa); additional month or 
intercalary month (adhimdsa) ; various kinds of years: the solar 
year is human or manusya year; 30 human years=1 pity year ; 

12 pity years=1 divya year (divine yeary; 12,000 divya years 
' constitute a yuga (6, 7, 8); the first half of the yuga is utsarpini 
kala, and the latter half is avasarpimi kala and they are calcula- 
ted from the apex of the Moon (candrocca) (this isnot very 
clear) (9) ; a yuga is of 60 years, and such 60 yugas, that is 3,600 
years had passed away since the kaliyuga, when the author was 
of 23 years of age, (10); the countof ayuga, year, month and 


a. at germmahaertaat wg | aE | 
afeaieat free veg fanart arat t 
—Arya. UI. 1, 


R. Taaaty wfierseret Sa at ar: | 
Be arate: Safer WATE | 
—~Arya, UI, 2, 
aa Set RN aTIAQSaTy TAM TT aRa: | 
SaTRATA STS FAATASAT |... ATA HTT TRB: 
FSH INT WA, Taser Parser wera 
(aeHTaIRaZ) 

Just as we have the time division, similarly we have the kgetra division 
or the circular angular division, A year has twelve months, so do we have 
12 radi in a bhagana. One-thittieth of a radi is one bhaga.; one-sixtieth of a 
bhaga is one lipta ; one-sixtieth of a lipta in one vilipta ; and one-sixtieth 
of a vilipta is one tatpara. 

Yoo Ao a. Cot 
g. als Talemieaeaissiee wate ea: | 


aE ae Tae ada: 
en —Arya. IV, 4, 


DIVISIONS OF ARYABHATIYAM 65 


day should begin from the month Caitra, Sukla Pratipada (the 
first day of the brighter half of the month Caitra) (11); man- 
docca (apex of slowest motion) and sighrocca (apex of fastest 
motion) (17—24). 


(iv) The Gola Pada with 50 verses. In Verse 1, there is 
a reference toa point inthe Sun’s path, the commencement of 
mesa (mesddi) ; this must have been vasanta-equinox. The ascen- 
ding nodes (pata) of planets and the shadow of the Earth move 
on the path of the Sun (arka-apamandala) (2-3); the angular 
difference in relation tothe Sun atthe appearance of Moon (12 
degree or amsa), of the Venus (9 degrees or 9 vinadika); of the 
Jupiter (2 more than the Venus ie. 11 vinadikas) ; the Mercury 
or Budha (13 vinadikas), of the Saturn or Sani (15 vinadikas) ; 
and of Mars or kuja (17 vinadikas). 


The half of the Earth. Moon, planets and stars is dark, since 
those parts happen to be under their own shadow; the other 
half is bright as it faces the Sun (this is not true with respect 
to stars—author) (5). The Earth is surrounded with an atmos- 
phere of air and water (6.7). Inthe Brahma-Divasa (Brahma’s 
day), the spkere of the Earth is increased by one yo’ana and 
decreased by this amount during the Brahma’s night (8). Just 
as a person sitting on a moving boat sees the stationary trees 
etc. on the bank of ariver moving inthe opposite direction, 
similarly the stationary stars are seen moving from Lanka (or 
equator) moving towards the West(9). On account of pravahavayu 
(air) the naksatra system and planets rise and set receding towards 
the West (10). The dimensions of Sumeru Parvata (North pole) 
is given to be one yojana, and it shines like a jewel (11) and in 
the next verse is given the position of Sumeru and the Bada- 
vamukha (South pole) (12). The four cities situated at a diffe- 
rence of 90° each on the equator are given (13). The distance of 
Ujjayini from Lanka (thus giving the latitude of Ujjayini) is 
given (14). 

On account of the thickness of the Earth-sphere, the 
Khagola (celestial sphere) is seen lessthan the hemisphere (15). 
The next verse describes' how moving appears the Khagola on 
the North and South poles (16). Then is given the measure of day 
and night of devas (gods), pitar (fathers), asura (demons) and 
manuja (men) (17). Then are given a few technical definitions 


66 BRAHMASPHUTASIDDHANTA & KHANDAKHADYAKA 


of celestial mathematics (18—21) like drsti-sthana (intersection of 
horizontal and vertical axis-—pirvapardiggata rehk@ and adha- 
turdhva-diggata rekha). Drn-mandala drgksepamandala (drghsepa 
is the zenith distance of that point of a planet’s orbit which is at 
the shortest distance from the zenith), Then the Bhuhhagola 
instrument is described (22, 23). Then follow the formula for 
calculating lagna (the horizon ecliptic point in the East) kale 
etc. comprising the Triprasnadhikara (24-33). In the next 
verses, we have lambaka or Rsine of colatitude (34); drk-harma 
(35) and ayana-drk-karma (36). Then follow the calculations of 
lunar and solar eclipses (37—-47). Verse 48 descrikes the coordi- 
nates of the Sun which are determined by the conjunction of hori- 
zon with the Sun, of the Moon by the conjunction of the Sun and 
the Moon, of planets by the conjunction of the Moga and planets 
or stars. Verse 49 describes how this jewel treatise has been pro- 
cured outof anocean of true and untrue knowledge with the 
help of a boat of intellect. This means that the author has taken 
special pains in discriminating true knowledge from falsehood 
with respect to the prevalent notions of astronomy. In the last 
verse he says, that he has not given anything new; he has given 


that very knowledge which was imparted by the Svavambhu in 
. the earliest times (50). 


The Pafichangas prepared according to the rules and for- 
mule of the Aryabhatiyam are still regarded with reverence by 
the Vaisnavas in the South. Brahmagupta was a great critic 
of Aryabhata, but finally he wrote his treatise, the Khandabhad- 
yaka, on the basis of this very Arvabhajiva (this treatise is a hara- 
nagrantha i.e. one containing a principal element of the Indian 
Calendar). The four commentaries of the Aryabhajiva available 
in Sanskrit are of Bhaskara I, Stryadeva Yajva, Parame$vara and 
Nilakentha. Two English translations by P.C. Senagupta (1927) 
and W.E. Clark (1930) are also available. 


Major Landmarks 

7 Indian astronomy which reached its zenith in the times of 

Aryabhata and Prahmagupta shows its evolution in the following 
stages < z 

1. Rudiments of astronomy in the Vedas and Brahmana 

«* Books like the Taittiriya Samhita and the Satapatha 

_-" Brahmana. This period is associated with the dis 





II. 


III. 


MAJOR LANDMARKS 67 


covery of the Vedic era, some of the planets, the twenty- 
four naksatras, cycle of seasons, concept of leap year, 
the dimensions of a yuga. solar and lunar years and the 
like. 


Astronomy of the Vedanga, also known asthe Vedanga 
Jyotis. Lagadha isthe most prominent figure ot this 
period (1400 B.C. to 850 B.C.) ; he is the frst compiler 
of a text on astronomy. In his work. we for the first 
time in history find a reference to the /feva Rasi (the 
knowable or the unknown quantity) and the Jhane- 
Rasi (known quantity). He tays the foundations of 
astronomical calculations. In his treatise we find a 
mention of such subjects as: Solstices (northern and 
southern journey of the Sun); increase in days and 
nights in the ayanas or solstices, solstitial tithis omis- 
sion of tithis, parva rasi, acceptable and non-acceptable 
parvas, addition of day, accepiable parvas, concept of 
yoga (aterm applied tothe joint space which would 
be travelled by the Sun and the Moon in a given period 
of time on the presumption that these two bodies have 
travelled in directions opposite to each other), method 
of finding out a naksatra on any parva day, distinction 
between parva-naksatra and tithi-naksatra, correlation 
of solar and lunar dates, measure of a nadika (unit of 
time), naksatra of the Sun, yoga and its naksatra, parva- 
bhasesa and equivalent Ralds. solar year, lunar revolu- 
tions (risings of naksatras) deities of nakstras, lunar 
and savana day differences (ahika masa), divisions of 
a savana day and length of day in two ayanas. This 
author probably belonged to Kashmir. 


The period of Siddhantas: Varahamihira in his well 
known treatise, the Paficasiddhantika, refers to five 
Siddhantas or systems of Astronomy: Paitamaha, 
Vasistha, Romaka, Pauliga and Surya (Saura). As re- 
gards its importance, he gives the first place to the 
Stryasiddhanta, places next the Romaka and Pauliéa, 
and declares the remaining two to be definitely inferior 
to the former. Wedo not possess the full treatise of 
these Siddhantas, except the Saryasiddhanta. Here too, 


68 BRAHMSPHUTA SIDDHANTA & KHANDAKHADAYAK 


we have difficulty. The Saryasiddhanta, as summarised 
by Varahamihira in his Paficasiddhantika, in many 
essential features differs from the system prescribed by 
the Text of the Saryasiddhanta now available. So we 
have two versions, the one with which Varahmihira was 
familiar and the modern one. 


The present Survasiddhanta comprises of fourteen chapters 
called adhyayas. We have an authentic commetary on it by 
Parameévara. The first two chapters of the Suryasiddhanta have 
no special name. The classification of chapters is as follows : 


Modern Surya Siddhanta 
Chapter Name of the Number 
Chapter of verses Subject 
I _ 69 Mean longitude of 
planets. 
II — 68 True motion and true 


longitude of planet ; 
and elements of Paii- 


canga. 
III Triprasnadhyaya 50 Directions, place 
and time. 
IV Candra-grahana- 29 Lunar eclipse. 
dhyaya 
Vv Surya-grahanadh- 17 Solar eclipse. 
yaya 
VI Chedyakadhyaya 24 Projection of eclipse 
ona plane surface. 
VIT Graha-samagama- 24 Conjunction of one 
yuddhadhyaya planet with another. 
VII Taravisayodhyaya al Conjunction of a 
Planet with the junc- 
tion star of a naksatra. 
IX Udayastamaya-vi- 18 Heliacal rising and 
sayodhyaya setting of planets. 
xX Candrastamayadi 16 Moon rise and eleva- 
visayah tion of Moon-horn. 
XI. Vyatipata-visayah 23 Pata (vyatipata) 
XII _ 87 Cosmogony and geo- 


graphy 


MODERN SURYA SIDDHANTA 69 


Chapter Name of the Number 
Chapter of verses Subject 

XIII Vyatipata-visayah 26 Armillary sphere and 

astronomical instru- 
- ments 

XIV — 28 Modes of reckoning 

time 
Total 500 


From the contents of the Modern Saryasiddhanta, it appe- 
ats that its great author (or rather compiler, since this Siddhanta 
has been existing much before he compiled this treatise). intends 
giving a complete but brief account of the entire Indian astron- 
omy. He has been careful enough to avoid controversies, and 
he has omitted the methods occurring in other Siddhantas and 
Maha-tantras as alternative rules. - He describes only those 
which are most important and of general nature. Part II of 
the book dealing with cosmogony and geography etc.. is very 
brief , a nd the entire subject has been summarised in three chap- 
ters (Chapters XII to XIV). The Chapter on Astronomical 
instruments (XIII) is sketchy and rather incomplete; the author 
has given the names only of the instruments, as if the purpose 
was to keep the details secret and guarded. The whole text of 
the Saryasiddhanta is finished in 500 verses (compare this with 
the length of other Indian books on Astronomy: the Brahmasph- 
utasiddhanta 1008 verses, the Siddhanta-sekhara 890 verses and 
Siddhanta-siromani proper 962 verses). 


The Modern Saryasiddhanta isa composition or compila- 
tion of a period when the Aryabhatiyam and the Brahmasphuta- 
siddhanta had already become popular. This Sarvasiddhanta is 
indebted to both these systems, though it has nowhere acknowleged 
them in the Text. We shall refer to this matter later at an appro- 
priate stage of our discussion. 


It may casually be mentioned here that Alberuni has 
ascribed the authorship of the Suryasiddhanta to Latadeva while 
Munisvara (603 A. D.) has ascribed it to Aryabhata I. Though 
there ‘is little or no support to these views. it is not improbable, 
that the works of AryabhataI and Latadeva which followed mid- 
night-day-reckoning were based onthe Suryasiddhanta prevalent 
atthe time. P. C. Senagupta on the other hand is of the opinion 
that “ the old Sarvasiddhanta was made up-to-date by Varahami- 
hira by replacing the old constants in it by new ones from Arya- 


70 BRAHMASPHUTASIDDHANTA & KHANDAKIIADYAKA 


bhata I’s midnight system. “ In this connection, it must be 
remembered that Varahamihira nowhere expresses his indebted- 
ness to Aryabhata I. ; 


The Survasiddhanta undoubtedly is the most popular book 
on Astronomy inthis country. It has been so for the last 1000 
years asis seon fromthe list of commentators on its text (K. S. 
Sukla has given a list of 28 commentators includiug those who 
wrote commentaries in the South Indian languges like Telugu and 
Kannada.) : 


Allanarya Suri MaheSvara 

Amaredya Mallikarjuna Stiri (1178 A. D.) 
Bhattotpala (966 A. D.) Narayana 

Bhudhara (1572 A. D.) Nrsinha Daivajfia (b. 1586 A.) 
Bhuti visnu Nrsimhadeva 

Candeévara (1178) Parame$vara (1432 A. D.) 

Cola Raghava Sarma (1592 A. D.) 
Dadabhai (1719 A. D.) Ramakrsna Ariidhya (1472 A. 19.) 
Devidasa Ranganatha (1603 A. D.) 
Kamala Kara Daneévarah Sarvabhauma 

(1618 A. D.) 

Kamabhatta Tamma Yajva (1599 A. D.) 
Krsna Daivajiia Yallaya (1472 A. D.) 
Madanapala Visvanatha (1628 A. D.) 
Madhavacarya 


A large number of astronomical books in this country were 
written on the basis of the Saryasiddhanta, asthe Ganakananda 
by Surya (1387-1447 A.D.), Ganitadarsa by Dharmapathin, 
- Makaranda Sarini by Makaranda (1478 A D.), Grahacabra by 
Kucanacarya (1299 A.D.), Visnukarana by Visnu (1556 A.D.) 
besides many others with indefinite dates such as the Sarya- 
siddhanta nayana-prakarah, Stiryasiddhanta-ganita Strvasid- 
dhanta-samgraha by Viévanatha Sari, and Suryasiddhanta Sarini 
by Ramadatta Daivajiia. K.S. Sukla has given a list of this 
literature in his Introduction to the Survasiddhanta. 


(iv) Period of Bhaskaral: The author cr the compiler 
ot the Stryasiddhanta is not known nor its date of com position. 
Bhaskara and Brahmagupta are the brilliant names of a contem- 
porary period. Bhaskara I lived in the seventh century of the 
Christian era and was a contemporary of Brahmagupta (628 


DIVISION OF MAHABHASKARIYA : 71 


A.D.). He wrote three works on Astronomy which were most 
likely composed in the following order : (i) the Maha-Bhaskariya. 
Gi) acommentary on the Aryabhétiva, and (iii) the Laghu- 
Bhaskariva, His commentary on the Aryabhatiya was written 
in 629, ie., only one year after the Brahmasphutasiddhanta. His 
commentary on the Aryabhatiwa was written in 629 A.D., ie, 
-one year after the completion of the Brahmasphutasiddhanta. 
Undoubtedly Bhaskara was the follower of Aryabhata I. Shukla 
says, that his works provide us with a detailed exposition of the 
astronomical methods taught by Aryabhata I and throw light on 
the development of Astronomy in India during the sixth and 
early seventh centuries A. D. which was the most brilliant 
period in the history of Indian Astonomy-Shukla has brought a 
critical edition with English translation of the Mahabhaskariyva 
and the Laghu-Bhdskariya and he proposes to bring out a volume 
on the life and works of this great astronomer, 


Division of Mahabhaskar iya 


The Mahabhaskariva is divided into Chapters called the 
adhyayas. The adhyayas have not been named as some of the 
Chapters of the Saryasiddhanta or the Brahmaspuhtasiddhanta. 
The number of verses in the Mahabhaskariya is as follows: 


Subject Number of 
verses 
Adhyaya I Mean Longitude of a 


Planet and Planetary 
Pulveriser 52 
Adhyaya II The Longitude Correction 10 
Adhyaya III Direction, Place and Time. 
‘ Junction-stars of the 
Zodiacal Asterisms and 


coal conjunction of Planets with 

them. 75 
Adhyaya IV The Longitude of a Planet 64 
Adhyaya V Eclipses 78 

Adhyaya VI Rising, Setting and Con- 
junction of Planets 62 
Adhyaya VIL Astronomical Constants 35 
Adhyaya VIII Examples 27 


These titles to the subject-matter given inthe above table 
have been assigned by Dr. Kripa Shanker Shukla in his critical 


72 BRAHMASPHUTA SIDDHANTA & KHANDKHADYAKA 

edition. The total mumber of verses in this work is 403. The 

Suryasiddhanta has, as stated above, 500 verses in all. 
Laghu-bhaskariya 


The Laghu-Bhaskariva is also divided into eight chapters, 
each chapter is known as Adhyaya. The subject matter in the 
book has been dealt with as follows : 


Subject Number of 

verses 

Adhyaya I Mean longitudes of the 
Planets 37 

Adbyaya II True Longitudes of the 
Planets 4] 

Adhyaya IIL Direction, Place and 
Time from Shadow 35 
Adhyaya IV The Lunar Eclipse 32 
Adhyaya V_ The Solar Eclipse 15 


Adhyaya VI Visibility, Phases and 
Rising and Setting of 


the Moon 25 
Adhyaya VII Visibility and Con- 

junction of the Planets 10 
Adhyaya VIII Conjunction of a Pla- 

net and a Ster 19 


The total number of vezrsesin this text is 214. The Laghu- 
Bhaskariyam isthus an abridged edition of the Maha-Bhaskariyam. 
From the closing stanza of this work, itis clear that the author 
wrote this work for the benefit of young students with immature 
mind by condensing and simplifying the contents of his larger 
work, the Maha-Bhasarivam (also known as Karma-nibandha). 
Thus we have a little of the parallelism: Brahmagupta, after 
finishing his bigger treatise, the Brahma-sphujasiddhanta, wrote 
a minor abridged work, the Khanda-khadyvaka as a karana 
grantha. This latter work of Brahmagupta, however, incorporates 
some original ideas not included in the earlier work. Shukla 
has given an analytical table indicating the rules of the Maha- 
Bhaskariyam incorporated in the Laghu-Bhaskariyam also in an 

abridged or modified form, and also a list of the rules which have 
been omitted in the Laghu-Bhasakriya. There are a few rules 
‘in the Laghu-Bhaskariya also which have no counterpart in the 


LAGHU-BHASKARIYA 73 


Maha-Bhaskariyva. Shukla further says that the arrangement 
of the contents of the Laghu-Bhaskariya is more systematic and 
logical than that of the Maha-Bhaskariya, and is, at the same 
time, in keeping with the general practice followed by the other 
Hindu astronomers. Numerous quotations of this work occur 
in the annotative works of Suryadeva (b. 1191 A.D.), Yallaya 
(1480 A.D.), Nilakantha (1500 A.D.), Raghunatha Raja (1597 
A.D.). Govinda Somayaii and Visnu Sarma and in the Prayoga- 
racand an anonymous commentary on the Maha-Bhaskarivam. 
We find the commentaries of this abridged work in Malayalam 
and Tamil also. Allthis speaks of the great popularity of this 
work. 


There are circumstantial evidences to show that Bhaskara I 
had associations with the countries of Aémaka and Surastra. 
His commentary on the Arvabhativa was probably written in 
the city of Valabhiin Surastra. Perhaps Bhaskara I was born 
and educated in ASmaka and lateron he migrated to Valabhi, 
where he wrote his commentary on the Aryabhatiya or that he 
was a native of Valabhi and got his education in the AéSmaka 
country. Perhaps there was a strong schoolof Astronomy in 
the ASmaka country, which was founded by the followers of 
Aryabhata, so much so that at places, Bhaskara I has also called 
Aryabhata as ASmaka, his Aryabhativam by the name A‘maka- 
Tantra or the Asmakiya ani the followers of Aryabhata as 
Asmakiyah. This ASmaka country or ASmaka Janapada is men- 
tioned in the Buddhist literature also. It was somewhere either 
in the north-west of India, or was situated between the rivers 
Narmada and Godavari. Bhaskara I was evidently a resident 
of the latter Aémaka (which was between the Narmada and 
Godavari). 


Brahamagupta and Bhaskara I were contemporaries. Both 
of them developed their systems in the earlier part of the seventh 
century A.D. (3700 years of Kaliyuga). Brahamasphutasiddhanta 
was written in 628 A.D. and the commentary on the Arva- 
bhatiyam by Bhaskara I was compos:d in 629 A.D. Bhaskara 
closely followed Aryabhata, but Brahmagupta had the ;uts to 
oppose the views expressed by this great master and he not only 
contradicted him at places, but also propounded many new ideas, 
methods of calculation and constants of greater accuracy. 


74 BRAHMASPHUTA SIDDHANTA & KHANDKHADYAKA 


The classification of the contents of Astronomy in adhikaras 
appears to be the original concept of Brahmagupta; this system 
was to some extent adopted in the modern Strva-Siddhanta 
in the case of a few chapters. The Vatesvara-Siddhanta by Vates- 
varacarya (born 802 Saka or 880 A.D. in Anandapwra city, 
Puniab, son of Mahadatta) also adopts the terminology: Madhya- 
madhbkara, Spastadhikara and Triprasnadhikara,. We owe this 
type of caption-nomenclature to Brahmagupta. 


Contents of the Brahmasphutasiddhanta 


Now we shall summarise the contents of the Chapters of 
this great treatise and also enumerate the number of verses in 
each chapter. The author has himself given the total number of 
verses in the Chapter in the ending verse of each chapter. Some- 
times, the verse specifying this number itself is not taken into 
account while giving the total number of verses in that chapter, 
and therefore, there occurs a minor discrepancy in the actual 
number and the number specified by the author himself. The 
following table records both these numbers separately : 


Number of Actual num- 


Chapter Title verses indi- ber of verses 
cated by the 
author 
PURVA-DASADHYAYI (First Ten 
Chapters) 
I Madhyamadhikarah (Madbh- 
'  -yamagati-radhyayah) 63 63 
II Spastadhikarah (Sphutagati- 
radhyayah) 67 68 
III Triprasnadhikarah (Tripr aé- 
nadhyayah) 66 66 
IV Candragrahanadhikarah 20 20 
(Candragrahanadhyayah) 
Vv _ ‘Suryagrahanadhikarah. ' 26 27 
(Arka-grahanam or  Ravigra- 
| hanadhyayah) 
VI. Udayastadhikarah 12 13 


(Udayastamayadhyayah) 


CONTENTS OF THE BRAHMASPHUTASIDDHANTA 75 


VII  Candraérigonnatyadhikarah 18 18 
(Candrasrngonnati-adhyayah) 
VIII Candracchayadhikarah 9 9 
(Candracchaya-adhyayah) 
IX Grahayutyadhikarah 26 26 
(Grabamelanadhyayah) 
x Bhagrahayutyadhikarah 70 70 
(Bhagrahayutih-adhyayah) 
Total (of Dasadhyayi) 377* 380* 
XI Tantra-Pariksadhyayah 63 ; 63 
(Dusanadhyayah) 


XII Ganitadhyayah 
Miégraka-vyavaharah 1—16 
Sredhi-vyavaharah 17—20. 
Ksetra-vyavaharah 21—39 
Vrttaksetra-ganitam 40—43 
Khata-vyavaharah 44—46 


Citi-vyavaharah 47— 
Kakacika-vyavahare 
karanastitre 48—49 
Rasi-vyavaharah 50—51 
Chaya-vyavaharah 52-66 66 66 
XIII Prasnadhyayah 49 48 
(Madhyagatyuttaradhyayah) 
XIV Sphutagatyuttaradhyayah 54 55 
XV Triprasnottaradhyayah 60 60 
XVI Grahanottaradhyayah 46 47 
XVII Srigonnatyuttaradhyayah ‘10 10 
XVIII Kuttadhyayah 103 102. 
. (Kuttakadhyayah) 
Kuttakarah 1—29 
Dhanarna-stnyanam 
samkalanam 30—42 
Ekavarna.samikarana- 
bijam 42—50 


Anekavarna-samikarana- 


76 BRAHMASPHUTA SIDDHANTA & KHANPAKHADYKA 


bijam 51—59 
Bhavita-bijam 60—-63 
Varga-prakrtih 64—74 
Udaharanani 75—102 
XIX Sankucchayadi'Ranadhyiyah 20 20 
XX Chandascityuttaradhyayah 20 19 
XXI Goladhyayah ' 70 70 
Samanya-golaprakara- 
nam 1—16 
Jya-prakaranam 17—23 


Sphutagati-vasana 24—30 
Bimba-sadhanam 31—35 


Grahana-vasana 36— 18 
Golabandhadhika- 
rah 48-—70 
XXII —s- Yantradbyayah 53 57 
XXITI #Manadhyayah 12 l2 
XXIV-  Sahtjnadhyayah 13 13 
Tutal 1016 1022 


In one of the verses, Brahmagupta states that he has composed 
- the treatise containing 1008 verses. Sudhakara Dvivedi has 
given the total as 1021, whereas he says, this number according 
to Brahmagupta’s own statement should be 1020. Ifone de- 


ducts the concluding 12 verses of the Satjianachyava, the num- 
ber should be 1008. 


Sudhakara Dvivedi, in his addition of the Brahma-sphuta- 
siddhanta (published inthe Pandita, 1991 and 1S02) gives asa 
supplement a small treatise of Brahmagupta known as Dhyana- 


grahanopadesadhyaya or Dhyanagrahanadhikarah which has 72 
verses. 


It would be worthwhile to give here the detailsof the 
Khandakhadyaka also, a book of Brahmagupta about which we 
have spoken’ so much. The titles to the chapters have not been 

indicated in the Text ; most’ likely they have been assigned by 


the commentator, Prthudaka Svami known as the Khandakha- 
_ dyakavivaranam. 


CONTENTS OF THE PRAHMASPHUTASIDDHANTA 77 








Chapter Title Number of 
verses 
L Tithi-naksatradhikaradhyayah 32 
(On tithis, naksatras etc.) 
II Grahagatyadhyayah 19 


(On the mean and true places 
of ‘star’ planets) 
III - Triprasnadhyayah 16 
(On the three problems relat- 
ing to diurnal motion) 


IV Candragrahanadhyayah 7 
(On lunar eclipses) 


Vv Suryagrahanadhyayah 6 
(On solar eclipses) 
VI Udayastadhikarah 7 
(On the rising and setting of 
planets) 
VIL Candrasrigonnatyadhayah 4 


(Cn the position of the 
Moon's cusps) 


VIII Samagamadhyayah 6 
(On conjunction of planets) 


UTTARA KHANDAKHADYAKA—APPENDIX 


IX Corrections and new methods 14 
x On conjunction of stars and planets 16 
Total 127 


ne a 
Bhattotpala, in his commentary on the Khandabkhadyaka has 
given several additional verses in the main or proper treatise 
and also in its Uttara portion or the Appendix. P.C. Sengupta’s 
edition (Sanskrit Text 1941) has given at the end of this pub- 
\ication the account of these additional verses. The English - 


78 BRAHMASPHUTA SIDDHANTA & KHANDARHADYARA 


edition (1934) classifies the Uttara-Khandabhedvaka into two 
chapters (which the author calls as Chapters IX and X), the 
Sanskrit edition gives 3 verses in Chapter IX, 21 verses in 
Chapter X and 243 verses in Chapter XI. Of these three 
chapters, the Chapter X has been given the title “Patadhibara’ 
and Chapter XI the title “Parilekhadhyaya" by Bhattotpala. 


TABLE 





















Arrangement of contents in different treatises 





Topic BrSpSi| SuSi | MBh SiSe | SiSi 








Mean longi- 
tudes of the 
planets LXII I I 


True longi- 
tudes of the 


planets ILATV II IV i 


Direction, 
place and 
time TLXV Il IW 


Computation| | 
of a lunar 
eclipse IV,XV IV V 


Ii 


IV,V 


Computation 
_of a solar 

eclipse V.XVI Vv Vv VI 
Projection of 

an eclipse XVI VI Vv 


Conjunction 
ofa planet 
with another ; 
planet IX VII VI 


Conjunction 
of a planet 
with a star xX | VIII 


Heliacal ris- 
ing of pla- 
nets 


XI 


ARYABHATA AND BRAHMAGUPTA CONTROVERSY 79 























Topic BrSpSi | SaSi | MBh | MSi | SiSe | SiSi 
- Moonrise and 

elevation of 

lunar horns |VII.XVII x VI ,VILVII xX] IX 

Pata XIV XI VII XI] VIII] XII 

Cosmogony , 

and geogra- 

phy XXII XII XVI ILiii 

Astrono. ins- 

truments XXII § XIII Il XIX | II-xi 

Time reckon- . 

ing XXIV | XIV Li 





Aryabhata and Brahmagupta Controversy 

The scientific Indian astronomy was more or less created by 

Aryabhata I (476 A. D.). It is said that he was the teacher of 
two distinct systems of astronomy, one of which is called the 
audayika system, and the other the ardharatrika system. 
In the first, the astronomical day is taken to begin at sunrise 
at Lanka, and in the other, the same begins at the midnight of 
the same place. In the Khandakhadyaka Brahmagupta gives 
compendious rules for the calculation of longitudes, etc, of 
planets according to the ardharatrika system of Aryabhata I. 
In this connection, he refers to Aryabhata in the following 
words in his Khandakhadyaka : 

Having made obeisance to God Mahadeva, who is the great 
cause of this world’s rise G. e. creation), existence, and 
destruction, I shall declare the Khandakhadyaka which 
will yield the same results as the great astronomical 
treatise of Aryabhata. 

As in most cases calculation by the great work of Arya- 
abhata, for (the knowledge of time and longitude of 
planets etc. at) marriage, nativity and the like is 
impracticable for common use every day, this smaller 


1. sftraer nerd sagefataRaaatar | 
TA SISMUTTAAegeT TTA II 





30 BRAHMASPHUTA SIDDHANTA & KHANDAEKHADYAKA 


treatise (i.e. Khandakhadyaka, literally meaning food 
prepared from sugar-candy) is made so as to yield the 
same results as that.’ 


The mean saturn diminished by 3 seconds, the Sighrocea 
of Mercury diminished by 22 scconds, the mean Mars 
increased by 2 seconds and the mean Jupiter increased 
by 4secords are equal to the respective mean planets 
of Aryabhata’s midnight system. 


Inthe Brahmasphutasiddhanta, Grahmagupta accepts the 
astronomical day to begin with the sunrise at Lanka, and the 
calculations of days, months, years, Yugas, and Kalpas all begin 
from Caitra Sukla Pratipada (the first tithi of the month Caitra 
in the bright-half of the Moon) and the first day is regarded as 
Sunday? 


Varahamihira in his epicyclic cast to the Stirvasiddhunta 
in his Pancasiddhantika adopts the ardharatrika system or the 
system of reckoning days from midnight. The question why 
Brahmagupta who was so bitter an opponent of Aryabhata I 
in his younger days (628 A.D.) claimbed down to describe and 
teach one of the systemsof Aryabhata’s astronomy in his sixty- 
seventh year (665 A.D.) is difficult to explain. In fact so great 
was Aryabhata’s reputation and fame that in spite of Brahma- 
gupta’s severe ricticisms of the former in Chapter XI of the 
Brahmasphutasiddhanta, it perhaps was undiminished and it 
was Aryabhata who continued to be universally followed. 


Some authorities have thus expressed the view that to meet 
the popular demand Brahmagupta in the Khandakhadyvaka took 
upon himself the task of simplifying Aryabhata’s ardharatrika 
system and in this task he became eminently successful. But it 
has been supposed that in this task he could not be a mere 
simplifier or expounder. 





smamehasa are: afefed adtseaa: | 

SRRAMATAY RETA TIAA TA: 

Rahs whee aie aetshat sear | 

smarter sSaisa ufaredve wet aT: | 
i, FaRaeacaaienmaignen: | 

Sena cari ai saa: Raster | —BrSpSi 1.4 


—RK.11,2,7 


ARYABHATA & BRAHMAGUPTA CONTROVERSY 81 


The minor work of Brahmagupta known as Khandakhadyvaka 
has two distinct parts : Khandakhadyaka proper and the Uttara 
Khandakhadyaka, In the first part the astronomical constants 
are the same as those of Aryabhata’s ardharatrika system, but 
the methods of spherical astronomy, calculation of eclipses and 
other topics are almost the same as in tbe Brahmasphutasidd- 
hanta. The corrections for parallax in calculating a solar eclipse 
is here an important illustration. 


In the Uttarakhandakhadvaka, Brahmagupta gives correc- 
tions to the Khandakhddyaka proper. In it are to be found the 
neat and original methods of interpolation and correction to the 
longitudes of the aphelia, as also to the dimensions to the 
epicycles of apsis of the Sun and the Moon while a few addi- 
tional chapters supply what else is necessary to the first seven 
chapters of the first part, to make the whule a complete treatise 
on Indian scientific astronomy. It was perhaps through the in- 
fluence of this supplementary part of the Khandakhadvaka that 
Brahmagupta’s great work, the Brahmasphutasiddhanta came to 
be valued among a distinct school of Indian astronomers. For 
long in this country India, this Siddhanta of Brahmagupta has 
been forming the basis for the calculation of almanacs by astro- 
nomers of the orthodox school of Rajasthan, Bombay and others. 


We might at this stage take up the question: Was 
Aryabhata the author of two distinct systems of astronomy ? 
Undoubtedly he was. Several authors have written on this 
subject. I may specially mention the name of Prabodha 
Chandra Sengupta (Journal of the Department of Letters, 
Calcutta University, vol. XVIII; Bulletin, Calcutta Mathemati- 
cal Society, vol. XXII. Nos. 2 and 3). The reasons advanced by 
him may be restated in slight details thus. In his Brahma- 





1. sree Raat camfestar agg'aT were | 
weaaSa: TAT Ora eae wT | 
THVI TRIRT Ca aera | 
ATMIAIPT Pasa s at ees | 
srvcentiory aft ayia feel aan ai ad | 
TRAE See Pasa A aa: BERL I 


~BrSpSi, XI. 23-25, also KK. V. 
2, See UKK, 9, 


82 BRAHMASPHUTA SIDDHANTA & KHANDAKHADYAKA 


sphutasiddhanta, Brahmagupta thus speaks of the two works of 
Aryabhata: 


As in both the works the number of the Sun's revolutions 
is spoken of as 432,000 years, their plinetary cycle is 
clear, i.e., of 4,320,000 years. Why then is there 
difference of 300 civil days im the same cyele of the 
two books 24 


Again, he says: 


In 14,400 years elapsed of the Mahayuga, there is produced 
a difference of one day inthe audayika and ardharét- 
rika systems.” 


Varahamihira in the Paticasiddhantika writes - 


Aryabhata maintains that the beginning of the day is to 
be seckoned from midnight at Lanka; and the same teacher 
again says that the day begins from sunrise at Lanka. ® 
Thus from the writingsof Brahmagupta and Varahamihira, it 
is clear that Aryabhata I was the author of both the audayika 
and ardharatrika systems of astronomy. In Varahamihira’s 
verse the phrase sa eva (@ &4), meaning “he undoubtedly” is of 
speeial significance. It removes the least doubt as to Arya- 
bhata’s authorship of both these systems. The audavika and 
ardharatrika astronomical constants are respectively to be found 
from the Aryabhatiya and may be deduced from the Khanda- 
khadyaka as well. The following is the comparative view of the 


constants of Varahamihira and of the present day Sarya- 
siddhanta. 


TABLE I : 


Planetary revolutions in a mahayuga of 4,320,000 years, 
according to various authorities. 


1. Brera: gett a ed ag wal’ we | 
frat Ug seat Fya7 Ba 


2, af: Taaahdt aed vagaries: | 
Bra eae tears abet: 0 

(3. eae caee ferafe sng ard: | 
a: 8 Ba Baie Tae a 





—BrSpSi XI, § 


—BrSpSi XI. 13 


——PSi, KY. 20 


ERYABHATA & BRAHMAGUPTA CONTROVERSY 53 


— ners nenemiemenenineenmeneeaneeaieneneemenmne tenement 
Planet BrSpSi Arvabhataya Khanda- Varaha- Later or 
Rhadyaka Stirya- modern 

siddhanta Surya 

(PS1.)  siddhanta 


ri, 


Moon — 57,753,300 57,753,336 57,753,336 57,753,336 57,753,336 
Sun 4,320,000 4,320,000 4,320,000 4,320,000 3,320,006 
Mars 2,296,828.522 2,296,824 2,296,824 2,296,824 2,296,832 
Jupiter 364,226,455 364,224 364,220 364,220 364,220 
Paes 146,567.298 146,564 146,564 146564 145,568 
Spence” — 488,219 488,219 488,219 488,203 
Venus 7,022,389.492 7,022,338 7,022,388 7,022,388 7,022,376 
Mercury 17,936,998.984 17,937,020 17937,000 17,937,000 17,937.060 
Moon's 


nodes 232,311,168 232,226 232,226 232,226 232,238 


es ee ee ee re tee ee see ee treet 








TABLE IT : 
Longitudes of the apogees of the orbits of Planets. 


Aryabhatiya Khanda- Varaha Modern 





Planets khadyaka ‘Stirya-sid- Surya-siddh- 
dhanta. anta 
Sun 78° 80° 80° 77° 07: 
Mercury 210° 220° 220° 220° 267. 
Venus 90° 80° 80° 79° 49" 
Mars 118° 110° 110° 130° 00” 
Jupiter 180° 160° 160° 171° 16" 
Saturn 236° 240° 240° 236° 37’ 
TABLE Iii 


Dimensions of the epicycles of Apsis 


Planets | Arybhativa Khanda-  Varaha. Modern 











khadyaka Sarya- Stirya- 
siddhanta  siddhanta 
Sun 13°-30" 14 14 132°-14° 
Moon 31°-30" 31° 31° 31¢°-32° 
Mercury  224°-314° ~ 28° 28° 28°-30° 
Venus "9°18" 14° is” 11°-12° 
Mars 63°-81° rive 76° 72°-75° 
Jupiter ' 313-36%° 32° 32° °.33° 


Saturn 403-583 60° 60° 48°-49° 





84 BRAHMASPHUTA SIDDHANTA & KHANDAKHADYAKA 








Table IV 
Dimensions of the Sighra evicycles (i.e. conjunctions) 
Planet Aryabhativa Khanda- Varaha Modern 
Khadyaka Siirva- Sarya- 
siddhanta siddhanta 
Saturn 363°- 40° 40° 40° 39°- 40° 
Jupiter 671°. 72° 72° 72° 70"- 72° 
Mars 2291 °-2393° 234° 234° 232° -235” 
Venus 2564°-2652° =. 260° 260° 262°-262" 
Mercury 1302°-1392° = 132° 132° 132°-133" 
Table V 
Longitudes of the nodes of the orbits of planets 
Planets  Aryabhafiya Khanda- Vartha Modern 
khadvaka Stirya- Stirva- 
siddhanta  siddhanta siddhanta 
Saturn 40° —; 40° Not stated Have to be 
Jupiter 20° 20° in the calculated 
Mars 80° 80° Text from the 
Vents €0° 60° data of the 
Mercury 100° 100° text 
LES ETERS set STesetenytatamnhsanshetirentneemnineireinantsinsniningiuninimnitertes 
Table VI 


Orbital inclinations (geocentric) to the ecliptic 


Planets  Aryabhativa Khanda- Vartha Modern 


khadyaka = Sttrya- Sir ya- 
io siddhanta  siddhanta 
Mars 90” 90’ 1” = 
Mercury 120 120’ 135’ 120’ 
Jupiter 60' 60’ 101’ 60’ 
Venus 120’ 120’ 101’ 120’ 
Saturn 120 120, 135’ 100’ 


‘The Mahabhaskariva of Bhaskara I (522 A. D.) contains 
a passage which corroborates the fact that Aryabhata I was the 
author of both the audayika and the ardharatrika systems of 
Indian Astronomy. According to Prthudakasvamin, whose 


ARYABHATA & BRAHMAGUPTA CONTROVERSY 85 


commentary on the Brahmasphutasiddhanta we have the 
privilege of presenting to the public, it is clear that in certain 
respects Bhaskara and others may be wrong but the Aryabhata’s 
authenticity cannot be questioned. Prthtdakasvamin while 
commenting on the Brahmasphutasiddhanta, XI. 26 writes: 


Such a mistake may have been made by Bhaskara and 
others; they have not understood his (Aryabhata’s) 
intention. 


The passage in the Mahabhaskariya giving constants of the 
ardhardatrika system runs as follows (we are giving the translation 
from Kripa Shankar Shukla’s edition on the Mahabhaskariva) : 


The astronomical processes which have been set forth 
above come under the sunrise day - reckoning (audayika 
system). In the midnight day-reckoning (ardhardtrika 
system) too, all this is found to occur: the difference that 
exists is being stated (below). * 


The next fourteen stanzas relate to the midnight day- 
reckoning of Aryabhata I. 


G) Civil days and omitted lunar days in a yuga and 
revolution numbers of Mercury and Jupiter are thus 
given : 

(To get the corresponding elements of the midnight 
day-reckoning) add 300 tothe number of civil days (Cin 
a yuga) and subtract the same (number) from the number, 
of omitted lunar days (in a yuga); and from the revolution 
numbers of (the ssghrocca of) Mercury and Jupiter 
subtract 20 and 4 respectively, 7 


Thus according to the midnight day-reckoning, we get 


civil days in a yuga =  1,577,917,800 
omitted lunar days ina yuga = 25,082,280 
revolution number of the sighrocca of 

‘Mercury = 17,937,000 


i 


revolution number of Jupiter 364,220 


1. face: aajat teat Aseratehreat AR: | 

meary waa wal Sy faa: ew Heat N —MBh. VII. 21 
2. fred) qa Seq esate faa | 

S aghast fates aise: —MBh, VII. 22 


86 


BRAHMASPHUTASIDDHANTA & KHANDAKHADYAKA 


Gi) Diameters of the Earth, the Sun and the Moon are 


thus given: 

(In the midnight day-reckoning) the diameter of 
the Earth is (stated to te) 1,600 yojanas; of the Sun 
6,480 (yojanas) and of the Moon, 480 (vojanas)'. 


- (ii) Mean distances of the Sun and the Moon are as 


(iv) 


(v) 


(vi) 


follows : 


The (mean) distance of the Sun is stated to be 689,358 
(yojanas), and of the Moon 51,566 (yojanas).* 


Longitudes of the apogees of the planets are as follows: 
160, 80, 240, 110, and 220 are in degrees the longitudes 
of the apogees of Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, Mars and 
Mercury respectively.’ 


Manda and Sighra epicycles of the planets are as 
tollows : 


The Manda epicycles ( of the same planets ) are 32, 14, 
60; 70, and 28 (degrees) respectively; and the Sighra 
epicycles are 72, 260, 40, 234, and 132 (degrees ) 
respectively. The Sun’s apogee and epicycle are the 
same as those of Venus (i. e. 80° and 14° respectively). 
The Moon’s epicycle in the midnight day-reckoning is 
stated to be 31 (degrees). 4 

The positions of the so called manda and fighra patas 
of the planets are given below: 


( The following directions for) the degrees of the 
(manda and sighra) patas of the planets as devised 


» SER A atraTal at Ta: | 


wrereaar wate: yao Ul ie) 
. aaa gubergren: | 

SATS Yor eR: Tafa: —24 
. BRS) ferent. Rrefacatren: sare | 

SIT Tega Aasie: wT —25 
. Wo aera: ata y | _ 

aaah Aare: |: Mea ATEN | 26 

BARA: SURAT SeMseaaaa: | 

Bara Girt Uae atta 3 —27 

TaPTg Cay fae | ~MBh, VII 26-28 (i) 


ARYABHATA & BRAHMAGUPTA CONTROVERSY 87 


(under the midnight day-reckoning) should be 
noted carefully by learned scholars: 


Add 180° to the longitudes of the mandoccas 
Capogees) apd Sighroccas of Mercury and Venus, and 
subtract 3 signs from the mandoccas (apogees) and 
Sighroccas of the remaining planets. Then are 
obtained the longitudes of the manda and Sighra patas 
of the planets. (Also) add 2 degrees to the longitudes 
of the manda patas and sghroccas of Venus, Saturn 
and Jupiter, and 14 degrees to those of Mars and 
Mercury. (It should be noted that) the sghra patas 
have been stated for all the planets excepting Mercury. 
(Mercury does not have a sighra pata). 


That is to say, the longitudes of the manda patas of Mars, 
Mercury; Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn are 21.5, 41.5, 72, 262 and 
152 degrees respectively; and the longitudes of the sighra patas of 
Mars, Jupiter. Venus and Saturn are (sighrocca—88.5°), (sighrocca 
—88°), (sghrocca+182°) and (sighrocca—88") respectively. 


(vii) A rule for finding the celestial latitude of a planet is 
as follows: 


(From the longitude of a planet severally) subtract the 
longitudes of its (manda and sighra) patas and there- 
from calculate (as usual) the corresponding celestial 
latitude of that planet. Add them or take their differ- 
ence according as they are of like or unlike directions. 
Then is obtained the true celestial latitude of that 
particular planet. The true celestial latitude of any 
‘other planet is also obtained in the same way. The 
remaining (astronomical) determinations are the same 
as stated before. This allisin brief the difference of 
the other tantra (embodying the midnight day-reckon- 


1. Tema fda: viet: ohare: | —28 
ae Mea: Fel wT SURAT: | 
aha g Rarat meat waar —29 
UA Gad Tarai Ae aaa Se | 
RTT MAPA AAR FATA! | —30 


faarat a gaat eferaan: sateen: | MBh. VII. 28 (ii) 31 G) 


88 BRAHMASPHUTASIDDHANTA & KHANDAKHADYAKA 


ing of Aryabhata DI. 
(viii) A rule for finding the longitude of the true mean planet 
according to midnight-day reckoning is as follows : 
Apply half the Sighraphala and (then) half the 
mandaphala to the longitude of the planct’s own 
mandocca (reversely). 


From the resulting longitude of the plamet’s mandocca cal- 
culate the (mandaphala and apply it to mean longitude of the 
planet: the resulting longitude of planet is stated to be) the 
true-mean longitude of the planet. This is stated to be another 
difference (of the midnight day-reckoning) * 


(ix) Length of the circle of the sky and derivation of the 
lengths of the orbits of the planets are given as 
follows : 


Multiply the revolutions of the Moon (in a yuga) by 
3, 240,000 and then discard the zero in the unit’s place : 
(thisigs the length of the circle of the sky in terms ot 
yojanas). (Severally) divide that by the revolutions of the 
planets (in a yuga): thus are obtained the lengths of the 
orbits of the respective planets in terms of yojanas? 


From these stanzas (from 20-35), it is evident that one yojana 
of the sunrise day-reckoning is one and a half times that of the 
midnight day-reckoning. 

Now from stanza 22, it appears that 300 is to be added to 
the number of civil days in a Mahayuga. According to the 
Aryabhatiya. the number of civil daysin this cycle is 1,577,917, 
500, which increased by 300, becomes 1:577,917,800, the number of 


1. arafier mara cary feaatery warate | —31 
PD ICEOE GEC CICCICICOCHIGg| 
Iu a qa Wl geetwe Aha: 1 —32 
PIAA VPAN: Mga Teva: | 
: UAT SAT TATA TEA /—MBh. VII, 31 Gi)-33 
2. werd aaa a SR | 


eperernar: oo Aa: wRatlsas —MBh, VII. 34 
3. Fakeumgtirara gare t . 
RA FERS ASAT lh 
=i fee ae wert: aan Dera] . 
| Ra ay VsTAET II —MBh. VII. 35 


ARYABHATA & BRAHMAGUPTA CONTROVERSY 89 


civil days in a Mahayuga according to Brahmagupta as referred 
to in the Khandakhadyaka. 


Again, the same stanza tells us to subtract 20 and 4 respec- 
tively from the revolutions of Mercury and Jupiter, and we arrive 
at the figures 17,937,000 and 364, 220, which are the revolutions 
of Mercury and Jupiterin a Mahayuga according to Brahma- 
gupta as given in the Khandakhadyaka. 

Again we can compare the figures for the diameters of 
the Earth, the Sun and the Moon given in the Mahabhaskariva, 
in the present day Surya-siddhanta and the Aryabhativa. 


Diameter Mahabhaskariva Modern. Aryabhativa 
of Sarya-siddhanta 

Earth 1,600 yojanas 1,600 yojanas 1,050, yojanas 

Sun 6,480 6,500 4,410 

Moon 480 480 315 


Then in stanza 24, we are given the distances of the Sun and 
the Moon as 689, 358 and 51, 566 yojanas respectively. The 
same figures are worked out by Lalla according to the 
Aryabhafiya and quoted in the Sisyadhwyddhida(LV.3.4) and they 
come to be 459,585 and 34,377. 


The stanza 25 states the longitudes of the aphelia of planets 
these figures tally with the corresponding figures given by Brah- 
magupta in the Khandakhadyaka : 

Longitude of aphelion of Jupiter 160°, of Venus 80°, of 

Saturn 240°, of Mars 110° and of Mercury 220°. 

Similarly the stanza 26 gives the peripheries of planets’ 
epicycle of apsis, which also is in concordance with the values 
given by Brahmagupta : 

Periphery of epicycle of apsis of Jupiter 32°, of Venus 
14°, of Saturn 60°, of Mars 70° and of Merury 28°. 

In the stanza 27 of the Mahabhaskariva, we have the 
dimensions of the epicycles of conjunction for planets; these 
figures are also the same as given by Brahmagupta: 

Epicycles of con‘uction for Jupiter 72°, for Venus 260°, 
for Saturn 40°, for Mars 234° and for Mercury 132°. 

In the stanza 28, we have the Sun’s epicycle having a 
periphery of 14° and the Moon’s epicycle 31°; the longitudes of 


90 BRAHMASPHUTASIDDHANTA & KHANDAKHADYAKA 


the nodes of the planets to be the same as in the Aryabhatiya. 


All these are the same as given by Brahmagupta in the Khanda- 
khadyaka. 


In the stanza 33 we have rules for finding the geocentric 
longitudes of planets which may be taken to be the same as in 
the Khandakhadvaka'; compare these values with those in the 
Sarvasiddhanta of Varahamihira in the Paficasiddhantika, XVII. 
6, but slight different from the Aryabhatiya? 


The last stanza of the Mahabhaskariya (35) gives the dimen- 
sions in yojanas of the orbits of planets ; these are the same as in 
the modern Saryasiddhanta. 


Thus we find a great semblance in the constants as given by 
the Mahabhaskariya of Bhaskara I, of the Stryasiddhanta as 
given by the Paficasiddhantika and understood by Varahamihira, 
and also the constants as given by Brahmagupta in his treatises, 
specially the Khandakhadyaka. It must not be forgotten that 
the same Aryabhata I who isthe celeberated author of the 
Aryabhatiya is also the author of another treatise very often 
referred to as the Tantra. . 


Ishall quote Prabodha Chandra Sengupta in connection 
with these similarities, and the great influence of Aryabhata on 
Indian Astronomy. He writes in his Introduction to the 
Khandakhadvaka as follows : 


We have shown that there is much resemblance in the 
constants between the Saryasiddhanta of Varaha and 
the Khandakhadvaka and for the matter of that with 
the Tantrantara of AryabhataI. In my papers “Arya- 
bhata and Aryabhaja’s Lost Work”, I have establish- 
ed the fact that the Saryasiddhanta as it existed 
before the time of Varaha, was made more accurate 
by him by borrowing the constants from Aryabhata's 
ardharatrika system. That there was a Suryasiddhanta 





g. innate’ wet enee’ aT Maehtane | , 
GAA WAY TE: ete wala Ba MI ~KK. II, 18 
2. Tea sey wy | . 
wearaege Tera sarer TT RAT: Ul 
saree ater at ae | 
ara g wagit freraanegel wae —Arya. II, 23-24 


ARYABHATA & BRAHMAGUPTA CONTROVERSY 91 


before the time of Varaha, is seen from Section 6 of 
the Table on page xii given before. This point is made 
clear from another consideration, viz., the star table 
in the modern Suryasiddhanta, which unmistakably 
points to the conclusion that the longitudes of some 
stars, e.g., Spica etc., correspond toa time much ante- 

' rior to that of Aryabhata I. The great fame of Arya- 
bhata I induced Varaha, the first maker of a neo-Sarva- 
siddhanta to use the elements of Aryabhata’s ardha- 
ratrika system to supplant the older materials in it. 
No wonder, therefore, that there is an opinion in 
favour of the hypothesis that Aryabhata I was the 
author of the Sarvasiddhdnta. If there were a shadow 
of truth in it, Varaha would have admitted it. Albe- 
runi indeed says that the Saryasiddhinta was compos- 
ed by Lata (Alberuni’s India, translated by Sachau, 
Vol. Ip. 153). We now know that this Lata or Lata- 
deva was one of the first pupils of Aryabhata I. He 
was the expounder of the Romaka and Patiliga Siddhantas 
as we learn from Varahamihira’s Paficasiddhantika, 
(1.3), As Alberuni’s statement is not corroborated by 
Varaha, we are not inclined to take it as correct. None 
of the earlier writers suggest that the Survasiddhanta 
was in any way modified or changed by Arya- 
bhata I. : 


It has now been established beyond doubt that the 
same Aryabhata was the author of the Aryabhafiva and 
another Tantra which is now lost. There is reason in 
support of hypothesis that this Tantra itself was the 
first work of Aryabhata I and that the Aryabhatiya was 
the second work from the order in which Varaha 
mentions them in the Stanza quoted earlier. If this 
hypothesis be true, the stanza in the Aryabhafiva’, 


which was translated by me as: 

“Now when sixty times sixty years and three quarter 
yugas also have elapsed, twenty increased by three 
years have elapsed since my birth.” 





1. veasarat afidiar eadtereaar gaavar: | 
satrat Fariearate Aa seratsdte: Ul —Arya. III. 10. 


92 BRAHMASPHUTASIDDHANTA & KHANDAKHADYAKA 


should now be translated thus : 

“In this Maha@yuga when sixty times sixty years and 
three quarter yugas also had passed, twenty imercased 
by three years had elapsed since my birth.”’ 


Now Bhaskara I the author of the Mahabhaskarwa and the 
Lagubhaskariya, wrote a commentary on the Aryabhafiya. The 
author commenting on this stanza observes that : 


“Or this was addressed by Aryabhata when expound- 
ing the science to Pandurangasvamin, Latadeva 
Nihganku and other pupils.’ 


This direct pupil of Aryabhata I also says that this stanza 
does not show that the Aryabhatiya was composed when Arya- 
bhata I was only 23 years old. but refers to the time when he 
probably began his career as a teacher of Astronomy. 


Senagupta out of his discussion concludes that we are not 
justified in accepting that the Aryabhatiya was composed when 
Aryabhata was only 23 years of age. This treatise as it exists in 
the present form must have been the composition of a mature 
age; it is a treatise highly finished in form; the date mentioned in 
this great work refers to a date when its author became a 
reputed guru or teacher, 


e 


Alberuni and Brahmagupia 


Dr. E.C. Sachau in his translation of Alberumi’s India (vol. 
IL. p. 304) speaks of Brahmagupta in the following words : 


Brahmagupta holds a remarkable place in the history 
of Eastern civilization. It was he who taught the 
Arabs astronomy before they became acquainted with 
Ptolemy; for the famous Sindhind of Arabian litera- 
ture, frequently mentioned but not yet brought to 
light, is a translation of his Brahmasiddhanta: and the 
only other book on Indian astronomy, called Atarkand, 
which they knew, was a translation of his Khanda« 
khadyaka. 


Brahmagupta, the ‘cee author of the Brahmasphuta- 
siddhanta, has another great work as we have said before to his 


credit which goes by the mame Khandakhadyaka. This has 





Ls eT VATA Bt at Testes: TE HTT 
| 


ARYABHATA & BRAHMAGUPTA CONTROVERSY 93 


already been said that perhaps to meet the popular demand, 
Brahmagupta in this treatise took upon himself the task of sim- 
plifying Aryabhata’s ardharatrika system or the system of 
midnight day reckoning. Alberuni, the author of the Indika has 
made several references or quotations from the Khandakhadyaka 
proper and also its supplement, known as Uttara-Khanda- 
khadyaka. 


(a) There is a reference to the accepted circumference of 
the Earth, as given in the Khandakhadyaka (Sachau’s 
Alberuni. Vol. I,p. 312) 


Multiply the difference in longitude (from Ujjayini) by 
the (mean) daily motion of a planet (in minutes) and 
divide by 4,800; apply the quotient taken as minutes 
negatively in places east of the meridian line of Ujja- 
yini and positively in places lying west.* 


(b) The rules for finding the ahargana as given in the 
Khandakhadyaka in I. 3-5 (Sachau’s Alberuni., Vol, 
II, 46-47), to which Dr. Schram adds a valuable anno- 
tation, the constants being taken from the later 
Paulisa Tantra as known to Bhattotpala. This Paulisa 
astronomy is derived from Aryabhata I’s ardharatrika 
system.” 


(c) A quotation from the Uttara Khandakhadyaka 
(Sachau’s Alberuni, Vol. IT, pp. 84-86) which Sengupta 
has given in his translation, Chapter X, pp. 148-152. 


(d) A quotation also probably from the Uttara Khandakha- 
dyaka (Sachau’s Alberuni, Vol. II. p. 87). These stanzas 
are found in the Brahmasphutasiddhanta, XIV, 47-52, 
also quoted by Bhattotpala as occurring inthe Brahma 
Siddhanta in his commentary on the Brhat-Samhita, 
IV,7. The manuscripts which Sengupta used did not 
show them as occurring in the Uttara Khandakhadyaka. 
These relate to the dimensions of the naksatras as seen, 
as distinguished from the same as calculated. 


]. seaet-araae-ternr: srt at wear | 
AUT BRITT G GEIL? HATTA Ul 
2.-KK, Pt. B. Misra’s edition, », 145. 


- KK. I, 15, 


94 


BRAHMASPHUTASIDDHANTA & KHANDAKHADYAKA 


(e) Two quotations from the Uttara Khandakhadyaka rel- 


ating to the celestial co-ordinates of Canopus and Sirius 
(Sachau’s Alberuni, Vol. II, p. 91). Present manus- 
cripts do not show these stanzas, which are probably 
the same as stanzas 35-36 and 40 of Chapter X of the 
Brahmasphutasiddhanta. 


(£) Two quotations from the Khandakhadyaka proper as 


alleged by Alberuni (Sachau’s Alberuni, Vol.II, p. 116). 
According to Amaraja, the first is a couple of stanzas of 
which the author is Bhattotpala and not Brahmagupa. 
The second quotation cannot be traced. These relate to 
finding the possibility of an eclipse whether of the Sun 
or of the Moon. 


(g) Two quotations from the Khandakhadyaka proper as 


asserted by Alberuni (Sachau’s Alberuni, Vol. II. p. 
119). These relate to finding the Lords of the year and 
ofthe month. According to Amarija the tules in 
question were given by Bhattotpala and not by Brah- 
magupta. Prthtdaka in his commentary on the first 
chapter at its concluding portion says ; 

“In this work the Khandakhadyaka, the teacher 

(Brahmagupta) has not given the rules for finding 

the Lords of the year and the month}, 


1. ssa easerah HRT sea aT eeRT | 


Reference 


Pi Sengupta : The Khandakhadyaka, 1934, 
KS. Shukla : Mahabhaskariya, 1960, 
KS. Shukla : Sarya-Siddhanta, 1957. 


Chapter IV 
Brahmagupta’s Originality 
in the Khandakhadyaka 


Sengupta in his Indroduction to the Commentary of the 
Khandakhadyaka has discussed this point. We shall reproduce 
here some of the points mentioned by him. 


Brakmagupta’s Khandakhadyaka 
(i) Brahmagupta does not accept the system of Aryabhata 


but has simplified it in the Khandakhadyvaka proper ; and here 
he has given the system which he thinks to be correct. 


Uttar Khanda Khadyaka 


Gd In the Uttara-Khandakhadyaka, he has further correc- 
ted some of his results, given earlier inthe Khandakhadyaka 
proper. In the proper Khandakhadyaka, Brahmagupta assignes 
to the longitude of the Sun's apogee the value 80°, whereas in 
the Uttara text he corrects it to 77° (UKK. 4): 


As the process of finding the apparent placesof planets 
as given by Aryabhata does not make them agree with 
observation, I shall, therefore, speak of this process. 
Of the Sun the apogee is at two signs and seventeen 
degrees (2signs 17°=60 plus17 degrees=77°)? 

Compare this with the value given in the Khandakhadyaka 
proper (1.13)? : 

The longitude of the Sun’s apogee is 80° [KK.I,13] (The 
Sun’s apogee is 80° or two signs plus 20 degrees) inocco means 
l,m eFeTAMaas Taste aaa TET | 

aaa werd UReaaeaa TTT UKK. IX 4 
2. wEhRaa okra: Tea METS | 
arure fabeadaaa ae aa ga: aay | KK. I, 13 


96 BRAHMAGUPTA'S KHANDAKHADYAKA 


mandocca of the Sun). The value given in the Paiicasiddhan- 
tika, IX.7-8) is also the same. 

Let us compare it with the present value. According to 
the astronomical constants as given in the Conn. des Temps., the 
longitude of the Sun's apogee in 499 A.D. (i.e. 1,400 years before 
1900 A.D.) was 


—77° 19'19.44" according to Conn.des Temps’ 
equation. 


—76° 40'37.22" according to Newcomb’s equation. 


The mean of these two valuesis very nearly 77° as given 
by Brahmagupta in the Uttaratext. Thus the value given by 
Brahmagupta is more correct than the value given by Aryabhata, 
The Aryabhativa gives the value 78° which is less correct. 


Brahmagupta more correct than Aryabhata 


(ii) Brahmagupta detected that Aryabhata had made the 
Moon’s apogee quicker and nodes slower, than they really are. 
In both the cases, Brahmagupta made rather an over-correction. 
We shall give the extract from Uttara-Khandakhadyaka in this 
connection : 


Multiply the ahargana by 110, increase the product 
by 511 and divide by 30, 31; subtract the result taken 
as revolutions, etc, from the mean Moon; the final 
result is the Moon’s apogee. 


Evidently Brahmagupta assumes that the anomalistic 
month=3031/110 days, This convergent to the anomalistic 
month was known to the author of the Vusistha Siddhanta as 
summarised in the Patcasiddhantika® (II-2-6). 


According to Brahmagupta, the length of the anomalistic 
month. 


= 1582236450000-— 4320000000 days, CBrSpSi. 1,15,16,18, 
57753300000—488105858 “and 20) 20) 
= 27.55454641 days which is for 1900 A. dD. 
= 27,5545502 days according to Radau. 
= 27.554602 according to the Aryabhativa. 


1. TIRE eR Ofte = wanTgaat afer rarfier Sire | 
» Se get heer TT | (UKK. IX. 5) 





UTTARAKHANDA KHADYAKA 97 


Here also Brahmagupta is more accurate. 


Again, the length of the sidereal period of the Moon’s 
apogee 


1577918450000 days 


488105858 
3232.732048 days. 


Aryabhata’s value of the same is 3231.987844 days, and the 
modern value is 3232.3754 days. Hence Brahmagupta’s result 
is by 0.3566 of a day out. while Aryabhata’s is by 0.3876 of a 
day in. 


l 


Further in the Uttara-KhandakhadvakaZX.10) we 
have: Deduct 3544 from the ahargana, divide the 
remainder by 6792 ; subtract the quotient that is 
obtained in revolutions etc. from the circle : the 
result isthe longitude of the ascending node.+ (IX.10) 


Here Brahmagupta gives the approximate period of the 
sidereal revolution of the Moon’s node to be=6792 days. This 
" according to his Brahmasphutasiddhanta=1577916450000 days 

232311168 

= 6792.25396 days, which according to Lockyer would be 
6793.39108 days and according to the Khandakhadyvaka proper 
is 6794.75083 days. Henc2 Brahmagupta’s attempt to correction 
makes the node quicker than it actually is. 


Brakmagupta corrects Mars’s Aphelion Point 


(iv) Again Brahmagupta states that the longitude of Mars’s 
aphelion should be increased by 17° and that of Jupiter by 10°. 
Evidently here too, Brahmagupta is more correct than Aryabhata. 
The passage in the Uttara Khandakhadyaka is as follows in this 
connection : 


Of Mars the apogee (the aphelion point) is to be 
increased by 17°, that of Jupiter by 10°; from the 
sighra of Venus 74 are to be subtracted; Saturn’s 
equation of apsis should be decreased by its one-fifth ; 
the sighra equation of Mercury should be increased by 


1. ae aty amas Raagh-eataa | 
* RAUSATS wed RT GMT Ta Te I '. —UKK.1X 10 


98 UTTARAKHANDA KHADYAKA 


one-sixteenth,.* 


This stanza says that in 499 A.D., Mars’s aphelion point 
had a longitude of 127°; of Jupiter the longitude of the aphelion 
was 170°.( KK.II. 6") 


According to Newcomb’s rule, the longitude of the aphelion 
point of Mars in 499 A. D. works out to have been = 12828712", 
According to the Conn. des. Temps’ rule, the same was 128°27°51". 
Hence Brahmagupta’s determination of Mars’s aphelion is correct 
within 1°30’ and is therefore, quite satisfactory. According to 
the Khandakhadyaka proper it was 110°, and according to the 
Aryabhatiya 118°. 

Of planets, beginning with Mars, the degrees of longitude 
ofthe apogees are respectively 11, 22, 16,8 and 24, each multiplied 
by 10. (KK .II. 6) 


Thus the longitudes of apogees of Mars = 110 (3 signs 20°); 
of Mercury = 220° (7 signs 10°) ; of Jupiter = 160° (5 signs 10°); 
of Venus = 80° (2 signs 20°) and of Saturn = 240° (8 signs). 
Compare these values with those given in the Patcasiddhantika 
XVII. 2 (the Sarva-siddhanta). 


Again according to this stanza Jupiter's aphelion had a 
longitude of 170° in 499 A.D. 


According to Conn. des. Temps’ rule the same was 170°25’. 
Thus here too, Brahmagupta is very accurate. According to 
the Khandakhadyaka proper, Jupiter’s aphelion had a longitude 


of 160° (KK. II.6) and according to the Arvabhativa, the value 
was 180°, 


Brahmagupta First to Use Second Differences 

All these illustrations reproduced here very well establish 

the. point that the great Indian astronomers from Aryabhata I 

to Brahmagupta were aware of the methods of separating the 

two distinct planetary inequalities, viz., that of the apsis and 

of conjunction in the cases of the five ‘star’ planets (PSi. Intro- 

duction Lii). In the Khandakhadyaka, Brahmagupta having 

given the “sines’ and the equations of the Sun and the Moon 

1. wears tet gtelrea: | 

faartina agen fern: when: wa at AN 

wate teed Slegamnfs ayer were —-URKIX. 11 

2. WRT Saat eal fag Teme: | —KK. Il, 6 


BRAHMAGUPTA FIRST TO USE SECOND DIFFERENCES 99 


ét the interval of 15° of arc of the mean anomaly, in the Uttara 
Khandakhadyaka teaches, for the first time in the history of 
mathematics, the improved rules for interpolation by using the 
second difference. This very important feature I am reproducing 


here from the translation by Senagupta of the verse ? 
(UKK.8): 


Multiply the residual are left after division by 900’ 
(i.e by 15°), by halfthe difference of the tabular 
difference passed over and that to be passed over and 
divide by 900° G.e. 15°): by the result increase or 
decrease. as the case may be, half the sum of the same 
two tabular differences; the result which, whether less 
or greater than the tabular difference to be passed, is 
the true tabular difference to be passed over. (UKK. 8) 


The rule given here applies to the case of all functions 
-hitherto considered in the Khandakhadyaka, which are tabulated 
at the difference of 15° of arc of the argument. They are: 


(i) the tabular differences of the Sun’s equation, 


(ii) the tabular differences of the Moon’s equation. 
Gii) the tabular differences of the ‘sines’. 


Sengupta has illustrated the rule by an example belonging 
to the table of sines. 


Illustration—To find the ‘sine’ of 57°. 


Brahmagupta’s table of sines in the Khandakhadyaka is as 


follows: 


Thirty increased severally by nine, six and one; twenty- 
four, fifteen and five, are thetabular differences of 
sines at intervals of half-a-sign. For any arc, the ‘sine’ 
is the sum of the parts passed over, increased by the 
proportional part of the tabular difference to be passed 
over2 (KK.1.30; also III.6) 


1. amahy auearahnata Tea | 

aqafiaet gated Ararger fra WRT | —UKK.IX.8 
2. Ren arate (fe) freee ara | 

BS TT GUS ST BA TATA II —KK. I. 30; also II. 6 


100 BRAHMAGUPTA’S KHANDAKHADYAKA 


This can be shown in the tabular form thus : 








Arc ‘Sine’ | Tabular difer- | Second difference 
ence 

0° 0 

15° 39 . 39 

30° 75 36 aac: 

45° 106 31 ~—5 

60° 130 24 —7 

15° 145 15 —9 

90° 150 5 a0 





Now 57° = 3420 minutes=900’ x3+720'. Thus three of the 
tabular differences are considered as passed over ; the last one 
being 31 and the one to be passed over is 24. 


The true tabular difference by the rule, for are 57°, 
_ 31424 720 , 31-24 
2 900 2 
Hence the ‘sine’ of 57° 
=99+36-+31+ 20 [31+24_ 720 , 31-24) 


==125.76 


90 2 90% 8 J 
As worked out from the logarithm tables the same comes 
out to be 125.80. 


Again ‘sine’ of 57° from Brahmagupta’s formula 


106-4722 5044 3824, 720 (720. ,, S124 
W6-+ oq X24+"—S=%X G66 a] 3 


106-4720 504.720 (7201) y 24-81 
106+ ag *24Foo9 [g00 72 J XB 


This. in fact isthe modern form the interpolation equation 
up to the term containing the second difference. Brahma upta thus 
takes a decidedly improved step here and is SRiocbeaie the first 
man in the history of mathematics who has done this. One should 
also remember that in the case where the function is not tabula- 
ted at a constant interval, Brahmagupta’s rule is remarkable. 


BRAHMAGUPTA AND SINE RULE 102 


Brahmagupta First to Introduce 
Sine Rule in Indian Plane Trigonometry 


In this connection, we shall reproduce the following verse 
from the Khandakhadyaka : 
Multiply the ‘sine’ of the (Sighra) anomaly by the ‘sine’ 
of the maximum Sighra equation and divide by the 
‘sine’ of the corresponding Sighra equation, the result 
is the ‘Sighra hypotenuse’ when the (Sighra) anomaly 
is half a circle, this Sighra hypotenuse is equal to the 
radius dinrinished by the ‘sine’ of the maximum 
equation ; when the anomaly is equal to the whole 
circle, the same is equal to the radius increased by the 
same ‘sine’ of the maximum equation. 
Let S, E and P be the positions of the Sun, the Earth and the 
s . Pp planet, say Mars, respecti- 
vely. Complete the paralle- 
logram SEMP; with M as 
centre and MP as radius, 
y. describe a circle. This circle 
is the epicycle of conjunction 
of Mars. Produce EM to cut 
this cirele at K. The ZPMK 
= £S'SP (the point S’ is on 
Fig. 4 ES produced ), the angle 
gained by the Earth over Mars since the rreceding conjunction. 
The ZPMK is called the sighra anomaly or ancmaly of conjunc- 
tion. We take EM=360, and MP=234. The ZPEM, which is 
equal to ZPES, the annual parallax of Mars, is called the sighra 
equation. The ZMPEis equal to the ZSEP, the elongation. 
The ZPMK is given, and PM and ME are also given. Hence in 
the triangle MPE, we have 
is = tan }PMK 


“Ltan 1(P-B=log ta 4+-L tan } PMK 


We have also 1 (P+E)=3ZPMK 


1. FeaensRaneTT ofa Hasaa EAT: | 
PAE TAT TT SAAT a It KK. VI. 1. 





tan } PMK 


102 BRAHMAGUPTA'S KHANDKHADYAKA 


Now ioe Es =1,3265841. 


The values of the ZPMK and the #.PEM and Brahma- 
gupta’s values as given in the verse’ are presented below ina 
tabular form : 





ZPMK=| 28°{ 60° | 90°] 121°} 135° | 148°] 164° 173° 
ZPEM=| 10°584 23°1’ | 33°L’ | 39°56’| 40°23'] 37°31, 25°32] 12°35 
Brahma- 


gupta’s ' F ay 
ZPEM=| 11°] 23°} 33°} 40° | 40°30] 37°30'] 25°30} 12°30 


It will be seen that Brahmagupta gives the values of the 
equation within 1/8th of a degree. It seems inexplicable why 
such discrepancies should remain in Brahmagupta’s calculations. 
It is probable that he wanted to state his equationsto the nearest 
half a degree. 


Now we shall take up the Sighra equations of Mars, and 


then revert to the Sine Rule. Wehavein the Khandakhu- 
dyaka: 


Mars, by the degrees of Sighra anomaly (i.e. anomaly of 
conjunction) of 28 getting at the corresponding equation of 11° 
rises (heliacally) in the east ; by the next 32° gets 12° more of the 
equation ; by the next 30°, 10° more ; by the next 31°,7°, more ; by 
next 14°, half a degree ; these are positive ; by the next 13°, nega- 
tive 3°; by the next 16°; negative 12° after this he is retrograde ; 
by the next 9°, negative 13°; by the next 7°, negative 124". 
After this the parts of the equations occur in the reverse order’. 


On the basis of this we have the following table of the 
Sighra equations for Mars ' 


Degrees of anomaly  Equationof | Phenomena 


of conjunction conjunction 
0" 0° Motion direct, 
28 +11° Rises in the east, 


TT iised er ame gitaetoin 
a tenet: gate wafixel ae i 
wre HA TIT SEAT ATEN att | 
wae aentigiggarshy Raise: 11 KK.118-9 


BRAHMAGUPTA AND SINE RULE 103 


Degrees of anomaly Equation of Phenomena 


of conjunction conjunction 
60° 114+12=+23° 
90° 23+10=+33° 
121° 33-+ 7=+40° 
135° 40+ 4=+40°30° 
148° 40°30’—3°= +37° 30° 
164 37°30'—12°= +25°30’ Retrograde motion 
begins. 
17> 25°30’—13° = +12°30’ 
180° 12°30—12°30’=0°0" 
187° —12°30" 
156° —25°30° Direct motion begins. 
212° . —37°30’ 
225° —40°30' 
239° —40° 
270° —33° 
300° —23° 
332° —11° Setsin the west. 
360° 0° 


Now we come back to our discussion on the verse VI.1. 


The Sighra hypotenuse spoken of here is EP, when SP or 
EM is taken to be R; when ZPEM is a maximum, PM is its 
‘sine’. 


It would be seen from the figure that 


pp— Bsin PMK xPM 
Rsin PEM 
This may again be written as 
‘ EP PM 


sin PMK sin PEM 
This is equivalent to the sine rule for a triangle in plane 
trigonometry. Brahmagupta is here seen to be the first person 
to give it in Indian mathematics, This expression reminds us 
of the famous relationship in respect to triangle ABC : 


a b c 


= 


snA sinB sinC 











104 BRAHMASPHUTASIDDHANTA'S KHANDAKHADYAKA 


Brakmagupta corrects 
Dimensions of the Epicycle of Apsis 


Brahmagupta corrects the dimensions of the epicycles of 
apsis of the Sun and Moon by—1/42 nd part and 1/48th parts 
respectively, The reference may be made to the following verse 
in the Uttara Khandakhadyaka : 

The Sun’s equations are to be made less by dvikrtasn- 
fonam (1/42nd) and the Moon’s equations, increased by 
vasuvedabhagayutam (1/48th). Multiply the Sun's equa- 
tion a planet’s daily motion in minutes and divide by 
the number of minutes of a whole circle and this is 
called Bhujantara correction and applied in the same 
way to the planet as the equation is applied to the Sun, 

The Sun’s epicycle of apsis has the dimension 14° in the 

Khandakhadyaka proper. With the correction introduced here, 
° f 1) — 72° U 
the value becomes 14 -@) =13° 40°, 
The correction to the Moon’s equations would make the 


epicycle’s dimension changed from 31° to 31° E +4 ex 31°38'45"", 


Prthtidaka’s commentary further corrects it to 31°(1+ bg)°1"35 


Brahmagupta 's correction to Saturn's epicycle of apsis 
is—1/5th part and that to the Sighra epicycle of Mercury 1/16th 
part as seen in the verse: 

Of Mars the apagee (the aphelion point) is to be 
increased by 17°, that of Jupiter by 10°; from the 
Sighra of Venus 74’ are to be subtracted ; Saturn's 
equation of apsis should be decreased by its one-fifth 
and the Sighra equation of Mercury should be 
increased by one-sixteenth? 

In the Khandakhadyaka proper (11.6), we have been given 
the longitudes of the apogee of planets: Mars 11°, Mercury 22°, 
Jupiter 160°, Venus 80° and Saturn 240°. Now with these correc- 
tions introduced in the Uttara Khandakhadyaka in the above 

1. frit tivataietcarges | 
SAATTRCATET, MITTAL Baa Tay | UKK. IX.9 
2~ wares trey ate TNT: | 
fereefong sega ferean: athe: Wet Get AKER | 
wae WLS Tema BT HA, UI _ URKAXAL 


DIMENSIONS OF THE EPICYCLE OF APSIS 105 


verse, the aphelion point of Mars in 499 A.D. had a longitude 
of 110 plus 17=127°; of Jupiter 160 plus 10=170°. 


According to Newcomb’s rule, the longitude of the aphelion 
point of Mars in 499 A.D. works out to have been 128°28'12”’. 
The same according to Conn. des Temps rule would be 128°27'51". 
Hence Brahmgupta’s determination of Mars’s aphelion is correct 
within 1°30’, and may be, therefore, regarded as very satisfactory. 

ccording to the Khandakhadyaka proper this value was, as 
already said, 110°, while according to the Aryabhativa, it was 
118°. 

The same may be said regarding Jupiter’s aphelion. Accord- 
ing to the Khandakhadyaka proper the value of its longitude is 
160°, according to the Aryabhajiya it was 180°; according to 
Conn. des. Temps’ rule, it would be in 499A. D, 170°25’, and the 
value given by Brahmagupta in the Uttara Khandakhadyaka, it 
is 170°. 

We have thus shown by many illustrations the important 
corrections introduced by Brahmazupta in his Khandakhadyaka 
specially the Uttara part. Brahmagupta was highly original in his 
methods of calculations, accuracies and interpolations. He intro- 
duced new ideas in mathematics. He went much ahead Aryabhata 
in many details. He so many times did not follow Aryabhata 
in calculations. In the Khandakhadyaka proper, his treatment 
of parallax in the calculation of solar eclipses is different from 
that of Aryabhata. The methods followed here are the same as 
propounded by him in the Brahmasphutasiddhanta} 


Senagupta is right when he says : As has already been 
remarked, these corrections and innovations in the Uttara 
Khandakhadyaka paved the way for the acceptance of his great 
work the Brahmasphutasiddhanta as a standard work on astrono- 
my by the western Indian school of astronomers. The directness 
of the treatment of topics, and the simplicity of calculations 
taught in the Khandakhadyaka made it very neat handbook 
for the beginner. These two works of Brahmagupta were 
perhaps the only astronomical works in circulations in western 
India when the Arabs conquered Sind early in the eighth century 


1, On Parallax— 
arat agafatier aa aat aaeaa: eye | 
aes wa aT HMA agh a I BrSpSi. XI. 33 


106 BRHAMASPHUTASIDDHANTA’S KHANDAKHADYAKA 


(712 A.D.) and the new conquerers learnt Indian astronomy and 
mathematics from these works as has been observed by Sachau. 
Alberuni who came to India early in the 11th centuty of the 
Christian era, learnt Indian astronomy chiefly by studying the 
Khandakhadyaka and the Brhat-Samhitad of Varahamihira, and 
both of them with the help of commentary of Bhattotpala. 


Reference 


P.C, Sengupta: The Khandakhadvaha, 1934, 


CHAPTER VI 


Indian Luni— 
Solar Astronomy 


In this chapter, it is proposed to give an account of astrono- 
mical constants and the equations in Indian luni-solar astronomy 
and to present a comparative view of these quantities with the 
corresponding ones in Greek and modern Astronomy. This acco- 
unt has been reproduced from P. C. Sengupta’s. Appendix I of 
the Khandakhadyvaka It has been shown that in many cases 
the Indian values of these constants are more accurate than the 
Greek values. and in Indian lunar astronomy the equations 
or inequalities discovered are the most startling. 


Solar Astronomy 


In solar astronomy the length of the year was determined 
by Aryabhata! from the heliacal risings of some bright star at 
the intervals of 365 and 366 days. 

' (1) The year according to the Aryabhatiya 


_. 1577917500 es 
= 7320000 days=365.2586805 days, 


=365 da. 6 brs. 12 mins. 29.64 secs. 
(2) The same 
_ 1577917800, 
= 2320000 days=365.25875 days. 
=365 da. 6 hrs. 12 mins. 36 secs., according to the 
Khandakhadyaka, the Stirvasiddhanta of Varaha 
and the modern Saryasiddhanta. 
(3) It is 
_ 1577916450, 
= 7330000 days=365.2584375 days, 
=365 da.6 hrs. 12 mins. 9 secs. according to the 


1, P.C, Sengupta, ‘‘Aryabhata’s Method of determining the Mean Motions 
of Planets,’ Bulletin of the Calcutta Mathematical Society. Vol, XII, No. 3. 


108 INDIAN LUNI-SOLAR ASTRONOMY 


Brahmasphuta Siddhanta of Brahmagupta. 
Now the mean sidereal year 
=365 da. 6 hrs. 9 mins. 9.3 secs, (Lockyer). 
The mean anomalistic year 
=365 da. 6 hrs. 13 mins. 49.3 secs. (Lockyer). 
The mean tropical year 
=365 da. 5 hrs. 48 mins. 46.054 secs. (Lockyer). 


Though we take that Indian year was designed to be the 
sidereal year, it approached most closely the anomalistic year ; 
and its excess over the sidereal year was about 3 minutes. From 
this consideration it appears that the Indian astronomers were 
justified in taking the Sun’s apogee to be fixed. 


Against the error of +3 min. in the Indian sidereal year, 
we may point out that— 


(1) The Hipparchus-Ptolemy tropical year 
=365 da. 14’ 48" in sexagesimal units, 
=365 da. 5 hrs. 55 min. 12 secs. which has an 
error of about+6 min. 
(2) Meton's sidereal year 


= (s65+2+ es days® 
=365 da. 6 hrs. 18 min. 57 secs, which has an 
error of +9 min. 48 secs. nearly. 
(3) The Babylonian sidereal-year was 4} min. too long, 
Thus the Indian value of it is closer to the true value. 
Again in 150 A.D. the longitude of the Sun's apogee 
according to the Conn. des Temps was 


=101° 13” 15°.17-6189". 03 gas a 


1900—150)] ? 
=1'6 patton 
1743 x [ 100 J 
=71° 16’ 26". 37 
while Ptolemy states it to be 65°30’ which was wrong 
by—5° 36’ 27"; 
ete cees 
1. Syntaxis, Karl Manitius’s edition, Vol. 1, p. 146, 
2. Ibid, p, 145, 
3. Encyclopaedia Britannica, History of Astronomy, 
4, Syntaxis, Vol. L p. 148. The Romaka Siddhanta of the Patca-siddhantika, 


VIII. 2, indicates the Sun’s apogee to be at longitude of 75°; this was per- 
__ haps a correction made by Latadeva to the Greek constant, 


LUNAR ASTRONOMY 109 


In 500 A. D (Aryabhata’s time) the longitude of the Sun’s 
apogee by the same rule works out to be=77°19'19.44’, 

Aryabhata states this to be 78° in the Aryabhatiya, 
Brahmagupta in the Uttaradhyaya of the Khandakhadyaka states 
the same to be 77°, while the Khandakhadyaka gives it as=80°. 
Hence the Indian findings of the longitude of the Sun’s apogee 
were more accurate. 

Again as to the Sun's equations of the centre we find that 
the Aryabhajiva states the periphery of the Sun’s epicycle to be 
13°30’", The Khandakhadyaka gives it as 14° ; while according to 
the Indian form, Ptolemy's value of thesameis 15°. Hence 
according to these writers, the Sun’s equations at 90° of the mean 
anomaly are :— 

According to the Aryabhativa =2° 8’ 54”, 

a »  Khandakhadyaka=2° 1' 40°. 
4 a Brahmagupta=2° 7’ 20". 
4 bs Ptolemy=2° 23’ 3°, 

The modern value =]° 55’ 97". 

Thus the Indian equations of the Sun are in general by more 
correct than the Greek ones. The Indian constants in solar 
astronomy are thus, generally, more accurate than the Greek 
ones. We now turn to the Indian Lunar astronomy, 

Lunar Astronomy 


Before discussing the constants in Indian lunar astronomy it 
is necessary to state something as to the time when the Moon 
was observed by our ancient astronomers and the astronomers 
from Aryabhata I (499 A.D. to Prthtdaka Svami (864 A.D.). 
The months were reckoned from the first visibility of the crescent 
at the time of the Mahabharata (1400 B. C.). We have a pass- 
age in the Bhismapatva where Vyasa speaks of the evil omens 
on the eve of the Kuruksetra war thus— 

aaa ware sales | 

“That the Moon and the Sun have been both eclipsed on 

the 13th days of the light and dark halves of the same month.” 


The eclipses could not take place on the 13th days of the 
month unless the months were reckoned from the first visibility 
of the crescent. This was the custom in Babylonia and it has’ 
still survived in the Mahomedan world. Even in the Pajica 
siddhantika of Varahamihira (540 A.D.), there is a special 


110 INDIAN LUNI-SOLAR ASTRONOMY 


chapter on zfe-aa'aa or the fiirst visibility of the crescent. It is 
thus clear that the practice was to observe the Moon when very 
near the Sun. 

Again Aryabhata says that ‘wedi,  serharir, 
“the Moon was determined from her conjunctions with the Sun.” 
The Moon was observed by him at the time of solar eclipses, or 
at the time of the first visibility of the crescent. 


Even up to the time of Prthudaka, the accuracy in Junar 
astronomy was chiefly aimed at the time of eclipses. Thus in 
his commentary on the Khandakhadyaka. IV. he makes the 
following introductory remarks :— 


“All knowledge relating to (luni-solar) astronomy is desired 
by the wise (or cultured) specially for knowing the right instants 
of opposition or conjunction ; these instants are, however, not 
visible to the eye. Of other things such as tithis, nabsatras and 
Karanas, as the planets, the Sun and the Moon, are not clearly 
observed, their beginnings and ends are not visible. Men see 
the agreement between calculation and observation at the times 
of solar and lunar eclipses. Hence the word of the astronomers 
is esteemed amongst men even in respect to such things as tithis. 
etc.” 


Thus the chief aim of the ancient Indian astronomers was 
to calculate the eclipses accurately and the Moon was observed 
chiefly at lunar or solar eclipses, though the time for observation 
related also to the fiinding of the first visibility of the crescent, 
This latter phenomena did not perhaps lead them to directly 
observing the Moon's position at such times by using instruments. 


Moon’s Mean Motion 


The practice of observing the Moon at the time of the 
eclipses alone led to the determination of the synodic month 
with the following results :— 


G) Mean synodic month according to the Aryabhativa 
___ 1577917500 
57753336—4320000 149 
=29,530582 days. 


1, ages wedqraet aaa errRreat fied: | Set -g qeahat axkh ata | 
setae ReTARCUTT TET Ta wRrresaakeatater | ares 
TEE ahaa ae: Tea | gent Renee Sag ame a ofhae | 


MOON'S MEAN MOTION 111 


(ii) The same according to the Khandakhadyaka 

=29,5305874 days. 

(iii) The same according to the Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta 

=29.530582 days. 

(iv) The same according to Ptolemy=29 da. 31’ 50” &" 26" 

in sexagesimal units=29.5305927 days 

The modern value according to Newcomb and Radau 

=29.5305881 days. 

Hence the Khandakhddyaka mean length appears to be 
the closest approximation. 

The mean sidereal month must have been deduced from the 
mean synodic month and the year adopted. Hence no compari- 
son need be made of this element here. 

We will now consider the sidereal periods, the nodes and 
the apogee of the Moon. These are shown below :- 





According to Sid. Per. of Moon's | Sid. per. of the 

Apogee Ascending Node 

Aryabhativa 3231,987079 da. 6794,749511 da. 

Khandakhadvaka 3231.987844 da. 6794.750834 da. 

Brahma-sphuta ~ Sid- 

dhinta 3232.73411 da. 6792.25396 da. 
Ptolemy 3232.617656 da. 6796.45571 da. 
Modern values (Lockyer) | 3232.37543 da. 6798,39108 da. 


aaa nmeenenenmemnneneneeemenmenmennme im meenammemnnairenmerntetenrrae eine eaeeeennaneendeten ee 

Here also the Indian values show a closer approximation 
to the true values, Brahmagupta’s figures representing the 
nearest approach, 

Other Constants 

So far the Indian values of the constants have been more 
accurate than the Greek ones; but as to the inclination of the 
Moon's orbit the Greek value is more accurate than the India 
value. 

Inclination of the lunar orbit 

Indian value=4°30’. 


M12 INDIAN LUNLSOLAR ASTRONOMY 


Greek value=5°0’. 

Modern mean value=5°8'43".427 (Brown) 

This discrepancy confirms the conclusion. that the observa- 
tion of the Moon was restricted to the time when she was near 
a node, either at solar or lunar eclipses, where a small error of 
observation magnified itself into about half a degree. 


We now turn to the parallaxes of the Sun and the Moon :- 





Sun’s Mean Hor. e's mean Hor. 


Parallax _. Parallax 
Aryabhatiya 3’55".62 52/30" 
Kandakhadyaka 3'56"5. 52'42"3 
Ptolemy ao." 53’34" 
Modern values 0'8”.806 57'2".79 





As to the Sun's horizontal parallax, the ancients were of 
course totally wrong, but in respect to that of the Moon their 
values were fairly approximate. 


We next consider the angular semi-diameters of the Sun 
and the Moon. These are :- 


| Moon's Mean Sun's Mean 
Semi-diameter 





Semidiameter. 
Aryabhativa 15’45" 16'29".4 
Khandakhadyaka (Brahma- 

sphuta-siddhanta) 16’0".22 16’15" 
Ptolemy 17'40" 15/40" 
Modern values . 15’33".60 16'1".8 


Ar meeneeseneseseserasychsateanasenavarastsheseupnessasemvsahieomutnisuieienhteupueniinsnstnnyiesii 


Here also the Indian values are more accurate than the 
Greek values, 


Moon’s Equations. The First Equation. 


Tt remains now to consider the Moon's equations in ancient 
Indian astronomy. As has been pointed out before, obser- 


MOON'S EQUATIONS 113 


vation was up to the time of Brahmagupta, restricted to the time 
of eclipses perhaps also of syzygies. 


The modern form of the Moon’s equations is 
=377' sin (nt-a)+13" sin 2(nt-a)+o.scesoe 


+76’ sin [2(nt—@)—(nt—a)J+40’ sin 2(nt—O).ssccssserrsseet 
where nt=mean longitude of the Moon, a the longitude of the 
Lerigee, 6=Ilongitude of the Sun. 


Here the first two terms viz, 377’ sin (nt—a) + 
13° sin 2(nt—a), are due to elliptic motion about the Earth in one 
focus; the term 76’ sin [2(nt—#)—-(nt—«)] 1s known as the evec- 
tions Wecombine a part of the first term with the evection 
term andthe expression for the equation of centre becomes 
=3)1' sin (nt—a) +13’ sin 2(nt—-a) +......00666-- 152 sin (nt—é@) cos 
(§—a)-+40’ sin 2(nt—8). 

Now at syzygies and eclipses sin (nt—0) and sin 2(nt—-6) 
will very nearly vanish. Hence according to modern astronomy 
at the syzygies and eclipses; the chief term of the Moon's equa- 
tion=301’ sin(nt—e). 

This according to the Aryabhativa 

=300' 15” sin (nt—e) 
” a5 Khandakhadyaka 

=296' sin (nt—a) 
a ; Uttara Khandakhadyaka 

=301'.7 sin (nt—a) 
3 ‘3 Brahmasphujasiddhanta 

=293' 31” sin (nt—a) 
7 re Greek astronomy 

=300’ 15" sin (nt—a) 

very nearly. 

Hence both the Greek and the ancient Indian astronomers 
were very near the true value of the Moon’s equation at the syzy- 
gies and eclipses. Godfray in his Lunar Theory, page 107, 
observes, “the hypothesis of an excentric, whose apse has a pro- 
gressive motion as conceived by Hipparchus served to calculate 
with considerable accuracy the circumstances of eclipses; and 
observations of eclipses, requiring no instruments. were then the 
only ones which could be made with sufficient exactness to test 





1. The accurate values of the coefficients appear to be 377’ 197.06, 
12! 57",11, 76’ 26" and 39’ 30”, 


114 INDIAN LUNI-SOLAR ASTRONOMY 


the truth or fallacy of the supposition.” We next consider the 
Second inequality of the Moon. 


Moon’s Second Inequality or Equation 


In ancient times it was Prolemy who first really found a 
second inequality of the Moon. According to Godfray (Lunar 
Theory, p. 107) “by dint of careful comparison of otservations 
he (Ptolemy) found that the value of this second inequality in 
quadrature was always proportional to that of the first in the 
same place, and was additive or subtractive according as the first 
was so; and thus, when the first inequality was at its maximum or 
5°1’, the second increased it to 7° 40’ which was the case when 
the apse line happened to be in syzygy at the same time.” 

It is well known that though Ptolemy discovered the second 
inequality in the Moon’s motion he was not able to ascertain its 
true nature. His corrections in this case are true when at the 
quadrature the Moon’s apse line passes through the Sun or it is 
at right angles to the line joining the Earth and the Sun’ In 
the general case his construction does not lead to the clegant 
form of the evection term as we know it now, nor does it lead 
to the nice form in which it was given by later Indian astrono- 


mers from the time of MaBjula (or Mumtjala, 854 Saka era~:932 
A.D.). 


As has already been pointed out, the early Indian astrono- 
mers from Aryabhata to Brahmagupta aimed at accuracy in 
lunar calculation only for the eclipses and syzygies, and did not 
interest themselves about the Moon's longitude at the quadra- 
tures. Hence this second inequality is absent in the works of 
these makers of Indian astronomy, as also in the Pre-Ptolemaic 
Greek astronomy. This points to the conclusion that in both 
the earlier Indian and Greek systems of astronomy. the modes of 
observation of the Moon were copied from an earlier system of 
astronomy whether Babylonian or Chaldean. Even in the 
Romaka Siddhanta of the Paticasiddhantika, there isno mention 
of evection.* Thus inspite of the transmission of a vague system 
of Greek astronomy; Indian astronomy as developed by Arya- 
bhata and Brahmagupta must be regarded as independent and 

1, Godfray’s Lunar Theory. pp, 108-110, 


2. Vide the Summary in P.C, Sengupta's paper, “Kryabhaga the Father 
of Indian Epicyclic Astronomy,” Journal of the Department of letters, vol, 
XVIL, Calcucta University Press, 


MANJULA’S MOON’S EQUATION 115 


original not only from this but also from other considerations. 
It sought to correct the constants as were obtained from the 
Babylonian and the Greek systems as has in some cases been 
shown already. 

Maiijula’s Second Equation of the Moon (932 A.D.) 


We now take up in detail Mafijula’s second equation of 
Moon. It is, however, necessary to say something about his first 
inequality. 

This is given in the form 


—488 sin (ni—a’) 


c6+ cos (nt—e") 


degrees, 


where nt stands for the Moon’s mean longitude, a"—that of the 
apogee. 
488° 


Hence when nt—e’=90°, the equation = 6" ==5°4! = 304’ 


showing an excess of 4’ over the modern value. 

It is further necessary to modify the expression for 
the Moon’s modern form of the equation by chang- 
ingoto 180°+«, as in ancient Indian astronomy anomaly 
is measured not from the perigee but from the apogee. 


The modified form is 
=— 301’ sin (nt—2)+13 sin 2(nt—<)...... 
—152’ sin (nt—6) cos (6—«@)+40' sin 2(nt—6)+... 
Maifijula’s lines giving the second equation are— 
The (mean) daily motion of the Moon diminished by 
11° and multiplied by the “cosine” of the longitude of 
the Sun diminished by that of the Moon's apogee is the 
multiplier of the “sine” and the “cosine” of the longi- 
tude of the Moon diminished by that of the Sun, 
divided severally by land 5. The results taken as 
minutes are to be applied negatively and positively to 
the Moon and to her daily motion if the quantities 
multiplied together are of opposite signs and in the 
reverse order if they are of the seme sign.’ 


1. geqeataraaifeea vein fear fai: | 
OUT Heal HAST FATT: ATT 
we UTE TaN | 
a SR Vt Ya TAT ERT AT II —I1L 12 


116 INDIAN LUNI-SOLAR AS1RONOMY 


As to the positive or negative character of the “sine” and 
the ‘‘cosine” he gives the rule:— 


The mean planet diminished by its ucca, the apofce, 
aphelion or the Sighra, is called Kendra or mean 
anomaly; its “sine” from above six signs (180°) arises 
from half circles and are respectively positive or 
negative, and its “cosine” in different quadrants are 
respectively positive, negative. negative, and posi- 
tive. 

The convention followed is that the “sine’’ is negative from 
0° to 180° and positive from 180° to 360° of the arc and that the 
cosine is positive betwen 0° and 90°, negative between 90° and 
270° and positive between 270° and 360°. 


We may now symbolically express Maiijula’s second ineq- 
uality thus :- 

—(13° 11’ 35"—11°) x 8? 8’ cos (8 —@) x8" 8’ sin (D-- 8) where 
D stands for the Moon as corrected by the Ist equation: we leave 
out the correction to the Moon’s daily motion as given in the 
stanzas quoted above. 


The moon’s new equation comes out to be 
= — 143/58" cos (9—«) sin (D—8). 


This, it will be seen, is exactly the modern form of the 
evection as combined with a part of the equation of apsis shown 
before, The difference in the main is that Mafjula's constant 
is 144’, a quantity less by 8’. In form the equation is most perfect, 
it is far superior to Ptolemy's, it is above all praise. It is from 
this inequality, we trust, that Mafijula should have an abiding 
place in the history of astronomy. The next writer who gives 
the second equation is Sripati (1028 A.D.). 


Sripati’s Second Inequality of the Moon 
The following stanzas from Sripati’s Siddhanta Sekhara, it is 
said. were communicated to Sengupta by Pandit Babua Misra. 
Though they are probably not very correct still the general” 
meaning is clear. They carry the following sense : 


“From the Moon’s apogee subtract 90° diminish the 
Sun by the remainder left; take the “sine” of the 
i. Te: wiraiia: tex ageless ys | 
aaa: vam: setae wenferar 11 


SRIPATI'S SECOND INEQUALITY OF THE MOON 117 


result; multiply it by 160’ and divide by the radius; 
the result is called caraphala. Put itdown in another 
place, multiply it by sara(i.e. R vers (D—2) or versed 
sine of the Moon's distance from the apogee) and 
divide by the difference between the Moon's distarce 
(hypotenuse) and the radius; the result is called parama 
(cara) phala, which isto be considered positive or 
negative according asthe hypotenuse put down in 
another place is less or greater than the radius. Multi- 
ply the “‘sine’ of the Moon which has been diminished 
by the apparent Sun, by the apparent paramaphala and 
divide by the radius; the final result is to be called 
caraphala to be applied to Moon negatively or posi- 
tively as the Moon minus the Sun and the Sun minus 
the Moon’s apogee (diminished by 90°) be of opposite 
signs; if these latter quantities be of the same signs, the 
new equation should be applied in the inverse order by 
those who want to make the calculation of the appa- 
rent Moon agree with observation.” 
Symbolically :— 
160’ R sald Case La) res 
x 160'k R sin isin [b= ~ (2—90°)) 90°)) R vers (D—¢) 
H-R 
= a: according as sH>or< R 
The new equation 


=F Resin (D—#) X paramaphala 

1. Frakeeaaetet war get | 
WaT ame waa AT | 
wale ACHAT Se, TA 4 UTE | 
ergertat eR |! 
RABAT ATA TIA 1 
gratecaaed Beats | 
epeeaargeegar a BART | 
Barareh Mam Berra 
uit amet adelaretieng, | 
Tug TataraTeTy || 
afe wate fe ard saeatag, Pla | 
epenftraciad ay Rega II 


118 INDIAN LUNI-SOLAR ASTRONOMY 


— 160" R sin[@—(a-90")] R vers (D-«) x _R sin (D-6) 


R(H—-R)xR 
—- 160’ R cos(§-a) x R sin(D-6) ,. R vers D-a)' 


RXR 


This equation is a slightly modified one but practically the 
same in form as that of Maiijula, except that the constant here 
is 160’, greater than his by 16’. The constant is 160°’ also ih 
CandraSekhara’s form as we shall see later on. We next consi- 
der the Moon’s inequalities as given by BhaskaralI in his Bijo- 
panaya.* aspecial work on these inequalities composed in the 
Saka year 1074 (=1152A.D.) two years after he had composed 
the Siddhanta Siromani. 

Bhaskara IJ on Moon’s Inequalities 


His preliminary statement runs thus .— 


112’ positive or negative representing the maximum 
difference. have been found by me inthe daily obser- 
ved Moon (as calculated and as observed) at that 
point of the ecliptic where the arc from the kadamba 
(i.e., its pole) passing through the zenith cuts it.) 


Thus for observing the Moon he selected the nonagesimal 
as the suitable point where the uncertainty about her parallax is 
zero, and found 112’ of arc to be the maximum difference bet- 
ween her calculated and observed places. 


Mallabhatta, perhaps a contemporary of Bhaskara II 
ascribed this difference to a supposed Sighrocca of the Moon. 
Bhaskara in stanzas 9-13, refutes the existence of the Sighra in 
the case of the Moon, the substance of his argument 
begins (i) that it is against the teaching ofthe Surva-siddhanta 
and other accepted authorities, (ii) that there is no variation 
of the apparent angular diameter of the Moon corresponding to 
this alleged Sighra, and (iit) that planets having a Sighra have 

_ retrograde motion which is never the case with the Moon. 


oe is some uncertainty, about this new fraction introduced by 
ripati. 


1. feren fates aetitin & eet: mere | 
see steers ae oer cr 


_~ Bijopanaya, stanza 8 


BHASKARA II ON INEQUALITY OF THE MOON 119 


The reasons for his new equationsare stated as follows:— 


When the Moon is situated at a quadrant ahead of 
the apogee and with the Sun at half a quadrant ahead 
of her, the maximum discrepancy (of 112’) is seen in the 
negative character. 
When the Moon is situated at three quadrants ahead 
of the apogee and with the Sun athalf a quadrant 
behind her, the maximum discrepancy (of 112") is seen 
in the positive character. 
When the eclipses of the Sun and the Moon take 
place at the apogee or the perigee of the Moon, the 
Moon as corrected by the equation of apsis is seen to be 
without any new correction called bija. 
When the eclipses of the Sun and the Moon take 
place at the ends of the odd quadrants of the Moon's 
anomaly (measured from the apogee), the discrepancy’ 
is seen to be less by 34’. 
When the Moon is at the apogee, whether the Sun be 
ahead or behind her by half a quadrant, the discre- 
pancy amounts to be 34’. 
The same discrepancy of 34’ is observed when the 
Moon is at the perigee and the Sunis ahead or behind 
her by the same distance. 
Thus by analysis and synthesis, and by repeated obser- 
vations, this variable correction has been devised by 
me; let it be seriously considered by the learned.! 
Bhaskara here speaks of six cases and we consider them one 
after another :-— 
The Moon’s equations as modified to suit siddhantas are 
given by 
—301' sin (nt—o)+13' sin 2(nt—2)...... 


~ 152’ sin (nt— 6) cos (6—«)—40° sin 2(nt—6)+...... 
According to Bhaskara’s Siddhanta - Siromani. the Moon's 
equation of apsis 
_31° 36’ 


= “BEF X 3438’ sin ee 


‘=—301' 46". 8 sin (nt—«), 


120 INDIAN LUNI-SOLAR ASTRONOMY 


this agrees well with the corres, cnding term of the modern 
equation. As Bhaskara takes in all the six cases, nt-a=90", 
270°, 0° or 180°, the second term of the equation of apsis 
vanishes. 
Case I. 
nt—a=S0°, nt~9=—45", @— a==135°; 
Here the total equation of the Moon 
=—301'—(76' +40’) = —301’—116’. 
This fairly agrees with Bhaskara’s observation, the difference 
being only of 4’. 
Case II. 
nt—4=270°, nt —0 = 45°, @—a= 225°; 
the total equation of the Moon 
= 301’ +76’ +40’ =301'+-116". 
This also agrees with Bhaskara’s ot servation. 
Case IIT. 
nt—a=0° or 180°, nt-—9=0° or 180°, 6—o=0° or 180°, 
the total equation=0’, this also agrees with Bhaskara's 
observation. 


Case IV, 
nt—a=90° or 270°. nt—§=0° or 180°, 6—a=90° or 270°, 





1. STRIATE, FAA Tare a | 
wt wR Uda aieat |) 20 Il 
wa atte TAIT qeatse WIE a: | 
wd wee vata asteat 21 II 
TOF BAA meee ae | 
wegen fategerfiet 11 22 1 
Start ER PETE gel ae | 
agRara-aa lett Feet | eee || 23 1) 
BI Tea ast Beez wares | 
: BRIS vakaga sareradtient 1) 24 |) 
ug anfiageastt Set ata fel 
ay ay was Nagata Taara Il 
saeatehig aatd Rat aahhs aie 25 Hh 


SRiPATI'S SECOND INEQUALITY OF THE MOON Jal 


the total equation= 3-301’. This does not agree with Bhas- 
kara’s statement that the total equation 
==F(301'£78"). 
Case V. 
nt—a=0, nt—§==E45°, 9—a=45°, 
the total equation 
=0'—76' + 40’ =—36’ or 0'+76'—40’= +36’. 
This fairly agrees with Bhaskara’s observation. 
Case VI. 
nt—a=180°, nt—@==E45°, @—a=180°245° 
the total equation 
=0'+76'+40’=0’ +116’, or 0—76+40’=0'—36”. 
This does not agree with Bhaskara’s statement. 


Bhaskara then states his first system of 24 equations corres— 
ponding to 24 sines in a quadrant to be 6’, 13’, 21’, 27’, 33’, 30,45’, 
51’, 56’, 61’, 65’, 68’, 70’, 72’, 74’, 75’, 75’, 76. 76’ 77°77, 78', 78', 
78’ 

These equations, he says—“are negatively added to the 
equation of apsis when that is negative and positively added to 
the same when that is positive’*. In other words his new equa- 
tions are complements of the equation of apsis, the two together 
being represented by 

—301' 46”. 8 sin (nt—«)—78’ sin (nt—a) 
Le. by—370" 46”. 8 sin (nt—a), 

Hence next states his second set of equations depending on 
6—D, to be 6", 9’, 13’, 17’, 22’, 24’, 27’, 30’, 32’, 33’, 34’, 34’, 34’, 33’, 
31’, 29’, 26’, 24”, 20’, 16’, 11’, 8%, 3’, 0 and says : 

“These minutes are negative in the odd quadrants of the 
argument and are positive in other quadrants.*” 

When the value of the argument is 15°, the equation is 17’, 

% as _ 45° % 34’, 
: " 90° " Of 


Ww 





1. Bijopanaya, 26-28, 
2. Het eT set | : 
ay ot weaHeT EAT I 28 | 
3, Bijopanaya, 29-32, — 
4, cen: Feat TNS ee ee aA aT EE 


122 INDIAN LUNI-SOLAR ASTRONOMY 


Hence the new equation=—34’ sin 2 (8D), 
=34' sin 2 (D—6). 

Here the symbol D stands for the Moon as corrected by the 
ancient Indian equation of apsis and its complement as given by | 
Bhaskara. It isreadily seen that Bhiaskara is the first of all the 
Indian astronomers to detect the equation known as “Variation” 
His constant, 34’, is less than the modern value by about 6', and 
cannot be considered as a serious error. 

We now see that the sum-total of the Moon’s equation as 
given dy Bhaskara 

=—379' 46"8 sin (nt—a) 4-34’ sin 2(D—@), 
the evection term being totally absent. This is a serious 
defect, and Bhaskara’s new equations would make the Moon 
generally more incorrect at the syzygies and eclipses than what 
the ancient Indian equation of apsis would do. 


Perhaps late in life when he was 69 years old in 1105 of 
Saka era (=1183 A.D.) he discovered the inapplicability of his 
new equations at the times of eclipses and in his Karana-hutt- 
hala he altogether omitted these new equations which he had 
given in his Bsjopanaya. 

As to Bhaskara’s second inequality which is really the com- 
plement of the equation of apsis without the evection term, it is 
far inferior to that of Mafjula and of Sripati: as we have seen 
their form of the second inequality combines the complement of 
the equation of apsis and evection in the mathematically cor- 
rect form. For the discovery of such a form of the equation as 
of these authors, very patient, careful and frequent observation 
must have been coupled with very careful and nice comparison 
of observed facts. 

As to “variation” it was first discovered by Abul-Wefa in 
976 A.D. which was quite forgotten when Tycho-Brahe re-dis- 

* covered it in 1580 A.D. Hence Bhaskaras in 1152 A.D., re-dis- 
covered it in India four centuries before Tycho. 


Candragekhara-of Orissa on the Moon’s Inequalities 


‘In connection with lunar inequalities it is nesefsary here 
to record what were the equations discovered or verified by 
M.M. Candragekhera Sithha of Orissa in the later half of the 
last century. He was educated in the orthodox Sanskrit fashion 


1. Godfray’s Lunar Theory, p.114, 


CANDRASEKHARA ON THE MOON'S INEQUALITIES 123 


and had no acquaintance with English education. His work 
Siddhanta-darpana was edited by Prof. Jogeschandra Ray, late of 
the Cuttack College, in 1899.1. Candragekhara in his work gives 
four equations of the Moon which are :- 


(1) The equation of apsis. 


(2) The Tungantra equation or the complement of the 
equation of apsis in combination with evection. 


(8) The fortnightly equation or variation. 


(4) The DigathSa equation or the annual equation (i. e. 74 
of the Sun’s equation). 


(5) The first equation is-of the form 
_ [31° 30'—30' cos (nt— )]3438 Xsin (nt—«) 
360° 
=-300' 497.5 sin (nt-2) +4’ 467.5 sin (nt~c) cos (nt-a«) 
=-300’ 49".5(sin nt~a) +2’ 23.25 sin 2 (nt-a) 


It is seen that Candragekhara wanted to correct the equa- 
tion of apsis to the second order of small quantities as in all the 
Indian authors from Brahmagupta but Candragekhara’s . form is 
correct though his contant is wrong. 


(2) His second equation is of the form 
160’ x 3438 sinfa— +90°)] 3438 sin(D-— 4) 
3438 ~ 3438 
Moon’s appt. daily motion? * 
Moon's mean motion 
=-160’ cos (@—2) sin (D—6) 
Moon's appt. daily motion 
Moon’s daily mean motion 
Here the constant is the same as that of Sripati discussed 
before. The symbol means the Moon as corrected by the 
equation of apsis. It isreadily seen that the constant of the 
first term of the equation of apsis is increased by 80’. and that 
the constant of evection is taken at 80’. In both the cases the 
error is about+4’. 


(3) Candragekhara’s third equation or Variation 


1; Sidahanta-darpana, V, 100-114, 
2, Ibid, V 
3. Li eee ee VI. 11-12. 


124 INDIAN LUNI-SOLAR ASTRONOMY 


where D’ means the Moon as corrected by the Ist and the 2nd 
equations. Here the constant is wrong by —1’ 18’. 


(4) His fourth equation or the annual equation 
=+,4, of the Sun’s equation of apsis,* 
1. 12x 3438 .. 
= 55 x ==5 360 ==sin (Sun’s distance from the 
apogee). 
=+11'27". 6 sin (Sun’s distance from the apogee). 


The modern value of the constant is 11710’. Tycho found 
it to be 4’ 30’. Horrocks’ (1639) co-efficient was 11’ 51”. 


As Candragekhara was aware of Bhaskara’s Bijopanava, as 
also of the work of Sripati, his merit here lies in the discovery 


of the annual equation, and correction to the constant of 
variation. 


Thus we have seen that so far as the luni-solar astronomy 
is concerned Indian astronomy is independent of Greek astronomy 
in respect of astronomical constants, that Indian astronomy is 
generally more accurate than Greek astronomy and that Indian 
astronomers were not mere “calculators’®, There were observers 
who verified and corrected the old astronomical constants as 
they came down from Aryabhata and Brahmagupta, who also 
found independently all the principal equations of the Moon. 





1, Siddhanta dacBana VI. 13, 
2. G.R, Kaye Hindu Astronomy, p. 60 


Reference 
P.C. Sengupta : The A hananad vanes 2 1934 
Karl Manitius’s edition : Syntaxis. 
Godfray F 


: Lunar Theory. 


CHAPTER VII 


Greek and Hindu 
Methods in Spherical Astronomy 


Here we shall reproduce from Sengupta’s paper a compa- 
rative account of the Greek and ancient Indian methods in 
Spherical Astronomy and to bring out the independence of the 
Indian Astronomers on this sub’ect. The views on this subject 
would necessarily differ from those of many European scholars 
such as Colebrooke and Bentley (early 19th century) to Kaye 
(early 20th century). Kaye wrote as follows inthe Journal of 
Asiatic Society of Bengal 1919, No. 3. 


The methods by which (the rules) were obtained are 
buried in obscurity. Braunmuhl* has stated “that the 
Indians were the first to utilise the method of projec- 
tion inthe Analemma-of Ptolemy.” It is intended to 
present the Hindu methods as clearly as possible and 
to show that Braunmuthl has not done sufficient justice 
to the Indian astronomers. . - 

As to Kaye, we shall show that his remark quoted above 
is due to the fact that he had to rely mostly on the English tran- 
slation of the Suryasiddhanta of Burgess, and perhaps he had no 
access to the works of Bhaskara II (1150 A.D.), who was the first 
to explain the ancient Indian methods clearly. . 

Greek and Hindu Methods in Spherical Astronomy 


Of the Greek methods in Spherical Astronomy, the 
history begins with elementary principles only from Euclid (300 
B.C.). Even in Theodosius’ Sphaerica® (about 153 B.C.) “there 
is nothing that can be called:trigonometrical.” Heath again says, 

1, Heath, Greek Mathematics, Vol. IL, p. 291. Braunmuhl, Geschichte der 


Trigonometrie, pp. 38-42, 
2, Heath, Greek Mathematics, Vol. II, p. 250, 


126 GREEK AND HINDU SPHERICAL ASTRONOMY 


“the early spheric did not deal with the geometry of the sphere as 
such, still less did it contain anything of the nature of the spheri- 
cal trigonometry. (This deficiency was afterwards made good by 
Menelaus’s Sphaerica).1 Hence the Greek spherical trigonometry 
began with Menelaus (90 A.D.). His theorem in geometry is 
well-known—"If the sides of a plane triangle be cut by a trans- 
versal into six segments, the continued product ofany three 
alternate segments, isequalto the continued product of the 
remaining three.’ From this proposition he deduced the so- 
called “regula sex quantitatum” or the theorem, if the sides of a 
spherical triangle be cut by an arc of a great circle into six 
segments, the continued product of the chords of the doubles of 
any three alternate segments is equal to the continued product 
of the chords of doubles of the remaining three segments.” In 
plane geometry if the sides BC, CA, AB of a triangle be cut by 
any transversal at L, M,N, respectively, L 

then we have 


BL CM AN - M 
LC MA‘ NB” 
In spherics the theorem is: Cc N 


Chord 2BL Chord 2CM 

Chord 2 LC ° Chord 2 MA * 
Chord 2 AN _ - 
Chord 2 NB 

Both these theorems are proved in A 
Ptolemy’s Syntaxis ( Karl Manitius’s ste ; Fig, 5 
tion, Vol. I, pp. 45-51). 

If R be the radius of the sphere on which the spherical 
triangle ABC is constructed, then the chord of the arc 2 BL= 
2 Rsin BL. Hence Menelaus’s theorem in spherics may be expres- 
sed as follows : 

SinBL SinCM Sin AN 
Sin LC * Sin MA * Sin NB7E 

This theorem is true for any spherical triangle. 

If 2B=AN=AM=90° and L the pole of AB, then LMN 
isasecondary tothe arc AB. There are four arcs of great 

_ citcles; taking any three as forming a spherical triangle and the 
fourth as the transversal we readily get for the right-angled 
1. A.A. Bjornbo, “Studien Uber Menelaos® Spharik”’ in Abhandlun- 


gen Zur Geschichte der Mathematischen Wi 
seq.; also Heath, Greek Mathematics, vol, II ae i Lae 





GREEK METHODS IN SPHERICAL ASTRONOMY 127 


triangle ABC, the relations :-- 
(i) sin a=sin b sin A 
Gi) sin c=tan a cot A 
(iii) cos b=cos a cos c 
(iv) tanc=tan bcos A” 


The above are some of the Napier’s rules for a right-angled 
spherical triangle, deducible from Menelaus’s theorem’, They 
are generally sufficient in the case of such triangles. In any 
spherical triangle, however, this theorem of Menelaus does not 
in any single step leadto any of the equivalents of the time- 
altitude or altazimuth equations in spherical astronomy. The 
ancient Indian methods, though none of them are so) highly 
finishe1 as Menelaus’s theorem, yet are not less powerful in 
tackling the problems that arise in astronothy in connection 
with the apparent diurnal motion of the héavens. The Greek 
or Ptolemaic method presents no further points of interest except 
initsapplication. Wenow proceed to illustrate the ancient 
Indian methods and shall refer to the Ptolemaic method as 
occasion, arises. , 


Ancient Indian Methods 
in Spherical Astronomy 


In the Indian methods there is no general rule to follow. 
It is by properties of similar right-angled triangles that a fairly 
complete set of accurate formulae are obtained. These right- 
angled plane triangles are classified under the names,—‘Kranti- 
ksetras’ (triangles of declination) and ‘Aksa-ksetras’ (triangles of 
latitude). We consider the following problems :— 
Problem :- To find the time of rising on the equator ofa 
length /, of arc of the ecliptic measured from the 
first point of Aries. 


Let © be the obliquity of the ecliptic and R.A. the right 
ascension corresponding to the longitude /, and 8 the correspond- 
ing declination. The Indian form of the equation is: 





1, Three more can be deduced similarly, namely, 
(v) sin c=sin b sin C 
(vi) sin a=tan ¢ cot C 
(vii) tan a=cos C tan b. 





128 GREEK AND HINDU METHODS 


R sin 1xRsine 


*R sin RA= Rees! where R is the radius of 


the sphere. 
Note:— If R be the radius of the circle of reference, the 
Indian trigonometrical functions for the arc 6, are 
(1) the ‘sine,’ (2) the ‘cosine’ and (3) the versed 
sine. They are respectively equal to Rsin 6, 
R cos @ and R vers @. 


In the adjoining figure, O is P 
the centre of the armillary 
sphere, YQ.YC are quadrants of 
the equator and the ecliptic, 
espectively. Pis the celestial 
pole, PCQ the summer  solsti- 
tial colure. Join OY, CQ, OP 
and OC, 

Let YS be=l, YM=R.A,, 
CQ= ZSYM—«4, SM=3. 

Join OS, OM. PSM is the 
secondary to the equator, Fig. 6 





From C draw CK perpendicular to OQ. From S draw Sm 
and Sn perpendicular to OM and OY, respectively. Join MN 
and from M draw MN perpendicular to OY. 

Then the triangles Smn and CKO are similar. They are 
called ‘Kranti-ksetras or declination triangles,—similar right- 
angled triangles having one acute angle=o. 


-.  Sm:Sn=CK:0C 
or Resin’: Rsinl=Rsin o :R 


-, s_RsinlxXR sino 
R gan SO sorse(T) 





The Aryabhatt ya, Gola, 25, Varthamihiza, in the Paficasiddhantika - 
(IV. 92) states it in the form 2R 4/ (RE ‘Sin 2)—R? Sin 2 
2Rcos§ 
“=RSin R.A, which is evident from figure, Brahmagupta's 


ea org identical with that of Aryabhata, (@BrSpSi. IT, 15, Strya-siddhanta 


_ Also Bhaskara IZ, Grahaganita cap, VII t: is i 
er eens ua » Stanzas 54-55, is in agreement 


TIME OF RISING 129 


Greek Method 
In the same figure’ let PSC be the triangle and YMQ be 
the transversal. Then Menelaus’s theorem gives 
sin PM, sin SY. sin CQO_4 
sin MS” sin YC” sin QP 





1 snl , sin® _ 
Of gas ae 
or sin §=sin 1Xsin ©. 
Indian Method 


Again by the Indian method from the same two simi- 
lar triangles we get 
mn: nS=OK : OC 
or, mn:Rsinl=Rcose:R 
R sin 1XR cos ® 
mn we 

Again MN : mn=OM : Om 

i.e. Rsin R. A.: mm=R: Roos 8 


. _ RsinIxR cos o 
Rsin R.A= aces anos a 


Greek Method 
- Take PQM for the triangle and YSC for the transversal. 
sin PC. sin QY. sin MS __ 
Then, ain CO sinYM* sin SP 2 


Be cos ® 1 sin § 1 
sin @ sin R.A” cos § 


or sin R.A.=tan 6 cot @, . 
The Indian form of the equation is different from that of 


Ptolemy’s. It is also better for the purpose of calculation. 
Note :—From the same two similar triangles we have 
On: ON=R cos8;R 


On: Ros p—Rcos RA. XR cost sevese(3) 
Again, tan R.A.= ue 
on 
_R sin XR cose 
= RXR cos ssasee(4) 


Again, mn: Sn=OK : KC 
1, Manitius’ Edition of Syntaxis, I, 51-53, 


130 GREEK AND INDIAN METHODS 


_ Rsin§ XR cose 


RStN R  _RsindSxR 
; . _MN vs sind X KR cos® 
ar R sin R. A= Wn x a aa 8 cos} Rsin ® 


Problem II :— 


Indian Method 


The problem discussed above rzovides the method of find- 
ing the sidereal time-intervals in which the signs of tke codirc 
rise on the equator. To find the ‘corresponding times at any 
latitude ¢, it is necessary to calculate and apply what is the 
ascensional difference due to the elevation of the celestial pole. 
This ascensional difference is called ‘carakala’ or the variation in 
the length of half the day. The ‘sine’ of this ‘carakala’ is called 
‘carajya.’ Tt ch denotes this ‘carakala,’ 


LR Sin cha SineXR sin 3XR 
then,’ R. Sin ch R cos $XR cos 8 


Just as in the solution of the previous problem, the dec- 
. linational triangles or ‘Kranti .Ksetras’ were constructed and 
used, so in the solution of this and other problems another set 
of similar triangles were conceived and constructed and were 
given the name ‘Absa ksetras. 
Let NPZH be the meri- 
dian (Fig.7), NOH the north- 
south line passing through 
the observer O.P the celestial 
pole. OQ the trace of the 
equator on the meridian 
plane, Z the zenith. Join OZ. 
From Q draw QM _ perpendi- 
cular to OZ. Then the 
triangle QOM is an ‘Aksa- 
ksetra’ or a latitudinal right- 
angled triangle, as 7QOM= 
¢, the latitude of the station. ; 
Another ‘Aksabksetra’ is thus . ue 
conceived, in the sam 7 4 
south celestial poles, N, a oak cater on ee ‘he py 


1, Aryabhatiya, Gola, 26; Paiica-siddhantiba, IV, 34: B 
IL, 57-58; Strya-siddhanta, TL 91; Grahaganita, Vill wae 


7 : Bhaskara, Goladhsaya { Wilkinson and Bepudeva Sastri’s tr, ) PP, 173-76; 


or 


(5) 





Sidereal Time-intervals 





also, ara, Grabaganita, Ch, IX 


SIDEREAL TIME-INTERV ALS 131 


circle of a heavenly body with declination 8, NEHW the 
horizon, PEP’ W the six O’ clock circle. Here AA’ the line of 
intersection of the diurnal circle with the horizonis called the 
“udayasta-sutra’ (or the thread joining the rising and setting 
points). SS’ the line of interesection of the diurnal circle and 
the six o’ clock circle, is the horizontal diameter of the diurnal 
circle. From S draw SK and SL perpendiculars respectively to 
AA! and EW. Join KL. 


Now since PN=¢, the latitude of the station. in the smail 
right-angled triangle KLS, the Z KLS is also=¢. 


SK : SL=QM : MO 
SLXQM_Rsin$xRsin¢ 
ta SK= ae 7 Reosd 

Now SK? is a “sine” in the small circle AB A’B’ of which 
the radius is R cos $; this “sine” reduced to the equator (radius R) 
is the ‘sine’ of cara. 

R sin ch=R sin EPA 
—Rsin 6xRsin ¢xR 
R cos $Xcosé 
Greek Method : 

Let® the arc PA be produced to meet the equator at C. 
Take PCQ’ for the triangle and EAN for the transversal. Then 
we get, ; 
sin PA... sin CE sia Q'N _ 1 
sin Ac” sin EQ’ sin NP 
cos § sin CE CE 608 cos$ _ 
sin a el 7 ee ann sing 
sin ¢Xsin § 
cos $X cos 8" 

Note—The perpendicular distance between AA’ and Ew is 
called the ‘sine’ of the amplitude or the ‘Agra’ which is thus 
calculated :— 

KL: LS=Q0:OM 
a ‘R sin amplitude=‘Agra’=KL 











or 


sin CE=sin ch= 


_LSxQO —RsinéxR 
OM R cos 


It is now evident that the ancient Indian method is different 





1. Bh&skara, Gola, VII, 39, 

2. This is called by the name ‘kujya’ or ‘hsitijya’. i, e., earth-sine. Aryabhata, 
. Gola, 26, Pearmaguet, II, 57, Strya-siddhanta, UL, 61 etc, 

3. Manitius, ibid, p. 8 

4, Aryabhata, Gola. 30, “ete, 


132 GREEK AND INDIAN METHODS 


from the Greek method in this case also. As the triangle KLS 
is difficult to show in the diagram, it is shown in its projection on 
the meridian plane in Burgess’s translation of the “Sdarya- 
siddhanta,”(page 232)and also in Wilkinson and Bapadeva Sastri’s 
translation of the ‘Siddhanta Siromani,’ p. 175. This has led 
Braunmuhl to assume that the Indian method of arriving at the 
equation of ascensional difference and some other equations of 
spherical astronomy has its origin in the Analemma of Ptolemy. 
A careful study, however, does not justify the identification ‘of 
Indian methods with the graphic method of the Analemma, 
which is deduced from the projections of the position of a heav- 
enly body on the meridian prime vertical and the horizon. It is 
being presently shown that what wasdone out of difficulty in 
drawing the figures properly has been taken by Braunmuhl as a 
Greek connection. 
Problem III’ :— 
To find the “Time-altitude” Equation 


If from any point S on the diurnal circle a perpendicular 
. bedrawn to the Udyasta-Sutra spoken of. before, this perpendi- 
cular is called the cheda or ‘istahyti.. The perpendicular from S 
on the horizon is called ‘Sanku’® the sine of the altitude. The 
line joining the foot of the ‘Sanku’ and that of the perpendicular 
on the ‘Udayasta-Sutra’ goes by the name of ‘Sankutala’ and this 
Sankutala lies to the south of the ‘Udayasta-Sutra’ during the day. 


In t his figure (Fig 8) if AA’ be the ‘Udayasta-Sutra’ or the 
intersection of the diurnal circle and the horizon, and S a point 
on the diurnal circle denoting a position of the Sun, SK, SL 
perpendiculars on AA’ and the horizon respectively; SL is called 
the ‘Sanku, SK the ‘cheda’ and LK, the ‘Sankutala’. In this 


triangle KSL, the angle KSL was recognised to be the latitude of 
the station. , 


Thus the triangle SKL is not taken in its projection on the 
meridian plane. The side SK is taken 'as formed of two parts. 





“1, Aryabhata could not arrive at the true equation, Cf, Gola 28. The correct 
‘tules occur in Paficasiddhantika, IV, 42, 44; Brahmasphutasiddhanta, III, 
36-36, 26-40 ; Stiryasiddhanta, Ill, 34-35. re 


2, Bhaskara says : SEMA: ig: | TeMMERATRTTATRA wa I 
“Gola, VIUI-39-41, Aryabhata uses the term Teer? Gola 29 


TIME-ALTITUDE EQUATION 133 


Let CC’ be the line of inter- 
section of the diurnal circle 
and the ‘six o'clock ‘circle 
EPW. Let SK cut CC’ in 
M. Then. 


SK=SM+MK 


Here SM, the ‘sine’ in 
the diurnal circle of the 
co-uplement of the hour angle 
is given a distinct name 
‘Kala’: and MK as explained 

Fig. 8 before is known by the name 
‘Kujya. This ‘Kala’ is constructed from the point S in the diurnal 
circle. Thus the triangles like SKL were not taken in their 
projections on the meridian plane as Braunmtihl would suggest. 





From the triangle KSK, we get, 

‘Cheda’ : ‘Sanku’=R: R cos ¢ where ¢ is the latitude of the 
observer: 

‘Sanku’ is here=R cos Z, Z being fhe Sun’s zenith distance. 

‘cheda’ =*& cosZXR 

R cos ¢ 

Now ‘Cheda’=radius of the diurnal circle+Kujya—versed 
sine of the hour-angle in the diurnal circle 0’ B+O’ V—BR, 
Rsin 8xRsin ¢? Rvers HXR cosd 


_=R cos 8+ =p cos ¢ - R 
As in the previous problem, Kujya=Sx—=S So 8xRsin$ 


RcosZXR_R cos 8 RsindxRsing « 
R cos ¢ R | et Ros ¢ 


R 
K R cos 6 
The above equation simplified becomes 
cos Z=sin$ sin $-+cos § cos $ cos H. 


2R vere Hi i 


In this connection we consider the altazimuth equation _by 
the Indian method. 


1. Bhaskara’s Grahaganita, VIII, 55. 


O' is the middle point of CC’ or it is the centre of the diurnal circle 
ABB’, ” 


134 GREEK AND INDIAN METHODS 


- 4pyoblem IV :— 
The Altazimuth Equation 
Indiad Method 
Let « denote the azimuth of the Sun from the south. In 
the same triangle SKL in the same figure, we have. 
LK: SL=R sin $: Rcos¢ 
or,  ‘Sankuatala’ : ‘Sanku’=R sin™d: R cos ¢ 
‘Sankutala’= Ricos ZXR sin § -_ = ; sin § 

Now ‘Sankutala’ is made up of two parts, namely, ‘Bahu’ 
and ‘Agra,’ of which the former is the distance of L from the 
observer's East-West line; the ‘Agra’ has been already found. 

Pete ‘Bahu sin a COs & _Rsin &XR 


and Agra ae cos G 
‘Sankutala’ ='‘Bahu' +'Agra’ 
RcosZXRsin $_Rsin ZXReosa, RsinsxR 


7 Ros $ R R cos $ 
_. Reos$ (ReosZxRsin ¢ RsinZxR cosa 
or Rsins="—R Ros ¢ $ ) 


which is easily seen to be equivalent to 
sin §=cos Z sin ¢—sin Z cos $, cos & 
Greek Method 


Ptolemy? has also a method of finding the Sun’s altitude at 
any hour of the day. His method is as follows :~ 


Zz 

c (i) Hewould find by 
means of his tables for the 
times of risings of the signs of 
the zodiac, the orient ecliptic 
point. (ii) He would then 
find the culminating point of 
the ecliptic. (iii) He would 
finally apply Menelaus’s 
theorem in spherics thus :— 


Let ASC be any position 
«Fig. 9 of the ecliptic,(Fig, 9)NZC the 


1, The equivalent of this. ina particular case, is first found in Brahma, 
sphutasiddhante, Ch, IT, 54-56 Cf, Stryasiddhanta, III, 28-31, also 
Bhiskara Grahaganita, IX, 50-52, 


2, Manitius, ibid, pp, 118, 19. 


PTOLEMY’S ANALEMMA 135 


meridian, NAMH the horizon, Z, the zenith and S the Sun. 
Here the celestial longitudes cf C, Sand Aare taken to be 
known; hence ZC and CH are also known. 


Now take ZCS for the triangle and HMA to be the trans- 
versal ; we then have by Menelaus’s theorem. 
sin ZH sin CA, sin SM _ 
sin HC“sin AS sin MZ 
cos CZ Xsin AS 
sin CA 
It isthus clear that Ptolemy had no direct method for 
connecting the Sun’s altitude and the hour-angle. This method 
is workable for the problem “given time, find the altitude” but 
is not workable in the converse problem: besides, the calcula- 
tion of the longitudes of A and C is very cumbrous. 








d 


or sin SM= 


Again, when EA has been found out, taking ZH™M for the 
triangle and CSA for the transversal, we get, 
ae a xe in = 1, whence and thence HIM: 
the azimuth can be found. The method is here also cumbrous, 
there being no direct connection between altitude and azimuth ; 
besides the time-element is not avoided. 





The Analemma of Ptolemy 
and the Indian Method. 
When thé Sun’s declination is zero and his hour-angle, is 
H, Zeuthen? following the method of the ‘Analemma’ of 
’ Ptolemy, as explained by Braunmuhl® has deduced the following 
equations : 
(1) cos Z=cos H. cos $ 
_tan H 
(2) tan ora G 
To these two, Heath following Braunmuhl, adds 


(3) tanZO mae 








1, Heath, Greek Mathematics, Vol. II. pp, 290-91, 
Zeauthen, Bibliotheca Mathematica, 13, 1900, pp, 23-27, 
2. Braunmuhl , ibid, pp, 12-13, 


3, The Indian form of this equatiom is R Sin ZQ =-__RSinHXR 
V/ R2- R2cotH XR? Sin?h 
R ; 
Bhaskara’s, Goladhyaya, Com, on VIII, 67. 


136 GREEK AND INDIAN METHODS 


where Z is the zenith and Q is the point of intersection of the 
prime vertical andits secondary passing through the Sun and 
the north-south points. 

Zeuthen! points out that later in the same treatise Ptolemy 
finds the arc 28 described above the horizon by a_ star of given 
declination 8’ by a procedure equivalent to the formula. 

(4) cos 8=tan 8’ tan ¢. 

With regard tothe ‘Analemma’ of Ptolemy. it may be 
noted, as Heath? says, that “the procedure amounts to a 
method of graphically constructing the arcs required as parts of 
an auxiliary circle in one plane.” Many thi1gs may be, in 
practice, done graphically far more easily than by the theoreti- 
cal method. Besides, no theoretical calculations occur in the 
‘Analemma’. Zeuthen?, following the method of this work, has 
deduced in the general case, the two equations. 

(5) cos Z=(cos 8, cos H+sin 8. tan ¢) cos ¢. 
cos §.sin H 


spt (cos s.cos H+sin 8.tan ¢) sin $ 


These eases, are suggested toa modern reader from a 
study of the figures in the ‘Analemma.’ But neither in this work 
nor in the ‘Syntaxis’ are they to be found. With regard to the 
first four formulae, it is possible that they were recognised by 
Ptolemy. With regard to the last two, Zeuthen® remarks ‘‘mais 
le texte nen contient rien,’ and they were certainly not recog- 
nised by Ptolemy. 

Besides the tangent function is wholly absent in Greek 
trigonometry. They are also different in form from those arrived 

_at by the Indian method as explained before. Thus, it is clear 
that the Indian methods are in no way connected with the 
method of the ‘Analemma.’ 

Even taking for granted that the Indians followed a method 
of projection much allied to the method of the Analemma’ there 
is no adequate reason for assuming that their method - is derived 
from any Greek source. Analogy and precedence do not neces- 
sarily constitute originality—there is still the chance of a remoter 
origin from which both the systems drew their inspiration. The 
method of the ‘Analemma,’ as has been already stated, Presents a 


1, 2, Rjornbo, loc, cit, p, 86. 
3, Zeuthen, loc, cit. p. 27, 


(6) tan a= aa 





ANGLE BETWEEN ECLIPTIC AND MERIDIAN 137 


graphical method for constructing the Sun's altitude and azimuth 
from the hour angle when the Sun’s declination is zero but such 
a graphical method is generally complex as compared with the 
elegant Indian method. An astronomer who constructs and uses 
an armillary sphere to arrive at his equations in spherical astro- 
nomy and who has not a well-developed spherical astronomy at 
his command must have to draw perpendiculars from the positions 
of the heavenly body; not only on the meridian plane, the hori- 
zon or on the prime vertical, asthe occasion arises, but also on 
the line of intersection of the diurnal circle with the horizon. 
Hence Braunmiihl’s statement that the Indian methods of spheri- 
cal astronomy have their origin in the ‘Analemma’s, in spite of 
his admitting that Indians were first to utilise its methods, is rather 
far-fetched and tends to take away the honour from the great 
Indian astronomers, who devised the beautiful methods. The 
‘Analemma’ as it now exists is a Latin translation from an Arabic 
version of the original Greek'. We may reasonably doubt that the 
Arabic version was greatly influenced by the ancient Indian system. 
We now pass on to the consideration of other allied or 
similar problems in the two systems of astronomy. 
Problem YV— 
To find the Angle between the Ecliptic and the Meridian 


Indian Method* 


Let YSA be thee cliptic, YCE 
the equator, E the east-point of 
the horizon (Fig 10). Cut off 
SH=90° and draw the great 
circle HEAP’ cutting the meri- 
dian P’SCH at the points P’ and 
H. The aim isto find AP’ but 
it is enough to find EA since AP’ 
is the complement of EA’. 


Both Aryabhata and 
Brahmagupta were unable to 
find EA correctly. Let P be the 
Fig. 10 celestial pole and let PAE’ be 


1. On the influence of the ancient Indians on Arab mathematics and 
astronomy; see Alberuni's India, translated by Dr. E, Sachau, Vol. I, p. 304, 

2, Aryabhata, Gola, 45; BrSpSi, IV.17; Stérya-siddhanta, IV, 25; Bhas- 
kara’s Goladhyaya, VIII, 21-74, first example in his own commentary, 








138 GREEK AND INDIAN METHODS 


the secondary to the equator cutting it at E’. Both the above 
astronomers were content with the idea that AE=AE’, or that 
AE=the declination of the point A of the ecliptic which is 90° 
ahead of S inthe above figure. This idea continued till the 
time of Bhaskara II (1150 A.D.) who found out the correct 
equation. 


He recognised that CS, the declination of S=PP’; P’EH is 
then the horizon of the station whose north geographical latitude 
isCS. Also, the ‘sine’of EAis the ‘Agra’ or the sine of the 
amplitude of the point A for the latitude CS. 

ae _Rsin AE’XR_ Resin 90°+YS)xR sin © 
..Rsin EA=—3- oes oo Re 


*R cos CS 
or Rin FA== sin (0° +) XR sin @ 
Rcos 8 
where] stands for YS and 8 for CS. 
Greek Method : 


We give below the Ptolemy’s method in a slightly modified 
form’. LetSHA be the triangle and YCE be the transversal ; 
then we have, 

sin SC sin HE sin AY 

sinCH*sin EA sin YS 

sin § sin 90° sin QO'+)_, 
cos8sin EA™ sine 
- sin E Aasin 5xXsin (90°+D 
coséXsinI ’ 
which is readily transformed into Bhaskara’s equation. The 
originality of Bhaskara would te readily admitted. 





Problem VI— 
To - the Angle between the 
, cliptic and the Horri 
Indian Method : ptic and the Horrizon 


(A) Aryabhata’s method: It consists of the following? 
steps :— 

(1) Determination of the orient point of ecliptic. 

(2) Finding the sine of its amplitude. 


i, Manitius, ibid, Book I, pp, 104-06, 
| 2 Aryabhata, Gole, 33 : Stryasiddhanta, V. 5.6, 


ANGLE BETWEEN ECLIPTIC AND HORIZON 139 


(3) Determination of the culminating point of the ecliptic 
from the hour-angle of the Sun. 

(4) Findiag the declination of the culminating point of the 
ecliptic. © 


Having obtained the above elements, his rule can be follow- 
ed thus: 

In this Fig. 11 NZH is the meridian, HMEAN the horizon, 
CN’A the ecliptic. If N’ be the nonagesimal or the highest point 
of the ecliptic, the altitude of N’ is the inclination of the ecliptic 
to the horizon. 


Let ZN’M be the vertical 
through N’, meeting the horizon 
at M. 


When the time is given, the 
longitudes of A and C can be 
found out, from which CZ the 
zenith distance of C and EA the 
amplitude of the orient ecliptic 
point can be determined. 





Fig. 11 
Here HM=EA. 
According to Aryabhata, 
Resin CN’=Esin CZXR sin HM 


and Rsin ZN’=V(R sin CZ)*—(R sin CN’)? 
This is only an approximate rule. As expressed here, 


; : H 

R sin zN'=k sin, CZ cos HM 
IR sin CZ XR cos HMxR 

=: RxRcosCN 

_ Rsin CZXRcos HM 

= R cos CN’ . 


(B) The method of Brahmagupta?: 
Brahmagupta would also first determine the orient ecliptic 


1, This correction was perhaps first noticed by Ranhganatha (1603 A. D,) 
in his commentary in the Stiryasiddhanta. 


_ 2, BrSpSi. V 3. 


approximately, 


accurately. 


140 GREEK AND INDIAN METHODS 


point A. Then he subtracts 90° from the longitude of A. Thus 
having the longitude of N’, he next finds the part of the day 
elapsed of N’ ; from which by the time-altitude equation discussed 
above, he finds ZN’. This is of course more agturate than that of 
Aryabhata. Bhaskara’ here follows Brahmagupta. 

Greek Method : 


Let the ecliptic CN’A cut the lower half of the meridian at 
F. Ptolemy takes AK along the ecliptic=90° and AR along the 
horizon=90°; then the great circle passing through R and K passes 
through the nadir Z’. Now take Z’FK tor the triangle and ANR 
for the transversal, then by Menelaus's theorem? 
sin FN Sin ZR, sin KA =I 
sin NZ“ sin RK “sin AF 
ae _sin FN cosFZ'_cos CZ sin CH 
oy SRE AE aa AC si AC an AC 
,_sin_CH 
sin AC 
Here Ptolemy's equation is simpler than that of Aryabhata: 
hence they must be independent of each other. 








or sin MN 


a Problem VIT:— 


To find the Angle made by the 
Vertical through any Point of the 
Ecliptic with the Latter 


This problem is considered 
by Ptolemy but it is not consider- 
ed separately in Indiam Astronomy, 
but from the rule for parallax in 
longitude. the rule for its calcula- 
tion can be deduced. 





Fig. 12 


Indian Method : 


In Fig.12 S_ represents the true position of the 
Sun and S’ the Sun's position as depressed Ly parallax, N’SA is 
the ecliptic. If from 8’, S’Q be drawn perpendicular to the ecli- 
ptic, then, if P is the horizontal parallax, 
re mere cre 
2. Manitius, iid, pp, 110-111. 


ANGLE MADE BY THE VERTICAT, ti 


,Reos SSQ PXRsin ZS R cos SS) 
SSK RR 

Fi aap ee 

=R V(R sin ZS (R sin IN) 

t= rx Rsin N'SxXR cos ZN’. where Nois the mos ctessad 


Thus R cos 8/SQ is seen to be 
Rsin N'SXR cos ZN 
— R sin ZS 

The Indian method is fully desersbed Tv Blachast rates 
‘Goladhyaya. VILL 12-25. The truth of the Tndsan rude na Kove 
S’SQ is easily seen from the spherical triangle ALLS. whisper Ar. 
the pole of the ecliptic. 
Greek Method : 


8Ptolemy takes SK and SL. 90° wach, ctbeag the vertuad 
circle ZSEK and the ecliptic N’SA. ‘The great circle thromigh k 
and L cutsthe horizon at Rwhich isthe pole of the vertieal 
circle. He takes SKL for the triangle and BAR for the trans 
versal, then 
sin SE sin KR sin LA. 
sin EK *sin LR”sin AS” 
or sin Reece ae 
i sin ZSxsin AS 


or cosS’SQ=cot ZS xcot AStan SE x car AS, 


The Indian and the Greek rulesare altogether different 
both in form and method. There can, thercfore, he no queaten 
of any connection between them. 


Problem VIII :-— 
To convert the Celestial Longitude of » Heavenly 
Body inte its Polar Longliude 
If o be the position of a (Fig.13),YK and @K are the celestial 
longitude and the celestial latitude, respectively; YM ound ¢M 
are the polar longitude and polar latitude: YN and eV are the 
right ascension and declination of the stur, 
Indian Method : 


All Indian astronomers attempt at finding MK which, sule- 


1, Aryabhata, Gola, 34; Pattcasiddhantika, 1X, 22 BySpSi, XI, 23, 


2. BrSpSi, V, 4-5 ; Stirvasiddhanta, V, 7-8 Dhaak ; 
ie ara, Grahadania, KU, 4, 


1 


140 ‘ GREEK AND INDIAN METHODS 


point A. Then he subtracts 90° from the longitude of A. Thus 
having the longitude of N’, he next finds the part of the day 
elapsed of N’ ; from which by the time-altitude equation discussed 
above, he finds ZN’. This is of course more ageurate than that of 
Aryabhata. Bhaskara’ here follows Brahmagupta. 


Greek Method : 


Let the ecliptic CN’A cut the lower half of the meridian at 
F. Ptolemy takes AK along the ecliptic=90° and AR along the 
horizon=90°; then the great circle passing through R and K passes 
through the nadir Z’. Now take Z’FK for the triangle and ANR 
for the transversal, then by Menelaus’s theorem.” 
sin FN yin. ZR, sin KA i 
sin NZ’ sin RK “sin AF 
at _sin FN cosFZ’_cos CZ sin CH 
Soe Ro AF sin AC sin AC sin AC 
: ,_sin CH 
or sin MN TA 
Here Ptolemy's equation is simpler than that of Aryabhata: 
hence they must be independent of each other. 











Problem VII:— 


To find the Angle made by the 
Vertical through any Point of the 
Ecliptic with the Latter 


This problem is considered 
by Ptolemy but it is not consider- 
ed separately in Indian Astronomy, 
but from the rule for parallax in 
longitude, the rule for its calcula- 
tion can be deduced. 





Fig. 12 
Indian Method: 


In Fig.12 S represents the true position of the 
Sun and S’ the Sun's position as depressed by parallax. N’SA is 
the ecliptic. If from 5’, 8’Q be drawn perpendicular to the ecli- 





ptic, then, if P is the horizontal parallax, 


1 Grahaganita; XII, 3-4. 
2. Manitius, ibid, pp, 110-111. 


ANGLE MADE BY THE VERTICAL 141 


mcoy Roos S'SQ PxRsin ZS_R cos S'SQ 
SQ=SS ne = R x rR 


ae en 
R V(Rsin ZS?—(R sin ZN’? 
= ux Rsin N’SxR cos ZN’, where N’ is the nonagesimal. 


Thus R cos 5‘SQ is seen to be 
_Rsin N’'SxRcos_ ZN’ 
_ R.sin ZS 
The Indian method is fully described by Bhaskara in his 
‘Goladhyaya. VIII, 12-25. The truth of the Indian rule for R cos 
3'SQ is easily seen from the spherical triangle AZS, where JA is 
the pole of the ecliptic, 
Greek Method : 


’Ptolemy takes SK and SL=90° each, along the vertical 
circle ZSEK and the ecliptic N‘SA. The great circle through K 
and L cutsthe horizon at R which isthe pole of the vertical 
circle. He takes SKL for the triangle and EAR for the trans- 
versal, then 

sin SE sin KR sin LA _ 

sin EK” sin LR™*sin AS 
cos ZSxcos AS 
sin ZSXsin AS 
or cosS’/SQ=cot ZS xcot AS=tan SEXcot AS, 


The Indian and the Greek rulesare altogether different 
both in form and method. There can, therefore, be no question 
of any connection between them. 

Problem VIII :-— 


To convert the Celestial Longitude of a Heavenly 
Body into its Polar Longitude 
If ¢ be the position of a (Fig.13),YK and oK are the celestial 
longitude and the celestial latitude. respectively; YM and oM 
are the polar longitude and polar latitude; YN and oV are the : 
right ascension and declination of the star. 
Indian Method : 
All Indian astronomers attempt at finding MK which, sub- 
1, Aryabhata, Gola, 34; Pattcasiddhantika, IX, 22 BrSpSi, XI, 23, 


2. BrSpSi. V, 4-5 ; Siryasiddhanta, V, 7-8 Bhaskara, Grahaganita, XII, 4, 
3. Manitius, ibid, p. 119, 


2 





1 


or sin LR= 


142 GREEK AND INDIAN METHODS 


tracted from, or added to, YK the celestial longitude, gives YM 
the polar longitude. 

According to Aryabhata’, 

MK =2KXR vers YVK XR sin o 


Brahmagupta? makes a dis- 
tinct improvement on Aryabhata 
and gives his rule for finding the 
projection MK on the celestial 
equator. 


If P be the celestial pole, PKH 
the secondary to the equator, 
Brahmagupta says that, 





Fig- 13 
oKXR sin (YVK+909 XR sin © 
R 


NH= 


If from 0, oR is drawn perpendicular to PKH, it is evident 
that, 

Rano es sin 0 ae sin 7 KR 

According to Aryabhata and Brahmagupta, as explained 
before, ; F ; 

Rsin oKR= R sin vet )XR_ sin 


Hence Brahmagupta intends that, 
NH=oR= GK Xx Ran oKR 


which is rather a big assumption. He then directs the finding of 
the part of the ecliptic of which OR or NH is the projection on 
the equator thus approximately to MK. 


Aryabhata, Brahmagupta® and the modern Saryasiddhanta 
take the declination GN=7K+KH where oK is small. They 
do not consider the case where OK is large. 


Bhaskara alone gives us fairly correct tules for this trans- — 
formation of co-ordinates. 
1, Aryabhata, Gola, 36, 


2 BrSpSi X, 17. 
3. BrSpSi, X. 15, Stryasiddhanta, I, 58. 


CELESTIAL AND POLAR LONGITUDE 143 


In order to find GN, he would multiply 
oK by® cos oKP 


R ; according to him, 
oN=—7RXR cos CRP KH 


Thisis a decided improvement on Brahmagupta’s corres- 
ponding rule. The declination ¢N obtained would be very 
nearly accurate. 


Having obtained oN, Bhaskara” then directs the finding of 
NH: thus, 


eKXR sin sKP 
DD" Riese aN. 

He then directs the finding of MK on the ecliptic of which 

NH is the projection by means of the times of rising of the signs 
of the zodiac on the equator. 


Thus, the Indian methods show a beginning and develop- 
ment only. The Greek method as given by Ptolemy is mathe- 
matically accurate. 


Greek Method® 


To transform the celestial longitude and celestial latitude to 
right ascension and declination. 

Let the great circle A°K meet the equator at 4. Ptolemy 
would then from the given value of YK. fnd YA and AKj by 
using his tables for the rising of signs of the zodiac on the equa- 
tor. He then takes MPo for the triangle and YN4 Q for the 
transversal. The Menelaus’ Equation, then, is 

sin AQ. sin PN | sin GA 32 

sin QP‘“sin Ne“sin AA 
Here ANQ=90°+, QP=90°, PN=90°; cA=cK+K 4. 
RA=90°+K A, whence Ne is obtained. 

He next takes PNQ for the triangle and “oA for the trans- 
versal, 

' , sin PA sin QA sin No _ 

** sin nQ*sin AN “sin oP 
Here PA=0, AQ=90°+0, QA=90°—YA. 

Hence the above equation giveshim AN. Now, 

YN=Y 4— AN, 
1, Bhaskara, Grahaganita XIII, 3. 
2, Ibid, XIII, 4, 
3. Manitius, Ibid, Vol, II. Achtes Buch, pp, 84-85, 





144 GREEK AND INDIAN METHODS 


Tt is almost needless to say that neither in the method nor 
in therulesis there any agreement between the Indian and 
Greek spherical astronomy in the solution of this problem. 

Kaye’s view? 

As to Kaye, it appears that he hasnot been able to find a 
method in the translation of the Sayrasiddhanta by Burgess. The 
figures of his paper referred to before do not show the “Aksakset- 
ras” even in their projections on the meridian place. He refers 
to Braunmuhl’s History of Trigonometry but does not appear to 
have been able tofollow him in his “Methode der indischen 
Trigonometrie.” Kaye, however, is not slow in belittling Indian 
trigonometry when he says :—The Indian astronomers employed 
the sine function principally and the versed sine occasionally ; 
they never employed the tangent function; and generally, but not 
always, preferred to employ the sine of the complementary angle 
rather than the cosine functions.” 

It is evident that Kaye 
never understood the meaning 
of the Indian functions of 
‘sine’ and ‘cosine.’ These 
functions are fully explained 
by Bhaskara* when he 
says :—— ; 


“Of that point the dis- 
tance from the east-west line 
is the sine and the distance of 
the point from the north-south 
line is the “cosine”. 





Fig. 14 
In (Fig. 14), of the arc APi, PsMi is the “sine” 
and PiN: is the “cosine” of AP2, PaMe is the “sine” and P2Ne 
is the “cosine”; of APs, PsMs is the “sine’’ and P3Ns is the 
“cosine”; etc. It is evident that a better definition of these fun- 
ctions was never given. | 
We have thus seen that some of the solutions of Aryabhata 
1 J.AS.B,N,S, KV, p. 154 
2. oa Beth seers deRK Erisal | 
SRR ae at aie 


—(Bhaskara, Grahaganita, commentary. IL, 88-21 


KAYE’S VIEW 145 


are imperfect, of Brahmagupta the solutions are more accurate, 
while those of Bhaskara are generally mathematically correct. 
The date of the scientific ancient Indian Astronomy is indeed 
499 A. D., while that of the Syntaxis is about 150 A.D. It is by 
these shortcomings and differences in the methods, new ideas (e.g., 
the idea of the differential calculus)* and the like, that we 
can sately say that Indian Astronomy in its scientific form, 
although of a later date than the “Syntaxis” of Ptolemy, is origi- 
naland not borrowed from foreign source. There is evidence 
that some crude form of Greek astronomy was transmitted to 
India and went by the name of the ‘‘Romaka" or the “Paulisa” 
Siddhanta, prior to the time of Aryabhata but our great Indian 
astronomers, Aryabhata with his pupils, Varaha-mihira and 
Brahmagupta, had to construct a new science altogether. 


(This Chapter is almost a reproduction of the paper by 
P. C. Sengupta, as acknowledged earlier). 


Reference 


P.C. Sengupta: The Khandakhadyaka, 1934 


CHAPTER VII 
Epicyclic Theory 
of Ancient Indians 


We shall give here some details of the Indian concepts 
regarding the motion of planets or wandering bodies among the 
stars. The Vedanga Jyotisa (1400 B. C. or earlier) does not speak 
of this, A comparison of the astronomical constants of the 
Greek and the ancient Indian systems, points unmistakably to the 
conclusion that the Indian constants as determined by Aryabhata 
I and his successors, are almost in all cases different from those 
of Greeks. Indian astronomers were highly original in their con- 
cepts and treatment. The originality of Aryabhata I and other 
astronomers would be seen from what we are discribing below. 


Apparent Motious of the Sun and Moon 


We have the following passages from Aryabhata : 

All planets move in eccentrics to their orbits at the mean 
rates of angular motion, in the direction of the signs of the 
zodiac from their apogees (or aphelia) and in the opposite 
directions from their Sighroccas. 


The eccentric circles of planets are equal to their concentrics 
and the centre Of the eccentric is removed from the centre 
of the Earth. 


The distance between the centre of the Earth and the centre 
of the eccentric is equal to the radius of the planet’s epicycle; 
on the circumference (whether of the epicycle or of the 
eccentric) the planet undoubtedly moves with the mean 


motion, 
Here the central idea was that undou- 
btedly planets moved unifomly in circles 
_ pi a’ round the Earth; if the motion appeared 
\ A. to be variable, it was due to the fact that 
WY the centres of such circle (i. e. the con- 
vc centric circles) did not coincide with the 


centre of the Earth. 


148 EPICYCLIC THEORY OF ANCIENT INDIANS 


Let E represent the centre of the Earth(Fig.15),APM the Sun’s 
circular orbit or concentric; let A and P be the apogee and the 
perigee respectively. From EA, cut off EC equal to the radius of 
the Sun’s epicycle. With centre C and radius equal to EA describe 
the eccentric A’P’S cutting AP and AP produced at P’ and A’. 
Here A’ and P’ are the real apogee and perigee of the Sun’s orbit. 
Let PM and P’S be any two equal arcs measured from P and P,’ 


The idea is that the mean planet M andthe apparent Sun S 
move simultaneously from P and P’ in the counterclockwise 
direction along the concentric and the eccentric circles. They 
move with the same angular motion and arrive simultaneously 
at M and S. 

Here EM and CS are parallel and equal, hence MS is 
also equal and ae to EC. Let SH be drawn perpendicular 
to EM. : 

"The angle PEM is the mean anomaly and the angle P’ES the 
true anomaly; the angle SEM is the equation of the centre, is readily 
seen to be plus (-+) from P’ to A’ and minus (—) from A’ to P’.. 
Thus as regards the character of the equation, the eccentric circle 
is quite right. We now turn to exmine how far it is true as to 
the amount. 


Let the angle SEM denoted by E and the angle / PEM 
= /P’'CS=6; EP=CP’=a; EC=MS=p, then 


tan | eet a. bene 


a—p cos 
, r 
aa sin n 6—5 sin 20-+52, SITS Bo ccceance 


Now the true value of E in me motion is ie by 
E=( 2e-— @) sin +22 sin 20+ sin 36*;... 


é 
Tr we now put 2 ener as a first mn 


Hence Pande? , which is greater than — oi me by 3 e. In the 


case of the bl if the value of p be correctly taken the error in the 
coefficient of the second term becomes+3’; similarly in the case of 
the Moon. the corresponding error becomes+8’, 


*Godfray’s Astronomy, p, 149, 


APPARENT MOTION OF THE SUN AND MOON 149 


Again if BmBe, what is the centre of the eccentric circle is 


the empty focus of the ellipse or that the ancient astronomers 
practically took the planets to be moving with uniform angular 


motion round the empty focus. This was not a bad approxi- 
mation. 
Also ES=r=EH approximately, 


r=a ( 1-2 cos 9 
a 
but in the elliptic motion 
r=a (—e cos @).* 
Hence the error is not very considerable hete also. 
This is the way in which the ancient astronomers, both 


Greek and Hindu, sought to explain the inequalities in the motion 
of the Sun and the Moon. In the casz of the Moon, these astro- 


3 
. @ 
nomers took the coefficient 2e—-F =300' nearly; the modern value 


is 377’ nearly. The reason for this has been pointed out to be 
that the Moon was observed correctly only at times of eclipses. 
At the eclipses of sygygies, the evection term of the Moon’s equa- 

tion .diminishes (numerically) the principal ecliptic term by 
about 76’. 

We have thus far explained the idea of planetary motion of 
the ancients under the eccentric circle costruction. The same, 
however, is explained under the epicyclic construction. 

Let AMP be the circular orbit of the Sun, having E the centre 

of the earth for the centre. (Fig. 16) 

U_ Let the diameter AEP be the apse 

g line. A the apogee and P the perigee. 

Let M be the mean position of the 

Sun in the orbit. With M as the 

centre, describe the epicycle UNS. — 

Let EM cut the epicycle at N and U. 

Now the construction for finding S 
the apparent Sun is thus given:-— 





Fig. 16 
the ZLUMS= ZMEA, the arc US is measured clockwise 
whereas the arc A to M is measured counterclockwise. 
From this construction MS is parallel to EA. If EC be 
measured equal to MS, the radius of the epicycle, along EA to- 


* Godfray’s Astronomy, p, 149. 


150 EPICYCLIC THEORY OF ANCIENT INDIANS 


wards the apogee, then CS is a constant length and C is a fixed 
point. Hence the locus of S is an equal circle with the centre at 
C. Thus both the eccentric, and the epicycle and the concentric 
combined, led to the same position. 
It was thus usual to explain the planetary motion under 
both the assumed constructions; and both gave the position for a 
planet. The eccentric circle construction appears to be the earlier 
in the history of astronomy and the latter was later. If the 
former construction can be traced to Apollonius of Perga who did 
so touch to develop the “conic sections’ as science, the reason why 
he preferred the eccentric circle to the ellipse. appears to be that 
either that this planetary construction was always deep-rooted in 
the minds of men or that he was carried by the idea that “the 
circle was the most perfect curve.’ We are inclined to the view 
that the eccentric circle idea was transmitted from Babylonia to 
Greece. We now pass on to consider the Indian construction for 
the possition of superior and inferior planets. 
Superior Planets 
With regard to the five planets, Mercury, Venus, Mars: 
Jupiter and Saturn, the Indian astronomers give only one constru- 
ction for finding the apparent geocentric position. Each of 
these “star planets’ is conceived as having twofold planetary 
inequalities : (i) the inequality of apsis, (ii) the inequality of the 
Sighra. With regard to the superior planets, the sighra apogee or 
the sighrocca coincided with the mean position of the Sun. As .- 
Varahamihira observed. of the other planets beginning with Mars, 
the Sun is the so-called sighra. (PSi. XVII. 1) 
Let AMSP be the concentric of whichthe centre E is the 
same as that of the earth(Fig.17); 
A'MiP’ the eccentric circle of 
apsis of a superior planet, of 
which the centre is C;A,M.S,P be 
respectively the apogee, the Mars 
-planet, the direction of the 
Sighra and the perigee of the 
concentric; A’M:P’ be the 
apogee, the planet as corrected 
by the equation of apsis, P’ the 
perigee in the eccentric. The arc 





Fig. 17 


INFERIOR PLANETS 151 


AM~=arc A’M;:; MM; is parallel and equal to EC. As used be- 
fore, both the concentric and the eccentric are of the same radius. 


Here the mean planet Min the concentric is taken to be, 
deflected to M, due to the true motion in the eccentric circle, 
Join EM, cutting the concentric at M.. Now let ES be joined 
and let 8’ be taken along ES, such that 

ES’ _ Sighra periphery of the planet in degrees 
ES 360 
_Sun’s mean distance from the Earth 
Planets mean distance from the Sun or the Earth: 
ES’ thus determined is called the radius of the sighra epicycle of 
the superior planet. 

With S’ as the centre and the radius equal to ES or EA 
describe another circle which is called the sighra eccentric cutting 
ES produced at S*. Now measure the arc S”Ms; in the concen- 
tric=SM, in the concentric. The apparent superior planet is 
seen in the direction EM; from the Earth. Thisis the construc- 
tion used in Hindu astronomy calculating the geocentric longitude 
of any star planet. 


It is evident in the case of a superior planet that the eccen- 
tric having S’ for the centre and whose radius=EA=R the 
standard radius for any circular orbit, is the mean orbit of 
the planet and S’ the mean position of the Sun. In other words, 
in the case of a superior planet, the éighra eccentric represents 
the mean orbit round the Sun. If the parallelogram CES’C’ be 
constructed, then an equal circle described with C’ as the centre 
is the apparent eccentric orbit of the superior planet. 


In the actual method of calculating the geocentric longitude 
of a “star planet’’ there are four operations given, the first two of 
which have the effect of changing the arc MA or rather the point 
A. The last two operations relate to the two displacements MM, 
and M.Ms. We have here followed solely the construction of 
the eccentric circles; the same geocentric position of a superior 
planet could be equally well obtained by the epicyclic cons- 
truction. In describing the constructions for finding the position, 
of an inferior planet we shall follow the epicyclic construction 
only 

Inferior Planets 


Let E be the centre of the Earth (Fig. 18), AMS the orbit of 


152 EPICYCLIC THEORY OF ANCIENT INDIANS 


a mean inferior planet or the mean Sun. EA the direction of the 
apogee of apsis and ES that of the 
fighra. The inequality of the apsis takes 
the mean geocentric planet from M to 
M,, such that MM, is parallel to EA. 
Let EM, be joined cutting the con- 
centric at M,;M, is taken as the 
centre of the sighra epicyle or the 
real circular orbit in which the appa- 
rent planet moves. 





Fig, 18 
With M, as the centre and the radius of theinferior pla- 
nents’ sighra epicycle as radius, describe the circle NVU which 
is here the sghra epicycle or the real circular orbit. In it draw 
the radius M:V parallel to ES; then VP is the geocentric position 
of the inferior planet. 


Here the first displacement MM, is due to the inequality 
of apsis and is for finding the position of M; the centre of the 
real circular orbit. The idea was that the apparent planet moved 
in a circular orbit of which the centre was very near thé mean 
position of the Sun, the first operation in this construction was 
calculated to determine the centre of this so-called circular orbit 
of an inferior planet. 


The sghra of an inferior planet moves round the Earth at 

_ the same mean rate in which the inferior planet moves round the 

Sun; hence the line ES in this figure is always parallel to the line 

joining the Sun to the mean heliocentric inferior planet, and in 
our construction, it is parallel to M,V. 


This in brief is an outline of the Indian idea of planetary 
motion as taught by Aryabhata I, Brahmagupta and Bhaskara II. 


—_—; 09 i— 


oe 


- Reference 
P.C. Sengupta : The Khandakhadyaka, 1934, 


CHAPTER VIII 


Brahmagupta 
and Arithmetic 


Scope of Ganita 


The word Ganita meansthe science of calculation. The 
term occurs in the Vedanga Jyautisa (c. 1200 B.C.): 

Just as the crest is to the peacocks, and just as the head- 

gem isto the snakes, sothe Ganita among the Vedanga 

Sastras stands at the head (VJ. 4) 

In the ancient Buddhistic literature, we find mention of 
three classes of ganita : (i) mudra Cfinger arithmetic). Gi) 
ganana (mental arithmetic), and (iii) saw. khvana (higher arith- 
meticin general). In the Brahmasphutasiddhanta, Brahmagupta 
uses the word ganita in the sense of eitire calculations. His 
ganitadhyava (Chapter XII) includes ; 

G) Misraka (mixtures). (ii) Sredhi (series). (iii) Ksetra 

plane figures), (iv) Vrtta-ksetra (circles), (v) Khata (ex- 

cavations), (vi) Citi (piles of bricks), (vii) Krakacika 

(sawn pieces of timber). (viii) Rasi (heaps or mounds of 

grain, and (ix) Chaya (shadow). 
Brahmagupta also uses the term Dhulikarma (literally meaning 
* ysnpwork”) for higher mathematics : 

The one learned man who knows the dha’ibarma or th2 

science of mathematics as propounded by Brahmagupta 

would far excell them in learning who are taught the 

calculations according to Aryabhata. Visnucandra and 

others.” : 

-In these ten eee of the Brahmasiddhanta has been 

given the dhiulikarma-or the science of entire calculations 


1, aat frat Haat ATA AUT TAT | 
a aq Aata-arerel aT mat faery ; Vo. 4. 

2. arart aah eRe RAT : | 
a ae qfeaaiarad waft ae —BrSpSi. X. 62. 


154 BRAHMAGUPTA AND ARITHMETIC 


which is faultless.* 


This science of dhulikarma has not been imparted by great 
teachers for blasphemy. One who would be using it tor this 
purpose would lose all good name.” 


Brahmagupta uses the term ganita only for those calculations 
which are of arithmetical in nature. The science of algebra, the 
foundations of which was laid by Aryabhata I, was named as 
kuttaka or kuttakara by Aryabhata, and in the Brahmasphuta- 
siddhanta also it is separately dealt with under Kuttadhyaya or 
kutiakadhaya (Chapter XVIII). Later on the term bijaganita 
was specifically given to the science of algebra. 


The Kuttadhyaya of the Brahmasphutasiddhanta deals with 
the (i) concept of kuttaka (pulveriser) , addition of positive and 
negative as well as zero quantities, equations in one unknown 
(eka-varna samikarana), equations in several unknowns (aneka- 
varna samikarana), equations involving products of unknowns 
(bhavita) and quadratic equations (var ga-prakrtik) (Chapter XVIII 
of the Brahmasphutasiddhanta). 


Aryabhata, Bhaskara and 
Brahmagupta use Place Value Notations, 


In Europe the first definite traces of the place-value nume- 
rals are found in the tenth and eleventh centuries, but the 
numerals came into general use in mathematical text books only 
in the seventeenth century. In India, however, Aryabhata I 
(499), Bhaskara I (522), Lalla (c. 598) and Brahmagupta (628) 
all use the place value numerals. There is no trace of any other 
system in their works. Perhaps in this country we had the place 
value system as early as 200 B.C. if not earlier. The use of a 
symbol for zero is found in Pingala’s Chandah Sutra (perhaps of 
200 B.C.). In literature, we have an indication of the place 
value from about 100 B.C. and later in the Puranas from the 
second to the fourth century A.D. The Bakhasali Manuscript 
(perhaps of 200 A.D.) uses the place-value notations. The 
_earliest use of t use of the place value principle with the letter numerals 


1. “1. neds eegtefeeegmence | . 
satan ess esis ae <2 nebpenere 66. 
— et aiaga er ve | —BrSpSi. X. 67 


OPERATIONS AND DETERM'NATIONS IN PATIGANITA = 155 


is found in the works of Bhaskara I about the beginning of the 
sixth century A.D. Thusfor 3179, the expressive words are 
Navadrirtipagni (nava 9, adri 7. rupal and agni 3). Similarly 
in the Brahmasphutasiddhanta, for a large number like 2296828522, 
the expressive terms are DVIYAMASARASTAPAKSAVASURA- 
SANAVADVIYAMAH(Dvivama two twos 22, Sara 5,asta 8, paksa 
2, vast 8, rasa 6. nava 9, dviyamah 22)2 Such usages are to be 
found in all works, which clearly state the place value concept 
was popular as a routine. From India. this system reached Arabia. 
During the reign of the Khalif Al-Mansur (753-774 A.D.) there 
came embassies from Sindh to Baghdad, and among them were 
scholars, who brought along with them several works on mathe- 
matics including the Brahmasphutasiddhanta and the Khanda- 
khadyaka of Brahmagupta: With the help of these scholars, Al- 
fazari, perhapsalso Yakubibn Tarik, translated them into Arabic. 
Both works were largely used and exercised great influence on 
Arab mathematics. It was on that occasion that the Arabs first 
became acquainted with a scientific system ofastronomy. It is 
acceptable to all writers on the subject that it was at that time 
that the Hindu numerals were first definitely introduced amongst 
the Arabs. Arabs at first adopted the ghobar form of num- 
erals which they had already obtained (but without zero) from 
the Alexandrians or from the Syrians. This they continued for 
about two centuries, but since they were not suited to their ri ght- 
to-left script, they gave them up and adopted the more convenient 
ones. For a detailed discussion on how numerals went to the 
west from India and spread in Europe one is referred to this dis- 
cussion in the History of Hindu Mathematics. PartI by Datta 
and Singh (1935, Single volume Edition, 1962, pp. 83-104). 
It is remarkable that Brahmagupta’s works like the Brahma- 
sphutasidhanta and the Khandakhadyaka became instrumental in 
the spread of the place-value notation in the neighouring coun- 
tries of the Middle East, and from their this system spread into 
_Europe. 


. Operations and Determinations in Patiganita 


The word Patiganita is a compound formed from the words 
pati, meaning ‘board’, and ganita, meaning ‘science of calculation’, 


1. MBh. 1. 4; 
2. BrSpSi 1-16. 


126 BRAHMAGUPTA AND ARITHMETIC 


hence it means the science of calculation which requires the uses 
‘of writing material (the board). The word piifi is not Sanskrit 
(it originated in the non-Sanskrit literature in India); the oldest 
term in Sanskrit for the board is Phalaka or pajta. However this 
term got currency in the Sanskrit literature also about the 
beginning of the seventh century. Brahmagupta does not use 
the term patiganita: he favours the use of the term dhilikarma or 
writing figures on dust spread on a board or on the ground. The 
word patiganita was translated into Arabic as ilm-hisab-al-takht 

(calculation on board) and the word dhalikarm a as hisab-al-ghobar 
(calculation on dust), 


Brahmagupta, in the very first verse in the Chapter XII 
(Ganitadhvyaya) refers to twenty operations (parikarma) and 
eight determinations : 


He who distinctly and severally knows the twenty logistics, 
addition etc.. and the eight determinations (vyavahara) 
inculding (measurement by) shadow is a ganaka (mathe- 
matician).! 


The commentators have given the list of these logistics 
(parikarma) and determinations (vyavahara) as follows: 


(A) Parikarma or logistics 


Sanhkalitam (addition) 

Vyavakalitam (subtraction) 

Gananam (multiplication) 

Bhagaharah (division) 

Vargah (square) 

Vargamtilam (square-root) 

. Ghanah (cube) 

. Ghanamilam (cube root) 
13. Five standard forms of fractions (Paitcarjati) 

‘Trairasikam (the rule of three) 
Vysta-trairasikam (the inverse rule of three) 
Pafica-rafikam (the rule of five) 
Sapta-rasikam (the rule of seven) 

. Nava-rasikam (the rule of n ine) 


1. I. Rt Re ae aoe er a 
es SRE ST TUS GU —BrSpSi. XII. 1 


WPHENAARwWDY PE 


Hh 
ne 


ee 
mS 


MULTIPLICATION i57 


19, Ekadaga-rasikam (the rule of eleven) 
20. Bhanda-pratibhandam (barter and exchange) 
(B) Vyavahara or determinations 


1. Miégrakah (mixture) 
2. Sredhi (progession or series) 
3. Ksetram (plane figures) 

4. Khatam (excavation) 

5. Citih (stock) 

6. . Krakacikah (saw) 

7. Rasih (mound) 

8. Chaya (shadow) 


Of the operations enlisted here, the first eight have been 
considered fundamental by later writers as Mahavira. The opera- 
tions of duplation and mediation (doubling and halving) were 
considered fundamental hy Arabs, Greeks and Egyptians; since 
they were not familiar with the place-value system. 


Mathematics in this country developed as an aid to astro- 
nomy, and therefore, for the first time we find Aryabhta(499AD.) 
in his Aryabhatiya describing as a special section (Ganitapada). 
Brahmagupta (628 A.D.) also followed Aryabhata in this respect 
and gave the science of calculation (ganita) a special place in his 
treatise on astronomy. The Siddhanta treatises, earlier than those 
of Aryabhata and Brahmagupta do not contain a chapter exclu- 

AIsé]2 devoted to ganita (the Strya-Siddhanta and the Siddhantas 
of Vasistha,Pitamaha and Romaka are thus without ganita 
chapetrs). Later on Bhaskara I and Lalla also did not include 
ganita as asection or chapter in their treatises.It is said, howe- 
ver, that Lalla wrote a separate treatise on Pafiganita. 


It may further be remarked here that Aryabhata I gives 
the rules for finding the square and cube-roots only whilst Bra- 
hmagupta gives the cube-root rule only (BrSPSi. XII. 7). 


Multiplication 


Undoubtedly the common Indian name ‘multiplication’ is 
“gunana’, this term occurs in the Vedic literature also. The other 
terms for this logistics are hanana, vadha, ksaya etc., which all 
mean ‘killing’ or ‘destroying.’ The synonyms of ‘hanana’ (killing) 
for multiplication have been used by Aryabhata I (499). Brahma- 
gupta (628), Sridhara (c.750) and later writers, and these tezrs 


158 BRAHMAGUPTA AND ARITHMETIC 


also occur in the Bakhasgali Manuscript. 


Aryabhata I does not mention the everyday methods of 
multiplication in his Aryabhatiya probably because they were 
too elementary to be included in a Siddhanta work. Brahma- 
gupta, however, ina supplement to the section on mathematics 
in his Siddhanta, gives the names of some methods with very 
brief descriptions of the processes: — 


The multiplicand repeated, as in gomutrika as often as 
there are digits in the multiplier, is severally multiplied 
by them and (the results) added according to places; 
this gives the product. Or the multiplicand is repeated 
as many times as there are component parts in the 
multiplier. 


(the word bheda occurring in the verse has- been translated 
as “integrant portions” by Colebrooke p. 319. Again by the term 
bheda are meant portions which added together make the whole, 
or aliquot parts which multiplied together make the entire 
quantity. 


The multiplicand is multiplied by the sum or the differ- 
ence of the multiplier and an assumed quantity and, 
from the result the product of the assumed quantity 
and the multiplicand is subtracted or added.” 


(Colebrooke thinks that this is a method to obtain the true 
product when the multiplier has been taken to be too great or 
too small by mistake.* Datta and Singh think, however, that 
this is not correct.* 


Thus Brahmagupta mentions four methods of multiplica- 
tion: (i) gomutrika. Gi) khanda. (iii) bheda. and (iv) ista. The com- 


mon and the well known method of kapata-sandhi has been omitted 
by him. 


1. quareeneged ged Ayfraret afer | 





afea: sata} quanaageh at ll — BrSpSi XII. 55 
2. get afro waniaeaaiata Sa | 
THe a aM Tessa ae: II — BrSpSi. XII. 56 


3, Colebrooke, T, H., Hindu Algebra, p. 320, 


4, Datta, B. and Singh, A.N., History of Hindu Mathematics Pt, 1 
(Arithmetic), p. 135 (1962)... 


MULTIPLICATION 159 


(i) Gomutrika-method or zig-zag method. The word gomu- 
trika means “similar to the course of cow’s urine’, hence 
“zigzag’’. This method in all essentials is the same as the sthana- 
Rhanda method. The following illustration is based on the 
commentary of Prthidaka Svami: 


Example: To multiply 1223 by 235. 


The numbers are written thus : 


2 1223 
3 1223 
5 1223 


The first line of figures is t hen multiplied by 2, the process 
beginning at units place, thus: 2X3=6;3 is rubbed out and 6 
substituted in its place, and so on. After all the horizontal lines 
have been multiplied by the corresponding numbers on the left 
in the vertical line, the numbers on the pai stand thus : 


2446 . 
3669 
6115 


eT en, 


287405 
after being added together as in the present method, 


The sthana-khanda and the gomitrika methods resemble 
modern plan of multiplication most closely. 


Gi) Khanda Method: or Parts Multiplicatian Method : 
Since the days of Brahmagupta, this method of multiplication 
also became very popular. Wehave two methods under this 
head : . 


(i) The multiplier is broken up into two or more Parts 
whose sum is equal to it. The multiplicand is then multiplied 
severally by these and the results added. 


To take an example: 
13 X158=(6+7) x 158=(6 x 158) +(7 x 158) 
=948-+-1106 
=2054 
(ii) The multiplier is broken up into two more aliquot 
parts. The multiplicand isthen multiplied by one of these, the 
resulting product by the second and so on till all the parts are 
exhausted. The ultimate product is the result. 


160 BRAHMAGUPTA AND ARITHMETIC 


Thus for example : 
96 x 237=(4 x 4x6) XK 237 
=(4X 237) x4x6=948 x4x6 
=(4 x48) x 6=3792 x6 
= 22752 


These methods of multiplication are found among the 
Arabs and the Italians, having obtained from reople of India. 
They were known asthe “Scapezzo” and “Repiego’’ methods 
respectively amongst Italians. 


(Citi) Ista-gunana Methed or the Algebraic Method. 


We have already quoted the relevant verse from the Brah- 
masphuta-siddhanta in this connection; (XII. 56): 


The wmultiplicand is multiplied by thesum or the 
difference of the multiplied and an assumed quantity 
and from the result the product of the assvmed quan- 
tity and the multiplicand is subtracted or added. 


This method is of two kinds according as we (i) add or (b) 
subtract an assumed number. The assumed number is so chosen 
as to give two numbers with which multiplication will be easier 
than with the original multiplier. The two ways are illustrated 
below: . 


i) 93x 13=(93+7) X13—7 x 13=1300—91=1209. 
(ii) 93 X 13=(£0+-3)13=S0 x 1343 x13=1170+39 
=1209 


This method was in use among the Arabs and in Europe, 
obviously having gone out from this country. 


This process has been regarded as an inverse of multipli- 
gation. The terms used for this operation are bhagahara, bhajana, 
harana, chedana, etc. all these terms more or less carrying the 
sense “to break into parts’, “to divide” etc., excepting “harana” 
which denotes “to take away”, This term shows the relation 
of division to the operation of subtraction, The dividend 
is ‘termed as bhajya. harya etc, the -divisor is known as 


1. mat uftg wanes aT | | 
Res a gt awksafiated wee 1 —BrSpSi. XU. 56 





SQUARE 161 


bhajaka, bhagahara or simply hara; quotient is known as labdhi or 
labdha (or “what is obtained”’). 

India never regarded this operation as a difficult one; in 
Europe, this operation was regarded asa tedious one till the 
15th century or so. Division was such a common operation that 
Aryabhata did not regard it as worth being included in his 
treatise. But since he has given the methods of extracting 
square-roots and cube-roots, which obviously depend on division, 
we conclude that the method of division was known to him. 
Most Siddhanta writers have followed Aryabhata I in omitting 
this operation from their texts, this being regarded too elemantary 
to be included. Brahmagupta does not give details of this 
Operation. The later treatises on Arithmetic as Sridhara’s 
Trisatika and the Patiganita (1.20) and Aryabhata II (c.950 A.D.) 
have given the details of this operation. 


Square 


The Sanakrit term for square is varga or krti (varga lite- 
rally means “rows” or “troops” of similar things). In mathema- 
tics, it usually means the square power and also the square figure 
or its area. Thus we find in the Aryabhatiya : 


A square figure of four equal sides (and the number 
representing its area) are called varga. The product of 
the two equal quantities is also varga'. 


The term brti means “doing”, “making’’ or “action”. It 
carries with it the idea of specific performance probably the gra- 
phical representation. 


For the first time we have a definite rule for squaring in the 
writings of Brahmagupta. But it does not mean that prior to him 
it was not known. It must have been known to Aryabhata I 
since he has given the square-root method. 


Brahmagupta gives his method of squaring briefly as 
follows : 
Combining the product, twice the digit in the less 
(lowest) place into the several others (digits) with its 
(i.e. of the digit in the lowest place) square (repeatedly) 
gives the square.” 


1. FRG: ward ae Gas | —Arya. II. 3. 
2. Uted But agaaaHlige aT: | —BrSPSi. XII. 63. 


162 BRAHMAGUPTA AND ARITHMETIC 


The method has been more clearly enunciated by Mahavira 
(850 A.D.) in the Ganitasarasamgraha : 


Having squared the last (digit), multiply the rest by 
the digits by twice the last. (which) is moved forward 
(by one place). Then moving the remaining digits con- 
tinue ae same operation (process), This gives the 
square.” 


Brahmagupta’s method of squaring is shown by the filox 
ing example : 
To square 125. 
The number is written down 
125 
The square of the digit in the last place, i.e, 5°=25 is set 
over it thus : 
25 
125 


Then, 2x5=10 is placed below the other sa and 5 is 
rubbed out, thus: 
25 
12 
10 
Multiplying by 10 the rest of the digits, § ie., 12 and setting 
the product over them (the digits), we have. 
1225 
12 
10 
Then rubbing out 10 which is not required and moving the 
rest of the digits, i.e. 12 we, have 
1225 
12 
Thus one round of operations is completed. 
, Again as before, setting the square of 2 above it and 2x2=4 
below 1. we have 
“1625 
i 
4 


1. GSS, P12 


CUBE 163 


Multiplying the remaining digit 1 by 4, and setting the 
product above it, we have 
5625 
1 
Then moving the remaining digit 1, we obtain 
5625 
1 


Thus the second round of operations is completed. 
Next setting the square of 1 above it the process is comple- 
ted for there are no remaining figures, and the result stands thus : 
15625 


Algebraic Method of Squaring 


Brahmagupta in his Brahmasphutasiddhanta gives a minor 
method of squaring thus: 


The product of the sum and the difference of the 
number (to be squared) and an assumed number plus 
the square of the assumed number give square’. 


This may be represented by the following identity : 
n?=(n—a) (n-+a)+a? 


This identity has been used for squaring by most of the 
Indian mathematicians. Thus 
18=(15—5) (5+5)+5?=225 


We arenot giving here other identities which have been 
used by latter mathematicians of India in getting the squares 
of numbers; for example, when Mahavira says : 


The sum of the squares of the two or more portions of 
the number together with their products each with the 
others multiplied by two gives the square? : 
he obviously refers_to the identity 
(at dA Creceeceteees P= a2 th? + 2+. tab bo, 


Cube 

The Sanskrit term for cube js ghana. It when usedin 

the geometrical sense also means the solid cube. In the arithmeti- 
cal sense, it means the continued product of the same number 
taken three times. Thus we have the definition in the Arvya- 


1. waRegiase: Btdeaitgea: | ~ BrSPSi. XII. 63° 
2. GSS. p. 13. . 


164 BRAHMAGUPTA AND ARITHMETIC 


bhatiya: 
The continued product of three equals and also the 
solid having twelve (equal) edges are called ghana." 


A method of cubing applicable to numbers written in the 
decimal place-value notation, has been in use in this country 
from before the 5th century A.D. Aryabhata I (499 A.D.) had 
the familiarity with this method; he, however, does not give the 
method of cubing if his treatise, though he describes the inverse 
process of extracting the cube-root. 


Brahmagupta gives the method of cubing in the following 
verse : 


Set down the cube of the last (antva); then place at the 
next place from it, thrice the square of the Jast multi- 
plied by the succeeding; then place at the next place 
thrice the square of the succeeding multiplied by the 
last, and (at the next place) the cube of the succeeding. 
This gives the cube.” 

The rule may be illustrated by an example. 

Example : To cube 1357. 


The given number has four places,i.e., four portions. First 
we take the last’ digit land the succeeding digit 3, ie. 13 and 
apply the method of cubing thus: 

(i) Cube of the last (1°) 

(ii) Thrice the square of the 
last (3.17) multiplied by 
the succeeding (3) gives 
(3.3.1) = 9 (placing at the 

, next place) 


1 


I 


(ui) Thrice the square of the 
succeeding, multiplied by 


the last gives (3.37.1) = 27(placing at the 
next place) 
(iv) Cube of the succeeding (3%) = 27 (placing at the 
next place) 
Thus 13° is thesum 2197 
1, arePRRaT ST TTT, tl —Arya, IT. 3. 


| SRakeege Bae she area | = BrSPSi. XII, 6. 


164 BRAHMAGUPTA AND ARITHMETIC 


bhava : 
The continued product of three equals and also the 
solid having twelve (equal) edges are called ghana.* 


A method of cubing applicable to numbers written in the 
decimal place-value notation, has been in use in this country 
from before the 5th century A.D. Aryabhata I (499 A.D.) had 
the familiarity with this method; he, however, does not give the 
method of cubing iff his treatise, though he describes the inverse 
process of extracting the cube-root. 


Brahmagupta gives the method of cubing in the following 
verse : 


Set down the cube of the last (antya); then place at the 
next place from it, thrice the square of the last multi- 
plied by the succeeding; then place at the next place 
thrice the square of the succeeding multiplied by the 
last, and (at the next place) the cube of the succeeding. 
This gives the cube.” 

The rule may be illustrated by an example. 

Example : To cube 1357. 


The given number has four places, i.e., four portions. First 
we take the last digit land the succeeding digit 3,ic. 13 and 
apply the method of cubing thus: 

G) Cube of the last (1°) = ] 

(ii) Thrice the square of the 

last (3.17) multiplied by 

the succeeding (3) gives 

(3.3.12) = 9 (placing at the 
next place) 

(iit) Thrice the square of the 

succeeding, multiplied by 


the last gives (3.37.1) =  27(placing at the 
next place) 
(iv) Cube of the succeeding (3%) = 27 (placing at the 
next place) 
Thus 13° is the sum "2197 | 
1. SRI TET TMT I | —Arya, IT. 3. 


a TRE TTT BEM AN Fates FA: | —BrSPSi. XII, 6. 


CUBE 235 


After this we take the next figure. 5, i.e., the number 135, 
and in this consider 13 as the last and 5 as the succeeding. Then 
the method proceeds thus : 

(i) The cube of the last 

(13°) as already obtained == 2197 
Gi) Thrice the square of the 
last multiplied by the 
succeeding, ie. 3.1375 = 2585 (placing at the 
next place) 
Git) Thrice the square of the 
succeeding multiplied 
by the last, i.e, 3.57.13 = 975 (placing at the 
next place) 

(iv) Cube of the succeeding, 

Le, 5° 


125 (placing at the 
next place) 


Thus 135° is the sum 2460375 


Now the remaining figure 7 is taken, so that the number is 
1357, of which 135 is the last and 7 the succeeding. The method 
proceeds thus : 


G) Cube of the last, i.e. 
(135%) as already 
obtained = 2460375 


Ci) Thrice the square of 
the last into the succee- 
ding, i.e, 3. (135)*. 7 = 382725 (placing at the 
next place) 
(iii) Thrice the square of 
the succeeding into the 
last, i.e. 3.77, 135 = 19845 (placing at the 
next place) 
(iv) Cube of the succeeding 


i.e. 7° = 343 (placing at the 
~ next place) 
Thus (1357)? is the sum 2498846293 


Evidently these methods of cubing are based on the identity: 
(a+b¥=a?+3a’b+3ab*-+b* 


and keeping in mind the place values of numerals in a given 


166 BRAHMAGUPTA AND ARITHMETIC 


number (this accounts for keeping the results of each of the four 
operations at the next place). 


Square-Root 


Indian synonyms for square-root are vargamiula or pada, 
of a kyti. The word mila means the “root” of atree. which may 
also mean the “foot’’ or the lowest part or bottom of a thing and 
hence “pada” or foot also became a synonym of rout. Brahma- 
Gupta defines squ@re-root as follows : 


The pada (root) of a kyti (square) is that of which it is 
the square.’ 


While the word mila for root is the oldest in Indian litera- 
ture (it occurs in Anuyogadvara-sitra, c- 100 B.C.), the word 
pada for root probably for the first time occurs in the writings 
of Brahmagupta- The term mala was borrowed by the Arabs who 
translated it by jadhr, meaning ‘basis of square’. The Latin term 
radix also is a translation of the term mula. In the Sulba litera- 
ture and in the Prakrta texts, we finda term karanifor square- 
root. In geometry, this term karani means a “side”, In later days, 
the term karani was reserved for surds, i.e. a square-root which 


cannot be exactly evaluated, but which may be represented by a 
line. . 


We would like to quote here a rule for determining square- 
root of numbers from the Aryabhatiya : 


Always divide the even place by twice the square-root 
(upon the preceding odd place); after having subtracted 
from the odd place the’ square (of the quotient), the 
quotient put down at the next place (in the line of the 
root) gives the root”. 


As an illustration, we shall proceed to find the square-root 
of 18225, 


The odd and even places are marked out by vertical (I) and 
horizontal ae lines : The other steps are as follows : 





1. wi atta ae | | BrSpSi. XVII. 35 
2. WR Rear ata aes | 
Re ge we) IRR ae [I — Arya, Il. 4. 


CUBEROOT 167 


P- 1-1 


18225 
Subtract square 1 root = 1 
Divide by twice _—— 
the root 2983 placing quotient at the 
6 next place, the root=13 
22 
Subtract square of * 
quotient oe a. 
Divide by twice 26)132(5 placing quotient at the 
the root 130 next place, the root=135 
Subtract square 5 
vf the quotient 25 


The process ends, The square-roct of 18225 is thus 135. 


It has been stated: by Kaye, that Aryabhata’s method of 
finding out the square-root is algebraic in character, and that it 
resembles the method given by Theon of Alexandria. Arya- 
bhata’s method is purely atithmetic and not algebraic is the 
view of Datta and Singh who do not agree with Kaye on this 
point, 

Cube Root 

The Sanskr‘t term for cube-root is ghanamila or ghanapada. 
The first mention of the operation of cube-root is found in the 
Aryabhatiya of Aryabhata'I (499 A.D.), though the operation 
is given in only a concise form : 

Divide the second aghana place by thrice the square 
of the cuberoot; subtract from the first aghana place 
the square of the quotient multiplied by thrice the 
preceding (cube-root); and (subtract) the cube (of the 
quotient) from the ghana place; (the quotient put 
down) at the next place (in the line of the root) gives 

(the root)2 
As has been explained by all the commentators on the . 
’ Aryabhativa, the units place is ghana; the tens place is first 
aghana, the hundreds place is the second aghana, thé thousands 
‘place is ghana, the ten thousands place is first aghana, the hun- 


1. sang ase factor Bats eT ATT | 
aiferge ofeagiea: sear aes TAT || —Arya. II. 5 


168 BRAHMAGUPTA AND ARITHMETIC 


dred-thousands place is second aghana, and so on. Thus to find 
out the cuberoot, one hasto mark out the ghana, first aghana 
and second aghana places, then the process of finding out the 
cube-root begins with the subtraction of the greatest cube num- 
ber from the figures up to the last ghana place. Though this has 
not been explicitly mentioned in the rule, the commentators 
say that it isimplied in the expression ghanasya miila-vargena 
etc, (“by the square of the cube-root etc.’”) 


We are reproducing here an illustration given by Datta 
and Singh. 

Example. Find the cube-root of 1953125. 

The places are divided into groups of three by marking 
them as below [ghana (| ) first aghana (—) and second aghana 
Cor 

ican aes Netcare | 


ples sees aa Oe 


F Thus the cube-root=125, 





Subtract cube dh enero: (c) Root=1 
Divide by thrice 
square of root, 
ie. 3.12 3)9(2 (a) Placing quotient 
Subtract square 6 after the root 1 
of quotient mul- 35 gives the root 12 
tiplied by thrice 12 (b) 
the previous root, 
ie OF S41: 
Subtract cube of 233 
quotient, ine. 2° 8 (c) 
Divide by thrice 
square of the root. 
Le. 3.12? 432)2251(5 (a) Placing quotient 
Subtract square of 2160 after the root 
quotient multiplied 12 gives the 
by thrice the pre- 912 root 125 
~ vious root, i. e. 

3.12 900 
Subtract cube of ~ 125 (b) 

-. quotient, i.e. 5* 125 (c) 


_ ‘From the details given, it would be clear that the present 


CUBE ROOT 169 


method of extracting the cube-root is almost a contraction of the 
method first given by Aryabhata I (499 A.D.) 

The method of Aryabhata has been invariably followed by 
Indian mathematicians. Brahmagupta in his Brahmasphuta- 
siddhanta repeats the method in the following words : 

The divisor for the second aghana place is thrice the 
square of the cube-root; the square of the quotient 
multiplied by three and the preceeding (root) must be 
subtracted from the next (aghana place to the right). 
and the cube (of the quotient) from the ghana place 
(the procedure repeated gives) the root.? 

Sridhara and Aryabhata II have further improved on the 
method of extracting cube-root proposed by Aryabhata I and 
followed by Brahmagupta. Rule for finding the cube-root as 
given by Sridhara in his Patiganita is as follows : 

(Divide the digits beginning with the units’ place into 
periods of) one ghana-pada (one “‘cube” place) and two 
aghana-padas (two ‘‘non-cube” places). Then subtrac- 
ting the (greatest possible) cube from the (last) ghana- 
pada and placing the (cube) root underneath the 
third place (to the right of the last ghana-pada), 
divide out the remainder up to one place less (than 
that occupied by the cube root) by thrice the square 
of the cube-root, which, is not destroyed. Sztting © 
down the quotient (obtained from division) in the 
line (of the cube-root), (and designating the quotient 
as the ‘first’ (@dima) and the cube-root as the ‘last’ 
(antya), subtract the square of that quotient, as multi- 
plied by thrice the ‘last’ (antya) from one place less 
than that occupied by the quotient (uparima-rasi) as 
ee and the cube of the ‘first’ Gdima) from its own 
place. 

(The number now standing in the line of cube-root is 
the cube-root of the given number up to its last-but 
one ghana-pada (cube place) from the left). : 

Again apply the rule, “(placing cube-root) under the 
third place’ etc. (provided there be more than two 
ghana-padas (cube places) in the given number; and 


1. at ore fans ca ARITA | 
atten Prysgftrer wae, sat Ta AT I —BrSpSi. XII. 7 


170 BRAHMAGUPTA AND ARITHMETIC 


continue the process till all ghana-padas (cube-places) 
are exhausted). This will give the (cube) root (of the 
given number).* 

KS. Shukla in his translation and commentary of this book 
has given the illustration of extracting cube-root as 
follows : 

Example :- To find the cube root of 277167808, 

Let us indicate ghana-padas or ‘cube’ places by ‘‘c’ and 
aghana-padas or non-cube places as “‘n”’ : 

NANCRHNHCNNC 
277167808 
Subract the greatest possible cube (i.e. 6° or 216) from 
the last ‘cube’ place (i.e. from 277) and place the cube- 
root (i.e. 6) underneath the third place to the right of 
the last ‘cube’ place; thus we have 
nnonnenne 
61167808 (remainder) 
6 (line of cube-root) 
Dividing out by thrice the square of the cube-root (i.e. 
by 3.67 or 108) the remainder up to one place less 
than that occupied by the cube-root (ie. 611) and 
setting down the quotient in the line of the cube-root 
(to the right of the cube-root), we have 
nnconncnnc 
7167808 (remainder) 
65 (line of cube-root) 
Let now quotient 5 be called the ‘first’ (adima) and 
the cube-root 6 the ‘last’ (antya). Then subtracting 
the square of the ‘first’ (@dima) as multiplied by thrice 
the ‘last’ (antya) (i.e. 3x65? or 450) from one place 
less than that occupied by the quotient (i.e. from 716), 
we get 


1, qraaaeaae & aa (92) disor saaal ART | 
dale Glee | Re I 
waeraan ti Agta (dG) asrreng | 

wed fae se ae aay Beparaea II go |} 
| EAT sag saat (a) STA | 
«BREE IRA TeT Rs BAeleLN 2211 


“ —Sridhara, Patigayita, 29-31 


CUBEROOT W711 


nmnconncenne 
2667808 (remainder) 
65 (line of cube-root) 


And subtracting the cube of the ‘first' (adima) (i.e. 5? 
or 125) from its own place (i.e. from 2667), we get 


ANCHRCHHC 
2542808 (remainder) 
65 (line of cube-root) 


One round of the operation is now over; and the num- 
ber 65 standing in the line of the cube-root is the cube- 
root of the given number (277167808) up to its last-but- 
one ‘cube’ place ( ghana pada ) from the left (ie. of 
277167), 


As there is one more ‘cube‘ place (ghana-pada) on the 
right, the process is repeated, Thus placing the cube- 
root (i.e. 65) under the third place beginning with the 
last-but-one ‘cube* place (ghana-pada), we have 
ANACHHCHNHC 
2542808 (remainder) 
€5 Cline of cube-root) 


Dividing out 25428 by 3.657 (=12675) as before, and 
placing the quotient in the line of the cube-root, we 
have ; 
nncnhncnne 
7808 (remainder) 
652 Cline of cube-root) 


Subtracting 3X65 x2? (=780) we get. 
nncnneonne 
8 (remainder) 
652 Cline of cube-root) 


Finally subtracting 2°=8 from 8, we get 

ANCHNCRHC 
0 (remainder) 
652 (line of cube-root) 


The second round of operation is now over. There 
being no more of ghana-pada (‘cube‘ place) onthe 
right, the process ends, The quantity in the line of 
cube root, viz. 652, isthe cube-root of the given 


372 BRAHMAGUPTA AND ARITHMETIC 


numter. The remainder teing zero. the cuke-root 


is exact. 
Fractions 


The concept of fractions in India can be traced to very 
early times, Inthe Rgveda,’ we. find such terms as one-half 
(avdha) and three-fourths (tri-pada). Ina passage of the 
Maitrayani Samhit@ are mentioned the fractions one-sixteenth 
(kala), one-twelfth (kustha), one-eighth (Sapha) and one-fourth 
(pagq). In the Salba Satras? we have not only a mention of 
fractions, but they have been used in the statement and solution 
of problems of geometric nature. Here in the Sulba, unit frac- 
tions are denoted by the use of cardinal number with the term 
bhaga or améa; thus pafica-dasa-bhaga (literally “fifteen parts’) is 
equivalent to one-fifteenth, sapta-bhaga (literally, “seven parts") 
is equivalent to one-seventh, andso on... The use of ordinal 
numbers with the term bhdga or amsa is also quite common: 
thus paficama bhaga stands for one-fifth. ‘The composite fractions 
like tri-a@stama stands for three-eighths and dyvi-saptama for two- 
sevenths. In the Bakhasali Manuscript, the term tryasta occurs 
for 3/8 and 33 is called trayastrayasta (three-three-eighths). 


The Sanskrit term for fraction is bhinna (literally meaning 
‘broken’). Oktviously the European terms as fractio, fraction, 
roupt, rotto or rocto are translations of the same term; they are 
derived from the Latin fractus (frangere) or ruptus meaning 
‘broken’. The Indian term bhinna has a few more connotations; 
it stands for such numbers of the form: 


@ic¢\ (2 .c¢\ (aie. a b 
af), ¢ of Tr) ($25 F Jor( at C ). 


These forms were termed jati’ ie., ‘classes’, and the Indian 
treatises contain special rules for their reduction to proper frac- 
tions, Sridhara and Mahavira each enumerate six jatis. while our 
author. Brahmagupta, gives only five (Bhaskara II gives only 
four). The need for division of-fractions in ‘classes‘ arose out 
of the lack of proper symbolism to indicate mathematical opera- 
tions. (Datta and Singh Arithmetic, p. 188). The only operational 
symbol in use was a dot, standing for the negative sign, 


— LR, K904 
2. Mait 8, IIL 7,7, 


te te 


- 3B, Datta, Subba, pp, 212M. 


FRACTIONS 173 


Reduction to lowest terms.-~A non-mathematical work, 
Tativarthadhigama-Sttra-Bhasya by Umasvati (c-150A.D.) casua- 
lly mentions as followsin the context of a philosophic discourse: 


Or, as when the expert mathematician, for the purpos 
of simplifying operations, removes common factors 
from the numerator and denominator of a fraction, 
there is no change in the value of the fraction, so.... 


Reduction to common denominator. Whenever we have to 
add or subtract fractions, we follow this reduction operation 
toa common denominator. Brahmagupta gives the reduction 
along with the similar processes : 


By the multiplication of the numerator and denomi- 
nator of eachof the (fractional) quantities by other 
denominators, the quantities are reduced to a common 
denominator. In addition, the numerators are united, 
In subtraction their difference is taken? 

Fractions in combination :-—Since there -was no proper 
symbolism available to these early Indian mathematicians, they 
divided combination of fractions into four classes : 

Bhaga, prabhaga, bhagapavaha and bhaga-bhaga. 

(i) Bhaga has been mentioned by Brahmagupta (BrSpSi. 


“XIL 8) thus: (Safe pussies) usually written as 
alcfe al.c|.e 
A Re 

where the dots denote subtraction. 


(ii) Prabhaga : The form(F of & of pe 








This is written as 


Ae 


1 scan 


Gii) Bhaganubandha :The form ( at 2) is written as 


a 
b 
ne 











1, I, 2, a 
2. feats : TRAST TA: TART | | 
Sasa Te aA FAA | — BrSpSi, XI. 2. 


174 BRAHMAGUPTA AND ARITHMETIC 

and the form 
Pt ge Pe (= a9 pment 
Rig ee ge qs a 


is written as 


. b\. . 
(iv) Bhagapavaha, i. the form (a— 2) is written as 


a 
é| 
ees 


De af Pe EN 
and the form - 5 FG tot( 50 





is written as 


lt 


¥ 
§ 
ne 


at 
u 


(v) Bhaga-bhaga : The form 


(+5) (4+ 4) 


There does not appear to have been any notation for divi- 
sion, such compounds being written as 


a p 
b jor} q | 
¢ r 

Ens 


just as for bhaganubandha. That division is to be performed was 
known from the problem, e.g., 1-3 was written as sad-bhaga- 
bhaga, ie. “onesixth bhaga-bhaga’ or “one divided by one- 
sixth’. It is only in the Bakhsali Manuscript that the term bha 
is sometimes placed before or after the quantity affected. 


(vi) Bhaga-matr, i.e., combinations of. forms enumerated 
above. Mahavira, the author of the Ganitasarasamgraha (850 





FRACTIONS 175 


ALD.) gives twenty-six variations of this class. We shall illus- 
trate it by the following example from Sridhara : 
What is the result when half, one-fourth of one-fourth, 
one divided by one-third, half-plus half of itself, and 
one-third diminished by half of itself, are added 
together ? (Trisatika, p. 12). 
A modern writer would have written it as: 
at+G of )+0+H+G4+E of $)G-3 of $) 
In the old Indian notation, it is written as 


1j/1lj1]1 
2,4/4)1 
3 








Doe 


can be read 





The defect of the notation isobvious: AR 
4} 4 


af 
also as ¢+é¢ and fe also be read as 1%. 
3 


And therefore the original meaning is inferred from the 
context or from the enunciation of the problem. 

The rules for reduction of the first two classes (bhaga and 
prabhdga) are those of addition or subtraction and multiplica- 
tion. The rule for the reduction of the third (bhaganubandha) 
and fourth (bhagapavaha) classes are given by Brahmagupta in 
the Brahmasphuta-siddhanta thus : 

The (upper) denominator is multiplied by the deno- 
minator and the upper numerator by the same (deno- 
minator) increased or diminished by its own numera- 
tor 

“Numerator” is known as “arsa" and the “denominator” 
as “cheda.”” 

We give here from Sridhara’s Patiganita (about 900 A.D. 
according to K.S. Shukla, 750 A.D. according to Datta and 
Singh) a rule for reducing a fraction of the bhaganubandha class 
(ie., a whole number increased by a fraction or a fraction imcre- 
ased by a fraction itself): 

1. sataazcuratasnt aa: gana: | 
Sarda afte: winded: = Br SpSi. XII.9. 


176 ’ BRAHMAGUPTA AND ARITHMETIC 


In the bhaganubandha class, the whole numter (raipa- 
gana) is multiplied by the denominator (of the frac- 
tion) should be increased by the numerator (of the 
fraction) or the upper denominator having been 
multiplied by the lower denominator, the initial 
numerator (i.e. the upper numerator) should be multi- 
plied by the sum of the lower numerator and denomi- 
nator.’ 

(Patiganita, 39 cf. BrSpSi. XII. 9 (ii); GSS. Gii) 113 

This means that 


b _ actb 
(i) at = - 
(it) $46 5 of (which was written by Indians in 
ihe style 
a 
b 
C. 
d 
a(d+c) 


is equal to bd 


Addition and Subtraction of Fractions 


In the Brahmasphuja-siddhanta, Brabmagupta gives the 
rule for the addition and subtraction of fractions : 
If the denominators (cheda) of fractions are different 
then reduce these fractions to a common denomina- 
tor. Now for the additions, unite the numerators and 
take their difference in case of subtraction? 
Brahmagupta and Mahavira give the method under Bhaga- 
jati. 
Multiplication 
Brahmagupta says : 
The product of the numerators divided by the pro- 
1. WEITER SRT GS AT: Tie: | . 
— manecstel eisitasqaeca ata: It —Patiganita 39. 
2. PRPS: TREE GRERTT: | 
Ra _ Sebeiser Seat Reise a7 | —BrSpSi. XII. 2 


DIVISION OF FRACTIONS 177 


duct of the denominators is the (result of) multiplica- 
tion of two or more fractions," 


While all other writers give the rule inthe same way as 
Brahmagupta, Mahavira in the Ganitasa@rasamgraha refers to 
cross reduction in order to shorten the work : 


In the multiplication of fractions, the numerators are 
to be multiplied by the numerators and the denomi- 
nators by denominators, after carrying out the pro- 
cess of cross reduction, if that be possible.” 


Division of Fractions 


The Aryabhatiya does not explicitly give the rule of divi- 
sion, but under the Rule of Three, we have an indication of 


thisoperation, The Rule of Three states the result as 


where f stands for phala ie. “fruit”, i for iccha, ie., demand or 
requisition, and p for prama@nq ie. argument. When these 
quantities are fractional, we get an expression of the form 
a c 
= x — 
bd 
“om 


n ; 
for the evaluation of which Aryabhata I states: 
The multipliers and the divisor are multiplied by the 
denominators of each other. 
These quantities are written in the following way 

eeaaemmenmreatl ‘ 
am 
b on 


c 
a! 


Transferring the denominators we have 
, am 
n Ob 
cl hUadl 











Performing multiplication, the result is oa The above 
quads of the obscure line in the Aryabhativa is based 


geet beastie ul | _ +BrSpSi. X13 


2 GSS; ~p, 25, (2) 





178 BRAHMAGUFTA AND ARITHMETIC 


on the commentaries of Suryadéva and Bhaskara I (the commen- 
tary of Paramegvara'on this line is vague and misleading). 
Suryadeva in this connection says : 
Here by the word’ gunakara is meant the multiplier 
-and multi plicand,’ iie.,the phala and’ iccha quantities 
_that are ‘multiplied together. By Bhadgaharg is meant 
the pramitha quantity.. The denominators of the phala 
and-técha dre taken to the pramana. The denominator 
of. the pramana is taken with the phala and icchd. Then 
multiplying these, ie., (the numerators of) the phala 
“and iccha and this denominator, and dividing by (the 
product of) the numbers standing with the prama@na 
the result is the quotient of the fractions. 
Brahmagupta gives the method of division as follows : 
The denominator and numerator of the divisor having 
been ‘interchanged, the denominator of the dividend is 
~ multiplied by the (new) numerator. Thus division of 
proper fractions is performed. - 


Square and Square-Root of Fractions 


Brahmagupta says as follows in this connection:— 
The square of the numerator of a proper fraction divi- 
ded by the square of the denominator gives the 
square®. 
This rule of Brahmagupta has been followed by other 
authors also, The rule regarding the square root as given by 
Brahmagupta is as follows: 


The square-root of the muineretor ofa proper fraction divi- 
ded by the square-root of the denominator gives the panece 
root? tf 


4 ~The. Rule of Three : : 

The Indian term in Sanskrit for* “the Rule of Three is Trai- 
vasika (literally, “three terms”’).’ The term occurs in the Bakh- 
sala ‘Manuscript also, arid also in the’ Arvabhatia, indicating the 





Li aie tmenseait Ba dae le * 
Stiegl aerate: wale = BrSp5i XI. 4 
2,, datetrakeratatintidt waft wi 1” : —BrSpSi. XIL.5 1) 

3 


seks Sevksiags coed "Br SpSi. KI. 5 (2) 


THE RULE OF THREE 179 


antiquity of the term. Bhaskara in his commentary of the 
“Aryabhatiya gives a justification of the use of this term for the 
Rule of Three thus: 
Here three quantities are needed (in the statement and 
calculation) so the method is called trairasika (meaning 
thereby the “rule of three terms’’). 


The problem of the Rule of Three has the fora : 


If p (pramdna) yields f (phala), what will i (icch@) 
yield ? 


Aryabhata II (the author of the Mahasiddhanta, 950 A.D.) 
uses the terms mana, vinimaya and iccha, instead of praméana, 
phala and iccha@ respectively. It has also been pointed out by 
several authors that the first . and third terms are similar, ie., of 
the same denomination. 


.: Weshall give here the Rule of Three as given by Arvabhats 
I and Brahmagupta : 
_In the Rule of Three, the. phala (“fruit”), being multi- 
Plied by the iccha C‘requisition’) is divided by the 
pramana (“argument”). The quotient is the fruit 
corresponding to the iccha The denominators of one 
being multiplied with the other give the multiplier 
(i.e, numerator) and the divisor. (i.e. denominator).* 
Inthe Rule of Three’ pramana (“argument”), phala 
(“fruit”) and iccha (‘requisition’) are the (given) 
terms; the first and the last terms must be similar. The 
iccha inultiplied by the phala and divided by the 
pramana gives thé fruit (of the demand). - 
Sridhara also gives the Rule of Three almost in the same 
words. -Bhaskara II, Narayana and others follow Brahmagupta 
and Sridhara i in the Trairasika operation. Sridhara i in his Pafsga- 


nita Says : i 


1. Sufiegeakr andsarafiened aa | 

aed THI Teresa nas ST | 

Ba: TET Car Baa AWA ATARI | . 

Fat aad WTI ‘aaa Woo. —Arya:, TI 26-27. 
2. Soe wart wats: weet | 

TSA TR TAHA Hat Vale | — BrSpSi XH. 10 


180 BRAHMAGUPTA AND ARITHMETIC 


In (solving problems on) the Rule of Three, the argu- 
ment (pramana) and the requisition (iccha), which are 
of the same denomination, should be set down in 
the first ani last places; the fruit (phala), which is of 
a different denomination, should be set down in the 
middle, (this having been done) that (middle quantity 
multiplied by the last quantity should be divided by 
the first quantity. 
We shall illustrate the Rule of Three by an example from 
the Patiganita (Example 25): 
_ Example, If 1 pala and 1 karsa of sandalwood are obtai- 
ned for ten and a half panas, then for how much will 
nine palas and one karsa (of sandalwood) be obtai- 
ned 
Here in this Example. 
argument=1 pala and 1 karsa=1} of 5/4 palas; fruit= 
10} or 21/2 panas; 
and requisition=9 palag and 1 katsa=9} or 37/4 palas. 
secoraane to the Rule we shall write them 4s: 
1 10 | 
1 ii 
4°24 
Converting these into proper fractions we havé 
5 21 37 | 
4 2 4 


Then applying the rule, (i.e. multiplying the second and the 
last and dividing by the first), we have 


5 21 
4. ae 





ee 
nig 





miro 


J ' 


_ Or transferring denominators fi 21437 pala 
2 “5.2. 4 
1. 2 Seaeceacimencey ee 
Tans sere FAS | _ | —Patiganita 43. 

2 wend ae mR wat wee 
- ° COR Tne wasn | = Panganita, Ex, 25. 


RULE OF COMPOUND PROPORTION 181 


=4 purana, 13 panas, 2 kakinis and 16 varatakas. (One purana 
is equivalent to 16 panas; one pana is equivalent to 4 kakinis, 
and One kakini is equivalent to 20 varatakas or cowries. 

Inverse Rule of Three 


This is known as vyasta-trairasika (literally meaning “inverse 
rule of three terms)”. After having described the rule of three, 
Brahmagupta proceeds to give an account of this inverse rule 
of three: 

Divide the phala with iccha and multiply by pramana; 
this gives the vyasta-trairasika inverse rule of three’. 

Here pramana is the argument also known as the first term 
and, and phala is the fruit also knowh as thé middle term and 
iccha is known as requisition or the last teem. As Bhaskara IE 
clearly states, this rule is applied where with the increase of the 
iccha, the phala decreases or with its decrease the phala increases 
(Lilavati). | 

Rule of Compound Proportion 


Brahmagupta and other writers call the rule of compound 
proportions as pafica-rdsika, sapta-rdsika etc., meaning the 
rule of five terms, rule of seven termsetc. depending on the 
number of terms involved the problems. These are 
sometimes grouped under the general application of the “Rule of 
Odd Terms’. Atyabhata I (499 A.D.) though actually gives the 
rule of three appears to have been quite familiar with the rule 
of compound proportion also: infact the difference between 
the rule of three’and compound proportion is more or less arti- 
ficial. This view was expressed by Bhaskara I (525 A.D.) in his 
commentary on the Aryabhapiyia : 

Here Acarya. Aryabhatd has deseribéd the Rule of 
Three only. How the well-known Rules of Five ete. are 
to be obtained ?I say thus: The Acarya has described 
only the fundamentals of danupata (proportion). All 
others-such: as the Rule of Five ete. follow from that 
fundamental rule « of proportion, How ? The Rule of 
Five etc. consist of combinations of the Rulé of Thee, 

“Tn the Rule df Five,’ there are twWo° Rules of 


1. sae Berg ea are ae RO | ne gods cee a? 
_ Rater a fester tf ae eas 


182 BRAHMAGUPTA AND ARITHMETIC 


Three, in the Rule of Seven three Rules of Three, and 
so on. This I shall point out in the examples. 


Brahmagupta gives the following rule relating to the solu- 
tion of problems in compound proportion : 

See In the case of odd terms beginning with three terms 
up to eleven, the result is obtained by transposing 
the fruits of bothsides, from one side to the other, 
and then dividing the product of the larger set of 

. terms by the product. of the smaller set. In all the 
fractions, the transposition of denominators, in like 
manner, takes place on both sidest 


This may be illustrated by taking an example from the 
commentary of - Prthtdaka Svami on the Bnhmaspinttana: 
dhanta : Sf oak - 

Example -—If£ aver ‘is ‘an increase of 10 in 3 months on 
100 (niskas), what would be the increase on 
60 (niskas) in 5 months, 
Here the Pramana paksa (the first set of terms) is 
100 niskas, 3 months, 10 niskas (phala) 


The second set-or the iccha paksa is 
60 niskas, 5 raonths, x niskas 


” The terms are written in in compartments as below : 


tars Es 
10 


In the atbes 10 (written lowest) i is the fruit of the first side 
(pramana paksa), and there is no fruit on the second side or the 
icca paksa, ‘Tnterchanging the fruits we get 
[ay 

2 {3} 5. 
-¢ Lo 10 
- ‘The larger 8 det bf terms. 4s on ihe second ‘side (icch@ paksa). 
_ The product of the“ numbers is 200. ‘The - _predact of the 
1 ate ata, waaay 3 STRATE | 
ss wt RR oe 4 
Sete HepeeETTT | —BrSpSiz XU. 11-12, 





tors 








RULE OF THREE AS A PARTICULAR CASE 183 


number onthe side of the smaller set of terms is 300. Therefore 
. . 3000 _ Tey , 

the required result is “309 =10. | 

Rule of Three ; asa Particulat Case 


Adele to, Brahmagupta, the above method of “com- 
pound proportion” may be applied to the Rule of Three. ° Tehas 
the example solved under the Rule of Three: : 

If one pala and one karsa of sandal . wood are obtained 

'» for. ten and a half panas, for how much will be obtains 

ed nine palas and one karsa.?. ‘ 
edt 1 kargas=1-pala). 

We shall represent them’ rere to the Rule | of” Con 
pound Proportion as . 

ems pabsa: 1 vala, 1 harsay' 10 pana. 
orzpala * 1 pana, 
] oi vaksa  : 9 pala, L pee oll pina . 
or 37/4 pala 1% pana 

This we shall represent as east 


ad teEK res cy ". 





The pede of sitvenbers on ae side oe ‘ie tase set is 
divided by the product of the numbers on,the side of the smaller 
set, 0 in this case isnot a number. It is the aa for the. 
unknown or absence, Hence the result i is: ae 


S742 hire 
5.43 patas : 





184 BRAHMAGUPTA AND ARITHMETIC 


The above method of working Rule of Three 
is found among Arabs, although it does not seem to 
have been used in India after Brahmagupta. 


Problem Containing Quadratic Equation 


Perhaps Aryabhata I is the first man in the history of 
mathematics to give a solution of a quadratic equation (499 
A.D.). In his Aryabhativa, he gives a rule for the solution of the 
following problem (I.am reproducing it as described by Datta 
and Singh) : 

The principal sum p(=100)is lent for one month 
(interest unknown=<x). This unknown interest is then 
lent out for t((=six) months. After this period, the 
original interest (x) plus the interest on this interest 
amounts to A(=16). The rate-interest (x) on the 
principal (p) is required. 

This problem requires the solution of the quadratic 
equation -— 

tx?-+-nx—AP=0 

which gives xo BIER ola tae 

The negative value of the radical does not give a solution 
of the problem; so that the result is 


_V Apt+(p]2)°—p]2 
t 


This solution is stated by _ Aryabhata Tin the following 
words : 

Multiply the sum of the interest on the principal and 
the interest (A) by the time () and by the principal 
(p). Add to this result the square of half the principal 
(p[2)*. Take square-root this. Subtract half the 
principal (p/2) and divide the remainder by the time 
(t). The result will be the Sy interest (x) on 
the principal. - 


_ Here the Sanskrit terms are mila for sglacieal and phala 
for interest. 


Be Lp herma patel | 
| SERRE wee aa TT Arya, I. 25, 





A PROBLEM ON INTEREST 185 


Brahmagupta (628 A.D.) givesa more general rule: He 
enunciates his problem thus: 
The principal (p) is lent out for t: months and the 
unknown interest on this (=x) is lent out for tg months 
at the same rate and becomes A. To find x. 


This evidently gives the quadratic : 
248 Pes =0 
2 tg 
whose solution is 
Aph , (rt? pti 
ack LL Get) OR 
al te i) 2ty 
The negative value of the radical does not give a solution 
of the problem, so it is discarded. 
Brahmagupta states the formula thus : 
Multiply the principal (py) by its time (4) and divide 
by the other time (te) (placing the result) at two places. 
Multiply the first of these by the mixture (A). Add to 
this the square of half the other. Take the square-root of 
this (sum). From the result subtract half the other. 
This will be the interest (x) on the principal.’ 
A Problem on Interest 


Brahmagupta gives a solution of a problem on interest : 
1n what time will a given sum s, the interest on which 
for t months is r, become k times itself ? 

The rule for the solution of this problem as given by Brah- 

magupta is : 
The given sum multiplied by its time and divided by 
the interest (phala), being multiplied by the factor 
(guna) less one, is the time (required).” 
Miscellaneous Problems 


Brahmagupta in his Ganitadhyaya of the Brahmasphuta- 
siddhanta gives numerous solutions in relation to miscellaneous 
problems. Here. I shall be quoting a few of the problems which 


L, sree: ATER urssefraraera | . : 
TAMAAYAS TAMA TATRA Il _ —BrSpSi. XII. 15+ 
2. arated set nerd SagMed aE 
SAAT Tena Ha ATTN — BrSpSi. XIL, 14. 


186 BRAHMAGUPTA AND ARITHMETIC 


have been quoted by his commentator Prthtdaka Svami in 
connection with one of his karana-stitra.* 


1. A horse was purchased by (nine) Anat in partner- 
ship. whose contributions were one, etc. up to nine; 
and was sold by them for five less than five hundred. 
Tell me what was each man’s share of the sale proceed? 
2. Four colleges (mathas), containing an equal num- 
ber of pupils, were invited to partake of a sacrificial 
feast. A fifth, a half, athird and a quarter (of the 
total number of pupils in the college) came from the 
respective colleges to the feast; and added to one, two, 
three and four, they were found to amount to eighty- 
seven; or, with those deducted, they were sixty seven. 
Find the actual number of the pupils that came from 
each college.’ 


3. Three (unequal) jars of liquid butter, of water and 
of honey, contained thirty-two, sixty and twenty-four 
Pala respectively ; the whole was mixed together and 
the jars filled again. Tell me the quantity of butter, 
of water and of honey in each jar‘. 


1. savehrest ae Sea BET ATT: | 
STRATE SRA BrSpSi. XII. 16. 

2. ward Tay RUE | 
aitét walsel fata: wala: gala: dah: wes | 
faders Tay AR eg feral aN 

3. qeernt TAR Herat aera | 
wee duane Seat fret asaa7 0 
Seta eg TART: | 
wai am teh: waa tl 
Tae CAT SATE STaT: | 
weer F fe Fae ac: 

4. adios agai 3a: eet qatt | 
aafhiae: Gal eslypree: Gn ; 
fety FA Ta Ski a ITT | 

Soa a 


MISCELLANEOUS PROBLEMS 187 


Reference 


B. Datta and A.N. Singh: History of Hindu Mathematics, 
Part I (1962). 


KS. Shukla The Patiganita of Sridharacarya 


(1959). 


Kern The Aryabhativa. Bhatadwika of 


Paramesvara (1875). 


CHAPTER K 
Brahmagupta as an 
Algebraist 


Ancient Indian name for algebra is Bijaganita where 
bija means element or analysis and ganita stands for the science 
of calculation. As early as 860 A.D., Prthudaka Svami used this 
epithet for algebra in his commentary. Brahmagupta calls 
algebra as Kuttakaganita or merely Rutfaka, a term which was 
later on used for “pulveriser” which deals with that special sec- 
tion of algebra which is connected with indeterminate equations 
of the first degree. Algebrais often also known as avvabta- 
ganita or the calculations with unknowns, in contrast to arith- 
metic which was known as vyakta-ganita or the calculations with 
knowns. 


* 


Algebra goes to Europe from India 


In the history of mathematical sciences, as Colebrooke 
rightly remarks, it has long been a question to whom the inven- 
tion of algebraic analysis is due. There isno doubt that Europe 
got algebra from Arabs mediately or immediately. But the 
Arabs themselves scarcely pretend to the discovery of algebra. 
Colebrooke says that they were not in general inventors but 
scholars during the short period of their successful culture of the 
sciences; and the germ at least of the algebraic analysis is to be 
found among the Greeks in an age not precisely determined, but 
more than probably anterior to the earliest dawn of civilisation 
among the Arabs; and this science in a more advanced state 
subsisted among the Hindus prior to the earliest disclosure of it 
by the Arabians to modern Europe. (Colebrooke: Disserta- 
tion on the Algebra of the Hindus)’. 


Colebrooke based his observations on the texts he could 
procure for his studies, These were: Bhaskara II's Bijaganita or 
Vijaganita (1150A.D.) and Lilavati (1150A.D.), the Ganitadhyayva 
and Kujtakadhyaya of Brahmagupta in his famous treatise the 
Brahma Siddhanta or rather the Brahmasphutusiddhanta (628 





1, Colebrooke, H, T., Miscellaneous Essays, Vol. I, 1872, p. 418, 


190 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


AD.). There can be no doubt regarding the age of these two 
authors. Bhaskara II completed his great work on the Siddhanta- 
fromani in 1072 Saka, and Karana-kutahala a practical astro- 
nomical treatise in 1105 Saka; these dates are based on the 
passaces given by Bhaskara himself in his works. The Bija- 
ganita and the Lilavati form parts of the great treatise, the 

Siddhanta-siromani. The genuineness of the text is established, 
as Colebrooke says, with no less certainty by numerous commen- 
tatots in Sanskrit, besides a Persian version of it. Those com- 
mentaries comprise a perpetual gloss, in which every passage of 

the original is noticed and interpreted : and every word of it is 
repeated and explained. From comparison and collation of 
various texts, it appears then that the work of Bhaskara, exhibit- 
ing the same uniform text which the modern transcripts of it 
do, was in the hands of both Muhammedans and Hindus, 
between two or three centuries ago: and numerous copies of it 
having been diffused throughout India, at an earlier period, as of 
a performance held in high estimation, It was the subject of 
study and habitual reference in countries and places so remote 
from each other as thenorth and west of India and the Southern 
Peninsula. 


This though not marking any extraordinary antiquity, nor 
approaching to that of the author himself, was a material point 
_ to be determined : as there will bein the sequel, so says Cole- 

brooke, oecasion to show, that modes of analysis, and in parti- 
cular, general methods for the solution of indeterminate prob- 
lems both of the first and second degrees. are taught in the 
Bija-ganita, and those for the first degrees repeated 
in the Lilavati, which were unknown to the mathematicians of 
the West, until invented anew in the last two centuries by 
algebraists of France and England! Bhaskara who himself 
flourished more than six hundred and fifty years ago, was in 
this respect a compiler and took those methods from Indian 
authors as much more ancient than himself. 
Regarding the age of the precursors of Bhaskara II, Cole- 
brooke says: The age of his precursors cannot be determined 
._ with equal precision. He then proceeds to examine the evidence 
_ as follows ; 


_ & Celebrooke, H, T., Miscellaneous Essays, p, 421. 


ALGEBRA GOES TO EUROPE FROM INDIA 191 


Towards the close of his treatise on Algebra. Bhaskara 
II informs us, that it is compiled and abridged from 
the more diffuse works on the same subject, bearing 
the names Brahme (meaning no doubt Brahmagupta), 
Sridhara and Padmanabha; and in the body of his 
treatise, he has cited a passage of Sridhara’s algebra 
and another of Padmanabha. He repeatedly adverts 
to preceding writers and refers to them in general 
terms, where his commentators understand him to 
allude to Aryabhata, to Brahmagupta to the latter’s 
scholiast Caturveda Prthudaka Svami and to the other 
writers above mentioned. 


Most, if not all, of the treatises, to which ke thus 
alludes, must have been extant, and in the hands of 
his commentators, when they wrote; as appears from 
their quotations of them; more especially those of 
Brahmagupta and Aryabhata, who are cited, and 
particularly the first mentioned, in several instances. 
A long and diligent research in various parts of India, 
has, however, failed of recovering any part of the 
- Padmanabha Bija Cor the algebra of Padmanabha) and 
of the algebraic and other works of Aryabhata. 


But the translator has been more fortunate in regard_ 
to the works of Sridhara and Brahmagupta, having in 
his collection Sridhara’s compendium of arithmetic, 
and a copy incomplete however, of the text and 
scholia of Brahmagupta’s Brahmasiddhanta comprising 
among other no less interesting matter. a chapter 
treating of arithmetic and mensuration; and another, 
the subject of which is algebra: both of them fortu- 
nately complete. The commentary is a perpetual one; 
successively quoting in length each verse of the text; 
procceeding to the interpretation of it, word by word; 
and subjoining elucidations and remarks; and its colo- 
phon, at the close of each chapter, gives the title 
of the work and the name of the author. Now the 
name which is there given, Caturveda Prthudaka 
Svami, is that-of a celebrated scholiast of Brahmagupta. 
‘frequently cited as such by the commentaries of 


192 


BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST . 


Bhaskara and by other astronomical writers; and the 
title of the work, Brahmasiddhanta or sometimes Brah- 
masphutasiddhanta, corresponds, in the shorter form, 
to the known title of Brahmagupta’s treatise in the 
usual references to it by Bhaskara’s commentators, and 
answers, in the longer form, to the designation of it, as 
indicated in an introductory couplet whichis quoted 
from Brahmagupta by Laksmidasa, a scholiast of Bhas- 
kara IJ. Remarking this coincidence, the translator 
proceeded to collate, with the text and commentary, 
numerous quotations from both. which he found in 
Bhaskara’s writings or in those of his expositors. The 
result confirmed the indication and established the 
identity of both text and scholia as Brahmagupta’s 
treatise, and the gloss of Prthtdaka. The authenticity 
of the Brahmasiddhanta is further confirmed by numer- 
ous quotations in the commentary of Bhattotpala on 
the Samhita of Varahamihira : as the quotations from 
the Brahmasiddhanta, in that commentary, (which is 
the work of an author who flourished eight hundred 
and fifty years ago) are verified in the copy under 
consideration. A few instances of both will suffice, 
and cannot fail to produce conviction. 


It is confidently concluded, that the chapters on arith- 
metic and algebra, fortunately entire ina copy in many 
parts imperfect, of Brahmagupta’s celebrated work as 
here described, are genuine and authentic. It remains 
to investigate the age of the author. 


Mr. Davis, who first opined to the public a correct 
_ view of the astronomical computations of the Hindus, 
is of opinion, that Brahmagupta lived in the seventh 
century of the Christian era. Dr. William Hunter, who 
resided for some time with a British Embassy at Ujjay- 
ini, and made diligent researches into the remains of 
_ Indian science at that ancient seat of Hindu astrono- 
mical knowledge, was there furnished, by the learned 
_ astronomers whom he consulted, with the ages of the 
.. Principal ancient authorities. They assigned to Brah- 
;-Magupta the date of 550 Saka; which answers to A.D. 


ALGEBRA GOES TO EUROPE FROM INDIA 193 


628. The grounds on which they proceeded are unfor- 
tunately not specified: but as they gave Bhaskara’s 
age correctly, as well as several other dates right, 
which admit of being verified; it is presumed that they 
had grounds, though unexplained, for the information 
which they communicated.. 


Mr. Bentley, who is little disposed to favour the anti- 
quity of an Indian astronomer. has given his reasons 
for considering the astronomical system which Brah- 
magupta teaches, to be between twelve and thirteen 
hundred years old (1263 years in A-D. 1799). Now as 
the system taught by this author is protessedly one 
corrected and adapted by himto conform with the 
obseryed positions of the celestial objects when he 
wrote, the age, when their positions would be conform- 
able with the results of computations made as by him 
directed, is precisely the age of the author himself: 
and so far as Mr. Bentley’s calculations may be consi- 
dered to approximate the truth, the date of Brahma- 
gupta's performance is determined with like approach . 
to exactness, within a certain latitude however of 
uncertainty for allowance to be made on account 
of the inaccuracy of Hindu observations. 


The translator has assigned on former occasions the 
grounds upon which he sees reason to place the author's 
age, soon after the period when the vernal equinox 
coincided with the beginning of the lunar mansion and 
zodiacal asterism Asvinz, where the Hindu ecliptic 
now commences. He issupported init by the senti- 
ments of Bhaskara and other Indian astronomers, who 
infer from Brahmagupta’s doctrine concerning the 
solistitial points, of which he does not admit a pericdi- 
cal motion, that he lived when the equinoxes did not, 
sensibly to him, deviate from the beginning of Asvini 
and middle of citra on the Hindu sphere. On these 
grounds it is maintained, that Brahmagupta is rightly 
placed in the sixth or beginning of the seventh century 
of the Christian era, as the subjoined calculations will 
more particularly show. The age when Brahmagupta 


194 


BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


flourished, seems then, from the concurrence of all these 
arguments, to be satisfactorily settled as antecedent 
to the eerliest dawn of the culture of sciences among 
the Arabs: and consequently establishes the fact, that 
the Hindus were in possession of algebra before it was 
known to the Arabians. 


Brahmafupta’s treatise, however, is not the earliest 
wotk known to have been written on the same subject 
by an Indian author. The most eminent scholiast of 
Bhaskara II (Gane$a) quotes a passage of Aryabhata 
specifying algebra under the designation of Bija, and 
making separate mention of Kugtaka, which more par- 
ticularly intends a problem subservient to the general 
method of resolution of indeterminate problems of the 
first degree : he is understood by another of Bhaskara’s 
commentators to be at the head of the elder writers, to 
whom the text then under consideration adverts, as 
having designated by the name of Madiyamaharana 
the resolution of affected quadratic equations by means 
of the completion of the square. Itis to be presumed, 
therefore, that the treatise of Aryabhata then extant, 
did extend to quadratic equations in the determinate 
analysis, and to indeterminate problems of the first 
degree; if not to those of the second likewise, as most 
probably it did. 


This ancient astronomer and algebraist. so says Cole- 
trooke, was anterior to both Varahamihira and 
Brahmagupta, being repeatedly named by the latter; 
and the determination of the age when he flourished 
is particularly interesting as his astronomical system, 
though on some points agreeing, essentially dis- 
agreed on others, with that which the Hindu astrono- 
mers still maintain. — 


He, as Colebrooke says, is considered by the commen- 
tators of the Suryasiddhanta and Siromani, as the 
earliest of uninspired and mere human writers on the 
science of astronomy, as having introduced requisite 


‘corrections into the system of Paragara, from whom. he 
took the numbers for the planetary mean motions; as 


ALGEBRA GOES TO EUROPE FROM INDIA 195 


having been followed in the tract of emendation, 
after asufflcient interval to make further .correcticn 
requisite, by Durgasinba and Mihira; who were again 
succeeded after a further interval by Brahmagupta, son 
of Ji3snu. 

In short, says Colebrooke, Aryabhata was founder of 
one of the sets of Indian astronomers, as Puliga, an 
author likewise anterior to both Varahamihira and 
Brahmagupta, was of another: which were distingui- 
shed by names derived from the discriminative tenets 
respecting the commencement of planetary motions at 
sunrise according to the first, but at midnight accord- 
ing to the latter, on the meridian of Lanka, at the 
beginning of the great astroriomical cycle. A third 
sect began the astronomical day, as well as the great 
period, at noon. 


Aryabhata’s name accompanied the intimation which 
the Arab astronomers (under the Abbasside Khalifs, as 
it would appear,) received, that three distinct astro- 
-nomical systems were current among the Hindus of 
those days: and it is but slightly corrupted. certainly 
not at all disguised, in the Arabic representation of 
it Arjabahar. or rather Arjabhar. (corrupted form of 
Aryabhata). The two other systems were, first. 
Brahmagupta’s Siddhanta which was the one they 
became best acquainted with. and to which they apply 
the denomination of the sind-hind; and second, that of 
Arca, the Sun, which they write Arcand a corruption 
still prevalent in the vulgar Hindi. 


Aryabhata appears to have had more correct notions 
of the true explanation of celestial phenomena than 
Brahmagupta himself, so says Colebrooke; who ina 
few instances, correcting errors of his predecessor, but 
oftener deviating from that predecessor’s juster views- 
has been followed by the herd of modern Hindu astro- 
nomers, in asystem not improved, but deteriorated. 
since the time of the more ancient author. 


Considering the proficiency of Aryabhata in astronomi- 
cal science, and adverting tothe fact of his having 


196 


BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEERAIS1 


written algebra, as well as tothe circumstance of his 
being named by numerous writers asthe founder of a 
sect, or author of a system in astronomy, and being 
quoted at the head ct algebraists, when the commen- 
tators of extant treatises have occasion to mention 
early and original writers on this branch of science, it 
is not necessary to seek further for a mathematician 
qualified to have been the great improver of the ana- 
lytic art, and likely to have been the person by whom 
it was carried to the pitch to which it is found to have 
attained among the Hindus, and at which it is observ- 
ed to be nearly stationary through the long lapse of 
ages which have since passed : the later additions being 
few and unessential in the writings of Brahmagupta, 
of Bhaskara and of Jhanaraja, though they lived at 
intervals of centuries from each other. 


Aryabhata, Colebrooke rightly says, then being the 
earliest author known to have treated of Algebra among 
the Hindus, and being likely to be, if not the inventor, 
the improver of that analysis, by whom too it was 
pushed nearly to the whole degree of excellence which 
it is found to have attained among them; it becomes 
in an especial manner interesting to investigate any 
discoverable trace in the absence of better and more 
direct evidence, which may tend to fix the date of his 
labours; or to indicate the time which elapsed bet ween 
him and Brahmagupta, whose age is more accurately 
determined. 


Taking Aryabhata, for reasons given, to have preceded. 
Brahmagupta and Varahamihira by several centuries; 
and Brahmagupta to have flourished more than twelve 
hundred years ago, and Varahamihira, concerning 
whose works and age, Colebrooke has given a few 
notes, and has placed him at the beginning of the sixth 
century after Christ, it appears probable that this 
earliest of known Hindu algebraists wrote as far back 
as the fifth century of the Christian era; and perhaps in 


an earlier age. Hence it is concluded that he is nearly 


as ancient as the Greecian algebraist Diophantus, sup- 


ALGEBRA GOES TO EUROPE FROM INDIA 197 


posed on the authority of A bulfaraj, to have flourished 
inthe time of the Emperor Julian or about A.D. 
360. 


Colebrooke further says: Admitting the Hindu and 
Alexandrian authors to be nearly equally «zncient, it 
must be conceded in favour of the Indian algebraist, 
that he was more advanced in the science: since he 
appears to have been in rfossession of the resolution of 
equations involving several unknowns, which it is not 
clear, nor fairly presumable, that Diophantus, knew: 
and a general method of indeterminate problems of at 
least the first degree, to a knowledge of which the 
Greecian algebraist had certainly not attained; though 
he displays infinite sagacity and ingenuity in particu- 
lar solutions ; and though a certain routine is indiscer- 
nible in them. 


Colebrooke appears to be of the view that Greeks. 
were the first to discover the solution of equations 
involving one unknown; and this knowledge was passed 
to ancient Indians by their Greek instructors in impro- 
ved astronomy. But “by the ingenuity of the Hindu- 
scholars, the hint was rendered fruitful and the algeb- 
raic method was soon ripened from that slender beginn- 
ing to the advanced state of a well arranged science, 
as it was taught by Aryabhata: and asit is found in» 
treatises compiled by Brahmagupta and Bhaskara.”’ : 


We do not agree with this analysis in entirety. Indian 
algebra is entirely of Indian roots. It had its beginning 
in the times of Samhitas and Brahmanas. Some of the _ 
equations and problems were solved by geometric 
methods. It must have had its origin in the Sulba 
period if not before. Aryabhata undoubtedly was the. 
discoverer of many algebraic solutions of equations of 
the first and higher order with one and more unkno- 
wns. Itisrather too much to trace the influence of 
Diophantus on Indian algebra which developed in this 
country independently. Brahmagupta is one of the 
most brilliant algebraists we ever had in the entire 
history of mathematics, 


198 BRAHMGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


Technical Terms 
Coefficient— 


“In the ancient Indian algebra, there is no systematic term 
for the coefficient. Usually, the power of the unknown is men- 
tioned when the reference isto the coefficient of that power. At 
one place, for example, we find Prthadaka Svami (the commenta- 
tor of Brahmagupta’s Brahmusphitasiddhanta) writing “the num- 
ber (anka) which is the coefficient of the square of the unknown is 
called the ‘square’ and the number which forms the coefficient of 
the (simple) unknown is called the ‘unknown quantity’ (avyakta- 
mana).’' However, at many places, we find the use of a technical 
term also. Brahmagupta once calls the coefficient samkhya? 
(number) and on several other occasions gunaka® or gunakara‘ 
(multiplier). Prtthadaka Svami (860 A.D.) calls it anka (number) 
or prakrti (multiplier). These terrns may also be seen in the. 
works of Sripati® (1039) and Bhaskara II’ (1150 A.D.), The 
former also used the word rapa for the same purpose.® 


Unknown Quantity 


The unknown quantity has been termed as ydvat-tavat 
(meaning so-much-as or as-many-as) in literature as early as 300 
B. C. (vide the Sthananga-sttra®), In the Bakhasali Manuscript, 
it has been termed as yadrccha. vaiicha or kamika (or any desired 
quantity)”. Aryabhata I in one of his verses calls the unknown 
as gulika™ (literally meaning a shot) From the early seventh 
century A.D., the word avyakta was used for unknown quantities. 
Brahmagupta uses this term in his Brahmasphutasiddhanta™ 


1. BrSpSi, XVIII. 44 (Com.) 


2. Ray aaa wate at dela | —BrSpSi. XVIII 63 
3. ae fete aig gua gute ga fears | —BrSpSi. XVIII 64 

aR TOR eR weet arid Hate | —BrSpSi. XVIII 70 
4. SRR TUS Tle: ye | —BrSpSi. XVIII 69 


5. BrSpSi XVIII. 44 (Com.) 

6. Sise XIV, 33-5, 

TI, Bijaganita 

8, Sige XIV, 33-5. 

9. Siltra 747. . 

10. BMs. Folio 22, verso; 23, recto and vetso, 
LL. afarate Re aa: | | 

12.3 ee Fhe TeTeATT | 


TECHNICAL TERMS 199 


Power 

Since long, the word varga has been used for the second 
power; the word also stands for square (Uttaradhyayana Sutra}, 
B.C. c, 300). The third power is similarly known as ghana, the 
fourth power as varga-varga (square-square), the sixth power as 
ghana-var ga (cube-square) and the twelfth power as ghana-varga- 
varga (cube-square-square). In later days, the fifth power was 
called vargaghana ghata (here the word ghata means product; the 
term means product of cube and square). The former system was 
multiplicative, rather than additive; wheras the latter was on the 
additive system. The seventh power on the additive system was 
known as varga-varga-ghana-ghata (product of square-square and 
cube), Brahmagupta, however, uses a more scientific system for 
expressing the powers more than four. He calls the fifth power : 
as Pajica gata (literally meaning, raised to the fifth), the sixth 
power as sad-gat (raised to the sixth) and soon, thus adding the 
suffix gata to the name of the number indicating that power? 
Bhaskara II has followed the system of Brahmagupta almost consi- 
stently for powers one and upwards. 


Equation 

Perhaps Brahmagupta has for the first time used the term 
samakarana or samikarana (literally meaning making equal) or 
simply sama (equal or equation )®. Prthudaka Svami (860) 
employs the term sdmya (equality or equation) for equation’. 
The equation is said to possess two Paksas® (sides) Itara-Paksa 
and apara-paksa. 
Absolute Term 

Brahmagupta uses the term riipa (literally meaning appeer- 
ance) for an absolute term. It represents the visible or known 


1, Chapter XXX, 10,11, 

2. SRT Tea Tea | 
wen Ban wears areeraisrr safe it 

3. at rarer wisest wader delay | 
frat Rarsft wiRa-raacua fi ai aa 
TARR WH Ae TIER FST: | 

4, Sige, XIV. 19, 

5, Bijaganita, 


200 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


portion of the equation whilst its other part is practically invisible 
or unknown!. 


Unknowns and Symbolism 


Aryabhata I (499 A. D.) probably used coloured gulikas or’ 
shots for represtnting different unknowns. Brahmagupta men- 
tions varna as the symobls for unknown. He has, however, not 
indicated how these varnas or colours were used as symbols for 
unknowns. Perhaps we might conculude from this that the 
method of using colours as symbols for unknown quantities was 
very common and familiar to the algehraists. Datta and Singh 
say that the Sanskrit word varna denotes colour as well as a letter 
of alphabet, and therefore, letters of alphabet came into use for 
unknown quantities : Ralaka (black), nilaka (blue), pitaka (yellow): 
lohita (red), haritaka (green), svetaka (white), citraka (variegated), 
hapilaka (tawny), pingalaka (reddish-trown), dhamraka (smoke- 


coloured), patalaka (pink), favalaka (spotted), syamalaka (blackish) 
mecaka (dark blue) etc’. 


It should be further noted that the first unknown quantity 
yavat-tdvat is not a varna or colour. It thus clearly indicates 
that the use of colours as symbols came at a later stage, whilst the 
word yavat-tdvat was in currency from much earlier times. Some 
authorities think that the term ydvat-tavat is a corrupted form of 
yavakastavat (where yavaka tweans red). Prthudaka Svami has 
sometimes used the term yavaka for an unknown quantity’. 


Laws of Signs 


Brahmagupta has in his Chaper XVIII devoted a special 
section entitled “Dhanarna Sunyanam Samkalanam” or calcu- 


lations dealing with quantities bearing positive and negative signs 
and zero, 





L. Seo Wat eT SRR TASER | —BrSpSi XVIII. 43 
at aad frat erat neat afar | —BrSpSi XVII. 44 


2. AAA Sera STAI aa: Gey aifeasteare: | 

Seat Sei ARTS AT AE UI 

AIT HAS sles Totes Tea aha | 

wit Raa afiae wearer weg a Waa Il 

Se ae Aas aren | —Narayana, Bijaganita 
3. BrSpSi XII. 15, (Com. ; XIL 18, 


LAWS OF SIGNS 201 


Regarding addition, Brahmagupta says : 
The sum of two positive numbers is positive, of two 
negative numbers is negatis e; of a positive and negative 
number is the difference’. 

Regarding subtraction, Brahmagupta further says : 
From the greater should be subtracted the smaller; (the 
final result is) positive, if positive from positive, and 
negative, if negative, from negative. If, however, the . 
greater is subtracted from the less, that difference is 
reversed (in sign), negative becomes positive and 
positive becomes negative. When positive is to be 
subtracted from negative or negative from positive, 
then they must be added together®. 


Mahavira (850 A, D.), Bhaskara II (1150 A.D.) and Narayana 
(1350 A. D.) have also given similar rules regarding addition 
(Samkalanam) and the subtraction (vyavakalanam), 

Again, the rule given by Brahmagupta regarding Multipli- 
cation is as follows - 

The product of a positive and a negative (number) is 
negative; of two negatives is positive; positive multiplied 
by positive is positive®. 

His rule regarding division is as follows ; 

Positive divided by positive or negative divided 
by negative becomes positive. But positive divided by 
negative and negative divided by positive remains 
negative’. 

Similar rules for multiplication and division were provided 
by later authorities as Mahavira and Bhaskara IT. 


1. BrSpSi XII. 15. (Com.); XIT 18. (Com) 
2. wateausatad Feat cae S| 

UA A TATE YR: Ta ET MI —BrSpSi. XVIII-30 
3. saaheaienet ef sare Raa | 


aed Tea BIE a TAT wale Ul 


weer ve ap Halt PETAL | 

MS AAT TATU TST FAT FAL Ml —BrSpSi XVIII. 31-32 
4. aaa saraaaea af wale | 

Fea: | waa: yaa a: FRAT —BrSpSi XVI. 33 


5. eet Tee ei Wah @ GTA GF | 
WR TAIT a eT wae {1 —BrSpSi. XVIII. 34 


202 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


Brahmagupta lays down the rules regarding evolution and 
involution as follows : 

The square of a positive or a negative number is positive 
we. The (sign of the) root is the same, as was that from 
which the square was derived’. 

As regards the latter portion of this rule, Prthudaka Svami 
has the following comment to make : ““The square-root should be 
taken either negative or positive, as will be most suitable for 
subsequent cperations to be carried on.” 

‘It will be interesting to observe the following observation 
of Mahavira (850 A. D.) regarding square-root of a negative 
quantity “Since a negative number by its own nature is not a 
square, it has no square-root.’? So says Sripati: “A negative 
number by itself is non-square, so its square-root is unreal; so the 
rule (for the square-root) should be applied in the case of a posi- 
tive numter.’”® 


Algebraic Operations 


Brahmagupta and other algebraists recognise six operations 
as fundamental in algebra : addition, subtraction, multiplication, 
division, squaring and the extraction of the square-root. 


Regarding addition and subtraction Brahmagupta says: 
Of the unknowns, their squares, cubes, fourth powers, 
fifth powers, sixth powers, etc..addition and subtraction 
are (performed) of the like; of the unlike (they mean 
simply their) statement severally.* 


In place of ‘of the like”, Bhaskara II uses the term “of those 
of the same species (jati) amongst unknowns” : 
Addition and subtraction are performed of those of the 
same species (jati) amongst unknowns; of different species 
they mean their separate statement.® 





1. aya Rd Ta SEE TI | 


UST: Fe ae ve afedy at | —BrSpSi, XVII. 35 
2 GSS. 1. 52, 
3, Sige, XIV, 5, f 
4. SRR Ta ET Tee ATT | 
geart dated sasfad gegeaart li” = BrSpSi.XVIII. 41. 
5. ahised oy cart srenistea areca ery fealers | 


- Bhaskara Il, Bijaganita. 


ALGEBRAIC OPERATIONS 203 


This means that the numerical coefficients of x cannot be 
added to or subtracted from the numerical coefficients of y 
or x” or x* or xy and so on because these terms belong to different 
jati or they do not belong to the category of the “like”. 

Again, regarding multiplication, Brahmagupta says: 

The preduct of the two like unknowns is a square: the 
product of three or more like unknowns is a power of 
that designation. The multiplication of unknowns of 
unlike species is the same as the mutual product of 
symbols; it is called bha@vita (product or factum).! 

Having given the rules of the operations for addition, sub- 
traction and multiplication, Brahmagupta does not think 
it necessary to deal with other operations. His section on the 
calculations with zero, negative and positive quantities ends here. 


How is an Equation Formed? 


Prthtdaka Svami while commenting on a verse in Brahma- 
sphutasiddhanta speaks as follows : 


In this case, in the problem proposed by the questioner, 
yavat-tavat is put for the value of the unknown quantity. 
Then performing multiplication, division etc. as required 
in the problem the two sides shall be carefully made 
equal. The equation being formed in this way, then 
the rule (for its solution) follows.? 


Plan for Writing Equations 


When in regards to a given problem. an equation has been 
formed, it has to be written down for further operations. 
This writing down of an equation is technically known 
as nydsa Perhaps the oldest record of nyasa is to be found in the 
Bakhasali Manuscript. According to the procedure prescribed in 
this work, the two sides of an equation are put down one after the 
other in the same line without any sign of equality being inter- 
posed. Thus the equations : 

Vat5=s Vx—T=t 

appear as 

1. aeuadt sremRarae qatar: | 
TASAUTT ATH: WEST N —BrSpSi.XVIILL. 42. 
2. BrSpSi. XVIIL. 43 (com) 


204 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


0 5 yu ma 0 sa 0 7 + mau 0 
1 1 1 11 1 
Here yu (g) stands for yuta (ga), meaning added, subtraction 
is+sign, derived from Ksaya or (#4) meaning diminished, gu 
(y) for guna or gunita, meaning ‘multiplied; bha (41) for division 
from bhajita and mu (4) for square-root, from mila meaning 
root; zero (¢) was used to mark a vacant place. 
Again, the following equation 


x+2x+3 X3x412 xX 4%=300 
is se haar ee ; 


3 aes di 300 
Ki i 


There is no sign for unknown in the Bakhasali Manuscript. 


Later on this plan of writing equations as adopted in Bakha- 
gal; Manuscript was abandoned in India; a new one was adopted 
in which the two sides are written one below the other without 
any sign of equality. It must be stated that in this new plan the 
term of similar denominations are usually written one below the 
other and even the terms of absent denominations on either side 
are clearly indicated by putting zeros as their coefficients. We 
find a reference to this new plan in the algebra of Brahmagupta. 

From which the square of the unknown and the unkno- 
wn are cleared, the known quantities are cleared (from 
the side) below that?. 

Here in this verse, the words ‘“‘adhastat” clearly indicate 
that one side of the equation is written below the other., As an 
illustration, Prthudaka Svami represented the equation? :— 

10x—8=x7+1 

as: 

ya va 0 ya 10 re 8 (%2.0+x.10—8) 
ya va 1 ya OO rt 1 (.1+x.0+1) 

which means, x7 was written as yavat-varga (ya@ va) and 
% Was written as yavat or ya. The minus sign was represented 
by a dot at the top of the number.(—8 was written as 8). We 
shall take another illustration from Prthudaka Svami. 

He would write the equation 

197x—1644 y—z=6302 

as 
1. BrSpSi. XVII. 43; compare also Bhaskara II, Bijaganita 
2. Br SpSi. XVIII. 49 (com.) 


PLAN FOR WRITING EQUATIONS 205 


ya 197 ka 1644 nm; 1 ra 0 
ya 0 ka Ons O ru 6302 


Here the first unknown x is represented by ya(vat), the 
second unknown y by ka(laka) and the third unknown z by nz 
(laka) and the term without unknown, a mere number is wrirten 
by ra(paka). The two sides, one written below the other if 
written in the present form, would appear as: 


197x—1644y—z+0=0x+0y +07 +6302. 


The Bijaganita of Bhaskara IT also follows the same proce- 
dure. One instance from it would be quoted here to illustrate 
the method of expressing equations. 

8xP +4?+ 10y72 x= 423+ 12y?2x 
or 8x2+4x?+10p?x=4%5+0x? + 12y?x 
is written as follows on Bhaskara’s or Brahmagupta’s plan : 
x is ghana of yavat (abbreviated as ya gha) 
xis varga of yavat. (abbreviated as ya va) 
y* is varga of kalaka (abbreviated as ka va) 
the coefficients 10 and 12 are bhavita (abbreviated as 
bha). 


The equation is: 


ya gha 8 va va 4 ka va ya. bha 10 
ya gha4yava0 kava ya. bha 12 


Datta and Singh state that the use of the old plan of writ- 
ing equations is sometimes met with in later works also. For 
instance, in the MS. of Prthudaka Svami’s commentary? on the 
Brahmasphutasiddhanta an incomplete copy of which is preserv- 
ed in the library of the Asiatic Society of Bengal (No. I B6), we’ 
find a statement of equations thus ;: “first side yavargah 1 vavakah 
200 ra 0; second side vavargah 0 yavakah 0 rit 1500. 


Sodhana or Clearance of an Equation 


After nydsa or statement of an equation, the operation to 
be performed is known as fodhana (clearance) or samsodhana 
(equi-clearance or complete clearance). The nature of 
this clearance varies according to the kind of equation 
In the case of an equation in one unknown only, whether linear, 


1. BrSpSi. XT. 15 (com.) 


206 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


quadratic or of higher powers, one side of it is cleared of the 
unknowns of all denominations and the other side of it of the 
absolute terms, so that the equation is ultimately reduced to one 
of the form 

ax*+bx=c, 
where a,b, c may be positive or negative;some of them may 
even be zero. Thus Brahmagupta observes : 


From which the square of the unknown and _ the un- 
known are cleared, the known quantities (ripaui) are - 
cleared (from the side) below that? 


On this Prthadaka Svami comments as follows : 


This rule has been introduced for that case in which 
the two sides of the equation having been formed in 
accordance with the statement of the problem, there are 
present the square and other powers of the unknown 
together withthe (simple) unknown. The absolute 
terms should be cleared off from the side opposite to 
that from which are cleared the square (and other 
powers) of the unknown andthe (simple) unknown. 
When perfect clearance (samsodhana) has been thus 
made...” 
Stidhara and Bhaskara II have also given the rules of 
clearance almost on the same lines. Thus the equation 
ya va 0 ya 10 ru 8 
pavalya Oral 
after perfect clearance having been made will. be (according to 
Prthudaka Svami) 
yt val yalOrn9 
ie. the equation 10x—8=27+1 
after clearance would become 
x—10x=—9, 


Classification of Equations 


Usually equations are classified as : 
simple equation : pavat-tavat 


quadratic 2 varga 
1. wera Met sens eT eT  —BrSpSi. XVIII. 43. 


2. BrSpSi. XVII. 43 (com. 


CLASSIFICATION OF EQUATIONS 207 


cubic : ghana 
biquadratic > Var ga-varga 


Brahmagupta classified them as 


@ equaticns in one unknown quantity : eka-varna 
samikarana. 


(ii) equations in several unknowns : aneka-varna sami- 
karana. 


(iii) equations involving products of unknowns: 
bhavita. 


- Eka-varna samikaranas (equations with one unknown) are 
further divided into (i) linear equations, and (ii) quadratic equa- 
tions (avyakta-varga samikarana). 


Prthtdaka Svami has classified equations in a different 
manner as follows: 


(i) linear equations with one unknown: eka-yarna 
samikarana. 


Gi) linear equations with more unknowns: aneka- 
yarna samikarana. 


Gii) equations with one, two or more unknowns in their 
second or higher pewers : madhyamdharana. . 
(iv) equations involving products of unknowns : bha- 
vita. 

As the method of solution of an equation of the third class 
Ge. equations with one or several unknowns in their second or 
higher powers) is based upon the principle of the elimination 
of the middle term, that class is called by the term madhyama 
(middle) aharana (elimination). The classification of Brahma- 
gupta and Prthtdaka Svami more or less received recognition by 

later writers on algebra as Bhaskara IT and others. 


Linear Equations with 
One Unknown and Their Solutions 


The first solution of a linear equation with one unknown is 
obtainable in the Sulba Sutras but not through an algebraic 
process,—the Sulba process is geometrical. It is said that there 
is a reference in the Sthandnga Sutra’ (c. 300 B.C.) to a linear 
equation by its name yavat-tayat. There has been a good deal of 


208 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


controversy regarding the date of the Bakhasali Manuscript 
where we have definitely a method of solving linear equations 
by the Rule of False Position. It would be interesting to give 
an account of this rule here by taking an illustration from the 
Bakhasali Manuscript. 


Problem : 


The amount given to the first is not known, 
The second is given twice as much as the first; the third 
thrice as much as the second; and the fourth four times 
as much as the third. The total amount distributed is 
132. What is the amount of the first ? 
(BMS. Folio 23, recto) 
In modern algebraic language, the solution of the problem 
would be given by the equation 
xt2x+6x+24x%=132 
where x is the amount given to the first. 


The solution of this equation is given asfollows in the 
Bakhasali Manuscript : 


‘Putting any desired quantity in the vacant place’; any 
desired quantity is || 1 ||, ‘then construct the series’ 
| 1 | 2/2 3 6 | 4 
1 1 1 1 1/1 | 


‘multiplied’ 11 ]|2|6| 241; ‘added’ 33. ‘Divide the 
visible quantity’ | ie [ which) on reduction be- 


ccmes | : : (This is) the amount given (to the first) 


(BMS. Folio 23, recto) 
The Rule of False Position may be regarded as an early 
stage of the development of thescience of algebra, since no 
symbol could have been evolved for an unknown quantity. As 
soon as the system of notations was introduced, the application 
of this Rule was no longer considered as necessary. Thus we 
find that Aryabhata I does not mention of this Rule. 
Aryabhata I states as follows regarding the solution of 
_ Imear equations : 
The difference of the known ‘amounts’ (rupaka) relat- 
ing to two persons should be divided by the difference 


LINEAR EQUATIONS 209 


of the coefficients on the unknown (gulika). The 
quotient will be the value of the unknown (gulika), if 
their possessions be equal. 

The original verse contains the term “gulikantara’ which 
has been here translated as the difference of the coefficients 
of the unknowns. We have already stated earlier that Aryabhata 
uses the term gulikd or shot for an unknown quantity.(sulikantara 
literally means only the difference of unknowns). This practice 
is also followed by other Indian algebraists. Prthtdaka Svami 
rightly observed that according to the usual practice in this 
country, “the coefficient of the square of the unknown is called 
the square (of the unknown) and the coefficient of the (simple) 
unknown is called the unknown? 

The rule given by Aryabhata. then, contemplates a problem 
of this kind : 

Two persons, who are equally ricb, possess respectively 

a,b times a certain unknown amount together with 

c. d units of money incash. What is that amount ? 
Now if x be the amount unknown, then according to the 


problem 
axtc=bxt+d 


Thence 
yx tt 
a—b 
Aryabhata has merely expressed this solution in his langu- 
age- 
Regarding the solution of linear equations, Brahmagupta 
says : 
Tn a (linear) equation in one unknown, the difference 
of the known terms taken in the reverse order, divided 
by the difference of the coefficients of the unknown 
(is the value of the unknown).® 


1 afrarmty fasig at: gerheg eaaezey | 
aed afar aed ad vals ger — Arya. I. 30 
2. BrSpSi, XVII. 44 (com.) : ; 
3. SRI Te TIN SASeaTA | 
ART: WA TAS VHT TIAA N —BrSpSi. XVUI. 43 





210 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


Similar solutions have been offered by the other Indian 
algebraists who followed Brahmagupta like Sripati, Bhaskara II 
and Narayana. Here again. we take a problem proposed by 
Brahmagupta in this connection : 

Problem: 
Tell the number of elapsed days for the 
time when four times the twelfth part of 
the residual degrees increased by one, plus 
eight will be equal to the residual degrees 
plus one.? 

Prthtdaka Svami has solved this problem as follows : 

Here the residual degrees are (put as) ydvat-tdvat, ya; 


increased by one, v@ 1 rt 1; twelfth part of it, ya wet I. 
four times this, yah wat, plus the absolute quantity 
eight 24 This is equal to the residual degrees 
plus unity. The statement of both sides tripled is 

yal .ra25 

yas =ra3 


This difference between the coefficients of the unknown 
is2. By this the difference of the absolute terms, 
namely 22, being divided, is produced the residual of 
the degrees of the Sun, 11. These residual degrees should 
be known to be irreducible. The elapsed days can be 
deduced then, (proceeding) as- before. 


If put in the modern notations, it means the solution of the 
equation : 


4 Get 1)48— 241, 


from which we have 


x+25=3x+3 
or 2x=22 
or x=11. 


Rule of Concurrence or Samkramana 
._Brahmagupta has included this rule in algebra, whereas 
other Indian mathematicians included it in arithmetic. Sam- 


1. Sartueteg gerarragy TseT: 1 i 
Ssicteget mat ASE ees —BrSpSi. XVIII. 46 


RULE OF CONCURRENCE 211 


kramanais the solution of the simultaneous equations of the 
type : 
x+y =a 
x—y=b 
Brahmagupta’s rule for solution is: 
The sum is increased and diminished by the difference 
and divided by two; (the result will be the two un- 
known quantities): (this is) concurrence (Samkra- 
mana).* 
Brahmagupta restates this rule inthe form of a problem 
and its solution : 
The sum and difference of the residues of two (heavenly 
bodies) are known in degrees and minutes. What are 
the residues? The difference is both added to and 
subtracted from the sum. and halved; (the results are) 
the residues? 
Linear Equations with Several Unknowns 


The first mention of a solution of the problem with more 
than one unknown is found in the Bakhasali Manuscript, anda 
system of linear equations of this type is solved in the Bakhaégali 
treatise substantially by the False Position Rule. 

A generalised system of linear equations will be 

bidx— cixi= ay bedix— CexXe= darescees 
bn Dx—Cax =an 


Therefore 
__ dCalc) 
24=S6]0)—1 
Hence i 


wee Oe Gal) __ ae 
ce SbiQ)—1 Cr 
"71, 2s Bescon 1 
One particular case, where bi=be=b3=......=bn =1 and a= 
C2=C3=......=¢n =¢ has been treated by Brahmagupta at one 
place. He gives the rule as follows: 
1. atsaaadet fea: damarR er aT | 
aaa fed Ramat 11 —~ BrSpSi. XVIII. 36 
2. aaraen fameted czar mart ah TF | 
tet fearssacfee Stet a fears BF —BrSpSi. XVII, 96 


212 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


The total value (of the unknown quantities) plus or 
minus the individual values (of the unknowns) multi- 
plied by an optional number deing severally (given), 

7 the sum (of the given quantities) divided by the num- 
ber of unknowns increased or decreased by the multi- 
plier will be the total value; thence the rest (can be 
determined).* 


Sarkom=ar Dx cxe=as, Dx oxs= ase 


Dxex =an 
Therefore 
Bye BT at ast over Fan 
nc 
Hence 
n=4( do =aratar. devs xa), 


and so on for x2, xs etc. 


Now we shall give the rule enunciated by Brahmagupta 
for solving linear equations involving several unknowns : 


Removing the other unknowns from (the side of) the 
first unknown and dividing by the coefficient of the 
first unknown, the value of the first unknown (is obtai- 
ned). Inthe case of more (values of the first un- 
known), two and two (of them) should be considered 
after reducing them to comon denominators. And 
(so on) repeatedly. If more unknowns remain (in the 
final equation), the method of the pulveriser (should be 
employed). (Then proceeding) reversely (the values 
of other unknowns can be found)? 
Prthudaka Svami has commented on this rule as follows : 


In an example in which there are two or- more un- 
known quantities, colours such as ydvat-tavat, etc. 
should be assumed for their values. Upon them should 


1. aura atid dt oan gH Rae | # 
Egia eed cease I —BrSpSi: XII 47 
2. AAU TTT Te | 
Ferarraan 2 are SN —BrSpSi. XVII. 51 


QUADRATIC EQUATIONS 213 


be performed all operations conformably to the state- 
ment of the example and thus should be carefully 
framed two or more sides and also equations. Equi-clear- 
ance snould be made first between two and two of 
them and so on tothe last: from one side one un- 
known should be cleared, other unknowns reduced to 
a common denominator and also the absolute numbers 
should be cleared from the side opposite. The 
residue of other unknowns being divided by the 
residual coefficient of the first unknown will give the 
value of the first unknown. If there be 
obtained several such values, then with two and two 
of them, equations should be formed after reduction to 
common denominators, Proceeding in this way tothe 
end find out the value of one unknown. If that value 
be (in terms of) another unknown then the coefficients 
of those two will be reciprocally the values of the two 
unknovns. If, however, there be present more un- 
knowns in that value, the method of the pulveriser 
should beemployed. Arbitrary values may then be 
assumed for some of the unknowns. 

Datta and Singh have said that the above rule of Brahma- 
gupta, and also the one indicated in the commentary of Prthudaka 
Svami, embraces the solution of indeterminate as well as the 
determinate equations. In fact, all the examples given by 
Brahmagupta in illustration of the rule are of indeterminate 
character. So far as the determinate simultaneous equations are 
concerned, Brahmagupta’s method for solving them will be easily 
recognised to be the same as our present one. 


: Quadratic Equations 

The geometrical solution of a quadratic’ equation in this 
country would take us to the Vedic Sulba period. The Bakha- 
sali Manuscript also contains certain problems which need the 


solving of quadratic equations. I shall quote one out of the 
numerous available : 


A certain person travels s yojana on the first day and b 
yojana more on each successive day. Another who 
travels at the uniform rate of S yojana per day. hasa 


start of t¢days. When will the first man overtake the 
second ? a ; 


214 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


This problem would today be expressed in terms of the 
following equation : 


SG@+x)=x stES *)p} 


where x is the number of days after which the first 
overtakes the second. Wemay write this equation 
as 
bx?—{2(S—s)+b}x=2tS 
whence the value x would be after solving the quadra~ 
tic : ie 
a {2S—s) +b} +8bis + {2S—s) +b} 
2b 


The Bakhasali Manuscript gives this solution as follows: 


The daily travel (S) diminished by the march of the 
first day (s) is doubled; this is increased by the common 
increment (6). That (sum) multiplied by itself is 
designated (as the ksepa quantity). The product of the 
daily travel and the start (t) being multiplied by 
eight times the common increment, the ksepa quantity 
is added. The square-root of this (is increased by the 
ksepa quantity; the sum divided by twice the common 
increment will give the required number of days), 
(BMS. Folio 5, recto) 


* AryabhataI (499 A.D.) is regarded as the founder of 
algebra, since he gives the solutions of a few quandratic problems. 
For example, to find the number of terms of an arithmetical pro- 
gression (A.P.), he gives the following rule : 


The sum of the series multiplied by eight times the 
common difference is added by the square of the dif- 
ference between twice the first term and the common 
difference: the square-root (of the result) is diminished 
by twice the first term and (then) divided by the com- 
mon difference : half of this quotient plus unity is the 
number of terms. 


In the modern notations of algebra, the solution would be 
expressed as follows : : 


1. aRatsErR afters Rawr AaegaT | 
ae fours She wid Tem I —Arya. II, 20 


QUADRATIC EQUATIONS 215 
—hb)— 
n= | Vest Ca b) 2a4 4 i 


There is another certain interest problem’, the solution of 
which has been provided in the Aryabhajiva as 


a V Apt t+ (pia —nl2 
t 


which is the solution of the quadratic equation : 
tx’?-+px—Ap=0 
Ayabhata I has thus given the solutions of a few quadratic 
equations, but he nowhere gives the procedure of solving these 
equations, 


We give here the Rules of Brahmagupta for the solution of 
quadratic equations. He undoubtedly is not the discoverer of 
these rules; but perhaps for the first time in the history of algebra 
we find the process of solving a quadratic equation so clearly 
indicated. 


First Rule : 


The quadratic: the absolute quantities multiplied by 
four times the coefficient of the square of the unknown 
are increased by the square of the coefficient of the 
middle (ie. unknown); the square-root of the 
result being diminished by the coefficient of the middle 
and divided by twice the coefficient of the square of 
the unknown, is (the value of) the middle.” 


T his expressed in the modern notations would mean 
Bs V 4actb?—b 
2a 
It would be noted that in this rule, Brahmagupta has emp- 
loyed the term madhya (middle) to imply the simple unknown 
as well as its coefficient. The origin of the term is doubtless 
connected with the mode of writing the quadratic equation in 
the form 
ax®+bx+0=0x?+0x+e 
so that there are three terms on each side of the equation. 
1. qenet oad aT TOT a TR | 
aa gard aired MRAATHAT | —Arya. II. 25. 
2. a agar rat erat aay | 
ae waa Ti feqaiedd wa —BrSpSi. XVIII. 44. 


216 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


Second Rule : 


The atsolute term multiplied by the coefficient of the 
square of the unknown is increased by the square of 
half the coefficient of the unknown; the square-root of 
the result diminished by half the coefficient of the 
unknown and divided by the coefficient of the square 
of the unknown is the unknown 


This when expressed in the modern algebraic notations 
would be 
3 V/ actb/2)? —(b/2) 
a 
Here if the quadratic equation is 
ax*+bx+tc=0 
the ‘absolute term’ is c (the one without the unknown x), ‘the 
coefficient of the square of unknown’ means the coefficient of x’, 
i.e. a, and the ‘coefficient of the unknown’ means the coefficient 
of x, i.e. b. 


The above two methods of Brahmagupta are exactly the- 
samie as were suggested by Aryabhata I. 


The root of the quadratic equation for the number of terms 
of an arithmetic progression (A.P.) is given by Brahmagupta 
according to the first rule? : 

_v Sst anh —(2a—b) 
2b 


Third Rule: 


Brahmagupta also suggests a Third Rule which is very 
much the same as is used commonly now. Thoughit 
has not been expressedly suggested as.a- new. rule, we 
find its application in a few. instances. For example this 
rule has been suggested in connection with the following 
problem on interest : 


A certain sum (p) islent out for a period (t1): 
the interest accrued (x) is lent out again at this 


Li sre erent Sgn : - 
Cera aaa RRR |) —BrSpSi. XVII. 45 

2. Tues Reel TET | ma . 
aber 9% Beet Raaieral ws: —BrSpSi. XII. 18 


QUADRATIC EQUATIONS - 217 


rate of interest for another period (t2) and the 
total amount is A. Find x. 


The equation for determining «x is 


t 
tte A, 
pti 


The solution of this ae would be : 


a pti (ta As Ai pt 
2te te 


Brahmagupta has stated the result in exactly the same form. 


Prthudaka Svami has illustrated it in solving the following pro- 
blem of interest : 


Problem : 
A sum of five hundred panas (p) is lent out 
for a period of 4 months (t:); the interest 
accrued (x) is lent out again at this rate of 
interest for another period of 10 months (t2) 
and the total amount is 78 (A). Give the 
pramana-phala, i.e., the interest accrued x. 


Here pramana-kala (t)=4 months 

pramana-dhana (p)=500 panas 

para-kala (tz), the subsequent period=10 months 
misra dhana or the total interest accrued (A) =78 panas. 


Brahmagupta states his solution of such quadratics like 
this : 


Take the product of the prama@na-dhana (p) or the sum 
originally lent out and pramdna-bala, i.e. the period for 
which originally lent out (ti); and divide by the para- 
kala or the subsequent time (fz): place this result at 
two places. Multiply the one placed at the first place 
with the misra-dhana (A), that is with the total inter- 
est accrued; in this product add the square of half the 
one placed in the second place; now take the square- 
root of it, and from it subtract half of the one placed 
at the second place. 





]. are: watered frassafreaara | 
spartala GMd WaT TART Fae | —BrSpSi, XII. 15: 


218 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


Thus i in the above example the product of _ pramana-dhana 


and pramina kala divided by varakala is Cptilte)4s a ae = 200. 





This is first multiplied by “the total! 'interést accrued (A); it 
becomes 200 X78=15600. To this is now added square of half 
of 200 (which is 10000) ; it becomes 15600 plus 10000=25600. Its 
square-root is taken which! is'160:° From this ‘8 Subtacted half of 
the quantity (i.e. halt of 200 whichis 100), Thus 160-100=60, 
which is the answer. It was the interest which first accrued (x). 


+. Another Quadratic Problem © a ee 


-.. Brahmagupta refers toa astronomical problem which 
involves the quadratic equation 


2 
(12-02) F 24 apx= 14a ay ) 


where a=agra (the sine of the amplitude of the Sun), b=palabha 
(the equinoctial shadow of, a gnoman. | 12 anguli long), R=radius, 
and x=konasanku (ine. of the altitude of . the Sun when his 
altitude. i is _ J: Dividing out. by 72+@ ) we have 


=e 2mx=n, 


y 


. wwlicié 
Wap | 2 144(R2— Eis 
“ptt rg 
Therefore we have 
x=V mtn m 

as stated by Brahmagupta. We find the same result in the 
Strya-siddhanta and in the text of Sripati. Aryabhata II (1150) 
also followed the method of Aryabhata I and Brahmagupta in 
solving a quadratic equation in connection with finding out the 
number of terms in an arithmetical progression. (A.P.) whose first 
term is (a), common difference is b and the sum is s. The number 
of terms n is given by! 


nn obs: t(a—b/2)?—a+b/2 
, b 


” Two Roots of a Quadratic Equation and Brahmagupta 
A quadratic equation has two roots. This must have been 
-Rnown to Indian algebraists even at a very early stage. Bhaskara 
II in his Bijaganita has quoted a rule ascribed to an ancient 
writer Padmanabha whose works are not available now : 


2: Mahasiddhanta: Bhaskara IL, XV. 50 


TWO ROOTS OF A QUADRATIC EQUATION 219 


If (after extracting roots) the square-root of the absolute 
side (of the quadratic) be less than the negative abso- 
lute term on the other side, then taking it negative as 
well as positive two values (of the unknown) are 
found’. 

The term used Leke. is dvividhotpadyate mitih which gan 
that two values are obtained. , , 

The existence of two roots of a quadratic equation appears 
to have been known also to Brahmagupta (628 A.D.). In illustra- 
tion of his rules for the solution of a quadratic he has stated two 
problems involving. practically the same equation : 


Problem I : The squate-root of the eenidue of the 
revolution of the Sun less 2 is diminished byy 1, multi- 
plied by 10 and added by 2: when will this be equal 
to the residue of the’ Revolution of the Sun less 1, on 
Wednesday? «2 2.7.0 fo ok Sak 
--ert « Problem Ik: Whemn-will-the< square: oft: saveonal the 
residue of the exceeding months less three. be equal to 
.the residue of the exceeding months ? 
We shall follow Prthtdaka Svami-in solving the Problem I. 
In this problem the residue of the revolttionsef #He Sun 
may be supposed to be x*+2; then by the question, we hgve 


10 @— 1)+2= e+], ~3octy got La st -rg} 
or x*—10x=—9 - : 
wut Again.in Problem II, if we put. 4y i fhe, pre of iy 
exceeding month, ‘then we have ,. GEE ans ene eee 
a (e384 EY arr gene a ness 


wf ors 210k 9. se 
Now by the second rule of Brahmagupta, retaining both 


the signs of the radical, we get : “fas ie Ss 
=5ck/ 25—9=9 or 1, ee ee se erey 
1. =e ae FapeTaST: | p oe ae 
set aahl gear Rtas fafa SY ~ —Bhaskaka, “Bijaganita 
2. Wea Aare Sh aed yrs | d ee ok 


°° aise rg asa sar way 1 sd *—BrSpSi. XVIII. 49 
3. aR Sareatishara ea: a “3 
© SMAI THAT: AT WATT I — BrSpS% XVIII: 50. 


220 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


As shown by Prthtdaka Svami, the first value is taken by 
Brahmagupta for the Problem I and second value for the problem 
II. Thus it is quite clear that Brahmagupta uses sometimes the 
positive and at other times the negative sign with the radical. 
Hence we shall say that Brahmagupta knew that a quadratic 
equation would have two roots, and according to the requisite- 
ness of the problem, one value out of the two would be utilised. 


Simultaneous Quadratic Equations 


Indian authors usually treated problems involving various. 
forms of simultaneous quadratic equations. 


Of we 
iii) sia LG v) ae } 


For the solution of the combination (i), Aryabhata I gives 
the following rule in his Aryabhatiya . 
The square-root of four times the product (of two quan- 
tities) added with the square of their difference, being 
added and diminished by their difference and halved 
gives the two multiplicands. 
This means that 
x=iV +4b4+d), y= P+4—d) 


For the solution of the same combination, Brahmagupta 
states as follows : 


The square-root of the sum of the square of the diffe- 
rence of the residues and two squared times the product 
of the residues, being added and subtracted by the 
difference of the residues, and halved (gives) the desi- 
red residues severally? 
(Here by difference of the residues is mesnt x—y; and by 
product of the residues is meant xy.) 


Brahmagupta does not seem to give the solution for simulta- 
neous equations of the combination (ii), Malays (850 A.D.) 
1. Ratt guia eave dqarqaT | . 

SRE Ct TTY ef ih _ —Arya. II. 24 
2. Tea f& sf qe PARR Bi gape | 
Parade gad ches FF Gees | — Br SpSi. XVIII. 99 


SIMULTANEOUS QUADRATIC EQUATION 221 


has given the solution : 


Subtract four times the area (of a rectangle) from the 
square of the semi-perimeter then by sankrumana bet- 
ween the square-root of that (remainder) and the semi- 
perimeter, the base and the upright are obtained. 
(GSS. VII. 1294) 


This expressed in the modern notations would be: 


x=Hat V a—4b), y=ta—V a — 40) 


For the combination (iii), Mabavira in his Ganita-Sdéra- 
Samégraha gives the following rule : 


Add to and subtract twice the area (of a rectangle) from 
the square of the diagonal and extract the square-roots. 
By sankramana between the greater and lesser of these 
(roots), the side and upright (are found),? 


This put in modern notations would be : 
x=E Vct2b+Vc—2d). 
y= (Vc+2b—Vc—26). 
For the combination (iv), Aryabhata I gives the following 
rule: 
From the square of the sum (of two quantities) subtract 
the sum of their squares. Half of the remainder is 
their product? 


The remaining operations will be similar to those for the 
equations (ii); so that 
=} (at 2c—a), y=} (a—vV 2e—a*). 
Brahmagupta in this connection says : 


Subtract the square of the sum from twice the sum of 
squares; the square-root of the remainder being added 
to and subtracted from the sum and halved, (gives) 
the desired residues.* 


. GSS. VII. 129% 
GSS. VIL. 1272 
3. qrae fe anifeataea aides | 
Ie wary ene TIERS Lh —Aaya. Il. 23 
4. af dane fmefe at ste Qe Fe aT | 
aa aatat ait afta: BF gente: nf —BrSpSi. XVIII. 98 


Nore 


222 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


These equations have also been treated by Mahavira, 
Bhaskara II and Narayana. Narayana has attempted two other 
forms of quadratic equations : 


@ em ron - 


For their solutions, see Datta and Singh, Algebra, P. 84, 


Rule of Dissimilar Operations : 


Datta and Singh say that the process of solving the follow- 
ing two particular cases of simultaneous quadratic equations was 
distinguished by most Indian mathematicians by the special 
designation visama-karma or dissimilar operation : 

22 
ym =m 
OP ak Ch ae aa 

These equations have been regarded by these mathematicians 
as if of fundamental importance. They have given the following 
solutions (expressed in modern algebraic symbols) : 

For the combination (i) : 


m m 
= (its ) ’ y= eo ) 


For the combinaticn (ii): 


mit So), 


We shall express these solutions as follows in the words‘ ot 
Brahmagupta : 


The difference of the squares (of the unknowns) is divi- 
ded by the difference of the unknowns and the quotient 

- is increased and diminished by the difference and 
divided by two ; (the results will be the two unknown 
quantities) ; (this is) dissimilar operation. 


The same rule is restated by him on a different occasion in 
the course of solving a problem. 


If then the difference of their squares, also the dinexee 
nce of them (are given) ; the difference- of ‘the squares 


2 aise er darren fee a1 
a ater gett feed ferred | 


BrSpSi. XVII. 36 


RULE OF DISSIMILAR OPERATIONS 223 


is divided by the difference of them, and this (latter) 
is added to and subtracted from the quotient and then 
divided by two ; (the results are) the residues whence 
the number of elapsed days (can be found),} 

“3s This visama-barma or dissimilar operation has been descri- 
bed by other Indian algebraists also. as Aryabhata II (Mahasi- 
ddhantd, RVIE, 22)” Sripati’ (Siddhanta-sekhara; XIV. 13) ; Bha- 
ékara IT (Lilavatiy and ‘Nariyana (Ganita. haumuds, I, 32). 


oars 4 t 


Yadeterminats Equations of the First Degree 


ore Rack tae ho Ney a a 
= Reeseheen I shedld bé giveti ‘the: credit of giving for the 
first time a treatmnent of the-indeterminate equation of the first 
degree. In his Aryabhatiya, we find a method for obtaining the 
general solution in positive integers of the simple indeterminate 
equation : 
” by—ax=c 
for integral values of ab.c, and further indicated how to 
extend it to get positive integral solutions of simultaneous indeter- 
Minate equations of the first degree. His disciple Bhaskara I 
(522) showed that the same method might be applied to solve: 
by—-ax=—c 
and further that the solution of this equation would follow 
that of by—ax=—1. These methods of AryabhataI and Bha- 
skara I have also been adopted by Brahmagurta, and in certain 
cases, the improvement were suggested by Aryabhata II in the 
middle of the tenth century A.D. 

The problems which were treated by ancient Indian algeb- 
raists and which led them to the investigation of the simple inde- 
terminate equation of the first degree may be classified under 
three heads: 

Class I: To find anumber N which being divided by 
two given numbers (a,b) will leave two given remain- 
ders (Ri Re). 

Thus we have = 

N=axt+Ri=by+Rz 


1. dR AK aR | 
anieat faa’ arat a8 ARERR: I BrSpSi, XVIII, 97 


224 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


Hence * by—ax=R,—Rz 
Putting c=RiMRe 
we get by-ax=-c¢ 


the upper or lower sign being taken according as Riis grea- 
ter than or less than Re. 


Class IL: To find'a number (x) such that its product 
with a given number (@) being increased or 
decreased by another given number (8) and 
then divided by a third given number (8) 
will leave no remainder. 


This means that in other words, we shall have to get the 
solution of : 

in positive integers. 

Class III : Here we have to deal with an equation of the 

form: : 
bytax= Ec 

Kuttaka, Kuttakara and Kuijta: These are the three terms 
which Brahmagupta has used in regards to the subject of indeter- 
minate analysis of the first degree. AryabhataI has also descri- 
bed this method in brief, but he does not use the word kuttaka. 
In the Mahabhaskarwva of BhaskaraI we have the terms Rujta- 
kara and kutta (522 A.D.) MBh. I. 41,49). These words have 
been translated into English as pulveriser or grinder. According 
to Datta and Singh, the Hindu method of solving the equation 
by-ax= ~E c is essentially based on a process of deriving from it 
successively other similar equations in which the values of the 

_ coefficients (a:b) become smaller and smaller. Thus the process 

is indeed the same as that of breaking a whole thing into smaller 
pieces, and this accounts for its name kuttaka or ‘pulveriser’. 


In the problems of the Class I, the quantities (@ and b) are 
called’ divisors’ bhagahara, bhajaka, cheda etc.) and Ri and’ Ra 
as ‘remainders’ (agra or sega etc.). while in a problem of the 
Class Il; B is ordinarily called the ‘divisor’ (bhdgahara or bha- 
jaka) and Y the ‘interpolator’ ksepa, ksepaka etc.) ; here a is called 
the ‘dividend’ (bhajya), the unkown quantity to be found (x) is 

_ called the ‘multiplier’ or (gunaka or gunakara etc) and y the 


INDETERMINATE EQUATIONS 205 


quotient or phala. In later years, Mahavira has called the baka 
number (x) as ravi. 


Preliminary Operations 
in Kuttaka-Karma 


Usually it has been suggested that in order that an equation 
of the form 
by—ax= Ec or bytax= £¢ 
may be amenable to solution, the two numbers 4 and 6 must not 
have a common divisor; for otherwise, the equation would be 
absurd, unless the number c had the same common divisor, So 
before the rules which we shall give hereafter, could be applied, 
the numbers a b. c must be made prime (drdha or firm; nicchedg 
or having no divisor. or nirapavarta, meaning irreducible to 
each other. 
In this connection Bhaskara I writes : 
The dividend and divisor will become prime to each 
other on being divided by theresidue of their mutual 
division. The operation of the pulveriser should be 
considered in relation to them. 


Similarly we find in the writings of Brahmagupta : 


Divide the multiplier and the divisor mutually and 
find the last residue; those quantities being divided by 
the residue will be prime to each other,* 


Aryabhata’s Rule : Aryabhata I is probably the first Indian 
writer on this subject, but the operation given by him is rather 
obscure. His disciple Bhaskara I has given the solution of inde- 
terminate equations of the first degree in more satisfactory Jangu- 
age. We shall give here the translation of Aryabhata's verse from 
the Aryabhatiya, as rendered by Bibhutibhusan Datta, because 
other translations of this verse do very often confuse the sense: 


Divide the divisor corresponding to the greater remait” 
der by the divisor corresponding to the smaller remain 


1. qarenaratey vangite antral | 
Rat eal eral Reeraré aatfag: —MBh, I. 41 
2. erat: werd AT aTTATERaa: | 
_ Ba el eet ata ween exe: | | ~BrSpS¢. XVIUL 


224 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


Hence * by—ax=R,—Re 
Putting c=RivRe 
we get by-ax=te 


the upper or lower sign being taken according as Riis grea- 
ter than or less than Rs. 


Class II : To find a number (x) such that its product 
with a given number (¢) being increased or 
decreased by another given number (8) and 
then divided by a third given number (8) 
will leave no remainder. 


This means that in other words, we shall have to get the 
solution of : 
axckr 
_—_, = 
B 
in positive integers. 
Class III : Here we haveto deal with an equation of the 
form : ; 
bytax= Ec 


Kuttaka, Kuttakara and Kutta: These are the three terms 
which Brahmagupta has used in regards to the subject of indeter- 
minate analysis of the first degree. Aryabhata I has also descri- 
bed this method in brief, but he does not use the word kuttaka. 
In the Mahabhaskariya of BhaskaraI we have the terms Rutta- 
kara and kutta (522 A.D.) MBh. I. 41,49). These words have 
been translated into English as pulveriser or grinder. According 
to Datta and Singh, the Hindu method of solving the equation 
by-ax== -E ¢ is essentially based on a process of deriving from it 
successively other similar equations in which the values of the 
coefficients (a.b) become smaller and smaller. Thus the process 
is indeed the same as that of breaking a whole thing into smaller 
pieces, and this accounts for its name kuttaka or ‘pulveriser’. 


In the problems of the Class I, the quantities (a and 6) are 
called’ divisors’ bhagahara, bhajaka, cheda etc.) and Ri and’ Rs 
_as ‘remainders’ (agra or sesa etc.). while in a problem of the 
Class IT; 8 is ordinarily called the ‘divisor’ (bhagahara or bha- 
_ jaka) and Y the ‘interpolator’ ksepa, ksepaka etc.) ; here @ is called 
the ‘dividend’ (bhajya), the unkown quantity to be found (x) is 
called the ‘multiplier’ or (gunaka or gunakara etc) and y the 


INDETERMINATE EQUATIONS 225 


quotient or phala, In later years, Mahavira has called the unknwn 
number (x) as ragi. 


Preliminary Operations 
in Kuttaka-Karma 


Usually it has been suggested that in order that an equation 
of the form 
by—ax= + ¢ or by+tax= tc 
may be amenable to solution, the two numbers a and 6 must not 
have a common divisor; for otherwise. the equation would be 
absurd, unless the number c had the same common divisor. So 
before the rules which we shall give hereafter, could be applied, 
the numbers a, b. c must be made prime (drdha or firm; niccheda 
or having no divisor. or nirapavarta, meaning irreducible to 
each other. 
In this connection Bhaskara I writes : 
The dividend and divisor will become prime to each 
other on being divided by the residue of their mutual 
division. The operation of the pulveriser should be 
considered in relation to them? 


Similarly we find in the writings of Brahmagupta : 


Divide the multiplier and the divisor mutually and 
find the last residue; those quantities being divided by 
the residue will be prime to each other.” 


Aryabhata’s Rule : Aryabhata I is probably the first Indian 
writer on this subject, but the operation given by him is rather 
obscure. His disciple Bhaskara I has given the solution of inde- 
terminate equations of the first degree in more satisfactory langu- 
age. We shall give here the translation of Aryabhata’s verse from 
the Aryabhatiya, as rendered by Bibhutibhusan Datta, because 
other translations of this verse do very often confuse the sense: 


Divide the divisor corresponding to the greater remain- 
der by the divisor corresponding to the smaller remain- 


1. aera vaca aa | 

aaa tet Saal revert aatae: . —MBAh, I. 41 
2. St: Wa SS TSE: | 

da all Peraal nta wee ee: | — BrSpSi. XVIIL 9. 


226 


BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


der. The residue (and the divisor corresponding to the 
smaller remainder) being mutually divided, the last resi- 
dueshould be multiplied by such an optional integer 
that the product being added(in case the number of quo- 
tients of the mutual division is even) or subtracted (in 
case the number of quotients is odd) by the difference 
of the remainders (will be exactly divisible by the last 
but one remainder. Place the quotients of the mutual 
division successively one below the other in a column; 
below them the optional multiplier and underneath it 
the quotient just obtained). Any number below .: 
the penultimate) is multiplied by the one just above 
it and then added by that just below it. Divide the 
last number (obtained by doing so repeatedly) by the 
divisor corresponding to the smaller remainder; then 
multiply the residue by the divisor corresponding to 
the greater remainder and add the’ greater remainder. 
(The result will be) the number corresponding to the 
two divisors. 


There is an alternative rendering of this passage also as 


follows: . 


Divide the divisor corresponding to the greater remain- 
der by the divisor corresponding to the smaller remain- 
der. Theresidue (and the divisor corresponding to 
the smaller remainder) being mutually divided (until 
the remainder becomes zero), the last quotient should 
be multiplied by an optional integer and then added 
Cin case the number of quotients of the mutual division 
is even) or subtracted (in case the number of quotients 
is odd) by the difference of the remainders. (Place the 
other quotients of mutual division successively one 
below the other in a column; below them the result just 
obtained and underneath it the optional integer). Any 


1. aera ergaerrEna | 


| Seeraad afte fer il 


aa sak aReraEat MT VL | 


| sian tsarafarar | | —Arya. IT. 32-33 


PRELIMINARY OPERATIONS 227 


number below (i.e. the penultimate) is multiplied by 
the one just above it and then added by that just 
below it. Divide the last number (obtained 
by doing so repeatedly) by the divisor corres- 
ponding to the smaller remainder; then multiply the 
residue ky the divisor corresponding to the greater 
remainder and add the greater remainder. (The result 
will be) the number corresponding to the two divisors. 


Aryabhata’s problem may be enunciated thus: 


To find anumber (NV) which being divided by two 
given numbers (a, b) will leavetwo given remainders 


(Ri o) R:2) . 


This gives : 
N=axtRi=by+Re 
(where Ri is a greater remainder and Rez lesser remainder, and a 
is the divisor corresponding to greater remainder and b the 
divisor corresponding to the lesser remainder.) 


Denoting as before by c the difference between Ri, and 
Ra, we get 


(i) by=axte if Ry>Ro 
(ii) ax=byte if Re>R1 ; 


the equation being so written as to keep c always positive. 


Hence the problem now reduces to making either 
axte byte 
b a : 
according as Ri>Rz or R2>Ri, a positive integer. So Aryabhata 
says : Divide the divisor corresponding to the greater remainder 
etc,” 


Now we shall proceed with the details of the operation as 
proposed by Datta and Singh in his History of Hindu Mathema- 
tics, Part II. Algebra : 


Suppose R>Re; then the equation to be solved will be 
axtc=by «Ci) 
a, b being prime to each other. 


228 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


Let 
b) a (q 
bq 
r ») b (qa 
1141 
v2) Tr (2 
req2 
13 
rm!) ¥m—2 (Gm-1 
fm-1 Qm-1 
ym) Ym71 (qm 
Tmqm 
Ym 
Then we get (when a< b, we shall have g=0, n=a) 
a=bqtn 
b=rigitra 
ra=reqatrs 
ro=raqat re 


m-2=fm-1 m1 +Ym 
To-1—=TmgGm+ fmt. 
Now, substituting the value of a in the given equation (1), 
we get 
by=(bqt+rixete 


Therefore 
y=qx+y1 
where 
: by=rnxte 
In other words, since a=bq+rx on putting 
=qxtn Gi 

the given equation (i) reduces to 

byr=rixte (iii) 


Again, since B=rigitrs 


PRELIMINARY OPERATIONS 229 


putting similarly x=quitx1 
the equation (iii) can be further reduced to 
r1X1=reyvi—-C (iv) 
and so on, 
Writing down the successive values and reduced equations 
in columns, we have 


(1) y=qut+y1 (1.1) bys=rix+e 

(2) x=qyitex1 (1.2) rix1=reyi--c 

(3) 1=Gexitye (1.3) repe=raxaite 

(4) x1=qayetxe (1.4) raxe=reVe—-C 

(5) ya=qaxetys (1.5) revs=rsxatc 

(6) xe=qsyatxs - (1.6) rsxs=reya—c 
Qn-1) ya-1==qen—2 xn-1 + yn (1. 2n-1) ran-2 ya=ren-t xa-1te 
(2n) Xn-1=qen-1 Vat Xn ad. 2n) Tan-1  Xn=72n =Yn—-C 
(2n-+1) yo=qen xat+ynti (I. 2n+1) ren yn-t1=renti xa tc 


Now the mutual division tan be continued either (i) to the 
finish or (ii) so as to get a certain number of quotients and 
then stopped. In either csse the number of quotients found, negle- 
cting the first one (q). as is usual with Aryabhata, may be even 
or odd. 

Case (i) First suppose that the mutual division is continued 
until the zero remainder is obtained. Since a, b are prime to 
each other, the last one remainder is unity. 

Subcase G.1.). Let the number of quotients be even. We 
then have 

ren=1, ren-1=0, Gan=ren-1 

The equations (1,2n) and (1.2n-+1), therefore become 

yn=Gon Xn HC 

and 

ynti=c ; 
respectively. Giving an arbitrary integral value (1) to xn 
we get an integral value of yn. From that we can find the value 
of xn-1 by the equation (2n). Procceding backwards step by 
step we ultimately find the values of x and yin positive integers. 
So that the equation (I) is solved. 

Subcase G. 2): If the number of quotients be odd, we shall 
have . 
Yon —-1=1, ren=0, gon-1=ren~2. 


230 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


The equations (2n+1) and (I. 2n+1) will then be absent and 
the equations (I. 2n-—-1) and (I. 2n) will be reduced respectively 
to — 

Xn-1=Gan71 Y— C 
and xn =—c ; 

Giving an arbitrary integral value (¢’) toy, we get an in- 
tegral value of x,-1. Then proceeding backwards as before we 
calculate the values of x and y. 


Case (ii) : Next suppose that the mutual division is stopped 
after having obtained an even or odd number of quotients. 


Subcase (i3.1): If the number of quotients obtained be 
even the reduced form ofthe original equation is 


ve Y +1=ren +1 X%n te 


or Yn bi rou +1 Xn +e 
; ee 
Giving a suitable integral value (t) to xn as will make 
y-py STREP wan integral number, 


Ten 


we get an integral value for yn by (2n+1). The values of 
~ and y can then be calculated by proceeding as before. 


Subcase (ii.2) : If the number of quotients be odd the reduc- 
ed form of the quotient is 
Yonu-1l Xn=Pgn Yn—-C 
Yan Yn TC 
Yan 71 


or Xn 


Putting yn-==t', where t’ is an integer, such that 
Yon t— 





tn oo 


2n 


we get an integral value of xa-1 by (2h). WWRERCe can be 
calculated the values of x and y in integers. 


“=a whole number, 


Tfx=a and y=8 bethe least integral solusion of ax-+c= 
by, we shall have 


aa+c=bB8 

Therefore albm+«)-+c=b (am+B), 

m being any integer. Therefore, in general, 
' x=bm+e 

But we have calculated before that | 


BHASKARA I AND KUTTAKA OPERATION 231 


=qwitx1: 
quits =bate 


Thus it is found that the minimum value « of x is equal to 
the remainder left on dividing its calculated value by b. whence 
we can calculate the minimum value of N (=ae+R)). This will 
explain the rationale of the operations described in the latter 
portion of the rule of Aryabhata I. 


Bhaskara I and Kuttaka Operation 


In Chapter I of the Mahabhaskarwa, Bhaskara I has descri- 
bed the preliminary operation to be performed on the divisor 
and dividend of a pulveriser. We shall quote it from the edition 
of K.8, Shukla : 


The divisor (which, is ‘the number of civil days in a 
yuga) and the dividend (which is “the revolution num- 
ber of the desired pianet’’) become prime to each other 
. on being divided by the Cast non-zero) residue of 
the mutual division of the number of civil daysina 
yuga and the revolution number of the desired planet. 
The operations of the pulveriser should be performed 
on them Ge. on the abraded divisor and abraded 
dividend). So has been said. 
An indeterminate equation of the first degree of the 
type 
ax—c 
Oe my 
(with x and y unknown) is known in Hindu mathematics by 
the name of “pulveriser”—kuttakara). In this equation, a is 
called the ‘‘dividend” (bhajva), 6b the “‘divisor’’ (bhagahara), c 
the interpolator (Rsepa), x the “multiplier” (gunakara), and » 
the “quotient” (labdha). 
In the pulveriser contemplated in the above stanza : 


a=revolution number of a planet.- 
b=civil days in a yuga, 
c=residue of the revolutions of the planet (Sesa) 


1. yams weta ae g 
arag laa) eat germ waifag: | ~— MBh. I. 41 





232 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


x=ahargana , 
and 4==complete revolutions performed by the planet. 

The text says that as a preliminary operation to the solu- 
tion of this pulveriser, a and b. ie., civildays in yuga and revo- 
lution-number of the planet, should be made prime to each other 
by dividing them out by their greatest common factor, That is 
to say, in solving a pulveriser, one should always make use of 
abraded divisor and abraded dividend. 


The interpolator, i.e., the residue, should also be divided 
out by the same factor. (This instruction is not given in the 
text, but it is implied that the residue should be computed for 
the abraded dividend and abraded divisor). 


Set down the dividend above and the divisor (hara) 
below that. Divide them mutually and write down 
the quotients (labdha) of division one below the other 
(in the form of a chain). (When an even number of 
quotients is obtained) think out by what number the 
(last) remainder be multiplied so that the product 
being diminished by the (given) residue be exactly 
divisible (by the divisor corresponding to that remain- 
der). Put down the chosen number called mati below 
the chain and then the new quotient underneath it. 
Then by the chosen number multiply the number which 
stands just above it, and to the product add the quoti- 
ent (written below the chosen number). (Replace the 
upper number by the resulting sum and cancel the 
number below). Proceed afterwards also in the same 
way (until only two numbers remain). Divide the 
upper number (called the “multiplier’) by the divisor 
by the usual process and the lower one (called the 
“‘quotient’) by the dividend: the remainders (thus 
obtained) willrespectively be the ahargana and the 
revolutions etc. or what one wants to know? 


We shall illustrate the operation by taking a problem from 

the Laghu-Bhaskariya (VIII. 17): 
The sum, the difference, and the product increased by 
one, of the residues of the revolution of Saturn and 
Mars—each is a perfect square. Taking the equations 


BHASKARA I AND KUTTAKA OPERATIONS 233 


furnished by the above and applying the method of 
such quadratics, obtain the (simplest) solution by the 
substitution of 2,3 etc. successively in the general solu- 
tion). Then calculate the ahragana and the revolu- 
tions performed by Saturn and Mars in that time toge- 
ther with the number of solar years elapsed.* 

Let x and y denote the residues of the revolution of Mars 
and Saturn respectively. Then we have to find out two numbers 
x and y such that each of the expressions «ty, x—y and xy+1 
may be a perfect square. 

Let x«+y=4P? and x—y=4Q?, so that 

x=2P?+2Q? 
y=2P?—2Q? 
and therefore xy+1=(2P?—1)?+ 4(P?—Q*) 
Hence the condition that xy-+1 be a perfect square is that 
P?=Q*. Substituting these values, we have 
=2(Q*+Q*) 
y=2(Q*—Q?) 
where Q may possess any of the values 2, 3, 4.......but not 1. (We 
neglect the case when x or y is zero). 5 


1. wed eegaft sarees 7a | 

euemacenat fifa way | 

FSSC AaISS BW | 

ant carla wRegetata sre I 

fret Dasa: maT TET | 

Ae Hi IRA 4 

wae Ja Tee sea II 

enue fafietateat 

wea Fret ace: fears | 

seine ished WT aes 

tal wees aalfed a | : —MBh, I, 42-44 
2. Bat nas) qnfetea: dafaratra 

qarrenaaet a Ta Srey Sais | 
ad arg fifa wife aenmaaea @: | 

SUT GUTS Ga: TRA TAA: I —LBh. Vil. 17 


234 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


Putting Q=2, we get x=40 and y=24, which is the least 
solution. 


Assuming now that the residues of the revolution (manda- 
laja-sesa) of Saturn and Mars are 24 and 40 respectively, we have 
to obtain the ahargana (which means the number of mean civil 


days elapsed since the beginning of Kaliyuga. or, in fact, any 
epoch). 


The revolution-number of Saturn is 146564, and the 
number of civil days in a yuga is 1,577,917,500. In the present 
problem, these are respectively the dividend and the divisor. 
Their H.C.F. is 4, so that dividing them out by 4 we get 36641 
and 394,479,375 as the abraded dividend and abraded divisor 
respectively. We have, therefore, to solve the pulveriser 


36641x—24_ 
394479375 


where x and y denote the ahargana and the revolutions respecti- 
vely made by Saturn. 


Mutually dividing 36641 and 394479375, we get 
3€641) 394479375 (10766 


394477006 
2369) 36641 (15 
35535 
1106) 2369 (2 
157) 1106 (7 
1099 
7) 157 (22 
154 
37@ 
_6 
1x27—24=3)3(1 
3 
0 


We have chosen here the number 27 as the optional 


numter (mati). In fact, mati may be chosen at any stage after 
- an even number of quotients are obtained, 


BHASKARA I AND KUTTAKA OPERATIONS 235 


Writing down the quotients one below the other as pres 
cribed in the rule, we get the chain 
10766 
15 
2 
7 
22 
2 
(mati) 27 
1 


Reducing the chain, we successively get 
10766 10766 10766 10766 10766 10766 3108044439 


(multiplier) 
15 15 15 15 15 288689 288689 
(quotient) 
2 2 2 2 18665 18665 
7 7 7 8714 8714 
22 22 1237 1237 
2 55 55 
(mati) 
27 27 
1 


(it would be seen in this reduction of chain that mati 
or 27 X2 plus 1 is 55; 55x22 plus 27 is 1237; 1237x7 
plus 55 is 8714; 8714 x2 plus 1237 is 18665; 1866515 
plus 8714 is 288689; and finally 28868910766 plus 
18665 is 3108044439 which is the multiplier). 

Dividing 3108044439 by 394479375, and 288689 by 36641, 
we obtain 346688814 and 32202 respectively as remainders, (This 
division is performed only when the multiplier and quotient are 
greater than the divisor and dividend respectively). These are 
the minimum values of x and y satisfying the above equation. 

Therefore. the required ahargana=346688814. and the 
revolutions performed by Saturn=32202. 

To obtain the ahargana and the revolutions of Mars, one 
has to solve the equation : 

191402 z—-40__ 
131493125 ~ ” 


236 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


where z and w denote the ahargana and the revolutions per- 
formed by Mars respectively. 


The general solution of this equation is 
2131493125 s+118076020 
y=191402 s+171872 
where s=0, 1, 2, 3....... When s=0, we have the least solution. 


Brahmagupta’s Rules Concerning 
Indeterminate Analysis of the First Degree 


For the solution of Aryabhata’s problem, Brahmagupta 
gives the following rule : 


What remains when the divisor corresponding to the 
greater remainder is divided by the divisor correspond- 
ing to the smaller remainder--that (and the latter 
divisor) are mutually divided and the quotients are 
severally set down one below the other. The last residue 
(of the reciprocal division after an even number of quo- 
tients has been obtained) is multiplied by such an optio- 
nal integer that the product being added with the differ- 
ence of the (given) remainders will be exactly divisible 
(by the divisor corresponding to that residue). That 
optional multiplier and then the (new) quotient just 
obtained should be set down (underneath the listed 
quotients). Now, proceeding from the lower-most 
number (in the column), the penultimate is multiplied 
by the number just above it and then added by the 
number just below it. The final value thus obtained 
(by repeating the above process) is divided by the 
divisor corresponding to the smaller remainder. The 
residue being multiplied by the divisor corresponding 
to the greater remainder and added to the greater 
remainder will be the number in view? 


1. sieerrergarras afargay | 
ALA REKET TORMIST: TI VTE II 
- 2h Reaftd easier daa | 
at qa: Sra aes SERTgICRTT: 
Stats aisord trerdante: Ie | 
ataapaced aera wae Il —BrSpSi. XVIII, 3-5 


' BRAHMAGUPTA‘S RULES OF ANALYSIS 237. 


Brahmagupta further observes: 


Such is the process when the quotients (of mutual 
division) areeven innumber. But if they be odd, 
what has been stated before as negative should be 
made as positive. or as positive should be made 
negative? 


Regarding the direction for dividing the divisor corres 
ponding to the greater number by the divisor corresponding to 
the smaller remainder, Prthtidaka Svami (860A.D.) observes that 
itis not absolute, rather optional; so that the process may be 
conducted in the same way by starting with the division of the 
divisor corresponding to the smaller remainder by the divisor 
corresponding to the greater remainder. But in this case of in- 
version of the process, he continues, the difference of the remain- 
ders, must be negative. 


That is to say, the equation 
by=axte 
can be solved by transforming it first to the form 
ax=by—c 
so that we shall have to start with the division of 6 by a, 

For the details of the “Theory of the pulveriser” as applied 
to the problems in Astronomy, the reader is referred to the writ- 
ings of Bhatta Govind, translated by K.S. Shukla, and given as 
an Appendix to the edition of the Laghu-Bhaskariva. For the 
rationale of the rules in relation to kuttakaor the pulveriser 


operation, one may also refer to the chapters by Datta and Singh 
in the History of Hindu Mathematics: Algebra. 


Solution of by==ax == 1. 


This simple indeterminate equation has a special use in 
astronomical calculations and therefore, Indian algebraists have 
paid special attention to it. In fact, this equaticn is solved 
exactly in the same way as the equation by=ax + c; it is a parti- 


1. of wag fata vf vrata ae | 
AYR TTT a —BrSpSi. XVII. 13. 


238 ~ BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


cular case only of the more general latter equation. Of course, there 
is a little justification also for treating it separately, since both 
the types of equations represent two different physical conditions 
of the astronomical problems. In the case of by=ax-kc, the 
conditions are such that the value of either y or x, more particu- 
larly of the Jatter, has to be found and the rules for solution 
formulated with that objective. But in the case of the equation 
by=ax1, the physical conditions require the values of both 
y and x. 


The equation by=ax+l is ieiails known by the name 
sthira-kuttaka, literally meaning the ‘constant pulveriser’ Prtht- 
daka Svami also names it as dydha-kuttaka meaning firm-pulveri- 
ser. Later on this term drdha-was confined to another sense, 
equivlent to nicched (having no divisor) or nirapavarta Grreduci- 
ble), The origin of the name sthira-kutjaka or constant pulveriser 
has been explained by Prthtdaka Svami as being due to the fact 
that the interpolator (41) is here invariable. 


For thesolution of this equation, we shall quote Bhaskara 


T’s rule and the rule by Brahmagupta, Bhaskara I writes in this 
connection as follows : 


The method of the pulveriser is applied also after 
subtracting unity, The multiplier and quotient are 
respectively the numbers above and underneath. Multi- 
plying those quantities by the desired number divide 
by the reduced divisor and dividend; the residues are 
in this case known to be the (elapsed) days and (resid- 
ues of) revolutions respectively’. 
The pulveriser 


ax—C 


a | w CD) 
may be written as 
A—I_y a Q 


where x=cX and y=cY. If X=a, Y=P is a solution of (2), us 
x=te, y=ch will be a solution of (i). Hence the above rule. 


1. eataqerentt gerne: wert | 
TUR wed 3 Uh AATATAT: I 





—MBh. I. 45 


BRAHMAGUPTA'S RULES OF ANALYSIS 239 


Brahmagupta’s Rule in this connection is as follows : 
Solution of by=ax—1: 


Divide them (i.e., the abraded coefficient of the multi- 
plier and the divisor) mutually and set down the quo- 
tients one below the other. The last residue (or the 
reciprocal division after an even number of quotients 
has been obtained) is multiplied by an optional integer 
such that the product being diminished by unity will 
be exactly divisible (by the divisor correponding to 
that residue). The (optional) multiplier and then this 
quotient should be set down (underneath the listed 
quotients). Now proceeding from the lower most 
term to the uppermost, by the penultimate multiply 
the term just above it and then add the lowermost 
number. (The uppermost number thus calculated being 
divided by the reduced divisor, the residue (is the quan- 
tity required. This is the method of the constant pul- 
veriser’. 
Solution of 
bytax=-ke 
Indian algebraists usually transformed this equation as 
by=-ax-+c, so that itappeared asa particular case of by=ax-+te. 
in which a was negative. Brahmagupta has been the first 


person to solve this equation, but the rule given by him is 
obscure : 


The reversal of the negative and positive should be 
made of the multiplier and interpolator.” 


Prthudaka Svami has tried to explain it, but he too is not 
very clear. He says: 


1. Gam: Weert HHT TATE AT TATCAA: | 
. oa ah RRBs ada TER EA: I 
TTIST: WTS AIS Tas TU Ls | 
gata wad ara: ware: we TTT I 
Toe Seat Teast SAM WAT | 
freteamenad faegea: 24 11 —BrSpSi. XVI. 9-11 
2. wd aay fata ei ert aga dal _ . 
RUA THE Aa: FT I BrSpSi XVIII. 13 


240 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


If the multiplier be negative, it must be made positive; 
and the additive must be made negative: and then the 
method of the pulveriser should be employed. 


Prthtdaka Svami, however, does not indicate how to derive 
the solution of the equation . 


by=—axte (1) 
from that of the equation 
by=ax—c +6(2) 
The method, however, seems to have been this: 
Let x=, y=8 be the minimum solution of (2). Then 
we get 
bB=a anc 
or b(a-B8) =-a(a-b) +c 
Hence x=a-b, y=a-8§ is the minimum solution of (1). This 
rule is very clearly indicated by Bhaskara II and others. 
We shall give two examples from Bhaskara II (Bijaganita) 
to illustrate the rule : 
Example I. 
138y=-60x% +3 
By the method described before, we find that the minimum 
‘solution of 
13y=60x+3 
is x=11. y=51. Subtracting these values from their respective 
abraders, namely 13 and 60, we get 2 and 90. Then by the 
maxim : “In the case of the dividend and divisor being of differ- 
ent signs, the results from the operation of division should be 
known to be so”, making the quotient negative we get the solu- 
tion of 
13y=-60x4+3 
as x=2, y=-9. Subtracting these values again from their respec- 
tive abraders (13. 60), we get the solution of: 
13y=-60x-3 
as x=11, y=-51. 
. Example II. 
| Hy=I8x-+10 


LINEAR EQUATIONS 241 


Proceeding as before, we find the minimum solution of 
lily=18x+10 
to be x=8, y=14. These will also be the values of x andy in 
the case of the negative divisor but the quotient for the reasons 
stated before should be made negative. So the solution of 
-lly=18x+10 
is x=8, y=-14. Subtracting these (i.e., their numerical values) 
from their respective abraders, we get the solution of 
-lly=18x-10 
as x=3, y=~4, 


“When the divisor is positive or negative the numeri- 
cal values of the quotient and multiplier remain the 
same: wheneither the divisor or the dividend is 
negative, the quotient must always be known to be 
negative’, — 

One Linear Equation in 


More Than Two Unknowns 


Whenever a linear equation involves more than two unkno- 
wn's the Indian algebraists used to assume arbitrary values for all 
the unknowns except two and then to apply ithe method of buy- 
taka or “pulveriser™. In this connection, Brahmagupta says: 


The method of the pulveriser (should be employed if 
there be present many unknowns (in any equation), 


1. Bh&skara II gives the following rule : 
“Those(the multiplier and quotient}cbtained for a positive divi- 
dend being treated in the same manner give the results corres- 
ponding to a negative dividend.” 


The treatment alluded to in this rule is that of subtraction 
from the respective abraders, He has further elaborated ir 
thus: 


The multiplier and quotient should be determined by 
taking the dividend, divisor and interpolator as positive. They 
will be the quantities for the additive interpolator, 
Subtracting them from their respective abraders, the quantities 
for a negative interpolator are found. If the dividend or divi- 
sor, be negative, the quotient should be stated as negative, the 
quotient should be stated as negative. 


1. srrauizay qa areaEr 
TEMA TITRE S} A FEAT By Nl — BrSpSi. XVUI. 51 


—Bijaganiia 


242 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


We shall take up one of the problems posed by 
Brahmagupta concerning astronomy and leading to 
the equation : 


197x—1644 y—z=6302. 


Hence 
1644 y+z+6302 
197 
The commentator assumes z=131. Then 
_ 1644 y+6433 
197; 
hence by the usual method of the pulveriser 
x=41; y=1, 


General Problem of Remainders ” 


A certain type of simultaneous indeterminate equations of 
the frst degree arise out of the general problem of remainders 
which may thus be stated: To find a number N which being 
severally divided by ai, G2, 23... an, leaves as remainders ri, 7» 
eee respectively. , 


While dealing with such a case, we shall have the following 
series of equations : 


N=aixitri=arxetre= agra tree Gn in br. 

We have reasons to believe that the method of solution of * 
these equations was known to AryabhataI.In the translation of 
the verse in the Aryabhafiya, II. 32-33 (the translation of which 
we have already given), the term dvicchedagram should be 
translated as “the result will be the remainder corresponding to 
the product of the two divisors”, instead of “the result will be the 
number corresponding to the two divisors.” (the last line of the 
translation). This explanation is in fact given by Bhaskara I, the 


direct disciple and earliest commentator of Aryabhata I. Such a 
rule is clearly stated by Brahmagupta?. 


es steady ga Rreaterrencert | 
arte eS Re a: Reale eA: a IL —Br SpSi. XVIII. 55 


2 ataisagisad deerdente: tr | 
. Strameemiagd aa II —BrSpSi. XVIII. 5 


GENERAL PROBLEM OF REMAINDERS 243 


The rationale of this method is not difficult. I shall quote it 
from the book of Datta and Singh: Starting with the considera- 
tion of the first two divisors, we have 

Navi tn=aoxatre. 


By the method described before, we can find the minimum 
value @ of x1 satisfying this equation. Then the minimum value 
of N will be a.¢+7,. Hence the general value of N will be given 
by 

N=ai (ast+e)tri 


=d1a, ttar@tri 


where t is an integer. Thus ai¢-+ri is the remainder left on 

dividing N by ai az as stated by ArybhataI and Brahmagupta, 

Now taking into consideration the third condition, we have 
N=ayaet+a er, =asx3t+r3 

which can be solved in the same way as before. Proceeding in 

this way successively, we shall ultimately arrive at a value of 

N satisfying all the conditions ; 


Prthtdaka Svami remarks : 


Wherever the reduction of two divisors by a common 
measure is possible, there ‘the product of the divisors’ 
should be understood as equivalent to the product of 
the divisor corresponding to the greater remainder and 
quotient of the divisor corresponding to the smaller 
remainder as reduced (i.e. divided) by the common mea- 
sure. When one divisor is exactly divisible by the 
other, then the greater remainder is the (required) 
remainder and the divisor corresponding to the greater 
remainder is taken as ‘the product of the divisors’. 
(The truth of) this may be investigated by an intelligent 
mathematician by taking several symtols. 


As an illustration we shall take up a problem quoted by 
Bhaskara II in his Bijaganita, and which in its solution follows 
the method of Aryabhata 1. Prthtdaka Svami while commenting 
on serveral verses from Brahmagupta (BrSpSi. XVIII. 3-6) 


Jd. Le., if p be the L.C_M. of a, and ag, the general value of N satisfying 
the above two conditions will be 
N=pt+a,a+7, 
instead of N=a,agt+aatr, 


244 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


observes that such problems were very popular amongst the an- 
cient Indian mathematicians. 


Problem : To find a number N which leaves remainders 5, 
4,3,2 when divided by 6,5.4,3 respectively. 
That is to solve the equations : 
N=6x4+5=5yt4=42+3=3w +2. 
We have since N=6x+5=5y+4, 
5y-1 
6 
But x must be integral, so y=6t+5, «=5t+4 
Hence N=30¢+29 
Again N=30t+29=42+3 


_ az—l3 
Therefore, t= “5 


Since t must be integral, we must have z=15s+14; 
hence t=2s+1. Therefore 


N=60s+59. 
The last condition is identically satisfied. The method given 
here is the one followed by Prthudaka Svami. 
Thus when N=60s+59=6x-+5 


= 6s 54 a9, <5 (D) 
Again. when N=60s+59=5y-+-4, 
= OP a1astu 
Again when N=60s+59=42+3 
= st 56 155414 
Lastly, when N=60s+59=3w+2, 
w= SSF57 295419, 


Varga Prakrti or Krti Prakrti or Square-Nature 


The word varga-prakyti (literally meaning ‘square-nature’) 
_ has been given by Indian algebraists to the indeterminate quadra- 
tic equation 
' Nxtic=y* 


VARGA PRAKRTI 245 


Here in this equation the absolute number c¢ should be 
rupa (or unity). which means the equation 
Nxtl=y* 
orit may be any absolute number. The most fundamental 
equation of chis class has been regarded as 
N#+1=y? 
“where N is a non-square integer. 

This branch of mathematics has originated from the number 
which is the prakrti of the square of ydvat, etc. (the unknown 
x etc.), and therefore, it is called varga- prakrti. The quantity 
N of the above equation is known as Prakrti. Brahmagupta uses 
the term GUNAKA (multiplier) for the same purpose’. 


This term gunaka together with its variation guna appears 
occasionally also in the writings of later authors. For example, 
Sripati (Siddhanta-sekhara. XIV. 32) employs the term gunaka 
where as Bhaskara IJ and Narayana use the term guna in their 
Bijaganitas. 

In this connection. we would now like to quote from 
Prthtdaka Svami (863 A.D.) from his commentary on the 
Brahmasphutasiddhanta : 


Here are stated for ordinary use the terms which 
are well known to people. The number whose square, 
multiplied by an optional multiplier and then increased 
or decreased by another optional number, becomes 
capable of yielding a square-root, is designated by the 
term the “lesser root” kanistha pada or the “first root” 
a&dya-mila). The root which results, after those opera- 
tions have been performed is called by the name the 
“greater root” Civestha pada) or the “second root” 
(anya-miila). If there be a number multiplying both 
these roots, it is called the “augmenter” (udvartaka); 
and on the contrary, if there be a number dividing the 
roots, it is called the “abridger” (apavartaka), 


Thus in the'equation 
Nx?+c=y', 
1. ae fate aig gue gute fates | 
Sea GUAGE: Geass RR MI —BrSpSi. XVIII. 64° 
2. BrSpSi. XVIII. 64 (Com.) 


246 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


x is known as the lesser root, y is the greater root, N is the multi- 
plier (gunaka) and c is interpolator or ksepaka. Bhaskara II has 
used the word “hrasvamila” for kanistha pada or adya-mila lite- 
rally meaning “Isser root’. The earlier terms, the “first root” 
(adyamila) for the value of x and the “second root” or the “‘last 
root” antya-mila for the value of y are quite free from ambiguity 
Their use is found in the algebra of Brahmagupta. The later 
terms appears in the works of his commentator Prthtidaka Svami. 


Brahmagupta uses the term ksepa, praksepa or praksepaka 
in the sense of “interpolator.” Again, when negative, the inter- 
polator is sometimes distinguished as the “subtractive” or. 
sodhaka and the positive interpolator isthen called “the addi- 
tive.” 


Lemmas of Brahmagupta 


Prior to our giving the general solution of the Square-nature 
or Varga-Prakrti, it would be better to give two Lemmas esta- 
blished by Brahmagupta. We have the following in the Brahma- 
sphutasiddhanta : 


Cf the square of the optional number multiplied by the 
gunaka and increased or decreased by an other optional 
number, ista, (extract) the square root. (Proceed) twice. 
The product of the first roots multiplied by the gunaka 
together with the product of the second roots will 
give a (fresh) second root; the sum of their cross-pro- 
ducts will be a (fresh) first root. The’ (corresponding) 
interpolator will be equal to the product of the (previ- 
ous) interpolators.! 


There is a little difficulty in ascertaing the real sense of the 
rule given in these lines since the word dvidha (twice) has two 
implications. Firstly, it may mean that the earlier operations of 
finding roots are made on two optional numbers with two optio- 
nal interpolators, and with the results thus obtained the sutse- 


1. ag Beanie gaa guifeege fetes | 
FR TUR: CEPT RKTT | 
«Ra eR Pa: WITT IRE | ‘3 
| PRINTS AT ETH ST —BrSpSi. XVIII 64-65 


LEMMAS OF BRAHMAGUPTA 247 


quent operations of their composition are performed. Secondly, 
it may also mean that the earlier operations are made with 
one optionally chosen number and one interpolator, and the 
subsequent ones are carried out after the repeated statement of 
those roots for the second time. It is alsoimplied that in the 
composition of the quadratic roots, their products may be added 
together or subtracted from each other. 


In other words, if x=o, y=B be a solution of the equation : 


N2xitk=y’, 
and x=a', y=’ be a solution of 
Natt’ =y?, 


then according to the above 
x=af'ba’B, y= BB'LNaa’ 
is a solution of the equation 


Na? +kk'=y?. 
In other words, if 
Na? +k= 3? 
No? +k =p" 
then 
- N(@eB’+e'B)§+ke’=(B Bt No’)* (1) 


In particular, taking e=a’, B=8’ and k=k’, Brahmagupta 
finds from a solution x=«, y= of the equation 


Nxt +k=y? 
a solution x=2e8, y=8?+ Na* of the equation 
Nx? tk=y? 
That,is, if 7 
Na?+k=8? 
then 
N(2a8)?+ k?=(8?+ Na*)? ap 


This result will be hereafter called Brahmagupta's Corel- 
lary. 


Thus Brahmagupta's First Lemma says that if two solutions 
of the equation (of the Square-nature) Nx’+1=y? are known, 
then any number of other solutions can befound. For example 
if two solutions of the Square—nature are (a,b) and also (a'sb’), 
then two other solutions will be : 


x=ab'+a’b, y =bb'+Naa’. 


248 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


We can compose this solution with the previous ones, and 
get another solution, and thus proceed on to innumerable solu- 
tions. From Brahmagupta’s Corollary to First Lemma we get 
another set of solutions. If (a,b) be solution of the Square- 
nature, then another solution of it is 

x~=2ab, and y=b?+Na? 

Thus even if we have only one solution, we can get the 
other solution also (since N is known), and thus we can get any 
number of solutions one after the other by this Principle of 
Composition. 

Brahmagupta’s Lemmas have been described by Bhaskara 
II (150 A.D.) in the following words : 


Set down successively the lesser root (hrasva), greater 
root (jyestha) and interpolator (Rsepaka); and below 
them should be set down in order the same or an 
another (set of similar quantities). From them by the 
Principle of Composition (Bhavana) can be obtained 
numerous roots. Therefore the Principle of Composi- 
tion will be explained here. (Find).the two cross-pro- 
ducts (vajrabhyasa) of the two lesser and the two greater 
roots; their sum is a lesser root. Add the product of 
the two lesser roots multiplied by the prakrti to the 
product of the two greater roots, the sum will bea 
greater root. In that (equation) the interpolator will 
be the product of the two previous interpolators. Again 
the difference of the two cross-products is a lesser root. 
Subtract the product of the two lesser roots multiplied 
by the prakrti from the product of the two greater 
roots; (the difference) will be greater root. Here also 
the interpolator is the product of the two (previous) 
interpolators. 


1. eats Toa we dot oes asd Haea aa | 
eae weg aaa wa TSA II 
are Beas Ee waEies ga | 
SQ SUI F Seat MPa: Fe: Tes: aA | 
ea FARRAR a wallet a qe PRET | 
dt aes Srsahaeaht Ses T eenfts Poe: 0 
. ‘Bhaskara HU, Bijaganita, VargaPrakrti.2-4 


PRINCIPLE OF COMPOSITION 249, 
Principle of Composition 


The above results have been technically known amongst 
Indian algebraists as Bhavana (demonstrated or proved, hence 
theorem or lemma). The word bhavana also means “composition 
or combination” in algebra. Bhavana may be of two types: 
Samasa Bhavana (or addition Lemma, or additive composition) 
and Antara Bhavana (or subtraction Lemma or subtractive 
composition), Whenever, again, the bhavana is made with two 
equal sets of roots and interpolators, it is technically named as 
Tulva Bhavana (or composition of equals), and when with two 
unequal sets of values then it is known as Atulya Bhavana (or 
composition of unequals). 


Proof of Brabmagupta’s Lemmas 


It is significant to be indicated that Brahmagupta’s Lemmas 
were rediscovered by Euler in 1764 and by Lagrange in 1768, 
and a considerable importance was attached to them. Krsna, 
(1580 A.D.) the commentator on the Bijaganita of Bhaskara II 
gives the following proof of Brahmagupta’s Lemmas ° 


Let («,8) and (@,’B’) be the two solutions of the equation 
netk=y. 
we have 
No?+k=6" 
Na?+h’=8" 
Multiplying the first equation by 8”, we get 
No28'2-+-b8'?=828 
Now, substituting the value of factor 8” of the interpolator - 
from the second equation, we get 
No® 8?-+k (Na+ k')=$°8? 
or N(0?8"-+Nka? + kk’ =88" 
Again, substituting the value of from the first equation 
in the second term of the left-hand side expression, we have 
Na®8+-Na?(B2—Na®) -+kk'=B*B" 
or N(a?8'2-+a’B?)+ RR! =8787+.N70%a” 
Adding+2NaBq’s’ to both sides, we get 
N(o8'-0'B)?-+ RR’ =(BB' + Naa’)? 


250 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


Brahmagupta’s Corollary also follows at once from the 
above by putting «’=«, B’=6 and 2’=R., 


N (208)°+?=(?+Na*)? 


Thus the roots are x=208 and y=?+ No? which is the 
Corollary. 


It would be seen that modern historians of mathematics are 
incorrect when they say that Fermat (1657) was the first to 
state that the equation Nx?+l=y*, where N is a non-square 
integer has an unlimited number of solutions in integers. For 
this assertion, history takes us to the early Seventh CenturyA.D. 
when Brahmagupta wrote his classical treatise. the Brahmasphu- 
tasiddhanta, and gave the well known two Lemmas and the 
Corollary to the first Lemma. 


Second Lemma of Brahmagupta 


In the Brahmasphuta siddhanta, we find another important 
Lemma by Brahmagupta stated as follows : 
On dividing the two roots (of a square- Nature) by the 
square-root of its additive or subtracrive, the roots for 
interpolator unity (will be found).* 


This Lemma when expressed in the modern language of 
algebra would mean that if x=a,y=8 be a solution of the 
equation. 

Nxtthi=y? 
then x=«/k, y=/k is a solution of the equation 
Nx? +l=y?. 

This -rule, at another place, has been re-enunciated . as 

follows : 


Tf the interpolator is that divided by a square then 
the roots will be those multiplied by its square- 
root, . 


1. we aes at ART TH ST | : 
| —BrSpSi. XVII. 65 
(2. ata Th rene aaa | _ 
i — —BrSpSi. XVIIL 70 


SECOND LEMMA OF BRAHMAGUPTA 251 


This rule may be expressed in terms of symbols as follows. 
Suppose the Varga-prakrti (Square-nature) to be 
Netpd=y*, 
so that its interpolator (Rsepa) p*d is exactly divisible by the 
square p*. Then, putting therein u=x/p, v=y/p, we derive the 
equation 
Nwid=1* 
whose interpolator is equal to that of the original Square-nature 
divided by p*. It is clear that the roots of the original equation 
are p times those of the derived equation. 


Rational Solution 


Indian algebraists have usually suggested the following 
method to obtain a first solution of Nx*+1=y* : 
Take an arbitrary small rational number, e, such that 
its square multiplied by the gunaka N and increased 
or diminished by a su‘tably chosen rational number k 
will be an exact square. 


In other words, we shall have to obtain empirically a rela- 
tion of the form 
Ne+k=f? 
where a, 2, and® are rational numbers. Let us call this 
relation as the Auxiliary Equation. Then by Brahmagupta’s Coro- 
llary, we get from it the relation 
N(2o8)*-+2=(6? + Nat)’, 


a 2 2y2 
or Ni a B + 1 = B+ Ne 
Pd k 

Hence, one rational solution of the equation Nx?+1=—y? is 

given by 
28 «B+ Na? 
x= b 2 y= b 

Work on the rational solution of the Square-nature has been 
also done by Sripati. In fact, his solution, given in 1039 A.D. 
is of historical significance. He derives the rational solution 
without the aid of the “auxiliary equation.” He gives the follo- 
wing rule : 


252 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


Unity is the lesser root. Its square multiplied by the 
prakyti is increased or decreased by the prakrti com- 
bined with an (optional) number whose square-root 
will be the greater root. From them will be obtained 
two roots by the Principle of Composition? 


Thus if m* be the rational number ephonally chosen, one 
shall have the identity : 


N.V?+(?—N) =m’, 
or N.V-(N—m) =m" 
Then by applying Brahmagupta’s Corollary we get 
Nm)?+ (mn? » ee 


om neh 
N(Geow) H=GRSN 


Hence 


where m is any rational number, is a solution of the equation 
Nx? +1=y?. 
This rationol solution of the varga-prakrti which was used 


by Sripati in 1039 A.D. was rediscovered in Europe by Broun- 
cker in 1657. 


We shall close this discussion by taking an illustration 
from Bhaskara II : 


Problem: Tell me, O mathematician, what is that square 
which multiplied by 8 becomes, together with 
unity, a square; and what square multiplied by 
11 and increased by unity, becomes a square. 

This means that we have to solve the equations : 
8xi+1=y? eoosee(d) 
llx?+1=y? ......Gi) 

In the second example, let us assume 1 as the lesser root. 
‘Following the method of Sripati, let us multiply its square by 
the prakrti (here in eq. ii, prakrti is 11), then let us subtract 2 
(an optional number) and then extracting the square-roots we 


1, Sxipati, Siddhanta-dekhara XIV. 33 


RATIONAL SOLUTION 253 


get the greater root as 3. Hence the statement for the com- 
- position is 
m=11 I[=1 g=3 is? 
I=] g=3 i=—2 
Here m=multiplier (gunaka or prakrti), I=lesser root 
(kanistha-mala). g=greater root (jyestha-miila) and i=interpola- 
tor (ksepa). 


Here we have set down successively the lesser root, greater 
root and interpolator, and below them again set down the same 
(See Brahmagupta’s Lemmas described by Bhaskara II). Now 
proceeding as before we obtain the roots for the additive 4: 


l=6, g=20, (for) i=4. 
Then by the rule: 


“Tf the interpolator (of a varga-prabrti or Square-nature) 
divided by the square of an optional number be the 
interpolator (of another Square-nature). then the two 
roots (of the former) divided by that optional number 
will be the roots (of the other). Or, if the interpolator 
be multiplied, their roots should be multiplied.’ 


are found the roots for the additive unity 
1=3, g=10 (for) i=1. 
Whence by the Principle of Composition of Equals, we get 


the lesser and greater roots :/—60, g=199 (for) i= 1. In this 
way an infinite number of roots can be deduced. 


Alternative method:—Bhaskara II has given another method 
for finding the two roots for the additive unity : 


Or divide twice an optional number by the difference 
between the square of that optional number and the 
prakyti. This (quotient) will be the lesser root (of a 
Square-nature) when unity is the additive. From that 
(follows) the greater root.? 





]. wemien: Wa: Fo: ees | 
SF MST TT BUT FRU I TE lt 
Bijaganita IT. 5. 
2, Siddhanta-éekhara, XIV. 32, 


254 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


Let us solve the first example 8x?+1=y?. We assume the 
optional number to be 3. Its square is 9; the prakrti of multiplier 
is 8, their difference is9-8=1. Dividing by this twice the optional 
number (23, i.e.6),namely 6, we get the lesser root for the addi- 
tive unity as 6. Whence proceeding as before. we get the greater 
to be 17, Thus here x=6 and y=17. 


Let us use this method for the equation 1lx*+l=y* Let 
the optional number be 3. Its square is 9: multiplier or prakyti 
is 11; the difference is 11—9=2; dividing by this twice the 
optional number (2X3), namely 6. we get 6/2=3, which is the 
lesser root. Consequently the greater root would be 10, Thus 
for this equation x=3 and y=10. 


Solution in Positive Integers 


The Indian algebraists usually aimed at obtaining solutions 
of the varga-prakrti or Square-nature in positive integers or 
abhinna. The tentative methods of Brahmagupta and Sripati 
always did not furnish solutions in positive integers. These, auth- 
ors, however: discovered that if the interpolator of auxiliary equa- 
tion in the tentative method be+1, +2or+4, an integral solu- 
tion of the equation Nx*+1=y7 can always be found. Thus 
Sripati Says : 


Tf 1,2 or 4 be the additive or subtractive (of the auxi- 
liary equation), the lesser and greater roots will be 
integral (abhinna)}. 
G) lf R=-£1, then the auxiliary equation will be 
N®+1=8 
where « and ® are intergers. Then by Brahmagupta’ Corollary 
we get 
x=208 and y=$?+Na2 


as the required first solution in positive integers of the equation 
Nxe+l=? ot 


1. . earl saeiftat da a wa I 
famine ars aa 4 wes dat | 
at Soiree aaareaha: | 
, Bijaganita, Varga-Prakrti. 5-6 


SOLUTION IN POSITIVE INTEGERS 255 


Gi) Let R=-L2; then the auxiliary equation is 
Ne?+2=6? 
By Brahmagupta’s Corollary, we have 
N(208)?+4=(8?+Ne*)? 


2 2 2 
or WN ar-(F ) 


Hence the required first solution is 
x=aB, y=) (8?+ Na?) 
Since Nu? =6? = 2, 
we have 3 (6?+Ne?)=6? + 1=c whole number. 
Gii) Now suppose k= +4: so that 
No®+4=8? 
With an auxiliary equation like this, the first integral solution 
of the equation Nx?+I=y? is 


x= 708 
y=93(8'—2). 
if @ is even; or 
aee = 
=; 8 (P—2); 


if B is aaa 
Thus we find Brahmagupta saying: 
In the case of 4 as additive the square of the second 
root diminished by 3, then halved and multiplied by 
the second root will be the (required) second root: 
the square of the second root diminished by unity and 
then divided by 2 and multiplied by the first root will 
be the (required) first root (for the additive unity). 
Datta and Singh has given the following rationale of this 
solution. 


Since N a? +4=8? (i) 
wehave WN (a/2)?+1=(8/2)%, i) 
Then by Brahmagupta’s gee we fet 
g 2 





i eee ene 
sang Htelae eIsseERETISSTIRA |! — BrSpSi. XVIII. 67 


256 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


Substituting the value of N in the right-hand side expres- 
sion from (i), we have 


N. (+) +1=("5) Gi 
Composing (ii) and (iii), 
w {S@-1 \ 41= {5 6-9) . 


Hence x=} of, y=4 (B*--2); 
and x=4a(B?—1), y=3B(0?—3); 
are solutions of Nx?+1=y", 
If 8 be even, the first values of (x,y) are integral. If 8 be 
odd, the second values are integral. 
(iv) Finally. suppose k= —4; the auxiliary equation is 
No?—4 = 6? 


Then the required first solution in positive integers of 
Nx'?+1=y? is 
x=50B(B?+3) (8+1) 
y=(B°+2) {3(8?+3) (B+1)—1}. 


Brahmagupta says: 


In the case of 4 as subtractive, the square of the second 
is increased by three and by unity; half the product of 
these sums and that as diminished by unity (are 
obtained). The latter multiplied by the first sum less 
unity is the (required) second root; the former multi- 
plied by the product of the (old) roots will be the first 
root corresponding to the (new) second root.? 

The rationale of this solution. as given by Datta and Singh 

is as follows : 

Na?—4=8? (i) 
N(a/2)?—1=(8/2)? 

Hence by Brahmagupta’s Corollary. we get 


: a 2 22 
n(4) u= (F495 
1, ARs at Saat gees eetad | 
TSS TAT TETRA || BrSpSi. XVIII. 68 


CAKRAVALA OR CYCLIC METHOD 257 
— ={h(R +2} Gi) 

Again applying the Corollary. we get 

N {408(82-+2)}?-+1—={4(84+48°+2)! aii) 
Now by the Lemna we obtain from (i and (iii) 

N {308(8?+3) (B°+-1)}?+1 

=[(6?+2){5(62+3) (P4+D—-L}P 
Hence x=}o8(6?+3) (6?+1), 

y=(8? +2) {4(8?+3) (+1)—1} 
isa solution of Nx?+1=y? 

This can be proved without difficulty that these values of x 
and y are integral. Since If8 is even, ?+2 is also even. And 
hence the above vatues of x and y are integral. On the other 
hand, if B is odd, 8? is also odd; under these conditions B?-++1 and 
6?-+-3 are even, In this also, therefore. the above values must be 
integral. 

Putting p=a8, g=$?+2, we can write the above solution 
in the form 

x=4p (¢—-1). 
=F9(q?—3). 

This was the form in which the solution was found by . 
Euler. 


Cakravala or Cyclic Method 


We have shown in the preceding articles that the most 
fundamental step in Brahmagupta’s method for the general 
solution in positive integers of the equation 

No?+1=y" 
where WN is a non-square integer, is to form an auxiliary equation 
of the kind 

Na+k=}" 
where a and b are positive integers and R=-b1, -42 or-t4. From 
this auxiliary equation, by the Principle of Composition, applied 
repeatedly whenever necessary, one can derive, as we have alrea- 
dy shown above, one positive integral solution of the original 
Varga-prakrit or Square-Nature. And thence again, by means 
of the same principle, an infinite number of other solutions in 
integers can be obtained. How to form an auxiliary equation of 


58 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


this type was a problem, write Datta and Singh, which could 
not be solved completely nor satisfactorily by Brahmagupta. In 
fact, Brahmagupta had to depend on trial. Success in this direc- 
tion was, however, remarkably attained by Bhaskara II. He evol- 
ved a simple and elegant method which assisted in deriving an 
auxiliary equation having the required interpolator-+1,+2, ort 
4, simultaneously with its two integral roots, from another auxi- 
liary equation empirically formed with any simple integral value 
of the interpolator, positive or negative. This methol has been 
technically known as Cakravala or the cyclic method. This is 
so called because it proceeds as in a circle, the same set of opera- 
tions being applied again and again in a continuous round. For 
the details of this method, our reader is requested to consult 
the Algebra of Bhaskara II and the narrative on this method as 
given by Datta and Singh wnder the title ‘Cyclic Method” in 


their History of Hindu Mathematics: Algebra, 1962 Edition, 
pp. 161-72. 


Solution of Indeterminate 
Quadratic Equation 


It is remarkable to see that Brahmagupta was the first 
algebraist in the history of mathematics to find a general solu- 
tion of the indeterminate quadratic equation 

Nete=y* 
in positive integers. We have the following verse in the 
Brahmasphutasiddhanta in this connection: 


From two roots (of a Square-nature or varga-prakrti) 
with any given additive or subtractive, by making 
(combination) with the roots for the additive unity 
other first and second roots (of the equation having) 
the given additive or subtractive (can be found). 


Let us take the following two equations: 
ak=an-+b; and bik=bn+Na 
From them we get: by eliminating n 

_ axb—abi=1 


1. | Saeed errr 
| Sessa FG Pertet Ho —BrSpSi. XVIII. 66 


SOLUTION OF INDETERMINATE 259 


= a whole number. 





Hence pw 


anf)? 2 
Now n2—-N= (ak 2, Na 


_ alk? —2bkartk 
= aE Ge 
_ R(ax®2k—-2bar+1) 
bans 2 


a 
Therefore + (ath—2bar +1) is a whole number. 


Since a, k have no common factor, it follows that 
avk—22batl1_n—N 





a ; —k=an integer. 
i 24 

Alo net N = atkoebatl 
k a 


av(b?*—~Na?)—2bai+1 
a 
aib—1\2 : 
~ (2) na 


Thus having known a single solution in positive integers 
of the equation Nx*-zc=y?, says, Brahmagupta, an infinite 
number of other integral solutions can be obtained by making 
use of the integral solutions of Nx?+1l=y* If (pq) be a 
solution of the former equation found empirically and if (a, 8) 
be an integral solution of the latter, then by the principle of 
Composition 

x=ph-kqa; y=gBt Np 
will be a solution of the former. Repeating the operations, we 
can easily deduce as many solutions as we like. s 
FORM Mr?xttc=y?: 
In this connection. Brahmagupta says : 
It the remainder is that divided by a square, the first 
root is that divided by its root’. 


This seems to mean that if we have the equation 
Mrtxtto=y* ; Gi) 
such that the multiplier Ge. the coefficient of x*) is divisible 


1. wiRere aah eet aye wie aafe | —BrSpSi. XVIII.70 


260 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


by n?’, then we are justified in saying that if we putnx=u, the 
equation (i) becomes Mu?tc=y" (ii), 

and clearly the first root of (i) is equal to the first root of (ii) 
divided by n. The corresponding second root will be the same 
for both the equations. 


FORM aix?zc=y" : 
We find Brahmagupta giving the following rule in this 


connection: This is a solution of a particular form of a 
var ga-prakrti or Square-nature. 


If the multiplier be a square, the interpolator divided 
by an optional number and then increased and 
decreased by it, is halved. The former (of these 
results) is the second root; and the other divided by 
the square-root of the multiplier is the first root.* 


Thus the solutions of the equation 


aerto=y* 
sin te 
Ba ui 


ee gee 
y (25) 


where m is an arbitrary number. 


are: 


Bhaskara II and Narayana have also given the same 
solutions as proposed by Brahmagupta. 


Rational Geometrical Figures 


In the days of: the Taittiriva Samhita and the Satapatha 
Brahmana, Indian mathematicians got familiarity with the 
solution of such equations 

ety =z? 
and the results were arrived geometrically on the basis of the 
law of rectangle as propounded by Baudhayana in the Sulba Sutras 
and which goes by his name. The reader is referred to the Chapter 
on Baudhayana, the first Geometer in the author’s “Founders 
of Sciences in Ancient India”. Baudhayana (c. 800 B.C.) gave a 


L. aaa Pe ahaa afer | 
RAR RUA: Te —BrSpSi. XVIII. 69 


RATIONAL GEOMETRICAL FIGURE 261 


method.of transforming a rectangle into a square, which is 
equivalent tothe algebraic identity : 


/ m—n m—n 
mn=(m——5— ) —( 5 
where m, n, are any two arbitrary numbers. 


Brahmagupta in connection with the solution of rational 
triangles says : 


The square of the optional (ista) side is divided and 
then diminished by an optional number; half the 
result is the upright, and that increased by the optional 
number gives the hypotenuse of a rectangle. 


We shall put these statements of Brahmagupta in the 
algebraic language thus: If m.n be any two rational numbers, 
then the sides of a right-angled triangle will be 


mn m 
: mi(qu—n) 4 at) 


This Sanskrit term ista may either mean “given” or 
“optional”. With the former meaning the rule would imply the 
method of finding rational right angles having a given leg. 


Brahmagupta was the first to give a solution of the equa- 
tion x*+4?=z? in integers. His solution is 
m—n?, 2mn, m+n, 
m and n being two unequal integers.” 

“Thus if m=7 and n=4 then m-n?=33, 2mn=—56 and 
m?-+n?=65; then the three numbers 33, 56 and 65 bear the rela- 
tion 33°-+56?=65". 

Mahavira (850 A.D.) also states 


The difference of the squares (of two elements) is the 
upright, twice their product isthe base and the sum 
of their squares is the diagonal of a generated 
rectangle? 


Isosceles Triangles with Integral Sides : The following state- 
ment of Brahmagupta in this connection is very significant : 





1. ree gore alta Seo aget wife: | 
SMAPS F TSETAT Fe: MT . —BrSpSi. XII. 35 
2. GSS, VIL. 902 


262 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


The sum of the squares of two unequal numbers is the 
side; their product multiplied by two is the altitude, 
and twice the difference of the squares of those two 
unequal numbers is the base of an isosceles triangle. 


Thus if m,n be two integers such that m is not equal to n, 
the sides of all rational isosceles triangles with integral sides are 
given by 

m+n, m+n?, 2(m?- n?) 
and the altitude of the triangle is2mn. ~ 


This method was also followed by Mahavira and other 
Indian mathematicians. In fact, their solutions are based on 
the juxtaposition of two rational right triangles, equal so that 
they have a common leg. It is remarkably a powerful device, for 
every rational triangle or quadrilateral may be formed by the: 
juxtaposition of two or four rational right triangles. 


Isosceles Triangles with a Given Altitude 


Here we have a rule given by Brahmagupta for finding out 
all rational isosceles triangles possessing the same altitude : 
The (given) altitude is the producer (karani), Its 
square divided by an optional number is increased and 
diminished by that optional number. The smaller is the 
base and half the greater is the side? 


Thus if m be any rational number then for a given definite 
altitude a, the sides of the saad secs: triangles are 


(= +m ) each and the base iss . We shall illustrate it 


by an example taken from the commentary of Prthudaka Svami 
The given altitude is 8; let us take any rational number m= 


2 42 
4 )= 


2 AZ 
10 each and the base i =12. Thus the three sides of the 





then the two equal sides of the isosceles are given by i( 


1. aft ae CeRUMaigait Beret aa: | 

| Berra eats ate UI —BrSpSi. XIL. 33 

2. a eaaateatels dyaseT wy | ee 
sist fe a arg: GT a eat ai: 1 —BrSpSi. XII. 37. 


ISOSCELES TRIANGLES 263 


rational isosceles triangle with altitude 8 are (10,10, 12). 
Rational Scalene Triangles: Brahmagupta lays down the 
following rule in the case of rational scalene triangle ; 
The square of an optional number is divided twice 
by two arbitrary numbers; the moieties of the sums 
of the quotients and (respective) optional numbers are 
the sides of a scalene triangle; the sum of the moities 
of the differences is the base? 
In other words, if m, p,q are any rational numbers, then 
the sides of a rational scalene triangle are : 


1 mm 1 m 
1G +p ).# (F+0). 
, (@. (e 

(5 -r)+2(3 -a) 


Here the altitude (m), area and segments of the base of 
this triangle are all rational. 


Thus putting m=12, p=6, and q=8 in Brahmagupta’s gene 
ral equation, Prthtidaka Svami derives a scalene triangle with 
sides (13,15) and (14) altitude (12), area (84 and the segments of 
the base (5) ewe are all integral numbers. 


+ +p) =i(% +6) =15 


£ (tua) (3 3 +8 )=13 





Fig. 19 Fig. 20 


1. weata vat Rae a wees | 
fran greanaraat zi 


—BrSpSi. XT, 34. 


BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 
Thus the two sides of the rational scalene triangle are 15 
and 13. The base is. 


122 1? 
= ~6 ) igs )=9+5—14 


wo} 


The altitude is m=12; area is equal to base Xaltitude 
2 


14x 12 pees, 
5 =and the segments are\/ 13°—122=5 and 


4/(15?—122) =9. Thus they are all integers. 





Rational Isosceles Trapeziums 


Brahmagupta has given us a method of obtaining such 
isosceles trapeziums whose sides, diagonals, altitude, segments 
His rule is as follows: 


and area are all rational numbers. 


The diagonals of the rec- 
tangle (generated) are the flank 
sides of an isosceles trapezium; 
the square of its side is divided 
by an optional number and 
then lessened by that optional 
number and divided by two; 







eT et wm 


(the result) increased by the 
upright is the base and lessened 
by it is the face. 


D H c 
Fig. 21 


_ Here in the figure, we have the isosceles trapezium ABCD 
of which C D is the base and A B is known as the fase. Accord- 
ing to Brahmagupta’s rule, we have (p being the optional 





number). 
4m?n?— - 
CD +i + 2 an  € 
+ 3 Y+(m n ) . (base) 
AB=% [{ 4m? —  ) foe) (face} 
Cn es 
DH = (m-n?) (upright) 
1. srecadl ag grefaitea wider | . : 
, Sen Rea en Rene II —BrSpSi. XII. 36 


RATIONAL TRAPEZIUMS 265 


AD = BC = m+n? (the aides of the trapezium) 
HC = base—upright = # (4m? _ ‘ ) (segment) 


lp J 
AC=BD= [4m'n? > (diagonal) 
Goran ce | 
AH =2mn (altitude) 
ABCD =mn [(4m'n?_ ‘ | (area) 
Lp 


By chosing the valuesof mn and p suitably, ‘the values 
of all the dimensions of the isosceles trapezium can be made 
integral. Prthudaka Svami starts with the rectangle (5, 12, 13) 
and suitably takes p as6;then he calculates out the dimensions 
of the trapezium: flank sides (AD and BC) = 13, base =14, 
and base = 4 altitude (AH) = 12, segments of base (DH and 
HC) = 5, and 9, diagonals (AC and BD) = 15, area ABCD = 
108. All these values are integers. 

In this example, the rectangle chosen is (5, 12,13) which is 
AA’ DH, where AD=m? + 7? = 13 

and DH =m? — rn? =5 
whence by adding the two we have 
2m? = 18 

This gives the value of m= 3, and hencen = 2. Prtht- 
daka Svami has taken the value of p=6 by choice. Putting 
these values of m,n and p, the values for the dimensions of the 
isosceles trapezium follow from the expressions given by Brahma- 


‘gupta. : 
‘ 4.37.22 
cp=3( +) + ( s-2t) = 945-14 (axe) 


Face = 9—5=4 
Sides AD = BC ==3?+2? = 13 
and so on fur the other dimensions. 


Rational Trapeziums With 
Three Equal Sides 


This problem is very much the same as one of the rational 
isosceles tpapezium with the only difference that in this case 
one of the parallel sides is also equal to the slant sides. We 


266 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


have the following solution of this problem from Brahma- 
gupta : 
The square of the diagonal (of a generated rectangle) 
gives three equal sides; the fourth (is obtained ) by 
subtracting the square of the upright from thrice the 
square of the side (of that rectangle). If greater, it 
is the base; if less, it is the face. 

As before, the rectangle generated from m,n is given by 
Cm?—n?, 2mn, m?+n?), that is these are the three sides of 
the right triangle, which correspond to the two sides and the 
diagonal of the rectangle generated by them. Let us suppose, 
we have a trapezium ABCD whose sides AB, BC and AD are 
equal, then 

AB = BC = AD = (r*+n?)? 
CD = 3( 2mn ? — Cm?—n? 2 = 14 mn? — mm — n* 
or CD = 3( m?—n? )? — (2mn)? = 3m!+3n* — 10 mn. 
Prthtdaka Svami has taken an illustration, where m=2, 


n=1 and he deduces two rational trapeziums with three equal 
sides ( 25, 25, 25,39 ) and ( 25, 25, 25, 11 ). 


The segment ( CH ), altitude (AH ), diagonals ( AC, BD) 
and area of this trapezium are also rational, and given by: 
CH (segment ) = 6 m?n?—m'* — n* 
AH ( altitude ) = 4 mn ( m?—n? ) 
AC = BD ( diagonals ) = 4 mn ( m?+n? ) 
ABCD (area ) = 32m'n? (m?—n? ). 


Rational Inscribed Quadrilaterals 


We find in the Brahmasphutasiddhanta a remarkable 
proposition formulated by Brahmagupta : 


To find all quadrilaterals which will be inscribable 
within circles and whose sides, diagonals, perpendi- 
culars, segments ( of sides and diagonals by perpendi- 
culars from vertices as also of diagonals by their 
____imtersection ), areas, and also the diameters of the 
be a ee 
Pe SSC cee a —BrSpSi. XII. 37 


RATIONAL INSCRIBED QUADRILATERALS 267 


circumscribed circles will be expressible in integers. 
Such quadrilaterals we shall call as Brahmagupta 
Quadrilaterals. 
The solution of this formidabl@ problem has been given by 
Brahmagupta as follows: 
The upright and bases of two right-angled triangles 
being reciprocally multiplied by the diagonals of the 
other will give the sides of a quadrilateral of unequal 
sides: ( of these ) the greatest is the base, the least 
_ is the face, and the other two sides are the two 
flanks.? 
Taking Brabmagupta’s integral solution, the sides of the 
two right triangles of reference are given by: 


GQ) m*—n*, 2mn, m?-+n?*; 
Gi) p'—q*, 2 nq, v?-+q"; 
where m,n, p,q are integers. Then the sides of the Brahk- 
magupta Quadrilateral are. 
(1? — 1")(p? +"), (py? 9G?) (mn? +n”), 
2mn(p?-+q*), 2pq(m? +n?) (Arrangement A) 
Prthudaka Swami has- 
illustrated the rational inscribed . 
quadrilateral by taking an 
example of the right angle 
triangles. 


G (3,45) (n?—1? = 
m'+n?=5, whence 
m=2,n=1) 


Gi (512,13)? —q?= Fy 
y+q?=13, whence 
p=3, q=2) Fig. 22 
Substituting these values in the above equations, we get the 
sides of the quardilateral as ( 39, 25, 52 and 60). 
1. Tema ae: TERR yaagaTy | 
oftal 4a edie aefeert aaah tI —BrSpSi. XII. 38 


2 The diagonals of this quadrilateral are given by BbaskaralI as 56 
(=3,124+4,5) and 63 (=4,1243,5). (Cont, on page 268) 








270 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


Put in other words, this means that one has to solve the 
following equations : 


(i) 5x25 = y? 
(ii) =10x—100 = y’ 
Git) 83x—7635 = y? 
Prthudaka Svami, the commentator on the Brahmasphuta- 
siddhanta proceeds to solve these equations as follows : 
(1.1) Suppose y = 10; then x = 125. Or put » =5; then 
x =10. 
(2.1) Suppose y =10; then x =20. 
(3.]) Assume y =1; then x = 92. 


He then remarks that by virtue of the multiplicity of 
suppositions there will be an infinitude of solutions in every 
case, But no method has been given either by Brahmagupta or 
his commentator to obtain the general solution, 


Double Equations of the First Degree 


Perhaps we have the earliest reference of the simultaneous 
indeterminate quadratic equations of the type 


xt a=? 
xt b= 
in the Bhakasali Manuscript (Folio 59, recto). 


Brahmagupta gives the solution of such simultaneous inde- 
terminate quadratic equations of a general case as follows: 


The difference of the two numbers by the addition 
or subtration of which another number becomes a sq- 
uare, is divided by an optional number and then incre- 
ased or decreased by it. The square of half the result 
diminished or increased by the greater or smaller (of 
the given number) is the number (required), - 


Expressed in the language of algebra, shall have: 


{i (em) [ra | 


Se erenannmnneenn ene eo) 


1. geist weet wats ie) 
(wee Sheeehnshaet tat a atu —BrSpSi. XVIII. 74 


tf 


DOUBLE FIRST DEGREE EQUATIONS 271 


ie 2 
or x= {4 (F)} Fb 


where m is an arbitrary number. 
Datta and Singh has given the rationale of this method as 
follows: 
=x-a; v?=xtb, 
From them, we have u2—v?=+aFb 


Therefore u—v=m 


and uty= aFh 
m 


where m is arbitrary. Hence 


=} Ce +m )=t+ (+ n) 


Sincc it is obviously immaterial whether u is taken as posi- 
tive or negative, we have 


Similarly v=} (= +m ) 
Therefore x= 3 es Pim) | Fa 


x fs (GEr0)} 


where m is an arbitrary number. 
Now we shall take up another particular case: for which 
Brahmagupta has given a rule: 
The sum of the two numbers tne addition and sub- 
traction of which make another number Geverally) 
a square, is divided by an optional number and then 
diminished by that optional number. The square 
of half the remainder increased by the subtractive 
number is the number (required). 
In the algebraic notations, we shall express it as follows : 


1, deat dea gh ethers ea | . | 
wei Tet Hlreaseatrat walt TT U1 —BrSpSi. XVII. 71 


oi4 BRAHMAGUPTA AS AN ALGEBRAIST 


et ae 


if bSc and m > “= , adhe : If these conditions be reversed then x 


and y will have ee values interchanged. 


Datta and Singh have given the following rationale of 
these solutions : ‘ 
axi=batoy td, 
: or a 2xy—abx—acy=ad, 
no, , or, (ax—c) (ay—b)=adt+he. 


: Suppose ax—c=m, a rational number; 


_ adthc 
rae 
Rae Therefore. 

x= Gat c) 
a 


~ _ 1 fad+be 
Gn?) 


=: : ' Or, we may put ayv—b=m; 


peat case, we shall have ao ad-tbe ; 
tees he at? 

whence ai ets ) 

— y= Eqn). 


.. Brahmagupta’s own rule. 


i! 


Whilst the rule given aboveis ascribed to an unknown 
‘author, Brahmagupta’s own rule for the solution of a quadratic 
Pndeterminiate equation involving a factum is as follows: 


’ With the exception of an optional unknown, assume 
arbitrary values for the rest of ‘the unknowns, the 
product of which forms the factum. The sum of the 
-product of these (assumed values) and the (respective) 
coefficients of the unknowns will -be absolute ‘quantities. 
“The continued products of the assumed values and of 
the coefficient of the factum will be the- coefficiént of 

the optionally (left out) unknown, Thus the solution 


BRAHMAGUPTA’'S OWN RULE 275 


is effected without forming an equation of the factum 
Why then was it done so 7! 


Datta and Singh think that the reference in the latter por- 
tion of this rule is to the method of the unknown author : 


“Kim krtam tadatah" ? The principle underlying Brahma- 
gupta’s method is to reduce, like the Greek Diophantus (c.275 
A.D.) the given indeterminate equation to a simple determi- 
nate one by assuming arbitrary values for all the unknowns ex- 
cept one. So undoubtedly it is inferior to the earlier method. 

We now take an illustrative example from Brahmagupta : 

Cn subtracting from the product of signs and degrees of 
the Sun, three and four times (respectively) those 
quantities, ninety is obtained. Determining the Sun 
within a year (one can pass as a proficient) mathema- 
tician. 

If we presume x to denote the signs and y the degrees of 
the Sun, then the equation would be: 

xy—3x—4y=90 
Prthtidaka Svami solves it in two ways: 


(i) Let us assume the arbitrary number to be17. then 
90.1+3.4 


y=t (17+3)=20 
Gi) Let us assume arbitrarily y=20. On substituting 
this value of y in the above equation, we get 
20x—3x =170 
. whence x=I0. 
1. witch tena faeata aera | 
mae cared ated wats Sa 
at serena oat verte ad deta | 
feria feenste aac-gaacare fe Bi dea il —BrSpSi. XVIII. 62-63 
2. wal ueigerd Baga fray fatter Te | 
aaid ee2aT TA PHRMA TATA: | —BrSpSi, XVIII. 61. 





= 0." 


Reference 
H.T. Colebrooke: Algebra with Arithmetic and Mensuration 
from the Sanscrit of Brahmagupta and Bhas- 
cara, London, 1817. 


B. Datta and A.N. Singh : oe of Hindu Mathematics Pt. I 
TT, 1962. 


CHAPTER X 

Arabic and. Indian 
Divisions of.the 
Lodiac 


1 Tefas [bng-beent a débatéd ‘question: whether the-Indian 
und Atabiai divisions of sthe aodiad had*a® common origin. Sir 
Willain Jones 'tholight that they‘had“ not: bet’ Colebrooke hold 
a dofithary-view. --Fhe coinciddncé,!in the twosystems ‘of division 
is's0 exact ‘that'He thinks, ‘it‘could -net-beidue £6' “cHancé: -Coleb? 
rodké'bas disttissed this point! in details tn oné of his Papers“enitit! 

-“On- the Indian: and Arabian-divisioni ‘of the’ zédiac™, Asiatic 
Researches Vol. ix.. p. 323-376: reSréduced! if the Miscellaneous 
Essays, Vol. ~ IL; p. 321-373, 1872. : 

Ps 445° Aloint' now the first: naksqtra, but anciently, the Jast 
= corp ek yt Tog fe TG eG Pee eee toet " : ‘ 
but one! probably obtained its present “situation at the ‘bead~ of 
the ‘abtrisins, when the Begining’ of’ the zodiacwas referred fo 
the-first deerée of Mébd (the Rain}. “As nieasaritig a , portion Gf 
the zodiac, it octubies the first 13°20’ of Mésa;‘Snd’ its beginning 
follows immediately attet thé principal, ‘Sar’ “iii ‘the last naksatra 
Revati, reckoned KY Soifle édactly, ‘by others nearly, opposite 
to the very conspicuous one, Which f6tmis ‘the fourteenth ‘asterism, 
Aa Consteltations\Aévhi1: comprises “threé’ star$ (Aries‘a! 8, Y) 
figured 2s a horse-head; and thé~ptincipal, which is also the 
adrthern 6né, is'statéd “by “all ancient “authorities; “ii10°N and 
&°E. from the beginning of the Mesa. : , 


BOO = awe — orks See eats : ee 

veicge ording *. arabs, the fst, mapaih OF. Mar mansions 

entitled Sheratan (by, Persians, Sheratain).,and. comprises twq_ 
stars of the third magnitude on the head. of Aries. in lat, oi 


and 7°51’ Nand ‘Jong. 26°13' and 27°7’. With the addition of ‘a 


278 ARABIC AND INDIAN DIVISIONS OF THE ZODIAC 


third, also in the head of the Ram, the asterism is denominated 
Ashrait. The bright star of the second or third magnitude 
which is out of the figure of the Ram, according to Ulugh Beg, 
but on the nose according to Hipparchus, cited by this author 
from Ptolemy, is determined Natih : It is placed in lat. 9°30°’N 
and long. 1 0° 43’, and is apparently the same with the principal 
star of the Indian asterism; for Muhammad of Tizin, in his table 
of declination and right ascension, expressly terms it the first star 
of the Sheratain. 


4 


2. Bharani the second asterism, comprises three stars 
(35, 39, 41 Aries) figured: by the yoni or pudendum muliebre and 
the principal and southern star of this naksatra is placed in 12°N. 
Qn the Aratian system, the second manzil, entitled Butain is 
placed by Ulugh Beg in lat. 1°12’ and 3°12’, and this cannot 
possibly be reconciled with the Indian...constellation. But 
Muhammad of Tizin assigns to the bright star of Butain a decli- 
nation of 23°N exceeding by nearly 2° the declination allotted by 
him to Natih or his first star in Sheratain. This agrees with the 
difference between the principal stars of Asvini and Bharani, and 
it may be inferred, that some among the Mohammadan astrono- 
mers have concurred with the Hindus, in referring the second 
constellation to stars that form Musca. 


3. Krttika. now the third, formerly the first, naksatra 
consists of six stars figured as knife or razor, and the principal 
and southern star is placed in 47 or 5°N and in 65 sixths of 
degrees (or 10°50’) from its own commencement (cf. the Saryasid- 

. dhanta). or 37° 28' to 38° from the beginning of the Mesa (the 
Siddhanta-Siromani or the Graha Laghava) respectively. This 
longitude of.the circle of declination corresponds nearly with 
that of the bright star in the Pleiades, which is 40° of longitude 
distant from the principal star of Revat. 

The stars indicated by Ulugh Beg for Thurayya, also corres- 
pond exactly with the Pleiades. 

4. Rohini, is the fourth naksatra, the Arabic name for the 
fourth mansion is Debara@n (or with the article Aldebaran). 
It corresponds to the bright star called the Bull's eye, and 
which is unquestionably the same with the principal 
and eastern star of Rohina, placed in 43° or 5°S and 49}°E 
by the Hinda writers on Astronomy. This naksatra is 


. 


ARABIC AND INDIAN DIVISIONS OF THE ZODIAC 279 


figured as a wheel cart, and comprises five stars, out of the seven 
which the Greeks named the Hyades. The Arabs, however, like 
the Hindus, reckon five stars only in the asterism. Sir William 
Jones supposes them to be in the head and neck of the Bull; they 
probably are a, P, ¥,8, = Tauri, agreeably to Mons. Bally’s 
conjecture. , 


5.. Mrgasird, the fitth naksatra, represented by an antelope 
head, contains three stars; the same which constitute the fifth 
lunar mansion Hakah ; for the distance of 10°S assigned to the 
northern star of this naksatra, will agree with no other but one 
of the three in the head of Orion. The difference of longitude 
(24° to 253°) from Krettika corresponds with sufficient exactness: 
and so does the longitude of its circle of declination (62° to 63°) 
from the end of Rewati; since the true longitude of ’ Orionis, 
from the principal star in Revati (£ piscium) is 633°. 


6. Ardra. the sixth naksatra, consists of a single bright 
star, described as a gem, and placed in $°S (by some in 11°) and 
at the distance of 43 to 4° in longitude from the last asterism. 
This indicates the star in the shoulder of Orion (¢ oriznis). The 
sixth lunar mansion is named by the Arabs as Hanah; and 
comprises two stars in the feet of the second twin, accordiag to 
Ulugh Beg, though others make it to be a shoulder. Mohammad 
of Tizin allots five stars to this constellation; and the Kamis, 
among various meanings of Hanah, says. that it is a name for 
five starsin the left arm of Orion; remarking also. that the 
lunar mansion is named Tahayi, comprising three stars called 
Tahyat. Obviously here the Indian and Arabian asterisms are 
irreconcileable. 


7. Punarvasi (used ina dual number) is the seventh 
nakstra, and is represented by a house, or even a bow, and it 
includes four stars, among which the principal and eastern one 
is 30° or 32° from the fifth asterism; but has been placed by all 
authorities in6°N. This agrees with (8 Geminoram) one of the 
two stars in the heads of the Twins. which together constitute 
the seventh lunar mansion ziread, according to Mohammad of 
Tus and Mohammad of Tizin and other Arabian authorities. 
The seventh lunar mansion of Arabs is named zirad ul ased 
according to Jauhari and other cited by Hyde in his Commen- 


250 ARABIC AND en PBN. a aie erie 
oR. VATE OT 


tary on Ulugh Beg. and that the Kamis ees this term to be 
a tiame of eight’ Stats fa n the ia ot a bow. Saar 


, 
Seta. feosdie: ra i Mee a = 


“Be Puliya, thie eighth asterism, is deat as an arrow: a4 
Consists ‘of t ree stars,the ¢ ‘chief of which being, also, the jmiddle 
most: has't no latitude; and “is ‘12° to 13” distant from: the seventh 
asterism, being placed by Hindu astronomers in 106° of longitude, 
This ig “Evidently 3°Cancti’and‘ dées not differ widely from the 
éighth lamar | mansion Nethrah, which according to Ulugh Beg and 
others consists‘of : two “stars, fielding: the’ niebtla of’ ‘Cancer! 
The Indian “éonstellation’ ‘cémprises ‘two ‘other | ‘Stars ” besides & 
Cancetis ‘which ‘are pethaps Y and B of the ‘eine’ constgtlattot ake 

ey ke 2d toe OS 

RG 20, Kies itt astetistn’’ doiitains five stars figured 
asa potter’swheel, ‘and of which the principal or eastern one is 
placed in 7°S, and according to different-tables,- 107;°: 108° or 109° 
E, This appears to be intended for the, bright.star j in ;the south- 
ern claw of Caircer, @ Cancéri), ‘and, cannot be reconciled with 
the lunar 4 bia sion’ Tae or ‘Tarfafi, which - co prises t “two stars 
tiear the lion's (sithha)-eye, “the oe entog ele Placet be 
Mohammad of Tizin ji ap 2d of N. ‘declination, py, ms . 
‘0. Ma ha,’ ‘the fentif ailetais contains Tike the ase five 
stats! But Which'are  Retreld as a house. The principal of the 
Southern one has no latitude; and according to all, authorities 
has 129° longitude: ~ THis is evidently’ Regalus: (@ ‘Léonis) : which 
is éxdétly 194° distant flom the last stat in Revan. “The’ fetth 
litha¥ mansicn of Arabians’ is Tebhap, which comprises thrée 
fsomet say, four) stats; nearly in the longitude of the Jion’s s heat att, 


re 


the zodiac.coincide., ‘This nakastra.- consists ph %gr7 and » 
Mike 


+o 


eu 1 7 oy SE wd jewige “Gas seater? Ai, “at 


7 “at “Parvg-Phalguni's the, “eleventh, naksatra and is repre. 


sented’ by a couch or bedstead; it consists of two stars.<  deter- 
z fined 1 b the place « of;the ¢ chief, star the, northernmost, accord- 
ing tot e @ Stixya-Siddhanta) i in ‘12N and 144°E,, or according to 
Brabmagupta, ¢ the Siroman 7 vand | ‘the. Grahglaghava. 147; .or 148° 

«They are paablsic Sand @ Leonis, The Arabian, name fog 
this | is lanar m mansion is zubrah or, Khertan. 


ARABIC AND INDIAN DIVISIONS OF THE ZODIAC 281 


It may be mentioned here that Brahmagupta and Bhaskara 
selected the southern for the principal star; while the Szrya- 
Siddhanta took the northern. Hence the latitude stated by 
several Hindu authorities is the mean between toth stars; and 
the difference of longitude, compared to the preceding and subse- 
quent asterisms. may be exactly reconciled upon this suppo- 
sition. 


12. Uttara-Phalguni, which is the twelfth naksatra, con- 
sists of two stars, and is figured as a bed or cot. These stars are 
ascertained by the place of one of them (the northernmost) 13°N. 
and 155° E. This indicates ® Leonis; the same which singly 
constitutes the Arabian Lunar mansion Serfah, though Moham- 
mad of Tizin seems to hint that it consists of more than one 
star. 


13. Hasta, the thirteenth naksatra, has the name and figure 
of-a hand: and is suitably made to contain five stars. The 
principal one towards the west, next to the north-western star, 
is placed according to all authorities in 11° and 170°E. This 
can only belong to the constellation Corvus; and accordingly 
five stars in that constellation («, 8, Y, 8 ande Corvi). The 
thirteenth lunar mansion of Arabs is Awwa, which is also 
described to contain five stars, situated under Virgo and so 
disposed as to resemble the letter Alif. They are placed by 
Ulugh Beg in the wing. Here obviously, there is nothing common 
between the Hindu and Arabian specification of the asterism. 


ae agreement is only in the number of stars and in the longi- 
tude. 


14. Citra, the fourteenth naksatra, is figured as pearl. It 
is placed by the Sarya-Siddhanta in 2° S and 180° E. and by 
Brahmagupta, the Siromani and Grahalaghava in 13 or 2°S ani 
183°E. This agrees with the Virgin’s’ spike (a Virginis). The 
same star constitutes the fourteenth lunar mansion of the Arabs 
named from it Simae ul adzi. 


15. Svati, the fifteenth naksatra, is represented by a coral 
bead. The Sarya-Siddhanta, Brahmagupta, the Siromani and 
Grahalaghava, all concur in placing it at 37°N. They differ one 
degree in Jongitude of its circle of declination, three of them 


282 ARABIC AND INDIAN DIVISIONS OF THE ZODIAC 


making it 199° and the other 198°. The Indian asterism totally 
disagrees with the lunar mansion Ghafr which is the fifteenth 
Arabian mansion. and which consists of three stars in the Virgin’s 
(Kanya) foot, according to Ulugh Beg. but in or near the 
balance (Tula), according to others. 


16. Visakha, the sixteenth naksatra, consists of four stars 
described as a festoon. All the authorities place the principal 
and northernmost star in 1°, 1°20’ or 1°30’ S and in 212°, 212°5’ 
or 213° E. The latitude seems to indicate the bright star in the 
Soutehrn Scale (« Librae), though the longitude disagrees (suggest- 
ing possibly a remote star « Librae). Colebrooke suggests the four 
starsto be avs Librae and Y Scorpii. The sixteenth lunar 
mansion according to Arabs is Zubanah or Zubaniyah according 


to Mohammad of Tizin, the bright star in the northern scale (6 
Librae). 


17. Anuradha, the seventeenth naksatra, consists of four 
stars and is described as a row of -oblations in aright line. Its 
chief or middlemost star is placed in 3°, or 2° or 1°45’ S and in 224° 
or 224°5’E, thus placing it near the head of the Scorpion (Vrscika) 
(8 Scorpionis) and the asterism comprises 8, 8, 1, and P Scorpionis. 
The seventeenth lunar mansion of Arabs is called [klil or Iklilu’l- 
jebhah, which is said to contain 4, 3, or 6 stars lying in a straight 
line. Those assigned by Ulugh Beg for this mansion are B, 5, ” 


and A Scorpionis. Thus here the Indian and Arabian astronomers 
both concur exactly. 


18. dJyestha, the eighteenth naksatra, comprises three stars 
figured asa ring. The principal and middlemost star is placed 
in 4°,33° or 3° S and in 229°,229°5' or 230°E; this position indicates 
Antares or the Scorpion’s heart (¢ Scorpionis), which is also 
the eighteenth lunar mansion, named Kalb or Kalbul'akrab. 
The three stars of Indian asterism may be o, ¢ and T Scorpionis. 


19. Mala, the nineteenth nabksatra, is represented by a 
lion’s tail, and it contains eleven stars, of which the charac- 
teristic one, the easternmost, is placed in 9°, 84° or 8° S and in 
241° or 242° E. This probably (not exactly) indicates » Scor- 
pionis. This agrees with the eighteenth lunar mansion of Arabs 
‘known as Shaulah, consisting of two stars near the Scorpion’s 


ARABIC AND INDIAN DIVISIONS OF THE ZODIAC 283 


sting. The Hindu asterism probably includes all the stars in the 
Scorpion’s tail (e,#, [, 9, @. +, *, A, v and ¥ Scorpionis). 


20. Purva-Asadha, thetwentieth naksatra, is figured as an 
elephant’s tooth or as a couch, and it consists of twu stars, of 
which the most southern one is placed in 53°, 54 or 5° Sand 
254° or 255° E. This corresponds well with 8 Sagittarii, and 
which also corresponds with the twentieth lunar mansion of 
Arabs called Naaim. The Arabian mansion consists of four. 
or according to some eight, stars. The Indian naksatra corres- 
ponds to § and « Sagittarii. 


22. Uttara-Asadha, the twenty-first naksatra, is represented 
by acouch or by en elephant’s tooth. The principal or the 
most northerly star is placed in 5° S and 260° or 261° E, agreeing 
with a star in the body of Sagitterius (Tt Sagittarii), and the 
ether staris perhaps the one marked €. The Arabian lunar 
mansion corresponding to it is Baldah, consisting of six stars. 
two, of which are placed by Mohammad of Tizin in declination 
21° and 16°. One of these must be a star inthe head of Sagit- 
tarius. Some authors. on the contrary, describe the lunar 
mansion as destitute of stars. Here the Arabs and Hindus do 
not show reconciliation. . 


22. Abhijit. the twenty-second asterism, consists of three 
stars figuring as a triangle or as a nut of floating Trapa Gin 
modern Indian astronomy, it does not occupy an equal portion 
of the ecliptic with other naksatras). Its brightest star is very 
remote from the zodiac, being in 60° or 62°N. The longitude 
of its circle of declination is 265°, 266° 40’ or 268° according to 
different authorities. The corresponding lunar mansion of 
Arabs is Zabih, consisting of two stars (according to some, four) 
in the horns of Capricorn. This totally disagrees with Indian 
asterism. 


20. Sravana, the twenty-third naksatra, is represented by 
three footsteps, ani contains three stars of which the middlemost 
is placed in 30° N (all authorities agree), and longitude. 280° 
(Sarya-Siddhanta) or 278° (Brahmagupta and Siromani), or 275° 
(Grahalaghava). The assigned latitude indicates the bright 
star in the Eagle, whence the three may be inferred to be «, 8 


~ 


284 ARABIC AND INDIAN DIVISIONS OF THE ZODIAC 


and Y Aquilae. According to Arabs, the twenty-third lunar 
mansion is Bala, which consists of two stars-in the left hand of 


Aquarius. Here again Arabian and Hindu divisions are at 
variance. 


24. Dhanistha, the twenty-fourth naksatra, is represented 
by adrumortabor. It comprises four stars, the westernmost 
of which is placed in 36° N and according to Brahmagupta, 
Siromani and the Sarya-Siddhanta in 290° E (Grahalaghava 
gives 286°). This longitude of the circle of declination and the 
distance of the star on it from the ecliptic indicate the Dolphin : 
and the four stars are ¢, 8, Y and 8 Dolphini. The correspond- 
ing lunar mansion of Arabs is S@ud, which comprises two stars 


in Aquarius (8 and € Aquarii). Here again the two divisions 
disagree completely. 


24. Satahbisak, the twenty fifth naksatra, is a cluster of 100 
stars figured by a circle. The principal or the brightest has no 
latitude; or only a third, or at utmost half, a degree of south 
latitude; and longitude 320°. This best corresponds with A 
Aquarii. According to Arabs, the twenty-fifth lunar mansion 
is known as Akhbiyah which consists of three stars only, placed 
in the wrist of the right hand of Aquarius. However, it appears 
from Ulugh Beg’s tables, as well as from Mohammad of Tizin’s, 
that four stars are assigned to this mansion. The Indian and 


Arabian systems of division differ considerably but less widely 
according to some. 


_ 26. Parva-Bhadrapada, the twenty-sixth naksatra, consists 
of two stars represented by a couch or bed. or else by a double 
headed figure, one of which is placed in 24° N and 325° or 326° 
E. The only conspicuous star nearly in that position is the bright 
star in Pegasus (a Pegasi) and the other may be the nearest 
considerable star in the same constellation (¢ Pegasi). The 
twenty-sixth Arabian lunar mansion is Mukaddim, consisting 
of two brightest stars in Pegasus (2 and 8). Here the Indian 
and Arabian divisions show concurrence. 


O72 Uttar-Bhadrapada, the twenty-seventh naksatra, consists 
of two stars, figured as a twin ora person with double face, or 
- else asacouch. The position of the most northerly of the two 


ARABIC AND INDIAN DIVISIONS OF THE ZODIAC 285 


is in 26° or 27°N and 337° E. which probably indicates the bright 
star in the head of Andromeda, and the other star to be the 
one in the extremity of the wing of Pegasus (Y Pegasi). This 
exactly agrees with the twenty-seventh lunar mansion of Arabs 
named as Muakkher. Ulugh Beg assigns those stars to it. 


28. Revati, the twenty-eighth naksatra, comprises thirty- 
two stars figured as a tabor. The principal star isthe southern- 
most one, it has no latitude, and two of them assert no longitude. 
but some make it ten minutes short of the origin of the ecliptic, 
viz. 359° 50°. This clearly marks the star on the ecliptic in the 
string of the Fishes (f Piscium). The ascertainment of this star is 
important in regard to the adjustment of the Hindu sphere. The 
Arabic name for this mansion is Risha, signifying a cord. But 
the constellation as described by Jauhari and cited by Golius, 
consists of a multitude of stars in the shape of a fish and termed 
Betnu'lhat; in the navel of which is the lunar mansion. Moham- 
mad of Tizin alse makes this lunar mansion to be the same with 
Betnu'lhat, which appears. however, to be the bright star in the 
girdle of Andromeda (8 Andromedae) though others describe it 
as the northern fish, extending, however, to the horns of Ram. 
The lunar mansion and the Indian asterism, therefore, are not 
reconcileable in this last instance. 


I leave it to the readersto draw an inference as to the 
concurrence of the divisions of zodiacin Indian and Arabian 
systems. I would personally agree with Sir William Jones that 
the agreements are by chance. Arabs derived the idea of 
dividing zodiac in 27 or 28 mansions from Indians, or may have 
gotit from Greeks, and then they proceeded in their own way 
for details. I do not agree with those scholars who sometimes 
state that the Hindus took the hint of dividing the ecliptic from 
Greeks. The Atharvaveda devotes a number of Sukias or 
hymns on Naksatras, and Ihave shown elsewhere that inspired 
by these hymns, Gargya was the first Rsi who detailed out 
the naksatras. This happened much before Greeks developed 
even their first notions of astronomy. While the concept of 27 
nakiatras is Vedic and most ancient and of purely Indian origin 
the concept of 12 Raéis (signs) or twelve constellations is proba- 
bly inspired from Greeks. [The names Kanya, (virgo), Tula 


286 ARABIC AND INDIAN DIVISIONS OF THE ZODIAC 


(Libra), Vrécika (Scorpio), Dhanu, (Sagittarius), Makara, (Capri- 
corn), Kumbha (Aquarius), Mina (pisces), Mesa (Aries), Vrsa 
(Taurus), Mithuna (Gemini), Karka (Cancer), and Sirnha (Leo) 
were not used for Rasgis or signs in the Vedic times]. I shall con- 
clude this description with a passage from Colebrooke : 


The result of comparison shows, I hope satis- 
factorily, that the Indian asterisms, which mark the 
divisions of the ecliptic, generally consist of nearly the 
same stars, which constitute the lunar mansions of 
the Arabians : but in a few instances, they essentially 
differ. The Hindus have likewise adopted the divi- 
sion of the ecliptic and zodiac into twelve signs or 
constellations, agreeing in figure and designation with 
those of the Greeks; and differing merely in the place 
of the constellations, which are carried on the Indian 
sphere a few degrees further west than on the Grecian. 
That the Hindus took the hint of this mode of 
dividing the ecliptic from the Greeks, is not perha- 
ps altogether improbable; but if such be the origin of it 
they have not implicitly received the arrangement 
suggested to them, but have reconciled and adapted 
it to their own ancient distribution of the ecliptic into 
twenty-seven parts. . 


In like manner, they may have either received or given 
the hint of an armillary sphere as an instrument for 
astronomical observation ; but certainly they have not 
copied the instrument which was described by Ptolemy, 
for the constructiun differs considerably. 


Names, Shapes, and Number 
of the Stars of the Naksatras 


The Muhitrta-cinjamani provides a list of shapes associated 
to the naksatras (MuC. II. 59-60), In this list we are giving the 
number of stars as indicated by Varahamibira, Brahmagupta 
and Lalla. The identification given here is as indicated by 
E. Burgess, in his Translation of the Surva-Siddhanta 1935, p. 378. 
(Calcutta). This table has been reproduced here from the 
Mahabhaskariya of Bhaskara I, edited by K.S. Shukla. 


NAMES, SHAPES AND NUMBER OF THE STARS 


Naksatra 
A$vini 


Bharani 
Krttika 


Rohini 
Mrgasira 


Ardra 
Punarvast 


Pusya 


ASlesi 
Magha 
P-Phalreuni 
U-Phalguni 
Hasta 
Citra 

Svati 
Visakha 


Anuradha 


Jyestha 
Mala 
p-Asadha 
U-Asadha 


ravana 
Dhaniasth 
Satabhisak 
P-Bhadra. 
U-Bhadra 


Revati 


Shape 


Head of 
a horse 

Yoni 

Razor 


Cart 


Head of 
a deer 

Jewel 

House 


Arrow- 
head 
W heel 

House 


Mafica 
Cot 
Hand 
Pearl 


Coral bead 


Arched 
doorway 

Heaps of 

offerings 
to gods 


dtarpen- 


dent 
Tail of a 

lion 
Tusk of 
elephant 
Mafica 
Three feet 
Drum 
Circle 
Maiica 
Pair 


Drum 





'Varaha Brahma 
3 2 
3 3 | 
6 6 
5 5 
3 3 
J 1 
5 2 
3 1 
6 6 
5 6 
8 2 
2 2 
5 5 
1 1 
1 qi 
5 2 
4 4 
3 3 
11 2 
2 4 
3 4 
3 3 
5 5 
100 1 
2 2 
8 2 
32 1 

Reference 


Number of stars 
Se Identification 
Lalla 


3 


3 
6 
5 


> cS Ll HOt ho On Le) ft ioe) 


Le) 


VNVE BW NM 


32 


287 


| «8,¥ Aries 


35,39.41 Aries 
7 Tauri etc. 
(Pleiades) 
a,6,Y.8,2 Tauri 
(rlyades) 

d, Gigs Orionis 


@ Crionis 
8,%,7,v. Gemi- 
norum 

6,8:¥ Cancri 


£,8,9,7,P Hydrae 

ae, rf 

Leonis 

8,4 Leonis 

8, 93 Leonis 
3.Y,0.a-8 corvi 

e Virginis 

(Spica) 

a Bootis (Arc- 
turus 

i:¥.8,¢, Librae 


8,8.7~ Scopionis 


1,¢,T Scorpionis 


A; V1, O,5 Hse 
Scorpionis 
8,¢ Sagittarii 


o,€ Sagittarii 
a8,Y Aquilae 
3,0.¥.8 Delphini 
4 Aquartietc, 
a.8 Pegasi 
YPegasi; a An- 
dromedae 
£Piscium etc. 


H.T. Colebrooke : Miscellaneous Essays, Vol. II. 1872. 
K.S. Shukla . The Mahabhdskariya. 


CHAPTER XI 


Brahmagupta’s 
Astronomy : Its Highlights 


Beginning or Starting Point 


Very often in Indian astronomy. we come across a term 
ahargana (literally meaning collection of days), which means 
the number of mean civil days elapsed at mean Sunrise at Lanka 
on a given lunar day (tithi). since the beginning of Kaliyuga. It 
is the beginning of Kaliyuga, which is taken as the starting point 
for the reckoning of ahargana. This happened on Friday, Febru- 
ary 18, B.C. 3102, at mean sunrise at Lanka, when the Sun, Moon, 
and the planets are supposed to have been in conjunction at the 
first point of thenaksatra Asvini (which is a fixed point situated 
near the star £-Piscium). According to Aryabhata and Bhaskara 
I, the duration of Kaliyuga is 1,080,000 solar years. Four times 
this (4,320,000) is the duration in solar yeazs of a bigger unit 
called Mahayuga or even yuga. 

' Lanka in Indian astronomy is a hypothetical place where 
the meridian of Ujjain (latitude 23° 11’ N, longitude 75° 52’ E 
from Greenwich) intersects the equator. It is one of the four 
hypothetical cities on the equator called Lanks. Romaka. 
Siddhapur and Yamakoti (or Yavakoti). The Stryq-siddhanta 
describes Lanka as a great city (mahapuri) situated on an island 
to the south of Bharatavarsa.t The present Ceylon is not the 
1, weer gerry Tae: | 

dty fig ifort tala 
yee Te Yea saaletis Fer aT | 
ware ae ant UTENARAT | 
UPAR ART Wel THETA I 


(Cont. on page 29C) 


290 BRAHMAGUPTA'S ASTRONOMY ITS HIGHLIGHT 


astronomical Lanka, as it is about six degrees to the north of 
equator. The astronomical Lanka is mentioned by Brahmagupta 
in the beginning of his very first Chapter’. 


According to Brahmagupta all the four yugas of a Catur- 
yuga or mahayuga are not of the equal duration : 


Kaliyuga is of 432,000 years. Dvapara of 864,000 years, 
Treta of 1,296,000 years and Krtayuga of 1,728,000 years; 
total of the four is 4,320,000 years. Aryabhata regards 
all yugas of equal duration. 1,080,000 years’. 


The Saka era, which is usually used in Indian astronomy 
for the reckoning of years commenced 3179 years after the 
beginning of Kaliyuga. 

The number of lunar months in a yuga doesnot coincide 
with the number of solar months. Thus we have the conception 
of the Intercalary months : the number of intercalary months in 
a yuga denotes the excessof the number of lunar months in a 


yuga over the number of solar monthsin a yuga. Thus ina 
yuga we have 


Lunar months _ 93,433,336 
Solar months 51,840,000 
Intercalary months 1,593,336 
Lunar days 1,603,000,080 
Civil days 1.577,917,500 
Omitted lunar days 25.082,580 


- The number of omitted lunar days in a yuga is equal to the 


number of lunar days in a yuga minus the number of civil days 
in a yuga, 


(Cont. from page 289) 


aaaagararey Taare sate | 

safiregt am Feat nfaftoa | —Surya. XII. 36-39 
1, lafatecumiferenernet: | 

wana deri a saa Rasta —BrSpSi. I. 4 


2. wet afea at safifeati wea | 

fat aaa Sere: wT waa 
. Break ant FeRTAe | 
RRS tt ea - —BrSpSi. 1. 8-9 


UNITS OF TIME 291 
Units of time 


For the measurements of durations, it is necessary to have 
units of time. Brahmagupta gives the following units :* 


6 pranas or Asus=1 Rksa-vinadika or naksatra-vighatika 
or one pala (24 seconds) 


60 palas =] ghatika (24 minutes) 

60 ghatikas =1 divasa or dina (day) (24 hours) 
30 dinas =] masa (month) 

12 masas =] varsa or year 


Similar to the divisions of time, we have the divisions of 
an arc? 


Vikala (or vilipta or viliptika) =second of arc. 


60 vikalas =1 kala (minute of arc) 

60 kalas =I arhSa (degree of arc) 

30 arhgas =] rasi 

12 rasis =] bhagana (complete circle, 
360°) 


Unlike Aryabhata and others, who take kali, dvapara. 
treta. and krta of equal number of years, Brahmagupta regards 
kali consisting of 432,000 years, dvapara twice of it, consisting 
of 864,000 years, treta thrice of Kali consisting of 1,296,000 
years and krta four times of kali conisting of thus 1,728,000 
years, all the four to be making a yu ga of 4.320,000 years.* Further 
in the beginning of krta there is a sandhya of 1728000/12 years 
(=144000 years). and at the end of Krta, there is asandhyaméa of 
144,000 years; similarly in the beginning of treta, we have a 


1. sntianitardi vette gear | 

gfeat geet faut aaa Brera ara —BrSpSi- 1.6 
2. are aerad frenetic: | 

Za farrgen: aie Penfeer a 0 —BrSpSi. 1.6 

ay aaa aRnParaicad waa | 

afte sige Ramey Retiset art | —Arya. III. 1 

yewute ufefseriserdi yea at ART: | 

aq re fra: at ere aT HH —Arvya, TI. 2 
3. waCetal TH aekat wag’ wala | 

PT SAT: TE TTT Tas Sa I 

Brent ofee: at agai wel ot | 

at aawiae daw: afeapi wala 1 —Br SpSi. 1.7.8 


292 BRAHMAGUPTA'S ASTRONOMY ITS HIGHLIGHT 


sandhya of 1.296,000/12; i.e. 108,000 years and at the close of 
treta a sandhyarhéa of 108,000 years. Again, in the beginning 
of dvapara we have a sandhya of 864,000/12, i. e. 72,000 years 
and at the close of dvapara a sandhyarh$a of 72000 years; and 
similarly at the heginning a sandhya and at the close a 
sandhyathga of 432,000/ 1, i. e. of 36,000 years in the case of kali. 
In this respect Brahmagupta appears to follow Manu. the first 
author or giver of law. He regards further the following 
divisions of time 3? 

71 yugas =] manu 

14 manus =Il1kalpa 


Again, in the beginning, at the middle and at the close of 
each manu, there are sandhis, each equal to the measure of krta- 
Thus, taken as a whole , 


1 kalpa=71 14 yugas+15 sandhya-sandhyarhéa 
=994 yugas+15 x duration of krta 
=904 yugas +15 x (4 x 432,000) years 
=994 yugas + 6 yugas =1000 yugas 
= J] Brahma-dina (Brahma’s day) 
Thus Brahma’s day is regarded as 1 kalpa or one thousand 
caturyugis or 1000 yugas or the same as 1000 mahayugas). 


Aryabhata regards a manu to consist of 72 yugas and 
therefore a kalpa according to him would be of 14X72 yugas, or 
1008 yugas. Since in the foreign Siddhantas like Romaka, there 
is no reference to yuga: manu and kalpa. Brahmagupta regards 
these systems to be unauthoritative-* 


We have said that our starting point was the beginning of 
Kaliyuga, Friday February 18, B.C. 3102, at mean rise at Lanka, 
_when the Sun, Moon and the planets are supposed to have been 
in conjunction at the first point of the Naksatra Aévini. This 
type of conjunction would again happen after a Ppeee of kalpa. 


1. L. agaeaten slagie ear | 


SRR Ug SaeTISHTLT TRL I —BrSpSi. 1. 10 
2. feat at caer weed Bt faxes Ter | : : 
merRACe Are Raat aeETARL . —Arya, U1. 8 


| 8. SRR Heras TRIGA: 1 ; 
JERS e Gta Tare —BrSpSi. I- 13 


UNITS OF TIME 293 


We shall have the same type of conjunction of grahocca, mandocca 

Sighrocca and pata after a complete cycle of kalpa as we had in 
the beginning of creation. Thisis a natural observable cycle 
which is recognised in Indian astronomy and in no other foreign 
system; and hence only che Indian system recognises the time 
measure of kalpa. 


Ucca or apex is of two kinds: mandocca (apex of the 
slowest motion) and sghrocca (apex of the fastest motion). The 
mandocca is that point of a planet’s orbit whichis at the remotest 
distance and where the motion of the planet is slowest. In the 
case of the Sun and the Moon, it is the apogee; and in the case of 
other planets, it is the apogee or aphelion, the geocentric longi- 
tude of the apogee being equal to the helio-centric longitude of 
the aphelion. The sighrocca of a superior planet (Mars, Jupiter 
and Saturn) is defined as the mean Sun; that of an inferior planet 
Mercury or Venus) sighrocca is an imaginary body which is 
supposed to move in such a way that its direction from the earth 
is always approximately the same as that of the actual planet 
from the Sun. 


The bhaganas or the revolution numbers ofa planet have 
been given by Aryabhata and Brahmagupta! both: they mean the 
number of revolutions that a planet performs in a certain period, 
say a kalpa of 4,320,000.000 years. 


The bhaganas of planets are given as follows: 


1. avtsaaaiart arr yen aq waa: | 
Tas RRs Vela aaeTE 
warauke qT Ba aa: TT | 
aire feenreryagweaaeaa: | 
egrarene-aary Teresa | 
steer eae yerele SacI: I 
Ria ettataTTeaT: | 
SSATe Bh WAR AATS TAS 
REP UGG PIST RABTT: | 
Gane aha: wy qeaha Fac: It 
uaa waite eth | 
TERE STU RA: ERRVTTE II 
URARA WR: Gas Fea: | 
taal Tear assets wr Br SpSi. 1. 15-21 


294 BRAHMAGUPTA’S ASTRONOMY ITS : HIGHLIGHTS 


ae RPT TC TC TS, 








Planet or a body Bhaganas 

Ravi or Sun 4,320,000.000 
Budha or Mercury 4,320,000,000 
Sukra or Venus 4,320,000,000 
Candra or Moon 57,753,300,000 
Kuja or Bhauma or Mars 2:296,828,522 
Budha-sighrocca 17,.936,998,984 
Brhaspati or Jupiter 364,226,455 
Sukra-sighrocca 7,022,389,492 
Sani or Saturn 146,567,298 
Arka or Ravi-mandocca 480 
Candra mandocca 488,105,858 
Kuja or Bhauma mandocca 292 
Budha-mandocca 332 
Brhaspati or Jiva-mandocca 855 
Sukra-mandocca 653 
Sani-mandocca 41 
Candra-pata 232,311,168 
Kuia or Bhauma-pata 267 
Budha-pata 521 
Brhaspati or Guru-pata 63 
Sukra-pata 893 
Sani-pata 584 





By pata is meant the ascending node of a planet's orbit (on 
the ecliptic). 


Ina kalpa, the number of bha-bhramas (sidereal days) or 
also known as bha-parivartas is 51,040,000,000. If we subtract out 
from this number the bhagana of the Sun, we get what is known 
as ku-dinas or Savana days or the solar or sacrificial days. 
(51,040,000.000—4,320,000,000=46,720,000.000 Savana days or 
kudinas). 


In a kalpa, the number of Ravi-bhaganas also correspond to 
the number of solar years (Saura-varsas). i.e» 4,320,000.000; this 
number multiplied by 12 gives the number (ie. 51,840,000,000) of 
solar months. 


The difference between the candra-bhaganas and the Ravi- 
bhaganas ina kalpa gives the number of lunar months (Candra- 


UNITS OF TIME 295 


masa) in a kalpa (57,753,300,000-4,320,000,000 =53,433,300,000 lunar 
months). 


By subtracting the number of solar months from the 
number of lunar months in a kalpa, one gets the number of 
adhi-masas (additional-months) :. 53,433,300,000-51,840,000,000= 
1,593,300,000 adhiinasas. This multiplied by 30 gives the number 
of lunar days (Sagi-divasa) in a kalpa ; 53.433,300,000x30= 
1,602,999,000,000 lunar days. The difference between the lunar 
days and kudinas in a kalpa givesthe number of avama-dinas 
in a kalpa : 1,602,999,000,000-45,720,000,000=1,556,279,000.000.1 


Brahmagupta calculates out the srsti-sathvatsara or the 
Creation Era during his year of composition of the Treatise. He 
says ;: Six manus have gone in the kalpa ; the seventh manu is 
now running of which have lapsed 27 caturyugis; of the twenty 
eighth caturyugi, the three yugas, krta, dvapara and treta have 
gone by and also of the present kaliyuga 3179 years have 
lapsed. The total period thus lapsed on calculation comes to 
be 1,972,947,179 years :? 


Total Period=6 manus+7 manu—sandhis+27 yugas 
+krta+dvapara+treta+3179 years of kali. 

=(6 X71 X 4,320,000 years} +(7 x 4X 432,000 years)-+ 
(27 X 4,320,000 years) +(1,728,000+1,296,000-+864,000)-++- 
3,179=1;972,947,179 years. 
=1,840,320,000-+12,096,000+-116,640,000 + 3,888,000-+ 
3,179=1,972,947,179 years. 


Calculation of Ahargana : The method of calculating ahar- 
gana (number of days elapsed since the beginning of kaliyuga) 


1. aRral: wageamnss caTfesaiee: | 

Ua WAT Ae: ataaeaar: He UN 

UF WUT TYR ale TATE: | 

WER Wire: aE: PAA | 

afer: afrrenferenivn vata aRrigaa: | 

ukiaaaERaa FR: waaay | —BrSpSi. I. 22-24 
2. eI Aaa: weve TTA APT: | 

Sraaniaaisas GU Wartsear: | 

MAIR Ba A STA: THAT | 

andra aha UI ; BrSpSi. I. 26-27 


296 BRAHMAGUPTA'S ASTRONOMY ITS : HIGHLIGHTS 


has been given by Brahmagupta and Bhaskara I is almost 
identical. The rule given in the Brahmasphutasiddhanta’ may be 
compared with the following given by Bhaskara I in the Laghu- 
Bhaskariya: 


Add 3179 to the (number elapsed) years of the Saka 
era, (then) multiply (the resulting sum) by 12, and 
(then) add the (number of lunar) months (expired) 
since the commencement of Caitra. Set down (the 
result thus obtained) at (two) separate places; multi- 
ply (one) by (the number of) intercalary months in 
a yuga, which are 1,593,336 in a yuga : and divide (the 
product) by 5,184 x 10,000 (i.e.) by 51,840,000). Add the 
(resulting complete) intercalary months to the result 
placed at the other place. Then multiply (that sum) 
by 30 and (to the product) add the (lunar) days (ie. 
tithis) expired of the current month. Set down (the 
result thus obtained) in two places; multiply (one) by 
the (number of) omitted lunar days ina yuga ie by 
25,082,580 and divide by 1,603,000,080. The resulting 
(complete) omitted lunar days when subtracted from 
the result put at the other place give the (required) 
ahargana. The remainder obtained on dividing (the 
ahargana) by7 givesthe day beginning with Friday 
at sunrise (at Lanka)? 


1. seq SATA BAAS | 

‘utuat amend ca wreratiare ga: 

Rrqamntatige gery guar gies fa: | 

WA TATAIST VITATEATISTHRS — BrSpSi. I. 29-30 
2. semeraia aya WHER RAAT: | 

Sarees SIAM: Ge] TET FURS: | 

a ee Races aa yaat BA | 

WMTERISHes TRH MATAR TATA! | 

sRareraaag steret Eeroet | 

arranfeart aranfer sfexret aera: 

SUIS reGETIT RARE | 

aa: wens ing uta exec: 

Wea IZ Ys ET | 

we Wael Rt gawker | —LBh. I. 4-8 


UNITS OF TIME 297 


Addendum: The mean lunar day (madhyama tithi) may. 
however, differ from a true lunar day (spasta tithi) by one, so that 
the ahargana obtained by the above process may sometimes be in 
excess or defect by one. To test whether the chargana (obtained 
by the above process) is correct, it is divided by sevenand the 
remainder counted with Friday. If this leads to the day of 
calculation, the ahargana is correct; if itleads to the preceding 
day, the ahargana is in defect; and if that leads to the succeeding 
day, the ahargana is in excess. When the ahargana is found to 
be in defect. it is increased by one; when it is found to be in 
excess, it is diminished by one. (K.S. Shukla: MBA. p. 4-5) 


Example—Caiculate the ahargaza on October 1,1955, 


From Indian Calendar we find that October 1,1965 falls 
on Friday. 7th lunar day (tithi) in the light half of the 7th 
month Aévina in the Saka year 1887 (elapsed). Let us proceed 
as follows: : 


Adding 3,179 to 1,887. we get 5.066. (1) 


. 


Multiplying this by 12 and adding 6 (i. e. the number 
of lunar months elapsed since the beginning of Caitra) 
we get 60,798. te iss (2). 


Multiplying this by 1,593,336 and dividing the product 
by 51,840,000, we get 1,868 as quotient. (The remainder 
is discarded as unnecessary) (3) 


Adding this number (i.e. 1,868) to the previous one (1.e.) 
60,798) we get 62,666. (4) 


Multiplying this by 30 and adding 6 (i.e. the number 
of lunar days elapsed since the beginning of the current 
month) to the product, we get 1,879,986. (5) 


Multiplying this by 25,082,580 and dividing the preduct 
by 1.603,000,080, we get 29,416 as the quotient. (The 
remainder is discarded as not necessary). (6) 


Subtracting this numter (i.e. 29,416) from the previous 
» one (i.e. 1,879,986) we get 1,850,570. (7) 
This is the required ahargana. Since division by 7 leaves 


298 BRAHMAGUPTA’S ASTRONOMY:: ITS HIGHLIGHTS 


lasthe remainder. we subtract one fromit, and get 
1,850,569 as the correct ahargana for the day. 


An Alternative Rule for Ahargana 


Both Bhaskara I and Brahmagupta give an alternative rule 
for calculating out ahargana’ : 


Multiply the number of (solar months) elapsed since 
the beginning of kaliyuga by the number of lunar 
months (in a yuga) and divide by the number of solar 
months (in a yuga). Reduce the quotient to days (and 
add the number of lunar days elapsed since the begin- 
ning of the current lunar month); then multiply by 
the number of civil days (in a yuga) and divide by 
the number of lumar days (in a yuga); the quotient 
denotes the ahargana. 


Mean Longitude of a Planet 


(i) The mean longitude of a planet in revolutions is given 
by the expression : (Brahmagupta? and also Bhaskara’). 





L. aaiaaracaaearg stated aaa: | 
fitear qiRader Raley coriesvera: |I ‘MBh. I. 7 
RATT feet of | 
wargint arene: fa: || —BrSpSi. XII. 18 
2. TEE HY TUR UT TTT FAT | 
FRU Get TAN satel wreaths BrSpSi. I. 31 
3, sata aay ary aaieteas art aferaraatee: | 
afa seregy WRITE: ATR Telefe Fae: TAT | — MBh, 1.8 
marmanaey feat yet | 
wad wer: Beat aaa: | 
WR PAT TT VE TU TR TAT | 
Saas ants | . .,,. —LBh, I. 15-17 
(Divide the product of the revolution-number of a planet and the 
ahargana by the (number of) civil days (in a yuga); thus are obtained the 
(number of) revolutions (performed by that planet). From the (successlve 
remainders multiplied respectively by 12,30 and 60 and divided by the same 
' divisor (i.e. the number of civil days in yuga) are obtained the signs, degrees 
_ and minutes etc. (of the mean longitude of that planet) for (mean) sunrise 


er Lanks). 


r 


MEAN LONGITUDE OF PLANET 299 


revolution numter of planet X ahargana 


Mean longi = — ; 
an longitude civil days ina yuga 


Similar expression is given by more recent Indian astro- 
nomers also. 
(ii) Mean longitude of desired planets in minutes 
(mean longitude of the known planet in revolu- 
tions etc. reduced to minutes) X (revolution number 


of the desired planet) 
revolution number of the known planet. 


This rule is common to Brahmagupta! and Bhaskara I?. 


(iii) An alternative rule for deriving the mean longitude of 
the Moon from that of the Sun and vice versa has been given 
by Bhasakara I and Brahmagupta both. 

Multiply the ahargana by the number of intercalary 
months in a yuga and divide (the product) by the 
number of civil days (in a yuga) : the result is in the 
terms of revolutions etc. Add that to thirteen times 
the mean longitude of the Sun. (This is the process) 
to obtain the mean longitude of the Moon*. 


Mean longitude of the Moon 
_(intercalary months in a yuga) X ahargana 





civil days in a vega. revolutions 
1. sremnitad afaregn wredghers | 
a SRE wat as wafte: | — BrSpSi. XIII. 27 
2. Rrerat aes aa a eign HE SAITTEa: | 
ote aramid eg adres abe at | MBh. I. 10 


The (mean) longitude of the Moon, the planet, or the Ucca 
(whichever is known) together with tke revolutions performed 
should be reduced to minutes. The resulting minutes should 
geen be multiplied by the revolution-number of the desired 
planet and (the product obtained should be) divided by the 
revolution-number of that (known) planet. The result is 
(the mean longitude of the desired planet) in minutes. 


3. amet qanfiarea fad aa year aeaery | 
wee Wes we TUNA Tz HI —BrSpSi. XIII. 33 
qarfaraa wet ed eta saree wrens aeae | 
ares afar Rettaehetat afearchiee I —MBh. 1. 11 


300 


BRAHMAGUPTA’S ASTRONOMY : ITS HIGHLIGHTS. 


+13 (Sun’s mear longitude): 


This expression may be rearranged to get the mean 


longitude of the Sun from the mean longitude of the Moon’. 


Mean longitude of the Sun 


= jg lmean longitude of the Moon 


_ Gntercalary months in a yuga) x ahargana 


utions, 
civil days in a yuga *evolutionsh 


Calculating the Mean 
Longitudes of the Sun and 
the Meon without using Ahargana 


Bhaskara I follows. the method of Aryabhata I and the 


same method more or less has been adopted by Brahmagupta in 
calculating the meam longitudes of the Moon and the Sun 
without the use of @hargana. The method may be described 


thus: 


1. gusta gettseassnd faa Ire wear: | 
@ Tamra aaieat aerate ge afeh: II MBh. I. 11-12 
By the number of solar days here is meant the number obtained above 
by reducing the years elapsed since the beginning of kaliyuga to 
months, then adding to them the number of months elapsed since the 
beginning of the current year, then multiplying the sum by 30, and then. 
adding to. the product thus obtained the number of lunar days elapsed 
of the current month, 


2 


Reduce the years elapsed since the beginning of kali- 
yuga to months and add to them elapsed months of the 
current year- Then multiply the sum by 30 and add 
the product to the number of lunar days elapsed since 
the beginning of the current month. Multiply that 
sum by the number of intercalary months in a yuga 
and divide by the number of solar months in a yuga 
reduced to days; the quotient denotes the number of 
intercalary months elapsed. The remainder is the 
adhimasasesa, Multiply the complete  intercalary 
months thus obtained by 30: and to the product add the 
number of solar days elapsed since the beginning of 
kaliyuga?: then multiply that sum by the number of 
omitted lunar days in a ywga and divide by the number 
of lunar days in a yuga ; the remainder obtained is the 


avamasesa called ahnika. Then multiply the avamasesa 
a 


MEAN LONGITUDES OF THE SUN AND THE MOON 301 


(also called ahnika) by the number of intercalary months 
in avyuga and divide by the number of civil days (in a 
yuga). Add the resulting quotient to the adhimasasesa 
and divide the sum by the number of lunar months in 
a yuga: this gives degrees etc. (This is the total adhi- 
masasesa). Next multiply again the avamasesa called 
ahanika by 60 and divide by the number of civil days 
in a yuga: the result is in minutes, seconds. thirds etc. 
The number of months elapsed (since the beginning of 
Caitra) are to be taken as signs and the number of 
lunar days elapsed of the current month as degrees. 
The sum of these signs and degrees and the minutes, 
seconds etc. corresponding to the avamasesa is the 
grahatanu. From thirteen times and from one time that 
grahatanu severally subtract the degrees, minutes etc. 
corresponding to the total adhimasasesa : the remain- 
ders thus obtained are the mean longitudes of the 
Moon and the Sun respectively". 


1. qfvarnfensa pease rae | 
wera Rnerea at RATATAT Ul 
sReraraatt ark ueaet ares: | 
Wea MTT Taare Sank: i 
Tae Vay Tea AAT TUT | 
aera teeeen cenit cara certs a —BrSpSi. XT. 20-22 
FATT TTR TepsaT aT RARE a eT 
amg antennae & Uda fatrater are ga: | 
auahead fady ate aty are aitsharss «| 
free ad fasts caer amaaraeaaeaerns: 
waft TARAS FSAISTHNY SF MITER | 
ward Be aena deren adisafera fraser: @ aa: | 
washed wee aah ass STAT: ATT | 
grag inate aaa Ie sacha sary || 
qestreracare 3 fear arn ae: seers | 
dae Fel aferedt at grag eee 
ate seat Ratha ve qaatenPea | 
aeritieran: area fraser Wales i 
saree eraser ara | 
Prerarat qua: nated we sefienists afearaa: | —MBh. I. 13-19 


(Here verse 17 should follow verse 15—K.S. Shukla} 


cy yo 2 ~ 


302 BRAHMAGUPTA’ S ASTRONOMY : ITS HIGHLIGHTS 


K. S: Shukla has provided the following rationale to the 
rule cited above: 


The fraction of the intercalary month (obtained in the 
rule)= ~ adhimasasesa__ , in mean lunar months. 
solar days in a yuga 
adhimasagesa 


=e —., in mean solar months. (i), 
junar days in a vuga ft 


The fraction’ of the omitted lunar day (obtained, in the 
rule) |= : 
__avamaéesa or ahnika 
“lunar days in a yuga 
a avamasesa 

civil days in a yuga 

—__avmagesa X 60 
civil days in a yuga 


Ma 


, in mean civil days. 
, in mean lunar days. 


»in mean lunar ghatis. (ii) 


The fraction of the intercalary month corresponding to the 
above fraction of the omitted lunar day 
_.(intercalary months in_a yuga) x (avamasgesa) 
(lunar days in a yuga) X(civil days in a yuga)’ 
in mean solar months. Gii) 


Adding G) and Git) and multiplying by 30, the total 
fraction of the intercalary month 


= { adhimasaéesa 
Junar months in a yuga 


(intercalary months in a yuga) x (avamagesa)” 
Cunar months in a yuga) x (civil days in a vuga 
in mean solar days, Cv) 


Suppose that m lunar months and d lunar days have 
elapsed since the beginning of Caitra. Then, treating them as 
mean lunar months and mean lunar days, m months and d days 
denote the time elapsed since the beginning of mean Caitra up 
to the beginning of the current lunar day (treated as mean lunar 
day). As (ii) isthe interval, in mean lunar ghafis, between the 
beginning of the current lunar day and the mean sunrise on that 
day, therefore 


m months+d days+(ii) - . 
.,denotes the time in mean lunar months, days, ghatis' elapsed 





ani =2} ghatis; 1 ghati=60 vighatis; 1 vighati=60 pravighatis. 





CONCORDANCE OF WORKING RULES ° 303 


since the beginning of mean Caitra up to the mean sunrise on 
the current lunar day. 


Like wise 
m monthst+d days+ (ii) —Civ) 
denotes the time in mean solar months, days, ghatis etc. 
elapsed since the beginning of the current mean solar 
year up to the mean sunrise on the current lunar 
day}. 
Let M, D, G, V, and P denote respectively the mean solar 
_ months, mean solar days, mean solar ghatis mean solar vighatis 
vend mean solar pravighatis elapsed since the beginning of the 
current mean soldr year up to the. mean sunrige on the current 
lunar. day. Then evidently mean longitude of the Sun 


=M signs, D degrees, G minutes, V seconds and 


i s ae P thirds. 


=(m di and d degrees)+[minutes, seconds etc. 
corresponding to (ii)]—[degrees, minutes etc. 

ase corresponding to (iv)]. 

and mean longitude of the Moon ~ 


=13 [m signs and d degrees+-(minutes, seconds, etc. 
corresponding to (ii)]—[degrees, minutes etc. 
corresponding to (iv)] 
because . ie 
[(1/12) mean longitude of the Moon—mean. longitude 
of the Sun. 
. =m signs+d degrees-+(minutes, seconds etc. 
corresponding to (ii)] 
(This equality i is based on the fact that. the left hand side 
denotes the mean lunar date also known as madhyama tithi).. 


A similar rele of these calculations of the mean longitude 





1, Because Givi is caval to fracdon of a lunar month’ betweeg the beginning 
of Caitra and the beginning of the current mean solar year fraction of an 
intercalary month corresponding to the tithis elapsed up to the beginn- 
ing of the current mean lunar day since the beginning of Caitra fraction 
of an intercalary morith corresponding to the avamadesa, i.e, the lunar 
portion between the beginning of the current lunar date and the follow- 
ing sunrise, 


304 BRAHMAGUFTA’S ASTRONOMY : ITS HIGHLIGHTS 


of the Sun and the Moon without basing on ahargana has als> 
been given by Brahmagupta in the Khandakhadyaka'. 


Concordance of Working Rules 


There has been a good deal of agreement on various rules 
of astronomical constants from the time of AryabhataI (459 
A. D.) to the Bhaskara II (1150 A. D.) or even later to the days 
of Muniévara (1620 A, D). Earliest concepts were formulated 
during the days of the Vedanga-Jyautisa and the Siddhantas of 
Indian and the western origin. for example of Brahma, Vasistha, 
Pitamaha, Romaka and Puliga. We in this section are giving 
some important concordances which we find confmon in the 
writings of Brahmagupta and his predecessors, contemporaries 
and successors as listed below. The list is not exhaustive. Only a 
a few illustrations have been cited. 

1. Arya —Aryabhativa. Aryabhata I, 499 A. D. 

2. ea —Brahmasphutasiddhanta, Brahmagupta, 628 


3. K. K.—Khandakhadyaka, Brahmagupta. 628 A. D. 

4, KKu—Karna-kutthala, Bhaskara II, 1150 A. D. 

5. LBh.—Laghu-Bhaskariya, Bhaskara I, 522 A. D. 
MBh.—Maha-Bhéskariva, Bhaskara I, 522 A. D. 
MSi.—Maha-siddhanta, Aryabhata II, 950 A. D. 
PSi.—Pajicasiddhanti ka,V arabamihira, 505 A. D. 
SiDVr.—Sisvadhivrddhida, Lalla, 598 A. D. 
31Sa.—Siddhantasarvabhauma, Munigvara, 1620 A. D. 
SiSe—Siddhantasekhara, Sripati, 1039 A. D. 
SiSii—Siddhanta-Siromani, Bhaskara I, 1150 A. D. 
SuSi.—Suryasiddhanta, Modern, 6th or 7th Century. 

1. Rule for finding the mean longitudes of the Sun, Mercury 

and Venus : BrSpSi. I. 44. 
Also MBh. 1.31. MSil. 26; SiSe II. 42, 43; SiSi. I i 
(d). 15 ; SiSa 1.105; KKu I. 7. 


2, Rule, for finding the mean longitude of the Moon’s 
ascending node node : BrSpSi, XXV. 35. 
1. L. fieaeaamanrtienra Ren ater | 
Serra Rare gfaaregaeteha: I 
Wate wae pra ae feta , ; 
3 wea att Tessa a It . =KK, I. 11-12 


CONCORDANCE OF WORKING RULES 305 


Also MBh. I. 33; SiDVy. 1.i. 52 Gi) 


3. Rule for finding the mean longitude of the Sighrocca of 
Venus and also giving the additives for the Sighrocca of Mercury 
and Moon : BrSpSi. XXV. 36. 


Also MBh. I. 35; SiDVr. L. i, 57 Gi) 


4, Rule for finding the mean longitude of the Sighrocca 
of Mercury : BrSpSi. XXV. 34. 


Also MBhb. I. 36; SiDVr. I. i. 50 (ii) 


5. Rule for finding the mean longitude of Saturn: BrSpSi. 
XXV. 35. 


Also SipVr. 1. i. 52 @; - MBh. L 37. 


6. Rule for finding the mean longitude of Mars: BrSpSi. 
XXV. 33. 


Also SiDVr I. i. £0 to MBAh. I. 38. 


7. Rule for finding the meat: longitude of Jupiter’: BrSpSi. 
XXX. 35. : 


Also MBh. 1. 39; SiDVr. I. i. 51 @. 


8. Rule for finding the distance of a place from ‘the prime 
meridian : BrSpSi. I. 36. 


Also MBh. Il. 3-4; LBh. I. 25-26; SiDVr. I. <STDB Os 
SiSa. I. 143-144, 


9, Rule for finding the directions : BrSpSi. IIT. 1. 

Also MBh. IIL 2; SaSi. 0-1-4; LBA. IIT. 1; SiDVr. I. iii. 
1; MSi. IV. 12; SiSe. 1V 1-3; SiSi. I. iii. 8-9. 

Alternative rule : BrSpSi. III. 2. 

Also MBA. III.3; PSi. XIV. 14-16; SiDVr. I. iti. 2; SiSe- 

IV. 4. 

10. Rule for finding the latitude and colatitude and the 

zenith distance and altitude of the Sun: BrSpSi. HI.10. 

Also MB&a, III 5; SaSi III, 13-14; LBh, 11133 SiDVr I. 
iii. 45: SiSe, IV. 7; SiSi_ I. iii. 18. 

11. Rule for determining the declination, day—tradius, earth 
sine and ascensional difference (for the Sun or a point on the 
ecliptic) : BrSpSi. Il. 55. 

Also SaSi II. 28; LBh. II. 16;. 1. ii SiDVy. 17; SiSe. III. 


306 BRAHMAGUPTA’S ASTRONOMY : ITS HIGHLIGHTS 


63-64 ; SiSi. I. ii. 47 (ii) (For RSine of the Declination). 
BrSpSi. 11.56; also Arya. IV 24; MBh. III, 6; LBA. Il. 
17; SiDVr. 1. i.18; SiSe. TIL. 66; . SiSi 1. ii. 48 (For day- 
radius). 
~ BrSpSi. II. 57-58 ; also MBh. ITV. 7 ; LBh, Il. 18 ; 
SaSi IL. 61; SiDVr. I. ii. 18; SiSe IIT. 67; SiSi. I ii, 49 @ 
(For the ascensional difference). 


12. For finding the times of rising of the s&yana signs at 
the equator : BrSpSi. IIT. 15. 


Also MBh. IIL. 9 ; SaSi. III. 42-43 : SiDVr. I. iii. 8; SiSe. 
IV.15; SiSi I. 11. 51. 


13. Rule for finding the ascensional differences of the 
Sayana signs Aries. Taurus and Gemini: KK. 1. 21. 

Also MBh. II. 8; PSi. 1. 10; SiDVy. 1, XIIL9; SiSi. 
I, i. 50-51. 

14. Rule for the determination of the meridian zenith 
distance and meridian altitude of the Sun with the help of the 
Sun’s declination and the latitude of the place ; BrSpSi. III, 47. 


Also MBh. Il. 11; LBh. Ul. 27; SiDVr. I. iii. 16 ;SiSe. 
IV. 42. 


15. Rule for determination of the latitude with the help 
of the Sun’s meridian zenith distance and declination : 


BrSpSi. : II. 13. 


Also MBh. IT. 17: LBh. III. 34; Sasi. TH. 15-16: SiSe. 
IV. 51, 


16. Rule for finding out the Rsine of the Sun's altitude 
for the given time in ghafis : BrSpSi. III. 25-26 Also Arya IV. 
28; MBh. IIL. 18-20; LBA. IIL. 7-10: SiDVy. I. iii. 24-25; SiSe. 
TV. 32,34; SiSi. 1. iii, 53-54. 


17. Rule for finding out the Sun’s altitude: RSin «= 
M Xday radius x gnomon 
OR. hypotenuse of equinoctial midday shadow 
where M=R Sin (given ghansFasc, diff) Rsin (asc. diff.), the 
upper or lower sign being taken according as the Sun is the nor- 


thern or southern hemisphere, @ is the Sun's aide BrSpSi. 
4 TE. 27 @). 


CONCORDANCE OF WORKING RULES 307 


Also MBA. Ill 24; SiDVr. I. iti. 27; SiSe IV. 37 

18. Rule for finding the Sun’s altitude when the Sun's 
ascensional difference is greater than the given time: BrSpSi. 
III. 33: 

Also MBh, III 25, LBA. Ill. 11; SiDVr. L. iii. 29 SiSe. IV. 41. 

19. Rule for finding the Sun’s altitude in the night : 
BrSpSi. UI. 63. 

_ Also MBh. IIT. 26; LBA. Ul. 11; SiSe. IV. 89. 
_ The Sun’s altitude for the night has been called Patala 

Sanku by Brahmagupta (BrSpSi. XV.9) 


20. Rule for finding the longitude of the rising point of 
the ecliptic with the help of (i) the instantaneous sayana longi- 
tude of the Sun and Gi) the civil time measured since sunrise, 
or with the help of (i) the Sun’s sdyana longitude at sunrise 
and (ii) the sidereal time elapsed since sunrise : BrSpSi Ii. 18-20. 

Also MBh. III. 30-32: LBh. II. 17-19; SaSi. LI. 46-48: 

SiDVr. I. iii. 11-12: SiSe IV. 18-19 G) : SiSi I. iii. 2-4, 


21. Rule for obtaining the civil time measured since 
sunrise with the help of (i) the Sun’s instantaneous sayana longi- 
tude and (ii) the sayana longitude of the rising point of the 
ecliptic, or the sidereal time elapsed since sunrise with the help 
of Ci) the Sun’s sdyana longitude at sunrise and (ii) the sayana 
longitude of the rising point of the ecliptic: BrSpSi III. 21-23. 

Also SaSi. ,IJI.50-51; MBh. III. 34-36; LBh. II. 20; 

SiDVy, I. iii. 13; SiSe IV. 19 Gi}—-22 @; SuSi I. iii. 5-7. G@. 

22. Rule for determining the R Sines of the Sun's prime 
vertical altitude: BrSpSi ITI. 52. 

Also Arya. IV; MBh. T11.37-38; LBh. II. 52. 

(An error created by Aryabhata has been criticised by 
Brabmagupta.) 

23. Construction of the locus of the end of the shadow 
of agnomon : BrSpSi. Til. 2-3, 

Also MBh. III 52; SiDVr. I. iii. 3: SiSe, IV. 5; 

24. Rule for finding the Sun’s mean anomaly: BrSpSi, 
IT. 12 (i). 


308 BRAHMAGUPTA’ ASTRONOMY : ITS HIGHLIGHTS 
Also MBh. IV. 1; SaSi. II. 29; SiDVr I. ii. 10: SiSe. iii, 
12; SiSi. I. i. 18-19 G). 


25. Rule for finding the RSine (Reversed sine) of an are 
(<90°) : BrSpSi II. 10. 


Also Sa@Si. II, 31-32 ; MBh. IV. 3-14; LBh. II, 2 (11)3 (i); 
SiDVr, I. it. 12; Sie. IE. 15; SiSi. I, iti. 10 Gi}-11. 


(We shall discuss it separately in the light of Brahmagupta 
formula.) 


26. Rule for fndmg the Sun’s equation of the centre: 
BrSpSi.. 11. 15 (ii); 


Also MBh. IV. 4 (ii); . IID SiSe. 27 


27. Rule for determining the Sun's true longitude: Bet 
XIV. 17-18. ; 


Also MBh, IV. 21-23: SiSe. II. 52. 


28. Rule for finding the Sun’s bhuja@ntara correction 
under the eccentric theory : BrSpSi. XIV. 19. 


Also MBh.IV. 24. 


29. Rule for determining the cara-samskara or cara 
correction : KK. I. 22. 


30. “Rule for finding the semi-durations of the day and 
night : BrSpSi. II. 60; KK. I. 23. 


Also SuSi. Il. 62-63; SiDVy, I. ii. 20-21; SiSe. IIT. 70 ; 
SiSi. J. ii.52. 


31. Rule for calculating the tithi : BrSpSi, Il. 62; KK. 
I. 25. 


Also SaSi. IL. 66 ; SiDVrl. ii. 22; SiSe. WL. 71: SiSi. 
I. i. 66. 


32. Rule for calculating the Karana : KK. I. 27. 
Also. SiDVr. I. it. 24; SiSe. IT. 77; SiSi. L ii. 66. 


33. Rule for calculating naksatra: BrSpSi. II. 62; KK. 
I. 24. 


Also SaSi. IL. 64; SDVr. I. ii. 23 ox SiSe. Wt. 75; SiSi. 
L li 67. 


34 Rule pertaining to direct ona fetebprea motions of 
; a planet : BrSpSi. TT. 5051. 


CONCORDANCE OF WORKING RULES 309 


Also MBh. IV. 56-57 ; SiSe. III. 59; SiDVr. I. ii. 42; 

35. Arulefor converting true distances known in min- 
utes into true distances into yojanas: for example: Sun's true 
distance in yojanas 

Sun’s mean distance in yojanas XSun’s true dist. in minutes 
Radius 
BrSpSi. XXI. 31 Gi). 

Also MBh. V.3 ; SiDVr. I. iv.5 G); LBh. IV.3; SiSz. V. 
4 ii) ; SiSi IV. 5 @: 

36. Rule for finding angular diameters of the Sun and the 
Mcon : BrSpSi. XXI. 34 GD: 

Also MBh. V.5: SiDVr. I. iv. 8; SiSe. V. 6; SiSi, 
Lv. 7, 

37. Formulae for the true (i. e. angular) diameters of the 
Sun, the Moon and the shadow in terms of the true daily 
motions of the Sun and the Moon (Here by shadow is meant 
the section of the cone of the Earth's shadow at the Moon’s 
distance.) : BrSpSi. IV. 6 (i) : KK. IV. 2 (i). 

Also MBh. V. 6-7; SiDVr.1. iv.9; MSi. V.5 Gi; 

SiSe V.9; SiSi. 1. v. 8-9; 


38. Rule for finding the spasta-valana (resultant valana) 
for the circle drawn with half the sum of the diameters of the 
eclipsed and eclipsing bodies as radius: ErSpS.. IV. 18 G). 

Also MBh. V. 46; SiDVr. I. iv. 26. 

39. Method for calculating the phas2 of the eclipse for 
the given time : BrSpSi. IV..11-12. 

Also MBh. V. 62-63 ; SiDVr. I. iv. 19-20; SiSe. V. 14. 

40, Rule for the determination of the ‘diameter of the 
shadow i.e., the diameter of the Section of the Earth’s shadow 
where the Moon crosses it : BrSpSi, XXIII. 8-9. 

Also MBh. V. 71-73 : Arycy IV. 39-40; SiDVr. I. iv. 6 
Gi)-7. ; 

41. Process of successive ¢pproximations in connection 
with calculations of a lunar eclipse: BrSpSi. TV. 8-9. 

Also MBh. V. 75-76: LBh.1V. 10-12: SiDVr. Liv. 14-16 
SiSe. V. 12-13; SiSi. I, v. 12-13. 


310 BRAHMAGUPTA’'S ASTRONOMY : ITS HIGHLIGHTS 


42. Rulerelating to the visibility-correction known as 
aksa-drkkarma < BrSpSi. VI. 4. 
Also MBh. VI. 1-2; SiDVr. 1. vii. 3 Gi); MSi. VIL 4; 
SiSe. IX. 7. 
43, Rule relating to the visibility correction known as 
ayanadrkkarma : BrSpSi. V1.3; X.17. 
Slightly modified in MBh. VI. 2 Gi)-3; SiDVr. I. vii. 
2-3 (i) - SiSe. IX. 45; similar in MSi. VII. 2-3; more 
accurate in SiSi. I. viii. 4-5. ; 
44. Rule relating to the visibilily of moon: BrSpSi. VI. 
6 ; XK. 32. 
Also MBh; VI. 45 G) PSi.V.3: SiDVr I. vii. 5; SiSe. 
1X.8 @). 18. 


45,. Rule for calculating the phase of the Moon: BrSpSi. 
VII. 11 Gi)-12. 


Also MBh. VI. 5 Gi)-7 ; SiDVr. I. ix. 12. 

46. Rule for the determination of the Moon’s true 
declination (i.e. the declination of the centre of the Mcon’s 
disc) * BrSpSi. VII. 5. 

Also MBh. V1. 8; SiDVr. 1. viii.2; SiSe. XK. 7- (these 
are approximate rules; a more accurate rule occurs in SiSi. I. 
vii. 3 and 13). 


47. Graphical. representation of: the elevation of the 
lunar horns in the first quarter of the month at sunset : BrSpSi- 
V1I. 7-10. 

Also MBh. V1. 13-17 5 SiDV. I. ix 3 SiSi- I. ix. 

48. Minimum distances of the planets from the Sun when 
they are visible : BrSpSi. vi 6 3 X. 32. 

Also MBh. VI. 44; SiDVr. I. vii. 5 G); SiSe. IX. 8 (i). 
12. ; 

49. Rule relating tothe determination of the time and 
the common longitude of two planets when they are in conjunc- 
tion in longitude : BrSpSi. IX. 5-6. . 
| Also MBh, VI. 45-51; SiDVr. I. x. 7-9 G); SiSe. XL 
12-12. 


50. Rule relating to the distance between two planets 


CONCORDANCE OF WORKING RULES Sil 


which are in conjunction in longitude : BrSpSi. IX. 11. 
Also MBh. VI. 54; SiDVr. I. x. 11; SiSe. XI. 10. 


51. Rule For finding the Bhujaphala and Kofiphala etc. 
without the use of the RSine-difference table: BrSpSi. XIV- 


Also MBh. VII, 17-19 ; SiSe- II. 17. 


52. To obtain the Sun’s mean true longitude derived from 
the midday shadow of the gnomon: BrSpSi. XIV. 28; IIL. 
61-62. 

Also MBh. VIII. 5; SiSi I. ii. 45. 

53. Rule to find the arc corresponding to a given RSine : 
BrSpSi II. 11. 

Also MBh, VIII. 6; SaSi. Il. 33, SiDVr. I. ii- 13, SiSe. IIL. 
16, SiSi. I. ii. 11 GD—12 @. 

For the concordance given here we express our indebted- 
ness to the work of K.S. Shukla on the Mahabhaskariya. 


Tables of Constants 


Some of the Tables of Constants have been given in an 
earlier chapter. We here give a few more tables which would 
indicate how far Brahmagupta introduced new concepts in eva: 
luating these constants of greater accuracy and refinement. 


TABLE I 
Position of Planets for the Beginning of kaliyuga 


In this Table are given the positions of the planets, includ- 
ing the Moon's apogee and ascending node, for the beginning of 
Kaliyuga. The calculations of Brahmagupta are different from 
those of the Saryasiddhanta and of Aryabhata I, 








Planet Positions according | to 
BrSpSi. rya. yn 
1 | 2 | 3 { 4 


o . 


eee. Ss 5 
Sun 000 0 000 0 000 0 
000 0 





312 BRAHMAGUPTA'S ASTRONOMY : ITS HIGHLIGHTS 








i | 2 | 3 | 4 

ee ger # <0. oe 
Moon's apogee 4 5 29 46 3 0 00 3000 
Moon's asc. node} 5 3 12 58 6 000 6000 
Mars 11 29 350 0 0 00 6000 
Mercury 11 27 24 29 00 00 0000 
Jupiter 11 29 27 36 0 0 00 0000 
Venus 11 28 42 14 0000 0000 
Saturn 11 28 46 34 00 00 0000 

TABLE II 


Diameters of the Sun, the Moon and the Earth 
in yojanas and the distances of the Sun 
and the Moon from the Earth 


BrSpSi BET 








| 
Sripati Bhaskara) Modern 
| I (in miles) 
1 12 | 3 4 | 5 4 6 


Sun’s diameter in 


yojanas 6,522 6,522 | 6,522 | 86,400 









Sun’s distance in 
yojanas  (mid- 
night reck.) 689,358 | 459,585 | 684.870 | 689,377 192,900,000 


Ratio 0°009596 (0,009,523) 009.461 00,093 


Moon’s diameter 

in yojanas 480 480 400 2:160 
Moon's distance 
_ in. yojanas (mid- 

night reck.) 51,566 


Ratio Earth's dia- 
“Tmeter in yojanas | 


ee Ee 


34,377 | 51,566 | 51,566 | 2,389,000 


SIDEREAL REVOLUTION OF THE NODES 313 
TABLE III 


Sidereal Revolutions of the Apogees 
of the Planets in a Kalpa 
an ene 


Apogee of | BrSpSi. According to | Arvabhativa 


Stirya-Siddhanta 








De er ee a he a ees, 
Sun 480 387 not given 
Mars 292 204 
Mercury 332 368 
Jupiter 855 900 
Venus 653 535 
Saturn Al 39 


TABLE IV 
Sidereal Revolutions of the Nodes 
of the Planets in a Kalpa 
a 
(Not gi given in in the Aryabhatiya) _ 


2 Node-Of 7a Sh BBP ee oe a = Bisel. 
nek Some erenes Lee ek emer et: Mpeneee etka sate 


Stirya-Siddhanta 


Mercury 521 
Jupiter 63 


Venus 893 


| 
Sergi ee a eh ee 

Mars 267 | 214 

488 

174 

908 

662 


Saturn 


314 BRAHMAGUPTA'S ASTRONOMY : ITS HIGHLIGHTS 
TABLE V 


Peripheries of the Epicycies 
of the Planets 





| BrSpSi. Sarya-Siddhanta| Aryabhatiya 








Planet 3 ———————— —_— 
| odd even odd even | odd even 
quad. quad. | quad. quad.| quad. quad. 
1 | 2 | 3 _ 4 
(a) Manda epicycles 
Sun 13°40’ 13°40’ 14 | 13°30’ 
Moon 31°36" 31°40’ 32° 31°30" 
Mars 70° 72° 75° | 63° 81° 
Mercury 38° 28° 30° | 31°30’ =. 22°30" 
Jupiter 33° 32° 33° | 31°30’ - 36° 
Venus 9° 11° | 11° 12° | 18° 9° 
Saturn 30° 48° 49° | 40°30’ 58°30’ 
(b) Sighra epicycles 
Z | 2 | 3... | 4 
’ Mars 243°40 232° 235° 238°30' 229°30' 
Mercury 132° 132° 133° | 139°30’ 130°30° 
Jupiter 68° 72° 70° | 72° 67°30" 
Venus 263° 258° | 260° 262° | 265°30’ 256°30" 
Satun 95° | «° 39° | 40°30". 36° 





1. In the middle of quadrants. it is 237° 


LATITUDES OF JUNCTION STARS 315 


TABLE VI 
Mean Diameters of the Planets 









































Planet BrSpSi. Strya-Sid- | Aryabhatiya| Modern 
dhanta 
1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | a 
Sun 3231’ 32'24" 33’ approx. | 32'2'36" 
Moon 32’ 1’ approx.) 32’ 31'30° 31'3" 
Mars 4'46" a 117" 9'36° 
Mercury 614" 3 2’8" 6'68" 
Jupiter 722" 330" | 312" 314.72" 
Venus | 9 4 6'24" 16.8" 
Saturn 5'24" 2’30" 136" 2/495" 
TABLE Vif 
Inclination of the Orbits of 
the Planets to the Ecliptic 
Planet BrSpSi. | Strya-Sid- \Aryabhatiya | Modern 
dhanta (Jan.00,195°) 
1 [i 2 | 3 | er ee an ee 

Moon 4°30° 4°30° 4°30 5°8'40" 

Mars 1°50’ 1°30’ 1°30’ 7 1°51'0" 

Mercury 2°32’ 2° 2° 7°0'14" 

Jupiter 1°16" 1° LV 1°18’21" 

Venus a {gas Ue 2 22339" 

Satura 2°10" 2° 2° 2°29'25" 


316 BRAHMAGUPTA'S ASTRONOMY: ITS HIGHLIGHTS 


TABLE VIII 
Longitudes of the Junction Stars 
according to Different Authorities 


Longitude (polar) Longitude according 
according to to 





Junction-star 


a ee ee ee ee ee 





of BrSpSi,.KK. SiSe.SaSi | MBh. LBh. SiDVr. 
SiSi. 

; an aie eel a aa Sa) ee 
Aévini 8° 8° 8° 8° 8° 
Bharani 20° 20° 27° 26°30° | 20° 
Krttika 37°28" 37°30’ | 36° 36° 36° 
Rohini | 49°28" 4o°30’ | 49° | 50? | a9 
Mrgagira 63° | G3? 62° | 62° 62° 
Ardra 67° 67°20" | 70° | 70° | 70° 
Punarvast | 93° 937, 92" | 92 92° 
Pusya 106° 106° =| 105° «| 105° =| 105° 
Aélesa 108° 109° =} 414? sf ua? 114” 
Magha 129° 129° | 128°30" | 128°30" | 128° 
P-Phalguni | 147° ef 14t° | a4? |: 19°20" 
U-Phalguni| 155° 155° 154° | 1549 =| :154° 
Hasta 170° 170° «| 173°} 1739 «|: 1739 
Citrs 183° iso’ «| 185° | 15° ‘| 184°20" 
Svati 199° 199° |197° | 497° | 197° 
Vigakha 212°5' 213° | 212” | 212° ‘| 212° 
Anuradha | —224°5" 224° | 222° | 222? | 222° 
Tyegtha -200%5 2o9° | 208° | 208° | 208° 
Mula ys 24i° | 241° | 24°30" | 241° 


: 
 -P-Asadha 254 254 =) 254° 1 254°30"! 254° 
LT SSS ea SY 


LATITUDES OF JUNCTION STARS 317 

















ee ee ee rae ee ieee ane ee ee en ee ee 
U-Asadha | 260° (260° | 267° | 266°30° | 267°200 
Sravana ams ag" | 285° | 284°30'| 284°10" 
Dhanistha | 290° -290"—| 296° | 295°30" ' 296°20" 
H | 
Satabhisak | 320° = 320". | 307", 307" | 13°20" 
P-Bhadra. 326° 326° | gasr| 398° | 327° 
U-Bhaira |. 337° 337° «| 345° | 345° 25 | 
Revati 0° .| 359°50’ | 360° 359° 
TABLE 1X 


Celestial Latitudes of 
the Junction-Stars 














Polar latitude given in Latitude given in 
JUN CON, | Sea SSeS 
star of eke. SaSi, SiSi | MBh. LBh SiDVr. 
We. - 
1 | 2 1 3 | 4 | 5 1] 6 [| 7 





Agvini 10°N |10°N | 10°N | I@N | LON | 10°N 
Bharani 12°N | 12°N | 12N | 12N {12N | 12°N 
Krttika 431'N | °N 4°30'N | SN SN N 
Rohini 4°33'S 3°S £30'S | 5S oun) 5S 
Megasiri 10°S 10°S 10°S 10°S 10°S 10°S 
Ardra eS los los |85 [oS | 9°S 
Punarvasau |6-N | 6°N | 6N ON | @N oN 





Pusya 0 0 0 0 0 it) 
ASlesa vies 7S TS Lo TS 7S 
Magha 0 0 0 0 0 0 


PPhalguni }12N |12N /12N [12N |12°N | 12N 
U-Phalguni! 13°N 113N |13°N [13N 113°N | 13°N 





318 


BRAHMAGUPTA’S A 





a 2 = ie 
Hasta 11°S 11°s 
Citra 1°45'S | 2S 
Svati 37°N 37°N 
Visakha 1°23’S | 1°30'S 
Anuradha | 1°44’S | 3°S- 
Jyestha 3°30'S | 4S 
Mula 8°30’S | OS 
P-Asadha | 5°20’S | 5°30’S 
U-Asadha | 5°S 5S 
Sravana 30°N 30°N 
Dhanistha | 36°N 36°N 
Satabhisak | 18'S 30'S 
P-Bhadra | 24°N | 24°N 
U-Bhadra | 26°N | 26°N. 


Revati 


0 


0 





320 BRAHMAGUPTA A GREAT CRITIC 


backing to the west) in one day. It is sufficient to postulate the 
existence of only one Sun, one Moon and twenty-seven naksatras 
to explain the astronomical phenomena.” 


3. -Brahmagupta differs from Aryabhata I in the length of 
the four yugas. Arvabhata regards allthe four yugas of equal 
lengths, i. e- 1,080,000 years; the caturyuga being of 4,320,000 
years. Brahmagupta regards Kaliyuga to be of 432,000 years, 
Dvapara to be twice of it, Treta to be thrice of it and Krtayuga 
of four times of the length of the Kaliyuga. Both have the 
caturyuga of the same length? 


4. Aryathata was not clear with respect tothe number of 
civil days (s@vana dina) in a yuga ;in one of his treatises he 
gives this number to be 1,577,917,800 and in the other 1,577.917, 
500 with a difference of 300 days. though in both the treatises, Arya- 
bhata I regards the number of solar years to be 4,320,000 in a 
Caturyuga or Mahayuga. Why is this difference ? asks 
Brahmagupta? 


5. Aryabhata regards mandocca (the apogee) and pata 
(the ascending node of the orbit on the ecliptic) as constant or 
stationary; then how cauld he propound a sphuta-yuga or the 
concept of true yuga with the concurrence of year, month and 
day on the Caitra Sukla Pratipada (the first day of bright half 
of the month Caitra) at the same time as indicated by Aryabhata 
in his Laghvaryabhatiya Tantra* 


Aryabhata was not clear in respect to the variance in the 
pata. In the Aryasta-Sata (in the Aryabhativa which has 108 
Arya verses), Aryabhata states that the pata of all the planets 


1. wRgeeareet aedca fate’ aq | 


SARS Hala AaiSrel GaTRITE Nl BrSpSi. XI. 3 
2. HAE APTS HA TTY a | 

TRIM SRI Ta TOT N —BrSpSi. X1.4 
3, SRR aie aan” a aT a BIE | 

fant wea AK go a —BrSpSi. XI. 5 


4. een aca: ol FTA a | . 
EGA SR A SAL —BrSpSi. XI. 6 


BRAHMAGUPTA A GREAT CRITIC 321 


show variance of movement, but in the Dagagitika (a chapter of 
ten Arya verses), he states that with the exception of the pata ot 
the Moon, the pata’s of all other planets are stationary or cons- 
tant. Brahmagupta points out this anomaly in the concept of 
Aryabhata.? 


6. Brahmagupta points out a self-contradiction in Arya- 
bhata. At one place he says that the Moon covers the Sun during 
the solar eclipse and similarly the shadow of the Earth covers 
the Moon during the lunar eclipse (and he doesnot mention 
Rahu) in this connection (Aryabhatiya, Gola. 37). At the same 
time it is said that Aryabhata was familar with the movement of 
“eight” planets, and thus postulating the presence of Rahu: in fact, 
the patas of planets are responsible for their eclipse, and the 
eighth planet Rahu is not present 


7. Aryabhata gives measures to Manus. Yugas and Kalpas 
different from what have been given in the recognised Smrtis.? 

8. Aryabhata regards Guruvara or Thursday to be the first 
day of the Kalpa, and not Sunday, which is wrong according to 
Brahmagupta.* 


9. Brahmagupta unnecessarily criticises Aryabhata in 
respect to the order of days. The motion of the planets decreases 
in the following order : Moon, Budha (Mercury), Sukra (Venus), 
Sun, Kuja (Mars), Guru (Jupiter) and Sani (Saturn). Aryabhata 
in one of his verses states that starting from the Sun and pro- 
ceeding in the increasing order every fourth is the dinapati or the 
“lord of the day” (Aryabhatiya, Kala. 16); this gives the order : 
Sun, Moon. Mars, Mercury, Venus and Saturn and hence the 
order of days as Ravivara (Sunday); Candravara (Monday,) 


1. seared ce waa ceria fear: area | 





BITS TaTAtSd waa Rex ara: | —BrSpSi. X1. 8 
2. saat at serenfh werateadg | 

Used a peut aaa aret We —BrSpSi. XI.9 
3, wage: seule gaTeaT a | 

SAE UAE) AY STATA TERT I —BrSpSi. XI. 10 


4. sig Rant calafisiser wala aed | 
7 Waa TRIER eee | —BrSpSi. XI. 1b | 


322 BRAHMAGUPTA A GREAT CRITIC 


Mangalavara (Tuesday), (Budhavara) (Wednesday), Guruvara 
(Thursday) Sukravara (Friday) and Sanivara (Saturday). Thus 
Aryabhata gives the same order of days as other authorities and 
there is no reason why he should be criticised. 


Certainly what is Sunday for Lanka, may not be Sunday 
at the same time for Siddhapura; and Aryabhata should have 
emphasised that the day (Monday, Tuesday etc.) is not cons- 
tant for all the places! , 


10. Brahmagupta expresses surprise why Aryabhata, in two 
of his treatises propounds two different systems of reckoning one 
from the Sunrise in Lanka and the other from the Midnight in 
Lanka? This causes a difference of one-fourth of the daily- 
motion in the two reckonings of the motion of planets.® 


11, Brahmagupta criticises Aryabhata on the point of dia- 
meter of the Earth. In the Gitikapada, 5 and 6, Aryabhata 
States that one yojana=8,0C0 Xx purusa, and1 purusa=4 hasta, 
thus 1 yoiana=32,000 purusas, and the diameter of the Earth is 
1050 yojanas. Brahmagupta further says that an error in the 
diameter of the Earth would cause an error in deéantara or 
Tongitude and thus also in the true fithi and consequently in the 

, calculation of eclipses also.* 


12. Aryabhata has rightly stated that the Earth isin 
motion and the Bhagayas are stationary. Brahmagupta’s objec- 
tion is that if the Earth is in motion, birds would not be able to 
return to their nests, and if the Earth's motion is upside-down 





1. qakaragel Raan agara eae: | 
wgieal salsa we ore feat il — BrSpSi. XI. 12 
2. aiid: mieagitierd raaiatita: | 
aaa Raat Hicker abe: 1 — BrSpSi. XI. 13. 
3. teenie cat at ue wae: | 
we ee a aren: wpeteatt aa: — BrSpSi. XI. 14 
4. MemtteaRit syeri gaat! 
SH Tanai sara th 
Tere =e Bo TRL | 
la RARE ESAT | — BrSpSi. XI. 15-16 


BRAHMAGUPTA A GREAT CRITIC 323 


then the roof and hills would come down, which is contrary 
to our observation.’ Obviously Brahmagupta is not ‘ustified in 
his criticism. 

13. Brahmagupta points out to the differences in his calcu- 
lations and the calculations of Aryabhata in the peripheries of 
the manda and sighra epicycles of planets in the odd and even 
quadrants. (This difference we have shown in Table V, p. 313)? 

14, Aryabhata I and Bhaskara I have both given a rule for 
the determination of the drkksepajyas of the Sun and the 
Moon : 

Take the product of the Sun’s or Moon's own madhya- 
jya and udayajya, then divide the product by the 
radius and then take the square of the quotient. Sub- 
tract that from the square of the own madhyajya; 
the square-root of that difference is known as the Sun’s 
cr Moon's drkksepajya? 

The Sun’s drkksepajya is the Rsine of the zenith distance 
of that point of the ecliptic which is at the shortest distance from 
the zenith (this point is called nonagesimal or the central ecliptic 
point). The Moon’s drkksepajya is the Rsine of the zenith 
distance of that point of the Moon's orbit which is at the short- 
est distance from the zenith. The rule given above is only 
approxiznate and has been criticised by Brahmagupta.* 

15. In the Aryabhajiya, there is a rule in the Golapada for 
finding the Rsine of the agra of the true Sun; and also for the 


1. matate wat wae a gat aS eT | 

SPST Tehet SYP: BHATT, |! —BrSpSi. XI. 17 
2. saat a: aRRRsaisr: et ya TT | 

waarTaHa Fat aT Bas HAGE | 

RRASASA FF ILA Ta: ATS | 

RTT GET A Hala Tera zee | —BrSpSi. XI. 18-19 
3. arasieapad fearariaahier 0 

FARIMIASTS BEF BT TS fag: I —Mbh. V.19 
4. fatraray reaTTST TALS T A SAT | 


SANT TT TET —BrSpSi- XI. 29-30 


324 BRAHMAGUPTA A GREAT CRITIC 


Rsine of the Sun’s prime vertical altitude.’ Bhaskara also gives 
the rule in his Mahabhiskariya : ; ; 


Multiply the Rsine of the (Sun’s) greatest declination 
by the Rsine of the Sun's true (sdyana) longitude; 
then divide (the product) by the Rsine of the colati- 
tude, the resultis (the Rsine of) the agra of the true 
Sun. When that (agra) is less than the latitude and 
when the Sun is also in the northern hemisphere, 
multiply (the Rsine of the Sun’s agra) by (the Rsine 
of) the colatitude; the result is the ans of the Sun’s 
prime vertical altitude.” 


The condition laid down in the rule that the “Sun's agra 
should be less than the latitude” is incorrect. The error was 
originally comitted by Aryabhata and Bhaskara followed it. 
This error was noticed by Brahmagupta®, Bhaskara I, however, 
corrected the error in the Laghu-Bhaskariya. There he gives the 
correct conditions. Itis not the agra that should be less than 
the latitude. it is the Sun’s declination (or rather the Rsine of 
the Sun’s northern declination as we have in the Laghu- 
Bhaskariya) which should be less than the latitude (or rather 
the Rsine of the latitude). This condition is necessary for the 
existence of the prime vertical shadow of the gnomon. 


It may be pointed out that the commentators of Aryabhatal 
have interpreted the rule given by Aryabhata I as conveying 
the correct meaning; they say that Aryabhata also meant 
declination when he used the term agra. 


L. aErmasterireaicat aat fasta | 

PAT ATE TAIT ETS I 

at fgaetat Se fgagerrmaa dake | : 

fagassren frment area: yaiat xfge I — Arya. V. 30-31 
2. wage at at aifastar | 

BE GaN Farts YEE || 

wee Ras BUEN UT aaseiaeiat | 

TERA ARTA Set aeaqeeTTT || 

ISR CCS AE SH: VT GAAS | 

wa are ae eae eer en —MBh, II. 37-38 
3. sees BEEN eee | B 4 | 

PRAT ATT Ta AAA | 7 —BrSpSi. XI. 22 


- BRAHMAGUPTA A GREAT CRITIC 325 


Usually by agra, we mean the arc of the celestial! horizon 
lying between the east point and the point where a heavenly 
body rises ; or between the west point and the point where a 
heavenly body sets. Declination is Rranti. 

16. Brahmagupta has criticised Aryabhata and his group 
for their expressions for determining lambana (i. e. the difference 
of the parallaxes, in longitude, of the Sun and the Moon), and 
the rule for determining the avanati or nati (i.e. the difference in 
parallaxes, in latitude of the Sun and Moon) 


Lambana is obtained with the help of the five Rsines : (i) 
madhya-jya, (ii) udaya-jya, (ili) drk-ksepa-jya, (iv) drg-jva, and 
(v) dré-gati-jya. 

(i) The madhyajya@ is the Rsine of the zenith distance of 
meridian ecliptic point : 

madhyajya=Rsin ($+ declination of the meridian ecliptic 
point)? 

In this expression ¢is the latitude of the place, and by 
R sin is meant R Xsine, R being the radius of the celestial sphere. 

(ii) The udayajya is the Rsine of the arc of the horizon 
intervening between the equator andthe ecliptic, and is given 
by: 

: RsnLXRsine 
udayajya= Rcos } = 
where L is the longitude of the horizon ecliptic point in the east. 
and» the obliquity of the ecliptic. 

(iii) The drkksepajya is the R sine of the zenith distance of 

the central ecliptic point®, and is given by : 





1. amar faaent eqafe ta aga at eae | 
waatea: wea Bera Hat | 
Ta IST BRANT ae aT | 
wears waa a fa TS 
sdaaater af sae fai weg ai ett. 
faa stassed fara afe aa: GARPL AI — BrSpSi-. XT. 23-25 
2. The meridian ecliptic point is the point of the ecliptic on the meridian. 


3° The central ecliptic point is the central point of the portion of the eclip- 
tic lying above the horizon, 


326 BRAHMAGUFTA A GREAT CRITIC 


drkksepajya 
iyax madhyajya ) 7b 
rf (madivajva— { wdanaivaxmadhvaip ] 


where R is the radius of the celestial sphere. 


(iv) The drgjya is the Rsine of the zenith distance (of the 
Sun) and is given by: 


ijva xR sin (L—@ 
arsiva| Re { drggatijya 4 sin (Z—~@) i } 


where L is the longitude of the horizon ecliptic in the east and 
@ the longitude of the Sun. 


(v) The drggatijya is the Rsine of the altitude of the central 

ecliptic point, and is given by : 
drggatijya=[R*—(drkksepajya)*}'? 

* where R is the radius of the celestial sphere. 

In the Mahabhaskariya’, the expression for the Sun’s 
drggatijya is: 

(Sun’s dyggatijya) 
=(Sun’s drgjya)? — (Sun's drkksepajya)? 

and similar is the expression for the the Moon’s drggatjya. 


Now lambana, which is the difference of the parallaxes, 


in longitude, of the Sun and the Moon, is given by the expres- 
sion: 


Lambana= Moon's lambana—Sun’s lambana. 
Sun’s lambana 
= Sun's drggatijya x Earth's semidiameter 
Sun’s true distance in yo‘anas 
Moon’s lambana 
=Moon’s drggatijya x Earth’s semi-diameter 
~ Moon’s true distance in yojanas 
These lambanas are in terms of minutes of arc etc®, 
1, Bera s GUA Aas ge | 
| tafeed aaat t aReTaT dae: 0 —MBh. V, 23 
2. eae area Fe del | 
| Seg Say fear wer fe: 1 





(Cont. on Page 225} 


BRAHMAGUPTA A GREAT CRITIC 327 


Thus lambana is given by subtracting the Sun’s lambana 
from Moon's lambana. 
This lambana is also expressed in the following way - 
Lambana 
| irsivay—(Cdrkksepaiyay pt? x18 
Moon's true distance 
Sun’s true distance 


in minutes. 


= Ox (lambana calculated in minutes) is the 


lambana in ghafis, where d denotes the difference 
between the daily motions of the Sun and the 
Moon. 


Aryabhata I has given his description of the determination 
of lambana and avanati in the Golapada 33, 34 of the 
Aryabhatiya’, and Bhaskara has followed his rules in the 
Mahabhaskariya®. Brahmagupta criticises them in his Brahma- 
sphutasiddhanta’, 


(vii) We shall now take up nati or avanati (both the terms 
mean the same). Nati is the difference of the parallaxes in 
latitude, of the Sun and the Moon and is givén by > 

oa i=[ drkbsepajya X 18 ~ arkksenajyd x 18 
Moon’s true dist. San’s true dist. 
: minutes. 
(Cont. from Page 324) 
ARR eo TET ANI | 
afenahad: met gle: Pasi aa: W 
feaiarakrrsd aay abet fae | 
salirqeaara iat a7 eee Hl 
Ug Fas Ga: HH Arafat | 
fatraraadteuigy cama ates: a — MBh. V. 24-27 
1. weatastadal srecaet aq a | 
TARE ATT II 
ara 7 ofa faeiaeret ees: FAM t 
PRRs ea eq aT ENS aatTERT A —Arya. IV. 33-34 
2. loc. cit, MBh, V, 24-27 
3. lec. ce. BrSpSi, XI. 23-25 


328 BRAHMAGUPTA A GREAT CRITIC 


(viii) Moon's true latitude=Moon’s latitude x nati. 


The present Suryasiddhanta and Brahmagupta both utilise 
the following expressions for Jambana and nati which give more 
accurate values: 


Rsin (M-@) X drggati ‘ya 


lambana= {Rsin (0° ghatis 


where M and ® denote the longitudes of the meridian ecliptic 
and the Sun respectively. 


ti drkksepaivya Xd 
nati= "Tarp 


where R isthe radius of the celestial sphere and d denotes the 
difference between the daily motions of the Sun and the 
Moon!. 


Brahmagupta has raised objections to the Aryabhata system 
regarding lambana (XI. 26-28), dykksepa CXI. 30-31) ayanadrk- 
karma (XI. 35), elevation of Moon's horns (srngonnati) (XI. 39) 
and similar several other points. He is so vehemently opposed — 
to Aryabhata that finally he declares : 


“Tt is beyond my capacity to enumerate all the defects 
of Aryabhata. Only a few have been given’ here as 
illustration. Intelligent people can easily find out 
others’. 


He also says : 


Aryabhata is neither conversant with the Ganita 

(mathematics), nor Kala (time calculations) nor Gola 
(celestial or spherical calculations). Itis difficult to 
enumerate separately the fallacies committed by him 

in the-respective chapters of the Ganitapada, Kalakri- 
yapada and Golapada’.. « 


1, loc, cit, BrSpSi, XI, 23, 
2. sre den ae a wet ae | 

TARE TM Sarasa asa is Br Sp Si. XT. 44 
3. aerstealt att aed ufersrstiares | 

3 TAT SIT OE PL PRT EPEAT I —BrSpSi. XI. 43. 


BRAHMAGUPTA AND SRISENA 329 


Brahmagupta and Sriscna 


In Varahamihira’s Pancasiddhantika we have a critical 
review of the five Siddhantas or five systems of astronomical 
study * Puliga Siddhanta, Romaka Siddhanta, Vasistha Siddhanta, 
Surya Siddhanta and Brahma Siddhanta. Colebrooke in his 
Paper “On the notion of the Hindu Astronomers concerning the 
precession of the equinoxes and motions of the planets’, publi- 
shed in the Asiatic Researches, vol. xii. p. 2037250, Calcutta. 
1816,4 to, reproduced in the Miscellaneous Essays. Vol. II. 1872, 
says the following in regards to the authorship of these schools 
of astronomy : 

All these books are frequently cited in the astrono- 
mical compilations and are occasionally referred to 
their real or supposed authors. The first is everywhere 
assigned to Puliga, whose name it bears. The Romaka 
Siddhanta is ascribed by the scholiast of Brahmagupta 
and by a commentator of the Strva Siddhania to 
Srisena. The Vasiétha Siddhanta is by the same 
authority given to Visnucandra. Both these authors 
are repeatedly mentioned with censure by Brahma- 
gupta ; and it is acknowledged that they are entitled 
to no particular deference. 

The Brahmna Siddhanta. which is the basis of Brahma- 
gupta’s work, isnot anywhere attributed to a known 
author ; but referred to in all quotations of it which 
have fallen under observation, either to the Visnudhar- 
mottara Purana, of which it is considered as forming 
a part, or to Brahma (also called Pitamaha) who is 
introduced into it as the speaker in a dialogue with 
Bhrgu, or itis acknowledged to be the work of some 
unknown person. The true author it may be now 
impracticable to discover, and would be vain to con- 
jecture. 

The Sarya Siddhanta (if the same which we now pos- 
sess) is in the like manner ascribed to no certain author 
unless in the passage cited by my colleague Mr. Bently 
(Asiatic Researches, vol. vi. p. 572) who ‘says that “in 
the commentary of the Bhasvati, it is declared. that 


330 BRAHMAGUPTA A GREAT CRITIC 


Varaha was the author of the Surya Siddhanata”, and 
who adds, that “Satananda, the author of the Bhasvati 
wasa pupil of Varaha under whose directions, he 
himself acknowledges, he wrote that work”. 


This concluding remark alludes to the following verse 
of the Bhasvati Karana : “Next I will propound 
succinctly. from Mihira’s instruction, (the system) 
equal to the Sarva Siddhanta', (Miscellaneous Essays. 
p. 388-90) (The word ‘Mihira’ has double meaning: it 
might be an abbreviation of Varahamihira, or it may 
mean sun or Sarya). 


Thus on the authority of Colebrooke, Srisena may by re- 
garded as the initiator of the Romaka system. Brahmagupta him- 
self mentions in one of his passages the name of Srisena in connec- 
tion with the Romaka system, and further the conceptions of the 
Romaka system came down as Vasistha system through Visnucan- 
dra,” Latadeva also derived from Srisena the concepts of the mean 
motions of the Sun, the Moon, the Moon's apogee and her node 
and the mean motions of Mars. Mercury’s. Sighra Jupiter, Venus’ 
Sigrha and Saturn. I have indicated elsewhere, which is also 
the view of Sankara Balakrsna Diksita, that the original Romaka 
and Pauliga Siddhantas were introduced to Indians by Latadeva, 
and the latter Romaka Siddhanta by Srisena (Original Romaka 
Siddhanta was prevalent before Saka 427 and this is the one 
which is mentioned by Varahamihira who makes no reference to 
Srisena and Visnucandra in the Pancasidhantika, and the latter 
Romaka Siddhanta was introduced by Srisena asis indicated by 
Brahmagupta. Thus we have two Vasistha Siddhantas and two 
Romaka Siddhantas). My personal view is that Latadeva, 
Stisena and possibly Visnucandra also, were naturalised Greeks, 
settled in India and they had adopted themselve to Indian life. 
They were conversant in Greek and Indian Astronomy both and 
had contributed substantially to Indian astronomy. Brahmagupta 
was opposed to any of these f oreign influences dominating Indian 


1. wa ae faite aederd ot Ta! 


2. aR gles ate: St FT | 
SRA adler aes) BageR a II —BrSpSi. X1. 50 





—Bhasvati Karana 


BRAHMAGUPTA AND SRISENA 331 


systems, and he very much resented such interferences in pure 
academic life of this country. He was opposed to Aryabhata 
for a different reason. Aryabhata was universally regarded as 
an authority in this country, and the conservativism was so deep 
that even where it could be shown by direct observation or 
on valid theoretical grounds, that a particular concept was 
erroneous or less accurate, people still chose to adhere to it, 
since they had the backing of Aryabhata’s authority. Brahma- 
gupta was against this nonscientific attitude. Needless to say, 
Brahmagupta was not always fair to Aryabhata in his criticism ; 
he overdid in enumerating the shortcomings of Aryabhata’s 
system, as if he was personally jealous of his wide popularity. 


Brahmagupta’s feelings against Latadeva, Srisena, Visnu- 
candra and others would be seen from the following passage in 
the Brahmasphutasiddhania : . 


From the fact that Srisena, Visnucandra, Pradyumna 
Aryabhata, Lata, and Sithha contradict one another 
regarding eclipses and similar topics, their ignorance, 
is proved daily. The criticisms which 1 have passed 
on Aryabhata are, with the requisite modifications. to 
be applied to the doctrines of each of these teachers as 
well. Iwill, however, make some further critical re- 
marks on Srisena and others. 


Srisena took from Lata the rules concerning the mean 
motions of the Sun, and the Moon, the Moo1’s apogee 
and her node, and the mean motions of Mars, Mercu- 
ry’s Sighra, Jupiter, Venus's Sighra, and Saturn; he 
took elapsed years and the revolutions of yuga (yuga- 
yata-varsa-bhagana) from Vasistha and the Padakarana 
of Vijayanandi; further took from Aryabhata the rules 
concerning the apogee. epicycycles and nodes, and 
those referring to the true motions of the planets and 
thus the Romaka Siddhanta which was (or is) a heap 
of jewels (as it were) has. by Srisena, been made into 
a patched rag (as it were)?. 


1. Siu yee TAREE | 
neues sittced farracay |i [Cont. on Page 330] 


332 BRAHMAGUPTA A GREAT CRITIC 


Brahmagupta very emphatically says about his system that 
so long as people would be finding concordance between the 
observed and theoretical results (drgganitaikyam) in respect of 
solar and lunar eclipses, his Brahma Siddhanta would be held 
in esteem’. 

In other systems, whatever concordance appears to be bet- 
ween the observation and calculation, of eclipses etc. it is, 
Brahmagupta says, merely accidental or by chance, as the maxim 
of letters bored by an insect in wood or paper’. 


qrassaankh was gals gents | [Cont. from Page 329] 
atiunntat af feet seri 


Tere Sais MENSA aT | 

Areas Reha Ie TAT Al 

ATAU ASAT FATE | 

ares TRATATURMPTET, |I 

Hits Tee ST: Fe FAT | 

ware Hekar aeeat ERT II —BrSpSi. XII. 46-50 


g, aah setae matey aaa Fat ae | 
ener Wald Geiser sea: | —BrSpSi. XI. 61 


3. arated aaa seunley watt efeaftrtaerT | 
aaae Te UTS gee tara || —BrSpSi. XI, 51. 


Reference 


Brahmagupta : T antrapariksadhyava in BrSpSi.. 

KS. Shukla : The Mahabhaskariya and the Laghubhaskariya. 

HT. Colebrooke : Miscellaneous Essays, Vol. IL., 1872. 

G. Thibaut and Sudbakara Dvivedi: The Pajicasiddhantika, 
Preface, 1889. 


CHAPTER XIII 


Brahmagupta and 
Astronomical Instruments 


The Twenty-second Chapter of the Brahmasphutasiddhanta 
is known asthe Yantradhyaya or a chapter on instruments. 
There is a description of seventeen types of time-reckoning instru- 
ments (Kala-yantra)! : 


1. Dhanuryantra—Bow instrument. 
2. Turyagolaka yantra—Quadrant (one-fourth sphere) 
3. Cakra yantra=wheel or circle. 
4. Yasti yantra—a pole or staff instrument. 
5, Satku yantra—Gnomon. 
6. Ghatika yantra—a clock or pot instrument. 
7, Kapala yantra—Bowl or potsherd instrument. 
8. Karttari yantra— Scissor or knife ; cutter. 
9. Pitha yantra=Pedastal or seat instrument. 
10. Salila yantra—Water-leveller. 
11. Brahma or Sana yantra—For describing circles. 
12. Avalamba Stitra—Threads with plumbs (Plumb 
lines). 
13. Karna or chaya-karna—A set of squares for 
diagonals. 
14. Chaya or Sanku-chaya—Sundial. 
1. BR SE ER Ts Sa | 
afte: vigdan ened at fez | 
afact wfissara: guearen fariatisy: | 


sameeren ogi searrel ii —BrSpSi. XXHI1, 5-6 


334 BRAHMAGUPTA AND ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS 


15. Dinardha yantra— Midday measure instrument. 
16. Arka yantra—Sun-instrument. 


17. Aksa or Palanga yantra—Small degree measure arc 
instrument. 


Salila yantra is used for levelling; since a liquid such as 
water seeks its own level, it can be utilised to know whether a 
surface has been levelled or not? Bhrama or Sana is used for 
‘drawing circles. Avalambaka or plambline is used for 
adjusting vertical line. Karna is used in connection with angles 
and diagonals. From Salila (no. 10) to the last (no. 17); these 
eight are used for adjustments and are basically important. 

The dhanuryantra is used for nata and unnata kala 
ghatikas. 

On the paridhi or the circumference of the cakra-yantra 
are indicated the twelve r@sis. ending up to Mina (XXII. 18). 
Brahmagupta has described the vasti yantra and shown how it 
could be used to give time at different parts of the day, and 
from its shadow drgiva and other characteristics can be calculat- 
ed. This instrument can also be used for ascertaining the solar- 
lunar differences, and for fixing up the directions. It can 
be used for determining various heights and altitudes. 


The karttari yantra is of the shape of a pair of scissors with 
two semi-circular blades, fastended to a string at the centre ; at 
the centre is fixed a pin or a pole which casts shadows. 


Setting up of the Gnomon 


Here it would be interesting to describe the 
setting of a gnomon; which K.S. Shukla has given in details while 
commenting on the Mahabhgskariya av.b: 

After having tested the level of the ground by means 
of water, draw a neat circle with a pair of compasses 
(karkaja) (At the centre of that circle, set up a vertical 
gnomon). The gnomon should be large, cylindrical, 
massive, and tested for its perpendicularity by means 
of four threads with plumbs (avalmbaka) tied to 
them. 
1. oas at ore sae Sra | 
Reads: shies aa enh | —BrSpSi XXIL 7. 


SETTING UP OF THE GNOMON 335 


Bhaskara I in his commentary on the Aryabhafiya tells us 
that there was adifference of opinion amongst astronomers in 
his time regarding the shape and size of gnomon (also called style). 
Some astronomers prescribed a gnomon with its one-third in the 
bottom of the shape of a prism on a square base (caturasra), one- 
third in the middle of the shape of a cow’s tail (go-pucchdkara). 
and one-third at the top of the shape of a spear-head (Salakara) 
and some others prescribed a square prismoidal (samacaturasra) 
gnomon. The followers of Aryabhata I, he informs us, prescrib- 
ed the use of a broad (prthu), massive (guru). and large (dirgha 
cylindrical gnomon, made of excellent timber and free from any 
hole, a scar or knot on its body. In the above stanza, Bhaskara I 
prescribes this last kind of gnomon: the other two kinds he 
proves in the commentary to be defective and so he reiects them. 


For getting the shadow'end easily and correctly the cylindri- 
cal gnomon was surmounted by a fine cylindrical iron or wooden 
nail fixed vertically at the centre of the upper end. The nail 
was taken to be longer than the radius of the gnomon, so that 
its shadow was alweys seen on the ground. 


Certain writers, Bhaskara I tells us i1 the commentary. 
prescribed a gnomon of half acubit (=12 angulas) in length 
and having twelve divisions. But according to Bhaskara I 
(although it was the usual custom) there was no such hard and 
fast rule. The gnomon could be of any length and any number 
of divisions. The gnomon should, however, be large enough, so 
that the rings of graduation on the guomoa may be clearly seen 
on the shadow. A broad and massive gnomon was preferred 
because it was unaffected by the wind. 


Brabmagupta describes gnomon which at the bottom is 
two angulas wide, pointed as a needle. 12 amgulas in length, and 
full of holes from the basic circular part to the pointed 
extremity. (BrSpSi. XXII. 39). 

As regards testing the level of the ground, Bhaskara I 
observes : 

When there is no wind, place a jar (full) of water 
upon a tripod on the ground which has been made 
plane by means of eye or thread, and bore a (fine) 
hole (at the bottom of the jar) so that the water may 


336 BRAHMAGUPTA AND ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS 


have continuous flow. Where the water falling on 
the ground spreads ina circle, there the ground is in 
perfect level ; where the water accumulates after 
departing from the circle of water, it is low; and where 
the water does not reach: there it is high. (Bhaskara’s 
Commentary on the Aryabhatiya, II. 13). 


After the ground was levelled, a prominently distinct circle 
was drawn on the ground as stated in the text (MBA, III. 1). 
In the time of Sankaranarayana (869 A.D.), there it seems that all 
lines were drawn on the ground with sandal paste (candana- 
ksodardra). The above circle having been thus drawn and coated 
with sandal paste, another small concentric circle was drawn 
with the radius of the gnomon. The gnomon was then placed 
vertically with the periphery of its base in coincidence with 
that circle. The gnomon was thus set up exactly in the middle of 
the bigger circle. The verticality of the gnomon was tested by 
means of four plumb lines hung on the’ four sides of the 
gnomon 


Gnomon Used for Finding the Directions 


The rule in this connection has teen described by 
Brahmagupta in BrSp¢i. III. 1. The samerule in other .words 
has been described by Bhaskara lin MBh. IIE.2. In the Vasana 
Bhasya, Prthtdaka Svami describes the details of determining 
the directions. The level of the ground is ascertained by means 
of water anda gnomon of 12 angulesis set up. Find out two 
points where the shadow of the gnomon enters into and passes 
out of the circle. Bhaskara prescribes drawing outa fish figure 
with these points. The thread line which goes through the 
mouth and tail of the fish figure indicates the north and south 
directions with respect to the gnomon. Brahmagupta says that 
if the Sun is on the eastern side, then where the shadow-point 
enters circle (in the forenoon) that point would be the west, and 
the point where it emerges out (in the afternoon) is the east, 


As the Sun moves along the ecliptic, -its declination 
changes. By the the time the shadow moves between the 
forenoon and afternoon points as given above, the Sun _ traverses 
some distance of thé ecliptic and, so, theoretically speaking its 


GNOMON USED FOR FINDING THE DIRECTIONS 337 


declination gets changed. It follows. therefore, that the East- 
West line in the atove determination isnot the true position 
of the actual East-West line. Brahmagupia (623 A.D.) was 
the first Hindu astronomer who prescribed the determination of 
the East-West line with proper allowance for the change in the 
Sun’s declination. (Shukla) The details of the method intended 
by him have been supplied by his commentator Prthadaka 
Svami (860 A. D.). 


Bhaskara and Brahmagupta both give another 
method of determining directions : (BrSpSi. IL 2; 
MBh. III. 3): With the three points (at the ends of the three 
shadows of the gnomon) corresponding to (any three) different 
times (in the day), draw two fish-figures (each with two of the 
three points) in accordance with the usual method. From the 
point of intersection of the lines passing through the mouth and 
tail (of the two fish-figures), determine the north and south 
directions. (MBA, IIT. 3). 


Brahmagupta in his rule is more precise : 


The point where the lines passing through the two 
fish-figures, which are drawn by means of three shadow 
ends (of the gnomon), intersect each other is for places 
in the northern hemisphere, the south direction. Cif 
the midday shadow falls to the north of the foot of the 
gnomon). If the midday shadow falls towards the 
south of the foot of the gnomon. it is the north 
direction. (BrSpSi. III. 2). 


This rule is obviously based onthe assumption that the 
the locus of the end of the shadow of the gnomon is a circle. 
In tact the locus for places whose latitude is less than (90°—the 
obliquity of the ecliptic), this locus is a hyperbola. 


Brahmagupta has made numerous uses of gnomon. He 
and Bhaskara. for example, both give the rules for finding the 
latitude and colatiude and the zenith distance and altitude of 
the Sun by finding out the length of the shadow and the length 
of the gnomon (BrSpSi. WT. 10; MBh. IL. 5); also rule for 
the determination of the latitude with the help ot the Sun's 
meridian zenith distance and declination (BrSpSi. Ill. 13; MBh. 


338 BRAHMAGUPTA AND ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS 


III. 17); also rule for finding the Sun's altitude (BrSpSi. WI. 27 ; 
MBAh, Il. 24) (The Sun’s altitude for the night has been called 
by Brahmagupta as patala-sanku, BrSpSi. XV. 9). 


Golayantra or Armillary Sphere 


The first mention of the Golayantra or the armillary sphere 
isin the Arvabhatiya (Golapada. 22)' which wasa uniformly 
round circle made of wood or of bamboo and _ which 
was of uniform weight or density alround. It was levelled with 
mercury, oil or water. A §alaka or pin (or rod) was fixed in it 
in the south-north direction. Its description from the com- 
mentary Bhafadipika of Paramadigvara is given here : 


A-sphere of wood. uniformly round on all sides and 
with uniform density, and also light is made to revolve 
round an iron axis fixed north-south without friction 
foil may be introduced to avoid friction). To the 
backside of the sphere is fixed a nalaka full of water 
which has the length equal to the circumference of the 
sphere: and which has a hole at the bottom. 


Now a thread, connected to the hook of the wooden 
ball (on the top side) passing over another small 
ball Gn the same axis of the wooden ball) is attached 
tothe mercury Jobe by its other end. The mercury 
lobe is placed on the level of water and’ water is allo- 
wed to flow through the bottom hole and with water 
mercury lobe also goes down. The time in which the 
above hook of ball comes to bottom (180°) is noted. 
The experiment is repeated with oil. The use of this 
mechanism is to revolve the ball by water or oil* 


1. Spor GHae THAR Te aT TL | 
Aaa RT sa Arya. IV. 22 
aro ame arse Rid aa adad ames Oe ceaay wt ae 
een wa wen ae | aGTad ef aE ate ge Tafirai GaT array AAT | 
seek | yrs cRNA Se TTA | aaa Raa 
fax aes Ba ess st | ree tein a 
aa aad Rea ad dieentates ated fr deers a wea) 
a a al TNS sag aa ean ad) aT 
[Cont. on Page 337] 


GOLAYANTRA OR ARMILLARY SPHERE 339 


In the Arabic epitome of the Almagest entitled Tahriru’l 
mejesti. the armillary sphere. Za ul halk, is thus described : 


Two equal circles are placed at right angles, the one 
representing the ecliptic, the other the solstitial colure. 
Two pins pass throught the poles of the ecliptic and 
two other pins are placed on the poles of the equator. 
On the first two pins are suspended a couple of circles 
moving, the one within, the other without, the 
first mentioned circles, and representing two seconda- 
ries of the ecliptic. Onthe two other pins a circle 
is placed, which encompasses the whole instrument, 
and within which the different circles turn; it repre- 
sents the meridian. Within the inner secondary of 
the ecliptic, a circle is fitted toit, in the same plane 
and turning in it. This is adapted to measure latitudes. 
To this internal circle, two apertures or sights, opposite 
to cach other, and without its plane are adapted like 
the sights of an instrument for altitudes. The armil- 
lary sphere is complete when consisting of these six 
circles. The ecliptic and secondaries are to be gra- 
duated as minutely as may be practicable. It is best 
to place both secondaries, as by some directed, within 
the ecliptic (instead of placing oneot them without it), 
that the complete revolution of the outer secondary 
may not be obstructed by the pins at the poles of the 
equator. The meridian likewise should be doubled, 
or made to consist of two circles; the external one gra- 
duated and the internal one moving within it. Thus the 
pole may be adjusted at its proper elevation above the 
horizon of any place. The instrument so constructed 
consists of seven circles. 


Tt is remarked that when thecircle representing the 
meridian, is placed in the plane of the true meridian, so 





fies’ fied tai da sci feat aaa set ase | ceaers eey 
Sree TR eT ea st ETT | a Per aaa 
ae wale Meet ant safe aat wageat safer) asa: | att 

SAAN SAY ATI | 

RUG Tea THR MI SaSi. XUI, 16-17 


340 


BRAHMAGUPTA AND ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS 


that it cutsthe planeof the horizon at right angles, 
and one of the poles of the equator is elevated above 
the horizon conformably with the latitude of the 
place; then the motions of all the circles round the 
poles represent the motions of the universe. 


After rectifying the meridian. if it be wished to 
observe the Sun and Moon together, the outer secon- 
dary of the ecliptic must be made to intersect the 
ecliptic at the Sun’s place for that time: and the 
solstitial colure must be moved until the place of 
intersection be opposite to the Sun. Both circles are 
thus adjusted to their true places; or if any object but 
the Sun. be observed, the colure is turned until the 
object be seen in its proper place, on that secondary 
referred to the ecliptic: the circle representing the 
ecliptic being at thesame time in the plane of the 
true ecliptic and in its proper situation.’ Afterwards, 
the inner secondary is turned towards the Moon (or to 
any star intended to be observed), and the smaller 
circle within it, bearing the two sights is turned, until 
the Moon, (or to any star intended to be observed), 
and the smaller circle within it. bearing the two sights, 
is turned, until the Moon be seen in the line of the 
apertures. The intersection of the secondary circle and 
ecliptic is the place of the Moon in longitude: and the 
arc of the secondary, between the aperture and the 
ecliptic, is the latitude of the Moon on either side 
(North or South). (From Colebrooke’s Miscellaneous 
Essays). 


The same instrument, as described by Montucla from the 


text of Ptolemy (1. 3. c. 2) consists of six circles: first a large 
circle representing the meridian; next four circles united toge- 
ther, representing the equator, ecliptic and two colures, and 
turning within the first circle on the poles of the equator, lastly 
a circle turning on the poles of the ecliptic, furnished with sights 


and nearly touching, on its concave side, the circumference of 
the ecliptic. . 


The armillary he described by the Arabian epitomiser, 


differs, Seen from Ptolemy’s in omitting the equator and 


GOLAYANTRA OR ARMILLARY SPHERE 341 


equinoctial colure, and adding an inner secondary of the ecliptic, 
which as well as the meridian, is doubled. 

According to Lalande, the astrolobe of Ptolemy, from which 
Tycho Brahe derived his equatorial armillary, consisted only of 
four circles: two placed at right angles to represent the ecliptic 
and solstitial colure; a third turning on the poles of the ecliptic 
and serving to mark longitudes; and a fourth, within the other 
three, furnished with sights to observe celestial objects and 
measure their latitudes and longitudes. 


Whether the ancient Greeks had any more complicated 
instrument formed on similar principles, and applicable to astro- 
nomical olservations, is perhaps uncertain. We have no detailed 
description of the instrument which Archimedes is said to have 
devised to represent the phenomena and motions of the heavenly 
bodies; nor any sufficient hint of its constructicn,; nor does 
Cicero’s account of the sphere exhibited by Posidonius suggest a 
distinct notion of its structure. 


Among the Arabs, no addition is at present known to have 
been made to the armillary sphere; between the period when the 
Almagest was trauslated and the time of Alhazen, who wrote a 
treatise of optics, in which a more complicated instrument than 
that of Ptolemy, is described; Alhazen’s armillary sphere is stated 
to have been the prototype of Tycho Brahe’s; but neither the 
Original treatise, nor the Latin translation of it, are procurable 
and oneis therefore unable to ascertain whether the sphere, 
mentioned by the Arabian author. resembled that described by 
Indian astronomers. At all events, says Colebrooke, he is more 
modern than the oldest of the Hindu writers. 


Here we give the literal translation of the passage on armi- 
Wary sphere or Golayantra occurring in the Surya-Siddhanta : 

Let the astronomer frame the surprising structure of 
the terrestitial and celestial spheres. 
Having caused a wcoden globe to be made (of such 
size) as he pleases; to represent the Earth: witha 
staff tor the axis passing through the centre, and 
exceeding the glote at both ends; let him place the 
supporting haoks, as also the equinoctial circle. 
Three circles must be prepared, (divided tor signs and 
degrees), the radius of which must agree with the 


342 


BRAHMAGUPTA AND ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS 


respective diurnal circles, in proportion to the equino- 
ctial: the three circles should be placed for the Ram 
(Mesa) and following signs. respectively, at the proper 
declination in degrees N. or S. ; the same answer 
contrariwise for the Crab (Karkata) and other signs. 
In like manner three circles are placed in the southern 
hemisphere, for the Balance (Tula) and the rest, and 
contrariwise for Capricorn (Mrgz) and remaining 
signs. Circles are similarly placed on both hoops for 
the asterisms in both hemisperes, as also for Abhijit 
and for the Saven Rsis, Agastya, Brahmahrdaya and 
other stars. 


In the middle of all these circles is placed the equinoctial. 


At the intersection of that and supporting hoops, the 
distant from each other half the signs, the two equino- 
xes should be determined; and the two solstices, at the 
degrees of obliquity from the equinoctial; and the 
the places of the Ram (Mesa) and the rest, in the 
order of the signs, should be adjusted by the strings of 
the curve. Another circle thus passing from equinox 
to equinox, is named the ecliptic; and by this path, the 
Sun illuminating worlds, for ever travels. The Moon 
and other planets are seen deviating from their nodes 
in the ecliptic to the extent of their respective greatest 
latitudes (within the zodiac)} 


1. ymin cat gazreartat | 


wees WT SLT | ATT Nt 
a8 TaeR errs fad | 
ARTA areal aye gat 
WGN: FT TART Ba aT: | 
METAR TOUTE: 0 
RR CTaE Ta afeat SRT | 
RRC: GIT A ATA I 
RA THT aeaistat fear ' 
wfregariat arcet Raina: 11 
aeRnGa: gah eer | 
waa det wae 
CHTRRT FETT ATT } 
28 get sen actos deem | | 


[Cont. on page 342] 


HOW TO OBSERVE PLACES OF STARS 343 


The author of the Sarya-Siddhanta then proceeds to notice 
the relation of the great circles before mentioned to the horizon, 
and observes that whatever place be assumed for the apex of 
the sphere, the middle of the heaven for that place is its horizon. 
He concludes by showing, that the instrument may be made to 
revolve with regularity, by means of a current of water; and 
hints, that the appearance of spontaneous motion may be given, 
by a concealed mechanism, for which quicksilver is to be 
employed. There isa hint of secrecy also in one of the lines, 
and it has, therefore, been stated that the construction and the 
mechanism of working should be learnt under the guidance of a 
teecher. 


How to Observe Places of Stars 


Details are not available in this connection. The Sarpa- 
Siddhanta only hints ‘that the astronomer should frame a sphere 
and examine the apparent longitude and latitude (sphutavib sepa 
and sphutadhruvaka)”’. The commentators, however, describz2 
the manner of making the observation. They direct a spherical 
instrument (Golayantra) to be constructed as described above. 
This instrument is very much similar to the armillary sphere. 
An additional circle graduated for degrees and minutes, is direct- 
ed to be suspended on the pins of the axis as pivots. It isnamed as 
Vedhavalaya or intersecting circle, and appears to be a circle of 
declination. After noticing this addition to the instrument, 
the instructions proceed ‘to the rectifying of the Golayantra or 
armillary sphere which is said to be placed, so that the axis shall 
point to the pole: and the horizon be true by a water level. 


The instrument being thus placed, the observer is instructed 
to look at the star Revati through a sight firted to an orifice at 
the centre of the sphere; and having found the star, to adjust by 
itthe end of the sign Pisces on the ecliptic. The observer is 
then to look through the sight, at the yoga star of Asvini, or at 


wRga: arses gaat | 

SRR aa aren eaISHT Hl 

ARTES AA Aa: Gar SATA MGA | 

SRA RG! TeTEMT BG: HN ; 

TASTER AIT AAT | SaSi, XIUT, 3-12 





344. BRAHMAGUPTA AND ASTRONOMICAL INSTRUMENTS 


some other proposed object; and to bring the moveable circle of 
declination over it. The distance in degrees, from the inter- 
section of this circle and ecliptic, to the end of Mina or Pisces, 
is its longitude (dhruvaka) in degrees; and the number of degrees 
on the moveable circle of declination, from the same intersection 
to the place of the star, is its latitude (viksepa) North or 
South. 


The commentators have rightly remarked that the “latitude 
so found is sphuja or apparent, being the place intercepted bet- 
ween the star and the ecliptic, on a circle passing through the 
poles; but the true latitude (asphuja) is found on a circle hung 
upon the poles of the celestial sphere as directed in another 
place”. (From Colebrooke’s Paper on the Indian and Arabian 
Divisions of the Zodiac. Miscellaneous Essays, Vol. I, 324-326). 


For the details of the Golayantra, readers are requested to 


refer to the description in the Siddhanta-Siromani of Bhas- 
kara IT. 


oc 


Reference 
Brahmagupta: yantradhyaya in —BrSpSi, 
KS. Shukla : The Mahabhaskanya. 
Bhaskara I : Commentary on the Aryabhapiya. 
Paramadisvara : Bhatadipika, a commentary on the Aryabhatiya, 
H.T. Colebrooke : Miscellaneous Essays, Vol. 11., 1872. 





8. 


4. 


q 
UW Shreya: 


WY TNaepe fasrats 


qalamearai Reaarfaare: 
wae TATU STAI: 
mat wgearateatatanamt Asa: gn 
ware wenfeed Age wert aq Fereiryay 
afeediad tye 8 afereyqaayaa 
a sarees wiferan = sfaerararet 
sheen fearareed: Ee WAN AWA uv zu 
Sateenteeat gfe FaCT: | 
apart carat aH TRI faster ue 
mufanisaal cefiifeer farsa apart 
afar spat feaal feaarat frre ara: 


PPP LL LDL DL 





PLS. 





PLL LS PPDL LL DL LL 


(1) 8. at FR aT) at ware adarereraaizar: un alt yest 
ameliton (art sre werAThasre: ) 


(a) 9. “3 qa: Tore Area atarerenaraigara ath Teedt aa: for 


_ (a) & | dhamfaniacrt: for (stenferrrred:) 
(@) &. fem (*) for (fe) 

2. smeq for (shea) (@) father for (feasieq) 
() wala somes set 
(@) 3. aaa for (ad squT) 
(4) ¥. faa for (4a) 2. fersaier for (fetseea) 
(&) aale saner vet 


( 2) 


rat erearatt Ferre eterna: 
eeaferartegen: eit farfeeraa nu 
raagETEaat eaaatat agit water | 4320000 
ae rental WE aearte gaaparatn Wout 
areata afc gi agtafeafiniretar 
feaat RITA YT: feat wae Ns u 
SPHOoALRReGoooleHoookszooo, 

grerarrtateraeatfe aatta gages 2000000 
_ gafafgaary a dat qegerareient Wen 

& (@) %. Ata for (aR) 
Q. wT for (wTATIA:) 
2. aay for (a=) 





(a) 2. wratar: for (aTata:) 


) 2 
3. (m7) %. wage for (ragga) (*) (&) (=) 
(F) %, Feat ear SB) Sa HF sys FI 

(@) 3. weatet: for (qreqit) 


. (Tt) §+%0+(a) 
R+¥-+ (3) 


343+ (%) Gora for (Get) (a) +3+ 
¥+2 +(a) 


X Se¥eoe for («2¥o0e) (a) dat H GAMA eI (=) Ke¥oos 
(#) set Gr & veg Gat HA EAI (z) 


& (5) & anh for (art) (&) ardag for (arizz) 
(=) %. enfag (@) anf (=) wie for (afr) 
(#) 3. den yee 
*. gaara for (fertary a) 
“Breen (@) for (gamiteaty) 


( 2) 


AI arate: aett HAAET AAA | 
areata tary “FARTASTHERTAEA Ngo 
favoaesed 
are aerating aeragTi FATATARTA t 
wea ft a agi dat weit TTRGAT een 
FeoRo000 
ral figutreqeantverragaaeaye: t 
aera agarertag RET 122 
¥AUYRE 000 


PPPS PDA LDP LL PDD LL IAD LPS LPLL LAL LLL ADDL LA ALA ALLIED DOD 





Qo, (=) 2, ¥3R000000 for (¥ 320000000) (#) eat aa z Late F 
sified & 1 
(t) 2+62+(") 
2 Hea aaEGeT YY (a) for (HATE) 
¥ +ex+(@) FaReTt for (waHrat) (@)+ N+ 
(@) 4. wettrad fry for (areata) 
&. Bape for (eareTAEAT) 


¢2. (8) &. ga for (age) (=) Iga for (TE) 
Q. ¥Rg¥ouoooo for (¥2g¥oqo000} (®) FAT BT 
() 3. grees for (TREAT) 
(@) ¥. waaeia for (sreatiz) 
Y. HeMTGAT for (HeTATAT) 
&. warea: for (Harea) 


22. (4) %. (HET) 
% ATAU for (aPLATAT) 
(1) 3. agragifrs for (azarprias) (a) 
¥. ter Fas! 
(a) X. Zafreereat for (qafr=ears) 
&. STAG for (seTAgATAT) 
(a) & feet 


( ¥ ) 


FRTTTRET TART: ETI 
mea Sia Bagh art TTT 2 
crete a ERATE 
see aah ae: EE TE RET ge 
setntga Frarat eer: YP AANA: | 
eT. SUTRA TTA Ra UK 


¥320000000 





a3. (H) &. TUR S (a) 7 Uae A for (a Vas 8) 
(@) 2. warafedear: for (arqafeaar:) 


(a) 3. fro ca sfa Fr ofea” & oearg eae F gare fez “TE 
acafe gr & feraat arty ae feat | ge aR AS Theat Ga: 
fret Tg! sae oRara flex ere: fewer TAT | 

. egrarelt for (eyfaaral) 


ge. (@) &. areret (@) areer (=) Tet for (sree) 
FRY (=) for (Zea) 
3. da (H) for (Tr) 
¥, TegTet: (1) weqd. ser: for (TeGt FeT:) 
(7) x. aeatere Tarat (#) (@) fer (wear atsrarat) 
(3) ¥. Wear eT: for (meat eT.) 
te. (3) &. ge (=) for (ga) 
3. wat (a) wat (@) saree for (aaa) 
(®) Saat for (smear) 
R. FET TT a eter & aif & 1 
(a) ¥. arg: for (arg) 
. %. at for (g) (=) @ wary for (= garg) 


FLLPPLA PDP LL LAL PLL PLL LD PL LDIF 


gk. 


gu. 


5. 


(*) 2 


aa @ 
go  wW-Al wo 


a a a Fe) =a 


om 
a 


(3) 


( x ) 


datrafee taeda aaeatea: afin: 
YISS¥BZ00000 
whreq feorererpreagreratice: Neen 
RECS RSAVY 
aageeneny 
gaTgrapATa qgratera aeiterer 
guezeeentsy 
staen atuafiy reafir fegaTETTT: th ge 1 
BERRIELUR 
faaaitorea werent Raarpria WTAE | 
woRZaaeHe? 
EEF TATLET TTT Nes 0 


% 
PSEAESRES 


PILLILLL EL LDL L LSD LIDS EDP 





. wear gare aa Fafa SI 

ell Dat Haifa 2 

. tr ata for (taiaafer) 

ee | 

. 9fe for (afz 

: esate (cenecteee =) 

ait (7) sfsaaa (=) sefaat (@) vefaaat for (qgrarrad?) 

gaat (1) segufat (=) sere (@ ) gear for (venti) 

; oe (=) ‘Fafa der eke Rite a chs 
ra TSI 

. Seat ga FT ae, Star Haifa Ft 

. Gear ge FH ae, Seat F aif S 1 

. ag for (aq) 

qsaaitaat for (ygaattat) 3 Geet for (Fears) 

. aa for (wt) (a) ararat for (qaett) 

wat for (qr) 

. Sp (a1) sep for (sz) 

. ar tder gad) aarh afea et 

4, qa Tage gars) Aare aia si 

&. STETfta for (ater) 


aae 


(2-4 


mTgTeR veo SYNC ABARTH ATTAIN: | 
VSG QONGUG 
FEAGTAT REX feforge BRR atyaaa SYN 
feqTQCAT: 1 EU ERR UN LEN 
atfitaat xe aearrantaia HaATTATAT 
ageratayy fetrant BRANES TATA 
REVI Ro U 





PLPPDDAADL LLL LIL DA LPG 


8. (a) &. Ustenar (7) Sgr for (ATETEAT) 


2. feadaan: (a) fertazet: (ferret) 
(fao fafga dere agt sarees at @) 
(a) ¥. fataanr: for (fear) 
y. fefagat: for (fefryzar) 
(®) &. argteaat for (atgteaat) 
_& -afatent 
fro aatatfad arg vt dear ga F agi 21 ei, Gar F faeraa 2 
(a) arpterat for (a@rgrerat) 


(4) &. stgteat for (argrerat) 


o, seat yet cs. Feat TA g. ayaa for (atgaaa) 
fao aatatind deat yar FI 


. (9) et aetre H fafee erg gerd 


(a) &. aaietat (&) warétat (=) for (aataaT) 
2. fafaaar: (&) (@) fafa: for (fefraat) 
(#) 3. deat ga 2, Teg Siar F sifea 21 (=) 
x. FET Tg, TR Stat H sie (=) 
(=) fro eettnifne deme” ga 2 
2 fafa: for (fafa) 


C95) 


SARARATRT URE TAT §3 feariaaua:: 


me aAqeagaqay: yo 1 


ware qa sracisfearenfcameneR 1 2g it 
aftaul caagern sroferceterra feag 


feraa: | QRERRE ExYoooo 


cera ara: aret fea: gferarea RR 











¥a2sovoens 
QUIGGE PEXYOOS 
22. (a) &. aaateararfe for (aadtstante) 
R (88, Yo. TAT 22 aaa H Heist ag gE dee wat ce aT 
wart Wt 2 a 1 Z) 
(+) 3. ferdzaaa for (fertaqaa:) 
¥. gear qa F Tag, Teg cr F ahs F1 
y. Feat TH gag, Teg far H ysy sia FT) 
(=) fro aattatfea teare’ aa g 
g. (8a, Po, aT Re a aalal F genta wee ge dee aet UH aT 
eqTa OX Afr TAM Yao, Vas PoYsY= WI F3Q sky ENF 
VQ TBVILLL so Yeo Wt XVY, |B se3, UsY 
RR. (7) %. LUERBTU_E¥ ooo (AH) BXYHRRZ Il ¥KooO 
3. arar (a) at at (a) (=) feat ar for (feraret) 
(7) 3. sfeaat: (=) for (afeaaf) 
YM. ag cent set vel at 7s 1 
(a) x. aefea for (area) 


fro aa at dat deme’ gH &, Teg diet F wae: ales Zt 


Ce) 


vienna wexeat gremtigat watra ciaarat: 


Yo¥ooooo0oo0 


R 3 
watat Talat: aaa: y3¥33300000 


TUATATAT: (1-83 


. MTATAT. QYERROOo0O afermrenfeaerggioret 


GEORREL000000 waa afirfeaar: | 


sfraranfararacaaarta fata: aarinfery Rv HN 


BoRRAXooo 


erergeegea TAT TE qarranins 
fegferer atfaraten feearfa fearfat carat: 0 84 Ut 





PPLLLAD LLL DD IED LAD LL A 


aa. (a) 2. ag der set acts at aarti & orci Get EF 1 (7) (=) 
() %. waaiae (#) for (wmeiaz) 
3. atet: for (zatzt:) 
¥, Fear qa F Ges, Teg tar H aifsa T1 
q. Aa F ger gag, Ted Sat F aifaa F1 
(a) 3. xfaeh: for (<iai:) 
(a) “efawrarereet areargferat waft | 
ETAT: WTTTAT Catal: aera: AAT AT VR? 
ag ate safe FI 
(5) agate afer dt 
ay. (a) &. ag cen oat cect ofa & aaa AA 9x fret we F (7) (=) 
QR. WoaVyyoooo for (RKoBRXK Oo) 
(=) aw al dal de’ ga & Aer H aaa: frenifar F— 
ARWRZo0000, PEoVKKKoooo00, Wo Yyyoooo 
Rx. (#) %. waa (=) for (area) 
a aret (7) (#) aref (@) aan for (and) 
3. alsa: (t) (#) (@) sfez: for (afer) 
(x) ¥. fips for (Fegfexer) 
(8). gi for (gait) 
“fr ae for (are) 2 RST: for (aia) 


( ee) 


Req rere: rene mena AaeT: i 
Stfa gear aia ieeTT: TTR: WRU 
PEYREPE000,92EE¥0000,39E 


SLAS LP SL. LL PADA PLL DLE PADDLED LALA AL ISLA LD LL DAE LAD SDA GSS 





2%. (=) 2. qe (7) FIUMTUS YZQOooooosccogavoococosooacs fer 
(see Ta: ) 
2. ae ) wa: ¢gggvoooo (a) aa: (a) faTAH for (FAT) 
3. are (7) He (=) zat (@ ) RATT: for (TAT TTTTT:) 
¥. aM: (7) iis yO: 3Q0e for (TMT) 
4. BGI FAT f Asacooo + 
&. RK E Roe for (RaXA¥ eg ooo) 
@, TaRaagy 7 for (maTeaGT Tt) 
5. + 3aqq000-4 
(fro wag aeary ‘a H ete F arta a 8) 
(a) %. vere for (gerd) 
g. sea: for (seat:) (@) aeaaTe sear: for (aay sz:) 
foo ga ¥ dee’ gag, car A ear: F— 
Qagoaddodag00000000, 9, ReYoooo, PLA Roo, 
BEYOOO, 3298, 
(@) 9. weqreg for (aer7T4) 


(a) %. Ie o, nareaadatrea for (waTeaqy afreat: ) 
3. IA for (avait) ¥ att: ea: for (aMayMT:) & THAT: for 
THISAT:) 
(7) aereraiafe weferet ferent ea: | 
HATA CRTC SHEMET eRITAT: New u 
(fac) (ag Bee 202 Fo F care ‘qraege fear’ F wet 21 ag 
THAT aia Hae H thax Terrat reas Barat faalegT yer 
frase ata ‘afesa ga va F gfe gov--araege feared F 
art gat eqrawetreareaa’ wit wa-fart 8) 
(Fre) ag atte (7 ) wat () oigfaftat 3 freaifea cern F 
MT BIT E— 
(a) 2. we: for (we); (=). ++ 


(7) 


C30) 


. rararafargtrgTTa aaa: 
geerenezoe HTT | 
arte aqat afafrcreracrata: 1 Ww 
a fra: engerttriataragdit az 
sifiat Paria ya feafadhiterenea HETTTT W REM 


gEeRRWeE 
SRR GLETICEAS ice RUCIGE RASC | 


afaat garfrera cfanrararfirareaa: WRU 





SLPS 





. aainaiteaa (7) aurt (a) aaTTeaa: for (aaTAeraa:) 
R. ag sem set ata F TA ate, (7) 
(wt) 2. are sett (@) ardacta (=) ardafaa for (arin) 
(#) ¢. wanTeada: for (arrestee: ) 
2. ae sear ya Hae 21 Sar A ores 3 | 
(*) 9. aniva for (aamaq) —“Seaa:” sored ai ae 3 


ae. (7) 


“o 


¥. FIT FT ALATA: for (Fa:) 
¥. Papi 
G. HF VasVeveMos+ 


as. (H) 8. Blader seTITT for (qiteteTeT aera) ( t) (=) (@) 
(7) 2. faaie (#) (frata) 
A LAHRLRZ LW for (gagggele) 
(@) 3. 4g dear ga F ae 2, dar F faeries B—2e5 822308 
(@) ¥. afrneqere for (afes: eget) 
(=) & eggs for (ra) 
re. (8) t. sat for (zz) (4) seqareat for " (serra) 
wre for (sre) (=) 
(") 3. gat (for a) 


(*) ¥. a \ (@) gate (=) gaia: for (qatse:) 
(a)? areamafeonfé for (aeaneedatt:) 


A 


ae 


Ferrara: serena miigfea: | 
sree ala n %° i 


TEATS TORTIE | 


oe mem cimrat aren dtafien: 1 32 
arate feqaare eqeatetar AEAATTAAT | 
reeves er eTaa afeaaty ti 32 uo 

ata aga | qrearat arenciteha: eee: | 





aearigangta faa aTasaiearaeAny TEER 
30. (a) %. frarat (a) for (aatat) 
2. areal: () aTaat (#) ataat (a) (=) for (raat) 
3. erat (mw) (%) seta (=) for (gat) 
(t) ¥. +Re+ 
y. wee: (%) (w) for (ae) 
&. Smif for (sptfz:) 
(@) ¥. frag qanieafage: for (Pruayatafage:) 
(@) ¥. wae for (aE) 
(=) &. sg for (sé) § sptfe: for (s#ife:) 
ag. (a) %. aiewderfas: 1 (7) (=) for (mextefe:) 
(7) 2. aareaiurg for (qureeiura) 
(a) %. wrendtafen: for (arectefia.) 
(@) 2. sexemrnrar for (ay TENT) 
(=) ¥. wiqng for (zefUTg) 
¥. gga for (agara) 
32. (tT) . taeaafe for (wafeaaft) (#) (a) a for (w) 
(#) 2. wat (@) for (ataT) 
22. (5). aatyt for (aatgt) (@) aint for (aya) 
a ge (5) () (@) for (eR) 
(at) 3. fevardt (&) for (ferartt) 
(@) ¥. s#teneaenrg for (seicataerTg) 
(A) &. TAIT for (aang) 3. Fevardiat for (ferareisef) 


ae 


agrenaraitecterat WERT FEAT: | 
PAPATAT ET tat WTMTTTSNT 1) BX 1 

fararerfa: seargsTTat afergiiarcem: TH | 
tarercafenTte: EATEN wate TAM WEN 
qafeti: AASTTLAT CATARACT singfiea: t 


Neos 


ATA ako zat wae SATTACEN aft: uae 
Saceteryfemiateti a arate ASTIN | 
goat qettae aot: sree TAT BO UI 


DPASPDSIS. 





ay. (a) 2. 

(7) 2. 
ay. () 2. 
_ mrs (7) (w) (=) for (arma) 
. Yooo (7) for (Yoo00) 


A 


we. (7) &. TUT (a) 
. Ufefaarnenfe for (afefir garantie) 
: HTT TTT for (aera WoT ) 
. tant for arm) 


tara for (tarat) 
Rat (*) (@) for (Zt) 


AMAT: for (afarattercrar: ) (=) 


‘ea -& GS Fre 2h0 at Cer gai ‘gar F gear ATE 31 
() (&) e (=) 


- ea (#) (&) for (gat) 
. feta for (aff) 
- eafirar for (agfivar:) 


foo aitarata dee’ yas (=) 


- PRATT for (earatree) 


3. fait for (at) 


PTT TT 
(#) (=) for (qq) 


%. SPE Tt (&) for (aa) 
—®) 2. serlereage for (HrufererTTZ) 


{ 2 ) 


ena EBS aT at ehATETATS TTY TT | 
seed efeerertar at Fate age a HEM 3S 
mearareat fiver eureztartaen tiara: 

he ac 
ereceraty goo set Fenramraiare: RAT: UREN 
afer go sierefatearen ATG | 
Prarferaa: afefeata feat feritrer: N¥ou 








35. (1) &. mem (at) (a) for (qeq) 
2. eae (4) for (eg) 
(%) 3. ‘a aa gee aa ar fag B, aT aray’ 2 
¥. FT for (ea) 
(@) 4. aafegarg for (yafefrgara) 
&. fates for (fafa) 
(a)e. +u eu | 
2a. (4) ¢. wadarfia for (fraaarfir) (7) fart aveve? 
X. AE TEA Tet Wey’ B TeaTG Wha Z! 
(7) 3. THAT: Woze (#) Tat: (a) for (aat:) 
¥. gat we FMT e§oo ay Fea FI 
(*) X. ATT: for (areisaT:) 
(a) ¢. BraRTTaTha for (errafrttartea) 
vo. (8) 2. FUT for (Gat to) (7) aferpur go & for (afeTUT 2°) 
2. gat (+) (#) Earemeat (@) eaTATA for (TaeTTT) 
(a) 3. efaareferaat (&) (@) afraren for (afateraat) 
(#) %. aeagueaitT for (afergaT te Aer) 
(a) 2. afergand for (aferger to) 


%. fartt for (feat) 
(a) ¢. aferqar: for (afeequr) 


2. ZaTetsd for ( qareaee) 


PLP SL LL ILS. 


( & ) 


eTATERAATR: qatetserrfadt TAETATMAT: 
memrecyat reurfeteTA: qanTaTa Weg 
aafaaratferaa: atgtagien: a TUT BE: 1 
samiaeat TAAL FER afenaeat fam sa: eI 
PRIETIA ertenart: we sweeter faa: 
efatants arat afeg HaterteTifa: UW vs 1 











2. (8) &. gat (=) for (gat) 


R. aes for (aT) (7) seraTT (#) fiessraTT for 
(faatraTezat) 
(a) 3. wareaferga: for (Tateferge:) (%) TART for (wate) 
¥. gat (#) (a) gat for (qat) 
y. wrens (%) (at) WITTE for (TaATFz) 
(@) 3. merrarecfarge: for (werraTefarya:) 


a. fattermraras: for (fratraes wrarTa: : 


(3) %. wamefaaa 


¥& (@)%. sage (3) for (ga%ERT) 


¥3, 


(a) 2. afua fea ea: for (gfqireat fara ez:) 
(%—aat & yaar sees Az g) 
(7) 3. @ for (% me 


(a) ¢ fret: for (Fravt:) (a) garferart: for (gaferar?:) 
2 oR (7) for (vez) 
3. BAST for (ATA) 
¥. Farfe (7) (#) for (taf) 

(1) X. EAeBRT ek00 (a) GBT for (BA) 

(=) (¥—agt at Gar some aH 2) 

(a) & AFTET for (afr@q) 


awies — for (garferart:) ¢ carerafrgir for (saranfe 


%. Gat for (freq) 


( & ) 


qrareateiat eararatentine ¢2e Reitentar: 
eM: qigate: sisted FATTY Te cal| 
Faeyr Portege: gi93 t 
qanfaatisat chara freaat: ayaa: esa) 
arenferiat wt: areanagfafegad: \ 
wenfadta erat: iat wen Te xe 


PPL MPP DP PPS PLS. 





PLL LPLIS. 


wy, (a) &. vat eRe’ deat aa St ve 
(=). s—aet at years somes at 2 
(@) 2. fat for (faat:) 
4) 3. ameat for (aqefat) y aciteatarr: for (frateatar) 





PPSLSP ADL PPD LL ADL ILL PPP 


) 

(7 ) 2. WaAT (=) for (wer) 

()  (#—aet ar ga oa eames aT e 

@) ¢. aaafatreraid: for (craft: (03) 
2. cagunfqedat: for (eagutreda:) - 

(=) 9. actafafa: for (accrafir: 963) 

¥. facaiat: + 

X.Y Et 

&. Ft for (set) 

3. vfagufaert for (carga: ) 


¥&. (a) &. TYR: for (TaM:) (a) TTT: for (HATA: ) 
(7) 2. ferattan: (@) fecaray for (facate) 
a. oo Fegma: 22 for (Fegaa:) 
¥. gfett arate: for (gfgdtaqaaiter:) (a) sagfvar for 
(aagfiuats) . 
4. tH: &% (a) a: (=) for (=H) 
(«) (fe —aet at aera seer Tet 2) 
(=) 3. fogat 22 for (Fegat:) 
g. qatar: for (artatrar:) 


vX. (@) 2. wearfarcraiet: (1) wearfirfircraiet: for (waft: ¢63) 
( 





( %& ) 


ata aet femata: FATT: aR: nN 
ATER: faarater fardgaat feateentel Ta 
TM: HT: : Rare fear aR ¥ quar: 1 
aafirata: att Q22Q aqatdrenlgy Weil 


ve. (a) &. att: (@) (@) for (ae) 
Q. BaD BY 1X for (aTat:) (@) weet: for 
(areata) 
3. tet Isist for (st) (@) fargmet for (fesgerst) 
LIRR 
(*) (fe—aat at qarr grees at 21 


(@) ¥. fart for (faa) 
x. fast for (fast) 


(=) & arty for (qray) 3 faagust for (fesearst) 
va. (5) &. faq: for (fequr:) 


2. Fe for (wat:) (@) safer for (wenfeaTTT) (=) 
wat for (at:) 


3. © FTL BWA 1 21 for (= Fr) 


¥. are —for (aT 2922) (wet HE der al A ae) (a) 
anTz 


+ FEST L Loot} Pop yp 
(=) ( aet Bt YMTT saTeT al 8) 


(a) &. #8 for (ara) 
©, ante for (eataq) 


fa) = +eee4 


IDASS: 


ve. 


Xo, 


(28) 


an Arata: 228 finger meNRe FATA 
WHY o¥l0Ng 
cadsaifrnaat meq wa BUS FTTT: xe U 
araré faarafict ceaagtermafemaritafien: 1 32% | 
aataeat feat Rea eATASe AAA: Yon 








(3) %. aaet afer: (7) azz wooe afemre: for (ant aot 
¥oo¥1og 2) 
2. Feat (aT), (@) for (Fez) 
%. BMs for (34%) (77) wet ae Ser ae at aE 
(1) ¥. Wtraea for (arta) 
Wi Je for (2285) 
&. wiraifaar Fer: for (art Bye Ft AaT:) 
(%) (Saat at gars seam Tag 1) 
(&) v. a for (qa) 
g. HRT UTI: for (ATT Yo 1 E¥oo¥togg) 
(3) %. erates afta: for (erat) 
RR BRETT for (348) 
&. at: for (#1) 
(1) 9. settefiert: for (aitefiret:) 
a. arfsetagar: for (afsarrymn:) (@) anfe&e for (afer) 


&) (fe -zet ar yaTT Traer aE 2) 


(a) 2. faractefacn for (ferantafaai:) 


(35%) 


afeneta: sregprefteafaherorTe mee aRTED | 
afaare aac agrafiaaaqand Tce 


SRoGWEGoo00 
gaatieren Baise eave aig vga afafa: \ 
wansstfoo 

aaqrararTy = -afarae: ¥32RYRO000 
AVRTT: WRU 


PIPP LLP LDP LDAP PSPS LLL PDL LLLP LA LILI L LL ILL LLP LLL PDP I 


4g. (a) &. ear for (et) (7) =e Rear for (araTeTeaT) (A) = for (2) 
2. Teng for (aeat) (sae Sha ar afar aac) (@) aura for 
(aexa) 
3. ‘ferfasrer” gett tie at arefean oe 1 (7) (a) 
¥. aa (1) eras (a) arate for (afratg) 


(7) ¥. cara for (za) 
(#) (@— agi Ht gars saa Ae { 1) 
(a) & aff for (afe:) 

io. gfaat for (sarfati) 


(=) ©. greater for ( garateatict) 
2. Ferg for .(aeqa) 
¥. arate for (afrarg) 
5. qaqerd for (3=aTq) 


4%. (3) & wee EBT (a) for (care ept) 
R. Fg SeM vet eet aT HAS 1 (7) (=) 
(7) 3. arpry (#) (@) arate for (aaeste) 
¥. SRaaaeRooe for (¥XaqseRoo) 
(5). qr den ga’ Aer Fegeccegoos sifee 81 
% GAH Ger Gag, ATH wR sift | I 





RR. 


( te ) 


aniaaiisreataz aac aa fedzentia FA: ¥Zo¥¥¥5000 

MEET ART SAT TRENT TATT AGE: Te Ca 
SZOXZPRo0o 

Taye nag TTT wafrepazeg | RRRLRooe0 

sedh: aera amareta Taadta TTA Ne g¥oXR2o00 

rae TTA ATE TTA fee: MAHAL | LGIGYERoOO 

BOUTTATTAY PRUCG CICS LiCiiC eee 

(a) 2. ama (*) for (arta) 


R. Tee for (aeTT) (a) weaeer qaE: for (aeaRUTA:) 
(t) 2. wag for (ware ) (®) (@) artats for (ware) 


¥. REAagR: (%) for ees 
(a) ¥. wate for (Farha) 

&. Fears for (aearfa) 

9. WTTERT for (ATE) 
(a) 3. @ary for (watse ) 

¥. Be for (<aqT) 


uy. (4) ¢. wa for (am) (@) wae for (eaqarax) (a) wae for 


44. 


(aaa) 
(7) %. 98g (#) (3) for (8¢) 
3. aera: aaa for (sat: waa) 
¥. TaaraTTaTces: for (aati waTaT:) 
R. QUOKEYQOOO (=) for (2RoXEROO) 
(®) 3. aane: Grae for (gat: aaa) 
&. ae for (Faeaa) 
fro yaifna stat dere gar FT away ot Sear F sifes Ft 
(@) we. qt for (a) 
(@) qa X gear somes wet 1 chat FT afar st 
(a) &. TetermrateRsTis for (TearaTy Fa) 





( 2° ) 


arenfeneeett ara CatseTfeaeTTEAT | 

Reae ewer warecteefarterea: URE 
TET 2 a gg tant RATE AT afe: | 
Saarae eT TUETGR TATA TeT*T Bq Ui yo U 


. (a) &, aterm for (west) (1) (#) (@) vet for (Aer) 
2. Farfe for (Farf) 
2. are (7) () for (AIT) 

(#) ¥. wear: (@) wea: (3) eq for (HEAT) 

(@) ¥. ae: for (av) 
&. atfeaat for (afta) 


(a) &. ad for (wed) 3 am (qx) TH for (AIT) 


yo. (a) &. Ydsater (w) eesantorg (a) ysantarq for (qstaxerara) 


%. aeerre (a) wHTaH for (ata) 
3. GaN (*) yf for (eryA) 
(1) gar & searg 2 ¢ at deat vel & aE 3 1 (=) 
(*) %. santas for (antrarara) 
, __ ¥, fafa: (@) ofa: for (afe:) 
/{@) % gartt for (gare) 
&. ges for (Gea) 
3) & Bening for (Gaara) 
2. Steg for (Stata) 





Xe. 


(C-Re. 2) 


stafermreteg afte et featezeaga: | 
seprenferarery ggeere say eeu 
WHATS: sharafieged creel ee \ 
frearrmerenat gamert gem Sars: xe 


~— 
P) 

— 
“wo 


a 
aA oA 
— we 


a @ 


a 
—* 


os 
az 
aH Kf ww BO 


(a) ». 


_ gag (afrgaren) (x) (a) afi: qeearar for (afre- 
ATaT 


. aTeq (7) ae (H) ave (A) are for (arerq) 
. wea (7) (%) weqAT for (Heat) 
- BG, (Gea) (1) Terat (#) Yerart for (ager) 


dafaareteiteaafa: for (Safaaretecrt) 
aaTET for (TTT) 

afa: geqarat for (afagaran) 

Tea for (yEAewT) 


. ofa: Jeaarar for (sfereara) 
- TI {TAT for (wT) 
. FeqaT: for (HeTAT) 


eamd: (@) tara for (eaq7a:) 


. GUA (a) for (gure) 
. ga (®) (@) Fa for (F=4) 


- wet (@) (+) for (werena) 
. Feat for (ara) 
. aaa: ce yet Sf! Rete aT ‘ae’ oe war a 


fare for (alte) 


(4) SATE loco FITaH, TMAH: TYRAAT Yoo FAT: | 


aed fr 2 raw ¥ at Horfireat aaraeg XE 
afaag itt fe 2 ad, were fafr ex ad g Paar 1 . 
ary 4 ad FT gate, fe 2 ee aa ved Te Erafag i Ko 
fro orits dat eile 280y fo F wanfta maegehrard F 
“afafem’ & 1 


(Ree 


meant tea at Qaieahaey sree: l 

vata a warafaaan: fag get qa afer: WeoON 
UTA TATA areTET ferrareHEATEY ] 

meaanla fecearatent sama FU Ee Ut 


SLI L LL LILI LPP LLL ID DDI 








go, (T) &. ate for (ate) 
2. fest for (zgt) 
(%) 2. stature for (start) 
(a) 4. fayararer for (frsyarrat:) 
&. afer: for (efean) 
88. (H) &. WT for (Bq) 


. fergariat (1) fesgarat (#) fesgatat for (fergsraiat) 
. 5am: Hatem: (1) (a) wa: for (TAHA F) 
(1) faoefe ot wafaart wermfeare: sere: b 
(@) ¥. aat for (aTat) 

2. ferpratat for (fesgaratai) 

(@) at efg & &3 ante & 22 at afew 2 

(3) 3. 347: for-(saa) 

¥. Bateata: for (gale) 


ww AD ww 


( 2) 


i aferrerrevra: T 


FEAT HUET: sfafeae eer Tat ATA | 
TTA HCTHT ae TOREFERTNTY wet 
qasarqarat afraaaar TUTTE \ 
TAETATT: afadateaareraeegtt WRN 
agafaerat qatfircerratiar alergaan: 
egrarasan cafsad aren TafeTAT: 0 3 





Gs ~ eR 


te 
aa 
oe ee 


4 


As 
_ — 
a 4g 
~ — 


AM 
on pela, — 
4a A A 
Ex M ww Aww wo wv 


— 
HK. 
—* 

an 


— 
4 
wo vo oe BD wo K HY xs 


wente for (aeare) (7) TeATER Teast (#) TeATER Feast 
for (AeHTeRcTHeA ) 


. Ge for (ege) (7) egerwaTA (#) eHerweTA for (eFewATy) 
. 78 for (aar) 


weary for (wea) 
wens GerHt for (aears HeTAt) 


. egelaeyy for (ERT) 


areaparp Tea’ aA gs | 


. TEMG Z for (FeATg) % EGE for (Fe) 
. Agama for (qaqa (1) (%) sasaragaaaT for (aHsaT- 


year) 


_ aysaracar: (1) (#) sasaTAqEaT: for al 
. RaSATAGAMAT for (smasaTyaTA) 


agpaaTeat: for (ASATACaT) 
waryat for (amITgat:) 
qesagqare for (sisanyaarar) 


. TETATICATT: for (TASTATIETT) 
. fafaa for (feerz) (7) (a) wafefa (@) cafafa for (taht) 


arat: for (qat:) (@) for (aat:) 
senfer (&) (a) (3) for (qa) 
ag (#) (@) () for (ate) 
yeafea for (agaftr) 


aral for (arat:)  ' 


(a) . war: for (wT) (a) 2. fafa for (ferra) 


( x ) 


RTTRTU: RATA TTT: ARTIST | 
fefaerrart feacarat aa TA faa faa WY 


aa 








¥ (a) &. aeaTTUT (=) for (AFIT) 
2. aa for (at) (t) aeaTH seat eae: WYN for (aTAA- 
fagy fart: WY 11) 
(7) 3. Tot for (T:) 
%. eat: for (aga) 
4X. war: for (zat) 
(a) ‘a’ Matfer aval | aw eas Heer wets afar Sat wa ges 
qe feat % 1 
(a) aet ag site siftee vat 21 
(3) 2. wt for (am) 
&. fazy for (fazg) 
. BHT FT | 
(e. @. 7.) ¥ afafeas sate — 
fadg frat gaa daa 2 aia seagate: | 
TET UATaTAT: afar WAT: WY 
LTT AY TATTARYOT: AIAASAT: | 
fafa (enforcer: earaan aeuit arr. uy 
(%) %. wat: for (qaT) 
X. (a Ba ge F(a) 
3. afer: WY 1 (a) fafrqeaer for (afrawn:) 
¥. fara for (Part) . 
(@) &. eae for (wag) 
&. Faq for (aaRPT) 
%& aaa: for (saat: 
| (3) fo Fe Rag Be GE 
TS sb TC aa a wa we Fagg 1 Seaway” 
wm fered & tga Te wee eT ATE AEE 1 





x. 


( 3 ) 


BAA GATT AE STATES ATTY IAAT: | 
afar ere: fren: agat are: WK 
gengaaerca w aetet SURAT: | 
TARCTATAATT FATT ATTY: § 1 
wa faaeataATa TAAATE TANT: | 
AQAA: TUTTRRTTRT manTeat: iy U 
ffrwadanaientafretedtfesargaT: | 
afaafaeammaaatrraren arr fifsat we 


(4) %. wat (*) for (aa) 

(1) fro mat ate ate chad acite at are ofeat at aa fs ware 3 
frat @ | (#) 

(=) &. e+e faery frat Wvxe+ 

2. Far: + Wer-+for (zat) 

3. waafrman: Wee for (AaaRITE) 

2. WaT: 263Q for (7A) 1 Taw TRAY TTS Thee wreea 

¥. PRR E 

R. ROR 

(a) vat ag wate “ET SI 


(1) 3. Jw () for (gm) 
(#) ¥. eat: for (%) 
(4) 2. HaTaat for (gata) 
(a) &. edaeae for (fara) 
(a) 2 water (a) for (aratar:) 
(@) 3. Arar for (Arar) 

¥. wartral for (vararat:) 


(a) %. fafarat: (7) (=) for (fefsrar:) 
%- & (#) (3) for (=) 

(1) 3. vam: (&) for (qa) 

(a @) ¥. Fa for (Fa) 
(Fao Sfau gs 24— Aa F faz) 





( %& ) 


CELATART TUATTT TAT: ae Pama: 
eft exer sreremareat FHRTERTEAT: 1 & UL BAIR 





& (8) &. ear (7) wat () (=) for (zat) 

a Ww a tRRE for (R¥1R 8188) u Ay ) geet i tt we 
u tas uN aot it gout i oe i ee uN 183K TT tet 
u ree ENS i 2a A we tt Tee i wets Pe. 
i 8 u 2053 u Bere UN "oak ni Bene uaRowHIRRV 
i Ra 7 ee TT Rear: uN a FART: u e nee ui 
VERT RET COYLE 1 RTO LYE TE LER SRE 
ae ate P08 | are) ) ray ou | Rote | 


tt \ ae ey \ QERR 1 Rev 1 qoKs ' arse | SeeATaT 
aft ut 


(@) ¥. farieeat for (fitter: | 
(area) (4) %. gs%0 (a) (a) for (Race) 
| % Wee (T) (a) for (Wz) 

% WR (7) (%) for (202) 
(*) wtaget qe 





go, (a) &. 


( w) 


FATE QRy Tet erage Sard tl 
farfergfer RRY ERT AeINTM a TERT Ngo Nt 


oat star Seeger SUT FATE | 


aca faqasiadteartata gfraa aT eeu 


Se 


PALDL LLL LLL DL LAL LLL DL 


TaTeAATT (1) Sasa (aH) saat () for (areTatazT) 
Earg () for (gq) 

var (7) sat (&) (@) sg for (Gea) 

sar (1) sat (a) (@) Sar for (zt) 


amen (@) zAgat for (aAgaT) 
RV Tatena for (Feet) 
wed for (as) 


2. gaeHATM for (grHAyAT) 
. aerarqat for (weqarezat) 


5. wena for (weTAay) 


Lo, WRX CaTeHATT for (RW TeHALAT) 
. vatfor (seat) - 
. @ for (zt) 


saga (m) satadtgat (a) saietgar for (saieergar) 


aeat for (aeat) 


. gfgareeatat 224 for (afeeartedearat) 


a+ 
RQ 


ae (a) aq for (39) 


. watsam for (ste) 
. &a for (ez) 


ie. srs for (Ste) 5. Sef for (eer) 


8 


mearfaaten He afomeeattea mead RTT | 

rater meat at afer aseat argatfesa naz 
faar@a FATA Bro mraaatefa aie TRUTEAT 
arate afcfaetaat ghitsfire: iglces TICE: 11 23 NN 
mere WaT: BER e wa atfemeTAt FAFAT 82WO | 
areata caittggettait: aife: nex ul 


ww. (a) 2. 


(7) %. ga () 

2. 
(=) %. 
(3) & 





. aaaraaarater (1) aafrratatafe for (saferarrarat afer) 
. wafardatsaatt ft for (serfeerarraraa ft) 
. wafers for (aaferat) 2 at for (xt) 3 afe for (afa) 


mame at 

eaqtax (Tt) sate (w) gatax (a) aeaaiax for (zara) 
Foret (7) FAA for (FEAT) 

afefaent sat sarc: for (afefareferst eraisfirw: draisfiza:) 


» wo gat () Fasargat (a) for (Prsargat) 


we ert wie wet | 
‘sire.’ area sifaet agt (mF) 


. ‘EmAaz for (Aza) 


‘Srisfan:’ ge ga F 
etarfere: for (gratfirn:) 
wise for (R%se) Jq4 


. ofefreeterat for (afefirefaat Sratsfire:) 


Fagtat (a) fagtat (a) Fadler for (frétit) 
for (a) 

fefadtaat: for (fggdteat:) 

fagtat for (frgtit) 

Farat for (feta) 


Pad 
oe 


Lach 


—_— 
f 
— 


ee 
Ria a) 


a 
— 


==, 
4 
ie 


aaaaaS 


—. 
a 
~~” 


oy 
A 


(Re) 


TZ THA slratargt au: raeayyy | 
canfefinge matcresitar wist 3£0 earTe val 
TATTTTAATETER ATE ater seat oa TT: 
aeUUitairercgaTTA: ara UU 
rear Area SRAM STE at 

atternat nagfeeramrenaty TaTeTTy: N YOU Ro 
erat ae yoETATA Poi s BA | 
TATA wat eqeet efrercaet fafa u a 
aplenreanmatiant acer ufatereeit: | 


a eRe TTeetHTaT eBNteHLA: ul ge 





HU Tesaqa: for (Ha: TIT) 
TUT: (#1) for (Far) 
rater for ahah 2) (wt) Carwt A for (gata) 

aie: (%) arHiat (@) Faas for (aA) 
Re TE a fr (ROT) 
FEES for (#aeHAsiaT) 
walyecaqar: for (at: TesaqrTAT) 
sat (at) at for (ait) ¥ gavad for (gaa) 
aaa: for (e4atz) 
aeat for (ate) 
geaat for (qerat:) 
TyaT for (grag) 

emrard () amitaig for (areata) 

gaafa for (yaar) 
Tagfaatg for (Tqyfearg) 
ecaneat (7) caned (am) caTeaT 
eareat for (aAez) 
ai for (s#) 
apcarerrmaataa for (saieareraaatfaar) 
waft for (xf) 
. weizaranaanifaar for (aalearersaataat) 


(a) exaedt for (are) 


( a ) 


glen waferd Pact fereter oer ST lg u 
fefaeterer faerie fatraaTas ree, Udell Rott 
oat frat aarateaa (2 2) feat ye mete NT t 
seater quant ga afeedatt: 122 





ses (6H) gAIE8 (7) for (42) 
3. fafa +24-+(7) for (fafa) 
R. PHT (Tt) Perrerrfasts 1eWlol PRR oll for (aaariferatt) 
(7) ¥. state (%) for (Prats) 
%. FRaTT 7 for (TTT) 
(a) % #eRt ¢ ae Ta 
3. at S3ugau arfrar for (ararfrat) 


R&. (3). wets (7) () (@) ares for (Hatz) 

2. wet RR’ ear Tt ‘fee F are sifae @, fore 3 1 
2. Hal: for (fit) | 

(1) 4. eat sifea aa Bt 
&. deat sire we 2 

(=). gate for (qtage) 

(8) 5. Rafer for (qe) 

(3) 4. qenga & etd for (arty) 

ERE © Adare for (giagu) 


(at 


aa aaafcedaz serge Brame ere 

sa ages feare afeat eye: ach 1 BRAUN 
yarerant re aye argu 32 | 
eaymaerarafardl ogreafae aa waft i RU 
SarraIag caster fengafefreay | 

gen afters eqeafeheati CEATATHA UYU 





Rx. (4) &. Bat (a) (*) (*) for (gar) 


2. Ferm for (Pasaar) (#) Pasqates aasitar for (Pavaat eaza- 
stat) 


(7) aat fretifea dear afer e— 





¥. aferat for (fat) 
(@) 3. TaRa for (Tq) 


(=) & ofeat for (afet) 


Ra. (H) &. ory (%) for (wERA) 


3. Hea (a) for (aa) 
(at) 3. agrees (#) sgreafar (@) egrenfas for (sgrefat) 


2. (%) %. afarera: (@) after for (after) 


(a) 


MR TATET aafacifemn faeraer a qa: 

rod axle fread afeeratenfi: 1 2¥ U 

famdtrneterareraTee malt wareTt 

qitaaeaaemfata afzartafe: get REN 

fare afefir eRe fafermettawarect Tea: , 

dg aft gfath gee varaad vee omardatinie: Uw 
- oE8RROO 


ONAN AANA LAN UNA A AN ANNAN UN ANNAN UNAM NN ACS 
24. (B) t. safe for (5) (safea) (n) aafgaterarg for (aafet Fang) (7) 
aafea for (safe) 
2. siege (a) Praaa for (faa) 
(w) 3. aaaeh: for (ra: qt:) 
(a) ¥. afearfit for (tfeafa) 
4. Prarafrsraterfa: for (Parqafenratrefe:) 
(a) 3. feraemrrg qa: for (fercerdta: ga:) 
2. Frag for (frag) 
2% (8) &. are: for (wae) 
2. waMEe (#) wHverfeftera: for (Tze) 
Yama for (24) 
TaIEM for (wa) 
am for (z=) 
eat for (sat) (&) satatat for (satu?) 
aeat: (Tt) (@) Beat for (Hret:) 
afrefite (x) (#) eefeefatir for (ezaferyfetin) 
wei: for (Amm:) (1) (a) Sfrate for (afrit:) 
VER W RRO for (RoRRYRoo) 
anlaraste (%) ataréet for (eararésfa) 
fac terfga atal qe “ag” ® aeaq ww ema gts 
(£a%, ¥8a) 
s. BTR: for (Ups :) 
waraae (=) for (TaTaae) 
fac Tend qa Ft Gat | 
(3) 3. Sat: for (@rat:) ya: for (te) 


Ss 


Aa 

G 

nr, 

q 

—* 
ome Kw Bmw ow 


cy 
— 


enn, 
cal 
: ~— 
fw 


( 32 ) 


eafeerai at wi RUEMA aa Wag | 
Sacra ae Sra aa ae eqay 1 25 
ateryfemergreTard water vaaq i 
eeyfinattier meine aaaTASA 1 Re 
erage WIR TEATEAAT Steet: \ 

sracrrareanat arama a NRolt 


areiteorreaefamrfarergemaea hehehe: CFATTTT | 
aaa eae fa fng CARATS: Wag 


as. (1) %. ard for (aa) 
% Fea (#) Fee (a) Fea for (Feat) 
(®) 3. ar sera for eels 
(a) ¥. facet for (faa) 
gal for (qi) 
araee for (HaHTA) 
afafataratal for (eexnTya ) 
. ET for (Fant) 
. We for (TAT) 
» FRO (T)+RES00+ 
fg: for (Fa) 
HIT for (xia) 
seft for (sf) 
am for (ar) 
wtgreueiat for (Tier WEI) 
. fa: for (sf) 
‘aafa’ 9 Ate | 
miraq for (51%) 
a 
grad (71) (#) (=) for (sca) 
zasefay for (zqsetafz) 
a for (x) 
(%) ¥. egerecay for (egaRTA) 
X. gare for (Fate :) 


DAT. 





2a 


R&. 


As 


a 


7.7 
o 
— 
a) 
— 


a 


3%. 


a 
— 


RR. 


QR. 


RK. 


( x ) 


eater afeferyernerart memes: AT | 
gdacereeneé eiemagrerdite aT aR UI 

areata EA AAACET | 

a eqeer sitarent: eqeet aitenreaTa: 1093 0 

vatearitag er afer: fercren faswit 1 

wae gd a 22 aft MEAS TATA: it 2B NBN 
area teeareaa: Que HARTA: teat Wea: | 
siernareesat | aes eamdeiqeatet Navn 





(3) % 


(3) % 


ee 


(a 


_— oF 
a 


(7) 


(#) 
(8) 


(=) x. 


(=) 
(7) 


“s 


BHD eM YD wo 


aw A ro 
5 4 ° 





eaet (7) east (#) east for (ease) 
weary for (Heats) 


affirm (7) (&) (=) for (afefaar) 

@ for (7) 

wtrran for (wtaren:) 

e7g for (eqgT) 

& for (7) 3 tare for (atarar:) 
STTaMT TA 

TAT: (=) for (aaat:) 

BREA for (2ER1R¥) (#) Tear aa Ft 

afteit (=) for (sitet) 

wg wale wet to Tame e veg gi afr a ate F wie 
wer tet dt 1s 21 

ua x. samefag oe 


- war (7) (&) (a) kana for (aaweTa) 
2. FEM for (weqH:) 

(®) 3. 
(a) *. 
ay 


(a) 2. 


ate: for (ar:) 
Bethes for (griey) 
aeaat for (arerat:) 
war for (wATq) 


( 3X ) 


guieefeframmage: 35 qatraatang | 
<fameayETT 30 aahafefateqeea: 3 r 


STATA Gs NTERT ART TINT BM FET | 
Rta 2 BeTSAT ATT: 30 Ul 


4%. (4) ¢. gdaafete for (gaiactefa) 
% +R3+(7) (3) 
3. a (a) (*) (@) (=) for (a) 
¥. fae (7) for (fea) 
% + 23r+(7) (a) 





(a) &. cat for (cAT:) 
(%) fo qa ¥ sitfea deat get aca Z| 
(@) . tar for (art) 
s, qaletaq for (zateaatd) 
&. rat for (FaT:) 
(4) 0. wat: for () 
Re. (a) %. Tr (%) & for (wr) 
| 2. TAT EIST: 1 8% for (aaa: 3% eqEt:) 
3. areasat (1) () for (HET) 
x. fa (5) (%) (3) for (fr) 
x. at: for (4:) 


(a). TRRMETRT: BY for (we: 2% eTET:) 
3. aTeTa for (HeTsAT) 


PLL LALLA LL LADD LL LSD EL LLP LLL ALL AO 


PPS SIS 


Cae) 
aeafatsttfinen give feag utara gaat l 
Re 
afietagarit great eget matt NSU 


acegenteta: art: ve atregeafefereecnantiet \ 
Sefamtfaattat: BRIO eqaeatet HACITT WE 











as. (a) 2%. oo uF or (sfarar) 
2. ae (=) for (232) 
: 4: ve (=) for (7) 


aod (7) (#) (&) Hy ) for (eget) 
wafe (1) (#) wafer (@) wate (=) for (wadifa) 

ne q pe coe z (4 a) Yo! deat 48 
(=) w. fearé for (faz) 

Fao yer H at rh ere gee | 
(@) 5. gatare: for (gateatet) 

&. BrHratel for (HTHaTet) 

(4) & gragict for (qraatet) 


_ (8) & wove (#) for (9) 


R WRK (7) (A) for (2¥R1¥0) 
3. erétreal (7) ergteeat (a) for (eRérrat) 
(@) ¥. teawTiaT for (craTitaT:) 
4. feratat: (@) eatattar for (feraitar) 
(a) & aT TET | (gaetterege ofefireetraaf) 
&. FO Ta —F & Feedster ee BS o¢ are wear 1 
fro Gar vette gtaré fe fatter qa ate feraar yer aT | 
sat deat SaAET F 
(@) & wat AT for (TeATTAT:) 


(@) 5. dcqe for (aeege) & afehH: for (afefiz) 
%. fesiaitan: for (feratat:) 


we 


ve. (a) 





( a ) 


wane nelisa” THRTET a meat aa | 
welt dag fenfrge: eat afte eyemET U¥oN 
ney feremreregferaTeTSaeT WT EE | 
aed eRe afefirrt wae aentaeg Uveu 


PALI DADD LAL LLL LD LAI PILL LLL IL LSD IP PPD DA DPD PPL PS 


ta (7) (%) (@) Hae for (A) 

2. wat (a) (™) for (ax) 

3. HeqsaHy (%) HeqaHt for (HeTAHz) 
. afte: (x) (=) for (xf) 

&. fearfaga (@) for (fafrga:) 

© eget for (egeT) 


(@) 5. at (@) & for (sé) 


(=) 
ve. (4) 


&. aeaitet for (a=ete) 

g. agsicies (x) (%) went (@) queer for (ze) 
2. safax (1) saat () safaz (a) safex for (sare) 
3. BanaThr: 1 (at) (&) wermertfr: for (warhteq) 

¥. aaftaar (%) (@) gferarer for (asia) 

y. Wet: for (wT) 

&. egfe for (ez) 

3. maaAThT for (wah) 


Q. agdana for (wer) 
2. satat for (saT#z) 


3. wena: for (wathreq) 


( 35 ) 


grentengritiat earemn genta 
shomtniamaegeyeyrt ganfeen Nee 
afteraet sirastaref areata faaatg 
matin amare fraratg altered v3 





IPAS LPL 


v2. (4) &. yrRaatargar (1) (#) Yraategarieet for (Yrmatareafast) 
R. eReTHEY: (1) (H) SRETHRh: for (eRETHrAI:) 
3. ataafa (a) sttetfa: for (attertfa) 
%, WaT (1) YHA (w) YATAAT (@) for (Fas AT) 
4. Barelary | (1) (#) (@) saree for (gafert) 
(1) &. eareaT for (carer) 
ie, Heat (A) Ae for (Fea) 
_ (a) sa eile ar gates ar 2— 
g. aftertfa: for (attsrrfr) 
&. He Fs TT SI 
(a) 2. egerm et: for (egetHar) 
¥. aerat for (yaTTAT) 
X. HATeAT for (Haris) 
Q. after (7) (#) (a) steve (@) for (aternd) 
%. afar (tT) Fyferat (*) Fyfivat (a) for (afeat) 
3. wag for (frara) 
~(H) ¥. seter (=) for (q ate) 
x. frawag (@) frase (=) for (Frama) 
) &. aarared for (ares) 
9, atereettat for (stents) 


@R *T gfe for (gfevat) s.r for (ara) 


S| 


wy. 


¥&. 


( 38 ) 


retrretartiregryfentaratag 8a | 
atterta: state at atten aera: Teese 
samara He ardefe caggraTed: \ 
aratfearetare weeRet Wa: RIE: KN 
Ratfaa: IEMA ATE EGET: BreTet | 
aiaeg FET: quieter Wegn 
SCOUT: EBT sldurineteyaea | 








TRAY FATETCAT T fagararevedeary ui xo ul 
al plateau eu Ds a (@) atresia: (=) for (siteaf) 
2. Hate wea (7) tafe wea (a) waft er for (zea) 
3. atterfa (a) () (@) sterta for (aftertfa:) 
(%) ¥. aeatg for (weet) 
(@) X. dated for (aatteq) 
&. acamfa: for (amafa:) 
(a) 2. waft 
3. atsrifa for (attertfa:) 
(a) %. raw (a) Tea for (aTTF) 
2. ee for (eqsF:) 
(&) 3. aretha: (@) vara: for (are) 
¥. am for (aTaT) 
(a) y. Aamdt for (¢ aI) 
(=). eget (7) (#) (&) eget (=) for (ger) 
2. sat (t) at (@) a: for (a) 
(@) 3. fastizer for (fara) 


(3) 2. qatar for (qa) 


. (8) &. (a2) for (az) 


(1). east: (@) for (eBT) 
(a) * qr: for (gzargt:) 


u, ay for (42%) 


( ¥o ) 


arupfafcargfe: maiifig aiigfafiaa: 
HaraaaTTTAR waft aR vs 
aniraeag’: Ake war aafienta ATRAT: | 
HeTAHE Bw Rergrarge feaet: Wve 
shoegerete aa nemegeitd att: 
afer eHTVET TAN FTN Xo 





va. (7) &. 


x. 
2. 


— 
a 

— 
wo 


aX 


of 
CP 
“~~ 
aH -] 
— 
wo “va 


— 
al 

ee 
a 


a 


iaadgaaad 


SLL LL 


afmafefa (=) anafefit (=) for (aapfir) 

feayfafa: for (Pegrafa:) 

Ato To Fo XI LR Lo Yo Ao Fo IY) Mwioton 
Jo Fo Ho WU ¥VIXI ol o ll Yo Fo Fo WRILBWLOLo tl 
Jo ToHOM PIRlorouf 


. aaigta for (aRagty) 
. WPT for (wefH) 


wi for (7a) 


_ Regrght for (Fegrafi) 
Tata for (axia) 
. oH for (a7) 


WIM for (FTA) 
ege (7) (#) for (ger) 


+ wary (7) (%) mary for (ser) 


afrerg (@) for (after) 
metaTe for (eta) 
<n for (38) 


wyere aT for (egies at) 


- TENET for (7gTH?) 
- Fpemery for (egengT) 
» Wet HH MET Yay “eyo” sf oY 


eae Kee ate Hat 
t 


ee) 


citing sal aa ceaft ARAGARMTTY 1X1 5 
asa sttererar ger date. at fae: xe Ul 


apa: preidalighratasita cfawrary 
TUATHA AAAS TATU RR 





a 
SLPSP LPP LDL ELL DLL SILL LLL LLL LIP LLL PLL ED LL PL PLL PEL LL ELL PPPS LLL LLL. 


42. (4) 2 


2 


3. 


W. 
T 
*) 
@) &. 


— 
— 
By -4 


a at 
he 


(a) &. 
42. (7) 


3. 


(=) «. 


(a) & 
Qo, 
8%. 


g. ata: (Tt) () sates: (@) ats: for (wat) 


aa for (4%) 


2 ¥1 Sto (T) (H) for (¥IRIS ) 


waa (1) HATA (@) saTarrTETAT for (srr 
CATT ATT HTAT) 


. Saateqat (1) (#) (@) for (atzA) 
. ferat (@) (=) for (feaar:) 


smaratsdtapean for (sareasitdtrarat) 
wecafa for (qeeatc) 


a 


wearq (7) (#) (&) a for (Taq) 


2. 
3. oat ag after Rog Seite H are 2 (a) aa? 
(a) ¥. 
y 
% 
‘9 


apt: (@) weat for (aeaH:) 


. atast (&) wie for (aT) 
. fav et 1 Ye + 
. seq: (a) for (seq) 


wei ag aifsat wel at ge & (*) 
Fao for (<faatarq) 
BraE: for (ETT ) 

argue for (aiteefrdtx) 
aga for (a4) 


(=) 2. amie: for (amtTH) 2 TATA for (TaTq) 


DANIIS 


XR. 


ay, 


( ve) 


a IL LE LWT LA Fegfafatiatarn- 
ght: TeeTg | RY, gnu 
sere aaah siarorteagt ic u Y3 uN 


enpreerfaeet eager mt cfraceig | 
sea fer ciereatin’ com Th cal 





(a) 2 @xxegwy (7) ExK1 Low for (Z¥Y, Rv) 
2. waedt for (ett) 
3, Aeant: for (Aeerart) 
¥, sT&: for (sT%) 
(7) X. sffaaat: 1401 BX (@) afta (=) for (afaaat:) 
& TamreTHay (%) () 
we. Ret 
(s)  fao Gent ya Hat ae EF 


(@) 5. care firt for (aarcfira) 


(7) &. fr for (Fir) (7) (%) (@) oft for (uty) 
R Taeaterrat (1) warren (@) for (qearetay at) 
3. fret (1) () (1) for (fae) 
¥. Gt (m) () for (et) 
(#) 3. warren for (wyzaTaN at) 
X. paar 
fa) &. efereng for (efrrretq) 
6. Teme for (erat) 
&. dtareafrdt for (dtareafne) _ 


(3) 2. waa for (ETAT) 


44. 


(* ) 


Faeroe yferar qaten SREAEATTT 3x80 
seeramrattar Prqagy afar afag: Teeal 
surearrerifersarentigeten RoRRRE0O ANTST t 
faqaget afererer cargrereurd fata: 0 ME 


PLD ISD LIS LAL LLL ILD LL LALO LLL L LD LIL DL OLD LED LD SA AA LD SDP DAD DADE P DL LD OO 


(=) &. 
. +3e9e+(7) (3) 

. FE FETT Bet I SAN F TANF 1 

. eet for (zgr) 

. fagagfevatirer (2) Prqmaferefind for (frqazrefica) 
. afeg (@) afag (a) for (afaq:) 

- +2258-+-aavat (#) qaivm (a) yes for (Fare) 
. eferat (@) efere for (afera) 

. ferartrsat for (frararrsar) 

. fagagarafarat for (fagagraferar) 


+229e+(3) 


. aa Pasar (1) (%) (@) at Pasar for (arfasar) 
. anifesirer (a) aaifetraqey for (auifgeiten) 


3. wera: (4) for (aferaa:) 


. caratare (1) earereraré (&) caraiwraré fer (zara) 
» PUOREREoof 


. SEAT for (ze) 


9. TY Bt 


(=) 2. 


¥, 


STATA for (jatar) 
faeEe: for (faeaa:) 

at iar for (afasat) 
carats for (earTetereard) 


( ¥¥ ) 


mifrarsa Faqasqre Ta great gat farfasit 
east = sarerdareat aa TECH 
eATETINS A magfaTT TATA: 

maT fratsat feerfea vufeat mea NM a 
meet RT afer af: UETTEAT RATETTY 
RUGRASEATY eagTTMaSTAT aT ven 


ae 

eS 
—_ 

ul 
— 


2 


4 
— 


Beil 
— 


. 


we 


. Tate (a i 
~ WW for (quar) 
- Eat for (gar) 
. OTe Fe (anand) ¥. ae: for (arr) 


- | (7) (%) (@) (a) for (gar) 
- SEM: (@) SET for (wear) 

. frei for (Ferret) 

- Wfor (az) 

; beat aTet + 


. tara (1) Brea errant (@) fagzarar for (fayasaraar) 
. at (7) (@) Eat for (gar) 
eee @) (#) earereratagr for (earéreristgr) 


wert: (7) for (aT) 
eet BMT for (sarersatear) 


3. eaTetera for (eaater3) 


‘Sar BIg 


- Wat: for (sea) 


wart (7) aI (e) aay for (arerz) 


- TTT (8) (=) for (ataserar) 
- TH for (am) 

. UY for (7a) 

. Say for ( (sea) 

“&. YfH for ( (afea:) 

- Bat (3) for (gat) 


Wax for RR) (a) ) Saree for Ss cilia 
% Fagg TT 





( ¥X ) 
farafaamefemrarsrsttrere | 
sem 23 geri ae efor fa: 1 go 
srrafeararaifa wefaeeT MAY soo FATT 
ated aan fem: feat werergs fea U1 ge | 
mata ax fem: A EAE CRO NTF et ATT 
arene BASE yeITAT ATA aA HT NER H 


LLDLLDL LLL LD LA LD LDP D LE LP LL DDL DD POPP DS 


So. (t) %. wat (wm) (@) wae for (eA) 
2. ag TEM Tag 
2. Fat (:) gate (#) 
(#) ¥. afes for (am) 
x. & ane gar ve ya E11 (a) 
(a) &. waz for (za) 


&t. (3) %. eaaqgat (#) (a) waraeqeT for (aay seo Fat) 

2. As ‘soo’ Beat wat a eH ‘eA’ F ATG Z (7) 
3. feran’ ea sfer & faermra vet (a) (@) fear: for (feran) 

(1) ¥. we 9a wet Gaz (*) 

(*) 4. aRafaeardifr (a) verfarardifa for (areereareifa) 
&. farat: for (fara) 

(a) 8. afer for (afere) 
5. WW =a afear for (seared sear) 

(3) &. aygat for (aggaT) 


&r. (t) &. farat (#) for (Facat:) 

% FW (7) for (FA) 
3. afear: (=) for (safest) 

(7) ¥. ag deat afar’ ak ‘aa’ S art HZ 
x. fafa: (a) ferers: for (ferra:) 

(&) &. aaa for (aaa) 

(a) ». ax for (zz) 

(a) 5. sai for (wat) ¥. den aa 


( ¥e ) 


canara: SaMEATAT ATA: cat aT: tt 
weer afteqa afrmrrera. 8 AIST: G3 
usdaTaat fama: egret fate fae | 
cai fede wat wate aart feat: Ve uN 


LI LS. 





IS. 





rt 





SL LLLDLIA 


g3. (a) fro ag aata aa sia H goer ati a ee der ar ats cae acts 
at 1 tar seta ata & fe feaftare arer ae acta feat & waa 


(@) aeaite ea oft F at cree ae SI 
(%) za fa H somes et 


(3) &. ata; for (ata) 2. aATETye for (wATATsaT) 
fro ag Rete ae aft H OYA GR IT HIT aT Ne fat aT aT a 
fafaa & 1 


&¥. (a) 2. fare: (7) (#) (=) (farnar) 
2. warat: (t) (%) Ttteat: (@) wash: (A) for (zAat:) 


(7) 3. raid (4) (%) (@) arate for (ATaia) 
fro saat zaiH TET §R ZI 


(%) ¥. teat (@) Wate for (aa) 
4. fare for (frara:) 
&. faftaat for (faftrsr) 


9. faacerear for (Farrar) 
eat Ses HEMT kz B 


(@) 5. Tatar for (seit) 


(3) 3. Aad for (Arai) 


( ¥s ) 


poagiend ape Hfiy ageTETA 
Rreaa’® arnt freged aferearera” ney U 

RE BAT NE ara: Bho TARE | 
SmaTUTA Taree BANS fafarerag neen 


PLDI LAD DLL PPL LD LIP LD LD ILD ID LAD DDL LD DDL LDP ALD DEL DS IPP SDS PLE LI ID IPI SLL DD 


SX. (4) ag atte ce ofe H araed aat 2 


(™) 2. 


2. 
3. 


(=) v. 


faa Taga: for (Feara agit) (a) wages for (ATFeaH) 
agers (%) (@) (=) for (aa) 
fraser (%) fread’sar (a) Prevacaart: for (Freres art) 


wai: (@) for (asf) 


4. AT for (art) 


&&. (af) & 


(7) 2 


(#) 3. 
¥. 
y. 
&. 
(a) &. 
&. 


(=) Qo, 


fao cael sale Fe S¥ 1 


. Fregersfa for (faxged sft) 
. freaga for (faerga) 


aaraa: for (aearq) 
ae aaite BY HTAeAT EX TI (7) (F) 


+s+(3) 

meet for (azat:) 

wat (et) caea for (wea) 

stat (=) for (aex) 

fafaerg 1 && ul (a) fafa aera for (fafaaaerq) 
aqaarar for (srReret) 


aa for (at) 
| for (4) 


wade i §¥ for (&&} 


( ¥s ) 


fd airearfat agra encanee freremt \ 
seifernafarea an fererer at aifeyaria 1&9 uw 
sor afefa erence feanfracia, arate \ 
eqenfreeana acaafeecrat fectiisag West 

fs HAT VISCATT: 


AAR AAADA RADAR PAPAL DPD PILL LILLIA LAL SILI 


gy. (3) 2. ferme for (wfrfrre) 
fro caat atta wer &% Zt (7) (*) 


(&) 2. agg for (agar) 

3. eqgTa for (eTgIz) 

¥. sfrarerft for ( firateattt) 
&. Hey Te yt 2 

we. sadtarare for (eafersataa) 


(a) ¥. aarenfa for (frarerfz) 
5. UW && WW for (gett) 
gs. (3) ¢. +afafa+ (7) (a) 
2. aft tear: (Tt) () (@) Tee: for (afrxer) 
3. fadtatrq (1) (=) for (fedtatsr7) 
aa eetH Feat go 31 (=) 
¥. ‘sf’ —& ‘eqra:’ an get afed adi ga afer F Far Fw 
sale & 1 (%) 
(7) ¥. at for (sar) 
&. wt (a) Fea for (Hx) 
. fararraue (@) fercfraug for (fartfraed) 
¥. ‘afe sttrafrars epfeantfnard fefoa’ ae ale atx a Fert 
Bre, HTT H Sax fea war 3 1 
(#) 5. ofefa: for (afefa) 
(3) %. -bafafa 2. team: for (<eqma) 
¥. “afer a ‘mena: aH shee wat 1 


( ve ) 


qafratfagt Fea Brat fereeren: | 
gat: arhaaaremeag tgaafaa? ue 
TETRA eaMeUTE RATES 
ate TIT stg afaat ater ue 
SANTA TAT Greg watereveTy 


3 


9 . . x. 
WASATCH IT EAST: 1 3 


Te TR ee tent bndeby reciundpep ue iiss: 
*. (8) 2. fae (a) fag (#) farg (@) far for (Frat) 
2. fewreaa: (7) ferred: (©) Ferrera: for (Parrerer:) 


(7) 3. sganfrat (#) (&) for atgqafaat) 
(#) ¥: aa (@) sere for (aeT=qTz) 
(®) >. fern: for (ferrrete:) 


X. yea: for (qatra:) 
(=) 2 fet for (fax) 
2. (8) &. gerne (%) frerrasaey (@) freraass for (garn- 
TTT) 
(7) &. Freres for (Farr) 
2. aft for (af) 
3. BEIT (%) Kaa for (RTT) 
(#) ¥. a for (tz) 
4. aTeaTq for (ara) 
(&q) Go aaa fret erat aia what qUaT 
TUT STAT: sratecat Tea: 2 frau: 
(7) ag ite eet ‘of’ HF ae sh ‘ea & art F sowed 2 
(F) ag ate ea oft wel 1 
(=) ae eile aa oft F aey et 
% (3) &. ae (m) () a8 (@) (a) for (&f) 
%. Fae (7) ga (H) ga (a) for (ga) 
3. geftat (1) yefircar (=) geftecet for (aire) 
¥. qsaat (=) for (Hea) 
(=) &. ar oz gerd (@) at 
(@) & W gare 
9. Feat for (wer) 3. afta for (qatar) 


(ae) 
sergtoniny ei ara EAT | 


Pager area aed eT NY 
sigarener at ape meat Aa 
TOTEM apretteree ate: wy 
Fareed grat gent simatic FATT | 
frereafeaaera: smd sata farted nen 


LS. PILL LSAL PLD DLS 








SLIPS PSS 


%. (3) &. stata (a A si for (a¢setaT) 
2, . Brae Fit for (fayazerar ATeqT) 
3. yee (1) yateart (%) ystersit for (qaeaT ) 
(7) X. Brarqar for (#atyzaT) 
(#) 2. fagaeinn for (fagararm) 
(a) ¥. gareta for (gareta) 
3. ysteare for (yreT ) 
(3) &. getgtat for (gesetat) ¥. garatat for (gareiar) 
2. fazer for (fagazarar) 3. ysitert for (ameara) 


y. (1) &. eat (Tt) vet: (&) Te: for (TAT) 
2. wt ae sf Fae ot (7) (#) (a) 
x. Ww at for (aT7at) 
(1) 4. TH: (@) aE: for (ax) 
(=) &. atfar for (atfe:) 
(@) ». seat for (sT=7) 
5. TH for (Tat) 
(3) & Torea for (Tere) ¥. yay for (yar) 
&. (3) &. wafa (#) for (aft) 
(®) 2. farrer (a) fegre® for (feret) 
. 3. fey (a) aay for (at: 
(@) ¥, aiatdennfed for (eshte) 
4. fagHey for (farreq) 
(3) 3. wat: for (aat:) 
&. faafed for (fara) 


Ce) 


ageagrreron aaa Hay 
“faqaenetgeT alten TF WOU 
serrate: arn ENT a HAST BT | 
aura SATaTS” FAMAPTT NU 


PLS PLS 


io. (&) 8. 
% Ff 


(7) 


(a) & 





PLADL LLL LAS LL ADD LDS 


azar (at) asa (@) aeat for (azar) 
a (=) for (34) 


. fags fafage (7) fagate frgafa for (frgaa) 


3 
x, 


autaet (1) (%) Fetisrret for (satire) 


y. ageira: (w) agar (a) aga for (aga) 
. Ray: Bar (=) FUGA for (=atarar) 


. +fagaft+ (=) 


+fagata+ 
euaal for (waicran) 


. aeaMt for (svat) ¥. walter for (afar) 
. Sifegrat for (wife: grat) (@) eaastaatfe for (eeasiar- 
wife) 


. OF: - (a=) 


fagsat (#) weat for (za) 


¥. FarTaeaat for (ystaasarat) (@) ysat for (pit) 


cad 


(*) 


% 
‘9. 
G. 
é. 


(a). 
(a) 2%. 


aq: for (FA) 


. aT (8) a: for (Brat) 


reat (a ) at for (avat at) 
qaeware for (qa =aTeTe) 
guredisearay for (arate) 

aaa ails Ge & 3, Ha: ae AAs I 
ara for (arf) 

atfe for (arf: ) 3. Fa for (ea) 


( 4) 


tg ayer getfeaem ofrecer TUEAAT | 
Het errarersterd ere gE: wea 
faqacerigt at ag sare rm \ 

fasd fastaz stat carat waectat U Qo 


rH 








8. (=) &. qaat (a) gaat: (m) eat: for (Eaat) 
2. yt (#) (@) for (aa) 
3. HaTenstada (e) wavered for (earesteaae ) 
%. aéqahm: (#) aeaarm: (@) Tega: for (TeTATAT:) 
(=) X. qerararet Fad: for (TAAATTETAT) 


&. aedare (a) aeaarert for (Tea) 
zuat ale Feat o 2% 


(@) ©. Fara for (ara) 
(3) 3. water for (weaves) &. geal for (ta¢TsT) 
to. (a) 8. Stat arefaratatt (#) (@) saraetareratt for (stare atertat) 
R. Swaetay (%) arvaat (@) sASATAT for (# SAAT) 
%. ara|@t (7) (*) Braet (@) st for (gran) 
(*) ¥. aaraiat for (eared) 


(%) ¥. Pretec (&) fast for (fasaae) saat ate dear 22 FB 
ne 20 feat 
; 


(a) & fagearted for (faqacrutg?) 
(4) 3. Sarena for (arama) 
2. Aeterna | 


PLS. 


gt. 


( 4) 
wat go ceatiaresiter sotacreasieasy | 
RHA GT eTeAT THT gg 
aarersarad sree wa: We aa 1 
WIA AANA ‘tata raat naz 
gufeata’ rate raistetier fragerat \ 
matte arearat ararartacanral eee 





(a) g. dareteremersat (at) aeration () statettarg (q) for 
(etatarg stsasar) 
(1) %. ag der ga 8 (#7) 
% sire safareet (#) steear (@) sreareand for (sivas 
aera) 
(#) ¥. wat for (waa) 
(a) %. waereng for (araterg) 
y. Favat for (ast) 
(a) &. aavatata for (atatara) 


8. (=) : srasaed: (1) sTsafasatge: (a) sre fava for (sresarge:) 


area (at) (#) ne . (aTea:) 
i | aashata (at) (#) (@) asttatar for (fratftaian) 
Bag (1) (5) fo Gs) 
(ut) X. aa (@) af for (af) 
(@) &. steat Pasat for (starsat) 
%. qaTHay for (aA) 
(4) %. stsa for (sre) 
2. araT for (atea:) 


23. (4) &. faardeaater (@) feargarata for (farrdaaia) 


(wt) 2. seria (@) sreat (@) serret for (wre) 
(@) 3. tava for (atzaia¢) 

Y. gravel for (garet) 

y. wet for (aartat) 

&. srFatat for (areatat) 

e. (aT YA e 
(3) %. farésaia for (feréaaia) 


(  ) 


Ragafagaat enghersara” TEAM | 
sarge eae fetter exetewaret: Teal 
Frgerdreratat feeneterreer afr 
coranfacred amen eeteaaTeT: ayn 
sora aHTReTRTERT Pea | 


earaterata” EATTATTIATTOTTAT 1 25 
gy, (a) 2. a ) (% flesh a ) for (at) 


(1) (# ) ward for (znd) 
: pee AY q! Ve pues 
. taryt for (eaTat) 
a asa ate: for (eas ETAT) 
waré for (trae) 
AGSH MAT: for (ATeTsATA: ) 
ware faaeaet for (warefeenet) (@) wrarg for (uae) 
we () (@) wa for (ad) 
feearer (a) farerert (@) fata for (fate) 
ed (%) for (@) 
waaet for (wate) 
wats for (assarfiz) 
artaafar for (arrercrft) 
SR: for (ata) 
Fraretrt for (fraréizra) 
Tenfarra for (assaf) 
aifarerargar (x7) ait at aecargar for (atfarerratgar) 
ISAT for (Fava) 
a: (@) gaveatatar for (zat) 
¥. waar: for (maar) (@) sTatrereraat for (araiaeeaaat) 
(%) ya aeite agt comer aah 2 1 Saw ater sifea 
(&) %. arearer for (arcetar) 
(a) 4X. Sarath aiftaea for (sareerfereeifirear) 
R. TTACTSAT 
2. gaTeTay, for (gar) 


a 


“oo 
on Oe 
2 @ @ 


a ee ai, 
al A 
Sr 


“—, 
All 
~~ 


ro 
a 

_— 
4 

— 


Si 


( x ) 


para EAgAT age aatq RTH: “mee \ 
SEAM = SEMA arerfere! FM nye ne 
efit were: AT TUT: shremgfatien: 
ufsrnenfacteat SHAG RA SSTS: sitet: tb gs 


SSIS S. ISS 








PPLDPL ILD LLL LLL LPI LIL LLLP IDS IS PII O PIL - 


Ye. (a) %. Baga: (7) wager (*) (@) Grgar for (gryar) 
RX. HWE, CERN, LARA, VEEN, VRoot 
3. aiicererear: (Tt) (&) waters (@) HSAs eM for 
(SATHAPATAT: ) 

(7) 2. wet ate dear et at 7s 1 

(@) ¥. carergfr: for (eraerafr) 
Y. BATH for (aAteHAet ) 
&. : frat aca gz 
e. Rath for (Rat) 
s. EaT We UTS 

(3) %. Saget: for (qrgar) 
3. BAHAR: for (HA THATEAT) 
®. aR for (aTH) 


Rs. (4) &. wamtern for (Seaceiteat:) (1) wa: (#) saa: (@) a4 for 
(sun) 
% +esoo(@) + 2+ 
(7) 3. yererer: (@) for (FART) 
BW. PREG, VORY, TERK, LER, CHAM, LQVop 
y. Foy seo for (Heat) (H) Ae: for (aeat)- 
&) &. vfaygegtrere: for (xfer yaa Uet:) 
(@) ©. yar for (TaT:) 
&. afa: weet: for (gfric:) 
(a) & e+ wee R+ soo 
PERK 
PRQR 
Raye 
Ryoo-f 


to. namhaRqeet 


( xe) 


sence AT Ge a ATR 
geewam ga ara Te: Gor: ge | 
dratfieag afuarreas gate gfaFrrg | 


artim faxat sferex zat HA AMAT Ul Yo uv 





we PP LPLLL LPL ALLL ILI 


28, (H) &. gedg (7) Yergeat: (*) Yerqea: (a) for (Yarn) 


(@) 2. wer for (er) 
3. mA for (HAT) 
¥. ataa: for (ara) 
y. ‘Bem gear Ft 


PER 
PERK 
RRay 
RHok 


2. Yeqear: for (yeeneT) 
0. (a) 2. Aatep ae (7) arferae for (Saif) 
2. afar: etreae for (afivataeat) (7) TAA for (wea) 
(®) afrgaeitem: for (rerygtea) . 
(#) 3. wate for (sfx) 


(=) &. “a free sain % Feats F fea cal dk ws Ft 


(@) 2. aenferreqa for (asifaag afrar) 
2. Far for (aa) 
¥. argh for (ydtearafirz) 
x. fade for (Fata) 


&. meat for (ae?) 


(3). Serreggfivet: 30 FRA for sy — afar) 
8, eH SOT Be 


( x) 


<fecramnyerfacrengea afer zat agnanta: ge00 | 
ati ATTEN: farce TENT UREN 

areal et 5 Rater mre | 

ferme re sires earfaaeaag WRVN 
aefarparetenterettt entra Bet ATTY | 
sifirer sre STE: qatameaTy Wz 


PLPPPP PS LID ALD DD PPL LLL INA LIPID PI LALLA A ADD PDD LID EL DDE 


st (0) 1 aA) ee (e) er (@) 
t) (%) (@) aeetenfa: for (weratfa:) 
cual a ) (@) sergr for (xergerq) 
. tfrcreage (7) (*) (@) cfrafrge for (<acaae) 
. weTTTT: (@) wert gra: for (astra) 
mre: (@) sre: for (sTatr) 
. Vaeraye for (eatery) ¢ Eat for (gat) 2 ag for (we) 
aT: for (sar) 3. Wet for (wet) 
uaftg (#) (a) aft for (afar) 
frauerat (7) ferauat (*) farazerat for (faszerti) 
aa for (Ht) 
T Te 
. aq for (afaa) 
feraqerat for (ferrrerat) 
. craita for (ufer) 2. Tarai for (wera) 
. earfrasagy: for (earfraergy) 
_ arttea (a) (#) (#) satea (5) for (aetaa) 
wrt for (stay) 
act () (@) for (aa) 
wag for (89) 
arm: (@) for (staT:) 
TATA (A) HATTA for (wITUTA) 
( eeetee ) lt 23 TT 
Ufafaiag fea gett srorsinrtg for (ofreanfiniag 
wat TTRITT ) 
» aN for (stra) 


7-_— NN 
4 4 aA 
~~ Ss ee 


ws 
Aw 


ao 
ae 


-_ 
ry 
~~ 


Aa 
aw 
— 
xu 
~— 
wo 


a 


— 
A 
— 

fl (GU8™ 25 Se 


a 


. 


Starr 





( x8) 


staat: merTafreshat gercfatiaetrg 
graye Sree AHA WU 
TeAATETETE chatacters \ 
arnfcmen aan extra aafaat RY u 
~ Farge garat fecferorert etereeactE: 
SaaarARTT savare’ fararfane: am: WRU 


LPI LDLL IA 


2%. (4) %. ae: (7) ahs for (am) 


(7) 2. seargft for (sergfa) 

3. gare (a) Gree for (qrAH TATA) 
(@) ¥. water for (wataT) 

4, way for (eT) 

&. wat: for (#ret:) 


(a) ¥. watgt for (satat)® waH for (AF) 


au. (8) &. wa Xevereara: (a1) watreareseare: for (waerareaeate:) 


2. atta (7 (#) (@) atetaz for (AeNTz) 
(t) 3. ware (*) (@) (=) for ward) 
(®) 9. Tatateterrg: (@) waeaTeTeaT|T: for (TaetareTTATg:) | 


(a) ¥. werga: for (aaga:) 
%. Sarfaarey for (sarfase) 


(a) 2. TataTeTETE: for (ratreTeTeATg:) 2. atarax for (a Fiaz) 


8. (a) &. faanferaaty: (=) for (faranfaraag:) 


q. Pavargat (=) for (freer) 
3. Baraaataqay (a) for _ BRrareaTaTT) 


(Tt) ¥. Se (%) aves: () for ee. 
(8) 4. aang for (araré) 





( xe) 


Ragaenct frat yat at TRAE: aT: | 
nae fafagirren STATE Fe: ue ENT HRN 
SoM aren qfeat “fava aig GA STAT | 
sures” aga faqaeneter a Nes 
that at greafuentard sige HU: | 
Stat aagigsargagt sat fargarat tt Re nt 


a. (4) &. frac (=) for (fram) 
2. eigafafedinr (2) (=) (@) for (agetetadrrrn) 
(%) 3. ga: (@) arate for (eaty:) 
(a) ¥. Ga eT for (TEwzT) 
(#) arenes: for (gree) 
2. sigafafiginat for (stgetefagtera) 
as. () gs (5) (#) (@) Ge for (7) 


R. Ft for (#xt) 


AU 


| FARE (A) EERE 


cy 
—— 
x 


_ sqaréBeed for (aang 3xea) 


~_ 
A 

— 
ge 


| a (@) for (@) 
(a) ©. aigat for (sg77) 

38. () &. wt for (ze) (7) (@) (@) gaat for (eee) 
(#) 2. saree (@) sara for (arate) 


(@) 3. aT for (Fat) 


PPPS SSS SLL SPP SSP SSIS 


. (a) & rrré (1) (5) (& ) ward for (aad) 


& 


Ro 


( t ) 


sangha! a ee Ferenfereseat Be: 
senate rer eae TeMS TA FAT IN Ro Ul 
omrareett afer frasereta an wae 
SEAT Ae aig ere WIEN 


DAL 





2. caret (1 ) (@ yf (saraTé) 
3. we (a) (#) care (@) for (waz) 


¥. at (m) (%) gat (@) GT for (gaT) 


(a) %. sta (#) (&) for (art) 


&. ataaife for (atzarfa) 


(a) ©. Ju for (qa) 
(=) 2. ward for (eae) ¥. gat for (gar) 


2. (a) 9. satardafa gogereoo (m) amTaTeHfs 2o%RREoo for (aaTAT- 
eafa) 


2 afigat (t) (#) (#) for (afiran) 
a. raf (m) (%) (@) (=) for (wa) 
¥, eater: (m) (&) at ara: (@) aaa: for (ara:) 


%. Bftac: (7) sfrgm: for (a) 


(t) &. ageatere (&) (a) ager for (sigenaré) 
(=) &. arardafit togeRe00 for (arardaft) 2. onto (afer) 


¥. saTata: for al 


(Se) 


arctan a3 Resear faqaeratia: ® ate: | 
FUT Sater arena eve a¢ grat uaz ui 
HEUTE afe agaacreaa: feaferstt 

grt sitter eagtentnaat TEER 
eargierraganafirert  Rafeam gatagte l 
BIqweasalAsy arag fara qatatett Teal 





(a) & 


VPI 


(*) for (xt) 

(a) aa (%) for (#a:) (@) ‘ee ve aera 
(+) (#) (@) for (a:) 

aufeasat (#) (@) for (sa) 


BU: 
ay: 
et: 


. ot: (#) (@) oe for {TUT 32 feasa) 
. Brat: for (gra) 


went qa H afaa we gt 


. daea for (Fae) 


aatragrat for (af ee¥ Te Brat) 


. UTaTaTHHATT YX for (atatarayTT 22) 2. ae for (ae) 


wut: for (=a) 
gaat (7) (=) for (gaat) 


. WTMATAT for (weTIEAT TAT) 


yet sete afer vet {Fae char faret es 21 


. BTA for (HT) 
Q. waveferarat: (at) eareteravacafaraat: (@) for (earaterare ae 
wafeteay:) 


qaatfasat for (qaacasat) 

Fasat (%) (a) Fasat (=) for (fisar) 

ge for (gfasar) 

aie: for (ate) 

ererrartgaatrqa: for (arated qaraferat: ) 
fafaser (a) fafastaat for (ferfrsaar) 

geataat: for (qeneferyat:) 


( & ) 


Began geet Ferrel wala aT ae 

arse sa sare Fears aaat UT Fe: Wag u 
saaradt asm eargicroma! Ha Fw | 
aaa A wee a SaTRATEAT ae: Wag 
aA BATT gat aT Ft a Be: | 
surat a ag wenft gent aa gz faq uv Reu 


rr 


3%. () 2. aT JOT for (at) (wt) TUT for (ar) (*) FIAT for (at) (wz) 
; wat: for (areat:) : 
g. agar (7) (#) (=) for (Sze) 
(a) & acfeat (#) feet (@) Uk: gmt for (weigeT 
(@) ¥. sary: for (gaa) 
(a) %. aRRUTHAT: for (ate) 


24. (4). qeareattemeat (7) (#) (*) for (eared wea) 
2. erate aye fawrq 1 (7) ereerergagai feat for 





(eaerreare aya fart) 
3. SARA SaTaAT for (Aearaareay) 
(4) 3. sarasar gar () qeaTRavaTAAaT (@) for (Qrateaazar) 


(*) ¥. dgany (*) eae for HTM 
(@) 2. qeaaaterrst for (qearaat eAsaT) 
2. caret for (erator) 


4. BAAT for (AAT) 
(=) 2. eareterara’ for (eatete=aTs) 
¥. St for (ay) 


Re. (3). srerritcmrengtat (7) (#) (@) for (sreraat wavaTAai) 
3. Ber: (7) (a) Bet for (3:) 
(a) ¥. ‘av’ afafon oe 
x. waht for (Heft) 
&. refrag for (wefaea) 
(3) %. srarecieeterget for (seearaat aavatéiai) 3 Bat: for (Fz) 


( 8) 


erat aet FEAT faqaerart aq ya 

aad ata: fafereen grage TC 
apie exer eargterata weERTEEG: \ 

FAR Tet TF ara sta aera: wal 
Rematedaare: serena at faeteaTe 
STATS Qt HAGA ae wat: ATT: Wt ¥o 
SaTETTATSA ararartt se AeTAT | 
faqaerat TAAL = sqrargye: wT AA UE N 





Rs. (at) &. Pasar (m) (@) Pret for (asa) 
(F) % agw for (aya) 
% eget (@) for (sg) 
(a) ¥. faa for (frat) 
x. aterereay for (atta) 
&. Sarat for (saa) 
Re. (a) &. ward for (rate) 
2. wea: for (AHATATT:) 
3. set for (sTet:) ’ 
vo. (7) & earatetemices (7) emaraifetetona for (arate Sate) 
2. Fat (#) aa for (aaT:) 
(t) 3. esq: (*) Fema: for (Hess wrTT:) 
(s) ¥. BR ga? 1 (a) 
y. Sater (a) Batera for (Bare) 
(@) &. faaterart for (frettearerz) 
(a) 9. amerefastens for (rad Bet a) 


¥e. (a) g. wera: (%) (@) for (areata) 


(@) 2. mated for (Hate) 
(a) 2. 


¥., 707 for (quar) 
4%. Ha for (Ha) 





< 
au 


Bs 


a 


¥y. (a) & 
2 . ArATT (7) (A) Aearag (a) for (ai wrag) 
mT) 2. 
(x) x. 


( «x ) 


waged oH area aqTaTTTaT: ’ 
ateaga faatt MTT HATTA: HTT: RN 
ae rTaTsaaTe: BAIA fattest TET | 
agemasttanti: gateatar: OTT: Nn eR 
farerner’ ten mrareatigat aaa \ 
Suet agferta ran: STMT: NYY A 
ALITA ita re ea Ae AGATST | 
magia wate faa ad wee eK 


— > oO 
AAAS 


| 


~~ 
at 


VETTTE ae ae 


(=) 


a) 


mma: (@) sry: for (ae:) 

areat for (are) 

qTaAT for ( TAzAz) 

wat for (Trt:) 

sTraeat for (sPTTTAt:) 

ageamasttarta: (7) (&) (@) (=) for (aqeaasitarfi:) 
wat (*) aa for (Fat:) 

marraraaarg (a) mebraraeret for (we@trasaarar: ) 
ara: for (sTaT:) 

wares Ta 

fearataar: for (feargaan:) (7) (a) fearéaa for (fearéaar:) 
aTRaT abt arcat for (ater) 


oS for ( aug.) 

Sia for (star) 

. ferratraora: for (ferrg tar: srat:) 
. Agfetratacr: for (aafeargaar:) 


maser (Tt) (%) (a) aaa for (Asa) 


qate (&) qatg for (qatq’) 
frawad for (fara) 





x 
an 

7"— 
re) 

— 


a 


Pd 
e 
ae 


7 = 
— — 


No 
4 
~~ 


Al 


x 
oo 


( %& ) 


Temaattareatar area dae (@) aqgat 


oreatagat irreatina: gaara uve U 
ferncarat aicarerorrattite areata: | 
TT aR MT, SAAT aa: tvs 

ATATTTAT aremryeratTeraT garerteny 


gtefearearat aateacaifaaraian nyc 


— 


. ferret (7 


ee ee i ae re 


) (®) (#) wae for (Wee) 
wa: (7) (%) (@) (#) for (ata) 


gener 1) qdactay for (qda=3s) 

. aims for (zaet) 

. Hag for (wgw’) &. egy for (wqtgsT) 
. fermeare (7) (#) (@) for (ferrearef) 

. erat (7) () (@) for (wieaTe) 


TAAMTTTATAAT Fo (eT) TTHETATTAMTAa: for (TANT) 


staat: (@) stearararmey for (sataar:) 
warafeat: (#) warafeat: (@) wareatfest: for (araafeat:) 


. Met aat: Sat (%) (@) Sat 3. for (sravataar: Far:) 


TAT aTATTAga: (Se) TATMTTaa: for (ATAPTATaTT) 
area: =: for (ast:) 
farneargt for (ferrearat) 


. wie for (wie) 


wareafaatt: for (araeafeatt:) 
aTATATTATTAAT &o for (ATAMTATT) 


: emt (7 (%) (@) gareeay for (gareret) 


) 
at (@) Fw for caren! 

(+) faaretat (@) ferratet for (fearaiat) 
araqarerara (a) steaqetaaa for ( ea) 


. Sata for (saaT) 

. feardat for (feataizr) 

- Eatorae for (ZaTeTETT) 

. Fay for (at) 3. feral for (feria) 


( %& ) 


sre ommg grea mM: | 
HTETATRY STANTS qe at N ¥en 
qeaicaTEM RATT mareneeuat | 
meee Baral sere TT Xo U 
Fagen qe Saga BATT miter: | 
TETRA HGAMAT TAT WEI 





¥e. (@) &. gare for (arr) 
2. Feareey (at) (%) HURTS aT for (HTAIT FE AT) 
%. greeted ¢¢ for (gteated) 
(t) ¥. ae for (3w) 
(@) ¥. careré for (arené) 
t. ‘Mea Te Ta I 
2. EaaT for (MIRMat) Tat eed cfs ‘area’ J areT g 1 
(4) %. erat for (arat) 2. setacas at for (wTeaat Ie aT) 
Xe. (#) &. Seat (7) (#) (&) (=) for (gaat) 
(Tt) 2. caeat (=) (a) for (eatear) 
3. aTettat (@) wet ar: for (wwTaf) 
(#) ¥. sasaT (@) wearsa: for (axaTeAT): 
(@) ¥. Hergrat for (FeqaraT) 
(3) & sag fea 
42. (%) ¢. fagaarar (7) (@)‘fayazgrar for (fagaeerr) 
2. EarTT for (Kiteer) (*) Harearae for (grareatazt) 
3. aeaterarar (at) qarersaTat: (we) TeATAsTTAT: for (aZAaTA- 
asaTat) . 
¥. amt (=) for (a7) 
(1) X. ag (#) (@) Ie TT for (aE) 
(®) &. faqaeraty for (faqarta) 
3. Faaesarat: for (TLAAATT) 
i. Heaters for (Fete sz) 
@) y. fataerat for (faqararat) 


% om for (gira) 4 aaeTSATAT for (agrees) 


( a ) 


aa faa eTTSTTT TUTATTTSAT_ WAT | 

sat araaryfenat Farge Pavitt AT NAR T 
gTaat Fagaeerer afer garrerstasta oT 

mae SRATETET wad TAR are N ysl 
sete aaita aa ante RRYERKO we gee pfraiud | 
aaa grenfreasann aat gaat: Teel 





42. (1) &. saateat (=) for (sqatsear) 
a. fayaeran (7) for (Fayre) 
(7) 3. feria for (frrartsaat zat) (a) 
(=) ¥. saTq (@) a7 for (aa) 
(@) ¥. Fuerateat for (qaresaatsear) 
&. ‘saa ya We FI 
9. farm for (frat) 
(a) 2. fayararat for (faqa=arr) 
43. (#) %. fagaarar (7) (=) for (fagaearar) 
2. ae (7) (*) (=) for(@t) 
3. Bre for (arat) (7) (M) PaeTT for (FTE BAT) 
(@) ¥. yermer for (gate) 
4. aT for (au) 
(4) 3. Brat for (ara) 
ye. (a) &. ee for (arte YR¥E¥¥o) (7) aU (@) aA for 
2. Ratgfagfiad yxy (a) otgfa for (He ey sfagfind) 
3. arate (7) (&) (@) sreteitat (=) for (ara) 
¥. fagzarar (7) (=) for (faga=erar) 
4. EAA: (7) (F ie ete (ar) 
(+) &. aut for (anf) 
9. fasar (# a) (&) for (sat) 
foo sata F at 7e Fe ee afer Haat g 
(=) 2. aatedtat gfa for (antd YRvE¥¥o AH Yx¥ ofa) 
(4) 5. aHTaT for (awTaT) & ae for (Tht) 


“s 


. THIS UR¥evuo for (aaty YR¥Evyo) 2 vA eferigd ex 


for (w% oxy afe 1 fat) 


%. EAat: for (eta) 


(&) 


Fagan SUEY ara oR eapfraarareng | 
ereaaatagti athe: ae: 1 a 
fafeai: ateaerciterete Tage wat 
RAAT afxerataearat ants: MAT UNE U 
STENT UFTAPTTATTT AAT. | 
aafafiagargraratated aul fraceay WYN 





yy. (T) 


— 
4 
~~ 


aa 


XS. 


— 
4 

— 
“oe 


vel wes 
rd 


(=) 


ys. (3) 2. 
i Q. 

3. 
(a) 2. 


a 


Gm ce pe Kw 


i 


fayrarat, (1) for (faga=arat) 

TAYAAT 92 for (ATFTAT 02) 

HAT: ATTATAAT for (FAT HATA 62) 

HUET oe ayaa (*) for (Far sarqaar) 

Torqage (a) range for (TeHaGT) 

gamard for (gaterard) 

fagegrat for (faya=grat) 2. THZAAT vz for (WATT 92) 





SLL LL LLL 


. fafeatt attract (1) faeat aterarcat (%) for (fafeat: aiva- 


ae) 
RITA (F) KT TTT for (SVT) (we) Treats for (wey 


agra (#) Tegra (@) Tara for (Tegra) 


aferarrrerat (=) aferart (@) aferaatt for (eferaat) 


sat: | (@) geet a: for (quer) 
afe for (fafeat:) 
teat for (atearteh) 


. atfeat for (atfsat:) 
2. fafeatt for (fafeat:) 3. agra for (a=erm) 


fagrarar (1) (3) fargrearar for (fagaatat) 
pulfarcgry (7) aetfrareay for (aeifaaceez) 
are (1) Trea for (TTATT) 


agra for (Faqararat) 2. walfrazgaq for (auifaacad) 


( ee ) 
UTAH aeaT FTA ATA 


faqreqrersarfcg gif aaa @t vs tt 
RTE BT Tea  AERTTETAATTY | 
aaa aay Faqrearater tags EU 
aigarenacier farqeeeratsyaTet are \ 

vara | wre BAT- auiig.a BIR NGO 


PPLI PIII PLL INI SS ISS 


us. (at) 2 
Q. 


. wat (&) for (arAr) 


(7) 


gf ww 


(F) 4. 


we. (a) 2. 


aw 


x w 


(wt) x. 
(#) & 


(=) : 





ie 


fagaern (7) (*) for (faga=arar) 
afeg (%) (*) for (satay) 


aareat for (tateat) 
qaisata for (qatat) 
agiaraayr (7) aqarazeat for (saqrtataear) 


. fagaarat for (fagacerar) (7) fagarateefrgrat () for (fay- 


araratactig Sat) 


. Rema for (zesa7) 


wear (7) (*) for (gsegrar) 
aawat for (wart) 

agearerd for (agerrer) 
agaTcaat for (AATATTaA ) 


2. fagagratax for (fagacarataz) 


ae 


aera 


. fargrat for (fagsar) 
go. (Tt) 8 


fagagrat for (fayacarai) (7) (#) fagazaraieé for (frgacar 
aisTATA ) 

aretaaire (1) for (artsy) 

aif for (arfa:) 


. fagaarat for (fagacarat) 2. qatat for (sqaiat) 





( we ) 


miferemreT sg RBWo farrarrrsa anes gaiguarat ' 
watat aarahstegaret a Lid Ugg 

warty aarat eget aeq ame arineTy | 

ates: MATTIAS HEART HAZ | GRU 





aa. (a) 2% Sy (wt) arfaeatara yer (#) for (arfereararé 
us 


a 


eratet (71) (=) (a) for (wnidt) 
sreerat (7) ster (a) for (steageret) 


. THTIT (F) wHTE (TaTsT) for (zHTZ) 


a 


«x 


Y. 2328 for (23Re¥) 

. wget (a) gat sae (*) for (aga) 

. wifseriag for (atfaeararg) 

e. is (aT) &. EAT LARLY TeHTAt for (RRR ATT 


an 


— 
ay 
— 
wo 


_ aTgaTet for (stergaret) (a) ssserreq for (sire) 
sat (t) (a) weaatseq for (wai) 


wea: for (aeqat) 


RM oe cae 


. WET: (1) (1) for (weA) 
(7) X. saga (*) sugq for (wea) 
—(%) &, saereagy for (meaqatad) (=) yer for (3) 
9, Sate FA for (Jarrqrng) 
(3) stciter for (arate) 
- aailemreati for (sepfenéatie) 
5. wad for (srg) 


( 8 ) 


sefingtierent ttre af | 
fardiavitafataar weagt. mifeerertat Sgn 
farfassa STeaTeTT ARETETYTTATTET 
feergemenys afeasa gtafateaey Nee tt 
WATAT sigaarerarcedteareanagary | 
afer: sigaet feaet cat agere: NER N 
ferarareecterereraren ey afereq | 
we wera fansaremrarqaniry een 
‘efa weared adtatser: 


wr ataert (7) vatrert (aw) waited for (afirgttad) 

R. arfsart for (atfser) 

3. ag: (1) (#) for (ae) 

¥. cearatefrafiat (1) wferrfrat (#) sterefiat for (xa 
ai aiferafaat) 


FRPP IPS. 


&3. (7) 








(+) 4. facrdtatrafat for (fartantafafiar) (=) fanfer for (fares } 
(a) &. saterert for (afergteaers ) 
¥. wearatgirafiat for (cearatarferufat) 
ev. (=) &. gat (#) (#) for (gat) 
(at) 2. gwadagat for (qUTaTaEAT) 
(®) 3. fageoey for (faery ) 
(4) ¥. at for (q4) 

GX. (8) &. aRetaretaT for (agreras) (7 (*) 
(7) 2. medtemeagarg for (wedtemreatayara) . 
(=) 3. ag: for (ag) 

RE. (4) %. feeearet for ( fararrater) 

(7) %. srarfegafzcg () (=) for (ararfeg afeezg) 
3. faseateara: for (Proearearag) 

(«) %. Btdtony for (getetaR) 

(a) ¥. aed ait for (adtart ngeit) 


fao wan HUE §& FB etrage ‘da’ aT da mea at AAT 
wear ay zatar & 4 


( wv) 

Ba | ATA: maT FETE ats: | 
afirmrercneUaAs, eater: eReTNE: neu 
ferauianaaarai faferarate vivenfeafatanet: t 
erage er arama afer WIN 
paeagaa SLA afearatg 
TATE TAT TEMG rant sera nau 
farferrertea afer genie BANATA 
vast anfacit TARTAR AAT UU 


2. (4) 2%. aafteafes: (7) for (afgeata:) 
(&) ¢. eaafueafen: for (afgeate: ) 
(%) %. qefreatte: for (afgeate:) 
2. (8) t. war faeterretirr (7) Ser fadteredtrr for (sara fafa 
arte) 





SSL 


(x) questa get race ad, af seat tar a gE 
(=) 3. faetteatettert for (fafirertedtera) 
3. (@) @ sfoqate: for (afearatg) 


%. weet (T) (#) for (ext) 
3. sfaeaft (+) (#) saearft for (xaerfa) 


(a) ¥. Reeagda for (Rareaqda) 
X. WETAT for (waa: ) 
(3) 2. Great for (queat) % sfaeafiz for (saenfr) 


X(t 2. aatyaa'a for az 


% Bt (%) (a) for (a) 


(#) t. sat gfe & ar qa’ ates ae g 
3. Hag (4) for (arta) 
(a) *. +74 


OLD PLSASS 


( we ) 


afaer (FA) Ta = coreg wtf B2Go SRT | 
fadesren: ater: we TRATAAT TEAT: 1 
vfeafargeit waETTD Ta eatin a are 
rengatergantiart meme ae oe 

Bra gan atizand fata aie GIL 

aaret §=—- rearafirs a 








PRELL A 


4. (4) &. seregy fas (at) verqafas (m) seregisfes for (weereqaiaa) 


(7) 


(3) 


“se 


fr st @ MM po K WwW A vo 


x aw Ww vo 


ee x wy 


. frarfsat for (arfsrar) 
. ¥aT: for (sa) 


PReo+ 
eat: (aH) for (HTT) 
arat for (ateat:) 


TErqriay for (ve wRgafas) 


. 7a: (%) (=) for (7a) 

- @ (7) (#) (=) for (a) 

. ara (Tt) (&) (=) for (are) 

. WeMEAHAT THE: (tT) TMNT aa: for (seTEt TH) 
. TM: Vol for (FA) 

. fart 201Q¥o (a) ft for (fra:) 

. TATE Ris (#) TeaTg for (aeatg) 

; Fat feat for (gariifaaz) 

. "gated for (seared } 


wre-(7) () for (are) 


. dre (a) (%) (=) for (ef) 
. art 1 (7) Farry (%) BATT (=) for (et) 
. OE (=) for (avs) 


fao oq sate F ats ae Peo |’ 
2¥ 


” PENA fat Z| 








(987) 


greta Baten BTA mTerairerig | 
fadtaafa sre nef & feat fanais” Nan 
aPUT faretforer feafefiracta’ aufeat TUT: canta: 1 
arat afaafarnagrrTsay aay NEU 
eratfinstird feafaas fauctg dae cea 
stareatyattert faree' eater NN 
qraracfagtateatrceratert quer ETUT | 
mE: mag aceTega: aia: Ta: U8 


SLOP PDLLL PPD LIL LL IDL LA SID 


. (3) %. Baw for (ar) 


2. Sta (7) for (SFr) 
3. fefirra (7) .(&) for (faafeafr) 
(#) ¥. geteres for (qatar) 
. farai® for (faaaté) 
(a) 2. sf for (aft) 3 frafeafa for afeafr) 


(a) 9. faadanatfzst (7) (#) for (fanatzarfsar) 
R. 3. TasFTHTETy (7) (#) (=) for (TaguTTHay ) 
¥. at: for (aTAe) 

(7) ¥. qaresfa: | (%) Gemeatfe: for (aT: earfa:) 

(=) & wig for (xfrafin) 


wo 


. (3) 2%. Frettfert (=) for (fart) 


(7) 2. vadeay (#) aed: for (wattaaz) 
(a) 3. ater for (ater) 
¥. tay for (Zar) 


. (3) &. at (7) (%) (%) for (ad) 


R. ag: for (arg:) 
. Gian: (a) () 
(=) ¥. TH for (qq) 
(®) %. aewt for (aca) 


3. gaara: for (iat: s:) 


aw 


wo 
AS 
. 


ww 
AU 


we 
x< 


ND 
as 


a 


= 


eS 


a 


— 


a 


— 


ir) 


— 


= 


~~ 


~—_— 
H 
—" 

mo 2S Re AM ee 


_— 
4 


— a 
i, ae 


~~ 
— 


(  ) 


aveafaefada: Serge sat | 

are ATER fasiter atentferat aT: WRU 
wes Trae eeAHA fatten Sf 
aratfirntadiert saaagd fafaag Nez ul 
TET feat TTFITTSMAT walt are: 

aia faster Rrerfeaeratenry aq stem nev 
eqefaed® wed smear’ feafeariiaibeastet \ 

atert catenin fanatdgray Wey nt 





“eo 


“eo 


an wo ro eK WwW BD Ho 





PPLL LDL PL LL LLL LLL 


| av af (at) went daft for (aeigha) 

. maBTTARAT (T) AGIA HATA for (MAF TATA TAT) 
. Trenrfere (t) (&) for (aeatferr) 

» Tage (3) for (aa ye) 

. afa for (fa) 

. fafrag for (fafraa) 


waEeTaarat for (THT WAHT) 
epee for (THT TAT) 
faeiter for (Paaitea) 
TTA (Tt) eeTTTETa (*) TST TreTA for (WaT) 
sitar (x) (=) for (starz) 
#94 (F) for (#84) 
feacratg for (feacratq) 
Hat for (ta) 
TET TeTTAT for (STSasTaat ) 


. aatat (%) aeitttsrafeh for (wararasfay) 


% 


wae for (ste) 


3. feafaaadtatrafat for (feafreatateasfes) 
(=) 2. samefireges ¥. fragié for (fret) 





2&. () 


( vw ) 


st carretera aa Faronrarerarais: ' 
sere: qat faa ate mea: Weg - 
anvzafagadt area f ferqerfeergerrred: \ 
prabicamiayatenis arated: W gon 
marafearafehagieat TTETATS AAT | 

gad favtadteftedeeteeat seifeat i es 0 


PLL LLL S 6 


garg (at) () (3) for (s77) 


‘2, fagasaet (7) (=) (=) for (fagasat) 


(=) 
| i 


(3) 


3. durfersaat (1) (#) (a) for (aatfasrar) 
¥. qaifeg for (qaifagag) 

x. ga (T) Fy for (Ft) 

&e Wel (* #) for (aremt:) 

: TAT fagaral for (Teataafayasay) 


i) 
5. ae for (are:) 
g. fam for (fra) 


g. annanfagatt (7) for (anisafagad) 
2. farerfar (7) for (frxgrfaar) 
3. Gatearena (7) (#) (=) for (gate) 
g. aaasateyaay for (aaizafagaa?) 
g. F HarTaTy for Se 
2 Bieerdisafeary (tT) (a) for (wraceatsafeat) 
2. Garafeat (=) for (urate) 
¥. faa for (aaa) 
serrata sarfae RAVPITTSATATETAT AT 
att fairdeitaresndismtcay Wes 


3. wrtsaibafcal for (ateistfent) 


PPPP PLAS 


ze. 


(3) 


( we ) 


sree AHA: FST: muarescateatee mre | 
TET (szt) ore: aaTETt freien’: 0 ge UN 
arafaméfeafeacracttce Ta AAEATY 
aeaTEUEAT fanfercrat ragutat MW Ro I 





af saree sqatseara: 


PPE LL ADL PALA PPL ALLL SD LLL 


g. araeaat: (7) (#) for (areca) 


“an cad 4 aw as 


e 


. Wee (7) for (ave7z) 
. shateafas for (seirafay) 


are: (gaat ties aT arerH) (7) (*) 
aaft (7) (#) (=) for (afr) 


. afrat (7) afreraa: (=) aioe: for (afretat:) 


aut: (7g wea gt 2) (#) aat va ga 


» OFF for (ayR) 
. Bateatas for (deteafes) &. afr for (ater) 


. TAA for (zara) 


waueurearay (at) (a) for (azugarrerr) 

agatay | (a) (%) for (agetat) 

‘af’ & Tee: ae sift vat 1 Fae ea AAT Gag,” 
fet 3; 


. Sameera for (axmgUrEs) 2. wyatt for (aqatat) 


ef’ & sreara:’ am aca 1 wear ata gas ME AK Py 
Wh farerart wet 


( vw ) 


emfudad & watt aemrederam came | 
aera cee vat saeutfa ema ng 
fafanerretstt araq aafaatasy waa 1 
aime wise maAsHAT FATT TATU RU 
waaacayveaat watfe sfatagadfaaren san ' 
agfacufewra: agererere n3u 

fasarget agiaaigearar BA ARETE: | 
areata ec eaaaeAA TATA NY 1 


2. () 2. 

(1) 3. 
(¥) % 

_ wenTea for (wena) 

. fafarrat for (fafaaaerat) 

. aa_ (7) sitar (F) saTeR for (sateH) 

. aeaifa (#) ay waft for (atari) 

Ba for (set) % TernifteaeR for (aaarasteT) 


(#) ¥. 


¥. (@) 


¥ 





erafudat (4) for (efqaet) 
aenrerat for (aeatear) 
‘a Te Tats 


Hae Agee (1) Tarass (#) TarAgeT for (AwTTEeT) 
. faert TH for (fara) 


. Searraga (1) steamed gy (a) sfesrecsaga for (afenta: 


Bq) 
BAN Te Te ats ar afer 7 stax seen ar areas g (=) 


t. BITIGIT (a) FaraGT LoRe2goo for (SF aA) 

2. 4 

3. Urs for (afr) 

. . wate: (a) for (wa) 

-(#) % 
(=) 


garar (7) gare: (4) ara for (gatar) 


Bi: TaGEN for (38 EET) 
RT for (SaaTITT) 


x. (a) 


@ 


n 


a 


a 


a 


CBG 9 


ereaTeE TERA arenrfarfeererT \ 

me (et f) aaa Se A oem Bra yn 
ao FUNZ saraTetegae ve ferarisrer Bae | 
aeaTATER arena harrerrarat at NEN 
cieafacreanfreet wearer yoAgT \ 

ate TFTTTTAT aererfaeT: camataanhe: Uo Ut 
HAA Patrremnceamtirecrerser \ 

erdat gefiret a af: ater seat area es 0 





Q. aet Hat (T) wed Way (a) for (ArT) 


2. 


aearafas (7) waite” at (#) acarafesg’ ae for (aeat 
afaass dr) 


. Res (F) TAS F for (ATETH) 

. eet (a) eat (a) eid for (get) 

. aeeq Har for (ara) 

. Tra for (TRTATg) ¢ aeuAfass for BU afesss) 

. ferftereraferat (1) frarftarenaferr (@) (a) for 
. (faratfsrat wefarrer) 


2. aarared for (waaay) 


av 


. fafrasratae (7) fafaeratere (=) fafararaie< for fatraa- 


wtTz) 

%. Sat (wt) satat (%) sara for (at) 
(a) ¥. watrcarar for (eatery a7) 
(4) %. TUTSa-Tat gat (mw) (%) JarEat yseat for (Fwaeeat) 
(a) 2. afaararrfe for (afersranfar) 

3. eapatacatt: for (ernafacnfr:) 
(a) % FUT gaa for (FwIEAT) 
(a) &. mereatat (7) sereraT for (sersaTaT) 

2. maafa: (1) (a) safe: for (wafer) 
(#) ¥. earatia for (cart) 
(a4) 3. aafa: for (anfa:) 

4. waaay TA 


PS LDS LISELI SSIS S ILS 


ee) 


fafraormrgaratire fraagiarigerr t 
TRAST areal neu 

assag (ASAE) sea: afay: gaa ise qe) 
TAS wrtrnea farsa ga Ww Qo N 
fasat ania CAFTA AAT ET | 
vfanfarrean feat fafagfurenaaaes eeu 
¥ROKo emgrera gs ar memeaterareaerTiga 
BaaeR aetna fara 22 NN 
caterer aafereratia haere: aratafsit: 1 
epefad: afeag feared fandaqated: 11 3 0 
sreaeararteag ferent feafaaert grgaTq | 
afte amen scuitentia aa: u gen 





PLL LPL LG 


&. (8) %. za for (afer) 


ag. 
£2. 


3. 


2. afegrarat (7) (a) eferqrarat for (areuraadt) 
(=) 2. zery for (efarq) % afarqratat for (ara?) 
. (3) &. e& (&) TRAIT for (Z2q) 
(a) &. ee for (eq) 
(3) 2. antgat (a) aniget (#) anigat for (a) aeaigat (anigat) 
(3) 2. wet (t) (&) for (af) 
2 ATA (7) TTT (H) TRAST for (arHtaz) 
(4) 3. 4g dear ee sft F siftee wat 2 
¥. weet (%) Tear for (erga) 
(=) &. aarrafeatt: (it) (#) aarafeat: (=) for (araafeat:) 
2. eplefada: for (eRe faréta:) 
3. afer for (afraq) 


(a) ¥. fererg (&) for (fea) 
(a) 3. afi for (afr) 
. fang’ for (fad) 


go 


- (3) %. -aaafeerang (1) (=) for (rasfreaiarg) 


2 wearEWay (1) (%) wearemat (=) for (wera) 


( =e ) 


warfare feaere! Ta ATT | 
wae aeadanfeenttd farreia’: 24 
egelernierenrarnaga ecm RET | 
arepefadag fafeneaaingatrere eral 
areigftidata ree fafaae fadrgarg 
eafematgrnongtd eat fawaig” Wee U 
afar: egefadiagd feaferaerat aiqtigat 
eay: fexenigat watt ya: qdaeay Nees 





PL LDP LADD L ADD DDE PDP 


a. () spel (a) (a) for (atatarfiarta) 


ge. 


29. 


¥ 


fanaiz (=) for (faraid:) 
ga (7) ga: (=) ge for (afr) 


aTaat for (ateda) 

wapheaag for (wapaferat) 

wet qa ate sifa Tar 1 fefrare at ye a 1 Bae afer Ff 
egQe Tea Tet Tt ga freta” ee 


. fereiat for (freaar) 


feafet (7) () (=) for (faftr) 


. e7E (t) (#) (=) for (esr) 

. eRe for (aT) 

. frraid for (faretd) 

. faneigarrned for (faretdatsaaea ) 


Hafeataeat for (gifeafaeas) (7) ga: (=) sa: for (ed) 
gat (7) (#) (=) for (at) 

sft: (5) fr (eg) 

qarany (#) qaraq TIN Ls ul for (ea=saq) 


%) ¥. frrtga 

&. 
(=) & 
- TAaay for (q4a-8Nq) 


fariza 
Hateafa for (sai feafa) 


ee 


TATE: srecepteatiartat ange | 
egefadacateatreta ater feafrararerarg 28 ti 
aa fen firaaerd veut det acne | 

graqranisd eacaratentseret WRN 

4 epenrtaereestvent TERA: TUT | 

THAT wd ay TyTN efarena WRI 
aeenferrtagtareaanrerterafareaeaTg 

aaa reer weet favera” phe: REWaRRe TAAEAT NR 





(mn) « 
(=) &. 
NM, 


faded (a1) fadaae: for (faerare) 
arereatt: (a) atten: for (areesta:) 
afaagq (#) eastay for (sPaqZ) 

SER: for (TeRT:) 

wa (=) for (7a) 

wtem: for (zite7:) 

erg for (eaTq) 


. Seorteree (1) (#) (a) for (aeue TAT) 
. TeITEY () TeTATEMY for (aaaq WET) 


feet: (#) for (fe2) 


. werfasaa (1) for (werfeees) 
. TTY (%) sa: eq for (aa: eT) 


. atau for (xfavgu7) 


verfsag req for (xetfcasuget) 
daa for (fatez). 


wareaa (t) (%) (=) for (anette) 


- Twat for (asa) (7) savgsfeasar (w) soarsefeasat for 


(waetat TsaaT) 

Pasattafa: () dat WRI (#) ge: for (Prong sfe:) 
gat (%) for (gat) | 

. ¥facar (%) for (aqaat) 

wate for (ata) 3 deat for (asa) 

favaraeta: for (Fasareafe:) 


( = ) 


fafarareratrcater afeenferrat mea | 
fafaramranafaccentagiatagta (a) WRU 


“sflat ara raTeR HCAS THAT efafiger 


se-faferet at farerrfater fram aaft neu 
¥RoYo qaaaraeiy recteorpysatiata: 
ariaenfafredt at at eeere sat eqezy WRU 





PPP LL LIL LD LLL LLL LL 





. fing aeatatex (1) fafaa aearetet for (Pafraaaraiax) 


fag (7) (=) for (Fgh (7) ) 


. state for (stare) 
. feerratta for (freretiar) 


wet wate at sae ote fares fart ya wat) Fy e— 
“fafarmarrnntas taregpfataga: mez” 


. fafraeargiac for (faframareiaz) 


merrETTT (M1) () (a) for (Teng wT) 


. Ufa (7) Tear (#) for (Tf) 
. afar for (agfeet) ~ 


aafa: (#) for (aafe) 
qaaaraetse (m) (a) for (qeaaeTse ) 


. wat (7) aaiseger () aalseRERt for (aia eyes) 


aaire for (wate) 

eadisersmd (&) eadisetga for (eaat e787) 

aati for (et ) 

Hat for (atay) 

fao—agt frag arrrae sat fretoret ox farafafar sata — 
feat ser aa & frat gat fara g— 

csqerara fate <b: afTTsar WacHa: | 

MAN GT Feat zat waa fafes: 0” 


( ¥ ) 


sguraferateaerat ; aafa araT ATS | 
arat eafareanagETaMseAT: WRENN 
gfe aad Taatseara: 1 





2%. (a) %. aay (7) for (TAT) 
2. sefaaratsa (1) (a) for (vefaacas) 
2. FET (a) for (wey) 


(7) ¥. ‘ef & rere’ aw ee oft H yea Far cals gaw wy, w, 
a, Afra g 


ag wars ea oe Fae et 
(a) %. aaare for (aaaretg) 


a. afr’ & ema? aH aT a1 


( 8.4 


ee at rearesagrntaenrg l 
eaite ea ETOTETENTERT RAITT SU 
aTTyeEe rt get get chrcioratis: 
crrereratstarmteetiat eat meh seat: Tia 
Fraeatrataa ifr a farce: | 
aiteatecat: aagaieateat ag a: yuan 


PADI DAIS SIS 


&. (F) % 


(7) 2. 


(*) 


(#) 2. 


wa 





LIPDLAL LALLA PPS PP LLL LID LIL PP PLD DS 


mere: (T) TeteHeae: for (TerTentaz:) 
aa for (a=) 
ag eat srAeT Tel S| 


weMRTaTe: for (weravenciae:) % smarter aetae for 
(sre TeATeHTett Z) 


earet for (zatat) x. gear for (Zea) 


_-arhrrytas: (=) for (<Prefirrgfer:) 


aff (=) for (att:) 


3. eedieit for (zetew) 


qeatfiedtefire for (qearexaisfa') 
ae sare Tater AE Z| 


. Tea for (eet) 
. tarafeat (7) (=) for (aeafest) 
. ¥& (mt) for (wg) 
T) 3. 


amt for (Bit) 


¥. aafeat (=) for (waar) 


er 


ae wale Brae aT ZI 


(=) 4. Beat: for (@ar:) 


EOS 


faqargre gfranfeaen greatta At atrarq | 
BRETT uel AEG nen 
RI HATTATT ATT AT TATA | 
aragaa: afeat: gaat Rafe SAT NK 


PLS 





%. (7) 2 


PLIL IAS 


fagaerat (1) (=) for (faga=qrar) 


. tera (7) wherg (#) for (ar=19) 
. BeaRTTAA, (T) GeMTETATETT for (TeaTeTA AT) 
. fadarg | aareait for (fareat araatt) 

garg for (gat) 


&. Tay for (TAT) 


(4) ¥ 
a 


_ weMeTATaT for (serrearIT) 

_ shea for (sara) 

. UTPaTgeaTeTATa for (AeaTeeTTeAA AT) 

. saqufeat: (=) seaafear: for (set: afeat:) 

. Searrafs (7) (m) scatrafra for (acarafes ar) 


. SPLAT for (srt) 


AAT EAST for (TAT AMAT TARA 
sengrngedifest: (fre gat dfs at aren) for (we 
qIA—fgo Fo—sergaa a fear:) 


. Ra AAT aerehene: for (TEATEAATTTSeATTAT ) 


‘werege for (weRgey) sae the aT ATTRA 
WET for (verqeq) 


» wragemtifenr:. for (waged: afer). 
2. 


geitrafecrani for (great aati ai) 


{ so } 


great: Rratgfacttanatrgtia af 

ane qaittacateat se atirat mattet: WE 
ERUEINNUIRS semerngfiagnat goriatratentct: \ 
sarfaataane: Tra ATERATETAET 1G 
afefeorgemeraeraEg ere: Fae: i 
quierrataink: aidiat diene neu 


PLL LL LPL ALPS ILI AS 


ay 
~—~-_ 
ra) 
ell 


Piet at 
H a 
ane KW AD ve OK MM GCM KW BD wo KM wo SG mm KW GM Lo 


& 
aa & 
= — 


4 
— 


os 
at 


a3 | 
os 
lf 
— 


—s~ oo 
A, ob 





LPILLLLDEL LD EL PDL DL LDL IE LPL A DE 


. ahety: (#) (=) strata for (Fertig) 
. africahe: for (yfaaahr) 
. wae (m) qerate (#) rae for (args) 


a 


» Brett: (7) (%) for (aatet:) 


Fergfiror Tafa: rene 12a RAlgell for (afirafnen Taf) 


_ezafea for (wear) 

. aitaiy for (fraty) 3 eaeegetax for (queqad zz) 
. Brame: for (atiat:) 

. Wan: (1) wad (*) wed for (wet) 


ag dend yasals H yaid F oeaTq wifes = 
germeafa (m) zeareeidft for (eenzeafa) 


. Tate for (TET ) 


&. wafa for (asufet:) 

avatfrs for (sarfre) 

ferareat for (feraret:) 

were for (ware) © sarftes for (warfare) 
wad for (WET) 

atfas for (atertfas) 

aftaray (7) afratait: (a) for (<ftatat) 


. Stfevereat a (a) (#) gferatear = (stferrrera) 
. Fae (¥) FT aHq for (7HEq) 

. ara: (%) aaa: for (afeg:) 

. Telfaard: for (wefaaat:) 

¥, 
3. 


aapereaiat for (qaeq ater) 
Afiqareaia for (dieters) 


— 
A 
~~ 


— 
A 
atl 
nem we Kw Vw 


( 55 ) 


sara: waistewefad eTaT 
aed eafermedat att ste ATAU a 
VaaTeAfaett fraggra aTETHER ata: | 
WARTS fae aagT ART Ngo U 
AT SPRATT GRANT: Ferea aeft a 
CEARATH EM FCI ASCE WE Ni Ve ul 








mg wate EA TS H aT eI (7) 
ag wits Breer aah FI 
fao aet ae sate fret sored 9% Teaeeaera F feat wat s— 


. sauearaafadh: for (seareraara feat: ) 


ug wile ya Ws Haat 21 (a) (*) 
fro ug eats Yb YB IX faRioTa Te HATER & feat gar 2 ! 


ata: for (ax:) 2 fafga: for (fae) 


. aaa for (arzz) 


saat TeaTHA € z (7) 


atat for (araT) 

arrreat (#) (#) for (art ear) 
aeawat (Tt) (#) for (agar) 
wife (7) (%) for (earfr) 

wate: (%) (=) for (zafr) 


. Raq (%) for (Rea: 3TH) 


geal for (seater) 
seawat for (erqa:) 


(4) 2. WrAgrarecaaat for (HTa Fatesenat) 
4 


. Ulfreca: for (eafaee:) 


Rogan ‘2’ Z ! 


(58) 


aed maya afd: FATT | 
SE AT Sea ATRTACATRAT Tray Ul a2 1 
rive: daidte earageareTaTg k 
garfuaa fadiarer eorfnaesi eamTeat: 3 0 





. ear: for ( eaeTaTe: ) 


. ainfgaaa for (zat) 


PLALAA LSD LD LL DS DA LD PS 


Raa TeaTHA Yo & (77) 


. area (7) Teta (#) seat for (Hetz) 
. thet (&) oft for (afat:) 


sftagagarary (at) (*) Haqagarai for (stagarary) 


. Bea: (T) (A) for (sea) 
. Mretaat (a) werersat (#) severe for (srqsea7ay) 


weTtecargata Ward for (arraAvatgata Wag) 


. WoW (A) for (1 eR UN) 


. ofa for (afsd:) 8+ 4F+ 
. STmetaat for (ITT seraat) 


qual HAST 22 & (7) 


. Swateteaq (7) (4) for (graretsaq) 

. CaHAT: 1-22 (Tt) SaHTeTHT: for (eaHTATT:) 

. Vaifer Tes Ha A aa st 

. RTA for (eaTITT) 

emf fadaret (#) eafud fadfearerq for (zafadaa 
faearer) 


.. wag for (ae we:) 
. AEwATy azaq for (agwAaTEATAq) 
. arfaerarant frafuder wafa 22 for (fadarat earfe 


TIT TARTATAT: U1 -2R Ul) 


a 


( & ) 


garg era aghemenmatearag | 
STENT: aqaaticratta: Nes tt 


gfe were nghsea 1 





LAL PPL I DLRALS 


ay. (a) aaah wader 22 f (7) 


2. ever ateart (7) errafateatn for (gras eigen) 
2. TeareTaaTEaTa: Tet (at) (H) serra for (water) 
3. greahraaife | greafiraatia: | for (agéafreaifir:) 
x. “Sf & sear’ ae ya aft Fa 21 Ree amfarae “a,” 
Fare G1 
(=) §. severest aramfirer aff: for (wena: agdafa aaife: 1g¥t1 ) 


(a) 2. Seqreraateata: ost for (HaTeATy:) 
3. ataafa for (sada) 
¥, ‘afer’ & ‘sears’ ae gat 


ctr 


(=) 


“so 


AB 


om 
A 

— 
“o 


2. 


4 


ae 





aS ae 


faratz eifrrat, af ararsaTad Fe war arfereng | 
safz Bfogetaated Fal gaat gu 
cfraed faang eOUTEY HT TACIT | 
geet cared Aederer aT TO 








PLS ASSIS LL LO 


» (1) ATA Tae for (aTaTsATAs) 
. wf (1) Tafa’ 3 for (TAT) 


_ ain (n) for (air) 


YAry (7) for (Gra) 


» TfqaTy for (afeyaTa) 

. FF for (eT) 

. zafra’ for (Adatrd) 

- %. afeary for (wfeaTT) 


zata’ for (zat?) 


- Ut for (arat) 


afeeifa for (afer) 
ge (7) fase for (zd) 


waerer (7) for (Teer) 


. TEx for (Ae) 


. FE for (x8e) 2. ferawa’” (feumg’) 3. eet for (we) ¥. 


3. (a) 2 
. at: (1) (HF) for (wats) 


xox wom ow 


( & ) 


Farag ave Fart RTETTTTiy | 

sind seergnfine % ‘ateferereary neu 
cheat at RTTLATEATTATA: \ 
ufem: eaargedt eoearfnd: attatt BHAT UY 





ard (7) (=) for (grad) 


gra for (Tr) 

waira’ (1) (a) for (satra’) 

sear grtinat (it) for (aeargatar) 

Bs arafaectearg (7) for (ge aafeeete) 


. Fra for (Gat) 2. adtsH: for (ade) 3. aatrg’ for 


(autre ) 


. FeaTg Tigary for (Teareafar) x. ss'atafa aera for (z- 


TeafreqeAtg) 


amt: (1) for (art) 


. aa for (eas eat) 


- Tat for (ae) 
wa: for (7) 
afeet erected for (afear: TAs et) 


. ase for (exe) 
. Wet: (=) for (afar) 


et serra: oy Hrafearled caenfa vaverararatatesr 
eeatiga get sft afer sr gtafe meta: 1 
for 
(ara Gaara: | 
wea: aruda Seated: ateat get vn) 





(ae) 


ufafadremeag are anratent: | 
aoe exrgteratert charg Teal 
eamfeast fasaryat ei aa —) 
TT TTR taatHTaA sage fatee faga nu § 


LFL DPD IS PLAS S 


&. aqaramtia for (sasrarata) 


astgratzar (Tt) TeerHEAeat for (TgTETTT) 


_ Radearaare for (faarerare) 


. atte for (area) 


. aEeaabriat for (saat arta ) 
. aeaerHtsa for (AstgaHASAT) 
. faerrmearer for (afatadeara) >. wuTAaT for (TaTAt) 


. TssF for (TST) ¥. HAsATY for (HAV) Y¥. aTaT for (adr) 


. a (=) for (za) 
. afta: for (afarat:) (=) 


ai for (a7) 


‘. aa for (Am) 


wafafiqaa for (fafea faa) 
. safest for (arfast) 2. Fa for (at) 2. ataA for (aH) 
qa for (qm) 4. fafaq for (fafer) 


( a ) 


guaran data ait ition & anreafart | 
ferwar anteearg eyaeed a faater Fett 
fagrafe® cfaegttaraRATTEETATE | 
<fanfiree aia caeaseR, eras TY ust 
s. (%) &. gartae (7) (a) for (garAz) 
3. saet (=) for (gat) 

aareafaat: (7) (4) for (aarafest) 

erat (1) easaT anid for (fewaratiq) 

cared (7) caneagan ered for (ear HEtaT ) 

(3) 5, ast for (zt) 

a. fastteareg? for (Fastert?) 


(=) 2. atsgt for (qatet) ¥. gear for (farar) 
9. eared for (wart) -&. GTR eae for (qaaet a7) 





sxe x 


g. gadat for (qrTat) 2. adiseiq for (aatet) 

3. walt for (ait) 

¥. arene feat: for (wareafeat) x. eysaraaig ted for (farsa 
ariearg Gi) &. gTH aT for (yaaa) 

5. (a) &. Tet (7) (=) for (xfarat) 

deere: (71) (a) for ( degaarcra:) 


» Tada (A) WHAT for (aaa) 


w 


G 


X. ew (1) eeaeeeray for (geaag F7) 
(a) ¥. eq for (sex) 


(%) 2. ated for (aie) 2. deqiterer: for (degen) 
- ¥& for (ea) 
¥. Sem for (seq) %. Te eTY for (igi eq) 


“ww 


Ro. 


Re. 


Fanta | 
Ras 


me 


a 


~~ 


“Af 


— 


H 


~~ 





pro PK ewe e® 


mracratahrryet gatrrq yg [wifes 
yaratfestagfir feefeetea x07 nen 
ed arareramettrerereat strat: | 
cfacdamye wet feqaatet fot 
SEGA: are fret aafertet: 1 
feymist wasteraranatrem: Neen 


PLP DGG 


arearaat (+) areaeray for (Tara) 


gairar (7) for (gata) 
wean (a) for (aaTT ) 


RT: for (ya4) 
. fectgraies (=) for (feriguter) 


arate for (erat) 2. gate for (qatrerq) 

misated for (Tara) 2. Tatreryarrte for (Gatrwag yay HHfz:) 
Tarrant (1) aaaaeraat for (atavaaaeay) 

aelteaas: (1) (a) for (afarra:) 

faqetarares: (1) for (feqaares:) 

arareracreat for (aaterarreat) 

featdtaateeh: for (fetaatc:) 

TaaaerTa for (atararaereat) 2. asqaat for (weer) 
aeltsaat for (afarrt:) ¥. yen: for (ace) (a) ger: & seit for 
(genet) 

feadtares: for (feqaate:) 

asta: (1) (&) for (ya) 

wafer (7) for (afer) 

faquiaitcansitar (=) for (faqutat sastar) 
arareraaatatar: (Tt) atrerawafatan: for (erraafatanr) 
fad for (fart) . 


. aR for (eaag) 2 tafser for (aaferrar) 


ysien: for (yarat) 2. wferTTUfad for (afraTe- fad) 


. waft for (wate) ¥. oflararag araeafereen for (faretrawa 


fatar:) 


( a ) 


aadiefreter RASTA aaa ATTA | 

TTA TTA feeyer smrena! TAG iecal GX 1 ¥o 
ma ar wat featrariemcheraeaTig \ 

ara toareratearafeae faa aa TATU 83M 
afreraneeti aera fete TR 
afetraqanedt gag ea afer: e¥ tt 








22. (3) 3. efrentan: at (a) xfastarat for (<fataran) 
R. aaetewa (1) saat (=) for (Fata) 
%, fay for (faqer faqat) 
(7) ¥. §¥¥o for (E¥I¥o) 
(4) 3. <feenian: at for (<frstarai) 
(=) «waa eaaierat for (aaacfastarat) 3. mF for (#1) 
23. (3) % farm for (featea) 
3. TUN for (aattsare) 
¥. sau (4) for (Saat) 
(7) &. aaa weafee deer areagT: for (aut sareafearafacer) 
(=) &. adeare” for (aeraraq) 
(#) &. gw (gaat) for (qa) 2 faatragq for (feat) 
2. auuraafacrafater for (ativarratenferer) Y. aaa for 
(az) 
a. (4) ¥. ofete sd oetatda (7) ofaqars yehs eda for (afi 
ret Yrs ea) 
3. Beeesta for (qetdea) 
y. ofeere: (=) for (afera:) 
(4) 2. creasing for (sreattararé ) 


%. 
. 


wag for (ae ) 
FTA: for (TTT) 


) ¥. Gare a for (qa) 
"3. GRE Ea for (Garsedt) x wha: for (afaa:) 
) 2. tert for (afr) 2. creates for (areata) 


2. 


BRS for (aatgeaa) 


( ew ) 
frente iat: gate Prova ferret | 
aang Brae seagaaang Wey a 


Hea Faerie aya PRCA | 
ora eraE wT fated wey gel 





3. Braet (1) araraTg for (gram) 
2. gray (*) TaaaT for (gza) 


a. ag for (aiat:) 

¥. vara for (frar) 

x, attra for (faretere) 

3. gar for (esa) 

g. AR for (aat:) 2. qapara for (3x7) 
maine waTEat feyfna yer see | 

WT TE yastat etfs: ou ek 

ag sate ‘a’ & afafes eat war 21 

a. TaYSAT for (TREAT) 

¥. dant for (sar) 

9. Fa for (faa) 

R. eye Ty for (yea) 

x. fegar for (zea) 

&. wz for (wT) 
(fao gaat HAGeT es 2) 

3. saRGaTTTa for (aqawATT) 


g. 4a for (faa) (+) egfad (4) for (eget) 3. sar 
gard for (qrqawaag) 


( a ) 


rect eat at PreraRTTTT TAG TUE: ' 
Rea veal SORTA ratvafatg: Neen 
zfa aereiaeege frratctragaanty \ 
arateeraat wary tratateg eat SMTA: UN ge 


(7) 


wv 


ete sitagy? aaetsera: 





meals AAT: TATA Sa ETA | 
waa: YA Wasgar fad gatq u wou 
ae sete ‘aH arfatees ora war St 


. TEA At for (wea) 
. Tgfafx: (7) finest: for (# ferafats: } 


suat wre 28 et 


. fara for (faer) 
. TATE HT for (ee) 


fro—eaal HAGEAT Ro ZI 


. Sfarrasifenat: for (efaargaatfz) 
. ofeera for (afte) 
. faafarcat sratafatet: garttera: for (anager tte 


fafee qartseaa:) 


(x) %. warePrg Ta 
& “sha” & “remma:” a at 3 
(%) 8. aise for (ate) 9. mraigreaft: for (amistad) 


wer 


2. (4) 


(7) 
( 
(= 
ok 


( 
( 
(*) 


Al 





( ee ) 


mre qaeaTIISAT \ 
afafeatirgeqre a eETATTARP ATE neu 
srreeifed feeem facta iene: \ 
HASITAT A PACT STREA N2 U 
rafraqarantgal TE TITRA | 
ae TAT TTT 28a: afageat® a men 
MTATGTATT RTE ara ary ] 
gaiaeat: Be Tater: ead ear nv 


PL LAL LIS 


g. watery (1) tater (=) for (watazTg) 
2. xfaferarat for (sfafaafare=arar) 
3. tH for (wa) 
¥, aaeaTaarafrered for (aaerarrarafrae) 
a. Fataeg for (adi) 
qats aaa for (aatraetg) 





LL LA 


g. TatHeT for (aaeez) 
2. Brarfah for (arf) 
3. aig for (ate) - 

%. aatwerg for (atarpe) 


3. (4) 2. 989g (T) for (ETE) 


a. afaaart (1) afeaats for (afsgeer) 

3. Blt: for (Bar) 

¥. Gf for (et) 2%. TSTE for (EZ) 

a. afaqeatat for (afageait) 

2. afer for (afag) 

3. Yeaegat (1) (*) for (se7eqaT) 

¥. wat (7) (a) for (HT) 

4. TROT: for (TagaT:) 

&. afear: for (afear) 

a. wa wT for (a) 2. Fates for (qarer) 


( geo ) 
Tearefemt: Set at cafes aardcteeare 
ratrenfearirterrcrataae: Teal 
sigaaishinea epenerend faftrataal | 
vfaafiraeanfaaat fradarsat Prana: neu 
granfiri fiver zm aeueiqare aq | 
aemz arm THT SMTATAAATSSAET UU 








x. (a) &. adigngld (7) atigegid for (#aigearé) | 
2. vatfe for (arf) 
2. waTsasaE: (7) for (xaaTHaay:) 
(a) 2. adigugd for (aétecata) 
2. waTes for (zaaTs) 
(a) 9. warqargergisd for (wartdtgeard) 2. v7 for (zw) 
%. Faq TH: for (7HE:) 


2. FaT (7) vat for (af) : 
a. welfrerge: (a) a vatfrafege: for (avitfrarse:) 


(%) %. af for (af) 2. oat for (ar) 3. asatfratsa: for (avatfrat- 
3) 


¢2. EearaT (tT) easaTAT for (=m) 
aermedt (7) At Tre for (sary) 

Bl for (Brat) 

egerey (a) egeter for (egeTeaT) 
marae (1) STATA for (qrssaa) 


ah oc pw ve 


(3) © 8+ &. aT for (ea) 
3. Termes for (Tem) «. warehTg Ga 


(&%) &. eane for (eT) % gered for (gare) 
- uel for (wHg) ¥. wat (7) for (PTT) 


gov) 


sieeramrariieasraiargatines 

enferarerergeTe q eaata ABTA Ws 

5 teed arafragratenfeare ql 

aratteiartired ARATMISSAISATA: 8 
gf sit aergea aeeaiseara: 





&. (=) . Faery (7 (@) for (saezr) 
2. Fever for (azgTiTeT) 
3. afragtartargarat (it) afragtartat werent a for (afer 
TATATAT TATA ) 
(7) ¥. eratetaatg for (eaataeaata) 
(3) x. rag for (grav) ¥. eaatg for (cari) 
(#) 8. caver for (saat) 3. afraqutariat aareat ary aTHta 
for (afgaarerar qarat J eatassaTa) 
&. (4) 2. ataf for (arta) 
3. weerat water for (aererarsisonr:) 
(1) ¥. gatfesd for (zeAtgre) 
g. Fasfeateay for (wasfeaaraare) 
4, araaatiea for (arattiniart are) 
aaragae BB wy Lather F caer F 
(a4) 2. tafiret for (tarhret) 
3, ware Preaca 
&. aT: sft for (“fa Saaeee aeqra:””) 
(#) 9. aaxfarta for (wasfarert) 2. tafafer for (ahr) 
3. aexrqay for (AeAraT) 


( gor } 


saat afer: TSI: wefarea: Fag Gat: | 
mifafaaaaren: TRE CURE EMEC IG nen 
PPO L QAR LRU YAS I Re 

sare aoe fag ATTATTRTTE 
fran ao eaaetiat ereaten BAST 1 ral 


egeTTMTATYRagURTT ERRATA \ 
ae: santé fraatraaeaaaT aay Ww en 





. Afafera: (7) aarafra: ¢x2 for (qafeaa:) 

. FeAtea: (1) for (wefaraz:) 

. FIAT 220 for (yA) 

. 23% GyUraar: for (ayaa) 

. 3. aifafserrar for (arfafaerpran:) 

. fafa: for (frera:) 8. veatea: for (vefiraa:) 

. werttea: for (wafaraa:) 2. ara for (wife) 3. wet for 


(Ta) 


. Um: for (ym) ¥. ataTa for (rat) 


. frat (7) Preavqet for (Prevger) 
. Razatet for (cawaiat) 

. Twater for (quate) 

. tagieaeaiay for (saTrerRat } 


met Se for (e@eakigTarRerEasat 
ABT URI) 

. fraa for (Prat) vo. cage for ey) 

. Haar for (geste) 

- BUTG for (Hartt) 2. raat: for (zatat) 3. gfurica for (quaiez) 

. eat for (aw) 

. brat (1) arate for (ara: ead) 

. eee for (watz) 


2. Jeceisr for (GURY) 2. eas for (exis) 3. chaz for 


(<farq) 


ae 


grata Bis ETT afetefag Wat Haha | 
ara wT, feareferss afecttoien nen 

wat “afirgentgat: sera 

eT HEAT FATEH erate TUE UYU 
CARAT TH WATT Va atic aR e SURAT | 
aafacadt gufsatteraerta @ TBAT GU 





PALS 


¥. (1) &. featefrayet (1) fetefier gat for (feaefra yt) 


¥, 
YX. 


aearefet (7) aeargfa for (aeargfe) 
aged BfeagU: (+) seat: for (=e) 


(7) 8, we for (Fw) 


(= 


) 


(*) 


4. (7) 


(7) 


( 
( 
&. (4 


a) 2 
a) &. 
2: 


) 


X. 


2. 


ao Fe A mo Ka 


ae sate at vara aie ar afera aed “ottaefasit’ ea ofa F 
STASI TET | 


&. Vite for (efra) ¥ TeaTerft for (qeaTefa) 
4. 
g. wen for (ar) 2. mae for (maTIL) 3. TS for (at) ¥ 


aqeat for (eect) 


qeatqafa for (searefa) 
aqeay for (aeaT) 


amt (1) (*) for (afe) 

qearerg for (TTT) 

aaa: for (Aeata:) 

srrattae: TeaTg for (weravehre: 1 Tests) 

went for (atest) 

afes (=) for (afe:) eet eats at wradite ar sitar se oeaTa’ 
21 we: eee ahs Tea’ J are eat FI 


. arTarsfire: for (srrarafire: ) 


garda for (qaita:) 2. soratfaa: for (artarafirs:) 


afasfia (1) for (afeatt) 
aay, + (7) for (ate) 


¥. syed: for (Terz) 
(#) &. wat for (a) %. TY a GAM for (TF + HTH) 


a, 


gufeama eure RATATAT t 

MTU THETA faery HEAT amg TRCN 
RABATGE afarat faa wlayE arfarat & | 

raTERTTERTRTATE gq eaftercaat neu 

ane THEME PATTATO RTT a: ai: ater | 

shafaare gaeaula faada: et 


a. (4) ¥. 
4X. 
(3) ¥. 


(*) 2. 


s. (a) 2% 


poe xe 








fadarareanta (a) for (faaataerarag) 
arate (7) for (arg) 
faeiary for (faa) 


faacad eatery for (framactet) 2. aa for (Ara) 3. HETATATA 
for’ (HEIATq) 


att (@) for (qeafaat =) (1) site faarai for (qe- 
afaat =) 

aftera.s (7) for (aiterqa'a) 

grarcaat (7) for (aftsritera4r) 

aearcaat (7) for (afteriterar) 

att for (afer) 

aiterg svaeat for (aftargqg weiter) 


. Srarfasrai for (Teafrat a) 2. wat for (Gat) 3. Yat for 


(sits) 


aatera (7) (=) for (aafear) 
wyaat: (7) (a) for (a: gaat) 


. Sftat fader (at) (=) for (sitafae) 
rs . FUTeares (7) qaredtes for (qqrearg) 
T) ow. 


ae for (qe) 


or faaar: for (faae:) 


() 2. 
(3) 2 


eater for (gata) 
gary for (ara) 





( eX ) 


seat gervafentianairatt ACEC am 
arinaties a aafafanaty fer eat: YoU 
farremragaasraaraes ararraat eat: 

a wate eenfqeraat A aig fest Wee 
are: eaAa afefierntererrre an 
wat TaleaaTAy TANE TE aA aca 
gad feaeteat: rer: eatentaereite | 
srarearen fare eae fa afaetaan Nez 


PLLDLDD ILL LDL PLL DS 


(4) 2. mrataerfeedd (a) for (arivetfey 4) 
(7) 9. seat for (aeTearT) 
(a) &. abt for (art) 
(#) 2. att for (Art) 2. eae for (FF) 
(t) 3. agftere: for (age) 
(&) &. wav for (24) 2. afa: for (aa) 
(a) ¥. vat: (a) for (34) 
(m) x. angad for (eareue) 
&. carers for (eae) 
(=) ©. deat for (aeat:) ¥ Bea: for (zea) 
(&) &. Pepe ae af saree gat 2. wat for (aA) 
3. wt for (WA) ¥. Gad: for (sad) ¥. a for (=) 
&. wat for (a¥) 
(@) &. sreater (1) Ga eared for (TET) 
3. Roaeafire (xr) Fawacafaes for (Rerafra’) 
3. aferedtar (7) aferedtat for (aferefrar) 
(7) ¥. grat for (aa) 
4. freraarery for ( faraited) 
(4) saeared for (sate) 
3. thar for (<faat) 


(#) %. Seated for (aTeTA) 2. cuter for (afaz) 
3. water for (zfrat) 


( %o& ) 


UAT errata eaeaRTATG AHA ATTHT: | 
HET FAFA: TAR FAR catered: ex 
aeital aaitatrate gearaactatt er: \ 
aeacheat: etteafreretetarateethi: NR 
FAATEA AAT TATH ATT: eafererrfeet we: | 
aernonfeaad eaten faerargaaatay 8g 
mafragand aafeat caleare at Tea: | 
ufafaarngratial cergresit 1 go u 


APA. 





gv. (a) 8. eared for (anea) 
2. TeaeTAT: for (THAT: ) 
(1) 3. ‘ea’ ag oe ae aif at 
(a) ¥. Creer: facta tics at “Tr” eo H artfee ae 3 
R. TRAIT HAT: for (WTETacHAT:) 
‘em’ 2. equa for (ame) 
(1) 2. Teae BTA: for (TeTEAT:) 


qe. (4) 3. start for (ater) 
% Fem (a) TAT for (ya) 
%. aeaeferat for (aeaeferar:) 
y. tate for (eatez) 
(=) 3. atari for (ater) 
a. afatar for (afettar) 
. Gear for (ger) 
(&) %. atserta for (afater) 2. ger for (ger) 
t&. (8) 2. aifseacer: for (arfsar wer:) 
g. weamefrag? (=) for ( Baa 
(=) 7 aeafangd (aenfarge) 
te. (H) 8. Neaagars (7) TETeTgAT for (Tener) 
(=) &. seweqat for (neuer) 
(8) t. Sem for (vE7ET) 


OL SS 


ge. 


R°. 


( too ) 


aa arieratafae mente aft et: \ 
ferent fara geet Tegaat gs 
oeaTNTEUATER TATA TTETET 
arenifaa feat aerataat aareafeat: 11 28 it 
faaat TETRA AATSTAR aeISaeT: 
ATaaaTS Teas arfseagegetkaea: ui Ro tt 





PLD LDL ALD LDL LD POLL PLL LD LDP LD DP DP OD PEP LN 


. TraSeTat (7) for (Ae FeAAT) 
_ aftneh: for (aft et) 
. fang for (fare) 


. af for (afa) 
. feast for (fae) 
. ae for (Tz) 


. aarataay for (aaeataa7) 
| fareat for (Raftaat) 

. WER for (7h) 

. aq for (4a) 


. aa He for (aaHq) 
. THaTtaTy for (aerate) 


. We eagrent welaee: (1) Quer eres Tere: for (HeseTETAaT 


EISTET:) 


. ¥E for (ge4) 
. eq for (saeT:) 


. qarer for (yeqez) 
. Sa: ea: for (seez:) 


tor 


aaah fem fiveratirat ferrgafaergaretcay 
aafia meg fete Tafrs fecifarrerea RU 
meee wat afegatet caters 
RR TRTE TTT TET TREAT are WRWU 
maTaay feat a firerreserrn fer firerererarg \ 
wT araferaererere ata veafrtata i Ru 
eafarafent farneeag fear feraafearerg 
ges: rd fean fine feenfind fafa Bat: WRENN 





a. (a) 3. afaa ferrgafergarecsast (7) for ( (afearfengafarrearaery) 
(7) ¥. afar for (fara) 


Bae 


Q8. 


Ww. 


A 


(a) 3. 
a. 


. fedtarereata for (fartfertereata) 


afrnfaat for (efsatiear) 
eifergareaedt for (gafzargaraet) 


(#) &. sareaery for (gatetsry) v afeateategs for feaferraatg) 
(3) . serene for (war) 
(7) 2. wafavafesr for (afegefzar) 
¥, TeAUTga for (TeatatgyAr) 
¥, areg for (TaTaTy) 
(#) &. are for (met) 2. safe afer for (afegatest) 
3. WeaTE NN eaeTU: for (waterway) ¥. TzraTe for (aera?) 
X. atart for (waTatz) 
(a). aewaag (x) garate for (gare) 
3. faftae ateg (7) for fafernar) 
(4) &. qarag for (gm=g) 
g. SeerIae for (gaeege) %. serrzatg for (cera) 
(&) 2. fattas grag for (faftarera) 
(=) 3. faeamragfed for (frreeagfea) 
&. aa: for (tq) 
{%) % ata: for (aTq) 2. Tafaaathy for (qafearfx) 


(Ree) 
fadeerraeeraferatear aU: | 
(cafaaris) oefeertet aratet sat eRe CATA: 1 AU 
gfe santa aaAtseqTa: 1) 








Rx. (7) 2. sefaeataiat (=) for (wafeaft safari) 
(1) 3. sfeat for (afert:) 
gat tie faeaifea f— 
qanreameracaign tafaran: for (Tafeafs sate saat 
TENTHS) 
(a) ¥. ah for (‘afa...taatseqra:”) 
(%) ¢. aaet for (ArH) 


2. tafrares for (fafaafs mata) 


SSS SSIS. 


( te ) 


myrerentacafaatt aut: eat fagt 

maeh retest gfafa: fear a fre: Wet 
warat raraegiats aha fae fae TA \ 
feage anfa afta uafir stmm Aged: 1 Rn 





g. () X. ater (1) ate for (a7) 


af 


(3) 


2. (4) 


G m A) vo 


K Mim we SK 


xg ww 


wo 


x 


(7) 
(3) 
(a) 


au 


R. 


g 

x 
g. 
g 


. feeaitaaiar (7) fereaittiat for (fercityRt:) 
. eaeaetagy (7) for (eat Farge) 

. afafr (=) for (afafy:) 

. = () for (a) 


waa TST for (Fes Zoe) 
fara: for (faea:) | 


. Fe for (Hs) 


seve tfegt for (set: ex2fg) 
gtex for (weet) 


. Frert: for (fareri:) 


. Ta for (aTt:) 
. BE for (HtzH) 


faut: for (faei:) 


_ aafrafafaxtafr ager: (1) safrafafeetatiagad: for 


(afaafafiefat | agar) 
gfafirrafe (7) (=) for (gfafragfi) 


. WyaAeS (1) WPTAATa: for (wqae4:) 


fgagaartt for (faagearta) 


_-afeg fate <faft (afegfatirctent) 


saferafaty <faagad: for (afrgfefircat ayer) 


. war frafa: for (zarfrafafa:) 
3 


WETS aed: for (AYATH:) 





va 
os 

4 
— 


—_— 


4 


-— 
~~ 


ad] 


— 


( 2) 


aateerd: gh arafant wg afta \ 
gamrfeaeardtet saeritainareres: neu 
HARE eareha: area Basra \ 
WAY TgTay sa neu 
eterracrr fea TEM ACETATE: | 
aaa fam: & ater: qd amet ue 0 


PALLDLL LL LI LAL LL DIL PLD LISD 





. Westar for (wassfazt) 
_ 88 (a) ai for (aA) 
. afafeet: for (gfataat:) 
wyaiat (7) (=) for (eqaarat) 
: a: for (=4:) 
We (a) for (a) 
fafa: zon for (affrt:) 
arrarad: for (afrareed:) 
wet for (at) 2. wt for (wrt) 3. Ae for (e4:) 


sracgararrat: (at) sraegasaraT: for (Sra TATATT:) 
qaapietd for (saareat) . 


ee 


oe iol 


3 for (¥7:) 

. afae for (afta) 

_ MATTAATATH FATS AGAT: for (Mag TENAHAT TAHT 
afada:) , 


2. mamehegET %. wage for (ATG) 
3. yaawiea for (yawned) &. fragt 


¥. § (at) @ for (a) 

g. areat: for (aTaT) 

2. 3. actarmareen: for (arzearaaTeat) 

¥, ateat for (atet:) 

&. zag for (cate) ¥. Tara for (aaa) 

g. area: for vo . aT for (xz) 3. fat for (zz) 
¥. @ for (a) 


( eR) 


afer: aT Paregartarat aTeaT: | 
neni faageré serra FATAATT: NEN 
atrarafieet aftz fara, nafrafeneat fara: | 
ATTEM TTA: erg fareie eto: Now 
sreretTract fant werfaare te: ’ 
aVaaeT TTAB faraéta: ts u 





SDA IMA IS DISS IDL IS 


&. (4) 2. aAeT for (aAaT:) 
¥. get (4) for (aa:) 
(T) g. wa for (#) 
2. wag for (aafaar) 
\. fram for (fae) 
(a) 3: faatgca &. wead for (wer) 
(%) &. wa for (4) 2. aaa (aaa) for (aaa) 
we. (4) %. atereaficer (7) (=) for (atearafersr) 
3. Sty (7) for (af) 
y. weft for (wef) 
&. TAT aT BATA: for (efraeracerat:) 
(1) 9. feraa for (fra) 
(#) %. aff for (afs) w. fra for (Faq) 
\. yefaat for (vefaa) 
&. Wear Ter TTT aT: for (ve far cay ar) 
(#) 2. atergafza for (aterefeaat) auf for (afz) 3. fea for 
(fea) 
¥. ATLA: (=) for (w<7'at:) 
cs. (&) . atraer (aw) arava for (ATT) 
3. fadtatat: (a) for (faaaiet) 
(t) ¥. at aq for (aTzeT) 
(a) ¢. atrarer for (aerate) 3. feast: for a) 
X% Ref | HROF 
(%) %. fare for (aa) 
2 SARS (7) for (SAAT) 


( ee ) 


GaeTTeT tafe: senffaarere: i 
ue arent iaeitzen fame ta: wen 
saa arraret Ararat trary faery 
age f feat aeataetTat vata aHRey Ngo il 
fait faciare fire qrae ReTTTHTH i 
en Tee aA fate size aw tfgemt: ee 
g. (3) 3. Faareta: (=) for eee 
¥, Gages (1) tree for (Fret z=) 
(a) 2. acafir for (arate) 
(a) ¥% +Re+ 
(#) 9. fevaat: for (fraatat:) 
2. aafa: for (acafa) 
2. ufaaorg (7) wafer fedora for (faeaT9) 
3. anfaag: for (aafeag) 
Q. areafar for(arez) 
2. ufaearg for (faaarz) 
3. aaferg: for (aHfarg) 
(#) %. areata for (are) 
R 
3 





nw 


ee. (8) 
(7) 


. afaerara for (faaara) 
. fager: (7) for (fre) 

3. fadata for (faértizr) 

%. facarafirat (1) (=) for (fedtarefaat) 
(1) . gyex for (gy7e7) 

. Ofer for (AfRar:) 

(4) 2. He for (are) 


(#) %. yorer for (THE) 
. ae (7) for (ate) 


os 


(ACP) 


fear ate gatas fae fasTeT | 

wegfireat ged ritext areeratatira: RQ 
pert efter sitearrariw aca \ 
sfafergadsea ata wait emfinertiaqag Tee. 


IISS, 


22. (5) &. faettte for (fatter) 
¥. M1 Yo 1 (Ht) for (ater) 
4. faafa for (fate) 
&. eefaafer (7) (a) for (agit) 
T) 9. =ueT for (free) 


( 
() 2. faerie for (fata) 
"2. gat for (357) 
3. Fe for (area) 
2. (4) &. fas (a) (=) for (fg) 
X. Haaetay (7 . (Heasecat) 
¥. wafe (a) (a) for (wafer) 
(1) & scat (wer ‘ofa’ adt 3) for (scarf) 
2. furtye for (starsrive) 
vw. emfuatray for (eafuaattaae)} 
(=) 5. sfafafer for (sfafar) ¥. qaiee for (qaaser) 
(%) %. HF for (af) 


2. Aa for (saa) 


z. fee, for (Peg) 
¥, waft for (wate) 





SLA 


(ae 3 


— 
aghpremart mataaehizet aarti | 
2 x 5 & 
einfua aged faeata factfomaeq 1 ex tt 


AY AULT FE 8) Rd ee ef aac 
coon RR ARIRRPRLK | ¥L MRR] &/ wp ww] s 
SRO] LE FG F LE KT, & Rw] BRo | I Re; VAY LEZ 

sie rb ad 


| { : 
90/90;25]2E,00,00!00 90 100 100 Joo} o0!00 ka 0° 
1 i : 4 i | 





: } ! : 
90/00 20/0000 0000 90 loo °° joo 592,90 1°90 'aOloo 


‘ 


00.0000 





* Y  & 

a) ui aml a) al atl o =) 5 
Sy ee) Ee eo eo AL a 
BVP Ro| RAL Gl eof <op eae} wi oo: 


DIPLSSSPLS LIISA ILS LPL LD IL LDP LPL LL LL LLL LLL LL LIL LLDPE LL LLL DL PL ILD 


2.% (3) 2 adt (=) a for (a) a vf 

_8 : 

3. aarfa (1) serft for (aeutft) 2 3 
y 

¥. am (4) for (74) @. ff s. Ho Ya 
3s 9 Ro 

(1) 4. geHat for (efter) 2 2E 

4 4 ° 

X. sears for (zeTfaa) o 6 


(3) 9. sareatat for eqrarat 3. aa for aeatfa 
cs. fasata for (faeara) 


_ (&) 8. adit for (aa) 2. a atige for (gmrfye) 


(a) of 5.9 9 8.8% 8. B for (%) ¥. 4 for (a) X. a0 


¢. frafiratiey for (Profan) 


ig 9 g cd it Qo 
R ay ge g ay 5 
4 ¥ 4 ° o ° 
9° 9° o ° ° Oo 


( 


-82&) 


(=) paras aftataa eT — Ie aa AH Sl 


ff. So RYT BT 


ox AG 
“we 
~@ 


img 
’ 
9 
° 


al. 4 
ap ws 4 
Re] Je Gf 


AJ 
CG 
o vo 
° 


Aw 


(t) oftaratfesraar: 


fod 
‘o-9 
° 


° 


au eT Yay FH F 


9 ° 2 


ER |] WW © | RR FO B 
* 


Ra Xs 


war f& a wa qT 3 3 og” q 


R © BE 
PER WY 


{ R¥ Re 


o 


o oO. 8 8 oO 


° 


0 


o 


© ¥ ¥ &6 90 © © © © @ @© © @ 


9 ’ 
R& ) 
od ? 
9 2 
fran: 
Q(T TIL ria y 3 & 
OTL] of w | RRR 
ELI s/s el aagys 
AL RL RR [RO RE RVR o 
© [Re gs 
1 sei 
t°R: RR R R OM OM e 
Re 4 Ro 3 
© Oo ° ° ° ° ° ° ° 
x q ot ze 
R¥q 20 Yo Jo |B Ro 


( gee ) 


rife cemfatacentreaTy | 
aiaitereereattar canifaviafratiat exe 

we waghretaat TEAR ARTE wate \ 
Hea TE wafraq aeanecanrlea stat at 26 


SSDS. 





PLLA SLL LS 


24. (4) 2. arTaRTATy (7) for (arTaTz) 


(a) 4. fFaq for (Fae) 


. feat: for (feat) 

. art for (armat) 

. Safrafeat for (afrafea) 

_ wif safemfa: for (anfasarrenta) 
areata for (ATTATT) 

. Saaz for (sata) 

_ grasa: afafirnfear for (anfasdefiratcrra) 
. Haute for (erat) 

. 7 afte sate (7) for (wares satel) 


ua asada gacere for (oe wafraatreacT) 


. & for (at) 
. ef for (aT) 
_ wafer ora safer fae 


AA IH TET TATAT BET TH THT 
Bal Wag Asafa caw ghreawad | 
for 
Ud WEP aa WET SeaTEs Fate 
HAT ve Wag Teese SAT aT 11 8S 


Ge) 


Ferearatghneadatan fede aera 
armen fester a4 Wat ay go 
aera feawaTeat awaraat F7% ACT | 
gertarreeeaatat graffi TEL aT 
memati ay grt esta ary | 
VEIT TH TTT aaSTAT ATTEN 2 U 


LLP ALAS 


ge. (&) ¥. fete for (fees) 
Q. way (1) BAT: for (sre) 
(7) 2. PrearaTafaeedztar 3200 for (Pasaratgfreatatar) 
3. Bee for (ATT), 
(=) ga ste H aet ‘fared’ ene 


fadar: 
fer ee eee et 
ge LPR X Lo WK o | o LR LALA 
g 





PPLSL APIS IS 


fiom ff 7 RT JT VI TT ATT? 
2 WZ o ¥ XY KR RVR Bo YX VE o 
Ro Ro Ro ¢s 
(&) 2. afweed for (afreet) 2. wR for (are) 
2. safe ret for (seers) 
¥. we for (Fer) 


ge. (%) 9. davit (1) eatera for (aati) 
(=) 3. gray for (gar#) 
() %. dati for (wait) 
2. feary for (fewry) 


48. (a) 3. weifrat avy (7) (=) for (watsfixe) 
| Y. epataar ary (7) i for (qaetsaat aa) 
(%) . aenife see for (ent) 
2. BF for (Bit) . 


PS LDPISS» 





( gee) 


wah Tey TeTETET: ate 
afirat med die: eeafgrteTRATT Ro 
waafaerarafae agfirgared ara A | 
cafafeen® cearastt aaiterat ger 11 et 
TSS ATA HA TATA TEIaT: wag | 
arate ged gear fet: eacreyaa: WRRU 
sree eae METEAATETHAAT | 

afin wear afer: eat errata BREN 


PPA LL DP LA LEAL TDS 


Xe. (3) &. veneers (7) (=) or bua) 


(7) 
(*) 


AN 


gat for (ya) 


¥, SeTmamAT for (earaeaz) 
2. cat arty for (ater) 


Bt. (@) & (A) () for (3) 


a 


vw 


oF 


—co 
A 


4 


—~ oo 
Al 
Nee 


a 


—~ oF; 
i 


| weit fear (xt) eat Petshit for (cemnfeasta) 
. agra for (seth) 
. araiay for (waa) 4 

aaaifertft for (zearfersfr) 


x ww 


_ Teqeat for (weget:) 


. agag (7) (=) for (sS7@) 
qa (=) for (qateraT) 
searatear: (1) for (aearaafear) 
afata for (afa a) 

7 for (=) 

weaTeratent: for (warq afeaT:) 
wea for (eet) 

¥S7E for (veag) 

qarerat for (aateraz) 

. afata for (afr Fq) 


“we “eo 


wk Ww 





Rh. 


x. 


( gro ) 


arenfaatanea: agammenfemtacgiat 
zat at nf ata WTAE, ateafa: erat tn 2 tt 
ReTRTAT viaaq CARTE aciertgra 

ud & great feat qa afr: WRK 
RET Fate wee TET Te itera \ 
wala ae ofaferqaaeamaransa WRN 


LLP LL LPL LL LILA LI LL LA 





RY. (3) 8. taflet (m7) c@let: for (xeiet) 


%. erat: (a) for stat 

(1) &. agarre for (agent) 
X. oTrearfrarTEe for (areafratrat:) , 

(=) (. Hz for (MeerTa) 2. Telet: for (<PIet) 2. <A for (zat) 
3. afeat for (afem) 


(=) 3. stem for (ae) 
&. water (7) wet & for (aAteT) 
4. Ue ae (71) for (TAH) 
aATAT (7) uate for (3atat) 
is. WUT for (Ta) (7) TUTAATT for (Ta yfe:) 
(=) &. aatgr for (ater) 
4. UareN for (way) 
%) %. adler for (meter) 2. we for (w) 3. afer for (aft) 


( 

(a) 3. feasted (m) for (frarqed) 
¥. T€ (7) TS () for (wg) 
%. wearer (m1) for (ze7ea) 
&. waTaaEed (a) for (HaTTEeT) 


(a) 2 Fraerey for (faasrqeedt) 


3. 
g. Teas for (TaTGact) 
‘&. marramed for (waTTEea) 


: (a) & Seam for (act) 


% gery for (wg) 


xe. (t) 2 


. wa (7) Fat for (wa:) 


. fara (a) (a) for (faa) 


Re. 


9. 


( eRe ) 


SpIeRTATA S wretezaneaTt aeterTea: \ 


arent FrereratearereereTTe NIWA 
seperate TIT 

Tea A afearha: gear verte rea kcal 
Tee ATTRA TAT TATA TTT: 

re ERTS sige AAT W REN 
arteryfienetea: srrazat aeafa ae: qatq | 
araafiatfrenirccarh afaat ahtat i zo 1 





arargrt (7) (=) for (aTatq TAT) 


. 33T for (zBra) 


a. Wa for (Az:) 
. Fat for (7a:) 
. Teaictefentfa: for (aearg aq afeatfe::) 


¥. Geatet for (TATE TT) 


(#) 2% 
2. 


(tT) 2. 
is) t 


. oearefenfa: for (searaag afeatfa:) & seat for (gear) 
. Waa for (Get) 2. wey for (Fez) 

. aysTearaeag (7) (4) for (eaMagaeETAA: | ATA) 
. Teareaa (s1) for (eater) 

(7) ¥. 


waa: for (sex) 

wa for (Hz) 

Bue TERT Ay for (MISTERAAA: aay) 
wa for (aa) 


sateryfmated: (7) (3) for (sitseryfwetar:) 
asafa for (safe) 


DPESPSPASLADLSSS SDD LDL ILL LL LAL Ee Pm 


( arr) 


smpnirnyie: warefsteryfnceatiet: | 
areata aTeTt eemafenttin: TET aT 
afenrate aa guitety fear afraiten: | 

AAG AT afeara Prammafeat Tt (= a) wife WRU 
Teabeeatem eaten Farah eargraiea ] 
SaRHAT garatarfirernifeet feaett: i 331 


v 


Yt); z) typi a 
i ae eo (oO 
09 | oo | Xo Zo | Yo 








wWrnrre. 





PE LAA LA LLL LS PPA A DLAI SIDA DP LAPIS 


88. (4) &. srratferafe: for (amparfrayie) 
(@) 2. afte: for (eafra:) 
RR. (8) ¢. afemat (7) (=) for (afeara) 
3. afeaterafsaa (7) (=) for (afeatrafrrrar) 
(wt) ¥. aexe'a for (aerg'ar) 
(3) x. zedtgfg for (exisiq) 
(%) &. fart for (fat) %. sfewat for (afesrat) 3. afaaree for 
(afeatert) 


a3. (3) ¥. afer: (m7) (=) for 
(afar) 
x, wrgaatet (*) for 
(Agate) 


2. semTAe at (3) for (sraztaz) 
2. gat () Fa for (gt) yw 
&. feaat (=) for (feaar:) 
(n) 5. qaaates for (artes) 
(4) 3. gat for (ga) 
(*) 2. faarfre for (frarfteat) 
(a) 2. aaae for (aia) 
3. gat for (gat) 








ct. 


faafeaurgy abagmatdtnat exyftenat: 
oageaTeare fanfed ate: TARA Teta 
faatct afereraaitrain ARATE | 

fayaer acafadt STC al 





PLL ADLLL LL AAD DLE ADL LL DD LA EL LEP ELD LLIN 





av. (a) &. fardte (7 ) for (faafet) 
we. fama: for (afxcit) 


. Waqeareacnaal (7) vaqearernaat for (wayeaRaTTay) 
. farea (7) for (fasfed) 


. Bye for (arya) 


. f.feat for (aferatt:) 
. faafed for (farted) 


. uaa for (arya) 

. Baz for (at: 

. vem for (zaat) 

. aff (7) for (afeat:) 
. BATA for (way) 


. fafarcat (1) for (faetat) 
. Tae (T) TTS for (THT) 
_ FeaaS At: (Tt) TeaTAG AH: for (aeeitatatt:) 


‘aed’ ae Ie sat sifee set 


a. faersit for (faetst) 

2. 

3. aeeaTeaTT: for (AeATATAT:) 
_ fafireat for (Prats) 

. @ for (=) 

. anced: for (APAeaTTT) 


aeata for (TAT) 


( wv) 


ad sat aferteata agaafaaray 
vei Etat raragatean rary W3EU 
agNITEGRE: agifarye sae: \ 
afem feat aeATyaA ares N39 0 
we aerarent afemifeaie afaatta | 
samreteanarat sea AEAARTERTA Was tl 





TOUTE TRTTEOTS CORTESE POULT EIEIO 


2G, (3) 2. waza (a) ete eat for (eat? at) 


2. 


go afar for (afenr) 


. TEeT for (azz) 

: erat Ro for (etaz eat) 

. Bed for (Sat) w. Heat for (geaT) 
. BH for (ea4) 2. fewer) for (agai) 
. TaeTNys: for (Teta: 

. afefeataa for (afefeataa) 

. TEarTgar (a) for (earTgas) 
» Wega for (vexqAT) 

- & for (89) 

- Beg for (ZIey) 

. Ufa for (afr) 


. agar (=) for (afr) 


aenrencaat (4) for (saedtreaeaat) 


pa for (ua'reraret) 
fzae for (faci) 


. vearat weraairedtaersreay for (weataieraret aaediaed- 


eaaTERAT ) 


. sergeant for (sersterraret) 
. Pravia for (afrarta 2. gaa (wera) aerate gat qa ageme 


waa Fate for (searternarstonetinearcreee ) 


OPSLSLS. 





{ 22x ) 


cemtagiteat wat eeatsaareaticn: i 
eraferarefa cageanr afar feat: WU 
weft Fagatt TRAST CRT Yo GH SATA: 
aniendt PafircererETR NA 0 it 

fiver carer a Faas Ree RgATIT | 
wiaferqeareaaat ante ame ¥en 


LLDLPPL IPL PDIPI SPL LL I LES 


38. (9) ?. seareaqaiartat (a) saarearagaat for (searenqaitaz) 


Ye. 


2. eating for (cafe) (7) srrrecfafa: for (seaereafaa:) 
. Sarfasre (7) for (sarfrat<) 
(+) ¥. ead: for (za) 
(=) &. searagquiates: for (geareTqahed®) 
. aareafad for (seraeafiaa) 
(#) &. Gaarea for (qa) 


Av 


. (a) % svete (7) (7) for (sefaatt) 


_ aemiaefertrdt (m1) sentatefarerat for (arereereret) 

¥. fafarttiteaazey (7) fafitcttrerage for (faferrtrtea- 
Tat) 

(7) & fagatas ae for (Pagar: a) 

(a4) 4%. aente for (arta) 

. efaraat for (erat) 

(&) 2. fair for (fasit) 2. ear’: for (2are:) 3. afta for (Serqat) 
%, faatisted for (fafa) 


oe 


AM 


STATA EAT (at) saaaaTR AT era for (savactaaearar) 
wat (*) for (att) 

gitar (7) sreqtrary (4) for (wereqttat) 

gata for (gata) 

sfaferqaaretnaraart TaSyAT TAT 

gfaar sada eranfavar ae arat 

for (afwat ararat caanfeasat aeaaearar | sfaferqaaret 
war arin weTEyATAY Ul) 


CaRe J 


soreiaraas geafeatrere carafe t 

y a 
MTEUTTAT: Ha: ae aT aw WR 
AFIT WEATTAT Ys afirettet HUT: | 
aren ate feemere: atte: Neg U 
srtfirr RTT: CaN E AT: FAR waaay 
peatafrestzette gernieat Neveu 


ALAS SS 








¥2. (4) 3. eater get for (eat: ae a) 
WaT (1) for (# 4) 
aay faait: for (earafaatr) 
qeat: for (TAT) 
(a) &. dat for (aa) 
3. aa ced for (aaaT ) 


“a 


(7) 


ee eG 


(%) &. qeet for (aetea’) 2. wat for (# 4) 


2. afratrere: (7) (=) for (afrattaz) 
g. Ewateatiat gt (7) (a) for (@oaraTieTEA) 
3. fartera (=) for (ferreaa:) 


Cel 


(=) 2. gr aa eaniae yet for (aeaTaETiaTyT) 
3. watfas (7) (=) for (sarfirs) 
a. Bae (1) GTT for (aaa) 
¥. ata for (aR) 

2. aaamt (saan) (1) THAT for (WaaT) 
(=) 4%. zee for (ef) 


(4) %. Seem for (eaeeTT) 
_ & weit for (aed) 


~ 


2. aaaT for (taaw ) 


(=) %. gem for (eaaary ) 2. ay: for (xigaT) 


(SRE) 


aferafeerafrrstsy gre atig Yar 
fasetteat cfaaeig arenfeatrg nyu 
sig, sreareieé faqaerter Hat Tay | 
areata qed eateries EMT Mt ve 
remain eet: AgeRTRTTEET | 
fad aremt eaeafgat sraesatet: RCE 


(#) &. 





PLL LPL DLE LDL LSS 


wat (1) went 

aataft (1) aatirgfar war for (aig 1) 
vfraeig (4) for (efareg) 

awaaeq (1) (=) for (wAteT) 


_ fameitad for (Pameitera) 


ay for (wet) &. aetafe for (eta) 
afrafemfaratacat rag at wing gfria for (wfraferafa- 
patary eter AT Yar) 


. J: for (fa) 3. fray for (<faz) ¥. wen for (a7) 


quae (7) (=) for (TUT) 
qaz for (Faz) 
aredat (1) arettax for (araiaz) 


Fax for (3H?) 


. Wed for (qarat) %. araitat for (araat) 


aretat for (aTearayt) 


arian: (wt) (=) for (Arata) 

weet: (7) (=) for (weet) 

eat: (a) for (ear) 

frdaten (x) feetterenett for (Pratt areat) 
oreatrgataacentat: (at) frecfeyer for (areafrygreaeesatt:) 
aeyrat (=) for (gas) 

qafeatat: for (srazsatet:) 

aed for (azd:) 2. ae: for (yaw) 3. dia for (a) 


tL. 


¥s. (a) ¥. faetatar (i) for (faetaiat) 


( gs ) 


afeat fardaireegrataramgreneM \ 

ud fadtaiar: anit at ufaaq se Ut 
saadaataty agitate 4 afay at: 

wate ftanat Tenet THE rraitiatg vet 
anfertere frit Fal aa eatarereget: 

Tea: anfaftandy: cafeat fara feet ara W¥ot 
atesfentfarafentinenterntsat Te BT: | 
afafaanifenta: gaateay af WAPI: Tete) 


LLL LILLIA L DY 


g. areat: (at) (*) for (area) 
4. Genta (a) for (wate) 
(1) %. faasigicacercrar for (fraser: + atta) 
(#) 2. ant: for (avert) 2. faeorer for (faaaian:) 
3. wrafrdarraaq for (qt arefaag) 


ve, (3) 2. waardaaral (7) (a) for (st artaaratq) 


%. meMteieaiat (at) (a) for (weatreaiaz) 
%. wea: for (Tear) 

(1) 2. Wewazfa for (weefa) 
4. atmat for (atrefq) 

(a) ¥. wet: for (a gat) 

(%) ¢. aafaa for (afm) 


xe. (#) 3. Tet (m7) for (weye:) 


2. aifsar: (at) cafedfarfser for (cafettferfset 
(t) 3. waite for (req) 
(=) ¥. arfearenta for (atfrersia) 

2. cafecitfraifsan: for (cafedtferarfsar) 

X. BAG for (Haq) 
(=) &. eafeanfear for (eafertferrtfent) ¥. eft for (#fq) 


x (4) 2. wet for (area) 


(4) 3. wer for (aE). aT for (war) 
(®) 2. aw for (faa) Mos 


( ere) 


vafeaet feareat afearea: rents: TRAIT | 
ater feria Faq ‘afeeafi WARN 
arfizat enyateat afer: MITT et Gea | 
AIATATAIENE TaaTEiaz feray ux U 
mranteniee TATA TANG A ata: TAATATY 
gay qantas afrererentan Tet: UNS U 








PPL SILL LA 


42. (4) 2. Ba (7) sarfeaat (=) for (safeatt) 
(7) 3. sraferat: for (sTreanfirat:) 
¥. Berg for (Hag) 
(3) X. ataecafentacrel for (atreaq afeniecred) 
(#) %. Sfeatfanet atea for (afeniqare) 
2. aferarad Hag for (afestrcata aay) 
4B. (4) 2. Tfqar: for (afta) 
3. fercat (1) (=) for (facat) 
g. age (7) (*) for (att) 
(a) ¥. sfggat: (4) for efsgat:) 
4X. eaeTrat for (qatatrcgiaz-) 
() % sma for (srt) 2. afar: for (afar) 3. faea: for 


& 
R 
8 
ce 
2 
¥ 
y 
(*) 8 
(77) 


(*) 2. 


(farat) ¥. TeaTEtax for (TRaTEAC-aTaz) 


. HT for (FATE) 
. FE (4) for (az) 
. Searacaarg (1) srerafestacrat for (afesiat Faz) 


gaifantfer (1) gahedtfes for (gaafenter) 


. areatfreagat: for (aearfrareat:), Saat TAH HET AY ZI 

. Ufentataarg for (afestataaq) 

. gayfeaticr for (qrafeatiaa) 

. BraTg for (wag) (7) 2. atfere for (arfas) geet ete dea 


RX Sl 

AAT ET AAT TST AT I 
Teafgfastest rife arenfir: wx 
waa ag ufafera site ovat vat Z| 

Aaat for (waz) 


( 220 ) 


4 ‘2 
sferateer afagar afrareararrafcare feat: 
TMATAPATA TAT CAMA TAATAT WKY U 


MLPLLIPSLS. 








ux. (@) 2. gat for (gat) %. eat for (area) 
3. watfeaferigedt aeitteaag for (aeraminaltaweaaat 
TaTT AT) TAHT BATH HAT RE ZI 


(#) | eareraratarear gaweraT ae I 
araachrsrira fearhe yfrerareata: WAX 
for 
Sferafear afe gar afuarearrrafeaeaenth: | 
TARATTANTTT BAHAAT THAT AYU 


(7) &. gat (7) (=) for (at) 
2. Tfgateaeat (7) afrareseaty for (afuareatara) 
3. Tarararast for (seraratacaytaz) 


fro—aa ean Hum atc tin owe as RAT HATAT vv 
faet 21 df 2 — 
Comadheaaiat fret \ stfadfeariatfuerrenta: yy i 
for (FETA TTET TAT TATA 7) 
(at) 4. sata for (sfea) 
feo gaat sated frerifisr B—aeiten dear ve Z| 
smifarseaitregeaam 7 Farad’ for (aareratrertadt 


WATT TAT 7) 


(7) . gfacrsearaferrefertt for (gfvareararaferaafesta) 
3, aereratat for (aareratreareaz) 
&. GaN for (aeaTTT) 


( 232 ) 


rer arefeerfactieantt finer Atha: | 
aatiea ufemrtaegeat aT was YEU 
meres: BEAT FHM wear aT at: \ 
ara sianentarag mgReEUTAR MTU YSU 


ws 


u&. (%) sfarafesr afe gar afuares carafeaa afeatta: | 
arated afenrfregedt ant weeaes | XS 
for 
arearctaeriare fear haa fererarenhe: | 
aratfed afeatiregeat aint WeeTsA WE 


(fa) sa eite at gata —afafear yy at saad WE 


(a ‘) fao Se care at Teett Sher fae cate at ifr det care Te 1 

eH Tea UY fered F 1 
q. ‘farargiot feat, srhrifeaririigcareahe: yy i’ ge oft 

eae UR ae eet aT So at “weNfeT WET’ 
fraat 1 Xs U1 teat frat St 

(7) -ae eee ee fe H eT SI 
aaat cee Tiea—a SF yy dearer Rie TY sat Gh es 
Ta TH YS TEM aes ets aT cae Tha, gaat ara Tha 
fl cat freq eatery 

(a) 2. met oe Tt wre UE TEES 


yo. (3) 2. atafraquereatat (a1) wy atrafereneat for (airaftaq we 
FEqTat) 
2. arat for (arat) 
3. Weqrat for (wea) 
saat sere sea frat Fad F 1 
(a) ¥. wat for (Beat) Watatragwereaiat art for (sitar 
TETAMIe Att) 
(®) %. wrat for (wat) 2. TETAfa for (sirafr) 
, agate for (wereataz) ¥. att: for (at) 





PLLPL LID LL LL 


ay 


( 932) 


ag eiriererraret RTA: nrvateat: ' 
alten earuyme fate? Ys I 
aeyaeg fy TUTTE TENT | 

af aerate areat sre: wa NEN 


AIS. 





4s. (1) &. Writ agave: (1) aareaarat for (Aa RATA!) 
2. arreafeat: for (aarrafeat:) 


3. georatfe (7) Hut easaaret for (Rafesastfe) 
¥. SqTe for fara) 


(7) %. arg: for (arg) 
(a) %. Ataragmel: for (Araratart:) 
2. ararafeat: for aArafeait: ) 
3. gedandt for (wife) ¥. aae78 for (fat) 


(®) %. mareK for (aerTaRarat:) 2. eat for (fast:) 3. wet for 
(at) 


us. (1) &. TOTegat Tarweag (7) TTA earaargara for (quTearedtt 
eq) 

3. Ht gaa gat (1) setgay sat for (ae Tara) 

(1) &. ay for (ag) 
we. ITT; for (srTITTAy:) 

(a) 3. TUT argatereata for (TUTeaTgaTTEATA) 
¥. Bet for (az) 
5. prayers for (weet ) 


s) 1, aifegaet for (ste yew) & ate (H) for (afe) 


2. UTA arf for (gereargat FeaTg) 
| aatsagery wea for (pifererrart) yx. meq for (TATq) 


( 233) 


Reman aga fewreact yt 

mene eagaty HEMT go Ul 

penis Us aaa 
HARTA STEM: Wgen = 

weal eek eedertoget 

ait aergferant frararied waft geT nn aR 


PLL. 


So. (a) ¥. aret for (areit) (7) atgat: for (argue) 

. aaas (7) for (atgufz) 

at for (¥e) 

weqraate for (aeatacraie) 

ataareat for (@teqareat) argwet for (aga) 
ysratet for aaraiat 

arguret for (amgareiy) x. eaatgagt for (atgafy) 
Reataertia for (aeqtaaraic ) 


aug for (wat) 2. eT for (fat) %. ysrmat for (yt) 


argza: for (agarei) ¥. afe for (sfx) 
Heraand for (HeqtTTAe) 





wen 








LLLLLL PL LDP 


—_ — 
Ay 4A 
— — 


_ 
yy 
~~ 
eh EO a SE RR 8 


&%. 


=_— 
4 
— 


egat (1) (™) for (xgat) 

aaaaat (1) aHautat for (eea'az) 
famenferd for (faeafete) 

aaaaAt for (aRaTATT) 

. TVA for (xgar) 2. wleaae for (wat att) 
eat sera for (TRACT) 


~~ 
jy oA 
wa ae 


a 
Se ke SR ee 


&2. (a) %. at aval (1) ararat for (aratef) 

a. areata (7) (7) for (ararfa) 

2. arargfer (7) aratgfaaed for wargfrat) 
¥ 

. 


. warraz for (wy) 
atarat for (ararit) 2. ad for (anitefa) 3. ara for (Fa) 


ae 


cfrafaaafesated aa FIRE af Te 
away sitar sia garg Ta ER U 
meareaeatid vip Tra me ferorratfet | 

arta aE were a a0 Tea 
rent egeatt RASTER ATER TET | 
samernanfratzafadt: 5g BTA gy 


£3. (a) e. qafer (1) aaferated for (qaferafet) 
2. guifg (=) for (gurite) . 
(«) ¥. rat for (area) 
2. wary for (ata) 
(=) 2%. aaaafed for (anfeaafed) 
(@) &. afea for (aed) %. atarg (7) for (arata) 
2. garg () for (garg) 
¥. (a) ¥. webegelag (7) (a) for (waegratAe) 
4. Tra (7 ae 
% aagEG (1) (5) for (wees) 
3. valga: (7) aererat: for (wergs ) 
(7) ¥. xq: for (waz) 
(4) X. araeg for (arrang ) 
3. Wetsena: for (aTeIsTe ) 
(7) 2. awe for (WET) 
%. TelET: for (aereHe) 
sa. (Rt. Tere (5) for (TER) 
2. seared: (7) seareraat for (szareqaa) 
_—}, Bfaerfeafaet (7) sfarafestag for (sfrafearfaet:) 
(7) ¥. wemtfa: for (weamTfe:) 
4. eqpafa for (egevft) 8. farerarz for (fasereaz) 
(3) i. seareaaa: for (seater) 3. sfrafeataet for (wfrafentfrat:) 
(&) &. weannfafeereds WRT TENT Vera: | FETE Fae: 
qe TA: saa oprofa afear faa: was ae 
for Fernit: tethers | sear afara- 
feoifae: ryirirert 1)” 





SLDA 


( 23x) 


eget mgt gees are 206 
memracatag feet ateatarn aa nee 
TOUT aati aia gMMA TR serTENT | 
ae GENET Fea MeN TET 1 gO 
renee age arega emeetig ag wt 
meugrig SBT argintintiensty TKCaT 
gate fecarar fares sitearerrat | 
aria a afeealt aera HEATTAT: Ngan 


LPPDP LDP LD PDIP LLL LLP LLL L PPD LL AS 








& (Bt (A) (@). for (3) 
(1) 3. Paarl for (Frafe) 
¥, ara for (area) 
(a) ¥. daw for (zafir) &. yferwed for (q fra) 
(#) %. wfor (a) 2. arait (1) aTe® for (aa) 
ee. (t) 3. ater (1) (4) for (aez) 
(7) ¢. sfaeeaarfett for (sfrrgrafet) 


¥. Gen ware: for (Gera) 
(=) ¥. ae for (af) 
(=) ¢. sree arfeatt for (sfaaigaarheat) 
2. BF Aten for (qsaz) 
es, (1) &. TerBitg (1) for (aerqAlg) 
(7) 3. eapfig for (eqefig) 
(=) 4. mega for (weg) 
(%) &. vem wtigarat for (wergtigarn) %. dreary for (Hteartg) 
¥, WEAaE for (wea) 2. eg xg for (erefre) 
me A WATT F | 
&&. (4) & eae for (fegtarfeerat) () gaferrarerafarar for 
(qaierrarfesrarirrar) 
&. Fy (at) aeMeareraa: for (Berean) 
3. Tae geadaa: (aaa Gerad: for (aed quran) 
(*) 4g vite soar ae, . 
(a) &. fegargatferar for (fegretfrrar) 2. 2 8 for (By) 
3. ae Faraday: for (aadgaraae) 


( e3e ) 


4 3 re 
water a fade yearned aanfsatay | 
e e* 
meMmAATE afacatat Aaa sa UW wo I 
¥ 


gfe aera aarHlseaTa: 1 


gfa aft arqiegefaara agarerfaaarfirarctaart: 11 go 1 


a 


30. (=) a. 


2 


(7) 3. 





arTal Tatearearat 


I 


waft (7) () for (7a) 


eaar for (Fr) 





arferarig for (arfeeTay) 


MAR TAIT TATA MRTlATEATA: It Wo 
afa at serrcarara facharat areata AaTCaT 


for (mena ATeUfA TAT TATA lool BT TATA TAA SCATA: ) 
me TAH TACT TET FI 


. &t for (et) 
. afar’ & seara:’ ae yt 


fro-nfaftar W3— 

afe st wenrarart faxfaat zateanit aarcat | aa caer att 
Faq Woo TH ATH Levy waders ul Sheoafe Yo TA | Val 
wa 8s Tae to wart | aa oer fete TA AT TeTTITe TeqaT- 
ered eit areata satft ft corer aa gfetanferfrrater | 
wat FT latte gee fayat arfeat fafa sat 1 afeyen-gg ar 
ae ate Tag uo: werefy afedtaraegectgeay | eT 


fated aret aaa oferta | aerorerd: YH way | eae Tears 


errgatetfarortd | errand 1 ot seeded: tt ateeg ae 
RE 1 GG | WG SESE ee va TI Fa 
me Tare few weerra aisey afaesdargit: gat- 


Pret f& aq 1 acrearmears gaanfie aed fagrarere 1 & 


ate Toy Predis at fergenfere i 


( e38 ) 


WA AA TAT ATAHTSM AT: 


2 art Venegaaiuaenaeta fagrer | 
aat amfekea A CIGSIECCLGRUAL 

ararg: Toared haere: Sfgaie are 
BAA BATT eRe rena aaa WIN 





we 
* 
~—. 
4 
— 


—_ 
J 
—S 


ma A TK Wo 


— 
4 
a” 


. faaiatg (1) (=) for (faaterz) 
. Fare (7) (=) for (42) 
. saeathy (7) sfreafit for (saath) 





sata for (4 a1) 
eaeat (1) eaaatt for (Seat) 
waqarenaafed (7) sergavateatea for (erraredfa) 


™: 


ezem for (eeeat) 
Breamaafet for (warteafer) ¥. frarrarg for (Frere) 


. saearft for (saerfit) 


fro-sfafea tSs— 

WT FaATAs CHATASCAT: TTT 1 AAATH LRooe 
STaTeeeal TTA APA TAM | Poo aT weer fr § 
aes ed wetfreat Taras uel fag asctate 2 at wale 
fefa ¢y aot a faaaiter i dty xe aa a aie fe 2 ee Fe 
¥ at 3 Te Seay tu wedtarhs gafeeta 


- Paar for (T= aTez) 


amaeraag (7) txeaq for (araaeeq) 


. ot for (ara) 


epfaer for (egefrer) 
ary for (a7) 


. eraT for (erat) 


( 38) 


anf Stary rasta facies aq 1 

sae eat war mee a eG 30 

ariaat mratetty aTeTIATg afegmat mq! 

BWoooo FE gat aiiemTg CAAT at 7 EAT ne 
afagramtatt zaqefa 4220000 aes amity eqEEy \ 
frarciteeqaarat aarat BGA FA yu 





g. Guta for (Farag) (7) wa: Tarra at for (qatar z1) 
. wana (T) TancTeataat for (aanTeaTaat) 
3. satan adteag (7) for (aagtaat Arq) 
(4) ¥. sTagteat for (rata?) 
2 qaNeTaUit for (qaraeaaat) 
3. water aat TAT for (aaTsT Tay g Td) 
g. wawet for (ariwet) (xt) artwetgs for (arixetgT) 
2, weird for (Ferg 4) 
a. anna (7) for (7 TeITa) 
(a) ¥. adtatg for (sTaTT2) 


(1) %. waduet for (aa wet) 
&. T TaEATA for (a TeATT) 


g. ¥RR000 (F) for (¥RR0000) 
aaa for (ara) 
2}. erserag for (eqse7 ) 
fro—aa atta at geet Thiet wet ferftenre fear yar wa sree 
dtar 81 vet vet @B evita eet Ghia WH set Ba 


(a) ¥. grefraren: for (xfagrarat) 
| A, wafer for (wagfe) 

~ Bi for (G7) 

— ® pReo No 

() x ¥3R00 aeiled for (£320 00g 


a 


G a 


ra 


Ce 


— 


mu} 


ec 
— 


ttm 
Aro SYS KR a WD vo 


4 
al 


— 
al 


2 


~~ 


( 238 ) 


graniferaacsa fee’: ae TERTAG | 

Tee AE: eat negairiaarerary tt & 1 
TETEETA area wafa aitsrafierarg | 
sart sated 3 fi arg aaa: Wet 
aig’ qrat waft zante fea: ofeen: 
ae ea TATE wufa fear: Ue 
mmaaat arafa were ageaieaTag | 
TgEt Fag Tema ATA TE: We 





Bw Kw mo po K ws VV wo 


vet eats aT Gate Ber TI 

TUG (1) Teaea: for (AeaI—TeaT Fa:} 
T) efatq for (aegatq) 

grayiat for (grauifz) 


. aagaag for (wa szarTz) 

. 3a 7 7 for (a7) 

. Sarat for (wrra) 

- Brag for (qa) 

. THAT: for (asfFa:) 

. ofefa at amare Frye for (aete¥ wafe sftertfireray) 
. Fat the faega fret g— 

‘canteat safe: agfvareat gee’ 


fro—diad tf ag 3— 


wea wate atsafeerat | vatat dats a fear yRaasaA: hott 


maig vaifra 2 afeat afer 2 
sraiseat (=) for (arate) 
qantas (7) eanftfat for (garftak) 
amarg (1) for (30°g) 

safe (7) for (waft) 

arise for (HsTAvsa) (=) 
aaryittat for (aattat) 
merge (at) for (werserfer) 

aerat (77) he for (aera) 


( vo ) 


7 AATPTAGTET: aenfara garfead | 
BRAT enivat mu a wrAtfa HeATPA UW go UI 
gare fewaret arecafiratea wafa weqtat 

a waraat TeRTRT TE faeateaenTg nee 
qiteareagatq fetta agara Tae: | 
cial uel EARTH NTE fag Ft eV u 
mn: raragiint age sagemtate: g¥¥oo | 
PUR Caninaasiciccecd crfrat: 1h g3 ut 





go, (4) %. mented (a) (a) for (serena) 
Q. eRe AMA for (aH way) 
(a) 3. amg THyEeM: for (HTgTAGRET) 
2%, (a) &. siteret for (vera) 
3. Vafeat (1) Cefaatter for (zefaater) 
(1) 3. ferat for (fataTa) 
(3) 2. gectafaat for (qecafrat) 
. 1 AaerRRt for (a warat) 
. agaty for (agai) 
2. fara for (feta) 
3. 74 for (az) 
%. 
rt 


of 


. area for (Wate) - 
. aatg eat for (aatHeaT) 
23. (m1) %. af (a) (=) for (snfas:) 
x. waftat (7) (=) for (aafret) 
3. ageafats: (7) (@) for (agganfrts:) 
; ¥. wtafreré (4) for (aefrez ) 
(a) &. grat for (grat) 
| §. Reraretert for (ferarttaz) 
(3) ¥. efaeg for (atefreg) 


SP APIPLAY 


( ee) 


wafer arate’ cif wenttag | 
ward Bye a fare: egetanft a neeen 
eteafrats atora afin werzerret gratTeeT | 
arearrd enfin frraT: eanfersarneard Wenn 
apeurae aT cand Retiee BATTY | 


eqefredarars fafrreg recat: Ween 





Pe 


ey. (@) 2. attefrsrfes (a) steftarfes for (eefrariza) 


wa 


cx ww 


. was for (quae) 


wag: (1) (=) for (waeqa:) 
wae (t) Fae for (Fat) 
farsa for (fafera) (=) 


. afaara: for (aftata:) 
. Arefranifer for (safqarfzt) ¥. eereq for (Faz) 
) %. Meaftieterefets (1) sterafrfeitorafefe for (sreafriafa- 


art ofefer) 


Q. ufe year (7) faryeara for (vereemra) 


¥. 


gafsreraeat (7) gat arazat for (Grafrzar) 
areata (7) (3) for (sera) 


qefrgeard for (wsraeard) 


. afearagar for (grataar) 


. Wet HAT FAS! 


yerrteat (t) (a) for (Yerrrer) 
araTaat (1) (*) for (artes?) 
aearaTg (71) for (aaatq) 

ary (mt) for (17) 


ararerettata: (aT) for (ararrgreqat are:) 


(a) %. aTarguartate: for (ararerearat ara: 


( oR) 


arate amet marfearereMT AT t 
rdeaeatat a “eee aupU: BOTT UL U 
qafae a: afefafaasitaita ata aE TT: | 
aaafaraiaret wate aarents FH FEAT U te 0 
faut at ofcfertara: SALBATITATT | 
ame z TET a wafa cemeraafa i ge 
earerdent ® ae: afc firfarcraret: aaa: | 
sustfaataate aaaeren: afefratstq Wt Ro Ut 


LS AIDA ILE LLL ELE LD LPL 


ADL 





ts. (t) &. eat (7) (%) for (ze) 
R. HHHAT (7) THT Fa (THT) 
3. Sat for (er) 
¥. Tyga: (T) TAWA: for (AAW) 
(a) x. yafe for (xafe) 
&. mradaqeaieset (a) for (mavrqeiea) 
(a) ¥. aaET: for (TMA) r aeRaARAT for (aRAT) 
vs. (a) 3. aefam (7) (=) for (wafer) 
2. faaireter (7) faut: for (fradtetea) 
2 Ty yer TU: (7) Ty Yer TU: for (a FayHET TT) 
¥. avnfe for (qanfz) 
(at) x. adhe for (ate) 
(3) %. afaah for (fram) 3. at ywer for (aeryseZ) 
ge. (#) &. fawe (a) (=) for (faust) Q. Rit (at) for (Far) 
3. weet (71) for (weitere) 
(*) ¢. fastrataiyat for (Freier gr) 
oo aareaTEat for (aatearenat) 
Re. (8) 2. ataraey for (mater) s(t). gat for (ad) 
(3) 2. Gat for (eat) ¢. aerameTadh: for (areTerat:) 





( va) 


faoranatafe at afeta fe ga arxatitat | 

wea a wel fafed egetantafanaatet UIW?WU 
serene mat Payeerat UST | 
andseeacag starr zat waft 22 
errata 4 *aferrent anfastian agian ea | 
sieTET: TaTaTfeaat PaSTaT TET: aan 
gétam afteeereT searantenta | 
egeaaraTtat aomrerg a Fa eeE NY 
ariadanten afraght fad ered 
afrararrares froma afe aa: FATA UU 


PLPDP LDL LEN 





2g. (t) ¢. afer (it) (a) for (sfeha) 

\. aafat (1) data for (atatat) 

4R. (4) &. garary (m) (4) for (BTTaTq) 
(7) 2. TT for (Te) 


3. surat for (are) 
33. (9) %. arse: for (atsz) 2. Evifs (4) emf for (atria) 
(7) 3. Wega 
¥. AgTUT for (agTAT) 
4. wet for (eT) 
(=) 2. ceria for (afar) 
By. (4) &. wufear for (ree) 
(7) %. yaravae for (afer) 
3. yeaa for (yearargaz) 
(=) &. gt for (gar) 
uy. (@) 9. atacatfed af (a) setuearfen a ate for (artacarfentfa) 
2. HH: for (=H) 
3. saTsT for (sea) 
(1) ¥. agfa for (agft) 
4. BTavaTsaTSa for (srateTs' ) 
&. fasar for (fastrazar) 
(a) 2. weet for (at) 





( we ) 


ATATGATT gazetted fang a 

qa arat aguate requester WREU 
zeae ag aeareti faa: FeatearaT 
yetentfasttar aearTAyTEATaLT NRW 
aarafeat farce gare ge 
mea REET errant waa EMT We 
fafa sirisagtt SM ETT | 

meats qeaTATEMSTaAaT Feat RU 


PA LPDLILLL ANIINL LININE INIA OIE A 


&. (7) &. feat (77) for (ferat) 
2. Fae (7) for (rT) 
(7) 3. qatrerfeact for (gatreitferat) 
(=) & feaeinereg for (featereq) 
we. (A) %. eaasat (7) Sava for (waa) 
2. sfafatrerg for (frefatrerz) 
(t) 3. fier for (ear) 
2. sfafatera (4) for (Feafazrarg) 
(=) 2. zr for (greet) ¥. FeeaT for (eta) 
as. (H) t. eat (a) aa for (zz) 
2. Tat (#1) for (a) 
(at) 3. went aarerenT for (aeaTeT) 
(3) &. sasaareg for (zasqaTsg) 
¥. aft for (gait) ¥. wae for (ge) 


Re. (a) t. Feet gem (a) ase aT Tea for (ase AAT) 
% gat (7) for (gat) 
3. (Ra) 
wera (7) for (weterar) 
(%) 3. “wea” Ya X. getosaT for (zaqsaT) 
_ Wetter gat for (weteeraT) | 


COLL. 


ee 


eaaoatat RRTATTTARA wala \ 

Tet: seaafearen TENT safaerare fara 1 Fo 1 
Gast actin tuhegeeTT | 

STE MEY ETAAA TA 1 gaunt Ta: UREN 

wa feariarat TATA ETT TEETH 
egereafeea ge easaat siaarantit Wan 
aretggrefati easel TaeAT ER: 
areiedneeg anata agit aa TEST 








PLPPL PL LA PLL LP LE LLL DEM LE EF EL ES 


30. (a) 2. ceeft cfs ar afea eee ‘ATA | 


33. (8) 


A ROE Set ae oe 


. ATATTATAEA fow (ATH) 
. atfirpat xf for (atfararefa) 
. wafa are: for (waft) 


gee oie at ares ‘caafoarargarren ar 


. ATaTgMTe for (ARITATTaT) 

. fasy ae for (fasyaraat ) 

. eragift (1) for (graft) 

. aatE for (adler) &. aexHE for (xT) 
. @& for (t) 


equ (7) aelege? for (FERIA) 

e aistafaes (1) for (eguraafaes) 
aadt (1) saat for (aft) 

wgega for (weregrT) 
eqerattaes for (eqaTaataey) 
aasaat for (esqa7) 

aaataaat fcr (aaataafe) 


g. ager (7) (=) for (ag) 
2. 
3. aTaTd (7) () for (HTATT) 


eam: (a) (=) for (ega:) 


%. Agewa (7) (=) for (WEE) 


( sve) 


fader ATA mm gut a I 
STEAMER sferatas qALATAY nau 
. frsat ST Wea fadterearTTRT “FASTD: | 
merit at aaaarat wat at aq WRU 
aent faaTaTe PTA ARTATAHATAT TS 
BUTTS wtfertata: WEN 
afaratat: TATRA E TART TTT \ 

faggut a vata wat aeciaé aU: TRACE 





PIPLP ILA PIPL SS 


3%. () 2%. TU for (FUT) 
2. Us (7) weeGT for (wz) 


3. Frat (Tm) for (aAat) 
(at) ¥. zaT for (sat) : 
y. darfiratia for (sdafaertze) 
(a). &. qareasat for (Garersat) 2. We for (ws) 
ax. (a) &. mew (7) (a) for (gq) 


g 

2. Fat (1) for (at) 

3. aay (A) for (arta) 

¥. fara for (fadarreayat) 
%. TATA for -(ATeTATAY) 


(a) &. wear for (gem) @. Tae for (qa) 


a8. (@) teat (7) (=) for (ax) 
; 2. faatata for (fasratg) 


3. (#) &. sex (7) (=) for (a7) 

aiifeatfs (a) ahfe: atte for (at) 
|. aataeiztet (a) for (adtaziaz) 
) %. 3 for (ay) 
0 } 3. at for (at) 


ae 


& 


we xk ww mo vo XK aw wv 


et. (F 


~~ 


a 
Kas} 


( eve ) 


eA, fara sagitefataiacta 1 
SeUTRTATT ferga: aftates aratt 3 ATATAT UL 35 
aeeacaeeT SAAT aeaaragteran aq 1 

sata fewer oe aah a 2 ARAAAEATT WBE UI 
wT afectrratire: soargferta mes: 

wrt a: arars TREE NTEAT THN ¥oN 
sfeargfeerratieratertars aft a: a FAR 
arian: afar: rat orstieafet afin ¥en 


le is gl ea Sala ed a 


HAT wart for (aatq afeat) (7) |e: for (afr) 
sfraferadta at aaa (7) sfaefenadta arratg for (sfA- 
afes andl & ar arg ) ‘ 
asvaan for (saa) 

fadaefa: for (fadarafr) 

Teta: for (ferta:) 

aiat efaat for (araTq aferat) 

ae ay for (sfrafeat art +) 

wapeax (1) (a) for (wReT) 

eran (7 ‘ (4 2 for (aT) 

afeat for (afarar) 

gra (a) for (yz) 

wrt Tfadtseatas: (+) ara sryfedteafass: for (ste afeirea- 
Ferm: ) 

gfedt + stat orem: (Tt) (7) for (gferatat arex:) 

erat grad (1) erat a caries for (areat a: ears) 
ghrarrarg ary (4) yforaat sTy for (gfrrg wy) 
wmaTifadtiscates: for (ire yfeateafrs:) 

afeat (7) (=) for (afeat) 

areata for (aratt) 

faa (1) afsreerar for (af: ear) 

wyatt (7) (=) for Gryafa) 

afa (1) (4) for (fa) 

afart for (afira:) 


( ae) 


eaTAa aaa gaara CEE I TATLTATET | 
faainaegeai agereat feria WAU 
arereaeera aay sree fee eea TAT 

a seat SRA EA B: ae Ta SOTA Neen 
arivegearrat HEAT AIT T TFUA TTATT 

TEA AAT Psat gfgnararia atearfat uw xe 
arataty stat aa: sireat a at warferfege: \ 

fa a acer zoey apranisat 8: zara ney n 
Pause aT, HrieaTE hag 
weutfafadaragq sfafeaa fagnRay Wve 


Pw, 


2. (8) 











acgt (7) (=) for (aga) 
. fad (1) (=) for (Praia) 
wewrarai (4) for (weuratai) 
. fadarata (4) for ( fadaafar) 
ararataaty (=) for (srratarata) 
steatfat (7) for (creat) 
PRATUTMAT (wt) GaeTETHAUTY for (GrAgTYTAIT) 
ara for (arf) 
. arate for (are) 
. grgraraat for (gragTETaraTy) 
grarat (1) qeart for (gaat) 
Ge Tt (7) () for (qFaat) 
raat for (grat) 
gerert (m) geacra for (geeaT) 
tara (=) for (erg) 
(1) 3. areratate for (arate) 
¥. Garg for (Arey) 
(=) %. geteaa for (qaiera) 
-¥§. (1) ¢. feamegeay for (frenacaq) 
(3). &. Hemet for (mEq) 


43. (3) 


a 
* 
pn 
4 
— 


—, = 
A a 
we we wm wpe K aw a we K as nwo 


4. (a) 2. 


( ve) 


yeransaatenrta sede gaerf atear | 

atten srgettat enteferceantt seri n¥oN 
ererqdaaiat aemtagea aarrat a 
gugactinggeniotratioatercrren N Yeu 
grenraentrerry afer Fame RaRTTETH | 
dateanfetrmmemreTEaTaey WEN 

shi niger earectiearts: ea: | 

wer vaTda yerat afeet Peyse a WYN 
gaat Talfaats ceunfeg vate efeairaeay 
ag waa aa_qumercact eqereat fetaveary we 





we, (4). gruTit (7) (=) for (gvafH) 


we. (8) 
(4) 2 


a) 


. atfraeari for (atfafaceafir) 


a. faga (7) (=) for (farga) 
2. AeATg (1) for (aear) 
3. ater for (aeta) 


a. ara for (att) 2. sa (7) Say for (wet) 

3. atateanfore (7) aateaafefqra: for (AzreataPefeora) 
¥. atfaserfzmaifz for (atfrsery fasrrifa) - 

x. TRE for (sTeT) 

%. arate for (arate) 


g. tara ater (1) sitergdtear for (atttar wfzear) 
. wat (seat Ties F wet F) for (wa) 

3. arfarst (7) (a) for (afaeet) 

¥. ‘arn’ wet sifea vel x. aéleat for (yetear) 

g. ATH Dear for (sta afer) 

4. a: for (sd:) 

& TEFUTAT (7 ) aq @rTYTAt for (weqgarer<) 

R. TeTETTAT for (Te AAT) 


( tke) 


aateageenet MAM CaAT AAHAGTAT | 

aed a waqeat gacadl Aft AeaAls yeu 

Hea faetaren daraerene faa: TqCAT: | 
nearer 4 Usa: SqeTHEATG TeceT 
qearateahingaia qua arewteerfererartera: 
AAA THAT fervent afgaaaty ara nye 
TTA TET sham fayaratel : | 

aT eaten maraat TET Wa: WLU 

wfeatat efraa meatentaterert TAA: | 

aati agft TRENT PRETTY sfrafrag xe 





4R. (4) 8. arated (a) AateaTgT for (arg) 
2. Treat for (aeat) 
(4) ¢. ares for (arateq) 


43. (4) &. werfar (=) for (rerfier:) 
%. wat (t) (=) for (*Tar) 
§. CGer: TATA (1) eyeTETEMTA for (eRarTATA) 
(@) 3. eget: wera for (egerterTa) 
4. (1) & reeeat (7) afeateat for (szaTare) 
. ferera (a) for (ferent) 
(7) 3. a facaafe for (afeaaafr) 
(=) &. TerTeTes for (qeaTATe) 2. ferorfs for (fect) 
a. (A) &. Bat (7) for (ea) "2, Wer for (ater) 
(4) 3. auTargt for (mer) 
(4) 3. Tega for (axa) 2. HargMeat for (aregarey) 
Xe. (9) egfrgiy (1) egfrgee’ for (efter) 


%. aght (qt) for (agfr) Sneha 
(1): 2. aferfatat for (sfaferat) x. ite for (qitsdt). 
3) % eafge for (xyfaqe) | 

——& weeafittere for (wasiteafetirera) 


( we) 


starter fadarerq nefafarceet freerrTeTT t 
WaUTIeATfey Ts TAA H: TTA WMO UL 
vinta fefarari fer Fara het TeHLTT A 


TEATRERTEY AUTEN Fea UE 


PPL ILLIA S. 


x, (4) 


ef ager feadfa tata: aeTet Fa TET | 
wer egafeand tig areas Nye 
dara'at sfafeatd fear fiat wet 
arieaed entfindad aat Wala i go u 
eracfareng aratey aden aay ata | 
entender aatet ee ferarereaat aa: neu 
areata fer agent PAT | 
MARAT MMT AeaTATt qeeTETe WEBI 








LOLPLG LA PIL IPL LS PILLS PP LF 


Q. fadarergueg for (favararque) (=) feaararaue for (fadatarque} 


us. (a) 9. stafaft (a) statute for (sinfafa) 


2. ‘a’ wet. afafem 2 


(a) ¢. aafafa for (siafafr) 2. a+ 


2. weltaa: (7) werfaa: for (wefea:) 

2. auger for (fewer) 3. AeHeat for (AaAT) | 

g. fastat (=) for (Peart). eftrat (at) (=) for (frre) 
3. eat (1) ae: for (wer:) ¥. afer (7) afererferq for (Ae4) 
y. garfiyd fe for (emfiadaa’) 

¥. arfeafen for (wa caed) 

2. faa at (Tt) a TTT for (aTARTaT) 

2. gaurft (7) for (eretrfr) 

3. gyareqra t) (=) for (gaxareata) 

g 

Q 


) g. at amardat for (at avarraai) 


. agaarfa for (ageutfr) 


(aR) 


afer afecrarerreTeratiret Rut: atleaartrg 
ra TCT farafiztarasiterta:  €3 0 
ofa at wearers wareatseara: | 





SLL AOS 


a3. (a) 0%. aerated (t) aermoarq sfedeft for (aearara- 
woferef ) 


3. atarahary (it) for (Tderiat) 
(a) ¥. xfer for (aft) ¥. aeteaara for (@tenTaTa) 


TTR TTTH fae Th BF: 
(a) 2. aermqareatcdelt for (aemuretatreta) 


y. eter for (#eTATTA) 
2 Sfeeratgt for (weerrigi) §. ‘ela’ seq: ga ae Ge 





ne 
_— 

rr) 

— 


4 


4 4 
see 


uw 
4 


en 
— 


— 


Mj 


— 


cy 


ee 


( xz) 


ny afrareara: 
grea: 


afeat Frater q: sin (a) fren am faarnta 

apt & maT BETA vata Tas: A: gu 
fart aga: Tea: Saterat: TAT: t 

data teat sara fardaiat area wIeu 

emit Saar gatagrt at 

seer at daadsigataas: ng 

HEART: afeard arTEraciat Bee: \ 
TATATTT ISTE ANTE: waft: APTETE: nen 
fafa (=) for (faafr) 2. dafeatat (a) (=) for (aafraret) 
. gafiasratfa (1) (=) for (sae farsa) 

- sara (7) errerety for (TERA) 

. Brataty (Tt) (=) for (arararq) 

. Sfeart for (fea) 

. aafecisar (7) (=) eafertar for (eafarar) 

. TUT for (GT:) 3. TeleaRtTaT: for (Tet: Ferra: ) 
. agat (7) for (agar) 

adareaiaas: (1) atatgatare: for (ae TgatTze: ) 
gat for (agat) 3. maReIRT for (SEAT) 
aaatgataaa: for (aerate: ) 

aga for (#gu) 2. wreret (#) for (arereq) 
wafuadt: (1) qafgadt: for (aafueat:) 

fao get waite TAT | 

¥. aTTEIe: (#7) for (ATE) 


(a) %. afeqer (zat va & settee gat 8) 


. WATE: for (APTI) 
fao-ga aeaite F oegera  aite “aere:” ae afar ag FI 


at 


(=) . Beat for (Beis) 


( ge ) 


watucinaiaenta fanfare water at: | 

wateratarget Ranta RAT UU 

igri eareiterertteng faeaet eee TCT @ATIAT 

steaceta eenett fart AAT Bea AT UG UE: AAT: | 

Sarat fetay ergs feteaeiar ana: i 

atten fagafive seer oct et ER Uv nN erat TATA: 
qaqa aa: 


PPPLPL LILI PPL ALLA 


a 
a 
a 
YD 


a 
a 

Bui 
— 





eT 


. Tales (7) (a) for (aeatge) 

am: for (a7:) 

an (‘av get’ we wee ohare sete at afar oe 2) 
earegieaaat (7) earetiaaatagta for (easier) 
wmegfa for (tapft) ¥. vq (7) TeraTATT for (AeTAAT) 
saat (7) seeefatear for (safc) 

Pat (7) PayTeatez for (Prat) 

wares: for (tt: TATecT:) 

mg ve wat a 81s. gett for (sae) 
watiraarata for (eqreatearsaterate) 

sacete for (arazafa) a. war for (<erqUT) 
aared: for (44: qaTed:) 


a. fadtatarya (1) afedtareayer for (fadtarq wry) 
%. agurerafa: (7) for (egareefr) 

3. wareay for (qarca:) 

¥. Barer for (Bats) 

y. SenTeage for. (were wad Ty) 
froeryet sss ararca:” wee afin aah & t. 

a. feferewrgeafa for (fadtarg arqeefa) | 

2. aTOasts: for (ayUT Taft) 

4. STATEAa for (TATE Tat) 

3 

% 


C9 gee GS ae Be ae 


en ee Se ae) 
ae 8 aad OF AT 


( ex ) 


neagaingtiaehrrmen TIAA t 


siattargfira 3a Ban fartarearg nei saafediaanf aa: 
sate Bayete eat: Fae Tat: | 
ae Bar aferan: eatagatienfenia: nau 


ala agatarta To 


Sui fas TATRA TA: wearaeT: | 

qegrnest Tat SATA ETNRT TARA Ugo Ul AUTH Ho 
saeasha farmer farsanre: TATTETTTA: | ATA Ao 
safrefay wet FaraRerETETHAT 1 ge U 


PAD LAI SES. 


=. (a) & 
(7) 2. 





<at (7) for (2a) 
afaat for (wea) 3. afaese for (afT8R) 


¥. Berge for (Heer) 


x, 4 
(3) 2 
g. eafeatar: (4) for (wafeatar:) 2. vata: for (as) 


&. (F) 2 
(t) 3. 


waar: greg aft vat SI 
axa for (sitar) 


sratares for (sate) ¥. BasGar for (ate 


x. qrat for (aat) 


fro “gdta-& oft go” am sifine agt 2 


. STdt aaa for (aif To) 


. aft (at) (=) for (afat:) 2. wart for (seATATAFET) 
. Waray for (Ao) 


“sufaa qared” wea afer sat T 1 
award for (ae) 


. Sethe (1) for (HAPTER TT:) 
. weaay for (zaiay) %. TaeTy for (Ho) 
. amee Fao! ow aet afew ret 2 


zeaay for (zattg) 


( xg ) 


oe simmer agua grant Aa: t 

aaasag fay ‘waaaeaeaATt UgVN 
daacrrtarercit arate | 

aT qeasreaten utssfraifeteage: \ 

aanfeanteagrti eaaererarrafatgata nezu 

Hayle TAT GATT ataqurgd BTA: 

CABATTSTA TH, TABATA AAlA TAT Ul Vv U 

PATA: TATA feerarferaarg | 

armas faqareranrargia TATUM NK 


nr 





9%. (a) 9%. Het for (wet) 2. Aaa for (qradt) 
3. aaseraa (1) satseraeredt (Het) for (aagaaredt) 
¥, wey (7) Praiguacege for (frAguaags) 
y. urfarerft for (<a) (=) 
(t) ¥. ‘ta’ & ‘qarcariy’ aan oe set afar aa F 
(3) 2. wet dary for (ae da) 
%. Geraaga for (quart) 
92. (9) %. seesfredfst for (sismfraifes) 
2. RYSE 44) AMAT for (gE: 
2. am As) for (a7) 
¥, aberateqperat (1) ofarateagat for (sferatergrat) 
(1) ¥. afemnbagratfor (aferaiergrat) 
45) %. Et (=) for (az) 
uk. (9) %. Westy for (aargia) 
(=) 2. sof for (gfe) a. cam: SHH for (qeeareta) 


RA 


( exo ) 


eTEAT eat TETET FUT 

safer TA AAT CAH ATA mae Ue u 
fare sraaIt AAT: 

aaeoenciee aiqennrtfcarteaety i 

atfz qarenaara nem qaret arf TEAC) 

cared fegenfeterat TATA | 

sferen og Sat feqater ga 1a; Nest 

qatar maipeTemeT wate, AHLATT t 

ag frag meq aferd 9 ga defer nen 





Ne 


2%. (") %. saaatremat (7) (4) for (weTatTEtaT) 
2. aseat for (veut) 3. Tatar (7) TeqH for (seTTAT) 
¥. wera (7) (=) for (wager) 
4. arg (7) (=) for (aAaTE) 
1) ‘feera’ & tearca:’ aa aifra adt o 1 
) 2. waqat for (setTHT) 

&. etaare: for (sqagrz) | 
ge. (T) &. Tega for (Tara) 2. whey for (afer) 
g. saree (1) (a) for (SaetAT) : 
2. Seam” (mt) (at) Aeaa” for (Raa) 
3. wferer (1) (=) for (sferez) 
%. at (1) ag Te sf aT B 1 for (ge) 

(1) %. feaetaé for (fegehr) 

(=) ¥. @tfor (x) 
%a. (7) : afee (1) (=) for (watz) 2. tea (4) (=) for (eaeT) 

aa (7) ae for (asd) 
(7) ¥. peel for (wHlracaara } 
¥. Te for (12a) &. defeat cater for (aefarq) 
(4) %. Fagare for (Fegqrea) %. Pred for (age). 


( tas) 


feqerectiergtnd aed wate atdafaag | 
erent arate HTT HIATT: Rot 
af Sleaaare TATA: 

TATE fragymangatrargatrectenta: 
qaihrreageT st a BATT gong Rev 
wRRaATH g adeerargtitac TR | 
FRAT santenanada WRVU 
nfaunagaystiryraaataa qd eu: 1 
augrigaghed a(t at ag aN RH 

ae. (a) t. afte (a) ag Pred for (ayer) 

3. at (iT) THaHfera for (areata) 

3. cepfet (1) for (vate) ¥. stat rarer: for (gt eragIz) 

A. sferery for (Weta) : 

¥. fao STSV Fane’ aw wet afer wee 

&. Tyee for (aaet) 2. wraaferd for (aqrdafad) 

. aeaRfer for (anf) ¥. St for (Et) 


at. (m) gem (m7) for (ge) 
(=) %. ger for (qerq) - 











LILA LPL LLL A LOGL LL PAE 


a2. (a) %. asa (7) siete for ‘caa) 
2%. Yamada: (1) Gamaaa for (weTade) 
(u) %. afearfirar a8 for (afeatfratar) 
(4) %. Wea for (Yet) &. Aare: for (seTaaz) 
Pe rfeysetis (3 1) yarafergaraet for (aatferaarreat ) i 
2. Barre: (1) Fa: for (artes) 
3. Ha: (a) (a) for (aay 
|) & eer for gH) 
(8). for (RY 


Ae 


ae 


ing di wen etre wat: Ue 
natgargatacen’ malate | 
area erate fem wageiart nxt 
nfronrty TUT fraaashrrm t - 
eet framers: stag rgafeetergard WREen 
Frysen aatgaantiafioatitgat geaeT | 
papingss ferret afgga fase: TON 
2¥. (t) &. fea (aw) fe for (at) ies 
Q. Sher ve Ae: (a) for (ster a) oe 
(7) 3. fated for (faster) 
(3) %. fat for (ad) 


OASIS: 








x. (@) 2%. aT (ze then ar aiferr aez ‘ar’ 8) (7) 
2. (xre fe ‘eat—’ & ares atett 8) (7) 
a. fee (w) ga feat y4q for (gafeat waq) 
1) ¥. ysat for (gef) 
4) ¥. gaint for (aiwe) 3. et for (et) 


&&. (3) & gu: (7) (3) for (gq) 
% (aat ‘sft wee qa ate Hae 8) (A) 
(7) 3. faquradtas for (fayattadtas) 
¥. Page or (fasmerya:) 
(a) 2. eft ga 


yo. (#) &. get (7) (=) for (=) 
x., fet) Za for (ga) 
7 3s, fash for (Fasaia:) 
GH). BRR for (Bat). aay for (Hateah) 
%. fa for (7) «. fagfud for (feqa) 
(#) 2. Fe for (ga) ‘ 


(tee) 


sulfeargan, deguaariteantad TWAT | 
ata x asset: maiiat faa’ R61 
frrnagrearet fagahrasga set TAH 
BUA. qaaarana aaet em MRE 
Farge feng meee TT Wat aera 
gata gra’ aug TyATTAy Bo Nt 
Erma itieraetat UE Aaeia AE | 
Siaeeiterrs’ RATTT A 32 


LAD L 


35. (7) . Batee (7) Faire for (HUTT) 
QR. BTaaT (7) are: BT for (BTeaT): 
(1) 3. ‘a xifea wat & ¥. BUT for (af) 
(4) ¢. utga for (watfert) —-] aTdaNgueaT for (aTdaTgNeT) 
ze. (a) %. aTCETAe (7) for (wTTRATET) 
(t) 2. fram for (fara) 
Ro. (t) &. aa (7) gar Aare for (warez) 
(t) 2. B for (%) . 
3. BAe BT | (wat Taat chee Tae — art ‘gar & aren) 
¥, TNs for (ata) 
) > ferge for (ferys) 
2. Bute for (aeYtyst) ¥. gatatecas for (grtgieeers) 
3. (8) fro—agt ew sete ar gered fereat fair are SO ra sete 
Brar &, (32 ar aeareen ot at ferera 
a. aft for (afin) 3. aaateat (1) Tart for (saraea ) 
(7) 8. aft for (aft) 3. geet if - seduadiad’ aaaatrdaetay 
(a) &. fre for (fr) 
© Paomag sate agt 203 93 Fret gar ae sere e— 
fryayet qifreretaiad waaeads dapatreraas tl Rk n 
fae Reif oe 8 art ar arene HTT aeUERT B fra gar 2 
(&) ¥. Pree for (Frys): t. Taft-for (pifA): 


og } Sererae for (Sduaeia) 9. paednaTTEEy+ 





PPL IS 


COLL SLL SL 


32. (7) 


SS 


a 


“ap 


Ws 
aD 
— 
4 
Pens. 


AU 
x 


ee 


au 
ae 


~—m 


—_— 


a st 
ee Ne ee 


44 
—" 


a3 


Bs] 


= 
a 
eee eee ee 


( 2&4 


nelaragt ae aularaateet 

ayaa aaa} 3e aie, TTA 1 aR T 
stgmercetaigant feaazit aa: \ 
meTTeMRRTHTETT franfirgsratt: TEES 
suai aeat Hgts ATS | 
Ferirqaren ar Pactra att navn 
EOEET YET afrtar deta age te: | 
MOTTA TACT Raeag fat FA: uu BYU 





2. 


Kw mo Da wo we KR an de Kw Me Me SK Ww 


LDL LLL LLL DLL FS Le 


(fro—aget ifes fafirere faaat ya war sata Zra 2) 
srt (1) set for (qa) 

aUaaaaaat (a) for (wataraqat) 

awEEs for (aguas) ¥. TET (=) for (a7) 
we aq for (se) &. WTA for (TearT) 

agi wre 3¢ aafaas | 

aaufadangat for (auaraqtt) 

wei for (se) 2. qoute for (Arata) 

sfaafac (1) (=) for (efx) 

HaaX (7) (F) for (wT) 

sereeit (1) (=) (S) for (wert) 

fas aft: for (Prypraf) 

writ (5) (5) for (sre) 

A for (farafrysrate: } 
frasryfa: (=) for (Prasraf: ) 

Htaafax for a 

wera for (sega) 

qa: for (at) 3. faxfayser for (faaafayae) 
at: for (at) ¥. aire for (atry:) 

aft (1) (=) (=) for (af) 





. Tea (t) () for (wee) 2. arat (=) (=) for (sa) 
. sacar (7) (=) (F) for (ATT) 


( ear) 


are ag efateta aafsrercatar i 
fegan Hafreraaqarnearagest RR 
relafateramyorenTeaget faaiten atfeater | 
agaafeayeat mefaarqaa GA: ut Re U 
WRUGIRCAA: TRL TT: ateagiaa® | 
afaarga anal ag fead qatar Naan 

wT UATE TA firigra: ATA | 
fea qerennfargenstiaes aaa: 80 
saree rahe errant fara 
aganteat enti: aarfmareat a2 Bee vo tt 





28 (B) &. ATE (#) for (ag) % Fat (#) for (Bar) 
a. dagar (a) for (q aqarat) 
¥. Fat (Tet sae BR aeaTg ‘a’ ate ser war feraat ferfraz 
. ya Tar 2) | 
(T) 4. sree for (ara) 
(a) &. aifa for (eft) 3. yTaReTaT for (AT aRarat) 
(&) ». steafirer for dela 3 yaar for (yx aaa) 
39, (1) %. wf (7) Bfe for (afer) . yar (7) (S) for (yar) 
3. gfrq (7) (F) = ) ¥. 8 (¥ ee 
%. BUTaTsaAfest (Tt) (F) for (qrairerfast) 


t autre (= a) gat for (aatqur:) 2. aedt for (act) 
4) %. Tat for (qat:) : 
(=) %. sara for (saga) 
) 2. faa (1) (&) for (feae) 
(m) 2. geMaTE (7) (&) for (qUTER) 3. TATE for (aT) 
ve. (5) t. gait (a) act (&) for (gf) 
2 SarTaarhee (tT) (a) (=) for (raarfes) 
%. samtteat (1) azafeat (a) azeteat for (agaateat) 
Br (H) (%) (F) for (A) 


( 283 ) 


aa aagfineg & SOTA TIEATTS SitaT 4 
SHAR TETATAT: NTA SAT: UU ¥y U 
earn eg Fa Tee CTS FALE: i 
zarat mara rat asia arat URN 
SENT, aw iced gfraacea aat amrelt \ 
areat: qamitted qret qraerga aq 1 x3 w 





ne 


. wae for (att) 
aaTareaig (1) garar for (area) 


saat for (saraiee) ¥. Fetes for (TET) 


(a) x. afivar for (gfiqarq) 


(a) X. gfamearearss (=) for (aferarg earar=a) 


aw AY vo 
. 8 


v2. (#) t. amret (1) (8) for (eae) 
\. aeitrrargat (1) wreatarate at for (wrattetredt) 


(1) 3. faarar qa for (fae) 
(a) 2. aratasitgat for (araettadt) 


g. agra (7) (a) (=) for (aera) 

2. Fata (7) (=) for (w frre) 3. ae (7) (=) for (ae) 
%. urTega (1) wataq for (meg) 

Y. PSs oaagre: FAT: 


(tT) &. TH for (He) ©. ATE for (=e) 
&. Feat for (Ha) &. aTet (&) for (wet) 


(4) 2. aa for (eft) ¥. mraraga for (arae) 


(=) & get for (met) 2. |e for (gat) 
¥. aetaa for (areas) 


( av) 


arora aaTT araraeetee “fafa WaT , 
geqeaqeny taraaBATA AATEA: YE A 
qegaata: aatnd ITT careers wha | 
FATTTT aang aaa ‘afeyaritea Wee 
sanfentasiten caeren aAMARERT | 

wee SmeTaT TRE Ta wei wale qed vg UN 


DASA PPA PPA PPD SPP ALS P LDP DLL LAS LAL PD IDL LDL IL LD LLL GILLI III AILS DDD DO 
we. (F) &. Sa +R. (‘8 aya’ —aeat Gt B)R. (1) + Ares: + 
2. @@ (mt) for (et) ¥. Gram: (7) gem: for (Far) 


— 
4 
— 


4M. 


%. 


apex ere ye xvas 


aga (7) Faye (+) for (Gage) 
Fat (1) share for (TTT) 
TAC: (7) (=) for (are) 


. Gt (4) (F) for (a) 


BA START: TATT:, HT ATs: for (HAI) 

yar: for (Yar) &. Aaragaria for (Aemeath) 
ante: for (TAA: ) 

‘array yd ¥. Feat: for (qa) 

yaaage for (Fagg) 


aa (7) gaaagft (+) for (qagrafe:) 


afd (=) for (afd) 
carranfee () (=) (&) for (arreerfes') 
ufwdaara (1) qaardearg for (qetenz) 
mia ($4) (7) Ht for (tex) 

TUT for (ahr) 


(a) %. gaaagfa for (gageafa:) 


(=) 2 


¥, 


&. 


mfucea (F) for (qed) ¥. Hey for (ArT) 
. Garage for (qaaqrzfe: ) 
ete + 4 ahr for (aitsa) 


¥8. (8) ¢. Bem (7 (1) =3aq for (az) 

: . siz for (gz) 
(3) 2. ge for (sz) &. BF for (3a) 

(=) 2 ate for (sz) 3. warq fafit: teq for (frfnirsaz) 
¥. wafa Sa GET for (aivafegere) 


{ my) 


cam aaa: 
arg faparitergannctanrsatentorTey ’ 
aaafiraeerraGaa gafagemfirey nrven 
“fafeeaaare AIT: 1 
Frearerntatqrare argc feaegr: 
fred qatar aermrattate SH YSN 





ve. (7) %. ereraere (w) A araeraareeagt: for (arearereagt:) 
Q. ater (1) ster for (ata) 


3. feq for (get) ¥. Jam: (=) for (Ta) 
4. ative (7) () (&) for (gfiva) et (a) (3) (8) for (=A) 
(7) . Paaeragre: for (Paftertare) 
(a) 9. eqreaaeresgt: for (aneragrera:) 
() &. “arash” oct ©. ateearet for (atearez) 
y. AteeT for (At=a) ©. af Fafreqaere: for (fafaoragre: Barer) 
. faeacrat for (faerreat) 
antfgat (7) arafaat for (antiga) 


g 
2. ATT 
% aoe (1) feaega: (4) (=) for (fever) 
Y. feos (at) (@) for (fare) 

X 


‘ ne (t) (3) (#) for (qaftt) &. aed: (a) for (#4) 
(7) v. freatoaraa get for (Paearcratatya) 
(=) ©. faeareat for (frerraai) &. wet (¥) for (a) 


(@) 0. frearcararg a for (freareataige) 
aryafe for (Tafa) 


a 


( ee) 


areifeg ereneai waza sta ae fet ae 
aeenfag aafagrey wy: fs: ve 

HAT STTRTL TAT: | 
aH ataq earmegieaaraat ATAYT | 
afvadaufefa: aera Bal WaT Yo 
faag: aoa cdr TTT: | 
afta: sracgeat afind ag afte eerreTegt NRen 

UI IEAAAIT: AAT: | 


SAAD AIIS 





ad 





¥&. (3) 8. areredia for (aTeTeTtT) 
2. aenfagad wd (7) for (acafege) 
2. frareg (a) farereg for (fagrea) 
(1) ¥. ater for (sta) 
4. Wat faa” ox ealard are HEH Are F att shes area iT 
(F) &. marteraere: (@) for (warAETARTZ) 
(™) Xx. Attar: for (fastarra:) 2. ae + 
3. frereg for (fagreq) 
(8) \. faat for (faaare:) 2. 3. sararfaareg for (wafagreg) 
% TA | 


xe. (4) %. aad ghey (7) aan: afeg for (aarafsg) 
% IA: (T) (F) for (ewe) 2. anteat (7) antec for (ated) 
(mt) ¥. ofetae: (=) (&) for (afetda:) 
(%) &. wasighag for (wawefng) 3. attedt (&) for (ate) 
(3) %. waH: qfy for (Tarafeg) x. ofa: for (aff) 
¥t (8). Freee (mt) (=) for (froiex) 
2 afefir: (ag aes Teeit Sifts aT afar ex 2) (=) 
3 err (Tt) (=) (=) for (et) 
—(F) &. Preaay for (freiaz) 
Ms wf ufrarsETe: for ( (aferonrere: werea:) 


or 


( tke) 


ernie Tat TTTTAT ararey 1 
featd awtaga yaa amiacerry Te cal 
Severe HT AAAI TAT TTT \ 
Aufaaten ig fazer Inia a BAT URE 
Brarataeatarat BAT HATTA we 
% TETE grat frre ae fareiteny yen 
STAT SAAT TATE: 
TUTE erage qedt sitafeaumat afiva: t 
afga: ERT TU RTH NTE ATU RK AU 





PPPL SL PALL GE 


42, (9) %. --aererat+ (arth sarcur eT ant) 


() 
(=) 


2. ararretaned (7) (=) for (aratraagd) 

3. farts (&) (7) dre for (quarry) 

¥. fear (7) (=) (S) for (fart) 

x. ed (1) (=) (=) for (ga) 

& Brararweaay (1) garry for (watery) 

%. +arg+ ov. ad for (aq) 

q. arary for (arate) 

srrrweaay for (gratawetaz) 

ae (1) tga fordve 2. Teta d for (Aste) 
atafrat (=) for (daPaet) 

. TBR, : ae 

Rralearae for (ferdtaaratz ) 

are (a) for (an) 

wet (afafcr ther) . Brareqaare: for (qrareraarz) 
aafratts=ayq for (efter) 

wa for (ase) a. peat (erat for (qeat) 

gat (a) (8) for (act) | 

TEETH (T) TEAR for (seyeTAT) 

4, Tha: for (¥faa:) 

% Tar for (Tat) 


Kw ve we wD vo at vo aw wo 
Cr a 2 . 


( ts ) 


qt uaferfeereentateteataia TU: I 
qareadt a aa rae fereas FTA: UW NEW 
Sake art aarsarerce face \ 
ne tradag earner VW Ro th 
qudanaadt TUeEAt orate TU: | 
Bat ua wed TOTTTAT: ARE: Fa: WSU 
geryarea: “Beret at gata: | 
ut wat euedt great ear Feet ut ve 

& (a) %. efaacer (7) (=) (&) for (afaae) 
2. at (a) (a) (e ye (aat) 

T) 3. Mase for (qmaez) = ¥, Re for (THT) 


( 
(a) 3. qe for (qr) 
( 
( 





B) ¥. yuasafrat for (quatre) 
a) %. 3st weast for (Beat) 
2. Fated (1) (@) () for (Fate) 
a. a (7) (%) (8) for (ge) 
(1) ¥. faree for (atv) «=, MeeaTTRY for (mecaTqeT) 
(&) %. weeat for (weeat) 


xs. (1) %. gmt (7) (&) for (ga) 
R. wee: (T) Hee (A) for (HeAET:) 
() 3. gai for (zat) 
(=) 3. aarngat for (qameat) =X. Sa: for (qa:) 
2. Haga: for (Taga: Be) 
8 (4) 8. FuTEW for (qayW) 
a. feate diate: (+) ar gate atater: for (gateataie:) 
(+) 3. exalt (=) for (aeat) ¥. east for (aredt) 
(3) 2%. fat at 8. Sait ataie: for (eateataie:) 
%. Tea for, (AeA) : 
(8) & arate for (rat: 8a). weuiifz at for ee 
| wate for (gat eat). emit for (zt) 
Rasy for (Feet) . 


Xa. 





—~ 
ia etl atlll 


_— 
~~ 


( eee ) 


aoe rere aT TUE BR ATETET | 

TORT RTT BATaT aITETa Ngo 
eer Seed ge HATA | 

aac get a gael Beye ar ag it 
rafeererane TTR ermereaTtah feewerat \ 
STH: anaat atart fefaqeaaet NEN 
cries fer agrCTUATEREGe a i 
warieergarae: gfitegfiae: nezu 


a. arrereea (7) (7%) (&) for (ae) 

R. weed (F) for (anew) 

2 TA for (gH) 

R. WPTERRe for (aPTETea) 

R. Tages for (GUIssa) ¥. createse for (zat) 
%. Teer Be (7) for (Baer Feet) 

R. wat for (araeit) 3. Geta (7) for (eat) 

¥. BTA (Tt) for (azyzwt) 

4u. Gmaay (S) for (Ewa) &. Faye ar for! (Saqeat a7) 
4. ragrag for (FARHAT) 2. waaay for (aTIcHT) 

¥. Saget for (wagut) 

F) %. ager for (Beez) 
3 
g 
Q 
3 
¥ 
: 
% 
8 
3 
4 
3 





PLL LL 


»¥, & Bagat gercta for (get 7 exgat Bz) 

. aHafedatant (7) aeaferngal for (aaaedtatadt) 

. weg: (7) (at) (F) for (seer) 

. Steet (7) aw eat for (atearat) 

. TATTT: for (wera) x. aw: for (at:) 

. aHateraM Eat for (THaeaAitadt) 

. OU: for (Gu) &. aearferatadt for (waTeaataa ) 

. TTT for (aiarat) 

. wt (7) (=) (=) for (#4) R. Fez (1) (=) for (38) 
. ofa for (eft) ¥. aa aT: for (aa #t:) 

. th: for (Ge) . 

. ft for (zfa) (=) 2. afaag for (afar) 


( wo ) 


eeereretfarantt qe fencer i 
fata wat San feeereary next 
EATITTY aay 2a aa pematraye: \ 
afar fentrnarcrafierd aT Beaat Tu gL 
Revmratrzem TATA HEH A ware \ 
dafeenfegral: uzuftegtastserma: Neen 
eft TATA STATA: | 
afa ott argege fagret greateara: | 








PPLASDLA IAD LIL LL PLE 


av. (1) & fagttat (&) for (feqattaz) 

2. HOuNAE (7) (=) (&) for (aarfrareqrz) 
) 3. weet for (et) 

t. fegatas for (frgutez) 


(7 
(3) 
&¥. (%) t. afera: (7) (=) (&) for (afera) 
(7) 2. ‘aa? wat sifee adi zo 1 
)3 
) 


(F) 3. qatraege: for (gataTye) 


&&. (4) 2. aenferarfeerat: (a) for (aaferarfeserat:) 
XY HERE 
X. ag Shes ee aft H ger f 1 (7) 
(7) ¥. fararrtraaea for (fararataerar) 
(a) 2. ‘afer & rere? ow wafers arr ace 5 
(=) ¥. feenrrtreay for (fraataee) 

g. fecarat for (feetat:) 


eee 


w 
— 
4 


—— 


4 


~~ 


a 


re) 
—* 


A 


x oad 
SS oN — 
ql 4 
Kw mo a ro a WW ro a K Vo wo Ww 


—~ os! 


44 


A 
~~ 


— 
4Y 
ed 


Q 


— eee 


( gor ) 
HY SSATENTA: 
Fae: 
TH TTT TATE: 


SRACATATY SaeTTfe ATTA merateganery | 
aaiterafeernarat wate afer neu 
afartad: afaacie'g Frnemareersat | 
errata argc fer @ mec: neu 
aanifa a: afaaci ciara chara: i 
meheg aneat ara ART ae RAITT NSN 

ayer fern feerreraafartten TAT IeRTERT 


avout farregefate a afa a aaa: Ux It 


eermereraifentafeprR EATER ITE | 
epaiaend af afe far a dae UK 





q. (@) %. seareaTaTa (7) seaTeaTaTs for (seTeqTaTZ) 
2. 
. searfa for (waft) ¥. ‘gfe’ va afe aet 3 1 


LOL LL LS Lo 


gfarery (a)afrrary for (gferarq) 


weTTeqTany for (seTeaTaTy) 
argny (1) agra for (argwra) 
afwarfas: for (afrareé:) 3. waredat for (warcraat) 


. eam: for (daz) 

. wardat for (ATTRA) 

. fat (=) for (Afr) 

.aretaat: (1) aaeadaw: for (wartd ay) 

. waaifat for (waft) vy. ‘a: oe set afer adie 


aaradast: for (areata) 


. Br (7) (=) for (qa) 


fear afer vel 3. ‘care sifer aet 
watg (7) for (xfag) 2. at for (af) 
zanfeata for (auifeafr) 


fare’ ve afer vat 1 eee erat Fo aet aaa’ fea 2 


aaa for (far) 


( er ) 


faqe: afafeegitoraerre ret afeet: 
aietsaigeteget STATE: FG 

fefaqaat facta FATT AEA \ 
create afererare: Fun 
agtefretatereat fared} Frat ALATA | 

nee Ta Tefies Het a TAT Us 
archer fares | 

mary fea are frat: arartat Sfa a aradtaa: en 








&. (3) &. fegaiser (7) FegHtra for (fegaiea) 
2%. Terfefi: (7) for (a arfafa:) 
a. at Aatat (a) ated aetat for (ahise) 
¥, ara: for (aeTTTTT: ) 

(7) x. Fegrd for (Feg=) 

(a) 3. what for (whisat) 


w (4) 2 rifa: (7) <4tatatfa: (=) for (xfaetalfa) 
ou ae ) for (atfae) a. af (st) for (afer) 
(a) 3. aff for (afar) 
&. (@) %. pt (a) for (zst) 


2 
. ay (7) (=) for (4) 
(1) 3. afaatafenat for (afiaraferat) 
%, faa 7 aT for (afzercar) 
Q. sdtefiret for (aitefieet) x. wear’ for (wea) 
& TUfAce for (gafiré) 
8 (@) t. cramg trang (a) cag ag for (statageaterrt4) 
2. fear (7) for (farq) 


(8) antege for (ortega 
3. afe for (3fr) 


gy. 


{ we 9 


cafiriadqagerrfratetgitaateatay ’ 
frugatana git at Af a ermdag: 20 N 

. ereaaTerear fer aranfayareadatg | 
granfind deter fesareat Sta qa: TN gen 
airefateadeifirat warhraran: eaNea TTT | 
went gurrferara: wet FATT faqat: nen 
afwarts aeateadiaraaiti eaaroatgertt | 
ferret: sree Ferre fee neu 
prtngfettentiorafendiateranreg \ 
area fearrafermre fear e eT Tera) 
aig eaaanag gferranstym ferret, \ 
Tatar weraratedts arratearht 1 eg tt 





PEL FILS SIS 


. Ofearg (1) ofaaty for (afeadarg) 

. aes () for (res) 

. sqdraa for (safearer) ¥. aaadas: for (aaradas:) 
aeadiq for (afadarq) 

afafe for (afer) 

ifgariraren: for (a ferartatfiraran) 

agen: (T) (7) for (grr) 

afar for (fgar) 

aifr: for (arf) 

sfirat (7) afta for (ferrg) 

fut for (Fray) 

gat (7) (#) for (gt) = &.- eat for (azar) 

fagia (=) for (fafat) =x. Farmseafq for (fearafit 
fag for (Fag) §. rere: for (werent) 

. THg (7) (4) for (gars) 

gfeared for (gfearea) 3. AeTe for (agty) 

. Fry for (Taq) 

. gifrarerae for (anfeareary) 


oo“ 
Red 
KP PEM PBA KO ws ww Ao 


Pn, 
al 
— 

< 


( we) 

qeafaarande argtea GHAGATATE: | 

aa fafeg eager tere TEE WaeA U 9g U0 
gfernenfeerarenera: eae feraTaaTaa: 

wet am feardcer: Yaa: UN go U 
afearan Tana: RTT grata: \ 

meg wate TTT TATA eae: sa Wh Qe tt 
arene fraera ae Ferret afeaq i 
aferaeratinfeagaaragter: ay meen 





%. fet for (far) 2. garfa (3) for (garfanra) 
3. Fag for (Fei eEZ) 

q. aw afer wet 

a. Aree y: for (arezerfy:) 

a. GFaq Heat for (qdarreT) 

2. grfamdceta: for (grfaars zerfer:) 


ae. (T) &. Ta: eae for (ae: By) 
%. Brat (t) (4) for (Azar) 
(7) 3. Wem for’ (erM:) 
(3) & tert 


. ea () great for. (garrercfer) 

3. ferttgat (7) (=) for (feared) 

& a8 aoe (aq) 

¥. afefetg at (7) afaferga for (afafeage) 
X Arama: (7) ATTEN: for (TeaTETT:) 
&. aq (7) (=) for (Aaq) 

(%) ©. ‘ered for (aTaray) 


| | (3) 4. amar@tae for (Teei) 
_¥. ferge for ( firrga) 


( we ) 


nrafeaer gay Farrer afarefafearenra tt: afar 
geraaqat afaferereTTTTT: N Ro U 


qfrare unfierdarg fare araanerery ' 
HRCA HM RAATTTNT roma Ww 
afaerdtantearaings] garetee 

arafeart carey mararatarfa ware: WRI 
SAAT afeart TR maar i 
safererrer Sareea Gath TANT cferartat 1 23 U 


Ro. (F) 8. oe ne () garfrerangferat for (gaa frarae- 


&. afgat: (7) for (afgar) 
fro ag geet tft ar ar fre aes g 
. garaagen: (1) for (qaanyur) 
. aT: for (aera) 
. Taferan: for (wafeaar) 
. ferarata sn 2° ui for (feaaratt) 
. garfaarers for (gra fraraz) 
. Arafetafzen: for (arafet: afgar) 
ort aay: for (gaara) ¥. Tega for (area: ) 
s#rg: for (Sz) 
(x) fee vat 2. Part for (gat) 
¥, Hege afrraay for (wagmafasarana) 
(a) 3. gat for (@a) =. Hemraciisg’g for (weqradis#g) 
£2, (@) 8% (1) for (Ba) or 
2. aferet (x) aerger for (x82) 
(7) 3. afamrtren for (afer) 
¥. daz for (FaTd:) 





_, 
Ean 


28. 


_ — 

E ill 

— — 
Pwo Ww eG ne Kw 


a 
es 


(4) 2 +fet+ 
23. (4) &. eharfarge for (gratht gay) . 
(1) 2. meet: for (weer) 3. afgar for (afgarf) 


¥, watda for (water) =x. gaa for (garfr) 
&. afaat for (araiet) 


PLDI 


av. (4) 


Ra. 


2%. 


Qu. 


(7 


— 


(3) 
(3) 


(=), 


(7) 


( 


4) 
(3) 
(7 
Rs. (F 


) 
) 


( wwe ) 


rere fara fet steam LUG F 
afore efiertea Aa TET UW Vv 
ae Tee, Re Fame F rae BT A 
aged mraferentaafge} WRU 
fafafamaafemrenafagayrrirrmateaTy \ 
saawagery “gatat: a3 Ma GAATT: U0 RU 
nanlanet A aranetta: afewfert mapatiy \ 
muvee: saat HEUTE rat WA: NON 
sre SYR afanaface qTATTTaT AAT ' 
MATTATT AT neatarranfenertae: Roh 





. afafee for (afaga) 
. weary for (wfeaTy) 
. Fi for (qwiat) iy. aTsa for (ata) 
._ afarge for (sfr@n) 
» 1H for (a4) 

. Spatsara: for (gatas: ) 
. aaRATE for (aaTarzy) 
. wremTfe (7) (=) for (ares) a. fitsey for (fare 


SLD ALS 





LP LAL LDL LDP DI LF 


. wate for (Aas) 
_ Fearaaare for (featazrr) 
. Uy for (atm:) —. aatew for (mate) 


wataet for (sitet) 
fet (1) fe for (Hed) 
weayat for (wferget) 
aed for (BH) —-¥. waa for (gaH) 


g 
x 
5 
X, 
%. 
Bo 
2. 
4. Feta for (rreTyAT) 
. 
R 
¥ 
& 
R 
9 
t 
R 
g 


‘fe’ for (sftz) 


3. yeptared for (yea aT) 
4%. ATA for (AAs) 


3. Seat for (wet) 


(Fro) —aa eats a Sei fend & nea H freaifr ded 
fer wt at rg 2 | 
“RT BRETT oft re Hao 


og! 3% Raflory for (aafiraq) 





RR. 


( gee) 


eprgaaerat courts wae ATA | 
reEqETeT A aTEtataTTieaT wReU 
TR ROTATE afegamaten: 

wren fraafaac efaaeguratts marfate Not 
ufafertat afta oR we AsenfergaTt: | 
faker afeeren fee: Wa THAHTAT th 32 1 
mragatrerett eet SATAN | 

faaict eareqattefafargneatiay Wau 
gferganaard grastfuntfiret TITTY \ 
sTaaTUfaeaaae vt WATERS SA: BU 


PPL ALPS LLL 


ga for (gt) Ter (7) (=) for (are) 
wanag for (waaay) =X. effiga for (affud) 


Geen 
rn) 
—™“ 


4 


28. (8) &. ataretat (7) at gare for (eaarfent) 
(7) %. atacezat for (ateererar) 
(3) %. gardai for (eeafzat) 
Re, (H) 2. atta (=) for (ati) 
wee (=) for (area) 
a. anefeafasst for (anaferafared) 
(wt) ¥. wrqergrara for (wTaryfr) %. a for (a) 
&. wrunfs fanfare for (HTUferafaact ) 
we. guPiEy for (gaFrg) 
(=) &. Wat for (ART) 
32. (8) &. fawseact (=) for (fred) 
(1) %. TR Ww for (7 =) 
3. Ferra: (#) for (fRaaa:) 
ax. (a) ¢. faeaterg (7)(=) for (faattearg) 
(=) 2. Heat for (ear) 
Q. 
2. 
4. 


varerg for (wae) (*) 
(a) %. ga for (32) 


( tox) 
a ty after find aratetiaereny i 
aren feet refienoaea: neu 
SG aeaateatac Tat fafa 
em FIESIGR Bat a aarfs feat ui ay tt 
SETATTTTRT aacifiermaey FOTTT: | 
MURATA ATA ATT: TECel 
wfeath TeaTaenia wala araafernhy | 
srerficaitaficen: TATA: TATACAT: UW Bo U 
<Perteqred feafanat Haste aq 
meareafraernera find FaRCUARAT: NASH 


PALI SLA LD LDA LLL PLL 





SPD LIL LSP 


2. (4) &. aaet (7) age for (aye) a. renee for casey 
a. Hegde (7) for (west) 
¥. qurfs Fg: (a) qearfra wea: for (qurfaaesz:) 
(t) ¥. afe 4 (=) for (yfet) 
(4) %. qa for ae 2. RerdatieT for (Mem) 
¥. Turfredg: for (qunfrnerrs:) 
ax. (4) &. gfua for (afd) 
2. awsraaift for (Sat +t zarkr) 
(1) 3. Fated for (wate) 
¥. fafa for (frfers) 
¥. Frag iat for (fas Bat) 
(3) & seat for (ge) 


ag. (4) %. wart (7) for (747) erat (7) for (aaah) 
(3) %. sat for (2) 2. GA for (arat) 


ve. (5) t. xetfearttefirar: (7) for (zserfeanitefirer:) 
(A) 2. arent for (araafertfr) 
4s.) eframareatrente for (einer) 
(8) 2. rere: for (Rerrper) 
(3) 2. song for (wer) 


( we ) 


stewie afenthinet: meat He: | 

argent faite wafer factetigatate: WRU 
eae gfentetegatett facta: 1 

vrata facie meaitegetientt arg: srs 0 ¥o Nt 
TOUATAHANY TUTATRAATTESATY \ 
araga feta: et arenfest waft u xe nt 
caferata dyer sarorergegeeT ETE 
eqeaaionea gat ateerqfiqe TAIT: Ux U 
edteamgTaTeT febfieredteattaateaat: | 
“aaaiat fat arafehaas TAT: UW YB 


PLLA LLL SL 


ze. (a) 2. 








LL LALLA L LDL ESD LD DDD 


semua (T) (a) for (xceaita) 


2. gateel wea: for (wdtrer:) 


_ ahiisaeremfa: (a1) fetttaatrnfa: for (faetdtgatenfs:) 


. wal TerrTeqT for (watreT:) 


arate (a) (a) for (ager) 
weatsgarant (1) weaigatet for (weatcyetat ) 
ata for (AT) ¥, svaq for (sT4q) 


. meqisgaraay for (weategatrrt ) 

. Tagarferare: (1) acagarfarart: for (aeagatfararc:) 
. Bray for (avat)' —-3..- Bre: for (Fe) 

2. agatferare: for (weagatferarc:) 

. agfiver: (7) (=) for (agferar) 

afer genera: (7) for (gfeaaT) 

. eqatara for (safaaa) = ¥. TAT for (ATT) 

. aqarag for (aqaras ) 2. afwar for (afar) 
. farm: (7) (=) feat for (fran) 

. faarfget: for (faafrar) 


(ae |) 


emranfeaag aera feqfend aed aq I 
acafantes 21a: ararerenfttf Tera) 
UfSeMTTAMATATY Te rereTetees faqarg | 
as ielbkd erect UsEN 
artfeeraatet qa TT: afawan: af awa: | 
arate et Reni BTA: neu 
frayetaz mee: aramarereafiaagttan: 
fermraefent Ferrer 4 qa ganareanatag N v9 Ut 
Teatase afta TR TTF fear | 
TNH Fatt ueEa maeqaaatefar i ve 





ve, (8) §. qreqrferrg (7) (=) for (agenferas) 
2. qeaet (7) WeTT Aeaee for (ARATE) 
3. saifa: for (fz) 
(t) ¥. ter for (TET) 
(3) % wenreeaed for (weet) 2, atte: for (#tfa) 
vu (4) 9. atfe: for (affe) 
(t) 2. gar for (gra) 3. da for (az) 
(3) 8. wife: for (wife) 


ve. (") 8. weafrmaar: (at) (=) for (acafaraar) 
) 


(a) % ate: (a) for (Ao 3. afar for (afaran:) 
¥. ferarer: ate for (faatfrata are) 
(3) % stats for (ata) 


¥s (3) %. geet: (a) () for (asem:) 3. fera(m) for (fare) 
%. Fagen: (1) (3) for (fee) 
(a) 2. araregfetagt?: tar: for (srareaferagtta:) 


YS (a) & wad for (ght). aa for (ge) 
(3) & aay for (Auth) ad 


( et ) 


meateaatarat: carreritedtermn t 
aad dafaerararat wate wear ve 
afaaitedtisena: 
aft araegefarara seqafareatrceaa: 
FAT: | 


PLSD LI ILL LID PISS ISI ISL IS 





¥e (a) %. dareeadteateara: (7) taeeratentears: for (Tarresataater: ) 
(t) . arat for (arat:) 


3. ‘af’ & mega: ae dfs adil, Fae aaa RU 
Hae afer & 1 


(4). Faraerateaterra: for (Tarrexaraattera:) 
3. ‘af’ & qeqra:’ aH Ae. 


( ts} 


AA CESMYATEATA: 
Agee: 

gaat: wifesat sa wetfa TIBIA | 

aie yaa aig aaitearrat agente: HU U 

em fae: Pula atfeemt TEE BUY i 

maitatifeaten ag at apenas: TUR 
argaattesitar QUE: Ha A: Uy \ 

wae eaeRen wala a: egenfaat: a: zu 

eTegeTaTt yaratfara wet feat cant: 

varfafernt Beray: arte at Egan: ue 

spfranitafiary Huta at HON mart UIT 
TARGET | weit x agente: BUR 





CLS FS DISS LLP LDDI LAS EAS AS 


2. (a) &. aterat (7) (a ) for (ats) 2% mratar (it) (=) for (aatearar) 


(a) 3. atfeysa for (#tfeysat) —¥. arg for (arg) 
(=) 2 ater at for (aateat ar) ¥. egentfera: for (earfes:) 
2 (a) ¢. faa: (7) fag a: for (Srxfan:) 2. saat (7) (F) for (er) 
(1) 3. atfeq for (atfe 
(=) 2. fae: for (frr:) ¥. aud for (ety) 
3. aafeatfester for (muiaatfeatar) x. afta: for (afta) 
() 8. fae: for (fa:) 3. aesteat for (atfestar) 
3. (a) 2. wre for (aa) 
(5) 2. aee for (ere) 
% (=) are (7) gua for (aa) %. we (7) (%) (F) for (7) 
(1) & =e (B) for (=z) ¥. +a+ (3) (&) 
(3) %. Gre for (qqT) 
(=) 2. erarg for (qa) 
4 (%) 2. auraritefiang (7) epftarditefirary for (spfearirefierg) 


Q. AETATA PIETY for (weary Tey FIETT) 
(8) 3. egrfer: for (egenferr:) 
(3) 2 surfeaedt for (xgfeart) 
(&) ¥. emg for (rex) 


PLP DIPS SS 


%. (a) 


(7) 


x. (7) 


(7) 
(=) 
(3) 


( tj 


aataciat wara at cfrafateratary | 
safarrariat at at afa epentan: TURN 
eqraarfracohargaatatat HASTA | ety i 
eleyasat caTete sfafaaarers SRT NOU 
wtfasaat fqn | TEETER gare: ’ 
qreeaiat feat cena tege oz Ut: Ute 
Pasateremeahaga: wdgaratataid aq t 
faraRaEge Tete arestare: nen 





PP LLL LS Lo E™ 


a. weararg (7) (4) for (axaiarq) 
&. tetat for (xrefat) 3. fafaer for (fafa) 


t. Seargtary (=) for (sqarfiag) 2. arn for (ara) 
2. wet ater (a) for (arate) 
. Beaten for (atdatiea) 


g. quaterpa (7) (=z) for (quiereR) 

&. Saat (it) (=) for (saat) 

3. frsatcrna (71) for (freat dena) ¥. g3: (7) (a) for (arta) 
&. gragutel for (qrazaict) 3. favaterwa for iste) 

4. wag: for (#u:) 


g. sRaRAVAT Tae for (quicerytsaat) 
3. fasateanaca for (Prsataena) ¥. at: for (aa) 


9. fregterneats for (Prsaiermacata) 

. weifesat (4) (F) for (aepréisaT) 

3. fa for (cafa) ¥. ad for (eq) . 

g. fraion for (Fasater) 3. weafega: for (eater) 


3. pfage: for (afage:) x. ateaad for (AMAT) 
&. Matsa: for, (tara:) 


( as¥ ) 


wearieage afrrienmeamafirearetg ' 
cedtoaettrgaromere Fagg ERTeT go N 
afrrseen oft ReAAAAT eyemdt wate i 
BCL ICG ILE shtorenfeciteratieat: Near 
yee gaat aeATA | Rema TARATATT | 
TEATTAATETAT ot 83 aT WS AEA VV 
segeraneeaTenaet rae RCRA: 
fgctenitidtecadatedt aa: AYES 28 





to, (&) %. et (a) (=) (8) for (Feat) 2. deter for (AveTAeT) 
a. & (7) (&) for (saa) ¥. aeedtearts (7) (s) for (atest) 
4. Brae (iT) (=) for (Grarea) 
(1) &. ge () for (gr) 
3. R38 for — 


—_ oa 
aq at 


Mei eaune 


) 

83. (7) &. SarmeMg (m1) for (sraTeaTq) 
2. fagetaat: (7) for (fadtaat) 
(7) 3. Tet for (mat) ¥. ate for (fe) 
(™) 2. aes (ey) waEaTT for (Ferme) 
3. waTereat for (eearaat) 
(8) X. Saag for (Saag) 3. SMTA for (earereat) 
vee 2, fagetadt for (feito) 3. ‘eaemg for (ate) 


( ws ) 


saiaware ea aBcerdat facet 
aSTeeAHAT: eeatrag wafer BUT: ues nu 
wfasisarantel aEat atmarearag i 
am, a terrctorara tame Hea: Wey 
fardateremag fare vant aalaqeya \ 
fragiq gamutfanfadsarat nes 


PPPID ASD ES 





yy. (a) &. aterer (7) for (sree) 


2. 
3. 
(a) & 


waaed (1) Geedted for (wade) 
gered (1) (a) (=) for (gfereret) 


Reatka Tada for (Hratanarda) ¥. Hey: for (wat: ) 


(=) %. stew for (arate) . wae for (GATT) 


2x. (8) 


(7) x. 
(a) 2. 
y. sara feodt seereary for (amrehradtererenrs- 


(=) 


e. werd (a) ae for (wer) 
Q. 
2. 
Mv. 


watsraeq (1) UitareT for (uitaTeT) 
waragaret (7) for (adtereaera) 
aatadieraa: (7) for (aida) 
warda for (w#reta) 

werd () for (wert) 


wid FeaAT) 


. Prataica for (Praia) 2. Tara for (TAH) 
. ary (Ss) for (qa) ¥. aft for (arf) 


we weiter ea nfa Fae gt 


. fratater for (faatater) ¥. gearatfa for (zeae) 
. frog for (fata) 2. wad for (wat) 
. TsaTaaaria for (yereaati) 


( tse ) 


wie, sare yore arfererereaeryztet: 
stewreetiet aging aaa 70 N 
ante aga i egaigatick eric Bea | 
aftet ated area mayer Nee 
meNERTIATHAT TERA Wale areefareTeT 
egrgaareigat BRA arg Taaq uve 


TN 





S LADD S Fy 


ty. (#) &. wetad (1) (&) for (watet) 2. uh (a) we for (we) 
4. weet (Tt) (=) for (ear) 


(ut) (Fao met ag atte 0 at sear ae sifiee & 1) 


¥. fede () for (feat) y. vetagd for (werfrgd) 
7) %. ga for (Ba) 3. sre TaaRT for (Tt@aaT) 
&) 2. wet for (wd) 


( 
( 
ts. (@) &. saree (7) (=) for (aecite) 
a. Aateaaeay (tT) for (Faz) 
(Fao ‘Hater’ ox etary TATT 1) 
3. Bq for (az8) 
(1) ¥. egetes for (eget=aat) 
4, ‘atem! for (&et) 
_ (fro gee facta ofa ar area) 
&. ene: (&) for (eae) 
(Fao gaat waite deat to 21) 
(=) %. sareite for (smcite) & ae for (acertd) 
(3) &. qaratay for (qaaer4) 


(Fro eet at geet if “Ay” area B areeT ala 2 1) 
28 (7) (fro gust ate dem te 8) 


(3) t. qrngtattt for ( (aeraratétat) 
(8) & gretsetdttt for (grarsfai) 


( tse ) 


steerarg eated feciten St agi | 
a ar fafa sitar madara @: WRot 
Beagd areata ae: t 
strafetegyred raed qamierg WIL 
BOTATIRET GFN BS HTT MEY | 
aeade qaawUEAHETE Ue: BB: NR 





t. BUT (S) for (Gar) 2. wae: (a) wa: for (waa) 
(at) 3. Sarg for (Ratq) ¥. Fares for (Ud 7) 
. % aarft for (aarft) (=) (=) 
(fro saat Rete Wear 2 F 1) 
(4) %. @ for (@:) 


(S) ¥. aeat for (AF) &. TEtaTEReTy for (APTA) 
. Waed: for (Taatt:) 


- agaigh (1) agtaig for (sgt arg?) 
. ararrata (1) arapraTa for (area) 
1) (=) for (garferrg) 


(t) ¥. oY gad (fro gaat stare Re 2 1) 
(3) 


g 

Q 

R 

¥ 

g. agaaigd for (aGat args) 2. ararreandern (arate) 
3. gardai for (qafeara) , 

g. agaatel for (AGaTE) 2%. Tara for (far) 

4%. HaHa for (TATE) 

g 
RX 


. RATA Faery (7) for (Wargd weary) 
. ydaeuedt (7) (=) for (grax) 
(fro—aef derrHa 22 F eat H RR frat gar 2) 
(a) rat etter eter 28 81 88 at Rete eae cart ax Freier Z— 
yada + GoTtStaraagsy ws: | 
qa digesifamtinar arreayfyer: RZ it 
(a) %. gdeaed for (Faery) 2. Yaaeaeat for (qaaxaay} 
3. (fro adeat 23 ifs £ 1) 
(=). waTge for (waTea) 


(tsa ) 


ait ocanereat aenfivatg & Te Perret | 
Epieadraguemns TWAATTAT 230 
23. (a) fro ahaa eat — 
ast vermaea dafvarss faysater'al a yUT wretRT sage 
aay a: gadtgerdts fearfsrat sareaergferat: 11 23 
(fro ag tate Fat 23 ATH TE TWAT TAT) 


2. (8) (fro gaat wa Tea YY 1) 








g. eae (1) eaferarencne for (Fafrareae) 
% Saha: (t) (¥) for (atfy:) 
(1) fo atfafern acter — 
ayes reraaeaT ayfgareaene fray sath a: | 
Brera: aa ToTATTAT kz 
3. Aq SY for (asz) 
(fao gaat wH Heat 22 Z 1) 
(=) met we ag Sfmt ats Fars ears H faeaifina oes fare 
wae F-test F 1 
‘oper at TOT atasaay ata: | 
qaral sare fonfarar erreaergforar 11” 
3. Ta for (ast) g. aaferarens for (agfuerg 5 Ger) 
(fao mater ey afer 2 1) 
(F) a at eeite faraifad 2 
apatew shag wratarereagritd 
roadigersed Farrar aareeeyfaT tt B” 
raat s-attar’ at asaaer Bx 8 
V. TeV for (aR) k. TER for (q FA) 





( tse) 


ert aafear’ cantata TATE 
pezwrrareqateararg Praifnarereg u "2s uv 
wafage: stared wat: after Nea | 

ua agfeecra wate sam Paar santa: 0 2x nt 
aedtefamatartia a eye mem TERT: \ 
aiftanitatig erqemt: TARARTT Ul 2 T 


PPL PD LLL LL PLL ST 


yw. (3) (Fre — RTTTAT Ss bene 1) 
agferat: (at) (4) (=) for (ayfeat) 
WA: nM aad for (a-zAaT) 

. wana: for (SaAaT) 3. BpET for (EFeT} 
(faommgeat 2X sifea z 1) 

() = (fro ea aeite at wrdeat 24 2) 

aeaaa: for (a7) 


(3) 


<  we 


id 


24, (@) &. Bat: for (wer) (7) Searryen: or (AeA) 
. egfeett for (xgfeerar) 2. saat (7) (@) (&) for (saat) 
(Fro —quat dem 2¢ aftr 2) 


¥, fasfa: for (faareafa:) 
g. SrwrTHe: for (aaa) 2. fegat for (fesrar) 
% 


A 


. (fro mre 2 AfFT 8) 
_ trata: for (Garat) ¥. farterrfa for (farrenfin) 
(Fao saat HATA EZ) 
aptafia (=) for (estefan) 
fraaa (1) frtaq for (fra) 
aTfaatefaary (7) aaratefaey for (akaatahry) 
(3) ¥. yet for (gatax) 4%, TACHA: for ‘labs 
(a) & (fro mat weuctert Qe afer g) (F 
{z) 2. fro farag for (fra) . Ha) for (#44) 
3. atfardtefatty for (aaritafatg) 


te a 


( ego J} 


talea feat. ey Fm TACHA TA Faery i 
aratereente gH: gaireaett HET: UZ II 
matatq afenengyts Barnfemifaaetr \ 
weds serif aerating: U as ut 
anita gertet aad atfeatta afer, 
ATTN quit fafiteznat 1 Re n 


ae 





29. (7) 2. fafaaiter (7) edteafaater for (edtea faster) 
(fac Raat eadeaT Re afer z) 


(it) 2. farcteay (=) for (faraeay) 3. ereTAe for (aTT TAT) 
(=) ¥. seat for (Beat) X. EA for (GA) 
. (fro agt amen 35 sifer 8) (=) 
(&) %. eatearg for (sated) 3. Hriaapeqst for (aratTAeeTse) 
Rs. (#) 2%. srmfa: (7) for (srarfz) 3. veaidate (7) for (seared ) 
(fro gaat reer 2e sifine ® ) 
(at) &. gat (F) for (Bar) ¥. sara for (aT) 
(a) 4. oet for (sfg:) ¢. srmfs: (&) for (starts) 
R. TRTeaH Gait: for (weaedtHataHia:) 
&. (fro mat weter Re sifea z) (F) 
(=) 2 veaRass for (Teed) ©. wATatg for (HMATEta) 


Xa. (4) &. graaret (1) (=) for (qeraTet) 
(fio qadt wadert 30 afea 2) 
(7) 2. etree (s) for (ere) ¥. wera for (ser) 
(=) ¥. (fo aet saeat 80 sifea 2) (=) | 


(=) %. guamret for (gers) ¥. waa for (fea) 
y shrerifeaisa for (atrifears) 
3. fafrgne: for (fafrgert) 


( eae) 


ud aerate fameerah eferrererTatg 
aftetag cfaafirangaiae mea: | Zo i 
anifaest mraeact et fix” wae TERTAG ! 
aerTeERTfeet ueat afcextt cite: 1 a u 
amg stafaraat Farrier i 

cantar: amet ey qeeqtaqra: tt 32 i 





%, 





ose 


. Ferhat (t) (=) for (fafit) 2. ofe (*) fafa for (Ft) 


(fae we HATE 22 2) 

weal for (azaat) ¥. (=z) (=) aff for (qefa) 
TIT for (TATA) 

wcuiaeta for (wxudtata) &. wader 
TAARATT for (aaarat) 3. wera for (TTA 


. wate for (@fa) X. LTA for (TaT Az) 


(Fro gaat wueeAT 322) 1 


(Fao gaat wader 32 2) &. Patt for (Fira) 
aemfee (at) wemfact for (aenfast) 

afcett (4) (=) for (sfezeir) 

sateiat for (weidt) y. (Fro adem 22 afar 2) 1 (F) 
aeATfast for (aearfegt) 


(Fao eaat deat 22 sifpe z)1 
aaa (1) wards for (wardse) 
waaay (1) SraTATe for (wT) 
aifgraardere: (a) agaradtara: for (atnfegaesafiern) 
wpTASA for (THT) 
arnfegaradtara: for (atnfagaveaferata: ) 
(fro saadeat 33 vifea 2) (=) 
TEMAS for (THAT) 3. Test for (aeteg) 
aqdtara: for (aveqfeara: ) 


( 2a 3 


am agate: wife: are 
eorefarfiqeteiatia agatfarn BAST: WAR 
Bhs Saueafeadt: catgeraTTgaraT: eae: \ 
sree FersaTeTgtCaT range u 3¥ u 
rrands mifarta r gaat Reareemin: \ 
SAMAR STA TATA aT: Nera 


PLLPPDLD PPL LIS 


33. (8) &. Nerseett: (1) Nerrrerat: for (Aarraeaat:) 
. gar (F) (7) (=) for (a) 
3. afer (7) (=) (=) for (afer) 
%. ware: (7) (&) (F) for (wert) 
(fao gaat waraear 2¥ afar 3) (F) 
(1) 4. sfatar: for (sftaat:) (ert ofes aaTer) 
— &. sad tits ar ifar oa t 
9. aeaifan for (agaifax) 
(a) 5. mater av sifeatd (=) | 
(S) %. Fearaarera: for (Faraaterat:) 


ay. (8) 2. qatar (7) (4) (=) for (qm az) 
2. Fada (1) (*) (=) for (faaa} 
_— (Fro-gaait art area 34 ifn. ) 
(4) 2. HE for (7H) 
, (fao—agt aimiem 44 sir 8) (=) 
(=) 4. feat for (fard:) 


84. (8) 8. farts (m) (=) (#) for (faaengg) 
2. He (1) (a) (=) for (Fa) 
¥. gat (m) (a) (=) for (BAT) y, Serer . ia (ra) 
(fro—aaat ameter 35, i 1) 
(=) -&. ga: for (Fat:) 
. 8, fto—aet -watent 24 tifa 2) (=) 
(=) % feateeare: for (fearaxeret:) 








PLL LA 


38. (7) 


39. (7) 


(a 





— 


( vez) 
safraractaeerittzaenst Suet Fire | 
afaat er: medt fab dqam: aftr: 11 34 1 
dagerefrtranternmgy \ 
weet eitat faata: afsaacet u 39 1 
aren treafettatatead safrnd t 
waTeait gfaracarateat aga TIA 1 ac " 








AS 


(fro—eaat wader zo sifra 8) 
a. eafarratrsaat (1) arttoratrerat for (aaftarsarrarat) 
2. fered (a) feqeee (4) for (feaert) 
3. faree (at) (=) for (fame) 
¥, afeateya: for (afantez:) 
g. safaaratraaat for (aafaoratraay) 
x. tga for (dad) §. (wAaeaT Ro fT F) (=) 
g. caferaratsrmaat for (erfraratataaray) 
3. Pamaret for (fara) x. gat for (aga) 
¥. ryt: for (qa:) ©. Heat for (set) 
3. STHA: for (THF:) 
(fro— gaat wTaeAT 35 Z) 
g. ga (7) BA for (Ft) 2. sétat for (Ara) 
a. wate (7) af for (ate) 
¥. Agar for (Tgat) 
g. aH for (gH) &. afgreTet for (wisreca) 
4, (fo—agt wate 3s Fifa 3) (=) 


(S) &. gt for (st) %. wafeatsdtay for (efaactrat) 


3a. (F) 


3. FF for (ats) 
(fro—eaat sae 32 sift 2) 
g. Uafeat (7) efeaitelis for (GHreatyfa) 


(ut) 2 aqdtore (=) for (aafare) 
(2) &. eftdfs (2) for (crest) 


3. (fro—aet ania 38 sift 2) (=) 


(=) ¥. Fge for (tga) 


( tev) 


vd fadteefirghidtt Rerfenreand: | 
asada at afecrfargaatay adaea 1 Re Ul 
Saran ated araetcafear warcedt: | 
eaefeanfndted caret STATIN Ut ¥o 
aeaifiréy drag hccufearnatarat ea: 
say Be: TATUTa TS faa een 
steufeanqTTTae ematfsatfartea: | 
mafraaqaraanaiay 4 aT AT een 





48. (1) (fao—eqat arieat Yo sifine 8) 
%. Usaadts for (uemadte) 
(a). 2. arfean: for (atfsar) 2. teredtd for (weaadtd) 
3. (fao—agt ware vo afna 2) (=) 
(=) ¥. dadtt for (afaer) 
vo, (4) — (fro—zaat deta ¥2 2 ) 
R. serafaraatg for (rerrafarrara) 
(1) % waetes for (arate) 9. Taft for (gare) 
(=) ¥. (fto—aet aertert v2 sifra 8) (=) 
%%. (8) — (fro—earat wre ¥R 2) 
8. GATT et: for (Hey et) 
Q. TaHyE: (1) HABE: for (wae sz:) 
(=) 3. casfeg for (wrafez) ¥. (fro —aat ameter ¥2 sified 4) (¥) 
(#) 2. wermRBe: for (waaBz:) 
¥R. (a) (fo— eae are v3 2) 
t. Maar (T) for (MTETHT) y. Talat (a) for (crearé:) 
3. saferna (a) eaeftera (at) ardtare for (aafaars) 
¥. arate (71) wera for (areata) 
(=) ¥. qUATy for (TUTTE) | 
(3) %. wament for (TaETET) ¥, wary for (areata) 
(fata ¥3 tifa 2) 1 (S) 
- AS) %. wae for (Gaga) 2. cet for (arata:) 
2. saferard for (seftart) ¥. ararg for (Sg 214) 


{ vex ) 


vfafaatemnataftearan® wate mrad | 
Tach AR agrat ETAT: Ween 
TEROTAAGEAT: HATTA ATTY | 
ARANETA GATT: SRO TASTE: uve n 
etferarterranfinee dtedaradg maT | 
arreraad areas aghHea: U vy u 





¥3. (=) 





(fao— gaat HAMM ¥¥ 3) 
arat (7) arate afer for (arttefar) 
aeaTs (Tt) TATA for (eT) 


(a) 3. faaramst for (fearemt) ¥ ava for (areca) 


we. (3) 


AI We 
(comes 


(7) 2. 


aewaTara: for (aeHATATa:) 


_ wae for (TET) &. (fro—amder ve afer 2) (=) 
. arial for (amtehat) y. ata for (wR) 


(fao—gaat wadeat ¥y 2) 
gage: (7) gre Fea for (qaser:) 
Sea eaa: (Tt) seTaeteareng for (erase: 


wenaraa Feat for (TePeMTAAGea:) ¥. Tenrat for (were) 


(a) %. Game: for (ganat:) ¥. (fro ameter vy sifra 8) (= 


(=) 


cw 


¥x. (7) 


_ 
(7) 2. 
(3) & 
(e) x. 


. Hata for (ITAA) %. TH Fe for (GaHEM:) 


Gear Fa for (TearHAT) . Beat for (HEART) 

ward ait for (aera) os. waraTa for (Ael=aM:) 

(fro —gaat wae ¥e 2) 

areata (7) for (aera) 

daa for (Tifa) 3. a for (aR) 

arrerarad for (aaa) ¥. (wet ertear ye’ fas z 1) 
arfass for (atfss) 


( eee ) 


mvaghé Saraght oe we waka qyem: ‘ 
srertfar marcarentafar gin WIT: 1 * uN 
Ranfecafearan ste mariea detain 

we Te SATTATTT ear! TEU voll 
taTMIATYRT F tat Pargeneeratitn ' 

seat arent aufara dzgtzarg ¥en 











LIE 


ve. (4) (fro gaat wadeTT Yo Z) 
a. meratg (7) (=) for (aerate) 
2. eamggit (1) for (eraqgft) %. ve (1) TE for (we) 
(t) ¥. ‘wa’ oe Beat SY. TA: for (Tat) 
(a) %. @amggft for (fareqeft) 3. 72 for (sz) 
&. (wat Heer Vo afr B 1) (=) | 
(=) weaatfa wate oe aaramggis esate | 
gaa areaatatgrn wats: Yell 
for 


“geralg Garqefa ve ye wafer cae: | 
mati ararieafk fergie wa YE 
vo, () (fro gaat aaeeat ¥e 8) 
g. deadarfat (7) (a) (S) for (aeazartia) 
2. eavearal (7) for (zaterat) ¥. aaa: (&) for (Raa) 
() ¥. Rapist for (Terie) 
(=) &, faerrat for (faarrar) §. sive for (site) 
2. areatal for (earexat) 3. eat: (=) for (eT) 
is, (fro —-aat at sear sifina ae 2) 
4%. TEA for (Taree) 2. eareaat for (eateraf) 
vc. (3) (fo —gaat aradert ve 2) 
2. sfirfitgen (=) for (fats) 
2. attiser: (1) Wheres: for (wettea:) 3. area for (aeara) 
_¥. Regeterg (1) (=) dzgetat for (segferra) 
(a) Xe (8) for (wR) (@ |) 3. at for (aaa) 
&. (fro—agt wader Ye sifea 2) (=) 
(F) 3. aemrg Tered for (sent atat) ¥, weeggtaTa for (daafeaTa) 





( es) 


weral aRaarat aeatd fafa: arfar: 1 
meagteaya seat ferarereaate u ve u 
tigerforen: Sat ana iefing SST ATE AT 
Fraaqan: wetter: morfearay MEANT YON 
raion fataat aritefeetr ! 

aifa TARE TTEAT agar feaat: ty T 
weet shatter eT digarare: U 
dears TUT: dfectaren: WARN 


PLP LAL LL ELL LL ELS 





¥R, (4) (Pro—auat acter dem Xo sifea 3 ) 
g. aaaeitar: (4) (=) for (azzataT) 
1) 2. weraré for (weqat) 3. wemria (=) for (werTA) 
_ (a) ¥.. merenids for (weratzs) 
4. (fro—agt wader Xo afr 2) (=) 
(&) 2. weratd for {neqat) ¥. meqatta for (series) 
%o, (#) (Pro— ant AGEAT ¥2 2) 
a. wtiisfafirg (a1) aitfafere: for (atatfafrg) 
(a) 2. aait for (arta) 3. wratat for (arqrar) 
(a) ¥ . (fo aa grdeat 4% 2) (S) 
(=) ‘. shafaatart: for (atifaterg) 
xR. (8) (Pose HAT XR 8) 
a. yfendiaifatrat (a1) fergfendfat for (Feri) 
2 at (7) () for (gar) 
(a) 3. farcctary for (fercdtar:) ¥. fai for (37) 
x. Feaer for (ferat:) 
(a) &. (Fro— at yi x2 8) (8) 


Na 


r) & 

x2. (#) (Fre ae &) 3. aitepet (a) (=) for (Arentet) 
(7) 
) 


2. ara for (Tara) ¥. (fao—aat aaeert ¥3 sifea &) (=) 
(=) 3. ararg for (T1Tg) 


( 5 ) 


seatgtantiy aifger cafafgentt antes: t 

RETESET NET TATATAY ys u 

aratat cogteroag hirer ageatseura: \ 
SE EEICE aaa: 





SAD LLL E DL LISS LPLADLDLLDID LA LLLP LLL BEI DP 
\ 


43. (H) (fro —gaat areieat XY 2) 
g. werat (1) meraife for (ead) 2. errfeq for (aanfar) 
(1) 3. aearegfa (=) for (aeaTgefa) 
(a) %. wexateaarfy for (weatzaarfq) 
¥, (fao-—aet wrter yv sifer z) | 
(=) %, weaatfe for (meats) 3. memggft for (aergEfr) 
%. (8) & soft (a) agfit for (wafH) 2. aaRaIt() for (ageait) 
(7) aaeey & ware’ aan afer set ogee geet shee Frerifine & 
_ epenferercran fear sqeaererrg 41 
(3) 2. garaeagfirtiat for (Tateeagfireiet) 
% wa Aeaa: for (aAGeatseqrs:) 
3. ‘a for (ageateara: Tare:) 
(=) &. agfa for (waghr) 
% peggy feanswaa seyTTT TAT UA 
a. eft epemegeeaargee: for (agzaiseaa: Taree: ) 


(8) 


“a 


ee el 


in, 
a 


( gee ) 


wy farsatacrear: 
q>aqee1: 


Sa Rea CeCECt]) 
atgqatrategenaratgera Fg | 
Feeostctertat fee feet fer ern: TU. 
fara a ware Ft Rett ae 
eee Faire pat at fer are: aw en 


a: 


eye’ eg at sree fet fear 


sigraraat feast at Sfe mere: a: nazi 


ee x 


. ater (at) for (fret) 


wo 2 ww xo a eee 





ma (4) for (se) 2. (fro—aet 1 aaftagar Fre 2) 
ais@ (1) ie: for (arg) ¥. fag (7) fag: for (fag) 

&. faat (7) for (far) 

egenfrent for (egeTyRt) 

ATAETT XY ui for (egeta 187) 

. aise for (atq) x. fret for (fre) 

fang for (fag)  &. Fat for (far) 

aise for (atq) ¥. fare for (fag) 

after for ( — io. HRCA for (sre) 

frat for (fart) 

wera for (frarat) ». fe ad erat (7) faard for (featé) 

shifa ata frat for (aera fear) 

wraaas for (TTT) 

fasarat for (frarat) 3. srcaene fear for (sremers fart) 

feardeqrat for (faare arat) 

fest for (feat) 2. “a” aat ag se ate 

agra for (a: grat ) 

(fro erat sate der ¥ 21 die at cer aT sete aa z 1) 

waea for (micrerit) 

wear for (a: grmmt) %. fasta for (feast) 

agra for (TE ArT) 


( Roo } 


2B at Faget staged wee at Tear} 
menarTe at aatereal afa TUR: auyv 
oar ancinteen fen TTA: Ta: | 

seat ERT aan Srarates TOS! TUK U 
TANGAAT atest ararat fapferaratai \ 
AEUAR AAA evar at afa maa: a UE 


(7) 
) 


(e) ¥. 


A wo A a 








. aaa (7) for (eats) 


seta (1) atiarg for (starz) 


(fro gaat aaa deat ¥ Z) 


. Haass for (aay) 2. WereTATseAA for (wersrarhait) 
. aang for (atarq) 


. fagargrat for (fagaarat) 2%. waters for (saat) 
. Feqegrar for (HeqeTaT) 2. SHAT for (atarq) 


. e (7) for (wend) 2. warqufest (7) for (warafesr) 


(fao gaat eater deat & 2) 


. karat for (arate) ¥, wares (a) for (FaTeT) 

. waTsfeat for (warafest) ¥. TUTET for (AAT) 
wen for (ase) 4. weleaTey for (THETA) 
wats for (WAT) 3. afearearat for (aferrerat) 


stg (1) vig for (Fire) 2. arerarg (31) for (ata) 
Rararay (F) for (erat) ¥. erat: for a) 
(fao saat wits deat 2) 
site (=) for (faz) . 
2. AgTTATAETA for (agaresntraet ) 
Saray for (zaerat) 
ET MITT ATT for (agaTt mae) 


( Yok) 


wife: aaniem ageet aa: | 

arent see afer: a aH NOU 
agreTTeaTeT ET fait ferorene 
Fagan aeearfead & ree: Ae 
mrameggeiges at grout & frat | 

HE TATA RHETT: gag aa at a aaa en 





LAN 


9. (1) 2. eifera: for (aifaa:) Rate (4) (=) for (xe) 
3. wa: (7) for (#at) 
¥. aatectas: (1) 4 aeriae: for (aaerter) 
X. oratfa arf for (arf) &. a for (aH) 

(1) (fao— saat ate det s 2) 

(a) ¥ adterctam: for (aateriaz:) 

(=) 3. eat = for (Hef 4) ¥. aeasae: for (aera) 
. grant for (xigarat) 


s. () ater (a) dtex for (fae) 
% eaifect (1) (F) for (ReaTIect) 
(7) (fao—gaat scitader & 2) 
(a) 2. ater for (faet) 3. 4 for (=) 
(&) &. ater for (fer) ¥. fagaserar for (fayagrar) 
Q. esearssfaet for (xsearfizct) 


a. (4) &. gatset (a) gated for (qziget) 
R. etree: (at) errTaTETTaT HRT: for (aaa aT: ) 
id ean eae 


¥. a7a: for (faH:) y. Tee for (ste) 
(fro —guat sit staat ¢ 2) 

(a) &. grata for (stat) 2. eraraTa for (ZHqTaTA) 
& mTigh: for (zaReTat:) 

(3) 4. cara for (T14a) Q. EHITATH for (x ITATT) 


g. Baasedt for (qaage) 3. Sfaarnfa for (& faarnft) 
&. TASH: for (RAH) 





C258. 


feanadeorefeeiat ‘feraaiaacaat | 

waft aatet qatar auatt a aaa: 1 Qo 1 
3 x) 2 

aA SAT: arena a aa feavatar 

q wife aca arts wrata a aa meen 

a: anniaanigat a ater gaara 

cfransizast gat at aaa a TAM: TV 

efaaratat afeat ftedaefiecafemt: | 

afa augtaed atest a a daa: 1 g3n 

neaarigiamt Barat WEA CG ACTA: | 

eparigicaat Brat meat & aaa: ral 


SI 





go. (tT) 2. Fesersat iar) Feyrsat for (festet) 
() &. fare for (fart) ¥. faraaraacaat for (farearaderar) 
X. wHSe for (wre) &. aaa: for (aa) 
(&) &. svet for (ait) 
tt. (8) 8. at (Tt) (4) () for (AH) 2. Featatar (=) for (fearatat) 
(7) : arasat for (wrsaT: ) ¥. ate (a) for (aaa) 
4. mate for (+ s4) 
(%) ¥. matey for (areas) 
(=) %. fearafar for (faataizr) —-&. asa for (a\s#) 
t2. (H) & ta (™) (F) for (iH) —-a aT (3) (SF) for (a) 
3. ater (a) (&) for (ater) =v. ara (=) for aaafr) 
(1) 4%. aise for (ane) 
(=) & Set for (x) 
23. (7) &. afeat for (afeat) 2. a7 for (a7) 
(3) 3. Ase for (ats) 
(=) 3. Aisha for (atest) 
wy. (H) t. were (7) aeraerd for (aera) 
wate for (arafr) . 
(t) &. wae'st for (wuraieng) ov qee'amaT for (waaleaa) 
(8) & see for (ar) 
(3). Woasts# for (wastae) ¥. qeraferat for (acrateaat) 


te as.) 


meagan afeerrafa <faara wale | 
aftaraat areas waar a aaa: ge 1 
water aunt ofa fear aatTaeTT: | 
anfafagrera raTaT a aa: Weeeu 
farcsad TATRA faat eae aTATETT | 
meratast at aera AAA: g0u 


PAPI ADL AD LD LD 


ay. (a) 2. 
2. 
. Aes for (Aras) 


(=) 
¥, 


(S) &. 


2%. (a) 2%. 
2. 


(7) ¥. 


(=) 


(s) & 
¥, 


vs. (7) 


(=) ¥. 


(=) ¥. 
&. 





ad 


grarmataarata (1) disafrerfes for (artctafserafer) 
vfaaraeaitery (1) <fafzatercrisery tor (xfafearaeitsery) 


<fraraeattea for (vPraraesiter) 2. caraisit for (atest) 
wareaet for (wareysz) 


Heqeerara for (AeqeraTat) 


g. Sa for (a) 3 atsaréatt for (ataraait) 
% 
¥. weary for (wearers) 


wfa for (xf) 2. fearareaitsery for (ateaitt) 


arat (7) () for (arat) 2. S& (T) saa: for (saz) 
eqsat (7) eat for (svat) 


fagat for (fagaarar) 4. arg for (war) 


3. asaT for (k15aT) 


wayseaAy for (SeAeTAT) %. FF a: for (ST) 
Faga=grat for (fagaerat) 3. aeat for (sar) 


g. AeTAATH for (TetHaTHtg) 2. TeTTaTEe for (AeTTaTHTA) 
2. 


ata for (@) 
frerard fcr (ferent) 2. terearestor for (werraTaiee) 
‘aca’ for (fercrert) «x. eeffant for (carefaar) 


+} fererad +e. srecaaraty for (aetraraia) 


(ae) 


ara “Pransttat SETATTT ag: afte | 
aratfesortertrasetT ea Teil 
fagaeyre aifian eargieratd anfirat FHSaT | 
mifieraraaraferat BHAA Ee fa: ate: Neu 
erent aaa cinta 

Get sree afearfa refit RN 
vente afearsartaned TUAT 
mesa eat aa CHAT ATS ATNTAT 1 RYU 








25. (8) &. matrasterat (7) (#) for (arafraaatat) 
. aratfer (at) (=) for (aratfez) 
(1) 3. SeaTAT for (seATAT) ¥. wearer: for (seater) 
(7) 3. sairarart for (arafraaatrat) 
(5) -¥. seat for (sfz:) 2. aTaTUt for (starter) 
¥ 


. sada for (waiter) 
t& (8) & gfe (7) ofa (=) for (gfvar) 
%. ward (7) (F)for(aeare ) 
(1) ¥. fasar: for (fase) 
(=) &. afwa for (afar) 2. ware for (waa) 
3. aTgfe: for (aapzhi:) 
(F) %. faqasarar for (faqagra) 
ze. (4). arrrgrtfir (a7) atovergfit for (atarrafir) 
—} warftak (7) aarfitat for (maf) 
(=) 3. Fert for (far) a. aaif for (aati: ) 
2. =raTfrat: for (rarfxaf) 
(=) 2. srvepfe for (armaeafiz) 2. aafa for (wath) 
RH) 8. sat (S) for (sat) 3. aaatgcr (=) (a) SaeTEatfor (aarret) 
y aT ( arc ial 
¥. waitaren (1) gaieraren for (Sat TaeHTeAMT) 
(4) %. asatazafeasat for (Heareat afestsat) 


_(%) 2. gat for (a) ¥. Featamiear for (gataaeniear) 
) ¥. qaiseaprea for (gt aan) 





(7) 
(3) 


- (8) 


(3) 
(F) 


{ Roy) 


menegefararel stead rte aarat | 
ae AETA AHASATTT FTI NII 
BET TANTS GHETAA AIT THAT 
saa afemfatd rantemrtintan: WIN 
Pronfeatganetsateet grat etafaere: 1 
eafeaafaqaeen any gat feat Ia nen 
ee RH AT oe TERT ATH | 

Bed facererd wrest od arftrcsta: UW 


wa Kk wt A vo 
tr} oe . 


oleae 9s Maan 


PP LPL AP LLIN 


carat (a) (=) for (con). Fater (1) (=) for (Petz) 


PPL PLL DD PLL IF 





. wERe for (FHz) ¥, ase for (saa) 
. Feat for (=f) g, satay for (<a) 


aaaiat ate for (Reza) y. faster for (facta) 
assat for (asat) 


Tat Batfintaerg: (7) watenfniaerg: for (waatearfrracaz:) 
seat for (se) 3. seq for (387) 

aeqt: for (aHeqa) ¥. mates (=) for (waafeathr) 
waarg: (5) for (Hace) 

SaHq Fa: for (aH) 

gram: (a) (7) (=) for (gear) 

fagarat (#t) (=) for (fagzerm) 

san: (7) (4) (&) for (wrar:) 

ferret for (faméaa) x. safe for (eater) 
fagararrata for (fagaeraty) 


ay for (at) (7) axwent for (aaa) 

grea (7) for (carer) 3. fgenry for (aaa) 
fear (1) (=) (5) for (aoteé) 

wania: for (tHia:) 

aqrard aaent for (aarareat wet) 

aaa for (savers) —-¥. tafser for (HER) 


( 2% ) 


TANITA sage TET sfirerrsttaat weet t 
HaITTTHt vara RrTtat sit BRST URE 
aremeyfverere frqaarat TUTATATAT | 
ante watdt wifes WERT TATU Vou 
OCA AT cemfeamgangetrtiver 
aanfeaeigTeeaT CHATTAAEMT U 26 ue 
ineraaranfarerTsat FAR TAH TTT: \ 
= aeaae qreanttey gam fercat: Re 





UE 


R& (H) 8. feet (7) fie for (sft) =. eT: (7) for (rT) 
(7) 3. ear for (ersar) 
(3) 3. farat for (sfrrart) ¥. agerat for (wz) 
_(S) & saa for (ava) . fart for (sft) 
—X, aisoret for (wataret) 
ae. (5) teehee (1) weg (=) for (wate) 
(7) % 2m for (aan) 
——§, fagaarer for (fagrerat (a) for (fagrerat) 
(=) %. watee for (anit) 
(=) % saat for (ersar) 3. fagargrar for (frgzarat) 
25. (8) %. arearfre for (aemfire) 
(7) 2. gat for (gar) 3. aay for (esa) 
(=) % sarvar for (asar) 
Ra. (F) srg (77) (=) for (srer:) 
%. Brarafeg (7) yraaifag for (grmeatfeg) 
— 3} afer: (1) () (&) for (gamer) 
_ (t) x, aaleatanata for (eteracerazfa) 
(ay 2 Greguifey for (gremnfey) 


ee, (&) t. sreqrg for (ara) 


( re ) 


deny eaifey fatten arat i genfeg aaah 
watey sistema ae farce aT U 30 
AHTATTEL AT rantfere frat eaereqaa: | 

va PETA EECA W3eu 
SSE Ta Fefirg ETAT wr: atefafacan: | 
auction fartar daat aed u qu 





go, (at) 8. 


2. 


¥. 
4. 


(a) 2%. 
2. 


(=) & 


3%. (a) %. 


Kw w- 


(m7) ¥. 


3. waafeen: for (aazarfaca) ¥. eregad: for (Frcegeh) 


_ adored for (stark) 


(=) ¥. 


(=) 


an 


32. (f) &. 


a3 


(7) & 


(=) & 





wrafeg (7) sratfag (=) for (aatfey) 

aratg (7) for ral ) 3. warat: (7) for (azatat} 
arate (77) Bas ) for (aarefa) 

yeafeedtar: (#) (x) pats for (qaatfacatar) 


waaaifay for (wrifeg) &. Tataty fer (gaifey) 
“eral? aed X. yatheratan: for (yrafacarar) 


areq for (faster) 

wage (1) (7) ()for (water) 
aera: (7) (=) (&)for (wat) 
artic (7) (S) for (aaarferat) 
uegad: (1) Teyet: for (ermeqet:) 
feat for (frat) 


eaquregqad: for (eaTeTat:) v. tad for (tax) 
aar: (7) : (=) for (wat) 
ee a (1) (6 ) (#) for (aergUT) 
ater (1) (=) (S) for (sreftat) ¥. eat: (=) for (eat) 
aed: (t) (at) () for (=z) 


farttat: (=) for {fareat) 
faafeat: for (faréar) 


( Res | 


aaa a wralai ratrarafapatenitt: t 
aT efter: aia fata erga " aR 1} 
geist aug ST aaaferarererfaaay fora 
aaratad frat fafast BTEATT WT AYU 
wierifaqaae fairy sifeaaetatt aay t 
wi  ferfaorarmnsta fasat arent Te Lal 
vehraeiaTt ferpearrgfaar \ 
geata MA faqagran TUTAATY UW FG UN 
a3. (a) ¢. saeaearadtat (7) (=) (=) for (saearataneiat) 
Q. Bratar (7) areett for (aetter) 
3. warTafest: (7) (a) (=) for (warafest:) 
¥. sratae (Tt) (a) (F) for (wreriet) 
y. fata (1) (+) (&) for (fata) 
& eruget: (7) (a) (F) for (raged) 
= Q. BAT for (Fatt) (F) Bras for (Raia) 
(7) %. aa for She 


eal 





“@) 2. (=) for serdar) 3. afigar: for (aferat) 
(a) ¥. a (zur) Q. avert for (arent) 
(F) ¥. axraza for (auf) 


X. 
%. at aterey (7) (*) for (aatataray) 
RHA (7) ANT for (AF ; wy) 3. str (at) sitar for (ste) 
%. Gera (Tt) (@) (S) for (qarTeT) 
¥ 2. wafarfe for ae es 3. Sfterfisar for (starsat) 
q. aratTIay for (aatatisey) 2. aT for (aw) 
%. BAT for (gra) (m) fetaazrafana for (fergstacrefaaa) 
2. st (i) for (a) & TATA (T) (&) for (eyATA) 
%. (a oat a yt S (%) (&) 8. era aa for (ety aT) 


(3) &. str for (watz) ¥. sae for (aT) 
%. Stagert for (forge) Q. eBay for (sepa) 
8. Sagat for (azngay) 


(=) &. seatmansa for (safrata) 2. Brag | for (eraTg) 
 aetnt for (Bart) «ow, faqaygrat for (faqaerat) 


C88) 


MOEA TENET OT eTTGe TUTE | 
Farenfrerree ayant ara: TON 
enTeTaRe at wifarareTAeATTT ABT I 
atererratta areeraresate: “Tag Tce 
Regen aret ees sRATEN He FCAT | 
MsIET aratag STARAATTT: U BEN 
eamerdeararer faqaaag eae LAT 1 
arfererstg atza freee Sai wafa xo lt 


a9. (a) %. weeter (1) erauéer for (apaesae 
2. goat: (1) wear for (Seat) «= -3. aa for (aaaif) 


LIS SS LIPSS. 








SLL SLL LIES 


¥. gave: (1) Ease: for (qarase:) 
(7) %. weaader sat for (agaeaer sat) =—-. Hea for (gra) 
¥. gree: for (wae:) 
(=) %. syruder for (@gsag der) x. fayarera for (fayterm) 
¥. gagaree: for (qarraeye:) 
as. (a) &. aya (7) waa for (wage) 2. sae (7) (=) for (aa) 
2. 1) (&) (&) for (sit) =. aa: for (wa) 
x ae (1) (@) for (me) 
(1) &. weet for (wer) 
(4) %. ge for (=a) ¥%. wae: for (7H) 
(=) 2. gaya for (Haye) 
3e. (4) &. saat afar (7) rar gfgar for (erat ar aRaAT) 
(3) %. Sagara gfe for (SyareanTaT Tear) 
(=) %. fagaegrt for (fayrgr) g. seat for (ear) 
3. fagzararat for (faserarat) 
¥o. (4) %. Tassm (7) erase for (ATT) 
2. secargaig (7) (#) for (weeaagara) 
(1) 3. Seay for sarz) 
(a) 2. seat for (TTT) «3. Eg for (7g) 
(S) %. werisar for (aerévat) «=. Saaee for (sez) 


¥, fagazgre for (fagraratce) 
x. fagasarat for (fagzar) 


(Rte: J 


TOAMETTATTA signee: \ 

afr afi atear: rare Baz area: Ween 
azarae tana fearatrieé meee \ 
wicaaM: sree micdaitta wetter: 1 RU 

wa sdprama sat Beart feferat \ 
aaraTS TUT fafa weenie Her: 1 xR 





— 
4 
— 


ptt 
i] 
— 
ve uh vo AM XE aw Uo 


of 
wv 
—_ 
4 ce 


— 
4 
~— 


— 
asl} 

— 
“oe 


(=) 


*R. (a) 


‘2. Say 
3. 


(t) 


OX, 


ec KD DO 


ral 


_ Rear (7) for (HeaTETaT) 


aaraferet (a7) werefrtaerr: for (aareferar sat ATAT:) 


. Fat (F) for (zat) ¥. amt: (&) (art:) 
. Faretta: (&) () for (earettarr) 

. Baal for (afer) ie, reat for (areat:) 
. RETSITAeH for (AeaTSTITTTSs) 

. ferret for (afer) 


aeqearaT for (wera) 2. eft for (zr) 


aaa ara (1) aa: attra for (waters) 
Wat (Tt) FF for (Fe) 
safer: (1) srafea: for (srrfar:) 


. Bice (7) (A) (S) for (wate) 


‘afr yee 
“pa: wafaa:” a are frat wat 21 


. Sreraratarnee for (asada) 
2. 

g. 
&. 


smvafar: for (artfaa:) 
AATAUTATH for (AararaaTears) 
feararat for (femaraaz) %. tae: for (srfer:) 


(3) for (sei) 2. ferferrem for (fairs) 
mae (a) for (fraareer:) 
We 


MeSATE TET: KAN for (wer:) 


Se 3. Heaters for eee 


at 
ofa 
Prion 
ps 






Xaver for (red) 


3. Hragtsasat for (Raraoreer:) 


( 2 ) 


ae ue HRHRTTAT STITT: | 
great Rarfeor fagaaen ga anf: ieee 
afgerersaraTeITTT arearciereraeat 
ferREN qa afeasat sfafaterag uy 1 
8 wigs aed Rreaece afy feaet BE: | 
SRI aferua: ecrda tafe 1 vy n 
Sea oe ate TT AT 

sige ag ga Prqaepen ewes qeTA Nw U 


“ye. (a) %. gat (a) (A) for (gat) 
(7) %. sara for (saat) 3. +aI+ (=) (a) 
¥. weary for (aet:) 
(=) ¥. fayazarr for (fagzerar) 








PLL LIL LL IED EE ASLO 


v4. (a) g. sat (=) for (at) 
(7) 2%, aw me gae 
3. gearega (&) for (gray) 
¥. wife for (afa) 
(4) 2. sat: for (sa) 
(=) 9. earardsar for (sarate’at) 
se. (@) %. eferwa (m7) for (aferara:) 
2. sfiret for (fier) 
(1) 3. aaa for (azz) %. prey for (xpTaTTT) 
4X. Baya for (sarat) —«-&. TTT for (arata) 
(a) ©. a8 for (a5%) Q. afiruia for (efirta:) 
&. Sfaareptar for (firaratar) 
() 2. aferaa for (aferara:) 
vs. (1) %. Maat (7) saTAA for (Sax TH) 
2. ad (7) (=) for (aa) 
2. a (A) (5) (3) for (ee) 
(a) ¥. dadat for (F Teat) X. TI for (arr) 
(a) ¢. Maat for (Tet) 3. Tea for (a4) 
we. fagasgra for (fayrarar) 


( rR ) 


aieqeeTaT ETH frst aataferetrart 
meri a ames = Ro Thiet 
BaTgaseat TUTAT eaTeaA waretan 
MTSTTT siedregereaT ag Jat vu xe Ut 
TAT Te ATA faqraemraatré gaz tt 

a faqaara afevfagratatera W Xo Nl 
argRifa: matfe: Feferrrast fered BU | 
muitearea are ferret rea at AM RU 


¥s, (a) %. adel for (aaa t) 
R. Maacansy (1) geraciawsd (F) for (maraaasy) 
3. SHAT (T) esrae for (Stat) 
() ¥. gaara for (aera) 
(*) %. wait for (wat) 2. weraciawel for (meTaease) 
3. SwRI for (sHareqar) 
(&) 3. seesrret for (sHrqat) 
‘“e. (@) &. gersafat (tT) (&) for (gasHar) 
% Ea for (ga) | 
(x) 3. sige for (sizatee) , api for (aq) 
—& Gare for (gat) 
(3) %. sargissfaraat for (grarpdstaract) 
2. garestat for (gatatar) ¥. agat for (wz) 
(=) 2. garsttar for (garsta) 
xe. (a) &%. am (7) (=) (=) for (aft) 
(1) &. fafeat a carat (fadriatarar) 
(=) %. faqazgrr for (faqagrat) ¥. srateat for (wid) 
x. fagaearar for (fagearar) 
—} Rretarsata for (feeiataterat) 
48. (8) &. Fem (7) for (xe) 
(7). 2. fxfaat for (fafa) 
%. wet for (frat) 
| g. zm (#) for (a) 
(e).2. Ig: for. (arg) 





3, aalteates for (aaiteates) 


( 2} 


froarengfzet sie getter 
aurea sata stdhitecraten Wan 
garastar art aractrararra eras a i 
ferred set: gate AAT: Ut HAN 
feaaratenaattatioraraeartamrfeardem l 


PLDIPPAS IL DP PS ISLS SS. 


¥2. (a) 
(7) 


( 
(¥) 


a 


g 
¥ 
% 
g 

2 
4 


cavarg ferrateatax aerarerasiara: WEN 





-~ 


. SaatTe (1) Saat for (aria) 
. fervalat for (Ferzton) a. fed for (wae) 
. Safat for (setae) =. Wat’ for (Fatite’) 


fgatatert for (featar) 


. SPAT for (erat) —-. Fearateat for (Ferrata) 
. sara arg for (sarare we) 
» SARS for (eas wate) 


wma (1) (=) for (eA) 


) 
. tat for (stat) a. eta Bq for (sfaai a3). 
pee ) 


. veRe for (set) =—-&. AE for (aq) 


gay faat for (gaftear) 


avatar (7) (=) for (ara’e) 
aise (1) (9) for (eae) 


. feararatern for (feraretert) «—¥, Saat for (sat) 
‘a gre (F) 


arate: for (TwaTAA ATA: ) 

feraratean for (ferataieet) ¥° sansfrat for (sarfear) 
ferrateat for (feata’e) 

aqrand fearate earad for (earare’ ferraterres) 


. sarearse: for (erasftara:) 


(8) 


eagrerardant aererearaiae: i 

; are aT Ferra ee eratfire GUN Ut 
AURTAUETA gar aeufeeaey atten \ 
arererTee fea HEAAYA wt eam: Wg 
are miaaa aafayacrara eared mea TTA: | 
wel eit area fare Aq Ww 


SS. 








uy. (4) 9%. aAT (it) for (a7) 
. SAAR: HAT for (saaMaH: HAT) 
78% Veet Chas oT Ts 
. Warfare (1) for (eat fara) 
. Taaag for (waver) «—«-&. aif for (waaiferen) 
wat arat for (wa wat) «=. Herferer for (a arfare) 
warifares for (aaatfete) | 
_ cara for (was TH) 
. BTA ae Vee TEA Ties HT ATA eI 
. ayfenea aragarag for (aot ferraar aaa) 
a. ateaister (a1) aaister for (Aaa) 
2. gat (1) (F) for (a) 
(7) 3. qagat for (era gat) %, aa for (eae) 
a. ataaisg’em for (AeaTHeq) 2. gat for (gt) 
g. atadisteq for (ataitte) 


xe. (8) te (A) () (efor (aa) & Bx (7) (#) for (werET) 
fato Reite at eet Gis Taree | 
3. ‘ser reat geet ofs ates oe & (77) 
¥, aetaaiat (7) (a) (=) for (aeaiat) 
(7) X. Bret for (ear) 3. area TeaT (s) for (serra) 
fao gad oft ar area | 
- & BBfor(e) 7 
(=)... gfree (s) for (fear) a. earqrae for (sarqaaet) 
@) 5 Fear for (RyeraT) x. PaqreareRt for (fergaeraraT) 


a 
«K — 
oo ww wo uh AO 2S XK aw A 


( 2x ) 


area weerataas aa fieT | 

SeETAR TAT Fasrrttea wpa: Rs tt 
sem eget Faeag STA Farrranfat &: 1 
a waeararal sete acta: Wen 
wea: dacafeamrreitet wate ate | 


sraigoratee’ aagtterget en gaat ou 





3. 


afaaal wee fasreareara: 


TaeT WEA: TAT: 





PLLISLIIIS LIL LLG 
s 


. MUP for (#treraT) 8, sepfse: for (#ta:) | 


‘a Fae Ihe BT Tea Ws Bt 
aaa: (=) for (eaa:) 


aeanfe: for (meqHTft) 


. ersenfa: for (egerft) a. ay ars 


aq rarreartres aaat for (eared: ) 
aeqft for (ert) ¥. eqeenfa for eqenft) 


. faery for (faseata) = ta ae 
. Faraz for (xarter) 2. aseadaa: for (aradtaat:) 


. ufeg (7) (S) for (aete) 3. BT ee for (gehea) 


gfenat: for pee 
fao—y, af’ F arty Bt Tar’ TH YT A TT I 


(a) y Pa for (Rex) & aearatueentt a for (srateesie’) 


%. 


(a) &. 


ofa wafeatt fareitet daaaitera: for (ef weyct fren 
eqrt:) . 


afee for (74g) 


¥. ‘ofa’ & aaa.’ aH THT TT 


(¥) g. 


g. 


araratrscatsa for (sraiaseite ) 
Trager et for (TgTIATgCT eT) 


( 2% ) 


AT WEMMAwega: 
gree: 
mera: atratig eeevatirary ' 
nraratan fasraeaa: ae aa i a 
FHARTUTTY stews afeafeargete: \ 
Seentanitean: geengitata: WRU 


- Sferaa dtderafaeara see WTA | 
om arege Bat Bara aT ee Bay 1 Pay 





SL PAIS 


Lm (=) (7) for (we:) 2. Baa (a) (=) for (Bea) 
3. Atay for (eftttg) vada garg, (=), 
4, arava: for (ara) —&. Baw for (Baw) 
9. Tq for (aa) s. aat (=) for (ax) 
(=) 3. aay for (efattg) ¥. ararig for (ararr) 
9. Tay for (ae) 
q. Tf (Tt) (= ie ce ea: (at) for (waea:) 
3. Bee (a) (7) (=) for (Re LUSH Sear 
y. afer (ar) ae: : (afr) 
(7) &. aga: for (za) 
(a) . arfeafaa for (afeafaa) 2. aaa: for (qeaer:) 
¥. weMrAN for (Heart) 
(=) 2. qaea: for (gee) 
2 (8) 4. triers (4) (#) () for (oie) 
Besar (at) for (age) 2. Serwq (a) (F) for (Haz) 
(t) ¥. qurfrara (&) for (qurfaaTa) 
(=) & arggtar for (agar) 
(5) %. wR for (wrt) 8. age aT for (age aT) 


th 


( re ) 


faqaeartsefet aeraeanfat aeitaneae | 
ing area Se Ba Aue 
aaeawset a: sgh gay vafaatarg t 
mearaeaare af fates Ber: ha 
afefactgar creatine argatfeaatt a: \ 
naa fafiadedtored Senet: a: 1g 





PLL LL LLL LLL SL 


¥. (a) %. aenisa (4) (F) for (werisa) 


(7) 
(=) 2. 


a. Farr (a) afaaagd for (werearege) 
3. areq for (are) 
7 eifrwead for (welferrerd ) ¥. Bema: (=) for (eae) 


(=) 2. faferagre for (faaerferwage) ¥. aoe for (Tee) 


aw 


. ure for (are) 


4. (a) 9. ofefefafa (7) fafefaefa for (sfefafac) 


(7) 2 a8 for (Ata) =. Te for (GTR) 


(a) ¥. doae for (arr) —¢. ofeferfafa for (afefafat) 
(=) 2 Aeit for (Att) 2. ofeferafa for (afefafae) 


&. (#7) 


Y. aeenat: for (Sera:) 


afefaadtse (1) sfefrsditg (=) for (sfefats) 
BUT: (=) (=) for (sutfa:) 

. fatadtaiert (1) (=) for (fafraateier) 
gana: (a) (=) for (Bare) 


x ww 


(a) x. aramfaargetfe (8) for (aremfraagatt) 
(a) &. aentfa for (aHtfas) 
(s) t. afehradine for (afefiréte) 


Ca) 


mee afefinfiatest afer meee TT 

at ama at oad BRA (a )aw TWN 
Sariet mal ae sreertarerfesrartt 

ah tereteara alge a aR eu 

mate gat areca freeerere | 

ute TraTeHtat rrr Dee: TN au 

SAAS ATT MTT eT | 

fadorsaraea: rahae aa: afta: 1 Qo UN 





we. (1) %. offerte (a) oferetar (=) for (afefafadas) 
2. fasta (a) for (ferafa) 3. saerfea for (warfer) 
%. vada (7) ofa (=) for (4a) 
Y. Serene: (7) Sena:.for (ara) 
(1) &. a: (&) for (a) 
(a) 2. ofefareta for (qfefafadat) ¥. cde for (rtd) 
%. FaeHe: for (BTET:) 
(=) 3. wenerfee for (wares) y. Spree: for (aar( a) FH) 
5. (8) &. santa (t) sate for (zaT) 
2%. FTA (1) for (saTEUtaz) 
3. seat (1) (4) (&) for (cart) ¥. THe (=) for (Taz) 
y. aaa: (t) (=) for (Taw) 
(a) &. atcarat for (arterat) 
_ (#) 8. Fara for (war) 3. eaeTMEUTeT for (zETTEMTITT) 
(S) %. aarta for (wat). 2. eH for (x3) 
&. (7) &. Sf (=) (=) for (Aft) 2. ar: for (a7) 
(7) are (©) for (art) ¥. Baza: for (aar(ar) ae) 
(&) 3. are for (ate) 2. firsenctrat: for frszpretat) 
(&) ¥. SBeree: for (wer (ar) aa) 
te. (a) tate (7) (7) (5) for (aerR) 


2 Tata (T) waa for (AaATaT) a. TH (mt) (=) (F(R) 
(a) ¥ srgfer for (ayfr) (=) & awTat for (amare) 
ny 4. wre for (sara) 3. aeasaT for (amare), 

(&, frearatreat for (fatarearrea:) ¥. wafe for (yf) 


{ e_ ) 


ferent raters ETT | i 
fremdufeesiafaentexngrea WT URE 
stan feet fecet eater Raeirerezgany t 
satfedtagfeererafige ait ae: wefan eeu 
ema AAAI Rae ara fratary \ 

WTARAT AT afafaaatera ATU 1 2B 





LSS LESS 


. fart (7) (a) (e ) for (frat) —->.: faze (=) for (feauz) 


sary (=) for fe ¥. grate for (Fasarz') 


. Asa for (77a) 


fasara for (fasaTé) 
Searfiarar for (Sanferrertece) 


- Bard (1) fergard for (garg) 

. fea (*) for (fede) 

. water’: (1) aate’: (=) for (aatez:) 

. Sata for (ata) 2. aeenfacitad ye for (Hea feaat feaat) 
. WaT (=) for (WTA) wv. fague for (fee) 


. Saarear for (Sear) ¥. satat for (att) 


. sarat for (at) «sw. fEdita for (feaarfeam) 
. ATTA for (ABM) 2. frearg for (gaTq) 
. sarferrafes for (sarfadtagte) 


aaarradt (1) aaarsats for (aaATIaT) 


. ward for (aratt) (7) at eradtetary for (ararifratarz) 
. afeae (T) (=) for (afer) 

_ da for (4a) 0} Ba for (Hear) 

. fra for (faa) 


. aaareaea for (aaaredt)  R.AaCET for (WaeAT) 
. arf for (a) 


( ao) 


saat aaacarfatean fate aarfeat arat: t 
ateiat faatat HEATH TT atfara: Ween 
fraerarq, alga afeferen TERIA 
sagsterarergatia waaay neu 

mATaTE sta cffeed neat aTg: | 

Fae feta fefar Ferret oer TENT Ween 
agRa aTeareaen fet aitfecemart afar: | 
carrera auifeaiancisatieg’: N90 





PLA LPL LIL ALL SD 


. feet (=) for (face) =. afta: for (afira:) 
. Feat for (feat) 


g 
R 
a. fadoratzurer (7) faaotarer for (faaatarqare’ ) 
Ry. yaPcas (aT) yaFced for (yer) 

3. fafeferer for (ufeferer) 

¥. mat ‘carat’ & are feat wh at F 

a. fadarargarer’ for (fataraaurer ) 

% WAY for (ysfae) . 

a. afeafaerra ea: are for (feaorarqarer ) 

3. ofeierer for (afefasr) 2. yafae for (afar) 


2%. () 2. ceaTermedt (1) TeHTerTEUTA for (TeaTITEt) 
2. faa (7) (=) (=) for (fart) 
3. atara (7 SEE ) for (aitrarearreata) 
(=) ¥. a7 FT for (arate) y. frasat (=) for (frzrat) 
fart: (&) for (feria) 
(3) & Wea for (FeaTITeT) 
(=) &. wearermedt for (qearTEt) 


8, U ’. argrat (1) (=) (#) for (age) 
| ara (7) (=) for (argaraer) 
(8) & fet for (fe) x. faeenUT for (ferdarat) 
(5) argRat for (aga) 





Re. 


RR. 


( Re) 


afte angen arenenta qaaceeaT | 
mreeticrneteari fadteteaiaa Fay es 
fadaqaafrem meatal g ATAATT MT: i 
reicrittenteereeaey facie: a 
aeaaTataTA Te TATEMTTRAATETY | 
PawerereereaTs “seagate rea: NN 


gre rere aes TTT | 


tala ata faraaTeaTg WRN 


“ee 
. 


row vo AW ro 
os 4 « . 


Be Ae a ee. 





afay () (=) for (fee) 
FUT (Tt) Fr for (xT) 


_ WER (st) (S) for (HATA) 
. Faqataeat (1) faveieat: (=) for (faster) 


qu for (az) 2. TERA for (Haat) 
favaaean: for (fayeat:) 

Faaiaya for (Taeagu) 

aeaaarrrae (1) (S) for (aaatarataraz) 

aratq (4) (=) for (araTq) 

i (4) (S) for (7) ¥. aTTeHaY: (a) for (HAST) 
aaaiaartiat for (aarirratttaz) 

sraqeanat: for (sTanat:) 

verte (srertat) —-¥. saTeaat: for (aranat:) 
faccat (=) for (gaat) 2. saat (a) for (araT) 

fraat (1) feratar weet for (fercat) 

qaerataas for (gqareataraars ) 

amr earataares for (gaat satarears) 

fanaa for (faraar) 

gaat for (gaat) y, Hemera for (HeTaATETAT) 
ferret for (ferrar) ¢, wear for (weaTq) 


( RRR) 


may mera facaferteaa MTT \ 
feaeraTeTE ufehirer mgaeieary WR 
fasat Faery We Pecan fret: 
wa carey waa atiat ASAT WRN 
aTATS errenrere eT gary saat eaTq | 
HU TAT mente mea eUtatg Ween 
aTrearteraeeaTa afefeven  TERTATNT \ 
meaa statettad afeere Ta aT URN 





¥, 


LL PLL LL ISLS , 


. fadarargarer (it) for (feet argue’) 


afefasa (a) ofeeat for (afeferer) 
aa (1) (#1) (&) for (are) 


arma for (Mag HAT) 


. fret Tareurer for (faetorataarer ) 
-Ufeferey for (afeferer) 
. faetoraTg for (faetoara) 


yur: (a) for (qa) 


. are for (ara) =a, Ta for (art) 
. aatftat for (asaT) 


fren for (fasat) = ¥. ter for (asa) 

Tat stat for (asa) 

quae for (awHett) 2. TeaTATG for (waiatg) 
P+ aes 

awaut for (aw'retT) 2, weMTMTA for (ata) 
afer (=) for (afefrer) 


» featteratatiert & (a) sce aattenttettat & for (arela ata 


tat Ft) 


oF for (afer) 
* +4+ 
Ue fritters for (are? a atciteeitat) 


at) 


ws 


( 222) 


sremePefaahee Fart ema: \ 
qrierag ad oa atect agate: WREU 
emferasgdtdaredten el 13 Feet 
Saiat art ore sagt & AT: TEATA it VW Ut 
ARMA efeargateferge FarTeg TET | 
woatartaier srrag area: Ne tt 
cratetataig samedi renter \ 
aanfrgearaiad Tat HET ATTA UE 





PPP PA PP PLD LP DLL LL PL DID LLLP LSP LL 


ae. (#) 9. farda (=) for (farhes) =a. Het (7) for (HA eT 


ru 
i 


— 


“dl 
— 


ae 
oy 
— 


“a 


~~ 


~~ 


a 
—* 


— 
. A 
~— 


—_~ oo 
a 


renders 


we aw Kw ASO wo re GCP OK we BD Kw MS KR K ow 


. saat for (wa7eat) 
. wey (S) for (Feat) 


. ofeerat: (7) (=) () for (afeere:) 

. Te for (tf) y. fanfed for (fara) 
. 9% for (af) a. fardta for (farts) 
. WH et: for (7Hzt:) 


g. wad for (a4) 
weratsal for (maeTEt) 

sreaat for (sTeqafe) ss, Ga aera for (Ga arg) 
maa eg for (wastEt) 

2. Sfeat (a) for (aéraT) 
%. area: for (aera:) 
wpareet for (HaVeAEAT) &. ‘a aT ZI 

saat for (sweat) 3. neat for ‘(aeat) 
ufest for (aétar) %. aa for (ataa:) 
+aq+ 

areca em: (&) for (atAeaa aT) 

araeaa ca: for (atraera aT) 

satrearat (1) craTeéqeatats for (sraterutefa) 
Taper for (Ta) 


. wrat (4) sete for’ (mate) 
. Rearaeat (=) for (aearaAT: ) 


4%. Arata for (Ara) 
aaraatirer: for (aaraafrer) 2. S#eq for (Fer) 


grata afrataig for (adaatata) 
aereraifast for (amtatarfaat:) 


2. Tense for (TAT) 


( rx) 


aah: TeRie sreTferataT gtriata TRANG t 
area a eT afa art: 7a faerarcat WRN 
z ‘aaa Rec Fearerer fafraarergeaea \ 
saienferyfafeanta cares eaTTTE aR 

a at fam: are TEIN aa TATU ca | 
cafecearfay aftent: raseraTee BQ UN 





wo 


g. Gar: for (Ta4at:) Q. serfirat (7) (=) for (armfaar) 
3. at for (zar:) 

Q. ertfestar for (semfaatar) ¥, “gfe” Ba 

t. far () (3) (8) for (fear) 

2. fegafa (=) team for (fearrfa) 

3. fagat for (favat)  v¥. feafargat (=) for (fafavar) 

4M, CARTS TAT 141 2Q 1 R13 1 for (eagraer) 

&. Fa for gfe 

, AM LRU YR LAG VaR for (TURE) 

Y. PASAT EY 1 LVL LRU AR for (eagraqeT) 

9, THAUTTRTAET © 1 PRL KRUMEL RE for (VaAMeaeTTAeT) 
&. wet (mT) (a) for (mer) 

R. Bear. (Tt) for (Sem:) faete cies ar aries oe 

&. Tat (7) TaaTSAfeT for (qatoqsafer) 

%. 1 fart yee & 

%, Beto 1&1 RQ 1 Yo for (qreaiy) 

o, Base for (atPE) 

& Tea Hey arfrmis for (ateat: wasTaTa) 

8. ‘ahem! & art ae BT BI 

R.- TAY: eM: ror (TATUT seqt:) 

%. Taheeafe for (qatercafir) | 

&. @ for (a) X. Gta 1&1 RVI ¥o for (ata) 
8. Were for (erat) Ro. eax for (azAsz) 

&. Jur: for (Jat) fao aet Satara gare 
| %- Ba: for (atcar:) (fro sate at gre qfaa at AIT) 
“3. Tay for (cafeqerfe) &. aitear for (aiteqt:) 

9 


1 MBRfor (TH). eaferania for (sararéta) 





28. (7) 


(3) 
(=) 
3%. (4) 


( 3 ) 


Tea Bat Tata: : APEC Awa 

Ue Tear sreeuarrd Ege fig aR 
wreath aa TERT AATET | 
aiearerttaernitea & PACT Ul 3 Ul 
PATER ‘ Rredaarafagerene: ' 
Tet + ea aE fae yraTay 1 Ry 
g. arefagh: for (wat <izt:) 

. aeat for (grat). “WENA” A TZ 
3. WeTaTAegE for (TETATT FE) 

R. BRAT seat for (Away Hea) 

a. Agad (1) aya for (wy) 

2. weMTamer (Tt) (A) (F) for (weurases)), 
3. eet (1) Paleared aaarars for (Rete) 
%. atreted (=) for (aaa) 

a. Aad for (aged) 3. Ept for (zr) 

g. wATISATE for (aearheagad) 

3. Ee ateared for (xgteate) 

_ amat sass for (waa) 

wa (7) carat (3) for (q1araTaAT) 
Be (1) wwe for (awa) 

3. feet for (fae) 

. Ba (=) for (we) 

@. waqaraTay for (aaorarraedt) 

fren for (Rreiet). 


ge 


wo 


A 


aw 


( Re ) 


gore weat 3 tarivefaeyaae 
eiafinataetare: “ereRTET REN 

eRe freee mearaerfeta: FTAA: | 
wet tye Fa aR AAAT AT IN 
aera agearateinceReteet: \ 
eqefaaé TEWEU aqeatateny NIsN 
farang li TTAUACTATAT | 

Bea aATUEAACAT: TARA UW Fe U 





PD ING 


4%. (8) &. ewe (3) (=) for (geTe) 
a. ferred (ar) Sut (s) for (Fru) 
3%. FEY (tT) (A) (S) for (ARE) 
¥. fagaterdare: (=) for (fadara:) 
(7) ¥. wenfqefastarardate: for (emfuafadara:) 
(a) 2. sftart for (air) d 
(3) %. wenfiqa for (zmfirt) «=. fawiararg dara: for (Freare:) 
&. aTaateta: for (errata) 
a0. (4) %. wart for (ward) 
Rs. (1) &. fram (a) free for (faea) 
(1) %. weitertgeages for (aairata's) 
2. egfenedl: for (egetarat:) %. fea a for (7) 
4. TREAT for (egerdtarea) 
(=) 2. seitengy’g for (warteterg) 8. Fag for (firaz) 
(=) 2. araiterarg for (watreateg) %. Fras for (faga) 
¥. wena for (wee ) 
38. (9) %. sea for (grat) 
R. TARAET (7) TET for (TAIZ) 
3. Fea: for (WATT) 
(a) %. wea for (gear) . 2. aren for (arAaT) 


ges 248). ® TARE for (ara) . 


( Re ) 


tag aferaten MTEEATT: TATE qagl 
mraareat Lee Ege Oe aT ¥o tt 

far rg gutat feafeert Batreernfearafine i 
migTERiTTed ERAT afer: sen 
aE sre a aeertteetat a aIANG: \ 
saad: sremearg Teenfgeciqe Bau eeu 





LLL LL DLE LOLOL 


¥o. (t) &. ofaetet (7) for (aferatar) 


(=) 


(5) ¥ 
R. 


aw A) 


g. 


arate (7) area for (age) 


. eae (7) (3) (&) for (ya) 


qfaatat for (rfwatar) 


. meat for (Heat) —«-..-WraTer for (ATERT) 


Wa at for (wa ar) 


. ofeferer (1) oftea: for (afere:) 


fageairat for (farggataz) 3. et (a) () for (BA) 
anfarat for (arfset) © -¥. ‘af for (=i) 


afeeea for (afea:) 


. ofeferer for (sfewa:) — &. aver for (ate) 


shat (1) eeuTeat for (REITAtTaT) 

ara (7) fret for (ate) 

ayad: (1) (=) for (ayaa) 

qeargepiga (71) (4) for (vearfagtye) 

sR gt for (s#at) 2. drat (=) for (rat) 


seat for (#t) 4. agua: for (araaa:) 
oa fea: for (a9aa:) 
qeaTe UTA for (Teafegtye) 


(ae) 


menea fertet cater Faeceferth 
feaeagenfemrrergereTeTae wey UN vz UI 
mrarrat aH faa: Brew TEaUT: \ 
fadaracaa aratireenraferef Nee 
MEUTATRAT BATU srenaeeataa: | 
ST TTATERTA: IATTTEA faat: Wey ul 
qgeited & aa aedet wet geq TT: \ 
Tet opefag epzariaeenaeds wee u 


. (7) 


Aa 


(a 
(= 


(= 


— 


g. 
2. 
2. 
%, 
x. 

ao 
. 
2. 


| 


ve. (B) 
() 


=) 


K. (9) 


~~ 


(7 ) 


(=) % 
(=) 2 


i. 
» 
»- 
g. 
2. 
2. 
¥, 
« 


vs. (T) &. ‘ 
2. 


(4) ¥. 
(=) ¥. 
x. 








weaeareaaey (1) weaeeaia for (neqeaferter) 
oe (1) qaftafise for (fase) 

ga (7) eat for (za) 
afefr for (afemfi:) 8. TERT for (EEA) 
weqeaatearatat for (nemer feaier aataz) 
afuafigafeafa: for (frgafeafa:) 3. gat for (zt) 
neat for (Heqeaferter 7) 
aiseat gfe for (atat) 3. gat for (zt) 
faa (st) a: for (fae) 
at Heat for (atecar) 3. faferatfa: for (fercatfx:) 
a gat for (ager) 
erqaat (7) qagwar (x) for (gayTT) 
faetar (1) faeta for (faeta:) 
eases (5) (3) for (qa5=3) 
ata for (*s) ¥. @ for (ta) 
arrerarafaay for (wraraaara feet: ) 
faet for (faets:) 
eres for (gagTT) 
wee TATE | 2. ‘fren’ at eI 
‘aa: for (f4) 
Gr for (GET) / t. TE for (gz) 
Gecrrag for (GEqaTATa:) 2. ATTA for (fretege) 
aiiara for (ariweta) q. daeaa for (daeds:) 


( ze ) 


afte afaaeat fedora y Srgetseaa: | 
qeutercnsay: TeaenTCARTARTA tt vo 1 
efa oft werd vemrfeae: 
GTSaISEATA: SATE: 
ve. (a) a. afeteh (xt) afte for (afeeet) 

2. Teasers: (=) for (stsatseam) 
3. West for (Het) 

¥. ‘afa’ & area’ aware aie aE 





PPE LS 


(7) y. aaa for (afar) 
%, tfe ft vafeata weareceam: grea: for (sft at vara 
TENTH: TSA SEAT: TATT:) 


(=) ¢. ofeaet for (afeet) 4. Tare for (afaavat) 
%. Treat for (Stedt) 3. ARRAY: for (WHET) 
¥, ‘afa & ware’ TH ET | 


(s) 9. ofere for (aferat) =. aerasfter for (aferaeat) 
%, ofa ott ararege frare weuiracreare: sree: for (xf att war- 
Te weUifeare: Teaser: TAT) 


(=) 
2. (a) 
(7) 
(3) 
(=) 
3. (4) 


(7) 
(3). 





( 230 ) 


AA TRRATAMAT: 
Tea: 


guetteafirar grantee qrafetrary ’ 
sfafeae sfrater ay aeige Wa: A WR 
aT safety qaracrentaae Fat 
naa PARA Zitat stfequmetd URU 
afer far *g TEMTETG mentee Sea | 
argrrereartt alte aad wat: ne 





aeyralfercate (7) yaatferctafir for (ysratfeafir). 
afeary for (afemra) (7) afer’ ys SI 
afetarg (1) ofeata for (aferarz) 


qaatfe safaferart for (ywatfeaferr) 

afees for (after) =. ofa for (aferarq) 
ates for (aatgz) 

faa for (Tfre) 3. ware for (*ary) 


%. 
“RQ, 
2. 
¥. et for (ad) 4%. gaae: for (Tzqw:) 
g. 
2. 
%, 
®. 


%. Safer for (ad) y. w aeagea: for (eae: a) 


g. atea (7) (4) () for (Tea) 

2. Ae for (ae) 3. fata (7) fag a for (faire et) 
¥. wut (=) (=) for (Fea) 

4. Vent ye for (cuferfirge) 


& AeA< for (az) 9. MTA (SF) for (aTAAT AT) 
s. arfaat for (af) 

2: av for (za) 3. farva for (fea) 

¥, fag (Fra) : 


&. aTeuTa (1) (&) for (atgutq) 

Q. feta eae (77 toe ieee 

3. fag (&) for (fag) ¥. aenfafis (aarfeat) y. atfe for (aife) 
&. afenerat for (afer) 2. feriaeat for (fata) 


(8) & afereart for (afer) 
ae 8, FT for (#ear) 2. factaferdaat for (fatal zat) 


( 232) 


aut crane often fire wae 
aifatas gaamreafemeeta gaa UY n 
mainaetiet ura afer feambrge: i 
wating Surgery eietten feareré SATE NK U 
qaifrge: saenecifag wate graeaTTy | 
te at deard afer mere fart: nen 








qmaeny for (qa) ‘. ata for (ait) 
waar way for (AAAS) 
» wary for (acer) 


TETATTA TTT HUTTE qiteatcg We I 
attymraaratea: CAGE nen 
sreagt feta oeraeTaA ATE ’ 
Teietafaraar: safe ns u 
4 (4) %. aatafor (wait) = 2. Fem (at) ofefered for (aferen) 
(1) 3. fax qai for (fas yaa) 
(a) 2. ofeeeq for (afar) ¥. Ofeee for (aire) 
(s) % afefiren for (afeerer) 
x. (4) &. wat afer (7) (=) for (aatraer) 2. Fe for (79) 
(a) 3. AR for (Aa) ¥. afeferer (=) for (after) 
y. wey (Ss) for (qe) &. fare for (Fear) 
(=) 2. wate for (aetraeraat) 
¥. Ura fren for (qav ofcarez) 
(E) 3. A for (Ft) we. Jae for (qa) 
&. (mt). ofeeaRs for (afer) 
(a) 2 ane for (#4) a. ofeferetg for (afereare) 
(§) 3. ga for (ga:) a. offre for (afer) 
ws. (8). eat (1) gdetee for (qeera) 
(a) 2. yprer feat for (qitafaad) 3. wera: (F) for (weat:) 
(=) % garfeg for (qatafeR) g. qaarany for (qe) 
(=) 9. qaaaN for (qa894) 
=. (1) 2. sTeae for (srsaa®) 2. faafee for (frreta) 
3. 
- 
& 


a 
a 


( 232 ) 


reagent agente \ 
aecamit TMT ayeqal 7 qa nel 
sta afitearea arate °Y ‘ieee \ 
ator gieegrerataata AT: UW 20 UN 


OL MA LAS 


&. (7) 


(3) 


(=) 2 





2 aw Ww 


=f TTSAMTEATA: AATCT: 


WN 


t. wataares (=) (&) for (wextte) 
2 

¥. yaa for (5a) 

. a for (sat) 


afrai for (diary) 3. qeatfeasarest (a) for (aemfiasarz) 


m8 Fitri for (ag aati) 


» Teeth for (acerarfeasar) 
» serra for (eerie) 


R. ysiteag. (7) yey for (sre). 


‘efa’ & ‘aaa’ an aifea wate | 
Tg %. AT MGA for (TBAT) 
mrataeaet for (aratza) 


afe wafsata aaeatteara: for (aft aearzareara: TATA: ) 
afar for (afar) 


2. fafa’ 8 aera’ TH act 


afa staraegefrard Plea ea: ATT: 
for 
(afa qereareata: sara: ) 


( 233 ) 


AA REHTLA: 
OSIST: 

TAT Te: SEAT: FTATTAT TA 
arg aera a FATE UE HT: neu 
genet arene teamed fee: ' 
averieciatrat ata SETTET (3 Ul 
sf FATIA LATTA aay | 
ARETE Bet TENET: gag eaTEAY RU 
Re eg ius TATA ATA | 
geafa que: erat wed siengaieagan uy 


on SLL LLL LPL LLIN 





2. (a) 2. gerard (a) geared for (garereaz) 
3. aearft (1) (=) (=) for (zerfa) 
(7) ¥. seat for (seAT:) y. geTaTe (=) for (HzaTZ) 
(4) 2. aq for (x07) 
(=) %. Hererered for (gerarasa) 
2. (a) &. geet for (FzFCT) 
(1) ¢. geneuie for (gerataT) 
g wahnfaas: (=) for (feqatfaas:) 
3. faat for (faat) ¥. at for (4 #) 
(a) ¥. = for (a) 
(=) %. Heneat for (FzzaT) &. EUs for (area) 
x. (a) &. Bay (a) (F) for (Arq) 
y. warned (7) qeraet (=) for (waTRETSA) 


3. meade: (7) Aatse: (=) for (weaTa:) 
(a) ¥. ‘ataerer for (AFTER) x. wR for (7TH) 
(a) 3. weae: for (weqta:) 
(=) &. gaTaede for (gat? aR) 
¥. (4) & gu: (&) fer (Gur) 
(s) 2 aatsaat for (xan) 


a 
a a a — 
ay dp sy ey 
—_—~T/ Ss ~~ 


a 
— 
if) 


) 


( av) 


eitafeagetart aeragzarfra: sez | 
aferrataren tenia WATT UL 
Beane feane aditand garry | 
guantad saree TTTATTTTT, Wed 

ay arta gua meget: IAF Tay fata: | 
fefaag: safaat sera a sen ne 0 





g. eatatagat (7) catateagat for (etakeagat) 


2. ata for (art) 3. ga for (za) 

g. eet for (erate) 

g. edteatsreagat for (eiteteae) 

Q. Surat for (a1) 3. ead for (Bare) 

g. feat (7) (=) (©) for (feat) 

3. aA for (wy) . gard (7) grad for (art) 
¥ 


. Fr (7) Ferarteiy’ (s) for (gaara) 

x. Blaaat for (Baas) 

a. aT () for (gra) ¥. Saareaya for (gras ) 
g. aydtat (=) (7) wyfaat for (syfeat) 


(fao—ag acta ae wf H acta der ty 12) 
. andlag for (amiferg) =—-3.-greva: for (graTa:) 


5: 
%. mrR 2 for (gua gE) «x. aft: for (fefird:) 
q 


. FER for (HeTHT<) e. Sofa for (aTarfa) 


R. OM: ard: for (grata:) 

¥. qaasagfafat: for (gra gay fafat:) 

&. sydttat for (syfeat) 

2. gifs for (gmfz) 3. weqrara: for (mggrara:) 
(fro—aete dem ty 2) 





a. (7) 


(234. ) 


ware faararrny” Baz @ a Feaatrogey 
TAIT _ rata feawetad wT: We 
aren arora Bat a atwerTe Be 
geata faatiad cia aera TERT: wen 
ASA TST Feerenrtrerafineea: ra tt 
aiaata ferret a: aor a ATT U Yo 





LLL LLP LAD LD LI LLL ODL EDS 


t. Bae (x) (=) (8) for (Bre) 
a. Se (agt qa F< ae 2) for (azz) 
2. gay (#) (&) for (Bay) 
¥. maa: (7) qa: for (az) 
yee ee (=z) 
&. wrenfege for (renfafer seated) 
(fao—zaat sate gear 2) (=) 
2. wa for (aa) %. arm: (&) for (=ApT:) 
(feo—guet sade we 8) 
2. 7a: for (qa: ) 
Q. ag site ‘fer’ & aera dat 2, (5) 
3. eeat: (=) for (asta) 
zee oie fege fret g— 
“ETS FANART AAT!” Nt 


(a) %. FeTaT: for (TAIT) 


2. ‘rrar aa, fers for (fra) 
gad of freatfra— 
aarrmigaaracaneranars: ~ for (pata fawiisd 244 
APTS TAT: ) 
(fa—aaat BARAT s 2) 


go. (a) %. aaitya: afaarg for (afaga: ahaa) 


(=) 
(=) 


Q. HETETL for (HSTHTZ) 
g. aftga: for (afaga:) =. HaraTe for (EsTaTS) 
Rae STAT TE I 


( 238) 


at arafit gat afraratirara aerarfesetg 
maa Sect at aeimatageHt: Ween 
eeaferaatent faenfert dscnfatarnat: | 
agate gaieag ABITAAA: YQ U 
geataceré ae THETA TAT: 

at zat faba aaa Wzeqz gait: TEE aT 
sree: eQqey TCE FUR, NaH | 
yeata aaeeit TUH: CATA: Tet aienq UW ge tt 


ee. (4) &. mamra (7) (=) (&) for (saws) 
(71) (fro— gaat eetta aeat 2% 2) 
a. at ara for (at stati gra) 
(a) 3. Raa: for (Hea) 
(=) (fa--- aceite wear 2¥ 2) 
X. Satie ay for (at staf) = ¥. fers for (afrarz) 
22. (8) %. wee (mt) for (azar) 2. grat (a) for (gaat) 
3. eaara for (eTaTT) 
(Tt) o agaeta ea oft F soe adh o1 
) 3. Farg for (Tata) 
aeila TYTAST F | 
t. Ear: (m7) (#) for (gaat) 
at (7) (A) for (zat) 
3. gam: (a) for (gaat) 
(fao —gaat aeiter dear e 2) (=) 
—(&) 3%. Baa: for (gaat) ¥. aay for (aay) 
x. freBet for (fazer) 
gy. (%) %. aH (a) (&) for (ate) 
2. eareare (1) earerae for (carer: TH) 
(Tt) 3. maaredte for (wermete:) ¥. TF for (aa) 
YX. afta for (aiarq) 
(fao—zaat RAH FRIT Qo 2) (=) 
(3) %. Tag or aTeq for (ita) 
AB) 4. aagretise: for (aeerety:) 





( 238 ) 


seater eae fection eget eT: 
Baumer fereage: TTT AKU 
sexe FLATT ETAT EAE | 
Ae arate fread TAM We: NEU 


LLL LEL LS ELLOS IS 


gy. (1) %. sate (7) (=) ($) for (amie) 
ww: (@) (4) for (TaT:) 
fageartert for (Bearer) 
Hen: (=) for (wgH:) 

after (et) (*) for (afi) 


(1) % ete for (ret) 


ee saa oe 


&. agicrat (F) for (gata) 
(fro—eaat evites teat 22 2) 
%. fae for (3) x. gen: for (ER) 
(=) 2. eatedf for (zara?) 3. we: for (arat:) 
¥. fa: 30 for (3) 
a. (H) 2. gen (S) for (Fer) 


i 
R. TUerart (7) TUTE eaaTT for (TURETATT) 

a. garg (T) garg for (zara) 

%. 7a (7) aTaVTa for (arated) 

4. frend (7) (=) (=) for (frerda) 

R. arrange: (7) gearrerege for (qermergt:) 
(7) (fro—guat setter teat 22 2) 


(4) ©. ae for (32) a. Faw for (Fer) 
Tera for (TUTKATArT) 

garg for (zara) ¥. Ta for (et) 
quaregd: (&) for (qaarrertge:) 


(=) 2. gureaart for (GUTRaTATT) ¥. wT for (ga) 


ee 


(Rae) 


ud AAG Faure at aE asm AT 
acute aaa: HAT UW 9 
TURBE: aa TIA aT AT | 

ai a ragf taréafea ATS AG Ws Ut 
WUT ATT SUTRA gag qaragihy: 
wafara aed Hat Ta gafas afag: 1 ge 


ay. (4) &. favtega (Tt) Tue for (fasta) 
(1) ¥. eqeaedt for (afer) =X. quay for (yr) 
(fao—euat avitw Feat 222) (=) 





LILLIA SS 





PPA LL PSL LA. 


(a) . fastest for (favteaqt) 2 mata for (TATA) 
(&) 2. fawtegat for (faateaqt) 
gs. (4) &. Be: (m) Be (*) for (Ba: Bet) 


yuya for (ya) ¥. aTatg for (aad) 
. teaferfea for (tareaFer) 
(fro—guat acta dear ey 3) (=) 
(t) —- + farferarafeafergr & sated ga: var ag 1 
eMsae a: Haha HEAR: TH 1s Ub 
Seat eats FeAT a H aT Hc frst we gear se 2 1 
(3) Reta? ger 
(=) (Fro—aaat wre ts Z) 
R. TEATey for (agar?) : 
(3) ¥. aa og for (ate) ==. eft for (safe) 
a LaTeTes for (<aTEsfea) 
(=) &. quaeeae for (quate: Beh) 
OY. at: 1E oe for (afte qa) 
4%. Werferda for (aretha) 
88. (FH) 8. garg for (gaa) 
(1) (Fao—aqait eats deat Re 2) 
(8) (Fro aaa eet siert 2 2) 
2. BeTEqTg for (arqTA) 
X. meagaTy for (aagaTy) 


g 
g 
g 
2. F7de for (Fafa) 
3 
y 


( 228 ) 


saree ary reenfir farina refi: t 
ae afta afi aafa daft war wate u on 
areata anita fararferatecafae | 
aera ete faa CTRRTTRT wats tr eu 
remade TIRE age: 


adafeteaaferardt arafeecea WIN 


Re. (8) 2. Saree (7) for (Sarg ya) 2. cafes (m7) (=) for (zafas) 
3. afta (7) (=) for (aft). srafa: (7) aaRe for (Fate 
(7) (fro—guat Site Tea Ys 3) 
y. agafrare for (sgaTfaaie) &. ria = for (a4) 
(4) &. aareget for (RaTqHA) 2. safes for (ahs) 
¥. wafa: for (wate) 
(=) (fro—eaatt ete deat 25 2) 
. sgatfaara for (=rrfrrra:) 
_ darad for (aaa) 3. gata for (cares) 
. aaa for (aa) afita for (afae) 
. Tafa: for (Tafa) 
. wafers: (1) (=) (s) for (cates) 
. Baraat (7) (=) for (zarvet) 
. fagaiseraat (7) (=) for (feae) 
(t) — (fao—aeat eats ae 28 2) 
¥. BT for (a) 4. RT for (aat} 
& Jt for (Te) 
(=) y. erat for (=a) 
(fro—aaat Bate FEAT 2 2) 
RR. (Tt) 2. FeRA for (Hera) 2. fate: for (ferz) 
a. wg for (=) 
(fro—auat sate Tea (2 F VATA Fa Z) 
(a) %. gebr for (HEFT) 
(3) (fao—aeiin Fear 2& 8) 
¥. 3rare for (aat) 4, Tee for (FAR) 
2. 3. arafate: cag for (arafescer) 


PPL II LPL LLL LL IS 








AN 


Ra. () 


wre Kan Ko 


(vo) 
warafarceste t wegferd Oye fad ary 
af ara: waaft Fa a ararfet NR 
aft agate fread war a fg fa 
wrteaar afar = weaafer AW ee ht 
sseqnra frad ferret ues 
ae a: ee emt ae ictal 


POEL LOD LDL LIN LIDSIP PDS LALLA RDNA EDR A RRA RE 


28. (a) &. wef (=) for (aeafr) 


(7) 


% Here (1) FEAL for (Sera) 
a. afeterra: for (afetara:) 


(fao—-gaat acitaeeat ¢¢ % eat ¥ daa ¢ fret a) 


(=) &. geraré ror (garaTX) 


(=) 


(fro —aeitaafeat ¢¢ 3) 
2. Tatty for (ara:) gee for (Herat) 


RY. (H) & afeg (m) (=) (8) for (afag) 


(7) 
(=) 


( 
(=) 


% geae: (7) for (gene) 

(fro—auat ite dear Qo H eat H 2) 
. HaKe: for (Feng) 

(fro— srteqr ge 8) 
%. Brae: for (Kea: ) 


3X. (8). ATARPT for (aaTATT) 


(7) 


- 
(S) 


X TaATPETAT (Tt) wry gery at & for (ga gat ar) 

3. Hew: (7) for (gaH:) 
(fro—aaat site ger 2¢ ) 

8. AT for (art) 

%. feagvafinare for (feae fara) 


(3) 2. TRRTA for (ara) X. gang for (gay gaat) 


(fro—auat mae 26 2) 
. feateatiz for (feae fe). ararae for (ararey7) 
XU TG for (UA) a, ae for (wa). 
A TRL for (gam aT) 3. F Few: for (gaz:) 


ww 
¢ 


RS 


Qe. 


- (3) 


Cee 


Fetaomrgrememte TATE AT \ 
srr weary Reratienng REN 
ga Tea ATTRTOATTT: mee | 
ageenattagri att arate RATT 1 Rou 
at t crear re am EAE aaate ayy | 
caaftmgaing agiacat a wer: the ul 


(a) 2. ae (ut) serfeat gargs eq for (wares 
KUT 
(1) (fro — gaat aeftee seat 22 21) 2. (sed Walser for (aed tear 
(a) %. wenfeargarg arg for (waTaTeaTSs_ATq) 
(=) (fao—eaat wr deat 222 
¥. free for (free) g. wefeat for (HATA) 
2. RATRMTT for (RAT 1) 
\. feamatisenta for (ferrgtaa) 
(=) % wisg: for (@iq:) —%. Bay for (Barra) 
(t) — (fa— gaat sate deat 22 #1) 3. wenfsaat (F) for (a) 
¥. Foreeiay: (F) for (aragia:) 
(=) 2. 8M for (a8aTy) 2%. EstU: for (BiT:) 
(=) (fao saat GH Tea 22 z) 
y. ageaftagry for (agraafeagrt) 
&. ay for (#Tq) eo. BAT wa for (eats) 
aang for (eaTy) 
qrarg (7) () () for ({ae4) 
gurfe for (saat) (7) earfeagaatrg for (eafawedtag) 
_ agiarag (a ) wetaxat for (aetexter) 
geva: (1) for (gem) 
(t) (fa gaat eeite det Ro & aeg feret gE go 2 1) 
X. Bat (a) (&) for (zzaT) 
(=) 2. garfeng for (=afang) ¥. gaat: for (Few) 
(=) — (fao—euait at TEM Ro 2) 
2. gatferg datarg for (rerPragarag) 
¥. gem: for (Few:) 





fe 


( R ) 


a ait Frage Ba: grata a CATT | 

Te. m ae wait Rag meat: WE 

eRATERT fanart Soren fretesigaaarg \ 

A arena eA HIHA: AU Zo 
eft ott Een THT 





PILLAI SS 


&. TU (7) TU: for (GH) 2. Fase (7) Caras: for (Fr Bx) 
3. Tat: (T) TAT for (qu?) 


(fro—euat sete deat 2¥ 2) ¥. ga: for (ea) 


X. Tag for (TR) &. GANT for (HAA) 

&. TUT Aaya for (ge Tage) 

¥, Ga: for (ea) 3. Bret: for (aTt:) 

&. (fro—aaat HA TAT Y¥ 2) 

%. TT: for (Tz) 2. FaRee: for (ga Ba) 
¥. ga: for (sa) ie. aarawe for (aetz7Z) 
3. Brat for aqT:) 


“oe 


. aferg (t) qaferarg for (qf) 

4%. fao—aa FH ‘afe af’ oa ae 2 

gene: (Tt) for (genet: a) 

(f—gaat site deat 23 2) 

fawaiatrara for (faraerarg) 

. wreraTy for (aTeTAT) 

. areaegafeary for (arerrersfcarg) 

arematg for (areqat) y. ‘efe sft’ gra 

Ber for (FER) 

(fro—eaat srefeat 22 2) 

wery for (AETq) g. aTangutang for (araaqatearg) 
- TAeATA for (qAeTAT) 

R. eae: for (Gene) x. ‘af -a—ue’ ae ae TT 


ol 


exe <a 


x ¢ 





ae" (a) 


(7) 


au 

x 
— 

4 
—— 


(=) 
(=) 


( ve ) 
¥ a 
AT TI TATA AHAAT 
arin were | 
aera TTT: a TAA: TAT 32 Ul 


serrate faratted ai TET TTA TTY | 
cued adat ar seat ae aT aha Ea 


g. Barat for (Ararat) 

aaat (1) for (waa) 

aura (7) auaazM for (aWaTET) 
25 (n) for (3) 

(fao—gaat site Get Ro 8) 

‘og 8 ‘aaa TH EAS! 

4 for (@) 


” 


aa 


aaraany for (TAT) 
Tai see: for (Aarat waar) 
aqaat for (aqatat) 2. aaa for (TFa7) 
aavgay for (aatez) ¥. 2a for (#7) 
g. art for (qari) ¥. Vad” Ga 
&. FEAT for (eatar) 
stau+ = 2. waar for (waa) 
3. eUaad a for (aura) 2. ayy for (ext) 
g. gat (7) (3) (&) for (ea) 
2 arent (t) (=) for (at eq) 
3. ‘a’ a frat ya TAT 
(fao—auat sate Fe 32 8) 
¥. aa gaa wate for (ad 7 Garaafr) 
3. agate for (7 guAaft) 


2. eareat for (at ext) 2. arya for (7A) 


ol ed 


( 2 ) 


pated a at wate RTARTA | 

aia Tet aamTTTETt ere ra 33 " 

TRA: EUTT ATA arate aaa wate 
ara: equa: ayant at ae aay BY \ 








3a. (a) t. eat (T) (*) (8) for (eat) 

2. watat (7) (F) for (sat) 
. Beary (Tt) TAT Beary for (Tetz77) 
(fro—auat sneer 3y fare 2) 


(1) ¥. fafer for fagtt —&. ated (=) (=) for (ated) 
(fro—gaat deat 32 8) 


av 


(4) 2. sear for (wat) 3. need for (azazay) 
(fro— at aadeat av sift 8) 
() © at for (wa) —-&, Aeay for (tery) 
ay. (8) ¢. aaah: (7) )) for (qeret) 
% aa: (i) (=) (=) for (a) 
(fao—euar dearer 3y fret #1) 
(1) (fo—guat acta tear 33 2, Teg meee’ wat get g) (F) 
aU sara ea waft 
aaah: war: eaenial ga: Tea ae 
arat (&) for (af) =. ear: for (aera) 
(3) % sist for (it) 4. dat for (SH) 
: A: for (grr: ) 
4. (fro—aat water 34 sifra 8) 
(®) 8. aE yt 


aw 


“wo 


PPL 


ax. (3) 


( ve ) 


TATE erred gat a af serTT 
crags amas ergUgT Hat nan 
aigague at ate aye free am 
age wt wernt BAIT 11 3 
aivtrere aaah fig: damien 
atntacdac gaat fred fread | Ton 








(fro ae Tala at eae cfs ar arehee a’ vest ahr at afar 
Fatsed 


erat (7) (&) (=) for (eget) 

aa (1) (™) (S) for (at) a. gat (7) (=) (5) for (am) 
et (7) ( ( (=) for (a) 

eee aera 3& frat 3g) 

Wee Syl yet a’ ceet ths ar afer ez 

ged fe cam F area ate 2 1 weet wae avg (s) 

gat (=) for (wage) wo. ‘sa’ ae ce ae Z (F) 

quat wate for (guqd) 

wet area (36) feet 3 1 

at: for (at) 

(fao— eat TeaTHA Ro ferar 2) 

afrtag for (sfrraa) 

(fao—aaat eeite eeat 343) 

(fao—agt aaeeqt 39 fet 2) 

wat for (gat) X. age for (ae) 

sea for (qT) 

e@ @ for (@) 2. ama for (aA) 

ga: (7) (=) (&) for (ea:) 

attrac (it) (=) i for (attiraz) 

eet (7) (=) (S) for (at) %, wet: (it) (1) for (wt) 

(fao—guat deqma aq frat 2) 


(") ¥. gafgat for (qaéiit) (Pro —zaat aati deat ae 8) 
(=) &. (fto—agt ander 30 aifea 2) 
(#) o aT+ 


( we ) 


arrange Rregtate aiqatsetry: U 

wlerat feet mE s i@earagedt wT gs 
-agiga ere renfrafafeyfainstrat qa: , 
feagarentett que: ARARTT: ata: gen 
betel aTeadat Taq qaNaY 

Seer j patel ateat TH: rates: Nou 


as. (@) %. Brat (7) (&) for (Fae) 
2 Bat (7) (*) for (zat) a aT (a) TB: (&) for TY 
(fao—guat qemraa 28 & 1) 
(7) ¥. gt (™) for (ga) x. Sgaredty: for (agdtseiry:) 
&. aaeat weet for (aetcuragt) 
(a) %. weet for (Fut) (wai wade ve sifae 8) 
S) X. aAyarsea y for (aaRtseity:) |. see agar for (eeeaTA) 
3e. (7) &. weet (Tm) (a) (F) for (weet) 
2. ‘gra’ ag Te gat the & sree HF (7) 
(fro—guat deat Yo 3) 
(7) 3. Taafamfa for (qenfaaft) 2. gatfer for (qr:) 
%. gue (=) for (qUF:) 4X, BMeTSTNT fea: Wt Fo 1 for 
(aaaaqe: afza: 11 28 1) 
(a) 2. afava for (afqea:) &. (set wae Yo sfsa 2g) 
(=) 3. veafrafa for (vesfrafar) 2. ‘qua: cert dies ar arefene oe | 
4X. PHT: for (wATSITT:) 
vo. (8) Bt (R) (3) (&) for (Rt) 
2. anfeas: (7) afatefaa: for (wafers: ) 
(fro—aqat dearam x9 % ) 
(=) %. gat for (gut) ¥. waR for (Ga) ¥. aT aTEaY (F)for(gtaeH) 
_— (fro— aaa erer 22 2) (F) 
(=) % SewiBequt for (Recaxgat) —§ are for (wea) 
X ataret for (att) =} aafgaa: for (aafere:) 
8, (Fro—agt arent ¥e aif 3) 
(=) 3% argu for (BayTt) —v. TUITE for (grasa) 
2. wafeaa: for (wafgae:) 





anal 


— 





( 288r) 


PERT eum: regtrerd 
saa error fad _BUUTRT Ul ¥2 uv 
eneeenterrastat darter gare \ 


gearat safe araafaa SeTGEATAT Wen 
Tea feat nismfeareargratsereTas: 
aeataaniarat wiaae: qaadiay uw ¥3 T 


¥e (8) & Segatat (7) (=) (8) for (#eqarT) 
. seat (7) (=) for (wet) 8. frat (ar) fe fer for (feat) 
(fro guar demat YR 2) 
(wt) ¥, wag: () for (Stet) «4. Fa for (FA) 
. ‘fedta’ gar 
(fro—zuat acts feat Yo 2) 
(a) 3. Sarerafzar for (eqeaateAr) 
(fao—aat water ¥2 fee 2) 
(=) %. oqatat for (AaTat) 3. at for (feat) 
¥2. (a) (fro eee aearea ¥3 Z 4) 
(1) 9. saat (8) for (aaa) wet ew aT ETA 
8. ma for (wa) ¥. afta for (gfe) 
y. ‘agar oa zg 
& sat for (ga) 
(fro—aaat sate Feat ¥z 8) 
Se . (fro—agt ater v3 fea g} 
(=) (fao —aaeeat ¥2 8) 
3. (a) (fro—eear dere vv 2) 
8. aE (T) (&) for (I) 
(a) 2. feat for (ferat) 3. aaa: for (seta) 
¥. ater for (wa) 
(fro—euat settaeert ¥2 2) 
(=) : art for (aif) 
y, (fo—aat wader ¥¥ ifs 3) 
(=) 3. sernftas: for (swere:) — &, Garang for (Te4aTy) 
cafe wanidat tetera areata 





SPL PDL LPL LAS 


Pate) 


steerer wae aaa ferry | 
zante ae wrtsifet mar wate Ut Xe u 
afer at sierrat sera iret: \ 
marae a1 THERE: maT wafer WR v 
mera aT aT ATAATTELAT L 
aa Bar azq at ered weatary ica 
yo, (4) (fro—gaatt aaieat xe 8) 
&. aa, (aT) gata for (qarTe) 
2 Be (7) aa for (aa) &. ata (A) (F) for (AF) 
(1)  , (fao—zaat scien deat ve 2) 
| (a) 8. aaare for (ary) %. ed for (gq) 
%° (fto— saat wATeaT Xe Afra 2) 
(=) 9. saarga for (Gareget) 2. cared for (earga) 
4%. (7) (fao— saat HAdeAT XR Z) 
(7) &. gavant for (*qatavt) =, aa: for (a:) 
&. BaTaNTa for (Maaraaeat) ¥. ‘a’ ga zg () 
(fao—zaat acta deat Xo 8) 
(=) 2. avtsfantetre: for (avifrataare) 
x. (fro—araeieat 42 sifira 8) 
(=) & oTaTq for (sTaT) g. sgavait for (ara) 
t. garg (=) for gata). aaa (t) aaa for (axa) 
3. TET (7) for (TAHA) 
¥. Heat (7) (&) for (wert) x. ARG (tT) (5) for (aq) 
(fro—zaat acts der 43 8) 
(ut)  (fro—gaat ate deat ue 2) 








Fal 


— & at for (are) &. aq for (arg) 
(a) 2. ea for (azar) %. TeHq for (ABT) 
X. aay for (aeq) (fro—aet ate deat 43 sift 8) 
CS) aids -p earitrtnanesitregarg+ 


|B AUR for (@earq) = &. Beet for (azar) _ 
| %. EAR for (FAT) 2. SexIaegY for (Bary aeagty 


e 


( 2x ) 


UAT TAT AE MAT TEATATET | 

aeitrtat aya a: waa FEET: AU YR ut 
ATT LAT TETAS AT aeaagierat 
afzaerar fqat a: manta aeae: a UME Nt 





PALS Lao SL 


43. (8) &. Ture (7) TATE for (ya) 


(=) 


(3) 


ye. (a) 


(7) 


2. 
XY, 


an 32 


a 


x ah we we KM an oO 


A LA) oO 


es (a) for (aes) y. weet (7) for (az47) 
Ta for (qu) 

(fro—eaat ater ¥ ferett 3) 

TaATEMTE for (TATTTAAT) 


. TywTG () for (Fate) wo. satreaga for (warTErsR) 


eta: (F) for (gee) 
(fao—eaat sete Tea 42 2) 


. Brat for (azat) =—-&. WaTAaT for (az WAT) 
. Uenrgt for (qavet) «=. Sreatarar for (walter) 


amg for (aqgat) os. gana for (HEE) 
(fao—aat wits wear &¥ sifsa 8) 

WRIGMG for (WGA) 2. PATA for (GFT) 
TeNgM for (te waa) 


. ag at for (at aya) 


(fro—zaat ara eat XY 2) 


. amare (7) qraTgT for (Tart) 
. Sleraragaa (7) Sata for (Bytat) 
. aq () ae for (at) «=. Afgacrerayl for (afeazat) 


(fao—zaat waited eat x2 8) 


. 9 
Wee Bs Yofrara ales | 


aaieagard a syafa FETT: A: URI 
(=) 2. fargta: for (gafet:) 2. aeaates for (Tee) 
(a) %. era for (aatTqr) =—-&. WeaT for (agaa) 


& 


gana for (ETH) 9. (fo —agt wre eat XX aifea Z) 


(=) 3. arora for (aarraT) «= «8. Tease for (aaa) 


%, 


ay at for (afeay) 


(  ) 


sia dey gt fear ae TATTLTAT | 
aeRO aah FET: a RX T 
sis a rae fcr et at eA RA we A 
areata a TOTAAL: Was i 
se eee aT eT TT 
feaerarceliee fax TAA: TECH 








¥X. (8) (fro—geat aaeeat 4§ 2) 
2. farcar (m) () for (fercat) 3. ara (a)(s) for (ay) 
Q. Aeradaer (7) () for (Aorta) 
%. yeaa (Tt) gee: for (Rea) 
(7) x. gar for (yar) (fro—zaat wits dem 44 2) 
(=) ¥. gera: for (germ) (fro—ewat weet xe afr 2) 
(=) ¥. garg for (gat) facat for (ferar) 
2. Fag for (ear) 
4. (4) (feo—gaat weer Xe 2) %. af at (t) aTat for (war) 
(a) 2 BF (s) for (3s) 
3. ‘ge’ gat the ar aR oe zg (=) 
¥, easel for (aarset) 
(fo—eaat writer xe 2) 
(4) &. weareetd for (gearset7) 
¥. (fao—guat ame yo afar 8) 
(=) %. wa at for (7 at) ¥. aearsat for (aatset) 
ts. (@) (fto—eet mer 4s 8) 
t. Harawat for (Fae) —-. Har (mT) for (wT) 
&. Bat (i) for (Far) ¥, feraeette for (franz) 
4. RTS: for (TETys:) | 
(7) & BragetTay for (sirerias) wl geeaiat for (ware) 
(fao— aaah areT ys 2, Hert Yo Afra ATT YA TT) 
(3) %. am for (eae) | a. rar aT for (waTRATANNA) 
(Y, feaareeine £4 for (fares fet) 
| Me RRTETTR: for (rare) 
) ©) . tat for (Hak) |. mer yee 





{ 23) 


seer efarreaaeAEATEg | 
erage Gea | EE TARTOTTE: tus u 
faz armgreat wrt ‘weafeeretnaat: \ 
qeaaaa raw: RAAT TTT: u yen 
wifaameT TTA erenreaeeeurfaTeaTat | 
seaifara fasted anfaagat aueat tt fo 


PP LL PEP 


us (4) (fo—eaat wader xe 2) 


g. TUT Us: for (TaTs:} 


(=) &. war: for (waTTs:) 


2. (fro—aet wadeat Xe afr 2) 3. at: for (at) 


(=) 3. aferard: for (afraergat) — &. TUgTYH: for (WET) 


xe. (8) 


(fao—guat HAFET Fo 2) 
g. amend (=) (aTrert) 2. Fats a for (qa) 


(7) 3. faRde (©) for (BR) ¥. wTaT: (=) (3) for (att) 


(fao—anatet X& 2) 


(a) % getsaatata: for (quart =) 


Xe (8) 


(fro—aiert to sifta 2) 


(fro ~ aa aeita at wae €2 @) 
Q. urfaascemeat (a) arfaraeercat: (=) for (wif rarcarat) 
2. aeasfratsfrat (m) sretsfrneg: for sreafaatfaate) 
3. at (1) Seat for (Bett) =. Sat (a) (S) for (=) 


(a) ¥. cmerg (&) for (=ret) 


(=) 
(=) 


g arfaseattdt for (arfrarsatat) 

g. (fro —aet wader &¢ fee 2) 
srea—tar wfaadterg + 

2. aeastaaisfrtset: for (erifratfratet} 

3, aca for (Beat) 


(a ) 


Bag ram faagtfoart aeitenereat ’ 
rate zea qa TAATAATT TTT: WS vi 
safacet aenat fea AUT ASAT 

seat aera aviad waft emf 0 eR U 
auinareranfaaerat varthecaheieay 

fareafer fear an fararRTETTg fngd aaa: 0 G3 UN 
| qntterigegentagatges 

sqreait TUT 1: agian THETA Tecat 


&%. (a) (fro ae eet at HaMeaT §R 2) 8. aft (7) afer for (wala; 
(t) 2. aati (=) for (vara) =. retary for (areaaTIg) 
(a) %. safe for (raf) ¥, Beat (&) for (scat) 
4. (fro—aet ardent <Q afer 2) (=) ¢. aaft for (vata) 
4%. (a) (fro—gaat aatmaeat &3 8) |g. fers (1) for (fase) 
2. Hearethe (Tt) (F) (F) for (aeeaverf) 
(1) 3. arfaa qarat for (anfaa aerdit) 
(3) ¥. (fao—eguat aasieat €3 ifs 2) 
(=) & aqerat for (set) 
&3. (a) (fo— saat wTeeAT &¥ 2) 
T) %. wafase for (wade) 2, tetany for (Fetaq) 3. HTT for (AA) 
a) ¥. ardt for (arat) x. (fro gaat wade gy afar 2) 
a%. (a) (fao—ga seta St er Gear gx a) 
et (7) for (Gr). aatgge (1) stig gua for (ATT) 
3. Te (t) () (&) for (sreqadt) 
¥, weteraraa (1) deer aaa for (eerevara7) 
%. wer (1) ARaG for (TIAA) 
(7) (3. fe8es for (fee) we. geTfeege for (gemfeyT) | 
s&s, fafertes for (fagtatea) e. ga for (qa) 
(=) aaigge for (amige) ¥. aeieraTta for (sgimaraa) 
> & Sert for (Trea) 20, (Fro—guat a der x aft @) 
(%). tae at wef 
aig Ue for (arigY) we. gO for (xa) 
% FETT for (aetna) 4X. BeAr for (7444) 


—_~ 


RR 





( & ) 


aaa Se eR: RY steageaaa: 1 
waattanga ae RETR en aun 
wand gergartteaysarg 
cabana rat aaa 3g age Neen 
gerreg trey aferaten TaqTETE \ 
ceuehent fgeererrat FATIIST tt Ro i 


LPP LPLELAD AD DIP DP IDL I FT OT 





. (9%) (froze acta a we der &§ 2) 


. arate (T) TereT for (aRTaTeaay ) 

- Bt (7) Bet for (ga) 

‘ateq’ ge oer 21 

aqartay’ for (aqrarta ) 

Ba for (ga) ¥. (fomaat wader &¢ aifed 2 +) 
. aaadar for (aarataay’) 

. Sqaagea: for (saqateaaeraa:) . ga for (ga) 

(4) (Fro—an acta ay ar deat &o 2) 

. gatirg (7) (=) (&) for (gett) 

. saterter (at) aa for (aeaTeteaTaq’) 

Wy for eq) %, Seay’ ag gtr gl 

as (aat wits ward 2), ‘agefae’ go F ate HT ATT T A 


— 
al] 
—* 
AD oS A KO I AI oO 


. 88 for (3g) &. thas for (efx) 
. Basan for (gearless) 
ee y. AF for (4s) 9 & “age” ga 
(3) (fro —-gaat vale FET fe Z) 
g. quia «) for (qUTeT4) 
a. eat (a) (©) for (at) 3. gat (7) (=) (#) for (er) 
(7) x. agate > (xa ) ¥. € for (7) 

&. tat for (Tat) 
(a) &. feet for (=q7) %. Galen for (que) 

9. saat for (2s) 5. (fro—arntert a fra 2) 
(e) ¥. aqetadsea for (ger) t.-geearey for (GuTeTay) 


g 
R 
R 
y 
(a) ¥. an for (SIAM) . seer for (wea) 
y 
Q 
® 


( wR ) 


ageing paningaaaTa aT 
seroma TAA HURT nest 
aT Tae: Aq; aafagad qa BT afer: | 
serie Here TITAG T HAA UN GE im 
qe aif Beas at wand eee: \ 

aa RY aA Fars TTA i vo N 


th 





qo, (4) 


2. 


LDL LAS 


(Fao —gusht ite tet ge 8) t. Bie for (a) 
ga (a) for (x7) (=) 3. ae (1) (&) for (emg) 


(1) ¥. agedieremfetage for (TgEtaTeRAT HAGT) 


X. 
(3) % 
(3) &. 
X. 


merararay for (ayarITeH) 

aad for (west) 3. eet for (reared) 

Hat for (gar) a. HTT for (Fag) 
garaatay for (wasaq) X. Area for (ArT) 


(fao—wn Ger vo @) | -&. yuare (tT) (s) for (GIz) 


. Tals a: way (7) gaaTA: for (Tat AF TTA) 
. FT for (a7) ¥ gar (a) (=) for (gue) 


samt fratena: for (ga ayarrar afera:) 


. water (F) for (wate) 

. Tatga: for (TAA). (fro—see Feat wo sifee 2) 
» Baifratafere: for (getter afea:) 

. Wega: TIM: for (aKa TTT) 


(fro—auat eae we 2) 


2. aa for (ga7d) 3. saa for (saz) 

2. ‘am’ (ag mex ard ifn ar are ge 2). fart for (#7) 
(3) &. 

3. aT for (a:) Bet for (BF) 


yo 


aiete for (wife) ¢. gave for (gar) 


(fro—zet am teat 0% sifsa 2) 


(&) ‘afer gat et aonfad wate 1 
wife BT TIAYTT TAT FA 11 vo A 


for 


| guy wifes Back A gan wT: | 
| AR Rae Ae Te TUT Ho u 


( we ) 


aafertereat Sa faterrata afar aft afr ati 
dara fea at qaerrasterg WIT Ug if 
agra ag ferent safints afr \ 

CAT aaa at RAMATACAMS TTF: 11 2 n 
wnat apa tarsfrdiged | 

UBUA AT AT HAPATACATT TU: 1 3 iv 





A Xk ww 


() 
93. (8) 


g 

Q 

(Tt) 3. 

g 
Vv. 

g 


PLP ELL DSS 


gfe: (t) afe for (eft) (fro—eguat at Feat 92 2) 
aaitfr (7) eaaitfe for (afaft) 3. fat for (afar) 
gears: (7) for (FeTaTUSTTR) 

faraufind for (ferafagigar)  &. aa for (a) 


. at for (ar) 


fao—gae mt “afd ar daa fet ax grat oy H” 
fer 21 


. ofa: for (ef) \. ferafe aferat for (ferafrafer) 
. weltfa for (afatt) = 3. afvat at for (qfat ar) 

. FATS ETA: for (Ha ATATTTETF:) 

. (fro —aet HATA 62 Afra 8) 


fa agecite ce ofa H saaee ae 2 
(fao—zaat waTeMT 0% 2) 


. saeftfr (wt) saat for (suffer) 


am (m) (&) for (ga) 
at’ for (a) (fro—zaat aise ve 2) 


. saaitft for (safafa) 2. aa for ar 
. (fro—ma ce 03 sist 2) 
. raaitfa for (safafe) 


(fro—gaat HA Tea w¥ Z) 


ag ae Choy F aarea J alka ahs FH os Peat wz 


(7) 
(=) 
(=) 


(fao— ag waite “ F sqeeg ae Z) 
(fac — aadeat oY afta 2) 
(fro—zagt water vs aifsat Z) 


( x5 ) 


aeremnfaatt at fafintar aad aaa: | 
aiiscacita a RATAATS MTT: UI orn 
aferorestoa sea fatter 
Prete aT art ATTICS TUR: Wey i 
MAATAATTT STAMTTA TAT AIH | 
Fafireet at ait BaRTTARATTTS MATH: 1 9% in 





wo, (a) (fro gaat wAeTT 6 2) 
(a) &. aatetafi: for (watafr:) 
(fro—guat ane ws g) 
(a) 2. (fro—aneter wy sifra 3) 
(=) 3. fame for (arte) 


wey. (4) (fro— seat rT we 2) 
%. wataat (wt) for (ater) «=. gaeaTa (7) (#) for (EarATT) 
(1) 3. aa" for (at) sy. Pais erafeney (=) for (Pafadens) 
%. ax’ for (at) 
(fro— gaat wT we 2) 
(=) : aarea (&) for (sata) 
&. (fro—aat area 0% sifrT 2) 
we. (")  (Fro—zaat aadeat we 2) 
(3) (feo—saat are ve 2) 
(&)  (fro—auat wader 52 8) 
(7) (fao—aaat eAeAT co 3) 
W&. Ter at ate frraifiea afar site E— 
Wilts fatorarane tafireargrd cer cafe 
aut gente fet GearaTaeTTTE TTT: 11 oF Ut 
(Fro —ag eet ea fit are Uf qT 8) 


%. Gi for (quife) —. eatadt for (errand) 
et fora) 


( Xe ) 


Taagiarceaq faa afireatantra url: t 
Taal frat saree feret gariaty Nv Y 
vegfaferernis aaa ait rT a 
gaia aT TAATAATY TTR! U Ge ‘u 
aitagfegat aTeeTeRR TATE HATA: \ 
TET afafaaat amt wa a BTAT We r 
9 (7) (fto—eaat are ws 8) 

%. Tyrac (7) (&) (=) for (gfasiae) 
R. gaTaata (7) aaata (F) (garata) 

(a) (fao—ag eeitader ae sft Foo WR, TT aaa F afer aT 

% 0 9 sifea Z) 
(a) (flo—aet wadert ws affect 8) 
(=)  (fro—eaat wader we 2) 


os. (4) (fro—zuat are we 2) 
a. aMea for (qatar) (1) A a aH OT 
(a) 3. afaed at for (gaia) =a. gate (=) for (gaz) 
(fro—euat wade 52 2) 
(=) : sate (=) for (ater) 
¥, (fro—HuaeT ve fra 8) 
(=) y. aft for (=) 


e.(t)  (fao—zaat HATET so Z) 
g. ATieamianrS (1) Tetq aataiTTS for (ATETATTIS ) 
(7) 2. safe for (afer) 3. afare: for (sfrrm:) 
¥. -agafgat (=) for (weqUst) 
(=) 3. afiergfi for (aitrafit) 
g. anfetcdatare for (avareacdataxt) 
¥. Taya for (eTUF) 
%. (fio— amet FATMM so 2) 
(s)  (fro—aaat Hae v2 2) . 
2. atisrafa for (athrefa) g. Ferg for (AFATRAq) 
y. at for (art) &. dara for (ahr) 








SLL 


( 2 ) 


Ter waza edenteadeateegay \ 

ately azoatrerrea teat water att: Ugo ul 
aren afacfaatrerar Rat 7 Fred 
aera sarTeati waft TAT Ns? Ut 
afeast EAAL JS feafirnaraata artery \ 
anita & ae CAAT AAU TAF: U aa 





so, (t) «= (fao—zaait wren sy 2) 
&. at (7) (&) for (ai) 2. eet (7) (&) for (gaa) 
3. wafe (7) (a) (=) for (wafea) 
¥, wfery () for (afer:) 

(7) — (fao—zuat wrdeat oR 2) 
(4) &. avteataa for (ateadaer) x. (fro gaat waa 52 ifs 2) 
(=) (fao—aaat wrefer 62 @) &. atiq_ for (a7z) 
) 


5%. (@) 9. eft for (xfs) (fro— saat wraeaT 52 8) 

2. tft: (7) (=) (7) for (afr) 

(a) ¢. cfarstat fararefastaat uf: for (xfs eqareafis wafe uf) 
3. ga (%) (a) for (ga) ¥. Aleta for (Facer) 
\. &. ‘egateafa’ “wafa’ oe aa gt 

(a) %. far for (xf) 4. Fareafaet for (Fgateafa) 
9. (fro —sagert «2 sifae 2) 

(=) ¢. cfastat for (xfa%) 
4. SPamarefnt for (aqareafir) <. vat for (aafa) 


sy. (4) (fao Zaat aAeeaT sz 2) 
(tT). (fro—eaat ara eT 52 8) 
a. afert for (wfatsh) 3. fav for (fer) 
3. am ot for (atifae) 
(3) g. sfarg for (wfatsé) 2. feafaaa for (feafaran) 
3.-aitad for (tified) =x, (fro —aeneeat 3 aifea Z) 
(oat war'eT 53 8) 
“os 3, app aet ay for (ait faa) 


( re +) 


freors afget fraemisy araaficghy 
wraifae a TAMTRATR TE: Gz 
afeasé eerete ait erent: aga frases a 
weemgifaeatt RATTATG TUE: Uo ‘nt 
ag Rafer aid Harte a 

TAA seat TITAS TAH: ae 
shafatiren wat qatterg aafaticeretarg \ 
cfataaannstar : qaraTaRAT THR: We tt 


2. (®) 


2. 
a. Rwafkd for (ae afed) 


(a) ¥. 


(=) 
(=) 


s¥. () 
(7) 8 
(3) & 
(¥) 


sy. (4) 


(7) 
(3) 


(=) 


5s. (#) 


“we 


(t) 2. 


aw pc Ww wo VY vo 





(fro—aarat HAT EAT SY 8) 
&3 (=) for (s2) R +ee+(a) 


(fro— ane em s¥ aifea 2) 


q. ‘S32 TI 


(fo—zaat wad eM sy 8) 

2. ‘sHHaT Te IT Z| 3. ay" for (ait) 

sR for (s#) ¥. (feo—maw et sy sifea 2) 
‘at (Ba) 

(fro—saat wae s< 3) 


. derdaas at (7) sorefafacarserass at for (ae FATT aT) 
. 3¢ for (2g) 
. Bardaag at for (Ae Farag at) 


meant for (weafise) ¥. (Pro—agt eave s¢ aifea 2) 
paarg eafrat-+ t. Beate for (ad Aaa) 


. meafisd for (Heafree) 


(fro— saat HATEAT so Z) 


. fg (7) (=) for (faz) 


Sraferarany for (sfrafafercerire) 


3. fafaftaar for (fafast) ¥. aetq (&) for (ast) 


(=) 2% 
'y. BaareauaTEs: for (Faas) 

. (fro—ardter so afr 8) 

-(%) 2 


gfafagart for (<fafaearr) 


fafacararstd for (fafacaarar) 


( 2 ) 


queues a Tart nafreaada sata: \ 
Safareiateneangaataset aT ig u 
fadaumrerdt negara seater ag \ 
mete feaargentcteoetigat Neon 

fabenrmere ferret TELAT RATERS 
sii Te sorfeat srraferefa® vce 


so, (4) — (fao—gaat wader cs 2) 
Q. a ag HANTS H omer wet (7) 
(1) %. fread for (Frevadi) 3. agua: for (wyfqt:) 
(3) vfradayfad: for (otda wafird:) 
¥. (feo—ane et o5 8) 
(=) y. Berg for (ar) 
ss. (8) (feo —gaat wra'e ce 2) 
a. area for (qurq) 2. Saat (1) garat for (gaat) 
(t) a Beat agra for (ete rgrg) 
¥, aeareta for (aeart) 
X. Mea BAT for (carat frat) 
(4) &. erarg (=) for (agua) 2. atg at for (AteAat) 
&. (fro— aneert se afae 2) 
(=) wo. freee for (fr3z) g. FrRae for (frase) 
s. faretat for (¥rurfe) 
¥. Meas gyal for (seratreffuct) 
3. WER for (Aya) 
se. (4) (fro aaat wre ea go 2) 
&. GF (T) GA: Be for (wAETETT) 
Rw (=) () for (qa) 
3. Paratat (7) (=) for (sarfeAt) 
¥. } amareaeaatat for (Ata auiea’ safer) 
(7) (fto—gadt tf “amar” & anew aiit 2) 
(4) %. yreaerg (F) for ("ReTETEATA) - 
X, (fro seer eo sife 3) 
(8) & fan for (free) 


PA LDAAS ALL LAS IIS 





( 2&2) 
mL Uaatera fasiat aeaat SRLTEAT 
ua fata HE AT RITA TUR: Igo U 
eafierarra uz maa TTA \ 
geata aferie wae wig eagheateay Wag i 
rueregaectetia: Ronyyy sig figerearrg Wea 
ware raaaeaTaTT: ayogvers Frama: FIT N82 


PLL LL LL 


(fao—zaat HAE &2 2) 
g. we for (Tet) (7) BTATATETGT for (aTUAATGT) 
2. meat (=) for (Feat) 
3. eRerasat for (eHerawat) (frost WaT eit eo z) 
g. aaa for (Aa) 
¥. (fro—mae ert 82 afer 2) 
. Turaratar for (GATTI) 
(fro—eaat HAT EAT €2 2) 
8. Tea for (weg). BraAT for (wTatTA) 
3. warfeat for (uafeat) ¥. afar for (xfer) 
y. (fto—agt waa eT 82 sifea 2) 
3. UpferraaTy for (wafearanay ) 
a. saya for (TETAS) 
(fro—guat waa emt 82 8) 
g. aaaataTg for (gare eT ARATE) 
Q. BIS FevATs (7) for (Wrewaarway7) 
3. frre: (¢) (4) for (feara: ) 
¥, geatpanetafnr: for (eyareparsefafr:) 
y, Faneryanrard for (eaAatTs WATT) 
& Wat for (waet:) 
g. eauaaieargmng for (zamatergwetd) 
2. Fare (S) for (wae) 
a. (fo—aae eT 83 afsd 2) 
g. TT ETRATG for (ATK) 


( Ray ) 


faa siearete REE afin TgET APTA ' 
secranttererei away gt ae AG UR rf 

sige prope qfurgeraeaT WY qui: BERRRO | 
PEESGIEREISGEl THAT SHAT ay u 

Tare area ZeaT fraatat _ Ba: i 

wad feutarfrgtt fgfrenrtad & aay neyn 


SAS OMS. 


aa. (7) 


_— 
4 
— 


{e) 2. 


wo re 
ee 





(feo— aut HHT ET ey 3) 

CATT (7) WYATT for (eq) 

ar (7) (S) for (3A) 

BAT | BURKS (7) TATA for (RATA) 


. (feo— wert HF GTZ) y, afar (=) for (ata) 


atorat for (agra) 

wey for (RYU) —-_—-yafor (ya) 

ugar for (AMAT) wo. fao—aeat waa eM e¥ Fifka 2) 
aTsferee AQYERRY TTF for (aitfeacamET BAvegRy) 


- Tq for (Fara) &. aerergay for (sstay) 
_ (Fro — seat ree ey 8) ‘ 
. fvarga (7) (+) (&) for (afwege) 


QREQIRo! GACT Ths aT arte (a) ear aT 
aware for (Tiga) year Fate aca e 


. Ae for (FAA) =. aTaHTa for (Beast) 
7a: for (qaT:) 


(fro —aet reat 8Y faa 2) 


. Wstg for (wg) 


(fro—enat wader eg 8). 

an 3G (7) 4% 3 for (ae g:) 

Ai () (&) for (&mR) 

fgarat for (faatat) x, fgurfire for (fafasnfirt) 
ava for (AF E:) a. NY for (rua) 

(fao —aretem e§ aifee 2) 

% for (4) — & BP for (Fg:) 


. feNiso, for (faaittt) ¥. feared for (feanfard) 


{ xX) 


agmtacatar Teak att aaatry 
atte faa area aieiteaat TAT: 1 ee ul 
piadatrfige Safest fatten Aer | 
ata afaga drafeee ate Fae aaa u as n 
tinct TUT Sriecataerye | ' 
atuiataae ‘afaa te gemtfaed ect 





DAL LILD IAS DLS DIA LL SD LIL 


ag. (7)  (fro—zaat ardeT ev 2) 
g. airte.a (7) (=) for (ataétz.7) 
2. at arent for (areat) 3. 8F aat (Tt) () for (Aaa) 
(a) ¢ aiadaa for (aiataa) ¥. (fro—aadeTt ev 8) 
3. FT Tat BATT: for (Aataat Tra:) 
(=) x. aT? for (ar) 2. Enai for (areat) 
ay. (t)  (fao—zaat wAeEIT es Z) 
g. fagut (7) (=) for (feqq) 
2. aw for (x) (x) Be steals for (eafeeta) 
3. fagat (7) fasta for (fe gat) 
(7) ¥. ga data for (sfaaatat) = =——-X. Gargaea for (gam gra) 
(a) &. fagat for (fegar) 
&. (fro— wAMeT es sifFT) 
() = sfadatng feqereafaat sre ateae aq 1 
aa gaat at afer: Be parts nes Ul 
for 
(sfadainfzge sugfesta fatter gat 
asafrdadar fear te gre ZARA U1 ky 11) 
es. (a) — (fa—gaat waa ee Z) 
g. frets (1) for (feet) aaa (7) (=) for (g%) 
3. aya (7) (=) for (asiate aa’) 
¥. gammftse (mt) (&) for (garfase) 
(#) 2. afe for(aafe) 2. Ha for (Am) 
“¢, gamaiiee for (gata) " 
y, (fro —mraeat ee afer 2) 
(=) 2. ae feafagurg for (sarferafagar) &. atetax for (Bsraz) 


( 28 ) 


gers al TEAATAAT: eat ' 
aATATETTAT TR at araderd: | u eet 
oA date aafaat etait rata weg ATATT | 
REET: “afsarefi tis gaara: I goo 
argo SAT: afeat: ate Tey FAT 
ara satire meetgrestiseata: Lgogit 


eft aft TATA ASTAAISEATT: | 





(3) 


(=) 


“ “oe 


as 


x ww 


aw AS A 0 GO. ge, Aw ee. 


(fao—zuat HAT EAT Yeo 2) 


. weataat (7) carrararg (=) for (wetATg) 


Roars for (GaHTA) 3. Fey for (Seq) ¥. HAT: for (#AzT:) 
TRATTUTAS AA: (HTATFATA TAA: ) 
(fro— gaat HAT AT Yoo afera 3) 


. fe arent for (wearamy) = &. Sea: for (TRAIT) 

. aaeaTE for (waAeTTA! \e, MEAT GRAa for (TATA aT) 
Ut: for (HaT:) (fao—a. ‘gatearaaey’ eft gare) 
(fro - saat am fem 202 2) 

. grata: (m) () for (gaara:) 2. atfee for (arafea) 

. Harare for (FeTHTZ) ¥, sea: for (se:) 
HSTHTT BaF: for (HETHTT WeA:) 

. (fro—aet amr deat 208 sifira 2) 

» OA: TaN: for (Gtara:) 


(fro—zaat wa eer 20% 2) 


aratery (T) sai for (sara) 2. waa ee for (a #) 
‘ef’ Bega: ow sift tet SZ 

. oat wet: for (WAT wT!) 2. aaa for (7a) 

. Bf ftaafeata FEMATERATA: | 85M for (aft Aree 
ABTERSEATE: ) 

. AAT for (area) 

» afe & careae:” yea (Fae “ott” aif 2) 
(fao—amdert 202 aifze 2) 

“wTat for (ararat) 2. saferadt for (rare) 

. ERFATBTAM for (HeHtereat) 





“ 


“et a 
ee ee 


e) 


(3) 
(=) 
(3) 
( 
( 


49 


) 


s) 


(7) 


(7) 
(3) 
(=) 


( ree) 


AY WHESATfAAAaeAy: 
walafaa: 


ae at fargufeerr atest atteverrdorrarha | 
saaireateantitiet AT A AAR: 12 
retire fa arertarrrrat TAT | 
wena aeaTeerafa aa a aaa: wRu 
arate Geaay cfaraia marta Fea HITTATY | 
atgrettacyte ma grat a aaa EU 
eranferiaraiare fas’ afer Aate® | 

EC 9 saat at aeahea a aaH Wx 


LS 


g. séait (1) (=) for (Mast) 2. fasnfe (a) for (aterfs) 

g. tse for (Ate) y. faaratfe for (atsratfa) 

3. Setaarg for (ataarq) =. farsrrerrft for (atararfar) 

%. wfareatd for (afar #7) 

2. weatae (m7) for (weatay) 2. weaMfa (4) (=) for (Heater) 
3. gia (&) for (ea) ¥. auf (¥) (=) for (arate) 

\. Fa: (F) for(aar) (fao—auat aa dea 2 feret 2) 
g. Meaiae afemrfaat (s) for (metiatfeatfuat) 

&. aTaeata for (araiaiz) 


Q. Geretareararg (a) ew ferdter; for (feratenrara) 
. aft (&) for (fn) (fro— eaat wueier 3 fret 2) 
g. doafratsearg for (faratertara) 


g. grarfeat (m7) for (ararfedtar) 

a. ferdtetsd (st) teat sit for (aris) 

R. TeYytmal for (wares) —s (fro — guah evite gent ¥ Z) 
g. feat for (feet) 

g. wrarfadteararat for (arafedrrataz) 

¥. fasta for (fasta) 2. atterq for (ater) 

4%. TE =gaa for (Rea) —«-««-3. RRB TaT for (Taras) 


( ras ) 


eftz ager q: ede TUR aay 
neficary aatafa wit Te aa UYU 
RreATITTTT ay zeary Tee afar: 

ata aged EeeaT ATT AT a aaa: nen 
ater Tent afer mare aferct aera \ 
areratet meng. fr aera sited a TAM U9 Ut 
ata ‘apt qed fear dita eet faaz | 

RET “aarat eed: 8 FAT: Uist 


x. (4) 2% 


% 
(7) ¥. 


— 
& 


ae 
— Lars 
a & 


G 
So So = 
fas: a 


Aa A 


ae ae 


Turse (i) for (tae) 2. J (7) (&) for (¥) 
vafaent (1) efrcar (=) for (zafaeT ) 
sccugieaatt for (eftert=at) 4, aa (=) for (ae) 


(fro—aeat setter a'eat ¥ 2) 


ABT for (TWH) 

weugrera for (efseriteaar) &. gerarareal for (a: ereaTAl) 
fadead for (aUHe) 

TIE erIETATTT (F) for (BAe TAIT) 


. TA (7) (A) (&) for (wee) 


aated (7) tated (a) (=) for (aét=t) 
ee at) ¥. @seata (=) for (zsearz’) 
g for 


. eygaatat for (gugrataz) 
. ESAT TETATAT for (areata) ¥. arai for (se at) 


ar ue ae ake al waft () (=) (&) for (afr) 
weer (7) (3) (= ) for (78 


fT aoe (5) oa a y. area for (sitet) 


. area for (ata 


qraafaet (2) for (rire?) 

ast se (7) Etat for (gs) 

aearefg (a1) Feared: for (Aereg:) (at) ¥. ae for (att) 
ged (=) for (get) & fasta for (Faas) | 


: seat for (aaa) 2. HESH for (HF) 
. aTadegrar for (art grat) 
Seq Hfor (Ges) 3. Featefs for Fereg ‘) 


( ee) 


ger feaeng after afeat a enaiee ort | 
afeararcorarreteat areatresriag 11 tt 

Bat: THATS saaceriaert fear hAT hae \ 
araregatoeahatat wigia’ aa 0 tou 
aretanenheanieernfefretiate: : 
aedatal arate srrereataa: Q2 w 

wre Bea Head BaEATAA Tae YER: | 
Sefeht qa ETA FA SATTATY eco 
Reacagifzedtd aa: seret ope Te | 
aeaeaaaenTaaat WMIIT: Wes 





&. (4) %. Faaaptat for (aersiat) 
(at) 2. eatae for (zeta) 
3. sreatg for (stag) 
(=) ato partterefet+ 
g. 2. TAMay for (aaetaiat) 
to. (a) (Fro—ag eet oat 92 at meter ox aifaa 3 ) 
g. Ha for (#2) Q. wTgiaat for (aretay) 
3. Ha: (=) for (wa:) 
(=) (fro—agt aah areieat 22 2) 
ee. (a) &. Tea for (aaa) (7) setTe for (seta) 
(t) 2. ema fem’, 9-8. Fa ee aT eM. a for () 
4, aat for (stat) &. aTaTaa for (ara) 
ys, Ha: for (#7:) 
(fro —zaat FATT Yo z) 
(a) &. srrret for (srr) 
5. (fro—eaat wadeat to afr 2) 
(s) & sfratsata: for (sTaT#z) 


ee. (a) & gear (x) (=) (8) for (gaan) 
RR. (at) &. afragdt for (eg aed) 


( 0 ) 


Saar HARA LATENT IATL t 
dinfirateareds fastted ahived art neu 
HERAT GHA GT GATT ATT | 

a ayat TET eats Baar WET gu 
aay ateerat seg ETNA \ 
EATS sare feraaeaTa Nag n 
efg ‘gia geraerarcereraiten af | 
mRTARAa ata ofreata” YReT ATTA ON 








ev. (4) %. Ba for (=aR) 
(7) 2. Pret=arg aa for (fratear=ay) 
2. et (a) for (gz) 3. Brat: for (ara) 
(a) ¥. dtefirstear for (etafareat=ar) 
(§) ¥. fretearegea for (Rrat=areag) 
ax. (a) &. aeted (7) (&) for (Aats=z) 
(a) % wer (3) for (sr) 
(=) 3. wear for (wera) 


ge. (7) & at (a) (™) (#) for (7) 
(7) %. wyararey for (AgaTaTq) 
(=) 3. gy FaMT for (sigaraT) 
. ¥. ayrgrarg for (wygTATT) 
4. Wheat for (Wa) 
gw. (R) t. agteta (t) wate for (aZt=e) 
(7) 3 gat (=) (F) for (gan) 
3. BiteaH for (acreit=7) 
(3) %. adtetea for (adie) 
3. eitea for (ater) (=) ¥. aaefig for (efx) 
t. aeleer for (uel). GAT for (aaTz) 


3. afreateem for (aerator) &. ayfivar for (afar) 
%. Aa for (74Et) 





AS 
St 
fa ~— 
ha a 


> 
. 
“a BH 
— 


Pe 


— 
~~ 


4 


—_— 
a AL — 


a 


Bu 


~_— 
—— 


= 
42.2 


—_~—— 


( we ) 


YE Jealaz afaa fren net gitea aqiuaq | 
TeRtaiaesite Tea qaatatar Far Nest 
3H facta quaiacintatg, at Sea af: \ 
eater qaigrarctarmateeten TN eH 
rat geatart aa Raiaz mareaarefe: | 
seme Famerratiraatatacirg Nel 

efa Ta TA Bran: 

walaaanseqra: FATT: 





aeq (it) (a) (S) for (fret) 

wert (7) (4) (=) for (aera) 

eq (7) (=) (&) for (Raq) 

afore for (afae) 

aaTfuay for (en aaafaa) 

Tatty for (AAAI) 

. et7 for (ete) 

Weed for (ate) 

. sarrafe: (1) (&) for (ware aft) 

qaatacterer for (graiat) 3. Brat for (era) 
eareqaatiet for (etatguaia) 

xq for (321) &. fafa for (fadra). 

epateea for (zst=a) %. Farge for (gTta) 

aa for (sz) a. FeTtAT (AF) for (Haat) 
meMTaY (iT) wear for (eA) 

‘afar’ & ‘aara’ ow os ares Aet (7) 

warareta: for (Wataarefa:) §. faretrater for (fearatat) 
Fare fasts for (atafeatay) . 

amearat (&) for (wart) ¥. ‘fa’ Farry aa Ts Fa I 
feat for (fara) % HeArIt for (Hataz) 

afa aft aaegefeare sigrarafemt aTearataaitseata: for 
(ofa wage are) 


COE GY ee, AR. Gea eee ae ae eS 


Se 


( awe ) 


na orafagateamt 
farifant: 
met: sea: Wye at aay wey | 
att: SReTATERGERTT Be geste: wen 
wae mr fergie area aferdat ata 
anifzer ara metered tare WRU 
qdraren a atte fag mentee 





anifadiecia weave wath maREMG Wea 
(8) &. Param: (a) aevag’: for (aerat:) 
2. Tafa: (7) (=) (=) for (saTa:) 3. at (&) for (ati) 
¥. Bey (7) age for (742) 
x. agenat: (1) (a) (F) for (agsraT) 
(7) &. stu for (saa) is, aera: for (gwIe:) 
(S) 5. ata: for (arm) &. steatat for (a7) 
R. (1) &. faetareictt (1) aval for (ateicit) 
2. water (7) waa () for (waters) 
(t) 3. warfe (=) for (wee) =. afgaatat for (aferaat) 
x. antfeg (=) for (attfasa) &. faarrgsrart for (ways) 
(3) 2. wMeaeetg for (wAHATEEAT) 
(s) ¥. aferdat for (afevtat) &. faragat for (ary) 
3. (4) %. Maeafisy for (7 Aaefaty) 


g 

q. rect (xt) aatficcteeta: for .(antfedteta) 

(1) 3. warem: for (grat) ¥. atteqfaay for (A Maret) 

4. aeafindy (=) for (senfat2g) 

 & mem (=) for (AeaTq) 

(=) t. aatteafady for (aetisefatg) | 

(=) % garea: for (grat) «8. Seqeafag for (a aisefeRg) 
%. amifeteerea: for, (anifetrsete) 


awn 


( 2 ) 


sarees faerat TUM: TR TET | 
arate: gear a4 Teal 
araeTrareaeT meauiorian qeq | 
erage raters aT AAT UN 
enfantitg fant qe Bay arate | 

are aera qteaeeTea TANT wg 
area: wamdcien grea aera: 
fracas: met Sterreneae: gatg ten 


eae 
2. 


(tT) ¥. 


aa 


4 


-_ —_—™ — oN 
So a eee 


A 
Cw Kt AOD MO aw Dw vo K Ww wo BM KO KH vo 3 


ra aa 


ateatatedtete for (asta yrern:) 3. FY ar 
faqarerarara: for (feaareratya:) —-. sae: for (e:) 


. gana sgege for (gavarrys' aa) 

. *aatat for (mqitat) 2. atatea for (water) 
. Jaraa age ge for (garargéaas) 

. aalralt for (sat at) 


faqarerarte: for (fararerraraa:) %. Teatedt for (wate) 
FTPATATTA TTT cor (GraAT SAT) 


. aH for (7%) 
. ayat for (azar) 
megeaategsy for (weaguivrtagg yg) 


wearg for (THT) «dM. BOTETTATA for (warepeaare) 
wrfrnarert (&) (1) warfaararard for (erfieatd) 


. wear for (ara) 
. faatge'erty met for (favtgd:) 


matfeyurerat (=) for (arefeqaretst) 


. wofraararg’ for (warfrware) —«-&.-raIT for (sTIT) 
_fratged: for (favtgd:) ¥. garaeeaer for (qaraaez) 


(meat) (1) wet for (Het) =. WA for (weH) 
Mrearatearad: for (Mrerarad:) ¥. ata for (Hata) 


. aaRGeT for (meager) 
. Ted for (wt) & Tate: for (srare:) 
. fasiceta for (farts) 


( w¥ ) 


damn grrdatcatiat famtfaarare: | 
aieiasi mee TER soraftactet ae Wen 
med: gasaafad aA rent aeitmeracay ’ 
Ferra Serra i ATEAT GATE 
anieaat aia sara Tat faery ' 
apearatact a TAA: Srerer Toa Ml go 
THETTA fagarat aeararaé aaReTae: | 
earer aeted: TS: RATE TTT: Fa 221 





s. (@) t geard (x) (s) for (gerd) 
. eat (a) afateafaat (=) for (ratateafit) 
(7) 3. dame for (fant) =x, Sete (=) for (ater) 
. wifes arfera for (ateq aTzH) «=. afer for (erates) 
(4) 3. dean (=) for (fear) ¥. aera for (aieizy) 
(=). atm for (Tem) 


. aTet: (a) wed: for (aTed:) 
. wae (Tt) (a) for (warHAT) 
» SHAT (t) for (FAT) 


. Harat for (aearat) 
. wAcRATeaT (s) (7) BAcHATEAt for (ataATeat) 
werafaat (1) wedtafas for (mettafac) 
. TereKTGT for (arreeary) 
. ft for (fe) & rar: for (Ber) 
. BAeRATEAT for (wAleATeATT) 
. Tara for (etata) 5. favarerrq for (farararg) - 
—}. aeeavafae for (meditate) 
22. (4) &. tard (1) ear for (vem) 
- (1) 2 Ste for (Fara) 
&. Tera for (wearmere) 
Sarees: for (eareaeteh:) 


3 
ss 
R 
x 
3 
9 
a 
5 
R 

(a) ¥. afer: (@) (8) for (aft) «=. era for (aR) 
R. wAeRATT for (#ATwAT) x, Aer for (Bex) 
g 
x 
3 
¥ 
y 
4 
9 
R 


a 


( ws ) 


arenes: Beate Fe 1 Bea ATI mer Te t 
sara arifeag seat ae faeerTTy Texel 
ragiertearoett area Bret Bee Gea fagararg t 
COR: JAR eariiaga: Wet FET TETANY WRU 
stage eer Fat afte TT GAEASA: | 
magenta ga ah a ay faaarard ex ul 





22. (a) 2. 


— 
4 
~~ 
wo An “Oy vo 


aD 
x 
— 
Bu} 
— 
au Ay oO 


(7) 


(=) % 


g. wan for (wat) «=X. ard for (ard) 


(=) 


os 

a 

~~ 
ee, ea ee a ee 


LP LMI LA LLL OOS 


metisy (1) Heats for (Hee) 


R raredtaat (1) rarat = tet a for (raratat) 
. te for (rater) 

. Feast (7) (*) for (seats) 

. eT: for (#7) 


arTetisages for (wenger) 3. art for (#77) 
aaearusa: for (atau) 


. HETsA_eTAa: for (HeTagGerarl) 


‘Key A | 
. TeaTasd for (wets) 
. Sear: for (FAT) 
. Wefcaredtedtr for (agicqeataeatt) 
. & (7) (*) (8) sé for (ad) 3. aut for (arf) 
. aTseearg for (agtT) 4X, HHT for (THT) 


. Ofararary for (geafararary) ©. gana: for (Za: 4) 
. aeesreaT for (AgteTt) 


. Basdtd: (1) gata: (&) for (ste) 
. et (=) for (wet) 


auta (7) eqagatia for (stganter) 


¥. few for (sfet) «x. aT for (ard) 


gasttd: for (adtatd) 


( we ) 


aig age aggeraded q Te argh Taree | 

aT fara agit ea sregarrfer Farrer ua gy tt 
eeqUT: RIT qzut ag aeaarfa arise: HAT | 
fanaa SATE at aah Trgfinte: AATATATA UREN 
tet: aaa fe aq aaah feecta: | 
anteater aafrarrat eaatt aytH: Ngo 

ay sfendt: qe aferat eter yeata gata: 


a%e 


frqetid: ded year quiet aR NW ge 








2%. (a) %. wergayE for (wetg) =—-& waft for (wgft) 
3. tara (#) for (eae) 
(7) %. aectg for (aetg)  ¥. gargerg (=) for (gg7Rg) 
yu. aetarfeatirar: sag (&) for (qeaatan’ geagfa zare7) 
q. fraternal agfate: swaretargz 1 kx Ul (F) 
for 

(area faarergia caer aaa faqtyg) 
2. waft for (argfr) 
g. garat: (4) for (ceare:) ©. gat (=) for (gem) 
3. F(a) for (@g) =. Sater for (saTa) 

%. area for (sara) 4. AEA Br | 
(3) - ae Re Aat oMee aa 

go. (a) &. aa (7) for (aut) 

(7). feat: (=) for (fewat:) 3. aerelt for (Tere) 


(4) %. at (=) for (ant) ¥. Terat for (Tere) 

(s\ (fro—guat wrdear ¢& %) -¥. SARTeT for (AAT) 
qs. (4) 2%. at for (42) 

(7) 2. aearge afar eat (=) for (eearet ceat eferar) 


. Ja: av for (ysait) 
- Staeq for (area). w, eryfe for (ayfH:) 
(fro—auat area to 2) 3. gard: for (gars) 
& Satsaea for (ataez) 5. Tel Tal 


R 
3. gard: for (zara:) fara: for (fegeret:) 
x 
% 


OLPLS 


a. (a) 





( we ) 


BET: HEAT ‘area: aT | 

rere eRe: SEAR Ie ae Ween 

Tenge feet feqat deetTaT aiearar | 

Ferarfe zrat fast ‘gafragazrea: Rot 

eft Ta Tea Be aeTa MEAT: Roll AeA: TAA: 
faxtfaaa: TATA: | 


an 


g. BeTTaT for (HeTeTTT) 
R. wa: (7) TARIITT (F) for (aa: FaTq) 
3. arerdietar (1) areredtataara: for (eareredt seraae:) 
¥, afagret: (7) atgre’: for (aétare:) 
4. eta: for (ae) 
Q. RETTHTT ST UT: for HeaTAHTaT ATTA: ) 
R. Tears: for (Teaidaas:) 
¥, afegra: for (adtera:) 
(fao—gaat wAeeHT os 8) 
g. HITAHT for (eater) ¥. guafeard: for (qwadteret:) 


. fare farted (at) Fara for (frat) 2. eat (7) for (zt) 
. faeregiz (1) freee for (Faraz) 

. Reaegatisearra: (7) (&) (Raeqgadisearz:) 

. fa & sara’ aH oe srasr sel St (7) 

. faarft for (faafar) 

. faraét for (farafe) 2. qearegt for (aeatat) 

. feaeperreaa: for (feaepeerert:) 

. efa & eared at Te TT 

(fro—-zuat wate fe 2) 

gered at for (Tawa aT) 

freétfeqar for (frafefeqar) 

. Matyas for (aiqaft) 2. deat cara for (Sera) 
. afaafarcatat for (frafecatfar) 


eS yw Oo Am MK aw vo 


paws 


( w= ) 


AY UAAa ATA 
wa fererfarara: 

WE AVTAAT FT AA TAT watt aa 
afgard mTATELTETT strane neu 
aft ge fare HH TS Tt aenfatrct HATA: | 
Bite: aaa JAryA: wufreTTT: mau 
ayers T aut Far: feoene & eeu: 
ny FATTY TY SAT $1 at qT Wan 
samt fae'a aa ATT fafraderqeany 
MIATA wala Tara SrfaT ATA WY 


PALL LD DLL ALAS 





t. (#) 2. aeaTy (=) for (yEaTTA) 
2. aed: for (ae) 
(1) 3. ‘wate’ ve agi sifra wee | 
a. (8) &. Beat (7) HAT for (Het) 
2. Afzat (7) afeat for (fated) 
(1) 3. Matta for (aeetia:) 
(a) ¥. fara’ for (fear) 
g. meNTafeat for (aerated) 
(=) %. sarafzat for (wefafgdt) 


% (a) &. ¥ for (&) 
2. carries (=) (7) agree for (errgra’ azar) 
(1) 3 fear: erat for (fevareat) =. gat for (ea) 
(a) % ermengetaean for (ermeatgey aaa) 


%. (&) &. ada (1) ta: for (Taga) 
(x) 2. “ferft for (fafas) | 
(3) 2. 48a for (Feéa) 

-()& Fa for (Fe) 


rns. 


“. () 





( we ) 


aA aaa fefitgerntad weet at sate seat: | 
ci an qatar stat feats Teal 

Sar aeITA qt: ceateareaeT fa ferfers 

faqafa BATT, Preertenfiar gen: nen 

» ahead Rare eet T eT 

aaa garg afer wea gett: Wo 

orate zaaeaT chrantagfid THAT | 

aTfarm: afirmeré faaehyeat aT: eafeay uo 
watcha giant serge a faTeTER 
aiatacatdat wafea: fa TAT: u eu 





g. fea (7) fafargerafet for (fafrgaratc) 

* MGT for (wast) 2. wHft (T) (=) for (wafz) 
. ‘sara gre ifs at TERT (77) (=) 

. BSaw (a) (&) for (Gear) 

. Hf for (wate) 

. Sarat (F) for (earat:) ¥. yeaH’ for (qgaH’) 
feargrrafe for (fafaraerafa) 2. wiser for (waa) 
tar: (7) (@)(=) for (at) . ger wehe for (wear xf) 
. fereet for (freer) ¥. earfeerat: (1) (4) (&) for (Rarrfeerat:) 
» BU for (gu:) () &. Fee ney 

. tat (a) for (Seat:) (7) 2. Agata’ for (aeere) 
. Fara for (Wera) ¥. Haar for (zat) 

aqasard for (aTHeeTe) 

afar (7) aft (=) (=) for (afar) 

. tafery (=) for (rafary) (&) 3. Tat for (auiz) 
Lagat (1) af for (giant) 

. seat (S) (Tt) aaadaedt for (Baraeataett) 

wit: (77) for (wTt:) () ¥. afar for (ET) 

. Reif for (eft) (=) &. squid for (qiwrt) 

. saat for (azat) (=) g. gear for (qari) 

. yeaa for (yAeaet) 3. TTT for (erat) 


AN A 3a OW OA a Oe pe a TOK KH 


( se ) 


mrateraafeta TAHT TAIT aia faqaq 
aE atadtaga tera aqua Meo 
Racararafeta:  afareeTET: Taaaterarta TUT: | 
ae ATT Frere mee WIV tt 
rafeti SATA MET G feta gear werefaad: | 
Teeter aaratts et: CARTY gear War 
ATTEN atferre afreclage aitraeiatara | 
emerianeay after: THTATIET: RATATAT UW 23 U 


nnn 


go, (4) %. gafefa (7) (a) (&) for (3afefa) ) 2. St (7) (=) for (3) 
a. fagag (7) (&) for (Fagaa) ¥. aa (7) (s) for (74) 
4. gala (=) for (erat) 
(1) & agurq for (aqaraTg) 
(3) 2. arreeatert for (arrest) 
3. fagaq for (fagaq) ¥. aaaTT for (aqurT) 
(=) (&) atisey for (et) 





OP 


) 8. fawmerg merhr for (fermen serait) 
) % PRBooop 
(=) 3. serghrees'a for (meretrape tr) 
F) . mertsat for (werat) ¥. wysee'e: for (wTga a) 
)t 


(a) 2. ae (aafefiz) 
%. waft (&) for (war) 
%. Tey for (qe) 
(a) ¥. aeary for (sseuT @) 
(3). 2 SIFATG for (rare) 
8 + (9) t. sturatt for (aearqre) 
(a) argent: for (sereeate: ) 


® 3. ett: for (eT) 


Oe 





SBR 


arated cadet eta eat ce, \ 
qeieiigigat TAT gTaaeaTE Trea 

aye create reefer ghengaa: \ 

aeard arate atermaireratty WR 
WITHA AAS wate menfadet a amet: | 
waratft a ag aa: Fa STTATAATAG (1 96 
| eraatetatectentraefire: ATRATHAT | 
aertorg arti geitdet saferaatht u go u 


MEPS 


g¥, (a) &. eaatset for (weaatedt) 2. eater (7) for (wera) 


aa. 


WW. 


( 
. (4 
( 


(a) 


3. Hetat (7) () for (Agat) 
%. qeatgrigar (a) qeatigneat (&) for (quietigtem) 
4X. WeTaTaTe (Tt) AEBAVATY (F) for (AgrTeaTa) 
(7) & wage for (seqget) ©. aT for (art) 
(a) ¥. geidh grtgar for (qeietignent) 
y, weaaeard for (Aerteard ) 
(=) 2%. wratsey for (waratet) 
(3) &. agaret (7) (=) for (wearat) 2. geet (7) for (eae) 
3. Acard for (wearg) ¥. card for (=aTaTz") 
x. Falararta (7) (a) eet sera for (wet waTaTay) 
(4) %. daarat for (qeaTat) X. gargatan: for (Fagarar:) 
%, zaretg’ for (eaTaTé’) ; 
) g. waranty for (waTaTT7) 
) +(a)-+() 
T) 2 yada for (4 at ) 
(=) 3. afane fe for (anenfa:) 
g. Sqaprere (71) for (2setatere) 
Q. wAeeATeHeAT (s1) (&) for (a AtATEaT) 
2. rfey (7) (=) (&) for (grfy) ; 


(at). Saapreqe for (setaterz) 7. HAITI Heat for (RaATHAT Hea) 


¥ 


(e) %. Temettergry for (creating) 


%, Geuferea: for (Gadferer:) 





( 252 ) 


saratfe varaiat sareeraaentin ae A 
amet a2 fags HUSA AGFEATEAT UE UN 
un ef TUTAT sae HR: gag agara: | 
aE FACE stea weave vata Uaeu 
gratin asm dee at afratra 
sitet sare aiaeaea sat Rou 
mgrarsTA aa fara aaa Recent 
garaan faite TATA TATE WWII 
ua stat eeraeatta agfa aTeravethh | 
watalht Gaal: qeragafrarenary 82 


PLL LANL 





ta. (8) 8. area (7) (&) (@) for (at 3) 
2. 4g (tT) Treaty for (fayeaasar) 
(7) & sqeqag for (aeat) 3. aaearaarey ay for (eqeated ata fag) 
2. Sgecaavat for (fayewrsar) 
(=) 3. sreqreararae for (sae a2) 
R. syeHavaT for (fageaAsa) 
te (F) 8. Be: (Tt) (=) (&) for (:) 2. Steet (a) (a) (s) for (stem) 
(7) 3. fegear for (fefaqarar) = ¥. qerease for (qarraz) 
4%. Gerad for (Teter) 
(=) &. qusradtsenft for (wereqatarta) 
Re. (%) &. Tera (7) (=) (F) for (GraqrtaH) 
% sang (=) for (ahr) 
3. TTSATASA (iT) sTETTATSE for (sTreTTse) 
T) ¥° Gs for (Wem) x. ar ears for (ariaeaea’) 
4) 3. Mtsavase for (stearate) (=) & sarem for (aasaT) 
) & Tet (T) (=) () for (aex) 
T) 2. (fro—‘fedta’ ve gr 2) 
) 3. qrareary (#) for (GuTaaTéarq) 
aR () &. agft (7) (=) (8) for (weft) 2. Serf (=) for (avetfr) 
(8) sarifrgitrafc: for (saratfirgaafet:) 
By “asserauartit for (areravstft) 3. satatft for (saraift) 


~~ 
ee ~~ ~— 


RR. ( 


f) 


Tos 


( 353 ) 


THR arATS TTCSATATAAAT AGATA 

BEE aoaetta sag iat ARETARATY WRN 
meartergTed TENA: CTRATATY | 

aged aatrgreaaitad wales aergr i ev 

ore aeafeet sfaeite weatgr aia atenearg | 

AINA meme wea: Teale walernaTaTy UY 





. FUTETareaat (7) (+) (=) for (TeTeeraear) 
. Seatit (#) for on 

. WaeATA (7) weaHEaTg for (weaTeTA) 

. went (4) (=) for (sar) ¥. areT for (as) 


qrareaad for (sare hat) 
aacarentg for (AHeTAAT) 
amrarg for (artery) 3. weaenTg for (aca) 


. BEAT for (art) 2. Heaned (7) for (AsmyTe) 
. HET for (Fat) R. Hseareq for (WET) 


afto-Lara eg afaarerm+ 3. et YA for (FA) 


. (ro—agt wate at dtr afinat 2 | 


capieagaaed wa wg ate wera: eq” (a) (&) for 
(eas aeafeat sfaete eater safe efteitarq) | 


_ neqaat (7) () (&) for (aeqeTet) 
. aRagared wey ogafe wer: eatears 


acafedt sfacta datearg wate atetrarg RX U 
for 

(are ceafeat afareited Hetoar wate atteterg | wae wer 
eqan yea: Tafa Uat T FATAAT RY It) 
ae nfs Ha’ at utter settee 3 cite cheat B—oeett ofe g: 
— dregeana wet agate wea: ata” 

(feo—ea sft at ceaft dfen atttegered og wale vem: 
eatera” wader wfrat H ye Ts 1 ae tt ate aT Te Stet 
HR Rar de a aftafers was CH Vile AT aT TTS 
aatay & waa: ada se wha at efe A oe eee a Seep 
satire aie ar gate firerrene eeret BY ATCT aT TE BI 


RY. 


as. 


( z5¥ ) 


aay areata ot aT TN a 

arent saTatete AAT wat waegate WREU 
faqeetitsuengnt area: UE: | 
aeaqyaang tata qd agam Fasat tt 29 1 
qa aforaraery afiga 3 aa at atte \ 

fasarae: at: afefianat angatfe: TRTATT: Ws UN 





PLA LLIAL DLA LA PPL 


. ay for (ee") 


wat (7) TE WET VEU for (aeat He) 


. Haga (7) (4) (#) for (wagafe) 


Be veita at seeit che 2k F aate at sat Ghee | 
Be Rete BT aT Ths Yo F xeilear a oeeit Gh F— 


. Tat for (aat) 


to feo ate ay a ala F aeata fecal F 


R We We for (acdt Het) 


(7) ¢. samt (&) for (argatt) 2. aa: (#) for (we:) 
(wt) 3. FE: Ww Ut (S) for (afe:) 
(fro—ee eet at gat ifa—As FT aay at cae oh e— 
¥. Gaeatt for (west dat) 
(=) &. Samet for (seearyeits) 
(4) &. wptfine for (aarfgd) (7) digas we ate? ue 
2. aa for (Fz) 
3. fasat for (fasar) 
“XBR (4) (#) for (at) 
4. TATE (Tt) (F) for (TATAHTe:) 
(1) Ra ait tt geet Shes Us a Reiter at face af 2 
& ys for (ara) . atfe (&) for (#tfe:) 
(a) t ‘atfiga for (afn3) ¥, afeattat for (afefrqt) 
els ag. ate for (atfe:) %. BUTE for (qurare:) 
ie @ A agit for (waufivs) 4 for (#4) 





Re, (T) 8. MaEAT (7) mage for (were aia) 


Re. 


{ Rx ) 


srargeatt amare ats HUERTA | 
sfearenreged safera TEMAETA QTd: NRE 
ae Searfrearameara watt aniaard \ 

seat eqraraqan asafercat frarfaarny: zo U 
RATT ETT TT: si feaveres ETE: | 

meet sramart feet tera: vigm RRQ 


PLLEL LPL PALL ON. 


2. sfartariged for (sfraraiged) 
(1) 3. aa for (WH) 
¥, HUTT 4 VU (F) for (wafeara) 
BT tH HT THT, Ro F aeteH aT gated 3 
(a) 2%. wearate for (sracHit) 
¥, aaifeatg for (wien) 
(=) 2. mass for (HTETAT) 
(@) 8. avaraea (7) for (ataTTeT) 
(7) % TTT N Rou for (aATA) 
3% mat (=) for (xe) 
BT AH BT THT, RLF RaleH BT gated ga 
(a) %. arated for (arHrtez) 
(=) %. warfamat for (Sather) 
%. Left egenftrarrat+ 
(3) . gaz (1) aT: y Re u for (ga:) 
2. Bee (7) (F) for (weer) 
a. farregarg (7) FAgaT for (#IgTT) 
(+) ¥. aratat for (wats) 
Ba cata at sae Thee sree acta at cael Che Ft 
(3) @& for (a) 
%. wget (#) for (ager) 
¥. seraarat (=) for (waar) 
a. farigat for (37) 
(=) 4. fasaiatt for (fase) 
3. feAgat for (wAgAT) 


C-Ree] 


aferagtefa meTeTT Te: ara aeq aa: t 

nae eT TUlAg CFE auiaeaulery NW IVWV 
wer zat yar Faroartaerree , 

raat TATE aT RTTTIRT at SATURAT 13 
ug fasat carat FORT: PUM: " 
quriegrdagd grants avriimraig uae 0 





PP LLL LLL LI LPL LAS BP APL OP 


2. (H) &. Fr (7) saree: YR for (TATTATT) 
% 3g (7) ayae: (&) for (aeGAz) 
3. Bn for (ere) = ¥. saTaay (1) for (sareaiaz) 
%. Ea (7) for (err) 
(7) §. ufragfafafa: xs? for (afirrafafafr:) 
(fao—ge xate t gated at aarfte ox a2 sear zt afer 
reg fret gf 33 2) 
(4) &. 4H for (a7) %. ay for (ag) 
3. eR for (a4) ¥. saTatat for (sareataz) 


RR. 


X. HR ae for (wag) 
(=) %. aH for (am) 
(3) t. aren (m) for (aren) 
R. weary (7) weTATT RY Ut for (weary) 
%. aH (at) (@) (#) for (aa) 
7) Re Ree BT TTT oe eit aT gah 8 
t. sterystyerar for (wreyayerar) 
(5) %. gear for (yprT) 
t. Terafe for (Prearerafar) 2. gat: (7) gar gyn for (gar) 
%. wt (t) (#) (#) for (aH) 
¥, os (1) yarigsz: for (qurargerz) 
%. (fro—agt ox ag ta sear set a) 
(t) §. qu: for (TaT:) 
: (fro—ga oft at sereTd 3¢ ZT ecile aT gate f) 


: (=) 2. Fa: for (gar :) ¥. yorigds: for ( garages) 


X, (fro—aet 1 ae Bea 8) 


ee pag ve for (qardgeaea) §. eur for (aq) | 


oO 





3X. (7) 


(7) 


(= 


~~ 


( wv ) 


Fatt Te A: FATT da zeae, \ 

nafeat zraat gs faarat wat ager: 38 r 
sefgrt avafecerer Rrarereaet eared | 

ufe ug: mrenteg grate fe aat aHA 1 Be rt 


IS. 





R. wee (&) for (eee) 
(aat 34 at tert afer 8) 

a. Sear: (T) tage: (F) sd Teger for (eer) 
3. Fa for (Tz) 
g. feta 13eu for (zz) 
¥. cava for (cae) 
4%. %S (S) for (Fe) 

fgo—ey eile at orad 20 7 eite at gaté 2) 
&. faeatt for (fast) 
a. dgead ay for (tazet3) 
we. Hafeat (=) for (aefeat} 
2. wate’ for {ad7) 
c. (fo—aat arg wader afr vet 8) 


(=) ¥. wae for (aaa) 


Be. (a) %. edtem (a) () for (fererq) 


R. aaiseaTeTy (a) (=) for (aateate4) 
(fao—ugt wae 3% ct 8) 
3. sarmfag (at) srenfag for (stenfzg) 


(7) 2. adtseredt WR0U for (adteate?) 


(fro—aa sate aT BATE as T eae) 


(=) : edtery for (fetera) 


¥. (Fito —aat at wae et a, sitfe wa sf aque net aT 
VITA Bo FT MAH HT TAT Fl. 


(=) ¥. wdsaRtt for (safari) 


2. arate for (sTeaTiag) 


(Ree <) 


Read nafarat aa eat feat wae ' 

fis wfafaai qatar at Caren naet 
araeaead a aa gael TEN wea | 

val arrefaigestiitvefeeyaizre : Nasu 
ate freanfated acegfriferarene \ 

ara weaned we : afgarqaataters UREN 


39. (7) 2. feercaa’ for (fera”) 
2. Wa eH (mat wae yo A 2) (7) GET Nasu for (er) 
3. faga’ (4) fred for (frat) 
(7) (fro—aa aeite er gered ae FT ate aT qatd 21 
¥. gat for (Fat) 
(a) 4. dar (#) for (ar) 
2. (fro— vat waReIT 30 sift 3) 
«. fro—aet arg wreear aét dt 2, ait fe ae sete aT aed, 
Ret ala ar gated) (&) — ¢. fecal for (fer) 
as, (8) &. ae (7) (=) (©) for (ard) ; 
Q. WaT: (T) WHEY URI for (AHN) (ast ys Feat zt 2) 
(7) 3. stared for (fart) 
| ST TAH BT TTT, Vo T gate ar gate eS 
(4) 2. RR er: for (AHzt.) (fio—aVt eae dea 35 Aha 8) 
¥. Tet madear yer 8, wailfe ae ae a eels ar gate 2 
(§) &. Wag: for (Hat: 
Re. (H) 8 feregft for (eqfir) (at deat ae 2) 
8, afin (1) (B) for (aang) 
a Fifi (1) for (coat) 
(1) ¥. efemrarery 1 Yo 1 for (afgerarert) 
ae Tene for (add seu) 
(Fo—eg ete at arerd vt ¥ ect ar gait 
®) ¥, wet Re’ at mate ifr Fi geysers Ro FX we 


i _ Seen nf a, wife ou, Ye wate aT Tad wen 
MTEL | 


rt 









( re ) 


2 3 x » 
aera ataat: eaterf BACT STATA: | 
cee UeWET miaitrrtinartz frafray It ¥o N 
agnatient fad TURARATERAT | 
eee CAT TalVas earrtarat Nese 
wrgUEt oe aa TTA ata | i 
eanigereghefed amet feneaearaafaed 1x2 1 





¥o, (=) (fro—aet sam the H HRT F Vo wer & @) 

%. ga (1) for (#7) 

(7) 2. aearat for (qarTt) 3, Grea ¥. ye sa 
Y. GeaeTATa: Wk i for (weer waa) 

(fao—ea. aH BT TAU, WTA Bis HT Tats 8) 

&. ATATt orarsaat for (anit srairatfe) 

(3) ©. vet vo’ wraer afer 31s. zat HT der aifaa al, wife 
ag seed wet we x aeitee BT GatT ATAT STAT FA 


(=) ¥. wo for (a9:) ¥. erATetat Garava: for (emai Geer ara} 
¥e, (a) &. arg for (ag) 
a. Ha (wet water Ye Az) (7) wT NY? MN for (A NY? Hl) 
2. epfage’ (71) (=) for (egttge’) 


(t) Be Re BT Baers RR eee BT gate e 
(4) 2. Wat ‘ve? wae aT TE SL. eaCTQM for (eAIET ) 
(fro—za oft F agare ga eee aT set QT ae aT 
gad @ wa: oat sea H macteat aifea ret z) 
g. af (tT) (4) (S) for (qe) 
Q. (fro—aet waaeart ¥z (7) ¥3 FB) 
3. cafe (7) cafe 7 THAT for (ae) 
¥, farara (1) faeara (=) for (faerat) 
(7) ZS RTH BT SATS MTA se TT Tare FI 
(4) 2. (fto— get wadteat ¥2 sifea g) 3. cafeter for (cra) 
¥. fears for (facara) 
uel waite & oa Fate eater aie adh waif ag sad 
AMAT HAT Ss A 
(=) 2. Ug for (Teg) 


¥2. (3) 


( 8 ) 


a facifgerencttat vafa aa agferca: . 
Trgerenrar steer TEAR ie ETT RU 
Tar arti CARTERET " 

sagas wafer WERTET rretict nee 
areata atrarat Ug arent aeatag: 

WETAT saree: stfiremearat fea: afragat ui xy nN 





OL OP PL LL PIN 


. wae’ (1) (=) (&) for (aaa ) 

. (fro—agt wrdeat ¥3 a 8) (=) () 
» THUY for (e:) 

. aa rt Te eae for (aga TIAA) 


(fro—aet ga sata For Hae ater aft aval aie 
ag saad sat ve F eter wr gate arat rat 2) 


» weRPRA for (TARA) 


(fao—agt aardeat ¥¥ & 8) (a) (5) 


» F7at (t) AATATTA: for (watguataredt) | 
. weet for (sa: eat) 
. THA for (areizt) 


. SerATAT Tu for (wre). §. qaftrT for (efi) 


(fro—aa seit ar ered Vy a” ait ar gate 2) 
(fao—ea aate ar sere vy a ate aT gale 2) 
MATS Hel Hea S ae HEAT ifn Tat 


. FATA: for (HATH) 
. . BRITE: eA for (aeatguataeet) 
¥y, (t) 2. 
2. 
() 3. 


(fro—agt wren ¥x sift 8) (=) (#) 
ay for (a7) 
afraarat (=) for (afer) 


¥. aeafag: WYK for (aeafag:) 


(fto—gu cotter at gered, ve a” ite aT gated 8) (3) 


ad 3. afmeaTat for (afracat) x. wm eer ae 
© (8) & URRereate for (ugerafa) 


¥g. (a) 


om 
a] 
— 


“K 
& 
Pie 
ad] 
aS 


=— 
4 
— 


x ww 


( er) 


UE arent qangatatieg aA 

aaatire THAT TGA aa ta TU eR " 
aaatea 1 HeTag aura aaveng wate LE: 
qaTaTAgT Tee greater aTeitagat ne 
mea RATATAT tg grata afireat 1 

Wee aHASAATEAAT fafa UN vel 


a. fag am: (a7) (=) (for firgaa:) 

(Fro—agt aanter ¥5 site @) 

ge Tq (7) for (ee aq) 

grands’ for (areadig) ¥. 7a for (qt) 

‘qa TI Te Ft 

(fro—aate aT TAT Yo 7 See gata &) (= 

ave for (act) &. HATS Br 

ugemrentre for (Ugererdttg) 2. eeeITa for (gee7q) 
aaiseatg (#) for (aneaa) 

(fao—aet wrteat vo ez) 

qaraag for (YaraTT yA) 

ug: Welt for (zg:) 

fagat for (fagaf) 

(fro—za aeite FT GATS, ¥s Facts sr gated Z) (a) 

R. Fara gaa for (yararegudt) v. are fagate for (awrstagat) 
Y. HA FIT BT 

&. Yarrdtette for (Targa) 

2. Farrga for (ywargAt) 
a 
3 
3 


OES 


aa: 


. Tama (a) (#) for (esata) %. TE for (ug) 
‘ (fto—aet wre ¥o went g) (=) 
. Fa: ech for (gat) 
(fro—ea aeite aT BTUs Ye FT eet aT Gate 3) (=) 
R. BARISTA for (ARTTEIT) ¥. HATA YI 
(fro —srere Gfes wari Te ‘Te aTAAT’ BATT) 
PTT TT APTS: LH ATTAT 
. ugeareafe for (uagataafa) 


( 28 ) 


afearaarrey spitafeaaase: 

qateeaterra mniteeateicterd feafarorrg ve 
eeritonieanetaat, q eehrae Y 
faqaeienyd ernvietea eamettel: u wo I 
aredatercate: fart HTT aay Py 
faqardsnar Ragarargagetrerdl Tea 





PPL LLL LAL LLL LA FEE 


¥e. (HT) %. WTreafera ag: () for (yttaferaxcg:) 
(fao—agt mtg auvert vet et 78) (=) 
(ut) %. eaferagee: ven for (feerazse:) 
2. area farfararg for (areiteatetarad fafa) 
(fro —aa acta aT Ged Yo F ete wT gata 8) (a) 
(3) 2. wafers for (fort) 3. wAeTT Ta | 


t. wise (m1) for (eriza) 
q. (fro —aet aneteat xo Bt gE 2) (Tw) (a) 
3. Hea: (1) dsaaherd for (Asafa) 
Y. cameital: for (eaaeriat:) 
(t) %. eaetiet: for (cateriat) 
| (fao— za eater aT gered, ue a ate aT gate a) (wr) 
(3) 3. arise: for (aaisa) \9, BATE Yt 
(=) & nafretetingfaacy for (Hefratg fear) 

, asa: for (qAHsT) 

¥, Sapa for (eamatt:) 


Rt. (R) t. (Pro—aet amtear ut 4) (a) (5) 
(1) 2. are for (ae) y. fiafire for ( fiafam) 
¥. aBereaet for (erat) 
(fro — ae sails ar wares 4Q a aalte aT gah ¢) (a) 
(3) gregetteret for (gegettered) 4. ania ya 
&) 2 Teese for (area) 
Po) Me BR eer for (gegetrer) 





( xz) 


Ferrante grraraneiscifirgre: Y 
wreath ait ag ara FAAT RR r 
mraauise afc dearth eae: 1 

ateg farsend sat aed fraaaae Ut aR ‘NU 
WIG vitavtat waa itera gagat Y 
qSws ad aerate feat We xeaT: UN we iN 
aaatea Ua: fafrencacaale mat nentage | i 
fafasrsagata arate festaerat WRU - 


Kr. (T) %. ama for (ater) 
2. (fre - wat wAeaT XR st ges) (1) (=) 
a. TraTetataat (7) (=) for (sraeararfeai) 
¥. até for (wT) (7) ¥. Fret for (fara) 
&. Ha for (HP) 
(fao—ae eater aT Tad 4a Tacit aT ate 2) (=) 
(a) 3. oraredardtat for (Tasizfeat) 6. wadeaT yar 
a. Tarentse (7) Tarenisaag for (aemisTag) 
2. (fro—aet wneem 42 at z) (7) (=) “ 
x. fadsartt for (fadserfr) 
(fro—ad aeitH aT TAT UY aT acta aT gated s) (=) 
\, fedtararase for (fedraeag) 





(4) . qraattemt for (qtaantet) ¥. Heer Ea 
(=) 2. wraventemag for (araeerterag) 
uy, (a) % (fao—aat warteat yy at 8) (a) (a) 
%. FET () Eat for (xet:) (t) ¥. ye for (ge) 
(fro—ee aete HT Berard xx a eels aT Gate 2) (5) 
(a) 2. Her for (gr) ¥. ereeM TT 
() 3. qed for (qa) % REBT for {zpT:) 
uy. (4) &. (Pro—aet wreterT ‘yy’ a eB) (1) (=) 
(1) 2 aanfa for (aeuafa) 3. arfeat for (aft) 


(feo—ae eater a seed xg ad etter ar gated @) (=) 
(a) ¥, wader get (F) 2. waa for (wrarrat) 
x. feat wTy for (feta) 


( rev J 


gad a i fener fafa fremag 0 Ne Ut 
faqageacin 3 STTATAV ARTA | 
gagati aad anata GaTaATA Ww 
faqae ferret raaeeTaiat aaa fara | 
eaeNTATAGT = aura grea fagafa Ys 
aT AATRTAT STAT warasisel ste 
saviceemcifareteraen: RARARRAT: 1KE 


PBL PDIP DD LS AS 





4g. (#) &. Ta fremt (7) for (fafrafaamrz) 
(t) 2 eaetee for (zei Hea) 
3. aeratat for (aferairat) 
(a) 2. e&qdadt for (gat Hea) 
—, fare for (fae) 
(&) 2%. TRaTHsa for (gat dee) 
9. fafaufaeet for (fafa fravrq) 


xo, (a) %. sateder (a) (a) (8) for (arate) 
3. Heatdtat (F) for (water) 
(1) 3. faufageagtarg for (fagagarayeitar) 
¥. gatas (#) for (gag) 
(4) 3. waptdtat for (water) 
(=) 3. fagageaeiarg for (Fryagaeertar) 


us. (%) %. Tavaat (7) (aT) (&) for (araFast) 

R. gaia (i) (F) for (gra) 
¥. aarat: (=) for (ara) 

(3) 2 gata for (qa) 

' @) * afererciomg for (afararateag) 

wR (a) 1 wat (7) (=) for (ae) 
Re SRT for (ste: 
(=) 3. Was for ( (wed) ¥, amt for (ara) 
&) ». waved for (yee) ¥. ait: for (art) 


( rex ) 


mega RTE TI AATELATRTATT 1 
mifeeeretarat agrarfarernerrag It Go tt 
fafaritvisrritdeargteraie avant aq | 
farfairarmrerre RATT TAT HTT Wag n 
eae fanfare Ferree: aE: | 
ares Perret aie RACAtTE ETT IN eeu 
erie TATATAT ETT BES ETATTERT 





meteor fara: efea| TAM WER 
fafa yee: wera eateratt Hea | 
safer rca areataeTea EAA: Neen 
go. (8) aicget (7) aged (=) for (aegat) 2. va for (aa) 
3. a oat ate ¥. vetarat (7) (=) for (warat) 
(t) x. ‘aaa ve are é, ma for (me) 
(a) ¥. eetmrat for (aarat) ; 
(S) &. ategad for (anqe) \. Tea for (TaeazeAT) 
&&. (T) &. WHIT for (Mrafat) =}. PaRaTRT for (TeeaTet) 
(1) 3. aa for (4a) (a) 2. uiaé for (catia) 
(=) ¥. ferfasisat for (fafasrur) 
&2. (7) %. arafer for (afET) 2. && for (a) 
a. a for (ark) ¥ geet ag gat ue ge it Ge gee 
(a) 4. cert fart for (aenfzaaa) 
(s) 9. fafaonfes for (fafaorte7) 
aR. (4) &. ease (7) eeisar for (eee) 
2. waefiratt (=) (=) for (ated) 
(t) 3. qa for (qarfer) ¥. tferqrraay for (dfrdqaty) 
(a) ¥%. aantered for (satzated) 
(s) 3. qarfes for (qatfer) 
&¥. (8) %. Re (7) bl N88 11 for (RHAgTTTA) 
(x) (fro—aaat warer §4 2) 2. 9 garg) ¥. Eeaft for (eerie) 


(a) 3. getfartatrearg for (gether) 
(s) 3. eeafag for (qarft) 2. eft for (eH) ¢. aaram for (aeaT:} 


&X. (a) 
(7) 


( rae ) 


eee eniiend goatee Fagrrgee ' 
zarapitetat yaaa siaaranta WRN 
afaag wifeearalirat ferent ai aay | 
fadTTATT agree areata eR U 
meneeTged srenet eferaitet fanfare | 
grisafaaarise fearcfa agaiarg tt go 
fata ait Farts THETA | 
wfarisertt Sa seen WRB NeG 


afererdrraerref eTETTETAT \ 


wes fanventra agente caerq nee 


= Rap HRA D pe PAA PACHA SAN TAIRA ADI ARSAORDDEDIS LLLP AP PLLA 


g, Rat for (gemeet) 


2. 
xv. 


(fro—zuat wader €¥ 2) 
wtare’ for (eritara’) 3. fagtry for (fags) 
apy for (eer) (fao— gat dfs yatta’ & area 8) 


y. ERT ea & &. TAY Ug for (AT EAI) 


_ gitaré. for (gaiverd) 


(fao—ag aeite STeeT AT) 


$m (@) (@) for (5a) &. a () (B) for () 


ae (=) for (a8) ¥. ereget (1) (#) for (Frew) 


. wee for (Bay) &. Tar for (GUPTA) 


meat for (wet) % sae for (sT=ATZ) 


. feast for ( ferfast) 


watearat (7) (=) (S) for (AatearAr) 
sara (=) for (weet) 


. eer (Tt) fart) (&) for (wears) 


farserat (1) (=) for (farisare) 


_ ares (4) eg for (seg) 


Fara: for (Farwd) 


28 ) Re Tee (e) for (azar) 







fret for (am) 


| 8 Fees for (aerate) _} freer tor (fazer) 


( eo ) 


META HCAS sirengeaereat ad rareara: | 

araeatatarria: fasta Nt wot 

nearaag UEe areata fata aerate Tea | 

TeeTaTaTAT tated wate TTET 98 

area aa: attrac fae: \ 

sh AERTS ate “aa: HA: TAT: WU 

artcraat Treat TeTHT meni Ferarranfit 

at arfiverttraret arta ment 3 T BAT 1193 0 
af TATA Tareas: (24 Heals: TATA:) 

wa ferarfaaa: Taree: 








ee. (@) &. gota (a) gare (#) for (Fa) 
. 2. (fro— ag gare sts at arefeaH Beez) (7) (s) 
(1) 3. wat for (aa") ¥. aarfea gaa aN HEN UE 
(4) &. grange for (ReraH) 
(s) +p efa att stage rare Teco artafaafraat seqra:+ 
(fro—aage: Teaseara aet vo F ealH TT AAT et TATE 
Teg sates afe H arrears Boge dha ate frarax ee R 
ard fear?) 
we. (1) &. mat waft for (atefaet wafer) (Fro — saat PATE & 8) 
(=)  fro—ag ‘aeateqTa’ BT WH Ras 2) 
(a) &. ararta (&) for (arariy) (7) 2. stat for (ara) 
a. faoy’ oe BTSs ¥. ata (Ss) (=) for (7) 
4. oat (F) for (ata) (fro—gaat wre 2 2) 
g. araTad for (raTaAT) (F) (fro—ag aeareata ar fer aes g) 
3. (4) &%. afr ve fasmgrrayca farted awerege featat crete: cH 
faarfiam: | for (aft arya TreTeqTa:) 
(7) 2. weft for (went) 2. 4 (&) (%) for (&). 
g. oe wa s (fo — gaat HAT eT ys) 
(a) %. aft we frsqat wages factra are egefaatet aera: 
wa faafran: for (afer warged Trereata: 3% eI: TAT) 
(6) — (fao—ag arateata: a dite aete g) 


BR, 


( rs ) 


WA AACA ATA 
aifam: 

mraieN ufeda: ag aa fat melt aa: | 
afer eaverey aaeard aay wee weeu 
AAABTAT ATI agegittaaran7 ’ 

afeeeigifent HUTTE wafer Ru 
afereranitacia: Urea feargarater: 1 
AaB ATATS ATT GATATATABT tt 3 1 


ww 





PLE LP SPE LLP 


a. (a) &. Faat (a) () (#) for (faa) 
(7) 2 treet (s) for (ara) 
a. adtsara: (=) for (aalarra:) 
(fao—aaat aefta deat ¥ Z) 
(&) (fro ae seat ¥ @ ead gare art atat at tetera 
aa F we fear watz) 
¥. afte: for (afea) 


% (8) %. atfeer for (eifeat) 2. wee. (Tt) (@) (&) for (wae) 
3. wre (a) freq for (#teq) 
(7) ¥. Thera say for (TeraeaAy) 
4, afse: (&) (&) for (afg) 
(fro—guat eit deat yf) 
(a) 3. et for (ateq) 
(=) 3. flog for (atzq) 


a. (1) 2. afetet (=) for (afer) 2 aa for (sat) 
| a. sues (&) for (wag) ¥. aa for (ra) 

X. Wet AIT FI | 

(fre—auat eet cert ¢ 2) | | 
_&) 2%. saa: for (arta:) &. magtet: for (matter) 
oy %. watlomwrea: for (sree) 

Setter: for (wee) -M, aa for (7a) 


( Ree) 


aferet a oH aed areata ease ' 

fate areal aafades vat erent wen 

ata RGAE BaeaqaT am: \ 
Ferrera nfeeremiageT agaeary Tea 

er ak aT aT SAT BT ger a wef BaTey ' 
ah aleat SAEATT HET Wau 

afer PAE NTT: gerd aa yan aasataly | 
afinfa sata aarerd TAAT U9 





¥. (4) 2. waa (mt) (S) for (STAT) 


(7) 


(s) 
we. (=) 


(=) 


R 
3. Mateatft (it) saenfa for (srareafe) 
%. 


OD UO wo AD wo AU BC 


af AU RS wo OO 


an A wo 


frigararea: (a1) (=) fata: for (feredsaatared:) 


Bated gy (&) for (Haley) ¥. fata (s) for (fra) 
(fao—auat ate deo g) 


. fadaatared: for (fraranataret:) 

. NaTeatft for (wateafa) (F) 3. sxeatfit for (Tateafir) 

. TART for (watt) (fro—eaat eat Tea s 8) 

. APTA for (ATT) 3. TITeATY for (aTeaTz) 

. TaTSAT for (wats) ¥. eaerenET for (era THT) 

. gett (t) for (gat) 2. (fro—gaet afer ar arefea gz) (77) 
. Brame (1) war war for (spzat) (7) ¥. wf (&) for (art) 
. Hate for (HATE) ¥. BHT: Wal (¥) for (yer) 


(fro—auat eit gear e 2) (a) 3. Bar for (gra) 


. went for (gat) y. safest for (saaTey) &. aR Ba 
. aattfar (ar) araitft (=) for (afarfat) 

. aaiare (7) ag (&) for (aria) 

. ame’ (7) for (asreaTe) (7) ¥. afear: ce)! for (afesr) 
. aa (s) for (Ha) &. “aA Te aT St 


(fro swat seteeeqT Yo 2) 


. waltf for (afer) 2. aatara for (seater) 
. ameara” for (aarTeZ’) (=) v. gerd for (gsart) 
» ¥ for (qa): 


( acc) 


arent fang arent af gear oT 
a gates rere are we A: ou 

sitar eager afererta redeem | 
argareg cera ates aT ay 1 
fea erent aaa a aU ATTA | 
afrony @ marae” 7 AAS: 1 Qo 





a. (a) %. eg (wt) ermes for (alae) %. aaTAaa for (HATATAT:) 
(t) 3. weafedtrratet for (weaferteratet) 

. aTSt for (ast) X. Frart for (gear) 
aufea for (quiet) (fro—auat eit dear 2¢ 8) 
Bree for (aay) 2. Oe: for (aa:) 
seqheadtaaiet for (wearfedteraiat) 
aretaefea for (arettacfet) &. & gaty for (+ qatq) 
azBAT EE for (aBTeE) 
wat (1) aaeTT for (war) 2. egal (mt) eat for (et) 
wae (=) for (am) 
sR for (TfeeTTIT) 
. arena for (aparangercarat) 
(fro— gaat site deat 22 8) 
vacttaataen for (aateafasar) %. equata® for (quate) 
Frat cavers for (sitarearetert) 
(sfereurat) for (sfesera) 
sataafava: for (warsafrea4r) 
arrafegite for (arate) 
(3) (fto—ceett afte ar sift oe) (#) 

2. ‘fared’ & srcew (7) fetae® for (ferret) 
(rr) 3. gfe for (gee) ¥. srertsara for (axerraeaTiit) 

X. SHIGA FT for (wrrasat) &. ferret for (reer) 

ie, @evaT arse: for (Haare) 
Rome te der tt) 
) Rater (ge): 

Se A for (aresem) \9, THAME for (ceranitan) 


x 


a SW we ro K Wo an 


Ad] 
oa 


—_~ om, 
a 


“oe 
2 
Pi 
wo) 
Pail 





(0%) 


ont met emt vateateae 

eT agin’ a aT gaia grater sare Ween 
wae at lial sitet aEG ATT a 

sgf meeqataai ag Te ars tera Ngzad 
maria rere amd af saree Tagfe 
grape agai aera eraired: Neen 





Ry. 


83, 


Kw WD 


ay AO un we 


Aw 


eA A wo wo KE ve A Mm KX a 


agupoh deat (1) egy BP Reha for (qatet te) 


. Beat (7) (=) . for (#TaT) 
. ewer (7) ewer (#) for (zea) (fe—seet thea ar afer oz) 
. BBtat (7) (=) Hs (xetat) ¥. Sarat: (=) for (saTaT) 


(fro—zaat erie ey 8) 


. SyNge for (gst) 3. Ewa for (zea) 


aat for (asaT) %. Saat: for (saat) 
AGT: JS zeET for (gst Agr) we. Fear for (eA) 
¥. Eptat for (agar apiat) 8. Egat for (x41) 


. es" (a) afs for (afg) 2. eset (7) svat (=) for (a=) 
. afsarecat (7) arfsaret a for (artsreiat) 


wate ($) for (sare) ¥. aasftat for (waster) 


. Sat FT for (sare) &. THe for (sHeT) 

. Asa for (a1sat) (fro—awat eataeert ¢¥ 3) 
. 2g for (eff) 2 EtsaT for (asaT) 

. *aTat for (FAasHaT) &. sare for (saz) 

. EFT for (zfs) &. Faw for (aT) 


ward for (¢aTd) 
wags (7) yggat for (azar) 


. MaeiaTa cor (waa) ¥. wT (F) for (TFET) 
. weet for (aga) «&. BBL for (aELT) 


(fro —eaat acta deat 8& 2) 


. yyard for (yergr’) wv. wet: (&) for (Fa) 
. Reega for (YEEGTa) y. Para for (eat) 


{ For } 


afez « earete a fae verified Beat , 
afezateats qe garam fad 1 R20 

area Faas aera ferae gaa 
qasaraiact anatase ferarrfaten fea: WRVU 
qara yet fasat aftegen paerateatind att 
<fasiararefagenrata lferargeren WRU 
meayaratase ciaenigTaaTtTiAA ' 
niframremreasy Beary ATER N Ve 





R%, (a) & 


(7) 


_~ on 
a dl 
~~ — 


Al 
PS 
—_— 
— 
A ee 


| (=) x. 
RR. fw} t. 
. feqfge (7) (#) ne for (fagfent) 


aw 


%. 
(7) ¥. 

Re. (@) 8, 
2 
a ke 


ee 


weniarifat (1) (a) for (aarti fea) 
wet (1) (&) (=) for (afg) 

fad (1) fafa: (fatt:) for (faz) 
aqratatx fa (=) for (aararatafa) 

qa for (ae) &. samt (At) for (geerTaat) 
(fro—-guat aitndear V¥ 3) 


. afaget for (afage) 
» wea for (grat) 3. fad for (fra) 
» WITH for (wratafat) &. Gea for (gaat) 


az for (fad) 


. aTeqt for (areat) 
_ Saafaetar (a) (a) (8) for (qasarataciar) 
é bie (+) (3) (S) for (feraz:) 


(=) () for (at) y. aise for (Fase) 
pune ReATTEAT RY 3) 
Fas for (HASH) 


gm (1) (¥) (=) for (gan) 


curatatfesfiadt (7) (=) (=) for (eararaiferr) 

efarixtat (=) for (xfasiztex)  (fro— gaat eeitaeieat 24 2) 
Feararahae (&) (7) aerate’ for (meatereitez) 

2. (fo—euat eettadtet 2 2) 

ARTETA TT for (HeaTaTATTt) 


r aot) 


siqaenainegtredafecitgan guea ataq 4 
Esa HUTA: steerragatear 3 thE! RYU 
TATRA AN HITT zi sigarbea fined 
faq at Fertaareerag aT UREN 
STSATTT aigaitegte anreateat J 


greanafiyat faqaegrat nimeiachraet NIH 





ay A) wo 


sow A ro kK 


Av AY wo 
4 


4 


oe 


_ Naieermiae (F) (7) eigaamtiae for (sigaaraiax) 


fear (1) fearyst (=) for (fearyst) 
ata: (1) a: (S) for (wa) ¥. oe (tT) TeaATe for (97) 


. aife for (arfe:) 


(fao—gaat saitpaeat Ys 2) 


. TRATAMTTT for (aRTTATAT) —s-.. Feat for (feat) 
. Ha: for (He) " M, ateaTe for (siren) 


q@ for (72) 


- TRATET (7 ay (gt) 


are 23 dafenery (xt) agar aafeay for (grsteyfeay) 


. Badd (7) fagaarta at for (fagraraa) 


(fao—zaat ate Tea 2 2) 


. fadteareaaagay (&) for ( fettemeaaagia) 
. ea for (gt) 

. TETH 82 for (aga) 

. fagaaraa’ for (fayrartaar) 

. fagasarata for (fagaarat) 

. ofa: (@) (=) for afer) 


feat: (=) (=) for (fast) 


. ferret: for (ferret) 


(fao—-gaat atte TET Fo Z) 


. gataeafet (=) for (af) 
_ giawert for (ara) . ‘afar’ oe aor et 


rs, (8) 


) 
(7) 


(=) 


-&) 


(40%) 


atgoreaTTieR sia eagaaiad are | 
ae afer mifa wnat fa: WAG ys U 
AUGAAT ATA rareniaty WET EU 
x TATATHT apfiven arfivenafi PTET UREN 





a a 


ne 








PPL LL LL LPL 


- @t (7) for (ge) 


. Wreat for (st=a)(fro—gaat atte sear 32 2) 
. Barat ath for (qeatat ary) 


ed (&) for (qt) 


, ne for (qaatat) 

. wee for (weerTT) 

. TTT ay (7) TeTAA tT (¥) for (rareataty) 
. ‘afar qt 

. fy (7) fefe for (xfs) 


(fro—azaat HATE Ro Z) 


. % for (x) 
.¥. af frre agrettery for (afar xfs fara) 


(Fro—auat sefteeert 22 4) 


. Terteay’ chon ar afer eect 3. aff for (zfe) 
. (fro —aaat were ert 30 sift 4) 
» baat a! ag oe gee ha rey ater & fever gar 3 1 


zou gfvarraf et fagtratforat aft 1 
fies fafa aaTTaT amiga Tee i 
ae wf wile et os & freitcia ox weeTe fore gat BF 


. fig for (zfz) 2 % for (afr) 
. afg for (fefe) 


wareat (=) for (eerste) 
Tyas (=) for (saWtgrry) 
(fao—guatt st area yo tifa 8) 


e fg fate for (efefatre) w. fe: for (afr) 
efe for (fafz) 


( 30 ) 


seatrarataee aateriee fara hrRTETY i 
aptaterey fiver seater fre Rol 
ReaTEe sears ayaa att 
raferasterat ated ata am HSTAT 1 32 v 
ghzie AAT Fearfererr TETRA afi: \ 
AHANATHT arfivart afigseat gaitgra: aR 


Ro, (9) &. Yesatax for (eHaiaz) 
a. wafraratae for (aafraraiat) 
3. fact: for (far) 
(fro—gaat ware 3% 2) 

(1) — (fao—enait aetadeqt 2¥ 2) 

(4) t. Aeetaraz for (Yeearaz) 
(fro—aet wreeat 2% fea 2) 
. wedtaregy (1) TAT fier for (weitare) 
aatertar (7 (=) (&) for (aataear) 
. welt (7) (*) (&) for (wet) 
. arate (7) a qeqat for (waar) 
. gar agar (7) fever uv 3x 1 for (zaTeear) 
(fro—euat HHAeAT 22 2) 
(7) (Fro—zaat vette seat 3x 2) 
g. ATER for (ATz%) 4%. FT ASAT for (zat — 
&. (fro— waaeat 32 sifee 2) 
(=) %. weatiteq for (wettaey) ¥. Tatay for (sera) 
y. fagar eat for (SaEaTTEAT) 
ar. (a) (fro—gaat wreteaT 23 2) 
afeteadagur (7) eye agar for (efsraaaqat) 
frarfrata: (7) (a) (=) for (faratfrara:) 
afar: (=) for (afret) ¥, fre’ gat (s) for (yfregm") 
gitar: (7) (=) (#) for (aatgrn) 
(1) (fro —eaat eater 36 2) 
(a) %. sfx for (efeta) &. (fro —aet wade 33 afer 8) 
(=) 2. efge'tara for (efedaera) 





at. (3) 


es Kw VY wo K wo 


Kw ee 


Rai e) 


(7) 
(=) 


#¢, (Ff) 
(=) 
(5) 
ay. () 


(7) 


( zon } 


Frater fag wz TATRA sora t 
TATA afta fetta afirartory Wazu 
mem gat AATET fervarera Be agian 7 
ieee Tate mat a xordiat aoa nae 
ye qafage: eri grenriqatga: ' 


sigerarafeataaa ararara: way 


t. 

R 
8 
xX 
% 

S 
3 
y 
g 

R 
¥ 
&. 
a 
\9 
g 

R 
Pa § 
g 
Q 
2. 
x. 
9. 


PDP PDP DLL LL DP L DLL ALLL DLL PLL LLLP LS PF + 


wer (1) (=) () for (wee) (fro—zaat mare <6 2) 


. erat (7) fareeet for (rar) 

. fafer (7) fare (&) for (Het). fader for (frrat) 

. afyarateay for (afgadt=a7z) 

. Bat (a) for (23) w. faite for (faze) 

. Te for (FT) (feo —zarat eetraeaT 20 2) 

. Fira for (tet) =v. fz fara for (féeitat) 

. afvaraed for (gfgaitea) = () ». fade for (faze) 
. apareat (1) fasarga for (weurTgaT) 

rat (a) for (ara) a. TetaTey (=) for (aeirenr) 

. Tem (a) for (dew) x. eea'at (1) (s) for (zeu-az) 


ewsat (1) eaTeSTt A: N 3s UW for (xT) 


. apargat for (wEaTgaT) &. Ewart for (zat) 

. (fro—anreteat 34 sifine 2) (7) 

. AEIgAeSaTaT for (MPABATTATHT) 

. Matagt errery for (araepretrary) 

. Epirey for (xew at) wv. ewat for (xeaT) 

. faye (7) gage (=) for (gq) (fro — saat materee 8) 
. Fat: (7) Gast for (qa) 


aigerony (m) for (sgaem) ¥. emhd: for (ark) 
fag for (fags) q. faeitaay for (fratuas) 
Meee SA RQ for (earara:) 

(fao —aaar act deat 32 2) 


®) R Yaa: for (Yet) os, wa: for (gra: ie 
8. Maeght: (ereate rt) (fro—apneiert 34 afer @) 
a) R. Tw for (gn) &. fear for (Padt) ¥. aziaat: for (ard:) 


he (7) 


eae 


erate afy oaraat ATETTY ait | 
ufeaecat ak a7 asa afearfrqrageny Ween 
eferrarrarg aFaaT A Ta Tet gate 
HAT TAATTA asrar afirat aT watt gon 
emreaneaTatt: wTAT fea aaq AMG t 
onedteratar frat QA FAT Wea ASA: Un Fs ‘N 


PIPED DS ISIN 








(Fro— eet HT FET 3 2) 
arrett (7) () (= oe (aarect) 


. afeaecat (at) aPeaea (=) for (sfereat) 

. Sfearfs gee eq (71) ish aqme for (afeare grat) 
. Beat (=) for (gat) (Fro— saat wataaem ¥o 2) 

. UPcrer aig for (aferecriatg) 

. afearfadigay for (afeafey F474) 


(fro—amrreat ay fe 2) ) (&) x. afe for (af) 
(fro—-gaal HAT EAT 35 3) 
aaaratate (7) wareaet for (ead) 
etaara for (afaare’) 3. Fy for (ZB) 
wart for (AST) (fao— saat eetraererT ¥e @) 


. Haars’ (=) for (afaara’) 


(fro—gaat saatear a5 siffea @) (&} waarat for (waraTe) 


. Sqafeaxy for (gefaxy) 


(fro—euat wae 2e 2) 


. waea (1) HeagaeTaTat for (AeereTATTa:) 


a. Feaaea (7) feaet (5) for (Ferner) 


3. 


(=) 


¥ 
R 
x. 
&. 
t. 


»» 


qavarmg (7) qa for (qarqTwTq) 
(fo —suat aaradeqt ¥R 2) 


. amet teTeaT for (eaeciteratan) (4) %. wed for (eae) 
. Reaea for (feaxer) 3. gana for (qarqzata) 


emearaata for (erecta) x. fraat for (faa®) 
(fao—sirdeat 28 for (35) 

eareearara: for (weareeqeatatt:) 

qaneartg for (qarqwara) ¥. emedtaciat for (sreitrater) 


(age) 


Aaa HATA afsariadt goa mate Fay ’ 
eqel gai aeiteddarfin aa: 0 38 r 
fenfearanrnfegfereaet ATUET TATE | 
nlaETEraTATY aia RYT: UW ¥o 
asta anats afte eaTeTe sift afcet | 
ferret efgram atearta TET een 
AHS faaeag! fat afeetga aya: 
meaigeegaaifen faariafafaca: xen 


Re (a). eae (7) (&) for (eat) (fro — gaat area vo 2) 
(7) %. aifsarfaa aay for (arfsmfaad) 
3. aT aqegt for (Tam) ¥. TTY for (F7z) 
(fro—auart veiteretert ¥3 @) () &. eget for (eget) 
x, (fro — aaqear sifat ¢) 
(&) 3. war agegw for (wasHT) 
¥, ‘adhaay’ aed dfs ar ore | 
¥o. (4) &. eagratat for (erararaTq) (fro ~—xaat amreat ¥2 8) 
. Hetat (1) for (atat) 3. arfeat: for (arfser) 
7) — (fro — gaat aeite dear ¥g 2) 
4) 2. aatariser: for (atarafset) (fro — gaat arent Ye *) 
(fae aya watert ¥t 2) 
(s) 3. seat for (ata) 
YR. (3) ia aearea ¥2 2) 
g. eeterad (7) eehet (e) for (pte) 
% AS (@) (s) for (sF) (x) %. sg for (TEN, FR) 
(a) 2. tuted we for (asetet aa) 2. fe for (as) 
¥. Agra for (fs-7T) ) (fro—gaat arr Fear ¥2 ¢) 
(8) & aba for (rife) 3. ca for (aga ay) 
¥R ot Nola ia ¥3 &) 
faget (7 elias (fraeag_fr) 2. afer for (3 fer) 
‘ qrerga: for (wagra ) () ¥. afeataa: (#) for(afestge) 


(fa ier al ¥g #) (4 a) (fao—aate det ¥3 8) 
_ t. aaa fe for (a3,fx) 





aon 


( ae) 


aferigaiared alaiqed datqaea 

gafavta: afrefeas wreite gars Ren 
wtat afemnfaat fatag areas, 

eater sett fa wet gem gutearday Nee tt 
magetred forecret wurifairstet Brafe | 


gait Ret BHAGEHE maga ve 0 


¥a. (a) (fao—saat madeat ¥¥ 2) 
x. arated (at) Aatqed for (atatqet) 
wade: for (térydea:) 3. sofearcia for (safera7:) 
(1) ¥. ofireferig (=) for (afrdada) 
(fro—auat Seite dear ve 2) 
(=) %. atat for (afat) 
(fao—auat eitedert ¥¥ 3) 
(=) &. Taig re for (afaige?) 
3. Ata: for (TAA) 
vv. (a) ((Fro— gaat waden ¥y 3) 8. diated for (atataz) 
R. arg for (wig) %. eraft (7) (=) (&) for (erafe) 
. 98 (1) (#) (#) for (ae) 
y. aateaeday (7) adtearetay ust for (grlcrea4) 
(fro —aaat eater dear ¥s 8) 
(a) 2. ag for (aig) 
x. Satara for (giieaetag) 
(=) &. state for (Atafad) 
2 wag for (atg) &. eareey for (ware) 
vy. (") (fae —zeat waeeat ¥e 2) 
g. eaarer (7) (S) for (eater) 
R FAsaraet (7) getteratacs for (Geatarstae) 
(a) 3. fiafeary for (Paraf) v. wargafe ven for (gagafe wey) 
(fa—qaat eeite det ve 3) 
(=) 3. farvft for (Prafe) 
2. Saat for (erat) wader ¥e 31 
, (s) 2. facta for (Grafs) 2. geaisaatae’ for (qetetatad) 


( 3a) 


va awa aifenite: sifeacioa “Trey 
qari net afgaia fafeagarai TU eq 
Frfirefer a ufesi anita sited aque \ 
state qenerteey weraata: vou 
siete: ee: eames F2T aT 

ud aa agate ata rah ve 





Yt, (a) &. agat (7) (=) for (awat) (fro—guat wade vo % 1) 


(1) ® 





LAA IN 


aga for (afeaa) 3. 3% (aR) for (sa) 


%. farargayat = yon (&) for (fataaqaqat =) 


(=) 


an 


¥e. (a) 


(fro— gaat wale deat xo 2) 


. was at for (ta aH) 
. fafeargegat a for (fafragagat a) (fro —eeite deat “ee #) 
. aga for (feat) 3. at asar for (sat atezyz) 


(fao— gaat agent ¥s 2) 


. fafirefer firefat a (a7) fafirefer fircfar for (fafirefer) 

. ean Tasfey (1) Use for (whet) 

. Fafa (7) for (arate 3a) 

. wersater: (7) Fararatel: xe (&) for (warsate:) 
. Gaifea: for (qatfea) 9. aTefEy for (Hqetsgtq) 


(fro—za at aay dear Xe 2) 


. teh for (wet) §. Hatshg for (Aqaséi) 
. Faia for (Aatyta’) v. Paaate: for (weraaie’:) 


(fao— seit der ¥q 3) (F) %. aushz for (sifeh) 


. HyUshex for (AAAs) 3. Arata’ for (atatsta’) 


(fao—guat wAdeat Ye #) 
aratearnfcaten: (7) ateftedanfirga: for (areiternfeerae: ) 


. Gaagaraat (4) (1) for (Aa agarays) 
« ee (=) (=) for (ae) 


‘av 9% Ga x (fro—zaat acter xz 2) 
mretteartiga: for (aretterarftaten:) 
> (fro—eaat setae ¥e 2) 


. Starenfaga: for (aeratteranfeafiga:) 


Ye, (7) 


(7) 


xe, (#) 


(7) 


(3) 


( 323 ) 


agro am " argfircia’ PTT | 

ai areaget wet gferte paieat Wee 
fata atettactecmrarcedt eam aaa a 
fyaras anrderad aiat waht Yo tl 


AN an we KX w wd vo 


ea 


(fro—gaat HATA Xo B) 


. TyareNa for (azar) 

. frie for (afatiax) 

. Treage (T) Teaqat for (areeqat) 

. oag (7) afeewe for (afease) 

. 49 for (am) 

. aH for (47) ©. wz for (ae) 

. oat for (mex) ¢. wat Tha: NR for (Faaeat) 


(fao—zuat aaledeat 43 2) 


. Tyarena for (aTyareas) 3. creaqal for (aeaqT) 


¥. afeave for (afease) (Fao — seite deat xo 2) 


al 


Aw ve 


x. 


an 


oc 


x wv 


afrarat for (efaziazt) 
fadtat ie — waicaa Gat oftet afere acai: 1 
for 


wal Tee wet Uferse Haat 


. wat (7) () for (cert) (fro—zaat wader 4X 2) 
: Sahay (earre?) 3. fazmqea® (m7) (= es). 


aaarTavaay (7) aRRATTAAAAT WaT XVI for (ABET 
wavaat waft yon) 

grea for (Tx) 

wafa (&) for (astfa) 

(fro—saat atneteat YY 2) 


. TaaTeeat for ( eeararwest) 2. seq for (#4) 
Ra for (ake) 3. fgarerg for (fazed) 


(fao—avitnaeat 42 2) 


. sea for (=) 


great for (q1<e) 9. waft 
amnman for (amEtTAT) 5. arat for (aiat) 





ug. (8) 


( 2 ) 


faz zafitat Get at am ated mat att | 
era TREE ATURE 
siredtafenhatia feraa i gARATY | 
grace wfiaer arf wah erie et 


(fro—auat water X2 &) 
g. saee for (set) (sr) ‘aea’ Gea F 1 
2. ae (7) (F) for (are) 
3. at (7) (a) for (azar) 

gar (7) (a) for (ayq) 


(tT) X. eafaat at for (<afirar ac) 


(= 


) 


(2) 


42. (4) 


(rt). 


(fro—zaat acta eect ¥Y 2) 


t. cere for (dreary) 
(fao—aeite went 42 af 3) 


g. fireat for (ea) 
3 ae BT 
&. wat (for) Tar 
¥. agama for (#zaTA) 
9. Hed aT for (Hz aT) 
(fro—aaat an eet 43 3) 
g. wifes a (a) anfaftaerta for (nfafin) 
2. Fag (S) HATE for (way) 


(fto—zaat eta dem ug 8) 


(=) % afenfift (=) for (aforfifi) 


(roan Feat 4a. aif 2) 


fe) *. werd for (farts) 


Ms Bate for (sae) 


( ax ) 
masa fanaerata arene eae i 
meaa giant aetoaraeararary x3 
3 . * 
aft wart AaTEATA: (QR at Seay AAT) 
atfaat: SAT: 





43. (a) — (fao—guat wader uv afer 2) 
g. a (7) (=) (S) for Fa) 2. Taare (7) for (aerate) 
3. aft sraegefaaia aearearat arfaafraa: (a) for (afa at ve 
fergit aarearat atfae:) 


(t) ¥. atet for (aT) = -¥. ater for (fea) 
(fro—gaat site wear x§ 3) 


(a) 2. wemeaea for (serra) 
(fro—zaat witaaeat YY afea 2) 
3. aft aaegefagia darearat afafran: for (afr wear 
HAaTEMTa: (2X AEAATATT: ) 


(=) & wesat for (waear) =—-&. waeeIeT for (erzaTeR) 


9, Tera for (aeteta) 
3. fe marege faaret aearearat are arfaertsearn: for (aft aar- 


We AATEATA:) 


( 328 ) 


HA AACA AT 
aaa: 

attare mraframeaiz wy araafzaan: | 
fararerea THOMA fgarig ATATAT Ne 
ara eitewemreterernt Terai: \ 
wit gaqagiusiag tt eiteea NIU 

grad fryaaareagieans fern: 
tafafa we eR cea firarsaiatg 3 
maeN aA TTT TETRTATE qae fafeat: 
aat ATT San safe Geese i ¥ 


PPL PLP LLLP A 


2. (%) &. eRaeat (a) aeaear (s) for (ame) 
. arenferaa (1) (&) for (Arafat) 
(t) 3. aq for (TH) oy. afgaratg for (afeartz) 
(a) &. attanser for (atta) 
2. ATatfearaeaizy for (arafeqaeatzar) ¥. Ferar for (feerar:) 
2. (8) &. aiearat (1) rere for (arate) 
y ATH: (T) t) () for (ATA) 
%. eaartisa (a) denagreres for (atagrerr) 
(7) ¥. gaa sgfit: (&) for (gaxergfy) 
(3) %. arate for (were) ¥. gaargfe for (serergfir) 
(¥) % Arathi for (aratft) 3. deragrttss for (ajagriiss) 
a (8) 8. grad (a) aa ae for (grazed) 2 aat for (faa) 
3. atfaa: for (arra:) 
(1), sterifate for (ererfafa) 
(3) 2. grat (=) for (grant) y. fagwea for (fageaz) 
y. aetafirdh (&) for (werefaait) 
%. (8) &. aaaat (m1) for (weer a7) 
MAGIA (T) TETEGATA for (werewraTe) 3. Hea: (mt) for (I) 
(@) ¥. svafes for (sTafeaet) YX. TT: YI for (amar) 
(%) &. amet for (wre), mategTaTe for (warenrara) 
(F) % marae for (weet at) 3. mepTaTA for (aemraTe) 
3. STATATATERTT: for (araraaTaeaT) YX. aT for (ara) 


{ 3 ) 


waraaradieng gata eaRTET fear 
TeTTeTENTETEH gefaera wagieary ux 
ATGET frata aver: STE a l 
Behe aera ager AMAT Ng 

at at aft AEUIEAT: we qatar = 
afaraara fer ant eet aT non 
qeara qt: FH ATTA efrect ATT 
& Bra faded aexmuita Faq Ws 0 





2. Hagatary (1) (=) for (qagfeara) 
%. galat for (afgarq) 


2. freada (7) freafzer for (frat) 

R. aearagr (a) for (arerarrgr) 

agered (1) are erat for (areas) 

. frsata for (frat) 

¥. araaneag for (TTTARA) 

2. feeafter for (frata) arerreagt for (atgraragr) 


uraft (at) (&) for (ft) 

afirada (7) fafircrerat (§) for (afrcataet) 
maT: (F) (FH TETA 

zat for (afi) 

weeds: for (wRTTETa:) 

aaant for (@3a-m:) | 
marquise: for (aqreiteat:) —&, TEE for (ae) 


“wo 


PEO ES ee ae ee 


a. atdacd (7) defeaq (&) for (fade) 

R. may’ oH Teett Then Taree (mT) wet: (&) for (Fat) 
a. Hutay’ aH gat tf saree (7) (=) 

Soy Te tle aT TIT Tey (T) (F) 

¢ ated (F) for (fetaz) 

Ys wae for (IT Us Ul) 


x 


to. 


8 
RR. 





( ts ) 


saree ahieaee Sai OATETE ' 
aaat ama alfa auigateasan arena wen 
caeTT ga fee ma SITES Bat SEAT 
favarqeata aan afar Ut SiG BATA: UW go 
y eareigeta qa HH coTatawH yl Tay | 
ate SAUeTyRUT ferferqeraret aa Baa: NR 
a Raeraerraerera EE: aafanrenta \ 
srattratemntuntarenratesattirn: TeceL 
Sfo He et ATATEMTA: (RR sea AATA:) 


WSs 





PL LM PP AL ddl tf 


sfars (=) for (atfire) 3. afer (a) (=) (x) for (&Fx) 
. gfeatt (nt) (=) for (ater) 

, eraifae: (m) (@) (&) for (eritfen:) 

. afa’ & aared az aa gt 

. ot Aaa: for (aaam:) 


%. Teche At SF areas Ad ‘gene’ (a) iy eA 
2 gat (Tt) () (&) for (zt) 2. ce (#) for a 
¥. gut (7) (&) for (gat) 4. eet (7) (A) (¥) for (37 
(t) & eave: (&) for (aare) ©. feast . ful 
cs. fara: for (facar) g. ateea for (fier) 
(3) 3. @e y ga . feasar for (fersaar) 
(4) ¥. gar () (=) (&) for (aa) 
Q. Feat (7) fava (F) for (fervar) 
R. amrataegar (1) (4) for (caraiazgar) 
%. gat (1) Zavaet for (gare) 
(7) ¥. garg afrrat (=) for (wareferect) 
(=) % fava for (feasat) ¥. gare for (gare) 
(f) & oe for (earataegat) ¥. gata for (gar) 
(3) &. ates for (Frere) (=) 2. sitsarg for (sreez) 
(a) &. a 
R 
% 
¥ 
q 


(") 


(a). sf 8 aay ae gad 


_ ©). 3. mratereefircd for (sratfrefemtig), 


( are) 


AA AAA ATA 


agtaar: 


aeaeeintar oferd etaret aifrat faa AAT I 
viesfradarenatat MATA UN 
PTTATSIAT AAT ATERLEA ATELY | 
usaateetteaa FETHTT Ferree Tae 
mataga: aay gfe as aay & UTA: | 
UCATATAIST: fear TATAATAT: 1 
afe fret: FrarreTeRT atari Neer | 
BRIE: qaeat framerate TET WS UI 

wa cert FEAH MYATT: TH | 


gree Ba: arafimeree A: x 1 





-_— 
au) 
~~ 


Fr oct 
es 


aaa @ 
_—~— 


ae ee et 
CREE) 


“a a 
— 


we DO DD ro aw KM a ro MM HO AS Oo 


PLLAL ISS LI LS 


. firth (a) afi for (strat) (=). efit for (#Pat) 


» arts (1) grag grrfeearg for (qroqrreaar) 
. ferzerdarary (7) (&) for (Ferezerq) 


grams for (qrett) 2. ferzaré for (farearst) 
gurfeecat for (qureeat) 3. aTravat for (arrarai) 


gfe for (afar) 2. aa: (=) for (zr) 


. waa for (Taya) ¥. TaaTeAT for (TAA) 

. afass for (afase) 2. faefaat for (are) 

. wea: for (Arrat:) 

. Fagaearat (7) (=) for (fagaerat) 

. fearat: (=) for (feara) 3. ante for (aT: 

. fare we: for (frre aat:) 8. fagaeretant for (Fagaersiaat) 


aartarrfys (1) carterafigas for (wararrfray) 


. faetat tha: (7) (a) for (faegae ster) 
 waraafge for (aerreatfge) 3. Harwet for (EzTATe) 
. at cde for (weaTET) ¥. Tae for (Fa: Gra) 


2, Feaegeat ae: for (Feregat Ter) 


( are) 


dathiqara dae dare agen: ' 
ag ferafereret data: werent: eM 

att ares ait eae a TAIT 1 
sarertige avian: sata: vvotr ON 
reugetiatt: avarrartaatie l 
Frareiat at froggy uau 

afinaa fea mer ear or vet 
raTATel faceted a fafa wate 





PDL A OE 


&. (A). arg weaTa: for (aaiteqa:) (a) aratt for (wait) 


“a 


ee 


a, 
ze 
—— 


—_ 
P| 


~~ 


Al 


— 


— — 


“os aM OT a ro em a PE Ea 


(fao—-aet sam Ties ware) 


. fafa: (Tt) (a) (¥) for (Zafer) 
. dared for (aad) ¥. areme for (arearat) 


reara: & att afte area (F) 


. meqraT: for (eaa:) 

. Brat for (Stat) %. wal for (wet) 

. Faremd: for (wereara:) 

. FT: for (FTA) %. Frage for (FareazA:) 
. Pea: for (ataa:) ¥. yo” Sear yer BI 

. Ararafeafres for (ataraa’srferat ) 

. Safire for (tara) 

. agH TTT: for (sae: THTe:) 


fasited (it) factted: for (fatiet) 
wa (at) Fat (F) for (gat) (7) 3. aren: (¥) for (war) 
egefeata: (&) for (egefrard:) x. afar for (afore) 
maa (&) for (a) (=) ¥. eaafige for (asmmfirer) 
fasited for (fated) 2. att for (wat) 
ferstrel for (fafiret) 


. ferfeaetist (&) for (Ferfiaita) (a). faa for (faz) 


wal for (wrat) (B) ¥. BH for (FA) 


2. fafearal for (fra’ara?) &. adtsemi for (actemt) 
x. femafreatat for (feraearatat) 


( 3x) 


fafartranfearg feenfeser & ater: | 
dartetananfeata aretaiteeegfine: Nenu 
Sagat Tat Testa feratgasey | 
faye aa fare THEA TATSAT tt 23 
fret am aa aren faftanreay fer: | 
SAAT sitet: ratararfeferarea Tera 
gated faaty rafirtercen ma stat | 

farsa RET ay ava ada Sa 1 all 
Feereerreag NEN 

manta eientat a g9 NN 


82. (F) &. wagatgar: area: for (ferzar & ate) 
2. taretteafiat for (Taraitetat) R. Atea: for (att) 
83. (&) t. (Pao—eza eaten ar sacred — ey Ff eeite at gate at 2) 
Paya aa farm TIIEAISTT TAT | 
farerga dgcer waar fafaat yeis Ty fee Nt 
for 
(aegat ware cael feratteraey | 
fagal aca frac’ waeareaeay 23 U1) 
gv. (&) (fro—ae ate ar gate, 23 at ate aT Tae HT 8) 
¢. farnatya for (fara) 
2. ager for (aye) 
wu. (=) &. Set for (Stet) «2. Fret for (Frat) 
3. aaeadt for (waster) = ¥. deren for (7) 
ve. (5) ¢. Pracmraeeginafate farar gardarariry | 
misarastht sary aT TAT TAT 1 ke 
for 
(Famerraeag: 11 8% 1) 
2. TaMaMeHreaceafanraaregaiapree4: | 
aafaad gard Hrargairs wrTT UW fe Ul 
for 


(watra deatater 11 ts 11) 





( are) 


eqreattaitat afag fren carat met ferent 
TAHATT GMT FF fa aa mean 95 It 
rerggafarated ag aid wa ani Ll 

farat yfermet eaT eregetterncttete TE CEL 
wiaterereaat efrafesitga: eae a | 
watiaataet atenee: egerairay NRoN 

ay FAPTTTTA aarqaaivs weet | 
“fefefetompa: weere 8 a HAA NE 
areafararet WRN 

sretrazfaran 1 33 0 





LLL PPL LLL LL LLL LPL PDI 


ws. (=) &. cameaiaitay for (eaicaiata) 


2. fegar for (fegar) 3. M: for (7t:) 
¥, ‘aay’ 9S TAS 

28. (8). faa gad for (aaa) 
2. feaa! set ae se rae Ife aT AAT 
a. wHUfEh for (ARs) 

Qo. (&) g. clrager faatad gar ete for (<frafenitga: eae) 
Q. oat ea’ oe eee of aT ota BA 
3. taal Foret for (waft) —-¥, aig for (arez ) 
4, ead for (sae:) 

Rt. (F) &. Marere for (wR) «—-R. H for (71) 
% faayt ares for (fefafefa gaya: seerefgt) 
¥. Far ae for (aay) 

2. (F) 0. aah Tafe: earercmfvar: we fre | 


TET ofeeya yearns Bfear: 1-22 


for 
(arafearardtfit 11 32 1) 
= wraherartht wg fren weaagar way | 
ares wares fear: spares fear 1 83 
. ‘for 
(wait aeafercat: 1 23 N) 


( 3% ) 


eae SWATH: newu 
‘fareren ait fara: 0 2K 

af fareafrare: u 
ai GE: Redstone FATT WERE U REM TU 
stafaty ateaafgfratartgie: UOEMS MIU RN 
aria: areTfath: meat higariary | 
afernfemteagehatataty at vata geratterq V9 UI 
eat Reg order TTETETTY \ 
Tfarat Feat a: guiftaata TWIT TS Us 





B. (&) t. taere ania: eaaghraitina: Ga att: | 


bac 


RY. 


5. 


() 


R 


TaTey ofseqa afratirarirs afesr ut VY ul 
for 
(sae Ena: UY U1) 
2. SAP GHAT ATT: STATA STATA HT | 
THs saTeteaMaTaNTT fafrawarg UR. 
for 
(xfasexattfacat: 11 24 11) 
g. aaETaTUT THAT for (friar) 
2. fata ft for (fata at) 3. weafighr for (waafgfa) 
¥, afaag for (afrargie:) 
g. aferar fart: tH: Seafghagaresary 
for 
(afardtfad: vofate: veafgfrgartarg |) 
3. fetateageeafretad for (frrtsagefatatety g) 
Oe a RP Re OR e+ 
¥, aafrereereat: for (TAAAT TTT) 
4, 4a: for (42:) 
&. FATT WaT FEU Ys I 
for 
(aT UAT FE UW Ys M1) 


= 
® 


( a5 ) 


aetfeataat @ a fanaa array fear 1 
aghrcrataet: ae, wea get yt aT eu 
Tat grenfuataati: aficfarfa: aafreratata: | 
afer ae cafeteria Nou 
a aa gpatteantefig ate gt 1 

waa:  @aag a renee UE: NIV 
walfer ear mmreeagttigay afe 1 
cet cement gsrereceret: TNIV 
are Reegtch ageresige: wert Fa: | 
afaat whasy at far: earreTA ate: 33 
ageIETt fra genera at fareft farre: | 
eaeigeraat TAA waite BATA Nay 








CC Mh 3. tft for (<a) 
% weqeies for (ways) ¥. gq for (UR) 
a. ‘afefrha: ce yar eI 2. gar for (ger) 
3. Wiefeafafeafand for (<acfafafafawd) 

¥. Uf: Ro UN for THN Ron 

Q. TIT AaAE: for (aT aE Tees) 

%. tarfeaPa: for (wearfeafy) 3. eater for (<azer) 
¥. gat: for (gam) y, “At? ge ae 8 
Re Fs TT ALU for (a: FTA: Re MN) 

g. maa: for (sate) 2. Faguie for (Ferg ef) 
2. sat for (sate) 

X. FETT: eyRt for (sercan: =) 

X. wergfinet for (farting) —-. itg’a: for (gaz) 
3. Gea: for (firca:) 

g 


. Sfeegfiga: for (faaeart) 2, for (aeargat 
3. Sfergfrre: for oe 


_, % Rge Fee for (RgaTe) 
Se & Beat for (3a) 


( ar) 


We TENTAT Faeyr afertateat 
mraigeget a egefeara seat wan Rot 
a0g aie aaa fatruererrafeagt ean: 
afar ailageagareh MATTER Wega 
ama senitefegtct feaerea aisaiea t 
age muaeaeanta afer gaat Naz U 

wa fa anit tered cataract ra \ 
arafsatesiisa dereararagian: ean 


ea eapadiseigagiagigaa x4 





U: (7) aavag for (age 


feat ) faata:(#) for nora wat (7) (=) (=) for (set) 
. Tar for (waraay) ¥. aa: for (ag) 

. eau: for (eT), (F) &. faster for meee 
. Wye for (Wwe) 2. aHesR for Orig) 

aaa: for (afaa:) ¥. ageaet for (agraTa) 

. gatsat (=) for (garat), (7) §. fatrreraTg for (ferrets) 
. agearamatsat for (agearssaret ) . 

. TGF for (aay) v. TelfeaA: for (welenaAT:) 


aiaitaseat (7) aatrageat for (araeitteat) 


. fzgfet for (wfewfet) 3. feacer ashe for (feraea astra) 
. waaay (aT) FereTeTaft for (eracasaTf) 
. a: (Tt) () for (&:), (@) ¢. ATT for (arf) 
. tH @ for (Feat) 2. Fefer for (wfesfer) 
. aferaer for (ferter) ¥. eaafe aetafit for (aerrcrearft) 
. waren (1) gare for (atarat eT 
mrataateet 


Yt (at) artrareart for later) 
agfaz: (7) for (agra) 
(fro—aet aafagae NM NaI Ug set ze) 
Trareet #4 for (waey ez) 
eftadt for (fiend?) 2. aratateata for (aratealaatst) 


. agfaa: (=) for (aafae:) (=) 2. trarget et for (water ea) 


éraat for (frat) x. arate for (aaa) 
(fro+efs Ataerart faeugareagatatas wangefrarc 
amemaragiaafaas: areaTATAG + ) 


( 332 ) 


arfgel agarETe ateit aarti a feet 

a errata THE fargtat raat wal Ney ry 
featera a WEE ATA AeTAT AMY AAA | 
ree aT et me TTA nen 


ef oft rarer fray aa waqafazhad arar- 


epefrard SATE: 
wel yea feata: SAT: tt 





LLLP LAL NIE 


ey. (&) 8. faa: (a) for (fafza:) > fergie: (=) for (frat) 


3. Wer: for (war) (7) rH ag seta fsa aa TI 
(=) 3. 7H: for (7a) ¥, mae—t for (2%) 
(=) wite ogueer 21 
UX. (7%) &. dave’ for (warary’) 2. (a) +a+ 
3. arated | BT for (arereqHz) ¥. Pree for (Prearart) 
4%. AE for (we) 
& 


. atafeane—agirafre: eared eftrarqeergeit 


WORE 
frata: | wafeatactontt | wereig’ garcrat: 1 Reco TAT 
RATES UT YT TARA | Roo, genet fr 2 aaHe Y gt 
warfredt 1 wary fagag fafa it gddtteafafa eX gets 
Tae ayy at eR The ¢ Feng ST TTRUTEhTy 


Beat TAU dag CARY at orequafe v aad wt 


fafad wagrareder tarat areceq weifrsta: | ae aN 


‘ar H ag atte aif wet St (e) eats rye BI 

aafratoae: wares Arenpagal xeegefrate: | wefeate- 
Front erereigy Gaara LQooo meMTEMTETTT UT YT TAA 
Roo aead fr | eras X at wefinet wags Pegag Haha 2 


et aeteatafiy tx get a rather at, RR ad ciate 2 


| ART ore Soaeg | y wea yag tt at I for 
* (rege feats: ware) 


( az) 


AA AATAHAT caTAAMIGaaTEAI: 


Us Ta SY aA 


derarige’ deat qafataar are: | 
farehalightiand catisa: HAT 2 

aa e: afar avo fant fra: ae: | 
meme: uirfaerniramgtae ATAT EZ! UR 
eater atat are eat ara We 1 
afeanfan waarafacatet wage ne zu 

BATT eae: aerTH EAST aait aM: | 

asta: aire fefracateat frafert yuu 
Baraat afearg frets fafa \ 
weqrfanragaa aaate welt aT UY 





. (%) &. aa: for (at) 2. fasatsH for (Prens) 
. (8) 8. daragiise: sfearfsdt afeaga aaa: | 


for 
anras aye: Uftt Wvo fram fra: waAag: | 
. meqaarfar fagtforarfadiseafrearan: a1 2 
for 


aearifa: afafasaarircctretia Ara ey 


ws 


. (S) %. Bam: for (aes) 2 Ye: for (gz) 
3, wetfeat for (afemfen) ¥. cfasrat for (wart) 
y. waeatfa: 1 3 ut for (wage) 113 


. (&) & Tar for (get) 2. ayer for (wten) 
3. atacafest for (fafiucrafesr) 


a. faatetg for (Prater) 2. fafersqaart: for fafa) 
a. dararaa for (AaeTH) —-¥. aeET for (wat) 
x, & for (aT) 


( ae) 


area may fe: ga feet: BHAT: | 
aratergat agar faraee: Moret: Bay gu 
aorferrag find e aa ferteargerten 
after: aga a 8a CAAT MN 
VISA wa feet ofertea after 

By BT garatearersa ferfasa& are: Ven 
an werenfatarafarrattat afeeairare 
Ree fertgae afeanet adtagonfiat wen 
ooo areatere Vara: ATE er: TEATY | 
aarenfer co Tet aeaerate Aten afarerat: t go Nt 
fafaratt carer cfarfetomeraferer: arate | 
fafertr arfestet wet ed atten: ez: en 





& (F) %. ATATTY for (ATTA) 2. Fareatga: for (ferarar:) 
3. avatg for (arate) 
¥. ¥. Paarentret fae: for (fare: Rare) 
g. (©) tae for (ges), for (ave) 
2. aft for (xfz%) ¥. & for (at) 
cs. (&) %. gata for (garat) 
& (=) t. wfaanet for (afgame) 2, find for (Fret) 
to, (&) %. Seat for (saat) 
X. TEA Ast for (arf so aret) 
—0n. (8) t fart for (fafaat) anita for (ait) 


3. haar eater for (xfafroorrateaer) 

¥. wait waft meq: for (aeftrez) 

Are sf —fretareer atenfeafa derrarfeat: teary | 
. for 


fafrstenfeata ated efter: x: 1 





( are ) 


acreteaageet TU: afatenfue og Ea 1 
feefenet waeafereaTet fara apafeeat: 1 3y 1 
fata afara: qarergataa aera ta: 
erent ae caafaceagt aeyHt Az: Wen 
dziait reat WAAL: aria: aAaea | 
waa ag eTemTATEAATEME: go U 
cage mea gwen alee FT mat | 
fiqaia wt ating farfire: optima: Nas 
sagas Fayurefasra Hat ferent: | 
wana TettgTA atreraeren: URN 
TEATY atearReTect ea aviadiege Fea 
mTTaTARAR: Tae maa? HATA UW ¥o tt 





. Bat for (afer) 2. farafenct for (faerfert) 
. fereat: for (farcar) 
. eagreTiage: for (Yareagzs) 
. farsa qa erg for (fataaeqa 2:) 
. ea: for (ag:) 
. Waar for (satat) «—«-.. IgHTeTeaTSsqT for (agateraTaTg) 
. Wag we for (qaagareT:) 
. gat for (Hat) R TTT for (GrTyAUT) 
. fagat for (7at:) ¥. fia fe for (frqata) 
. Torftafartitar for (gatPratiran:) 
cafe: for (epfsra: ) 
Paren fragt <faren Geren Teetferca4n: | 
WIHT cai eareaearaTETT | Fk I 
for 
saarariiares Paerefaaras Hate fear: | 
sigma arya afteiteatg alarmed: 11 Be 
. qeadt for (deed) 2, aeat for (rat) 
_ mraedg for (wratHz) ¥. aTauETy for (weT7Z ) 


wo a 3c ww ro I Oo BD wo a 
. * 


avo 


( 22° ) 


THI fear sisiieaefaaattrareaset 1 
ana aeHat guna waa PAB: It ek 
anfigeanivat eaaga al first y 
asrnfatr amfegen ae FAT U YR 
fastata afer ae aTeg ARTI aay I 
seman fasted raft sfermnid WZ 
feat Rrra yt mara fast act ' 

meray waaeTea woe TS nee nt 

faa agit farafrenfivaradtamts maT | 
weds faratret cfza: Tet wet wafa vy nt 








%y. (&) &. cena for (wera) «8. Prrarfiz for (fearrafi) 
¥, frafara (eRedexy) for (arefraaitfaarea BA) 


y. meng ater Gert dega: for (aaat aegay) 

&. ‘agwa’ Te ZI es! 

¥2. (&) %. Sed for (Fz) R. Parte for (Pratt) 
3. anegga for (7 Zea) ¥, fre: for (frst) 
u, wereefas for (seTafate) 
&. faster for (fariter) ww. BAT for (@e) 
&. fas: for (war) 

v3. (&) &. qfge for (afr) 2. et for (ere) 
2. wTeeyga for (args) = ¥. ATE Ty for (waaay) 
x. faeit for (fat) &. Fad for (fas) 
y. Haq for (Fa) 

wy, (%) %. Frere for (freata) fare for (free) 
R. Taarata for (at sere) 
3. farsa for (fare) ¥, TMay for (rom) 
X, atgery for (ate7y) 

vi, (s) 3. sade for (wat) |. fared fig for (faxafesyfinrra) 


oa Wega faererr: for (neitgarfa sTaT@) 





( 332 ) 


AYATAitfa — WEAVE | YO 1 La 1 AR! Vo lFoGl 
FRE UAE 1 REEL BYR L RET L Qos tot 

(Ate —Rarfga ay we gu F 1) 

FATT — 33 1 FEL ESL LIT L YY L YW | LEW I Qo t Yow 
12g lb QUSI QoVIBRIONU 

TA— 5 1 BE LYO 1 ELS LEE LEO Lae SY LOI XSI 
RELL ON 

TRE—Yo Yoo | QXo | RAE L AVE L REEL RT | BR¥oo | 
BIS | You | Ro | go] oll 

MALU VAR RS LAE LYE HS EEL YR LEY EROI 
eel gIoN 
BATT 39 aTTATSTAT Qwy LTT Y | WAT OE LAA 
TAT 3 HAT: un ReaTyfewse: u eHeTs fF Iq TAI 
32 AY s TAT V0 1 

Rear faratet went we CATT AT 1 

aamaugente atfeae area: YE 

ag aay TAT: AACA: AYTATART: | 

TETAS TWN TATA TAT: Uv Ul 


LP 


(S) &. eo for (Reg)  —-% Bok for (332) 3. ¥a (¥8) 

¥. 34 for (3%) 4X. 2@ for (Re) 

%&. (&) 8. frome vara for (fremnaafaart) 
Q. et for (Het) 3. 78g aT for (a2) 
%, SEO for (eyed) 
4. SmaE for (AAT) —-& Ree for (a) 
is, Gafas for (gafe) 
5. ‘afeay’ We Gate | 

Vo. (&) %. Tyra Tera warfare | Me 1 

. for 


(AQTAMATTTATSS Tea LITA TAT: NN se tt) 


MALIA 


( aar) 


aagenierye carafe fay: t 
agraant ayfea THEN HoTATTEATAT €y: vs 
TUATAT: TLHTAT agtarcraatan NTTTHT: 
amt faqearriat TeTTaRRT: HART uve ul 
qaren aaferer sqagaaregen farryza: | 
gerfamt RTT RATT ATATETT: Yoh 
geen: SANT: meat TeTAT TATAT | 
eet BORLA: ATE AAA: AYAAT: URL 
FRET crareaaard afte: At 
aamfegaie: eget watcafengy: Teecay 

aT: aviefa fererit gaya: aver fererrereat: | 
attire TATA: FTAA: yaatgay: Ww x3 u 








OAS 


ve, (&) 8. Marq were fastens: | 


we. 


Xf. 


XR. 


Oe 


(3) 


for 
(agra teeerert fees ferret: 1) 
2. agrgaar ayfeat awe Heetterfrer: a vs 
for 
Tereragieal waar gaaletser ey: Ye 
wafer for (wart) 


g. 

t. afrerqaes for (gxferput:) | 

% WER for (ve) 3. Tarst for (caret) 
¥. @rgrer for (ais) \. Berra: for (ype) 
g. are’ Te ET SI 

2. Waa: fives: for (areas freer: 
3. WaT for (azT) 

g. Udafaea: for (adafafrrat) 

2. TMTeTeaseEin: for (agayta: Te frarqeat:) 
TTT: for (afer arate) 

OY. SOUT: for (SrA) 


( 333) 


RATT APRA gfisacrr: ] 
merafarettgerarat faaeatrst: gafeyeh Te ca 
TET aren THT: arrereghraasa: ’ 
wateMaTRaTTTSTT eaaigey: WAU 
eae AATAT TAA: TOUT cfaeat: | 
sreea TATE eae wage uw yen 

ETT AUTfSTAT: AT: TSHTTA TIT: KAT: | 
aemmryfenaeT: CATH GTEAAAT (AKA: 1 Wo 
aay aera yf aaragarrfasan ea | 
aeanennfatragezamart TATU NYS 


uv. () &. aitsegfr for (aafir) 2. TU: for (TA) 


xX. (F) 


ug. (F) 


yo. (F) & 


us. (F) 2 


g 
g 
& 
g 
g 


. feat: for (aat:) 2. HTT for (Era) 

.afor (a) « -¥. wader for (water). eT ET A 
maga: for (TATT ATT) 9. Ysarat for (Tszat) 

. Sayan: for (Gaqat) «=—«-.s SSaTAeT for (WARS) 

. STTUT 39 gar WY AT XY TMs & AT VT 
3 wT WME 


for 

( saat agra eantfaat waghe: 1 ¥en ) 

meq yfnean: Oy: VS fe Re TET: FR Gag 5 THT °¢ fare: 
for 

(Soy Trea: TT: VSHIAT OT HAT: |) 


. waafvaryio: caratagarytes: TT Mt Kw Ul 


for 
(rerrafeart uepirardeen frre: 1 Xe 1) 
read aareHa YS HaTMG CATA ITA A 

for 


(aaege de TUT yfe waragartfasarery |) 


. reais ay was ater AAT RS 


for 


(aeaacnafafaggira ae grat ag NYS 1) 


(aa) 


“i free aitenfe: aaa eras | 
efferent whardrafastiong vi ve 
eral aimfaat agent fasataeat are: | 
ar: we Tanna afrantg thera aw Gon 
yaa wafad g aR TF a Hy weaT I 
idee fad amteaey get coer ge 
wafaaal ¢2 wear favarag uu 63 Nt 


PDAAIPPLPSS LIS LLLP PS LLLP ALDL PL PLLA OP LDS 
ye. (F) &. frermata art: eRe favarel cava wet me: aihere 
fi 


or 
(afagat afterrfa: yO aerate Ge 1) 
y. ART wateeafeat Fl fafa fasat yor: 1 Ke 


(ara fastener Fatwa ae W¥e tt) 
Ro. (8) 2. aramid slog aw 


(aad pein anion 1) 
% waft gz ae TSGe afm ge 
‘or 


(are: eearmittataatfaat za 1) go 11) 
He—(aaferaiefrree ears arate qesareifarery) 
QL. (5) %. wafraat eue site 9 frrwr, . 
PARE QL AT s aT aT Lo frgan: | 
fagacay fan: So ona a Wee ul 
or 
we Ue vated F wHe Ges TATA EAT | 
aid wet Prod aetae feat srert i eon 
(s) we—ensaraer eatered? 1 
RR. (F) &. sat ee egeny gear ay Teaeretf | 
Se aaa NTS FaMCRTT Gee (CA 


(afeerat 11 &8 iy . 
&3. (F) . afead oretat ofa. faatterreccara wed a) 
spanned Os gee EH TR 1 G3 


(ae from 4 42) 





( 33x ) 


gaara ey wifemefecata: uu ey it 
fasat faqagrar eraeaafa faurfnarsarcay | 
watt Fred area Treraarfgraaeaifa: nae U 
mieraratt Paoierrxereraa: sifadferaaren: | 
we fag: Saat riveree BTA 1 GN 
reatenarra aat arsat faa frarfirang €aTq | 
ferzencitaTen wat fasaat eat PU: Was 





ay, 


RK. 


arent fanfeamis warrarg wala 3gco EAHA: | 
MUGISETAY TATA TAT TTT 1 YU 
for 
(TaartrzeaT i ey u) 
FATA AHA TTS SAT TTT 
area oem fagtat feag am ufaferarse: 1 e¥ Ul 


for 
(wifrarenfacarem: 1 &¥ 1) 
(5) ¢. frtararyfivar yfafere frase sar 
asear faasa aed faatter areaiferat waft u ge ul 
for 
(fasat fagagrr araecafa frarfrareatery | 
wet frat areat ataaarferncceifa: 1 <& 11) 


. (&) &. far gre 


2. marge: for (zerarqa:)’ 3. aes for (aitferd) 
%, faraerat for (feazerar:) YU, AMSAT: BATT UW FOU 
for 
(aarerers SUT 1 GO I) 
(mrraer ofa faatrracrareettfret fare aT | 
argfaget: srrggarat: sfrerter ui) 
wa IWS: Bg: 


. (8) 2. feaafaanfirar saraq for (ferare fenfaarg arg) 


Q. aye: for (wT) 3. eaTAaT for (eaTaaT) 

¥, fravaracy for (frsaar) 
(seqfivat rater atest ferarsenfraT eee | . 
 fararaalgiscarran Pawar wet FA URS) WA Te: ATG: 


( 33% ) 


free BUTT fact faa NATTA BACT TF: t 
Lame fates’ ReameROTae: AAT: 1 GE 
SOTA AI oo AUTAAA AAA wg | 
fafaaera men ferratfaregeraay T wR uN 
EwAHAEA arqargett ae raareren: ' 
earaaerfirater fareygararyaga: i oz 
mat: oag ua ea st aaa fegra: wars: | 
afteeg 1g: v1 cafe ait aaq eciss TT TT vee TAA | 
BaATAT | aaa At | ANAT 1 AAT Whe go Fa, 
aaa sit carey ared  fafearnfer 1 tat geared t 
GSAT TAT FATA THAT TAT TATTLE | TY POLITE 1 
atfeat Geto 1 eerie 1 aa fxite 1 conf 1 siteeg 

gfe wareaisd aa: | 





G8. (F) &. faramaay for (farzaaaigey) 2. Prasarggt for (fava) 
a. free’ Tz TTS | 
¥. TaUTge for (sarge) 4. Serra: for (Fara) 


oo, (S) ¢. saraostt Ae gfne waft: TayEET | 
seria yaauss Ayarhe wert ATTA 1 9° 1 for 
(sara eta TF po 11) 
sfe fofareafernrearfcsfaal waraeTt | 
arecaearatat afercitsfregerte: 1 0 11 for 
(arTAay AAT 1 z 11) 


2. 0% AY Tea aT ees 8 sifine Fo oTAT ges Afar 
wr. (¥) Tae wile Ae wR FI . 
. araared ferferray ] err erearg or rere ferry | oe fara 
feat tareeren efe ferferrafer oF 9 1 
ay _ sferreyarifet for (wadtertrs ft) 8. for (a) 
oR bafta agrpraet errandatareaa: MATT: Ne 


; 











MereraaAT TATA TT 
g 

ara AT AqITy QR AEANT: THAT: 
AUETT PAT: we aaais’ dara 
ATTA FAT: BQ waa warfraty 
PTAA HATTA BQ HATTA WA 
THTAM: TTT Qe ATTA aeareafealt: 
WATTS LTTAY Rod ARABATAATTAT ET 
measarar fafrraraty 0% TRATAAT aBATAT 
WAST AFT APT oe WaT aaatfeay 
marrrqarery Ro Wea faatraaT 
aragfafegadta: Yo weaszarfsaty: Har 
waa Ta Qo wagaafag ae 
HAT HITS IT Ik WTAAHA: Tag 
PTATATU TST wee HIST ITA AT 
mifatafaaaafe ee meat ey: 
ait: we: fasts: Re TERT YL IAT 
TA AAT FAHY SE UIC ECE IC 
moat HITAH 320 «Malaraaia seat 
gaat frasrarfe Bay aagTTafEaT 
ufaafeatferateatty: Ce OCU O CHIC ET 
afr: Ha TAT go malTaefacar 
afrerrarrare 233 walaaen faa 
ates: TaeaaT: vo mab Fa 
afaaran: afane: get WE fegal ATA: 
afaATaae ae Ryo FASTA 
afraTeyTaTy we weTs tater sear 
afaaran: afaTar: é werseagat ate 
aferaratarery goy aaafreaaar wafer 


aeyal aAaanTy 


waafanet 7 araaafe: 


cede 
& 
V8, 
oe 
oy 
gay 

a 
Ree 
Ko 
28 
BB 


RR 


Rok 
Yao 
33 
Rod 
qo 
Le.) 
xe 
IVE 
v4 
do 
RC9 


885 
a8 
88 


ie 


gaara a: afar: 
DCO ICEU ECE: B 
TATA 
FAATAT TTT 

SCE ICEC OTT 
HIBAIT WAHT 
afaraagra atts 
afar Rea ATM TTI 
METAR TAT AT 
meuraaT TAIT 
MCSA YTALY SAT 
aseTaRa TATA 
ACTA ATT 
WIT: FTA: 
AFT WASTAA 
WAHL Ale Tene 
aeataafeahrat 
WRMTATSATT: 

‘arp fenantaniest 
WATT wT: st 
aaa Teay 
OTe feHray TAT 


amraactaserfndt carta: 


maacraatay FeT- 
Aaa aTTeTet 
MAAN: ATT: AST: 
areee areaear fret: 
MAT ATT: 

MATE MISA saeATy 
araate feaearey 
arate seat 
gee AG 





car, 


9k 
BAR 
at 
BKe 
TARR 
R08 
Que 
nes 
269 
Be 
208 
Bo 
ou 
BR 
9h 
BrAS 
Ree 
ey 
8ah 
Ree 
RRY 
BRR 
Re 


84 
\a9 
RRC 
Joh 
Wo 
2 
Bey, 
RRR 


Ro¥ 


ce we. 


WPT ASEM ATTA 
aracaten afrarata 
aeraay araiia 
UPA TATA 
arairend TAT 
ofa afraaea re 614 
gfe afar: 
gfa agar frat 
aft arg neraife 
Bearag faeerar 
eefahaca rag 
eegfafararary 
gatfaqar fear 
sgareparce fafa: 
BERT 
SBYTTAT TATA 
aErarerey fiat 
VTEUTN TTA 
RETSBNGT ETT 
aearafanafeqeaat 
eparetnal: 
CISD UCUIG IEEE Ist 
gesat ayaa 
eufeara vate 
sfkaara afar 
eeaaa went fate 
ReUTUT arg 
EsemTT aT: 
BETTI 
pea wert: 
VET WH ATS 
asefearatafaary 
eeeey ware afer: 
TTT qari 
BEATA araitecat 


Rw 


be) 
BBE 
RR 
9k 


RR 


g5R 
gaa 

eé 
8R8 


esereqeararaifeafay 
ecerraaa fasaTaTTE 
BSeIhAUS FAT 
eserererarantt FHA 
ESCTAAUTHTATH, 
sey wafer 
esclafrayatat 
Boe THU 

re atteifs ageaTd 
ag afese aaafaag 
Tae fear Te 
SHASMAT AT 
SRUTAAIS 
wsufaadl areaTtaz 
seme rata 
saa Wat 
saUTeg FT Is 
STAT ATT 
sawtafagaite - 
saasaat frat 
SAF WTMTETHAY AIT 
saafaaarataa 
SEATAASHTTT 
samen arataat: 
samreafaat faagqea 
SIATA ACTA TT 
SAACTTATATTT 
FRATETTAT TTL 
vafrarteTyeat 
wafar a: ofefe: 
say yeuyararaeaya 
Jay FASITHAHTAT 
SAACTAT ATITA, 
sfeaufeat af gat 
sfearafaared fia 


(3) 


VR 


- gy 


RV 
BRR 
te 
Qow 


ao 


£95 


(anee 


RRA 
gee 
PR 
re 
XX 
RoR 
Ro 
ce) 


fest eTHAT . 
Sanforarfeater 
safeaatfeateay 
saastrara fe: Sar - 


saasitaram sare 


sfrara diate 
sateattaaatnarg 
BAT RAHTUT - 

or aTaaaTSig WeAy 
waTrerareerea: - 
HET FATT: 
meTaT: Tq: 
meuafaare Prttery, 
RUT TAT R 
UA Talat 
RIAALAYU | FATT 
wnfeararargy Te 
wafenat: Tat 
cafafayara4r 
wareafacaian AT: 
varteafemfatega: 
vasefeaaatent 
wbagaaarar 

UHhy EIT A 
UHATA TTS Tats 
val afeyaant gata: 
UF WRAT HOT 

ud agqat arfesiqe: 
ug fraraarea T4 

ud aig Paaitegat 
ua aay fasacay 
ud Slat @sreacshs 
Uae aararaeqeat: 

wa fasat efaarfer 

wa fdtoragteet 


RRR 


Woy 
Ree 
gRe 
Xe 
& 
SAG 


L0G 


TARE 


5 


wR 
Ray 


WR 
VR 
Rok 
OG 

Ww 
RRR 
AOR 


BER 
a 


8& 
RRR 
aR 
RR 
ays 
FoR 
At 


RRs 
Qs 
RR 


RR 
ee 


vq qararnt afar 
wa verataria fir 
ud war eaTt 
ud areaaratataa 
RATA SA TET 
PATH SAGA, 
HAAS SET 
afearal eafage 
arora Tareq leis 
RUTTaTA CATCH 
Bua: afeat 
aualaheaaaraa: 
HUTACAA aT 
mors sarareta 
HUTA Sta Tavs 
araragat es 
HITT SATIS A, 
aute were 
aula 
ay variate 
afaragyfe: mrasaRTE 
weqraraiaa ga: 
HUTA ES STATI: 
erate har 
SIGCSE CLIC! 
FOTTMAAAS: LRAT 
HCH TTT A, 
Fe TATE 
around TTT 


ABA WTA: TF 





aye) 


ave 
Ree 
the 
fou 
Req 
La-3-9 
RaR 
ayo 
Ro 
sy 
BKR 


Re 


WR 
Say 
I 
RXR 
| a2 
© RRS 
Xs 


arena Pear fa 
areata fra faea a 
FATA ART 
PTET TAA 
HAATTTTAT FART 

FIL GUGUCE RIG lan 
afeagaraarry 
HITATAIAT Aes 
HAA AAICeATAT 
pagers: 
sfraarmifeqer 
HATATT: HET 
gearty eftand fhm 
gear faarteat 
peaaferafeat: 
asuagarad Tala 
Heyes ay 

RE TH Her sas A 
aarfecataarar 
atesaar fayerat 
He RTHUT 

ae TIUTATATA 
aeTATat TAN 
RUST TA 
area aetfreet 
Breer ae 
aifeatafevagan: 
wifasar aemifeT 
mifasar fayaseraat 
aft: arse 
UIE CUL 
mierertatafearnr 
are fagesarar 
weTreNy forweafean: 


| e RR RTE ETETperhT 


R08 


Uo avow a 
au ro > 
3 


an 
A A 


R52 
RR 
se 
833 
RK 
Rey 
wy 
BRA 
ee 


yo 
RRM 
Rog 
83 
RE 


ererararfararta 
amaresaet ath 
fafastsar arate 
ferfast wee ferca: 
fafasteavsaat: 
MATA ARS 
warared TfETTy 
SAATAATT ASS 
afaqayar saree” 
waar feaar: asta 
eae: aaa 
eaciaaa frat: 
SSSTSTAT TTATT 
@ yrtaeagate 
GS TIUTT aT 
TTT TAT ARR: 
TEA freeafing: 
afqasnt Tea 
afd sexeTe 
afada Gat frar, 
Taafesr: TIT AT 
Taferar Tae fanaa 
TAATUTGA LTT 
TATA LAT 
TIAA satay 
CRICICGICE 
mateaar fear 
TANITA: 
TORII: Fal 
quay farwenfqa4r 
TUAW TCA 
Tos aifeget 
TIeHAgTaT 
SRURICR IC CIES 
YUU: TERTAT: 


Cx) 


R38 
ag 
8 

Rex 
Rey 
eV 
IRR 
a 
93 
RRY 
RRR 
BR 
& 
Qos 
Vey 
RRC 
{50 
Reo 
BRR 
BRo 
Qoo 
ox 
RXQ 
RAY 
RAY 
9% 
Qoo 
XS 
R35 
RE 
gu 
RAE 
8a5 
2o¥ 

BR 


fire at greafa: 
afd arate a 
afvarearfaare: 
afwarfa axfaat: 
afar eqare + 
Twat erytatecar 
TF TUATT AT 
THAT THAT: 

Tat cay Way 
TUT T aferay 
pease aifaafe 
Tegertacateet 
mMigar Tv 
TETeAATTeM: 
TeRayfeasay 

TEU SAAT: 
Tey WAT aT 

TET TIT Tara: 
TeUrat 7 
TEATTARATA, 
WY SAT Wales 
TENTH AGH AeTs 
WanNisarar 
WeAMTA TESLA 
Wat: TAMA 
TATAACH CHT 
TEATHTTT: ITH 
UIAGTHTA: TRAETET 
aareacd T Tat 
are sfefafadrry 
afentreae 
afeniqaiarcet 
afeareaa seat 
afeat caput: 
aratarayaieasat 


xe 
3 
9% 
498 
BRK 
BRE 
gee 
aes 
¢a5 
gRY 
Rie 
R9k 
Re 
gay 
39 
RRR 
&g 


RU 


Qs 
Ws 
23k 
g3K 
RRR 
23y 
ou 
BRR 
oy 
eR 
RCE 
rte 
R08 
322 
BRR 
BW 
RR 


SRT ATT 
SRICATED BATA BHA: 
aay sHafapatt 
BH TTA RATA: 
warred faareara 
BTM HAT 
aeate ayat 
APA THAT 
araciarery 
azaaafent yferat 
PPCORIC ICI LD 
ast feaagq 
ATTATT TTT 
faareatfragee 
safaareeeand 
aafaararferaa: 
aafaarates ofrgarar 
aarfearaahue g 
Bled Meawwssas 
oreata afaaaat 
Bay Ahrarré 
HIT BAT 
orat Bal faaeT 
GATT AALAT 
| BraTaraT TT Adr 
wratfactarataz 
Brat esa aise 
Seg aay 
Baga ATA 
| ATTA STITT 
MaTassiay HUTT 
gp iet Mga . 





(5 


92% 
30 
782 
a 
2X5 
Que 
bata 
283 
Bae 
SS 
Gy 
RR 
RAg 
gon 
; 
96 


» 


Be 
BRE 
88 
R&o 
oe 
\oy 
&R 
VE 
rhe 
aKe 
RRo 
Rok 
ROR 
&8 
RRR 
Yo 


RY 
9 
ax 


ATT BART Fea 
BATT ATATCAT 
WAAz TATTAT 
aarrar fala 
BRIT AAT 
maft aHTrashery 
waaate gafaat 
Fas HTITTATGT 
waaay: 
METH TSA: 
srarernaft wat 
faararrsat aftrat 
forrarra Teta 
fararrey aifeaveyarr 
Sra farearcarearay 
Marea HAE TT 
HAT ATTA 
afer aearay 
aieash HOTTY 
afetsy FATT 
ata waWa: ofa: 
ara Hea Hest At 
aA ITSAT: 
maT eT 
HT: TAS Tad: 
Mea Barger: 
TAT THSTATATIATT 
TTA HATTT Ble: 
FATES TI 


Ope 


sarafefireqeey 


sat srerersafqran: 
saTalfa saratat sar 
sarge ahs arsurse 


a 

A 
485 
gue 
86 

tg 
RRR 


BRR 
eRR 
Pee 
¥R 
X83 
xae 
RRR 
GR 
Roo 
vo 
Rho 
SRR 
6S 
yee 
EE 
9k 
Rae 
Ras 
Xgo 
gol9 
RRS 
4G 
yg 
XBR 
R08 
uy 
8a 


ROLCALE ent 
TAT ATES GT 
aaa AAT: 
qssag THA: Alaa: 
ast TTAHATAT 
aearenfay aler 
qeeTeTTeAT TAT 
aeeqee fafa gyatat 
aeepenfefa: aa: 
areca aera sat ear 
AAA ATT HATTLTT 
» TeafreHT ASAT TTT 
aeary SAAT: 
aaafigd se atet: 
agaquetfa TET 
afer atrrefa 
areata 
CeO mCARGIMIG| 
aera EYTIH 
TATA LATT 
agniaxard Taat 
Ro CRC IBIUG 
aaa Tater 
aenregaferaatralt 
aR MATA 
arent faery: 
areantfaneeart 
arenrfray 
area TANTRA 
arent qaaraiat 
aracaa utara fartg 
fafaramea afc 
fafareraae 
fafartafeats 
fafaateararet 


(8) 


R08 
ae 
RO 
loge) 
855 
Rs 
REX 
okt 
Re 
RRs 
IRE 
Ys 
Rak 
Qs 
RR 
aR 
gde 
Re 
yo 
3 
Ray 
ERAS 


Bye 


RRo 
BRE 
oh 
RRR 
yee 
8X0 
R08 
ug 
R 
RRR 
RRA 


RE 


fafafaaanfte 
fregaentettrea 
Geaea era T SAT 
deafeaat gear 
ae acaitelt sfereatt 
Prrearracag: 
fara feafaga: 
Praag 
Payerarefagtafer 
faye: afafegat 
Fagan afaa: Yat 
PrAGTAeTTISST: 
Preraraat oq: saree 
fasar Hearst 
fasarEe TELAT 
fasareaafeantat 
fasarfgata aaa SAT 
Fasatermacafage: 
Pasaratg fired: 
Pasaranigateay 
fasat fagazerat 
Pasar faetrqarr 
PRSaTEAT USAT 
fasargat gatat 
faaaaaeg afta: 
Fameataan rat: 
frasrgsingtts 
fryer aergaayt 
fravatcanaay: 
fafaqaaeerarat: 
FUPTH TAT 
saga fayIT 
sqaraara: TIT 
SPT AE TATA 
aquifaarag 


ek 
83 
cha! 
RRR 
853 
RRA 

cB 


OR 
ROR 
RRe 
Qto 
Ree 
ve 

we 
RRA 
Roh 


- 053 


gs 


RR 
IRR 


be 
R&R 
&g 


“Ths 


Be 
Bay 
RY 
TZ 
BRE 


2B 


gee 


afaqmaraanan: 
FASB SANTA 
esareg annie afte 
faaferanaate 
farqey Gray HAT 
favre feagezat 
ferarararerar 
ferarateareateq 
farqaaaaaa ai 
feaTaye soa: 
feararronratfeserait 
farafespttqergse 
Free OT TATE AT 
faraerafefirege 
feacafare 

faraer Borat 
feanearat aT 
ferufaaraatear: 
Feary ARATE 
feratafe: qeargsafiett 
feqaratrnsttar 
dramagaaat: 
aaa RATA: 
Zrwee TT 

TAT HACIA 
qITHTETTA 
TCH: ETAT BH 
CHISTTA TAA 
gaasat afwazr 
BAIT TEST 
enrfaresyea: 
Eatin a wafer 





(5 ) 


xox 


Ree 
BRS 


_ ue 


303 
a 
Te 
rus 
zee 
We 
oh 
aR 
a 
o¥y 
gv 
Ive 
aR 
OG 
xe 
RR 


eet STATA 
ERAT ERA TATA STA: 
eftaygtsaat 7: 
efcaqgsaaagar 
efter meaTMT 
zecat fara afert 
eoaat fagasrat 
eargaTy Az 
aT TE TAT 

Car Mea AIT: 
BMTT FATT 
SATETTI AMS SET 
SaTTT TAY YH 
BeayUt: BAT: 
TUT FF 
eaagaaifeacarsa: 
are fra frararad: 
ATMA TATA 
aTuprfaara: 
CRUE oe 
TTUTierarg aE 
ayer afar: 
aT sleaqaary 
TaMAT AIT T 
AeA AT BATT 
ae farafercattey 
aam ay A ast 
aetefrarateartt 
arearyfqatrarsat 
areafat fear 
areata: Pratgfaa 
reafagasrar 
faquradaatoay 


us wer: fara: 
, foxy: TATTT 


R45 


eg 


feqdtaartat 

Brey uferaratreda: 
aaa TUS 
TAT TTUAT: 
agra ahaa 
ate TTCTATT 

ay AA TATATSAT 


TABS: TRAST: 


TaATUa TT Sy 
BE CHIC COREE 
ESTTT: BUSSHATAT 
COUT ATA TTA 
aeraaraaearg 
areas 
ATATTSAT Fea 

a figat atrsrafa: 
wera Fat faa: 
aafage: TreEqIe 
wafaerat 

CCC RCCOCIGL 
AAAS TATE ST 
AAIETTS AAT 
aaarafratret 
ATAA TY GIA 
aaa ASAS 
aveteqTeaTTEAT A 

T PATQTAGHeT: 
a egeardaertacars 
arsraasefaterat 
ateag a ane feat 


aaah MATT aes: 


AAHALAA TAT 
fafirefa a afeaty 
FARA 
PaReATTSIA TT 


Cs") 


Vay 
ESA) 
RvK 
RvR 
ROR 
REE 
BRE 
ee: 
g 
REG 
QV 
RvE 
Ry 
BRe 


RAR 


faseurreret weet 
fagecarrardt fartat 
Aaa eaAeAey 
TSTATATTACT 
Fay AcaaAT 
FASTA TAT IT 
gaaqaan a: 
FATA ATHT 
FaeITATT Ha 
qaiscfe TUUATs 
cara st 

Fay TAQTTT 

Tea HATTA ATT 
qeanernest aa: 
TTA RAHAT 
qwarerectryata 
qerer Tufenhaae 
ofenraarret 
ofeaafaata a: 
gheneara fare: 
ghee WITT 
afefaer garaat 
afefadtseatay 
qfetearerea 
ofaratafearasar 
qfarat wager 
qaet: Tata 
TRATTTSN TTA 
qaeafa aa: fafaea: | 
qaafa taaear: 
qraaqaeaatey 
qreamaeyaaged 
TagaTeaset BAT 
qaaeaarard 
qrataraeararat sy 


RRR 
RRR 
{Xo 

ER 
R23 
guy 
883 
RRL 
88 


RRR 


21919 
RRR 
RR 


( 20 } 


qrara facrafastrerat: % NTI AyT 298 
fresneafrartt a2 oye: searafy 4s 
fasafafaao yt B30 MIATA wea ay 
fasiater afar 32o STARA HIRT at 
favs aqaay faze a30 0 aTTaTfrryfin: TATA QR 
qaaars eyes TENTH 53 ATT Tearaafaqasay wf 
gaircatiaal aa ¥e ATT YeTSACATeT aug 
qaifaga: Fhe 23Be Waray fae BR 
TITAT ANY Ast ee aac = so 
gaat feryheray BVs ATA THAATAT &S 
ser seat seal Jok WANT AHTATAT 30x 
qferarara farce aay sTeqafifaatra 223 
ofarer UTA ue mTeaat fads 232 
Uru a Coon ae aTeerateasr faeiatar 222 
wen feaaiq ey mt frmarats asy 
TTSUTT Ta feHT 223 wruifaafentetirsta: g 
wife fas frat: Qo TTA AT: TAT: BEE 
sfaferqearerran se ster vat qerar Vk 
wfafeaafadarary We Het eT TAT KE 
| Matearrantey wy HeaTTHAT Ths sg 
sfarereaafcet iow Seafarer ar at 33 
maga sear: aeq agnofrenfafrey REE 
MITT: UAT ass atgentfer, aife: RR 
megera: Tat QR ABSASTATTT QR 
Way Yra way RR TY GANTT TAFT AAMT: 2RR 
wanfettrray oe fargaareat feafir Qe 
wae FeST AT: Re fagafeerater Rw 
TRTEMTATY Tea vee garecfifirann RM 
TATTASA TRASTTT «= No -AURTETET UTatay as 
TATA ETAT gue qufeard sed gow 
sre ofedheafra: we TAU Tenfuay g 
TRA OMATE ae aarenefaaid: 32e 
cmrerat nt 3. waitenreaefeerfar 33 
ARPT BeaTGT 8 waaay aT RR 


STS GRY. ATES y Bak 


wear: af 
wT feRerat ase 
wrarifearraay 
WrUaTssraTy 
wTUTfearraTy 
wa fseaery 
waeataaaraty 
WeaIaTa AT 
ufeatfat we: 
weet TrmAPa fsa 
wafrrerrarat 
waetqafaeat 
wintaneaat 
wrTHSTaasTTY 
AMT STAT HT 
WIT area: 
wift ata 
WMTAG aT GAs 
WATT TT 
wreafeararat tr 
aafeararat it 
aiTagiaeatat awise 
WiaaHETTATAT 
wrfaaat TaTat 
Be eT waft 
Bw SAH AAT 
a prmsateaa: 
penser cfrserafeate 
YOU ART YH WA 
BIEATLS A 
aerate 
BATT TAT 
grHeAT TAT 
BAHT HT 
gaat: atfesat 


( 22) 


Yoo 

Qo 
Ray 
RX 
R45 
vo 
FRY 
RXV 
Wes 
2&9 
Rey 
GRY 
Re 
Raye 
R80 

aX) 
836 
RRP 
Rus 

By 
BRK 


RuR 
Ruy 
aRy 
RY 
QaR 

\o¥ 
203 
gus 
RRo 
BR 
ae 


Sax 


Bearaey aTaTerey 
Warat gaat 
yfearat eaaea: 
wafefa: FASTA 
waft ant 
wafefaearayseat 
WATT: 
SIC GIRCEIG| 
HAATST TAT: 
AHWITG: HY 
ASATAATRAT 
asafercan: Set 
asmararg cated fatter 
Hea 
HatHESSTUT 
weattad tex ay 
means eRe at ware 
FEATARAT BT 
AeTSTATA eafaarrafer 
wearer vag 

WEA TATA Ass 
weqaTfaeKeMtes 
aeqaafa: eqerta: 
WET STAT TER 
FETA HSATHAT 
werey faaicrratay 
wear fearaatat 
Teas ETH 
wearers AT ATT 
TEAST ATT: 
wedeqars eta: 

Hea aat ara: 
ae fags 
aataecaha gt: Fed: 


WeeHe WAST 


Pee 


TeTEGS TTA 
wate ATTA 
aaa aaAeT 
Hara Aealsa 
area: Haas afae: 
mrafanefeatras 
maria areaatet 
WATS TATE 
aaTatg afteqate 
AAT TRATET ATE 
arsafraeaarera 
areata ara: 
TAT grearay 

Facat weaezt 
fagarterara fear 
qagegte: caning 
qaaeeqa fer cay 
qufgtecrniqy 
yretafaga: 
araatargar frat 
Fagararfarel: 
aga aAsT 
aorfed: Waa SET 
Aorfay aatiay 
TRAITS SES RAAT 


TT: Baa ese aT RTE AY 


TESA HUTT 
afe fart: faster 
qafas fae 
Tafraqanaaret 
TITRA TATST 
WAS TeaTa ASA 
; watt sla 
. afte srg 


( 22) 


Qa? 
FRE 
ys 
DER 
Wwe 
AS) 
aes 
AR 
geo 
ao 
Rw 
RV 
RX 
R05 
UW 
tay 
ey 
RX 
fog 
35 
883 
yy 
Re 
Roig 
Roo 
Pee 
Bat 
Bre 
BR 
&& 
Yok 


Ree. 
RRo- 


Rov 


afceeaTaTs ATTA TT 
afezeararg ar afeTt 
afte <ararerary 
aftafeatar tat 

a: TATE TA 
aqeq TATA 
mena aaah: 
AeA ATT: 
ages ATA 

areat afar fata: 
areeararara: fatasr 
AAT TAT ITT TS 
gears seat 
PUR CRICIIE CL 
gaara aft: HAA 
ATTATTT TAT 
ATMTATATTA SAAT 
BTA AAA TST 
GAARA CHET: 
Brag: Taree 
BATT TT ATT TT 
arefafeaay frat 
wre afaqaeat 
arasifeqaeeaa 
AAC STAT: 
garrayscafent 

y ATATTAS 

a TA Toye 

Feat Te Way 
arpa waaetat 

ay aratfa aaa 

at arate garfaay 
aa RATATAATA 
waster feaar 

W avsrarat a & fe 


R88 
RoR 
ROR 
FOR 
S98 
34 
Baas 

4 
RY 
xRR 
BWR 
YOR 
ves 
wwe 


Rs 
RR 


Re 
avy, 
R08 
RAK 
eh) 


20g 
8Re 


OR 


Ro 
RvY, 
RAK 
2¥ 
R85 
Rae: 
RXR 


aT areal SAT 
at af ugant 
areeqarwaeger 
veqforar aawar 
VeLAIAAT TIT 
vfarrate atfeasat 
Uaaexqraaat 
erro faa: 
vaaexarfecan: 
UAT BACT: 
fare farang 
<fafaataantafer 
Taare feafaaary 
Paar TaaT 
vagmaat waft 
cfazrerraenfacen: 
<Prarfraatera feat 
aakrorarfaaer 
Cari yatt wareTa 
caaratacafeat 
arg FIT, am 
waar feqa 
crear ferret: 
wreaarnat farat 
Trae eset HiAS 
wg TI as 

ug seas 
RRTTAT: HTT 
werqar ara fara: 
SITATMS FATE 
wri segarta 
eurfiaaia fart 
eI wg 
SI STW: 

wa raral WATT 


( 2) 


Qe 
RS 
gee 
RRR 
x 
3e5 
&R 
¥R 
RR 
ay 
ee 
Rey 
g95 
Ss 
925 
Yo 
gay 
9% 
(93 
ROR 
wR 
ace 
¥& 
RR 
ae 
Rae 
VER 
RRR 
RRR 
RAY 
gas 
WR 
RRO 
RRR 
Das 


MATH ATA 

art Tar TAHT ERT: 
qT SIAN 
aearatarerfretar 
ATA TAT 
ATT TH 
aqaearal Tat 
waranaaat 
TSAI AT Tat 
SHIA ATT 
ETT ATT 
MSTA T: TACHA 
wselaTaRarat 

mea raren aaftepe 
ara eH oA 
saratent facar 
APATARISUATH 
BIATU ITT 
CCR CINI CEE 2 

AFT ASATAT TTA 
arereqaaarat 
FacareaqitaqAgat 
arafresatatery 
ARTHAS CTI 
qaqa: FT: 
aaaaey TTA 
at aEtfoarary 
apa LarAKTa 
TTSTSTAY 
amtapraget 
qatarararfararat 
qoatfeatraaad 
FAAaTATA aT: 

are satenfatary 
fared afery 


ae 

ae 

5 
ye 
B08 
Re 
Ree 


Rok 
ROK 
RRR 
R08 

Re 

9& 
awe 
ke) 
QUS 
2019 

48 
Qve 

CAC) 
VSG 

veo 
RXR 
AX 
QV, 
guy 
WE 
Be 
cA 

=e 
EES 
Baad 
REE 


faqeara gat 
faery Psat 
fretryMTAsal BAT 
faerrarraaae 
farratacfaatt tat 
feetaraty Aer 
frrrrat ey atearay 
fretaea atet gata 
faatcter fectarefart 
faettt aferera: 
faatat wearereged 
fetal we: 


i: Ve 
fafrrataatsa st 
faPrrarargecaferar 
fafrraiarafaratar 
fafanaia cera 
fafa: atetazat: 
farfiaaaaay ata 
fartagera: 
fardtans area 


ferro 
fagaseret FATE 
fagaegrar yferarfeetar 
fagearn afer 


faqasrat AAT 


( ¢ ) 


faeareaiRTy Raya: 
faergeta fae 
at ataafiary 
azar ae fairy 
SAAT ATA TTT 
aaa TATA 
BUTEA ABT: 
BRIG TA TA: 
aafaqaarrEtay: 
cafanraaaiqert 
aaa asa ater 
SHLAA: 
ATT HAT 
SHAT BT HTALAT 
ame Bea ET 
aqrazafeae stay 
EAPTQATT ANT 
STATA TA 
aqraeqrare ata 
amare afayfiray 
sae at Haq 
Eqrals ara eT 
arere eae Payeeg 
saTaTeasay ATE: 
surate aaa 
ee BATATA TT 
aigarat gatfersar 
THAT MATT 
verrreargiay 
agraataos 
Rraratecaes 
apaetstra ea 


) THMTETT A AT Bear 


MHMEITTIT 
THM RATT TT 


883 
903 
Roe 
Ro 
RAY 
R05 
R85 
{53 
yes 
VRE 
R&R 
%o 
yok 
Roy 
$oR 
B82 
gua 
RVE 
XR 
BRR 
Rok 
RRR 
20% 
Qoo 
Yo 
ge 


BW 


THETMSITMAT 
VESTS AASAT 
gata MTA 
ufafeaqa afar 
erferatfird: aerate: 
arfiray frat 
afaaraqreait 
aframacad a: 
UPAR TT TO TAT: 
afar fercatrra fe 
aferaaie: eye faeatt 
erfererg fa fata: 
afafaetorarea grat 
aPraarqeararaat 
aferaay: TeqTT 
arafeg areacat 
Sara Wrastay 
ahreaeqemetatsy 
YsrTat Ys STAIN 
Parag wy 
qaraetraTTy 


aria areata: afefaty: 


“eee aafata: Year: 
IT aeeqfaay 
arraqare fasts 
araratts fea 
asifrag gfuaraedt 
aefeafrt ag a7 
strarra ara 

Hey wsaraT 
area fas ara reer 
a frefgarer sty 
aeafaraat yarfia 
TS TMTATTTT IT 
TENANT ERT: 


( & ) 


Jog 
XR 
Rvo 
2919 
IRV 
QE 
4 
98 
\g 
BUY 


aR 
Rak 


RR 
q 
LER 
aa 
36 
Yo 
Ro 
8 
Qwe 
RRS 
RoR 
RRR 
R 
RR4 
XE 


age 


RRo 
Bee 
ys 
Ro 

R3 
RR4 
wes 


astaantaaaet: 
YfSETAATATHTT 
WeITATT BTA 
qsear fararfarar feat 
TIT BA TATA 
Seafrfata asta 
sara waaa aaa 
aaa aT 


amifaeat araencre 


AIT TeeT 


afaag aifreay 
weTeatTgla 
seater FT 
HATH ALATA 
acafarcart ferat 
aagafearqageat TU: 
SRC EICUL 
AAHSAT: ATU: 
aaasalaqan ATT 
TAASATSTUT 

aa fercal CHEHEATT 
aafattaaraig Heat 
aAaearat aay 
TAIT FIM: 
TTHHVSA T: 

aa Tara a 
waiter carat 
afeawarea: 
afaat +t ae aeIT 
aaluaaaieeate 
afgat faetrier: 
AAT ATATSRTAT 
UTATHSATSEAY ATAT 
facafa etfratafe 


fart aret FATT 


oe 


gr 
gto 
go 

ov 
305 


Ree 


gRo 
as 
{53 
Re 
guy 
2g 
28s 


RB 
ov 
Rag, 


Rok 
Roy 
{Vs 
ROT 
RRR 
RVG 
RK 
RE 
R85 
RV 


285 


ee 


faciaf a aa 
far grand Fats 
TEATARAL FRAT 
qare Tat Pasa 
qaisar faqtariszay 
gare aafera faantt 
qaierrarfaserarfa 
qilzareagqaiaferag 
egserertifreetay 
Feat FTA 
THAT HTT 
SARATATE : 

SAA TMISHTS T 
wiraraferat afse 
arate farat 
aitareg arafrart 
eitataatarat 
TATA Tse AA 
fenera” aeferat 
feaeraifarta oH: 
wares Pragy's 
crafted feaferaer 
TSS THETA 
ease’ aRaft TATA 
eqreararrat afag 

eRe freaaart 
wHefaeaarereat 
eHeaeda Tet WAR 
HEMT HAT AT 


( &) 


RRR 

& 
IER 
R08 

cAC) 

Ro 
gRY 
Yo 

¥R 
Vey 
Res 
Qe 
Re 
BRR 
Ree 


an 


TAFOVHTT IMT: 
eamifeastt Pasar 
eaaqaaeaaar wha 
CAAT ATT AT TTT: 
PLATTE SAT WAT 

AAT AMEATAT 
erararafine ar seats 
TABAHAZAT FAT 
caferafent fart 
cafaarg ofr fnya 
ARAM WTA TATA 
ra RATATAT 
aaa ATT 
eafamorcey amt 
eae S AAT: 


earaltrata yamaha: 


Aes TA 
CAINS A AT 
CAAA S A BAT 
earerery feafersrrg 
TATAATS TUT SqTaTS" 
carey faatte Hear 
CAPITA: 
eareaarR aay 
BAT HISAA, 
ST gAaATTT 
BAATTETT TATA, 
GqaT savas ATs 
wey 


 sasealesnemaahetostomasenl 


03 


go 
29k 
RAY 
Rew 
Ras 
Raq 
RRR 
98 


