Srimaddevibhagavatam 


—k-— 


CHAPTER I 
On the Solar and Lunar Kings 


Ya Sarat 

raat aaa Heat Wa Fata: 1 

vun ures ante uüfirmgpg: Ga: d ou 

Süta said : Glad to hear the excellent divine 
stories of the Solar and Lunar races. The virtuous 
King Janamejaya, the son of Pariksit, again asked: 

wats IATA 

WAA aa er RTA equ | 

wem aera a atgqararster waar 11 2 u 

mI Weg Hat urquunfsrdtu 1 

ftd dudtai cw faenderidat: u3 u 

fe ae ugh sa Aa sr à 

Adm aha gors Ra ARENE U 4 Ut 

“O Lord! I am now very eager to hear the 
increase of the two lines of Kings. O Sinless One! 
You know everything. So kindly describe, in 
detail, the pure histories, capable to destroy sins, 
of the kings and their characters. The kings of the 
Lunar and the Solar races were great Bhaktas of 
the Highest Sakti, $ri Bhagavati Devi; this I have 
heard. O Muni! Who wants not to hear further on 
the glorious anecdotes of the Bhaktas of the Sri 
Devi? 

gf Tft ust cara: Rags: i 

agaa gr: west gf usu 

When the Rājarsi asked thus, the Muni Krsna 


Dvaipayana, the son of Satyavati began to narrate 
gladly the several deeds of the Kings. 
Gara sata 

Ayma mna feudi WU | 

agua a ans A MAA 6 u 

Vyasa said: O King! I am now narrating to you 
in detail the origin, etc., of the Lunar and the Solar 
dynasties as well as of other kings in their 
connection. Hear attentively. 

frenraiféren re GEMS ess: | 

ATTA KATRA Tera KET N 7 ou 

aa Tat Ie sg Had: | 

ARTA as ad enean: usu 

The four-faced Brahma sprang from the navel 
of Visnu; engaged in practising Tapasya, he began 
to worship the Maha Devi Durga, extremely hard 
to conceive. Maha Devi, pleased at his worship, 
granted boon to Brahma; Brahma, the Grandsire 
of all the Lokas on thus getting the boon, became 
ready to create the world; but he could not create 
all on a sudden the human beings. 

fafard ager fut Gere wars: à 

a feet snap thereat wearer 9 ou 

TAS! AAPA ATA: | 

TiferRnishtar ates: Were: g: | 

veneti ĪRE: Meet AAT: FAT: 10 i 


718 


Though the creation was eternally fashioned by 
the Parmātmā Bhagavati, the four-faced Brahma 
thinking over in his mind variously, could not 
quickly spread it out and accomplish it as a veritable 
fact. Therefore He, the Prajapati, first created 
mentally the seven mind-born sons. These were 
known by the names of Marici, Atri, Angira, 
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vasistha. 

TA ETF STATS ATT, | 

FASEAN ST AA: MATE: 1 11 N 

amiga wre web | 

ARo are ferra yg Meta 12 0 

ARTA ATT AT AEA SITES T ARS 

gayat: art geo Aa: Ya: oU 13 

Next sprang Rudra from the anger of Prajapati, 
Nàrada from his lap; Daksa from his right thumb. 
Thus Sanaka and the other Rsi were also his mind 
bornsons. O King! The wife of Daksa was born from 
the left thumb of Prajapati; this all-beautiful daughter 
is well known in all the Puranas by the name of Virini 
and Asikni. Narada, the chief of the Devarsis, was 
born, on some other occasion in her womb. 

STĀSTA IATA 

aa À Ayal AEL Agth am Ta: | 

ARa «metit gemfāfā wera: 14 u 

vet derer Wet g dtftrat Amar Hf: 0 

ret fir serum: vt aANT: 0015 N 

fafaatenreard Tag AMG Dd 

CATA TTT TER ATĀKTUT 11 1 6 1 

Janamejaya said: O Brahman! A great doubt 
arises in me to hear that the great ascetic Nārada 
was born of Daksa in the womb of Vīriņī. The Muni 
Nārada indeed, was the son of Brahmā; moreover 
he was the foremost of the ascetics and especially 
endowed with the knowledge of Dharma; how, 
then, can he be born of the womb of the Daksa's 
wife Virini. Well, if that be so, then describe, in 
detail, that wonderful story of the birth of Narada 
in the womb of Virini. 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 
"dag: Hel Yeh: VATS NEAN | 
ART SQ HAT Hd YA 0017 d 
O Muni! Under whose curse, the high-souled 
Narada, though very wise, had to leave his first 
body and be born again. 


GAITA sara 

AUS anrfest aa: gaudunfēa: i 

Mat: Gata quot gfgtat: verdspar 11 18 N 

ad: ugaza IATA dary | 

GA: mafa: GardiRvat FAATRTA n 19 N 

Vyāsa said: O King, Brahmā, the Self-born, with 
a view to create offspring, ordered first Daksa: “Go 
and multiply innumerable children for the increase 
of the world.” Thus ordered by his father, the 
Prajāpati Daksa produced five thousand powerful 
and heroic sons in the womb of Vīriņī. 

qar drama: PIAA: | 

sara aai daft: serena: u20 N 

Ya: WANA aT PRAT: Wail: HAT | 

vitesrat eer «ut Tree a ym 021 

yà yari ser enn: REM: | 

paisa fufgarara arate faeere: u 22 0 

Seeing all the sons of Daksa, desirous to 
multiply, the Devarsi Narada, urged on, as it were, 
by Fate, began to laugh at them. How do you desire 
to multiply when you know not the dimensions and 
capacity of earth; so you will, no doubt, be put to 
ridicule and laughter. Rather, if you proceed on 
work, knowing beforehand the earth’s capacity, 
your efforts will be fruitful. Other wise, your 
attempt will, no doubt, end in failure. 

AAMT Set Fa A ALATA YATRA | 

WERT: yor: end we fafarifereafet u 23 N 

Alas! You are awfully illiterate! Not knowing 
the dimensions of the world, you are ready to 
multiply your progeny; how, then, can you meet 
wit success! 


«Ta Sarat 


Heus Feat Wagen 1 
TAA: wer TAME qi: foetu 24 N 


Book VII Chapter I 


719 


smear ATT GS xara TM: | 

Vyasa said: O King! Hearing, all on a sudden, 
these words, Harya$va and other sons began to 
speak with each other “What this Muni has told, is 
very true.” Let us then ascertain the earth’s 
dimensions; we can easily multiply afterwards. 

fru d ud waren: üfürd spa: 25 N 

ae wd ultr AAA WO | 

great esfera: art efaroreat qemqt i 26 lt 

wdreanperreat q HAA: Ha: i 

Sa: VATA Sea UPS ITT STR 27 0 

Thus saying, they all went out to reconnoiture 
the earth. Thus excited at Narada’s words, some 
went eastward, some southwards, some towards 
the north and some went to west all simultaneously 
and, as they liked, to make a survey of the earth. 
When the sons went away, Daksa became 
exceedingly sorry on their absence. 

waren ware ARKA: | 

asi dat: ced wenigen ar u 28 u 

ANG: We dremur Us aged uh: | 

afa aa el à Basra Ya: fret 29 Nu 

yai g wat: Hef WaT: du TAT | 

STAT arat TRASHY ear red fenitfaar: 1 30 n 

wu cw wemqd RAAN | 

TATA qur: RATA: 031 lt 

WITT As TAPA KKĀ, | 

Bent again on multiplying, he begat other sons; 
those sons again wanted to procreate. Seeing them, 
Narada again laughed and said: “Alas! What fools 
are you! Not knowing the dimensions of the earth, 
why are you ready to procreate?” They were 
deluded by Narada’s words, took them as true, and 
went out as their elder brothers did. Not being able 
to see those sons, Prajapati Daksa became very 
sorrowful for them and cursed Narada in rage. 


IA Sart 


ATĒŠTAT 3t gar pea n 3 2 NU 
waar gsx mini wer a | 


Gat 3 rer art vel eret 3 ife: T: d 33 ut 

Daksa said: "O Evil-minded One! You have 
destroyed my sons; so be yourself destroyed; you 
will have to be born in the womb for your sin in 
causing the death of my sons; you have caused my 
sons to go abroad; so you must be born as my son. 

sft werent aah tita rr T: | 

uiis gerer dittrarfifā a: alu 34 u 

Thus cursed by Daksa, Narada had to take his 
birth in the womb of Virini. I heard also that the 
Prajapati Daksa begat afterwards sixty daughters 
in her womb. 

wires fērera ware gar: merda, | 

THE HAM WTRTRESUUTS ER 1435 ! 

am ante alara aaa sque 1 

2 da ya mareas REANA u36 u 

8 reaif wa wüaifn ga: 1 

TAI GATI Water Satay AAAA ! 37 i 

Wea AN: UWURRÍSNTETenU | 

Mara: we menfa: 1 

wd gg: VT green: 138 N 

sft Medra Seno) Am 
FIRSAT: 11 1 H 

O King! Daksa, the great knower of Dharma, 
then gave up the sorrows for his sons and married 
his thirteen daughters to the high-souled Kašyapa, 
ten daughters to Dharma, twenty-seven daughters 
to the Moon, two to Bhrgu, four to Aristanemi, 
two to Kréaéva and the remaining two to Angira. 
Their sons and grandsons, the Devas and Danavas, 
became powerful but antagonistic towards each 
other. All of them were heroes and very Māyāvīs; 
so, deluded by greed and jealousy, they quarrelled 
amongst each other. 


Here ends the First Chapter in the Seventh Book on 
the beginning of the narrative of the Solar and the 
Lunar lines of kings in the Maha Purāņam 
Srimaddevibhàgavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


720 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER II 
On the Piercing of the Eyes of Cyavana Muni 


sada IATE 

TARTS WETSTRT Vf dzi ATARI | 

water tnis faster: nan 

Janamejaya said: O Highly Fortunate One! 
Kindly narrate in detail the spread of the families 
of those kings in the Solar line who were born and 
who were especially endowed with the knowledge 
of Dharma. 

Oe Sara 

sya sire agir vierge PETA i 

am spi war yd mmüemmHND H2 1 

Vyasa said: O Bharata! I now speak to you 
exactly what I heard of yore, from Narada, the best 
of the Rsi, how the Solar race spread. 

Wenap ane: SĀRTA wt 1 

ATSTITATSTĀ Yue arena WPT: 11 3 n 

wore force aÀ AeA fenem i 

ATA Sra PARVATI 4 di 

" Once, on an occasion, the Muni Šrīmān Nārada, 

on his tour, came at his will to my holy hermitage 
on the beautiful banks of the Sarasvatī river. On 
seeing him I bowed down at his feet and then 
remained standing before him. 

farférerequrfireaT aqmaraat fray | 

wasi afte gamma È Ns N 

I then gave him a seat and worshipped him with 
great esteem. I then said to him: “O Best of Munis! 
You are worshipped by the whole universe; my 
retreat is sanctified by your coming. 

«ut maa weg at Utada | 

TST A VATA: urls ferreae: Het Mt 6 tt 

ganga caf nga 1 

sitqenratsereré SETA feu 7 N 

O All-knowing One! Kindly narrate the histories 
of the Kings that were famous in the family of the 
seventh Manu; they were unequalled as far as their 


origin was concerned and their characters as well 
wonderful. Therefore I am very eager to know, in 
detail, the history of the Solar race. 

ammen WES WHTWeHnudep | 

ofa yet war STARS: crarefa us 

SATA VSAM: WANA HASAT, | 

O Muni! Describe shortly or in detail as the 
circumstances may require.” O King! When I made 
this question, Narada, the knower of the Highest 
Reality, gladly smiled, and, addressing me, began 
to describe the history of the Solar race. 

ane Jama 

yy wera ust aa 9 u 

wat agad miada, d 

aan ye sat ATSIGAKSTATTA: 11 1 0 1 

ferenti query aira: Ratia: à 

ada: darat vei: wera i 11 0 

querer U farre entum: YU à 

Beers: frat career ror gites Temm N 12 u 

ATG WIDRTTSSDUOTRIUTA d 

Narada said: O son of Satyavati! The history of 
the royal families is very holy and pleasant to hear; 
the more so when they are heard, one acquires 
Dharma and wisdom; therefore do you hear. In 
ancient times, Brahma sprang from the navel-lotus 
of Visnu and created the world. This is well-known 
in every Purana. That self born, all-powerful, all- 
knowing, the Doer of all, the Universal Soul 
practised Tapas in ancient times for Ayuta (ten 
thousand) years. By virtue of that Tapas, He got 
special powers to create the world. He meditated 
on the Auspicious Mother, and getting from Her 
the excellent powers, He created first the mind- 


| born sons, all endowed with auspicious signs. 


"ffe: iaman u13u 
SR ats RRENA: HAT: Waa: l 


Book VII Chapter IT 


721 


Of them, Marici became well known in this act! Was the son of Dhrsta; though he was a Ksattriya, 


of creation. His son Kašyapa was respected by all 
and he was of great celebrity. 

stadt «ament asngar feet u 14 u 

Gar: Hd ATA SMT SATA UT: | 

"ura: farsa EMER arya 15 LI 

Sart wira: reif fererearroma ATF i 

He had thirteen wives, all daughters of Daksa 
Prajapati. The Devas, Daityas, Yaksas Pannagas, 
beasts and birds all sprang from him. Therefore 
this creation is called the Kāšyapī creation. 
Amongst the Devas, the Sun is specially famous; 
his other name is Vivasvān. 

wur ya: Puer avem: u16 

qur Gaetan: videvifiratia: | 

manag ARpA: 17 N 

Aai aA UR ART: YA: d 

garga t gm: watfta ae i18 u 

Renae iS RES wera: | 

EVA YAS Aad MAAT: Bat: M19 0 

PET WA: YA: WA: MASA | 

wma ard emersit fergpfánreram] i 20 u 

Aart deren Had Prone | 

WIT WTA AANA 021 0 

Annet qq Vasara: warren | 

His son was named Vaivasvat Manu; he was a 
famous king. Besides, Manu had nine more sons. 
Iksvaku was the eldest. Their names are :(1) 
Nābhāga, (2) Dhrsta, (3) Šaryāti, (4) Narisyanta, 
(5) Pràm$u, (6) Nrga, (7) Dista, (8) Karüsa, and 
(9) Rsadhara. Iksvāku, the son of Manu was born 
first. He had one hundred sons, and Vikuksi was 
the wise and the eldest of these. Iam now narrating 
how the nine sons, born afterwards of Manu, spread 
their families. Ambarisa was the son of Nabhaga; 
he was very truthful, powerful, and religious. 


ada: NANUS YAAA: 22 0 
yey wh at wera | 
Gamer wenden AU u23u 


He always governed his subject justly. Dharstaka 


46 


he attained to Brahmanahood. He was naturally 
weak in fighting; always he was engaged in the 
works relating to the Brāhmaņas. 

yaken are Iga: | 

grar a dar gat enara 24 u 

IAAT Ya TAT WASH Gat | 

AP getter were: sierra € N 25 N 

fafadt vfenrarmarfareenfürfer a ser i 

Anarta was the well known son and Sukanyā 
was the beautiful daughter of Šaryāti. The King 
Šaryāti gave his beautiful daughter in marriage to 
the blind Cyavana Rsi; but the Rsi, though blind, 
got his beautiful eyes again by the good character 
of the daughter. We heard that the ASvins, the Twins, 
the sons of the Sun, gave him back his eyesight. 


WAR IATA 


Hse meani «freut t 26 u 

TRU AAĀSRITI GAT Gat THT | 

gan yoda ar ant ererurafsma 00 27 N 

gat war wears water wereshW 1 

rati wp eneuTeWerguuW: 028 N 

RTI afe A aeres iin wear i 

Janamejaya said: O Brahmana! How is it that 
the King Saryáti married his lovely-eyed daughter 
Sukanyā to the blind Cyavana Muni? I have got a 
great doubt on this point. The King gives his 
daughter in marriage to a blind person, if she be 
deformed, ill-qualified, or void of female signs. 
But the daughter, in this case was beautiful. How 
then Šaryāti, the Chief of Kings, gave over his 
daughter, knowing that the Rsi was blind? O 
Brahmana! I am always an object of favour to you; 
so explain to me the cause of it. 

ya sana 

fe tat ga: gear ARa S29 u 

BUT: Wea agara Bawa | 

Süta said: Glad to hear these words of 
Janamejaya, the Muni Dvaipayana smilingly said: 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


these, the white Yūthikās, Mallikās, and other 
creepers and shrubs were seen beautifying the 


722 
CITA Sara 
deae: starseataata afia: «30 n 
er tūri aearhtt eremo: i scenery 
Was: KU AAE: 0031 0 i 
Wer: Wear: Nat: fen Tet: YRT: à 


Šaryāti, the son of Vaivasvata, had four thousand 
married wives. All of them were endowed with 
auspicious signs and beautiful, all of them were 
daughters of kings. They all were very obliging 
and dear to their husbands. 

wat Gat qp arat d pene mm Tra 32 N 

fag: fara mgt watat emeret 1 

But, out of all of these, the King had only one 
daughter exceptionally lovely and beautiful. The 
father and all the mothers loved exceedingly that 
sweet-smiling daughter. 


aes rauf 10033 0 

AGA a xeaesurdtsuhd i 

Not very far off from the city, there was a beau- 
tiful lake of clear waters, like the Manasasarovara 
lake. A Ghat way (steps made of stones) descended 
into the lake. 


zaaien aman 34 N 

wrgewnWrelvi wdusfhmTggq | 

Swans Kāraņdavas, Cakravākas, Datyühas,, 
Sarasas and other birds used to play on its waters. 


Wt mi nunepHfWu u35 
msan gatvi df&d ured: Tā: a 
ATA Ct: WA: TATA SAT (1 36 Ut 
EIAPCOET CE wachavemtiay | 
sietefaa at: wader 37 1 
mAN AS hae: nien dER: | 
freee: YÀ: dad TTT: 138 u 
Five varieties of lotuses were there in full bloom, 
bees were humming there all around. Various trees, 
Sala, Tamāla, Sarala, Punnāgas, Ašokas, Banyans, 
Peepuls, Kadambas, rows of banana trees, 
Jambiras, dates, Panasas, betelnut tree, cocoanut 
trees, Ketakas, Kaficanas, and other various 
beautiful trees encircled round the lake. Within 


Wengrrenafefsearmerenuiüeqq 390 

aya atf: esenreerferferen | 

matà yet Set urqurai wuTqd 140 tt 

MATA: VITRA: TTA ET: d 

Especially there were, amongst them, jack trees, 
mango trees, tamarind trees, Karanjas, Kutakas, 
Palāšas, Neem trees, Khadiras, Bel trees, and 
Amalaki trees; and peacocks were sounding their 
notes, cuckoos were cooing their beautiful voices. 
Close to that place, there was, in a sacred grove 
covered over by trees, staying Cyavana Muni, the 
Bhrgu’s son, of a tranquilled mind, and the chief 
of the ascetics. 

Testi fast tart eue ÈA: 11 41 u 

weal gered rur iamen: d 

Sartru ien ereererarifafzr: 11.42 u 

NAT TTT uerfisresr i 

waedteitssrasrereetarfr: RAET: 43 u 

Thinking the place lovely and free from any 
obstacles, the Muni took his firm seat there and, 
collecting all his thought within himself , took the 
vow of non-speaking and controlling his breath 
became engaged in practising tapasyā. Restraining 
his senses and foregoing eating and drinking, that 
Muni constantly meditated on Bhagavatt of the 
nature of Sat, Cit and Ananda. O King! While he 
was thus meditating, the anthill grew up round and 
covered his body and nice creepers covered that 
also all round. 

ATA Wear vrereairentut firfiferan: 1 

a a qut efiuríeuvs ga wed: lt 44 0 

«aaa U: Aoga: i 

FTA M Ustaed agama 45 u 

O King! Long intervals passed away and it was 
covered over with ants; so much so that that 
intelligent Muni was covered entirely and looked 


Book VH Chapter H 


723 


B R 
like a heap of earth. O King! Once the King Šaryāti 


wanted to play in an artificial wilderness and came 
there to the lake with his wives. 

mai: qetdadaa: wferdsuet | 

mieh niae aa HUTT 146 N 

yarar aE fene wia | 

garii farfereer«ft AT aAA 1 47 N 

Saryati became at once deeply engaged in 
playing on the clear waters of the lake, surrounded 
by the beautiful females. On the other hand, the 
quick beautiful daughter Sukanyā, picking up 
flowers here and there with her companions also 
began to play. 

Rai ORT |d 

UTA aeh TATA VATS 48 11 

Dressed in ornaments, Sukanyā walked to and 
fro; her anklets making a beautiful tinkling sound, 
till she came to the ant-hill of Cyavana Rsi. 

PASTA HAAS wr aena ita: | 

vagi ara Tal a uen ga wafers 249 u 

frāafētā afer wpa wat gā 1 

Wale died: Mai vum semet u 50 u 

She sportingly sat close to that ant-hill and 
instantly saw a shining substance inside through 
that, like fireflies. “What is this?" She thought and 
wishing to take it, took a thorn and became very 
eager to prick it up. 

T SEAT ART ATCT ATE gate | 

ferret Gaye AAA TT u 51 u 

Slowly she went close to it and no sooner she 
got ready to prick it, than the Muni saw the 
beautiful, good-haired daughter as if to one’s liking. 

at dea aci Ta aman: i 

ATA Of fērtafētā arta: n52 u 

The ascetic Bhargava, seeing that auspicious 
nice lady with nice teeth, spoke out in a feeble 
voice: “What are you doing? O thin-bellied One! I 
am an ascetic; better go away from here. 

wies fremenfar aras wn | 

"wr Reana aetas team gvitaft u 53 1 


You have got such big-eyes, yet you do not see 
me. I therefore forbid you in your this attempt; do 
not pierce the anthill with a thorn. 

aad prenar ar area a gutter d 1 

feng vafer TT viret 541 

Though prevented, the daughter could not hear 
his words and asking "what was that?" pierced his 
two-eyes with thorns. 

aaa Ae Raat ITT THAT | 

sere«dt stesura wr fee qd g Wafer a USSU 

Thus impelled by Fate, the princess sportingly 
pierced his eyes; but she suspected and thought 
"What have I done?" 

Gate a wem fauna: WARATA, | 

Wdadrufdd: art ufdrd amt € ou56 tt 

MEIN EIGNIN sqettferesrat g TAUTA | 

AAN qp st AMTERA Atta: ou 57 u 

TRIM! a refert wrfürai wur i 

Tal Bag Sas vidíasd:faatsuaq u 58 u 

Thus becoming afraid she returned from that 
spot. His two eyes being pricked, the great Muni 
exceedingly pained, became very wrathful; he 
incessantly gave vent to sorrows and remorse, 
being restless with pain. At that instant it happened 
that the king, ministers, soldiers, elephants, horses, 
camels, so much so that all the beings that were 
there, had all their evacuations (passing their urines 
and faesces) stopped. Seeing thus happened all on 
a sudden, the King Saryati was very much pained 
and became very anxious. 

Shrek: aifend erdt vraie i 

Fae UTT: HUT g AANA 11 59 Ni 

All the soldiers came to the King and informed 
him of the stoppage of their evacuations. The King 
thought over the cause why this had happened. 

fafan erat TT Srferenrerererarirer à 

Jeune fas: Had qupd HTL 60 u 

Cogitating thus, the King returned home. Be- 
coming very much troubled with cares and anxi- 
eties, He asked his soldiers and kinsman “Who 
amongst you has done such an heinous act?" 


724 I Srimaddevibhagavatam 
ata: UB rt gue TERQUE | Though I do not know who is that mischievous 
wate cuanta ga 61 N person that has shown him contempt or like that, 
kaagi at nnne: | this our state at present clearly shews that this is 
emer enger wierarfater Prva: 62 N the fit punishment of that." 
wager qune amer fase | sfr VERT fnr Aafa: od 
aaa N ATARI Wen: 63 i manaa i t feats aa u 65 u 
On the west side of the lake the Maharsi sft ARAMA vergu? aaa) 

Cyavana is practising the great tapasyà in the midst RRS: n2 


of the forest; I think some one has done mischief 
to that king of ascetics, blazing like a fire; and 
therefore we are overcome with this disease. The 
high-souled aged son of Bhrgu has become 
specially proficient in his asceticism and has 
become supreme; I think someone must have 
injured him. 

rd at ale ersamd quid TATA i 

GY gÈ: et qur geri ATARI E 640 


Hearing this, the soldiers said: None of us has 


committed any mischief by word, mind or body; 
we know this very well. 


Here ends the Second Chapter of the Seventh 
Book on the piercing of the eyes of Cyavana 
Muni in Srimaddevibhagavatam the Maha 
Purāņam, of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


724 Srimaddevibhagavatam 
up 
I CHAPTER III 
The King Saryati’s Giving His Daughter in Marriage to Cyavana Muni 

ware Sara "srerférerr car welt war qur fü: ene 1 
gf wes araratarsm ferente i Bete er spa: rear wed aetate: 05 u 
qiraat ana Aans a na d aa fa aidaa viarum | 
demr ot diga fuat g:fiat wem | aa fe wen fad aaen u 6 u 


Rafa IET wr KAT Aaa i2 0 

Vyasa said: O King! Thus the King, troubled 
with cares, asked his soldiers, in an angry mood. 
Next he asked his friends in sweet words. The 
princess, seeing his father and his soldiers 
sorrowful, thought of her piercing the two eyes of 
the Muni with a thorn and thus spoke to the King: 

ad wer feu arti dteurga: 1 

meam west wefPoagawHtad: 03 

“O Father! While sporting in that forest, I came 
to see a very hard anthill covered with creepers 
and shrubs wherein I found two holes. 

wa Gatadersattert tert wem 1 

Wem fap erst up eye 11 4 ou 

O King! Through those small openings, I saw 
the two shining things as if they were fireflies and 
thinking them so I pierced them with thorns. 


At this time a faint voice I heard coming from 
that anthill. “Oh! I am killed!” I then took out my 
thorns and found them wet with water. “What is 
this! I asked myself and was thunderstruck with 
fear; but I could not know that what I pierced in 
that anthill.” 

war Feat qp Wale: ponere We | 

Tree ATT aeta: fánneammq 7 u 

Hearing these gentle words of his daughter, 
the King Šaryāti thought that that act had no 
doubt insulted the Muni and went at once to the 
anthill. 

aama wat qd sort | 

meamna went giagi Wt: g ni 

He broke the anthill that covered the Muni and 
saw the suffering Cyavana aged in practisting 
Tapasya, very much in pain. 


Book VII Chapter IHI 


725 


yra deag war d arta uR 1 

ga aAa waren 19 1 

GAT RU ETT bL cT gne quen | 

aama MET eqs 10 u 

The King prostrated flat before the Muni and 
then with folded hands, praised him with hymns 
and humbly said to him: “O Intelligent One! My 
daughter has done this wrong act while sporting; 
therefore O high-souled One! What she had done 
unknowingly, do you forgive out of your own high- 
heartedness and liberality. 

amaa fè yard waid nN GER. 

aaraa man: etquete aud 11 it 

I have heard that the ascetics are always void of 
anger; therefore now you have to forgive this 
daughter of the offence and thus shew your 
kindness. 

CITA Sar 

gfe grat eere erat areata 

Radai quar wart gai YI 0 12 Ni 

Vyasa said: The Maharsi Cyavana, hearing thus 
the King's words and specially seeing his humble 
and distrezsed nature, said: 


taga gara 


TAS enar await meaty | 

a Warsster werd gftat died gd N 13 N 

"X dier uga AA areal FTA: 1 

aa un 3 wet gifted gad u14 u 

“O King! I never was angry a bit; your daughter 
had pained me; yet I am not angry and have not 
cast on her any curse; you better see, that I am 
innocent; much pain is felt by me due to my eyes 
being pricked. O King! It seems that you are sorry 
and troubled for that sin. 

emt ut Gear caterer Mt T: | 

ya ata aai samta Brea: ALAN 1 5 N 

Who can acguire happiness in this world who 
has committed a great offence to a Bhakta of the 
Devī, in spite he gets even Šiva as his Protector. 


fee att Téluret Areta MAT: | 

arena Ufterat am: efte urfērar: 1 16 0 

O King! On the one hand, I am now worn out 
by old age, and then, on the other hand, I am 
deprived of my eyes; what shall be now my means? 
Please say, who will take care of the blind man? 

wiara 

Raat aga: Vat nRa aANT | 

AT YAA vereqentert R MAAT: 017 tt 

The King said: “O Muni! The anger of the 
ascetics is transient; you are in practice of your 
tapasyā; so your anger is a thing of impossibility. 
So kindly forgive the offence of the daughter. I 
have got many persons who will incessantly take 
care of you." 

"IAA SATA 

aes Prid VIETU He AA: | 

ada: maar: fà qe fef N firm i 18 N 

Cyavana said: "O King! There is none of my 
relations with me; then ] am now made blind; how 
shall I go on with my tapasyà? I do not think that 
your servants will take care of me. 

amua aut vd Het ari Ju | 

fe 8 uftaate! wat serere 19 u 

FAST TERIA GA MA VET | 

aR quae at A dat aR 120 Uu 

O King! If you think it your duty to please me, 
then do my word, give me your lotus-eyed daughter 
to serve me and take care of me. O King! I will be 
very glad if I acquire your daughter; she will serve 
me when I will be engaged in my tapasya. 

ud qud GG À eaa da sfr 1 

wae NĪ vere Ararat HERE 0210 

Riia TTT HU Aes UNER | 

«ata qut faferaatsé dam: 022 lt 

O King! This, if observed, will satisfy me and 
all the troubles that are now with you and your 
army will no doubt disappear. O King! Think and 


grant me your daughter to me, you will not incur 


any sin nor any fault. 


726 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Oe Sarat 

wratfadieri spear yfi sra 1 

4 wnsurear area fefersirare sm i 23 N 

Vyasa said: O Bharata! Hearing thus the Muni’s 
words, the King Saryati was immersed in care and 
could not say anything whether he would or would 
not give over his daughter to him. 

HAAN quare pura amm i 

Seed tat SAT TAT ATTAIN ! 24 il 

The King thought, “my daughter is very fair like 
a Devakanya and this Muni is aged, ugly and 
specially he is blind; how then can I be happy if I 
give over my daughter to him. 

TA: querer qos: VANS qur | 

RASTU: TU TTU STHISTNIR 1025 N 

Who is there so stupid and vicious that knowing 
his good and bad, he for his own selfish happiness 
wants to deprived his beautiful daughter of the 
enjoyments of her married life. 

ya at rai Gy: VBATITTĪŠAT | 

ae qu Ufa Wrest ensi caret Arta u 26 u 

How will that fair eyebrowed daughter of mine 
pass her days happily in the company of this aged 
Muni when she will be overpowered by passion. 

ater gata: cart ANAN YET | 

smergest uit ma fry gag freier 27 0 

Tw wr prea waT | 

seca aree asa axafērfī 28 u 

The more so when the young beautiful ladies 
are not able to conquer their passions though 
possessed of husbands of their own standard and 
liking, how then can my daughter conquer her 
passion on getting this old blind husband! The 
exquisitely beautiful Ahalya married Gautama; but, 
seeing the youthful beauty of that lovely lady, Indra 
deceived her and took away her chastity. 

Meal wr Uta uaa erdferaeier | 

ATG À gu Wurf KAT u 29 N 

Till at last, her husband Gautama finding that 
action contrary to Dharma, cursed him. Now 


through the severe curse of that Brahmarsi many 
troubles many arise; so I cannot in any case give 
my daughter Sukanyā over to him. 

ofa dfaa yatana: veré erit à 

afaatay untae wot aS Ag: faa: 30 N 

Thus thinking and absent-minded the King went 
back to his home and, being very distressed, called 
his ministers to form a council. 

Aafa gadaa fer enden Wars ETAT i 

Wat casa fares sirenod gada aT u31 U 

framed faferat fed ear d Har à 

O Ministers! What am I to do now? Is it advis- 
able to give over my daughter to the Muni? Or is it 
better to suffer these pains? Judge and say what is 
the best course for me." 

"fat Wed: 

fè qsamna das "32 U 

gina gaan web sR Ñ 1 

The Ministers said: “O King! What shall we say 
in this critical juncture? How can you bestow your 
exceedingly beautiful daughter to that ugly 
unfortunate ascetic? 


Cara saru 
aa Raga ater Prat formar i33 N 
Gan RaR Aral IERGĻATA € | 
A: PETA Fanrenpiadrsa: 1 34 i 
Rd grafa ferguuraastsfar d i 


Dvaipayana said: At this moment, seeing her 
father and ministers troubled very much with care, 
Sukanyà understood at once everything by signs 
and hints; she then smilingly said to her dear father: 
“O Father! Why are you looking so sad with cares? 
Perhaps you are very much troubled and sad for 
me. 

Ee Tea Yt Ta VATA TATA NL 35 N 

Anti wea aurea a fia: | 

Bia WaT aa: Bear HPA AAT HA 1! 3 6 Ut 

Ware Waa Uttara V aay i 

O Father! I have pained that Muni; so I will go 


Book VII Chapter HI 


727 


and console him; what more than this that I will 
give up myself at his feet and please him.” Hearing 
these words of Sukanyā, the King spoke to her very 
gladly before all the ministers. 

wu Uff venue Ufa asa 37 n 

ARA sad serere fasta: i 

“O Daughter! The Cyavana Muni is blind, aged 
and of a worn figure, especially of a very irritable 
temper; and you are a mere girl; how will you be 
able to serve him in that dreadful forest? 

HIM UAT WaT vfeufengmp NI 38 u 

wart wur Werder YAAN i 

You are like Rati in beauty and loveliness; how 
can I bestow my daughter to that aged worn out, 
blind Muni for my own pleasure! 

für oat were autsnfesrema w 0 39 u 

Aaya ATTA GTA | 

The father marries the daughter to him who has 
got relations, who is a proper age, strong, who has 
got unequalled grains and wealth, gems and jewels, 
never to a man void of wealth. 

aa a He farmer ardt gt SAAT: 11 40 lt 

ati gar Mar ost aed arfrata a | 

O broad-eyed One! You are exquisitely 
handsome; and that ascetic is very old; see what 
an amount of difference lies between you two. The 
Muni, moreover, has past his marriageable age; so 
how can I give over my daughter. 

ses Pad an ae fret AR ud n 

AHA enewdlet Wu we | 

O Lotus-eyed! You always dwell in beautiful 
places; how can I now make you dwell for ever in 
thatched huts? 

moi Hat und Ararat ata ww 42 n 

aa wanmiurn trad fuasufufer à 

O Cuckoo voiced one! Rather will I and my 
soldiers die than to bestow you to that blind 
husband. 

fara vate Ērd fa eee 0043 d 

afta sra gA a anas emer ente, | 


Let whatever come it may, I will never lose 
patience; therefore, O One of good hips! Be qutet. 
I will never give you to that blind man. 

wed frag at arg dētsd u ata B44 N 

a ral areareré «uit Aaa aera 1 

O my Daughter! I do'nt care a straw whether 
my kingdom and my body live or die, but I will 
never be able to give you over to the ascetic.” 

Gara d tet we sper wget fg: 045 0 

EEEEECIGICHE SP 2E au: | 

Hearing thus the father’s words, Sukanyā began 
to speak with a glad face the following sweet and 
gentle words: 


grataat 
aA fim fa: arat afit at AASIA 46 u 


ga ag uui ni epu ft i 
Patents ager ufi were 047 0 
TT UTE aft Gag ut fast a | 
aded are are wu 448! 
a Mirasa Bara wares Fert uaa | 


“O Father! Do not trouble yourself for nothing 
with cares on my account. Give me over now to 
that best of Munis; then all the persons will be 
happy, no doubt. I will derive my intense pleasure 
there in that dense forest by serving with intense 
devotion my old husband, who is very holy. I have 
got not the least inclination towards these worldly 
enjoyments which are the sources of all troubles 
for nothing. My heart is now quiet. Therefore, O 
Father! I will become a chaste wife to him and act 
according to his liking." 

ATA Sarat 

ATT TTT rear ferit feret TAT 49 N 

Tat a Teta cuum ufa a 

Tear wur ferret ayaa ditam 11 50 Ji 

saria gat dt arret faftrafarsit | 

zaras À adr vat ferarefaftrar qu: 51 u 

Witte qf: et urat stats ware | 

Rag 4 wur dimmi quur g ou52 


728 


euren utuatdaras: | 
Waasttaapt smi Stream YG war t 53 1 
Was VTB: dmana | 

Brat Yat Bet TS TATA WE whet 4 54 u 
Ufa wem de arre Jg ura 

Vyàsa said: O King! The Ministers were greatly 
amazed on hearing these words and the King also 
become greatly pleased and took her to the presence 
of the Muni. Going before him, he bowed down to 
the Muni and said: “O Lord! Please accept duly 
this daughter for your Seva.” Thus saying, the King 
betrothed his daughter to him according to rules. 
Cyavana Muni also become very glad to receive 
her. The Muni took the daughter willingly for his 
Sevà but refused other dowries that the King 
presented. Thus the Muni became pleased; 
immediately the soldiers began to evacuate and 
were very glad. Seeing this, the King's heart 
became filled with joy. When the King, thus 
finishing the betrothal ceremony of his daughter 
wanted to return home, the thin bodied princess 
then told her father: 


Katara 

Terr AA argifti auf a À fü: 655 u 

acne URETATA VASARA | 

ad q yeaa gran auf taa lt 56 u 

aRar aan ata rer À entes à 

afara ya: YB wem eat TATA 57 Ui 

wampar arent ferarfsrgm | 

weite wr qune Hatt Gack g ATA i58 N 

foret erat a aden vfi HERI | 

asad afer ae uem yf i 59 u 

adat srferearttr ATA carat fere t 

Sukanyā said: "O Father! Take away all my 
ornaments and clothing and give me for my use an 
excellent dear skin and one bark. O Father! I will 
dress myself like the wives of Munis and serve my 
husband in such a way as will bring to you the 
unparalleled undying fame in Heaven, Earth and 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


the Nether regions; also I will serve my husband’s 
feet so that I can derive the highest happiness in 
the next world. I am now full of youth, especially 
beautiful; do not think a bit that as I am wedded to 
an aged ascetic, that my character will be spoilt. 
As Vasistha's wife Arundhati has attained celebrity 
in this world, so also I will attain success; there is 
no doubt in this. 

STATA TA AEA Taisa: WHAT gA n 60 u 

ada arferrarftr ust entfernt «ra | 

Gamat KAT went uxutrHfenq 67 0 

wears frt Stray alas at regir i 

ver HUTA ferent FATT 1 62 u 

feravteredt rat faaea mfia: | 

WA: Tal: Yat Bear arnee 1 63 1 

segia A gaa, | 

amga nda ufa: RaRa: i 

aA a Tea qat SÄTTA u 64 NI 

gfā ARRAI IEIR aaa 
ardtaissara: 11 3 11 

As the chaste wife Anasūyā of Maharsi Attri 
has become widely known in this world so will I 
be known also and establish your fame. The 
exceedingly religious King, hearing all these words 
of Sukanya, gave her deer skin and all other articles 
wanted. The King could not help weeping, when 
he saw that his daughter had dressed herself like 
the daughter of a Muni. He stood fixed, very sad, 
on that very spot. All the queens were exceedingly 
filled with sorrow to see the daughter dressed in 
bark and deer-skin. Their hearts quivered and they 
began to weep. O King! Then the King Saryati bade 
goodbye to the Muni, leaving there his daughter. 
He went with a grievous heart and returned to his 
own city, accompanied by the ministers. 

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Seventh Book on 
the bestowing of the daughter of the King Saryati to 
the Cyavana Muni in Srīmaddevībhāgavatam, the 
Mahā Purāņam of 18,000 verses, by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book VII Chapter IV 


729 


CHAPTER IV 
On Sukanyá and the Ašvins 


Sata gara 


Ta wat et aren Aam 0 

aya a ansia Gat eae tu 

Vyasa said: O King! When the King Šaryāti 
departed, that virtuous lady devoted her time in 
serving her husband, and the Fire. 


warana vargfsr venter farferemtsr wr à 
eat at Aaa ure CYRRTSTRTWUN 42 Uu 
u aaa vemufegr Wem | 
Utara yrat g gai verfügen 3 n 
fre VAI UR quem i 


were Pad pea GPA N 4 di 


She gave to the Muni for his food various 
delicious roots and fruits. She made him bathe with 
warm water; then making him put on the deer skin, 
she made him sit on the Kušāsana. (Seat made of 
the Kuša grass.) Next she used to place in his front 
Kuša, Til and Kamandalu and speak to him "O 
best of Munis! You are now to perform your daily 
rites (Nitya Karma).” 

myra ent T MATA PITT à 

quat at KET are walt aaa 5 lt 

When the Nitya Karma was finished, the lady 
used to catch him by his hand and make him sit on 
another seat. 

Users UTT wens A TOAST 1 

wera wat cene gat 6 N 

Next the princess brought fresh ripe fruits and 
cooked rice, grown without cultivation and gave 
to the Muni for his food. 

edd ult qui GAISS, | 

ugma wt watt adt emer 7 N 

When the husband finished his meals, she gave 
him devotedly water for cleansing his mouth; then 
washing his hands and feet gave him the betelnuts 
and pan leaves. 


qaga d dave wp yy | 

yia writer wert Ari Ad: lg |i 

Next he made him sit on an excellent seat, and 
with his permission, performed her own bodily 
purifications. 

erent tat Heat grata u owfaut 1 

Wars mA feme war ouo 

She then, used to eat the remnants, fruits and 
roots of the dishes of her husband; and coming next 
to her husband addressed him affectionately “O 
Lord! Order me what can I do now for you? 

madagi ase waft afe Wem | 

wa xen fret aya ufgaenr 100 

If you like, I may champoo your legs and feet"; 
thus every day that princess devotedly spent her 
time in serving her husband. 

AS STAT AT HATE Fae | 

adaa Wat warn wahr 17 N 

At evening when the Homa ceremony was 
finished, she collecting delicious and soft fruits 
presented to him to eat. 

aa: Aa agg WERT Tara | 

querunt Prat SIESTHTG vb Fat 12 u 

With his permission she, then, ate that were left 
of the fruits; next she prepared bedding soft to the 
touch and gladly made him sleep on it. 

ga wu Ba art maae wur 1 

sant gest af seretturt poet 113 tt 

When his dear husband thus laid himself on the 
bed, she champooed his feet and legs and in the 
interval, asked him about the religious duties of 
the chaste wives of the family. 

madai wer Frist ufeungum | 

Prise er gi Hat gera iIk u 14 u 

wel wines ates arerderar oft à 

patur yilar arg va veufé war 15 n 


730 


When the Muni fell asleep in the night, she 
devotedly laid herself close to his feet and slept. 
During the summer season when her husband was 
perspiring, the lady used to fan him with cool 
breeze. She took off his troubles and thus served 
her husband. 

ud ardent greaisftavaeri wu 1 

PACA TAS TTS ASSMAN 1 6 

In the cold season, she collected firewood and 
lit them before him and used to ask him frequently 
“O Muni! Are you feeling pleasure in this?” 

ara aga aera wet unt REIR | 

andara PITT wearer utd frat 17 u 

PATEL er AEM qt TAT FEATS HAT | 

avira Ufa Area TT sume d qa: 18 u 

That lady, dear to her husband, used to get up 
from her bed in the Brahma Muhürta before 
Sunrise, next made her husband get up and took 
him some short way off and there made him sit for 
calling on nature. She kept ready water and earth 
and stood in readiness at a suitable distance apart. 

ariama arrays vpn d 

TTU RĀTE UTT T emer u 19 u 

KTM g FREE | 

RU gren waar Fare n2ou 

Ti Tet yp UA Fara | 

mre Teas TS wurgreedr 21 u 

fama werepd À weTETG | 

soeh quur He T AAA 022 N 

Knowing that he had finished his calls for 
nature, she took him back to the A$rama and 
washed his hands and feet with water duly 
making him sit on a convenient Asana. She then 
gave to him the pot for Acamana and then began 
to collect fuel. She used to bring pure clear water 
and made it hot; then she asked her husband 
fondly “O Husband! Have you finished cleaning 
your teeth? Warm water is ready; may I bring it 
to you? You better bathe with that, uttering your 
Mantrams. 


Srimaddevibhdgavatam 


add Ehrerensu Gear uat wads 1 
faftrearad poar Seen He 023 
Ua aeuo Ut erem AURA i 

frei ween quur fup uwu24u 

-The time is now for performing the morning 
Sandhya and for performing Homa. Do the Homa 
regularly and worship the Devas." The princess, 
whose nature was pure and clean as anything, kept 
herself engaged daily in serving her husband, 
Cyavana Muni, with perfect gladness, austerity, and 
observing all the rules duly. 

anfarafiatat xr VIAA endet wer i 

SIRTETGTHR Fal vere AT WATAT 8 25 i! 

Thus that beautiful-faced princess worshipped 
gladly Cyavana Muni, serving Fire and the guests 
daily. 

afifa ceret g amaina À 1 

AARAA HSA MANTA u 26 u 

Then, once, on an occasion, the Ašvin twins, 
the sons of Sürya came sporting and at their 
pleasure, close to the hermitage of the Cyavana 
Muni. 

WA SM g at eat Praet varont gf i 

Tread aeaa TAGATAUVATA 27 N 

At that time the princess, beautiful in all respects, 
was returning home after her bath in a pure clear 
stream and came to the sight of the two Ašvins. 

At gear darent ai TT VITA | 

wad: wur arecrrafeaatfedt i28 u 

Being enchanted by her extraordinary lovely 
beauty, they thought she might be a Deva Kanyā, 
quickly went to her and fondly questioned her: “O 
slow moving One like an elephant! Look! We are 
the sons of Devas; we have come to you to ask 
some question. 

ami fas amie we wat manfa 1 

arai caged urat aie wed yaa u 29 u 

O Excellent One! Wait for a moment; we request 
thus to you. O Sweet-smiling One! Please answer 
our questions truly and properly." 


Book VII Chapter IV 


731 


YA area WR: Het RATATAT | 

taat acts ferrecarared areca t 30 N 

fēctar sftftarem enter AAA | 

PSG aa arg ATTATETĪČ sU 11 3 1 N 

O Lovely-eyed! Whose daughter are you? Who 
is your husband? Why have you come here alone 
to bathe in this tank? O Lotus-eyed! You seem to 
be a second Laksmī; O Beautiful One! We want to 
know-something; please reply exactly. 

waren eret eret feret areas | 

wed Hea: digi aeidt aAA u32 0 

O Beloved! Your feet are exceedingly gentle; 
why have you not put on any shoes; why are you 
walking barefooted? Our hearts are being troubled 
to see you walking thus barefooted? 

ferret ait wet URI sene: | 

aargasa fefc famed wt qa 133 u 

O Thin bodied One! Your body is very soft that 
you ought to have gone in car; why are you thus 
walking on foot and in such an ordinary dress in 
this forest? 

adiran cet a vd fafta i 

TG ashe ag wei eur 134 N 

Why have not hundreds of maid-servants 
accompanied you? O lovely faced One! Speak truly 
whether you are a princess or an Apsara. 

STAT HAT ETT STAT TASS STAT | 

wh tat da great ur aai vemm n 35 u 

O Sinless One! Blessed is your mother from 
whom you are born; blessed is your father. 
Specially the person with whom you are married, 
we are unable to describe his fortune. 

daeitamttram firna a geitaa | 

vacias aaa FATT ou 36 N 

O Lovely eyed! This earth is being sanctified 
by the movements of your feet; consequently this 
garden is now purer today than the Devaloka. 

demas qua: et a eat Uae qp a | 

Ā art fà: wet safe Raa u 37 u 


Boundless is the fortune of these deer and birds 


who can see you whenever they like; what more 
can we say than this that this forest is rendered 
very pure. 

wesc wa ara eed ae seiten | 

frat aed ufa: sare zgfirests fet I 38 11 

O Fair One with fair eyes! It is needless to praise 
your beauty; speak truly who is your father and 
who is your husband; we like very much to see 
them. 

Cana SATS 

TARE a: spes MATH AT SHIRT à 

Waa TAHA VATA FATS 439 N 

yatea at at fast sat wh 1 

AA Ul Heat frat SAT ATTA 140 N 

Vyasa said: O King! On hearing their words, 
the exquisitely beautiful princess bespoke to the 
twin Devas with much bashfulness: “T am the 
daughter of Šaryāti; father has given me over, under 
the directions of the Daiva, to the Maharsi Cyavana. 

Ufetetshea 3 tat qaaa area: à 

wur arent RIP VÜGHTHT 41 

Iam his chaste dear wife; the Maharsi is staying 
in this very place. O Twin Devas! My husband is a 
blind ascetic and he is very aged. I gladly serve 
him day and night according to the rules of chastity 
amongst women. 

sir gat fesfirerard afateatire arene 1 

TAT pea ae Waa |1 42 0 

Who are you? And why have you come here? 
My husband is staying in the ASrama; kindly come 
and sanctify the Agrama.” 

Taatad oat GATGAATI CIN | 

nei carafe ATT fran eir Ufa i 43 Ji 

O King! The two Ašvins heard her and said: "O 
Auspicious One! Why has your father betrothed 
you, such a gem, to an old ascetic? 

ana starastent fergedrarast erem à 

adata quar ft aa sesh smfirdt u 44 u 

vd Rains yit enfer 1 

Vata Aeran 145 u 


732 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Itis very strange. Indeed! In this solitary forest 
you are shining like a steady lightning; what more 
can we say than this that we hardly find a beautiful 
lady like you, even in the Devaloka! Alas! The 
Deva dress and a full set of ornaments and blue 
dyes look well on you; this deer-skin and barks of 
trees in no way fit you. 


"fs Gaara ATG SINT 46 N 
Ga Gast et A SITO 
"Té wu: pra Baus i 
TATA vut: aera: 
udii atrruferttesera 1147 11 
O Beautiful One! Your eyes are very large; yet 
the Creator has given you a blind husband; specially 
a very aged one; and you are wearing away by 
constantly dwelling with your blind husband in this 
forest. What more can be wrong for the Creator 
than this? O deer-eyed One! In vain you have 
selected him for your husband. 
variererart radan 
pense LIT ay Hah | 
ute 


TAM He umet 148 it 
At this period‘pf your and beauty it does not 
look at all well to see you with your blind husband. 
You are versed in dancing and music; but your 
husband is blind and aged; when in dancing you 
will shoot your darts of love, on whom then, will 
those arrows fall? 
ada s Aiat 
ule a AT Ft TART | 
an frard a densferqiav- 
Want hai AA 49 
O large-eyed One! Oh! The Creator is certainly 
of a very little understanding! Else why would he 
have made you, so full of youthful vitality, the wife 
of a blind man? O lovely-eyed One! You are never 
fit for him; select another husband. 


3 


qur aft raft remm u 50 t 


O Lotus-eyed One! Your husband is not only 
blind but an ascetic; so your life is quite useless; 
we do not consider it fit that you reside in this forest 
and put on this bark and deer-skin. O dark-eyed 
One! Your body and every limb thereof is very 
beautiful; judge well and make one amongst us your 
husband. 

fe dadsamafāafsrd d 

agha MANATA, | 
RET yi udgamafsri 
waaay WS 1 

O Proud One! Why are you being so very 
beautiful, spending your youth in vain in serving 
this Muni? No good signs are visible in this Muni; 
he cannot maintain nor protect you even; why are 
you, then, serving him in vain? O spotless One! 
Leaves at once this Muni, quite incapable in giving 
any sort of pleasure, and marry one of us. 


wd Tat tara at a 
Hee ard Wiad fam i 
NĒ qur Het fü caret 
ferrea Tft art u 52 u 
O Beloved! Then you will enjoy in the Nandana 
Kānana or in the forest of Caitraratha. O Proud 
One! How will you spend your time with the aged 
husband, being brought to so much humiliation and 
without any dignity and self-respect. 


anes ttt fst adsa 
wie He aaa qemw 53 N 
You are endowed with all auspicious signs; 
moreover you are a princess; you are not ignorant 
of all enjoyments in this world; why then you like 
to live such an unfortunate life in vain in this forest? 
O Princess! Your face is exceedingly beautiful, 


Book VII Chapter V 733 


your eyes are wide and your waist is thin. Your| you to serve at this young age of yours, to remain 


voice is sweet like a cuckoo. in this forest and serve this aged man. O Princess! 
TT Aam araa Is it that you like troubles and nothing else. 
Uh ga Fara PASTA | waa: d 


garry wr quate yea genae arate 1 
ania oft area Tse 54 u| VT ata gm 


Who is more beautiful than you? Quite now your HAA TT are 56 It 
aged ascetic husband and marry one of us for your att hmm ergo? qun 
happiness; then you will be able to enjoy excellent qqeheumr 11 4 11 
celestial things in the heavens. O One with a face lovely like the Moon! We 
fēk 4 qa ara ad war see that you are of a very soft body; so to collect 
qa wr fest Bear i water fruits is never a duty fit for you." 
Gar aaie md day Here ends the Fourth Chapter in the Seventh Book on 
fe a ud qurg grga 55 u the conversation between the two ASvins and the 
O good-haired one! What pleasure can you Princess Sukanyā in Srimaddevibhagavatam, the 
derive by your staying in this forest with your blind Maha Purāņam, of 18,000 verses, by 


husband! O deer-eyed One. It is very painful for Maharsi Veday vase: 


Book VII Chapter V 


733 


CHAPTER V 
On Cyavana’s Getting His Youth 


Aeg spem AGITA AUT | 

dacia dt ax aud rai uod 

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing their words, the 
princess began to tremble; but holding on patience 
she spoke to them in reserved terms thus: 

act at fang a dzi grime 1 

"dici dylai a Ad ufqqués: 2 0 

“You are the sons of Sürya and you are the 
acknowledged deities amongst the gods; specially 
you know everything, I am a chaste virtuous 
woman. You ought not to speak to me in the above 
manner. 

ft gat ats ga maA 1 

ad teat d art dre mde u3 ou 

arsi uwdee cur fear: | 

ayda ut Ad smfegués u4 N 

O Twin Devas! Father has betrothed me to the 
Muni practising the Yoga Dharma; besides I am 
chaste; how can I behave like a prostitute! This 


Sun is the Witness of the actions good or bad of 
all people; He is therefore looking on our actions 
also, Besides you both are born in the family of 
the high-souled Kašyapa. 
HHA Uh TAM HAA ATA | 
aranshate dan iA eniferata wu 5 N 
adc tread «dt md qnaa ars à 
garansi wp wrath: ula Hara N 6 di 
Thus it is utterly wrong for you to utter such 
(irreligious and infamous) words. You know well 
the course of Dharma, what is religious and what 
is irreligious in this world which has got nothing 
substantial; how can a family woman leave her 
husband and serve another? Go wherever you like, 
O Sinless Devas! I am the daughter Sukanya of 
the King Šaryāti, devoted to my husband. Other- 
wise I will curse you,” 


SUTH Sara 
SRS TTT ATA fae ITT i 
Maga esr vient we qa: 7 ou 


734 
wag vast g enfer ma a 
at ara gA grama: sae wa 8 
Vyasa said: O Bharata! Hearing these words, 


the A$vins were greatly surprised, and, afraid of 


the Muni, spoke again: “O Princess! We are very 
much pleased to see your chastity; therefore, O 
Beautiful Woman! Ask boon from us; we will grant 
for your welfare. 

miè wae garai dafraat 1 

ga watt wate uf ga uu 

O honoured Woman! We, the physicians of the 
gods, will certainly make your husband exceed- 
ingly beautiful and young. 

Taare = Ulett guy 1 

were nA agies u10 0 

"wr carded scar fafa raaf aar | 

vaara rites AMA VEGA (1 1 N 

O Smart and Intelligent One! When we three 
will be exactly the same in figure, age and lustre! 
you better can make one us your husband.” Hearing 
their words Sukanyā became greatly amazed and 
went to her own husband and spoke everything 
what they, the God’s physicians, said. 


Gears 

warftraetaal edt ATT Sree | 

get ver Rend arae wp 012 

Sukanyā said: ^O Husband! The Ašvins, the 
Sürya's sons, have come close to our Arama. I 
have seen the two Devas and their bright bodies. 

der ai ureaaigt arret Tags à 

afd reri eira d aerem u3u 

fret ateravgumi aft era 

waa BAAS d sp ed wefegu u4 i 

aaragasi a aftena: uid We d 

wa warren ufus qup uisu 

Seeing me beautiful they were overpowered 
with passion and told me. “We will, be sure, make 
your blind husband, young, bright and give him 
two eyes again; but you will have to make one 
condition. Hear it: Your husband will be exactly 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


like us and you will have to select your husband 
amongst three of us.” 

GTS ET WE At AAA | 

fe edere: met gaara 16 1 

O Holy One Hearing this as strange, I now come 
to inform you. Now judge and say what I am to do 
now. 

ganni qatar A Tt BATS wu | 

darmu da dem dfe ui 17 N 

The Deva’s Maya is very difficult to com- 
prehend; the more so, when I do not know their 
intentions! O Omniscient One! I will act as you 
desire.” 


wat Sara 


TRS HAST THE TAA Gat | 

area aie À yii gafirarat 118 u 

faery asta IA GTA PATI 1 

Cyavana said: "O Beloved! Go just now, at my 
word, to the A$vins and bring them, O auspicious 
One! before me. What more shall I say than this: 
Go and observe, what they say, as early as possible. 
There is no need to think over this matter.” 


Ua A MAA AI TTT TasaatT 19 U 

Braam areal Aaa uet i 

Vyasa said: O King! Thus getting the permission 
from her husband, Sukanya went immediately to 
them and said: "O Ašvins! You are the chief gods; 
now do as you say. I agree to observe what you 
desire.” 

ABT MTA eret EAA TA ATTA u 20 N 

we usage at Ulma fara: d 

wore eaaet cats: ufadsmg 21 u 

Hearing her words, the two Devas then went to 
the Muni's Aérama and told the princess: “Let your 
husband enter in the midst of the water. The aged 
Cyavana Muni went down quickly in the midst of 
waters to attain a good form. 

amaA uaaa at STR |! 

Tae Pega RATETA: 022 N 


Book VII Chapter V 


735 


1 
Next the two Ašvins entered into the water of 


that tank. A few minutes after, the three persons 
came out of the tank. 

seus eater yar: wv: RA | 

TTT: KATATAATKTAT 0 23 N 

All were equally bright, equally beautiful, 
equally young and their limbs were decorated 
equally with earrings and various other ornaments. 

asga-ateat: ad quitter arattīfa i 

aena we ufd AAC N 24 N 

arara ie GULA TAA | 

They all spoke simultaneously: “O Auspicious 
One! There is no other woman beautiful like you, 
especially your face is very clean and fair; therefore 
select any one of us three as your husband. O Fair 
One! Whomever you love most, choose him. 


Gara Jara 


VT EAT TIRANA TATA i025 I 

qranit wager | 

Vyasa said: O King! Sukanyā then saw their 
bodies are equally bright and beautiful; not the least 
difference is to be found in beauty, age, voice and 
dress. 

mg HSRIHTTST dias aaa 26 N 

amad ufi gereng afaa, | 

She became doubtful on seeing their equal 
appearances. The princess, not being able to 
distinguish her husband, became very anxious and 
thought: 

fe waht Rg: di AA denne 1 27 u 

ufi tage gh dni RATS EREA, 1 

“What am I to do now? Whom to choose? They 
are exactly the same. Ī cannot distinguish who is 
my real husband? 

saree anaana afer n 28 N 

ped fh War ara HOT KAUTTTA | 

This may be the magic set up by the two A&vins. 
However, I am put to a great crisis. I won't ever 
select another who is not my husband. 

a na RA afta: Aa u29 Uu 

aaa: HEA IAT AT erm | 


Therefore my death 
now? The third form 
Deva’s son.” 


is well nigh; what to do 
seen now may be also a 


gf dias mere wei adi forem 30 n 
wet madi edt gpa a Heat | 


Thus cogitating, she resolved to meditate on 


the Highest Prakrti, the 


Lady of the Universe, the 


most Auspicious Orne. Then the thin-bellied 
princess began to ging the hymnus of the 


Bhagavati. 


yaara 
mai cat snm: PITS yg: faa n 31 u 
tat Ase adten up enit aa | 
Sukanyā said: “O World-Mother! Under most 
painful circumstances [ take refuge; preserve my 
chastity; i bow down to Thy feet. 


"TH: Valga afā mu; VIA u 32 
frr rit era dura: RTA à 
Se Waa YS wd versnm 433 n 
UTT cafiramem aes iret eire | 


O Devi! Salutations 


to Thee, born of lotus. O 


Thou, the dear consort of Sankara! Salutations to 


Thee. O Thou favourite 


to Visnu, O Mother of the 


Vedas! O Sarasvati! Salutations to Thee. Thou hast 
created the world, moving and unmoving; Thou 


art preserving it without 


being least excited; again 


Thou art swallowing it for the peace and well-being 


of all. 


aaa wart cd gear u34 tt 
aigas R angat aTtķai ear wer 1 
What more, Thou art the Most Worshipful 


Mother of Brahma, Vis 


nu, and Maheša. Thou al- 


ways illuminest the understanding of the illiterate 
and Thou always grantest liberation to the Jüanins. 
aa wat wer got qeufraagiar u35u 
ARES RI ca fort Rara i 
TAA FUT Hl ALAA YS i 3 6 N 
fatgar ARa reat antiq Ya: 1 


Thou art the Prime 
Beloved of the Prime Pu 


in in fulness and the 


sa. Thou grantest Bhukti 


736 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


(enjoyment) and Mukti (freedom) to the souls that 
are cleansed and pure; Thou givest pain to those 
that are entirely void of knowledge and Thou 
grantest happiness to those that are endowed with 
Sattva Guna. O Mother! Thou bestowest Siddhi 
(the success, the eight supernatural powers), fame, 
and victory to the Yogis! 

yoi vat yasi ferent ued war N 37 u 

ufi aga A arta 1 

avai trad He ch Gunter aA nu 38 u 

wf asta ada fafan À Nea i 

Being merged in an ocean of bewilderment, I 
come now to take refuge unto Thee. O Mother! 
The two Devas are playing hypocrisy with me; 
thus puzzled I ca’nt fix my mind whom to select; 
therefore I am merged in an ocean of sorrow. 
Save me by shewing my real husband. O 
Omniscient One! Knowing my vow of chastity 
dost Thou enlighten me to so that I can know my 
husband. 


Gata sara 


wa waar dat eat aer ARER u39 

zasema BM garn AT, | 

Vyasa said: O King! Thus pleased by the 
Sukanyā's prayers, the Devi Tripura Sundari then 
imparted to her the pleasant Sattva Jñāna 
(knowledge pertaining to Sattva Guna). 

Aiya wem qeusaheutnuedt 40 tt 

yada (TTT sme ved ufem i 

She then looked again at the three personages, 
and though they were similar in appearance and 
beauty, instantly she recognised mentally her 
husband and chose him. 

qsa wet get Aaqet at agag: 041 n 

wien amra dzīt qaqa 1 

When Sukanyā selected the Muni Cyavana, the 
two Devas became greatly pleased to see that. 

TAA: ATT were dt gA 42 d 

years A amatam 1 


The two Devas were pleased by the grace of 


r- 
Bhagavatī; they were further pleased to see the 


Dharma of chastity and granted her the boon. 
AT q CATA WU AA MTA AT MATT 0 43 N 
Asada AACS TA: | 
SWR: paisi À ganai FAA 144 N 
fis och od ore erts ferrorperit à 
ma Tat gammai qd As yaaa N45 N 
They then bade good-bye to Cyavana and were 

ready to start to their own place when Cyavana 

being very much pleased to get through their grace, 
his beauty, youth and wife, interrupted them, saying 

“O high-minded Devas! You have done much good 

to me. I used to feel pain every day, in spite of my 

having this wife having good hairs! 
TREAT UA GA ATTA HTT | 
garai Aa eat dai Buy 46 N 
wunfad aa: fkfagradat ga 1 
But owing to your mercy, I cannot describe how 
happy I am now in this world of woes and troubles. 

I was very aged and blind and was without any 

enjoyment but it is you that coming to this forest 

have brought to me eyes, youth and exquisite 
beauty. Therefore, O twin Devas! I desire to do 
something good to you in return. 


SIT fip at ruspetenser d 47 u 

a fere at tal Mara RUTATATČĀ i 

Tagad feretro ara IL 48 tl 

Fie on him, who does not return anything for 
the good that he has received from a beneficent 
friend. That man remains indebted for ever in this 
world; therefore I am desirous to gīve your two 
now whatever you want. 

SUA RUTA AG AAT d 

wid at vara agenti Art: 1.49 u 

gaat at ates fisa Kada emt i 

O twin Devas! Even if the Devas or the Asuras 
find it difficult to attain, I will give that to you to 
free myself of the debt I owe to you. I am greatly 
pleased at your good deed; therefore be kind 
enough to speak out whatever you desire.” 


Book VU Chapter VI 


great at g Water UTE 50 N 

ATA yaad funem 

T fug: erga ud at AATA usi 

Seaver Garter add AT Gt: AE | 

fuwerfafe eda ARA aun 452 

They began to consult with each other, and spoke 
to the Muni Cyavana who was seated with Sukanya 
beside him: ^O Maharsi! We have got all our 
desires by the grace of Father! Still it is difficult 
for us to drink some libation along with the other 
Devas and we thirst after that very strongly. 

VISIT fend dzi AAT: FARA | 

qaran ada afa gross Rt ATT 053 ul 

artaka waded attsod «it rdum | 

At the great sacrifice of Brahma in the Golden 
Mountain (Kanakācala), Indra, the King of the 
Devas, ordered us not to drink Soma, as we were 
physicians. 

weise at serene wind usa! 

fürurersfia vaut eere: BTA | 

Therefore, O Knower of Dharma! O Ascetic! 
You will certainly do us a great favour if you can 
make us drink the Soma juice; we would be very 
glad and have our desires satisfied." 

urea Tal: Wr Te AAT WE NSS N 

"dé KTR aera WD waa: | 


737 


Thus hearing the words of the A$vins, Maharsi 


Cyavana gladly spoke 
words. 


to them the following gentle 


Sat VaR qur: Waal er ureranfafa t 56 N 

Araya PRET vicars VATA i 

O Twin Devas! I was blind and aged; but now I 
am become a young and beautiful man, and it is 
by your grace that I have got back my wife. 


fad carseat 
Wap fad 


e i lakā 


W570 


Therefore I speak this truly before you that at 


the great sacrifice of 


the lustrous King Šaryāti, I 


will gladly make you drink the Soma in the 
presence of Indra, the, King of the Devas. 


parva TA Ear al fee wht SA: u 58 N 


ITE TAA F 
aft sted 


HARTS ! 59 N 
TEGO TTR 


TRASE: 115 11 


Hearing these wo 
Ašvins werc greatly 
world of the Devas. 


rds of the Muni, the twin 
leased and went back to the 
nd the Muni Cyavana, too, 


returned to his own Arama with his wife Sukanyā. 


Here ends the Fifth C. 
the getting of yo 


anter of the Seventh Book on 
th by Cyavana Muni in 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavātam the Maha Puranam of 
18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book VU Chapter VI 


Cyavana make these with twin Devas drink Soma 
and how his words came out to be true. Human 


47 


CHAPTER VI 


737 


On the Ašvins Getting the Right to Drink Soma 


WARN gara 

«aaa zi deit cit endi urat a 

data He ed wd MU Wee: 1 di 
Uga web haana wit | 

ferit fresit aa andit dt arora i 2 ui 
miira waren frem ag wu a 

fid warea sitqenimitsfen wem 1 3 u 
Janamejaya said: O Muni! How did Maharsi 


strength is insignificant compared to Indra's 
strength. Indra forbade the physicians, the A$vins, 
to drink the Soma juice. How then could the Muni 
give the right thereof. This is very wonderful. 
Therefore, O Thou, devoted to Dharma! O Lord! 
Describe in detail the doings of this Maharsi 
Cyavana. I am very anxious to hear it. 


738 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


T 

Gat gal ga ada: UTT: od 

Reer Weare tamenftram: 5 i 

maea vratfererrart ATT SS | 

wf wre aaa aei sah frat u6 u 

wagi waa BAT GTĀSRITA BA | 

Yar steht at wr g HET Ade AAT 7 N 

Vyasa said: O King! In that famous sacrificial 
ceremony solemnised by of the King Saryati, 
Cyavana Rsi did wonderful feats. O Bharata! I am 
now narrating to you his entirely wonderful 
character. Hear it attentively. Maharsi Cyavana, 
illustrious like the Devas, began to enjoy with a 
cheerful mind and gladdened heart, with his 
beautiful wife Sukanya who was like a Deva 
Kanya. Now, once on an occasion, the wife of 
Saryati became very anxious and trembling said 
to her husband weeping: "O King! You have 
betrothed your daughter to the blind Muni Cyavana; 
now it is your duty to go and enquire whether the 
daughter is living or is dead. O Lord! What is my 
beautiful daughter doing with that husband. 

Tes AA Yaa FEAT | 

fee orale Gener OT IIZI ATRI TEETH, 1 8 uu 

Wages Tad ensi wee ae 1 

amare faea euism afa uou 

qeni weer vot Hot areae] i 

aig oft Marea geret Gorath u 10 u 

Please go just now to the Muni's Asrama and 
see about it. O Rajarsi! I always burn in pain and 
agony when I think of her. She must have become 
very lean and thin due to the troubles of Tapasya; 
please bring her quickly here to my presence. She 
is suffering an everlasting pain from having an aged 
blind husband; and it is quite likely she has become 
very lean and thin. I am anxious, therefore, to see 
my daughter lean and thin who is wearing barks of 
trees as her dress. 


wraiferearer 
restate fermenter Garrat SERI | 
Rag ame afr a daaag udin 


Šaryāti said: “O broad-eyed One! I am going 
gladly just now to see my dear daughter and that 
Muni of severe vows. 


eum Sart 

TAMARA quartier: AT Ma HeTA | 

ama IATE Rasma gt: 0 12 Ul 

TersssmmHtg g amava=ugtufī: | 

radars eumd bw ud30 

d retam fers gufrta: 1 

fé tagad ant qr eitesférfém u 14 u 

Pease TdERATATSAT: Ufa: qd: | 

andan eri yitsa aSa: wu 15 u 

Vyasa said: O King! Thus saying to his wife, 
distressed with sorrow, the King Saryati mounted 
on his chariot and quickly went towards the ASrama 
of the Cyavana Muni. On reaching there, he saw 
the Maharsi Cyavana like a Deva’s son. Seeing 
his body like that of a Deva, the King became 
bewildered and began to think thus: “What! Has 
my daughter done such an ugly act, blameable in 
the society! That Muni was very calm and quiet, 
penniless and very old; my daughter, perhaps, being 
overpowered with passion, killed him and has 
taken, no doubt, another husband. 

gasa yaara AAA wr alas 1 

The Hea: Terra aa Ha: od 16 N 

Rrena silat erras eren fà enfer t 

were gate wot safe femp N 17 N 

Itis indeed difficult to control the God of Love, 
armed with his flowery bow; the period of youth 
is moreover very hard to conquer. So this daughter 
impelled by lust has thrown a dreadful stigma on 
the clear name of the family of the great Manu. 
Fie on him whose daughter in this world is of a 
vicious character! It seems that daughter are born 
for the expiation of all the sins committed by their 
fathers. 

War agi ad qud rardra fist 1 

gaiena ur qur qot water feser i 18 N 


Book VH Chapter VI 


739 


BT ATT STAT far rater fee | 

arent ft wet urb argvi d Ha war 19 N 

But what an unjust act have ] committed for my 
own selfish ends? It is highly incumbent on every 
father to betroth his daughter with every care 
possible to a bridegroom suitable in every respect; 
but I did not do it and now have got the fruits 
equivalent to my doing. 

gf dear aat g: yit maa i 

eer gent TT wem vam fase: 20 N 

mai fnnt: want: nat AT | 

TTT AMAIA KERT 21 N 

fé entier ferae erar NT: aAA: | 

FTA var Sarge Aap: fuer i22 u 

If I kill my daughter, vicious and unchaste, I 
will incur sin due to killing a woman and moreover 
my daughter. I am the cause of this stain on Muni's 
line of descent. On the one hand, the scandal on 
one is very powerful; and the affection for a 
daughter is strong on the other, what am I to do 
now?" The King became merged in deep thoughts. 
At this time Sukanya accidentally saw her father 
thus drowned in anxious thoughts. 

ar apa ri TAI Yona fürqiferos à 

Tear VAS ort WHURGHDIND 23 N 

Seeing him, Sukanya instantly came to her 
father’s side and asked the King in sweet affec- 
tionate words. 

fee amat minen ferma: | 

safe aft der qarrrgstarony 024 N 

O King! How is it that your face has become so 
pale with anxious thoughts, seeing the Muni sitting 
in front of you, a young man with lotus-eyes. 

AR weweund wenn uf ww | 

m fear qaste wind He wa u25 

O Father! What are you thinking? You belong 
to the famous Manu’s family; besides, you are a 
high-minded man; you ought not to be sad so 
suddenly; come quickly and bow your head down 
before my husband. 


Bae SAT 

sta gar aa: grat rai: maden: 1 

Wares aai War yeah dau Aa: 026 u 

Vyasa said: O at Hearing thus the daughter’s 
words, the King became impatient with anger and 
began to speak to her: 
Rrsirara 

qa gAs: yi (TARDES E | 

ssi Yar RTA: ARSA NEAT 0 27 N 

“O Daughter! Where is that aged blind ascetic 
Muni Cyavana and who is this youth intoxicated 
with lust? A great dopbt has arisen in my mind. 

"qf: feb Pree: ura vera gepa à 

AAS it ul: Tag: Heresy 28 u 

O Vicious Soul! Have you slain that Cyavana 
Muni and engaged yourself in such a sinful act? O 
You, a Disgrace to your family! Have you accepted 
another husband out of your desire of lust? 

wise PIRTI a UTT ATT i 

fēk qd qund aud i feet 291 

frisé quam TAHASTA | 

seat yoo egga wat ar 30 N 

My mind has became very much troubled on 
not seeing that Muni in|this A$rama. O vicious One! 
Now I do’nt see the Muni; but instead of him, I 
see this bright person. 
your sinful behaviour 
the ocean of cares, 


And thus it is on account of 
that my mind is drowned in 


u31 nN 

saki uu dā ādā 

ARNAN: ATT: Ha: ARĪ: 032 N 

Then hearing her |father's words, Sukanyā 
smiled and gladly ons at once to her husband 
and said: "O Father! He is your son-in-law; He is 
the same Cyavana Muni; there is no doubt here. 
The twin A$vins have given him this beautiful 
lustre and lotus-like eyes. 

TATA dunt 

mai HEU Tt 


SÑ WU i 
Gat: 33 


740 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


The two Ašvini Kumāras came accidentally to 
my Āšrama and out of mercy no doubt they have 
made Cyavana such a nice young man. 

"TÉ Ta parre dem vat uaa RoR | 

wem cd end maiat BTANA 11 34 u 

word vd oft same rai fü: 1 

anges aot ud anerféreafet fere 35 N 

O King! Fam not your that daughter that will do 
a vicious act as you think, beguiled by this beautiful 
form of the Muni. Father! Bow down before the 
Cyavana Muni. Ask him and he will tell you 
everything." 

gf spat ere: oar: IANA i 

ŅUTATA Wf TA ew USS ATR d 36 ! 

Hearing thus the daughter's words, the King 
went instantly to the Muni and bowed down before 
him and asked him affectionately thus: 


wara 

Here agai miang Sen | 

AU HAS MA A TT À SAT YA: 037 N 

Tas MEAS WU SREM | 

ag ARG WHICH u 38 N 

The King said: “O Son of Bhrgu! How have 
you got your eyes back? Where has your old age 
gone? Kindly narrate all your details as early as 
possible. O Brahmana! Seeing your exquisitely 
beautiful form, a great doubt has arisen in me; so 
tell me everything in detail; I will be very glad, no 
doubt." 

IIT SATA 

areas aera Sarat firmaret à 

TIER: HAMA HIM JUMTA 139 N 

Cyavana said: “O King! The two A$vins, the 
physicians of the Gods, came here on their own 
account and have done me this good out of their 
mercy. 

na darat att aa suas PU | 

Resim wait eat dtmurtrit n 40 N 

Owing to the benefit thus received, I have 
granted them the boon that I will make them drink 


the Soma juice in the Agnistoma Yajfia of the King 
Saryati. 

Wd war aa: Wied Mears ferret wm | 

TRÀ Ta HERTST HĀRTA WH 4 

Thus I have got these beautiful eyes and the new 
youth; therefore, O King! Collect yourself and sit 
in the holy sacrificial seat. 

Sepe: U g farre werd: uferdtufir: à 

Galas: Hea: HAs NETT U 42 di 

When the Brahmin Cyavana Muni spoke thus, 
the King Šaryāti and his dear wife sat with greatest 
pleasure and began to talk on auspicious topics with 
the high-souled Muni. 

aad mta: we wart afta | 

"rerfirenfir miat GURU 1143 N 

Then the Bhargava consoled the King and said 
I will perform your sacrifice; please collect all the 
necessary materials. 

TT feret erst eat Brat qam] 1 

Wended Juss aa upstate 144 i 

I have promised to the Ašvins that certainly I 
will make them drink the Soma juice. Therefore, 
O King! I will have to carry that out in your 
sacrifice. 

ga framnfüenfü ga Wesen d 1 

qaen qr wd Bras Ta 045 N 

O King! If Indra be angry, I will stop him by 
my Tapas face and in the Agnistoma Yajfia I will 
make the Ašvins drink Soma. 

Ww: UATE: wrath: gata: 1 

SEXE VENI AMATA VATA 146 i 

Gara Tad WaT unm aun UT | 

werdzminre-qu: dal AA: fae 0 47 U 

Vyasa said: O King! Saryati, the lord of the 
earth, then gladly approved the proposals of 
Cyavana Muni. The King then shewed respect to 
the Muni and, with a pleasant attitude of mind, 
returned to his city with his wife, all the while 
talking of the Muni in the way. 

preset uzfta adama, i 

arama walter 48 ul 


Book VII Chapter VI 


741 


On a good auspicious day he, possessed of 
enormous wealth and prosperity, prepared an 
excellent place for the performance of the sacrifice. 

Fara yiana | 

miat arsrarmma era: qferdtaferg i 49 uu 

The Muni Cyavana then invited Vasistha and 
other respectable Munis and initiated the King 
Saryati for the performance of the sacrifice. 

férrd qp wem ag gar: ud WS | 

seen wa areas: u 50 H 

Atthe commencement of the sacrifice, Indra and 
the other Devas and the two A$vins all came to the 
sacrifice to drink Soma. 

yard vilka diae arefararquit i 

"ges a graaifetti ayaa usi 

Seeing the A$vins, Indra became afraid and 
asked the other Devas, “Why have the A$vins come 
here? 


fafaa a turet adna a | 

AGA Uae frat d u52u 

They are the physicians and, therefore, never 
fit to drink Soma. Who has brought them hither at 
this great Agnistoma Sacrifice?” 

agree: Aena NET | 

VIA arcarara ut Tenue 53 i 

The Devas remain all silent. Cyavana Muni then 
became ready to offer Soma to the A$vins and Indra 
immediately stopped him saying: "They are already 
prohibited to drink Soma as a sacrificial share; so 
do not accept the vessel of Soma for them.” 

We ATA Haat Ta: udi | 

Aueru aci att wei Vreftud nn 54 0 

Cyavana then said: “O Lord of Saci! These are 
the Sürya's sons; tell, then, truly why these are 
rendered unfit to drink Soma. They are not of mixed 
blood; they are born of the legal wife of Sürya 
Deva. 

A as went endasitgdt à: 1 

oat wur qaem Uie uui fra 55 n 

O Lord of the Devas! What is the fault, then, of 


the Ašvins, the physicians, that they be prohibited 
to drink Soma juice. 


Foiss weet yr 

Irenas ti get dt aaa WaT u 56 u 

Please reply. O Indra! This point must be settled 
by all the Devas here. I have promised to make 
them drink the Som juice in this sacrifice. 


Rasat Far west ware Taka | 


ured went ut À ad few 157 ü 
To keep my von have initiated the King in 


this sacrifice. I will have my word fulfilled; there 
is no doubt in this. 
ward Sm Yat gri Ad aa: | 
PATA THN : Waa war uss tl 
O Indra! They have given me my youth and 


endo: adad: | 


bestowed my eyes and have done me great good. | 
will also do good to them to my best.” 
Y- vara 

fate parādi araedt Nfa it: 1 

sAd + areal urgente 59 N 

Indra said: “The Devas have appointed these 
Devas their Physicians; therefore they are looked 
down upon in the society; so they are unfit to drink 
Soma. You need not make them drink Some.” 


era ST 
SCOTS HAS cys Ta PŪT 1 
red fà fe ah are sr um TASH t 60 u 
a 


ws ferare 
«atst ara gara STU | 


Hugara Wott 
aa freind Weng) garos 
TEES: 116 11 
Cyavana spoke: "D Indra! You have adulter- 
ated yourself with Ahalya; why are you, then, giv- 
ing vent to your anger thus in vain. You have 
treacherously murdered Vrtrasura; it is quite inap- 
propriate for a vicious 
the A$vins cannot ha 


person like you to say that 
e the right to drink Soma. 


Srīmaddevībhāgavatam 


742 

This is guite impossible.” O King! On the spring- Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Seventh Book on 

ing of this dispute, no body spoke to Indra. The granting the Ašvins the right to drink the Soma juice 

illustrious Bhargava, then, made them accept the O EVS He Mana turam COR 
i d 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Soma juice. 


742 


Srīmaddevībhāgavatam 


ar D car Pal m 


CHAPTER VII 
On the Ašvins Drinking the Soma cup 


GTA sara 


ae We q WA Arga: qfi Hora | 

Vara wat AA GST: (i01 di 

m sure nafarni cd draft 1 

attranftr faa vi rat fersmesufiremae u 2 i 

Vyāsa said: O King! When the vessel filled with 
the Soma juice was given to the two Ašvins, Indra 
became very angry and showing his strength, spoke 
thus to the Muni Cyavana. ^O Brahmana! Never 
will you be able to endow him with such a high 
honour. When you have shown towards me your 
enmity, I will kill you, no doubt, exactly like 
Vi$varüpa." 

TOU IATA 

"reader rrr usfāvradet 1 

at unde wraqenaframmy 003 i 

std cat aana Het aad EH | 

afama eax dat fate mad u4 i 

Cyavana said: “O Indra! Do not insult the two 
high-souled Ašvins. They have given me beauty, 
youth and lustre and made me look like a second 
Deva. O Lord of the Devas! Just as the other Devas 
can take the vessel of Soma excluding you, so the 
two powerful Ašvins can do the same towards you. 

SA sara 

faust ada: art mé aa metas | 

afa RER wares fonder etu u 5 u 

Indra said: "They are the physicians; so they 
cannotin any way have the right to accept the Soma 
cup. I will just now sever your head." 


SU Saray 

amga qp caret ARTA U TA: 1 

ré q mama sedes d uem ge 

Vyasa said: O Ornament to the race of Bharata! 
At these words of Indra, the Muni made the Ašvins 
accept the Soma cup, thus highly insulting, as it 
were, Indra and not taking any notice of his words. 

arrest warren éd g fuum 1 

mha ama d wrench u7 

MATH AT AG ed zrefenerfer eren] i 

ad g wena fesmeufüeTqu, 8 Uu 

When the two Ašvins accepted the cup with a 
desire to drink the Soma thereof, the powerful] Indra 
saw it and said: "If you make them drink Soma 
out of your own necessity, I will hurl thunderbolt 
on your head exactly in the same way as I did 
towards Višvarūpa.” 

andige mtaka: 1 

wine fattractamat? uou 

The Muni became violently angry at this and 
made the A$vins drink the Soma according to due 
rites and ceremonies. 

Bashy pikana TATA i 

gai wdesrat queteumueup uo 

ftd careret Wat enenuuur Ta: | 

TRITT ast a sentra: 411 N 

Indra, too, angrily hurled thunderbolt on him in 
the presence of all the Devas. The weapons shed 
lustre like million Suns. Seeing the thunderbolt 
hurled on him, the powerful Muni made the Indra’s 
thunderbolt stand stock still by virtue of his Tapas. 


Book VII Chapter VII 


743 


Ha A meng gta: | 

weramdt gå get RAN YAAN: 0 12 N 

T pa aga MATT ANAT | 

set: qeu: mdp gÀ NRT: u13 d 

The powerful Muni then adopted black magic 
to kill Indra and offered oblations of clarified butter 
and grains, purified by Mantrams, in the Fire. By 
the Tapas of Cyavana, of unbounded lustre, there 
sprang from the sacrificial hearth Krtyà (A female 
deity to whom sacrifices are offered for destructive 
and magical purposes). And out of Krtyà originated 
a very strong person, very cruel and of huge body, 
a great Demon. 

Weal Aa WerHt wae: mA 1 

vr wéarnsnefssrég! warm: (014 

TALAT SAT AAA Met VT | 

gat wu awa YEA: 4015 d 

The horrible Demon, named Mada, was terrify- 
ing to all the beings. His body was huge like a 
mountain, teeth very sharp and terrible. Four teeth 
were hundred Yojanas long each, and his other 
teeth were ten Yojanas long. 

arg udademmaradt peA 

frag fret pur Aiea ATT 16 N 

His arms were like mountains, very long and 
fierce, tongue, horrible, rough and so very long 
that it reached up to the heavens. 

arg free enfer strat gy i 

"Tr ara: Arnita sire: 17 u 

His throat was like a mountain peak hard and of 
a furious appearance; nails resembled tiger's, hair 
is horrible. 

Srl HIATT ur ET eme TTT | 

A gare sfiwursferarads u 18 M 

His body was jet black like lamp black; face 
very terrible, eyes bright like the conflagration fire 
and awful. 

Sater ferar esr Area fad ITT | 

via: AAA Hel AT wewq: N19 N 


One of his jaws touched the ground and the other 


1 
touched the heaven.|Thus was born the Demon, 


named Mada of huge form. 
i : UG WDTHTSEHTSERT d 
Baa ada A WaT uS uzo 


Looking at him, the Devas became suddenly 


frightened; Indra, too] got very much terrified at the 


sight of him and did not want to have any more fight. 
sfà erat wart ahaa: 1 
carat Aut TATU, 021 


The Demon swallowed Indra's thunderbolt, 
looked at the sky, and stood up as if to swallow at 
once the whole Ūnivģrse. 

Ww varia: (TAKAS, | 

kai Wel greg: vate efter: u22u 


He became infuridted with rage and pursued 
Indra to devour him. Seeing this, the Devas cried 
aloud: “Alas! We ard slain." Indra had his arms 
disabled by Mantrams and so he could not hurl his 
thunderbolt though hd wanted to do so. 

were: quse cies TTT à 

Rae WaT aa TSE HAARATA 24 N 

The Lord of the Devas, then, with thunderbolt 
in his hand, looked|on the Demon as Death 
personified and remembered his Guru, skilled in 
the knowledge which is the proper time to perform 
a certain thing. 

BŪT, ggatregmet: 1 

earn quer fautraagvi Wed 0625 0 

The liberal-minded Brhaspati knowing the time 
of imminent danger, and that he is remembered by 
Indra, at once came to [the spot. 


frond aur qi vreftafer 1 
UNA QUE EB, u26u 


He then judged what to do in the present crisis 
and told Indra: *O Indra! This cannot be averted 
even by Mantrams; what to speak of thunderbolt! 

angit wes aapea RT: | 

waters 


> GRA ACT usse 27 N 


744 


This powerful Asura Mada has arisen from the 
sacrificial hearth by virtue of the Tapas of the 
Cyavana Muni. The Muni’s power is especially 
felt here. O Lord of the Devas! Nobody, You, J, 
nor any other Deva will be able to resist him. Know 
this, 

afad wa yae Cae AAT | 

Vu are caer AGA Wen: 028 N 

Even Brahma cannot thwart the anger of one 
who is devoted to the Sakti, the Highest Force; 
Cyavana is the Bhakta of the Highest Sakti. So no 
other body is able to defeat him. 

a Panta F Herat fae | 

a Pranfag orm: PITT aafeq u 29 N 

He is the man himself to take back the Krtya 
that he has originated. There is no doubt in this. So 
it is better for you now to take the shelter of the 
Muni." 


UIT Sarat 


geret qeu yresranregagf-t uf i 

were Ūda warhead: 130 N 

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus from his Guru, 
Indra went to the Muni and bowed down shudder- 
ing, before him. 

ae under VAK, | 

Vast wa ada aad A AEK 431 

KAUA CIE GIC GIC EI ELOR fa | 

rr: aeda far yea F132 1 

O Muni! Forgive me and stop the Asura from 
his intention to slay the Devas. O All knowing One! 
Be pleased, I will keep your words. O Bhārgava! 
The two Aświns will, from this day, have the right 
to drink the Soma juice. This I speak out to you in 
truth. O Brahmana! Be graciously pleased unto me. 


füeur d Ae we Vada quium | 
a anà ena ren ta afteafe 133 t 
irarafirardd! rachel u ues fe | 
afar grate: entfdeq fane wae 34 ti 
"Df pi ow udem unn | 


wierd g fag we didum 11 35 u 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


O Ascetic! Your intention will never be baffled. 
Especially I know you to be a knower of Dharma; 
so, you will never be able to make your word 
swerve from truth. The two Aévins will, by your 
grace, be able to drink always the Soma cup; and 
the King Saryatis fame will also know no bounds. 
O Muni! Know that what I have done is simply to 
test your prowess in Tapas. 

Ward He À gerade Wer ARTA, 1 

Hea wdeaarat Tur set farefteramq u 36 u 

O Brahmana! Now do this favour to me and take 
back your, this Demon Mada sprung from your 
sacrificial hearth and thus do good to all the Devas. 
There is no doubt in this. 

KAT WURUD vue unread 1 

deen maag feum 43700 

gamara dfāri mia Ae WW: 

AIG UAT TT wenp W138 N 

Thus spoken piteously by Indra, Cyavana, who 
knew the Highest Reality, drew back within himself 
the anger arising from the enmity with Indra. Then 
the Maharsi Cyavana consoled the Devas that were 
very much perplexed and anxious out of terror of 
the Demon named Mada and divided the Asura 
into four parts (1) female sex, (2) drinking, (3) 
gambling and (4) hunting animals. 

We ferrea qdcuramea afend fura i 

PNT KTI qu «edu 39 i 

When Mada was thus divided into four parts, 
the terror stricken Devas felt themselves relived 
and saved and got consoled. 

Weg deg wei camem Weert 1 

afai adeaaten UTTATATA arta: 0 40 0 

Cyavana then placed the Devas in their 
respective stations and completed the sacrifice. At 
last, the religious Bhargava made first Indra and 
then the two A$vins drink the Soma Cups. 

wd dr aata vfngaent | 

ARA dtudt vrerrder eut sem tl 4 1 tt 

wesrafir fagard wd quferfusqq | 

STRE: magai rats Tati 42 u 


Book VII Chapter VIII 


745 


O King! Thus Cyavana had the A$vins their) When the daughter reached a marriageable age, 


Soma Cups by virtue of his power of Tapas. Theuce 
the tank with the sacrificial post Yüpa became 
famous and the Muni's ASrama also was renowned 
and honoured in all respects on the surface of the 
earth. 

maia ig grama HU | 

aa UA amt wm wfusgds: 43 4 

The King Saryati, too, became very glad at this 
sacrifice and completing the sacrifice returned with 
his ministers to his city. 

Wed Ta fr AIGA: MAATA, | 

STATE Tats Taras sta 44 N 

The Manu’s son, the powerful religious King 
Saryati governed his kingdom, free from any 
obstacles or other enemies. He had one son named 
Anarta; and Anarta had a son named Revata born 
to him. 

Psat: AAS are faata grafa | 

emerat qanaat 45 i 

Revata built the city of KuSasthali in the midst 
of the ocean and began to live there. He enjoyed 
all the things in the countries named Anarta and 
others. 

wa Yaad wa PERAS | 

yi a tad ATT AKT Ysera 11 46 ul 

Revata had one hundred sons of whom Kakudmi 
was the eldest and of pure character. He had one 
daughter very beautiful named Revatī, endowed 
with all auspicious gualities. 

ATT Tal AAT GTS Ya: | 


PORTA TSR VATA HAGA H4 7 Ut 


the King began to think where he could get a prince 
of a good noble family. 

tad ara ao RR: ufirdtufer: à 

war Id aama ATT: 148 0 

That powerful King began to govern his people 
Anartas, with his headquarters at the Raivata hill. 

ferret TEM Tr GET SAT IT aT 0 

Tent Yeoh genet west Brahe 49 i 

gi afha yore: ganar rada 1 

AAC TAI UER: frame ! 50 ui 

“Whom. to betroth this daughter," the King 
thought and settled that he would go to Brahma 
and ask him, the e omniscient Prajapati, 
worshipped by the Devas. Thus the King went with 
his daughter Revati tp the Brahmaloka. 

TA tag ams Bai t PUE 

ert: ahaa faeere: fere: 11 51 tt 

There the Devas, [Yajiias, Vedas, mountains, 
oceans and rivers all were shining with luminous 
bodies. 

swa: Reat: Toner i 

wey: Wires: Wel Maa GTA: 1 52 u 

eft RRRA merge? eques 
Wunde 117 11 

There the eternal Rsis, Siddhas, Gandharvas, 
Pannages and Caranas were singing hymns to 
Brahma, standing with folded hands. 

Here ends the Seventh |Chapter of the Seventh Book 
on the twin Ašvins drinking the Soma Cup in 
Šrīmaddevībhāgavaļam, the Maha Puránam of 

18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. — 


Book VII Chapter VIII 745 


SAU - | 
< — . . CHAPTER VIII 
On the King Revata and the Solar Dynasty 
WANA JATT daughter Revati to the Brahmaloka (the abode of 
Hads Uensurads wa UA |1 Brahma)? I entertain al great doubt on this point. 
weet war tadteigar eum ud ou war yal spe que MOA: HATA | 


WIN Saharan AAICTANATTATA N 2 N 


Janamejaya said: O Brahmana, The King Mara Wm Fei tada: i 
Ksattriya; how could he go himself with his araeitaasfrgera ARRA ders: 11 3 N 


746 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


I heard of yore while conversing about matters 
connected with the Brahmins, that the Brahmin 
only who self-restrained and the knower of 
Brahman could alone go to the Brahmaloka. The 
Satyaloka is very hard for the worldly people to 
go; so I doubt how the king could have gone with 
Revati from the Bhtrloka to the Satyaloka. 

ya: ratnaritfā Wdymen frfa: | 

maA g Vet Tale Wit: AA | 


Man, when he discards his body, can go to the 


Heavens. So is recited in all the Šāstras. How then, | 


people, while, in their human bodies can go to the 
Brahmaloka. 

vaniqa: et tee Wr Seat WE u4 u 

TA dere fasy8sqnéR: ufum 1 

VIE WAT TARA WESSIH: WERT N 5 n 

So cut asunder my doubts how the King Revata 
could go to the Brahma loka to ask the Prajapati 
on certain matters. 

eara sarea 

Tür frat ware eias: ufafir: 1 

zeiten afģeitat ur wr det ud ne 

ada ACK HAT WT YA: | 

apres Weta dod wagen 7 

Vyasa said: O King! On the top of the mountain 
Sumeru, are Jocated the Indra’s heavens called 
Amaravati (the abode of the Immortals) the 
Samyamani city of Yama, the Satyaloka, the 
Vahniloka, the Kailāsa, Vaikuntha the abode of 
Visnu and others. 

sara: mAh We: curet gek: | 

"Wap wuifür alta: fermer quent 8 od 

mata ta aaa uw afaeit | 

adararss yore: paca: fret 9 u 

The great archer Arjuna, the son of Prtha, went 
to the Indraloka and spent five years there. In 
ancient times, the Kings Kakutstha and others went 
to Indraloka, in their human bodies. 

rei Feier: VATA afi RETIA: | 

Farad uror ARTA HTT: (10 d 


FETT: GU WS Tele TIT: TATE | 

Smregdt dt TUPAKA n 1 1 

Even the powerful Daityas used to conguer the 
Indraloka and resided there at their will and 
pleasure. In ancient times, when the sovereign of 
the earth, the King Mahābhisa went to the 
Brahmaloka, the most beautiful Ganga also was 
coming to the Brahmaloka. 

; à ET 

faaam AŪTTA Far aT EČ TT a2 U 
Rai aane ard: ATT ARETA À A 
ART at tar gA A A AKTA, u 13 N 
On the way the King saw Her. O King! 
Accidentally at that time her clothing were cast 
aside by the wind; the King saw her partly in her 
naked state, and, overpowered with lust, smiled; 
Ganga also smiled. Seeing the states of them, 
Brahma instantly cursed them; and they had to 
come in this world and take their births. 

dramēsfu at: wd difsar derarad: | 

Treat aft NARR u4 u 

"rupe wer: cwdem qum | 

mar: Tash eiat: Qatar TTT n 15 tt 

All the Devas, when oppressed by the Danavas, 
went to Vaikuntha and sang hymns to Hari, the 
Lord of Kamala. O King! Men can go to all the 
Lokas; in fact those high-souled men that perform 
Yajfias or severe asceticisms and thus have ac- 
quired great merits, those performers of Sacrifices 
and ascetics surely go to the Heavens. 

aaya Haque acai um i 

Warga wart Wat ATT gu 16 tt 

ada cana aga warfare | 

O King! It is only the abundance of good merits 
that is the only cause of going to Heavens. So you 
ought not to entertain any doubts on this. 


WANT IATA 


tat tad meat yalear areca t 17 i 
sareh Ta: agree Hea Ta ITT | 


Book VII Chapter VIII 


747 


serum f wurfas edt Sa Gat YA: N 18 N 

aari AERA À HAT | 

Janamejaya said: O Muni! The King Revata 
went with his daughter Revati to the Brahmaloka; 
but what did he do when he went there? What did 
Brahma order him? And to whom did the King 
betroth his daughter, when ordered by Brahmā? O 
Brahmana! Speak out all these in details to me now. 


TA IATA 
fma wélurer went tac: fat 1 19 di 
Wem at uRwE werndes Wat wer | 
areata rere foret eretraqur: AUNT 11 2 0 N 
CUSERIDIA EIE EIE ES EM 


Vyasa said: O King! Hear. When the King went 
to Brahmaloka to ask about the proper bridegroom 
of his daughter, there was going on singing and 
music; so he waited a while to find an opportunity 
when the assembly would have a leisure; but he 
was so very pleased with music that he could not 
desist from hearing it til! the end. 

aaa wu mud wuns wp u21 

qira Gat Tea verfi TAGAT | 

When the music was finished, the King bowed 
down to Brahma and showed him his daughter and 
informed Him of his intention. 


miara 
at adu AN ad wu YRT 22 u 
Sa HY AT SEISIE cat NATA: | 
aga wager A AfA: GAANA: 0 23 N 
aftitr war: enr feror erre à 


The King said: ^O Deva! This good daughter is 
mine; now kindly say who will be her bridegroom. 
O Brahma! To whom shall I betroth this daughter? 
I have come to you to ask on this point. I have 
searched for many princes and seen also a good 
many of them and none of them is to my liking 
and so my mind is not at rest. 

ARTA Sadao PENANTA EEE |(24 N 

aaraa we utd magi ATA | 


geii aaar a udengunigaqu u25 N 

aan adye a i wares od 

O Lord of Devas! Therefore I have come to you. 
Kindly select one bridegroom for her. He is to be a 
Kulina (of good family), powerful, religious, 
liberal, and a prince ¢ndowed with all auspicious 


qualities. This is my prayer." 


vam saru 
aami era! wad Aude 126 N 
agata AAT FIAT HITT UAT | 


Vyasa said: O Ki 
the Creator of the w 
laughed, thinking that a very long interval had 
passed away. He then (said: 


EEIEIE] 
maea MAN À gA G: 0 27 0i 


IET: Great À we diūgdrrerieram: | 

O King! The princes that you thought would 
become the bridegroom of your daughter, all died; 
their sons and grandsons and their friends even have 
all passed away. 

atafēvrtratsša ur wadd 28 1 

dyremer gar we wir Affa i 

Mae aT WaT ATS WaT te fg i 29 n 

sae sf carat ngaa: fre ! 


The twenty-seventh Manvantara of the Dvapara 


g! Brahma, the lotus born, 
rld, hearing these words, 


Yuga is now going on; so none of the princes of 
your family are now existing. The Daityas sacked 


your city. Now Ugrasena, the King of Mathura, is 


reigning i in that place. 
MYUEA 301 
Saas: iu: wet ARTA: d 


Bett arfkrarrat semi vmi TAT u32 U 

SETS ee l 

simam aA qe: 33 

He belongs to the illustrious lunar family of 
Yayāti. His son, the powerful Karhsa, born of a 


748 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Danava, began to do injuries always to the Devas; 
he threw his own father to the prison. Becoming 
very haughty, he began to govern himself the 
countries of other kings and began to tyrranise over 
the subjects. O King! The Earth became so much 
troubled by the armies of the wicked Demon Kings, 
that She became quite unable to bear further loads. 
So She went to seek refuge to Brahma. 

AGL ATA: POT: HTH: d 

Raat aene füvart asa ATAU yia: n 34 u 

magen qud enya: EAT: | 

writ ara: ga adatas 035 

Brahma and the other Devas then began to say: 
“O Earth! To remove your burdens, the lotus-eyed 
Narayana will incarnate Himself as part incarnation 
in the form of Sri Krsna. He who is Narayana 
practised in ancient times, as the son of Dharma, a 
very severe asceticism, in company with his brother 
Nara in the sacred hermitage of Badari. 

asado age argdatsft faga: 1 

tare Fea: ura: che: pupa MTN 11 36 N 

Now this very Deva is born in the great family 
of Yadu in the womb of Devaki by Vasudeva and 
is now celebrated by the name of Vasudeva.” 

Sume Tat À ari Brat Get || 

SUT YT: UTA numum Weta: 0 37 Uu 

O King! He has slain that vicious wicked Karnsa 
and has installed Ugrasena in his place. The very 
powerful Jarasandha, the vicious King of Magadha, 
is the father-in-law of Kamsa. On hearing the death 
of his son-in-law, he became in infuriated with rage 
came to Mathura, and raged a terrible war. 

ama HAT HATTER HATE GT | 

HOTTA Ra: vive TAT WTA: 113.8 

warmed ye Hari Wat aa: 1 

Kara Tet wast was u39u 

Vasudeva defeated in a battle that Jarasandha, 
proud of his mighty valour. Though defeated, 
Jarásandha sent Kalayavana with his host of army 
to fight again with Krsna. Bhargava Vasudeva, 


when he heard that the King of Yavanas arrived, 
sent away all the members of his family and the 
Yādavas to Dvārkā and began to wait with his 
brother Balaráma for the Yavana King. Then he 
went alone to the camp of Yavana and led him 
away to a mountain cave where was sleeping the 
King Mucukunda and had then the Yavana King 
slain by Mucukunda. 

Pog Nat cream Git gammā i 

qnt at vit per: Preah: we vit: | 

ARAA gier FIT i 

wig We Gear ga: WATT | 

Sub cu ward wen agra d d 

ATBATFUTGFATATA saat UTAH: | 

agg date add aera: WE 40 ti 

Krsna then went to Dvarka. The city of Dvārkā 
was then in a dilapidated condition. Krsna brought 
together the artists and got built exquisitely the 
beautiful palaces, forts, and markets and stalls, etc., 
and so added to the beauty of the place. That 
Vasudeva, of mighty prowess, thus improving the 
city, made Ugrasena the King of that place; and 
Krsna is now waiting there with his friends. 

TETTE N mt TSA SATE: | 

Waist gach dtt atsrg qa uus: 041 0 

His elder brother Baladeva, the carrier of the 
plough, is celebrated. Thus he with Musala in his 
hands is a great warrior and the part incarnation of 
Ananta Deva. 

Vis UIT Sang Hat HAASAN | 

tadi wena ferarefaftr qa: 142 n 

He is the fit bridegroom of your daughter. So 
give your daughter in marriage, without any delay, 
according to the rules of the marriage ceremony to 
Sankarsana Balabhadra. 

Eu Ut sass TB cai ES ECOD 1 

ae BMT ure HAS UIN 0 43 N 

After giving your daughter in marriage, go to 
the hermitage of Badari and practise tapasya. That 
sacred retreat is the (park) recreation ground of the 


Book VII Chapter VIII 


Devas, holy and yielding to human beings the 
objects of their desires. 


edm Sara 


fe wen Varēs! sum weratrar i 

SET TT Usenet FRAM: 144 I 

ae at aemdaTa Seat A MATA | 

MAKE quedis quie: Areas 11 45 i 

ware Brasmard TART dē Uae | 

Vyāsa said: O King! Thus ordered by the lotus- 
born Brahmā, the King went to Dvārakā with his 
daughter. Reaching there he gave over his all 
auspicious daughter in marriage to Baladeva duly 
according to the rules and regulations. At last, 
according to Brahmá's injunction, he became 
engaged in severe austerities in the Badarikas$rama 
and, when the time of death arrived, left off his 
mortal coil on the banks of the river and went to 
the world of Gods. 


TANT IATA 


maagaasi Tad Aye 146 ! 

Tare, frega ure garda: 1 

"pure g mi wu anA fet 47 N 

HM FHT A AAA TST ATS red f à 

vadi Tat Aeg: Wor wat: MAT ll 48 N 

Janamejaya said: O Bhagavan! You have uttered 
one wonderful thing. One hundred and eight Yugas 
passed away when the King of Revata with his 
daughter was deeply absorbed in hearing music in 
the Brahmaloka yet neither the good King nor the 
daughter did get sufficiently old. How could this 
be! How could they have lived so long! Were their 
longevities ordained to be such a long period! 


Set Saray 
TOT TATA aT A Tet tat TA: | 
aa rer: wera Tees EISA |1 49 t 
Vyasa said: O King! The Brahmaloka is not 
touched by any vice nor sin; old age, hunger, thirst 
or fear of death nothing exists there; nor is there 
any other cause by which weariness comes. So what 


749 


doubt there can be that the people there will be 
long-lived, free from old age and death! 
rece vrata: de TRENT 1 
Te: HCA aay ate FAA: i050 ii 
Wag Yad: Ya sera iden | 
zagi fere: giia R: 510 
When the King Saryati went up to the Heavens, 
his sons were all sexed by the Raksasas; those 
that remained, they, terrified left KuSasthali and 
fled on all sides. Vaivasvata Manu sneized; owing 
to that, came out of hi$ nose one powerful son; his 
name was Iksvaku. 
BATT frin i 
Sara, 052 1! 


Regi. wee dederam. 
fagia: unetui : 5310 


He spread the Solar dynasty and became cel- 
ebrated. Getting ex initiation from the 
Maharsi Narada, he began to meditate the Devi 
constantly and practised severe tapasya for the 
spread of his race. O fine Iksvāku had one hun- 
dred sons; Vikuksi was the eldest; he was power- 


ful and endowed with great strength. 
siam tr rr rr |] 
supó qur Yat: : U54 0 


smear tara: sen: feet od 

Iksvaku became king and lived in Ayodhya. He 
sent his fifty sons, the powerful Sakuni and others 
to Uttarapatha (Eastern) provinces for governing 
those countries. 

fare cen tstarfesreda d Gat: i 55 0 

aaRS U TAM UTT | 

erit gt afta ursf Bare ear MUA: 56 Ul 
att Adama TRB AS TASCA: |1 8 11 

That high-souled monarch sent also other eight 
sons to govern the countries in the South. (West- 
ern). O King! He kept the remaining two sons by 
his side for his own service. 

Here ends the Eight Chapter of the Seventh Book on 
the story of the King Revata and the spread of the 
Solar dynasty in the ME Srimaddevi- 
bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


750 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


CHAPTER IX 
On the Story of Kākustha and on Māndhātā 


era sata 

aafaa fapt yra: à 

STUART AE 1 

Ati anA Gt IT YaST 1 

ZASA TAMMY WMT AAAA 0 2 N 

Vyasa said: O King! Once on a time, the time 
for Astaka Sraddha (the funeral ceremony in 
honour of the departed) arrived. Seeing this, the 
King Iksvāku ordered his son Vikuksi: "O Child! 
Go immediately to the forest and bring carefully 
pure sanctified meat for the Sraddha purpose; sec, 
that there be no neglect of duty. Thus ordered, 
Vikuksi instantly went to the forest equipped with 
arms. 

TT HA AT: T ATTRA | 

maia uftstat separe gyfer: u 3 ui 

fear TEST AT VIET emat aA | 

srt Aeman fux area dag! 

He hunted in the forest lots of boars, pigs, deer, 
and hare. But he was so very tired with his journey 
in the forest and got so hungry that he forgot every- 
thing about the Astaka Sraddha and ate one hare 
there in the forest. The remaining excellent meat 
he brought and handed over to his father. 

Wana wart uit ga Tear | 

aadi asgicat went grama: 5 Nn 

When that meat was brought to be sprinkled for 
purification, the family priest Vasistha, on seeing 
it, at once came to know that some portion had 
already been eaten and it was the remaining part. 

TATU Ta sm mania Rerfer: 1 

ua agma ufus: MEZ 6 nu 

The leavings of food are not fit for the sprinkling 
purpose; this is the Sastric rule. Vasistha informed 
the King of this defect in the food. 

Tae wd user suferfeontfady i 

gata faai GTA: 07 odi 


In accordance with the Guru's advice, the King 
coming to know thus the violation of the rule by 
his son, became very angry and banished his son 
from his kingdom. 

visite fe ferret AAT Sat FATT: 0 

"db at sumenp fuqeduedus: uS 

mA Adam MATA: | 

The prince became known from that time as 
Šašāda; he did not become the least sorry for his 
father's anger; he went to the forest and gladly 
remained there. 

frusto usd und da NE 9 I 

YERA EANTA: Wf: TAA | 

He gladly passed his time absorbed in religion 
and sustained his life on forest fruits and roots. 
After sometime when his father died, he inherited 
his kingdom. 

VAAN: VĪRAM WE 10 i 

WMATA: Has sia dep: d 

we arava xen Gert: ii u 

‘On becoming the King of Ayodhya, Šašāda had 
only one son; he became famous in the three lokas 
by the name.of Kakutstha. He was known also by 
other names Indravaha and Purafijaya. 

Waa IATE 

aaa: Het S ITG UT | 

ATi af web eum da area N 12 N 

Janamejaya said: O Holy One! How and why 
was the prince named Kakutstha. Why was he known 
by the two other names? Speak all this to me. 


Cae gara 


VMS Hate TT AIGU Sher ATT | 
Tweet wenn fni: fuqüdrHÉ aera) 
wafursidt gar Ger wd ugfsdrn 013 
wrgfereitrenrférate ferar sree | 
aware TIÉASTETSTD TAKA: H 1 4 1 


Book VI Chapter IX 


751 


Vyasa said: O King! When Šašāda went to the 
Heavens, Kakutstha became king. That religious 
king then began to govern the country of his father 
and grandfather with an authority supported by a 
powerful arm. At this time the Devas suffered a 
defeat from the Danavas and took refuge to Visnu, 
the Infallible and the Lord of the three worlds. The 
eternal great Visnu full of intelligence and bliss 
then addressed the Devas: 


Rearea 

qnm wéruret mA NNA, | 

V gaa d deren K 15 N 

amira aate aen geh: 1 

WIR: WAST THE AT ATT 16 N 

Visnu said: “O Devas! Go and pray to the King 
Šašāda. He will be your ally and kill all the 
Demons. That King is religious; especially he is a 
worshipper of the Highest Sakti. He is good archer 
and will come to help you. His strength is immense. 

a: gena wp wad Wem | 

adei WERTSD weeds al n17u 

area YSTATATA ta: 

Weert Wat waif: 18 n 

Vyasa said: O King! Indra and the other Devas 
hearing the nectar like words of Hari went to 
Ayodhya, to Kakutstha, the son of Šašāda. Seeing 
the Devas at his palace, the king worshipped them 
duly and with great care; and he asked them why 
they had come there. 

Tatars 

ease maraa fad wet IT | 

"enr Ye Fat ws ast WaT "19 

gag Het dam gean AA: 1 

waren een wer sadi AT 20! 

The King said: O Devas! When you have 
favoured me by your presence here, I am blessed 
and sanctified; my life is crowned with success. 
Say what I can do for you; I will carry it out even 
if it be very hard for me to perform.” 


eat He: 
rere Ge USS WRIT a graft: | 


ur sa Gey lā n21u 
uarie get fiet A aA ST | 


ferar ferreae weit w22 u 


The Devas said: “O Prince! Please help and back 
us and defeat the Daityas, invincible by the Devas 
and form an alliance with Indra. O King! By the 
grace of the Highest Sakti, you have nothing 
unattained anywhere; 
the order of Visnu.” 


so we have come to you by 


qA warerer Sara EET: 

zA À ae da gua: 23 0 

The King said: "O Devas! I can back you and 
become your ally if Indra carries me on his back in 
the time of war. 

"nmi q eff AA IRASAT | 

aad uftrsartt UeTaagadiragu, 11 24 N 

I will fight nor with the Daityas but for the 
Devas; but I will go to the battle-field on Indra's 
back; this I speak to you truly. 

aetgalud dar: adder pig, | 

Ti TA TAI RTA ensstt regs 1125 i 

Vyāsa said: O King! The Devas then spoke to 
Indra: “O Lord of Saci! It is now your bounden 
duty to do this; so quitting shame, be a carrier to 
this king." 

PAAR BH: UR efter SIS à 

aya quenqui exefaratt META 26 N 

Indra got ashamed very much, but being 
requested frequently by, Hari, at last assumed the 
appearance of a bull like the great Bull of Siva. 

wuredg Weasel Ta d 1 

Raa: rf SAAT HAART STAT (V 27 N 

The King mounted or that bull to go to the war; 
he fought while taking his seat on the hump on the 
shoulders of the bull (Kakuda); therefore he was 
named Kakutstha. 


752 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


FA are: Gat da Fa ATES: | 

We feng qemeatdeanqpeeg wi 1 28 u 

ferar geraat dui Wear i 

ures dd cathe wet wg € 0291 

The King was carried by Indra on his back hence 
he was named Indravāha; he conquered the 
Dānavas in battle; hence he was called Purafijaya. 
The powerful King defeated the Dànavas and gave 
away all their wealth to the Devas. He bade farewell 
to the Devas and returned to his own kingdom. 
Thus the alliance was formed with Indra. 

pee Tara Taf Rer SMT: | 

ape ae retrait aag AAT: 1 30 M 

O King! Kakutstha became very celebrated on 
this earth; his descendants became kings and were 
known as Kākutsthas and were all very famous here 
on this Earth. 

napemearerereg art MATA TETAS: | 

arta faspreaen YY: gaat diary 31 N 

Kakutstha had one powerful son, nained 
Kakutstha by his legal wife; Kakutstha had the son 
Prthu, of mighty prowess. 

froth aye: maana: | 

farsifireq fasta: yar: gat ware: 132 N 

Prthu was the part incarnation personified of 
Visnu, and worshipper of the feet of the Supreme 
Sakti. His son was Visvarandhi; he became king 
and governed the kingdom. 

ETE Ya: a ARTA: BAA: | 

Ag cung dumet sempe 33 N 

His son was Candra; he came to be king, 
governed his subject and multiplied very much his 
issues. 

mad Wee wa uen: | 

mid ffe ca get wmegüwwr u34 tt 

Yuvanasva was one of his sons; he was very 
powerful and spirited. Savanta was the son of 
Yuvanāšva; he was very religious. He built a nice 
city named Savanti like the Paradise of Indra. 

AEG YAS eSATA WERWS: | 

Praag: Garena aya uferetatq: 35 N 


gaam gat cert oufenftaet 1 

gg ferae ATT granary 3.6 N 

Brihada$va was the son of the high-souled 
Šāvanta; he had a son Kuvalayāšva. He became 
the Lord of the earth by the power of his arms. He 
killed Dhundu Dànava; so he was very much 
celebrated by the name of Dhundumāra. 

"aen qure urerarmr AAA à 

qaaa ya: siarada sta entier: 1 37 n 

frésvreange: utet erar uferdiufe: | 

AKTA frame FRTAKTEI SYA: 38 N 

His son Drdhāšva; he governed the earth; His 
son was Šrīmān Haryāšva. His son was Nikumbha; 
he became the King. Nikumbha had his son 
Varhaņāšva. Kri$á$va was his son. 

weap acrarreatame: d 

wer vat wert anA fra: 1039 u 

His son was the powerful Pasenajit; his son's 
prowess knew no bounds. Parasenajit had the 
fortunate son Yauvanāšva. 

Hanaga: raie wétufer: à 

SIETA g waar aa ffe 40 u 

O fortunate One! The son of Yauvaná$va was 
Šrīmān Māndhātā; he became the Lord of the Earth 
and for the satisfaction of the Devi Bhagavati had 
one thousand and eight palaces built in Benares 
and in the other chief places of pilgrimages. 

maag dead werdtety ura 1 

Am a msaga Tt 441 tt 

Prada: ņa: gla faran fug: yA: d 

Mandhata was not born of his mother’s womb 
but was born in the belly of his father. Then the 
ministers tore asunder the belly of his father and 
got him out. 


maa 
aA Ota a Se aT Naat Aga 42 N 
MATS HAAN ET AT ANTAL | 
FETT TRA TATA, 11-43 
Wer uals: Ya: waga: 1 


Janamejaya said: O fortunate One! What you 


Book VII Chapter IX 


753 


said was never seen nor heard ever before since 
This sort of births is highly improbable. How was 
that beautiful son born in the belly of his father? 
Describe this in detail and satisfy my curiosity. 


Ta sata 
AaAA SATAN Ta uvaenfites: 11 44 n 
qati a ort e aya qudd 1 
Tat Farce: wrafareaamm fregyt: n 45 0 
anang sirerarsit g fire ei TTT: à 


ATS quit Afr: a a uta: u 46 u 

qure eftaa: MARA er Team i 

qar q g: fad fam spar quurena: 47 I 

agate ITT tat urfara | 

fe A gra mener ale wed PATA |1 48 N 

wia arm ga wa weer | 

Vyasa said: O King! The King Yauvanāšva had 
one hundred queens; yet he had no issues. The King 
always thought much about his son. Once the King, 
sorry and desirous of a son, went to the holy retreats 
of the Rsis. On arriving there, he began frequently 
to respire heavily before the ascetics. The Rsis 
became filled with pity on seeing his sorrowful 
condition. O King! The Brahmins then said to him: 
O King! Why are you thus sorrowful and dis- 
tressed? What is your sorrow that is troubling your 
heart? Speak truly. We will surely redress your 
grievance.” 


aay gara 


wet ot Wea ads ut ww 149 

wiraturt a yri Wek dd fev | 

Yauvanāšva said: "O Munis! I have got the 
kingdom, wealth, excellent horses, one hundred 
illustrious chaste wives. 

sfera eite enrsu fis seram 050 ! 

MARTEL AAT ata ATTA | 

I have no enemies in the three worlds; no one is 
stronger than me. All the Kings and ministers are 
obedient to my call. 


Wes Paras qd aaa g A dmm 51 


48 


e| penai aif Saca da wi 


ETSI fer: rera yet qa: n 52 n 

AATM ATARI ST PAA: 1 

But O Ascetics! I have no son; this my sonless 
states is the only cause of my pain and sorrow. It 
has marred all my happiness. See! The persons that 
have no son Ea any way go to Heavens. 
Therefore I am always being pained for this. You 
all are ascetic; you have taken great pains to Jearn 
the essence of the Veda Sastras. 

PĒRTA Beet great fayiq à 11 53 n 

wag Wu are à qur Datta amm: i 

So kindly order me what sacrifice is fit for me 
to have a son. O Ascetics! If you any pity for me, 
kindly perform this good work for me." 


em gara 

Ae werd V: PUA GUAT: d 54 ti 

AG tm, 1 

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the words of the 
King, they were all filled with pity; and, with 
fullness of mind, made him to perform the sacrifice 
whose presiding deity was Indra. 

wet: verfu Tenquieg asa: 11 55 U 

Abad danas warf wem spud: | 

For the sake of the King, that he may get a son 
born to him, they had a jar filled with water by the 
Brahmins and purified and charged that jar with 
the Vedic Mantrams. 

Tat Aeg wfenmesgfadt Pat 56 n 

ferre IATA Wir Wert CATA 

The King got thirsty in the night and entered in 
the sacrificial ground; seeing the Brahmins asleep, 
the King himself drank that water, surcharged with 
the Mantram. 


arate ted fetid RIRTIEJTA u 57 u 

fd am garda aeng 1 

The Brāhmins consecrated and kept that water 
apart, according to due rules, surcharging with 
Mantrams, for the wife of the King; but the King, 


754 


getting thirsty, himself drank that water 
unconsciously. 

Rah Hest seat car fan fasii n 58 u 

UTT Td aa did werirer fest: i 

Tan dite fafan vt greg aerei Wgq NM 59 n 

Next morning the Brahmins seeing the jar of 
water empty, were started very much with fear; 
the Brahmins then asked the King: Who drank the 
water? 

gf wurmrammgrianma Aut qun | 

mf wum Tft wearer 60 

Ae: BET S SUA: HHT Pau VAI i 

When they came to know that the King himself 
drank the water, the Munis thought this to be an 
act of Daiva (Fate) and completing the sacrifice 
returned to their abodes. Then the King became 
pregnant by the power of the sacrificial Mantrams. 

yi Prearrarmrgufaurenrer spud: 61 N 

tart Haan MA A AA ndaf: | 


After some time, the son became fully 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


developed. Then the King's minister, cutting his 
right bowel, got the son out. Out of the God's 
favour, the King did not die. 

h reat PARISH AAA PMG 62 N 

west efsrdi wera meraga: à 

Ws vageararn nre gferdrafer: à 

TB sparen afer aa Rm, 63 N 

efr sfhrédiarad enge? game 
FANSAT: 11 9 11 

When the ministers were troubled with the 
thought whose milk the child will suck, then Indra 
spoke out the child would drink (Mān Dhātā) my 
forefinger and gave his finger into the child’s 
mouth. For that reason his name was Māndhātā. 
Thus I have described in detail the origin of 
Mandhata. l 
Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Seventh Book on 
the story of Kakutstha and the origin of Māndhātā in 

Srimaddevibhagavatam the Maha Puranam, of 

18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


754 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


n SO Ora 


CHAPTER X 
On Satyavrata 


Garu Jaru 

aya uma w quf Mad d 

miera fendi watasagadtar: 1 

Vyāsa said: O King! That King Māndhātā, true 
to his promise, conguered one after another the 
whole world and became the paramount sovereign 
of all the other emperors and got the title 
*Sàrvabhauma' (Sovereign of all the earth). 

qas waren wgRiRqENIPCS | 

PATE Hd Ae Taga wpeq u2 

O King! What more to speak of Mandhata’s 
influence at that time than this that all the robbers, 
struck with his terror, all fled to the mountain caves. 
For this reason, Indra gave him the title 
*Trasadasyu.' 


wea farsquet sat vrgrfeiar: KATSSTA i 
Ufer yaa a udag 003 u 


ATĻAUTA CHEN st Fat gu 1 

Wege ured qued dara 4 d 

He married Bindumati, the daughter of 
Šašavindu. Her limbs were proportioned and per- 
fect and so she was very beautiful. Mandhata had 
by that wife two sons: (1) the famous Purukutstha 
and (2) Mucukunda. 

Vegetal sue : Ya: maefa: 1 

g ITT ee serait: us i 

Purukutstha had his son Anaranya; this prince 
was celebrated by the name of Brhada$va. He was 
very religious and deeply devoted to his father. 

teemu ysa: wereffan 1 

TATA RALTATS YASUE ATA: di 6 N 

His son was Harya$va; he was religious and 
knew the Highest Reality. His son was Tridhanva; 
his son was Áruna. 


Book VII Chapter X 


755 


aene Ya: STRA sft sa: 1 

MSHS: HA Hare ERAT: w 7 u 

wr UTT faaara gaara: i 

Ra wert feet wo wen qud: wp 4 8 ud 

Aruna's son was Satyavrata; he was very 
avaricious, lustful, wicked and wilful. Once one 
an occasion that vicious prince, overpowered by 
lust, stole away the wife of one Brahmin and so 
created an hindrance in his marriage. 

fate wanes START WU 1 

weist vaut a gat: er VATU 9 N 

O King! The Brahmins, united in a body, came 
to the King Aruna, bewailing and lamenting and 
uttered repeatedly: Alas! We are ruined! 

UY (srt m ag: Ragan AA: à 

f wd ma gr naag fest: N 10 u 

The King addressed to the grieved subjects, the 
Brahmins: “O Brahmins! What harm his been done 
to you by my son.” 

ferar faerat tat feraenqetenn à 

valeat ferr LALI koralik: ITT 11 11 i 

Hearing thus the good words of the King, the 
Dvijas, versed in the Vedas, repeatedly blessed him 
and said: 

WIT HY: 

wie Grae feme weer feet | 

fearfeat fayaan wer aferatat 12 1 

O King! You are the foremost of the powerful. 
So your son is like you. Today he has forcibly stolen 
away during the marriage ceremony a Brahmin 
daughter already given over in marriage.” 

CATH SAT 

Spe durt eet TT TTT: 1 

Game gar ama wd d WESHUT 013 N 

Vyasa said: O King! The highly religious King 
hearing the words of the Brahmins, took them to 
be true and said to his son: “O One of evil 
understanding! You have rendered today your 
namie useless by perpetrating this evil act. 


T qi RE TATA | 

q anaa crar Ure feas Wa wee tl 1 4 i 

O Vicious One! Get away from my house! O 
Sinner! You will never be able to live in my 
territory!" 

pii fiat wre ea ITS à qe: à 

aerate wars: WE ada 15 i 

gra Wd ad TESRTUERUU | 

ATT: Be Hert Hear fs TATA i 1 6 u 

Seeing his father angry, Satyavrata repeatedly 
said: "Father! Where shall I go?" He said: "Live 
with the Candalas. You have stolen a Brühmin's 
wife and so have acted like a Candala. 

"ré wur gare ceu at genius i 

AAE as GET: HA ATT 1017 A 

Go and live with them happily. O Disgrace to 
your family! I do’nt like to get issues through you; 
you have obliterated this family’s name. 

a Rora galai attie wert: | 

Raa KTI AMATI 18 u 

So, Sinner go wherever you like. Hearing thus 
the words from his angry father, Satyavrata 
instantly quitted the house and went to the 
Candalas. 

HAMA WU WUT: wg wd i 

agamen: stirred AKTA: 119 n 

The prince, wearing his coat of armour and 
holding bows and arrows, began to spend away 
his time with the Cāņdālas; but he could not get 
out of his breast his feeling of sympathy and mercy. 

"rar PATA: fran afters erem à 

yemsa ates Mas ndafa: u 20 n 

When he was banished by his liberal angry 
father, the Guru Vasistha instigated the King to 


the above purpose. 
ATRASTĀ: | 
wh adore Fammumggā 421 u 
Satyavrata was therefore angry with Vasistha, 
inasmuch as he, versed in the Dharma Šāstras, did 
not dissuade the father from banishing his son. 


756 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


gafara fürar wer wérafe: à 

Gareisay moet ut aaa asia: 22 u 

His father, then, owing to some inexplicable 
cause, quitted the city and, for the sake of his son, 
went to the forest to practise austerities. 

a aad war aia WIRT: d 

am gray WE quur waar 123 N 

O King! Owing to that sinful act, Indra did not 
rain at in his kingdom for twelve years. 

faaara anterféreg frd qu | 

dare BTA wem fage qu: u24 N 

O King! Just then Visvamitra, too keeping his 
wife and children in that kingdom, began to practise 
severe austerities on the banks of the river Kausiki. 

STAT TA HATA STE THT € | 

erepta ghar mafi u25 u 

AMATU TATA KG: Tyri STR | 

aani Araneae UTT 026 

Raae grat trader agua | 

Jara gerer daret at NAA fau u 27 u 

pomaria garort uferit fier afe 1 

"dfe arora: atri feret wftermer d 28 N 

aada a Ut Tet Ted T: WT: 1 

auf anette g:ttadi srrafstarg i 29 n 

The beautiful wife of Kušika then fell into great 
trouble how she could maintain the family. All the 
children, pained with hunger, began to cry, begging 
for Nivara rice food. The chaste wife of Kaušika 
became very much troubled in seeing all this. She 
thought, seeing the children hungry. “Where am I 
to go now and from whom to beg, and what to do, 
inasmuch as the King was not then staying in the 
Kingdom. 

ATi Tt ost ent afer fara t 

WR gar: wet agerem Afs yer t 20 n 

wes we g faena KAN agunt qa: 1 

Urea warren 3 fafēat fare: u 31 u 

The husband is not also near; so who would 
protect my children? The boys are incessently 
crying. Fie therefore to my life!" She thought also 


thus: "My husband has left me in this penniless 
state; we are suffering for want of money. He does 
not know these, though he is quite able. Save my 
husband, who else will support my sons? 

weal aah cnr rk ww fau 1 

THIS TTT feres turfir ENE N 32 u 

They will all die now of starvation. I might sell 
one of my sons, whatever I get out of that, I can 
support the others; this is now my highest duty. 

wed thot Hear GRU aur wdt i 

ar asia ageara wet vi fatear i 33 u 

I ought not to do otherwise and kill all my 
children; so 1 will now sell one of my sons to 
support the others." Thus hardening her mind, she 
went out, tying the child by a rope round his neck. 

fret rer seat net werden i 

VIE TTT eta aera Ter i 34 ii 

The Muni's wife, for the sake of the other 
children, fastened the middle son by a cord and 
got out of her house. 

qar Urata ATT? see a 

"reo quiet g fee Praia vina 35 n 

The prince Satyavrata saw her distressed with 
pain and sorrow and asked: “O Beautiful One! 
What are you now going to do? Who are you? 

"dd Teh HVS TELA TART FATĻAT | 

fone meai wet afe wat: 436 0 

This boy is crying; Why have you tied him by a 
rope round his neck? O Fair One! Speak out truly 
to me the cause of all this." 


sefiraeqarer 

fasta matsi atsit ques i 

freie caret cfr fam gam, u 37 N 

ara efie UTT menn To rae | 

amt ganii steer ARITA Ā (1 38 U 

The Rsi's wife said: “O Prince! I am the wife of 
Visvamitra. These are my sons. I am now going, 
for want of food, to sell one of these out of my 
own accord. O King! My husband has gone away 
to practise tapasya; I do not know where he has 


Book VII Chapter X 757 
SPICE Tre U data: gt APT: | 
Ta aa Tt arais: mia: 46 tt 


gone. There is no food in the house; so I will sell 
one to support the other sons.” 


arate Now when the King Aruna went for tapasyā to 
wfunrt war Ut arent set wa | the forest, the Muni Vasistha carefully guarded the 
raža VĒRĀSA arean 1390 Ayodhya city, and the palace and the household. 


naas oat aftsamusfē: | 

frat was UZTAMATA 10047 i 

RETA KAT ATIRAU: | 

afr afèr vri eram frega 1 48 u 

Satyavrata, too, used to sustain his livelihood 
daily by hunting, according to his father's order; 
and abiding by Dharma, lived in the forest outside 
the city. Satyavrata cherished always in his heart, 
for some cause, a feeling of anger towards Vasistha. 
When his father banished his religious son, 
Vasistha did not prevent his father. 


Satyavrata said: “O Chaste One! Save your 
children. I will bring to you your articles of food 
from the forest till your husband does not come 
here.” 

gà aarmer vert fefurferteu i 

Ata rf Ara ASA ! 40 N 

SETH AT TT T Ta Alfa | 

fasti Ad Heat Wass 0 41 0 

Daily I will fasten some food on a tree close by 
your A$rama. This I speak truly." The wife of 
Visvamitra, hearing these words of the prince, freed 


the child of the fastening and took him to her vasi at frat efti a fret spe i 
Āšrama. A anamre yfrdite: emu e149 0 
PS MARTAA ATA MAARAG: | Ufa FAST TART VR | 


maA @ unten fagarahtae uso n 

This is the cause of Satyavrata’s anger. 
Marriage does not become valid until seven 
footsteps are trodden (a ceremony); so the stealing 
away of a girl within that period is not equivalent 
to stealing away a Brahmin’s wife. The virtuous 
Vasistha knew that; yet he did not prevent the 
King. 

miy Rasu ware wérfe: à 

asm a IT arefrayeg-dWERHITH 0651 1 

One day the prince did not find anything for 
hunting; he saw in the forest the cow of Vasistha 
giving milk. Very much distressed by hunger, the 
King killed the cow like a dacoit, partly out of anger 
and partly out of delusion. 

A WE gerda HHT ATT TAT | 

JĀ adu acid Atrat AI, 52.0 

ur! gaaat aAa qui | 

VIA KITT a ARR a gara 53 uU 

He fastened part of the flesh to that tree for the 
wife of Visvāmitra and the remainder he ate 


Ug ART Tea Hale mAh 42 t 

The child was named afterwards as Galava, due 
to his being fastened by the neck. He became a 
great Rsi afterwards. The Vi$vamitra's wife then 
felt great pleasure in her home, surrounded by her 
children. 

AAR WT up Pua a ftue: | 

farts U WA: Hest TESTU € 43 1 

Filled with regard, and mercy, Satyavrata duly 
performed his task and provided daily the family 
of Visvamitra with their food. 

A RATA emere ier a 

Agra uid qa st E ll 44 N 

He used to hunt wild boars, deer, buffaloes, etc; 
and used to take their flesh to the place where used 
to dwell the wife of Visvamitra and the children 
and tie that up to an adjoining trees. 

sata a Ad Garten: 1 

Adf wort TU pret STRA 045 u 

The Rsi's wife used to give those to her children. 
Thus getting excellent food, she felt very happy. 


758 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


himself. O One of good vows! The Visvamitra’s 
wife did not know that to be beef and thought it to 
be deer’s and so fed her sons with that. 

wf ect ardt amar gammai | 

graf qud urd erTerarfeqvimereng 54. N 

Now when Vasistha came to know that his cow 
been killed, he was inflamed with anger and spoke 
to Satyavrata "O Vicious One! What a heinous 
crime have you committed, like a Pišāca, by killing 
the cow?" 

Wa « vie HU: udq vafdren 1 

ammeg: TRITT SIRE USS M 

For the killing of the cow, the stealing of a 
Brahmin’s wife and the fiery anger of your father, 
for these three crimes, let there come out on your 
head three Sankus or three marks of leprosy as the 
signs for your crimes. 

fayieg Rer meer à safer weary afra ) 

Amea ggtaadafēma 56 u 


From this day you will be widely known by the 
name of Tri$anku and you will shew your Pi$áca 
form to all the beings.” 


wa Wat aftša Wer Heat TT: 1 
TATU ae aaa era: $7 u 
Vyasa said: O King! The prince Satyavrata thus 
cursed by Vaisistha remained in that retreat and 
practised severs tapasyā. 
ATG MA damp | 
smana edt wats went rang 1 58 n 
efr Adema TER unma 
EISE: 11 10 11 
But he got from a Muni's son the excellent 
Mantram of the Highest auspicious Devi Bhagavati 
and became merged in the contemplation of that. 
Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on 
the story of Satyavrata in the Mahapuranam 
Šrīmaddevībhāgvatam of 18,000 verses, by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


758 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


a a 


CHAPTER XI 


On Trisanku 


Waa IATA 
afaa a pret sat firetefue: „da: | 
wa vu gfe wert ud 
Janamejaya said: O Intelligent One! Did the 
prince Trišanku free himself afterwards of the curse 
inflicted on his by the Muni Vasistha. 


Te Tara 

RATA IT: Ayaan, | 

amaaa alt daR: 2 

Vyasa said: O King! Satyavrata, cursed by 
Vasistha, was transformed into a demonaical state 
(Pisacatva); but he became a great devotee of the 
Devi and passed away his time in that ASrama. 

aaa Beat Hes ATT | 

wirst ATT ATA greater AAT (3 ui 

One day he repeating slowly the nine-lettered 
Mantram of the Bhagavati, wished to perform the 


Purašcaraņa ceremony (repeating the name of a 
deity attended with burnt offerings, oblations, etc.) 
of the said Mantra, came to the Brahmins, bowed 
down to them with great devotion and purity and 
said: 

freer: goad d reri yore d d 

safest mu wdss da: Wa gua 

“O venerable gods of the earth! Kindly hear me; 
I with my head bowed down pray to you, that you 
all be my priests (Rtvijs). 

NU U ayers em: rat feum! c 

wate: ardfagad arafarag: pat: u 5 0 

You are all versed in the Vedas; so kindly do 
for me duly the Homa ceremony equal to one tenth 
part of Japam, for my success. 

aaas qud: wat aafajam: 1 

ard we fre: adn quad nen 


Book VII Chapter XT 


O Brahmanas! My name is Satyavrata; I am a 
prince; you ought to do this work for me for my 
welfare.” 

Wege TEVA Add: We | 

VIETA ga gret SITE eramsspom 07. ii 

Thus hearing the prince's words the Brahmanas 
said: "O Prince! You are cursed by your Guru and 
you are now turned into a demonaical state. 

a amais meni draserafiresne: 1 

faymeeenurei wiag nET 8 

You have now no right to the Vedas; especially 
you are now in the Pišāca state; it is blamed by all 
the persons; so now you are not fit to be initiated 
into the ceremony. 

Cae zara 

aaya AKTU NTST FAA € | 

férrsftferafird tse fet; waft ad fere: u 9 N 

Vyasa said: O King! Hearing them, the prince 
got very sad not dejected and thought “Fie on my 
life! What shall I do now in living even in the forest. 

für ard ufi: MAN TE JT | 

Teague: Aranga: Hah fa 10 u 

wat geri seat frat mFS: | 

Va aheri cat wasnrq eme u 11 N 

My father has forsaken me; I am banished from 
the kingdom; again, by the Guru's curse, I have 
got this Pišaca s state; I therefore can't decide what 
to do." The prince, then, collecting fuel, prepared 
the funeral pils for himself, remembered the 
Candika Devi and repeating Her Mantram, re- 
solved to jump into the fire. 

gar ardt vrerurart ferat weaferat wo: i 

wer vare wane fera: preferred: u 12 0 

Lighting the pyre in front, the prince bathed and 
standing, with clasped palms, began to chant the 
hymns to Maha Maya before entering into the fire. 

ma mad dg ugami ne à 

ASNT TTT ARI AE ATA: 0 13 I 

ratu att gal Mara TUTATSTA 1 

Risa wernt univ ĒRT 14 ui 


759 


At this moment, the Devi Bhagavati, knowing 
that the prince was ready to burn himself, came 
instantly to the sport on the back of the lion, by the 
aerial route. She manifested Herself before him and 
spoke in a voice deep like a rain-cloud. 


lagara 

feo aR emat ETSI T at RTS | 

feet sa rerom fra a arated: 15 N 

Teed erat ast qat weiter east fent 1 

frag wast dvi masg wud u 16 u 

aq ammira HTV firquaa i 
aana a earafurfreg TA 0/17 M 
Riar art agretē niread AYA: 1 

“O Virtuous One! What is all this? What have 


{ you settled all these? Never throw yourself in fire; 


be patient. O Fortunate One! Your father is now 
aged; he will give you his kingdom and will go to 
the forest for tapasyā; therefore, O Hero! Do leave 
your depression of spirits. O King! To-morrow the 
ministers of your father will come to you to take 
you there. By My Grace, your father will instal 
you on the throne and, in due time, he will conquer 
his desires and will go undoubtedly to the 
Brahmaloka. 


aye FATT 


zarar d dar edt avatar 18 N 

Targa reta meaa: | 

Vyasa said: O Fortunate One! Thus saying, the 
Devi vanished at that spot; the prince, too, desisted 
from his purpose of entering into the fire. 

aaa TMT AST ARTA U (19 0 

quid: wa: wat Wet arated: i 

ear ware pae v AIT ATTA 120 N 

In the meanwhile, the high-souled Narada went 
to Ayodhya and at once informed everything to 
the King. The King became very sad and began to 
repent very much, hearing the son’s resolve to burn 
himself. 


Sar wafu YT sum FI: 1 


760 


Rame satan gavage: 270 

wet wefuegu YA un wfEaW | 

The virtuous King, grieved at heart, for his son, 
“You all are aware of the 


said to his ministers: 
turning out of my son. 

wee Rr at ifa: cHedadt WA N22 N 

STATE ITA: VEN Weare: GTATAĒĒTA i 

I have forsaken my intelligent son Satyavrata; 
though he was very spiritual and worthy to get the 
kingdom; yet, at my command, he instantaneously 
went to the forest. 

Rama fags eradta: anmfeera: 123 N 

aiba AUT pret: AIAR: a: | 

Void of wealth, he, practising forgiveness, 
passed his time in study, particularly in spiritual 
knowledge; but Vasistha Deva cursed him and 
made him like a Pi$aca. 

AST BVA HA WAS cu gamma 124 N 

er: sfhrerarenr fitrs: ater: Ya: | 

Very much distressed by pain and sorrow, he 
was ready to burn himself but the Maha Devi 
preventing him, he desisted from this purpose. 

AETGTEG T d yii RIS ARTACTA 125 1 

aaa aaa maina 1 

aafaa oct Wee sea MAAR 126 1 

art UTT MISS quar GTA: à 

So go hurriedly and, consoling my powerful 
eldest son, bring him at once to me. I am now calm 
and quiet and of a retiring disposition; so I am 
determined to practise tapasyā. 

gaara nhat: uaaa urfifa: (27 u 

verear fe vifo: 

My son is now capable to govern the subjects; I 
will now instal my son on the throne and retire to 
the forest. So he gladly sent his ministers to his 
son. 

Set dt Aas UTT: UAT TT N 28 N 

STARTA Herat wage AAA | 


The ministers, too, gladly went there and 


——————!——— 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


consoled the prince and, with respect, brought him 
to the Ayodhyā city. 

Bat ARTA wen gari APT, 29 N 

Ween gt mg, 1 

fee ad Prgt ad war gat ferenfera: à 30 n 

Imantu saa AATA, 1 

Seeing Satyavrata with matted hair on his head, 
with dirty clothes, and thin and worn out with cares, 
the King began to think within himself “Oh! What 
a cruel act have I done, though I know everything 
about religion, in banishing my intelligent son, 
quite fit to govern my kingdom." 

gf diia war wurfeira méme: u31 N 

STA CACHE AAT ATA TATA, | 

sufag wd ust wrodqara € u32 0 

erreur rar ARa ATE: 1 

Thus thinking, he embraced his son by his arms 
and consoling him, made him sit by his throne. 
The King, versed in politics, then began to speak 
gladly with suffocated feelings of love, to his son 
sitting by the side of him. 

wiara 

ya erit aft: ast aA Parga: 33 N 

anani tri Wet Ai: Wat WaT: 1 

reet PAT aH ATA TT aet 3.4 

“O Son! Your highest duty is to keep your mind 
always on religion and to respect the Brahmins. 
Never speak falsely anywhere nor follow any bad 
course in any way. 

fresith vadei taaa: 1 

GN qud: AT SATO TAT ITT: 11 35 N 

Rather the words of the spiritual good persons 
ought to be fully observed; the ascetics ought to 
be worshipped. Senses must be controlled and the 
wicked cruel robbers are certainly to be slain. 

ded aiga tat ga wea fF 1 

Were aden mur: cater: ARTA: TE 36 N 

O Son! For one’s success, one should consult 
with one’s ministers and keep that as secret by all 
means. 


Book VII Chapter XI 


761 


ezi TSI phar ity: wata ga | 

a faydah fad MATA, 037 0 

Any enemy, howsoever insignificant he may be, 
a clever King should never overlook him. The 
ministers, if they be attached to other masters and 
if they come round afterwards, don’t trust them. 

at: Ada Bem: grax wear | 

ent ufa: wer arai at Emma Feary: 3.8 N 

Spies should be kept to watch friends and foes 
alike. Shew your living regards to the religion 
always, and make charitable gifts. 

yaad «rendent quw wp ws | 

"eur fefaent aa: error neva: 39 N 

One ought not to argue in vain and always avoid 
the company of the wicked. O Son! You should 
worship the Maharsis and perform various scarifies. 

aga tema art TE A 1 

Tea A tei Waa MATA 00640 d 

Never trust women, those who are inordinately 
addicted to women, and the gamblers. Never is it 
advisable to be addicted too much to hunting. 

Ua TĀ ddr rā g anaya u | 

Tri ARAN ITT THAT 41 

Always shew your back to gambling, drinking, 
music and to the prostitutes and try to make your 
subjects follow the same. À 

ara qe maneri wd wer 1 

mrih ndia aera ferfirererer 114211 

Early in the morning at the Brahma Muhürta 
every day you should get up from your bed and 
bathe and perform other analogous duties. 

TAIS: UAT tt aT epe: | 

GAAS Tae UT: Tartar 043 N 

O Son! Be initiated by the Guru in the Devi 
Mantra and worship with devotion the Supreme 
Force, the Bhagavati. Human birth ts crowned with 
success by worshipping Her Lotus Feet. 

Wege verge defturesret fray à 

a ard mt redfefe farsa: 44 u 


O Son! He who performs once the great Puja of 


the Maha Devi and drinks the Caranamrta water 
(water with which Her feet are worshipped) has 
never to enter again in the womb of his mother; 
know this as certain. 

wel gyi narach xut uraft er da fF à 

sa — wmareufafasfestesut 45 u 

That Maha Devt is all that is seen and She 
Herself is again the Seer and Witness, of the nature 
of Intelligence. Filled with these ideas, rest fearless 
like the Universal Soul. 

wear Peaster aerated watt farsa i 

wae cw weet adafafa: 11 46 Ni 

Do your daily (Naimittik occasional) duties, go 
to the Brahmin’s assembly and calling on them 
ask the conclusions of the Dharma Śāśtras. 

dost sTRIUITApSUT-d ed eT, | 

rituma a Wu ug wear 47 N 

The Brahmins, versed in the Vedas and 
Vedantas, are objects of venerations and must be 
worshipped. 

afgana: eats fu da T Hares | 

smenTafére ta ad qafa afa u 48 u 

Give, then, them always according to merits, 
cows, lands, gold, etc. Do'nt worship any Bráhmin 
who is illiterate. 

UST Marae Vor Het griefer | 

aa: Wi aded efus 49 i 

aren iang MAAN: Wen: d 

erat afar cep fam was aera: 0 50 NI 

Don't give to illiterates more than their belliful 
wants. O Child! Never trespass Dharma, out of 
covetousness, and remember always not to insult 
ever after wards any Brahmanas, The Brahmins 
are the cause of the Ksattriyas, the more so they 
are the terrestrial gods; honour them with all your 
care! In this never flinch from your duties. 

ags Raig: TATA CIETA | 

cet resni ast: tang AA yeaa 51 N 

Fire comes out of water; the Ksatriyas come out 
of the Brahmanas; iron comes out of stones. The 


762 


powers of these flow then that clash dies away in 
the source. 

vea faster arate velt: i 

ama Radda aden wjfafineser 0 52 nu 

ELEGIDA HaT "prat yaya: \ 

ATRI xig: erdt Fi TATA € 0 53 11 

sta MR TAI wergqu? rennes) 
URESNI: |1 11 11 


Know this as guite certain. The King who wants 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


his own welfare and improvement must by gift and 
humility shew his respect especially to the 
Brahmins. Follow the maxims of morality as 
dictated in the Dharma Šāstras. Amass wealth 
according to rules of justice and fill the treasury. 
Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Seventh Book 
about the story of Trišariku in the Mahapuranam 
Srimaddevi bhàgavatam of 18,000 verses by 


Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


762 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


ae 


CHAPTER XII 


On Vasistha's Course on the Trisanku 


«ara sara 
wa weitere: fiat Bete: wordt qu: l 
aa frat ume gaa fno NT 
Vyasa said: O King! Thus giving the advice to 
his son, the King Triéanku was excited with 
feelings of love and, in a choked voice, said to his 
father that he would fulfil what he had been 


ordered. 

Aaga TATA, | 

aaa PANT AST 2 |i 

The King then called the Brahmins, versed in 
the Vedas and Mantrams, and had all the materials 
for installation collected quickly. 

"feret wddtatat Marana fanta: 1 

Vatu dau URAA AAT u 3 M 

He brought the waters from all the sacred place 
of prigrimages; he then called together with great 
respect all the kings. l 

quasfe ft qaga 

aR gi tse frih ferfererfeaer 1 4 u 

On a sacred day, the father installed his son on 
the throne and gave him, in accordance with due 
rites and ceremonies, the royal throne. 

qamasi yi wg mia Ya: | 

ad fudmgd n gat Wu: d 5 

The King then adopted with his wife the third 
Vanaprastha stage of life and practised a severe 
tapasyā on the banks of the Ganges. 


sre pred gal caf fenfu 1 

SS wrt wearer ie i 

Then in due course of time the King went to the 
Heavens. There he began to shine like a second 
Sun by the side of Indra, respected by all the gods. 

Eus us] 

qd ura rk mara WW d 

wera efuia smt duiftemfener 7 u 

afta Ayra mA eum aa: | 

wet qn: Ayran Aada: weit i 8 ui 

Janamejaya said: O Bhagavan! You spoke 
before in course of conversation that Satyavrata 
was cursed by Vasistha on the killing of his cow to 
become a Pišāca; how then he got himself freed of 
this curse. There is a doubt on this point. Kindly 
clear it and oblige. Satyavrata was cursed; hence 
pronounced unfit to succeed to the throne. 

a Rimar f sdeorrantraa: | 

Tier afer: VITA eium uo u 

wat afe fame orotate à 

afta at für veré areymanfe: u 10 u 

How was the Muni, by what actions, was he 
freed of the curse? How could the father bring back 
to his home his son of the form of a Pišāca? O 
Viprarsi! Kindly narrate to me how the Muni was 
freed of his curse. 


Book VII Chapter XII 


763 


SUIT SOT 

afar a ras À wer: darent via: | 

gamag: weet: 17 

aaura ddl sara NAT € | 

War Wenn IP: FA: ATT 72 N 

Vyasa said: Cursed by Vasistha, Satyavrata 
became then and there transformed into a Pišāca, 
very ugly, violent and terrible to all; but when he 
worshipped the Devi with devotion, immediately 
the Devi gave him a beautiful divine body. 

Romaa rd een und ta ania i 

Rara enferaaredt hp ETE N 123. U 

aftrits ftt verae sme: MRRINTEA: | 

frasi er apart ARAJET (1 14 u 

By the grace of the Devi, his sins were all 
washed away and his Pi$áca form vanished. 
Satyavrata, then, freed from his sins became very 
much vigorous and energetic. Vasistha also became 
pleased with him, blessed thus by the Supreme 
Force; and so was his father, too. 

wed VITA LITE ra fan urfēra à 

ga a fafedkigdaedt wann 1s 

When his father died, the virtuous Satyavrata 
became King, governed his subjects and performed 
various sacrifices and worshipped, too, the Eternal 
Mother of the Gods. 

wed wat spare gera: gym d 

wart: seres: taser: 16 N 

O King! Triganku had a very beautiful son born 
to him, named Harišcandra, endowed in all his 
limbs with auspicious signs. 

qari gi Heat feta: yadta: i 

Arar yor nf wien mat a u7 

The King Tri$anku wanted to make his son 
Yuvarāja (the Crown prince) and then in his that 
very body while living, enjoy the Heavens. 

"fugerent Wer Vara fafagu: 1 

IATA oot wie: GATERA li 18 ti 


The King went to the Aérama of Vasistha and 


——————- 


gladly asked him, with folded palms, bowing down 
before him duly. 


KICIK 


aaga ma AAAA | 

fafi A gaaer Agai maa 19 1 

“O Ascetic! You are the son of Brahmā, versed 
in all the Vaidik Mantrams; so you are exceedingly 
fortunate; now I beg to inform you one thing; hear 
it gladly. 

Foor Asa aga Vaya U | 

aaa wit ANETTA 20 0 


I now desire to enjoy the happiness of the 
Heavens and all the enjoyments of the Devas, while 
I am in this body. 

arenas tara: wifed weet aa a 

Weed a sited wet Pat 21 

To enjoy in the Nandana Garden, to live with 
the Apsarās and to hear the sweet music of the 
Devas and the Gandharvas, these ideas now have 
taken a strong hold of my heart. 

TUIS cd TREATY ATES EDDA |d 

"ems vnu ad ede Re u22 N 

Therefore, O Great Muni! Engage me in such a 
sacrifice as will enable me, in this very body to 
live in the Svarloka, 

Uaufsft ANAS GE amd WHTEAT | 

mag WE ear garie qud N 23 N 

O Muni! You are fully competent to do this; 
therefore be ready for this. Have the sacrifice done 
and let me have quickly the Devaloka, so difficult 
to be obtained! 

afs sare 

TAKA wat arr We: | 

eua fe yet vent: enfira: gramu i 24 u 

mar wear gua war i 

sra damit siem gets: 025 u 

HS AAAI YA: Taiti | 

Vasistha said: "O King! It is exceedingly hard 
to live in the Heavens while in this mortal body. 


764 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


ae 
The departed only live in the Heavens by their 


merits, this is a known fact. Therefore, O 
Omniscient One! Your desire is hard to be attained. 
I am afraid of this. O King! The living men can 
hardly enjoy the Apsarās. Therefore, O Blessed 
One! Do the sacrifice first. Then, when you leave 
this body, you will go to the Heavens.” 


"ATA IATA 


SHI AAT WAT WANA: 0026 N 

sara wert Yat afte wei i 

"red urstad sursratdsmes Ai ate 27 U 

erat YARA Gran airs faser BTA | 

Vyasa said: O King! The Maharsi Vasistha was 
already angry with the King; therefore when he 
spoke these words, the King heard and became 
absent-minded. He again spoke to the Maharsi: *O 
Brahmana! If you do not allow me to do the 
sacrifice, on account of your haughtiness, I will 
have the sacrifice performed now by another priest. 

Teg sert wur ats: i dag: 028 N 

wore TUK ofa ament sra quia | 

ama vd writer get wa regu 0 29 | 

vans us  apfteugf d 

wamefteüfesw miia u30 

"rw wenig: ura KARI seien | 

Vasistha became very angry at the words of the 
King and cursed him: “O evil-minded One! Be as 
soon as possible a Candala in this body. You have 
committed acts by which your path to the Heaven 
is obstructed. You have stolen a Brahmins wife, 
and defiled the path of religion; you have killed 
the Surabhi Cow and you are a libertine. Therefore, 
O Sinner! Never you will go to the Heavens, even 
after your death.” 


"HTH Sara 
Sea TEU vreifeergtaneeearumafu 131 N 
wa dat IRT aya anp: 1 
GISĀSVTĀ IT Aa TT ST ATTA U 3 MT 
ae wears fret wader | 


"fteraifser ware feet dieat vat u 33 u 
THATS HARE: PAUE WEA: | 

Vyasa said: O King! Hearing these harsh words 
from the Guru, Trišaūku became immediately 
Cāņdāla in that very body. His golden earrings 
became turned into iron; the sweet sandal smell 
over his body smelled like faeces; his beautiful 
yellow clothes became blue, the colour of his body 
became like that of an elephant, due to his curse. 


Wagar RAAJAT N 34 N 
eae RATE fe ATA: CAT | 
O King! Those who are the worshippers of the 
Supreme Force can produce such things when they 
are angry; there is not the slightest doubt in this. 
Therefore one ought never to insult any devotee of 
the Supreme Force. 
"raster fe after gr: 35 N 
quar Pet Prat Ue Us quieran; t 
awe ae dat aAa wed 36 U 
The Muni Vasistha is always engaged in re- 
peating silently the Gayatri of the Devi. So what 
wonder is there that the body of the King will be 
reduced to such a wretched state by his rage. 
ferrari g:ardtavig: ITT: | 
fh afr aa rear dēt asdrafifqa: 37 u 
The King Tri$anku became very sorry to see 
his ugly body; he did not go home; rather he 
remained in the forest in that form and poor dress. 
ded Wa uve a d grastieari 
Je wears aga: difzarsur srféreafe 11 38 u 
He began to think, distressed with sorrow and 
overpowered with misery: "My body is now 
blameable to the extreme, so what to do and where 
to go in this wretched state! I find no remedy to 
exhaust all my sufferings. 
erratis apre ver aiir afe à 
wferar arefteifa dies aries Ta: u 39 N 
waa ayers wet srfsreufe | 
ĀTRU 3 at feret ae 40 tt 


If I go home, my son will be, no doubt, very 


Book VII Chapter XII 


much pained with sorrow. My wife, when she will 
see my Cāņdāla appearance, she went accept me; 
my ministers will not regard me as they used to do 
before. 

feri ar aRar er fere am remm à 

edt A HUSA xr ege eumd ua41u 

My friends and relations, when they will come 
to me, will not serve me with the former care. So it 
is far better to die than to live, thus despised. 

ami ar safer qd Welt faftraqsemt | 

Heal ASAI TET SPAT AIT N 42 N 

I will drink poison or drown myself in waters 
or hang myself. Or I will burn myself in the funeral 
pyre duly or I will quit this blameable life by 
starvation. 

seat Veet Gast wea d 

grad cw yrs genda 11 43 u 

yfi gadam ATA | 

MATE tendent Aas HMS N 44 N 

But, Alas! I will be guilty of suicide; so again 
due to this sin I will be born a Càndala and I will 
be again cursed. Thus thinking, the King again 
thought that at present he ought not to commit 
suicide by any means. 

siepe wart wi EST RE | 

siii rama TAUTAI srferar weer em: 0 45 u 

“I will have to suffer for my Karma; and, after 
due suffering, this Karma will be exhausted. So I 
will suffer in this forest for my Karma in this my 
body. 

UST STATA A ATA TAT | 

TASA WHS Het HH DHT 46 N 

Without the enjoyment of the fruits, the past 
actions can never die out; therefore all actions done 
by me, auspicious or inauspicious, I will enjoy or 
suffer in this place. 

gid-quarerrszmst iterat tat qe | 

ert if ATRI Kari Wem ll 47 N 

Always to remain close to a holy Asrama, to 
wander in holy places of pilgrimage, to remember 


765 


the Devi Ambika, and to serve the saints will now 
be my duties. l 

wa miai gi fnr Gun | 

UATARA: 0048 Ul 

Thus I will no doubt exhaust all my actions, 
residing in this forest; then, if chance permits, and 
if I meet with a saintly person, all my intentions 
will be crowned with success. 

fer Aa Tru erect vemm qu: 1 

Tn me: nnd sex dunt 11 49 d 

Reiser ATT für: VITSE RT | 

ghar: frater aaro mfa: u 50 u 

Thus thinking, the King quitting his city went 
to the banks of the Ganges and repenting very 
much, remained there on the Ganges. The King 
Hari$candra came to know the cause of his father's 
curse and with a sorrowful heart sent ministers to 
him. 

RATA TI eura: werarfeaar: à 

yma sperme Fram Weng 051 

Targa cw at Paraguay 1 

wate ferae zit ATT PTA 52. 

Like a Càndala, the King was respiring fre- 
quently; at this time the ministers went to him and 
bowing humbly, said: “O King! Your son has 
ordered us to come here; we have come at his 
command; we are the ministers of the King 
Harišcandra. 

Fag: VIE Arey Sa TUT: 1 

amat qo gad dare fiat aa 530 

Know this verily, O King! Kindly hear what the 
Crown Prince has said: “Go and bring my Father 
here without any delay.” 

WEHTSTSTATHTITSS Tse Wher TTETU: | 

Rat ad aff HITU WaT 54 N 

Therefore, O King! Cast aside your mental 
agonies and come to the city. The ministers, the 
subjects all will be always at your service. 

Te wareftens: U aa x3 À 1 

Weasel Werte geared RT u 55 u 


766 


We will all try our best to please Vasistha, so 
that he may favour you. And that greatly illustrious 
Muni being pleased will certainly remove your 
sorrows quickly. 

sfr werd werenfüd agen fara 

AARAA reet Pm 56 

O King! Thus your son has spoken to us many 
words; so now be pleased to go to your own abode. 


UR gara 

gfe dui qu: spear rf garp: à 

Tage mand cr ufi Haare: 057 Ul 

Vyasa said: O King! That Cāņdāla-like King, 
hearing even their words thus, did not consent to 
go back to his house. 

ATA aar ATRI tq uer: ur i 

Tra Ut AE Gag ATA À u58u 

amir Wo He NT AA: 1 

Rather he told them: “Ministers, go back, all of 
you to the city; and at my word, tell my son that I 
wont’t go back to my house. Better leaving off all 
idleness, you better govern the Kingdom carefully. 

TATA: — 4059 Ui 

w dueatu usta nga: 1 

ATTmaATa Hd TEŠA ATR 60 i 

Shew your respect specially to the Brāhmins and 
perform various sacrifices and worship the Devas. 
I do not like in this blameable Cāņdāla form to go 
to the city of Ayodhya with the high-souled ones; 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


so you all go back to Ayodhya without any further 
delay. 

ua feat carer afters NETACTA | 

qg mama ge TA aaa 861 U 

Instal, at my order, my powerful son Harigcandra 
on the throne and do all these stately duties.” 


FREE Y EENT FM d 


"ferar ferdspequi AT fat ANAA 62 N 
When the ministers heard thus the King ordering 


them, they began to cry very much, and, bowing 
down, they went away early out of the hermitage. 

AEG ysfa faftrgdesg | 

aih Wer agia A a u63 U 

On coming back to Ayodhyā they regularly 
installed on a sacred day the King Hariścandra with 
Abhiseka water, purified with Mantrams. 

aime deret ferae AUTTAT i 

Tei wenn fiis: frat Riera i 64 N 

gf sfera] ngo? vend 
ERISTI: 012 11 

Thus the powerful virtuous Hari$candra, on 
being installed on the royal throne by the command 
of the King, remembered always his father and 
began to govern his Kingdom with his ministers 
according to the dictates of Dharma. 
Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Seventh Book 
on the description of Vasistha’s curse on Trisaüku in 
the Maha Purāņam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 

verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


766 Srimaddevibhagavatam 
Se M có i esu alio Eas 


CHAPTER XIII 
Visvamitra Helping Trisanku 


waa M Wsqguidufrei mera CHUNG: | 

afters: gat wat ufedbjuymaan: | and wer qud: gas was 3 n 

Preig at TTT: wi Was it that he bathed in the holy waters of the 

Janamejaya said: O Muni! I see that at the | Ganges and lived in the forest and when he died 
command of the King, the ministers installed | he was freed of the curse; or was it that the Guru 
Hariscandra on the royal throne; but how Tri$anku Vasistha favored him by his grace and freed him 
got rid of his Cāņdāla body, kindly say. of the curse? O best of Rsis! I am extremely eager 

Wat ar aad q own ufteqa: 1 to hear the life of the King therefore kindly describe 

wem wr qui aaea: u2 to me in detail his wonderful career. 


Book VII Chapter XIII 


"UT sara 

SR gi peat Usa GTA: | 

"pTenferen qut TA Wan faarafssarq ! 4 1 

Vyasa said: O King! The King became glad- 
dened in his heart to instal his son on the throne 
and began to pass his days in that forest in the 
meditation of Bhagavati Bhavani. 

We TEST art qp TURISTI: | 

ae enreqaréter warstireentforent qf: 5 u 

Thus some time passed when Visvamitra, the 
son of Kušika, completing his course of Tapasya 
with an intent mind returned to his home to see his 
wife and sons. 

amta tact gue Ohad yaara à 

aaf ares turet ferret wusiur 6 0 

gérer g wet areca att: yee à 

ava fat feat ser: urferar: Ga AEG 7 N 

On coming back to his house, the intelligent Muni 
found his sons and other members of family happy 
and well conditioned, became very glad and when 
his wife came to him for his service, asked her: “O 
Fair-eyed One! How did you spend your time in 
days of famine? There was nothing whatsoever of 
the stock of rice, etc., in the house; how then did 
you nourish these days? Please speak to me. 

ae quf Gat anna: UL Taft i 

fe et qp cert HA fram RIT MT u 8 N 

War feret gat as scar efter gar 

rite fereretet fer attertt frei: u 9 u 

O Fair One! I was very busy with my austerities, 
I could not therefore come to you and see my boys; 
how then, O Beloved, and what measure did you 
resort to for their maintenance? O good and 
aupicious One! When I heard of the dire famine, I 
thought then ^I have no wealth; so what shall I do 
if I go there?" 

semakan fsa: gear at 1 

Wasser waferegsureeni 10 Uu 

aoe Prt gear agerar difsat sory | 

werd Raa wear wen 41 N 


767 


Thus thinking I did not come then. O Beautiful 
One! At that time, one day I was very hungry and 
being very much tired I entered into the house of a 
Cāņdāla, with the object of stealing. On entering 
the house I found the Cāņdāla sleeping; then being 
extremely distressed with hunger, I entered into 
his kitchen if I could find anything there.” 

aq MSs quare weed BATT | 

Fens gmat Wer eee Aa d 412 

When the dishes were sought and turned, and 
when I was going to take cooked dog’s flesh I 
immediately fell into the sight of that Cāņdāla. 

YE: Hed HA amit Ye a Fas rent i 

att ard feud raqaareate vise 13 1 

gegen: serré geran AEN yz 

ware Youd ert TAGAT fnr N 14 í 

Sees Mera TU: gperurfée: 1 

virent wat ayant wise 15 1 

He asked me very affectionately “Who are you? 
Why have you entered here at this hour of night? 
Why are your looking after the dishes? Speak what 
you want.” O Beautiful One! When the Cāņdāla 
asked me these questions, I was very much pressed 
by hunger and J spoke out my wants in a tremulous 
voice: O Fortunate One! I am an ascetic Brahmin; 
very much pained by hunger I have entered your 
house stealthily and am looking out for some 
eatables from your cooking pots. 

TĪRA ATS eater reru | 

gitratsta aavarat ATA BETA 16 u 

OTT TA: Hea MATT APPT | 

wal Wr He wur ars STATA 17 N 

O Intelligent One! I am now your guest in the 
form of a thief; I am now specially very hungry; 
so I will now eat your cooked meat; kindly permit 
me. Hearing these words, the Cāņdāla spoke to me 
in words authorised by the Šāstras: ^O One of the 
Superior Varna! Know this to be the house of a 
Cāņdāla; so never eat that flesh. 

getsi ey Wr cari a fester | 

Raa arare er geist afte feb ARE u 18 N 


768 


The human birth is very rare in this words; then 
again to be born a Dvija is more difficult; and to 
get Brahmana hood again in the Dvijas is 
exceedingly difficult. 

gETERE + water: weder CITAS | 

ST AAT WHT: HAUT AT TTT: lt 19 N 

Are you not aware of this? They ought never to 
eat the defiled food who desire to attain to the 
Heavens; owing to Karma, the Maharsi Manu has 
denominated the seventh caste as Antyaja and has 
discarded them altogether. 

varsdtsé Hon ferg ATT ATA CITA: | 

Prana vearrat a eitsraterat feat 20.0 

autdemtetatsa m arg cat fare 1 

So, O Brahmin! I am now by my actions turned 
into a Candala and so forsaken by all; there is no 
doubt in this. I am forbidding you so that this fault 
of Varna Sankara may not suddenly attack you.” 


fersnfira zara 


ATi aai tnis afer favere 210 

amana eer viui weitere i 

Visvamitra said: “O Knower of Dharma! What 
you are speaking is quite true; though a Cāndāla, 
your intelligence is very clear; hear, I will now 
speak to you the subtleties of the Dharma in times 
of danger. 

ae tant gad wer ufq ame u22 N 

TETA qa eared TT PT 1 

O Giver of respect! Always and by all means it 
is advisable to keep up the body; if sin be thereby 
incurred, one ought to perform Prāyašcitta 
(penance) for its purification when the time of 
danger is over. 

Si Aaaa 4 a 23 1 

PUTT EAT Kent ATA UTT: 1 

But if one commits sin when the time is not one 
of danger, one gets degraded; not so in the time of 
danger. The man that dies out of hunger, goes to 
hell, no doubt. 


Sriraaddevibhágavatam 


amga ended gaia 024 ! 

ane dda a Asaa | 

Therefore every man seeking for his welfare 
must satisfy his hunger. Therefore I intend to steal 
for preserving my body. O Cāņdāla! See! 

aadi a eiro arcad wefind gÀ: u25u 

at a ada sternere ret erferserfet à 

The sin, incurred in stealing during famine, 
which the Pandits have declared, goes to the God 
of rains until he does not pour forth rain. 


fasta gara 


BIH wur HI TTT: WEHTSU N 26 N 

TTT TART: t 

O Beloved! Just when I spoke these words, the 
God of Rains began to pour forth rain so desired 
by all, like that coming out of the elephant’s trunk. 

Afedtsé at diet avd femper we 4 27 N 

ASS MGE CARAT PAT: ULAT Yar | 

When the clouds thus poured forth rains with 
the glitterings of the lightnings, I felt very glad 
and left the house of the Candala. 

ATA vd ERE caret Eee LT 28 N 

EIE WIN: HU gap i 

O Beautiful One! Now speak out to me how did 
you behave in that famine time, so terrible to all 
the beings." 

Gara sata 

git wer wer spear Rae Aaa 29 0 

WISI uy wa fid: HI: MATET: | 

Vyasa said: O King! Hearing the above words 
of the husband, the sweet-speaking lady spoke: 
“Hear, how I passed my time in times of famine." 

mea wate garās gab ugunīm, d 30 u 

state yat: Ue agaaa: faa: | 

“O Muni! After you had gone to practise 
tapasyā, the dire famine raged; and my sons, ex- 
hausted of hunger, became very anxious for food. 


afiaractatdien -tarra a at u 31 0 
atasi Roran fate wet aar i 


Book VII Chapter XIII 


I became very anxious to see the sons hungry; I 
then went out to the forest in quest of wild rice; 
and I got some fruits. 

Ta referre Aamen: 1 32 u 

ATA Wa oreet faf TT TA: 1 

Thus I spend some months by collecting the rice 
growing wildly in the forest; then in times these 
also could not be got and I became again anxious. 

a fier fee gA Aan ate art 33 0 

* wary cera yet LTA Od 

The Nivara rice, too, is now not available; and 
nothing is obtained also by begging; there are no 
fruits on the trees and no roots are found under the 
earth. 

agerem difser are sdfe TATU: u34 u 

f afit ga reat fee aA genfa | 

The sons are crying in agony of hunger. What 
to do? And where to go? What am I to say now to 
the hungry boys? 

ue fafeca wur PAKA tq: 035 N 

"pris carer Helfer f 1 

ETA TET rires AT RANT ATTA N 36 il 

"Wrerdtsé IEMA ATAU SPT UTET à 

gta dfeier water gatsd wheat War 37 N 

Ramani WETWURT BMT IST | 

ward gA Pimms wera 438 it 

Oh God! Thus thinking on various ways, I at 
last came to this conclusion that I would sell one 
of my sons to a rich man and whatever price I can 
fetch, with that I will preserve the lives of the others 
sons. O Dear! Thus thinking, I became ready and 
went out. O Fortunate One! Then this boy began 
to cry aloud and became very distressed; yet I was 
so shameless that I took the crying boy and got out 
of my A$rama. 

Wap Wear ATT ATTA LTA | 

USS uou erf: KeA sero: | 39 Il 

aas agardd aat ATA 1 

fomard stadstt serestsur MT TU 11 40 u 


At this time one Rājarsi Satyavrata seeing me 


49 


769 
very distressed, asked me "O One of good vows! 
Why is this boy weeping?” 

ST A wat we GAGA: | 


mya TE as Te GAN 41 

any AOA fafi we 1 

guea feed ag AETR: 442 1 

O Muni! I spoke to him “To-day I am going to 
sell this boy." The King's heart became overfilled 
with pity, and spoke to me: "Take back to your 
Āšrama this boy." Daily I will supply you with 
meat for the food of your boys until the Muni 
returns home." 

IEIET yore quits fames | 

KTI at KTS werd erat: 11 43 u 

Ala aat: ere UTT afsramutan | 

ahaa rese safer amem i 44 N 

O Muni! The King from that time used to bring, 
with great pity, daily the flesh of deer and boar 
killed by him in the forest and he used to tie that 
on this tree." O Beloved! Thus I could protect my 
sons in that fearful ocean of crisis; but that King 
was cursed by Vasistha only for my sake. 

afaa att a pret da RAA | 

Kate after caret pA uf: 4s u 

fasigififer Ha qnd TH AEAT | 

alta CATA MISA Get qu: 46 tt 

One day that King did not get any meat in the 
forest; so he slaughtered the Kama Dhenu (the cow 
giving all desires) of Vasistha and the Muni became 
therefore very angry with him. The high-souled 
Muni, angry on account of the killing of his cow, 
called the King by the name of Tri$anku and made 
him a Candala. 

Tals g: fta TT aes SSA SALT | 

Va Weal aed Jud: 047 

aa agaa saat Ad: fener | 

Wasa Wendedr ATA ata € 448 ti 

O Kaušika! The prince turned into a Cāņdāla 
because he came forward to do good to me, so T 
am very sorry for his sake." So it is your urgent 


770 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


duty to save the King from his terrible position by 
any means or by the influence of your powerful 
Tapasya.” 
eae Sala 

afer araifra: seat HRR APT: | 

ame mià dat wiengduem 49 i 

Vyasa said: O King! Hearing these words from 
his wife the Muni Kaušika consoled her and said: 

fasta gara 

Hakan d wmurgd uem | 

Wem: Het da ereansfarsfara 50 u 

fenaa after qanm d 

*O Lotus-eyed One! I will free the King of his 
curse, who saved you at that critical moment; what 
more than this that I promise to you that I will 
remove his sufferings whether it be by my learning 
or it be by my Tapas." 

esa frat erar aire: uvareiferq 51 u 

feram qud: He Meg ATA | 

Thus consoling his wife at that moment, 
Kaušika, the Knower of the Highest Reality, began 
to think how he could destroy the pains and 
miseries of the King. 


Hasa AKTA FTA VA Grftfa: tt 52 u 

Arig: wert dia: dt: arag: | 

Thus thinking, the Muni went to the King 
Trišaūku, who was staying at that time very humbly 
in a village of the Candalas, in the garb of a 
Candala. 

amredd aft geen fakts ftn: 153.0 

aahua ureter WA: 1 

miar d e sp ule atone u 54 N 

saratar aeri uice fuste: 1 

"egi ee dlurer Ve SHS ferar ume: 55 u 

aisd a aftenfir fa fe avare i 

Seeing the Muni coming, the King was greatly 
astonished and instantly threw himself before his 
feet like a piece of stick. Kaušika raised the fallen 
King and consoling him said: “O King! You are 
cursed, on my account, by the Muni Vasistha. I 


will, therefore, fulfil your desires. Now speak what 
I am to do. ” 
WHATS 

wat mia: wd atest Mata 456 

Ai asa PASTE ahh NERU | 

wae we fats uem cert aera 57 N 

The King said: “With a view to perform a 
sacrifice I prayed to Vasistha that “I would perform 
a sacrifice, kindly do this for me.” 

ama wiht venti Wenn | 

walt Gran afiitsut meh Fert 58 1 

aan f ta enfer: GARA d 

Wat wrearaniqes TAA 0159 Uu 


“O Muni! Do that sacrifice, by which I can go 
to the Heavens in this my present body. Vasistha 
became angry and said: “O Villain! How can you 
go and live in the Heavens in this your human 
body?” I was very anxious to go to the Svarga 
(Heaven) so I again spoke to him: 


arai quféd Heal AASE BAAN | 
Mal AAS snis Veci! Wa UAT d 60 NN 
sadenfud wd an wre | 
Ta wea wustsf dm 61 N 
eger Ra mer gaei: à 
«feres Fred vid vea cakes t 62 n 
aft Sea TAG senum? umma 
TAGVSATT: 11:73 L 


“O Sinless One! I will then have the excellent 
sacrifice done by another priest." Hearing this, 
Vasistha Deva cursed me, saying “Be a Candala." 
O Muni! Thus I have described to you all about 
my curse. You are the one quite able to remove 
now my grievance." Distressed in pain an agony, 
the King informed him and became quiet. 
Višvāmitra, too, thought how he could free him of 
his curse. 

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Seventh 
Book on the coming of Visvamitra to Trisaüku in the 
Maha Puranam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book VII Chapter XIV 


771 


CHAPTER XIV 


On Trišanku's Going to the Heavens 


Ta gara 

Aiia wet Het megan: | 

para = uada ug 

Vyasa said: O King! Setting in his mind what 
to do, the great ascetic Vi$vamitra collected all the 
materials necessary for the sacrifice and invited 
all the Munis. 

yari wal great fasta: 1 

arma: ad wad Rba Prater: 20 

Thus invited by Visvamitra, the Munis became 
informed all about the sacrifice; but, owing to the 
fact that the Muni Vasistha prevented them, none 
of them went to the sacrifice. 

megaa aaan: Raa: | 

amener vea Tt aA: Ren o3 tt 
-ame ata: et afiša Frater: à 

ATTAT ATR: we ape FAT gà d 

When Vi$vàmitra, the son of Gadhi, came to 
know this, he became very anxious and very sad 
and came to this King Trišanku and sat. The 
Maharsi Kaušika then became angry and said: “O 
King! Vasistha preventing, the Brahmins have all 
refused to come to the sacrifice. 

uya H quu: ffi wem rai qm | 

rari wernt aad d ewig u5 N 

yara TTU KA ATA: | 

eal wed cat aa weiter d 6 N 

But, O King! See my power of tapasya; I will 
immediately fulfil your desires; I will instantly send 
you to the Heavens, the abode of the Gods.” Thus 
saying, that Muni took water in his hand and 
repeated the Gayatri Mantram. He gave to the King 
all the Punyams (merits) that he collected for 
himself up to then. 

qena ped Ua gara métufWm d 

"HB ces wen Aem: 7 ou 


y Wu ma aga a 1 

ante wma dia: vef ass quent 8 N 

Giving him thus all the Punyams, he spoke to 
the King: “O King! Throw away all idleness and 
go to the abode of the Gods you wanted to go. O 
King of Kings! Gladly go to the Heavens by the 
power of all the merits collected by me for a long 
time and let you fare well there.” 


ear IATA 

yama faux Prefer aa: | 

serra wem waft Aaea sear uou 

Vyasa spoke: O King! When the King of the 
Vipras, Vi$vamitra, spoke thus, the King Trišanku, 
by virtue of the Muni's Tapas, got high up in the 
air without any delay like a quick flying bird. 

SUT MA Ta Wa: Vr Baw 1 

wet tame KĪEAMTA 10 N 

TASA Aas HISAR WET: | 

"mri daagr a geet: semp opi 

Thus getting up and up, when the King reached 
the abode of Indra. The Devas, seeing the terrible 
Cāņdāla-like appearance of Tri$anku, spoke out to 
Indra: “Who is this person coming like a Deva with 
a violent speed in the air? 

REAM WHETTAVAT SSN | 

arent Rotate a Priest asada u 12 t 

area aa aaa cach sp: | 

ante vite wat spt ara ear cae 1:3 

Why does he look like a Cāņdāla and is so fierce- 
looking?” Hearing thus, Indra got up at once and 
saw that one, the meanest of the human beings and 
knowing him to be Trišanku reproachingly said to 
him: "You are a Cāņdāla, quite unfit for the 
Devaloka; so where are you going? You ought not 
to remain here; so go immediately back to the 
earth.” 


772 
K: wafer: TAA T | 
Fuam car wat afturquat AMSAT: (1 14 N 
Gagner wore fratre TRG i 
want ver estate venttesferamgput n 15 N 
O Destroyer of the enemies! Indra speaking thus, 
the King dropped from the Heavens and, like a 
Deva whose merits had been exhausted, fell down 
immediately. Triganku then cried out frequently 
“O Vi$vamitra! O Visvamitra! Being displaced 
from the Heavens I am now falling very violently; 
so save me from this trouble.” 

AR qunfad vera: hT uir: à 

spe fester dara wast drew akru 16 ui 

ATT vore Ras mm qu 1 

pen aA aera s fa Area u 17 u 

O King! Hearing his cry and seeing him getting 
down, Visvamitra said: "Wait, Wait.” Though 
displaced from Heaven, the King by virtue of the 
Muni's Tapas, remained stationed at that place in 
the middle of the air. 

fasnfiritsurm: wear wets fem | 

found saat oft enteh tetera tt 18 i 

Visvamitra then began to do Acamana (sip 
water) and commenced his great Sacrifice to create 
another new creation and a second Svargaloka 
(Heaven). 

TRAM TAT ATA carey yretufer: à 

MATA ager aft wher g TĒTST s 19 0 

Seeing his resolve, the Lord of Saci became very 
anxious and eagerly came to the son of Gadhi 
without the least delay and said: 

foe rfr ATR HATTA: | 

aret yen TAS afe fe; aar u20 N 

“O Brahmana! What are you going to do? O 
Saint! Why are you so very angry? O Muni! There 
is no necessity to create new creation. Order now 
what 1 am to do. 


tes sara 
xi frei neuri ed carent | 
ware vita fata orig far 21 u 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


Viśvāmitra said: "O Lord of the Devas! The 
King TriSanku has become very miserable to have 
a fall from the Heavens. Therefore this is now my 
intention that you gladly take him to your own 
abode.” 


wer d fran amer quuretegttene: | 

ant act fafecitzitfiragare amma: 022 1 

Vyasa said: O King! Indra was thoroughly aware 
of his determined resolve and very powerful 
asceticism; so he accepted to do according to his 
word, out of terror. 

feed qd pal fanrrardfterar 1 

emper alors VATA Tar 23 u 

The Lord Indra then gave the King a bright and 
divine body and made him take his seat in an 
excellent car and taking leave Kaušika went with 
the King to his own abode. 

Te yah qp eat furtgpefe ae 1 

RaRa: gA wes arent Afters ra N 24 N 

Visvamitra became glad to see Trišanku go to 
the Heavens with Indra and remained happy in his 
own Aérama. 

ahaizisa egeat fA ANTR 1 

fag: ventur ari fadt vTSwW-dymq 25 u 

The King Hariácandra, now hearing that his father 
has gone to Heaven by virtue of his Tapas, began 
to govern his kingdom with a gladdened heart. 

ardenta: oret Mat ME SIT | 

wdreerenqduenar iA: 26 tl 

The King of Ayodhya began then to live 
constantly with his clever wife, full of youth and 
beauty. Thus time passed away; but the beautiful 
wife did not become pregnant. 

adama gaat tur miad gren i 

war fata ver agada gis: 27 u 

The King became very sorry and thoughtful. He 
then went to the holy hermitage of Vasistha and 
bowing down informed him of his mental agony 
due to his getting no son. 


Book VII Chapter XIV 


773 


ATHBETAT ream yore rear ATT i 

soca fumi Tur Hag 028 N 

dasa wart warrantee: i 

sui ge sag dada una u29 0 

*O Knower of Dharma! You are skilled in the 
Science O Mantrams. Especially you know 
everything of Daiva (Fate). So, O Giver of honour! 
Do for me so that I get a son. O Best of Brahmins! 
There is no salvation for one who has not got any 
son; you are well aware of this. 

erga Tastee safe faena à 

SATUS VISE U VAT U 20 N 

mafana aot À fret emen fe 1 

mamase Fare fear u 31 u 

Then why do you overlook my case when you 
can remove my sorrow. Even these sparrows are 
blessed who nourish their offsprings. And I am so 
very unfortunate that, day and night, I am immersed 
in cares and anxicties, due to my not having any 


” 


son. 


ara Fart 
zarari ALU frdafuf2rd eur: | 
fic wre magara fast: Ya: 032 i 
Vyasa said: O King! Hearing these pitiful 
utterances of the King, Vasistha thought over in 
his mind and spoke to him everything in particular. 
WRITE sara 
"wei wu vena densus feum 1 
AUSI ud Uem garg |1 33 N 
Tera Wess AKTI eraut ufa i 
RATA Wem a d wd ew uaa 
Vasistha said: O King! True you have spoken 
that in this world there is no other sorrow more 
pain giving than the state of not having any issuc. 
Therefore, O King! you worship with great care 
the water-god Varuna. He will crown your efforts 
with success. 
asmara «fist Sa: HTG: | 
amea atts miaa 135 i 


edgewear radium Jf 1 

enira ferar erifirfag: wise FU i 36 i 

There is no other god than Varuna to grant sons. 
So, O Virtuous One! Worship Him and you will 
get success. Both Fate and Self-exertion are to be 
respected by men; how can success come unless 
efforts are made. 

cune At: ard IEMETA: 1 

wd afurerdfeafaricurem quem N 37 N 

fr Ma ga: spem Taare: 1 

wur feud wet Wu gafīga: 138 N 

O King! Men who realise the Highest Truth 
should make efforts, guided by just rules; success 
comes to those who work; else never one is to 
expect success." Hearing these words of the Guru, 
of unbounded energy, the King made a fixed 
resolved and bowing himself down, went away to 
practise tapasya. 

Tre? ast wart panad gu: 1 

GTI fart HAM sat TT: 39 N 

Wa qe user afe d 

PUSAN Wea: 04 40 0 

On the banks of the Ganges, in a sacred place, 
seated on Padmasana, the King became merged in 
the meditation of the God Varuna with noose in 
his hand and thus practised severe asceticism. O 
King! When he was doing this, the god Varuna 
took pity on him and gladly came before his sight. 

saagad aa maai ufa: | 

at ata ada qetsfn quur wa 47 it 

Varuna, then, spoke to the King Harišcandra: 
“O Knower of Dharma! I am glad at your tapasyá. 
So ask boons from me." 


waare 


aaas Ra devo uoi fè YATA, | 

saan ges Mar Ha: 10042 N 

uer a ART ed g: PATA E | 

Raagd aa: argh aagi ura: Raa 43 u 

The King said: “O God! J. am without any son; 
give me a son, who will give me happiness and 


774 


Srimaddevibhàgavatam 


will free me from the three debts that I owe to the 
Devas, the Pitrs and the Rsis. Know that with that 
object I am doing this Tapasyà." Then the God 
Varuna, hearing these humble words of the 


sorrowful King, smiled and said. 


aan dara 

wat afa Aara ware arise: | 

fre are ae: waite atone tr eg 44 u 
cafe ad da prr ut aston: | 

Wyss ta wu qud aT 45 i 

“O King! If you get your desired well-qualified 
son, what will you do for me to my satisfaction? O 
King! If you perform a sacrifice in honour of me 
and fearlessly sacrifice your son there like an 
animal, I will then grant you your desired boon.” 

were 

da tong dened USTRĀS S enfin i 

ugi wer Ud yi wermaqseifü A ua6u 

deme wai gana ye aa | 

sites Fort PATS qd YT 1 47 N 

The King: “O Deva! Free me from this state of 
sonlessness; O Water God! When my son will be 
born, I will do your sacrifice with my son as an 
animal in that. This I speak truly to you. O Giver 
of honour! There is no suffering more unbearable 
than this one: not to have any son; so grant me a 
good son so that all my sorrows be vanished.” 

aay Sarat 

qara Ga: Ht WHATS JET À | 

wed ueni ad ues MATA: 48 Ui 

Varuna said: "O King! You will get a son as 
you desire; go home; but see what you have spoken 
before be fulfilled and turned true." 


«TU Sara 
sepe aettardt efr we wet a 
waft mera quid un 49 N 
weg arated quf aR, | 
"wget spur rear a ufu 50 Ul 


Vyasa said: Hearing these words from Varuna, 
Harišcandra went back and told everything about 
his getting the boon to his wife. The King had one 
hundred exquisitely beautiful wives of whom, 
Šaivyā was the lawful wife and queen and was very 
chaste. 

aret Wasa a wet eee nafr a 

aya ufadt Wat em AATA 051 

marae fattrarteanrgatretar | 

"ser aÈ yaf qua ar gt RA un 52 u 

After some time, that wife became pregnant and 
the King became very glad to hear this and her 
longings in that state. The King performed all her 
purificatory ceremonies, and when ten months were 
completed, and on an auspicious Naksatra and on 
an auspicious day, she gave birth to a son, like that 
of a Deva son. | 

angered wi Sao) 

TĀ Wet JA: Sea TAN: URABA: 53 1 

WH STAHL esr arat TRUE: 1 

TARUS AAEE: 540 

On the birth of his son, the King, surrounded by 
the Brāhmins, performed his ablutions and first of 
all performed the natal ceremonies and distributed 
innumerable jewels and much wealth; and the 
King’s joy knew no bounds at that time. 


Wgawmsummm 11 14 11 


The liberal King gave away, in special charities, 
wealth, grains, and various jewels and lands and 
had the performance of music, dancing and other 
things. 

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Seventh 
Book on the going to Heavens of Trisaüku and the 
commencement of Hariscandra 's narrative in the 
Maha Purāņam Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 
verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. 


Book VII Chapter XV 


775 


CHAPTER XV 
On the King Harišcandra 


edu Sara 

vat "e aa n Gane i 

amma aq myi yàn: BT: 1 d 

eiaa Ju ure AKTS Prem | 

Gat maae rema TAT WD Uu 2 d 

Vyasa said: O King! When there was going on 
in the King's palace, the grand festivities for the 
son's birth ceremonies, Varuna Deva came there 
in the holy Brahmin form. “Let welfare be on you." 
Saying this, Varuna began to say: ^O King! Know 
me to be Varuna. Now hear what I say. 

"Web He web rere STRUD TT | 

Seared Goud Ase wrap 3 fet 3 0 

ga quer erar: Sperm ST Feat AN € i 

"eb wf ad Td Se BATT 11 4 dd 

O King! Your sonis now born; therefore perform 
sacrifice in honour to me with your son. O King! 
Your defect of not having a son is now removed; 
so fulfil what you promised before." Hearing these 
words, the King began to think “Oh! Only one lotus- 
faced son is born to me; how can I kill it. 

Ararat: Baraat aAA Attar | 

a datori ard wader yaam us ul 

On the other hand, the powerful Regent 
(Lokapāla) of one quarter is present in a Brahmana 
form; and it never behaves one to show disrespect 
to a Deva or to a man who wishes welfare to us. 

Trete: adu: uå "uifürfsr: Ger | 

fe mth eset g weinen u 6 u 

àdi Hum IET Ufa U | 

Tara Ari versteh feemuueenu u 7 ou 

Again itis very difficult to root out the affection 
for a son; so what am I do now? How shall I 
preserve my happiness due to the birth of my son. 
The King, then, with patience bowed down to him 
and worshipped him duly and humbly spoke to 
him in beautiful words, pregnant with reason. 


Gada args: fi Aemmmā a 

dba faa wae Uu owgafamm is i 

“O Deva of the Devas! I will obey your order 
no doubt and I will perform your sacrifice 
according to the Vedic rites and with profuse 
Daksinas (remuneration to priests, etc.). 

A m ames edunt AR 1 

Tea Yass eer wap ANT 9 di 

But, when in a sacrifice, human beings are 
immolated as victims, both the husband and wife 
are entitled to the ceremony. Father purified on 
the tenth day and mother on the expiration of one 
month after the son’s birth; so how can I perform 
the sacrifice until one month expires! 

adds weed et ware sm | 

wat He vd arity ama Wis 110 0 

You are omniscient and the master of all the 
beings; and you know what is Nitya Dharma. So, 
O Varuna Deva! I want one month time; and shew 
mercy thus on me. 


OTe SATA 


FG Wort wegerer safer i 

Taher esu Trent ae ereiforurfia wu 11 u 

Vyasa said: O King! The King Hari$candra 
saying thus, Varuna Deva spoke to the King! “O 
King! Welfare be unto you! Do your duties; I am 
now going back to my place. 

amira mare de ALT ea | 

gaea YA FTAA 12 0 

BRA VARTA ATAT ISA reat ui: 1 

RRR ga ura wet urfzdep urfēra: d 03 u 

O King! I will come again after one month. 
Better finish the natal ceremonies and the 
Namakarana ceremony regularly and then perform 
my sacrifice.” O King! When Varuna Deva turned 
his back, the King began to feel happiness. 


776 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


af: yad aren AAST: | 

ferret defers ade fereraeferra 14 i 

Wem GATS WaT USAT ETA | 

"mum difeasrfer werfafirgdar u 15 u 

Then the King gave as gifts millions of cows, 
yielding plenty of milk and ornamented with gold, 
and mountains of Til, sesamums to the Brahmins 
versed in the Vedas and kept his name, with formal 
ceremonies as Rohitasva. 

wif mÀ aa: myi faddu wat Dd 

emer Ye web asda qam: 16 oN 

dtea d qafada fram: vüeeunm | 

yna queries: TATA parse: 1 17 u 

When.one month became complete, Varuna 
Deva came again in a Brahmin form and frequently 
said: *O King! Start the sacrifice just now." The 
King, on seeing the God of Waters, at once fell 
into ap ocean anxieties and sorrows; he then bowed 
down and worshipping him as a guest, spoke to 
him with folded palms: 

femur ča vara Té À urfērci weit i 

we atft ante feftragifod wa nisn 

aret A UY: VATE FATALE: | 

Temata dsé enftenfir ign 11 19 u 

"O Deva! It is to my great fortune that you have 
landed your feet at my place; O Lord! My house 
has been sanctified to day. O Deva! I will do, no 
doubt, your desired sacrifice according to the rites 
and ceremonies." But see, the victims that have 
not their teeth come as yet are not fit for a sacrifice; 
so the versed Pandits say; so I have settled I would 
perform your great sacrifice, as desired by you, 
when the teeth will come out of my son." 


eT Saray 
PHRMA TEAGRA TAIT | 
FRK yi ma fase qunm 200 
Verear ATT wet fisse i 
ARNT WS TET He nre Ga ti 21 N 
Vyàsa said: O Lord of men! Hearing thus, 
Varuna spoke "Let it be so" and went away. The 


King Hari$candra became glad and passed his days 
in enjoyments in his household. When the tecth of 
the child got out, Varuna knew it and came again 
in a Brahmin garb in the palace and spoke “O King! 
Now commence my sacrifice." 

ETS wereltet dier yr frg | 

ŅUTFATATATATĀ: THAT ATT 0022 di 

KAT Wart rib ferum: | 

mAN fafaa wd yacrefarong 1 23 N 

Seeing the Brahmin Varuna there, the King, too, 
bowed down and gave him a seat and showing all 
respects to him, worshipped him. He sang hymns 
to him and very humbly said with his head bent 
low: ^O Deva! I will perform your desired sacrifice 
with plently of Daksiņās according to rites and 
ceremonies. - 

wreitsurgasiteitsai AR A xima: | 

wr VIĻA AM JE AET 124 N 

But the child's Cūdākaraņa (the ceremony of 
tonsure) is not yet done; so the hairs that were at 
the birth time are still there and the child cannot be 
fit for sacrifice as long as those hairs exist. 

TATA ATT farfet STATA gare 1 

deg: wee agit quera ret: feet t 25 u 

So I have heard from the elderly persons. O Lord 
of Waters! You know the Šāstric rules; kindly wait 
till the Cūdākaraņa is over. When the child will 
have his head shaven, I will certainly perform your 
sacrifice; there is no doubt in this." 

Tea aa sper Waa: We d YA: | 

yma uir Wad qs 260 

aA d adamni add TASYA | 

VARA dart RNA 027 0 

Hearing these words, Varuna spoke to him 
again: "O King! Why are you deceiving me like 
this so often? O King! Now you have all the 
materials ready for the sacrifice; only for your filial 
affection you are deceiving me. 

dttenifātti near a matte we ate à 

aas arent ymi ema enfe: 28 U 


Book VII Chapter XV 


777 


STE TEBTĪ ISK ATA ATG | 

AUT A are ATA u29 N 

However, if, after the ceremony of tonsure, you 
do not perform my sacrifice, I will be angry and I 
will curse you. O King! I am going for the present; 


but see do not tell lies, being born in the family of 


Iksvāku.” 

SCHTHTE AAA Weta TIA, | 

WH WHS! AAT Wat WWD u30 ul 

KTM q Wad UA | 

aor oum swat qud: TA: u31 N 

Instantly Varuna disappeared; the King, too, felt 
himself happy in his household. When the 
ceremony of tonsure was commenced and grand 
festivities were hold, on the occasion Varuna soon 
came again to the King’s palace. 

wate gaa we gafrafreit 1 

ufegr frararet wed THOS TTT, lt 3 2 N 

we cfr fas ai RaT, | 

ĪRU: SIA Ta ram: 033 

The gueen was then sitting before the King with 
the child in her lap when Varuņa came up there. 
The Brāhmin Vāruņa then appeared like a Flaming 
Fire and spoke to the King in clear voice: “O King! 
Start the sacrifice.” 

qR career agarda faga: | 

"CST d A paige: wc 0 34 u 

faftraegerfirear d vetare ferrara | 

Tarter ater wee faftrqdenq 11 35 t 

Seeing him, the King was confused with terror 
and with folded palms, quickly bowed down to him. 
After worshipping him duly, he very humbly said: 
“O Lord! Today I will perform your sacrifice.” 

areata carte grana AN i 

Oth oreet varfitierqardtfir vau u 36 u 

But kindly hear with attention my saying and 
then do what is advisable. O Lord! If you approve 
of this as reasonable, I then open my heart to you. 

wa: arret dvaeray ert farsa: à 

wiegt Yat ve aaferat fag: 37 u 


The three Varnas Brahmanas, Ksattriyas, and 
Vaišyas become Dvijas (twice-born) only when 
they are duly purified according to proper rules 
and ceremonies; without any such purifications 
they are certainly Südras. 

weet Yat Asa speed fry: | 

sorte: fērart: varfefer deg Profs: 138 N 

So the Pandits versed in the Vedas declare. My 
child is now an infant only; so it is like a Südra. 
When his thread ceremony (Upanayana) will be 
performed, he will then be fit for the sacrifice; this 
the Veda Sastras declare. 

maA af Matua S rc | 

STET E GUNA ur AVA gras féget t 39 N 

wae ufa dast dbi ui Wed da | 

«racer naisiin agar aa 0040 N 

The Ksattriyas are so purified in their eleventh 
year; the Brahmanas in their eighth year and the 
Vaišyas in their twelfth year. So, O Lord of the 
Devas! If you feel pity for your this humble servant, 
then wait till the Upanayana ceremony is over, 
when I perform your grand sacrifice with my son. 

vitesareitsfer erdt IT ferma i 

Wem aga: U ages we fas 441 N 

O Bibhu! You are the Lokapāla; sepecially you 
are conversant with all the Sastric rules and have 
acquired the knowledge of Dharma. If you think 
my saying as true, then go to your home. 


GTA sara 


Ba quar ae: sper earam; aret uf: à 

SATEK arem WHATS qu: 042 N 

mAsa gent wat ayaga aA: | 

Ge ma gael YU Yana E 043 

Vyasa said: Hearing these words, Varuna’s heart 
was filled with pity and so he went away instantly, 
saying “let it be so.” Varuna going away, the King 
felt very glad and the queen, knowing the welfare 
of the son became glad too, 

Tan Usenet KRKA TU: 1 

IET Asa Yat aye yrs: 44 i 


778 

wedudtaunnft fesse za: 1 

"AT we: Pinta: aAa 45 u 

Then the King gladly performed his state duties. 
After some time, the child grew ten years old. 
Consulting with the peaceful Brahmanas as well 


as his ministers, he collected materials for the 
Upanayana ceremony befitting his position. 
GATI games serere Ju: | 
fad fatra foret KITT: YA: 1 46 u 
Adama wem are sud unm | 
ammm mud Ayen 1 47 i 


When the eleventh year was completed by his 
son, the King arranged everything for the thread 
ceremony but when his thoughts turned to Varuna’s 
sacrifice, he became very sad and anxious. When 
the thread ceremony began to be performed, the 
Brahmin Varuna came there. 

«t diae qaterequt worea que: fune: à 

qaae: Wa: egere GŪTI 048 t 

aanus UZparatsfta tt ga: à 

yaaa À ye Wet dearest: 49 

Seeing him, the King instantly bowed down and 
standing before him with clasped palms, gladly 
spoke to him: ^O Deva! My son's Upanayana being 
over, now my son is fit for the victim in the 
sacrifice; and by your grace, my sorrow that was 
within me as not having a son, has vanished. 

aiie we wspravefAmm a 

mà spur era emer wefRaEn 50 ! 

amadan enfer wf reu d 

mA gai grat dard afquéh 51 N 

I speak truly before you that, O Knower of 
Virtue! after some more time I have desired to 
perform yours sacrifice with plenty of Daksiņās. 
In fact, when the Samāvartan ceremony will be 
over, I will do as you like. Kindly wait till then." 


dau Saray 


wan ui Uae AMT | 
qgdgfd gar grami wert 52 1 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 
TTT WENT STAT Ta ATT: | 
smart art amadan u53 i 
Varuna said: “O Intelligent One! You are very 
much attached to your son now and so by various 


reasonable plays of intellect, you are repeatedly 
deceiving me. However, I am going home today at 
your request but know certain that I will come again 
at the time of the Samāvartana ceremony. 

Note: Samavartana means the return home especially 
of a pupil from his tutor’s house after finishing his 
course of study there. 

FT Waa urgft marge fargriud t 

tet ufa: are war a eeu 54 N 
amti eut sear Hares erfreut: | 

UA MHS ATT Tal Para AAS AAT N 55 N 

O King! Thus saying, Varuna went away and 
the King became glad and began to perform duly 
his various duties. The prince was very intelligent; 
and as he used to see Varuna coming, now and 
then, at the time of the ceremonies, he became very 
anxious. 

Vilta ATTI Vu Wyeast: | 

ATS SATA nA ait 11 56 u 

fared wet quien uisa ferent: | 

wat ATT amet 570 

He then made enquiries outside hither and thither 
and came to know of his own being about to be 
killed and he desired to quit the house instantly. 
He then consulted with the minister’s sons and 
came to a final conclusion and went out of the city 
to the forest. 

Te Ya Ja: cH gifts gI Tar | 

TATA FARA ATTA 115.8 N 

Va WAST RASA THT ATES Wa: | 

Wed pieda He aati gaz 59 N 

When the son had gone to the forest, the King 
became very much afflicted with sorrow and sent 
messengers in quest of him. When some time 
passed away, Varuna came to his house and spoke 
to the distressed King: ^O King! Now perform your 
desired Sacrifice." 


Book VII Chapter XVI 


779 


Tat yora vb UTE gada hr fēru d 

"Ust FATT Gat AAT TATA: t 60 N 

ada frg grams wd 

aAA 3 gig unt ureumm 61 N 

The King bowed down to him and said: “O 
Deva! What shall I do now? My son has become 
afraid and has gone away. I do not know where he 
has gone. O Deva! My messengers have searched 
for him in difficult places in mountains, in the 
hermitages of the Munis, in fact, in all the places; 
but they have not been able to find him anywhere. 

arama Wurst fd enfe wp d 

ae rss dg MTSE wee 62 

My son has left his home; order now what I can 
do. O Deva! You know everything; so judge I have 
got no fault in this matter. It is certainly luck and 
nothing else." 


ATA sarea 


FR square: sper year: HAA JE i 
wong wp qd mefa UA: YA: M 63 N 
qs Cut VEGA U Wehen: d 
PAST eftt qaedfeamur: i64 N 


Vyasa said: O King! Hearing these words of the 
King, Varuna became very much angry and when 
he saw that he was deceived so many times by the 
King, he then cursed, saying: “O King! As you 
have cheated me by your deceitful words, so you 
be attacked by dropsy and be severely pained by 


O0. 


it, 
sft erat nda: paa wear | 
Vats operant areal FAVA q 65 tl 
We year gi UTZĪt sm PASTATETGA | 
TTT uror terete aada ghi: w 66 n 
efr Area Ta TRIO am 
-JARRIS ETT: 11:75 11 
Thus cursed by Varuna, the King was attacked 
with that disease and began to suffer much. 
Cursing thus, Varuna went back to his own place 
and the King was much afflicted with that terrible 
disease. 
Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter in the Seventh 
Book on the story of the King Harišcandra 
in the Mahapuranam Srimaddevibhagavatam 
of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


779 


Book VII Chapter XVI 


CHAPTER XVI 


On Sunahsepa Freed and Hariscandra Lured ` 


ale dara 


mAsa web wem Woda fsa: 1 

quei ui ure oaferats 79t er ud ou 

gas at sper fet TSI | 

Tata aft wisn Reda 002 0 

Vyasa said: O King! When Varuna went away, 
the King was very much laid down with that dropsy 
and daily his pains began to increase and he began 
to suffer extreme pains. O King! The prince, on 
the other hand, heard, in the forest, of the illness 
of his father and filled with affection, wanted to 
go to his father. 

act cadi g frat zener 1 

TTT Got AA PIEKKTATTTA E OU 3 N 


amag Wer ed Heat MTU um | 

ANAT FRM À HU WIA 804 N 

A year had passed away and the prince desired 
very gladly to go to his father and see him. 
Knowing this, Indra came there. He came instantly 
in the form of a Brahmin and with favourable 
arguments desisted the prince, who was about to 
go to his father. l 

Sa saldu 

Taya a arate madf Aga a 

aa: ae Weed Wears fi gar us i 

Indra said: "O Prince! It seems you are silly; 
you know nothing of the difficult state policies. 
Therefore it is that you are ready to go, out of 
ignorance, to your father. 


780 


frat we me arene: 1 

«nftrafā gri s wafertsor ferrent i 6 n 

amer fit ARTIETA erit ATT TAK 1 

aed arm: cufer YARAT: 07 i 

O Fortunate One! I£ you go there, your father 
will get his sacrifice, where a human victim is to 
be offered, performed by the Vedic Brahmanas and 
your flesh will be offered are oblations to the 
blazing Fire. O Child! The souls of all the beings 
are very dear; it is for that reason, for the sake of 


soul, that sons, wife, wealth and jewels are all dear. 
amet serene gear cat aec YT | 
wat enfer nme srfenfer usu 
Tara A wrest Wn fae 1 
yà frat eed were dur ga: 9 d 
Therefore, though you are his dear son, like his 
soul, yet he will certainly have you killed and get 
Homas offered, to free himself from the disease. 
O Prince! You ought not to go home now; rather 
when your father dies, you would certainly go there 
and inherit your Kingdom." 
wd fairest areas unm 1 
TAM fen art Ya: caen qu: 010 
serere g:ftad spear ars verear: | 
TATU RP dk at gakga: 03 o 
O King! Thus hindered by Vasava, the prince 
remained in that forest for one year more. But when 
the prince again heard of the severe illness of his 
father, he wanted again to go to his father, resolved 
to court the death of his ownself. 
Grae (BŪT artes wp NER | 
Praramra qs gran: GT: YA: 0 12 1 
vRaratsfrg arat afte verqüfequ i 
wwe iram tur Orsay 0 13 n 
Indra also came there in the form of a Brahmana 
and, with reasonable words, repeatedly advised him 
not to go there. Here, on the other hand, the King 
Hariécandra became very much distressed and 
troubled by the disease and asked his family priest 
Vasistha Deva: "O Brāhmaņa! What is the sure 
remedy for the cure of the disease?" 


Srimaddevii bhàgavatam 

Aas TET: Yat ast He FATA | 
mamà BACT vote srféemerfet u 14 NI 
War qgan: reat arertdaurit: 1 
KĀTA qued ost He WAT 15 tt 
Vasistha, the Brahma’s son, said: "O King! 
Purchase one son by giving his value; then perform 
the sacrifice with that purchased son and you will 
be free from the curse. O King! The Brahmins, 
versed in the Vedas, say that sons are of ten kinds, 
of whom the son, purchased by paying its proper 
value, is one of them. So buy one son. 

wreumtsfü waa: Aen wears | 

rents fea: st geret TATE: 116 N 

wd wuütfad! wat ARTŠA WERWSU | 

wat Rama aAA 4017 |i 

There will very probably be within your king- 
dom a Brahmin who might sell, out of avarice, his 
son. 1n that case Varuna Deva will certainly be 
pleased and grant your happiness." Hearing these 
words of the high-souled Vasistha, the King be- 
came glad and ordered his minister to look after 
such a son. 

arsftraf fea: enfafia ara squd: i 

aag mu: qam Prefer fastea: 0008 0 

mara Ye: ware giat feat: t 

Tat wet went efe gi Wars d NIN 

There lived in that King’s dominion one 
Brahmin, named Ajigarta, very poor; he had three 
sons. The minister spoke to him to purchase his 
son: “J will give you one hundred cows; give one 
son of your for the sacrifice.” 

TS: YUM: gpiterier gent i 

cama ate caf g wat wer 20 N 

refte vreggear agerer dift sym i 

Yat a Het deat fad a WAT ee 27 N 

You have three sons named respectively 
Sunahpuccha, Sunahéepa and Sunolāngūla. Give 
me out of them one son and I will give you one 
hundred cows as his value. Ajigarta was very much 
distressed for want of food; so when he heard the 
proposal, he expressed his desire to sell his son. 


Book VII Chapter XVI 

PECORE Heat ATATACTAA | 

aas araerarar ui see 122 N 

teat a Bp get Tat aT T | 

amr wy wk ATA ÈT: 023 i 

He thought that his eldest son was the rightful 
person to perform funeral obsequies and offer Pinda 
and he therefore did not spare him. The youngest 
son, too, be did not spare also, as he considered 
that his own. 

vet g:fad di duri yorguy | 

WW ag fiend amped 24 u 

miaa wp waa AAA mm: d 

VITĒTAT aea ort quretsrirg for 25 u 

At last, he sold his second son for the price of 
one hundred cows. The King then bought him and 
made him the victim for the sacrifice. When that 
boy was fastened to the sacrificial post, he began 
to tremble and very much distressed with sorrow 
began to cry. Seeing this, the Munis cried out in a 
very pitiful tone. 

"Té aagi did eui neut WU | 

sari vareitreifregaremerdt qat 2 6 u 

sepe faraTHY A goatee | 

Tat Warde: We fe adeatate feat: 27 N 

When the King gave permission for the 
immolation of that boy, the slaughterer did not take 
weapons to slaughter him. He told that he would 
never be able to kill the boy, since he is crying ina 
very pitiful tone. When he thus withdrew himself 
from his work, the King then asked his councillors: 

sra: PACTA Sarat sersrat war i 

Rea WT Mai WMATA 0028 N 

“O Devas! What ought to be done now?" 
Sunahéepa then began to cry in a very pitiful voice; 


the people present there began to discuss and there 
arose a great noice on the affair. 

sitters THAT UH d 

Tr HREM gar Oat ara u 29 ul 

ded faut afe seraa ugi fane à 

«dei uen à Wm ase east i 30 i 


781 


g Racer LATI KES WAT | 

Then Ajigarta stood up in the midst of the 
assembly and spoke: “O King! Be patient; I will 
fulfil your desire. I am desirous of wealth and if 
you give me double the amount, I will slay 
immediately the victim; and you can complete early 
your sacrifice. O King! He who is hankering after 
money, can always entertain feelings of enmity 
even towards his own son. There is no doubt in 
this.” 

CTA Saver 

AEG cet ver Beret yaa: 31 i 

ayers GATT Tat VITA, | 

ATT fra AE ud wed AEA: 032 0 

Vyāsa said: "O King! Hearing those words of 
Ajigarta, Hariscandra gladly spoke to him: "I will 
immediately give you another hundred excellent 
cows.” Hearing thus, the son’s father, avaricious 
of wealth, immediately resolved and became ready 
to slay his son. 

vitsrargperfereitsett ois Hares: i 

eyed a d ga KAT: cu UNTA: 133 N 

apiga gett mgd: d 

fyres mera Tati faster: 134 N 

Tagad LAY SAGA: wer: | 

All the councillors seeing the father ready to 
slay his son, were struck with sorrow and began to 
lament exclaiming "Alas! This wretch, a disgrace 
to his family, 1s now ready to kill his own son. Oh! 
We never saw before such a cruel vicious person. 
This Brahmin must be a Demon in a Brahmin body! 

RIFATST feeders aras ferent n 35 u 

wer Yet eri UTC fe YS d aaae 1 

STEHT À Waa Vor air Aafia u 36 N 

vieni Use AT g-qresfu i 

Wd alte Ta wd Hitt: 037 i 

adit quede agar Gama: | 

Fie on you! O Cāņdāla! What a vicious work 
are you now going to do? What happiness do you 


782 


derive by slaying the son, the jewel of jewels, only 
to get some wealth? O Sinner! It is stated in the 
Vedas that the soul takes its birth from one’s body; 
so how are you going to slay your soul! When the 
hue and cry arose in the assembly, Visvamitra, the 
son of Kausika, went to the King and, out of pity, 
said: 
fasta sara 

Usa Yt wdd yg: Raa 38 u 

syed afear uut YRTSTSET dem | 

O King! Sunahéepa is very piteously crying; so 
let him be free; and then your sacrifice will be 
complete and you will be free of your disease. 

qum ua gud und feared afe usou 

woi temata ater fenem | 

There is no virtue like mercy and there is no 
vice like killing (Himsa). What is written about 
killing animals in the sacrifice, is only meant for 
the persons inclined to sensual objects and to give 
them a stimulus in that direction. 

SIME tered mAg TT 400 

a pd Tanta Uda: ypstitresan | 

O King! He who wants his own welfare and who 
wants to preserve his own body ought not to cut 
another’s body. 


GATT wats wem da da aT 41 N 

adain er TAN STUART: | 

He who pities equally all the beings, gets 
contended with a trivial gain and subdues all his 
senses; God is soon pleased with him. 

amad frat qunm 4421 

siae fid gi Mat acter Bret | 

O King! You should treat all the Jivas like 
yourself and thus always spend your life, so dear: 
to all. 

vafiresfi qui ad qd wat cad fist 0 43 N 

wei credat uà vnd Aga | 

You desire to preserve your body by taking away 
the life of this boy; similarly why would he not try 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


to preserve his own body, the receptacle of 
happiness and pleasure. 

yaragi at NAA we d gu 44 

rami Kde fasi fun 1 

O King! You have desired to kill this innocent 
Brahmin boy; but he will never overlook this 
enmity of yours done in previous lives. 

rs gf fert at eren: wed YA: 45 N 

Bart eat d urep seb GATT | 

If anybody kills another willingly, though he 
has got no enmity with him, then the one that is 
killed will certainly kill afterwards the slayer. 

TRĪS SETA Saray Ft ATA: N 46 N 

varersit Tareas urarem: Asafa: à 

His father, out of greed for money, is deprived 
of intellect and so has sold away his son. The 
Brahmin is certainly very cruel and sinful. 
Therefore is no doubt in this. 

WEG Fea: Yat wrerentsfu Wat AAT tt 47 t 

aaa UIHĀŠA ate at gayest 1 

UMA oa: Heard Aart 48 N 

When one goes to Gaya or one performs an 
Ašvamedha sacrifice or when one offers a blue bull 
(Nila Vrsbha), one does so on the consideration 
that one would desire to have many sons. 

UBT WT TST ATH F HNA: | 

Paete vest urd ed Ager: 149 N 

Moreover the King has to suffer for one-sixth 
of the sins committed by anyone in his Kingdom. 
Therefore is no doubt in this. Therefore the King 
ought certainly to prohibit any man when he wants 
to do a sinful act. 

a tigen Henge qure: | 

yiil agaaa gpa: YET: 150 1 

Why then did you not prevent this man when 
he desired to sell his son? O King! You are the son 
of Triganku; especially you are born in the Solar 
line of Kings. 

urdcaamdaremi endfiresfir ata | 

TRA duum À N51 N 


Book VII Chapter XVII 


783 


So how have you desired, being born an Arya, 
to do an act becoming an An-Aryà (non-āryan). 
If you take my word and quickly free this 
Bráhmin boy, you will certainly derive virtue in 
your body. 

Ta dt Wu urWfauregfeemum | 

frat st vm UTS: N 52 N 

Your father was converted into a Candala by a 
curse but I sent him in his very body to the Heavens. 

rst AA Ser Tact ufa: fenet 1 

aa ufmHRD ge d owed qu 153 

qed ren did edd STRA | 

And you are well acquainted with this fact. 
Therefore, O King! Keep my word out of your love 
for that. This boy is very pitifully crying; so free 
him. 

ATS ŠI me FT aS PATA i54 N 

måmit gr enel ud ATaqers 1 

I pray this from you in this your Ràjasüya 
sacrifice and if you do not keep my word, you will 
incur the sin of not keeping any word. 

wit weder dd HASRAT 155 N 

BUT UTA FTA ITTA AMA: d 

Do you not realise this? O King! You will have 
to give anything that a man wants from you in this 


sacrifice; but if you do otherwise, sin will attack 
you, no doubt.” 


eae Sarat 

sft rer aa: spe GĒTE quie: 1156 N 

Taara AKTS: Hla APTA | 

wera urdu gads yet ga 057 u 

ATA ATA SNE 1 

spera fame: ard: eds fenem dar i 58 u 

Vyasa said: "O King! Hearing these words of 
Kaušika, the King Hariécandra spoke thus: “O son 
of Gadhi! I am suffering very much from the 
dropsy; I will not be able therefore to free him. 
You can pray for some other thing. You ought not 
to throw obstacles in this my sacrifice." 

AT eret vrait Praha Ss repr: 1 
aya graded dar did fuse u 59 u 

efr sfera ergo? erem 
DEMSA: 016 11 

Višvāmitra became very angry at this, and, 
seeing the Brahmin boy very distressed, became 
sorrowful and mourned very much. 

Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Seventh Book 
on the story of Sunahsepa in the Mahāpurāņam 
Šrīmaddevibhāga vatam of 18,000 verses, by 
Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. 


Book VII Chapter XVII 783 


CHAPTER XVII 


On Sunahsepa Freed and Hariscandra Lured 
"d faarao: Spem pna: YENGA: | 
H Tr TU Wat entire pe TRU 0 3 N 
wdd sme caer AA gE: | ATTA TET, WERT BUTEA: | 


A a gha weer Wael ust Nan 
wai Wade: ya wah HAT ERA, | The sorrowful Śunahśepa, hearing thus from 
qaa a afer WHTSUD 2 N Visvamitra, began to repeat silently in his mind 
Vyasa said: O King! When Visvamitra saw that! the above Mantra, clearly pronouncing each letter. 

the boy was crying very pitifully, he went to him! O King! No sooner Šunahšepa repeated that Mantra 
with a merciful heart and said: “O Child! I am) than the kind-hearted Varuna came suddenly before 
giving you the Varuna Mantra; recollect this within! the boy, greatly pleased with him. 

your mind and if you go on repeating that Mantra «gar aad ud fered und wat: 1 


silently, you will certainly fare well.” qgqdent ad yèm ga A ust 


784 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


wensferferfezrer: urat Worry ws | 

wagiwfenget we qera Wu für ou 6 n 

Everyone in the assembly became thoroughly 
surprised to see Varuna Deva come there and they 
all became glad and chanted hymnsin honourof him. 
The diseased Hari$candra was also thoroughly 
surprised, fell to his feet, and with folded palms began 
to sing hymns to Varuna, standing before him. 

ētera sara 

Gada Haren wrasse gige: 1 

GATT: AUT: wise: unfer n7 ou 

"rm wd PATA woe: em, d 

wd ATi payor isu: Pett: d 8 u 

Harišcandra said: "O Deva of the Devas! I am 
very vicious; my intellect is much defiled; I am a 
sinner before you; O Merciful One! Now shew your 
mercy and sanctify this humble self I was very 
much troubled on not having a son; so I had 
disregarded your words; now shew your mercy on 
me; what offence can cling to him whose intellect 
is already out of order? 

ad ate E ESI Esci EH D HD 

asara tata ifta ft uo 

agre Tate venit a vr Aa t | 

sfratsd da area quie gerd HNL 10 N 


A beggar does not see his own faults; I am also 
in want of a son; so I could not see my defects. O 
Lord! Being afraid of the terrors of hell, I have 
deceived you. Those, who are sonless, cannot find 
rest anywhere. Especially he is barred from the 
Heavens. Being terrified by this dictate of Šāstra, I 
have shown disregard to your words. 

ATR gout fart Ti AAT faeit i 

gRadtsé Soren figa: KAT 11 NU 

TASS UERTST Ya A ITT: WT d 

agin at site arora qure u 12 n 

O Lord! You are wise and I am ignorant; 
especially I am extremely afflicted by this terrible 
disease; I am also deprived of my son; so you ought 


not to take my notice of my faults. O Lord! I do 
not know where my son has gone; O merciful One! 
Perhaps he, being afraid of his life, has fled away 
to some forest. 

werd faut aver état ERAT: i 

Grils siqua unma GET u13 N 

wet Ta Aa d qd VATE d 

weitgrgd web wast cafe ATA, 14 Ni 

For your satisfaction, I have now commenced 
your sacrifice with this purchased boy; I gave an 
equivalent value and I have purchased this boy. O 
Deva of the Devas! You sight only has taken away 
my infinite troubles; now if your be pleased, I can 
be free of my this disease dropsy and my troubles 
will all be over. 


Gata gara 


Bier eT A: Spes Tat TTT V | 

aaa: wara quiu N15 N 

Vyasa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of 
that diseased King, Varuna, the Deva of Hearing 
thus the words of that diseased King, Varuna, the 
Deva of the Devas, took pity on him and thus 
spoke. 


dur SAT ST 

FS WSS TG aed Wi ERE | 

"assi RiR t vara lt 16 N 

Varuna said: “O King! Šunahšepha is uttering 
hymns of praise to me; he has become very 
distressed; so quit him. Your sacrifice, too, is now 
completed; now let you be free from your present 
disease." 

egeret aane ward feret TAT | 

AN Wadi qr Heat quien u 17 u 

faqraset faa: EEA ETC | 

Waa UAT Mast | 18 ti 

Thus saying, Varuna, freed the King of his 
disease in the presence of all his councillors; the 
King became of a beautiful body and got himself 
completely cured and shone bright before the 


Book VII Chapter XVII 


785 


assembly. Shouts of victory arose from the midst 
of the sacrificial ground when the Brahmin boy 
was freed of his bonds of rope, by the mercy of the 
high-souled Deva Varuna. 

WAT WHAT: et UAT TATA, | 

WUT: YAN agarda dfezra: t 19 N 

Tan fad rd vot TT Tamrac: | 

gpisrasar wvarfsrerarer ATT: i20 N 

The King became very glad on his, being 
recovered immediately from his disease and 
Šunahšepha, too, became free from his anxiety and 
pacified when he got himself liberated from his 
being immolated on the sacrificial post. Then the 
King HariScandra completed his sacrifice with great 
modesty. Afterwards Šunahšepa addressed the 
councillors with folded palms and said: 

at sit erar: genda gdg from i 

wesmemqunur wensierfaz: feet u 21 1 

TSK aea Waa: far A ASNA: ww t 

Watt THAT VRUÍ ANARA 0 22 Ut 

epe TAT AT WAT: Wry: Wem | 

“O Councillors! You know well the Dharma; O 
Speakers of truth! Kindly specify according to the 
dictates of the Vedas. O Omniscient ones! Whose 
son am I now? Who is my most respectful father? 
Please deliver your judgement and I will take his 
refuge. When Šunahšepha spoke thus, the members 
of the assembly began to speak to each other 


sūnas u23 Uu 

amina: were sfera: à 

TART aS qatssit werdfafe frere: 0 24 u 

“The boy must be of Ajigarta; whose else can 
he be? This boy is born of the limbs of Ajigarta; 
and he has nursed him according to his might. So 
he must be his son; whose else can he be?" 

AT AI MAT TW: | 

fagitta andar AAA: Fer t 25 i 

gals gA IRA N HIT: | 

AAA amu urgmpeetsserta d 026 Ut 


50 


Vāma Deva then told the people of the assembly 
"The father of the boy sold his son for money; the 
King purchased him. So he can be said as the son 
of the King; or he may be called son of Varuna, in 
as much as he freed him from his rope bondage. 

AeA STETAITRT TIT AEA a: 1 

wem favere wiki frat: gt: 027 u 

For, he who nourishes another with food, who 
saves one from one's fear, who protects one by 
giving money, who bestows learning to anybody 
and he who gives birth to any of the above five 
classes of persons can be called his father. 

war shferferg: ure: PAANS | 

aerate dara Froid ws d 28 n 

gel Ween atest arent i 

waa Uda: wdufs: 029 0 

uea s ers froti gRr 1 

O King! Thus some one turned out to be in 
favour of Ajigarta, some other in favour of the 
King; but nobody came to any definite conclusion. 
When matters stood in this doubtful condition, the 
omniscient all-respected Vasistha Deva addressed 
the disputing members thus: “O high-souled Ones! 
Kindly hear what the Srutis say on this point. 

Freier war ferar feats wa: fry: N 30 u 

WAY UAT Cus TATE | 

FRK sa: YASA sia Wa TU N 

Ba FeAl TST WAT Tal TEST A À Te: | 

When the father has cut off his filial attachment 
and has sold his son, his fatherly connection has 
ceased then. No doubt this boy was purchased by 
the King HariScandra. But when the King fastened 
him to the sacrificial post, he cannot be called as 
the father. 

memg EAST AA GEA rene 11 32 u 

aaraa TTA ATT GA: ATA: | 

ah a either em: utsttrgetrgerfī TU 33 N 

tri romagna TAT trad PATA i 

Again when this boy singing hymns in honour 
of Varuna, he being glad freed him of his 


786 


bondage, so Varuna cannot be called his father. 
For whoever praises a god by the great Mantras, 
that Deva becomes pleased with him and gives 
him wealth, life, cattle-kingdom and even final 
emancipation. 

TA wasmd TĀŠ da ms 134 Nu 

wat get verde aeurentrage | 

Rather Visvamitra saved the boy by giving him 
in his critical moment the powerful great Mantra 
of Varuna; hence the boy can be called as the son 
of Vi$vamitra and of none else. 

OTe garu 

ara atest ARIBEI ATS: WWW: d 35 ll 

frarftrag ware d at aferct oer 1 

we ga m d afgaan Igma: u 36 u 

Vyasa said: O King! Hearing the words of 
Vasistha, all the members of the assembly gave 
their unanimous consent and Visvamitra with his 
heart filled with love, exclaimed “O Son! Come to 
my house." And caught hold of his right hand. 

pesti ATRI aa CHE UR: | 

eU WHAT SUNT KAUT 0 37 1 

Šunahšepa, too, accompanied him and went 
away. Varuna also went to his own abode with a 
gladdened heart. 

AĒTTY TUT HIST: Tae ETT | 

ms tae aaga aT: (1 38 Ut 

VARY UTA GI AT | 

The councillors, too, departed. Freed from his 
disease, the King gladly began to govern his 
subjects. 

VaR Tapa Art TSUNA F 39 N 

arama ae Wit gadam, 1 

At this time his son Rohita heard all about 
Varuna and became very glad and leaving the 
impassable forest passes and mountains, returned 
home. 

SA sr We: ua VATA 0 40 d 

qfastsdr IT aaa: engen: i 


The messengers informed the King of the arrival 


Srimaddevibhdgavatam 


lof the prince; the King heard and his heart 


overflowed with love and he gladly came there with 
no delay. 

qar Aamar AAA: quw: 41 N 

grsaafādt qaga: yer | 

Taste ct agera VĀRTI yaaa: 142 N 

maaa Yi WET wges p YA: | 

Seeing the father coming, Rohitāšva became 
filled with love and overpowered with sorrow for 
long separation began to shed tears and fell 
prostrate at his feet. The King raised him up and 
embraced him gladly and smelling his head 
enquired of his welfare. 

sait wan gfēdt Afesttuft: 43 n 

sre: vittrafrtemaramta, i 

Ted vum dart ARANAN wu 44 u 

quid AU FY fren t 

When the King was thus asking his son, taking 
him on his lap, the hot tears of joy flowed from his 
eyes and fell on the head of the prince. The King 
and the prince then began to govern together his 
kingdom. The King described in detail all the 
events of the sacrifice where human victims are 
immolated. 

Iga mat wart qa: N45 N 

as yarns AnaY: | 

ward way aAA afestsdia ya: 11 46 N 

He started next the Rajastiya sacrifice, the best 
of all sacrifices, and duly worshipping the Muni 
Vasistha, made him the Hota in that sacrifice. When 
this grand sacrifice was finished, the King respected 
the Muni Vasistha with abundant wealth. 

Vere wed wi wem ARG, | 

faurfiratsfü exa aftša a dra: 470 

fufercar dt feret Sere ferent à 

farris für ayes afi ufeufsrqu u 48 N 

dea farerarferered wat g yreftud: 1 

Once, on a time, the Muni Vasistha went gladly 
to the romantic Heaven of Indra; and Visvamitra, 
too, went there also and both the Munis then met 


Book VII Chapter XVII 


with each other. The two Maharsis took their seats} Vyasa said: O King! Hearing such words, the 
in that Heaven. But Vi$vamitra was astonished to; Vigvamitra, of a very angry temper, spoke to him 
see Vasistha greatly respected in Indra's hall of| with his reddened eyes: 

assembly and asked him, thus: 


fasta sarar 
FAS Sa wat eif qd Prearanfed area | 
aad UST veu Wat edi AAA 49 Ui aad wew da wfrepur at qu: 55 1 
GT 3a TET owed Be ATs 1 aa searfstd qua qua: ufsaer w | 


“O Muni! Where have you received this great) ada eset veré HE REMA Uu 56 u 
honour and worship? O Highly Fortunate One!) Hurt qd wat a estes HRT t 
Who has worshipped you thus? Speak out truly." | "O Vasistha! Hariscandra obtained a boon from 
Varuna when he made a certain promise; then he 
ats sara 


cheated Varuna with deceitful words. So he is a 
TOS À TT RK: TATA 50 ü liar and cheat. Why are you praising then that King! 


ToT: BIRT Te Wenefüm | O Intelligent One! Let us now stake all our virtues 
Vasistha said: "O Muni! There is a King named] that we have earned since our birth by our 
Harišcandra; he is very powerful and my client;! asceticism and studies. 


that King performed the great Rajasüya sacrifice] arqeqenfet arent HEATA 057 U 


with abundant Daksinās. anna afad wd uus um fev | 
Aastha Wars: arash yaaa: 151 n erar cared we qus fafa uma i58 1 
WI a LVA wea: | veré Hea Acree q ferait Hat erar à 
EU Ub WAT SI UTT alae 11 52 N versui venteienreu rdi Vetus 1 59 N 
fe vestu ya: aed aetergtri firar à sft Se IE Tengo] Tenes! 
There is no other King truthful like him; he is MAEM SEMA: 017 11 


virtuous, charitable, and ever ready in governing You have praised exceedingly that King who is 
his subjects. O Son of Kaugika! I have got my| * great cheat; but if I cannot prove him to be a liar 
worship and honour in his sacrifice. O best of] % the first water, I will lose all my virtues from 


Dvijas! Are you telling me to speak truly? my birth; but if it be otherwise, then all your virtues 
versi wat sr at a area 53 N will be destroyed. Thus the two Munis quarrelled 
werd AUT ara yR: UTA: 1 with each other and making this stake, departed 

ki from the Heavens and went to their respective 


Again I speak truly to you that there never was 
a King truthful, heroic charitable, and very religious 
like him nor there will be such a one. 


Āšramas. 
Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter in 
the Seventh Book on the freeing of Sunahsepa 


ana sara and the curing of Hari$candra in the 
Mahāpurāņam Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam, 
gfe rer aa: Ar ferarfératsfere rer: | 
aye Mea SAAT ATS 4 u OE AS ONG VERS DY 


Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


788 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER XVIII 


On the Quarrel between Hariscandra and Višvāmitra 


UTR gara 


wu east grad wd wr | 

suvagadi ser get arecirerary I N 

wagers: ait weve: | 

wanrafasmenfàr fe tafe amt nan 

Vyasa said: O King! Once on a time Hari$candra 
went out to the forest on an hunting excursion; and, 
while roaming to and fro, he saw that a very 
beautiful lady was crying. The King, seeing this, 
took pity on her and asked: *O Fear One! Why are 
you in this forest crying alone? O Large-eyed One! 
Has some one pained you? 

Safe dtfearscae fh t ge sary d a 

ata ed fasts OR et Tat asra a n 

WOT U TĀ rerit sfr RETTA, à 

defn qe erst AKAI wee mm ua u 

What is the cause of your sorrow? Express this 
quickly before me. Why have you come here in 
this dreadful lonely forest? What are the names of 
your husband and your father? O Beautiful One! 
In my kingdom, no demon can give any trouble to 
another's lady; I will immediately kill him who 
has given you this trouble. 

wf& ga anit wen va vīta | 

fama aa ure a frst quem us Nu 

git wet aa: Spes ant ei emeret à 

wry ang TIA 06 

O thin-bellied One! Be comfortable; do not 
weep; tell me why you are in this sorrowful state; 
know that no sinner can remain within my 
territory.” Hearing the words of the King, the lady 
wiped out her tears by her hand and began to say: 


"dere 
TTT masa fersnfirat wengf-t: à 
au: pfa weuH was erret at 7 N 


am gam mà da gad | 

fates at raat eret ditt grrr IRT uS u 

*O King! I am Siddharüpini, of the nature of 
success; to get me, Vi$vàmitra is practising terrible 
austerities. So these troubles have arisen from him, 
the son of Kuśika. O King! For this reason I am 
sorry in Your kingdom. O One of good vows! I 
am a gentle lovely Lady; still that Muni is giving 
me so much trouble." 


warar 

TTT oa ferorrenfar aa gd faa à 

ame anfrent ufi aroma 9 N 

genae farei a avr AFI i 

"Ter wore Brean were aģtuft: 10 N 

The King said: "O Large-eyed One! No longer 
you will have to suffer any more pains. Be patient. 
I will go and make the Muni desist from his 
tapasya.” Thus comforting the lady, the King went 
hurriedly to the Muni Višvāmitra and, bowing 
down to him said with clasped palms: “O Maharsi! 
Why are you ailing your body by this terrible severe 
austerity? 

Tait firadsari aren REAR i 

fea tears gfe wed Ferd uti 

arsed Ta ma Hatt wet fane 1 

sashes MEA AMSAT: ws u1200 

O Highly intelligent One! For what great noble 
cause, are you practising this hard tapasyā; speak 
truly to me. O Son of Gadhi! I will fulfil your 
desires; there is no need of your practising this 
severe penance; please get out of it immediately. 

fea wu uda a wed YETA, | 

virasdrerest att qu: arte enfeferq 1 13 tu 

seat fatter ci wer ferarfirat Te urit 1 

"HERE SATAII TES HE enfrentar: 1 1 4 N 


Book VII Chapter XVIII 


O Maharsi! You know everything; so what shall 
I say anything further? See! If ought not anyone to 
practise this extremely dreadful tapasyā, causing 
troubles to the people within my territory." Thus 
prohibited by the King Harišcandra, the Muni 
became very angry at his heart and went towards 
his own hermitage. 

a treat TATU Foe | 

afte a dare qus: ufum 1s N 

The King, too, went back to his palace. The 
Muni on his arrival at his hermitage, began to 
cogitate in his mind “Why has the King unjustly 
desisted me from my tapasyā and also discussions 
that took place between him and Vasistha. 

Ufa waar Tumes, | 

fare agen feret aret wiegen, 16 u 

Visvamitra became very angry at his heart and 
ready to take the vengeance of this. He thought 
over on many points and created a terrible demon 
of a dreadful appearance in the form of a boar and 
sent it to the territory of the King Hari$candra. 

wear desi ferner gerne | 

Aisha vereor: Hears qareun 17 u 

That terrible boar, of huge ^ody, entered into 
the kingdom, raising a dreadful sound. The guards 
became afraid at his terrible noise. 

WAUA MAANA ps | 

Wrerdtai a avert essent asrerw t 1 8 u 

"Rr a deft his ede: 1 

aaa fafenacgf RATA Far N 19 UI 

Entering into the forest, that boar began to whirl 
round and round and destroy the Malati forest, at 
another place the Kadamba forest, and at others 
the Yūthikā forest. 

"qUqenrehaenWUSrHÉe reri cp Ue | 

adits AGA YAR 8020 u 

KATRU TTT TTT | 

IATA wet AT UPR Gat at 210 

At other places he began to dig up the earth by 
his tusks and root out the Campaka, Ketaki, Mallika 


789 


and various other trees. At other places again, he 
rooted out nice gentle USira, Karavira, Mucukunda, 
Ašoka, Vakula, Tilaka and other trees and so 
massacred the nice gardens and forests. The forest 
guards, then, taking their weapons, rushed forward 
on that boar. 

manAR: wA aaa: FATTA: | 

Bett SHURA MATT ITT: 0 22 i 

Those that were making garlands and the florists 
became very distressed and uttered uproars of 
consternation. 

aA: HASTA SAY aa ARAA d 

IAGTĀSATATU Het: ATA: 0 23 N 

A ears fersramenret Ta smt a: i 

apes smétfer Soars ETH: 124 N 

That boar, as if an incarnation of Death, though 
routed out with flights of arrows, could not be 
terrified; rather when he began to harass the guards 
very much, they became very much afraid and 
being very distressed took the refuge of the King 
and, trembling, said: “O King! Protect us. Protect 
us.” And they cried piteously. 

TARTAR AT TATA ATA | 

Weg fen vet Hat Tag AANA: 1 25 n 

"mé fanifir davat NAATA TA: | 

eur were ATG AAA: 026! 

Seeing the guards terrified and distressed, the 
King asked them: “Whom do you fear so much 
and why you are so distressed? Speak truly before 
me. O Guards! I do not fear the Deva nor the 
Demons; so tell me who has created this panic 
amongst you. 

Bit dest mura ci vni geht fect 1 

AAR: Ayo ces UIA: GT 027 N 

Sat at arat arf d freien viv: fore: 1 

Ga fag fraga: ragana aT: 128 u 

I, no doubt, will send that vicious cheat unto 
the door of Death by this arrow, who has come 
against me in this world. What sort of enemy is 
that? What is his form? What is his power and 


790 


where is he residing now; speak this quickly to 
me. Be that enemy a Deva or a Danava, I will slay 
him immediately by the multitude of arrows.” 


ARNT Be: 
weal a arash a Gat aa faa: | 
enfrente mrgrenrat vrsifiaBfher Ta u 29 iu 
LUGA TT | 
fadum wd Katara 301 


Krāsas APTIEKA | 

a fesrfr went NATA 031 0 

The Mālākāras said: “The enemy is not a Deva, 
nor a Danava, Yaksa nor a Kinnara; it is a boar of 
a huge body that has entered into the forest. Very 
powerful, he is uprooting by his teeth all the 
beautiful flower trees; in fact, he is ruining all the 
gardens and forests. O King! We shot arrows on 
him, struck him with cudgels and hurled stones at 
him so much; yet he did not get a bit afraid; rather 
he turned back to kill us. 


Cara sara 

FAH AKTI UAT AENG: | 

AIS AAT wat Wee 132 0 

Vyasa said: O King! Hearing these words, the 
King’s fury knew no bounds and, immediately 
getting on horseback, he went towards the garden 
and forest. 

Sar VEN Yt remm: 

werduufüd: pad ME 33 U 

Taveras Pat TATU | 

art arto ater Ta Maga TAT 11 34 N 

Then the horsemen, elephant drivers, charioteers 
and infantry, all followed him. When the King went 
there, he saw the terrible boar, of a huge body, 
whirling round and round and making the peculiar 
sound in the forest; and he witnessed also the 
destroyed condition of the forest and became very 
angry. 

mÀ smi wae aes er yRTHAT | 

a ed Gent ud ara MUR 035 N 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 
Seas a ITL TAK KI BATH | 
gets agar pdos YET N 36 N 


He then drew his bow and arrows and fell down 


on him to take away bis life. Seeing the King coming 
angrily towards him with bow and arrows in his 
hands, the boar began to sound more terribly and 
ran forward before him. The King saw that boar 
coming towards him with his mouth wide opened 
and began to shower arrows upon him to kill him. 

wart ATRI are AGTTA | 

gta fafira afer-éqerat attur: 37 u 

AAAS A Ag TREAT ATA | 

Aim mmaa JU Tat 38 Ul 

The boar immediately made those arrows 
useless, and very violently and quickly jumped and 
passed away, over the King. When the boar passed 
away, the King angrily drew his bow with great 
care and shot sharpened arrows at him. 

Tread d AAT TT HITT AT: | 

Ware fatsrarvdianr TIRES UTT: 39 n 

aut qued wu: got arggfd ua: | 

Ha-aghaamd Wat: AURA u40 N 

One moment the boar came in the King’s sight; 
and at another moment he vanished away; thus the 
boar began to flee, uttering all sorts of sounds. The 
King Harišcandra then became very angry and 
drawing his bow purposed him, mounting on a 
horse, swift like the wind. 

Rasp AA rears € | 

aa angen fae cw MAA 041 N 

BAe: «=| ARNT ST GATT | 

Tat fd: tei Ai WIR 42 I 

The soldiers then entered the forest and scattered 
hither and thither; the King alone pursued the boar. 
The sun entered unto the meridian; and the King 
came to be alone in a lonely forest. 

HEXTEHTU wat aera fand we | 

qha: apferatscaef aya STATE: 0 43 N 

spesa urit erar PITS TA | 

antsetstatafts «ret draft: 144 u 


Book VII Chapter XVIII 


His horse was fatigued, and he, too, was tired 
of hunger and thirst. The boar went away out of 
sight. The King also missed his way in that dense 
jungle and became greatly absorbed with intense 
cares and anxieties. 

fe mat aa Treat a eraser X a 1 

aire: A semi cuf u45 N 

wa Reana fart aaf 1 

m args uaa RANAR 46 u 

He then began to think. “Where shall I now go? 
There is none to help me in this dense jungle. 
Especially I don’t know the right path." While he 
was thus thinking, he saw, all on a sudden, a river 
with clear water in that lonely forest. 

tear at afect tren urate quan | 

agd fart udt UTT, 47 u 

wet diem quenr KANTA aerate: 1 

sag amt wd farüumfmüfie: 4s i 

He became much delighted to see the flowing 
river and, alighting from horseback, he drank that 
water and made the horse also drink it. 

PAT are quse suere | 

aaa des treat a gd FAST, u 49 0 

He became much relieved by drinking; and 
though he was much bewildered not to find the 
right track, he wanted now to go to his own city. 

were MRA: Wor TART 1 

afia ass mene ff amma: 50 u 

At this moment Višāmitra came up there in an 
old Brahmin form; the King also looking at him 
bowed down to the Brahmin garbed Visvamitra, 
who then spoke to the King: 

Tat fasta tara fantina d | 

ate dd ftert year aot ARAA 51 u 

“O King! Welfare be unto you! What for have 
you come here? O King! What object have you 
got in view in this lonely forest? Be calm and quiet 
and speak everything before me.” 


791 


wara 

weise MAARATA | 

wy uueiyp alae 52 

xt franfid ge at queer any à 

wérdtsé aami ara 53 i 

The King said: “O Brahmin! One powerful boar 
of a huge body entered into my garden and spoilt 
altogether all the gentle flower trees there. To desist 
that boar, I pursued him with bow in hand and went 
out of the city. 

Tease gaen rarát sate emma] t 

Usdtisentt pret: Sat aerfü vd AAS 4 N 

Atradu reum: | 

aa geri a wem Wen wd n55 nN 

That powerful boar, very swift and, as it were a 
magician, has escaped my sight and gone away 
where I do not know. I pursued him and have come 
now to this place and I do not know where my 
soldiers have gone. O Muni! Now I am deprived 
of my men, I am hungry and thirsty. 

vari esta faut senfü art yet 1 

THU aa greed faunt at 56 N 

aAa Ra fart sfetfaspa: i 

TRA Hal wp amda: Wat 57 n 

I do not know which is the road to my city; nor 
do I know where my soldiers have gone. O Dear 
Lord! It is to my great fortune that you have come 
in this lonely forest. Now I want to return to my 
home; kindly shew me the way. I have completed 
my Rājasūya sacrifice. I always give everyone 
whatever he wants. This is known to everybody. 

atest ufa a EAT fnm | 

smrrermatezrat areas faget CIT 58 u 
gf AACA TAT ATT PARESE ATA: | 181 

O Dvija! If you want money for your sacrifice, 
then come with me to Ayodhya and I will give you 
abundance of wealth. I am Hari$candra, the famous 
King of Ayodhya. 

Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Seventh 
Book on the origin of the quarrel between 
Hariscandra and Višvāmitra in the Mahāpurāņam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


792 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER XIX 


On Hariscandra's Kingdom Taken 


ara gara 

fer er AA: T sya: ATA Wf: 1 

VE waad gidi da ga niu 

Iriettūttrā que mai wrap | 

ert cwm ma fugurt qdut ur N 2 u 

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing thus the words of 
the King HariScandra, the Maharsi Kaušika 
smilingly said: “O King! This Tiratha is very 
sacred; if one bathes here, one is cleansed of one’s 
sins and virtue springs up. So, highly fortunate One! 
Bathe in this and do peace-offerings (tarpanam) to 
your fathers. 

are: BTA sete cel verear PARA i 

art wera Uns yoat Asaa d 3 

ma ME AEIGTAAETT VEĻ eat 1. 

U wrereret ya fa eigas 11 4 ut 

O King! This time is very auspicious and highly 
meritorious; so take a bath in this sacred Punya 
Tirtha and make charities as far as it lies in your 
power. Svayambhuva Manu says: “He, who 
arriving at a lirtha capable to give high merits 
(Punya), does not bathe and make charities, 
deceives himself, so he is the slayer of his soul, no 
doubt. 

wenig were ud tag: 1 

gira ant a rsi mt wd: 5 Nn 

emer miai gara | 

TAA MEUSMATH ET Aa GT ANAT: 1 6 oN 

So, O King! Do meritorious acts as best as you 
can in this excellent tirtha. Then I will shew you 
the way and you will go to Ayodhya. O Kakutstha! 
Today I will be pleased with your gifts and I will 
accompany you to shew you the way; this I have 
decided.” 

Tea werd Ws qm: Hearsay | 

araterari faftracemqmezmit-étu u 7 i 


Hearing the deceitful words of the Maharsi, the 


King took off his upper garments and tying the 
horse on to a tree, went towards the river to bathe 
according to due rites. 

ARITA gu gat urn fed: 

aaa ASNT aasa d 8 oU 

Tat verraferfet gar ware fugae: à 

Rataa verürurd warf a uou 

O King! The accidental combination, that was 
to have been so (sure to come), so enchanted the 
King by the Muni's words, that he got himself 
entirely under the control of the Muni. He duly 
completed his bath and offered peace offerings to 
the Devas and the Pitrs and then spoke to 
Višvāmitra. ^O Lord! I am now making gifts to 
you. 

CAT HRTSRU Tt STRATEN ATTA 

mat sited wp NET 0 10 di 

O Fortunate One! Cows, lands, jewels, 
elephants, horses, chariots or horses, etc., anything 
that you like I will give you just now. There is 
nothing that I cannot give. 

RU femur peated WU 1 

wag nsnm gai afaa nian 

ATT ATT S TTT FA à 

orisha aifstt aft garth Ta atfoq 1 1 2 u 

When I performed previously the Rājasūya 
sacrifice, I took, then, before all the Munis, this 
vow. So, O Muni! You are also present at this 
principal Tirtha (place of pilgrimage); so express 
what you desire; I will give you your desired 
object.” 

fāanftra sara 

mard sp arie fergem AFT i 

ipe ilā "1310 

Barat mAs: yda wéruhr: 

ane dnd T "14u 

yha amtenRastaarat Wm 1 


Book VII Chapter XIX 


793 


Visvamitra said: “O King! Your glory is spread 
far and wide in this world; especially I have already 
heard that there is no second man charitable like 
you. The Muni Vasistha has said: “The King of 
the solar dynasty, the Tri$anku's son, Harišcandra 
is foremost and first amongst the kings in this world 
and there is no one so liberal-minded as he is; such 
a king there never was nor ever there will be." 

arat mimaa ferarat ste wife 11 1 5 u 

Gaeta wert ded afi H EIT | 

So, O King! Now the marriage time of my son 
has arrived; so I pray before you to-day, that you 
give me wealth to celebrate this marriage." 


wara 


fearé pe ada aà urférd aa nie 

OREO trt esr are avente AS t 

The King said: “O Brahmin! Yes! Celebrate the 
marriage ceremony; I will give you your desired 
wealth. What more can be said than this that 
whatever wealth you would want, I will give that 
abundantly. There is no doubt in this.” 

eau Sarat 

sere: ATAKA dat wht: 17 

rer urat wae urférarareraytenq i 

Vyasa said: O King! Hearing these words of the 
King, the Muni Kaušika became ready to deceive 
him and originating the Gandharvi Maya, created 
a beautiful youth and one daughter aged ten years 
and showing them to the King, said "The marriage 
of these two is to be celebrated today. 

PA: Hans Hear U uwyrfutusu 

Uda: BAA aie FTA | 

O King! To marry the boys and the girls in the 
household is to earn more merits than the Rajastiya 
sacrifice. 

Taga quei TE feast: 11 19 ui 

Aa dara ayaa: | 

So today you will get that desired fruit if you 
make charities for the marriage of this Brāhmin 
Youth.” 


EG TA UST ATA TES ATT: lt 20 n 
vrerfer er wearer terrere: STATA | 
The King was much enchanted by his Maya; so 
no sooner he heard those words, he immediately 
promised: “That will be done” he did not raise any 
objection whatsoever. 

aa afiraumitsar ami wie wfmarn 21 

fāgritratsfā war darfirars s sni aay à 

Visvamitra then showed the way and the King 
went to his city. Vi$vàmitra, too, thus deceiving 
the King, went back to his Asrama. 

gtegfāttrrafšartratsadtaga 122 u 

qda gore va afe art watt i 

When the King was staying in Agnisala (cook 
room), Vi$vamitra Muni went to him and said: "O 
King! The marriage rites have been finished; so 
today give me what I desire in this sacrifice hall.” 


watara 


aisde far gfe cat afsad ern 23 ui 

a sient ar: arts fear AT | 

cae fe sitfard cee fersret prea aS u 24 u 

Arafat at: wae eR | 

The King said: ^O Brahmin! Speak out what 
you want; now I like to get fame. So if there be 
anything in the world, that is not to be given by 
me, if you want, I will give that even to you, no 
doubt. The mortal, possessing all wealth, if he do 
not earn good name and fame capable to give 
happiness to him in his next world, passes his life 
in vain.” 

fasta sara 


wed Of mena area ufu 125 1 

TTU TAI adtmedsfaurat | 

Vi$vamitra said: "O King! Give to this 
bridegroom, while within this sacred sacrificial 
alter, you entire kingdom with the royal umbrella 
and Camara for fanning the king and elephants, 
horses, chariots, infantry and all the gems and 
jewels.” 


794 


na sara 

"ifie ATT Tet aT a ASA: 11 26 N 

qiam aa Besa | 

qTétafirfe d wre ARAS RAR: 27 u 

Vyasa said: O King! The King Hariscandra was 
deluded by his Maya; so no sooner he heard the 
Muni's words, he willingly said without the 
slightest consideration: *O Muni! I give as you 
pray, my this vast dominion to you." The very cruel 
Visvamitra, then, said: “O King! I have accepted 
your offer; but O Intelligent One! Give now the 
requisite Daksiņā to complete your gift. 

afarot af vers arava wert | 

warned ari [Tene npada 428 

Manu says: "Gift without Daksiņā is fruitless’ 
so to get the fruit of your gift give Daksinà as duly 
fixed." 

TATE ca sereni ae aay 1 

Sepe dar ws engparenterfafeme: 29 u 


The King was exceedingly surprised to hear this 


and said: “O Lord! Kindly say what amount of 


wealth am I to give to you as Daksina. 

ale fragt qt qe verfio | 

amira TER ae ATAGATUTRTI ! 30 u 

O Saint! Say the value of your Daksina. O 
Ascetic! Don't be impatient; I will give you the 
Daksinà to that amount, no doubt." 

ARĪ waren Tati Ta qutera i 

Raag reagan vere Afaa u 31 u 

Hearing this, Visvamitra told to the King: “At 
present give me two and a half loads of gold as 
Daksiņā. 

gauge uri afarot ste ATA | 

areata Raga enr aremsfefaremr: 1 32 N 

The King Hariscandra became greatly amazed 
and promised: "I will give you that;" he then 
anxiously mounted on his horseback and became 
ready to go quickly. 

dea ĒRA AAT: HARTAT: à 

sear ndaf eni Za warf: 133 N 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


At this time, his soldiers who lost their roads in 
quest of their king, came to him. They were very 
glad to see him; but, seeing him anxious, they began 
to praise him in great haste. 


Cara sata 


St AAT TAY Ta AKT IET | 

mg ant urgeri qa: 34 d 

Vyasa said: O King! Hearing their words, the 
King did not say anything, good or bad; but 
thinking on his own doing, entered into the zenānā. 

fēk war tated ard wea sequia i 

wRgdtsé fastu ad urgvatta u351 

Oh! What have I promised to give? I have made 
a gift of all that I have; I am cheated in this matter 
by the Muni like one robbed by a thief in a 
wilderness. 

Use writ quit wear we wiry 

anga aui ur a aft Wa: u36 N 

My dominion including my dress J have 
promised to give to him. Moreover I will have to 
pay besides two and a half loads of gold. 

fé mfi freier a art aud qa 

wartdtsé Beat ay APT 037 u 

Aut daar À wr ca fs afara à 

fe feram ver Yes unatsfefager: t 38 N 

My brain seems to have been completely 
destroyed. What to do now? I did not know the 
cunningness of the Muni. Therefore I am cheated 
by this deceitful Brahmin. It is next to impossible 
to understand the work of Daiva. Oh! My Fate! 
What will happen to me now?' Very much 
bewildered, the King entered in the interior of the 
palace. 

uii faerat quam alt vues emu | 

fee roit ferre surfer ar feret ife mmm i 39 1 

AAA: AAA Usa: qud: YU d 

arena ai N40 u 

The queen seeing her husband immersed in 
cares, enquired into the cause, thus: “O Lord! Why 
have you become so absent-minded? Kindly say 
what you are thinking now? O King! The son has 


Book VII Chapter XIX 


795 


come back from the forest before you completed 
your Rājasūya sacrifice; why then are you in grief 
now? Kindly speak out the cause of your sorrow. 


anufaftera erie ereram-gsteit sfü ar t 
aans Gade: paps art u 41 u 
ferar afterct egt afia ferar ufa: à 
PIRI quymje wwe we AAA 11 42 u 
aara Aara qd mfra: à 


Ware fhaaan: SNOT er N 11 43 Uu 

Nowhere is your enemy, strong or weak; only 
Varuna was angry with you; now he is also very 
satisfied. So there is nothing further for you to do 
or to think. O King! Owing to cares, this body gets 
weaker and weaker, day by day. So nothing is like 
cares to lead one to death.” When his dear wife 
said so, the King expressed to her somewhat the 
cause of his cares, good or bad. 

atest eren nett Parere ere Fa: | 

GST ITT gri erst fist yf: 44 u 

IATA PITT Tam: fenem: | 

But the King was much absorbed with his cares 
so that he could not eat nor sleep though his bedding 
was perfectly white and clear. Early in the next 
morning, when, getting up from his bed, he was 
doing anxiously his morning duties, Vi$vàmitra 
came up there. 

mite qukerafauri MUA: 45 d 

amt Fafa Yet PES CES CAE C HE 

MUTATE Wart WOT GA: YA: ou 46 N 

When the sentinel informed the King of the 
arrival of Vi$vamitra, he gave order for him to 
enter. Vi$vamitra, the Looter of his all and 
everything, came before him and told the King who 
repeatedly bowed down to him: 

fara serrer 

Tee CaS it aft ara TATA | 

Gant Saar IA HRIATTITA ANAT 47 N 

“O King! Now leave your kingdom and give 
me the gold that you promised as Daksina and 
prove that you are truthful.” 


wr Jara 

rarftrared vdd À ara feet t 

AAS AA TEN AT feret HE AT N 48 U 

Hari$candra said: "O Lord! I have given you 
this vast dominion of mine; so my Kingdom has 
now become yours; I am leaving this Kingdom and 
going to somewhere else. 

uda un d ceed fattrafšut 1 

yatai aquest weyat füst |1 49 u 

art cart d dre nnm: | 

O Kaušika! You need not think a bit for this. O 
Brāhmaņa! You have taken my all according to 
the technical rule; so now I am unable to give you 
Daksinà. 

Wagener var anni afammq iu 50 u 

FAI fer: wre vot emet er wrerdtu | 

Wea Vari d mar dari feu usi 

If, in time, wealth comes to me, I will at once 
give you your Daksina.” Saying him thus, the King 
told his wife Saivya and his son Rohita “In this 
Agnihotra room I say that I have given my vast 
dominion to the Muni Visvamitra.” 

sanadi TATA | 

vae afr srirafür wre are Kafi tt 52 ui 

ARTS ti TSI PAT | 

yaka yA: Uma waaay i! 53 N 

Elephants, horses, chariots, gold and jewels all 
I have given to him along with my kingdom. What 
more than this that save us three, everything else I 
have given to him. “O Maharsi! Take fully this 
prosperous dominion; we are going somewhere else 
to a forest or a mountain cave.” 

BOTT qnd sat altars: afa i 

fart: gentan maei firmam i 54 i 

The exceedingly virtus HariScandra spoke thus 
to his wife and son, and, paying respects to the 
Muni, went out from his house. 

adi suit dter smafusTesmefü | 

R KATE ward: YETMA i55 t 

Seeing the King going thus away, his wife and 
son, afflicted with cares, followed him with their 
sad faces. 


796 


Berar Berta ates area | 

Bey: whos: we wr: 56 ut 

Seeing thus, all the inhabitants of Ayodhya cried 
aloud, and great consternation and uproar arose in 
the city. 

RT qnd ait get: FAM: ATA: 0 

afad vena fattratsafiees & 57 0 

O King! What is this act that you have done? 
How has this suffering come to you! O King! The 
great Fate, without any consideration, has certainly 
deceived you. 

ad antera game ped métufim à 

fanaa ATT ated rut er NT 1 58 N 

The Brahmanas, Ksattriyas, Vaisyas and Südras, 
all the four Varnas gave vent to their sorrows, when 
they saw the King going away with his wife and 
son. 
Riiga d g quen wies: | 

eratserfirfer smit garat agrum: 59 n 

Roia arrdentgantta: fra à 

mad agarda Varu PEt au: neon 

The Brahmins and the other inhabitants of the 
city, all were afflicted with sorrows and began to 


Srimaddevibhágavatam 


abuse the vicious Brahmana saying that "He is a 
cheat, etc." 

farra: qaot 3 aver Tes afin i 

"Té reir at qe var ath YAR i 61 Ul 

O King! Give the gold for Daksinà and then go; 
or say that you will not be able to give and I will 
then not take the Daksina. 

wet Tern ar ad vts ferae i 

ad ATT terete werfen w62 u 

Or if you entertain within yourself any greed, 
then take back all your Kingdom. O King! If you 
think that you have really made this gifts, then give 
what you have promised.” 

wd gad màd Ra ndaf: 1 

yina aden gatefergetsardtq U6 3 N 

efr MARIT ergo? aaa? 
WOMAN 11 19 11 

The son of Gādhi was saying so, when the King 
Hari$candra very humbly bowed down to him with 
folded palms and said to him. 

Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter of the Seventh 
Book on the taking away of Harišcandra's Kingdom 
in the Maha Purāņam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 
18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


796 Srimaddevibhágavatam 


CHAPTER XX 
On Hariscandra Paying His Daksina 
IRA sara cni afi Arent verfi qst | 
aera st fed d «t after virer à wana ada a fas 03 
wam A afte free caer Yat odd vat wa yarearfir Kati ATAPI 
yiia: afratsé mA: 1 aiaeei Wares aaaea TATT N 4 n 


So, O Lord! How can it possible that I will not 
IGA aa Hat attest qu: 12 N : 
T give what I have voluntarily promised myself? O 


ta 11. 66 11 E 
Hariscandra said: "O Muni! l wul not take my Best of Dvijas! I will certainly pay off your debt. I 
food until I pay you your Daksinà in gold; know 


this to be my resolve; therefore O One of good 
vows! Discard all your anxieties for Daksa. Tam on getting the money I will pay it off to you.” 
the King of the Solar dynasty; especially since the 


time I have completed my Rajasvya Sacrifice, I id 


give to every man whatever he desires. gari wera PĒTA fru M, d 
Te Wed dem Alot seb rere Uu 5 tt 


must give you the gold as you desire; be calm and 
patient; but you will have to wait one month; and 


Book VII Chapter XX 


Visvamitra said: "O King! Kingdom, treasury 
and strength are the three sources of income; but 
you are now deprived of all these. Whence, now, 
do you expect to get gold? O King! Vain are your 
hopes to get money; what am I do now? You are 
now wealthless and how can I, out of greed, give 
you trouble? 

gass e ndara are fo FAEN à 

frei wat a aaa diea met qu d 6 n 

eT STUTCT AT area et ATTA | 

TAKATSSVYTI Wadi H TESTRIEAM: UTT 7 u 

"IE at were magaan: | 

gant anita fh quet aa earn us u 

O King! Better say “I will not be able to give 
you Daksina,” and I will then quit my strong 
expectation and go away as I like. And you, too, 
can think that you have no gold, so how can you 
give money and so you can go wherever you like 
with your wife and son.” 

"UT Saray 

TOTAITĪTĀ spear ATTA er TAT: 1 

Wegare Bb weet qe wmm uo N 

"mH Sls fia SIT: Gre ur ATA: | 

shear dd g d agar erent e fet 10 t 

Vyasa said: O King! Hearing these words of the 
Muni, at his time of departure, the King said: "O 
Brahmana! Be patient and I will certainly give you 
your Daksina. O Dvija! My wife, son and I myself 
are all health; so selling these, I will give you the 
money; there is no doubt in this. 

meh uya faa emerat aft wait i 

areata niren USE Waa: |1 11 1 

emm civi web ari weg WX 1 

Teas Sea Gata: ATS WaT TIT 11 12 NT 

O Lord enquire whether there is anyone who 
can purchase us and I will agree to become the 
slave with my wife and son. O Muni! You can sell 
all of us and the price you get, you can take two 
and a half loads of gold out of that and be pleased. 


797 


oft gaama HE USAT Yatra: | 

SHAT HTT TEE Saved VHT: TAMA I! 1 3 N 

at sear a qti vert ATT AIG i 

sara U Heratshear qfi waaay 14 u 

Thus saying, the King went to Benares where 
Sankara was staying with his dear consort Uma. 
The King saw the beautiful city, the sight of which 
makes one's heart dance with more joy and he said 
that he had become blessed. 

vt arate rar FT lafaard 1 

Ware a ardet paa aRar t 15 N 

Then he went to the banks of the Bhagirathi and 
bathed in the Ganges and offered peace-offerings 
(Tarpana) to the Devas and the Pitrs and completing 
the worship if his Ista Deva (his own Deity) looked 
around where he would go. 

taga agane fecat amqureft TA i 

wer Aye Beat: ufum: 16 It 

WT UST qutd: VE USM TAH: | 

Wü weg a gut fergmnreter 0 17 u 

The King entering into the beautiful city of 
Benares began to think that no human being is 
protecting this city but Siva Himself is protecting 
it. So if he lives there, he would not be living in a 
city which has been given away by him to 
Visvamitra. 

aise ARE agoi fA EA, à 

x cet wur PTT TS TA, 18 ui 

The King, then, distressed much with pain and 
troubled and being very much bewildered, began 
to journey on foot with his wife and son and entered 
into the city and placed his confidence. 

We Aaa queat FRK WETTER | 

Ba mm: gana far vet qp wm i19 u 

SEG GA KTI erem fm i 

EAT TRERTRSTRT-THRERTTHERT 11 20 ii 

At this moment he saw the Muni Visvamitra, 
wanting Daksinà and humbly bowed down and 
spoke with folded palms: “O Muni! My dear wife, 
my son and I myself are living here; you can take 


798 


any of us and have your work done; or say what 
other work we will have to do for you.” 
fasta sara 

gui: a urat sri a taai wa afán i 

ad ae fat fe eda ere afe 21 N 

Višvāmitra said: “You promised that you would 
pay Daksinà at the end of one month; and today 
that one month is completed; if you remember, then 
give me the Daksiņā.” 


wara 


sareremfu wuguif ATat guise 1 

Redam ueeudignme amm u22 

The King said: "O Brāhmaņa! You are wise and 
are endowed with the power of tapas (asceticism), 
as yet one month is not complete; still half a day is 
remaining; wait till then; and no longer.” 


fasta gara 

gem WERTSD ITT GT: | 

wie we wera A ga wes u23 N 

Visvamitra said: "O King! Let it be. I will come 
again and if you do not give me then, I will curse 
you. 
KTS a aT ĒST ITS APR | 

«neret yeregrfir fA ar ufesrar 11 2 4 N 

ga: Verh firarfur gar ara AA i 

fe: West A aa aren wet mq 25 

Thus saying Vi$vamitra went away. The King 
then thought within himself how he would pay him 
back what he had promised. There is no influential 
friend of mine in this Benares city who can help 
me with money; where then can I get the reguisite 
money. 

Tati atrada with arturs Fram i 

"ifa mmf agafà ayers vr afán u 26 u 

I am a Ksattriya. Pratigraha (begging or 
accepting any gift) is forbidden to me and how can 
I beg or accept any gift! According to the code of 
Dharma, the offering of sacrifices (on one's own 
behalf), studying, and giving are the three duties 
ordained to a King. 


29 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 

AA Hit: urat IKTAIUTRI: | 

aga Were TE ar wenenfenmu: 27 N 

And if I die not paying a Brahmin’s Daksina, I 
will be polluted with the sin of stealing a Brahmin's 
property and I will then be born a worm or will 
became a Preta. So to sell myself (and pay off the 
debts) is better than this. 

a gara 

Tat eurepet dt PATA | 

yaaa wer weft arentggar UT 28 tt 

wast fundi went taeda | 

agii fe ay: weraftend: u29 N 

Sita said: O Rsis! When the King was thus 
thinking humbly with his face bent downwards, 
and in a distracted state of mind, his wife spoke to 
him with tears in her eyes and in a voice, choked 
with feelings: “O King! Discard all cares and keep 


your own Dharma, Truth. 

ma: Wet at wafer Gert a | 

Treat FHI MARTU 30 N 

He who is divorced from Truth is forsaken like 
a Preta. O Best of all men! To keep one's Truth is 
one’s Dharma; there is no other Dharma superior 
to it; so the sages declare. 

aftagtanettd a errant: KAT: feat: | 

qafa A used ATRI ATT AAT N 3 1 U 

wemerqied emymeng sam | 

ATTTAT AAA 1032 |i 

He whose words turn out false, his Agnihotra, 
study, and gifts and all actions become fruitless. 
Truth is very much praised in the Dharma Sastra 
and this Truth raises up and saves the virtuous 
souls. Similarly falsehood, no doubt, drags a 
vicious man to hell. 

VATKĀLTTGA wae cw usa: 1 

ger Wa KARTE: 33 N 

The King Yayati performed the Horse sacrifice, 
and the Rājasūya sacrifice and went to Heavens 
but once he spoke falsely and so he was dislodged 
from the Heavens.” 


Book VII Chapter XX 


ware 
agama yatetsta area: | 
saai apas fer agi nA A 34 N 
The King said: “O Thou, going like an elephant! 
I have my son who will multiply my line; speak 
out what Thou wishest to say.” 


Weare 

Teena t dut garnet: fena: 1 

vut wera ferra afe fermer afar 11 35 N 

The Queen said: “O King! The wives are meant 
for sons (your having me has been fulfilled as there 
is your son). So sell me for the money value and 
give the Daksiņā to the Brahmin. Let you not 
deviate from the Truth. 

ena SAT 

STIGA oat até iR: | 

Wires a tat à faaara: fad: 11 36 0 

Weag athe wx arate wei i 

f ta RATU M Ura AYAT: u 37 u 

Vyasa said: Hearing this, the King fainted. 
Afterwards regaining consciousness, he wept with 
a grievous heart. “O gentle One! What you have 
uttered just now has caused me much pain; am I 
such a Sinner as to forget entirely all your 
conversations and your sweet smiles! 

Ba aa He erret aA SHAT | 

waberüeage wet ade urftrī u38u 

KAT qafastet a eft afew | 

foma Aè yasiga: N 39 n 

Alas! O Sweet-smiling One! You ought not to 
speak such words. O Fair One! How have you been 
able to utter these harsh words not fit to be spoken! 
Speaking thus, the King became impatient at the 
idea of selling his wife and fainted and fell to the 
ground. 

wart qà d gear Wedarsfü wétufeng | 

sqrdd Rout wag yga uaou 

wr WERTS RANNTA, | 

aed PaRa yal tea: 141 0 


799 


Seeing him fainted and lying flat on the ground, 
the Queen became grievously hurt and spoke with 
great compassion. “O King! Whose evil have you 
done that you have fallen into this calamity? Alas! 
He who is accustomed to sleep in a room adorned 
with carpets is today like an humble man, sleeping 
on the ground! 

ata atfēgīt feret féruramraarfstaw i 

w ua ufirdiareit afer vafüfer R ufer: 42 0 

T we f dana Gd wa ét i 

afdstrdsqeitsa «fra: urarfirat eer i 43 u 

The King who gave crores and crores of golden 
mohurs to the Bráhmins, that same King, my 
husband is lying now on the ground! Alas! What a 
painful thing! O Fate! What has this King done to 
you that You have thrown this Indra and Upendra 
like King in this dire calamity!” 

Bea Urs fü aah ufon Haare g | 

ii anamanna — 44 tt 

Rore genfae: wre aret qaia: i 

Aa ma Weert unu efe ase ua45ag 

gA referet stat forgrit Srsfergerfer 46 u 

ate RRT vergu! weed ERIRE 
AISETA: 11 20 11 

Thus saying, the beautiful gueen (of good hips) 
very much grieved by the sight of her husband’s 
pain fell down unconscious on the ground. Then 
the boy prince, seeing father and mother both 
senseless, lying on the ground, became very much 
troubled, and, becoming hungry, cried “O Father! 
O Father! I am very hungry; give me food to eat; 
O Mother! O Mother! My tongue is being parched; 
give me food to eat" and the boy began to weap 
repeatedly. 

Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Seventh 
Book on the earnestness of Haris$candra to pay 
off the Daksinà in the Mahāpurāņam 
Srimaddevibhaga vatam, of 18,000 
verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


800 - Srimaddevibhagavatam 
CHAPTER XXI 
On the Sorrows of Hariscandra 
WW Sure agigi wenn faired 1 
Vata urit fA were | aaa fe; aida Greate weird 1 8 N 


arated WU: Hat ot ve afer Faq 7 N 

Vyasa said: O King! At this moment, the Muni 
Vi$vàmitra, endowed with his power of tapas, came 
up there, very engry as if the God of Death, to ask 
of his wealth. 

ancien FRA: wart ofa afta: 

a ater angen weraftrenadty 112 u 

Sis pA wai aAA, | 

mot Mai ganga ada 3 N 

Seeing him Hariscandra fallen thus senseless on 
the ground, Višvāmitra, then, began to sprinkle 
water on his body. O King! The man who is 
involved in a debt his troubles increase day by day. 
So get up and pay your promised Daksiņā. 

Raa: Mar fener arta | 

aara Watt wT ANRA wr 4 d 

Tft ware gu ati wer gA: | 

TTR V IRT ATRTATE Esa: 11 5 Nu 

The King, thus sprinkled with water, cold as 
snow, regained his consciousness; but, seeing 
Visvamitra, he fainted again. At this, the Dvija 
Vigvamitra consoled him and angrily spoke to him 
thus: 

festa sara 

drat efor ar a ufe Sedudsm | 

Arma: Mati wert festa Aft uen 

HA Arh: wit eri: vent: Gea hae: i 

“O King! If you want to maintain your 
steadiness, give, then my Daksina. Look! It is Truth 
that makes the Sun shine; It is the Truth that has 
stationed this Earth in its position; what to speak 
more, even the Svarga is established on Truth; so 
the greatest Dharma lies in Truth. 


aaa qp uei A TT FAT U7 d 


If the fruit of the thousand ASvamedhas be held 
in one pan and Truth be held on the other pan of 
the balance, then Truth outweighs the thousand 
horse sacrifices or what need I to speak all about 
this! 

"elut afori wera areata arate | 

ITETATTA ure IRATE TATA TT 009 d 

Sega e arit fert ver emet | 

gdes frat gore uferasféq: 1 10 tt 

O King! If you fail to give my Daksinà before 
the Sunset, I will, no doubt, curse you. Saying this, 
Visvamitra went away. The King also became very 
terrified. The wealthless King was pained by the 
words of the Muni; but he was more troubled with 
the thought how he would pay him and keep to 
Truth. 


Ka sara 
varam wa SIEM uum: | 
aeng: wref frdat vengergfe: 011 M 


aA vett g d eger amate ard Rer i 
vara wr went anaidai ae nu 12 N 
aana ania fear arent Id i 
Ngai fe yao wettest a Hera: 113: N 
amea mii erareifirfer fafa: 1 


Süta said: O Rsis! At this time, a Brahmin, 
skilled in the Vedas, with many other Brahmins, 
started out of his house, at that very place. The 
queen, then seeing the Brahmin ascetic close by, 
addressed the King in words reasonable and in 
accordance with the Dharma, O Lord! A Brahmin 
is considered the father of the other three Varnas 
(i. e., Ksattriyas, Vai$yas, and Südras) and a son 
can certainly take the father’s things: so it is my 
intention that you beg your wealth from this 
Brahmin. 


Book VII Chapter XXI 


801 


ware 
are wane mA afratsd get 14 0 
ara gg fai araor «t fērera à 
Tere fart anai yasa ada 11 15 u 
aaae area: reaa ANEA: | 


The King said: “O One of thin waist! To beg 
suits the Brahmanas; it is prohibited to the 
Ksattriyas; I being a Ksattriya do not wish to take 
anything as gift.” The Brahmins are the Gurus of 
all the Varnas. So they are always to be respected. 
It is not proper to beg from a Brahmin; especially 
the Ksattriyas never ask anything from the 
Brahmins; it is totally prohibited. 

aama gri arre fed 116 01 

VRPT Usi WÉTUTGTTHD | 

aura q armed qa Haut aa: 17 N 

gadda W afa gaat fata da: 1 

afd Ag Gees qur 11 1 8 N 

Offering oblations, study, gift and the governing 
of subjects and protecting those that take refuge is 
the Dharma of the Ksattriyas but they would never, 
never, ask any other man “Give, give,” and utter 
these words indicative of humility O Devi! The 
words “I am giving you" are impressed within my 
heart; so I will earn money from some other source 
and give that to the Muni. 


Wear 

Tet: VAN: WRSTRSTEHTHHT-A: GATT: | 

were: wur ues wem araa u 19 ui 

facut Rgn tat spas Tere TERT 1 

Werne: AST UIT eren AB s 20 N 

The Queen said: “O King! Time keeps some 
men in one and the same state; again it throws 
others into troubles; Time it is that give respect to 
one and again it is Time that gives disrespect to 
others, Time it is that makes one a donor and it is 
the same Time that makes another a beggar. Se 
even the Rsi Vi$vamitra, learned and endowed with 
the strength of Tapasa, becoming angry has 
deprived you of your kingdom and happiness and 


51 


has thus done quite an irreligious act in the shape 
of tormenting others. You can now judge in this 
the wonderful workings of Time." 


wiara 


aR ctamrertor at ferar ger quar i 

ag uri Raa afe cette array 21 0 

arsi veran 4 are fesferauren à 

wart arse fred fe sperdtatfsr rq 0 22 0 

The King said: “T would rather cut off my tongue 
into two pieces by a sharp sword than I would quit 
my Ksattriya pride; and I would never be able to 
utter the words ‘Give, give,’ O Forunate One! I 
am a Ksattriya; so I never ask anything of anyone. 
I always say that, by the strength of my arms, I 
will earn money and pay off my debt.” 


uegmara 


"fa d fe ener unfer a art wa: | 

ae qp ur sar AfA arā: 1123 N 

HE VT HT Tea A TAM ÀA ATA | 

waited wgétearer ee: HATATA i 24 u 

The Queen said: “O King! Indra and the other 
Devas have given me over duly to your hands. So 
I am your religious (legal) wife; especially I have 
got education and I ought to be protected. Therefore 
O Luminous One! If you do not like to beg then 
you can sell me and pay off your Daksina." 

Uae wires: wn 1 

at aerd urea fereremarferg:fisra: 0 2 5 N 

wat a ya: wed fraai eren wma 

fagymurttagrtremstaemgrarata 126 0 

The King Hari$candra became grieved very 
much to hear these words and lamented, saying 
“O What a painful thing is this! What a painful 
thing is this!" His wife again spoke: “O King! Will 
we, afterwards, be burnt by the fire of curse from a 
Brahmin and thus lowered very much? So keep 
my word now." 


aaa a Weed rada a ATA: | 
care agit MT ed aera «i Wet pa 027 u 
ala SRRA Merger verres ERIRE 


UPISATI: 00211 


802 l Srimaddevibhagavatam 


You are selling me, not because that you are | nothing sinful a fault will be incurred by you. So 
infatuated with desire for gambling nor you are | sell me and keep to Truth and the fruits thereof." 
deprived of all knowledge by enjoyments in| Here ends the Twenty-first Chapter of the Seventh 
worldly things nor you are selling me owing to Book on the description of the sorrows of 
avert the danger of your kingdom. It is that you Harišcandra in the Mahapuranam, 


are selling me to pay off the debt to your Guru. So Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


802 


a ——»——————— 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER XXII 


On Selling Hariscandra's Wife 


ara 3ara 

EST AIA UST UAT YA: YA: | 

we wx www famd d afd: ni i 

Jy uend a wert deni | 

ufa d ren urit expe mW u2 ul 

Vyasa said: O King! When the Queen Madhavi 
requested repeatedly the King, He said: “O Good 
Auspicious One! When you have not met with any 
scruple to utter clearly these harsh and cruel words, 
I will do that act now which the most ruthless 
persons do not dare to do. 

Waa WW WT YRST AMAT: | 

saad wer tt at amat qus: d3 N 

age ddl canada 1 

sit att men wd upei rend WH oU 4 N 

Saying this, the King went with his wife, very 
distressed, to the city. Placing her on the public 
road, the King cried out in a voice choked with 
feelings and eyes full of tears: “O Citizens! Hear 
you all. Do any one of you require any maid- 
servant? 

sneafererfa ene TT WITTE AA | 

U aeg wage Tae TRATES 

dsgaaftenm: Hed uci ahga: | 

This lady is dearer to me than my life. If any of 
you be able to offer price of her as I will declare, 
then let him give it out quickly.” The Pandits then 
said: “Who are you? Why are you come here to 
sell your wife?" 


wara 
fe ni ya Heed A ASETA: 6 c 
TIE arsin aaea: urd sitae | 
The King said: “Are you asking. me of my 
introduction? Hear then: Iam a heartless brute and not 
fit to be called a man; or I am a Raksasa; nay, I am 
ore than that; I am prepared to do this sinful act.” 
Cara Jara 
at red wer spe entforent fea, u 7u 
quud HA eta | 
adaa d q char nU: sui 
wa H amagi ypa a f | 
Jeet a AA adverse d o9 
Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing this, Kauśika 
suddenly assumed the form of an old man and came 
out and spoke to Hariścandra: “I am master of 
boundless wealth; so I am able to give you the 
money you want; I am ready to purchase the 
maidservant by giving an equivalent wealth. Better 
give me the maidservant. 
wu Tah erat q-afe area A err i 
vagt qp fawn eta sud: 10 Ww 
fadtuf g wat grata er fhaa | 
My wife is exceedingly delicate; she is unable 
to do all the household work; so lēt me have the 
maid. But say quickly what value am I to pay?" 
When the Brahmin spoke this, Hari$candra felt his 
heart, as it were, torn asunder; so he could not for 
the moment speak anything. 
I 


Book VII Chapter XXII 


803 


fog sara 

wur aatsuvitemi aa wifüg: ui N 

arpeufiré fart yanmda tsa | 

miray wage ferat red ET T 12 M 

airaa GAT rien am i 

afede garta ferar: yand 13 u 

The Brahmana said: “Take an equivalent 
amount of money according to the age, beauty, 
qualifications and capabilities of your wife and 
hand her over to me. Hear about the prices of the 
male and female servants as written in the Dharma 
a Šāstras: The price of a female servant clever, 
good, well-qualified and possessing thirty-two 
auspicious qualities is one Koti gold mohurs; and 
the male servant sulle qualified fetches one 
Arbuda gold mohurs. * 

gerani FAKTU GK — 

gaa eater a wet iea na 

aa: a faut qud: gt ae | 

et Frere ota rar Uta 15 N 

Hari$candra became very much pained to hear 
the Brahmin speaking thus; but he could not say 
anything. The Brahmin then placed in front of the 
King the money over a bark and caught hold of the 
hair of the Queen and was ready to drag Her. 


Wears 

ga ware Ai eit UTAAVATRIE KAA | 

gat at fay gu cfmefr o u6 N 

Weg ya Arte Wr GTI AT I 

Ai ATMA MATA A VASES ASYA D 17 uu 

Ad: BATA: WEST FLAT HST | TATA | 

agate, seagate: 18 

The Queen said: ^O Arya! Let me see once the 
lotus-face of my son; leave me once. O Brahmin! 
Please see that it will be hard for me again to see 
this boy. O Son! Behold! Your mother is now a 
slave. So, Prince, do not touch me. I am not fit 
now to be touched by you. The boy, then, seeing 
the mother suddenly snatched away, cried out "O 


Mother! O Mother!" and followed her with tears 
in his cyes. 

Bed Gel Warne: BIT | 

wand fus MEANA 19 d 

aima wtszarfer ta yaa TTT à 

That boy tumbled at every step still he caught 
hold of the mother's clothing by his hand and began 
T accompany her. The Brahmin, seeing this 
behaviour of the boy, became impatient with anger 
and began to beat him. Still the boy wept, saying, 
Mother! Mother! and never quitted the hold of his 
mother. 

Ware 

Yard He R «rer totter fe NARAN 20 tt 

mias are safer ferr endure i 

geet ATT: Wats HH d wu 21 

The Queen said: “O Lord! Have mercy on me 
and purchase this boy also. Though you are 
purchasing me, yet without this boy I will not be 


able to do your work. My fate is bad; therefore 


this calamity has happened. Shew this favour to 
me. 
SITRTUT Saray 

erat “Prater Haai AA ares: | 

sida nfo: Hata fe ATTA 22 N 

vid Gee wal U alfa uem 1 

BITI aur vfrenqurfeaer 1123 N 

ĀTI Raa: Grant Wee aS | i 

"The Brahmin said: Take this money and give 

me the boy too. For the Wise in the Dharma Sastras 
fix such to be the prices of a female and a male. 
The other Pandits make differences in the prices, 
e.g., one hundred, one thousand, one lakh, one crore 
and so on, according to the different qualifications. 
But for the female, who is skilled in all actions 
modest, of good behaviour, and well qualified and, 
on whose body the thirty-two auspicious signs are 
seen, her price is one Koti gold mohurs and for a 
man qualified, one Arbuda gold mohurs. 


804 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


HA sama 

ade qum wf we fart vē ga: N 24 0 

Wr AeA AAT RRRA, | 

Süta said: O King! The Brahmin then gave over 
the price of the boy as decided, in gold mohurs in 
front of the King over a bark and then tied both the 
mother and son. 

Tatu Te fat wear we yaaa: 0250 

yanig RT Hea AHA Turm ferat à 

annaig dat Rad qure u26u 

afe art ufa gd srerumeafüer ufa i 

aa qua À val RIAS Ā YA: 27 1 

He, then, gladly and without any delay, carried 
them to his home. At the time of departure, the 
Queen circumambulated the King and, kneeling 
down, bowed down to him and, in that state of 
humility, began to speak: “If ever I have done any 
charities, if ever I have poured oblations on the 
Fire, if ever I have satisfied the Brahmins, then, by 
that virtue, Hari$candra will again be my husband." 

writ: Rai gar smritsftr errare 1 

wréf wr eaae fsrereurgeri-zu: 028 u 

Raka wet armar nasie aT i 

AHSTATSfŪ gat d «sere eere 1 29 A 

Seeing his wife, dearer then his life, fallen on 
his feet, the King became very distracted and 
lamented, crying “Alas! Alas! The shadow of a 
tree never leaves the tree; but you being verily 
modest and endowed with all qualifications, are 
now separated from me." 

wd urat afas a quens WU | 

gta agarda Ai cd fecal zn ATT N 30 i 

Speaking thus reasonably with his wife, the King 
said to his son: "O Child! Where will you go, 
leaving me here? 

sitamais Rawat 

TAA a god gaenpua b fs u31 

"wer fent d wane cw sate: 1 

Where shall I go now? and who will stop my 
miseries? The King, then, spoke to the Brahmin: 


“O Brahmin! The pain that I experience in the 
separation from my son, I did not feel on the 
occasion of quitting my kingdom or on my being 
exiled in a forest." 


wur fg war eia; rat ratā fē u 32 u 

TAT CORT AA HEMT GAB fatear 

panded KATE, 133 N 

mAg ufet ura ara aram wrfar à 

“O Auspicious One! The husband, good natured 
in this world, nourishes always his wife and keeps 
her always in comfort and happiness. But I am such 
a bad husband of yours, as I have left you and made 
you float in the sea of sorrows, Born in the Iksvaku 
family, I inherited the kingdom and its pleasures; 
but, Alas! Your getting such a husband has now 
been reduced to slavery! 

ŠO ASA i KARSTA 134 N 

wr Anata afer Arena: i 

O Devi! I am merged in this ocean of sorrows 
and troubles. Who will rescue me, by narrating this 
ocean of sorrows and troubles. Who will rescue 
me, by narrating this story of the Puranas!” 

Ga gara 

WyUquna THE: HVT: Fae: N 35 N 

maa q faye 44 wu | 

Sita said: O King! The Brahmin, then, began to 
take away the queen and the boy, whipping them, 
in the face of the King. 

Aant g dt gear atg a urféra: u 36 n 

mata g: Petter qst: Wat: 

Seeing his wife and son being dragged away in 
that state, the King's pain knew no bounds and be 
frequently sighed and sighed and bitterly wept 
aloud. 


ai gi a SARA A wa gena 37 U 


isa Yet: 038 u 
Pore fami amet IEM gain i 
Alas! My dear wife, whom the Moon, the Sun, 
Wind or any other body could not see ere this, has 


Book VII Chapter XXII 


805 


E 


become now reduced to slavery today! Oh! How 
beautiful and gentle are the fingers of my child? 
He has been sold off to-day, being born in the Solar 
Dynasty? Alas! Fie on my foolish understanding! 

wr fit gr front ace wmrarden ota: 39 0 

Sartre mta KAS TA mets feres i 

Oh my Dear! Oh my child Rohitāšva! Your this 
wretched conditionis due to my Anaryairrespectable 
bad maxims! Oh! Through the mockery ofthe Daiva, 
I have got this distress! Fie on Me! 

Ya sata 

wa afaa Wats oe N40 

qaar Reimaa rama: 

aain GĒĀBKATTIA HEA: 0041 

wforea: CANC ssa frg suy: \ 

Vyasa said: The King was lamenting thus when 
the Brahmin disappeared with them, in the very 
tall trees and walls of palatial buildings. At this 
time the cruel fiendish Muni, endowed with great 
power of asceticism came there quickly, accom- 
pained by his disciples. 

farts sare 


OT AACA UAT TATA FÍA LI 42 I 

at ga Teramet ate wed qu | 

Visvamitra said: “O One of mighty arm! If you 
think it your duty to respect Truth, then pay me 
the Daksiņā of Rajasüya sacrifice that you promised 
before.” 

etary Jare 

aren Te gaai verfi N 43 u 

TTT UTA AT HAH WU 1 

Harišcandra said: "O Rājarsi! I bow down to 
Thee. O Sinless One! Now take the Daksina of the 
Rājasūya Sacrifice that I promised to pay you 
before." 


fagritra sare 
wat create xed efr wdhud 44 n 
KATRA WAR TT get ATS ŠTATI | 


Višvāmitra said: “O King! Whence have you 


collected these gold Mohurs that you are now 
paying me as my Daksiņā. How have you earned 
this? Say.” 

wara 


Amda m RAA AATE 45 n 

eg aed fnr ATAA YAT | 

Hariścandra said: “O Dvija! O Sinless One! 
What use is there in telling this to you. It will 
increase agony by hearing O One of good vows. ” 


sftrara 


ammi Aa Tet ota ya R 46 

KA SAVU BATA d 

Visvamitra said: “I won't accept money earned 
not rightly. Give what you have acquired by rightful 
means. Say truly how you have acquired it." 


mara 


Ter eat g ar are fae AARAA: u 47 u 

k: pir facti fats | 

fataren stes gaha Tem iu 48 N 

Hariscandra spoke: ^O Brahmin! I have sold my 
wife the Devi Madhavi for one koti gold mohurs 
and my son for ten kotis of gold mohurs. So take 
this eleven Koti Gold Mohurs from me.” 

ya sara 

ated UN ARTTA, | 

Sentra vro Sta: atftratsadta t 49 i 

Sūta said: Seeing the gold collected out to the 
sale of wife and son very small, and seeing the 
King overpowered with pain and sorrow, Kaušika 
angrily spoke: 

aftrara 

TG ren cru safe fam 1 

aagana fag viguit aa T ag 50 t 

ATT RI ed weet ate afro | 

RTA ate Ran wee cet tt ubsenpus U 

UIS ER YAU MATA NI | 

UU AT YATE WE |) 52 |! 

“O King! The Daksiņā of the Rajasiya Sacrifice 


606 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


cannot be so small; so collect quickly other money 
to complete it. O Vilest of Ksattriyas! If you think 
this much to be proper for me, see first the 
enormous power of mine that I possess of my 
tapasyā, practised duly of my pure Brāhmaņahood, 
of my violent power and of my chaste study and 
then you can pay my Daksina.” 
XS 

STARA Wee: ener eA 1 

atara famia edt VAN aT: 53 t 

Hari$candra said: “O Bhagavan! I have sold just 
now my wife; and so wait for some time and I will 
collect more gold and will pay that to you.” 


fasts sara 
aguin: Rad ase feet rfr i ? 
we ua utat Barnet rui enum 54 n 
ste SRRI Weng) TAREA 
RSAT: 11 22 11 
Višvāmitra said: “O King The fourth part of the 
day is now remaining; I will wait till then. After 
this you won't expect any other reply from me." 
Here ends the Twenty-second Chapter of the Seventh 
Book on the selling of Hariscandra's wife in the 
Mahapuranam Srimaddevibhagavatam, 
of 18,000 verses, by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa, 


806 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER XXIII 


On Hariscandra as a Slave of the Candala 


TT IATA 
magran wart fedet fum aa: 1 
"dare et yof after: afya wrdt uu 
fran We Wa Wer vitem: 1 
Aaa YE: Hea graretresmunqur: ti 2 N 
Vyasa said: O King! Speaking these harsh and 
cruel words to the King, the Muni took that money 
and went away. When Visvamitra went away, the 
King Hari$candra became very much perplexed 
with sorrows and sighed frequently. He then began 
to say with his bent downwards. 
Wü center du Test | 
a adig cage arā frei aT 3 o 
“Suffering from constant pain and troubles, I 
am now turned into a Preta; if any body finds me 
serviceable, he may purchase me with value in gold 
as proper; but he should do this quickly before the 
sun sets.” l 
amn aR mAAR, | 
Gut fagia: my gAs i4 u 
HOT AR: RAT: HUTT: JENAR: | : 
Krafta vrina: 5 0 
Dharma, then, assuming the form of a heartless 
Cāņdāla came there quickly to test Hari$candra. 


The body of that low mean person was of a black 
colour, his air looking ferocious, his belly elongated, 
body emitting stench odours, teeth very long, and 
his face, covered with beards. He had one bamboo 
in his hand; in his neck, the bones of the dead were 
hanging and his chest was very distorted. 
Sugat Sara 

are Tarte erat sper: rT 1 

faunaga diet frr dudtad 16 n 

The Candala said: "I am in urgent need of a 
servant; I will keep you as my slave; say, then, 
quickly what is,your price? 

euam SAT 

a agrees pets grey | 

agang: i meatier ure ou 7 ou 

Vyasa said: O King! When the cruel, extremely 
ferocious and heartless Candala said thus, the King 
Harigcandra was surprised to see his 6 
and said: “Who are you?” 


-ANSA Sara 
USES vera: Vef qure à 
vm ada RB gamma: 08 ui 


Book VII Chapter XXIII 


807 


The Candala said: “O King! I am the famous 
Candala, Pravira; you will have to remain always 
subject to me and to collect the clothes of the dead 
persons." 

way Wet dad dgmadia i 

ara: arfsrat arf warteate feria u 9 ou 

weWedrpubutguerwp Wem: 7 

emere git wedi: naon 


Hearing his word, the King said: "I want to be 
purchased by a Brahmin or a Ksattriya. See! The 
sages say, that the Dharma of good people.is 
excellent; the Dharma of the persons intermediate 
is middling; and the Dharma of the mean is 
depressing. You belong to low and mean class. So 
my Dharma cannot be observed if I remain in your 
house." 


; ATSTA SgTd 

wana war ent: aAA aoa | 

arani erar waag AR MATA: 11 d 

The Cāņdāla said: ^O King! This is the Dharma 
of yours now mentioned by you; then why did you 
mention that anybody can purchase you); without 
any previous consideration, you spoke before me. 

feremfarea at ga tssfte erra m a 

arama AKAI exu u12 N 

ufrwebwambwugüdsRerymsag — C 

He who speaks with preconsideration stains his 
desired object; but, O Sinless One! You did not 
consider and you spoke that ordinarily. However, 
if I take your words that you spoke first to be true, 
then you are no doubt, purchased by me." 

wf sara 

ATA TST BH ATTA: 013 d 

RAMS AeA A AT A AAT | 

Hariécandra said: "The villain that speaks 
untruth, goes downright to a terrible hell; so to 
become a Candala is far better for me than to use 
an untrue word." i 


cum sara 

«mre aga: umet rata erate: 114 u 

soremmdfgwrar: we dā mfi i 

amers wei vta fauna: n 15 n 

wera dad WEHSUSD aaaf: | 

Vyasa said: O King! When the King was 
speaking thus, the ascetic Vi$vamitra arrived there 
out of anger and impatience; he rolled his eyes and 
said: "This Cāņdāla is come to give you your 
desired money; why, then, are you not giving me 
the remnant of my Daksina!” 


wara 


srmerqriievireerareart afer aifore nen, 

Ha amsaa wires fererenma: | 

Hariácandra said: “O Kaušika! Nothing is 
unknown to you. My this body is born for the Solar 
Line; how then can I accept this slavery of a 
Candala!” 


frarfira sara 
ife aerfa ranrnfamast WA 17 1 
ere SS greci Ta i 
umeremeerar fagrefe À fermer 1 1 8 N 
Ter eme renean ATT: RIGATA: | 


eae far wera Tft a RTA: 19 u 

sarttīta À fed a Yaraftu aye | A 

Raasta rai graria ee 20 N 

Višvāmitra said: "If you do not sell yourself to 
a Cāņdāla, be certain that I will just now put you 
under my curse. Give me immediately my Daksina, 
be it whether from a Cāņdāla or from a Brahmana. 
There is no other purchaser at present than this 
Cāņdāla. But know this as certain that I won't go 
back until I get my money. O King! If you do not 
give me money just now, then when half the 
Ghatikà of the day is remaining, I will burn you up 
by my fire of anger." 


ena sare 


shaan wem gaafgastifād: i 
yi agra AE fügen 021 0 


808 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


Vyāsa said: O king! Hearing these words of 
Visvamitra, the King became almost dead; 
bewildered with fear, then he clasped the feet of 
the Rsi and said, “Be friendly, please.” 

war sara 
aisead Ra AAs rages fata: | 

yard we faut PESAR 1221 

vad frase aa RARASAN: | 

aaa yama wafaaa: 23 I 

Harišcandra said: ^O Viprarsi! I am now very 
humiliated and have become very afflicted and 
distressed. Especially I am your Bhakta, I am your 
servant; so begraciusly pleased and free me from 
this painful companion of a Cāņdāla. O Muni! In 
lieu of my remnant Daksinà, I will be your obedient 
slave; I will do your work and follow your 
commands." 


faair sara 


waned WenTe iw wa fie d 

faq eet art udia ufu 24 

Visvamitra said: "O King! You are then my 
slave, you will obey always my commands." 


ru Sara 


vgra epi WIS gui: | 

amaa TARA wr ATA 11 25 N 

arent ram ugar ITU: | 

SIT RAIAS fee enfer carta 1126 I 

Vyasa said: O King! When Vi$vàmitra said so, 
the King, out of joy, thought that he regained his 
life and said to Kaušika. "Always I will obey your 
words; now order me what work I will have to do." 

faa zara 

aerma TETAS fe 3t were i 

Wert ae Wie WT wb MATEĻAT 0 27 di 

"fia nre À are fere aia qm i 

Visvamitra, then addressed the Cāņdāla and 
said: "O Cāņdāla! Come to me and give me the 
price for this slave. I am now handing this slave 


over to you; give me the price and take him. I want 
money; I have no need for a servant." 


Wags wer da snp AEA: 4028 0 

ama frei qui faaara | 

Vyasa said: O King! When Višvāmitra spoke 
thus, the Cāņdāla, overflowed with joy, came 
immediately to the Rsi Visvāmitra and said: 


arafa wen w ved 29 N 

att verf gear amat asé fist i 

are aima wer eur 11 30 N 

*O Dvija! The relief that you have given me by 
selling this servant, for that I will give you the ten 
Yoyanas wide land of Prayaga Mandalam, covered 
over with jewels." 


ATA Taree 


ad veregenfer yari: 1 

arses Wehr SITE AAAA: 031 N 

Rise wat aiaga rad 1 

arre eer Aaaa fe 3 uer: 11 32 u 

Vyasa said: O King! The Cāņdāla then gave me 
thousand gems, one thousand jewels, one thou- 
sand pearls and one thousand gold mohurs and 
Vi$vamitra took them. No signs of distraction nor 
unpleasantness were visible on the face of the 
King Harišcandra rather he laid hold of his pa- 
tience and thought within himself. 

werde CET are aed nA 1 

aaraRat weet marai u33 

SAUSI Meret ee aT farum AAT i 

wdt fea: yag: ua quur 34 ul 

“Visvamitra is now my master; I will do any 
work that he puts me in.” At this time, the incor- 
poreal voice, the voice of the fourth dimensional 
space, sounded from the Heavens: “O Fortunate 
One! You are freed from the Daksina, the debt 
before that you promised to give me.” A shower 
of flowers fell on the head of the King from the 
Heavens. 


Book VII Chapter XXIV 609 
arg aaf d dar: Whe: Ast wera: | fagra zara 
vier aearsterst ram already u 35 i asai eden W gu a 
At this time the powerful Indra and the other] — xafa asReafer di Wea rara rd wit i 38 u 
hosts of the Devas praised the King, saying:| gf stvedturrad IET qunm] ERI ARITA 


“Sadhu! Sadhu! Well-done, Well-done.” The heart 
of the King was then filled with intense joy and 
the King then said to Kaušika. 

va fe aren fira rar edi fe erra à 

ged urferatse d ammecrarquit Aa: 1 36 N 

fee auf reet sat A ae we | 

way g wee ud yna 037 

“O Intelligent One! You are a greater benefactor 
to me then my father, mother and friend as you 
have freed me in a moment from my debts. So, O 
mighty armed one! Your words are beneficial to 
me. Now order what am I to do." 


INASA: 11 23 11 
When the King said so, Visvāmitra then said: 
“Go and observe from to-day the words of the 
Candala. Let good befall on you!” Thus saying, 
the Maharsi Vi$vàmitra took the money given by 
the Cāņdāla and went away to his own place. 
Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter of the Seventh 
Book on the King Hariscandra's acknowledging of 
the slavery of the Cāņdāla in the Mahāpurāņam 
Srimaddevibhàga vatam, of 18,000 verses, by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book VII Chapter XXIV 


&09 


CHAPTER XXIV 


On Hariscandra in the Burning Ghata of Kasi 


vitaes Sart 
ww: rua VT STEN T2 AT: | 
agate Yaad ct Good: wen feuda 
Saunaka said: O Süta! Now describe as quickly 
as you can in detail what the King Hari$candra did 
afterwards in the house of the Candala. 


Ha sama 
fasts wet fat aut KENA: | 
faaara caret Ira seen ALAC N 2 N 


Sūta said: When Vi$vamitra went away, the 
mind of the Candala was filled with joy. He already 
gave to Vi$vàmitra that amount of jewels; so he 
tied now the King and, telling him "Do you now 
stand on the path of falsehood? began to beat him 
with sticks. 

gaganden aaa 1 

frre verrfirear ci vari ga fērsat: 4 N 

Ameera UST aE | 

aad Uma capu MASA, us N 


The King was already very much tired of the 
bereavements from his dear ones; now being beaten 
by the Cāņdāla, his senses were lost. In this state 
the Candala took him to his house and fastened 
him with a chain. Then the Cāņdāla's troubles were 
over and he fell asleep. The King lived in the 
Chàndála's house in that state fettered by a chain; 
but he did not take any food there. 

wd Gaye gear amet dbi Te | 

a ragana afit at Tu: 6 N 

sarees fermer aren fort fear i 

rur gadaa ata aratterfereafe 1 7 ui 

Incessantly he wept for his wife and son and 
others. "Alas! That thin lady, seeing the sad face 
of her son is now remembering me with a morose 
face. She is now perhaps thinking, with a grieved 
heart, that whenever the King will get the money, 
he will pay off the promised money to the Brahmin 
and then will free us from this yoke of slavery. 

araurd mem: wet aah Ya: | 

mwa mA ait ae maaa 11 8 i 


610 


Srīmaddevībhāgavatam 


aar ai arangi aferermererat TA i 

TAA: KERT MTafamafāma: 19 1 

Alas! When will that day come when will he 
see me and this crying child and speak with us. 
When the son will cry, saying I will go to my father; 
father! When will he come and speak with the 
child? That fawn-eyed gentle woman does not 
know that I am now placed under a Cāņdāla. Alas 
I am deprived of my kingdom, friends; and I have 
sold away my wife and son; now I am bound in the 
chain of slavery of Cāņdāla. 

AMVs AN STENT | 

wa a Raaf antes ari rT 10 N 

Alas! So many miseries have fallen on me all 
one after another." Thus thinking incessantly about 
his dear consort and son, the King passed his days 
in the house of that Cāņdāla. 

Fara faerararer err farfrdtfeer: | 

state uuu aa ferfa ga: 1310 

MVS MET YAMR | 

par vetalsāfaiei Uu Ya: Ya: 12 1 

Four days passed; and on the fifth day the 
Cāņdāla came there and rebuked the King with very 
harsh words and freed him from his fastenings and 
said: “Go to the burial ground and collect the 
clothing of the dead bodies. - 

“VATS fA erit VAT feed wed | 

TA TAA A TS TAT Ga 13 N 

Ba a att gus Weta afa aT FRA | 

card" ae sft da ada: 14 N 

There is a wide Šmašāna (burial ground) on the 
southern part of Kasi, go and protect that and 
whatever is due to you, justly take that; do not leave 
it. Take this Jarjara club and go there quickly. Say 
to all that you are the messenger of Mirdbahu and 
this staff is his." 


Wa sem 
aftifyer wet qp KĀRTA: d 
ahtsiats MASTS PATA | WENT: U 15 
ATSTĀTAS yraa i 


wat at MATTE TA waver d 1 6 N 

Sita said: O Rsis! Thus Harišcandra became a 
Cāņdāla's servant and was engaged in collecting 
the cloths of the dead persons. Thus ordered by 
the Cāņdāla, whose duty was to collect the rages 
of the dead bodies, the ae went to the burial 
ground. 

yaha afarot aot fere warrenty | 

STARTA TATRA Tt quei ae 17 i 


To the south of the city Kasi, was situated the 
dreadful SmaSiina, scattered over with the garlands 
of the dead, bad odours were emitting on all sides 
and it was covered all over with smoke. Hundreds 
of jackals were yelling there and the ground was 
being reverberated by their yells. Vultures, jackals 
and dogs were at many places dragging the dead 
bodies. 

aRadio regia i 

arderet fanai: 19 tt 

zidanim aatuft: | 

ATTIE MATTE TA, 20 N 

At other places were scattered heaps of bones; 
the whole ground was covered with the putrid smell 
of the dead. At some places it seemed that from 
within the funeral pyre, the half-burnt dead bodies 
were laughing wildly with their teeth wide open 
from their mouths. Thus the dead bodies looked 
terrible when being placed under fire. Lots of dead 
bodies were brought there and there was a great 
tumultuous uproar made by the cries of their friends 
and relatives. | 

at ga frat at ae dredi Aaa EN 

wr mAai at ange frame 421 n 

"rere fret: da a TAS ater à 

aftr gree: uaretut sa: ART 11 22 

weraieeauuaegfrfe cata i 

Oh! My son! My friend! My relative! My 
brother! My child! My dear wife! Oh! My cousin! 


(s 


Book VII Chapter XXV 


811 


Oh! My grandfather! Oh! My father! My grandson! 
My acquaintance! Where hast thou gone leaving 
mé here! Come once and let me have a sight of 


thee! With such dreadful sounds as these, the burial. 


ground was being echoed. 

Flesh, marrow, fat all were being burnt in the 
fire and a peculiar sound Son, Son was being 
produced there and AE voidness in the minds 
of the people. 

smasewermmeab Wal BA WAT 123 N 

RUTTEN SAT MATET, | 

BUA wu MOT SUA 24 U 

The fire was burning with a crackling noise. 
Thus the SmaSana looked very terrible as if the 
universe was being destroyed at the end of a Kalpa. 
The King Hariácandra arrived there; and, with 

. extreme pain, he began to give vent to his sorrows. 
wr Yea APA ari wh eri petiere | 

wr für Ga Barer TI CT ETA 025 ii 

SITET ST HT WaT Web e qu: 1 

fart af reper TA «spit afr 2 6 Ul 
. “My ministers, servants! Where are you all now? 
Where is kingdom that I got by a succession of 
inheritance! O my Son! O my dear wife! Where 
are you staying now, at what a long distance, 
leaving me here out of the Brahmin’s anger. 
Without Dharma man can never get auspicious 
fruits. So men should carefully eam Dharma. 

"werd mAg tma fü oi 

geld ferra amereiteh GT: GT: 027 tt 

wet faea: yarat att gent | 

AFERRA aden qud: 028 N 

The King, whose body was covered with dust 


and dirt, thought thus repeatedly; and at last,| 


remembering the Cāņdāla's words, went out in 


quest of the dead. Out of this eventful cares and 
anxietes, his body became lean like a stick; still he 
ran, to and fro, and calculated thus: 

ATA gd diet yri Irma: i 

Sé HA zd UN d USA wo! 29 N 

werd Rrra Tati GTI ITT: | 

Aineina RNE: n30 n 

Fraen frenan: 1 

mmama A: SAN 3111 

“This dead body will fetch for its price one 
hundred gold mohurs; out of this, this belongs to 
the King; this to me, and this to the Cāņdāla.” So 
he thought constantly and his state became awful. 
His face, arm, belly and feet and the other parts of 
body were all covered over with ashes and dust, 
the King wore a ragged cloth where hundred places 
were sewn over; his toes were all besmeared with 
all sorts of flesh, marrow, fat and other things. 

RILIFICICGE Jal: AEE LAAN EE | 

AMATA TAS: N32 N 

a wat a fear AA aA waaa: | 

wd Brest ATT Aim ayr: 133 1 

ate MRITA vengo? amd 
IRSA: 11 24 11 l 

He began to satisfy his hunger out of the food 
that was prepared for all sorts of dead bodies; and, 
taking their garlands, he encircled his head with 
them. Day and night he did not sleep and always 
he sighted and sighed, crying, Alas! Alas! Thus 
one year passed away, as if it had been three 
hundred years. 

Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter of the Seventh 
Book on the stay of Harišcandra in the burning 
ground in the Maha Puránam, 
Srimaddevii bhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by 

Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


TĀ 


Book VII Chapter XXV i 811 


CHAPTER XXV Í 
On the Quarrels Between Hariscandra and Visvamitra 
qe sara >` Sita said: Here, on the other hand, one day the 
WS J wat wi aak: aat aft: | boy Rohitāśva went out with other boys to play at 


anor gr fenem: epum: ud some place close to Kasi. 


812 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


mei quem ad aigan 1 

AAAS TOSSA: "2 N 

He first played with the his comrades; he then 
began to root out and collect, as far as he could, 
the Darbha (Ku$a) grass, with its ends and which 
had not deep roots. 

ardada ergs uem: | 

wees wf affftet were 3 N 

qasa vefidEIHISTQNHO | 

Wed Ua cheat fia: we we 14 n 

On being questioned why he was taking the 
Dharbha grass, Rohita told his comrades that his 
master was a Brahmin and that he was collecting 
them for his satisfaction. Saying this, he began to 
collect carefully by his hands the sacrificial fuel 
(Samidhā) and other fuel for the burning purposes. 

"SQRWETTHTWTED War ATT Aaa: | 

yia art fafafa serere var fT: u 5 u 

ama: feret dicar feror vr RETA i 

werten fare gd want 16 i 

He collected the Palāša-wood for Homa purpose 
and making it into a bundle with other articles 
already collected, took it on his head, but at every 
step he seemed to be fatigued. Feeling thirsty he 
went to a pool of water close by and keeping his 
load on the ground went down to drink water. 

aaraa mapori sera: | 

maa werent wedtereniqwnmr 7 N 

Drinking water he rested a while and then as he 
had keep his load on the anthill, he began to take it 
back on his head, a very poisonous deadly serpent 
came out suddenly out of that anthill at the order 
of Visvamitra. 

Ward aera) SE U UND Yd 

arei ud emat engeren faster N 8 i 

vafer safer: wre: | 

€ Aua a ga: met ed ata: uou 

aren: uama udast Yada: | 

The snake immediately bit the boy who instantly 
fell down and died. His comrades seeing Rohitasva 


dead went to the house of the Brahmin. With much 
anxiety the boys went soon out of fear, to his mother 
and said: “O Brahmin’s maidservant! Your son 
went out with us to play outside; but suddenly a 
poisonous snake bit him and he is dead. 

git m aga: Brat aaa gr d 10 ui 

word Ufer yet fore mge wem 1 

AY at Tan wg: wA 11 n 

yatean amar smrareqmrersredt | 

Rohita's mother, hearing these cruel words like 
thunder lightning at once fell down on the ground 
like a plantain tree, cut of from its roots. The 
Brahmin, then, came and sprinkled water on her 
face. When she regained her consciousness, the 
Brahmin then angrily spoke: 
'SITETUT Sara 
aagana Pret rrt ct Prompt 11 12 u 
Vet Het ge enm d gu cr RW | 
aea gent aT a fafaga 13 t 
*O wicked One! It is very inauspicious to cry at 
the evening time; especially the disfavour of the 
Goddess Laksmi (i.e.), the poverty comes to the 
householder, you know this; why are you then 
weeping? Have you not a bit of shame in your 
heart? She made not reply at this. 

a went dar yates fsa 1 

ago} dt T WAST 4014 i 

Rather very much immersed in grief for her son, 
she wept in a pitiful voice. Her body was covered 
with dust, hairs were dishevelled and her face 
covered all over with tears from eyes. She 
constantly wept out of sorrow. 

aa at pii fat meta | 

ftrerai gt mat Ter Tu are ferepafit 15 u 

arent dene ae Tēti Wu ETA | 

wet fafder aa mera: YA: YA: 16 N 

The Brahmin, then, became very angry and 
spoke to the queen: “O Villain! O Wicked! Fie on 
you. I have bought. you for money; yet you are 
hindering my luck. If you had this thought that you 


Book VI Chapter XXV 


813 


would not work under me, why did you take for 
nothing my money?” 

vee art wre feni wear fim | 

Tartare Gat emer: ATSB uat aS: 17 u 

Sat 9 IU FE UTE mere | 

gest at da Word AA gaa 18 

Thus repeatedly scolded by the Brahmin, she 
pitifully cried and spoke to the Brahmin in a voice 
choked with feelings: *O Lord! My son has fallen 
into the jaws of death, being smitten by a serpent.” 
O One of good vows! I will never be able to see 
him. So kindly permit me to go and see my boy.” 

JAA Hout Ae Gata Sale € | 

Garett pi faut maeaea 19 u 

Saying thus, that lady began again to weep ina 
pitiful voice. The Brahmin became very angry and 
spoke thus: 

BEIT sara 

WIS gEWHTe fà TATA UTTAR | 

anaf TE wer ware fru i 20 u 

"uh rad isa magda | 

“O Cheat! Your conduct is extremely blameable; 
you do not know how one commits a sin. The man 
who taking his pay from his master spoils his 
master's work, he goes to the terrible hell Raurava 
and is being scorched there. 

sar R shed ASA ponet ATU 2 1 N 

fanana card dida 3 1 

"weg unit we: HU ANSTA: vre: 1 22 N 

ware Prone afmardstottratat 1 

ufe X fae fifteen ufa 123 0 

Living in the Hell for a short while, he is born as 
acock. Oritis useless forme to give you this instruction 
of the Dharma Šāstra, for to speak to such to an 
illiterate, cruel, low, hypocrite and lair and to one 
addicted to sinful acts is to sow seed on an user land 
and to see it fruitless. Now if you have any fear for 
the afterlife, come and do the household affairs. 

vagana wr fani durare: | 

meni ge ure yz uut sm 24 


Hearing this, she said to the Brahmin, trembling: 
“O Lord! Be graciously pleased and shew your 
mercy on a maidservant. 

ŅEMU Kr At Ararat MTA | 

vagrans er wr yea foes faerat: 125 0 

ete Hout set yaya fE o 

sare ft feng: SAITE: 11 26 N 

Only for a moment I will go to see the dead son 
Of mine; so give me order to go there for a 
moment.” That lady was deeply absorbed with 
sorrows for her son; then she put her head on the 
feet of the Brāhmin and with a pitiful voice cried. 
The angry Brahmin with eyes reddened then began 
to speak. 

fay sara 

fe a ruo A ard qed pea 3 | 

fé c Ta A sor RARAN N 27 tt 

warn Ram crateneant wenn € | 

NTA TART: VIGO 11 2 8 N 

“What purpose of mine will be served by your 
son? Don’t you know about my anger? Have you 
forgotten about my whipping? So be ready and 
do my household work without any delay.” 
Hearing his words, the queen held her patience 
and began to do the household work. She spent 


half the night time, when she finished 
champooing his feet. 
ATEVETA HT Urea Gare AAT | 


AT eae Pea GRITS MATT 29 N 

q wur wem werde NAT a | 

wacarter wat ferendeit sre € 30 u 

When this was over, the Brahmin spoke to her,: 
“You can go now to your son; but see, finish his 
burning ceremonies and come back quickly. See 
that my morning works do not suffer.” Thus getting 
the permission, the Queen went at that dead of night 
to look for her son, alone and weeping. 

gear ad frst ost yet vita difedr i 

gave puta frac dest wat 0 31 N 


Gradually she went out of the precincts of the 
city of Kasi and there she saw her son like a poor 
man’s son lying on the ground over leaves and 
pieces of woods. Seeing her son dead, the humble 
Queen was very troubled with sorrow like an 
antelope, straying from its herd and as a cow 
missing her calf. 

PTT g: erat vred eat APT i 

wee gs mA fAs qanm 1 33 ul 

i guys. 

TAT PAA TT TTA aA APS i 34 Ut 

The Queen Madhavi then began to lament, in a 
“O my Son! Come once 


very pitiful tone, thus: 
before me; sdy why you are angry. Oh! My child! 


You used to come frequently to me, uttering Ma! 


Ma! Then why are you not coming now? 

GA: AT eret yer reiner STAHL | 

rage aes ae etter "35 

UM arg Uh AHA U | 

BU ATE ET MT SICH ED HANH GAT li 36 N 

Saying thus, she tumbling went and fell over 
his son. She, regaining her consciousness, em- 
braced her son and placing her face on the face of 
the child began to weep pitifully. “Oh! My son! 
Oh! My child! Oh my Kumara! Oh! My Beauti- 
ful!" and began to beat her head and her breast 
with her hands. i 

USER TRES RT ed oen amend rng à 

Asf wears speret uferd wem i 37 N 

AMSUPAAS quu YAN aagi | 

Prifaaet seat ATM fauna g 038 N 

O King! Where are you now? You used to look 
upon your son dearer then even your life. Your 
that son is now lying dead on the ground. Come 
and behold him once. It seems that the son has got 
back his life. Thus thinking she looked upon his 
face; but when it looked dead, she fell immediately 
unconscious. 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 
wet ced TA YANA d 
veri er ure Z afe due 391 
Promef acid dd Prargrafrareny 1 


Getting back soon her consciousness, she held 
his face by her hands and said: “O Child! Rise up 
from your sleep; awake; now is the dreadful night 
time; hundreds of jackals are yelling into our ears. 
Even Pretas, Bhütas, Pi$acas, and Dakinis are 
roaming in packs and making terrible sounds Hum, 
Hum. Your comrades returned to their homes just 
at sunset; Why are you alone remaining here?" 

a sara 
Waar uerb Haut pete e471 N 
BT PSE amet ET ACT WATS HATH | 
2 ya plage * ma T uereufu 142 1 
Sita said: The thin-bodied queen, thus saying, 
began to lament “Oh my Child! Oh! My son, Oh! 
Rohitāšva, O Kumara, why are you not replying to 
my words! l 

Wale SAA aea fh A TTA TT AT 

AAAA Wal AART tt 43 N 

Oh my Child! I am your mother; do you not 
recognise me; look at me once. O Child! I am 
deprived of my kingdom and exiled from my 
country; my husband has sold even his body and I 
am myself reduced to slavery. 

TTT vilarfir cat sear Ua AT 1 

CE waren fatofes ATAATTT 44 ul 

Jata: feds: wordt: | 
- What man is there that can live in this state! I 
am living simply by seeing your lotus-face. The 
astrologer who cast your horoscope at your birth, 
calculated future events in your life; but where? 
none of them is fructified. They said: That this child 
will be a hero, warrior, long-lived, very charitable 
man, and always ready to do the worship of the 
Devas, Dvijas and the Gurus. 


Book VII Chapter XXV 


615 


vida: art pemafgemehasí45 u 
maida Aagaard rifa: à 
sera ene SIRTHOTHEEST Ya: 46 N 


AURA ass tanmtatttatasm: | 
aa MAMÀ Vx meat AAM 0447 u 
aama rers erat safer Ufa wr | 


What more than this that the child will be one 
paramount sovereign and with his sons and grand 
will enjoy his kingdom. This boy will be the master 
of his senses and will fulfil the desires of his father 
and mother. Oh my Son! Now all those predictions 
have turned out false. O Child! You have on your 
palms so many auspicious, signs, discus, fishes, 
umbrella, Sri Vatsa, Svastika, flags, Kalaša 
(earthen jar), Camara and other signs; besides these, 
various other auspicious omens exist on your 
hands. 

arf uatr na FSTATRTĻAT SET 0048. UI 

a mga & vt st ea Aa: | 

aa d eRe ga gad GST: Fa THAT 49 N 

Rd AIS GA BAM A TATKRUŅST: | 

Are all these become in vain to-day! O Son! 
You are the Lord of this whole dominion; but where 
are your that Kingdom now, those ministers that 
royal throne, that umbrella, that axe, that vast 
amount of riches, that Ayodhya city, those palatial 
buildings, those elephants, horses, and chariots? 

wate ya Ut erect aenmtsfirt i50 N 

Bl led gr JUTTES UA vaqd fü i 

aa à fiver asī: haa 51 ue 

amatam wenig | 

Where have gone your subjects! O Child! Where 
have you gone now, quitting all these and even me! 
O beloved Husband! See the condition of your son 
who inhis early childhood used to move on all fours 

.(the hands and feet) and get up on your broad chest, 
anointed with Kumkum, and spoil it with dust; O 
King! Come once and witness the condition of your 
child who used to press, out of ignorance due to his 
young age, the Tilaka on your forehead, prepared 
of Mrganabhi, (musk). 


a a area raitis: us2u 

sifsrdt meamna sot | 

qa dei gar Raat eren used Wat tt 53 U 

cape ura wa heaga 1. 

Alas! Flies are now sitting on the lotus face to- 
day which I used to kiss over, covered with dirt; 
the insects are now stinging that. Oh! This I have 
got to witness now! O King! Come and see once 
your child is now sleeping on the ground like a 
poor man's dead son. 

WD Usage d ws fare teary u 54 u 

a ta f Nat Het wd USAT | 

Wwe AK T URUCTRTĒ n551 

Bl YA at IÀ AeA AT HANH Fae | 

O Fate! What bad act did I commit in my past 
life, that I have got to suffer so much in this life 
and I do not get an end of them! O Child! O Son! 
Oh, my Kumara! Oh! My Beautiful! what I not be 
able to see you once any more elsewhere? 

We aen fered d sper UIT: 56 N 

mgri: urate: vf: 1 

The Queen Madhavi thus lamented very much 
when the warders of the city, hearing her lamenta- 


tions awoke and came to her without any delay, 


greatly astonished. 
$ Sen ad: 
AT Teas Herre Ut ga fefe 57 N 
Uae fasten walt nae fafa 1 
VARAS erar eret a ffergraenmerdha 58 1 
They asked her thus: “Who are you? Whose son 
is this? Where is your husband? Why are you 
weeping here in this dead. of night, without any 
fear?" Though thus questioned, the thin Queen did 
not reply anything. 
qasi yer wr quf eg aya Yd 
freremarferg samt EAE AGIRI] 4591 
ag vt VITA ITT K: | 
KAT: IEAKGAGAUTTA: 060 N 
Being again asked, she remained silent; and in 
the next moment she was pained with extreme 


816 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


agony and began again to cry. Tears flowed 
incessantly from her two eyes out of her sorrow. 
The guards then began to suspect her and were 
greatly afraid. So much that hairs stood on their 
ends out of terror. They at once raised their arms 
and began to talk with each other. 

wa ait a Taatad: fafa area 1 

aegen WAST Tera menfe 1 61 N 

yur xrafé fh era um fest ate: à 

agraar TART: HRAPAESM: 1162 u 

When this lady is not giving any sort of reply, 
she is then certainly not a woman; most probably 
she will be a Raksasi, knowing magic and 
destroying young children. So she should be killed 
with great attention. If she be not a Rāksasī, then 
why she should stay in this dead of night outside 
the city? No doubt, this Raksasi has brought some 
one’s child to eat here. 

SAAT ACA AT MS HG eru | 

qadt aft wee AA 0063 N 

Gataradiegt ag: grenarfürfr: 1 

BATT VARU! tat eruere TATA 11 64 u 

Thus saying, they without any delay, tied her 
hairs closely and some caught hold of her hand 
and some caught hold of her neck, saying O 
Rāksasī! where will you go now? The armed men, 
then dragged her perforce to the house of the 
Candala and handed her over to him. 

3 ane atest aeran i 

aeai aan Vis Aen aAA 65 u 

All the people said: “O Chief of the Candalas! 
We have caught today outside the city this child 
eating Raksasi; so you better take her quickly on 
the slaughter ground and slaughter her. 

AUST: We at SBT Meat Tenaga | 

a gyal hate eienfzurerdesum 66 N 

afara YR sate: quash | 

wanted: oat cles Tees I TAGS 067 1 

The Cāņdāla looked at her body and said. “This 
Raksasi is widely celebrating in this world. I know 


her from before; but no bodies able to see her. This 
Mayavini has devoured many sons of many 
persons. You all will acquire great merit when she 
will be slaughtered and your good name will be 
known to all and will last long. You better now go 
back to your own homes. 

fgsrattarentrardt varoiedeft a at AT: | 

afaa actardt a Wendt eqeum: 168 u 

Wersrafenef a eu WAS at: | 

fani ferat arse a erat ferera ast i 69 u 

The man who kills women, children, cows and 
Brahmins, who burns another’s house with fire, 
who destroys the wayfares of others, who steals 
his Guru's wife, who quarrels with saintly persons, 
and who drinks wine, if killed, will certainly yield 
merits to the man who kills him. If such a one be a 
female or a Brahmin, no sin will accrue if he or 
she be slaughtered. 

EAT FU AT SYA MSTRTA: | 

AAT HAM PA WHAT SAT tl 7 0 N 

sasadara WTUT WEWUT GT | 

tare esr geren WT TANU 071 i 

So it is my paramount duty to kill her." Saying 
this, the Cāņdāla tied her closely and drawing her 
by her hairs, began to beat her with a rope. The he 
told to Hari$candra in terse language: “O Slave! 
Kill her; this woman is by her very nature wicked; 
so do not judge anything in this matter of killing 


„ 


her. 

ETA yore: year aaa WT | 

dunratser aer We Sltauvifeea: 172 N 

a versed ed tri efe mmu | 

Same ara Aa eaetfaqu 11 73 1 

Hearing these harsh words, like the falling of a 
thunderbolt, the King shuddered. When he came 
back to his nature, he fearing lest a woman be 
killed, said to the Cāņdāla: “I am not at all able to 
carry this order out; so kindly make over this task 
to some other servant of yours. He will kill her. I 
will certainly carry out any other order that you 
would task me to do.” 


Book VII Chapter XXV 


817 


Spes agh cat wera aree | 

arsed gerant aeitsvar: aA UTT: n 74 u 

amma weet Tat eat Hea | 

Tee Gat Weg Us serm 175 u 

Thus hearing the King, the Cāņdāla said: 
"Discard your fear and take the sword; this 
Māyāvinī kills always the children; so to kill her is 
meritorious; in no way whatsoever ought she to be 
saved." The King became very sorry and said: 

ferat ea WA A BATT: KAT | 

tad aifad urd gaea: 076 0 

gaat a: fat ganas ar 1 

Wa went Bisa wena u77 u 

“Women should always be protected with care, 
never to be killed; the more so as the religious 
Munis have assigned greater sin in the killing of 
woman. The man who kills consciously or 
unconsciously females, certainly becomes boiled 
in the Maha Raurava hell.” 


ANSI sara 

at aari yer dient frre à 

arafaradt att agri g wu TATU 78 u 

we feet qum Ti Saar TAT | 

ATKATTUT ah vite fam gear 79 0 

vean aczrantur eias: Taree erfererfet | 

The Candala said: “Don’t you say this; take 
this sharp sword, lustrous like a lightening; where 
killing 
abundance of merits are acquired in doing that. 


one engenders happiness to many, 
This wicked fellow has eaten many children of 
this place; so kill her as early as possible and bring 


peace happiness to the Kasi people. 
wara 

urosrenftrad da ad ehanas uso u 

amaA a a pat Tad Ta | 

The King said: “O Chief of the Cāņdālas! I have 
taken the difficult vow from my childhood, not to 
be kill any woman. Therefore I cannot exert myself 
in this matter of killing the woman as you order. 


52 


asi Sara 

varfirard feat gg fee are faerasweg u 81 u 

Weta der Ase erred fares | 

a: varies ga vanfirenrd faga n 82 u 

TATU AT HUTT | 

The Chāndāla said: “O Wicked Fellow! No 
work is superior which is not the master’s work. 
Why then are you cancelling today to carry out 
my order, when you are taking pay from me. The 
servant that spoils his master’s work, taking his 
money, is not freed from the hell even if he remains 
for ten thousand years there. 


wara 


VST A À ufi MATET 11 8 3 N 

rama wfe «i fani marearen | 

"raf g d gei ear anat Ae wu 84 u 

aA: fudefedfu due d 

waa start Freer fara: yit: 85 N 

TT wet arat GŪS ST: d 

"meret afe: ure duni wr 86 Ni 

The King said: "O Lord of the Cāņdāla! Put me 
to some other task that is very difficult. 1 will do 
that easily. Or if you have an enemy, specify and I 
will kill him no doubt within an instant. I will give 
you the whole earth by Killing him. Even if Indra 
comes against you with the other Devas, or 
Danavas, or Uragas, or Kinnaras, or Siddhas, or 
Gandharvas, I will slay him with my sharpened 
arrows, but I will never be able to kill a woman." 
The Candala, then, began to tremble with anger at 
these words and said to the King. 


TSI IATA 
Jaari Gated agreed amentiam | 
TSAR KAT TOT ATA TUT: | 

are fe agar Ti soy A Meat aa: 87 N 
Pretest wa cette fhaaan ae à 

fend eraat arcam q APART 88 u 
IET we: ageno RASAT | 
TAAS U VESTE Vat uaa AAAI us9 N 
sa Smeda enge? GAREA ERA RITE, 


UHI MS ENT: 11 25 11 


818 . Srimaddevibhagavatam 


“You are a servant and what you have spoken | and cut off her head.” Thus speaking the Cāņdāla 
is not fit for a servant. Working as a slave of a| gave him the axe. 
Candala, you are speaking the words of the gods. | Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter of the Seventh 
Therefore, O slave! hear now what I say; no need, Book on the quarrels between Hariscandra and 
of exchanging any further words. O Shameless , Visvamitra in the Maha Purāņam, 
One! If you fear sin a bit why then did you accept Srīmaddevī- bhagavatam, of 18,000 by 
the slavery in a Candala’s house. Take this sword Maharsi Veda Vyasa, 


818 = Srimaddevibhagavatam 
CHAPTER XXVI 
On the Sorrows of Harišcandra 
a sara daru aefa ferar seres Ute 1 
adsa yore: wre rft feat ritma: 1 RT sam gara fererasdt pareun 11 6 t 
adua amet GTA GK aT od oat TT REE WUsE fe ATA, d 


Sita said: The King Harišcandra with his face 
bent low thus said to the Queen: ^O Young One! I 
am a great sinner, otherwise why shall I be ready 
to do this heinous act! However now sit before me. 

fred daftrenfir eg IEF ore: 1 

Vaya HH Get set mat TT: U2 N 

If my hand be capable to kill you, then it will 
cut off your head.” Thus saying, the King took the 
axe and moved forward to cut her. 

aunt qu: eft or a sme aR | 

aada aai raggafirastartt u3 it 

As the King did not recognise her as His Queen, 
so the Queen did not recognise him as Her husband, 
the King. So the Queen, being very much strained 
with sorrow, began to utter with a view to court 
her death. 


wars 

ASTE yyy are ahaa ate Want | 

yaki A gat RR afe: wu ud d 

a cert wd araerfacar catia i 

Mati UZIET WTTHua ATA, 5 1 

O Cāndāla! It you like, I say something; hear 
my son is dead and is lying close to the outer skirts 
of the city. Wait till I bring my child before you 
and do his burning ceremonies. Next you can cut 
me off by your axe." 


a ya at ace fern grad ae WE: 07 N 

oon aani uferat argqeacairteet i 

VAS sei TNT GT (1 8 N 

The King said: “Very well; let that be,” and gave 
her permission to go to her dead son. The Queen, 
emaciated and pale, her body being covered all over 
with dust arrived at the burning ground and taking 
her dead son, bitten by a serpent, on her lap cried 
out loudly O Son! O my Child! O my young Son!” 
and referring to her husband said: “O King! See, 
to day, the sad condition of your son, lying on the 
ground, as his bed. 

Wad ware d yae Wü d 

wart aade garām AAA uo d 

My son went to play with other boys and, bitten 
by a cruel poisonous serpent, left his life.” Hearing 
the pitiful cry of that helpless woman, the King 
Hariscandra went to the dead and took off the cover 
of his face. 

rer fremayred quen ud w ufa: i 

yeaa eemper uwd0 d 

Due to the long exile and the difficulties thereof, 
the Queen was changed altogether in her outer 
form, so the King could not recognise her weeping 
as his wife. 

at wer sadi sire enferrrenfer aa | 

Ruandan yaana ud] 


Book VII Chapter XX VI 


&19 


MSi d ASHMAN Fea serena | 

ATT YRAN 12 N 

On the other hand the King, too, had not the 
curled hair on his head as before; it has turned into 
matted hair and his skin especially has become like 
the bark of a dried tree; so the Queen could not 
make out the King also. The King then noticed all 
the King-making auspicious signs on the several 
limbs of that dead boy, poisoned all over and lying 
on the ground and began to think thus: 

rit frufēri aet ears soifas 1 

aerate aa: 13. 


ara yiga YAAA, d 
ature 14 
AIE: VALCE AES ALEEA IESELEN 
Irsftadgst A aA fiemetud nis 1 


amcam dtatet drdsmesraturen: | 

fererrerarat eit: genea: 16 0 

MO — tresitrarfiresarcherr: | 

The face of the child is very beautiful like the 
Full Moon, nowhere, there is any sear nor anything 
like this; the nose is high; the two cheeks are clean 
like a mirror and specious; the hairs are blue, 
curling, similar, long and waving, the two eyes are 
widely expanded like a full blown lotus, the two 
lips are red like Bimba fruits; the chest is wide and 
spacious, the eyes are stretched up to the ears; the 
arms are extending up to the knees; the shoulders 
are elevated; the legs are elongated, yet god-like 
like a lotus stem; the appearance is grave, the 
fingers are fine, yet strong enough to hold the 
world; the navel is deep and the region of the 
shoulders elevated. 

oat He ART HEAT Het PHT: 1 17 U 

"ret Ta: gaida PAETA 0 

Certainly this boy was born in a royal family. 
Alas! What a pain is this! The cruel Death has 
reduced him to this state! 


Ud sata 


Ua gansa ri sme trate: em ugs 
TFT? ITS KIĒTATAUTTAT | 


"HESUgSTe U AA À NATTA: LI 1 9 li 

vitat afe er RTI paiar ARTA, i 

Reman mas A eftzizetan fere: i 20 1 

aA mi IE MUECU | 

Süta said: Thus looking carefully that boy in 
the lap of his mother from his head to foot, the 
King Hariścandra got back to his ancient recollec- 
tions. He recognised the boy to be his and wept 
aloud repeating the words Oh! Oh! The tears 
flowed from his eyes and he said: “This is my boy 
that has been reduced to this state! Oh! The cruel 
Fate!” Though the boy is dead, yet the King re- 
mained bewildered for a moment. The queen then 
spoke out of terrible pain: “O Child! What sin is 
that which has caused this dire calamity, I cannot 
imagine!” 


MERCI 

Bl Ae HEY une eguumemes up 21 

gami at ag nene 1 

LIS TATA MT ATAGTEI qan 22 M 

after verra farar par BT | 

WANN: Gera raia ARA: 023 Ut 

SR tad: fe feta: qid cara i 

Blt AT au: Yea WAT AT 0 24 N 

paris edt at gat a fret TAA | 

“O my Husband! O King! I am extremely 
worried of pains and troubles; leaving me thus, how 
is and where you are passing away your time in a 
calm, quiet state! O Fortune! It is You that has 
brought about the loss of the Rajarsi Hari$candra's 
dominion, the separation from his friends and what 
more, you have caused his wife and son to be sold! 
Has he done so much mischief to you! ” Hearing 
her cries, the King’s patience gave way and he 
came to recognice the Devi and the son and 
exclaimed ‘She is my wife and dead boy is my 
son. Oh! What a series of troubles, one coming 
after another. 

we ada ueitd srernanfu d ga: 25 0 

eat wur Barat Wein g | 


620) 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


HUE WORSE ATTARTTUTTAI, N 2 6 N 

yia Paaa fada maiaa 1 

Ai UTT RA Tat a A 127 u 

Aug: giret vieto ife 1 

Being overpowered with extreme trouble and 
pain, the King fell unconscious on the ground; the 
Queen, too, looking at the King’s state, fell 
motionless, and, void of senses, no sooner she 
recognised him as the King Harišcandra. Some time 
after, the King and Queen both got back at the same 
time their consciousness and, with great sorrow 
and agony, began to lament. 


wara 
E a gpa d aed PANAR u28 1 
uya d ya dri wed fe a dra | 
ata arate ep Gareth ATT, 29 N 
SOY Hal Gas aes eei WIES | 


The King said: “O Child! Why my heart does 
not rend to thousand pieces, seeing to day your 
gentle face pale lifeless, that was once beautiful 
with curls of hairs! O Rohita! When will you come 
to me saying in a sweet voice ‘Father! Father!’ 
When shall I address you affectionately ‘Oh my 
child! Oh my child!’ embracing you within my 
breast! 

aa gut fa ART 30 u 

marae aatri wees 1 

4 aise Wa wey wap Beas 031 u 

warsf fügen fatal at equat t 

Te Tes À aaea Wed lt 32 u 

Aaaa — wEr À ommum 1 

a maA  VGUIMSUESU 33 

frūgaa utter famia | 

Whose tawny coloured dust on his knees will 
spoil my clothes, lap and my body! O Delightful 
Son! I have sold you as if an ordinary thing, though 
I am your father. As yet my pleasure of having a 
son is not satified. Owing to the mockery of the 
mean Fate, my unbounded kingdom, friends, and 
abundance of riches all have vanished away! 


Finally I had one son and that too is now in the 
jaws of death! Oh! With what an amount of terrible 
pain I am being burnt up to day when I am seeing 
the lotus-face of my son, smitten by a serpent and 
lying dead on the ground!” 

Vaya Aaa SCIO ATRE: 034 N 

una a det geda Paua € à 

vae fd uem vio Aaaa 35 t 

adu KAT: ANTAA 1 

Aesma RIA A Ayre: 136 UI 

ATS aU qt ATEN STAT | 

Thus speaking in a voice choked with feelings 
and with tears in his eyes, as soon as he was going 
to take his boy in his lap, he fell senseless on the 
ground. Seeing the King lying on the ground, 
Šaivyā thus thought: “Such is His voice as makes 
me certain that He is the King Hariscandra, the 
best of men and the delighter of the learned men’s 
hearts. 

SAT PRAM: Tartana: N 37 UI 

VATA: HATE A ACM: | 

faremo aite or perdi uid afer 38 1 

veer faferar dar srdyarfedifear | 

darit a rersueredar aA i 39 U 

Wey WRIST WAH: IT nga | 

His teeth are like those of the famous 
Hariscandra just like to Mukul and his nose is 
elevated and soft like the Tila flower. But if he be 
Harišcandra, how is it that he has come to this 
burning ground!" Thus thinking, while she looked 
atthe King, leaving for the moment the sorrow for 
his son, joy, pain and surprise attacked her heart 
simultaneously; and she, in that state, fell down 
unconscious on the ground. Then gradually 
regaining consciousness she spoke in a pitiful 
voice: “O Fortune! You have caused to the King 
who was once like an Immortal, the loss of his 
kingdom, friends, and even the sale of his wife 
and son. And now you have transformed him into 
a Candala! You are merciless, religionless, void 


Book VII Chapter XXVI 


621 


of any justice as to what is just and what is unjust. 
You are shameless. 


Raai ga Harem rata ft lu 40 t 

TTT Ata WaT ATAKA, | 

wang KET ATATATAT 4 d 

wrafrarsht tars amereitsst Hat au: i 

ara ugarfir d oat fegremenfü arn 42 0 

VERA asà aise fattīfāuda: 1 

RATT ATT: Td TATA RAT TAT: 00 43 HU 

waren’: wanda farce mieren 1 

So fie on you! O King! Where are gone today 
that royal umbrella, that throne, that Camara, and 
that pair of fans on you both sides! Oh! What is 
this transformation caused by the Vidhātā (the 
Ordainer of Fate)! When the high-souled King used 
to travel, all the kings used to remove as His 
servants the dust of the roads by their clothing! 
Oh! Is He the same King of Kings, Hari$candra 
who is roaming in this unholy burning ground, 
burdened too much by his load of sufferings! 


Wiss meds wR 44 N 
T [23 | d t 
amiridan eE u4s u 
; TRA eR | 
Oh! Innumerable human skulls are lying here; 
the small earthen posts (brought for the purifica- 
tion of the bodies of the dead) are lying scattered 
close to each; the garlands of flowers for the dead, 
being intertwined with the hairs of the dead, are 
presenting a grim spectacle! The ashes, charcoals, 
half-burnt dead bodies, bones, and marrorws all 
arranged one over another make the place more 
hideous. The marrows of the dead bodies have 
come out and are dried up by the sun. 


gATgaTaTĪ YeR 46 0 


Hurareareayay 

ae ITS: VATA gafn: | 
Tagra U HRA HVS Ua JNA |1 48 N 
He ramas ferrerardu RT 1 


MRS U Teal ET AAAA STHT 49 Ui 

ae a WAT À ert WW | 

At places, vultures, and Sakunis are crying 
hideously and the crows and other birds, eager to 
eat flesh, are roaming to and fro. All the quarters 
of the sky are looking blue with the smoke, arising 
out of the burning of the dead. The Raksasas are 
constantly roaming hither and thither, gladly feasting 
on the human flesh. Is the King passing his days 
thus in this place? Alas! Oh! What a painful thing 
is this!” The daughter of the King, Saivya, was 
overpowered with an awful sorrow; and clasping 
the neck of the King, began to lament again, in a 
pitiful voice. *O King! You have spoken that you 
are a Candala. Is this a dream? Or a Reality? O 
King! If it be true you are a slave of the Cāņdāla, 
then say to me; my mind is being deluded very 
much! (7.e., I cannot indulge this idea). 

werd iat ma et grādam us50 

ada fyne wA 1 

«mft ert: ga: wed reti AETAT N 51 u 

"rp wt au: aaea: 1 

O Knower of Dharma! You have shewn your 
great zeal towards Dharma; and, for that reason, 
you are displaced from your royal throne! Now if 
such help comes out of worshipping the Brahmins 
and the Devas, then Dharma cannot stand and, 
along with it, the truth, simplicity and harmlessness 
cannot exist." 

Xd saru 

Sia eM era: spear fr spent TAS: 052 0 

BUTT TAS BAT TT: SUTERGT | 

PĒTA q gRr fr: gett g: T u 53 u 

quu Aeda raga, | 

Süta said: Hearing these words from the thin 
Šaivyā, the King took a heavy sigh and then 
described to her in detail with tears flowing on his 
neck, how he got the Candala state. The fearful 
Queen became very much pained to hear all this 
and having a deep sigh, described, as it was, how 
her son died. 


822 


P 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


TM WS aar arai faa wetter u 54 N 


aua write fur fafeeaqe: 1 
wRerxust um vreat ceat fnr u55 u 
eta carters: wet dafra PT RR | 
TART ASA MIST Tā UA N 56 N 
FIS Wa TA WT WARN, | 


O, hearing this, the King fainted and fell 
unconscious on the ground. Then regaining 
gradually his consciousness, he began to kiss, with 
his tongue, the face of his dead son. Saivya then 
said in a choked voice: "Now sever off my head 
and obey your master’s word.” O King! You will 
be saved then as having kept your truth; and your 
master’s order would be carried out. 

vaaraod UAT g ara sper fos: d 57 u 

Ata saat yra ferrerarferg fis: l 

Hearing this, the King fainted and fell down 
senseless. Getting up conscious in a moment, he 
began to weep bitterly.” 


watara 


ati à cera with ei aAA n 58 u 

aa Agh acd Rud EN | 

The King said: “O Beloved! How have you 
uttered such cruel words? How can I execute that 
which is hard even to utter! 


Roda 
wu afar art aar fengrerirer a i 59 u 
aara Rea it aaa eit à 
ga WaT tat ATRI Frau AEA i 60 N 
quu aer var Para g; fist rent | 


Saivya said: ‘O Lord! I have worshipped the 
Devi Gauri and other Devas and the Brahmins; so, 
with their mercy, i will get you as my husband in 
my future birth. Hearing this, the King again fell 
down instantly on the ground; getting up 
immediately, he was overpowered with sorrow 
and began to kiss the face of the dead son. 


watara 
frat a trad did aret Ai nsn 61 h 


"Tenrareits fr adīt Ua A TTA | 

UUSA: Wee geni ae 62 

amarani UN VATA | 

The King said: “O Dear! I wo’ nt be able to suffer 
any longer for along time. But, O thin-bodied One! 
See, I am so very unfortunate that I have no 
command even over my heart. If I enter into the 
fire without the permission of the Candala, then I 
will have to become again the slave of a Candala 
in my future birth. Think it over. 

AT U at um SS VITA eeu 63 

amd prea: Wurer eui | 

TR gamed at write yer 11 64 ll 

Tasha aTerent atseamdidyresr: GA: 0 

After that I will have to go to the hell and be 
tormented there. But this too I find beneficial to 
me. Rather I will go to the hell Mahà Raurava and 
there suffer for a long time the torments of the hell, 
yet I do not like to live a little longer when my 
boy, the continuer of my family, has left his life 
out of the queen fancies of the Great Time and I be 
merged in the sorrows for my son.’ 


NA manga ya: disft aam u 65 N 

ad oniani Urea shay quie: | 

TTT green erai (g Fst ATT u 6 6 N 

My bodys is now at the command of the 
Candala. How can I in this state quit my life without 
his permission. If I leave my body, I will be 
indebted to him and I will have to suffer in hell. 
Let this be so; still I will leave off my body, the 
receptacle of all these pains and troubles. 

refe HIT dag fiae qu | 

mwi preset wuafaud 67 I 

Wis garumam GATT | 

Nowhere, in the Triloki, is any pain like that 
felt in the demise of a son, not in crossing the 
Vaitarani nor in the Asipatravanam! So I will now 
throw myself on the burning fire along with the 
dead body of my son. 

fareni cate Ame MARTI 0068 i 

"Used waar esferas: AAA | 


Book VII Chapter XXVII 


823 


T ated a wedür frsturequraur 69 u 

agas Tew vd fare YA i 

So, O Thin-bodied One! You should now excuse 
me, £.€., do not prevent me. O Sweet-smiling One! 
I now permit you to go back to the house of the 
Brahmin. 

ute ad ufa ed at aie ara: u70 0 

vimm: wets Gr Fraga aera | 

Be elis Hada pleat effer 71 u 

If ever I have given in charity riches, offered 
oblation to the fire, and given satisfaction to my 
superiors then, in the other world, I will get you 
and my son. But there is no such chance now in 
this world. 

"wan KAT fanfa cat grferfeira 1 

SIST werd aero WU UAT: 072 d 

mauhia dar Wasa: "uu first: i 

wet dier: eah CATT SSH 73 N 

O Sweet-smiling One! If ever I had given you 
offence while conversing or making jokes with you, 
now at the time of my parting, excuse them all. O 
Auspicious One! Never despise the Brahmin out 


of your pride as a Queen. Look on your master as 
a Deva and try all your best to satisfy him.” 


IATA 

agaa wet fof gar od 

GANNA Be ae vum 11 74 i 

THAT AE AA eat WH IIS TAT l 

Be tat a Ath raat item rag N 75 N 

Spe Usa arare TT ulead | 

efr dhadtanrad eqq? ATS ERISA 

afa enyeumr 11 26 11 

The Queen said: "O Rājarsi! I will also throw 
myself on the burning fire. O Deva! I will not be 
able to carry on this burden, so I will accompany 
You. It is better for me to accompany you; so there 
will not be otherwise. O Giver of Honour! I will 
enjoy with You heaven or suffer with You in the 
hell." Hearing this, the King said: “O Chaste One! 
Do as you please.” 

Here ends the Twenty-sixth, Chapter of the Seventh 
Book on the narration of the srorows of Harišcandra 
in the Mahapuranam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 
18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


VVA NMN Ww T T 


823 


Book VII Chapter XXVII 


æ mM A 


CHAPTER XXVII 


On Hariscandra’s Going to the Heavens 


Ga zara 

aa: Hear ferat AWS STRTUT Aa TAHA | 

wader ua ws agge uod 

Sūta said: The King Hari$candra then prepared 
the funeral pile, and placed his son on it. Next he 
and his wife with folded palms merged themselves 
in the meditation of the Paramešvarī, the Lady o 
of the Universe. 


und gud: m AAT: nan 
ATT wd VA Wa enit 


That Hundred-eyed is reigning within these five 
Kosas (or sheaths) Annamaya, etc. She resides in 
the sacral plexus of the nature of Brahman, of the 
Purusa composed of Anna and Rasa And She is 
the Ocean of Mercy. Wearing the red robe, She is 
ever ready with various weapons in Her hands for 
the preservation of the Universe. When the King 
was engaged thus in meditating on Her, Indra and 
all the Devas with Dharma in their front came to 
the King Hari$candra with no delay. They all 
coming up said to the King: “O King! Hear. 

a frame: TATA MARATA SU 

ream: Wheat AAT: KAUT: | 

arm: frr erieraf Kara aemsfadt u 6 u 

we drāsu agar Aaaama wr | 


824 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


fase at tof wdfresfr ata: 7 1 

faanftra: a tsefteared uaea i 

Tam the Grand Sire and here are present Dharma 
Himself, the Bhagavan Visnu, the Sadhyas, 
Visvedevas, Maruts, the Lokapālas, the Caranas, 
the Nagas, the Gandharvas, Siddhas, Rudras, the 
twin A$vins, and all the other Devas and 
Visvamitra, who going over the three worlds 
wishes to make friendship according to the law 
ordained by Dharma, is now himself desirous to 
grant you your desired objects." 

tri gara 

"meme editus agana: 8 i 

fafrarenaradeagyy: wifi: ) 

Dharma said: “O King! Do not risk such an 
hazardous undertaking. I am Dharma; I am satisfied 
with your patience and forbearance, control of your 
senses, and the other Sàttvic qualities and have 
therefore come to you. 

YA sara 

FRIA meram We: MSR ASAE 9 u 

verser areata fre ca: GATT: | 

ame Aia wmraigaaufaa: 1101 

gi o reARedtadfar: 1 

Indra said: “O Hariscandra! I have also come to 
you. So your good fortune knows no bounds, to- 
day. You with your wife and son, have conquered 


the Eternal World. O King! What is hardly |. 


attainable by any human being, you have conquered 
that, by dint of your own merits. So Get up to the 
Heavens (vibrations of the Fourth-dimensional 
Space) with your wife and son. 


a sata 


asya agg 11 d 

Se IRINA Pre | 

yaaa mgd gga Ta W120 

Süta said: Indra then sprinkled over the dead 
son on the funeral piles, the necter, destroying the 
fatal effect product by unnatural death. At that time 


big showers of flowers were thrown on him and 
Dundubhis were sounded. 

SATA Wa: ut AKTU TET: | 

"gH: IU: Waa: VITA: 0013 N 

aat wan afters: ufUensu wd wur | 

award: IATA ath KERT: 14 0 

In the meanwhile, the prince got up from the 
funeral pile. He got back his former beautiful body 
and he looked peaceful, healthy, and greatly 
satisfied. HariScandra embraced his son instantly 
in his bosom; the King and Queen also both 
regained their former beautiful appearance at that 
time and were decked with clothes and garlands. 

GR: wupuizsut wer UAT FA: 1 

aya mami yt Aan 15 ul 

werde agaa aeih Batt TA i 

wane veri Prorat enun wen u 16 N 

Their hearts were then deeply filled with great 
joy at their getting back their desired object and 
their health. Indra then said to the King: “O Highly 
Fortunate One! Now ascend to the Heavens with 
your son and wife, by dint of your meritorious 
deeds and get the holy happy ends of your 
endeavours.” 


pitas sara 


aaa: eater sows faa 
Srt Prep RE TET AT SMTA 17 di 
Hariácandra said: “O King of the Devas! The 


Candala is my master; so until I get freedom from 
his bondage, I cannot go to the Heavens without 
his permission." 
ed sara 

aad wife AMATATATUTTT | 

SM Mra tat fri wes wap 18 N 

Dharma said: “I am myself that Candala and 
had assumed that from and shewed you the city of 
the Candala. Knowing that you will suffer. 


oe sara 


wm unt wart inig A | 


Book VII Chapter XXVII 


825 


Ten afters ward GTM I AUT u9 u 

What more than this, that I myself am that very 
Candala, I am that very Brahmin and I am that 
very poisonous serpent who had smitten your boy.” 

Note: This is all the one and the same the Fourth 
Dimensional Space. 

Indra said: Hari$candra! Now got up, by virtue 
of your own meritorious deeds to that place which 
is highly covetted by all the human beings that exist 
on earth. 

zer sarea 

Sara AMT ure: Ves Frater a 

SAMA: HAA ATT AT: 420 0 

Harišcandra said: “O King at the Devas! I bow 
down to you. Kindly consider what I say now. All 
the inhabitants of the city KoSala are in mourning, 
due to their being separated from me. 

fasta mA ae oremard fear | 

wae Aart Tau: SANAN 27 N 

How then, can I go to the Heavens leaving my 
sorrow-stricken subjects here. To abandon the 
Bhaktas, the devotees, is to incur the great sin due 
to the murder of a Brahmin, the killing of a woman, 
the drinking of liquors and the killing of a cow. 

granted MTG TE | 

Void AAAS CITT: PTAL AA 11 22 N 

Afan warearfir AEATESA feat rat 1 

"fa d wfüer ven wer ur quum u23 u 

wdtsgufa area arch arsfi d: wg | 

O Indra! It is highly inadvisable to abandon a 
Bhakta who is always in service. How can one be 
happy when one abandons such devotees. So I will 
not go to the Heavens without them. You better go 
back to the Heavens. O Lord of the Devas! If my 
subjects can go with me, J am ready to go with 
them to the Heavens or to the Hell." 


ga Sara 


agi yaur eat rat à gu 24 N 
«tu darauted vd gu tautu 1 


Indra said: “O King! Some of them are more 
sinful, some are more meritorious; different grades 
of people exist there. So, O King! How can you 
desire all to go simultaneously to the Heavens.” 

ears sura 

ath Vien qutd IANA 25 0 

aad cw aera: ad wd gūtā a 1 

weg ai VĒ war WANASA 26 N 

IATA Weed ae varifercrar | 

Hariscandra said: ‘O Indra! It is through the 
power of the citizens that the Kings enjoy their 
kingdoms, perform great many sacrifice, and do 
many engineering works (in excavating tanks, etc.) 
There is no doubt in this. So I, too, have due 
religious acts and sacrifice through my citizen's 
help. They gave me all the articles necessary for 
kings. So how can I now quit them so that I may 
get the Heavens. 


were tam fēkferatta gaftam i27 u 

wafer ATA duqqurp T: | 

ABATU act ATA HAM 28 Ul 

AEG ferme A: at eran: | 

O Lord of the Devas! If my subjects have no 
such Punyams as to enable them to the Heavens, 
then let the Punyams done by me in giving away 
charities, in the performance of sacrifice, and other 
meritorious works be divided amongst them 
equally. If I myself enjoy Svarga for a very long 
time; but, if by your favour, I can enjoy with them 
even one day’s residence in Svarga for my merits, 
that is also superior to me.” 


Hd sare 
wd faerie Vata: 129 N 
yeaa ees faanftraar mers: | 
TE wd gdi WAHT 130 It 
Au fae wrare feaenfera: à 


Sita said: ‘Let that be;’ saying thus Indra, the 
Lord of the three worlds, Vi$vamitra, and Dharma 
who were very pleased went immediately to 


826 Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Ayodhya from Kasi by their yogic power. In an!) aias arma yade 138 0 
instant they reached Ayodhya, filled with the) dasa amata seen qarsnit i 
Brāhmaņas, Ksattriyas, Vai$yas, and Südras; and| emerat wernt: wrdsmemsd TATA t 39 ll 
Indra exclaimed to them all: ‘Let all the citizens! He then got up and took his seat in the aerial car 


come before Hariscandra, without any delay. that has no equal and that goes at will. It was 
amag sr: Vie veteris Ysera n 31 n beautifully adorned, very rare even to the Devas 
aiaa edens g 1 and decked with bells emitting jingling Kinkini 
zR matana RAA: 320 sounds. The high-souled Śukrācārya versed in the 
we wat mi feeuregmenfüfe | Sastras and the Guru of the Daityas, seeing 


Today they all will go to the Heavens by virtue| Hari$candra in the Vimāna, spoke thus: 
of the Punyams of Harišcandra. Thus saying, they Um Tart 


took all the men to Hari$candra. Then that religious ardt foraner aret TEN | 
King told his subjects, ‘let you all now ascend with werd RIA wiser WART 40 d 


me to the Heavens." A : 
Oh! What is the glorious result of forbearance 


NT Sn (Titiksa)! What is the great fruit of charity! Oh! 
ater wur FT VITA D ara: 033 N Due to whose influence, the King HariScandra 
a tary frfivemat ei agg d i today has attained the some region with 
wer peA fasurmeegsu 134 0 Mahendra! 
frames: aad maA: d qa sam 


Süta said: Hearing these words of Indra and their we adored efter feqq | 
King, they all became very glad. Then those who a: JAR a gr: wg ensem u "TET 
were engaged in their worldly desires, they handed carte KITT garelf sprureer | 
over the charge of their worldly concerns to their amat : F TY, 
own sons, gladly became ready to go up to the aft ined > ) a wera ) 


Heavens. : 
TAXISTA: 11 27 11 
amague mfia: n \ 
MN Rasa ees Stta said: Thus I have described to you all the 


mAsa ara RAT ETT: | doings of Hari$candra. Any man, oppressed with 


. f R veu Je ns d sorrows and troubles, no doubt, attains constant 
md Gece wies wr d happiness, if he hears it. What more than this, those 


pores erat fngert Gardi qgeturt 37 u who want Svarga get Svarga, those who want son 


The high-minded King Hariscandra then! set sons, those who want wife get wife, and those 


installed his son Rohitasva on the royal throne and! who want kingdoms get their kingdoms by hearing 
permitted him to go the beautiful city Ayodhya, this incident. 


filled with jolly and healthy inhabitants. Next Here ends the Twenty-seventh Chapter of the 


addressing his son and friends, he took leave of Seventh Book on the going of Hariscandra 
them. Thus, by virtus of his own good deeds, the to the Heavens in the Mahāpurāņam 
King Hariscandra attained great celebrite. Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam, of 18,000 


um atttageri fauriu uģtufā: l verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. 


Book VII Chapter XXVIII 


627 


CHAPTER XXVIII 
On the Glory of Sataksi Devi 


WAN Sarat 

fafwrafirqumenri Rara AAT | 

Varetu adult aid N 

magi RT Hat Atat «eit scent fyran i 

ATT ae at meh WAT Od wm 2 

Janamejaya said: Rsi! Wonderful is the story of 
the religious Rājarsi Hari$candra that you have 
described, the great Bhakta of Sataksi Devi! Why 
is that auspicious Siva, the wife of Siva, called 
Šatāksī? Explain to me, the cause of it, O Muni! 
And thus make my birth full of use and success. 

wr fe cea yr una ygi: | 

Wd SANA AMA ! 3 N 

Who is there amongst the clear minded that 
gets fully satisfied, when he hears the good deeds 
of the Devi? Each sentence, describing the good 
deeds of the Devi, gives the undecaying fruits of 
Ašvamedha Sacrifice. 

eur Sav 

TO Usa vrarafrereret gren i 

warared «p faktoru feet uad 

Vyasa said: O, King. Hear; I am describing the 
story of Sataksi Devi. You are the great devotee 
of the Devi; so I have nothing that I cannot say to 
you. 
grund: mga: wd MAET: 1 

Ruaa wat wegat TERN 5 dd 

Sarat qp ari dat are wem wu erf 1 

deieta a weet fads maa wq d 6 u 

In olden times, there was a great Dànava named 
Durgama; he was very cruel. He, the son of Ruru, 
was born in the family of Hiranyaksa. [Once he 
thought within himself thus: “The Munis offer 
oblations by Mantras as ordained in the Vedas. 

feuggüewusraf wa: cmd area 1 

TENT AST Maa STRE ARSA 07 i 


maada da wt Wu | 

THT TT ATHY SAAT: WATT: d 8 I 

And the Devas, eating the clarified butter (ghee) 
of these oblations, get nurtured and strenghened. | 
The Vedas is the strength of the Devas; if the Vedas 
be destroyed, the Devas also would be destroyed. 
Thus it is advisable to destroy the Vedas. (There is 
no other easy way.) Thus thinking, he went to the 
Himalayas to perform tapasya. He began to 
meditate Brahma in the space of his heart, and, 
taking air only, passed away his time. 

aa: Weal swargarscaqdu: | 

wdt at at ad o wssmuugss 19 ui 

warts vfrfererat EEE ATL: | 

wi a WA dt aa wae add nion 

[Mark here that all the Devas reside in space, a 
magnitude of the Fourth Dimension.] He practised 
hard tapaysa for one thousand years and the Devas 
and the Asuras and all the Lokas were agitated by 
the power of his Tejas (fiery lustre). Then the 
Bhagavan, the four-faced Brahma, became pleased 
with him and mounting on his carrier, the Swan 
came up there to grant him the boon. Brahma told 
clearly the Demon, sitting in Samadhi with his eyes 
closed, ‘Let all be well with you; now ask what 
you desire?’ 

Tare ara get NASENNE: | 

IM TEATS egfeer: w MATA: u 11 0 

gara at ga aarefe Wü d 

fap Ahy a AT araa wbefu 12 N 

“Satisfied with your tapasya, I have come to 
grant you the boon.” Hearing thus, the Demon got 
up from his Samadhi and worshipping Him duly, 
said: "O, Lord of the Devas! Give me all the Vedas. 

fad à g wen am aT ÈN | 

act a af da mami a een: 0 10300 


O, Mahešvara! Let all the Vedic Mantrams, that 


828 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


are found in the three worlds, with the Brāhmaņas 
and the Devas, come to me and give me such 
strength as would enable me to conquer the Devas.” 

Bid ea ea: spear TASHA qur aud i 

WTA Were g ugdēgu we og14ü 

wer fep Rae carer: | 

FRETKA: 15 

Hearing this, the God Brahma, the author of the 
four Vedas, replied "Let it be as you wish." and 
went away. Form that time, the Brāhmaņas forgot 
all about the Vedas. So bathing, Sandhya, daily 
Homas, Sraddha, sacrifice, and Japam and other 
rites and performances, all became extinct. 

facer gè werent ETA, | 

faii fenfire ate faut wa: UTT u 16 u 

Then a cry of universal distress arose on the 
surface of this wide earth; the Brahmins began to 
say to each other: "How has this happened! How 
has this come to pass! Now what are we to do? 
Where the Vedas have disappeared. 

GATITATRGTRTĀT: aded eva: wo i 

sft wat maY md aE 0017 u 

fasit: HST smear efersaimersaraa: | 

ele U wer deat auna is i 

STRAT A g asīder gm | 

Thus when great calamities befell on the earth, 
the Devas became gradually weaker and weaker, 
not getting their share of the sacrifice Havis. At 
this time, that Demon invested the city of 
Amarávati. And the Devas, not being able to fight 
with the Asura, of a thunder-like body fled to 
various directions. 

Tetras ear Heat Pater feretur: afer 19 u 

feat frg amg u ! 

Gite: UTT VI caret WANT t 20 u 

ardt gtareremanq qegsmtsur sn i 

They took refuge in the caves of the mountain 
Sumeru and the inaccessible passes of the mountain 
and began to meditate on the Highest Force, the 
Great Goddess. O King! When oblations of 


clarified butter are offered to the Fire, those get 
transferred to the Sun (Süryaloka) and get trans- 
formed as rains. 


GTA Hyh Pret arf spen 421 oN 

wurden wf: penat TT: | 

wagered Tomu maA n220 

Ya: WAIST ACA AAP AAETAT | 

So when the Homa ceremonies disappeared, 
there was the scarcity of rain. The earth became 
quite dry and not a drop of water was found 
anywhere. The wells, tanks, pools, rivers all were 
dried up. And this sate of ‘no rains’ lasted one 
hundred years. Countless people, hundreds and 
thousands of cows, buffaloes and other beasts went 
to the jaws of death. 


Te We Kg HU: 123 N 

sae cda aero: VITA: d 

reat Ruaa: wy fate: rang 24 u 

The dead bodies of persons remained in heaps 
in every house; persons would not be found to 
perform their burning ceremonies. When such 
calamities were seen, the calm and quiet body of 
the Brahmana, in their earnestness to worship the 
Supreme Goddess, went to the Himalayas. 

wR ZARA | 

PETERA ATA VNU A: U25 N 

gai Ge weft ummy wy fe | 

qanaq hg Adee waif 1 26 nn 

They with their whole heart and without taking 
any food began to worship the Devi daily with their 
Samadhi, meditation and worship. ^O Mahešānī! 
Shew mercy on us. O Mother! It's not praisworthy 
to Thee to manifest Thy such anger on us, the low 
persons and guilty of all sins. 

alt dex daft vafratftrafāt 1 

wre areas HU A TAT T: 127 N 

So, O Devešvarī! Forgive us. If Thou art angry 
on us for our faults, even then we may be excused, 
for Thou art the Internal Ruler within us all and 
we do whatever. Thou impellest us to do. (The other 


Book VII Chapter XXVIII 


829 


Devas become pleased and give fruits when they 
are worshipped by Japam, and other Homa 
ceremonies; but that is not even possible due to 
the disappearance of the Vedic Mantrams from 
amongst us. But You are kind as mothers are 
towards their children whenever they remember.) 

"rear festinare fd; wate YA: YA: | 

adas dur wd wueisfr ata u28 i 

Wan Vey Hera | 

stars fermens et verfecarfeifar u 29 1 

wate «i een wa maiak 1 

amanare qd AA AA: 030 I 

So without Thee, there is no other rescue for 
these people. O Mahešvarī! Whatever Thou willest, 
Thou canst do that; so what art Thou seeing again 
and again? O Mahešānī! How can we live without 
Water, whatis called the Life. Now rescue us from 
this great difficulty. O Mother of the Worlds! O 
Mahešvarī! Be pleased. Oh the Ruler of the endless 
crores of Brahmandas! Obeisance to Thee! We bow 
down to Thee, the Unchangeable, of the nature of 
Intelligent. 

"H:cperenwsura Fagard utu: 

"Hr darian Ways AAT A 031 N 

afer ether ardat areas BHATT: 1 

at wader edt adda wae: 1 32 N 

aft imm Sch vers weet 1 

grifam wed ahea urddi 433 n 

We again and again make obeisance to Thee, 
the Lady of the Universe and realisable by the 
Vedanta words (not this, not this). All the sayings 
of the Vedànta declare Thee, by negating (not this, 
not this) other transient objects as the Cause of all 
this Universe. We with all our hearts bow down to 
the Devi.” When the body of the Brahmanas thus 
praised and chanted the hymns of Mahešvarī, She 
created innumerable eyes within Her body and 
became visible. 

Raine AeA i 

TAAS KAA 3AN 


anè a act YAAR, | 

miadan AA N35 N 

gaaer Aia A Ae: | 

wdatiedat agi marania 36 M 

Her colour was dark-blue (colour of the fourth 
dimension, space) like heaps of collyrium (eye- 
paint); eyes like the blue lotuses and expanded; 
breasts hard, regularly elevated round and so fleshy 
that they touched cach other, four handed; with 
Her right hand, holding arrows; on the under hand 
holding lotus; on the upper left hand holding a great 
bow and on the lower hand, carrying vegetables, 
fruits, flower and roots with abundance of juice, 
destroying hunger, thirst and fever. 

aaiftgdudtamgi AUT | 

aia EÀ MSAA 37 N 

Meana AA RT: REAN: | 

BEI nergftunatadstā: 11 38 Uu 

She was the Essence of all Beauty, lovely, 
luminous like the thousand Suns, and the ocean of 
mercy. That Upholder of the Universe, showed— 
Her form and began to shed waters from Her eyes. 
For nine nights continuouslyj, the heavy rains 
poured down out of the waters flowing from Her 
eyes. 

gaada enerorarrfor agad i 

Adama tt eirenr aie: ATT amfü 1 39 U 

adagun ie: UAA | 

Preia iRam: ge qee Pater af: u 40 u 

fürfereat SERT far edt wafigg: | 

m Aad A aM aena 41 ud 

Seeing the misery of all the people, out of pity, 
She showered incessantly tears from Her eyes; and 
all the people and medicines were satisfied. What 
more than this, out of those tears, the rivers began 
to flow. The Devas that remained hidden in the 
mountain caves, now came out. Then the Brahmins, 
united with the Devas, began to praise and sing 
hymns to the Devi. Thou art known by the Vedanta 
Mahāvākyas. We bow down to Thee. 


830 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


verum west A rīt AA: d 

amacage tf were agurRutt 42 n 

faga finu qadah a am | 

TERS GAT were 0 43 t 

Thou ordainest everything to all the worlds by 
Thy Maya; so again and again we bow down to 
Thee. Our Obeisance to Thee! Who art a Kalpa 
tree to the Bhaktas yielding all their desires! Thou 
assumest the body for the Bhaktas! Thou art always 
satisfied; without any equal; the Lord of the 
Universe! We bow down to Thee. 

var st eet afar greraft eai Tat spar | 

agerem Afen ma: verter rfe ALT T: 1 44 N 

wut mm newts darauf | 

As Thou, O Devi! hast innumerable eyes only 
for our welfare and peace, therefore Thou wilt be 
called henceforth by the name *Šatāksī.” O Mother! 
We are very much hungry; so we have no power 
to chant hymns to Thee; therefore, O Mahesani? 
Shew mercy on us and deliver to us our Vedas.” 


eum Savery 


Bea tat Tet: ca TATA TTT 14 St 

TAG merger wame «at fran i 

referent rrenfsr UNAS ATT TN 46 11 

ATT md tad zhi 

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing these words of The 
Devas and the Brāhmins, the Auspicious One gave 
them the vegetables, delicious fruits and roots to 
them that were on Her Hand, for their eating. After 
She was prayed, She gave to men sufficient 
quantity of various articles of juice food and to the 
beasts, grass, etc., until new crops came out. 

wwe mum ARNAT 0047 di 

Aa: Heer ST qme ALT: 1 

WaT: urget ur gts gt eet u 48 0 

O King, from that day She became famous by 
the name of Sakambhari (becasue She nourished 
all by vegetables, etc.) Great tumult arose and the 
Demon Durgama heard all from the emissaries and 
started out to fight with his weapons and army. 


mmg: maiaa: | 
ele aA eA furi wg ngo ti 

amw Raymi da terarara waa: | 

aa: freeones: MARTESA 50 N 

ale area ara wry: ad fest: l 

aana ah tara Ra: fat u51 n 

He took one thousand Aksauhini armies with 
him (one Aksauhini army equals large army 
consisting of 21,870 chariots, as many elephants, 
65,610 horses, and 109,350 foot) and, shooting 
arrows, he came quickly before the Devi and 
invested Her and the Devas army and the Brahmins. 
At this, a great tumultuous uproar arose and the 
Devas and the Brahmins united exclaimed: ‘O 
Devi! Save us; save us.’ 

egre TATA ed TET: FEAT | 

Ta: TAMAS CoM KATE May: 52 u 

mata AS AG A d 

us3 I 

The Auspicious Devī, then, for the safety of the 
Devas and the Dvijas created round them a 
luminous circle and She Herself remained 
outside. The terrible fight, then, ensued between 
the Devi and the Danavas. The Sun was covered 
with their incessant hurling of arrows; and the 
shooters could not shoot accurately on account of 
the darkness that then prevailed. Then by the 
collision of the arrows of both the parties, the 
arrows caught fire and the battlefield agian 
became filled with light. 

wmélurewrennafuqfemem 1 

aA weigh fefemdiaymmem: n54 N 

miaa RoR a Prga Aht vum i 

ATT wa adit an fared 55 u 

carmel gan edt sifsrft aT rem 1 

fare TAM! AER 0656 N 

The quarters on all sides resounded with harsh 
bow sounds and nothing could be heard. At this 
moment, came, out of the body of the Devi, the 
principal Saktis (forces incarnate) Kālikā, Tāriņī, 


Book VII Chapter XXVIII 


631 


PES! 
Sodasi, Tripura, Bhairavi, Kamala, Bagala, 


Mātangī, Tripura Sundari, Kamaksi, Tulajā Devi, 
Jambhini, Mohini, Chinnamastā, and ten thousand 
armed Guhya Kālīs and others. 

Sara aay ET: WT: | 

IBM oT: MAG AAEM: N 57 N 

stadiona i i 
render g sATA n58 it 

suh curseur Aa: i 

wifenfür: wg epu He Was RY: u 59 1 

Thirty-two Saktis, sixty-four Saktis, and then 
innumerable Saktis, all armed, came out of the Devi 
successively. When the Sakits destroyed one 
hundred Aksauhini forces, Mrdangas, conch-shells, 
Lutes and other musical instruments were sounded 
in the battle-field. At this time, the enemy of the 
Devas, Durgama, came in front and first fought 
with the Saktis. 

waa maeng i 

aAa m: wat faer amA AA: 60 1 

m A umo fatma | 

THT ATATA: 61 N 

paaa ner q gaa verdfieena: | 

Hia ngm yrent: Mat RATE 062 0 

medha g card ANTA, | 

STATES Tor ST A: 63 N 

wera ECOEILCTECOE MEI 

ww: aame £64! 

The fight grew to such a terrible extent that, 
within ten days, all the Aksauhini troops were 
destroyed. So much so as the blood of the dead 
soldiers began to flow in torrents like rivers. When 
the fatal eleventh day arrived the Danava, wearing 
red clothes on his waist, red garlands on his neck 
and annointing his body all over with red sandal 
paste, celebrated a very grand festivity and mounted 
on his chariot and went out to fight. With the 
strenuous effort, he defeated all the Saktis and 
placed his chariot before the Devi. Then a terrible 
fight ensued for two Praharas (six hours). The 


hearts of all shivered with horror. At this time, the 
Devi shot fifteen very awful arrows at the Danava. 

aghiasgà aerate RT 1 

BTA wet great eats ufum 11 65 N 

watided wer fene mafiaa | 

Weal amu wf wart yt df: Neon 

His four horses (Vahanas) were pierced by Her 
four arrows; the charioteer was pierced by one 
arrow; his two eyes were pierced by two arrows; 
his arms by two arrows, his flag by one arrow and 
his heart was pierced by five arrows. He then left 
his body before the Devi, vomitting blood. The 
vital spirit, the luminous counterpart, emitting from 
his body, merged in the space like body of the Devi. 

wea dmg Frater de faddy € 1 

Ba dare ITT 67 i 

ad wares: ad quastéfennu i 

TG güsmát sacar TAGAT FAT 68 N 

The three worlds, then, assumed a peaceful 
appearance when that greatly powerful Danava was 
killed. Then Hari, Hara, Brahma and the other 
Devas began to praise and chant hymns to the 
World Mother with great devotion and in voices, 
choked with feelings. 

al Sy: 

SRTSTHÉGere eh CUT Wa 1 

"TH: mh fora RT WR 69 

wafufmgque POLIR ES LEU G 1 

at meat fre waarmee 11 70 0 

The Devas said: “O Auspicious One! Thou art 
the only Cause of this Illusions of this world, 
presenting an ureal appearance (while Brahma is 
the Only Reality). So Thou art the Lady of all the 
beings (otherwise why it would be that Thou hast 
nourised all the beings with vegetables, etc.) So, 
Obeisance to Thee, the Sakambhari! Hundred- 
eyed! O Auspicious One! Thou art sung in all the 
Upanisads! The Destroyer of the Durgama Asura! 
We bow down to Thee, the Lord of Maya, the 
Dweller in the five sheaths Anna, Rasa, etc. 


832 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


aren Afan at gardfer gA: à 

marasa at SSTA gA 77 u 

RESEDIPI EIE SERI afa | 

serfererarfeerr-ft anA eun u72 N 

We meditate upon Thee, the Lady of the 
universe, as demonstrated by Pranava Aum, whom 
the chief Munis meditate with their Nirvikalpa 
hearts (hearts free from any Vikalpa, doubts or 
ignorance). Thou art the Mother of the endless 
crores of universe! Thou assumest the Divine 
Bodies at times for our welfare! Thou art the 
Mother of Brahma, Visnu and others; we bow down 
to Thee with all our heart. 

A: gatare Wet WAAN: | 

naai KZT varat mat feat n73 ou 

Thou art the Mother of all; so out of mercy, Thou 
hast shed tears from the hundred eyes, to remove 
the miseries of the low humble persons. Thou art 
the Ruler of all!” : 


CUT gara 

sfa xqar uidet anrferrarfefsrdt: 1 

yie farfartriodt: Hqursspeur vest 11 74 n 

Vyasa said: O King! Thus when Brahma, Visnu, 
Hara and the other Devas praised and chanted 
various hymns to the Devi and worshipped Her 
with various excellent articles, She became 
instantly pleased. 

FoR At aaa AMATIEM RT sat | 

argrttait AAA nara füenerfat 75 u 

Wi agen maden faga: 1 

wea farsa war smit ggtsspre f& 076 N 

Then the Devi, graciously pleased, handed over 
the Vedas to the Brahmanas. At last, She, the 
Cukoo-voiced, made a special address to them. 
“These Vedas are the excellent parts of My body. 
So preserve these with your greatest care. The more 
so when you all have seen with your own eyes what 
a great calamity befell on you taken these Vedas 
went away out of your hands! 

yens Ader Ger Geis waa fè i 

ATA uns fafarncarorarafagad u77 0 


usha niafg mard dendum | 

Aa Ger tacts Kart Tats sue: 78 u 

You should all worship and serve Me (the 
Controller of the Space) always; there is no other 
thing higher than this I can advise you for your 
welfare. Read always these My excellent glorious 
deeds I will be pleased thereby and will destroy all 
your bad calamities and misfortunes. 

gtgetargīit mr am a: | 

Tarte a yengi arat rear aaa i 79 i 

Tene ATA Iga Art STRIP rad: | 

HAns war gar weft ut uso 

My name is Durga, because I have killed this 
demon Durgama; so he, who will take My name 
Durga and Sataksi, he will be able to unveil my 
Maya and walk freely. No use in telling more than 
this, that I tell you now, O Devas, the Essence of 
all essences: “Both the Suras and the Asuras would 
always serve Me and Me, alone.’ 


aa saru 


ragi Se Sarat Sa wea | 
wad ueegaasttutt usi 

i said: O King! Thus giving pleasures to 
the Devas by these words, the Devi of the nature 
of Existence, Intelligence and Bliss disappeard 
before them. 

Vad uimed wei Uu WE d 

Todt Varta Adama, u82 

O King! This Grand Mystery I have described 
to you in detail; but this is the source of good to 
all; so keep it secret with every care. 

"p sad yopaman wiegen | 

qatanari deteitāi drat us3u 

efr SRRA HERO) FARE- 
SOUP MST: 11 28 11 

The person that hears daily with great devotion 
this Chapter, gets all that he wants and at last gets 
the worship in the Devī Loka. 

Here ends the Twenty-eighth Chapter of the Seventh 
Book on the glory of the Satàksi Devi in the 
Mahāpurāņam Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam, of 18,000 
verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. 


Book VII Chapter XXIX 


833 


CHAPTER XXIX 
On the Devi's Birth in the Daksa's House 


Card Sarat 


werd wdevarrto wat ARTA i 
sido a alta war feq uou 
mR Hert MRAR 1 
Tera fag TRIKĀTĀ: u2 N 
Vyasa said: O King! Thus I have described the 
glory of the Devi. Now I will narrate, as far as I can, 
the excellent lives of the kings of the the Solar and 
the Lunar dynasties respectively. They all attained 
their excellent glories, simply because they were 
favoured by the Grace of the Highest Sakti; they 
were all the great devotees of the Supreme Deity. 


Pardee oN AMAT NN 4 d 

All their prowess, bravery, prosperity and all 
their glory, know that those all were derived from 
the mere parts of hte Para Sakti. O King! Those 
Kings and others as well were able to cut off the 
Tree of this World by the Axe of their Knowledge, 
simply because they were the devotees of the Para 
Sakti. 

ATA HAN ga | 

Vetra dar wrest: usn 

eme dagremfēti ret ved WaT TT | 

Wasa papes eag dd: 6! 

So with all the care possible, the Lady of the 
Universe is to be worshipped and served. Men 
should avoid worshipping any other gods, as people 
avoid the husk to get the grain inside. O King! By 
churning the ocean of the Vedas, I have got the 
jewel as the lotus-feet of the Para Sakti; and I think 
that I have discharged all my duties and think 
myself satisfied and successful. 

CARIN WT ALT HIST SAT | 

WW Ua Here UXPHEIRQ ATT 47 U 


53 


gurah ag Asarni i 

"fime a wrt a da sagi ns n 

Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, and Ivara are the four 
feet and Sada Šiva is the plank over head; thus 
these five form the seat on which the Devi is seated. 
There is no other deity superior to Her. To shew 
this (to the ordinary ignorant people) the Maha 
Devi has taken seat composed of the five Brahma, 
Visnu, Rudra, ĪSvara and Suda Siva. 

amama T3 Ja yet water: | 

"er adage astra wat: 119 Uu 

Superior to these five, what is stated in the Vedas 
as Vyaktam and in which all this Universe in sewn, 
as it were, crosswise and lengthwise, lying in and 
through, that is Bhuvanešvarī, the Goddess of the 
Universe. 

Note: Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, lévara and Sada Siva 
are the Regents or the presiding Deities of earth, water, 
fire, air and Akasa. 

war Ramana gaai nra à 

ama gA mg: Amama: 110 di 

A CET TTT saya 

wie venere à 

wem Aaya SATA 01 

No man can be free unless he until the Goddess. 
When men will be able to encircle the Akasa, of 
the fourth dimension, as if it were an antelope skin, 
then they will be able to root out the miseries of 
the world, without knowing the nature of the Devi 
(i.e., impossible). Thus the Švetāšvataropanisad 
says: “Those that were engaged in meditation, 
Dhyana Yoga, they saw the Devi covered by the 
Gunas Sattva, Rajas and Tamas and the forces 
incarnate respectively of the several Devas.” 

SHAT SIT TAT AAT IT TTT | 

weet uftersa wal efe Freer ua 12 0 

ferent spafefa dareafsfen: l 

aa cha Aà aiaga n13 u 


834 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


RU N 
Soto make the human birth a success, first avoid 


all companies, be it out of shame, of fear, or 
devotion, or out of love; then bring the mind and 
keep it steady in your heart and then be devoted to 
Her and consider Her as the Supreme. This is the 
Vedanta Dindima (the declaration of the Vedanta). 
ariaa edi uw d geld qunm | 
wemeredgaeta Smp TATŪ 4014 0 
Whoever takes the name of the Devi, either in 
sleeping, going or resting or in any other condition, 
he is certainly freed from the bondage of the world, 
no doubt. O King! So worship the Māhešvarī with 
all the care that you can. 
farsu erat verteret féresfutta 1 
"rura: we wa: Wea qp Bat 15 d 
' Goon step by step; first worship Her Virat Rüpa 
(cosmic form); then Süksma Rüpa (subtle form) 
and then her Antaryāmī Ripa (inner form, ruling 
within). Thus when your heart is purified, worship 
the Para Sakti,of the nature of Brahma, beyond this 
Maya, this Prapafica Ullasa, of the nature of 
Existence, Intelligence and Bliss. 
TART at sremefauttq i 
amera UT rfe yiera T 11 16 ii 
vmi ferae ar: A AT SITE ATA | 
Waa WIHT eid WaT od 17 N 
When the Citta (heart) melts in Para Sakti, then 
comes the real Ārādhanā (the real worship). So 
dilute your heart in Her. O, King! Thus I have 
described to you the sanctifying deeds of the 
extremely devoted kings of the Para Sakti, who 
were noble minded and religious. 
wat cité dafad wWuRTWSN u 18 i 
One who will hear this will acquire fame, 
Dharma, intelligence, good end, and merits that 
have no equal. Now that else do you like to hear? 
«fari quad usin TTT i 
Atag 


wur y iTA t19 i 


wa KĀ amaiga a 
AU ware Tiri ate ferr 20 1 
Rds wate rereraftfifer gran | 
Wea Rat THe IAA: 21 
Janamejaya said: O Bhagavan! In olden times, 
the World-mother Para Sakti handed over Gauri 
to Hara, Laksmi to Hari, and Sarasvati to Brahma, 
born of the lotus from the navel of Hari. Now I 
hear that Gauri is the daughter of Himalaya as well 
of Daksa; and Maha Laksmi ts the daughter of the 
Ksiroda ocean (ocean of milk). They were all 
origirated from the Prime Devi; how, then, Gauri 
and Laksmi came to be the daughters of others? 

adiad sift Hs ARTA | 

faf aaa di ed disraedagen: 022 1 

O great Muni! This is next to impossible; so my 
doubt arises. O Bhagavan! You are quite competent 
to cut off all my doubts; so by your axe of 
knowledge, cut off my present doubt. 


ara Sar 

TT UTA IE UHR | 

adherent à fheara fF fore 1 23 u 

edit aa gaanaria | 

wafer & dar: geara aft 124 0 

Veda Vyasa said: O King! Hear. I am telling 
you this wonderful secret. You are greatly devoted 
to the Devi; so nothing there can be that I cannot 
disclose to you. Since the time the Great Mother 
gave over to Hara, and Brahma, Gauri, Laksmi 
and and Sarasvati, respectively, these three Devas, 
Hara, etc. were performing their task, preserving, 
etc. 

RATT TAIT ATTEN: 0 

FRR STARI asic aM N25 N 

went aga fr STĀSTA | 

seyi dueta a 426 

O King! Once on a time, certain Danavas, named 
Halāhalas were born. In time, they became very 
powerful and in a short time conqured the three 
worlds. What more then this, that they being elated 


Book VII Chapter XXIX 


835 


with the boon granted to them by Brahma, took 
their forces and invested the Mount Kailāša and 
the Vaikuntha regions! 

RR: emu gA A wg: | 

ukatae MARZH 027 it 

WINE neama: | 

TEST Vata AVA À gTTAT BAT: UG N 

Seeing this, Maha Deva and Visnu both made 
preparations for war. A terrible fight ensued 
between both the parties. For sixty thousand years 
the battle lasted incessantly but the result was 
stalemate. Gradually there was a great cry of 
consternation in the two parties. 

ATG Tea TATA ESTERI: | 

wengraeatista;2: TIGRA FEAT: 29 

erred reize Beret WR: | 

Nereti wiih a erat quar wary dt i 30 u 

When Siva and Visnu with great effort destroyed 
the Dànavas. O King! Siva and Visnu then returned 
to their own houses and began to brag of their 
powers before their own Saktis Gauri and Laksmi; 
whereas the Demons were killed on account of the 
Saktis of Gauri and Laksmi. Seeing them boast, 
Gauri and Laksmi laughed not sincerely whereon 
the two gods were very much angry. 

Weredta Hga aifeararfenrerat | 

SM COC CICS: 031 

Ae gad AAT TAA q AT GA: | 

arated UTT grERETCRTQI WAT ! 32 ! 

They under the magic spell of the Prime Maya 
insulted them and even used offensive languages. 
Gauri and Laksmi quitted them and disappeared. 
A great uproar then arose in the worlds. Both Hari 
and Hara became lustreless due to their insulting 
the two Saktis. 

frere er fra faire vr ara à 

SATA TA: srecdreridt Stadt war i 33 N 

wen Permit sia: Parga Ra, i 

part taamedt Het VETUÍBTHTSU 34 tt 


They become powerless and unconscious and 


turned out mad. Seeing this Brahma became very 
anxious. Hari and Hara are the two chief Deities; 
how then these two have be come unable to perform 
the actions of the world! What is the cause? 

ares: fd Pras dad emque | 

gerat aferar fee er Gats Tu Prva: 35 N 

Aira da asd ad erat uferfieur | 

gla Roag gt vfferaeiere: 1136 1 

Why this calamity has sprung up out of season? 
Will there be a Pralaya (a general dissolution) of 
the world out of some offence, when no actions 
are being done! I know nothing about this. So how 
can J find a remedy! Being thus very distressed, he 
began to meditate with his eyes closed in the fourth 
dimensional space in the heart. 

VSK, matēta ug | 

Weta MATA: VuTeHssTQ dT 4 37 Ut 

adi wenn venere eer | 

RITI usar fasercenret TAA: i 38 UI 

O King! The Lotus born Brahmā then found out 
by his meditation that this calamity was brought 
about by the great wrath of the Parà Sakti. He then 
tried to find out the remedy until Hari and Hara 
did not regain their former natural position. Brahma 
began by his own Sakti to carry on the functions 
of them both, viz., that of preservation and 
destruction for some time. 

AKT KIT Harel Agrar | 

ITGATATU waren MAA AT: 11 39 |i 

sara Ari Ava: aA AET: 1 

FARSEN AU: chi U SIR: ll 40 il 

The religious-minded Prajāpati guickly called 
his son Manu and Sanaka, etc., the Rsis, for 
bringing peace on the two great Gods! When they 
came to him, the great ascetic four-faced Brahmā 
told them: “I am now busy with many more works; 
so I am unable to carry on my tapasyā? 

WUT THEY TT SAT NAST | 

foraferon a farfürdt VISTU: 47 u 


By the wrath of the Highest Force, Hari and Hara 


836 Srimaddevibhagavatam 


have become somewhat distracted; so for the! Rather that family where the two Saktis will take 
satisfaction of the Para Sakti I am performing the | their birth, will purify the whole world and that 
three functions, i.e., those of Creation, Preservation | man himself be crowned with success.” 
and Destruction. IU JATA 

wem per M RR waz y | RARER: gar m: a et 

: Rata: wd wememfeueme 45 i 
aan at ydg a carat iragana | PRET nena ome 
aM Hed Aga azitgfgstāfa a: 11 43 0 "m 
Va SUME 0029 1 


So you both practise this hard tapasyā with the 
greatest devotion and bring about Her satisfaction. 
O my sons! Do such as Hari and Hara gain their 
former states and then be united with their own 


Vyasa said: O King! The pure-hearted Daksa 
and other mind-born sons of Brahma, hearing the 
words of the Grandsire, expressed their desire to 
AK . EUM worship the Para Sakti and went to the forest. 
Saktis respectively. Your fame will increase Here ends the Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Seventh 
thereby, no doubt. Book on the birth of the Bhagavati in the house of 

era Seg Ta: Week AAT | Daksa in the Mahāpurāņam Srimaddevibhagavatam 

mAn wat magi tre A 44 tl of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


4 Y1ATYTT^ ID) VVV 


836 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER XXX 


On the Birth of Gauri and Siva’s Distraction 


eae Sara 

WA g aAest RAATI: | 

maiaa AE: RRT: Ud U 

gaai umi Rh agasan | 

wa: Wear edt m yag ayi gA a2 n 

Vyasa said: O King! They went to the forest 
and fixed their seats on the slopt of the Himalayan 
mountain and engaged themselves in repeating 
silently the seed Mantra of Maha Maya and thus 
practised their austerities. O King! One hundred 
thousand years passed in the meditation of the Para 
Sakti. The Devi pleased became visible to them. 

t 

GTM tagat? us 

gat oat wdsnrdiquguautsmem: | 

amet fared agra ua u 

Her form was three-eyed, and of the form of 
Existence, Intelligence and Bliss (Saccidananda); 
She was filled with mercy. In Her one hand there 
was the noose, in another hand, goad; in another 
hand there was the sign bidding her devotees 


discard all fear, and in the other hand She was ready 
to offer boons. 

ame TTA TA: | 

afta-ad fenTegr sttagtarerattuam: 15 u 

at: mean mispaa | 

AM: Were cuu: aera 6 tl 

mA wdeudt cedem 1 

gf gear siat shearer fin 7 u 

The good-natured Munis, seeing this Form of 
the World Mother began to praise Her. "O Devi! 
Thou art existing separately in every gross body; 
we bow down to Thee. Thou art existing wholly 
(cosmically) in all the gross bodies; we bow down 
to Thee. O Paramešvarī! Thou art existing 
separately in every subtle body; we bow down to 
Thee; Thou art existing universally in all the subtle 
bodies; we bow down to Thee, Thou art existing 
separately in all the causual bodies wherein all the 
Linga Dehas (subtle bodies) are interwoven; we 
bow down to Thee. Thou art existing universally 


in all the causal bodies; we bow down to Thee. 


Book VH Chapter XXX 


837 


Thou art of the nature of the unchangeable Brahma, 
the receptacle of all the Jivas and thus residest in 
all the bodies; so we bow down to Thee. Thou art 
of the nature of Atman, the Goal of all the beings; 
we bow again and again to Thee.” 

yiga WemET AASA: | 

wa: wear ur cat Nara Aaf n 8 n 

at wg WEDHUID ASE Wat HAT | 

Thus the pure-natured Daksa and the other 
Munis praised Her with voice, choked with feelings 
of intense devotion and bowed down to Her feet. 
Then the Devi, pleased, spoke to them in a cuckoo 
voice. ^O Highly Fortunate Ones! I am ever ready 
to grant boons; so ask what you desire." 

ATG Ari spear Seaway: WW u 9 N 

waürereefeemd a afāt gadu | 

Weser Taare Wat Vf Het WH od TO 

O King! Hearing thus, they asked that Hari and 
Hara both regain their natural states and be united 
respectively with their Saktis, Laksmi and Gauri. 
Daksa again asked: "O Devi! Let your birth be in 
my family. 

qatar GATE pap wa zh od 

wa ead ar Gott tars faery a N 

ae UH weft Tata MAMA d 

O Mother! I will, no doubt, consider myself as 
having then realised the fulfilment of my life. So, 
O Paramešvarī! Speak by Thy own mouth how Thy 
worship, Japam, meditation will be conducted as 
well the various fit places where they would be 
performed.” 


garar 

aeaaea SaN Taga: 11 12 lt 

Adie: vader ASUNA: FATA | 

SAT APU SITE TALAT Ta: 0 13 0 

frei at À rat cere afte | 

virgae TNT ura: VRS Wen N 14 N 

The Devi said: "The insult shewn towards my 
Saktis has led to this calamitious state of Hari and 
Hara. So they should not repeat such crime. Now, 


by My favour, they will regain their health and of 
the two Saktis, one will be born in your family and 
the other will take Her birth in the Ksiroda Sagara, 
the ocean of milk. Hari and Hara will get back their 
Saktis, when I will send them the chief Mantra. 

marii ft creat tt uper PRET: Ger | 

exi ĪRE d Bs eran RT: fern 0 15 i 

"feared at wart ad FTA | 

prr ada are Gen erat a aay 16 N 

The chief Mantra of Mine is the said Mantra of 
Maya; this is always sweet to Me; so worship this 
Mantra and make japam of this. The Form that you 
are seeing before you, this is My Bhuvanešvarī 
form (that of the Goddess of the Universe), or 
worship My Virāt (cosmic) form; or Saccidānanda 
form. The whole world is my place of worship; so 
you can meditate on Me and worship Me always 
and in all places.” 

eqn Saray 

sagaaiadi «dt aforgtarkerarhaH à 

GATT Heu: We wumub Wawa: 1 17 N 

want wdguid Ranga, | 

at after taal at aaa qu u 18 u 

Vyasa said: When the Bhuvanešvarī Devi living 
in the Mani Dvipa thus giving Her reply, went 
away, Daksa and other Munis all went to Brahma 
and informed him with great earnestness of 
everything that happened. O King! Thus Hari and 
Hara both became devoid of their haughtiness and 
got back their previous natures by the Grace of the 
Supreme Deity and were thus enabled to perform 
their functions as before. 

mA Gierguar dur hat wur | 

FAAA GT WE: MARTRA N 19 N 

BANS ET AASS HAT, | 

dar: gR: we yagi u aft 200 

Then, on a certain time, the Devi Bhagavatt, 
the Fiery Nature of the Para Sakti, took Her birth 
in the house of the Prajapati Daksa. O King! 
Everywhere in the Trilokas, great festivities were 


838 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


held. All the Devas became glad and showed 
flowers. l 

RTA: wat AE gu | 

TART aT AEAT 012 1 N 

afta mia: gas RAR: | 

Arai g aai ad HdA APT 22 N 

The Dundubhis of the Devas were sounded by 
the hands and made very grave sounds. The pure- 
minded saints were gladdened; the Sun’s rays 
looked purer and cleaner; the rivers were elated 
with joy and began to flow in their channels. When 
the World-auspicious Devi, the Destroyer of the 
birth and death of the Jivas, took Her birth, 
everything looked propitious. 

sme are UTT ēra: i 

«dr ya: Brava vea VHT AS aT w 23 N 

a gate wer Wer 1 

The wise Munis named Her ‘Sati’ as She was 
of the nature of Para Brahma and Truth Herself. 
The Prajāpati Daksa handed over the Devi, who 
was before the Sakti of Mahadeva, to that Deva of 


«avt deft caret Arareltst wma E: 027 N 
' Vyasa said: O King! Hear. I am describing to 
you the ancient history of the burning of Sati. Once 
on a time, the famous Rsi Durvāsā went to the bank 
of the river Jambü and saw the Devi there. There 
he remained with his senses controlled and began 
to repeat silently the root Mantra of Maya. 

Wea: Wr «aft Ararat eren | 

GAGA AKAI 028 0 

«dtr verayat at sae forcer uhr: | 

wet Foie aren catrantor ara: £029 0 

ATT E TT Sat: TATA TĀM | 

washer aaa N wudluà 3011 

Then the Goddess of the Immortals, ihe Bhagavatī 
was pleased and gave the Muni a beantiful garland 
as Her Prasāda that was on Her neck, that emitted 
the sweet fragrance of Makaranda (juice of flowers; 
Jasamine). Whereon the bees were about to cluster. 
The Maharsi took it quikly and placed it on his 
head. He then hurriedly went to see the Mother to 
the place where Sati’s Father, the Prajapati Daksa 


the Devas, Mahadeva. Due to the misforune of | was staying and bowed down to the feet of the Sati. 


Daksa, the daughter of Daksa burnt Herself in a 
blazing fire. 
WANT IATE 

adamant mad aa YÀ 4240 

vmi m set gi KAT od 

wares Haas AE u25 N 

wa miaa catered aga fe 1 

Janamejaya said: O Munis! You have made me 
now hear a very inauspicious word. How can such 
a great thing of the nature of the Highest Intelligence 
come to be burnt up in a fire! The mere recollecting 
of Whose Name dispels the terrible danger of the 
burning up by the fire of Sarhsara, how can She be 
burnt up by fire, 1 am extremely eager to hear; kindly 
describe that to me in detail. 


era Sara 


TTY WHT Ga Udder BUTT 0 26 U 
waren gata wat mauu 1 


ys aan a arate TC? | 

Be EN CaM ATU Geta wer Aa: 11 3 1 UI 

AeA Tat AT Wrara yA ATT: | 

wem: VAI PARATA: 32 li 

The Prajāpati then asked him: O Lord! Whose 
extraordinary garland is this? How have you got 
this enchanting garland, rare to the mortals on this 
earth! The eloquent Maharsi Durvāsā then spoke 
to him with tears of love flowing from his eyes: 
“O Prajapati! I have got this beautiful garland that 
has no equal, as the Prasāda) favour of the Devi. 

reta at arett ot utt a aA | 

arai vrfeerenra mfi reram N 3 3 1 

fs qp et rer Waa AG | 

état force mer ng fumer lt 34 N 

verfu IA ur quede. | 

The Prajapati asked that garland then from him. 
He, too, thinking that there was nothing in the three 


Book VII Chapter XXX 


839 


worlds that cannot be given to the devotee of the 
Sakti, gave that garland to the Prajāpati. He took 
that on his head; then placed it on the nice bed that 
was prepared in the bed-room of the couple. 

Wspeiedt wat ATEITTĀ NG: 4350 

anam «WENA WDR VIET | 

Rra Raia teat wea Wem TT 11 36 Li 

THAT ATT dē Ud U | 

Being exicted by the sweet fragrant smell of that 
garland in the night, the Prajapati engaged in a 
sexual intercourse! O King! Due to that animal 
action, the bitter enmity arose in his mind towards 
Sankara and His Sati. He then began to abuse Siva. 

wen anita qu: udterdfegarar 137 N 

gas forays MIGĀ wre | 

O King! For that offence, the Sati resolved to 
quit her body that was born of Daksa, to preserve 
the prestige of the Sanátan Darma of devotion to 
Her Husband and burnt Her body by the fire arising 
out of Yoga. 


HANTS IATA 


wear wader mA frmadfēga: 11 38 N 

monre Tu fitt enr: 1 

Janamejaya said: O Muni! What did Maha Deva 
do, thus pained by the bereavement from His 
consort dearer than His life, when the Sati' s body 
was thus consumed. 

SUTH Sarat 

da: Ut g wes WaT ath Wem 39 

Sreitaergerat rr: forerenrarisrat qu | 

Vyasa said: O King! I am unable to describe 
what happened afterwards. O King! Out of the fire 
of anger of Siva, the Pralaya seemed to threaten 
the three worlds. 

vera: waa SATO: u 40 u 

Feet dest wars TA | 

Virabhadra came into existence with hosts of 
Bhadra Kalis, ready to destory the three worlds. 
Brahma and the other Devas took refuge to 
Sankara. 


aema tat: TES SHUÉ ag: 041 tl 

sd ndas A mema: i 

aad gaiena aa TAT 042 i 

ASARAS aa: Rast wea: 1 

aaea ta uy: 1143 N 

Though Mahadeva lost everything on Sati's 
departure, He, the Ocean of Mercy, destroyed the 
sacrifice of Daksa, cut off his head and instead 
placed the head of a goat, brought him back to life 
and thus made the Gods free from all fears. He, 
the Deva of the Devas, then became very much 
distressed and going to the place of sacrifice, began 
to weep in great sorrow. 

angani wt aar aaa q Paene i 

Asana gr Wife ASHE: N 44 N 

He saw that the body of the Intelligent Sati was 
being burnt in the fire of the Cita. He cried aloud; 
Oh My Sati! Oh My Sati! 

aur iaaa: WAAAY vient: | 

We Tara AET, 45 u 

Rag ea AA LETU UAT: | 

PGA AT TTU SERE N 46 UI 

And taking Her body on His neck, began to roam 
in different countries, like a mad man. Seeing that, 
Brahmā and the other Devas became very anxious 
and Bhagavan Visnu cut off the body to pieces by 
His arrows. 

RTG dardtarargftent et | 

Sara a adt Šarm it fram u 47 

aster UTT ATT cat fehferar gN, i 

fred afateat aa Praid wa 11 48 u 

rad weg: gaoia: 1 

AAL wear: rata naria fasrqa: u 49 N 

"Wherever the parts fell, Sankara remained there 
in so many different forms. He then said to the 
Devas: “Whoever will worship, with deep devotion 
in these places, the Bhagavati, will have nothing 
left unattained. The Highest Mother will remain 
close to them there. The persons that will make 
Purascarana (the repetition) of the Mantrams, 


840 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


especially the Maya Bija (the root Mantra of 
Maya), their Mantrams will become, no doubt, 
fructified and become incarnate.” 

seyret vietety wary farang: | 

«ret Frat JUMS FAETATĪĒTĀT: 50 n 

O King! Thus saying, the Mahadeva, being very 
much distressed for Sati's departure, passed His 
time in those places, making Japam, Dhyānam and 
taking to Samadhi. 

Wats IATA 

rfr RTA aA esr: gts mat à 

fer dents mier arf dut at A as u 51 N 

aa Rerarat edat «mft wr GUTAT à 

pafs Ta ze Asa Wenpi u 52 u 

Janamejaya said: Where, in what places the 
several parts of the Sati fell? What are the names 
of those Siddhapithas? And what is their number? 
Kindly describe these in detail; O Great Muni! No 
doubt I will highly consider myself blessed by 
hearing these words from your blessed mouth. 


Garu Sara 


so saga Vector mg 1 

set sao UTT weet: 10053 0 

arg Ag a idari faari: 1 

freie anh aaah RT: 154 N 

Vyasa said: O King! I will now describe those 
Pithas (Sacred places) the mere hearing of which 
destroys all the sins of men. Hear. I describe dully 
those places where the persons desiring to get lordly 
power and to attain success ought to worship and 
meditate on the Devi. 

morer fergreraft rirtgatrartrtt i 

aa à firmar gite wr feiert u 55 n 

ahi erferar grat arent TATE | 

TTE GST gis afar wet wem lt 56 lt 

five mad fagaga 1 

T urb eat wat arent i57 u 

O Maharaja! The face of Gauri fell in Kāšī; She 
is well known there by the name Višālāksī; that 


which fell in Naimsaranya became known by the 
name of Linga Dharini. This Maha Maya is known 
in Prayága (Allahabad) by the name of Lalita Devi; 
in Gandha Mādana, by the name of Kamukt; in 
the southern Mānasa, by Kumudā; in the northern 
Mānasa, by Vi$vakama, the Yielder of all desires, 
in Gomanta, by Gomati and in the mountain of 
Mandra, She became known by the name of 
Kāmacāriņī. 

nA cp wedi era 1 

AA WERT ATRI THT q ATEA $8 
— waHdta eater edt ar atftacutt i 

fad Aadat wre: gegat wr gt ou 59 

The Devi is known in Caitraratha, by the name 
of of Madotkata; in Hastinapura, by Jayanti; in 
Kanyakubja by the name of Gauri; in the Malaya 
Mountain, by Rambha; in the Ekamrapitha, by 
Kirtimati, in Vi$va, by the name of Višvešvarī; in 
Puskara, by the name of Puruhütà. 

marks wearer edt ware à 

ma fuaa: yè neut agade 160 N 

varrtartt sar g Arad fareaufrent i 

sfivrēt merh great wat AN AAT d 61 u 

She is known as Sanmārga Dayini in the Kedāra 
Pitha; as Manda, in the top of the Himalayas; and 
as Bhadrakarnikà in Gokarna. She is known as 
Bhavani in Sthane$vara, as Vilvapatrika in Vilvaka; 
as Madhavi in Śrīśaila; as Bhadrà in Bhadrešvara. 

mE FT Wa HAT HUTS | 

earl exelent qp caret Ha TAT N62 N 

VIETĀ wereet fsrafeit wera à 

agi qp after arate gpeg 63 i 

She is known as Jara in Varāha Saila; as Kamala 
in Kamalalaya; as Rudrani in Rudra Koti; as Kali 
in Kālaiijara; She is known as Maha Devi in 
Salagráma, as Jalapriyá in Sivalingam; as Kapila 
in Mahalingam, as Mukutešvarī in Makota. 

magai GT verear CTA i 

"arat Wem urenr fenem Weun 64 N 


As Kumari in Māyāpurī, as Lalitambika in 


Book VH Chapter XXX 


Santana; as Mangala in Gaya Ksetra, as Vimalā in 
Purusottama. 

serene eared Runa Were i 

Ronane ureem Ygada nes u 

As Utpalāksī in Sahasráksa; as Mahotpala in 
Hiraņyāksa; as Amonghāksī in the Vipāšā river; 
as Pātalā in Pandra Vardhana. 

ravi gad g free sagt i 

forget fager eat meat srerament t 66 n 

As Nārāyaņī in Suparsva, as Rudra Sundari in 
Trikūta, as Vipulà Devi in Vipula; as Kalyani in 
Malayacala. 

warrant g afters g wf a 

won udi g aqarat gad 67 u 

As Ekavirá in Sahyadri; as Candrika 
Hari$écandra; as Ramana in Rama Tirtha; 
Mrgavati in the Yamuna. 

aed atedtd g grrr area ad | 

maai PITT qp maman carat u 68 u 

As Kotivi in Kotatirha; as Sugandha in 
Mādhavavana; as Trisandhya in the Godavari; as 
Ratipriyā in Gangādvāra. 

Brago TTT aac afar 1 

PĒRU gracat q uem ZARA ad ll 69 u 

As Subhananda in Siva Kundam; as Nandini in 
Devikātata; as Rukmini in Dvāravatī; as Radha in 
Vrndāvana. 

dat ngai g maA wp | 

Rag an fter forest fenaa u 7 0 u 

As Devaki in Mathura; as Parame$vari in Patala; 
as Sita in Citrakuta; as Vindhyādhivāsinī in the 
Vindhya range. 

weht nenen edt fra | 

amber Were qp erat eat u71n 

O, King! As Mahālaksmī in the sacred place of 
Karavira, as Uma Devi in Vinayaka; as Ārogyā in 
Vaidyānātha; as Mahešvarī in Mahākāla. 

srraeggamdtēta farm fidà | 

Tiga sd Umm carer ATĒHŪM N 72 0 

As Abhayā in all the Usna tīrthas, as Nitambā 


in 
as 


641 


in the Vindhya mountain; as Mandavi in 
Mandavya; as Svāhā in Māhešvarīpūra. 

BIAS VAST q ufa smenuec | 

wig amar wem qearadt u73u 

As Pracanda in Chagalanda; as Candika 
Amarakantaka; as Vararoha in Somešvara; 
Puskarāvatī in Prabhāsa. 

TaN UG UTA BAT 1 

rend NET Vaterai fü 174 N 

As Devamātā in Sarasvati; as Paravara 1 
Samudrtata; as Mahābhāgā in Mahālayā; 
Pingale$vari in Payosni. 

fitter qagire y aik cafavrtart i 

samadh eem wer vent 1175 0 

As Simhikà in Krtašauca; as Atišānkārī in 
Kartika; as Lola in Utpalavartaka; as Subhadra in 
Sona Sangam. 

"rer Reged Agfa wast 1 

were fast ara ff 176 u 

As the Mother Laksmi in Siddhavana; as 
Ananga in BharataSrama; as Vi$vamukhi in 
Jalandhara; as Tara in the Kiskindhya mountain. 

aaa gi myne | 

after ect fora g gedai qur 77 u 

As Pusti in Devadàru Vana; as Medha in 
Kasmiramandalam; as Bhima in Himadri; as Tusti 
Visvesvara Ksetra. 

waaa yian aTarettēvt 1 

Sign ent IU afer: feris qom 178 N 

AT GATES A rati à 

ammamga amt agafgdoft aa 1791 

As Suddhi in Kapālamocana; as Mata in 
Kāyāvarohaņa; as Dhara in Sankhoddhara; as Dhrti 
in Pindaraka; as Kala in Candrabhāgā river; as 
Šivadhāriņī in Acchoda; as Amrtā in Venda; as 
Urvašī in Vedarī. 

IDEE SUME ur ME CIEN 

uan eee g wu aa so it 


As medicines in Uttara Kuru; as Kušodakā in 
Kušadvīpa; as Manmathà in Hemaküta; as 
Satyavadini in Kumuda. 


in 
as 


642 


asd ata q Fiftrdsrammema 1 

mat auae dA Raae ngin 

As Vandanīyā in A$vattha; as Nidhi in the 
Vaišravaņālaya; as Gayatri in the mouth of the 
Vedas; as Parvati near to Siva. 

aac waist wememW aad | 

qafaa wem are argu dere wat 82 u 

As Indrani in the Devalokas; as Sarasvati in the 
face of Brahma; as Prabha (lustre) in the Solar disc; 
as Vaisnavi with the Matrkas. 

aret udi g Wag er fre eram i 

fore ARC am viera: uA n 83 n 

She is celebrated as Arundhati amongst the 
Satis, the chaste women and as Tilottamā in the 
midst of the Rāmās. Again this Mahādevī of the 
nature of the Great Intelligence (Samvid) is always 
existent in the form of Sakti named Brahmakalā in 
the hearts of all the embodied beings. 

wares wp dier SSTA | 

MARTA cers uftentfear: u 84 u 

O Janamejaya! Thus I have mentioned to you 
the one hundred and eight pithas (sacred places or 
seats of the Deity) and as many Devis. 

adimg Uta atrak wr à 

ITT yita arit PTT srt i85 N 

a: agaa WIHTESRTHSTHN | 

weurafafnivet dette wi TAT N86 N 

Thus are mentioned all the seats of the Devis 
and along with that, chief places in India (the 
world). He who hears these excellent one hundred 
and eight names of the Devi as well as Her seats, 
gets himself freed from all sins goes to the Loka of 
the Devi. 

way wddtdw weds: 1 

Rada ftardtsgrerdiai frat a 1! 87 11 

alva Wedi gari TATA fat: | 

anata nre Wedge: uss tt 

O Janamejaya! His heart gets purified and is 
rendered blessed, no doubt, who duly makes yatra 
(sojourn) to all these seats of the Deity, performs 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Sraddhas, offers peace-offerings to the Pitrs and 
worships with the highest devotion the Goddess 
and asks frequently the pardon of the World 
Mother. 

Gaga MATI wrt | 

TATA saa: Cara: 11 89 1 

wate: Harter acardterat TU |i 

aaa faa à gaenen aft weit 19 oi 

denr: at: we yada fea 

Ruaa wd wg zen asta uera 

O King! After worship, one should feed the 
Brāhmaņas, well dressed virgins (Kumārīs) and 
Vatukas with good eatables. All the tribes whether 
they be Cāņdālas, know them all to be of the nature 
of the Devi and therefore they should be 
worshipped. Never one is to accept any donation 
or gifts (Pratigrahas) in these seats of the Devi. 

"engen querat PAT WAT: | 

mnia aar adioa 92 N 

pà megapa, d 

Ramai a pda ARRA At: 93 u 

The saintly persons should make Purascaranas 
(repeat the names of their own deities, attended 
with burnt offerings, oblations, etc.) of their own 
Mantrams with all their might in all these places 
and should never be miserly in their expenses on 
this account. 

aud Hed urat steer: MATA: 0 

weaned eee NE u94u 

aià fever ursfu diui qum | 

wed ertum uit gri Maa Ht sre: 1195 u 

He who starts to these places, with devoted 
hearts filled with love, finds his Pitrs in the higher 
and greater Brahma Loka for one thousand Kalpas 
and gets the highest knowledge, crosses the ocean 
of the world and becomes free. Many a people have 
attained success by repeating these one hundred 
and eight names of the Deity. 
Tareas aga: feat Tat: | 
Aaaa wramequras ae fagi 196 u 


Book VII Chapter XXXI 


843 


maid at Aa water fe | 

dur atia Pret sem udfūr arts: 097 u 

Any place wherein are kept those names, 
embodied in a book, becomes free from such 
dangers as plague, cholera or any misapprehensions 
from planetary Deities and so forth. Nothing 
remains to be attained by these persons who repeat 
these one hundred and eight names. 

"pues geist ATRI: 1 

qaga wast wetufegueus 98 

sata geared & qeftesut fa U STA: i 

wader yad aa: fh gaara: 99 u 

That man, devoted to the Devi, certainly attains 
blessedness. That saintly person becomes of the 
nature of the Devi. The Devas bow down and 
worship him when they behold him! What then 
need be siad that the saints would worship him! 

MERA UAE, | 

gamat: wd warf uet aT 100 i 

uf AKT areata ar à 

Rada ws HAARATA: u 101 1 

The Pitrs become pleased and get their good 
ends when these one hundred and eight names are 
read with devotion. These places are, as it were, 


Intelligence personified (Cinmaya) and places 
ready to yield freedom from bondage. Therefore, 
O, King! Intelligent men should take their shelter 
in these places. 

WE AUT mes wd uif: 

verfa a fas spar: sirgst 102 N 

efr dtagaturrad Went aane 
RRRS: 1130 11 

O King! Whatever secrets and other deeper 
secrets about the Great Goddess you asked to know 
from me, I described to you. What more do you 
want to hear. Say. 

Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Seventh Book 
on the birth of Gauri, the seats of the Deity, and the 
distraction of Siva in the Mahāpurāņam 
Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 

Note: The number one hundred and eight is a holy 
number, got by taking the half of 216,0000, the number 
of breaths inhaled by a child in the womb who promises 
to take the name of God at his every breath or by taking 
one-eighth of 864,000, the number of seconds in a day. 
The two zeros are then dropped. Thus the number 
signifies the one who fulfils one’s promise. 


Book VII Chapter XXXI 


843 


CHAPTER XXXI 
On the Birth of Parvati 


enrenreitgnirerarfēmrdtet E: | 

agri vam wd Aaea N NT 

ant farsa API eren eT | 

gat y feat uer: u Aaga AAT u2 N 

Janamejaya said: O Muni! You told before that 
‘the Highest Light took Her birth on the top of the 
Himalayas.’ Now describe to me in detail about 
this Highest Light. What intelligent man can desist 
from hearing these nectar-like words about the 
Sakti? The danger of death may come even to the 
Devas that drink nectars but no such danger can 
possibly come to those that drink the nectar of the 
Devi's glorious deeds. 


eum sara 

eris Rt gaas R Precis ETAT: | 

maari agent Preater after vt 003. ul 

spp werd adsan | 

ate: Brag aura aforeyt RertssTaq A N 

Vyasa said: O King! You are blessed; you have 
attained what you are to attain in this life; you are 
taught by the high-souled men; you are fortunate 
since you are so sincerely devoted to the Devi. O 
King! Hear the ancient history: Wherever the Deva 
of the Devas the Mahešvara rested while He was 
wandering all over the world in a distracted state, 
carrying the Sati's body that was burnt by fire. 


844 

mamia: STHIÉERTTHTTS |d 

TTU qenret Pat a SAA U 5. t 

aerated rd elei Wea | 

Wiest sad mead wuddw 6 it 

He spent his time there with his senses 
controlled, in Samadhi, forgetting all his knowledge 
of Samsara in deep meditation of the form of the 
Devi. At this time, the three worlds, with their 
objects, moving and immoving, with their oceans, 


mountains and islands became void of prosperity, 
and power. 

ama: Spend ad: nA sud | 

sar: adima: 07 u 

Wat grita HTT WATTERS STET | 

Dent Gaaru uiia adm isu 

The hearts of all the embodied became dried 
up, without any trace of joy; they were all burdened 
with anxious thoughts and remained indifferent. 
All were merged in the ocean of sorrows and 
became diseased. Planets retrograded and the 
Devas had their states reversed. The Kings were 
attacked with a series of ills and misfortunes. 

SĒRA Hee mTeTRUISTW | 

orate GATT qp ATA ARTE: 9 N 

Adhibhautik and Adhidaivik (from material 
causes and from divine interference). At this time 
a great Asura, named Taraka, became unconquer- 
able owing to his receiving a boon from Brahma. 

agenda SANANA: | 

Raag a: ya: a d ear srfenafet 10 N 

Being intoxicated by his power and heroism, he 
conquered the three world and became the 
sovereign ruler. The Brahma Prajapati, gave him 
boon to this effect that the legitimate son of Siva 
would be able to kill him. 

gR meaag: w add: | 

LEAC IESS ES TOLESLC LIX mm ATG WI 1 1 

And as at that time Siva had no son, the great 
Asura, elated with joy, became infatuated and 
carried off all victories. 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 
aa Sagat: bah coos Ld OT: 
ti2u 
All the Devas were banished from their places 
by his oppression; they remained always anxious 
owing to the want felt by them of a son of Siva. 
irren Hel Aca: | 
aT UGA Hes rea arfērrat 1 1 3 N 


Šankara has now no wife; how can He then have 


a son! We are very unfortunate; how can our work 
be accomplished? 

sta eraga: ad mygr i 

wetgqetiard U eur sg K 14 

Thus oppressed with thoughts, all the Devas 
went to Vaikuntha and informed the Bhagavan 
Visnu of all that had happened, in privacy. 

waa: we aag TAN | 

wrt adu attratūrtrartett wu 15 u 

The Bhagavan Visnu began to tell them the 
means, thus: ^O Devas! Why are you all so anxious 
when the Auspicious Goddess of the Universe, the 
Dweller in the Mani Dvipa, the Yielder of all 
desires like a Kalpa Vrksa is always wakeful for 
you. 

TATRA ST AGUAS LCD | 

Ridi wae GATSTIAVITA I | 1 6 N 

ment mel ngatani assay i 

ga Sagas pumped: 17 N 

It is due to your faults that She is shewing Her 
indifference; it is meant to teach us (not for our 
destruction but to shew Her Infinite mercy). When 
a mother nourishes and frightens and reprimands 
a son, it is not that she has became merciless; so 
the World Mother, the Controller of the Universe, 
will never be merciless to you as regards your 
qualifications and defects. 


ATT wala AIT US we | 
ISU: Ed eas act wat fast 1s N 
vereri Wat at INTI are Wr PĒRTA | 
Reta orage wr a: care PATA 119 


A son commits offence at every step; who can 


Book VII Chapter XXXI 


645 


bear that in these three worlds except the mother! 
So soon take refuge to the Highest Mother, the 
Goddess of the universe, with the sincerest 
devotion. She will certainly take action and help 
your cause. 

genfaya graag A: vase i 

daa friar dā: we wufim: u20 N 

MTA Were füeed ATĒTUA d 

amig aT: wd were 127 0 

Thus ordering the Devas, Visnu with His consort 
Laksmi and the other Devas quickly went out to 
worship the Devi. Going to the Himalayas, they 
soon engaged themselves in doing the Puraácarana 
Karma (act of repeating the names of the Deity, 
attended with burnt oblations and offerings, etc.). 


AATAM AIA Beara a RESTE | 
T Bg ST TU 


O King! Those who were well versed with the 
performance of sacrifice to the Mother, began their 
sacrificial ceremonies and all began to hold vows, 
viz. Trtīyādi Vratānī. Some were engaged in 
incessantly meditating on the Devī; some began 
to repeat Her names constantly; some began to 
repeat the Devī Sūkta. 

mamama: Aep egia: | 

STARTA: A ARRANA: 1124 i 

Eta Wig: Tat waist: | 

saa agai AASTATE 0025 1 

Thus some devoted themselves to repeating 
names; others to repeating mantrams. Again some 
were engaged in performing severe (painful) 
Candrayana and other Vratas. Some were doing 
Antarayāgas (inner sacrifices); some were doing 
Prāņāgnihotra Yāgas; whereas others engaged 
themselves in Nyāsādi, etc. Again some began to 
worship the Highest Sakti, the Goddess of the 
Universe, without any sleep or rest, by the seed 
mantra of Maya. 


NAT ST BTSs a 

mya GT: spear u26 

aig agilig | 
TRARY 27 u 


O King! Thus many years of the Devas passed 
away. When the ninth Tithī came in the month of 
Caitra on Friday, the Highest Light of the Supreme 
Force Suddently appeared in front of them. That 
Light was equal to Koti lightnings, of a red colour, 
and cool like the Koti Moons. Again the lustre was 
like the Koti Suns. The four Vedas personified were 
chanting hymns all round Her. 

Raiana went NE: | 

"rar uted a feeder a rea UTT, 28 U 

ited wq o Non i 

au eham a due 29 

That mass of fire was above, below, on all 
sides, in the middle; nowhere it was obstructed. It 
had no beginning, nor end. It was of the form of a 
female with hands and feet and all the limbs. The 
appearance was not that of a male nor that of an 
hermophrodite. The Devas, dazzled by the 
brilliant lustre, first closed their eyes; but at the 
next moment, holding patience when they opened 
again their eyes, they found the Highest Light 
manifesting in the form of an exceedingly 
beautiful Divine Woman. 

cheer feet Aart erurmírarétaa i 

Wag kimia aad weyp YT 430 N 

Marea inm MET d 

ada woar pant mada 1 31 N 

Her youth was just blooming and Her rising 
breasts, plump and prominent, vying, as it were, 
with a lotus bud, added to the beauty all around. 
Bracelets were on Her hands; armlets on Her four 
arms; necklace on Her neck; and the garland made 
of invaluable gems and jewels spread very bright 
lustre all around. 


u33 U 


\ 
Naaa RART 3.4 u 


Lovely ornaments on Her waist making 
tinkling sounds and beautiful anklets were on Her 
feet. The hairs of Her head, flowing between Her 
ears and cheek sparkled bright like the large 
blacks bees shining on the flower leaves of the 
blooning Ketakī flower. Her loins were nicely 
shaped and exquisitely lovely and the hairs on Her 
navel gave additional beauty. 

PAR RT, | 

areadtafataagigmm 35 H 

ITB Te — d 

Tiä ATEN Uu 36 Ni 

Her exguisitely lovely lotus mouth rendered 
more lustrous and beautiful by the shining glden 
ear-ornaments, was filled with betel leaves mixed 
with camphor; etc.; on Her forehead there was the 
half crescent moon; Her eye-brows were extended; 
and Her eyes looked bright and beautifully splendid 
like the red lotus; Her nose was elevated and Her 
lips very sweet. 


TATA IEICICMBINIC HIS CICE 
arhat aaa u 3s u 


Her teeth were very beautiful like the opening 
buds of Kunda flowers; from Her neck was 
suspended a necklace of pearls; on Her head was 
the brilliant crown decked with diamonds and 
jewels; on Her ears, earrings were suspended like 
the lines on the Moon; Her hairs ornamented with 
Mallika and Malati flowers; Her forehead was 
pasted with Kasmira Kumkuma drops; and Her 
three eyes gave unparallelled lustre to Her face. 


sratorftent ware weufesta u 40 u 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


On Her one hand there was the noose and on 
Her other hand there was the goad; her two other 
hands made signs granting boons and dispelling 
fears; Her body shed lustre like the flowers of a 
Dādima tree. Her wearing is a red coloured cloth. 
All these added great beauty. 

fai net ; 

Sremsrneumuftqqp HA: wn NAIN 

WEST di rengi Wor: Brat AT: d 

att AVI ITT ĀTI: 42 I 

Thus the Devas saw before them the Mother 
Goddess, the Incarnate of unpretended mercy, with 
a face ready to offer Her Grace, the Mother of the 
Whole Universe, the Enchantress of all, sweet- 
smiling, saluted by all the Devas, yielding all 
desires, and wearing a dress, indicative of all lovely 
feelings. The Devas bowed at once as they saw 
Her; but they could not speak with their voice as it 
was choked with tears. 


GŪTI recur UTT: | 

mgpa haaa o — 0430 

Then holding their patience, with much 
difficulty, they began to praise and chant hymns 
to the World Mother with their eyes filled with 
tears of love and devotion and with their heads 
bent low. 

dar He: 

"ut det neces frat aci =: | 

AA: VA WE fra Wurm: TATA N 44 u 

aaa ATT saci rerit Ar FETT | 

gut di momi wà gadu Ad WU: 045 1 

The Devas said: We bow down to Thee, the Devi 
and the Maha Devi; always obeisance to Thee! 
Thou art the Prakrti, and the Auspicious One; we 
always salute to Thee. O Mother! Thou art of a 
fiery colour (residing as a Red Flame in the heart 
of a Yogi) and burning with Asceticism and 
Wisdom (shedding lustre all around). Thou art 
specially shining every where as the Pure Caitanya; 
worshipped by the Devas and all the Jivas for the 


Book VII Chapter XXXI 


rewards of their actions; We take refuge to Thee, 
the Durgà the Devi we bow down to Thee, that 
can well make others cross the ocean of Samsara; 
so that Thou helpest us in crossing this terrible 
ocean of world. 

dt arena tarea Ga fara: TĀ T aee i 

"ra must gerar TTT u 46 I 

Mother! The Devas have created the words (1. 
e., the words conveying ideas are uttered by the 
five Vayus, Prana, etc., which are called the Devas) 
which are of the nature of Vi$varüpa, pervading 
everywhere, like the Kama Dhenu (the Heavenly 
Cow yielding all desires, riches, honour, food, etc.,) 
and by which the brutes (the gods) become 
egotistical. O Mother! Thou art that language to 
us; so Thou fulfillest our desires when we praise 
and chant hymns to Thee. 

mI See avd! KARA | 

madai aaga «um: urat rary 47 1 

O Devi! Thou art the Night of Destruction at the 
end of the world; Thou art worshipped by Brahma; 
Thou art the Laksmi the Sakti of Visnu; Thou art the 
Mother of Skanda; the Sakti of Siva; Thou art the 
Sakti Sarasvati of Brahma. Thou art Aditi, the Mother 
of the gods and Thou art Sati, the daughter of Daksa. 
Thus Thou art purifying the worlds in various forms 
and giving peace to all. 

"Wererai wr Ra udyr wr efits à 

west — adt wel 48 ul 

We bow down to Thee. We know Thee to be 
the great Maha Laksmi; we meditate on Thee as of 
the nature of all the Saktis as Bhagavati. O, Mother! 
Hlumine us so that we can meditate and know Thee. 

mamas aa: gara | 

misapi aa: stewed 49 Nu 

O Devi! Obeisance to Thee, the Virat! 
Obeisance to Thee, the Sūtrātmā, the Hiranya- 
garbha; obeisance to Thee, the transformed into 
sixteen Vikrtis (or transformations). Obeisance to 
Thee, of the nature of Brahma. 


847 


ARTS gamma | 

BATA queat TATA, u 50 u 

We bow down with great devotion to Thee, the 
Goddess of the Universe, the Creatrix of Māyic 
Avidyā (the Nescience) under whose influence this 
world is mistaken as the rope as a garland is 
mistaken for a rope and again that mistaken is 
corrected by whose Vidya. 

TTU PASTA | 

adenan wt seared 51 u 

"Warentytferfevni ATTAATARTATĪĀTTĒT à 

Agra wenmerenefüvitq 1 52 u 

We bow down to Thee who art indicated by both 
the letters Tat and Tvam in the sentence Tat Tvamasi 
(Thou art That), Tat indicating the Cit (Intelligence) 
of the nature of oneness and Tvam indicating the 
nature of Akhanda Brahma (beyond the Annamaya, 
Pranamaya, Manomaya, Vijfianamaya and the 
Anandamaya—the five Košas, the Witness of the 
three states of wakefulness, dream, and deep sleep 
states) and indicating Thee. 

am: Yura ant glares i 

ATA d Hen aaa: 053 d 

gtr gar aar addfordrarférerferdt à 

We Arar Heya ATARI: KAT 0654 N 

O Mother! Thou art of the nature of Pranava 
Om; Thou art Hrim; Thou art of the nature of 
various Mantras and Thou art merciful; we bow 
down again and again to Thy lotus Feet." When 
the Devas thus praised the Devi the In-dweller of 
the Mani Dvipa, the Bhagavati spoke to them in a 
sweet cuckoo voice. 


shteqara 
wes fast ard aadi drat: | 
anars WT STeRORTHeReTERTSÍUT A 55 1l 
“O Devas! What for have you come here? What 
do you want? I am always the Tree, yielding all 
desires to my Bhaktas; and I am ready to grant 
boons to them. 


648 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


erat afr ar Feat gers ARITA | 
Ry Arg GAARA d! 56 N 
gfe wheat 3 Kaut arta fage: | 
gfe ITT aft seat W-qEHTSWU 157 N 
faster Pst TAA: TT | 


That Thou takest the body to have a son of Šiva 
is our fervent prayer to Thee.” Hearing the Deva’s 
words Parame$vari, with a graceful countenance, 
spoke to them, thus: “My Sakti will incarnate as 
Gauri in the house of Himalayas; She will be the 


You are my devotees; why do you care, when I | wife of Siva and will beget a son that will destroy 
am on your side? I will rescue you from the ocean | Taraka Demon and will serve your purpose. 


of troubles. O Devas! Know this as My true 
resolve." O King! Hearing these words of deep 
love, the Devas became very glad and gave out all 
their causes of troubles. 
Sw: 

mai fra srareasfist TTT 058 H 

"dar werfünefuvar Va 1 

aura ifs: vat fear i 59 u 

“O Paramešvarī! Thou art omniscient and witness 
of all these worlds. What is there in the three worlds 
that is not known to Thee! O Auspicious Mother! 
The Demon Taraka is giving us troubles day and 
night. 

Braga Fat agrum fera | 

Prager g rof errarfir cet ARA 60 n 

Brahmā has given him boon that he will be killed 
by the Siva's son. O Mahešvarī! Sati the wife of 
Siva has cast aside Her body. It is known to Thee. 

adaga: fe ar ama unu: 1 

wager: VM cens 610 

Wear HITS! eife: Fanta AS i 

wrei-frafird yemi seeds 062 N 

What will the ignorant low people inform the 
One, Who is Omniscient? O Mother! We have 
described in brief all what we had to say. What 
more shall we say? Thou knowest all our other 
troubles and causes of sorrows. Bless us so that 
our devotion remains unflinched at Thy lotus feet; 
this is our earnest prayer. 

gRr dat au: spear rare Wgt od 

Wa VK am int srfarerfer fears 11 63 N 

forarer T year RT ar: are feramearfet | 

UAC QARTA 1 64 tt 


TTU fe TT ATRAST: | 

TART TTU ferent UA Nes N 

And your devotion will remain steadfast at My 
Lotus feet. Himalayas, too, is worshipping Me with 
his wholehearted devotion; so to take birth in his 
house is to my greatest liking; know this.” 

CITU sara 

Raas ARTS IE aa: | 

aÀ: degana Nenusit aatsadia lt 66 u 

Vyāsa said: O King! Hearing the kind words of 
the Devī the King of mountains was filled with 
love; and, with voice choked with feelings and with 
tears in his eyes spoke to the Goddess of the world, 
the Queen of the three worlds. 

met gel uearnprefresfu | 

ARATE TS: LAY]: en vd fees feft 1 6711 

ada PRE NATÀ | 

sratemfegušat guai aT: 11 68 u 

“Thou hast raised me much higher, that Thou 
dost me so great a favour; otherwise where am I 
inert, and unmoving and where art Thou, of the 
nature of Existence, Intelligence and Bliss! It 
manifests the Greatness of Thy Glory. O Sinless 
One! My becoming the father of Thee indicates 
nothing less than the merits earned by me for doing 
countless A$vamedha sacrifice or for my endless 
Samadhi. 

STI WES eife: PASTA Tals ATT | 

al Rares LĪST smeranfafer t 69 u 

"TERT Wet aha serat U aeu: 

Aa TT TAT STAT AY AT ATTA ET 0070. N 

Oh! What a favour hast Thou shewn towards 
me! Henceforth my unparalleled fame will be 


Book VII Chapter XXXII 


849 


spread throughout the whole Universe of five 
original elements that ‘The Upholder of the 
Universe, the World Mother has become the 
daughter of this Himalayas! This man is blessed 
and fortunate!” 

AUT. t fé ears Canad wur i 

KATE aram dat ASRA AEM: 71 U 

zd wer cw wd 4 Hua agua | 

adda a eumd afe wu 72 

Who can be so fortunate, virtuous and merited 
as he whose daughter She has become, Whose belly 
contains millions of Brahmandas! I cannot describe 
what pre-eminent heavens are intended for my 
Pitrs, my family predecessors wherein virtuous 
persons like myself are born. 

ant a Raaf sid a sfera à 

aqa uments radam web d: 73 i 


O, Mother! O, Paramešvarī! Now describe to 


me Thy Real Self as exemplified in all the 
Vedāntas; and also Jňāna with Bhakti approved by 
the Vedas in the same way that Thou hast shown 
already this favour to me. So that by That 
Knowledge I will be able to realise Thy Self.” 


SIT sare 


Bit Wea aa: T WaT | 
ATA ar weet steer 11 74 u 
ale areata Wero) ume 
Safaris MSTA: 0031 11 

Vyasa said: O, King! Thus hearing the praise of 
Himalayas, the Goddess of the Universe, with a 
graceful look, began to speak the very secret 
essences of the Srutis. 

Here ends the Thirty-first Chapter of the Seventh 
Book on the birth of Parvati in the House of 
Himalayas in the Mahapuranam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses, 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book VII Chapter X XXII 


849 


CHAPTER XXXII 
On Self Realisation Spoken by the Devi 


steeqarat 
Tag īst: wd caret wet Wu | 
"ur ATOTATAT ngumi yA 1 i 


The Devi said: “Hear, Ye Immortals! My words 
with attention, that I am now going to speak to 
you, hearing which will enable the Jivas to realise 
My Essence. Before the creation, I, only I, existed; 
nothing else was existent then. My Real Self is 
known by the names Cit, Sambvit (Intelligence), 
Para Brahma and others. 

engen rd erm am TH. 

qa afr: fers viféeratarfer faga 11 3 ul 

audtararadt ar arenae fente: i 

aam  eerfergqsrarsfea ader u 4 i 


My Atman is beyond mind, beyond thought, 


beyond any name or mark, without any parallel, 


54 


and beyond birth, death or any other change or 
transformation. My Self has one inherent power, 
called Maya. This Maya is not existent, nor non- 
existent, nor can it be called both. This unspeakable 
substance Maya always exists (till the final 
emancipation or Moksa). 

wreesedrerreeenperiznfe diffe: 

eu bad uad gs m "5 

Maya can be destroyed by Brahma Jfiána; so it 
can not be called existent; again if Maya does not 
exist, the practical world cannot exist. So, it cannot 
be called non-existent. Of course it caonot be called 
both, for it would involve contr: dictions. This 
Maya (without beginning but with end at the time 
of Moksa) naturally arises as heat coines out of 
fire, as the rays come out of the Sun and as the 
cooling rays come out of the Moon. 

creat ant sfrarat sitar: enreter K | 

ates fereftar: var: pdt omega u 6 tl 


850 


Just as all the Karmas of the Jivas dissolve in 
deep sleep (Susupti), so at the time of Pralaya or 
the General Dissolution, the Karmas of the Jivas, 
the Jivas and Time all become merged in one 
uniform mass in this great Maya. United with My 
Sakti, I am the Cause of this world; this Sakti has 
this defect that it has the power of hiding Me, its 
Originator. 

TA amame semet war | 

CTIA | Shea cw WHHRTH 0 7 di 

I am Nirguna. And when I am united with my 
Sakti, Màyà, I become Saguna, the Great Cause of 
this world. This Maya is divided into two, Vidya 
and Avidya. Avidya Maya hides Me; whereas 
Vidya Maya does not. Avidyā creates whereas 
Vidya Maya liberates. 

arrest waren TĀ | 

yauma anaa 8 ii 

Maya united with Caitanya (Intelligence); i.e., 
Cidābhāsa is the efficient cause of this Universe; 
whereas Maya reduced to and united with five 
original elements is the material Cause of the 
Universe. 

Aani Wu semper: dus uta 

AT urat wart x waht sms n 9 u 

Some call this Maya tapas; some call Her inert, 
material; some call Her knowledge; some call Her 
Maya, Pradhana, Prakrti, Aja (unborn) and some 
others call Her Sakti. 

feret gfe at wig: Aara AET: à 

after mgdan aa: N 10 0 

The Šaiva authors call Her Vimarša and the other 
Vedāntists call Her Avidyā; in short, this Māyā is 
in the heads of all the Paņdits. This Māyā is called 
various in the Nigamas. 

we «eremi upper frag i 

WEIT reed aaa SAT 11 n 

DATE T Mad qyucd Wes wq | 

ayaa U di A UT Wen w 12 N 


That which is seen is inert; for this reason Maya 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


is Jada (inert) and as the knowledge it conveys is 
destroyed,itis false. Caitanya (Intelligence) is not 
seen; if It were seen, it would have been Jada. 
Caitanya is self-luminous; not illumined by any 
other source. Were It so, Its Enlightener would have 
to be illumined by some other thing and so the 
fallacy of Anavastha creeps in (an endless series 
of causes and effects). 

TANTS TATA CAAT Wena | 

alai: vurerenmeé aerem 11 1 3 N 

VANTTTĒGI Taa fats ud 1 

arava a fered Reda 14 0 

Again one thing cannot be the actor and the thing 
acted upon (being contrary to each other); so 
Caitanya be illumined by itself. So It is Self-Iumi- 
nous; and it illumines Sun, Moon, etc., as a lamp 
is self-Iuminous and illumines other objects. So, 
O, Mountain! This My Intelligence is established 
as eternal and everlasting. 

ARAL TA GVA CATA: | 

dd ara arash aféfeq u 15 i 

The waking, dreaming and deep sleep states do 
not remain constant but the sense of ‘I’ remains 
the same, whether in waking, dreaming or deep 
sleep state; its anomaly is never felt. (The Bauddhas 
say that) The sense of intelligence, Jfiana, is also 
not felt; there is the absence of it; so what is existent 
is also temporarily existent. 

"fg qure da mAT i 

agya: a wur fire: fau: T ou6 

aga a freed with segreti: 1 

BESTA TMT: Würmer: (17 d 

But (it can then be argued that) then the Witness 
by which that absence is sensed, that Intelligence, 
in the shape of the Witness, is eternal. So the 
Pandits of all the reasonable Sastras declare that 
Samvit (Intelligence) is Eternal and it is Blissful 
the fountain of all love. 

ara spe fe sparaffer ameter Rer à 

PART figures wné Wm u18 N 


Book VII Chapter XXXII 


851 


emufifegsrtsUlduq wa Wat WH o) 

weg wr ATR aed Wea: 19 

Never the Jivas or embodied souls feel ‘I am 

ot’; but ‘I am’ this feeling is deeply established 

in the soul as Love. Thus it is clearly evident that I 
am quite separate from anything else which are all 
false. Also I am one continuous (no interval or 
separation existing within Me). Again Jūāna is not 
the Dharma (the natural quality) of Atman but it is 
of the very nature of Atman. 

ATR wasted a ee aT HUN | 

ferre an mia Rafya fe ferret u 20 n 

If Jūāna were the Dharma of Atman, then Jfiana 
would have been material; so Jītāna is immaterial. 
If (for argument's sake) Jfiana be denominated as 
material, that cannot be. For Jana is of the nature 
of Intelligence and Atman is of the the nature of 
Intelligence. Intelligence has not the attribute of 
being Dharma. Here the thing Cit is not different 
from its quality (Cit). 

Maas: Yar Adar | 

aa: yisi jamaaa: 21 

UYA: RRA Greet etaa | 

VAĻĀ PTA: 0221 

So Atman is always of the nature of Jītāna and 
happiness; Its nature is Truth; It is always Full, 
unattached and void of duality. This Atman again, 
united with Maya, composed of desires and Karmas, 
wants to create, due to the want of discrimination, 
the twentyfour tattvas, according to the previous 
Sarnskāras (tendencies), time and Karma. 

Ada creat aay | 

safe: aise afr m 23 0 

O Mountain! The re-awakening after Pralaya 
Susupti is not done with Buddhi (for then Buddhi 
is not at all manifested). So this creation is said to 
be effected without any Buddhi (proper intelli- 
gence). 

ufa GATT utes A Bafa | 

wand were ramreerücuu 24 N 


Wert AAJ HARRIARI, | 

TTT NPA, 25 0 

O, Chief of the Immovables! The Tattva 
(Reality) that I have spoken to you is most excellent 
and it is my Extraordinary Form merely. In the 
Vedas it is known as Avyakrta (unmodified), 
Avyakta (unmanifested) Maya Sabala (divided into 
various parts) and so forth. In all the Sastras, it is 
stated to be the Cause of all causes, the Primeval 
Tattva and Saccidànanda Vigraha. 

wdaudqnfresraraBRUTR | 

Gerrard wafer ager u26 N 

Where all the Karmas are solidified and where 
Icchà Sakti, (will), Jňāna Sakti (intelligence) and 
Kriya Sakti (action) all are melted in one, that is 
called the Mantra Hrim, that is the first Tattva. 

ANSI SUA: PIEAUGA: | 

MAIN AA ARTA YA: 027 N 

Wet TAA Tara TTRETTÉRHISRT ERIT 1 

VSAM STEHT ATA: RaT: 11 28 u 

Mas aa gepemd ge: 1 

vegan dequm wp 029 

TENENT: USOT LT 1 

From this comes out Ākāša, having the property 
of sound, thence Vayu (air) with ‘touch’ property; 
then fire with form, then water having 'Rasa' 
property; and lastly the earth having the quality 
‘smell.’ The Pandits say that the ‘sound’ is the only 
quality of Ākāša; air has two qualities viz., sound 
and touch, fire has three qualities sound, touch, 
form; water has four qualities sound, touch, form, 
taste; and the carth has five qualities sound, touch, 
form, taste and smell. 


asuaan ufeeni ua 130 i 

Patera aed ytceh STRE saa: | 

ath HUM BE: 9 arm: ga fF u31u 

ofarsnradionad feerd Rigat aa: i 

Out of these five original elements, the 
allpervading Sütra (string or thread) arose. This 
Sūtrātman (soul) is called the "Linga Deha,’ 


852 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


comprising within itself all the Prāņas; this is the 
subtle body of the Paramātman. And what is said 
in the previous lines as Avyakta or Unmanifested 
and in which the Seed of the World is involved 
and whence the Linga Deha has sprung, that is 
called the Causal body (Karana body) of the 
Paramatman. 

aa: a sparfer waftencoranta: 132 N 

wade eid AARAA | 

vate a sent ueris frrstefētm u 33 u 

The five original elements (Apaūcīkrta called 
the five Tan Matras) being created, next by the 
Pajicikarana process, the gross elements are 
created. The process is now being stated: O, Girija! 
Each of the five original elements is divided into 
two parts; one part of each of which is subdivided 
into four parts. 

Uhh amd get fasst 1 

aamfēdai?t drag wu d 340 

wenn w Araig: ANSANTE: | 

Taya: MaA Mya: 35 ! 

This fourth part of each is united with the half 
of four other elements different from it and thus 
each gross element is formed. By these five gross 
elements, the Cosmic (Virat) body is formed and 
this is called the Gross Body of the God. 
Jfüanendriyas (the organs of knowledge) arise from 
Sattva Guna of each of these five elements. 

ARPA TA aedes PTT d: 1 

EIE ssi venqgiestareagfdter "36 n 


ghar dere ll 37 u 


Again the Sattva Gunas of each of the 
Jüanendriyas united become the Antahkaraņāni. 
This Antahkarana is of four kinds, according as its 
functions very. When it is engaged in forming 
Sankalpas, resolves, and Vikalpas (doubts) it is 
called ‘mind.’ 


; Pues cr nami 

AKTU qp Wagen TWAT 038 Ul 

rat wats Irate arenes ut à 

ware free wren safe deam i 39 u 

When it is free from doubts and when it arrives 
at the decisive conclusion, it is called ‘Citta’; and 
when it rests simply on itself in the shape of the 
feeling ‘I’, it is called Aharnkara. From the Rajo 
Guna of each of the five elements arises Vak 
(speech), Pani (hands) Pada (feet), Payu (Anus) 
and Upastha (organs of generation) 

efe prot qàsurdt aR AAT: i 

BUSS: CMGI: TAME: 11.40 tt 

aafaa wate os atfzarttr u | 

greufauge da ftrar a fed Wa: 41 0 

Again their Rajo parts united give rise to the 
five Prāņas (Prana, Apāna, Samana, Udāna and 
Vyāna.) the Prana Vayu resides in the heart; Apana 
Vayu in the Arms; Samana Vayu resides in the 
Navel; Udana Vayu resides in the Throat; and the 
Vyana Vayu resides, pervading all over the body. 
My subtle body (Linga Deha) arises from the union 
of the five Jūānendriyas, the five Karmendriyas 
(organs of action), the five Prāņas and the mind 
and Buddhi, these seventeen elements. 

Target vn waren fetu agrad | 

wur ggf: Wheat aT qmrf-gferem BAT i 42 N 

referent qp AAT eareferemTerfafar i 

vare MT qp Praca rater fere 0 43 N 

And the Prakrti that resides there is divided into 
two parts; one is pure (Suddha Sattva) Maya and 
the other is the impure Maya or Avidya united with 
the Gunas. By Maya is meant. She, who, without 
concealing Her refugees, protects, them When the 
Supreme Seif is reflected on this Suddha Sattva, 
Maya, He is called I$vara. This Suddha Maya does 
not conceal Brahma, its receptacle; therefore She 
knows the All-pervading Brahma and She is 
omniscient, omnipotent, the Lady of all and confers 
favours and blessings on all. 


Book VII Chapter XXXIII 
enam aai ITG ATT: | 
TBM: CURA: ITHARTTATUT: 044 di 
ada: deal a naga: 1 
aferari g anaa fru n45 u 
When the Supreme Self is reflected on the 
Impure Maya or Avidyā, aJe is called Jīva. This 
Avidyà conceals Brahma, Whose nature is 
Happiness; therefore this Jiva is the source of all 
miseries. 
aa adi erada a TA: | 
Be dureh aaae 46N 
Sea OA: | 
WET ANON AAMT AAA | ATA: 047 U 
Both Iévara and Jivahave, by the influence of Vidya 
and Avidyā three bodies and three names. When the 


Jiva lives in his causal body, he is named Prajíià; 
when he lives in subtle body he is known as Taijasa; 
while he has the gross body, he is called Vi$va. 

eared  ferareafeaterer: uftanttta: | 

vais aur SaR: 11 48 1 

So when Iévara is in His causal body, he is 
denominated Isa; when He is in His subtle body, 
he is known as Sütra; and when He is in His gross 
body, He is known as Virāt. 


653 


Vert cafes qe UAB WC: E: | 

a fe ada: wramesffar peas i49 N 
ata feast farsi Arms va: 1 
Tegfadttat fred fr IAA: i 50 0 

afar dmēstamad vergu aga) adifharai 
ETSAI: il 32 11 

The Jīva glories in having three (as above- 
mentioned) kinds of differentiated bodies and 
Iévara glories in having three (as above-mentioned) 
kinds of cosmic bodies. Thus ĪSvara is the Lord of 


| all though he feels Himself always happy and 


satisfied, yet to favour the Jivas and to give them 
liberation (Moksa) He has created various sorts of 
worldly things for their Bhogas (enjoyments). This 
I$vara creates all tne Universe, impelled by My 
Brahma Sakti. I am of the nature of Brahma; and 
I$vara in conceived in Me as a snake is imagined 
in a rope. Therefore I$vara has to remain dependent 
on My Sakti.” 

Here ends the Thirty-second Chapter of the Seventh 
Book on Self-realization, spoken by the World 
Mother in the Mahāpurāņam Srimaddevibhagavatam 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book VII Chapter X XXIII 653 


Ame e NN Ī ^ ex 
CHAPTER XXXIII 
On the Devi's Virat Rüpa 
egeret Brahman, there is no such thing as Maya; only one 

Taree cT ARTA | Brahman exists. 
wrsfü na: gere rer mere VET: dodo mse wd STAT Tee: RTT | 
erae We fem wafer fep | mama fit poga 030 

wires erdt dene entafr KET d 
WESEL eee qure denm uu 


"IET Uem wate ATGTĪGTKTAT TAT 11 4 dd 

I am that Brahma, of the nature of Intelligence. 
I create this whole world on this Unchangeable 
Eternal (Mountain-like) Brahma, (composed of 
Avidya, Karma, and various Šarhskāras) and enter 
only Cit, Intelligence. There is no other intelligence] first as Prāņa (vital breath) within it in the form of 
than Me. Cidābhāsa. 

Viewed practically, it is known variously as; surengs uerge uem | 
Maya, Vidya; but viewed really from the point of ITG AAA: Wer 5 di 


The Devi said: ^O Girirāja! This whole universe, 
moving and unmoving, is created by My Maya 
Sakti. This Maya is conceived in Me. It is not, in 
reality, different or separate from Me. So I am the 


854 


a quf aden srüfeiwm wart a 

aft qagutendat aA SAT: d 6 d 

O Mountain! Unless I enter as Breath, how can 
this birth and death and leaving and retaking bodies 
after bodies be accounted for! As one great Ākāša 
is denominated variously Ghatākāša (Ākāša in the 
air), Patākāša (Ākāša in cloth or picture), So I too 
appear variously by acknowledging this Prana in 
various places due to Avidyā and various 
Antahkaranas. As the Sun's rays are never defiled 
when they illumine various objects on earth, so I, 
too, am not defiled in entering thus into various 
high and low Antahkaranas (heart). 

dfe orem affa faget Weng: 

amma gamma 7N 

The ignorant people attach Buddhi and other 
things of activity on Me and say that Atman is the 
Doer; the intelligent people do not say that. I remain 
as the Witness in the hearts of all men, not as the 
Doer. 

DICE NEEIME enfeudt unn y 1 

UETGTIARTATĒMT: Head WAT us it 

ada nead Set wfraemurmrerd: | 

am saegre a wade a a aa: 19 d 

ayaga U Aaa A tava: | 

ATG TTT "10u 

O Acalendra! There are many Jivas and many 
Iévaras due to the varieties in Avidyā and Vidya. 
Really itis Maya that differentiates into men, beasts 
and various other Jivas; and it is Maya that 
differentiates into Brahma, Visnu and other Iévaras. 
As the one pervading Sky (Ākāša) is called 
Mahākāša Ghatākāša (being enclosed by jars), so 
the one All pervading Paramātmā is called 
Paramātmā, Jīvātmā (being enclosed within Jīvas). 
As the Jivas are conceived many by Maya, not in 
reality; so Iévaras also are conceived many by 
Maya; not in essence. 

atten PG testa: waite: | 

"emat maA AN a LITE U 011 o 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


ATE AT UAT SGA: ARTA | 
ufa wdfüd Mana a ewer n 120 
O Mountain! This Avidya and nothing else, is 
the cause of the difference in Jivas, by creating 
differences in their bodies, indriyas (organs) and 
minds. Again, due to the varieties in the three Gunas 
and their wants (due to the differences between 
Sattvik, Rajasik and Tamasik desires), Maya also 
appears various, And their differences are the 
causes of different I$varas, Brahma, Visnu and 
others. 

$yedsé U ware farerenseater at 

aans Raed a art we a Anh 113 0 

Asi mAN ALATA ATS HAST | 

UAA TUSTIN SE A AEE: 14 

O, Mountain! This whole world is interwoven 
in Me; It is I that am the ĪSvara that resides in causal 
bodies; I am the 'Sutrátman, Hiraņyagarbha that 
resides in subtle bodies and it is I that am the Virat, 
residing in the gross bodies. I am Brahma, Visnu, 


and Mahešvara; I am the Brahmi, Vaisnavi and 
Raudri Saktis. 

ANSE PHASE WerHISÉ TET: | 

"wfgsniwenrnnRIsUTEHS A Uys: 05 u 

aed FAI quer spas ar i 

ataire «eret euremé wear feram u 16 N 

I am the Sun, I am the Moon, I am the Stars; I 
am beasts, birds, Candalas and I am the Thief. I 
am the cruel hunter; I am the virtuous high-souled 
persons and I am the female, male, and hermaph- 
rodite. There is no doubt in this. O Mountain! 
Wherever there is anything, seen or heard, I ai- 
ways exist there, within and without. 


A waft Tar ath aq AT i 
"erf ATG SATA fe AT 17 N 
win wüduremdeter faster fü 1 
admen weg ATA aera: 18 ul 
aema afer at TAA 1 


TAA AAT 19 AU 


There is nothing moving or unmoving, that can 


Book VII Chapter XXXIII 


exist without Me. If there be such, that is like the 
son of a barren woman. Just as one rope is mis- 
taken for a snake or a garland, so I am the One 
Brahma and appears as Iévara, etc. There is no 
doubt in this. This world cannot appear without a 
substratum. And That Substratum is My Existence. 
There can be nothing else.” 


Rara sara 


"rem aaf qafsr were i 

aša xgfregrfir ufa ef port 120 1 

The Himālayas said: "O Devi! If Thou art 
merciful on me, I desire, then, to see Thy Virāt 
form in the Fourth Dimensional Space. 

This sight is developed when the mind resides 
in the heart centre or in the centre of the eye-brows. 
A proper teacher is necessary.” 

ONT sare 

pla cer oe: rat wet Sat: ferma: | 

eRgfeanurnr TAN ues u210 

aa Wen Aiea AARAA fear | 

eva wd sat 422 


Vyasa said: O King! Hearing the words of 


Girirāja,Visņu and all the other Devas gladly 
seconded him. Then the Devi, the Goddess of the 
Universe, knowing the desires of the Devas, 


showed Her Own Form, that fulfils the desires of 


the Bhaktas, that is auspicious and that is like the 
Kalpa Vrksa towards the Bhaktas. 

ayes Tee freed WTAE d 

enters weer urggat a want 23 1 

fam: st ae dat: wrath arg: venti: 1 

fast gaeng: uférdi werd ayy 1 24 n 


ART ATR TaN HURT | 
ECT wlan varesreiien HS wmm 25 t 
AU! feq Uae: Ren: | 
SRSA Mes wg: red: sq MNP: 25 1 
APTA qt edt Ta TO TT TEL: i 


Wants: waren faerit a want 11 27 1 
They saw Her Highest Virat Form. The 


855 


Satyaloka is situated on the topmost part and is 
Her head; the Sun and Moon are Her eyes; the 
quarters, Her ears; the Vedas are Her words; the 
Universe is Her heart; the earth is Her loins; the 
Bhuvarloka is Her navel; the asterisms are Her 
Thighs; the Maharloka is Her neck; the Janarloka 
is Her Face; the Taparloka is Her head, situated 
below the Satyaloka; Indra and the Devas and the 
Svarloka is Her arms; the sound is the organ of 
Her ears; the A$vin twins, her nose; the smell is 
the organ of smell; the fire is within Her face; day 
and night are like Her two wings. 

ART ĒST: wA: 1 

vat fsrgr VATETAT AT der: Vaitftam: 028 u 

SMT Aen AT STA ATT Vett feiert 1 

miai: varqdtteatgt wera: 11 29 u 

PA: emeden THAT gu | 

ITG Wd ware: eer serdtact u 30 u 

The four-faced Brahma is Her eyebrows; water 
is Her palate; the juice thereof is Her organ of taste; 
Yama, the God of Death, is Her large teeth, the 
affection is Her small teeth; Maya is Her smile; 
the creation of Universe is Her sidelooks; modesty 
is Her upper lip; covetousness is Her lower lip; 
unrighteousness is Her back. 

FA: war raseh gear ngg: 1 

AEN AST: WAST GAM: Se: Wendt: 31 N 

The Prajapati is Her organ of generation; the 
oceans are Her bowels; the mountains are Her 
bones; the rivers are Her veins; and the trees are 
the hairs of Her body. 

Amana ASe ET 1 

AGA AN: vp: Hea a ara fa: 320 

maara AA: EUH | 

PARTS Kg eft Salsa HUT wm 33 N 

O King! Youth, virginity, and old age are Her 
best gaits, positions or ways (courses) paths, the 
clouds are Her handsome hairs; the two twilights 
are her clothings; the Moon is the mind of the 
Mother of the Universe; Hari is Her Vijūāna Sakti 


456 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


(the knowledge power); and Rudra is Her all 
destroying power. 

Mamma: wal: sifüregt ere feret: i 

ATARI: HEUAMAATA Wat: 1 34 u 

arg NEU «SEN: gran | 

The horses and other animals are Her loins; the 
lower regions Atala, etc., are Her lower regions 
from Her hip to Her feet. The Devas began to 
behold Her this Cosmic (Virat) appearance with 
eyes, wide awake, with wonder. 

ssremremaeeres after a reat i035 u 

dErmeaenrd add efmufamWn | 

"Target v sereni wp Aq 36 | 

wari weet wem d 

festes: — ferentem 037 0 

Thousands of fiery rays emitted from Her form; 
She began to lick the whole universe with Her lips; 
the two rows of teeth began to make horrible sounds; 
fires came out from Her eyes; various weapons were 
seen in Her hands; and the Brahmanas and Ksattriyas 
are become the food of that Awful'Deity. Thousands 
of heads, eyes and feet were seen in that form. Crores 
of Suns, crores of lightnings flashes, mingled there. 
Horrible, Awful, That appearance looked terrific 
to the eyes, heart and mind. 

sient WA Tai | 

AE Yu: Us Kermi a at N 38 U 

fahmga Yeg, | 

ert a oad dei maA 139 1 

The Devas thus beheld and began to utter cries 
of horror and consternations; their hearts trembled 
and they were caught with immoveable senseless- 
“Here is the Devi, our Mother and Pre- 
this idea vanished away at once from 


ness. 
server.” 
their minds. 
aya à Rear darīta verteret: i 
SAMY velat Heo u 40 i 
aa a dancer aaa er ANTR | 
Wagga KATE fH 4410 
MORN are wed wupWefent | 


At this moment the Vedas that were on the four 
sides of the Devi, removed the swoon of the Devas 
and made them conscious. The Immortals got, the, 
the excellant Vedas; and, having patience, began 
to praise and chant hymns in words choked with 
feelings nad with tears of love flowing from their 
eyes. 

dar He: 

amat anrea ule diag ETA |1 42 0 

wd dex Wafer waa SA, | 

ar wd tafe: Varde urate 43.0 

The Devas said: “O Mother! Forgive our faults. 
Protect us, the miserable, that are born of Thee. O 
Protectress of the Devas! Withhold Thy anger; we 
are very much terrified at the sight of Thy this form. 

PATA Ware Bara If: | 

aaah Hel a ferat was 44 tl 

"Hed qari art woranferch | 

adami mt dien 45 i 

O Devi! We are inferior immortals; what prayers 
can we offer to Thee! Thou Thyself canst not 
measure Thy powers; how then can we, who are 
born later, know of Thy greatness! Obeisance to 
Thee, the Lady of the Universe! Obeisance to Thee 
of the nature of the Pranava Om. 

TART: ATTA TATA ASAT: | 

BANAT: TAT Tae AT: 1-46 4 

ATS dt: HITT: ATLA: UTT UA WI | 

uas WAM M Pate AA: 047 ü 

Thou art the One that is proved in all the 
Vedāntas. Obeisance to Thee, of the form of Hrim! 
Obeisance to Thee, the Self of all, whence has 
originated the Fire, the Sun, and the Moon and 
whence have sprung all the medicinal plants. 
Obeisance to the Devi, the Cosmic Deity, the Self 
in all whence have sprung all the Devas, Sadhyas, 
the beasts, birds, and men! 

uma sitftecit au: rag oed TAIT | 

sereni faftrsra camel HER: 48 uU 


Book VII Chapter XXXIV 


wr Wrote ARATE: AUT Ue d | 

AM: wur TAT KITT et AAS AM: 1049 U 

We bow down again and again to the Great 
Form, Maha Maya, the Self of all, whence have 
sprung the vital breath Prana, Apāna, grains and 
wheats, and Who is the source of asceticism, faith, 
truth, continence and the rules what to do and what 
not to do under the present circumstances. The 
seven Pranas, the seven Lokas, the seven Flames, 
the seven Samidhs, the seven Oblations to Fire, 
have sprung from Thee! 

ATA fua: fuera: wentfe u | 

"umen: Wat TATETEĀ AA AA: WSO N 

Obeisance to Thee, the Great Self in all! 
Obeisance to the Universal form of the Deity of 
the Universe Whence have sprung all the oceans, 
all the mountains, all the rivers, all the medicinal 
plants and all the Rasas (the tastes of all things). 

WAT: AAA cat UB ufa i 

weet daļā erf AT Tata Ae: N S1 N 

"TH: GERMS U AK urgļutgat: | 

ater mead gide maS ART AA: N 52 Ni 

We bow down to that Virāt Form, the Great Self, 
the Mahā Māyā, whence have originated the 
sacrifice, the sacrifical post (to which the victim 
about to be immolated is bound) and Daksiņās (the 
sacrificial fees) and the Rk, the Yajus, and the Sama 
Vedas. O Mother! O Maha Maya! We bow down 
to Thy front, to Thy back, to Thy both the sides, to 
Thy top, to Thy bottom and on all sides of Thee. 


657 


aria AA SAAREN | 

we aan md UTE 53 N 

O Devi! Be kind enough of withhold this 
extraordinary Terrific Form of Thine, and shew us 
Thy Beautiful Lovely Form.” 


et Save: 


gfe sfr pe quam serate GŪTU i 
dea wt uH Au WAT ou 54 d 
mmige water | 
semgha tweety uss i 


FEM egest we var sfrferferafoiar: | 

wrth: we gue 56 N 

ofa sfera. serņnt gares; dria 
TIRSA: 1133 11 


Vyāsa said: O King! The World Mother, the 
Ocean of mercy, seeing the Devas terrified, 
withheld Her Fearful Cosmic Form and showed 
Her very beautiful appearance, pleasing to the 
whole world. Her body became soft and gentle. In 
one hand She held the noose, and in another She 
held the goad. The two other hands made signs to 
dispel all their fears and ready to grant the boons. 
Her eyes emitted rays of kindness; Her face was 
adorned with beautiful smiles. The Devas became 
glad at this and bowed down to Her in a peaceful 
mind and then spoke with great joy. 

Here ends the Thirty-third Chapter of the Seventh 
Book on the Devi’s Virat Ripa in the Maha 
Puranam, Srimaddevibha gavatam of 18,000 verses, 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book VII Chapter XXXIV 857 


Aoc el T oc a oc 0-9 V m J J Ar aeeeseen ya r wre t J Home 


CHAPTER XXXIV 


On the Final Emancipation 


sitģegara is my affection towards the Bhaktas that I have 
a ye wana d dd wd weg | shewn to you all this great form of mine. 
wenfü arrarcaearētavi att war ud tt a agra ara | 


wu xEfüd vrad aci cept fm 2 n 
Ved WO TS USA staan | 
saranda: aia ll 3 u 


Nobody can see this form without My Grace; 


The Devi said: "O Devas! You are not at all 
worthy to see this My Wonderful Cosmic Form. 
Where are Ye! and where is this My Form! But it 


858 


Srīmaddevībhāgavatam 


the study of the Vedas, the Yoga, the gift, the 
Sacrifice, the austerities or any other Sadbanas are 
quite incompetent to make this form visible to 
anybody. O King of mountains! Now hear the real 
instructions. The Great Self is the only Supreme 
Thing in this world of Maya (Illusions). 

far: cafe fafan eratertfadaa: | 

AMR: une TUSSI ped 4 N 

Wrataramarradtt: aa | 

AeA Wess BIT u 5i 

He it is that under the various Upadhis of an 
actor and enjoyer performs various functions leading 
to the Dharma (righteousness) and the Adharma 
(unrighteousness). Then he goes into various wombs 
and enjoy pleasure or pain according to his Karma. 
Then again owing to the tendencies pertaining to 
these births he becomes engaged in various functions 
and gets again various bodies and enjoys varieties 
of pleasures and pains. 

UTT A fara: craft fea 

AMAA Yet TART: ATA: PRR: 6 d 

O Best of Mountains! There is no cessation of 
these births and death; it is like a regular clockwork 
machine; it has no beginning and it goes on working 
to an endless period. Ignorance or Avidyā is the 
Cause of this Sarnsara. Desire comes out of this 
and action flows thence. So men ought to try their 
best to get rid of this Ignorance. 

Tenens cunda Pad au d 

vaia IATA ACSA ATT 7 odi 

O, King of Mountains! What more to say than 
this that the Goal of life is attained when this 
Ignorance is destroyed. The highest goal is 
attained by a Jiva when he becomes liberated, 
while living. 

gaura wfespmesmsRr wo 

waar wat fewer g drat us d 

And Vidya is the only thing that is able and 
skilful in destroying this Ignorance. (As darkness 
cannot dispel darkness, so) the Karma done out of 


Ignorance is Ignorance itself; and such a work 
cannot destory Ignorance. 

a at cast Aaien fau i 

VIAN SATAY cium tat TEA 11 9 

andar mai ga: waesift fe 1 

wat TTT Sea SAA werdq u 10 N 

So it is not proper to expect that this Avidya 
can be destroyed by doing works. The works are 
entirely futile. Tbe Jivas want again and again the 
sensual enjoyments out of this Karma. Attachment 
raises out of this desire; discrepancies creep in and 
out of this ignorant attachment great calamities 
befall when such faults or discrepancies are 
committed. 

weedeat A ATE: | 

gilde aati: eniwreyeenu 11 N 

gres fi acd: ITU: | 

"wert sare ATR fügen wp 012 U 

So every sane man ought to make his best ef- 
fort to get this Jūānam (knowledge). And as it is 
also enjoined in the Srutis that one ought to do 
actions (and try to live one hundred years) so it is 
advisable to do works also. Again the Srutis de- 
clare that the “final liberation comes from Knowl- 
edge’ so one ought to acquire Jianam. If both these 
be collectively followed, then works become ben- 
eficial and helping to Jianam. 

fa hagdan afettera wee d 

sufre: vare SHAG: 13 0 

rud wegred fatter warn 1 

wu: Vamgratdgeitmad a as ud4 

(Therefore the Jivas should take up both of 
these.) Others say that this is impossible owing to 
their contradictory natures. The knots of heart are 
let loose by Jñānam and the knots are knit more by 
Karma. So how can they be reconciled! They are 
so very diametrically opposite. Darkness and light 
cannot be brought together, so Jīānam and Karma 
cannot be brought together. 


aerea ani drfarenrf-r rera. 1 
raga wean paiT: (1 15 N 


Book VII Chapter XXXIV 
prt aaa a dari URI: | 
maada wy: cenWifr- aa: TAL N 16 d 
Therefore one ought to do all the Karmas as best 
as one can, as enjoined in the Vedas until one gets 
CittaSuddhi (the purification of one’s heart and 
mind). Karmas are to be done until Sama (the control 


of the inner organs of senses), Dama (the control 
of the outer organs of senses), Titiksà (the power 
to endure heat and cold and other dualities), 
Vairagyam (Dispassion), Sattva Sambhava (the birth 
of pure Sattva Guna in one’s own heart) take place. 

Tet Wa durer HAEATA | 

sit agrs er orent Preatsrean qa: 117 0 

After these, the Karmas cease for that man. Then 
one ought to take Samnyasa from a Guru (Spiritual 
Teacher) who has got his senses under control, who 
is versed in the Srutis, attached to Brahma 
(practising the Yogic union with Brahma). He 
should approach to him with an unfeigned Bhakti. 

aqasi pataani: 1 

qaren Premed aÀ 11 1 8 1 

amenar g aade, | 

TA m Aning wgurfg wsmed n19 11 

vaatan: ga areata: | 

MAG greet Rsi Rea: 120 1 

He should day and night, without any laziness, 
do Śravaņam, Mananam, and Nididhyāsanam 
(hearing, thinking and deeply realising) the 
Vedānta saying. He should constantly ponder over 
the meanings of the Mahavakyam ‘Tat Tvam Asi.’ 
‘Tat Tvam Asi’ means Thou art That; it asserts the 
identity of the Supreme Self (Brahma) and 
Embodied Self (Jivàtma). When this identity is 
realised, fearlessness comes and he then gets My 
nature. First of all, he should try to realise (by 
reasoning) the idea conveyed by that sentence. By 
the word ‘Tat’ is meant Myself, of the nature of 
Brahman; and by the word "Tvam' is meant ‘Jiva’ 
embodied self and the word ‘Asi’ indicates, no 
doubts, the identity of these two. 


859 


TG U areal sita wat A yn: 1 
swghegnRr wet read JÀ: 27 1 
arcardaifdegrarani ta utt € | 
MATA: Wea TAA: PTAA: 11 22 UI 
The two words “Tat and ‘Tvam’ cannot be 
apparently identified, as they seem to convey 
contradictory meanings (‘Tat implying 
omniscience, omnipresence, and other universal 
qualities and ‘Tvam’ implying non-omniscience 
and other qualities of a limited nature). So to 
establish the identity between the two, one ought 
to adopt Bhagalaksmana and Tyāgalaksmaņā. 

Note: Bhagalaksmana—kind of Laksmana or 
secondary use of a word by which it partly loses and 
partly retains its primary meaning also called 
Jahadajahallaksana. Tyāga Laksmana—a secondary use 
of a word by which it loses partly its primary meaning. 

fort g tete MARGRIEU tera: 1 

Talat Ta ATT AMSAT WaT 123 u 

The Supreme Self is Brahma—Consciousness, 
endowed with the omniscience, etc., and the 
Embodied Self is Limited Jiva Consciousness, 
etc.). Leaving aside their both the adjuncts, we take 
the Consciousness, when both of them are 
indentical and we come to Brahma, without a 
second. 

ew: U araara IUD | 

wgenfaqudüd! sur dūda A: 124 

The example is now quoted to illustrate what is 
called Bhagalaksanà and Tyāgalaksaņā. "This is 
that Devadatta’ means Devadatta seen before and 
Devadatta seen now means one and the same 
persons, if we leave aside the time past and the 
time present and take the body of Devadatta only. 

USA: TAK: | 

wma RTMM: ādā 25 

Rems annn vé Aaa: | 

RSA FT SATE: LATTA 3 AMAT tt 26 N 

This gross body arises from the Paiicīkrta gross 
elements. It is the receptacle of enjoying the fruits 


860 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


of its Karma and liable to disease and old age. This 
body is all Maya; therefore it has certainly no real 
existence. O, Lord of Mountains! Know this to be 
the gross Upadhi (limitation) of My real Self. 

arated MaE, | 

Wdlgfangpd waged aaa fag: 1 27 0 

arua pde YANSA: | 

Rasai: verreqaraverstren: 1128 N 

The five Jūanendriyas (organs of senses), five 
Karmendriyas (working organs), the Prana Vayus, 
mind and Buddhi (rational intellect), in all, these 
seventeen go to form the subtle body, Süksma 
Deha. So the Pandits say. This body of the Supreme 
Self is cuased by the Apaūcīkrta five original 
elements. Through this body, pain and pleasure are 
felt in the heart. This is the second Upādhi of the 
Atman. 

sarfrateattiarard g gets: à 

ARTS ATT ALOT AAT 0 29 N 

suia sit hares aT | 

WA aR N: H WANT 30 u 

The Ajñāna or Primeval Ignorance, without 
beginning and indescribable, is the third body of 
the Atman. Know this also to be my third Upadhi. 
When all these Upadhis subside, only the Supremed 
Self, the Brahman remains. 

"Warrant verges fü vnum | 

"fecidtenfeareddm wu uwgen 131 N 

"rwr frat qenarferemt 

Wea A aya HAT | 
erst Fra: Virts quit 
A eit gamma su ua2 

Within these three gross and subtle bodies, the 
five sheaths, Annamaya, Pranamaya, Vijtianamaya, 
and Anandamaya always exist. When these are 
renounced, Brahmapuccha is obtained. That is 
Brahma and My Nature, too, This is the Goal of 
‘Not this, Not this’ the Vedanta words. This Self 
is not born nor It dies. It does not live also, being 
born. (But it remains constant, though It is not 


born). This Self is unborn, eternal, everlasting, 
ancient. 
at dared KATRA KAT | 
sett dt a ferardtdt are eat A gura 11 33 1 
amuta AKATATETSTA 
IARA gera | 
Ag: Uvater aA ung: 
UATARA 0034 N 
It is not killed, when the body is killed. If one 
wants to kill it or thinks It as slain, both of them do 
not know; this does not kill nor is it killed. This 
Atman, subtler than the subtlest, and greater than 
the greatest, resides within the cave (the Buddhi) 
of the Jivas. 
arent tart fate vU tata oq | 
wg g ante fats wa: ume wp 35 N 
Sat garargfisratedg Wen i 
IRA ated career: 136 i 


He whose hearts is purified and who is free 
from Sankalpa and Vikalpa (doubts and mental 
phenomena), knows It and Its glory and is free 
from sorrows and troubles. Know this Atman and 
Buddhi as the charioteer, this body as the chariot, 
and the mind as the reins. The senses and their 
organs are the horses and the objects of 
enjoyments are their aims. The sages declare that 
the Atman united with mind and organs of senses 
enjoys the objects. 

aeaaea TATA ASSET: | 

A werearer Han arrester 37 1 

wed Aana RKK: War VA: i 

a g arene ATG sm 38 N 

He who is non-discriminating, unmindful, and 
always impure, does not realise his Ātman; rather 
heis bound in this world. He who 1s discriminating, 
mindful, and always pure reaches the Goal, realises 
the Highest Self; and he is notfallen again from That. 

HTVIGATAU | 

Asaa: umet adtei aeat Var lt 39 N 

Bea ATA RTU Pea A 

ATARI TI PATA SAT wr 40. i 


Book VII Chapter XXXIV 


661 


That man becomes able to cross the Ocean of 
Sarnsāra and gets My Highest Abode, of the natuare 
of everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss, 
whose charioteeris Discrimination, and who keeps 
his senses under control by keeping tight the reins 
of his mind. Thus one should always meditate 
intensely on Me to realise the nature of Self by 
Sravanam (hearing), Mananam (thinking) and 
realising one’s own self by one’s Self (pure heart). 

agen: Up KRAMA | 

raia eae mrexeteuut: 11 41 1 

THN: CAE: CURA: UREA: | 

Sam mnmensdrgientsé TAHA 42 N 

When by the constant practise, as mentioned 
above, one's heart is fit for Samadhi (being ab- 
sorbed in the Spirit), just before that, he should 
understand the meaning of the separate letters in 
the seed Mantra of Mahāmāyā. The letter ‘Ha’ 
means gross body and the letter *Ra' means subtle 
body and the letter ‘I’ means the causal body; the 
(dot over the semicircle) is the fourth “Turiya’ state 
of Mine. 


: W43l 

amia q maag: | 

at earn dl dete 44V 

Thus meditating on the separate differentiated 
states, the intelligent man should meditate on the 
aforesaid three Bijas in the Cosmic body also and 
he should then try to establish the identity between 
the two. Before entering into Samadhi, after very 
carefully thinking the above, one should close one's 
eyes and meditate on Me, the Supreme Diety of 
the Universe, the Luminous and Self-Effulgent 
Brahma. 

mari enit Heat amamatecertiutt i 

Aaaa divert feum: 445 0 

TTT Peas peer perat TA TACT à 

we funeri war praca uae 

wart deb Genf ufq | 


$e wearer denm uaemüq N 47 N 
O Chief of Mountains! Putting a stop all worldly 
desires, free from jealousy and other evils, he 
should (by constant practise of Pranayama) make 
equal according to the rules of Pranayama, the 
Prana (the inhaled breath) and Apana (the exhaled 
breath) Vayus and with an unfeigned devotion get 
the gross body (Vai$vànara) indicated by the letter 
*Ha' dissolved in the subtle body Taijasa, the 
Taijasa body, the letter *Ra' is in a cave where 
there is no noise (in the Susumnā cave) after that 
He should dissolve the Taijasa, ‘Ra’ into the Causal 
body ‘I’ He should then dissolve the Causal body 
the Prajiia ‘I’ into the Turiya state Hrim. 
arrears Raaff, | 
erui uaaa wredetvsuiqt 48 II 
fa tura UL TATA ARTA: | 
aga wa wate gana da: 0449 
Then he should go into a region where there is 
no speech or the thing spoken, which is absolutely 
free from dualities, that Akhanda Saccidananda 
and meditate on that Highest Self in the midst of 
the Fiery Flame of Consciousness. O, King of 
Mountains! Thus men by the meditation men- 
tioned above, should realise the indentity between 
the Jiva and Brahma and see Me and get My Na- 
ture. 
ATTRA SAAT qESIT ATATRITI TATA | 
AAT TTA TAA ATTY TAT N 50 N 
oft Adema ergo? aa sahara 
AGA MST: 1134 11 
O Lord of Mountains! Thus the firmly resolved 
intelligent man, by the practise of this Yoga sees 
and realise the nature of My Highest Self and 
destroys immediately the Ignorance and all the 
actions thereof.” 
Here ends the Thirty-fourth Chapter of the Seventh 
Book on the Knowledge, Final Emancipation in the 
Maha Purāņam, Srimaddevi bhagavatam, of 18,000 
verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


662 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


CHAPTER XXXV 
On the Yoga and Mantra Siddhi 


Rua sara 

art ag nem ui fnr i 

AT da nutsé wae wey ug 

Himalaya said: ^O Mahešvarī! Now tell me the 
Yoga with all its Angas (limbs) giving the 
knowledge of the Supreme Consciousness so that, 
I may realise my Self, when I practise according 
to those instructions." 


sitāegara 
a atrīt ue: TÈ spits Tact | 


Sri Devi said: “The Yoga does not exist in the 
Heavens; nor does it exist on earth or in the nether 
regions (Pātāla). Those who are skilled in the Yogas 
say that the realisation of the identtiy between the 
Jīvātmā and the Paramātmā is ‘Yoga.’ 

"inita fares aratfirat aay: à 

wd amman wd: wp sag 

Ween UTRTTEd cart UTER WATT d 

emerge ARa grum: us n 

after Meat Erud gars satay | 

am efafiaren: virt Of aa ast 6 u 

wu: dale sr att Quer USAT i 

Rata savi da shifts wat gum 7 ou 

O Sinless One! The enemies to this Yoga are 
six; and they are lust, anger, greed ignorance, van- 
ity and jealousy. The Yogis attain the Yoga when 
they become able to destroy these six enemies by 
practising the accompaniments to Yoga. Yama, 
Niyama, Asana, Pranayama, Pratyāhāra, Dhāraņā, 
Dhyana, and Samadhi, these are the eight limbs of 
Yoga. Yama includes Ahirhsā (non-injuring; non- 
killing); truthfulness; Asteyam (non-stealing by 


mind or deed); Brahmacarya (continence); Daya 
(mercy to all beings); Uprightness; forgiveness, 
steadiness; eating frugally, restrictedly and clean- 
liness (external and internal). 

ava Fram: wrenb wen udganm | 

uaa waft up WE ume Wem us N 

drafta vith Augu, | 

water fra HTG BA 9 ou 

seta Ragen ganar: | 

Wemeafüfa tei sif gg 10 N 

These are ten in number. Niyama includes also 
ten qualities: (1) Tapasya (austerities and pen- 
ances); (2) Contentment; (3) Astikya (faith in the 
God and the Vedas, Devas, Dharma and Adharma); 
(4) Charity (in good causes); worship of God; hear- 
ing the Siddhāntas (established saying) of the 
Vedas; Hri or modesty (not to do any irreligious 
or blameable acts); Sraddha (faith to go do good 
works that are sanctioned); (9) Japam (uttering si- 
lently the mantrams, Gayatris or saying of Puranas) 
and (10) Homam (offering oblations daily to the 
Sacred Fire. There are five kinds of Asanas (Pos- 
tures) that are commendable: Padmasana, 
Svastikāsana, Bhadrāsana. Vajrāsana and Vīrāsana. 
Padmāsana consists in crossing the legs and plac- 
ing the feet on the opposite thighs (the right foot 
on the left thigh and the left foot on the right thigh) 
and catching by the right hand brought round the 
back, the toes of the right foot and catching by the 
left hand brought round the back the toes of the 
left foot; sitting then straight and with ease. This is 
recommended by the Yogis (and by this one can 
raise oneself in the air). 

Note: The hands, according to some, need not be 
carried round the back; both the hands are crossed and 
placed similarly on the thighs. 


Book VII Chapter XXXV 


863 


WHER UIK Wed Yn 1 
agent fersremft Rah Ag i110 
Haan: udder TAI Grrr i 
quur: regret urna wT u 12 u 
spar wert A: afghan 1 
Hal: rer HATA HAN: VISAS «13 t 
Place the soles of the feet completely under the 
thighs, keep the body straight, and sit at ease. This 
is called the Svastikāsana. Bhadrasana consists in 
placing well the two heels on the two sides of the 
two nerves of the testicles near the anus an catching 


by the two hands the two heels at her lower part of 


the testicles then sitting at ease. This is very much 
liked by the Yogis. 

ant Reene asaya | 

Wea UH: seat PTA debut 14 N 

smspenrat fastest dt 1 

Vajrasana (diamond seat) consists in placing the 
feet on the two thighs respectively and placing the 
fingers below the thighs with the hands also there, 
and then sitting at ease. Virasana consists in sitting 
cross on the hams in placing the right foot under 
the right thigh and the left foot under the left thigh 
and sitting at ease with body straight. 

gsarssatagmg sel MENMAN 15 N 

amaai anh Ag:UBUT g WDTUT | 

SUA TAG AMAA VD: 11 16 N 

aren Agaa da teeter: à 

Taking in the breath by the Ida (the left nostril) 
so long as we count ‘Om’ sixteen, retaining it in 
the Susumnā so long as we count ‘Om’ sixty-four 
times and then exhaling it slowly by the Pinglala 
nadi (the right nostril) as long as we count ‘Om’ 
thirty-two times. (The first process is called Püraka, 
the second is called Kumbhaka, and the third is 
called Reacaka). 

raat mga ARAT: 0017 11 

AT YA: HATA SEA AAT | 

Arata wage we u18 di 


This is called one Pranayama by those versed 


in the Yogas. Thus one should go on again with 
his Pranayama. At the very beginning, try with the 
number twelve, i.e., as we count ‘Om’ twelve times 
and then increase the number gradually, to sixteen 
and so on. 

maaa: rel ane «t agder: 

wed fēns a onai ut fag: 19 u 

Pranayama is of two kinds: Sagarbha and 
Vigarbha. It is called Sagarbha when Pranayama 
is performed with repeating the Ista Mantra and 
Japam and meditation. It is called Vigarbha 
Pranayama when ‘Om’ is simply counted and no 
other Mantram. 

PUTA: dut dt vasis: | 

nam: hadga wt: WT AKT: 4 20 0 

"wer cumenfürateedterifnmd | 

When this Pranayama is practised repeatedly, 
perspiration comes first when it is called of the 
lowest order, when the body begins to tremble, it 
is called middling; and when one rises up in the 
air, leaving the ground, it is called the best 
Pranayama. (Therefore one who practises 
Pranayama ought to continue it till he becomes able 
to rise in the air). 

shart Renai fem fate 27 1 

ATi ava: yerrenistuettad | 

Now comes Pratyahàra. The senses travel 
spontaneously towards their objects, as if they are 
without anyone tos check. To curb them perforce 
and to make them turn backwards from those 
objects is called ‘Pratyahara.’ 

TRH, 22 N 

ifte vest fermai aat afar i 

SIRE Tras HT greg aenfaftru 23 u 

aut re o tma Frerā 1 

To hold the Prana Vayu on toes, heels, knees, 
thighs, secrum, genital organs, navel, heart, neck, 
throat, the soft palate, nose, between the eyebrows, 
and on the top of the head, at these twelve places 
respectively is called the ‘Dharana.’ 


664 


amka AT Aaina 24 0 

arearaitseart wart LATTĒIETETĀ | 

maman Fret serenum 25 N 

MATIEM: ARRETARA, | 

sar mend ass UA N 26 N 

fast iah wenqaree AT | 

wesgatfiasrfrstfasdrauwua 11 27 0 

Concentrate the mind on the consciousness in- 
side and then meditate the Ista Devatā within the 
Jīvātmā. This is the Dhyana. Samadhi is identify- 
ing always the Jīvātmā and Paramātmā. Thus the 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


flower). On the left of this Susumnā is the Idā Nadi 
white and looking like Moon; this Nadi is of the 
nature of Force, nectar-like. On the right side of 
the Susumnā is the Pingalā Nadi of the nature of a 
male; it represents the Sun. 

weite ur g prar afgaf i 

arr wor RATE Sea i 31 n 

mÀ vast aft g efe i 

aged mariai q gue faga 32 N 

The Susumnā comprises the nature of the all 
the Tejas (fires) and it represents Fire. The inmost 


sages say. (Samadhi is of two kinds (1)|of Susumnā is Vicitrā or Citrini Bhülingam nadi 


Samprajiiata, or Savikalpak and (2) Nirvikalpak. 
When the ideas the Knower, Knowledge and the 
Thing Known, remain separate in the conscious- 
ness and yet the mind feels the one Akhafida 
Saccidananda Brahma and his heart remains, there, 
that is called Samprajfiata Samadhi; and when those 
three vanish away and the one Brahma remains, it 
is called Asamprajiiata Samadhi). Thus I have de- 
Scribed to you the Yoga with its eight limbs. O, 
Mountain! This body composed of the five ele- 
ments, and with Jiva endowed with the essence of 
the Sun the Moon, and the Fire and Brahma in it as 
one and the same, is denominated by the term 
'Vi$va.' 

fra: nerada yit ATSat Mat: 1 

AY gua a green era: i28 u 

There are the 350,000 nādīs in this body of man; 
of these, the principal are ten. Out of the ten again, 
the three are most prominent. 

WaT Tegu2ss aaah i 

sar are ferar aret Yur q aati 29 1 

Riran FA nA maaga | 

aAA an firrerrear Gear ufa 30 u 

The foremost and first of these three is Susumnā, 
of the nature of the Moon, Sun, and Fire, situated 
in the centre of the spinal cord (it extends from the 
sacral plexus below to the Brahmarandhra in the 
head at the top where it looks like a blown Dhustüra 


(of the form of a cobweb) in the middle of which 
resides the Iccha (will), Jüiàna (knowledge) and 
Kriya (action) Saktis, and resplendent like the 
Millions of Suns. 

aged q foramen Veci! venfauret à 

Seafarer q wt Urat Taha TĒVU 11 33 N 

were mei careuiqengeen | 

greenest vat aa fafue 134 N 

aged IE Wage CERTA d 

ateniargaita TATA, 35 N 

Above Him is situated Hrim, the Maya Bija 
Harātmā with ‘Ha’ and Candra Bindu repesenting 
the Sound (Nada). Above this is the Flame, Kula 
Kundalini (the Serpent Fire) of a red colour, and 
as it were, intoxicated. Outside Her is the Adhara 
Lotus of a yellow colour having a dimension of 
four digits and comprising the four letters ‘va’, "ša", 
‘sa’. The Yogis meditate on this. In its centre is 
the hexagonal space (Pitham). 

YAMA erent wt Ferg: 1 

Ta ut Rit igi «at fag: 36 tt 

aged «festo nA wenn 1 

kari fagani u agtsitud aq: 37 0i 

This is called the Mūlādhāra for it is the base 
and it supports all the six lotuses. Above its is the 
Svadhisthana Cakra, fiery and emitting lustre like 
diamonds and with six petals representing the six 
letters ‘ba’, *bha', ‘ma’, ‘ya’, ‘ra’, ‘la’. The word 


Book VII Chapter XXXV 


‘Sva’ means ‘Param Lingam’ (superior Male 
Symbol). Therefore the sages the sages call this 
‘Svadhisthan’ Cakram. 

niaig derer nAi eene 1 

GŪTU each seiman Raa 38 N 

fares Ari vat aoaaa | 

aged VEMARK, 039 0 

Above it is situated the ‘Manipura Cakram’ of 
the colour of lightning on clouds and very fiery; it 
comprises the ten petals, comprising the 10 letters 
da, dha, na, ta, tha, da, dha, na, pa, pha. The lotus 
resembles a full blown pearl; 
'Manipadma.' Visnu dwells here. 

moan waaay 1 

art MTK g Wu gqwHgm 40 u 

verted VIBE MA grad | 

arrest «resi BP: wfentiierg u 41 0 

Meditation here leads to the sight of Visnu. 
Above itis *Anātata” Padma with the twelve petals 
representing the twelve letters ka, kha, ga, gha, na, 
(ca), (cha), (Ja), (Jha,) fia, ta and tha. In the middles 
is Bānalingam, resplendent like the Sun. This lotus 
emits the sound Sabda Brahma, without being 
struck; therefore it is called the Anahata Lotus. This 
is the source of joy. Here dwells Rudra, the Highest 
Person.’ 

amaai aq yerube wu i 

ak farre pubis 421 

tat: Nend dati WETWSTH | 

faye a RTT TREAT t 43 Il 

Above it is situated the Vi$uddha Chakra of the 
sixteen petals, comprising the sixteen letters a, à, 
i, i, u, ü, r, F, li, lr, e, ai, o, ar, am, ah. This of a 
smoky colour, highly lustrous, and is situated in 
the throat. The Jivatma sees the Paramātmā (the 
Highest Self) here and it is purified; hence it is 
called Vi$uddha. This wonderful lotus is termed 
Ākāša. 

fy verenna UETGTA | 

Marah TA q amans RBA weg u 44 u 
55 


hence it is 


865 


anaim TA AAA wetter 0 

Rad zadah weal dept 045 

Above that is situated between the eyebrows the 
exceedingly beautiful Ajiia Cakra with two petals 
comprising the two letters ‘Ha’ and Ksa. The Self 
resides in this lotus. When persons are stationed 
here, they can see everything and know of the 
present, past and future There one gets the 
commands from the Highest Deity (e.g. now this 
is for you to do and so on); therefore it is called the 
Ajiia Cakra. 

moaned aged g Vt q aged: i 

we emari gere aa Gat 46 0 


wd AMIAR 047 

Above that is the Kailāša Cakra; over it is the 
Rodhini Cakra. O, One of good vows! Thus I have 
described to you all about the Adhàra Cakras. The 
prominent Yogis say that above that again, is the 
Bindu Sthan, the seat of the Supreme Deity with 
thousand petals. O Best of Mountains! Thus I 
declare the best of the paths leading to Yoga. 

erdt Kadam aaa: | 

"egit vifeRRTHTQ EU Wellen 48 11 

Now hear what is the next thing to do. First by 
the Pranayama, fix the mind on the 
Mulādhāra Lotus. Then contract and arouse the 
Kula Kundalini Sakti there, between the anus and 
the genital organs, by that Vayu. 

fergstaenidrar frgas er yet | 

VTA at ust aha fateri tt 49 u 

Pierce, then, the Lingams (the lustrous 
Svayambhu Adi Lingam) in the several Cakras 
above-mentioned and transfer along with it the 
heart united with the Sakti to the Sahasrāra (the 
Thousand petalled Louts). Then meditate the Sakti 
united with Sambhu there. 

adagi ay KATRU | 

refor q at ries ATareat eigen 50 1 


*Püraka' 


866 
wahana — Suit | 
ema Arto emm aa: Welt: 57 n 
There is produced in the Bindu Chakra, out of 
the intercourse of Siva and Sakti, a kind of nectar- 
juice, resembling a sort of red-dye (lac). With that 
Nectar of Joy, the wise Yogis make the Maya Sakti, 
yielding successes in Yoga, drink; then pleasing 
all the Devas in the six Cakras with the offerings 
of that Nectar, the Yogi brings the Sakti : down 
again on the Mūlādhāra Lotus. 
waren =| Pfr | 
yangia war: wa raat arta N 52 il 
Thus by daily practising this, all the above 
mantras will no doubt, be made to come to 
complete success. 


WRG ada Ta | 

a or: ata YET THRASH Ta 53. 

A YON: AIHA KARA TATA | 

sea afūd aa aang 054 N 

And one will be free from this Sarnsara, filled 
with old age and death, etc. O Lord of Mountains! 
I am the World Mother; My devotee will get all 
My qualities; there is no doubt in this. O Child! I 
have thus described to you the excellent Yoga, 
holding the Vayu (Pavana Dharana Yoga). 

sardi greet g Agarafēat au d 

feauremeratessqegt qat ferma w tt 55 i 

Now hear from Me the Dhārāņā Yoga. To fix 
thoroughly one's heart on the Supremely Lustrous 
Forces of Mine, pervading all the quarters, 


countries, and all time leads soon to the union of 
the Jiva and the Brahma. 

aaa sate fat sit adm TA | 

agar ane erat afa fani t vraie N56 N 

aasad unt IITHVEH | 

deere g NA wT 0057 ! 

Rr Ceara tart CAMS: | 

Raira: dt HEMTĀM: 158 N 

If one does not guickly do this, owing to 
impurities of heart, then the Yogī ought to adopt 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


what is called the “Avayava Yoga. O Chief of 
Mountains! The Sādhaka should fix his heart on 
my gentle hands, feet and other limbs one by one 
and try to conguer each of these places. Thereby 
his heart would be purified. Then he should fix 
that prurified heart on My Whole Body. 

Waa we ate aout diate wae i 

mae waft ug: area 59 u 

PAA Ufa RAAT Beas | 

ante feat wat ac UTT ferar few: 1160 U 

The practiser must practise with Japam and 
Homam the Mantram till his mind be not dissolved 
in Me, My Consciousness. By the practise of 
meditating on the Mantra, the thing to be known 
(Brahma) is transformed into knowledge. Known 
this as certain, that the Mantra is futile without 
Yoga and the Yoga is futile without the Mantra. 

saat fi erere erfsgeen um | 

runat dà uet dia ead Ner 

Wei maai EIGHT AAA Siberia: | 

vf AAA: GET: wir: et HSYAT | 

Taare srt aere VITAAITĒĀT: i 62 u 

efr sfera ergo? aaa 
VES: 1135 11 

The Mantra and the Yoga are the two 
infaliiable means to realise Brahma. As the jar in a 
dark room is visible by a lamp, so this Jīvātmā, 
surrounded by Maya is visible by means of 
Mantra to the Paramatma (the Highest Self). O 
Best of Mountains! Thus I have described to you 
the Yogas with their Angas (limbs). You should 
receive insturctions about these from the mouth of 
a Guru; else millions of Sastras will never be able 
to give you ° irue realisation of the meanings of 
the Yogas." 

Here ends the Thirty-fifth Chapter of the Seventh 
Book on the Yoga and the Mantra Siddhi in the Mahà 
Puranam Šrīmaddevī. bhagavatam of 18,000 verses, 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book VII Chapter XXXVI 


667 


CHAPTER XXXVI 
On the Knowledge of Brahman 


sittegarer ; 

zagen CATA ST i 

ween Preatsa maaa ngae: uod od 

afa: afafed qerat TH nga, | 

daadaa ANN 

Šrī Devi said: “O Himalayas! Thus making 
one’s own self attached to the Yoga by the above- 
mentioned process and sitting on a Yoga posture, 
one should meditate on My Brahma Nature with 
an unfeigned devotion. (How the knowledge of that 
Formless Existence and Imperishable Brahman 
arises, now hear.) He is manifest, near, yea, even 
moving in the hearts of all beings. He is the well- 
known Highest Goal. Know that all this whatever, 
waking, dreaming, or sleeping, which moves, 
breathes or blinks, is founded on Him. 

VASAT Heats ui 

PaAMTTERS WHAT | 
aarp sy a 
afateettan frfear alfa 3 0 

amagi Wa U Wud ates: | 

Ad waa are fae 4 u 

He is higher than Being and Non-being; higher 
than the Wisdom, He is the Best Object of adoration 
for all creatures. He is brilliant, smaller than the 
smallest and in Him the worlds are founded and 
the Rulers thereof. He is the Imperishable Brahman. 
He is the Creator (Life), the Revealer of Sacred 
Knowledge (speech) and Omniscient (or the 
Cosmic Mind). This is the Truth. He is Immortal, 
O Saumya! Know that He is the target to be hit. 

Note: The words ‘higher then wisdom’ mean higher 
than Brahma. (Brahma is the highest of all Jivas, higher 
than Brahma means higher than all creatures. The word 
Vijfiana denotes Brahma as we find in the following 
speech of Brahma in the Bhagavat Purana) ‘I, the 
Wisdom Energy (Vijiiana-Sakti) was born from the 


navel of this Being resting on the Waters and possessed 
of the Infinite Powers.’ 

Visnu is called ‘Prana’ because he is the leader of 
all (Prana-netri). He is called Vak, because He is the 
Teacher of all; Visnu is called Manas because He is the 
adviser of all (Mantri). He is the Controller of all the 
Jivas. 

The third verse lays down that Brahman is to be 
meditated upon or that the Manana should be performed; 
as the second verses teacher that Dhyàna or 
concentration also is necessary. 

Thus Sravana, Manana, and Dhyana of Brahman 
have been taught. This is the method of Brahma 
upāsanā. 


RAY AĢTATĀA XETUT 
wed adargt dre faig 5 a 
Worat Ig: VA ATT IET AAA AAS | 


WaT nen 


Take hold of the Mystic Name as the bow, and 
know that the Brahman is the aim to be hit. Put on 
this the great weapon (Om), the arrow (of the 
mind), sharpened by meditation. Withdraw thyself 
from all objects, and with the mind absorbed in 
the idea of Brahman, hit the aim; for know, O 
Saumya! That Imperishable alone to be the Mark. 
The Great name ‘Om’ is the bow, the mind is the 
arrow, and the Brahman is said to he the mark. It 
is to be hit by a man whose thoughts are 
concentrated, for then he enters the target. 

Ta: We wis ad: 1 
wade SITTSITRHTHTH-SIT 
ret aiamaa Ag: 7 n 

In Him are woven the heavens, and the inter- 
space, and mind also with the senses. Know Him 
to be the one Support of all, the Atman. Leave off 


868 


all other words (as well as the worship of other 
deities). This (Atman) is the refuge of the Immor- 
tals. 

‘He is the bridge of the Immortal’—the words 
Amrta or Immortal means Mukta Jivas. In the 
Vedanta Sitra I, 3-2, it has been taught that the 
Lord is the refuge of the Muktas. So also that ‘He 
is the Highest Goal of the Muktas.’ 

SRI ga taal deat TA ATSU: | 

a waded aga MANA: 18 N 

wife erana cater 

da: MTU TAA: WATA, | 
feet warqt af 
"amem HRS: uou 

In Him the life-webs (nadis) are fastened, as 
the spokes to the nave of a chariot; He is this 
(Atman) that pervades the heart, and by his own 
free will manifests Himself in diverse ways (as 
Vi$va, Taijasa, etc., in waking, sleeping, etc., 
states); and also as One as Prājña in the dreamless 
state. Meditate on the Atman as Om (full of all 
auspicious qualities and who is the chief aim of 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


qaum: yonda 
ufeftedtssr Kad afaa 1 
fara Rusif r 
amenuna uie 10 N 

He who is All-Wise, and All-Knowing, whose 
Greatness is thus manifested in the worlds, is to be 
meditated upon as the Atman residing in the Ether, 
in the Fourth Dimensional Space, in the shining 
city of Brahman (the Heart). He is the Controller 
of the mind and the Guide of the senses and the 
body. He abides in the dense body, controlling the 
heart. He, the Atman, when manifesting Himself 
as the Blissful and Immortal, is seen by the wise 
through the purity of the heart. 

frat waudfafsodd addgra: à 

giid are auifer afaret urrat 11 1 

The fetters of the Jivas are cut assunder, the ties 
of Lingadehas and Prakrti are removed (the effects 
of all) his works perish, when He is seen who is 
Supremely High (or when the Supremely High 
looks at the Jiva.) 
Note: Visņu is Parāvare, because Para or High 


the Vedas), in order to acquire the knowledge of | Beings like Rama; Brahmas, etc., are Avara or inferior 


the Paramatman, Who is beyond the Prakrti and 
the Sri Tattva. Your welfare consists in such 
knowledge. 

Note: This shows that Brahman is the Antaryamin 
Purusa. He resides in the heart where all the 72,000 
Nādīs meet, as the spokes meet in the navel of the wheel. 
He moves within the organs, not for His own pleasure, 
but to give life and energy to them all. The Om with all 

"its attributes must be constantly meditated upon. He 
manifests Himself in manifold ways in the waking and 
dreaming states as Vi$va and Taijasa; while He 
manifests as One in the state of Susupti or Dreamless 
sleep as Prajfia. He is beyond darkness; He has no mortal 
body. Meditate on such Visnu in the heart in order to 
get the Supreme Brahman, with the help of the Mantra 
Om. The result of such meditation is that there is the 
welfare of yours—all evils will cease, and you will get 
the bliss of the manifestation of the Divinity—your Real 
Self within your Heart. 


in His comparsion.] [| Note: This shows the result of 
Divine Wisdom in the last verse. The Avidyà covers 
both I$vara and Jiva. It prevents [svara being seen by 
Jīva, and Jiva seeing lávara. It is a direct bondage of 
Jiva and a metaphorical fetter of I$vara. Avidya is the 
name given to Prakrti in Her active state. When Her 
three qualities Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, are actively 
manifest. Destruction of Avidya means putting these 
Gunas in their latent state. There is a great difference 
between the destruction of the Avidyāl lfetters as taught 
in this verse, and the unloosening of them as previously 
described in this verse! There Avidyā still remained, 
for it was merely a Paroksa or intellectual apprehension 
of Truth. Here Avidya itself is destroyed by Aparoksa 
or Intuitive Knowledge of Brahman. 

The bonds are five: The lowest is the Avidya bond, 
then the Lingadeha bond, then the Pramācchādaka 
Prakrti bond, the Kama bond and the Karma bond. When 
all these bonds are destroyed, then the Jitānī goes by 


Book VII Chapter XXX VI 


the Path of Light to the Santamka Loka. Before 
proceeding further all have to salute the Sisumara—the 
Dweller on the threshhold—the hub of the Universe. 

The Šišumāra literally means the Infants Killer and 
means the porpoise and is the name of a constellation, 
in the north, near the Pole. It corresponds perhaps with 
the Draco or the Ursa Minor. For a fuller description of 
it, see Bhagavad Purana Book 5, Chapter 23. Here it is 
a mystical reference to a Being of an exalted order, 
which every Jini passes by, in his way beyond this 
Universe. It may correspond with the ring-pass not of 
the Secret Doctrine! It is the name of Hari, also, as we 
find the following verse “The Supreme Hari, the 
Support of infinity of worlds and who is called 
Sisumara, is saluted by all knowers of Brahma on their 
way to the Supreme God.” 

ferma ut atit farsi wet ferner | 

ai sairt Rea fag: 12 N 

The Brahman (called Si$umaram) free from all 
passions and parts (manifests in the external world) 
in the highest Golden Sheath (the Cosmic Egg). 
That is pure, that is the highest of Lights, is is that 
which the knowers of Atman know. 

Note: ‘He is in the Centre of the Cosmic (as 
Šišumāra, the Light of all Cosmic Suns). He is even in 
the centre of our Sun and illumining all planets.’ ] 

In the first respect He is meditated upon as Sisumara 
and in the second as Gayatri.’ 

Note: In man, the Brahman manifests in the heart or 
the Auric Egg. called the city of Brahman. In the 
Universe, He manifest Himself in the Cosmic Egg, 
called the ‘Golden Sheath.’ These are the two places 
where Brahman may be meditated upon. 

This verse has been explained in two different ways: 
First, as applying to SiSumára and secondly, as teaching 
how to meditate on Narayana in the Sun. The “Golden 
sheath' would then mean the Solar sphere. The 
Supremently High Brahman resides in the excellent 
Golden Sheath. He is Pure and Without parts. 


Ta smar udfird faut i 13 n 


869 


The Sun does not shine there in His Presence 
nor the Moon and the Stars (for His Light is greater 
than theirs, they appear as if dark in that Effulgence, 
like the candle-light in the Sun. Nor do these 
lightning, and much less this fire shine there. When 
He shines, everything shines after Him; by His 
Light all this becomes manifest. 

Him the Sun does not illumine nor the moon 
and the stars. Nor do these lightnings; much less 
this Fire illumines Him. When He illumines all (the 
Sun, etc.,) then they shine after (Him with His 
light). This whole Universe reveals His Light (is 
His Light and its Light is His). 

Note: The Sun, ete., do not illumine Him, i.e., cannot 
make Him manifest. 

HAA PRATT TMT STOTT LTT | 

auste a wad sd fad afte 14 i 

The Eternally Free is verily this Brahman only. 
He is in the West, in the North and the South, in 
the Zenith and the Nadir. The Brahman alone is; it 
is He who pervades all directions. This Brahman 
alone is it who pervades, This Brahman alone is 
the Full (that exists in all time the Eternity). This 
Brahman is the Best: 

This (idam) Brahman is alone the Vi$vam or 
Infinity or Full (pürnam). This alone is the Best, 
the Highest of all. As the word 'idam' is used 
several times in this verse, it qualifies the word 
Brahman and not 'viávam.' 

Note: The Brahman was taught to be meditated upon 
fully in the Heart and the Hiranmaya Ko$a. But lest 
one should mistake that He is thus limited in those two 
places, one is to infer that they are selected as the best. 

WaT WW CH Paral AAA | 

wee: WHemedr A vitae renis 15 u 

fādtarā wet minema = d 

aaka Asana nfģatutsft eva t 16 u 

The man who realise thus is satisfied and has 
all that he wants to do and is considered as the 
best. He becomes Brahman and his Self is pleased 
and he neithter wants anything nor becomes sorry. 


870 


O King! Fear comes from the idea of a second; 
where there is no second, fear does not exist. No 
danger then arises for him to be separated from 
Me. Nor I also get separated from him. 

spread fiad fag uda i 

Ev qp aa JA art WW 0017 0 

O Himalayas! Know that I am he and he is I. 
Know that I am seen there were My Jūānī resides. 

sé ate a ered rua ar HEPAT | 

warf fry rss unm 018 0 

Neither I dwell in any sacred place of 
pilgrimage, nor do I live in Kailāša nor in 
Vaikuntha nor in any other place. I dwell in the 
hear lotus of My Jüàni. 

MUTĒ AHA rat ser | 

ga fast ATT ret pera i 19 1 

fad yaad fereerat uem AT: | 

The blessed man who worships once My Jūiānī, 
gets Koti times the fruit of worshipping Me. His 
family is rendered pure and his mother becomes 
blessed. He whose heart is diluted in the all- 
pervading Brahma Consciousness, purifies this 
whole world. There is no doubt in this. 

aaa g age cae VAATA 40020 1 

aid Taran ae amat aviones ft i 

O Best of Mountains! I have now told everything 
that you asked about Brahma Jfiāna. Nothing now 
remains to be further described. 

sé wigra vara wfengennr vüfeni 21 u 

fermer er ANH eret ATTA fS | 

This Brahma Vidya (science of the knowledge 
of Brahma) is to be imparted to the eldest son, who 
is devoted and of good character and to him who 
is endowed with the good qualities as enumerated 
in the Šāstras and not to be given to any other 
person. 

"rm dā oT Rnd qa dem TĀ u22 n 

wer aftrat wat: Wentgta Terra: | 

He who is fuly devoted to his Ista Deva and 
who is equally devoted to his Guru, to him the high- 
minded persons should declare the Brahma Vidya. 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 

Aufa feed wo ws ume: 1231) 

weg Yad awarded eut | 

Verily, he is God himself, who advises this 
Brahma Vidya; no one is bale to repay the debts 
due to him. 

fiafia: viet ANTAR: 24 N 

Rai war ae Seed md ware | 

qÀ a garumā Aasaa 125 0 

He who gives birth to a man in Brahma, is, no 
doubt, superior to the ordinary father; for the birth 
that a father gives is destroyed; but the bith in 
Brahma that is given by the Guru is never 
destroyed. So the Sruti says: ‘Never do harm to 
the Guru who imparts the knowledge of Brahma. 

TATOOS STA TATA TE: W: | 

Pra +2 TTT Wt SE A vim 426 

In all the Siddhāntas (decided conclusions) of 
the Sastras, it is stated that the Guru who imparts 
the knowledge of Brahma is the best and the most 
honourable. If Siva becomes angry, the Guru can 
save; but when the Guru becomes angry, Sankara 
cannot save. 

amada E area à 

TĀ KAT arn dar dant WaT 27 N 

So the Guru should be served with the utmost 
care. So the Guru must be served with all the cares 
that are possible; by body, mind, and word one 
should always please Him. 

ITM q HAT: FAAC Ae fret: | 

zamada nyana 028 u 

sat aser ere Pros er afar à 

adta aa ae ugar et ArT 29 N 

ya: darf vete eret AETŠTETST i 

ofa Weedon were uw d 

SEIT SIS U UAT: WHAT YET (30 |I 

att MERITAT Weng) GAREA 
adhtara ANSATT: 1136 11 

Otherwise he becomes ungrateful and he is not 
saved. O Best of Mountains! It is very difficult to 
acquire Brahmajfiana. Hear a story. A Muni named 


Book VII Chapter XXX VII 


871 


Dadhyam of Atharvana family went to Indra and 
prayed to him to give Brahma Jiiana. Indra said: “I 
would give you Brahma Jana, but if you impart it 
to any other body, I would sever your head.” 
Dadhyama agreed to this and Indra gave him the 
Brahma-Jūāna. After a few days, the two Aévins 
came to the Muni and prayed for Brahma Vidya. 
The Muni said: “If I give you the Brahma Vidya, 
Indra will cut off my head." Hearing this the two 
Ašvins said: “We will cut your head and keep it 
elsewhere and we will attached the head of a horse 
to your body. Instruct us with the mouth of this 
horse and when Indra will cut off your this mouth, 


we will replace your former head.” When they said 
so, the Muni gave them the Brahma Vidya. Indra 
cut off his head by his thunderbolt. When the horse- 
head of the Muni was cut off, the two physicians 
of the Devas replaced his original head. This is 
widely known in all the Vedas. O Chief of 
Mountains! He becomes blessed who gets this the 
Brahma-Vidya.” 

Here ends the Thirty-sixth Chapter of the Seventh 
Book on the Highest Knowledge of Brahma in the 
Mahapuranam, Stimaddevibhagavatam, 
of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa. 


CHAPTER XXXVH 
On Self Realisation Spoken by the Devi 


Rume zara 
aia fé eats aa art qua fe | 
waa Aya CHESUREEUÉRRTRTUT: (1 Nu 
The Himalayas said: "O, Mother! Now describe 
your Bhakti Yoga, by which ordinary men who 
have no dispassion, get the knowledge of Brahma 
easily." 


sfteaqara 
miaa 3 orena nagre urn à 
eta waar wfesnup arm ou2u 
TANT ANT: asd TASH NAN i 
FIT TTT, 03 N 


maiga spere PHT ATT i 

vea: waraonedta u ou 5 d 

This Bhakti (devotion) again is of three kinds 
as the Gunas are three. His Bhakti is Tàmasi who 
worships Me, to pain other, being filled with vanity 
and jealousy and anger. That Bhakti is Rājasic 
when one worships Me for one's own welfare and 
does not intened to do harm to others. 

Fred Ware wei atA ga: 1 

venere ATT ST: u6 u 

He has got some desire or end in view, some 
fame or to attain some obects of enjoyments and 
ignorantly, and thinking himself different from Me, 


The Devi said: “O, Chief of Mountains! There| worships Me with greatest devotion. 


are three paths, widely known, leading to the final 
liberation (Moksa). These are Karma Yoga, Jriàna| 
Yoga and Bhakti Yoga. Of these three, Bhakti Yoga 
is the easiest in all respects; people can be do it 
very well without incurring any suffering to the 


Taq qp WE vem STATT UTE | 

Weg fr: uaren SUITS quem 7 At 
Amud cH ude a | 
Adma ended q warst 11 8 u 
Again that Bhakti is Sáttvik when anybody 


body, and bringing the mind to a perfect| worships Me to purify his sins, and offers to Me 


concentration. 


3porsterear- Terent ar sr fen fiarfere wert à 
wigi wufeyd wn wem WTA 14 i 


the result of all his Karmas, thinking that Jiva and 
ĪSvara are separate and knowing that this action of 
his is authorized in the Vedas and therefore must 
be observed. 


Book VII Chapter XXX VII 


871 


—————————————————————————————————————————————————— 


CHAPTER XXXVH 
On Self Realisation Spoken by the Devi 


Rume zara 
aia fé eats da md qua fe | 
waa Aya CHESUREEUÉRRTRTUT: (1 Nu 
The Himalayas said: "O, Mother! Now describe 
your Bhakti Yoga, by which ordinary men who 
have no dispassion, get the knowledge of Brahma 
easily." 


sfteaqara 
miaa 3 orena nagre urn à 
eta waar wfesnup arm ou2u 
TANT ANT: asd TASH NAN i 
FIT TTT, 03 N 


maiga spere PHT ATT i 

vea: waraonedta u ou 5 d 

This Bhakti (devotion) again is of three kinds 
as the Gunas are three. His Bhakti is Tàmasi who 
worships Me, to pain other, being filled with vanity 
and jealousy and anger. That Bhakti is Rājasic 
when one worships Me for one's own welfare and 
does not intened to do harm to others. 

Fred Ware wei atA ga: 1 

venere ATT ST: u6 u 

He has got some desire or end in view, some 
fame or to attain some obects of enjoyments and 
ignorantly, and thinking himself different from Me, 


The Devi said: “O, Chief of Mountains! There| worships Me with greatest devotion. 


are three paths, widely known, leading to the final 
liberation (Moksa). These are Karma Yoga, Jriàna| 
Yoga and Bhakti Yoga. Of these three, Bhakti Yoga 
is the easiest in all respects; people can be do it 
very well without incurring any suffering to the 


Taq qp WE vem STATT UTE | 

Weg fr: uaren SUITS quem 7 At 
Amud cH ude a | 
Adma ended q warst 11 8 u 
Again that Bhakti is Sáttvik when anybody 


body, and bringing the mind to a perfect| worships Me to purify his sins, and offers to Me 


concentration. 


3porsterear- Terent ar sr fen fiarfere wert à 
wigi wufeyd wn wem WTA 14 i 


the result of all his Karmas, thinking that Jiva and 
ĪSvara are separate and knowing that this action of 
his is authorized in the Vedas and therefore must 
be observed. 


672 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


gh Aaaa: 1 

fa dire af wie: ATT Ra n 9 u 

aaah: What Aggi | 

agit gp wat a oes wd uo N 

This Sāttvikī Bhakti is different from the 
Supreme Bhakti as the worshippers think Me 
separate; but it leads to the Supreme Bhakti. The 
other two Bhakti or the Highest unselfish Love.) 

agar UTA g urere Frater À i 

"pueri Pret AA ATT 11 

GAMTTINCTATATATAT ARI PTA 1 

Jad add ta damai Wat ou 2 u 

Now hear attentively about the Para Bhakti that 
I am now describing to you. He who hears always 
My Glories and recites My Name and whose mind 
dwells always, like the incessant flow of oil, in 
Me whois the receptacle of all auspicious qualities 
and Gunas. 

WA Ta at aft 4 raaa 1 

TT AIT 013 N 

naats fRA amener eféferq | 

dremdeendrurarenr Met a dist u4 i 

But he has not the least trace of any desire to 
get the fruits of his Karma; yea he does not want 
Samipya, Sārsti, Sayujya, and Salokya and other 
forms of liberations! He becomes filled with 
devotion for Me alone, worships Me only; knows 
nothing higher than to serve Me and he does not 
want final liberation even. 

Waa ara fuent gef: 

ma ni fred arate a fader: 15 0 

agus wart fiat ped g a: | 

"rer TTT vitiererirer er UTA 16 n 

He does not like to forsake this idea of Sevya 
(to be served) and Sevaka (servant who serves). 
He always meditates on Me with a constant 
vigilance and actuated by a feeling of Supreme 
Devotion; he does not think himself separate from 
Me but rather thinks himself 'that I am the 
Bhagavati.' 


Aran AAs Sd Hed qu: 

ada adma wdea wader 17 

"Hd aad Arare i 

q Hatt teg qued aaa ll 18 N 

He considers all the Jivas as Myself and loves 
Me as he loves himself. He does not make any 
difference between the Jivas and myself as he finds 
the same with anybody as he has abandoned all 
ideas about separateness; he bows down, and 
woships the Cāņdālas and all the Jīvas. 

aaa Hea AAT | 

TESA Teg Terres WaT 19 N 

af Wurpenrdt wifey: wer | 

PTT: ouem: 120 N 

He who becomes filled with devotion to Me 
whenever he sees My place, My devotees, and 
hears the Šāstras, describing My deeds, and 
whenever he meditates on My Mantras, he becomes 
filled with the highest love; and his hairs stand on 
their ends out of love to Me and tears of love flow 
incessantly from both his eyes; he recites My name 
and My deeds in a voice, choked with feelings of 
love for Me. 

Note: The Para Prema Bhakti is like the maddening 
tush of a river to the Ocean; thence in the shape of 
vapour to the highest Himalayan Mountain peaks to be 
congealed into snow where various plays of bright 
colours take place.] 

wera wea got amr | 

"rte semi AGRA, 4211 

erf vm foot fraai | 

Prat ur qed vac faraygmeufaatsra: 11 22 M 

O Lord of the mountains! He worships Me with 
intense feelings as the Mother of this Universe and 
the Cause of all causes. He performs the daily and 
occasional duties and all My vows and sacrifices 
without showing any miserly feeling in his 
expenditure of money. 

agate a gaap | 

Tad wer frd tavrarea WEN 023 


Book VII Chapter XXXVII 


873 


snig o We ae Ier i 

eméenfevfüdi aa SA: 024 0 

He naturally longs to perform My festivities and 
to visit places where My Utsavas are held. He sings 
My name loudly and dances, being intoxicated with 
My love, and has no idea of egoism and is devoid 
of his body-idea, thinking that the body is not his. 

WRT AMT Tet Had TAA TAT | 

a ĒKA of giem 25 u 

fet rf ar uror TI GT wr i 

"eat qeafefk q a ffrafü Tēma 11 2 6 N 

He thinks that whatever is Prārabdha (done in 
his previous lives) must come to pass and therefore 
does not become agitated as to the preservation of 
his body and soul. This sort of Bhakti is called the 
Parà Bhakti or the Highest Devotion. Here the 
predominent idea is the idea of the Devi and no 
other idea takes its place. 

ge ware VT after yet Arad: | 

Tea er frat Wee ferret wee 0 27 ui 

TET AT TBST Ha ATT Wontar, | 

areas a tT T a ages wd: 028 I 

O Mountain! He gets immediately dissolved in 
My Nature of Consciousness whose heart is really 
filled with such Para Bhakti or All Love. The sages 
call the limiting stage of this devotion and 
dispassion as Jūāna (knowledge). When this Jnana 
arises, Bhakti and dispassion get their ends 
satisfied. 

STRE HATA AEA WICSTAT A ATT | 

sme NA art ufūrgtu a reste |1 29 It 

TA meas aerem AT ALT SHEA | 

wa an fagua wr mds 4301 

Yea! He goes then to the Mani Dvipa, when his 
Aharikāra does not crop up by his Prarabdha 
Karma, though he did not fail to give up his life in 
devotion. O Mountain! That man enjoys there all 
the objects of enjoyments, though unwilling and 
at the end of the period, gets the knowledge of My 
Consciousness. By that he attains the Final 


Liberation for ever. Without this Jiiàna, the Final 
Liberation is impossible. 

Ot Wh: HITS TOT RRA ITT à 

sea Wer Wt TEAM: 031 d 

ae fermare Wot ast 3 | 

ada veee ada ga ae a: 32 

aud TART frg 1 

Wea erre fg wd 133 N 

He realises Para Brahma who gets in this body 
of his the above Jfiana of the Pratyak Atma in his 
heart; when his Prana leaves his body, he does not 
get re-birth. The Sruti says: ‘He, who knows 
Brahma, becomes Brahma.’ In the logic of Kantha 
Camikara, (gold on the neck) the ignorance 
vanishes. When this ignorance is destroyed by 
knowledge, he attains all his knowledge the object 
to be attained, when he recognises the gold on his 
neck. 

fafenstafemacana agru a 

ATA TAS SHAY GAT ret aT ATA 13.40 

rerit an wares fafa agaa fer 1 

Wa ea werd panafaa a 11 35 N 

O Best of Mountains! This My consciousness 
is different from the preceived pots, etc., and 
unperceived Maya. The image of this Paramatma 
is seen in bodies other than the Atma as the image 
falls in a mirror; as the image falls in water, so this 
Paramātmā is seen in the Pitrlokas. As the shadow 
and light are quite distinct, so in My Manidvipa, 
the knowledge of oneness without a second arises. 

"rep maana grat fr wh a 

Tale THA urdened qd: WU 1 36 N 

yea strat Te erem wr: Wa: d 

wer greri waren art fe wert 437 u 

That man resides in the Brahma Loka for the 
period of a Kalpa who leaves his body without 
attaining Jñāna, though he had his Vairāgyam. Then 
he takes his birth in the family of a pure prosperous 
family and practising again his Yoga habits, gets 
My Consciousness. 


874 

sana Wats SAT | 

aa: Wages rate ANAA, 0038 0 

Aeg: PTT KCN A: | 

cart gad auf daurférer gear 39 u 

O King of Mountains! This Jfiana arises after 
many births; it does not come in one birth; so one 
should try one’s best to get this Jfiana. If, attaining 
this rare human birth, one does not attain this Jriàna, 
know that a great calamity has befallen to him. 
For this human birth is very hard to attain; and 
then the birth in a Brahmin family is rarer; 
moreover amongst the Brahmins, the knowledge 
of the Veda (the Consciousness is exceedingly 
rare.) 

vafecendutrataRatgada wa 

adana: ata gA 40 u 

adao Uga dept AAT | 

aray A ST Wd: lt 41 U 

The attaining of the six qualities (which are 
considered as six wealth), restraint of passions, etc.; 
the success in Yoga and the acquisition of a pure 
real Guru, all these are very hard to be attained in 
this life. O Mountain! The maturity and the 
activities of the organs of the senses, and the 
purification of the body according to the Vedic rites 
are all very difficult to attain. Know this again that 
to get a desire for final liberation is acquired by 
the merits acquired in many births. 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


AT AHA SA wrerisfu ur AT: | 

amd da wad wer war fuse ua2 lt 

TATA AANA FATS ATA AAT | 

ua USB momar Fram i 43 u 

That man's birth is entirely futile, who attaining 
all the above qualifications does not try his best to 
attain this Jfiana. So one should try one's best to 
acquire the Jana. Then, at every moment, he gets 
the fruits of the ASvamedha sacrifice. There is no 
doubt in this. 

yaa wate Par? ya ya ae cate frame i 

Had Watered wre Waray 444 

As ghee (clarified better) resides potentially in 
milk, so the Vijfiana Brahma resides in every body. 
So make the mind the churning rod and always 
churn with it. Then, by slow degrees, the 
knowledge of Brahma will be attained. 

et wear Hare: fe daiafšfšm: i 

weed ware f& spar: sitafiresfu 11 45 u 

oft daddtarrad vert enm? adifiarai 
TARSAR 0037 11 

Man attains blessedness when he gets this Jāna; 
so the Vedanta says : Thus I have descirbed to you 
in brief, O King of Mountains! all that you wanted 
to hear. Now what more do you want?” 

Here ends the Thirty-seventh Chapter of the Seventh 
Book on the glories of Bhakti in the Mahé Purāņam, 
Srimaddevibhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


874 Srimaddevibhagavatam 


t teen ye ee eee 


CHAPTER XXXVIII 
On the Vows and the Sacred Places of the Devi 
ferrera sare Mother! Also sanctify us by describing the vows 
fe tart eat geet Wet i and utsavas that are pleasing to Thee, and by 
yen a aferarfor gatframamt wr 1 n performing which, men become blessed and get 
aerate cer urat gka afit à themselves satisfied. 
werd ae um HaHa dat AT: 2 i Ni 
The Himālayas said: "O Devi! Describe the 
places on this earth that are prominent, sacred, and | Wa ayd na tart Ge ETN HATTA: | 
worth visiting and which Thou likest best. O| sat: adimg ads dno 3 n 


Book VII Chapter XX XVIII 

Tarte srepareaearfedsfarfeehfereei Tere à 

saa wat ATTA TH AA 4 tl 

The Devi spoke: “O Himaván! All the places 
that are on this earth are all Mine and all should be 
visited. And every moment is fit for taking vows 
and utsabs. For I am of the nature pervading every 
moment; so whatever actions are performed at any 
moment are all equal to taking My vows and 
utsavas. O King of Mountains! Still I am now 
telling something out of My affection to My 
Bhaktas. Hear. 

iret Hee Bar raat: war Rī à 

ma: Ut fadi a veperfufed wer ous ou 

yomg qd ATA wg U | 

fiera rere waren w |1 6 Ut 

There is a great place of pilgrimage named 
Kolhapura in the southern country. Here the Devi 
Laksmi always dwells. The second place is 
Mātripura in the Sahyādrī mountain; here the 
Devi Renuka dwells. The third place is Tulajapur; 
next is the place Saptašrnga, the great places of 
Hingula and Jvalà Mukhi. 

yrhai: Ut Last smart: LATTA i 

sfr star ada a 117 11 


the great of Sakambhari, 
Bhrāmarī, Sriraktadantika and Durga. The best of 
all places is that of Vindhyācala Vāsinī, the great 
places of Annapürna and the excellent Kaficipur 


places 


(Conjiverum). 
iian: wt tart aree = 1 
tesa arama wuenu 
Aata: ut tart Radana | 
Wareatart «em sft wp 10 N 
Next come the places of Bhima Devi, Vimala 
Devi, Sri Candralà Devi of Karņāt, and the place 
of Kaušikī. Then are great place of Nīlāmbā on 
the top of the Nilàparvata, the place of 
Jāmbūnadešvarī, and the beautiful Srinagara. 


875 
"Teese wera Aare aegfefan | 

Titer: ad wart reg ure forget 11:7 
Wan wera deat wafers 1 

Triat erem TATA MASAA 12 N 

The great place of Sri Guhya Kali, well 


established in Nepal, and that of Šrī Mīnāksī Devi 
established in Cidamvaram. The great place 
named Vedāraņya where the Sundari Devi is 
residing; then the place named Ekàmvaram, and 
the place Bhuvanešvara near Purusottama where I 
always dwell as Para Sakti Bhuvanešvarī. 

Taree Ut tart dritgaterāa a d 

wer sfera: veri virg fag 13 u 

Serna qp seremerd wien wem i 

sitregtigadgat ufurdtd wn wp N 14 N 

The famous place of Madālasā, known in the 
south by the name Mallāri; the place of Yogešvarī 
Varāt, and the widely known place of Nila 
Sarasvati in China. The excellent place of Bagala 
in Baidyanath, the supreme place Manidvipa of 
Srimati Bhuvanešvarī where I always reside. 

Saag: HATA SAT | 

TS sare werransftrerrm 11 15 N 

Ad: VT tart wefuef tne | 

wear waedt wr AAT 0016 N 

The Yonimandala Kāmākhyā, the place of 
Šrīmatī Tripura Bhairavī, the excellent of all the 
places in this earth, where the Devī Mahā Māyā 
always dwells. There is no other place better than 
this on the earth. Here the Devi becomes every 
month in Her course of menstruation and where 
the virtuous men are seen. 

AT eae: Wal weareresdi We: | 

Wddy wer vert dam aft 17 

Here all the Devas remain in the form of 
mountains and where on the mountains the 
excellent Devas inhabit. 

aac yfc wat aen GAT art: | 

ATT: WAT um "18 


Treas wt vem streets | 


876 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


aA aftsar vara wenifánft n 19 n 

Aftrē g vereor et ur fergenfeoft 1 

Tee KERT STSTÉD cur TĒTETAT 00 20 N 

The sages say : That all the places there are of 
the nature of the Devi; there is no better place than 
this Kāmākhyā Yonimandala Puskara, the sacred 
place, is the seat of Gayatri; the place of Candika 
in Amareša; and the excellent place of Puskareksini 
in Prabhasa. The place of Lingadharini Devi in 
Naimisāraņya, and the place of Purubhütà in 
Puskaraksa; Rati dwells in Āsādhī. 

aeqréineran giek uus i 

wey wage epe 21 N 

APKART q afters afin riet erat | 

TAN PALA AN TATA 022 U 

vitet g ETA yato ATATĀTĒ i 

panned grata aet at ania 1 23 n 

Dandini Paramešvarī dwells in Caņdamuņdī- 
Bhüti dwells in Bharabhiti; and Nakulešvarī dwells 
in Nàkula. Candrika dwells in Hariscandra; Sankari 
in Srigiri; Trišūlā in JapeSvara; and Sūksmā in 
Āmrātakešvara. Sankari dwells in Ujjain, Sarvani 
in the place Madhyama, and Marga Dayini dwells 
in the holy Ksetra Kedara. 

frame EE CHE marat HeT EJAT 1 

TTT gest vardisponfu AH 1 24 u 

wer wag AIN frat a 

agers Vela WEX qp einem 425 n 

The celebrated Bhairavi dwells in the place 
named Bhairava; Mangala in Gaya Ksettra; 
Sthāņupriyā in Kuruksetra; and Svayambhuvi Devi 
dwells in Nākula; Ugra dwells in Kankhala; 
Visvesa dwells in Vimale$vara, Mahānandā in 
Attahāsa; and Mahāntakā in Mahendra. 

citēt oftthartt reir FT eremi qr: | 

srardt giant utt naoi catientfeds 1 2 6 u 

afge fasens NENT TETeT2 | 

Trent auf ENEA RAR 27 N 

sanai gani verto erorii 1 

TÀ q wem WAIST BER 28 u 


Bhimešvarī dwells in Bhima; the Bhavani Sankari 
dwells in Vastrāpadma; and Rudrāņī in Ardha Koti. 
Višalāksī dwells in Avimukta; Mahābhāgā dwells 
in Mahālaya; Bhadrakarni in Gokarna; and Bhadra 
resides in Bhadrakarnaka; Utpalaksi dwells in 
Suvarnaksa; Sthāņvīšā in Sthāņu; Kamala in 
Kamalālaya; Caņdā in Chagalandaka, situated in 
the south near the sea coast. 

ISA Prada TATA end st 1 

TEAN VBA! verteret ares FA: 11 29 u 

vigent tat: VIS Se META at | 

What eats Kat wat 130 0 

Trisandhyā dwells in Kurundala; Mukutešvarī 
in Mākota; Šāņdakī in Mandaleša; Kali in 
Kalafijara, Dhvani in Saükukarna; Sthūlā in 
Sthülake$vara; and Paramešvarī Hrllekhà dwells 
in the heart lotuses of the Jñanins. 

Vert care gem: Arrana wr à 

vere were sper web ub 031 

xa farra usnédi wos a 

The places mentioned above are all dearest to 
the Devi First the merits of these places are to be 
heard; next the Devi is to be worshipped by the 
rites and ceremonies according to these rules. 

aaar adaa aaa wise AI i 32 1 

aa da aAa wdnwfeeuguum 1 

afa cerrar duaa PRET 33 N 

aniren ga TATA RATA t 

ga gama wrereearea a: wq u34 N 

Or, O Mountain! All the holy places of 
pilgrimages exist in Kasi. The Devi always dwells 
there. Persons. devoted to the Devi, see these places 
and if they make Japam and meditate on the lotus- 
feet of the Devi, they will cartainly be freed from 
the bounds of Sarnsara; there is no doubt in this. If 
anybody, getting up in the morning, recite the 
names of these places, all his sins would instantly 
be burnt away. 

qeira urar r regnant AAT i 

Tea wdsdrenrenfa fame: 435 u 


Book VII Chapter XXX VIII 


877 


And if one reads, in the time of Šrāddha, before 
the Brahmins, these holy names of the Devi, his 
Pitrs will be purified of their sins in the Mahākāša 
by the Maha Prana and will get their highest goal. 

qara: ae went unt vf i 

aga paR wem we gaat 136 0 

ATA da cadet Vara: | 

Aamtgdtarei Iamftrftad 137 0 

ARTA TT ATT ad a a 

yamai Ya wem wTenpesf 38 u 

O One of good vows! I will now describe to 
you the vows that are to be carefully observed by 
men and women; hear. Ananta Trtiyakhya Vrata 
(vow), Rasakalyani Vrata, and Ardranandakara 
Vrata, these three Vratas are to be observed in the 
Trtiya (third) tithi. The next come the Friday vow, 
the Krsna Caturda$1 vows, the Tuesday vow, and 
the evening twilight vow. 

Amana da Ņetaata w | 

ga dat Wenger def dearer fast 139 0 

Ti mA yea: rel ANTA | 

Taare ad Wars yA RAT 40 tt 

In this twilight vow, Maha Deva places the Devi 
in the evening on an Asana; and He, along with 
the other Devas, began to dance before Her. Fasting 
is enjoined in this vow; and then in the evening 
one must worship the Devi, the Giver of all 
auspicious things. Especially in every forthight, if 
the Devi be worshipped, She gets extremely 


uA41 tt 

O Best of Mountains! The Monday vow is very 
agreeable to Me; the worship of the Devi should 
be done and then in the night one must take one’s 
food. 

carte gat Gages TAT ATTA ERT | 

maagi wa ad if ua nazm 

wereareafi ferit fererstfirferenrfer & à 

mR Hed at d Age ferme: 11 43 N 


T—— 


The two nine nights vow called Navarātra are 
to be observed, one in the autumn and the other in 
the spring season. These are very dear to Me. He 
is certainly My devotee and very dear who for My 
satisfaction performs these and the other Nitya 
Naimittik vows, free from any pride and jealousy. 
He certainly gets the Sajujya Mukti with Me. 

Wena Marge AA eren: AA für: | 

smart Hate areieqengarfsrsit 44 u 

water «tem Harter sme] i 

wierd wa paaa a 4s N 

Ufasteratrantt sumet KET, | 

HA th: Wal HAA AAA 46 N 

O Nagaraja! The Holy (Dol) festival in the 
month of Caitra on the third day of the white 
fortnight is very pleasing to Me and should be 
observed by all. My devotees perform the 
Sayanotsava in the Paurnamasi in the month of 
Asadha; the Jagaranotsava in the Paurņamāsī in 
the month of Kartika, the Ratha Yatra in the 3rd of 
the white fortnight in Āsādha; the Damanotsava in 
Caitra. And my dear festivals in the month of 
Šrāvaņa and various other festivals. 


ASM TAHA Ta Wa Fae: | 
sinrtdesiamfa masa AeA: 047 N 
ferrets teat aerea: à 
aud ged Wem wiredadixe: uas u 
"Her paS afta: WANAE à 


weed ware uu wWifrereen | 
qirara Varde ATTATA GATI 049 i 
gta afirmar "ergo? 
SAATTE ARSE: 1138 11 
Tn all these festivals one should feast well with 
gladness all My devotees, and the Kumaris 
(virgins), well clothed and dressed, and the boys, 
thinking them all to be of My very nature. No 
miserliness is to be entertained and I should be 
worshipped with flowers, etc. He is blessed and 
attains his goal and is dear to Me who carefully 
and devotedly observes every year all these 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


878 


festivals. O Nagendra! Thus I have described to| Here ends the Thirty-eighth Chapter of the Seventh 
you in brief all the vows that are pleasing to Me. | Book on the vows and the sacred places of the Devi 
These instructions are not to be given who is not a| i? the Maha Purāņam Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam, of 

disciple nor to one who is not My devotee.” 18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


878 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


CHAPTER XXXIX 
On the Worship of the Devī 


ftarera gara 
ea NAV Peasia | 
ate ya aeran AT PTS ll 1 
The Himālayas said: "O, Devī! O, Mahešvarī! 
O Thou, the Ocean of Mercy! O World-Mother! 
Now describe in detail how Thy worship is 
conducted, the rules and ceremonials thereof.” 


Wear 

ret nia vrerstfarenrerr «rer firn 1 

aera ae yoy wende 402 0 

ferfererr HA sr amarem ANAT fu V | 

rensfa fgfaen urenr feeit afarat qu i 3 u 

The Devi said: "O King of Mountains! I now 
describe to you the rites and ceremonies and the 
methods of My worship that are pleasing to Me. 
Hear it attentively and with faith. My worship is 
of two kinds: External and internal. The external 
worship is again twofold one is Vaidik, and the 
other is Tantrik. 

Raats füfaur after yar | 

fuent dfe: arat dedtaraafad: 11 4 ni 

wired afaet dfsrar erdt | 

ed KME pO teat faite 11 5 u 

The Vaidik worship is also of two kinds 
according to the differences in My forms. Those 
who are initiated in the Vedic Mantrams worship 
according to the Vedic rites and ceremonies and 
those who are initiated in the Tantrik Mantram 
worship; according to the Tantrik rites. That stupid 
man is entirely ruined and goes to Hell who 
knowing the secrets of worship, act contrary to 
them. 


aif at at We: U vada eem | 
TA OT Aft VERT VAT at qum i6 u 


ma "saat AA tunes usu 

First I will describe to you the Vaidik worship; 
hear. The highest Form of Mine that you saw 
before, with innumerable heads, innumerable eyes, 
innumerable feet, and the Illuminer of the 
intelligences of all the Jivas, endowed with all 
powers, Higher than the Highest, Very Grand, 
worship That, bow down to That and meditate on 
that. O Nogendra! This is the first form of worship 
that I describe to you. 

zagaa: cat afd aT | 

ma: waar dina: 119 u 

Aa va wemsft des vnub aa | 

ada Ua Uys uu Tata dar d 10 ud 

With your senses controlled, peaceful, with a 
well concentrated mind, void of egoism and vanity, 
and devoted to That, perform sacrifices to That, 
take refuge of That, see That within the temple of 
your mind, and always recite Her name and 
meditate on That. 

ATA VAT ATA: | 

ada atteraita Ufa ug 

geb wurQed! Wes TAT TAT | 

TERT À naaa WHAT WaT: 0012 |i 

Take hold of Me, and My ideas with one 
pointed loving devotion and please Me with the 
performance of sacrifices, austerities and gifts. By 
My Grace, you will no doubt be able to get the 


Book VII Chapter XXXIX 


879 


Final Liberation. Whoever is entirely attached to 
Me, thinking Me as the Highest, is the foremost 
amongst the Bhaktas. 

VĒ saenga qd 

amda ages Raa ot YA: 013 N 

Wend uin ma g haan: | 

maira srfensfacar tard TTT 11 14 u 

I promise that I will certainly deliver him from 
this ocean of the world. O King of mountains! 
Meditation with Karma and Jūāna with Bhakti will 
lead one to Me. Only the work alone will fail to 
get one to Me. O, Himavàn! From Dharma arises 
Bhakti and from Bhakti arises the Highest Jfiana. 

Afregtrargfāct eren att: wentfeier: | 

TAVITA 97: Writ LATA: ASAT 1 15 N 

udad s wat qa: URAT: | 

AAT THTSITSITQUIRTUTT = afer: 11 16 0 

What are said in the Sruti and Smrti Šāstras the 
Maharsis take, that as the Dharma; and what are 
written in other Šāstras, they take them to be 
Dharmabhasa (the Shadow or reflection of 
Dharma). Out of My omniscient and omnipotent 
Nature, the Vedas have come. Owing to the want 
of Ignorance in Me, the Vedas can never be 
invalidated. 

HTV spueboqétere u Petar: 1 

Ward spdtat er aa: rarraftrsmdt 11 17 N 

AIR aerator UTT i 

ad afe HIT Ta masa feos: 11 18 u 

The Smrtis are formed out of the meaning of 
the Vēdas; so the Smrtis and Purāņas, formed by 
Manu and the other Rsis, are authoritative. In some 
places it is hinted that there other Sastras than the 
Vedas, taking the Tantras indirectly into account. 
Although the matters relating to the Dharmas are 
mentioned therein, but as they are apparently 
contrary to the Srutis, the Tantras are not accepted 
by the Vaidik Pandits. 

aa VITA PIAA: | 

amgen ATT 19 


aagi weer Waren d 

VISITS TAM eife FTA X AT 20 N 

The other Šāstra makers are marked with their 
ignorance; so their sayings cannot be authoritative. 
Therefore he must resort entirely to the Vedas who 
want the final liberation. As the king's order is 
never disobeyed amongst his subjects, so the Sruti, 
the Command of Mine, the Lord of all, can never 
be abandoned by men. 

MAMA RTT AT AKTS Het f: | 

Haare qp wears: 21 0 

Ta Gert He Wet A gdda: | 

oat war fe eer Tematā yar u22 U 

To Preserve My Commandments, I have created 
the Brahmana and the Ksattriya castes. My secrets 
are all embodied in the Srutis. For that reason, the 
words of the Srutis are no doubt to be known and 
observed by the sages. 


i123 M 

aa pda aat afore wa uar i 

WES ALTA RAT ! 24 N 

O Mountain! When the Dharma (righteousness) 
declines and the Adharma (unrighteousness) reigns 
supreme, I then manifest Myself in the world as 
Sakambhari, Rama, Krsna and others. Therefore, 
the Devas, the preservers of the Vedas, and the 
Daityas, the destroyers of the Vedas are classified. 

at agua spine waste | 

wem — ywangdesnfemedrrufv 25 u 

Ada HT: Ufa er first: à 

aree afr menor eis Ratan wr 26 u 

Whoever does not practise according to the 
Vedas I have created many hells for their lessons. 
When the sinners hear of those hells, they get 
extremely terrified. The king should banish those 
stupid persons from his kingdom and the Brahmins 
should not talk with them nor take them in their 
own lines nor when partaking of food, those who 
forsake the Vaidic Dharma and go for shelter to 
another Dharma. 


880 


arfraftitreaitr anrarta ade: | 

wr mura da cles Sante: 827 11 

The Šāstras that are extant, as contrary to the 
Srutis and Smrtis, are all Tàmasa Šāstras; 
Mahādeva has framed these Vāma, Kāpālaka, 
Kaulakas, Bhairva and such like Šāstras for 
fascinating the people; else He has no object in 
framing them. 

forest nemate guftāt Tug: | 

qaam: vmareefrenee er VITA: 11 28 N 

wer d arena wennisféend: | 

gamata HUKA: HT N 29 N 

VT doada RT: VATE E | 

THOTT STRTRTAI Watt: VAT qp 11 30 di 

Those Brāhmaņas that were burnt up by the 
curses of Daksa, Šukra, Dadhīci and were banished 
from the path of the Vedas, it is for delivering them, 
step by step that Mahadeva has framed the five 
Agamas, Saiva, Vaisņava, Saura, Šākta and 
Ganapatya Sastras. 

wa def gi sg ud fenfu | 

desean det a wate enféferq 3.1 

arden defied rE fst aT 

daftrendeg Aamen, 132 ul 

In those Tantra Šāstras there are some passages 
in conformity with the Vedas and there are other 
passages contradictory to the Vedas. If the Vaidik 
persons resort to passages in conformity with the 
Vedas, then there cannot arise any fault in them. 
The Brahmins are not Adhikaris to those Tantric 
texts that are contradictory to the Vedas. Those 
persons that have no claim to the Vedas can be 
Adhikaris to these latter texts. 

amada afent Saure d 

efor afed art Wi ae Waa 33 N 

adem: Raa rp PIRTI TAT: | 

adiyaman maia: 34 I 

feet ASAT RATATAT TAT: 1 

Sal GALA Tee TEA: 113.5 N 

surda war war urges i 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


Therefore the Vaidik a Brāhmaņas should resort 
to the Vedas with all the care possible and make 
the Para Brahma of the nature of Jītāna manifest 
within them. The Sarhnyāsins. Vānaprasthas, 
householders and Brāhmacārīs should give up all 
their desires and take refuge in Me; free from 
egoism and vanity, kind to all creatures, their hearts 
wholly given to Me and engaged in speaking out 
My places, with enrapt devotion. They always 
worship My Virat (Cosmic) form, fmmersed in the 
Yoga called Aisvarya Yoga (Cosmic Yoga dealing 
with the glories, prosperity of god). 

ATi frafraqrramenarst aa: 136 0 

ATA arent DE 1 

web Amga: yaar uum 037 

T illumine the understanding with the Sun of My 
Consciousness, and I destroy the Darkness of 
Ignorance of those persons that are always engaged 
in practising Yoga with Me. There is no doubt in 
this. O Nagendra! Thus I have described in brief 
the methods and practices of the Vaidik Pūjā; now 
I will tell you the Tantriki Pūjā; hear attentively. 

megh dzurafēdtarar stat wd | 

Wat ar veifact arfü aem yga 38 u 

Weise ar smrfeiit aa ansfu wen: i 

am sgri Garam adi ware 39 N 

aymi memg Wevftmevmeumm | 

Aedma at alagagrata 140 

THAT Wal STORTTRTSRTERTR, | 

varggetiai uzavstraftts4ta n 41 u 

wWrsriepgrenrsfiferenTHT e ss ff, 1 

ga aAA: 1420 


On an image, or clean plot of ground, or on the 
Sun or the Moon, in water, in Bana Linga, in Yantra 
or on a cloth or in the lotus of heart, one is to 
meditate and worship the Blissful, Higher than the 
Highest, the Devi, Who creates this universe with 
the three Gunas Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, Who is 
filled with the juice of mercy, Who is biooming in 
youth, Whose colour is red like the rising Sun, 


Book VII Chapter XL 


Whose beauty overtops to the full, Whose all the 
limbs are exquisitely beautiful, Who is the 
sentiment of Love Incarnate, Who feels very much 
for the mental pain of Her Bhaktas, Who being 
pleased, manifests Herself before the Bhaktas on 
Whose forehead, the segment of the Moon shines 
incessantly, and Whose four hands hold goad, 
noose and the signs of fearlessness and to great 
boons. 

TAGAT ft sew fe 1 

agen gari RĒTA q at AAT 43 tt 

SATAN GATT UTT UPE: AT: | 

iaa ui egani AM 4 tt 

Until one is entitled to the internal worship, one 
should worship the external; never he is to 
abandon it. Worship is internal when one’s heart 
gets diluted in Para Brahma, of the nature of the 
Universal Consciousness. O Mountain! Know My 
Consciousness (Samvit) to be My Highest Nature 
without any limitations. 


881 


ST: aa wg Aa: verat Aan 1 
. cdférgarferftaet g fren creat nmt t 45 ul 
Sra: demam fm futt | 
wea STAT ATA 46 0 
Therefore it is highly incumbent to attach one’s 
hearts, free from other adjuncts, constantly to this 
Samvit. And what is more than this Samvit is this 
illusive world full of Maya. So to get rid of this 
world one is to constantly meditate on Me, the 
Witness of all, the Self of all, with a heart full of 
devotion and free from any Sankalpa or desires. 
att: Ut TEST: Hert WaT | 
TARA ATA YT Uda u47 U 
sft dtagdtarmad ergo? Adama 
adhftarandatraeRgītseara: 1139 11 
O Best of Mountains! Now 1 will describe to 
you in detail the external form of worship. Hear 
attentively. 

Here ends the Thirty-ninth Chapter of the Seventh 
Book on the worship of the World-Mother in 
Srimaddevibhaga vatam, the Maha Purànam, of 
18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book VII Chapter XL 881 


CHAPTER XL 


On the Outer Worship of the Devi 
lagara | the Supreme Consciousness, Who is manifest as 
marema (nf daag, \ Caitanya while up-going to the Brahmarandhra (the 
ww era sig Prae uo od apearture supposed to be at the crown of the head, 
qwe caged Riga d thorugh which the soul takes its fight at death) and 
Heer dat edi qusc denqqu i2 Who is of the nature of nectar while returning back 


WRITE ET WATT RNAS ATE, 1 in the Susumnà canal." 

am: VGA GTA wud i3 n| eat atsama afesarreefuvf | 

The Devi said: “Getting up from the bed early| "i targa virenfir frar: wat: arta U 4 N 
in the morning, one is to meditate on the thousand} After meditating thus, he should meditate on the 
petalled lotus, bright, of the colour of camphor, in| Blissful Form of Mine within the Kundalini Fire 
the top part his brain on the head. On this he should| situated in the Mūlādhāra Lotus (coccygeal lotus). 
remember his $ri Guru, very gracious looking, well} Then he should rise up to go for the calls of nature, 
decorated with ornaments, with His Consort Sakti | etc., and complete Sandhya Vandanams and other 
and bow down to Him and within Him he should! duties. 
meditate the Kundalini Devi thus: “I take refuge| amaaa adt grat efendi fam: 1 
unto that Highest Sakti Kundalini, of the nature of Baia caret PT TAUTA TA, usu 


56 


882 _Stinaddeyibhagavatain 


The best of Brahmins, then;'should:forMy-sat- | & «These: ade of the nature of: carth; water, fire, air, 
isfaction perform the-Agnihotra Homa:and sitting | and ether; the five elements and,also.of the nature 
in his Asana miake cac (Emu to |9f:Jāgrat.(waking); Svapna; (dreaming). Susupti 
do My Puja: (worship). m ** , |(deep sleep state) Turiya (the fourth state) and;Atita 

Note: The brain has three divisions; the lower; the | Ripa; the: (the fifth state) excluding the 4. states, 
middle and the. iki OF, ind -most pet which is very | corresponding to tbe five states. ButJ, who. ant'of 

UG. noman | nature: of. Brahma,.am over and. above. the five 
: (elements and the five states; therefore My seat is 


ri RE H Be wem a ] 6 u ; | always on the top of these five forces. 
(qu wedhnr glen unns bm T 7 a s a glial a 
Next he is to make Bhūta Suddhi (puri ation Meditating on Me thuis.and worshipping N Mewith 
of elements of the body by-respiratory attraction his mind concentrated, he is:next to make Japam 
and replacement) and. then the Matrka Nyasa. Then. (reciting My name slowly). After: Japam he is to 
he should arrange the letters of the-root.Mantra of | 
Maya and execute the Hrllekha Matrka Nyasa. In (then place:the Arghya for the,exterhal uad i 
this he.is to place the letter ‘Ha’ in the Muladhara, |. aj ggf RIA ads at |. 
the letter ‘Ra’ in his heart and the vowel. T inthe I. TATE pear Geren wea 1. 13- " m" 
middle.of.his is bros and run: on the top part. of}. Then the-worshipper is to sprinkle with the Astra 
his head. Bes | | mantra ‘Phat’, all the articles: of worship that are 


77. placed in front of him and purify them. 
eive ak id MAA pea V. Was T Rp Urea fs: | 
Finishing then all the ole Nyasas according 4 


geišu WANIG N 
Aaa ga mè m: TT d 
Vin ea Sali ALi 151 


| make over the fruits:of Japan to; Me: He should 


hs of the seat c on 1 the four quarters East, South, 
West and North. l 


he en quater kā 
down to. his "t inis 


a Then he should meditate ofi the | Great ‘Devi in Dum he should meditate on he. Ouid seat, 
t de Ie s heart blewn by Pranayam uated | tbe beati j divi fomo his heart man finvoķ 


H 


ete Visi, ‘Rudra, Sadāš asiva teas are the pane and UM Āvālianā a 
five Pretas situated under My feet. o7 t 


T to H ķi 


oe 


Book. VH. Chapter XL. M 


clothes, all sorts: of. — or- scents; Howes i 


and the, necessary articles with: due devotion and: 
he should worship the attendant deities, of the- Yantra. 
If one be unable to. worship daily, the attendant deities, 
one must worship: thenyom pe 


rupee Sean v fari; 19- "e 


Of the attendant. deities, one must: ‘meditate. iiis ; 


principal deity of the nature of Prabha: (illmination) 
and. think Aet, ix, «Her rays the. three, worlds are 
pervaded. ... 


| ATRI: aa tat 1201 Wo 
:, Nexthe Should, worship again the Bhuyanesyari) 
Devi, the, Chief Deity. along. with other. attendant), 


PERS, uy 


deities with Ses ind. smelling flowers. and 


sand, À pares) stotra, and. the. Deyi. [i 
‘Aham 1 Rudgebh, etc. and ‘SanevaiDeva Devil 


[sk ty 


un = papi P8 
(S idari ret BANGA us ^| 


a Mo 


standing omitheir;ends;allishould satisfy: Mic) 
frequently with tears of leve:flowing. from their) 
eyes and with voice choked with feelings and with | 


dancing, music: and. singing, and, with, his: whole | form of the D 


body filled with joy... 32. kā 
Aaunradiša ie maa 
Wheaten adtsé à aedi ANT N 25 N 


(should ds pnesBrabrnapas 


SEN QUE Huic! | 


i With hete! filled "m Jave:andowith: hairs) 


483. 
My glory is welb-established. inthe. Veda 
Pārāyaņa and iiyall the Puranas. Sofor My satis- 
faction, one. should, offer, daily, to Me one's every- 
thing with. one’s body and recite the; reading from, 
e Vedas,..: T 
Su sdfde. o 
frente: EEG Rd Ml 26 T le 
a 
aT 27. a. 
Next, alter completing ihe Homa offerings, di 
young Virgins ; well 


jésides i in his heart and: frat by Sariihāta Mudiā 
take leave oft the s Deity invoked. ` MN EUN 


a ud peu dini WOW 
AAE get fen ferearrferenferafe ft 1 

tert q TRE es dipl 3dstisy 
O Himayanj Nothing enisinscaf;anyrdime 
unavailable te hips swhossvosships Hug; ghe 
Bhuvane&varj-De; ds After- quitting shischagdyy. he 
"goes to the Magi Dvip „M place, He.gets,the 


i 


884 
! 


fargyétaasraumerftre quud: 

spe C yet a Hered feet 33 u 

O Mahidhara! Thus I have described to you the 
rules of worshipping the Great Devi; consider this 
in all aspects and worship Me according to your 
Adhikara (claim) and you will attain your Goal. 
There is no doubt in this. 

gd q iame it arf ceca t 

WIRED Varme wp trai wt gee 34 li 

an gee: 1 

amari ced. Madai war 35 ul 

O Best of mountains! This Sastra Devīgītā you 
are not to tell to those who are not the devotees, to 
those who are enemies, and to those who are 
cunning. If one gives out this secret of Gita, it is 
like taking off the covering from the breast of the 
mother; so carefully keep it secret and think that 
this is very necessary. 

Web Uma rears eager vta fi 1 

sfera gaura qdtufeeqan a 36 u 

Mena udadqsmermmat wt: | 

qaaa: we warts UTT we IL 37 N 

This Devi Gità ought to be given to a disciple, a 
Bhakta, the eldest son, and to one who is good 
natured, and well dressed and devoted to the Devi. 
O Mountain! In the time of Sraddha (solemn 
obsequies performed in honour of the manes of 
deceased ancestors) he gets the highest place of 
the Pitrs who reads this Devi Gita before the 
Bráhmanas. 

ara Sarat 

sya HT mad arama | 

gars yam: we tass waz ! 38 N 

wet ferred wit met Grad g ar 1 

"ur virt urea steer UT viata a 039 lt 

We: Tha: Waa WIRT: | 

Vyasa said: The Devi vanished there after 
describing all these. The Devas were glad and 
considered themselves blessed by the sight of the 
Devi. O Janamejaya! The Haimavati next took Her 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


birth in the house of the Himalaya and was known 
by the name of Gauri. Sankara, the Deva of the 
Devas, married Her. Sadānana (Kartika) was born 
of them. He killed the Tarakasura. 

wast g xemempRRI u40 

Aa Sa: Hoe Vat rafters | 

aegagi Fra g ar am: N47 n 

EQUO gida Aa TET MAIS TAT | 

O King! In ancient times, when the ocean was 
churned, many gems were obtained. At that time 
the Devas chanted hymns to the Devi with a 
concentrated mind to get Laksmi Devi. To show 
favour to the Devas, Rama Devi got out of the 
ocean. The Devas gave Laksmi to Visnu, the Lord 
of the Vaikuntha. Visnu was very glad at this. 


gia afr rerqdiarereenpeq u 42 u 
ater: aa wein à 
"pred aaa qub wd ua: 43 
Jer o teeta meter usen d 
ada | wae WIE VS | 
"farsi arai fred fa sya: sgttrest u 44 u 
aft afia venim SIRVE en! Sears 
ume odhar AARSET: 0140 11 
GING ( 2250 ) wèg iur peregi: i 
STAFIT HRI hw: bd od 


O King! Thus I have described to you the 
Greatness of the Devi and the birth of Gauri and 
Laksmi. One's desires are all fulfilled when one 
hears this. O King! This secret I have described to 
you. Take care not to divulge it to any other body. 
This is the secret of the Gita; so carefully conceal 
it. O One of pure heart! I have told to you this 
Divine and Sin-destroying narration, that you 
asked. What more do you want to hear? Say. 

Here ends the Fortieth Chapter of the Seventh 
Book on the External Worship of the Devi in the 
Mahāpurāņam, Srimaddevibhagavatam, 
of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa. 


P kel a Lord! 1 haveheard, all. tha | 


you have described ‘about:the sweet inectar-like 
characters of tho King. of the Solar and:the Lunar | 


dynastics.'Now:kindly describe ‘the real Tattvà of! 


the Virat Form of the Great Devi and-how:Shé| 
was worshippedin every Manvantara by-the Regent | 
of that Manvantattt and the Kings there 


NAT 


Man as Was the. Deyi ‘worshipped? I am very 


AS VE 


s to hear all t this, 0,Guru!, In fact describe} 


3 


Bhavan by concentrating attention t to, which, 1 
can have the Rower.to 


of the Devi andlega get, the. highest goodi 
world. 


et entitled with all. the, Yogic 


understand, the sublle. forms 


to you in ' deth about th ‘worship of the 1 
Btiāģāvatī hat teads of the Mu of the Vote 
hearing’ of hicho the practica f 
whith enables one to gēt thé host, good. In diy 
| dt yore/the Devatsi Narada asked Narayana about 
this very point; I will now’ tell you" what!thd 


S 


| Bhagavan, the Promiīgatēršēf 1 the Yoga TRiva, 


| advised Narada) SUR ws "BT 
+ ter ane: arae io O 
apenas wane wya done 
ae aera team Wea Ra: sr 6 Bamed 


| wdgesfui wf meget atso uns mo eidi 


Once on a time the-ak powerful Devarsi Narada 
wers, aņd.bo m 
the body « of. rahma was. travelling. a all c over Pins 
earth and came to the, hermit age Pob the, 


‘| journey vel ti ‘powed down to the Yogi e 


and asked Him what you ask me now." "als roY 
busca sare 
ii id 


888 

Narada said: O Deva Deva Mahadeva! O, Thou, 
the Ancient Purusa, the Excellent One! O 
Omniscient! O Thou, the Holder of the Universe! 
O Thou Who art the repository of the good qualities 
and Who art praised by all! 

Wren Tat aq werfen | 

wad Ha wad gadā ui ui100 

O Deva! Now tell me what is the ultimate cause 
of this Universe: whence has this Universe its 
origin? And how does it rest? To whom does it 
take refuge? 

arsed IATA HX WAHT: | 

Sa FIAT ATT HUERISTWTHTUTUT, 11 0 

Where does it dissolve in the time of Pralaya? 
Where do all the Karmas of these beings go to? 
And what Object is that whose knowledge destroys 
for ever the Maya, the Cause of all this Moha 
(illusion)? 

wasa fen ata fk: CATT | 

arent sed we wuemequruup 12 1 

Whose worship, what Japam, and Whose 
meditation in the lotus of heart are to be made, by 
which, O Deva! the knowledge of Paramātman 
rises in the heart, as the darkness of the night 
vanishes by the rising of the Sun. 

Unt we cuf duetam: 1 

wear mented we fF uisu 

O Deva! Kindly reply to these my question in 
such a clear manner as the ignorant people in this 
Sarhsāra can understand and get themselves across 
this ocean of Sarhsāra. 

ATA IATA 

wa afim ye: wretat area: | 

aren verant where eretseretta t 14 u 

Vyasa said: Thus asked by the Devarsi, the 
ancient Narayana, the Best of the Munis, the great 
Yogi gladly spoke: 

mman sara 


s aties TARA | 
Oa ares eat ft maa 4 TE 15 N 


Srimaddevi bhagavatam 


“O Devarsi! Hear I will now speak to you all 
the Tattvas of this world, knowing which the mortal 
never falls into the illusion of this world.” 

manaira deft prea Iarsft fg | 

vafafirterrerdtatente ARAR: 16 N 

O Child! The original cause of this Universe is 
the Devi Maha Maya (the image of the Supreme 
Caitanya Para Brahma); this is the opinion of the 
Rsis, the Devas, Gandharvas, and other intelligent 
person. 

T TRG eat wur a ufeureent | 

wars wma wrefirfer ret TOTTI N 17 u 

Wen: T agr gam: Rafia | 

erat dur ard Wd wem (18 tt 

It is written in the Vedas and other Šāstras that 
the Devi Bhagavati, worshipped by all in the 
Universe, creates, preserves and destroys the 
Universe by the influence of Her three Gunas. I 


|now describe to you the nature of the Devi, 


worshipped by the Siddhas, Gandharvas and Rsis, 
the mere remembering of Whom destroys all sins, 
and gives final liberation Moksa (and Dharma, 
Artha, and Kama also). 

We ATTA: Taga: VATTATA i 

yanma: sirada: 19 N 

wag: frat wu wemufereeewu | 

weet ude agana: Wu u 20 N 

WS WS wae are AMATA | 

ATT TATA Maret: prea 21 0 

The powerful Svayambhuva Manu, the First, the 
husband of Satarūpā, the prosperous and the Ruler 
of all the Manvantrars worshipped the sinless 
Prajāpati Brahmi, his Father with due devotion and 
satisfied Him when the Grandsire of the Lokas, 
the Hiranyagarbha spoke to his son: "The excellent 
worship of the Devi should be done by you. By 
Her Grace, O Son, your work of creating worlds 
will be successful.” 

TAR: Verr Tq: varranqat fare 

wei werdet aasaga: 022 


Book VIII Chapter I 


689 


era dei gavtt amigar: frer 1 all incarnate; Thou fructifiest the desires of all to 


arai Brat Wages HERRERA ii 2 3 i 

Thus spoken by  Brahmà, the  Bibhu 
Svāyambhuva Manu, the Virát incarnate, wor- 
shipped the World Mother with great austerties. 
And with his concentrated devotion, he satisfied 
the Devi Deve$i and began to chant hymns to Her, 
the First-born, the Màya, the Sakti of all, and the 
Cause of all causes. 


WYATT 
w Te VAT mRNA | 
GMA = mant 24 i 
aq cene Grorearrafeftr i 
Texawanmm — wdaeqd — fü N25 
Manu said: “Thou art Brahmi, the ocean of the 
Vedis, Krsna, the abode of Laksmi, Purandara. I 
bow down again and again to Thee, the Devešī, 
the Ciuse of Maya, the Cause of this Universe. 
Thou toldest Sankha (the conchshell), cakra, gadā, 
etc., inThy hands and Thou residest in the heart of 
Nārāyaīa; Thou art the Vedas incarnate, the World 
Mother,the Auspicious One, bowed down by all 
the Deva, and the Knower of the Three Vedas. 
Wü cem mem mega | 
maan naag 26 
mA fü VAS rra RÀ | 
qaiea m Aey u27 1 
O Thou, adowed with all powers and glory! O 
Mahāmāye! Mahābhāge! Mahodaye! (the Self- 
manifested). Thou residest as the better half of 
Maha Deva, ad Thou dost all what are dear of 
Him. Thou art he most beloved of Nanda, the Cow- 
herd (in the forn of Maha May, the daughter who 
concealed Krsm and slipped from the hands of 
Kamsa and gotup in the air and remained as 
Vindhyavasini; alo in the form of Sri Krsna), Thou 
gavest much pleasre and wert the cause of all the 
festivities; Thou takst away the fear due to plague, 
etc., Thou art worskpped by the Devas. O Thou, 
the auspicious Bhagwati! Thou art the welfare of 


success! 

adinin fora wefefe für | 

PTS TH THT ATTA AES d 28 u 

ward wer fast prt a aden | 

watered wen Ar 29 

Thou art the One to Whom all take refuge and 
Thou removest their all the dangers; O Thou, the 
three-eyed! Gauri Nārāyaņī! Obeisance to Thee. I 
bow down to that ocean of all brightness and 
splendour, without beginning or end, the One 
Consciousness, wherein this endless Universe rises 
and remains interwoven therein. 

wen adara anata efe: war i 

wrereeafür faster: deat magga, 130 I 


nyhende: = WENT: | 

TET WaT WTS Urey: 031 0 

Ibow down to the Devi, whose Gracious Glance 
enables Brahma, Visnu, and Mahešvara to do their 
respective works of creating, preserving, and 
destroying the Universe. O Devi! Thou art the Only 
One, whom all can bows, since the lotus-born 
Brahmi, terrified by the horrible Daityas, was freed 
by Thy prowess only. 

vel Bt: ent: Maier: enfer: Garten rar att | 

aaah arare Raar Wars va n 32 1! 

O Bhagavati! Thou art modesty, fame, memory, 
lustre; Thou art Laksmi, Girija, the daughter of 
Himalaya, Thou art Sati, the Daksa's daughter; 
Thou art the Savitri the Mother of the Vedas, Thou 
art the intelligence of all and Thou art the cause of 
fearlessness. 

Ka cat a aaa gm ur wr à 

tararftt «rerā Stet sites afer wie 5 u 33 1 

So I now engage myself in reciting Thy Japam, 
Thy hymns and Thy worship. I meditate on Thee 
and see Thy form within my heart and hear Thy 
praises. 

sre Aa: Bot AAAI: qe | 

Arara: myi aaa RETA: 134 1 


890 . CE : Sramāddeiābtāgavātāni 


^ eii Porro egal ana es Pm 
babe Vb qubd n 1381 LM 
ASK, im maad m: 36 d 
Be graciously pleáséd' on me, O Devit ft is by 
Thy Grace that Bfāhnidīs the Revealer of thé Four 
Vedas! Visit fs the T-ord of Laksmi Indrá is the 
Lord of the Devās and of the three worlds: Varina |” 
is the Lord'of waters, Kibera is the Edrd of wealth, 
‘Yumi’ i$ tHe Bord of thé dead, Nhirrta isthe Lord 
f the Raksdsas; and Somat the Lord of the water 
elétnent and praised by thé three Worlds: Therefore, 
O Auspicious World Mother! I how uu again 


: "i Ā WUX SUPE i, wok 


and agein to Thee 


af eae ata tag li dr tī i 
= And by your pünyd (merits) they will nó dóubt 
multiply on and on. | He who reads with ‘devotion 
this hymn (stotra) composed by you; will dēt ‘Sons, 
fame arid: beauty i in the World’ and, iri ‘the end, fie 
will be. Giititlēd to get the: Highest Place. ` . 
srie wifvegéet tmt v m 
di frat wga gaga wa P 
The people will have:powers unopposed by 
anybody, willget wealth.and grains, will get victory 
everywhere, TRUE: and | hiscenesniqeswi 


p P Ev PERĒ ae U 37. 1i, 
ab Narayana, said: fey Child! When, Svayambhuva 
Manu, the son of Brahma, chanted thus the hymns | 
19. the Adya, Sakti Bhagvati, N ļārāyanī,. it became 


i NLR wag 
uam ĒST ware: erate eae o 
> meter eraat areata: PTT li 4i w 

EN + Narayana: said: tO-Child! The Devi para 
__,, |Adya ‘Sakti granted thus: the desired boón'to 
"e oe Mani? a vārtishied awy ‘at oiite 


Pleased and, Apoks, to him thus: 


Cem eie at ani v vafis ls poe 
" Hearitig thus thé words of the sor, the Praj — 
the Lond. Gott over the ritiebfot" ‘a bod tine: 


tē aa a ee A teak ao 
epee Pa tegen arcane ed dtarstārāmm R47 
„| AldshT have’spent'an éndles time in this work 
piu a ales SJ. fen ha TvrXT m . | of creation, but as yet nothinghas beén doré; For 
The Devi-said: ffOnking/of. Kiigel By- My! theEarth, the receptacle of all né TrVasis sabmérged 
blessing, yourworktofiereatiomwiil be'compteted | in Water atid has gone down the Rásatala: What 


Book VIE Ghapter H © 
see. afea Eo RYES: Wis H vij 
«dreaftruf neret Farge sear tt 48 di? o 
om ARAL sena. FEB He qm 
olalog bite SR SAT bh i a inca 


alf: the Bhagavān,the Primeyal: XE iida 
Whose Command I am engaged: jh.this work : of 


OTU adu werra YX WEEN € VEL. 


_ 891 


creation; helps. me it this Work of mine, no doubt 


V [it will be accomplished then:and themonly;" io 


-: Here ends theiFirst Chapter of the Eighth Book on: 
ihe: descriptioniof the :worldsin the Mahapuranam, .. 

Srimaddevi. bhagavatam, of L8,Q00 ‘verses, by. ov 
; Mabasi ce hams if 


Pog xa 


——— id. 


Book VIII Chapter H - das gei. LOMA eu MIS ea 1 ERE i 


Morey = combina agiis it hds all made 
Vd dra o tihe . »  |us mergé in'aifóceait f” öder! Ts: iš sóniétlting 
owes ferire rüber r4 Poo] | Divine, ofa Sattvic quality under the guise of this 
EI SS IPRERES EE hi ae ison’ | boar? Tewasof-the:size of a thumb antie it: ds now 


jou 


like thé Himalaya Mountain? «es 0 iinan 
sākts. T s eL VOTRE 


co Nārāšrtjā arods avi you have got | 


your senses controlled ahd Have’ overcome lust, | TES? +. | Tas " uz 
anger ete), And othét'etiemies] ‘then you! are ferit bi edama arg. dedi. s ita kadi, ied bs 
certainly entitled to hear this secret.) White Brātimā air o R RERA 8: ol oe 


Oh! Is this: the LAESA m "YajbáPurtüisa? 
, | While-they werd thus diseu: itigy thie Bhidgavan, i in 
süddénty theté Came out of! thit^tose of the the shape of the boat began't Hikko sounds, 
theditative’ Brāhntā: ‘one y6titg boar (thie’ child of 4 | like the rolling of the: ‘mouittain élouds/àt tniestime 
ped of the eps of ote ie tinge A NO of'the Pralaya resouriding all the: Len arp gus 


l UE 


ün ts stībjēēt With Matici 


was discussing i ith Matīci arid 
other’ Brahmar "Svāyanābhuva" i 


er M: 


AM this Brahma,and all; (hé Rsis assembled thas 
became very glad, Hearing the ghurghura noise of 
the: Boar, their troubles, ended and.the.people of 
Janarloka, Taparloka, Satyaloka and, all the Deyas 
6 being very much gladdened began to chant sweet 
‘thumns with Chandas ro Rk, Yajus, Sama and 
zif Atharva Vedaš/td' that Ra Pa isa, the Bia ivan, 
a from : all’s sidēs. DRE 


becarhe; while ie = cert at x "aee to 
4 vety bis:ēlephidtit, ‘in’ dfi fastant; a very. strange 
site sides? oce this (me Kurds p 


mte pedi 
neared i emit aa 


Hearing their praises; the Bhagavan’ Hari 


My doses dea {tisa ras sriāli one; it is | 


892 


graciously looked on them and immediately 
merged Himself in the ocean. The ocean was very 
much agitated with the fierce striking of the hairs 
of the Boar, when He entered into the waters of 
your refuges! Protect me.” 


STATA TA ERTHTHTQTSUS: 1114 11 

aiana yt waararsrat vum | 

aft w aA Crater AML 15 Ul 

Hearing these words of the ocean, the God Hari 
tore asunder all the aquatic animals and went down 
beneath the waters. Searching violently hither and 
thither, He knew the earth by her smell. At once 
the Bhagavan Hari, the Lord of all, went to Her 
and rescued the earth by raising Her up on his big 
teeth, the Earth that was the abode of all the beings. 

at wager Set uw ARJEN: d 

Wye ferns Vegu safari 16 N 

at quar secant ferftfer: wag: RT | 

Gera mft dENgSeuen 17 0 

When the Bhagavan, the Lord of all the 
sacrifices, came up with the Earth on the top of 
His teeth, He looked beautiful like the elephant of 
a quarter taking out by the root and holding a 
thousand petalled lotus his tusks. When the 
Bhagavan rescued thus the Earth, raising Her up 
on His tusks, Brahma and Indra, the Lord of the 
Devas, the powerful Manu began to praise Him 
with sweet words: 


aparer 


Rad w yosma enar à 

ufque adaware 181 

Ft a uit ga vin agen wu | 

qria yomen egenum 019! 

Brahma said: "O Lotus-eyed! O Bhagavan! 
Thou art victorious everywhere; O Thou, the 
Destroyer of the sufferings of the Bhaktas! Thou 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


hast, by Thy own prowess, humilated the Heaven, 
the abode of the gods upto Satyaloka! Thou, the 
Giver of all the desires! O Deva! This earth shines 
so beautiful on Thy teeth as the thousand petalled 
lotus, taken up by the root by a mad elephant, shines 
on his two tusks. 

Fe as wet à wed gfragama | 

squaiswmrvenrnüsmqufWH 1201 

wal met sae ufEWERG | 

qaa ferae pare wat 21 N 

O Bhagavan! This Form, i.e., that of Thy 
sacrificial Boar, with earth on Thee looks so very 
beautiful as the lotus looks beautiful on the tusks 
of an elephant. O Lord! We bow down to Thee, 
the Creator and the Destroyer of everything; Thou 
assumest many forms for the purpose of destroying 
the Danavas; Thou dost do many acts that redound 
to Thy Glory. 

AVA AAS YEAS At AA: | 

walang Gea sg È 22 1 

We bow down to Thee, to Thy Front and to Thy 
Back. (Really thou hast no front nor back. Thou 
art everywhere.) Thou art the Upholder of all the 
Celestials and the Immortals! Thy eyes shine 
equally everywhere. 

versé auma Praes: egf: | 

werargrevre: BA Gree frees 23 N 

ver AAMT saa WT R | 

gut frat wet aara uem 1 24 N 

O Deva! By Thy power I am brought up and 
engaged in the work of creation and by Thy order 
I create in every Kalpa this Universe and destroy 
it. O Lord of Immortals! In the ancient times the 
Devas united churned the vast ocean by Thy help 
and got according to their merits their due shares. 
O Hari! Indra, the Lord of the Devas is enjoying 
the vast kingdom of Heaven, the Trilokas, by Thy 
Will and appointment. All the Devas worship him. 

RIAA: | 
ware cent aga genga: 25 0 


Book VIII Chapter II 

fi: Vast reta sraufafastad: | 

saa ATTTA AZT 026 N 

aisa Agafa: adage | 

furi werararstt aama: 127 N 

So the God of Fire has got his burning power 
and is residing in the bellies of the Devas, the 
Asuras, men and all other beings and penetrating 
their bellies, is satisfying all. Yama, the King of 
Dharma, by Thy appointment, is the Lord of the 
southern quarters, is presiding over the Pitrs and 
being the witness of all the actions of the Jivas, is 
awarding duly to them the fruits thereof. 

Amat Taree erit AANA: 1 

adai wiftrat mmg eere: emend 028 N 

Nairrta, the Lord of the Raksasas, the witness 
of all the actions of all the beings, by Thy com- 
mandment, is the destroyer of all the obstacles of 
the devotees that take refuge unto thee, though he 
is a Yaksa. 

wir argaritgit eiresureit wrenféng: | 

PASTA AAT CPRBGTCTRTHRTR: 1 29 N 

The Varuna Deva, by Thy order, has become 
duly the Lord of the waters, and the Regent of the 
Loka (Dikpāla). 

arpea: | 

TATA Fresh AENA STATS: 0 30 N 

The Vayu, the Life of all, the carrier of the smell, 
has become by Thy order Lokapāla and the Guru 
of the universe. 

wat: farada agori stasa: | 

Maat: WAARA TAA: 31 N 

Kubera, obedient to Thy order, has become the 
Lord of the Yaksas and the Kinnaras and is holding 
a respectful position like other Lokapalas. 

jma: Adora: Wy: d 

rat eitessreen sut weaarftrurera: 11 32 ll 

I$ana, Who is the destroyer of all the Jivas, has 
got his Lordship over a quarter by Thy order and 
is being praised by all the Rudras, the Devas, 
Gandharvas, Y aksas, Kinnaras, the men and all the 
beings. 


893 
m surge AE ae | 
aiya: AS fF AAT VAT: UEAN: 1133 N 
O Bhagavan! We bow down to Thee, the Lord 
of the Universe; the imnumerable Devas that are 
seen are merely the small fractions of Thy powers.” 


ARTA Sarat 
ue wet aago | vnrerauqe: i 
TTT ATATTUTTTE AT TA, 1341 
daram Wed fētrarai ngg, | 

FT rigas sagft: 035 N 

agrdafrummt ange: 1 

IAU eft at deer AANST i 3 6 u 

Nārāyaņa said: O Child Nārada! When Brāhmā, 
the Creater and the Grandsire of the Lokas, praised 
thus the Ādi Purusa Bhagavān, He cast a side long 
glance at them, offering His Grace, When the 
Bhagavan, the Sacrificial Boar, was coming up with 
earth rescured and placed on his teeth, the awful 
Hiranyaksa, the chief of the Daityas came before 
Him and obstructed His passage when He killed 
him by one violent stroke of his club. 

Frayer ARNAN AAT PANTA: | 

qena gg WA N37 0 

TUM: YATRA ud ege | 

weurafaf-nfent Aar TTTTATETATA i 38 li 

ate sfera. werque? STR ead 
fdtaisearg: 11 2 11 

He was besmeared all over his body with the 
blood of the Daitya; and thus He came up from the 
Rasatala and placed the earth on the waters. He 
then went away to His Vaikuntha abode. 

O Child Narada! He who hears or reads 
devotedly this glorious deed of the Bhagavan and 
the deliverance of the Earth, will certainly be freed 
of all his sins and goes to the highest holiest place 
of Visnu, the Lord of all. There is no doubt in this.” 
Here ends the Second Chapter of the Eighth Book on 

the uplifting of the Earth by the Sacrificial Boar in 
the Mahāpurāņam Srimaddevibhagavatam, of 18,000 
verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


494 


Bhawan Went away to: jValkusthustestiblishing | 


the Earthin:due position and equilibrium, Brahma 
spoke thus to his son: ^O: Powerful Sonof mine, O 
Sváyambhnva!; The. best:.of those: that-are: filled 


with Teja: (energy) and Tapas! Now: ge on: with 
your, work of.creation, as you'think: propèr, on! naie, : 


earth, the: ss asas of all ue Jīvasi: cvi ni 
ae PEE a ete edi 
And M ERAN e Lord of Sacrifices, 


Ed tothe division: of place and:time, and}. . 


with all EAEE of various kinds, 
ieithat willsbevasetot in 


portomnins y yon suctfice 


Do Dharma etum to: ‘the Šāstras, and 
according tothe Varna (thé: differenti castes} and 
Āšramā (Brahmachrya; eta); thus! by (gradually 
going: on stepby step in the: ane of Y Maui. ix 
progeny wiltbe: = DIE 


et i WES AWS ate. 

» mra en pR E UA IE D 
' Beget lovely sons and eod Eeoa anel 
culture; modesty. and:ornamented with-variots |: 
other good:qualifications, like yourself;:then,marry 
your: daughters; when ‘they willconi6 tol- 
marriageable age, to proper’ persons of good 


"oret Mais "égemt gere a d c 


Srimaddo ibi 


s S m"— and then’ fix your’ mind ‘thoroughly 
| oi the Excellent Panis that’ is’ ee ety Best 


OF 


Vr dote fr we 7 7 
ogeta "uti gi tari atia: i 


i 


«O Child! Now-go arid serve the Bhagavan with 
devotion as} have advised You and “you will 
certainly attain* th Ti "whiétf is’ difficult to be 
worshipped ànd'obtaihed: ising’ thus Ws son 
Svayambhuva Manu! and starting hint ih'his work 
of création, die lotus: "borti, ‘the’ ‘Lord ofall’ the 
ec Brahma went away | to His own abode. ja 


was married to the "Prajápati Dal 


p Sin ie |; 1310 


BE. VI Chapter! IV. 


eet im. asa, 15.0. šā 

"And know, that all the, beings j in. this world had 
their origin. from, this | last daughter, . 
progeny of these three daughters and. the Maharsis 
respectively: By Maharsi: Ruci-was: ‘born one, son 
named Y ajfia, in the. womb of Āķīti; he is.the part 
oft the Bhagavān 4 Adi, Purusa, Visnu; by. Maharsi 
Karddama, | in the. womb of Devahuti: was. born the 
Bhagavan, Kapila, Deva, the, famous. author of the 
‘Saakhya Šāstra; and in the, womb. of. Prasitti, byl: 
the Prajapati Daksa were born some daughters only; 
know that the Devas, men,: beasts, and. birds were 
all created by this Prajàpati Daksa. 


sas wmapemdqamehmt fg: | 2. adrot cut amata W220 


Wd wer vaa addenda: 1164. 


TAAA Agre t sparen ferc. 1 PE 
sd wi wr watfaenfuedem 17. 
IS wfargrd eater TTA, | s 
qiiem eoe ia T 
 sufgya arent wet genero | 


renf ada a: giera TET. "19 u 
These offsprings were the first promulgators i in. 
the work of creation. In the Svayambhuva 
Manvantara, the powerful Bhagavan Yajfia, by 
the help of the Devas. named Yama, saved his; 
mother’s Father Manu from the attacks’ of the: 


Rākşasas; and the great Lord of the Yogis, the: 


Bhagavan Kapita, remained for a while in his 


Āšrama and: gave “spiri tual- instructions to his| 
mother Dea 7By v which Avidyā could he at 


boA agno weil bad edn390 novoa sri «uti 


„i “| special Dhyana. Yoga, i aa allit 


$95 


e | once destroyed, and. disclosed] his Sānkhya. Šāstra, 


| the great work on the Spiritual, Philosophy and the 
letails an, finally 


i 3T: a 2 1. Al. 

Oh! I bow. down to ) the beat Yogācārya, ‘the 
Bhagavan Kapila Deva, the Fructifier of all desires, 
the mere remembrance of Whose Name makes 
easily the Yogi realise the: meaning of the Sarnkhya 
Jnana. T he sins are immediately destroyed to thóse 
that hear ot read the holy anecdote d the € progerly 
| of the: dàughters of Manu. 


emi iet ee qim i^ 


s wma c aera W230" 
PR Race SETA qued am 
eno RRRA re Beebe Soi asm 
O Child! Now I déscribé to You the'progeny " 


| the sons of Svāyambhivā Manē: Méar attentively. 


.| The hearing of which wilt enable one to éater into 
the highest: place. Now is beingidescribed" the 
history. about the.progeny of those who "formed 
those. Dvipas: (islands) Varsas (countries). and 
oceans. for.the welfare and happiness of all the 
creation and for.the use of them.: Hear. TUE 
Here,ends the Third. Chapter. of the Eighth, Book on. 
the description of the family. of Maņu in... 
Srīmaddevībhāgavatam, the Maha Purāņam, Ls . 
18,000 verses, by i Maharsi Veda a Vyāsa. m 


OWA TII TD. Wt 


Book vin, flaper] IV. S95 


DOA MBO odi DAD edno290 fovea stu asa — [ tox E 
nidi bobuloni esw ten) dss od! to noie ARBITER We ;: BE Be 
O .easgīvd) abnslet nevoe orf} ormBirthe Faitily of Priyavráta TBR © 
eri bas esqivC moves agi Magda isod woh! 1 bii! TH ķi i BPFZĒ BRIT 


T The aS an said: he Giri son aai 
1 ei i 3 T dius novoa | roni Id dose: via » B Sis ^ 
pora vā ambhuva, Pri ANT ta serve always shis father r 


orli sie udnīsl 4 
ar nni A we 392 i Was vely vas Jg ow obiis 9 

and was arried a ter of 
ej bd T sri Aetas vs Ve po 5 ontEo2d DIB 1U 


avi qu E lovely 
ve pes ajāpa eexceedingly love 
sīndz ivCl säs? oti the Fr VR en ao2 sogi ngh Jovel 


how and beautiful Barhismatī, resembling like him, 


; 


896 


adorned with modesty, good nature and various 
other gualīfications. 

Ai pran aaea | 

ITT Heat stead xr adterita 3 u 

arduas aemper: 

WerdHirqeiwg want wey: 14 di 

qaugBsr nad AARTEN: 1 

afters: safest udi ufum 5 N 

Kai arg asenaan: i 

aas wada made sft aa: ng 

He begat ten sons, very spiritual and well 
qualified and one daughter named Ūrjasvatī. This 
daughter was the youngest of all. The names of 
the ten sons are respectively: (1) Agnidhra, (2) 
Idhmajihva, (3) Yajfiabahu, (4) Mahavira, (5) 
Rukmašukra (Hiraņyaretā) (6) Ghrtaprstha, (7) 
Savana, (8) Medhātithi, (9) Vītihotra and (10) 
Kavi. The name "Agni" was attached to each of 
the above names. Out of these ten, the three sons 
named Kavi, Savana, and Mahavira were 
indifferent and dispassionate to the world. 

anafea: wa d getters: | 

amen Tears Preyer WATT N 7 N 

SET U Marat Ha: ats TERT | 

Gaga tarde fagan s 

In due time, these became extremely free from 
all desires and they were proficient in Atmavidyà 
(Self-Knowledge). They were all Urdhvareta (of 
perpetual chastity; who has subdued all their 
passions) and took gladly to the Paramaharhsa 
Dharma. Priyavrata had by his other wife three 
sons, named Uttama, Tamasa, and Raivata. 

Meita ud gat weno d 

Raad: ws Spp E uou 


"ard: Ss tais UN 10 ! 

These were all widely known; each of them in 
due time became endowed with great prowess and 
splendour and became the Lord of one Manvantara. 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Emperor enjoyed with his sons and relations, this 
earth for eleven Arbuda years; the wonder was this, 
that he lived so long and there was seen no decay 
in his strength as regards his body or his senses. 

erit fadt aardiexramtaa: fore | 

va cafeent wen fareirazr mera PATA, ui 11 N 

Donita aes Tatu aa: mgA | 

wa franfirearftt srt unen woui2u 

Once on an occasion, the King observed that 
when the sun appeared on the horizon and got up, 
one part of the earth was iilumined and the 
remaining part was enveloped in darkness. Seeing 
this discrepancy, he thought over for a long time 
and exclaimed. “What! Will the Darkness be seen 
in my kingdom, while I am reigning? This can 
never be. I will stop this by my Yogic powers.” 

wa araftīdt WaT Ya: TATA: | 

TAA UG: ATT N 13 NI 

APT Test TAT TAT ARTA: | 

uA aysrent APR RTA 14 N 

Thus thinking, the King Priyavrata mounted on 
a luminons chariot, as big as the Sun, to illumine 
the whole world and circumambulated round the 
earth seven times. Whatever portion of the earth 
was trodden by the wheel on each occasion, became 
an ocean. 

ERIT: dT Bet BTUT TAT FATTAT: | 

verifirergeares after: wur ftra: i15 n 

A amia: MAA gra fe d VET: | 

wadu: vrardra: senettdtuvisin: 16 N 

galu: MAT: VITA KERT: | 

wat a Rai g feet RTA, u 17 u 

Thus the seven oceans had their origins. And 
the portion of the earth, that was included within 
the ruts, became the seven islands (Dvipas). O 
Child! Now hear about the seven Dvipas and the 
seven Oceans: The first is the Jambu Dvipa; the 
second is Plaksa, the third is Salmali; the fourth is 
the KuSa Dvipa; the fifth is Kraufica; the sixth is 


Priyavrata, the son of Svayambhuva, the King- |the Saka Dvipa; and the seventh is the Puskara 


Book VIII Chapter V 


897 


Dvipa. The second Dvipa Plaksa is twice the first 
Jambu Dvipa and so on; each succeeding Dvipa is 
twice as large as its previous one. 

wins aae wp 1 

ante cw Wes udtqas 3080 

grūdreftmrsta: yraresifer d ur: | 

wer ITT: uféreat fRisravaem 11 19 ui 

Now hear the names of the oceans. The first 
ocean is named Ksāroda (the salt water ocean); the 
second is Iksurasa (the sugercane ocean); the third 
is Surà (the wine ocean), the fourth is Ghrtoda (the 
charified butter ocean) the fifth is Ksiroda (the 
ocean of milk); the sixth is Dadhi Manda (the ocean 
of curds); and the seventh is that of ordinary water. 

werd weagiarent a: amas día: i 

arate ferait wart Garcia 1120 0 

wade aidsiga d 

qaaa: usd gemga: 121 N 

mai aapa | 

"erg Ward mR aaa: 022 

putas a gA | 

Raam asyr: 123 0 

zen vet oq iÀ | 

Wusdt gags: RRRA: 024 1 

VES curet gftmustadēpet 1 

RaRa Aaaa at 25 0 

The Jambu Dvipa is surrounded by Ksira 
Samudra. The King Priyavrata made his son 
Agnidhra, the lord of this Dvipa. He gave to his 
Idmajihva, the Plaksa Dvipa surrounded by Iksu 


Sagara; so he gave to Yajfiabahu the Salmali Dvipa 
surrounded by Sura Sagara and he gave the lordship 
of Kuša Dvipa to Hiraņyaretā. Then he gave to his 
powerful son Ghrtaprstha the Kraufica Dvipa 
sutrounded by Ksira Samudra and to his son 
Medhātithi the Saka Dvipa surrounded by 
Dadhimanda Sagara. 
eras yanig | 
difvatat erdt war TRUNG: 26 0 
ampa aaga fup 1 
amdtereart caer asm aree agar 27 n 
we Krasa gave: aada: | 
Ramari spear Aami rats STAR, i 28 u 
efr STATIS weno] AIREA TATA APT 
Wgesemmm 14 
Finally he gave to his Vitihotra, the Puskara 
Dvipa surrounded by the ordinary water. Thus 
distributing duly amongst his sons, the separate 
divisions of the earth, he married his daughter, the 
youngest Ūrjasvatī to the Bhagavan Ušanā. In the 
womb of the Bhagavan Šukrācārya had his famous 
daughter. O Child! Thus giving the charge of each 
Dvipa to each of his sons and marrying his 
daughters to the worthy hands, he took to Viveka 
(discrimination) and adopted the path of Yoga. 
Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Eighth Book on 
the narration of the family of Priyavrata in the Maha 
Purāņam, Šrīmaddevī bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. 


Book VIII Chapter V 897 


— 
CHAPTER V 
On Mountains and Rivers 

saman sare Dvipas and the Varsas as marked out by the Devas. 
Sed sq Read diuadfaste: | In brief, I describe about them; no one can speak 
VS ade uem agaia u in about this in details. First, the Jambu Dvipa is one 
amaria ares ferre: SPAT 1 lakh Yojanas in its dimensions. 
maA: UA: Wael ARAT: 42 N farre AGATE TAIS S A HTT | 


Šrī Narayana said: O Child Narada! Now hear| 74 "att anig «eee: 3 Uu 
in detail about the divisions of the earth into the amer: Rieni ARA: fier: fürdt à 
andadas wf ada: 4 u 
57 


898 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


T 


This Jambu Dvīpa is round like a lotus. There 
are nine thousand Yojanas in its dimensions (i.e., 
in its diameter or circumference?) and there are 
eight very lofty mountains, in those Varsas, 
forming their boundaries. 

agde Ba 8 ad fame a 

dar wat arnt agarga usu 

zagi ege erui afiša: 1 

rant fiftasitse agaaga: w 6 on 

Of the Varsas, the two Varsas that are situated 
in the North and South, are of the size of a bow 
(segmental); and the four others are elongated in 
their size. The centre of all these Varsas is named 
Īlāvrta Varsa and its size is rectangular. In the centre 
of this Īlāvarsa is situated the golden Sumeru 
Mountain, the King of all the mountains, one lakh 
Yojanas high. It forms the pericarp of the lotus 
earth. 


surged ster: day — usa 

mata fra: yr atrae | 

Taare Wem ad fādta a fers uou 

great qdiat g vaigi aisrafa a | 

umam GTA: MÅTTA ll 10 di 

The top ofthis mountain is thrity Yojanas wide. 
O Child! The sixteen thousand Yojanas of this 
mountain is under the ground and the eighty-four 
Yojanas are visible outside. In the north of this 
Īāvarsa are the three mountains the Nilagiri, the 
Svetagiri and the Srngavan, forming the boundaries 
respectively of the three Varsas named Ramyaka, 
Hiranmaya and Kuru respectively. These run along 
from the east and gradually extend at their base 
and towards the salt ocean (Lavana Samudra). 


AEAN Wane: BATT | 
yalgan aima: 11 
crum a 
garuma frat Pues: 12 N 


Raada aa: nitatur: ST: à 

SGR asd: Uefa: 1 13 11 

gnad Paget wand a ama | 

Ammamni RRETA: 414 d 

These three mountains, that form the 
boundaries, are each two thousand Y ojanas wide. 
The length of each from the east towards north is 
less by one-tenth (1/10) of the above dimensions. 
Many rivers take their sources and flow from 
them. On the south of Ilāvarsa, three beautiful 
mountain ranges, named Nisadha, Hemakūta, and 
Himālayas, are situated, extending from the east. 
They are each one Ayuta Yojanas high. These 
three mountains form the boundaries again of 
Kirhpurusa and Bharata Varsa. 

sergarafyadt regards: | 

yn cw aa: sftorareraresada: 15 N 

arta AA aradi finer: 1 

"rst: spat art malana Ru u 16 u 

To the west of Ilavrtta is situatted the mountain 
called Mālyavān and to the east situated the 
mountains Gandhamadana, Nila, and Nisadha, the 
centres of the highest sublime grandeur and 
beauty. The length and breadth of these the 
boundary (limiting) mountains are each two 
thousand Yojanas. 


whgnrermersraragrendet: ufrdt a dt 1 
"equ Tat Aerts wurden: 4017 0 


da Rrena feret Aega: | 
aerate Aten 4 (18 u 


Then the mountains Mandara, Suparsvak, and 
Kumuda and others are situated in the Ketumāla 
and Bhadrāšva Varsas; but these all are reckoned 
as the Pada Parvatas (mountains at the foot) of the 
Sumeru mountain. The height and breadth of each 
of these is one Ayuta Yojanas. These form the 
pillars, as it were, of Meru on the four sides. 

aaiue q weddrsfufenfsner: 0 

wag Rig w: wangi u19u 


Book VIII Chapter V 


$99 


éste She eam: war: Rear: 1 

maet ffs vaag: 1120 u 

On these mountains, the mangoe, the jack, 
plantain, and the fig trees and various others are 
situated, four hundred (400) Yojanas wide and 
eleven hundred (11,00) Yojanas high; they seem 
to extend to the Heavens and form, as it were, the 
flagstaffs on the top. 

maea: vraneruhunfés: 1 

Waa genu ARATAT: 421 

wgwedférdt wem draft Ried 1 

sarah eat saa ereramqut: 22 u 

The roots, bases of these trees as well as their 
branches are wonderfully equally thick and extend 
to enormous distances. On those mountain tops are 
situated, again, the four very capacious lakes. Of 
these, one lake is all milk; the other lake is all 
honey; the third lake is all sugarcane juice and the 
fourth lake is all sweet water. 

«d veh Aui adage | 

aq Rams AA: 423 N 

sandina «versa: 1 

Refa vare Geran TATA |1 24 u 

There are, then, again the four very lovely 
gardens named Nandana, Caitrarath, Vaibhrajaka, 
and Sarvatobhadra, very lovely, enchanting and 
pleasing to the delicate female sex and where the 
Devas enjoy the wealth and prosperity and their 
other Yogic powers. 

URI BATA WD | 

UAHA AAAS TANS I 


faRpeyarnf gears yeh a 1 
Aat arida wert KĀ a 026 1 


Here the Devas live always with numerous 
hordes of women and have their free amorous, 
dealings with them, to their heart’s contents; and 
they hear the sweet songs sung by the Gandharvas 
and Kinnaras, the Upa Devatās about their own 
glorious deeds. On the top of the Mandara 
mountain, there are the Heavenly mangoe trees 


hundred Yojanas high; the sweet delicious nectar- 
like mangoe fruits, very soft and each of the size 
as the summit of a mountain, fall to the ground; 
and out of their juices of a colour of the rising sun, 
a great river named Arunoda takes her origin. 


asenada ammar yadda | 

dl waste gaeng 27 NU 

STEVE wernt add ure 1 

gut wr at det eomm 28 N 

Here the Devas always worship the great Devī 
Bhagavati named Aruņā, the Destructrix of all sins, 
the Grantrix of all desires and the Bestower of all 
fearlessness with various offerings and with the 
lovely water of this Aruņodā river, with great 
devotion. O Child! In ancient days, the King of 
the Daityas (worshipped always this Mahā Māyā) 
Aruna Devi (and obtained immense wealth and 
prosperity). 

aAa AN: HATE WATS | 

WERT Horace Fanta aif d 029 N 


ate Wrersqems-tar garam i 
geai aaa AA Brat fea i 30 N 
STEHT: TATRA SKA, N 31 N 


sft reared weno? seme) yore AT 
VETT |1 8 11 

He who worships Her becomes cured of all 
diseases gets his health and other happiness by Her 
grace. Therefore, She is named Ādyā, Maya, Atulā, 
Anantā, Pustī, ĪSvaramālinī, the Destroyer of the 
wicked and the Giver of lustre and beauty and thus 
remembered on this capacious earth. The river 
Jàmbünada has come out, as a result of Her 
worship, containing divine gold. 

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Eighth Book 

on the description of the receptacle of beings 
and on the mountains and on the origin of rivers 
in the Maha Puranam Srimaddevibhagavatam, 
of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa. 


900 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


CHAPTER VI 


On the Rivers and Mountains 


simran sare 

aenar dt VT (AT ART cep ATE | 

Tamed wr weuremgd Ure uou 

wesrwurgrarememerturd Raan 1 

aaea AE Sis: 2 1 

ARTA aft GET d 

Wd Want U Tretorn 03 

Narayana said: O Narada! This Arunoda river 
that I mentioned to you rises from the Mandara 
mountain and flows by the east of Ilāvarsa. The 
Pavana Deva (the God of wind) takes up the nice 
smell from the bodies of the wives of the Yaksas 
and Gandharvas, etc., and the attendants of the Devi 
Bhavani and keeps the surroundings of the earth 
there filled with nice smell for ten Yojanas around. 

Reida gentry 1 

Tas U dt saepe aun 4 d 

West spüren a afümremqd Gm | 

adt manemane wisarfasft erat u 5 u 

Again the rose-apples with their nuts, of the size 
of an elephant, fall down upon the earth from the 
high peake of the mountain Mandara and break 
into pieces; the sweet scented juices flow down as 
ariver. This is called the Jambü river and this flows 
by the south of Ilāvarşa. The Devi Bhagavati there 
is pleased with the Juice of that rose-apple (Jambü) 
and is known by the name of Jambadini. 


aiaa ferereestt arctan faetesumg 7 N 

The Devas, Nàgas, and Rsis all always worship 
with great devotion, the lotus-feet of the merciful 
Devi, wishing the welfare of all the Jīvas. The mere 
remembering of the name of the Devi destorys all 
the diseases, and all the sins of the sinner. Therefore 
the Devas always worship and chant the names of 
the Devi, the Remover of all obstacles. She is 
installed on both the banks of the Jambi river. 


aira RTT IT nE ETITUTSTIT | 

nale err ATĒRATT Tee u 8 u 

Urine: ard aorta gar qum | 

wandtieaat gr draft uou 

If men recite Her names Kokilāksī, Karuna, 
Kāmapījitā, Kathoravigrahā, Devapūjyā, Dhanyā, 
Gabhastinī and worship, so they get their welfare 
both in this world and in the next. With the juice 
of the Jambū fruit aided by the combination of the 
wind and the rays of the Sun, is created the gold. 

ATT reader: | 

Remeni spout fafeti ted 10 0 

amaaa garu with wafafafü i 

"regant xr fam atte: arpa: wer uw 11 d 

Out of this are made the ornaments for the wives 
of the Immortals and the Vidyadharas. This gold, 
created by the Daiva, is known by the name of the 
Jambünada gold. The love-stricken Devas make 
their crowns waist bands and armlets out of this 
gold for their sweet-hearts. 

yee ay a kpag d 

"ET: Huren: gadi: 12 N 

WUI ARNA: wg INT UT: WT: | 

gardia aeree wet Wat: 11 13 u 

There is a big Kadamba tree on the mountain 
Supāršva; the five streams of honey called Madhu 
Dhara get out from its cavities and running by the 
west of Ilāvrta Varsa, flow over the land. The Devas 
drink its waters; and their mouths become filled 
with the sweet fragrance. 

aya us dn aera waa: 1 

GZTA Cart ETR i 14 Ni 

AG: UH ASTEGISTATNATA: | 

mai erae samt daR u 15 0 

AGT HAET BATT TEA d 

wud GŪS arena 116 N 

The air carries this sweet fragrant smell to a 
distance of even one hundred Yojanas. The 


Book VIII Chapter VI 


901 


Dhārešvarī Maha Devi dwells there, the fulfilleri Mānapriyā, Mānapriyatarā, Maravegadhara, 
of the desires of the Bhaktas. highly energetic, of| Mārapūjitā, Māramādinī, Mayūravarašobhādhyā, 


the nature of Kala (the Time, the Destroyer), and 
having large faces (Mahanana), faces everywhere, 
worshipped by the Devas and is the presiding Deity 
of the woods and forests all around. 

Ada eren armatfegattt i 

sacar: yea edt weiten u07 ou 

Wd HACASt dt ATT Yaa We: | 
verius ve FE vist 


WatafirasrgenTeremer enfer: 

TATA: Ae TAG n 19 It 

The Devi, the Lady of the Devas, is to be 
worshipped by the names “Karala Deha," Kālāngī 
“Kamakotipravartini’. The great Banyan tree 
named Satabala is situated on the top of the Kumud 
mountain. From its trunk many big rivers take their 
origin. These rivers possess such influences as to 
give to the holy persons there, the milk, curd, 
honey, clarified butter, raw sugar, rice, clothing, 
ornaments, seats, and beddings, etc., whatever they 
desire. Therefore these rivers are called Kamadugh. 

sates x ata aa: 1 

Tür weet det agaaa 20 ul 

tere (ego rerreressqat wr AT | 

fi cadet weet Atal TAT 021 N 

They come gradually down the earth and flow 
by the north of Ilāvarsa. The Bhagavati Minaksi 
dwells there and is worshipped by the Suras and 
the Asuras alike. That Deity clothed blue, of fearful 
countenance, and ornamented with hairs of a blue 
colour, always fulfil the desires of the Devas 
dwelling in the Heavens. 

erferarears ferar er aT i 

mAAR Aira arrears lt 22 0 

arated anata o une a 

mame Ramga: u 23 0 

ufiraimuddem aA deer 1 

wat unb curan aa u224 n 

Those that worship Her, remember Her or praise 
Her by the names "Atimānyā, Atipūjyā, 
Mattamatanga Gāminī, Madanonmādinī, 


Šikhivāhanagarbhabhū, etc., are honoured by the 
Deity Mīnalocanā Ekāngarūpiņī and the 
Paramešvara and get all sorts of klājā 

dui marli 

a miga tu "25 

Amatā dits IRAARTIIT: 1 

vittruraradatdgetuumadaam: 126 

mada sed arastitd ga Tad i 

ATTĀT ARTS uui Prefer w27 u 

aa std vasa dfravi a afet: à 

Garret d un Vēlam: GU 28 N 

Those drink the clear waters of these rivers 
become free from old age or decay, worry, 
perspiration, bad smell, from any disease, or 
premature death. They do not suffer anything from 
error, from cold, heat, or rains, or from any paleness 
in their colour. They enjoy extreme happiness as 
long as they live and no dangers come to them. 

ficat fasta: afferam gas d 1 

Arata afs otters 029 n 

Rasen qui amy yore: i 

qug: porda ggnītseīt fecha: 11 30 u 

free: ruda wagt Fama à 

fraug Priama: after: Via wast 37 0 

agdsrefusa gat sum va a | 

am: aada were füsr 132 u 
aft dagda WETTER PSS ATT: 11 6 11 

O Child! Now hear the names of the other twenty 
mountains, that encircle the Golden Sumeru 
mountain at its base, as if they were they filaments 
round the pericarp of a flower. The first is Kuranga; 
then come in order Kuraga, Kušumbha, Vikankata, 
Triküta, Sisira, Pataūga, Rucaka, Nisadha, Šitīvāsa, 
Kapila, Šaūkha, Vaidūra, Cārudhi, Harnsa, Rsabha, 
Naga, Kālafijara and lastly Narada. The central one 
is the twentieth. 

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Eighth Book on 
the rivers and the mountains Sumeru and others in the 
Mahāpurāņam Šrīmaddevībhāga vatam, of 18,000 
verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. 


902 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER VII 
On the Ganges and the Varsas 


starrer sara 

AR Be a ydo gt arsragratert: | 

mAd MaRa geet 1 N 

wed ages màd Nrada i 

w: mAs A aANT: 11 2 N 

Narayana said: Jathara and Devaküta are the two 
mountains situated on the east of Sumeru; their 
dimensions towards the north are eighteen thousand 
Yojanas wide and two thousand Yojanas high. On 
the west of Meru, are situated the two famous lofty 
mountains Pavamana and Pariyatra; their length 
and height are well known. 

mas at maien quunt | 

dàna: wart keranda 13 N 

wma yg madR | 

wd Aa Maima RUP na n 


Brahmapuri, for the eight Lokapālas. The Lords 
of the four directions, east, west, north and south 
and of the four corners, north-east, northwest, 
south-west, south-east, occupy these. 

amei meagan: gam: d 

wea got gaama non 

viret dart Wem pT d 

grad mead wem wer AEAT 10 N 

aad a agizagurdtat uem i 

The dimensions of each of these eight cities are 
two thousand Yojanas and a half. In fact, there are 
nine cities ther including the Brahmapuri. Now hear 
the names of these nine cities in due order. The 
First is Manovati, the second is Amaravati, the third 
is Tejovati, next come in order Samyamani, 
Krsnangana, Sraddhavati, Gandhavati, and 


On the south of Meru are situated the two lofty Mahodaya, the ninth is Yašovatī. The Lords of the 
mountains Kailāsa and Karavira. On the north, of| Puris are Brahma, Indra, Fire and the other 
the Sumeru mountain, are situated the mountains | Dikpālas in due order. 


Šrūgagiri. 

viae: Rad fa 

We: mea: Raai us u 

Rak  urgfé gh dasa: | 

Teasers garaam: 6 N 

Thus the golden Sumeru mountain, shines like 
the Sun, surrounded by these eight mountains. In 
the centre of the Sumeru, there is a Divine city 
built of the Creator Brahma, ten thousand Yojanas 
in dimensions. The learned sages that know 
everything from the highest to the lowest, describe 
that as square in dimensions and all made of gold. 

amagi ae wala gta i 

afaa erra: Würevfag! wem: 007 i 

at wfpereruermfm uw: 1 

qe: Wea ava AMAT N 8 N 

On the top of the Sumeru, are situated the world 
known eight golden cities, subservient to the 


aaa datēta arora fert: 11 N 


amaia AN aA U Ae | 

aistein wearedfasrét fea: 1 12 N 

queda iur dad fest: | 

TTT UTT TTT 13 N 

ga a Matra kg faga t 

When Visnu Bhagavan assumed the Tri 
Vikrama Form in His Dwarf Incarnation and went 
at the sacrifice, to get back the Kingdom of the 
Heavens from the demon Bali, there was created 
one hole or cavity over this Bahmāņda Kataha 
(skull) by the nails of the toes of that foot that 
went up towards his left; and through that cavity; 
the famous river Bhagavati Ganga flowed on the 
top of those heavenly Kingdoms, the clear waters 
of which are ever ready to destroy the sins of the 
whole people. For this reason, She is known in the 
three Lokas as the Visnupadi manifested. 


Book VIII Chapter VII 


903 


GTA HEAT AT GTA g 14 dd 

feat yaha edt cadet 1 

efiam ATA FT Arata i 15 N 

This took place long long ago, many thousand 
Yugas ago, a period difficult to determine. The 
Ganges fell first on the top of the Indra’s Heavens, 
near place called Visņudhāma, known in the three 
worlds. 

Amaai ga: WUE: | 

wae ware gy 16 

aream U wate: vadet fra: 1 

T WATE WT Wea: 017 N 

wafàmi wana wdeefüdum: 1 

ameifeait fated uat fafagarfrst u 18 u 

Here the pure-souled Dhruva, the son of 
Uttānapāda within his heart the lotus-feet of Sri 
Visnu Bhagavan and exists still there taking ref- 
uge on that immoveable position. There the high- 
souled Seven Rsis, knowing the highest purifying 
influence of the Ganges, circumambulate the 
river, wishing for the welfare of all the Lokas. 

sat wr fra enaA a i 

aA aapa "enureennifefu: u 19 N 

fare gamsa a a | 

aS UWedl TAI 120 N 

agat Pret a aeeita V ANE | 

ugfiatafmddt agag 210 

This is the great place where one gets success, 
and final liberation, the success-giving place of the 
ascetics and where the Munis with clots of hairs 
on their heads daily take their dip in the Ganges 
with the greatest pleasure and admiration. The 
Ganges flows thence from the Dhruva Mandala, 
the abode of Visnu, in Kotis and Kotis of Divine 
Channels, interspersed with many Vimānas or 
carriages, deluges the Candra Mandala (the Moon 
Sphere), comes gradually to the Brahma Loka. 

aai a adit a ufttarauec | 

din area a ages aT: 11 22 0 


Here She is divided into the four channels, Sita, 


Alakananda, Bhadra, and Caturbhadra and 
irrigating many countries, mountains, and forests 
ultimately falls in the oceans. 

di er AERO: saya | 

HAMA A yaa a vauidi 11 23 it 

iemetis far maa a 

ARO qp STETSIST wat TATA 0 24 i 

The Sita, the famous Dhara, purifying all, while 
falling down from the Brahmaloka, passes round 
the mountains that form as it were the filaments of 
the flower-like Sumeru mountain, and falls on the 
top of the Gandhamadana range. 

amafi tat at qp Bret quufnm | 

ad meaa: sjurafacdtar ufifzniat 25 n 

aA reet seat hga WATA | 

agit derat weteat Argana i 26 u 

aftat umas ar im aafaa | 

TTT INT FATT GMAT ANS 0 27 N 

Thence She, worshipped by the Devas, irrigates 
the Bhadrāšvavarsa and falls eastward into the salt 
ocean. The second Dhara (stream), named Caksu, 
getting out of the Malyavan range, gradually gains 
strength and assumes great force and flows by 
Ketumālavarsa to the western ocean. 

UTT TT a fau Tunt i 

aaa ARa watt Arta 11 28 N 

taad fifa yrearsarite fata 1 

afratadt seat aNd CETT WT N29 íi 

The third Dhara (stream), the very pure 
Alakanandā, getting out of the Brahma Loka, passes, 
through the Giriküta mountain and other forests, 
falls to Hemaküta; next She flows thorugh the 
Bharata Varsa and meets with the southern ocean. 

afani wafi ITU qdtar at ART à 

UEN: TTS Att AHA WE Wd 4 30 N 

No words can describe the glory and the 
purifying effect of this river; suffice it slay that 
those who march out to bathe in this river get at 
each of their steps, the fruits of doing the great 
sacrifices, Rājasūya and A$vamedha, etc. 


904 

TATA qo fe gem | 

adage amt g sPmeenenqa: 0310 

asian ierat aperui ere i 

Ww wq im cemesnuredt 0 32 u 

The fourth Dhara of the Trailokyapavani Ganga 
Devi, named Bhadra, falling from the mountain 
Šrūgavān, becomes swift and capacious, flows by 
the Northern Kuru country and satisfying the 
people there flows down into the ocean. 

ara derer Tag at enusfu wife fe 1 

agit Gemma Ae 033 

waft und ad adgampifa ft 1 

ITT amean sitereentuerfs voti 34 N 

Many other rivers, getting out from the 
mountains, Meru, Mandara and others, flow 
through the various Varsas or continents, but of 
all the Varsas, continents, this Bhārata Varsa is 
called the Karma Ksettra (or the field of actions). 
The other eight Varsas, though on earth, give the 
pleasures of the Heavens. The reason for this is 
that when the period of the persons enjoyments in 
the Heavens cease, they come and take their births 
in the one or other of these eight Varsas. 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 
variari quater areata | 
Geant agar aiat lal N35 ll 
Geet meda: uftenfeuar: 
— HAMM: te "36 
Wendt argent: fereitsfü fè 1 
Jagem: wet add wdes fF 437 
sft SRRA erga sued 
GASEA: 117 11 
The people here live for ten thousand years; their 
body is hard like thunderbolt and all are endowed 
with powers of Ayuta elephants. No one is satisfied 
with a little of the pleasures of sexes; so all men 


live happily with their wives, etc. It is not that the 
males alone are so happy; the females also are full 
of youth throughout their lives and become 
pregnant, when they are less than one year old. In 
short, the inhabitants of the Varsas enjoy for ever 
as the persons of Tretà Yuga do." 

Hear ends the Seventh Chapter of the Eighth 
Book or the story of the Ganges and the 
continents in Srimaddevibhagavatam, the Maha 
Purāņam, of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa. 


904 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER VIII 
On Ilāvrta 


sframrant sara: 

ay GERI AYT: Wate: ECCE Er 

Vata racc EE EET MT 

Nrayana said: In those Varsas, Visnu and the other 
Devas use to worship always the Great Devi with 
Japam and meditation and to chant hymns to Her. 

addagusctentta AnA: | 

eat TEMATU KI ur fum 2 u 

ag oe aduaday | 

RRA oe "3 u 

PAT g 


fattrfšray quier aff: e EN 
werntrerfafur2rafa- e: saku 1 


Gat afar TATA ow us d 


The forests there are ornamented with all sorts 
of fruits, flowers and leaves, in all the seasons. In 
those excellent forests, and on the mountains, in 
those Varsas and on the clear waters interspersed 
with full blewn lotuses and Sarasas (cranes) and in 
those countries where varieties of mountain trees 
are standing and where varieties of birds frequent 
and echo all around, the people play in waters and 
engage themselves with a great many pleasant 
occupations; and the beautiful women, as well, 
roam there with the kniting of their eyebrows. 

wart Eat paff aE d 

avafü a aty mane: 06 d 

mame PTT KA; d 


Book VIII Chapter VIII 


905 


sds AU Aes TIT | 

marggierarsdt wfeere MATA: 7 ou 

The people there enjoy as they like, surrounded 
by young women; Narayana, the Adipurusa 
Bhagavàn Himself, worships the Devi there, to 
shew his extreme grace of all the inhabitants of 
the Navavarsa. The people also worship the Deity. 

serge g warren: | 

We wa Val dat feed data BT: 8 i 

wears cum aiya fae u | 

TAM: VTUTETA TAA aR BAST 119 UI 

By worshipping the Devi only, the Bhagavan 
remains there in Samadhi, surrounded with 
Aniruddha and his other Vyühacatustaya (the four 
forms). But in Ilāvrta Varsa, the Bhagavan Rudra, 
originated from the eyebrows of Brahma, resides 
only with women. 

srar-frareras: emitē Rr: | 

Tea qas? qe Had wer 11 10 u 

smear turp wedusgfédvsur | 

at erret girar er aft VATTATATM: i11 N 

sued VAT STATS: | 

No other person can enter there; for the Bhavani, 
the Sakti of Rudra has cursed that any male entering 
there would be transformed into a female. The Lord 
of Bhavani, surrounded by innumerable women, 
remains here engaged in the worship of the 
unmanifested unborn Bhagavan Sankarsana. For 
the good of humanity, with intense meditation, He 
worships His own Turiya Form of the nature of 
Tamas, Thus: 


siteprargara 


S AM Mat WETTSSTS Way 
ATA CT TATU AA BET 12 m 


Wares cat gama 00 13 ul 
Šrī Bhagavāna said: Obeisance to Thee! the 
Bhagavan, the Great Purusa, endowed with all the 


qualities (the principal six  Ai$varyas or 
prosperities), the Ananta (the Infinite) and to the 
Unmanifested! We worship Thee, Whose lotus 
feet are the refuge of all. Thou art the great store- 
house of all the superhuman powers and the di- 
vine faculties of omnipotence, etc. 
"Due Wranprendgtetu- 

iia arate gfērsad | 
got wem at farrier 

aed a Wn fuffquen 14 


Thou art always present to the Bhaktas. Thou 
art creating all these beings. Thou givest Moksa to 
the Bhaktas and destroyed their attachment to the 
world and Thou bindest Thy non-devotees in 
bondage to this world. Thou art the Lord. We 
worship Thee. 


A matsin sft - 
"eraut: gtaaftātam: u15u 
We are entirely under the control of the passions, 
anger, etc., and our minds are always attached to 
the senses; but though Thou art always looking at 
this world for its creation, etc., Thy mind is not a 
bit attached to it. 
"urge Ratatat 
Afii wies: à 
a ae firareifira ataftud 
qusa egag ! 16 N 
So who will not turn to Thee, desirous to conquer 
his self. Thou art appearing by Thy Maya as one 
whose sight is ignorant; Thou lookest dreadful with 
Thy eyes reddened with the drink of Madhu (wine). 
By the touch of Thy feet, the mental faculties are 
very much enchanted; hence the women folk of 
the Nagas cannot in any way worship Thee, out of 
bashfulness. 


wedqdtsé Prgar vertere 
Amh amaA wget 17 N 


906 


The Rsis say that though Thou art the Only One 
to create, preserve and destroy, yet Thou art quite 
unconcerned with them. Thou art Infinite and Thou 
hast innumerable heads. This vast universe is like 
the mustard seed resting somewhere on one of these 
heads, which Thou canst not feel even. The Mahat 
Tattva is Thy body manifested first. It is built of 
Sattva, Raja and Tamo Gunas. 
Ud ad Weg att WR: 
fir: WHAM Ta qaia: | 


wane ad weqmefqun 11 1 8 N 


Brahmā has come out of this and I again have 
sprung from This this Brahmā and am nurtured by 
the Sattva and the other Guņas and with the help 
of the Teja, created these elements and the senses. 
These Mahat Tattvas and we all are controlled by 
Thy Extraordinary Form. Thou hast kept us in our 
respective places by Thy Kriya Sakti as birds are 
kept duly by the strings through them. Mahat 
Tattva, Aharnkara, and the Devas, elements and 
the senses, before mentioned all united create this 
Universe by Thy Grace. 

afafa pelt aduduīt 

"rat Asa gemina: i 
a ae frega 
TA mm feeritaarmt 119 N 

Thy creation is very big and grand: for this 
reason the gross thinkers, deluded by Thy power, 
never understand it. This Maya is the only means 
to get the Sarhsāra Nivrtti, Moksa, the real Goal of 
man: and this Maya, again involves them in the 
Karma entanglements, very hard to get through. 
Coming in and going out, both of these are Thy 
forms; so we bow down to Thee.” 

ANA IATA 

Wd a wage eb dado UA d 

sergaqareta morama: 20 0 

ada dyis umm naa gfe | 

ATT uu: Weur een 421 U 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 

sargāt at afd argdatu FAAATA, | 

Narayana said: Thus the Bhagavan Rudra, with 
His Own persons in Hāvrta Varsa use to worship 
the Devi and the Sankarsana, the Controller of all 
the Lokas. The son of Dharma, well known by the 
name of Bhadrašravā and all the persons born of 
his family and his attendants, worship thus the 
Devi. 

wafer at g warteweifedn 1 22 N 

wa aaa frufen | 

wana u at ale qui svaift u 023 1 

This form is well known to all the the name of 
Hayagriva and worshipped thus. All the persons 
there worship Him with the intense meditation and 
Samadhi and realise Him thoroughly. Then they 
praise Him, according to due customs and get the 
thorough Siddhis (successs in getting extraordinary 
powers). 


watse ft fires ovate à 
targa wafé frasi fed 
fēru vt fuat RRA: 24 u 
The Bhadrašrvās said: “Obeisance to Thee, the 
Bhagavan, the Incarnate of Virtue, and to Him who 
destroys completely the desires, attachments, etc., 
to worldly objects! Ho! How wounderful are the 
feats of the Bhagavàn! Death always destroys all, 
but people, seeing this, seem not to see this. Seeing 
that the son meets with death, the father desires to 
live long not for a virtuous purpose but for sense 
enjoyments, what is called Vikarma. Those who 
are skilled in Jfiàna and Vijfiana say that this 
Universe that is seen is very transient. 
aaa fasi eau: HT mat 
uyala menaa ferafga: 1 
carte refer tars ATHAT 
Grater pani jdt qu u 25 N 


Book VIII Chapter IX 


907 


Moreover those Pandits who are endowed with 
much Jñāna, see vividly the transitoriness of this 
Universe. Still, O Unborn One! When practically 
they come to deal with this, they all become 
overpowered with the influence of Maya. 

aagana 

d a T 
Tri a fast cate arefenrcot water 
HAARR wr eq: 126 I 

So Thy Pastime (Lila) is wonderfully variegated. 
(Instead of spending our time uselessly in discuss- 
ing on Sastras) we bow down to Thee, and Thee 
alone. Thou art the Self-manifest Caitanya. Thou 
are not the object to be covered by Maya. Thou 
dost not do anything in the sort of creation etc., 
Thou remainest simply as the Witness thereof. 

sarai quur ARATTA- 

MAAN giam: i 
erra d aadsfrarad 
wd mA aada d 27 u 

Sill the Vedas declare that Thou createst, 
preservest and destroyest the Universe. It is quite 
reasonable and nothing to be wondered at. Thou 
art the the Atman of all. When the Pralaya (the 


time of great dissolution) comes, the Vedas were 
stolen by the Daityas and taken to the nether 
regions, the Rasātala. 
wd wait Asi gave et ww | 
SEAT AVIA ST ARTI d 28 ! 
Thou, in the form of Hayagriva (Horse-faced), 
rescued the Vedas and gave them to the Grandsire 
Brahma who was very eager to get them back and 
understand their meanings. Thou art the true 
Sankalap (resolve); we bow down to Thee.” Thus 
the Bhadrašravās prasie the Hayagriva form of Hari 
and sing the glorious deeds of Him. 
wat fina a: wdvgnueu a: | 
Wayans wdteien aster A: |1 29 N 
sf SRR Verge AEREA gage TA 
HOUSE: 11 8 11 
He who reads these narratives of the Maha 
Purusa (the high-souled personage) or he who 
makes others hear these things, both of them, 
quitting their sinful bodies, go to the Devi Loka. 
Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Eighth Book on 
the description of Ilāvrta in the Mahapuranam 
Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book VIII Chapter IX 907 


CHAPTER IX 
On the Divisions of the Continent 
siantar sara Were sara 
xf a mae: VR: 1 3 a aA nia ATA 
ada Ae AER: (dodi annaia ase RANTA, 
wer deft ced ENAS: | tere era AAT WE WA 3^ WUTE d 
Wygogfeermgen: vdife eqqeravataq M2 N ard TTT gR: n 32 SW u 
Narayana said: In Harivarsa, the Bhagavan Hari | raq faae wer: yhaa 
is shining splendid as a Yogi in the form of eara art fore fire ferar i 


Narasimha. The Maha Bhāgavat (most devoted) | Waal IK naaraan 

Prahlada, who knows the attributes of God andrai at wine 3 ni 
worships and chants hymns with his whole hearted| Prahlada spoke: "I bow down to Thee, the 
devotion, seeing that beautiful form, gladdening | Bhagavan Narasimha Deva. Thou art the Light of 
to all the people. all Lights. Thy big teeth are like thunderbolts. Let 


908 


Thee manifest in Thy most terrible form. Let Thee 
destroy the desires of the people to do Karma and 
let Thou devour the great Ignorance (Ajfiana) the 
Moha (delusion) of the people. Thou art the 
receptacle of the Sattva, Raja and Tamo Gunas. 
Let myself be always free from any fear by Thy 
Grace. “Om Khraum!” Let this whole world rest 
completely in peace and happiness. Let the cheats 
quit their guiles and be pure and simple. Let all the 
people quit completely their animosities towards 
each other and think of their welfare. Let all the 
people be from making injuries to others and be 
peaceful; and let them have their control over their 
passions. Let our mind be completely free from 
desires and rest entirely and devotedly to Thy lotus- 
feet. Let us not be attached to sons, wives, wealth. 
house or to any other worldly objects. If there be 
any attachment, let it be to the objects dear to the 
Bhagavan. He who barely sustains his body and 
soul and controls himself completely, success is 
very near to him; not so to the persons that are 
attached to the sense. 
MSMR MATT LTT 
vint afa FTgTafņāg F: 1 

a: maen US sme 

Rieger dtfsafta: ua u 


The dirt of the mind, that is not washed away 
by bathing in the Ganges or by taking resource to 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


ata sifenstirareataserat 
weirs AAAS T: | 
TAURI Seat ERT 
Tandarata staat aft: u 6 u 
But he who indulges in various mental 
phantasms, without any Bhakti to the Bhagavan, 
he follows the worldly happiness that is certainly 
to be hated and never he gets Vairágvam and other 
higher qualities). 
sR manara H EL LEES LI 
Barone aati | 
Rar ebd ufa wawa Te 
war Hera eui dA 7 u 
As water is life to the fish, so the Bhagavan Hari 
is the self of all embodied beings and so He is to 
be specially prayed for. So if a high-souled person 
be attached to household happiness, without 
thinking of God, then his greatness dwindles into 
a trifling insignificance like the ordinary pleasure 
of man and woman when they are full of youth. 
ATS NT GTG ATA 
WET i 
JRigurd serdi at WTA Us N 
So leave, at once, the home that is the source of 
Birth and Death and leave Trsna (thirst, desire), 
clinging to life, low-spiritedness, name, and fame, 
egoism, shame, fear, poverty and loss of one’s 


the Tirthas, etc., is removed by the company of | honour and worship the Lotus-Feet of the Bhagavan 


the devotees to the God and by their influence, 
hearing, thinking, and meditating on the attributes 
of the Bhagavan. 


uit T 


So who is there that does not serve the 
Bhagavan! He who has got Niskàma Bhakti 
(devotion without regard to any fruits thereof) to 
the Bhagavan, to him come always the Devata, 
Dharma and Jiiāna and other higher qualities. 


Nrsithha Deva and be entirely fearless.” 

wd Beruf wish rensa 1 

get mmie xem 9 u 

Beat U aes fü sHTGTRGTUSWHIAS | 

emer ata usrfuir weder 10 nN 

Thus Prahlàda, the Lord of the Daityas, daily 
worships devotedly the Bhagavan Nrsimha, 
resplendent in his lotus heart, the death blow, the 
lion to all the elephant sins. In the Ketumāla Varsa, 
the Bhagavan Narayana is reigning in the form of 
the Kama Deva, the God of Love. 


Book VIII Chapter IX 


Waser VATS cp TART | 

m aada wad ngat wera 11 U 

The people there always worship Him. The 
daughter of Ocean, the Indirā Devī, who confers 
honour and glory to the Mahātmās is the presiding 
Deity of the Varsa. She always worships the Kama 
Deva with the following verses: 


fret rarer aatstadam: 17200 

The Laksmi Devi spoke: “Om, Hrām, Hrim, 
Hrüm, Om namo Bhagavate Hrsīkešāya! Thou art 
the Bhagavan of the nature of Om. Thou are the 
Director, the Lord of the Senses; Thy Atman is the 
Highest and the Receptacle of all the good things. 
All the Karma Vrttis, all the Jūāāna Vrttis, and effort 
and resolution and other faculties of the mind, act 
in their respective channels by Thy looking and by 
their being constantly practised in Thee. And the 
elements over which they get their masteries are 
subservient to Thy Laws. The mind and the other 
eleven Indriyas, and touch, taste and other five 
senses are but Thy parts. All the rites and 
ceremonies observed in the Vedas are found in 
Thee. Thou art the infinite store of all the the 
foodings of the Jivas. From Thee flows the 
Paramānanda, the Highest Bliss. Thou art All, Thou 
art the Substance, Purity incarnate; Thou art the 
Energy, the Strength manifest in all. Thou art the 
Finish of all the happiness and Thou art the Only 
One Substance, that can be desired by the people. 
So obeisance to Thee! This Thy Lordship is not 
dependent on any other body. The women that 


909 


know Thee, the Lord of all and worship other 
bodies for their husbands, those husbands can never 
save them, their lives, their wealth, progeny or other 
dear things as those are controlled by Kala (Time) 
and Karma. 
aa ufa Raga: Tad: 
aiaa: urfer aagi TAT à 
E ue KANTA frat set 
"rareremumafer Wer WAL d 1 3 N 
So they can not be termed husbands at all; Thou 
art the Real Husband; and no other. For Thou art 
naturally fearless and Thou protectest in every way 
the persons that becomes afraid. 
ara d madeg 
a «mmegrsfisernmetuer i 
ada netfa 
GRATE NAATA 0 1 4 N 
Thou art the Lord of all wealth; so no other is 
superior to Thee. How can then, they be 
independent whose happiness depends on others! 
The lady that desires to worship Thy lotus feet only 
and becomes subservient to no others, she attains 
all the desires. 


ferécréeqagaur astra 115 i 
Again the lady who, desiring other desires than 
to get Thee, does not worship Thy loius feet, Thou 
fulfillest the desires of her too. But, O Bhagavan! 
When the period of enjoyment of these things 
ceases and when the objects of these enoyments 
are destroyed, then she repents much due to the 
loss of those things. Brahma, Mahadeva, the Suras 
and the Asuras practise hard Tapasyas to get me, 
impelled by their desires to attain the objects of 
sense enjoyments; but he only really gets me who 
worships and takes refuge of Thy lotus feet only, 
for my heart is entirely attached to Thee. 
"ped AaTereļma vitfér dfad 
"isst UTAGETĪI Idam | 


910 
fant vri aerate reram 
a goreateaned fay: 16 0 

So, O Acyuta! Kindly shew Thy Grace and put, 
on my head, Thy lotus palm, praised by the 
universal people that Thou placest on Thy Bhaktas. 
O Bhagavan! That Thou takest me in Thy Bosom 
is a sign of Thy Grace. 

mga eder: arrest fags 17 N 

Up am ad a afd wat: WSTH | 

Ae ģargteeri Ag: witha PTA u 18 i 

No one can fathom the deeds of Thee, the Only 
Controller of all. Thus the Prajāpati and the Lords 
of that Varsa, worship the Bhagavan, the Friend of 
all, with a view to attain their respective desires 
and Siddhis. In Ramyak Varsa, the Matsya form 
of the Bhagavan is set up and consecrated. The 
Suras and the Asuras worship Him. The highly 
intelligent Manu always chant hymns to that 
Excellent Form thus: “Obeisance to Him who is 
the Life of all, the Essence and Strength of all, to 
that Great Fish Form, the Body Incarnate of Sattva 
Guna, who is of the nature of Om and Bliss." 


qued RETETA: N 19W 


Thou art the Lord of all the Lokapalas and of 
the form of the Vedas. Thou art within and without 
all this universe, moving and non-moving; still all 
the beings are unable to see Thy form. As the people 
bring under their control the wooden dolls, so Thou 
controllest the universe by the rules and prohibitions 
under the names of the Brahmanas, etc. 

a sated u gd ai AAA | 

arent Wem Gadi AT: Raum | 
Zi eikeuretr: Pt Hcet 
Rar addisfi Ya Āra U | 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


ung 7 yf enu: 
agi emaa vag 11 20 N 

Thou art the God. The Lokapālas, being 
overcome by the fever of jealousy and pride, 
become guite unable, either individually or 
collectively, to guit their jealousies and to protect 
the tripeds, guadrupeds, reptiles and snakes; so 
Thou art the God. 


WE SRTGITURTUITHTT AA: 021 N 

Thou hadst upheld this earth along with me and 
with the medicinal plants and creepers; and Thou 
shewedest the highest luminous light in the great 
ocean, at the time of Pralaya, tossed with surging 
waves and didst roam there. Thou art the Self of 
all the beings in the universe. 

we wilt er gast aq: unire: | 

maaa Bast TAGAT 022 N 

So we bow down to Thee. Thou the Manu, the 
best of the mortal beings, used to praise the 
Bhagavan, who took His incarnation in the shape 
of the Fish, the Remover of all doubts. 


wana tara Prelate: | 

ret URGE Wea: 023 0 

Slt AACA TAT ergo? SEY TH eraut 
TIRSA: 11 9 |1 


Manu, the foremost of the Bhāgavatas (the 
devotees) is reigning there in the service of the Fish 
Incarnation of the Bhagavan, with intense 
meditation and expurging all sins and with great 
devotion. ” 

Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Eighth Book 
on the narration of the divisions of the continent in 
the Maha Puranam Srimaddevibhagavatam 
of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book VIII Chapter IX 


911 


CHAPTER X 


On Bhuvanakosa 


starrer sarar 
froma ATA at serarendeuga | 
eme anata: dtsamdram qua gewd uu 
Narayana said: In Hiranmaya Varsa, the 
Bhagavan is remaining in the form of Kürma, the 
Tortoise, as the Lord of Yoga. He is thus praised 
and worshipped by Aryama, the Ruler of the Pitrs. 


ardurare 


3 Hb wad apa Wee 
Aaea aay aa sat per ATĪSAEATATU 
AAT II 


Aryamā said: “Om namo Bhagavate Akūpārāya; 
(King of tortoises, sustaining the world.) Obeisance 
to Thee, the Lord of all prosperities, in the form of 
Tortoise (Kūrma); Thou art built of Sattva Guna 
Incarnate; no one can make out where Thou dost 
dwell; Thou art not encompassed by Time; (Thou 
art in the Present, Past and Future); so obeisance 
to Thee. Thou dost pervade all things; we bow 
down to Thee. All are established in Thee; so 
obeisance to Thee. By Thy extraordinary Maya 
(power) Thou hast made manifest this universe that 
is seen. This is Thy Form. It is by no means distinct 
from Thee. This Thy Form is seen in so many 
forms. So the true reality being not known like the 
mirage, these cannot be counted; really speaking, 
what is Thy form, no one can definitely say. 


Auda wm: 03 0 


Thy beings generated by heat and moisture (said 
of insects and worms), those that are born of eggs, 


from wombs and the plants and other moving, non- 
moving beings, the Devas, Rsis, Pitrs, Bhütas, and 
these senses; the sky, the heavens, earth, mountains, 
rivers, ocean, islands, planets, and stars all these 
art thou and Thou alone. Thy name, form, and 
appearance, are as varied; and their numbers cannot 
be counted. 

atradeatatareuracit 

cota: enfeudun i 
gen war aragua 
aA am: aeaa d 1 4 N 

Still, Kapila and others have determined their 
numbers, by the knowledge of which Thou canst 
become visible to the Eye of Knowledge. Thy form 
and nature are determined by these Sankhyas 
ascertained by Kapila. So we bow down to Thee.” 

wd waft eden we ad: 1 

Trad unit sep wd*pnWd TAH US N 

aay Hey TAURA: | 

antanas aval Gerd Fat 6 d 

Thus Aryamā, and the other rulers of the Varsa 
all united sing, praise, and worship the Bhagavan 
Kürma Deva, the Controller of all and the 
Generator of all. All Hail to Thee! The Bhagavan 
Yajfia Purusa is manifest in Uttara Kuru Mandala 
in the form of Adi Varāha. 

dase fattragd aars sais | 

qr: wedifer at aman emda 07 d 

The Earth Herself worships Him always. The 
Goddess Earth praises Hari, the Y ajfia Vārāha, the 
Destroyer of the Daityas and worships duly that 
Deva, with Her heart lotus, naturally devted, 
rendered more devoted by Her attachment to the 
Lord. 


yara 
So m aà naag 
OMA UETATATATA 


912 
"HETSRTSRI WU: chH- 
TATA Bera AKT us d 
wer ead Haar feuf2rat 
Tory areftaa MAATA, i 
neti Heat ATT fazarat 
"Té fnna fieret uo n 
The Goddess Earth spoke: “Om Namo 
Bhagavate Mantratattva Lingāya Yajfias Kratave” 
Ibow down to the Bhagavān, the Great Boar; Thou 
art Om; Thy real form and nature can be known by 
only the Mantra and Tattva. Thou art Yajūa and 
Kratu (sacrifices) incarnate; therefore all the great 
sacrifices are Thy limbs. Thou art the Three Yugas 
(there being no Yajfia in the Satya Yuga) Thou art 
that which is left as Pure, after doing Karma (so as 
to be fit for performing Yajfias). So obeisance to 
Thee. The sages, versed in Jītāna and Vijiiāna say 
that Thou art hidden in the body and in the senses 
as fire is hidden in the wood. So they, ardent to see 
Thee, seek for Thee with a discriminative and 
dispassionate mind, judging karmas and their fruits; 
and then Thy Nature is revealed. 
seti paangat- 
idaraan à 
sreeftarertrfegreremgrfgfir- 
Pierre TSK d u 10 0 
arte frgtutriautgd 


ma AKT ToT ATA 110 

I bow down to Thee. Thy Form can be 
ascertained by the cause and effect of the Karmas 
and other Gunas of Maya, sense objects, senses, 
actions, Devas, body, time, Ahankara and others. 
I bow down to Thee. Those can see thus Thy form, 
whose mind is firmly established in Thee, by their 
discrimination and Yama, Niyama, etc., and who 
have abondaned all sorts of fickleness and 
changeability of their tempers. So obeisance to 
Thee. As iron goes attracted towards the magnet, 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


so Maya dances before Thee with Her Gunas and 
Her works in the way of the creation, preservation 
and destruction of this universe; but Thou art totally 
indifferent to it. 

Mau ort uama gÀ 

at at Taran ERT: 
garnit Prga: | 
mefa: worms A AA 12 0 

For the sake of the Jivas (embodied souls), 
desire comes to Thee, though Thou art not quite 
willing! Thou art the Witness of the Jivas and their 
Adrsta (the Fate). I bow down to Thee. The Yajña 
Varāha, the Cause of this universe, has lifted me 
up from the Rasatala and placing me on His big 
tusks, has come out from the Pralaya, the great 
ocean, after overpowering in battle His enemy, the 
powerful Daitya, like an elephant, I bow down to 
that Controller of all, to Thee. 

feres asiani gruti a wd 1 

dare xd sfrequrafeues wdr 13 u 

In the Kimpurusa Varsa, the Bhagavan Adi 
Purusa (the Prime Man), the Self-manifest and the 
Lord of all, is residing in the form of Rama, the 
son of Dašaratha and the joy of the heart of Sita 


:» 


Devi. 


gagara 
3 AMY mad saaya NA sfer | arda- 
Viada wa: suffers sorftacitera aa: | 


RTU fart woet 14 a 
Šrī Hanumāna thus spoke: ‘Om name Bhagavate 
Uttama Slokaya.’ 1 bow down to the Bhagavan, 
who art sung by the excellent verses, Purifying all. 
I bow down to Thee, the incarnate of modesty, good 
temper, vows and good sings; Thy mind is always 
under control; Thou dost imitate, as Thy nature is 


Book VIII Chapter IX 


good, the actions of all persons; obeisance to Thee. 
Thou art the Supreme Place to awards praise. 
Obeisance to Thee. Thou art Brahmanya Deva (in 
the creation of the universe), the high souled 
Persons Mahapurusa Thou gettest the First Share, 
above all the persons! Thou art the One Tattva and 
That Alone, as established in the Vedanta. The holy 
realisation is the only guide to it. This Tattva 
dominates over all the Gunas. It can never be an 
object. Only by pure intellect, It can be realised. 
There is no name, form of It. It is always beyond 
the pale of Ahankara. I take refuge to this Tattva, 
the most Peaceful, with my body and mind. Thy 
incarnation in human shape in this world is not 
simply for killing Ravana but for giving instructions 
to the mortals. 
natria nedyani 
Waada a act feit: 1 
PASAN PM: TA AA: 
Hapa aaan 15 N 
The contact with woman and the suffering 
thereof are very difficult to avoid; to give this lesson 
also He took this incarnation, He Who is merged 
in enjoying the Supreme Bliss of His Own Nature 
and He Who is the Lord of all, how can He suffer 
miseries in the bereavement of Sita. 
aà U STRIS STEHT Yeas: 
waka ITATATGGA: | 
a Glad nyema 4 
want arte fererquréfet 11 16 n 
He is the best friend and the very Atman of those 
who have conquered their minds and senses. 
Especially He is the receptacle of all the qualities 
and is in enjoyment of other divine extraordinary 
powers. So He is not attached to the worldly objects. 
How can the delusion due to His wife come and 
darken Him? and why will He send Laksmana in 
exile? He is the Mahat Tattva and the Parama Purusa; 
so good birth, beauty, intelligence, oratory or good 
form nothing can please Him. Bhakti (devotion) 
can only attract Him. 


58 


913 
wem JA gts uri 
"Uum a gtgatatreitatg: i 
Ads geraft at asters 
HE At MAAN: 0017 0 
If that be not the case, then why will He, the 
elder of Laksmana, the Bhagavan the son of 
Dašaratha make friendship with us, the wanderers 
of the forest and who are by nature, not the 
receptacles of any beauty, etc. 


RS rure asa: 
Wafer a: qgurnpm | 
sme ri aarp ef 
A SMTA TAHT 18 
So everyone, be he a Sura or Asura, man, or not 
man, should worship the Hari manifest in Rama, 
in the human body with all his heart. He is so good 
that if any body worships Him even to a very small 
extent, He always considers it to be much; what 
more can be said than this that He took all the 
inhabitants of Kosala to Heaven! ” 


qnem 010 11 

Nārāyaņa said: Thus Hanuman, the best of 
monkeys, sings the praises and worships duly in 
Kimpurusa Varsa, the lotus-eyed Rama, truthful, 
and determined in his vows. He who hears this 
wonderful description of Rama, is freed of all his 
sins and goes with his body pure to the abode of 
Ràma. 

Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Eighth Book on 
the desription of Bhuvanakosa in the Mahāpurāņam 
Srimaddevibhàga vatam, of 18,000 verses, by 
Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. 


914 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


CHAPTER XI 


On the Continents and Bhāratavarsa 


starrer sarar 
ane a APSKATS: | 
Rem saat da romi frasa n 1 N 
Narayana said: In this Bharatavarsa (India) I am 
present, as the First of all, in the shape of the Man, 
at present existing before you. Let you praise Me 
incessantly thus: 
AR gara 
Ge Hp wad saagi 
wisika AA ATTN 
minà arena a A zh au 
mats mig at a snnt 
Bradt demmisfu A: 1 
si ga qitfeiquia 
wd atsurafāfārrartatt u 2 u 
Narada siad: Thou art the Bhagavan. Obeisance 
to Thee. Thou art completely free from attachment 
and envy and Thou art the incarnate of Dharma, 
Jňāna and Vairāgyam (Dispassion). No trace of 
Ahankara (egoism) is in Thee. Obeisance to Thee. 
Thou has't nothing of wealth; Thou art the foremost 
of the family of Rsis; Thou art Nara Narayana. 
Thou art the Parama Hamsa (the highest class of 
ascetics and renouncers of the world). Thou art the 
Highest Guru; Thou art happy with Thyself and 
the Leader of all; I bow down to Thee. Thou art 
the Lord of all, yet not mixed in the work of 
creation. etc. Though Thou residest in every 
embodied being, yet no hunger and thirst can press 
Thee; though Thou art the Witness, yet Thy sight 
is not at disturbed by the proximity. Thou art not 
at all connected and no desires can come to Thee; 
Thou art the Witness. 
sé fe arant 
FTA SpTGTSHITG A | 
ariar vat ftit cit 
warn aefiatfsgrg ener: 11 3 N 


So I bow down to Thee. This path of Yoga has 
come out of Thee and it is established in Thee. 
The Bhagavan Hiranyagarbha has given instruc- 
tions on the cleverness in Yoga, thus: That leaving 
aside the egoism of this body, the seat of all evils. 
the people at last will take resort to the path of 
Bhakti and set their minds on Thee, Who art be- 
yond the pale of the three Gunas. 

"sif mq Rna: 

Why qty y fiu 

Vida fargreqpen eren Teram 


"rec TA Va HAT 1! 4 uu 


It, like the ignorant persons very much attached 
to this world as well as the next, the wise pass their 
time in the thoughts of their sons, wives, and riches 
and ultimately become very much pained on the 
destruction of this ugly body, persons versed in 
Jfiana and Vijfiana be afraid in the end of their 
separation from the body, then their study of the 
Šāstras and all their labours become labours 
merely, without any effect. 

ae: Wat wat gadaufiai 

vd HrTHTSÉTHGTHÉSTS: | 
RAR att cafe a: GATT Uu 5 ut 

When such a thing occours to the learned, then 
O Thou, the Subduer of the knowledge of senses! 
Thou. Thyself givest us instructions that we may 
easily think of Thee. Then this terrible clinging to 
this ugly body that Thy Maya brings about and 
which it is very difficult to discard by other means, 
will leave us quickly. 

wa wife war dd ARTA | 

anal APR: gane senem, 06 Nu 

arà sir ae after FR 1 

ayaa dat UPA: 7 N 


Narada, the seer of all, well qualified with the 


Book VII Chapter XT 


knowledge of all the Tattvas, the foremost of the 
Munis, thus worships it and praises Narayana Who 
is unaffected by any of the Upadhis (and who 
corresponds to Nitya and Lila.) (both Permanent 
and the Pastime-making). O Devarsi! I now 
describe to you the rivers and mountains in 
Bharatavarsa. 

"erdt Henne ares Pages: | 

AT: HEH: es wu qafüfur us ou 

mes MA cerita: | 

arum Rias gfrumauda: 9 1 

araa Ayane RRAN | 

Tradl tada: at Hteuda: 10 0 

Aas RR: araftiteran | 

KATRS ET fret ATTN: IL 11H 

Hear attentively. Malaya, Mangalaprastha, 
Maināka, Citraküta, Rsabha, Kūtaka, Kolla, 
Sahya, Devagiri, Rsyamūka, Šrīšaila, Vyankata, 
Mahendra, Vāridhāra, Vindhya, Šuktimān, Rksa, 
Pāriyātra, Drona,  Citraküta, Govardhana, 
Raivataka, Kakubha, Nila, Gaurmukha, Indrakila, 
Kāmagiri and many other mountains, that cannot 
be numbered. 

agaaa: PASA MAN: | 

aagana AnA n12 n 

maa a Urania Aarena ARTA i 

Great merits accure on seeing these mountains. 
Hundreds and thousands of rivers issue form these 
mountains. Drinking their waters, bathing in them 
and visiting them and singing their praises 
completely destroy the sins of mind, word and 
body. 

qa axa KATE ater 13 1 

aera a aratt aun Sa waka à 

TEMA POAT irada Tat u14 i 

"irarertt fare ff er ATR à 

art tar a ar Harc vend 15 i 

adah a Riya siasio werd i 

sufüreneur Grant w dgrgfēremadt 16 N 

A aga da main sagt | 


915 


mai or taad uwwedi aum N17 
GUAT U AZA ATT HEAT | 
Ram a aitent er a ate yatia: 018 u 
Thy names of the rivers are: Tamraparni, 
Candravarnšā Krtamālā, Vatodaka, Vaihayasi, 
Kaveri, Vena, Payasvini, Tungabhadra, Krsnavena, 
Šarkarā, Vartakà, Godavari, Bhimarathi, 
Nirbindhyā, Payosnika, Tāpī, Reva, Surasa, 
Narmada, Sarasvati, Carmanvati, and the Indus, 
Andha, and Sone, Rsikulya, Trisāmā, Vedasmrti, 
Mahānadī, Kausiki, Yamuna, Mandākinī, 
Drsadvati, Gomati, Sarayü, Rogdavati, Saptavati, 
Susomā, Satadru, Candrabhāgā, Marudvrdhā 
Vitastā, Asiknī and Visva and many other rivers. 

afirat menage’: vencerenrifür: | 

RTA ARR: 19 1l 

Those persons that take their births in the Varsa 
enjoy the (Divya) Divine, human, and the lower 
enjoyments, as the effects of their Karmas, in 
accordance with their Sāttvik, Rājasik, and 
Tamasik qualities. 

safe faferen Am: adata Prana 1 

amatan wate EX 1020 lt 

All the inhabitants of this Varsa take their 
Samnyasa, Vanaprasthas, etc., in accordance with 
the rules of their Varnas (castes) respectively and 
enjoy beatitudes as dictated (in their Sastras). The 
Vedavadis (the propounders of the Vedas), the Rsis, 
and the Devas declare that this Varsa is superior to 
all the other Varsas, as the Grace of God is easily 
obtained here. 

ada cu adu urn efus: | 

adfe gaat deaea: rear: 121 1 

They say: Oh! What an amount of good works, 
the inhabitants of Bharata Varsa did in their 
previous lives, that by their influence, the Bhagavan 
Hari has become pleased with them without their 
having any Sādhanās (good Yogic practices). 
aret arftat frem vita 

Uga uaittaga rad gR: | 


916 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Aia eret TT wears 
yhaa wer fF 4: 022 N 

Therefore we also desire to have our births there, 
for there if we be born amidst the persons there, 
we would be able serve Hari, Mukunda in every 
way. What will severe austerities, gifts, sacrifices, 
and practising vows avail us? Even if we go to 
Heaven, what benefit we will derive there? 


ea ee U 


Then we would never be able to bring our mind 
to the lotus-feet of the Bhagavān Nārāyaņa. Our 
tastes for sense enjoyments would increase and we 
would be whollv deprived of Bhagavān, Far better 
itis to be born in this Bhārata Varsa as short-lived 
persons, than to acguire other places where one 
can live up to the period of Kalpa and then be 
reborn. 


dara daienrd ud Be 124 N 
For the intelligent people of Bhārata, getting this 
mortal coil can within a short period devote 
themselves to the Bhagavān Hari and be free from 
rebirth. 
a aa dUGAKUT ETA 
TMA STRTSRITETGISTUT: | 
ATA TAMA Wale: 
qisreientsfü a ow Hera 25 u 
That place is never to be visited and served, even 
if that be Svarga Loka where the nectar-like ocean 
of the sayings of Vaikuntha are not heard; where 
there are no assemblages of saints who take refuge 
of the Lotus feet of Bhagavàn; where the great 
sacrifices and festivities of the Bhagavan Visnu 
are not celebrated. 
wean gaf frag du siet 
Weare yay | 


aa uev Gaara wd sut 
weiter ge ure sm 426 
Those persons, that to do not try for Moksa, 
when they get human births and when they possess 
Jiiana, Kriya (methods of doing sacrifices and other 
works for the help of Jñāna) and Dravya (materials 
for those sacrifices), are certainly like beasts and 
get themselves repeatedly entanged into bondage. 
a: sega afēfē ere 
saae aRar: à 
We: gasaan ga 
Tarte qui: wana wey: 27 Uu 
wai fayreafitauférat go 
*rarefat Uegtfērat we: 1 
wer feret sreraratrosat- 
Aaa fesruraueena 11 28 N 


wad eftsistat vi m uru 

The people of Bhārata Varsa offer oblations to 
Indra and other deities, invoking their names 
separately, with proper rules (Vidhis), mantras, and 
purodāša (a sacrificial oblation made of ground rice 
and offered in Kapalas or vessels); but the All 
sufficient Bhagavàn Hari, the Giver of blessings 
accepts those very gladly. 

True that He grants unto the people what they 
ask from Him; but He hardly gives anybody the 
Paramartha, the Highest Goal. The reason being 
that the people ask again and again after receiving 
what they had asked. So He gives of Himself His 
own lotus-feet to those who, having abondened all 
their desires, worship Him and only with the idea 
of love. (1) Thus: We are living very happily in 
the Heavens as the fruit of the Istāpūrta that we 
performed fully; yet we want that we may also be 
bornin Bharata Varsa with our memory all renewed 
with the thought of the Bhagavan Hari. The 
Bhagavan residing in this Bharatvarsa, awards the 
highest welfare to its inhabitants." 


Book VII Chapter XII 917 


wd mi Rar: fngrep arate: 1 give ar fe iA feretur a u32u 
PASTU urere ATT BVT u29 u aa: Ut MAR rantes |1 33 il 
gg iret fe sAN: gam: ut | sft eA AERTS CAT 
vuumif-avirfg: writ: RART: 130 n QARISA: 11 11 11 


Nārāyaņa said: O, Devarsi! Thus the Devas of The names of vo and made ihese Arg: 
the Heavens, the Siddhas, the Highest Rsis, sing | SY@™@Prastha, Candrasukra, Avartana, Ramanaka, 
the excellent merits of this Bharatavarsa. There are Mandaropakhya, Harina, Paficajanya, and Ceylon. 


the eight Upadvipas of this Jambudvipa: When the The length and breadth of Jambudvipa have been 
described; now the other six Dvipas, Plaksa and 
others will be described. Hear. 
Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Eighth Book 
on the discription of the continents and of 


sons of the King Sagara were searching for the 
footprints of the stolen horse (for ASvamedha 
sacrifice), they found these Upadvipas; so it is 
finitely stated. 


Bhāratavarsa in the Mahāpurāņam, 
aU madana | 


P Srimaddevibhagavatam, of 18,000 verses, by 
TOTEM: UTTAR Base pa Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book VII Chapter XII 917 


| ITAAAVĀJI YUE T yuu, 


CHAPTER XII 
On the Dvīpas 
ATT Sart wanafaa MT anrerat aAa: | 
wget gut are TĀ ihe: 1 Ada Team aera: N 6 d 
aam ude: aek uftafea: ud Fire exists at its bottom with form incarnate. 
Teas Yat Serum sme uw | This is named Saptajihva. The Ruler of this island 


adafa faqr: wmm: n2 n is Idhmajihva, the son of Priyavrata. He divided 


Narayana said: The Jambudvīpa has been his island into the seven Varsas and distributed them 
described, how it is and what is its width. It is |to each of his seven sons and he himself took refuge 
surrounded on all sides by the salt ocean. As Meru | Of the path of Yoga, so much liked by the Knowers 
is surrounded by Jambudvipa, so the salt ocean is | Of Self and he got the Bhagavan Vasudeva. 


surrounded by Plaksadvipa, twice its size. fra a wed Ak VII KaTgd AAT | 
"ruft sme fe dega |d ama ufa wur wguifor weer 47 1 
TAAS vare SKATU ATER 03 ui wy Wren Act: wur fere: wur Aa fi | 
Ronisia fergeftfer fafaga: à aem yore afai queria u 8 u 
PATA aria sit cuu: N40 maT wedwnur ste en uentis: 1 


As the ditch is surrounded by gardens, so the salt nigà dune ques w uon 
ocean is surrounded by gardens. As the Jambu tree wif quis Ruada va a | 

Tae Stet ara: TAG UAT: d 10 lt 

The names of these seven Dvipas are: Siva, 
Yavas, Subhadra, Santi, Ksema, Amrta, and 
Abhaya. Seven rivers and seven mountains exist 


exists in Jambudvipa, so the Plaksa tree exists in the 
Plaksa Dvipaand of the same size. The name Plaksa 
Dvipa is derived from the name of this Plaksa tree. 
This tree is of a golden colour. 


aftana: vd date ur à respectively in the seven islands. The rivers are: 
fra wet aat eagaeat adt fey: 5 ui Aruna, Nrmna, Angirasi, Savitri, Suprabhatika, 


918 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


Rtambharā, and Satyambharā. The names of the 
mountains are Maņikūta, Vajrakūta Indrasena, 
Jyotismana, Supraņa, Hiranyasthiva, and 
Meghamāla. 

Ada sera astaeastarfarer: 1 

Frein aA Pretend: WSITEem 0 11 N 

fasta wig zata ga a | 

erg Set eni: IATA stash 0 12 u 

The seeing and drinking the waters of these 
rivers take away all sins and all darkness due to 
ignorance. The four castes live here, Hamsa, 
Patanga. Ūrdhvāyana, and Satyanga, corresponding 
to the four casts Brahmana, etc. The inhabitants of 
this Plaksa Dvipa live for one thousand years; and 
all are of variegated wonderful appearances. 

megam fafaenwey 1 

migr aiferenfaftrarsd wife st u 13 N 

green fer sd er eden «rsen: | 

sae a KES KARTĒ 14 u 

warf wr ada vagy NS | 

amatore act ats: west un 15 u 

They follow the customs and usages dictated 
by the Vedas and worship the God Sun for the 
attainment of Heaven. The mantra by which the 
worship is done is this: We take refuge unto that 
Sun, Who is the Body Manifest of the Ancient 
Person Visnu and Who is the Ordainer of Satya 
(Truth), Rta (Straight forwardness), Brahma, Amrta 
(Immortality) and Mrtyu (Death). 

fama: udami frfagireuferent wr | 

wadua dega: web uf u16 u 

vadi umi a uftaratafesd 1 

PATI giasmarafaqurfereme u 1 7 t 

O Narada! All the persons here live long, of 
vigorous senses, energetic, powerful, intelligent, 
enthusiasts, and valorous; everyone gets 
extraordinary powers of themselves. Next to this 
Plaksa Dvipa is the Iksu Ocean. This Iksu Sagara 
surrounds the Plaksa Dvipa. Next comes Salmala 
Dvipa. It is twice as large as Plaksa. 


wart MA fiam Afè: à 

aa a wmeneftqur wremear wende: u 18 N 

wat Aa TESTU WEIST: | 

wea grae aren fe aang: Aaaa 1 19 u 

This Dvipa is surrounded by Surāsāgara (the 
ocean of wine). There is a tree named Šālmalī in 
this island, which is as large as the Plaksa tree. 
The high-souled Garuda resides on that tree. 
Yajfiabahu is the Ruler of this place. 

WTA: Ue MA: FATA qat ATA 

gator a arnt afar Fratera u 20 11 

grat drei wu Wenden 1 

Utes cat TI fata 0 21 N 

He was born of Priyavrata; he divided his Varsa 
into the seven parts and distributed each of them to 
his seven sons respectively. Now hear the names of 
these Varsas: Surocana, Saumanasya, Ramana, Deva 
Varsa, Pāribhadra, Āpyāyana, and Vijfiata. Seven 
mountains and seven rivers exist there respectively. 

ay ants: Wear UA wd: Bat: | 

"NU: magis anda Hem: 1220 

eye: gaadyg  WERDIRTUT u | 

Ww Uda: aa adres Sera 11 23 0 

The names of the mountains are: Sarasa, 
Šatašrūga, Vàma Deva, Kandaka, Kumuda, 
Puspavarsa, and Sahasra-Sruti. Now hear the 
names of the rivers. 

agaf: frtrareft radi auper | 

vert da regu wha ureter: 124 u 

wgdqeur ad urgdudummgam: | 

gaat Ri ager guum 125 0 

Anumati, Sinivali, Sarasvati, Kahu, Rajani, 
Nanda, and Rākā; these are the seven rivers. The 
people are divided into the four castes: Srutadhara, 
Viryadhara, Vasundhara, Isundhara. These 
correspond to the Brāhmaņas, etc. 

qd dams ait chien d 

athe: fagaervat ANER: t 26 N 

"atat a wert rc ST wn: wdteq i 

ua paaa: arra wentfde: 027 1 


Book VIII Chapter XIII 


919 


They worship the Bhagavàn Moon, the 
Controller of all and the Creator of all the Vedas. 
They offer food duly in the black and white 
fortnight to their Pitrs The mantra for their worship 
is: "Let Soma, the King of all, be pleased.” O 
Narada! Next to Surāsāgara is Kušadvīpa, 
surrounded by Ghrtasagara (the ocean of clarified 
butter). 

yilga: utsd pN: wenn | 

GRA HOE funeri eger] i 28 I 

PTT ATB STRUegRATES | 

Ruaan: ana: TG 429 N 

Its dimensions are twice as large. Here are blades 
of Kuša grass, of a very resplendent colour. The 
name of the Dvīpa is from this Kušastamba. This 
bundle of Kuša, illumines all the quarters with their 
gentle rays. The Ruler of the Dvipa is Hiranyareta, 
the son of Priyavrata. 

AGRA ATA AUTEN ATT | 

ags agers dat qeefa: Wc 030 

rnqunqeradt fate! d 

Aai ady aaa Aima: wat: 031 N 

He divided the Dvīpa into seven parts and 
distributed each of them to each of his seven sons 
respectively. The name of the seven sons are: Vasu, 
Vasudāna, Drdharuci, Nābhigupta, Stutyavrata 
Vivikta, and Bhāmadevaka. 

Aa: aaa tg aaia Paea | 

aman agn: Hfrewamem: 32 1 

warten sites aan: T wei: | 

Taner ape Aafia we a 33 N 

There are seven mountains forming the seven 
boundaries and so are the seven rivers. Hear the 
names of these. The names of the mountains are: 


Cakra, Catuhérhga, Kapila, Cirtre Devanika, Kita, 
Ūrdhvaromā and Dravina. The names of the rivers 
are: 
qatar darat gagian 1 

aaa: gamma: wd wa A 134 

are: aif dramarfirgq E | 

Gada damtrggdurt: venta: 135 u 

Rasakulya, Madhukulya,  Mitravindà 
Srutavinda, Devagarbha, Ghrtacyut, and 
Mantramalika. The inhabitants of the Kušadvīpa 
drink the waters of these rivers. There are the four 
castes here KuSala, Kovida. Abhiyukta and Kulaka 
corresponding to the Brahmanas, etc. 

Tatad d wd astē: | 

aad aaan: wd wdfaet wat: 136 N 


We asia vaeri wed drorftrarfiva: 137 1 
aft MAHITA Hep SEAT 
ERSEN: 0012 11 

They are all powerful like Indra and the other 
chief Devas; and all of them are omniscient. They 
worship the Fire God and perform various good 
works in honour of Him. Their mantra is this: "O 
Fire! Thou carriest the oblations direct to Para 
Brahma. In the sacrifices of the Devas, Thou 
worshippest that Personal God and offerest to Him 
whatever are given in oblations, mentioning the 
respective limbs of His Body. Thus the inhabitants 
of that Dvipa worship the Fire God. 

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Eighth Book on 
the narration of Plaksa, Salmala, and Kuša Dvipas in 
the Mahāpurāņam, Srimaddevibhagavatam, of 
18,000 verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book VIII Chapter XIII 919 


PACD UL ULINAO VA, AW LLC UL MAW KAT ULLAUCLA ALL U Le | 


CHAPTER XIII 
On the Dvipas 
RS Jaret Narada said: Thou, the Knower of everything! 
Bedoni a ag wattetan 1 Describe about the remaining Dvīpas, knowing 


aq fasta Uma wae "1 which we will be highly delighted. 


920 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


simao Zara 

vga ua yaaani meq | 

wat afe: mirage fe: SAIS: 2 

Narayana spoke thus: The very vast Ghrta 
Sagara (the ocean of clarified butter) is encircling 
the Kuša Dvīpa. Next to it is the Kraufica Dvipa. 
It is twice as large as Kuša. 

gfttemradt anf atrraatartafta wt i 

araftdda: asd ger uRedd 13 u 

ASA YR sacr er Raga: FAS aT | 

aftercare emu a weet: 4 ü 

The Ksira Sagara (the occan of milk) is 
surrounding this Dvipa. The Kraufica mountain is 
standing here. The name of this Dvipa is derived 
from this mountain. In days gone by, the highly 
intelligent Kartikeya burst this mountain by his own 
prowess. This Dvipa is washed by the Ksira Sagara; 
and Varuna is its Regent. 

wager amr ae favre finer Ares: | 

framers: aradan: 15 N 

The son of Priyavrata, Ghrtaprstha, respected 
by all and whose prosperity knows no end, is the 
Lord of this Dvipa. He divided this Dvipa into the 
seven parts and distriubted them to his sons and 
named the Varsas after the names of his sons. 

adi g fasrsiTa ure varese i 

yamg ay ewurfadymnp éd 

Tad WTAE TT AST € | 
u7 wu 


am was wur fren afr ada: d 8 u 

He made his sons the rulers of those places and 
he himself took the refuge of the Bhagavan 
Narayana. The names of the seven Varsas are 
respectively: Ama, Madhuruha, Meghaprstha, 
Sudhàmaka, Bhrajistha, and Vanaspati. O Narada! 
The seven mountains and the rivers there are very 
celebrated throughout the worlds. 

Wat d ana abrasive: | 

weg Aa: adel wx sft atfia: uou 


aren argdrararctenr Aeta a i 
ghravadt wean aféraerferenr «9T 10 N 


The names of the mountains are: Sukla, 
Vardhamana, Bhojana, Upavarhana, Nanda, 
Nandana, and Sarvatobhadra. The names of the 
rivers are: Abhaya, Amrtaugha, Aryaka, Tirthavati, 
Vrttirüpavati, Suklà, and Pavitravatika. 

gah uud argduda vad | 

YEN agesfaorers das: 11 i 

wd agda: wewr freier fè 1 

AAT: Gear amr Sarat uf u12 N 

The inhabitants there drink the highly pure water 
of these rivers. The people there are divided into 
four colours Purusa, Rsabha, Dravina, and Vedaka 
and they worship the Bhagavan Varuna, of the form 
of water. 

vu(atsferar sera asia farfererfeur: | 

ara: qeudtat vor yara: verc 013 N 

ATA: ueteres: PIMTATATATAT eT: | 

gf west wr eaten farted: werd: u 14 0 

Then they become very discriminative, and, with 
great devotion, and holding full within their folded 
palms the water, repeat the following mantra: "O 
Water! Thou art the essence Virya of the Person 
Bhagavan and Thou sanctifiest the Bhürloka, 
Bhuvarloka, and Svarloka. 

ua vemaintaautag tat: | 

gRr EA: 415 

ers U giutszi ufermarad wr d 

maA faforetsei afersorat AKT: 16 u 

Thou destroyest the sins of all. We all are 
touching it; purify our bodies'. After finishing their 
mantrams, they sing various hymns to Varuna. 
Next to the Ksirode Sagara, is the Saka Dvipa, 
thirty two lakh Yojanas wide, surrounded by the 
Dadhi Sagara (the ocean of curds), of similar 
dimensions. Here the most excellent tree named 
the Saka tree exists. 

wares ATTI U fü WWW | 

Jaaa Rue Wenferferfer epe: 0 17 u 


Book VIII Chapter XIII 

fossa HU aatfir oraret ay wr i 

wur Gather vari GPT Wa: 018 n 

O Narada! The Dvipa is named so after the tree. 
Medhatithi, the son of Priyavrata is the Lord of 
this Dvipa. He divided this land into the seven 
Varsas and distributed each to his seven sons 
respectively; and ultimately he took refuge to the 
path of Yoga. 

gūsat waydaatsa wana: | 

eqartrenfiratet agsutsu ANR 0 19 N 

matana: wer mar: aaa entier: i 

SUT FEASA TAME: VATA 0020 0 

eere SATIS WATT: | 

TASA: uper Garay AT 21 NI 

The names of the seven Varsas are Purojava, 
Manojava, Pavamānaka, Dhūmrānīka, Citrarepha, 
Bahurüpa, and Visvadhrk. In these Varsa there are 
seven mountains, one in each Varsa, as forming 
their boundaries; and there seven rivers also. The 
names of the mountains are: I$ana, Üruárüga, 
Valabhadra, Sata Kesara, Sahasra srotaka, 
Devapala, and Mahāsana; the names of the rivers 
are: 

aam yanga suamfēta a d 

auf ward weeyfata a 22 n 

wat fagam: VT Tell esser: \ 

wgduest ae weneengadi 1023 11 

amaga a ugdurt sdtita: 1 

wad Wray urere van 024 u 

Anagha, Āyurdā, Ubhayasprsti, Aparājitā, 
Paficapadi, and Sahasrašruti and Nijadhrti. These 
seven rivers are all very big and resplendent with 
lustre. The people are divided into four classes: 


Varsas, Satyavrata, Kratuvrata, Danavrata, and 
Anuvrata. They all take the Pranayama exercise 
and thereby bring the Rajas, and Tamo Gunas 
under their subjection and they worship Hari, of 
the nature of Prana Vayu, Higher than the Highest. 
aif Ēsma: wet aft) 
ere: Wagar seria at faataa: 25 N 


921 


STATA manag At As YER | 
WerefüWvsrg Weg aga: 026 
Their mantra is this: “He has entered into all the 

living beings and no urishes them by the Prána and 

other faculties; He is the Internal Ruler of all and 
the Supreme Controller; this Universe is under His 
control; let Him protect and nourish us. 
gauas RTT: | 
mmda gaani RAET: 127 0 
AAR gi araara A wr à 
ua fevrardig waaga 28 0 
O Narada! Next to this Dadhi Sagara is Puskara 
Dvipa; it is twice as large as Saka Dvipa. It is 
surrounded by the Dudha Sagara (the ocean of 
milk) all twice as large. The leaves of Puskara tree 
that shines in the Puskara Dvipa, are fiery like 
golden flames; they are as clean and pure. 
TAK GATI Ufa: 1 
wed Aem ANANYA 29 N 
au Wes Ware MAAAR: | 
satetaureitaaddnatttmit: 30 u 
Crores and crores of leaves, golden in colour 
ornament this Tree. Vasudeva, the Guru of all the 

Lokas, has created this Puskara Dvipa as the seat 

of Paramesthi Brahma, possessed of six 

extraordinary powers, for the purpose of creation. 

There is one mountain in this Dvipa; it is divided 

into two parts, named Arvācīna and Parácina. 
TATA: dessen efi i 
aa Ry a ent agg wur E n31 N 
sateen aguda: i 
"ie wafümftpdour]: weft da fü u32 0 
These form the boundaries of the two Varsas. 

The mountain is one Ayuta Yojana high and one 

Ayuta Yojana wide. There are four cities on the 

four sides. Indra and the three other Lokapalas are 

the lords of these cities. The Sun God comes out 
from their top and circumambulating Meru, goes 
there again. 
acne Uh Caretta SM a 
rasatsferet ditfergtar: KTTTABAA i 33 N 


922 

wdgi uera adament mar | 

wù manda aadu sat 1340 

The whole year is his Cakram, circle of circuit; 
His path is Uttarāyaņam and Dakşiņāyaņam. 
Vītihotra, the son of Priyavrata is the lord of this 
island. He distributed the two Varsas amongst his 
two sons, Ramana and Dhātakī. They rule over the 
two Varsas named also after them. 

qm: md yira gaan: | 

aad wensfuub utter 35 Ul 

wats art aaa use 

anda et waters wtsvisq 136 N 

WenkTWgd mi Wu rad AA: | 

gf Maeda? seruos sues 
IRRIS: 1113 11 


Srimaddevibhàgavatam 


Like the inhabitants of the above Varsas, the 
people also get power of themselves and worship 
devotedly the God seated on the lotus and follow 
such path of the Yoga as leads them to the Brahma 
Sālokyā, etc. The mantra runs thus: ‘We bow down 
to that One God, without a Second, of the nature 
of Peace, Who is the Fruit of all the Karmas, Who 
is the seat of illumination of Brahma, Who is 
established in Unity, and Who is worshipped by 
all the Lokas. 

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Eighth Book 
on the description of the remaining Dvipas in the 
Mahàpurànam Srimaddevibhagavatam, of 18,000 

verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


922 Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER XIV 
On the Lokāloka 
RTA sara «terit ura add dar ftufa: à 
Ta: Tea ARARA Taras: | Satur cleat AAMT: Ga: I 5 d 
Sire a eitesrettendTd: RRRA: uu gadai atomi waat agentes | 
aaga a zat gat mT. | saim s dITATTTATT: mane ft U61 
Geena rr terit fra nzu The God Himself has made this as the boundary 


of the three Lokas. The rays of the Sun, the Polar 
Star and all the planets are confined to this sphere; 
rather passing through its middle, the luminaries 
shed their lustre on the three Lokas. 
meam R a aa a ARE | 


Narayana said: Next to the ocean of pure water, 
is the mountain, called Lokaloka. It marks the 
sphere between the two countries Loka and Aloka. 
O Devarsi! There is a land, all of pure gold (beyond 
this ocean of pure water) for a space equal to the 


distance between Mānasottara and Meru. SUAS ACTA: west HARA: 7 N 
N | faf: wg B 2 gu 
"ert ware: fedt a hfaa 3 ut vanaf Rinie 
aa: admin At WD WWW 1 irea uguftīt AATA YA 1 
virereiten sia ren UG utara 4 u Aut ugly warn maA 119 N 


a Metts 2 E 
"his land is ike a minor there are fio beings O Narada! This great mountain is so lofty and 


here; the reason is, any substance placed on it would 
at once be converted into gold and nothing can be 
obtained out of it. O Narada! No living beings can 
live there and therefore it is named Lokāloka. This 
is established always between the Loka and Aloka. 


capacious that the rays of the luminaries can never 
go out of it. The learned men say, that the size, 
form, and indications of this mountain are such as 
this is the one-fourth of five hundred times the size 
of the earth on its summit. The self-born Brahma 
has placed very big elephants on all sides of it. 


Book VIII Chapter XIV 


Raha fearon 3t erf Prater à 

PRAT: TASS STATS ATTA: 10 N 

Ut KARTE RaRa sar: 1 

ei a watayart agetufudeura ur d 

Hear their names. These are Rsabha, Puspacüda, 
Vamana, and Aparájita. These four elephants are 
said to hold all the Lokas in their respective 
positions. The Bhagavan Hari gives strength to 
these elephants and to Indra and others who are 
reckoned to be His Vibhütis (powers). 

Ryani ded adaarrarek: | 

emer eae fereradafquqa: i12 0 

He manifesting His Suddha Sattva and super- 
extraordinary powers, and united with Anima, 


Laghimā, etc., the eight Siddhis, is reigning there 
surrounded by His Parisadas Visvaksena and 
others. 

IERI DE uftaat spas: ARTA: | 

SITE KATRA TT WATT: N 13 N 

MATa de I Tet fers: ATA: | 

ATT THT ATMA: 014 d 

He is the one God of all; He is without a second. 
For the welfare of all, He is holding Sudaršana and 
His various other weapons; and the powers of His 
arms are great. He is His own Cause and at all 
times He pervades all in and through. He is Eternal. 

Asafa Us TRAUKA | 

Rd IEF gam 0 15 N 

This Universe is upheld by His extraordinary 
power Maya for its preservation, He remains in 
this form till the end of a Kalpa. The inner width 
described above, determines the width of Aloka. 
For it is situated outside the above Loka. 

at: Treat Bat efe fè | 

emen: Wut TATA, |1 1 6 N 

yisi aed: Wn Tatra: | 

AUS us Karam urdveyreqwe ! 17 N 

Beyond the mountain Lokāloka, is said to lie 
the pure path leading to Yogešvara within the egg- 
shaped ellipsoid formed by the Heaven and Earth. 


923 


The inner dimension of this ellipsoid is twenty- 
five Koti Yojanas. When this egg becomes 
unconscious (lifeless), the Sun enters within it in 
the form of Vairaja, Hence the Sun is called 
Martanda. 

Ruani sft afkgraisugga: | 

water ft ferrea far: @ aire u 18 u 

mian acer rate a dur: 1 

qakdenypant wüguadieumq 19 

He is Hiranyagarbha, when He is born from this 
Golden Egg. It is the Sun that ordains the quarters, 
Ākāša, Heaven and Earth, etc., in their proper spheres 
and divisions. This Sun is the Atma of Svarga and 
Moksa, hell and other lower regions, of the Devas, 
men, birds, reptiles, trees and all other living beings; 
and He is the Presiding Deity of their sight. 

adanan gat sme sitar: à 

CAAT TUS TT BRAM IEIET: 020 u 

was ft feat ari atana a afga: | 

feat u fzreararétart xr geraden n 21 N 

O Narada! Its width is Paíica$at Koti Yojanas 
and its height or depth is twenty-five Koti Yojanas. 
If as the two halves of a gram are of the same size, 
so the Earth and Heaven are of equal size. 

aa aR Terra | 

TATA Waa audi at: N 22 

amd Aeh a yaaa ATR | 

Saran fm fenem u23 n 

The space enclosed between them is called 
Antariksa; the Sun God, the foremost of the planets, 
being situated in the middle, gives light and 
illumines and heats the three Lokas. He goes by 
the path of Uttarayana and therefore His motion 
becomes slow (His motion becomes Mandagati). 

ANAT Weasel GET | 

efaoraanrara AA fee u24 11 

seater Togad fet Ta | 

fayaniaararea fran fag 425 

The Sun then getting up higher prolongs the day 
time. Similarly when the Sun follows the path of 


924 


Daksinayana, He gets Sighra-gati and not going | maintains an even position and the day and night 


up so high, shortens the day time. 


STHESITTEISITRITET feared aie cup d 
agru wage: dug frame: 26 N 
wart amati fa era: | 
wsrfadwng dar fra ferent 127 un 
carseat wr ae Iatsfā sate ur i 


qirafag Mat ft dar waa we: 28 N 
aasian vata aada 29 n 
gA sneered HERTS way 
IJESA: 1114 11 


Again when He comes at the Equator, He 


Srīmaddevībhāgavatam 


become equal. When the Sun is in the signs Aries 
(Mesa) and Libra (Tula), then the day and night 
become equal. When the Sun traverses the five 
signs Taurus, Gemini, etc., the day becomes longer 
and when the Sun traverses the five signs Scorpio 
and orthers, the day becomes shorter and the night 
becomes longer. 

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Eighth Book 
on the description of the Lokaloka space in the 
Mahapuranam Srimaddevibhagavatam, of 18,000 
verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


924 


Srīmaddevībhāgavatam 


a 


= ceo o eee I [Eme 


CHAPTER XV 
On the Motion of the Sun 


siantar zara 


wa: wi o wen taga | 

sitoderfenfafiReateet wat wa: ud 

Narayana said: O Narada! I will now describe 
the motion of the Sun. Hear. It is of three kinds; 
Sighra (perihelionic), Manda (Aphelionic), (and 
even). 

waren atta wait KAA | 

wart md ez TATA AT, 02 di 

dura «font afde are: | 

att ater aren amrdteffer Vrfēgar i 3 n 

O Surasattama! Every planet has three positions. 
The name of the Madhyagati position is Jāradgava, 
the name of the northern position is Airāvata; and 
the name of the southern position is Vai$vanara. 
The asterisms Ašvinī Krttikā and Bharani are 
known by the term Nagavithi. 

Xif&varsi garā rereteafreitad 1 

TEST Tartare AeA react gar u 4 u 

War erreur Set ant sea | 

AUT gat wert wer warts wa u 5 n 

Rohini, Ārdrā, and Mrgaširā are named Gaja 
Vīthī, Pusyā, and Punarvasu are named 
Airāvatīvīthī. The three Vīthīs, above-mentioned 
are called Uttara Mārga. Pūrvaphālgunī, Uttara 
Phālgunī and Maghā are named Ārsabhī Vīthī. 


gafa «rer vat virdteftfer vr vrfēgam i 
As farm cteft emet wer t 6 u 
ware dierafiaen Meat ant seat | 
errr apedteufuyezdt 07 N 
spart or LIFE er anit yaf ve | 


Ward wee aA da mm usu 


Hasta, Citrā and Svātī are called Govithi; 
Jyesthā, Visakha and Anuradha are named 
Jaradgavi Vithi. These three Vithis are named 
Madhyama Marga. Mula, Pürvasadha, Uttarāsādhā 
are termed Ajavithi Šravaņā, Dhanisthā and 
Šatabhisā are termed Mrga Vīthī. Uttara 
bhādrapadā, Pūrvabhādrapadā, and Revatī and 
called Vai$vànarivithi. 

arg eiterafireit aA umi Seat 
uou 


mà 10 tt 

These three Vithis (paths) are called 
Daksiņamārga. During the Uttarayana time, as the 
Dhruva attracts the rope of air from both the sides 
of the Yuga, orbit (or axis), the chariot of the Sun 
ascends, (i.e. is drawn up by the rope). 

wie Rauaga wat GTA | 

wÉrgras safe dearer gm 1 N 


Book VIII Chapter XV 


Thus when the Sun enters within the sphere, the 
motion of the chariot becomes slower and the day 
is lengthened and the night is shortened. O Sura 
Sattama! Know this to be the course of the path of 
the Sun. 

wf unb ruma, | 

wfüdeerdgra maA wer sep ou 12 1 

qa faareaar utafksu utteitfiem i 

aya Uae KATAFUT TT Ta: 0 13 i 

When the cord draws towards the south, the 
Chariot descends and as the Sun then comes out of 
the sphere, the motion becomes quick. The day 
shortens and the night is lenghtened. Again when 
the cord is neither tightened nor is it slackened, 
rather its motion is exactly midway, the Sun also 
remains in a medium position and his Chariot enters 
within a sphere of equilibrium and the day and night 
become equal. 

menses wr: maA | 

TPM rar at g sra wrfüfiedt 1 14 N 

maint: wu wad owumenft cw | 

gan eames war Wags q ug5 

When the cord of air, in a state of equilibrium is 
attacted by the Polar Star, then it is that the Sun 
and the Solar system revolves; and when the Polar 
Star slackens its attraction over the cord of air, the 
Sun coming out of the middle sphere, revolves; 
and the Solar system also revolves. 

ale aed: qut wat went cw | 

ahaa get gest Weser u6 N 

qa à canst are area AETGŪ | 

wanfereirerft ATA erevft à AgTgtt 1 17 u 

On the east of Meru is established the city of 
Indra and the Devas dwell there. It is called 
therefore Devadhānikā. On the south of the Meru, 
is the famous city of Yama, the God of Death, 
named Samyamani. On the west of Meru, is the 
great city of Varuna, named Nimlocani. 

wget vtt rear wheat are ferret à 

eat vd: hem seat aAA: is N 


925 


Para areas Pretest fter 1 

Romai Agta: taisīt: Aegis: 1119 i 

On the north of Meru is the city of the Moon, 
named Vibhavari. O Narada! The Brahmavadis say 
that the Sun first rises in the city of Indra. At noon 
the Sun goes to Samyamani; at evening the Su goes 
to Nimlocani and He is said to set. In the night the 
Sun remains in Vibhavari. 

writer frfrerfer mat ae UAN: à 

Mag art: aida war gA 0 20 n 

ĪRI war aed We wa fafi fF à 

wet TESTU Hate atada 1 21 u 

O Muni! The going of the Sun round Meru is 
the cause of all the beings getting themselves 
engaged in their respective duties. The inhabitants 
of ther Meru see the Sun always in the central 
position. The Sun moves on, eastwards towards 
the stars, keeping the Meru to his left; but if the 
Zodiac betaken into account, it would appear that 
the Meru is left towards the south of the Sun. The 
rising and the setting of the Sun are always 
considered in front of Him. 

squneaua da adi g TTS | 

faprreastarg cat g Team w "N22! 


O Devarsi! Every point, every quarter, every 
person, seeing the Sun says that the Sun has risen 
there: again where he becomes invisible, He is 
considered to set there. The Sun always exists. so 
there is no rising nor setting for Him. It is His 
appearance and disappearance that make men say 
that the Sun rises or sets. 

ATM digg: udder wa: | 

IET fe gam vd: u24 n 

Vast RIBAS YA | 

m gt amara qr TT u 25 N 

When the Sun is in the Indra’s city, He illumines 
the three cities, those of Indra, Yama, and the Moon 
and illumines the north-east and east-west corners. 


926 


Srumaddevībhāgavatam 


So when He rests in the city of Fire, he illumines 
north-east, east-west, and south-west, the three 
corners, and at the same time the cities of Indra 
and Yama; and so on for the other cities and 
corners. 

adai gtuautmi teen: Rea: 1 

ada Bad ary: ta uretfa ares 11 26 1 

agma Aeddi fafo: 1 

Ufā asm: amd afe ayda: 127 1 

O Narada! The Mount Meru is situated towards 
the north of all the Dvipas and Varsas. So whenever 
any person sees the Sun rise he calls that side 
"east." But Meru exists towards the left of the Sun; 
so it is said. If the Sun travels in 15 (fifteen) 
Ghatikās, the distance from Indrapuri to Yamapuri. 

"rt dal atsrarat wura enfermos | 

mimaa warden 028! 

Gama HEAT: aanta: | 

ud dat arei xr dirst ara 11 29 ui 


He is said to travel within that time a distance 
equal to 24 Kotis, 12 5 lakhs and 25000 Yojanas 


(22695000 Yojanas). The thousand-eyed and 
thousand-rayed Sun God is the Manifester of Time. 
He travels in the aforesaid way the cities of Varuna, 
Candra and Indra respectively. 

wife ARTRĪTA SAT: HIATT | 

AM erar Det: rare À feferanflur: 130 n 

"ap we reife ae ret rif À 1 

wd eda wat smRESQUTG 31 

He is diadem of the Svarloka; and the Zodiac is 
his Atman. He travels thus, to mark off time to all 
persons. O Narada! The Moon and the other planets 
and stars rise and set in the aforesaid manner. Thus 
the powerful chariot of the Sun travels in a Muhürta 
142,00000 Y ojanas. 

GI ergfstyreeranfür wate wy: 1 

adnaga wing a ako 132 0 

VARTA GATT WORT SITTHTA | 

ARI ah venere graye frat 0 33 t 


—— MÀ 

denda quu aaa 34 u 

By the force of Pravaha Vayu (air), the Sun God, 
the Incarnate of the Vedas travels round the cities, 
the Zodiac, in one Samvatsara (year). The wheel 
of the Sun's Chariot is one year; twelve months 
are the spokes; three Cāturmāsyas are the nave and 
the six seasons are the outer ring or circumference 
of the wheel. The learned men call this chariot as 
the Samvatsara (one ycar). The axis or axle points 
to the Meru on one side and to Mānasottara 
mountain on the other. The end or circumference 
of the wheel marks off other divisions of the time 
as Kala, Kastha, Muhürta, Yama, Parahara, day 
and night, and fortnights. 

maaan a: Wet aa TANT | 

AMATA uma uw 135! 

MARTA fint wef aera i 

frat pd wet fgdiutssit qa Ha: 36 N 

qudm Wen wumgefedi a. c 

piua umm ueber arated: 037 u 

The wheel is fixed on the nave. The Sun goes 
on this wheel, like an oilman's on his oil-machine, 
round and round the Mānasottara mountain. The 
castern side of the wheel is on that axis and the 
other part is fixed on the Pole Star. The dimension 
of thc first axis is (15750000 Yojanas). The second 
axis measures one-fourth of the above (3937500 
Yojanas). It resembles the axis of an oil-machine. 
The upper side of that is considered to belong to 
the Sun. 

TAS AAAA: d 

agda: urs Rma eri: 038 N 

AAT AACA :pNT: d 

RASA SMUT BAT uf: 11 39 N 

Agfa m Aea wea | 

TTT: qatsuur: wafer: «40 u 

The seat of the Sun on his chariot measures 36 
Lakh Yojanas wide. The Yuga measures in length 
one-fourth of the above dimensions, that of his seat. 


Book VIII Chapter XVI 927 


The Chariot is moved by seven horses, consisting | fage arsrarat U egeret nU | 
of the seven Chandas, Gayatri, etc., driven by wate dadavīt fast Pa 4s n 
Aruna. afa MeRa FTIR URRY 
Ārā miN caret add TESTS: | JARS: 11 15 11 
ada meae RIANA: 11 41 t Other Rsis, Apsarās, Uragas, Grāmaņīs, 
yarsts URENT: saree: | Rāksasas, and all the Devas, each divided in groups 


wqafa TA: K umani: qst: i42 u of seven, worship every month that highly lustrous 

The horses carry the Sun for the happiness of | Sun-god. The earth measures 90152000 Kroša 
all. Though the charioteer sits in front of the Sun, Yuga Yojanas. (1 Krosa + Yojana) The Sun passes 
his face is turned towards the west. He does his 
work as a charioteer in that state. Sixty thousand 
Valakhilya Rsis, of the size of a thumb, chant the 
sweet Vedic hymns before Him. 

AUT ITE ST UT WTA STUNT: d 

TAU? aguas tar: wae GIT N 43 N 

Weng: HT A TTA ufa ferrea à 

mind nah AETA 44 i 


over this distance in a moment. He does not take 
rest in his this work even for a day; no, not even 
for a moment. 
Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter of the Eighth Book 
on the motion of the Sun in the Mahāpurāņam, 
Srimaddevii bhāgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


927 


CHAPTER XVI 
On the Motion of the Planets 


Book VIII Chapter XVI 
sianar sare 
sate: gaat fast wired warfare | 


ARAL GU yagara ud ut 


Šrī Narayana said: O Narada! Now hear the 
wonderful movements of the planets and their 
positions. The auspicious and inauspicious events 
of the mankind, are due to the different movements 
of these planets. 

an pomah WAM wat AE | 

aera a Mea hefa wat (1 2 I 

wa f ute aera da a | 

T yt a ari wefawaa ade 0463 ou 

As in a potter’s wheel going round and round, 
the motion of the insects crawling on the wheel, 
appears in a contrary direction, so the motion of 
the Sun and other planets moving on the Zodiac 
composed of the Rāsis (12 constellations) which 
again always moves round the Meru as an exle, 
appears different. 


ufigd wifes crew faota: 1 

" va mage veg: us N 

mrasa nen MATA TĀ IT | 

aiya q amend 3 sete uen 

Their motion from one star to another and from 
one constellation to another appears so likewise. 
These two motions therefore are not contradictory 
but are consistent; so it is settled everywhere by 
the learned Pandits (as being subservient to the 
Zodiac). O Narada! He, Who is the Origin of all, 
Who is the Adipurusa, from Whom all this 
Prapafica, this material world composed of the five 
elements remains, that Nārāyaņa, roaming about, 
has divided the Trayi Atma into twelve parts for 
the perfect happiness of all and for Karma Suddhis 
(the purification of Karma, acts). 

aada aes faferareitsdims sra. i 

Weg MAT cu adalay A aay u7 ou 

aise fergie a 1 

aad wer wd ueurcw fase Mar N g N 


928 


The sages furnished with Jñāna and Vijfiána 
have thus argued on the point, following the path 
as laid out in the Vedas. The Sürya Narayana, 
moving on in the six seasons, spring, etc., has 
established, cold, heat, etc., as the Dharma of the 
seasons, duly for the fructification of the Karmas 
for the individual beings. 


ATTAHTANUUT AAS STATA HAP: | 
Iarad: Agata aria a fears: 9 N 
sistat a asia À Sat fader dt en i 

RAS STAN AHA SANTA E 10 Uu 
HUTA Wat AAT STATS: 1 


HARTETAdATaTA: Uga feat ou] ul 

Those persons that worship this Adipurusa, with 
devotion, according to the knowledge of the Vedas 
the customs and usages of Varuna (castes) and 
Āšrama (Brahmacarya, etc.) and with various 
performances of Yogas, get their fruits respectively 
according to their desires. This Sun is the Atman 
of all the Lokas and resting on the Zodiac between 
the Heavens and the Earth, enjoys the twelve 
months in the twelve constellations, Aries, etc. 
These months are the limbs of the year. 

ath aft a aeiaai | 

mam west a site REA 12 


Two fortnights make one month. The 27 aster- 


isms go to form one month according to the Solar 
measure, of the day and night. The period that the 
Sun takes to travel over the two constellations is 
called Rtu or the Season (i.e., two months). 

Wamena: afāfugtaattta: 1 

"rers if amg ward Wa: 11 13 N 

a pratt avatar stat ufrgfsrat: à 

aa arestus wg wires 114 0 

The Scientists say that this season is the limb of 
one Samvatsara. The path that the Sun describes 
within the three seasons or half the year in the 
Zodiac is called one Ayanam. The time taken by 
the Sun with earth and heavens to make a circuit 
of the Zodiac is called one Vastsara or year. 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 
wet spefle eret facet fag: i 
aen utara u usu 
agana want, 1 
smrataterdrarerfertsr: career: u 16 u 
This year is reckoned into five divisions as: 

Samvatsara, Parivatsara, Idāvatsara, Anuvatsara, 

and Idvatsara. These are functioned by the Sighra, 
Manda, and uniform motions of the Sun. So the 
Munis say. Thus far the motion of the Sun has been 
described. Now hear that of the Moon. 
wa aan: wheat area Pratera i 
ud wrrsdifsmedt catered: U17 u 
IU fire Ta LST ert: 1 
qanat AeA sien AAT TA: 18 U 
The Moon is situated one lakh Yojanas higher 
than the Sun and shares with the motion of the Sun 
for one year; and She enjoys as well every month 
with the Sun in the shape of the dark and bright 
fortnights. 

amai Raag vargfēt ent i 

we yitar: tat ses i TARR N 190 


The Moon, the Lord of Night and of the me- 
dicinal plants also enjoys the day and night by the 
help of one constellation or 2+ Naksattras. Thus, 
by Her Sighragati, the Moon enjoys the Naksattras. 
During the bright fortnight, the Moon becomes 
more and more visible and gives pleasure to the 
Immortals by Her increasing phaces; and, during 
the dark fortnight by Her waning phases, She de- 
lights the Pitrs. 

adua wer: yanga: | 

adana urat Sta: HA 27 U 

She performs revolution in the day and night by 
Her both the phases of the bright and dark fortnights. 
Thus She becomes the Life and Soul of all the living 
beings. 

am videar yedhiera fay: 1 

" ws ANRA: YEAST: 22 N 

HAASAN YNF: d 


Book VIII Chapter XVI 


929 


The Moon, endowed with the highest prosperity, 
travels one Naksattra in thirty Muhürtas. She is Full 
and the Soul without any beginning. She fructifies 
the desires (Sankalapas) and resolves of all; hence 
She is called Manomaya. She is the Lord of all the 
medicinal plants (Osadhis); hence She is called 
Annamaya. She is filled with nectar; hence She is 
called the abode of Immortality and She gives Nirvana 
(the final liberation) to all. Hence She is called 
Sudhakara. 

actigaqentrattgaadieeny 

PITT AAA IETĀ | 

aa starch wate irerarat fread: 024 0 

Ama cif dumwr qp d 

aminen TTT ARTS 25 1 

She nourishes and satisfies the Devas, Pitrs, 
men, reptiles and trees; hence She is called 
"Sarvamaya." By Her influence the asterisms travel 
over the three lakh Yojanas. The God Himself has 
made the Naksattra Abhijit to revolve round the 
Meru, along with the other Naksattras in the 
Zodiac; so this is reckoned as the twenty-eighth 
Naksattra. The planet Venus (Sukra) is situated 
above the Moon two lakh Yojanas high. 

we: pet feeder Visa TA TU | 

g: UZTAtaTATadrET kla "26 


sinana Raen ag: 
ui (aj aaa” "27 uU 


He sometimes goes before the Sun, sometimes 
behind and some times along with Him. He is very 
powerful. His motion is of three kinds: (1) Sighra, 
(2) Manda, and (3) uniform. He is generally 
favourable to all the persons and does for them 
many auspicious things. So, it is stated in the 
Šāstras. 

aftefasugeat ata: wder g 1 

ITG: MARSA TTT RART: 28 u 

VIAA: pner | 

"ersentgarferftedter area: ITĀTT TA Tn 29 N 


O Muni! Sukra, the illustrious scion of Bhrgu, 


123 u 


59 


removes the obstacles to the rains. Next to Sukra, 
the planet Mercury (Budha) is situated two lakh 
Yojanas high. Like Sukra, he, too, goes sometimes 
in front, sometimes behind and sometimes anlong 
with the Sun. And his motion, too, is of three kinds: 

erferarersrararat gantragam: | 

suRsredt vitat wrerarat facerem: 030 0 

ufa Rafa: itai ojo uel: | 

Batt cep Wa afe amt a aaa u31 0 

Sighra, Mandra, and uniform. When Mercury, 
the Son of Moon, is away from the Sun, then 
Ativāta (strong winds, hurricanes), Abhrapāta (the 
falling of meteors from the clouds) and draught 
and other fears arise. The planet Mars, the son of 
the Earth is situated two lakh Yojanas higher. 
Within three fortnights (45 days) he travels one 
Rāši. This occurs when his motion is not retrograde. 

WOT HA Se TSA er TAK: | 

wet fees sari wafer: 13200 

Thana tet th Pat T | 

"fa amt AAR RTA 33 tt 

This Mars causes all sorts of mischief, evils, and 
miseries to mankind. The planet Jupiter is situated 
two lakh Yojanas higher. He passes through one 
Rāši in one year. When his motion is not retrograde, 
he is always in favour with the Brahma Vadis. 

aa: Vast HY maga: | 

ater: gigs AÀ: VĒ i 34 u 

ukm wif valts: 1 

Peerage wea: gren: enrerfirat at: 1 35 it 

Next to Brhaspati, comes the planet Saturn, the 
son of the Sun, two lakh Yojanas higher. He takes 
thirty months to pass over one Rāšī. This planet 
causes all sorts of unrest and miseries to all. 

WW SA: ANANA: | 

rst: uted Audumi wr mgr u 36 n 

Maa yi ATA GTA: ET A md a 

anigi verd fA IATA d 437 N 

sft MERITA TERTS ERE 
EMSA: 11 16 1 


930 Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Therefore He is called a Manda Graha (a |special favours to all. These circumambulate te 


malefic planet). Next to it, is situated the Saptarsi | Visnupada, the Polar Star. 
mandala, the Great Bear, eleven lakh Yojanas | Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Eighth Book 


higher up. O Muni! The seven planets always do | 0” the motion of the planets in the Maha Puranam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi 


Veda Vyasa. 


930 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


T? rg enum 


CHAPTER XVII 
On the Dhruva Mandalam 
shana sara ITT eere funem | 
aamen mai MATOTA: | gears AARS d usu 
adean: wot dnd wen ouod The Devas also worship him. He, resplendent 


Narayana said: Beyond the Saptarsi mandalam 
(the Great Bear), thirteen lakh Yojanas higher is 
situated, the Visnu's Parama Padam (the highest 
place of Visnu). 

manman: sfmrerdd cede: 1 

efrerurfafe-xur afeat gada w o2 

ear ae TERT HMS Ya: 1 

agi afar: ais: Wen: War 3 d 

The Great Bhagavat (devotee of God), the most 
respectful, Sriman Dhruva, the son of Uttānapāda, 
is established there with Indra, Agni, Kašyapa and 
Dharma and the Naksattras. The visitors pay to him 
always their respects. 

sister: aeastfeargared Tara | 

saiti wduwi IEAKRTTĶATA 4 ti 

mcafee ATRI ASAT | 

aanrayha  fafeastator a: 5 d 


He is the patron of those who live till the end of 
a Kalpa. He is engaged in serving the lotus-feet of 
the Bhagavan. He has been made by God Himself 


the pillar round whom all the planets, stars, and 
the luminary bodies are revolving always and wit 


in his own glory, illumines and manifests all. As 
beasts tied to yoke go on tilling, so the planets and 
stars, fixed on the Zodiac, go quickly round and 
round this Dhruva, the Pole Star; some nearer, some 
further distant in spheres, propelled by Vayu. 

Street er Haft 4 VĀNTAT: TM gd | 

aimat agar wd wa d uu 

wd wari: wd Wad: Wee cw a 

Parrett sqb Prodi aT uo 

As the hawks hover round the sky, so the above- 
mentioned planets, go completely round and round 
under their own Karmas and controlled by the Vayu 
in the sky. Thus all the luminaries do not fall to the 
ground, as they are kept up in their respective 
positions by the favour of the union of Prakrti and 
Purusa. 

Saite hirer ayaa Wen | 

ara maa drum 17 tt 

aerataire: greetragut KĀ i 

TESTI aa aise Ya SHAMS: 012 ll 


Some say that this Jyotiscakra, the celestial 


h |Heavens (the Zodiac) is Sisumára. It is kept duly 


great force in the Zodiac and in the celestial in its position for the purpose of holding things up 


Heavens. 
SIT aera aa euis: 1 
ATS gar pen: VITA: Honea: 11 6 ui 
"wert aida waaa u 1 
wa seras: we *HTUTEN ANARA 007 lt 


by the power of the Bhagavan. Hence, it does not 
fall. It is resting with its body coiled round and 
with its head lower down. O Muni! Dhruva, the 
son of Uttānapāda is staying at the tail end. 
TIASA U Sor: wearers: à 
afaiga ada Refa graft: 013 0 


Book VIII Chapter XVII 

ea reram yesi HEM ITT: | 

Amada PIERRE: 14 u 

And, in addition to him, also at the tail rest 
Brahma, the Sinless Prajāpati, worshipped by the 
Gods, Agni, Indra and Dharma. Thus the creation 
is at the tail and the Saptarsi mandala is staying at 
his waist. Thus the celestial wheel (Jyotiscakra) is 
resting with his coils turned in a right-hand 
direction. 

sanane agurdstiert ui 

afama wed wrest a n 15 n 

Gesta mien | 

micena TARA Hass 16 N 

On his right side are found the Uttarāyaņa 
Naksattras, fourteen from Abhijit to Punarvasu 
and on his left side are found the other fourteen 
Daksinayanam Naksattras from Pusya to 
Uttarāsādhā. O Son of Brahma! Thus the 
Naksattras form the coil-shaped body of the 
Sisumara, the Zodiac; half the Naksattras on the 
one side and the other half Naksattras on the other. 

aade anra | 

Tadgu yeas siut aAa: 17 0 

aira uf yad: urgdtdararmat: | 

erfürfsreci RTSTGT madga: 11 1 8 11 

His back is on the Heavenly Ganges named 
Ajavithī. Punarvasu and Pusyā form the right and 
left side of loins; Ārdrā and Ašlesā form the right 
and left feet (westward); Abhijit and Uttarāsādhā 
form the right and left nostrils. 

quiet wr gad afer wets WT | 

wed argarfātsaudgarmat: 11 19 1 

ahs ta yet a modara: | 

wadas afnam cw 200 

O Devarsi! $ravanà and Pūrvāsādhā form the 
right and left eyes respectively; so say the persons 
that form the Kalpanās (fancies) Dhanistha and 
Mula form his right and left ears; Maghā, etc., the 
eight Daksināyanam Naksattras form the bones on 
the left side. 


931 


site amandi radīt ga a 

ade pitia wr are fF i21 N 

aaay dines wires uns 1 

SITAR Wem ASRR AANT: 122 N 

O Muni! Mrgašīrsa, the Uttarayana Naksattras 
form the bones on his right side. Satabhisa and 
Jyestha form the right and left shoulders. 

amasema eit am: 1 

pure: uror Wee: uh Sue 11 2 3 1 

GE nate ware erf: | 

meang Ed wR wate fash n24 n 

Agasti (the Canopus) forms the upper jaw and 
Yama, the lower jaw. The planet Mars forms his 
face; Saturn forms his organ of generation; 
Brhaspati forms the hump on the shoulders; the 
Sun, the Lord of the planets, forms his breast; 
Narayana remains in the heart; and the Moon is in 
his mind. 

Note: Si$umàra is also the constellation Dolphinus 
and is sometimes meant for the polar star.) 

errant amr: ufvantfetat: à 

GU: WTA Wet TESI WW: N 25 U 

wafiy qur (mard ATRTTOTT: VETT d 

wengeradt fron: adani ag: 126 N 

O Narada! The two A$vins form the nipples on 
his breast; USana forms his navel; the Mercury is 
his Prana and Apana; Rāhu is his neck and Ketu is 
all over his body; and the stars are reigning all over 
the hairs of his body. This Zodiac is the body 
composed of the Devas of that All Pervading 
Bhagavan. So every intelligent person should daily 
mediate this Šišumāra in the Sandhya time, with 
perfect purity and keeping himself Mauna (silent), 
and with his whole heart. 

PRAT WIE ATAGAA AAT AT: 1 

Miama Rama AAM: 127 Nu 

Aut Aara arena 

Uae narge eA 28 1 

Then he should repeat the following mantras and 
get up and say: ‘Thou art the Substratum of all the 


932 Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


luminaries, we bow down to Thee; Thou createst| The planets, Naksattras, and the stars are Thy 
and destroyest all. Thou art the Lord of all the | body. The Daiva is established in Thee alone. Thou 
celestials. Thou art the Adipurusa, the foremost of |destroyest the sins of those that compose the 
all the Purusas; we meditate fully on Thee. Mantras.The sins are comepletely destroyed for the 
meanmneach time being of him who bows down or remembers 
UTUTUK Weg Preen | 
ART: GAA aT Prasmei 
VAT TRAST UT 1 29 |! 
efr ACAI TAT TEIKTS guess 
TAISNA: 11 17 11 


Thee in the morning, afternoon and evening” 
Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Eighth 
Book on the Dhruva Maņdalam in the Mahā Purāņam 
Srīmaddevī, bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi 
Veda Vyāsa. 


932 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


CHAPTER XVIII 
On the Rāhu 


SframTerur gara 

META: Whey Wes | 

qaaa a dfēmatsagēm: i il 

qaaa nda: fnere: à 

amu weed AA at femen emp 2 d 

Narayana said: O Devarsi! The Sphere of Rahu 
(the ascending node) is situated one Ayuta Yojanas 
below the Sun. Rāhu, the son of Sirnhikā is moving 
there like a Naksattra. This Rahu swallows up both 
the Sun and the Moon and He has got immortality 
and capability to travel in the sky. 

"qeunusus aut ANTAR, | 

BMGS g RASA 3 N 

AEK q ARESTI We: | 

g: wdwud quen Umi 4 N 

The Sun's rays go up to one Ayuta Yojanas. 
The Asura Rāhu thus covers his rays. So the sphere 
of the Moon extends upto the twelve thousand 
Yojanas. Rāhu covers the field of the thirteen 
thousand Yojanas. So he covers both the Sun and 
the Moon. Desire to take the vengeance of the 
previous enmity, he covers them during the time 
of Parva (the festivals). 


Spb erste Te eornm: 
aana feror WR wen N 5 NI 
ah wey ATA sgrenmrenfef wur à 
wear get miaa d e d 


Ma — fis gTafkamma: | 

amada Msaga gta € ou7 ul 

This planet wants to cover them from a 
distance. Hearing this, the Bhagavan Visnu hurls 
His Sudaršana Cakra against Rahu. This Carka 
(disc) is encircled with the fiery flames and is very 
terrible. When all the quarters were filled with its 
violent flames, Rāhu became instantly alarmed 
and fled away from the distance. 

seat vie q tat STU. d 

TASTE eife: ATAT: 11 8 N 

Regt arora a Renen er men | 

asrargatecarn citer: quar RAAT: t9 ul 

O Devarsi! This is known as the eclipse known 
amongst the mortals. Below the sphere of Rahu, 
there are the other pure Lokas situated. O Sattama! 
The Siddhas, Cāraņas, and Vidyādharas live in 
those Lokas. Their dimensions are one Ayuta 
Yojanas. 

ATSTĀTS TAT e ALATA | 

Aorem — fara n 10 N 

O Devarsi! Below them live the Yaksas. 
Raksasas, Piśācas, Pretas and Bhūtas with their 
excellent Vihàras (residences). 

aaa weraiteh maag: warf fa à 

"astare qaad arate: w 11 N 

TASTES rd TASTE i 

yt Riem WuUISa-HTUT 0 12 NI 


Book VIII Chapter XVIII 


933 


NT E 
The learned people call this Antariksa. It extends 


upto where the wind blows violently and where 
the clouds appear. O Best of the twice-born! Below 
this Antariksa is this earth, measuring one hundred 
Yojanas. 

duras: utere mfia: uferdisrar: à 

spuferdsmewerd anaga 013 

AUGA: wur dat feu up 1 

Were AAT aT: V3: 014 N 

All the articles and things of the earth are found 
here: birds herons, cranes and ducks all fly over 
the earth. The earth extends upto this. Now is 
described the con figuration of the earth. O Devarsi! 
At the lower part of this earth there are seven places 
(caves or nether regions). 

saint: aiga: | 

aad uer wie fēdtei fart am 1s n 

ada gac wih age d TMC | 

Tere TI U WS uk Tarte N 16 0 

Their diameter is one Ayuta Yojanas. In all the 
seasons, all sorts of enjoyments can be had at those 
places. The first is Atala; the second is Vitala. Next 
come in order: Sutala, Talātala, Mahātala, Rasatala, 
and lastly (the seventh) the Pātāla. O Vipra! Thus 
the seven holes or regions are reckoned. 

qat feni ureret Bea d fere STAT: d 

weg aeaf featstattrama a 17 N 

wrrWüHUgdqennemuedg N | 

aeea gara: Vada N 18 u 

These are termed the Bila-Svargas and they yield 
the happinesses, greater than those of the Heavens. 
These are all filled with lovely amorous 
enjoyments, prosperity and happiness. They are 
crowded with gardens and Vihāras (the places of 
enjoyments). 

Sea HRA STAT ANTA: | 

Aeng tht: KATRA RĪT: 19 N 

= dara TH: | 


A uzo 
- these Vihāras are all decorated tastefully 


so as to furnish especial tastes of enjoyments. The 
powerful Daityas, Danavas, and Snakes enjoy here 
great happiness incessantly, united lovingly with 
their sons, wives and friends. The householders 
also pass their time in ease and enjoyments, 
surrounded by their friends and attendants. 

fraufa Wet ERST: wdduendur: l 

mast maag ag dau fafa: n21 n 

"C Weare seat Wfürgensmfena: d 

PATRIA TTT CNET: ARAM: 0 22 ul 

They are all Mayavis (Magicians) and their 
resolves are not thwarted; they are more than God 
in this respect and they are filled with desires. They 
all live with joy and in enjoyments and they find 
pleasure in all the seasons. Maya, the Lord of Maya 
had built separate cities, as he liked, in those nether 
regions. Besides he has created thousands of 
dwelling-houses, palaces, and town-gates, studded 
with gems and jewels. 

ATNĀCIS: LSAT: | 

"Umen fep: wunTedurms 023 u 

mipana ARMATĂ: 1 

S ER AES C JESI ESRC IELE eit a i 24 u 

The assembly halls, Catvaras, and Caityas are 
elaborately decorated and rare even to the Suras. 
The Nāgas and Asuras live in those houses with 
their consorts; doves and pigeons and female Mayinā 
birds are hovering there. In those places many plots 
marked out artificially and excellent rows of palatial 
buildings of the Lords of those Vivaras adorn there. 
Very big gardens also exist there. 

mmaa magaan: 1 

aera aeania: vitfürwifsrw 25 u 

All these cheer the minds; and, to add to their 
beauty, many places of fruits and flowers are close 
by, fit for the comfort and enjoyments of the ladies. 
qariman A: | 
Wani: yaga: USE: 126 n 
TTT TNT: 
FAST N27 


934 


The tanks and pools of water are crowded with 


various birds; the lakes are filled with clear waters 
and the Pathina fishes abound there. The aquatic 
animals move in the waters, violently agitating 
them. Various kinds of lotuses, Kumud, Utpala, 
Kahlàra, blue lotus, red lotus, are fully blown in 
these lakes or reservirs of water. 

WS Hatta fret: Weeks cu à 

sfsataaety ada fafad: vats 28 N 

armi er went foret enara a xt | 

aa Ya ve ait ssrergféufafi: 129 u 

The gardens there are all overcrowded with the 
Viharas of the inhabitants there and echoed with 
the sweet melodious music, pleasing to the senses. 
For there, these places seem to vie with Heavens. 
No fear is there, whether during the day or during 
the night. 

amnya a Prettiest: | 

Pred an: Vantā wer epea: t 30 0 

a wr wy uai Rea: 1 

TOA A SATE: 031 d 

The gems on the crest of snakes constantly 
illumine the environments and there is no darkness 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 
there at any time. The food there is prepared with 
the divine medicines and they drink and bathe with 
these medicinal plants; so no disease attackes them. 

actuacion: 1 

MICA SAC A ATRI ETAT || 32 N 

ATT Tal qut TT IAS Fe: | 

Old age, fever, indigestion, paleness, sweats, bad 
smells, or loss of energy or any other source of 
trouble cannot them. The people are always happy 
and good. 

WTS Vada Festa 33 N 

atrast queer wea: |d 

Wet NATURA Haka Aeg 034 N 

She GARGITA TEISE REARSET- 
SSCA: 1118 11 

Only they fear the Teja of the Bhagavan and 
His Sudaršana disc; and they fear nothing else. 
When the Teja of the Bhagavan enters, the 
women’s abortions take place. 

Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the 
Eighth Book on the narrative of Rahu 
Mandalam in the Mahapuranam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses, 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


934 Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER XIX 
On the Nether Regions 


starrer aret izvada tāftra: atrastā fase: à 
yet feat faa amore wane d ur à facet WB wire wed w: 4 i 
Tat wet am addsadtdad uiu None of them are capable to know all, as they 
TUK Ya YET ATAT: wefeharftren: | are exceedingly difficult to be carried out. When 
marna emer wen Smeg a wrest 2 ti this powerful Bala yawned, the three classes of 


Narayana said: O Vipra! In the first beautiful | women were produced, fascinating to all the Lokas. 
region Atala, the exceedingly haughty son of the; They are named PurhScali (or unchaste woman) 
Dānava Maya, named Bala, is living. He has created | Svairini, (an adultress) and Kamini (a lovely 
the ninety-six Mayas. All the requisites of the| woman). 
inhabitants are obtained by them. The other HM Geared mafia werd: | 
Māyāvīs know one or two of these. vafremernemerngpmuffee:o 5nd 

WAT TAT ATA TAVIS: | emaferandsp miaf a: fara: 1 

sim suwi wat eeu 03 N GK Sat Aya ACM TTT, 6 N 


Book VII Chapter XTX 


935 


When any man, beautiful and lovely to them, 
enters into their Atala region, they, with the help 
of the Hataka sentiment (of love), generate in him, 
while in solitude, the power to enjoy (copulate) 
and with their sweet smiles and amorous lovely 
looks and with great caution embrace him 
thoroughly and begain to converse with him and 
with amorous gestures and postures, and thus 
please him well. 

gvatisené frat maet WEM 1 

west WA: TATU ge MTA 07 N 

wa Uren Rete sae a ARE | 

Riaan fara frat usu 

When the people enjoy this Hatakarasa, they 
think often and often, that they themselves have 
become gods, they have become Siddhas and 
powerful like Ayuta elephants; being blind with 
vanity and finding them endowed with powers and 
prosperity, they think themselves so repeatedly an 
constantly. O Narada! Thus the position in Atala 
has been described. Now hear, the description of 
the second region Vitala. Vitala is situated below 
the earth. 

TTT Aa ferret arta: |d 

WIEdRSECHTRTS Sd sadama: 9 

wsmafaqnavenfü ater set uw | 

saver farga ated aenfrgfora: 10 N 

wards great aga 1 

There the Bhagavan Bhava, worshipped by all 
the Devas, has assumed the the name of 
Hātakešvara and is staying there coupled with 
Bhavani, surrounded by His attendants specially 
for the increase of the creation of Brahma. The 
river Hātakī flows there and has Her origin from 
the essences (Semen virile) of them both. Fire, 
augmented by the help of the wind, begins to 
drink it. 

"wfingt weer afgtemm fuerte fF 11 i 

ABT Tenet Gaul eae | 


When the Fire leaves that, making a Phutkara 


noise (i.¢., blowing out air through the mouth), the 
gold, named Hātaka, is created. This gold is very 
much liked by the Daityas. 

ŠTATS ward sme fui2u 

aaeh seemed PTT i 

yara aferatur amer énrefeni3 u 13 N 

suu datu frend: frag à 

The Daityas women use this gold always for 
their ornaments. Below Vitala is Sutala. It is 
reckoned as of some special importance. O Muni! 
The highly meritorious Bali, the Son of Virocana 
lives here. The Bhagavan Vasudeva, brought down 
this Bali into Sutala, for the welfare of Indra. 

farféren ts fr marga sfera 11 1 4 tt 

everett rer verfa: fener STS 1 

FAI ur ur sftenrqada u15 N 

wa taeagramrerata «=| afta: o 

erüqureeutsemfu add wem: 16 

He assumed the body of Trivikrama and gave 
to Bali all the wealth of the three Lokas, all the 
Laksmi went to him and installed him in the 
position of the Lord of the Daityas. What more 
can be said than this, that what prosperity, wealth 
and riches that Indra could not obtain, that Sri 
Laksmi Devi Herself has followed Bali, Bali, as 
the Lord of Sutala, has become entirely fearless, 
remains here upto this day and is worshipping 
Vasudeva. 

frem EleeqnnpusRSeng | 

adaa Tee Ad U ANE 03170 

amp wat wendgh È i 

utes fay ud fe gua is i 

O Narada! It is said by the high-minded persons 
that when Vasudeva Himself, the Controller of all, 
appeard as a beggar, Bali gave him land, and, 
therefore, on account of making gift to a good 
person, he acquired so much prosperity. But this 
cannot be reasonable. For, it is not at all reasonable 
to cast the effects of making this gift on Narayana, 
O Narada! Who is Self-manifest by His own 
Extraordinary Glory and Who is Himself filled with 


936 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


all Ai$varya (prosperity) and Who can bestow the 


Highest Goal of life and other requirements of men. 
Tea were arate ra OTT 1 
SCIRE EE ENUUE E EGAN: i 19 1 
AAT ATA ere T Tere | 
ade oat fret maaa 20 1 
This Narayana is the Devas of the Devas; if 

anybody takes His name, when in the greatest 

distress, he gets himself immediately freed from 
the Gunas, the cause of bondage due to his Karma. 

All persons perform many Yogas and follow the 

paths advised by the Sankhya method, with their 

minds directed to the All-Controller Bhagavan, to 
abandon all sorts of troubles and miseries. 

A Mest SHISDTHNETSUNE AN | 

mami a aaa CITA, 021 N 

O Narada! Know that the Bhagavan does not 
shew us His Favour when he gives us greatest 
wealth and prosperity. For the wealth and riches 
are the offspring of Maya and the source of all 
worries, miseries and mental troubles; and one is 
liable to forget the Bhagavan when one gets such 

a wealth. 


spartans So; wrsrafesremd: 023 0 

The Bhagavan is pervading all this universe and 
is full of wisdom; and He is seeing always all the 
ways and means; He took away, in the way of 
begging, rather cheated all that Bali had, leaving 
only his body; and at last, finding no other means, 
fastened him by the Varuna Pāša (noose) threw 
him in the middle of the mountain cleft (cave) and 
then has stationed Himself at his door as a Door- 
keeper. 

autrragarti frttgaiftrarrata | 

ararfert Hegel T wat seeufa: 24 u 

Wafers | 


Once, out of his extreme devotion, Bali did not 


care at all for his difficulties, troubles, or miseries. 
Rather he gave out that Indra, whose minister is 
Brhaspati had acted very foolishly. For when the 
Bhagavàn becomes very graciously pleased, he 
wanted from Him ordinary wealth. 
Aetteaftratgd fesestuqeseW 25 N 
amaret ys garam it qat araf 1 
ararua: sfrarrgrar TATA: 11 2 6 1 
ATi aa Te aera: | 
But what will the wealth of the Trilokas avail? 
It is a guite insignificant thing. Surely, He is an 
illiterate and stupid brute who, for mere wealth, 
leaves the Bhagavan, Who is the Fountain of all 
Good Wishes to the Humanity. My grandfather 
Prahlada, who was highly fortunate, who was 
devoted to the God and who was always ready to 
do good to others, he did not ask for any other 
thing than the servantship of God (the Dasya 
Bhāva). 


T i adn 27 ul 


When his powerful father died, the Bhagavān 
wanted to give him unbounded wealth; but the 
Bhāgavata (devoted) Prahlāda did not want that. 
None of us, who are marked with so many 
deficiencies can know the nature of the Bhagavan 
Vasudeva, Whose omnipotence cannot to 
compared and all these manifested worlds are but 
His Upadhis (adjuncts, limitations). 

wa eer: aise afer: weh: 4 29 N 

Het add wur gren gf: FAA d 

tra PRASA rer WAT SATA: à 30 N 


namga AA aque | 

wees wfndt aaa fe ousiru 

O Devarsi! Thus Bali, the Lord of Daityas, the 
highly respected and renowned in all the Lokas, is 
reigning in Sutala. Hari Himself is his Door-keeper. 
Once the King Ràvana, the source of torment to 


Book VIII Chapter XX 


937 


all the people, went out to conquer the whole world; 
and when he entered Sutala, that Hari, ever ready 
to shew Grace to His devoted, threw him at a distance 
of one Ayuta Yojanas by the toe of His foot, 

va syarqoratsst afer: vepres | 

SIT Uae aa: 1032 0 

ste sfera METRO Tey 
aa Seay: 11 19 11 


pis 


Thus by the grace of the Devadeva Vasudeva, 
Bali is reigning in Sutala, and enjoying all sorts of 
pleasures, without any equal anywhere. 

Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter of the 
Eighth Book on the narrative of the Atala, 
etc., the Patalas in Srimaddevibhagavatam, 
the Maha Purāņam, of 18,000 verses, 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book VIII Chapter XX 


937 


CHAPTER XX 
On the Narrative of Talatala 


KATRA sare 


atstaat aag, i 

maA wat amt Aga ud it 

Nārāyaņa said: O Nārada! The cave lower down 
than Sutala is Talātala! The Lord of Tripura, (the 
three cities) the great Maya Dānava is the Ruler of 
this region. 


uzu 

Mahešvara, the Doer of good to the three 
Bhuvanas, burnt his three cities; but at last, being 
pleased with his devotion, He rescued him. Thus 
Maya, by the favour of that God, has regained his 
own kingdom and the enjoyments thereof. 

emerat rire wtsst armmafammea: i 

gad wand: udamduggā 13 

aisea Mercer epe 1 

gaii mzdami 3TUT: aAA MET wu 4 d 

This Maya Danava is the Teacher (Acàrya) of 
the Mayavi sect and the cult thereof; and he is 
skilled in various Mayas or all sorts of the majic 
powers. All the fierce demons, of cruel temper, 
worship him for their prosperities in their various 
enterprises. Next to this Talatala is the most 
renowned Mahatala. The sons of Kadru, the very 
angry Snakes, live here. 

mamai ferr wemerenkdenf a 1 

pinnaan Hur Gra 06 5 i 


FRIAR TERTCUT: EST: FTA: | 

vnem: wd wa Wd nen 

They are many headed. O Vipra! I now mention 
to you the names of the famous amongst them: 
Kuhaka, Taksaka, Susena, and Kaliya. These all 
have very wide hoods and they all very strong; they 
all are of cruel, temper. Their kinsmen also are so. 

TAURA cupo Una: | 

wan fata MAASAR: 7 N 

adsa faat aag | 

ga Padda wÀ grau À ou 8 

They are always afraid of Garuda, the Kings of 
birds. Surrounded with their sons, wives, friends 
and acquaintances, they live happily, well skilled 
in various sports and pleasures. Lower down this 
Mahātala is Rasātala. The Daityas, Dānavas and 
Pani Asuras live here. 

Pramanaa ar fewagrartts: | 

mAN gf a teer: Wetter Sars u 9 N 

minua merae RATAN | 

Waa U RAA Kafka: 00 

fisan sa war ferat Pref fè à 

Ad aris: SUT Brera FIE H1 tl 

Besides these, there live the Nivata Kavacas of 
the Hiranyapura city and the Asuras named 
Kaleyas, the enemies of the Devas. These all are 
naturally very energetic and brave; their powers 
are baffled by the Tejas of the Bhagavan and they 
live like snakes in this region. 


938 


farezfer vn € | 

ASIC ATTEIKT: 12 N 

MYRA: via: afer: Yt Va wr | 

aad weht dYaugeia a 13 ti 

Ways: Hata date: | 

eat were fraaie festes: 11 14 0 

The other Asuras that were driven and were 
afraid of the Mantras, uttered by Saramā, the 
messenger of Indra, live here too. O Nàrada! Lower 
down is Pātāla, where live Vāsuki, the Chief of 
the snakes, and others named Sankha, Kulika, 
Šveta, Dhafianjaya, Mahaéankha, Dhrtarāstra. 
Šankhacūda, Kambala, Ašvatara, 
Devopadattaka, all very angry, of wide hoods, and 
virulently poisonous. 

Uaneraradsr HUTT: 1 

sfera: esferesavituizaemsut u 15 u 

wear: sft ARa: | 

Some of these have five heads, some seven 
hoods, some ten; some hundred, some others have 
thousand heads, while some other have on their 
crests exceedingly luminous jewels. 

wrrentufefimfrei wewüfahü 16 i 

fauna a cat wer anaa: | 

amer Wee fe PIRMA SAT 17 uU 

werd: Rien reet sprach | 

arate wm fe wdeeugfser usu 

By their rays, they dispel the darkness of the 
nether regions; but they are awfully prone to anger. 
At the bottom of this Pātāla, and at a distance of 
the thirty Yojanas; the Portion of Bhagavan in the 
shape of the Infinite Darkness is reigning there. 

aehan wart a wenn | 

dad mae: att aggvaat: un 19 n 

sé AVS weg ea: ws | 

ITT: Vu füraumi a vite 20 0 

O Devarsi! All the Devas worship this Form. 
The devotees call Him by the name of Sanakarsana, 
as He is the manifested emblem of “Aham” and 
the common ground where the Seer and the Seen 
blend into one. 


and 


Srimaddevibha Ieavatam 


yei fe ftrgra ga erum | 
TED data fnis: ari fast: 12700 
wed yardage | 
arate ATA Bet ENAT: 22 N 

He is the thousand-headed Controller of all, 
moving and non-moving; He is of infinite forms; 
He is Sesa; this whole universe is being held as a 
mustard bean on His head; He is the Nature 
Intelligence and Bliss and He is Self-manifest. 
When he wants to destroy all this during the 


Pralaya, the very powerful Sankarsana Rudra, 
well arrayed with the eleven Vythas, military 
(squadrons) arrangements, springs up from Him. 
Beis Sire serps | 
sefrearerarat NETU 23.0 
From His Central Eyebrows, looking wide with 
His Three Eyes and raising His Trident, resplendent 
with three flames. 
ARIRANTGAKT GTS | 
Reay mereuadtsfmgra 11 2 4 u 
TATA ME Araya: | 
UTT: vae A ma ritēja 1 25 u 
All the (prominent) principal snakes, ruling over 
many others, come to Him during the nights, filled 
with devotion and surrounded with Bhaktas 
(devotees) and bow down to Him with their heads 
bent low and look at each other’s faces, enlightened 
with the lights from the jewels shining with clear 
lustre, on the nails of the red toes of His Lotus- 
Feet. 


PRPS MTA VST AISA i 

Garten UTT IZT aT 26 u 

amag meaa: | 

foaia: TTT 27 1 

At that time their faces become brilliant with 
the rays emitting from the jewels on the top of their 
very gay encircled hoods; and their cheeks look 
beautiful and shining. The daughters of the Naga 
Raja also do like this; when very beautiful rays 
come out of their perfectly excellent bodies. 


Book VIII Chapter XXI 


939 


sfata VITA Wn: | 
KAT TATA BA fm 28 u 


aaa ATT: | 

TART: wats eievafst w 29 1 

Their arms are wide extended; they look very 
clear and they are beautifully white. They use 
always Sandalpaste, Aguru and Kasmiri 
unguments. Being overpowered by the amorous 
passion, due to their contact with those scented 
things, they look at Him with bashful glances and 
sweet smiles and expect Asis (benedictions) from 
Him. 

COMBE CE E CLE EE QU FS CEL E 

HOMAA HA T STTSTTHTARTETTÉSTS: | 30 N 

MISA STATS TATA ARTI: | 

sania amfedat were: 31 N 

And then His eyes roll maddened with love and 
express signs of kindness and mercy. The 
Bhagavan Ananta Deva is of boundless strength; 
His attributes are infinite, He is the ocean of 
infinite qualities. He is the Adi Deva, of a very 
good nature and His Nature is highly luminous. 

Permanent atest u 1 

emer meaa: adgang: 132 N 

He has abandoned anger and envy and He wants 
the welfare of all. All the Devas worship Him and 
He is the repository of all Sattvic qualities. 

amma us Rare Te 1 

amaa taddi ET u33 U 

S ELI URE 


Mua Reve N34 1 


The Devas, Siddhas, Asuras, Uragas, 


Vidyadharas, Gandharvas, and Munis always 
meditate on Him. On account of His constant 
Mada Raga the ethusiasm and intoxication, His 
sight appears intoxicated and His eyes look 
perturbed with emotions. He is always pleasing to 
those who sutround him and to the Devas by His 
sweet nectar-like words. 

aeran: E fagia erst Bere 1 

STRAT: ETT TTT: 11 35 ii 

Pbi Qu DEN War | 

dada USM: 036 


The sa garland hangs from His neck; it 
never wanes and it is always decorated with the 
fresh and clear Tulasi leaves. The maddened bees 
make their humming noises incessantly and thus 
add to the beauty. He is the Deva of the Devas and 
He wears a blue coloured cloth and He is 
ornamented with only one ear-ring. 

T apie megas: | 

Tes: Tai ager wa aaa: 437 i 

sanctet davit afia: arcade: | 
efi seared METRO EAH AMS EAT: 11 20 11 

He (the God Visnu) Undecaying and Immutable; 
resting His fleshy arms on the Halakakuda (the lofty 
portion of the plough), He is upholding the golden 
girdle as the elephant Airavata of Indra upholds 
the golden girdle. O Narada! The devotees describe 
Him as the Source of this Lila of the Universe and 
the Controller of the Devas. 

Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Eighth Book 
on the narrative of the Talatala in the Mahapuranam 
Srimaddevibhàgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


939 


Book VIII Chapter XXI 


CHAPTER XXI 


On the Narrative of Hells 


ARTA Jata 
Aas = Waa: ATA: | 
aa «weal MANA URGE U 1 
srafahertacraedatsea Heat: 
Brae: RA ARRATS SA | 


"gd Yanpi Aap ATA, 
mage da dere u2 N 
Narayana said: O Devarsi! Sanātana, the son of 
Brahma, recites thus in the assembly of the Devas, 
the glories of the Bhagavan Ananta Deva, and 


940 


worships Him, thus: How can one of ordinary 
sight and understanding grasp the real nature of 
Brahma, Whose mere Glance enables the Prakrti 
work Her Gunas in the Creation, Preservation and 
Destruction of this Universe! Him Whose nature 
has no beginning nor end; Who though One, has 
created all this Prapafica (the universe of five 
elements) as a covering to the Atman (the True 
Self). 

Ad A: FERIA AUT wed 

dupe erae frente a 1 
AF qmafeureas-Teearard 
rasayana: 113i 

He has made the Sat and Asat, out of his 
infinite compassion, this universe, full of cause 
and effects, visible in His one and only one 
Suddha Sattva nature where even the very 
powerful lion is imitating his Lila (Pastime), void 
of all defects, to bring under His control the minds 
of His own kinsmen. 

Note: This Ananta Deva is the Ruling Principle in 
the Fourth Dimensional Space.) 


eee: Bate TATA di 
Waa MIAA: 4 N 

To Whom else, then, the persons, desirous of 
Moksa, will take refuge, the mere hearing or 
reciting Whose Name, in a fallen or a distressed 
condition, or merely in jest, takes away instantly 
all the sins! He is upholding the earth with the 
mountains, oceans, rivers and all the beings as if 
an atom on his thousand heads. He is infinite. His 
power knows no decrease in any time. 


Wet TT: Raa ameet at 
viterar ATi ferait fara ne n 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 

No one can describe his actions even if one had 
thousand tongues to speak. He is an infinite 
strength, of the endless high qualities and of 
unlimited understanding. Thus staying at the 
bottom of the earth, the Bhagavan Ananta Deva is 
upholding with ease this earth for her protection, 
unaided and independent. 

um dg g Rri qf d 

Te agent aganna: uu 

auly xp ATG HMA: | 

uma a Wwqunpmufam as! 

O Muni! The people get the fruits of their actions 
and desires as they want and as they have followed 
the paths laid down in the Šāstras and become 
according kings, men, deer or birds or other 
creatures in other states. 

ferre rera: wbhver efter WIRES | 

eurer frag uem free uon 

O Narada! This I have described, as you 
questioned me before, the various and dissimilar 
fruits of various actions, done according to the 
dictates of the Dharma and the Sastras. 

AN gara 

Rimana Bet waa Hay | 

RATI Haunt U tar AT AMAA 110 LI 

Narada said: O Bhagavan! Kindly describe to 
me now why has the Bhagavan created so many 
diversities, when the Karmas, done by the Jivas, 
are the same. 


wd: Terres mas gaftaem: 1 
PITT GT strat thet fervi frag u 11 N 
maan Srar eng: glad Tert rar | 
GRacd a AUT ed TT eT MAT n 12 N 
gard da yed ATARI TTT i 
ARTA SITAE pART 13 Uu 
Narayana said: O Narada! So many different 
states arise because the Šraddhās of the doers are 
so different. The fruits differ because the Šraddhās 


Book VIII Chapter XXI 


vary, some being Sattvik, some Rajasik and some 
Tāmasik. If the Sraddha be Sāttvik, happiness 
comes always; if it be Rājasik, incessant pain and 
misery is the result; if it be Tamasik, misery comes 
and the loss of the knowledge of good or bad is the 
result, 

erareferemfafecennurt upturn: 1 

Wea: ag cre fes 014 u 

gareni radot fisv | 

PT arene afán feyle à wu 15 u 

Thus the fruits differ as the Sraddha varies. O 
Best of Dvijas! Thousands and thousands of states 
occur to a man as the result of their Karmas, done 
under the influence of the beginningless Avidyà 
(Nescience), O Dvijottama! I will now deal in detail 
with their varieties; hear. 

qieg vena cp AMG | 

anqar: gm atst MTA € 1 16 N 

ate dat xdtarat warrant VTATĒŠTA: | 

HT: TATA vitz KATTATAT: KUTĀ 11 17 i 

Behind this Triloki, below this earth and over 
the Atala, the Pitrs named Agnisvattas and other 
forefathers live. Those Pitrs stay there, and, 
practising deep Samādhis, they offer always, to 
their best, blessing to their own Gotra (families) 
respectively. 

fugwetsfü smarindy why | 

fami witty conte: grēka u18u 

ATTY MATa SAI: | 

"emend and fees frame 19 N 


AAT aT TATA | 

"Warp Wate wat wermevifratferar 020 Nu 

There Yama, the God of the Pitrs gives 
punishment to the dead brought there by His 
messengers according to their Karmas and faults. 
By the command of the Bhagavan, the Yama, 
surrounded by his own Ganas (persons), judges 
and does full justice according to the Karmas that 
they had done and the sins they and had 
committed He sends always those of his 


941 


messengers who obey his order and know the 
Tattva of Dharma, and who are posted to their 
respective duties to carry out what He commands. 

warrantee dem artafa fe 1 

aeria aa wd u21 Ul 

The writers of the Šāstras describe twenty-one 
Narakas of hells; others say there are twenty-eight 
hells. Now hear their names: Tamisra, Andha 

me sierarftret Aas qdtur: 1 

TERHRSTHI up peN Wd: 022 N 

AT WEIT ators d 

Ware qui ditgutsu pirat: 23 N 

Refs amd wa wa 

VT rer dnd ATT sara ar 24 u 

Wate: III dar ANAA ATT 1 

MIM: AAT: GTA 0025 i 

adifearara: Wr SGH Ta a | 

TANTO STA AT: VASAT: TT 26 i 

daypeisqentu: valada: UA 1 

qaqa wire oneris: 11 27 N 

Tāmisra, Raurava, Maharaurava, Kumbhīpāka, 
Kālasūtra, Asipatrakānana, Sükaramukha, 
Andhaküpa, Krmibhojana, Taptamürti, Samdaméa, 
Vajrakaņtaka, Šālmalī, Vaitaraņī, Pūyoda, 
Prāņarodha, Višasanam, Lālābhaksa, Sārameyādana, 
Avīci, Apahpāna, Ksārakardama, Raksogaņa, 
Sambhoja, Šūlaprota, Danda$üka, Avatārodha, 
Paryávartanaka, and Sücimukha. These are the 
twenty-eight Narakas or hells. 

Note: These are 29. 

S ART ATA AMATA: UTT: | 

ARII erat mam: TIT: VR IL 28 i 

sft SARA ergo? snnm 
UPAST: 1121 11 

These hells are very tormenting. O Son of 
Brahmā! The embodied beings (jīvas) suffer these 
according to their own Karmas respectively. 

Here ends the Twenty-first Chapter of the Eighth 
Book on the narrative of hells in the Maha Purāņam, 

Srimaddevibhàga vatam, of 18,000 verses, by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


942 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER XXH 
On the Sins 


ARE sata 

aaa: aaa: Waray WU 1 

site waded mammaa: non 

Narada said: O Everlasting one! O Muni! Now 
describe the various actions that lead to these 
tormenting hells. I like to hear about them in detail. 

sftanran sare 

ata na foram amaan we fe 1 

aa ow fe geen ustedes 420 

TAU Wag areata: | 

aeaa are ur areas 13 

Narayana said: O Devarsi! He who steals other’s 
sons, wives, and riches, the wicked fellow is taken 
to Yama by His messengers. Tied down hard and 
fast by the terrible messengers of Yama, by the 
Kala rope (rope of time), he is taken to the Tamisra 
hell, the place of many torments. 

Wet wet da wenig: USD | 

aren: gafa WISI: Herel ater Aa Eu 4 

yastan Ra me venga | 

a: ufi daa g arda us it 

acere ur hR: | 

Tet wa Agia uóu 

There the Yama's attendants punish him, beat 
him and threaten him; and he becomes stupefied, 
and feels himself very weak, distressed and ulti- 
mately faints. He who deceives another' s husband 
and enjoys his wives; the Yama's servants drag 
him down to Andha Tamisra hell. There he suffer 
many amount of pain and suffering. He loses in- 
stantly his eyesight and his brain gets upset. 

: l 

aaaf eag wwagdfíeg n7 n 

aeania AR: KIMA: 1 

aAA at AN Weser 8 |i 

Wem was ei Hered adege: 

Rea ana GA wdfag 9N 


His state resembles that of a tree when its trunk 
is broken. For this reason the ancient sages called 
this Andha Tāmisra. He who being subject to ‘My’ 
and Mine quarrels with others and being very much 
attached, maintains his family, leaves his families 
here and goes with his bad tendencies to the 
Raurava hell, very horrible to all. 

wa ae Guo udara | 

Be eese à g fR sita: qu nion 

a ua Rat year a Usaha WU d 

aeda: weurar wife: 01 N 

ee: Gulagu sige: Gas: 1 

wd werent unb at WEW: N 121 

The animals whom he injured and killed before 
in this world, assume the form of Ruru animal and 
torment him in the next. For this reason, the 
intelligent knowers of Purana, call this Raurava. 
The ancients says, that Ruru is more cruel and 
ferocious than snakes. These animals live in that 
hell; hence it is termed Maharaurava. 

"rat prea fe a: ut Mears: | 

TG ATA ES Red UTA 13 N 

"p S: yes: me: uymfanremafu i 

Id Yet amat traka u 14 u 

estore cardia sede a amg | 

"efr agit aeagiaeaany ! 15 N 

He who torments others, goes to this hell and 
these Rurus, the flesh-eaters, spring on his body 
and bite and eat his flesh. he who cooks other 
animals and birds, that cruel ferocious, thus 
deluded, is cooked in return on the hot oil in the 
Kumbhīpāka hell by the Yama Dūtas for thousand 
years. 

fügfewergrurTpeenTe uo Ho HW | 

aperiat ATA amant TATA: w 16 u 

agfeaureragrarits-e: riesgo ate: à 

ated vid AA maas u enafa à 17 0 


Book VIII Chapter XXII 


He who quarrels with his Pitrs and the Brahmanas, 
is taken by the Yama Dūtas to the Kalasütra hell 
and there be burnt by the fire and Sun. There that 
hellish person, being troubled very much, inside 
and outside by hunger and thirst, sometimes sits, 
sometimes sleeps, sometimes walks, and sometimes 
runs hither and thither. 

frauen à ured wtf x | 

ammen gad d uri ues wen 1s i 

errori am cu dgrafka wo 

O Devarsi! He who transgresses the path of the 
Vedas in times other than those of calamity and 
danger and follows other paths even to a trifling 
distance, that sinner is taken by Yamadütas to 
Asipatra Kanana and there whipped severely. 

aya Wedel wnat aaa 19 0i 

Kad meum smena: | 

srüraafPeuura srt a anh: 420 

"ifiserarawatrit a edtsettfe Whew: | 

aat Vai ure wagen Us we u21 

vetri sien unsveuenreutit: | 

Not being able to bear that, he runs wildly to 
and fro and is pierced by the sharpedged Asi leaves 
on both his sides. His whole body being cut 
asunder, he cries "Oh! I am killed!’ and faints away. 
Then feeling himself pained very much, he tumbles 
down at every step. Thus the sinner suffers for 
violating the path of the Vedas. 

a Tat owsnpest guek ata: 022! 

fas mas er urdtararcent a R: | 

Wk Yaa ued fA: u23 N 

IEIEEIEPECOMSISEIF SE COME 

The King or that royal personage who gives 
orders of punishment, not approved by Dharma, 
and hurts or punishes the body of a Brahmana, the 
Yama's servants throw him down into the 
Sükaramukha Hell and grind down his body with 
great force as a sugarcane is ground down. 

TATA: HPA Ta: 124 t 

a drearit agen deat arcadia fg i 

Raama arscafafermaterany i25 u 


943 


id Ae BATA TIAA | 
a aap uate detrstedēa 126 0 
He then crises aloud bitterly, he gets fainted and 
becomes stupefied. He is crushed by them and 
suffers all sorts of pains and miseries. Again he 
who knows the feelings of others when they are 
tormented, pains those insects who live on other’s 
blood as bugs, etc., and who does not realise other’s 
pains, goes, as a purnishment for that fault to the 
Andhakipa Hell. 

wait sight: gt: ugga: 1 

wiüqüvsr narina AA: N27 1 


There he is pained by the beasts, birds, deers, 


reptiles, mosquitoes, bugs, louses, flies and 
Dandašūkas and various other cruel animals. 
UTT aah degu diewd 1 


Ram Varat gr a sia, 28 ! 

weg diated: Taras: erar KTI: | 

await miaa ufediferguuerd 29 N 

u wages: Av wifi 1 

arate gam  uRurwd 30 N 

There he lives in his ugly body and roams like a 
beast. The man who, getting even a trifling wealth 
and food-stuff, does not perform the five Maha 
Yajfias and gives not a share of that to the Devas 
and feeds his own belly with that like a crow, is 
taken by the ferocious Yamadūtas to the worst 
Krmibhojana Naraka for his sinful deeds. 

marta figs wet | 

PRAT GATT STRETHTUTAI A: TTT 31 i 

AaS uga GT UAT T À | 

IE RA U angi Tea a 32 1 

This hell is one lakh Yojanas wide and is the 
reservoir of worms. It causes terror to the 
inhabitants of the hell. That sinner assumes the form 
of an insect and is eaten up on return by the insects 
and thus passes his time there. 

EIRTO REGEO TSD or HAT | 

ITT wp gad mga gT: 033 N 

amA: aA u 1 

Asrai AR medai wes wu 34 N 


944 


qag Rya ASA GATT: | 

ferar eite er ARTIST TT qu 35 u 

When a man does not give any share to the 
Atithis or the guests and does not offer oblations 
to the Fire and eats his food, he, too, goes to the 
above hell. When a man in times other than that of 
great danger and distress, follows the livelihood 
of a thief and robs gold and jewels forcibly of a 
Brahmin or any other person, he is taken to this 
hell and the Yama's servants pierce and cut off his 
skin by a fiery hot iron cutter. 

areata arf rats sfērām rr: | 

eg wali: wes uot u26 

PRASA d amar: greet terete qq t 

GATT! Mere amu 037 u 

When a man goes for an illicit cohabitation to 
one who is not fit to be approached and when a 
woman goes similarly to an unapproachable man, 
both of them are taken, being whipped, to this hell 
by the servants of Yama! Where the man is obliged 
to embrace a fiery hot iron figure of woman and 
vice versa. When a man goes to all sorts of wombs 
for unnatural crimes, he is taken to Vajra Kantaka 
Naraka and placed on the top of an iron Salmali 
wood. 

WHAT magen 4 wr deaa: | 

eed fafstefeer d ater mur RT: 038 N 

Amua Vada Aaaa: 1 

«ai Pagie uftearat U are 39 N 

When a King or any royal personage, subject to 
the Pasanda Dharma (i.e., the unrighteous path) 
breaks the boundary of a law, he for that sin goes 
to Vaitarani, the ditch round that hell. 

MST: UAT STRETHTUTD EATER: | 

ma fagsieta argent are 40 ti 

waa mirhaa u aa: | 

frogs | cayenne: 1 41 i 

There the aquatic animals eat his body all 
around. O Narada! Yet neither his life nor his body 
parts with him. He is thrown, for his Karma, into 
the rivers filled with faeces, urine, puss, blood, 


Srimaddevibha, igavatam 


hairs, bones, nails, flesh, marrow, fat, etc., and he 
becomes very much troubled. 

ddrearigaai emuudf a 

guaeiturat 3 a WEST Wea: 42. 

STARA: WSpera utum: 0 

Asaga PIRETA: 10143 N 

faudfa game: | 

ma were: 44 ui 

Those who are the husbands of Vrsalis (girls 
under twelve years of age, who have attained 
menstruation; or the barren women), void of any 
Sauca (cleanliness) or shame and without any 
Acara Vyavahara (the following of one’s natural 
customs and rites) and those who follow Pa$vàcara 
(like beasts), they meet with a very hard fate and 
are threwn into this hell filled with faeces, urine, 
cough, blood and other impurities and when they 
feel hungry, are forced to eat the above things. 

3 adada usur d feme od 

yema ferm yaa: 4450 

TTT RĪTA d 

vufirer Aata a erieereq dama i 46 N 

When those persons that are twice born, 
maintain dogs and asses, etc, and when they are 
addicted to hunting, and kill daily, for nothing, 
beasts, birds and dear, those evil-doers are specially 
watched by the servants of Yama and when they 
retire, they tear them asunder by shooting bows at 
them. 

Up aT GTG UAR UTERE | 

aaye ath aga ag 47 

Fora heida SREITHRTGTHS: | 

at aratu want à fest naaa: 48 N 

He who kills animals, engaged vainly in a 
sacrifice and addicted to haughty tempers and 
habits, is thrown into this hell by the Yama’s 
servants and whipped very severely. The twice- 
born that co-pulates blindly with a savarna wife, is 
taken by the Yama’s messengers into the hell filled 
with semen and he is made to drink that. 


Book VIII Chapter XXIII 
Ya: ura qetsqx A antcient: | 
Ya: Hues maafa ta: HUTTATT ur d 49 u 
3r gets Aada TT: UTĀHTAMT: | 
Wala ahd IET NTSTTENT: 11 50 1 
Those who are addicted to robbery, who put fire 
to other’s houses, who make others drink poison, 
those that are treacherous, and who destroy the 
interest of the villagers and other persons, those 


kings or the royal personages are taken after their 

death by the Yamadütas to the Sàrameyadana hell. 
aaa AFA sme | 
férgreafireseiverar: Aaa WERT: 0 51 N 
AAMT AUTEM WH aed A 1 


945 


tA us2u 

aa: wt yaar aiga 1 

efer Staēdturrad Terps ET 
ANAM EMT: 11 22 11 

There seven hundred and twenty dogs, very 
wonderful to behold, come furiously and with great 
force and energy, over them and feed on them. O 
Nārada! This hell is denominated as Sārameyādana 
Naraka and it is very horrible. Now I will describe 
to you the other hells Avici and others. 

Here ends the Twenty-second Chapter of the Eighth 
Book on the narrative of the sins leading to hells in 
the Mahapuranam Srimaddevibhagavatam, of 18,000 
verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book VIII Chapter XXIII 945 
` ^ N + we e ccc pt x N 
CHAPTER XXIII 
On the Remaining Hells 
starrer zara At ar first aT vere Ava ar TATA | 


Bae: waar unir agi ATRI E | 

am fāfmāseiea dat urugga: 1 08 

A Aega ath aders ATEN] a 

Beart viiregrarfafiget: weft fg u2 u 

Narayana said: O Narada! When persons, 
impelled by sinful motives, always speak false at 
the time of giving evidence or at the time of taking 
or giving money, they, after their death, go to the 
terrible hell, named Avici. There, from the summit 
of a mountain, one hundred Yojanas high! they 
are dropped at once down below with their heads 
inverted down. 

SGICINE ANESEC iR IGL: C — d 

"pp wat y a adfa n3 N 

adenan feemPesiese 1 

frat Aa wed gamma 4 d 

Here the solid ground looks like water and 
appears like waves. Therefore it is called Avici, 
resembling like Avici waves. Here if the sinners 
body be cut to small pieces, still he does not die; 
rather he gets a new body when his body is all cut 
to pieces. 


60 


radusi gi oat fradta fe u5u 

wren dui d frat uwRunm | 

gafa TAGAT ort arentaat We 6 Ni 

ate amme fet wu | 

"eurer cepe aise ANT: 407 i 

Renaat anna NT 1 

attest 4 ag wad Veunmm d 80 

O Son of Brahma! When a man, be he a Brahmin, 
Ksattriya, or a Vai$ya, drinks the Soma (wine) or 
due to inadvertence drinks wine, he is thrown into 
this hell. O Muni! The Yama's servants make him 
drink the molten iron. When a vile person being 
maddened by the pride of his self-learning, birth. 
austerities or Varna and Agrama, does not pay his 
respect duly to his superiors, he is thrown into the 
Ksarakardama hell with his head downwards. He 
suffers a tremendous pain there. 

a dia gaye: anand | 

Aasa ant gianesyqd 9 u 

When a man or woman out of delusion, performs 
the human sacrifices (where men are immolated 
as victims), he or she has to eat the human flesh 
here. 


946 Srimaddevibhagavatam 
dd an iere ada aise: | seven faces come from all sides and eat them as a 
fertsft ur usi wrderst AKTY 10 dd fierce serpent devours a mouse. 
werd frearet g area ram: 1 dsaty paie Pres | 


wren ga a ad ferar Brama o1 13 ut 

Those that killed before all sorts of beasts, come 
after their death into this abode of Yama, all united 
and like butchers, cut each others flesh by pickaxes, 
cte., and drink their blood and dance and sing 
repeatedly. They do, in fact, what the terrible 
Rāksasas do. 

ayaka para ITF eger gÀ | 

ade UTA: Teun ZUA: 0012 di 

STATA SHY ĀSTTA VA AT STU | 

Aukea asa fritter 13 i 

magmi IATA i 

Wear cu d Wer VIETA Ufa € u14 N 

When persons meet with the innocent persons, 
wishing to live in villages or forests and raise their 
confidence by various such means and make them 
attached and finally pierce them by pointed Silas 
(trident) or pointed swords and kill them as if they 
were ordinary play things, they are taken after their 
death by the Yama dütas and thrown into Süladi 
Naraka (pierced by Sülas). 

Verlag wares: aygasat RAST: | 

frags: head wes n15 0 

Afsa amaret agen daria fe 1 

3p Agdam AT SAMU: 16 i 

They are pierced there by Šūlas and become 
overpowered by hunger and thirst. Herons and 
cranes, with their sharp beaks hunt after them to 
and fro. Thus tormented, they remember all their 
sins Gone in their previous lives. 

"en auifeneasta are Frade fF i 

daram a aatfrsta ada: 17 1 

TATA: AAT Welt ARTTATA i 

"rer factor for gratgaufadm: u18 tl 

Those who follow stray paths and trouble the 
other beings as the serpents do, they fall into the 
Dandašūka hell. Here worms with five face and 


ATA: ANRA: 0 19 I 
deaatufafire er eter cup cafus t 


gaa a PTA wonder d 20 0 

Those who confine persons in dark holes, a dark 
room or a dark cave they are taken by the Death 
servants with their arms uplifted and confined to 
similar dark caves, filled with poison, fire and 
smoke. 

asire ga ayer | 

Udder xeu Tauki: 421 

wert urugēft fra wide: | 

arfüroft arsrquer à dit: RAETIA: |1 22 N 

yer: wrens Vadtareafa fè i 

a amearrferatfer aipeanna: 11 23 0 

When a Brahmin householder, seeing a guest 
coming to his house in a reasonable (proper) time, 
casts a furious sinful glance at him as if to burn 
him, the Death's attendants, the herons with 
thounderbolt like beaks, the crows and the Vatas 
and other birds and very fierce vultures all come 
and forcibly take out the eyes of that person who 
committed the aforesaid sins. 


Riaan warafarfergtent ATA: | 
faraseka ddaTufemasuam 124 0 
TAG gfi da reste | 
regard ari a Wat afha: 125 0 
gida u ma werd freu à 


ferar ep Yost aaa Fa AAT: 11 26 íi 

When person elated with vanity of his riches 
become too haughty and doubt over their Gurus 
and when their hearts and faces wither withal away, 
as it were, with the thoughts of their income and 
expenditure, and being always unhappy, hoard up 
money always like the Brahma Pišācas, the Death’s 
officers take them for these Karmas to Sücimukha 
Narakas and pierce all over his body with pins, as 
a tailor does with his cloth. 


Book VIII Chapter XXIV 


947 


fran: wdatsgu ga: afta fe | 

Ud agen erate: UTREHTA, 0 27 u 

UOTE MAM: Ale HIST mpm: | 

weenitsfu sak sverTenneenfa fF 28 i 

O Devarsi! True, sinful persons thus suffer 
hundred thousand hells. All these are very painful 
and tormenting. Out of these the abovenamed 
twenty hells give the greatest sufferings. 

fasta Tera, unSTEESUSTA | 

wr aiman creat smi quitan ! 29 u 

yaani ager frat rem aa ARTA | 

iae fe tammy: u30u 

O Devarsi! The sinners suffer various pains in 
hells and virtuous persons go to the several spheres 
where all sorts of happinesses and pleasures reign. 
O Maharsi! I have described to you many forms of 


practising one's Sva Dharma; yet know this verily 
that the worship of the Devi's Gross Form and of 
Her Virat Form is the Chief Dharma of all the 
persons. By worshipping the Devi, the persons have 
not to go to the hells. 

ĪPAŠĀ c ay are md | 

"wr adt saareneteagat afsrat JUTTA t 3 1 u 

sft MeRa MEPIS STAT 
TUF MSATT: 11 23 11 

In fact, when the Devī Bhagavatī is worshipped, 
She Herself arrange for crossing the person to the 
other shore of this ocean of transmigration of 
existence, 

Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter of the Eighth 
Book on the description of the remaining hells in the 
Mahāpurāņam Srimaddevibhagavatam, of 18,000 
verses, by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book VIII Chapter XXIV 


947 


- RNA 


1 


CHAPTER XXIV 
On the Devi Pūjā 


Ane IATA 

esr eNA semen: 1 

mania edt ar ware at aa nt N 

eimererferf£r: Al aT Here enar i 

AA a giagi ma waa 42 Ll 

Narada said: O Bhagavan! Of what sort is the 
Dharma, i.e., the worship of the Devi? In what way 
shall we worship Her, so that She gives us the 
Highest Place? What are the methods and forms 
of Her Worship? Where and when shall we worship 
Her! So that the Durga saves us from the above 
mentioned hells. 

SĪRTTUT sare 

Saif ony Riad À fagat at | 

gat wdred edt ete: waar 003 0 

Taunt urggr rend pp pupa | 

amarag dar eat efn vem d 4 N 

Narayana said: O Devarsi! You are the foremost 
of the Knowers of Truth. I will therefore tell you 
how the Devi gets pleased and how Her worship is 


conducted according to the Dharma. Hear atten- 
tively. O Nàrada! I will also describe the nature of 
Sva Dharma. Hear that also. When one worships, 
with due rites and ceremonies, the Devi in this 
beginningless world, She Herself removes all the 
terrible dangers and difficulties. 

uama Aage a qt | 

m edt yard Ahina soy us Ni 

wRufwferarerer edt VS od 

yi eee amena (TK AT 1 6 d 

Hear the rules how the people worship the Devi. 
When the Pratipat Tithi (the first day after the Full 
or New Moon) comes, one should worship the Devi 
with a present of rice, etc., with ghee (clarified 
butter) and give that to the Brahmins. 

fedtarat wrecker YATATA, d 

whi wa dtatgatad ae 070 

Then one becomes completely free from any 
disease. On the second day (Dvitiya Tithi), one 
must serve the Mother of the Universe with sugar 


948 Srimaddevibhagavatam 
and give that to the Brahmins; he then becomes| Wantavat afer rer det uaa qu: tt 


long-lived. 
gdtarfēadt det greta 1 
aft Grat faremo ade arent sv u 8 u 
agaf wsrisuwur war wo fase wa 
aa wa aren a feeuünmqga uo 


were mA Mag 16 U 

O Muni! If on the tenth tithi, one offers to the 
Devi black Til (sesamun) and then to the Brahmin, 
he becomes free from the fear of death. If, on the 
eleventh tithi, (ekādašī) one gives the curd to the 


On the third (tithi) on commencing with the Püjà, | Devi and then to the Brahmin, one becomes a great 
the worshipper must give milk to the Devi and give | favourise of the Devi. 


that to a best Brahmin; he is then freed from all his 
troubles and ailings. On the fourth (tithi) the 


worshipper is to offer a cake of flour to the Devi | 


and then give that to a Brahmin; no obstacles come 
to that man. 
yami Hearne qot fuae i 
ada vent dd Weerepeut way 10 d 
wr wey wih mehgerranffr à 
SITETUTT U graei Teenie WAT u 1o 


BAVA gerere STATS SAAT ar AT i 

ara cw ashes uw cdifieat mung u 17 u 

aderai a gi wureruesfW uw i 

ara Grat fara wemdafemmeweq 18 N 

If on the twelfth day, one offers to the Devi and 
to the Brahmin the Cipitaka rice or grain (well 
parched and flattened) one becomes a favourite of 
the Devi. If, on the thirteenth day one gives to the 
Bhagavati grains and then that to a Brahmin, one 


On the fifth tithi, the worshipper is to offer | gets progeny. 


plantains to the Devi and then to give that to the 
Brahmins; he thus becomes intelligent. On the sixth 
tithi, the worshipper gives honey to the Devi and 
then that to a Brahmin; he gets thus the beauty of 
his body. 

aami gedde dd wer feme wr | 

Té ara vida TAA EST d 12 ! 

aimee eet Aces 1 

mema yaa aT AAR: 113 | 

qai areas RU PE PTA XT | 

wear yare sgarfag cite Wer w 014 Lt 

On the seventh tithi, the Brahmin gives to the 
Devi the Naivedya (an offering of rice, etc.) with 


ugdvai a dat wed UPA | 

ara Garumā Pract aftīdt sraq 1 19 N 

qai yiman wereate d 

warf a PĒTA PATA S AA i 20 N 

If, on the fourteenth day, one gives to the Devī 
the flour of fried barley or other grains (Šaktu) and 
then that to a Brahmin, one becomes a favourite of 
Šiva. If on the Full Moon day, one offers to the 
Devi Pāyasa and then that to a Brahmin, then one's 
Pitrs are uplifted to the higher regions. 

aR gat with wer wert od 

area Hae 27 N 


O Muni! On the above tithis, if one forms daily 


Gur (sugarcandy) and then that to the Brahmins; | Homas, as stated in the Pūjā Chapter, the Devi 
he then becomes freed from his mental sorrows. | becomes very pleased. The articles corresponding 
On the eighth day, if one give cocoanut, one is |to the tithi as mentioned above destroy all the evils 
freed of one's remorse, etc.; on the ninth, if |and inauspicious omens. 


anybody gives fried rice (Laj), he will have his} fart uai cw Ai ufventfdam 1 

happiness increased both in this world and in the} auam wer: tek simi wr maA 11 22 N 

next. gaan a dh ed md fusa 
amanda q wet Porras i rmt ved a feat miaa? 23 
MEITA war g wHeneerged FE 15 i vibrat us wet Adel aR, i 


Bock VIII Chapter XXIV 949 


On Sunday, it is a rule to give an offering of] Karkati, Kusmanda, Modaka, Panasa, plantain, 
Payasam (a food prepared of rice, milk, and sugar). | Jambu (rose-apple), mangoe, sesamum, oranges, 
On Monday, the milk; on Tuesday, the nice! Dadima, (pomegranate) Vadarī (Jujube) the Dhatri 
plantains; on Wednesday, the fresh butter; on| (Amalaki) fruit, Pāyasa, Prthuka, gram, cocoanut, 
Thursday, the gur or sagarcandy, Friday, the white| Jambira. Kaseru, and Sürana. 


warf sensit fay sare graft wr t 32 N 


sugar, and on Saturday, it is a rule to give the 


clarified butter of cows milk. frh itt Proffert nR: à 
eatin aa Wt 2400 AY ACTA SOTA Uere 0 33 i 
Ue feret vai et afer gi fencer | ari meh Uu und wwe | 


afta utad xr hrai game 25 N 
mat aeud cu Bad: Wy 1 
Wed; wee TT AT ATM 026 u 
Te waa cup ust Ga UTT ! 
aqi rad a y ueds w 427 


vrageh yout a fee afr dd wer 34 

The auspicious events occur when these are 
offered. The intelligent persons have thus decided 
to give the above on Viskambha and the other 
Yogas. Now hear: I will describe the things that 

madia ure waded VT ANE | are offered on the respective Karanas: Kamsāra, 

ferus arty erat fram 28 0 Mandaka, Pheni, Modaka, Vatapattraka, Ladduka, 

Now hear what should bc offered on the| Ghrtapüra, Til (sesamum), curd, ghec, and honey. 
Naksattras. The following are the the Naivedyas| amatā pith edttdemrera | 
given to each of the Naksattras, in due order, from; — aremeredyasurfi wt ur 35 N 
Ašvinī: Clarified butter (ghee), sesamum (Til),| faut «ma WA soy aeadumga: | 
sugar, curd, milk, Kilatak (Malai, milk), Dadhikürci| dagraddtarai "WI NYFF 36 1 
(Malai curd), Modaka (a kind of sweetmeat, aj) ydagi cw Adeaquacwt | 
confection) Phenika, Ghrta Mandaka, a sort of) Ua gams qeterfeferg ura, 37 N 
swect meat of wheaten flour and gur, Vatapattra, yeu fara aden | 
Ghrtapura (Ghior), Vataka, Kharjura juice (of the ayaa Ade Wah U ANG 38 tl 
datepalm), a sort of sweet meat of Gur and gram,| These are to be offered devotedly to the Devi 
honey, Sürana, Gur Prthuka, grapes, datepalms, | on the respective Karanas. Now I will describe to 
Cārakās, Apüpa, Navanita (fresh butter), mudga, | you the other offerings very pleasing to the Devi. 
modaka, and Matulinga. Now hear what are given| Hear. O Narada! Hear it with great attention and 
in the Viskambha and the other Yogas. love. On the third tithi of the bright fortnight, in 


qarati quud Yronta sefa | the month of Caitra, one is to worship duly the 
Té ny ud qui würde eue 29 I Madhuka tree and offer Pafica Khadya (the five 
aatri nhe a pons ait rae i sorts of food). So hear what articles are to be offered 
UH weet ARAA Temp ou 30 0 according to the rules that are laid down on the 
ant aei da agtreta u | third day of the white fortnight of the other menths. 
athe ured wr gah woh Wem 37 i SĀBATĀ Hey vik iaa g | 

athe wr adm aot Wem oa amare Wed ur NY fuge 39 u 


The World Mother becomes very much pleased} saot afr eei amà wp STR | 
when one offers to Her the following things: Gur,| amfàrY urerd ure afte TA sm 40 n 
honey, ghee, milk, curd, Takra, Apüpa, fresh butter, | mmf hue gren dri er aftregfetenr 1 


950 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


are mÈ a dari ud ed Ware 47 n 

attest a Ade ARTA utente | 

wd gragraēata uw mudisuuq 42 N 

The Guru, in the month of Vaisakha; the honey, 
in Jyestha; the fresh butter, in Āsādha; the curd, in 
Šrāvaņa; the Šarkarā, in Bhādra; the Pāyasa, in 
Ašvin; the pure milk, in Kārtika; the Pheni, in 
Agrahāyaņa; the Dadhi Kūrcīkā in Pausa; the 
clarified butter of cow's milk, in Māgha, and the 
cocoanut offerings, in the month of Phālguna 
Thus with these twelve sorts of offerings, one is to 
the Devi in the 
respectively. 

Timer remet Ara HTT | 

Teram nre reset aucrarttrtt t 43 N 

frat mamm weéwgenefudit i 

One should worship the Devi in the Madhuka 
tree with these names: Mangala, Vaisnavi, Maya, 
Kala-ratri, Duratyayā, Mahāmāyā, Matangi, Kali, 
Kamalavasini, Siva, Sahasracarana, and 
Sarvamangalarüpini. (One name for each of the 
12 months). 

uwfRr4imuusddi wt RAA, 44 i 

aa: erate Arfi meet wrist | 

weder adqguicafgt 1450 

TH: GRAMS STD AATSET a 1 

mest mà wenngengdd 46 nN 

Finally, to bring the vow to a good issue and to 
have one's desires fulfilled with greater success, 
one is to sing stotras (hymns) to the Māhešvarī, 
the Controller of all the gods, in that Madhüka tree, 
thus: ‘Thou art lotus-eyed; obeisance to Thee! Thou 
art Jagaddhatri, the Upholdress of the Universe, I 
bow down to Thee; Thou art Mahešvarī, Maha 
Devi, and Mahāmangalarūpiņī (Thou art the great 
Devi, and Thou dost great good to all). 

var unge u mamiy A i 

aaa weerfv: vegresttttt 47 i 

"arit AAT Alaa WEST | 

Taka ufum undvsagenttett 1 48 n 


worship twelve months 


Thou destroyest the sins, Thou givest Moksa or 
final liberation. Thou art Parameévari, Thou art the 
World Mother and Thou art of the nature of the 
Highest Brahma. Thou art Madadātrī (the giver of 
Mada, the Supreme Felicity and rapture or 
excessive delight), Thou art maddened with Mada 
the (Excessive Joy); Thou canst be reached When 
Thou art given proper veneration; Thou art the Most 
High. Thou art Intelligent; Thou art meditated upon 
by the Munis; and Thou dwellest in the Sun. Thou 
art the Lord of the several Lokas (worlds); Thou 
art endowed with the Highest Knowledge; and 
Thou art of the colour of water at the time of Pralaya 
(the Universal Dissolution). 

wa oma wat yeatgeatas a 

nemeni ufearsfr wu 49 u 

Querida AAE GATT | 

GA a asta ant au: u50 Nn 

Thou art worshipped by the Gods and the Asuras 
for the destruction of the Great Moha. So Great 
Victory to Thee! Thou art the Rescuer of one from 
the abode of Death; Thou art worshipped by Yama, 
Thou art the elder of Yama, Thou art the Controller 
of Yama and Thou art worshipped by all. 
Obeisance to Thee! Thou art impartial; Thou 
controllest all; Thou art perfectly unattached; Thou 
destroyest the people’s worldly attachments; Thou 
art The one to whom all look for the fructification 
of their desires; and Thou art the Compassion 
Incarnate. Thou art, worshipped by the names: 
Kankāla Krüra, Kāmāksī; Minàksi Marabhedini, 
Mādhuryarūpašālinī; and Thou art worshipped with 
the Pranava Om prefixed to all the Stotras and the 
Mantras. 

amama ud adena | 

Wren AEN AAT N 51 1 

haa ae in iA 1 

mydin a nA 52 oN 

Thou art of the nature of the Seed Māyā 
(māyābīja); Thou canst be realised by repeating 


Book VIII Chapter XXIV 


951 


the mantra and Thou canst be pleased by the deep 
concentration (Nididyāsana) on Thee. Thou canst 
be reached by all men through their minds and Thou 
dost things that are pleasing to the Maha Deva. 

muaa Noma naie | 

HYATT namai us3 n 

mgeraefiamafteaagttmrā 

Uraschathiteetitgararat 54 u 

Thou dwellest in the trees Ašvattha, Vata, 
(Peepal tree) Neem, mangoe, Kapittha, (wood 
apple tree) and the tree Kul (Jujube) trees. Thou 
art the Panas (Jack) tree, Thou art Arka, Karira 
and Ksira trees. 

gaats gada wur 

auam Wa udaa 55 u 

wd Tam iyi Gaia meta ara | 

AA weet uud wd depu 56 u 

fred a: usà cut adtafaat R: 

emfirenféreret aa Ry wer R u 57 tt 

Thou residest in Dugdha valli (the milky juice of 
plants); Thou art the Compassion Incarnate; and fit 
to shew mercy. Thou art sincerity and kindness and 
Thou art the Consort of the Omniscient. So Victory 
to Thee!’ O Narada! After the worship, ifone performs 
the stotra above described, to the Devi, the worshipper 
derives all sorts of Punyams (merits) He who reads 
daily the Stotra, pleasing to the Devi, becomes freed 
of all sorts of diseases, pain and freed of his fear of 
passions, so hard to conquer! 

aate amdan eratelf etara, | 

aaae cari AA NT SS i 

What more than this that he who wants money, 
gets money; who wants Dharma, gets Dharma; he 
who wants Kāma, gets his Kāma (objects of 
desires); and he who wants Moksa, gets Moksa. 
The Devi is the Awarder of the Catur Varga 
fourfold fruits. 

amei Agaa faroreft arre sr | 

vag aae wee: Wars: 59 u 


If this Stotra be read, the Brāhmin becomes 


Vedavit, the knower of the Vedas; the Ksattriya 


gets the victory; the Vai$ya gets wealth and the 
Südra gets happiness. 

MATS T: VAI R: | 

Ayman qaia acufadt u 60 u 

Kari Wem: Aegis i 

a: Ghee a MMT Wdlees | 61 u 

Fia far we aom rafa è | 

udung: spar Ma uwsmqd 0620 

Ifthis Stotra be read with devotion and attention, 
the Pitrs get undying satisfaction, lasting till Pralaya 
(the time of universal dissolution). Thus I have 
described to you the method of worshipping the 
Devi. The Devas consider it with great attention. 
He gets the Devi Loka, who performs the worship 
of the Devi, as above described, with devotion. 

Ua TA AEA URI UTT WD 

wae waar: Water ERIS 11 63 0 

O Brahmana! When the Devi is thus 
worshipped, all the desires are fulfilled; all sins 
are destroyed; and, in the end, one's mind 
becomes pure and the worshipper is respected and 
worshipped everywhere. 

RATT sr ATT et KTS PU Haha 1 

mamaga Aaa: 1164 n 

ada tata ATA carat frane | 

Geta d wunesrd MAERA 165 N 

O Son of Brahma! His fear of going into hell is 
destroyed by the Grace of the Devi, even in dreams, 
he does not fear anything. By the Grace of Maha 
Maya, his sons and his grandsons, riches and grains 
multiply and multiply. He becomes a great and 
steadfast devotee of the Devi; there 1s no doubt in 
this. Now I have described to you completely the 
rules of worship of the Devi. 

usd fe were: wetter | 

aay aga mat Wd 66 I 

wd IATA Wsri wee | 

a we TATU TĀS "67 


When one performs this, one becomes freed of 


952 Srimaddevibhàgavatam 


the Narakas; and all sorts of good things come to| O Muni! Now hear this Prakrti Paficaka, its 
him. O Muni! The Madhüka worship and the | narrative and the greatness thereof. Know that this 
monthly worship have been described also. He who |is as curious as it gives liberation. 

performs this Madhüka worship fully, never meets | $f sredturrad AERIS ETRIE ferat 


with any disease or obstacles. FTE TUTTATT SERB CAAA TET an 
amaai aaah Mad: Tah UT | SRST: 11 24 11 
ATT RAT SAT TST THA 68 ii aqitragry: (839 ) vdifara-mgeregd: i 


Now I will describe to you the other five aspects SATAN SANT: 11 1 1 


of the Great Devī of the nature of Prakrti. Her Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter of the Eighth 
Book on the worship of the Devi in the 


Mahāpurāņam Srimaddevibhagavatam, 
of 18,000 verses, by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa. 


Name, Form and Origin give pleasure to all the 
worlds. 

"nerd speraret wend: Tah A | 

Ga da yoy ufvnfatmeen u 69 N 


* OR 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER I 
On the Description of Prakrti 


simman sara world that can describe fully the characteristics of 
Tet eat wem cant: aa 1 Prakrti! However I will describe to you that much 
me a gefa vat: wae gam 1 ui which I heard from my own father, Dharma. Hear. 


Sri Narayana said: This (Highest) Prakrti is) WREATH: War piis gèar: 1 
recognised as five-fold. When She is engaged in wet Weer ar edt uA: wt entfernt 5 u 


the work of Creation, She appears as: The prefix ‘Pra’ in the word Prakrti means 
(1) Durga, the Mother of Gaņeša (2) Radha, (3) exalted, superior, excellent; and the affix ‘Krti’ 
Laksmi, (4) Sarasvati and (5) Savitri. donotes creation. So the Goddess, the Devi Who 
ane is the most excellent in the work of creation is 
known as the Devi Prakrti. 
aifereisTer HT Ghat GAT AT HT ATTA AT | mā ` 
T WHE U yA ad a: | 
fee or acai UTT TT WET HAT N 2 N vada Rrena TE 
fat ufi ena a SĒR: 1 FPA Wa: ueu 
Dua S > arian To come closer: ‘Pra’ signifies the Sattva Guna, 


the most exalted quality, ‘Kr denotes the Rajo 
Guna and ‘Ti’ denotes the Tamo Guna. (The Sattva 
Guna is cosidered as the Highest as it is perfectly 


Narada replied: O Thou, the Best of Jianins! 
Who is this Prakrti? (Whether She is of the the 


t f Intelli of matter?) Why did She M : zi 
ee QM PARE ad b clear and free from any impurities whatsoever; the 


ifest Herself and th in why did Sh all... - : : ; : : 
joa qc ues UC NR eR nra qM! Rajo Guna is considered intermediate as it has this 


Herself in these five forms? And what are Her 
characteristics? Now Thou oughtest to describe the 
lives of all, the different modes of their worship, 
and the fruits that are accrued thereby. Please also 
inform me which Forms of them manifested 


defect—that it spreads a veil over the reality of 
things, so as not to allow men to understand the 
True Reality, while the Tamo Guna is considered 
worst as it completely hides the Real Knowledge). 
Eraman OT AT EPI rH | 


themselves in which different places. Dost Thou 2 
yam yea Vata «era 7 N 
please narrate to me all these. 


riai aaa at ar ai amit ÀA 1 So When this Intelligence of the nature of 


RER — yi E A MUR gn pas ADAC a tinged 
Narayana said: O Child! Who is there in this| +!!! "e above tarce Saunas and becomes 


956 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


omnipotent, then She is superior (Pradhānā) in the 
work of creation. Hence She is styled as Prakrti. 
yar add wa alas yaa: | 

Beret a ur eet wane: ur wentfeier u 8 u 

"nare ufeferet faemeut aye R: 1 

gates afarorrertat amaret Warf: STAT 19 ui 

O Child Narada! The state just preceding that 
of creation is denoted by ‘Pra’; and ‘Kr’ signifies 
creation. So the Great Devi that exists before 
creation is called Prakrti after creation The 
Paramātmā by His Yoga (i.e. , Maya Sakti, the Holy 
Ghost) divided Himself into two parts; the right 
side of which was male and the left side was the 
female Prakrti. 

Note: The Holy Ghost is the principal of Conception 
and Emanation, Creation). So the Prakrti is of the nature 
of Brahma. 

AT Tea er FM AT ST ATTA | 

AMS Se MT Mifare aise Raat n 10 Uu 

She is Eternal. As the fire and its burning power 
are not different, so there is no separate distinction 
between Atman and His Sakti, between Purusa and 
Prakrti. 

arava fe ants: eder Wem 1 

wd smi wersoureaft ane u11 

Therefore those that are foremost and the highest 
of the Yogis do not recognise any difference 
between a male and a female. All is Brahman. He 
is everywhere as male and female for ever. There 
is nothing in this world that can exist for a moment 
even without this Brahman consisting of male and 
female. (i.e. they are Brahman with Maya 
manifested). 

omana Sfr Rer | 

ussfadya vem WennpkRnis 12 n 

Out of the Will of Sri Krsna, to create the world 
Whose Will is all in all, came out at once the Mala 
Prakrti, the Great Devi I$vari, (the Lady Controller 
of the Universe) Brahma with Maya in a state of 
equilibriums). 


cage wahr gikt ART | 
AT STCRTTIETGT NEE ATT N 13 di 
By Her Command came out five Forms from 
Her, either for the purpose of creation or for 
bestowing Favour and Grace to the Bhaktas 
(devotees). 
miyara eat ar Prana frafirat i 
meat fersparar quismreensfuvit u 14 u 
Durga the Mother of Gaņeša, comes, as the first, 
the most auspicious, loved by Siva. She is 
Narayani, Visnu Maya, and of the nature of Pürna 
Brahma (the Supreme Brahma). 
: UfStaT xq | 
aatis ect ar preheat atest 15 u 
This eternal, all auspicious Devi is the Presiding 
Deity of all the Devas and is, therefore, worshipped 
and praised by Brahma and the other Devas, Munis, 
and Manus. 
l 


erdereaquerentferrsiirererfarstt 
yetga vüaügsas 116 tt 


This Bhagavati Durga Devi, (when She gets 
pleased) destroys all the sorrows, pains and troubles 
of the Bhaktas that have taken Her refuge, and gives 
them Dharma, everlasting name and fame, all 
auspicious things and bliss and all the happiness, 
nay, the Final Liberation! 

SRUTRTTRTAIEGÉUATUTRTSTUIT | 

ate VM aaga 1 17 N 

HAIKU wr VIKI TT à 

She is the Greatest Refuge of Bhaktas that come 
to Her wholly for protection and are in great 
distress, whom She saves from all their dangers 
and calamities. In fact, know this Durga Devi as, 
verily, the Presiding Deity of the heart of Krsna 
and as His Highest Sakti, of the nature of the Holy 
Fire and the Holy Light. She is Omnipotent and 
resides always Krsna, the Great God. 

reat fata fats rgia 18 u 

fea fier ga aren ist GT arf: 1 

fer: AT VIKI gna: ara aaa u 19 u 


Book IX Chapter I 


qÈ: yiee agitat ada a | 

PATHE AT POT UAT: IL 20 1 

She is worshipped by all the Siddha Purusas 
(those that have attained success); the (eighteen) 


Siddhis all go to Her and when pleased She gives 
whatever Siddhis (success) that Her Bhaktas want. 
This Great Devi is the intelligence, sleep, hunger, 
thirst, shadow, drowsiness, fatigue, kindness, 
memory, caste, forbearance, errors, peace, beauty, 
and consciousness, contentment, nourishment, 
prosperity, and fortitude, She is sung in the Vedas 
and in other Šāstras as the Maha Maya, of the nature 
of the Universe. In reality, She is the All Sakti of 
the Universe and She is the Sakti of Krsna. All 
these qualities are also mentioned in the Vedas. 

v: Tat sprquramiereereqt remm i 

ONS eA SAAT Brot wr PITT 21 0 

EAT KUT TVA AT UTA: | 

adducaan uw defirsread 22 11 

What is mentioned here is a tithe merely, in 
comparison to that of the Vedas. She has infinite 
qualities. Now hear of other Saktis. The second 
Sakti of the Paramatman is named Padma 
(Laksmi). She is of the nature of Suddha Sattva 
(Higher than Sattva Guna) and is Krsna’s Presiding 
Deity of all wealth and prosperity. 

masaia Mia a KITT warmer i 

MTA SHAT ae Ha STAT N23 ul 

VATA UST naa Ula | 

mgen wad: KAUT Aia u24u 

This very beautiful Laksmi Devi is the complete 
master of the senses; She is of a very peaceful 
ternper, of good mood and all-auspicious. She is 
free from greed, delusion, lust, anger, vanity and 
egoism. She is devoted to Her husband and to Her 
Bhaktas; Her words are very sweet and She is very 
dear to Her husband, indeed, the Life and Soul of 
Him. 

weeearferenr ect sftastorerattrat | 

neat dhs udana ait u25 1 


957 


vat xr verteret TATA TS] | 

Wey agha natat gfewt aur 026 u 

This Devi is residing in all the grains and 
vegetables and so She is the Source of Life of all 
the things. She is residing in Vaikuntha as Mahà 
Laksmi, chaste and always in the service of her 
husband. She is the Heavenly Laksmi, residing in 
the Heavens and the royal Laksmi in palaces and 
the Grha Laksmi in the several families of several 
householders. 

wdwrfUrg xerg ANEN Wut d 

aien gaaat AAT FAR wp 027 I 

arftrasur aftrat anftat enereteni | 

waren wt wer deta waa 128 N 

O Narada! All the lovely beauty that you see in 
all the living beings and all the things, it is She; 
She is the glory and fame of those that have done 
good and pious works and it is She that is the prowess 
of the powerful Kings. She is the trade of merchants, 
the mercy of the saints, engaged in doing good to 
others and the seed of dissensions in those sinful 
and viscious persons as approved of in the Vedas. 

adyn wee emat wet rg 1 

agraar S wr WaT: 029 0 

udama at at er eat aa i 

mafa: fear er uir vafer FT 11 30 u 

She is worshipped by all, reverenced by all. Now 
I will describe to you about the third Sakti of the 
Great God who is the Presiding Deity of knowledge 
speech, intelligence, and learning. This third Sakti 
is named Sarasvati. She is all the learning of this 
endless. Universe and She resides as medha 
(intelligence) in the hearts of all the human beings; 
She is the power in composing poetry; She is the 
memory and She is the great wit, light, Splendor 
and inventive Genius. 

Avantasia NAT | 

ATT a wdesewhdt 31 

franare are arf ves fireft 1 

veuiurerenesnuumefuvt n32 n 


958 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


She gives the power to understand the real 
meaning of the various difficult Siddhanta works; 
She explains and make us understand the difficult 
passages and She is the remover of all doubts and 
difficulties. She acts when we write books, when 
we argue and judge, when we sing songs of music; 
She is the time or measure in music; She holds 
balance and union in vocal and instrumental music. 

Runaman ufeafenerusfifert 1 

eran wie aoe i33 u 

IET U aster sfrefifirar i 

fere pgeuawufawt = =— 34 

She is the Goddess of speech; She is Presiding 
Deity in the knowledge of various subjects; in 
argumentations and disputations. In fact all the 
beings earn their livelihood by taking recourse to 
Her. She is peaceful and holds in her hands Vina 
(lute) and books. Her nature is purely Sāttvic 
(Suddha Sattva); modest and very loving to Sri Her. 
Her colour is white like ice clad mountains, like 
that of the white sandal, like that of the Kunda 
flower, like that of the Moon, or white lotus. 

eit grami sitet XeTHTeUUT | 

Aaa qut waai TURAL N35 i 

fatgfrercaanr a udftfgmeat ar | 

an ferar g AAA vent qaem: Wr 11 3 6 N 

She always repeats the name of Paramatma Sri 
Krsna while She turn Her bead composed of jewels. 
Her nature is ascetic; She 1s the bestower of the 
fruits of the asceticism of the ascetics; She is the 
Siddhi and Vidya of all; She grants always success 
to all. Were She not here, the whole host of 
Brahmins would always remain speechles like the 
dead cluster of persons. 

set gerer fear egent snafterenr | 

GU uer fied wt fru a n37 0 

Wr eruit autat Agha er STANT i 

PETA THTUTE aaron U AAT 1138 lt 

What is recited in the Vedas as the Third Devi 
is the Holy Word, the Third Sakti, Sarasvati. Thus 


I have described Her. Now hear the glories of the 
other Devis in accordance with the Vedas. She is 
the mother of the four colour (castes), the origin of 
the (six) Vedāngas (the limbs of the Vedas and all 
the Chandas, the Seed of all the mantrams of 
Sandhya vandanam and the Root, the Seed of the 
Tantras; She Herself is versed in all the subjects. 

faraka er aaea aaah à 

anA a udin 139 0 

"ferret ma rast agro à 

cath aen: Hi atefe gemmas 1 40 ul 

Herself an ascetic, She is the Tapas of the 
Brahmins; She is the Tejas (Fire) and the caste of 
the Brahmin caste and embodies in Herself all sorts 
of Samskàras (tendencies; inclinations); She is the 
Japam. Pure, known by the name of Savitri and 
Gayatri, She resides always in the Brahma Loka 
(the Sphere of Brahma) and is such as all the sacred 
places of pilgrimages want Her touch for their 
purification. 

Tatad grarreeneenefuvtt | 

WaT U WAT U AA 47 n 

uaaa cw fratar i 

maA Rng 420 

Her colour is perfectly white like the pure 
crystal. She is purely Śuddha Sattva, of the nature 
of the Highest Bliss; She is eternal and superior to 
all. She is of the nature of Para Brahma and is the 
bestower of Moksa. She is the Fiery Sakti and the 
Presiding Deity of the Brahma Teja (the fiery spirit 
of Brahma, and the Brahmanas). The whole world 
is purified by the touch of Whose Feet, this Savitri 
Devi is the Fourth Sakti. 

ATT Ud sd WANE | 

ah aget afin cat avtarftt d 143 u 

aama ur uaaa | 

yoia Raam data: gaat wa 44 N 

weisen er drerit aT à 

wTRÉTTEERSUT a WU ASAT AAT 0045 It 

O Child Narada! Now I will describe to you 


Book IX Chapter I 


about the Fifth Sakti, the Devi Radhika. Hear. She 
is the Presiding Deity of the five Prāņas; She 
Herself is the life of all; dearer than life even to Sri 
Krsna; and She is highly more beautiful and 
superior to all the other Prakrti Devis. She dwells 
in everything; She is very proud of Her good 
fortune (Saubhāgyam); Her glory is infinite; and 
She is the wife, the left body, as it were, of Sri 
Krsna and She is not in any way inferior to Him, 
either in quality or in the Tejas (fiery Spirit) or in 
any other thing. 

THAT UBT UTATeat Wart 1 

WATASHI ATT KĒSTAT 11 46 u 

name sigma uinea: | 

Taner UAEM 47 N 

She is Higher than the Highest; the Essence of 
all, infinitely superior, the First of all, Eternal, of 
all the nature of the Highest Bliss, fortunate, highly 
respected, and worshipped by all. She is, the 
Presiding Devi of the Rasa Lila of Sri Krsna. From 
Her has sprung the Rasa mandalam and She is the 
Grace and the Ornament of the Rasa mandalam 
(the dance in a circle in Rasa). 

Note: Extracts from a paper on Creation as explained 
by Hon’ ble Justice Sir G. Woodroffe. 

The Lecturer commenced by pointing out that an 
examination of any doctrine of creation reveals two 
fundamental concepts: Those of Being (Kutastha) and 
Becoming (Bhava); Changelessness and Change; the 
one and Many. The Brahman or Spirit in its own nature 
(Svarüpa) is and never becomes. It is the evolutes de- 
rived from the Principle of Becoming (Mūlā Prakrti) 
which constitute what is called Nature. The latter prin- 
ciple is essentially Movement. The world is displayed 
by consciousness (cit) in association with Mülà Prakrti 
in cosmic vibration (spandana). Recent Western hypoth- 
eses have made scientific ‘matter’ into Māyā in the 
sense that it is but the varied appearances produced in 
our mind by vibration of and in the single substance 
ether. The doctrine of vibration (Spandana) is however 
in Indra an ancient inheritance. The whole world is born 
from the varied forms of the initial movement in Mila 


959 


Prakrti. The problem is how does such multiplicity ex- 
ist without derogation to the essential unit of its effi- 
cient cause, the spirti? The lecturer then made a rapid 
survey of the Sankhya philosophy on this point which 
assumed two real and independent principles of Being 
and Becoming which it calls Purusa and Prakrti and 
passed from this the easiest dualistic answer to the pure 
monism of Sankara which asserted that there was but 
one Principle of Being, the Sadvastu and Maya, whether 
considered as a Sakti of Isvara or as the product of such 
Sakti was Avastu or nothing. He then pointed out that 
the Tantrik doctrine with which he dealt occupied a 
middle position between these two points of view. Siva 
in the Kulārņava Tantra says ‘Some desire Monism 
(Advaitavada), others Dualism (Dvaitavada). Such, 
however, know not My Truth which is neither Monism 
nor Dualism (Dvaitadvaita vivarjita). Tantra is not 
Dvaitavada for it does not recognise Prakrti as an inde- 
pendent unconscious principle (Acit). It differs from 
Sankara's Advaitavāda in holding that Prakrti as a con- 
scious principle of Becoming, that is as Sakti, is not 
not Avastu, though its displayed picture, the world is 
Maya. It effects a synthesis of the Sankhya dualism by 
the conversation of the twin principles of Purusa and 
Prakrti into the unity which is the Ardhanàriávara Siva 
Sakti. 

As regard other matters it adopts the notion of the 
Sankhya such as the concepts of Mula Prakrti with the 
three Gunas, vibration (spandana), evalution (Parinama) 
of the Vikrtis and the order of emantion of the Tattvas. 
Sakti which effects this exists and is Herself never 
unconscious (Acit) though It has the power to make 
the Jiva think It is such. If this were understood one 
would not hear such nonsense as that the Saktas (whose 
religion is one of the oldest in the world) worship 
material force or gross matter (Jada). 

The lecturer then shortly explained the nature of Sakti 
(Sakti Tattva), a term which derived from the rood ‘Sak’ 
meant the Divine Power whereby the world was created, 
manifested and destroyed. In Tantra the power and the 
Lord who wields it (Sakti is Brahman. The first is the 
transcendent, the second the immanent aspect of the 
one Brahman, Who is both Siva and Sakti. The Mother 
creates (Kāryavibhāvinī). The Father wills what She 


960 


does (Karya Vibhavaka). From their union creation 
comes. Sakti is not like the diminutive female figure 
which is seen on the leap of some Indian images, to 
which is assigned the subordinate position which some 
persons consider a Hindu wife should occupy. She is 
not a handmaid of the Lord but the Lord Himself in 
Her aspect as Mother of the worlds. This Sakti is both 
Nirguna and Saguna that is Cit Sakti and Maya Sakti. 

After thus defining The nature of Sakti by which the 
world was created, the lecturer commenced an account 
of its manifestation as the universe, following in the 
main the Sarada Tilaka written in the eleventh century 
by Laksmaņācārya, the Guru of the celebrated 
Kashmirian Tantrik, Abhinava Gupta. The following 
is a very abbreviated summary of this, the main portion 
of the paper. The lecturer first referred to the 
Aghanāvasthā state which was that Niskala Siva and 
touching upon the question why Siva became Sakala 
(associated with Kala) and creative explained the term 
Kala and the theory of Adrstasrsti taught by the Tantra 
as by other Sastras. The former is according to Sankhya, 
Mila Prakrti; according to Vedanta, Avidya and 
according to the Siva Tantra, Sakti. The latter is the 
dectrine that the impulse to creation is proximately 
caused by the Karma of the Jivas. It is the seed of Karma 
which contains the germ of Cosmic will to life. When 
Karma becomes ripe, there arises the state called Iksana 
and other names indicative of creative desire and will. 
There then takes place a development which is peculiar 
to the Tantra called Sadrša Parinàma, which is a kind 
of Vivartta. The development is only apparent for there 
is no real change in the Anandamaya Kosa. Sakti which 
exists in Sakala Siva in a purely potential state is said 
to issue from Him. This is the first Kinetic aspect of 
Sakti in which Sattaguna is displayed. This is the 
Paramākāsāvasthā. Nada (Sound, Word) then appears. 
Sakti becomes further Kinetic through the enlivening 
of the Rajo Guna. This the Aksaravastha. Then under 
the influence of Tamas, I$vara becomes Ghanibhüta 
and what is called the Parābindu. This is the 
Avyaktavastha. Thus the Supreme Bindu men call by 
different names, Maha Visnu, Brahma Purusa, or Devi. 
It is compared to a grain of gram which under its sheath 
contains two seeds in undivided union. These are Siva 


Srimaddevi bhagavatam 


Sakti and their encircling sheath is Maya. This Bindu 
unfolds and displays itself, in the threefold aspect of 
Bindu, Bija, Nada; or Siva, Sakti, and Siva Sakti; the 
three Saktis of will, knowledge and action. This is the 
mysterious Kama Kala which is the root of all Mantras. 
These seven: Sakala Siva, Sakti, Nada, Parabindu, 
Bindu, Bija, Nada are all aspects of Sakti which are the 
seven divisions of the Mantra Om and constitute what 
is called the creation of Para sound in the Iévara creation. 

The lecturer having explained the nature of these 
Saktis which formed part of the sound (Sabda), Sadrsa 
Parinama, referred to the form or meaning (Artha) 
creation in the same development by the appearance of 
the six Sivas from Sambhu to Brahma which were 
aggregate (Samasti) sound powers. It was he said, on 
the differentiation of the Parábindu that there existed 
the completed causal Sabda which is the Hidden Word. 
The causal body or Para Sabda and Artha being 
complete, there then appeared the Displayed word or 
Sabdartha. This is a composite like the Greek Logos. 
The Sabda Brahman or Brahman as cause of Sabda is 
the Caitanya in all beings. The Sabdartha in the Vedantin 
Nāmarūpa or world of name and form of this Sabdartha 
the subtle and gross bodies are constituted, the Saktis 
of which are the Hiranyagarbha sound, called 
Madhyamā and the Virāt sound Vaikhari. By Sada is 
not meant merely physical sound which as a quality of 
atomic ether is evolved from Tamasik Ahankara. 

The lecturer then pointed out that there had been 
Adrsta Srsti up to the appearance of Sakti and Vivartta 
development up to the completion of the “Word’ or 
causal sound. There then takes place real evolution 
(Parinama) in which the Tattvas (or elements discovered 
as a result of psychological analysis of our worldly 
experience) are said to emanate according to the 
Sankhya and not the Vedantic scheme, though there 
were some peculiarities in the Tantrik exposition which 
the lecturer noted. Finally Yogika Srsti was accepted 
in so far as it was the elements which in varied 
combinations made up the gross world. 

In conclusion the lecturer pointed out that Indian 
Sastra was a mutually connected whole. Such pe- 
culiarities as existed in any particular Šāstra were due 
to variey of standpoint or purpose in view. The main 


Book IX Chapter I 


961 


point in this connection to be remembered was that the 
Tantra was practical Sadhana Sastra. Whilst Sankara 
dealt with the subject from the standpoint of 
Jūānakāņda, the Tantra treated it from the point of view 
of worship (Upàsanakanda) the Tāntrik doctrine is 
compounded of various elements some of which it 
shared with other Šāstras, some of which are its own, 
the whole being set forth according to a method and 
terminology which is peculiar to itself. 

wer after wararatraret i 

Jireiresarfrdft eet virdrerafererfarent 48 N 

Waa a agda 1 

Paton a Prorat Aas sarerstūgtt tt 49 ut 

She is the Lady of the Rasa Lila, the Foremost 
of the Jovial, humourous (witty) persons and dwells 
always in Rasa. Her abode is in Goloka and from 
Her have come out all the Gopikas. Rasa—The 
circular dance of Krsna and the cow-herdesses of 
Vrndāvana. Her nature is the Highest Bliss, the 
Highest Contentment, and Excessive Joy; She 
transcends the three Sattva, Rajo and Tamo Gunas 
and is Nirakara (without any particular form); but 
She dwells everywhere but unconnected with any. 
She is the soul of all. 

fatter fart egean | 

ARTA ferrem ar ferrari: 50 ui 

She is without any effort to do anything and void 
of Ahankara. She assumes froms only os show Her 
favour to Her Bhaktas. The intelligent learned men 
(Pandits) read Her Mahima (glories) in meditating 
on Her according to the Vedas. 


dieses aes wet 52 u 


The chief of the Devas and the Munis could 
never see Her; Her clothings are fire proofs and 
She is decorated with many ornaments all over Her 
body. Her body looks as if the crores of moons 
have risen all at once; She is the Giver of Bhakti 
(devotion) towards Krsna, service towards Krsna; 


61 


and She bestows all wealth and prosperity. 
HAM Tas JINAYAT BT Ar | 
"ureusniegyiufesr cg  WHENT 04053 U 
warfefigsr ur udder a WWW 1 
flier PTA: TT fiery t 54 ui 
were «rem wen ueri xn 1 
akade wat summ ws 055 
In Varáha Kalpa i.e., when the Varāha 
incarnation took place, She incarnated Herself as 
the daughter of one Gopa (cowherd), named 
Vrsabhanu. And Earth was blessed by the touch of 
Her feet. She is such as Brahma and the other Devas 
could never perceive Her by any of their senses, 
yet every one at Vrindavan saw Her very easily. 
She is the Gem amongst women. And when She is 
seen On the breast of Krsna, 
lightenings flash in the blue mass of clouds in the 
sky. 
ATRUNA UIT 
AU Bea ACIS gerer ar Ha t 5 6 Ul 
wa wuur ger fü grama at 1 
Ata wart Soft ar trem vr yata i 57 ui 
AIT: HATA: A HEAT TETTE: | 
vad: wfafasrg sors wdefüg: u58 ui 


In days gone by, Brahma practised several 


it seems that 


austerities for sixty thousand years to purify 
Himself by seeing the nails of Her toes; but far 
from seeing that, He could not have that even in 
His dreams. Aí last He succeeded in seeing Her at 
Vrndavana and became blessed. O child Narada! 
This is the fifth Prakrti and she is denominated as 
Radha. Every female in every Universe is sprung 
from a part of Sri Radha or part of a part. 

uftquicar: wur ferences: yatia: 1 

Tl at: yerina entarfir Frys 159 u 

WIAA AT iur gaara | 

aaaea sasar Marat 160 0 

O Narada! Thus I have described to you the five 
Highest Prakrtis Durga and others. Now I am going 
to describe those that are parts of these Prakrtis. 


962 


Hear. The Ganges, Ganga has sprung from the lotus 
feet of Visnu; Her form is fluidlike; She is eternal. 
uftonenagresacataraataut 1 
yam Hmurnftaiumusartrit 161 N 


Terao | 

Raen distat eat aw wre 162 n 

And She is the veritable burning Fire to burn 
away the sins of the sinner. She is sweet to touch 
in taking baths and in drinking; She gives final 
liberation to the Jivas, and leads easily to the 
Goloka Abode. She is the holiest amongst the 
places of pilgrimages and is the first of the running 
rivers. 


meemin 1 

aaa wet mer aaa u 63 11 

az vrgaratasftvtt 1 

frem Prager areēft -mrauifiram u 64 i 

She is the rows of pearls in the clotted haris of 
Mahádeva's head and She is the Tapasyā 
(asceticism) incarnate of the Tapasvīs (ascetics) 
of the Bhārata Varsa. This Ganges purifies the 
three worlds and is the part of Mūlā Prakrti; She 
shines like the Full Moon, is white like white lotus 
and like milk; She is pure Suddha Sattva, clear, 
free from any Ahankara, chaste and beloved of 
Narayana. 

errigrensut «p Tevet fererasrirst à 

Ranra wr fererparafeeren wet i 65 N 

wuseewusmidueurad ga a 

MUTA BT wur ufquc yoat wer 66 i 

The Tulasi Devi is the consort of Visnu. She is 
the ornaments of Narayana, and dwells always at 
the lotus feet of Narayana. By Her are performed 
all the acts of worship, all austerities, and all 
Sankalaps (resolves). She is the chief of all the 
flowers, holy and able Sankalaps (resolves). She 
is the chif of all the flowers, holy and able to give 
merits (Punyam) to others. 

Anima a cert Arata i 

wei Heat 67 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Ua: Yat WENT | 

Gravatt darot Hatt spar ! 68 N 

At her sight and touch, Nirvàna can be obtained; 
and, were it not for Her, there could be no other 
fire in this Kali Yuga to burn the sins. She Herself 
is of the nature of Fire and at the touch of Whose 
lotus-feet, the earth is purified; all the Tirthas desire 
to have Her sight and touch for purification and 


without Her all acts in this world become fruitless. 

aan far a fers ddan vr ferner] i 

Matar a gga enrfirdt wenn 1! 69 u 

Uga um a wana qenefuvit i 

mAai VITA ma at urea 0070 N 

She bestows Moksa (liberation) to those who 
want final liberation, grants all sorts of desires to 
several people, Who Herself is like a Kalpa Vrksa, 
Who is the Presiding Deity of all the trees in 
Bharata and Who has come here to grant 
satisfaction to the ladies of Bharata Varsa and She 
is considered very superior throughout all parts of 
India. This Tulasi Devi is the chief factor of Mula 
Prakrti. 

WEITHÉSTESHESUT IT AAA HVAC | 

Waa a AARET 71 N 

maea RA wa | 

m m Gat maA n72 u 

Then comes the Manasã Devi, the daughter of 
Kagyapa, She is the dear disciple of Sankara and is 
therefore very learned in matters of Šāstras. She is 
the daughter of Ananta Deva, the Lord of Snakes 
and is respected very much by all the Nagas. She 
Herself is very beautiful, the Lady of the Nagas, 
the mother of the Nagas and is carried by them. 

midge  canmpHUngfüer 1 

miara ferar firi arene 73 N 

ferrea faaee ferrara | 

Tas uut weet aaah 74 1 

She is decorated with ornamets of the Snakes; 
She is respected by the Nàgendras and She sleeps 
on the bed of Snakes. She is Siddha Yogini, the 


Book IX Chapter I 


963 


devotee of Visnu and always ready in the worship 
of Visnu; She is the Tapas and the bestower of the 
fruits of Tapas. 

Rai hasad a ATE aT wr U1 zt: | 

aaRafty gara quf ow sm u75u 

adrad a vacict mmm | 

Herself an ascetic, She spent three lakh years 
(according to the Devas measure) and has become 
the foremost of the ascetics in Bhàratvarsa. She is 
the Presiding Deity of all the mantras; Her whole 
body shines with Brahmateja (the Holy Fire of 
Brahma). 

gerna UTT ARAA 40076 i 

IREYA: Ut AINU ufa i 

STARS prier erar quiam i 77 N 

WEIST WT aaa up ANE | 

ATTY FST UT Vat WentRit 78 N 

Herself of the nature of Brahma, She again 
meditates on Brahman. She is sprung from a part 
of Šrī Krsna and the chaste wife of Jarat Karu Muni, 
the mother of Astika, the great Muni; She is the 
part of Mula Prakrti. O Child Narada! Now comes 
the Sasthi Devi, the Mother of Devasena. She is 
the most superior amongst the Gauri and the other 
sixteen Matrkas. 

gadtarfagrsit a ant Prenat act i 

WET Was ust wendet 179 0 

vars Prep wer qune a ATH i 

yn garg wear fray dam u 80 d 

This chaste woman is the giver of sons and 
grandsons in the three worlds and the nurse, the 
foster mother of all. She is the sixth part of Müla 
and is hence known by thename of Sasthi. She lives 
near to every child as an aged Yogini. 

gar a feet wu wer fem | 

wer ta wsm Heat us1 

ARTA erar PACTA ST: wi i 

Wide U GATKUT STSISBTUTSRTRUÓT 0082 Uu 

Her worship is everywhere prevalent in the 
twelve months Vaisakha, etc. When the child gets 


born, on the sixth day Her worship is done in the 
lying-in-chamber and agian on the 21st day (after 
twenty days have passed away) the most auspicious 
worshipful ceremony of Her is performed. The 
Munis bow down to Her with reverence and want 
to visit Her daily. 


rer tact UPAR IZT wanitet i 

yamin U edimvzerdfüzct 83 N 

yathaaya wine WAT | 

gA aera a det wrwefvt usau 

She protects all children always with a mother’s 
affectionate heart. This Sasthi Devi is again the 
part of Mula Prakrti. Then appears the Devi 
Mangala Candika. She goes from one house to 
another, on land or through water or in air, doing 
great good to them; She has come out of the face 
of the Prakrti Devi and is doing always all sorts of 


good to this world. 

aa rmeratdt ur ufrzd: uftaifear i 

yig aads y uss n 

Gaulaert DEKI HGEURE II | 

wRger udaisrmasit adatftara !86 Nu 

Her name is Mangala Candi because She is all 
auspicious at the time of creation and assumes very 
furious angry appearance at the time of destruction. 
So the Pandits say. On every Tuesday in all the 
worlds Her worship is done; and She, when pleased, 
gives to women sons, grandsons, wealth, prosperity, 
fame and good of all sorts and grants all desires. 

eer RUD ded weet fad neat 1 

WATT IT lett HUTA 1187 N 

gnierememqen vot Bafa: | 

TTT WT Ws AAA AAT ss tt 

This Mangala Candi is again the part of Mila 
Prakrti. Now come the lotus-eyed Māhešvarī Kali 
who when angry can destroy all this universe in a 
moment, who sprang from the forehead of the Mala 
Prakrti, Durga to slay-the two Demons Sumbha 
and Nišumbha. She is the half-portion of Durga 
and qualified like Her, fiery and energetic. 


964 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CAIGA ELINE af rA] i 
yam udma spem aa un n 89 N 


wéfufwer edt wen AAR | 
PONT PUTA crore fase: i90 u 
yaaan MAHA weed i 
"Wed datus ea AATA: 97 N 
xut aed: Ga quur: Hisar ARTT | 


antia Td STEHT wp UTA 0 92 Ui 

The beauty and splendour of whose body make 
one think as if the millions of suns have arisen 
simultaneously. Who is the foremost of all the 
Saktis and is more powerful than any of them, Who 
grants success to all the persons, Who is superior 
to all and is of Yogic nature, Who is exceedingly 
devoted to Krsna and like Him fiery, well-qualified, 
and valorous, Whose body has become black by 
the constant meditation of Sri Krsna, Who can 
destroy in one breath this whole Brahmanda, Who 
was engaged in fighting with the Daityas simply 
for sport and instruction to the people and Who, 
when pleased in worship can grant the four fruits 
Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksa. 

wenfafur: Kg BGA: | 

PUTINA AT endi agent 0093 ui 

amer weet wee wether | 

Taree IET wats 0094 UI 

This Kali is also the part of Prakrti. The Devi 
Vasundhara (Earth) is agian the part of Mala 
Prakrti. Brahma and the other Devas, all the Muni 
mandalams (the spheres of Munis), fourteen Manus 
and all men sing hymns to Her. She is the support 
of all and filled with all sorts of grains. She is the 
source of all gems and jewels, She bears in her 
womb all the precious metals. All sorts of best 
things issue from Her. 

werfsrer waster uferar af-aat Ger | 

udhan cw adana 95 ut 

She is the Refuge of all. The subjects and kings 
worhip Her always and chant hymns to Her. All 
the Jivas live through Her and She bestows all sorts 
of wealth and prosperity. 


wur feat watered PTT array 
WHA eser a aren feratur gta: 196 N 
A T SIC cet rene attarftī qi 
varmerédt afgurtt ufefasrg gira 097 N 
Without Her, all this, moving or non moving, 
become void of any substratum. Where to rest on! 
O Child Nàrada! Now hear about them who are 
issued again from the parts of Mila Prakrti as well 
as the names of their wives. I will now narrate duly. 
The Devi ‘Svaha’ is the wife of Agni (Fire), and 
the whole Universe worships Her. 

War ferar pata a PERI gT: ATT: | 

farm agoett a den wea ora 98 0 

"rar fear fe fase wdasd fe Freer 

wan figu ust a uerfini frt: n 99 u 

Without Her, the Devi can never take any 
oblations. Daksinà and Diksa are both the wives 
of Yajfia (Sacrifice). They are honoured everwhere. 
So much so that without Daksina (the fees given 
atthe end of the Sacrifice) no sacrificial ceremonies 
can be complete and fructifying. The Devi 
*Svadhà' is the wife of the Pitrs. All worship this 
Devi ‘Svadha’ whether they are Munis, Manus, or 
men. 

visit igari fà franc vr rar fer à 

vafiedt arguet ufefarsn ufsrat i 100 N 

Mert a uri U Front ep war fera à 

Git: weft afrat wee u101u 

If this mantra 'Svadhà' be not uttered while 
making an offering to the Pitrs, all turn out useless. 
The Devi ‘Svasti’ is the wife of the Vayu Deva; 
She is honoured everywhere in the Universe. 
Without this *Svasti' Devi no giving nor taking 
nor any action can be fructifying and useful. ‘Pusti’ 
(nourishment) is the wife of Ganapati. All in this 
world worship this Pusti Devi. Without this “Pusti’, 
women or men alike all become weaker and 
weaker. 
war ferar fefto: quist enfüdtsfu x i 
ariaueft ARI after area wd i 102 0 


Book IX Chapter 1 


965 


wen frat a WET: MATT Aa: 1 
gmach wats: afta a ATT: 103 u 


result of one’s success), all the blessed people 
honour Her with great reverence. Were it not for 


Tusti (satisfaction, contentment) is the wife of| Her, all the persons in this world would have been 


Ananta Deva. She is praised and worshipped 
everywhere in this world. Without Her no one 
anywhere in the world can be happy. 'Sampatti' is 
the wife of I$àna Deva. The Suras, the men all alike 
worship Her. 

we cient afta fāžu er erar fart | 

oft: attest a aed: ada ufa 104 u 

ad citam adaty ITG TTT fet | 

eared adt yes: ufsrat a snmferam ! 105 i 

Were it not for Her, all in this world would be 
oppressed with dire poverty. The Devi ‘Dhrti’ is 
the wife of Kapila Deva. She is honoured equally 
in all places. Were it not for Her, all the people in 
this world would have become impatient. The 
‘Sati’ Devi is the wife of Satya Deva (Truth.) She 
is endearing to the whole world. 

war frr ATA ayaa: War 1 

Hecht gar redit ferar er TTT i 106 t 

we eite] ada fepe aat fn i 

TTU? ykrar Wr yrn Gua War! 107 U 

"ur fat seed weg A d 

gath diram enifdsi-Tergfsrat 11 108 u 

The liberated ones worship Her always. Were it 
not for the truth loving Sati, the whole world would 
have lost the treasure in friendship. Daya ‘Mercy’ 
endearing to the whole world is the chaste wife of 
*Moha Deva'. She is liked by all. Were it not for 
Her, all the world would have become hopeless. 
The Devi ‘Pratistha’ (fame, celebrity) is the wife 
of Punya Deva (merit). She gives merits to persons 
according as they worship Her. Were it not for Her, 
all the persons would remain dead while living. 
The Devi ‘Kirti’? (fame) is the wife of Sukarma 
(good works). 

war ferar werd aoe yd «e i 

frat qaae er ufsrar aaa i109 N 


Herself a Siddha (one who has acquired the 


dead, devoid of any fame. Kryà (workefforts, 
action, doing) is the wife of “Udyoga’ (enthusiasm). 
All honour Her greatly. 

«rar ferar read fattest a are 1 

aeach freer wr wert UfSTAT 110 N 

aar ferr smear PARTTTA | 

ae eit ar a reri Barefoot i 111 N 

O Muni Narada! Were it not for Her, the whole 
people would be void of any rules and regulations. 
Falsehood is the wife of Adharma (unrighteousness) 
She is honoured greatly by all the cheats that arc 
extant in this world. Were she not liked by them, 
then all the cheats would become extinct. She did 
not fall in the sight of any body in the Satya Yuga. 
Her subtle form became visible in the Tretà Yuga. 

aulas cw gru da daar | 

"ell Tee a ada afte SET 11 1 12 N 

When the Dvapara Yuga came, She became half 
developed. And at last when the Kali Yuga has 
come, She is fully developed and there is no second 
to Her whether in bold confidence and 
shamelessness or in talking much and pervading 
everywhere. 

UA BA UAT wad up Te T2 d 

miade er rf BSA er ufo N 113 N 

"great fot sree AN | 

ener fret arate ahegtemegiretat u 114 u 

aR redd AG mew War | 

With her brother Deceitfulness She roams from 
one house to another. Peace and modesty and 
(shame) are both the wives of good behaviour. Were 
they not existent, all in this world would have turned 
out deluded and mad. Intelligence, genius and 
fortitude, these three are the wives of Jnana 
(knowledge). Had they not lived, every one would 
become stupid an insane. 


yig taei ar enrfssesur WAT 0 115 0 


966 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


wearer a fergie PRET erar Rr i 

ada situer a eteritdftadt at u 116 0 

Marti is the wife of Dharma Deva. She is the 
nature of Beauty to all and very charming. Were it 
not for Her, Paramatman would not get any resting 
place; and the whole universe would have become 
Niralamba (without anything to rest). This Chaste 
Mürti Devi is ofthe nature of splendour, loveliness 
and Laksmi. 

SHOT URSA U ATT ATS raf 1 

At Sarena Prat at Reger u 117 u 

aad reat: urea ra a TA 1 

AU frat ray den ARAE u 118 u 

She is every where respected, worshipped and 
reverenced. ‘Sleep’, the Siddha Yogini, is the wife 
of Rudra Deva, who is of the nature of Kalagni 
(the universal conflagration at the break-up of the 
world). All the Jivas spend their nights with Her. 
The twilights, night and day are the wives of Kala 
(Time) 

mA Aen er viet ebd a regm 1 

afe eire erit rater fert 11 1 19 N 

erst eared speed fret PITT sed 1 

WU Saleen Va 8 STETERIT 0120 N 

If they were not, the Creator even would not be 
able to reckon time. Hunger and thirst are the wives 
of Lobha (covetuousness). They are thanked, 
respected and worshipped by the whole world. Had 
they not lived, the whole world would have merged 
ever in an ocean of anxities. Splendour and burning 
capacily are the wives of Tejas (fire). Without 
these, the Lord of the world could never have 
created and established order in this universe. 

anai far STB ferar a 1 ae: à 

ATRI Ae wears fenfus u121n 

"reat seio ferra Pitti farei 1 

Prat meat TT AT T GBA u 122 u 

Death and old age are the daughters of the Kala, 
and the dear wives of Jvara (the disease). Without 
these, all the creation would come to an end. The 


Tandra (drowsiness, lassitude) and Priti 
(satisfaction) are the daughters of Nidra (sleep). 
And they are the dear wives of Sukha (pleasure). 

"aret cared sierra ferfergar fade 1 

SRI er 3 STE sagt ARRI ufo N 123 N 

They are present everywhere in this world. O 
Best of Munis! Sraddha (faith) and Bhakti (devo- 
tion) are the wives of Vairāgyam (dispassion). For 
then all the persons can become liberated while 
living (Jīvanmuktas). 

"reat grasse Tata | 

arfaferdarmTar er aot a Tai YA: 124 0 

RRs ead ager ferret gg; 1 

IZT qfefatit ward alfa: em: 125 u 

Besides these there is Aditi, the Mother of the 
Gods, Surabhi, mother of cows; Diti, the mother 
of the Daityas; Kadru, the mother of the Nagas 
(serpents); Vinatà, the mother of Garuda, the prince 
of birds; and Danu, the mother of the Danavas. All 
are very useful for the purpose of creation. But 
these all are parts of Mūlā Prakrti. 


HOT SM: fr TETRA ata t | 
Cent eret a dia ddr arf u 126 u 
grs HATA reta a TH i 
are genia afttrgemareīdt i127 1 
IET met Mss tem tt 1 
wegh dm wghrmesenmrü 1128 0 
Fagot He ar Here WIS fieret: | 
CUT AT rer Hat Haran aem 129 N 
GATT ura U aA enaA 1 
ATT GT AMA Saat TA i 1 30 t 
Tent seat Yen aa wera frat 1 
FIAT Area ETT peret! 131 N 
Talat er een qa adt qur i 
Yad acquirer e egrfeidt eremum qom IL 132 u 
maad arahafatiateae TATSUTT | 
verear wfenroft vitam Tad creat: vata 1 1331 
ore ft SSH a enea Heat i 


ani eter xr ferret er eet t 134 i 
varat srt aan waa erdt à 


Book IX Chapter I 


Toren a yaa omae wr 3rfavft u 135 u 
Walaa er gut aT iaa dt à 
aga: Wed: ATŠA TATA mu 136 N 


967 


If any Vipra worships a virgin girl, eight years 
old, with clothings, ornaments and sandalpaste, 
know that he has worshipped the Prakrti Devi. The 


Now I will mention some of the other parts of| best, middling, and worst are all sprung from 
Prakrti. Hear. Rohini, the wife of the Moon, | Prakrti. 


Sarhjiia, the wife of the Sun; Šatarūpā, the wife of 
Manu; Saci, the wife of Indra; Tara, the wife of 
Brhaspati; Arundhati, the wife of Vasistha; 
Anasüyà, the wife of Atri; Devahüti, the wife of 
Kardama; Prasüti, the wife of Daksa; Menaka, the 
mind born daughter of the Pitrs and the mother of 
Ambikà, Lopamudra, Kunti, the wife of Kubera, 
the wife of Varuna, Vindhyavali, the wife of the 
King Bali; Damayanti, YaSoda, Devaki, Gandhari, 
Draupadi, Šaivyā, Satyavati, the chaste and noble 
wife of Vrsabhānu and the mother of Radha; 
Mandodarī; Kaušalyā, Kauravi; Subhadra; Revati, 
Satyabhāmā, Kālindī, Laksmana; Jàmbavati; 
Nāgnajiti, Mitrabinda, Laksana, Rukmini, Sita, the 
Laksmi; Kali, Yojana-gandha, the chaste mother 
of Vyasa, Usa, the daughter of Vana, her 
companion Citralekha; Prabhavati, Bhanumati, the 
Sati Māyāvatī, Renuka, the mother of Parašurāma; 
Rohini, the mother of Balarama, Ekanandā and the 
sister of Sri Krsna, Sati Durga and many other 
ladies are the parts of Prakrti. 

A SS WN: WET: Tat: Wd HEMT: | 

acini ge: AAA atid: 137 u 

Aamann Werder Vara: | 

arent often aa ufagaadt wdt 1138 N 

The village Deities are also the parts of Prakrti 
and all the female sexes, everywhere in the 
Universe are all come from the parts of Prakrti. So 
to insult any woman is to insult the Prakrti. If one 
worships a chaste Brahmin woman, who has her 
husband and son living, with clothing, ornaments, 
and sandal paste, etc., one worships, as it were, 
Prakrti. 

vole: uferar da Seregno: | 

want reet a aaia: 0 139 LI 


ferent aa fenes IATA Uf star | 

wal: IATE SsTHTETTHEXTHT: 11140 0 

Wea HAT: geteng afar: | 

TATA THATS ANT: Wehlfdar: 1 141 

Those women that are sprung from Sattva Guna 
are all very good natured and chaste; those that are 
sprung from Rajo Guna are middling and very 
much attached to worldly enjoyments and do their 
selfish ends and those that are sprung from Tamo 
Gunas are recognised as worst and belonging to 
the unknown families. 

FATRĪTAETA rare ATT: GT | 

ARTA AMARANTA: 1142 U 

giar: Hee yat: Tatar: Herel: 1 

yira eperer aay va TART TTT: 00143 1 

sauter deren: vata: 1 

wd ARa wd wed CUTA 144 u 

They are very scurrilours, cheats, ruining their 
families, fond of their own free ways, quarrelsome 
and no seconds are found equal to them. Such 
women become prostitutes in this world and 
Apsaras in the Heavens. The Hermaphrodites are 
parts of Prakrti but they are of the nature of Tamo 
Gunas. 

wr Wal: VT: geri queri er ANA 1 

VĒ querar gat guthrie i145 u 

we: SPOT Ter arerféram | 

AZT urat Erg easy OFS i 146 N 

Thus I have described to you the nature of 
Prakrti. So in this Punyabhümi Bharata Varsa, to 
worship the Devi is by all means desirable. In days 
past by, the King Suratha worshipped the Mula 
Prakrti Durgà, the Destructrix of all evils. Then 
again Sri Rama Candra worshipped Her when he 
wanted to kill Ravana. Since then Her worship is 


968 


extant in the three worlds. She was first born as 
the honourable daughter of Daksa. 

sms GARA SIT PET SAAT AAT | 

amt w ufensrp Wer Fear 147 u 

aa fanaa west erst ugpafet afer à 

She destroyed the whole hosts of Daityas and 
Danavas. It was She who, hearing the abusive 
words uttered against Her husband at the Yajfia by 
Daksa, Her father, gave up Her body and took up 
again Her birth. She took Her birth in the womb of 
Menaka and got again Pa$upati as Her husband. 

TÄNA vae HOT: Tra KA: 1148 N 

Age! Ta UTA ARS | 

TATA yar RaRa 149 tt 

And of the two sons, Kartika and Gane$a, born 
to Her, Kartika was the ArhSa (part) of Narayana 
and Ganapati was Sri Krsna Himself, the Lord of 
Radha. O Devarsi! After the two sons, Laksmi Devi 
came out of Durgà. Mangala Raja, the King Mars 
first worshipped Her. 

frg eig maae: 1 

mak urgafaat ueni uftufsrat uw 150 U 

AZT WaT qanm: ! 

arà meadh adt sero Utara n151 tt 

waama via dadmgfmugā: 1 

geri ufsrar wen rera ATEA 0152 LI 

Since then, all in the three worlds began to 
worship Her, whether they are Devas or men. The 
King A$vapati first worshipped Savitri Devi; and 
since then the Devas, Munis, all began to worship 
Her. When the Devi Sarasvati was born, the 
Bhagavan Brahma first worshipped Her; next the 
greatest Munis, Devas all began to worship Her. 
On the full moon night of the month of Kartika, it 
was Bhagavan Sri, Krsna, the Highest Spirit, that 
worshipped, first of all, the Devi Radha within the 
Rasa Mandalam the enclosure, within which the 
Rāsa-līlā was performed (the circular dance) in the 
region Goloka. 

vdirefrreart ATT POT TTT | 

rifta tig artrarmia ser: 153 I 


Srimaddevibhàgavatam 


“TAT TUE: YLT ST AAT STAM ēt: | 

wer wenfafda ris: we Yar 154 u 

yaara Rna yfr aaa WET | 

yiri wat det qasta yf 155 u 

Then under the command of Sri Krsna, all the 
Gopas (cow-heards), Gopis, all the boys, girls, 
Surabhi, the queen of the race of the cows, and the 
other cows worshipped Her. So since Her worship 
by the inhabitants of Goloka, by Brahma and the 
the other Devas and the Munis, all began to worship 
ever Sri Radha with devotion and incense, light 
and various other offerings. 

pR qvi cw À | 

ig Cay WOIENTRUUT WATT: 11 156 uU 

yaara Rnt user AT: ET i 

HUA SIT: HT: UAT WT 157 N 

On earth She was first worshipped by Suyajiia, 
in the the sacred field of Bharatvarsa, under the 
direction of Bhagavan Mahadeva. Subsequently, 
under the command of the Bhagavan Sri Krsna, 
the Highest Spirit, the inhabitants of the three 
worlds began to worship Her. The Munis with great 
devotion, with incense, flowers and various other 
offerings worship always the Devi Radha. O Child 
Narada! Besides these, all the other Devis that have 
issued from Prakrti Devi are all worshipped. 


Usa NAGI TĀ U uu YA od 

va à efi ad padzīti vnm u158 

"erri carat a fan sra: siqfiresft 1159 0 
af RRRA ergo? games 


HONS ETT: |1 1 11 
So much so that in the villages, the village 
Deities, in the forests, the forests Deities and in 
the cities, the city Deities are worshipped. Thus I 
have described to you all according to the Sastras 
the glorious lives of the Devi Prakrti and Her parts. 
What more do you want to hear? 

Here ends the First Chapter on the Description of 
Prakrt in the Ninth Book of the Mahapuranam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter II 


969 


CHAPTER II 
On the Origin of Prakrti and Purusa 


ang IATA 

wur opt add di afd wit a 

Raama ater crea ap ui 

were gead maada € | 

wa at ug War aq dafārgmam 2 d 

Narada said: O Lord! I have heard all that you 
said in brief about the Prakrti Devi. Now describe 
in detail. Why the Mila Prakrti Adya Sakti (the 
Prime Force) was created at the very beginning 
before the creation of this world of five elements. 

spar wrufsTeneram wem A wat 1 

ATR arat wid siqfresrfir wi t 3 i 

wet wares Vmtarfātti gu | 

wit eene vid ata WENT 4 di 

How did She, being of the nature of the three 
Gunas, come to be divided into five parts? I desire 
to hear all this in detail. Now kindly describe their 
auspicious births, methods of worship, their 
meditation, their stotras, (praises) Kavacas (the 
mystic syllables considered as a preservation like 
armour) glory and power in detail. 


simrer gara 


Free amer arsit frei enrert feret feet vrer à 

feret itera Pret Fret reiten ga a 5 ul 

ama euet AAAA: | 

ada yafatter aaen wart nen 

Narayana spoke: O Devarsi! The Mula Prakrti, 
of the nature of Maya of Para Brahman is an eternal 
entity (Nitya padārtha) just as the Atman, the 
celestial space (the nabho mandala); Time (Kala), 
the ten quarters, the Universe Egg, the Goloka and, 
lower than this, the Vaikuntha dhàma all are eternal 
things. 

aars TÀ aS eres wat MAT wr Tati 

VARAT 4 fura ur rem KATARĀ 0 7 N 

fort rent tanta: TSi Gaara: | 

fac gar ae ad memet fe a Mae: us N 


"t fé amassen a OE erg cat fan i 

Atman and Prakrti are in inseparable union with 
each other as Fire and its burning capacity, the 
Moon and her beauty, the lotus and its splendour, 
the Sun and his rays are inseparably united with 
each otber. As the goldsmith cannot prepare golden 
ornaments without gold and as the potter cannot 
make earthen pots without earth, so the Atman 
cannot do any work without the help of this 
omnipotent Prakrti. 

AAMT HT STU E VIPAT 19 UI 

Werder: wat fen: VU USD | 

area etat ar vif: uftatfiar t 10 u 

are gts: ufredzmša art T: | 

aa Rma e a HT Wet 013 0 

The letter ‘Sa’ indicates ‘AiSyaryam’ prosperity, 
the divine powers; and ‘Kti’, denotes might, 
strength; and in as much as She is the Bestower of 
the above two, the Mūlā Prakrti is named ‘Sakti’. 
*Bhaga' is indicative of knowledge, prosperity, 
wealth, fame; and in as much as Mula Prakrti has 
all these powers, She is also called ‘Bhagavati.’ 

AAT YH: AAS SCHT p WTA HAT | 

aa eon ea: MERA AGA: 12 0 

And Atman ‘is always in union with this 
Bhagavati Who is all powers, so He is called 
‘Bhagavan.’ The Bhagavan is therefore sometimes 
with form; and sometimes He is without form. 

Note: When Prakrti becomes latent, God is 
without form; with Prakrti manifest, God is with 
form.) 

asad ferent turas atfira: War i 

wa a oui ga uci 13 N 

aayi ase ada Adar | 

adi ded d den wad 14 0 

The Yogis always think of the Luminous Form 
of the Formless Bhagavan and declare Him to be 


970 


all blissful Para Brahma, the God. Though He is 
invisible, the Witness of all, Omniscient, the Cause 
of all, the Giver of everything and of every form, 
yet the Vaisnavas do not say so. The Vaisnavas 
declare how can fire, strength and energy come 
when there is no fiery, strong, energetic Person 
behind it? 

afa da d rer caret fra à 

qmen wur duree UTT 15 n 

awama ded waa | 

ada Gat we fayd Watery 16 0 

feni red ada Nen | 

Therefore He who shines in the centre of this 
fiery sphere is the Para Brahma; He is the Fiery 
Person; He is Higher than the Highest. He is AII 
Will; He is All-Form, the Cause of all cause and 
His Form is Very Beautiful. He is Young; He looks 
very peaceful and loved by all. 


Weerefafaf-ierena-ddfemA NH 018 u 


He is the Highest; and His Blue Body shines 
like new rain-clouds. His two eyes defy the beauty 
of the autumn lotuses in the mid-day; His 


exquisitely nice rows of teeth put all the series of 


pearls in the dark back-ground. 
aniwa a wenturegufüedu | 
Gra aad cep SURTQHESRRUDT | 19 uU 


wserafiafegrérendiaizregenfn 1 

fürs geie TAATA l 20 u 

The peacok's feather is seen on His crown; the 
garland of Malati flowers is suspended from His 
neck; His nose is exceedingly beautiful; the sweet 
smile is always seen on His lips. There is no second 
like Him in showing favour to the Bhaktas. He 
wears yellow clothings, as if the burning fire is 
emanating all round; the flute is seen on both His 
hands, reaching to the knees. His body is decorated 
all over with jewels. 

watani a ade west fem i 

udadyā adaa wang 1211 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 

Ryui fir Raut ffr | 
LAT WT: VARA VATA 022 A 
He is the Sole Refuge of this Universe; the Lord 
of all, omnipotent and omnipresent. No trace of 
deficiency can be seen in Him; He is Himself a 
Siddha (perfect) Purusa; and the foremost of all 
Siddha Purusas; bestows Siddhis to all. The 
Vaisnavas meditate always That Eternal Sri Krsna, 
the Deva of the Devas. 

wengegsurenrftrgmensflRre UL 1 

samt agar wer fae suai 123 N 

VT a ut wal Hor seat | 

ARAA AV WERT: 124 I 

He takes always fully all the fears of birth, old 
age, and all ills and sorrows. The age of Brahmā is 
the twinkling of His eye. That Highest Self, the 
Para Brahma is denominated as Krsna. The word 
‘Krş’ denotes Bhakti to Sri Krsna and the letter 
‘na’ signifies devotion to His service. So He is the 
Bestower of Bhakti and devotion to His Service. 

AKG A: BA HON: asti: | 

gs daad vant dita uw 425 0 

aH: udaerssdt firgaroren ua vii 

WETTER reta fg: Wy: 1-26 0 

Again ‘Krs’ denotes all; everything; and ‘na’ 
signifies the root. So He Who is the Root and 
Creator of all, is $ri Krsna. When He desired, in 
the very beginning, to create this Universe, there 
was nothing then except Sri Krsna; and at last, 
impelled by Kala, (His Own Creation) He became 


ready, in His part, to do the work of creation. 


Wee: AC er Fart SIS € | 

Siet aami afaruisr: qure: 27 N 

at cast wernt eETHTEIRÍ HATATA: | 

anita afta 4 erreuensraformq 28 i 

The Lord, who is All Will, willed and divided 
Himself into two parts, His Left part becoming 
female and His Right part becoming male. Then 
that Eternal One, Who is greatly loving, looked at 
the female, His left part, the Sole Receptacle to 


Book IX Chapter IT 


971 


hold all the contents of love, very lovely to the 
eyes, and looking like the beautiful lotus. 
| 


afrafadetmdagmet uu 

eir anaa "29 

XPORBÍDECTSRTGRTTEPUTHENHT 1 

gurggi gaai wear WAM 0 30 N 

ada Gat meat aaa carci i 

agia Xem UTSIPRHRTW 0 31 Ul 

The loins of this woman defy the Moon; Her 
thighs put the plantain trees quite in the 
background; Her breasts are mistaken for the 
beautiful Bel fruits; flowers are scattered as Her 
Hairs on the head; Her middle part 1s very slender, 
very beautiful to behold! Exceedingly lovely; 
appearance very calm; sweet smile reigning in 
Her lips; side long glances with Her; Her clothing 
is purified by fire; all over Her body decorated 
with gems. 

vara füeidi wed WT | 

GTI AGA a arzaifēfāatitāma u 32 u 

wet fagar Amur | 

mi Rrgērg a emt a faa i 33 N 

Her eyes, also, like the Cakora bird (Greek 
partridge) began to drink incessantly with joy the 
moon beam from the face of Šrī Krsņa, defying, 
as it were, the ten millions of moons. On Her 
forehead there was the dot of vermilion (red-lead); 
over that the dot of of white sandal paste and over 
that was placed the musk. 

ated asm renta fum i 

THRE ww owudi ererenpatq 034 N 

IATE TA LE CIE: WE 

wA runsmrdfāmf 135 

The fillets or braids of hair on Her head are 
slightly curved; this was decorated with Mālatī 
garlands; on Her neck was suspended the necklace 
of gems and jewels and She is always very amorous 
towards Her husband. On looking at Her face, it 
seems that ten millions of moons have arisen at 
once; when She walks, her gait puts (humiliates) 
those of ganders and elephants in shade. 


WEST at TT rei Ta MANTER | 

UAA Eten raSi wem € N36 N 

O Muni! Sri Krsna, the Lord of the Rasa Dance, 
and the Person of Taste in the Rasa Sport, looked 
askance at Her for a while and then catching hold 
of Her by Her hand went to the Rasamandalam 
and began to play the Rasa sport, (the amorous 
pastime). 

aries sm gA 1 

"Wenn gadi ras want fey 037 N 

qa: a a ORAM SY TTA | 

enc atai a PIRTS NAR 38 i 

mai ART: KĀ p YAA | 

Faan sare MAAT R: 13.9 0 

It seemed then the Lord of amorous pastimes 
had become incarnate there and had been enjoying 
the various pleasures of amorous passions and 
desires. So much, that Brahma’s one day passed 
away in that sport. The Father of the Universe, then 
becoming tired, impregnated in an auspicious 
moment in Her womb who was born of His left 
portion. 

mema RRE AES aya € | 

qa aA aa aad AINARA 40 11 

au Aiamaa weder aya € | 

fr:arrarg: weist a a Ag 41 u 

The Prakrti Devi was also tired of the embraces 
of Šrī Krsņa; so after the intercourse, she began to 
perspire and breathe frequently. Her perspiration 
turned into water and deluged the whole universe, 
with water; and Her breath turned into air and 
became the life of all the beings. 

aya yingan | 

AA AT AT: WOT: War SIT u 42 u 

MONSTA: AAA ASAT wp ATA: | 

ayga AGA Bel: MNA UZ A 43 i 

The female that sprung from the left side of Vayu 
became his wife and out of their contact orginated 
Prana, Apana, Samana, Udana and Vyāna, the five 
sons. These are the five vital Vàyus of all the beings. 


972 


Besides these from the womb of the Vayu’s wife 
came out Naga and the other four lower Vayus. 

enideniag aya Meri META, | 

BTA derit aout spa wr u 44 N 

ererarqaurferegfen: HUNT SINT | 

yana manai wards 0045 íi 

The water that came out from perspiration, Varuna 
Deva became the presiding Deity of that; and the 
female, sprung out of the left side of Varuna Deva, 
became the wife of Varuna, called Varunàni. On 
the other hand, the Sakti, of the nature of knowledge 
of Sri Krsna, remained pregnant for one hundred 
manvantaras. Her body became effulgent with 
Brahma-teja (the fire of Brahma). 

grunts AT pergere fra | 

HOUT HIT MAH MAT LAT TAT 1146 N 

IATA a mAs g ue 

ware feret ai ferrets Weg 047 N 

Krsna was her life and She again was dearer to 
Krsna than his life even. She remained always with 
Sri Krsna; so much so that She constantly rested 
on His breast. When one hundred Manvantaras 
passed away, that Beautiful One gave birth to a 
Golden Egg. That egg was the repository of the 
whole universe. 

aea fet a our eat ede equ | 

IMI weh mde Wet 148 N 

FEAT POI Wear erar WAM € | 

yya edt dasreresrut er refer 49 N 

The Beloved of Krsna became very sorry to see 
the egg and out of anger, threw that within the water 
collected in the centre the Universe. Seeing this, 
Sri Krsna raised a great cry and immediately cursed 
Her duly and said: 

UasUed aa cres nagie wr FBT | 

Ta amaaa fu regula Parser 50 N 

a area srfereafea YA: à 

STR T: MARTI Pree: 51 

“O Angry One! O Cruel One! When you have 
forsaken out of anger this son just born of you, I 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


say then that you become from to-day bereft of 
any issue. Besides, let all those godly women that 
will spring out of your parts, they also be deprived 
of having any issue or sons and they will remain 
ever constant in their youth.” 

TAA eat SIETI aa: 1 

ariya pater ypeerauri WATT 11 52 N 

Jaaa Agee 1 

wayae adye 053! 

O Muni! While Sri Krsna was thus cursing, 
suddenly came out from the tongue of the beloved 
of Krsna, a beautiful daughter, of a white colour. 
Her clothings were all white, in her hands there 
were lute and book and all Her body was decorated 
with ornaments made of gems and jewels. She was 
the presiding Deity of all the Sastras. 

HA Hretat a a ÍHETAUT aya € | 

ATTATITA amer afne tee Wear 11 5 4 N 

varin pont fame aya a: | 

aama füspst ameta weis: (55 U 

Some timer later the Müla Prakrti, the Beloved 
of Krsna divided into two parts. Out of Her left 
portion came Kamala and out of her right portion 
came Radhika. In the meantime Sri Krsna divided 
himself into two parts. From his right sidc appeared 
a form two-handed; and from left side appeared a 
form four-handed. 

IATA ATO HOTT CANT ATT TS 

aAa art wen aa ae owfewah 56 N 

we cant a yeah get ATTTTA U | 

aam a ahs area Arti aA: 57 N 

The Sri Krsna addressed the Goddess Speech, 
holding flute in her hand, "O Devi! You follow 
this four-handed Person as his wife' and then spoke 
to Radha: O, Radhe! You are a sensitive, proud 
lady; let you be My wife; so it will do you good’ 
Sri Krsna also told Laksmi gladly to become the 
wife of the four-handed Narayana. Then Narayana, 
the Lord of the world, took both Laksmi and 
Sarasvati to the abode Vaikuntha. 


Book [X Chapter IT 


ZU aa 8d sd Tere | 
TTT UT aa ACs: 0 58 u 
AHA ATT UTT AT AAT R: | 
ag: Sree anite rey AAT: i59 u 


O Muni! Both Laksmi and Sarasvati became 


issueless, being born of Radha. From the body of 
Narayana arose his attendants, all four-handed. 
They were all equal to him in appearance, in 
qualifications; in spirit and in age. On the other 
hand, from the body of Kamala arose millions and 
millions of female attandants all equal to Her in 
form and qualifications. 


aa ITT eit ferent AF 1 

TATA TA AAT AAT: I! 60 Ut 

win @ pia aaa free wq 

mgao: wet aya: under fait: u 61 u 

Then arose innumerable Gopas (cow-herds) from 
the pores of Sri Krsna. They were all equal to the 
Lord of Goloka in form, Gunas, power and age; 
they were all dear to Him as if they were His life. 

Tamremgtat swgüfus-er | 

TEMATA AT: at Verena: aaa: 11 62 N 

TTT TT: VIVA PATA AAT: | 

HATA (T: Wal: TH: MAA TATA I 63 II 

From the pores of Radhika came out the Gopa 
Kanyās (cow-herdesses). They were all equal to 
Radha and all were Her attendants and were sweet- 
speaking. Their bodies were all decorated with 
ornaments of jewels, and their youth was constant, 
they were all issueless as Sri Krsna cursed them 
thus. 

waft fay EI PUTA | 

anda gat ar ferream amat 11 64 u 

O Best of Brahmanas! On the other hand, 
suddenly arose Durga, the Maya of Visnu (The 
Highest Self) eternal and whose Deity was Krsna. 

Note: Durga was the Avatara of Mila Prakrti not 
the Avatara of Radha as Laksmi and Sarasvati were. 


at arany ndanani | 
gauttranit echt wo ATRI UAT: t 65 u 


973 


wat direct cw wenreietsatt i 

WRuvieut Serene Popma t 66 n 

She is Nārāyanī; She is Isani; She is the Sakti 
of all and She is the Presiding Deity of thc 
intelligence of $ri Krsna. From Her have come out 
many other Devis; She is Müla Prakrti and she is 
ĪSvarī; no failings or insufficiencies are seen in Her. 
She is the Tejas (of the nature of Fire) and She is 
of the nature of the three Gunas. 

waar Atfadamgum 1 

SUSETWHWRET HESS 671 

ARTA farerdt wr PET i 

ufaspaizperurar venuunqfügr 068 

Her colour is bright like the molten gold; Her 
lustre looks as if ten millions of Suns have 
simultaneously arisen. She looks gracious always 
with sweet smile on Her lips, Her hands are one 
thousand in number. 

BAVA ATA TTT: AAMT: | 

wd fasafterar cient ART: JA AAT 11 69 N 

advadvert er enrfirart yeaa à 

POA HS amr AMA wr erdt 70 N 

qaqa aaah gaat gaat 1 

aitu artavu Teen auziu 

Various weapons are in all Her hands. The 
clothings of the three-eyed one are bright and 
purified by Fire She is decorated with ornaments 
all of jewels. All the women who are the jewels 
are sprung from Her parts and parts and by the 
power of Her Maya, all the people of the world are 
enchanted. She bestows all the wealth that a 
householder wants; She bestows on Krsna’s 
devotees, the devotion towards Krsna; nay, She is 
the Vaisnavi Sakti of the Vaisnavas. 

wuftag quer a sien g quy a i 

Ol Gal WIES WAST ESTER 0 72 0 

PaT V U$ TT UH A VISTA | 

wdyifensersur a sfrgssit amare 1 73 u 

She gives final liberation to those that want such 
and gives happiness to those that want happiness. 


974 


She is the Laksmi to the Heavens; as well She is 
the Laksmi of every household. 

TATU VATA TR GE HAST | 

ar feat snrard sitaagaftra fiera i 74. u 

"rw tanga Aaen wart i 

RaRa erf ut Hest U ARG 075 U 

She is the Tapas of the ascetics, the beauty of 
the kingdoms of the kings, the burning power of 
fire, the brilliancy of the Sun, the tender beauty of 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


one hundred moons, born with great ease, wearing 
apparel purified by fire and decorated with various 
ornaments praised Krsna, the One and Only Cause 
of the Universe and then took Her seat gladly with 
Her husband in the throne made of jewels. 
wafirsiqt gut fgemsut aga U: | 
amait were afarat mre: 182 N 
wavntcatare: ane: | 


At that time Krsna divided Himself into two 


the Moon, the lovely beauty of the lotus and the |parts; His left side turned into the form of 
Sakti of Sri Krsna the Highest Self. The Self, the | Mahadeva; and his right side turned into the Lord 
world all are powerful by Her Sakti; without Her | of Gopikās (cow-herdesses). The colour and 


everything would be a dreary dead mass. 


ATTUR TEST frst car ara nf: | 
wiifrerssrgfegferartferastearfesfraft 1 76 n 
m a up Wael qune Wm € | 
Tattierai wu wedbowfübyeu 077 u 
Krasi wu Teita uwqdu | 
UTT rus fam ETA n78 N 
O Nārada! She is the seed of this Tree of 
World; She is eternal; She is the Stay, She is 
Intelligence fruits, hunger, thirst, mercy, sleep, 
drowsiness, forgiveness, fortitude, 
bashfulness, nourishment, contentment and lustre. 
The Mila Prakrti praising Sri Krsna stood before 
Him. The Lord of Radhika then gave Her a throne 
to sit. O Great Muni! At this moment sprang from 
the navel lotus the four-faced Brahma, with his 
wife Savitri, an exceedingly woman. 
wise: siuii suf ar: 1 
agiri qe Vada 0879 
GT ag „a GET NANANA | 
SESH  YenquUnqgum N 80 U 
taR wa We Ada | 
sara TTT Brel POA Wat Fat s1 N 
No sooner the fourfaced Brahma, the foremost 
of the Jūānins, fond of asceticism and holding 
Kamandalu in His hand came into being than He 
began to praise Sri Krsna by His four mouths. On 


peace, 


splendour of the body of Mahadeva is pure white 
like white crystal; as if one hundred suns have 
arisen simultaneously. 


Aum ergentat g: 83 ul 
AI NET: Ut: | 
ways aad: 184 1 


Riad Aadha: cud: wunqfe | 

Rufe IET KĀTA, d 85 ! 

In His hands there are the trident. (Tristila) and 
sharp-edged spear (Pattisa); His wearing is a tiger 
skin; on His heads matted hair (Tatà) of a tawny 
hue like molten gold; His body was besmeared all 
over with ashes, smile reigning 1n His face and on 
His forehead, the semi-moon He has no wearing 
on his loins; so He is called Digambara (the quarters 
of the Sky being His clothing); His neck is of a 
blue colour; the serpent being the ornaments on 
His body and on His right hand the nice bead of 
jewels well purified. 

Wawasan ARĪ: TATA | 

Tera sitas KTV i86 N 

Su ATM p aa d 

MAKETS tei t up 87 u 

ug gate d at queis: i 

verfügen Tat wan et: Wc 880 
af SRRA env) games RARA: 11 2 11 


Who is always repeating with His five faces the 


the other hand the Devī Sāvitrī, with a beauty of| Eternal Light of Brahmā, and Who was has 


Book IX Chapter IH 


975 


conquerred Death by praising Sri Krsna, Who is 
of the nature of Truth, the Highest Self, the God 
Incarnate, the material cause of all things and the 
All auspicious of all that is good and favourable, 
and the Destroyer of the fear of birth, death, old 
age and disease and Who has been named 


Mrtyufijaya (the conqueror of Death). This 
Mahadeva took His seat on a throne made of jewels 
(diamonds, emeralds, etc.) 
Here ends the Second Chapter of the Ninth Book on 
the origin of Prakrti and Purusa in the Mahāpurāņam 
Srimaddevii bhagavatam of 18,000 verses by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa 


Book IX Chapter III 


975 


CHAPTER III 


On the Origin of Brahma, Visnu, Mahesa and others 


shane IATA 

aa feat wet sarak MET aa: | 

aa: Howe Veer feet aya Fut N 

Tā Penam yane: à 

aut Tea verser: Usa: spem w 2 N 

Narayana said: O Devarsi! The egg (born of 
Mila Prakrti) that was floating in the waters for a 
period equal to the life period of Brahma, now in 
the fulness of time, separated into two parts. 
Within that egg there was a powerful Child, 
lustrous like one thousand millions of suns. This 
child could not suck mother's milk, as it was 
forsaken by Her. 

für ram ufterent rere ferrem: à 

werten at gaan u3 N 

Legan: GSH amat Set HEAT i 

UAT a PANT: TATA AST (4 di 

So being tired of hunger, the child for a moment 
cried repeatedly. The child that will become the 
Lord of countless Brahmāņdas (universes), now 
an orphan having no father nor mother began to 
looks upwards from the waters. This body came to 
be denominated afterwards by the name of Maha 
Virat, when he became gross and grosser. As there 
is nothing finer than radium so there is nothing 
grosser than Maha Virat. 

AMA enisi GARA UAT: | 

eme wefangerat Were Wa: 5 A 

Teh eir favarts Rana i à 

amer qut teat er Hot aad afe an 6 u 


The power of this Maha Virat one-sixteenth of 
that of $ri Krsna, the Highes Self. But this boy, 
(born of the Prakrti Radhà) is the Sole Stay of all 
this Universe and he is denominated by the name 
"Mahā-Visņu'. In his every pore countless universe 
are existing. So much so that even Sri Krsna could 
not count them. 

Ten dZSTATAĀA forgot A HATTA i 

Gafrenfrardtai AUT wean a fent 1 7 ou 

gfafasdy dete wafaaa: 1 

urarerqsraretesnt Tens wed usu 

If it were possible to count the number of the 
dust particles, it is impossible to count the number 
of the Universe. So there are endless Brahmas, 
Visnus, and Mahešvaras. In every Brahmanda, 
there is Brahma Visnu, and Mahe$a. Each 
Brahmāņda extends from Pātāla to the Brahmaloka. 

ad wed aw dist aaisrafeta a: 1 

Ta Hed xr retten: Wargrentfeutsrt: 9 N 

feret: ARRAS AT GATT | 

madui get daammdga 10 N 

The abode of Vaikuntha is higher than that (ie. 
it is situated outside of Brahmanda), again the 
abode of Goloka is fifty koti yojanas (50x10x4 
x2 million miles) higher than Vaikuntha. This 
Goloka Dhàma is eternal and real as Sri Krsna is 
eternal and real. This world composed of the seven 
islands is surrounded by the seven oceans. 

siage aan a i 

wed wur eiA erret esee: 


Wid i 


976 
Urartu wur sus a | 


Forty-nine Upa-Dvipa (smaller islands adjacent 
to then) are existing here. Besides there are 
countless mountains, and forests. Higher than this 
earth is the Brahmaloka with seven heavens and 


below this are the seven Pātālas. This is the 
bounding limit of Brahmanda. 

d ena speifent acter: TTT 11 12 0 

wd: UT tacit AARAA: | 

Ww: Ue ee: KAA: UC: 013 

ad: wi AEA h ANAN: 1 

wd wd qn a aeaa a N14 I 

Just above this earth there is the Bhürloka; above 
is Bhuvarloka; then Svarloka, then Janarloka, then 
Taparloka, then Satyaloka, and above that is 
Brahmaloka. The splendour of Brahmaloka is like 
that of molten gold. But all the substances whether 
outside or inside this Brahmaloka, are transient. 

aR fassus dunt are 1 

Iga PVG, 15 NI 

Preah Anah greet voa i 

gcn anA weté aha ui) N 

When this Brahmànda (cosmos) dissolves, 
everything dissolves and is destroyed. All are 
temporary like bubbles of water. Only Goloka and 
Vaikuntha are eternal. In every pore of this Maha 
Virāt is existing one Brahmanda (cosmos). 

we RE STAT QUSE GT HAT | 

were were aeaa: 1 17 N 

Ra: enter: ror er AST rt ren | 

Rattersta Rean serait Tees: 018 It 

What to speak of others even Krsna cannot count 
the number of these Brahmandas. In every 
Brahmāņda there is Brahma, Visnu and Maheša. 
O Child Narada! In every Brahmanda, the number 
of the gods is three kotis or 30 millions. Some of 
them are the Dikpatis (the Regents of the quarters); 
some are the Dikpālas (the Rulers of the Quarters), 
some are asterisms, and some planets. 

fa Atay AAS ALTA: | 

ae GTC U Age SBT Ya: YA: U 19 N 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 
février wi fe fadi a a fhaa | 
Riana gaent Ble HT UA: WA: 120 N 


In the Bhirloka, there are four Varnas (Brahmins 


etc.,) and in the Pātālas there are Nagas. Thus the 
Universe exists composed of moveable and non- 
moveable things (this is Brahmanda Vivrti). O 
Narada! Now the Virat Purusa began to look up to 
the skies again and again but He could not see 
anything within that egg except the void. 

wet ma dat und Gort Xue i 

wat east «da ener: Waa 021 ! 

adanaya fab Manang, 1 

aad acted weeny 0 22 ! 

Then distressed with hunger he cried out repeat- 
edly and became merged in anxiety. Next moment 
getting back his consciousness, he began to think 
of Krsna, the Highest Person and saw there at once 
the eternal light of Brahma. He saw there His form 
as deep blue like new rain-cloud; with two hands, 
garment of a yellow colour, sweet smile on His 
face, flute in His hand and He seemed to be very 
anxious to show His Grace to Devotees. 

WEA TAHT (RT HARANA, | 

at Mat gÀ a ate: wtf 423 N 

edt Aas spfeauraríaerfsia: | 

western wa at vum 11 24 N 

Looking at the Lord, His Father, the boy became 
glad and smiled. The Lord, the Bestower of boon 
granted him boons appropriate for that moment ‘O 
Child! Let you possess knowledge like Me; let your 
hunger and thirst vanish; let you be the holder 
innumerable Brahmāņdas till the time of Pralaya 
(the universal dissolution). 


fremit Potada adai usb we | 
wnmgegieiadterfaafetet We n251 
SRT quu nU wr WD TERTA, | 
sā yaaa daimgat um 126 0 
Be without any selfishness, be fearless and the 
bestower of boons to all. Let not old age, death, 
disease, sorrow nor any other ailings afflict thee. 


Book IX Chapter III 


Thus saying He repeated thrice on his ear the six- 
lettered great Mantra ‘Om Krsnaya Svaha’ 
worshipped by the Vedas with their Angas, the 
Giver of desires and the destrover of all troubles 
and calamities. 

paraugi HoT yaa | 

aai arate a adfaetet WU 0 27 ! 

Tisi Grat Talent AFTATATA À fp: | 

gant AMA Prater merit È 28 1 

wfafersd aztāei garā darat aA: d 

ameni ferret feat: deraymen d u 29 u 

O Brahma’s Son! Thus giving the mantra, Sri 
Krsna arranged for his fooding thus: In every 
universe, whatever offerings will be given to Sri 
Krsna, one sixteenth of that will go to Narayana, 
the Lord of Vaikuntha and fifteen-sixteenth is to 
go to this boy, the Virat. 

arrears VI a | 

Waa wa Horr 4 fe fifa 11 30 0 

"erf Ade wet gara at wa: | 

RU Galata dead cents fers qum 1 31 N 

Sri Krsna did not allot any share for Himself. 
Himself transcending all the Gunas, and Full, He 
is always satisfied with Himself. 

ru dai Grat agara yafay: | 

wur faf a at ae cart ul 32 u 

GTA aeri Fear Maret fera fr: à 

wu d srernidrageri WWW 33 UN 

What necessity is there for any further offerings? 
Whatever the people offer with devotion, the Lord 
of Laksmi, the Virat eats all these. Bhagavan Sri 
Krsna giving thus to the Virat the boon and the 
Mantra said: “O Child! Say what more you desire; 
I will give you that instantly.’ 

ah IATA 

att aaa sfera fare | 

wed maag smi ur great u ar 34 N 

The Virat boy, hearing thus the words of Sri 
Krsna, spoke: "O Thou Omnipresent! I have got 
no desires whatsoever, save this that as long as I 


62 


977 


live, whether for a short time or for a long time, let 
me have pure Bhakti towards Thy lotus feet. 

gam ts arate MATL 1 

agfrtitgdg Raa get few: u 35 N 

fe anna ava aaa Ust a 

Ada duet qua disueur 136 N 

GATT Tas start qur | 

TATA wifes ata af Wen 1 37 N 

In this world he is Jivanmukta (liberated whilst 
living) who is your Bhakta; and that bewildered 
fool is dead while living who is devoid of any 
Bhakti to Thee. What needs he to perform Japam, 
asceticism, sacrifice, worship, holding fasts and 
observances, going to sacred places of pilgrimages 
and other virtuous acts if he be without any bhakti 
to Sri Krsna? Vain is his life who is devoid of any 
devotion to Sri Krsna, under Whose Grace he has 
obtained his life and Whom he does not now pay 
homage and worship. 

araara ITS TA rere piaig: | 

"usrrerifer wea asada: AAMT: 038 N 

He is endowed with Sakti as long as Atma (Self) 
resides in his body; no sooner the Atma departs 
from his body all the Saktis accompany him. 

VARA NET Vata WHA: W: | 

RSMY watet Tes: WATT: u39 N 

BARA ATAKA fans a ANE | 

zara Hor: yf nent gga u 40 u 

O Great One! And Thou art the Universal Atman 
(soul) who transcends Prakrti, Who is All will, 
Primeval Person and of the nature of the Highest 
Light. O Child! Thus saying, the Virat boy 
remained silent. 

sigo sara 

gfat qi Rs aasi ca aur spa | 

saisie er rere a AA 41 a 

Sri Krsna then, spoke in sweet words: ‘O Child! 
Let you remain as fresh as ever like Me. You will 
not have any fall even if innmerable Brahmas pass 
away. 


978 


a vires wo asferre WT 1 

varier «er faseast Tft 42 0 

wale sumus wxzreemye di 

Praise aaia geia d n43 n 

Let you divide youself in parts and turn into 
smaller Virats in every universe. Brahma will 
spring from your navel and will create the cosmos. 
From the forehead of that Brahma will spring 
eleven Rudras for the destruction of the creation. 
But they will all be parts of Siva. 

Armada! fayadenaen: i 

qa freres feret Gaiters rfereafer t 44 N 

TTT: werd afara eur | 

aia ate ut frei xau Pare n 45 1 

The Ruler named Kalagni, of these eleven 
Rudras, will be the destroyer of all this Visvas 
(cosmos). Besides, from each of your sub-divisions, 
the Visnu will orginate and that Bhagavan Visnu 
will be Preserver of this Vi$va world. 

Treat Hatta er AA enarererfterem | 

aft eite fas ATT HIT i46 N 

Teal Cacia Tet viet Were F | 

went aghi a ded da dem 47 N 

I say that under my favour you will always be 
full of Bhakti towards Me and so sooner you 
meditate on Me, you will be able to see My lovely 
form. There is no doubt in this; and your Mother, 
Who resides in My breast, will not be difficult for 
you to see. Let you remain here in ease and comfort. 
I now go to Goloka. 


sfterrargaret 

Os ae TES ae finer sm | 

mana eiue apu a fog STUT N 48 N 

TES AM AA TTA A AT | 

Saying thus Sri Krsna, the Lord of world 
disappeared. Going to His own abode He spoke 
instantly to Brahma and Sankara, skilled in the 
works of creation and destruction: "O Child 
Brahma! Go quickly and be born in parts from the 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


navels of each of the smaller Virats that will arise 
from the pores of the Great Virāt. 

avr a aera wet a gÈ au 49 u 

STRAT Vat sert PTA fett: ga: à 

wa GET d Aca Aras Aaaah: 50 n 

O Child Mahadeva! Go and be born in parts from 
the forehead of each Brahma in every universe for 
the destruction of the creation; (but be careful that 
you not forget) and perform austerities for a long, 
long time. O Son of the Creator Brahma!’ Thus 
saying, the Lord of the Universe remained silent. 
Brahma and Siva, the auspicious, bowing to the 
Lord went to their own duties. 

maa eie weredterh web | 

aya a fares Aaria AHA 570 

VATA Bar diam: STATA srereqan | 

suger: waaren faseadt wma: 052 N 

On the other hand, the Great Virāt that lay 
floating in the waters of the Brahmànda sphere, 
created from his every pore cach smaller Virat. That 
youth Janárdana of the form of the Great Cosmos, 
wearing yellow garment of the bluish-green colour 
of the Durba grass, lay sleeping pervading 
everywhere. 

waren MET aya AAA: | 

aya wards wp AMM YARRA 0053 N 

Ald ST SST UST TAT: | 

ATTTSTET et ware ferar frat Ta 1 54 i 

TT qnd qut PUTT ATAT | 

Brahma took his birth in His navel. He, then, 
after his birth, began to travel in that navel-lotus 
and in the stem of the lotus for one lakh yugas. But 
he could not find out the place whence the lotus or 
its stem had sprung up. O Narada! Then your fa- 
ther became very anxious and came back to his 
former place and began to meditate the lotus feet 
of Sri Krsna. 

art cast at ad cama feet 55 i 

VA IRT ST AES THAT | 

wet gas dqepd unfer 156 u 

st rfr ires wraiths | 


Tamga at un aa: US wen a: 57 1 


Book IX Chapter IV 


979 


Then, in meditation, with his intropective eye, 
he first saw the small Virat, then the endless great 
Virat lying on the watery bed, in whose pores the 
universes are existing and then he saw the God Sri 
Krsna in Goloka with Gopas and Gopis. He then 
began to praise the Lord of Goloka when He 
granted boons to your father, and he began to do 
the work of creation. 

aygdemm: Yat MAN: HIRA: 

1) N58 

aya Ure AA RISUS armurgdd: | 

AGUAS MTA aA Taa, ! 59 1 

From the mind of your father, were born first 
Sanaka and other brothers and then from forehead 


eleven Rudras sprang. Then from the left side of 


that small Virat lying on the bed of waters, the 
four-handed Visnu Bhagavan, the Preserver of the 
Universe, came. He went to Svetadvipa, where he 
remained. 

aaa ATE a sar fayd wast «1 

vent wet wr uraret fareitent FERTETA 11 60 ut 


wd wdeimpü favi ARNE wd 

wfifasa gafrragarfrendrarga: 61 0 

Then your father became engaged in creating 
this Universe, move able and non-moveable, 
composed of three worlds, heaven, earth and Pātāla, 
in the navel of that small Virāt Purusa. O Narada! 
Thus from the pores of that great Virāt each 
universe has sprung and in every universe there is 
one small Virat, one Brahma, one Visnu and one 
Siva and others. 

gad aftd sgreporreaitd-t rw i 

wu Ward walsh spar: sigfiresfi 1 62 u 
af MaR merge) AIREA TAS eT: 1 3 11 

O Best of twice born! Thus I have described thc 
glories of Krsna, that give exceeding pleasure and 
Moksa. Now say what more you want to hear? 

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Nineth 
Book on the Origin of Brahma, Visnu 
and Mahesa and others in the Mahapuranam 
Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa 


Book IX Chapter IV 


979 


CHAPTER IV 
On the Hymn, Worship and Kavaca of Sarasvati 


ARE gara 

api wed un quí careret | 

AQT Wad a aed ala WSPTN 01 o 

T: UT Hat Hat Het Wed Waray i 

Cha OT OPA GAT AT HA HT AT ETT AT u 2 A 

wat vetat er tard er ward afit sra 

rfr: Heat AN GT ATTA 0 3 ui 

Narada said: By your Grace I have heard 
everything very sweet like nectar, of the origin of 
things. Now may I ask you which Devi of these 
five Prakrti has been worshipped by what Mantra? 
and by whom? How has each of them been 
praised? and by whom? How has the worship of 
their Mürtis (from) become prevalent in this 
world? What are the Stotram (hymn of praise), the 


Dhyàna (meditation) glory and life of these? Also 
what sort of boon do each of the Devis grant? and 
to whom? Kindly describe all those in detail. 
siaran sara 

miya ent Ter agh: rect | 

aii er ffa watt: wae T N 4 N 

anai WaT yR a IATA: TGT: | 

gard a ouftd adage usu 

Narayana said: O Child! Durga, the mother of 
Gaņeša, Radha, Laksmi, Sarsavati and Savitri, 
these are the five Prakrtis sprung directly from 
Mila Prakrti. The methods of their worship, 
wonderful glorious acts, excellent stotrams, and 
their lives, inculcating good to all, and sweet like 
nectar are all widely written in the Vedas, 


980 


Puranas, Tantras and other Šāstras. So there is no 
need to described them here again. 

Wea: TA ATi a at YI | 

ad warf d aeran Prema 6 n 

alot AGA WET UBI WgerefUscr | 

Geet mener Frat ver Tatar er afán 11 7 n 

Now I am describring in detail the auspicious 
characters of these that are sprung from the parts 
and Kalas of the Prakrti. Hear attentively. Kālī, 
Vasundhara, Ganga, Sasthi, Mangala Candika, 
Tulasi, Manasā, Nidrā, Svaha, and Daksiņā, these 
are the parts of Prakrti. 

ifr att grad afar 1 

hamda wp ter eam ATT d 8 i 

gatarda ween fanof atte meu 1 

By and by I will desctibe, briefly, the merit- 
giving characters, and pleasant to hear. Along with 
these I will describe the Karmas of the Jivas, and 
the great exalted lives of Durga and Radha. I am 
now describing Sarasvati’s character. 

agaaga deta: TOT NO N 

erat arcadia sites farferftar à 

GARAS wu safes dfc: u100 

Hear, O Muni! Sri Krsna introduced first in this 
Bharata, the worship of the Devi Sarasvati, the 
holder of Vinà in Her hands, under whose 
influence, the hearts of illiterate stupid persons 
become illumined with knowledge. 

afai vé Salt eror: TATŪ: à 

sau wt enr erat Hetero 1 0 

au fara card uda: We Hu | 

agara fed wei wRUTH WWE 11 12 i 

The amorous Devi Sarasvati sprang from the 
end of the lips of Radha and so she desired to marry 
Krsna out of amorous feelings. Sri Krsna, the 
controller of the hearts of all, know it instantly and 
addressed the Mother of the people in true words 
proper to Her and beneficial to Her in the end. 


sigon sara 
wa ament ata Hest a erg sion | 
gari dat udg c AAT 13 N 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


aS GATT ATA GATT | 

mifltdaderaud cfremeiqartveu 14 i 

O Chaste One! The four-armed Nārāyaņa is born 
from My parts; He is young, of good features and 
endowed with all gualifications; so much so, he is 
like Me. He is a Knower of amorous sentiments of 
women and He fulfils those desires; what to speak 
of His beauty, ten millions of the God of love are 
playing in His body. 

cate Hit a Ut Heart ale LATS! | 

Tat arad ter at ws srfenerfer 11 15 N 

"rae srerarearfür TASHA vfard ATA: 1 

weet wire ufe xem u16! 

O Beloved! And if you desire to marry and 
remain with Me, that will not be of any good to 
you. For Rādhā is near to Me; She is more powerful 
than you. If a man be stronger than another, be can 
rescue one who takes his shelter; but if he be 
weaker, how can he then, himself weak, protect 
his dependant from others. 

wer: MAMTA SS (EIE STÉERTHRER: | 

ATA ATA AT M WITT V AA WE 0017 N 

msaga er rore V K: ATT: | 

Worthy ra: ya: entere ram 11 1 8 N 

Though I am the Lord of all, and rule all, yet I 
cannot control Radha. For She is equal to me in 
power, in beauty, in qualifications, equal to Me in 
every respect. Again it is impossible for Me to quit 
Radha for She is the presiding Deity of My life. 
Who can relinquish life? Though a son is very dear 
to his father, still it may be questioned, is he dearer 
than his father’s life? 

vd ug Tes Wed qe vs wf 1 

ufi aisat que Aiga fert qun 11 19 i 

Angana aaa 1 

THAT CATT HAA KŪTT AAE 20 ul 

So, O Auspicious One! Go to the abode 
Vaikuntha; you will get your desires fulfilled there. 
You will get for your husband the Lord of 
Vaikuntha and you will live ever in peace and enjoy 


Book IX Chapter IV 


happiness Though Laksmī is residing there yet like 
you she is not under the control of lust, anger, greed, 
delusion and vanity. 

TAT Atel aar tear ya wameafet | 

Tike a gige after gant 27 1 

prafageg «ri gari Medi tiara à 

"rer yraa ferent wr alt 22 0 

maa wat dat Weis YAT: | 

She is also equal to you in beauty; qualities, and 
power. So you will live with her in great delight 
and Hari, the Lord of Vaikuntha, will treat both of 
you equally. Moreover, I say this in particular that 
in every universe, on the fifth day of the bright 
fortnight of the month of Magha, every year, the 
day when the learning is commenced, a great 
festival will be held and men, Manus, Devas, and 
the Munis desirous of liberation. 

aaa attra: fag ann terdtrerat: 023 0 

"giu afta Hed Het erurafi i 

AKTA STA A UTTAR TSM u 24 i 

UAT Ha LETA BIA | 

Vasus, Yogis, Nagas, Siddhas, Gandharvas, 
Rāksasas all will perform your worship with 
devotion in every Kalpa till the time of Maha 
Pralaya comes. All are required to be Jitendriya 
(having their senses under control) and Samyami 
(concentrating his mind, and with a religious vow) 
and they will invoke Thee on a jar or on books and 
then meditate according to what is stated in the 
Kanva Sakha of Yajurveda and then worship and 
sing hymns to Thee. 

Rafa: dans ue a qerassfüw 25 N 

gem go feof attt aeraft 

mad a metered he er ufa ast 126 n 

Thy Kava (an armour; a mystical syllable € & 
considered as a presevative like armour) is written 
on the bark of the Bhürja tree and then with eight 
kinds of scenls mingled with it is placed within a 
golden nut or ring named Māduli) and then hold 
on the neck or on the right arm. 


981 


unii a aga: yA er feret à 

BoM THAT at eat aa TAT u 27 u 

ade azgdatranrara: 1 

atas enter pr: WAA: 128 1 

wd daru Yael ya ates: | 

aya yha treat wee: anad 129 n 

The learned should recite Thy Stotras during 
worship. Thus saying, the Param Brahma Sri Krsna 
Himself worshipped the Devi Sarasvati. Since then, 
Brahma, Visnu, Maheša, Ananta Deva, Dharma, 
Sanaka and other Munindras, all the Devas, Munis, 
all the kings and all the human beings are 
worshipping the Devi Sarasvati. O Narada! Thus 
the worship of the Eternal Devi is made extant in 
the three worlds. 

ANG Sara 

yrfa ad cart wf Prt i 

Wege Geb gad a wastes 30 

wa Aafaa ste std quet wu | 

add ead nakai Arga 131 i 

Narada said: O Chief of the Knowers of the 
Vedas! Now describe to me the methods of wor- 
ship, Dhyana, Kavacam, hymns, the appropriate 
offerings of the Puja flowers, sandalpaste and 
other good things necessary in these worships and 
which are so sweet to hear. J am ever very eager 
and anxious to hear these. 


sianar sara 


HU ANS AVA HATE HATHA | 

WAT: Vaca: yaaan aT 32 N 

MAI ITU feremiurtentsf = i 

udfā wwe Art cafe dan: gro: 33 N 

Narayana said: O Narada! I am now stating the 
method of worship of the Devi Sarasvati, the 
Mother of the Worlds, according to Kanva Sakha 
of the Yajurveda. Hear. On the day previous to the 
fifth day of the bright fortnight of the month of 
Magha or the day of commencement of education, 
the devotee should control his senses, concentrate 
his mind and take his bath. 


982 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


ear ram: Heal Te MATA sifed: | (root), Mula, ginger, ripe plantains, excellent Bel 


raiar aaka YA: 034 0 
gi qina aetssitei waa i 
SORT ARTTA CITAM ATA Jau 35 N 
eurer YA: Net garda | 
'Then he is to perform his daily duties and instal 
the jar (Ghata) with devotion and according to the 
Mantras of the Kanva Šākhā or the Tantra, as the 
case may be. He is to worship first on that Ghata 
(jar) Ganapati (Gaņeša), then meditate the Devi 
Sarasvati as described below, invoke Her and 
again read the Dhyàna and then worship with 
Sodašopacāra (sixteen good articles offered in the 
worship). 
Wap weg dafraftay 036 N 
anà ater arfenferereeftet remm à 
O Good One! Now I am speaking, according to 
my knowledge, about the offerings as ordained in 
the Vedas or Tantras. 
«Tert afer afr m9 anaga t 37 u 
suf xpi vagi mr | 
Taftīd NA ITT TTT li 38 1 
ARAA Vers VIETA | 
gaduadgad wfüwure aatfer u39u 
warmest fus gadaa | 
fürs Taara VARETU 1 40 N 
Gari a aye first a qatar | 
Ath agah HAS YMAR 47 1 
Wasiwre are ie euren | 
arene arate Yat er RTI II 42 i 
Hear. Fresh butter, curd, thickened milk, rice 
freed from the husk by frying, sweetmeats (Til 
Laddu) prepared of Til, sugar cane, sugarcane juice, 
nice Gud (molasses), honey, svastik, sugar, rice 
(not broken) out of white Dhana, cipitak of table 
rice (Alocal), white Modaka, Harvisyanna prepared 
of boiled rice with clarified butter and salt, Pistaka 
of wheaten flour, Paramanna with ghee, nectar like 
sweetmeats, cocoanut, cocoanut water, Svastik 
Pistaka, Svastik and ripe plantain Pistaka, Kaseru 


fruit, the jujube fruit, and other appropriate white 
purified fruits of the season and peculiar to the place 
are to be offered in the Püja. 

gid yangi «wr qriti Secret | 

"did Yate wr viu a Gat w 43 N 

reat E YRT peregri er TOT | 

Grava it cart ARTEL ARER 44 u 

O Narada! White flowers of good scent, white 
sandalpaste of good scent, new white clothes, nice 
conchshell, nice garlands of white flowers, nice 
white necklaces, and beautiful ornaments are to be 
given to the Devi. I say now the Dhyanam sweet 
to hear, of the Devi Sarasvati according to the 
Vedas, capable to remove errors! Hear. 

aae NET wea | 

Mai yerani afarat ARTA 4s i 


ITT LIEN 

gūti gartdatrardrarfāfr: 147 N 

ae wat dfeat a AIAMAMĀ: | 

Ve Sareea I eT Ve Sea AAT: 148 N 

I hereby bow down to the Devi Sarasvati, of a 
white colour, of a smiling countenence and 
exceedingly beautiful, the lustre of whose body 
overpowers that of the ten millions of Moons, 
whose garment is purified by fire, in whose hands 
there are Vina and books, who is decorated with 
new excellent ornaments of jewels and pearls and 
whom Brahma, Visnu, Mahešvara and the other 
Devas Munis, Manus and men constantly worship. 
Thus meditating the Devi, the intelligent persons 
should offer all articles, after pronouncing the root 
Mantra. 

de wad ger usag d 

aot daeh Wut freafrat ga 49 n 

ferais a att weet cartes | 

adai wet a ARAA 50 


Then he is to hymn and hold Kavaca and make 


Book IX Chapter IV 


983 


Sāstānga pranamas before the Devi. O Muni! Those 
whose Devi Sarasvati is the presiding Deity, are 
not to be spoken of at all (7.e., they will naturally 
do all these things and with a greater fervour). 
Besides all should worship the Devi Sarasvati on 
the day of commencement of education and evety 
year on the Sukla Paficami day of the month of 
Magha. The eight-lettered Mantra, as mentioned 
in the Vedas is the root Mantra of Sarasvati. (Aim 
Klim Sarasvatyai namah). 

aot drtgagīt ar dat a HT Wa Ww | 

mad aged afe ww ou511 

ererfiarerfaeh da isi eared: i 

Or the Mantra to which each worshipper is 
initiated is his Mülamantra (not Mantra). Or 


uttering the Mantra ‘Srim Hrim Sarasvatyai} 


Svāhā, one is to offer everything to the Devi 
Sarasvati. This Mantra is the Kalpa Vrksa (1.c., the 
tree yields all desires). 

vr ANT area qur 152 Ji 

veal wait ya cw wm 1 

qà a DIG Gent gerd 53 1 

ziad mi dt argudā Yet | 

girà ad get sm set 154 1 

ameina mentada dttaafreit i 

faie eel Ad ewrspgra tf u55 i 

Narayana, the ocean of mercy, gave in ancient 
times, this very Mantra to Valmiki in the holy land 
Bharata Varsa on the banks of the Ganges; next 
Bhrgu gave this Mantra on the occasion of solar 
eclipse to Maharsi Šukrācārya on the Puskara 
Tirtha; Marica gave to Brhaspati on a lunar eclipse; 
Brahma gave to Bhrgu in the Badarikā Arama; 
Jaratkaru gave to Astika on the shore of the Ksiroda 
ocean; Vibhāņdaka gave this to the intelligent 
Rsyašrūga on the Sumeru mountain. 

fra: HuTeqaa emma ware 1 

yira VIRAFATA TA TTT fU 56 11 

we: wia da ARESTA tita 1 

ad mera: Kad afda 057 0 


Šiva gave this to Kaņāda and Gautama, Sūrya 
gave to Yajfiavalkya and Kātyāyana, Ananta Deva 
gave to Panini, to the intelligent Bharadvaja and 
to Šākatāyana in Bali's assembly in the Pātāla. 

USA us: first vege | 

"fa RITARTET fà graut ae 11 58 t 

mat spp feni ari Mar WD 1 

Raes Ayai apre citm 159 u 

If this Mantra be repeated four lakhs of times, 
all men attain success. And when they become 
Siddhas with this Mantra, they become powerful 
like Brhaspati. In past times, the Creator Brahmà 
gave a Kavaca named Višvajaya to Bhrgu on the 
Gandhamādana Mountain. I now speak of that. 
Hear. 


Aeraafāgi se wearer | 

nda adean wader, wduf 160 0 

AMA wad ae fases wat 1 

amaai mur agedad wT U61 N 

Once on a time Bhrgu asked Brahma the Lord 
of all, and adored by ail, thus: ‘O Brahman! Thou 
art the foremost of those that know the Vedas; there 
is none equal to thee in matters regarding the 
knowledge of the Vedas; (so much so that there is 
nothing that is not known to thee; for all these have 
sprung from thee). Now say about the Visvajaya 
Kavaca of the Devi Sarasvati, that is excellent, 
without any faults and embodying in it all the 
properties of all the Mantras. 

agrara 

sy ara Watt Hart Utara | 

st rfe spera TTA v 62 1i 

Sed quus AAR mal gara a | 

Tava fayat wa d wads 0163 u 

Brahma said: O Child What you have asked 
about the Kavaca of Sarasvati that is sweet to hear, 
ordained and worshipped by the Vedas, and the 
giver of.all desired fruits, now hear of that. In the 


984 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


very beginning, the all-pervading Šrī Krsņa, the 
Lord of the Rasa circle, mentioned this Kavaca to 
me in the holy Brndàvana forest in the abode 
Goloka at the time of Rasa in Rasa Mandala. 
ada weft a Pegga Ung | 
AYA AAA ad SHE 64 Il 


had cinia l 

riya qwe uem ndg: u66 n 

This is very secret; it is full of holy unheard, 
wonderful Mantras. Reading this Kavaca and 
holding it (on one’s arm) Brhaspati has become 
foremotst in matters of intelligence; by the force 
of this Kavaca Šukrācārya has got his ascendancy 
over the Daityas; te foremost Muni Valmiki has 
become eloquent and skilled in language and has 
become Kavindra and Svayambhuva Manu; 
holding this Kavaca he has become honoured 
everywhere. 

aura ien: GUA: UOT: RETTA: | 

Wet MAT Taga CAT: HIATT: TANT |1 67 N 

gar draferami a yee T | 

THN VITA AIGUTA: ATA | 68 I 

Kaņāda, Gatama, Kaņva, Pāņini, Šākatāyana, 
Daksa, and Kātyāyana all have become great 
authors by virtue of this Kavaca; Krsņa Dvaipāyana 
Veda Vyāsa made the classification of the Vedas 
and composed the eighteen Purāņas. 

waa tadi aBa UTT: | 

AT USAT GIT MARAR U: 69 N 

PREITY IETVARA! dACTETAT i 

site darva gear ads OST: 11 70 N 

Šātātapa, Samvarta, Vasistha, Parāšara nd 
Yajfiavalkya had become authors by holding and 
reading this Sarasvati Kavaca. Rsyašrnga, 
Bharadvaja, Āstika, Devala, Jaigisavya, and Yayāti 
all were honoured everywhere by virtue of this 
Kavaca. 


ARTA fx efus pamatā: | 
Tad dau ged saat ymaa N 71 0 


rdarauftgrmaatdamay a |1 

maag a wary fafrart: waia: 1172 u 

O Dvija! The Prajapati Himself is the Rsi of 
this Kavaca; Brhati is its Chanda; and Šāradā 
Ambika is its presiding Deity. Its application 
(Viniyoga) is in the acquisition of spiritual 
knowledge, in the fruition of any desires or 
necessities, in composing poems or anywhere 
wheresoever success is required. 


aft St rica carer Port A arg wea: 1 
sfraneaant varer siet 3 wdarsemqg 173 N 
3 Bt wert varifer sip ung PRT 1 

So MB Ta eger eter A ASAT 074 0 
Cat amaia eer amat 3 waren i 

al frene tater U8 asagn 7 5 NI 
EE E RII Scrat MATSAg | 
Ama vat wu dió nasag u76 N 
3 At St arg À tat hei ESTE EEG | 

3 Sl ente CAT A ATTY 77 u 
So St freres water Fag aa | 

So Gt aet air vare WH ever Karsā g 11 78 N 
do wdeuüferanra ungui wars | 


3 wnftresrqqod vere Wa Masa ! 79 NI 

May Srim Hrim Sarasvatyai Svāhā protect fully 
my head; Srim Vāgdevatāyai Svaha, my forehead; 
On Hrim Sarasvatyai Svaha, my ears always Om 
Srim Hrim Bhagavatyai Sarasvatyai Svaha always 
my eyes; Aim Hrim Vāgvādinyai Svāhā, always 
my nose; Om Hrim Vidyādhisthātrī Devyai Svāhā, 
my lips always; Om Srim Hrim Brahmyai Svāhā 
my rows of teeth; Aim, this single letter protect 
my neck; Om Srim Hrim my throat; Srim, my 
shoulders, Om Hrim Vidyādhisthātrī Devyai 
Svaha, always my chest; Om Hrim Vidyadhi 
Svarüpayai Svaha my navel, Om Hrim Klim 
Vanyai Svaha my hands; Om Svarvavarnatmi 
Kayai Svāhā my feet; and let Om Vāgadhisthā- 
tridevyai Svāhā protect all my body. 

a% uddrsarftri Kamēr LESE | 

do Threats varerfeafafor vang 11 80 N 


Book IX Chapter V 

Sot Sf act KĀ gÀ CATT | 

aad iaasa uf at watsag si ut 

TE off mart tat Askari udarsa | 

oo U Remak AÀ tare ni aesa u 82 N 

So Walters TAT ARTE At NAIS A | 

SoU oft gett merar AÀ Kamēr ATS AG 1 83 1 

V weyrexarirat RIA NTS AKT | 

So Bt udyan Tater ated warseng |1 84 t 

e qerasarerat aese At wars i 

3 TAUTĀ armen AI weiss ! 85 i 

Let ‘Om Sarvakaņthavāsinyai Svāhā protect my 
East; Let Om Svarvajihvagravasinyai Svaha, the 
South-east; Om Aim Hrim Srim Klim Sarasvatyai 
budhajananyai Svāhā, my South; Aim Hrim Srim, 
this three-lettered Mantra my South-west; Om Aim 
Jihvāgravāsinyai Svāhā, my West; Om 
Svarvambikayai Svaha, my North west; Om Aim 
Srin Klin Gadyavāsinyai Svāhā my North; Aim 
Sarvašāstra vāsinyai Svaha, my North-east; Om 
Hrīm Sarvapūjitāyai Svaha, my top; Hrim 
Pustakavasinyai Svāhā my below and let ‘Om 
Grantha bijasvarupáyai Svāhā protect all my sides. 

sfa a attīd faa aeiae, | 

Be fags ATA wed THI 186 ! 

Wu pb tremendo iena | 

We Tea VARI - HEART n 87 U 

O Narada! This Vi$vajaya Kavaca of the nature 
of Brahma and its embodied Mantra I have now 
spoken to you. I heard this before from the mouth 
of Dharma Deva in the Gandhamadana mountain. 


985 


Now I speak this to you out of my great affection 
for you. 

T fatiagerctanraret: | 

uma deni Hat mAg: ss i 

uanga Ag g Mari E 

"fe eagna gaa wa ! 89 N 

But never divulge divulge this to anybody. One 
is to worship one’s spiritual Teacher (Guru Deva) 
according to due rites and ceremonies with 
clothings, ornaments, and sandalpaste and then fall 
down prostrate to him and then hold this Kavaca . 
Repeating this five lakhs of times, one gets success 
and becomes a Siddha. 

Tear adige Acree waa i 

Vaita ae sīļu HAT Waa: 190 n 

zd a wUaymateh Hat efe gÀ | 

miaa a eat a det IRT 91 N 
efr edid mero? THY AMS EAT: 11 4 11 

The holder of this Kavaca becomes intelligent 
like Brhaspati, eloquent, Kavindras, and the 
conqueror of the three worlds, no sooner one 
becomes a Siddha in this. In fact, he can conquer 
everything by virtue of this Kavaca . O Muni! Thus 
I have described to you this Kavaca according to 
Kāņva Sakha. Now I am speaking about the method 
of worship, Dhyana and the praise of this Kavaca . 
Hear. 

Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Ninth Book on 
the hymn, worship and Kavaca of Sarasvati Devi in 
Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter V 985 


CHAPTER V 


On Sarasvati Stotra 
starrer gara Stotra (hymn) of Sarasvati Devi, yielding all 
amaaa: wed saat wearer I desires that Yajfiavalkya, the best of the Rsis recited 
enphraigeesut da „era at aT ouod od in days of yore to Her. The Munis Yajfiavalkya 
Ferner a gam SIG € | forgot all the Vedas out of the curse of Guru and 
wer TA gaat terest YAA u2 N with a sad heart went to the Sun, the great merit- 


Narayana said: O Narada! I now describe the) giving place. 


986 


agra waar wa eter afore | 

aera wa wea ete a gig: 430 

ws umm wá dama | 

sara wife ardt waren er IATA ! 4 N 

areara ditare sucer wenn U: | 

YA: TTU Geta AAA: 15 M 

There he practised austerities for a time when 
the Lolākhya Sun became visible to him, when, 
being overpowered by great sorrow, he began to 
cry repeatedly; and then he sang hymns to him. 
Then Bhagavan Sürya Deva became pleased and 
taught him all the Vedas with their Angas (limbs) 
and said: “O Child! Now sing hymns to Sarasvati 
Devi that you get back your memory.” Thus saying, 
the Sun disappeared. The Muni YAjfiavalkya 
finished his both and with his heart full of devotion 
began to sing hymns to the Vag Devi, the Goddess 
of Speech. 


UMA SAT 

gui ge wanana Kadam | 

yema aed a gR 6 N 

smi afe ft fat wis forense à 

tandai a gr quart 7 ou 

yai warrant vr PATI gram i 

aa wd gamay uc wm "8 

Yajfiavalkya said: "Mother! Have mercy on me. 
By Guru’s curse, my memory is lost; I am now 
void of learning and have become powerless, my 
sorrow knows no bounds. Give me knowledge, 
learning, memory, power to impart knowledge to 
disciples, power to compose books, and also good 
disciples endowed with genious and Pratibha 
(ready wit). So that in the council of good and 
learned men my intelligence and power of 
argument and judgment be fully known. 

wert seat a Heit gaat Ya: | 

SHEET aT tam wart 9 d 

wdferenfererdt ar eret amit At TA: 1 

Amii aftra wz tou 


Whatever I lost by my bad luck, let all that come 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


back to my heart and be renewed as if the sprouts 
come again out of the heaps of ashes. O Mother! 
Thou art of the nature of Brahma, superior to all; 
Thou art of the nature of Light, Eternal; Thou art 
the presiding Deity of all the branches of learning. 
So I bow down again and again to Thee. O Mother! 
The letters Anusvara, Visarga; and Candrabindu 
that are affixed, Thou art those letters. 

qafasi ur adt eret sfr mt TA: 1 

STEMS RMT ar edt referer 11 u 

aar ferr VATA A ad TAT | 

TTT IT TY ST AA AM: 12 N 

So obeisance to Thee! O Mother! Thou art the 
exposition (Vyakhya) of the Sastras; Thou art the 
Presiding Deity of all the expositions and 
annotations. Without Thee no mathematician can 
count anything. So Thou art the numbers to count 
time; Thou art the Sakti by which Siddhantas 
(definite conclusions) are arrived at; Thus Thou 
dost remove the errors of men. 

Agian um wet et AAA: | 

mhoran RaRa fuut i 13 t 

MTA TTT or eet ATA: | 

TAHA TENT At US TA 414 N 

So again and again obeisance to Thee. O 
Mother! Thou art the Sakti, memory, knowledge, 
intelligence, Pratibha, and imagination (Kalpana). 
So I bow down again and again to Thee. 
Sanatkumāra fell into error and asked Brahma for 
solution. 

aya yras figi aden: 1 

Tansy SRTSTSTOHT sftp St: 15 i 

He became unable to solve the difficulties and 
remained speechless like a dumb person. Then Sri 
Krsna, the Highest Self arriving there, said: ‘O 
Prajapati! Better praise and sing hymns to the 
Goddess of speech; then your desires will be 
fulfilled.’ 

sara a a at vifa arvffirgi waa | 

T Tala wi AA AAA WAIT: 016 N 


Book IX Chapter V 


987 


aa Werner qur AGTTA, | 

aed wes cr AGENT 0317 MN 

Then the four-faced Brahma advised by the 
Lord, praised the Devi Sarasvatī; and, by Her grace, 
arrived at a very nice Siddhanta (conclusion). One 
day the goddess Earth questioned one doubt of Her 
to Ananta Deva, when He being unable to answer, 
remained silent like a dumb persons. 


aya yras ià gid aaa: | 
Wer At A ETA UAE: AYHUTĶAT |1 1 8 ! 
aasan fugred Pate ARTA d 
aaa: KITT A UYEG arfeute Gat 19 N 
adh wer up wnürdfaenng | 


aa wear fid dat pde 420 

dora frei art winds | 

WROTE ea CATE: ATAKA: N21 1 

At last He became afraid; and advised by 
Kašyapa, praised Thee when He resolved the doubt 
and came to a definite conclusion. Veda Vyasa once 
went to Valmiki and asked him about some Sütras 
of the Puranas when the Muni Valmiki got 
confounded and remembered Thee, the Mother of 
the world. When by Thy Grace, the Light flashed 
within him and his error vanished. Thereby he 
became able to solve the question. Then 
Vyāsadeva, born of the parts of Sri Krsna, heard 
about the Purana Sütras from Valmiki’s mouth and 
came to know about Thy glory. 

at ferat de aeat a yraa rent | 

Wel raat at a anA snp u22 N 

war Grafen wp GTI cer ATT A: | 

He then went to Puskara Tirtha and became 
engaged in worshipping Thee, the Giver of Peace, 
for one hundred years. Then Thou didst become 
pleased and grant him the boon when he ascended 
to the rank of the Kavindra (Indra amongst the 
poets). He then made the classification of the Vedas 
and composed the eighteen Puranas. 


"Iq p Wes: UPS cuui Waray 11 23 N 
aut ata afie quit AT adt fang: à 


US VIE U WERE THETA 24 U 


fat added a u wat a yR | 
war wae at prea faerauugenenW 25 1 
IATA Verma a dad U KAA | 
ITT 3t fore efr west: 126 0 
ao at Riia weder RI 1 


When Sada Siva was questioned on some 
spiritual knowledge, by Mahendra, He thought of 
Thee for a moment and then answered. Once Indra 
asked Brhaspati, the Guru of the Devas, about 
Sabda Sastra (Scriptures on sound). He became 
unable to give any answer. So he went to Puskara 
Tirtha and worshipped Thee for a thousand years 
according to the Deva Measure and he became 
afterwards able to give instructions on Sabda Sastra 
for one thousand divine years to Mahendra. O 
Surešvarī! Those Munis that give education to their 
disciples or those that commence their own studies 
remember Thee before they commence their works 
respectively. 

va tegen uf a quip: 1.27 N 

eder Gantt erfara: | 

ww: Wee: duse u28 u 

Ot id fears KIT Tre WE: | 

The Munindras, Manus, men, Daityendras, and 
Immortals, Brahma, Visnu and Maheáa all worship 
Thee and sing hymns to Thee. Visnu ultimately 
becomes inert when He goes on praising Thee by 
His thousand mouths. So Maha Deva becomes 
when he praises by His five mouths; and so Brahma 
by His four mouths. 

BORA UIŅACARTAI Alea: 06 294 

worm Pe ete a gde; | 

: When great personages so desist, then what to 
speak of me, who is an ordinary mortal having one 
mouth only!" Thus saying, the Maharsi Yājūavalkya, 
who had observed fasting, bowed down to the Devi 
Sarasvati with great devotion and began to cry 
frequently. 

SAREN WRTHTSIU AA AETSRĻATA AA lt 30 N 

gadis adaa red wr STA € | 


988 Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


Then the Mahāmāyā Sarasvati, of the nature of| He becomes a good poet, eloquent, and 
Light could not hide Herself away. She became | intelligent like Brhaspati who reads this stotra of 
visible to him and said: “O Child! You be good | Sarasvati by Yājūavalkya. Even if a great illiterate 
Kavindra (Indra of the poets).” Granting him this | reads this Sarasvati stotra for one year, he becomes 


boon, She went to Vaikuntha. easily a good Pandit, intelligent, and a good poet. 
PIECE TR MICE E ks T: uq 31 Ul Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Ninth 
gardia meari aeeaferrat wad. 1 Book on Sarasvati stotra by Yajafiavalkya 
GELEE] FCIP-CEEL pru Wad. "32H in Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 
a iaag Trudi yadi waaay, 133 I verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


efi SCANT ergo? TART VTS ETT: | 5 | 


988 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


CHAPTER VI 
On the Coming in this World of Laksmi, Ganga and Sarasvati 


starrer SATA 

mad g àq wat mra | 

TTT Heo wma ATT ud 

yaa yeaa U yaan i 

gaaksftem er feerfer: yora gA 2 1 

auaa ae aca: uenefuvi 1 

Narayana said: O Narada! Sarasvati lives always 
in Vaikuntha close to Narada. One day a quarrel 
arose with Ganga, and by Her curse, Sarasvati came 
in parts as a river here in this Bharata. She is 
reckoned in Bharata as a great sanctifiying holy 
and merit-giving river. The good persons serve Her 
always, residing on Her banks. She is the Tapasyā 
and the fruit thereof of the ascetics. 

wurden varetu 13 N 

aaa Wat d Ara fa | 

aut Refs aque great wfdufs uad 

mÀ FAN reat MA at EN | 

Tread udurtsat rath carer i5 ui 

She is like the burning fire to the sins of the 
sinners. Those that die in Bharata on the Sarasvati 
waters with their full consciousness, live for ever 
in Vaikuntha in the council of Hari. Those that 
bathe in the Sarasvati waters, after committing sins, 
become easily freed of them and live for a long, 
long time in Visnu-Loka. 


gaint drofareamerarat fue | 


editur a Tents=ahararafest str a u 6 u 

ATT a: ETAT STAT gSA AT | 

wea aad cpi deua u gut 7 i 

If one bathes even once in the Sarasvati waters, 
during Cāturmāsya (a vow that lasts four months), 
in full moon time, in Aksyayà or when the day 
ends, in Vyatipáta Yoga, in the time of eclipse or 
on any other holy day or through any other 
concomitant cause or even without any faith and 
out of sheer disregard, one is able to go to 
Vaikuntha and get the natuare of Sri Hari. 

Arata da rada vu aT aT | 

mega: niaya U Hama Wea: U 8 i 

fred maA a: ceu | 

a uta Ged Ya w aa: u9 ti 

If one repeats the Sarasvati Mantra, residing on 
the banks of the Sarasvati, for one month, a great 
illiterate can become a great poet.There is no doubt 
in this. Once shaving one’s head, if one resides on 
the banks of the Sarasvatī, daily bathes in it, one 
will have not to meet with the pain of being again 
born in the womb. 

gud cfd fhaa gored, i 

Gad ard art sya: fee smqfiresft 10 n 

O Narada! Thus I have described a little of the 
unbounded glories of Bharata that give happiness 
ad the fruits of all desires. 


Book IX Chapter VI 


Wa Sarat 
ARTA: Brat Atal WATT: | 
Ua: upes d vita ARTA 010 
Süta said: O Saunaka! The Muni Narada hearing 
thus, asked, again at that very moment to solve his 
doubts. I am now speaking of that. Hear. 
ANE Tara 
ad mad gat weds ad | 
HAM mb WT set AT 12 N 
gat afar ada ara WU | 
UM Bafta: ha staf qa 13 1 
Narada said: O Lord! How did the Devi 
Sarasvati quarrel with the Devi Ganga and how 
did she by Her curse turn out in India, into a holy 


river in giving virtues? I am becoming more and| 


more eager and impatient to hear about this critical 
incident. I do not find satiety in drinking your 
nectar-like words. Who finds satiety in getting his 
good weal? 

Het MITT AT io ufsrat ert TA | 

OTF AAAS TT YaST YET RT 14 d 

maada aga | 

gei ga deb menga 015 d 

Why did Ganga curse Sarasvati, worshipped 
everywhere. Ganga is also full of Sattva Gunas. 
She always bestows good and virtue to all. Both of 
them are fiery and it is pleasant to hear the cause 
of quarrels between these two. These are very rarely 
found in the Puranas. So you ought to describe that 
to me. 


Sarr gara 


s ae aaah ATi queda i 

TE: HATA Uday 16 N 

ree aca thr ferent: ATTA: AAT | 

pan amenasa aad serra 17 n 

Narayana said: Hear, O Narada! I will describe 
that incident, the hearing of which removes all the 
sins. Laksmi, Sarasvati and Ganga, the three wives 
of Hari and all equally loved, remain always close 
to Hari. 


989 


aa Seat im aroda à 

attra T Aa U Wheat YA: TT: 18 Li 

Rogie agaa frttem er aput ar 1 

ami wan ade cerea act 19 u 

One day Ganga cast side-long glances frequently 
towards Narayana and was eagerly looking at Him, 
with smile on Her lips. Seeing this, the Lord 
Narayana, startled and looked at Ganga and smiled 
also. Laksmi saw that, but she did not take any 
offence. But Sarasvati became very angry. 

STATA USN At ATT ST ATT | 

menfe a ar aft = yri agag 1! 20 i 

sara aoh eat THAT TRAET | 

after Ad MAARRE 021 d 

Padma (Laksmi) who was of Sattva Guna, 
began to console in various ways the wrathful 
Sarasvati; but she could not be appeased by any 
means. Rather Her face became red out of anger; 
she began to tremble out of her feelings (passion); 
Her lips quivered; and She began to speak to Her 
husband. 


PRAT ATS 

uda aRaafes: Wand: enr weer a 

aise aga fate wert w 022 0 

md Arani Tat Temm d 

serat er aged «t fafa wit u 2 3 u 

The husband that is good, religious, and well 
qualified looks on his all the wives eqully; but it is 
just the opposite with him who 1s a cheat. O 
Gadadhara! You are partial to Ganga; and so is the 
case with Laksmi. I am the only one that is deprived 
of your love. 

ima: waren arti wife gina | 

ant aan add feuftd eff u24 

fe stata asta GTA iuam i 

Rroga siai durare: Waa u 25 N 

It is, therefore, that Ganga and Padma are in 
love with each other; for you love Padma. So why 
shall not Padma bear this contrary thing! I am only 
unfortunate. What use is there in holding my life? 


990 
wat ad weed u d adie aati: | 
aa yat a dear a arf aft qa u26 N 


Her quite illiterate; they have not the least 
knowledge of the Vedas. They are quite impotent 


to understand the nature of your mind. 
madaan: XT BET at ATA | 

TAS ST AAT U SIR ASTM 0 27 N 

Ta Anat igara fret war | 

anès at eret AER 28 ! 

O Narada! Hearing Sarasvati’s words and 
knowing that she had become very angry, Narayana 
thought for a moment and then went away from 
the Zenana outside. When Narayana had thus gone 
away, Sarasvati became fearless and began to abuse 
Ganga downright out of anger in an abusive 
language, hard to hear: 

i freie rait vafer arf foe 1 

arftīd veftris fargmafergfireofer 29 0 

Navi aff ware gtafaeit a 

fè aaf a atsit ire aA 1130 N 

“O Shameless One! O Passionate One! What 
pride do you feel your husband? Do you like to 
show that your husband loves you much? I will 
destroy your pride to-day. I will see to-day, it will 
be seen by others also, what your Hari can do for 


anama at war egy Umf 031 N 

were aroft at wart Agrecracdt att 1 

gana wftgur wrferegfü a ders: 832 1 

feufid act opr hfa aagatft | 

frst warmed rer galt aem Bt «33 1 

Saying thus Sarasvati rose up to catch hold of 
Ganga by Her hairs violently. Padma intervened 
to stop this. Sarasvati became very violent and 
cursed Laksmi: ‘No doubt you will be turned into 
a tree and into a river. In as much as seeing this 
undue behaviour of Gangá, you do not step forward 
to speak anything in his assembly, as if you are a 
tree or a river. 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


VIE Ara q AT at VISTU THT € | 

aaa g: Ram eit Tati AT LIT 34 N 

Padma did not become at all angry, even when 
she heard of the above curse. She became sorry 
and, holding the hands of Sarasvati, remained 
silent. 

STARTI q at vgbenmapRrRm i 

SATA TTT at Sat gari ATACĪTMTA i 35 N 

sitrtrirare 

gg ett at wat fe A aaf à 

gutter gan ET fret ararerattott i 36 u 

Then Ganga became very angry; Her lips began 
to quiver frequently Seeing the mad fiery nature 
of the red-eyed Sarasvati, she told Laksmi: 'O 
Padme! Leave that wicked foul-mouthed woman. 
What will she do to me? 

amei gdi aad aerefrar 1 

mad dat UTT amadt VIAA T 0 37 i 

AZT Hig arg a war are U gi | 

aci gara aci faarafagitreatt 11 38 N 

Wray ud Brat: ware fered aft i 

She presides over speech and therefore likes 
always to remain with quarrles. Let Her shew Her 
force how far can she quarrel with me. She wants 
to test the strength of us. So leave Her. Let all know 
to-day our strength and prowess.’ 

saga ur eat aes vmi garfāfa 39 u 

ATT sag AT AT cat A SISTI € 1 

erred wr wem vif aa uri: 40 N 

eit dert er urarfer Weta ym: | 

Thus saying, Ganga became ready to curse 
Sarasvati and addressing Laksmi, said: O Dear 
Padma! As that woman has cursed you to become 
a river, so I too curse her, that she, too, be turned 
into a river and she would go to the abode of men, 
the sinners, to the world and take their heaps of 
sins." 

gard wei spem at VISTU wed 41 u 

rata draft wat urfünard erfreafar à 

wafur-idi aa wT € Od! 42 N 


Book IX Chapter VI 


991 


ugisaghia mia agi: d 

Radi cnt year araarara aes 0 43 1 

Hearing this curse of Ganga, Sarasvati gave her 
curse, “You, too, will have to descend into the 
Bhurloka (the world) as a river, taking all the sins 
of the sinners.’ O Narada! While there was going 
on this quarrel, the four-armed omniscient 
Bhagavan Hari came up there accompanied by four 
attendants of His, all four-armed, and took 
Sarasvati in His breast and began to speak all the 
previous mysteries. 

aaraa: ada: oe Td RR | 

AAT WET AAT U VT HSA HE 44 N 

sara g: faang aret amaret fang: i 

Then they came to know the cause of their 
quarrels and why they cursed one another and all 
became very sorry. At that time Bhagavan Hari 
told them one by one: 


sfrenrarTarer 

wife vel ceram Tee tritersnTé Bt 0045 u 

Sarasa sper verear HTT PEAT i 

ada cadena gard wow 146 N 

NT iage «Tft | 

TT ugra UTC! Tft T ITT: 1 47 N 

O Laksmī! Let you be born in parts, without 
being born in any womb, in the world as the 
daughter in the house of the King Dharma-dhvaja. 
You will have to take the form of a tree there, out 
of this evil turn of fate. There Šakhacūda, the Indra 
of the Asuras, born of my parts will marry you. 
After that you will come back here and be my wife 
as now. 

Sreitaerara-fiarer gorse er Term i 

Tau wfgrd viu Wes ATA 448! 

and ATTĪSTĀM Tamrac TW 1 

vit arena uzmrerigta fasaa 1.49 u 

There is no doubt in this. You will be named 
Tulasi, the purifier of the three worlds, in Bharata. 
O Beautiful One! Now go there quickly and be a 
river in your parts under the name Padmāvatī. 


amd andigtaramersra ure | 

waiters quur da stat gaad 150 i 

am mieh gar afara nT 1 

Wee A À AATĢTAT 51 d 

O Gange! You will also have to take incarnation 
in Bhārata as a river, purifying all the worlds, to 
destroy the sins of the inhabitants of Bharata. 
Bhagīratha will take you there after much 
entreating and worshipping you; and you will be 
famous by the name Bhāgirathī, the most 
sanctifying river in the world. 

Tener KURI iS pat 1 

THE KAT und Gres sm 52 u 

HOR We yer wucfivat wWüregd | 

Tad a Walaa Gat: enr we 53 

There, the Ocean born of my pats, and the King 
Šāntanu also born of my parts will be your 
husbands. O Bharati! Let you go also and incarnate 
in part in Bharata under the curse of Ganga. O 
Good-natured One! Now go in full Ansas to 
Brahma and become His wife. 

im ag Praca vata fas 1 

Wats mena gen wreenefuvtt 11 54 N 

naeh Hersam Gotten teno 1 

Udara Mat fürs UATT: 455 d 

Let Ganga go also in Her fullness to Siva. Let 
Padma remain with Me. Padmā is of a peaceful 
nature, void of anger, devoted to Me and of a 
Sattvika nature. Chaste, good-natured, fortunate 
and religious woman like Padma are very rare. 
Those women that are born of the parts of Padma 
are all very religious and devoted to their husbands. 

mien: sfera uferfeserg ufsrar: | 

frat aaia art yes siam: i 56 u 

qa darn a dd Henn | 

reitgara Te dut yR wag: gura 57 u 

They are peaceful and good-natured and 
worshipped in every universe. It is forbidden, nor, 
opposed to the Vedas, to keep three wives, three 
servants, three friends of different natures, at one 


992 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


place. They never conduce to any welfare. They 
are the fruitful sources of all jealousies and quarrels. 
Where, in any family females are powerful like 
men and males are submissive to females, the birth 
of the male is useless. 

Frere a war temas wo ue UZ | 

HG ger ager aes et eere 11 58 1 

aud de Weed wenud Jersey | 

"OTTO K Witte aT 059 N 

Mai UMN aA A dei TE wa a 

At his every step, he meets with difficulties and 
bitter experiences. He ought to retire to the forest 
whose wife of foul-mouthed, of bad birth and fond 
of quarrels. The great forest is better for him than 
his house. That man does not get in his house any 
water for washing his feet, or any seat to sit on, or 
any fruit to eat, nothing whatsoever; but in the 
forest, all these are not unavailable. 


amat Rerfeféerstqat wfereit nt 60 i 

Aalst g:d dut a getafe yer i 

PATI fersarer at dutem 11 61 I 

Rather to dwell amidst rapacious animals or to 
enter into fire than remain with a bad wife. O Fair 
One! Rather the pains of the disease or venom are 
bearable, but the words of a bad wife are hard to 
bear. Death is far better than that. 

geii yaam Mumgfitead | 

Gata etifāmmt da sreatd virgen u 62 ii 

wate ped end T Wu Wenn | 

fifedtsz uta aden ath wu ou63u 

Those that are under the control of their wives, 
know that they never get their peace of mind until 


they are laid on their funeral pyres. They never see 
the fruits of what they daily do. Then have no fame 
any where, neither in this world nor in the next. 
Ultimately the fruit is this: that they have to go to 
hell and remain there. 

am: aitfetferétat at sfterarfü at R a: | 

adai a waettat vans stare fearfe: 164 u 

wad: Get da agar: Hara | 

"reg wit freed senem areata 165 i 

His life is verily a heavy burden who is without 
any name or fame. Never it is for the least good 
that many co-wives remain at one place. When, by 
taking one wife only, a man does not become 
happy, then imagine, how painful it becomes to 
have many wives. O Gange! Go to Šiva. O 
Sarasvati! Go to Brahma. 

ara frag Weite RĪT sremenu | 

Geren aea Ut qefrer a Ulta: 11 66 N 

se vat ga wee E Wea T | 

ferra rea uet a ae: spear: Tat 67 u 

Hais yR sat g:sftemufēta wr 11 68 u 
aft RARITA IRI FIREA VETS EAT: 11 6 11 

Let the good-natured Kamala, residing on the 
lotus remain with Me. He gets in this world 
happiness and Dharma and in the next Mukti whose 
wife is chaste and obedient. In fact he is Mukta, 
pure and happy whose wife is chaste; and he whose 
wife is foul-natured, is rendered impure, unhappy 
and dead whilst he is living. 
Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the 
coming in this world of Laksmi, Ganga and Sarasvati 


in the Mahapuranam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 
12 NNN verses hv Maharsi Veda Vvāsa 


992 Srimaddevibhagavatam 
To ——————————————— 


CHAPTER VII 
On the Curses on Ganga, Sarasvati and Laksmi 
starrer sarar Narayana said: O Narada! Thus saying, the Lord 
sea sai "Irem fama at ARE | of the World stopped. And Laksmi, Ganga and 
arda wugdem: amia wes ou ou Sarasvati wept bitterly, embracing one another. All 
ATA Val: WART PATTI, l of them then looked to Sri Krsna, and gave vent to 


after: AAAs Meat up EP T 2 N their feelings one by one with tears in their eyes, 


Book IX Chapter VII 


993 


and with their hearts throbbing with fears "m redfer arf: urd wer: STATA | 


SOITOWS. 


aracļara 

fai afe È Ata gear | 

"wecarfirarufierenn: par sitafer am: fra: t 3 

agent aftenft atta amet eu | 

aret fe frad arate PAT ua ti 

Sarasvati said: ^O Lord! What is, now, the way 
out of this curse, so severe and paining since our 
births? How long can helpless women live, 
separated from their husbands? O Lord I certainly 
say that I will sacrifice my body when I go to 
Bharata, by taking recourse to yoga. The Mahātmās 
always protect all the persons without fail." 

meara 

ae pÀ aT KRĀT TAA | 

iori c faren: ati wT 5 u 

Prafwanttrttamt atte at ait fà 1 

"wow ath utt hy weyedsfu ar tt 6 d 

Ganga said: "O Lord of the Universe! Why have 
been abandoned by You. What fault have I 
committed? I will quit my body. And you will have 
to partake of the sin due to the killing of an innocent 
woman. He is surely to go to hell, even if he be the 
Lord of all, who forsakes in this world an innocent 
wife." 


uara 


TA AAE GT: RNA TA | 

ware pe we 8 wey aa aT 7 N 

ana andigrarereantt T Bey d 

fraa TIKT wer serie qt uam 8 ul 

Padma said: “O Lord! Thou art of the nature of 
Sattva Guna in fullness; what wonder, then, how 
Thou hast become angry! However let Thou be 


dpa da faueersgurfinfa d ce wo N 

herr gaei dearga wel od 

Yara Hal aM TRIM IL 10 it 

But tell me, how long I will have to stay there? 
After how man days I shall be able to see again 
Thy lotus-feet? The sinners will wash away their 
dirts of sins in my waters by their constant baths 
and ablutions? By what means shall I be freed again 
and get back to Thy lotus-feet. 

qan farm ragfismadaam | 

areata war m afe que ug 

Ti madia areata ATA | 

mA KAT UST enar eater Safa t 12 N 

How long shall I have to remain in my part, the 
daughter of Dharma Dhvaja, at the expiry of which 
I will be able to see Thee agian? How long shall I 
have to assume the form of Tulasi tree, the abode 
of Thine. O Thou, the Ocean of mercy! Say, when 
wilt Thou deliver me? 

Treas at aroi ate TTT sre] 1 

mal VOTE fuf ud Ta 11 13 Ni 

at ant seas vivi at Pranay i 

Ted Gate E ATA MET V a: dH 14 Ui 

And if Ganga have to go to Bharata, by the curse 
of Bharati, when shall She be freed of the curse 
and sin and when shall She see back Thy fect? 
Again if Sarasvati have to go to Bharata out of 
Gangā's curse, when will that period of curse 
expire? How many days after shall She be able to 
come back to Thy feet? Now, be pleased to cancel 
Thy order for them to go to Brahma and Siva 
respectively." 

SIAM HATHA S erat ATA AT | 

maei Great ete U YA: YA: 15 U 

O Narada! Thus speaking to Jagannatha, the 


pleased now with Sarasvati and Ganga.|pevj Kamala bowed down at His feet and 
Forgiveness is the best quality of a good husband. | embracing them by Her own hairs of the head, cried 
Iam ready just now to go to Bharata when Sarasvati! frequently. 


has cursed me. 


63 


( Sara VERT Wart Great verereafat i 
fagna RERA: (01 dd) 


994 


Srimaddevibhàgavatam 


sfrsrarqarer 

PASTRY verae u gvarft 1 

anai enfisrrfir spur ee RAAR tl 16 N 

smt arg wera aftr xD T | 

ME a weed wa freq Faqs un 17 00 

Now the lotus-navelled Hari, always eager to 
shew favour to the devotees, smiled and with a 
gracious heart took up Padma on His breast and 
said: “O Surešvarī! I will keep my own word, also 
I will act according as you like. O Lotus-eyed! 
Hear. How the two ends can be made to meet. Let 
Sarasvati go in her one part to have the form of a 
river and in her one-half part to Brahma and remain 
with me in Vaikuntha in Her full parts. 

spite ar ferr iar ameet sum i 

wd wd yet xau fash wage is 

Waa ATĪJA wifes urat getwnt i 

Aa: RTA: yars erferegíe 119 11 

Ganga will have to go in one part to Bharata to 
purify the three worlds, as she will be urged eagerly 
to do so by Bhagiratha. And She will remain in 
her one part in the matted hair of Candra Sekhara 
(the Mahadeva with Moon on his forehead), 
obtained with a great difficulty, and so will remain 
there purer than her natural pure state. 

ATR Wes cd Rd GTA | 

umad agar qemtganefuuft u20 

heb VAA U Ta WU aT AATA | 

were fter da ras wp TESTE 11 21 N 

And let her remain with me in full parts. O 
Padme! O Lovely-eyed One! You are most 
innocent; so part of your part will go to Bharata 
and be the Padmāvatī river and you will be the 
Tulasi tree. After the expiry of five thousand years 
of Kali Yuga, your curse will expire. Again you 
all will come to My abode. 

"uai tagu feats: dažam | 

ferar feraerdfeur dot werd wea 22 N 

ERSEIPIECOEIRSES TESI ERERIG | 

"pur; ma are TRA AANT 23 N 


O Padme! Calamities are the causes of the 
happiness of the embodied beings. Without dangers 
no one can understand the true nature of happiness. 
The saint worshippers of My mantra who will 
perform their ablutions in your waters, will free 
you all of your curse by tocuh and sight. 

yiri enfer hai decent att 1 

sifereifer a wert NAMES, u 24 N 

Watson seat fasta rp aed à 

Wd ws ate a gaai ager 025 1 

O Fair One! By the sight and touch (Daršana, 
Sparšana) of My bhaktas (devotees), all the sacred 
places of pilgrimages in the world will be purified. 
For uplifting and sanctifying the holy earth, My 
mantropāsakas, i.e. , Saivas, Saktas, Ganapatyas, 
etc., that are devoted to Brahma all over residing 
in Bharata. 

agra Va fret ura yarrerafer wr d 

wert a nerh gafa sete lt 2 6 1 

aA ripe: HIATT TSE THAT: | 

shaam sera arenergiayiam 27 N 

Where My Bhaktas reside and wash their feet, 
that places is undoubtedly reckoned as the holy 
places of pilgrimages. So much so that by the sight 
and touch of My devotees, the murder of a woman, 
of a cow, of a Brahmin, the treacherous and even 
the stealer of the wife of one's Guru will be 
sanctified and liberated while living. 


adds galu IB 


Those who do not perform the vow of Ekādašī, 
who do not perform Sandhyās, who are Nāstikas 
(atheists), the murderers, all are freed of their sins 
by the sight and touch of My devotees. By the sight 
and touch of My devotees, those who live on their 
swords, pens, and the royal offcials, the beggars in 
a village and the Brāhmaņas who carry (deal in) 
bullocks are also freed of their sins. 


Book IX Chapter VIT 


fersrrandt fire fraraena ana: | 

CATE srdeqat WHEAT 30 N 

sa at dquen2r ae: Yea: 1 

yas gariņi wamertestard 131 N 

The traitors, the mischief makers of their friends, 
those who give false evidence, those that steal 
other’s trust properties, are also freed of their sins 
by the sight and touch of My devotees. Those who 
are foul-mouthed, bastards, the husbands and sons 
of unchaste women are all purified by the sight 
and touch of My Bhaktas. 

Va Yrs sacl MAAAR: | 

adfa serge USS RĪTI, 132 N 

The Brahmin cooks of Südras, Brahmins of an 
inferior order (who subsist upon the offerings made 
to the images which he attends), the village 
mendicants, those who are not initiated by their 
Gurus, these all are purified by the sight and touch 


of My devotees. 

frat wert aaf uri wed Gary ! 

P: get a VHT aa write 11 33 N 

aga gp da dt a gota daft | 

U Terral udt nanga ! 34! 

O Fair One! The sins of those persons who do 
not maintain their fathers, mothers, brothers, wives, 
sons, daughters, sisters, the blind, friends, the 
families of the Gurus, the fathers-in-law, the 
mothers-in-law are also removed by the sight and 
touch of My devotees. 

arana tema d 

Varah ĒRA wat Tae 35 N 

gaug at AARRE: | 

wale a fase gA 36 it 

Werde ire YET ATERT: | 

wa Wan NAA, 37 U 

Those that cut the A$vattha trees, that slander 
My devotees, and the Brahmins that eat the food 
of Südras, are also freed of their sins. Those who 
steal the Deva’s articles, the Brahmana’s articles, 
those that sell lac, iron, and daughters, those who 


995 


commit 


Maha Patakas (Brahmahatya, 
Surāpānam, Steyam, Gurbanganaganah, Mahānti 
patakanyahuh, tatsamsargahseha Paficamam) and 
those that burn the Siidra’s dead bodies, these also 
are freed of their respective sins by the sight and 
touch of My devotees.” 


sftrersettearer 

ATA AVI ae AERA | 

Ai g aeai: KAT ARTETA: 0038 di 

stufāafāštms megni: | 

Tama eat: rors MÄET: 139 N 

Maha Laksmi said: “O Thou gracious to faithful 
attendants! What are the characteristics, the marks 
of those Bhaktas of Thine that Thou hast spoken 
of just now whose sight and touch destroy instantly 
the Mahāpātakas (five great sins), that are destroyed 
after a long time by the water of the Tirthas and 
the earthen and stone images of the Gods. 


Ufa uddati Gat FTATATTEATA i 
Bat VIETA War MAANA 0 40 N 
aut dat wet d ar ater wm 1 
weet wit ct Sorat SANTA: 041 ui 
raura dat a ear IOTI: à 


A yiera ANRT: SmUmegt 0 42 N 

The sins of the vilest of men, devoid of Hari 
bhakti, vain and egoistic, cheats, hypocrites, 
slanderers of saints, vicious souls are destroyed by 
your Bhaktas, whose touch and ablutions sanctify 
the sacred places of pilgrimages; by the touch of 
the dust and water of whose feet, the earth is 
purified; whom the Bhaktas of Bharata always pray 
to see; ad there is nothing higher than the meeting 
of those Bhaktas.” 


ad sara 


mnga: spear atten es Ufa: 0 

Prat maga sstramt 143 0 

Sita said: O Great Rsi! Thus hearing the words 
of Maha Laksmi, the Lord smiled and began to 
speak about the secret things or the marks of the 
Bhaktas. 


996 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


sfera 

THAT Haat IRR WS RTT: à 

yansi urged Gad YRR RRA 44 U 

amy Wet + amet Gag wa 

vert ufeat ATIKA onerata ATTA 11 45 ul 

O Laksmi! The marks of the Bhaktas are all 
mentioned very hiddenly in Srutis and Puranas. 
These are very sanctifying, destructive of sins, 
giving happiness, devotion, and liberation. These 
are never to be described to deceitful persons; these 
are the essences and to be kept hidden. But you 
are very simple and like my life. 

[3t ua ruf ufereafā | 

adfa dared arft uferst er ATT 46 u 

I therefore speak to you. Hear. O Fair One! All 
the Vedas declare him to be holy and the best of 
men, in whose ears are pronounced from the mouth 
of a Guru, the Visnu mantra. 

Gearon rd wd Wem AST: 1 

veniet mene ar fene esu 47. N 

À: AA ar sre esti AG wr Ty 1 

staare A var atf eret zt: wen u 48 u 

At the very moment of his being born into this 
world, one hundred generations back of that person, 
whether they be at that time in heaven or hell, get 
instantancous liberation and if any of them happen 
to be born then as Jivas, they become liberated at 
once while living and finally get Visnupadam (the 
place of Visnu). 

UTT ARITA V Brel Aaya: l 

nanomeftagrad: ensmfegyor HaT 49 N 

Wqqprsrferarror Aa: KAT: | 

Waa: mgA: TAJA Wa T USO N 

That mortal is My Bhakta (devotee) who is full 
of devotion to Me, who always repeats My glories 
and acts according to My directions, who hears 
with all his heart My topics, and hearing which, 
whose mind dances with joy, whose voice gets 


cheked and tears incessantly flow out from whose 
eyes, who loses his outward consciousness. Such 
a man is indeed, My Bhakta. 

aalok Ta ufi arrears i 

würd at agian Wu dat u51 

Pu ape a dari a Wei | 

tratami w xavisfu a a aioe 52 N 

My Bhaktas do not long for happiness, or Mukti, 
or the four states Salokya, Sāyujya, Samipya and 
Sarsti, nor the Brahmahood, nor the Devahood (the 
state of immortality); they want only to do Seva 
(service) to Me and they solely intent on doing this. 
Even in dreams they do not desire the Indraship, 
Manuship, the state of Brahma, so very difficult to 
be had; nor do they want the enjoyment of 
kingdoms and heavens. 

ATA Att STATE YAN, | 

ARTA: STATŪTI gaa : 11 53 N 

a alfa a wet urea at Atef MATCTAA | 

ged efr we wal He wenn u 

AIHA dneredgéhuuep KATRA 54 Nu 

att SRRA vengo? amet 
ARSENI: 007 11 

My Bhaktas roam in Bharata, eager to hear My 
glories, and always very glad to recite My sweet 
glorious deeds. The birth of such Bhaktas in 
Bharata is very rare. They purify the world and go 
ultimately to My abode, the best of all Tirthas 
(sacred places). Thus I have spoken O Padme! all 
that you wanted to hear. Now do as you like." Then 
Ganga and others all went to obey the order of Sri 
Hari, Who went to His own abode. 

Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Ninth Book on 
the curses of Ganga, Sarasvati, and Laksmi and the 
way to freedom thereof in the Mahāpurāņam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter VIII 


997 


CHAPTER VIII 
On the Greatness of Kali 


STR sare 


mad yaam U mÀ | 

TTT Hea xeu À wt: ws dí 

mA sed mar ate a sere: fuam 1 

araftrgrgadt ur aa arit gastftar 2 n 

Naranyaa said: A part of Sarasvati descended 
in this Bharata Punya Bhümi (land of merits), 
owing to the curse of Ganga; and She remained in 
full in Visnu's region, the abode of Vaikuntha. She 
is named Bharati, on account of Her coming to 
Bharata; she is called Brahmi because she is dear 
to Brahma; and She is called Vani as She presides 
over Speech. 

Atari a eeu webxw Wb grad 1 

zR: Maika da NT owed 3 d 

mad ad ur a dishes a urat i 

wia urea sands 4 i 

Hari is seen everywhere, in tanks, in wells, in 
running streams (1.e., in Saras). Because He resides 
in Saras, therefore He is called Sarasvan. Vani is 
the Sakti of that Sarasvān; therefore She is 
denominated Sarasvati. The river Sarasvati is a 
very sacred Tirtha. She is the burning fire to the 
fuel of sins, of sinners. 

uyangi star di umb a | 

u À am aoa afters ane 5! 

ara waa at a xum frat fra: | 

Ai agra A Ya: mAN fay: ou 6 u 

O Narada! Through the curse of Sarasvati, the 
Devi Ganga also assumed the form of a river in 
part. She was brought down to this earth at the 
request of Bhagiratha Hence she is called 
Bhagirathi. While Ganga was rushing down to the 
earth Siva capable to bear the great rush of Her, 
held Her on His head at the request of the Mother 
Earth. 

WS WITT HHA AT A waa Wei | 

and mima wet et: we 07 1 


TASHA A AT HHA AY AAT AT | 

eneasrge vaen godt wr usu 

Laksmi also, through the curse of Sarasvati 
came in part of parts to Bharata as the river 
Padmavati. But She remained in full with Hari. 
Laksmi appeared also in, Her other part as the well- 
known daughter Tulasi of the king Dharmadhvaja 
in India. 

WT waders gma: | 

aya gaa a Hea ayana 9 u 

we: qne cw ad ferr a TK | 

waren uz faga sitet: uga 10.0 

Last of all, through Bharati’s curse and by the 
command of Sri Hari, she turned into the Tulasi 
trees, purifying the whole world. Remaining for 
five thousand years of Kali, all of them will quite 
their river appearances and go back to Hari. 

arta natr catty areftearert ferat 1 

"reife HT ares devenu Bt: d11 

mama: yreeforet ITT SIT | 

ATA Maar site Frat wan u 12 N 

By the command of Sri Hari, all the Tirthas save 
Kasi and Vrndavana will go along with them to 
Vaikuntha. Next at the expiry of the ten thousand 
years of Kali, Šālagrāma Sila (the stone piece 
worshipped as Narayana) Siva, and Siva Sakti and 
Purusottama Jagannatha will leave the soil of 
Bharata and go to their respective places, (4.e., the 
Mahatmyas of these will be extinct from Bharata). 

maas quum wif sree TT d 

drei er aA eret: Mea wu 13 N 

gage deum wenifnpurenhd-m d 

dahin er ora arque: ATA A t 14 U 

There will then case to be the saints (of Siva 
Sakta, Ganapatya and Vaisnava sects, (eighteen) 
Puranas, the blowing of conch shells (auspicious 


sings), Šrāddhas, Tarpanas, and all the rites and 


998 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


ceremonies dictated by the Vedas. The worship and 
glorification of the Gods, the recitation of their 
praises, their names will be extinct. The Vedas with 
their Angas will no longer be heard of. AU these 
will disappear with them. 

dag arrest dara Tq | 

ad waged swayed: ura aT us N 

AMA: wa füsureuedua | 

goia wem srféredfa at: we N16 u 

The assembly of the Sadhus, the true Dharma, 
the four Vedas, the village Devas and Devis, the 
Vratas (vows) the practising of the austerities, 
fasting, all will disappear. All will be addicted to 
the Vāmācāra ritual (the left-hand ritual Tàntrik 
form of worship; sarcastically used in the sense of 
drinking wine and eating flesh, etc.) 

Wot: HU GĀTATA HERRIA: d 

antsy fésrenr: wel rferedifer rer: UHL 17 N 

jet Sc aAA farant asf fender: 1 

arated enar srfereafer ev: WOT 18 N 

They will speak falsehood and be deceitful. If 
any body worships, his worship will be void of 
Tulasi leaves. Almost all will be deceitful, cruel, 
egoistic, thievish and mischievous. Men will be at 
variance with one another; women will be at 
variance with one another; no fear will exist in 
marriage ties. 

we etam: du: GIAN Tt Tt | 

waded: prgadenttri argafā i19 0 

yevatt a Rot yet genase: | 

Properties will be only of those that will make 
them (.e., there will cease to be any inheritance 
from father to son and so forth). Husbands will be 
obedient to their wives; unchaste women will be 
in every house. Wives will rebuke their husbands 
by incessant noisings and chidings. Wives will be 
the sole mistresses of houses and husbands will 
stand before them as servants with folded palms. 

DSTA ALAM: VA VAYLETAT 11 2 0 N 

cma afer We difrdettrateram: i 

frardaiftrār: ref corre = foret u 21 u 


MASUR TA Aara GALT str: | 

adanim: Tar afar faa! 22 u 

Fathers-in-law and mothers-in-law will be their 
servants. The brothers of wives, and their friends 
will be the managers of the household affairs. But 
there will be no friendship with one's class fellows. 
The brothers and friends of the house owners 
(masters of the house) will appear quite strangers 
as if they are new-comers. Without te command 
of the housewives, the masters of the houses will 
be unable to do anything. 

ARIHATĀVT: Yat mearen Aafa: | 

dear a apr TATA A HNA: 023 N 

ITS erfersdfer urere TA xr | 

Tam ufesife vargmenfür fam xr i 24 u 

The divisions of caste (Brahmana, Ksattriya, 
Vaišya, and Šūdra) will entirely disappear. Far from 
practising Sandhya Vandanam and other daily 
practices, the Brahmanas will cease to hold the holy 
threads even on their bodies. The four colour- 
classes will practise the doings of the Mlecchas, 
read the Šāstras of the Mlecchas and forsake their 
own Šāstras. 

aaga fA ser: VSTUTI Aaa: He | 

GoR Mansy Gas dur: 125 U 

aed wat: ad Matt a ate i 

KTV masada Aft: 126 u 

The Brahmins, Ksattriyas, and Vai$yas will 
become the slaves of Südras, will become their 
cooks, runners and carriers of buffaloes. Every one 
will be devoid of truth. Earth will not yield any 
grains; trees will not yield any fruits and women 
will be issueless. 

afta ma: aft afüférafsrm | 

udt ARAA a after: aerate: 027 N 

UTT arg S RST: d 

meta "wen difftatherey: 128 11 

The cows will not yield milk; even if there be a 
little, milk, ghee will not come out of it. The 
affection between husband and wife will die out 


Book IX Chapter VHT 


999 


and the families will be devoid of truth. The King 
will not wield any powers; the subjects will be over 
burdened with taxes. The ever flowing big rivers, 
the petty streams, the caves of mountains all will 
gradually have very little water in them. 

team: yada uri Ua U | 

way qrararantste + frst aa: WAN 29 N 

Saletan Targa Ten Rt AT ALT SITGTGRT: | 

gaat gam: Meal srfererfet Ad: we 0 30 t 


The Four Varnas will be devoid of Dharma and 
Punya (merit, virtue). One in a lakh may be 
virtuous. Afterwards that too will cease. Men, 
women, boys, all will be ugly and deformed. They 
will utter bad words and vile sounds. 

Safe AT FATT ART START: | 

ARII AUT wp uf der: 031 0 

amer aai org CUT T | 

emeret: we waa HUSA: 032 N 

Some villages and towns will be completely 
deserted by men and will look terrible; at some 
others few cottages with few inhabitants will be 
seen. Villages and town will be jungles and jungles 
will become filled with men. The inhabitants of 
the forests will become heavily taxed and 
disconsolate. 

wets a Rei rent rētu a 1 

upede dar srfemdía wet TT 33 ul 

acia erat: yratsirareerantes: i 

wae U ATT AKTA are 34 N 

The beds of rivers and lakes will become dry 
owing to want of rains and will be cultivated. The 
Kulinas of high families will become very low The 
whole earth will be filled with liars, untruthful 
cheasts and hypocrites. The lands, though 
cultivated well, will yield grains in name. 

tat: Waar LIT LATRTZ Ea: | 

Rams Garam: VTB aura: 135 0 

"WIRT CRIGATY AT AST Wd: | 

TAUTU! TATA zitat USAT: HOT N 36 1 


Those who are well known as he millionaires, 


they will become poor and those who are devoted 
to the Devas wil be atheists. The towns folk will 
have no trace of mercy; rather they will hate and 
envy their neighbours and turn out murderers of 
men. In the Kali age, males and females will be, 
everywhere, of a dwarfish stature, diseased, 
shortlived, and of very little youthful virility. 

uim: wrest ad naaar fA i 

awasi xr gad tigen wr nR u 37 n 

ATT eit atest a fedet | 

Rad asrfereart deat: Het tu 38 N 

The hairs will turn out grey no sooner the people 
reach their sixteenth year. And they will be very 
old when they become twenty years old. The girls 
of eight years will have menstruation and will 
become pregnant. They will deliver every year. Old 
age will attack them when they become sixteen 
years old. Some women will have their husbands 
and children living. Otherwise almost all will be 
barren, childless and children living. Otherwise 
almost all will be barren, childless. 

eaten: ae ATTIE TA a 1 

AIGA a AAAA: 39 |i 

wart arttritat am smitrurerersttfera: à 

Ratai fama srfereifer seit it t 40 u 

The four Varnas will sell their daughters. The 
paramours of the mothers, wives son's wives, 
daughters and sisters will be the source of support 
to them all. No one will be able, without money, 
to collect the merits by repeating the name of Hari. 

magga at a alftadataa | 

Aa: umani uw waqeouteate i41 u 

«qf vagi ahi queque vu | 

want went at weuesufmt 142 1 

Persons will make gifts for name and fame and 
ultimately will take back what they had made as 
gifts. If there be any gifts made by one’s own self 
or by one’s forefathers for a Deva purpose or for 
Brahmins or for the families of the Gurus, there 
will not be found wanting attempts to take back 
those gifts. 


1000 


"separar: ATT VA: | 

aami cfas ada: 043 

rimia: ahaa: à 

smqsmemfirer wait wet T 44 li 

ATRI da afte we UE | 

maa utena freteifa ada: 145 0 

eftt Port nf ede ratur | 

Pamat rar ATATUTI aed er farte: t 46 NI 

Some will go to daughters, some to mothers-in- 
law, some to the wives of sons, some to sisters, 
some to mothers of co-wives, some will go to the 
brother's wives. In every house, those who are unift 
to be mixed will be mixed with, excepting one's 
mother. In Kali Yuga who is whose wife? And who 
is whose husband? There will be no certainty; who 
is whose subject and what village is to whom? 
There will be no surety that such a property belongs 
to such and such a man. 

acia: web wel RTA ET: 1 

Vari amna wd a Aref: 047 

aaga aon erferedfer a urfürar: | 

PATHE up SATA WAVE |1 48 di 

querer ayam: rerum wreranfes: d 

ITT: wd ad uw guetta: 11 49 N 

All will turn out to be liars, licentious, thieves, 
envious of other’s wives, and murderers of men. 
In the houses of the Brahmins, Ksattriyas, and 
Vaisyas, the three higher castes, the current of sin 
will flow. They will live by selling lac, iron, and 
salts prohibited by the Sastras. The Brahmins will 
drive buffaloes, burn the dead bodies of the Südras, 
eat the food of the Südras and go to unchaste 
women. 

bECEIECIE IE Heat S ic 1 

aggafadais temia: 150 1 

yah arefarsitar pet er TEAC | 

fergrori teram srferearfer er urferent 11 51 I 

There will be no more faith existing in the five 
Rsi Yajfias. Almost every Brahmin will not observe 
the vows of Amāvasyā Nišipālana. The holy 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


threads will be cast away and the Sandhya 
Vandanam and cleanliness and good practices will 
cease altogether. The unchaste women who deal 
in giving loans, etc., and live on interests and the 
procuresses during menstruation will cook in 
Brahmin families. 

aama Prem aa Aat a ferant: 1 

AAT SAAT I AS ET: HET TT 52 I 

ud aot duqu ud ort MTĀ | 

KU gat U sys da was 153 tt 

There will be no distinction of food, no 
distinction of wombs, no distinction of Āšramas, 
and no distinction of persons. All will turn out 
Mlecchas. O Narada! Thus, when the Kali will have 
its full play, the whole world will be filled with 
Mlecchas, the trees will be one hand high and the 
men will be of the size, of a thumb. 

ferrea ferrara: qa: after à 

ANT TATA sies AT: 11 54 N 

dint maa didatemamga: | 

RS! a uferdt frre fteafā 1 55 ui 

Then the most powerful Bhagavan Narayana 
will incarnate in His part in the house of a Brahmin 
named Visņujašā as his son. Mounted on a long 
horse, holding a long sword He will make the world 
free of the Mlecchas in three nights. 

test agai gar ertet nRa 1 

STAT A AT aper vrfererfe i 56 N 

sm War THAT Wdb d 

PITT FARM Tey wfemufe 57 N 

Then he will disappear from the face of the 
Earth and She will be without any sovereign and 
be filled with robbers. There will be incessant 
rain, for six nights and it will rain and rain and the 
whole earth will be deluged; no traces of men, 
houses, and trees. 

aas gemeen: Reigi WA 1 

mefa grenat gedt war dat a AT t58 u 

wel wea a geet wat u ga un i 

aqaa ert: Wort erfersatw 59 


Book IX Chapter VIII 


After this the Twelve Suns will rise 
simultaneously and by their rays the whole water 
will be dried up and the earth will becomes level. 
Thus the dreadful Kali will pass away when the 
Satya Yuga will come back, Tapasyā and the true 
religion and Sattva Guna will prevail again. 

aaa effet daar ATETUTT afer | 

Ufa after urges We Te neon 

wma: afar: ad faguadt mafia: 1 

uyada after: yua: Wet 1161 N 

The Brahmins will practise Tapasya, they will 
be devoted to Dharma and the Vedas. The women 
will be chaste and religious in every house. Again 
the wise and intelligent Ksattriyas devoted to the 
Brāhmaņas will occupy the royal thrones and their 
might, devotion the Dharma and love for good 
deeds will increase. 

Ayar ar PARI entire: | 

Vater Vragitemu afs AAT: 162 u 

Ragai cen Aafaa: à 

ina: ad henaa: 463 

The Vaisyas will again go on with their trades 
and their devotion to their trade and the Brahmins 
will be reestablished. The Südras, too, will be gain 
virtuous, and serve the Brahmins. Again the 
Brahmins Ksattriyas, and Vaisyas and their families 
will have Bhakti towards the Devi, be initiated in 
Devi Mantras and all will meditate on the Devi. 

egit arta ART yof gni: qa TT 64 u 

ataare Sarat Rares grat qa: i 

HT TA UAT TAGLAR: UTA u 65 N 

Again there will be spread the knowledge of the 
Vedas, the Smrtis, and the Puranas, all will go to 
their wives in menstruation periods. No Adharma 


(unrighteousness) will exist and the Dharma will 
reign in full, with all the parts (Kalas) complete. 
When the Tretà Yuga comes, the Dharma will be 
three footed; when the Dvapara Yuga will come; 
the Dharma will be two-footed and when Kali will 


1001 


begin, the Dharma will be one-footed, and when 
Kali will reign supreme, no Dharma will exist, even 
in name. (O Narada, Now I will speak of time.) 

ane: ATT cant fay fara: NEN gam: | 

AAT Blew AAA HAAS WSU uw ! 66 N 

at wait ara 8 u agra: wet | 

adh: yet ubrmatafeteretarar 067 u 

ad uaa fa modena i 

"wem Aaa Aas AM wWuqsuw N 68 n 

The seven days of the week, Sunday, etc., the 
sixteen tithis, Pratipadà etc., the twelve months 
Vaisakha etc., the six seasons Summer, etc., the 
two fortnights (dark and bright) and the two Ayanas 
(Northern and Southern) are rendered in vogue. 
One day consists of four Praharas, one night 
consists of four Praharas; a day and a night 
constitute one so-called day. Thirty such days make 
one month. In the computation of time, five kinds 
of years (Varsas) were already mentioned (in the 
8th Skandha). 

ad wt «uri er derat a fears i 

Vidas wea ATT U at md 069 u 

reat er gi dd areen aa AT | 

weet g feet TATA: 070 N 

As the Satya, Tretā, Dvapara and Kali roll on 
turn by turn, so the days, months and years also 
roll on in turn. One day, according to the Devas, is 
equal to one year, according to men; three hundred 
and sixty human Yugas equal to one Deva Yuga. 
Seventy-one Deva Yugas make one Manvantara. 

manat inp: u vreftud: 

agram er Ta pce "wziu 

AmA at wet Ua we: | 

ou: Wendt AKAI age 172 N 

The life period of Indra, the Lord of Saci, is one 
Manvantara. Twenty-eight Indra’s lives equal to 
one day of Hiranyagarbha (the golden wombed) 
Brahma. One hundred and eight such years equal 
to the life of one Brahma. When this Brahma dies, 
there is Prakrta Pralaya. The earth is not visible 
then. (The dissolution of Prakrti takes place.) 


1002 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


AGA fags srerfersrforemqu: | 
SRV PTA: wd i wer fear u 73 u 
aaa wee wa weit wu | 
wa referas me ure wp servit AT 74 u 


The whole Brahmanda is deluged by water; 


Consciousness and Bliss is the Highest Spirit of 
all. All others, Brahma, Visnu, Mahešvara the Great 
Virat, the Smaller Virat, all are His parts. This 
Brahmais Mülà Prakrti and from That has appeared 
Sri Krsna, the Lord of his left half which is woman 


Brahma, Visnu, Mahe$vara and the other wise Rsis | (Ardha Nariávara). 


get diluted in Para Brahma whose substance is all 
truth and consciousness. That time, the Prakrti 
Devi, too, gets merged in Para Brahma. The fall of 
Brahma and the dissolution of Prakrti are called 
the Prakrta Pralaya. 

fram ATG sfiqour: urea gÀ | 

vd avdfa vratfur agtsratacmt w i75 u 

Prater a ya: feet u | 

ud afafaen fica: afafeetste at 76 n 

The duration of this Pralaya is one Nimesa of 
the Para Brahma Mila Prakrti united with Maya. 
All the Brahmāņdas (universes) are destroyed at 
this time. When this Nimesa expires, the creation 
begins again in due order. So one cannot count the 
endless numbers of times when this creation and 
dissolution works are going on. 

pfe Hea Tat UTT Seat Aah: KAT | 

gat a vami u gaismai WANs 877 ! 

wamdtat erra Heat Safe enr: GATT | 

aiem a umna wa w: 0781 

So who can tell how many kalpas had past away, 
or how many Kalpas will come, how many 
Brahmāņdas were created or how many 
Brahmāņdas will be created. Who will be able to 
count how many Brahmas, how many Visnus or 
how many Maešvaras there have been. But One 
and Only One Para Brahma Paramešvara (the Great 
God) is The Supreme Lord of these countless 
Brahmandas. 

adi VT U AARAA d 

ARTGTV «eat ymeqeatyrer Meee 11 79 1 

ARITA Ta aps: Hae wepfer: TT | 

TET: VAIRAS TITETA:: à 80 n 


This Paramešvara of the nature of Existence, 


a gut fieret faster ui: | 
ITU did mete fasqot: vem 81 N 
R ki ud Rh waa | 

vasrafād us wd aga u s2 i 

Itis She that divided Herself into two forms; in 
Her one form, She resides as the two armed Krsna 
in the region of Goloka; and as the four-armed 
Narayana in Vaikuntha. All the things from 
Brahma, the Highest, to the mere grass the lowest, 
all are originated from Prakrti. And all the 
Prakrtiborn things are transient. 

waren ui sur niei wa: TEL 83 N 

Aent fere wate | 

Gift sre sete egre: 84 N 

Thus the True, Eternal Para Brahma, beyond 
the thee gunas, the Source of all creation, Whose 
substance is All-Will is the Only Substance 
beyond the region of Prakrti. He is without 
Upadhis (conditions, as time, space, causation and 
attributes); He is without any form; and the forms 
that He assumes, they are for shewing His Grace 
to the devotees only. The Lotus-born Brahma is 
able by His power of Knowledge to create the 
Brahmanda. 

frat yamada deat Aaderafād | 

UAT ATA Wn qui WEIT US Ut 

magas wea: udag: d 

wdeurdi wdurdr Varat Uddugma 1186 UI 

It is by His Grace that Siva, the Lord of the yogis 
is named Mrtyufijaya (the Conqueror of Death), th 
Destoyer of all, and the Knower of all Tattvas. By 
His Tapas, Siva has realised Para Brahma and 
therefore has become the Lord of all, All-knowing, 


Book IX Chapter VIII 


endowed with great Vibhütis (lordly powres), the 
seer of all, omnipresent, the protector of all, the 
bestower of all prosperities. 

fay: wire: STEIGU BET | 

Rena a Wea: ada 11 87 i 

a Wea srract ufeagrigsttutt i 

TTT TT AKAM FET AAA I 88 N 

The devotion and service towards Para Brahma 
have alone made Sri Visnu the Lord of all; and it 
is through the power of Para Brahma, that 
Mahāmāyā Prakrti Devi has become omnipotent 
and the Goddess of all. Bhagavati Durga has got 
His Grace by Her devotion and service to Him and 
has become Mila Prakrti of the nature of Being, 
Consciousness and Bliss. 

mas tanta a aarftrsrgeaar | 

Tem faerat Aaa EĢTATRTET AAT 11.8.9 N 

ndien or year er fagat ww i 

ama ore wdfasdu uar ow90 

And so has the Devi Savitri, the Mother of the 
Vedas, become the presiding Deity of the Vedas 
and She is worshipped by the Brahmanas and the 
Knowers of the Vedas. That She presides over all 
the branches of knowledge, is worshipped by the 
learned assemblies and by the whole Universe is 
the result only of worshipping the Prakrti Devi. 

adorned? wr adamant 1 

adat weder adai gaat uoi 

wader a weis wdguifaarsrdt i 

porami Hwy sera 04 92 i 


That Laksmi has become the bestower of all 
wealth and the presiding Deity of all the villages 
and the mistress of all, worshipped by all and the 
bestower of sons to all is also the result of 
worshipping Her. Thus it is through the worship 
of Prakrti that Durga, the Destroyer of all calamities 
and troubles has appeared from the left side of Sri 
Krsna; and Radha has become the presiding Deity 
of His Prana (vital airs), and She is worshipped by 
all and possessed of all knowledge. 


germen ror ferent Vea 1 

wala a et a dm urina 193 N 

prag WHI wedted ura aT i 

Wasa wr ye wayt u udā u94 u 

Rataa a ufum a | 

ret Vie CSET VHA 95 u 

It is by the worship of Sakti that Radhika has so 
much excelled in love, has become the presiding 
Deity of the prana of Krsna. has got His love and 
respect, has been placed on His breast and is 
exceedingly beautiful. With the object of getting 
Krsna for her husband, She practised severe 
austerities for one thousand Deva years on the 
mountain Šatašrūga in Bharata to get the Mila 
Prakrti's Grace. And when the Šatašrūga in Bharata 
to get the Müla Prakrti’s Grace. 

POA: LAAT Hea SUS HIM fang: à 

at wel eat ant ouwdumfü g n6 

TH gerere firs wae ata a oat i 

Saas AT uere wa tt 97 lt 

mi Agra RCE CR deNA | 

ake a after U deat Ēsma Fat 198 n 

uad aa MAN SS AVAL WTA | 

And when the Sakti Mīla Prakrti became 
graciously pleased towards Her, Sri Krsna seeing 
Radhika increasing in beauty like the Crescent Moon 
took Her to His breast and out of tenderness wept 
and granted Her highest boons so very rare to others 
and said: O Beautiful One! You better remain always 
in My breast and devoted to Me amongst all my 
wives; let you be superior to them all in good fortune, 
respect, love and glory. From to-day you are my 
greatest best wife. I will love you as the best amongst 
them all. O Dear! Always I will be submissive to 
you and fulfil what you say. 

SIRT V TATU VO Wd: 199 I 

USA et ATT TAPA | 

APT A SAT AT GET: PKT: MTA 1 100 N 

AU ureyt urat ATGTATGAACI A i 

feat adage U querer fenaet 101 N 


1004 


Thus saying, Sri Krsna selected her as his wife 
without any co-wives and made Her dear to His 
Heart. The other Devis besides the five Prakrtis, 
already mentioned, also derived superiorities by 
serving Müla Prakrti. O Muni! What shall I say, 
everyone reaps the fruits as the practises Tapasya. 


quiu aad CATA MATS AYA E | 
Matt ma ada viene 1102 N 
ware a feed at adian aya WT | 
vafin feet THAT et Tent 0 103 N 
weldiararft a aren gate i 


Bhagavati Durga practised on the Himālyās 
tapasya for one thousand Deva years and meditated 
on the lotus-feet of Mila Prakrti and so has come 
to be worshipped by all. The Devi Sarasvati 
practised tapasya for one lakh Deva years and is 
come to be respected by all. The Devi Laksmi 
practised tapasya at Puskara for one hundred Divine 
Yugas and, by the Grace of Mila Prakrti, has 
become the bestower of wealth to all. 

aAA resi AT TST dem TT ATU 104 u 

afratuge a feet erem er eq | 

yaram qui vat wu fawtoud05 
gre dd wm its WATT od 

yaaa fauperuam urdr AYA F | 106 N 

The Devi Savitri worshipped Sakti for sixty 
thousand divine years in the Malaya mountain and 
is respected and worshipped by all. O Bibhu! 
Brahma, Visnu, and Mahešvara worshipped Sakti 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


for one hundred Manvantaras and so have become 
the Preservers, etc., of this world. 

amaia ATT star: wn AT: | 

Weis meaane utgdsenfā aa fē t 107 0 

radi TT a aaa: | 

way: Ada: TaN Gs U: N 108 M 

Šrī Krsna practised for ten Manvantaras 
terrible austerities and therefore obtained his 
position in the region of Goloka and is remaining 
there to-day in greatest bliss. Dharma Deva 
worshipped Sakti with devotion for ten 
Manvantaras and has become the lives of all, 
worshipped by all, and the receptacle of all. 

wa demy aaa wel Satay USAT: | 

Waa mast wor ATRIUTŠA ufsrr: 109 U 

We d efi we GTI HAART, | 

3peearerer we fh ya: sitgftrestt t 110 i 

ste saddtunrad games yig 
ARGARTITAATASE ASEM: 11 8 11 

O Muni! Thus all, whether the Devīs, Devas, 
Munis, Kings, Brāhmaņas, all have got their respect 
in this world by the worship of Šakti. O Devarsi! I 
have thus described to you all that I heard from the 
mouth of my Guru, in accordance with the rules of 
the Vedas. What more do you want to hear? 

Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Ninth Book on 
the greatness of Kali in the Mahāpurāņam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1004 Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


CHAPTER IX 
On the Origin of the Šakti of the Earth 


ARE IATE | Wea Wert reat ATG ade | 
ten Fae ag: Ua WS 1 NOMA feranfer af star: wae N 2 N 
wur un: prata: wera: utente: 1 1 u agent fewer qararat wr fester 1 


gare asst wt Ya: ou 3 N 

Hel AYS HT IAM ALAM Aaa AAT | 

Te WHat ae TATA, 04 4 di 

During this Pralaya, the Devi Vasundhara 
(Earth) disappears; the whole world is deluged with 


Sri Narada said: In the twinkling of an eye of 
the Devi, the Pralaya takes place; and in that very 
time also the Brahmànda (cosmos) is disssolved, 
which is called the Pralaya of Prakrti. 


Book 1X Chapter IX 


water and all this appearance of five elements called 
Prapaíica vanishes in the body of Prakrti. Now 
where does Vasundhara (Earth), thus vanished, 
reside? And how does She again appear at the 
beginning of the creation! What is the cause of her 
being so much blessed, honoured and capable to 
hold all and victorious. So tell about Her birth, the 
source of all welfare. 


stamart sare 


vaittget wat war gear sit S: 1 
oferta sa: weg yedy w "5n 


Sri Narayana said: O Narada! So it is heard that 
the Earth appears at the very outset of the creation. 
Her appearance and disappearance so occur in all 
the Pralayas. (This earth) the manifestation of the 
great Sakti, sometimes becomes manifest in Her 
and sometimes remains latent in Her (the Sakti). It 
is all the will of that Great Sakti. 

ad kadi  mpbewnüeur 

aya aga teur wfsegua: yy N7 N 

wget ye fem get umma 

anai atīt a aaref urerar dada ws u 

Now hear the anecdote of appearance (birth) of 
the earth, the cause of all good, the source of 
destruction of all calamities, the destroyer of sin 
and the cause of furtherance of one's religious 
merits. Some say that this earth has come out of 
the marrow of the Daityas, Madhu and Kaitabha, 
but that is not the fact. Hear now the real fact. Those 
two Daityas were greatly pleased with Visnu's 
valour and prowess in the fight between them and 
Visnu; and they said: 'Kill us on that part of the 
earth which is not under water.’ 


wear war ud efr Heur ud: 1 10 u 


From their words it is evident that the earth was 


1005 


existent during their life-time but she was not 
visible. After their death, the marrow came out after 
their bones. Now hear how the name 'Medini' 
came to be applied to the earth. She was taken out 
of the water, and the marrow came to be mixed 
with the earth. 

ED Kiss ESPECIE 

Wt ad wegepeh trieeareg qunt 1 11 N 

Werfenregrüeea AHA foi PETA | 

Tat aya alot Wehen Yar d 12 N 

It is on account of this mixing that she is called 
Medini. Now I will tell you what I heard before in 
Puskara, the sacred place of pilgrimage, from the 
mouth of Dharma Deva, about the origin of earth, 
approved by the Srutis, consistent, and good. Hear. 
When the mind of Maha Virāt, merged in water, 
expanded all over his body, it entered into every 
pore of his body. 

Wes pros adui decret feraty a | 

wet WEdT Wig TAM ga 40013 N 

eire feret er Hay IT war i 

areni PRET ate MYA: YA: 0014 N 

Next the Mahāprthvī or the Great Earth appeared 
at the time of Pafici Karana (mixing of one-half of 
each of the elements with one-eighth of of each of 
the other four elements). This Mahāprthvī was 
broken into pieces and placed in every pore. It is 
this differentiated earth that appears during creation 
and disappears during Pralaya. 

sfēra gare aouar | 

yea Kg aaea faerat i 15 N 

wfrfasrg age Aoma d 

waar wadua aT 16 wl 

From this mind, concentrated in every pore of 
the body of Maha Virat, is born this earth, after a 
long interval. In every pore in the skin of this Virat 
Purusa there is one earth. She gets manifested and 
she disappears. 


vuxHeduer | ees ga 
itunes didi u17u 


1006 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


yadta VUUT TTT | 

ateritgfrigrar de UR nisi 

umoa daug Teeter: 

kailā dts ul d d] N19 N 

This occurs again and again. When she appears, 
she floats on the water; and when she disappears, 
she gets merged in the water. There is this earth 
(world) in every universe; and along with her, there 
are mountains, forests, seven oceans, seven islands, 
Sumeru mountain, the Moon, the Sun and other 
planets, Brahmaloka, Visnuloka (the abode of 
Visnu) Siva loka and the regions of the other Devas, 
sacred places of pilgrimage, the holy land of 
Bharatavarsa, the Kaficani Bhümi, seven heavens, 
seven Pātālas or nether regions, on the above 
Brahmaloka, and Dhruvaloka. 

wa aai fart vttreat Fitter ar à 

sarah a frat sratfür pirates i 20 n 

Wed urged da sun fuum oa 

"erfenrerfeuggt qe: qur MAT 021 N 

This law holds good in every world in every 
universe. So every universe is the work of Maya 
and thus it is transient. At the dissolution of Prakrti, 
Brahma falls, Again when creation takes place, the 
Maha Virat appears from Sri Krsna, the Supreme 


Spirit. 

Pret a RaRa RRAN: we | 
fienttrergact m amd ufsrat wit: 22 N 
ARR eama a 1 
Rahen ust wr speriuar 23 N 
ATA wer AA ASM WTA: | 


Eternal is this flow of creation, preservation and 
destruction; eternal is this flow of time, Kastha; 
eternal is this flow of Brahma, Visnu and Maheša, 
etc. And eternal is this flow of Vasundhara who is 
worshipped in the Varaha Kalpa by the Suras, 
Munis, Vipras, Gandharvas, etc. The Sruti says that 
the Presiding Deity of this eternal earth is the wife 
of Visnu in His boar-form. Mangala (Mars) is the 
son of that earth and Mangala’s son is Ghateša. 


"Ra sata 

uf ht SO ane a gti 24 0 

ante da ant wad: watsrat eit | 

Wende demia: 250 

Narada said: In what form was the Earth 
worshipped by the Devas in Vārāha Kalpa. The 
Vārāhi, the receptacle of all things, moving and 
non-moving, how did she appear, by what method 
of Pafici Karana, from the Mūlaprakrti? 

TERT: TT VT TATA: | 

Te treet Gar cara ag Wat 26 LI 

What is the method of her worship in this 
Bhirloka and in the Heavens (Svarloka). Also tell 
me, O Lord! in detial, the auspicious birth of 
Mangala (Mars). 

ARTA SaTey 


ANS a ATEN TAO Vea: KU | 

IEM Web erat Rony Tara, 0 27 ll 

WE Tt LITA Uarusi TAT Fs | 

waa fia wem fast od water 280 

Narayana spoke: In ancient days, in the Varaha 
Kalpa, Varaha Deva (the boar incarnation) when 
entreated and praised by Brahmi, killed the Daitya 
Hiranyaksa and rescued the earth from the nether 
regions Rasātala. He then placed the earth on the 
waters where she floated as the lotus leaf floats on 
water. In the meantime Brahma began to fashion 
the wonderful creation on the surface of the earth. 

apr cater edt ur carat argent ef: à 

TIESU sera ARANAN: 29 0 

Then tenet wat aft xr PASTA 1 

miei wert welt Raade, 30 N 

Bhagavan Hari, in His boar from and brilliant 
like ten million suns saw the beautiful and lovely 
appearance of the presiding deity of the earth, 
possessed of amorous sentiments. He then assumed 
a very beautiful form, fit for amorous embraces. 
They then held their sexual intercourse and it lasted 
day and night for one Deva year. 


Book 1X Chapter IX 


1007 


yadian at TU gad i 
fērarurar fari wuHrsfupSWue: 0310 
A fear i 

ute reat WTA HT eat THT ! 32 N 

The beautiful Earth, in the pleasant amorous 
plays, fainted away; for the intercourse of the lover 
with the beloved is exceedingly pleasant. And 
Visnu, too, at the same time was very much 
exhausted by the pleasant touch of the body of the 
Earth. He did not become conscious even how days 
and nights passed away. 

yisi në xD Gum Aa XOU | 

Wat Sear at dat turam a enti wea t 33 1 

gifts aad: Rigrgēvā: 1 

wer: yA afa: Hyaa i gt: u34 u 

When full one year passed away, they got back 
their senses and the amorous man then left his hold 
of the loved. He assumed easily his former Boar 
form and worshipped Her as the incarnate of the 
Devi, with incense, lights, offerings of food, with 
vermilion (Sindur, red-powder), sandal-paste, 
garments, flowers and various other offerings of 
food, etc. 


sffrTarTarer 

wafer wa yet aa: dafam GGU i 

grama: Reger arrarfeha: 035 1 

He then said: O Auspicious One! Let Thou beest 
the receptacle of all things. All the Munis, Manus, 
Devas, Siddhas, and Dānavas, etc., will worship 
Thee with pleasure and willingness. 

agaci ent agra d 

ardas? a Te a gedfru36 ti 

Ta ai afteta stor gA: 1 

War a a pR anita ath aA 1 37 N 

On the day the Ambuvaci ceremany closes, on 
the day when the house construction, i.e., the 
foundation is laid, on the day when the first entry 
is made into the newly built houses, when the 
digging of the well or tank commences, and on the 
day when tilling the ground commences, all will 


worship Thee. Those stupid fools that will not 
observe this, will certainly go to hell. 


agtitara 

ae we menm ARAT | 

weman Taada KATE, 138 ü 

Trent rfe teat forafetrt ferat aen 1 

viui udrd usi a mret dive aem u 39 u 

"IR Uys cup wur qediqem | 

Wane KAT aut a pui 40 tt 

Threat det a Wears Wem d 

TAAU TAISE PRATT U ATA] 11 41 N 

The Earth spoke: “O Lord! By Thy command I 
will assume the form of Vārāhī (female boar) and 
support easily on my back this whole world of 
moving and non-moving things, but the following 
things, pearl, small shells, Šālagrāma, (a black 
stone, usually round, found in the river Gandaki, 
and worshipped as a type of Visņu), the phallus or 
emblem of Šiva, the images of the goddesses, 
conch-shells, lamps (lights), the Yantras, gems, 
diamonds, the sacred upanayana threads, flowers, 
books, the Tulasī leaves, the bead (Japa mālā), the 
garland of flowers, gold, camphor, Gorocanā 
(bright yellow pigment prepared from the urine or 
bile of a cow), Sandal, and the water after washing 
the Šālagrāma stone, I will not be able to bear. I 
will be very much pained in case I were to bear 
these on Me." 


shenrargarar 

zamnda à yar snffredfe att i 

areata enresqot A feet ady raftī 42 N 

zaagraam AR a ARE | 

aya da weer duni treme: 143 N 

Sri Bhagavan said: “O Fair One! The fools that 
will place the above articles on Thy back will go 
to the Kalasütra hell for one hundred divine years.” 
O Narada! Thus saying, the Bhagavan Narayana 
remained silent. Now the Earth became pregnant 
and the powerful planet Mars was born. 


1008 


yai ap: fere A wel mrt R: | 

UATE FEAT WAT W 44 N 

agia wan Ama a d 

tt feng edv OPS AT asa € 11 45 N 

By the command of Sri Hari, all began to 
meditate on Earth according to what is mentioned 
in Kāņvašākhā and began to praise Her. Offerings 
of food were given, uttering the root Mantra. Thus 
became extant all over the three worlds Her worship 
and praise. 

ATG IATA 

fē LAT Ta AT Kems U FH az | 

m igg sd aget AA 46 I 

Narada said: O Bhagavan! Very sacred is the 
meditation, hymn and the root Mantra of the Earth. 
I am very anxious to hear them Kindly describe it 
detail. 

sana sara 

ard a uférdt Set aao ar gfe à 

cat fe agru usaregfsrar uférdt ear 147 0 

ww: aldis nghan R: 1 

wart KTad ai spur aaah ANE 48 N 

Narayana said: The Earth was first worshipped 
by Varáha Deva; next She was worshipped by 
Brahma. Next She was worshipped by ali the 
Munis, Devas, Manus and men. O Nàrada! Now 
hear the Dhyàna, praise and Mantra of the Devi 
Earth. 

So Bi oft act aged varient 

Hat fap Ufa wg | 

Jaian mess 0149 N 

maaa IeTgratrama, | 

Trent IET waretaaaary 50 u 

af&srarspenrerert wiegt afeat ara | 

RATA AT Sat Mel aT UPA S ATT US 1 N 

wat sy nia narama a | 

The Earth was first worshipped by Bhagavan 
Visnu with this root Mantra (müla mantra). “Om 
Hrim Srim Klim. Vasundharayai Svaha.’ Next He 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


said: "O Devī Earth! O Thou Smiling One! I 
worship Thee, who art worshipped by the three 
worlds, whose colour is white like white lotus, 
whose face is beautiful like the autumnal moon, 
who art the Store-house of all gems and jewels, 
and who has put on a raiment purified by fire. All 
then began to worship Her with this Mantra. 


sianar sate 


wa Wa werent weft ey 152 0 

aaa wt wae aff varat | 

e) werent wet ATW 453 

ere trast wre afe A wd d 

wein a dda udyana 1054 

Sri Narayana said: Now hear the hymn sung 
before Her according to Kanva Sakha: O Thou, 
the Giver of Victory! Holder of water! Endowed 
with water, full of victory; Consort of the Boar 
Incarnation, Carrier of victory! Bestow victory on 
me. O Thou Auspicious One! The Store-house of 
all good, O Thou incarnate of all auspiciousness! 
Bestower of good, Thou, the Source of all good to 
bestow all sorts of welfare! Bestow all things that 
are good and auspicious to me in this world. 

wdermua afr ude afe A owe 1 

quae goat sse wena u55 

O Thou! The Receptacle of all, the Knower of 
all, all powerful, the Bestower of all desires, O Devi 
Earth! Give me the fruits that I desire. 

Wusrerd quran qug Wd 1 

wéwuned adane dam i56 

O Thou! Who art ail merits Thou, the Seed of 
all religious merits, O Thou, the Eternal, the 
receptacle of all religious merits, the home of all 
religious persons, Thou bestowest merits to all. 

weuwmgt ATS Uden ww | 

q dftuade yia 57 1 

atari Kart aft dit a ahs a 

sé «dbi nggi ATAKA T: TST lt 58 N 

O Thou! The Store-house of all grains, enriched 
with all sorts of corns, Thou bestowest harvests to 


Book IX Chapter X 


1009 


all; Thou takest away all the grains in this world 
and again Thou producest all corns of various kinds 
here. O Earth! Thou art all-in-all to the landlords, 
the Best Source of refuge and happiness. O 
Bestower of lands! Give me lands. The above hymn 
yields great religious merits. 

Algu Aga AA: | 

Aftrared yrs ad Wea: 159 N 

weary ATA ATA: | 

He becomes the sovereign of the whole earth 
for millions and millions of births who rising early 
in the morning reads this stotra. Men who read this 
acquire merits due to giving away lands as gifts. 


SATA Feat Ya u60 n 
ATT LUST Heat TAT | 


"61W 
smit 
wir yeaa VISTU KET werapt 11 62 H 


People become certainly freed of their sins, if 
they read this stotra, who take back the lands after 
making them as gifts, who dig earth on the day of 
Ambuvācī, who dig wells without permission on 
another's well, who steal other's lands, who throw 
their semen on earth, who place lamps on the earth. 

aadu Ys Gud ATA HA: | 

yAn Herat TAHA OEC TE 1! 63 N 

sh ARATE Tene) amg? TTS ATT: | 9 | 

Religious merits, equivalent to one hundred 
horse sacrifices accrue from reading this stotra. 
There is no doubt in this. This stotra of the great 
Devi is the source of all sorts of welfare and 
auspiciousness. 

Here ends the Nineth Chapter of the Ninth Book 
on the origion of the Sakti of the earth in 
Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses 

by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter X 1009 
OO 


CHAPTER X 
On the Offences Caused to the Earth and Punishments thereof 
ATG IATA afta adeenent arama carte a | 
yengi uod uni met a | qion fermu ef usu 
UTT UH WAT ga ud tl Sri Narayana said: If one makes a gift of land in 
agarri spart die wmm us wi this Bharata of the measure of a Vitasti (a long 
darmu stares wenn: 02 u span measured by the extended thumb and little 
aragi yirda urd wapesud Uu i finger) to a Bráhmana who performs Sandhya three 
Zefa aadar aq defeat wv u3 i times a day and is thus purified, one goes and 


Narada said: I am now desirous to hear about! remains in Siva Loka (the abode of Siva). If one 
the merits acquired by making gifts of land, the| gives away in charity a land full of corn to a 
demerits in stealing away lands, digging wells in| Brahmin, the giver goes and lives in Visnu Loka 
other's wells, in digging earth on the day of! in the end for a period measured by the number of 
Ambuvaci, in casting semen on earth, and in| dust particles in the land. 
placing lamps and lights on the surface of the earth | ord syfet er arta seem eame a: | 
as well the sins when one acts wrongly in various| adarraren urb gator: fer ue u 
other ways on the surface of the earth and the) yrr a were a urggmgmted | 


remedies thereof. "ocu ware dads aaaf: 07 u 
sanra are If one presents a village, a plot of land, or grains 
facferamngfit a at aa a TÀ | to a Brahmin, both the giver and receiver, become 


deargara fenmer wr are fradfent ua u freed of their sins and go to the Devi Loka (the 


1010 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


abode of the Devi). Even if one be present when a 
proposal for a gift of land is being made in says 
‘This act is good,’ one goes to Vaikuntha with 
one’s friends and relatives. 

want Want a degli wy a: 1 

a fasft Aeg maciza su 

qaad RA: frat ga: 1 

yd afta uH aft a tram uo 

He remaines in the Kālasūtra hell as long as the 
Sun and Moon exist, who takes back or steals away 
the gift to a Brahmin, offered by himself or by any 
other body. Even his sons, grandsons, etc., become 
destitute of lands, prosperity, sons, and wealth and 
remain in a dreadful hell named Raurava. 

Tat ant fares as wet garfā a | 

feat ater da gnitarā a fergfer u 10 N 

We «eni Peper ant wet garfā a: à 

a Reak a mafaa wii u 

If one cultivates the grazing land for the cows 
and reaps therefrom a harvest of grains, one 
remains for one hundred divine years in the 
Kumbhipaka hell. If one cultivates any enclosure 
for cows or tanks and grows grains on them, one 
remains in the Asipatra hell for a period equivalent 
to fourteen Indra’s falls. 

dafisryge wat cw cries a: | 

Went ath da Fi Premera wo 0012 N 

rt ritu tafe disent weet ur: à 

afro a at frst ded 13 u 

One who bathes in another’ s tank without taking 
off five handfuls of earth from it, goes to hell and 
one's bath is quite ineffectual If anybody, out of 
his amorous passion casts his semen privately on 
the suface of the ground, he will have to suffer the 
torments of hell for as many years as. are the 
numbers of dust particles on that area. 

sigareat TI a: eet Aa: | 

ware after a Kamera ergeben 11 14 ut 

wen werd cd qe: Hales a: 1 

entrar a errat quoti ere a: 1 15 11 


If anyone digs ground on the day of Ambuvācī, 
one remains in hell for four Yugas. If, without the 
permission of the owner of a well or tank, a stupid 
man clears the old well or tank and digs the slushy 
earth from the bottom, his labour goes in vain. 

wd He Wee quebé ASST U: | 

aa fest da mafiga n16 N 

Tanta Tent UT denqager AAS | 

yar cep weer ada: 17 0i 

The merit goes to the real owner. And the man 
who laboured so much goes to Tapta Kunda Naraka 
for fourteen Indra’s life-periods. If any one takes 
out five handfuls of earth from another’s tank, 
when he goes to bathe in it, he dwells in Brahma 
Loka for a period of years amounting to the number 
of particles in those handfuls of earth. 

fag faa würd Vera a ara: | 

ares A dt qat ates arte FBT u 18 N 

qi dhe dtstafī U ater: ATT | 

spit yid wr LETU He Stat AT u 19 u 

During one’s father’s or grandfather’s Sraddha 
ceremony, if one offers pinda without offering any 
food (pinda) to the owner of the soil, the Šrāddha 
performer goes certainly to hell. If one places a 
light (Pradīpa) directly on the earth without any 
holding piece at the bottom, one becomes blind 
for seven births; and so if one places a conch-shell 
on the ground (Šankha), one becomes attacked with 
leprosy in one’s next birth. 

Brot aaa er gani a fut TAT | 

Ga AeA BAT: uere 1120 tt 

Rrafert hanai a mada Ac 1 

Varat grata: a fash o u21 n 

If any body places pearls, gems, diamonds, gold 
and jewels, the five precious things on the ground 
he becomes blind. If one places the phallic emblem 
of Siva, the image of Sivani, the Šālagrāma stone 
on the ground, he remains for one hundred 
Manvantaras to be eaten by worms. 

vig «ist froma yet wr qedigery t 

agda Hitu a fase yay 4 22 0 


Book IX Chapter XT 


Savi yaa cdi test Wem 1 

a esa uw aft Ath Spe 023 u 

Conchshells, Yantras (diagrams for Sakti 
worshippers), the water after washing Silas (stones) 
Le. Caranàmrta, flowers, Tulasi leaves, if placed 


on the ground, lead him who places these, verily 
to hells. The beads, garlands of flowers, Gorocana, 
(a bright yellow pigment prepared from the urine 
or bile of a cow), and camphor, when placed on 
the ground, lead him who places so to suffer the 
torments of hell. 

srt wares U Saal GOH | 

Peary sp aT aaa 11 2 4 N 

"res Gaga aA YA Mea: | 

a ARAA a MET aa aT: 425 u 

marai urufüg d wet yay d 

aba web qsd u daoia: 1126 ll 

The sandal wood, Rudraksa mālā, and the roots 
of Kuša grass also, if placed on the ground, lead 
the doer to stay for one manvantara in the hell. 
Books, the sacred Upanayana threads, when placed 
on the ground make the doers unfit for Brahmin 
birth; rather he is involved in a sin equivalent to 
the murder of a Brahmin. The sacred Upanayana 
thread when knotted and rendered fit for holding, 
is worth being worshipped by all the castes. 

st Gear gut afte affer sr fi rafe 1 

Barter aag er ieu: ure 27 0 


1011 


One ought to sprinkle the earth with curd, milk, 
etc., after one has completed one’s sacrifices. If 
one fails to do this, one will have to remain for 
seven births in a hot ground with great torment. 

YR Tent at fi enfer wat ya: | 

SAT Werurdt uito wggue 11 28 u 

vat ga cuui sfera Wenifder | 

ATA egerunt RRETA: 029 i 

faster errmermeierssiereenes frat | 

yrd KATRA 30! 

aft smeared enu? FIREA 
WENT: 0010 11 

If one digs the earth when there is an earth-quake 
or when there is an eclipse, that sinner becomes 
also devoid of some of his limbs in his next birth. 
O Muni! This earth is named Bhümi since She is 
the abode of all; she is named Kāšyapī since she is 
the daughter of Kašyapa; is named Vi$vambhara, 
since she supports the Universe; She is named 
Ananta, since she is endlessly wide; and She is 
named Prthivi since she is the daughter of the King 
Prthu, or she is extensively wide. 

Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Ninth Book on 
the offences caused towards the surface of the earth 
and punishments there of in hells in the 
Mahapuranam Šrīmaddevī bhāgavatain of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter XT 


1011 


CHAPTER XI 
On the Origin of the Ganga 


ANG Sava 
gi yfreqarearadia KATE, |d 
TE aq defeat at ur 
mà mma war ter 1 
fermer um tae eaa wp 4 2 N 
web ga gt at wer wem WU | 
wen sitgfireorfir ure quad VITA 3 N 


excellent narration of Earth. Now I want to hear 
the anecdote of Ganga. I heard, are long, that 
Ganga, of the nature of Visnu and appearing from 
the feet of Visnu, the ĪSvarī of the Devas, appeared, 
due to the curse of Bharati, on Bharata; why has 
she come to Bharata; in which Yuga and asked by 
whom did she come to Bhàrata? O Lord! Now 


The Devarsi Narada said: O Thou, the foremost} describe to me this auspicious anecdote capable to 
of the knowers of the Vedas! I have heard the] destroy sins and yield religious merits. 


1012 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


sftararenct sarer 

Tare: SAT: welder: d 

wer oat at dee Sure douter 4 du 

WIES] at KE 1 

amda sft Gara: vrearat gada: 5 ni 

Narayana said: O Child! In ancient days there 
was born a prosperous Emperor King of Kings, in 
the Solar dynasty. He had two beautiful wives; one 
was named Vaidarbhi, and the other was named 
Šaivyā. Saivyà delivered a very lovely son; his 
name was Asamaiija. 

AM CETUETUTHTH Visi aA d 

aya TĪRI K U atm W 06 i 

TĀ yaa WU a niai ara a | 

ASST OT f?rd eme eres: YA: YA: 007 N 

On the other hand, the queen Vaidarbhi desirous 
of getting a son, worshipped Sankara, the Lord of 
Bhütas who became pleased and granted her 
request; and Vaidarbhi became pregnant. After one 
hundred years of pregnancy she gave birth to one 
mass of flesh. Seeing this, the queen became very 
afflicted and taking refuge of Mahadeva, began to 
cry loudly and very often. 


uou 
Bhagavan Sankara, then, appeared there in a 
Brühmin form and cut that mass of flesh into 
thousand pieces. Those thousand pieces turned out 
into thousand very powerful sons. Their bodies 
looked more brilliant than the mid-day sun. 
after qp: VTUBKGĀRTATEA A 1 
Ta WE Tea VTA TET ad (10 di 
AUKSTĀ RICCO ACA | 
waa ATS AAT Heat: 4110 
But they were all burnt to ashes by the curse of 
Kapila Muni. And the King began to lament bitterly 
and he entered into the forest. Asamafija practised 
tapasyā to bring the Ganga for one lakh years when 


he quitted his body in course of time. His osn 
Arhšumān practised tapasya for one lakh years to 
bring Ganga unto Bharata and he, too, died. 

YATE TAA WMA 

WU: Heat ORIS NU ATGdTTA: 0 12 Ui 

wires Vat wera: w:o 

dura fraps TOSSA: 1 13 U 

Then the son of Arhšumān, the intelligent 
Bhagiratha, a great devotee of Visnu, free of old 
age and death and the store of many qualifications, 
practised tapasyā for one lakh years to bring Ganga 
on earth. At last he saw Sri Krsna brillant like ten 
millions of summer suns. He had two hands; there 
was a flute in his hand; be was full of youth in th 
dress of a cow-herd. 

WU: Heat GAGA, d 

aat gai zen where 11 1 4 u 

feast meieni fasi aration | 

Aaa  smenpmefuump 15 tt 

A sight of His ever ready to show grace on His 
devotees. He is Para Brahma, whose Substance is 
Will; he has no deficiencies. Brahma, Visnu and 
Mahešvara and the other Devas and Munis, etc., 
all praise Him, who pervades everywhere. 

regn ut wer ufque wem ad 

werferfyrerdier wd great 16 N 

Afad ATT a Put uqid: wq i 

SSRs ATHENA, 11 17 N 

He is not concerned with anything; yet He is 
the Witness of all. He is beyond the three gunas, 
higher than Prakrti. A sweet smile is always in his 
face, which makes it the more lovely. There is none 
equal to him in showing Grace to the Bhaktas. 

wf&spReigperET ME oke EIE U 1 

qeta gr a: VITA a YA: ga: 118 d 

BISA Tat ur aid donum i 

Garu kad feed weitesten: 1 19 0 

His raiment is purified (uninflammable) by fire 
and he is decorated with gems, jewels and 
ornaments. The King Bhagiratha saw that 


Book IX Chapter XI 


1013 


unforseen appearance, bowed down and began to 
praise over and over again. His whole body was 
filled ecstacy. Then he clearly told what he 
wanted for the deliverance of his family. 


sfrerrarqarer 

and andres vite RAR | 

WR KATRA AAA 020 uU 

veeqy rama qa MAT wt PTA i 

fauet wy defy feererermfirt: 021 0 

Bhagavan Sri Krsna then, addressed Ganga and 
said: “O Surešvarī! Go quickly and appear in 
Bharata, under the curse of Bharati. By My 
command go quickly and purify the sons of Sagara. 
They will all be purified by the touch of the air in 
contact with the Ganges and rise up in divine aerial 
cars, assuming forms like Mine and they will come 
to My abode. 

madar SIP ada PRTA: | 

Tgog aime A A 022 I 

aiai ure sre apd gR: i 

qrar aaea ia aya srdt sau 11 2 3 u 

They will there remain always as My attendants 
and they will not be involved in the sins that they 
committed in their previous births.” O Nārada! It 
is stated thus in the Vedas, that if the human souls, 
taking their births in Bhārata, commit sins for 
millions and millions of births, the sins will be 
completely destroyed if they touch once the air in 
contact with and carrying the particles of the 
Ganges. 

mime: que SMUT Ae: | 

HARRAH AAT AAAS UT 0 24 u 

vraentfesrerard ara spdt spen i 

"rfr arr er rons aera wr 1025 N 

The sight of the Ganges and the touch of the 
Ganges water give religious merits ten times more 
than the touch with the air in contact with the 
Ganges water. People become freed of their sins 
then and there especially if they bathe in the 
Ganges. 


Ta arash gars 1 

vf Galfer avatar reat qum i 26 u 

Wager: qud dara wet a | 

fāfagata d fag meta aaa u27 N 

It is heard in the Srutis that the bathing in the 
Ganges, if done according to rules, destroys all the 
sin e.g. the murder of a Brahmin, etc., acquired in 
one thousand millions of births done consciously 
or unconsciously. The merits that are acquired by 
the bathing in the Ganges on a day of religious 
merit, cannot be described even by the Vedas. 
Whatever is mentioned in the Agamas is but a mere 
trifle. 

EEUERUIFICIDIÉ aa Ta KC CE a 1 

arated up Bat u28 0 

qud ay Ga AGEIA: WU I 

aaia uus tee fet 129 0 

Even Brahma, Visnu and Maheša cannot 
describe fully the merits of the bathing in the 
Ganges. O Brahmin! Such is the glori of ordinary 
bathing. Now I will describe the effect of the 
Ganges bath done with a Sankalpa (resolve); hear. 
Ten times more the result is obtained when the 
Ganges bathing is done with a resolve (Sankalpa) 
than ordinary bath and if one bathes on the day 
when the sun passes from one sign to another (in 
the Zodiac), thirty times more religious merits 
accure. 

amai arte erect apoi fA i 

wdt asynp usd AMO 48030 0 

urgeat dotnet grata wr i 

MATI wp aed Mase fuesen u31 it 

On the new Moon (Amāvasyā) day, the Ganges 
bath gives the merits as above mentioned; but when 
the Sun is in his Southern course (Daksinayana) 
double the merits are obtained and when the sun 1s 
in his Northern course, ten times more religious 
merits are obtained. The Ganges bathing in the time 
of Cāturmāsya, full Moon day, Aksaya Navami or 
Aksaya trtīyā yields merits that cannot be 
measured. 


1014 


WISI FAH | 
PRC EES IG IER ILS TOt 


tHe 132 
rarmranai frat garai aera a 1 
TA fara eet dira x 33 U 
HoT HTSrat U Aaa TUT ET: | 


And if on the above Parva (particular periods of 
the year on which certain ceremonies are 
commanded) days both bathing, and making over 
gifts are done, there is no limit to the religious 
merits acquired; hundred times more than ordinary 
bath, religious merits are obtained. Great religious 
merits accrue from the Ganges bath on Manvantara 
tithi, Yugādyā, Sukla seventh day of the month of 
Māgha, Bhismastami day, Ašokāstamī day, and 
Sri Rima Navamī day. 

ads fiut quei eara Fa qe Tq 1 34 N 

ITG q TT uw | 

"nw areal wer vnum 1 35 Ut 

Again double the merits than those of the above 
arise from bathing in the Ganges during the Nanda 
ceremony. The Ganges bath in Dašaharā tenth gives 
merits equivalant to Yugadya Snānam (bath). And 
if the bathing be done on Mahānandā or in 
Mahāvāruņī day, four times more religious merits 
accrue. 

wasnpbet uud füweepids aft à 

yoi enfe Va STHT-SERTHGIS HT AT N 36 N 

wexmmmewa xpi art ww: | 

urea wn wa: MATT eng ll 37 N 

Ten million times more religious merits accure 
from the Ganges bathing on Maha Maha Varuni 
day than ordinary bath. The Ganges bath in the 
Solar eclipse yields ten times more religious merits 
than in the Lunar eclipse. Again the Snanam in 
Ardhodaya Yoga yields hundred times more 
religious merits than that of the (solar) eclipse. 

creer Wait fera Tat: YX: | 

agaa Tat Wa STÉNRSTHTCHeRENT 1038 |! 

Thus saying to Ganga before Bhagiratha, the 
Lord of the Devas remained silent. The Devi Ganga 
with her head bowed down with devotion, said: 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Wears 

"rfr and ma mA: W | 

Aaa a WAR WUUT da Aiwa 039 1 

refer rfe ei arent art cette | 

m dpa vata aura ag wut 40 n 

Ganga said: “If I am after all, to go to Bharata 
as Thou commandest and under the curse given 
previously by Bharati, then tell me how I would 
be freed of the sins that the sinners will cast on 
me. 

fr mo Raa eor Ta 1 

war anei qr AON: wed TAN 41 Ji 

nagis werd arate wafers 1 

wales agai ag Wat uz 

How long will I have to remain there? When, O 
Lord! Shall I be able to return to the Highest place 
of Visnu? O Thou, the Inner Self of all! O All 
Knowing! O Lord! Whatever else I desire, Thou 
knowest them all. So be pleased to instruct me on 
all these points." 


sfrenrerTarer 

wry atfod It wa wed MaR | 

wf seneurar maA wfererfr 43 N 

VARAT cat xr eati reenefüfür i 

Raar frets dirt qeraregfsr 144 v 

Bhagavan Sri Hari said: "O Sureávari! I know 
all that you desire; when you will assume the liquid 
form, the Salt Ocean will be your husband. He is 
My part and you are of the nature of Laksmī; so 
the union of the lover with the love stricken in the 
world will turn out a happy and qualified one. 

"greg: GT AIT UAT AT ATT d 

dana eii eame VALTERI HA 11 45 N 

amuyi taf eno: Tara | 

ws Referer ITT: ITT TIE APT 46 t 

Of all the rivers Sarasvati and others in Bharata, 
that go to mix with the ocean, you will be the best 
and highly fortunate of them all. From today you 
will have to remain in Bharata for a period of five 
thousand years, under the curse of Bharati. 


Book IX Chapter XI 


1015 


ent 


fred emer erred Rata vit cher à 

rata ttre ufa cease Maza 4047 Uu 

vert caveat a Kia spfivergiqar wt à 
C aera SERT: we ware aaa: 1 48 1 

You will be able to enjoy daily and always the 
pleasures with the Ocean. O Devi! As you are a 
clever lady, so He is also apt and expert. The 
inhabitants of Bharata will praise Thee and worship 
Thee with great devotion by the stotra which 
Bhagiratha has composed. 

HUAI THAT SAAT vert VARI à 

a: walle wore Bis TATA PATA 49 N 

im Waifs at queer saz i 

qv «auras famosas a Tesfē 0 50 1 

He will derive the fruit of one horse-sacrifice 
who will meditate on Thee as per Kāņvašākhā and 
worship, prasie and bow down to Thee daily. Even 
if one utter ‘Ganga,’ ‘Ganga,’ though one is one 
hundred Yojanas away from the Ganges, one will 
be freed of all sins and go to Visnu-loka. 

mana PITT wd vfenefw à 

upmana akg Pria. nsi n 

mai g agemi yraa aaf | 

miarana cu faiga n52 11 

Whatever sins will be cast in Thee by thousand 
sinners bathing in Thee will be destroyed by the 
touch of the devotees of Prakrti Devi. Even if 
thousands and thousands of sinners touch the dead 
bodies an bathe in Thee, all those will be destroyed 
when the Devi Bhaktas, the worshippers of 
Bhuvanešvarī and Maya Bija, will come and touch 
Thee. 

waa wanted ef | 

web ahs: ABT: IARTĪRĀT: Wy 53 1 

ag ate EC: PER EQUES 

rasta ust safe unret ou 54 

turamas a hh eque | 

O Auspicious One! Thou wilt wash away the 
sins of the sinners, by Thy stay in Bharata with 
other best rivers Sarasvati and others. That will be 
at once a sacred place of pilgrimage where Thy 


glories will be chanted. By the touch of the dust of 
Thine, the sinner will be at once purified and he 
will dwell in the Devi-loka (Mani Dvipa) for as 
many years as will be the dust there. 


mra cafe À sraenrwammarfeuden t 55 i 

wuegsifer ui A Tegfer gt: wa i 

ura cw oufewdr win use 

exi Wreath str rfe ATT i 

AT ARTA qa vat fan 057 N 

gemi au acd urere: feerferecater à 

All Hail to the Devi Bhuvanešvarī! He who will 
leave his body on Thy lap with full consciousness 
and remembering My name, will certainly go to 
My abode and will remain, as My chief attendant 
for an infinite period. He will see countless Prakrtik 
Layas (dissolutions of the Universe). Unless a man 
has collected hordes of religious merits, he cannot 
die in the Ganges; and if he dies on the Ganges he 
goes to Vaikuntha as long as the Sun rises in this 
world. 

Pee Wd: quur waren AER 58 N 

mÀ ga arsti ath dw Urga i 

arat verssreserierfa TURKS, 11 59 i 

att gai reti aati ci a andan i 

I get many bodies for him where he can enjoy 
the fruits of his Karma and I then give him My 
Sārūpya (From resembling Mine) and make him 
My attendant. If any ignorant man, void of any 
Jūānam, quits his body by touching merely Thy 
water, I give him Sālokya (place in My region) 
and make him My attendant. 

arca TTU ĪRĒT At 60 V 

wt garf metat ras wm uo 

saa aT TTT KAT dm 01 61n 

«et aa emeret ure e 1 

: M62 U 

BET: Wet Mewes AA Toa Mea | 

Even if one quits one’s body in a far off place, 
uttering Thy Name, I give him place in My region 
for one life time of Brahma And if he remembers 
Thee with devotion, and quits his mortal coil atan 


1016 


other place, I give him Sārūpya (Form resembling 
Mine) for a period of endless Prakrtik Layas. He 
instantly gets on an aerial car made of jewels and 
goes with My attendants to the region of Goloka 
and gets form like Me. Those that worship daily 
My Mantra, that pass their days, eating the remnant 
of the food offered to Me, they need not have any 
distinction whether they die in Tirath or not. They 
themselves can easily purify the three worlds. 
Getting on the excellent and best aerial car built of 
jewels, they go to the region of Goloka. 
vitfsverdtf meat fagtat afit Hert u 63 N 
waist q Pret Ader ARTA à 
ee JIT 11 64 MT 
TEKA wretch data a | 
THT errat dat aft uzrgaitsti fē u 65 i 
waite ITT Mets RIA, | 
UA MA KATE V ATA gr: fī wu 66 N 
SATA a Ut agre: TTT: | 
O Chaste One! Even if the friends of My 
devotees, be born in animal births, they also will 
be purified by the devotion shewn towards Me and 
getting on a jewelled aerial car will be able to go 
to Goloka, so difficult of access. Wherever the 
Bhaktas may be, if they simply remember Me with 
devotion, they will become liberated while living 
by the power of My Bhakti. 
serra sieti a pegara ATT u 67 u 
fef SERT srl t epe ATTY | 
opie ga gstarara ATR: 0068 di 
SAQA LATA SATA gA: YA: 1 
wore U sitet wrayer 0 69 i 
VfR tir a ATSTĀTI € | 
Thus saying to Gangā, Bhagavān Šrī Hari 
addressed Bhagīratha: O Child! Now worship 
Ganga Devi with devotion and chant hymns to 
Her. The pure Bhagiratha meditated with 
devotion as per Kauthuma Sakha and worshipped 
the Devi and praised Her repeatedly. Then Ganga 
and Bhagiratha bowed down to Sri Krsna and He 
disappeared at once from their sight. 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


ARS Barat 

Sha EAA SAAT ES TTA WO 0 70 N 

gai wan ufrde defeat ar 1 

The Devarsi Narada said: O Thou the foremost 
of the Knowers of the Vedas! How, by what 
Kuthuma Sakha, the noble King Bhagiratha 
meditated on the Devi Ganga; what stotra did he 
recite and what was the method with which he 
worshipped the Ganges. 


stanan sama 


meat Aeara queat year etter a argdt 71 u 

dase Seeds a dant shag | 

myi a feret a ate fern fore rary 1 72 N 

Narayana said: O Narada! One should first take 
one’s bath, and putting on a clean washed clothing 
should perform one’s daily duties. Then one should 
control oneself and with devotion worship the six 
Devatās Gaņeša, Sun, Fire, Visnu, Siva and Siva. 

dasa deua; a aisfrant a srt i 

myi fase ATŪTATA fames u 73 N 

fi virara fere] er era warden: | 

Pre arava artt ferat er gfeettrgā t 74 N 

Thus one becomes entitled to worship. First 
worship is to be given to GaneSa for the destruction 
of obstacles; the Sun is to be next worshipped for 
health; Fire, for purification; Visnu is then 
worshipped for getting wealth and power; Siva is 
worshipped for knowlege and Sivani is worshipped 
for Mukti. 

datiem aaan aN 1 

quum LATA MET soy AR |175 1 
afer MaR enge? AIRRA CTS A: 1111 

When these Devatàs are worshipped, one is 
entitled to worship the Deity. Otherwise contrary 
become the effects. Now I am saying what 
Dhyànam (meditation) did Bhagiratha practise 
towards the Devi Ganga. 

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Ninth Book 
on the origin of the Ganges in the Mahāpurāņam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyàsa. 


Book IX Chapter XII 


1017 


CHAPTER XII 
On the Origin of the Ganga 


siara zara 

TATU aset HANANI, | 

Aadan wart crayon uu 

dara Horgeat ut why i 

AKTS amu, Xenungfüenp 2 i 

Narayana said: O Narada! Now about the 
meditation (Dhyana) of the Devi Ganga as per 
Kanve Šākhā, which destroys all the sins. O 
Gange! Of white colour like white lotuses! Thou 
destroyest all the sins of men. Thou hast appeared 
from the body of Sri Krsna. Thou art powerful like 
Him. Thou art very chaste and pure. Thou hast 
worn the raiment, uninflammable and decorated 
all over with ornaments made of jewels. 


Rigdügefed uni deafight: | 

«gt we amaeana, si 

Thou art more brilliant than one hundred 
autumnal Moons. Thou art also well pleased with 
a smile on Thy lips. And Thou art always of steady 
youthful beauty (that never wanes). Thou art dear 
to Narayana, calm and of peaceful temper, and 
proud of being His with His fortune. Thou bearest 
the braid of hair, decked with garlands of Malati 
flowers; Thy cheeks are anointed with sandal dots, 
with Sindüra bindu (dots of red powder, vermilion) 
and well adorned with various artistic lines made 
of musk. 

wesfasfafiresurdfBqeqWmm | 

RR RIE ECOL GIRLS nén 

Thy garment and Thy beautiful lips are more 
red than the ripe Bimba fruit (the red fruit of a 
cucurbitaceous plant); Thy teeth vie as it were, with 
the rows of pearls. 


A : S 

tod smote Kg a feat, 7 u 

jfi Marta à i afin i 

Vert A SN 

How lovely are Thy eyes! How delightsome is 
Thy side-long glance! How close are Thy breasts 
like Bel fruits! Thy loins are thicker and more solid 
then the plantain trees. How do Thy feet look 
beautiful, defying the beauty of the Sthalapadma 
(ground Lotus)! 
i qu MT : i 
etsutferiqnrasiqusuITeut nou 
How do the red sandals look lovely with 
Kunkuma and alaktak (red powder)! What a red 
tinge Thy feet have shewn with the honey of 
Parijata flower that is seen on the head of Indra). 

mragas garded wet | 

wuRemfefrenmsfqgg — 101 

"fée queri asrfirat redit i 

att atur aai MATE, uu 

sifra: wears a erst farmyard? vidi à 

The Devas, the Siddhas, the Munis, offer always 
Arghyas (offerings of rice with Durba grass) at Thy 
feet; the ascetics bow down at Thy feet, and it seems 
as Though so many lines of bees are on Thy lotus 
feet. O Mother! Thy lotus feet give liberation to 
those that want Mukti and enjoyment to those that 
want Bhukti (enjoyments). O Mother! Thou art the 
boon; Thou art the chief excellent; Thou grantest 
boons and Thou showest Thy favour to Thy 
devotees; Thou bestowest the Visnupadam (the 
place of Visnu); but Thou hast come from the feet 
of Visnu. 

serrer carta eurer Bret gpWTH 12 

ara Aye ATA rset | 

ATA mene a Sate MATAA 1113 u 

qi did a Ade aisi yad NA, | 


1018 


wei Hati ure TieDHTeDHe up 0 14 u 

wet Weed wp darat utes d 

Thus meditating on the Devi Ganga flowing by 
three routes (in Heaven, earth and internal regions), 
the bestower of good things one should offer to 
the Devi sixteen things: Asana, Padya, Arghya, 
water for bathing, ointment (anülepana), Dhüpa 
(scents), Dipa (lights), Naivedya (offerings of 
food), betel, cool water, clothings, ornaments, 
garlands, sandal-paste, Acamaniya (water for 
sipping), and beautiful bedding and worship Her 
with these. 

STAT MET wr VITEK vigetwfe: 15 1 

usd vert Asatte S dq | 

Then, with folded hands, one should perform 
stotra to Her and bow down to Her with devotion. 
Thus the worshipper gets the fruits of ASvamedha 
sacrifice. 


ANG sata 


sigir gag matata rere 016 0 

Roda aras querens | 

Narada said: O Lord of the Devas! At present I 
am desirous to hear the sin-destroying and virtue- 
bestowing stotra (hymn) of Ganga Devi, the 
Purifier of all those that are fallen from virtue, 
originated from the feet of Visnu, the Lord of world 
and the husband of Laksmi. Kindly narrate all these 
in detail. 


sfranraut sare 


TO ANS AAMT urged YT t 17 N 

Reipas, | 

werEeawigpeni at tt wore 0018 ! 

"ssp BUS a rer eds | 

"frr PITT at tt rE 19 U 

Narayana said: O Narada! Now I am narrating 
the stotra of Ganga Devi, that destroys all sins and 
bestows all religious merits. Hear. I bow down to 
the Ganges who appeared from the body of Sri 
Krsna, enchanted by the music of Siva, and, who 


Srīmaddevībhāgavatam 


was bathed with the prespiration (water coming 
out of the body) of Šrī Radha. I bow down to Ganga 
Devi who first appeared in the circular dance (Rasa 
Mandalam) in the region of Goloka and who always 
remains with Sankara. 

mAn Ir eaa | 

arttatgfttarat er at vivi urnam wu 20 N 

aittatsrafretturt quif Hanya vn: | 

HI a tera at ta UTATRTEA 0 21 N 

My obeisance to the Devi Ganga who remains 
in the auspicious grand utsav of Radha (Rasa 
Mandalam), crowded with Gopas and Gopis, in 
the Full Moon night of the month of Kartika. She 
is one koti yojanas wide and one lakh times on 
koti yojanas long in the region of Goloka. 

avad um qt seh gnum à 

Raga ur sepu at vhi Wor 1 22 !! 

fiisrewiaraterat at quif tengon qd: à 

ASA seres A t vit VOTATIETETT 11 23 lt 

My obeisance to Her! In Vaikuntha, Ganga is 
sixty lakh yojanas in width and four times that in 
lenght. My Obeisance to Her! In Brahma-loka, 
Ganga is thirty lakh yojanas wide and five times 
as long. I bow down to Her. 

Rieter a qu agim aa: | 

ange rach a at Wat WOM 11 2 4 N 

vartu! def auru ad: 1 

anga Sparten m at viri wurHTEREN 0 2 5 1i 

In Siva-loka, She is thirty lakh yojanas wide and 
four times that in length. I bow down to Her. In 
Dhruva-loka, She is one-lakh yojanas wide and 
seven times as long. I bow down to Her. 

saadaa cet carro aa: | 

angat ews ar at vit yormmerg i 2 6 N 

akaga um eet agro qn: d 

angar gieh at at vii WOT ! 27 N 

In Candra loka She is on lakh yojanas wide and 
five times as long. My obeisance to Sri Ganga 
Devi. I bow down to the Ganges who is sixty 
thousand yojanas wide in the Sürya loka and ten 
times that in length. 


Book IX Chapter XII 


varateraferedturt uif denm we: | 

TGA vr quietas at iut worse it 28 tt 

areata We ARTO Aa: 1 

BGA STM AM di viui erre 29 u 

I bow down to Ganga in Tapo-loka who is one 
lakh yojanas wide and five times that in length. 
My obeisance to Ganga Devi in Janar-loka, who 
is one thousand yojanas wide and ten times that as 
long. 

AGITA UT Se MTT Aa: | 

angar AM Age fe et WT VUTATEIEA ! 30 1 

wears Ef VO wd: | 

SHTQET AT ST HOTS rt TA WoT 3 1 oU 

I bow down to Ganga in Mahar-loka who is ten 
lakh yojanas wide and five times that in length. 
My obeisance to Ganga Devi in Kailāša who is 
one thousand yojanas wide and one hundred times 
as long. 

vaarti quf qynpum ww: 

vWarfen-ft acta at vivi yore 11 32 u 

I bow down to Ganga Devi who is known as 
Mandakini in Indra-loka, and who is one hundred 
yojanas wide and ten times than that in length. 

"rare mad vc Retort gyra i 

wet aynqur ef at viui worm 0 33 ll 

miam aa: after er BATAT i 

fürdt eese ar at vii MUTATRTEA, ! 34 t 

wet ur iani a 3rararittguferer | 

Brat sear ur at zii WorHTETEN ! 35 N 

My obeisance to Ganga Devi, known as 
Bhagavati in Pātāla who is ten yojanas wide and 
five times as long. I bow down to Ganga Devi, 
known as Alakananda in this earth, who is two 
miles wide, in som places more wide and in some 
places less wide. I bow down to Ganga Devi who 
was of the colour of milk in Satya yuga, of the 
colour of Moonin Trejà Yuga of the colour of white 
sandal paste in Dvapara yuga. 

SICUT Heat Wr AAA gférdiao i 

verf a Pref aftr at vit worms t 3 6 u 


1019 


€— 
aidaftrarast arfirat grues: 1 


weenie und entfesranfstd aga 137 0 

I bow down to Sri Ganga Devi who is as water 
in Kali yuga in this earth and as milk in Kali yuga 
in Heaven. O Child! By the touch of one molecule 
of the water of the Ganges, all the horrible sins 
incurred in ten million births, the murder of a 
Brahmin and so forth, are burnt to ashes. 

gaa wire aerimadefēiurtī: 1 

Raed U wat weet usse 038 1 

fred at fe wore vis wr vate | 

Msvanerne Pret wae ATA ym: 139 N 

Thus I have described in twenty-one years the 
great stotra (human) of the sin-destroying and the 
virtue-increasing merits of Ganga. He reaps the 
fruit of the ASvamedha sacrifice (Horse sacrifice), 
who daily sings this praise of Ganga after 
worshipping Her with devotion. There is no doubt 
in this, 

SYA HAA vat Aaa HAA | 

Trae Wh aap TATA 4.0 u 

sraqgentfet: gam wat wate dis: | 

a: Wr ATA AAS BAT U 41 ul 

yet ade g aA rer ANT | 

The persons that are without any sons get sons 
hereby and those who have no wives get wives. 
The diseased get themselves free from their 
diseases, and the man who is under bondage, is 
liberated from that bondage. He who getting up 
early in the morning reads this stotra of Ganga, 
becomes widely known even if he be not known at 
all and he becomes illumined with wisdom even if 
he be quite ignorant. Even if he sees a bad dream, 
he acquires the merit of bathing in the Ganges and 
of seeing good dreams. 


Tam Tit er vet da aA: 1142 0 
SSRITH At WEA ST BT MET ATT: | 


"gud d age trea: PASATA 0 43 ll 
aires ars star da fire rar | 


1020 


Sri Narayana spoke: O Narada! With this stotra 
(hymn) did Bhagiratha praise the Ganga Devi. Who 
then went with him to the spot where the Sagara’s 
sons were burnt to ashes by the curse of Kapila. 
By the contact of the wind in touch with the 
particles of water of the Ganges, those sons of 
Sagara were instantly freed of their curses and they 
all repaired to Vaikuntha. She is named Bhāgirathī, 
because Bhagiratha brought Her to this earth. 

gerd efi ad TTT, !44 ! 

quad ward ant f ya: sitghreakt i 

Thus I have discribed to you the story of the 
Ganges. This anecdote is highly meritorious and 
the great step to liberation. What more do you now 
want to hear? Say. 

ang zarar 

wma wet fram wat yaaa 145 n 

oa ot cha fatten aed aq A uit i 

TT WAT À À Ur fei erp 46 0 

weed g ferettot queat erepfiverefit | 

Narada said: O Lord! How did Ganga come to 
flow through the three worlds by there routes, and 
thus purify them? How was she carried and to 
which places? How did the people of those 
localities accord respect to Her? Kindly describe 
all these in detail. 

starrer Saret 

fett yia g Ware: YARA: 0 47 N 

HON: dus wi wemqan wwe | 

ta yai at Wuss Ceara: 48 N 

wegen: wd sewer VIETU: 1 

Narayana said: O Narada! On the Full Moon 
night of the month of Kàrtik in the Rása mandalam, 
at the great festivity in honour of Radha, Sri Krsna 
worshipped Ràdhà and remained there. Next 
Radha, worshipped by Šrī Krsna, was worshipped 
by Brahma and the other Devas, by Saunaka and 
the other Rsis, who also stopped there with much 
gladness. 


Srīmaddevībhāgavatam 


Tatra gardft a aad 149 u 

wit KTM ator U ware | 

JA wem gdt arā ARTERA, 150 1 

Prat miam g wdegmsegehm i 

n eng eb owdvrui wu 51 

eupeure envi KAT cp werent d 

Anan maA crest Wale 052 W 

TPT at: RARR | 

Roma vnd WeugfWised 153 1 

gat rentum serere YNT i 

adaig u eta ara feo wa usa 

agah afeatga MATT, | 

At this moment the Devi Sarasvati, the Presiding 
Deity of the Science of Music began to sing lovely 
songs regarding Krsna, in tune with vocal and 
instrumental music. Brahma became glad and 
presented to Sarasvati a necklace of jewels, Maha 
Deva gave her gems and jewels rare in this 
universe; Krsna presented the best Kaustubha 
jewel; Radhika offered excellent invaluable 
necklace of jewels; Narayana presented to her the 
best and most excellent garland of jewels; Laksmi 
gave her invaluable golden earrings decked with 
gems; Visnu-Maya Mila Prakrti, Bhagavati Durga, 
who is Nārāyaņī, [Svari, "ani, presented Her 
devotion to Brahma, so very rare; Dharma gave 
her devotion to Dharma and high fame; Agni (fire) 
gave her excellent raiments purified by fire and 
Vayu gave Her Nüpura (toe ornaments) made of 
gems and jewels. 

gaitas vider wat gg: u55 ul 

wail sian ITTF i 

At this time, Mahe$vara, the Lord of Bhütas 
(elements) began to sing, at the suggestion of 
Brahma, songs relating to Sri Krsna’s grand Rasa 
festival. 

æg: vn: we Praga TAT 0 56 N 

wet dari unma ay owes | 

we wel srerentut UTT TK, 57 N 


Hearing this, the Devas became very much 


Book IX Chapter XII 


1021 


enchanted and remained motionless like statues. 
With they their 
consciousness. Then they saw that there was no 
Radha nor Krsna in the Rasa mandala; everything 
was deluged with water. 


great difficulty, regained 


Beer weg: We TTT Mey: BT Fa: à 
wart gan speret ae Anaa uss i 
Tes NT um staram xerarfirfer à 
wd sumas: wd „gg: WaT u59n 
wana asta fast aifud eue a: 1 


The Gopas, Gopis, Devas and Brāhmaņas began 
to cry loudly. Brahma in his meditation then came 
to know that Radha and Krsna both have assumed 
this liquid appearance for the deliverance of the 
people of thé world. Brahma and others, all began 
to praise Sri Krsna and said: “O All prevading One! 
Now be pleased to show as Thy form and grant us 
our desired boons. 

Tafari at canenqpammüfRuft 60 1 

aa Yaa: Ae garni EAT | 

watse yR enagaga 61 i 

MEETS RT atest er fēruradt: | 

At that instant a sweet incorporeal voice was 
clearly heard by all, as coming from air above, that, 
“I am the Self of all, pervading all; and this my 
Sakti, Rādhā, is also the Self of all, prevades all; 
so there is no separation of us from you all even 
for a moment. It is only to show our favour to the 
devotees that we assume special forms. For this 
reason only there is separation of us from you as 
regards this body! There is nothing else. Besides 
you have no necessity with our bodies. 


mat wat: we gaada durer u62 li 

Tara ui ssuritreite were | 

aft se a eret adsa KAT: 163 N 

aug vipera nde gTsune- | 

tad faei SATA HS MTS i064 N 

O Devas! Now if my Manus, men, Munis, 
Vaisnavas and you all, purified by Mantras, desire 
very much to see My From clearly, then I tell you 


to request Mahe$vara to carry out My word. O 
Brahma! O Creator! Better ask Mahūdeva, the 
World-Teacher, that He would better compose the 
beautiful Tantra Sastra, in accordance with the 
limbs of the Vedas. 

wd vrafāvti ub Gabi uen 1 

ada: watema: "65 

eins feats wsufafüned: | 

Weisen HAT err WAT 1! 66 d 

And that the above Sastra be full of Mantras, 
capable to yield desired fruits, Stotras (hymns) and 
Kavacas (protection mantras) and rules of duc 
worship in proper order. And that also My Mantra, 
My Stotra, and My Kavaca be also given there in 
a hidden form. So that those people that are sinners 
might not understand their real meanings and thus 
turn out against Me. 


grafa ferma da star at acefitafet à 
WEY verb aia TAT ll 67 N 
war eure wÉüredf a AIGA | 
aree A srferedfer od areata: 1168 U 
freret afaa ad ware da sum | 


WAT: US WARIS Yt: BE Ta Ta |1 69 Ui 

It may be that one in a thousand or in a hundred 
may worship My Mantra. And My Mantra 
worshippers, the saints, become purified and come 
to My Abode. If My Sastra be not well made (i.c., 
if every one be able to understand its meaning) 
and if every one be able to go from Bhürloka to 
Goloka, then Thy labour in this creation of the 
world will all be in vain. Therefore dost Thou better 
create different worlds according to the difference 
of Sāttvik, Rajasik, and Tamo Gunas; then some 
will be the inhabitants of this Bhürloka, some will 
be the inhabitants of Dyuloka according to their 
Karmas. 

yfr: kerani RaR: 1 

sé wd ma: wife dadafg 070 

ufi gyei aaa aft wr gaf 1 

Aaya TT AAA GAA: 71 i 


1022 


O Brahman! If Maha Deva promises earnestly 
in this assembly of the Devas, I will then exhibit 
My True Form. O Narada! Thus speaing, the 
Eternal Purusa Sri Krsna remained silent. (ie. , 
the aerial incorporeal voice stopped).” 

Tegra WTA arar agare fora Yar | 

Se Aart eat AM Aha aT: 072 n 

Tera at Heat vellent TT AT U: | 

"qvi ferempraran AÀ: AAT 0 73 N 

agar ahtentt ufa ug 

Timditagregva freer afe aqua: 074 u 

"rfr Hoga er arg TAU ad: | 

Hearing this, Brahma, the Creator of the world, 
gladly informed Siva of this. When the Lord of 
Knowledge, the Foremost of the Jūānins, 
Bhūtanātha heard the words of the Creator, He took 
the Ganges water in His hands and swore that ‘I 
will complete the Tantra Sastra, full of Radha 
mantras and not opposed to the Vedas.’ If one 
touches the Ganges water and speaks lies, one 
remains in the terrible Kalasütra hell for a period 
of one Brahma’s life time. 

sep viet weet gia 075 0 

anfia start vrerer fece: | 

ad ager U HEE: yes 76 

O Dvija! When Bhagavan Sankara said this 
before the assembly of the Devas in the region of 
Goloka, Sri Krsna appeared there with Radha. The 
Devas became exceedingly glad to see Him. They 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


prasied Him, the Best Purusa and they were all 
filled with rapture and again engaged themselves 
in the grand Rasa Festival. 

Varam UH GEA | 

ares yihad Tt a: 77 u 

gard «fed ad Gara u yey i 

@ Wa FART A WET MSHA 078 N 

Some time after, Maha Deva lighted the Torch 
of Mukti i.e., the Tantra Sastra was published by 
Him, as promised. O Child! Thus I have disclosed 
to you this anecdote, so-very secret, and hard to be 
attained. Thus Sri Krsna Himself, is verily the 
liqued Ganga sprung in the region of Goloka. 

Tepe ARRONA | 

RA CATT ESTE AT HOT A WTA 007 9 Uu 

PUTT VT wesgsuhwer 179 1 

aft Staādtanrad erue) Tamed 
STATĪSEATA: 012 

This holy Ganga, born of the bodies of Krsna 
and Radha inseparable from each other, grants 
enjoyment, lordship and libe. ation. Sri Krsna, the 
Highest Self, has placed Her in various places; so 
Ganga is of the nature of Sri Krsna and is 
everywhere, equally honoured everywhere in the 
Brahmanda (universe). 

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter in the Ninth Book 
on the origin of Ganga in the Mahapuranam 
Srimaddevi bhagavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1022 ; Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


CHAPTER XIII 
On the Anecdote of the Ganga 
ARE sara WMT at AHS VA gta AT 2 i 
ae: VBA ada gwar | siet sed Tara TSH gi: Wu | 
FA TAT AT RTT AY ITT ATES HOD odi umad a vmuid TTT at da Are u30 


Narada said: O Lord for of the Devas! Kindly| tm mad vagara: Firat gt: 1 
say in what Loka did Ganga go after 5000 (five) Ķdedeatta awelerrea: hiia: at 4 d 
thousand) year of the Kali Yuga? Narayana said: The Bhagirathi Ganga came 
starrer zara down to Bharata under the course of Bharati; and 


i A va i | when, the term expired, She went back, be the Will 


Book IX Chapter XIII 


1023 


of God, to the region of Vaikuntha. Also at the end 
of the period of their curses, Bharati and, Laksmi, 
too, left Bharata and repaired to Narayana. Ganga, 
Laksmi, and Sarasvati, these three and Tulasi all 
these four are so very dear to Sri Hari. 
ante sare 

Artura ur eet faaara | 

AEAĀSGAT U sat Prahran a ar Uu 5 u 

aya a fates Tim anra | 

Tel HT WRN uH areg 6 d 

Nārad said: How did Ganga appear from the 
lotus feet of Visnu? Why did Brahma put Her in 
His Kamandalu? I have heard that Ganga is the 
wife of Siva; how then, came She to be the wife of 
Narayana? Kindly describe all these in detail to 
me. 

starrer sarat 

"pr aya Meta a T xenefüvit i 

TTT aay aeaeo u7 N 

xarfüsrgadt ur sAm afer | 

durer waton o 8 

Narayana said: O Muni! In ancient times, in the 
region of Goloka, Ganga assumed the liquid 
appearance. She was born of the bodies of Radha 
and Krsna. So she is of the nature of both of them 
and their parts. Ganga is the presiding deity, of 
water. She is unequalled in Her beauty in this world. 
She is full of youth and adorned with all ornaments. 

PTT AAT KATE | 
meian NIN 

Her face was like the autumnal mid-day lotus 
and sweet smile was always reigning on Her lips; 
Her form was very beautiful; Her colour was as 
bright as melted gold and She looked brilliant like 
the Autumnal Moon. 

Kramer | 

wdtrefe-snfor: gadegtm 10 i 

Urtad gatet erga quem | 

qraredagnet gac gaisam un 


Eyes and mind get cool and become pleasant at 
Her beauty and radiance; She was of purely Suddha 
Sattva; Her loins were bulky and hard and She was 
covered with excellent clothings all over Her body. 
Her breasts were plump and prominent; they were 
raised, hard, and nicely round. Her eyes very 
fascinating, always casting side-long glances. 


diet wate metuenda | 


Rigfügofed wi maai: 112 0 
agtufrargi ieg wie d 
wtTGIHRRRHENIS U Ya 0013 0 


Her braids of hair situated a little oblique and 
the garland of Malati flowers over it made Her look 
extremely handsome. The sandal-paste dot and the 
vermillion dot were seen on Her fore-head. On Her 
cheeks the leaves of musk were drawn and Her 
lips were red like Bandhüka flowers and they 
looked enchanting. 


Wesarfensftsrréquivempssqe | 

ardt afaspa a tetera fērafā i 14 u 

Wl TATA FUN ATA YARAT | 

AT ganra Ati fers N 15 

Panamai a fusi wed ger 1 

GAGA GAMAS u16u 

Her rows of teeth looked like rows of ripe 
promegranates; the ends of Her cloth not 
inflammable by fire, worn in front in a know round 
the waist She sat by the side of Krsna, full of 
amorous desires, and abashed. She covered Her 
face with the end of Her cloth and was seeing, with 
a steadfast gage the face of the Lord and She was 
drinking the nectar of His face with great gladness. 
Her lotus face bloomed and became gladdened at 
the expecation of a first amorous embrace. 

dem gspedur Wenifenaferer | 

vaaia ast ferret a uf ou 17 u 

"irdifisrentfesrenr Atkas augam à 

SARIN THAT 0018 LU 

She fainted on seeing the Form of Her Lord and 
a thrill of joy passed all over Her body. In the 


1024 


meanwhile Radhika came up there. Radha was 
attended by thirty kotis of Gopis. She looked 
brilliant like tens of millions of Moons. Seeing 
Ganga by the side of Sri Krsna, Her face and eyes 
became reddened with anger like a red lotus. 
iat iani master 1 
aera — u19 
ATA ARNAR, | 
Vara oret eah a fer u 20 u 
Her colour was yellow like campaka and Her 
gait was like a maddened elephant. She was 
adorned with various invaluable ornaments made 
of jewels. Her pair of clothings were tied round 
Her waist. They were decked with invaluable 
jewels and not infammable by fire. (fire-proof). 
RIGAS HS U ATA | 
erede fareidt waters 21 u 
wamama T 1 


Parrett U safe: dana 1 22 u 
The Arghya offered by Šrī Krsņa was on Her 
lotus-feet of the colour of a flowing shrub-Hibiscus 
mutabilis and She was going slowly step by step. 
The Rsis began to fan Her with white Camaras no 
sooner She, descending from the excellent 
aeroplane decked with jewels, began to walk. 
aiig wart afar | 
dadaman Rigi fügsiüfr 123 0 
erdt seres er virer: eres | 
CREAM PITT wem 124 N 
Below the pont where the parting of the hairs 
on the head is done, there was the dot of Sindüra 
on Her fore-head. If looked brilliant like a bright 
lamp flame. On both sides of this Sindürabindu, 
the dot of musk and the dot of Sandal-paste were 
seen. When She began to quiver with anger, Her 
braid, with Pārijāta round it began to tremble also. 
fur audi ZR | 
gamd mrad w u25 0 
À F TRETA yp a 
Adata ratu utt fast: fira i 26 0 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


Her lips adorned with beautiful colours, began 
to guiver also. She took Her seat angrily on a jewel 
throne by the side Šrī Krsņa. Her attendants took 
their seats in their allotted positions. Seeing Rādhā, 
Šrī Krsņa got up at once from His seat with 
reverence and addressed Her, smiling and began 
to converse with Her in sweet words. 

Ai g UTT ut: aagi à 

RTI Heer: UT Hus: 1 27 A 

words GÜDUT ARRET: | 

TIA U TERT U qETd WAI: 028 U 

The Gopīs, very much afraid and with their 
heads bent low, began to chant hymns to Her with 
devotion. Šrī Krsņa also began to praise Her with 
stotras. At this moment Gangā Devī got up and 
praised Her with various hymns and asked Her 
welfare with fear and with humble words. Out of 
fear, Her throat, lips and palate were parched up. 

FTA YET ASAT Tafel AY EAT UT d 

Ge Ruge cffe 129 0 

TUNRA ALA penes UTE TT | 

eur moe pR u30 1 

She took refuge humbly at Sri Krsna's feet. Sri 
Krsna then took Ganga Devi on His breast when 
She became calm and quiet. At this interval 
Surešvarī Ganga looked at Radha, seated on a 


throne, lovely and sweet, as if She was burning 


with Brahma Fire. 

ai gaaei oor sfrarir urri adt 1 

aya Reda a dzer a 31 N 

wed ftgreaseat a tat tht avi T i 

qr gagatu saci snot t 32 u 

Since the beginning of creation, She is the Sole 
Lady of innumerable Brahmas and She is Eternal. 
At the first sight, She looked young as if of twelve 
years old. Nowhere in any Universe can be seen a 
lady so beautiful and having no beginning nor 
end. 

adware: asaru”: wererft | 

"War gravadfai e-urredresnu33u 


Book IX Chapter XIII 


1025 


fagorat Premi woo a yt I | 

Viet aeania adit u34 a 

She was auspicious, well endowed with all 
auspicious signs, prosperous, and having the good 
fortune of having a best husband. She was the 
foremost jewel amongst the ladies and appeard as 
if all the beauties were concentrated in Her. 

ITT quat quet TTT i 

Aadat set walg datu au nasu 

POTENT Parag Asa een fee | 

uiri er reread GATT GATT wr u 36 t 

Radha is the (left) half of Sri Krsna’s body; 
whether in age or in strength or in beauty she was 
in every was perfectly equal to Sri Krsna. Laksmi 
and the Lord of Laksmi both worship Radha. The 
excellent brilliance of $ri Krsna was overpowered 
by the beauty of Radha. Taking Her seat on the 
throne She began to chew betals offered by Her 
attendants (Sakhis). 

NETĀ WSTHT STHTHTSTEST ATT | 

dari a cae pad a gem 0 37 u 

aai Wa treat ret orc ATT i 

Horror xr wrerfireremt vum t 38 1 

She is the Mother of all the worlds; but no one 
is Her mother. She is fortunate, respected and 
proud. She is the Ruling Lady of Sri Krsna’s Life 
and Soul and ever dearer to Him than His Prana 
(vital breath). 

ger wr gid 4 wem und a 

Fanaa a PIRTI wit T ATA i39 N 

varia ter sardtgrgara aT | 

rer aee otter fetter TTT Fs 40 It 

O Devarsi! Gangā, the Governess of the Devas, 
looked at Her over and over again with asteadfast gaze; 
but Her eyes and mind were not at all satiated. At this 
moment, Radha addressed smilingly to Sri Krsna, the 
Lord of the world, humble and in sweet words. 

mara 
Si wrote Herat fere agag | 
wgsidt afar urge regnm ARNAT i 41 i 


65 


"ef urere want qereifesafenmet | 

enu quere friar ga: wa: 42 u 

O My Lord! Who is that Lady sitting by Thy 
side, looking askance, eager and with a smiling 
countenance. She is enchanted with Thy beauteous 
form and fainting away. Her whole body is excited 
with rapturous joy. Hiding Her face with cloth She 
is frequently looking at Thee. 

verfa at dires Gare: ARAA: WT 1 

af tafe rieta sre gdferfravft u 43 n 

Thou also dost look on Her smilingly and with 
desires. What are all these? Even during My 
presence in this Goloka, all these bad practices are 
being rampant. 

rata ta gdi at at fü a i 

ami ath Gam er elt safe: ferrem t 44. u 

ayant firarfiret weitere eue | 

arre a ff a sr afaa sum |1 45 N 

It is Thou that art doing all these bad things often 
and often! We are female sex; what shall we do? 
We are naturally, of a very pleasing temper, simple. 
I bore and forgave all these out of our love. O 
Licentious One! Take Thy Beloved and go away 
quickly from this Goloka. Otherwise these things 
will not bid fair to Thee. 

ged favent war etary | 

am Hat Tar Web ati ana d 46 N 

AT racer ftem qd Wu | 

Ww Tere feres adhaut aya HT 0047 N 

Firstly, One day I saw Thee, united with Viraja 
Gopi, in Candana (Sandal wood) forest. What to 
do? At the request of the Sakhis, I did forgive Thee. 
Then, hearing My footsteps, Thou didst fly away. 
Virajà, out of shame, quitted Her body and assumed 
the form of a river. 

atfedrrfretturt eret teat ETO à 

erf féreraram ar Ta aE u 48 1 

TE at arat cw wie wif i 

wed ete fast farst ai ETC 049 N 


That is million Yojanas wide and four times as 


1026 


long. Even to this day Viraja is existing, testifying 
to Thy Glory (near Puri, Jagannatha)! When I went 
back to My home Thou didst go to Viraja again 
and cried aloud ‘O Viraje! O Viraje!” 

qar ATT ATT ur anie i 

"ree ufandt edt quater asia u 50 it 

eet TTT ftatua pd «mar i 

Wb AT U AAA: HT Wa uw 51 N 

Hearing Your cry, Viraja, the Siddha Yogini 
arose from the waters, out of Her Yogic power, 
and when She showed Thee Her divine appearance, 
decked with ornaments, Thou didst draw Her to 
Thy side and cast Thy seed in Her. It is owing to 
the casting of that seed in the womb of Viraja that 
the seven oceans have come into existence! 

Feed VITA WAT THATS | 

wet Tessa fete qd TAT 52 N 

vir w utes Ta tate | 

ATT: ort a feni qst enqarg 0 53 u 

Secondly—One day I saw Thee in actual 
intercourse with the Gopi named Šobhā! Hearing 
My footsteps, Thou fled'st away that day also. Out 
of shame Sobha quitted Her body and departed to 
the sphere of Moon (Candra Mandal). The cooling 
effect of the Moon is due to this Sobha. 

EIER carat at COL faga | 

vera fs orecerarar fébsferefürenmer wt u 5 4 1 

fk fereefturt gara: feferstat a fea à 

faaearaa wsrerenfu few 155 i 

fhaa: Ted: erede fT | 

qa depos fhea 1561 

When Sobha was thus distressed, Thou didst 
divide Her and put some parts to gems and jewels, 
part to gold, partly to excellent pearls and gems, 
partly on the face of women, partly to the bodies 
of Kings, partly to the leaves of trees, partly to 
flowers, partly to ripe fruits, partly to corns, partly 
to palaces and temples, partly to purified materials, 
partly to young and tender shoots and foliage, and 
partly to milk. 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 

fafa gtagītā frem à 

GE WET TTT pent Galas ad 1 57 A 

eit UB fetta wd waar i 

wur dē Rema SA waited 158 1 

vene: vr ar chet qum snp € | 

Haa an qui WT Wear TT d 59 u 

RÈ UN: POT SHAM He T | 

KATATU fhe ergrererfu hast t 60 N 

fhaa aver feat 1 

haapa artatstt er fert u 6 1 u 

Thirdly—I saw Thee united with Prabha Gopi 
in Vrndàvana. Thou fled st away, hearing My 
footsteps. Out of shame, Prabha quitted Her body 
and departed to the Solar atmosphere. This Prabhà 
(lustre) is fierce luminosity of the Solar atmosphere. 
Out of the pangs of separation Thou criedest and 
didst divide Prabha and didst put some parts in Fire, 
partly amidst the Yaksas, partly into lions, among 
men, partly amongst the Devas, partly in 
Vaisnavas, partly in serpents, partly in Bráhmanas, 
partly in Munis, partly in ascetics, and partly in 
fortunate and prosperous ladies. 

agna ynag date fm i 

ana: APM AMAIA fient u 62 u 

wg Grat u uds: qd wefad «mur i 

wife gara wr SSSA THATS u 63 u 

add gavrarai wregaiziedtfar: i 

Teudtūdai cw watraterifet 64n 

TTT Te? teria we | 

Tri a utat gata yu fent t 65 u 

Thou hadst to weep then after Thou hadst thus 
divided Prabha, for Her separation and and fourthly 
I saw Thee in love union with the Gopi Santi in 
Ràsa Mandalam. On the coming of the spring 
season, one day Thou with garlands of flowers on 
Thy neck and with Thy body besmeard with sandal 
paste and decked with ornaments, wast sleeping 
on a bed of flowers with Santi Gopi, decked with 
gems, in a temple made of gems and pearls and 
illumined by a lamp of jewels and Thou wast 
chewing the betel, given by Thy beloved. 


Book IX Chapter XIII 


RE aeons wd mu i 

wife ufterse fore at rate Wait i66 n 

were: VĒ a TAs aga € | 

Parser TT ot Gur Weed uu 067 It 

faa g fates fiaa a rfr dt | 

SAGA qur PAI T fast t 68 u 

verear zr] greens fera | 

aaay data ates frem 69 u 

Hearing My sound Thou fled'st away. Sànti 
Gopi, too, out of fear and shame quitted Her body 
and disappeared in Thee. Therefore Santi is 


reckoned as one of the noblest qualities. Out of the 
pain of separation. Thou didst divide the body of 
Sànti and distributed partly to forests, partly to 
Brahma, partly to Me, partly to Suddha Sattvà 
Laksmi, partly to Thy Mantra worshippers, partly 
to My Mantra worshippers, partly to the ascetics, 
partly to Dharma, and partly to the religions 
persons. 

War ae xp ed get TTT U ATA WE | 

qüwqadt meorartnigrutia: 070 

mr adadan We 

U LZS TSK SKS qasira n71 


Fifthly—Dost Thou remember that one day 
anointing all over Thy body fully with the sandal 
paste and good scent and with garlands on Thy 
neck, well dressed, decked with jewels, Thou wast 
sleeping with Ksamā (forgiveness) Gopi in ease 
and happiness, on a nice bedding interpersed with 
flowers and well scented. 

Rest fig wer: quia eH | 

na warren HT TAI RUD HS N 72 N 

qii direi a ue ow mew d 

AAA ITS VT 073! 

Thou wert so much overpowered by sleep after 
fresh intercourse that when I went and disturbed, 
then Thou two didst get up from the sweet sleep. I 
took away Thy yellow robes, the beautiful Muralī 
(flute), garlands made forest, Kaustubha gems, and 
invaluable earrings of pearls and gems. 


1027 


waa nm wr waist errat i 

SAT qnas TAIT ST: WAY 74 u 

aa dé uftersu costar uférefi war | 

Ate: ym U TNA ada g u75 

fu TIM ri unm wet ua: | 

fe feret fereurat er dors fever 1 7 6 N 

akay dalu giay fours | 

auftenaitstt casa: VĒST favere 0 77 u 

I gave it back to Thee at the earnest request of 
the Sakhis. Thy body turned black with sin and 
dire shame. Ksamā then quitted Her body out of 
shame and went down to the earth. Therefore 
Ksamā turned out to be the repository of best 
qualifies. Out of affection to Her, Thou didst divide 
Her body and distributed them partly to Visnu, 
partly to the Vaisnavas partly to Dharma, partly to 
the religious persons, partly to weak persons, partly 
to ascetics, partly to the Devas, and partly to the 
Pandits (literany persons). 

aget afer we fei; spar: sitgfireofar à 

Tye da aE eren uet u 78 N 

SUATAA HT WEN TART | 

vit reg erm ATR ST MATT wu 79 u 

O Lord! Thus I have described Thy qualities as 
far as I know. What more dost Thou want to hear? 
Thou hast many qualities! But I am not aware of 
them. Having thus spoken, the red-lotus eyed 
Radha began to rebuke Ganga sitting by the side 
of Sti Krsna with Her head bent low out of shame. 

Tm wet fasta an Rugs i 

fera Hum wenn? MAAN wr 80 u 

At this time Gangà, who was a Siddha Yogini 
came to know all the mysteries, and instantly 
disappeared from the assembly in Her own water 
form. 

wen atta ferma udarati ec TA à 

wri cmd wars rigafeagattrit u$ u 

mgr weed ĒRA sitter fragte à 

stgarauriutst feast Vot wet 182 u 


The Siddha Yoginī Rādhā came to know also, 


1028 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


by Her Yogic power, the secrets of Gangā and 
became ready to drink the whole water in one sip. 
Gangā, knowing this intention of Rādhā, by Her 
Yogic power, took refuge of Krsņa and entered 
into His feet. 


Teale rw AHS src AUT | 

wash wer ada Aa EP east AT n83 ou 

ada IOTI U years er Tita | 

wesgqayes yale: Ufa 840 

Then Radha began to look out for Ganga 
everywhere: First She searched in Goloka, then 
Vaikuntha, then Brahma-loka; then She searched 
all the Lokas one by one but nowhere did She find 
Ganga. All the places in Goloka became void of of 
water; all turned out dried mud and all the aquatic 
animals died and fell to the ground. 

vattuntrariaufšattaram: — d 

Waal Waa: ud ģafrgautam: 85 

And Brahma, Visnu, Siva, Ananta, Dharma 
Indra, Moon, Sun, Manus, Munis, Siddhas, ascetics 
all became very thirsty and their throats became 
parched. 


Tie ATT: YERENI: | 
i watts weet wed: wr 
ATA BATT, 

eee as waa WaT N87 u 

Fiesa Parent Pied a feror | 

Patti a Pet Pitan PA 88 u 

TTT U ATH MATT EH | 

Vs Teg aad wan. u 89 1 

They then went to Goloka, and bowed down 
with devotion to $ri Krsna, Who was the Lord of 
all, beyond Prakrti, the Supreme, worthy to be 
worshipped, the Bestower of boons, the Best, and 
the Cause of boons; Who is thc Lord of Gopas and 
Gopis; Who is formless, without any desire, 
unattached, without refuge, attributeless, without 
any enthusiasm, changeless, and unstained; Who 
is All Will and who assumes forms to show favour 
to His devotees; Who is Sattva, the Lord of truth, 


186 ll 
l 


the Witness and eternal Purusa, and Who is the 
Highest, the Supreme Lord, the Best and Excellent, 
the Highest Self and the Supreme God. They began 
to hymn Him. 

wi wet urn U9 | 

ŅUTI qua: we wÉRTTHIGTERSERT: 0 90 N 

PII: WISI: Tranter: | 

ad wu udg sed wsenu 97 N 

All were filled with intese feelings with 
devotion; tears of love were flowing from their 
eyes and the bodies of all were filled with ecstacy, 
the hairs standing in ends. 

ratfadd wi sur HARER, | 

aerate, 92 

Roast wp mae: Aramara | 

targa wad uud Fat 93 0 

wrerferesfüereri vremeereenofeen 1 

Wut Wed diac Yard germ 94 u 

Ufa wa eas RIM 1 

TTU waa: frg quits: 1 95 n 

He was Para Brahma; His Substance was made 
of Transcendental Light, Who is the Cause of all 
Causes, who was seated in a wonderful throne, built 
of invaluable gems and jewels, who was being 
fanned by the Gopas with white chowries, who was 
seeing hearing with great delight, and smiling 
countenance, the dancing and singing of the Gopis, 
who was chewing the scented betel offered by 
Radha and who residing in the heart of His dearest 
Sri Radha, who was the Perfect, all pervading, and 
the Lord of the Rasa Circle. The Manus, Munis, 
and the ascetics all bowed down to Sri Krsna, no 
sooner they beheld Him. 

VARTA: Wd sq: wafer | 

Wn ure Wd a cnp 96 N 

frafāci man ITT TT i 

aan agai spear fereuj reat aA t 97 N 

ama arae wp srr AUTATARTA i 

nuagi cgo Wet 098 N 


Joy and wonder at once caught hold of their 


Book IX Chapter XIII 


1029 


hearts. They then looked at one another and gave 
over to Brahma the task of communicating their 
feelings. The four faced Brahma, with Visnu on 
His right and Vama Deva on His left, gradually 
came in front of Sri Krsna. Wherever He cast His 
glance in the Risa Mandalam, He saw Sri Krsna, 
full of the Highest Bliss, of the nature of the Highest 
Bliss, sitting. 

wd poma eat cast west | 

wed Hamas du AARAA, 99 

pi yole amorfa | 

TAS U Ag fm u 100 u 

ada aaa a gat Va i 

TUTSTNUTEAHUT Aart AT RaT 0 101 N 

All have turned out Krsnas; their seats were all 
uniform; all were two armed and with flutes in their 
hands; on every one’s neck is the forest garland; 
peacock’s tail was on the top of everyone’s crest 
and Kaustubha jewels were on and their breasts. 
The Forms of all of them were very beautiful; very 
lovely and very peaceful. No difference at all 
between them whether in form, or in qualities, or 
in ornaments, or in radiance, in age, in lustre, in no 
respect no one was inferior to another. 

uyta wd wüvadsusgdy i 

fé rat tad fē ar agr redeant: u 102 N 

aut dar: U TA Peri ator t 

Prat a ata qat fateri arm w 103 u 

No one was imperfect; no one was deficient in 
lordliness. It was indeed very difficult to make out 
who was the master and who was the servant. 
Sometimes He is seen in His Teja form as the Great 
Light, and there is nothing else; sometimes there 
is that Clear Divine Form; sometimes He comes 
Formless; sometimes with form; and again 
sometimes both with and without form. 

Tata aut pot erat wed wu i 

IRGRTTEĪU qur are er OT i 104 i 

TTU PO HOTA BHAA | 

hat a get Rena ngaga: 1105 U 


Sometimes there is no Rādhā; there is only 
Krsna; And sometimes again in every seat there is 
the Yugal Mürti Radha and Krsna combined. 
Sometimes Radha assumes the form of Krsna. So 
the Creator Brahma could not make out whether 
Sri Krsna was a female or a male. At last He 
meditated on Sri Krsna in his heart-lotus and began 
to chant hymns to Him with devotion and prayed 
for fogiveness for his misdoings. 

BURR E Hepat LTA SAT TTT | 

TaN ead seeuruftenurdesu 11106 II 

We: UKRU Yas Tawa | 

Saul HOTS ep TESTER W107 1 

When Sri Krsna got pleased, the Creator, 
opening His eyes, saw Sri Krsna on the breast of 
Sri Radha. There were His attendants on all the 
sides and the Gopis all around. Seeing this, 
Brahma, Visņu, and Mahešvara bowed down to 
Him and sang His praises. l 

xaurde: ugi Tdtriseorfšau, | 

Ya: Wore SBT qEg: ASM 4 108 I 

aaam agaa ÀN: | 

water a a uda: eyes: 109 U 


sirsrrargare 

WTS Het ATA HATTA | 

PETS Valea PAKETE a: 110 1 

Sri Krsna, the Lord of Laksmi’, the Omnipresent 
Cause of all, the Lord of all, and the Internal Ruler 
of all, knew their intentions and, addressing them, 
separately said: "O Brahaman! Is it all well with 
you? O Lord of Kamala! Come here. O Mahadeva! 
Come here; let all be well to you. 

BUTT HF ARAN WaT ATH | 

TTU ATT sra VITA 111 

Te at urgfires«dt qgr eter: | 

qeria a waat at aped fram u 112 0 

You all have come to me for Ganga. Ganga has 
taken refuge under My feet out of fear for Radha. 
Seeing Ganga by My side, Radha wanted to drink 
Her up. However I will give over Ganga to the 


1030 


hands of you all; but you will have to pray to Radha, 
so that Ganga becomes fearless of Her. 

TRO aa: Acar Oa: emer: 

ETA merma sfrasmafigfsramq 113 0 

AAVATT: degu ube: | 

am IT dagaa WIAA: (1 114 A 

The lotus born Brahma smiled at Šrī Krsna’s 
words and began to sing hyms to Radha, Who is 
fit to be worshipped by all. The Creator Brahma, 
the Compiler of the Four Vedas, the Four-faced 
One praised Radha with His Four heads, bent low 
and addressed Her thus: 

AM Sart 

TAT PACHA WAST XTWWUEG | 

FAAS AT HRA: VISTA 115 N 

POT AT aI A ATA FA i 

ĀTI Heart At Wa WAT 1116 N 

Brahmi said: “O Radhe! Ganga, appeared from 
Thee and the Lord Sri Krsna. Both of you were 
transformed before into the liquid forms in the Ras 
Mandalam, on hearing the music of Sankara. And 
That Lquid Form is Ganga. So She is born of Thee 
and Sri Krsna. Hence She is like Thy daughter and 
to be loved as such. She will be initiated in Thy 
Mantra and She will worship Thee. 

srferearfer uae Ap T: | 

qan: HHA TEAM: Aana R A: 11 117 4 

TATA ST AT TT HEU aAA | 

adfent cd qdyft war A AAAS 118 

The four armed Lord of Vaikuntha will be Her 
husband. And when She will appear in parts on 
earth, the Salt Ocean will be Her husband, O 
Mother! The Ganga that dwells in Goloka, is 
dwelling everywhere. O Governess of the Devas! 
Thou art Her mother; and She is always Thy Self 
born daughter." 

SAN ari grat vellent or ATT 1 

adya WD POESTAT: 0119 N 

AAT Up MIM ae chat wr ERR: | 

sara Aaga aasa 1200 


Srimaddevibhaga vatam 
vistergrufen record rase | 
fate forte izrotāt: 121 1 


Hearing, thus, the words of Brahmā, Rādhā gave 


Her assent towards the protection of Ganga. And then 
Ganga appeared from the toe-tip of Sri Krsna. The 
liquid Ganga, then, assumed Her own form and, 
getting up from water, was received with great honour 
by the Devas. Bhagavan Brahma took a little of that 
Ganges water in His Kamandalu and Bhagavan 
Mahadeva kept some of it in His own head. 

Tee Util west Hate: | 

Tein gai ferri eure w 1122 0 

ad wee aerated war | 

"TT mda Ugra ahs Waal GE 123 N 

The lotus born Brahma, then, initiated Ganga 
into the Radha Mantra and gave Her instructions, 
Radha Stotra (hymn of Radha) according to the 
Sama Veda, Radha Kavaca (protection mantras), 
Radha Dhyan (meditation on Radha), method of 
worship of Radha, and Radha’s purascarana. Ganga 
worshipped Radha according to these instructions 
and went to Vaikuntha. 

vah: aad gt qot fargat 1 

KANTA wert afit Wt u 124 N 

ad ufi: HI TENT ware A: | 

Weser quid galna u125u 

O Muni! Laksmi, Sarasvati, Ganga, and the 
world purifying Tulasi, these four became the 
wives of Narayana. Krsna, then, smiled and 
explained to Brahma the history of Time, hardly 
to be comprehended by others. 

sign sara 

vemm gt S wer gente WENN i 

TU] HIRT quate Tat TEAM |1 126 N 

qa a ASR ear GAA WATE | 

frat anada à asta umma: 127 N 

He then spoke: "O Brahma! O Visnu! O 
Mahe$vara! Now you better take Ganga and I will 
now tell you what a change has been effected by 
this time. Hear. 


Book IX Chapter XIV 


You, the three Devas, the other Devas, Munis, 
Manus, Siddhas, and other Mahātmās that are 
present here, are living now. For this region of 
Goloka is not affected by Kala (Time). Now the 
Kalpa is going to expire. 

Wa sitate Tete amats 1 

GTA udfādi ated Hea SAT 128 U 

ESIDIPEOIE EIER ae ATETAT AT t 

dau) cu frat ad WOR U UA 129 N 

So in the other regions than Goloka and 
Vaikuntha, the Brahmas, etc., that were existing 
in all other Universes, have all now dissolved in 
My Body. O Lotus-born! Save Goloka and 
Vaikuntha, all are now under water, the pre-state 
of earth. 

TT Off pe dao lentē Tar | 

vd werte fever werqmgr wemeae 130 0 

wary fs wet aanfad Ya: | 

würd YA: OS es v gt: WE 131 

Batter go and create your own Brahmāņdas and 
Ganga will go to that newly created Brahmanda. I 
will also create other worlds and the Brahmas 
thereof. Now you all better go with the Devas and 
do your own works respectively. 

Wel AEA: RIT Fh U AGUS: | 

Tat: cafefaemet er ufereatra er aera: 0 132 N 


1031 


STRAT URIATATAT HATA TT AA 1 

Sat Tea qa BS gta Wada: 0133 N 

You have waited here for a long interval. As 
many Brahmas that have fallen all appear again.” 
Thus saying Sri Krsna, the Lord of Radha went to 
His Inner Chamber. The Devas also instantly 
retired from that spot and engaged themselves 
earnestly in the creation work. 

Tete wr fret ET deus fracas 1 

ARO UMTS TA wap qe Ren 134 N 

AAA AT WAT TTE AAA UAT: | 

ferar freres ft wat N 135 t 

gad afād certian | 

Gad werd rt fh we: sigfiresft 1136 u 

TRESANA: 11 13 11 

Ganga remained as before till then in the region 
of Goloka, Vaikuntha, Sivaloka, Brahma-loka, and 
in other places, by the command of Sri Krsna. She 
is named Visnupadi, because She appeared from the 
feetof Visnu. Thus I have described to you this plesant, 
essential story of Ganga, leading to liberation. What 
more do you now want to hear? Say. 

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter the anecdote of 
Ganga in the Ninth Book in the Mahāpurāņam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter XIV 1031 


| 


CHAPTER XIV 
On Ganga, as the Wife of Narayana 
WR IATA n 

eit: erat rim geri bii tu xir GTA dpud: Teas ART: à 
Wer mme ares fem git uin IATA wur wef wur waste N 3 M 
wim cwn àpat spi Wu 1 Hos M : 

: Narayana said: Brahma came from Goloka to 
ae oT ee Ue a aaa a a T 2 u . . oc 

7 . MNA _ | the region of Vaikuntha accompanied by Ganga. 
Narada said: O Lord! Ganga, Laksmī, Sarasvati, 


and the world purifying Tulasi, these four, are 
dearest to Narayana. Out of these, Ganga wentdid| WEIT warr ur cat zaaf a 
the region of Goloka to Vaikuntha. So I have heard. Tadeo Etter dah am nan 
But how did She come to be the wife of Nārāyaņa.| Jarre a maaa | 
I have not heard. Kindly describe this. aera ATi qund ow od Rem usd 


1032 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


Brahmā said to Nārāyaņa: O Lord! Gangā, born 
of the bodies of Rādhā and Krsņa, full of youth, 
modest, extraordinarily beautiful, of pure Suddha 
Sattva, and void of anger and egoism, does not like 
to marry anyone save Thee as She is born of Thee. 

amama ten TU tata a à 

aye wet sad ahead 6 Nu 

fede atri AU UT: | 

ada Ted yeh Gaisma wp 17 ou 

But Radha is of a very proud nature and very 
wrathful. She was even ready to drink up Ganga. 
But Ganga at once and intelligently took refuge 
into the feet of Sri Krsna. So the whole Goloka 
became void of water. 

"red a Hens wdquigun | 

yafana ndai arcatsfgrata Ts N 

akam Ti a VIETA: | 

Grasi UHM TRACT TAT 119 N 

Seing this, I have come here to know in 
particular the whole history of the case. Then Šrī 
Krsņa, the Knower and the Ruler of the hearts of 
all, came to know my heart and instantly caused 
Gangā to issue from His toe and handed Her over 
to me. I bowed down to Šrī Krsņa and now I have 
come with Ganga to Thee. 

yra wt xr eret qélearssmmr weit | 

wian feast emi wis 10 u 

Sarg weet weed war | 

wa vel du cam viret ft wdt 11 u 

Now Thou dost marry the Sure$vari Ganga 
according to the Gandharva rule of marriage. As 
Thou art a Deva of taste and humorous in the 
assembly of the Devas, so Ganga is. As Thou art a 
gem amongst the males, so She is the gem amongst 
the females. 

faen fares virt qurararaq | 

sufierat verd Heat a Verde a: GATI 12 N 

d faara werent KET ame AGITA: 1 

ay vraedfea: utsfā pat Temm 13 1 


And the union of a humorous man with a 


humorous woman is axceedingly pleasant. Now 
marry this Lady who has come of Her own accord 
to Thee. $ri Mahà Laksmi becomes annoyed with 
one who dest not marry a woman who has come 
spontaneously. There is no doubt in this. The wise 
men do never insult the Prakrti. 
, wá wf: Ga: afta: pcena c 

vere srrararat femur werd: ur: d140 

alg fay: querit atseira age: | 

PMTs TST UT WT 0015 di 

All the Purusas (males) are born of Prakrti and 
all the females are parts of Prakrti. So Prakrti and 
Purusa are both inseparable and verily one and the 
same. So these two should never insult each other. 
(If Thou sayest that Ganga is attached to Krsna; 
how canst Thou marry Her. He reply is) As Sri 
Krsna is beyond the attributes and beyond Prakrti, 
so Thou also above Prakrti. The one-half of Sri 
Krsna is two armed; the other half of Sri Krsna is 
four-armed. 

giy: verc AT A mr arent TAT | 

Ted wat quiera waraga 16 N 

wart ta ehiad wenfruest | 

Saya erar at cf AA GATT W: 17 N 

Radha has appeared from the left side of Sri 
Krsna. He Himself is the right half and Padma is 
His left-half. (As there is no difference between 
Radha and Kamala so there is no difference 
between Sri Krsna and Thee. Therefore as Ganga 
is born of Thy body, she wants to marry Thee. As 
Prakrti and Purusa are really one and the same 
without any difference, so the males and females 
are one. 

miada raa at TE gR: vem | 

Anta: wt Yt Yaar ug 

tā woofers tira west yer | 

THT yei WaT AT AT LACT GANTT H 19 Ut 

Thus speaking to Narayana, Brahma handed 
Ganga over to Narayana and went away. Narayana, 
then, married Ganga smeared with sandal paste and 


Book IX Chapter XV 


1033 


flowers, according to the rules of the Gandharva 
marriage. The Lord of Laksmi then spent his time 
happily in enjoyment with Ganga. Ganga had to 
go to the earth (under the Bhāratī s curse) and 
afterwards returned to Vaikuntha. 

ferar fragararearaa rayada E l 

"egi tyra ur edt aadA 20 N 

TT gadaikan 1 

aiae g: Raa aoi uar afsrarsft er t 2 1 u 

As Gangā appeared from the feet of Visņu, She 
denominated Visnupadi. Ganga Devi was very 
much overpowered with enjoyment in Her first 
intercourse with Narayana; so much so that She 
remained, motionless. Thus Ganga spent the days 
happily with Narayana. Sarasvati’s jealousy 
towards Ganga did not disappear. though She was 
advised by Laksmi Devi not to do so. Sarasvati 
cherished incessantly the feeling of jealousy 


towards Ganga. But Ganga had not the least feeling 
of jealousy towards Sarasvati. 

Rett at aratt rer tit radit à 

im VISTU altar ta eftfirar u 22 u 

TG we wee feed at umm: 1 

mE GORA UAT AMAT 23 

att afferma: erga? 14749 
IJESA: 1114 0 

At last, one day, when vexed too much, Ganga 
became angry and cursed Sarasvati to take Her birth 
in Bharata. So Laksmi, Sarasvati and Ganga were 
the wives of Narayana. Lastly Tulasi became the 
wife of Narayana. So the number of wives of 
Narayana amounted to four. 

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter in the Ninth Book 
on the story of Ganga becoming the wife of Narayana 
in the Mahapuranam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 
18,000 verse by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter XV 


1033 


- m 


CHAPTER XV 
On the Anecdote of Tulasi 


AN Sarat 

menie aredt wet aT a ae € | 

get ga Sey ar at ar ges ud od 

HET AT A HO AA HAT HA Ho Te | 

Sat AT ATT GT a MOT Weed: UT 42 N 

Narada said: O Bhagavan! How came the pure 
chaste Tulasi to the wife of Narayana? Where was 
Her birth place? And what was She in Her previous 
birth? What family did She belong to? Whose 
daughter was She? 

Afam Pré a ndara, | 

ATi vi aa AnA 3 N 

watt cup ude wd Ada i 

aam udat adai URERA 4d 

And what austerities did She practise, that She 
got Narayana for Her husband, Who is above 
Prakrti, not liable to change without any effort, the 
Universal Self, Para Brahma and the Highest God; 
Who is the Lord of all, omniscient, the Cause of 


all, the Receptacle of all, Omnipresent, and the 
Preserver of all. 

warmest get gari ram € 1 

ai magam Paya auftadt us 

Ofer A ast wie Were yee: | 

ware ded ad deg nen 

And how did Tulasi, the chief Devi of Narayana, 
turn out into a tree? Herself quite innocent, how 
She was attacked by the fierce Asura? O Remover 
of all doubts! My mind, plain and simple, has 
become restless. I am eager to hear all this. So 
kindly cut asunder all my doubts. 


ARTaT Sara 


AIT TATA: yaara: WPA: | 

am «itftaiša fautttgragga: 7 0 
wet senarefüreifast dura: yR: 1 

aga aAa furias: usu 
aaa saini aAa: d 
Narayana said: O Narada! The Manu Daksa 


1034 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Savarni was very religious, devoted to Visnu, of 
wide renown, of a great name, and born with 
Visnu’s parts. Daksa Sàvarni's son Brahma Savarni 
was also very religious, devoted to Visnu and of a 
pure Suddha Sattva Guna. Brahma Savarni’s son, 
Dharma Sávarni was devoted to Visnu and He was 
the master of his senses. 


wat dadraftruramumaur: 9 it 
aga gsarafiriertāmamau: | 
GRA Aga GUAT: 110 I 


Dharma Savarni’s sons Rudra Savarni was also 
a man of restraint and very devoted. Rudra 
Savarni’s son was Deva Savarni, devoted to Visnu. 
Deva Savarni’s devoted to Visnu. Deva Savarni’s 
son was Indra Savarni. He was a great Bhakta of 
Visnu. His son was Vrsadhvaja. But He was a 
fanatic Saiva (devoted to Siva). 

wens we vigadttagmaaa | 

warafü wc AA za dfüfSseumw 11 0 

AU mut rr GATT A Tt 1 

yai a adla qp aa W: N 12 N 

At his house Šiva Himself remained for three 
Yugas according to the Deva measure. So much 
so that Bhagavān Bhūtanātha loved him more than 
His own son. Vrsadhvaja did not recognise 
Nārāyaņa, nor Laksmī nor Sarasvatī nor another 
body. He discarded the worship of all the Devas. 
He worshipped Šankara only. 

ae mià ARTS I Wat ast € | 

wem maian feet wdesd: 13 

ura: madga gai wem V: | 

ai a fama a add d farne 14 N 

The greatly exciting Laksmi Pūjā (worship of 
Mahà Laksmi in the month of Bhàdra and Sri 
Paficami Pūjā in the month of Magha, which are 
approved of by the Vedas, Vrsadhvaja put an entire 
stop to these and the Sarasvati Pūjā. At this the 
Sun became angry with the King Vrsadhvaja, the 
discarder of the holy thread, the hater of Visnu, 
and cursed Him thus: 


gaia wet sts vera Braanone | 

gested a vate i rg featert: 115 ut 

viet IT Paes HT: wenn i 

for and Kaa samet vri adt 16 N 

“O King! As you are purely devoted to Siva 
and Siva alone, and as you do not recognise any 
other Devas, I say within no time, you will be 
deprived of all your wealth and prosperity." 
Sankara, hearing this curse, became very angry and 
taking His trident, ran after the Sun. The Sun, 
becoming afraid, accomapined His father Kašyapa 
and took refuge of Brahma. 

Raaen meath ret pur | 

sam pi Tea AHS a Gat TT 17 Uu 

TERAST: EET: YHA TAT: | 

ane a wast 4 wg: vnu rum 18 d 

Bhagavan Sankara went to the Brahma Loka, 
with trident in His hands. Brahma became afraid 
of Mahadeva and took Sun to the region of 
Vaikuntha. Out of terror, the throats of Brahma, 
Kašyapa, and Sun became parched an dry and they 
all went afraid for refuge to Narayana, the Lord of 
all. 

KERT yorqed Wear EGA YA: Wu | 

wd fred wpe aot wt 19 ul 

mang HIT Aas Kr «dt 1 

Ran saa t sitar va fē a afer feet 1 20 N 

They all bowed down to Him and praised Him 
frequently and finally informed Him of the cause 
of their coming and why they were so much afraid. 
Narayana showed them mercy and granted them 
* Abhaya' (no fear). “O You! Who are afraid, take 
rest. What cause of fear there can be to you, when 


t^^ 


I am here 
infer à aa aa ai ferret sera: à 
ARTS Tear TANT SHSM aT: 021 N 
WTdTSÉ Wa Sat: Hal A Wad Bar | 
aaa wuneuur deat Rasa: 122 N 
Whoever remembers Me, wherever he may be, 
involved in danger or fear, I go there with the 


Book IX Chapter XV 


Sudaršana disc in My hand and save him. O Devas! 
I am always the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer 
of this universe. In the form of Visnu, I am the 
Preserver; in the form of Brahma, I am the Creator; 
and in the form Maheéa, 

Rasi rang arft gatst Bromas: | 

faerea Trad ath fere 23 N 

ga ed wr at enfer wat Ha: | 

aag agin vel at afia visum t 2 4 N 

I am the Destroyer. I am Siva; I am you; and I 
am the Sürya, composed of the three qualities. It is 
I who assumes many forms and preserves the 
universe. Better go to your respective places. What 
fear can ye suspect? I say, all your fears due to 
Sankara, are verily removed from this day. 

weet du asan oat TT: | 

WHEAT STATA ALATA ITTF: 1625 Ul 

yat: Raga we ATG: fira: 1 

wamu2u- dendi È Tea: wt 026 VW 

Bhagavan Sankara, the Lord of all, is the Lord 
of the Sadhus. He always hears the words of His 
Bhaktas; and He is kind to them. He is their Self. 
Both the Sun and Siva are dearer to Me than My 
life. No one is more energetic than Sankara and 
the Sun. 

VITA: GE ngA: yini a erat | 

«ft a wernt marezt grfera: Wat: 27 u 

sra va Referat at famen | 

PATA deret MAT 1 2 8 N 

Mahadeva can easily create ten million Suns and 
ten million Brahmas. There is nothing impossible 
with Šūlapāņi. Having no consciousness of any 
outer thing, immersed, day and night, in meditating 
on Me, with His whole heart concentrated, He is 
repeating with devotion My Mantra from His five 
faces and He always sings My glories. 

send Riaan acacamt fany, | 

Ā a ni pod ares STSTUSTEW 0 29 |! 

Naand maoan | 

fort wate aaea fire da fagen: 11 30 u 


1035 


Į am also thinking, day and night, of His welfare. 
Whoever worships Me in whichever way, I also 
favour him similarly. Bhagavan Maha Deva is of 
the nature of Siva, all auspiciousness; He is the 
presideing diety of Siva, that is, liberation. It is 
because liberation is obtained from Him, He is 
called Siva.” 

vania aa wem viene: fora: od 

Woe GUS vedere: 0311 

aasa TTY MĒRA: | 

ATA WMT ot Mit vaa UTT 32M 

O dear Narada! While Narayana was thus 
speaking, the trident holder Mahadeva, with his 
eyes red like reddened lotuses, mounting on His 
bull, came up there and getting down from His Bull, 
humbly bowed down with devotion to the Lord of 
Laksmi, peaceful and higher the highest. 

TR U tierra | 

fated poef afa are 33 u 

ade at wa aya d 

aay: dfād cw ARNA |134 N 

dentate wed uaa | 

vaya yedi ware 135 N 

faarrtgenttd uydi atm wer 1 

gat cured Team 036 ! 

Narayana was then seated on His throne, decked 
with Jewel ornaments. There was a crown on His 
crest; two earrings were hanging from His ears; 
the disc was in His hand; forest flower's garlands 
on His neck; of the colour of fresh blue rain cloud; 
His form exceedingly beautiful. The four-armed 
attendants were fanning Him with their four hands; 
His body smeared all over with sandal-paste and 
He is wearing the yellow garment. That Bhagavan, 
distressed with the thought of welfare for His 
Bhaktas, the Highest Self was sitting on a jewel 
throne and chewing the betel offered by Padma 
and with smiling countenance, seeing and hearing 
the dancing and singing of the Vidyādharīs. 

a ware went aero fugia 

Waa Gat sre KTR 37 NI 


1036 


HVAT WETSTGEIT ETA U AAMT Tt 

fra: dega wist uper KET 38 ui 

When Mahadeva bowed down to Narayana, 
Brahma also bowed down to Mahadeva. The Sun, 
too, surprised, bowed down to Mahadeva with 
devotion. Ka$yapa, too, bowed and with great 
bhakti, began to praise Mahadeva. On the other 
hand, Sankara praised Narayana and took His seat 
on the throne. 

Tarn yardi fasii isst i 

yaam fad fremurdē: u39 

Wigwqeawui web Easter | 

fércorearer 

amri HA TA As HTT BRIM 40 ii 

The attendants of Narayana began to fan 
Mahadeva with white chowries. Then Visnu 
addressed Him with sweet nectar-like voice and 
said: "O Mahešvara! What brings Thee here? Hast 
Thou been angry?” 

"ERES Jara 

quest wr Wath Na wrote PTA i 

we: rome Sher A enter q UT 4 

yaman wd dd We d 

a aami waa gAs afattreatēr 42 0 

Mahadeva said: O Visnu! The King. Vrsadhvaja 
is My great devotee; he is dearer to Me than My 
life. The Sun has cursed him and so I am angry. 
Out of the affection for a son I am ready to kill 
Sürya. Sūrya took Brahmā's refuge and now he 
and Brahma have taken Thy refuge. 

cater TCO TAA SERT RE AT | 

Arad fastened wn gaa afte: 43 u 

uag moruan he fs aa it: 1 

shaan adie war 44n 

And Those who being distressed take Thy 
refuge, either in mind or in word, become entirely 
safe and free from danger. They conquer death and 
old age. What to speak of them, then, of those who 
come personally to Thee and take Thy refuge. The 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


remembrance of Hari takes away all dangers. All 
good comes to them. 

fé t emer rferam TA ale START à 

siltam AG Gayest T 4s d 

O Lord of the world! Now tell me what becomes 
of My stupid Bhakta who has become devoid of 
fortune and prosperity by the curse of Sürya." 


fires 

EIGANDI GIEC ER? ULEI JE KALEN 

Wand uitda vite es aN N46 N 

GAR ya: aeg MATA STOTT | 

THAT CM qa: ASAR ga: 147 n 

Visnu said: *O Sankara! Twenty-one yugas 
elapsed within this one-half Ghatika, by th 
coincidence of Fate (Daiva). Now go quickly to 
Thy abode. Through the unavoidable coincidence 
of the crue] Fate, Vrsadhvaja died. His son 
Rathadhvaja, too, died. 

aya er were iaag Na | 

ear gdvmurragdt mÀ 148 N 

Teast fiar wr ACTAVAT Tet i 

Taty mia: evant er sfereafer 11 49 N 


Rathadhvaja had two noble sons Dharmadhvaja 
and Kusadhvaja. Both of them are great Vaisnavas; 
but, through Sürya's curse, they have become 
luckless. Their kingdoms are lost; they have 
become destitute of all property, prosperity and 
they are now engaged in worshipping Mahà 
Laksmi. Mahà Laksmi will be born in parts of their 
two wives. 

wiugpent war at a aA wife: d 

TIR dea: Vist TES gA esd uw 50 N 

Then again, by the grace of Laksmi, 
Dharmadhvaja and Kušadhvaja will be prosper- 
ous and become great Kings. O Sambhu Your 
worshipper Vrsadhvaja is dead. Therefore Thou 
dost go back to Thy place. O Brahma, O Sun! O 
Kašyapa! You all also better go to your places re- 
spectively. 


Book IX Chapter XVI 1037 


Sepa a ameter: ands eee Te: | went gladly to their own places respectively. And 
Sal WY: AVES: KAT UTT WaT 051 ud Mahadeva, too, Who is always quite full within 
rast ave vfi uya wet usi Himself, departed quickly to perform His Tapas. 
aft Aedma erp auem] IARA | Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter on the question of 
VEA FIRSATA: 11 15 11 anecdote of Tulasī in the Ninth Book in the 


O Narada! Thus saying, Bhagavan Visņu went| Mahāpurāņam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 
with His wife to the inner rooms. The Devas also verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter XVI 


1037 


CHAPTER XVI 


On the Incarnation of Maha Laksmi in the House of KuSadhvaja 


sian IATA 

want at er MATTE ATT ATA A | 

atts a Ah dmg uou 

mermadtattta dt ye agag: 1 

wusddt ydd akaaga 02 

Sri Narayana said: O Muni! Dharmadhvaja and 
Ku$adhvaja practised tapasyā and 
worshipped Laksmī. They then got separately 
their desired boons. By the boon of Mahā Laksmī, 
they became again the rulers of the earth. 

GI Velta aet ara ft 1 

AAMAS ATA HAMM Tat TAT 3 uu 

MU AROA AAG SU € 1 

gar laf HEH AET ! 4 N 

Aa Al aT AAN RART | 

They acquired great religious merits and they 
also had their children. The wife of KuSadhvaja 
was named Mālāvatī. After a long time, the chaste 
wife delivered one daughter, born of the parts of 
Kamala. The daughter, on being born, became full 
of wisdom. 

went a dgadi wad nA: 15 0 

WATAUGA TT MC ATA | 

aAA creda Ana 6 tl 

On being born, the baby began to sing clearly 
the Vedic mantrams from the lying-chamber. 
Therefore, and She was named Vedavati by the 
Pandits. She bathed after her birth and became 
ready to go to the forest to practise severe tapas. 
Everyone, then, tried earnestly to dissuade her, 


severe 


devoted to Narayana, from this enterprise. But she 
did not listen to anybody. 

Vanda da uni a ufu d 

AYN wr quest er tA fü ATT HEU 7 N 

wenfü get a feet erem | 

yaa at a aga gerens us n 

att a a orat afara gR: are | 

amA Am ua Seat daft nou 

She went to Puskara and practised hard tapasya 
for one Manvantara. Yet her body did not get lean 
a bit; rather she grew more plumphy and fatter. By 
degrees her youth began to shew signs in her body; 
one day she heard an incorporeal voice from the 
air above, ‘O Fair One! In your next birth Sri Hari, 
adored by Brahma and other gods, will be your 
husband.’ 

RT Sea ST EET VA € YARN: 1 

ada fusum udd temet nion 

are fat wea Ka AAA AT 1 

gav KAA Tavi gian 00108 

GT ms RARR wr urei aut adr foo i 

Pag wwe we nAg 12 0 

ATA HT U UTE AST MATU: | 

Hearing this, her joy knew no bounds. She went 
to the solitary caves in the Gandhamādana 
mountain to practise tapas again. When a long time 
passed away in this tapasyā, one day the irresistible 
Rāvaņa came there as guest. No sooner Vedavatī 
saw the guest, than the gave him, out of devotion 
to the guest, water to wash his feet, delicious fruits, 


1038 


and cool water for his drink. The villain accepted 


the hospitality and sitting there, began to ask: 

"gen ITaft at est ee Heat ada t 13 N 

at eer a amet diasifürqatenm i 

VITA «p Aaa sadi uA 14 

yasina Aut: ararurguifša: d 

V AUT HA SPI HPA: 15 

“O Auspicious One! Who are you?" Seeing the 
fair smiling lady, with beautiful teeth, her face 
blooming like the autumnal lotus, of heavy loins, 
and of full breast, that villain became passionate. 
He lost entirely all consciousness and became ready 
to make violence on Her. 

wet genta qgr ei vafivrd or ET € | 

stesura fafergeb A em: d 1 6 0 

qur mer edt yet wsrerenm | 

m GS ug ded Gad a WA E17 

Seeing this, the chaste Vedavati, became angry 
and out of her tapas influence, astounded him and 
made him insensible to move. He remained 
motionless like an inanimate body. He could not 
move his hands nor feet nor could he speak. That 
wicked fellow then mentally praises to her. And 
the praise of the Higher Sakti can never go futile. 
She became pleased and granted him religious 
merits in the next world. But she also pronounced 
this curse: 

RT VIZITU at «i frieatu vaira: 1 

WETS U GT HATS TATA 11 1 8 N 

SIRT HUS AAT GET TAM F | 

Wat at ec HT Ta Ta wet 19 u 

"That when you have touched my body out of 
passion, then you will be ruined with your whole 
family for my sake.' Now see my power. O Nàrada! 
Thus saying to Ravana, Vedavati left her body by 
her yogic power. 

Then Ravana took her body and delivered it to 
the Ganges and he then returned to his own home. 
Rut Ravana thought over the matter repeatedly and 
exclaimed. 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 
aret Pangi x8 teh act ATTATSĻT | 
ota fete dics fare va: YA: 020 u 
MU Saat Meat spar TAHT | 
vftaraeitfer arena weet aut ga: u21 N 
*What wonder have I seen! Oh! What a miracle 
this lady has wrought! Ravana thus lamented, This 
Vedavati, of pure character, took her birth 
afterwards as Sita, the daughter of Janaka. For the 
sake of this S1tà, Ravana was ruined with his whole 


family. 

errat ar a quur usur: 

GA wi a walt Ryta ety 422 u 

"Hur WRITER ga TATA, | 

ara gl tā wa we wu u23u 

By the religious merits of her previous birth, 
the ascetic lady got Bhagavan Hari Sri Rima 
Candra, the Fullest of the Full, for her husband 
and remained for a long time in great enjoyment 
with the Lord fo the world; a thing very difficult to 
be attained! 

wife + TĀ Aaa AT YU | 

gara tad ad g rfr rud wo 24 N 

Though she was a Jātismarā (one who knows 
all about her past lives), she did not feel any pain 
due to her practising severe austerities in her 
previous birth; for when the pains end in success, 
the pains are not then felt at all. 

Agent em gfat act 1 

da gam andta cens 425 

qiri arch wid wid Roepe | 

vereri wate efert aem BY aaa i 26 NI 

füg: aerated wendüt tage: 1 

TA ATA Usenet ep SHIT 027 N 

Sita, in Her fresh youth enjoyed various 
pleasures in the company of her husband, 
handsome, peaceful, humorous and witty, the 
chief of the Devas, loved by the female sex, well- 
qualifed, and just what she desired. But the all- 
powerful Time irresistible; the truthful 
Ramacandra, the scion of the Raghu’s family, had 


is 


Book IX Chapter XVI 


to keep up the promise made by his father and so 
he had to go to the forest, ordained by Time. 

wet waste dian SÀ T | 

wasb an af a funus aft u280 

wa a gai gpa a gt aya gd 

sare ffe wed VATA: 029 N 

He remained with Sita and Laksmana near the 
sea. Once the God Fire appeared to Him in the 
form of a Bráhmana. Fire, in a Bráhmin-form, saw 
Ràma Candra morose and became himself 
mortified. Then the Truthful Fire addressed the 
truthful Ramacandra: 

fist sara 

MIATA WH Hess Agua: | 

Maeue ada auf: 30 0 

“O Bhagavan Ramcandra! I now speak to you 
how time is now coming to you. No has come the 
time when your Sita, will be stolen.” 

ed a gfiard u pow Waren se | 

wre ufi zer erat varfedsssmar 31 N 

qenia frat eat a utram va: | 

dā: weerfüdtsé er a Pag gamme: 0 32 1 

The course of Destiny is irrestible; none else is 
more powerful than Time, Fate. So give over your 
Sita, the World Mother to me and keep with you 
this Chaya Sita (the shadow Sita; the false Sita). 
When the time of Sita’s ordeal by fire will take 
place; I will give Her back to you. The Devas united 
have sent me to you. I am not really a Brahmin; 
but I am Agni Deva (eater of oblations). 

WHT Yea A IATA U HAT | 

iat Aug gaat faguat 33 N 

fafta vfrarar arardtat enn € | 

agepan qt ware ARE 00341 

Ramacandra heard Fire and gave his assent. But 
his heart shattered. He did not speak of this to 
Laksmana. By the yogic power Agni (Fire) created 
a Maya Sita. This Maya Sita, O Narada, was 
perfectly equal to the real Sita. Fire, then, handed 
this Maya Sita to the hands of Ramcandra. 


1039 


Cat gétear a adt Meat argh Aea wr à 

WRU AT THI MCAT HT HAT 0 35 1l 

Kafi wat east ara WT d 

dia i drama weet uenpde 36 u 

Hutāsana (fire) took the real Sita and said ‘Never 
divulge this to any other body’ and went away. 
What to speak of divulging the secret to any other 
body, Laksmana even could not know it. By this 
time Rama saw one deer, made of all gold. To bring 
that deer carefully to her, Sita sent Ramacandra 
with great eagerness. 

ieu RUE WAY ATTRA LAAT A 1 

Tad Ta qui ci fere AA wp 37 N 

AOA A Ted a Heal AMAA TT: | 

WUT WET wit SET at FT 38 1 

Putting Sità under Laksmana’s care, in that 
forest, Ràma went himself immeditately and 
pierced the deer by one arrow. That Maya mrga 
(the deer created by magic powers) on being 
pierced, cried out ‘Ha Laksmana! and seeing Hari 
before him and remembering the name of Hari, 
quitted his life. 

qme Rea fermu feum a d 

waa dd U WITT E 4039 

dgveetegratetfenast giant: i 

Gast AEA: 140 N 

The deer body then vanished; and a divine body 
made its appearance in its stead. This new body 
mounting on an aerial car made of jewels, ascended 
to Vaikuntha. That Mayik (magic) deer was in its 
previous birth, a servant of the two gate-keepers 
of Vaikuntha; but, for the sake of some emergency, 
he had to take up this Raksasa birth. 

STET Var A AT ea CAAT T FTAA | 

a fü a vam sani aAA ua: 

Te a BAM WA Tat GP Tn | 

dat get Waal Gara caciterat 42 lt 

He again became the srevant of two door- 
keepers of Vaikuntha. On the other hand Sita Devi, 
hearing the cry ‘Ha Laksmana!’ became very 


1040 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


distressed and sent Laksmana in search of Rama. 
No sooner aid Laksmana get out of the hermitage, 
the irresistible Ravana took away Sita gladly to 
the city of Lanka. I 

fée a WA GA GTA RUTA | 

qut wr FTA ITT vitat Aa east R: 11 43 N 

yaf dure aft farmers ast qa: | 

Wt: Was sum MANARA 44 


Now Ramacandra, seeing Laksmana on the 


tapasyā there; that place is the giver of religious 
merits and then you will be the Svarga Laksmi 
(Laksmi of Heaven). 

ICH agai Year WaT WR U: | 

Ræ fregad a venies F150 1 


AS HAT ATA AAHISAT AT | 
att visami wr sūdi EUST w 51 N 


Hearing this, the Chaya Sita went and practised 
tapasyā for the three divine lakh years and became 


way in the forest, became merged in the ocean of | Maha Laksmi. This Svarga Laksmi appeared at 


sorrows and without losing any time came 
hurriedly to the hermitage where he could not find 
Sità. Instantly he fell unconscious on the ground; 
and, after a long time, when he regained his 
consciousness, he lamented and wandered here 
and there in search of Her. 

wet ung wart vede 1 

HETATATRTART det arnt ZR: 45d 

Ment Wear WRN Aa IDEE 

ATŠA We ci ea Tavi aitrā: WE 0 46 N 

After some days on the banks of the river 
Godāvarī, getting the information of Sītā, he built 
a bridge arcross the ocean with the help of His 
monkey armies. Then he entered with his army into 
Lankā and slew Rāvaņa with arrows with all his 
friends. 

vt er afgaat U ANAT ART | 

EITRTS AT Y Aaa Brent get 11 47 N 

IATA Bran afa IT U aaar ae i 

aR faé agai aga uas 

When Sita’s ordeal by fire came, Agni (Fire) 
handed over the real Sita to Ramcandra. The 
Shadow Sita then humbly addressed Agni and 
Rama Candra ‘O Lord! What am I to do now? Settle 
my case. 

psica rec id wag: 

vd Tres quu afar ueni quus i 

er quet ada ventessritsifersafer n 49 

Agni and Ramcandra both of them then said to 
Chaya Sita: “O Devi! Go to Puskara and practise 


one time from the sacrificial Kunda (pit). She was 
known as the daughter of Drupada and became the 
wife of the five Pandavas. 

TA gi West ITG YT d 

Sarat waa a eats SATS 1652 N 

wegrar rudi ect grat gaara | 

Prereroft sr err arent Perera Tay 11 53 N 

She was Veda Vati, the daughter of KuSadhvaja 
in the Satya Yuga; Sita, the wife of Rama and the 


daughter of Janaka in Tretā Yuga; and Draupadi, 


the daughter of Drupada, in the Dvapara Yuga. As 
she existed in the Satya, Treta, and Dvapara Yugas, 


g» 


the Three Yugas, hence She is Trihāyaņī. 
ATG IATA 


far: wap ad wen ayadhyga | 

gf meani sia deer 54 ii 

Narada said: O Chief of Munis! O Remover of 
doubts! Why had Draupadi five husbands? A great 
doubt has arisen in my mind on this point. Remove 
my doubt. 

sftarraut saru 

Varat eredi tat wa MUTT ARE | 

eure wat a agia 55 ! 

Narayana said: O Devarsi! When, in the city of 
Lanka, the real Sita came before Rama, then Chaya 
Sita, full of youth and beauty, became very anxious. 

TARA Wupqund vient WT | 

AU Ream meid ga: ga: 56 1 

utt afe aft ufu aft af Pere | 

uf R ut R ugan wart aT 57 N 


Book IX Chapter XVII 


Agni Deva and, Ràmachandra both told Her to 
go to Puskara and worhsip Sankara. While this 
Chaya Sītā was practising austerities in Puskara, 
She became very anxious to get a good husband 
and asked from Maha Deva the boon ‘Grant me a 
husband’ and repeated it five times. 

Ramada sped weer IRT: | 

fiir wa fiat wer afai at edt i58 N 

da wr utearat vr aaa enrfirstt fira | 

sfa a aftrd wd werd ana 5m 59 Ll 

Siva, the chief among the humorous, witty 
persons, hearing this, said “O Dear! You will get 
five husband.' and thus granted her the boon. 
Therefore, She became the dearest wife of the five 
Pandavas. Now hear other facts. 


ater iurat eienrart frat wat atem i 
Raima at cient vans arat arva: 0 60 il 
WHEAT SS Hea WHt U ANT | 
TA adores uni queda w 461 
SIT Wat emet fedt ur | 


When the war at Lanka was over, Sri 
Ramacandra got his own dear wife Sita, and in- 


1041 


stalling Vibhisana on the throne of Lanka, re- 
turned to Ayodhya. He ruled for eleven thousand 
years in Bharata and finally went to Vaikuntha 
with his all his subjects. Vedavati, the incarnation 
in part of Laksmi dissolved in the body of 
Kamala. Thus I have described to you the pure 
anecdote of Vedavati. 

frd Quant quad UTA 62 I 

aad ATV dem ug wd 

ifr wens Brat aa deadt smart 63 N 

ATG faster arvarttr d uw 64 u 

sft ARTA menge? Tage 
SSMS: 1116 1 

Hearing this destroys sins and increase virtue. 
The four Vedas geigned incarnate, in their true 
forms, on the lips of Vedavati; hence She was 
named Vedavati. Thus I have told you the anecdote 
of the daughter of Kušadhvaja. Now hear the story 
of Tulasi, the daughter of Dharmadhvaja. 

Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Ninth Book 
on the incarnation of Mahà Laksmi in the house of 
KuSadhvaja in Srimaddevibhagvatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter XVII 1041 
T———- 
CHAPTER XVII 
On the Anecdote of Tulasi 
starrer sarar scent of sandal-paste began to cool the bodies. 
LATI uet a rerelifer a fersrar 1 Madhavi was the jewel amongst women. 


sur mef mssi W a mema dodi 

mai reti Heat ARAA TA | 

weedeat yaaa 102 N 

Sri Narayana said: O Narada! The wife of 
Dharmadhvaja was Madhavi. Going to the 
Gandhamadana mountain, She began to enjoy, 
with great gladness, the pleasures with the king 
Dharmadhvaja. The bed was prepared, strewn with 
flowers and scented with sandal-paste. She 
smeared all over her body with sandal-paste. The 
flowers and cool breeze in contact with the sweet 


66 


shead wyatt 

waren weet yet terest wp oper 3 odi 

qu Rata qut: tatērrat: I 

"ri daadyīd 4 ard a fearon uaá d 

Her whole body was very elegant. Besides it 
was adorned all over with jowel ornaments. As she 
was humorous, so the king was very expert in that 
respect. It seemed as if the Creator created 
especially for Dharmadhvaja, the humorous lady 
Madhavi expert in amorous affairs. Both of them 
were skilled in amorous sports. So no one did like 


1042 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


to desist from amorous enjoyments. One hundred 
divine years passed in this way, day and night 
passed unnoticed. 

aA wat aft ura ATA U | 

"gent dat thts a gii sara aT 11 5 n 

am mf at wel daai Ut | 

staat siaa wir wr dasa fet fet 6 on 

The king then got back his consciousness and 
desisted from his amorous embraces. But the lustful 
woman did not find herself satisfied. However, by 
the Deva’s influence, she became pregnant and 
conceived for one hundred years. In the womb there 
was the incarnation of Laksmi; and the body’s 
lustre increased day by day. 

JA aot gR g wz ue | 

yaar yas a spewefanerf-wd 1 7 u 

afanya q fara a caret | 

Kara at a wartgrt UT at ART 8 d 

Then, on an auspicious day, on an auspicious 
moment, auspicious Yoga, auspicious lagna, 
auspicious Am$a, and on an auspicious 
combination of planetary rules and their houses, 
she delivered on the full moon night of the month 
of Kartika one beautiful daughter, the incarnation 
in part of Laksmi. 

madia MARAT, 1 

uefi a ugi aai TE 1 9 

gamann Pera wanun d 

agaaa atagan u10 u 

The face of the body looked like the autumnal 
moon; Her two eyes resembled autumnal lotuses 
and her upper and lower lips looked beautiful like 
ripe Bimba fruits. The daughter began, no sooner 
it was born, to look on all sides of the lying-in- 
room. The palm and lower part of feet were red. 
The navel was deep and below that there were three 
wrinkless. Her loins were circular. 

via qataraantt AA a gestae i 

yami Gah Kft ARĪRURĀSVTA 1 1 1 u 


heuer qattera Keta 1 

AT THY at gt Goat AAT: 0 12 N 

Her body was hot in the winter and cold in the 
summer and pleasant to touch. Her hairs on the 
head were hanging like the roots of the fig tree. 
Her colour was bright like Campaka; She was a 
jewel amongst women. Men and women cannot 
compare her beauty. 

AA ATT U get at adfa wether: à 

U ARIBARA diet wafetar 113 u 

wafer wud sare o weffes | 

aa tarred du dam we qu: 014 tl 

The holy wise men named Her Tulasi. As soon 
as she was born, she looked of the female sex, full 
onevery way. Though prevented repeatedly by all, 
She went to the forest of Badari for practising 
Tapasyā. There she practised hard Tapasyā for one 
lakh divine years. 

TTT ATT: Fart srferdfer er Afya i 

tite derer Vita daare wr urgfü u 15 1 

amar giant: wedi fam TTT i 

fisracaad a Hea TT 16 N 

Her main object was to get Narayana for her 
husband. In summer she practised Paficatapa 
(surrounded by fire on four sides and on the top); 
in the winter she remained in water and in the rainy 
season she remained in the open air and endured 
the showers of the rain, twenty thousand years. She 
passed away thus in eating fruits and water. 

fisrugesu a umem auftadt 1 

UTT ATT ATR 17 N 

For thrity thousand years she subsisted only on 
the leaves of trees. When the forty thousandth year 
came, she subsisted only on air and her body 
became thinner and thinner day by day. 

wdt gea PET aya AT | 

fader AAE apr at ACĪS: 18 U 

mad at ad at aR, 1 

agia a m SBI TATA ÉWGTESH N 19 0 

agara went feemem ITTATATU 1 


Book IX Chapter XVII 


1043 


Then for ten thousand years afterwards she left 
eating anything whatsoever and without any aim, 
stood on only one leg. At this time the lotus-born 
Brahma, seeing this, appeared there to grant her 
boons. On seeing Him, Tulasi immediately bowed 
down to Brahma, the Four-faced One riding on His 
vehicle, the Swan. 

Note: The vehicle theory of the Devas came from 
Egypt. The Devas were without vehicles at first and 
were faced half-beasts. Then they were rendered men 
and their vehicles were fancied as beasts. The face of 
the Durga Devi was thought of as that of a tiger. 


agarar 


at goia gate gt ware aisa u 20 N 

eur ceems 1 

He then addressed her and said: “O Tulasi! Ask 
any boon that you like. Whether it be devotion to 
Hari, servantship to Hari, freedom from old age or 
freedom from death, I will grant that to you.” 


gonar 

TUT AT yag er Hae afer 27 11 

RARE qur: BT GSM AA UTA | 

Tulasi said: "Father! I now say you my mind. 
Hear. What is the use of hiding away my views 
out of fear or shame to One who knows everything 
reigning in One’s Heart. 

are g Teel rdi Tiesā Kert T u22 u 

garia hat er ree acest firerr i 

erate yeaa wir uféan 23 1 

Tādi wane gav Tamro | 

mili redeem at grea TTT i24 N 

I am Tulasi Gopi (cowherdess); I used to dwell 
before in the Goloka. I was a dear she-servant of 
Radhika, the beloved of Krsna. I was also born of 
Her in part. Her Sakhis (female attendants) used 
to love me. Once in Risa Mandalam I was enjoyed 
by Govinda; but I was not satiated and while I was 
lying down in an unconsicous state, Radha, the 
Governess-in-chief of the Rasa circle, came there 
and saw me in that state. She rebuked Govinda 
and, out of anger, cursed me: 


"rfi cel reet attra wr IIRTTU € | 

mgar U Metal weet a aqesry 25 u 

ETT eur MITA TAT ART, a 

‘Go at once and be born as a human being.’ At 
this Govinda spoke to me: “If you go and practise 
Tapas in Bharata, Brahma will get pleased and He 
will grant you boon. When you will get Narayana, 
the Four-armed, born of Me in part as your 
husband." 

SAAT Sao satay wen: 26 N 

SOT ET Ae AACA rad TT TRY TET 0 

He Aaa «id vr weeds 027 u 

aimi d oft wel aad ci m tī À | 

O Father! Thus speaking, Sri Krsna disappeared 
out of sight. Out of Radha’s fear, I quitted my body 
and am now born in this world. Now grant me this 
boon that I get the peaceful, lovely beautiful 
Narayana for my husband.” 

wees Sart 

gam ATA Wass sips: 0 28 i 

aiaa Ot wat st UTE | 

Bind megi: 129 

Brahma said: O Child Tulasi! The Gopa 
(cowherd) Sudāmā was born of Šrī Krsna's body. 
At the present time he is very energetic, He too, 
under the curse of Radha, has come and taken his 
birth amongst the Danavas. 

VIRSA KREMI A ATT: | 

Tete tat OT GT Hrs: 030 t 

He is named Šaūkha Cüda. No one is equal to 
him in strength. In Goloka, when he saw you 
before, he was overpowered with passion for you. 

fasting 19T WARN: were: | 

AU ATG TTT WRIT 031 Ut 

ferent carafe aT wa STAT Gah t 

TEA eT uedt eet sisrferfr VISTA N 32 N 

UZTANTATI yit crate afterfT 1 

VITA AT Wem: 033 N 

Only out of Radha’s influence, he could not 
embrace you. That Sudāmā is Jātismara (knows 


1044 


all about his previous births); and you, too, are 
Jatismara. Therefore is nothing unknown to you. 
O Beautiful One! You will now be his wife. 
Afterwards you will get Narayana, the Beautiful 
and Lovely for your husband. 

fra qaraar ca wer fersrarerdt à 

part ady faao tT TĀ 0034 N 

vet far a Tela ST er famen AT 1 

gaa qanaur aren darediíe w u35 1 

Thus under the curse of Narayana, you will be 
transformed into the world purifying Tulasi tree. 
You will be the foremost amongst the flowers and 
will be dearer to Narayana than His life. No one's 
worship will be complete without Thee as leaf. You 
will remain as a tree in Vrndàvana and you will be 
widely known as Vrndāvanī. 


vereraniffürifursr gafteifa WrETS | 
aaae oe quura deam 36 Ul 
Aeka Ita rest wur U | 
sad aad Het aaa AAT |1 37 N 
VITA U wae ta hagar ar | 


The Gopas and Gopis will worship Madhava 
with Your leaves. Being the Presiding Diety of 
the Tulasi tree, you will always enjoy the compay 
of Krsna, the best of the Gopas.” O Narada! Thus 
hearing Brahmà's words, the Devi Tulasi became 
very glad. Smile appeared in her face. She then 
bowed down to the Creator and said: 


yeast 

wer a RA PO aor U verme 38 1 

"wed seat d mr wem cer ays à 

smgumsé cw Miele dagg TA: 0390 

Mra aerate eror | 

aama Mid Ga GEO 040 N 

gate vhr memi ware à 

“O Father! I speak now truly to Thee that I am 
not as devoted to the four-armed Narayana as I am 
devoted to Syama Sundra, the two-armed. For my 
intercourse with Govinda Sri Krsna was suddenly 
interrupted and my desire was not gratified. It is 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


because of Sri Govinda’s words that I prayed for 
the four-armed. Now it appears certain that by Thy 
grace I will get again my Govinda, very hard to be 
attained. But, O Father! Do this that I be not afraid 
of Radha.” 
Vada sara 

Terr ures qe NEMATA, 041 Ui 

TAT UTOR eur cat Hater afara | 

imi gaie a Arar er TTT 11 42 N 

were ed Bort airfare arfēremtt 1 

Brahma said: ^O Child! I now give you the 
sixteen lettered Radha mantra to you. By Her Grace 
you will be dear to Radha as Her life. Radhika will 
not be able to know anything of your secret 
dealings. O Fortunate! You will be dear to Govinda 
like Radha.” 

yaaga qe U Vo À NEMA 143 Ut 

tat Ga wg Hitt ST ai TTT 

wd gana a quratfafimm 44 u 

Thus saying, Brahma, the Creator of the world, 
gave her the sixteen lettered Radha mantra, stotra, 
Kavaca and mode of worship and pura$carana and 
He blessed her. 

wi Bort rer At ra eren T | 

aya Regt wr cat MATA AAT i 45 t 

fig ur get at wre uefem | 

ays Buen afgyag w qoum !46 N 

Tulasi, then, engaged herself in worshipping 
Radha, as directed. By the boon of Brahma, Tulasi 
attained Siddhi (success) like Laksmi. Out of the 
power of the Siddha mantra, She got her desired 
boon. She became fortunate in getting various 
pleasures, hard to be attained in this world. Her 
mind became quiet. 

Weare cat Aes ATA: GT | 

Ra rè AUT a gd U GAITA 47 N 


YR flet er ATT ITU ATT T | 
wed wand da yda 048 
aft PRITI SIRE arrears 


ge Rer TINS EMT 017 11 


Book IX Chapter XVII 1045 


All the the toils of Tapasya disappeared. When| food and drink and slept on a beautiful bed strewn 
one gets the fruit of one’s labour, all the troubles| with flowers and scented with sandal paste. 
then transform to happiness. She then finished her| Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Ninth Book 
on the anecdote of Tulasi in Srimaddevibhagavatam 
of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter XVIII 


1045 


CHAPTER XVIII 
On the Union of Sankhaciida with Tulasi 


uru 

Rīgu dear wy amriz at Wf | 

Garay MT Ge yaaa 1 2 u 

Nārāyaņa said: Thus highly pleased, Tulasī went 
to sleep with a gladdened-heart. She the daughter 
of Vrsadhvaja, was then an her blooming youth 
and while asleep, the Cupid, the God of five arrows, 
shot at her five arrows (by which one gets 
enchanted and swooned). Though the Devī was 
smeared with sandal paste and She slept on a bed 
strewn with flowers, her body was felt as if being 
burnt. 

yonan afta 1 

ATi HT yra wa aot goia E u3 i 

agii MTU aot dai gaa, | 

aot a set UD aut ITU MARTA 1 4 d 

aot at Sarat TU aru wre ĒĒTATUTĀTA | 

Out of joy the hairs stood on their ends all over 
her body; her eyes were reddened and her body 
began to quiver. Sometimes She left uneasiness, 
sometimes dryness; sometimes She got faint; 
sometimes drowsiness and sometimes again 
pleasntness; sometimes she became conscious, 
sometimes sorrowful. 

sist aot aege free gmTW 5 d 

widt «omgmfradēt at ya: 1 

ama aged Ya a nén 

Sometimes she got up from her bed; sometimes 
she sat; and sometimes she fell again to sleep. The 
flower-bed, strewn with sandalpaste, appeared to 


her full of thorns; nice delicious fruits and cold 
water appeared to her like poison. 
: um ratte i 

Raan ga feet Yat a HS TEAL 7 N 

fred a Great AE GTA: | 

Riguad wa Ad U ga usu 

Her house appeared to her like a hole in a ground 
and her fine garments seemed to her like fire. The 
mark of Sindūra on her forehead appeared, as it 
were, a boil, a sore. She began to see in her dreams 
that one beautiful, well clothed, humorous, young 
man with smile in his lips, appeared to her. 

aut «avi daai gàd ged et oi 

Get a gari u Ufa evar uod 

maaa TET, 1 

amegi meadi tread apis t 10 N 

His body was besmeared with sandal-paste and 
decked with excellent jewels; garlands of forest 
flowers were suspending from his neck. Coming 
there, he was drinking the honey of her lotus face. 
He was speaking on love themes and on various 
other sweet topics. 

audi when? gad GT yg: 1 

wispendei aed a Aare t 11 u 

yaa g mames a ata od 

wid ga aft write feiern 12 1 

As if he was embracing amorously and enjoying 
the pleasures of intercourse. After the intercourse 
he was going away; again he was coming near. 
The lady was addressing him ‘O Darling! O Lord 
of my heart! Where do you go. Come close.’ 

Yas dat wre fau qu: YA: | 

wd wr red ura «mit ada ATG 013! 


1046 


raae werghit iana | 
ganu aor pear ferai qp TERT 11 14 t 


Again when she became conscious, she began 


to lament bitterly. Thus on entering in her youth, 
the Devi Tulasi began to live in the hermitage of 
Badari (Plum fruit, It may signify womb. Those 
who visit Badari are not to enter again to any 
womb). On the other hand the great Yogi 
Sankhaciida obtained the Krsna Mantra from 
Maharsi Jaigisavya and got siddhi (success) in 
Puskara Tirtha (sacred place of pilgrimage where 
one crosses the world). 

«ada Te data wd i 

amg at ma ae TART aif 15 u 

IAA Ge: Aste gat er aradt | 

smredd tage gav godt gt nien 

rae > i 

vamwdumsuiwW Tere 017 

Holding on his neck the Kavaca named 
Sarvamangalamaya and obtaining the boon from 
Brahma as he desired, he arrived at Badari, by 
Brahmà's command. The signs of the blooming 
youth had just begun to be visible in the body of 
Šankhacūda as if the God of Love incarnated in 
his body; his colour resembled that of white 
Campakas and all his body was decked with 
jewelled ornaments. 

madras WA | 

IAA mt ARA 18 1 

Tavera IATA, d 

URSA Wrerdd a AAA 19 N 

pg GĒTE | 

His face resembled the autumnal full moon; his 
eyes were extended like the lotus leaves. The 
beautiful form was seen to sit in an excellent aerial 
car, made of pearls and jewels. Two jewel earrings, 
nice and elegant, suspended upto his cheek; his 
neck was adorned with Parijata flower garlands; 
and his body was smeared with Kumkum and 
scented sandal-paste. 


Šrīmaddevībhā; gavatar 


Wr Spr PETA PEAT ATTA ll 20 t 

ftat d Prei ame TA: TA: | 

ayatraget Hadmofar 021 
AP defert 


Smpeseermiwrareerefeduqq o 422 
animi = i 
wert mata ref eu 23 1 


O Narada! Seeing Sankhacūda coming near to 
her. Tulasī covered her face by her clothings and 
she, with a smiling countenance, cast repeatedly 
sidelong glances on him and bent her head low 
abashed in the expection of a free intercourse. How 
beautiful was that clear face of her! It put down 
the autumnal moon in the background. The 
invaluable jewelled ornament were on her toes. Her 
braid of hair was surrounded by sweet scente Malati 
garlands. 


ITU TA T Sor 
faadsogaa temana 


N24 0 
TTT HAA STACT | 
TWH HUAI ATAU "251 


l 

q at oai wat geie gaia 26 n 

IATA aià g wu dnm uw: 

The invaluable jewelled wonderful earrings like 
the shape of a shark were hanging up to her check. 
Extraordinarily beautiful necklaces were seen being 
suspended to the middle of her breasts and added 
to the beauty thereof; on her arms and hands were 
jewelled bangles and conch ornaments; jewelled 
armlets and on fingers excellent jewelled rings were 
seen. O Muni! Seeing that lovely beautiful chaste 
woman of good nature, Sankhacüda came to her 
and taking his seat addressed her as follows: 

Vads Sara 

SE HT SAM ST ATT AT 27 

cat ra TIT Hehe Adama 1 

Heft frat mi amat He ge 28 0 

*O Proud One! O Auspicious One! Who are 
you? Whose daughter are you? You took fortunate 


Book IX Chapter XVIII 


1047 


and blessed among women. I am you silent slave. 
Talk with me." 

Baa Tat Ya WHAT HTHOTIT | 

ahaa uer Vas Were AT 29 1 

That beautiful eyed Tulasi, full of love, replied 
to Sankhacüda with smiling countenance and face 
bent low: 


yer 

ATT gars wp querat AUTaa | 

quaa fret wed TES AISA lt 30 N 

rfr f gister Teeter TA | 

ABT HS We saa H aT aT 31 N 

“T am the daughter of the great king Vrsdhvaja. 
I have come to this forest for tapasyā and am 
engaged in this. Who are you? What business have 
you to talk with me? You can go away wherever 
you like. I have heard in the Šāstras that persons 
born of a noble family never speak with ladies of a 
respectable family in privacy. 

guasa urat grigmerefafsta: | 

sarge: gate: wr ao arf 321 

MUTA WATT YHA WT | 

ferrehsrrenrisurmgareat wp Wed 033 M 

wed gem srgenpemfavínr 1 

madR Aaa dent wed uw du i34 N 

Only those that are lewd, void of any knowledge 
in the Dharma Sastras, void of the Vedic knowledge 
and who are not Kulinas, like to speak with women 
in privacy. And those women, too, that look 
externally beautiful but very passionate and the 
Death of males, who are sweet tongued but filled 
with venom in their hearts, those who are sweet 
externally but like a sword internally, those that 
are always bent in achieving their own selfish ends 
and those that become obedient to their husbands 
for their own selfish ends otherwise behaving as 
they like, those that are filled inside with dirty 
things and outside looking pleasant in their faces 
and eyes, whose characters are pronounced as 


defiled, what intelligent learned and noble-minded 
man can trust them? 

arate eama Wr a 

Timma xp AAAA 35 N 

Hit gt umet a Raag AT i 

ang ait AAA: Waar $T GTA: N36 N 

Those women do not discriminate who are their 
friends or who are their enemies; they want always 
new persons. Whenever they see a man well 
dressed, they want to satisfy their own passions. 
And they pretend with great care that they are very 
chaste. 

vat ent at Rafts grad vet Taa 1 

q gad weufinesfa eed war 037 i 

arg caret adia er marit ure: à 

WAHT A WAT ST TTT ATE 11 38 1 

They are vessels of passion; they always attract 
the minds of others and they are very enthusiastic 
in satisfying their own just. They verbally shew 
that they want other men to go away but at hearts, 
feelings for intercourse remain preponderant; 
whenever they see their paramours in private, they 
laugh and become very glad but externally their 
shame knows no bounds. 

and sardaa vau ep ITI d 

vid gid tele argistta Weser ! 39 ul 

"rft fpem TFT wenig | 

Via Rimay: fam 40 U 

When they do not have their intercourse with 
their paramours, they become self-conceited; their 
bodies burn with anger and they begin to quarrel. 
When their passions are satisfied fully, they become 
glad and when there is a deficiency in that, they 
become sorrowful. 

gtirerarstadtararaig=ft er OTe | 

Gat tea aid gari uferd wer 41 ul 

KĀTA pde xRreruf 1 

wont freed GAGN fren 42 n 

For the sake of good and sweet food and cold 
drinks, they want beautiful young persons, 


1048 


qualified and humorous. They consider witty young 
persons clever in holding intercourses, more dearly 
than their sons. 

wed Rogers a qu aT HATA i 

aoe pdd yeast are Gara 43 N 

aam naid fad amgrfiratesmm | 

SATEK U ASTI Wat 044 N 

And if that beloved one becomes incapable or 
aged, then he is considered as an enemy. Quarrels 
and anger then ensue. They devour these men as 
serpents eat rats. They are boldness personified and 
they are the source of all evils and voice. 


dman ow smefemrewfuuf 146 n 

Even Brahma, Visnu and Maheša remain 
deluded before them. They cannot find out any clue 
of their minds. They are the greatest obstacle in 
the path of tapasyā and the closed doors for 
liberation. Devotion to Hari cannot reach those 
women. They are the repositories of Maya and they 
hold men fast by iron chains in this world. 


gites TYERYEHHERSH 0148 N 


They are like magicians and false like dreams. 
They enchant others by external beauty; their lower 
parts are very ugly and filled with excrements, 
faeces, of foul scent and very unholy and smeared 
with blood. 

ATATRUT urat vr faftrar fafrar ur | 

formant AHATOTAGTATSTARTATETA 49 N 

saat deat dd g fenum ATG | 

ana: vad waaay uso N 

The Creator Bhagavan has created them as such, 
the Maya to the Mayavis and the venom to those 
who want liberation, and as invisible to those that 
want to have them.” Thus saying Tulasi stopped. 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


O Narada! Sankhaciida, then smilingly addressed 
her as follows: 
waqg sara 

vea aiad efr «ter western i 

Rhan a fafa Premera 51 u 

Aia fāfēri amat efi uddiemu i 

Heal WT ane V IT wr WaT 52 N 

O Devi! What you have spoken is not wholly 
false; partly it is true and partly it is false. Now 
hear. The Creator has created this all-enchanting 
female form into two parts. One is praiseworthy 
and the other is not. 

want wart gut urfāsit vrfereríerenr | 

VĒRA wr amer urfefafefaar u 53 n 

TATU xw ahead erre WITH | 

ATi avis adie 4054 d 

He has created Laksmi, Sarasvati, Durga, 
Savitri, and Radha and others as the primary causes 
of creation; so there are the prime creations. Those 
women that are born of their parts, are auspicious, 
glorious, and much praiseworthy. 


VETT Saget vert verrer vr finer i 
wraradt went a eeu vreft aem i 55 n 
wares U aett arsvafaferzr fafeeaer i 
PUTAS a lest Geet TAT i 56 I 
ereeursetrdt Hur wur Herat wem i 


anid dgadt ETC Wer Wem 057 1 
yiq: Ren ai a gE | 

west eid a afta eiaei ussu 
Fatt: sa a ia enifer: RANT | 
fast ia aferarar dear aa ow 59 N 


suefri a fever virs yer ferar à 
aciei a ayant g wt gt uo 
Šatarūpā, Devahūtī, Svadhā, Daksiņā 


Chāyāvatī, Rohiņī, Varuņānī, Šacī, the wife of 
Kubera, Diti, Aditi, Lopāmudrā, Anasüya, 
Kautabhi (Kotarī), Tulasi, Ahalya, Arundhati, 
Mena, Tara, Mandodari, Damayanti, Vedavati, 
Ganga, Manasa, Pusti, Tusti, Smrti, Medha, 
Vasundharā, Sasthi, Mangalacandi, Mürti, wife of 


Book IX Chapter XVIII 


1049 


Dharma. Svasti, Sraddha; Santi, Kanti, Ksanti, 
Nidrā; Tandrā, Ksudhā, Pipāsā, Sandhya, Ratri, 
Divā, Sampatti, Dhrti, Kīrti, Kriyā, Šobhā, Prabhā, 
Šivā, and other women born of the Prime Prakrtis, 
all are excellent in every Yuga. 

TAVA U tadzamftaa a | 

Tare faydy deróheudq wp 061 

werd agi ath A Waa: | 

agat a faga meed wifi 62 N 

The prostitutes of the heavens are also born of 
the above women in their parts and parts of parts. 
They are not praiseworthy in the universe; they 
are all regarded as unchaste women. Those women 
that are of Sattva Gunas are all excellent and 
endowed with influence. In the Universe they are 
good, chaste and praiseworthy. 

aed a fagi yad waif: 1 

Trad quid een faf wq 63 N 

FEAT TAKE TS PEST: à 

gadarna tren FIAT: WaT 0 64 i 

This is not false. The Pandits declare them 
excellent. Those that are of Rajo Gunas, and Tamo 
Gunas are not so praiseworthy. Those women that 
are of Rajo Gunas are known as middling. They 
are always fond of enjoyments, yield of them, and 
always ready to achieve their own ends. 

«der gR eraieifenqur: war i 

sewer meeen datusmad 65 

Be Head u vada udi 1 

wei gade agde: 66 u 

These women are generally insincere, delusive, 
and outside the pale of religious duties. Therefore 
they are generally unchaste. The Pandits consider 
them as middling. Those women that are of Tamo 
Gunas are considered as worst. 

" quof He wr: VĒŠTV RAT i 

frit frsto arsti teeatt aera 67 N 

STATO AUT SIETUTY S IAT | 

wiago araa cart zétearfir VISTA u 68 u 


Those born of noble families can never speak 


with other wives in a private place or when they 
are alone. By Brahma’s command I have come to 
you. O Fair One! I will marry you now according 
to the Gandharva method. My name is Sankhacüda. 
The Devas fly away from me out of terror. Before 
I was the intimate Sakha (friend) of Sri Hari, by 
the name of Sudama. 

seta viret AARRE: | 

ggir AAA wemmsé gt Ww 69 1 

agmg Wey wrursfü urdu wd 

STAT AASE MRNA VITA: 0 70 N 

Now, by Radhika’s curse I am born in the family 
of The Danavas. I was a Parisad (attendant) of Sri 
Krsna and the chief of the eight Gopas. Now, by 
Radhika’s curse I am born as Sankhacüda, the Indra 
of the Danavas. 

rferenitsz Bait giae: | 

sr cd go Hy ER WU 071 N 

TĀM vféresrenturesmers fer Smet TFT à 

vat HT SE ares TTT: 1072 1 

By Sri Krsna's grace and by His mantra, I am 
Jatismara (know of my past births). You, too, are 
Jātismarā Tulasi. Sri Krsna enjoyed you before. 
By Radhika’s anger, you are now born in Bharata. 
I was very eager to enjoy you then; out of Radhika’s 
fear I could not. 

zagra U yian WETS | 

wRud go get weequwuma 173 N 

Thus saying, Sankhaciida stopped. Then Tulasi 
gladly and smilingly replied: “Such persons (like 
you) are famous in this world; good women desire 
such husband. 


goara 

vafer get Pred faga er weiter: | 

aadA wim yryafeeofe enn: 74 N 

weursEHtpar wed feraor wüfsnr d 

a fifgasmasgrerd: gates erar fare: 0 75 u 

Really, I am now defeated by you in argument. 
The man who is conquered by woman is very 
impure and blamed by the community. The Pitr 


1050 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


Lokas, the Devas Lokas, and the Gandharva Loka, 
too, look upon men, overpowered by women, as 
mean, despicable. 

Prefer frat der aera: veftra i 

SiR veretur Pret ara at Prater i 76 N 

spat fat ees wah uad AT | 

aft gem aya: AINET: 077 u 

Wat wi dey uaa: | 

agfa: ARa: yaaga: 1178 N 

Even father, mother, brother, etc., hate them 
mentally It is said in the Vedas that the impurities 
during birth and death are expiated by a ten days 
observances for the Brahmanas, by twelve days 
observances for the Ksattriyas, by fifteen days, 
observances for the Vai$yas and by one month's 
observances for the Südras and other low castes. 
But the impurity of the man who is conquered by 
women cannot by expiated by any other means 
except (his dead body) being burned in the funral 


pyre. 

AEG ees fue: Asado i 

ARA taal Wu WSrsonqeu ! 79 NI 

fé at ART MUA BURT: | 

fee feat agra veftfüreier HAT EMT It 80 Ut 

The Pitrs never accept willingly the pindas and 
offerings of water (Tarpanas) offered by the 
women-conquered men. So much so that the Devas 
even hesitate to accept flowers, water, etc., offered 
by them on their names. 

Kamara war ed er uttfēra: | 

GT after ATT quite aa T7 87 N 

ara yeas M AARAA TT | 

giaa a ata tht aires wr u 82 N 

Those whose hearts are entirely subdued by 
men, do not acquire any fruits from their 
knowledge, Tapasyà, Japam, five sacrifices, 
worship, learning and fame. I tested you to ascertain 
your strength in learning. It is highly advisable to 
choose one's husband by examining his merits and 
defects. 


TUATHA ASHACHATT U | 

wre andrea uiema attnra xp 8 83 ! 

Were GA KAT agea UTT 1 

srarecat oat amat Weare ur: 11 84 11 

wiata fora da gadu fāgasfā a à 

Mela U Fat Sra BAM HST SATUS N 

T: Hae ea Hite ale faa | 

format ees patah U ITT 11 86 N 

Sin equivalent to the murder of a Brahmin is 
committed if one give in marriage one's daughter 
to one void of all qualifications, to an ole man, to 
one who is ignorant, to a poor, illiterate, diseased, 
ugly, very angry, very lame, devoid of limbs, deaf, 
dumb, inanimate like, and who is impotent. If one 
gives in marriage a daughter to a young man of 
good character, learned, well qualified and of a 
peaceful temper, one acquires the fruits of 
performing ten horse sacrifices. If one nourishes a 
daughter and sells her out of greed for money, one 
falls to the Kumbhipaka hell. 

wn Go a aa eri une | 

qadha: arhatatéssradet 187 u 

AGA antigen: UPS IA | 

fammi ierat agda AANT N 88 N 

scrape go fam aÀ d 

That sinner drinks the urine and eats the 
excrements of that daughter, remaining in that hell. 
For a period equal to the fourteen Indra's life- 
periods they are bitten by worms and crows. At 
the expiry of this period, they will have to be born 
in this world of men as diseased persons. In their 
human births they will have to earn their livelihood 
by selling flesh and carrying flesh." 


agare 
fe aft wgys Warne WE 189 ! 
niedo fararea cd STAT LETI He | 
Gaara ti vt eyg tot fend wdt 190 u 
Thus saying, when Tulasi stopped, Brahma 
appeared on the scene and addressed Šankhacūda: 
O Sankhaciida! Why are you spending uselessly 


Book IX Chapter XIX 


1051 


vour time in vain talks with Tulasi? Marry her soon 
by the Gàndharva method. As you are a gem 
amongst males, so She 1s a gem amongst females. 

Raen fama STAT yorar, i 

Adege mra ar aR gA N 91 u 

aisteatergacant U agaist Gore: à 

fe mafa ct mtaas ford aft 92 1 

Sara cw GTA fanden | 

Itis a very happy union between a humorus lover 
and a humorous beloved. O King! Who despises 
the great happiness when it is at one’s hand! He 
who forsakes the pleasure is worse than a beast in 
this world. O Tulasi! And what for are you testing 
the nobly qualified person who is the tormentor of 
the Devas, Asuras and Danavas. 

AAT Hates SLAN AAT PONT AT UTA t 93 u 

gar afr arfārzit sar a ara em | 

LAT £RT ate A fA UATSTAT 194 N 

ams uw gadi uum AS | 

ARo a gant az dat ara vfer: Gat i 95 u 

ansi: vata aftrisetrdt act | 

wensgeup chen a gages HA 96 1 

AM gA AT MATA AAT WET d 

ATS SAU zi AAT TATET FATA 11 97 N 

wem wet wes wp wem grūta a 

errare vena of faden wdt 98 n 


diem Bran ed er VTS TAT IT | 

sri ard gR dam u daft uoo 

O Child! As Laksmi Devi is of Narayana, as 
Radhika is of Krsna; as is My Savitri, as Bhava’s 
is Bhavani, as Boar’s is Earth, as Yajfia’s is 
Daksinà, Atri's Anasūyā, Gautama’s Ahalyā, 
Moon's Rohini, Brhaspati's Tara, Manu's 
Satarüpà, Kandarpa's Rati, Ka$yapa's Aditi, 
Vasistha’s Arundhati, Karddama's Devahiti, 
Fire's Svāhā, Indra's Saci, Gaņeša's Pusti, 
Skanda's Devasenà, and Dharma’s Mürti, so let 
you be the dear wife of Sankhacüda. Let you remain 
with Saükhacüda, beautiful as he is, for a long time, 
and enjoy with him in various places as you like. 

TI Tar ferent ar TĀS HE iet | 

VZ cer sf gata a od 

agi u adage viu yd wf u00 

efr stagātarmad erg 
TTAB YSTEMS: 11 18 |1 

When Šankhacūda will guite his mortal frame, 
you would go to Goloka and enjoy easily with the 
two-armed Šrī Krsņa, and in Vaikuņtha with the 
four-armed Krsna and with great gladness.” 

Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Ninth Book 
on the union of Sankhaciida with Tulasi in the 
Mahāpurāņam Šrīmaddevībhāga vatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. 


Book IX Chapter XIX 


1051 


CHAPTER XIX 
On the Going of the Devas to Vaikuntha after Tulasi’s Marriage with Šarikhacūda 


ANE gara 

fāfaaftrenregi Vada HAMA | 

ap da m oqfuni warf fe ara "wu 

aa: wt qp and aed ag WEDR d 

Narada said: O Bhagavan! Wonderful is the 
story that has been now recited by you. My ears 
are not satisfied. So tell me what happend 
afterwards. 


siantar sara 
zaan exer vare a aay faker: «2 11 


mad faa wae wi a aaa: | 

wf ghai u wergfespr g ou 

Narayana said: O Narada! The Creator Brahma, 
blessing them, departed to His own abode. The 
Danava married Tulasi under the Gandharva 
method. The celestial drums sounded and the 
flowers were showed. In the beautiful lovely house 
the Danaverdra, remained in perfect enjoyment. 

a A ma mi ante ware a 

"presb at wa geet waded 4 di 


1052 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


Prorat Paste meh Higaan d 

agubnems agate ga usu 

Tulasi, too, being busy with fresh intercourses, 
became almost mad after them. The chaste Tulasi 
and Sankhactida both became deeply immersed in 
the ocean of bliss in their sexual union and began 
to enjoy sixty-four sorts of amorous sports. 

MOA feres vfirenrat saftey 1 

anyes BM Neu 

aed ways warn wie: 1 

ada wa a adigaia 170 

In the Sastras on love affairs, all the connections 
of limbs with limbs that are described, as the lover 
and the loved desire, they both enjoyed those with 
perfect freedom and pleasure. The place was 
solitary; to add to it, the scenery was grand and 
lovely; so nothing remained untasted of the several 
tastes of amorous pleasures. 


On the banks of the river, in flower-gardens, 
they slept on the flower-beds smeared with sandal- 
paste, and enjoyed the amorous pleasures. Both 
were adorned with jewel ornaments; both were 
skilled in amorous practices; so no one desisted. 


IET A doton dear wdt nou 

Aat wearer Ge Tantatad d 

agas wate faster ar n11 N 

The chaste Tulasi out of her nimbleness due to 
young age, easily stole into the heart of her 
husband. Sankhaciida, too, a great expert in 
knowing other’s amorous sentiments, attracted 
with heart of Tulasi. 

wer a a deer figi RITARA | 

"D IÀ a wate al ga 12 N 

wr «db carers ROTERTE, | 

wen wdBged ddl a 3130 


Tulasi obliterated the sandal marks from the 
breast of the King and the sign of tilak from his 
nose. The King also wiped away the dot of Sindüra 
and Alaka (vermillion) marks from Tulasi’s 
forehead and put marks of nails on her round plump 
breasts. 

wWereTO A a veal wagio, | 

ater wat a iadi am 14 U 

wd U mist wet famed 1 

aed fart at a wuennp wem 15 N 

gad ume rea atta 1 

Tulasi also hurt the King’s left side by her 
bracelets. Then the King bit the lips of Tulasi. Thus 
each one embraced the other, kissed each other and 
each one began to champoo the thighs, legs, etc. 
When both of them thus spent their time in amorous 
sports, they got up and began to dress themselves 
as they desired. 

ciet: Haan: ur wes fred wat 16 N 

walt Gat uu Wa aye | 

yai da via aAA a amm 17 N 

uaa wd weet We og 

AFA TTT | 181 

jat a fred fry wrap GVA | 

art darttrād Hgrard UA: ga: 19 N 

Tulasi smeared Sankhaciida’s nose with red 
sandal-paste mixed with Kumkum (saffron), 
smeared his body with sweet-scented sandal-paste, 
offered sweet-scented betels in his mouth, mad him 
put on celestial garments (fireproof; brought from 
Fire) put unto his neck the wonderful garland of 
Parijata flowers, destructive of disease and old age, 
invaluable jewel rings on his hand, and offering 
him excellent gems, rare in the three worlds, said: 
“O Lord! Iam your maidservant" and uttering this 
repeatedly bowed down to the feet of her husband 
with devotion. 

FATT UAT aA SAAT UTM A | 

ferat Tapas VAN GA: GT: u 20 t 

Prienai UTT ETA, d 


Book IX Chapter XIX 


1053 


aaa HATGU aa arf franz 21 u 

wRud aare cast unes] | 

qaa wed we fette wu22 

ad we TEM ARTS up uq i 

ATT ITS Pr wr qeu 23 

dt Hafan wr TATETAT amd a ad 

HT Tare UTM AA HOS i 24 N 

ayaa NS COTNUDD | 

wig a that fest cuwd fasad N 25 N 

fatradsram$tūtt great Tft Peary | 

OUT ST SLIT wr TT Tei WANS 26 N 

She then got up and with smiling countenance 
began to look on his face with a steadfast gaze. 
The king Sankhacüda then attracted his dear Tulasi 
to his breast and took off the veil fully from her 
face and began to look on that, next moments he 
kissed on her cheek and lips and gave her a pair of 
garments brought from the Varuna’s house, a 
necklace of jewels, hard to get in the three worlds, 
the tinklets of Svaha, th wife of Agni, the Keyūra 
(armlets) of the Sun’s wife Chaya, the two earrings 
of Rohini, the wife of the Moon, the finger rings 
of Rati, the wife of Kamadeva, and the wonderfully 
beautiful conch, given by Višva Karma, excellent 
bedding studded with pearls and jewels and various 
ornaments; and when he gave her all these things, 
he smiled. 

Pot matter qua uewapun | 

fri vad ciedsoscur wd AMT 27 u 

aerate Uga WP a 

att Ray: wel haig: u28 u 

sava dum ww fiero «d 1 

wemguenpro euafatifit 429 

format wp arg cet gar 1 

wane Wester HT AUT 30! 

The king then put garlands on Tulasi's braid of 
hair, nicely variegated Alakas on her cheek, three 
crescent lines of sweet-scented sandal paste within 
the Alakas, dots of saffron all around that, the 


red Alka on the feet and toes; he then placed feet 
on his breast and utterred repeatedly: 


& fer wa aratsafireqosd GA: Ga: A 
Taras ai a Heat waaay 4310 
matai fiers went earaiat adīt 1 
"wed cated vrs NO atat 0320 
TT Car shares a Garey at Prata 1 


wet wet figeit Aage 133 u 

quare drama 1 

qf VIA AA Tai zat ae Tā 34 U 

"t aye a aerated 1 

feuis Great aed Tagi 435 

“I am your servant” and then held her on his 
breast. They then left the hermitage, in that state 
and began to travel in various places. In the Malaya 
mountain, in mountains after mountains, in solitary 
flower gardens, in the mountain caves, in beautiful 
sea-beaches, on the banks of the Puspabhadra river, 
cool with watery breeze, in various rivers and 
riversides, in Vispandana forest with sweet songs 
of the birds of the vernal season. 

wen aA a EE ECCO | 

viue heats urere ad at 136 M 

Gert Medi er PANIA | 

mega wage waaa at 37 11 

They then went from Vispandana forest of the 
Surasana forest, from the Surasana, forest to the 
Nandana forest, from the Nandana forest to the nice 
Candana forests, from Candana forest to Campaka, 
Ketaki; Madhavi Kunda, Malati, and Kumuda and 
lotus forests; thence they went to the forest of desire 
gratifying trees (Kalpavrksa forest,) and Parijata 
trees. 

fait ber tart erat mierTudd | 

aidan fase hah eset 38 1 

ram geina 1 


n39 U 


They then went to the solitary place Kāñcana, 


brilliant Sindüra mark looking like a flame, and| thence to the Kafict (forest) they then went to the 


1054 


Srīmaddevībhāgavatam 


Kifyalaka forest, thence to the Kālicanākar (the 
gold mine), thence to Kaficuka and various other 
forests echoed with the sweet sounds of cuckoos. 
There, on beds strewn with flowers and scented 
with sandal-paste they both enjoyed each other to 
their hearts content and with great pleasure. 


q R quit adaa a wg HT 40 N 

san poraa age een: 

But none of them, whether Sankhaciida or 
Tulasi, got quenched with their thirst. Rather their 
passions were inflame! like the fire on which 
clarified butter is poured (in sacrifices). 

WaT BE WANT TSTSTH Gage: 041 1 

ved wisest Wear RSEN YA: YA: 1 

Ud oW GYM Wes VISS: WATA ! 42 Uu 

UA wuf RTA war | 

ATA Baraat KTI, 043 N 

"ratur froi TATATAT U yrifea: à 

warren deren ragam wem 44 u 

The King of the Dànavas, then, brought Tulasi 
to his own kingdom and, there, in his own beautiful 
garden house, he incessantly enjoyed her. Thus the 
powerful king of the Dānavas passed away one 
Manvantara in the enjoyment of his kingdom. He 
spread his sway over the Devatās, Asuras, Danavas, 
Gandharvas, Kinnaras, and Raksasas. The Devas, 
dispossessed of their realms, wandered everywhere 
like beggars. 

A adsa VSTAGATOT: MATA | 

guid Hear Sega vi WES 45 0 

Mal TEM Bt: Bret VATA VITA | 

"dst eram faen NET 11 46 u 

At last they united in a body and went to the 
Brahma’s assembly and there they began to cry 
and then related the whole history how the Danava 
Sankhacüda oppressed them. Hearing all this, 
Brahma took them to Sankara and informed Him 
of the whole history of the case. 

wan Ūras a: are aed wr SHIT € | 

geb wai ST wet wey 4047 U 


"ur cw at STATS wg 

weet gwuretsr ATTIE, 48 u 

When Mahadeva heard all this, He took them 
all to the highest place, Vaikuntha devoid of old 
age and death. Going towards the first entrance of 
Narayana’s, abode, they saw the gate-keepers 
watching the gate, taking their seats on jewel 
thrones. 


SAAT AAT A ATTA SST 11 50 u 

They all looked brilliant, clothed with the yellow 
garments, adorned with jewel ornaments, garlanded 
with forest flowers, all of Šyāma Sundara (dark 
blue, very beautiful) bodies. They were fourarmed, 
holding on their hands, conch, mace, discus and 
lotus; sweet smile was on their faces and eyes 
beautiful like lotus leaves. 

Wen aR Tait MAN R | 

asqat U Gg AAN aaa u 51 N 

wa wer gnrfür fies met: i 

aa: ref aradtear AANT et: ATA 52 u 

On Brahma asking them for entrance to the 
assembly, they nodded their assent. He, then, 
accompained by the Devas, passed one by one, 
sixteen gates and at last came before Narayana. 

wefüfu: uftgat weer ways: | 

areata we: equ: 53 N 

Aagiswreant AA AE | 

On reaching there. He saw that the assembly 
was completely filled with Devarsis, and four- 
armed Narayanalike Pàrisads (attendants), decked 
with Kaustubha jewels. The sight of the Sabha 
(assembly) makes one think that the Moon has just 
arisen, shedding effulgent rays all round. 

miena ghana 54 0 

enpeavenafunt teat ESAT St: i 

ATTUR end SERIE M 55 NI 


Book IX Chapter XIX 


1055 


"frat sort wade: 1 

fatratgatertratarnteratātemram i 56 1 

By the will of Sri Hari, excellent diamonds, 
invaluable gems and necklaces of gems and jewels 
were placed at various places. At other places rows 
of pearls were shedding their splendour and 
brilliance like the garlands of gems and jewels. At 
others, the mirrors were placed in a circle; and at 
various other places, the endless wonderful picture 
lines were drawn. 


gactesdeerifaffeat ON "58 Ul 


Again at other places, the jewels called 
Padmarágas were artistically arranged as if the 
lotuses were there spreading their lustrous beauty 
all around. At many other places rows of steps were 
made of wonderful Syamantak jewels. All around 
the assembly, there were the excellent pillars, built 
of Indranilam jewels. 


geet Gees Set eae D 


Over those pillars, sandal leaves strung on 
strings from pillar to pillar, were suspended. 
Golden jars, all brimful with water were located at 
various places. All around, the garlands of Parijata 
flowers were seen. The hall was decorated with 
sweet scented sandal trees, red like saffron and 
musk. Sweet scents were being emitted al] round. 

Renag qeremofenfsram, à 

agada Ryn a fee: 61 nN 

The Vidyadharis were dancing at places. The 
assembly hall measured one thousand Yojanas. 
Countless were engaged all over on various works. 

Ga sfteR wem vinis wt We | 

add were uen MAAA 0 62 N 

aqenearmtinfatends ferm | 

fattest pretest ecmrerfasqfür 63 1 


aada feud after | 

Wut genis wouwsdd afd gar nez 

Brahma, Sankara, and the other Gods saw there 
Sri Hari seated in the centre on an invaluable 
jewel throne, as a Moon looks surrounded by 
stars. There were the crown on His head, the ear- 
rings on His ears; garlands made of wild flowers 
were on his neck and His body was smeared all 
over with sandal paste and He was holding 
Kelipadma (a sort of lotus) in His hand. He was 
seeing with a smiling countenance, the dancing 
and music before Him. 

vid madai PATRIA i 

GATT Yad aac sed qam 65 i 

Thre Uren wa dfāci yere: 1 

wads waar a afterall: 166 N 

He was full of peace, the Lord of Sarasvati 
Laksmi was holding gently His lotus-feet and He 
was chewing the sweet scented betal offered by 
Her. Ganga also was fanning Him devotedly with 
a white Camara and the others were singing hymns 
to Him with their heads bent low with devotion. 

wafafsre d gar Ry Vaga ad 

Ganga: Wu: Us WoT JEJA 067! 

"ere S anaim: MANS METAT: | 

STATS UAT TAT MAT ARTA HT: 1168 N 

Brahma and the other Gods all bowed down to 
Him; their bodies were all filled with Pulaka 
(excessive joy causing hair stand on end); tears 
flowed from their eyes and their voices were 
choked out of emotion. 

arateger spear fee SITATATU à 

quid eram fria gt ge NGN 

Sheet sper ude: adraia, | 

Weta Tarot wet a MEM 070 

The creator Brahma, then, with clasped hands 
informed Him, with head bowed down, of the 
whole history of Sankhacüda." Hearing this, the 
omniscient Hari, knowing the minds of all, smiled 
and spoke to Brahma all the interesting secrets: 


1056 


Kangara 

yaaga quid wd wrap usw i 

Creer cw rwr ARTS: GT 071 N 

spp Adare KAT d 

"rere uti ure TATA 72 u 

O Lotus born! I know all about Sankhacüda. 
He was in his previous brith My great devotee, an 
energetic Gopa. Now I speak to you the ancient 
history of Goloka; hear. This story about Goloka 
is sindestroyang and highly meritorious. 

ym aT Woes daa UM 1 

au arret erit Tempra aTSue 073 u 

TAKSEN Laas | 

Rami «rear a HA uremferenr VT u 74 N 

Sankhacüda, in his previous birth was the Gopa 
Sudāmā, My chief Parisad (attendant). He has now 
become a Dānava on account of the dire curse 
pronounced by Sri Radha. 

wr at farcsrar eret fargrrer fhagar, | 

Uae HE SUITE GG9t ST AA TT I 75 N 

fara a adei ui mes er RAT t 

vest at gr tared Ratt: wg 76 Nu 

One day when I went from My abode, 
accompanied by Virajá Gopī, to the Rasa Mandala, 
My beloved Radha, hearing this news from a maid 
servant, came up at once with Her whole host of 
Sakhis wrathful, to the Rasa Mandalam (ball dance 
in Goloka) and, not being able to see Me, saw 
Virajà turned into a river, She thought that I had 
disappeared. 

at ggr fat eat ware ated YU | 

aot ar sedare atst wr RS 077 ul 

TASETAN Yara A Tent E | 

aa at redeam Ata uf u78 

So She went back to Her own abode with Her 
Sakhis. But when I returned to the house with 
Sudama, Radha rebuked Me very much. I remained 
silent. But Sudāmā could not bear and he rebuked 
Radha in My presence, a thing quite intolerable to 
Her dignity! 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


THAT HIATT T CERUESTOOTITT | 
wena cone wu uf 79 
elitei MATA gali duratesum i 
AHA d quí segt w Wa: YA: 1 80 N 
On hearing this rebuke, Ràdhà's eyes became 
red with anger and She immediately ordered Her 
Sakhis to drive him away. Sudama began to tremble 
with fear. immediately on Her command lakhs and 
lakhs of Sakhis got up immediately and drove that 
not irresistible Sudāmā away. Sudāmā repeated his 


chafings and roarings. 

US rest amat Aca GET NYTT F | 

att t ardt attra qreut ee: 81 0 

d teed vad a baat Wi UTD | 

Aaa TET At Gah Pua YA: 082 0 

On hearing these, She cursed him: "You better 
be born in the womb of a Danavi.’ Hearing the 
terrible curse, Sudāmā bowed down to Me and went 
away crying; then Radha, who was all-mercy, 
became melted with mercy. 

TACU fas Ur Trew wea andif GA: TA: 0 

gere V AKTI AT a freeway 8 3 u 

Were weg: Gat waren gg:ttamm: | 

staret aftra Sree AeA AAT i 84 u 

And She prevented him repeatedly, not to go 
away. Radha wept and told him, ‘O Child! Wait. 
Where are you going? No more you will have to 
go; return.' Thus saying She became very 
distressed. The Gopas and Gopis also began to 
weep. I then explained to them. 

STATA TUTE Hea TTT WI | 

garian a a Parar 85 

maaa suma vnd ueddi Mad 1 

yrat sai arate dari SW 86 Ul 

In about half a moment Sudāmā will come back, 
fulfilling the conditions of the curse. "O Sudāmā! 
Come here when the curse expires.’ Then he 
appeased Radha also. Know that one moment 
(Ksana) in Goloka is equal to one Manvantara on 
earth. 


Book IX Chapter XX 

yaad wages Geta areata 1 

Herafest ante: wdurarfeasgme: 087! 

TH NIS Weta Vite TES ANAT | 

fra: eg dent wu yea wera: 88 il 

The Yogi Sankhacüda, expert in Maya and very 
powerful will soon return from the earth. Take this 


My weapon Sila and go early to Bharata. Siva will 
slay the Danava by this Šūlāstra. 

Wü wad dió cd | 

fafa arra: wate fest qa: 89 N 

Ata da sc ish ffer amm: | 

wert Ren farediseta cw 090 N 

The Danava holds always on his neck My 
auspicous Kavaca and will therefore become the 
conqueror of the universe. No one will he able to 
kill him as long as he holds the above Kavaca . So, 
first of all, I will go to him in the form of a 
Brāhmaņa and ask from him the Kavaca. 

adirasttercacan aa are aaf à 

wae are aaah qub ate |1 91 N 

aaen dendaren fafzrau 1 


1057 


meant da eregegeiferafer a ira: 92 N 

uaar ggg srfererfer vr fram | 

O Creator! Thou also didst give him the boon 
that his death would occur when the chastity of of 
his wife would be destroyed. I will go and hold 
intercourse with his wife. Then his death will occur 
without fail. His wife after her death will come 
and become My dearest wife. 

SRA ATA ATA db VI FTA U 11 93 N 

We wer dat vid wf War | 

ud a agia ages: 094 di 

efr dtagdturmad ergo? TIRE 
CaS EAA: 1119 1 

Thus saying, Narayana gave over to Mahadeva 
the Šūlāstra. Then He went gladly to His inner 
compartments. On the other hand, Brahma and 
Rudra and the other Devas incarnated themselves 
in Bharata. 

Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter on the going 

of the Devas to Vaikuntha after Tulasi's 
marriage with Sankhacüda in the Mahāpurāņam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter XX 1057 
Noe * a ~ M ^ ^c - 
i riaient an DJ 
CHAPTER XX 
On the War Preparations of Sarikhacūda 

sian sara Himself, to get the victory of the Devas. He, 

wm fra Wfrdreg der aaaesr cu | then, sent Citraratha, the Lord of the Gandharvas, 
ware ware qui AMATA qut Wi. as a messenger to Sankhaciida, the Lord of the 


Narayana said: Brahmi, then putting Siva to the 
task of killing Sankhacüda went to His own abode. 
The other Devas returned to their homes. Here 
under the beautiful Vata tree, on the banks of the 
river Candrabhāgā, Mahadeva pitched His big tent 
and encamped. 


qd grat rati medya fa, | 


Dānavas. By the command of Mahadeva, 
Citraratha went to the city of the king of Daityas, 
more beautiful than Indra’s place and more wealthy 
than the mansion of Kubera. 

uade def afuit rae d 

wfeerenerufafüd ara usu 

refi: Raa gina: BARAT i 

sacar: IRA verefefu: n 6 u 

The city was five yojanas wide and twice as 
much in length. It was built of crystals of pearls 
and jewels. There were roadways on all sides. 
There were seven trenches, hard to be crossed, onc 


1058 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


after another, encircling the city. The city was built 
of countless rubies and gems, brilliant like flames. 


There were hundreds of roadways and markets 
and stalls, in the wonderful Vedis (raised platforms) 
built of jewels. All around were splendid palacial 
buildings of traders and merchantmen, filled with 
various articles 

afi gftāftetrsrā: ae: su 

Tea gai aaa Vaated wu | 

ada asari em Weaver 9 N 

There were hundreds and kotis of beautiful 
buildings, adorned with various ornaments and 
built of variegated red stones looking like Sindiras. 
Thus he went on and saw, in the middle, the 
building of Sankhaciida, circular like the lunar 
sphere. 

sreafiafinaresrfér: utara: 1 

ici a IATA AT FAA ou 10 d 

RIC NISC a 
fe gengan aA ii it 

Four ditches all filled with fiery flames, 
encircled one after another, his house. So the 
enemies could not in any way cross them; but the 
friend could easily go there. On the top were seen 
turrets, built of jewels, rising high to the heavens. 
The gate-keepers were watching the twelve gates. 


mfisantattt: mR weaned: 1 
NAi xerdturt ITT TT, u 12 u 
wage qerddisfü at BW qaf a: 1 
an fup god yogi UTT 013! 
Rsd irni a rue eit | 


waa Gad Wi dega 14 tl 


In the centre were situated lakhs and lakhs of 


to the first gate and saw one terrible person, copper 
coloured, with tawny eyes, sitting with a trident in 
his hand and with a smiling countenance. He told 
he had come as a messenger and got his entrance. 

aR ur AES ITT YA: | 

"rp enrsfü vafer eat SAAT TUT WD O15 N 

Tea Msengi sagas = | 

wre wdquid Aaaa UA 16 i 

Thus Citraratha went one after another to all the 
entries, not being prohibited at all though he told 
that he had come as a messenger on war service. 
The Gandharva reached one after another, the last 
door and said: O Door keeper! Go quickly and 
inform the Lord of the Dānavas all about the 
impending war. 

aud Hafan wr gat viquare € | 

a wa VISAS d way GARA, 017 NI 

IMIEVARI cantar RUTA i 

misaia feed aeaa aa 138 tt 

Ig usn: wüfd Aer | 

JE Weed veuiegs WAT 19 N 

When the messenger had spoken thus, the gate- 


*|keeper allowed him to go inside. Going inside, the 


Gandharva saw Sankhaciida, of an excellent form, 
seated in the middle of the royal assembly, on a 
golden throne. One servant was holding on the 
king’s head an umbrella, decked with divine 
excellent gems, the inner rod of the umbrella being 
made up of jewels, and decorated with expanded 
artificial flowers made of gems. 

fed urdaumīt afar: vara: \ 

gad gai mi AT, 20 N 

Tied eui apt gau wert wi d 

amas: uwRqd qatar Aaea: 121 u 

vainu gatgreaurfērēT: d 


The attendants were fanning him with beautiful 


excellent jewel built houses. In every room there | white camaras; he was nicely dressed, beautiful 
were jewelled steps and staircases and the pillars | and lovely and adorned with jewel ornaments. He 
were all built of gems, and jewels, and pearls. | was nicely garlanded, and wore fine celestial 
Puspadanta (Citraratha) saw all this and then went | garments. Three Koti Danavas were surrounding 


Book IX Chapter XX 


1059 


him; and seven Koti Dānavas, all armed, were| remained seated on excellent aerial cars, built of 


walking to and fro. 

Was € d spr yaga: ufus: 22 0 

IATA Wow qum geh vinta d 

yaaa sara 

ma Rages eres: Wat 23 u 

agh ina aadA Aaya a 

Puspadanta was thunderstruck when he saw 
thus the Danava, and he addressed him thus: “O 
King! I am a servant of Siva; My name is 
Puspadanta; hear what Siva has commanded me 
to tell you. 

wed ef cu waramféreent a uiu 24 N 

Warer wo Guy sie uu d 

TRG U qa yaeenfaa: fora: 0 25 u 

werd weno Bea: 1 

“You better now give back, to the Devas, the 
rights that they had before'. The Devas went to 
Sri Hari and had taken His refuge. Sri Hari gave 
over to Šiva one Sala weapon and asked the Devas 
to depart. At present, the three eyed Deva is residing 
under the shade of a Vata tree in the banks of the 
Puspabhadra river. 

feet ft dui a paar spe ffe 26 u 

Ten eur fe vigu qua arate | 

qe went Brat Vie: VERT A 00 27 U 

He told me to speak this to you, “Either give 
over to the Devas their rights, or fight with me.’ 
Please reply and I will speak to Him accordingly.’ 
Sankhacüda, hearing the messenger's words 
laughed and said: 

PATASĒ Mitre cd et TI Gas € | 

a naaa d quí aeh u28 

wages we ada epu | 

variat vea amen Brathay t 29 u 

“Tomorrow morning I will start, ready for war. 
Better go away to-day." The messenger went back 


jewels and gems. The following were the persons: 


adage dēlu era: WWE | 

aomas sucer fna ferzwa: 130 u 

frat fapad wfürerzer arene: | 

ASTE dist feraevanmerer: 131 I 

"redet AGITA: HOE: HEPA: I 

GOTI Weert saa wem 320 

set a Arar Vs SxS VAT: | 

agatsēta VAY Smeg grew Bat: (1 33 i 

KTMY YRY fasrenuifuet a dt i 

ears wise wast exp 1340 

agg menda gus HSAN | 

mia virion: areas dian u35! 

Skanda, Virabhadra, Nandi, Mahākāla, 
Subhadraka, Visalaksa, Bana, Pingalāksa, 
Vikampana, Virüpa, Vikrti, Manibhadra, Baskāla, 
Kapilaksa, Dirgha Danstra, Vikata, Tamralocana, 
Kalakantha, Balibhadra, Kalajihva, Kuticara, 
Balonmatta, Ranaslagho, Durjaya, Durgama, (these 
eight Bhairavas), eleven Rudras, eight Vasus, 
Indra, the twelve Adityas, fire, moon, Višvakarmā, 
the two Ašvins, Kubera, Yama, Jayanta, Nala 
Kübara, Vayu, Varuna, Budha, Mangala, Dharma, 
Sani, Iśāna, the powerful Kamadeva. 

sues TED wed Hest wem | 

verd Tey det ware weed u36 N 

ISAM fenem 1 

TATŪ TANU 037 0 

Ugradanstrā, Kotarā, Kaitabhī, and the eight 
armed terrible Devi Bhadrakālī. 
bloody red clothings and She smeared red sandal 


Kali wore the 


paste all over Her body. _ 
eredi u gad u mest get yer | 
ard carla rests stat ar at rat RT 3.8 N 
faudt fact frat quiet VT t 
VGA AGA: NAĀ — 4391 


Dancing, laughing; singing songs in tune, very 


to Siva and replied to Him accordingly. In the| jolly, She bids He devotees discard all fear, and 


meantime the following personages joined Siva and 


terrifies the enemies. Her lip is terrible, lolling, and 


1060 


extends to one Yojana. On Her eight arms She 
holds conch, disc, lotus, axe, skin, bow and arrows. 

di wdern weit NNa, | 

faepe meret yrfv er TATA i40 N 

Wat gari ast Ue Heya | 

Aura arturei area WUTUTSTSRH 41 dd 

ARTA Me TAIN TSS TAT | 

UTC Uo YATUTĀ er UT 4.2 N 

ma arged dé dud wem 1 

sada feed femme Wap 43 N 

She was holding in Her hands, the bowl shaped 
human skull; that was very deep and one Yojana 
wide. Her trident reached up to the Heavens; Her 
weapon called Sakti (dart) extended to one 
Yojana. Besides there were Mudgara (mace), 
Musala (club), Vajra (thunderbolt), Kheta, (club), 
brilliant Phalaka (shield), the Vaisnava weapon, 
the Varuna weapon, the Agneyastra (the fire 
weapon), Nāgapāša (the noose of serpents), the 
Nārāyaņāstra, the Gandharva’s weapons, the 


Brahma’s weapons, the Gadudastram, the 
Pārjanayāstram, the Pa$upatastram the 
Jrmbhaņāstram the Pārvatāstram, the 


Mahešvarāstram, the Vāyavyāstram, and the 
Sanmohanam rod and various other infallible 
divine weapons. Besides hundreds of other divine 
weapons were with Her. 

amta TA eit aera farentfefsr: | 

ref referat a fener AARE: 44 u 

TATA HST TATA: | 

derer uyda aada q Rs: ou 45 u 

Three Kotis of Yoginis and three Kotis and a 
half of terrible Dàkinis were attending Bhadrakālī. 
Bhütas, (demons) Pretas, Pi$acas, Kusmāņdas, 
Brahma Raksasas, Raksasas, Vetālas, Yaksas and 
Kinnaras also were there in countless numbers. At 
this time Kartikeya came there and bowed down 
to his father Mahadeva. 

aAa wg vea: WT TAT | 

fag: urif werareí WWW AAA 1146 N 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


AT Ga Wa AA VIS: Wasa | 

sara get urat wensedaupm wp 47 u 

He asked him to take his seat on His left side 
and asked him to help. Then the army remained 
there in military array. On the other hand, when 
Siva's messenger departed, Sankhacüda went to 
the zenana and informed Tulasi of the news of an 
impending war. 

TATA ST T SIT VHASTSAT | 

sara gut meh gada fagam 148 n 

ears 

& morien à TA fers À aa UTA 1 

& uong verdi oftfad arum 49 n 

No sooner She heard than her throat and lips 
and palate became dried. She then with a sorrowful 
heart spoke in sweet words: ^O my Lord! O my 
Friend! O the Ruler of My life! Wait for a moment 
and take your seat on My heart. 

ya apr wae wy aif d 

Uva vat arat fe fereeirerarszit er ATETL N50 N 

ardada umm À nA are ieu | 

GRAY wur gestae wp Fa us n 

Instil life in Me for a moment. Satisfy My desire 
of human birth. Let me behold you fully so that 
my eyes be satisfied. My breath is now very 
agitated. I saw by the end of the night one bad 
dream. Therefore I feel an internal burning. 

dam scat speret dier TUS 1 

IATA «uri ust fad wet «enum 52 u 

Thus at the words of Tulasi, the king Sankhacüda 
finished his meals and began to address her, in good 
and true words, beneficent to her: 

WEA same 

AIGA afer we asd pP TS IRR | 

yet zu: qui qud wed venir WO ! 53 N 

“O My Lady! It is Kala (the time) that brings 
out these various combinations by which the 
Karmic fruit is enjoyed; it is Kala that awards 
auspicious and inauspicious things; this Kala is the 


Book IX Chapter XX 


1061 


Sole Master to impart pain, fear, and good and bad 
things. Kāla is the Sole Master to impart pain, fear, 
and good and bad things. 

FA af ATV haa RTT: | 

KĀ yudas weds ATA: 0054 ui 

Tat IGO VARAT Ardea emo: i 

Aad pim: ATV ure wf K ATT: 11 55 N 

Trees grow up in time; their branches, etc., come 
out in time; flowers appear in time and fruits come 
out in time. Fruits are ripened in time and after 
giving the fruits, they die out also in time. O Fair 
One! The universe comes into existence in time 
and dies away in time. 

wr S state faa ares att Gah i 

ICTS U Gather UTA Uhr er ATT: ! 56 N 

deat data mao deta a | 

werfererforararaTHter weft: ww w57 u 

The Creater, Preserver, and Destroyer of the 
universe, are creating, preserving and destroying 
the worlds with the help of time. Time guides them 
in every way. But the Highest Prakrti is the God of 
Brahma, Visnu, and Maheša (1.c., the Creatrix of 
Time). 

AR WAT redi SATA HHA A: | 

ATS TU wed Carat BT WY: 1 58 N 

frater paraat ani TART | 

wie: adeas wafer WAYA: 159 1 

This Highest Prakrti, the Highest God is 
creating, preserving and destroying this universe. 
She makes the Time dance. By Her mere Will, She 
has converted Her inseparable Prakrti into Maya 
and is thus creating all things, moving and 
unmoving. She is the Ruler of all; the Form of all, 
and She is the Highest God. 

wd waa SIMT wat Unf seb a: | 

wd waa dd td wet nia 16001 

"ETT ATft aar: VALET KITT | 

GET U AUAKTURĪA AAAI 1161 N 

aman addist yaa siggy 1 

"emerit gars! wate vitaen li 62 N 


By Her is being done this creation of persons 
by persons, this preservation of persons by persons, 
and this destruction of persons by persons. So you 
better now take refuge of the Highest Lord. Know 
itis by Her command the wind is blowing, by Her 
command the Sun is giving heat in due time, by 
Her command Indra is showering rain; by Her 
command, Death is striding over the beings; by 
Her command fire is burning all things and by Her 
command the cooling Moon is revolving. 

Taney wrens TATU ud wn i 

fast egs HET Was mgh Wa 063 

WedH a dede dd oreo ast od 

wal aT sip chat ar west] Tr HT N 64 N 

She is the Death of death, the Time of time, 
Yama of yama (the Good of death), the Fire of fire 
and the Destroyer of the destroyer. So take Her 
refuge. You cannot find and fix who is whose friend 
in the world; so pray to Her, the Highest Go, Who 
is the Friend of All. 

He Hl ara ed egt ar fate ahaa: TT à 

rae ret HHO w qaa faa: t 65 U 

ora caret: vitas faa at at dfe: | 

JA ga urere great ww 66 N 

Oh! Who am I? And who are you either? The 
Creator is the combiner of us two and so He will 
dissociate us two by our Karma. When difficulty 
arises, the ignorant fools become overwhelmed 
with sorrow; but the intelligent Pandits do not get 
at all deluded or become distressed. 

ATi d adst estd arate fire i 

wa: ad aed a uq seem 167 u 

TAT cd AUT HM ART ALT A 1 

wd wea qur aft reatu affa u 68 u 

By the Wheel of Time, the beings are led 
sometimes into happiness; sometimes into pain. 
You will certainly get Nàrayana for your husband; 
for which you practised Tapas before, in the 
hermitage of Badari (the source of the Ganges, the 
feet of Visnu). I pleased Brahma by my Tapasya 
and have, by his boon, got you as my wife. 


1062. 

darat wtf sels ci fünf i 

are arent ges qi erae a aT u 69 N 

TEST ni T RAT cert er ATT | 

ani TATA we 470! 

But the object for which you did your Tapasyā, 
that you may get Hari as your husband, will 
certainly be fulfilled. You will get Govinda in 
Vrndāvana and in the region of Goloka. I will also 
go there when I forsake this, my Demon body. Now 
I am talking with you here; afterwards we will meet 
again in the region of Goloka. By the curse of 
Radhika, I have come to this Bharata, hard to be 
attained. 

yaten ada wn: vitent 3t jur fee à 

vd a dk uersa faened frema er 71 0 

were WIT eft wt enis eere ATS | 

zara U festa er ar we WATT 0 72 Nu 

You, too, will quit this body and, assuming the 
divine form will go to $ri Hari. So, O Beloved! 
You need not be sorry." O Muni! Thus these 
conversations took them the whole day and led 
them to the evening time. 

gare vun wed yiga | 

arvana weno waft 073 u 

The king of the demons, Sankhaciida then slept 
with Tulasi on a nicely decorated bed, strewn with 
flowers, and smeared with sandal paste, in the 
Ratna Mandir (temple built of jewels.) This jewel 
temple was adorned with various wealth and riches. 

vendue Pitti wer weed i 

FTA wrt wem STRA: 074 Nu 

spear arf at siet rata g: Ran | 

gief Pagi frat viuum 475 i 

Garett TTU faena ATATĒT 1 

The jewel lamps were lighted. Sankhacüda assed 
the night with his wife in various sports. The thin 
bellied Tulasi was weeping with a very sorrowful 
heart, without having taken any food. The king, 
who knew the reality of existence, took her to his 
breast and appeased her in various ways. 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


UU pert wed wish Aeg, 076 ! 

wow mea oat ad wettest Wu] | 

wat dyna at ddl wereenpdamu 77 N 

mist da «dur Wd MATA um | 

vit dadt a med Print KAUT 078 N 

What religious instructions he had received in 
Bhāņdīra forest from Sri Krsna, those Tattvas, 
capable to destroy all sorrows and delusions, he 
now spoke carefully to Tulasi. Then Tulasi’s joy 
knew no bounds. She then began to consider 
everything as transient and began to play with a 
gladdened heart. 

yoria gisi fr WX | 

sage att Arter 079 1 

Veni er aa at gt arelantant war à 

yA a gett AA wfr wu 0 80 N 

Both became drowned in the ocean of bliss; and 
the bodies of both of them were filled with joy and 
the hairs stood on their ends. Both of them, then, 
desirous to have amorous sports, joined themselves 
and became like Ardhanārišvara and so one body. 

monin er at Ret wat wrote wah à 

at Ret qaqa a dfe g wat u 81 u 

gad gaim KR 1 
ai eral at a Hetil vISTHT N 82 n 

As Tulasi considered Sankhacüda, to be her lord, 
so the Danava King considered Tulasi the darling 
of his life. They be came senseless with 
pleasureable feelings arising out of their amorous 
intercourses. Next moment they regained their 
consciousness and both began to converse on 
amorous matters. 

«ai Aart feeat gaat a ani YA: | 

aut a kodama wanaat 83 u 

Ba fefe dt afgeaufšdt à 

Had Waar Br at Aa afar 84 N 
sft SRE TIRER MARTRI VME A 

RSAT: 11 20 11 

Thus both spent their time sometimes in sweet 

conversations, sometimes laughing and joking, 


Book IX Chapter XXT 1063 


sometimes maddened with amorous sentiments. As} Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Ninth Book 
Sankhactida was clever in amorous affairs, so| on the war preparations of Sarikhactida with the 


Tulasi was very expert. So none felt satiated with| Devas in the Mahapuranam Srimaddevibhagavatam 


lov affairs and no one was defeated by the other. of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter XXI 


1063 


ET M————————————————À 


CHAPTER XXI 
On the War between Mahà Deva and Sankhaciida 


sianar sare 


sipi WTA EXITCGT TT: FTAA: | 

oat wed enr YAAR, i N 

TATA: UA vea iners | 

tira wr amet gear gear PACK 2 

wanngnntaganitecadany 

Sri Narayana spoke: Then the Dānava, the 
devotee of Sri Krsna, got up from his flower strewn 
bed, meditating on Sri Krsna, early in the morning 
time, at the Brahma Muhirta. Quitting his night 
dress, he took his bath in pure water and put on a 
fresh washed clothing. He then put the bright Tilaka 
mark on his forehead and, performing the daily 
necessary worship, he worshipped his Ista devata 
(The Deity doing good to him). 

Rae wy ag ATH 03 N 

WAS NAE ers U ASAT | 

aena aah aT Bat Pret U ANE 4 tl 


edt ad Raa feum Wem a oue 

ater agen aero fara | 

amoi ores a AAT Sat Her lt 7 It 

He then was the auspicious things such as curd, 
ghee, honey, fried rice, etc., and distributed as 
usual, to the Brahmanas the best jewels, pearls, 
clothing an gold. Then for his marching to turn out 
auspicious, he gave at the feet of his Guru Deva 
priceless gems, jewels, pearls, diamonds, etc., and 
finally he gave to the poor Brahmins with great 
gladness, elephants, horses, wealth, thousands of 


yi Hear g TĀ Udy Wn a | 

ga wae maf at wed ow weduuqu us 

Wiad a Vist aeafeny | 

mad Gams fepe E 9 N 

He then gave over to his son, the charge of his 
kingdom and of his wife, and all the dominions, 
wealth, property, all the servants and maid servants, 
all the stores and conveyances. He dressed himself 
for the war and took up bows and arrowcases. 

WIEN KĀTA wa SITUE | 

samt a feat GATT aR u 10 u 

Taree renti farentfefür: 1 

faae a rfr a fretfēft: 11 u 

By the command of the King, the armies began 
together. Thee lakhs of horses, one lakh elephants, 
one ayuta chariots, three Kots of bowmen, three 
Kotis armoured sodiers and three Kotis of trident 
holders got themselves ready. 

mat dar uff as ANE | 

wen Amada waggmerfayme: 412 

wena: wr fagat veri went wt od 

freamsaitfēvit daruft great fera: n 13 N 

firea wight a AT € | 

wfüsisra PITT sfrefé FT N 14 n 

Then the King counted his forces and appointed 
one Commandar-in-Chief. (Mahāratha), skilled in 
arts of warfare, over the whole army. Thus the 
generals were appointed over the three lakh 
Aksauhiņī forces and their provisions were 
collected by three hundred Aksauhiņī men. He, 
then, thinking of Šrī Hari, started for war, 
accompained by his vast army. 

Note: One Aksauhiņī consists of a large army 


stores, two lakhs of cities and one hundred kotis of| consisting of 21870 chariots, as many elephants, 65,610 


villages. 


horses, and 109,350 foot). 


Srimaddevibhdgavatam 


angaa: VA: | 
He then mounted on a chariot built of excellent 
jewels and, headed by his Guru and all his other 
elders, went to Šankara. O Nārada! Bhagavān 
Mahādeva was at that time, staying on the banks 
of Puspabhadrā. 
frgrartu Rrarat agi ARS 16 N 
ARTA TT: RATA KIA cur ATT 1 
uigurettrud a ea a Ufā N 171 
SET wp meaag | 
"Wardreraferedturt Ge yeng wem u 1 8 u 
That place was Siddhāšrama (the hermitage 
where the yogic successes had been obtained and 
can easily be acguired in future for the Siddhas as 
well a Siddha Ksettra.) It was the place where the 
Muni Kapila practised. Tapasyā, in the holy land 
of Bharata. It was bounded on the east by the 
western ocean, on the west by the Malaya 
mountain, on the south, by the Sri Saila mountain 
and on the north by the Gandha Madana Mountain. 
It was five yojanas wide and one hundred times as 


mad AT wp gers db SDN 0 19 N 

waunfeerirar Arata ATTA | 

mada er ferar ar fée i 20 n 

This auspicious river in Bharata yields great 
religious merits and is always full of clear, 
sparkling running water. She is the favourite wife 
of the Salt Ocean and She is very blessed. Issuing 
from Šarāvatī Himalayas, She drops into the ocean. 

That ama: gear weer ufzratasit | 

aa Treat MFIs Gati ZR 21 0 

aga want qatar 1 

PN ATA qgr sre w dien 22 u 

Keeping the river Gomati (Goomti) by her left; 
She falls into the west ocean. Sankhaciida, arriving 
there, saw Mahadeva under a Peepul tree near its 


root with a smiling countenance, like one Koti Sun 
seated in a yogic posture. 


His colour was white like a pure crystal; as if 
the Fire of Brahma was emitting from every pore 
of His body (burning with Brahma Teja); He was 
wearing the tiger skin and holding the trident and 
axe. He dispels the fear of death of His Bhaktas; 
His face is quite calm. He, the Lord of Gauri, is 
the Giver of the fruits of Tapasya and of all sorts 
of wealth and prosperity. 

angi WHAT STYRT STER, | 

fagare fersrefrat fasrad er ferro 25 N 

fāgamrt fayaat FAJAR RNR, | 

eu aU U Atalay, 26 uU 

The smiling face of ASutosa (one who is pleased 
quickly) is always thinking of the welfare of the 
Bhaktas; He is the Lord of the Universe, the Seed 
of the universe, the All-form (all-pervading), and 
the Progenitor of the universe. He is omnipresent, 
All pervading, the Best in this universe, the 
Destroyer of this universe, the Cause of all causes, 
and the Saviour from the hells. 

Wye Was TIT) Aaa | 

sremgr faurater d pt AAYA: 027 u 

we: ur orfenspen: HAT WUTHTH a: | 

"rat ascot IK dep RAT 28 1 

He is the Awakener and Bestower of 
Knowledge, the Seed of all knowledges, and He 
Himself is of the nature of Knowledge and Bliss. 
Seeing that Eternal Purusa, the King of the Danavas 
at once descended from his chariot and bowed 
down with devotion to Him and to Bhadra Kali on 
His left and and to Kartikeya on his front. The other 
attendants did the same. 

anfri «rad quit aet KG vias: | 

sunm gr ud dara 1290 


Book IX Chapter XXT 


1065 


Wa FT MI MUHA U UTA | 

TT Hear er irem rade n 30 n 

Waa Werdat MTATETTATA € | 

Šankara, Bhadra Kālī and Skanda all blessed 
him. Nandīšvara and others got up from their seats 
on seeing the Danava King and began to talk with 
each other on that subject. The King addressed Siva 
and sat by Him. Bhagavan Mahadeva, the Tranquil 
Self, then, spoke to him, thus: 


l Hered SATA 

Rara Sorat orem fre riva erdferq u 31 u 

mie yas rerrarzerrfir erféren: 1 

wyuusmf warst ufügsr warafer: 032 1 

“O King! Brahma, the knower of Dharma and 
the Creator of the world, is the Father of Dharma, 
The religious Marici, a devotee of Visnu, is the 
son of Brahma. The religious Prajāpati KaSyapa is 
also the Brahmā's son. 

GA: regt aer elt RT HAAS | 

RED a3: Great eredremarferaférat 11 33 N 

Daksa gladly gave over to Ka$yapa in marriage, 
his thirteen daughters. Danu, fortunate and chaste, 
is also one of them. 

vearfisrezit: Yat AATEC: | 

det ARAS wera: 134 0 

megan entire asit ferpereer fordfesur: à 

ST uci Web Gent ORIG 0035 ! 

Danu had forty sons, all spirited and known as 
Danavas. The powerful Vipracitti was the 
prominent amongst them. Vipracitti’s son was 
Dambha, self controlled and very much devoted 
to Visnu. So much so that for one lakh years he 
recited the Visnu mantra at Puskara. 

T qe FA POT TATA: l 

dat rat eu WT UT ANTATT 36 ! 

via ed mi itat Teas Gertie: | 

erar wfresmarngnd urea 37 N 

His Guru (spiritual teacher) was Sukracarya; 
and, by his advice, he recited the mantra of Sti 


Krsna, the Highest Self. He got you as his son, 
devoted to Krsna. In your former birth, you were 
the chief attendant Gopa (cow-herd) of Krsna. You 
were very religious. Now, by Rādhikā s curse, you 
are born in Bharata, as the Lord of the Danavas 
powerful, heroic, valorous, and chivalrous. 

Matas Ges AA a aera: | 

IET cw gufu 38 N 

daar a yea durar: Gari faa à 

VETAT JT KS mau dum: 139 N 

A11 the things from Brahmā down to a blade of 
grass, the Vaisņavas regard as very trifling; even 
if they get Sālokya, Sārsti, Sāyujya and Sāmīpya 
of Hari, they do not care a straw for that. Without 
serving Hari, they do not accept those things, even 
if those are thrust on them. Even Brahmahood and 
immortality, the Vaisnavas count for nothing. 

sat ATT at A AA THAT E | 

PNRI d fe ar carat fāgā sym: 140 Nu 

F ust a darat welt wer fēru à 

qe amd vd fas qarRaBg à uz 141 0 

They want to serve Hari (Seva-bhava), 
Indrahood, Manuhood, they do not care. You, too, 
are a real Krsna Bhakta. So what do you care for 
those things that belong to the Devas, that are 
something like false to you. Give back to the Devas 
their kingdoms thus and please Me. Let the Devas 
remain in their own places and let you enjoy your 
kingdom happily. 

ae yet ad PANT: | 

afer carter T arat seraient wr 42 N 

sfera UTUTĪ cet area Eey i 

radusi u ht a ufa À AÈ 43 N 

No need now for further quarrels. Think that 
you all belong to the same KaSyapa’s family. The 
sins that are incurred, for example, the murder of a 
Brahmin, etc., are not even one-sixteenth of the 
sins incurred by hostilities amongst the relatives. 

Pataca vr anai hat afer wr rar i 

amy RAA wa urges Mar 44 N 


1066 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


amia: LAKA wHardivateray | 

AAE TATA Pr 45 u 

If, O King! You think that by giving away to 
the Devas their possessions, your property will be 
diminished, then think that no one’s days pass ever 
in one and the same condition. Whenever Prakrti 
is dissolved, Brahma also vanishes. Again He 
appears by the Will of God. This occurs always. 

fer GE amr ET Asha HAT 1 

uyim er: wel were warp 46 N 

frem: ashe rere fari grat ere: | 

TH: ene Wd MENA HAT U 147 N 

True, that knowledge is increased by true 
Tapasyā; but memory fails then. This is certain. 
He who is the creator of this world, does his work 
of creation gradually by the help of his Knowledge- 
power (Jfidna-Sakti). In the Satya Yuga, Dharma 
reigns in full; in the Tretà Yuga, one quarter is 
diminished; again in the Dvapara only one-half 
remains. And in the Kali Yuga, only one quarter 
remains. 

OTS HS: WA Hel HT MTL 

aretha AA «p Are YA: 48 u 

frg areas HTC werd qanm i 

ed aft ATŠA Great A HAT AT 049 Uu 

Thus Dharma gets increase and decrease. At the 
end of the Kali, the Dharma will be seen very feeble 
as the phase of the Moon is seen very thin on the 
Dark Moon night. See, again, the Sun is very 
powerful in summer; not so in winter. At midday 
the Sun is very hot; it does not remain so in the 
morning and evening? 

entes U eram eere SI WARTE: | 

RA yaaa arf ars gfēd ws uso 

rep hias wave VARTA | 

qy: yfirarat a aad 51 N 

regit a srafered ad afer fet fer 1 

was yuia wi pat fet fet usa 

The Sun rises at one time; then he is considered 
as young; at another time be becomes very 


powerful and at another time he goes down. Again 
in times of distress (1.e., during the cloudy days) 
the Sun gets entirely obscured. When the Moon is 
devoured by Rāhu (in the Lunar Eclipse), the Moon 
quivers. Again when the Moon becomes liberated 
(i.e., when the eclipse passes away) She becomes 
bright again. In the Full-Moon night She becomes 
full but She does not remain so always. In the Dark 
fortnight She wanes every day. In the bright 
fortnight She waxes every day. 

gen: TAPA HON MTA STRHUTT | 

Tr fe vert efer a ētera 53 ou 

ATS Ws VACA west: loved: I 

srfererfer atest west: JSST 54 N 

In the bright fortnight, the Moon becomes 
healthy and prosperous and in the dark fortnight, 
the Moon becomes thinner and thinner as if 
attacked with consumption. In the time of eclipse 
She becomes pale and in the cloudy weather, She 
is obscured. Thus the Moon also becomes powerful 
at one time and weak and pale at another time. 
Vali now resides in Patala, having lost all his 
fortunes; but, at some other time, he will become 
Devendra (the Lord of the Devas). 

HIT YEA MASA SAINT dun | 

are we Pract ar Reia AAT 55 Ni 

nre aye favorit urea TT: 1 

arenas area avatar werdiea er 56 d 

gyan Waa Be: UTT: | 

ate Weare Teel ATA vu 157 N 

erst urbe Feat art art qu: TA: | 

This earth becomes at one time covered with 
grains and the resting-place of all beings; and, at 
another time, She becomes immersed under water. 
This universe appears at one time and disappears 
at another. Every thing, moving or non-moving, 
sometimes appears and again, at another time, 
disappears. Only Brahma, the Highest Self, remains 
the same. By His grace, I have got the name 
Mrtyufijaya (the Conqueror of Death). I, too, am 


Book IX Chapter XXI 


witnessing many Prakrtik dissolutions, J witnessed 
repeatedly many dissolutions and will in future, 
wintenss many dissolutions, 

HU URNES U Wa Gee: Ba: 58 ! 

Beat U IAV METER: UT: | 

ate wed at fe aag aAa u59 Ni 

TÈ West U Wafer Was SANT | 

wer gd TTT urer aay: Heat TAT 60 N 

seas deat ad fenfit quar: 1 

The Paramatman becomes of the nature of 
Prakrti. Again it is He that is the Purusa (male 
principle). He is the Self; He is the individual soul 
(Jiva). He thus assumes various forms. And, again, 
Lo! He is beyond all forms! He who always repeats 
His Name and sings His Glory, can conquer, at 
some occasion, death. He is not to come under the 
sway of this birth, death, disease, old age and fear. 
He has made Brahma the Creator, Visnu the 
Preserver and Me the Destroyer. By His Will, we 
are possessed of those influences and powers. 

aea Gert Praise feud qu 61 0 

ae afr wed TARATA, d 

aa gajas a ATA Fra: 62 0 

yadan render: | 

O King! Having deputed Kala, Agni and Rudra, 
to do the destruction work, I Myself repeat only 
His name and sing His glory, day and night, 
incessantly. My name is, on that account, 
Mrtyufijaya. By His Knowlege Power, I am 
fearless. Death flies away fast from Me as serpents 
fly away at the sight of Garuda, the Vinatà's son." 

BRAM U U AAMT: AMAT qum 63 N 

ĒraTa wp vier Waa wp ANG | 

WTST Wu Yea WA FA: YA: 64 d 

sara uui xd ui feudo | 

O Narada! Thus saying, Sambhu, the Lord of 
all, the Progenitor of all, remained silent. Hearing 
the above words of Sambhu, the King thanked 
Mahadeva again and again and spoke in sweet 
humble words. 


1067 


wags sara 

Ta Sead Ga AUT Ti BAT UW 65 N 

erem ferfgerare garai artery i 

BARS AEA TARA up wq d 66 ! 

qia eer edad Gar: weet afes: 1 

"ur cra  uwduedüsriWisr 167 u 

yaoa Wd NC AT TEENS 1 

aaa ferae: Het dar fea: 68 u 

yee web gator: d 

Sankhacüda said: The words spoken by Thee 
are quite true. Still I am speaking a few words. 
Kindly hear.' Thou hast spoken just now that very 
great sins are incurred by kindred hotilities. How 
is it, then, that He robbed Bali of his whole 
possessions and sent him down into Patala.? 
Gadadhara Visnu could not recover Bali's glory 
But I have done that. Why did the Devas kill 
Hiraņyāksa and Hiraņyakašipu, Simbha and the 
other Danavas? 


"ur ayes digg ad yt 69 


es ee an \ 
memis fast Tad: WAA: 070 1 
aa ga a aaa mAd Aa | 
amaai: aAa: wer 471 tl 
WHIT KTI HIST HAT E | 


In the gone days, we laboured hard when the 
nectar was obtained out of the churning of the 
ocean; but the best fruit was reaped by the Devas 
only. However, all these point that this universe is 
but the mere sporting ground of Paramātman, Who 
has become of the nature of Prakrti (the Polarities 
of the one and the same current to produce electric 
effects). Whomsoever He grants glory and fortune, 
he only gets that. The quarrel of the Devas and the 
Danavas is eternal, Victory and defeat come to both 
the parties alternately. 

aqs sada am west fruno wq 72 N 

Aaa Rīga ATTA: | 

gd dedi ess FASS: errat i 73 N 

wa adsa «ifteiftida west 1 


1068 — 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


So it is not proper for Thee to come here in this 
hostility. For Thou art the God, of the nature of the 
Highest Self. Before Thee, we both are equal So it 
is a matter of shame, no doubt, for Thee to stand 
up against us in favour of the gods. The glory and 
fame that will result to Thee, if Thou favour of the 
gods. The glory and fame that will result to Thee, 
if Thou art victorious, will not be so much as it 
will be if we get the victory. On the contrary the 
inglory and infamy that will be inconceivably much 
more than what would come to us if we are 
defeated. (For we are low and Thou art Great.) 


Fa sper weer a freed: 074 u 
ana Wart aaa 1 
ETT STU 

gant: we uar d sudynumpsd: N75 N 

wl Ga edt xrererentiet UATSTĀ | 

"rap eta cH ed Uu 0076 i 

ftvastrutda we duree quU | 

Ruang gE cep LKA Tanya 1177 N 

Mahadeva laughed very much when he heard 
the Danava’s words and replied: “O King! You 
are descended from the Brahmin family. So what 
shame shall I incur if I get defeat in this fighting 
against you. In former days, the fight took place 
between Madhu and Kaitabha; again between 
Hiraņyakašipu and Hiranyaksa and Sri Hari. 

Frat: Fe GS U MTS a UT Hay | 

udgat: wdurg: Wada aya € 1781 

we ypwufefu wd wat: WaT ga: | 

udyana U HOTT UI: 0079 Ui 

I also fought with the Asura Tripura. Again the 
Serious fight took place also between Sumbha and 
the other Daityas and the Highest Prakrti Devi, the 
Ruler of all, and the Progenitrix of all and the 
Destructrix of all. And, then, you were the Parisad 
attendant of Sri Krsna, the Highest Self. 

Note: Sri Krsna is the Eternal Purusa beyond the 
Gunas. He creates Prakrti. All the creation is effected 


by Him. He is the Master of all the Saktis. These Saktis 
come from Him and go unto Him. $ri Krsna plays with 
these Saktis, these lines of Forces, very powerful and 
terrible, indeed, that go to create, preserve and destroy 
the whole universe. These Lines of Forces have their 
three properties: (1) Origin; (2) direction and (3) 
magnitude. And finally they come back to their origin. 
This makes one Kalpa, one Life, one Moment, one in 
the Full One. The Gunas come out of these Saktis, these 
Lines of Forces. Sri Krsna is the Great Reservoir, the 
Great Centre of Forces, Powerful, Lovely and Terrible. 
And these events as described here, appear in the 
intermediate stages when the Fourth Dimension, etc. 
The Fourth Dimension does not at once turn out into 
the Third Dimension but it takes place by degrees. This 
explains our dreams visions, etc. which, if seen when 
the mind is pure, turn out to be true. 

aa wag caer ale II carat Gar: | 

Cl GSM Hed UHI Teg CAAT TE 80 i 

goi va Mag RA 1 

fe ust a aar A fart aa: n81 u 

So the Daityas, that were killed before, cannot 
be compared with you. Then why shall I feel shame 
in fighting against you? I am sent here by Sri Hari 
for saving the Devas. 

a a He ITU amor fe Water i 

saad Wiese fan a ANE | 

SHE IGS I WAT: WS AAT N 82 N 

ste ARRA enge) TAREA 
gafāviistara: 11 21 11 

So either give back to the Devas their 
possessions, or fight with Me. No need in speaking 
thus guite useless talks.” O Nārada! Thus speaking, 
Bhagavan Sankara remained silent. Sankhaciida got 
up at once with his ministers. 

Here ends the Twenty-first Chapter in the Ninth 
Book on the meeting of Mahadeva and Saükhacüda 
for an encounter in conflict in the Mahapuranam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter XXII 


1069 


CHAPTER XXII 
On the Fight Between the Devas and Sankhaciida 


simao sarar 

Ba wore Ara aaa: MAAA, | 

VATEE urd U GATT: uw wem ow 

fora: vare daily YA AA | 

wads: Was Gert wm F 2 i 

Sri Narayana spoke: Then the King of the 
Danavas, very powerful, bowed down to Mahadeva 
and ascended on the chariot with his ministers. 
Mahadeva gave orders to His army to be ready at 
once. So Sankhaciida did. 

we nist ggū mi a quudum | 

ar aye faufahrat we wem 3d 

daa wy ds dau Ui TU | 

FIVE AIG Tft GAR: 04 di 

PA area Arar AA wr | 

Wa eger den dara ws d 

fama mwne rtu: 1 

qus Fast THAT PÄ: NGN 

wat IET uet adai dt: 1 

aad a Aea ĀTI TexES: 17 N 

gina uz sAN a I: | 

maa d dmg: et u MT: 408 |i 

TEM wubr Ga up tada T d 

aiga fies you we afer ouo ou 

faves a VOTE qu: wt i 

WHET U EA A Wea weet: 0 10 d 

mH a qaqa Amde: we | 

adivatea: ad aaarat wt: we 11 ul 

Terrible fight then ensued between Mahendra 
and Vrsaparvā, Bhaskara and Vipracitti, Nišākara 
and Dambha, between Kāla and Kālešvāra, 
between Fire and Gokarna, Kubera and Kalakeya 
between Viśvakarmā and Maya, between Mrtyu 
and Bhayankar between Yama and Samhara, 
between Varuna and Vikamka, between Budha and 
Dhrtaprstha, between Sani and Raktāksa, Jayant 
and Ratnasāra, between the Vasus and Varcasas, 


between the two A$vin Kumāras and Dīptimān, 
between Nalakübara and Dhümra, between 
Dharma and Dhurandhara, between Mangala and 
Usāksa, Bhanut and Sovakara, beeween Kandarpa 
ad Pithara, between the eleven Adityas and 
Godhamukha, Cürna and Khadgadhvaja, 
Kaücimukha and Pinda Dhümra and Nandi, 
between Vi$va and Palāša, between the eleven 
Rudras and the eleven Bhayankaras, between 
Ugracanda and the other Mahāmārīs and 
Nandi$vara and the other Danavas. 

"puer Wag WASA seat | 

Wege U Vier deett TFT: AA wu 1 2 Ll 

ad a gay: Garage: aad A | 

tatters wa alfefieatrd: wg 13 u 

saa gags wya: 1 

VIETA aS Brew Wrap UATTŠTAT: d 14 NI 

east ggg: we efter atafermer: 1 

The battlefield, then, assumed a grim aspect, as 
if the time of Dissolution had come. Bhagavan 
Mahadeva sat under the Vata (peepul) tree with 
Kārtikeya and Bhadrakali. Sankhactida, decked 
with his jewel ornaments, sat on the jewel throne, 
surrounded by kotis and kotis of Danavas. 

Tar wd thes Sem edt 15 d 

aS a TI anaa AAT | 

"itsuHenzr yas qaaa mÀ: wg N16 N 

aaia yah KAA SATA R: | 

The Sankara’s army got defeated at the hands 
of the Danavas. The Devas, with cuts and wounds 
on their bodies, fled from the battlefield, terrified. 
Kārtikeya gave words ‘Do’nt fear’ to the Devas 
and excited them. Only Skanda resisted the Danava 
forces In one moment he slew one hundred 
Aksauhini Danava forces. 

TATA ATS BASSAI 0 17 Ui 

Wd tat GATT S T ta: A 

aega IMI a wert 18 ul 


1070 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


The lotus eyed Kali also engaged in killing the 
Asuras. She became very angry and no sooner did 
She slay the Asura forces, than She began to drink 
their blood. She easily slew with Her one hand and 
at every time put into Her mouth ten lakhs, and 
hundred lakhs and Kotis and Kotis of elephants. 

VGK YA fus eum | 

ada weet U aad wat WA 19 0 

heel YA NIST: SINN | 

diaa wg: ad MENU: 420 U 

Thousands and thousands of headless bodies 
(Kavandhas) came to be witnessed in the filled. 
The bodies of the Danavas were all cut and 
wounded by the arrows of Kartikeya. They were 
all terrified and fled away. 

quat fanfarra fran: | 

whan ur dziņa wd facto ur u21 0 

UETATČ U NH a aya wre | 

AGE er UM: Tra VMSA: 22 u 

Only Vrsaparva, Vipracitti, Dambha, and 
Vikamkana remained fighting with Skanda with 
an heroic valour. Mahāmārī, too, did not shew his 
back and he fought out vigorously. By and by they 
all became very much confused and distressed; but 
they did not turn their backs. 

" gatat wergfBsspg = | 

has BAT TBI AEN ACI 023 u 

aAa arereni erem UTT wea: | 

tet faarare wear arora ory 1024 N 

Seeing this terrible fight of Skanda, the Devas 
began to shower flowers. The killing of the 
Dànavas looked like a Prakrtik Dissolution. 
Šankhacūda, then, began to shoot arrows from his 
chariot. 

TU maks are advi wem | 

nedin Taya aga u u25 i 

at: Wega: wésur3p dne: 

Wa Wa aaa wp u26 

The shooting of arrows by the king seemed as 
if rains were being poured in clouds. Everything 


became pitch dark. Fires only were seen emitting 
their golden tongues. The Devas, Nandi$vara and 
others, fled away, terrified. 

qda c tūri foret yaar TAT i 

Fagan gs u gant cw nde u27 0 

Quer wegen a ua: rasa: | 

tentu ais ufi send wem 128 u 

Only Kārtikeya remained in the battlefield. 
Then Sankhacüda began to throw terrible showers 
and showers of mountains, snakes, stones, and 
trees. So much so, that Kartikeya was covered by 
them as the Sun becomes obscured by fog. 

agaaa Ku gag w WaT | 

sister vel feet Frese verdioenra 29 N 

Tat wht füenTexur wenn a: 1 

with fru gate rer saree A 11 3 0 n 

aut Hof a aoe aya AAA: YA: | 

Teen aagi Gert frem gr 431 N 

The Demon King cut off the weighty guiver and 
the pedestal of Skanda broke His chariot. By the 
divine weapons of the Danava, the peacock (the 
vehicle) of Kartikeya became exhausted. Kartikeya 
threw one Sakti (weapon) on the breast of the 
Daànava; but before it fell, the Danava cut off that, 
lustrous like the Sun and, in return, darted his Sakti. 

ISA ATT: | 

STENT AT ECA A ATL LOCI I 32.0 

miga daia Water WW | 

Vaita «s fecun rarest: |1 33 N 

By that stroke, Kartikeya became stunned for a 
moment; but he immediately regained his 
consciousness. He then took up the quiver that 
Bhagavàn Visnu gave him before and many other 
weapons; and ascending on another chariot, built 
of jewels, began to fight out violently and valiantly. 

"fà Rataa ursi-r wena i 

Ti erar feds VIEg—s GIGA 34 N 

Ware mi sra fate vneresaen i 

Fadu VITA ITT GĀZA aay u 35 i 


Getting angry, he resisted all those showers of 


Book IX Chapter XXII 


snakes, mountains and trees by his divine weapons. | indomitable strength. He then got up in full vigour. 
He resisted fire by his watery (Paryannya) weapon. | Bhadrakālī went to the field to see the Kartikeya’s 
Then He cut off easily Sankhacüda' s chariot, bow, | forces. Nandiévara and other heroes, the Devas, 


armour, charioteer, and his bright crown and he| Gandharvas, Yaksas, Rāksasas and Kinnaras 
threw on his breast one blazing Sakti of white| followed Her. Hundreds of war drums were sounded 


1071 


colour. 

ST HAITI ITT U AAAS AY € | 

Bete ATARI wem 136 ! 

UA aS a Area ATTA aw: | 

Je Wee GN WUSÜOW ARE 137 N 

The Danavendra fell unconscious; but, at the 
next moment, he regained his consciousness 
quickly, mounted on another chariot and took a 
fresh quiver. The Danava was the foremost in his 
magic powers, He, by his power of Maya, made a 
shower of arrows so much so that Kartikeya 
became completely covered by that multitude of 


yaana Rra KTV asrargary u 38 11 
fru at a arts HET cafe | 
ward resa afariratssaent 139 1 
Tre MOTT VERT ente NRE: | 
et IET d sore ferra raafārtīt i40 n 
Then the Danava took one invincible Sakti, 
lustrous like one hundred Suns. It seemed that 
flames of fire were licking high as if the Disolution 
Time had come aright. Inflamed by anger, the 
Dànava threw that Sakti on Kartikeya. It seemed, 
then, that a burning mass of fire fell on him. The 
powerful Kartikeya became senseless. 
Pract erf ara aana eot | 
aa contd a aye AATFATA 47 u 
caret SIT AT Tar safer aT | 
diemque dow dde: 42 0 
ad mg iaa? CIBRIBTHÍORGNT: | 
"TETWÍSISI AEM: WAM WTSTESRI: 11 43 N 
Bhadrakālī immediately took Him on Her lap 
and carried him before Šiva easily restored him to 
his life by his knowledge-power and gave him the 


and hundreds of persons carried Madhu (wine). 
MATA T PĀRIM UTT | 

GV Rear wroeot a eur 11 44 u 

Reena WA Ya: WA: | 

Spt adh a meh wad wore nas 

Se west eee x ual wey | 

Ariea  ITOT: BATT: 1146 N 

Going to the battle-ground, She gave a war-cry. 
The Dānava forces got fainted by that cry. 
Bhadrakālī shouted aloud inauspicious peals after 
peals of laughter, Then She drank Madhu and 
danced in the battlefield. Ugra Damstra, 
Ugracaņdā, Kotavi, the Yoginis, Dakinis, and the 
Devas all drank Madhu (wine). 

apr caret VB: vitae wert 1 

AMATA was WIT Tat Awaits ves «dt 11 47 u 

wart fate af a yorar | 

Tat Pata USAT ow exor 148 N 

. Seeing Kali in the battlefield, Sankhacüda came 

up again and imparted the spirit of Fearlessness to 
the Daityas, trembling with fear. Bhadrakālī 
projected, then, the Fire weapon, flaming like the 
Great Disolution Fire; but the king quickly put out 
that by the Watery weapon. 

fada arent a a dit a Teu | 

miado a fede Adas er N 49 N 

myat ufagu caret afa TTA i 

Tat War a vitu aras a eeu 50 u 

Kali then projected the very violent and 
wonderful Varunastra. The Danava cut off that 
easily with Gandharvastra. Kali then threw the 
flame-like Māhešvarāstra. The king made it futile 
by the Vaisnavástra. 

"meurt wr adt faga adag i 

Wat AAMT GB Maes Tad 051 d 


1072 

wed TT Teed Wea | 

Wd wares var t deag 52 i 

Then the Devi purifying the Nārāyaņāstra with 
the mantra, threw it on the king. At this the king 
instantly alighted from his chariot and bowed down 
to it. The Nārāyaņāstra rose high up like the 
Dissolution Fire. Sankhacüda fell prostrate on the 
ground with devotion. 

ares aa Kru cert virgas i 

ATT NET Fatt wear OW: 053 N 

«rat agru faeere wr adit targa | 

Tn faeere dieratut wrenn a 0 54 N 

The Devi threw, then, the Brahmāstra, purifying 
it with Mantra. But it was rendered futile by the 
Dānava's Brahmāstra. The Devi again shot the 
divine weapons purifying them with mantras; but 
they also were nullified by the divine weapons of 
the Dànava. 

at fergra greg er aera orem à 

TH ARAM OT MATS U wem USS N 

Then Bhadrakali threw one Sakti extending to 
one Yojana. The Daitya cut it to pieces by his divine 


weapon. 

wore ud a eet urged ENT | 

Pau fing a arayareniftutt u 56 n 

HY Uae fT TUS SC eT: | 

uae a ter gad a RRR 0/57 u 

The Devi, then, being very much enraged, 
became ready to throw Pasupata Astra, when the 
Incorporeal Voice was heard from the Heavens, 
prohibiting Her, and saying “O Devi! The high- 
souled Danava would not be killed by the Pasupata 
weapon. 

Matar AAT aufus: i 

mace seer sur wu: 58 N 

BATHS spent A SANT yere i 

Wawa GATI snm PIT TET 1 59 N 

For Brahma granted him this boon that until the 
Visnu’s Kavaca will remain on his neck and until 
his wife’s chastity be violated, old age and death 


Srīmaddevībhāgavatam 


will not be able to touch him.” Hearing this 
Celestial Voice, the Devī at once desisted. But She 
out of hunger, devoured hundreds and lakhs of 
Dānavas. 

s wem uds ragi sent | 

Rear ATT ATATATA GTA: 11 60 UI 

Gan fada ur ect zfrerquituri dar à 

KE aas: ITS UTT A: 167 N 

The terrible Devi Kali, then, went with great 
speed to devour Sankhaciida but the Danava 
resisted Her by his sharp divine weapons. The Devi 
then threw on him a powerful axe, lustrous like a 
summer Sun; but the Danava cut it to pieces by his 
divine weapon. 

wake aerādt aa a SA a | 

adia: sagà wee 462 

dira afar caret hagen init à 

ava a ti wm SATA une At u 63 u 

The Devi seeing this, became very angry and 
proceeded to devour him; but the Dànava King, 
the Lord of all Siddhis, expanded his body. At this, 
Kali became violently angry and assuming a terrific 
appearance, went quickly and with the blow of one 
first, broke his chariot and dropped down the 
charioteer. 

aa we a fosa esarfiatforei | 

ATTIE TE WETS: TAHA d 64 N 

FEM SATA a Vet ARTA ara: | 

AYTA U Ma eer: AUT SOMA TN 65 N 

Then she hurled on the Asura one Sila weapon, 
blazing like a Pralaya Fire. Sankhacüda easily held 
that by his left hand. The Devi became angry and 
struck the Dānava with Her first; the Daitya's head 
reeled, and, rolling, he fell unconscious for a 
moment. 

SAT Aaa Wear MATE TTT i 

AUG WEG CAT UE AA M 66 N 

ceases U Teda TE ep Ver or | 

Area Fara vt TTT ATA S QUIT: 0 67 N 


Next moment regaining his consciousness he got 


Book IX Chapter XXIII 


1073 


up. But he did not fight hand to hand with the Devi. 
Rather he bowed down to Her. The weapons that 
the Devi threw afterwards were partly cut down 
by the Dànava and partly taken up by him and 
absorbed in him and thus rendered futile. 

Tetra grad eat RaT UA: A: | 

wea a yaaa META eife 11 68 u 

Beata AT MAS: WURST | 

Paa TT arr HATTA t 69 N 

Then Bhadrakālī caught hold of the Danava and 
whirling him round and round threw him aloft. 
Then the powerful Sankhacüda fell down on the 
ground from high with great force; he immediately 
got up and bowed down to Her. 

TIKAI fra quate | 

aede gigt a fasi went 170 0 

amaai a gat at daft er Ut gen i 

Ura Yara ARA STA VIETA u 7 1 u 

He then ascended on his beautiful chariot, built 
of excellent jewels. He did not feel any fatigue with 
the war and went on fighting. Then the Devi 
Bhadrakālī, feeling hungry began to drink the blood 
of the Danavas and ate the fat and flesh, 

sara Marii dated aera | 

TA WETS VGK Faas 0 72 n 


wat a grmdzrummaf$mā TASJA | 

yarn Pott aereas MTA 0 73 M 

She came before Mahadeva and described to 
Him the whole history of the warfare from 
beginning to end. Hearing the killing of the 
Danavas, Mahadeva began to laugh. She went on 
saying “The Danavas that get out of my mouth 
while I was chewing then, are the only ones that 
are living. This number will be about one lakh. 

ame qadi a zd Uga d | 

ITALIA watt aman u 74 u 

TAA NET MEANEN: | 

Tu figu maei Rra HU MTG li 75 i 

efr SRATI Tengo? FIREA ARGARTATGATA 
ÈS: 11 22 11 

And when I took up the Pāšupata weapon to 
kill Dānava, the Incorporeal Celestial Voice spoke: 
‘He is invulnerable by you.’ But the very powerful 
Dānava did no more fling any weapon on Me. He 
simply cut to pieces those that I threw on him.” 

Here ends the Twenty-second Chapter in the Ninth 
Book on the fight between the Devas 
and Sarikhacūģa in the Mahāpurāņam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter XXIII 1073 


CHAPTER XXIII 
On the Killing of Saükhacüda 
sima Zara x wre a ana fanmade R: | 
Pamei ATT aaga: | quí war ware qme gA 3 
aÀ rad U AA cal: wg AMG doi Rraerradtejai l piai g 1 
VISAS: Pre wgr ĒRA a | 7 Magi vest 4 i 
TATA WaT waa für dxwngfr 82 1 Then a great fight ensued between Siva and 


Sankhacüda for full one hundred years but there 
was no defeat nor victory on either side. The result 
was stalemate. Both of them, Bhagavan and the 
Danava quitted their weapons. 

SITAR ATT ATeITAR Wd: | 

WRA: HATEN Geet JINA: 5 d 

amami a yayi U aga € | 


huge and heavy bow case. maa Hat: viqeifaarara SUE 11 6 Nu 


68 


Nārāyaņa said: Šiva, versed in the knowledge 
ofthe Highest Reality, hearing all this, went himself 
with His whole host to the battle. Secing Him, 
Sankhaciida alighted from his chariot and fell 
prostrate before him. With great force he got up 
and, quickly putting on his armour he took up his 


1074 


Šankhacūda, remained on his chariot and 
Mahadeva role on His Bull. Hundreds and hundreds 
of Dànavas were slain. But extraordinarily 
endowed with divine power, Sambhu restored to 
life all those of His party that were slain. 

Kam IATA: VU |1 

MTT Cup wega AAA, 007 di 

In the meanwhile, an aged Brāhmaņa, very 
distressed in his appearence, came to the battlefield 
and asked Sankhaciida, the King of Dānavas: 

GATT IATA 

af frat a veia vet Ta wine | 

vd udana rat art ARs aif usu 

Progra a quara gaa a iR | 

"seat Harare qe: wed w Hats u 9 u 

“O King! Grant me what I beg of you; you give 
away in charity all sorts of wealth and riches; give 
me also what I desire; give me, a Brahmin, 
something also. I am quite peaceable aged 
Brahmin, very very thirsty. Make your Promise 
first and then I will speak to you what I desire. 

Note: The Brahmins only are fit for receiving frauds 
and cheatings. 

agaa Wiz: Werden | 

named wrizmefegsremWumma |1 10 1 

ga gad foot wore eta a | 

wg wa TA god wit 71 N 

The King Sankhacüda, with a gracious 
countenance and pleasing eyes swore before him 
that He would give him what he would deisre. 
Then the Brahmin spoke to the King with great 
affection and Maya: ‘I am desirous of your 
Kavaca (amulet).' The King, then, gave him the 
Kavaca (the amulet, mantra written on a Bhurja 
bark and located in a golden cup). Bhagavan Hari 
(in the form of that Brahmin) took that Kavaca 
and, assuming the form of Sankhciida came to 
Tulasi. 

Tea FESTE ATT ep dtaltīri ATT WE | 

aa VIET: VIO We aad wf u12 ut 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


ITT TUTA | 

wFrard u gide after 013 

Coming there, He made His Maya (magic) 
manifest and held sexual intercourse with her. At 
this time Mahādeva took up the Hari’s trident-aiming 
at the king of the Danavas. The trident looked like 
the Mid-day Sun of summer, flaming like a Pralaya 
fire, It looked irresistible and invincible as if quite 
powerful to kill the enemies. 

Aaa Teed U Taya | 

Raamaa a dam 114 0 

In brilliance it equalled the Sudaršana Cakra (disc) 
and it was the chief of all the weapons. No other 
body then Šiva and Kešava could weild such a 
weapon. l 

apes det VE wager | 

Wild gered a Aani N 15 i 

Wed admain aadA | 

Rigu died qe VISAS U AMG u6 N 

Tat emi VĀSA AREA, | 

Cat A STET ST Great MTA PAT tt 17 u 

And everybody feared that but Siva and Kešava. 
In length it was one thousand Dhanus and in width 
it was one hundred hands. It seemed lively, of the 
nature of Brahma, eternal and not capable to be 
noticed, whence and how it proceeded. The weapon 
could destroy, by its own free Lila (Will) all the 
worlds. When Siva held it aloft the aiming at 
Sankhacüda, He hurled it on him, the King of the 
Demons quitted his bows and arrows and with mind 
collected in a yoga posture, began to meditate on 
the lotus-feet of Sri Krsna with great devotion. 

Ye wp wat great wars gR 1 

Tat ITU a are TA Stay M 18 Ul 

Tet yen feared faii attra i 

By areteet VISA "191 

waan ated UTT: 

"eterne IATE ut ie "20u 

At that moment. the trident, whirling round fell 
on Šankhacūda and easily burnt him and his chariot 
to ashes. He, then, assuming the form of a two- 


Book IX Chapter XXIV 


armed Gopa, full of youth, divine, ornamented with 
jewels, holding flute, mounted on a Divine Chariot, 
surrounded by kotis and kotis of Gopas who came 
there from the region of Goloka, whose bodies were 
built up of excellent jewels, and Sankhaciida then 
went up to the Heavens (Goloka, where Sri 
Vrndāvana is located is located in the middle). 

TT TA Prat V wpa | 

WRT V riti TĀ SAAN GA u21 U 

gani a at apr werdet | 

AS amrgi drmsfrukagdt u22 1 

He went to Vrndavana, full of Rasas (sentiments) 
and bowed down at the lotus feet of Radha Krsna 
with devotion. Both of them were filled with love 
when they saw Sudāmā, and, with a gracious 
countenance and joyful eyes, they took him on their 
laps. On the other hand the Sila weapon came with 
force and gladness back again to Krsna 

AT VIS U ats yal d wp TQ d 

aR: IES IJ € 0 23 N 

AMES MITT BTA 1 

yii yada a darat Wife wu 24 u 

The bones of Šankhacūda, O Narada! were 
transformed into conch-shells. These conch-shells 
are always considered very sacred and auspicious 
inthe worship of the Devas. The water in the conch- 
shell is also very holy and pleasing to the Devas. 
What more than this, that the water in the conch- 
shell is as holy as the water of any Tritha. 

dette wr ufest vispar fara | 

Via MARTA aa Hat: Tae 11 2 5 i 

wem dts a: Sta: Var i 

viet wur wa tamat gR: 26 0 


This water can be offered to all the Gods but 


1075 


not to Siva. Wherever the conch-shell is blown, 
there Laksmi abides with great pleasure. If bathing 
be done with conch-shell water, it is equivalent to 
taking bath in all the Tirthas. Bhagavan Hari resides 
direct in the conch-shell. 

wa aad wattage | 

a VIAA: ya a ferire: 27 u 

TAT VET Tft AAAS ARTA: | 

Rasi grad wear Pratetes ITF 11 28 Ut 

Where Sankha is placed, there Hari resides. 
Laksmi also resides there and all inauspicious 
things fly away from there. Where the females and 
Südras blow the Sankhas, Laksmi then gets vexed 
and, out of terror, She goes away to other places. 
O Narada! Mahadeva, after killing the Danava, 
went to His own abode. 

West GAMAS: IV wuTgd: | 

qu: waters ung: warigdgat: 129 N 

agegua: wet perdia: | 

aya gags Parn Hama d 

wig: Great a yian: 130 u 

efr sired eno) games 
IRIRA: 11 23 11 

When He gladly went away on His Vehicle, on 
the Bull’s back, with His whole host, all the other 
Devas went to their respective places with great 
gladness. Celestial drums were sounded in the 
Heavens. The Gandharvas and the Kinnaras began 
to sing songs. And showers of flowers were strewn 
on Šiva's head. All the Munis and Devas and their 
chiefs began to chant hymns to Him. 

Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter of the Nineth 
Book on the killing of Sankhaciida in 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter XXIV 1075 


CHAPTER XXIV 
On the Glory of Tulasi 
Us . Narada said: How did Narayana impregnate 
mans maai wem E | Tulasi? Kindly describe all that in detail. 


Geet Sa Woo TH careers o1 Nu 


1076 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


sfanrant sare 


mang maa ANG a | 

VISU wat Yet roaa 02 u 

yafaa wd see wedged | 

UA A wera 11 3 u 

Narayana said: For accomplishing the ends of 
the Devas, Bhagavan Hari assumed the Vaisnavi 
Maya, took the Kavaca from Sankhciida and 
assuming his form, went to the house of Tulasi. 
Dundubhis (celestial drums) were sounded at Her 
door, shouts of victory were proclaimed and Tulasi 
was informed. 

ggi arama gederafau | 

waged p agent aterarara WDR 4 dd 

repeat rp tat Artel WATT | 

wmf wearer gav urea 15 di 

sirgruterert ert GTAT ARATATA ATE | 

afew Rigi arforvass et adt! 6 u 

The chaste Tulasi, hearing that sound very 
gladly looked out on on the royal road from the 
window. Then for auspicious observances, She 
offered riches to the Brahmins; then She gave 
wealth to the panegyrists (or bards attached to the 
courts of princess), to the beggars, and the other 
chants of hymns. 

Masa Taree Weste wat wet od 

AeA KR KTM, 700 

GTA Utd: led UT d ati attrac i 

ATG ATVATATA TA U RE pO 8 di 

That time Bhagavan Narayana alighted from His 
chariot and went to the house of the Devi Tulasi, 
built of invaluable gems, looking exceedingly 
artistic and beautiful. Seeing her dear husband 
before her, She became very glad and washed his 
feet and shed tears of joy and bowed down to Him. 

WRR TĀ arama argat | 

wise a edt ar wdsfeqemm uou 

ere À ous we uite U aya Ed 

Wt Td cw Wet ude Kat 1100 

Then She, impelled by love, made him take his 


seat on the beautiful jewel throne and giving him 
sweet scented betels with camphor, began to say: 
“To-day my life has been crowned with success. 
For I am seeing again my lord returned from the 
battle.” 

ahaa nae A ara qose ET | 

US grid ATi get fet 11 00 

Then she cast smiling glances askance at him 
and with her body filled with rapturous joy lovingly 
asked him the eyes news of the war in sweet words: 


qorart 

adeat men aa wu i 

we aye forrest «ft qure 12 u 

weiterer scat weer ATCTUTT: | 

VIB4dS N KŪT myag aa: 0 13 

“O Thou, the Ocean of mercy! Now tell me of 
your heroic valour, how you have come out 
victorious in war with Mahadeva who destroys 
countless universes.” Hearing Tulasi’s word, the 
Lord of Laksmi, in the guise of Sankhaciida, spoke 
these nectar-like words with a smiling countenance. 


sfrerarTarer 

ameet: Fat: cere uuimed snp € | 

"yit aya weet gramatu efte u 14 u 

Wit a are STET SE aT: | 

aama Wea AE 0015 N 

wars sid auai Rrach Prat qa: à 

BURA Wat ATA: STA AT AIS d 16 tl 

O Dear! Full one Samvatsara the war lasted 
betwixt us. All the Daityas were killed. Then 
Brahma Himself came and mediated. Peace, then, 
was brought about and by the command of Brahma. 
I gave over to the Devas their rights. 

TĀ TTU TA Waa We ANG | 

TT KATRA TTT IKT, u 17 N 

ud Aahar oneri enean HT | 

When I returned to my home, Siva went back to 
His Sivaloka. Thus saying! Hari, the Lord of the 
world, slept and then engaged in sexual intercourse 


Book IX Chapter XXIV 


1077 


with her. But the chaste Tulasi, finding this time 
her experience quite different from what She used 


to enjoy before, argued all the time within herself 


and at last questioned him: 


qe eara 
Bl aT cd ag WAM TSK ATA TAT Ui 18 N 
gigi medici weawai vnnfü È 1 
qediaat grat ah: wows 19 N 
ie | 
aa gt adt kj MATA 4020 U 


“Who are you? O Magician! By spreading your 
magic, you have enjoyed me. As you have taken 
my chastity, I will curse you. Bhagavan Narayana, 
hearing Tulasi’s words and being afraid of the 
curse, assumed His real beautiful figure. The Devi 
then saw the Eternal Lord of the Devas before her. 
He was of a deep blue colour like fresh rain-clouds 
and with eyes like autumnal lotuses and with 
playful Līlās equivalent to tens and tens of millions 
of Love personified and adorned with jewels and 
ornaments. 

Sunt eraat virer digan i 

vt apr ait art teat dura eur 22 N 

Waal hr VII YA: wr HaT € | 

His face was smiling and gracious; and he were 
his yellow-coloured robe. The love-stricken Tulasi, 
seeing That Lovely Form of Vasudeva, 
immediately fell senseless; and at the next moment, 
regaining consciousness, she began to speak. 


gears 

BATA à CAT ANT WHT |1 23 1 

we UTT NA cant cara ga: | 

umeai fe gar da: WAT 24 1 

O Lord! Thou art like a stone. Thou hast no 
mercy. By hypocricy Thou hast destroyed my 
chastity, my virtue and for that reason didst kill 
my husband. O Lord! Thou hast no mercy; Thy 


heart is like a stone. So Let Thee be turned into a 
stone. 

aeanoea Wa LI STOTEIUT | 

reef eran vat st urat fe era: 25 u 

ort fermer ueri a met wd 

qai ete iaat freonu Wedge: 26 0 

Aas Het SBI RENEA: | 

wast at Aggama weh 827 u 

Those who declare Thee as a saint, are no doubt 
mistaken. Why didst Thou for the sake of others, 
kill without any fault, another Bhakta of Thine. 
Thus speaking Tulasi overpowered with grief and 
sorrow, cried aloud and repeatedly gave went to 
lamentations. Seeing her thus very distressed, 
Narayana, the Ocean of Mercy, spoke to her to 
cheer her up according to the rules of Dharma. 

sfera 

moat get wx Hae umet fuu i 

raed vides cwn Gat du: 028 1 

Hea cat enfin rs fu ferret a TAIT | 

sup aggid ada wu: WA u29 I 

O Honoured One! For along time you performed 
tapasyà in this Bharata, to get me. Sankhacüda, 
too, performed tapasyā for a long time to get you. 
By that tapas, Sankhacüda got you as wife. Now it 
is highly incumbent to award you also with the 
fruit that you asked for. 

SEVI wea a feared PETS d 

wa TA Nat mef ed vum wea 130 N 

Ba aiden rente a fasa 1 

Yet gya Fo qug weg wn 31 

Therefore, I have done this. Now quit your this 
terrestrial body and assume a Divine Body and 
marry Me. O Rame! Be like Laksmi. This body of 
yours will be known by the name of Gandaki, a 
very Virtuous, pure and peilucid stream in this holy 
land of Bharata. 

wa Ayaa Guage faa 1 

goaia gedift a fagat 132 0 


1078 

fay eg gure wart Says | 

warrant qe afesafs amt 33 i 

Your hairs will be turned into sacred trees and 
as they will be born of you, you will be known by 
the name of Tulasi. All the three worlds will 
perform their Pūjās with the leaves and flowers of 
this Tulasi. 

tart wat ar rare siters TT utet i 

wa wa goat gar wsrg gat 34 

Tere fendi we garai at | 

Aid wat T AGRA 35 N 

madhang anona | 

Therefore, O Fair-faced One! This Tulasī will 
be reckoned as the chief amongst all flowers and 
leaves, In Heavens, earth, and the nether regions, 
and before Me, O Fair One, you will reign as the 
chief amongst trees and flowers. In the region of 
Goloka, on the banks of the river Virajā, in the 
Rāsa circle (the celestial ball dance), where all 
amorous sentiments are played in Vrndavana forest, 
in Bhandira forest, in Campaka forest, in the 
beautiful Candana (Sandal) Forests and in the 
groves of Madhavi, Ketakti, Kunda, Mallika, and 
Mālatī, in the sacred places you will live and 
bestow the highest religious merits. 


SRTHGESAS WHT aeng YAR: |1 36 N 
godeg quu ragu | 
after a terit adatu arfērafā 1 37 i 
AA U adda mmea a | 
TAGAT a AAA U38 U. 
All the Tīrthas will reside at the bottom of the 
Tulasi tree and so religious merits will accrue to 
all. O Fair-faced One! There I and all the Devas 
will wait in expectation of the falling of a Tulasi 
leaf. 
U em: adig udag difēra: | 
gadās AAA Waray 0039 i 
greai at qed went | 
"row gida gedit: 1400 


Any-body who will be initiated and installed 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


with the Tulasi leaves water, will get all the fruits 
of being initiated in all the sacrifices. Whatever 
pleasure Hari gets when thousands and thousands 
of jars filled with water are offered to him, the same 
pleasure He will get when one Tulasi leaf will be 
offered to Him. 

TAMA Beh deno WaT | 

godu dene afta et 47 n 

veruni a KAT w at HAT i 

Head ad faepe wd 42 0 

Whatever fruits are acquired by giving Ayuta 
cows as presents, those will be also acquired by 
giving Tulasi leaves. Especially if one gives. Tulasi 
leaves in the month of Kārtika, one gets the fruits 
same as above mentioned. 

Pret egestate oth vaca 38: | 

vosmet que Uys N AM: 1430 

Gendt verat Heat Year qd BUM: | 

Tastes ately ferret wr ea u 44 u 

If one drinks or gets the Tulasi leaf water at the 
momentous Time of Death, one becomes freed of 
all sins and is worshipped in the Visnu Loka. He 
who drinks daily the Tulasi leaf water certainly 
gets the fruit of one lakh horse sacrifices. He who 
plucks or culls the Tulasi leaf by his hand and 
holding it on his body, quits his life in a Tirath, 
goes to Visnu Loka. 

godasin gre at AT: | 

wi msada wn Pfr emu 45 N 

Gendt cant gear veTesrt at A vare 1 

a ofa meg wr macia 146 NI 

Whoever holds in his neck the garland made up 
of Tulasi wood, gets certainly the fruit of horse 
sacrifices at every step. He who does not keep his 
word, holding the Tulasi leaf in his hand, goes to 
the Kalasütra Hell as long as the Sun and Moon last. 

arte ftremgrud TU asa Aa: | 

a ae hah a mafai 047 u 

godaan AR uero wr at OAT i 

veruni Ware ahs unn: TT 48 


Book IX Chapter XXIV 


He who gives fasle evidence in the presence of 
the Tulasi leaf, goes to the Kumbhipaka Hell for 
the life-periods of fourteen Indras. He who drinks 
or gets a bit of the Tulasi leaf water at the time of 
death, certainly goes to Vaikuntha, ascending on a 
car made up of jewels. 

yman xp gravai PAARA d 

esata Hara rara Pat dear: u 49 N 

argirarsyrferesros a barat TT: | 

get a faferafe a fēāfā at: for: n50 n 

Those who pluck or call the Tulasi leaves in the 
Full Moon night, on the twelfth lunar day, on the 
passing of the sun from one sign to another, the 
mid-day, or on the twilights, on the night, while 
applying oil on their bodies, on the impurity 
periods, and while putting on night dresses, verily 
cut off the Narayana’s head. 

furi gertua wat wdfud uhr | 

ST Ad U at cw USA ques 57 n 

qi taut wei fered ate | 

Ye cw qeu amend 52 1 

O Chaste One! The Tulasi leaf kept in the night, 
is considered sacred. It is considered good in 
Sraddha, vow, ceremony, in the making over of 
any gift, in the installation of any image or in 
worshipping any Deva. Again, the Tulasi leaf fallen 
on the ground or fallen in water or offered to Visnu, 
if washed out can be used in holy and other purposes. 

qaenfüsrgadt ur meth cw free | 

ors ore fred u frerntet Hears u 53 u 

maftrgrgadt dr vor Wr quar i 

WATT ar uet Hawa wp TET i 54 N 

Thus, O Good One! You will remain as tree in 
this earth and will remain in Goloka as the Presiding 
Deity thereof and will enjoy daily the sport with 
Krsna. And also you will be the Presiding Deity of 
the river Gandaki and thus bestow religious merits 
in Bhàrata; you will be the wife of the Salt Ocean, 
which is My part You are very chaste; in Vaikuntha 
you will enjoy me as Rama lives with Me. 


1079 


wa a eet erret apud Wa rfe 1 

Tara a WaT wp ATT HITU: d 55 d 

aé cu seein risatttrafret 1 

after afr mat aa vu: 56 u 

ARITA «teretamderamat: | 

ABT ash ewig Wd 57 0 

Andas for Me, I will be turned into stone by your 
curse; I will remain in India close to the bank of the 
river Gandaki. Millions and millions of insects with 
their sharp teeth will make ring, (the convolutions 
in the Šālagrāma or sacred stones), on the cavities 
of the mountains there, representing Me. 

Wren Uda adder 1 

aden waar 158 u 

ween Uda adhe | 

pattie Far weal arate 0 59 u 

Of these stones, those that have one door 
(entrance hole), four convolutions, adorned by the 
garland of wild flowers (having a mark like this) 
and which look like fresh rain-cloud, are called 
Laksmi Narayana Mūrtis (forms). And those that 
have one door, four convolutions and look like 
fresh rain-clouds but no garlands are called Laksmi 
Janardana Cakras (discus). 

mad agah mal ARa, | 

qani Ad ted amea 460 N 

ang free a naa ferry, | 

aam anb i aame 610 

Those that have two doors, four convolutions, 
and decked with mark like cow’s hoof and void of 
the garland mark are called Raghunatha Cakras. 
Those that are very small in size, with two Cakras 
and look like fresh rainclouds and void of garland 
marks are named Vamana Cakras. 

sales fra a dS, d 

fest shet wa siud fēurit wet 62 u 

THO a adore wed SHUT | 

Rah centered dd umeufm 11 63 N 

Those that that are very small in size, with two 
Cakras and the garland mark added, know then to 


1080 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


be the Sridhara Cakras. These always bring in 
prosperity to the houshold. Those that are big, 
circular, void of garland mark, with two circular 
Cakras, are known as Damodara forms. 

Tat Utah U UGDINUDIP | 

curried Ae yequantarq 064 ui 

AT AT A STATA | 

Treat Me NAGU AMT 4065 | 

Those that are mediocre in size, with two Cakras 
and marked as if struck by an arrow, having marks 
of arrows and bow-cases are known as Raņa- 
Rāmas. Those that are middling, with seven Cakras, 
having marks of an umbrella and ornaments, are 
called Rájaraje$varas. They bestow the royal 
Laksmi to persons. 

Ramah apo cep Wed | 

aiaei a fart wnpdiuemeu 166 n 

UTT fah ep ush OGA | 

würd wed wp fagi wee 067 u 

Those that have twice seven Cakras, and are big, 
looking like fresh rain-clouds are named Anantas. 
They bestow four fold (Dharma, wealth, desire and 
liberation). Those that are in their forms like a ring, 
with two Cakras, beautiful, looking like rain- 
clouds, having cow-hoof marks and of mediocre 
size, are named Madhusüdanas. Those that have 
one Cakra are called SudarSanas. 

Galt Arah TAA Tee | 

frock gragani canta wath ues 

adta famae a fgach fane ate | 

"fé gadd wat Amad FT 69 d 

Those that have their Cakras hidden are called 
Gadādharas. Those that have two Cakras, looking 
horse-faced, are known as Hayagrivas. O Chaste 
One! Those that have their mouths very wide and 
extended, with two Cakras, and very terrible, are 
known as Narasirnhas. They excite Vairagyas to 
all who serve them. 

Rash TE wr aaa aT i 

werfrTRié fase fot a yaya 70 N 


arent fram vr ash er ad pe i 

aged q fad adamaya u71 0 

Those that have two Cakras, mouths extended 
and with garland marks (ellipitical marks) are called 
Laksmi Nrsimhas. They always bless the house- 
holders who worship them. Those that have two 
Cakras near their doors (faces), that look even and 
beautiful, and with marks manifested are known 
as Vasudevas. They yield all sorts of fruits. 

wr yaah a elu. 1 

RIAA aut a quen U72 

È Uh Wart UE VA Y VI | 

daii yard qed yet wat N73 0 

Those that have their Cakras fine and their forms 
like fresh rain-clouds and have many fine hole 
marks within their wide gaping facets are called 
Pradyumnas. They yield happiness to every 
householder. Those that have their faces of two 
Cakras stuck together and their backs capacious, 
are known as Sankarsanas. They always bring in 
happiness to the householders. 

ated g tart ade afer i 

gani TEM yada wife: 074 

yenme wa aa ufafedt att 1 

«ada cata uddan am 475 

Those that look yellow, round and very beautiful 
are Aniruddhas. The sages say, they give happiness 
to the householders, Where there is the Salagrama 
stone there exists Sri Hari Himself; and where there 
is Hari, Laksmi and all the Tirthas dwell there. 
Worshipping Salagrama Sila, destroys the 
Brahmahatya (killing a Brahmin) and any other sin 
whatsoever. 

arte atit TTT ATA TT | 

arnat agate meat Rordsn 11 76 1 

BATT west ade wp ETA: | 

GB U Meret Yor ATT Ya M 77 u 

In worshipping the Salagrama stone looking like 
an umbrella, kingdoms are obtained; in worshipping 
circular Silas, great proserity is obtained; in 


Book IX Chapter XXIV 


1081 


worshipping cart-shaped stones, miseries arise; and 
in worshipping stones, whose ends look like spears 
(Silas, death inevitably follows. 

Raae a afta fine afta a 1 

waa sragarttifādtut rot yar 78 N 

ad art Wiest a stag A SATA | 

meme arranged aqufefe it 79 Ut 

Those whose facets are distorted, bring in 
poverty; and yellow stones bring in various evils 
and afflictions. Those whose Cakras look broken, 
bring in diseases; and those whose Cakras are rent 
asunder bring in death certainly. Observing vows, 
making gifts, installing images, doing Sraddhas, 
worshipping the Devas, all these become highly 
exalted, if done before the Šālagrāma Šilā. 

a Hd: addy udag difāra : 

adag diy adu a ag a sol 

wd agf dart uut at WW | 

aagi ww d smenmfsrerdent us 

One acquires the merits of bathing in all the 
Tirthas and in being initiated in all the sacrifices, 
if one worships the Šālagrāma Sila. What more 
than this, that the merits acquired by all the 
sacrifices, all the Tirthas, all vows, all austerities 
and reading all the Vedas are all acquired by duly 
bu da by the holy Šālagrāma Šilā. 

SPI MATS SET | 

adag ueque wafarot spat erem t" 

yemedi frei spes er at AT: | 

Rud war a Mat Do YT: 0 82 ll 

He who performs his Abhiseka ceremony 
always with Šālagrāma water (being sprinkled with 
Šālagrāma water at the initiation and installation 


ceremonies), acquires the religious merits of 


performing all sorts of gifts and circumambulating 
the whole earth. All the Devas are, no doubt, 
pleased with him who who thus worships daily the 
Šālagrāma. 
agua arsta tai ata ur 1 
shaan wera seat ufa gt: TATU 83 N 


aaa «Ro arent Mpi eum | 

Ra fe areata Pract aahi i84 u 

What more than this, that all the Tīrthas want to 
have his touch. He becomes a Jīvanmukta 
(liberated while living) and becomes very holy; 
ultimately he goes to the region of Sri Hari and 
reains in Hari’s service there and dwells with him 
for countless Prakritic dissolutions. 

OUT Cathy ST UTC ASAT U | 

d ru ued aequam: uss i 

AGITA eet Mag age |d 

gat vei afergurt frerteresr Sard: 186 N 

Every sin, like Brahma Hatya, files away from 
him as serpents do at the sight of Garuda. The Devi 
Vasundhara (the Earth) becomes purified by the 
touch of the dust of his feet. At his birth, all his 
predecessors (a lakh in number) are saved. 

mema eae TITS or A GAT | 

aduain faat TESTI 187 u 

frafumgfet waa asfunmenpend | 

Ra: we IAV srfereafer t gra: 88 N 

He who gets the Šālagrāma Sila water during 
the time of his death, he is freed of all his sins and 
goes to the Visnu Loka and gets Nirvana; he 
becomes freed ontirely from the effects of Karma 
and he gets, no doubt, dissolved and diluted for 
ever in (the feet of) Visnu. 

VENTO erat hena acy Ud 

wor grfur du drag wat aa: 11 89 1 

mema IET tem AT A TĀ 1 

a wars Uu mandatary 1900 

He who tells lies, holding Šālagrāma in his 
hands, goes to the Kumbhīpāka Hell for the life- 
period of Brahmā. If one does not keep his word, 
uttered with the Šālagrāma stone in his hand, one 
goes to the Asipatra Hell for one lakh manvantaras. 

EMEA aif a: 1 

Tea SAR aid etaa vrfasafe 91 N 

momi xr qed gre at fa atthe 1 

sraigtat recat ste ft AUST 1 92 i 


1082 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


He who worships the Šālagrāma stone without 
offering Tulasi leaves on it or separates the Tulasi 
leaves from the stone, will have to suffer separation 
from his wife in his next birth. So if one does not 
offer the Tulasi leaves in the conchshell, for seven 
births he remains without his wife and he becomes 
diseased. 


meant U qe vid vien was | 
cit verte merat a AR: fra: 93 1 
upya at wen draturi att ur | 
wfredà wer ga ada unuup 1194 II 
vd ar Igasu Aaaa | 


VIA Mel ARS: Has FHA 1195 i 

He who preserves the Salagráma stone, the 
Tulasi and the conchshell, in one place, becomes 
very learned and becomes dear to Narayana. Look! 
He who casts his semen once in his wife, suffers 
intense pain, no doubt, at each other's separation 
So you become dear to Sankhacūda for one 
Manvantara. Now, what wonder! That you will 
suffer pain, at his bereavement. 

sega siget er ferm a WW | 

"ww id uftersu fand fea w 11 96 il 

«rem sha am wr erae gfeaarfa i 

USA cat arti agus OTU: 97 N 

watt: area tit get ara ANE | 

O Narada! Thus saying, Sri Hari desisted. Tulasi 
quitted her mortal coil and assumed a divine form, 
began to remain in the breast of Sri Hari like Sri 


Laksmi Devi. Hari also went with her to Vaikuntha 
Thus Laksmi, Sarasvati, Ganga, and Tulasi, ali the 
four came so very dear to Hari and are recognised 
as ĪSvarīs. 

wt Nasas ayaa w uos 

WERWESUSD a aya teat dt i 

gar: asi dog TAR grast qum N99 u 

On the other hand, the mortal coil of Tulasi, no 
sooner quitted by Tulasi, became transformed into 
the river Gandaki. Bhagavan Hari, too, became also 
converted into a holy mountain, on the banks 
thereof, yielding religious merits to the people. 

wate aa ates foret ergferert x i 

sre UC em emer KET fof u 100 N 


aera: fier AaTzitugrumgaftā i 
scr «feri ad f& sra: sigfiresfer u 101 N 
efr sfr fara HERO AIRE ARTI IMEA 


IRSA: 11 24 11 

The insects cut and fashion many pieces out of 
that mountain. Of them, that fall into the river, yield 
fruits undoubtedly. And those pieces that fall on 
the ground become yellow coloured; they are not 
at all for worship. O Narada! Thus I have spoken 
to you everything. What more do you want to hear 
now? Say. 

Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter of the Ninth 
Book on the glory of Tulasi in the Mahapuranam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1082 Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 
og geiša g a 


CHAPTER XXV 
On the Worship of Tulasi 


ARS S hymn of Tulasi) now. O Muni! By whom was She 
qeat a dar gear quar RTSUIDTST | first worshipped? By whom were Her glories first 
emer: KENT U Sst er era ATT 1 1 sung? And how did She become therefore an object 
Oa WS qud Ha pur Ward AA 1 of worship? Speak out all these to me. 


WA UST T BYE Ha dT ag UK U2 N 
Narada said: When the Devi Tulasi has been HER Wu wees agg: | 
made so dear to Narayana and thus an object for ae frg quai aragi sim uan 
ip, then describ hi : : 
sors hip ea desctibe Hee NOESHIIEES LOU MS Süta said: Hearing these words of Narada, 


qa sata 


Book IX Chapter XXV 


1083 


Narayana, laughing, began to describe this very 
holy and sin-destroying account of Tulasi. 
sframremr sara 

gR: dya god tt a we UK | 

TTT were Wat E na dd 

we a Gaidu META Kadru | 

Amada altura dt aaa usu 

Narayana said: Bhagavan Hari duly worshipped 
Tulasi, and began to enjoy her with Laksmi; He 
raised Tulasi to the rank of Laksmi and thus made 
her fortunate and glorious Laksmi and Ganga 
allowed and bore this new union of Narayana and 
Tulasi. But Sarasvati could not endure this high 
position of Tulasi owing to Her anger. 

VT at wert moe urne was 1 

Aea wars Aitu wem € Neu 

nikai oat wirt fg d 

wares aeda a Gub 470 

She became self-conceited and beat Tulasi on 
some quarrel before Hari. Tulasi became abashed 
and insulted and vanished off. Being the I$vari of 
all the Siddhis, the Devi, the Self-manifest and the 
Giver of the Siddhiyoga to the Jñānins, Tulasi, Oh! 
what a wonder, became angry and turned out as 
invisible to Sri Hari even. 

oh apr geet att weed i 

aagi year ww qoe us i 

Aa Bear aT Bera St: get ud i 

USTATATA At LAAT TEST MATT TAT E |1 9 N 

Not seeing Tulasi, Hari appeased Sarasvati and 
getting Her permission went to the Tulasi forest. 
Going there and taking a bath in due accord, and 
with due rites, worshipped with His whole heart 
the chaste Tulasi and then began to meditate on 
Her with devotion. 

wart ara amah sirmā ayer i 

aaa Sat a afesratata a 10 N 

WAT HITS ASIST ANE | 

Warden fears aati AAA ud u 


O Narada! He gets certainly all siddhis who 


T 


worships Tulasi duly with the ten lettered mantra: 
‘Stim Hrim Klim Aim Vrndavanyai Svaha,’ the 
King of mantras, yielding fruits and all gratifica- 
tions like the Kalpa Tree. 

gada qe Rige u | 

aaa U EU aoe AMG N 12 N 

ART qur ar arfesfar ré een | 

WHAT MUTA SIT BRUT BAT 4013 N 

O Narada! Atthe time of worship, the lamp of ghee, 
was lighted and dhüpa, sindüra, sandal, offerings of 
food, flowers, etc., were offered to Her. Thus hymned 
by Hari, Tulasi came out of the tree, pleased. And 
She gladly took refuge at His lotus feet. 

at aed dtr frem: udgsar waite à 

aE cat emare spat get aes 14 u 

ad cart onftreifa cant er aurea: | 

SYR ATTEMPT KATRA fay: u 15 N 

Visnu, then, granted her boon that ‘You will be 
worshipped by all; I will keep you in My breast 
and in My head and the Devas also will keep you 
in My breast and in My head and the Devas also 
will hold you on their heads.’ And He then took 
her to His own abode. 

ANG gara 

fe cart erat fn ar fee Garey i 

Cea WET (TE EHRESITHÉRT 1116 Ut 

Narada said: O Highly Fortunate One! What is 
Tulasi’s dhyana, stotra and method of worship? 
Kindly describe all these. 

stran sara 

eraféarat aei a Rda Wer | 

weapon A Tear go aeg: 0.17 u 

Nārāyaņa said: When Tulasī vanished, Hari 
became very much agitated at her bereavement and 
went to Vrndavana and began to praise her. 

sftvrrreTarer 

JAU Fats Ara Vat ud 
fergeerens gai ufa at spore, 18 


1084 


qe aya at tat vardt gara ad | 

ATT Sarat Seat st ETK V 19 n 

The Bhagavan said: The Tulasi trees collect in 
multitudinous groups; hence the Pandits call it 
Vrnda. I praise that dear Tulasi. Of old, She 
appeared in the Vrndavana forest and therefore 
known as Vrndavani. I worship that fortunate and 
glorious One. 

SA er farsa ferar ot ferc i 

aa faganfirareat foret er STSTHSTER. |i 20 0 

Aa a fagamta ufersnfür eeu wer t 

at fagaurat adt faren eee 11 21 1 

She is worshipped always in innumerable uni- 
verse and is therefore, known as Vi$vapüjità (wor- 
shipped by all). I worship that Vi$vapüjità. By 
whose contact, these countless universe are always 
rendered pure and holy; and therefore She is called 
Visvapavani (purifying the whole univere). I am 
suffering from her bereavement, I remember the 
Devi. Without Tulasi, the Devas do not get pleased, 
thought other flowers be heaped on them; there- 
fore She is considered as the essence of all the flow- 
ers. 

Gar A qur ĻOTI MAST WET fas à 

at gerent rar a xgfiresrfir ges: 122 u 

farsa centers eiA STARR | 

"Aft rar fresa ot viter ATT 23 N 

Now I am in sorrow and trouble and I am very 
eager to see her, who is of the nature of purity 
incarnate, The whole universe gets delighted when 
the Bhaktas receive her; hence She is called 
Nandini; so may She be pleased with me. 

wer carder att Patty, wo 

dodi aa ferra at afin pūt fram. t 2 4 u 

partae T nyaaa eit i 

aa gerettet T ATA arg viam i25 u 

There is nothing in the universe that can be com- 
pared to Her; hence She is called Tulasi; I take 
refuge of that dear Tulasi. That chaste dear one is 
the life of Krsna, hence She is known as 
Krsnajivani. Now may She save my life. 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 

geld wad gai drei aa arate: | 

gal Kodi maneas dt 26 N 

vada abet maga, ad 

frat «pr fira: vite argaramra arte 27 0 

O Narada! Thus praising, Ramapati remained 
there. The chaste Tulasi then came to His sight 
and bowed down to His lotus feet; when She 
becoming sensitive out of the insult, began to weep. 
Bhagavan Visnu, seeing that sensitive dear one, 
immediately took her to His breast. 

UNA IKT er veros U eit a: | 

UNM HE cath FRATATA Beau 10 28 u 

wi aadA tet wdy wee 1 

Raet a adiu cen UTT WF a 29 N 

Taking, then, Sarasvati’s permission, He took 
her to His own home and brought about, first of 
all, the agreement between her and Sarasvatī. Then 
He granted her the boon, "You will be worshipped 
by all, respected by all, and honoured by all; and 
all wil carry you on their heads.’ 

faai at get Uga ae a | 

mad aarp ATRATATA Wfel n 30 N 

Get afar a at ATA ANG | 

y wagmmum faa adi wer 370 

I will also worship, respect and honour you and 
keep you on My head. Receiving this boon from 
Visnu, the Devi Tulasi became very glad. Sarasvati 
then attracted her to her side, made her sit close to 
her. Laksmi and Ganga both with smiling faces 
attracted her and made her enter into the house. 

ga Garett faragha fasaura=tt i 

Varam det a det ported 32 u 

KATRA a Web Aaa 1 

g: Wdwbw AIST ASIAT GAT !33 N 

O Narada! Whosoever worships her with her 
eight names Vrndà, Vrndāvanī, Visvapuyjita, 
Visvapavani, Tulasi, Puspasara, Nandani and 
Krsna Jivani and their meanings and sings this 
hymn of eight verses duly, acquires the merit of 
performing Ašvamedha Yajfia (horse sacrifice). 


Book IX Chapter XX VI 


1085 


«feit ufüreat er qe ITT t 

wa AM4 Ws wr fafear feum ge i 34 u 

weg: strat or ara a ranan 1 

adunia enim arah w esf 35 i 

Specially, on the Full Moon night of the month 
of Kārtika, the auspicious birth ceremony of Tulasi 
is performed. Of old Visnu worshipped her at that 
time. Whoever worships with devotion on that Full 
Moon combination, the universe purifying Tulasi, 
becomes freed of all sins and goes up to the Visnu 
Loka. 

erf gedtuz at gar vr AA | 

TATA ATTA TAG Wc PATA, 36 u 

agi oud ost frardtat esfera i 

ait ogee: |137 1 

Offerings of Tulasi leaves to Visnu in the month 
of Kartik bring merits equal to those in giving away 
Ayuta cows. Hearing this stotra at that period gives 
sons to the sonless persons, wives to the wife less 
persons and friends to friendless persons. 

Tht aged TEST Feat Serr | 

Tara Ag urarapodar UTT 1 38 i 

gard enférd vata turi qurfartt spur i 

On hearing this stotra, the diseased become free 
of their diseases, the persons in bondage become 
free, the terrified become fearless, and the sinners 
are freed of their sins. O Narada! Thus it has been 
mentioned how to chant stotra to her. Now hear 
her dhyana and method of worhsip. 


wate ae rfe avavymsrend « 139 N 
aga dai a remeras far i 

af EXT SANA EXIT ARNA 1 40 N 

In the Vedas, in the Kāņva Sakha branch, the 


method of worship is given. You know that one is 
to meditate on the Tulasi plant, without any 
invocation (āvāhana) and then worship her with 
devotion, presenting all sorts of offerings as 
required to her. Now hear Her Dhyānam. 

geet gerant a edt wat ratum i 

GŪTU saeara 41 i 

Fay Get wen ake da wf i 

Ufa wate qe ur w far i42 u 

foriteraf a udh ayaat 1 

Saami yal xr wet at g RARR N 43 tt 

Of all the flowers, Tulasī (the holy basil) is the 
best, very holy, and captivating the mind. It is a 
flame burning away all the fuel of sins committed 
by man. In the Vedas it is stated that this plant is 
called Tulasi, because there can be made no 
comparison with Her amongst all the flowers. She 
is the holiest of them all She is placed on the heads 
of all and desired by all and gives holiness to the 
universe. She gives Jivanmukti, mukti and devotion 
to Sri Hari. I worship Her. 

ST eius Vea WoT: à 

Sth dogmu fē spar: sigfireoRt u 44 t 

ste MARITA "enge? games 
THAMS AT 11 25 1 

Thus meditating on Her and worshipping Her 
according to due rites, one is to bow down to Her. 
O Narada! I have described to you the full history 
of Šrī Tulasi Devi. What more do you want to hear 
now, say. 

Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter of the Ninth 
Book on the method of worship of Tulasi Devi in the 
Mahāpurāņam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter XX VI 1085 


CHAPTER XXVI 


On Savitri 
ANE Sart WU St AGM HT Ta A yd: WA: | 
FOGTA spi fg, | at at ufer exe wat war ar ut 2 ui 
Wd: aae wat carearquere nin Narada said: I have heard the anecdote of Tulasi. 


Now describe in detail the history of Savitri. Savitri 


1086 


considered as the Mother of the Vedas. Why was 
She born, in days gone by? By whom was She first 
worshipped and subsequently also? 


siama sare 


sam dus yet fem oa 

RAX a dgmterugmtēgat wd 3 

war my: unum md 1 

Tass Ud a u4 il 

Narayana said: O Muni! She was first wor- 
shipped by Brahma. Next the Vedas worshipped 
her. Subsequently the learned men worshipped 
her. Next the King Ašvapati worshipped Her in 
India. Next the four Varnas (castes) worshipped 
Her. 


ANG sara 


al at Asgar at aa Ufer i 

adyn a wr oat wert deer aT uta 

Narada said: O Brahman! Who is that A$vapati? 
What for did he worship? When the Devi Savitri 
became adorable by all, by which persosns was 
She first worshipped and by which persons 
subsequently. 


Sara gara 


Tet Tent ayo 1 

aku aeeat a Prot gaa: 16 d 

area ens Reh erben 1 

aeda remeare erem wa ag: 7 u 

Narayana said: O Muni! The King Ašvapati 
reigned in Madrade$a, rendering his enemies 
powerless and making his friends painless. He had 
a queen very religious; her name was Mālatī; She 
was like a second Laksmi. 

Aa etr aen a afged: | 

NAT warn ursi ARG d 8 N 

Dearest wt una atest A gest ATA i 

TE wa gam west faquar ouo 

She was barren; and desirous of an issue, She 
under the instruction of Vasistha, duly worshipped 
Savitri with devotion. But She did not receive any 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


vision nor any command; therefore She returned 
home with a grievous heart. 

Tat at gaat spr aaan aAA 3 | 

PATA THM ST Gere Tay 110 N 

Wasa Aaa Wad: WaT | 

a cael a ares: wearesit ATT wp 11 0 

Seeing her sorry, the king consoled her with 
good words and himself accompained her to 
Puskara with a view to perform Tapas to Savitri 
with devotion and, being self-controlled, practised 
tapasya for one hundred years. Still he could not 
see Savitri, but voice came to him. 

srararesmsrareft a AĀAKTITĪRTTA, 1 

TRA GY A AG cd He ANT 012 N 

waht MA aT WIR: | 

Wr det ow gegara A 13 i 

An incorporeal, celestial voice reached his ears: 
‘Perform Japam (repeat) ten lakhs of Gayatri 
Mantram.' At this moment Parāšara came up there. 
The king bowed down to him. 


qhreara 

SIEUT MrT: UT feat WW | 

ara nue mar fear u4 d 

The Muni said: “O King! One japa of Gayatri, 
destroys the days sins. Ten Japams of Gayati 
destroy day and night's sins. 

wean waste und mafii RA | 

Wea asa Hears weg 15 

walt Ward und GRTVRMSRISTATSTA 1 

wedsrWed um masaniga u16 it 

eife afte fagri sat angora: i 

One hundred Gayatri Japams destory one 
month's sins. One thousand Japams destroy one 
year's sins. One lakh Gayatri Japams destory the 
sins of the present birth and ten lakh Gayatri Japams 
destroy the sins of other births. One hundred lakhs 
of Jápams destroy the sins of all the births. If ten 
times that (i.e. 1,000 lakhs) be done, then libera- 
tion is obtained. 


at wdwumeN grat wu 117 Ul 


Book IX Chapter XXVI 


1087 


amanina yale fuod 

STATS ATAHATT T 18 0 

mhiad wot ma: aT | 

(Now the method, how to make Japam). Make 
the palm of the (right) hand like a snake’s hood; 
see that the fingers are all close, no holes are seen; 
and make the ends of the fingers bend downwards; 
then being calm and quiet and with one’s face 
eastward, practise Japam. Then count from the 
middle of the ring (nameless) finger and go on 
counting right-handed (with the hands of the watch) 
till you come to the bottom of the index finger. 
This is the rule of counting by the hand. 

Jadrana tattemat a epe 11 19 u 

IAA à feni waa rest | 

TMA Treas wat U Kad: 020 d 

HAT MATA ITT Tt: i 

mafya Eat ra ARAR 11 21 u 

O King! The rosary is to be of the seed of white 
lotus or of the crystals; it should be consecrated 
and purified. Japam is to be done then in a sacred 
Tirtha or in a temple. Becoming self-controlled one 
should place the rosary on a banyan leaf or on a 
lotus leaf and smear it with cowdung; wash it, 
uttering Gāyatrī Mantra and over it perform one 
hundred times Gayatri Japam intently in 
accordance with the rules. 

AM TATA CAA EST TAHA | 

AT vi Teaser Flea amsfengiegar ll 22 N 

wd mit wae areal wd ae 1 

TRASE atest Serra i 2 3 i 

Or wash it with Paficagavya, milk, curds, 
clarified butter, cow urine and cowdung), and then 
consecrate it will. Then wash it with the Ganges 
water and perform best the consecrations. O 
Rajarsi! Then perform ten lakhs of Japam in due 
order. Thust he sins of your three births will be 
destroyed and then you will see the Devi Savitri. 

fred deat a 2 rana fea fea 1 

TEATS wf HTATA WIAA BPA: WET 24 N 


dadyan: wdanhg 1 
Geel Hed uH X M HMA i25 
O King! Do this Japam, being pure, every day 
in the morning, mid-day, and in the evening. If 
one be impure and devoid of Sandhya, one has no 
right to do any action; and even if one performs an 
action, one does not get any fruit thereby. 
safe a: Gat aret seq VĒRA à 
Viasat: uiga: 26 Nu 
"restare Ardei a: afa i 
wow quunt feum uo WD 027 N 
He who does not do the morning Sandhya and 
the evening Sandhya, is driven away from all the 
Brahminic Karmas and he becomes like Südras. 
He who does Sandhya three times throughout his 
life, becomes like the Sun by his lustre and 
brilliance of tapas. 
AANA AK AGAT |1 
Hay: wr duret amat fe at Ba: i 28 u 
data er uférsmfür AT Vara: | 
we: Ut aita aadenfedtem: 129 u 
What more than this, the earth is always purified 
by the dust of his feet. The Dvija who does his 
Sandhya Vandanam and remains pure, becomes 
energetic and liberated while living. By his contact 
all the tirthas become pourified. All sins vanish 
away from him as snakes fly away at the sight of 
Garuda. 
a weft wu: Ost fuae: füsqdun à 
Tegu u anda Piana v "30 u 


u31 U 

The Dvija who becomes void of Sandhya three 
times a day, the Devas do not accept his worship 
nor the Pitrs accept his Pindas. He who has no Bhakti 
towards the Mula Prakrti, who does not worship 
the specific seed Mantra of Maya and who des not 
hold festivities in honour of Müla Prakrti, know 
him verily to be an Ajagara snake without poison. 

Rapada Priem fas: 1 

vaaia aAA gett: 1320 


1088 


Srimaddevibhàgavatam 


Krasti wr aA quere: | 

ah at fert feriat aT: 033 u 

Devoid of the Visnu mantra, devoid of the three 
Sandhyās and devoid of the fasting on the Ekadasi 
Tithi (the eleventh day of the fortnight), the 
Brahmin becomes a snake devoid of poison. The 
vile Brahmin who does not like to take the offerings 
dedicated to Hari and who does the washerman’s 
work and eats the food of Südra and drives the 
bufalloes, becomes a snake devoid of poison. 

spur yaad a: uw fant quete: i 

yet query faadtat wem u34 

The Brahmin who burns the dead bodies of the 
Südras, becomes like the man who is the husband 
of an unmarried girl. The Brahmin also who 
becomes a cook of a Südra, becomes a snake void 
of poison. 

rare a wfernrét yeast xr at frat: | 

"ufirsftfer aftsftfer RAA ueitut: N 35 u 

a: maand fanit it Rataan à 

it fagtsefhereriteft Kg: 11 26 1 

The Brahmin who accepts the gifts of a Südra, 
who performs the sacrifice of a Südra, who lives 
as clerks and warriors becomes like a snake void 
of poison. The Brahmin who sells his daughter, 
who sells the name of Hari or eats the food of a 
woman who is without husband and son, as well 
as of one who has just bathed after her menstruation 
period, becomes like a serpent void of poison. 

water areffirant faedtat gator: à 

at faenfamet fam feriat aera: 137 n 

Walaa vadat ft wecreitstt wr at fest: | 

frargenfextedt faedtat attr: 38 u 

The Brahmin who takes the profession of pimps 
and pampers and lives on the interest, is also like a 
serpent void of poison. The Brahmin who sleeps 
even when the Sun has risen, eats fish, and does 
not worship the Devi is also like a poisonless serpent. 

sya a alse: waa | 

ayara a alas caries u 39 tl 


wes ud qur uw vereri NÀ à 

rem Wusu wrfecü gari aware Ww 0 A0 tt 

Thus stating all the rules of worship in order, 
the best of the Munis told him the Dhyànam, etc., 
of the Devi Savitri, what he wanted. Then he 
informed the King of all the mantras and went to 
his own ASrama. The king, then worshipped 
accordingly and saw the Devi Sàvitri and got 
boons. 

AR Sar 

fe ar cant ur rfr: fear yore | 

weet Oat a fe eran Waal BUTTE: 141 

Narada said: What is the Savitris Dhyana, what 
are the modes of her worship, what is stotra, mantra, 
that Parāšara gave to the King before he went 
away? 

qu: aa feats usa suum d 

aah a ur usu g faune: 42 

Tad sitafireorfit afer: wed NET 1 

IA weet wp sp warad: 043 U 

And how did the King worship and what boon 
did he get? This great mystery, grand and well 
renowned in the Srutis, about Savitri, I am desirous 
to hear in brief on all the points. 


Tau Jaret 


RSPUTAA Va Varro U UTT: | 

wane agdvai act waa TAT 0 44 NI 

Narayana said: On the thirteenth day (the 
trayodasi, tithi) of the black fortnight in the month 
Jyestha or on any other holy period, the fourteenth 
day (the caturdašī tithi) this vow is to be observed 
with great care and devotion. 

ad agim w RAHAT | 

Grat aaia yaaah Rr 045 N 

art atadi a siters ARRA, i 

TEM TUC RATAA ATA 46 U 

Foruteen fruits and fourteen plates with offerings 
of food on them, flowers and incense are to be 
offered and this vow is to be observed for fourteen 


Book IX Chapter XX VI 


years consecutively. Garments, holy threads and 
other articles are also offered and after the Vrata is 
over, the Brahmins are to be fed. The lucky pot 
(mangalghata) is to be located duly according to 
the rules of worship with branches and fruits. 

maai a feet a ata foren] ford rary i 

usu wsufag ue aA fus 147 0 

spur cart er feront ATA SAT | 

wat ganftrari u di a WARA 148 N 

Ganeša, Agni, Visņu, Šiva and Šivā are to be 
worshipped duly. In that ghata Sāvitrī is to be next 
invoked and worshipped. Now hear the Dhyānam 
of Sāvitrī, as stated in the Mādhyan Dina Šākhā, 
as well the stotra, the modes of worship, and the 
Mantra, the giver of all desires. 

maaa sacl Ada | 

TfwnrETRHRiVEHEERIÜTTGSTHO 049 0 

suena venqgunIgfügT | 

agi ameter, 06 50 N 

Apart gat orat estat er spat fae: à 

piiama a vert wee u51u 

aaea a dega fūvtta 1 

dgsdtsasui wr st ai deum 52 N 

I meditate and adore that Sāvitrī, the Mother of 
the Vedas, of the nature of Pranava (Om), whose 
colour is like the burnished gold, who is burning 
with Brahma teja (the fire of Brahma), effulgent 
with thousands and thousands of rays of the 
midday summer Sun, who is a smiling 
countenance adorned with jewels and ornaments, 
wearing celestial garment (purified and 
uninflammable by fire), and ready to grant 
blessings to Her Bhaktas; who is the bestower of 
happiness and liberation, who is peaceful and the 
consort of the Creator of the world, who is all 
wealth and the giver of all riches and prosperity, 
who is the Presiding Deity of the Vedas and who 
is the Vedas incarnate, I meditate on Thee. 

C CATT tel avr UTT TATE i 

Greater ae wae tefturargdgartt 153 u 


69 


1089 


ara Wresihren aah Aryan | 

usa Et Varāgaddi fau: 154 0 

Thus reciting the Dhyànam, mantra and 
meditating on Her, one is to offer Naivedyas 
(offerings of food) to Her and then place one's 
fingers on one's head; one is to meditate again, 
and then invoke the Devi within the pot. One 
should next present fourteen things, uttering proper 
mantras according to the Vcdas. Then one must 
perform special püjà and chant hymns to the Devi 
and worship Her. The fourteen articles of worship 
are as under : 

a meri wre p vara argo i 

gu did wr Ade aigei vie we u55 N 

aed avi cured ITT, d 

Wet weed ow qan wey use 

(1) Seat (Asana); (2) water for washing feet 
(Padya), (3) offering of rice and Durba grass 
(Arghya), (4) water for bath (Snānīya), (6) 
anointment with sandalpaste and other scents 
(Anulepana), (7) incense (Dhüpa), (8) anointment 
with sandalpaste and other scents (Anulepana), (7) 
incense (Dhüpa), (8) Lights (Dipa), (9) offerings 
of food (Naivedya), (10) Betels (Tāmbūla), (11) 
Cool water, (12) garments, (13) ornaments, (14) 
garlands, scents, offering of water of sip, and 
beautiful bedding. 

wmunfeaen u eurefd a ar i 

Ware quad a War qud AAT lt 57 N 

While offering these articles, one is to utter the 
mantras, this beautiful wooden or golden seat, 
giving spiritual merits is being offered by me to 
Thee. 

cheated a ure a grad Rd wed, i 

Gating yg a Mar qu Brafem uss u 

ueni a gagu aag, | 

quad yiaritarei war gri AAA 59 u 

This water from the Tirthas, this holy water for 
washing Thy feet, pleasant, highly meritorious 
pure, and as an embodiment of Pūjā is being offered 


1090 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


by me to Thee. This holy Arghya with Durba grass 
and flowers and the pure water in the conch-shell 
is being offered by me to Thee. (as a work of initial 
worship). 

gia wad a As area | 

war Prater Tea A ufum 60 i 

viter qud wife erian, | 

mar trated rem tere qarfis 1 61 t 

This sweet scented oil and water being offered 
by me to Thee with devotion for Thy bathing 
purposes. Kindly accept these. O Mother! This 
sweet-scented water Divine-like, highly pure and 
prepared of Kumkuma and other scented things I 
offer to Thee. — 

waited a ad a HENEN, | 

gad a gyd d Term ÀIR Nez 

Miva Gad war quu fefe i 

O Paramešvarī! This all-auspicious, all good and 
highly meritorious, this beautiful Dhüpa, kindly 
take, O World Mother! This is very pleasant and 
sweet scented; therefore I offer this to Thee. 

wat agtarate werd AARRE u 63 N 

aranne tan zi Paf | 

O Mother! This light, manifesting all this 
Universe and the seed, as it were, to destroy the 
Darkness is being offered by me to Thee. 

gta yee we Wife arf 64 N 

quad waged wp Adel WRRTERUT | 

aaou wet augam nesu 

qf&d yè da wur quad Prafemy à 

Gotta arft yid fuuraramrenenq, i 6 6 N 

set start a sitet uineam 1 

devumu wr owumpwrfeeti-m 11 67 u 

Devi! Kindly accept this delicious offering of 
food, highly meritorious, appeasing hunger, 
pleasant, nourishing and pleasure giving. This betel 
is scented with camphor, etc., nice, nourishing, and 
pleasure-giving; this is being offered by me to Thee. 
This water is nice and cool, appeasing the thirst 
and the Life of the World. So kindly accept this. 


atai er pA reri AĒTETA | 

atearfsfāttatat siet shad war 11 68 u 

gad quad i TETTA, | 

magga maen ATA 69 u 

O Devi! Kindly accept this silken garment as 
well the garment made of Kārpāsa Cotton, 
beautifying the body and enhancing the beauty. 
Kindly accept these golden ornaments decked with 
jewels, highly meritorious, joyous, beauteous and 
prosperous. 

HRA Ud HH cp YEA | 

waited a dūmos 170 1 

agafa Rai sgsiemem- | 

f quad da mei U whee 071 t 

Kindly accept these fruits yielding fruits of 
desires, obtained from various trees and of various 
kinds. Please have this garland, all auspicious and 
all good, made of various flowers, beauteous and 
generating happiness. 

quad w qiue tet er afer Teram i 

Rigu at cb manfat w72 0 

qua a wat figi REA, | 

Raada quaqatatfir 73 u 

Ufas deta wanpd U VERTU | 

eret Yost Grat vint vērgtit: 11 74 u 

O Devi! Kindly accept this sweet scent, highly 
pleasing and meritorious. Please take this Sindüra, 
the best of the ornaments, beautifying the forehead, 
highly excellent and beautiful. Kindly accept this 
holy and meritorious threads and purified by the 
Vedic mantrams and made of highly holy threads 
and knitted with highly pure knots. Uttering thus, 
offer the above articles that are to be offered to the 
Devi, every time the specific seed mantra being 
uttered. 

vidt mr sra a srt agros farum i 

maia aged afgsmarmia ww 475 U 

vatmanga conem fug: 

"refaire veto a Uae l7 6 N 

Then the intelligent devote should recite the 
stotras and subsequently offer the Daksinàs 


Book IX Chapter XX VII 


(presents) with devotion to the Brahmanas. The 
Radical or the Specific Seed Mantra mantra is the 
eight lettered mantra $rim Hrim Klim Svaitrai 
Svaha; So the sages know. The Stotra, as stated in 
the Madhyandina Šākhā, gives fruits of all desires. 
I am now speaking to you of that mantra, the Life 
of the Brahmanas. Listen attentively. 


faysitarad wr Frat aaa « 1 
POs Sat Alaa OT AAT FT 77 U 
sert AT T ure TTS A ANE d 
TA PONAM WHAM Tota dT 78 LI 
aa m VĀĢET U set rend ufa i 


O Narada! Savitri was given to Brahma, in the 
ancient times of old in the region of Goloka by 
Krsna; but Savitri did not come Brahma loka with 
Brahma. Then by the command of Krsna, Brahma 
praised the mother of the Vedas. And when She 
got pleased, She accepted Brahma as Her husband. 


aeara 


Wwfegqriqeu vi yoge n79 

feared at yam va daft | 

weet wupounmdewfuvf nsonu 

Roarda mRet were wa galt | 

fra faha fe freariasenesfüvtt u 81 u 

Brahma said: Thou art the everlasting existence 
intelligence and bliss; Thou art Mülaprakrti; thou 
art Hiranya Garbha; Thou didst get pleased, O Fair 
one! Thou art of the nature of fire and Energy; Thou 
art the Highest; Thou art the Highest Bliss, and the 
caste of the twice born. Dost thou get appeased, O 
Fair One! Thou art eternal, dear to the Eternal; thou 
art of the nature of the Everlasting Bliss. 

Hdd U yaa Ha „ak | 

aiant feum AT U u82 ul 

ya alee afr wee wa daft i 


1091 


O Devi, O Thou, the all auspicious One! O Fair 
One! Beest thou satisfied. Thou art the form all 
(omnipresent)! Thou art the essence of all mantras 
of the Brahmanas, higher than the highest! Thou 
art the bestower of happiness and the liberator O 
Devi, O Fair One! Beest thou appeased. 

Rumaa saveftatratut 33 ul 

sadaya fa wat wa deft 1 

TĀ WAST ATAT Wenn Pad AT: 11 84 N 

aamua eter aR | 

STH HAT TTT ea TA a Hae u 85 i 

Thou art like the burning flame to the fuel of 
sins of the Brahmanas! O Thou, the Bestower of 
Brahma teja (the light to Brahma) O Devi! O Fair 
One! Beest appeased. By Thy mere remembrance, 
all the sins to me by body, mind and speech are 
burnt to ashes.” Thus saying the Creator of the 
world reached the assembly there. 

Af AE ref aerate VAT AT 1 

aa watt dgargutāju: 86 

wat at a afer at MTU wet | 

wamafi grd deat Heat aT a: UST di 

Urs gūti Sarat eeu? HAI U ATU 87 U 

aft sfida ergo? qae 
gglzīlseama: 11 26 0 

Then Savitri came to the Brahmaloka with 
Brahma. The King Ašvapati chanted this stotra to 
Savitri and saw Her and got from Her the desired 
boons. Whosoever recites this highly sacred king 
of Stotras after Sandhya Vandanam, quickly 
acquires the fruits of studying the Vedas. 

Here ends the Twenty-sixth Chapter of the Ninth 
Book on the narration of Savitri in 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter XX VII 1091 


—— 
CHAPTER XXVII 
On the Birth, etc., of Savitri 
START sarar sara HT ST Waa aR Wl | 
yansa As aaa: se fara | "gem urat ragi a Aaii FATT u 2 u 


wasb wx at xdi EAT i i Narayana said: O Narada! After having chanted 


1092 


the above hymn to the Goddess Savitri and 
worshipped Her in accordance with due rites and 
ceremonies, the king A$vapati saw the Devi, 
effulgent like the lustre of thousand suns. She then 
smilingly told the king, as a mother to her son, 
whilst all the quarters were illumined with the lustre 
of Her body: 


arfēragara 

TA CERTSD ad wate wife 1 

Gift Ma dearer dd arearit FTA u 3 u 

Utētaamron a anita ca ahr à 

vd prelate gat vr rfe ato U N 4 it 

Savitri said: O King! I know your desire. 
Certainly I will give what you wife long for. Your 
chaste wife is anxious for a daughter, while you 
want. a son. So, one after another, the desires of 
both of you will be fulfilled.” Thus saying, the Devi 
went to the Brahma Loka. 

STRAT Wr War sat Tae WTA € 1 

TS SMT KAS AMATS SAT np FNS I 

ANAS UMN TT HET GU | 

wrfeftfer a am vemrgutēgu: 6 d 

The King also returned to his house. First a 
daughter was born to him. As the daughter was 
born, as if a second Laksmī was born after 
worshipping Savitri, the King kept her name as 
Savitri. 

aed a aearen aya cup fet fet a 

RUTA Yas AT Ba 0067 i 

AT at ae Taras WW od 

Were Nagi? marpa us 

As time rolled on, the daughter grew, day by 
day, like the phases of bright fortnight moon, into 
youth and beauty. There was a son of Dyumat Sena, 
named Satyavāna, always truthful, good natured 
and endowed with various other qualifications. 

TT wet get at at cereus rary | 

AA are adqast at Team TE wit ji 9 u 

TU Aras Wea a: i 

wea weasel wet Agoa nion 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


The daughter chose him for her bridegroom. The 
King betrothed her with jewels and ornaments, to 
Satyavana, who gladly took her home. After one 
year expired, the truthful vigorous Satyavana gladly 
went out, by his father’s command, to collect fruits 
and fuel. 

mm redit aaa a geram: à 

Aua gamma rorem ARTA i11 tt 

Hui Yet ap TGS yt od 

ya wast ah ceases et au 12 u 

The chaste Savitri, too, followed him. Unfortu- 
nately Satyavàna fell down from a tree and died. 
Yama, the God of Death, saw his soul as a Purusa 
of the size of one's thumb and took it and went 
away. The chaste Sávitri began to follow Him. 

uam yadi apr aa: tanda: 1 

ere AIT wredi AeA went MET, 0 13 N 

The high souled Yama, the Foremost of the 
Sadhus, seeing Savitri following Him, addressed 
her sweetly: . 


enira Zara 


eret are enfer ffr Teta ATTY ATA | 

"fa arent aida mef oe Met mp 14 4 

“O Savitri! Whither are you going in your this 
mortal coil? If you like to follow after all, then 
quit your this body.” 

eg Heat A Brea Tetra uter sift i 

ae a wu Vid du TA AM: Gar N 15 

ada qularet & aya ut T | 

veras sq HITS. aerate NGITE 11 16 i 

“The mortal man, with his transient coil of these 
five elements, is not able to go to My Abode. O 
Chaste One! The death time of your husband 
arrived; therefore Satyavana is going to My abode 
to reap the fruits of his Karma. 

aim TEE weg: annue wein | 

ae ga wet vite: wale potted u 17 u 

HANA Masala TATA: SAHA | 

war greet warfededt Mar, 1 18 N 

Kart adia SAAR | 

PGA feret: MARAE u 19 u 


Book IX Chapter XXVIII 


1093 


Every living animal is born by his Karma. He 
dies again through his life long Karma. It is his 
Karma alone that ordains pleasure, pain, fear, 
sorrows, etc., By Karma, this embodied soul here 
becomes Indra; by Karma he can become a 
Brahmā's son. What more than this that Jiva, by 
his Karma, can be in Hari’s service and be free 
from birth and death! By one’s own Karma all sorts 
of Siddhis and immortality can be obtained; the 
four blessed regions as Visnu's Sālokya, etc., also 
can be obtained by Karma. 

Ged a Wet a Weed SAA: | 

Mau Raa er Toga ča U 020 1 

adn a Wig quitar tau | 

aama haa dvacdt a IKT 21 N 

Arita Beer Hs ATT YDG: | 

eaten urged Vrs TTT 022 N 

aim tated a feared verentur | 

adaa a gadu UTT 23 i 


miia ued a aait xerenHiwm | 

SAO ST fire wr veau i24 u 

due Career candor | 

gAn ules fer wa au: 0 25 u 

fer MRAMA Tero? mam? 
FOAMS ETT: 11 27 11 

What more than this that by Karma, a being 
becomes divine, human, or a King, or Šiva or 
Gaņeša! The state of Munīndra, asceticism, 
Ksattriyahood, Vaisyahood, Mlecchahood, moving 
things, stones, Raksasahood, Kinnaras Kingship, 
becoming tree, beasts, forest animals, inferior 
animals, worms, Daityas, Danavas, Asuras, all are 
fashioned and wrought by Karma and Karma 
alone.” O Narada! Thus speaking, Yama remained 
silent. 

Here ends the Twenty-seventh Chapter of the Ninth 
Book on the birth etc. of Savitri in 
Šrīmaddevī. bhāgavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. 


Book IX Chapter XXVIII 


1093 


CHAPTER XXVIII 


On Savitri 


VARTA sare 


"HET wur sper wrfendt cer ufo | 

ETA wear Seer querer caet ud ti 

Narayana said: O Narada! Hearing the words 
of Yama, the chaste intelligent Savitri, replied with 
great devotion: 


KIGE GIRI 

fe ei agda at at Tega T | 

cal at Set Ml dē: Hi: HY GIST HAMA: 11-2 0 

*O Dharmarajan! What is Karma? Why and how 
is its origin? What is the cause of Karma? Who is 
the embodied soul (bound by Karma)? What is this 
body? And who is it that does Karma? 

fé ar art er gfe: at en at uror: ÅRE t 

adia fe aut vati queer wow 3 o 


spent Aa ent at ent TV ferent: 1 

at sita: Wore AT career aera 0 4 d 

What is Jnana? What is Buddhi? What is this 
Pranas of this embodied Jiva? What are the 
Indriyas? And what are their characteristics? And 
what are the Devatas thereof? Who is it that enjoys 
and who is it that makes one enjoy? What is this 
enjoyment (Bhoga)? And what is the means of 
escape from it? And what is the nature of that State 
when one escapes from enjoyment? What is the 
nature of Jivatma? And what of Paramatma? O 
Deva! Speak all these in detail to me.” 


ent sara 
aauttredt ed: wd gage Wu | 
sā fa qp dem aaa aw us i 
agh Weder daram et 1 
aiian cw aT Ua aR 6 N 


1094 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Dharma said: “Karma is of two kinds—good |  wférdt argya wei deremta | 


and bad. The Karma that is stated in the Vedas as 
leading to Dharma is good; all other actions are 
bad. The God’s service, without any selfish ends 
(Sankalpa) and without the hope of any fruits 
thereof (ahaitukī), is of such a nature as to root out 
all the Karmas and gives rise to the highest devotion 
to God. 


al aT Hates th al aT Perfect Ta ST 1 

SIVA A ATT Aa WR: 3p: FAT 0.7 N 
: 1 

aims afan ata segt aera 11 8 tt 


A man who is such a Bhakta of Brahma becomes 
liberated, so the Šrutis say. Who then does the 
Karma and who is it that enjoys? (i.e, no such 
body). To such a Bhakta to Brahma, there is birth, 
death, old age, disease, sorrow nor any fear. O 
Chaste One! Bhakti is two-fold. This is stated by 
all in the Srutis. The one leads to Nirvana and the 
other leads to the nature of Hari. The Vaisnavas 
want the Bhakti to Hari i.e. the Saguna Bhakti. 

fahiua xr Auga JOMA | 

KRruaeui a aie aisfa aera: 11 9 1 

The other Yogis and the knowers of Brahma 
want the Nirguņa Bhaktī. He who is the Seed of 
Karma, and the Bestower for ever the fruits of 
Karma, Who is the Karma Incarnate and the Mūla 
Prakrti, is the Bhagavān; He is the Highest Self. 
He is the Material Cause of Karma. 

art fraturfiredfer ary sere: | 

ai daug aad Wenegs: 010 

SUSI MTA Walt: WT 1 

ashi nggeus AW We TA uit 

Know this body to be by nature liable to dissolve 
and die. Earth, air, ākāša, water, and fire these are 
the threads, as it were, of the work of creation of 
Brahma Who is of the nature of Being, ‘Deh?’ or 
the Embodied Soul is the Doer of Karma, the Karta; 
he is the enjoyer; and Atma (self) is the prompter, 
the stimulator within to do the Karma and enjoy 
the fruits thereof. 


watt Kaut geef wr: 12 n 

wad wat a tētu otra Aaa wer à i 

art fresas Frafedtata a 13 n 

The experiencing of pleasures and pains and the 
varieties thereof is known as Bhoga (enjoyment). 
Liberation, Mukti is the escape there from. The 
knowledge by which Atma (sat) and Maya (Asat) 
are discriminated is called Jūānam (Brahma 
Jüánam). 

nangati a art rati rd 1 

farai PTT sfr eftst er afe u 14 u 

fagférerere ara areeltst sat sp | 

TANIA WMS IENS SANT 11 15 M 

The knowledge is considered as the root 
discriminator of various objects of enjoyments. (i.e. 
by which the various objects are at once recognised 
as different from Atman). By Buddhi is meant the 
right seeing of things, (as certain) and is considered 
as the sead of Jfianam. By Prana is known as the 
different Vayus in the body. And this Prana is the 
strength of the embodied. 

Brean cro Vaitas, | 

Dre mut da gftard u afar 16 N 

APMETNI WA: BTL | 

vereri saoi rut rarer TATA, 11 17 N 

Mind is the chief, the best, of the senses, it is a 
part of I$vara; its characteristic is its doubtful 
uncertain state. It impels to all actions, irresistible. 
It is inascertainable, invisible; it obstructs the Jana. 
The senses are seeing, hearing, smelling, touching 
and tasting. These are the several limbs, as it were. 
of the embodied and the impellers to all actions. 

sfrarinad a Wh adatom | 

Rast iaei yasi Uu quem 18 1 

Wat eger weet saat: Bat: | 

woreefeyen fe a vita: Rafa: u 19 tt 

They are both enemies and friends as they give 
pain (when attached to wordly objects) and 
happiness (when attached to virtuous objects) both. 


Book IX Chapter XXIX 


1095 


The Sun, Vayu, Earth, Brahma and others are their 
Devatàs. The Jiva is the holder, the sustainer of 
Prana, body, etc. 

wt cared wer fuu wed wc | 

AIT ARITA U GATT U SÀ (020 di 

gad fd wd eur os emm | 

hat AAs wes AT Wn 21 1 

The Paramatma, the Highest Self, is the Best of 
all, Omnipresent, transcending the Gunas, and 
beyond Prakrti. He is the Cause of all causes and 
He is the Brahma Itself. O Chaste One! I have 
replied, according to the Šāstras to all your 
questions. These are Jiianas of the Jüanins. O Child! 
Now go back to your house at pleasure." 


wrferzqarer 

THRE ery arftratt aT vert ar ATU TAT | 

amity yw U agama 022 

wat at difi arft vita: aut da at YA: d 

wat at aon mi a at uei 023 u 

Savitri said: “Whither shall I go, leaving my 
Husband and Thee, the Ocean of Knowledge? Please 
oughtest to answer the queries that I now put to 
Thee. What wombs do the Jivas get in response to 
which Karmas? What Karmas lead to the Heavens? 
And what Karmas lead to various hells? 

aa at cusiur uf deafened a 

at at ator anit wh ar ae aor 24 

aa or deihi or carcass AUT i 

ot at ao grat Gat at ds edv t 25 u 

Which Karmas lead to Mukti? And which 
Karmas give Bhakti? What Karmas make one Yogi 
and what Karmas inflict diseases? Which Karmas 
make one’s life long? or short? Which Karmas 


again make one happy? And what Karmas make 
one miserable? 
sidas ATA APT: a aur | 
stat ar at cep yer: ha eo 1126 N 
Rasen: A aration wat 
car faan aA MET N27 u 
Which Karmas make one deformed in one’s 
limbs, one-eyed, blind, deaf, lame or idiotic? Which 
Karmas again make one mad? Make one very much 
avaricious or of a stealing habit? What Karmas 
make one possess Siddhis? Or make one earn the 
four Lokas Salokya, etc.? 
St OT argureiu quftared T AT à 
mimik dat epud Gat HTT 28 1 
Tare dat ot owurefens Pere 
arent at enferferer: fassent are fe a ar 29 n 
What Karmas make one a Brahmin or an 
ascetic? Or make one go to Heaven or Vaikuntha? 
What Karmas enable one to go to Goloka, the par 
excellence and free from all diseases? How many 
are the hells? What are their names and how do 
they appear? 
ward; atch arie fērdd ay faster à 
"rft anton da at at carer: Iemad i 
werfen WaT Ys wed emmemquémr 30 u 
Set CAA TAT Taa? ARTA 
MAIESTAS: 11 28 11 
How long will one have to remain in each hell? 
and what Karmas lead to what diseases? O Deva, 
Now tell me about these that I have asked to you 
and oblige.” 
Here ends the Twenty-eighth Chapter of the Ninth 
Book on the story of Savitri Srimaddevibhagavatam 
of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter XXIX 1095 


CHAPTER XXIX 
On Savitri, on Gifts, and on Karmas 


starr amp Narayana said: Yama got thunderstruck at these 


maei spear wr ferr am: | queries of Savitri. He then began to describe, with 
TE pam arurd; 3 CNCE uru a smiling countenance, the fruition of the several 


works of the Jivas. 


1096 


ta Sarat 

HM gragradfar Aces vd asg | 

wr wd ydagi pri ARA wey 2 d 

maada vd mah aor at 1 

“WaT WRT WaT ST ATA TTT FA N 3 íi 

Dharma said: O Child! You are now a daughter 
only twelve years old. But you speak of wisdom 
like the Highest Jiianins and Yogis, Sanaka and 
others. O Child! By virtue of the boon granted by 
Savitri, you have become incarnate of Her in part. 
The King Ašvapati got you before by performing 
severe penances. 


aan sft: siud: mre wart a ware 1 

"emsfefer: TĀ preme wr WAT N 4 11 

"rem yrei aes aT rem ere ar Tien i 

wem TT: TAS eT LATE FATT Su 

As Laksmi is dear and fortunate with regard to 
Visnu, as Mahādevī is to Mahadeva, Aditi to 
Kašyapa, Ahalyà to Gautama, so you are to 
Satyavana in respect of affection and good-luck 
and other best qualities. 

aan vert a frag gar dean aaah? à 

aam a eub bw fam gam NGN 

wem ae yfad deem at cen fre | 

virer fire ei wr erem ATA: für 1 7 n 

As Saci is to Mahendra, as Rohini is to Moon, 
as Rati is to Kama, as Svaha is to Fire, as Svadha 
is to the Pitrs, as Sanjfià is to the Sun, as Varunani 
is to Varuna, as Daksiņā is to Yajfia, as Earth is to 
Varāha, as Devasenā is to Kārtika, so you are 
fortunate and blessed with respect to Satyavana. 

amd qve att seai a «üfenm | 

ay Ufa warm warf uenenum usu 

O Savitri! I myself grant you this boon of my 
own accord. Now ask other boons. O highly 
fortunate One! I will fulfil all your desires. 


magara 
aad Aei yai yak NA | 
qaa mn amA uo 


Srimaddevibhágavatam 


"egg: Gara SIEUT Cep wart 1 

West waded eurrsrdfmu 10 u 

Savriti said: “O Noble One! Let there be one 
hundred sons of mine by Satyavana. This is the 
boon that I want. Let there be one hundred sons of 
my Father.as well; let my Father-in-law get back 
his (lost) eyesight and may he get back his lost 
kingdom. This is another boon that I want. 

sie reser red menih gR i 

Rada wart edie N wrest udi 

Atama wr sit age ar 1 

fosrirearatst a Mr emeng i12 N 

Thou art the Lord of the world. So grant me this 
boon, too, that I may have this my very body for a 
lakh years when I may go to Vaikuntha with 
Satyavāna. Now I am eager to hear the various 
fruitions of Karmas of several Jivas. Kindly narrate 
them and oblige.” 

TAMA IATA 

arafa rere wel ATAftTG Ta | 

shamda er eneranfir Prema 013 N 

yaraga A AA TAT STR d 

yad IET aa wp sisted SINT: 014 UI 

Dharma said: “You are very chaste. So what 
you have thought will verily come to pass. Now I 
describe the fruition of Karmas of the Jivas. Listen. 
Excepting this holy land of Bhàrata, nowhere do 
the people enjoy wholly the fruition of their two- 
fold Karmas, good and bad. 

GU Wer qaaa Tue MAATTE: | 

ATV weet a WU wife: aft unis i 

fafsresftfera: at start adatfrg | 

wast a we vay aay U N 16 


It is only the Suras, Daityas, Danavas, 
Gandharvas, Raksasas, and men that do Karmas. 
The beasts and the other Jivas do not do Karmas. 
The special Jivas e.g. men, etc., experience the 
fruition of their Karmas in Heavens, hells and in 
all the other Yonis (wombs). 

fagredt vita aie afg | 

yngi sad at at gaits wem 0 17 u 


Book IX Chapter XXIX 


1097 


——— | 
atm aya MĪT RAJ RTT 
Specially, as the Jivas roam in all the different 
Yonis, they enjoy their Karmas, good or bad, as 
the case may be, carved in their previous births. 
The good works get fructified in Heavens; and the 
bad works lead the Jivas to hells. 
aiden afta: wr ater faferer af | 
-Raben IFA wer: wade 019 
wht Harton stash ysrator | 
diastidtu afro: Kat gat erasum 20 0 
This Karma can be got rid of by Bhakti. This 
Bhakti is of two kinds: (1) Nirguņā of the nature 
of Nirvana; and (2) towards Prakrti, of the nature 
of Brahma, and with Maya inherent. Diseases come 
as the result of bad and ignorant actions; and 
healthiness come from good and certain scientific 
Karmas. Similar are the remarks for short and long 
lives for happiness and pain. 
aangaan: Hon TA wr a 
Renaa watepd2 eum i21 N 
were feri afer far yoy att a 
aged gti u gu apfereafit 22 0 
By bad works, one becomes blind or deformed 
in body. So by doing excelient Karmas, one 
acguires Siddhis, etc. These are spoken generally. 
I will now speak in detail; listen. This is very secret 
even in Puranas and Smrtis. 


gem mgh aif: wem AT | 

Mesa TIT: HB: WHET: Maa 1 23 N 

In this Bhàratavarsa, men are the best of all the 
various classes of beings. The Brahmanas are the 
best of men and are best in all Kinds of Karmas. 
They are responsible, too, for their actions. 

ratā frase weary ae Ber d 

FIT denm arent faferer: wf 24 u 

WAM VEIT free ITF T | 

aii wenns Pram Praga: 025 N 


alfa uà EAT Ud Ga | 
venas aed qui frenrfirat aft 126 u 


O Chaste One! Of the Brahmins, again, those 
that are attached to the Brāhmaņas are the best. 
The Brahmanas are of two kinds as they are Sakama 
(with desires) or Niskāma (without desires). The 
Niskami Brāhmaņas are superior to the Sakāmī 
Brahmanas. For the Sakamis are to enjoy the frutis 
of their Karmas, while the Niskamī Brahmānas are 
perfectly free from any such disturbances (they 
have not to come back to thes field of Karma). 
The Niskama Bhaktas, after they quit their bodies, 
£o to a place free from sickness or disease, pure 
and perfect. From there they do not come back. 

Raa fast Hoot uxWrenTTHPSNU | 

Thatch Wie a ora ferrata: 27 N 

PH SOTA rear grade E | 

and umma det war aig u28 u 

The Niskāma Bhaktas assuming the divine 
forms go to the Goloka and worship the Highest 
God, the Highest Self, the two-armed Krsna. The 
Sakāmī Vaisnavas go to Vaikuntha; but they come 
back in Bharata and get into the wombs of the 
twice-born. 

SATS TA U PIRTI ATA HAT E | 

sri er Pet wean areata faf Wat: 29 1 

ATRI Awrarsa VAT: AAT | 

a iat Pen ahafamarateatstat i 30 n 

By degress they also become Niskāma when 
they certainly acquire pure undefiled Bhakti. The 
Brahmanas and Vaisnavas that are Sakamis in all 
their births, never get that pure undefiled intellect 
and never get the devotion to Visnu. 

dtaffšrar far a a aera: wet à 

a wife agro a Taras aed 31 i 

Tt ta 3p a ditetferarfirar: à 

aafa AS GTI art 432 

The Brāhmaņas, living in the Tirthas (sacred 
places of pilgrimages); they again come down to 
Bharata. Those that are devotedly attached to their 
own Dharma (religion) and reside in places other 
than Tirthas, go to Satyaloka and again come to 
Bharata. 


1098 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


verf fam: gas aa 1 

asia 4 dota yai art 133 u 

TAVAI A feres teno: 1 

midi ware yaga, 034 

The Brāhmaņas, following their own Dharma 
and devoted to the Sun go to the world of the Sun 
and again come to Bhārata. And those who are 
devoted to Mūla Prakrti and devoted to Niskāma 
Dharma go to Maņi Dvīpa and have not to come 
back from thither. 

Tan Fre BHT: SIT: PRTA TITUTQT: | 

a wife Raah wr garatfa sm u35 n 

A ferr Adam: vaeriferear: Ure à 

a aie Not cw wauifr und u36u 

The Bhaktas of Siva, Sakti, and Gaņeša, and 
attached to their own Dharma respectively go to 
the Siva Loka and return from thence. Those 
Brahmanas that worship the other Devas and 
attached to their own Dharmas go to those regions 
of theirs respectively and again come to Bharata. 

tt ART: TUN fest: à 

a wife a Rath sungivesern 37 u 

meha fast darertamm: WET | 

STETSTRT2T TATA ct Biter ATH JATIN 38 1 

Attached to their own Dharmas, the Niskami, 
Bhaktas of Hari go by their Bhakti step by step to 
the region of Sri Hari. Those that are not attached 
to their own Dharma and do not worship the Devas 
and always bent on doing things as they like 
without any regard to their Ācāras go certainly to 
hells. No doubt in this. 

UP va aigan Ta a | 

Ada yea AT: Heaths: 1 39 N 

Taara d a ath ditt d Ja d 

ana a araa ater: Heath: 40 1 

The Brahmanas and the other three Varnas, 
attached to their own Dharmas all enjoy the fruits 
of their good works. But those who do not do their 
Svadharma, go verily down into hells. They do not 
come to Bharata for their rebirth, they enjoy their 
fruits of Karmas in hells! 


RUNA Ua ATT wa U | 

RF feng: dam a lt41 d 

wat cate fana saath waits d i 

ada aa a aa maag 0 42 0 

Therefore the four Varnas ought to follow their 
own Dharmas of the Brāhmaņas, they are to remain 
attached to their own Dharmas and give their 
daughters in marriage to the similarly qualified 
Brahmanas. They then go to the Candraloka (the 
region of the Moon). There they remain for the 
life periods of the fourteen Indras. 

NET aaa ah FOTA 1 

BRUT UTT reete vr RS ETE: 43 N 

vt waite feror matara: v 

Wed U vid vaut quot ufa: wo A 44 I 

And if the girl be given, with ornaments, the 
results obtained would be twice. If the girl be given 
with a desire in view, then that world is obtained; 
but if the girl be given without any desire but to 
fulfil the God's will and God's satisfaction only, 
then one would not have to go to that world. They 
go to Visnu Loka, bereft of the fruits of all Karmas. 

a waa fateasignta waite d od 

wf du arestā aaa fh 11 45 N 

yhnr ara dfe aa a ITT: à 

Those that give to the Brahmanas pasture ground 
and cattle, silver, gold, garment, fruits and water, 
go to the Candraloka and live there for one 
Manvantra. They live long in those regions by 
virtue of that merit. 

à cafe Gautier ma aaah att 46 n 

Aai voee d pares SITEIUITT V | 

aià d wa wie cata afr 47 N 

faye fort ard qfi V PTT | 

Again those that give gold, cows, copper, etc., 
to the holy Bráhmanas, go to the Sūrya Loka (the 
region of the Sun) and live there for one Ayuta 
years (10,000 years), free from diseases, etc, for a 
long time. 


qafa aft fervat anf fagent wr t 48 1 
"wafer farre a Aa ate 1 


Book IX Chapter XXIX 


1099 


wa Aada drgedsfkar 049 u 

Those that give lands and lots of wealth to the 
Brahmins, go to the Visnu Loka and to the beautiful 
Sveta Dvipa (one of the eighteen minor divisions 
of the known continents). And there live as long 
as the Sun and Moon exist. O Muni! The 
meritorious persons live long in that wide region. 

Note: $veta Dvipa may mean Vaikuntha, where 
Visnu resides. 

fao fang amd enfe quran | 

Ti cafe fene 3p rm aie YAFA t 50 t 

a arifa repete a gR quern | 

TEM a feos we 51 N 

faqs faye amd pdha naan: wet à 

"yup ww gara dt wer We ae: 52 

Those who give with devotion dwelling places 
to the Brahmanas, go to the happy Visnu Loka. 
And there, in that great Visnu Loka, they live for 
years equal to the number of molecules in that 
house. He who offers a dwelling house in honour 
of any Devas, goes to the region of that Deva and 
remains there for a number of years equivalent to 
the number of particles in that house. 

Wurf ART eds LOTTE E | 

"rar agio Gus qb May esp 53 u 

Weg fai ventas FNRA: | 

The lotus-born Brahma said that it one offers a 
royal palace, one obtains a result four times and if 
one offers a country, one gets the result one hundred 
times that; again if one offers an excellent country, 
twice as much merit one acquires. 

"b eat wert u Wdururugmā 54 i 

U TT sed up VIAA Tt 

"rari ue Sort WIA TATA: WAT 1 55 N 

ag anivans Ferra He HAT | 

magman aaa Ff, 56 d 

ser ar TTA ea ardt attenti | 

One who dedicates a tank fer the expiation of 
all one's sins, one lives in Janar Loka (one of the 
pious regions) for a period eqivalent to the number 


of particles therein). If any man offers a Vapi (a 
well) in perference to other gifts, one gets ten fold 
fruits thereby. If one offers seven Vāpīs, one 
acquires the fruits of offering one tank. 

arate aa ufa ust udhugd 057 N 

we carte feat rft esee WaT | 

TARTU ASM MGE U AK |1 58 tt 

aans CARTY amdtqemm e? HL i 

A Vapi is one which is four thousand Dhanus 
long and which is as which wide or less 

Note: Dhanu equals a measure of four hastas. 

If offered to a good bridegroom, then the giving 
of a daughter in marriage is equivalent to a 
dedication of ten Vapis. And if the girl be offered 
with ornaments, twice the merits accure. The same 
merit accrues in clearing the bed of the mud of a 
pond as in digging it. So for the Vapi (well). 

NVYAg TT RB a: att a Ou 59 ul 

a war ater aaor ater | 

garam at were arate wespra 60 N 

a ada wp ufu yay | 

O Chaste One! He who plants an ASvattha tree 
and dedicates it to a godly purpose, lives for one 
Ayuta years in Tapar Loka. O Savitri! He who 
dedicates a flower garden for the acquirement of 
all sorts of good, lives for one Ayuta years in 
Dhruva Loka. 

"t carte ferar a ferra Tt fet i 61 N 

Raah Ats fà aaia un i 

Rag a FG we ma TOT i62 u 

mene forfarenrart were SIR | 

O Chaste One! He who gives a Vimāņa (any 
sort of excellent carriage) in honour of Visnu, in 
this Hindus than, lives for one Manvantara in 
Visnuloka. And if one gives a Vimana of variegated 
colours and workmanship, four times the result 
accrues. And one who gives a palanquin, acquires 
half the fruits. 


a gari aR AH gud data, 63 1 
fast AASA TART ym | 


1100 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


TTT Aegi a: alter REA 164 d 

animai isti gimmie Web | 

Again if anybody gives, out of devotion, a 
swinging temple (the Dol Mandir) to Bhagavan Sri 
Hari, lives for one hundred Manvantaras, in the 
region of Visnu. O Chaste One! He who makes a 
gift of a royal road, decorated with palacial 
buildings on either side, lives with great honour 
and love in that Indraloka for one Ayuta years. 

MAUS er SAA STA MATHS HAT M65 N 

ug at a age a ad afer | 

YA CAMS AST UTAH ANAT N66 N 

mieg 1 

Equal results follow whether the above things 
are offered to the Gods or to the Brahmanas. He 
enjoy that which he gives. No giving, No enjoying. 
After enjoying the heavenly pleasures, etc., the 
virtuous person takes birth in Bharata as a Brahmin 
or in other good families, in due order, and 
ultimately in the Brahmana families. 

smart Yaa Yara CAM HH 67 N 

ya: iste vafģušīd a afraraa: | 

arte are erg at neqne sra T 11 68 ii 


The virtuous Brāhmaņa, after he has enjoyed 
the heavenly pleasures, takes his birth again in 
Bharata in Brahmana, Ksattriya or in Vai$ya 
families. A Ksattriya or a Vai$ya can never obtain 
Brahmanahood, even if he performs asceticism for 
one Koti Kalpas. 

AUT ATT HT WTA srt Tt 

"sped giad end eneuadfeymhfa 169 N 

Ud atri fesferfeas ga: Aa 70 N 

ste sesta FERID TURE IREIRTTORİNÈ 
MAZIMA RARS: 11 29 11 

This is stated in the Šrutis. Without enjoying 
the fruits, no Karma can be exhausted even in one 
hundred Koti Kalpas. So the fruits of the Karmas 
must be enjoyed, whether they be auspicious or 
inauspicious. By the help of seeing the Devas and 
seeing the Tirthas again and again, purity is 
acquired. O Savitri! So now [ have told you 
something. What more do you want to hear? Say.” 

Here ends the Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Ninth 
Book on the anecdote of Savitri on the fruits of 
making gifts and on the effects of Karmas in 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1100 Srimaddevibhagavatam 
my a I 


CHAPTER XXX 
On the Conversation Between Savitri and Yama 
GUDE CIEI Śivaloka where he dwells with great respect for 
weaif tri a ata wader au | years equivalent to the measure of that food. This 
ara: yuia EE arengud wid * Anna-dàna' (the giving of boiled rice and other 


Savitri said: "O Dharmarājan! Kindly tell me |eatables) is a great dana (charity) and this can be 
in detail about those works that lead the meritorious | done not only to the Brahmanas but to the other 
persons to the Heavens and various other spheres." |castes also, where similar results also follow. 


LTS Sara HAS ario ad a afaa 1 
Ari a fnm a: waht u À ATA UR waa area: Farag tt 4 N 
samara a ferry died 2 vel arere or erit reri afa 
aided maa AA YT a 1 ata fewer aelvmmgd aft usu 
saerryart ow ferar wémd n3 There is, or will be, no other charity superior to 


this charity of anna (rice, boiled it may be and other 


Dharmarāja said: “O Child! He who gives rice 
eatables). For here no distinction is made as to what 


and food to the Brahmanas in India, goes to the 


Book IX Chapter XXX 


caste will get it or not, nor the discrimination of 
time, when to give such a charity. O Child! Seats 
(Asanas) given to the Devas and the Brahmanas, 
carry the donor to the Visnu Loka, where he dwells 
for Ayuta years with great respect and love. 

at gana a farra fecat af waar | 

aroma wp faut wl 16 

agii quafet dtf ayi ww d 

ad mmu we item wq u7 N 

Giving excellent cows yielding milk to 
Brahmanas take the donor to Visnuloka, where he 
is glorified and remains for years equivalent to the 
number of pores in that cow or those cows. And if 
cows be given on a meritorious day, four times the 
merits accure, and if given in a sacred place of 
pilgrimage, hundred times the result occurs; and if 
given in a tirtha, where Narayana is worshipped, 
koti times the results accrue. 

Tt at were fure aia aga i 

atima wa Ui Nea 138 u 

asagi weft STETUTTT a 1 

eva a frayeth ugtat uo 

He who gives with devotion, cows to the 
Brahmanas in Bharata, remains in the Candraloka 
for one Ayuta years and is glorified. He who gives 
a two-mouthed cow to a Brāhmaņa goes to 
Visnuloka and remains there for as many years as 
there exist the numbers of hairs on the body of that 
cow and is glorified. 

"warf aena Sieg AAT | 

aulumrgd wisfü Wted AKTA d 10 1 

fama diferte aag qaia ww | 

ma ager astra aft uid i 

A gift of a beautiful white umbrella to a Brahmana 
makes one go to Varunaloka for Ayuta years where 
he remains with great pleasure. Giving garments 
to the diseased Brahmanas make one fit to remain 
with glory in Vayuloka for one ayuta years. 

A salle ATEMTA VISIT AAA | 

mim a ads macia 012 


1101 


reri arena feat great IKT i 

"ud wath maiaa 413 0 

Giving to a Brahmana the Šālagrāma with 
garments makes one remain with glory in 
Vaikuntha as long as there exist the Sun and Moon. 
Giving a beautiful bedding to a Bráhmana, glorifies 
a man in the Candraloka as long as there exist the 
Sun and Moon. 

at cafe dt | darat ATETUTA d | 

araardat astt afgeta wmm 14 u 

enfe ma a afe femur ww d 

Wales ATAKA aW 15 

To give lights to the Devas and Brahmana 
glorifies a man in Agniloka (the region of Fire) for 
one Manvantara. To give elephants to the 
Brahmanas in Bharata, makes one sit in the same 
throne with Indra for his life period. 

UN Assert a Hila aes = | 

Wed arent ole urgere aft u16 N 

weet Pifeatar ft care arena a | 

"tad arent wth mag 0017 u 

Giving horses to the Brahmanas makes one 
remain in Varunaloka for fourteen Indras life 
periods. Giving a good palanquin to a Brahmana 
make one remain in the Varunaloka for fourteen 
Indras life-periods. 

wg arfeeni a fe arta arena u | 

née argotā VITA aft 713 i 

at aaa a faye cast SRTSTHUR | 

Ule ager aagi yay un 19 N 

Giving a good site or a good orchard to a 
Brāhmaņa leads one to the Vāyuloka where he 
remains with glory for one Manvantara. Giving a 
white camara and fan to a Brahmana, leads the 
donor to the Vayuloka where he remains for one 
ayuta years. 

eri vet at garfā ferisftdt raeqeit: à 

wr Teta at arr sra Avo 11 20 u 

Giving grains and jewels make one long-lived 
and both the donors and receivers go certainly to 
Vaikuntha. 


1102 


aad 2fretatur aNd bos 

wr va foresftdt a vat AZ: werdd u21 N 

at ae sed wu reb anie 1 

gftesg iaa weet: 022 0 

Kokas TTT PTT i 

fir fra pe naaf 123 u 

He who always recites the name of Sri Hari, 
lives for ever and Death goes far far away from 
him. The intelligent man that celebrates the 
Swinging Festival (Dol Yatra) in the last quarter 
of the Full Moon night in this land of Bharata, 
becomes liberated while living, enjoying pleasures 
in this world, goes in the end to Visnuloka, where 
he remains for one hundred Manvantaras; there is 
no doubt in this. 

BOTA asà fiut aq i 

arate a srafecurg PANAT: 11 24 N 

Rea STETIT a: eir ur STU 1 

fecun c wed feranfe 250 

Ifthe Swinging Festival be performed under the 
influence of the asterism Uttara Phalguni then the 
fruits become doubled; this is the saying of Brahma 
Himself The performer lives to the end of a Kalpa. 
To give til (Sesamum) to a Brahmana, leads one to 
Siva Loka, where one enjoys for a number of years 
equal to the number of til. 

aa: qutt durer fortstrei siat | 

mamaa qr Api a He) HAT 26 N 

aaga rate varat ga ram | 

OY gafa aaa SIT V Aaa 27 N 

maA wget arafésrerqdsr 

aa radar arti Arad a PATA N28 N 

Then one is born in a good yoni and becomes 
longlived and happy. To give a copper plate yields 
double the effect. To give in India a chaste wife 
the garments and ornaments to a Brahmana (and 
then to purchase her with an equivalent in gold) 
leads one to Candra Loka where one remains for 
fourteen Indra’s life periods and enjoys day and 
night the celestial Apsarās. 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 

wer terete a autora Seu | 

farast Aga dieva we Had 29 ul 

Tat rad vr ether et frangi 

timeam er emot fueras i 30 N 

Thence the donor goes to the Gandharva Loka 
for one ayuta years and day and night enjoys 
Urvašī. Then he gets for thousand births chaste, 
fortunate, wealthy, gentle and sweet-speaking, 
beautiful wives. 

Wearfer wes eme AIT A dt AT: | 

Tema wp venen maA 31 

qx quib ums uem | 

He who gives nice and delicious friuts to the 
Brāhmaņas, remains with glory in the Indra Loka 
for a number of years equivalent to the fruits. He 
gets again a good Yoni (birth) and gets excellent 
sons. 

"uer c gam Fe a ARITA 32 N 

Has Heart WT ATETUTA caret wp | 

"RR retard xr seat arta a smt 033 U 

AMR th AAA aT 

aaa ag fagrr wd fano Jaq u34 N 

pete TASH secat TA 

To give thousand trees while there are fruits on 
them, or nice friuts only to the Brahmanas, makes 
one enjoy the Heavens for a long, long time and 
he then comes back to Bharata. To give various 
things and good edifices with grains, etc., to the 
Bráhmanas leads one to the regions of the Devas 
where he remains for one hundred Manvantaras. 

Ad: GA HT V WEDRITSTATOND d 35 I 

"rc weit Ait refert wet à 

«rfr sra frgrar quagpr wr smt 1361 

Tél wp Wu waned Ya | 

Ya: etit Mores AEL sgftrut sra 37 1 

Then he gets a very good birth and becomes the 
master of abundant wealth. He who gives with 
devotion to the Brahmanas lands certainly goes for 
one hundred Manvantaras and remains there in 
glory for one hundred Manvantras; and, coming 


Book IX Chapter XXX 


1103 


again to be born in good wombs, they become 
Kings. 

aa wate after sra ora TTT d 

sinter vaiga grata ws: u38 U 

atrastu We PIE ROUES IE | 

warrant da qquó U wéhm 139 0 

The earth does not leave him for hundred births. 
He becomes prosperous, wealthy and possesses 
many sons and becomes the lord of his subjects. 
He who gives a good village with pasture land and 
cows, dwells with glory in Vaikuntha for one lakh 
manvantaras. 

ya: gai ima ITACGAMATATA | 

a walter a d gedt Sarat cane w 40 N 

Then he gets a good birth (becomes born in a 
high caste family) and obtain a lakh villages. The 
earth quits him not even if he be born a lakh times. 
(This is very bad then, to one who does not like to 
be born again). 

Guat a ree U VARAT i 

gueuri tanasko rr: a a a 

amt ag fera ga rt afer 1 

neared U hort wrasse 42 N 

He who gives a village inhabited by good and 
obedient subjects with ripe excellent grains, various 
tanks, trees and adorned with fruits and leaves 
dwells in Kailāša with great glory for ten lakh 
Indra's life periods. 

ya: Gather ma SER SITUE ST ! 

arnt a fud U GAMMA RTA: 043 0 

ENT da wea Gag Yar d 

madig ada Uģim 44 1 

Getting again born in high family, he becomes 
Rājādhirāja in Bharata and obtains Niyuta towns. 
There is no doubt in this. The earth quits him not, 
even if he be born āyuta times. Really he gets the 
highest prosperity in this earth. 

amt a wach Vet at fe fears | 

une meas Wwsmqe war a 45 N 

adasia MAJAA RA, | 

miad uw àg aeaa 46 i 


He who gives to a Brāhmaņa one hundred towns 
and countires, inhabited by good or mediocre 
subjects, with wells, tanks, and, various trees, 
remains with glory in Vaikuntha for one Koti 
manvantaras. 

ya: gA duma dadada, | 

wagddarl Wem vena ufa 047 

"bd at vietēja wart arfeta cw i 

merase xr TART MET, 1048 N 

Then he becomes born in this earth in a high 
caste family, becomes the Lord of Jambudvipa and 
attains in this earth great prosperity like Indra. The 
earth quits him not even if he comes here Koti 
times; in reality he is a Mahatma (a great-sould 
man), Rājrāješvara (the Lord of Kings) and lives 
upto the end of a Kalpa. 

xenférenrt gi a at carte TĀ à 

agii we aid AmA A HNT: 1 49 N 

siegētu at werfer amare ufi 1 

MO wt Aa wee A PT: 50 N 

He who gives his whole property to a Brahmina, 
gets in the end four times that; there is no doubt in 
this. He who gives Jambu Dvipa to an ascetic 
Brahmana, gets undoubtedly in the end one 
hundred times the fruit. 

wagiandtarg: weed Aag: 1 

adai augi ad: weet amem 051 

adamas He nQSu a | 

ISP] gargtīri Arta Ae: 52 0 

sreiversrarurt ard ugue spastísrg: | 

Rana uforgia shon: ura ua 53 n 

If you give away Jambu Dvipa, the whole earth; 
if you travel all the Tirthas, if you perform all sorts 
of asceticisms, if you give shelter to all, if you make 
gifts of all sorts, know that you will have to come 
again to be reborn in this earth; but if you become 
a devotee of Mila Prakrti, then be sure that you 
w’ont have to come here and be reborn. The 
devotees of Mila Prakrti go to Mani Dvipa, the 


1104 


Stimaddevibhagavatam 


Highest place of Sri BhuvaneSari Devi and remain 
there and they see the fall of innumerable Brahmas. 

adits frgrer wat TIA i 

Ai Rearea et ATTRA 11 54 i 

wea Cas ara saat a Hag i 

ata a afta was rater 55 1 

The worshippers of the Devi Mantra when they 
quit their mortal coils, assume divine appearances 
endowed with Vibhitis (manifestations of powers) 
and free from birth, death and old age, assume the 
Sārūpya (the same form) of the Devi and remain 
in Her Service. They reside in Manidvipa and see 
the part Pralayas. 

mifer gar: Rrra farara srt TA 1 

feft Rasai up WATTS 0 56 N 

afr godai att ea a a: | 

"magi cw AA RaR 57 01 

The Devas die, the Siddhas die, the whole 
universe vanishes; but the Devi Bhaktas never die 
and they remain free from birth, death, and old age. 
He who offers Tulasi leaf to Bhagavan Hari in the 
month of Kārtika resides for three yugas in the 
temple of Hari. 

ya: gA durer effe PATA | 

Rafai vat: a MAMA fa u 58 u 

TE a: TÉ TTT ATG TORT: | 

gatera tgd RaR usgu 

Getting again a good birth, he acguires the 
devotion to Šrī Hari and becomes the Foremost of 
those who restrain their senses. He who bathes in 
the Ganges early before the rising of the Sun 
remains in enjoyment in the temple of Hari for sixty 
thousand yugas. 

ya: Gals corey fost Saya | 

RITUS Ve auth gt Ta 60 u 

Getting again a good birth, he gets the Visnu 
Mantra, and, quitting his mortal coil, becomes 
united with the Feet of Sri Hari. 

Ufa aegrrafīdģera wee | 

anife eared u Mar Aaa T1671 N 


Raard a Ta a oa: gdagfā i 

We wes wad Pfr wp N 62 N 

He has not to come back from Vaikuntha to this 
earth. He remains in Hari's Service and gets the 
same form of Hari. He who bathes daily in the 
Ganges, becomes purified like the Sun and gets 
the result of performing the Horse-sacrifice at every 
step. 

Ug WT HTT AGAR | 

"red wu deua macaa fA 63! 

ya: gA dora effe PAG i 

Haars Rae aana Taq 64 N 

The earth, becomes purified by the dust of his 
feet and he enjoys in Vaikuntha as long as the Sun 
and Moon exist. Then again he becomes born in a 
good and beautiful womb, and is liberated by 
acquiring the devotion to Hari. He becomes very 
energetic and the formost of the ascetics, pure, 
religious, learned, and self-restrained. 

miha: yA aaia a RARA: à 

titencheantest me auf MR: 65N 

Ud at gara ea gA, | 

a Wad a more aafésaqdet d 66 d 

When the Sun comes midway between Pisces 
and Cancer and heats intensely the earth, the man 
who in Bhārata gives cool water to drink to the 
people, resides in happiness in Kailāša for fourteen 
Indra’s life periods. 

Ta: gA dur «vaig Tat ward | 

Rams duni daca: 67 U 

aurea wegard a a: Hate first | 

wagered Hat Nraafgt nesi 

Getting again a good birth here, he becomes 
beautiful, happy, devoted to Siva, energetic and 
expert in the Vedas, and the Vedangas. He who 
gives to a Brahmana the Saktu (sattu) in the month 
of Vaisakha enjoys in the Siva temple for as many 
years as there are number of particles in that 
quantity of sattu (powders in parched oat). 

aA and dt f poran i 

VAS uri gerd ATA HNT: |169 N 


Book IX Chapter XXX 


1105 


aes uted Ms arafestarqd 1 

ya: Gata area Hon vfs ws Ya 00 70 N 

He who performs the Krsna Janmastami vow 
in this Bharata, is freed from the sins incurred in 
his hundred births; there is no doubt in this. The 
observer of the vow remains in great enjoyment in 
Vaikuntha for fourteen Indra’s gets again a good 
birth here and acquires Hari Bhakti. 

Bea sm at Prachi atfa a: | 

Wed Pras wo wunmreenref 1 71 0 

Rra Nari a farani carte a: | 

omagii da ated an 472 0 

He who performs the Šivarātri vow in this 
Bharata Varsa, resides with great joy in Siva Loka 
for seven manvantaras. He who offers the Bel 
leaves to Siva in Sivaratri time, resides with great 
joy in Siva’s Abode for as many yugas as there are 
number of leaves. 

WA: Gata gm fraser ragam | 

farerraraprarodftar-rstraresfirnmreeq 173 N 

Amisa ATA viet atstāgact | 

anita ada ram ararurfürfaarf-tgr 74 N 

"rd arsureinre qr qyr aur fart sr i 

Raagi utsfü race metad 75 u 

Getting again a good birth here, he acquires the 
devotion to Siva and becomes learned, prosperous 
and possesses sons, subjects and lands. He who 
performs vow and worships Sankara in the month 
of Caitra or Magha and who, with a branch of a 
tree in hand, dances day and night for one month, 
or half a month, or half a month, for ten days or for 
seven days, dwells in Siva Loka for as many yugas 
as the number of days he dances. 

smaa at fe matte set TAT | 

ATT arated Aaa 76 u 

Wr: Gat durer aafia PGK | 

frafsami yad Weber aaa 0 77 N 

He who performs the vow of Sri Rama Navami, 
lives in the abode of Visnu for seven Manvantaras 
in great joy. Getting again a good birth, he 


70 


beocomes devoted to Sri Rama, the foremost of 
those who have self restraint and he becomes very 
wealthy. 

miai nega wende: eru a | 

mRNA: wésfarfafer: aft 78 it 

aadeuents RRAN 1 

Iatarttrattatmedganmeg 179 

Raah adas amaaa | 

He who performs the Šāradīyā Pūjā” (the great 
Durga Puja in the month of autumn) of the Mila 
Prakrti with incense, lights, offerings of food, and 
animal sacrifices of buffaloes, goats, sheep, 
rhinoceros, frogs or other animals, together with 
dancing, music, and various other auspicious 
things, resides in the Siva Loka for seven 
Manvantaras. 

Wa: Gath dora aa ahs a fries 80 1 

agai firemmedtfer yada A 1 

memaga maaa aA: 181 N 

Tava: Mis rada a HNT: | 

Getting an excellent birth, and a pure 
understanding, he gets unbounded prosperity, sons 
and, no doubt, grandsons and he becomes a very 
powerful sovereign possessing many horses and 
elephants. There is no doubt in this. 

Ad: Yaorent ma wera a AA !82 u 

fred TT Ta TAT AT ATT | 

are Tet VHS nentur TST 83 u 

TMT ep AAAS ATA ATATT | 

ya: Fahy durer TSRTSITSRT aT N 84 N 

Again he who worships daily with devotion for 
a fortnight beginning from the eighth day of the 
bright fortnight the Mahà Devi Laksmi, remains 
in the region of Goloka for fourteen Indra's life 
periods. Then, obtaining an excellent birth, he 
becomes a sovereign. 


cara UTRTSTE U AT XRTHUSUA | 
Tart grass Hear MUA VT TAT 085 N 
FOLIIS ME Qul um 
STRE Wa aT AMM BST 11 86 N 


1106 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Tet Tad utsft aay serunt aA: | 

STRE VERTIT Hor Ast HASTA 187 N 

He who in the full moon night in the month of 
Kārtika prepares a Rasa mandala with one 
hundred Gopas and Gopis and worship Sri Krsna 
and Radha in Šālagrāma or in images with sixteen 
varieties of offerings remains in Goloka for 
Brahma’s life-time and coming again to Bharata 
acquires an unflinching devotion to Sri Krsna. 

MAT aci ar wear visi gib | 

ĒTIKA ware w: 11 88 N 

Wd: AUT UA uniauent wat 

Wawrenri at TTR wu 189 N 

And when this Bhakti becomes greatly 
intensified, he gets initiated into Šrī Hari mantra 
and after quitting his mortal coil, he goes to the 
Goloka. Then he gets the Saripya (the same form) 
of Krsna and becomes the chief Pārisad (attendant 
of Krsna) and, becoming free from old age, he has 
no fear to fall again down to this earth. 

Yao aTS UT Hort amg tt a a: d 

aad ured wisfü araš sem ag: 1190 I 

Ue GATT PUTAS GAT TAT | 

mAN vie Gest mAAR eet 97 N 

CEPS UR RUE KAA VATČT V: | 

qa: HORA neut dur urat TT 1 92 u 

He who observes the Ekādašī day, remains 
fasting and performing penances in the bright or 
dark eleventh day, remains in Vaikuntha in great 
enjoyment and comfort. Then, again coming into 
this Bharata he becomes a devotee of Hari. And 
when that Bhakti is intensified he becomes solely 
devoted to Hari and quitting his mortal coil, goes 
again to the Goloka and gets the Sārūpya of Krsna 
and becomes His Parisada (attendant). 

yaaa ur wee We ad 

OTE oTr ur: vh USAT: 093 u 

aade weet aad | 

vara a dente ATT Borah 94 N 

agah sara a: ATT at sme i 

mat ashes araftaragdu uos 


Then, freed of old age and death, he does not 
fall. He who worships Indra in the month of Bhádra 
in the twelfth day of the white fortnight is 
worshipped in the regions of Indra for sixty 
thousand years. He who performs in Bharata the 
worship of the Sun on Sunday Sankranti (when 
the Sun goes from one sign to another) and the 
bright seventh Tithi, according to due rules and 
ceremonies and eats the food called Havisyánna 
(rice boiled in ghee), dwells in the Süryaloka for 
fourteen Indra’s life periods. 

mi GT Tft sud wa 

sdBgumagdvai urfērzit ut fē WaT 96 t 

mi weet wearer d 

O wares imagoa: 197 n 

Then coming to Bhārata, he becomes free from 
all diseases and becomes prosperous. He who 
worships Savitri on the fourteenth day of the black 
fortnight dwells in region of Brahma for seven 
Manvantaras with great eclat and glory. 

fartsftdt sraredtsfu smraredtuarga: i 

"Te Speed erat THAT: ATTA u 98 t 

siat sifredt Sear ATMA NEN à 

"ét aftrgtt reser farm u 99 ui 

Coming again to Bharata he enjoys beauty, 
unequalled valour, long life, knowledge and 
prosperity. He who worships on the fifth day of 
the bright fortnight in the month of Magha, with 
his senses controlled and full of devotion, the Devi 
Sarasvati with sixteen articles of food, resides in 
Mani Dvipa for one day and one night of Brahma. 

"grep a Gastar U Aade: i 

TT ganh at f ATR arf ST u 100 t 

fred shaadi AV UTE | 

"rat cagare feet Rrit wu 101 0 

On getting re-birth, he becomes a poet and a 
learned man. He who daily gives with devotion 
for his whole life, cow and gold to a Brahmana 
dwells in Visnu Loka for twice as many years as 
there are the numbers of hairs on the bodies of these 


Book IX Chapter XXX 


cows and plays and jests with Visnu and doing 
auspicious things he finds pleasure. 

Trad efr me Smaga S: | 

Tet GRU Ws WaT 0102 N 

sinter ya aaea: Ga | 

In the end he comes again to this Bharata and 
becomes the King of Kings, He becomes fortunate, 
prosperous, possesses many sons, becomes learned, 
full of knowledge and happy in every way. 

asta ste Aera meag SIT 11103: tt 

fāgetagarumed red rai 1 

aa: qae gat U aAA 104 0 

fagrgfasitet a siagon: | 

He who feeds a Brahmana here with sweetmeats 
goes to Visnu Loka and enjoys there for as many 
as there are hairs on the body of the Brahmina. In 
the end he comes again to Bharata and becomes 
happy, wealthy, learned, long lived, fortunate and 
very powerful. 

at ate a gara tats ARTA 105 N 

"pi ATT wp ah Weta 1 

qa: Taken U Gat gare 106 N 

aR rerit wet att sra i 

mai eife etat fe err ATT? sq 107 N 

wdurafafrivet Aaa Tega i 

TON GAs ads wo AAT 108 1 

He who utters the name of Hari or gives the 
name (i.e. the mantra) of Hari to others, is 
worshipped in Visnu loka for as many yugas as 
the number of times, the name or mantra was 
uttered. Coming again he Bharata, he becomes 
happy and wealthy. And if such things be done in 
Narayana Ksettra, koti times the above results 
ensue. He who repeats the name of Hari koti times 
in Naráyana Ksettra, becomes, no doubt, freed of 
all sins and liberated while living and he will not 
get rebirth. He lives always in Vaikuntha. 

wags area A qur ud Und | 

froth costes für fraparsemregqarg 109 N 

Pra a: KARO Hear feat a far i 

mastaaa w ante Rradferq 110 n 


1107 


Wat Wynne ferais AÀ à 

He gets the Salokya (the same region) of Visnu, 
is not liable to fall, becomes a Bhakta of Visnu. 
He who daily worships the earthen phallic symbol 
(after making it daily) for his whole life, goes to 
the Siva Loka and dwells there for as many years 
as there are the number of particles of earth. 

qa: Gf Waist curd TAT W117 N 

Neia paa Brenda a verter à 

Head uw dud Mag TAT: VITA NN 112 N 

Getting rebirth he becomes the King of Kings. 
He who worships daily the Salagrama stone and 
eats the water (after bathing it) is glorified in 
Vaikuntha for one hundred Brahma’s lives and 
becomes bron again. 

qA VT SIT eta ur gE 1 

AKTA ferepotin a wed uas sqq 113 N 

wuif da weffor enfe fifteen a 1 

spear trate Agos maagin 114 0 

When he acquires the rare Hari Bhakti and 
quiting his mortal coil goes to Visnu Loka, whence 
he is not to return. He who performs all the 
Tapasyās (asceticism) and observes all the vratas 
(vows), dwells in Vaikuntha for fourteen Indra's 
life peroids. 

Tet MAT GAS NIST SITE STER | 

wet pent ATB ST «fae 115 0 

a: Scat eddy spur Hear efr t 

a g Raima aft A asia rg 116 d 

Quart weed a IGI SS RAA a | 

aaua U Heat TAT u 117 N 

Getting rebirth in Bharata he becomes the King 
of Kings and then he becomes liberated. He is not 
to return any more. He who bathes in all the Tirthas 
and makes a journey round the whole world, gets 
Nirvana. He is not reborn. He who performs the 
Horse-Sacrifice in this holy land Bharata enjoys 
half the Indraship for as many years as there are 
hairs on the body of the horse. 

t AAA: |1 


agii myar 
"wévaitsfü maar ft wer a: um: 118 


1108 


Ran et pa: Vef Ger ARTA à 

wart west ARIA 1190 

He who performs a Rājasūya Sacrifice, gets four 
times the above result. Of all the sacrifices, the 
Devi Yajíia, or the Sacrifice before the Devi is the 
Best. O Fair One! Of old, Visnu, Brahma, Indra 
and when Tripurasura was killed, Maha Deva did 
such a sacrifice. 

VIAA: IAV udo Batt 1 

AA Vat VeA Aag feet 120 N 

Sa U Ha: Ua TEMG: | 

O Beautiful One! This sacrifices before the Sakti 
is the highest and best of all the sacrifices. There 
is nothing like this in the three worlds. This Great 
Sacrifice was done of yore by Daksa when he 
collected abundant sacrifice materials of all sorts. 

aye Hoe da qaem af 121 N 

Aga atest fam «idt fares taa: 1 

wedded a at wart: 0122 N 

And a quarrel ensued on this account between 
Daksa and Sankara. The Brahmins conducting the 
sacrifice cursed the Nandi and others. And Nandi 
cursed the Brahmanas. Mahadeva, therefore, 
disallowed the going on of sacrifice and brought it 
to a dead stop. 

aa ai U W war ya: 1 

try avauda vaste a du: |1 123 01 

wariga nga agas and: | 

fra: Papa Hrs JAMN 124 ll 

Of yore the Prajapati Daksa did this Devi Yajfia; 
it was done also by Dharma, Kašyapa; Ananta, 
Kardama, Svayambhuva Manu, his son Priyavrata, 
Siva, Sanat Kumara, Kapila and Dhruva. 

Tenere emori wearer PTT à 

āsi vu. "1251 

aai aci a haag VIR | 

wea asa da feet af 126 N 

The performance of this sacrifice brings fruits 
equal to performing thousands and thousands of 
Rājasūya sacrifices. Therefore there is no other 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


sacrifice greater than this Devi Yajfia. One 
becomes surely endowed with a long life of one 
hundred years and is liberated while living. He 
becomes equal to Visnu in knowledge, energy, 
strength, and asceticism. This is as true as anything. 

rat rare Ranat a AR: | 

VAT xr erem dep att SHAT AAT 1 127 N 

dtutai a var im ufaao foret a i 

Varese mart at qun qut wem 128 N 

"raram rer as: ufarari Tet Bar | 

"Tert Sort er Matt Tear aot TPETT i 129 1 

vfrarori darot ereresrart Wat Ba à 

yanai gant a Wena cup waa: 130 0 

qari aarti a aati sme AT | 

strat a rer sia faget a ae u 131 u 

Raa gat a Amami ep WÈT 1 

taaan wer adag off 132 0 

amdana wend up SNAN | 

Rea frayed Hara: Yara A u133 N 

O Child! This Devi Yajūa is the best and highest 
of all the sacrifices as Visnu is the highest amongst 
the Devas; Narada, amongst the Vaisnavas; the 
Vedas, amongst all the Šāstras; the Brahmanas 
amongst all the castes; the Ganges amongst the 
sacred places of pilgrimages, Siva amongst the 
Holy of Holies, the Ekādašī vow amongst all the 
Vratas; Tulasi, amongst all the flowers; the Moon, 
amongst the asterisms; Garuda, amongst the birds; 
Prakrti, Radha, Sarasvati and Earth amongst the 
females; the mind, amongst the quick-going and 
restless senses; Brahma, amongst the Prajapatis; 
Brahma, amongst all the subjects; Vrndravana, 
amongst all the forests; Bhàrata Varsa, amongst 
all the Varsas; Laksmi, amongst the prosperous; 
Sarasvati, amongst the learned; Durga, amongst 
the chaste; Radhika, amongst the fortunate. If one 
hundred horse sacrifices are performed, Indrahood 
is sure to be obtained. 

er a wedtatat veastg terora i 

west a serat augi Meta a 134 


Book IX Chapter XXXI 

"ré AGU derat WaT Speer | 

Ue wd Had VIRSA W135 1 

Itis by the influence of bathing in all the Tirthas, 
performing all the sacrifices, observing all the 
Vratas, practising all the austerities, studying all 
the Vedas circumambulating the whole earth, that 
this Highest Sakti's service is obtained and this 
service of Sakti is the direct casue of Mukti 
(liberation). 

Gury a day ARAY ada: | 

frafūd myi gaiga 1136 M 

aai a agai aap, | 

maen da det wuds E 137 0 

aaen a wav Fema a | 

udamattreētat wdfuahé aft 1138 0 

To worship the lotus-feet of the Devi is the best 
and highest, is stated in all the Puranas, in all the 
Vedas, and in all the Itihāsas. To sing the glories 
of Müla Prakrti, to meditate on Her, to chant Her 
Name and attributes, to remember Her stotras, now 
down before Her, to repeat Her Name, and to drink 
daily Her Pādodaka (water after washing Her feet) 


1109 


and the offerings already offered to Her, these are 
approved of by all; and everyone desires this. 

wet Pree ot ser feeriut fet ae i 

Jer watt erit ae aa aft u 139 u 

ari e afa: estiferarent viret JOT i 

aiaa: adna AANE: Wc 0140 

ste SRRI Wer) AIREA 
Bigssum 1130 11 

So worship, worship this Mila Prakrti, Who is 
of the nature of Brahma, and, lo! Who is again 
endowed with Maya. O Child! Take your husband 
and live happily with him in your home. O Child! 
Thus I have described to you the fruition of the 
Karmas. This is auspicious to every human being, 
desired by all and approved of by all. The Real 
Knowledge from this. There is no doubt in this.” 
Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on 

the conversation between Savitri and Yama and on 
the fruition of Karmas in the Great Purāņam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1109 


amar a grt Muai a ut way | 
"nat va wer «tdi Weed fast uz n 


Book IX Chapter XXXI 
I But ua itis | 
CHAPTER XXXI 
On Yama’s Giving the Sakti Mantra to Savitri 
stanran sare 
Whea spear Tft TG: | 


ayaa Aaa WW Wears AT 401 dd 
Narayana said: O Narada! Hearing thus the 


supreme nature of Mila Prakrti from Dharmaraja 
Yama, the two eyes of Savitri were filled with tears 
of joy and her whole body was filled with a thrill 
of rapture, joy and ecstacy. 


KUCE GIE] 
Aed of URORT, | 
sgt a aa SATR, 002 di 
She again addressed Yama: O Dharmaraja! To 
sing the glories of Mīla Prakrti is the only means 
of saving all. This takes away the old age and death 
of both the speaker and the hearer. 


ferre cw adfutgrata a | 

sinda Aa aot arate drevfta, wa u 

waft cha fafa ag dafāgi at 1 

gpramdfāumdi wr sp ut ARA su 

"nHisperfergTe AT TEĀTRA | 

This is the Supreme Place of the Dānavas, the 
Siddhas, the asceties. This is the Yoga of the yogins 
and this is studying the Vedas of the Vaidikas. 
Nothing can compare even to one-sixteenth of the 
sixteenth parts of the (full) merits of those who are 
in Sakti's Service; call it Mukti, immortality, or 
attaining endless Siddhis, nothing can come to it. 
O Thou, the Foremost of the Knowers of the Vedas! 


1110 


Ihave heard by and by everything from Thee. Now 
describe to me how to worship Mila Prakrti and 
what are the ends of Karmas, auspicious and 
inauspicious. | 

KAT U uet sere RART 11 6 N 

era trie wp defekta wat a | 

Thus saying, the chaste Savitri bowed down her 
head and began to praise Yama in stotras according 
to the Vedas. 


mirga 

am eared YR ER: WU 7 di 

ad ga: ad ma aust AER, |d 

aaa adgy wen wee aa: 8 Ni 

ad wemusmrOür ci worry d 

She said: "O Dhamarājan! The Sun practised 
of yore very hard austerities at Puskara and 
worshipped Dharma. On this, Dharma Himself 
became born of Sürya as his son. And Thou art 
that son of Sürya, the incarnation of Dharma. So I 
bow down to Thee. 

VV wat fad weet sitesi uvm 9 u 

Mad Herd d Hardt CHIEN | 

Raft dd cera URI yga u 10 ul 

«mfir d désert a: vm ee sftferam i 

Thou art the Witness of all the Jivas; Thou seest 
them equally; hence Thy name is Samana. 1 bow 
down to Thee. Sometimes Thou by Thy own will 
takest away the lives of beings. Hence Thy name 
is Krtānta. Obeisance to Thee! Thou holdest the 
rod to distribute justice and pronounce sentence 
on them and to destroy the sins of the Tivas; hence 
Thy name is Dandadhara; so I bown down to Thee. 

Note: Any Jiva, in course of his travelling towards 
Mukti, can expect to pass through the stage Y amaship; 
and if he pleases, he can become a Yama. 

fad a eere a: ade oda 11 N 

arda gfrard a cd ated WUTRHTETER | 

aut srgrfrgt a: dat dae: 112 11 

At all times Thou destroyest the universe. None 
can resist Thee. Hence Thou art named Kala; so 


Srimadde vībhāgavatam 


obeisance to Thee! Thou art an ascetic, devoted to 
Brahma, self-controlled, and the distributor of the 
fruits of Karmas to the Jīvas; Thou restrainest Thy 
senses. Thou art called Yama. Therefore I bow 
down to Thee. 

vflarat aiea at ATAKA, | 

Tay wed firi grami aT 11 1 3 N 

"rft aAA wet quat first amarem 1 

"IST GANS wei ERIS d 14 N 

Thou art delighted with Thy Own Self; Thou 
art omniscient; Thou art the Tormentor of the 
sinners and the Friend of the Virtuous. Hence Thy 
name is Punya Mitra; So I bow down to Thee. Thou 
art born as a part of Brahma; the fire of Brahma is 
shining through Thy body. 

"jr vuraf Ut wer ayi Wore 1 

FRAT A AT ECE IS oram AA AT u 15 u 

"medi west Horas € | 

Thou dost meditate on Para Brahma, Thou art 
the Lord. Obeisence to Thee!” O Muni! Thus 
praising Yama, She bowed down at the feet of Him. 
Yama gave her the mantra of Mila Prakrti. How 
to worship Her and He began to recite the fruition 
of good Karmas. 

sé ameh fred AAA T: wdq 16 N 

mane we ae adoro | 

ugruut fe uzfrai wee d 

an: AKT agg magka ffir 07 N 

aft MERITA ergo? qoasi? 
Ca WENT 1131 11 

O Narada! He who recites these eight hymns to 
Yama early in the morning, getting up from his 
bed, is freed of the fear of death. Rather he becomes 
freed of all his sins. So much so, that even if he be 
a veritable awful sinner and if he recites daily with 
devotion this Yamāstakam, Yama purifies him 
thorughly. 

Here ends the Thirty-first Chapter of the Ninth Book 
on the Yama's giving Sakti Mantra to Savitri in the 
Mahāpurāņam Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book 1X Chapter XXXII 


1111 


CHAPTER XXXII 


On Various Hells 


stanan sare 

naria Herad wera feftrgdenu |i 

anaa wp argara Xd: AA: Uu 

Narayana said: Then, initiating her with the 
Great Seed, the Adi Radical Mantra of the Maha 
Sakti, Šrī Bhūvanešvarī in accordance with due 
rules, the son of Sürya began to recite the various 
effects of various Karmas, auspicious and 
inauspicious. 


erha sara 


yunta atch aft ara: | 

maiaa a agar Pema u2 N 

magda ATS oft d 

aayan tart er fer Sita: verenHfsr: 11 3 n 

“Never do the persons go to hell when they 
perform good Karmas; it is only the bad works that 
lead men to hells. The different Puranas narrate 
various heavens. The Jivas go to those places as 
the effects of their various good Karmas. 

wprenfnurenrer are fW wnHf oq 

pao a Ata ufa rame mu 040 

ment er TS aia arate T | 

ATTIE wp of aw usu 

The good Karmas do not lead men to hells; but 
the bad Karmas do lead them veritably to various 
hideous hells. In different Šāstras, different hell- 
pits are ascertained. 

ferr er efr agre a g RaR i 

qipa Mar aes gam wr 11 6 N 

ussite a Huerta vars ait i 

Frater dt mnt wfirarfr spit efr tt 7 u 

Different works lead men to different hells. O 
Child! Those hell-pits are very wide, deep, painful 
and tormenting, very horrible and ugly. O these! 
Eighty-six pits or Kundas are prominent. Many 
other Kundas exist. Now listen to the names of the 
Kundas mentioned in the Vedas. Their names are: 


atapus quiu anus Tay | 
fepri KAUSU POSTS U FAA 8 oU 
mare gprs aaps aa wp d 
SphupusWqgedeuippus U alam uou 
BUS MANTA U REDUCE EGER 
mAs niahi uds U GATT 11 10 N 
PITS ARERI GTS U GENT | 
MAGS esque gui wed WEN 1 11 " 


Mahega vr Aad ARIER 12 u 
pipi yahe wdqué quae 13 


qu U ander qfzrerd a gad 14 u 

wavs yogis was U situm | 

Meus ages aod TATA 1S N 

BUTS sags TAGS a GA | 

amang a ANGERA 11 16 N 

wrergus wdtqus «utqus «ira xi i 

amis AUS pigs Hates d 17 N 

TAMAS serus GTS yrferfen i 

Vahni Kunda, Tapta Kunda, Ksāra Kunda, 
Bhayanaka Kunda, Vit Kunda, Mütra Kunda, 
Slesma Kunda, Gara Kunda, Dūsikā Kunda, Vasa 
Kunda, Sukra-Kunda, Sonita Kunda, A&rü Kunda, 
Gàtramala Kunda, Karnamala Kunda, Majja 
Kunda, Marsa Kunda, impassable Nakra Kunda, 
Loma Kunda, Keša Kunda, impassable Asthi 
Kunda, Tamra Kunda, the exceedingly hot and 
painful Lauha Kunda (the pit of molten iron). 
Carma Kunda, the hot Sura Kunda, sharp Thorny 
Kunda, Visa Kunda, the hot Taila Kunda, very 
heavy Astra Kunda, Krmi Kunda, Piya Kunda, 
terrible Sarpa Kunda, Mašaka Kunda, Darnša 
Kunda, dreadful Garala Kunda, Vajra Darhstra 
Vršcika Kunda, Sara Kunda, Sila Kunda, awful 
Khadga Kunda, Gola Kunda, Nakra Kunda, 


1112 


sorrowful Kaka Kunda, Manthana Kunda, Bija 


Kunda, painful Vajra Kunda, hot Pasaéna Kunda, 
sharp Pāsāņa Kunda. Lala Kunda, Masi Kunda, 
Cakra Kunda, Vakra Kunda very terrible Kürma 
Kunda, Jvalà Kunda, Bhasma Kunda, Dagdh 
Kunda, and others. 
wenn apu Kme 18 
Manga TRG rdv npn 1 
gaiak arog weit RAAEN 19 u 
uiga mas yout eur d 
i dud wed dar 200 
seti tri wer VII wm 1 
yd wrong” da spit AMATI 021 N 
Besides these, there are the Taptasūcī, 
Asipatra, Ksuradhāra, Sūcīmukha, Gokhamikha, 
Kūmbhīpāka, Kālasūtra, Matsyoda, 
Kantuka, Pāmšubhojya, Pāšavesta, Šūlaprota, 
Prakampana Ulkāmakha, Andhakūpa, Vedhana, 
Tādana, Jālarandhra, Dehacūrņa, Dalana, Šosaņa, 
Kasa, Šūrpa, Jvālāmūkha, | Dhūmāndha, 
Nāgavestana and various others. 
HUSA Aaa T TATA T | 
Fraga: har tare a iere 22 N 
augt: a Sa ) 
t23 uU 
O Savitri! These Kundas give much pain and 


Krmi 


torment greatly the sinners; they are under the 
constant watch of innumerable servants. They hold 
rods in their hands; some of them have nooses; 
others hold clubs, Saktis, awful scimitars; they are 
fierce fanatics, maddened with vanity. 


adgidadtuftrardg 4 wd: 
aaa Pestana: 24 u 


Šrīmaddevībhā, igavatam 


temp: iaee: 1 
amaga: urfafsr: weififafr: 11 25 u 
All are filled with Tamogunas, merciless, 
irresistible, energetic, fearless and tawny-eyed (like 
copper). Some of them are Yogis; some are 
Siddhas, they assume various forms. When the 
sinners are about to die, they see these servants of 
Yama. 
att: ud: vmi: dit tora: 1 
aed: yapa fraraffrferter a u 26 N 
mAai aada asās: 1 
aware sin: TAŠY ātrā: 027 
eret en forct aia preter qu | 
aut frarat repu Pate meray d 0 28 i 
aft RRR TIT) TIRE ARCA ATS 
SUAS: 11 32 11 
But those who do their own duties, who are 
Šāktas, Sauras, or Gāņapatyas or those who are 
virtuous Siddha Yogīs, they never see the servants 
of Yama. Those who are engaged in their own 
Dharmas, who are possessed of wisdom, who are 
endowed with knowledge, who are mentally strong, 
who are untouched by fear, who are endowed with 
the feelings of the Devas, and those who are real 
Vaisnavas, they never see these servants of Yama. 
O Chaste One! Thus I have enumerated to you the 
Kundas. Now hear who live in the Kundas.” 
Here ends the Thrity-second Chapter of the Ninth 
Book on the enumeration of various 
hells for sinners in the Mahapuranam 
Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


CHAPTER XXXIII 


On the Descriptions of Different Sinners 


LTS sara 


xfurene weet amfist adt ata od 
wet sre wp aft AT TT N 


Dharmarajan said: “Those that are in Hari’s 
service, pure, the Siddhas in Yoga (those that have 


attained success in Yoga), the performers of Vratas 


1112 Srimaddevibha igavatam 


CHAPTER XXXIII 


On the Descriptions of Different Sinners 


LIETA sara Dharmarajan said: “Those that are in Hari's 


xfurene weet amfist adt ata od service, pure, the Siddhas in Yoga (those that have 
age arent ura a gem uia attained success in Yoga), the performers of Vratas 


Book IX Chapter XXXIII 


(vows), the chaste, the ascetics, the Brahmacaris 
never go to hells. There is no doubt in this. 

HATA Blais peo ub AT: 1 

waren avarafgas wer ow: 12 n 

VERITACTHHTTSd MA RC FATT | 

uzratfmareitfr weer Boma 13 u 

Those persons that are proud of their strong 
positions and who use very harsh burning words 
to their friends, they go to Vahni Kunda and live 
there for as many years as there are hairs on his 
body; next they attain animal births for three births 
and get themselves scorched under the strong heat 
of the Sun. 

arent gfüd act afd EmA 1 

"refe a wenTwnepus wer a: 4 d 

aa AFA a ad fien wr qure | 

Tea faced walt at WWW 5 N 

He goes to the Tapta Kunda hell who does not 
entertain any Brahmana guest with any eatables 
who comes to his house hungry and thirsty. He 
lives there for as many years as there are hairs on 
his body and he has to sleep on a bed of fire, very 
tormenting. Then he will have to be born for seven 
births as birds. 

vRrart wp dma srgarat | 

aami mmidi sura hac Wege 

a aft Add a Gaara a g 

a aise a weg MÀ 007 i 

If anybody washes any clothing with any salt 
on Sunday, or on the day of Sankranti (when the 
Sun enters another sign), or on any new-moon day 
or on any Sraddha day (when funeral ceremonies 
are performed), he will have to go to the Ksara 
Kunda hell where he remains for as many years as 
there are threads in that clothing and finally he 
becomes born for seven births as a veritable 
washerman. 

yopa a: ped MAMTA: | 

Agara mafa grat ada a us n 

wuerfermfsrardi4t vem frerat we 1 


1113 
Aana wem fiat wa: 9 di 
ad Wd fre atta afte rur | 

Ald: Ut Gus Grad g ulema 10 N 

The wretch that abuses Mila Prakrti, the 


Vedas, the Sastras, Puranas, Brahma, Visnu, Siva 
and the other Devas, Gauri, Laksmi, Sarasvati 
and the other Devis, goes to the hell named 
Bhayanaka Narakakunda. There is no other hell 
more tormenting than this. 

wa Raas ianei ada ATA: | 

Amea mafai a feed ud 

Ment went at ghar u wf | 

uftadagemttm frepud a yarfe a: 11 12 u 

The sinners live here for many Kalpas and 
ultimately become serpents. There is no sin greater 
than the abuse of the Devi. 

area a waitin Rresitst aa feft à 

akada frepiter wasffer 1 1 3 N 

There is no expiation for it. So one ought never 
to abuse the Devi. If one discontinues the 
allowances given by oneself or other persons to 
the Devas or Brahmanas, one goest to Vistha 
Kunda and has to eat the faeces there for sixty 
thousand years and finally to be born in Bharata as 
worms in faeces the same number of years. 


WaT A cert a: fa a | 

sean HITS yo w:o NIAN 

aapa a aah wx faster 1 

ya: yoly wp gut amd WaT 015 di 

If any person without the owner’s permission 
digs another’s tank dried of water, or makes water 
in the water of any tank, he goes to Mitra Kunda 
and drinks urine for as many years as there are the 
particles in that tank. Then he becomes born in 
this Bharata as an ox for one hundred years. 

eset Aen ourgud wen E i 

quasar wa wget wa fash nie 

Aa: yoia up Wet TIT aT 1 

you da wd wh ae: Ba: 17 


If any person eats good things himself without 


1114 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


giving any portion thereof to the number of his 
family, he goest to Slesma Kunda where he eats 
phlegm, for full one hundred years. Then he 
becomes born as Preta (disembodied spirits) in 
this Bharata for hundred years and drinks phlegm, 
urine and:puss; then he becomes pure. 

frat mai we qe maf gi uam | 

at a veneris wafuu: 18 

Winer da atst aa fasià 1 

wat astern yaad wd: Bra: Nn 19 

He who does not support his father, mother, 
spiritual teacher, wife, sons, daughters and the 
helpless persons, goes to Gara Kunda where he 
eats poison for full one hundred years. Finally he 
becomes born and wanders as Bhütas (disembodied 
spirits). Then he becomes pure. 

gaistāfti amag: KAR at fē arta: 1 

Kde We A yea a ut: 20 0 

"ferentis er ararf-r egre certfarentf-t = | 

sea wwd wid gradiens 021 N 

He who becomes angry and shrinks his eyes at 
the sight of a guest who has come to his house 
offered the Devas or Pitrs, who do not accept the 
water offered to them by that villain. On the contrary, 
he earns all the sins of Brahmahatyā (murder of a 
Bráhmin and so forth) and finally goes to 
Düsikakunda where he remains for one hundred 
years and eats polluted things. 

quired da atst da sR 1 

Art maa waa aa: Wha: 022 N 

er xod xxr fergrar ATRI Stare afa i 

a fefe aures wet aR 23 N 

Then wandering as Bhütas for one hundred years 
he becomes purified. If anybody makes a gift of 
any article to a Brahmin and then again gives that 
article to a different man, he goes to Vasà Kunda 
where he eats marrows for one hundred years. 

PROM MAAK smt TATA i 

wt AA «ftgtsrurgta wou24u 

gate enrfirsft arft aarttr-ft ar gATTU 1 

"m yh Waa vendi Wenfa A: 025 N 


The he has to roam about in India for seven as a 
Krkalasa (lizard) and finally the becomes born as 
a very poor man with a very short life. If any woman 
or any man makes another of a different sex eat 
semen, out of passion, he goes to Sukra Kunda 
where he drinks semen for one hundred years. 

yira da ast wur frst 1 

BRA vrared a aaa qa: BFA: 11 26 1 

"dare wr YS fay card a AAT | 

VU ĪSTU S cea gau 027 i 

Then he crawls about as worms for one hundred 
years. And then he gets purified. If anybody beats 
a Brahmana who is a family preceptor and causes 
his blood to come out, he will have to go to Rakta 
Kunda where he has to drink blood for one hundred 


ww: Brahe aa HAT E 028 N 

USA asad Wee sre SPT TK | 

sippi gaa fe at at: u29 

U Aap wp wn verd | 

wt area aterert aa: yer: 30 0 

Finally he has to roam about for seven births in 
India as tigers; then he becomes pure by degrees. 
If any body mocks and laughs at any devotee of 
Krsna who sings with rapt consciousness and sheds 
tears of joy, he will have to go to A$ru Kunda where 
he drinks tears for one hundred years. 

wala Beat Wafer Yate at at | 

Hrs rer ATT VITEK 31! 

aa: OT Meet artnet Ps i 

Borah a ITT det: Weal Tag” N 32 N 

Then he has to roam as a Candala for three births 
and then he becomes pure. He who always cheats 
his friends, lives for one hundred years in Gatramala 
Kunda. Then roaming about for three births as an 
ass and for three births as a fox concurrently, he 
becomes purified. 

aki at rada Kada: 1 

a aAa CaS VIAA li 3 3 N 


Book IX Chanter XXXIII 


aA weer atrīt afta: UG | 

USE: ST: PAG 34 N 

Out of vanity, if anybody jests at a deaf person, 
he goes to Karnamalakunda where he eats for one 
hundred years the wax of the ear. Next he comes 
to the earth as a deaf and a very poor man for seven 
births, when at last he gets purified. 

vienenruruta sitfārt Ser ait AT: i 

"esrei THT THIS emen 11 35 u 

Aa weer VISTA HII UAR | 

Roh ates Hage: WARAY 36 N 


If-any body commits murder out of greed to 


support his family, he goes to the hell Majjākuņda 
where he eats marrow for one lakh years. Next he 
becomes a fish for seven births, for seven births he 
becomes a mosquitto, for three births he becomes 
a boar, for seven births he becomes a cock, deer 
and other animals concurrently; at last he gets 
purified. 

naag TTT: Blak MATT | 

autor neat femtonter at at At: 00 37 ui 

ŪPIS! atapus wer a: | 

ATIRAU Ta aa frets 138 N 

If any stupid person sells the daughter whom he 
has supported, out of greed for money, he goes to 
Mārnsa kunda and lives there for as many years as 
there are hairs on her body. 

Wr eye a Hater wf: 1 

Wirt AĒČ Sear THU freee N 39 N 

The Yama’s servants beat him with their clubs. 
His head becomes overloaded with the burden of 
the flesh; and, out of hunger, he licks the blood 
coming out of his head. 

aa f MR rt cafe frr vit 1 

aade TUR AUT 140 N 

Prorat ates Hehe: WARAY | 

tga fe welts AAA MÀ 4 N 

Next that sinner comes to Bharata and for sixty 
years becomes a worm in any daughter’s faesces 
for seven births he becomes a hunter; for three 


1115 


births, a boar; for seven births, cock; for seven 
births, frog; for seven births, leech; and for seven 
births, crow; when he gets purified. 

WAAAY Hay Aa: Wher PĀRI | 

AAA aerate AT 042 d 

ante a: aita alsyfa: Wehen | 

wa fef pug a Tare u Pat t 43 u 

One who shaves on the day of observing vows, 
fasting and funeral ceremony day, becomes impure 
and unfit to do any action, and, in the end, he goes 
to the Nakha Kunda where he receives blows of 
clubs and eats nails for one hundred Deva years. 

aaam wets denisa: 

west ia fort at asda md 44 u 

w fasta krp yaar, |. 

wet aa ef wenfe grama: 45 N 

If anybody worships, out of carelessness, the 
earthen Siva phallic symbol with any hairs on it, 
he goes to the hell Keša Kunda where he remains 
for as many years as there are particles in that hair; 
then he gets to the yoni (womb) of a Yāvanānī (a 
Mleccha woman) out of Hara's wrath. 

VIASAT ESATA STRE: V TATA | 

frgut at fera firs ta gara u 146 u 

Va fagatugus vates Hela i 

Aa: Fa Gye HST: KŪTS 1147 Ut 

After one hundred years he becomes freed from 
that and then he becomes a Rāksasa; there is no 
doubt in this. He who does not offer Pindas to the 
Visnupada in honour of his Pitrs at Gaya goes to 
the hell Asthikunda where he remains for as many 
years as there are dirts on his body. Then he 
becomes a man; but for seven births he becomes 
lame and poor. Then he gets purified. 

wares ad: Yast ft tea: | 

a: Gad Nerget fett vr carat 48 u 

Wat mapo a wad ow frst 1 

adits a at dad Tea U 49 

The stupid man who commits outrage and 
violence on his pregnant wife, resides for one 


1116 


hundred years in the hot Tàmra Kunda (where 
coppers are in a molten condition). He who takes 
the food of a childless widow and the same of any 
woman that has just bathed after menstruation goes 
for one hundred years to the hot Lauha Kunda 
(where iron is in a molten condition). 

HVS Matas U HU fef quias i 

E aA AT TATA AAT N 50 N 

For seven births he becomes then a crow and 
for seven births he becomes born of washerwoman, 
full of sores and boils, and poor. Then he gets 
purified. 


maau RESP dd: A AIT: | 
at fe tre agag AA 57 it 


yaad angus a fasta 1 
a: RUA Tat IATA D 00 52 Ul 
VU Wea Gude waned fagi finer: à 
wt Teer Ga: AAAI 00653 N 
ATTĪSTĪT: TT ATA | 


If one touches the things of the Devas after 
touching skins or impure hydes, one remins in the 
Carma Kunda for full one hundred years. If any 
Brahmin eats a Südra's food, requested by him, 
he lives for one hundred years in the hot Sura 
Kunda. Then for seven births he performs, the 
funeral rites for a Sidra; at last he becomes pure. 

URGE: Heal AAT aredearfs WAT u 54 u 

Mahega uw warst aa fasta à 

wifzdt Vaga est wp adi 55 U 

If any foul-mouthed person uses always harsh 
and filthy language to his master, he will have to 
go to Tiksna Kantaka Kunda where he eats thorns. 

qa Toa MAT UTTTGA Ta: VIG 1 

feror sitas éfer fader at fe ura: 156 1 

Ragos a agtstt eared xr fergfer à 

wat sra-uurdt a waft IATA N 57 N 

Besides, the Yama’s servants give severe 
beatings to him with their clubs. For seven births 
he will have to become horses when he gets 
purified. If any man ministers poison to another 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


and so takes away his life, he will have to remain 
for endless years in Visakunda, where he will have 
to eat poison. 

MATT RB Sr ET: Weal TATA | 

ares medai fé gd a quam: 858 

YAS CATA AT VIAA ep STU | 

ya mhas a fester war 159 n 

Tat aayon qut water ATT i 

Then he will have to pass for one hundred years 
as a murderer Bhilla, full of sores and boils, and 
for seven births he will have to be a leper when at 
last he gets purified. Being born in this holy land 
Bharatavarsa, if any man strikes a cow with a rod 
or any driver does so whether by himself or by his 
servant, he will have to dwell certainly in the hot 
Lauha Kunda for four yugas. He will have to pass 
as many years as a cow as there are hairs on that 
cow when ultimately he gets purified. 

wart fa at afta algotu Bear 60 u 

gah ades autmagd fa | 

aa: gA durer viet cung: 11 61 N 

If any body strikes any other body with a red- 
out iron dart (Kunta weapon), he will have to dwell 
in the Kunta Kunda for ayuta years. Then he will 
have to remain for one birth in a good womb, with 
a diseased constitution, when ultimately he will be 
purified. 

Wares FANA Aa: Yeast Te | 

at ste a gar aid wisest fester: 162 0 

Reais frui wart a: 1 

mammat x owe wa faut 163 n 

If any Brahmin villain eats, out of greed, any 
flesh (not sacrificed before the goddess) or anything 
not offered to Hari, he will have to remain in the 
Krmi Kunda where he eats those things for as many 
years as there are hairs on his body. 


at Weathers et frs: à 
SITETUT: VIA er VATA: 164 N 
Ya yaari vr VAgTŠ auum i 
AAA: UAGTŠA wd 165 ti 
afs anata we wa fret | 


Book IX Chapter XXXIII 


i mu 


Then he will have to pass for three births as 
Mlecchas when ultimately he becomes born in a 
Brahmin family. If any Brahmin performs the 
Šrāddha of a Sidra, eats the food pertaining to a 
Sraddha of a Südra or burns the dead body of a 
Šūdra, he will have to dwell certainly in Paya 
Kunda, where, being beaten by the rod of Yama, 
he eats the puss, etc., for as many years as there 
are hairs on his body. 

Tat ARTA R VIS: HAAY N66 N 

Tenth «kau at Wes Ta st 

port oat e weg d wd gfā dt TT: 1167 Ut 

RONA a AVS Water A: | 

ado afa: aise gages wd: u 68 i 

aden ndara aa: Wat Taga i 

ad Haas veeunpgdu: 169 i 

Then he becomes reborn in this Bharata as one 
greatly diseased, poor, deaf and dumb and ultimately 
he will have to roam for seven births as a Sidra. 
He who kills a black serpent on whose hood there 
is the lotus mark, lives in Sarpa Kunda for as many 
years as there are hairs on his body and he is bitten 
by serpents there and beaten by the servants of Yama 
and eats the excrescences of snakes and finally 
becomes born as a serpent. 

eraot Tay: nur srfàrarqsgen i 

Ryga wfregizr assidar df a: 70 0 

Then he becomes a man shortlived and having 
the cuticaneous disease and ringworm. And his 
death also comes out of snake-bite. 

E gay: Hus WMA U d 

Rai afiretarentsr VIETA, 0 71 0i 

ure orga asa 1 

Aa Tamga Mat sre 0 72 N 

Aa MAMA tss: BPA: | 

Gt Yet HEAT Bear a MARTA: 1 7 3 N 

u us URS Hus Wanted TAT | 

srfárdt mède wa gaat afer: 074 

He who kills mosquittoes and other small 
fanged-animals, that earn their substance rightly 


1117 


and pass so their lives, goes to DarhSa masa Kunda 
where he is eaten by mosquittoes and other fanged- 
creatures and lives there without food and crying, 
weeping, for as many years as the numbers of lives 
destroyed. Besides the Yama’s servants tie his 
hands and feet and beat him. 

ad ft nfà: kec HAFT: | 

dé miade a fay dé ata u n75 

a did asrégrort enterat ale ATT | 

U ATOMUS TA Reeg 76 u 

Then he becomes born as flies ultimately he 
becomes purified. He who beats and chastises any 
man not fit to be chastised and beaten and as well 
as a Brahmana, goes to Vajra Damstra Kunda, full 
of worms, and lives there day and night for as many 
years as there are the number of hairs on the 
chastised person. 

yapan AA quu miSa: | 

mfa ted We wTETenW Ut aut 477 0 

TA: wenn a MMA waar | 

PISTafa arma ae: yp TAT: 078 Ul 

When he is bitten by the worms and beaten by 
Yama’s servants, he cries sometimes, weeps 
sometimes, and becomes very miserable. Next he 
is reborn as a crow for seven births when ultimately 
he gets purified. 

RAGA A YS: Ways HUET a: i 

farra a he U ATT cunque 79 N 

wt giants: GUY Ut Od 

att est TATA 11 80 i 

If any foolish king punishes and gives trouble 
to his subjects out of greed of money, he goes to 
Vrscika Kuņda where he lives for as many years 
as there are hairs on the bodies of ‘his subjects. 
There is no doubt in this. Finally he becomes born 
in this Bharata as a scorpion; then a man diseased 
and defective in limbs, when ultimately he becomes 
freed of his sins. 

meN: yaa A gAn aR TAT i 

teas ut AA Rae: su 


1118 


Srimaddevibhàgavatam 


a ga word diy U mg | 

ferar: grate: NARA: grat KAT: 82 1 

If any Brahmin carries or raises weapons, 
washes the clothes of others who do not perform 
Sandhyās and abandons his devotion to Hari, he 
lives in Saradi Kunda for as many years as there 
are hairs on his body; he is, then, pierced by arrows. 
Finally he becomes purified. 

ART nia Art Wass A: | 

yra: ener anuo Meshes wanfe w: 83 N 

a iaaah wienn TTT | 

endive meg dah tegis u84 N 

If any king maddened by his own folly and fault, 
shuts his subjects in a dark cell and kills them, then 
he will have to go to a dreadful dark hell filled 
with worms having fanged teeth and covered with 
dirt. This hell is named Gola Kunda. 

afaa TATA WSmerTeqHa xp 

aA MATIEM: Yast TACHA 85 il 

He lives there bitten by insects for as many years 
as there are hairs on the bodies of his subjects. 
Finally he becomes a slave of those subjects, when 
he gets purified. 

mangkin Werde at at: 1 

Amend Wed Vara ow: usé 

eit feret AARS gar i 

aa: went fēns f deta WA: YA: 087 N 

If anybody kills the sharks and crocodiles, etc., 
that rise out of the water spontaneously, he will 
have to remain, then, in Nakra Kunda for as many 
years as there are thorns or edged points on those 
animals. Then he will have to be born as crocodiles, 
etc., for some time, when he will be purified. 

ag: Monee er a: VT UTM: | 

wn ent dt fü TAA wm uss Ul 

If any man, overpowered with lust, sees 
another's wife's uncovered breast, loins, and face, 
he will have to remain in Kaka Kunda for as many 
years as there are hairs in his own body. 

Vada š U dra: rotas: l 

wq: aaa wenn 11 89 


vetet a at pit rà gane: 1 

aa Hune 4 otrai uq N90 N 

Here the crows take out his eyes. Finally for 
three births he gets himself burned by Fire when 
he becomes pure. He who steals in India the gold 
of the Devas and the Brahmanas, dwells certainly 
in Manthana Kunda for as many years as there are 
hairs on his body. 

mfa gaat HASA: | 

vfirgsiteft er ava AARAA 191 u 

wat afta NEZ AA | 

und tutes a a larna: 192 0 

My servants give him good beatings, and 
cudgellings; his eyes are covered by Manthana 
Danda insects (or animals) and he eats their dirty 
faeces. Then he is reborn as a man but for three 
births he becomes blind and for seven births he 
becomes very poor, cruel, and a sinful goldsmith 
and then he is born a Svarnavanik (Sonar bene). 

ait urere teeter uf d 

Ue enna ates warf w: 093 0 

waa drafaguish cites rer: | 

mA anger aa: Bast wat: 094 

and hny tage: | 

U get qui Mota THAT N95 Ni 

O Fair One! He who steals in India copper or 
iron, silver or gold, dwells in Bija Kunda for as 
many years as there are hairs on his body. There 
the Bijas (a kind of insect) cover his eyes and he 
eats the ex-crescences of those insects. My 
messengers torment him. Finally he gets purified. 
If any body steals in India any Devata or the articles 
of a Devata, he dwells in Vajra Kunda for as many 
years as there are hairs on his body. There his body 
gets burnt up. My messengers torment him and he 
cries and weeps and remains without any food. 
Then he gets purified. 

aes AGA Wer | 

aisd ags ad: ST dem 11:96 d 

drenreaigrenrat a ase: afer: à 

TAMAS U Caras uq 1197 ui 


Book IX Chapter XXXIII 


1119 


Brea querit fur daru à 

wath dafaga adts=t sraufémm: u 98 N 

If any body steals the metal gold or silver, cows, 
or garments of any Deva or a Brahmana, certainly 
he dwells in hot Pasana Kunda for as many years 
as there are hairs an his body. Next for three births 
he becomes a tortoise and all sorts of white birds. 
Finally for three births he becomes a leper and for 
one birth he becomes a man with white marks on 
his body. 

wat Celerant er pest t urat AAT 1 

WAAAY MUG: SI ATT: 099 Ii 

td wierd unb at Raag: | 

Aana AMAT quem: d 1 00 N 

Next for seven births he becomes diseased with 
a severe colic pain and bad blood and lives short. 
When he gets purified. If any body steals brass or 
Kamsya properties of any Devas or a Brāhmaņa, 
he will have to remain in the sharp Pasana Kunda 
for as many years as there are hairs on his body. 

gari a dt GR yatana: 1 

OUI U Ves WUquew 101 

U daara ad ATA | 

asemaa Tae aa: grfer: 102 N 

Next he becomes born in Bharata for seven 
births as horses; and ultimately his both the testacles 
got enlarged and he gets diseases in his legs when 
he gets purified. If any body verily eats the food of 
an adulterate woman or lives on her alms, he will 
have to go to the Lalà Kunda for as many years as 
there are hairs on his body. 

afad sags estt ex g: faa: | 

AAT VER Ae: yp HATTA: 0 103 1 

My messengers torment him there and he eats 
the saliva and thus lives miserably. Then he gets 
eye diseases and colic; when ultimately he gets 
purified. 

miet meie vir fait smt sfr à 

wares did ugs 1041 

ad args atst aa fase à 

dakar vaca: UY: wf wu 105 u 


Borat TTT: Horan à 

Ad: U MIAS Wd: West AAT: 1106 I 

If any Brahmana lives on writing only or on the 
service of Mlecchas, he lives in Masi Kunda very 
painfully, eating ink, tormented by My messengers 
for as many years as there are hairs on his body. 
Then he becomes a black animal for three births 
and for another three births he becomes a black 
goat. Then he becomes a Tal tree when he gets 
purified. 

URI yrei aiae at eta: 1 

emeret wr qa aed PHS ATT A: 107 N 

wate aa Padega wed: 1 

wt KAT: papes aA 1108 N 

If any body steals a Deva’s or a Brahmana’s 
grains, or any other good materials, betel, Asana 
(seat) or bedding, he lives in Cürna Kunda for one 
hundred years, tormented by My Ditas 
(messengers). Next for three births he gets himself 
born as a goat, cock, and monkey. 

aA ABA araemttrgat srfar 1 

agrees after arena qa: BPA: 1109 U 

"ater «Ik A erat Red A A: | 

wwWegmde wmm Coast: W110: 

Finally he becomes born as a man with the 
heart disease, without any issue, poor, and short 
lived. When, at last, he gets purified. If any body 
steals any Brahmin’s property and thereby does 
cakra püjà (the famous cakra circle worship in 
Tantra), or prepares a potters’s wheel or any other 
wheels, he will have to go to Cakra Kunda and 
remain there for one hundred years, tormented by 
My messengers. 

aa waaay Awa | 

arg wasnt agreed: IRT: u 111 u 

"iter a fring ardfā aai ATA i 

Va aqui uw femen ates u112 U 

Then he will be born for three births as an oilman 
suffering from very severe diseases when he will 
ultimately be poor, without any issue and diseased. 


1120 


Finally he gets purified. If any body casts a sinful 
eye on any Brahmana or on cows, he will have to 
remain in Vakra Kunda for one hundred Yugas. 

Aa Tae aH La: TET 4 

«Rar dsrétazr atiae: sper: n 113 N 

aA TAGAT Brora er qnt: à 

Bara ferereisr vara Brera 114 N 

Next for three births he becomes a cat, for three 
births he becomes a vulture; for three births he 
becomes a boar; for three births he become a 
peacock; for seven births he becomes a man 
deformed and defective in limbs, his wife being 
dead, without any issue. Finally he becomes 
purified. 

faf rite er rero ut fir safer à 

quis aaa she vrared Haart: 11115 N 

wet ng Brera a spent: à 

Borat fasts NY aa: prar: u 116 

If any person born in a Brahmin family eats the 
flesh of a tortoise that is prohibited, he lives in 
Kürma Kunda, for one hundred years, eaten by 
tortoises. Then he becomes for three births a tortoise; 
for three births, a boar; for three births a cat; for 
three births, a peacock; till at last he gets purified. 

ad erf da at enamel: | 

wm sarerdé cw AHS U UTTHT W117: N 

wa facet preted U TTT: | 

ATT AAAS YAH Ad: MPT: 1 1 18 M 

If anybody steals clarified butter or oil of any 
Devas or a Brahmana he will have to go to Jvala 
Kunda or Bhasma Kunda. That sinner remains in 
oil for one hundred years and gets soked through 
and through. Then for seven births he becomes a 
fish and a mouse when he gets purified. 

Rita eret at visione AT t 

and quae a uterus 0119 N 

wand derit ram | 

vacare xp eet grféret sd i 120 N 

If anybody, born here in this holy land Bharata, 
steals-sweet oil of a Devas or of a Brahmana, the 
powdered myrobalan or any other scent, he goes to 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Dagdha Kunda where he lives, burnt day and night 

for as many years as there are hairs on his body. 
Gita: UTT KTITIRASTAČI à 
aay UTT fF Ha TAT u 21 M 


For seven births he becomes born emitting a 


inasty smell, for three births he becomes musk 


(mrga-nabhi) for seven births, as a Manthāna insect. 

aera wera faradu ar af | 

afess whgfü and NÅJA 11220 

aana a vert fear à 

TS uer Stat areal ahs Taa, 123 N 

Then he becomes born as a man. If, out of envy, 
a powerful man appropriates to his purpose 
another’s ancestral property by cheating, by using 
force, he goes to the hot Süci Kunda, being 
tormented there like a Jiva dropped in the midst of 
a very hot oil tank, full of boiling oil. 

aaa Tata att dēt = ue 1 

naman und aun fresh u124 0 

His body is, then, being burnt up severely as 
the result of his own Karma; the wonder being that 
his body never gets completely destroyed nor 
reduced to ashes. For seven manvantaras he lives 
there without any food. 

vai ART uada asa: | 

akataza Aep AS Hart: 0125 Ui 

aA sra grfirétat eka aa: Bra: 1 

Ta: Tati TT pii aT: N 126 0 

sft SARRIA Vengo? Tamga 
THAME: 11 33 11 

My messengers give him good beating and 
cudgellings and chastise him; he cries aloud. Next 
he gets himself born as worms of faeces for sixty 
thousand years. When he becomes born as a pauper 
without owning any land. Thus that villain, getting 
a fresh lease of human birth, begins again to do 
fresh good acts.” 

Here ends the Thirty-third Chapter of the Ninth Book 
on the description of different sinners in different 
hells in Srimaddevibhaga vatain of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter XXXIV 


1121 


CHAPTER XXXIV 
On Various Hells 


ra gara f 

Rafa sit gta aarda: Yare: | 

aed df mmda «ma nin 

aftat aAA maiar | 

ag dt amama yanai ada, 2 tl 

Dharma Raja Yama said: "O Fair One! If, in 
this Bharata, any murderer, merciless and fierce, 
kills any man, out of greed for money, he goes and 
miserably dwells in the Asipattra hell for fourteen 
Indra’s life periods. And if that murderer kills a 
Brāhmaņa, he lives in that hell for one hundred 
manvantaras. While in hell, his body becomes 
fiercely cut and wounded by the swords. 

firi: dades für Gere HT | 

sent: yagda asa: u30 

There My messengers chastise him and beat him 
and he cries aloud and passes his time without any 
food. 

HA: MATT VIMSTATA Tent: | 

"hene: MAPA YT: MATA 4 tt 

arara AUST Tas PT | 

waar zer Vaga msa: usu 

Won ae waver aa: wn | 

Then he becomes born for one hundred years as 
a Manthāna insect, for hundred births as a boar, 
for seven births as a cock; for seven births as a 
fox, for seven births as a tiger; for three births, as 
an wolf; for seven births, as a frog; then as a 
buffaloe when he becomes freed of his sins of 
murders. 

mai amrot at eet a: Hf a Neu 

art adds facite ate 1 

aa: Wat ware fest MARR uu 

RATS HUT: TSG | 

wd wat Aaa: BAA 0 8 N 

If any body sets fire to a city or a village, he 
will have to live in Ksuradhara Kunda for three 


71 


yugas with his body severed. Then he becomes a 
Preta (disembodied spirit) and travels over the 
whole earth, being burnt up with fire. For seven 
births he eats unclean and unholy food and spends 
his time as a pigeon. Then for seven births he 
becomes diseased with a severe colic pain, for 
seven births as a leper; when ultimately he gets a 
pure human body. 

PAST wd: West Weed | 

went ad gar fia aft a: 9 N 

wate neo aaraa: | 

Aiga asredtsf gefifērst Gra u 10 u 

wt Waghraya ale GTG | 

GAMĪC: Burst IETPĪEKTA: A 11 N 

aA AHA ETC: BPA: | 

If anybody whispers in one’s ear another’s 
calumny and thus glorifies himself and abuses and 
vilifies the Devas and Brāhmaņas, he goes and 
remains in Sūcī Kunda for three Yugas, and he is 
pierced there by needles. Then he becomes a 
scorpion for seven births, a serpent for seven births, 
and an insect (Bhasma Kita) for seven births; then 
he gets a diseased human body when, at last, he 
becomes purified. 

feu fe ye fren equat Hath a: 12 N 

TA omis Aas ala Wea Ta: | 

mA aga Ce yay 0013 0 

wt AAA MSA: 1 

Bora ATS TT TTT 14 N 

ad amaga rent Raa: | 

If any-body breaks into another’s house and 
steals away all the household articles, cows, goats 
or buffaloes, he goes to Goka Mukha Kunda where 
faeces are like cow’s hoofs, there, beaten by My 
servants, for three Yugas. (Gokà is Goksura, hoof 
of a cow). Then, for seven births, he becomes a 
diseased cow; for three births, a sheep; for three 
births, a goat; and finally he becomes a man. 


1122 


smratérat seers: Hard wa: gra: u 15 n 

TATARSTAN ure ARTS E R: | 

wifzdt gag aaa 16 u 

But in this man-birth he is born first as diseased, 
poor, deprived of wife and friends, and a repenting 
person; when ultimately he is freed of his sin. If 
anybody steals any ordinary thing, he goes to Nakra 
Mukha Kunda and lives there for three years, 
greatly tormented by My messengers. 

aa srdemurerar tufteaiftriga: | 

wt Aaaa TEN ww: yp: 17 N 

Rr mga Wage quar iure | 

a aa wade U Hero GTA 0018 0 

Next for seven births, he becomes a diseased 
ox. Then he attains a very diseased man-birth, and 
ultimately he is freed of his sins. Such are the 
horrible results. If anybody kills a cow, elephant, 
horse, or cuts a tree, he goes to Gaja Darna Kunda 
for three yugas. 

mA waged mm: HATA, | 

a naa gaa Boa 119 u 

TITOVA: EST AAA | 

we Pratt gftat vri arate a: KAT 20 N 

até rires PĒTA | 

wa fost cium mandana 127 0 

There he is punished by My messengers freely 
by the teeth of elephants. Then he attains three 
elephants births, three horse-births; then he 
becomes born as a cow and ultimately he is born a 
Mleccha when he becomes pure. If anybody 
obstructs any thirsty cow from drinking water, he 
goes to Krmi Kunda and Gomukha Kunda filled 
with hot water and lives there for one manvantara. 

wet Aish NAA went aga: | 

UTT Ae: pL AAT: 8 22 U 

Titi wererat cep anf artrafireta 1 

rfe eser Wea a a: Shea aif 23 N 

Rrgecat wera TE ef RA | 

afore asredtsfür maagi 24 N 


Next when he attains a human birth he owns 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


not any cattle nor any wealth; rather he is born as a 
man, very much diseased, in low castes, for seven 
births when he becomes freed. If anybody, being 
born in Bharata, kills cows, Brahmins, women, 
beggars, causes abortions or goes to those not fit 
to be gone into, he lives in the Kumbhipaka hell 
for fourteen Indra’s life periods. 

asa anata Grins WWW | 

aut wafer erar a avi waft cem 25 0 

aui Uae Ae AT aub ATA | 

aot a Acres U Ut U TTA 0 26 N 

Jat KATRAM wrest KERT: | 

RRS U MATA WaT AANG 27 N 

There he is pulverised always by My 
messengers. He is made to fall sometimes in fire, 
sometimes over thorns, sometimes in hot oil, 
sometimes in hot water, sometimes in molten iron 
or copper. That great sinner gets thousand vulture 
births, hundred boar births, seven crow births and 
seven serpent births. 

uatagenrttr asai sTad wf | 

ATATSTATG OH ZUR: Het efe: 128 U 

He then becomes worms of faeces for sixty 
thousand years. Thus travelling frequently in ox 
births he at last becomes born as a very poor leper. 


margar 

fageca a meet fhan NNR 1 

HT AT ATT E A aT Meat: 29 wu 

Sāvitrī said: “O Bhagavan! What is, according 
to the Śāstras, Brahmahatyā (murdering a Brāhmin) 
and Gohatyā (killing a cow)? Who are called 
Agamyās (woman unfit to be approached)? Who 
are designated as void of Sandhyā (daily worship 
of the twice born castes)? 

aréifara: yaren at at at ARA 1 

fea: at at mah at at fanitser qae: 130 N 

Yat xueenyu wat guvtufa: i 

Tavi wat wd ag defeat ar ous) 

Who can be called uninitiated? Who are said to 
take Pratigrahas (gifts in a Tiratha? What are the 


Book IX Chapter XXXIV 


characteristics of a real Grāmayājī (village priests), 
Devala, (Brahmana of an inferior order who 
subsists upon the offerings made to the images 
which he attends), the cook of a Šūdra, of one who 
is infatuated (Pramatta) and the Vrsalipati (one who 
has married an unmarried girl twelve years old in 
whom menstruation has commenced; a barren 
woman). Kindly describe all those to me. 
erst sarat 

startu reram wat fit i 

fre er rater er gif aaah vom i 32 i 

wA ara gida waa dat 1 

a: alfa dega Mai HAT a: N 33 N 

Dharmarājan said: O Fair Sāvitrī! If anybody 
makes a distinction between Krsna and His Image 
or between any Deva and his image, between Siva 
and His phallic emblem, between the Sun and the 
stone Sürya Kānta (a precious stone of a bright 
and glittering colour) between Gaņeša and Durga, 
he is said to be guilty of the sin Brahmahattyā. 

wa ed a waar mf | 

aif sega a Tees SAAT A: 34 N 

amag a why aeg wo 

ate Aaga dt AEA HAT A: 035 N 

If anybody makes any difference (superiority 
or inferiority) between his own Ista Deva (his 
Deity), his Spiritual Teacher, his natural father, 
and mother, is certainly involved in the sin of 
Brahmahattya. 

fayuretah da seams AUT | 

wife sega dt Tees HAT U: 36 N 

Raida a attach am | 

ft tags ut ARE VT W: 1 37 N 

He who shews any difference (superiority or 
inferiority) between the devotees of Visņu and 
those of other Devas, is said to commit 
Brahmahattyā. He who makes any difference in 
matters of respect between the waters of the feet 
of any Brāhmaņa and those of Šālagrāma stone, is 
said to commit Brahmahatyā. The difference 


1123 


between the offerings to Hari and Hara leads to 
Brahmahatyā. 

VANN gut APNR | 

wate adami det watercraft 38 u 

Wertes aaa wa fü fui i 

ates dd vii aaraa ST U: N 39 N 

IRT Seats after ata V | 

Wd g: Hed wed geet GI U: 40 

Agard at ar ener i 

a: ofa Fite a AAE epu: 41 n 

He who shews any difference between Krsna, 
Who is verily the God of gods, the Cause of all 
causes, the Origin of all, Who is worshipped by all 
the Devas, Who is the Self of all, Who is 
attributeless and without a second yet Who by His 
Magic powers assumes many forms and who is 
I$àna, is said to commit, indeed, the Brāhmhattyā. 
If any Vaisnava (a devotee of Visnu) abuses and 
envies a Sakta (a devotee of Sakti), he commits 
Brahmahatyā. He who does not worship, according 
to the Vedas, the Pitrs and the Devas or prohibits 
others in doing so, commits Brahmahatya. 

at Pata ghi aaah qe i 

ferri Ufas AAAS VATA 042 N 

wart dara a tart Aa | 

A ardana feta darat eife a 11 43 N 

He who abuses Hrsīkeša, Who is the Highest 
of the Holy things, Who is Knowledge and Bliss 
and Who is Eternal, Who is the only God to be 
served by the Devas and Vaisnavas, and those Who 
are worshippers of His Mantra, and those who do 
not worship themselves are said to commit 
Brahmahatya. 

3t Frefa uerdēt emrsgnefuvitu i 

adran a wats wera 44 i 

udaan a ndai afgai wer a 

adenine U delet we d 145 i 

He who abuses and vilifies Mulaprakrti Maha 
Devi, Who is of the nature of Causal Brahma 
(Kàrana Brahma), Who is All Power and the 


1124 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Mother of all, Who is worshipped by all and who 
is of the nature of all the Devas and the Cause of 
all causes, Who is Adya Sakti Bhagavati, is said 
to commit Brahmahatya. 

pursed vae vr KGTAGTA i 

Ran aem dearest at TAKTAT 46 u 

wa valftr quanta d A apdfer ATTaT: | 

CAF AAA A uteref£reuü: 47 u 

He who does not observe the Holy Sri Krsna 
Janmāstamī. Šrī Rāma Navamī, Šivarātri, the 
Ekādašī happening on Sunday, and five other holy 
Pārvaņas (festivals), commits Brahmahatyā; is 
considered more sinful than a Cándala. 

sigareat gari Weitere a 3 i 

gdft and at aaa VT A 448 0 

TU UTT Great ATT qp Wary i 

afert at sr quai AeA HAY 8: 0 49 tt 

He who in this land of Bharata, digs earth on 
the day of Ambuvācī or makes water etc. in the 
waters of the tanks, is involved in the sin of 
Brahmahatyà. He who does not support his spiritual 
teacher, mother, father, chaste wife, san and 
daughter, though they are faultless, commits 
Brahmahatya. 

férarét wer 1 wda UE gi g T: 1 

Runa at ARE FJ N: 50 N 

acest fred fae a gra 

qua urférafesr vr agrersdt went: 1 51 u 

He whose marriage does not take place during 
his whole life-time, who does not see the face of 
his son, who does not cherish devotion to Hari, 
who eats things unoffered to Sri Hari, who never 
worshipped throughout his life Visnu or an earthen 
symbol of Siva, verily commits Brahmahatya. 

"itg vad estat a femp | 

"rfe fāgattea Meat SHAT A: 52 Il 

dèries at fut quera: | 

fer fet mae a wad ATA aera: Uu 53 N 

O Fair One! Now I will recite the characteristics, 
according to the Sastras, of Gohatya, (Killing a 


cow). Listen. If anybody does not prohibit one, 
seeing one to beat a cow, or if he goes between a 
cow and a Brahmin, he is involved in the sin of 
Gohatya. If any illiterate Brahman, carrying an ox, 
daily beats with a stick, the cows, certainly the 
Gohattyā. 

garia TT sees TSTĀGATATEMT | 

Wats Grated w Wea PĀGJAA u 54 u 

If anybody gives the remains of another’s meal 
to a cow to eat, or feeds a Brahmin who caries, 
rather moves or drives, cows and oxen; or eats 
himself the food of such a Brahmin driver, he 
commits Gohattya 

gustuft ursret siehst eT AT AT: à 

Weed ASA was ArT AMA: 055 N 

urd warfe aA dt MA Urea ATSĀKT i 

3ré aeeai: errata t 56 I 

Those who do sacrifices of the husband of a 
barren woman (Vrsali) or eat his food, commit sin 
equal to one hundred Gohatyas; there is no doubt 
in this. Those who touch fire with their feet, beat 
the cows or enter the temple bathing but not 
washing their feet, commit Gohatya. 

at spen Reneraresr vie ferrite ur | 

Walaa a at ath a Meat PGA 57 u 

area aut sien arreter a Ea: 1 

TATA V Meat wad qu: 11 58 I 

Those who eat without washing their feet or 
those who sleep with their feet wetted with water 
and those who eat just after the Sun has risen, 
commit Gohatyā. Those who eat the food of women 
without husbands or sons or the food of pimps and 
pampers or those who do not perform their 
Sandhyās thrice, commit Gohattyā. 

verd R u dd at Aegis waft ar à 

EAA AE A ECT simu 59 u 

Amit grat wur ea WT | 

Tet at q git aru Meat SAGA u 60 N 

If any woman makes any difference between 
her husband and the Devatā, or chastises and uses 


Book IX Chapter XXXIV 


harsh words to her husband, she commits Gohattyā. 
If any body destroys cow’s pasture land, tanks, or 
land for forts and cultivates there grains, he 
commits Go-hatya. 

PARI Tete a: atte fam 1 

GAMA MEA SACTAT 61 1 

Wah tae Gerster ait a tere 1 

gd carla a Wel Maca U BAYT 62 N 

He who does not do Prāyašchita (expiation, 
atonement) for the expiation of the sin of Gohatya 
done by his son (for fear of his son’s life), commits 
the sin himself. If any troubles arises in the state 
or from the Devas, and if any master does not 
protect then his own cows, rather torments them, 
he is said to commit Gohatya. 

Witt sae fg tara e | 

Ade yours a U Meat SATA 63 N 

yaani at ardt fireurarét warren: | 

dati Tegdl w meat THU 64 N 

Sergei gr qe at wTETUb fW | 

GATT mrt fg ET MAYA 65 N 

If any Jiva oversteps the image of a Deva, fire, 
water, offerings to a god, flowers, or food, he 
commits the great sin Brahmahatyā. When a guest 
comes, if the master of the house always says 'there 
is nothing, nothing with me; no, no' and if he bea 
liar, cheat and an abuser of the Devas, he commits 
the above sin. O fair One! Whoever seeing his 
spiritual teacher, and a Brahman, does not bow 
down and make respectful obeisance to them, 
commits Gohatya. 

A GTA ararararamr dt first: à 

ferenfért er farert er a IET Aa N 66 N 

If any Brahmin, out of sheer anger, does not 
blessings to a man who bows down or does not 
impart knowledge to a student, he commits 
Gohatya. 

Tecan ferrea er ATT fa fT 1 

Tai Rast gumāa Prater werent N 67 u 

O Fair One! Thus I have described to you the 


1125 


characteristics, approved by Sastras, of cow-killing 
(Gohatya), and murdering a Brahmin 
(Brahmahatya). Now hear which women are 
(Agamyās) not fit to be approached and those 
which are fit to be approached (Gamyas). 

ret Tran ep UGU Sa | 

amar a GT aT ate defer fag: u 68 N 

"rere wf we fasted T att | 

ITT fe ar T9 frater avertir ar: u 69 0 

One's own wife is fit to be approached (Gamyā) 
and all other woman are Agamyas, so the Pandits, 
versed in the Vedas, declare. This is a general 
remark; now hear everything in particular. 

yani ferret a fergruri SAT à 

TATE TPM U teh dē fest 11 70 N 

VRS Treff Wear srerecuare HAT | 

ART amt ate peia HATA 71 u 

O Chaste One! The Brahmin wives of Südras 
or the Südra wives of Brāhmaņas are Atyāgamyās 
(very unfit to be approached) and blameable both 
in the Vedas and in the society. A Südra going to a 
Brahmani woman commits one hundred 
Brahmahatyās; so a Brahmana woman going to a 
Šūdra goes to the Kumbhīpāka hell. 

werent fama a fargrort wreath 1 

afe vmi ssfagt quens w: 172 0 

V ARI fenster VISTAS: BTA: 1 

fag: feret qoi wer AUT, u 73 i 

As a Südra should avoid a Brahmani, so a 
Brāhmaņa should avoid a Sidra woman. A 
Brahmana going to a Südra woman is recognised 
a Vrsalipati (one who has married an unmarried 
girl twelve years old in whom menstruation has 
commenced. So much so that that Brahmana is 
considered an outcast and the vilest of the Candalas. 
The offerings of Pindas by him are considered as 
faeces and water offered by him is considered as 
urine. 

a fūgai quot a denquicste d 

aiani quet HATA TTATSASTAT 17.4 


1126 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


fisica quelermemuare «a UT: | 

aema sperdtferféresirsft gata: i 75 n 

No where whether in the Devaloka or in the 
Pitrloka, his offered Pindas and water are accepted. 
Whatever religious merits he has acquired by 
worshipping the Devas, and practising austerities 
for Koti births, he loses all at once by the greed of 
enjoying the Südra woman. There is no doubt in 
this. A Brahmin, if he drinks wine, is considered 
as the husband of a Vrsali, eating faeces. 

T eRe AT l 

Rara u petah astafēsm: 11 7 6 N 

And if he be a Vaisņava, a devotee of Visņu, 
his body must be branded with the marks of a 
Taptamudrā (hot seal); and if he be a Šaiva, his 
body is to be branded with the Tapta Šūla (hot 
trident). 2 

yeast Te wuefiünn yay 1 

gai woe] set amat arti udi 77 u 

Adama RTI fug: A i 

mg: We aera ARTA RAR 11 7 8 N 

frat Brae uet vr fire aftr i 

wg: Yatra daram ate was: 0879 1 

The wife of a spiritual teacher, the wife of a 
king, step-mother, daughter, son’s wife, mother- 
in-law, sister of the same father and mother, the 
wife of one’s brother (of the same father and 
mother), the wife of a maternal uncle, the father’s 
mother, mother’s mother, the mother’s sister, 
sisters, the brother’s daughter, the female disciple, 
the disciple’s wife, the wife of the sister's son, the 
wife of the brother’s son, these all are mentioned 
by Brahma as Atyāgamyās (very unfit to be 
approached). The people are hereby warned. 

Wat: HIT Gla dit TAS HATATA: | 

a mami aay ume ast 80 N 

amutsa wih de w fife: | 

a atte estore wr Werardt want u 81 u 

If anybody, overpowered by passion, goes to 
these. Atyagamya women, he becomes the vilest 
of men. The Vedas consider him as if going to his 


mother and he commits one hundred Brahmahatya 
sins. These have no right to do any actions. They 
are not to be touched by any. They are blamed in 
the Vedas, in the society everywhere. Ultimately 
they go to the dreadful Kumbhīpāka hells. 

PUTS dent ar dem aT HALT E | 

freie astare ar Harem w fis: 11821 

Aaa a TAT gré grat att SITUTUR | 

SKATA Velie a utsedlfára: wg: 1823 N 

O Fair One! He who performs Sandhyas 
wrongly or reads it wrongly or does not perform at 
all the three Sandhyās daily, is called as void of 
Sandhya. He is said to remain uninitiated who does 
not, out of sheer vanity, receive any Mantra, 
whether he be a Vaisnavite, Saivite, or a Sun 
worshipper or the Gaņeša worshipper. 

arena K ageage, | 

aa ARTA: tant Temata AAT 1 84 N 

aa CRTUIRET Wat Alt Bt: We | 

WRITES aga a TeTamagt uss i 

Went ears yas aT | 

eter a Heart wem wnpusfu ow 186 n 

madi grā get wt | 

Tarra a area frarata freres i 87 t 

Where there is the running stream of the Ganges, 
lands on other side, four hands in width, are said 
to be the womb of the Ganges (Ganga Garbha) 
Bhagavan Narayana incessantly dwells there. This 
is called the Narayana (Ksetra). One goes to 
Visnupada who dies in such a place. Varanasi 
(Benares), Badari, the Confluence of the Ganges 
with the ocean (Ganga-Sagara), puskara, Hari Hara 
Ksettra (in Bihar near Chaprā), Prabhasa, 
Kāmarūpa, Hardwar, Kedara, Mātripura, the banks 
of the river Sarasvati, the holy land Vrndavana, 
Godavari, Kaušikī, Triveni (Allahabad), and the 
Himalayas are all famous places of pilgrimages. 

wg AA at ari ufq enn: 1 

aa dim enzsfrures wafer: 88 N 

Ad apart zmrarsftfer atfāa: 1 

wer dataset xr dac: ufenfda: u89 ut 


Book IX Chapter XXXV 


1127 


Those who willingly accept gifts in these sacred 
places are said to be Tirthapratigrahis (the 
acceptors of the gifts in the Tirtha). These 
Tīrthapratigrāhīs go in the end to Kumbhīpāka hell. 
The Brāhmaņa who acts as priests to the Šūdras is 
called Südrayàji; the village priests are called 
Gramayajis. Those who subsist on the offerings 
made to the gods are called Devalas. 

yuta a: yaar sf Ba: 1 

HTS wee ufu wp: 890 

wh ud War wx wei quolud: | 

Ud maaala: Hester warf à 11 91 11 

HUST a athe Prater BAMA T t 92 Nu 

sha ARRAI TIRE] IRIRI 


MAATEN AGA MS TT 0034 11 


The cooks of the Südras are called Sūpakāras. 
Those who are void of Sandhya Vandanams are 
called Pramattas (mad). O Bhadre! These are the 
marks of the Vrsalipatis that I have (now) 
enumerated. These are the Great Sinners (Mahà 
Pātakas). They go ultimately to the Kumbhīpāka 
hell. O Fair One! I now state by and by the other 
Kundas (hells) where other people go. Listen. 

Here ends the Thirty-fourth Chapter of the Ninth 

Book on the description of the various 
hells in the Maha Puranam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter XXXV 


CHAPTER XXXV 
On Various Hells 


LIFTS Sart 

ldai ferr alta owed | 

yant yadi ad edo ui d 

dzesi erat jos atari TEŠ UTT | 

a fam: crea a qat aft getty u 2 ui 

Dharmarajan said: O Chaste One! Without 
serving the Gods, the Karma ties can never be 
severed. The pure act are the seeds of purities and 
the impure acts lead to impure seeds. If any 
Brahmana goes to any unchaste woman and eats 
her food, he will have to go ultimately to the 
Kālasūtra hell. 

wad AIGA Rad wq d 

ATSTĀTI Tet era: Meat AAS ST: N 3 N 

There he lives for one hundred years when 
ultimately he gets a human birth when he passes 
his times as a diseased man and ultimately he gets 
purified. 

Where wrenudt fadiut geet Bat | 

ata effet dar aged jaAa 14 i 

aya au Usa ws gt U HANSER | 

aa Hed HETAVAT ATSTĻVAT VASAT usu 


a fier: Het Tesla garcia 1. 

ygi aat gray areata arie Paar tt 6 u 

Those women who are addicted to their (one) 
husbands only are called Pativratas. Those addicted 
to two persons are named Kulatās; to three, are 
called Dharsinis; to four, called Purhšcalīs; to five, 
six persons, called Vesyas; to seven, eight, nine 
persons are called Pungis; and to more than these, 
are called Mahāvešyās. The Mahāvešyās are unfit 
to be touched by all the classes. If any Brahmana 
goes to Kulatā, Dharsini, Purhšcalī, Pungī, Vesya 
and Mahāvešyās, he will have to go to the 
Matsyoda Kunda. 

Vales Herat germi ayer | 

Wea garcia agar yore it 7 u 

yami anyi ada a HA: 1 

Teaver dat ary aay us i 

Those who go to Kulatàs remain there for one 
hundred years; those who go to Dharsinis, remain 
for four hundred years, those who go to Purhšcalīs 
for six hundred years; those who go to Vešyās, of 
eight hundred years; those who go to Pungis, 


1128 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


remain for one thousand years and those who go 
to Mahā-vešyās remain in the Matsyoda Kunda for 
ten thousand years. 

ada oat sien anger area: | 

fefe poemi erm vr ree: 9 i 

fenes: KAT aset qan: wget: | 

KG wey aaah a d 100 

My messengers chastise and beat and torment 
them very severely. And when their terms expire, 
the Kulatà-goes become Tittiris (a bird), the 
Dharsini-goers become crows, the Purnšcalī- 
mongers become cuckoos, the Vešyā-haunters 
become wolves; the Pungi-goers become for seven 
births boars. 

mAai erret PTET: i 

a spen weds vet oat: 11 N 

edd CH UMass i d 

wat waarmagmgat ume: 120 

TOUGH GUTS dui: BPA: 1 

AR AT asa Yeates T1130 

u reique U eat aA | 

If any ignorant person eats food during the 
lunar and solar eclipses, he goes to Aruntuda 
Kunda for as many years as there are particles in 
that food. He then becomes born diseased with 
Gulma (a chronic enlargement of spleen) having 
no ears nor teeth, and after passing his time so, he 
becomes freed of his previous sin. If anybody 
makes a promise to give his daughter to one but he 
gives actually to a different person, he goes to 
Pamsu Kunda where he eats ashes for one 
hundred years. 

wagomertt a: Ura Vigdt VITEK t 1 4 N 

Radmana wu Ata area: 1 

TART Tareas: Bratt er fan 15 N 

warf gres: UTT gE | 

Raa preted TAA BITS: um 116 N 

aA vasa ATA Aa: Na 

Again if anybody sells his daughter, he sleeps 
on a bed of arrows in Pamsuvesta Kuņda for one 


hundred years, chastised and beaten by My 
messengers. If any Brāhmaņa does not worship 
with devotion the phallic emblem of Šiva, he goes 
to the dreadful Šūlaprota Kuņda for that heinous 
sin. He remains there for one hundred years; then 
he becomes a guadruped animal for seven births 
and again he becomes born a Devala Brāhmin for 
seven births when he becomes freed. 

Alfā gio fast afgat eue fis: 17 N 

yha auedtsfü fageotarega xw | 

If any Brahmana defeats another Brahmana in 
a bad useless argument and triflies him and makes 
him tremble, he goes to the Prakampana Kunda 
for as many years as there are hairs on his body. 


Yarra alacant TU UTT u 18 u 

Ag d Vagfa Megh dare fü 1 

seat ware dua Gad mu feat 119 II 

Saat ASAT qeeturequummong | 

wat wera wr faerat HANG 11-20 1 

WT THA eret arrest TTA ent: WI: | 

If any woman, being very furious with anger, 
chastises and uses harsh words to her husband, she 
goes to Ulkamukha Kunda for as many years as 
there are hairs on his body. My servants put fiery 
meteors or torches in her mouth and beat on her 
head. At the end ofthe term, she becomes a human 
being but she has to bear the torments of widow 
hood for seven births. Then she is again born as 
diseased; when at last she gets herself freed. 

at ATR weer cuisrenu wen AT N21 u 

aariate cata erret feathery i 

Prada wa qa asa 422 u 

The Brahmana woman, enjoyed by a Südra, goes 
to the terrible dark Andhaküpa hell, where she 
remains, day and night, immersed in the impure 
water and eats that for fourteen Indra's life periods. 
Her pains are unbounded and My messengers beat 
her severely and incessantly.” 

aak PITT at aT | 

ATA Waa ITT Tat 123 1 


Book IX Chapter XXXV 


TTA MATS MATA pad? | 

mad TSI ATA Way 24 N 

At the expiry of the term in that hell, She 
becomes a female crow for thousand births, a 
female boar for one hundred births, a female fox 
for one hundred births, a hen for one hundred years, 
a female pigeon for seven births, and a female 
monkey for seven births. 

Tat Ta aier waa er AT | 

Ta Adee Tet TATE wt daro 25 N 

Wd: HEFT denn: Yet NATT: 1 

frage aver aft a dearest 26 0 

Then she becomes a Cāņdālī in this Bharata, 
enjoyed by all. Then she becomes an unchaste 
woman with the pthisis disease, a washerwoman, 
and then an oilwoman with leprosy when she 
becomes freed. 

wed aAa meer degu 1 

eau ao da yet a wat qom 27 I 

Provera wT gat aise 1 

forana wei ree aft ou2su 

ad sráfieenferer varat qur: BFA: t 

O Fair One! The Vešyās live in the Vedhana, 
and Jalarandhra hells; the Pungis live in the 
Dandatadana hell; the Kulatas live in the Dehactirna 
hells; the Svairinis live in the Dalana hells; the 
Dharsinis live in Sosana hells. Their pains know 
no bounds at all those places. My messengers 
always beat and chastise them and they eat always 
the urine and faeces for one Manvantara. Then, at 
the expiry of their hell period, they become worms 
of faeces for one lakh years when they become 
freed. 

meN aTgrofi redegtrat ashy arre: 29 u 

aval Ayai a wat ar rm astare 1 

waves werd wife À war: 30 N 

TRA HATS rir Praag Maer | 

dat fent were d ATEA: 0 31 I 

"rff giaa frame: | 

afrat argroftredģyat arsfa uftarct i32 N 


1129 


"qat srareatsfür yet er ate tq 1 

miata gfttratemar ae afar: 133 1 

Weunpednfü a aa eat fS: 1 

waa cuna deh magin 134 u 

If a Bráhmana goes to another Brāhmaņa's wife, 
if a Ksattriya, Vai&ya and Südra do so, they go to 
the Kasāya hell. There they drink the hot Kasaya 
water for twelve years when they become purified. 
The lotus-born Brahma has said that the wives of 
Brahmins, Ksattriyas, etc., live in hells like 
Brahmins, Ksattriyas, etc., and they then get freed. 
If a Ksattriya or a Vaisya goes to a Brahmin’s wife, 
he is involed in the sin of his going to his mother 
and goes and lives in the Sürpa hell. There the 
worms of the size of a Sürpa bit that Ksattriya, 
that Vaišya and that Brahmana’s wife. My 
messengers chastise them and they have to eat the 
hot urine. Thus they suffer pains for fourteen 
Indra's life periods. 

MUST AUER STG dq: Wha | 

wat ger q Gendt wert et «rures N35 t 

frem ar vrai gate wr serene qnt i 

Grat wfruTERd cep ue at A unes 136 u 

Pret ar tayka a a sarei qst 1 

Treats eot Gear yierat at A ATSĀK N 37 u 

Raa tage asà a a serene ATA | 

argya ATEIVI wt a sarerate Freer x 438 N 

AUTGĀĢĪAT U ITG AIT | 

fast querer ag farmers: 39 N 

fires rar er ITT AST | 

Wd wt adata maagin 140 u 

darian wet ST: 1 

When they become boars for seven births and 
goats for seven births, when at last they are freed. 
Now if any body makes a false promise or swears 
falsely, taking the Tulasi leaf in his hands, if 
anybody makes a false promise, taking the Ganges 
water, Šālagrāma stone, or any other images of God 
in his hand; if any body swears falsely, placing his 
right palm on the palm of another; if anybody 


1130 


swears falsely, being in a temple or touching a 
Brahmana or a cow; if any body acts against his 
friends or others, if he be treacherous or if he gives 
a false evidence; then all these persons go to Jvala 
Mukha hell, and remain there for fourteen Indra’s 
life periods, chastised and beaten by My 
messengers and feeling pain as if one’s body is 
being burnt by red hot coal. 

ASTRO VIR urs qq: BRAT: 041 u 

eredi virer ey era eret: grat: à 

Brera reta meang Galt 042 n 

aata aap: worst da: yif: 1 

WRIEWTHGIGT D Uta MUA 043! 

wt wage AMAAV Wu: vr | 

füsurardl wagà tas: WARAY 0441 

One who gives a false evidence, with the Tulasi 
(holy basil) in his hand becomes a Cāndāla for 
seven births; one who makes a false promise with 
the Ganges water in his hand, becomes a Mleccha 
for five births; one who swears falsely while 
touching the Salagráma stone, becomes a worm of 
the faeces for seven births; on who swears falsely, 
touching the image of the God, becomes a worm 
in a Brahmin’s house for seven births; one who 
gives a false evidence touching with the right hand, 
becomes a serpent for seven births; then he 
becomes born as a Brahmin, void of the knowledge 
of the Vedas, when he becomes freed. One who 
speaks falsely, while in a temple, is born as a 
Devala for seven births. 

fénmferarstenrft a cranfasicear à 

wet weer qe: a RRS Brora 45 u 

araretar GEREI asda: yR: l 

If one swears falsely, touching a Brahmana, one 
becomes a tiger. Then he becomes dumb for three 
births, then for three births he becomes deaf, 
without wife, without friends, and his family 
becomes extinct. Then he becomes pure. 

frst a tHe: Haas viso: 46 N 

ferret TUV HUTSTTG TA 1 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


freararaftu armel rigen: UTT 47 tl 

Those that rebel against their friends, becomes 
mongoose; the treacherous persons become 
rhinoceroses; the hypocrite and treacherous persons 
become tigers and those who give false evidences 
become frogs. 


YS Gears VTA: d 

freafznarferdtasr wera wat fast: 48 N 

So much so, that their seven generations above 
and seven generations below go to hell. If any 
Brahmana does not perform his daily duties (Nitya 
Karma), he is reckoned as Jada (an inert matter). 

"REEITATESTT AGTATARI Tes FA ded 1 

auand uga: — 0049 

gaid a aaa SA vrared TTT: | 

weshqwidedtsfü wRTSRHERHBUD E Uu 50 It 

He has no faith in the Vedas. Rather he laughs 
at the Vedic customs. He does not observe vows 
and fastings; he blames others who give good 
advices. Such persons live in Dhūmrāndhakāra hell 
where they eat dark smoke only. 

Welt ATA UTT: SIS: 1 

"powered u darmu 151 0 

UTT U KET VARTA, | 

ise aft g yard eaaa RaT 11 52 1i 

Then he roams about as an aguatic animal for 
one hundred births successively. Then he 
becomes born as various fishes when he is freed. 
If anybody jests at the wealth of a Deva or a 
Brahmana, then he with his ten generations above 
and below becomes fallen and he himself goes to 
the Dhūmrāndhakāra hell, terribly dark and filled 
with smoke. 

quiet qasish aaa ary | 

aa TAs MT ART 0053 Ui 

vit arare: RTA: frame: à 

wet HTATÉTEIT qeu: UAS Tat AT: 0 54 Li 

There his pains know no bounds and he lives 
there for four hundred years, eating smoke only. 
Then he becomes a mouse for seven births, and he 


Book 1X Chapter XXXVI 


1131 


becomes various birds and worms, various trees 


and various animals when ultimately he gets a 


human birth. 

faut agii a Aerie Referee: à 

wremeérerfeearartt verfafenndt TA: 55 u 

a alfa amas a mAd a 1 

ada waned aa umm: 456 

If a Brahmin earns his livelihood by being an 
astrologer or if he be a physician and lives thereby 
or if he sells lac, iron, or oil, etc., he goes to the 
Nagavestana Kunda hell where he lives for as many 
years as there are hairs on his body, tied up by 
snakes. 

dat ATATĒTUT: UTT Tat AT: | 

At sre Worl WEIT WTA N 57 |i 

Then he becomes born as various birds; 
ultimately he gets a human birth and becomes an 
astrologer for seven births and a physician for seven 
births. 


TV FANS (TART: fr: | 

VĒTRA a pert esfererft auferat 11 58 1 

Then for sometime he becomes a cowherd 
(milkman), for sometimes a blacksmith; for 
sometimes a painter, when he becomes freed of 
his sin. O Chaste One! Thus I have described to 
you all the famous Kundas or hells. 


if aA a fs sya: sitqfiresfir 11 59 N 

att RRRA werque? Tagi 
VU SSH: 1135 1) 

Besides there are innumerable small Kundas. 
The sinners go there and suffer the fruits of their 
own Karmas and travel through various wombs. O 
Fair One! What more do you now want to hear? 
Say.” 

Here ends the Thirty-fifth Chapter of the Ninth Book 

on the description of the various hells for the various 

sinners in the Maha Puranam Srimaddevibhagavatam 
of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book 1X Chapter XXXVI 


1131 


vA je oA J nena oT omm 


CHAPTER XXXVI 
On Having No Fear of Yama for those Who are the Patīcopāsakas 


GUCE GII 

adia wernt S CWdudurgum | 

arrears aat aaa ud 

wbwqslswsd pred gai TA 02! 

Savitri said: O Dharmarajan! O Highly 
Fortunate One! O Thou! Expert in the Vedas and 
the Angas thereof! Now kindly describe that 
which is the essence of the various Puranas and 
Itihasas, which is the quintessence, which is dear 
to all, approved of by all, which is the seed by 
which the Karmic ties are cut asunder, which is 
high, noble and happy is this life. 

wdud a dui udine | 

wa gud a uydfa da Wd AAT: 03d 

ert a a uefa ag Aa waa cu | 

a ydd Wane dept aq aya 4 d 


Kindly describe the above by which man can 
acquire all his desires, and what is the only source 
of all the good and auspicious is things. And by 
knowing which man has not to face any dangers 
or troubles, nor has he to go to the dreadful hells 
that thou hast severally just now described and that 
by which men can be freed of those various wombs. 


frar he ants ar faftrarfa at 
Au ara wan an festa urn: usu 
wee wenn ur ridicu d 
Sha dE AT ET HU wr STIS 116 U 
MĪT ASI Het eet a yu 1 


det ot faa Atim arenga 7 u 

Kindly now describe all these. O Bhagavan! 
What is the size of the several kundas or hells that 
Thou hast just now enumerated? How do the 
sinners dwell there? When hast just now 


1132 Srimaddevibhagavatam 


enumerated? How do the sinners dwell there? | Rigau yay 1 
When a man departs, his body is reduced to ashes.|  WetertatSaraeramtearfere gery 13 u 
Then of what sort is that other body by which the) Heit angis earn wat ST a 
sinners enjoy the effects of their Karmas? and why a fe wate tat a warqereient AT: 0 14 ul 
do not those bodies get destroyed when they suffer] This is the step to Mukti (final liberation) and is 
so much pains for so long a time? What sort of | the indestructible state. By this one can get Salokya, 
body is that? Kindly describe all these to me. Sārsti, Sārūpya, and Samipya, th different state of 
SĀRTA sara beatitudes in which the soul (1) resides in the same 
augā = N ; hal a : Ed station, condition, or rank, or equality with the 
ee : : Supreme Being in power and all the Divine 
Narayana spoke: Hearing the questions put É 3 
forwatd by Santti Dhanara remembered Sd attributes (the last of the four grades of Mukti, (3) 


: ; possesses the sameness of form or gets assimilated 
Hari and began to speak on subjects that sever the M Cer MS ; 
to the Deity or (4) gets intimately united, identified 
bonds of Karmas: 


or absorbed into the Deity, 


world with the Deity, (2) possesses the same 


ATT sarat dedtuttatārta d t ugeifer TATU i 
aA wat aay ety ig a | "ife & Rad ar sia gara, 11 1 5 ui 
werfen vi a u9yu wurdfer et fret «dal aeudfā a à 
sag umen datu wr gad d a aifa asfa ani erm dat ge u 16 u 
was art a Tggdrqpua-qq 10 O Auspicious One! The worshipper of these five 
i \ Devatās has never to see any of the hells, watched 
adage U miaa 11 i by My messengers. Those who are devoid of the 
ATi adit mataa, | devotion to the Devi see My abode; but those who 
ubagaignat igh m 12 go to the Tirthas of Hari, who hold Harivásaras 


“O Child! O One of good vows! In the four | (festivities on the days of Hari) who bow down at 
Vedas, in all the books on Dharma, (Smrtis) in all | the feet of Hari and worship Hari, never come to 
the Samhitās, all the Itihasas, all the Puranas in the | My abode named Samyamana. 

Narada Paiicarātram, in the other Dharma Sastras| Preftrgar fama yarmaa PaT: 1 

and in the Vedangas, it is definitely stated that the| frafa Aa vuzifa aAa feram T: 17 i 
worship of the Pañca Devatās (the five Devatas)| waudfraram: aeina | 

Siva, Sakti, Visnu, Gaņeša, and Sürya is the best, | — "regat Geqwra a gE AU FRN: M18 U 

the highest, the destroyer of the old age, disease, | Those Brahmanas that are purified by their 
evils and sorrows, the most auspicious and|performing the three Sandhyās and by their 
leading to the highest bliss. In fact, the worship of | following the pure Acaras (customs and 
these Pafica Devatās is the source of acquiring all | observances), those that find no pleasure until they 
the Siddhis (the success) and saves one from! worship the Devi, those that are attached to their 
going to the hells. From their worship springs the |own Dharmas and their own Ācāras, never come 
Bhaktic Tree and then and then only the Root of | to My abode. 

the Tree of all Karmic bonds is severed for ever) Ma: foratarachsat Aaaf 1 

and ever. Wed IRE U Ted ANAT ud9 u 


Book 1X Chapter XXXVI 


atif a a uda efterasret ferar à 

PAE AAAA: 20 N 

My terrible messengers, seeing the devotees of 
Siva, run away out of terror as snakes run away 
terrified by Garuda I also order My messengers 
with nooses in their hands never to go to them. My 
messengers go mostly to other persons than the 
servants of Hari. No sooner do My Messengers 
see the worshippers of the Krsna Mantra, than they 
run away as snakes get terrified at the sight of Garuda. 

eftereTarerenrat «mrt aa Pray i 

wife AGP ATT FTA, 2 1 N 

nyani cat qed wu: YA: | 

feria ware wr ere ITSTa d AHA 22 N 

Citragupta, too, one of the beings in Yama's 
world, recording the vices and virtues of mankind), 
strike off the names of the Devi worshippers, out 
of fear and prepare Madhuparka, etc., for them (a 
mixture of honey; respectful offering made to a 
guest or to the bridegroom on his arrival at the door 
of the father of the bride). 

Starta er wife dat deagtarar | 

A Head fg UEAGOUTANT: 423 

They rise higher than the Brahma Lokas and go 
to the Dev? s abode, i.e., to Manidvipa. Those that 
are the worshippers of the Sakti Mantra and are 
highly fortunate, whose contact removes the sins 
of others, they deliver the thousand generations 
(from the downward course). 

ama AVĀRI YOR A TMT I | 

greitfer aie: dite ais qur wr trary t 24 N 

MY «ft afer rere et: GT à 

ge: Weite Ta aT AR Was AAT 1125 N 

As bundles and bundles of dry grasses become 
burnt to ashes, no sooner they are thrown into fire, 
so the delusion at once becomes itself deluded at 
the sight of the forms of those devotees. At their 
sight, lust, anger, greed, disease, sorrow, old age, 
death, fear, Kala (time that takes away the life of 
persons), the good and bad karmas, pleasures and 
enjoyments drop off to a great distance. 


1133 


ATG: SDUTTS eni al ANT ETT Y d 

Bas aif at der Heras war afe u 26 N 

yy defami erent gamma OG 

yfadtargrrenreretoreitatter per 27 u 

O Fair One! Now I have described to you the 
states of those persons that are not under the control 
of Kala, good and bad karmas, pleasures and 
enjoyments etc., and those that do not suffer those 
pains. Now I am speaking of this visible body. 
Listen. Earth, water, fire, air, and ether are the five 
Maha Bhütas (the great elements); these are the 
seeds of this visible body of the person and are the 
chief factors in the work of creation. 

Seat edid a aggfēfēreit Te | 

ufrentedaycat ect fafidt srdq u28 u 

a ph CTS wears vale | 

TRISTAN Ut sita: Gea: qur: 29 N 

The body that is made up of earth and other 
elements is transient and artificial i.e., that body 
becomes burnt to ashes. Within this visible body, 
bound, is there a Purusa of the size of a thumb; 
thatis called Jiva Purusa; the subtle Jiva assumes 
those subtle bodies for enjoying the effects of 
karmas. 

fasta get dt d agi alee | 

Bel FT Mae TAME ATA 130 U 

Wet ABT dēt at wen ufi ga 1 

AVEATT A AsSeATT Yrtentchech TAT 11 3 1 I 

In My world, that subtle body is not burnt by 
the burning fire. If that subtle body be immersed 
in water, if that be beaten incessantly or if it be 
struck by a weapon or pierced by a sharp thorn, 
that body is not destroyed. 

Wage MUTES AI us wor 

yaa uedusdsf a 1320 

TATA A: V fr MATING wr | 

aiad gei: Gat Cp PETRI 0033 N 

gosni vai ad ates enerenfir vt | 

ale Sea TAT ATT TIRE 
YMSAN: 1136 1 


1134 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


That body is not burnt nor broken by the burning 
hot and molten material, by the red hot iron, by 
hot stones by embracing a hot image or by falling 
into a burning cauldron. That body has to suffer 
incessant pains. O Fair One! Thus I have dwelt on 
the subject of the several bodies and the causes 


thereof according to the Šāstras. Now I will 

describe to you the characters of all the other 

Kundas. Listen.” 

Here ends the Thrity-sixth Chapter of the Ninth Book 
on the destruction of the fear of the Yama of those 
who are the worshippers of the Five Devatās, in the 
Maha Purāņam Šrīmaddevī. bhāgavatam of 18,000 

verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. 


1134 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


——————_— M 


CHAPTER XXXVII 
On the Eighty-six Kundas 


erst Sart 

vitgisoant wd gus cw agar | 

Fret dày ure agit: aft ui M 

adatu ved fufüd ANEN | 

SOE UAT wp ATT WaT u2 N 

Dharmaraja said: “All the Kundas (hells) are 
circular in form like the Full Moon. Of these, the 
Vahnikunda has the fire lit at its bottom, by the 
help of various kinds of stones. This Kunda will 
not be destroyed till Mahapralaya comes. Here the 
sinners are tormented severely. 

Weed BW videayratar | 

una: mist a afp watery 3 ul 

We ya Wadfe: wrfüfsr: uaa 1 

tard AA give afsagartt Hama 4 i! 

It looks like a blazing coke. The flames are rising 
from it one hundred hands high. In circumference 
those flames are two miles. This is named 
Vahnikunda. It is full of sinners crying loudly. It 
is constantly watched by My messengers who are 
chastising and punishing the sinners. 

mmi uw feigna, | 

Herat arated VERT eq a 5 it 

mime aggies one: 

Wats: Wh ud: Hrs AH 1 6 N 

Next comes the Tapta Kunda. It is filled with 
hot water and full of rapacious animals. The sinners 
there are severely beaten by My messengers and 
they are always crying out very loudly, which is 
being echoed and re-echoed all around terribly. It 


extends for one mile. This Kunda is filled with hot 
salt water and the abode of many crows. 

dae ARAA seat wary d 

mA vred gaisma quar card: u7 od 

VASKA: yeksa: 1 

fargfirtar «ri uut zorra U TATA u 8 U 

Then there is the Bhayānaka Kunda. It extends 
for two miles and it is filled with sinners. They are 
being punished by My messengers and they are 
incessantly crying "Save us, Save us.’ Next comes 
the Vistha Kunda. It is filled with foeces and 
excrements, where the sinners are moving without 
any food and with their palates and throats dry. 

atagitadamenct urfufun-wEW | 

asii gia came Yared: 9 ul 

waft vred pdi amaaa art: 1 

wunprgd: Wt upentésr epo 10 u 

Oth werarafenférerent? vifa: Ter | 

Tera tartara grege ien 11 N 

Its size is two miles and it is very bad and ugly, 
with foetid and nasty smell. It is always filled with 
sinners, who are being chastised by My Dütas 
(messengers) and eat those foeces and excrements. 
The worms therein are constantly biting and 
stinging them and they are crying 'deliver us, 
deliver us.' Then comes the hot Müttra Kunda. It 
is filled with the hot urine and the worms thereof. 
The great sinners always dwell here. It measures 
four miles; and it is quite dark. 


Book IX Chapter XXX VII 


misia: gerdetsargā: | 

Voumgut ueri ante: uftd gr 12 i 

warf unfer dfEd: wer | 

meme mhs cep Tera u 13 u 

My Ditas always beat them and their throats, 
lips, palates are all dry. Then comes the Slesma 
Kunda. It is filled with phlegm and the insects 
thereof. The sinners dwell in phlegm and eat that 
phlegm. Then comes the Gara Kunda. It is filled 
with (factitious) poison. It measures one mile. The 
sinners eat this poison and dwell here. 

matedfarter urfüfu: gota a | 

aidr ata mapaa aft: 141 

wuledtdadB: vpendd: YEA: | 

arate wr memes wntewu 15 i 

The worms thereof bite them. They tremble at 
the chastisement of My Dütas and cry aloud. My 
messengers look like serpents, with teeth like 
thunderbolt and they are very furious an fierce, with 
their throats dry and their words very harsh. Then 
comes Düsika Kunda. It is filled with the rheum 
and dirt of the eyes and it measures one mile. 
Innumerable worms are born therein. 

TAR: dae saute: eewfan: 1 

AAA gut megi Yg (160 

waits: grafa eter erf 1 

mhe slot yS H 11 17 u 

Numberless sinners live there, and as they move, 
the insects immeditately bite and sting them. Next 
comes the Vasa Kunda It is filled with the serum 


or marrow of the flesh and it measures one-half 


mile. The sinners dwell there, chastised and 
punished by My messengers. Then comes the Sukra 
Kunda. It measures two miles in diameter. The 
insects, born in the semen, bite the sinners, and 
they move on and on. 
with: dae IGA: etevfánt: | 
Sig a eri miter nas 
Te: trigera | 
qut Iga engurfüfsrfeae 119 U 
ardtgdyami w wafg: etewfànt: 1 


1135 


Then comes the Rakta Kunda, with very 
offensive, foeted smell. It is deep like a well and 
filled with blood. The sinners dwell here, drinking 
blood. The insects therein are always biting them. 
Then follows the A$ru Kunda. It measures in size 
one fourth the measure of the well (above- 
mentioned). It is always filled with hot tears of 
eyes; and many sinners are seen there living 
weeping and crying and being bitten by the snakes. 
ui mandai aqu uray 20 u 
afshi uar onive würwfür | 
aiaei u Asā: urfafardien 21 N 
adgs wr gate: entewfant: 1 
Then there is the Gatra Mala Kunda. The sinners 
are chastised and punished there by My messengers 
and being bitten by the insects thereof, they eat the 
dirts of the body and dwell there. Then comes the 
Karna Mala Kunda. The sinners eat the wax of the 
ear and fill the place. The insects always bite them 
and they are crying aloud. It measures one fourth 
the measure of a Vapi. 


aai aT at wergdfiniep 22 0 


uerurafērrdei ardtadyarorey 1 

wRquf Remida give asa: 23 0 

wrfüfsr: dae ta adiu wars: | 

Then comes the Majja Kunda. It is filled with 
fat and marrow, emitting foeted offensive odour. 
It measures one fourth the measure of a Vapi. The 
great sinners always dwell there. Then comes the 
Māmsa Kunda. This is filled with the greasy flesh. 
If measures (one-fourth) that of a Vapi. 

patente deed: ater: u 24 u 

wrétfe vred af sammrava War: | 

adigi U aR 125 Ul 

TAN: dad yaam gave asa: 1 

Those who sell their daughters dwell here. My 
messengers always chastise and punish them and 
horrible insects bite and sting them and they cry, 
out of fear and agony, ‘Save us, Save us,’ and eat 


1136 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


at times that flesh. Then come in succession the 
four Kundas Nakha, Loma and others. They also 
measure each one-fourth that of a Vapi. The sinners 
dwell there, always chastised by My messengers. 


yaaah uw wegen 26 

wart vines: waurediud war 1 

Next comes the very hot Tamra Kunda. Burning 
cokes exist on the top of very hot coppers. There 
are lakhs and lakhs of very hot copper figures in 
that Kunda. 

werd games: tafe: rff t 27 u 

qanm ferediut wa aeter asa: i 

Waa cu VIIA 128 

seri winded wake: mA i 

gere vias: vrsrorsorfesdférar 29 N 

The sinners, being compelled by My messengers, 
are made to embrace each of these hot copper 
figures and they cry loudly and live there. It 
measures four miles. Then come the burning Angara 
Kunda and the hot Lauha Dhara Kunda. Here the 
sinners are made to embracs the hot iron figures 
and, feeling themselves burnt, cry out of fear and 
agony. 

Ta tafe yet u Hdfedaatsd: 1 

Terrified fusTeqgfenmTUTRW 30 N 

ae eM Ml Tr 

adis aguas area u 131 

Whenever My messengers punish them they 
immediately cry out *Save us, Save us.' It measures 
eight miles; and it 1s pitch dark and very awful. 
This is named the hot Lauha Kunda. Then come 
the Carma Kunda and Surà Kunda. The sinners, 
beaton by My men, eat the skin and drink the hot 
urine and dwell there. 

aAA Rae MA gaya aie: i 

a: MMs cw gadhen ANTA 32 

SAET U ATA p GAGA | 

aguii: heave qdiadt: wae u 33 u 

Then comes the Šālmalī Kuņda; itis overspread 
with thorns and thorny trees, causing intense pain. 


It measures two miles. Millions and millions of 
great sinners are made by My men to fall from the 
tops of those trees down below where their bodies 
get pierced by very sharp thorns, six feet long; and 
thus they dwell there, beaten by My men. 

Teh GVA neater à 

garmfadafgva wr GAN usd: 34 N 

We dtf vied a eles: BHATT: | 

aR REg aus: vivre: 035 N 

Out of thirst, their palates get dried up; and they 
cry out repeatedly *Water, Water,' Out of fear, they 
get very anxious and then their heads get broken 
by the clubs brought down on them by My men. 
So they move there like the beings burnt in very 
hot oil. 

yasidan maoa Ra a 1 

féritérererenrurt er y er ITARA 36 N 

wee: urfūtrdri AA gear rfe: | 

Varde cw aterfeutafsmam 37 

Then comes the Visoda Kunda. It measures two 
miles in diameter and is filled with the poison of 
the serpent called Taksakas. My men punish the 
sinners and they drink the poison thereof and dwell 
there. Then comes the hot Taila Kunda. There are 
no insects here. Only the great sinners dwell. 


WR: a ili ME T 


All around burning coals are flaring and when 
My men beat the sinners, they run hither and 
thither. It is filled with horrible intense darkness 
and it is exceedingly painful. It looks dreadful and 
measures two miles. Then comes the Kunta Kunda. 
Sharp pointed iron weapons like tridents are placed 
in order all round. 

VM cep PLT CATA | 

ated uenafnfr: haaa att: 140 u 

misita quer YuRchstearsa: | 

ales vigpufüd: wünridet 147 1 


Book IX Chapter XXXVII 


1137 


daiira ferire tairgi wf 1 

merarafēnfārdi WW gaya mE: 142 u 

The sinners, pierced by those weapons, are seen 
encircling the Kuņda. It measures one-half mile. 
Beaten by My men, their throats and lips get dried 
up. Then comes the Krmi Kuņda. It is filled with 
terrible worms and insects, snake, like-with sharp 
teeth, of the size of a Sanku (a Sal tree) deformed 
and hideous looking; and it is filled with pitch 
darkness, terrible to look at. Beaten by My men, 
the great sinners dwell there. 

RaRa w gabe weed | 

vast: wii MA quer afa: i43 N 

Mega nineT, | 

mdaftamig mA: wderfànt: 144 0 

Then comes the Püya Kunda. It measures eight 
miles in diameter (or in circumference?). The 
sinners dwell and eat the puss; thereof and, are 
beaten by My men. Then comes the Sarpa Kunda. 
Millions and millions of snakes of the length of a 
Tal tree are existing there. These serpents encircle 
the sinners and as they bite them. 

ape vex wu ater ae: | 

gosari Tai Vatu uA RT: 45 N 

EEÉCOFUIPEICRCÉTHIIGIETESE GENE 

werureresasr sre AEA: 46 tt 

Bett wet epefqnezduu urge: | 

My men also beat them at the same time. So 
there arises a general hue and cry. “Save us, Save 
us; we are done for.’ Then come in order the Damša 
Kunda, Masaka Kunda, and the Garala Kunda. 
These are filled with gad-flies, mosquittoes, and 
poison respectively. Each of them measures one 
mile. The sinners hands and feet are tied up. So 
when the gad-flies and mosquittoes fiercely sting 
them, and My men violently beat them 
simultaneously, they raise a loud uproar and are 
made to move on, in their tied states by My persons. 

asai: qué areata RRT i47 N 

«rere AR AAAPAAGĪTA: i 

gread wed dis uaa n48 u 
72 


Their bodies get thoroughly reddened and 
covered with blood by the stinging of the flies, etc. 
Then come the Vajra Kunda and the Vrécika Kunda 
filled respectively with Vajra insects and the 
scorpions. Each of them measures one-half that of 
the Vapi. The sinners that dwell there, are 
incessantly bitten by insects (Vajras and scorpions. 
Then come in order the Sara Kunda, Šūla Kunda, 
and the Khadga Kundas. They are filled 
respectively with arrows, spikes, and scimitars. 
Each of them measures one half that of the Vapi. 

Afà: rfuferefe arare vett: 1 

aadA: qut weatd ITS, 49 N 

ate: yignraries faxed urfuferdferm à 

aradi sfāg wrfüfir: aiewifàrd: 150 1 

The sinners are pierced by arrows, etc., and 
become covered over with blood and dwell there. 
Then comes the Gola Kunda. It is filled with boiling 
hot water and it is pitch dark. The sinners live there, 
bitten by the insects. This Kunda measures half 
that of the Vapi. The insects bite them and My 
men beat them; so their fear knows no bounds; 
everyone of them is weeping and crying loudly. 

safa: TATA TT gAs asa: 1 

aiftrgrittrdgri eae mA wat 510 

wredfagareitfari ultra d 

arae uy er sroeirissetfefs: 52 u 

This Kunda is filled with hideously offensive 
smells. So the pains of the sinners are infinite. The 
Nakra Kunda comes next. It measures half the 
Vapi, is filled with millions and millions of 
crocodiles living in water. The horrible looking 
deformed sinners live there. The Kaka Kunda then 
follows. 

Roars werd aN: i 

arenas frgdratnifad: artery i53 N 

RETS A HVS AAA qut ITT | 

afar: ART vrezgf gr WAL 54 N 

The sinners here are being bitten by hundreds 
of deformed crows eating foeces, urines and 


1138 


Šrimaddevībhāgavatam 


phlegm. Then come the Manthāna Kuņda and Bīja 
Kunda. These are filled respectively with insects 
called Manthāna and Bīja. Each of them measures 
one hundred Dhanus. (One Dhanu=four hastas) 
Those insects are stinging the sinners and they cry 
out ka loudly. Then follows the Vajra Kunda. 


wedge weg: Usa u56 

gemuri: uremdifafi ww i 

It measures one hundred Dhanus. Many insects 
with their tecth as hard as thunderbolt live there 
and bite the sinners who cry out loudly. It is pitch 
dark. Then comes the hot Pāsāņa Kunda. It 
measures twice that of the Vapi. It is so built of 
hot stones as it resembles a burning mass of coal. 
Th sinners become restless with the heat and turn 
round and round in the middle. Then comes the 
Pāsāņa Kuņda and the Lala Kunda. The Pāsāņa. 
Kunda is made up of the sharp pointed stones, 
having sharp edges. 

werarafenfirjaet erus U RA: 157 u 

migra wp weft m ater asa: | 

maiaa: VĒRO gya uss tt 

woe: urfürfere na gAs ase: | 

gut quizá: migra urfüfinfeam 59 u 

Innumerable sinners dwell there. Many red 
beings live in the Lala Kunda. Then comes the 
Mahi Kunda. Its size is one hundred Dhanus and 
its depth is two miles. It is made up of hot stones, 
each measuring the Afijana mountain. The sinners, 
beaten and driven by My persons, move on and on 
in the middle. Then comes the Cürna Kunda. It 
measures two miles (in circumference) and is filled 
with (seven) cürnas (powders). 

fari wardrser NU gave afsa: | 

pii Hoa A PA V AAMT 60 u 
Spat quint a athe ARAT i 


The sinners, driven and beaten My men, go on, 


restless hither and thither and eat the powders and 
get themselves burnt. Then comes the Cakra 
Kunda. Here a potter’s wheel sixteen sharp-edged 
spokes is constantly whirling round and round; the 
sinners are being crushed by this wheel. 


adie ash Pret a finregfenrmuren 61 t 

HaHa ITT quiteger AAA | 

aaan wrfanrsbesiqh 1 62 u 

Tame: Waray catia TATU | 

Then comes the Vakra Kunda. It depth is eight 
miles. It is fashioned very much curved; and with 
and sharp slope it has gone down. It is built on the 
plan of a mountain cave, filled with hot water and 
it is enveloped with deep dense darkness. The 
aquatic animales there are biting the sinners, who 
get very much restless and are crying out very 
loudly. Then comes the Kürma Kunda. 

ntfefiférgsaTenit: ester Garett: 11 63 i 

weed: diga tar war: urfufsrden i 

TATOTR CTA TA: RITARI 11 6 4 N 

wari: Urata: gi FATS TT | 

ARI ref ALTĀRI i65 N 

Here millions and millions of tortoises in the 
water awfully distorted, are bitting the sinners. 
Then comes the Jvālā Kunda. It is built of fierce 
fiery flames. It measures two miles in circumfer- 
ence. The sinners here are always in great diffi- 
culty, with intense pain and crying out loudly. 
Next follows the Bhasma Kunda. It measures two 
miles. 

wisst: dqad urfüfreierefant: i 

aerate aye: RRA: 66 u 

The sinners get themselves well burnt in hot 
ashes and live there, eating the ashes. It is filled 
with hot stones and hot irons. The sinners here are 
always being burnt in hot irons and hot stones and 
their throats and palates are being parched up. 

Ufa Sort er MRA: | 

ATT taret mA ATETA w 67 N 

wists varia aahi wentftt d 


Book IX Chapter XXXVII 


1139 


adagi drt yaaa 68 

"rHWgeHfaedsesghRnfadY | 

Then comes the Dagdha Kunda. It is deep and 
horrible. It measures two miles in circumference. 
My messengers threaten always the sinners there. 
Then comes the Süci Kunda. It is filled with salt 
water. Waves are always rising there. It is filled 
with various aquatic animales making all sorts of 
noises. 

fraai a TT aiaiga 69 u 

aed: qrfafsrdad dforestostq ht: [ 

aeg: vespa yug: WU 70 N 

It measures eight miles in circumference and it 
is deep and dark. The sinners here cannot see each 
other and are bitten by the animals. Pained very 
much, they cry out loudly. Then comes the 
Asipattra Kunda. On the top surface of the Kunda 
there is a very big Tal tree very high. 

Waungetaué vr alfid vr warty i 

aa ITAA STANT: 071 0 

momia he a ugennfenm | 

wai rae a gamat ge 172 N 

utara wed p piama 1 

rfl tata U enean aT i73 N 

The edges of the leaves of this tree are sharp 
like the edge of a sword. One mile below this Tal 
tree is situated the Kunda. The sharpedged Tal 
leaves, then, fall on the bodies of the sinners from 
the height of a mile and they get cut and wounded; 
blood comes out of them and the sinners, in great 
pain, cry out ‘save, save.’ It is very deep, very dark 
and filled with Rakta Kita a kind of blood like 
insects. 

adua dii U alfa a MAARN | 

LVA a Anna 074 0 

Ut THU a A MATT | 

igdeadgi miega 75 0 

This is the horrible Asipatra Kunda. Next comes 
the Ksura Dhara Kunda, measuring one hundred 


keenedged weapons, as sharp as nice razors. The 
blood of the sinners is flowing here profusely. Then 
comes the Süci Mukha Kunda filled with sharp 
weapons of the form of long needles. 

Wegen Fayre Brana i 

Hepes GUST TATA qug t 76 N 

mad a met tRQÍASTHIUT | 

manaa ta MEAN UT N77 N 

TTT U AMAA HT | 

It measures fifty Dhanus. The sinners get pierced 
by them and are constantly emitting blood. Their 
intense pain knows no bounds. Then comes the 
Gokamukha Kunda; inhabited by a sort of insect, 
called Gokā. They look like mouths; hence they 
are named Gokàmukha. It is deep like a well and it 
measures twenty Dhanus. The great sinners suffer 
an intense amount of pain there. They have got to 
keep their mouths always downwards as the Goka 
insects always bite and sting them. 

Hus ARTS Gy ASAT 178 di 

Te unread a arith: da WT | 

LAI wailed wae 79 ud 

Then comes the Nakra Kunda. It resembles like 
the mouth of a crocodile and measures sixteen 
Dhanus. It is deep like a well and numbers of 
sinners dwell there. Then comes the Gaja Damša 
Kunda. 

erqférgrert wr dos a ingerit i 

qfi era eae ufteifaqu I 80 u 

It measures one hundred Dhanus. Next comes 
the Gomukha Kunda. It measures thrity Dhanus 
and resembles the mouth of a cow. It gives 
incessant pains and troubles to the sinners. 

IAM gai AAA STATTERT | 

rent eager PTT u 81 N 

Then comes the Kumbhipàka Kunda. It is like 
a wheel resembling that of the Kālacakra, very 
horrible; and it is rotating incessantly. It looks like 


- 


a water-jar, measuring eight miles, and it is quite 


Dhanus (one Dhanu-four hastas). It 1s filled with| dark. 


1140 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


vadai u met feud afer 1 

GARS U mhe a 82 ul 

"rfr er yaa ufo: BAT | 

UTT 399r: VIELGFGĒTA aW N 83 N 

Its depth is one lakh Purusas of the height of 
100,000 persons. There are many other Kundas, 
Tapta Taila Kunda and Tapta Taila Tamra Kunda, 
etc., within it. This Kunda is filled with almost 
unconscious great sinners and insects. They beat 
each other and cry out loudly. 

asidig  qacdetera 1 

min: vaa afer smi amm 11 84 t 

WrRRTGHQdAI SEAT YA: | 

maa: cure dit adhe de uss 

My messengers also threaten them with clubs 
and Musalas. So at times they fall dizzy-headed, 
at times they get unconscious, and sometimes they 
get up and cry. O Fair One! The numbers of sinners 
here equal to four times that of all the other sinners 
in the other Kundas. 

iir it aba Heitor a eae | 

yirt cea ANTE A AMT: 186 N 

They know no death, however much you beat 
them. Their lives persist. For the body is built up 
for sufferance, it is indestructible. 

adisi a panh wettest 

refus fast VA uit: 087 N 

senfara quer ora assay: à 

frames: Gat vem té TTT: YA: 088 N 

ada aeayrar de Get 1 

yaad U oi YTA 89 u 

AAC: pate areata: a sated: | 

yaaa at Uga, 90 N 

This Kumbhipaka Kunda is the chief of all the 
Kundas. This Kunda where the sinners are tied to 
a thread built by Kala, where My men lift the 
sinners on high at one time, and sink them down 
below at another time, where the sinners becoming 
suffocated for a long time, get unconscious, where 
their sufferings know no bounds, where it is filled | 


with boiling oil, is named the Kālasūtra Kunda 
Then comes the Matsyoda Kunda, hollow like a 
well. It is filled with boiling water and it measures 
twenty-four Dhanus. 

cari werarfafsreatesertiter dau | 

Hageenisd: maaa UAA u91 N 

maA waters AATA i 

qne ah TTT 92 N 

Next comes the Avatoda Kunda. It measures one 
hundred Dhanus. The sinners get their bodies 
burned and chastised by My persons, live there. 
No sooner they drop into the water of this Kunda, 
than they are attacked with all sorts of diseases. 
Then comes the Krmikantuka Kunda. 

aigada mAd HOT, | 

wüfr wed gdfardaregd fag: uos 

wuraigfinentut eue: d 

Wa Ji NAP MEM 94 


The sinners are bitten by the Krimi Kantuka 
insects and cry oout loudly, creating a general 
consternation and live there. Its another names is 
Aruntuda Kunda. Next comes the Pārhsu Kunda. 
It measures one hundred Dhanus. It is oversperead 
with burning rice husks. 

Urea adh wr ursa dft sid 1 

PTAA Hs a AL fag: 495 N 

uama ri at wert ate aT | 

agiram a At y 196 N 

The sinners eat those hot husks and live there. 
Then comes the PaSavestana Kunda. It measures 
two miles. No sooner the sinners fall in this Kunda 
than they are twined round by this rope or Pāša. 
Hence its name. Then comes the Sūlaprota Kunda. 

Wadi uri ga wea AUT d 

adia fendtarad SAITE MATA u 97 U 

qada fe À gat area: aai qu 

erqfágrarmrot agen YO u98 N 

It measures twenty Dhanus. No sooner the 
sinners fall here than they are encircled with the 
Šūlāstra (darts). Then comes the Prakampana 


Book IX Chapter XXXVII 


1141 


Kunda. It measures one mile. It is filled with ice- 
cold water. The sinners, going there, shiver at once. 
Next follows the Ulka Kunda. It measures twenty 
Dhanus. 

PATA a iA TVT, | 

ATT: ANT: gest TATA NN 99 t 

HATA U TATU AGO | 

TEA: urfafsrdad worse: WAT 100 N 

It is filled with burning torches and meteors. 
My messengers thrust the torches and meteors into 
the mouths of the sinners living there Next comes 
the Andha-Küpa Kunda. It is pitch-dark, shaped 
like a well, circular and very horrible. The sinners 
beat each other and eat the insects thereof. 

wurdtagenis sao: eteufan: i 

Gaita waar iA: wentfer: N 101 0 

Their bodies are burnt with hot water; they 
cannot see anything on account of dire darkness. 

Aarts feregrer UTT: | 

agran a deri ARITA 102 u 

aoa afea aa we eas ÙA: | 

trj:WreyTHTd wp Webs CSAS 103 1 

The Kunda where the sinners are pierced by 
various weapons is known as the Vedhana Kunda. 
It measures twenty Dhanus. Then comes the 
Dandatadana Kunda. It measures sixteen Dhanus. 
The sinners dwell here, threatened by My 
messengers, 

frere wereresder dtares oft: à 

er3férgrermtot a seti wentfm N 104 N 

vaai mat hs dega wafer 1 

veidaa AeA 105 

Then comes the Jalarandhra Kunda. Here the 
sinners live encompassed by a great net as fishes, 
etc., are tied in a net. Next comes the Dehacürna 
Kunda. It is quite dark and its depth is that of the 
height of one koti persons; its circumference is 
twenty Dhanus. 

afit viaa wate i 

"fart wert a qequt a 106 U 


a: wife aa NA gave MET: | 

UUW SMA U ahs cert BATT 107 uU 

The sinners, here, encompassed by iron chains 
are made to fall below where their bodies are 
reduced to powders and they are inert and almost 
unconscious. The Kunda where the sinners are 
crushed and threatened by My messengers is 
known as the Dalana Kunda; it measures sixteen 
Dhanus in circumference. 

"rer undt at STEAM: | 

AA CTI] TART TANT 1108 N 

madem wif tabem | 

mai deme urfüc wg 109 N 

"rarenmbesmureuftqu? FITA, | 

girq Tea: wiht: teneram 110 N 

Next comes the Sosana Kunda. It is deep up to 
the height of one hundred persons and it is very 
dark. It measures thirty Dhanus. On falling on the 
hot sand, the throats and palates of sinners get dried 
up. Their pains knows no bounds. Hence it is called 
the Sosana Kunda. Then comes the Kasa Kunda. 
It measures one hundred Dhanus. It is filled with 
the juices of skins and its smell is very offensive. 
The sinners eat those astringent waters and live 
there. 

; ite i 
aaron: YU wrayer 111 N 
giari aged: UTT: apes fi 1 
spend he JaN 112 
Wewrareennqut AgTaratētrd ma | 
staviafonarat wr ICE War i 113 n 
agarki a wart wen daft a 
JNda ARNA vr 114 u 
Then comes Sürpa Kunda. It measures twelve 

Dhanus and is extended like a winnowing basket. 
It is filled with hot iron dust and many sinners live 
there, eating those foetid iron dusts. Next comes 
the Jvalamukha Kunda. It is filled with red hot 
sand. From the (bottom) centre rises a flame, 


1142 Srimaddevibhagavatam 


overspreading the mouth of the Kuņda. It) agai ange amide sar, t 


measures twenty. Dhanus. uegiifā a ert waren frgmt | 
TANS WIS AOE BIT | want rf dat a fe sper: sitgfiresfer 118 N 
VARTA ut giS ā ad wa ugagsan | EAD dana menu qaem) aad 
mAsa arzri frerpusay | THAIS ENT: 1137 11 
qaia are afer 116 N It measures one hundred Dhanus. Then comes 


The sinners are burnt here by the flame and live | the Nagavestana Kunda. It is encircled and filled 
awfully; they get fainted no sooner they are dropped with the serpents. No sooner the sinners are let fall 
in this Kunda. Then comes the Dhūmrāndha there, than they are surrounded by the snakes. O 
Kunda. It is dark, quite filled with smoke. Within | Sāvitrī! Thus I have spoken to you about the eighty- 
that the hot bricks are placed. The sinners get |Six Kundas and their characteristics, Now what 


suffocated with smoke; and their eyesight becomes | more do you want to hear? Say.” 


also obstructed. Here ends the Thirty-seventh Chapter of the Ninth 


aq: gratūduiti uRaitfitaq i Book on the Eighty-six Kundas and their characteris- 
UAMATJA uret arīva Sat wa n117u tics in the Maha Puranam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 


18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1142 Srimaddevibhagavatam 
| f : SU ES 


CHAPTER XXXVIII 
On the Glories of the Devi 
mazara characteristics? What is to be done by which the 
deltuftt afe na mmo Aa aH | enjoyment of the karmas done can be desisted and 


der gfrrgneitsi aaa 1 ou nullified? O Bhagavan! The woman kind has been 
AU! gR wefypufr mem | created by the Creator as devoid of any Tattvajtiana 
anh atga gardena, u2u or true knowledge; now tell me something about 
Savitri said: ^O Lord! Give me the devotion to | "s True Knowledge. REA 
the Devi to that Ādyā Sakti Bhagavati Maha Maya. wd qni a us má sia que 
Paramešvarī Māyī that is the Essence of all aaae Het Tele wry u 5o 
essences, the Door of final liberation to the human fg: 1 : aij afa kis i 
beings, and the Cause of delivering them from ais sacrifices dd d d 
hells, that is the Root of all the Dharmas that lead places a Écilenimases: oean pcd dausterities 
to Mukti, that destroys all the inauspiciousness, cannot be compared with one sixteenth of imparting 
that takes away the fear of all the Karmas, and that 


: ; knowledge to those who are ignorant (of true 
takes away always all the sins committed before. knowledge). Mother is hundred times superior to 


afar aftumtaftī fe at arat GRŪTA i father; this is certain; but the Spiritual Teacher, 
advise afte fee sama 0300 |the Giver of True Knowledge, is hundred times 
weergraferétar u stentafāttifattrar à more to be reverenced and worshipped than the 
fafasart ari aa aafārai a u4u mother. O Lord!” 

O Thou, the Foremost amongst the knowers of ara Sarat 


the Vedas! How many kinds of Muktis are there in vd wat at art at watt aifisa: i 
this world? What is the True Bhakti? What are its ang IĒRTĒKĀ ar Tag ASML 7 N 


Book IX Chapter XXX VIII 


dtgftrotrarart sftaditquraitd-n i 

PU Goat U At POAT u 8 u 

Dharmarāja said: ^O Child! What boons you 
desired of Me before, I granted them all to you. 
Now I grant this boon to you that “Let the devotion 
towards the Sakti now arise in your mind’ O 
Auspicious One! You want to hear the reciting of 
the Glories of Šrī Devi; by this; both he who puts 
forward the question and he who hears the answer, 
all their families are delivered. 


wet aA a fe wggufsm: 1 
Waa A as ah WEA wouou 


erat aq carat ferra TATU i 
en ugue are femper wdferq i 10 N 
Aīda: Woes fü aves Sram | 
a Ung webs: dufism quie: 13 0 
ARYA VAM Sarasa USD F | 


momar wart A ferdfer TA À N 12 i 
mad aiya ates wert | 
AGA eer Mg: MATA: 13 N 
ara: alte: Tat Ass a TET: AT: l 
Raam a Gath fe amer SG: 14 N 
aaah apr: free gia ARARE | 
HAT T ad & aT ian orai 11 15 N 
amil maai qe iyrarea: | 
aiftraredt TAT ASAT qaom t 16 Ut 


afattth fasrarta oem welfare: 17 N 

vretsferfee refer WHT AAT TS: | 

watferftad wrarfe weg: vista a: 118 0 

When the Sesa Naga Ananta Deva with His 
thousand mouths is unable to recite the glories of 
the Devi, when Mahadeva cannot described with 
His five mouths, when the Creator Brahma is 
incapable to recite Her glories with His four 
mouths, when Visnu, the Omniscient, falls back, 
when Kārtīkeya with His six mouths cannot 
sufficiently describe, when Gaņeša, the Guru of 
the Gurus of the great yogis is incapable, when the 
Pandits, the knowers of the four Vedas, the Essence 


1143 


of all the Sastras, cannot know even a bit of Her, 
when Sarasvati becomes inert in going to describe 
Her glories; when Sanatkumāra, Dharma, 
Sanatana, Sananda, Sanaka, Kapila, Sürya and 
other sons of the Creator have fallen back, when 
the other Siddhas, Yogindras, Munindras are quite 
incapable to glorify the deeds of Prakrti Devi, then 
how can I recite fully the Glories of Her? Whose 
lotus-feet Brahma, Visnu, Siva and others meditate; 
and lo! when it becomes difficult for Her devotees 
even to think of Her, then what wonder is there 
that She will be so very rare to others! Brahma, 
skilled in the knowledge of the Vedas knows more 
of Her than what other ordinary persons know so 
little of Her auspicious Glories. 

IÀ ad GU at Holt WATT | 

ata frstūstmā meh wade nion 

aaa cated fas fererg poitea TS | 

ere wr Haare Rah Pra: vam i 2 0 tt 

Lg HIATT SITE Yes TAT 1 

arenes nfs ià dura «uar ufa i 21 N 

Ue va faust are a TAI wenn: d 

dungen igi gad 1022 

More than Brahma, Gaņeša, the Guru of the 
Jüanins, knows; again Sambhu, the Omniscient, 
knows the best of all. For, in ancient times, that 
knowledge of the Prakrti Devi was given to Him 
by Krsna, the Highest Spirit in a solitary place in 
the Rasa Mandalam in the region of Goloka. 
Mahadeva, again, gave it to Dharma in the 
Sivaloka; Dharma again gave the Prakrti Mantra 
to My father. My father became successful (Siddha) 
in the worship of Prakrti Devi when he practised 
austerities. 

Aer HE Hearse frat eraamorentd a 1 

"emm waa fremde gum 123 0 

TUE AAA AMAA TERT SET Gh SIT | 

agra A TTT verfu ATT 4 24 ui 

vate uderaradaruren: | 
uzsu 


1144 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


ferendi Peaedt Frearcat Prefer: à 

Prepon fani Feju Pra: 126 n 

fate: udatatt U Taree: WaT: | 

"wrarfef?re: wepfeefae T2 ITT: 127 U 

Tad uuizrwqnferefiret Wu i 

THE ARR Viet ATSTĀTI i 28 N 

aa wieder Ufa 1 

Of old, the Devas wanted to offer to me the 
Government of the Yama Loka; but as I was very 
much dispassionate towards the world, I became 
unwilling and became ready to perform austerities. 
Then my Father told the Glories of Prakrti Devi. 
Now I describe to you what I heard from my Father 
and what is stated in the Vedas, though very 
difficult to comprehend. Listen carefully. O Fair 
Faced One! As the eternal space does not know its 
own extent, so Prakrti Devi Herself knows not Her 
own Glories; then what can be said of any other 
person on this! She is the Self of all, endowed with 
all powers and lordship, the Cause of all causes, 
the Lord of all, the Origin of all and the Preserver 
of all; She is Eternal, always with Her Cosmic 
Body, full of everlasting bliss, without any special 
form, unrestrained, having no fear, without any 
disease and decay, unattached, the Witness of all, 
the Refuge of all, and Higher than the Highest; 
She is with Maya and She is Mila Prakrti; the 
objects created by Her being known as the Prakrt 
creation; Who remains as Prakrti and Purusa 
inseparable from each other as Agni and Her 
burning force; the Maha Maya, of the nature of 
everlasting existence, intelligence and bliss. 


wd em cw MAUKA 0429 u 

Togad Mad a wast € | 

ada af a gat gam 30 0 

adtatrevant fy MATEA, | 

metateoravd Sora WAT 11 31 N 

Though formless, She assumes forms for the 
gratification of the desires of Her Bhaktas. She 
created first the beautiful form of Gopala Sundari 
i.c., the form of Sri Krsna very lovely and beautiful, 
captivating the mind. His body is blue like the fresh 


rain cloud; He is young and dressed like that of a 

cow-herd. Millions of Kandarpas the (the Love 

deity) are, as it were, playing in His body. 
maeng MAMA | 

Marde ANSTATA 1032! 

agenata, | 

ahead VT maaadaaa 33 0 

His eyes are vie with the midday lotus of the 
autumn. The beauty of His face throws under shade 
the millions and millions of the Full Moon. His 
body is decorated with invaluable ornaments 
decked with jewels. Sweet smile reigns ever in His 
lips; it is adorned more over with His yellow 
coloured invaluable robe. 

Wagkaed a wad wader | 

yaqi a oid a wemeiaudqe 34 N 

He is Parama Brahma. His whole body is 
burning with the Brahma Teja, the Fire of Brahma. 
His Body is Fiery. He is lovely, sweet to look at, 
of a peaceful temper, the Lord of Radha and He is 
Infinite. 

Note: The Universe; as we see, is unreal like what 
we see in the Kaleidoscope; various apparent pictures 
of an endless variety of beautiful colour, and forms. 

Nde a uR NS vien | 

miee eaaa 035 ! 

He is sitting on a jewel throne in the Rāsa 
Mandalam, and is incessantly looked upon by the 
smilling lovely Gopis at one and the same time. 
He is two-armed. 

dfi aeria feast ATT | 

GUAT ST aA AA n 3 6 N 


damgragteaaafadfanga 1 
aeia WrediureHtsqq 37 N 


A garland made of wild flowers is hanging from 
His neck. He is playing on His flute. His breast is 
resplendent with Kaustubha gem that He laways 
wears. His body is anointed with Kumkuma 
(saffron); Aguru (the fragrant and cooling paste of 
the Aguru wood), musk, and sandal-paste. The 
garland of beautiful Campaka and Mālatī flowers 
is hanging from His neck. 


Book IX Chapter XXX VIII 


Wedgie werdfanmgfen i 
Wege ur eai eren feft: "38 ul 


On His head, the beautiful crest is being seen, a 
little obliquely situated in the form of the beautiful 
Moon. Thus the Bhaktas, filled with Bhaktis, 
meditate on Him. O Child! It is through His fear 
that the Creator is doing His work of creation of 
this Universe; and is recording the Prārabdha fruits 
of their Karmas. 

Ren: ure er adr ATT GAT t 40 t 

were: deat udad unm i 

frat yada soft a ate: 41 0 

WMATA AAT ATT: à 

wera Ama: 42 0 

It is through His fear that Visnu is awarding the 
fruits of Tapas and preserving the Universe. By 
His command the Kālāgni Rudra Deva is 
destroying all. By Whose favour Siva has become 
Mrtyufijaya, the Conqueror of Death and the 
Foremost of the Jiianis; knowing whom Šiva has 
become Himself endowed with knowledge and the 
Lord of the knowers of knowledge, full of the 
Highest Bliss, devotion and dispassion. 

aes wer: wen VIAA d 

BEES] saut agamia alt o uasü 


PÅTA 44 u 


Through Whose fear the wind becomes the 
foremost of runners and carries things, the Sun 
gives heat, Indra gives rain, Yama destroys, Agni 
burns, and Water cools all the things. 

fait veifer eaten nania ATT à 

rifā aram reer Beat T 45 N 

MATCH FATT YO er AAT | 
. Wala IK HS: HTS BHATT 46 I 

By Whose command the Regents of the (ten) 
quarters of the sky are watching and preserving 
nice orders; through Whose fear the planets are 


1145 


describing their several orbits. Through Whose 
fear, trees flower and yield fruits; By Whose 
command the Kala destroys all. By Whose 
command all the beings whether on land on in water 
are quitting their lives in time; until the proper time 
comes no man does not die even if he be pierced 
whether in battle or in danger. 
Tat Meera A frei fet Tara | 
moms wry Ag woua47u 
Wr qub wann | 
suia ZĪMĒ a ATRI V dera 1 48 U 
wat àa AATRUT armed fanfa ar i 
aa: Garter saris eii Sa erar fi i 49 u 
By Whose command the wind supports the 
water; the water supports the tortoise; the tortoise 
supports the Ananta and the Ananta supports the 
earth; the earth supports the oceans, mountains and 
all the jewels. The earth is of the nature of 
forgiveness, i.e., endures all. For this reason all 
things, moving and non-moving, rest on Her and 
again melt away in Her. Seventy-one Divine Yugas 
constitute one Indra's life period. 
sire faerat amarante: | 
amfi yienuret aeg feathery wu 50 1 
we PTT A: Id: | 
ART: wafirtared seruit I TA: wn 051 i 
Twenty-eight Indra's life periods constitute 
Brahma’s one day and one night. Thus thirty days 
constitute Brahma’s one month; so two months 
constitute one Rtu (season); six Rtus make one year. 
aes Port a ageno gU 1 
UA wer wat weh fag: 52 N 
Wed wrgd wd Sars ATT: | 
votar aren farerrar wr sfrgisrfirdesst i53. u 
Thus one hundred years constitute Brahma’s 
life. When Brahma dies, Sri Hari’s eye closes. That 
is the Prakrtik Pralaya. At this time, everything, 
moving and non-moving, from the Deva loka to 
Bhür loka (earth) dies. The Creator Brahma gets 
dissolved in the navel of Sri Krsna. 


1146 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


frem: aitad er drea aaga: à 

ferita ATT ec egre Wer: 054 i 

TE am Brat Cat ATATEĀST: BATA: 1 

giai ferupirarat facttat: agra: 55 N 

The four-armed Visnu, of Vaikuntha, sleeps on 
Ksira Samudra, the ocean of milk, i.e., He dissolves 
on the left side of Sri Krsna, the Highest Spirit. 
All the other Saktis (forces) dissolve in Mila 
Prakrti, the Maya of Visnu. 

Te Pures gat at gga | 

CRIUIÍSI: IRY St aes AeA aT 56 N 

sigaria caret cus iru E cT 

warisrra carat wr wera AA 57 u 

The Mila Prakrti Durga, the Presiding Deity of 
Buddhi (reason) dissolves in the Buddhi of Krsna. 
Skanda, the part of Narayana, dissolves in His 
breast. Gane$a, the formost of the Devas, born in 
part of Krsna, dissolves in the arm of Sri Krsna. 


Tran a aes a water taatfīd: | 
POTTS wt eT HUT UAT 11 58 i 
aad a wae er: ITT arr à 


Rerar aruft xr fsrgrat da a Winner: 159 ! 

And those who are born in parts of Padma, 
dissolve in Her body and Padma dissolves in the 
body of Radha. All the cow-herdesses and all the 
bodies of the Devas dissolve in Rādhā's body. But 
Radha, the Presiding Deity of the Prana of Sri 
Krsna, dissolves the Prana of Sri Krsna. Savitri, 
the four Vedas and all the Šāstras dissolve in 
Sarasvati; and Sarasvati gets dissolved in the 
tongue of Sri Krsna, the Highest Self. 

RIZ V MUTT PACHA THAT | 

warming xr AST umm emt gamma: 11 60 N 

waren fee TAI we MATA: | 

aware wag: 61 N 

The Gopas in the region of Goloka dissolve in 
the pores of His skin; the Prana Vayu of all dissolve 
in His Prana Vayu; the fire dissolves in the fire in 
His belly; water dissolves in the tip of His tongue, 
and the Vaisnavas, (devotees of Visnu), drinking 


the nectar of Bhakti, the Essence of all essences, 
dissolve in His lotus-feet. 

ANTAL: l 

Rasma wafer Siar: Hort erfaue i 62 u 

aa eng fast ARa wt à 

AU Wap apu ung: we wei 63 U 

All smaller Virats dissolve in the Great Virat 
and the Great Virāt dissolves in the Body of Šrī 
Krsna. O Child! He is Krsna, on the pores of Whose 
skin are situated endless Universes; at the closing 
of Whose eyes, the Prakrtika Pralaya comes and 
on the opening of Whose eyes, the creation takes 
place. 

agedion gida Ya a: | 

TATA! fro mag cw lt 64 N 

TAN NN up YS: FAA: YA: d 

sayko a den Ata FAT |1 65 N 

The closing and opening of the eyes takes the 
same time. Brahmā's creation lasts one hundred 
years and the Pralaya lasts one hundred years. O 
One of good vows! There is no counting how many 
Brahmas or how many creations and dissolutions 
have taken place. 

an spei da deat Aa Ped |d 

wrap wet uen KARTI: 166 N 

wits pn geid | 

BHO: ud quat wed eta wa fē 1 67 N 

As one cannot count the number of dusts, so 
one cannot count the creations and dissolutions. 
This 1s the Great Unspeakable Wonder! Again on 
Whose closing of the eyes the Pralaya takes place 
and on whose opening of the eyes the creation takes 
place, out of the will of God, That Krsna dissolves 
at the time of Pralaya in Prakrti. 

Was U VU wap: UTA: FATT d 

a ganu aiia defect fag: 6s u 

Toubrearmswmearpddaren | 

Ranana wea a fast 169 n 

This Highest Sakti, the Müla Prakrti is the Only 
One without a second; it is the only one Nirguna 
and the Highest Purusa. It is considered as ‘Sat’ 


Book IX Chapter XXX VIII 


existing, by the Seers of the Vedas. Such a thing 
as Mila Prakrti is the unchanged state (Mukti). 
During the Pralaya, Force, Who can in this universe 
recite Her glories? 

AU aed aeg wu: AA: | 

yras agafem wgfeur 170 0 

Mukti is of four kinds, (1) Salokya, (2) Sārūpya, 
(3) Sāmīpya and (4) Nirvana. So it is stated in the 
Vedas. 

amare arien Irtertt 1 

AGATA TASH TAT AAAS RT 071 Ui 

anfteratser Praturrer yraa i 

TTT fe ater frat eere fadt: 172 0 

Out of them Bhakti towards the Deva is the 
highest; so much so that the Deva Bhakti is superior 
to Mukti. Mukti gives Salokya, Sārūpya, Sāmīpya, 
and Nirvana. But the Bhaktas do not want anything. 
They want service of the Lord. They do not want 
anything else. 

Raama a aa wager | 

TFT TUV em ri LTA, 1 73 t 

fasma u Fratut term fag: 1 

yeaa sra: tarfrafēr=tt i 74 u 

The state of becoming Šiva, of becoming an 
Amara or an immortal, becoming a Brahma, the 
birth, death, disease, old age, fear, sorrow, or 
wealth, or assuming a divine form, or Nirvana or 
Moksa all are looked on alike by the Bhaktas with 
disregard and contempt. 

aigar Yet frames on | 

fageden Pri a att er paai N75 N 

aars a spé sfifarsit: Aart VT i 

qaaa aia fert er oteagat: 76 u 

Because Mukti is without any service while 
Bhakti increases this service. Thus I have told you 
the difference between Bhakti and Mukti. Now hear 
about the cutting off of the fruits of the past Karmas. 
O Chaste one! This service of the Highest Lord 
severs the ties of Karmas (past acts). This service 
is really the True Knowledge. 


1147 


Afte youd Ghat Tes aat emu i 

zara rua witafirea a aere w 77 N 

we yr grat wat md: d 

SB an a eed WT WIDE UTER wp |1 78 Ul 

So, O Child! I have now told you the Real Truth, 
leading to auspicious results. Now you can go freely 
as you desire." Thus saying to Savitri, Yama, the 
son of Sürya, gave life back to her husband and 
blessing her, became ready to go to His own abode. 

FG BUT erat weedeat gif | 

mai spear aaģa gurīttr: 179 u 

wears ge: wa da eU 

Seeing Dharmarāja ready to go away, Savitri 
became sorry to have the bereavement of a good 
company, bowed down at His feet and began to 
cry. Yama, the Ocean of Mercy, hearing the crying 
of Savitri began to weep and told the following 
words: 


ent Jaret 


Beat ga Yara Yost wp TU 80 N 

ATT UTT artes oat tat Ferrara | 

TATU CaS A MANA ad HS 81 I 

Dharma said: “O Child! You enjoy in this holy 
Bharata happiness for one lakh years and you will 
in the end go to the Deviloka or Mani Dvipa. Now 
go back to your house and observe for fourteen 
years the vow called Savitri-vrata for the mukti of 
women. 

Ranat «rur aterm | 

Weyeraddval MĒRA ad STU 0 82 i 

YATE TATA UTCA TAM ATT | 

geat sd da pened yfaftad 083 i 

This Vrata is to be observed on the fourteenth 
day of the white fortnight in the month of Jyestha. 
Then observe the Maha-Laksmi Vrata. Its proper 
time is the eighth day of the bright fortnight of the 


! month of Bhadra. For sixteen years consecutively 


without any break this vow is to be observed. 


itf weer a ATtt ar arta a fest: wem, i 
tiger cr edt ngog usu 


1148 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


fermi VARU wet ABT i 
am UTT mat watt 85 N 
TERRE entrer GTI 1 

dre IISTI er IATA emn 86 N 

frat serat uf aR i 

Wet wurde p pirat amen 087 u 

The woman who practises with devotion this 
vow, goes to the abode of Müla Prakrti. You would 
worship on every Tuesday in every month the Devi 
Mangala Caņdikā, the giver of all good; on the 
eighth day in the bright fortnight you should 
worship Devi Sasthī (i.e., Devasena); you should 
worship Manasa Devi, the giver of all siddhis, on 
the Sankranti day (when the Sun enters another 
sign) in every year; you should worship Radha, 
the Central Figure of Rasa, more than the Prana of 
Krsna on every Full Moon night in the month of 
Kārtika and you should observe fasting on the 
eighth day in the bright fortnight and worship the 
Visnu Maya Bhagavati Devi, the Destructrix of 
all difficlties and dangers. 

Note: The Rasa is the playing out of the Vedāntic 
saying of Brahma as ‘Raso vai Sah;' He is of the nature 
of Rasa, the most sweet and lovely Divine Principle 
which unites the Rasika and the Rasika). 

Wf] YEN TAJ wRTHNI a | 

"wr at garage LATA 088! 

se ere qui Yar arai sfa: wan à 

ud wem fais: wsrüenrerentsfigm] 11 89 u 

The chaste woman having husband and sons 
who worships the World Mother Mila Prakrti, 
whether in Yantra, or in Mantra or in image, en- 
joys all pleasures in this world; and, in the end, 
goes to the Deviloka or Mani Dvipa. O Child! The 
worshippers Sádhaka (one who is in one's way to 
success) must worship all the manifestations of the 
Devi, day and night. 

ada uden uem unb 1 

ara: unu ĒRA] 90 N 

Segara at erst erm frerifen à 

Terran vafrt at er erat er rome 91M 


At all times one must worship the omnipresent 
Durga, the Highest I$vari. There is no other way 
to attain blessedness than this." Thus saying, 
Dharmaraja went to His own abode. Sāvirtī. too, 
with her husband Satyavan went to her home. 

ma regret iret werdt vr emm | 

ARTA Brae Hard fF ANT 92 1 

mAT: YIA: WERHUT U | 

ase Wet MTU TANU WD 0093 |i 

Both Savitri and Satyavan, when they reached 
home, narrated all their stories to their friends and 
acquaintances. In time, by the blessing of Yama, 
Savitri’s father got sons and father-in-law recov- 
ered his eyesight and kingdom and Savirti Herself 
got sons. 

waa qui Yara QUSS up ST | 

ITT fra ari aded: ufeaar i94 i 

agaid wur dièrs d 

For one lakh years, Savitri, enjoyed pleasures 
in this holy land of Bharata, and ultimately went 
with her husband to the Deviloka Savitri is the 
Presiding Deity of the Süryamandalam, the solar 
orb. The Sun is the central Para Brahma. The 
Gayatri Mantra, the Presiding Devi, proves the 
existence of the highest Brahma in the centre of 
the Sun. 

atest att dari artērsft aa entfear u 95 u 

Pad aftīd ecu Ma à 

Hamta vr fe Ya: straftresht u 96 Nu 

sft ARRA TIREI ACARI ATS 
MIRESE RISATI: 1138 11 

Therefore She is called Sāvitrī. Or Her name is 
Sāvitrī because all the Vedas have come out of 
Her. Thus I have narrated the excellent anecdote 
of Sāvitrī, and the fruitions of the Karmas of the 
several Jīvas. Now what more do you want to hear? 
Say. l 

Here ends the Thirty-eighth Chapter in the Ninth 

Book on the glories of the Devi and on the nature of 
Bhakti in the Maha Purāņam Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 
of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book 1X Chapter XXXIX 


1149 


CHAPTER XXXIX 
On Maha Laksmi 


Ra sara 


soygi Tema fra: 1 

EUEEIPEEEICEE GE frist ae: in 

aan wed Heri x Te i 

aya Sitgfirearfér PARTEMTĪTAT 11 2 u 

Narada said: O Lord! I have heard in the 
discourse on Savitri and Yama about the Formless 
Devi Müla Prakrti and the glories of Savitri, all 
true and leading to the endless good. Now I want 
to hear the story of the Devi Laksmi. O Thou, the 
Chief of the knowers of the Vedas! What is the 
nature of Laksmi? 

arava yra ars fA fab spar TAT TT à 

aape wg ag defeat at ous 

By whom was She first worshipped? and by 
what Mantra? Kindly describe Her glories to me. 


Sr gara 


Bee TT MAG UTT: | 

edt antes aga weiss 14 i 

ata yaf var UNAS 1 

an gaad nagina 5 i 

variant gag T | 

wear TRIG UAT eae ATT nén 

Nārāyaņa said: Of old, in the beginning of the 
Prakrtika Creation, from the left side of Krsna, the 
Supreme Spirit, appeared in the Rasamandalam 
(the Figure Dance) a Devi. She looked exceedingly 
handsome, of a dark blue colour, of spacious hips, 
of thin waist, and with high breast, looking twelve 
years old, of steady youth, of a colour of white 


Campaka flower and very lovely. The beauty of 


Her face throws under shade millions and millions 
of autumnal full moons. 
WATT WTA | 
wr edt füferur ar we udg”tegam 47 ud 
siasa aoa rur aaa faar 1 
SVE ARTA Pea STUDY VT T Us di 


Before Her wide expanded eyes, the midday 
lotus of the autumnal season becomes highly 
ashamed. By the Will of God, this Devi suddenly 
divided Herself into two parts. The two looked 
equal in every respect; whether in beauty, quali- 
ties, age, lovelines, colour, body, spirit, dress or- 
naments, smile, glance, love, or humanity, they 
were perfectly equal. 

Rada data jor asg T | 

wgratarsereartréfarures vtr 9 u 

WTEITS SE ATATATA fasst a TATA | 

EELS AHA AAA 10! 

Now she who appeared from the right side is 
named Radha and she who came from the left side 
is named Maha Laksmi. Radha wanted first the 
two armed Sri Krsna, Who was Higher than the 
highest; then Maha Laksmi wanted Him. 

Purana ro aya E | 

SHT fest arate sat: 11 0 

"pisa faust were set a 

PTA qo fre ferrem ans AIN 12 u 

aiga arcet near Wt um i 

Radha came out of the right side and wanted 
first Krsna; so Krsna, too, divided himself at once 
into two parts. From His right side came out the 
two-armed and from his left side came out the four- 
named The two-armed person first made over to 
Mahà Laksmi the four-armed One; then the two- 
armed person Himself took Radhà. Laksmi looks 
on the whole universe with a cooling eye; hence 
She is named Laksmi and as She is great, She is 
called Mahà Laksmi. 

ITV feat saana a: u 13 N 

VEGA cup mint Tq d 

wqsissr deu yad ws wg 14 u 

And for that reason the Lord of Radha is two- 
armed and the Lord of Laksmi is four-armed. 
Radha is pure Aprakrtic Suddha Sattva (of the 
nature of pure Sattva Guna, the illuminating 


1150 Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


attribute) and surrounded by the Gopas and Gopis.| meig a ety My wy ow 23 1 
The four-armed Purusa, on the other hand, took | qarag wag HH aay | 


Laksmi (Padma) to Vaikuntha. Agui uferar asset edt amata wt u 24 tt 
waists wat dr gr paama ent i She is the lustre and beauty of the ornaments, 
mwas WT HTHTAUD SAT AT |1 1 5 1 gems, fruits, water, kings, queens, heavenly 
apr wr "area: Wftquiqur TAT à women, of all the houses, grains, clothings, 
Vaaran eT waar gar 16 cleansed places, images, auspicious jars, pearls, 


The two-armed person in Krsna; and the four- | jewels, crest of jewels, garlands, diamonds, milk, 
armed is Narayana. They are equal in all respects. | sandal, beautiful twigs, fresh rain cloud, or of all 
Maha Laksmi became many by Her Yogic powers. |other colours. She was first worshipped in 
(i.e., She remained in full in Vaikuntha and | Vaikuntha by Narayana. 
assumed many forms in parts). Maha Laksmi of) fģctā aero WAM qdtà vietu er 1 
Vaikuntha is full, of pure Sattva Guna, and| ferar yin ar a afte area ga 25 n 
endowed with all sorts of wealth and prosperity. Tryst AAT UAT Ade: | 

TOT m a war a Gary TAU wi wits atts ates fanda 26 u 


xag mioaa mmiun 117 0 rra armel: urne wr fent i 

UTT? moga TT wy | Next She was worshipped by Brahma and then 

Tohia Yeo a wem: 18 N by Sankara with devotion. She was worshipped by 
dora gent Aris d Visnu in the Ksiroda Samudra. Then she was 


Tat e vef grāfam are 19 0 worshipped by Svayambhuva Manu, then by Indras 

She is the crest of woman-kind as far as loving |amongst men, then by Munis, Rsis, good 
one's husbands is concerned. She is the Svarga|householders, by the Gandharvas, in the 
Laksmi in the Heavens; the Naga Laksmi of the | Gandharvaloka; by the Nagas in the Nagaloka. 
serpents, the Nagas, in the nether regions; the Raja| yansi ARIS Hal THT AT sam 27 N 
Laksmī of the kings and the Household Laksmi of| seram a wargdat fg wig ARE i 
the householders. She resides in the houses of) Wa We a mà 7 qua TTGATAT 28 
house-holders as prosperity and the most, She was worshipped with devotion by Brahma 
auspicious of ali good things. She is the for one fortnight commenceing from the bright 
progenetrix, She is the Surabhi of cows and She is eighth day in the month of Bhadra and ending on 
the Daksiņā (the sacrficial fee) in sacrifices. the eighth day of the dark fortnight in the three- 


mef dis pls =r worlds. She was worshipped by Visnu, with 
A devotion in the three worlds on the meritorious 
wae MR U wddsedfser 20 


hej h f : em Tuesday in the months of Pausa, Caitra, and 
5 j As te dangmer of the milkocsanand shë ls Bhadra, Manu, also, worshipped Her on the Pausa 
Padmini, the beauty of the spheres of the Moon 


Sankranti (the last day of the month of Pausa when 
and the Sun. the Sun enters another sign) and on the auspicious 
Ropy wig wey U wey U | Tuesday in the month of Magha. 

Ty quueftg Rae WY A u21 N fare afar ar a Brg erasg aera: 1 

wdwerg wer Way Wendy A 1 aA draizniert reram ATS u 29 1 

wRrmg w eara ce ui ow 1122 Ll at see 1 
WEE YTarara at 

mAN vp peer rectg wr rte | icd wr HSN WAG "Wer u30 0 


Book IX Chapter XL 


Thus the worship of Maha Laksmi is made 


1151 


She was then worshipped by Kedara, Nila, 


prevalent in the three worlds. She was worshipped | Subala, Dhruva, Uttanapada, Sakra, Bali, Kašyapa, 
by Indra, the Lord of the Devas and by Mangala| Daksa, Kardama, Strya, Priyavrata, Candra, Vayu, 


(Mars) on Tuesday. 

Arata dea wer ata U | 

KAT PITT afar Tat 431 0 

ATA U gat Has Pee | 

Raad ua Hatta arg 432 

aaa afg da cette uf 1 

ud waa ady uer wf Mar ou 

advaatiedt wr wewueenefuuft u 33 u 

ste sfera enge? games 

CATIA SEATA: 11 39 01 


Kubera, Varuna, Yama, Hutāšana and others. Thus 
Her worship extended by and by to all the places. 
She is the Presiding Deity of all wealth; so She is 
the wealth of all. 

Here ends the Thirty-ninth Chapter of the 
Ninth Book on the story of Mahà Laksmi in the 
Maha Puranam Srimaddevibhagavatam 
of 18,000 verses by Maharsi 
Veda Vyasa. 


YA MTA VT 


Book IX Chapter XL 


— Ee 


1151 


CHAPTER XL 
On the Birth of Laksmi 
Ra sare dpud VU Gar Arrest Ut | 
mme at at ae depueenfüit 1 ara Sarat VESA Ga: N 6 N 


Aguar wereadt mat uu 
ad aya m cat oftreat RRRA | 
YU A EATS SMT AT TY omnemque 11 2 


The Devas, then, went to Brahma with their 
hearts full of sorrow and, taking Him from there, 
they all went to Narayana in Vaikuntha. Going 


Narada said: O Lord! How did the eternal Devi| there they all took refuge of the Lord of Vaikuntha. 
Maha Laksmī, the dweller in Vaikuntha, the} They were very much distressed and their throats, 
beloved of Narayana, the Presiding Deity of! palates and lips were quite dry. 


Vaikuntha, come down to the earth and how She, 
became the daughter of the ocean? By whom was 
She first praised? Kindly describe all these in details 
to me and oblige. 


siana gara 


gu galva: maea gie | 

aya das Neiet U Ane 403 N 

watt: nifak erat KET UTT G: Raa | 

Teal SAT Ou Agus ARTRĪTA ANT ! 4 d 

Narayana said: O Narada! In ancient days when 
on Durvāsās curse, Indra was dispossessed of his 
kingdom, all the Devas came down to earth. 
Laksmi, too, getting angry, quittied the Heavens, 
out of pain and sorrow and went to Vaikuntha and 
took the shelter of Narayana. 

warsilaerg: wd gat TAT: AAT i 

wat cw ype giga w usu 


aa water Herat KUNGU | 

aya ragam ur uddumasfūvft 7 u 

wem uferer gftūd dar dat: ae | 

aurea Were frem aggt € us ut 

At that time Laksmī, the wealth and prosperity 
of all, came down on earth by the command of 
Nārāyaņa and became born in part as the daughter 
of the ocean. The Devas, then, with the Daityas 
churned the Ksiroda Ocean and, out of that, Maha 
Laksmi appeared. 

get at sear umet a fau | 

zÀ VARAT get afta ug i 

eased Wet WEST ANE | 

at dasa cw dye ada a Frame: 110 N 

Visnu looked on Her. Her joy knew no bounds. 
She smiling, granted boons to the Devas and then 
offered a garland of flowers on the neck of 


1152 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


Nārāyaņa (as a symbol of marriage celebrated). O 
Nārada! the Devas, on the other hand, got back 
their kingdoms from the Asuras. They then 
worshipped and chanted hymns to Mahā Laksmī 
and since then they became free from further 
dangers and troubles. 
ANE Sara 

ame VISTU gate YANE: HATHA | 

thet STAT at ET sferBereoferequ 11 N 

mig: der wT wet d qT: 1 

Aa SAAT OT Vet yr MATS AT 12 0 

cal aT WaT AUT spa ga Wt a 

Narada said: O Bhagavan! Durvāsā was the best 
of the Munis; he was attached to Brahma and had 
spiritual knowledge. Why did he curse Indra? What 
offence had he committed? How did the Devas and 
Daityas churn the ocean? How, and by what hymns 
Laksmi became pleased and appeared before Indra? 
What passed on between them. Say all this, O Lord. 


sianar sara 
Ra ASU: WT 13 
miei Ga YER Ta WE BITE: | 
Hea HLS Aa Hel HIM SAAT: (1 14 0 
ARĪ aa WERUSI ATATŪMATTA: |d 


oaa uid Apn AET 115 N 


Nārāyaņa said: In ancient days, Indra the Lord 
of the three worlds, intoxicated with wine and 
becoming lustful and shameless, began to enjoy 
Rambhā in a lonely grove. After having enjoyed 
her, he became attracted to her; his mind being 
wholly drawn to her, he remained there in that 
forest, his mind becoming very passionate. 

gated Gf wei WENT |d 


16 I 


a |, 170 
Weta a french farre gah | 


Indra then saw the Muni Durvāsā on his way 


Brahma. From the body of the Rsi, emitted, as it 
were, the rays of the thousand mid-day Suns. On 
his head was the golden matted hair. On his breast 
there was the hoary holy thread; he wore torn 
clothes; in his hands there was the Danda and 
Kamandalu; on his forehead there was the bright 
Tilaka in the form of the Crescent Moon. 

(Tilaka—a sectarian mark on the forehead made 
with coloured earth or sandalpaste.) 

ae aaa fent xig War: 

fSreratt var ceii ak: Cucu 11 19 1 

One hundred thousand disciples, thoroughly- 
versed in the Vedas and the Vedāngas, were 
attending him. The intoxicated Purandara, seeing 
him, bowed down to him and he began to chant 
with devotion hymns to his disciples also. They 
were very glad. The Rsi with his disciples then 
blessed Indra and gave him one Parijata flower. 

RATU foren ament gafas: à 

famed maag a AAE, u200 

TNT et Viesi MARRE, | 

Vien: Wed Peta a Ware aT 0 21 i 

gu a AKTA weg wem | 

When the Muni was returning from the region 
of Vaikuntha, Visnu, gave him that beautiful 
Pārijāta flower. Old age, death, disease, sorrows, 
etc., all are removed by the influence of the flower; 
and the final liberation is also attained. The 
Devendra was intoxicated with his wealth; so 
taking the flower given by the Rsi, he threw it on 
the head of the elephant Airavata. No sooner the 
elephant touched the flower, than he became 
suddenly like Visnu, as it were, in beauty, form, 
qualities, fire and age. 

watt aay wa aT qub 22 u 

ATT SETS eR ERIT edt ST € | 

RUT Vē TAAS ITT ANT 023 il 

A VOM Heed g deret | 


wist 


from Vaikuntha to KailSa burning with the fire of | The elephant, then, forsook Indra and entered 


Book IX Chapter XL 1153 
es 
into a dense forest. The Lord of the Devas could,| mantra a gar niet STATŪTI | 
in no way, get him under his control. Rafya a aed pur 32 0 
Ag dd ww spt veh Ute: 124 N fanana u tavs ada a | 


agaa WETSE: vena U owed: 1 

On the other hand, the Muni Durvāsā seeing that 
Mahendra had thus dishonoured the flower, became 
inflamed with rage and cursed him saying 


yrat 

amt frat mara Het MATAA 025 11 

meng ad a meer RAKT | 

faomfrafed da Adel at He WET 26 N 

rfr STATE mmt rere aL 1 

westivafge VOTED Way Ww: 127 01 

aeni area tart yz 1 

rfe at och srent ferratis u 28 u 

Gat vet waren Stay: vere rà i 

“O Indra! You are so mad with wealth that you 
have dishonoured me. The flower that I gave you 
so lovingly, you have thrown that, out of vanity, 
on the elephant's head! No sooner one gets the 
food, water, fruits that had been offered to Visnu, 
one should eat that at once otherwise one incurs 
the sin of Brahmahattyā. If anybody forsakes the 
things offered to Visnu, that he has got perchance, 
he becomes destitute of wealth, prosperity, in 
telligence, and his kingdom. And if he eats the food 
already offered to Visnu with devotion, he then 
elevates his hundred families passed before him 
and he himself becomes liberated while living. 

Ade attēri Grat Pret a: uni N 29 u 

TAR ar sra a fremere aq | 

amatar weniteifasr fēgraf n 30 N 

If any-body daily eats Visnu's Naivedyam (food 
offered to Visnu) and bows down before Him or 
worships Hari with devotion and chants hymns to 
Him, he becomes like Visnu in energy and wealth. 
By mere touch with the air round about his body, 
the places of pilgrimage become all purified. 

AUTH YS AE: YAT AGANT | 

damam EMEA a 4310 


73 


enfe from dest aria 33 u 

sag wdfrd adua, i 

summ xre fusus ww 134 

ardtfürafirerrert er asi srerarfe-ma 1 

snmma we fasmamreHS wo435 

age quaere fersrmaumferm à 

ftreraragarsi xr sarum asa xw 0 36 N 

ue wd grafa far Aana à 

O You Stupid! The earth becomes purified by 
the contact of the dust of the feet of such a one 
devoted to Visnu. If anybody eats the food 
unoffered to Hari and flesh that 1s not offered to 
any Deity; if he eats the food of any unchaste 
woman, any woman without husband and sons, the 
food offered at any Südra's Šrāddha (funeral) 
ceremony, the food offered by a Brahmana, who 
is a priest to the Südras in honour of a Siva Lingam, 
the food of a Brahmana priest who subsists on the 
presents of a temple, the food of one who sells his 
daughter, the food of one who subsists on dealings 
with womb concerns, the leavings of others, the 
stale food left after all others had eaten, the food 
of the husband of an unmarried girl (twleve years 
old in whom menstruation has commenced), the 
driver of oxen, the food of one uninitiated in one's 
Istamantram, of one who burns a corpse, of a 
Brahmin who goes to one not fit for going, the 
food of a rebel against friends, of one who is 
faithless, treacherous who gives false evidence, the 
food of a Brahmin who accepts offerings in a sacred 
place of pilgrimage, all his sins (incurred in the 
ways above-mentioned) will be removed if he eats 
the prasádam of Visnu, i.e the food offered to 
Visnu. 

grada deat tfe 1 37 u 

gem ays: wa tara: | 


1154 


amaa yee frontteata wp 038 n 

ATA ATAU ATT IST: | 

Even if a Cāņdāla be attached to the service of 
Visnu, he sanctifies his millions of persons born 
in his family before him. And the man who is 
devoid of the devotion to Hari is not able even to 
save himself. If anybody takes unknowingly the 
remains of an offering (such as flowers) made to 
Visnu, he will certainly be freed from all the sins 
incurred in his seven births. 

ATT sre er Vera fererisfererda a t 39 n 

AiR 1 

aeni gai wur efr 140 li 

ATTIE arg oR: TAA i 

And if he does this knowingly and with intense 
devotion, he will certainly be freed of all sorts of 
sins incurred in his Koti births. So, O Indra! I am a 
devotee of Sri Hari. And when you have cast 
away the Pārijāta flower offered by me on the 
elephant's head, then I say unto you that the Maha 
Laksmi will leave you and She will go back to 
Narayana. 

ATTUTRI srentsé a ērti auger: 141 u 

OTA ASMA FTRTTTTĪĀ A 1 

fe enfer tata: Haas woah: 42 u 

geuftesa frem aA R | 

vé qui wur fet aa yi RA 43 N 

I am highly devoted to Narayana; so I do not 
fear anybody, I fear neither the Creator, nor Kala, 
the Destroyer, nor old age, nor death; what to speak 
of other petty persons! I do not fear your father 
Prajapati KaSyapa nor do I fear your family priest 
Brhaspati. Now he, on whose head there lies the 
flower Parijata offered by me, verily he should be 
worshipped by all means. 

gr sper HRT Yt wb ga | 

Id Wig viüeniunpgre Vno: 044 

Hearing these word of Durvasa, Indra became 
bewildered with fear, and being greatly distressed 
and holding the feet of Muni, < >d out loudly. 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Wis Sart 

qa: agfa: Brat wi rang Wat i 

eet a ure date ffe wr efe tu 45 u 

tard auai sisi ATVEST, | 

AĒRTNTĪGENA THIS MANAR 0 46 N 

He said: The curse is now well inflicted on me; 
and it has caused my delusion vanish. Now I do 
not want back my Raja Laksmi from you; instruct 
me on knowlege. This wealth is the source of all 
coils; it is the cause of the veil to all knowledge, it 
hides the final liberation and it is a great obstacle 
on the way to get the highest devotion.” 


gara 
Yi wer 

Wufefafirius ufaquni a usaf 47 u 

uerdb faqes wat: U va a | 

ainda: wtsfü epa get u48 ti 

The Muni said: This birth, death, old age, 
disease, and afflictions, all come from wealth and 
the manipulation of great power. Being blind by 
the darkness of wealth, he does not see the road to 
Mukti. 

wufwnames fava frau: i 

eret fa: went a usafe i49 i 

fēfēut ferrartere ITETTA: BTA: d 

AARAA T SAM TAT: ET: (50 | 

The stupid man that is intoxicated with wealth 
is like the one that is intoxicated with wine. 
Surrounded by many friends, he is surrounded by 
the unbreakable bondage. The man that is 
intoxicated with wealth, blind with property and 
overwhelmed with these things has no thought for 
the real knowledge. He who is Rājasik, is very 
much addicted to passions and desires; he never 
sees the path to Sattvaguna. The man that is blind 
with sense-objects is of two kinds, firstly, Rajasik 
and secondly Tàmasik. He who has no knowledge 
of the Šāstras Tamasik and he who has the 
knowledge of the Šātras is Rājasik. 


Book IX Chapter XL 

ma a fgfaet unt efter d 

uah a Prat: mut Uu 51 M 

ata wüfaasrdt ward aac | 

wed uuu AA a ada 52 Nu 

O Child of the Devas! Two paths are mentioned 
in the Šāstras; one is Pravrtti, going towards the 
sense objects and the other is Nivrtti, going away 
from them. The Jivas first follow the path of 
Pravrtti, the path that is painful, gladly and of their 
own accord like a mad man. 

amie HEPAT eser TTA: | 

Uu mega N53 N 

saad TU wat War | 

As bees, blind with the desires of getting honey, 
go to the lotus bud and get themselves entangled 
there, so the Jīvas, the embodied souls, desirous 
first of getting enjoyments come to this very painful 
circle of births and deaths, this wordly life, which 
in the end is realised as vapid and the only cause 
of old age, death, and sorrow and get themselves 
enchained there. 


atifāttarai wr ATATATAI maT w i 54 N 
MAKITA ed cmd U R: 1 
AFC Baal WaT UTT 0655 d 


For many births he travels gladly in various 


wombs, ordained by his own Karmas, till at last 
by the favour of gods, he comes in contact with 
the saints. Thus one out of a thousand or out of a 
hundred finds means to cross this terrible ocean of 
world. 

rper ueni wey od 

warf weder stat deumgsa 56 

HATTA AAA N | 

war PATA fraud qud we 057 N 

When the saintly persons kindle the lamp of 
knowledge and shew the way to Mukti, then the 
Jiva makes an attempt to sever this bondage to the 
world. After many births, many austerities and 
many fastings, he then finds safely the way to 
Mukti, leading to the highest happiness. O Indra! 
What you asked me, I thus heard from my Guru. 


1155 


sd spi qudeareepesfu yea | 

Wiese gear diam aya a: 4 58 0 

are adana met were fat 1 

Tp: Taras Treat U qaynmedi 59 n 

O Narada! Hearing the words of the Muni 
Durvasa Indra became dispassionate towards the 
Samsara. Day by day his feeling of dispassion 
increased. One day, when he returned to his own 
home from the hermitage of the Muni, he saw the 
Heavens overspread by the Daityas and it had 
become terrible. 

ees warn waren | 

amuma yaaa a AAA 160 u 

Aiamaa, 1 

VIETU ai qs aret ufe 61 N 

wnt mafa cast erra à 

carat Ut wer iran feni UT d 62 n 

witty yiga a Aaga à 

At some places outrage and oppression knew 
no bounds; some places were devoid of friends; at 
some places, some persons had lost their fathers, 
mothers, wives, relations; so no rest and repose 
could be found. Thus, seeing the Heavens in the 
hands of the enemies, Indra went out in quest of 
Brhaspati, the family preceptor of the Devas. 
Seeking to and fro Indra ultimately went to the 
banks of the Mandakini and saw that the Guru Deva 
had bathed in the waters of the Mandakini and 
sitting with his face turned towards the East towards 
the Sun, was meditating on Para Brahma, Who has 
His faces turned everywhere. 

my yori wera 063 u 

afte a uke a afis AsAT, 1 

WS a ayan wr AAMT u 64 u 

Tears were flowing from his eyes and the hairs 
of the body stood erect with delight. He was elderly 
in knowledge; the spritual Teacher of all, religous, 
served by all great men; he was held as most dear 
to all the friends. Those who are Jñānins regard 
him as their Gurus. 


1156 


wes a mga graft | 

GT YS wat a aa a gta: Nes oN 

Wed e BT vii WUTHTH a: 1 

Mara wis AA: 66 i 

He was the eldest of all his brothers; he was 
considered as very unpopular to the enemies of the 
Devas. Seeing the family priest Brhaspati merged 
in that state of meditation, Indra waited there. When 
after one Prahara (three hours), the Guru Deva got 
up. Indra bowed down to his feet and began to weep 
and cry out repeatedly. 

grid maar seih TT | 

aduer wm BEML 67 

ĀRA cw ragi sūta at: | 

Then he informed his Guru about his curse from 
a Brāhmin, his acguiring the true knowledge as so 
very rare, and the wretched state of Amarāvatī, 
wrought by the enemies. 

Rrra art spear galada at: 68 N 

quea ARRANA: 1 

O Best of Brahmanas! Hearing thus the words 
of the disciple, the intelligent speaker Brhaspati 
spoke with his eyes reddened out of anger. 


ITEKATA 
gi wd gas middei sy oueou 
a arent fe ARRA ferait a Hares | 
dufrat faufrai «ga smeaftutt 70 1 
dd eater u rad arti Tae à 


adai a TATA vast waar |1 71 

*O Lord of the Devas! I have everything that 
you said; do not cry; have patience; hear attentively 
what I say. The wise politicians of good behaviour, 
with moral precepts, never lose their heads and get 
themselves distressed in times of danger. Nothing 
is everlasting; whether property or adversity; all 
are transient; they only give troubles. All are under 
one’s own Karma. What had been done in previous 
births, so one will have to reap the fruits afterwards. 
(Therefore property or adversity, all are due to 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


one's own Karma.) This happens to all persons 
eternally, births after births. 

amA AA at ufteaat d 

weh fü and avi gads Ramn 11 72 u 

Pain and happiness are like the ring of a rolling 
wheel. So what pain is there? It is already stated 
that one's own Karma must be enjoyed in this Holy 
Bharata. 

WV er feas ferrei eqq | 

"ge affer ant enewedfesmfu u73 N 

The man enjoys the effects of his own Karmas, 
auspicious or inauspicious. Never the Karma gets 
exhausted in one hundred Koti Kalpas, without 
their effects being enjoyed. 

sagaida dite qud aed Wey 1 

saan dd U HA GATT 74 i 

AAAS data HAHN | 

SAATA a eat prado 075 Nu 

aget fe aut a amsaa da fF 1 

The Karma, whether auspicious or inauspicious 
must be enjoyed. Thus it is stated in the Vedas and 
as well by Sri Krsna, the Supreme Spirit. Bhagavan 
Sri Krsna addressed Brahmi, the lotus-born, in the 
Sama Veda Šākhā that all persons acquire their 
births, whether, in Bharata or in any other country, 
according to the Karma that he had done. 

HOT TRIMS ST HOTT sr perform 11 7 6 n 

«runu ngaeaf vati a anion 1 

attests and wilferanrqmesht 077 N 

The curse of a Brahmana comes though this 
Karma; and the blessings of a Brahmana come 
again by this Karma. By Karma one gets great 
wealth and prosperity and by Karma again one gets 
poverty. You may take one hundred Koti births; 
the fruit of Karma must follow you.  . 

a R aaa sti resna tar | 

weve sae use uw adm 478 

quarféressmatsfür Maša fe endum 1 

agers up at uud fu fet u79u 

Rad ritigi ar cattery i 

wü ot a ae at gad wu gr so 


Book IX Chapter XL 


O Indra! The fruit of Karma follows one like 
one’s shadow. Without enjoyment, that can never 
die. The effects of Karma become increased or 
discreased according to time, place, and the person 
concerned. As you will give away anything to 
persons, of different natures, in different times and 
in different places, your merit acquired will also 
very accordingly. Gifts made on certain special 
days bring in Koti times the fruits (merits, punyam) 
or infinite times or even more than that. 

ATT negran ar erts ferar | 

aA Ua GH uud aaa aga cw ou81 

WANS eos at wetsftres i 

"em mee Vea ATA ST 082 N 

ata dave waite he Wem | 

arated feu art wmm WaT 83 U 

Again gifts, similar in nature, made in similar 
paces yield punyam the same, in character also. 
Gifts made in different countries yield punyams, 
Koti times, infinite times, or even more than that. 
But similar things given to similar persons yield 
similar punyams. As the grains vary in their natures 
as the fields differ, so gifts made to different 
persons yield different grades of punyas infinitely 
superior or infinitely inferior as the case may be. 

Giving things to a Brāhmaņa on any ordinary 
days yields simple punya only. But if the gift be 
made to a Brahmana on an Amāvasyā day (new 
moon day) or on a Sankranti day (the day when 
the Sun enters another's sign) then hundred times 
more punyam is acquired. 


agaat drofureamrid wed w 84 

Ten wir: Aep a weer | 

Ada Dent arse dat ango sra n 85 n 

ITT UA Mg | 

KAA quae were wdfefts6u 

Again charities made on the Cāturmāsya periods 
(the vow that lasts for four months in the rainy 
season) or on the fuil moon day, yield infinite 


1157 


punyams. So charities made on the occasion of the 
lunar eclipses yield Koti times the result and if 
made on the occasion of the solar eclipse yield ten 
times more punyamas. Charities made on Aksayaya 
Trtiya or the Navami day yield infinite and endless 
results. So charities on other holy days yield 
religious merits higher than those made on ordinary 
days. 

TET Wr WEIT FIT HUSA | 

we west stad quur esu we 187 N 

"IIT GIŠA AUT YMTQUD SIHUD DOO 

prs Patter Prater pera yer yfe i 88 i 

As charities made on holy days yields religious 
merits, so beathing, reciting mantrams, and other 
holy acts yield meritorious results. As superior 
results are obtained by pious acts; so inferior results 
are obtained by impious acts. As an earthen potter 
makes pots, jars, etc., out of the earth with the help 
of rod, wheel, earthen cups or plates and motion, 
so the Creator awards respective fruits to different 
persons, by the help of this thread (continuity) of 
Karma. 

aaa aga we aa garter cur od 

ea gets dow ARTA mp 189 N 

a ferrem ferent sy rg: ure BETAS i 

"WE: BSI a Ged: Ged cec: 190 N 

Therefore if you want to have cessation of this 
fruition of Karma, then worship, Narayana, by 
whose command all these things of Nature are 
created. He is the Creator of even Brahma, the 
Creator, the Preserver of Visnu, the Preserver, the 
Destroyer of Siva, the Destroyer and the Kala (the 
great Time) of Kala (the Time). 

Tear wart a: ARTA | 

Au ma dufastafecare viet: 91 1 

galee ara: ATT KTI | 

Sra BM AE aaa ANT 0 92 di 

eft Maeda ergo? games 
IRSA: 11 40 11 


Šankara has said: He who remembers 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


1158 


Here ends the Fortieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on 
the birth of Laksini in the discourse of Nàrada and 
Narayana in the Maha Puranam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Madhusūdana (a name of Visnu) in great troubles, 
his dangers cease and happiness begins. O 
Narada! The wise Brhaspati thus advised Indra 
and then embraced him and gave him his hearty 
blessings and good wishes. 


1158 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER XLI 


On the Churning to the Ocean 


sftarrant sare 
att carat fis gres SEIT: ITT | 
gett guga wd: qum wg ur 
vite wear serré; qET Speer | 
wigan: wd ēst yem We 420 


wa: AAN GTA a | 

yeaa NARA Aga n7 0 

Whose mother is so much devoted to her 
husband, whose father, mother’s father and 
mother’s brother are self-controlled and of pure 


Nārāyņa said: O Twice-born! Indra then|Sattva Guna, he is not expected to be so very 
remembered Hari and took Brhaspati, the Guru of | haughty! Every man may be guilty to Hari for the 
the Devas, to the assembly of Brahma, | three faults: For some fault due to that of his father, 


accompanied by the other Devas. They soon 
reached the region of Brahma and no sooner they 
saw Him, than Indra and the other Devas and 
Brhaspati all bowed down to Him. 

auld maaan garaf afè weer a 

Vea Wege Wie HAST: 03 N 

Brhaspati, the Ācārya of the Devas, then 
communicated all to Brahma. Hearing this, He 
smiled and spoke, addressing Indra: 

wears 

ace Wgsrerdtsfer wart 3p fraa: à 

eus Arara gnf: ewm n 4 N 

TIME sara fap: WTTSTA | 

Hort Wer Weg Het ASEP WaT US N 

“O Indra! You have been in My race; nay, you 
are My grandson; the Arya Brhaspati is your Guru; 
you yourself are the ruler of the Devas and you are 
very wise and sagacious; the mother of your father 
is the powerful Daksa, a great Visnu Bhakta. How 
is it, then that when the three sides of the family 
are pure, one would turn out so haughty and 
arrogant! 

aren ferar weer fuer rit Prāta: 1 

WATS MIGS che Asipi dq ue N 


or of his mother's father, or of Guru, the Spiritual 
Teacher. 

Raa WTA udaa: | 

"pe Sea Wala uw Mae AAT 8 di 

uisgi a areal fF vier: 1 

faa a yafadiesitadt at wu 

Raa: WFAA M: Wal: end: HEM: | 

aera: If ftat arrested tt 10 N 

Bhagavan Narayana, resides in this great holy 
temple of our this physical body controlling the 
hearts of all. At whatever moment, Sri Narayana 
quits this temple-body, at that momant this body 
becomes dead. I myself am the mind; Sankara is 
the knowledge, Visnu is the vital breaths, Bhagvati 
Durga is the intelligence (Buddhi), sleep, etc., the 
powers of Prakrti; when these are being reflected 
on by the Atman, Jiva is formed with a body for 
enjoyment called Bhoga Sarirabhrt. 

aai TA qure aif gam: 1 

"em web meat UESTRE 0011 0 

aré frags vier frogei warfare: à 

"qu «dy Ser Ae aH AM u 12 N 

When a king departs, his attendants also follow 
him; so when this Indra! We all, are verily, the 
parts of Sri Krsna I myself, Siva, Ananta Deva, 


Book 1X Chapter XLI 


Visnu, Dharma, Maha Virāt, you all are His parts 
and entirely devoted to Him. And you have shown 
contempt for His flowers. 


fira yfad mai quip du a | 
aa galam ad gaa apd TTT 013 N 
AGU Hees UT PUTT ST STM TTA | 
Beat ST HUT wp AIST Fe aT d 14 ui 
Wes feme fü dd ou sep | 


madi wt wg at ar tartar: 115 N 

Bhagavan Sankara, the Lord of the Bhitas, 
worshipped the lotus feet of Sri Krsna with that 
flower. The Rsi Durvāsā gave you that flower. But 
you showed disrespect to it. The flower, Pārijāta, 
after being offered at the lotus-feet of Krsna, should 
be placed on the head of an Immortal; His worship 
is to be done first; and it is the foremost amongst 
the Devas. So you are now being afflicted by the 
inevitable course of Fate; Fate is the most powerful 
of all. 

m strana TTT STM, | 

AYA TES AH US TAT ST TSI AE 16 N 

Pia erat sfrarer fare procera vr | 

VAĻA mr wd YOM: WE 0017 d 

Who can save that unlucky man against whom 
Fate has turned? Seeing that you have rejected the 
flower offered to $ri Krsna, $ri Laksmi Devi has 
left you out of anger. Now come with Me and with 
your family priest Brhaspati to Vaikuntha and 
worship the Lord of Laksmī; then by His grace 
you may get back your Heavens. 

aa Tea Wael Wad KAT | 

SB Were di wae venum 118 UI 

fanegarden 1 

wid aRar SARATA u 19 u 

Thus saying, Brahma with Indra and all the other 
Devas, went to the Eternal Purusa Bhagavan 
Narayana and saw that He was full of Fire and 
Energy like one hundred koti summer mid-day 
Suns, yet perfectly cool and calm. He has no 
beginning, and no end, nor any middle. He is 
Infinite. 


1159 


agii: unde TART i WL | 

we ergfirdesr tra uta n 20 1 

a wary: gu: we qeat Aeg: 1 

RRA: MANET: WAIT 021 N 

gaii HAMM aes TaN endis: | 

wage: Wet: vafer AT: 22 N 

The four-armed Pārisadas, Sarasvati, the four 
Vedas, and the Ganges, all were surrounding Him. 
Seeing Him, Brahma and the other Devas bowed 
down with devotion and began to chant hymns to 
Him with tears in their eyes. Brahma, then, 
informed Him of everything when all the Devas, 
dispossessed of their places, began to weep before 
Him. Narayana saw that the Devas were very afraid 
and much distressed. 

a cay Gert faced ware | 

ITT a aeatefaatsay 123 0 

Way gah Fert werd Toy i 

sara ATM spr vasitfafasisra: 024 

sfrermrar Tere 

mide eqs we fee at fir fae 1 

areata vadmavi wergedaftritw N25 N 

They had no jewel ornaments as before, no 
vehicles (Vahanas), nor the Daivic splendour as 
before, not that brillance; always fearful. Then 
Narayana, the Destroyer of fear, seeing the Devas 
in that state, addressed Brahma and the other 
Devas: O Brahmana! O Devas! Discard all fears. 
What fear can overcome you? I am here. I will 
give you again the immoveable prosperous Rajya 
Laksmi (the Laksmi of the kings). 

feats faga wet 

fed wei wm Ragana 26 N 

wrararmdvegfergereer restates HATA | 

an amsi ARTA SATA: 27 

But for the present, I give you some advice 
proper for this moment. Listen. There are endless 
universe where exist innumerable persons. All of 
them are under Me. So know verily, that I am under 
them also. 


1160 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


oa ost fe ae ent ft frigo i 

aasi 1 feet waren we FTA t 28 N 

qatar: VIETA eret HATT: | 

vregraranrdtsé a eta fa at Tar 29 u 

My devotees regard Me as the Highest They 
know no other than Me; they are fearless; so I do 
not remain in that house where My devotees are 
dissatisfied. I instantly quit that hous with Laksmi. 
Durvāsā Rsi is born in part of Sankara. He is highly 
devoted to Me. He is pakkā Vaisnava. He cursed 
you and, as a matter of fact, I am Laksmī instantly 
left your house. 

AIGA geet a rarer i 

a ated a fai a wer aa fester i 30 u 

TRA TE PT a SrET- AAT: | 

TESST naga arf RTA, N 31 N 

Laksmī does not reside in that house where 
conchshells are not blown, where there are no 
Tulasī trees, where there is no worship of Šiva and 
Šivā, where the Brahmanas are not fed. O 
Brāhmaņa! O Devas! Where I and My Bhaktas are 
blamed, Maha Laksmi becomes greatly displeased. 
She instantly goes away out of that house. 

xard at gat fad at aftaret 1 

ra warfest arfü arta sfreaqqerafa 32 0 

Tarifa T9 ferenturifer G E te | 

wanferferst saa er aferen fer ager, 33 u 

Laksmi does not stay even for a moment in that 
house where the stupid person, without any 
devotion for me, takes his food on the Harivasara 
Ekādašī day (the eleventh day of the moon’s wane 


WETRBT wet ur KNERT | 

Vat srearét a srrarétat famem: 135 N 

If the son of an unchaste woman be a Brahmana, 
he and the husband of an unchaste woman are great 
sinners. If anybody goes to such a person's house 
or eats the food of a Südra during a Sraddha 
ceremony, Laksmi becomes very angry and vacates 
that house. Being a Brahmin, if one burns a Südra's 
corpse, one becomes very wretched and the vilest 
of the Brahmins. 

wife Ser qaqered qr: dieat i 

VISTO Treat at AA FIAT: | 36 N 

TRĪNU eue arie quen | 

Spur feat Praet fist: 37 N 

Laksmi never stays for a moment more in that 
house. Being a Brahmin, if he be a Südra's cook 
and drives oxen, Laksmi fears to drink water there 
and quits his house. Being a Brahmin, if his heart 
be unholy, if he be cruel, envies others and elames 
persons, if he officiates as a priest for the Südra, 
Laksmi Devi never stays in his house. 

WAIT: Vaitu arret Sat ut TET | 

Maa a a ort enema SATA: 038 N 

sui fat autera ah fafaa | 

first meo VA aaerenter Were i 39 1 

The World-Mother never stays even for a 
moment in his house who eats at the house of one 
who marries an unmarried girl twelve years old in 
whom menstruation has commenced. He who cuts 
grass by his nails, or writes on the ground with his 
nails, or from whose house a Brahmana guest goes 


or increase) or on My anniversay birthday. If | back disappointed, Laksmi never stays in his house. 


anybody sells My name or his own daughter, where 
the guests are not sreved, Laksmi quits that house 
instantly and goes away. 

Note: That Guru is the Real Guru, who, being 
capable, imparts the name of God to worthy persons 
without taking any fee at all. 

"ir fem: darent Nerurut er aeafer: à 

TAA at ré arte yore: 1134 ii 


Walaa feat yaa aar ar ram: à 

fear repens it er ueremramfa feram u 40 N 

saranda fent at we RTR 1 

erdtfardt fe at Agrā arte feram u 41 N 

If any Brahmana eats food at the early sunrise, 
sleeps during the day or engages in a sexual 
intercourse during the day, Laksmi never stays in 
his house. Laksmi slips away from that Brahmana 


Book 1X Chapter XLI 


who is devoid of Acara (rules of conduct), who 
accepts gifts from Südras, from him who remains 
uninitiated in his Mantram. 

Raamaa art fe a: 3rd argos: | 

nyaga araret um HT revere i42 N 

Breen dorsa ST AAT i 

vat er argūsmei SST T Aa aque t 43 il 

The ignorant man who sleeps naked and with 
his feet wet, who laughs always, and always talks 
at random on disconnected subjects like a mad man, 
is forsaken at once by Laksmi. Laksmi becomes 
angry and goes away from the house of that man 
who applies oil all over his body first and then 
touches the bodies of others and always makes 
some sounding noise on several parts of his body. 

adttarattt a: ders gag: 1 

ferrrafarrferéreg werente a fear 44 N 

serat Faden fe du at dfe dau i 

sttaftet aadA aft MARTA: 45 1 

If any Brahmana forsake observing vows, 
fastings, the Sandhya ceremony, purity and 
devotion to Visnu, Kamala (Laksmi) does not 
remain in his house any longer. If anybody blames 
always the Brahmanas and shews his hatred always 
towards the Brāhmaņas, if he does injury to the 
animals, and if he does not indulge in his heart 
anything of pity, kindness, Laksmi, the Mother of 
the Worlds, quite him. 

"TX aa grat Remi aM | 

aa Rek ur edt adie 146 n 

TA ITT PUA AAT fun d 

ara orien eet an fesfer aqu 147 u 

O Lotus-born! But where Hari is worshipped 
and Hari's Name is chanted, Laksmi, the Mother 
of all auspiciousness remains there. Laksmi 
remains where the glories of Sri Krsna and His 
Bhaktas are sung. 

aa gestr: vir: foror KIA | 

adagi turi da ur RAER 448 u 


Laksmi always remains there with the greatest 


1161 


gladness where conch-shells are blown, where there 
are conchshells, the Salagráma stone, the Tulasi 
leaves and the service and meditation of Laksmi 
are daily done. 

raters aa aa hdi ISTA | 

guest magma at uaan 49 ut 

figi tat aa Aut at a TUR 1 

ada adeart da vergi adt uso 

Where the phallic emblem of Siva is 
worshipped, and His glories sung, where Sri Durga 
is worshipped and Her glories are sung, Laksmi, 
the Dweller in the Lotus, remains there. Where the 
Brāhmaņas are honoured and they are gladly 
feasted, where all the Devas are worshipped; the 
chaste Laksmi, the Lotus-faced, remains there. 

BURA U gpa U Tamara: 1 

aiitearnt war aoa meat a 51 0 

STRAT At AAA TANT KATE E | 

"ferar arnt went darit ems went 152 11 

Thus saying to the Devas, the Lord of Laksmi 
said: *O Devi! Go without any delay to the Ksiroda 
Ocean and incarnate there in part.” He then 
addressed Brahma and said: “O Lotus-born! You 
also better go there and then churn the Ksiroda 
Ocean; when Laksmi will arise, give Her to the 
Devas.” 

SRM HUSA STATA TT TA 1 

arn area wg: AATA, 053 u 

Tart tat Heat He Heal U ASAT | 

wean Ve Ham RART: YU: 54 N 

O Devarsi! Thus saying, the Lord Kamala went 
to His inner compartment. On the other hand the 
Devas, after a long time, reached the shores of the 
Ksiroda Ocean. The Devas and the Daityas then 
made the Golden Mountain (the Sumeru) the 
churning rod, the Deva Kürma (the tortoise), the 
churning pot and Ananta Deva (the thousand 
headed serpent) the churning cord and began to 
churn the ocean. 

aaah a geàr, | 

ame eared unpéadi ges u55 ui 


1162 Srimaddevibhagavatam 


armrest eat ar a amaA „a l towards the homes of the Devas, in order to free 
afara vars farà Ahh utt u56 u them from their curse. Then, by the grace of Mahā 
While churning was going on, by and by arose | Laksmi and by the granting of the boon by Brahma, 
Dhanvantari, Amrta (the nectar), the horse |the Devas got back their own possessions from the 
Ucchaihérava, various other invaluable jewels that | hands of the Daityas.” 
were desired, the elephant Airāvata and the| sed afii wd Gg TTU | 
beautiful eyed Laksmi. Visnupriya, Sri Laksmī| Wad ami u fà spar: Agira i 59 N 
Devi, no sooner She got up from the ocean, she, sf MRITA merge? qae 
the chaste woman, presented on the neck of CRA MS EMA: 11 41 11 
Narayana, of beautiful appearance, the Lord of all,| O Narada! Thus I have described to you the story 
Who slept on the Ksiroda ocean the garland |of Laksmi Devi, the Essence of all Essences, and 
(indicative of accepting Him for her bridegroom). | very pleasant to hear. Now what more do you want 


GA: KYAT GAA ST TAIT iR TT | to hear? Say. 

adt «ft qur ARTA, u57 Here ends the Forty-first Chapter of the Ninth Book 
ugar: vafewd ceed TAHT l on the churning of the ocean and on the appearing of 
eeaim AAA ANG 58 il Laksmi in the Maha Puranam 

Then Brahma and Mahešvara and the other Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses 


Devas being pleased, cast a favourable glance by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1162 Srimaddevibhagavatam 
0 OoOoOvm" 


CHAPTER XLII 
On The Stotram of Maha Laksmi 
ana saru Visņu, Šiva, and Šivā, the six deities with scents 
Redt "x i AAT |d and flowers. 
dad CRT eat etd ae uei 1 u wate wo Nereti ucreehefavftn | 


Narada said: O Bhagavan! I have heard about! Yat Wat Weit aan a JAAM 004 i 
the glories of Hari, about the Tattvajtiánam (the query gg army Ti wi 1 
True Knowledge) and the story of Laksmi. Now werfag west ow amare frd ga usa 
tell me Her Dhyànam (meditation) and Stotram| Next Indra invoked Maha Laksmi, of the nature 
(recitation of hymns) of Her. of the highest powers and greatest prosperity, and 
began to worship Her as Brahma, who was acting 


as an officiating priest in the presence of the Munis, 
verear ftf pr reb gear AA amet 1 Brahmanas, Brhaspati, Hari and the other Devas, 
we dear afte WSSSTUTSUU 2 Shad dictated him. 
miai a feet a ate ror] farei forem | VĒST qui a qétear eater | 
War] Ta AZT TEMA ETAT tt 3 N carat Sef mere quraTHTH AE UU 6 N 


Narayana said: O Narada! Indra then, bathed! — sx a mamà Gad sunt Wa 1 
first in the Tirath (holy place) and, wearing a| Rrr da zarna afe wei dā u7u 
cleansed cloth, installed, first of all, an earthen jar| He first smeared one Pārijāta flower with sandal 
(ghata) on the beach of the Ksiroda Ocean. Then | paste and reciting the meditation mantra of Maha 
he worshipped with devotion Gaņeša, Sürya, Fire, || aksmi offered it to Her feet. The meditation 


Book IX Chapter XLII 


1163 


mantra that was recited by Devendra, was what 
Bhagavan Hari first gave to Brahma. I am now 
telling you that. Listen. 

weereeusnereférenrerurdi UA, | 

madaig o wq si 

“O Mother! Thou residest on the thousand- 
petalled lotus. The beauty of Thy face excels the 
beauty of koti autumnal Full Moons. Thou art 
shining with Thy own splendour. 

waa Weal gai Wn | 

yaaa uidi wdt uou 

venquursqareut miai iem | 

Jaena ag RAT uw 10 u 

Thou art very beautiful and lovely Thy colour 
is like the burnished gold; Thou art with from, 
chaste, ornamented all over with jewel ornaments; 
Thou art wearing the yellow cloth and look! What 
beauty is coming out of it! Always a sweet smile 
reigns on Thy lips. Thy beauty is constant; Thou 
art the bestower of prosperity to all. 

adiu vr neoe st VITA | 

SATA E ATCA ATTA 11 

Wyss sear Tara NEN | 

dt reca free adds trade 11 1 2 u 

I Maha Laksmi! I meditate on Thee." Thus 
meditating on Her endowed with various attributes 
with this mantra, Indra worshipped devotedly with 
sixteen upacaras (articles offered). Every upacara 
(article) was offered with the repetition of mantra. 
All the things were very excellent, right and 
commendable. 

VITA uenerit a fafan wr i 

superan xw fuf favre 13 n 

aed a fates wr TET 2T WTRIGTA | 

We tiari addfendifter 14 u 

“O Maha Laksmi! Vi$vakarmà has made this 
invaluable Asana (a carpet seat) wonderfully 
decked with jewels; I am offering this Asana to 
Thee. Accept. O Thou residing in the Lotus! This 
holy Ganges water is considered with great regard 


and desired by all. This is like the fire to burn the 
fuel in the shape of the sins of the sinners. 

urumafkad” rp ET Hae | 

qedegatedad wader u15u 

vgmitud rati gadi warenferfer 1 

wages wp YİR 0 16 N 

O Thou! The Dweller in the Lotus! This Dürba 
grass, flowers, this Arghya (offering) of the Ganges 
water perfumed with sandalpaste, I am offering to 
Thee. Accept. O Beloved of Hari! This sweet 
scented flower oil and this sweet scented Amalaki 
fruit lead to the beauty of the body; therefore I 
present this to Thee. Accept. 

Weuledsts wr garai sitet: fra à 

maii w pA eur efe Em. (1 17 tt 

waaa cp dega d 

snare start ved spot fA Tuam nu 18 0 

udutgdēftsi a wer vium uc | 

garratwumd cw maen RE u19 0 

O Devi! I am presenting this cloth made of silk 
to Thee; accept. O Devi! This excellent ornaments 
made of gold and jewels, which increases the 
beauty, I am presenting to Thee. Accept. 

sfiguraid 4d er ufāsi TTA | 

ginh qud det Sf TAM 20 n 

Wrage wp ufeni ferro | 

watt wuned w gadi a wiveaftu21 

Teed Cp ATT, | 

aRt da Ade wRRTEIST 22 0 

O Beloved of Krsna! I am presenting this sweet 
scented holy Dhüpa prepared from various herbs 
and plants, exquisitely nice and the root of all 
beauty, to Thee. Accept. This sweet scented 
pleasant sandalpaste I offer to Thee, O Devi! 
Accept. O Ruler of the Devas! I present this 
pleasing holy Dipa (lights) which is the eye of this 
world and by which all the darkness is vanished, 
accept. O Devi! I present to thee these very 
delicious offerings of fruits, etc., very juicy and of 
various kinds. Accept. 


1164 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


at TARA cup MORARIT, 1 

gd yti da Serb ufum u23 u 

VIESI sper U Wea | 

MST Ue weed WTERT d 24 N 

O Devešī! This Anna (food) is Brahma and the 
chief means to preserve the life of living beings. 
By this the nourishment of the body and the mental 
satisfaction are effected. Therefore I am presenting 
this food to Thee. Accept. O Maha Laksmi! I am 
presenting this most delicious Paramānna, which 
is prepared out of rice, milk and sugar, to Thee. 


hren U KG GET, 425 u 
ATATĒRTTA ITT wears wer wi 


aera Gage ud 426 

Accept. O Devi! I am presenting this most 
delicious and pleasant svastika prepared of sugar 
and clarified butter to Thee; accept. O Beloved of 
Acyuta! I am presenting to Thee various beautiful 
Pakkannas, ripe delicious fruits and clarified butter 
out of cow's milk; accept. 


wane coupe, 028 


O Devi! The sugarcane juice, when heated, 
yields a syrup which again heated yields very 
delicious and nice thing called Gur. I am presenting 
this Gur to Thee; accept. O Devi! I am presenting 
to Thee the sweetments prepared out of the flour 
of Yava and wheat and Gur and clarified butter; 
accept. 

quad yerearch firgret for TATA i 

ATi ga vad tahtraneanrary 29 NI 

"war Prafed sare IA ITT i 

vitrarggd da ae a qud wp N30 nN 

I am presenting with devotion the offering made 
of Svastika and the flour of other grains; accept. O 
Kamale! I am presenting to Thee this fan and white 
camara, which blows cool air and is very pleasant 
when this body gets hot; accept. 


AS i dd emer yaaa | 

was a at wa wuufeqanu 31 tl 

Ramere AAS? KREA | 

safer grii a AARAA ! 3 2 N 

O Devi! I am presenting this betel scented with 
camphor by which the inertness of the tongue is 
removed; accept. 

stand a Mai afer TER d 

aadtgdeftsi a wamwnfeed-am u33 

augst u enfirst ere ofa TATA i 

vemeduifaenH cup depre 034 

O Devi! L am presenting this scented cool water, 
which will allay the thirst and which is known as 
the life of this world; accept. O Devi! I am 
presenting this cloth made of cotton and silk that 
increases the beauty and splendour of the body. 
Accept. O Devi! I am presenting to Thee, the 
ornaments made of gold and jewels which are the 
source of beauty and loveliness. Accept. 

wirst sft a squoi afar TEIMTA | 

ATS Pratt agns weg 35 u 

qed ya wred ufa wera 1 

wd yasi cw were 136 UI 

O Devi! I am presenting to Thee these pure 
garlands of flowers which blossom in different 
seasons, which look very beautiful and which give 
satisfaction to the Devas and to the kings. Accept. 

Teed Tat tet fa VITA | 

quadtated ta faga vae Wal 37 N 

yaa Hoard vet IT | 

Tanta gaergaafaaa, 138 N 

O Devi! I am presenting to Thee this nice scent, 
this very holy thing to Thee by which both the body 
and mind become pure, which is most auspicious 
and which is prepared of many fragrant herbs and 
plants; accept. O Beloved of the God Krsna! Iam 
presenting this Acamaniya water to Thee for 
rinsing the mouth, pure and holy, and brought from 
holy places of pilgrimages; accept. 

wengqrunpuréd Kad dfe TATA | 

"ewgedWqd a ufeumfu qe 139 N 


Book IX Chapter XLII 
Wasqerévitre vr aged Sher TETATA | 
yeas sear a Aa gada: 140 N 
O Devi! I am presenting to Thee, this bed made 

of excellent gems and jewels and flowers, 

sandalpaste, clothings and ornaments; accept. O 

Devi! L am presenting to Thee all those things that 

are extraordinary, very rare in this earth and fit to 

be enjoyed by the Devas and worthy of their 
ornaments; accept. 

AC IST STRSIT aT GVA PRI: | 

wet area tagga € o ua10 

HAS WET gt: PAJA Wd: | 

wating amant San aaah 42 u 

O Devarsi! Uttering those mantras, the Devendra 
offered those articles, with intense devotion 
according to the rules. He, then, made Japam of 
the Mila Mantra (the Radical Seed Mantra) ten 
lakhs of times. Thus his Mantra revealed the Deity 
thereof and thus came to a successful issue. The 
lotus born Brahma gave this Mantra ‘Srim, Hrim 

Klim Aim Kamalavasinyai Svaha’ to the 

Devendra. This is like a Kalpavrksa (the tree in 

Indra’s garden yielding whatever may be desired). 
fent insi TS: careers aret: i 
EE HPELI uid Mud quae "43 Uu 


This Vaidik mantra is the chief of the mantras. 
The world ‘Svaha’ is at the end of the mantra. By 
virtue of this Mantra, Kubera got his highest 
prosperity. By the power of this Mantra, the King- 
Emperor Daksa Savarni Manu and Mangala 
became the lords of the earth with seven islands. 

fradtrarurdt chant gu wa a | 

we ĒST wear WoT AMG 145 1 

fir TA Termeni: sens agit «dt i 

TART AT TT  wua 460 

Priyavrata, Uttānapāda, and Kedārarāja all these 
became Siddhas (were fructified with success) and 
became King-Emperors. O Nārada! When Indra 


1165 


attained success in this Mantra, there appeared 

before him Mahā Laksmī, seated in the celestial 

car, decked; with excellent gems and jewels. 
sadad geet radīt fear er wt 

n47u 


Wd e ens N 


The Great Halo, coming out of Her body made 
manifest the earth with seven islands. Her colour 
was white like the white campaka flower and Her 
whole body was decked with ornaments. Her face 
was always gracious and cheerful with sweet 
smiles. She was ever ready to shew Her kindness 
to the Bhaktas. On Her neck there was a garland 
of jewels and gems, bright as ten million Moons. 

am mag mia Aa wi d 

gomifadgatT: MAAA: P: 49 N 

Em up waa ANAT HAA: | 

wahfmueda dfehta aq a nson 

O Devarsi! No sooner did Indra saw that Wrold 
Mother Maha Laksmi, of a peaceful appearance, 
than his body was filled with joy and the hairs of 
the body stood on ends. His eyes were filled with 
tears; and, with folded palms, he began to recite 
stotras to Her, the Vaidik stotras, yielding all 
desires, that was communicated to him by Brahma. 

Wat sare 

"TH: SAAT ANTAT AT AA: 1 

guard wed Aes Nat AA: N5S1 N 

VAGĀHUMĀ  UATETĀ Any TA: | 

Wee feret duret sw AAT T: 1 52 4 

Indra said: "O Thou, the Dweller in the lotus! 
O Nārāyaņī! O Dear to Krsņa! O Padmāsane! O 


Mahā Laksmī! Obeisance to Thee! O 

Padmadalaksane! O Padmanibhānane! O 

Padmāsane! O Padme! O Vaisnavi! 
addons Mare Hut TA: | 
ehukeyert a eda Aut aa: 153 N 
FTA: IATA er POT AMT A: à 


TIZRŪNTEAKUTĒ wel U sm us4 i 


1166 


Obeisance to Thee! Thou art the wealth of all; 
Thou art worshipped by all; Thou bestowest to all 
the bliss and devotion to Sri Hari. I bow down to 
Thee. O Devi! Thou always dwellest on the breast 
of Krsna and exercisest Thy powers over Him. 
Thou art the beauty of the Moon; Thou takest Thy 
seat on the beautiful Jewel Lotus. Obeisance to 
Thee! 

durarsreed RÀ ant AA: | 

"Ht AKT afksart Aut au: 55 tt 

O Devī! Thou art the Presiding Deity of the 
riches; Thou art the Great Devī; Thou increasest 
always Thy gifts and Thou art the bestower of 
increments. So I bow down to Thee. 

aque ur megat ment: afta i 

minia deem 1561 

masia fav we A yam | 

ahs: ar Gran afm wreresrfirdt n57 u 

afefaganren cat RA c o rr | 

thal ed wr giai erri vum um 1 58 N 

O Devi! Thou art the Mahà Laksmi of 
Vaikuntha, the Laksmi of the Ksiroda Ocean; Thou 
art Indra’s Heavenly Laksmi; Thou art the Raja 
Laksmi of the Kings; Thou art the Grha Laksmi of 
the hoseholders; Thou art the household Deity of 
them; Thou art the Surabhi, born of the Ocean; 
Thou art the Daksina, the wife of the Sacrifices; 
Thou art Aditi, the Mother of the Devas; Thou art 
the Kamala, always dwelling in the Lotus; Thou 
art the Svāhā, in the offerings with clarified butter 
in the sacrificial ceremonies; Thou art the Svadhà 
Mantra in the Kavyas (an offering of food to de- 
ceased ancestors). So obeisance to Thee! 

va fi gauru natem agen | 

VSAA GUI ed ANAT | 59 1) 

makaa a ATAT VITA YT | 

Wenger wa a wRanmausp wT neon 

O Mother! Thou art of the nature of Visnu; Thou 
art the Earth that supports all; Thou art of pure 
Suddha Sattva and Thou art devoted to Narayana. 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


Thou art void of anger, jealousy. Rather Thou 
grantest boons to all. Thou art the auspicious 
Šāradā; Thou grantest the Highest Reality and the 
devotional srevice to Hari. Without Thee all the 
worlds are quite stale, to no purpose like ashes, 
always dead while existing. 

"er far saree TTT | 

vilae er fayi a yaad sar fram 1 61 tt 

adatu gr curar weertrewsfuvit i 

eafefanraatarant ct a enmmefüutt u 62 n 

Thou art the Chief Mother, the Chief Friend of 
all; thou art the source of Dharma, Artha, Kama 
and Moksa! As a mother nourishes her infants with 
the milk of her breasts, so Thou nourishest all as 
their mother! 

am UAT Seat forgrat VISTA WaT | 

wem cd weer ure udi wes: 063 N 

mds: erie wow state gad: 1 

var état wr: aisha Stata PIITA t 64 1 

A child that sucks the milk might be saved by 
the Daiva (Fate), when deprived of its mother; but 
men can never be saved, if they be bereft of Thee! 
O Mother! Thou art always gracious. Please be 
gracious unto me. 

GRAFIKU vd Wi NAT sratfar | 

df cw femp mfg aa wart ou 65 n 

aE maraa était tadaa Pape: | 

wduufgérur rada aftr uecu 

O Eternal One! My possessions are now in the 
hands of the enemies. Be kind enough to restore 
my kingdoms to me from my enemies’ hands. O 
Beloved of Hari! Since Thou hast forsaken me, I 
am wandering abroad, friendless, like a beggar, 
deprived of all prosperities. 

ae afe a ad a oder | 

vardu yard a natira wu67 N 

wt wet ae mård ww | 

Segen U AA wd: GET: WE NGS I 

O Devi! Give me Jiiinam, Dharma, my desired 
fortune, power, influence and my possessions. O 


Book IX Chapter XLIII 


Narada Indra and all the other Devas bowed down 
frequently to Maha Laksmi with their eyes filled 
with tears. 

WUTATU arg asī At aa Ya: Ya: | 

Eu views stat trier cers: 169 n 

ae um: wert uuu a GA: GA: 1 

day wi Sra YOST AAMT 0 70 N 

ayaa gÀ wat: Geyer gia i 

WACA KET: Ta Ta Cat ATG 71 

Brahma, Sankara, Ananta Deva, Dharma and 
Kešava all asked pardom again and again from 
Maha Laksmi. Laksmi then granted boons to the 
Devas and before the assembly gladly gave the 
garland of flowers on the neck of Kešava. The 
Devas, satisfied, went back to their own places. 

Wet edt gt: ri Et aiara: 1 

agda xagé welt a wa 072 

«ear anions at er gēnam: vitfergetenmg 1 

zd wii Targus Pret a Uda: 73 N 

PAYA wo AAAI AE | 

Tae Ktafafgdagma, 174 i 


1167 


The Devi, Laksmi, too, becoming very glad 
went to Sri Hari sleeping in the Ksiroda Ocean. 
Brahma and Mahe$vara, both became very glad 
and, blessing the Devas, went respectively to their 
own abodes. Whoever recites this holy Stotra three 
times a day, becomes the King Emperor and gets 
prosperity and wealth like a God Kubera. Siddhi 
(success) comes to him who recities this stotra live 
lakhs of times. 

Ranei afa usar q WaT i 

Went a mA after a ym: 075 u 

ale ARRA eno) qaad 
RIRIS: 11 42 11 

If anybody reads regularly and always this 
Siddha Stotra for one month, he becomes very 
happy and he turns out a Rājarājendra. 

Here ends the Forty-second Chapter of the Ninth 
Book on the Dhyānam and Stotra of Mahā 
Laksmi in the Maha Purāņam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter XLIII 


1167 


CHAPTER XLIII 
On Svāhā 


«Ra gara 

man TET gada AM Wat | 

wate Trea wear asa fem 1 n 

cata ATi ste: rai ARAA | 

wuftaat wi a wt defāgi at: N2 N 

Terr sme feat WETS | 

ITT GTI Ané we wi 3 N 

ada Tati auge a wda: 1 

swans GTA adhe iga, 4 di 

Narada said: O Rsi Narayana! O Highly 
Fortunate One! O Lord! Thou art equal to Narayana 
whether in beauty or in qualities, or in fame or in 
energy or in everything Thou art equal to Narayana. 
Thou art the foremost of the Jitānins; there cannot 
be found be found a second like Thee as à Siddha 
Yogi, the ascetics and the Munis. And Thou art 
the crest of the knowers of the Vedas. I have heard 


the wonderful anecdote of Maha Laksmi that Thou 
hast told me. Now tell me any other thing that is 
unkown, very good in everyway, in accordance 
with Dharma, in the Vedas, and that which is not 
as yet written in the Puranas. 
sianar sare 

AAŅANATGI YA T: 1 

dd aaa HA wETSISGSTH U 5 d 

ay aane vr site fe ar varfireofar 1 

wet GS wenn usar AeA: u6 tt 

Narayana said: There are many wonderful 
hidden anecdotes that are not published as yet in 
the Puranas. What you have heard is very small in 
fact. Please mention me what you like to hear, what 
you think as best amongst them and I will describe 
that to you. 


1168 


E — 


ang Sarg 

ware det efaait were ade” | 

gana xar ver afar wdet au 7 u 

Ware and wa perona a | 

Mitra wagers defeat at ou 

Narada said: When clarified butter is poured as 
libations in all the sacrificial cerernonies to the gods, 
Svāhā is to be uttered everywhere as excellent, and 
commendable; so Svadha is to be repeated in the 
offerings when the obtations are offered to the Pitrs, 
te deceased ancestors. Then, again, Daksina (the 
sacrificial fee) is always to be paid as right and 
excellent. So, O Knower of the Vedas! I like to 
hear the account of Svadha, and Daksinà and their 
merits. Please now tell me about them. 


ga gara 


ANG aa: Brat Weer Way | 

aot agers gm! gah uou 

Süta said: Hearing the words of Narada, 
Narayana Rsi smiled and began to speak the very 
ancient words of the Puranas. 

simma Saver 

YÈ: Wea dar: KATEMTĀ ay: TU | 

Peete TATA: RETA N 10 di 

Uem magi azuemdgd YA | 

aan spear Aaa free sfrefé ue u 11 

Narayana said: Before the creation, the Devas 
assembled in the beautiful Brahma’s Council to 
decide on their food question. They all brought to 
the notice of Brahma the scarcity about their food. 
Brahma promised to remove their food difficulties 
and began to chant hymns to Hari. 


ana gara 


agent fü TATA U ATT € | 

ag aaga «ri deser are: 4 12 u 

Nārada said: O Lord! Bhagavān Nārāyaņa 
Himself incarnated in part as Sacrifice. Are not 
the Devas satisfied when the Brāhmaņas pour 
oblations of ghee to the Devas in those sacrifices? 


Srīmaddevībhāgavatam 


sianar IATA 


ziada fama srt 4 fumus | 

aa Aa mad agri gegga 113 u 

gar ferrum As dest er aa: WA: | 

mar feet ERENT 1 14 u 

Narayana said: O Muni! The Devas, in fact, did 
not get the offerings of the clarified butters that 
were poured in with devotion in sacrificial acts by 
the Brāhmaņas and Ksattriyas. So they were very 
much depressed and went again to the council of 
Brahma and informed Him that they could not get 
any food for themselves. 

aan year p carta sitot ret erdt | 

Gat want Vadima Wan 015 ul 

Waa: woo da ndeman i 

ada gai vara muin FATT 116 N 

SURAT CATT |d 

sard feet warty at sy n17 1 

Agai Heat iaga TI i 

On hearing this, Brahmā at once meditated and 
took refuge of Šrī Krsņa; Krsņa advised them to 
worship Mūla Prakrti. Brahmā then, by the 
command of Sri Krsna, began to meditate on 
Prakrti, worship Her and chant hymns to Her, Then 
from the part of Prakrti, an all-powerful Devi 
appeared. She was very beautiful, Šyāmā (of a blue 
colour) and very lovely. This Devi was Svaha. She 
looked always gracious with smile in Her face; it 
seemed that She was always ready to show favour 
towards the Bhaktas. She appeared before Brahma 
and said: "O Lotus born! Want any boon you 
desire." 


JERSTUfO GST 


aan ahaa arsta gat 1 18 n 

ge gren: IAA verat ferar à 

Atari ate at anri BAT: u 19 t 

garea a qp: ayaa i 

Hearing Her words, the Creator spoke 
reverentially: "O Devi! Let Thou be the burning 
power of Fire; without Thee Fire would not be able 


Book IX Chapter XLIH 


to burn anything. At the conclusion of any Mantra, 
whoever taking Thy name, will pour oblations in 
the Fire to the Gods, will cause those oblations to 
go to the Gods and reach them. And then they will 
be very glad. 

ama: duae wr sfissar wr qst t 20 u 

arat Rer vrarenTqiat srarifēras 1 

PAM Ta: Speer ar favor ays 002 1 N 

agara cat elt varfirgret riga | 

O Mother! Let Thou be the wealth of Fire, the 
beauty and housewife of Fire; let Thou be 
incessantly worshipped in the regions of the Gods 
and amongst men and other beings.” Hearing these 
words of Brahma, Svaha Devi became very sad 
and expressed Her own intentions: ‘I will get Krsna 
as my husband; let me perform Tapasyā as long as 
it takes. This is my object. All other thinge are false 
as dreams. 


xarérerer 


sé quot strati em fertur i n22n 
ARI AARAA | 

fermen snae xr vispiegarat feng: 1 2 3 i 

faufa rir fra vr ent: refer foa à 

wafengsdt carat Wry wp ITUTVAT: 0 24 N 

I always meditate with devotion on the lotus- 
feet of Šrī Krsna, serving Which You have become 
the Creator of this world, Sambhu has become the 
Conqueror of death, Ananta Deva is supporting this 
universe, Dharma is the Witness of the virtuous, 
Gaņeša is getting first of all, the first worship. 

Vata: AAAI SAT areae TAT à 

mat Wasa yar afavaar 25 u 

aagi Frit mda fusum | 

WIFE Urata TSTHTHTTTG: 8 26 N 

Prakrti Devi has become the adorable of all and 
the Munis and the Rsis respected by all. O Child! 
Heaving spoken thus to the Lotus-born, Padma, 
with Her lotus-face, meditating incessantly on the 
Lotus-Feet of Sri Krsna, free from any disease, 
started to perform tapasyā for attaining Him. 


74 


1169 


TT quat adt camem RUT fnm 1 

aaa SAARA ce o 027 0 

wat «as siawi foret epe: WA | 

ada aria a wed qur a vefüuft 28 n 

She, first of all, stood on one leg and practised 
austerities for one lakh years. Then She saw the 
Highest Purusa Sri Krsna, Who is beyond Prākrti 
and Her attributes. The beautiful amorous Svaha, 
seeing the Lovely Form of the Lord of Love, fainted. 

ITS WT ATT TTT ATT | 

fera aay adaga € 129 N 

TTU at sor affari aaa RT à 

The omniscient Bhagavàn Krsna knowing Her 
intentions, took Her to His lap, reduced very much 
in body by long continued Tapasyā, and He said: 


sftsrarqarer 
aè cus AA uct ufesfü uso 


AT AAT HAM Hit VARA E | 
aygas Aale vet warmed er arty 31 
TART KET UTT | 
afara ATA ST V TEVA uw 32 u 
vfireafer creat rei TTT crafter à 


O Devi! Thou shalt be My wife in the next 
Varaha Kalpa. Then Thou wilt be the daughter of 
Nagnajit and wilt be known by the name of 
Nagnajiti. O Beloved! At present let Thou be the 
Energy of Fire and be His wife. By My boon Thou 
wilt be worshipped by all. Fire will make Thee the 
Lady of His house and take the utmost care of Thee. 
Thou wilt be able to enjoy easily with Him. 

gagaaisadi dat eet Tareq ANE 33 

Tana dat afgdatrava: 

Bade Hea LETA aT ANRT 113.4 

"ups uge at wrfür sare Aaa: | 

O Narada! Thus saying to Svaha, Bhagavan 
disappeared. On the other hand, Fire came in there 
by the command of Brahma, with a doubtful mind 
and began to meditate on Her, the World Mother 
as per Sama Veda and worshipped Her then pleased 
and married Her with mantrams, etc. 


1170 
war feet adgīd A tt wen we u35u 
ada fait av singe war | 
aya reb erret qp BATT up AAT 00 36 LU 
a gumu m eit fect gaa i 
at: gaa waive TAUTA u37 N 
afaunftandurneattar sat wr | 


For one hundred divine years they enjoyed each 
other. In a very solitary place while they were en- 
joying each other, Svaha Devi felt pregnant. For 
full twelve divine years She retained Her pregnancy. 
Then She delivered gradually there sons 
Daksiņāgni, Gārhapatyāgnī, and Ahavaniyagni. 

IA YAS Teo: QANA: 138 N 

Tarēfd agend ure a aire | 

Taga A Ha er AT TATA aree N 39 t 

aiiai aA: 1 

Råd gar aut dradtat an faa: 40 N 

uferearferdtar et Reri ret Gary i 

Wears wer quit fe fea: u 41 n 

TRATAN HA Tg: ORIG: | 

wRqer fear: ad gar: dyad: ua2u 

The Rsis, Munis, Brahmanas, Ksattriyas poured 
oblations of clarified butter pronouncing the 
terminal mantra ‘Svaha.’ He who pronounces this 
excellent terminal Mantra "Svāhā” gets immediate 
success in his actions. Then all the mantras without 
‘Svaha’ the in teend became impotent as snakes 
become when void of poison, the Brahmanas when 
they are devoid of the knowlege of the Vedas, the 
wife when she does not serve her husband, the men 
when they turn illiterate and the trees, when void 
of fruits and branches. O Child! The Brahmanas 
then became satisfied. The Devas began to receive 
the oblations. 

qia M UG ada uw | 

gad aftri We ATG 11 43 t 

gad Maré wn fen yar: sitqfiresfa i 

With the ‘Svaha’ mantra everything turned out 
fruitful. Thus I have described to you the ancedote 
of “Svaha.’ One who hears tis essential anecdote 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


gets his happiness enhanced and the Moksa in his 
hands. What more do you want to hear? Say. 
AN gara 

varese xr cart vata ga u 44 u 

"gus afedera da age gut a 

Narada said: I like to hear how Fire worshipped 
Svāhā and recited stotras (hymns of praise) to Her. 
Kindly tell me the method of worship, the Dhyanam 
and Stotra. 


sianar Zara 


GU TAK MATA 45 N 

aa seat ARTA TT 1 

adamin wren ues 046 

Tet Hysa TE Url Haters | 

Wale Tt er ag 47 u 

Regia fufarat got aot weet IATA | 

Narayana said: O Best of Brahmanas! I now tell 
you the meditation (Dhyānam) as per Sama Veda, 
the method of worship and stotra. Listen 
attentively. At the commencement of any sacdficial 
stone or in an earthen jar (ghata), the Devi Svaha 
and then commence the ceremony with the 
expectation of getting the desired fruit. The 
following is the Dhyānam (meditation) of Svaha 
Devi: *O Devi Svaha! Thou art embodied of the 
Mantras; Thou art the success of the Mantras; Thou 
art Thyself a Siddha: Thou givest success and the 
the fruits of actions to men Thou dost good to all. 

gfe curar er Wert esr Creech AT: 48 n 

wafefg vrüceqeat erret KA sn | 

3 gi afgemarā qo AMSAT w 49 u 

a: Water Tt WaT ads aga | 

Thus meditating, one should offer Padya (water 
for washing the feet), etc., uttering the basic Mantra; 
success then comes to him. Now hear about the 
Radical Seed Mantra. The said mantra (mila mantra) 
is this: ‘Om Hrim Šrīm Vahnijāyāyai Devyai Svaha.’ 
If the Devi be worshipped with this Mantra, all the 
desires come to a successful issue. 


Book IX Chapter XLIV 


aeara 

xarer aaa afgan tataa u 50 u 

fac fear rera VĀKT | 

"rer: Gar Ao a afè GETAAT 051 0 

dares a unt deno | 

aena a aguante 1520 

Fire recited the following stotra: “Thou art 
Svaha, Thou art the Beloved of Fire, Thou art the 
wife of Fire; Thou pleasest all’ Thou art the Sakti, 
Thou art the action, Thou art the bestower of Kāla 
(time); Thou dost digest the food; Thou art the 
Dhruva; Thou art the resort of men; Thou art the 


burning power; Thou canst burnt everything, Thou 
art the essence of this world; Thou art the deliverer 
from the terrible world; Thou art the life of the 
gods and Thou nourishest the Gods.” 
Aedma amar a: gA: à 
wdfufanidwer ge vnb Wa T n531 


1171 


atmet wares Wwe uH um | 
srt werd Ub maA elfen i 
vertat carat er durer qurmequn N 54 t 
sq dtaedtanrad TIRE ATARI ATS 
carere] PANS ATT: 11 43 11 
O Narada! He who reads with devotion these 
sixteen names, gets success both in this world as 
well as in the next. None of his works become 
dificient in any way; rather all the works are 
performed successfuly and with a successful issue. 
Reading this stotra, one who has no wife, gets wife. 
So much so that the man who recites the stotra 
gets for his wife equal to Rambhā, the heavenly 
nymph, and passes his time in greatest bliss. 

Here ends the Forty-third Chapter of the Ninth Book 
on the history of Svaha in Srimaddevibhagavatam, 
the Maha Puranam, of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


—— MM ere wee 


Book IX Chapter XLIV 


1171 


CHAPTER XLIV 
On Svadha 


Ugu gmdeia dae: u2 u 
Nāyāyaņa said: O Narada! I will tell you now 
the excellent anecdote of Svadha, pleasing to the 
Pitrs and enhancing the fruits of the Sraddha 
ceremony when foods are offered to the Pitrs. 
Listen. Before the creation, the Creator created 
seven Pitrs. Four out of them are with forms and 
the other three are of the nature of Teja (light). 
Note: Kavyavahoanalah somo yamašcāryamā 
tathà, agnišvāttāh barhisadah somāpā pitr devatah. 
These seven Pitrs are according to the other 
Puranas. 
GT Wenger Tatars | 
Met WET Aut sm ator 3 N 
ani adadi sm qo eas | 
ofeach er Preise fermer er gA spam u 4 N 


Seeing the beautiful and lovely forms of the 
Pitrs, He made arrangements for their food in the 
form of Sraddhas and Tarpanas, etc. (funeral 
ceremony and peace-offerings), etc. (Sraddha, 
solemn obsequies performed in honour of the 
manes of deceased ancestors.) Taking bath, 
performing Sraddha ceremony upto Tarpanam 
(peace-offerings), worshipping the Devas and 
doing Sandhya thrice a day these are the daily duties 
of the Brahmanas. 

fred a pater anaiei smart i 

af datafa uwtsfü fad us 05 Nu 

ahaaa stent 1 

wet Uh ma A wise «Wa NGN 

If any Brahmana does not perform daily the 
Trisandhyās, Sraddha, Tarpana, worship and the 
reciting of the Vedas, he becomes devoid of fire 
like a snake without any poison. He who does not 
perform the devotional service of the Devi, who 


1172 


eats food not offered to Sri Hari, who remains 
impure till death is not entitled to do any karma 
whatsoever. 

wem smarad: gst wmm fūgtaa | 

a owreqefa funr aah arenas: 7 ü 

adamy: gf: faang warm: WT | 

wd det agada web fafmp usas 

Thus, introducing the Sraddhas, etc., for the 
Pitrs, Brahma went to His own abode. The 
Brahmanas went on doing the Sraddhas for the Ptrs, 
but the Pitrs could not enjoy them and so they 
remained without food and were not satisfied. They 
all, being hungry and sad, went to the Council of 
Brahma and informed Him everything from 
beginning to end. 

SEI wp ATRI Heat SE q AAT | 

erative ower 90 

fead gradtafrevadi adta | 

Jadan venIWUMIGUI 100 

Brahma then created out of His mind one 
daughter very beautiful, full of youth and having a 
face lovely, as if equal to one hundred moons. That 
women was best in all respects whether in form, 
beauty, qualities or in learning. Her colour was 
white like the white Campaka flower and her body 
was adorned all over with jewel ornaments. This 
form was very pure, ready to grant boons, 
auspicious and the part of Prakrti. 

faapai stir RRR aat TATA | 

Tatru er geet vahaga 11 n 

yangan cep feret a 

"eft Agi ware vereri vereremr 12 u 

Her face was beaming with smiles; her teeth 
were very beautiful and her body shewed signs, of 
Laksmī (i.e., of wealth and prosperity) Her name 
was Svadhā. Her lotus-feet were situated on one 
hundred lotuses. She was the wife of the Pitrs. Her 
face resembled that of a lotus and Her eyes looked 
like water lilies. She was born of the lotus born 
Brahma. 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


grava adt sar peage | 

ATRI wruayt wenn mostrar 11 1 3 0 

mAN da feurer first art ag: wu 14 

The Grand-father Brahma made over that 
daughter of the nature of Tusti (Contentment) to 
the hands of the Pitrs and they were satisfied. 
Brahma advised the Brahmanas privately that 
whenever they would offer any thing to the Pitrs, 
they should offer duly with the mantra Svadha 
pronounced at the end. Since then the Brahmanas 
are offering everything to the Pitrs, with the Mantra 
Svadha uttered in the end. 

Tar TET Saar fq vat VAT | 

ada efàrm wren xd ganaf 15 0 

frat am femur qaat wem ad 

yai amp: watt Mat qua: WATT LI 16 N 

Svāhā is laudable, when offerings are presented 
to the Gods and Svedha is commendable when 
offerings are made to the Pitrs. But in both the 
cases, Daksinà is essential. Without Daksina 
(sacrificial fee), all secrifices are useless and 
worthless. The Pitrs, Devatās, Brahmanas, the 
Munis, the Manus worshipped the peaceful Svadha 
and chanted hymns to Her with great love. 

Šargay Ager: uyi: | 

Raumas fret: wèh atm a 117 0 

gad afer wd vatum 

adai a gèt fe ye: smqfireefer 1 18 Nn 

The Devas, Pitrs, Brahmanas, all were pleased 
and felt their ends achieved when they got the boon 
from Svadha Devi. Thus I have told you everything 
about Svadhā. It is pleasing to all. What more do 
you want to hear? Say. I will answer all your 
questions, 

stare sara 

verga wr cart Etat TEN i 

Agia aa ag defeat at 19 tt 

Narada said: O Thou, the Best of the knowers 
of the Vedas! O Muni Sattama! [ want now to hear 


Book IX Chapter XLIV 


1173 


the method of worship, the meditation and the 
hymns of Svadha Devi. Kindly tell me all about 
this. 


ARTA Jaret 

EXTA a rer aerd Wei TN | 

ad aria a ensi smgfireofer ASĀ 11 20 u 

INPOAM AA AAA STATA | 

aut uer mer Wd: Sm BAP u21u 

Narayana said: You know everything about the 
all auspicious Dhyana, Stotra, as stated in the 
Vedas; then why do you ask me again? However I 
will speak out this for the enhancement of 
knowledge. On the thirteenth day of the Dark 
Fortnight in autumn when the Maghā asterism is 
with the Moon and on the Sraddha day. 

vaut maai up fim: pafin: | 

"ESTER STER AGT AVOTI E |1 22 N 

rero ARĪ Hat IATA i 

sar à fqaarat smart wet TA 123 N 

One should worship with care Svadhà Devi; then 
one should perform Šrāddha. If, out of vanity, a 
Brahmin performs Šrāddha without first worship- 
ping Svadha Devi then he will never get the fruits 
of Tarpanam or Sraddha. ‘O Devi Svadhe! Thou 
art the mind-born daughter of Brahma, always 
young and worshipped by the Pitrs. Thou bestowest 
the fruits of Sraddha. 

fe srar Rrevat ar waar rio ae i 

«eerie cea Toth pdt sp u 2 4 N 

So gl sf Eae vereri ETAT | 

peur wr dus KAT qt wuntafast: «25 U 

So I meditate on Thee. Thus meditating, the 
Brahmin is to pronounce the motto (müla mantra) 
and offer the Padyam, etc., on the Šālagrāma stone 
or on the auspicious earthen jar. This is the ruling 
of the Vedas. The motto is ‘Om Hrim, Srim, Klim, 
Svadha Devyai Svaha.’ She should be worshipped 
with this Mantra. After reciting hymns to the Devi, 
one is to bow down to the Svadha Devi. 


Kits sup PLANS Marga faymu | 

dated quí serum wepd WT 26 N 

O Son of Brahma! O Best of Munis! O Skilled 
in hearing! I now describe the stotra which Brahma 
composed at the beginning for the bestowal of the 
desired fruits to manking. Listen. 


siana sera 


Tata deferret Matt: à 

ed wdurvat antag wu 427 

Narayana said: The instant the Mantra Svadha 
is pronounced, men get at once the fruits of bathing 
in the holy places of pilgrimages. No trace of sin 
exists in him at that time; rather the religious merits 
of performing the Vajapeya sacrifice accrue to him. 

Tal tae ate ate anari BN | 

MGA HSA TSA ALIN wp 028 0 

MH AMAA 31: TOA ATA: à 

a magii wea a dea: 129 N 

*Svadhà,' "Svadhā, 'Svadhà,' thrice this word 

if one calls to mind, one gets the fruits of Šrāddha, 
Tarpanam, and Bali (offering sacrifices). So much 
so, if one hears with devotion during the Sraddha 
time the recitation of the hymn of Svadhā, one gets, 
no doubt, the fruit of Sraddha. 

Teen waar add rae: |: USAT à 

frat farttat vr ersrearedtt yaaa n 30 N 

Rigori morgen ed aortan 1 

aasad a aAA meyer 31 N 

If one recites the Svadhā mantra thrice every 
time in the morning, midday and evening) every 
day, one gets an obedient, chaste wife begetting 
sons. The following is the hymn (Stotra) to Svadhā 
wife begetting sons. The following is hymn (Stotra) 
to Svadhā: *O Devi Svadhe! Thou art dear to the 
Pitrs as their vital breaths and thou art the lives of 
the Brahmanas. Thou art the Presiding Deity the of 
Śrāddha ceremonies and bestowest the fruits thereof. 

feared UTT TT quessurs Gat i 

arataa Get a west Aa u32 u 

So vafis] Ta: Talal vere ed SPAT TAT | 

fraftarggdā: wenen «fm ga: n331 


1174 Srimaddevibhagavatam 


O Thou of good vows! Thou art eternal, true,| These the Lord of the world has Created for the 
and of the nature of religious merits. Thou appearest | success of actions.’ No sooner Brahma, seated in 
in creation and disappearest in dissolution. And | His assembly in the Brahma Loka, reciting this 
this appearing and disappearing go on for ever. |stotra remained silent, then Savdha Devi appeared 
Thou art Svasti, Thou art Namaskāra (salutation); | there all at once. When Brahma handed over the 
Thou art Svadhà. Thou art Daksina, Thou art the |lotus-faced Svadhà Devi over to the hands of the 


various woks as designated in the Vedas. Pitrs, and they gladly took Her to their own abodes. 
miya gator fafufüan 1 He who hears with devotion and attention this stotra 
SOAR U Sum sereno verde i34 NI of Svadhi, gets all sorts of rich fruits that are desired 
weder AEST We: LAT Asta! € | and the fruits of bathing in all the Tirthas. 
war Agma: Wael ara HASTA 35 N Here ends the Forty-fourth Chapter of the 
at durer age a fm wf 1 Ninth Book on the story of Svadha Devi in the 
marad quei a: apaitfer amfa: 11 discourse between Narada and Narayana in the Maha 
ae: adta eifed TOATA i 36 ti Puránam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 

aa Aedmaa ETA! FARGA IRGART VA verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. 


NIRA JAIRA: 11 44 11 


1174 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


sy ——————— 


CHAPTER XLV 


On Daksina 


strana sara 

Sth CARA NT BAYT UTT | 

agn afarorrears reet Prema 11 1 it 

Tie gotten arate vas sa et: 1 

Ten erra welt erm AAT rate 2 N 

ada gat wat gum yah act od 

Read yad mRet adt us 

Narayana said: The excellent, most sweet stories 
of Svaha and Svadhā are told; now I will tell you 
the story of Daksina; hear attentively. In early days, 
in the region of Goloka, there was a good-natured 
Gopi named Sušīlā, beautiful, Radha’s companion 
and very dear to Sri Hari. She was fortunate, 
respected, beautiful, lovely prosperous, with good 
teeth, learned, well qualified and of exquisitely 
handsome form. 

erst amet adt mere | 

gato get varam aem 4 u 

Her whole body was tender and lovely like 
Kalāvatī (one versed in 64 arts; moon) She was 
beautiful and her eyes were like water lilies. Her 
hips were good and spacious; Her breasts were full; 


she was Syama (a kind of women having colour 
like melted gold; body being hot in cold and cool 
in summer; of youthful beauty); as well She was 
of the Nyagrodha class of women (an excellent 
woman. Stanau Sukathinau Yasyà Nitambeca 
Višālatā. Madhye Krinabhavedya Sanyagrodha 
parimandala). 

ASTE waaay | 

nadrain faretēt ATT Ns Nu 

Always a smile sweetened Her face; and that 
looked always gracious. Her whole body was 
covered with jewel ornaments. Her colour was 
white like the white campakas. Her lips were red 
like the Bimba fruits; Her eyes were like those ofa 
deer. 

ATT Fron efte gamit à 

MATA Mae HoT fuerit u 6 ti 

Sušilā was very clever in amorous sciences. Her 
gait was like a swan. She was specially versed in 
what is called Prema Bhakti (love towards God). 
So She was the dearest lady of Sri Krsna. And She 
was of intense emotional feelings. 


Book IX Chapter XLV 


Tat ver Wa WaT Talat 1 

Sarerafant wars XTETETT: YT: GT 407 d 

dagange wat MET: 1 

SBT Tatu gt MAT AT, N g u 

She knows all the sentiments of love; she was 
witty humorous, and ardent for the love of Sri 
Krsna, the Lord of the Rasa circle. She sat by the 
left side of Sri Krsna in the presence of Radha. Sti 
Krsna, then cast His glance on Radha, the Chief of 
the Gopis and hung down His head through fear. 

afte vereri THAT | 

ales afta U ars PERTE 9 u 

aa at g reddi faga quem | 

Adad mariaa wear a: 10 N 

ura a ente ser yrit ara KANTA | 

foresters für ir: giere Frat 11 tt 

Radha’s face turned red; the two eyes looked 
like red lilies; all Her bodies began to quiver out 
of anger and Her lips began to shake. Seing that 
state of Radha, Bhagvan Sri Krsna dissappeared, 
fearing that a quarrel might ensue. Sušīlā and other 
Gopis seeing that the peaceful Krsna of Sattva 
Guna and of lovely form had dis appeared, began 
to tremble with fear. 

fasten wud aa mAai caretes: | 

yeiga stat afterarerchent: 12 N 

TH Weymda sia Ya: Ya 

agii yu degus 0 13 0 

Then one lakh Koti Gopis seeing Krsna absent 
and Radha angry, became very much afraid and 
bowing their heads down with devotion and with 
folded palms began to say fequently. “Radhe! 
Protect us, protect us’ and they took shelter at Her 
feet. 

Aeaaeai wat: Yared va Ww | 

"gea vnu maa cep WW 14 N 

werd a aid a feng uva | 

usid wget wvfei a yee aT 15 N 

O Narada! Three lakh Gopas also including 
Sudāmā and other took shelter at the lotus feet of 


1175 


T 


Šrī Rādhā out of fear. Seeing, then, Krsņa absent 
and Her companion Sušīlā running away, Rādhā 
cursed her thus: 

arenrrfer Meta at oraret werent | 

wet MANTA sTumureg whee u 1 6 li 

yaaa aa gadagtt wr 1 

west waned wasn € 017 0ü 

‘If Susila’ comes again to this Goloka, she will 
be reduced to ashes.’ Thus cursing Her companion 
Susila out of anger, Radha, the Darling of the Deva 
of the Devas, and the Lady of the Rasa circle went 
to the Rasa circle and called on Krsna, the Lord of 
the same. 

MAFI Ua: Hoot Ter fermen TT | 

grazed T ater gaT 18 il 

& E ATTATĀVTTES urerferesfira 1 

urarférerqaer ure aife erar feram i 19 n 

Not being able to find out $ri Krsna, a minute 
appeared a yuga to Her and she began to say: O 
Lord of Pránas! O Dearer than My life! O Presiding 
Deity of my life! O Krsna! My life seems to depart 
from Thy absence! Come quickly and shew Thyself 
to me. 

Sid: ukrdramagda wr fet fas i 

ae a fango? aed data: War 20 u 

uia: goetara: wer wet: 1 

Tea Afsana: Wat 421 N 

eria: Yaa: Vraits: wife: War 1 

O Lord! It is through the favour of one’s hus- 
band that the pride of women gets increased day 
by day. Women’s safeguards of happiness are their 
husbands, Therefore women, who are helpless crea- 
tures, ought always to serve their husbands accord- 
ing to Dharma. The husband is the wife’s friend, 
presiding deity and the sole refuge and the chief 
wealth. It is through husbands that women derive 
their pleasures, enjoyments. Dharma, happiness, 
peace and contentment. 

wardens MIA UBS: 022 0 

SNe: Carat seat Segal: | 

aa ug: wur dye gvad 23 N 


1176 


If husbands are respected, wives are respected 
and if husbands are dishonoured, women are 
dishonoured too. The husband is the highest thing 
to a woman. He is the highest friend. There is no 
better friend than him. 

RUTA wat U UTT | 

yie U Tat emma: Bit FTA 11 2 4 N 

ays Gagan a VERTIT: AT: | 

Waders WoT: 0025 N 

Ranea var: Prat iier füremeqe: | 

Ware varfira: (TT rw BIS 26 i 

The husband is called Bhartā because he 
supports his wife; he is called Pati, because he 
preserves her; he is called Svami, because he is 
the master of her body; he is called Kānta because 
he bestows the desired things to her; he is called 
Bandhu, because he increases her happiness; he is 
called Priya, because he gives pleasure to her; he 
is called I$a, because he bestows prosperity on her; 
he is called Pranesvara, because he is the lord of 
her Prana; and he is called Ramana, because he 
gives enjoyment to her. There is no other thing 
dearer than husband. The son is born of the 
husband; hence the son is so dear. 

VAĻA: Laat Host fü: war | 

STHCROUT ur aid feast 0 27 N 


er a addig adagy afar a 
maA uféreursr walter a auth at 28 N 
galaa aadA mererart-r art | 
summer grama afar fr spar w i 29 N 
Jeder fayda dgdarfēd wu i 


mia: waan: eoi éd TSI u30 N 

The husband is dearer to a family woman than 
one hundred sons. Those who are born in impure 
families, cannot know what substance a husband 
is made up of. Taking baths in all the Tirthas, giv- 
ing Daksiņās in all the Yajfias (sacrifice), circu- 
mambulating round the whole earth, performing 
all austerities, observing all vows, making all great 
gifts, holy fastings, all that are dictated in the 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Sastras, serving the Guru, the Brāhmaņas and the 
Devas all cannot compare to even one sixteenth 
part with serving faithfully the feet of the husband. 
The husband is the highest; higher than the Spiri- 
tual Teacher (Guru), higher than the Bráhmanas, 
higher than all the Devas. 

B2EPEECCKI adag fare: 1 

ferararar AUT gat GOTI aem fra: 11 31 n 

As to man, the Spiritual Teacher who imparts 
the Spiritual Knowledge is the Best and Supreme, 
so to the women their husband are the best of all. 

ai waar tart a ada a | 

AAISTTATEIMNI dreamt AŽA wp 32 1 

fayarfantmataanivant aerated: i 

EA a denied Areal GUAT: 033 N 

Oh! I am not able to realise the glory of my 
Dearest, by Whose favour I am the Sole Ruler of 
one lakh Koti Gopis, one lakh Koti Gopas, innu- 
merable Brahmāņdas, and all the things thereof, 
and all the lokas (regions) from Bhu (earth) to 
Goloka. Oh! The womanly nature is insurmount- 
able." 

BRIA URI HO vr SEAT AMT: | 
coda door ar eer area area 3.4 u 

ws eff ta dtr feug 1 

aa wr afar adt ear Mea AT u 35 N 

Thus saying, Radhika began to meditate with 
devotion on Sri Krsna, Tears began to flow inces- 
santly from Her eyes. She exclaimed “O Lord! O 
Lord! O Ramana! Shew Thyself to me. I am very 
much weak and distressed from Thy bereave- 
ment.” 

TTU arent fader are i 

AY CATA: We dzi Heal TERT 1136 N 

meni tae qui favum: wergfafeng i 

fakta spear gardtat emerfen t 37 u 

Now the Daksina Devi, driven out from Goloka, 
practised Tapasya for a long time when She entered 
into the body of Kamalà. The Devas, on the other 


Book IX Chapter XLV 


1177 


hand, performed a very difficult Yajūa; but they 
could not derive any fruit therefrom. So they went 
to Brahma, becoming very sad. 


RA AAPA TATRA TATA: Gt 
ARTA STATS dēt: 0038 N 
fer reg ueieerit er afo ay i 
wem edt at were wore OT i39 u 
aa: Wyse Afani ARTA wr WT | 


Hearing them, Brahmà meditated on Visnu for 
along time with devotion. At last Visnu gave Him 
a reply. Visnu got out of the body of Maha Laksmī 
a Martya Laksmi (Laksmi of the earth) and gave 
Her Daksinà to Brahma. Then with a view to yield 
to the Devas the fruits of their Karmas, Brahma 
made over to the Yajiia Deva (the Deva presiding 
the sacrifice) the Devi Daksina, offered by 
Narayana, Yajfia Deva, then, worshipped Her duly 
and recited hymns to Her with great joy. 

ATT ARS THUS 0040 UI 


ada grata gai pae | 
HAO AAS STATA 41 1 


yarei a pert gear i 
agtfagtr: ur gerar: 44 u 
RATANA: PSS CSTA | 
xusnafrdareut quegtfoTmanma 45 u 


Her colour was like melted gold; her lustre 
equalled koti Moons; very lovely, beautiful, 
fascinating; face resembling water lilies, of a gentle 
body; with eyes like Padma Palāsa, born of the 
body of Laksmi, worshipped by Brahma, wearing 
celestial silken garments, her lips resembling like 
Bimba fruits, chaste, handsome; her braid of hair 
surrounded by Malati garlands; with a sweet 
smiling face, ornamented with jewel ornaments, 
well dressed, bathed, enchanting the minds of the 
Munis, below the hair of her forehead the dot of 


musk and Sindüra scented with sandalpaste, of 
spacious hips, with full breasts, smitten by the 
arrows of Kama Deva (the God of Love). Such 
was the Daksina Devi. 

Mea AMAA | 

wi xgr woftat a ast Westra € 11 46 I 

uct ama wore faftrstféraudenn i 

feat miyi da utter g fs 47 u 

"ng Xu per Beat Wag TTT Wu | 

b gun m edt fae greater n 48 n 

Seeing Her, the Yajña Deva fainted. At last he 
married her according to due rites and ceremonies. 
Taking her to a solitary place, he enjoyed her for 
full divine one hundred years with great joy like 
Laksmi Narayana. Gradually then Daksinà became 
pregnant. She remained so for twelve divine years. 

aa: Gore US aT HS d adeno i 

uy aft a aaa: wes: 04907 

wit afarorar aref GATT U WG E | 

fiar maar aera deferat fag: 150 n 

Then she duly delivered a nice son as the fruit 
of Karma. When any Karma becomes complete, 
this son delivers the fruits of that Karma. Yajfia 
Deva with His wife Daksiņā and the above named 
Karmaphala, the bestower of the fruits of actions, 
gives the desired fruits to all their sacrificial acts 
and Karmas. 

wag afar ATT qoi xr VGA | 

ee eat u Vea: aff da ARs 51 UN 

war age: Rya: | 

Tara tag: cud tae sp u52u 

So the Pandits, the knowers of the Vedas, say. 
Really he, henceforth, began to give fruits to all 
the persons of their acts, with his wife Daksina 
and son, the bestower of the fruits of the actions. 
The Devas were all satisfied at this and went away 
respectively to their own abodes. 

weal enr a Hat wr qui eee farum i 

cert wenn deem Ya 53 0 

af eatin uif a Aut ate farum 1 

A GET ANTANS AAT 11 54 i 


1178 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Therefore, the man who performs Karmas, 
generally known as Karma Kartās, should pay the 
Daksina (the Sacrificial fee) and so he completes 
at once his actions. It is stated in the Vedas, that 
no sooner the Karma Karta pays the Daksina, than 
he obtains the fruits of his Karmas at once. 

Ged watt g fag wr due i 

Tanta cada g ar Prentfepam a at i55 i 

PTA TESTU wane fum aa: 1 

AA Sag Went SITEIUITAÉ V aes 11 56 N 

In case the Karma Karta, after he has completed 
his acts, does not pay either through bad luck or 
through ignorance, any Daksiņā to the Brahmanas, 
its amount is doubled if a Muhürta, passes away 
and if one night elapses, its amount is increased, 
to one hundred times. If three nights pass away, 
and the Daksiņā not paid, the amount last brought 
forward, is increased again to hundred times; if a 
week passes, the last amount is doubled, and if one 
month passes away, the Daksinà is multiplied to 
one lakh times. 

Tat endi g ur fraotfequrr sq à 

ed caer wd d Peas wea 57 N 

Ta gaat a 1 ateis R: 1 

aftst entrar du unda unmeb 11 58 N 

If one year passes away, that is increased to ten 
millions of times and the Karma, also, bears no 
fruits. Such a Karma Karta is known as taking away 
unfairly a Bráhmana's property and is regarded as 
impure. He has no right to any further actions. For 
that sin, he becomes a pauper and diseased. Laksmi 
Devi goes away from his house, leaves him, cursing 
him severely. 

vare Sgi Mt Tra Fara | 

frat Aa yea dud smgaqdum 59 0 

Wd Gus eps wETRHSTERT. | 

wd a dea ot gedit Aa red neon 

So much so that the Pitrs do not accept the 
Šrāddha, Tarpanam offered by that wretched 
fellow. So the Devas do not accept his worship, 


nor the Fire accepts the oblations poured by him. 
If the person that performs sacrifices does not pay 
the sacrificial fee that he resolves to pay and he 
who accepts the offer does not demand the sum, 
both of them go to hell. 
salt dt are arfas dar we: i 
aidad ram ATA, 61 N 


Wügda weg: 1620 


But if the performer of the sacrifices does not 
pay when the priests demand the fee, then the 
Yajamāna (the performer of the sacrifices) only 
falls down to hell as the jar, severed from the rope, 
falls down. The Yajamāna (pupil) is denominated 
as a Brahmasvāpahārī (one who robs a Bráhmana's 
property); he goes ultimately to the Kumbhipaka 
hell. 

vt TAT ister SIH SAH: 1 

UA VAI HT WWW: 63 d 

ete afer fam fee spar: sitgfirosfi i 

There he remains for one lakh vears punished 
and threatened by Yama's messengers. He is then 
reborn as a Cāņdāla, poor and diseased. So much 
so that his seven generations above and his seven 
generations below go to hell. O Nàrada! Thus I 
have narrated to you the story of Daksina. What 
more do you want to hear? Say. 

ana gara 

AT aaron ent spa MK qd N 65 u 

efr afr a meta vadd | 

erafàrui dem aquis a ates 166 U 

Narada said: O Best of Munis! Who. bears the 
fruits of that Karma where no Daksiņā is paid. 
Describe the method of worship that was offered 
to Daksinà by Yajiia Deva. Narayana said: Where 
do you find the fruit of any sacrifice without 
Daksina? (i.e. nowhere.) That Karma only gets 
frutis where Daksiņās are paid. And the fruits of 
the acts void of any Daksinā, Bali who lives in the 
Patala only enjoys; and no one else. 


Book IX Chapter XLV 


asà aged a aaa WU WX od 

RMA: AGRA U 467 

queiraferferurart ws seafach vr n | 

aaa: qud GAAS: werd w wq ! 68 N 

TTT end ated - HUE 

For, in olden times, it was ordained by Bamana 
Deva that those fruits would go to the king Bali. 
All those pertain to Šrāddha not sanctioned by the 
Vedas, the charities made without any regard or 
faith, the worship offered by a Brahmin who is the 
husband of a Vrsala (an unmarried girl twelve years 
in whom menstruation has commenced), the fruits 
of sacrifices done by an impure Brahmana (a 
Bráhmana who fails in his duties), the worship 
offered by impure persons, and the acts of a man 
devoid of any devotion to his Guru, all these are 
reserved for the king Bali. He enjoys the fruits of 
all these. 

GĒTE BT vet KATRA N 69 N 

aad avarai yagan frgmt 1 

ya virer ai ag: piegi er ATT 70 u 

YAREN: KAKŪTT FETT HUTA: | 

O Child! I am now telling you the Dhyana, 
Stotra, and the method of worship as per Kanva 
Šākhā of Daksinà Devi. Hear. When Yajfia Deva, 
in ancient times got Daksiņā skilful in action, he 
was very much fascinated by her appearance and 
being lovestricken, began to praise her: “O Beau- 
tiful One! You were before the chief of the Gopis 
in Goloka. You were like Radha; you were Her 
companion; and you were loved by Sri Radha, the 
beloved of Sri Krsna. 


Ug Sars 


Ge Teta ve west WenT aT 0 73 N 
Terran aera a oftendit fram i 
mianya q ITĀ rem Weed 172 N 
afani aferortarerseratay AT fiurr | 
WR a QCM NTT vito VITA 73 N 
PAT STETSITUTes t AAU | 
"itetered wearer wa smargufeenr 1 74 N 


1179 


In the Rasa circle, on the Full Moon night in the 
month of Kartik, in the great festival of Radha, 
you appeared from the right shoulder of Laksmi; 
hence you were named Daksina. O Beautiful One! 
You were of good nature before; hence your name 
was Sušilā. Next you turned due to Radha’s curse, 
into Daksiņā. It is to my great good luck that you 
were dislodged from Goloka and have come here. 

nui He Wert ume verfiri He i 

enfin «tūri afe a WHAT Du 75 N 

var far a adut ae ado PAA | 

aa fen erem at effort A VISTA 0 76 u 

O highly fortunate One! Now have mercy on 
me and accept me as your husband. O Devi! You 
give to all the doers of actions, the fruits of their 
works. Without you, their karmas bear no fruit. So 
much so, if you be not present in their actions the 
works never shine forth in brilliant glory. 

ARITA fasureTqu Ta ud 

IVI He qrd «t MRA ET fert 77 u 

add rad sm MU WENN: | 

arent frog rangi area u78 

"erg waa Peļu wf TT d 

Tad HON TATA U AAT HE |1 79 di 

Tata wife: enit Tr IATA art i 

darit sE at VE ATA U 80 i 

Without Thee, neither Brahma, nor Visnu nor 
Mahe$a nor the Regents of the quarters, the ten 
Dikpālas, can award the fruits of actions. Brahma 
is the incarnate of Karma. Mahe$vara is the incarnate 
of the fruits of Karmas; and I Visnu myself is the 
incarnate of Yajfias. But Thou art the Essence of 
all. Thou art the Para Prakrti, without any attributes, 
the Para Brahma incarnate, the bestower of the fruits 
of actions. Bhagavan Sri Krsna cannot award the 
fruits of actions without Thee. 

FAT wp TRA aaga | 

Gar aya Wr Wet AA di HATH 81 

su efürmedta zamora U A: WIT i 

We a went ure ATA yn 11 82 1 


1180 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


O Beloved! In every birth let Thou be my Šakti. 
O Thou with excellent face! Without Thee, I am 
unable to finish well any Karma. O Nārada! Thus 
praising Daksina Devi, Yajfia Deva stood before 
Her. She, born from the shoulder of Laksmī, 
became pleased with His Stotra and accepted Him 
for Her bridegroom. If anybody recites this Daksina 
stotra during sacrifice, he gets all the results thereof. 

TĀ aot meme 1 

TIA eie) fermas AFR 0 83 N 

eae afte wf wee waded | 

wies. ataust Yonne un 084 

Raad wat Vat a dgh | 

ast amat U heh Rudd uss i 

west mAsa a are | 

wart arta er difrartu ugh 186 N 

If anybody recites this stotra in the Rājasūya 
sacrifice, Vajapaya, Gomedha (cow sacrifice) 
Naramedha (man sacrifice), A$vamedha (horse 
sacrifice), Langala Sacrifice, Visnu Yajfia tending 
to increase one’s fame, in the act of giving over 
wealth or pieces of lands, digging tanks or wells 
or giving fruits, in Gaja medha (elephant sacrifice), 
in Loha Yajfia (iron sacrifice), Svarna Yajūa (gold 
sacrifice), Ratna Yajiia (making over jewels in 
sacrifice), Tamra Yajūa (copper), Siva Yajūa, 
Rudra Yajíia, Sakra Yajīa, Bandhuka Yajūa, 
Varuna Yajfia (for rains), Kandaka Yajfia, for 
crushing the enemies, Suci Yajfia, Dharma Yajiia, 
Papa mocana Yajfia, Brahmāņī Karma Yajfia, the 
auspicious Prakrti Yaga, sacrifices, his work is 
achieved then without any hitch or obstacle. There 
is no doubt in this. 

vlui ST ar gd Hist wu: UST |i 

faférera a aci wd srafe faf2raw u 87 Nu 

gå iti wr fered curs Gana Syo i 

VT xi arte «fārori wsrareqeft: u 88 u 


The stotra, thus, is mentioned now; hear about 


the Dhyanam and the method of worship. First of 


all, one should worship in the Šālagrāma stone, or 


in an earthen jar (ghata) Daksinā Devi. The 
Dhyànam runs thus: 

mattered aaron HATH | 

Wdeu cat a weet Weudump uso 

Ra: Reana wr ufsrat afat yT i 

Visai yig a gri yet wn 90 

“O Daksinā! Thou art sprung from the right 
shoulder of Laksmi; Thou art a part of Kamala; 
Thou art clever (Daksa) in all the actions and Thou 
bestowest the fruits of all the actions. Thou art the 
Sakti of Visnu, Thou art revered, worshipped. Thou 
bestowest all that is auspicious; Thou art purity; 
Thou bestowest purity, Thou art good natured. 

urea Atal Wort Usage: 1 

Sra uris wed derer AN 191 N 

3 off aot gi afar verf u farag: | 

uaatgtiagerean afar aAa 92 i 

So I meditate on Thee” Thus meditating, the 
intelligent one should worship Daksina with the 
principal mantra. Then with the Vedic Mantras, 
padyas, etc. (offerings of various sorts) are to be 
offered. Now the mantra as stated in the Vedas, 
runs thus: ‘Om Srim, Klīm, Hrim, Dāksiņāyai 
Svāhā.” With this mantra, all the offerings, such as 
padyas, arghyas, Svaha. With this mantra, all the 
offerings, such as padyas, arghyas, etc., are to be 
given, and one should worship, as per rules, 
Daksinà Devi with devotion. 

sad wd wurefénmeunmeg ui 

Mad Wife da wed adeno |193 u 

ge a Ameni a: go umfea: i 

eii a deed a weaned af u94u 

O Narada! Thus I have stated to you the anecdote 
of Daksina. Happiness, pleasure, and the fruits of 
all karmas are obtained by this. Being engaged in 
sacrificial acts, in this Bhàratavarsa, if one hears 
attentively this Dhyānam of Daksina, his sacrifice 
becomes defectless. 

agat eret vt ferae er Tanta i 

wae wera goe Hat um ! 95 n 


Book IX Chapter XLVI 


1181 


erret prt ferc frana, i 
ukaa wr AU Host er dti ANT 196 N 
aadA sA tradit GGU | 
afta edgft wart PAGSTA 0 97 N 
dae dyhead faut der wem 1 
"Henr spe Gert ATA APA: 498 Nu 

att ARRIT HIN dam SRGURIIUNISIO 
usan enyeurg: 1045 11 

So much so that the man who has got no sons 

gets undoubtedly good and qualified sons; if he 

has no wife, he gets a best wife, good nature, 

beautiful, of slender waist, capable to give many 


sons, sweet speaking, humble, chaste, pure, and 
Kulina; if he be void of learning, he gets learing; if 
he be poor he gets wealth; if he be without any 
land, he gets land and if he has no attendants, he 
gets attendants. If a man hears for one month this 
stotra iof Daksina Devi, he gets over all difficulties 
and dangers, bereavements from frinds, troubles 
imprisonments, and all other calamities. 

Here ends the Forty-fifth Chapter of the Ninth Book 
on the anecdote of Daksina in the Maha Purāņam 
Srimaddevi. bhagavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book IX Chapter XLVI 


1181 


CHAPTER XLVI 
On Sasthi Devi 


aman a edtat yaaa | 

aami afti were defeat at nan 

Narada said: O Thou, the foremost of the 
Knowers of the Vedas! J have heard from you the 
anecdotes of many Devis. Now I want to hear the 
lives of other Devis also. Kindly describe. 

siana Sart 

vatai ana fam quu cw Venerem | 

galma er edtat arat sitqfréestu n 2 i 

Narayana said: O Best of the Brahmanas! The 
lives and glorious deeds of all the Devis are 
described separately. Now say, which lives you 
want to hear. 

ARG Sarat 

"BL Wedel wp AAA Weed: Het | 

Iatrarai efi stg restr Tad: 03 u 

Narada said: O Lord! Sasthī, Mangala Candi, 
and Manasā, are the parts of Prakrti. Now I want 
to hear the lives of them. 

starrer saret 

asim WHat a ata wat Wentferar i 

amaaa Rara at AT 11 4 1 

mag a Raren Sasa AT | 

grorféren fire me Ceara AT 1 5 i 


Narayana said: O Child! The sixth part of Prakrti 
is named as Sasthi. The Devi Sasthi is the Presiding 
Deity of infants and children; She is the Maya of 
Visnu and She bestows sons to all. She is one of 
the sixteen Mātrkās. She is known by the name of 
Devasena. She performs Vratas (vows); She is the 
chaste and dearest wife of Skanda. 

MAYS A Tea erat taoro 1 

wed fergpursfeer nra fuga uen 

She decides on the longevity of children and is 
always engaged in their preservation. So much so, 
that this Siddha Yogini always keeps the children 
on her side. 

wear: qumfaftr agafar sor 1 

agri afar gad gad iis "7 u 

Wer trasaagriiaardgamat: Ya: 

dist agegrat aver tt: Wet us d 

O Best of Brahmanas! I will now talk about the 
method of worshipping this Devi and the history 
about Her bestowing children that I heard from 
Dharma Deva. Hear. Svayambhuva Manu had one 
son Priyavrata. He was a great Yogindra and re- 
mained in practising austerities. So he was not in- 
clined to have any wife. 

GET p Web Herat aa € | 

gent gaara a od Ad gy uoa 


1182 


yita x art ATATATA ayaa: | 

Tred wer arā Hfadziemē wb |1 10 N 

At last by the effort and request of Brahma, he 
got himself married. But many days passed, and 
he could not see the face of a son. Then Maharsi 
Kašyapa became his priest in the Putresti Sacrifice 
(to get a son); and when the sacrifice was over, he 
gave the sacrificial offering called caru to his wife 
Malini. 


FRAT Ua TS TAM: Va TT ana € | 
aan ci OT adh Set AAMT O01 i 
Aa: Ya A TAHA BHAA | 
nataan N12 I 


On eating the caru, the queen Malini become 
pregnant. For twelve Deva years she held the 
womb. After twelve years she delivered a full 
developed son, of a golden colour; but the son was 
lifeless and his two eyeballs were upset. 

a apr weg: Wat arg aiaa: | 

yoia a Yaga TAT 0013 N 

VAS M aay WaT Teta Aer FF | 

wis MA HAN Gs Heat aAA 11 1 4 u 

At this, the friends wives became very sorry and 
began to weep. The mother of the child became so 
very sorrowful that she became senseless. O Muni! 
The King himself took the son on his breast and 
went to the burning ground. 

ASTE Cd Wa VUE SEIT: | 

Watt TOWER XV RISTSUIR 15 N 

Katram da faa cw gavt a | 

fart nA 116 u 

There with his child on his breast he began to 
cry aloud. Rather he got himself ready to guit his 
own life than leave the son from away his breast. 
At this time he saw in the space overhead an aerial 
car, white as crystal, made of excellent jewels, 
coming towards him. 

sera safest areas aimant i 

«rerferaferfersmat KSTATSTĒĒRTĒSTAA 0 17 u 

weet aa edt cw arab Wes | 

Jadumani ag RAT u1s i 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


The car was shining with its own lustre, en- 
circled with woven silken cloth, which added to 
its beauty. Innumerable garlands of variegated 
colours gave it a very nice and charming appear- 
ance. 

SUSAN ITT, | 

Gardi Aai aA TSIM 19 U 

Set at tat Ws gea UTA |d 

"Wenn Utd cen femme arc fa 20 N 

On that car was seated a Siddha Yoginī, very 
beautiful, of a lovely appearance of a colour like 
that of white campakas, always youthful, smiling, 
adorned with jewel ornametnts, ever gracious to 
show favour to the devotees. On seeing Her, the 
King Priyavrata placed the child from his breast 
on the ground and began to worship Her and chant 
hymns to Her with great love and devotion. 

uges TT at gei zung i 

AAT Valera vriert ener ATT ATS 0 21 N 

stare 

TH at GUNA Set HET TATA Gat | 

BT HT TVS IAT ATA T TAT 22 

And he then asked that peaceful lady, the wife 
of Skanda, Who was shinning like a summer sun: 
“O Beautiful! Who art Thou? Whose wife art Thou 
and whose daughter art Thou? From Thy 
appearance it seems that Thou art fortunate and 
respected amongst the female sex.” 

TORS GA: ĀTI UĀĪS | 

sara gada cur gari worenrfteft Nu 23 u 

erat ŠIE T SAT AIT AT | 

we Tat OT dem Wear U AA WT 4 24 Ui 

O Narada! In ancient times, when the Daityas 
dispossessed the Devas of their positions, this Lady 
was elected as a general and got victory for the 
Devas; hence She was named Devasena. Hearing 
the words of the King Priyavrata, Devasenā, who 
fought for the Devas and was all good to the whole 
world, said: 


Book IX Chapter XLVI 


1183 


sfttadatara 

wat MR wa aA a 

YE At AAT aa «dt Gara sifira 25 NI 

ATT er ferire vehement GAA | 

fad wetter forearen ween WHA: UTT 26 N 

“O King! I am the mind-born daughter of 
Brahma. My name is Devasenā. The Creator before 
created Me out of His mind and made Me over to 
the hands of Skanda. Amongst the Matrkas, I am 
known as Sasthi, the wife of Skanda. I am the sixth 
part of Prakrti; hence I am named Sasthi. 

aqaa waersé fuerant frara a ad 

erase after: wffeas weed u 27 N 

I give to those who have no sons, wives to those 
who have no wives, wealth to the poor, and I give 
works to those who are workers (karmis.) 

ae go wa vient eat tet a i 

mafas faufusr wd srafe endum 28 u 

HUI aguas dye: WeenHu | 

aim ueuasr m fave: 029 u 

Happiness, pain, fear, sorrow, joy, good, and 
wealth and adversity all are the fruits of Karmas. 
As the result of one's Karmas, people get lots of 
sons and it is due to the result of one's Karma again 
that people are denuded of all the issues of their 
family. As the result of Karma, the people get dead 
sons; and as the result of Karma the people get 
long lives. 

ser praida atom aime: | 

aim agus arate: aut 0430 ! 

«nium waar Wht vrareceren | 

aim a tagat enims sheep wp 11 31 N 

All enjoy the fruits of their Karmas, whether 
they be well qualified, or deformed or whether they 
have many wives, or whether they have no wife, 
whether they be beautiful, religious, diseased, it is 
all through Karmas. Disease comes out of their 
Karmas. 

Tee AMATI TAT Sp d 

Paya TT edt gar aor FT n 32 U 


ATT T cat aE Brea | 

Tat eat. are ud aT 33 i 

Again they get cured by their Karmas. So, O 
King! It is stated in the Vedas that Karma is the 
most powerful of all.” Thus saying, Devasenā took 
the dead child on her lap; and, by the wisdom, early 
made the child alive. The King saw, the child, of a 
golden colour got back his life and began to smile. 

saat a Uva TOUGHT WT VT | 

yia sp ddl wt WeTHERT 034 Uu 

GARE At XTSIT YRRIR: 1 

qe wr edt uwRqer aa wou35 

sere d qd sura dares asd forfan à 

Thus bidding goodbye to the King, Devasena 
took the child and became ready to depart, At this 
the King's palate and throat got dry and he began 
again to chant hymns to Her. The Devi Sasthi 
became pleased at the stotra made by the King. 
The Devi then addressed the King and said: 


agarar 

fg voten ca ToT ariga: Ad: 136 N 

WA gai a ads TTT tad He | 

qa enà yi A pot ARA N37 u 

“O King! All that is stated in the Vedas, is made 
up of Karmas. You are the son of Svāyambhuva 
Manu, and the Lord of the three worlds. You better 
promulgate My worship in the three worlds and 
you yourself worship Me. Then I will give you 
your beautiful son, the lotus of your family. 


Gad am fread Todd wdfSqW i 
wife cer anit ara 0 38 ! 
Vaga AB arret wp afaa, | 
AMAT THAN add AG WPT 039 N 
afrt fern vpn faget trata w | 


Afri wat ta Paget quiam 40 1 

aad er wes grami eu | 

Your son, born in part of Narayana, will be 
famous by the name of Suvrata. He will be well- 
qualified, a great literary man, able to remember 
his conditions in his former lives, the best of Yogis, 


1184 


performer of one hundred Yajñas, the best of all, 
bowed down by the Ksattriyas, strong as one lakh 
powerful elephants, wealthy, fortunate, pure, 
favourite of literary persons, learned and bestower 
of the fruits of the ascetics, renowned and bestower 
of wealth and prosperity to the three worlds." 

setae wr adt ait d smod: adt 41 u 

Tat gren uellent ward PŪT: à 

sra adi ant vr gear AEH BST ATT 0 42 N 

Thus saying Devasena gave the the child to the 
king. When the king promised that he would 
promulgate Her worship, the Devi granted him 
boons and went up to the Heavens. 

AAMT TATA: TATE KRUTA: | 

SITTGT HMA gaii YACTHA 143 N 

gar ay: ATE aw asst AE | 

tie aaa ada Vaga 44 u 

The king, too, becoming very glad and sur- 
rounded by his ministers, returned to his own abode 
and informed all about the son. The ladies of the 
house, become highly delighted when they heard 
everything. On the occasion of the son’s getting 
back his life, the king performed everywhere aus- 
picious ceremonies. 

Sd a yara aTgrutszīt ert eat | 

THT ST MATEY PROTA MEITA N 45 N 

"ED SANs AAT STATA AT: 1 

Seri gram were asa 46 N 

The worship of Sasthi Devi commenced. Wealth 
was bestowed to the Brahmins, Since, then, on 
every sixth day of the bright fortnight in every 
month, great festivals in honour of Sasthi Devi 
began to be celebrated. 

aga arama ARARAT | 

ATT Yate ST YMA TAT 047 Ui 

ada adam Maja wem € | 

wat Kafi a vitat wat POSTS U 48 N 

"eg dae enter ep YAT: | 

Since then, throughout the kingdom, on every 
sixth day after the birth of a child in the lying-in 


Srimaddevibhàgavatam 


chamber, Sasthi Devi began to be worshipped. On 
the twenty-first day, the auspicious moment, at the 
ceremoney of giving rice to a child for the first 
time, when sixth months old, and on all other 
auspicious ceremonies of the children, Sasthi 
Devi's worship was made extant and the king 
himself performed those worships with great care 
and according to due rules. Now I will tell you 
about the Dhyanam and method of worship and 
stotra as I heard from Dharma Deva, and as stated 
in Kauthuma Šākhā. Hear. He has said: 

FIGIT w2 ATSA AASTAT YA 11 49 u 

Rri gafat gran vrerirgr Ferran: | 

waist wand: Yat Wistar a ETAT N 50 1 

In a Šālagrāma stone, in a jar, on the root of a 
Vata tree, or drawing the figure on the floor of the 
rooms, or making an image of Sasthi Devi, the 
sixth part of Prakrti and installing it, one should 
worship the Devi. 

"uae a garai Garu! MTA, | 

yamani IETTUTATĀTA 0051 u 

arent uci Web wd at og 

ofa caren carte qur aea ferarum: i 52 N 

The Dhyànam is this: O Devasena! Thou art the 
bestower of good sons, the giver of good luck; Thou 
art mercy and kindness and the progenitor of the 
world; Thy colour is bright like that of the white 
Campaka flowers. Thou art decked with jewel 
ornaments. Thou art pure, and the highest and best 
Devi. Obiesance to Thee I meditate on Thee." Thus 
meditating, the worshipper should place flower on 
his own head. 

Greater a yest KĀRTI wet i 

meate tered udis 53 1 

AAAA wow wit E 

do di A verf farda 154 u 

Then again meditating and uttering the principal 
mantra one is to offer the Padya (water for washing 
feet), Arghya, Acamaniya, scents, flowers, dhüp, 
lights, offerings of food and best roots and fruits 


Book IX Chapter XLVI 


1185 


and one should worship thus the with various things 
Sasthi Devi ‘Om Hrim Sasthi Devyai Svaha’ is 
the principal Mantra of Sasthi Devi. 

seat West Gate WIA: | 

Aa: tral a WUT ekg: AAs: SS N 

Kid wp amd at YARON, | 

Wat WT GT dt Wadd: 156 H 

This great Mantra of eight letters a man should 
repeat as his strength allows. After the Japam, the 
worshipper should chant hymns with devotion and 
undivided attention and then bow down. The Stotra 
(hymn) of Sasthi Devi as per Sama Veda is very 
beautiful and son-bestowing. 

aga a GATT Hata: | 

wit soy gAs ndaga 57 1 

The lotus-born Brahma has said: If one repeats 
(make Japam) this eight lettered mantra one lakh 
of times, one gets certainly a good son. O Best of 
Munis; Now I am going to say the auspicious stotra 
of Sasthi Devi as composed by Priyavrata, Hear. 

awmi a adu y ane | 

it qe mA Praga VI AAT AA: 58 1 

gard gera wed oh art a | 

arent aun eet at GUT 40059 0 

One's desires are fulfilled when one reads this 
very secret stotra. Thus the King Priyavrata said: 
“O Devi, Devasena! I bow down to Thee. O Great 
Devi! Obeisance to Thee! Thou art the bestower 
of Siddhis; Thou art peaceful; obeisance to Thee! 
Thou art the bestower of good; Thou art Devasena; 
Thou art Sasthi Devi, I bow down to Thee! Thou 
grantest boons to persons; Thou bestowest sons and 
wealth to men. 

Had Mares wet asā mīt d 

ged usigraurd fragt a utm: 60 N 

"rari Rrgatttrā uztācā wat TA: | 

mÀ anes a Vara ART AR: N67 d 

So obeisance to Thee! Thou givest happiness 
and moksa; Thou art Sasthi Devi; I bow down to 
Thee. Thou thyself art Siddha; so I bow down to 


75 


Thee. O Sasthi Devi! Thou art the sixth part of 
this creation; Thou art Siddha Yogini, so I bow 
down to Thee. Thou art the essence, Thou art 


Z 


Sáradà; Thou art the Highest Devi. 
arertisraeeat wünrer Hut am: | 
HMA eheu: HHT uw AMA tt 62 I 
Tae CATHAL WERE SST TA TA: d 
Get chemin udui deu 163 N 
So I bow down again and again to Thee. Thou 

art the Presiding Deity Sasthi Devi of the children; 

I bow down to Thee. Thou grantest good; Thou 

Thyself art good and Thou bestowest the fruits of 

all Karmas. O Thou O Sasthi Devi! Thou shewest 

thy from to thy devotees; I bow down to Thee! 

Thou art Suddha Sattva and respected by all the 

persons in all their actions. 
gaman wel AAT AM: 1 
errand uisu qur wer 64 N 
farmterafarā A mit =: od 
ent af frat dfe gi afe quf nesu 
Thou art the wife of Skanda. All worship Thee. 

O Sasthi Devi! Thou hadst saved the Devas. So 

obeisance to Thee O Sasthi Devi! Thou hast no 

envy no anger; so obeisance to Thee. O Surešvarī! 

Give me wealth, give me dear things, give me sons. 

Give me respect from all persons; give me victory; 

slay my enemies. 

"ri «fe we afe feet osa wea 1 

ent ofe uvm afa usine ub: 066 u 

id fit wort afe ferat afe aha 1 

meat u we efe ster AAT AA: 167 N 

O Mahešvarī! Give me Dharma; give me name 
and fame; I bow down again again to Sasthi Devi. 

O Sasthi Devi! worshipped reverentially by all! 

Give me lands, give me subjects, give me learning; 

have welfare for me; I bow down again and again 

to Sasthi Devi, O Narada! 
sfā ef degu OY ys fuus: | 
gris wr: WHIM: YATA: 168 N 
Utara sera a: sponte g AAA i 
ag werd Ya ut ufus u69u 


1186 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Thus praising the Devi, Priyavrata got a son, 
renowned and ruling over a great kingdom through 
the favour of Sasthi Devi. If any man that has no 
son, hears this sotra of Sasthi Devi for one year 
with undivided attention, he gets easily an excellent 
son, having a long life. 

weird aut sra ASS STOTT eT à 

adaa Aga wp 1170 0 

dH as a giri aadi ayer i 

gerrgadi a yd edited: u71u 

If one worships for one year with devotion this 
Devasenā and hears this stotra, even he most barren 
woman becomes freed from all her sins and gets a 
son. Through the grace of Sastht Devi, that son 
becomes hero, well qualified, literate, renowned 
and long-lived. 


THAT a AT AT TAT EE AT TAT | 
wd grat cepi ziedam 172 1 
Wea are a fire sonra à 
"HS enr ate: wstediwaraa: 173 1 
ata ARRAI AIRI AIREA usque? 
FEAR MSA: 11 46 11 
If any woman who bears only a single child or 
delivers dead children hears with devotion for one 
year this stotra, she gets easily, through the Devi’s 
grace, a good son. If the father and mother both 
hear with devotion, this story during the period of 
their child’s illness, then the child becomes cured 
by the Grace of the Devi. 

Here ends the Forty-sixth Chapter of the Ninth Book 
on the anecdote of Sasthi Devi in the Maha Purāņam 
Šrīmaddevībhāgvatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. 


1186 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


- E 


CHAPTER XLVII 
On Manasa 
stant sare Or the Candi who is an object of worship of 
«lt Wey emp "emm | Mangala of the family of Manu who was the ruler 


wet hrid a wanemri faymmu ouod 

T: quifach ere dao UBI 1 

gheine adai faga n2 

aan a add ih Kendt wr TTT | 

Narayana said: O Narada! I have now narrated 
the anecdote of Sasthi as stated in the Vedas. Now 
hear the anecdote of Mangala Candi, approved of 
by the Vedas and respected by the literary persons. 


The Candi, that is very skilled in all auspicious” 


works and who is the most auspicious of all good 
things, is Mangala Candika. 

HTT AT A eat a a ates 3 N 

gen at ade cat sfà él: 1 

Or the Candi who is an object of worship of 
Mangala (Mars), the son of earth and the bestower 
of desires is Mangala Candika. 

amene a ar a Weder ua 

et ngiyas wadana: 1 

wer grarssitgadt da messer 5 


of the whole world composed of seven islands and 
the bestower of all desires is Mangala Candi. 
ufa wr gat euge d 
wuneursfeueram difrarftredaar 6 
Wer ufsrat HT p vitor UAT |d 
Age ad ait fpa wea wow 
Or it may be that the Mīla Prakrti, the Govern- 
ess, the Ever Gracious Durgà assumed the form of 


‘Mangala Candi and has become the Ista Devatā of 


women. When there was the fight with Tripurasura, 
this Mangala Candi, nigher than the highest was 
first worshipped by Mahadeva, stimulated by 
Visnu, on a critical moment. 

wean gts a dae | 

ITT art Wer ur aT 11 8 d 

aaae gut qur vimm | 

a a dheidh a aya worded: n9 i 

O Brahmin! While the fighting was going on, a 
Daitya threw out of anger one car on Mahadeva 


Book IX Chapter XL VII 


and as that car was about to fall on Him, Brahma 
and Visnu gave a good advice when Mahadeva 
began to praise Durgà Devi at once. 

sare qua: visite amedifer a wt i 

wrargrars wdgmd safest 10 0 

VSIA urs STU A YD: | 

ATATTAT xp gR AA WHESSD 11 i 

EI dei R a AUT Wee 1 

Durgā Devī that time assuming the form of 
Mangala Candi appeared and said “no fear no fear, 
Bhagavan Visnu will be Thy Carrier buffalo. I will 
be also Thy Sakti in the action and Hari, full of 
Maya, will also help Thee. Thou better slayest the 
enemy that dispossessed the Devas. ” 

garaian adt gion: Vētra AT 12 u 

Rada vreau SATA MATA: | 

O Child! Thus saying, the Devi Mangala Candi 
disappeared and She became the Sakti of 
Mahadeva. Then with the help of the weapon given 
by Visnu, the Lord of Uma killed the Asura. 

aig fat get ad gar ēda: N 13 

Tga: vat ead ARRARIR: | 

we: frie vita qurqfeeiwp F114 0 

wan ferper get aat erdt greater i 

MATTS Yaa: ARAM 4 15 0 

When the Daitya fell, the Devas and Rsis began 
to chant hymns to Mahadeva with devotion and 
with their heads bent low. From the sky, a shower 
of flowers fell instantaneously on Mahādeva's 
head. Brahma and Visnu became glad and gave 
their best wishes to Him. Then ordered by Brahma 
and Visnu, Sankara bathed joyously. 

VETATATU at Tere dat Tere Senn] 1 

wrar aaa fefe 16 u 

yaa ated d 

siàs mitad: ufar&rere u 17 0 

aerate ur: fug 1 

agia gama wein nis n 

Then He began to worship with devotion the 
Devi Mangala Candi with pādya, Arghya, 


1187 


Acamaniya and various clothings. Flowers, san- 
dal paste, various goats, sheep, buffaloes, bisons 
birds, garments ornaments, garlands, Pāyasa (a 
proparation of rice, ghee, mild and sugar), 
Pistaka, honey, wine, and various fruits were of- 
fered in the worship. 

EHIGEGETHSERCEIBEZGEE 

CT ITT IA PHT 1 1 9 1 
ad xemfor qeu dala at ane | 

So Ot wet Tages Ufa Wueefuza 20 li 

Dancing, music, with instruments and the 
chanting of Her name and other festivals 
commenced. Reciting the Dhyana in 
Mādhyandina, Mahadeva offered everything, 
pronouncing the principal Radical Mantra. "Om 
Hrim Srim Klim Sarvapüjye Devi Mangala 
Candike Hum Phat Svaha’ is the twenty-one 
lettered Mantra of Mangala Candi. During 
worship, the Kalpa Vrksa, the tree yielding all 
desires, must be worshipped. 

$ & we wein: C: 

"sU: area ilā kā N27 U 

E Wafufgsidquew | 

wart wp adi srgrederedi wem 11 2 2 ! 

O Narada! By repeating the Mantra ten lakhs of 
times, the Mantra Siddhi (success in realising the 
Deity inherent in the Mantra) comes. Now I am 
saying about the Dhyanam of Mangala Candi as 
stated in the Vedas and as approved by all. Listen. 

edt urevadtai yagen i 

Radi Kart orat reer 0 23 N 

Vara PTA | 

Weg a gr radam: eunt ! 24 NI 

“O Devi Mangala Candike! Thou art sixteen 
years old; Thou art ever youthful; Thy lips are like 
Bimba fruits, Thou art of good teeth and pure. Thy 
face looks like autumnal lotus; Thy colour is like 
white campakas; Thy eyes resemble blue lilies; 
Thou art the Preserver of the world and thou 


as 


bestowest all sorts of prosperity. 


1188 

daar at satdteui wer st | 

GY aAa wat gaai 025 n 

Thou art the Light in this dark ocean of the 
world. So I meditate on Thee.” This is the 
Dhyànam. Now hear the stotra, which Mahadeva 
recited before Her. 


TA wa maada horae | 

arte facet wetddinewahth 126 

wires co giha | 

g Togad cw ouprocewes 027 

Mahadeva said: “Protect me, Protect me. O 
Mother! O Devi Mangala Candike! Thou, the 
Destroyer of difficulties! Thou givest joy and good. 
Thou art clever in giving delight and fortune. Thou 
the bestower of all bliss and prosperity! Thou, the 
auspicious, Thou art Mangala Candika. 

"aS wend cw adugenge | 

wai gea dub end 28 

yà teat a heeg i 

yà HA HJA HATA, 29 N 

Thou art Mangala, worthy of all good, Thou art 
the auspicious of all auspicious; Thou bestowest 
good to the good persons. Thou art worthy to be 
worshipped on Tuesday (the Mangala day); Thou 
art the Deity, desired by all. The King Mangala, 
born of Manu family always worships Thee. 

ametenga "eni a we i: 

umen unma ua30u 

m a Ager wt a adatom i 

Rmt uw ot yga? 0310 

KĀTA VY Heal mgereif Senn | 

Uga U wet avr wa: Pra: 032 N 

Thou, the presiding Devi of Mangala; Thou art 
the repository of all the good that are in this world. 
Thou, the Bestower of the auspicious Moksa. Thou, 
the best of all; Thou, the respository of all good; 
Thou makest one cross all the Karmas; the people 
worship Thee on every Tuesday; Thou bestowest 
abundance of Bliss to all." 


Stimaddevibhagavatam 


wer qferar dat frat adage d 

fadta after ar a AEST Te A 33 N 

Atā ya war ngA TI U | 

ugd ass at yai: wafer 134 N 

Thus praising Mangala Candika with this stotra, 
and worshipping on every Tuesday, Sambhu 
departed. The Devi Sarva Mangala was first 
worshipped by Mahadeva. 

tat ugermifaatinesd st 1 

qha uratavey fagavrufštar war 35 t 

aa: ada usur aya Gaga | 

was yfad màt 36 

Next she was worshipped by the planet Mars; 
then by the King Mangala; then on every Tuesday 
by the ladies of every household. Fifthly she was 
worshipped by all men, desirous of their welfare. 
So in every universe Mangala Candika, first 
worshipped by Mahadeva, came to be worshipped 
by all. Next she came to be worshipped 
everywhere, by the Devas, Munis, Mānavas, 
Manus. 

eT ESA a: porter amfa: à 

Wage wate A smbSHae | 

add yatta vee a fet fed 137 u 

O Muni! He who hears with undivided attention 
this stotra of the Devi Mangala Candika, finds no 
evils anywhere. Rather all good comes to him. Day 
after day he gets ons and grandsons and so his 
prosperity gets increased, yea, verily increased! 

SHT Sart 

IA KAT AGA AATA, | 

Kadi area wegd star: 1138 I 

Nārāyaņa said: O Nārada! Thus I narrated to you 
the stories of Sasthi and Mangala Caņdikā, according 
to the Vedas. Now hear the story of Manasā that I 
heard from the mouth of Dharama Deva. 

Ga GAN Wad TAU U UTT à 

aaa Wgt eet rer ara deaf 11 39 0 


KAT Tad TU UTA aT | 
da ur maurādt aa unn daft 140 0 


Book IX Chapter XL VII 


1189 


Manasā is the mind-born daughter of Maharsi | . 


Ka$yapa; hence she is named Manasā; or it may 
be She who plays with the mind is Manasā. Or it 
may be She who meditates on God with her mind 
and gets rapture in Her meditation of God is named 
Manasā. 

STATA et UT dt Soret Perea 1 

Bret a queque PUTT WATT: 041 

Sev a spr went 1 

wda weh area wey: 4420 

She finds pleasure in Her Own Self, the great 
devotee of Visnu, a Siddha Yogini. For three Yugas 
She worshipped Sri Krsna and then She became a 
Siddha Yogini. Sri Krsna, the Lord of the Gopis, 
seeing the body of Manasā lean and thin due to 
austerities, or seeing her worn out like the Muni 
Jarat Kàru called her by the name of Jarat Káru. 

wifi er adr ad quare arise: | 

Tt SETCUTHTR ATS ae WT: 043 N 

vent a meas xr Ofer aerate: | 

aot soreg wiht ar Gat TE 044 u 

Hence Her name has come also to be Jarat Karu. 
Krsna, the Ocean of Mercy, gave her out of 
kindness, Her desired boon; She worshipped Him 
and Sri Krsna also worshipped Her. Devi Manasa 
is known in the Heavens, in the abode of the Nagas 
(serpents), in earth, in Brahmaloka, in all the worlds 
as of very fair colour, beautiful and charming. 

wore aren aa aT afsrar ae à 

frafdrear a at dāt aa Stet uaiféar u 45 N 

farepsrenrdtar vrarireureft ca ntfs 1 

She is named Jagad Gauri as she is of a very 
fair colour in the world. Her other name is Saivi 
and she is the disciple of Siva. She is named 
Vaisnavi as she is greatly devoted to Visnu. 

amat urenífanft aa AfA er 46 i 

miaii farra at aaa wr i 

fat dedam ar aa fue erat N 47 N 

fatgant ereara aa ur freer à 

rari a ant a gada Vara 148 n 


She saved the Nagas in the Snake Sacrifice 
performed by Pariksit, she is named Nagešvarī and 
Naga Bhagini and She is capable to destory the 
effects of poison. She is called Visahari. She got 
the Siddha yoga from Mahadeva; hence She is 
named Siddha Yogini; She got from Him the great 
knowledege, so she is called Maha Jñānayutā, and 
as she got Mrtasaiijīvanī (making alive the dead) 
she is known by the name of Mrtasafijivani. 

waaga at a weh wer à 

areae AKR wer AISA AUST i49 u 

aneian ferar street qufefir i 

Bar „streets wena: 50 N 

ARA fagagsara STATE qt: | 

mean mat Rugs 510 

Aarh arr ih Artgartt ram | 

semettarettaara fuera a 152 1 

TETTTgAT a at eet fagagfsmam | 

As the great ascetic is the mother of the great 
Muni Āstīka, she is known in the world as Āstīka 
mātā. As She is hte dear wife of the great high- 
souled Yogī Muni Jarat Kāru, worshipped by all, 
she is called as Jarat Kārupriya. Jaratkāru, 
Jagadgaurī, Manasā, Siddha Yoginī, Vaisņavī, 
Nāga Bhaginī, Šaivi, Nāgešvarī, Jaratkārupriyā, 
Āstikamātā, Visahari, and Maha Jūiānayutā these 
are the twelve names of Manasa, worshipped 
everywhere in the Universe. 

aeia rA yR qu: wq 53 N 

ae ATT RA AT ANEA E 

amA a ya unma U HR usa 

mA agf mafa 1 

sd east VĒST g eÀ ATA HE 055 I 

frei wdenmd qur arent: wee | 

He who recites these twelve names while 
worshipping Manasà Devi, he or any of his family 
has no fear of snakes. If there be any fear of snakes 
in one's bed, if the house be infested with snakes, 
or if one goes to a place difficult for fear of snakes 
or if one's body be encircled with snakes, all the 


1190 Srimaddevibhagavatam 


fears are dispelled, if one reads this stotra of| Ten lakhs of times repeating the Manasā mantra 
Manasa. There is no doubt in this. The snakes run | give one man success in the stotra. He can easily 
away out of fear from the sight of him who daily | drink poison who attains success in this stotra. The 
recites Manasa stotra. snakes become his ornaments; they carry him even 
weer wifes use u on their backs. He who is a great Siddha can sit on 
Ktatatgieera u fad sireprftyan: | a seat of snakes and can sleep on a bed of snakes. 
EE STHUÍ Heat A LATAE: |157 0 In the end he sports day and night with Visnu. 
ARTA ATT TENS AAT: | Here ends the Forty-seventh Chapter of the Ninth 
att a ar are meda teary, I S8 ll Book on Manasá's story in the Maha Purāņam 
efr SRA TEI TIRER AINA ORT Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses 


TadaRsīlseara: 11 47 11 by Maharsi Veda Vāysa. 


1190 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


CHAPTER XLVIII 


On Manasa 


maagi at a PATI ARTA 1 

Rasad a frat fafana smt u 3 n 

Narayana said: O Narada! I will now speak of 
the Dhyànam and the method of worship of Sri 
Devi Manasā, as stated in the Sama Veda. Hear. ‘I 
meditate on the Devi Manasa, Whose colour is fair 
like that of the white campaka flower, whose body 
is decked all over with jewel ornaments, whose 
clothing is purified by fire, whose sacred thread is 
the Nagas (serpent), who is full of wisdom, who is 
the foremost of great Jfianins, who is the Presiding 
deity of the Siddhas, Who Herself is a Siddha and 
who bestows Siddis to all.’ 

ofa career a at edt Weta UTAR | 

tadtfāfateji: quriurgend: u4u 

IEMĀY ade attra: | 

WA Auda YAA SISTERS us ul 

O Muni! Thus meditating on Her, one should 
present Her flowers, scents, ornaments, offerings 
of food and various other articles, pronouncing the 
principal Seed Mantra. O Narada! The twelve 


lettered Siddha Mantra, to be mentioned below, 
yields to the Bhaktas their desires like the Kalpa 
Tree. 

so gi off aot Uer Bod eae adf: | 

PESTO CEL magdam nen 

watahesiters a AA aÈ 1 

gami fest wer ia A 7 oi 

Now the Radical mantra as stated in the Vedas 
is ‘Om Hrīm Srim Klim Aim Manasā Devyai 
Svaha’. Repetition of this, five lakhs of times, yields 
success to one who repeats. He who attains success 
in this mantra gets unbounded name and fame in 
this world. Poison becomes nectar to him and fame 
in this world. Poison becomes nectar to him and 
he himself becomes famous like Dhanvantari. 


sraraQrest g HA Tagen Acta: i 
sree «edtdizmat wsrretsfewrfvna: 8 N 
VARI wai tur Wer mew at she N 


mamaia afar dau N9 tt 

O Narada! If anybody bathes on any Sankranti 
day (when the sun enters from one sign to another) 
and going to a private room (hidden room), invokes 
the Devi Manasa Īšānā and worships Her with 
devotion, or makes sacrifices of animals before the 
Devi on the fifth day of the fortnight, he becomes 
certainly wealthy, endowed with sons and name 
and fame. 


Book 1X Chapter XLVII 


1191 


Were afd cerca Iva 1 

BUI AAMT Vegd THAT: d 00 0 

WT anna wyquitat afer 1 

Tare moi ae «gad array ud 

Thus I have described to you the method of 
worship of Manasa Devi. Now hear the anecdote 
of the Devi as I heard from Dharma. In olden days, 
men became greatly of the Devi as I heard from 
Dharma. In olden days, men become greatly 
terrified on earth from snakes and took refuge of 
KaSyapa, the supreme amongst the Munis. The 
Maharsi KaSyapa became very afraid. 

Haig wast ta: enserdt wena: | 

dastsrqanur cuesta gums 12 0 

waisted! ai Mai West wur | 

ATT ATT dU Mega WTA Y AT 73 tt 

He then with Brahma, and by His command 
composed a mantra following the principal motto 
of the Vedas. While composing this mantra, he 
intensely thought of the Devi, the Presiding Deity 
of that Mantra, through the power of his Tapasya 
and through the mental power, the Devi Manasā 
appeared and was named so, as She was produced 
from the sheer influence of mind. 

HUTT AT aT AAT SAT VITA | 

TAM UTS HOTS qure AMSAT I 1 4 U 

feature d Rr a Ya: wur 

SNA UIA At AT Tl ATA WO 15 d 

On being born, the girl went to the abode of 
Šankara in Kailāša and began to worship Him and 
chant hymns to Him with devotion. For one 
thousand Divine years, the daughter of Kašyapa 
served Mahadeva when He became pleased. 

erai oat AE VIGATATA ATA E | 

Gumi «ea wem yt 16 i 

He gave her the Great Knowledge, made Her 
recite the Sama Veda and bestowed to her the eight- 
lettered Krsna mantra which is like the Kalpa Tree. 

saturarerasitsi Sat qmd aa: | 

THRs WD dug WS 0017 N 


qaam rite dne Medumu | 

ma Tepes At edt I qo: FAT 18 N 

wT TĀ ret Gent via | 

Ēri a auque Horr FATATA: (19 di 

frat aya ur eat east GT: WITT i 

‘Srim, Hrīm Klim Krsnaya Namah, was the 
eight-lettered Mantra. She got from Him the 
Kavaca (amulet) auspicious to the three worlds, 
the method of worship and all the rules of 
Purascarana (repetition of the name of a diety 
attended with burnt offerings, oblations, etc.) and 
went by His command to perform in Puskara very 
hard austerities. There she worshipped Krsna for 
the three Yugas. Sri Krsna then appeared before 
Her. 

apt Hye smt Hoa a Harker: 20 u 

Ut ARATTA TTU K BH: | 

at a Ņadt arā Ra cd sd Ta 21 n 

at Brat up neum aiad et: 1 

On seeing Krsna, immediately the girl, worn out 
by austerities, worshipped Him, and she was also 
worshipped by Sri Krsna. Krsna granted her the 
boon "Let you be worshipped throughout the 
world’ and departed. 

Wart VĒST HTC p Hels WTHTGTAT 40 22 N 

fādta aga «vata KU a | 

grat wat da ATA reef 11 23 n 

aya grat at a Bry tag KAT | 

ST ATT eal YT N 24 N 

O Nārada! She was thus first worshipped by the 
Supreme Spirit. the Deva Krsna; secondly by 
Sankara; thirdly by the Maharsi Kaśyapa and the 
Devas. 

startet gAs SITE SITETUTTTUT | 

pelgrarreranh fester PT 25 N 

Gay GaN N ACTH U TERT | 

Prat wmm wafer gear AAA 26 u 

Then she was woshipped by the Munis, Manus, 
Nagas, and men; and She become widely renowned 
in the three worlds. Kašyapa gave Her over to the 
hands of Jaratàru Muni. At the request of the 


1192 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Brahmin Kašyapa, the Muni Jarat Karu married 
Her. After the marriage, one day, being tired with 
his long work of Tapasya, Jarat Karu laid his head 
on the hip and loins of his married wife and fell 
fast asleep. 

amme ferent: ram Saha d 

fare ATT Beat WAT rufen i 27 n 

terne cemere dt 1 

erga afar deat feret rar frere] 28 N 

aaa urd eren ufi 1 

"affer a: gat rare ag Ufa i29 u 

a webrgrferfred Tareas BAT | 

AAmir afar aterarara watt u 30 u 

KU Gat ARĀBI gars yet A | 

Gradually the evening came in. The sun set. 
Then Manasā thought ‘If my husband fails to 
perform the Sandhya, the daily duty of the 


Brahmanas, he would be involved in the sin of 


Brahmahatyā. It is definitely stated in the Šāstras, 
that if any Brahmana does not perform his Sandhya 
in the morning and in the evening, he becomes 
wholly impure and the sins Brahmahattyā and other 
crimes come down on his head.’ Arguning thus, 
these thoughts in her mind, as commanded by the 
Vedas, at last she awakened her husband, who then 
got up from his sleep. 


"qgfresrer 

wet Ghar: Uta Part: HATTA 03 1 0 

ef aeris Mr ar ada | 

quaga da ad eras wu 32 N 

qiiar: Mel sate Prone | 

oer fra: ga sito: user 133 N 

ufasataare wr ufesesut eft: veu | 

ade udaa: udda 134 1 

The Muni Jarat Karu said: O Chaste One! I was 
sleeping happily. Why have you thus interrupted 
my sleep? All his vows turn out useless who injures 
her husband. Her tapas, fastings, gifts, and other 
meritorious works all come to vain who do things 
unpleasant to her husband. If she worships her 
husband, she is said to have worshipped Sri Krsna. 


adad wu: udguaramfēk a aa, 1 

adada wed a Alay N 35 LI 

werd varfirramar: cent aréfe Wrevftq i 

For the sake of fulfilling the vows of the chaste 
women, Hari himself becomes their husbands. All 
sorts of charities, gifts, all sacrifices, fastings, 
practising all the virtues, keeping to truth, 
worshipping all the Devas, nothing can turn out 
equal to even one-sixteenth part of serving one's 
husband. 

yà a wn at ufa ch at 36 N 

Aha attra re wr aret TAIT: UK | 

AAi sea dfaa att freq 37 1 

AHS WAT fF eene? adi ate | 

gafar sre er aracestearat 1138 N 

wet wate wie afaa à 

She ultimately goes with her husband to the 
region of Vaikuntha, who serves her husband in 
this holy land Bharata. She comes certainly of a 
bad family who does unpleasant acts to her husband 
or who uses unpleasant words to her husband. She 
goes to the Kumbhipaka hell as long as the Sun 
and Moon last and then she becomes born as a 
Cāņdālī, without husband and son." 

Sepp U ABT anger KERT: 39 N 

ait Sa ar edt sitae FUP 

Speaking thus, Jarat Karu, the best of the Munis, 
became angry and his lips began to tremble. Seeing 
this, the best Manasa, shivering with fear, addressed 
her husband: 


IESTTet 

Hamua Patt: Gara 11 40 N 

He Milt Bryer qETUT WA Yad | 

senso wer wat attr fe 41 u 

I have broken your sleep and awakened you, 
fearing you might miss your time of Sandhya. I 
have committed an offence. Punish me as you 
think. 

a magi 4 aaccstearadt | 

BRAT Ara cat AATA 42 N 


Book 1X Charter XL VIII 


1193 


WU. Hea fle wa A YA: YA: | 

gii a utt gr Aai vrepperaq 43 N 

MATA MTA Hg ANE | 

“I know that a man goes to the Kalasütra hell as 
long as the Sun and Moon last in this world, who 
throws an obstacle when any man eats, sleeps or 
enjoys with the opposite sex.” O Narada! Thus 
saying, the Devi Manasā fell down at the feet of 
her husband and cried again and again. On the other 
hand, knowing the Muni angry, and ready to curse 
her, the Sun came there with Sandhya Devi. 

WARTS OPT PAYA ATER: FATT 44 N 

Rada a ag eram we etiara à 

And He humbly spoke to him with fear: “O 
Bhagavan! Seeing Me going to set, and fearing that 
you may miss Dharma, your chaste wife has 
awakened you. 


KART sata 


qaherana apr uredt ert a 4s N 

aena tat Pēra vri care TA: | 

ama waa weg red uw 46 n 

arena p uud eiui ST | 

Sat arorref mea Aa STER MARAT N 47 |i 

Ua: BS first: STORE a dere fase: | 

O Brahmin! Now I am also under your refuge; 
forgive me. O Bhagavan! You should not curse 
Me. The more so, a Bráhmana's heart is as tender 
as the fresh butter. The anger of a Brahmana lasts 
only half the twinkling of an eye (Ksana). When a 
Brahmana becomes angry, he can burn all this 
world and can make a new creation. 

SITETUIT SEN GMT: URACARISTT | 48 0 

sigui waar sreredtfer: ATT | 

So who can possess an influence like a 
Brahmana. A Brahmin is a part of Brahma; he is 
shining day and night with the Tejas of Brahma. A 
Brahmana meditates always on the Eternal Light 
of Brahma.” O Narada! Hearing the words of the 
Sun, the Brahmin became satisfied and blessed 
Him. The Sun also went to His own place, thus 
blessed duly. 


peg wat spem feereqet aya = 49 N 

wget snmma aR géteat STATS | 

dears tara feu: ufüsmqnedm cw 050 1 

vant meigi gaat faga | 

a Wan qe visfimed fafü gR n51 u 

arai aaa fagrit sme | 

To keep his promise the Brāhmin Jaratkāru quit- 
ted Manasa. She becomes very sorry and began to 
cry aloud with pain and anguish. Being very much 
distressed by the then danger, she remembered Her 
Ista Deva, Mahādeva, Brahmā, Hari and Her fa- 
ther Maharşi Kaśyapa. 

aam Tet maa wp 052 N 

Afas ayuda mur RaT: | 

apr foutsefteda ferfut wend: wu 53 u 

Gera U Waa WUTHTH CEU: | 

On the very instant when Manasa remembered, 
Šrī Krsna, the Lord of the Gopis, Mahadeva, 
Brahma and Maharsi Kašyapa appeared there. Then 
seeing his own desired Deity Sri Krsna, superior 
to Prakrti, beyond the attributes, Jaratkaru began 
to praise Him and bowed down to Him repeatedly. 

AUS yi A TAT Ya” Wem 4 54 A 

Haast sat sft Wet WaT a: | 

WEIT ga spear HEAT Wulf 155 n 

yaaa meer gA, d 

ate carent duet erférgr wen At t 56 u 

retreat TAIT AIA m d | 

Then bowing down to Mahadeva, Brahma and 
Kašyapa, he enquired why they had come there. 
Brahma, then, instanly bowed down at the lotus 
feet of Hrsīkeša and spoke in befitting words at 
that time if the Brahmin Jaratkaru leaves at all his 
legal wife, devoted to her own Dharma, he should 
first of all have a son born of her to fulfil his Dharma. 

WT wr Kai Heal TATA |! 57 11 

agar g dd fart ereerorfegerm i 

AA TA WS BAA I GA THA "58 N 

TaN gad sper wende: | 

"wen wre ana Waudem 59 

Tara WARS AAAS Sara ATT | 


1194 


O Muni! Any man can quit his wife, after he 
has impregnated her and got a son. But if without 
having ason, he leaves his wife, then all his merits 
are losts as all water leaks out of a siever or a 
strainer. O Narada! Hearing thus the words of 
Brahma, the Muni Jaratkaru by his Yogic power 
recited a Mantra and touching the navel of Manasa 
spoke to her: 


WHHL ATS 
Tra WAS da gat aa 160 n 
Rasai watt fiet agron: à 
Td vr a er ae ar TMA: 161 tt 
wit aataat da ara AR Tear 1 


“O Manasa! A son will be born in your womb 
self-controlled, and best of the 
Brāhmaņas. That son will be fiery, energetic, 
renowned, well-qualified, the foremost of the 
Knowers of the Vedas, a great Jianin and the best 
of the Yogis. 

Vu pit Ararat efie: qot u 62 i 

qafa fec wd wenn À uar i 

urere atten ar at fira fraarfēsft n 63 n 

afs GATT U erat perfor | 

ghtufteyat cyt miega: 164 i 

That son is a true son, indeed, who uplifts his 
family who is religious and devoted to Hari. At his 
birth all the Pitrs dance with great joy. And the 
wife is a true wife who is devoted to her husband, 
good-natured and sweet-speaking and she is 
religious, she is the mother of sons, she is the 
woman of the family and she is the preserver of 
the family. He is true friend, indeed, the giver of 
one’s desired fruits, who imparts devotion to Hari. 

at igda a fret eftactwarta: à 

ar miero aa rutaratārterft 165 N 

Garu u rit esftferferrerdt à 

Rapina a a gea: 166 u 

That father is true father who shows the way to 
devotion to Hari. And She is the True Mother, 


religious, 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


through whom this entering into wombs ceases for 
ever, yea, for ever! That sister is the true kind sister 
from whom the fear of Death vanishes. That Guru 
is the Guru who gives the Visnu Mantra and the 
true devotion to Visnu. 

Tes IAA A R ast per HT | 

arsariaud<i at fast mr 67 UN 

anfani Rne fé at art aed: | 

da ust wernt xp 6s 0 

That Guru is the real bestower of knowledge 
who gives the Jñānam by which Sri Krsna is 
meditated in whom this whole universe, moving 
and non-monving from the Brahma down to a blade 
of grass, 1s appearing and disappearing. There is 
no doubt in this. What knowledge can be superior 
to that of Sri Krsna. The knowledge derived from 
the Vedas, or from the sacrifices or from any other 
source is not superior to the service to Sri Krsna. 

aai Rd a erage | 

we Ae Fat quet wr vant amat fē ur: 69 u 

irren erre fugit fe erre: à 

Rangi art at carter fü ate: 70 u 

The devotion and knowledge of Sri Hari is the 
Essence of all knowledge; all else is vain and 
mockery. It is through this Real Knowledge; that 
this bondage from this world is severed. But the 
Guru who does not impart this devotion and 
knowledge of Sri Hari is not the real Guru; rather 
he is an enemy that leads one to bondage. 

a fig: Brererdtu art dera tired | 

wat mhana qu 4071 0 

A aaa: Wed Hera fü aera: 1 

VT GA U GUAM 072 

Verily he kills his disciple when he does not 
free him. He can never be called a Guru, father or 
friend who does not free his disciple from the pains 
in the various wombs and from the pains of death. 
Verily he can never be called a friend who does 
not show the way to the Undecaying Šrī Krsna, 
the Source of the Highest Bliss. 


Book IX Chapter XL VIII 


1195 


asia: wed entqyit arierat FT i 

Te Tika wt saad Got vr fertur i 73 N 

Fate a udda ad d wet Saat | 

Ta UG ci caret KAA fg 74 N 

RATATAT Seat AAA NEN fever 1 

Gent quu art TES dfe TATA i75 N 

So, O Chaste One! You better worship that 
Undecaying Para Brahma Sri Krsna, Who is 
beyond the attributes. O Beloved! I have left you 
out of a pretenec; please excuse me for this. The 
chaste women are always forgiving; never they 
become angry because they are born of 
Sattvagunas. 

Now I go to Puskara for Tapasya; you better go 
wherever you like. 

sipari Na PT: ETETOTI Ware: à 

SECRETS: T NAA PsA 0 76 N 

WISIS a ĒTATGATA WIUTGRROST | 

Those who have no desire have their minds 
always attached to the lotus feet of $ri Krsna. O 
Narada! Hearing the words of Jaratkaru, the Devi 
Manasā became very much distressed and 
bewildered with great sorrow. Tears began to flow 
from her eyes. She then humbly spoke to her dearest 
husband: 


wastara 


Wama Cae Aan A77 u 

aa rÀ cat fred aa aara i 

ayd: FaN: yad: W 78 N 

mA: yoat feregareada: W: i 

Ufa: ufemarat g magn Aa: 791 

“O Lord! I have not committed any such 
offence, as you leave me altogether when I have 
thus broken your sleep. However kindly show 
Thyself to me when I will recollect you. The 
breavement of one’s friend is painful; more than 
that is the breavement of a son. Again one’s 
husband is dearer than one hundred sons; so the 
breavement of one’s husband is the heaviest of all. 

qirg fira: eioi reia gÀ: 1 

ga adagi Amat wem gÀ uso ll 


A udma gai wem wo | 

agférerat ans A a arg a Art 81 oi 

TET A A a BAL pT | 

fagi a aa mA AA afürsrt ar g2 N 

am yya: Gra medai at weit à 

To woman, the husband is the most beloved of 
all earthly things; hence he is called Priya, i.e., dear. 
As the heart of one who has only one son is attached 
to that son, as the heart of a Vaisnava is attached 
to Sri Hari; as the mind of one-eyed man to his 
one eye, as the mind of the thirsty is attached to 
water, as the mind of the hungry is attached to food, 
as the mind of the passionate is attached to lust, as 
the mind of a thief is attached to the properties of 
others, as the mind of alewd man to his prostitute, 
as the mind of the learned is attached to the Sastras, 
as the mind of a trader is attached to his trade, so 
the minds of chaste women are attached to their 
husband. 

Sepe mar edt wur Kam: We 083 N 

ATi WAN wre at pur ur Haris: | 

Jeha TAI FITFATATA at q^ 484 N 

mA WA: me Raa Aara | 

qar gr dt arr fergirent visnqeng: 85 N 

Thus saying, Manasa fell down at the feet of 
her husband. Jaratkaru, the ocean of mercy, then, 
took her for a moment on his lap and drenched her 
body with tears from his eyes. The Devi Manasa, 
too, distressed at the breavement of her husband 
also drenched the lap of the Muni with tears from 
her eyes. 

TTT Tati PTA UTA: | 

SIT ae fang: wereniet ventu TN 86 N 

SAT TT Vi: chord Afet WN: 1 

writ sreramm wat aT 11 87 Nu 

fragnta ara ras a forem: | 

Some time after, the true knowledge arose in 
them and they both became free from fear. 
Jaratkaru then enlightened his wife and asked her 
to meditate on the lotus feet of Sri Krsna the 


1196 


Supreme Spirit repeatedly; thus saying he went 
away for his Tapasyà. Manasā, distressed with 
sorrow, went to his Ista Deva Mahadeva on Kailāša. 
The auspicious Siva and Parvati both consoled her 
with knowledge and advise. 

prend fat meh qaqa gout uss i 

anranist gai et frei st Te | 

Tita wem Brat VIAA: 89 N 

dega er antiat atfirat frt Te: | 

WT ANAT ATTA TERN 06 90 N 

Some days after, on an auspicious day and on 
an auspicious moment she gave birth to a son born 
in part of Narayana, and as the Guru of the Yogis 
and as the Preceptor of the Jfianins. When the child 
was in mother's womb, he heard the highest 
knowledge from the mouth of Mahadeva; therefore 
he was born as a Yogindra and the Spiritual 
Teacher of the Jīiānins. On his birth, Bhagavan 
Šankara performed his natal ceremonies and 
performed various auspicious ceremonies. 

wafer urea forem a ferar: farsi: à 

ninaa areata gdt Pra: 091 n 

"ure wr rai vai vent fafana | 

vir wat aerdatnireterat 092 u 

The Brahmanas chanted the Vedas for the 
welfare of the child; various wealth and jewels and 
Kiritas and invaluable gems were distributed by 
Sankara to the Brahmanas; and Parvati gave one 
lakh cows and various jewels to others. After some 
days, Mahadeva taught him the four Vedas with 
their Angas (six limbs) and gave him, at last, the 
Mrtyufijaya Mantra. 

STE VISATATA aa AGA UA d 

Renea ards ised To Ta 93 1 

As in Manasa’s mind there reigned the devotion 
to her husband, the devotion to her Ista Deva and 
Guru, the child’s name was kept Astika. 

TATE U ATA GATT WaT | 

ware wae fend: queni viuum |1 94 lt 

Had Uga Aa VT: | 


Srimaddevibhágavatam 


Astika then got the Maha Mantra from Sankara 
and by his command went to Puskara to worship 
Visnu, the Supreme Spirit. 

feet enforce a quequar quim: 1195 N 

sen eraut «mend fora VAĻA 1 

vient a AU fieret TAS ames: 196 N 

A STAT HAT HATA ST TU: à 

There he practised tapasya for three lakh divine 
years. And then he returned to Kaila$a, to bow 
down to the great Yogi and the Lord Sankara. Then, 
bowing down to Sankara, he remained there for 
some time when Manasā with her son Astika went 
to the hermitage of Kāšyapa, his father. 

at agai gat ggr y wre wsmufw: 097 N 

yasa vene aerate gdt Ta | 

ASOT BISA TIT frg: u o8 u 

atfatter RRASA qd un ure d 

MATa et Afar Teal amamos ar 199 N 

Seeing Manasa with son, the Maharsi’s gladness 
knew no bounds. He fed innumerable Brahmanas 
for the welfare of the child, and distributed lakhs 
and lakhs of jewels. The joy of Aditi and Diti (the 
wives of Ka$yapa) knew no bounds; Manasa 
remained there for a long, long time with his son. 


ada qne eaae AATE | 
aay sera: weet W100 dl 
aye WEN Ta saat HUT | 
ATS waa (MATA matt W107 UI 
a Jet Ada HITE AHA Ā | 


Tet gear ATT Matua: | 102 N 

pue our wears RAUTATE: | 

TS MTA g TES wan ufü 11 103 N 

O Child! Hear now an anecdote on this. One 
day due to a bad Karma, a Brāhmaņa cursed the 
king Parīksit, the son of Abhimanyu; one Rsi’s son 
named Šrngī, sipping the water of the river Kaušikī 
cursed thus: "When a week expires, the snake 
Taksaka will bite you, and you will be burnt with 
the poison of that snake Taksaka.’ Hearing this, 
the King Pariksit, to preserve his life, went to a 


Book 1X Chapter XLVIII 


1197 


TO 


place, solitary where wind even can have no access 
and he lived there. 

dake ated aai vno: ufi i 

aada Ware: figu wem 104 u 

erdakdfh uma dara: vereor adt | 

a aah d gia q get gn: 0105 0 

When the week was over, Dhanvantari saw, 
while he was going on the road, the snake Taksaka 
who was also going to bite the king. À conversation 
and a great friendship arose between them; Taksaka 
gave him voluntarily a gem; and Dhanvantari, 
getting it, became pleased and went back gladly to 
his house. 

werent STRRITHTRI Td c rap feeren 1 

WaT AT AAT VE PAAT VTA E 00106 N 

teat AMATA Agl wenn | 

Tat Vat dzi 4 UTE Ta AT 107: N 

The king Pariksit was lying on his bed-stead 
when Taksaka bit the king. The king died soon 
and went to the next world. The king Janamejaya 
then performed the funeral obsequies of his father 
and commenced afterwards the Sarpa Yajūa (a 
sacrifice where the sankes are the victims). 

moriar Tarot Met eene | 

a carat A iag Aes viet west 108 t 

OR a agh éd fuent: aya: | 

aa quer GATVI gA 109 u 

In that sacrifice, innnmerable snakes gave up 
their lives by the Brahma Teja (the fire of the 
Brahmins). At this, Taksaka became terrified and 
took refuge of Indra. The Brahmins, then, in a body, 
became, ready to burn Taksaka along with Indra, 
when, Indra and the other Devas went to Manasā. 

wf qpa Wea nanga: 1 

ad areata aces Get SATU |1 110 N 

HAMA ARTURA! wd wow | 

aÀ at quB: Hua wTEIUTSHT N 111 N 

her frei fügt tat IET | 

TI sperat at Tear wp eratis! 1 1 2 N 


Mahendra, bewildered with fear, began to 


chant hymns to Manasā. Manasā called his own 
son Astika who then went to the sacrifical assem- 
bly of the king Janamejaya and begged that the 
lives of Indra and Taksaka be spared. The king, 
then, at the command of the Brahmanas, granted 
their lives. The king, then, completed his sacrifice 
and gladly gave the Daksinàs to the Brahmins. 
The Brahmanas, Munis, and Devas collected and 
went to Manasā and worshipped Her separately 
and chanted hymns to Her. 

WHET STUTHTITETE SEI YAH FAR | 

VU: dispu HATH: war PA: 113 0 

TAS UAT GTA UAT | 

"Ter Wengen afe a feni rear 11 1 14 u 

Vadi vigu aeiaai rag | 

da rt eet weg: rare ad 115 N 

etd enferd wel fe spur: aro i 

Indra went there with the various articles and 
He worshipped Manasa with devotion and with 
great love and care; and He chanted hymns to Her. 
Then bowing down before Her, and under the 
instructions of Brahma, Visnu and Maheša, offered 
her sixteen articles, sacrifices and various other 
good and pleasant things. O Narada! Thus 
worshipping Her, they all went to their respective 
places. Thus I have told you the anecdote of 
Manasa. What more do you want to hear. Say. 

ang ara 

eet CAAT qure Het AAT AAT W116 u 

Garland ae: sigfereorftr Mad: | 

Narada said: O Lord! How did Indra prasie Her 
and what was the method of His worshipping Her; 
I want to hear all this. 


starrer saru 
Gera: yena gear alter a area 11 117 tt 
verre adt aram fena: | 
aire MORA verde u118 Ut 
waa Wat West dana | 


awi urere aA AE 119 N 


1198 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Narayana said: Indra first took his bath; and, 
performing Acamana and becoming pure, He put 
on a fresh and clean clothing and placed Manasa 
Devi on a jewel throne. Then reciting the Vedic 
mantras he made Her perform Har bath by the water 
of the Mandakini the celestial river Ganges, poured 
from a jewel jar and then He made Her put on the 
beautiful clothing, uninflammable by fire. 

watg uad qe UTT AHA: | 

tgo a fasst er afa ferent fora Tara tu 120 u 

AIST qae TATA qi «dt i 

3 gi s maA Tarter KA: 121 N 

Then He caused sandalpaste to be applied to Her 
body all over with devotion and offered water for 
washing Her feet and Arghya, an offering of grass 
and flowers and rice, etc., as a token of preliminary 
worship. First of all the six Devatās Gane$a, Sun, 
Fire, Visņu, Siva, and Siva were worshipped. Then 
with the ten lettered mantra ‘Om Hrim Srim 
Manasā Devyai Svaha’ offered all the offerings to 
Her. 

aerate qe adi we wem | 

STA VSM weno mg: 0122 N 

TE STCESIU sr feror ftat var | 

Atel AMATU ATSATATT TA À 0123 U 

aye yuasa erdt aaa | 

Stimulated by the God Visnu, Indra worshipped 
with great joy the Devi with sixteen articles so very 
rare to any other person. Drums and instruments 
were sounded. From the celestial heavens, a shower 
of flowers was thrown on the head of Manasa. 


wafürargrar at ag AAT 124 i 

ga mAs uereadfenafenme: 1 

Then, at the advice of Brahma, Visnu and 
Maheša, the Devas and the Brahmanas, Indra, with 
tears in his eyes, began to chant hymns to Manasā, 
when his whole body was thrilled with joy and hairs 
stood on thier ends. 

Yat sara 
far cat Sargeant atest vat AMT 125 i 


meani e TAI sr fe verd TAS ETAT i 

Hao PAT dā TATU Uu 126 N 

TS: Wad aep TU TTT Ta | 

Weare vi aafia 127 u 

AA MH APE Ah TESI HM TA: | 

Indra said: O Devi Manase! Thou standest the 
highest amongst the chaste women. Therefore I 
want to chant hymns to Thee. Thou art higher than 
the highest. Thus art most supreme. What can I 
now praise Thee? Chanting hymns is characterised 
by the description of one’s nature; so it is said in 
the Vedas. But, O Prakrti! I am unable to ascert 
ain and describe Thy qualities. Thou art of the 
nature of Suddha Sattva (higher than the pure sattva 
unmixed with any other Gunas); Thou art free from 
anger and malice. The Muni Jaratkaru could not 
forsake Thee; therefore it was that he prayed for 
Thy separation before. 

vd ar ufa are rrt ir eremsfefe: N 128. u 

Garu wr wh AAAI WEIT Wa: | 

TĀ vare: WTO: KENT: quaft u 129 N 

O Chaste One! I have now worshipped Thee. 
Thou art an object of worship as my mother Aditi 
is. Thou art my sister full of mercy; Thou art the 
mother full of forgiveness. O Surešvarī! It is 
through Thee that my wife, sons and my life are 
saved. 


are Gute careant Aag aiat war i 

Pret erarfü sur cd wear sTdfēra N 130 N 
Tur aa gat u alent gtvaft 1 
Īsu Varta TT: 1131 u 
dari wTarearat ATT at fet fet a 


yina att a oar d 1320 

amas: entfernt rera spumam: à 

I am worshipping Thee. Let Thy love be 
increased. O World-Mother! Thou art eternal; 
thoush Thy worship is extant everywhere in the 
universe, yet I worship Thee to have it extended 
and further. O Mother! Those who worship Thee 
with devotion on the Sankranti day of the month 


Book 1X Chapter XLVIII 


1199 


of Āsādha, or on the Naga Paficami day, or on the 
Sankranti day of every month or on every day, they 
get their sons and grandsons, wealth and grains 
increased and become themselves famous, well 
gratified, learnred and renowned. 

a cat a gattreifā Heer War: 0133 N 

Vai wea Aut aera T | 

vd vasi AT Gas WORST! 134 n 

If anybody do not worship Thee out of 
ignorance, rather if he censures Thee, he will be 
bereft of Laksmi and he will be always afraid of 
snakes. Thou art the Grha Laksmi of all the 
householders and the Raja Laksmī of Vaikuntha. 

ATAU ITTATSSAT 4 Aa: 1 

ara Asa cat ep WT as für 1135 0 

HATH TANTS AT Tet AATATĒŠTET | 

Bhagavan Jarat Karu, the great Muni, born in 
part of Narayana, is Thy husband. Father Kāšyapa 
has created Thee mentally by his power of Tapas 
and fire to preserve us; Thou art his mental creation 
hence thy name is Manasā. 

m Seam ed Care Rea n 136 u 

aa ed nmam uhsrar dfa we 1 

3 AM WTA ear: TTA RTA 137 N 

aa cat Frat adt werdfe wtf: à 

ARRAS afr ed IRA Sum t 138 1 

Thou Thyself hast become Siddhà Yogini in 
this world by thy mental power hence thou art 
widely known as Manasa Devi in this world and 
worshipped by all. The Devas always worship 
Thee mentally with devotion; hence the Pandits 
call Thee by the name of Manasa. O Devi! Thou 
always servest Truth, hence Thou art of the nature 
of Truth. He certainly gets Thee who always 
thinks of Thee verily as of the nature of truth." 

"t fi cat adfa U cart WIT eq: à 

zas Tara erat Feta wfrffeup 11 139 u 

VT T yea wut sary | 

yar are ar cat Fart creat forge: 140 u 


O Narada! Thus praising his sister Manasā and 
receiving from her the desired boon, Indra went 
back, dressed in his own proper dress, to his own 
abode. The Devi Manasa, then, honoured and 
worshipped everywhere, and thus worshipped by 
her brother, long lived in Her father’s house, with 
Her son. 

argh: yR PIAA eem wp Aa: | 

"here psg carter fnr s 141 

vi earafercar afftor KTATATA GTETT i 

wet wr enero Test wed YOA 142 N 

Ond day Surabhi (the heavenly cow) came from 
the Goloka and bathed Manasā with milk and 
worshipped Her with great devotion and revealed 
to Her all the Tattva Jñānas, to be kept very secret. 
(This is now made the current story wherever any 
Lingam suddenly becomes visible.) 

am qr fram wr rafes er YAS | 

guts quasttst Mai ATIA 11 1 43 i 

erani arr TTT V t 

fad Agege Rrariitat sar wq, 144 N 

O Narada! Thus worshipped by the Devas and 
Surabhi, the Devi Manasā went to the Heavenly 
regions. O Muni! One gets no fear from snakes 
who recites this holy Stotra composed by Indra and 
worships Manasā; his family descendants are freed 
from the fear due to snakes. If anybody becomes 
Siddha in this Stotra, poison becomes nectar to him. 

tama Rugs waar: 1 

adore sracatsfir ferf2rd Marga: 1145 i 

efr ARRIA ergo? AIRES- 
VIARMSNT: 11 48 11 

Reciting the stotra five lakhs of times makes a 
man Siddha in this Stotra. So much so that he can 
sleep on a bed of snakes and he can ride on snakes. 

Here ends the Forty-eighth Chapter of the Ninth 

Book on the anecdote of Manasa in the Maha 
Purāņam Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1200 Srimaddevibhagavatam 
CHAPTER XLIX 
On Surabhi 
AE sara agai T: arg wat Tint: KA | 
GAT AT AT ARTA MCAS TAT 1 at aya usui eA WOO 8o 


amai dergigtrorft aa: gu 

Narada said: O Bhagavan! Who was that 
Surabhi, who came down from te region of Goloka. 
I want to hear Her life. Kindly describe. 


Sumu gara 


Teraftigraddt mare wat YA: 1 

Tat yarat Krēta at MAT 1 2 N 

vaifggtatt cera Prema 1 

aye GI WW WT gaat at 3 N 

Narayana spoke: O Devarsi! The Devi Surabhi 
sprang in the Goloka. She was the first in the 
creation of cows; and, from Her, all the other cows 
have come. She is the Presiding Deity of the cows. 
I will now speak Her history from the very 
beginning. Hear. Before, She appeared in the holy 
Vindavana. 

Uae Urea IRT we Agh 1 

Titurga qed qued wat 4 ii 

wea aa wets fam U aga, | 

aya afta teat RMT TUS di 

One day the Lord of Radha, surrounded by the 
Gopis, was going gladly with Radha to the Holy 
Vrndàvana. There he began to enjoy in a solitary 
place with great pleasure. He is All Will and 
suddenly a desire arose in His mind that He would 
drink milk. 

was yt ef eres armada: | 

agri quite acat ATA MATA: d 6 d 

qar aat sham auè gale ww | 

at ganh a AE 7 I 

Then He created easily the Devi Surabhi, full 
of milk, with Her calf, from His own left side. The 
calf of Surabhi is nothing else but Her wish 
personified. Seeing Surabhi, Sridàmà milked Her 
in a new earthen jar. The milk is more sweet than 
even the nectar and it prevents births and death! 


ate a famqe da uke: NA, d 

meksa yiga ats gfttatar uo 

The Lord of the Gopis drank the milk. What 
milk dropped out of the jar, created a big tank! 
The tank measured one hundred Yojanas in length 
and in breadth and is known in Goloka by the name 
of Ksirasagara. 

TT a wera: merar aya WI | 

tina go yet mRNA ion 

aya RMA wget GAITA: | 

adea TH KAT PŪT: N 11 d 

The Gopikās and Radha play therein. At the will 
of Sri Krsna, Whose Nature is All Will, that tank 
become full of excellent gems and jewels. Then, 
from every pore of Surabhi, there appeared 
suddenly one lakh koti Kāmadhenus (cows who 
yield according to one’s desires). So much so that 
every Gopa who used to live there in Goloka had 
one Kāmadhenu and each house had one such. 

aa GaAs aga: tayga: | 

enfer a rat gè er at ITT, 12 N 

Wat VAT TATA TAT GT A | 

at ae Ag fry AR THAT u 13 N 

Their calves again became so many that no limit 
can be put to them. Thus, by degrees, the whole 
universe was filled with cows. This is the origion 
of the Cow Creation. O Narada! Surabhi was first 
worshipped by Bhagavan Sri Krsna. Therefore She 
is so much honoured everywhere. 

Afama sitorcargan R: | 

aya uer: wer erderaarfad yr 14 N 

card wits E GIERE CO GHCIDE Zli] 

Adh a erem Prater wan d u 15 N 

On the day next the Devālī night (new moon in 
the month of October), Surabhi was worshipped 


Book IX Chapter XLIX 


1201 


by the command of Sri Krsna. This is heard from| morning after Divali night, becomes also 
the mouth of Dharma Deva. O Child! Now hear! worshipped in this world. Once a day in the 


the Dhyānam, Stotra, and the method of worship 
of Surabhi as mentioned in the Vedas. I will now 
speak on this. ‘Om Surabhyai namah,’ is the 
principal six-lettered mantra of Surabhi. 

So qoe AM Bit RAR: WEN: | 

Ra asta AAMT RTE: 176 N 

cari agaid Am: garu wei: | 

Aiga gga a afar wearer 11 17 0 

If anybody repeats this mantra one lakh times, 
he becomes Siddha in this mantra. This is like 
Kalpa Vrksa (a tree yielding all desires) to the 
devotees. The Dhyanam of Surabhi is mentioned 
in the Yajur Vedas. Success, prosperity, increase 
and freedom come as the result of worshipping 
Surabhi. 

oyhan Kai TF GT | 

mermttrgmgddt warum Tat IAA, usu 

"ferret oat a Ht TRITT | 

aan ud wdfesyd at eet qe ast 19 1 

ue at ferr iaid amà 1 

virent sedan pf Geass: i 20 N 

The Dhyānam runs as follows: “O Devi Surabhi! 
Thou art Laksmi, Thou art best, Thou art Radha; 
Thou art the chief companion of Sri Radha, Thou 
art the first and the source of the cow creation, 
Thou art holy and Thou sanctifiest the persons; 
Thou fulfillest the desires of the devotees and Thou 
purifiest the whole universe. Therefore I meditate 
on Thee." 

daana gate eiga: | 

a: yde wir a a qsat srargfā 11 21 N 

Wer fry wr ame ATETA | 

aft wem KTS ue: 022 4 

Reciting this Dhyānam, the Brahmanas worship 
the Devi Surabhi in Jars, on the heads of cows, or 
on the pegs where cows are fastened or on 
Šālagrāma stone or in water or in fire. O Muni! He 


Varahakalpa Surabhi did not yield milk, by the 
influence of Visnu Maya. 

Aa wurde TANT YAR | 

TTT U wi qur MAMAA: 023 1 

The Devas became very anxious. Then they 
went to the Brahmaloka and began to praise 
Brahma. At His advice, Indra began to chant hymns 
(Stotra) to Surabhi: 

TI gara 

TA de gravā ga a AAT TR: d 

Tai dtodd amet AR 1 24 u 

At Tea wp Taga HEU: | 

AT: pna u Wat ATA AAT AA: 125 N 

The Devenda said: “O World-Mother! O Devi! 
O Maha Devi! O Surabhi! Thou art the source of 
the cow creation. Obeisance to Thee! Thou art the 
dear companion of Radha; Thou art the part of 
Kamala; Thou art dear to Sri Krsna; Thou art the 
mother of cows, I bow down to Thee. 

Auga sur nda wad ut 1 

affari erre sfera wat am: ou260 

PÀ wo repr ras AAT AA: | 

"sert eren aÀ sat Am: 27 d 

Thou art like the Kalpa Vrksa (a tree yielding 
all desires), Thou art the Chief of all; Thou yieldest 
milk, wealth and prosperity and increase thereof. 
So I dow bown to Thee. Thou art auspicious, Thou 
art good, Thou bestowest cows. Obeisance to Thee! 
Thou givest fame, name and Dharma. So I bow 
down to Thee.” 

masaman FBT KET WITT: | 

armady aAa EISE aa 128 ul 

TESTU at wer aif wf qom 1 

WITT AT St Meta pret WEA 1 29 N 

O Narada! Thus hearing the praise sung by Indra, 
the enternal Surabhi, the originator of the world, 
became very glad and appeared in the Brahmaloka. 


i ith devotion on the next d ; 
VO worships wiih " Granting boon to Mahendra, so very rare to others 


76 


1202 


and desired by him, Surabhi went to the Goloka. 
The Devas, also, went back to their own abodes. 

aya fayi weet GUI cup An | 

great ud Tat aera: Wife YU T 30 0 

gd Gist wergud TV U: UIA | 

irm ease attargaaretar 310 

The whole world was now full of milk; clarified 
butter came out of the milk; and from clarified 
butter sacrifice began to be performed and the 
Devas were fed and they became pleased. O Child! 
He who recites this holy Stotra of Surabhi with 
devotion, gets cows, other wealth, name, fame and 
sons. 

a ere: addy udag der: 1 

Bo vds YS Yarn arid paR 32 N 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Ghat hadaa aft porta d 
a Yadtat wp sump sue: 133 I 
sft Mada ergo? games 
Va UWIPRIHLESPES 0049 11 

The reciting of this Stotra qualifies one as if he 
had bathed in all the sacred places of pilgrimages 
and he had acquired the fruits of all the sacrifices. 
Enjoying happiness in this world, he goes in the 
end to the Temple of $ri Krsna. There living long 
in the service of Krsna, he becomes able to be a 
son of Brahma. 

Here ends the Forty-ninth Chapter of the Ninth Book 
on the anecdote of Surabhi in the Maha Puranam 
Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1202 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER L 
On the Glory of Sakti 


ANG Fars 


gd dum Vedat wearer | 
spem d end eget eA TTT, TENET 
aya siqfresrf wet dai | 

ie gitar fee gr 2 u 

Narada said: O Bhagavan! I have heard all the 
anecdotes of Prakrti, as according to the Sastras, 
that lead to the freedom from birth and death in 
this world. Now I want to hear the very secret history 
of Sri Radha and Durgā as described in the Vedas. 

via afisha sera degt: 1 

TE d dad AAA TU AAR u 3 u 

watt ae afar ere | 

water MARTĀ ART v4 ou 

Though you have told me about their glories, 
yet I am not satisfied. Verily, where is he whose 
heart does not melt away on hearing the glories of 
both of them! This world is originated from their 
parts and is being controlled by them. The devotion 
towards them frees one easily from the bonds of 
Samsara (rounds of birth and death). O Muni! 
Kindly describe now about t, m. 


starrer Sara 

spp ANE warf weet spkrenfeW d 

Te HEMT UAT ANTAL TTT U 5 |i 

TATU At ared Sat sete TETRA | 

qeoupiratu: deat weed Neu 

Narayana said: O Narada! I am now describing 
the characters of Radha and Durga, as described 
in the Vedas listen. I did not describe to anybody 
this Secret which is the Essence of all essences 
and Higher than the highest. This is to be kept very 
secret. 

weit wing morgafi, | 

wart ta adai frr 3h wapa a 

Tati «read facets | 

SATA: Waal A Tanta fF go S N 

Hearing this, one ought not to divulge it to any 
other body. Radha presides over the Prana and 
Durga presides over the Buddhi. From these two, 
the Mūlāprakrti has originated this world. 

venerat: ware fre pug qqgum | 

Taal waai qup ame afd 9 d 

Raia A ferat a: WAT | 

sihrafa agaid agata Aa: eT N 10 tt 


Book IX Chapter L 


These two Saktis guide the whole world. From 
the Mahavirat to the small insect, all, moving or 
non-moving, are under the Mülaprakrti. One must 
satisfy them. Unless these two be satisfied, Mukti 
cannot be obtained. Therefore one ought to serve 
Mila Prakrti for Her satisfacation. 

GEM werent ISARR: | 

rare rmt atwrferamfor: Brat: d 11 N 

GMA gnenn 1 

GTA ureret af i Aa vnnd (1 1 2 tt 

Now of the two in Mula Prakrti, I will describe 
fully the Radha Mantra. Listen. Brahma, Visnu, 
and others always worship this mantra. The 
principal mantra is ‘Sri Rādhāyai Svaha.’ By this 
six-lettered mantra Dharma and other fruits all are 
obtained with ease. If to this six lettered Mila 
mantra Hrim be added, it yields gems and jewels 
as desired. So much so, if thousand koti mouths 
and one hundred koti tongues are obtained, the 
glory of this mantra cannot be described. 

Ware Vari wat sip ARRA: | 

SMM het WATTS 10013 d 

Rauf at wen fene: sa | 

aa da ureftrerar fe ure 14 u 

When the incorporeal voice of Mila Prakrti was 
heard in the Heavens, this mantra was obtained, 
first by Krsna in the Rasa Mandalam in the region 
of Goloka where all love sentiments are played : 
(The Vedas declare him as Raso vai Sah). From 
Krsna. Visnu got the Mantra; from Visnu, Brahma 
got; from Brahma Virat got, from Virat, Dharma, 
and from Dharma I have got this Mantra. Repeating 
that Mantra, I am known by the name of Rsi. 

ae wort ci wed eR ST: 1 

SIEITETT: UCI ar Pres area At Fat u 15 N 

porata «rent eret Teel FET i 

erra: Vadeamedai UTA 1 16 N 

Brahmā and the other Devas meditate always 
on the Mūlā Prakrti with greatest joy and ecstacy. 
Without the worship of of Rādhā, never can the 


1203 


worship of Sri Krsna be done. So men, devoted to 
Visnu, should first of all worship Radha by all 
means. Radha is the Presiding Deity of the Prana 
of Sri Krsna. Hence Sri Krsna is so much subject 
to Radha. The Lady of the Rasa Mandalam remains 
always close to Him. 

gnaoi a aeei fageda: à 

IT ae Pret wur dita RBA n17 u 

wa arara hi 1 

adai Wat a RAe A ISN 

Bag edt mast rers a iÈ à 

Without Her Sri Krsna could not live even for a 
moment. The name Radha is derived from 
‘Radhnoti’ or fulfills all desires. Hence Mila 
Prakrti is termed Radha. I am the Rsi of all the 
mantras but the Durga Mantra mentioned in this 
Ninth Skandha. Gayatri is the chanda (mantra) of 
those mantras and Radhika is the Devata of them. 

ant dist Rn vrfensq uftatira u 19 0 

We quur venta adore a 1 

arg zer werent vTeraTferenm] 11 2 0 N 

Really, Narayana is the Rsi of all the mantras; 
Gayatri is the chanda; Pranava (om) is the Bija 
(seed) and Bhuvanešvarī (the Directrix of the 
world) is the Sakti. First of all the principal mantra 
is to be repeated six times; then meditation of the 
great Devi Radhika, the Sakti of the Rasa is to be 
done, as mentioned in the Sama Veda. 


The meditation of Radha is as follows: “O Devi 
Radhike! Thy colour is like white Campaka 


1204 


flowers; Thy face is like the autumnal Full Mon; 
Thy body shines with the splendour of ten million 
moons, Thy eyes look beautiful like autumnal lotus; 
Thy lips are red like Bimba frutis, Thy loins are 
very heavy and decked with the girdle (Kāticī) 
ornament; Thy face is always gracious with sweet 
smiles. Thy breasts defy the frontal globe of an 
elephant.Thou art ever youthful as if twelve years 
old; Thy body ts adorned all over with ornaments; 
Thou art the waves of the ocean of Śrħgāra (love 
sentiments). Thou art ever ready to shew Thy grace 
to the devotees; on Thy braid of hair garlands of 
Mallika and Malati are shining; Thy body is like a 
creeping plant, very gentle and tender; Thou art 
seated in the middle of Rasa Mandalam as the Chief 
Directrix; Thy one hand is ready to grant boons 
and another hand expresses ‘Have no fear.’ 


anami Mira Mages i 26 I 

Iemet dienaa | 

guņunttrai dgatftrai warty u27 u 

We tures rīt srt geni UŽSYAT i 

wc assed weder fumme: 28 1 

Thou art of a peaceful appearance; Thou art ever 
youthful; Thou art seated on a jewel throne; Thou 
art the foremost guide of the Gopikas; Thou art 
dearer to Krsna than even His life; O Paramešvarī! 
The Vedas reveal Thy nature." Meditating thus, 
one is to bathe the Devi on a Šālagrāma stone, jar, 
yantra or the eight-petalled lotus and then worship 
Her duly. 

aaa «eft ereasrTereraría weterar i 

yona ugeri GAAS ETAT i 29 N 

Ure q uraatéereneqassed AAT i 

We arent varferent Were |1 30 U 

First the Devi is to be invoked; then Padya and 
Asana, etc., are to be offered, the principal Mantra 
being pronounced at every time an offering is 
given. After giving water for washing both the 
feet, Arghya is to be placed on the head. and 
Acamaniyam water to be offered times on the 
face. 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


mud; at cencent Ti er uarfiardt i 
Tat AAA twr AAT sme 031 N 
MARSA efe er ATTA 1 
TAS wet eared 132 


Madhuparka (an oblation of honey, milk etc.) 
and a cow giving a good quantity of milk are next 
to be offered. Then the yantra is to be thought of 
as the bathing place where the Devi is to be bathed. 
Then Her body is to be wiped and a fresh cloth 
given for putting on. Sandalpaste and various other 
ornaments are next to be given. 

Tae sete d 

usar Vaga a 133 

aa: pataa aRar fart: à 

aiman RaT 1034 

wer uae Amadis: | 

Various garlands of flowers with Tulasi Mafijari 
(flower stalks) Pārijāta flower and Satapatra etc., 
then, are to be offered. Then within the eight petals, 
the family members of the Devi are to be thought 
of; worship is next to be offered in the right hand 
direction (with the hands of the watch). 

aero aaa a Tear N 35 u 

veniret afro vr A qp YRT | 

ware cree: YARATA: 036 u 

"red ursi repe wp wet i 

Semet usar dad Ramo 137 u 

First of all, Malàvati on the petal in front of (on 
the east) the Devi, then Madhavi on the south-east 
corner, then Ratnamālā on the south, Sušīlā on the 
south-west Sašikalā on the west, Pārijātā on the 
north-west, Parāvatī on the north and the 


benefactious Sundari on the north-east corner are 
to be worshipped in order. 
WETS waresvargmaroteg GT i 
AAE cette Was u38 it 
dr adi Ararat regTÉPe emu: 1 
Werernuféd: AARAA: 039 
Outside this, Brahmi and the other Mātrkās are 
to be worshipped and on the Bhüpüras (the 
entrances of the yantra), the Regents of the quarters, 


Book IX Chapter L 


1205 


the Dikpālas and weapons of the Devi, thunderbolt, 


etc., are to be worshipped. Then all the attendant 
Deities of the Devi are to be worshipped with scents 
and various other articles. 

dd: vgeta zafi Tae: l 

metei a at fret KABATA: 40 

a wd yA ver waa wm i 

a TAfŠUITAFA Kg iter ure vise 4 1 ul 

Thou finishing the worship, one should chant 
the Stotra (hymns) named Sahasra-nama (thousand 
names) Stotra with care and devotion. O Narada! 
The intelligent man who worships thus the 
Rāsešvarī Devi Radha, becomes like Visnu and 
goes to the Go-loka. 

a: arat diarea verse ie Sr: | 

Hed wer ma gamsmavat UST 0042 i 

kaaa wet gaat ad | 

FIAT TA sme Manca war! 43 u 

He who performs the birth-day anniversary of 
Sri Radha on the Full-Moon day of the month of 
Kārtika, gets the blessing of Sri Radha who remains 
near to him. For some reason Radha, the dweller 
in Goloka was born in Vrndàvana as the daughter 
of Vrsabhànu. 

aite prm ertet eren: | 

yanmi amii Aaa, 0144 N 

Reanga estan Rama: 1 

However, according to the number of letters of 
the mantras that are mentioned in this chapter, 
Purascarana is to be made and Homa, one-tenth of 
Purascarana, is to be then performed. The Homa is 
to be done with ghee, honey, and milk the three 
sweet mixed with Til and with devotion. 


ane sara 
wit ae qa wena det vata uas 
Narada said: O Bhagavan; Now describe the 
Stotra (hymn) Mantra by which the Devi is pleased. 


simran gara 
AK went menswear d 
mAh TEs FATIH TS 146 u 


amar udi swumvia | 
werfawwarfefirfadermmauaigs 47 1 
Narayana said: O Narada! Now I am saying the 
Radha Stotra. O Thou, the Highest Deity! the 
Dweller in Rasa Mandalam! I bow down to Thee; 
O Thou, the Chief Directrix of the Rasa Mandalam; 
O Thou dearer to Krsna than His life even, I bow 
down to Thee. O Thou, the Mother of the three 
Lokas! O Thou the Ocean of mercy! Be pleased. 
Brahma, Visnu and the other Devas bow down 
before Thy lotus feet. 

m: madan an: arfatā viet 1 

manade wfB Wuewfzh 248 

A godet «mur veaa i 

"Hb gt Mati mt udefūvīt 1149 n 

Thou art Sarasvatī; Thou art Sāvitrī; Thou art 
Saükari I bow down to Thee; Thou art Ganga; Thou 
art Padmavati; Thou art Sasthi; Thou art Mangala 
Candika; Thou art Manasa, Thou art Tulasi; Thou 
art Durga; Thou art Bhagavati; Thou art Laksmi; 
Thou art all, I bow down to Thee. 

yopi rat ware: RETIA, i 
nson 

sd wait Aari a: ss emu: | 

aaa gest fnfgenarferea wifawifa u 51 u 

Thou art the Mila Prakrti; Thou art the Ocean 
of mercy. Obesiance to Thee! Be merciful to us 
and save us from this ocean of Samsara (round of 
brith and death).” O Narada! Any body who 
remembers Radha and reads this Stotra three times 
a day does not feel the want of any thing in this 
world. 

Sen a adfered ien memes | 

wd Teed ud a oe q ufu 52 NI 

a ga Aa grian ATF | 

TEM: AN A RTTE: 11 53 i 

He will ultimately go to Goloka and remain in 
the Rasa Mandalam. O Child! This great secret 
aught never to be given out to any. Now I am telling 
you the method of worship of the Durga Devi. 


1206 


Šrīmaddevībhāga vatam 


Hear. When any one remembers Durga in this} ftresat dant diet aer ee TĀ 1 


world, all his difficulties and troubles are removed. 
Wats sre TR aS Hater i 
wafarear admen vat wer gaT u 54 u 


wdsranrfireettereatfiweawsfuuft 1 

week: aiff wam yf uss ui 

It is not seen that anybody does not remember 
Durga. She is the object of worship of all. She is 
the Mother of all and the Wonderful Sakti of 
Mahadeva. She is the Presiding Deity of the 
intellect (Buddhi) of all and She controls the hearts 
of all and She removes the great difficulties and 
dangers of all. 

aera a Sraramquredret wc fre: | 

qeupirant wr ufbfterernifivft t 56 u 

aen emen i ae Woven | 

anya viata a era: Wem 0 57 N 

Therefore She is named Durgà in the world. She 
is worshipped by all, whether a Saiva or a Vaisnava. 
She is the Mülà Prakrti and from Her the creation, 
preservation and destruction of the universe 
proceed. O Nàrada! Now I am saying the principal 
nine lettered Durga Mantra, the best of all the 
Mantras. 

wmguzrt wd usmfüed SIR | 

Aaa AA: Wal AoA HAUT: l6 58 II 

MEAS PITT TASES rente: | 

sarga werd MANTIS: 159 1 

ugn Berean: Tft saa: i 

enamad qui vr arent vem u 60 n 

‘Aim Hrim Klim Cāmuņdāyai Vicce’ is the nine 
lettered Bija mantra of Sri Durga; itis like a Kalpa 
Vrksa yielding all desires. One should worship this 
mantra by all means. Brahma Visnu, and Maheša 
are the Rsis of this mantra; Gayatri, Usnik and 
Anustubha are the chandas; Mahakali, Maha 
Laksmi and Sarasvati are the Devatās; Rakta 
Dantika, Durga, and Bhramari are the Bijas. 

Haha sfr er VITA: EET: | 

aatia fatrar sated 061 tt 


xerit: vēna aerate 11 620 

Nanda, Sakambhari, and Bhima are the Saktis 
and Dharma (virtue), Artha (wealth) and Kama 
(desires), are the places of application (Viniyoga). 
Assign the head to the Rsi of the mantra (Nyasa); 
assign the chandas to the mouth assign the Devata 
to the heart. 

dadag great wur Aa fü i 

weft wat: patsa era: N 63 u 

Prat Fa ARTA E | 

Fe amaaan carts RA, u64 N 

Then assign the Šakti to the right breast for the 
success and assign the Bīja to the left breast. Then 
perform the Sadanga Nyāsa as follows: Aim 
Hrdayāya namah, Hrīm Šīrase Svaha, Klīm 
Šikhāyām Vasat,.Cāmuņdāyai Kavacāya Hum, 
Vicce Netrābhyām Vausat, ‘Aim Hrīm Klim 
Cāmuņdāyai Vicce’ Karatalaprsthābhyām Phat. 
Next say touching the corresponding parts of the 
body: ‘Aim namah Šikhāyām, Hrim Namah’ on 
the right eye; "Klīm Namah’ on the left eye, Cam 
Namah ‘on the right ear, "Mum namah’ on the left 
ear, ndàm Namah’ on the nostrils; Vim Namah on 
the face; "Ccem Namah’ on the anus and finally 
‘Aim Hrim Klīm Camundayai Vicce’ on the whole 
body. Then do the meditation (dhyàna) thus: 

agramen R Wem 1 

vro yii wr Pr: wg dati at: 65 U 

ETS PTT ISTITUTI | 

OSTA TI GST stat 66 N 

*O Càmunde! Thou art holding in Thy ten hands 

ten weapons viz, Khadga (axe) Cakra (disc) Gada 
(club) Bana (arrows), Capa (bow), Parigha, Süla 
(spear), Bhus$undi Kapāla, and Khadga. Thou art 
Maha Kali; Thou art three-eyed; Thou art decked 
with various ornaments. Thou shinest like 
Līlāfijana (a kind of black pigment). Thou hast ten 
faces and ten feet. 

ngkene at Gears: | 

Ud TART enrettenesfuvtta t 67 t 


Book IX Chapter L 


1207 


Raat rp uy MASĪVA E d 

we pheri U deyfvnHfu Ta N 68 N 

anig TAT Suet KULTS A VAT | 

ust yest da GARU 169 u 

The Lotus born Brahma chanted hymns to Thee 
for the destruction of Madhu Kaitabha I bow down 
to Thee.” Thus one should meditate on Maha Kali, 
of the nature of Kamabija (the source whence will 
comes). Then the Dhyanam of Maha Laksmi runs 
as follows: *O Maha Laksmi, the destroyer of 
Mahisāsura! Thou holdest the garland of Aksa (a 
king of seed), Parasu (a kind of axe), Gada (club), 
Isu (arrows), Kuliša (the thunderbolt) Padma 
(Lotus), Dhanu (bow), Kundika (a student's water- 
pot, Kamandalu), Danda (rod for punishment), 
Sakti (a kind of weapon), Asi (sword), Carma 
(shield) Padma (a king of waterlily), Ghanta (bell), 
(Surāpātra) (a pot to hold liquor), Süla (pick-axc) 
Pasa (noosc) and Sudaršana (a kind of weapon. 
Thy colour is of the Rising Sun. 

TTT TA Ares frat | 

Terma asied wfesnpeedi 704 

Thou art seated on the red Lotus. Thou art of 
the nature Māyābīja (the source whence female 
energy comes). So Obeisance to Thee! (The Bija 
and the Devi are one and identical)." Next comes 
the Dhyanan of Malia Sarasv ati as follows: 


Bei n N 


O Maha Sarasvati! Thou holdest bell, pickaxe, 
plough (Hala), Conchshell, Musala (a kind of club), 
Sudarśana, bow and arrows. Thy colour is like 
Kunda flower; Thou art the destroyer of Sumbha 
and the other Daityas; Thou art of the nature of 
Vanibija (the source whence knowledge, speech 
comes. 

HAREN: JU Wat aS VEO | 

wdlsEqeuui cw cegfesreuaenq 173 N 


Thy body is filled with everlasting existence, 
intelligence and bliss. Obeisance to Thee!" O 
Narada! Now I am going to say on the Yantra of 
Maha Sarasvati. Listen. 

TS VATA sata faf d 

VITA we ashe era AT ATA aT Uu 7 4 u 

amsaa wi uetedtaaratft: 1 

aafia did edi wort u75 u 

First draw a triangle. Draw inside tne triangle 
eight petalled lotus having twenty-four leaves. 
Within this draw the house. Then on the Yantra 
thus drawn, or in the Šālagrāma stone, or in the 
jar, or in image, or 1n the Vanalingam, or on the 
Sun, onc should worship the Devi with oneness of 
heart. 

yina ATT afedt wen uh od 

Prr we at aa Ad etur usq u76u 

wurden ated visi argh waa i 

Weur ST: quu: repu Wenqup 77 N 

Then worship the Pitha, the deities seated also 
on the dais, 7.c., Jaya, Vijaya, Ajità, Aghora, 
Mangalà and other Pitha Saktis. Then worship the 
attendant deities called Avarana Pūjā: Brahma with 
Sarasvati on the east, Narayana with Laksmi on 
the Nairrit corner, Sankara with Parvati on the 
Vayu corner, the Lion on the north of the Devi, 
and Mahasura on the left side of the Devi; finally 
worship Mahisa (buffalo). 

aigu garda Tey UART, | 

dant vendat wr erem greet fa 1 78 u 

quf tat arf a aate a | 

seit eva a wart rendi qum 79 N 

anrd RISE ur Ut onset We | 

Ta wd: ugg yT: uso ul 

Raai deat er ates Prat aget aen | 

"ramen UT quart Vif ST A HAT 81 u 

wife at teneat fet fet aft vafe i 

gai ae aa: qfi urquidt zit maT u 82 u 

Next worship Nandaja, Raktadanta, Sakambhari, 
Siva, Durga, Bhima, and Bhrāmarī. Then on the 


1208 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


eight petals worship Brahmi, Māhešvarī, Kaumārī, 
Vaisnavi, Vārāhī, Nara Sirnhī, Aindrī, and Camunda. 
Next commencing from the leaf in front of the Devt, 
worship on the twenty-four leaves Visnu Maya, 
Cetana, Buddhi, Nidra (sleep), hunger, a shadow, 
Sakti, thirst, peace, species (Jati), modesty, faith, 
fame, Laksmi (wealth), fortitude, Vrtti, Sruti 
memory, mercy, Tusti, Pusti (nourishment), Bhrānti 
(error) and other Matrkās. 

wd WOT Wet Aaa | 

wed AAA qotarfrarat: 83 N 

FT Ale MATTE, | 

gaat fear xe arammi aa: ou 84 

SSI INE IC DIE GICs i — d 

wt mAai a wat erede |1 85 N 

Next on the corners of the Bhüpura (gates of 
the Yantra), Gane$a Ksettrapalas, Vatuka and 
Yoginis are to be worshipped. Then on the outside 
of that Indra and the other Devas furnished with 
weapons are to be worshipped as per the aforesaid 
rules. For the satisfaction of the World-Mother 
various nice offerings and articles like those given 
by the royal personages are to be presented to the 
Mother; then the mantra is to be repeated, 
understanding its exoteric and esoteric meanings. 

aa: Veet qeur at FAIS i 

"TR Beet ant ferent yours 186 N 

AHA east aware at: 1 

anidan BTW AT: |187 N 

Then Saptašatī stotra (Caņdī pātha) is to be 
repeated before the Devi. There is no other stotra 
like this in the three worlds. Thus Durga, the Deity 
of the Devas, is to be appeased every day. He who 
does this gets within his easy reach Dharma, Artha, 
Kama, and Moksa, the four main objects of human 
pursuits (virtue, wealth, enjoyment and final 
beatitude). 

gfe d af fay siant freres | 

garda da màn aa uss il 

wd tat afta mAN | 


gaat wR ARAIAN u 89 N 

MAMA Wen: We turae: at foren i 

O Narada! Thus I have described to you the 
method of worship of the Devi Durga. People get 
by this what they want. Hari, Brahma, and all the 
Devas, Manus, Munis, the Yogis full of knowledge, 
the Asramis, and Laksmi and the other Devas all 
meditate on Sivam. 


weg Wares eT a 90 

agimi Waal LTE OTTE, | 

Ted VITA Sa: Tet ve ud TAT 11 N 

One’s birth is attained with success at the 
remembrance of Durga. The fourteen Manus have 
got their Manuship and the Devas their own rights 
by meditating on the lotus feet of Durga. 

wéderdunesrd TTT, | 

vad Uz ada a utm u92 

gaan fea gendaan, | 

BMS ATA AE: et est TNT N93 N 

O Narada! Thus I have described to you the very 
hidden histories of the Five Prakrtis and their parts. 
Then, verily, the four objects of human pursuits 
Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksa are obtained by 
hearing this. 

agi ord Ost faren urere ATA i 

dd art maA d d Spem AAA 0 94 N 

aaa wàqdqüenl qo wu 1 

uftger wart vaca fe fafa 95 n 

He who has no sons gets sons, who has no 
learning gets learning and whoever wants any thing 
gets that if he hears this. The Devi Jagaddhatri 
becomes certainly pleased with him who reads with 
his mind concentrated on this for nine nights before 
the Devi. 

free ude: were At | 

«mur ayur weet aet firerastt fü T: 1 96 i 

Vata Aa fremteraarfāftr 1 

vnu asl EAST, 0 97 1 

The Devī becomes obedient to him who daily 
reads one chapter of this Ninth Skandha and the 
reader also does what is acceptable to the Devī. 


Book LX Chapter L 


1209 


To ascertain before-hand what offects, merits or 
demerits, would accure from reading this 
Bhagavata, it is necessary by examining through 
the hands of a virgin girl or a Brahmin child, the 
auspicious or inauspicious signs. 

Take g HE Yah WAT: | 

wei a STĀSTA Wort YA: WA: N98 N 

Gea Hara aarttanama ATA 1 

VITA Woes AUT vasta Piftrara i 99 u 

First make a Sankalpa (resolve) and worship the 
book. Then bow down again and again to the Devi 
Durga. Then bring there a virgin girl, bathed well 
and worship her duly and have a golden pencil fixed 
duly in her hand and placed in the middle on the 
body. 

HORIS ar Baretta AHA | 

sedis ard srafet fate 100 N 

she secret eno? TIRE 
FATA EAA: 11:50 11 

Then calculate the auspicious or inauspicious 
effects, as the case may be, from curves made by 
that pencil. So the effects of reading this Bhagavata 
would be. If the virgin girl be indifferent in fixing 
the pencil within the area drawn, know the result 
of reading the Bhágavata would be similar. There 
is no doubt in this. 

Here ends the Fiftieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on 
the glory of Sakti in the Mahapuranam 
Srimaddevibhaga vatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 

HOMER TTA UTE: (362511) vcl: JAER: 
RIITAA uu veu PRT: d 
"HT HAN: KAT: | 

Here ends the Ninth Book. 


The Ninth Book Completed. 


Notes on Sakti and the Saktas 


Extracts from the Calcutta Review. No. XL VII, 
March 1855. 


The Saktas—Their characteristics and Practical 
influence in society. 


In the Markandeya Purāņam, Nature (Prakrti) 
is said ‘to have assumed three transcendent forms, 
according to her three Gunas or qualities, and in 
each of them to have produced a pair of divinities, 
Brahma and Sarasvati, Maheša and Kali, Visnu 
and Laksmi, after whose intermarriage, Brahma 
and Sarasvati formed the mundane egg, which 
Maheša and Kali divided into halves; and Visnu, 
together with Laksmi, preserved from destruction. 


The Tantras, which are full of mysteries and 
mystical symbols, while they admit the three forms 
of the female principal to be severally the 
representatives of the three primary Gunas, derive 
their origin from the conjunction of Bindu, or the 
sound called Anusvara, and marked (*) with the 
Bija or roots of mantras or incantations. Every 
specific mantra, or a mantra, peculiar or exclusively 
belonging to any divinity, consists of Bija or toot, 
and the Anusvara, which together from what is 
called a Nada; and it is from the Nada, or the 
combination of the two symbols, that the Three 
forms of Sakti are said to have had their origin. 
But this symbolical representation, the Tantras, 
which exalt Siva and his bride, above all other 
divinities, mean, that Bindu and Bija severally 
represent Siva and Sakti. the parents of all other 
gods and goddesses. Thus: ‘The Bindu, which is 
the soul of Siva, and the Bija which is the soul of 
Sakti, together form the Nada, from which the three 
Saktis are born (Kriya Sara Tantra). Here is another 
attempt of the worshippers of Siva amd his Sakti 
to identify their guardian divinities with the 
Supreme Brahma. 

In the Goraksa Samhita, we read as follows, 
* Will, action, and intelligence are in order the 
sources of Gauri, the wife of Siva, Brahmi, the 
wife of Brahma and Vaisnavi, the wife of Visnu. 


1210 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


The theory dismisses altogether the notion of the | Purāņam, offends or insults a female’ incurs the 


three Gunas, and substitutes will, action, and 
intelligence in their place. 

Again the Šāstras, it appears, have increased the 
number of the female divinities, according as they 
have increased the number of the male deities or 
their incarnations. The Kürma Purāņam gives five 
forms of the original Sakti : ‘And she (Mila Prakrti) 
became in the act of creation fivefold by the will 
of the supreme.’ And the forms which, according 
to this authority the original Prakrti is said to have 
assumed, are: Ist, Durga, the birde, Sakti, or Maya 
of Siva; 2nd, Laksmi, the bride, Sakti, or Maya of 
Visnu; 3rd Sarasvati, the same of Brahmi, or in 
the Brahma Vaivartta Puránam of Hari, whilst the 
fourth, Savitri is the bride of Brahma. The fifth 
division, Radha, is unquestionably, as Dr. Wilson 
very justly remarks, “a modern intruder into the 
Hindu pantheon.’ ; 

In every succesive creation of the universe, the 
Mila Prakrti is said ‘to assume the different gra- 
dations of * Arhša-rūpiņī, Kalā-rūpiņī, and Kalamsa- 
rüpini, or manifests herself in portions, parts and 
portions of parts and further subdivisions. Thus the 
writes of the Puranas state: 'In every creation of 
the world, the Devi, through Divine Yoga assumes 
divine forms and becomes Amsa-rūpā, Kalā-rūpā, 
and Kalarn$a-rüpa, or Améam$a-rüpà. The Arhšas 
form the class in which all the more important mani- 
festations of the Sakti are comprehended, the Kalas 
include all the secondary Goddesses, and the 
Kalaméas and Arn$ārhšas are subdivisions of the 
latter, and embrace all womankind, who are dis- 
tinguished as good, middling or bad, according as 
they derive their being from the parts of their great 
original, in which the Sattva, Rajo and Tamo Guna 
predominates. At the same time, being regarded 
as manifestations of the one Supreme Spirit, they 
are all entitled not only to respect but to venera- 
tion. “Whoever,” says the Brahma Vaivartta 


wrath of Prakrti, whilst he who propitiates a fe- 
male, particularly the youthful daughter of a 
Brahmin, with clothes, ornaments and perfumes, 
offers worship to Prakrti Herself.’ 

We shall next determine the questions,—What 
is Sakta, and what is the complexion of his faith? 
By Šāktas are understood the worshippers of Sakti. 
This is true only when we take the term Sakti in its 
restricted sense, This term, which had originally 
but one primary signification, has in the course of 
time come to be used in two different senses, a 
general and a limited one. When taken in its widest 
sense, it means the allegorical representation of the 
active energy of God and is synonymous with Mila 
Prakrti, the primitive source of Gods and men. In 
its limited sense, it is confined to Siva Sakti, the 
Tamasi, the offspring of darkness, and the last of 
the first three forms of the original Prakrti. It is 
Sakti in this latter sense, the.bride of Siva, whom, 
in her manifold forms, the Šāktas worship. The 
followers of the Siva Sakti then are alone called 
Saktas. 

Every Hindu may pay his adoration to all the 
thirty-three Kotis of Gods and Goddesses compos- 
ing the Hindu pantheon, but one and one only of 
the five divinities, Visnu. Siva, Sürya, Ganapati 
and Sakti must be his Ista Devata or tutelar divin- 
ity. Here is the marked distinction between gen- 
eral worshippers and special followers. To render 
this distinction more clear, we observe, that three 
are certain general formulas and prayers forming 
the ritual of worship of every praticular divinity. 
These may be learnt by any Hindu from the Sastras, 
or from the mouth of a Brahmana and used in the 
adoration of any God or Goddess, according to 
choice or necessity. But besides these general man- 
tras, which may be made use of by any Hindu, 
without any distinction of sect, there are the Bija 
or specific formulas, which are received only from 


Book IX Chapter L 


the hallowed lips of the Guru or spiritual guide. 
These are kept in great secrecy and repeated 
mantally every day, as a matter of highest religious 
duty. The God or Goddess, whose Bija or Mila 
mantra is received in the prescribed manner, by 
any devotee, becomes his guardian divinity; and 
the person, thus initiated, becomes the special fol- 
lower of that divinity. The Saktas, then, are the 
special followers of the Sakti of Siva. They may in 
general worship any other God or Goddess, but 
the bride of Siva, in one or other of her horrid 
manifestations, must be their guardian deity. The 
following passage, quoted from the works of Mr. 
Colebrooke, will much elucidate the subject. 
That the Hindus belong to various sects, is uni- 
versally known. Five great sects, exclusively wor- 
ship a single deity. One recognises the five divini- 
ties, which are adored by the other sects respec- 
tively; but the followers of this most comprehen- 
sive scheme mostly select one object of daily de- 
votion and pay adoration to other deities on par- 
ticular occasions only. The Hindu theologists 
have entered into vain disputes on the question, 
which, among the attributes of God, shall be 
deemed characteristic and pre-eminent 
Šankarācārya, the celebrated commentator on the 
Vedas, contended for the attributes of Siva; and 
founded or confirmed the sect of Saivas, who 
worship Mahadeva as the supreme being, and 
deny the independent existence of Visnu and 
other Deities. Madhava Ācārya and Vallabha 
Acarya have, in like manner, established the sect 
of Vaisnavas who adore Visnu as God. The 
Sauras (less numerous then the two sects above 
mentione) worship the Sun, and acknowledge no 
other divinity. The Gāņapatyās adore Gaņeša, as 
uniting in his person all the attributes of the Deity. 
Before I notice the fifth sect, I must remind the 
reader, that the Hindu Mythology has personified 
the abstract and active powers of the divinity; and 


1211 


has ascribed sexes to these mythological person- 
ages. The Sakti, or energy of an attribute of God, 
is female and is fabled as the consort of that per- 
sonified attribute, * * * The exclusive adorers of 
the Sakti of Siva, are the Sāktas. (Asiatic Re- 
searches, Vol. VII, pp. 279). 

The Saktas, who adopt the female principle in 
the last of her three principle modifications, as their 
special divinity,—instead of deriving her origin 
from the supreme Brahma, use to her the language 
which is invariably applied to the preferential object 
of worship in every sect, and contemplate her as 
the only source of life and existence. She is declared 
to he equally in all things, and that all things are in 
her, and that besides her there is nothing. In short, 
she is identified with the Supreme Being. Thus it 
is written in the Kasi Khanda: “Thou art predicated 
in every prayer-Brahmā and the rest are all born 
from Thee. Thou art one with the four objects of 
life, and from Thee they come to fruit. From Thee 
this whole universe proceeds, and in Thee, asylum, 
of the world, all is, whether visible or invisible, 
gross or subtle in its nature: what is, Thou art in 
Sakti form and except Thee nothing has ever been. 
‘The Sakti of Siva being indentified with Saktiman, 
the Deity, is-declared to be not only superior to 
Her Lord, but the Cause of Him. Of the two objects 
(Siva and Sakti) which are eternal, the greater is 
the Šakti.” Again Sakti gives strength to Šiva; 
without Her he could not stir a straw. She is 
therefore the Cause of Siva. (Sankara Vijaya). 

Although the Puranas do, to a certain extent, 
authorize the adoration of Sakti, yet the principal 
rites and incantations are derived from a different 
source. Of the Puranas, those which in particular 
inculcate the worship of the female principle, are 
the Brahma Vaivartta, the Skanda, and the Kālikā. 
But neither in them, nor in any other Puranam, do 
we find the Bija or radical mantras which the Saktis 
receive from their spiritual guides. These, as well 


1212 


as the greater portion of the formulas intended for 
general worshippers, are received from an 
independent series of works, known by the 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


of the Siva Sakti, ten are held to be the chief being 
distinguished by the name of Dasa Maha Vidya or 
ten great Vidyas Their names are as follows: (1) 


collective name of Tantras. The fabulous origin of | Kali, (2) Tara, (3) Sodašī (4) Bhuvanešvarī, (5) 


the Tantras is derived from revelations of Siva to 
Parvati, and confirmed by Visnu. It is therefore 
called Agama, from the initials of the three words 
in a verse of the Sadala Tantra. Comming from the 
mouth of Siva, heard by the mountain born 
Goddess, admitted by the son of Vasudeva, it is 
thence called Agama. 

In the Siva Tantra, Siva is made to say: ‘The 
five scriptures (the four Vedas and the Puranas) 
issued from my five mouths, are the East, West, 
South, North, and Upper. The five are known as 
the paths to final liberation. There are many 
scriptures, but none are euqal to the upper scripture 
(meaning the Tantras). 

Accordingly, the observances and ceremonies 
they prescribe, have indeed, in Bengal, superseded 
the original or the Vaidik ritual. They appear also, 
says Dr. Wilson, to have been written chiefly in 
Bengal and the eastern districts, many of them 
being unknown in the West and South-India and 
the rites they teach having there failed to set aside 
the ceremonies of the Vedas, although they are not 
without an important influence upon the belief and 
the practices of the people. 

The Sakti of Siva, whom the Saktas make the 
particular object of their devotion, in preference to 
and exclusion of all other gods and goddesses, is 
said to have first assumed sixty (60) different forms, 
each of which is believed to have a great many 
modifications. Each of these secondary man- 
ifestations of the Sakti is again said to have taken 
a variety of forms, and so on almost without end. 
Even the cow and the jackals are declared to be 
parts of Bhagavati and venerated by the benighted 
natives of the country. Of the sixty primary forms 


Bagala, (6) Chinnamastā, (7) Dhūmāvatī, (8) 
Bhairavi, (9) Mātangī and (10) Kamalatmika. 
These are the forms in which the Saktas generally 
adore the bride of Siva as their guardian divinity. 
The Šāktas are divided into two leading branches, 
the Daksiņācāris and the Vāmācāris; or the 
followers of the right hand and left hand ritual. 
With the former, the chief authorities, among the 
Tantras, which are too numerous to be enumerated 
in theis place are the Mantra Mahodadhi, Šāradā 
Tilaka, Kalika Tantra, etc., While the impure ritual 
adopted by the latter is contained chiefly in the 
Kulacūdāmaņi, Rudra Yamala, Śyāmā Rahasya, 
Yoni Tantra, and similar works. 

The Vamis or the left-hand worshippers, adopt 
a form of worship contrary, to that which is usual, 
and they not only worship the Sakti of Siva in all 
her terrific forms, but pay adoration to her 
numerous fiend-like attendants, the Yoginis, 
Dakinis, and the Sakinis. In common with the other 
branch of the Šāktas, Siva is also admitted to a 
share of their worshipful homage, especially in the 
form of Bhairava, as it is with this modification of 
the diety, that the Vama worshipper is required to 
conceive himself to be identified, just before he 
engages himself in the orgies peculiar to his sect. 
Thus, ‘I am Bhairava, I am the omniscient, 
endowed with qualities. The object presented to 
the followers of the left-hand ritual, is nothing less 
than an identification with Siva and his Sakti after 
death, and the possession of supernatural powers 
in this life. It has no precedent either in the Puranas 
or in the Vedas. It is quite peculiar in itself, and 
perfectly distinct from every other form of worship. 
The Kularnava Tantra declares: ‘The Vedas are 


Book IX Chapter L 


1213 


preeminent over all works, the Vaisnava sect excels 
the Vedas, the Saiva sact is preferable to that of 
Visnu and the right-hand Sakta to that of Siva— 
the left hand 1s better than the right-hand division, 
and the Siddhànta is better still, the Kaula is better 
than the Siddhànta, and there is none better than it. 
The Vāmācārīs in general, and the Kaulas, in 
particular, make a great secret of their faith, not 
because they are in any way ashamed to avow the 
impure rites they perform, but because, by being 
made public, the rites are said to lose their efficacy, 
and become abortive. ‘Inwardly Saktas, outwardly 
Saivas, and in society nominally Vaisnavas, the 
Kaulas assuming various forms traverse the earth. 

The form of worship varies according to the end 
proposed by the worshippers : but in all the forms, 
the five Makaras are indispensably necessary. 
These are Mamsya, Matsya, Madya, Maithuna, and 
Mudra (flesh, fish, spirituous liquor, women and 
certain mystical gesticulations). They are called 
Makara, because they all begin with the letters m 
(1). Thus we read in Šyāmā Rahasya: ‘Wine, flesh, 
fish, Mudra, and Maithuna, are the five-fold 
Makara, which takes away all sin.’ Appropriate 
mantras are also indispensable, according to the 
immediate object of the adorer. These incantations 
are no more intelligible to us than Egyptian 
hieroglyphics, and consist of meaningless mono- 
syllabic combinations of letters. They are very great 
in number and are all declared to be highly 
efficacious, if properly used according to the 
dictates of the Tantras. Take the Prasada mantra. 
It is cumposed of two letters, H and S, and is one 
of the very few to which any meaning is attempted 
to be attached. The Kulārņava says: The letter He 
is the expirated and S the inspirated letter, and as 
these two acts constitute life, the mantra they 
express is the same with life, the animated world 
would not have been formed without it, and exists 
but as long as it exists, and it is an integral part of 


the universe, without being distinct from it, as the 
fragrance of flowers, and sweetness of sugar, oil 
of sesamum seed, and Sakti of Siva. 

He who knows it, needs no other knowledge, 
he who repeats it, needs practice no other act of 
adoration. The authority here cited is very elaborate 
upon the subject. 

The rites practised by the Vāmācārīs are so 
grossly obscene, as to cast into shade the worst 
inventions which the most impure imagination can 
conceive (unbridled debauchery with wine and 
women). 

Solitude and secrecy being strictly enjoined to 
the Vamis they invariably celebrate their rites at 
midnight and in most unfrequented and private 
places. Those, whose immediate objects is the 
attainment of super-human powers, or whose end 
is specific, aiming at some particular boon or gift, 
are more strict on the point, lest they reap no fruits 
of their devotion. They never admit a companion, 
not even of their own fraternity, into the place of 
their worship. Even when they are believed by the 
credulous Hindus to have become Siddhas, that is, 
possessed of supernatural powers; or, in other 
words, when they have acquired sufficient art to 
impose upon their ignorant and superstitious 
countrymen, and have established their reputation 
as men capable of working miracles, they take 
every care not to disclose the means through which 
they have attained the object of their wish, unless 
revealed by some accidental occurrence or un- 
looked for circumstance. Those whose object is of 
a general character, hold a sort of convivial party, 
eating and drinking together in large numbers, 
without any great fear of detection. But yet they 
always take care to choose such secluded spots for 
the scenes of their devotion as lie quite concealed 
from the public view. They generally pass un- 
noticed and are traced out only when we make it 
our aim to detect them by watching over their 


1214 


movements like a spy. At present, as their chief 
desire appears to be only the gratification of sensual 
appetites, they are at all times found to be more 
attentive to points which have direct reference to 
the indulgence of their favourite passions, than 
those minor injunctions which require of them 
secrecy and solitude. 

We shall now enumerate some of the leading 
rites observed by the Vāmācārīs of this country. 
The drinking of spirituous liquors, more or less, is 
with them no Jess a habit than a religious practice. 
Here it should be observed that the orthodox Vamis 
will never touch any foregin liquor or wine, but 
use only the country doasta, which they drink out 
of cup formed either of the nut of a cocoa, or of a 
human skull. They hold the bowl on the three ends 
ofthe three fingers of the left hand, viz., the thumb, 
the little finger, and the one next to the thumb, 
closing the two other fingers. The liquor is first 
offered to their especial divinity in quart bottles 
or pints but more frequetly in chaupalas and earthen 
jars, and then distributed round the company, each 
member having a cup exclusively his own. If there 
be no company, the worshipper pours the liquor 
into his own cup, and after holding it in the manner 
just described, repeats his Bija Mantra, while 
covering it with his right hand. The Vāmācārī, then, 
whether he be a sole worshipper or a member of a 
party, brings the cup filled with the heart-stirring 
liquid in contact with his forehead, as a mark of 
homage paid, and then empties it at a single sip. 
No symptom of nausea must be shewn, and no 
spittle must be thrown, indicating dis-relish of the 
celestial nectar to which the liquor is said to be 
converted by the repetition of the holy text. Three 
times the cup must go round over and over, before 
any food can be put to the mouth. There are 
technicalities in vogue among these, which they 
use their parties. For instance, when boiled rice is 
to be served, they say distribute the flowers; the 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


drinking cup is called pāttra; onions, nutmegs; the 
bottles, Jantras, etc. They call themselvees and all 
other men that drink wine, birs or heroes, and those 
thatabstain from drinking, patus, i.e., beasts. At 
the time of the principal initiation, or mantra 
grahana, that is, when the specific of Bija mantra 
is received from the Guru, he and his new disciple 
drink together, the former at intervals giving 
instructions to the latter as to the proper mode of 
drinking. 

Many ludicrous anecdotes are told of Kaula 
gurus and disciples, when heated with the 
intoxicating drug; when their brains are excited by 
drinking copiously, their conduct towards each 
other does little agree with the relation which 
subsists between them. Some times the relation is 
quite inverted and the disciple acts the part of the 
Guru, and puts his feet on his head which the latter 
quietly submits to this height of profanation on the 
part of the former. 

There is still another variety of the Vamis who 
substitute certain mistures in the place of wine. 
These mixtures are declared in the Tantras to be 
equivalent to wine, and to possess all its intrinsic 
virtues without the power of intoxication; such as 
the juice of the cocoanut received in a vessel made 
of Kānsā, the juice of the water lemon mixed with 
sugar, and exposed to the Sun; molasses dissolved 
in water, and contained in a copper vessel; the juice 
of the plant called Somalata, etc. 

In all the ceremonies, which not only com- 
prehend the worship of the Sakti, but are performed 
for the attainment of some proposed object, the 
presence of a female, as the living representative, 
and the type of the goddess, is indispensably 
necessary. Such ceremonies are specific in their 
nature, and are called Sādhanās. Some who are 
more decent than the rest of the sect, join with their 
wives in the celebration of the gloomy of Kali. 
Others make their beloved mistresses partners in 


Book IX Chapter L 


1215 


the joint devotion. Here the rite assumes a blacker 
aspect. The favourite concubine is disrobed, and 
placed by the side or on the thigh of her naked 
paramour. In this sitaution, the usual calmness of 
the mind must be preserved and no evil lodged in 
it. Such is the the requisition of the Sastras, say the 
Vamis, when reproached for their brutal practices. 
But here we first remind them of the fivefold 
Makara, and then ask them the plain question, how 
many among them can really boast of ever attaining 
to such a state of perfection, and such thorough 
control over the passions, as to keep them un- 
rufflled, or from being inflamed in the midst of 
such exciting causes. 

In this way is performed the rite called the 
Mantra Sadhana. It is, as must be expected, carried 
on in great secrecy, and is said to lead to the 
possession of supernatural powers. The religious 
part of is very simple, consisting merely of the 
repetition of the Mila Mantra which may or may 
not be preceded by the usual mode of Sakta 
worship. Hence it is called Mantra Sadhana, to 
distinguish it from other sorts of Sādhanās, which 
we shall presently notice. After ten p.m. the devotee 
under pretence of going to bed, retires into a private 
chamber, calling in his wife or mistress, and 
procuring all the necessary articles of worship, such 
as Wine, grains, water, a string of beads, etc., he 
shuts the doors and the windows of the room, and 
sitting before a lighted lamp, joins with his fair 
partner in drinking upto one, two, or three o'clock 
in the morning. 

One of our neighbours, a rich and respectable 
man in the native community, was in the habit of 
holding private meetings with his mistress every 
night, for the purpose of making the Sadhana. He 
had a string of beads made of candala’s teeth, which 
is yet preserved in his family, as a precious relic. 
The beads are believed to be endowed with a sort 
of animation, to drink or absorb milk, and to shew 


the appearance of grim laughter when wine is 
sprinkled over it. We have ourselves seen the rosary 
and tried its alleged virtues, but found nothing in it 
verifying the above statements. 

There is another sort of devotion, called the 
‘Save Sádbanà,' the object of which is to acquire 
in interview with and command over the impure 
spirtis, such as the Danas, Tālas, Vetālas, Bhütas, 
Pretas, Sakinis, Dakinis, and other male and fe- 
male goblins, so that they may be ready at com- 
mand to do whatever task the worshipper shall be 
pleased to commit to their charge. In this horrible 
ceremony, a dead body is necessary. The corpse 
of a candala is preferable to any other. But that 
which is declared to be the most meritorious, 
forming the shortest path to the acquisition of do- 
minion, is the body of a cāņdāla, having died a 
violent death, on Tuesday or Saturday, days sa- 
cred to Kali and on the day of the total wane of the 
moon. Such a conjunction of circmstances can 
rarely take place, and consequently any dead body 
serves the purpose. The rite assumes different 
forms. According to some authorities, the adept is 
to be alone at midnight in a $mašāna, or a place 
where dead bodies are either buried or burned, 
and there to perform the prescribed rights, seated 
on the corpse. According to others, he must pro- 
cure in the dead of night, four lifeless bodies, cut 
off their heads, and then bring them home. Placing 
these at the four corners of a square board, he 
should take his seat upon it, which with the wor- 
shipper upon it, must be supported by the four 
heads. In this latter method, the Guru is some- 
times seated in the front, for giving necessary di- 
rections, as well as for the purpose of encouraging 
the novice and to prevent his sinking down under 
fear. But whatever be this preliminary step, the 
leading features in either case are the same. The 
worshipper must be furnished with spirituous li- 
quors, and fried rice, and grain. Thus supplied, he, 


1216 


after worshipping the Sakti in the usual manner 
must continue repeating his Müla Mantra without 
interruption. This sort of prayer is called Japam. 
Ere long, he is said to be troubled with a hundred 
fears and assailed by a thousand hideous appear- 
ances. Infernal beings, some skeleton-like, and 
others pale as death, some one-legged and other 
with feet turned backwords, some with flaming 
brands taken from funeral piles in thier hands, and 
others tall as palm trees, emaciated, with hideous 
faces, and worms hanging from every part of their 
bodies, now dance round him, now terrify him 
with frowning countenances, and now threaton 
him with destruction. The corpse itself, upon 
which he has taken his seat, seems suddenly to re- 
vive, its pale eyes begin to sparkle and wear a furi- 
ous look, now it laughs and then opens wide its 
mouth, as if to devour him, who is thus oppressing 
it with his burden, and, Oh! dreadful to mention, 
now it attempts to rise and mount in the air. The 
heads also are said to show the same fearful! Ap- 
pearances. In the midst of these terrors, the devo- 
tee is required to persevere, to keep steadily in 
view the object of his devotion, to fix his mind 
firmly on his tutelar goddess and to pay no regard 
to the fiend-like phantoms. To the reviving corpse 
and heads, he is directed to present wine and food, 
with the view of pacifying them. If by giving way 
to fear, he tries to escape by flight, he instantly 
falls down insensible on the ground, and either 
dies on the spot or turns mad for life. But if, in 
spite of such apalling dangers, he can continually 
maintain his ground, the evil spirits gradually 
cease to frighten him, and are at last enslaved to 
his absolute will, like the genii represented in the 
story of Aladdin’s Wonderful Lamp. 

We now come to the blackest part of the Vama 
worship. The ceremony is entitled Sri Cakra, 
Pürnabhiseka, the ring or full initiation. This wor- 
ship is mostly celebrated in mixed societies com- 


Srimadde vibhagavatam 


posed of motely groups of persons of various 
castes, though not of creeds. This is quite extraor- 
dinary, since, according to the established laws of 
the caste system, no Hindus is permitted to eat 
with an inferior. But here the law is at once down 
away with, and persons of high caste, low caste, 
and no caste, sit, eat, and drink together. This 1s 
authorised by the Šāstras in the following text: 
‘Whilst the Bhairavi Tantra (the ceremony of the 
Cakra) is proceeding, all castes are Brahmanas— 
when it is concluded they are again distinct. 
(Šyāmā Rahasya) Thus, while the votaries of 
Sakti observe all the distinctions of caste in pub- 
lic, they neglect them altogether in the perfor- 
mance of her orgies. 

The principal part of the rite called the Cakra is 
the Sakti Sadhana, or the purification of the female 
representing the Sakti. In the ceremony termed the 
Mantra Sadhana, we have already noticed the 
introduction of a female, the devotee always 
making his wife or mistress partner in the devotion. 
This cannot be done in a mixed society. For 
although the Vamis are so far degenerated as to 
perform rites such as human nature, corrupt as it 
is, revolts from with detestation, yet they have not 
sunk to that depth of depravity as to give up their 
wives to the licentiousness of men of beastly 
conduct. Neither is it the ordination of the Sastras. 
For this purpose, they prescribe females of various 
description, particularly, ‘a dancing girl, a female 
devotee, a harlot, a washerwoman, or barber’s wife, 
a female of the Brahmanical or Sidra tribe, a flower 
girl or a milk-maid (Devi Rahasya). Some of the 
Tantras add a few more to the list, such as, ‘a 
princess, the wife of a Kapali or of a cāndāla, of a 
Kulāla or of a conch-seller' (Revati Tantra). Others 
increase the number to twenty-six, and a few even 
to sixty-four. These females are distinguished by 
the name of Kula Sakti. Selecting and procuring 
females from the preceding classes, the Vāmācārīs 


Book 1X Chapter L 


are to assemble at midnight in some sequestered 
spot in eight, nine or eleven couples, the men 
representing Bhairvas or Viras, and the woman 
Bhairavis or Nayikas. In some cases a single female 
representing the Sakti is to be procured. For this 
purpose a woman of a black complexion is always 
preferred, in all cases, the Kula Sakti is placed 
disrobed, but richly adorned with ornaments on the 
left of a circle (cakra) discribed for the purpose, 
whence the ceremony derives its name. Sometimes 
she is made to stand, stark naked, with protuberant 
tongue and dishevelled hair. She is then purified 
by the recitation of many mantras and texts, and 
by the performance of the mudrā or gesticulations. 
Finally she is sprinkled over with wine, and if not 
previously initiated, the Bija mantra is thrice 
repeated in her ear. To this succeeds the worship 
of the guardian divinity; and after this, that of the 
female to whom are now offered broiled fish, flesh, 
fried peas, rice, spirituous liquors, sweetmeats, 
flowers and other offerings, which are all purified 
by the repeating of incantations and the sprinkling 
of wine. It is now left to her choice to partake of 
the offerings, or to rest contended simply with 
verbal worship. Most frequently she eats and drinks 
till she is perfectly satisfied, and the refuge is shared 
by the persons present. If, in any case, she refuses 
to touch or try either meat or wine, her worshippers 
pour wine on her tongue while standing, and 
receive it as it runs down her body in a vessel held 
below. This wine is sprinkled over all the dishes 
which are now served among the votaries. 

Such is the preliminary called the purification 
of Sakti. To this succeeds the devotional part of 
the ceremony. The devotees are now to repeat 
their radical mantra, but in a manner unutterably 
obscene. Then follow things too abominable to 
enter the ears of men, or to be borne by the feel- 
ings of an enlightend community; things of which 
a Tiberius the feelings of an enlightend commu- 


77 


1217 


nity; things of which a Tiberius would be 
ashamed, and from which the rudest savage would 
turn away his face with disgust. And these very 
things are contained in the directions of the Sastrs, 
‘Dharma dharma  Havirdipte Svatmagnau 
manasasruca,  Susumnā Vartmanà Nitya 
Moksavrttim juhomyaham. Svahantam mantra 
mucharya Milam smaram param. * * * *, Tara 
dvayāntaragatam Paramananda Kāraņam. Om 
Prakasakasa Hastabhyàm avalambya Unmani 
Šrucā, Dharmādharma Kalāsteha Pürna Vahnau 
juhomyahma. * * * *, Sampūjya Kāntām 
santarpya stutva nattvā parasparam, Samhāra 
Mudrayā Mantrī Sakti Vīrāņ visarjjayet'. Those 
who abide by the rules of the Šāstras are compara- 
tively few; the generality confine themselves 
chiefly to those acquainting themselves with all 
the minute rules and incantations of the Sastras. 
The cakra is nothing more than a convival party, 
consisting of the members of a single family, or at 
which men are assembled and the company are 
glad to eat flesh and drink spirits under the 
protencc of a religious observance. 

The Šāktas delineate on their forheads three 
horizontal and semicircular lines, with ashes, ob- 
tained, if possible, from the hearth on which a 
consecrated fire is perpetually maintained. But as 
such ashes are not always procurable, they gener- 
ally draw lines of red sandal or vermillion. They 
sometimes add a red streakup the middle of the 
forehead, with a red circlet at the root of the nose. 
The circular spot, they mark, when they avow 
themselves, either with saffron or with turmeric 
and borax, but most frequently with red sandal, 
which however, properly belongs to the Saiva 
sect. 

The beads are made either of coral, or of a certain 
species of stone called sphatic, or of human bone, 
or the teeth of a Cāņdāla. This last sort is said to be 
replete with miracles, and is much valued by the 


1218 


Vāmācārīs. The seeds of the Rudraksa and more 
specially what they call the Sunkhya Gutika are 
highly prized by the Daksiņās. 

There is another set of impostors who pretend 
to have obtained dominion over the impure spirits. 
These go about doing miracles among the igno- 
rant Hindus, by whom they are called in for vari- 
ous purpose, generally for curing diseases, barren- 
ness, etc. they invariably come at night, in a body 
of two, three or four persons, one of whom is al- 
ways a ventriloquist. They requrire to be brought 
yava flowers, which are sacred to Kali, sweet- 
meats, curds, etc., which being placed on the floor 
of a room, they and the visitors enter the room. 
The worship of the Sakti is now porformed and 
then the lights are extinguished. The chief actor 
then beings to call his vassal goblin by name, say- 
ing, ‘Arambaraye, Arambaraye,’ and a hollow 
voice answers from a distance. “Here I am com- 
ing.' Soon after a variety of sounds are heard as if 
some one knocking at the door, windows, roof, 
etc., or if it be the thatches shake, the bamboos 
crack, etc., in short, the room is filled with the 
presence of the spirit. Now the head impostor asks 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


him a number of guestions as to the nature of the 
disease to be cured, and then begs some medicine 
to be given, on which a sound is heard, as if some- 
thing were thrown on the floor. The lights being 
then brought in, roots of plants or some such 
things are discovered. In this way, the command- 
ers of ghosts impose upon the credulous Hindus. 
The process is called Caņdujāgāna, or awakening 
the ghost. The impostors always fail before men 
of sence in their attempt to call in the ghost. 

The tenets of the Saktas open the way for the 
gratification of all the sensual appetites, they hold 
out encouragement to drunkards, thieves and 
dacoits; they present them means of satisfying 
every lustful desire; they blunt the feelings by 
authorising the most cruel practices, and bad man 
to commit abominations which place them on a 
level worse than the beasts. The Saktya worship is 
impure in itself, obscence in its practices, and 
highly injurious to the life and character of men.’ 

Extracts from the Calcutta Review No XLVII, 
March 1855. 

Pages 31-67. 

By H. H. Wilson, L. L. D., and F. R. S. Calcutta, 
1846. 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


—x- 


CHAPTER I 


On Svāyambhuva Manu 


"Id IATA 

an ITEM «AAU 

waded iai wea ud 

maag udg a edt ueesfuuft 1 

waar med went eva 020 

Aa: atraer elt rere STAT | 

Narada said: O Narayana! O Thou, the Supporter 
of this whole world! The Preserver of all! Thou 
hast described the glorious characters of the Devi, 
that take away all the sins. Kindly describe now to 
me the several forms that the Devi assumed in every 
Manvantara in this world as well as Her Divine 
Greatness. 

"rem a aa ae KK iege fF uou 

TAR seat Thao | 

wa: yeaa edhe uad 

cult AUT Gareth GS Wd | 

O Thou, full of mercy! Describe also how and 
by whom She was worshipped and praised; how 
She, so kind to the devotees, having been thus 
pleased, fulfilled their desires. I am very eager to 
hear these, the very best and blissful characters of 
the Devi. 


sfanrant sare 
arava wet ct aft urea us i 
wert PAS T ARTA, | 


u 6 tt 


Sri Narayana said: Hear O Maharsi! The glories 
and greatness of the Devi Bhagavati leading to the 
devotion of the devotees, capable of giving all sorts 
of wealth and destroying all sins. From the navel 
lotus of Visnu, the holder of the Cakra (discus), 
was born Brahma, the Creator of this universe, the 
great Energetic One, and the Grand Sire of all the 
worlds. 

srfermretarrartadamr ate: 1 

a agga sears Urga werd 17 u 

The four faced Brahma, on being born, produced 
from His mind Svayambhuva Manu and his wife 
Šatarūpā, the embodiment of all virtues. 


"EG a gare «rear ferrari uferdtufa: 1 10 u 

For this very reason, Svayambhuva Manu has 
been known as the mind-born son of Brahma. 
Svāyambhuva Manu got from Brahma the task to 
create and multiply; he made an earthen image of 
the Devi Bhagavati, the Bestower of all fortunes, 
on the beach of the sanctifying Ksira Samudra 
(ocean of milk) and he engaged himslef in wor- 
shipping Her and began to repeat the principal 
mystic mantra of Vagbhava (the Deity of Speech). 


1222 

STATE at Sat arre TAI WE: 1 

fragt Rasare fragen 110 

were HB, turam: Rum: 1 

yaad fera: TT: PARTEK AETATT 0 12 N 

Thus engaged in worship, Svayambhuva Manu 
conquered by and by his breath and food and 
observed Yama, Niyama and other vows and 
became lean and thin. For one hundred years he 
remained standing always on one leg and became 
successful on controlling his six passions lust, anger 
etc. 

WS eraat dengnuit PATA afe i 

wer TATE eet AI sure 13 d 

sara aad feet at ara aftr) 

qa aaah sper atest Wu 14 1 

TANE AL ERIT TAG | j 

He meditated on the feet of that Adya Sakti (the 
Primordial Sakti) so much that he became inert like 
a vegetable or mineral matter. By his Tapas the 
Devi, the World Mother appeared before him and 
said: “O King! Ask divine boons from Me.” Hearing 
these joyous words, the King wanted his long 
cherised and heart-felt boon, so very rare to the 
Devas. 


Were 

wa afa fasrentar sn wafareret 15 0 

TÀ Ge wg adie 1 

Tareas UY: Gat WT 0 16 ! 

ahs: urea R: Geta UU | 

Manu said: “O Large eyed Devi! Victory to Thee, 
residing in the hearts of all! O Thou honoured, 
worshipped! O Thou the Upholders of the world! 
O Thou, the Auspicious of all auspicious! By Thy 
Gracious Look, it is that the Lotus born has been 
able to create the worlds; Visnu is perserving and 
Rudra Deva is destroying in minute. 

wreftaferfiererersTer VITA Serena (1 17 M 

wit: Raada dea w WU d 

mama: urgft uri maa 18 tt 

awed a Haste Preftat ufo: à 

gap Aa areata: Be wa a N19 d 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


By Thy command it that Indra, the Lord of Saci, 
has got the charge of controlling the three Lokas; 
and Yama, the Lord of the departed is awarding 
fruits and punishing according, to their merits or 
demerits, the deceased ones, O Mother! By Thy 
Grace, Varuna, the holder of the noose, has become 
the lord of all aquatic creatures and is preserving 
them; and Kubera, the lord of the Yaksas, has 
become the lord of wealth. Agni (fire), Nairrta, 
Vayu (wind), [sana and Ananta Deva are Thy parts 
and have grown by Thy power. 

adyna wa arefmutdfēmm: 1 

ara afa tafe at qutsfa iun u 20 u 

wer Wal: wienn fere agg À Ta à 

arvana tart À sofergudifera: 27 1 

dat Rīta: Wert «rati sTAdTaft i 

a dafi ef wéfe smaafa u N22 0 

Then, O Devī! If Thou desirest to grant me my 
desired boon, then, O Thou! the Auspicious One! 
Let all the great obstacles to my work of procreat- 
ing in this universe and increasing my dominions 
die away. And if any body worships this great 
Vagbhava Mantra or any body hears with devo- 
tion this history or makes others hear this, they all 
shall be crowned with success and enjoyment and 
Mukti be easy to them. 

dat eras BPH Fos srerert Hrs | 

Sme wag reped Wise Tam 023 li 

afa: adamtitatat ar fè i 

wafer ARAT d aa: 4240 

gf MERI Weng) IREA JIRSA: 1 1 1 

Specially they would get the power to remember 
their past lives, acquire eloquence in speaking, all 
round beauty, success in obtaining knowledge, 
success in their deeds and especially in the increase 
of their posterity and children. O Bhagavati! This 
is what I want most. 

Here ends the First Chapter of the Tenth Book on the 
story of Svāyambhuva Manu in the Mahāpurāņam 
Stimaddevibhaga vatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book X Chapter II 


1223 


CHAPTER II 


On the Conversation Between Nàrada and the Vindhya Mountain 


sitāegara 

yius maA addaa 1 

aaa wed aa cafe qnm nan 

ai am Aans AAR | 

ATA AA aren A gaa uou 

The Devi said: “O King! O, Mightysarmed One! 
All these I grant unto you. Whatever you have 
asked for, I give them to you. I am very much 
pleased with your hard Tapasyā and with your 
Japam of the Vagbhava Mantra. Know Me that My 
power is infallible in killing the Lords of the 
Daityas. 

Wed freaked dsup war sre sr a 

Wr after wed terit werd wq 3 N 

wa werd! adh erat WERWS | 

uag was sump fada 4 d 

O, Child! Let your kingdom be free from 
enemies and let your prosperity be increased. Let 
your devotion be fixed on Me and in the end you 
will verily get Nirvana Mukti. O Narada! Thus 
granting the boon to the highsouled Manu, the 
Great Devi disappeared before and went to the 
Vindhya Range. 

"tst frame Kg: higaange | 

agama wget wr ST us N 

"wr fama front edu 1 

aya ET Bart udui HÍTWYUT NGN 

O Devarsi! This Vindhya mountain increased 
in height so much so that it was well nigh on the 
way to prevent the course of the Sun when it was 
arrested by Maharsi Agastya, born of a kumbha 
(water jar). The younger sister of Visnu, 
Varade$vari, is staying here as Vindhyavāsinī. O 
Best of the Munis! This Devi is an object of 
worship of all. 


WIT HY: 
ASÀ fieras: ga feared Tm PET | 


mgin a fend gaat 7 n 
ad a Amae: wdd d WAATA, | 


Verret wants wd frat ag is i 

Saunaka and the other Rsis said: O Süta! Who 
is that Vindhya Mountain? And why did He intend 
to soar high up to the Heavens to resist the Sun’s 
course? And why was it that Agastya, the son of 
Mitrāvaruņa quietened that rising mountain? 
Kindly describe all these in detail. 

af qvam arent ETA i 

carseat Vicar quum weed 19 n 

STE ATA ATA AT: ARTA | 

maage maA: 010 

O Saint! We are not as yet satisfied with hearing 
the Glories of the Devi, the ambrosial nectar, that 
have come out of your mouth. Rather our thirst 
has been increased. Süta said: ^O Rsis! There was 
the Vindhya Mountain, highly honoured and 
reckoned as the chief of the mountains on the earth. 

gg Page daa: | 

TTT ATT ASAT enar: VIKOR fü 11 11 N 

STAT: IINA GERIT: AN ANT: | 

Petia war wET YET Wa were: 0 (12 1 

It was covered with big forests and big trees. 
Creeping plants and shrubs flowered these and it 
looked very beautiful. On it were roaming deer, 
wild boars, buffaloes, monkeys hares, foxes, tigers 
and bears, stout and cheerful, with full vigour and 
all very merrily. 

T amiada: 1 

seh: age: udemamegā: 113 1 

Tt fast aereenesn | 

daft: werdtat wma esat YT: 14 Ni 

The Devas, Gandharvas, Apsarās, and Kinnaras 
come here and bathe in its rivers; all sorts of fruit 
trees can be seen here. On such a beautiful Vindhya 
Mountain, came there one day the ever joyful Devarsi 
Narada on his voluntary tour round the world. 

a gru am 4 quiqrara dumm i 

"urere Wem erat arena N 15 d 

ganas qafü yas m KTI | 


1224 


Seeing the Maharsi Narada, the Vindhya 
Mountain got up and worshipped him with padya 
and arghya and gave him a very good Asana to sit. 
When the Muni took his seat and found himself 
happy, the Mountain began to speak. 


ferr gara 


Senf Herat ATT ANT: Ha SAA: 0 16 u 

anma STARA NA feug 1 

wa det Cerere fe wem Tā: N 17 u 

om aaiae wegft wu M | 

Vindhya said: “O Devarsi! Now be pleased to 
say whence you are coming; your coming here is 
so very auspicious! My house is sanctified today 
by your coming. O Deva! Your wandering is, like 
the Sun, the cause of inspiring the beings with 
freedom from fear. So, O Narada! Kindly give out 
your intention as to your coming here which seems 
rather wonderful. 

ANG IATA 

ATT cardo vita ist 

TA BRT HAT CART: RTT | 

wdut PIRTI wea Ma: 119 0 

Tat gers fareumr amamimrerir a i 

Narada said! “O Vindhya! O Enemy of Indra! 
(Once the mountain had a very great influence. 
Indra cut off their wings and so destroyed their 
influence. Hence the mountains are enemies of and 
so destroyed their influence. Hence the mountains 
are enemies of Indra). I am coming from the 
Sumeru Mountain. There I saw the nice abodes of 
Indra, Agni, Yama, and Varuna. There I saw the 
houses of these Dikpālas (the Regents of the several 
quarters), Which abound in objects of all sorts of 
enjoyments." 

SIT serait: PASAT LI 2 0 N 

saadi Alt qgr TA: WES SINT | 

IEGATAATUI fe vale tases Wm 1! 21 M 

Thus saying, Narada gave out a heavy sigh 
Vindhya, the king of mountains, seeing the Muni 
heaving a long sigh, asked him again with great 
eagerness. “O Devarsi! Why have you heaved such 
a long sigh? Kindly say.” 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


pee "mure Waffe d 

E 22 

a Rican Krasa sort: fane à 

daftarga: ST ATT n23 u 

Hearing this, Nārada said: “O, Child! Hear the 
cause why I sighted. See! The Himalaya Mountain 
is the father of Gauri and the father-in-law of 
Mahadeva; therefore he is the most worshipped of 
all the mountains. 

Tata a cere: rE: Way: | 

qu: gedisyat srt era UTE: 124 n 

Fras: wda fex wem Usu a 

VT: CRIA Wd Wa THE: 11 25 il 

The Kailāša Mountain again, is the residence of 
Mahadeva; hence that is also worshipped and 
chanted as capablc of destroying all the sins. So 
the Nisadha, Nila, and Gandhamādana and other 
mountains are worshipped at their own places. 

a wafer a farmer agaf: vane: | 

quema: asd aruda: 026 i 

amer wq AS ake Cw RTT 1 

udarmgdenait «ra wig mem: 27 0 

What more than this, that the Sumeru Mountain, 
round whom the thousandrayed Sun, the Soul of 
the univere, circumambulates along with the 
planets and stars, thinks himself the supreme and 
greatest amongst the mountains “I am the supreme; 
there is none like me in the three worlds.” 


yerr metri x area farsi TE 28 N 
aft fadma wept rh RARAN 12 1 
Remembering this self-conceit of Sumeru, I 
sighed so heavily. O Vindhya! We are asceties and 
though we have no need to discuss these things, 
yet by way of conversation I have told this to you. 
Now I go to my own abode.” 

Here ends the Second Chapter of the Tenth Book on 
the conversation between Narada and the Vindhya 
Mountain in the Maha Puranam 
Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book X Chapter III 


1225 


CHAPTER III 
On Vindhya "s Obstructing the Sun’s Course in the Heavens 


A saa 

ud wqufasari cafe: UM: WIE | 

SA sure Vie xem eme udo 

m afar faeuf£rat SASAUTRTĪTA à 

"ra vrift a SÀ a Weta: 02 t 

Sita said: ^O Rsis! Thus advising, the Devarsi, 
the great Jūānī and Muni going wherever he likes, 
went to the Brahmaloka. After the Muni had gone, 
the Vindhya became immersed in great anxiety and, 
becoming always very sorrowful, could not get 
peace. 

wa f& tan À are wel We ware | 

Aa grifi eost aft caret T nra WaT 11 3 N 

Rr ar riter red sift RIGA | 

Rra 3 uted fere ard getter: 

ud feres PĀRU MATI ETA 4 u 

mgd fer: af ande graft 1 

"What shall I do now so as to overthrow Meru? 
Until I do that, I won't be able to get the peace of 
my mind or my health. The highsouled persons 
always praised me for my enthusiasm and energy. 
Fie to my energy, honour, fame and family! Fie to 
my strength and heroism! O Rsis! With all these 
cogitations in his mind, Vindhya came finally to 
this crooked conclusion: 


ungga: Mar «aad an: | 
wen antes dei attearttt Fret: at: 16 u 
"Daily the Sun, 
cumambulate round the Sumeru; hence Sumeru is 


stars and planets cir- 


always so arrogant; now if I can resist the Sun’s 
course in the heavens be my peaks, He will not be 
able to circumambulate round the Sumeru. 

war feret gat: utt TA | 

ud ant freu qo Nat ferent a U7 U 

armed faerat afara fates 


va aya fien: xi Tag spit: 11 8 u 

Weber: ggat: ud ana vaaftud: | 

mAAR wae Terenas Hey 19 1 

wa feum wr eadtara yn | 

If I can do this, certainly I will be able to curb 
the Sumeru in his pride. Thus coming to a 
conclusion, Vindhya raised his arms that were the 
peaks high up to the heavens and blocking the 
passage in the Heavens remained so and passed 
that night with great uneasiness and difficulty, 
thinking when the Sun would rise and he would 
obstruct His passage. 

ward ferre rat fait fafaa: env: 10 u 

spen fet mga fta 

Wenden frage ep wp: yp ud 0 

fri rft rst fert er aaa à 

verf prat ad wr exor: aA i 12 h 

At last, when the morning broke out, all the 
quarters were clear. The Sun, destroying the 
darkness, rose in Udaya Giri. The sky looked clear 
with His rays; the lotus, seeing Him, blew out with 
joy; while the excellent white water-lilies, at the 
bereavement of the Moon, contracted their leaves 
and closed as if at the separation of one's lover, 
gone to a distant place. 

wed Het Yate carat a yaar i 

angunga feri uf 113 1 

The people began to do their own works on the 
appearance of the day; the worship of the gods, 
the offerings to the Gods, the Homas and the 
offerings to the Pitrs were set a going on (in the 
morning, afternoon and evening respectively). 

va ure eret errare feraitfarsttag à 

aad Percenroit-rfenrieer arty t 14 u 

msa ayer feet qa fers a d 

arent wet ATT weet ene es u 15 Ul 

a WISI id atsTeedfsud | 


1226 


The Sun marched on in His course. He divided 
the day into three parts, morning, mid-day, and 
after-noon. First of all he consoled the eastern 
quarter which seemed like a woman suffering from 
the bereavement of her lover; then he consoled the 
south earten corner; then as He wanted to go 
quickly towards the south, His horses could not go 
further. The charioteer Aruna, seeing this, infomed 
the Sun what had happened. 


ALSCATT 

erit aaa faeit retu mi Rer: 16 N 

veia meu Saperet a pef, | 

Aruna spoke: “O Sun! The Vindhya has become 
very jealous of the Sumeru as You circumambulate 
round the Sumeru Mountain daily. He has risen 
very high and obstructed your course in the 
Heavens, hoping that you would circumambulate 
round him. He is thus vying with the Sumeru 
Mountain. 


Ha saru 
efe RTA FTA t 17 N 
eret TTA SA Beret farm: | 
Ta: IRA fee paga aata era: u 18 u 
frei at arfsramif de fe aream i 


Sūta said: O Rsis! Hearing the words of Aurņa, 
the charioteer, the Sun began to think thus: "Oh! 
The Vindhyais going to obstruct My course! What 
can a great hero not do, when he is in the wrong 
path? Oh! My horses” motions are stopped to-day! 
The fate is the strongest of all (Because Vindhya 
is strong to-day by Daiva, therefore he is doing 
this). 

a: aut mas N 19 

atertrgmmifstā fe ata faker à 

wed aan deg erar: we wr AMT: 0 20 1 

"fer mi waded mAT | 

Even when eclipsed by Rahu (the ascending 
node) I do not stop for a moment even; and now 
obstructed in My passage, I am waiting here for a 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


long time. The Daiva is powerful; what can I do? 
The Sun's course having been thus obstructed, all 
from the Gods to the lowest became helpless and 
could not make out what to do. 

Ranea: ae nre RAPA quie: 21 

a eat faea aret gafada: i 

"ar Reg: afer Fitton exter ar 11 22 i 

"TE: TATA ABUT | 

Citragupta and others ascertain their time 
through the Sun’s course; and that Sun is now 
rendered motionless by the Vindhya mountain! 
What a great adverse fate is this! When the Sun 
was thus obstructed by the Vindhya out of his 
arrogance, the sacrifices to the Devas, the offerings 
to the Pitrs all were stopped; the world was going 
to rack and ruin. 

us a uf2rar err ata w 23 u 

fumftfere enr fra Vaf 1 

VIETAI decry: 024 N 

Tat ETSI TA ĀTRA TAS: |d 

The people that lived on the west and south had 
their nights prolonged and they remained asleep. 
The people of the east and the north were scorched 
by the strong rays of the Sun and some of them 
died; some of them lost their health and so forth. 

zena Brad vertmTepenfea en | 

ar: Seat: afer: fn apii sfrenfas: 125 u 

gdiaissur 113 11 

The whole earth became devoid of Šrāddhas and 
worships and a cry of universal distress arose on 
all sides. Indra and the other Devas became very 
anxious and began to think what they should do at 
that moment. 

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Tenth Book on 
the obstruction of the Sun's course by the Vindhya 
Mountain in the Mahā Purāņam 
Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. 


Book X Chapter IV 


1227 


CHAPTER IV 
On the Devas’ Going to Maha Deva 


ad sata 


at: wa KM Ase | 

Waa GU St VOM: di] od 

IEM: Vata: getras: 1 

ww faite witrenfearery 02 u 

Sūta said: O Rsis! Then Indra and all the other 
Devas, taking Brahmā along with them and placing 
Him at the front, went to Mahādeva and took His 
refuge. They bowed down to Him and chanted 
sweet and great hymns to Him, Who holds Moon 
on His forehead, the Deva of the Devas, thus: 


dar Hy: 


Wa ta TAA GUDORSTUESD | 

aefa at wera d 3 1 

“O Thou, the Leader of the host of Gods! 
Victory to Thee! O Thou, Whose lotus feet are 
served by Uma, Victory to Thee! O Thou, the Giver 
of the eight Siddhis and Vibhütis (extraordinary 
powers) to Thy devotees, Victory to Thee! 


sita remp wad Wr i 

ama TESTA Ta Vima 405 d 

O Thou, the Background of this Great Theatrical 
Dances of this Insurmountable Maya! Thou art the 
Supreme Spirit in Thy True Nature! Thou ridest 
on Thy vehicle, the Bull, and residest in Kailāša; 
yet Thou art the Lord of all the Devas. O Thou, 
Whose ornament is snakes, Who art the Honoured 
and the Giver of honours to persons! O Thou! the 
Unborn, yet comprising all forms, O Thou Sambhu! 
That findest pleasure in this Thy Own Self! Victory 
to Thee! 

"rare gara rye AAS a | 

werfergfrerr wd cefempepamr cw 6 it 

Rapana eras a 

Amma hme attra weet «a: 07 ou 


anions agri ursi KERT | 

daana  smumuudd us 

O Thou, the Lord of Thy attendants! O Thou, 
Giriša! The Giver of the great powers, praised by 
Maha Visņu! O Thou, That livest in the heart lotus 
of Visņu, and deeply absorbed in Mahā Yoga! 
Obeisance to Thee! O Thou that can'st be known 
through Yoga, and nothing but the Yoga itself, 
Thou, the Lord of the Yoga! We bow down to Thee. 
Thou awardest the fruits of yoga to the Yogins. O 
Thou, the Lord of the helpless! The Incarnate of 
the ocean of mercy! The Relief of the diseased and 
the most powerful! O Thou, whose forms are the 
three gunas, Sattva, Rajo, Tamas! 

yoga 

TATA Hera XETGRIOTS A AA: 9 Ul 

O Thou! Whose Emblem (carrier) is the Bull 
(Dharma); Thou art verily the Great Kala; yet Thou 
art the Lord of Kala! Obeisance to Thee! (The Bull 
represents the Dharma or Speech). 


Wa sarar 


Ue tat: U quy aag: | 

We ia arem yearagetary u0 1 

Thus praised by the Devas, who take the 
offerings in sacrifices the Lord of the Devas, whose 
emblem is Bull, smilingly told the Devas in a deep 
voice: 


2itsnrargara 

Wisi fure: KATE: | 

iWeb dari weet gaat: ug 

O Thou, the excellent Devas! The residents of 
the Heavens! I am pleased with the praises that 
you have sung of Me. I will fulfil the desires of 
you, all the Devas. 

tat HY: 
adlan iR sire 1 
alai vga a vi fray mere n 12 oN 


1228 


udat fieras Ra Wager Wels: | 

argant fruta ft dut gradsa n 13 n 

agfa Krava THATS | 

MTA Hoge Het way 14 N 

AB TaERAUTA we x: VT aT | 

erar; a smaratat srarda fe grad 11 1 5 1 

gaat da wet fread 1 

The Devas said: O Lord of all the Devas! O, 
Giriga! O, Thou whose forehead is adorned with 
Moon! O, Thou, the Doer of good to the distressed. 
O, Thou, the Powerful! Dost Thou do good to us. 
O, Thou, the Sinless One! The Vindhya Mountain 
has become jéalous of the Sumeru Mountain, and 
has risen very high up in the Heavens and he has 
obstructed the Sun’s course, thereby causing great 
troubles to all. O, Thou, the Doer of good to all! O 
Hāna! Dost Thon check the mountain's abnormal 
rise. How can we fix time it the Sun’s course be 
obstructed! And when there is no knowledge, what 
is now the time, the sacrifices to the Devas and the 
offerings to the Pitrs are now almost dead and gone. 
O Deva! Who will now protect us? We see Thee 
as the Destroyer of the fear of us and of those who 
are terrified. O Deva! O Lord of Girišā! Be pleased 
with us. 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 
fire gara 


Tere receta Tegu qu: 16 u 

gma feet mit Tara | 

MSTA TATU OST: AUT 017 N 

vitférat ana: HERR: | 

vea waft: a gaat viet u 18 tt 

Sri Bhagavan said: “O Devas! I have no power 
to curb the Vindhya Mountain. Let us go to the 
Lord of Rama and pay our respects to Him. He is 
our Lord, fit to be worshipped. He is Govinda, 
Bhagavan Visnu, the Cause of all causes. We will 
go to Him and tell Him all our sorrows. He will 
remove them. 


AHS Wea 1 19 1 
shy SRRI weno) agmen JASAT: | 4 1 
Hearing thus the words of Girīša, Indra and the 
other Devas with Brahmā placed Mahādeva at their 
front and went to the region of Vaikuntha, 
trembling with fear. 

Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Tenth Book on 
the going of the Devas to Mahādeva in the 
Mahāpurāņam Srīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. 


1228 Srimaddevibhagavatam 


nn m NN ^ ^ 


CHAPTER V 
On The Devas’ Going to Visnu 


Wa sama at HY: 

A meer Weeds AT TEN, | wa feet were wenpew udw u2 li 
feri Amora sey: Waray aou set amma wanes |1 
mAN AZT TqTQu end | erg Mia  TTEDTSSSUH 403 |! 


Sita said: Then the Devas, on arriving at} Victory to Visnu! O Lord of Rama! Thou art 
Vaikuntha, saw the Lord of Pate neva of | prior to the Virat Purusa.” O Enemy of the Daityas! 
the Devas; the World-Teacher, with his £yeS [O Thou, the Generator of desires in all and the 
beautiful like Padma Palāsa (lotus-leaves), shining | Bestower of the fruits of those desires to all! O 


with brilliance and began to praise Him in a voice | Govinda! Thou art the Great Boar and Thou art of 
choked with intense feelings of devotion, thus: — the nature of Great Sacrifice! 


Book X Chapter V 


1229 


Tea — STATS 4 d 
wearin HRAKUTA wd Wo | 
wera Ga areata U5 u 


O Mahā Visņu! O Lord of Dharma! Thou art 
the Cause of the origion of this world! Thou didst 
support the earth in Thy Fish Incarnation for the 


deliverance of the Vedas! O Thou Satyavrata of! 


the form of a Fish! We bow down to Thee. O Thou! 
The Enemy of the Daityas! The Ocean of mercy! 
Thou dost do the actions of the Devas out of mercy. 


amarante peur a am | 


A ag: Pet were gam ws N7 N 

O Thou! The Tortoise Incarnation! That grantest 
Mukti to others! Obeisance to Thee! O Thou! That 
didst assume the form of a Boar for the destruction 
of the Daityas Jaya and others and for raising the 
earth from the waters! Obeisance to Thee! Thou 
didst assume that form—Half man and half Lion— 
of the Nrsimha Mürti and tore asunder Hiranya 
Kašipu, proud of his boons, by Thy nails. 

audit a Fett AR: | 

amd wunnemr ANAA, 8! 

af domma dut mae | 

GEAR MARNA 9N 

We bow down to Thee! Obeisance to Thee! That 
in Thy Dwarf Incarnation, didst deceive Bali, 
whose head got crazed by the acquisition of the 
kingdom over the three Lokas. We bow down to 
Thee, that in Thy Paraśu Rāma Incarnation, didst 
slay Kārta Vīryārjuna, the thousand handed, and 
the other wicked Ksattriyas! Obeisance to Thee! 

arid wera À AA: | 

gEerdie«ufenydauéted nion 

softer gi masia E | 

That wert born of the womb of Renuka as the 
son of Jamadagni. Obeisance to Thee, of great 
prowess and valour, that in Thy Rama Incarnation 


as the son of DaSaratha, didst cut off the heads of 
the wicked Raksasa, the son of Pulastya! 

augers set: uediseiod: u11 N 

THA WE SATIKT Hera: 1 

ent HEATUTATATA WT Peat KAT: 0 (12 Ui 

aA pma Sara HIS eT ABET AN à 

We bow down again and again to Thee, the Great 
Lord, that in Thy Krsna incarnation, didst deliver 
this earth from the clutches of the wicked King 
Duryodhana, Kamsa and others and didst establish 
the religion by removing the then prevailing vicious 
ideas and doctrines. 

wEuafaumra «=o aufero 13 tt 

aged gtit disat aui qam tam: à 

Teoma stad er GETSTITŠA u 14 u 

We bow down to Thy Buddha Incarnation, that 
Great Deva who didst come down here to put a 
stop to the slaughtering of the innocent animals 
and to the performance of the wicked sacrificial 
ceremonies! Obeisance to the Deva! When almost 
all the persons in this world will turn out in future 
as Mlecchas and when the wicked Kings will 
oppress them, right and left, 

weed Taree dadara d TA: 1 

amaan qe MATA THOTT WD 15 N 

gedaan ATT Ade aed | 

Thou wilt then incarnate Thyself again as Kalki 
and redress all the grievances! We bow down to 
Thy Kalki Form! O Deva! These are Thy Ten 
Incarnations, for the preservation of Thy devotees, 
for the killing of the wicked Daityas. Therefore 
Thou art called as the Great Reliever of all our 
troubles. 


we areca SId were 16 U 
WU A CATT qur HUSA TAMPA: 1 


ee ee cote VA 


O Thou! Victory to Thee! The Devas Who 


1230 


Šrīmaddevī. bhāgavatam 


tT m ————— 


assumess the forms of women and water for 
destroying the ailings of the devotees! Who else 
can be so king! O Thou, the Ocean of mercy! O 
Rsis! Thus praising the yellow robed Visnu, the 
Lord of all the Devas, the whole host of the Devas 
bowed down to Him and made Sāstāngas. Then 
Visnu Gadadhara, hearing their hymns, gladdened 
them and spoke: 


sthrrargara 

vasf mAai cared farses i 19 u 

tadi ATT wd UM Aa | 

qed u at wat ddp VGA 020 i 

watt Va: KARU ward: | 

Sri Bhagavāna said: “O Devas! I am pleased 
with your stotra. You need not be sorrowful. I will 
remove all your troubles that have become 
unbearable to you. O Devas! I am very glad to hear 
the praises that you have offered on Me. Better 
ask boons from Me. I will grant them though very 
rare even and obtained with difficulty. 

"p WAS wd HT SETA MAT: 421 N 


wir afte mt ean d vias: vag ier | 
amah: manai er AAAS WU: 022 t 
ATi a dare A Wel WRIT: | 
AT arfas: tar: goundurfer-mum i 23 N 
ATGTGMUI erem Marti wr safererter 1 


Mahe HTT ANT: Wel TOIT: 11 24 Ni 


Any person who rises early in the morning and 


recites with devotion this stotra sung by you, will 
never experience any sorrow. O Devas! No 
poverty, no bad symptoms, no Vetālas nor planets 
nor Brahma Rāksasas nor any misfortunes will 
overtake him. No disease, due to Vàta (windy 
temperament), Pitta (bile) and Kapha (phlegm) nor 
untimely death will visit him. His family will not 
be extinct and happiness will always reign there. 

ierfereifer TART T: KAUT: | 

fe yadigar dts watetarerary 25 n 

ues agi GRR d qud: | 

War Tay wg: Herat AHA ! 2 6 N 

arent a dees wratsupa RE 

wa stemagrast spear ae feta: 1 

yaaa: d yegin 127 0 

ata sneered weno] anis 
JIRSA: 05 

O Devas! This stotra can give every thing. Both 
the enjoyment and freedom will come within any 
one's easy access. There is no doubt in this. Now 
what is your difficulty? Give out. I will remove it 
at once. There is not a bit of doubt in this." Hearing 
these words of Sri Bhagavan, the Devas became 
glad and spoke to Visnu. 
Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the 

Devas’ going to Visnu, in the Maha Purāņam 
Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1230 


Šrīmaddevī. bhāgavatam 


+ Ter 


CHAPTER VI 
On The Devas’ Praying to the Muni Agastya 


ua saru 
sima aaa: Hyer: we wa fF 1 
PMA omen g aA nan 
Süta said: “O Rsis! Hearing the words of the 
Lord of Laksmi, all the Devas become pleased and 
they spoke: 
dat He: 
zara veya geada | 


faro areas antītti ata fF u 2 Nu 

da wrQfadüs wd wa wefewb | 

amanan fü fē opu: qa arafe u 3 u 

The Devas said: "O Deva of the Devas! O Maha 
Visnu! O Thou, the Creator, Preserver and the 
Destroyer of the Universe! O Visnu! The Vindhya 
mountain has risen very high and it has stopped 
the Sun's course. Therefore all the works on earth 
are suspended. We are not receiving our share of 


Book X Chapter VI 


Yajūas. Now where we will go, what we will do, 
we do not know." 


sisrrarqaret 

a alt ada at Healt | 

ah mah wen: yor: unmgf uaa 

Sri Bhagavan said: “O Devas! There is now in 
Benares the Muni Agastya of indomitable power, 
in devoted service of that Primordial Sakti 
Bhagavati, the Creatrix of this Universe. 

are gfradfstit ATRTITETI MATA | 

maane arfērrafā KAT: 5 n 

a ware Bamm Vu | 

"rere PM: GATI AT Fr: tere: weh u 6 u 

This Muni alone can put a stop to this abnormal 
Vindhya Range. Therefore it behoves you all to 
got to that fiery Dvija Agastya at Benares where 
the people get Nirvāņa; the Highest Place and pray 
to him (to kindly fulfil your object).” 


Ha Jaret 


wa wqufesred farm aam: | 

yda: param: Wd mgao gta u7 n 

Süta said: ^O Rsis! Thus ordered by Visnu, the 
gods felt themselves comforted and, saluting Him, 
went to the city of Benares. 

arora raada ret N pem | 

aftr wares wen) Aa: d 8 Ut 

dau quar aga uri feme: | 

ama gada mai wet owed u90 

In a moment they went to the Holy City of 
Benares, and bathing there at the Maņikarņikā ghat, 
worshipped the Devas with devotion and offered 
Tarpanas to the Pitrs and duly made their charities. 
Then they went to the excellent A$rama of the Muni 
Agastya. 

miaa AAMT | 

mat: màdar 10 

Haale: Hos cast: MESRA | 

uit veined we: wear iin 


The hermitage was full of quiet quadruped ani- 


1231 


mals; adorned with various trees, peacocks, her- 
ons, geeses and Cakravakas and various other birds 
tigers, wolves, deer, the wild boars, rhinoceros, 
young elephants, Ruru deer and others. Though 
there were the ferocious animals, yet the place was 
free fear and it looked exceedingly beautiful. 

Mara UTT GATT ufi wur | 

qasan: wd ATM Ya: YA: N12 N 

On arriving before the Muni, the gods fell 
prostrate before him and bowed down again and 
again to him. 

dar Hy: 

war fame ATRI SA NTA 1 

ATARI AAE Heat 13 

VGA suana | 

elferenPrels TT ITT ATS A N 1 4 u 

They then chanted hymns to him and said: O 
Lord of Dvijas! O Thou honoured and most 
worshipful! Victory to Thee. Thou art sprung from 
a water jar. Thou art the destroyer of Vātāpi, the 
Asura. Obeisance to Thee! O Thou, full of Sri, the 
son of Mitravaruna! Thou art the husband of 
Lopamudra. Thou art the store house of all 
knowledge. 

TEN WHAT TATA TTT | 

virarfr aterayttat «ndr quat AAS TG A 1S u 

Atgguftaraa Pararatara E | 

SEMUSVĻTATA MAT ATS T 11 16 1 

Thou art the source of all the Šāstras. Obeisance 
to Thee! At Thy rise, the waters of the ocean 
become bright and clear; so obeisance to Thee! At 
Thy rise (Canopus) the Kāša flower blossoms. 
Thou art adorned with clots of matted hair on Thy 
head and Thou always livest with Thy disciples. 
Sri Rama Candra is one of Thy chief diciples. 

Wa wafer Wor WEDpY 1 

asa a quara veia tss d 017 u 

Wate: Praat tartare cart PTT ret: | 

gunredewmqg uredifedr wmm ui18u 


O great Muni! Thou art entitled to praise from 


1232 


all the Devas! O Best! The Store house of all 
qualities! O great Muni! We now bow down to 
Thee and Thy wife Lopāmudrā! O Lord! O very 
Energetic! We all are very much tormented by an 
unbearable pain inflicted on us by the Vindhya 
Range and we therefore take refuge of Thee. Be 
gracious unto us." 

gate dts meat qiu warf: | 

We VARAT area fagas fess: 119 N 

Thus praised by the gods, the highly religious 
Muni Agastya, the twice born, smiled and 
graciously said: 

arrears 

Wat: wae emendam | 

winter Warurdt PUTERTHERTH 11 20 N 

AMSAT AIT: Hot TA ATTA | 

Rīga a agar a yet Heat U: 21 0 

“O Devas! You are the lords of the three worlds, 
superior to all, highsouled, and the preserver of 
the Lokas. If your wish, you can favour, disfavour, 
do anything. Especially He who is the Lord of 
heavens, whose weapon is the thunderbolt, and the 
eight Siddhis are ever at his service is your Indra, 
the Lord of the Devas. 

dm pge gana SAIA | 

ya waoni ft aisha: fd qr GET 22 uU 

What is there that he cannot do? Then there is 
Agni, Who burns everything and always carries 
oblations to the gods and the Pitrs, Who is the 
mouth piece of the Devas. 

waron Aia: udui anA: 1 

SIST ta: fae R wu: 23 U 

canta afe qam: card Teo ag | 

afta Ugerat tar: caftent a ders: 24 N 


Šrimaddevībhāgavatam 


Is there anything impracticable with him! O 
Devas! Then again Yama is there amongst you, 
the Lord of the Raksasas, the Witness of all actions, 
and always quick in giving punishment to the 
offenders, that terrible looking Yama Raja. What 
is there that the he can not accomplish? Still, O 
Devas! if there be anything required by you that 
awaits my co-operation, give out at once and I will 
do it undoubtedly. 

ud girah Prora farger: d 

yim: yraa: are aag 2 5 u 

vet faea freaitsdifafentu: i 

rere Aa HÍSE waaay 26 0 

Hearing these words of the Muni, the Devas 
became very glad and joyfully began to say what 
they wanted. O Maharsi! The Vindhya mountain 
has risen very high and thwarted the Sun’s course 
in the Heavens. A cry of universal distress and 
consternation has arisen and the three worlds are 
now verging to the ruins. 

qaga vara yA Prerar que: fšrar i 

Ta Ft aa STP | 

Udearandta w ard wdemfa fF un 27 u 

gfer SERIEI TERT GTA? IISTI: | 6 d 

O Muni! Now what we want is this that Thou, 
by Thy power of Tapas, curbest the rise of this 
Vindhya Mountain. O Agastya! Certainly, by Thy 
fire and austerities, that mountain will be brought 
down and humiliated. This is what we want. 

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the 
Devas' praying to the Muni Agastya for checking the 
abnormal rise of the Vindhya Range in the Maha 
Puranam Srimadde vibhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1232 Šrimaddevībhāgavatam 


CHAPTER VII 
On the Checking of the Rise of the Vindhya 
We sere sifted aa caret Wat Hest | 
gRrarast warned fagat fear: à War Rm: ad agfa: 12 


afta milal Igma wat „fr: dod Süta said: Hearing the words of the Devas, 


Book X Chapter VIT 


1233 


Agastya, the Best of the Brahmins promised that} destroyest the fear of the Bhaktas; Thou art the 


he would carry out their works. O Rsis! All the 
Devas then became very glad when the Muni, born 
of the water jar, promised thus. 

Adam: vafer férererrfer A riva: à 

uct gia: simga UTD, 0 3 oí 

ae qug unt foeits-eiem sm: | 

agmi pat fasta 4 u 

They then bade good-bye to him and went back 
gladly to their own abodes. The Muni then spoke 
to his wife thus: “O daughter of the King! The 
Vindhya Mountain has baffled the progress of the 
Sun’s course and has thus caused a great mischief. 
What the Munis, the Seers of truths said before 
referring to Kasi, all are now coming to my mind 
when I am thinking why this disturbance has 
overtaken me. 

an Ala HG AoA T ATR TH | 

aritgfēva azti uffrereratitur: us 

agri a Hei adda uer: 

ford fam srferedifer erga Pret wem 6 u 

They said that various hindrances would come 
to him at every step, who is a Sadhu intending to 
settle at Kasi. Let him who wants Mukti, never 
quit Kāšī, the Avimukta place, in any case. 

"isst wr uar: asper frenar fr 1 

gereaqeear wat at aft: won: 0700 

aftrnvat wares spr fervent fna i 

deur ART ATS AAA: 008 1 

But, O Dear! To-day I have got one hindrance 
during my stay at Kasi.” Thus talking with much 
regret on various subjects with his wife, the Muni 
bathed in the Manikarnika ghat, saw the Lord 
Visvesvara worshipped Daņdapāņī and went to the 
Kala Bhairava. He said in the following terms: 

AGS WETSTOD Maat STHERGR | 

web qun yal: metgar: uo n 

vd piara AAA Array WATT: | 

uit fee aera varfirg sraerfafeferars 110 u 

*O Mighty armed Kālabhairava! Thou 


78 


God of this Kasi City. Then why art Thou driving 
me away from this Kāšīdhāma. O Lord! Thou 
removest all the obstacles of the devotees and Thou 
preservest them. Then why, O Destroyer of the 
sorrows of the Bhaktas! Art Thou removing me 
from here? 

wma Treat A Cp CST à 

at eile wigan qi HUT ATT Uo 11 ut 

Never I blamed others; nor did I practise any 
hypocrisy with any person nor did I lie; then under 
what sin, Thou art driving me away from Kasi. 

we grec wr d IGAKS e Jas LG Wt: 1 

wmm urfarfererot wdferefranum 1 12 0 

vi opis eared diurezi «a: wat fafenia: i 

verangsrafer: eftararrecet afárort faery u 1 3 u 

O Rsis! Thus praying to Kāla Bhairava, the Muni 
Agastya, born of water jar and the husband of 
Lopāmudrā, went to Sāksi Gaņeša, the Destroyer 
of all evils and seeing and worshipping Him, went 
out of Kasi and proceeded to the south. 

weitere wera: 1 

dagan ATZĪT wT aE STU 0014 N 

würarafraregr fiftrarda & ufu 1 

am east d fied wiesen is u 

The Muni, the ocean of great fortune, left Kasi; 
but he become very much distressed to leave it and 
he remembered it always. He began to march on 
with his wife. As if riding on his car of asceticism 
he arrived at the Vindhya mountain in the tiwnkling 
of an eye and saw that the Mountain had risen very 
high and obstructed the passage of the Sun in the 
Heavens. 

wed ureeuqut span Rad ATA i 

far: weet qar fragerffira 11 16 u 

deaf rit arent afar: | 

4 opr aufdrat facet arr warty 1 17 u 

The Vindhya Mountain, seeing the Muni 
Agastya in front, began to tremble and as if desirous 
to speak something to the earth in a whisper became 


1234 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


low and dwarfish and bowed down to the Muni 
and fell down with devotion in sāstāngas with 
devotion just like a stick dropped flat on the ground 
before the Muni. 

erst set qatar i 

arid fie aa maara wat 018 0 

sense "isyRenlest aa YA | 

Seeing the Vindhya thus low, the Muni Agastya 
became pleased and spoke with a gracious look: 
“O Child! Better remain in this state until I come 
back. For, O Child! I am quite unable to ascend to 
your lofty heights. 

venera qfratzafayt uf wares: 

see wu fjr usuregdqmun 

rat Greatest nfi sive tes ai u 20 u 

HOGAVATAT. AAAS TAT | 

wrsfir eet aor fearna ngg 21 0 

easy Where far-eeranfersfifer er vites i 

Thus saying, the Muni became eager to go to 
the south; and, crossing the peaks of the Vindhya, 
alighted gradually again to the plains. He went on 
further to the south and saw the Sri Saila Mountain 
and at last went to the Malayācala and there, 
building his ASrama (hermitagc) settled himself. 
O Saunaka! The Devi Bhagavati, worshipped by 
the Muni went to the Vindhya Mountain and settled 
there and became known, in the three worlds, by 
the name of Vindhyavásini. 


u319 U 
l 


Wd sara 


Wea we WAAL N22 |! 
WTAE WTA TAT | 


at trad aea fanat array N 23 NT 

arat Marg VST Yas TAT | 

Sita said: Any body who hears this highly pure 
narrative of the Muni Agastya and Vindhya, 
becomes freed of all his sins. All his enemies are 
destroyed in no time. This hearing gives knowledge 
to the Brahmanas, victory to the Ksattriyas, wealth 
and corn to the Vaišyas and happiness to the 
Südras. 

erofelf etara erareff eramequm i 24 N 

SUAS AAA HIST Tri | 

If any body once hears this narritive, he gets 
Dharma if he wants Dharma, gets unbounded 
wealth if he wants wealth and gets all desires if he 
wants his desires fulfilled. 

wd wriyerqddianed afta: u25 tt 

DA Tet ate f mre | 

weet dra war aera N 

are afta sider: fe ya: eras 26 u 

efr sfida: verge IREA 
Wu 117 11 

In ancient times Svāyambhuva Manu 
worshipped this Devī with devotion and got his 
kindom for his own Manvantara period. O 
Saunaka! Thus I have described to you the holy 
character of the Devi in this Manvantara. What 
more shall I say? Mention please. 

Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Tenth Book on 
the checking of the rise of the Vindhya Range in the 
Mana Puránam Srimaddevibhaga vatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1234 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 
CHAPTER VII 
On the Origin of Manu 
VIA sare Ha sara 
BTN AAT: VA AAA BENT ATT: | VARI eae ye wares fe à 
sage aff wat Tasmana ado 


ads waren wwfd uRuesfr 2 ou 
Saunaka said: O Süta! You have described the| mma: u må dētarardentfēra: 1 


beautiful narrative of the first Manu Svāyambhuva.| Sita said: O Rsis! The very wise Narada, well 


Now kindly described to us the narratives of other | versed in the knowledge of $ri Devi, hearing the 


highly energetic Deva-like Manus. glorious character of the first Svayambhuva Manu, 


Book X Chapter VIII 


became desirous to hear of the other Manus and 
asked the Eternal Narayana: 


ATE sara 
Tri HW ounnenfé uero ATA a3 d 
O Deva! Now favour me by reciting the origins 
and narratives of the other Manus. 


siana SAT 

Wass Wy: aiga sel WEDTY | 

santa da Ii IET], 4 di 

Narayana said: O Devarsi! I have already spoken 
to you everything regarding the first Manu. He had 
worshipped the Devi Bhagavati, and thus he got 
his foeless kingdom. You know that then. 

Aad gg wenn 1 

ITT fred ager 5 u 

Ridas wy: cantare set aAA: à 

füwaeue: shagan: nen 

Manu had two sons of great prowess, Priyavrata 
and Uttānapāda. They governed their kingdoms 
with fame. The son of this Priyavrata, of indomi- 
table valour, is known by the wise as the second 
Svārocişa Manu. 

a eA aR 33: | 

fart maana crise 7 1 

Hoia spear aa: gadaa: | 

ger fd gari usan hg: us 

Dear to all the beings, this Svārocisa Manu built 
his hermitage near the banks of the Kalindi (the 
Yamuna) and there making an earthen image of 
the Devi Bhagavati, worshipped the Devi with 
devotion, subsisting on dry leaves and thus 
practaised severe austerities. 


wdr artftrura dm rem 10 N 

Thus he passed his twelve years in that forest; 
when, at last, the Devī Bhagavatī, resplendent with 
brilliance of the thousand Suns, became visible to 


1235 


him. She got very much pleased with his devotional 
stotrams. 
i t START Arti ATA i 

wd vanifemTRHRUSRISSUIHd: 011 

arua a SA u uati | 

a dera faftrasrsd ya: wd feng: 12 0 

The Devi, the Saviour of the Devas, and Who 
was of good vows, granted to him the sovereignty 
for one Manvantara. Thus the Devi became famous 
by the name Tarini Jagaddhatri. O Narada! Thus, 
by worshipping the Devi Tarini, Svarocisa obtained 
safely the foeless kingdom. Then establishing the 
Dharma duly, he enjoyed his kingdom with his 
sons; and, when the period of his manvantara 
expired, he went to the Heavens. 

YA STA catch PTA ATTA Q 

gia samt am frasagat ag: N 13 

ITS AST are WTAE: | 

wwifur Agaa ATA 11 14 N 

Priyavrata’s sons named Uttama became the 
third Manu. On the banks of the Ganges he 
practised tapasyā and repeated the Bija Mantra of 
Vagbhava, in a solitary place for three years and 
becamed blessed with the favour of the Devi. 

wean tat vera tifvesnferanmaa: | 

Tad freed DN cate fenan 15 u 

TTT T yaa IAT | 

AIS weet vrsféermarferam 1 16 u 

With rapt devotion he sang hymns wholly to 
the Devi with his mind full; and, by Her boon, got 
the foeless kingdom and a continual succession of 
sons and grandsons. Thus, enjoying the pleasures 
of his kingdom an the gifts of the Yuga Dharma, 
got in the end, the excellent place, obtained by the 
best Rajarsis. 

aqhana ame fragt wy: od 

atar ae wanes sare 17 u 

teat =o aH: | 

und vm are mauaaudar (180 

aware evi EATR, 1 


1236 


A very happy result. Priyavarata’s another son 
named Tàmasa became the fourth Manu. He 
practised austerities and repeated the Kama Bija 
Mantra, the Spiritual Password of Kama on the 
southern banks of the Narmada river and 
worshipped the World Mother. In the spring and 
in the autumn he observed the nine night’s vow 
(the Navaratri) and worshipped the exccellent lotus 
eyed Devešī and pleased Her. 

TAT: WHTSHTHTEI AT AAT TATA: 019 0 


O obtaining the Devi’s favour, he chanted 
excellent hymns to Her and made pranamas. There 
he enjoyed the extensive kingdom without any fear 
from any foe or from any other source of danger. 
He generated, in the womb of his wife, ten sons, 
all very powerful and mighty, and then he departed 
to the excellent region in the Heavens. 

tet werd YSeegnmrnTSs 10021 NI 

ATA ITU STH | 

ēftsi nanadh TEIKT 80 22 N 

TATA TATA, | 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


The young brother of Tamasa, Raivata became 
the Fifth Manu and practised austerities on the 
banks of the Kālindī (the Yamuna) and repeated 
the Kama Bija Mantra, the spiritual password of 
Kama, the resort of the Sadhakas, capable to give 
the highest power of speech and to yield all the 
Siddhis, and thus he worshipped the Devi. 


segui enm wefuhafrmaen u23 N 


TTA: YHP AERA 1024 
efr MAERA argue? 
STAGŪSBIĪSTIT: |1 8 40 

He obtained excellent heavens, in domitable 
power, unhampered and capable of all success and 
a continual line of sons, grandsons, etc. Then the 
unrivalled excellent hero Raivata Manu established 
the several divisions of Dharma and enjoying all 
the worldly pleasures, went to the excellent region 
of Indra. 

Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Tenth Book on 
the origin of Manu in the Mahāpurāņam 
Šrīmaddevībhāgatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1236 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER IX 
On the Anecdote of Caksusa Manu 


sianar gara 


aaa: yadi Fast datumam | 

gA Hat Asse WHAT d dou 

BTA Us: YASNA TTG: | 

U8: Woe A fü V wa: 2 1 

Narayana said: O Narada! I will now narrate 
the supreme glories of the Devi and the anecdoie 
how Manu, the son of Anga, obtained excellent 
kingdom by worshipping the Devi Bhagavati. The 
son of the king Anga, named Caksusa became the 
Sixth Manu. One day he went to the Brahmarsi 
Pulaha Rsi and taking his refuge said: 


wer var wrt: yet VOTE, 1 

mir ni feast TTT arate urepat rq u 3 u 

Anae 3 radagdfšan i 

Ted Yas SHemen- qut AA 4 o 

O Brahmarsi! Thou removest all the sorrows and 
afflictions of those that come under Thy refuge; I 
now take Thy refuge. Kindly advise Thy servent 
how he may become the Lord of an endless amount 
of wealth. O Muni! What can I do so that I may get 
the sole undisputed sway over the world? How 
my arms can weild the weapons and manipulate 
them so that they may not be baffled? 


Book X Chapter IX 


1237 


wWafefzrenrei sur Wu SW | 

adsum carats W usa 

gad wei qur Mt: euius | 

How my race and line be constant and my youth 
rernain ever the same, undecayed? And how can I, 
in the end, attain Mukti? O Muni! Kindly dost Thou 
give instructions to me on these points and oblige. 

aara uhr: sinr: hag un wu 6 d 

Tatas aut AA sip WES | 

ffraramrerarar vd aaa we u7 ou 

Hearing thus, the Muni wanted him to worship 
the Devi and said: “O King! Listen attentively to 
what I say you to-day. Worship to-day the all 
auspicious Sakti; by Her grace, all your desires will 
be fulfilled.” 

MT Sara 

TE ATT: UAT | 

aan dei GRTRUSTeRIWERT 18 Ni 

Cāksusa said: “O Muni! What is that very holy 
worship of Sri Bhagavati? How to do it? Kindly 
describe all these in detail.” 


afrearet 

wama ter: TSi UTT, | 

anua fermenti nora AF vem d 9 odi 

rene) ATRI after org fe i 

a att armrerg-efid TRG 10! 

The Muni said: “O King! I will now disclose all 
about the excellent Püja of the Devi Bhagavati. 
Hear. You recite (mentally) always the seed mantra 
of Vakbhava (Speech) (The Deity being Maha 
Sarasvati). If any one makes japam (recites slowly) 
of the Vakbhava Bija thrice a day, one gets both 
the highest enjoyment here and, in the end, release 
(Mukti). O Son of a Ksattriya! 

wotatget difawgkgnt way | 

wee Broan she firent Aaa: 17 0 

féruressud: yuma: Rata: 1 

mads deat aaa 12 ! 


There is no other Bīja Mantra (word) better than 


this of Vak (the Word). Through the Japam of this 
Bija Mantra comes the increase of strength and 
prowess and all successes. By the Japam of this, 
Brahma is so powerful and has become the Creator; 
Visnu preserve the Universe and Mahe$vara has 
become the Destroyer of the Universe. 

Seear fU fTHTETTHERTHI: | 

"reped asing: o 130 

we raat vere NAV srafisrenn à 

HRTER Hf er sar S ferc Tes: 1 14 U 

The other Dikpālas (the Regents of the quarters) 
and the other Siddhas have become very powerful 
by the power of this Mantra, and are capable of 
favouring or disfavouring others. So, O King! You, 
too, worship the Devi of the Devas, the World 
Mother and are long you will become the Lord of 
unbounded wealth. 

wd a ghad gees wsfüs: | 

syen wem. fees dh 15 d 

"ouod aae urere nup T: | 

«irse yirda: yotar ferr: 16 u 

There is no doubt in this” O Narada! Thus 
advised by Pulaha Rsi, the son of the King Anga 
went to the banks of the Virajá river to practise 
austerities. There the king Caksusa remained 
absorbed in making Japam of the Vagbhava Bija 
Mantra and took for his food the leaves of the trees 
that dropped on the ground and thus practised 
severe austerities. 

Wansed wecargit fādtā arava: i 

Artas vary Heat verumfarero: 1 17 u 

Wd BAM AS COHEN ITT: | 

rer sra fred wfeueitegsnf-sat 11 1 8 u 

The first year he ate leaves; the second year he 
drunk water and in the third year he sustained his 
life by breathing air simply and thus remained 
steady like a pillar. Thus he remained without food 
for twelve years. He went on making Japam of the 
Vagbhava Mantra and his heart and mind became 
purified. 


1238 
TAT a dem: UTT wat Porat VE: | 
GTA argregtuaat 019 u 
asic guest wda d 
saai d eat PĒTA 020 
While he was sitting alone, absorbed in the 
meditation of the Devī Mantra, there appeared 
before him suddenly the Paramešvarī, the World 
Mother, the Incarnate of Laksmī. The Highest 
Deity, full of dauntless fire and the Embodiment 
of all the Devas, spoke graciously in seet words of 
Caksusa, the son of Anga. 


lagara 
yiretara à enfia we GTA | 
agai vuarenfi euer À gA 21 
“O Regent of the earth! I am pleased with your 
Tapasyā. Now ask any boon that you want. I will 
give that to you. 


F dagfma u221 

dente ay nip aid ara agi | 

weéftfir ga À fe wet TRUTH 0 23 i 

Chaksusa said: "O Thou, worshipped by the 
Devas! O Sovereign of the Deva of the Devas! 
Thou art the Controller Inside; Thou art the 
Controller Outside. Thou knowest everything what 
I desire in my mind. Still, O Devi! When I am so 
fortunate as to see Thee, I say "Thou grantest me 
the kingdom for the Manvantara period.” 


sftaegaru 
Wd TT U (AA | 
Yat ARTA et safer ied YUMA: 11 24 N 
Wed fregued; ofa NAA T AYA: 1 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


The Devi said: "O Best of the Ksattriyas! I grant 
unto you the kingdom of the whole world for one 
manvantara. You will have many sons, very pow- 
erful, indeed, and well qualified. Your kingdom 
will be free from any danger till at last you will 
certainly get Mukti.” 

wd ara at edt wad up N25 0 

TATA MAT ARAT TATA i 

Wtsf Wat 73: WS: WATE ASTM i 26 t 

spa agas urdeimgdda: | 

WATT TERA: AURET: 0027 N 

Thus granting the excellent boon to Manu, She 
disappeared then and there, after being praised by 
Manu, with deep devotion. The Sixth Manu, then 
favoured by the Devi, enjoyed the sovereignty of 
the earth and other pleasures and became the best 
of the Manus. 

eH VTA WaT: | 

ST Waray WERTSSRTGITETGT: 28 i 

Wd cw mgg: Wy: | 

aya ngadis mià frame u29 1 

sta ARRITI enim? ases ādtaR? 


AAS: 1) 9 11 


His sons became the devotees of the Devī, very 
powerful and expert and became respected by all 
and enjoyed the pleasures of the kingdom. Thus 
getting the supremacy by the worship of the Devī, 
the Cāksusa Manu became merged in the end in 
the Holy Feet of the Devī. 


Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Tenth Book on 
the narrative of Cāksusa Manu in the Mahāpurāņam 
Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. 


1238 Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


CHAPTER X 


On the History of the King Suratha 
stammar sarar u a dag: We: MAT: | 
went eÀ ngia: wy: 1 am TUTO da Tat WaT: 2 N 


SMA: AAA AAT TAT 1 Narayana said: Now the Seventh Manu is the 


Book X Chapter X 


Right Hon’ ble His Excellency the Lord Vaivasvata 
Manu Šrāddha Deva, honoured by all the kings, 
and the Enjoyer of the Highest Bliss, Brahmananda. 
I will now speak of this seventh Manu. He, too, 
practised austerities before the Highest Devi and 
by Her Grace, got the sovereignty of the earth for 
one Manvantara. 


SM MATE: Gator: ufa: fret i 


U water ama dēli won: 03 N 
wit mamu: nAaR: 1 
Tema kt ddtufunaum: 4 u 


The Eighth Manu is the Sun’s son, known as 
Savarni. This personage, a devotee of the Devi, 
honoured by the kings, gentle, patient, and power- 
ful king Sávarni worshipped the Devi in his previ- 
ous births; and, by Her boon, became the Lord of 
the Manvantara. 

ANE sara 

wet ATA at SISSE Hay d 

eur: VĒLAK N 5 n 

Narada said: O Bhagavan! How did this Savarni 
Manu wotship in his previous birth the earthen 
image of the Devi. Kindly describe this to me. 


sframerur sara 


Saat war warfare 1 

Brat ur fever? error: 6 N 

3porarét aga urea: YB: enfer: pdt | 

aa cp gar umnenenuveo 7 1 

Narayana said: O Narada! This Eighth Manu 
had been, before, in the time of Svarocisa Manu 
(the second Manu), a famous king, known by the 
name of Suratha, born of the family of Caitra, and 
very powerful. 

anti ni att werten se | 

Aa sped eterfaedfust AUT: 8 1 

waa: Gutta afta: 1 

sein quer ust urere fü ui 

He could well appreciate merits, clever in the 
science of archery, amassed abundance of wealth, 


1239 


a generous donor, a very liberal man and he was a 
celebrated pot and honoured by all. He was skilled 
in all arts of warfare with weapons and indomitable 
in crushing his foes. 

at U It am want GISTHUTQ: | 

Peat mmredtaradvratradm: 10 


wat Saat TS K: PARTS: | 
amA Aa wer eornm enm 11 0 


Once on a time, some of his powerful enemies 
destroyed the city of Kola, belonging to the revered 
king and succeeded in beseiging his capital wherein 
he remained Then the king Suratha, the conqueror 
of all his foes went out to fight with the enemies 
but he was defeated by them. 

xd wdusnmr dasa afi: 1 

fawmrfsrasr cred UST wwe: u 12 u 

ammang Hrarftradt ww | 

WebTent feret S 1U3E ST TquIETHTRTG: 1 13 N 

Taking advantage of this opportunity, the king's 
ministers robbed him of all his wealth. The 
illustrious king then went out of the city and with 
a sorrowful heart rode alone on his horse on the 
plea of having a game and walked to and fro, as if, 
absent-minded. 

qp: Heaney TATSIT STR: | 

wsüestqpdsqed greenday nugu 

Te haces CH UAT WATT 1 

arama yada dig: gÀ: 115 u 

The king, then, went to the hermitage of the 
Muni Sumedha, who could see far-reaching things 
(a Man of the Fourth Dimensions). It was a nice, 
quite Āšrama, surrounded by quiet and peaceful 
animals and filled with disciples. There in that very 
sacred Asrama, his heart became relieved and he 
went on living there. 

Wenap a adore g Gara d 

"REO Tear Wreany VI feranfzaa: 116 0 

WA NA aga arent friaa, | 

ITT yea KARTE U day 17 N 

One day, when the Muni finished his worship, 


1240 


etc., the king went to him and saluted him duly 
and humbly asked him the following: “O Muni! I 
am suffering terribly from my mental pain. O Deva 
on the earth! Why I am suffering So much though 
I know everything, as if 1 am quite an ignorant 
man. 
IATA ATT Wd | 

carte aut af Mai Saat ATA Uu 18 N 

fe mitt aa treat ae yf wa g i 

GINA wa defeat at 19 ll 

After my defeat from my enemies, why does 
my mind become now compassionate towards who 
stole away my kingdom. O Best of the knowers of 
the Vedas! What am I to do now? Where to go? 
How can I make me happy? Please speak on these. 
O Muni! Now I am in want of your good grace. 


gfaara 

amfa AS maai VA | 

dimers adagi uu 1200 

wet warmer AAN a 

m seruare wiqaoenmmerfuzrü 

The Muni said: “O Lord of the earth! Hear the 
extremely wonderful glories of the Devi that have 
no equal and that can fructify all desires. She, the 
Maha Maya, Who is all this world, is the Mother 
of Brahma, Visnu and Maheša. 

"rera uftdaeodfēta write uf 1 

m yaaa fed wr urea wdar 11 22 u 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 

wet wet deta U d 

emer CETHTUT areata 123 |i 

O King! Know verily that itis She and She alone, 
that can forcibly attract the hearts of all the Jivas 
and throw them in dire utter delusion. She is always 
the Creatrix, Preservrix and Destructrix of the 
Universe in the form of Hara. This Mahamaya 
fulfills the desirese of all the Jivas and She is known 
as the insurmountable Kālarātri. She is Kali, the 
Destructrix of all this universe and 

férsrererftuft caret ret BATT | 

vet we Sosa eat fave Via t 2.4. u 

wana Aid METRA WYTRRT | 

TT Wut yas Tena vagu d 

" ws Aeneas Aut eà 25 0 

sft sfida ergo? aenea 
RISETTA: 010 11 

She is Kamala residing in the lotus. Know that 
this whole world rests on Her and it will become 
dissolved in Her. She is therefore, the Highest and 
Best. O King! Know, verily, that he alone can cross 
the delusion (Moha) on whom the Grace of the 
Devi falls and otherwise no one can escape from 
this Anādi Moha.” | 

Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Tenth Book on 
the anecdote of the King Suratha in the Maha 
Purāņam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1240 Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


CHAPTER XI 
On Madhu Kaitabha Killed 3 
watara is Her Form? and what are Her qualities? O 
al Ot adt ram ureer ai arefāgi at | Brāhmin! Kindly describe all these to me.” 
ar treat granti ATi fe vagfās 1 1 gara 
regeret dt f er er fen | IRT: Tad w aoai FRA | 
admen yer gua wu Ada: 02 aan aR sat da at ar sert u 3 u 


The king Suratha spoke: O Best of the twice aa ma Fat fusi ger hme | 
born! Who is that Devi that you spoke just now? | — angst srg TATE Afsa u 4 u 
Why the Devi deludes all these beings? What for) gar manag Zagat wards: 1 
does She do so? Whence is the Devi born? What|  aeguiqentardt radīt wyke usu 


Book X Chapter XI 


The Muni spoke: “O King! I will now describe 
the nature of the Devi Bhagavati and why does 
She take Her Form in due time. Listen. In ancient 
days, when Bhagavan Narayana, the king of the 
Yogis, was lying in deep sleep on the ocean on the 
the bed of Ananta, after He had destroyed the the 
Universe, there came out of the wax of his ear the 
two, Danavas, Madhu and Kaitabha, of monstrous 
appearances. 

emot gagga aa wreefuvit à 

warp cem det eB at ngke 16 d 

ffs Senat furum: GM a 

ARA suras? erat u grat 7 o 

They wanted to kill Brahma, who was lying on 
the lotus coming out of the navel of Bhagavan. 
Seeing the two Daityas Madhu and Kaitabha and 
seeing also Hari asleep the Lotus-born Brahma 
became very anxious and thought: 

for nif ea earth eet yn e BEAL i 

wd feuaurer wader: su 

ate: wera dat enrduwnfrdt 1 

wer avira gat fifsat srrargft: 19 d 

at wet vert fir Prat ereiugferenm i 

Now Bhagavan is asleep; and these two 
indomitable Daityas are ready to kill me. Now what 
am I to do? Where to go? How shall I get ease? O 
Child! Thus thinking, the high souled Lotus born 
suddenly came to a practical conclusion. He said: 
Let me now take refuge to the Goddess Sleep, 
Nidra, the Mother of all and under Whose power 
Bhagavan Hari is now asleep.’ 


agarar 


Fa fa sore reer n10 

maA À AARAA fra | 

aaa: Wes ania: 11 

Brahma then began to praise Her thus: “O Devi 
of the Devas! O Upholdress of the world! Thou 
grantest desires of Thy devotees. O Thou 
auspicious! Thou art Para Brahma! By Thy 
Command all are doing respectively their proper 
spheres! 


1241 


CAE RIE RIT SUE e iE TA] | 

warfar-ft anm rear meridavtaftT: 11 12 0 

nectar wera Arar weet AT 1 

meet weet UT wt wenifdet 13 u 

erat Uf: ater anit: athe: REAA | 

Ata sige wrefecrattat MET 

Thou art the Night of Destruction (Kala Rātri); 
Thou art the Great Night (Maha Rātri). Thou art 
the greatly terribie Night of Delusion (Moha Ratri); 
Thou art omnipresent; omniscient; of the nature of 
the Supreme Bliss. Thou art regarded as the Great. 
Thou art highly worshipped; Thou art alone in this 
world as highly intoxicated; Thou art submissive 
to Bhakti only; Thou art the Best of all the things; 
Thou art sung as the Highest, Thou art modesty; 
Thou art Pusti (nourishment); Thou art forgiveness 
(Ksama); Thou art Beauty (Kànti); Thou art the 
embodiment of mercy; Thou art liked by all; Thou 
art adorned by the whole world; Thou art of the 
nature of wakefulness, dream and deep sleep; Thou 
art the Highest; Thou art alone Highest Deity; Thou 
art highly attached to the Supreme Bliss. There is 
no Other thing than Thee. There is One only and 
that is Thee. Hence art denominated as One; Thou 
becomest again the two by contact with Thy Maya. 

wma AmA were 1 

TRISHA ST MAA emet (V 15 u 

srt treater qui gedaan à 

Wet wast wet watt u 16 u 

At weary mana | 

sent agan a ameng 17 0 

ARTA Tar Aaa aa 1 

Thou art the refuge of Dharma, Artha and Kama; 
hence Thou Thou art Thee; Thou art the Turiya 
(the fourth state of consciousness) hence Thou art 
Four. Thou art the God of the five elements; hence 
Thou art Paficamī (five); Thou presidest over the 
six passions Kama, anger etc.; hence Thou art 
Sasthi; Thou presidest over the seven days of the 
week and Thou grantest boons seven by seven; 


1242 


hence Thou art seven. Thou art the God of the eight 
Vasus; hence Thou art Astami; Thou art full of the 
nine Ragas and nine parts and Thou art the Goddess 
of nine planets; hence Thou art Navami. 


ari GTG aerate ur i 1 8 1 


sarezüferer aft nā "20 

adamin Arar fadeartreaar 1 

Thou pervadest the ten quarters and Thou art 
worshipped by the ten quarters; hence Thou art 
named Dašamī (the tenth day of the fortnight); 
Thou art served by the Eleven Rudras, the Goddess 
of eleven Ganas and Thou art fond of Ekādašī Tithi; 
hence Thou art denominated Ekādašī; Thou art 
twelve armed and the Mother of the twelve Adityas; 
hence Thou art Dvàda$i; Thou art dear to the 
thirteen Ganas; Thou art the presiding Deity of 
Visve Devas and Thou art the thirteen months 
including the Malas Masa (dirty month), hence 


Thou art Trayodašī. 
gg? AJJI: u2iu 


damarin toirnit: | 
West wenya Aega 22 N 
WSMAHAAYSAMAM a | 


Thou didst grant boons to the fourteen Indras 
and Thou gavest birth to the fourteen Manus; hence 
Thou art Caturdašī. Thou art knowable by the 
Paūcadašī. Thou art sixteen armed and on Thy 
forehead the sixteen digits of the Moon are always 
shining; Thou art the sixteenth digit (ray) of the 
Moon named Ama; hence Thou art Sodašī. 

vinas eater ff arated 23 N 

waa Ted maat carats: 1 

wdr great Seat fami ames u 24 u 

west amat gayi urs | 

O Devešī! Thou, though attributeless and 
formless, appearest in these forms and attributes. 
Thou hast now enveloped in Moha and Darkness 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


the Lord of Rama, the Bhagavan, the Deva of the 
Devas. These Daityas. Madhu and Kaitabha are 
indomitable and very powerful. So to kill them, 
Thou better dost awake the Lord of the Devas. 


fare 

We tar sre at werfen u25 ! 

Sere er TAA AeA ara d 

The Muni said: Thus praised by the Lotus-born, 
the Tàmasi Bhagavati (the Goddess of sleep and 
ignorance), the Beloved of Bhagavan, left Visnu 
and enchanted the two Daityas. 

wes waaay: enen aA: 026 N 

usta dvi age grata | 

wer di aadi eit pr d wipes 027 u 

"RETE Made srg: Ua gt i 

qaqa U MATI MAET: 8028 0 

ugate aque fq: d 

On being awakend, the Supreme Spirit Visnu, 
the Lord of the world, the Bhagavan, the Deva of 
the.Devas, saw the two Daityas. Those two 
monstrous Dànavas, beholding Madhu Südana, 
came up before Him, ready to fight. The hand-to- 
hand fight lasted amongst them for five thousand 
years. 

vit aas Raca srararftfēcīt i 29 u 

Raa at setae: VANA, | 

wd adda: spem REN: 30 U 

aa aeargult Ase srarenfirfer forfan à 

Then the two Dànavas, maddened by their great 
strength, were enchanted by the Maya of Bhagavati 
and told the Supreme Deity “Ask boon from us." 
Hearing this, the Bhagavan Adi Purusa (the Prime 
Man) asked the boon that both of them would be 
killed that day be Him. 

vt agrsfraet gad gtaragēna 310 

anai wie = ad were xr aba i 

algara WTI ITGTIENJAT FT 0032 N 

Those two very powerful Danavas spoke to Hari 
again “Very Well. Kill us on that part of the earth 
which is not under water.” O King! Bhagavan 


Book X Chapter XII 


Visnu, the Holder of the conch and club, spoke: 
“All right. Indeed! Let that be so.” 
Heal UTS feat War reat aut: 1 
wa edt agra sum Wear TT 33 N 
reel wann adarivatvatt 1 
AGFA frm ETA 134 lt 
aa MaR meno) avr She 
USIRSHSENTT 11 11 11 


Saying this He placed their heads on His thigh 


1243 


and severed them with His disc (cakra). O King! 
Thus Maha Kali, the Queen of all the Yogas arose 
on this occasion when the praise was offered Her 
by Brahma. O King! Now I will describe another 
account how this Maha Laksmi appeared on 
another occasion. Listen. 


Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Tenth Book on 
the killing of Madhu Kaitabha in the Maha Puranam 
Srimaddevibhàgavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book X Chapter XII 


1243 


CHAPTER XII 


On Savarni Manu 


aPrearer 

nR Tea: 1 

darat ASSAY: Ud oi 

weet CTA: 1 

wremfafsrer ays Tere u 02 ul 

The Muni said: O King! The powerful Asura 
Mahisa, born of a She-buffalo, defeated all the 
Devas and became the Lord of the whole universe. 
That indomitable Danava seized forcibly all the 
right of the Devas and began to enjoy the pleasures 
of the kingdom over the three worlds. 

aa: wafer: ad gar: Tao ETAt: | 

VAI U UTE A we !3 N 

wet dadgat erdt viemregcīt | 

gai adamgiftm AT: 14 odi 

The Devas, thus defeated, were expelled from 
their abodes in Heavens. They took Brahmā as their 
Leader and went to the excellent regions where 
Mahā Deva and Visņu resided and informed them 
of all that had been done by that vicious Asura 
Mahisa. 

Gari a dat KTI quum d 

Aia xau sith eerdtduenae: u 5 N 

uage gaisma 1 

adag Ag fiery ueu 


They said: O Deva of the Devas! The insolent 


Mahisāsura has become unbearable and he has 
taken possessions of the rights and properties of 
the whole host of the Devas and he is now enjoying 
them. Both of you are quite capable to destroy the 
Asura. So why do you not devise means to 
annihilate him in no time! 

Ud rat U Waray: | 

War walt gag wem vas 07 1 

wd Aga Re | 

wa: Wenge agerhart usu 


Hearing these pitiful words of the Devas, 
Bhagavan Visnu became quite indignant. Sankara, 
Brahma and the other Devas all were inflamed with 
anger. O King! From the face of the angry Hari, 
then emanated an Unusual Fire, brilliant like thou- 
sand Suns. 


iym gara dura a aga: 4 10 Lt 

Then by and by emanated fires also from the 
bodies of all the Devas who were filled then with 
joy. From the mass of fire thus emanated there came 
out a beautiful Female Figure. The face of this 
figure was formed out of the fire that emanated 
from the body of Maha Deva. Her hairs were 


1244 


formed out of the fire of Yama and Her arms were 
formed out of the fire that emanated from Visnu. 

ara a eat arate T EET: | 

rents Fat wu wera Hayag: 011 Ul 

Ffrareit deret TÀ: Ural ATTY AAT | 

ranged TAG area wget W120 

RAN AAT ATAT SAT: TAT vum | 

wares awe ager 4013 u 

Wada wp imd cbt YD | 

Wie derer ar THe erat fret 14 u 

O King! From the fire of the Moon came out 
two breasts; from the fire of Indra came out Her 
middle portion; from the fire of Varuna, appeared 
Her loins and thighs; from the fire of Earth, Her 
hips were formed; from the fire of Brahma, Her 
feet were formed; from the fire of the Sun, Her 
toes were formed; from the fire of the Vasus, Her 
fingers were formed; from Kubera's fire, Her nose 
came out; from the excellent tejas of Prajapati, 
teeth; from the fire of Agni, Her three eyes; from 
the fire of the twilights, Her eye-brows and from 
the fire of Vayu, Her ears appeared. 


cuit araemrat smit duret Aare | 
wear derar eat stat ufewufadt 15 n 
Vet adr fren farah rg aT TTT i 
gat edt with MEATA 16 1 
asi wes: act uui TATA d 
AATE dt ART MAAS |1 17 N 
frame vfxwuren uar adīt | 
TT: Gg aa ae fet agemttru u18 u 
aga fact grum HTS qu: | 
qem great A aea ATS BA N 19 N 
refers fuie a oquufer wem at ad 
Adah yout a ae de Garrat: u 20 1 
figu Aa adr tā enact | 


Ruarangi fae tents fafan lt 21 u 

O Lordof men! Thus Bhagavatī Mahisamardinī 
was born of the Tejas (fiery substances) of the 
Devas. Next Siva gave Her the Šūla (weapon 
spear); Visņu gave Sudaršana (Cakra;) Varuņa gave 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


the conchshell; Fire gave Šakti (weapon); Vāyu 
gave Her bows and arrows; Indra gave Her thun- 
der bolt and the bell of the elephant Airāvata; Yama 
gave Her the Destruction Staff (Kāla Daņda); 
Brahmā gave Her the Rudrāksa, rosary and 
Kamandalu; the Sun gave Her, in every pore the 
wonderful rays; the Time (Kāla) gave Her sharp 
axe and shield; the oceans gave Her the beautiful 
necklace and new clothes two in number); 
Višvakarmā gladly gave Her the crown, ear-rings, 
Kataka, Angada, Candrārdha, tinklets; and the 
Himālayas gave Her the Lion as Her Vehicle and 
various gems and jewels. 

wart gut gdt a fè: | 

was wart umm gÀ fey: 022 0 

aAa Ant at setae a 

at gggdergdi gat ufüwdifsqu 23 u 

aAA urgenti i 

aut Freres gavit vrai farqerafere i 24 u 

Kubera, the Lord of wealth gave Her the cup 
filled with the drink; Bhagavàn Ananta Deva gave 
Her a necklace of snakes (Nàgahàra). Thus the 
World Mother, the Devi, became honoured by all 
the Devas. The Devas, very much oppressed by 
Mahisāsura, then, chanted various hymns of praise 
of the World Mother Māhešvarī Maha Devi. 

nears aerate werd we € | 

aa aed weeds 125 N 

arene wenn reum: d 

TA: E quu goat ATS Weng 026 ti 

Hearing their Stotras, the Devesi, worshipped 
by the Devas, shouted aloud the War-Cry. O King! 
Mahisasura, startled at that War-Cry, came to 
Bhagavati with all his army corps. 

radgan fart: ainia, i 

faa mo: Amage 27 0 

AKTA frererde su: | 

VITA: uWumiqeus u28 0 

Then that great Asura Mahisa hurled various 
weapons in the air and overcast the sky with them 


Book X Chapter XII 


1245 


and began to fight with great skill. The several 
generals Ciksura, Durdhara, Durmukha, Baskala, 
Tamraka, Bidalaksa and various other innumerable 
generals as if Death incarnate, accompanied 
Mahisa, the chief Dànava. A fierce fight then 
ensued. 

ama: uRgat dt afest wn: | 

aa: m aag adt cinerea u 29 n 

Wart ure eat ufeunfinm. | 

wur gida ow ec qugfSq: 30 

Then the Devi Who enchants all the beings, 
became red-eyed with anger and began to kill the 
generals of the against party. When the generals 
were killed one by one Mahisāsura, skilled in the 
science of magic, came up quickly to the front of 
the Devi. 

ana ware quí rar fen: | 

wu WIS WIS aa: 0310 

mf ATRI WATT AVATARS AT TNT 0 

atst ufa wed fered 032 N 

The Lord of the Danvas, then, by his magic 
power, began to assume various forms. Bhagavati, 
too, began to destroy his those forms. Then the 
Daitya, the crusher of the Devas, assumed the form 
of a buffalo and began to fight. 

UT Saar Yee fot Gas aT: i 

mamma fes edt carota 33 n 

Bead dd: We Bat as fes aa a 

gggdadagtt wd gat: witfem: u34u 

The Devi then fastened the animal, the Asura, 
the Death of the Devas, tightly and cut off his head 
by Her axe. The remainder of his forces, then, fled 
away in terror and disorder with a loud cry. The 
Devas became very glad and began to chant hymns 
to the Devi. 

ve wat: weno ufeunqeed 1 

wg KAT: Wr ife gars ta | 3 5 N 

WHAT YEAS SHIRA HTH: | 

fiaa Aqua ARTETA: 136 N 

O King! Thus the Laksmi Devi appeared to kill 


Mahisāsura. Now I will describe how Sarasvati 
appeared. Listen. Once on a time the two very 
powerful Daityas Sumbha and Nigumbha were 
born. 

aa Wdifzar gar: ud gefšrat gu 1 

Raima adi quguemd 037 

They attacked the Devas, oppressed them and 
siezed their houses and rights. The Devas became 
dispossessed of their kingdoms and went to the 
Himālayas and offered stotras to the Devī with the 
greatest devotion: 


dat xy: 
wa eat amrarafiarrratfad 1 


maitas ARRASTA «11380 
aah aAA cera | 
Rapina ansia 139 1 


“O Devešī! O Thou, skilled in removing the 
difficulties of the Bhaktas! Victory to Thee! O 
Thou, the Sinless One! Old age and death cannot 
touch Thee. O Thou! Death incarnate to the 
Dānavas! O Devešī! O Thou, of mighty valour and 
prowess! O Thou, the embodiment of Brahma, 
Visnu and Maheša! Unbounded is Thy might; Thou 
canst be easily reached by the power of devotion. 

xgfeferferent argramta mifra à 

Wrist nea arf naon 

O Thou, the Creator, Preserver and Destroyer! 
O Madhavi! O Thou, the Giver of Bliss! Thou 
dancest with great joy at the time of the dissolution 

of all the things (Pralaya). 

vite addin wet runā 1 

EM ENE CE GE CIPINE CIES! uain 

SEA TA IOTA, |d 

ud dagai dat Bagai aÀ 0042 i 

O Thou, full of mercy! O Deva Devešī! Be 
gracious unto us. O Thou, the Remover of the 
sufferings of the refugees! We now come unto Thy 
protection. The terror of Sumbha and Ni$umbha is 
like an endless ocean unto us. Save, save us from 
their fast clutches. O Devi! save us O King! verily. 


1246 


wear ARa wre at MAAROTI, | 

Vata MET RAAR 143 N 

"fore wr ree amateur! | 

waasi wr AAA ua44 n 

When the Devas praised thus, the daughter of 
the Himàlayas, Bhagavati became pleased and 
asked “What is the matter?" In the meanwhile, 
there emitted from the physical sheath of the Devi, 
another Devi KauSiki who gladly spoke to the 
Devas: “O Suras! I am pleased with Thy Stotra. 
Now ask the boon that you desire. 

farai at epe Wen ef wu 1 

vjsrammsent arr Fryers farsra: 45 u 

Sellers sit qe Srergmeram à 

TAUTA af quem aaa: 146 ü 

wr Gad afe feepner fen 1 

The Devas then asked for the following boon: 
“Q Devi! The two famous Daityas Sumbha and 
Nišumbha have forcibly the three worlds. The 


wicked Lord of the Dànavas, Sumbha, has 
overcome us by the power of his arm and is now 
tormenting us without any break. Kindly devise 
some means to kill him.” 


sfrasqarer 

garg ureter gji vivre a 147 

PTT GA WS a: ded: ATTA A: | 

yara aA dernxisrauned uas! 

aayi wert radi PARET i 

War: MATA ger sauificpet STU! 49 ui 

The Devi said: “O Devas! Be patient. I will kill 
these two Daityas, Sumbha and Nišumbha and thus 
remove the thorn on your way. At an early date I 
will do good to you" Thus saying to Indra and the 
other Devas, the merciful Devt disappeared at once 
before their eyes. The Devas with their hearts 
delighted went to the beautiful Sumeru Mountain 
and dwelt there in the caves thereof. 

izdēt ugar eat gjafa: i | 

Sea at areca edt ritena u 50 u 


Here the servants of Sumbha and Nišumbha 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Canda and Munda, while they were making their 
circuits, saw the exquisitely beautiful Devi, the 
Enchantress of the world, and came back to 
Sumbha, their King and said: 

BIT Ua Feat at eret | 

aq alqm I wae us) 

ayat afte gar aret Rya i 

TEM: aedes qaum 52 

“O Destroyer of enemies! O Giver of honour! 
O Great King! You are the Lord of all the Daityas 
and are fit to enjoy all the gems and jewels. To- 
day we have seen an extraordinary beautiful 
woman jewel. She is fit to be enjoyed by you. 

at aaa ardi dea vies: | 

mai ange ant a terdf a grrēt u 53 n 

a aa arte adt argyft ar HAET i 

So now you would better bring that perfectly 
beautiful woman and enjoy. No such enchanting 
woman can be seen amongst the Asura women, 
Naga Kanyās, Gandharva women, Dānavīs or 


» 


men. 

Td TAIT: rat YT: VISIEM: 0654 Ui 

qd duum gtd art array | 

Tati wear Soar: MATA 55 N 

Hearing thus the words of the servent, Sumbha, 
the tormentor of the foes, sent a Daitya named 
Sugriva as a messenger to Her. The messenger went 
to the Devi as early as possible and spoke to Her 
all that Sumbha had told him. 

qid FLAT dēt yee Age: | 

fer BETA am Aeiterfērrdt Wy: 11 56 u 

dst Tea aca aren ARATA | 

agh Yup A afe ASENTA: 57 N 

*O Devi! The Asura Sumbha is now the 
conqueror of the three worlds and respected by the 
Devas. O Devi! He is now enjoying all that is best, 
the gems and jewels. O Devi! I am his messenger 
sent here to convey to you his message as follows: 
O Devi! I am the sole enjoyer of all the jewels. O 
Beautiful-eyed! You are a gem; so you would 
worship me. 


Book X Chapter XII 


1247 


vei erf ITS ST AT TSCA | 

adgy wf oves. snp w 58 

mA Wa qur wat ui ATS TĀ: 1 

O Fair One! All the gems and jewels that are in 
the Deva loka, in the Daitya loka, or amongst the 
regions of men, are under my control. So you would 
lovingly worship me.” 


| Sup 

Web dati è eat tenia 59 N 

iar at war vd Har STRA FTA i 

aAa gar A ga AT What Tat Far 11 60 N 

The Devi said: "O Messenger! True that you 
are speaking for your King; but J made a promise 
before How can I act against it? O Messenger! Hear 
what I promised. 

a a af faeyqa wr aemutēfā 1 

wit irufersreit spare Vat A ANT ITA 61 N 

we Wat uftrgrt Heat PTS KA: 1 

Tard Tft acer wearers fna E 11 62 N 

Whoever in the three worlds will conquer me 
by sheer force and thus crush My vanity, whoever 
will be as stong as Myself, He can enjoy Me. So 
the King of Daityas can prove My promise true 
and by sheer force can marry Me. 

TEMATS Hered tants ale ars: 1 

Viestardu rare sremftras: t 63 N 

Ue erat WETqeur: UATATŪ GT GU: | 

HUTA WAIT Gent quiuis: 464 N 

What is there with him that he cannot do? So, 
Messenger! Go back to your master and tell him 
all this so that the powerful Sumbha may fulfil My 
promise.” Hearing thus the words of the Great 
Devi, the messenger went back to Sumbha and 
informed him everything regarding the Devi’s 
sayings. 

wars fid eras YET: ACA ATT: | 

alone Ced gg: nesu 

aat eqorararart ecd afi: wy: | 

aN yo Tat HTT WA RT: 66 di 

The very powerful Lord of the Daityas, Šumbha 


became very angry at the unpleasant words of the 
messenger and commanded the Daitya named 
Dhūmrāksa: “O Dhūmrāksa! Listen to my words 
with great attention. 

at get Arata eresrsvarsfiarert AU | 

adadda vÜu mesa d ue 67 tt 

semasb Aaa Wels Karte: | 

WEWTSSRTUI Alea: ASAT AETA: |1 68 Lt 

Go and catch hold of that wicked woman by 
her hairs and bring her to me. Go guikly; do not 
delay.” Thus commanded, the very powerful and 
the best of the Daityas, Dhūmrāksa, went at once 
to the Devī with sixty thousand Daityas and cried 
aloud to Her: 

gareana gem: aaea a: | 

sAd STARI wat derafs vni 69 u 

yet am verted wdupmerefe | 

ATAKA cat rā eerafet WH 70 t 

*O Auspicious One! You would better worship 
quickly our Lord Sumbha, who is very powerful 
and mighty; you will then acquire all sorts of 
pleasures; else I will hold you by your hairs and 
take you to the Lord of the Daityas. 

STH ur det adt gera fram i 

TATA Wer ATTN Tee d Wut 710 

Tat IATE a fo aR vga i 

BPH qeadtstrrerqut renis: 172 1 

Thus addressed by Dhūmrāksa Daityas, the 
enemy of the Devas, the Devi said: “O Powerful 
One! O Daitya! What you have spoken is perfectly 
right, but tell me first what you or your king 
Sumbha can do to Me? When the Devi said thus, 
the Daitya Dhümralocana rushed to Her at once 
with arms and weapons. 

wea GAN Faro wat 1 

aa: Seat Met ge aot Ata 73 1 

fayit gest gery d 

magaid MATE a WE qenrafesr: 74 u 

With one loud noise, Māhešvarī burnt him 
immediately to ashes. O King! The other forces 


1248 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


wéte partly crushed by the Lion, the vehicle of the 
Devi and partly fled away in disorder to all the 
quarters; some become senseless out of fear. 
Sumbha, the Lord of the Daityas, became very 
angry to hear this. 

galu a RACIRIEE: E TAE JASLE 

aa: aaiae SAAT: NATA 075 N 

"vs qus Tento AAA: VELICE [ 

SU mer TA aea fareniar ergferenur: 0 76 N 

His face assumed a terrible form with eyebrows 
contracted. Then he became impatient with anger 
and sent in order Canda, Munda and Raktabija. 
The three powerful Daityas went to the battle and 
tried their might to capture the Devi. 

di srélqurcstruemed WAIT | 

arated ward) wr Waheeer 77 N 

wet TT ats manaa yar d 

Reeds Gest gm dant u 78 lt 

The Devi Jagaddhatri, of violent prowess, seeing 
that these three Daityas were coming to Her, killed 
them by Her trident and laid them prostrate on the 
ground. Hearing their death with all their army, 
Sumbha and Nisumbha came in their own persons 
arrogantly to the battlefield. 

vivere Pyaar WHTSDURRTSTHTI 

Pojada VIETA Heal YG MEHTA |1 79 N 

eg aprit Sat Pract oc MATS t 

ofa deret yest atm ST u80 u 

Šumbha and Nišumbha fought for a time with 
the Devī a terrible fight and became tired, when 
the Devī killed them outright. When the Bhagavatī, 
Who is all this world, killed Sumbha and Ni$umbha, 
the Devas began to praise Bhagavati, the Supreme 
Deity of Vak (Word) incarnate. 

fērgt: deg ageuramanttendt we 1 

va s afta xsrargsratsferuren: 81 u 

RENAA MARA: AUT: GRUT U | 

"wg na edt sad waht cw 482 

O King! Thus I have spoken to you in due order 
the manner in which the beautiful Kali, Mahà 


Laksmi and Sarasvati incarnated themselves on the 
earth. That Supreme Deity, the Devi Paramešvarī 
thus creates, preserves, and destroyes the Universe. 
wert da un da dtum ft d 
at amaa dagft argan u 83 n 
"WerHrat yarani wr st enr faena à 
You better take refuge of that highly adored 
Devi, that causes the distinction and the delusion 
of this Universe. Then only you will attain success. 


ofa Ta ae: sper qo: Wem weno u 84 di 

Wei wore vnu NARRANT, d 

Pent aar qermna wu: 85 N 

Narayana said: The king Suratha, hearing these 
beautiful words of the Muni, took refuge of the 
Devi, that yields all desired objects. 

adii qarat er vanam eife: | 

arate fet mā frenmampsb we n 86 N 

war wer Way arent: sara i 

mga grat at gif arto u87 u 

He built an earthen image of the Devi and, with 
concentrated attention, thought wholly of the Devi 
and began to worship Her with devotion. When 
the worship was over, he offered sacrifice of the 
blood of his body to the Devi. Then the World- 
Mother, the Deity of the Devas, became pleased 
and appeared before him and asked him: Accept 
the boon that you desire. 

"Ter Praga Art STTHSTHN | 

Tad rehech ta urehee aud N 88 ui 

When the Devī said thus, the king asked from 
the Mahešvarī that excellent knowledge whereby 
the ignorance is destroyed and as well the kingdom 
free from any dangers of difficulties. 


sittegarer 
werfen dh Wet wet À AAT 
afecatt wat eaaa vat ga 89 
ITEM TU SpuTer Sareea ey | 
ater aaa arerürsiferar aT 1 90 N 
The Devi said: “O King! By My boon, you will 


Book X Chapter XIII 


get your foeless kingdom in this very birth as well 
as the Jiianam that removes ignorance. O King! I 
will tell you also what you will be in the next birth. 
Hear. In your next birth, you will be the son of the 
Sun and be famous as Sāvarņi Manu. 

aa waar ufīd summ | 

wale agent efi ATA ATA N 9 1 M 

wd qr at det oag cer 1 

Bish Sear: Wares smit weer: u92 N 

By My boon you will be the Lord of the 
Manvantara, become very powerful and you will 
get good many sons." Thus granting him this boon, 
the Devi disappeared. By the Grace of the Devi, 


1249 


Suratha became the Lord of the Manvantara. 


wd à affa arent aafaa end wi 
WATS squa-xer Henn 193 N 
att secured serpy severe 
RINSE: 1211 


O, Sadhu! Thus I have described to you the birth 
and deeds of Sávarni. He who hears or reads this 
anecdote with devotion, will be a favourite of the 
Devi. 

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Tenth Book on 
the anecdote of Sávarni Manu in the Mahapuranam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book X Chapter XIII 


1249 


CHAPTER XIII 


On Bhramari Devi 


sanra sara 

aam: saat Aga ARTA, | 

"rp SR aR: warad nju 

Sri Narayana spoke: O Child Narada! Hear now 
the wonderful anecdotes of the births of the 
remaining other Manus. 

eae: Yat: wa fērmeītgam: i 

Seay usus arma fee va aw u2 i 

watts fetges wd Ua HAETT: | 

aa: Usa wd Meat GTA, N 3 di 

frena farsa: yoi epee: RAT: à 

weur nA aft ftemia verge uw 4 ul 

The mere remembrance of these birth anecdotes 
causes Bhakti to grow and well up towards the 
Devi. Vaivasvata Manu had six sons: viz., Karusa, 
Prsadhra, Nābhāga, Dista, Saryati, and Triganku. 
All of them were stout and strong. Once they all 
united went to the excellent banks of the Yamuna 
and began to practise Pranayama without taking 
any food and became engaged in worshipping the 
Devi. 

armam RTMM: 1 

was we wad MUA Wü: 5 it 

irian argugomreītasttamm: 

QUNT USAT: HAVA ACMA: 11 6 d 
79 


areas dat wer 

famem neam udea 7 u 

Each of them built separately an earthen image 
of the Devi and worshipped Her with devotion and 
with various offerings. In the beginning they took 
the dry leaves of the trees that dropped of them- 
selves for their food; then they drank water only, 
then breathed air only; then the smoke from the 
fire of the Homa; then they depended on the Solar 
Rays. Thus they practised tapasyà with great 
difficulties. 

ayguagaret weturpenfuedu d 

"rear fererar cara arate nm 1 8 N 

ait damm agaaa, | 

wd gravid ager mA non 

The continual worship of the Devi with the 
greatest devotion made them conscious of their 
clear intellect, destructive of all sorts of vanities 
and delusions, and the Manu's sons thought only 
of the Hallowed Feet of the Devi; their intellects 
were purified and they were greately wondered to 
see within their Self the whole Universe. 

maiya ai meach: 1 

at ga aaae ITT wa NO0 1 

gatini aig: 1 


1250 


Thus they practised their Tapasya full twelve 
years when Bhagavati, the Ruling Principle of this 
Universe resplendent with the brilliance of the 
thousand Suns, appeared before them. The princes 
with their intelligence thus purified saw Her, bowed 
downt and, with their lowly hearts, began to chant 
hymns to Her with greates devotion. 


Wy Hd: 

meat wae ut Hemet ud 0 

amanea armrayfrafed od 

“O sani! O Merciful! Thou art the Devi 
presiding over all. Thou art the Best. So Victory to 
Thee! Thou art known by the Vágbhava Mantra. 
Thou gettest pleased when the Vagbhava Mantra 
1s repeated. 

arttanfau af aetiesrafiferarfrfsr t 12 u 

wmmremnaaefsdfufr | ` 

Terma A mee AA 113 0 

Ruadhain a | 

wd ga mad magte: 14 u 

varagget et rere werd YD | 

O Devi! Thou art of the nature of Klim Kara 
(of the form of Klīm). Thou gettest pleased with 
the repetition of Klīm Mantra. O Thou, that 
gladdenest the Lord! Thou bestowest joy and 
pleasure in the heart of the King of Kama. O Maha 
Maya! When Thou art pleased, Thou givest that 
Unequalled Kingdom. O Thou that increasest the 
enjoyments! Thou art Visnu, Surya, Hara, Indra 
and the other Devas. When the high-souled princes 
praised Her thus, Bhagavati became pleased and 
spoke to them the following sweet words: 


sfitgogara 
WA TEA STERTETUET BAT: 15 U 
Premera: Beg ray smear À ASU | 
at ward wd arean, 16 1 
Wass Ware spere HA eere à 
“O High-souled Princes! You all have wor- 
shipped Me and practised, inceed, very hard 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


tapasyás and thus you have become sinless and 
your intellects and hearts have become thoroughly 
purged and thus purified. Now ask boons that you 
desires. I will grant them are long to you. 
WY Ad: 

afā Prhe ved dataset 17 u 

STHIT STOMA: enr APTA WÍTSI € 1 

wafiord adda a att fet: isu 

The Princes said: “O Devi! We want unrivalled 
Kingdoms, many sons of long longevity, continual 
enjoyment of pleasures, fame, energy, freedom in 
all actions, and as well the good and keen intelli- 
gence. These will be benificial to us. 


sfréearer 

Tarr a dat watt VARTA | 

BUTS À erae spere u 19 u 

vad: we wad rere WeWisnT: 1 

dae dear athe ums 4200 

adferd avratsttfāsmmu: d 

aA AANA: sRHUD qp 0421 U 

The Devi said: Whatever you have desired, I 
grant them to you all. Besides I give you another 
boon. Listen attentively. By My Grace you all will 
be the Lords of the Manvantaras and acquire 
strength that will experience no defeat, and you 
will get prosperity, fame, energy, powers, and a 
continual line of descent and abundant full enjoy- 
ments." 

SIT gara 


va deat arava umm spmaftsrr | 

STATE MUTT aA d: HEAT Tet 11 22 N 

A wager: waste aera à 

Wed ATARI ATA: |123 0 

Narayana said: After the World Mother 
Bhramari Devi granted them these boons, the 
princes chanted hymns to Her and then She in- 
stantly vanished. The very energetic princes ac- 
quired in that birth excellent kingdoms and abun- 
dance of wealth. 


Book X Chapter XIII 


1251 


att adfa d wqeure wa | 

digi dearer ds fa zt wea START i 24 u 

They all had sons and thus established their 
families, and became the Lords of Manvantara in 
their next births. 


Hart mata wrefefuqsmfT: 1 


gut gaada aga: uzsu 
seared Wet: wararewargy: | 
RAA emadi ga a 26 
aya wae mada: | 
gat ATA: ugue: |127 0 
Tavi! HEFCHTESTTHT IA TPE: 0 
aqdaizarattigiant ware fay: 128 
sata Sat ARTA: | 
Gant samada Wy: Wa: 129 0 
West nea spe seta: 1 
U84 fauprafiiaqdémgy: at u 30 n 
aya ha sat wrt: way: |d 
agiia wat mA m: 31 u 
SMTA: quur dur Cag PTT: 1 
Teena: we array wand: 132 0 


By the Grace of the Devi, the first of the princes 
Karusa became the Ninth Manu, the exceedingly 
powerful Daksa Sāvarņi; the second prince 
Prsadhra became the Tenth Manu, named Meru 
Savarni; the third prince, the highly enthusiastic 
Nabhaga became the Eleventh Manu, named Sürya 
Savarni; the fourth prince Dista became the Twelfth 
Manu, named Candra Savarni; the powerful fifth 
prince Saryati became the Thirteenth Manu named 
Rudra Sāvarņi and the sixth prince Tri$anku 
became the Fourteenth Manu named Visnu Sávarni 
and became the celebrated Lord of the world. 

ane saret 

met or art oct wet rent ferfear | 

wand ae wis fafast ARANKA 33 Ul 

a qfauftnreorfi ftreredteramgau i 

agi Raai yatea sraurdt we ou 34 Ni 

Narada questioned: O Wise One! Who is that 
Bhramari Devi? What is Her Nature? What for She 


takes birth? Kindly describe all this beautiful and 
pain destroying anecdotes to me. I am not satiated 
with the drinking of the nectar of the Glories of 
the Devi; my desire to hear further more is as strong 
as ever. As the drink of the nectar takes away death, 
so the drink of this anecdote of the Devi takes away 
the fear of death. 


starrer sare 

TT ARE att rgia, i 

aienea fares NATAR 35 i 

aasa feed clear | 

Neah eneurur YA Aaa wem u 36 u 

Narayana said: ^O, Narada! I will now narrate 
the wonderful glories of that unthinkable, 
unmanifested World-Mother, leading to Mukti. 
Hear, as a Mother behaves towards Her child kindly 
and without any hypocrisy, so the World-Mother 
in all Her lives manifests Her merciful sincere deal- 
ings for the welfare of the humanity. 

ye we magere EDU | 

Wet erdum sagt Wenn 037 1 

u AAAS war wet WU: d 

qader uw vara ofer 11 38 N 


In days gone by, in the nether regions, in the 
city of the Daityas, there lived a powerful Daitya 
named Aruna. He was a furious Deva Hater and a 
pakka hyprocrite. 

"Ter fenaa uel TEST i 

Teanga unt fe HERT u39u 

TRA: TETAS Ya: | 

aada wat MRAMA: 40 i 

With a view to conquer the Devas, he went to 
the banks fo the Ganges in the Himalayas, practised 
a very hard Tapasyā, to Brahma, taking Him to be 
the Protector of the Daityas. First influenced by 
Tamo Guna, he withheld in his body the five Vayus 
and partook only the dry leaves and repeated the 
Gayatri Mantra and practised austerities. 


1252 


Thus he practised for full ten thousand years. 
Then for another ten thousand years the Daitya 
lived drinking some drops of water only; then for 
another ten thosand years he remained by inhaling 
air only; and then for another ten thousand years 
he did not take any thing and thus practised he his 
wornderful Tapasya. 

wd wage Mg RST: | 

war fi wat agadan, 142 on 

SHE: THe Grea SITUÉ oT AT: 11 43 N 

Thus practising his Tapasya, a sort of wanderful 
halo of light emitted from his body and began to 
burn the whole world. This thing then appeared a 
great wonder. All the Devas then exclaimed. “Oh! 
What is this! Oh! What is this! And they trembled. 
All were very much terrified and took refuge of 
Brahma. 

Aami gaat: grat aa aga: | 

"efatedt GARETT mit Wat 444 N 


Hearing all the news from the Devas, the four- 
faced Bhagavan rode on His vehicle, the Swan, 
and with the Gayatri went very gladly to where 
the Daityas was practising his austerities and saw 
that the Daitya was immersed in meditation with 
his eyes closed; and he looked, as it were, blazing 
with fire, as if a second Fire himself. 

west curar diui fādtaftra ure i 

at are Rouen arate fmm u 46 u 


His belly had become dried up, body withered 
and the nerves of the bodies, too, became almost 
visible; only the life breath was lingering there. 
Brahma then spoke to him: "O Child! Auspices to 
you! Now ask the boon that you desire." Hearing 
these gladdening nectar-like words from the mouth 
of Brahma, Aruna, the chief of the Daityas opened 
his eyes and saw Brahma in his front. 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


safer: Tt evo write | 

miat dd ugdeaufaama 48 

Sra eroe een red At TET VATA | 

GTA TATA egeat at ffe: wed: u 49 i 

Seeing Brahma before him with a rosary of 
beads and Kamandalu in his hand and attended by 
Gayatri and the four Vedas, muttering the name of 
the Eternal Brahma, the Daitya rose up and bowed 
down to Him and sang to Him various Stotras. 

at wa wasnt wr sragerRerfa i 

STA SSUTATA TA TATA TAT IL 50 N 

TENT FIA RAFAT: | 

AAS AAT g BT ATA ART AAT w 51! 

Then the intelligent Daitya asked from Brahma 
the following boon that "I shall not die. Grants 
this.” Brahma then gently explained to him: “O 
Best of the Danavas! See that Brahma, Visnu, 
Mahešvara and others are not free from this 
limitation of death! What to speak then for others! 

at ates dt ft are u: VIAA wur i 

ATATIĒ g Geena war: Faery 52 N 

I cannot grant you a boon that is an impossibil- 
ity. Ask what is possible and just. The intelligent 
persons never show an eagerness to an impossibil- 
ity.” 

Sft serere: Brat YA: rarer WT | 

ATV IATA desit für afar: 53 n 

fiar AT AGUA SEIT TT | 

wae yaa da ae at wat usa 

sw fago afe Ba erret a 

Hearing the above words of Brahma, Aruna 
again said with devotion: “O Deva! If Thou art 
unwilling to grant me the above boon, then, O Lord! 
Grant me such a boon, as is practicable, that my 
death shall not be caused by any war, nor by any 
arms or weapons, nor by any man or any woman, 
by any biped or quadruped or any combinations of 
two and grant me such a boon, such a large army 
as I can conquer the Devas." 


Bit ea aer: Gear uat aitssidiq 55 I 


Book X Chapter XIII 


1253 


wer at ATTY Wars: vel Proh | 

AS TATA UTT, 56 II 

Hearing the words of the Daitya, Brahmā said 
“Let that be so” and went back instantly to His 
own abode. Then, puffed up with that boon, the 
Daitya Aruna called on all the other Daityas that 
lived in the nether regions. 

ŠTATA wernt wafüd: | 

BUTT ASAT: wed Senet ci West 57 u 

«i cw amgin, 1 
gaai Way Spear Cente aH: 1 58 Ul 

The Daityas, that were under his shelter, came 
and saluted him, as their king and, by his command, 
they sent messengers to the Heavens to fight with 
the Devas. Hearing from the messenger that the 
Daityas were willing to fight with the Devas, Indra 
trembled with fear and went instantly with the 
Devas to the abode of Brahma. 

aa: ure sera aero: Wert Wf d 

werfen FRA VIA VIAA 59 I 

Taking Brahma, too, along with them from 
there, they went to the Visnu Loka and took Visnu 
with them and all went to the Siva Loka. 

frat oft aa anf d GET | 

wali wa KĀTA: 160 0 

STRUM erst snm afe i 

qa-ganagrambreanryaa uem N 61 u 

There they all held a conference how to kill the 
Daitya, the enemy of the Gods. While, on the other 
hand, Aruna, the king of the Daityas surrounded 
by his army, went ere long to the Heavens. 

Fat Wa WUHT ATTUR Wd 

PRATT: Wd Sg: FOTE ! 62 N 

VG: vient qur: TAG: Vere yore | 

Werfeeremeramdtienasden: wn u63 N 

O Muni! The Daitya, then, through the power 
of his Tapas, assumed various forms and seized 
the rights and possessions of the Moon, the Sun 
Yama, Agni and all the others. 

Tea green Geant «ufu etf: à 

Eue ar ageret ARTS TĀ sm u 64 u 


yata sre Wart wer WW: | 

gta ITT: wd end Referer wr amt: 65 N 

All the Devas, then, dislodged from their stations 
went to the region of Kailāša and represented to 
Sankara about their own troubles and dangers 
respectively. Then, what was to be done on this 
subject, on this, great discussions cropped up. 
When Brahma said, that the death of the Daitya 
would not ensue from any fight, with any arms or 
weapons, from any man or woman, biped, 
quadruped or from any combination of the above 
two. 

waar wa anngevrūtutt 1 

aad yore ar a: care fererrearfer 11 66 u 

TTT genea at AAT | 

Kg aA u 67 u 

Then the Devas became all anxious and could 
not find out any solution at that instant, when the 
Incorporeal Voice was clearly heard in the 
Heavens: Let you all worship the Queen of the 
Universe. She will carry out your work to success. 

Spear eet eror aroft AAAATATGTGAT: i 

geet wag wei We gate 68! 

Te TS YU qp aratdagi wher 1 

TA KĀTA TAA ATT TAT HE |1 69 i 

If the king of the Daityas, always engaged in 
muttering the Gayatri, forsakes the Gayatri any 
how, then his death will occur. Hearing this 
gladdening Celestial Voice, the Devas held the 
council with great caution. When it was settled 
what ought to be done, Indra asked Brhaspati and 
said: 

arent: Uwe read EXITTHUTG: | 

Wear HT sat area d after 11 70 n 

“O Guru Deva! You would better go to the 
Daitya for carrying out of the Devas’ ends and do 
so that he forsakes the Devi Gayattri Paramešvarī. 
We will all now go and meditate on Her. When 
She will be pleased, She will help us. 

gemfavea qe wd gates, i 

PATA UTA STAT 171 n 


1254 


aa TT Aaa ep: we gA: 1 

mardi edie: 072 

Thus commanding Brhaspati and thinking that 
the beautiful Protectress of Jambü Nada would 
protect them the Devas all started to worship Her 
and, going there, began the Devi Yajña and with 
great devotion muttered the Maya Bija and 
practised asceticism. 

gua vid wemenpesfemdt 1 

amd yerai d wwesnrW Wenm 073 N 

WA gam: Herff A owe | 

"Té serere wegen a 1174 N 

On the other hand, Brhaspati went ere long in 
the garb of a Muni to the Daitya Aruna. The king 
of the Daityas then asked him: “O Best of Munis! 
Whence and why have you come here. Say, O 
Muni! Where have you come? I am not one of your 
party. Rather I am your enemy. 

gRr wer aa: spem TATU Aras: | 

SARE I IT Vat T TT Vets NS 75 A 

AT umdt a Mati ad ag | 

gf wer aa: spear Atte gemmam 11 7 6 N 

TR wt wana waar | 

matana edt Pretareant FTA € 0 77 N 

Hearing the above words, Brhaspati said: When 
you are worshipping incessantly the Devi whom 
we too worship, then say how you are not a one on 
our side! "O Saint! The vicious Daitya, hearing 
the above words and deluded by the Maya of the 
Devas, forsook the Gayatri Mantra out of vanity 
and therefore he became weak, bereft of the Holy 
Fire. 

qanat pea enema: | 

«at gaina wmenmum fub 78 N 

Wer g: we AT waa à 

Then Brhaspati, having succeeded in his work 
there, went to the Heavens and saw Indra and told 
him everything in detail. The Devas became 
satisfied and worshipped the Highest Deity. 

wd agit wre wafer AT u79u 

mga TT ATR U 1 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


aleqiudarn wife 80 ul 

Fragen det ferara aan à 

fahren Range 81 

O, Muni! Thus along interval passed, when one 
day the World Mother, the Auspicious Devi 
appeared before them She was resplended with the 
brilliance of ten million suns and looked beautiful 
like ten millions of Kandarpas (Gods of love). Her 
body was anointed with variegated colours, etc.; 
She wore a pair of clothings; a wonderful garland 
suspended from Her neck; Her body was decked 
with various ornaments and in the fists of Her hands 
there were wonderful rows of hornets (large black 
bees). 


APTA N 82 N 
mN Rea ri emaT: ATA 0 
waters danga 183 ! 
anata: ufqar alienate i 
adima  wddeuyifüWt 184 tl 


wafer udne adios 1 

"wear udaa wet wea Brat uss n 

Her one hand was ready to grant boons and Her 
other hand was ready to hold out “no fear." On the 
neck of Bhagavtai, the Ocean of Mercy, and 
peaceful, were seen the variegated garlands with 
large black bees all round. Those male and female 
bees singing incessantly all round Her the 
Hrinkara Mantra (the First Vibration of Force), 
kotis of black bees surrounded Her. The All- 
auspicious Bhagavati, praised by all the Vedas, 
Who is all in all, composed of all, Who is all good, 
the Mother of all, Ominiscient, the Proctectress of 
all, was adorned fully with dress.” 

Set at acetal aT wen 1 

gaina fama fram nsen 

Seeing suddenly the Devi, in their front Brahma 
and the other Devas became surprised and by and 
by they got relieved and gladly began to chant 
hymns of praise to Bhagavati, Whose Glories have 
been written in the Vedas. 


Book X Chapter XIII 


1255 


dar He: 

«it fa werfril yR à 

AA: HATA naie TATSKĻ A 11 87 u 

"wfasrederarurafen eue es AA: | 

THDCEHTquUAWHI ETUTĀ HA: 88 N 

The Devas said: *O Devi! Obeisance to Thee! 
Thou art the Highest Knowledge and the Creatrix, 
Preservrix and the Destructix of the Universe. O 
Thou, the Lotus-eyed! Thou art the Refuge of all! 
So we bow down to Thee. O Devi! Thou art col- 
lectively and individually Vi$va, Taijasa, Prajiia, 
Virāt and Sūtrātmā. O Bhagavatī. Thou art differ- 
entiated and undifferentiated; Thou art the 
Kütastha Caitanya (the Unmoveable, Unchange- 
able Consciousness). 

gt amatā gen 1 

fate suf ef anise d 89 u 

So we bow down to Thee. O Durge! Thou art 
unconcerned with the creation, preservation and 
destruction; yet Thou punishest the wicked and art 
easily available by the sincere devotion of Thy 
Bhaktas. 

am: satah nadd stratcat | 

saat Waa aA faena aut am: 190 1 

aa: dtatat fa anhagera 1 

"dt na nmi erate HY AA: 091 N 

O Devi! Thou scorchest and destroyest the 
ignorance and sin of the embodied souls. Hence 
Thou art named Bhargā. So we bow down to Thee. 
O Mother! Thou art Kalika, Nila Sarasvati, Ugra 
Tara. Mahogrgā; Thou assumest many other forms. 
So we always bow down to Thee. O Devi! Thou 
art Tripura Sundari, Bhaiaravi, Mātangī, Dhūmāvatī, 
Chinnamasta, Šākambharī and Rakta Dantikā. 

foam mAs after | 

AM: ITT ford und temata 92 u 


"93 t 


wwegssgufufr aaia fra 1 
wp fasra iA sme fees ua 


Obeisance to Thee! O Bhagavati! It is Thou that 
didst appear as Laksmi out of the milk ocean (Ksira 
Samudra). Thou hadst destroyed Vrtrasura, Canda, 
Munda, Dhümralocana, Rakta Bija, Sumbha, 
Nisumbha and the Exterminator of the Dànavas 
and thus, Thou didst do great favours to the Devas. 

Gerad gaat deed AAT AA: | 

gre werad spned wutsupw 1195 li 

Aad cad dyf at aa: 1 

and wig ara Hisp 96 It 

So, O Gracious Countenced! Thou art Vijaya 
and Ganga; O, Šārade! We bow down to Thee. O 
Devi! Thou art the earth, fire, Prana and other 
Vayus and other substances. O Merciful! Thou art 
of the form of this Universe; the Deva from, and 
the Moon, Sun and other Luminous forms and of 
the Knowledge Form. 

"Taf are dfā artavu arate | 

AM: Tare rad nadia d aut AA: 197 0 

fa Adfa arečrat reu RETA: | 

we pera at TA: Wea 98 N 

O Devi! Thou art Savitri; Thou art Gayatri, 
Thou art Sarasvati; Thou art Svadha, Svaha, and 
Daksiņā So we bow down to Thee. Thou art, in the 
Vedas, the Agamas, "Not this" "Not this" Thou 
art what is left after the negation of all this. This 
all the Vedas declare of Thy True Nature Thus as 
the Absolute Consciousness in all. Thus Thou art 
the Highest Deity So we worship Thee. 

antea erenrqumrt ur aa: gat i 

TÀ uel aM fred frena Aut am: 99 N 

AEK urgdūt: uà At quarte i 

an med aaa: wate aut AA: 0 100 W 

As Thou aft surrounded by large black bees, 
Thou art named Bhramari. We always make 
obeisance to Thee! Obeisance to Thee! Obeisance 
to Thy sides! Obeisance to Thy back! obeisance to 
Thy front! O Mother! Obeisance to Thy above! 
Obeisance to Thy below! 

qui He werafer wferfiarfirarfrtr 1 

amanan wf 101 11 


1256 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


wa fe snm efe wet | Brahma; in fact, everything what they had to say, 


we siyadi sa naaa 1 102 N 

Obeisance to everywhere round of Thee! O 
Thou, the Dweller in Maņī Dvīpa! O, Mahā Devī! 
Thou art the Guide of the innumerable 
Brahmāņdas! O world Mother! Let Thou be 
merciful to us. O Devī! Thou art higher than the 
highest. O World Mother! Victory be to Thee! All 
Hail! O Goddess of the universe! 

adm? | 

Wie uments wate mA 1103 1 

Thou art the Best in the whole universe; Victory 
to Thee! O Lady of the world! Thou art the mine 
of all the gems of qualities. O Parame$vari! O 
World Mother! Let Thou be pleased unto us.” 


ARTAOT Tareq 
ga aaa: AT UTP et A: | 
SATS STIS UT rerentfegesenfüuft t 104 n 
Narayana said: Hearing those sweet, ready and 
confident words of the Devas, the World Mother 
said in the sweet tone of a Mad Cuckoo: 


lagara 

Wrarsé Wat car aAirr: | 

gag fers: ad aga cattery 105 N 

Wdlarae YU: Fea Vag aT HIT | 

SEG uftd wget WU 106 1 

“O Devas! As far as granting boons to others is 
concerned, I am ever ready. I am always pleased 
with you. So, O Devas! Say what you want.” 
Hearing the words of the Devi, the Devas began to 
express the cause of their sorrows. 

andai dori ATs AAT | 

verrai gi GU er ene HRS: 0 107 N 

were agri wp saad wf 1 

Spear gagi Herma War 108 N 

They informed Her of the wicked nature of the 
vicious Daitya, the neglect of the Devas, the 
Bráhmanas and the Vedas and the runis thereof, 
and the dispossession of the Devas of their abodes 
and the receiving by the Daitya of the boon from 


duly and vigorously. 

TRIN Fears WD d 

VĀETATTETATATS ERI 109 lt 

Then the Bhagavatī Bhrāmarī Devī sent out all 
sorts of black bees, hornets, etc., from Her sides, 
front and forepart. 

SATA SEM Aai yaaa | 

nedigadet Hg frit: nion 

aeina tateen: frase t 

fafa daig xau fatter nits ut 

Innumerable lines of black bees then were 
generated and they joined themselves with those 
that got out of the Devi’s hands and thus they 
covered the whole earth. Thus countless bees began 
to emit from all sides like locusts. The sky was 
overcast with the bees; and the earth was covered 
with darkness. 

VAT Uu daana garana, | 

a aed daragi arammgqequet: 112 

at Wuei wgenfürer epp d 

umts wr Spem ATSTĀTS, N 113 N 

The sky, mountain peaks, trees, forests all 
became filled with bees and the spectacle presented 
a grant dismal sight. Then the black bees began to 
tear asunder the breasts of the Daityas as the bees 
bite those who destroy their beehives. 

TTS TU MAT Hai At UG | 

URI A À Raa ST ET WET 1:14: N 

ada a TAT wd uot WITS: d 

"WU VATA A Hea 0115 0 

Thus the Daityas could not use their weapons 
nor could they fight nor exchange any words. 
Nothing they could do; they had no help but to 
die. The Daityas remained in the same state where 
they were and in that state they wondered and died. 
No one could talk with another. 

amao d Wa ferret dem 1 

peace unm: are ediPreeunm: i116 

emeriaaarerdfrfe exer: Barat i 

fé fast spare wer mady u 117 u 


Book X Chapter XIII 


1257 


Thus the principal Daityas died within an instant. 
Thus completing their destruction, the bees came 
back to the Devi. All the people then spoke to one 
another “Oh! What a wonder!” “Oh! What a 
wonder!” Or like this: 

ad caro: Be currere TT: | 

frarar gderestit pu "118 0 

ATdtganfāfaā mt TUTATUTOTA: 

waged wga ATT: dtm qe u 

fafa gewat Agara: | 


Weder trate STETAT u 120 Uu 
“Whose Maya is this! What a wonder that She 


will do like this!” Thus Brahma, Visnu and Maheša 
became merged in the ocean of joy and worshipped 
the Devi Bhagavati with various offerings and 
shoutings of chants “Victory to the Devi" and 
showered flowers all around. The Munis began to 


recite the Vedas. The Gandharvas began to sing. 

KATRA ATS AA: TA: d 

dentarrres eurer esnTema 0 121 0 

maraa KAT AITAS er | 

wa matà ud agfat u122 

The various musical instruments. Mrdangas, 
Murajas, the Indian lutes, Dhakkàs, Damarus, 
Sankhas, bells, etc., all sounded and the three 
worlds were filled with their echoes. All with folded 
palms chanted various hymns of praise to the Devi 
and said “O Mother! Īsānī! Victory to Thee!" 

MARAE Hata aT VUJ | 

tatūrg fango afte wiser dēt a ary NN 123 N 

wada arrests WaT Aa: | 

fad adored datu 124 u 

The Maha Devi became glad and gave to each 
separate boons and when they asked “for 
unshakeable devotion to Thy lotus feet,” She 
granted them that also and disappeared before them. 
Thus, I have described to you the glorious charater 
of the Bhramari Devi. 


usai radi wa UATUMAN, | 

DREIPSPISEEE SES IE UUC CIE CE 1125 li 

edterereendiqet TSS TAS AMSA i 126 1 

"reed fret orres Agi At: 1 

adagang N 127 0 
att Magda ergo? aermebst 
TAEST: 11 13 01 
wrefe3: dasa ( 51111) vorhortaqea: gA: | 
sahara area SRA: 11 11 
TASS TTT: FHT: | 

If anybody hears this very wonderful anecdote, 
he crosses at once this ocean of the world. Along 
with the gloriess and greatness of the Devi, if one 
hears the accounts of Manus, then all auspicious- 
ness comes to him. He who hears or recites daily 
this Greatness of the Devi, becomes freed from all 
his sins and he gets himself absorbed in the 
thoughts of the Devi (Sājuya). 

Note: The Mantra is here not merely the Seed, the 
Spiritual Password, but it connotes, besides the idea of 
the password, the Adi First vibration and it exhibits the 
First Spiritual Form, endowed with the highest feelings 
of Faith, Wisdom, Bliss and Joy, displayed with the 
grandest colours, startling thrills, rapt enchanting signs, 
gestures, and postures, the shooting forth of all powers, 
the sources of Siddhis, that cannot be ordinarily 
conceived in the worldly concerns. Their faint echoes 
govern this mighty world. The Mantras are seated in 
the six cakras or plexuses or the six Laya centres in the 
spinal cord. Within these cakras, the transformations 
of the Tattvas take place. Some vanish. Some appear 
and so on. Remarks: In this chapter we find clearly the 
mention of the several names of the ten Da$a Maha 
Vidyas. 

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Tenth 
Book of the account of Bhramari Devi in the 
Mahāpurāņam Srimaddevibhagavatam 
of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa 
and here ends as well the Tenth Book. 


***k 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


-k= 


CHAPTER I 
On the Morning Duties 


ANG Sava 


WTA YAMA ARTA AAMT | 
sed wens eden aud ou 
yrguta: ut Wig: EPI EESEECIER | 
akraratremisa gA paT, 11 2 N 
Narada said: O Bhagavan! O Thou, the Eternal 
One! O Narayana! O Lord of the past and the 
future! Thou art the Creator and the Lord of all the 
beings that lived in the past and that will come 
into existance in the future. Thou hast described to 
me the highly wonderful and excellent anecdote 
of the Exalted Devi. How She did assume the forms 
of Mahakali, Maha Laksmi, Maha Sarasvati and 
Bhramari, for the fulfilment of the Devas’ purposes 
and how the Devas got back their possessions by 
the Grace of the Devi. All you have described. 
agn sirgfirearfir aa fofr dat i 
vewreerufuqerfa wart ag WAT oua 


O Lord! Now I want to hear the rules of Sadācāra 
(right way of living), the due observation of which 
by the devotees pleases the World-Mother. Kindly 
describe them. 


sftarrant sare 
TT ANE ATA waranfateenay d 
weqerar edt infr da oua 
uane dei alga fet fet ad 
aa uer Agan us u 


Narayana said: O Knower of Truth! Now I am 
telling you those rules of the right way of living, 
which rightly observed, always please Bhagavti. 
Listen first, I will talk of the Brahmins, how their 
welfare is secured, what the Brahmanas ought to 
do on getting up early in the morning from their 
bed. 

segnqud urnas uwenüdquasd i 

Pentti: arteries: 6 u 

amaaa agre frat ret st fefe | 

A Yvert a aifaehiftasta dune 07 u 

From the sunrise to the sunset the Bráhmanas 
should do all daily and occasional duties (Nitya 
and Naimittik Karmas) and they are to perform the 
optional works for some particular object such as 
Puttresti Yajfia and other good works (not acts of 
black magic as killing, causing pain and inconve- 
niences to others, etc. It is the Self alone and not 
the Father, Mother, etc., nor any other body that 
helps us on our way to that happiness in the next 
world. Father, Mother, wife, sons and others are 
helps merely to our happiness in this world. None 
of them are helpful to us in bettering our states in 
the next world. 

amet were fee fg wen 1 

atta enun AMATA gum usu 

aan: WeTHE ed: peg en: TATA TA V d 

Teeter fere varrererat far: t9. u 


1262 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Deliverance of one’s Self depends verily on his | ara fgfeer: Gren: mre eira ram | 
surah yendodt st erst grerfiresat t 16 u 


own Self. Therefore one should always earn and 
store dharma (religion) and observe always there 
the right conduct to help one in the next world. If 
Dharma be on our side, this endless sea of troubles 
can be safely crossed. The rules of right living as 
ordained by the Manu in Srutis and Manu Smrtis 
are the principal Dharmas. The Bráhmanas should 
always be observent to their Dharma as ordained 
in the Šāstras, Sruti and Smrti. 

MARTA ATA AT WS: | 

ATATTGANA TATA! AT UTAH 110 1 

BTA: UTA erf qur HC ATUTAT TEA: | 

Be Bh GST ren ue HA TSN 11 i 

Follow the right conduct and then you will get 
life, posterity and increase of happiness easily 
destroyed; the right conduct is the auspicious 
principal Dharma of men. Persons of right living 
enjoy happiness in this world as well as in the next. 

aaie g wedi | 

aiad werdtut ufeennigavi: 12 It 

ITT ASTANA CHAT d 

niai Tad Aa amat AAT: PTTL 13 N 

Those, who are veiled in darkness by Ignorance 
and thus wildly enchanted, can verily see their way 
to Mukti if they follow the Great Light revealed to 
them by Dharma and the right conduct. It is by 
Sadācāra, that superiority is attained. Men of right 
conduct always do good deeds. From good deeds, 
knowledge comes. This is the advice of Manu. 

ududafkBisTaram: unb au: 1 

ada wen da wd ara 14 u 

TRATEMfādisa add fs d 

w pagka wem vp a: N 15 i 

Right way of living is the best of all the Dharmas 
and is a great Tapasyā (asceticism). The knowledge 
comes from this Right Living. Everything is 
attained thereby. He who is devoid of Sadacara, is 
like a Südra, even if he comes of a Brahmin family. 
There is no distinction whatsoever between him 
and a Südra. Right conduct is of two kinds: 


AT foerat qurerat: Tam: | 

urine gf wea aiesudspbu]70 

(1) as dictated by the Sastras, (2) as dictated by 
the popular custom, Laukika). Both these methods 
should be observed by him who wants welfare for 
his Self. He is not to forsake one of them. O Muni! 
The village Dharma, the Dharma of one's own 
caste, the Dharma of one's own family, and the 
Dharma of one's own country all should be 
observed by men. 

wen fg west era wee figs: 1 

gaunt a aad ener area ua A i018 i 

ukata eit wurat tafsri i 

merged afafa aw 19 u 

Never, Never he is to do anything otherwise. 
With great loving devotion that is to be preserved. 
Men who practise wrong ways of living, are 
censured by the public; they always suffer from 
diseases. Avoid wealth and desires that have no 
Dharma in them. Why? If in the name of Dharma, 
painful acts (c.g. killing animals in sacrifices) are 
to be committed, those are blamed by the people; 
so never commit them. Avoid them by all means. 

Ata Jaret 

agafa VAI PATA: verreonet p | 

fraai agaft Amiao n 20 1 

Narada said: *O Muni! The Šāstras are not one, 
they are many and they lay down different rules 
and contradictory opinions, How then Dharma is 
to be followed? And according to what Dharma 
Sastra? 

sfanrant Zara 

speret sā AA quot gau BT 

qadm War TG ATA eprferq 21 Ut 

Narayana said: Sruti and Smrti are the two eyes 
of God; the Puránam is His Heart. Whatever is 
stated in the Sruti, the Smrti and the Purāņams is 


Book XI Chapter I 


1263 


Dharma; whatever else is written in other Sastras 
is not Dharma. Where you will find differences 
between Sruti, Smrti and Puranas, accept the words 
of the Sruits as final proofs. Wherever Smrti 
disagrees with the Puranas, know the Smrtis more 
authoritative. 

Raed aa qp aera ep Wee | 

spear wart eag WIRT 0 22 Ui 

afd waea wr untae wd 1 

Valku g TA ufa: Hera gera 023 N 

yig afaa WWE WENN | 

aft adie d ad ygtara dau 424 1 

And where differences will crop up in the Srutis 
themselves, know that Dharma, too, is of two kinds. 
And where the differences will crop up in the 
Smrtis themselves, consider, then, that different 
things are aimed at. In some Puranas, the Dharma 
of the Tantras is duly described; but of these, which 
go against the Vedas, they are not to be accepted 
by any means. 

eaten: Aii qunm A aera: | 

pease aaa wea wp n251 

weder da vae etamin: 

darāt ate Poreremmut A TAN 1126 1 

Tantra is accepted as the authoritative proof then 
and then only when it contradicts not the Vedas. 
Whatever goes clearly against the Vedas can in no 
way be accepted as a proof. In matters concerning 
Dharma, the Vedas is the Sole Proof, Therefore 
that which is not against the Vedas can be taken as 
proof; otherwise not. 

at daugiau wdds-muHmm | 

pueris wer Prana orm erf f& 27 u 

wumerduaeri dare cnin | 

aA: TOOTS dab aT Umen uw u28 N 

Tea WATT LAAT AAT vp TAA | 

Whoever acts Dharma according to other proofs 
than what is ordained in the Vedas, gocs to the 
hell in the abode of Yama to get his lesson. So the 
Dharma that is by all means to be accepted as such, 


is what is stated in the Vedas. The Smrtis, the 
Puranas, or the Tantra Šāstras can be taken also as 
authoritative when they are not conflicting to 
Vedas. Any other Šāstras can be taken as 
authoritative when it is fundamentelly coincident 
with the Vedas. Else it can never be accepted. 

a prea adadte ATTAT 29 N 

adya eia mania, | 

aman: mya À erR: 11 30 lt 

qunxifenar 3 Aaa: | 

A ud fire aif emia: "31H 

Those who do injury to others even by the blade 
of a Kuša grass used as a weapon, go to hell with 
their heads downwards and their fcet upwards. 
Those that follow their own sweet free will, that 
Bauddhas), those 
that follow the philosophical doctrines called 


take up any sort of dress (c.g. 


Pasupatas, and the other hermits and saints and 
persons that take up other vows contrary to the 
religions of the Vedas, for example, the Vaikhanasa 
followers, those who brand their bodies by the hot 
Mudras, at the places of pilgrimages, e.g. Dvaraka, 
etc., they go to hell with their bodis scorched by 
red hot brands (Tapta Mudras). 

darme U emule: HAT | 

SATAN Sel fd; Oras Het gu 32 N 

ad ar arf arfü erar a sufren à 

sug wdu ung Wwüesfü 1033 

So persons should act according to the excellent 
religions commanded by the Vedas. Everyday he 
should get up from his bed early in the morning 
and think thus: “What good acts have I done, what 
have I given as charities? Or what I advised others 
to do charities what greater sins (Mahapatakas) and 
what smaller sins have I committed?" 

aara tata Tees AAT | 

SRA: Wed HI ATT 0 34 ul 

wur RAGI Tanase wit i 

frfrfsarer: alt «deae AAT M 35 il 


At the last quarter of the night he should think 


1264 


of Para Brahma. He should place his right leg on 
his left thigh and his left on his right thigh crosswise 
keeping his head straight up and touching the breast 
with his chin, and closing his eyes, he should sit 
steadily so that the upper teeth should not touch 
the lower jaw. 

aE ae: GAN: | 

wirft aerated: 036 0 

fai Beet aft moraran, | 

aA tēta: fert aise wea dian: 037 u 

He should join his tongue with his palate and 
he should sit quiet, restraining as his senses. He 
should be Suddha Sattva. His seat should not be 
very low. First of all he should practise Pranayama 
twice or thrice; and within his heart he should 
meditate the Self of the shape of the Holy Flame 
or the Holy Light. (Om Mani Padmi Hum.) 

LTA Ut LOTI ÀE: 1 

RAJ fagara arvana: 38 N 

PORN WTA eT Tela: | 

VITA ant: ITOTATA gdifta: 139 n 

He should fix his heart for a certain time to that 
Luminous Self whose Eyes are everywhere. So the 
intelligent man should practise Dhāraņā. 
Pranayama is of six kinds: (1) Sadhüma (when the 
breaths are not steady), (2) Nirdhüma (better than 
the Sadhüma), (3) Sagarbha (when united with 
one's mantra), (4) Agarbha (when the practise is 
without the thought of any mantra), (5) Salaksya 
(when the heart is fixed on one's Deity) and (6) 
Alaksya (when the heart is not fixed on one's De- 
ity). No yoga can be compared with Pranayama. 
This is equal to itself. Nothing can be its equal. 

greg zh went Tage: | 

autaarerat BA Taya: 0140 tt 

Vua yoa: divo: WTA TU: | 

gem organi urfuegrer feno 41 u 

vri: Weyer d fave i 

wa WR: ATUTTATATA: RA WS 0 42 ud 

This Prāņāyāna is of three kinds, called Recaka, 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Püraka and Kumbhaka. The Pranayama consists 
of three letters, A, U, M, ie., of the nature of “Om”. 
Or, in other words the letter A, of the Pranava Om 
indicates Pūraka, the letter “U” denotes Kumbhaka 
and the letter “M” denotes Recaka. By the Ida Nadi 
(by the left nostril) inhale as long as you count 
“A” (Visnu) thirty-two times; then without breath, 
i.e., do Kumbhaka as long as you count “U” (Siva) 
sixtyfour times and by the Pingala Nadi (the right 
nostril) do the Recaka, i.e., exhale the breath as 
long as you count ^M" (Brahma) for sixteen times. 
O Muni! Thus I have spoken to you of the Sadhüma 
Pranayama. 

amm ferreae qst AHS THATS 

BUA wreym ananaga wT | 

Sart AV SMAGU ft noaa IATTTI 

daiane ARC ATS TMA lt 43 N 

tem mmy d i 
wfrafirafergr wardquensut i 


uga afa feret Cader en: 044 Ut 
Rafa: dannata wferfzrer Rda: | 
ate nalaat qur: fa: wd aA 145 N 
are edt a arsa aAa «t ARN | 
RAGI S ATT aAa u 46 N 
THAT ATA Waray RAAS ATTAT, | 
RATATAT ASMA WUE | 47 N 
After doing the Pranayama as stated above, 
pierce the Six Cakras (i.e., plexuses) (called 
Satcakra bheda) and carry the Kula Kundalini to 
the Brahma Randhra, the brain aperture, or to the 
thousand petalled lotus in the head and meditate in 
the heart the Self like a Steady Flame. (The Nadis 
are not those which are known to the Vaidya or 
the Medical Šāstras. The latter are the gross 
physical nerves. The Nādis here are the Yoga 
Nādis, the subtle channels (Vivaras) along which 
the Pranik currents flow. Now the process of 
piercing the six Cakras (or nerve centres or centres 
of moving Pranik forces) is being described. Within 


Book XI Chapter I 


this body, the six nerve centres called Padmas 
(Lotuses) exist. They are respectively situated at 
the (1) Müladhàra (half way between Anus and 
Linga Mūla), called the Sacral Plexus; (2) Linga 
Mila (the root of the genital organs),; called 
postatic plexus; (this is also called Svādhisthāna) 
(3) Navel, the Solar Plexus (4) Heart, the cardiac 
Plexus, (5) Throat (6) Forehead, between the eye 
brows there-the lotus in the forehead, called the 
cavernous plexus (Ajtià Cakra) has two petals; in 
these two petals, the two letters “Ham” "Ksam" 
exist in the right hand direction (with the hands of 
the watch; going round from left of right keeping 
the right towards one circumambulated as a mark 
of respect). I bow down to these which are the two- 
lettered Brahma. The lotus that exists in the throat 
laryngeal or pharyngeal plexus has sixteen petals 
(visuddha cakra); in these are in due order in right 
hand direction the sixteen letters (vowels) a, à, i, 1, 
u, ü, ri, r, lr, Iri, e, ai, o, au, am, ah; I bow down to 
these which are the sixteen lettered Brahma. The 
lotus that exists in the heart, the cardiac plexus 
(anāhata cakra), has twelve petals; wherein are the 
twelve letters k, kh, g, gh, n, c, ch, j, jh, ñ, t, th; I 
bow to these twelve lettered Brahma. The Solar 
plexus forms the Great Junction of the Right and 
Left sympathetic chains Ida and Pingala with the 
Cerebro spinal Axis. The lotus that exists in the 
navel, called the Solar Plexus, or Epigastric plexus 
(Manipura Cakra) has ten petals wherein are the 
ten letters d, dh, n, t, th, d, dh, n, p, ph, counting in 
the right hand direction (that is clockwise) (and 
the action of this clock's vertical in the plane of 
the spinal cord; also it may be horizontal). The lotus 
that exists at the root the genital organ, the genital 
plexus or postatic plexus has six petals. The petals 
are the configurations made by the position of 
Nādis at any particular centre. Svadhisthana cakra 
or Svayambhu Linga, wherein are sitauted the six 
letters, b, bh, m, y, r, l; I bow down to this six- 


80 


1265 


lettered Brahma. (These are the Laya Centres). The 
lotus that exists in the Mūlādhāra, called the sacral 
or sacrococcygeal plexus has four petals, wherein 
are the four letters v, $, s, s. I bow down to these 
four-lettered Brahma. In the above six nerve centres 
or Laya Centres, or lotuses, all the letters are 
situated in the right hand direction (clockwise). 
Note: Allthe nerves of the body combine themselves 
in these six nerve centres or Laya Centres. Each of these 
centres is spheroidal and is of the Fourth Dimension. 
At each centre many transitions take place, many visions 
take place, many forces are perceived and wonderful 
varieties of knowledge are experienced. These are called 
the Laya Centres. For many things vanish into non- 
existance and many new Tattvas are experienced.) 
Thus meditating on the Six Cakras or plexuses, 
meditate on the Kula Kundalini, the Serpent Fire. 
She resides on the four petalled lotus (Centre of 
Sakti) called Mūlādhāra Cakra (Coccygeal plexus); 
She is of Rajo Guna; She is of a blood red colour, 
and She is expressed by the mantra “Hrim,” which 
is the Mayabija; she is subtle as the thread of the 
fibrous stock of the water lily. The Sun of Her face; 
Fire is Her breasts; he attains Jivan mukti (libera- 
tion while living) within whose heart such a Kula 
Kundalini arises an awakens even once. Thus medi- 
tating on Kula Kundalini, one should pray to Her: 
Her sitting, coming, going, remaining, the thought 
on Her, the realisation of Her and chanting hymns 
to Her, etc., all are Mine, Who is of the nature of 
all in all; I am that Bhagavati; O Bhagavati! All 
my acts are Thy worship; I am the Devi; I am 
Brahma, I am free from sorrow. I am of the nature 
of Everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss. 
Thus one should meditate of one's ownself. 
aA freenu caret edi | 
sue werd o wenfafür 48 u 
Itake refuge of that kula Kundalini, who appears 
like lightning and who holds the current thereof, 
when going to Brahmarandhra, in the brain, who 
appears like nectar when coming back from the 


1266 


brain to the Muladhara and who travels in the 
Susumna Nadi in the spinal cord. 

KTS HAN aera frame i 

Jeder Yelaupfedat wear: d 

Teta wi wu dup sfp aa: 49 n 

gr SATA AIIN veras 
arf APT HAPS ETA: 01 11 

Then one is to meditate on one's own Guru, who 

is thought of as one with God, as seated in one's 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


brain and then worship Him mentally. Then the 
Sadhaka, controlling himself is to recite the 
following Mantra “The Guru is Brahma, the Guru 
is Visnu, it is the Guru again that is the Deva 
Mahešvara; it is Guru that is Para Brahma. I bow 
down to that Sri Guru. 

Here ends the First Chapter of the Eleventh Book on 
what is to be thought of in the morning in the Maha 
Purāņam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1266 


brain to the Muladhara and who travels in the 
Susumna Nadi in the spinal cord. 

KTS HAN aera frame i 

Jeder Yelaupfedat wear: d 

Teta wi wu dup sfp aa: 49 n 

gr SATA AIIN veras 
arf APT HAPS ETA: 01 11 

Then one is to meditate on one's own Guru, who 

is thought of as one with God, as seated in one's 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


brain and then worship Him mentally. Then the 
Sadhaka, controlling himself is to recite the 
following Mantra “The Guru is Brahma, the Guru 
is Visnu, it is the Guru again that is the Deva 
Mahešvara; it is Guru that is Para Brahma. I bow 
down to that Sri Guru. 

Here ends the First Chapter of the Eleventh Book on 
what is to be thought of in the morning in the Maha 
Purāņam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


CHAPTER II 
On Cleaning the Body 


siantar gara 


STARI A gate dar aaeei: we wep: i 
Baia Wyo eile Aes vrg-drga ATTA: (11 
wal get aaa werd wur a 
Tatras qo denami co qun 02 LI 
Narayana said: Even if a man studies the Vedas 
with six Angas (limbs of the Vedas), he cannot be 
pure if he be devoid of the principle of right living 
(Sadācāra) and if he does not practise it. All that is 
in vain. As soon as the two wings of the young 
ones of birds appear, they leave their nests, so the 
chandas (the Vedas) leave such a man devoid of 
Sadācāra at the time of his death. The intelligent 
man should get up from his bed at the Brahma 
muhūrta and should observe all the principles of 
Sadācāra. In the last quarter of night, he should 
practise in reciting and studying the Vedas. 
fafa ad: gpatfegsqerq on. i 
art wedunfer geet wart 3 N 
vied da mad g fac 1 
Aaaama watt ama ane 4 i 
Then for some time he should meditate on his 
Ista Deva (his Presiding Deity). The Yogi should 
meditate on Brahma according to the method stated 
before. O Narada! If meditation be done as above, 
the identity of Jiva and Brahma is at once realised 
and the man becomes liberated while living. 


vada wae: CGquTduTeUÜu: d 

asia wera: sre: Gates: Ba: 5 i 

marea a: pataa fear: 1 

Reagania Ya: eN 

After the fifty-fifth Danda (from the preceding 
sunrise £.c., 2 hours before the sunrise comes the 
Usākāla; after the fifty seventh danda comes the 
Aruņodayakāla; after fifty eighth Danda comes the 
morning time; then the Sun rises. One should get 
up from one's bed in the morning time. He should 
go then to a distance where an arrow shot at one 
stretch goes. There in the south-west corner he is 
to void his urines and faeces. 

ferar für a potest TSI were feat: à 

Adai ysa: paeme: 07 nu 

"wer aadi q ea: hodam, 1 

Am g h patate wemmenft u 8 u 

Then the man, if he be a Brahmacari, should 
place his holy thread on his right ear and the 
householder should suspend it on his neck only. 
That is, the Brahmacari, in the first stage of his 
life should place the holy thread over his right ear; 
the householder and the Vanaprasthis should 
suspend the holy thread from the neck towards the 
back and then void their faeces, etc. 

amaia girdfü fre: wrest THE | 

art Fram act Saaga: uu 


Book XI Chapter I 


1267 


a lene awe a fara udd i 

siltam gala aediq a wee 10 0 

aa aay wag a Tee Ute fera: à 

deride dist dared ndi 

He is to tie a piece of cloth round his head; and 
spread earth or leaves on the place where he will 
evacuate himslef. He is not to talk then nor spit 
nor inhale hard. One is not to evacuate oneself in 
cultivated lands, that have been tilled, in water, 
over the burning pyre, on the mountain, in the 
broken and runied temples, on the ant-hills, on 
places covered with grass, on road side, or on holes 
where living beings exists. 

Rasi cw eat u gut yagi: | 

see Bat arft wem à years u12 u 

m at serus fus HT wur i 

Wer cus: wa foyer: 013 N 

One ought the to do the same while walking. 
One ought to keep silence during both the twilights, 
while one is passing urine or voiding one's faeces, 
or while one is holding sexual intercourse, or before 
the presence of one's Guru, during the time of 
sacrifice, or while making gifts, or while doing 
Brahma Yajfia. One ought to pray before 
evacuating, thus: “O Devas! O Rsis! O Pišācas! O 
Uragas! O Raksasas! 

Bat esq wis afasifir are i 

fa dures ward gates Bares 11 1 4 u 

ararit faym: UARA TTT: | 

a mated Held feos feast 1 15 U 

You all who might be existing here unseen by 
me, are requested to leave this place. I am going to 
ease myself here duly.” Never one is to void oneself 
while one looks at Vayu (wind), Agni (fire), a 
Brahmana, the Sun, water or cow. 

saei far Gala selena: i 

aa areata feri erguvtqunfafer: u 16 u 

Wafer sara a magna 1 

Ua we Weta g eden we fu 17 


At the day time one is to turn one’s face 


northward and at the night time southward, while 
easing oneself and then one is to cover the faeces, 
etc., with stones, pebbles, leaves or grass, etc. Then 
he is to hold his genital organ with his hand and go 
to a river or any other watery place; he is to fill his 
vessel with water then and go to some other place. 

TT gerent FT AAT: | 

vent rat ver HOt Vey AAT AT: 11 18 u 

STETIT T TA set Va Drea farsi: | 

aiina eeN 19 Ul 

gaara Peres 4 men: ear WaT | 

wary faut vira Ags faut wp 20 u 

The Brahmana is to use the white earth, the 
Ksattriya is to take the red earth, the Vai$ya is to 
use the yellow earth and the Südra is to apply the 
black earth and with that he is to cleanse himself. 
The earth under water, the earth of any temple, the 
earth of an anthill, the earth of a mouse hole, and 
the remmant of the earth used by another body for 
washing are not to be used for cleansing 
purpose.The earth for cleansing faeces is twice as 
much as that used in case of urine clearance; in the 
cleansing after sexual intercourse thrice as much. 

wart fort at fra sereitaga MA | 

īrei erred vire eafaqut BATT 21 u 

aAA forest qp IAEA | 

Paras Haya: RTR: 022 u 

In urine cleansing the earth is to applied in the 
organ of generation once, thrice in the hand. And 
in dirt clearing, twice in the organ of generation 
five times in anus, ten times in the left and seven 
times in both the hands. 

amai Ue Uses u | 

yak a agak ufwent Guge: 123 u 

wa viret avere faut agre: | 

Propi AT adrat a Agra u 24 u 

Then apply earth four times first in the left feet 
and then on the right feet. The house holder 
should clear thus; the Brahmacari 1s to do twice 
and the Yatis four times. 


1268 Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 
amies q fra virant i arrestee wi: 1320 
Jede q War MeN amit epa eere 25 u seat viret IATE ATT IRR | 
varar engega «ast fr athe i wf qataigergrevia g 133 0 
BITE veel g unie wende 26 1 agit AGA ret AART | 


taret yrant i 

"TOT WIAA: VETE TM GAARA 0 27 N 

At every time the quantity of wet earth that is to 
be taken is to be of the size of an Amalaki fruit. 
never it is to be less than that. This is for the 
clearance in the day time. Half of these can be used 
in the night time. For the invalids, one-fourth the 
above measurements; for the passers-by, one- 
eighth the above dimensions are to be observed. 
In case of women, Šūdras, and incapable children, 
clearings are to be done till then when the offensive 
smell vanishes. 

dadua drarraegtei faeftad 1 

adma ATTIE wary: 28 tl 

amga vid qp Hats ema F | 

"TR amt anne g afümm 11 29 1 

No numbers are to be observed. Bhagvan Manu 
says—for all the Varnas the clearing 1s to be done 
till then when the offensive smell vanishes. The 
clearing is to be performed by the left hand. The 
right hand is never to be used. Below the navel, 
the left hand is to be used; and above the navel the 
right hand is to be used for clearing. 

virerenzifor ferait erem faa: 1 

wer a eii er: u30 u 

yaaa wea ward www | 

AETA SPETA GATEŠTIMTATT: |1 31 N 

OTST RATA: ITT ATT ERT PEAT | 

The wise man should never hold his water pot 
while evacuating himself. If by mistake he catches 
hold of his waterpot, he will have to perform the 
penance (prayascitta). If, out of vanity or sloth, 
clearing be not done, for three nights, one is to 
fast, drinking water only, and then to repeat the 
Gayatri Mantra and thus be purified. 


In every matter, in view of the place, time and 
materials, one’s ability and power are to be 
considered and steps are to be taken accordingly. 
Knowing all this, one should clear oneself 
according to rule. Never be lazy here. After 
evacuating oneself of faeces, one is to rinse one’s 
mouth twelve times; and after passing urine and 
clearing, one is to rinse four times. Never less than 
that is to be done. 

RITE AT: FT VASA ATT: TA: N34 N 

BITE p Aa: paiana ARTA, | 

denai greymqewaum 35 

The water after rinsing is to be thrown away 
slowly downwards on one's left. Next performing 
Acamana one is to wash one's teeth. He is to take 
a tiny piece, twelve Angulas (fingers) long (about 
one foot) from a tree which is thorny and gummy. 

abana Yate papery | 

BANGER Ya: Hara TTT 136 N 

attr grāfa urenr dana | 

TAM Vea HII WaT d 

Ba ya Yared Aaa U SHE U 0 37 N 

The cleansing twig (for teeth) is thick like one’s 
little finger. He is to chew the one end of it to form 
a tooth brush. Karafija, Udumbara (fig tree), 
Mango, Kadamba, Lodha, Campaka and Badari 
trees are used for cleansing teeth. While cleansing 
teeth, one is to recite the following mantra: "O 
Tree! Wherein resides the Deity Moon for giving 
food to the beings and for killing the enemies! Let 
Him wash my mouth to increase rhy fame and 
honour! 

sarga ui are: yam: ayy afr 1 

senate tat a eub Ve un 038 

ard danse ufufgfadw wo 

sm gresnigšfāgtamgmumaaa« 1039 

vef a: Hed WH GAITA SIT I 


Book XI Chapter LIT 


alae niaaa verge? Aa RE t 40 u 
uhai maas 1 
O Tree! Dost Thou please give me long life, 
power, fame, energy, beauty, sons, cattle, wealth, 
intellect, and the knowledge of Brahma.” If the 
cleansing twig be not available and if there be any 
prohibition to brush one’s teeth that day (say 
Pratipada day, Amāvasa, Sasthi and Navami), take 
mouthfuls of water, gargle twelve times and thus 
cleanse the teeth. 
Sat SSCA HT N47 u 
Pease uragiret ema ae far fustafafauen 
iat Rs ren ert i 
asrni raag gi Hulgnt afri- 
"reri ares KET aA AR: Prefs n42 u 
efr SRRA AITA PIRRE 
fdtatseara: 11 2 11 


1269 


If one brushes one’s teeth with a twig on the 
new moon day, the first, sixth, ninth and eleventh 
day after the Full or New Moon or on Sunday, one 
eats the Sun (as it were, by making Him lose his 
fire), makes his family line extinct and brings his 
seven generations down into the hell. Next he 
should wash his feet and sip pure clean water thrice, 
touch his lips twice with his thumb, and then clear 
the nostrils by his thumb and fore finger. Then he 
to touch his eyes and ears with his thumb and ring 
finger, touch his navel with his thumb and little 
finger, touch his breast with his palm and touch 
his head with all his fingers. 

Here ends the Second Chapter of the Eleventh Book 
on cleansing the several parts of the body in the 
Mahapuranam Srimaddevi bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


CHAPATER III 
On the Glories of the Rudraksa Beads 


starr sare 
"spa vere aram diui Afh qu 1 


"great dearest Praehenteaat aa i 

TATA East aE Teel a eget uod 

ad Ada ta dies ams | 

ukami remm già sravi zeta, Uu 2 ou 

Šrī Nārāyaņa said: O Nārada! There are the six 
kinds of Acamana: (1) Suddha, (2) Smārta, (3) 
Pauranik, (4) Vaidik, (5) Tantrik and (6) Srauta. 
The act of cleaning after evacuating oneself of urine 
and faeces is known as Suddha Sauca. After 
cleaning, the Acamana, that is performed according 
to rules, is named as Smārta and Pauranik. In places 
where the Brahma Yajfia is performed, the Vaidik 
and Srauta Acamanas are done. And where acts 
e.g. the knowledge of warfare are being executed, 


the Tantrik Acamana is done. Then he is to 
remember the Gayatri Mantra with Pranava (om) 
and fasten the lock of hair on the crown of his head, 
thus controlling all the hindrances (Vighna 
Bandhanam). Sipping again, he is to touch his heart, 
two arms, and his two shoulders. As sneezing, 
spitting, touching the lower lip with teeth, 
accidentally telling a lie, and taking with a very 
sinful man, he is to touch his right ear (Where the 
several Devas reside). 

ARN data are: quiso | 

ad ane aya wf fasta af uu 


amiant dēt ege wed | 

AAS Sd THATS ure fefta u 5 u 

On the right ear of the Brahmanas reside Fire, 
Water, the Vedas, the Moon, the Sun, and the Vayu 
(wind). Then one is to go to a river or any other 
reservoir of water, and there to perform one's 
morning ablutions and to cleanse his body 


Book XI Chapter LIT 


alae niaaa verge? Aa RE t 40 u 
uhai maas 1 
O Tree! Dost Thou please give me long life, 
power, fame, energy, beauty, sons, cattle, wealth, 
intellect, and the knowledge of Brahma.” If the 
cleansing twig be not available and if there be any 
prohibition to brush one’s teeth that day (say 
Pratipada day, Amāvasa, Sasthi and Navami), take 
mouthfuls of water, gargle twelve times and thus 
cleanse the teeth. 
Sat SSCA HT N47 u 
Pease uragiret ema ae far fustafafauen 
iat Rs ren ert i 
asrni raag gi Hulgnt afri- 
"reri ares KET aA AR: Prefs n42 u 
efr SRRA AITA PIRRE 
fdtatseara: 11 2 11 


1269 


If one brushes one’s teeth with a twig on the 
new moon day, the first, sixth, ninth and eleventh 
day after the Full or New Moon or on Sunday, one 
eats the Sun (as it were, by making Him lose his 
fire), makes his family line extinct and brings his 
seven generations down into the hell. Next he 
should wash his feet and sip pure clean water thrice, 
touch his lips twice with his thumb, and then clear 
the nostrils by his thumb and fore finger. Then he 
to touch his eyes and ears with his thumb and ring 
finger, touch his navel with his thumb and little 
finger, touch his breast with his palm and touch 
his head with all his fingers. 

Here ends the Second Chapter of the Eleventh Book 
on cleansing the several parts of the body in the 
Mahapuranam Srimaddevi bhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


CHAPATER III 
On the Glories of the Rudraksa Beads 


starr sare 
"spa vere aram diui Afh qu 1 


"great dearest Praehenteaat aa i 

TATA East aE Teel a eget uod 

ad Ada ta dies ams | 

ukami remm già sravi zeta, Uu 2 ou 

Šrī Nārāyaņa said: O Nārada! There are the six 
kinds of Acamana: (1) Suddha, (2) Smārta, (3) 
Pauranik, (4) Vaidik, (5) Tantrik and (6) Srauta. 
The act of cleaning after evacuating oneself of urine 
and faeces is known as Suddha Sauca. After 
cleaning, the Acamana, that is performed according 
to rules, is named as Smārta and Pauranik. In places 
where the Brahma Yajfia is performed, the Vaidik 
and Srauta Acamanas are done. And where acts 
e.g. the knowledge of warfare are being executed, 


the Tantrik Acamana is done. Then he is to 
remember the Gayatri Mantra with Pranava (om) 
and fasten the lock of hair on the crown of his head, 
thus controlling all the hindrances (Vighna 
Bandhanam). Sipping again, he is to touch his heart, 
two arms, and his two shoulders. As sneezing, 
spitting, touching the lower lip with teeth, 
accidentally telling a lie, and taking with a very 
sinful man, he is to touch his right ear (Where the 
several Devas reside). 

ARN data are: quiso | 

ad ane aya wf fasta af uu 


amiant dēt ege wed | 

AAS Sd THATS ure fefta u 5 u 

On the right ear of the Brahmanas reside Fire, 
Water, the Vedas, the Moon, the Sun, and the Vayu 
(wind). Then one is to go to a river or any other 
reservoir of water, and there to perform one's 
morning ablutions and to cleanse his body 


1270 


thoroughly. For the body is always unclean and 
dirty and various dirts are being excreted out of 
the nine holes (doors) in the body. The morning 
bath removes all these impurities. 

STMT eT uTd WATE | 

vami wd Head wad nen 

arene fare: Gat safe PAT UA: à 

Therefore the morning bath is essentially 
necessary. The sins that arise from going to those 
who are not fit for such purposes, from accepting 
gifts from impure persons or from the practice of 
any other secret vices all are removed by the 
morning ablutions. 

wemgrasmeemd Penta fet fua 

aig wem deuda] | 

HU maneh Herda: usu 

RAMS: AA: SER HTCTHTE | 

Without this bath, no acts bear any fruit. 
Therefore every day, this morning bath is very 
necessary. Taking the Kuša grass in hand, one is 
to perform one’s bath and Sandhya. If for seven 
days, the morning ablutions are not taken, and if 
for three days, the Sandhyās are not performed, if 
for twelve days, the daily Homas be not performed, 
the Brahmanas become Südras. 

HOTA GAA AACA T: 11 9 NI 

mad q TT TTT fri: i 

MTK Ut ATT ge Pl Wer ou00 

mit red demgresftratreiaa i 

wrest g E CROCO LESDEPEE GET T 

The time for making the Homa in the morning 
as very little; therefore lest ablutions be done fully 
which would take a long time and hence the time 
for the Homa might elapse, the morning bath should 
be performed quickly. After the bath the Pranayama 
is to be done. Then the full effects of bath are 
attained. There is nothing holier in this world or in 
the next than reciting the Gayatri. It saves the singer 
who sings the Gayatri; hence it is called Gayatri. 

arg art wafgy: MTTGATAAATA, | 

mam: xfador: taut: Wet 12 It 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


During the time of Pranayama, one must control 
one’s Prana and Apāņa Vayus i.e., make them 
equal. The Brahmin, knowing the Vedas and 
devoted to his Dharma, must practise Pranayama 
three times with the repetition of Gayatri and 
Pranava and the three Vyārhitis (Om Bhu, Om 
Bhuvar, Om Svah). 

a Ah waist olf A Heres | 

mat ada aad aret 4 u fer: 113 N 

* weder wait Aiat VITA, 1 

While practising, the muttering of Gayatri is to 
be done three times. In Pranayama, the Vaidik 
mantra is to be repeated, never a Laukika Mantra 
is to be uttered. At the time of Pranayama, if any 
body’s mind be not fixed, even for a short while, 
like a mustard seed on the apex of a cow-born, he 
cannot save even one hundred and one persons in 
his father’s or in his mother’s line. 


UTT SURAT ETA: 14 ou 

smid quer Wefüfuqgan | 

Pranayama is called Sagarbha when performed 
with the repetition of some mantra; it are called 
Agarbha when it is done simply with mere 
meditation, without repeating any mantra. After 
the bathing, the its 
accompaniments, is to be done; i.e. the peace 
offerings are made with reference to the Devas, 
the Rsis, and the Pitrs (whereby we invoke the 
blessings from the sublte planes where the 
highsouled persons dwell.) 

Ya ex wia wexgfüéeunme 115 tt 

Rogent ref Seater erp EITCUTH | 

waa «dei wp varā: 8016 Ul 

sagha aR favi 4 

"We UZ HUTA wiped IAM BAN | 

wate: AoNriaTgTad watch Rrarai 

agemi a: Heald rad; a Tai Ales: 017 0 

After this, a clean pair of clothes is to be worn 
and then he should get up and come out of the 
water. The next things preparatory to practise 


Tarpanam with 


Book XI Chapter HI 


1271 


Japam are to wear the Tilaka marks of ashes and 
to put on the Rudráksa beads. He who holds thirty- 
two Rudraksa beads on his neck, forty on his head, 
six on each ear (12 on two ears), twenty four beads 
on two hands (twelve on each hand) thirtytwo beads 
on two arms (sixteen on each), one bead on each 
eye and one bead on the hair on the crown, and 
one hundred and eight beads on the breast, (251 in 
all) becomes himself Maha Deva. One is expected 
to use them as such. 

aM TAU Seat Tada TA 1 

frarai vrafrai motat ama: 18 u 

agtudid get at as desc | 

shudan pores wenfü at 19 u 

O Muni! You can use the Rudraksas after tieing, 
stringing together with gold or silver always on 
your Sikha, the tuft of hair on the head or on your 
ears. On the holy thread, on the hands, on the neck, 
or on the belly (abdomen) one can keep the 
Rudraksa after one has repeated sincerely and with 
devotion the five lettered mantra of Siva, or one 
has repeated the Pranava (Om). 

Freatsrsracan ferret KATE Sra 1 

CRAIN HIATĒEBAATAT AIT 0020 U 

"arai aera canaratates are i 

mieni ad eat a Tu u 21 

Holding the Rudraksa implies that the man has 
realised the knowledge of Siva-Tattva. O Brahman! 
The Rudrāksa bead that is placed on the tuft or on 
the crown hair represents the Tāra tattva 7.e., Om 
Kara; the Rudraksa beads that are held on the two 
ears are to be thought of as Deva and Devi, (Siva 
and Siva). 

aatadte daisr vem get fA: TT i 

wd meadi adi grad rft sme 22 N 

The one hundred and eight Rudraksa beads on 
the sacrificial thread are considered as the one 
hundred and eight Vedas (signifying the Full 
Knowledge), as sixteen digits of the Moon 
completed; on the arms, are considered as the Dik 


(quarters); on the neck, are considered as the Devi 
Sarasvati and Agni (fire). 

"Wet STRTUTÉ antai EAT U AIT 1 

waded dar: reb faerat arrafóram i 23 u 

sagem Maca A Aya: | 

uaa Agis car TATU KIT 24 N 

Raai cat maaa Hau i 

qda war ITSFAFTATĀ me: u25 0 

The Rudraksa beads ought to be taken by men 
of all colours and castes. The Brāhmaņas, 
Ksattriyas and Vaisyas should hold them after 
purifying them with Mantras i.e. knowingly; 
whereas the Südras can take them without any such 
purification by the Mantras; i.e. unknowingly. By 
holding or putting on the Rudraksa beads, persons 
become the Rudras incarnate in flesh and body. 
There is no doubt in this. 


FTA durt feat 1 

aAa Yh quer geh AY AA WaT 00 26 i 

td ex wedai uri freq aq ag 

STAIN TH Aaa WEA 0027 ii 

aati aa farrier: danan: i 

By this all the sins arising from seeing, hearing, 
remembering, smelling, eating prohibited things, 
talking incoherently, doing prohibited things, etc., 
are entirely removed with the Rudraksa beads on 
the body; whatever acts, eating, drinking, smelling, 
etc., are done, are, as it were, done by Rudra Deva 
Himself. O Great Muni! He who feels shame in 
holding and putting on the Rudrāksa beads, can 
never be freed from this Samsára even after the 
Koti births. 

sageu eer uftaré we a: ou28u 

sat aa wieder ferrara: 1 

sagen EA PATA, 0029 0 

YAT: UAH ARM SW: | 

FAUNU T fafafa fad 30 0 

He who blames another person holding 
Rudraksa beads has defects in his birth (is a 
bastard). There is no doubt in this. It is by holding 


1272 


on Rudraksa that Brahma has remained steady in 
His Brahmahood untainted and the Munis have 
been true to their resolves. So there is no act better 
and higher than holding the Rudraksa beads. 

Fara waar aed eet garf ur: 1 

weurafaf-rivn: raeh w wef 1 31 i 

semītu sg wirende fere: 1 

figeotemartfē ars serat fermeum n 32 u 

He who gives clothing and food to a person 
holding Rudrāksa beads with devotion is freed of 
all sins and goes to the Šiva Loka. He who feasts 
gladly any holder of such beads of the time of 
Šrāddha, goes undoubtedly to the Pitr Loka. 

sagaro: Ural IATA: AAA: | 

adma: Brat ma 33 1 

at at ad art aut at fear: | 

He who washes the feet of a holder of Rudraksa 
and drinks that water, is freed of all sins and resides 
with honour in the Siva Loka. If a Brahmana holds 
with devotion the Rudraksa beads with a necklace 
and gold, he attains the Rudrahood. 


PATA WAT MIA AAT AAT 134 N 


Šrīmaddevibhāgavatam 


eae hac at da GA WETRY | 


miah ar dau wed maafa u35 u 
AAT RAT AT ART MACH TTA S!T AT | 
wdurafaferdvn: AATAAAATCT N 36 N 
aat saraaa WaT Ah A VTERTĀ | 
wera pagn 11 37 N 
efr RERA CHIR ATRIA 


FAAS EMT: 3 

O Intelligent One! Wherever whoever holds 
with or without faith and devotion the Rudraksa 
beads with or without any mantra, is freed of all 
sins and is entitled to the Tattvajfidna. I am unable 
to describe fully the greatness of the Rudrāksa 
beads. In fact, all should by all mean hold the 
Rudraksa beads on their bodies. 

Note: The Number one hundred and eight (108) 
signifies the One Hundred and Eight Vedas, the 
Brahmana, the Source of all Wisdom and Joy. 

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Eleventh Book 

on the glories of the Rudraksa beads in the Maha 

Puránam Šrīmaddevībhāga vatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. 


CHAPTER IV 
On the Greatness of the Rudrāksam 


ANG gara 

viagis Beat Masa | 

wfürdr Wet s: eut MA f we go 

Narada said: O Sinless one! The greatness of 
the Rudrāksa seed that you have described is verily 
such. Now I ask why is this Rudraksam so much 
entitled to worship by the people. Please speak 
clearly on this point. 


ARTA sare 
wana qu vet maa, ffs wy: 1 


WA U KA gara susp AT U 2 d 
Narayana spoke: O Child! This is the very 


question that was asked once by Kārtika, the 


sixfaced One, to Bhagavan Rudra, dwelling in 
Kailāša. What He replied, I say now. Listen. 
GTA sara 

TT Wy Arad Haat ATM: | 

frat am dg gussdicadgata: 3 0 

wende gr: ad gefawaraeaan: | 

uda enfer afémerersé frat wht 4 u 

Rudra Deva spoke: “O Child Sadanana. I will 
dwell briefly on the secret cause of the greatness 
of the Rudrāksa seed. Hear. In days of yore, there 
was a Daitya called Tripura who could not be 
conquered by any body. Brahma, Visnu and the 
other Devas were defeated by him. They then came 
to Me and requested Me to kill the Asura. 


1272 


on Rudraksa that Brahma has remained steady in 
His Brahmahood untainted and the Munis have 
been true to their resolves. So there is no act better 
and higher than holding the Rudraksa beads. 

Fara waar aed eet garf ur: 1 

weurafaf-rivn: raeh w wef 1 31 i 

semītu sg wirende fere: 1 

figeotemartfē ars serat fermeum n 32 u 

He who gives clothing and food to a person 
holding Rudrāksa beads with devotion is freed of 
all sins and goes to the Šiva Loka. He who feasts 
gladly any holder of such beads of the time of 
Šrāddha, goes undoubtedly to the Pitr Loka. 

sagaro: Ural IATA: AAA: | 

adma: Brat ma 33 1 

at at ad art aut at fear: | 

He who washes the feet of a holder of Rudraksa 
and drinks that water, is freed of all sins and resides 
with honour in the Siva Loka. If a Brahmana holds 
with devotion the Rudraksa beads with a necklace 
and gold, he attains the Rudrahood. 


PATA WAT MIA AAT AAT 134 N 


Šrīmaddevibhāgavatam 


eae hac at da GA WETRY | 


miah ar dau wed maafa u35 u 
AAT RAT AT ART MACH TTA S!T AT | 
wdurafaferdvn: AATAAAATCT N 36 N 
aat saraaa WaT Ah A VTERTĀ | 
wera pagn 11 37 N 
efr RERA CHIR ATRIA 


FAAS EMT: 3 

O Intelligent One! Wherever whoever holds 
with or without faith and devotion the Rudraksa 
beads with or without any mantra, is freed of all 
sins and is entitled to the Tattvajfidna. I am unable 
to describe fully the greatness of the Rudrāksa 
beads. In fact, all should by all mean hold the 
Rudraksa beads on their bodies. 

Note: The Number one hundred and eight (108) 
signifies the One Hundred and Eight Vedas, the 
Brahmana, the Source of all Wisdom and Joy. 

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Eleventh Book 

on the glories of the Rudraksa beads in the Maha 

Puránam Šrīmaddevībhāga vatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. 


CHAPTER IV 
On the Greatness of the Rudrāksam 


ANG gara 

viagis Beat Masa | 

wfürdr Wet s: eut MA f we go 

Narada said: O Sinless one! The greatness of 
the Rudrāksa seed that you have described is verily 
such. Now I ask why is this Rudraksam so much 
entitled to worship by the people. Please speak 
clearly on this point. 


ARTA sare 
wana qu vet maa, ffs wy: 1 


WA U KA gara susp AT U 2 d 
Narayana spoke: O Child! This is the very 


question that was asked once by Kārtika, the 


sixfaced One, to Bhagavan Rudra, dwelling in 
Kailāša. What He replied, I say now. Listen. 
GTA sara 

TT Wy Arad Haat ATM: | 

frat am dg gussdicadgata: 3 0 

wende gr: ad gefawaraeaan: | 

uda enfer afémerersé frat wht 4 u 

Rudra Deva spoke: “O Child Sadanana. I will 
dwell briefly on the secret cause of the greatness 
of the Rudrāksa seed. Hear. In days of yore, there 
was a Daitya called Tripura who could not be 
conquered by any body. Brahma, Visnu and the 
other Devas were defeated by him. They then came 
to Me and requested Me to kill the Asura. 


Book XI Chapter IV 

efe marene MET, d 

udzana feet wed une wq ns u 

At their request, I called in my mind the Divine 
Great weapon, named Aghora, beautiful and 
terrible and containing the strength of all tbe Devas, 
to kill him. It was inconceivable and it was blazing 
with fire. 

fauce amaia tart ATA U | 

wafer Parra, nén 

Raada g aged war | 

aaaea: R aafaa: 07 ou 

For full divine one thousand years I remained 
awake with eyelids wide open in thinking of the 
Aghora weapon, the destroyer of all obstacles, 
whereby the killing of Tripurāsura might be 
effected and the troubles of the Devas be removed. 
Not for a moment my eyelids dropped. There by 
my eyes were affected and drops of water came 
out of any eyes.—Note here. 

angg WaT MESANA: | 

Ta WERT udui Rien TET 

aye U estat aeaa: 
: ORO gN: EM nou 
archer: DA NERT: RATT | 
fastu: qe aAa wate fēnu 10 N 
How enemies are to be killed. It requires great 
thought, great concentration, great yoga and great 
powers.) O Mahāsena! From those drops of water 
coming out of my eyes, the great tree of Rudraksam 
did spring from the welfare of all. This Rudraksa 
seed is of thirty-eight varieties. From My Sürya 
Netra. i.e., My right eye, symbolizing the Sun, 
twelve yellow coloured (Pingala colour) varities 
have come; and from my left eye representing the 
Moon, the Soma Netra, sixteen varieties of white 
colour and from my third eye on the top, 
representing Fire i.e. the Agni Netra, ten varieties 
of black colour have come out. 

daaviyg were i a Sad | 

Sat vent Pst āga: POET WH: 11 N 


1273 


Of these the white Rudrāksams are Brahmins 
and they are used by Brahmanas; the red coloured 
ones are the Ksattriyas and should be used by the 
Ksattriyas and the black ones are Südras and should 
be used by the VaiSya and the Sudras. 

UA: Bra: AMG ade i 

Raad cadet enifa Area 12 N 

One faced Rudraksa seed is the Siva Himself, 
made manifest and rendered vivid; even the sin 
incurred in killing a Brahmana is destroyed thereby. 
Two faced or two headed Rudrāksam is like the 
Deva and Devi. Two sorts of sins are destroyed 
thereby. 

faranno: wremeedecert at AUT 1 

Uga: vend wur negent crater w 13 N 

Verear: tat VS: eno ITRETATHG: | 

MAA ATI st: — 014 

Tad aig Uus MUTT | 

"ago: enr a e aferat et 15 u 

The three faced Rudraksam is like fire; the sin 
incurred in killing a woman is destroyed in a 
moment. The four faced Rudraksa seed is like 
Brahma and removes the sin of killing persons. 
The five faced Rudraksam is verily an image of 
Rudra; all sorts of sins, e.g. eating prohibited food, 
going to the ungoables, etc., are destroyed thereby. 
The six faced Rudrāksam is Kārtikeya. It is to be 
worn on the right hand. 

wrerecarfefer: ure ATA Ayre: | 

AAA MAAN BAM ATA ATA: 116 Ut 

AGRO fi tenaa: à 

MEGA! Heras wremesr femme: 017 N 

One becomes freed of the Brahmahatyà sin. 
There is no manner of doubt in this. The seven 
faced Rudrāksam is named Ananga. Hoiding this 
rees one from the sin of stealing gold, etc., O 
Mahasena! The eight faced Rudraksa is Vinayaka. 

aagi Tone tated aa u | 

qeraahad ars a viegytar qefer 1 1 8 I 

vanr Ururfa dfe aat err à 

Rema ATT enfer ertet wi wa ! 19 N 


1274 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Holding this frees one from the sin of holding 
an illicit contact with a woman of a bad family and 


with the wife of one’s Guru, etc., and other sins as |. 


well. It enables one to acquire heaps of food, cotton, 
and gold; and in the end the Highest Place is 
attained. | 

sr cir YOM: Ae RAPA LIU | 

deat drag umāgmargā 020 

siege: PITT T gest wq 1 

WUE Tea A 021 i 

TED: yanai AAA STOTT |d 

The fruit of holding the eight faced Rudraksa 
seed has been said. Now I will talk of the nine- 
faced Rudrāksam. It is verily the Bhairava made 
manifest. On the left hand it should be worn. By 
this, the people get both Bhoga (enjoyment) an 
Moksa (liberation) and they become powerful like 
Me and get themselves freed at once, without the 
least delay, of the sins incurred by committing 
thousands of abortions, hundreds of Brahmahatyas 
(killing the Brahmanas). 

SIE SAM: Aantal Wards: 022 N 

mesa ŠTATA erar sema: i 

TAMIAMI GMAT IIT N 23 N 

Holding the ten-faced Rudraksa is verily 
wearing Janardana, the Deva of the Devas. The 
holding of which pacifies the evils caused by 
planets, Pišācas, Vetālas Brahma Raksasas, and 
Pannagas. 

AFAHTEMSM A SLATS CITT | 

Rrerai erre A eer uero TTT 1 24 N 

AIA ATTA Cup | 

Tat Wee Ma AH ll 25 !! 

The eleven-faced Rudrāksam is like the Eleven 
Rudras. The fruits, the efficacy of which I now 
describe. Hear. The fruits obtained through the 
performance of one thousand horse sacrifices, one 
hundred Vajapeya sacrifices, and making gifts of 
one hundred thousand cows are obtained thereby. 

AKG enn vnd TTS i 

BMT STREET HUT | MTT 11 2 6 N 


SR fret grasmsrerafeear: | 

TĀ aa a TEARS aA 27 lt 

If one wears the twelve-headed Rudrāksam on 
one’s ear, the Adityas get satisfied. The fruits of 
performing Gomedha and Ašvamedha sacrifices 
are obtained thereby. 

ifori erar Va euraremat sri «t fg | 

TU Gf srt ear Aa TAT: enfe: 11 28 N 

au fafa eeu a U orfir: Vadd i 

gaasi ver quit reget sre 29 N 

Rea Hag, 

GTA IATA seat sergio i 30 N 

edd TA Maat THEM 

No fear comes from horned buffaloes, armed 
enemies and wolves and tigers and other murderous 
animals. Also the several diseases of the body never 
come to him. The holder of the twelve-faced 
Rudraksa seeds feels always happy and he is the 
master of some kingdoms. He becomes freed of 
the sins incurred in killing elephants, horses, dear, 
cats, snakes, mice, frogs, asses, foxes and various 
other animlas. 

ATTA wen Saat ufa st 31 u 

alfa apa: Udenredfafee: | 

Tat varat we wer ad piae 432 n 

O Child! The thirteen faced Rudraksam is very 
rare; if anybody gets it, he becomes like Kartikeya 
and gets all desires fulfilled; and the eight siddhis 
are under his grasp. He learns how to make gold, 
silver and other metals; he attains all sorts of 
enjoyments. There is no manner of doubt in this. 

era adara ara carat fermi i 

"med frat ta ume at fugfer a: 33 0 

O Sadanana! If anybody holds the thirteen faced 
Rudrāksam, he becomes freed from the sins 
incurred in killing mother, father and brothers. 

"pend wundert ITU VUAG | 

VIE Saat ae PTA Wen 134 M 

maad uféa cee firs: Tara g | 

fe WA agate aulta Ya: YA: 35 N 


Book XI Chapter V 


O Son! If one holds on one’s head the fourteen 
faced Rudrāksam always, one becomes like Šiva. 
O Muni! What more shall I speak to you! the Devas 
pay their respects to one holding the fourteen faced 
Rudrāksas and he in the end attains the Highest 
Goal, the state of Siva. His body becomes verily 
the body of Siva. 

Wsud "ad qd: rad wu: 1 

PATA uan: rca erre racer BSAA: u 36 i 

wefaorta: formes VEMTAITĀT g | 

maagd anlar 037 

The Devas always worship the Rudraksa seed; 
the highest goal is attained hy wearing the 
Rudrāksam. The Brahmanas should hold on their 
heads at least one Rudraksam with devotion. A 
rosary of twenty-six Rudrāksams is to be made and 
tied on the head. 

aE dureh Wenn | 

aera Taare Hear oz TRTHTÉCAGRTH 1 38 N 

among wag add wong | 


Similarly a rosary of fifty seeds is to be worn 


1275 


and suspended on the breast; sixteen each on each 
of the two arms; twenty-four Rudraksams to be 
worn on the wrists, twelve on each. O Sadànana! 
If arosary be made of one hundred and eight, fifty 
or twenty-seven Rudraksams and if japam be done 
with that, immeasurable merits are obtained. 

asemaa wma af 1390 

eut erorsartenar e Wretifea US 1 

PIAA rata gta 140 N 

sie ARRATI HEFT waren 
agsfstarg: 11 4 11 

If anybody wears a rosary of one hundred and 
eight seeds, he gets at every moment the fruit of 
performing the ASvamedha sacrifices and uplifts 
his twenty-one generations and finally he resides 
in the Siva Loka.” 

Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Eleventh Book 
on the Greatness of the Rudraksam in the 
Mahāpurāņam Šrīmaddevībhāga vatam of 

18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. 


CHAPTER V 


On the Rudrāksam Rosaries 


gar sara 

GATI SGHTGTAT: TOT AAA Woy | 

BRAT ga wan fag ex sia: nan 

frem: Ges seca aim UG i 

tatina rn: waa: ae | "2 

— wadat NSD | "3 n 

Iévara said: "O Kartikeya! Now I will speak how 
to count the Japam (repetition of the mantra) with 
the rosary. Hear. The face of Rudraksam is Brahma; 
the upper summit point is Siva and the tail end of 
Rudraksam is Visnu. The Rudraksam has two-fold 
powers: It can give Bhoga (Enjoyment) as well as 
Moksa (Liberation). Then string or tie together, 
like a cow's tail, and like the snake’s coiling a body, 


twentyfive five faced Rudraksa seeds, thorny and 
of red, white, mixed colours bored through and 
through. The rosary is to taper as a cow's tail tapers 
down. 


In stringing the beads into a rosary, it should be 
seen that the flat face of one Rudraksam is in front 
of the flat of another Rudraksam; so the tail, the 
pointed end of one, must come in front of the tail 
or the narrower end of another. The Meru or the 
topmost bead of the string must have its face tumed 
upwards and the knot should be given over that. 


Book XI Chapter V 


| 


1275 


CHAPTER V 


On the Rudrāksam Rosaries 


gar sara 

GATI SGHTGTAT: TOT AAA Woy | 

BRAT ga wan fag ex sia: nan 

frem: Ges seca aim UG i 

tatina rn: waa: ae | "2 

— wadat NSD | "3 n 

Iévara said: "O Kartikeya! Now I will speak how 
to count the Japam (repetition of the mantra) with 
the rosary. Hear. The face of Rudraksam is Brahma; 
the upper summit point is Siva and the tail end of 
Rudraksam is Visnu. The Rudraksam has two-fold 
powers: It can give Bhoga (Enjoyment) as well as 
Moksa (Liberation). Then string or tie together, 
like a cow's tail, and like the snake’s coiling a body, 


twentyfive five faced Rudraksa seeds, thorny and 
of red, white, mixed colours bored through and 
through. The rosary is to taper as a cow's tail tapers 
down. 


In stringing the beads into a rosary, it should be 
seen that the flat face of one Rudraksam is in front 
of the flat of another Rudraksam; so the tail, the 
pointed end of one, must come in front of the tail 
or the narrower end of another. The Meru or the 
topmost bead of the string must have its face tumed 
upwards and the knot should be given over that. 


1276 


The rosary, thus strung, yeilds success of the 
Mantra (mantra-siddhi) When the rosary is strung, 
it is to be bathed with clear and scented water and 
afterwards with the Paficagavya (cow-dung, cow 
urine, curd, milk, and ghee); then wash it with clear 
water and sanctify it with the condensed electrical 
charge of the Mantra. 

eta: Ēras ATA eret Wen | 

wap fran rana EAR, ! 6 N 

Tem Sara 

"ersrerfafr: reg urere ei wea 7 d 

Then recite the Mantra of Siva (Six limbed, with 
"Hüm" added and collect the rosaries. Then repeat 
over them the Mantra “‘Sadyojata, etc., and sprinkle 
water over it one hundred and eight times. 

gad wear Bayt fuum a | 

Ata sara Prt aA u 8 N 

grater saure NARRO | 

"rep Ga Ut TI Aaa uo n 

fer enu gar ao TTT TAT | 

saaman Ad Weed Pera 10 N 

Then utter the principal mantra and place them 
on a holy ground and perform Nyāsa over it, i.e., 
think that the Great Cause Siva and the World- 
Mother Bhagavati have come on them. Thus make 
the Samskara of the rosary (i.e., purify it) and you 
will find then that your desired end will be attained 
successfully. Worship the rosary witht he Mantra 
of that Devata for which it is intended. 

«nua f£ ate wid Hot emper TAT | 

RETRIEIRUÉ Pret wera UAT Wd: d 01 o 

feast sped ata Wa: TT: od 

erat fue wegen 412 

One is to wear the Rudrāksa rosary on one's 
head, neck or ear and controlling one self, one 
should make japam with the rosary On the neck, 
head, breast, or the ears or one the arms, the rosary 
should he held with the greates devotion. What is 
the use in saying about it so often? It is highly 
meritorious and commendable to holds always the 
Rudraksam. 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


art at we Ba dušā geht 

Drain den sre GATT fasted: n 13 N 

SEER spar aféfered ASAT | 

gifa Wea ath watt qe 14 N 

Especially on such occasions as taking baths 
making gifts, making japams, performing the 
Homas, or sacrifices to Vi$ve Devas, in performing 
the Pūjās of the Devas, in making Prāyašcittams 
(Penances), in the time of Sraddha and in the time 
of initiation, it is highly necessary to hold 
Rudraksam. A Brahmin is sure to go to hell if he 
performs any Vaidik act without wearing any 
Rudraksam. Note: It would be offering an insult to 
Siva!. 

"ref mA aud up STAT | 

gautada vrai rd fragu 15 u 

aigfaataaat wer rece SU 1 

weereHsperndesequra ^ u16u 

Quasi wheats garafan | 

erat meat gdaft wp Aa: 0017 oU 

It is advisable to use the true Rudrāksam with 
gold and jewel, on the head, neck or one one’s 
hand. Never use the Rudraksam worn by another. 
Use Rudraksam always with devotion; never use 
it while you are impure. Even the grass that grows 
with the air in contact with the Rudraksa tree, goes 
verily to a holy region for ever. Jābāla Muni says 
in the Sruti; If a man wearing Rudraksam commits 
a sin, he gets deliverance from that sin. 

ad wer UTT STATE fF 1 

Wert fe a KATRU SRATT Uu 18 N 

feng & err Cafe en ae Saray | 

"amr: reat Gent tuf exui: Wem d 19 d 

Even if animals hold Rudraksam, they become 
Siva; what of men! The devotees of $ri Rudra 
should always use at least one Rudrāksa on the 
head. Those great devotees, who with Rudraksam 
on take the name of the Highest Self Sambhu, get 
themselves freed of all sorts of sins and pains. 


tat diga weurgfanrenTa | 


Book XI Chapter V 


1277 


arena wr marta A vivit: WATA: 020 0 

Sahat Ū Aa À ATA: | 

"warmer art wdsratfafriRr 21 11 

Those who are ornamented with Rudraksam are 
the best devotees. It is highly incumbent on those 
who want their welfare to wear Rudrāksam. Those 
who hold Rudrāksam on their ears, crown hair, 
neck, hands, and breast, get Brahma, Visnu, and 
Mahešvara under them as their Vibhütis (manifes- 
tations, powers). 

wA Praat er Hus gut went i 

maas femper dem Wut femp: 022 0 

errat TA TAT TAG EARR: 1 

Tatas wdu meen yoraftor: 023 0 

Ai AMMA YA: Tenet amu 1 

sania: Bagh: GV exmgumun N 24 N 

The Devas and all those Ķsis that started the 
Gotra, the Adipurusas (the first chief men in several 
families), held with reverence the Rudrāksams. All 
the other Munis, that descended from their families, 
the ardent followers of Srauta Dharma, the pure 
souled, held the Rudrāksams. 


THI A Wat wramaafurar fagn? 1 


ag WA mAT: 100125! 
SHAUN ABT Taa WII 1 
FAI qp TERR TATŠTTGTUT qp u26 i 
werd ffr water ga aka a | 


FTA He ww fag erasg AZT ll 27 0 

It may be, that many might not like at first to 
hold this Rudraksam, the visibile giver of liberation 
and so well written in the Vedas; but after many 
births, out of the Grace of Mahadeva, many become 
eager to take the Rudraksams. The Munis that are 
the Jābāla Sakhis are famous in expounding the 
inestimable greatness of Rudraksams. 

GO BT qua vaynentfequt sre i 

yanig qus LIRU AT 0 28 U 

sanaa vaiga wr 1 

Wares ere Fred ATA erat fere i029 N 

The effect of holding Rudraksams is well known 
in the three worlds. Punyam (great merit) arises 


from the mere sight of Rudraksams; ten million 
times the merit arises by its touch; and by wearing 
it, one hundred Koti times the fruit arisee and if 
one makes Japam every day, then one lakh koti 
times the punyam arises. There is no manner of 
questionings in this. 

wu ante aud x atak em i 

"sarei LMA A wat AT ATA: 030 0 

STA: wdsrarat rata ngA | 

KTI  deritut uen fora: 37 0 

SHAM Wed agrumā At: 1 

sfeggt ar Rae eot at duri: tt 32 1 

He who holds in his hand, breast, neck, ears, 
head, the Rudrāksams, becomes an image of Rudra. 
There is no manner of doubt in this. By holding 
Rudrāksams, men become invulnerable of all the 
beings, become respected, like Maha Deva, by the 
Devas and Asuras and they roam on the earth like 
Rudra. 

ead weurqvzt SAAT q SIRUIR 1 

TS KATRA sf am fire ufa u 33 N 

ashe gRr f yanig a: à 

satarfātttft egret af aaa 34 N 

Even if a man be addicted to evil deeds and 
commits all sorts of sins, he becomes respected by 
all, on holding Rudraksams. By this men are freed 
of the sin of taking Ucchista and of all the other 
sins. Even if you suspend a Rudraksam rosary on 
the neck of a dog and if that dog dies in that state, 
he gets liberation! Then what to speak of others! 

adua: a TTT UTT feng i 

weh efr f Saat eat eds SUR 0 35 N 

wenfasfenaer Kota Neru 1 

ata: Ut wen warme Yafāttra 36 u 

efr RRRA ATG Vara 
VEHeumm 5i 

By holding Rudraksams, men even if they be 
devoid of Japam and Dhyànam, become freed of 
all sins and attain the highest state. Even if one 
holds merely one Rudrāksa seed purified and 


1278 Srimaddevibhagavatam 


surcharged with Mantra Sakti, he uplifts his | Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on 
twentyone generations, gets to Heaven and resides the Rudraksam rosaries in the Maha Puranam 
there with respect. I am speaking now further of Srīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses 

the Greatness of Rudrāksam. by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1278 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


; 


CHAPTER VI 


On the Greatness of Rudraksam 


gat ara 

weet gvufugamitarga: ut 1 

FRA g Asfa senta utsvita ug ou 

yemi dem raptai er rem à: 1 

adai q wem vim prat ergaut wem u2 ou 

"ed TA AMSA reram SE ar | 

Wisi g wer wht agedsfüd way tu 3 N 

ĪSvara said: O Kārtikeya! Kušagranthi, Jivapattri 
and other rosaries cannot compare to one-sixteenth 
part of the Rudraksa rosary. As Visnu is the best 
of all the Purusas, the Ganga is the best of all the 
rivers, Ka$yapa, amongst the Munis, Ucchaihšravā 
amongst the horses, Maha Deva amongst the 
Devas, Bhagavati amongst the Devis, so the 
Rudráksam rosary is the Best of all the rosaries. 

Ed: Wat KS Ala: Ut ATT Og 

agag T ay weaned fare n4 

Ranma VITA gA, | 

ma YG Aas THI 5 dd 

All the furtis that occur by reading the stotras 
and holding all the Vratas, are obtained by wearing 
the Rudraksam bead. At the time of making the 
Aksaya gift, the Rudraksam bead is capable of 
giving high merits. The merit that accrues by giving 
Rudráksam to a peaceful devotee of Siva, cannot 
be expressed in words. 

ganag wast dwar d 

Raega exe U BTA 6 d 

"wed ore faspfrd Art wearer | 

a viue ast cw fra: spem: w7 ou 

If anybody gives food to a man holding the 
Rudrāksam rosary, his twenty one generations are 
uplifted and he ultimately becomes able to live in 


the Rudra Loka. He who does not apply ashes on 
his forhead and who does not hold Rudrāksam and 
is averses to the worship of Siva is inferior to a 
cāņdāla. 
i fi iki : fr 1 

maa ageda warer fore feed us u 

waaay cr s: | 

eno VAs Tel STAT qp IVT 0 9 Ui 

If Rudrāksam be placed on the head then the 
flesh-eaters, drunkards, and the associates with the 
vicious become freed of their sins. Whatever fruits 
are obtained by performing various sacrifices, 
asceticism and the study of the Vedas are easily 
attained by simply holding the Rudraksam rosary. 


Akagi Kota a | 


miia  wdfrenfefurem 10 tt 
AGUS THT EN SHAT F MOT | 
yana Soret dutrar furere 11 i 
a KATRAM uas a fe | 


Whatever merits are obtained by reading the four 
Vedas and all the Puranas and bathing in all the 
Tirthas an the results that are obtained by immense 
practise in learning all are, obtained by wearing 
Rudraksam. If at the time of death, one wears 
Rudraksam and dies, one attains Rudrahood. One 
has not to take again one's birth. 

"are emh argtat fuer ufa 12 i 

4 FS ada: | 

wrereit arf erterer for: ATTA eru 13 u 

ware a: u tard fra Ata 1 

yferatergyferatht ems taser Taras: 114 N 

FON TTY AST Fat ar suras: | 

FAUNA U Set Art dea: NISS N 


Book XI Chapter VI 


If anybody dies by holding Rudraksam on his 
neck or one his two arms, he uplifts his twenty- 
one generations and lives in the Rudra Loka. Be 
he a Brahmana or a Candala, be he with qualities 
or without qualities, if he applies ashes to his body 
and holds Rudraksam, he surely attains Sivahood. 
Be he pure or impure; whether he eats uneatables 
or be he a Mleccha or a Cāņdāla or a Great Sinner, 
any body if he holds Rudraksam is surely equal to 
Rudra. There is no doubt in this. 

firearm enfta are: ulate eeu: | 

sanie sq AKA RARA 16 u 

argd audia q waretfesfst fterd à 

"fürs g Sarat MAMAR: GT: 77 ou 

If any body holds Rudrāksam on his head he 
gets Koti times the fruits; on his ears ten Koti times 
the fruit, on his neck, one hundred Koti times the 
fruit; on his thread, ayuta times the fruit; on his 
arm, one lakh Koti times the fruit and if one wears 
Rudrāksam on one's wrist, one attains Moksa. 

ATA! Wear afin ernt ART t 

Haka: war TAM Hea deno t 18 N 

FAI mud areata: | 

USA g dt Pret a We: MARTA u 19 u 

Whatever acts, montioned in the Vedas be 
performed with Rudraksam on, the fruits obtained 
are unbounded. Even if a man be without any 
Bhakti and if he wears on his neck the Rudraksa 
rosary though he does always vicious acts, he 
becomes freed of the bondage of this world. 

saatda at KAA d ee: 1 

ardt mist ed ame: wu fene i 20 n 

arfēreit ar USE aT SHAT T AIT | 

Rach yoda ate és wem 21 

Even if a man does not hold Rudraksa but if he 
be always full of devotion towards the Rudraksam, 
he attains the fruit that is got by wearing the 
Rudraksam and he attains the Siva Loka and is 
honoured like Siva. As in the county of Kikata, an 
ass which used to carry Rudráksam seed got 
Sivahood after his death, so any man, whether he 


1279 


be a Jñāni (wise) or Ajfiàni (unwise), gets Sivahood 
if he holds Rudrāksam. There is no doubt in this.” 
erg Sars 

SMA Wu Way: SA BAT | 

alae at at aderage waa 1220 

Skanda said: "O God! How is it that in the 
county of Kikata (Bihar), an ass had to carry 
Rudraksa; who gave him the Rudrāksams! And 
what for did he hold that?" 

sftenar aret 

Smp va qug weet feeds | 

ere wmm g area: aft g u23 N 

aisada ate ufWereg | 

Amata mg weufinite: 124 0 

Bhagavan I$vara said: “O Son! Now hear the 
history of the case. In the Vindhya mountain one 
ass used to carry the load of Rudrāksam of a 
traveller. Once the ass felt tired and became unable 
to carry the load and fell down on the road and 
died. 

AMATS GTA HAARATA: 1 

Taga KAT FEAT UW 2 5 Il 

magaga rasta netaa 1 

TAREE areal ATA: HET i 2 6 u 

After his death the ass came to Me by My Grace, 
becoming Mahešvara with trident in his hand and 
with three eyes. O Kārtikeya! As many faces as 
there are in the Rudrāksam, for so many thousand 
Yugas the holder resides with honour in the Šiva 
Loka. 

arta Wea: ka EA RITA. | 

HART ASE AT AT te rers für am 11 27 At 

TRAM Arad waa: | 

FATATRINTI Gus cha aT GTI WaT 028. 

One should declare the greatness of Rudraksam 
to one’s own disciple never to disclose its glories 
to one who is not a disciple nor a devotee of 
Rudrāksam nor to him who is an illiterate brute. 
Be he Bhakta or not a Bhakta, be he low or very 
low, if he holds Rudraksam, then he is freed from 


1280 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


SE i 


all sins. No equal can be to the merit of him who 
holds the Rudráksams. 

uaaa mga: 1 

Wed mAg weet yaaa: 0029 N 

The Munis, the Seers of truth, describe this 
holding on of Rudraksam as a very great vow. He 
who makes a vow to hold one thousand 
Rudrākşams, becomes like Rudra; the Devas bow 
down before him. 

data gr: uA var vaT U: | 

and q Werner mgr: WS VST N 30 N 

wa Brerai atdisiev grata g | 

Biiterchaest g ATA TĀ 11 31 N 

Wd Huta: We Te AAE VITA | 

at ma WATHISSBRGCH q WSUd 032 

If thousand Rudraksams be not obtained, one 
should hold at least sixteen Rudrāksams on each 
arm, one Rudrāksam on the cown hair; on the two 
hands, twelve on each; thirty-two on the neck; forty 
on the head; six on each ear and one hundred and 
eight Rudraksams on the breast; and then he 
becomes entitled to worship like Rudra. 


qantas: 1 

mimer ware Prat sd 11 3 3 U 

aorta wsrereemesarfasrfe a: | 

daai ararfer ania aaga 34 U 

If any body holds Rudraksam together with 
pearls, Prabala, crystal, silver, gold and gem (lapis 
lazuli) he becomes a manifestation of Siva. If a 
body, through laziness even, holds Rudraksam, the 
sin cannot touch him as darkness cannot come near 
light. 

SAMANTHA Wat ESTAGANT: | 

Tt «ufi Gea RISTA aggrag: 35 n 

ma aa Pref rartagrgatēt wer i 

FTA wer IT forcer HOA ar: 11 36 Ut 

If any body makes makes Japam of a mantram 
with a Rudraksa rosary, he gets unbounded results. 
Such a merit giving Rudrāksam, if one such 
Rudraksam be not found in any one’s body, his 
life becomes useless, like a man who is void of 


Tripundraka (three curved horizontal marks made 
on the forehead by the worshippers or Siva). 

TARAS TESTER ATA HITU: | 

KAA: UGA VREA: AT 37 N 

agar: fags Creagh: | 

spear eser Pret Sa: VARMA: 0 38 N 

If any body simply washes his head all over with 
Rudraksam on, he gets the fruit of bathing in the 
eleven faced and fourteen faced Rudraksam is 
Sankara made manifest; so it entitled to worship 
by all. The Rudraksam is Sankara made manifest; 
so itis always worshipped with devotion. 

aa wd erent qub AKA 4039 N 

The greatness of Rudrāksam is such as it can 
make a king out of a poor man. On this point, I 
will tell you an excellent Purāņic anecdote. 

adu fast: tatāru gfā spa: 1 

vert a taam daga 40 i 

ape AA: GTG: 1 

AUTOR: GRAET: RAT: ll 41 N 

There was a Brāhimin, named Girinātha in the 
country of Kosala. He was proficient in the Vedas 
and Vedāngas, religious and very rich He used to 
perform sacrifices. He had a beautiful son named 
Gunanidhi. The son gradually entered into his youth 
and looked beautiful like Kandarpa, the God of 
Love. 

Tt: gféreurearer Uefi genran à 

deam FA alata wed a. 42 N 

vires Tar Tt PAT vt fram i 

fad edt wr ya dp uyara fria: 43 

Bar Ara für HH fanfare fer AAT i 

"ret frat arf unum Afgan 44 u 

While he was studying at his Guru Suddhisana’s 
house, he, by his beauty and youth captivated the 
mind of his Guru's wife named Muktāvalī. The 
Guru's wife became so much enchanted by his 
extraordinary beauty that she, being unable to 
control herself, mixed with him and for some time 
remained with him in secret enjoyment. Then 


Book XI Chapter VII 


1281 


feeling inconveniences, due to the fear of his Guru, 
to enjoy her freely, used poison to the Guru, killed 
him and then he began to live freely with her. Next 
when his father, mother came to know about this, 
he put to death instantly his father and mother, 
administering poison to them. 

Arora er ATA KET Te: | 

arena We eird Tt War TAS: 0 45 N 

quatre aicateepa: | 

matched: WATE ASAS: u 46 u 

Yaca TAT Aref SATA Tet TAT 

ANT Reet XOT STOTT 0 47 I 

Ua gd GI WAN U WISI: | 

He became addicted to various pleasures and 
his wealth was exhausted gradually. He began to 
steal in Brahmanas’ houses and became addicted 
very much to drinking. His relatives outcasted him 
from the society for his bad behaviour and banished 
him outside the town. He then went into a dense 
forest with Muktāvalī; and he began to kill the 
Brahmins for their wealth. Thus a long time passed 
away; when at last he fell into the jaws of death. 

Ad d duo WANA: MEAN: 148 N 

Prasad A TANT: | 

wat: cun arn aya ARa 149 tt 

"ugsreaat ung: woes fortis fg à 

gig Wer vie Agra u50u 

Pagea writ fere Ww: | 

aemet spp FIAT Ra È us. u 


Then to take him to the region of Death, 


8i 


thousands of the Yama's messengers came; at the 
same time the Siva’s messengers came from Siva- 
Loka. O Kartikeya! A quarrel then ensued between 
both the parties of Yama and Siva, The Yama’s 
messengers, then, said: “O Servers of Sambhu! 
What are the merits of this man that you have come 
to take him? First speak to us of his merits.” Siva’s 
messengers —‘Fifteen feet below the ground 
where this man died, there exists the Rudrāksam. 

AIT à Eat Tea: Paaa i 

wdt amea Ras fus 152 0 

"dt yoga: wf: VISTO 1 

gta saanee afd wu ws u530 

O Yamā's messengers! By the influence of that 
Rudraksam, all his sins are destroyed; and we have 
come to take him to Siva." Then the Brahmin 
Gunanidhi assumed a divine form and, getting on 
an aerial car went with Siva's messengers before 
Siva. 


: us4u 
alt SRRI Wero? VIRS 
FENET: 11 6 N 
O One of good vows! Thus I have described 
briefly to you the greatness of Rudraksam. This is 
capable to remove all sorts of sins and yield great 
merits. 

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on 
the Greatness of Rudraksams in the Mahāpurāņam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book XI Chapter VII 


1281 


feeling inconveniences, due to the fear of his Guru, 
to enjoy her freely, used poison to the Guru, killed 
him and then he began to live freely with her. Next 
when his father, mother came to know about this, 
he put to death instantly his father and mother, 
administering poison to them. 

Arora er ATA KET Te: | 

arena We eird Tt War TAS: 0 45 N 

quatre aicateepa: | 

matched: WATE ASAS: u 46 u 

Yaca TAT Aref SATA Tet TAT 

ANT Reet XOT STOTT 0 47 I 

Ua gd GI WAN U WISI: | 

He became addicted to various pleasures and 
his wealth was exhausted gradually. He began to 
steal in Brahmanas’ houses and became addicted 
very much to drinking. His relatives outcasted him 
from the society for his bad behaviour and banished 
him outside the town. He then went into a dense 
forest with Muktāvalī; and he began to kill the 
Brahmins for their wealth. Thus a long time passed 
away; when at last he fell into the jaws of death. 

Ad d duo WANA: MEAN: 148 N 

Prasad A TANT: | 

wat: cun arn aya ARa 149 tt 

"ugsreaat ung: woes fortis fg à 

gig Wer vie Agra u50u 

Pagea writ fere Ww: | 

aemet spp FIAT Ra È us. u 


Then to take him to the region of Death, 


thousands of the Yama's messengers came; at the 
same time the Siva’s messengers came from Siva- 
Loka. O Kartikeya! A quarrel then ensued between 
both the parties of Yama and Siva, The Yama’s 
messengers, then, said: “O Servers of Sambhu! 
What are the merits of this man that you have come 
to take him? First speak to us of his merits.” Siva’s 
messengers —‘Fifteen feet below the ground 
where this man died, there exists the Rudrāksam. 

AIT à Eat Tea: Paaa i 

wdt amea Ras fus 152 0 

"dt yoga: wf: VISTO 1 

gta saanee afd wu ws u530 

O Yamā's messengers! By the influence of that 
Rudraksam, all his sins are destroyed; and we have 
come to take him to Siva." Then the Brahmin 
Gunanidhi assumed a divine form and, getting on 
an aerial car went with Siva's messengers before 
Siva. 


wd saam aararcnfaat war | 
ada METROJ: 0! 54 
alt SRRI Wero? COREA 
Wale: 11 6 11 


O One of good vows! Thus I have described 
briefly to you the greatness of Rudraksam. This is 
capable to remove all sorts of sins and yield great 
merits. 

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on 
the Greatness of Rudraksams in the Mahāpurāņam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


CHAPTER VII 
On the Different Numbers of Facets of Rudraksam 


siano sarar 
wa me ngaa RA fara: 1 
"rerfenri a mess area: 11 1 11 
geigarmaratsea sa aft Wem 1 
meni pup aR: 2N 
Sri Narayana said: O Narada! When Girīśa thus 
81 


explained to Kartikeya the greatness of Rudraksam, 
he became satisfied. Now I have spoken to you of 
the glories of the Rudraksams as far as I know. 

gar sagn aftratsagrag: | 

want AAA ams euis d u3 ut 

wat g atna AIR | 


1282 


weg wifequi uud od SOTA: 14 d 


vaneaza wereesnm cw 1 

ASTOTĀ Ys AT SAATA, 11 5 oH 

Now, as to our subject of right way of acting, I 
will now speak on other things that ought to be 
known. Listen. The seeing of Rudrāksam brings 
in a lakh times of Punyam and koti times the merit 
arises from touching that; holding it brings in koti 
times merit; again if one makes the japam of a 
Mantra with that Rudraksam, one obtains merit the 
hundred lakh koti times and one thousand lakh koti 
time the merit. 

SHAT F ASTANA ATH 1 

em tueur oeaetagaerm 6 tl 

anthem g read Wen ad: 1 

er ant gta watfear 07 od 

The merit in holding the Rudrāksam is far 
superior to that in holdīng Bhadrāksam. The 
Rudrāksam seed that is of the size of an Amalaki 
is the best; which is the of the size of a plum, is 
middling; and which is of the size of a gram is the 
worst, this is my word and promise. 

rerum: gRr argen: IAA Rrargram à 

asset: IRT qr asada: Yate: 8 di 

TAY ATRI KAT: gra Taia: | 

tat avareg faster: gre: Bat wentfetet: w 9 ut 

The Rudràksam trees is of four kinds: 
Brāhmaņa, Ksattriya, Vaisya, and Siidra. The white 
colour is Brahmana; the red colour is Ksattriya; 
the yellow colour is Vai$ya and the black coloured 
Rudrāksam seed is Südra. 

aren aaraa UURTGTSÓ qp aay 

ferre TTT TS KAT emnt 10 N 

wur: fren genge: dar: YT: 1 

Altes sa TTT Usage 011 N 

The Brāhmaņas are to use the white coloured 
Rudraksams; the Ksattriyas, the red coloured ones, 
the Vai$yas, the yellow coloured ones; and the 
Südras, the black ones. Those Rudrāksa seeds that 
are nicely circular, smooth, hard, and whose thorns 
or points are distinctly visible, are the best. 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 
TORTUGA TERRA THAT 1 
wana Hag FTA: waren: N12 N 
aq devas get auum we | 
wurfsentrerquredipiur IAT u 13 u 
Those that are pierced by insects, broken in parts, 
whose thorns are not clearly visible, with swells 


and holes and those that are coated over, these six 
varieties of Rudráksams are faulty. Those 
Rudraksams that have their holes by nature runing 
through and through are best; and those that have 
their holes pierced by men are middling. 

wag ana aa RAAST d 

fred mga VA Swat yavat 14 1 

magai famen ere: fores: d 

fraramnestat fires ferret att, u 15 u 

The Rudrāksa seeds that are all of uniform 
shape, bright hard, and beautifully circular should 
be strung together by a silken thread. How to test 
the Rudráksa seed? As gold is tested by a touch 
stone; so the Rudrāksam is tested by drawing lines 
on it; those on which the lines are most uniform, 
bright and beautiful are the best and they should 
be worn by the Saivas. 

ZPO 1 rat argh: wteyr treet | 

nià greges usmgrd WaT u16 n 

astmeni x aaa | 

feat frat arf agay: 17 1 

One should hold one Rudraksam on the crown 
hair, thirty on the head, thirty six on the neck; 
sixteen on each arm, twelve on each wrist, fifty on 
the shoulders, one hundred and eight Rudraksams 
in the place of the sacrificial thread; and the devotee 
should have two or three rounds on the neck. 

Hiss qa da af TIEREN T | 

wR aed da pid ada a 18 i 

qa did deer exe andar | 

fort vetri ummy weed 19 

weed wih xn Sun aaa | 

On the earrings, on the crown of the head, the 
head, on bracelets, on armlets, on necklace, on the 


Book XI Chapter VII 


1283 


ornament worn on the loins one should hold 
Rudraksam always, whether one sleeps or eats. 
Holding three hundred Rudraksams is the lowest; 
holding five hundred 1s middling; holding one 
thousand Rudraksams is the best; so one ought to 
wear one thousand Rudraksams. 


Anman An att wepedvr cw 042000 

adir wee g dra gAs uw | 

adi arated: 021 

At the time of taking Rudraksam, on one’s head, 
one should utter the Mantra of [sana; the mantra 
of Tat Purusa while holding on one’s ears; Aghora 
mantra on one’s forehead and heart; and the Bija 
of Aghora mantra i.e. “hasau” while holding on 
one's hands. 

uayen ameda ater 1 

ugaetiitsrad FAUNU 221 

IATA wat LTA, | 

Wehen HAA: UAUA: 1 23 I! 

UTT WTA ATTA | 

One should wear the rosary of fifty Rudraksa 
seeds, suspended up to the bolly, uttering the 
Vamadeva mantra, i.e., Sadyojātādi, etc., the five 
Brahma mantras, and the six-limbed Siva mantra. 
One is to string every Rudraksa seed, uttering the 
root mantra and then hold it One-faced Rudrāksa 
reveals Paratattva (the highest Tattva); when worn, 
the knowledge of the highest Tattva arises; the 
Brahma is seen then. 


farq uhr adiad nq lt 24 0 

emmadi: VITA weer Pew | 

aerate: Uae quf ao «25 i 

Amada FAa4tstafasaa aura: | 

VRERUITeS SAY quai Feat: 0 26 N 

The two-faced Rudrāksam is Ardhanārīšvara, 
the Lord of the other half which represents woman 
(in the same person); if worn, Ardhanarisvara Siva 
is always pleased with that man who holds it. The 
threefaced Rudrāksam is Fire made manifest; it 
destroys in a moment the sin of killing a woman. 


The three-faced Rudraksam is the three Agnis, 
Daksiņāgni, Gārhapatya, and Ahavaniya; 
Bhagavan Agni is always pleased with that man 
who wears the three-faced Rudraksam. 


u27Uu 

aad mada: Spp Umen: 1 

WU PAA: UAH: 028 0 

The four-faced Rudraksam in Brahma Himself. 
The wearer gets his prosperity enhanced, his 
diseases destroyed, the divine knowledge springs 
in him and his heart is always pleased. The five- 
faced Rudrāksam is the five-faced Siva Himself; 
Mahadeva gets pleased with him who holds it. 

wer aura darat Wu: d 

VEGA Sse: AR aA: u29u 

Raah aà cat wouter nA: à 

HUC FAST: aeaa T: 130 i 

The Presiding Deity of the six-faced Rudraksam 
is Kartikeya. Some Pandits take Ganapati to be the 
Presiding Deity of the six-faced Rudraksam. The 
presiding Deity of the seven-faced Rudrāksam is 
the seven Mātrkās, the Sun and the seven Rsis. 

KEUC ECG CER: IGE LGC TC p HE | 

TEU: AENA 31 N 

"dr maiaa: yfad aera: | 

asaq PaSa: 32 0 

By putting on this, the prosperity is increased, 
health and the pure knowledge are established. It 
should be put on when one becomes pure. The 
Presiding Deity of the eight-faced Rudraksam is 
Brahmi, the eight Mātrkās. By holding this, the 
eight Vasus are pleased and the river Ganges is 
also pleased. 

wget mEnE: yet: 1 

wann wher seta: wewares: 0330 

aaa] Am Gea GaU | 

ATT cT Mana adar 134 i 

The putting on of this makes the Jivas truthful 
and pleasant-minded. The Devatā of the nine-faced 


1284 


Srimaddevibhdgavatam 


Rudraksam is Yama; holding this puts off the fears 
of Death. 

ARTA VHA SMM: CI: | 

GTS ferma STRUD art WSDT: 035 tl 

Taya Slaa: 1 

aataid arg: warp Aefa 36 u 

The Devata of the eleven-faced Rudraksam is 
ten quarters the ten quarters are pleased with him 
who wears the ten-faced Rudrāksam. The Devata 
of the eleven-mouthed Rudraksam is the eleven 
Rudras and Indra. Holding this enhances happiness. 
The twelve-faced Rudraksam is Visnu made 
manifast; its Devatàs are the twelve Adityas; the 
devotees of Siva should hold this. 

"arat BAAS vera: | 

gemaa fasts fe wen: 37 i 

AGIETO LTA: TH: riga: VT: | 

wear RUDI armed: wdifef 138 i 

The thirteen-faced Rudraksam, if worn, enables 
one to secure one’s desires; he does nowhere 
experience failures. The Kama Deva becomes 
pleased with him who wears this. 


UA sm FAMAS: 1 

adate wattage: 039 

Ta wid a ot oig fata uw d 

youth fagaré vat astra: 400 

The fourteen-faced Rudraksam destroys all 
diseases and gives eternal health. While holding 
this, one ought not to take wine, flesh, onion, garlic, 
Sajfia fruit, Calta fruit and the flesh of the boar 
which eats excrements, etc., 

Dent fea da dzert seat We | 

aA a dia a quay adai | 

eran: ado: wert 0041 i 

alt Area ergo? CHRP 
VAS: 07 

During the Lunar and Solar eclipses, daring the 
Uttarāyaņa Sankranti or the Daksināyana 
Samkranti, during the full Moon or the New Moon 
day, if Rudráksam be worn, one becomes instantly 
freed of all one's sins. 

Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Eleventh Book 
on the greatness of one faced etc., Rudráksam in the 
Maha Puranam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


CHAPTER VIII 
On Bhiita Suddhi 


santaa gara 


ways a Herat went 1 

TOIT HUSH WAAL N 1 N 

wearin aera € | 

wa waft data ganstor areas: 11 2 1 

Narayana said: O Great Muni! Now I shall tell 
you the rules of Bhüta Suddhi i.e. the purification 
of the elements of the body (by respiratory attrac- 
tion and replacement, etc.). Firstly, think of the 
Highest Deity Kundalini (the Serpent Fire) as ris- 
ing up in the hollow canal Susumnā in the Spinal 
Cord from the Mulādhāra (the sacral plexus) to the 
Brahmarandhra (the aperture supposed to be at the 
crown of the head). Next, the devotee is to medi- 
tate on the Mantra “Hamsa” and consider his 


Jīvātmā (the embodied soul) united with Para 
Brahma. 

— ki šui i 

vei wemfaut meaa 3 N 

TEN iR i 

ddai Amia Ted cmq 4 i 

Then think from leg to the knees in the form of 
a square Yantra (diagram) as furnished with Vajra 
thunderbolt) (represented by 63 lines at the four 
corners); consider this square as the earth, of a 
golden colour and represented by the letter “Lam,” 
representing the Seed Mantra of earth. Next from 
the knee to the navel consider the semi-moon and 
at its two ends consider that the two lotuses are 
situated. Consider this as the circle of water, of 


1292 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER XI 
On the three Kinds of Bhasma 


ARE IATA 

Afad eet ares stars: R i 

Ta d ea mee WA ui 

Narada asked: O Bhagavan! How is the above 
Bhasma of three kinds? I am eager to hear this. 
Kindly describe this to me.” 

sianar saret 

Rea vagni eat ea: yoy | 

mannaa na A uz 

wi Adag teeta Jor d 

ae wen ceotfrafesteat 3 11 

Narayana said: “O Narada! I am now talking of 
the three kinds of ashes; hearing this even destroys 
one’s sins and brings in good fame. When a cow 
evacuates her dung, just as the cow dung leaves 
her and is far from reaching the ground, one shoul 
catch it with one’s hand and this cowdung burnt 
with "Sadyojātādi i.e., Brahma Mantra" becomes 
ashes which are called “Santika Bhasma,” i.e., 
ashes producing peace. 

Mawel ent à Tad g a | 

states åa data ated: 1401 

"ifie aera HME U Aa: SIUD d 

Warest gde wer alfa usu 

Before the cowdung is about to reach the ground, 
the devotee should take it with his hand and uttering 


the six lettered Mantra, he is to burn the cowdung. 
The ashes from this are called Paustik Bhasma, 
i.e., ashes leading to nourishment. 

If the cowdung be burned with the Mantra 
“Haum,” the ashes of this are called “Kamada 
Bhasma i.e., ashes leading to the granting of 
desires, 

mea eae stereo: ype: d 

Tat MSG Wea g AMAT F We e NI 

w : PR 

AUN SN: gam Tea iE: AAA ST 007 i 

O Narada! On the full moon day, new moon 
day or on the eighth lunar day a man is to get up 
from his hed early in the morning and be pure and 
go the cow enclosure. He is to salute the cows and 


d take the cowdung, uttering the Mantra Haum. 


daai q Seen HOT VIR Ker | 
tarfagrgtīt: usu 

Warest g water Team West yy | 

zA g dan ipa q aa wo 

If he be a Brahmin, he is to collect the white 
cow dung; if he be a Ksattriya, he would take the 
red cow dung; a Vai$ya, yellow cowdung and if he 
be a Südra, he would take the black cowdung. 

verge yet eet at d 

quer ar gai grave ag Parag 10 n 


Book XI Chapter XI 


1293 


anggana at siamet g ar i 

dart fend cw fsreeffsra tara: u 11 i 

Then by the mantra “Namah” he is to form that 
into a ball and cover it with the husk of rice or 
some other grain and dry it in a sacred place, 
repeating the mantra *Haum". Bring fire from a 
forest or from the house of a Veda-knowing 
Brahmin and reduce the cowdung to ashes by this 
mantra, uttering the mantra Haum. 

DIEGO RENE HERES fragt: 1 

qai Terr wares qp Prefer u02 n 

dent West degsmi dei Wem | 

"Tangrifersearfür aretha wr 13 N 

Adaa uri g wear rna 1 

NETĀ WU Heal ATT: WU 0 14 |! 

Next take out the ashes carefully from the fire 
place (Agni Kunda) and place it in a new jar or 
pot, again remembering the mantra Haum". Mix 
with the ashes the Ketaki dust, the Patala flower 
dust, the root of the fragrant grass called khas khas, 
saffron and other sweet scented things with the 
mantra "Sadyojātam prapadyami,” etc. 

WO IAPS WATE AAT | 

Wares urdt gt ARATA: 015 N 

EJA dd: yer JEAN Y | 

Aitu q gas rH Wn We 16 N 


First perform the water bath, then the bath of] Svaha by the forefinger, 


the ashes. In case one cannot have the water bath, 
one is to have the ash bath. Washing the hands, 
feet 
Sarvavidyānām,” and uttering “Tatpurusa” 
one is to besmear one’s face with ashes and by the 


and head with the mantra "Īšānah 


etc., 


mantra "Aghora” apply ashes on one's chest; with 
the mantra Vāmadeva.” 
ain naig wur feum: | 
yira Ue yaa ufum 17 N 
VATFA Urdt eder ugerarenrd tq | 
saria frag g fadtad 118 n 
He is to use ashes on his navel; and with the 
mantra "Sadyo Jāta, etc.,” all over his body; he is 


to quit his former cloth and put on another fresh 
cloth. Wash your hands and feet and sip (do 
Acamana). It will serve the purpose if one simply 
uses Tripundrak and if one does not besmear the 
whole body with ashes. 

TATA „TA WT Merah 1 

miang U PATA 1 19 ll 

ATA da VOTU aut hd ada a | 

KĀ Ga arg areas fe ated u 20 u 

Before the midday one is to use Bhasma with 
water; but after the midday with dry ashes one is 
to draw the Tripuņdra lines of ashes with the 
forefinger, middlefinger and ringfinger. The head, 
forehead, ears, neck, heart, and the arms are the 
places whereon the Tripundras are used. 

wane wart qood 

wiqefacnrgrs frau era: 21 0 

aes uan auf aradda ania: 1 

HAUT q HUST HEAT FCM AE N22 N 

aed wea figfefus eat 1 

farrdefartt iret foremismr ara: 11 23 0 

"STEEP erat Pro 1 

"ers diygsrameardtsra gf HAT: 024 N 

On the head, the ashes are applied with five 
fingers and with the mantra "Haum”; on the 
forehead, the Tripundra is applied with mantra 
middlefinger and 
ringfinger; on the right ear, it is applied with 
"Sadyojáta" on the left ear, with 
"Vàmadeva" Mantra; on the neck with Aghora 
mantra by the middlefinger; on the chest with 
“Namah” mantra by the forefinger, middlefinger 


mantra; 


and ringfinger; on the right arm with vasat mantra 
by the three fingers; on the left arm with “Hum” 
mantra by the three fingers; and on the navel, the 
ashes are to be applied with the mantra I$anah 
sarva devanam by the middlefinger. 
welfare Var gf ager: a 
amei wan eret farupeaqed | ism: 25 ut 
Untied aed Wdlyecumo quur 


1294 Srimaddevibhagavatam 


formed rad sum gard were 126 ears are the seats of the two Ašvins and the neck is 

waist eat TUTTE T AM | where Gane$a resides. The Ksattriyas, Vaišyas, and 

afrava dar aya: WRT ae IST, W270 Südras are to use Tripundras without any mantra; 

udereramdtai mur xfüd AT d they are also not to use the ashes on the whole of 

“afi ugaona vizi fara srt "i 28 N the body. The lowest classes (e.g. the candalas, 

st MEAT TAT METRO Varese etc!) and the uninitiated persons are to use the 
RAGS Z: 1g Tripundraks without any mantra. 


The first line in every Tripundra is Brahma; the | Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Eleventh Book 
second line is Visnu; and the third, the topmost on the description of the greatness of the three 
line is Maha Deva. The line of ashes that is marked kinds of Bhasmas in the Mahāpurāņam 
by one finger is Ī$vara. The head is the place of Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses 
Brahma; the forehead is the site of I$vara; the two by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1294 Srimaddevibhagavatam 

aoe. S x 
ts Hm ad as 

CHAPTER XII 
On Holding the Tripundra and Urdhvapundra 
siano sara fere ii wor arr sen farferfára i 
Se spe send sue Um | "und ad wa gad deta wus 
UEN a ARTEO, ag araar VT Sp ETAT genet | 


fies afr at a gfe cf u 21 

Sri Narayana said: O Devarsi Narada! Hear now 
the great secret and the fruits of besmearing one's 
body with ashes, yielding all desire. The pure 
cowdung of the Kapila (brown) cow is to be taken 
up by the hand before it reaches the ground. It 
should not be like mire i.e, not like a liquid; it 
should not be also very hard nor should it emit a 
bad stench. 

sudes: ues Tgaratd afe 1 

dga Brava} aftertare |1 3 ui 

anaa anaes een farferfrüst | 

"uma Bee wes ated what ws 14 o 

And in case if the cowdung that has already 
fallen on the earth, has to be taken, it should be 
scraped off from the top and bottom; make it into 
a ball and then burn it in a pure fire, repeating the 
principal mantra. Take the ash and tie it in a piece 
of cloth and keep it in a pot. The pot in which the 
ashes are to be kept should be nice and good, hard, 
clean and sprinkled over for purification. 


aa Aafaa at EAST fufardq 6 u 

Uttering the principal mantra, one is to keep the 
ashes in the pot. The pot may be of metal, wood, 
earth, or cloth; or it can be kept in any other nice 
pot. The ashes can be kept in a silken bag where 
the mohurs are kept. In going to a distant land, the 
devotee can take the ashes himself or kept with his 
accompanying servent. 

fieret sen naa argentsfi ar i 

A Ag que camp Bn 07 d 

a dup etr fata a eum | 

werfen agoia Win us 

When it is to be given to somebody, it is to be 
given with both the hands; never with one hand. 
Never keep it in an unholy place. Never apply feet 
to the ashes, now throw it in an ordinary place nor 
ever cross it by your legs. 

ferfererorfarfer: egferutent watta: | 

dara fraget a ym u9 ui 

rā: durfād wer fado: Praufāreit à 

TAT orar Orel reia g ws 10 U 


Use always the ashes after purifying it with 


Book XI Chapter XH 


1295 


mantra. These rules of holding the Bhasma are 
according to the Smrtis. By holding Bhasma in this 
way, the devotee becomes, no doubt, like Siva. The 
ashes, that the Vaidik devotees of Siva prepare are 
to be taken with devotion. 

dimanti frag MET aires: | 

TA pate gri Adame da ated: 11 N 

Ws: aieka marn Ta | 

fraus ae gan maS + TĀ 11 12 u 

All can ask for that. But the ashes that the 
followers of the Tantra cult prepare, are taken by 
the Tāntriks only; it is pohibited to the Vaidiks. 
The Südras, Kāpālikas, and other heretics (e.g., 
Jains, Buddhists) can use the Tripundras. Never 
do they conceive in their minds that they would 
not take the Tripundra. 

spear aeaa ereamereamft uferat tee 1 

fxuvgumet war wem dumis w13 U 

fas: wath avr creat uferat ae | 

seer gg cw ve Aara PAA 14 u 

The holding on of Bhasma (ashes) is accroding 
to the Vedas. Therefore one who does not apply it 
falls down. The Brāhmaņas must use the 
Tripundras, repeating the mantra; and they are to 
besmear whole body with ashes; if they don’t do 
so, they are surely fallen. 

dat afe farferafar: dmana: i 

da wearin gd a yga 15 N 

wee fafag qp rg Prone deat aa i 

Aut agger fayro farfeereaw 1 1 6 N 

He can never expect to get liberation even after 
koti births who does not besmear his body with 
ashes devotedly and who does not hold the 
Tripundras. O Narada! The vile man who does not 
hold Bhasma duly, know the birth of that man as 
futile as 1s the birth of a hog. 


frau à fatrafa idfa rada qu 18 n 


Consider that body as a burning ground which 
does not bear the Tripundra marks. The virtuous 
man should not cast a glance at him even. Fie on 
that forehead which does not carry the Tripundra! 
Fie on that village which has not a single temple 
of Siva! Fie on that birth which is void of the 
worship of Siva! Fie on that knowledge which is 
void of the knowledge of Siva. Know them to be 
the slanderes of Siva who mock at Tripundra. Those 
that put on the Tripundras, bear Siva in their 
forehead. 

mafa a à aaen mafa ae E 

"er pg went a mm 19 n 

spares erd raran, 1 

IGA Ay a sgan anA À 20 

The Brahmin who is Niragnik (without the holy 
fire) is not nice in every way. So if the worship of 
Siva be not done with any Tripundra is not 
praiseworthy, even it be attended with abundance 
of other offerings. Those who do not besmear their 
bodies with ashes or who do not use the Tripundras, 
get their previous good deeds converted into bad 
ones. 

a: yatai ad facts seeft 1 

Tet data Browser a mum (1 2 1 1 

ferar delfaaran vardvarae esum | 

wd Gg da yanagi WaT 422 

Unless the Tripundra mark is taken up according 
to the Sastras, the Vaidik Karmas (works) or those 
performed according to the Smrtis prove injurious; 
the good works whatsoever done by any man count 
for nothing; the holy words heard seem as if 
unheard and the study of the Vedas counted as if 
not studied. 


acanat a Agog uta Sm 1 
GA der GA AM GA uri FAT qu: 23 N 
ger aram Prgug at a Ter 
TAIN IT zrhenfireof T: GATI 11 2 4 N 
ferrata Pc aad AMATI fg w: | 


ae goers Sarge U MOT i25 N 


1296 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


The study of the Vedas, Sacrifices, Charities, 
asceticisms, vows and fastings of that man, who 
does not use the Tripundra, all become fruitless. 
Without using Bhasma (ashes) if one wants lib- 
eration, then that desire is equivalent to live after 
taking poison. There is no doubt in this. The Cre- 
ator has not made the forehead vertically high nor 
round; but he has made it slightly slanting and 
curved fit to have the Tripundra. 

wast a word fe fred a ade i 

frem: waved wore adefear 26 u 

carte ram Wal 3 Hata ATERN i 

a tat A AT LA east AAT: 112.7 N 

ferr frdanfrqud vr farirur eg | 

Making thus the forehead, the Creator wants, 
asit were, to inform everyone that every one ought 
it use Tripundra marks; the curved lines also are 
made visible for this purpose. Still the ignorant il- 
literate man does not put up the Tripundra. Unless 
the Brahmanas use the curved Tripundras, their 
meditation won't be successful; they will not have 
liberation, knowledge, nor their ascetiscism would 
bear any fruit. 


dace Vist ferent AT srdq 11 2 8 N 

PAT fer fair mièr foramen 

As the Südras have no right in the study of the 
Vedas, so the Brahmanas have not any right to 
perform the worship of Siva, etc., unless they use 
the Tripundras. 

Weave e«t vara uda «29 N 

WOT AHN TAA TAT | 

arava ated wena say, 11 30 N 

Syra q CURCCCICRCICIC ELE 

Ad HTG TH FS U ye g 031 tl 

TNT ES Yel gA U | 

FATSTATĀTATAT wer UTgga fate 32 u 

vaig werde Hauge ad: | 

wena agg umdfüfü 133 0 

First of all, facing eastward, and washing hands 
and feet, he ought to make a resolve and then to 


take a bath of the ashes mentally, controlling his 
breath. Then taking the ashes of the Agnihotra 
sacrifice he is to put some ashes on his own head, 
uttering "Īšāna” mantra. Then he is to recite the 
Purusa Sükta Mantra and apply ashes on his face; 
with the Aghora mantra on his chest; with the 
Vamadeva mantra, on his anus; with Sadyojata 
mantra on his legs; and with the mantra Om, he is 
to besmear his whole body with ashes. This is called 
the bath of fire by the Munis. 

adata qpaterentad wu: | 

aa: Wares gererqWuggu wemeft 11 34 1 

feriferrqud feftrat ret wd TÈ | 

dadaa ada wa cw ou35 

So bring all the actions to a successful issue one 
is to take first of all this bath of fire. Washing his 
hands, then, he is to make Acaman duly; and, 
according to the above-mentioned rules, he is to 
apply ashes on his forehead, heart, and all round 
the neck with the five mantras above-mentioned; 
or with each mantra he is to apply the Tripundras. 

gadai warranty UI | 

IETEK a erf sra vr eater 36 t 

Ter TĪRAI feo: enr VATA | 

aan aden - we aree 37 

Thus all woiks are fructified and he gets the right 
to do all the Vaidik actions. The Südras, even, are 
not to use the ashes touched by the lowest classes. 
All the actions ordained by the Šāstras are to be 
done after being besmeared with ashes of the 
Agnihotra sacrifice; otherwise no action will bear 
any fruit. 

wed vires aut gratia! qenfausr i 

we crete ae aterqua 4 sm u38 N 

fruuguyftagat at esate: ND: | 

w fa trreftaenttig armen 039 1 

wur ut wer dat mad Ga: | 

All his truth, purity, Japam, offering, oblations 
to the sacrifice, bathing in the holy place of 
pilgrimage, and worshipping the gods become 


Book XI Chapter XIII 1297 


useless, who does not hold Tripundra. No fear of| performed in honour of the manes of deceased 
disease, sins, famine, or robbers comes to the) ancestors) the Brahmins purify the rows where 
Brahmins who use Tripundra and rosary of} persons are fed; so much so that the Devas glorify 
Rudrāksa and thus remain always pure. In the end,| them. One must use the Tripundra marks before 


they get the Nirvana liberation. marks before one performs any Sraddha, Japam 

a dfe: are graut fani: aut nson sacrifice, offering oblations or worshipping the 

Smp UA WI BA aged Gras | Višvedevās; then one gets deliverance from the 

gagoz: Yarn KAĻSSTATA Wr: N jaws of death. O Narada! I am now speaking further 
serere spetsfü HAA dt u 41 N of the greatness in holding the Bhasma; listen. 

Set TATA FTP Cae Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Eleventh Book 
ZEISE: 0121 on the greatness in holding the Tripundra and 


During the time of Sraddhas (solemn obsequies | Bhasma in the Mahāpurāņam Srimaddevibhagavatam 
of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book XI Chapter XIII 


1297 


useless, who does not hold Tripundra. No fear of| performed in honour of the manes of deceased 


disease, sins, famine, or robbers comes to the) ancestors) the Brahmins purify the rows where 
Brahmins who use Tripundra and rosary of} persons are fed; so much so that the Devas glorify 
Rudrāksa and thus remain always pure. In the end,| them. One must use the Tripundra marks before 


they get the Nirvana liberation. 
waar: sree Vsat fan: BRT n 40 t 
mÈ ad wa at sata ql | 
satqug: arem KS fa Aa: i 
TET ET TSA enerenfir 4 11 41 11 
efr sfera AEII TEIRRA 
BIENS: 012 11 


marks before one performs any Sraddha, Japam 

sacrifice, offering oblations or worshipping the 

Visvedevas; then one gets deliverance from the 

jaws of death. O Narada! I am now speaking further 

of the greatness in holding the Bhasma; listen. 

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Eleventh Book 
on the greatness in holding the Tripundra and 


During the time of Sraddhas (solemn obsequies | Bhasma in the Mahāpurāņam Srimaddevibhagavatam 


of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


CHAPTER XIII 


On the Greatness of Bhasma 


siame Zara 

Reader aana A | 

AA KET? wed wed TATA 1 N 

wh WEN yi da eT uuu sm | 

"diat amd ure Marat fare u 2 u 

TEM yt atga aa 1 

ARAA raņeja wou3 

Nārāyaņa said: O Best of Munis! What shall I 
describe to you the effects of using the Bhasma! 
Only applying the ashes takes aways the 
Mahāpātakas (great sins) as well as other minor 
sins of the devotee. I speak this truly, very truly 
unto you. Now hear the fruits of using simply the 
ashes. By using Bhasma, the knowledge of Brahma 
comes to the Yatis; the desires of enjoyments are 


The Šūdras get merits in using Bhasmas and the 
sins of other are destoyed. To besmear the body 
with ashes and to apply the curved Tripuņdras 1s 
the source of good to all beings. The Šruti says so. 

were waa feet Afad sa 

qma da wem feda; Prises 6 n 

wegen Wei faert fest sf 1 

IAU re ver fray Prügenn 7 u 

maai feret fard ferent sp 1 

aio da ver ferias risen S u 

fami a refert ferret afeat ape: 1 

aja valis PARE uon 

waeadirdeurfefu: 


S lā šī 


That this implies the performance of sacrifice 


eradicated; the improvement is felt in all the| by all, is also asserted in the Srutis. To apply ashes 
vrituous actions of the householders and the studies| to the whole of the body and to use Tripundra is 
of the Vedas and other Šāstras of the Brahmacārīs! common to all the religions; it has nothing, in 


get their increase. 

N rf - ! 
srartedgo ta aer feras rds 4 u 
ware wdsyarat fer fuent safe: 1 
Teritageri xra qe free AUER Ss N 


82 


principle, contradictory to others. So the Sruti says. 
This Tripundra and the besmearing with ashes is 
the special mark of the devotees of Siva; this again 
is asserted in the Sruti This Bhasma and the 
Tripundra are the special marks by which one is 


1298 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


characterised; it is said so in the Vaidik Sruti. Siva, 
Visnu, Brahma, Indra, Hiranyagarbha, and their 
Avataras, Varuna and the whole host of the Devas 
all gladly used this Tripundra and ashes. 

SATA TRA TAT RT K: 1 

udeni war SRL Vājā niin 

agamia areena: 

Wfefsrsr ed eT B di "12 

ara: arf: vrxvfrcep ient: | 

aadi mur PETA 113 uU 

Durga, Laksmi, and Sarasvati etc., all the wives 
of the gods daily anoint their bodies with ashes 
and use the Tripundras. So even the Yaksas, 
Raksasas, Gandharvas, Siddhas, Vidyadharas, and 
the Munis have applied Bhasma and Tripundra This 
holding on of ashes is not prohibited to anybody; 
the Bráhmanas, Ksattriyas, Vaisyas, Südras, mixed 
castes, and the vile classes all can use this Bhasma 
and Tripundra. 

sayert Agog w À: wureftd gar i 

a wa frst fagrat dat giga nign 

Rafi aftr: tei a: VATAETUT | 

fastest tat ufenefravaadfur 1 15 0 

O Nārada! In my opinion they only are the 
Sādhus (saints) who use this Tripundra and besmear 
their bodies with ashes. In seducing this Lady 
Mukti (liberation is personified here as a lady) one 
is to have this gem of Siva Lingam, the five lettered 
Mantra Namah Sivāya as the loving principle, and 
holding on the ashes as the charning medicine, (as 
in seducing any ordinary woman, gems, jewels and 
ornaments, love and charming medicines are 
necessary). 

aie Ga TTT wart ar dfetsfü ar i 

TA sien Hērda: wuedlel quee 16 u 


dikti su BLA 18 I 


O Narada! Know the place where the person, 


who has besmeared the body with ashes and who 
has used Tripundra takes his food as where Sankara 
and Sankari have taken their food together. Even 
if anybody himself not using the Bhasma, follows 
another who has used the Bhasma, he will be soon 
honoured in society even if he a sinner. What more 
than this, if anybody himself not using the ashes, 
praises another who uses the Bhasma, he is freed 
from all his sins and gets soon honour and respect 
in the society. 

frgartut rayada fe aw | 

meii gt da da adage w19 ul 

an fan ffir Argui soma quant i 

All the studies of the Vedas come to him though 
he has not studied the Vedas, all the fruits of hearing 
the Srutis and the Purāņas come to him, though he 
has not heard them, all the fruits of practised 
Dharma come to him though he has not practised 
any, if he always uses this Tripundra on his 
forehead and gives food to a beggar who uses 
Tripundra on his forehead. 

naa arg ga fafa: 42000 

mag dafaci msh fe wq 1 

Even in countries as Bihar (Kikata, etc., that 
have got a bad name) if there be a single man in 
the whole country whose body is besmeared with 
ashes and who uses this Tripundra, that is 
considered then as Kasi (Benares city). 

BIS VITA ar RASANT: 27 

ARTA TA AT A USA AT KAT, | 

ware ata fè TATA n221 

atsfū ai nRa = at orange i 

Any body, of a bad or of a good character, be 
he a Yogi or a sinner, using Bhasma, is worshipped 
like my son, Brahma. O Narada! Even if an 
hypocrite uses Bhasma, he will have a good future, 
which cannot be attained even by performing 
hundreds of sacrifices. 


Hunte ATT Sram ÀT 9: 23 u 
RaRa aR gu u graut wem WW | 


Book XI Chapter XII 


Prat aodai En ART 1 24 N 

TARIS NOEN MEARAN | 

If any body uses Bhasma daily either through 
good companion or through neglect, he will be 
entitled, like me, to the highest worship. O Nārada! 
Brahma, Visnu, Mahešvara, Parvati, Laksmī, 
Sarasvati and all the other Devas become satisfied 
with simply holding on this Bhasma. 


Aaa A aga A duin Wee: 025 0 

a dearer que Argun wr GT | 

aM aay sate didamrs are 026 N 

exi aukadga aot ae urevitu. 

SIBI tat verfergich Ti ATA Wat 27 N 

The merits that are obtained by using only the 
Tripundra, cannot be obtained by gifts, sacrifices, 
severe austerities, and going to sacred places of 
pilgrimages. They cannot give one sixteenth part 
of the result that accrues from holding the 
Tripundra. As a King recognises a person as his 
own, whom he has given some object of recogni- 
tion, so Bhagavàn Sankara knows the man who 


uses Tripundras as His own person. 
aa frafaggie Fa yf 
fiserrfrats-ererrferart ogres TETT i 28 N 
amdanad Matattta Wen | 
Rragatsmremt ejmetznatsfu R: 129 N 
They that hold Tripundras with devotion can 
have Bholā Natha under their control; no distinction 
is made here between the Brahmanas and Cāņdālas. 
Even if any body be fallen from the state of 
observing all the Ācāras or rules of conduct proper 
to his ASrama and if he be faulty in not attending 
to all his duties, he will be Mukta (freed) if he has 
used even once this Bhasma Tripundras. 
aphasia ndes en | 
AT wre ule A He ad WE 30 u 
Prigia ga wa fe NME | 
Prasmei dat ara Tes forarqu 31 N 
frarctareat gua a fi dtef vr sre à 
warden def ager uftefdem 32 1 


1299 


Never bother Youself with the Caste or the 
family of the holder of the Tripundras. Only see 
whether the sign Tripundra exists in his forehead. 
If so, consider him entitled to respect. O Narada! 
There is no mantra higher than this Siva Mantra; 
there is no Deity higher than Siva; there is no 
worship of greater merit-giving powers than the 
worship of Siva; so there is no Tirtha superior to 
this Bhasma. This Bhasma is not an ordinary thing; 
it is the excellent energy (semen virile) of fire of 
the nature of Rudra. 

wet wdgcarat wdurdfeyiterm | 

aiat arserit aft meat ar dfšdtsft ar 33 u 

arti wate giaa: | 

anaa: utu: adada: l 

adds Gam: Used Hed war usan 

All sorts of troubles vanish, all sorts of sins are 
destroyed by this Bhasma. The country where the 
lowest castes reside with their bodies besmeared 
with ashes, is linhabited always by Bhagavan 
Sankara, Bhagavati Uma, the Pramathas (the 
attendants of Siva) and by all the Tirthas. Bhagavan 
Sankara, first of all, held this Bhasma as an 
ornament to his body by purifying it first with 
“Sadyo Jata,” etc., the five mantras. 


rd senrfor wera wenreas 
gif Safer gan n 35 n 
efr sfera. erg? GHEIRE 
THEMSATT: 11 13 11 
Therefore, if any body uses the Bhasma 
Tripundra according to rules on his forehead, the 
writings written at the time of his birth by Vidhata 
Brahma will all be cancelled, if they had been bad. 
There is no doubt in this. 

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Eleventh 
Book on the greatness of Bhasma in the 
Mahāpurāņam Šrīmaddevībhāga vatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. 


1300 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER XIV 
On Holding the Vibhiti 


startet samet 

amena at wert at War | 

wea nair mafa frase a Gort: ud 

gaa: BTA: Val: yora ana i 

ada qoer erereareragmida fis: 2 N 

Narayana said: O Narada! Whatever is given as 
charities to any man besmeared with holy ashes, 
takes away instantly all the sins of the donor. The 
Srutis, Smrtis, and all the Puranas declare the 
greatness of this Bhasma. So the twice-born must 
accept this. 

Raa stern aparfeseiest erferd ess i 

seas ferae wélud uz i 


Whoever holds this Tripundra, of this holy ashes 
at the three Sandhya times, is freed from all his 
sins and goes to the region of Siva. The Yogi who 
takes a bath of ashes throughut his body during 
the three Sandhyas, gets his Yoga developed soon. 
By this bath of ashes, many generations are lifted 


up. 

THETA TEN: HAE Mā |d 

TAA IETEIKT, 05 ul 

addy aque addig arn | 

Aches Tt Wd RETA ITU: 6 Ul 

O Narada! This ash bath is many times superior 
to the water bath. To take once a bath of ashes 
secures to one all merits acquired by bathing in all 
the sacred places of pilgrimages. There is no doubt 
in this. 

BUB CES "t per aqaa: 1 

wem weeRaftduem 07 ou 
Tae Tat ufāsi Aa fem d 


vagt Rand ear era: rad Pra: ts u 
By this bath of ashes, all the Mahāpātakas (great 
heinous sins) and other minor sins as well are 


instantly destroyed as heaps of wood are brought 
down to ashes in a moment by the fire. No bath is 
holier than this one. This is first mentioned by Siva 
and He took Himself this bath. 


war wg waren uus rafa: 1 
adaig err venari welt 9 ul 
werent: SATA U: AAT a 
ata write a fe eet a dort: 1100 
3p qmen gg ufiquir stata qt | 


Wenpupfxe ger fret a aera: ug 

isana vBIFWBÉT a: GATT | 

v gp asà deaf 112 1 

Since then this bath of ashes been taken with 
great care by Brahma and the other Devas and the 
Munis for their own good in all the virtuous actions. 
This bath of ashes is termed the bath of fire. So he 
who applies ashes on his head, gets the state of 
Rudra while he is in this body of five elements. 
Those who are delighted to see persons with this 
ashes on their bodies are respected by the Devas, 
Asuras, and Munis. He who honours and gets up 
on seeing a man besmeared with ashes is respected 
even by Indra, the Lord of Heavens. 

smagumi seat wearer | 

Wut teeta AMA ATA fra IL 13 N 

"pcne raram fred Sr eat Fa: TW I 

sere IERĪT ar ATAVLATS MATA |1 14 i 

admain: wr arf aea sf 1 

Even if any body eats any uneatables, then the 
sin incurred thereby wo’nt touch him, if his body 
be then besmeared with ashes. He who first takes 
a water bath and then an ash-bath, be he a 
Brahmacārī or an house-holder or an anchorite 
(Vānaprasthī) is freed of all sins and gets in the 
end the highest state. 

ska ii op u1s ll 
RAM ITT eer: 
Gy eae kūti "16n 


Book XI Chapter XIV 


1301 


Specially for the Yatis (ascetics), this ash bath 
is very necessary. This ash hath is superior to the 
water bath. For the bonds of Nature, this pleasure 
and pain, are cut asunder by this ash bath. The 
Munis know this Prakrti as moist and wet; and 
therefore Prakrti binds men. 

Wed WETUTS STURM erate | 

WAT SÉ aerate Sam u 17 u 

If any body desires to cut asunder this bondage 
of the body, he will find no other remedy for this 
in the three worlds than this Holy Bath of ashes. 

vere int cer ufērard Wu ow: 1 

wR BET pi gd wd wo ao gis 

ATT: FTAATT T V: TATA | 

vanam: Krastā meta 19 N 

In ancient days the ashes were first offered to 
the Devī gladly by the Devas for their protection, 
their good and purification, when they first saw 
the ashes. Therefore any body who takes this bath 
Of fire, gets all his sins destroyed and he goes to 
Šiva Loka. 

TRA TAH STAT: | 

qier watfir msia: 11 20 n 

agate: TT: FT: wear orent: | 

aged were queer aft 210 

He who daily uses this ashes has not to suffer 
from the oppression of the Rāksasas, Pišācas, 
Pūtanās and the other Bhütas or leprosy, the chronic 
enlargement of spleen, all sorts of fistulae, from 
eighty sorts of rheumatism, sixty four kinds of 
bilious diseases, twenty two varieties of phlegmatic 
diseases and from tigers, thieves, and other vicious 
planetary influence. 

wae AT era aem WM: | 

Yount wet a Duis u22 1 

"jr emerit rw ure A HITU: | 

TET PIT a a: Hishy may | 

U MAOI yeaa a Wy 11 1 1 

wenfaftr were d afudidwummq 123 0 


Rather he gets the power to suppress all these 


as a lion kills easily a mad elephant. Any body 
who first mixes the ashes with pure cold water and 
then besmears his body with that and puts on the 
Tripundras, attains soon the Highest Brahma. He 
who holds the Tripundra of ashes becomes sinless 
and goes to the Brahma loka. 

aaa amit exerexert festi gery 1 

ietu gd wi WISHINGIHRUQ 024 N 

aes wp USA, | 

argtaigad UTd aera WET Ha 0 25 N 

He can even wipe off the ordnances of the fate 
on his forehead to go to the jaws of Death, if he 
uses, according to the Šāstras, the Tripundras on 
his forehead. If the ashes be used on the neck, then 
the sin, incurred through the neck, is completely 
destoryed. If the ashes be used on the neck, then 
the sin incurred by the neck, in eating uneatable 
things is entirely destoryed. If the ashes be held on 
the arms, then the sin incurred by the arms is 
destroyed. If it be held on the breast, the sin done 
mentally is destroyed. 
"reat Rrapi urd Te ad BA | 
UZIET TTT, i 2 6 NI 

cet wrest uere Pares | 

aaa Tear r IRIN 0 27 uU 

Prea ep aut at À pu | 

If it be held on the navel, the sin incurred by the 
generative organ is destoryed. If it be held on the 
anus, then the sin incurred by the anus is destoryed. 
And if it be held on the sides, then the sin incurred 
in embracing other's wives is destroyed. So, know 
fully, to use ashes is highly commendable. Every- 
where three curved lines of ashes are to be used. 
Know these lines as Brahma, Visnu and Maheša; 
Daksinagni, Garhapatya fire and Ahavaniva fire; 
the Sattva, Rajas and Tamas qualities, Heaven, 
earth and Pātāla (nether regions). 

Tea feet fergrareraraend Wd: 028 N 

srüfégpsud wei mend wp ym | 

veneer cela erar venta i 29 N 


1302 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


If the wise Brahmin holds properly the ashes 
his Mahapatakas are destoryed. He is not involved 
in any sin. Rather he, without any questionings, 
gets his liberation. All the sins, in the body 
besmeared with ashes, are burnt down by the ashes, 
are burnt down by the ashes, which is of the nature 


Ati ergo urd grgamēstt ut Es: 1 

TATA! srareastarfeani we: wem 11 36 u 

TATA ESTA Raate Nia: | 

"edid wane a a warstradd u37 u 

Even if at the time of death one takes a bath of 
ashes, though he has committed an inordinate 


of fire, into ashes. He is called Bhasmanistha (a|amount of vices, all his sins are soon destoryed. 
devotee of Bhasma i.e. ashes) who takes a bath of | By this bath ashes, the Self is purified, the anger is 


ashes, who besmears his body with ashes, who use 
the Tripundras of ashes, who sleeps in ashes. 

TAMAS SHAS sit E: 1 

wert fareraartat srardturfrqugen: 130 t 

STETRTT a qt wens sft By: | 

qaen tenants SED 031 N 

He is called also Atmanistha (a devotee of 
Atman (Self), At the approach of such a man, the 
Demons, Pišācas, and very serious diseases run 
away to a distance. 

wats afseatgxdta = sra: | 

ARATE ae utet ITT HOTTA N 32 u 

qenia Gat vam tered YU | 

fagegenfvi ser aga: 033 ü 

There is no doubt in this. In as much as these 
ashes reveal the knowledge of Brahma, it is called 
Bhasita from Bhasma, to shine; because it eats up 
the sins, it is called Bhasma; because it increases 
the eight supernatural powers Anima, etc., it is 
called Bhüti; because it protects the man who uses 
it, it is called "Raksa." 

after: nafaa: vind ata A ra: à 

GU XU Wem und umet 34 N 

aani Hear A: EAT AAT | 

aad axa HE dm AA 35 u 

As the sins are all destroyed by the mere 
remembrance of Bhagavan Rudra, so seeing the 
person using the Tripundra, the demons, bad spirits 
and other vicious hosts of spirits fly away quickly, 
trembling with fear. As a fire burns a great forest 
by its own strength, so this bath of ashes burns the 
sins of those who are incessantly addicted to sins. 


destroyed; the senses are calmed down. The man 
who uses even once this Bhasma comes to Me; he 
has not to take any more births in future. 

geet att surge: 1 

afad viet qp wdurd: wast 1138 Ul 

STEERS cat REAA eret AT: | 

frei d urge nan R d fas: 39 u 

On Monday Amāvasyā (also on the full moon 
day) if one sees the Siva Lingam, with his body 
besmeared all over with ashes, one's sins will all 
be destroyed. (All the sins are not seen; hence the 
tithi is called Amāvas.) If people use Bhasma daily, 
all their desires will be frutified whether they want 
longevity, or prosperity or Mukti. 

Rug wai yod sarferrisTereenq | 

BOT Tae: Uer À AÀ eA: N 40 N 

Rygai spr verdad A ym | 

Praia aed verres T femmes u 41 N 

GATI ATATUTGACA GTA, | 

The Tripundra that represents Brahma, Visņu 
and Siva is very sacred. Seeing the man with 
Tripundra on, the fierce Raksasa or mischievous 
creatures flee to a distance. There is no doubt in 
this. After doing the Sauca (necessary cleanliness) 
and other necessary things, one bathes in pure cold 
water and besmears his body with ashes from head 
to foot. 

hae reu FIT $2 STETRWTUEH 42 ! 

Prat ; : 

RET ameut GAT TAN: FTA ATA: 0 43 N 

By taking the water bath only, the outward 
unclean things are destroyed. But the ash bath not 
only cleanse the outer external uncleanliness but 


Book XI Chapter XIV 


1303 


cleanse also all the internal uncleanliness. So even 
if one does not take the water bath, one ought to 
take this ash bath. There is to be no manner of 
doubt in this. 

Aga web were feat gt | 

weed afar SEAT 4.4 N 

aad dere Praga wa | 

UATRAGATAKU A FTTATĒT ATU 45S il 

All the religious actions performed without this 
ash bath seem as if no actions are done at all. This 
ash bath is stated in the Vedas. Its another name is 
the Fire Bath. By this ash bath both outside and 
inside are purified. So a man who uses ashes gets 
the entire fruit of worshipping Siva. 

afgavata disor urferargriat Wem i 

arsti atfēvīt Fret areot FTTETA 46 N 

A Maeda TTT see feat YA 1 

TART Agel da Wu: 047 

By the water Bath only the outside dirt is 
removed; but by this bath of ashes, outside dirts 
and inside dirts, both are fully removed. If this 
water bath be taken many times daily, still without 
an ash bath, one's heart is not purified. What more 
shall I speak of the greatness of ashes, the Vedas 
only appreciate its glories rightly! Yea, very 
rightly! 

"gi ae "greg: addera: 1 

WAM a: Halas ARA It 48 N 

Or Maha Deva, the Gem of all the Devas, knows 
the greatness of this Bhasma. Those who perform 
rites and works prescribed by the Vedas, without 
taking this bath of ashes, do not get even a tithe of 
the fruits of their works done. 

aaedeoratedaft arena aga: i 

a: RT gera remet aamfāttr u49 u 

Ww Uae: Taos sepa: 1 

Wrest Wea c TSA ay «50 i 

Only that man will be entitled to the entire fruits 
of the Vedas who perform this bath of ashes duly. 
This is the opinion of the Vedas. This bath of ashes 
purifies more the things that are already pure; thus 
the Sruti says. 


a aRar at rere nguah AT | 

sridtatett: eidg Iran fist: 51 u 

Aas gi aeea | 

meS pd TAA WIR: 52 ll 

That wretch who does not take the bath of ashes 
as aforesaid is a Great Sinner. There is no doubt in 
this. By this bath greater interminable merits accure 
than what is obtained by innumerable baths aken 
by the Brahmanas on the Vāruņī momentous 
occasion. So take this bath carefully in the morning, 
mid-day and evening. This bath of ashes is ordained 
in the Vedas. 

STETETT urd sitet wean afer wae i 

Wad q NEIE MAC: 153 0 

adamam qam A araa Aa: | 

fattracnaviratste rame feat fea: 154 u 

So know those who are against this bath 
mentioned in the Vedas, are verily fallen! After 
evacuating oneself of one’s urine and faeces, one 
ought to take this bath of ashes. Otherwise men 
will not be purified. Even if one performs duly the 
water bath and if one does not take this bath of 
ashes, that man will not be purified. 

ferent garam arftrerraft ardfūr i 

ammang went xenemd Spi 55 d 

yE ador war ward: | 

VIETĀ RTS aoa: 1 56 N 

So he cannot get any right to do any religious 
actions. After evacuating one's abdomen of the 
outgoing air, after yawning, after holding sexual 
intercourse, after spitting and sneezing, and after 
easing oneself of phlegm, one ought to take this 
bath of ashes. 

Was yaaa STATE wen | 

mama Waa Sed aga u57 i 

Stet CATAL AGIA CHAS ATMS CATT: | 

O Narada! Thus I have described to you here 
the greatness of Sri Bhasma. I am again telling 
you more of it specially. Listen attentively. 

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Eleventh 
Book on the greatness in holding the Bibhüti (ashes) 
in the Mahāpurāņam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1304 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER XV 
On Using the Tripundra and Urdhvapundra Marks 


starr Sara 

aiftaReniahttader deter ATETA | 

aoia saed feque ae fud 

werarfererdyener ue wd fm: BAT: | 

Tends: vats fnis drag u2 1 

Narayana said: Only the twice born are to take 
this Tripundra on the forehead and the other parts 
of the body after carefully purifying the ashes by 
the mantra Agniriti Bhasma, etc. The Brahmanas, 
Ksattriyas, and Vai$yas are known as the twice- 
born, (the Dvijas). So the Dvijas ought to take daily 
this Tripundra with great care. 

weet wunp us fus seat | 

qeri fast: enr AEA U ITT t 3 N 

ferrent verear a: U ara à 

aqi Ura wate A MT: 14 i 

O Brahmana! Those who are purified with the 
ceremony of the holy thread, are called the Dvijas. 
For these the taking of Tripundra as per Sruti is 
very necessary. Without taking this Vibhüti, any 
good work done is as it were not done. There is no 
doubt in this. 

A magus vnnd tmt fra | 

wet ya seat western 5 

mast qetagatera yfaga | 

"m wera A kaa 6 N 

a aaaftranistt maA g 1 

Maat war werd tuf Une 7 od 

Wanted A NANREN, | 

Kaa Wat aege: IWATE: 1s it 

Even the japam of Gayatri is the most important 
and the chief thing of the Brahmanahood. But that 
is not advised if the Tripundra be not taken. O 
Munis! As long as the ashes born of Agni are not 
applied on the forehead, one is not entitled to be 
initiated in the Gayatri Mantra. O Brahmana! 


Unless ashes he applied on the forehead, no one 
will recognise you as a Brāhmaņa. For this reason 
I take this holding of the merit-giving Tripundra 
as the cause of the Brahmanahood. 

ragi fad war were uftada 1 

UA aaron ĒRA wed Meter 19 u 

"rema wear wifeiftiragerdae | 

MA Tan gerard Wea Ware 110-1 

I speak this verily unto you, that he is recognised 
as a Bráhmana and literary on whose forehead there 
is seen the white ashes purified by the mantra. He 
is entitled to the state of a Brahmana who is 
naturally very eager to collect the ashes as he collect 
the invaluable gems and jewels. 

"weg vest dirsa | 

a dso gir Wat sereni Spe u 11 d 

ser wes IRBIS 1 

UO aise sft aa: wed wed AdTad u12 N 

Those who are not naturally eager to collect the 
Bhasma as they are naturally eager to collect gems 
and jewels, are to be known as Cāņdālas in some 
of their previous births. Those who are not naturally 
joyous in holding Tripundra, were verily Candalas 
in their previous births. This I tell you truly very 
truly. 

MAINT TT YS THOMA 1 

a We uh uH umqaf A KE: 13 Ul 

. Rafeu verear a: fret yara à 

a get: Aake weet enge: o 

adatai werercoratsra: 0 UU" 

fayRemoi rera Has Sera i 

Weser ufeat à srafag v: u 14 u 

Those who eat roots and fruits without holding 
ashes go to the terrible hells. “He who worships 
Siva without having Bibhüti on his forehead, that 
wretch is a Siva hater and goes to hell after his 
death. He who does not hold Vibhüti is not entitled 


Book XI Chapter XV 


1305 


to any religious act." Without taking Vibhüti, if 
you make a gift of Tula Purusa made of gold, you 
won't get any fruits. Rather you will have to go to 
hell! 

aaradterfed: deat fane fü 1 

wem dear weder Rrgfenfadifü u 15 u 

"arre: vitam amd: Wi: aeter i 

arf qp arferamerirararaumfaenq 11 16 N 

As the Brahmanas are not to perform their 
Sandhyās without their holy threads, so without 
this Vibhüti, one ought not also to perform one's 
Sandhya. If at times a man by chance has no holy 
thread, he can do his Sandhyà by muttering the 
Gayatri or by fasting. But there is no such rule in 
holding Bhasma. 

fara aer fter URRY: safe | 

fragfrarui Ram afe dari afer a: 017 ui 

were sare firni ar fast: 1 

"rem Haie! erararerarier aer fase: u 18 N 

If one performs Sandhya, without having any 
Vibhiti, he is liable to incur a sin; as without 
holding this Bhasma, no right can come to him to 
perform his Sandhya. As a man of lowest caste 
acts contrary and incurs a sin if he hears the Veda 
mantra, so a twice-born incurs a sin if he performs 
Sandhya without having his Tripundra. 

were a ae: Hear eratera: | 

dort aes si sm wer fee: 19: H 

wad at rasa q lisse ar aaa: | 

"Igi atest Ars ufent eT AAT 20 N 

emet pasts fast: teag | 

q dasi urarfr STETĒTB aa: WaT N 21 N 

The twiceborn must therefore collect his 
thoughts with his heart intent on this Tripundra 
whether it be according to Srauta or Smārta 
method—or in absence thereof the Laukika 
Bhasma. Of whatsoever sort is the Bhasma, it is 
always pure. In the Sandhya and other actions of 
worship, the twiceborn ought to be very careful 
and punctilious in using this Bhasma. 


ATT at ATRIVĪETUTOTA, 1 

materia wefan q 122 

weyerad maA aftr | 

No sin can enter into the body of one besmeared 
with ashes. For this reason, the Brahmanas ought 
always to use ashes with great care. One is to hold 
the Tripundra, six Angulas high or greater by the 
fore, middle and ring fingers of the right hanc 

Aaa S did ARA 123 N 

HAA KAA GA BS ATA WIA: | 

SEATS giten SHUT MEAT ECT N24 NI 


Ifany body uses Tripundra, shining and brilliant, 
and extending from eye to eye, he becomes, no 
doubt, a Rudra. The ring-finger is the letter “A,” 
the middle finger is “U” and the forefinger is "M"; 
so the Tripundra marks drawn by the above three 
fingers is of the nature of the three gunas. The 
Tripundra should be drawn by the middle, fore, 
and ring fingers in a reverse way (from the left of 
the forehead to its right). 

at wd aame Yor | 

walaan gatur: fugere wats TAT u 26 N 

sremifarereatgt SRAM aT: | 

fra vie waterodterasitrafiah 027 0 

I will now tell you an anecdote, very ancient. 
Listen. Once Durvāsā, the head of the ascetics, with 
his body besmeared with ashes and with 
Rudraksam, all over, on his body went to the region 
of the Pitrs, uttering loudly ^O Sankara, of the Form 
of All! O Siva! O Mother Jagadambe, the Source 
of all auspiciousness! 

ATA repere Arami: | 

waster qp Wwegenratfürams: 028 N 

MATA uum wg aise | 

ATT wf Wer 29 UI 

The Pitrs Kavya-Vālās, etc., (Kavya Vālanalah 
Somah Yamah scaivāryamā Tathā, Agnisvāttvā, 
Vathisadah, Somapāh Pitr Devatāh) got up, 


1306 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


received him heartily and gave him seats and 
shewed him great honours and respect and held 
many pure conversations with the Muni. 

faq are hira g UTT i 

Ot: aaa Tt Ea: efr N 30 Ni 

Wet: AR aes wm: fer at ung: l 

fort: AR feror: Bieta Vera: u 31 u 

During their talk, the sinners of the Kumbhīpāka 
hell were crying "Oh! Alas! We are killed, we are 
being killed” Oh! We are being burnt; some others 
cried “Oh! Oh! We are cut down.” Thus various 
cries and lamentations reached their ears. 

gard Het Vei g: Ra PTS Ble i 

UY Aana a grestserfireafe u 32 0 

a aaisa qt dat ur | 

add amea uri Aaa: 330 

Hearing their piteous cries, Durvasa, the prince 
of the Rsis, asked with a grievous heart the Pitrs, 
“Who are those crying?” The Pitrs replied: There 
is a city close to our place called “Samyamani 
Pura” of the King Yama where the sinners are 
punished. Yama gives punishment to the sinners 
there. 

ATATGĀ: — porate: 1 

aasia agai arent ASTET 11 3 4 u 
MA everett ia arrears a 

uevifranatgt: Rg ww n3s il 

O Sinless One! In that city the King Yama lives 
with his terrible black-coloured messengers, the 
personifications of Kala (the Destruction). For the 
punishment of the sinners, eighty-six hells exist 
there. The place is being guarded always by the 
horrible messengers of Yama. 

aa quad qiue hrie AKT | 

add agai a aa oq wubmW 36 N 

ERR 

DRISCEUTAUPESICKSPIESCHEIEE CAST AT 

à aa: art adea d A 1 

Out of those hells, the hell named Kumbhipaka 
is very big and that is the chief of the hells. The 


ailings and torments of the sinners in the 
Kumbhipāka hell cannot be described in hundred 
years. O Muni! The Siva-haters, the Visnu-haters, 
the Devi haters are made to fall to this Kunda. 

a defeat: dfe gde a MUITA: u 38 Nu 

aani seo d uamerža J AA 1 

SATAN À Aled ATARI du 39 u 

Ayra fa Uma A g | 

TET: "40 1 

a dga: aba uae WoW | 

Those who find fault with the Vedas, and blame 
the Sun, GaneSa and tyrannise the Bráhmanas fall 
down to this hell. Those who blame their mothers, 
fathers, Gurus, elder brothers, the Smrtis and 
Puranas and those as well who take the Tapta 
Mudrās (hot marks on their bodies) and Tapta Šūlas 
(i.e., those who being Saivas act as they like) those 
who blame the religion (Dharma) go down to that 
hell. 

duum Tara: Yes: STHUTSTEUT: 41 dd 

sasen ares waa | 

fe du aa: spear fne ARIAT 42 u 

We hear constantly their loud piteous cries, very 
painful to hear; hearing which naturally gives rise 
to feelings of indifference (Vairagyam). Hearing 
the above words of the Pitrs, Durvāsā, the prince 
of the Munis, went to the hell to see the sinners. 

sera aferrequt at quee: i 

TASS aaien Aa ett 11 43 N 

VERESITATE TESTE g STRATA | 

zina Atfegrata gafa cw ATA 44 i 

Tea Tat ASAT: GAGA | 

O Muni! Going there, the Muni bent his head 
downwards and saw the sinners when, instantly 
the sinners began to enjoy pleasures more than 
those who enjoy in the Heavens. The sinners 
became exceedingly glad. Some began to sing, 
some began to dance, some began to laugh; some 
sinners began to play one with one another in great 
ecstasy. 


+ H 
. 
+ 


n45 uU 


Book XI Chapter XV 


1307 


SUITE WEE: eea AAT: | 

PATA TMT PISA wq: 46 Ul 

The musical instruments Mrdanga, Muraja, lute, 
Dhakka, Dundubhis, etc., 
sonorous tones (in accordance with five resonants). 


resounded with sweet 


The sweet fragrant smell of the flowers of Vasanti 
creepers spread all round. Durvāsā Muni became 
surprised to see all this. 

qf fadt qgr agave fafa: 1 

vit a nemaha afe 47 

went Nergdmygdarafgaīt 1 

tatgtattīd HE GRĪMTTĪŪATA n 48 N 

The messengers of Yama were startled and 
immediately went to their King Yama and said: 
“O Lord! Our King! A wondrous event occurred 
lately. The sinners in the Kumbhīpāka hell are now 
enjoying pleasures more than those in the Heavens. 

fit ta arin: menan à 

"afar: TT aa AĀ pron ed tae 49 tt 

Rri gaano at erue viraufeera: | 

nameet wat d aa uta: 50 ul 

at arat Weare WuTERISURTGU | 

O Bibhu! How can this take place! We cannot 
make out the cause of this. O Deva! We all have 
become terrified and have come to you.” Hearing 
the words of the messengers, Dharmarāja, 
mounting on his great buffalo, came there instantly 
and seeing the state of the sinners sent news 
immediately to the Heavens. 

gai at gais urat qon: WE 51 u 

aema achorsersrar: 1 

ATTIE eaten: GAM: wg u52 u 

Hearing the news Indra came there with all the 
Devas, Brahma came there from His Brahmaloka; 
and Narayana came there from Vaikuntha. Hearing 
this, the regents of the quarters, the Dikpālas came 
there with all their attendants from their respective 
abodes. 

uftard Rear: wel gtr: | 

anying aranga RaT 53 u 


afam Ua dd A fage ROTH à 

aA uae AF heda u54 N 

They all came there to the Kumbhīpāka hell and 
saw that all the beings there are enjoying greater 
pleasures than those in the Heavens. They all were 
astonished to see this; and they could not make 
out why this had happened. “What a wonder is 
this! This Kunda has been built for the punishment 
of the sinners. 

vic diet Gal Bt Tar unam f ATL i 

shot Agafa wae BIT 55 u 

WTA Weed ferret Haar HAT | 

asdasd fm: u56u 

When such a pleasure is now being felt here, 
the people won't fear anything henceforth to 
commit sins. Why is this order of the Vedas created 
by God reversed? Why has God undone His own 
doing? What a wonder is this! Now a great miracle 
is before our sight." Thus speaking, they remained 
at a fix. 

aen a uA a AAA HOT 

tamaa ÅR: driz faa: 157 ui 

gat Aag: MET: Viene | 

udar aed dd mhada 58 H 

moam v vaa nam | 

wer denada mega, 159 0 

They could not make out the cause of this. In 
the meanwhile Bhagavān Nārāyaņa after consulting 
with the other Devas went with some Devas to the 
abode of Sankara in Kailāša. They saw there that 
Sri Bhagavan Sankara (with crescent of the Moon 
on His forehead) was playing there attended always 
by the Pramathas and adorned with various 
ornaments like a youth, sixteen years old. His parts 
of the body were very beautiful as if the mine of 
loveliness. 

AMT: aftqet vai i rary i 

wert waits uw ugdd wart = 60 UI 

aud Haare wmnepautpeq i 


He was conversing on various delightful subjects 


1308 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


with His consort Parvati and pleasing Her mind. 
The four Vedas were there personified. Seeing 
Him, Narayana bowed down and informed him 
clearly of all the wonderful events. He said: 

UA ATT da A a: dam 61! 

aa AHN da wegtsfr Aa: WHT a 

Raai Aa ara WAAC: ll 62 il 

vara Hep ari tamrftrar PTT | 

sya ferent afara «erf cara ferra 1 63 n 

“O Deva! What is the cause of all this? We can- 
not make out anything! O Lord! Thou art omni- 
scient. Thou knowest everything. So kindly men- 
tion how is this brought about!" Hearing Visnu's 
words, Bhagavan Sankara spoke graciously in 
sweet words, grave as the rumbling of a rain-cloud: 
*O Visnu! Hear the cause of this. What wonder is 
there? This is all due to the greatness of Bhasma 
(ashes)! 

sperat ABATU spar fas stat fg 1 

gafar wet xe gaim: rei: 64 N 

MAT SIT Tavera UTI | 

SITROSTEHeRUIRET Ua Wem 165 n 

What cannot be brought about by Bhasma! The 
great Saiva Durvasa went to see the Kumbhipaka 
hell, besmearing his whole body with Bhasma and 
looked downwards while he was looking at the 
sinners. Át that time, accidentally a particle of 
Bhasma from his forehead was blown by air to the 
bodies of the sinners in the hell. 

da maid we ATT war CTA | 

Ba: Ot g web fugere u 66 u 

ATT Weel TA TTT GAT TAT 1 

fadt g MATTS Hed afaa t 67 lt 

Thereby they were freed of their sins and they 
got so much pleasure! Such is the greatness of 
Bhasma! Henceforth the Kumbhīpāka will no more 
be a hell. It will be a Tīrtha (holy place of pilgrim- 
age) of the residents of the Pitrlokas. 

NĒĒTETT MA area Coa AAA | 

areata d aa fugerat: 168 u 


paras rfr dtaifī Ta orgfire rete 1 

Aian g feted oft va 69 i 

Whoever will bathe there will be very happy. 
There is no doubt in this. Its name will be 
henceforth the Pitr Tirtha. O Sattama! My Lingam 
and the form of Bhagavati ought to be placed 
there. The inhabitants of the Pitr Loka would 
worship them. This will be the best of all the 
Tirthas extant in the three Lokas. And if the 
Pitrévari there be worshipped, know that the 
worship of the Triloki is done. 

ARTA SATE 

gla gaara: sped eat qut UTT WI | 

west amaa wat Gare gR: 0700 

wed Kna ATi vinta d 

my arta v IT TATA: 071 It 

Narayana said: Hearing thus the words of 
Sankara, the Deva of the Devas, He thanked Him 
and, taking His permission came to the Devas and 
informed them of everything what Sankara had 
said. Hearing this, the Devas nodded their heads 
and said, “Sadhu (well, very well)” and began to 
glorify the greatness of Bhasma. 

miga Ragna: HT: 1 

frayea wapnedishernwrenem 72 N 

aAA fort a dear aft anfa i 

PATTER AAE S 1173 LI 

O Tormenter of the enemies! Hari, Brahma and 
the other Devas began to eulogise the glories of 
ashes. The Pitrs became very glad to get a new 
Tirtha. The Devas planted a Siva Lingam and the 
form of the Devi on the banks of the new Tirtha, 
and began to worship them regularly day by day. 

aa à rs years era: à 

A fas Gaal WaT: KONTET 0 74 N 

ATT HOT qp wuegunfu aa fg 1 

Was gest g hiaan aafaa: u 75 

The sinners that were there suffering, all 
ascended on the celestial chariot and got up to 
Kailāša. Even today they are all dwelling in Kailasa 


Book XI Chapter XV 


1309 


and are known by the name of the Bhadras. The 
hell Kumbhīpāka came to be built afterwards in 
another place. 

Peg Jami taeda oq afear | 

ofa a uwdunsurd SETAE 11 7 6 N 

aa: wat ffafr feet WX d 

wedquefatr Aaaa: 077 ui 

Since that day the Devas did not allow any other 
devotee of Siva to go to the newly created hell 
Kumbhipaka. Thus I have described to you the 
excellent greatness of the Bhasma. O Muni! What 
more can there be than the glories of the Bhasma! 
O Best of Munis! Now I am telling you of the usage 
of Urdhvapundra (the vertical marks) according to 
the proper province of the devotees. 

wast yrds dorama | 

weduezyurerfa Reri Aaa: 178 N 

anifininecatar M EE HE TA I | 

wim df feras fada: 079 11 

Kretu aè qedipemfint d 

Listen. I will now speak what I have ascertained 
from the study of the Vaisnava Śāstras, the mea- 
sure of Urdhvapundra, according to the Anguli 
measurements, the colour, mantra, Devata and the 
fruits thereof. Hear. The earth required is to be seen 
red from the crests of hills, the banks of the rivers, 
the place of Siva (Siva Ksettram), the ocean 
beaches, the ant-hill, or from the roots of the Tulasi 
plants. 

Ja Uae aM Agag AR: 80 N 

gard vriferast wich Teh avert VĀKT 1 

sitet vrafrengehtde Jaga si i 

The earth is not to be had from any other places. 
The black coloured earth brings in peace, the red- 
colour earth brings in powers to bring another to 
one’s control; the yellow-coloured earth increases 
prosperity; and the white-coloured earth gives 
Dharma (religion). 

af: yika: greet Wexrarerentt aT | 

ararfirererqr fred after er uaferdt 82 n 


qiga anda TG: WISH | 

adua suppARBAD «ar 183 i 

If the Urdhvapundra be drawn by the thumb, 
nourishment is obtzined; 1f it be drawn by the 
middle finger, longevity is increased; if it be drawn 
by nameless or ring finger, food is obtained and if 
itbe drawn by the forefinger, liberation is attained. 
So the Ürdhvapundras ought to be drawn by these 
fingers, only be careful to see that the nails do not 
touch at the time of making the mark. 

Wea YR AN GATT: | 

Werte ant vise AT: VT I! 84 N 

The shape of the Urdhvapundra (the vertical 
mark or sign on the fore-head) is like a flame or 
like the opening bud of a lotus, or like the leaf of a 
bamboo, or like a fish, or like a tortoise or like a 
conch-shell. 

Giga g SMAGĀ | 

Wee Wem eR A: WH 4 85 I 

wurgedwafu: qud wer Afati RTA à 

wgfenorges: qug astrs farfērei rer u 86 i 

The Urdhvapundra, ten Angulis high is the super 
best; nine Angulis high, is best; eight Angulis high, 
is good; the middling Urdhvapundra is of three 
kinds as it is of seven Angulas, six Angulas, or 
five Angulas. The lowest Urdhvapundra is again 
of three kinds as it is four Angulas, three Angulas 
or two Angulas high. 

were werd faaan 1 

"rere fe fa T aeque i87 u 

On the Urdhvapundra of the forehead, you must 
meditate Ke$ava, on the belly you must think of 
Narayana; on the heart, you must meditate on 
Madhava; and on the neck, you must meditate on 
Govinda. 


sat «ft urā fanaa 1 
adage U utpgesdg cp 088! 
afe cutest Trepi qp STR d 
shet aga art ehki g mote 11 89 U 
ys U wast g BHAA wd | 
rester metr amat aft woo 


1310 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


So on the right side of the belly, you must 
meditate on Madhusüdana; on the roots of the ears, 
on Trivikrama; on the left belly, on Vamana; on 
the arms, on Sridhara; on the ears, HrsikeSa; on 
the back, Padmanābha; on the shoulders Damodara; 
and on the head Brahmarandhra you must meditate 
on Vasudeva, 

UTT UB AT ATA: WHTÍE: | 

ATATgemd faftrar emetqedquaen i91 u 

ayate AAA VITA, | 

fra vetoed af gogia sn: 92 N 

sg wert firad aa satu i 

guratsft ferae vm eras taa 1 93 u 

Thus the twelve names are to be meditated. In 
the morning or in the evening time when you are 
going to make the Puja or Homa, you are to take 
duly, single-in-intent, the above names and make 
the marks of Urdhvapundras. Any man, with 
Urdhvapundra on his head, is always pure, whether 
he be impure, or of unrighteous conduct or whether 
he commits a sin mentally. Wherever he dies, he 
comes to My Abode even if he be of a Candala 
caste. 

Veniet NET Aaa OT: | 

"ierat quarfzasmaergdt N 94 N 

Units naana: | 

SRE STANT SAT Hi 9 5 t 

My devotees ( Vīra Vaisņavas or Mahavira 
Vaisnavas) who know My Nature must keep an 
empty the lines of 
Urdhvapundra of the form of the Visnupada (the 
feet of Visnu) and those who are my best devotees 


space between two 


are to use nice Urdhvapundras, made of turmeric 
powder, of the size of a spear (Sila), of the form 
of the feet of Visnu (Visnu padah). 

sr q durar: qugrafesarafa ifie: | 

vedios — u96u 

The ordinary Vaisnavas are to use with Bhakti, 
the Urdhvapundras without any empty space, but 
the form of it is to be like a flame, the blossom of 
a lily or like a bamboo leaf. 


amati afosar-qd: hasaa: i 
afazi ast weraret a red 197 u 
ierat Four SERI. 
afsagt pera Were 98 N 
wedqua qu: quiis q VITA i 
"rest fos anang aure: essrenfafur: t 99 n 
Those who are Vaisnavas in name only can use 
Ürdhvapundra of both the kinds, with or without 
any empty space. They incur no sin if they use one 
without an empty space. But those who are My 
good devotees, incur sin if they do not keep an 
empty space between the two vertical lines (in the 
Urdhvapundra three vertical lines are used). 
faergetgrttt eret ut: AT 1 
ate fage aa abet ait R: 100 U 
AIGU nes q PASS qnte i 
DRAM res wem ver fepe: 0 101 N 
Ria a: qatgedts famem: | 
ate va feared forent fart era erdtetī u 102 U 
The Vaisnavas who use excellent vertical rod 
like Urdhvapundras keeping an empty space in the 
middle and uttering the mantra "Keávàya Namah” 
build My Temple there. In the beautiful middle 
space of Urdhvapundra, the Undecaying Visnu is 
playing with Laksmi. That wretch, the twice-born 
who uses Urdhvapundra without any empty apace 
kills Visnu and Laksmi, seated there. 
afvezqeduug g a: adf fenes: i 
a uai arte avesrrasfesriem i 103 u 
RA Upei ater formi i 
wedqugrfür deresrqramecaf-ramft wr t 104 i 
The stupid who uses Ürdhvapundra without a 
vacant space goes successively to twenty-one hells. 
The Ürdhvapundra should be of the size of a clear 
straight rod, lotus, flame, a fish with sharp straight 
edges and with vacant spaces between them. 
i fēsta vu 1 
fern gde: "Pan: watWgnpr N 105 N 
O Great Muni! The Brahmana should always 
use the Tripundra like the lock of hair on the crown 


Book XI Chapter XV 


1311 


of his head and like his Sacrificial thread; otherwise 
all his actions will be fruitless. 

erred arty ard ferges efte: | 

sedy Pp U SO wqrennm u 106 u 

areheafeck feat def Sta Sm i 

Wart PTT cedar: 0 107 i 

yogar Tage ere Ta MAT | 

Therefore in all ceremonies and actions the 
Brahmanas ought to use Urdhvapundras of the form 
of a trident, a circle or of a square form. The 
Brahmana who knows the Vedas is never to use 
the semi-moonlike mark (Tilaka) on his bead. The 
man who is of the Brahmin caste and follows the 
path of the Vedas should not even by mistake use 
any other mark than those above-mentioned. 

emeret feRrgerel ait feorarmnfay tt 108 u 

Red grgiat da tris feat wt: | 

Riagg terse sii ft ATT lt 109 u 

Other sorts of puņdras (marks) that are 
mentioned in other Vaisņava Šāstras for the 
attainment of fame, beauty, etc., the Veda-knowing 
Brāhmaņas should not use them. The Vaidik 
Brāhmaņas should not use even in error any other 
Tilaks than the curved Tripundras. 

were APETĪTI IITA i 

far gogr Nerana an STĀTT, 110 n 

If, out of delusion, the man, following the path 
of the Vedas, uses other sorts of Tripundras, he 
would certainly go down to hell. 

Ware rismudfandt ate 1 

Varta A Geeta yogina d 7111 u 

atest fame palami amia: | 

siaaa fent g siqua fe 112 0 

asadas fian, | 

Seer Aea mi fer q Sea N 1 13 u 

The Veda-knowing Brāhmaņas would certainly 
go down to hell if they use other sorts of Tripundras 
on their bodies. Only the Tilakas, prescribed in the 
Vedas ought to be used by those who are devoted 
to the Vedas. Those who do not observe the duties 
of the Vedas would use Tilakas approved of by 


other Šāstras. Those should use marks approved 
of by the Vedas whose Deity is that of the Vedas. 
Those who follow the Tantra Sastras different from 
the Vedas, should use marks approved of by the 
Tantras. 

astadatrer umermisieda fg 1 

dar Were: MIATA: 1114 1 

STARTU sitet fot arit wt 1 

daft fratu 2d feat reru W115 u 

Maha Deva is the Veda’s Deity and, ready to 
deliver from the boridages of the world, He has 
prescribed the Tilakas prescribed in the Vedas for 
the benefit of the devotees. The marks prescribed 
by Visnu, also a Deity of the Vedas, are also those 
of the Vedas. His other Avatāras also use marks 
approved of by the Vedas. 

prgutatāvtarmatt ar E C fè 1 

sla font g ferat ARR 116 u 

The Tripundras and the besmearing of the body 
with ashes are according to the Vedas. In the Tantra 
Sastra different from the Vedas, there is the usage 
of Tripundra and other marks. But they are not to 
be used by the Vaidikas. No never. 

aaga ra fereifeenpreenm | 

damas dara aT |1117 0 

mone ITT Riego rda fè | 

"mq ARTavi set Wü UTA Wary d 

tme yer Mere eremum N 118 

sft SARRATI merge? Verena 
Vase |115 11 

Those who follow the path of the Vedas should 
use the curved Tripundras and Bhasma on their 
foreheads according to the rules prescribed in the 
Vedas. He who has obtained the highest state of 
Narayana, 1.e., who has realised My Nature, ought 
to use always on their foreheads Sila marks scented 
with fragrant sandalpaste. 

Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book 
on the rules of using the Tripundra and Urdhvapundra 
marksin the Mahàpuránam Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 
of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1312 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER XVI 
On the Description of Sandhya Upasana 


stanta sarea 

ama: gaai yod HAAA, | 

ATETITOTATETARI enfird Aa FATT 1 

yade ser RaR ASTE à 

WIA eat TA TEATS RARER 0 2 Ui 

"gat afar deat feror: deat surat i 

Narayana said: Now I am speaking of the very 
holy Sandhyopāsanā method of Sandhya worship 
of Gayatri, the Presiding Deity of the morning, 
midday and evening, and of the twice-born. Listen. 
The greatness of using Bhasma has been described 
in detail. No further need be stated on the subject. 
I shall talk, first of all, of the morning Sandhya. 
The morning Sandhya is to be done early in the 
morning while the stars are visible. When the Sun 
is in the meridian, the midday Sandhya is to be 
performed; and while the Sun is visibly going 
down, the evening Sandhya is to be recited over. 

water warf soy cafes 3 ti 

SAAT ARIAT HEAT YARR | 

area giaa paea fare war 4 n 

sam yda mesei tat od 

aam aaa Ardea PMT AAT d 5 d 

Now again, the distinctions are made in the 
above three Sandhyàs: The morning Sandhya with 
stars seen is the best; with stars disappeared, 
middling; and with the Sun risen above the horizon, 
inferior. So the evening Sandhya, again, is of three 
kinds: best, middling, and inferior. When the Sun 
is visibly disappearing, the evening Sandhya is the 
best; when the Sun has gone down the horizon, it 
is middling and when the stars are visible, it is 
inferior. 

fnit quit eene deut 

ae: virer ainnir wan i 
ARTA uet i 
fiar WS Aa quit a VIET u 6 u 


Hen p«r ertet dear SATO 1 

Saat AA Wa: aT da waa |17 dd 

The Brahmanas are the root of the Tree, the 
Sandhya Vandanam; the Vedas are the branches; 
the religious actions are the leaves. Therefore its 
root should be carefully preserved. If the root be 
cut, no branches or leaves of the tree will remain. 
That Brahmana who knows not his Sandhya or who 
does not perform the Sandhyās is a living Šūdra. 
That Brāhmaņa after his death verily becomes a 


dog. 

Tens wendod Peale | 

aansen war fF usu 

ETRIE DICOS AARAA, | 

arardtargurdta wrafim ww: wp uo 

Therefore the Sandhyas must be observed every 
day. Otherwise no right comes at all to do any 
action. At the sunrise and the sunset the time for 
Sandhyà is two Dandas (48 minutes) and if 
Sandhyà be not done or rather neglected in the 
interval, the Prāyašcitta (penance) is to he paid duly 
(performed duly). 

nre mur rd erqeriezf UATTĀT | 

aaa adi sears sat ai ATA n 10 uu 

OR ATS T Teepe aa ATA 1 

TAUTU WaT fees RH WATT 1 1 1 Ul 

If the proper time for Sandhya expires, one more 
offering of Arghya is to be made in addition to the 
three Arghayas daily made or the Gayatri is to be 
repeated one hundred and eight times before the 
Sandhyà is commenced. In whichever time any 
action ought to be done, worship, first of all, the 
Sandhya Devi, the Presiding Deity of that time and 
do the actions proper to that time afterwards. 

Te AMT Great IIS A IET aT | 

"dh abhor wan agram 12 i 

adit dom garda erdt dear ferit | 

"turn wedei carer wert 013 


Book XI Chapter XVI 


1313 


The Sandhya performed in dwelling houses is 
ordinary; the Sandhya done in enclosures of cows 
is middling and on the banks of the rivers is good 
and the Sandhya performed before the Devi’s 
temple or the Devi's seat is very excellent. The 
Sandhyopāsanā ought to be done before the Devi, 
because that is the worship of the very Devi. The 
three Sandhyās done before the Devi give infinitely 
excellent fruits. 

KAT sat dd aera 4 WEN | 

a ferrara Freer a fora amrat TAT 14 0 

am IAAT TAT: RAT | 

Raa WEST SAAT 0015 d 

There is no other work of the Brahmanas better 
than this Sandhya. One can rather avoid worship- 
ping Siva or Visnu; because that is not daily done 
as obligatory; but the Sandhyopāsanā ought to be 
done daily. The Gayatri of the Great Devi is the 
Essence of all the mantras in the Vedas. In the Veda 
Šāstras, the worship of Gayatri is most definitely 
pronounced. 

aargatsfi darat at carat sae wr 1 

dar wate at Pret aaron aa: BAT 16 N 

AAT BM: MAT A PITT ACTEM: | 

SSTA west gaunmm 17 H 

Brahma and the other Devas meditate in the 
Sandhya times on this Devi Gayatri and make a 
japam of that. The Vedas always make japams of 
Her. For this reason the Gayatri has been men- 
tioned as the object of worship by the Vedas. The 
Brāhmaņas are called Šāktas inasmuch as they 
worship the Primal Sakti (Force) Gayatri, the 
Mother of the Vedas. They are not Saivas nor 
Vaisnavas. 

araia: WOT VTA HATA: | 

Aways AM ARTA Weg VE AUIS N 

MaA Raar Hye Wa Wd 

Afaa artavu sftentstt aa: we u 19 N 

Firstly make the ordinary acamana three times, 
and, while inhaling, drink a little of the water of 


acamana, repeating “Om Kešavāyā Svaha, Om 
Narayanaya Svāhā, Om Mādhavāya Svaha.” 
Then wash your two hands, repeating “Om 
Govindaya Namah, Om Visnave Namah.” Then 
by the root of the thumb rub the lips repeating 
“Om Madhusūdanāya Namah, Om Trivikramāya 
Namah.” So rub the mouth, repeating “Om 
Vāmamāya Namah, Om Šrīdharāya Namah.” 

ERRAN: AN UTaTaT sp: WT | 

wait aged Wyse: 201 

geutrrareiteTett er AAAS ERIT | 

wards stave Bt: PONS ARANT 421 u 

soar am xay | 

TTT: WaT TR: SAGA AAT 22 UN 

Aai afar: Uiear great emeret | 

WE IATA GRIM AAT 1 23 A 

Wet mot eater urarerfa forester sr 1 

dadunfecart sri ders 24! 


Then sprinkle water on the left hand, saying 
“Om Hrsike$aya Namah.” Sprinkle water on the 
legs, saying "Om Padmanabhaya Namah.” 
Sprinkle water on the head, saying “Om 
Dāmodarāya Namah.” Touch the mouth with the 
three fingers of the right hand, saying “Om 
Sankarsanaya Namah.” Touch the nostrils with the 
thumb and forefinger saying “Om Vāsudevāya 
Namah, Om Pradyumnaya Namah.” Touch the 
eyes with the thumb and ring-finger, saying “Om 
Aniruddhaya Namah, Om Purusottamaya Namah.” 
Touch the ears with the thumb and ringfinger say- 
ing “Om Adhoksajava Namah, Om Nārasimhāya 
Namah.” Touch the navel with the thumb and little 
finger saying "Om Acyutàya Namah.” Touch the 
breast with the palm, saying “Om Janārdanāya 
Namah.” Touch the head saying “Om Upendraya 
Namah.” Touch the roots of the two arms saying 
“Om Haraye Namah, Om Krsnaya Namah.” 


afaritires; dicar ama HNA: | 
aaa YTL wie Brags rum 25 N 


1314 


Srimaddevibha igavatam 


Tanta WWW we fus 1 | The external air is inhaled in Pūraka; air is not 


writ Tes dicar Bart srdafasr: 026 N 

Hegon dte urfürer afar g | 

Wists yeu fag: 127 0 

While sipping the Acamana water on the right 
hand, touch the right hand with your left hand; 
otherwise; the water does not become pure. While 
doing Acamana, make the palm and the fingers all 
united and close, of the form of a Gokarna (the ear 
of a cow) and spreading the thumb and the little 
finger, drink the water of the measure of a pea. Ifa 
greater or less quantity be sipped, then that would 
amount to drinking liquor. 

poari ad: rar yora, i 

mast ferr areigtavedgaa 128 1 

vfi tated ants gii, | 

Then thinking of the Pranava, make the 
Pranayama, and repeat mentally the Gayatri with 
her head and the Turiya pada, ie, Apojyotih 
rasomrtam Brahmà Bhurbhuvah svarom. Inhale 
the air by the left nostril (Püraka), close both the 
nostrils (Kumbhaka) and exhale the air, by the 
right nostril (Recaka). Thus Pranayama is ef- 
fected. 

eas urndfeed urnam fagien: 29 n 

Rede AA sunm d 

ABT Tramm q rent ast eet. t 30 1 

Vera: TANS WUTATAS er HEATH: | 

read wdsmerg urRrrdeurad: 31 0 

While doing Püraka, Kumbhaka and Recaka 
repeat the Gayatri every time; hold the right nostril 
with the right thumb and hold the left nostril with 
the ringfinger and little finger (.c., don’t use 
forefinger and middle finger). The Yogis who have 
controlled their minds say that Pranayama is 
effected by the three processes Piraka, Kumbhaka 
and Recaka. 


agii wert wen adag 133 1 


exhaled nor inhaled (it is retained inside) in 
Kumbhaka; and air is exhaled in Recaka. While 
doing Püraka, meditate on the navel, the four-armed 
high-souled Visnu, of the blue colour (Syama) like 
the blue lotus. 

Heh EACCOIERS IDEE SEGUE | 

yami wrest ugdad frame 0434 N 

tad vient eA TES | 

ISA Fach UAT 35 

While doing Kumbhaka, meditate in the heart 
lotus the four-faced grandsire Brahma Prajapati, 
the Creator seated on the lotus and while doing 
Recaka meditate, on the fore-head, on the white 
sin-destroying Sankara, pure as crystal. 

Wee freres speres wero ver i 

Tec qe J wreqardtat wap 36 N 

Uhre at with Wef un 1 

Mara wp yoy UTUTUĒ Wd 4037 

In Püraka, the union with Visnu is obtained; in 
Kumbhaka, the knowledge of Brahma is attained 
and in Recaka, the highest position of I$vara (Siva) 
is attained. This is the method of Acamana 
according to the Puranas. Now I am speaking of 
the all sin destroying Vaidik Acamana. Listen. 

word gyd—eard refi q faepe i 

mad anedifira: STARA 438 N 

Treat RT ari srdqearafeaferennq i 

yeaa fart morian: 039 

Reciting the Gayatri mantra “Om Bhurbhuvah," 
sip a little water; this is the Vaidik Acamana after 
repeating the seven great Vyahrtis Om Bhuh; Om 
Bhuvah, Om Svah, Om Mahah, Om Janah, Om 
Tapah, Om Satyam, repeat Gayatri and the head 
of the Gayatri Apojyoti Rasomrtam Brahma 
Bhurbhuvah svarom and practise Pranayama three 
times. 

AGA g ATUTATATATA RASIAT | 

arate — HETQUSUSOHSH, 

daR vVisaguda g 


u1u 


Book XI Chapter XVI 


1315 


WANT ar AVE: 400 

maeng da aerenftor: 1 

amarante fergie: gerat raregvitads: n 41 0 

sate ursi qatearerdt ot career: i 

AMATA GmdfaBend g naz 

Hereby all sins are destroyed and all virtues 
spring. Now another sort of Pranayama Mudra is 
described: The Vanaprasths and Grhasthas would 
do Pranayama with five fingers, holding the tip of 
the nose; the Brahmācārīs and Yatis would do 
Pranayama with the thumbs, little finger, and ring 
finger (avoiding middle and fore). Now I am 
speaking of the Aghamasana Mārjana mantra. 
Listen. The Manta of this Mārjana is "Apohisthà 
Mayobhuvah, etc." 


gota orefafittasar WUTSTETHT 0044 ul 

There are three mantras in this. There are three 
Padas in every mantra, prefix Om to every pada 
(thus nine times Om is to be prefixed); at the end 
of every páda sprinkle water on the head with the 
sacrificial thread and the Kuša grass. Or at the end 
of every mantra do so. By the above Marjana 
(cleaning) the sins of one hundred years are in- 
stantly destroyed. Then making Acamana (taking 
a sip of water to rinse the mouth before worship), 
repeat the three Mantras “Om Sürya$ca mā 
manyuéca, etc." 

sirdtiššfā poss rei da HAT | 

Ie fA gud owe) WrenufeeRS 045 N 

"fiet d firent qp errapadt GET | 

Get poai a sud xf waa: 146 N 

By this act, the mental sins are destroyed. As 
mārjana is done with Pranava, Vyārhītis, and 
Gayatri, so make Mārjana by the three mantras 
**Apohisthà, etc." Make your right palm of the 
shape of a cow’s ear; take water in it and carry it 
before your nose and think thus: “There is a terrible 


sinful person in my left abdomen, his colour is dark 
black and he is horrible looking." 

guai at wed URTAGA pd 

aamir x mà 447 

AGFA ABT amimitsgut fà i 

fremd g viti à wrrafifer sm t 48 N 

Recite, then, the mantras "Om ritamca 
satyamcabhidhyat, etc.” and “Drupadadiva 
Mumucāna, etc.” and bring that Sinful Person 
through your right nostril to the water in the palm. 
Don't look at that water; throw it away on a bit of 
stone to your left. And think that you are now 
sinless. 

sara g Tet: urat gr wr afrutsrāg | 

wets Te qp gaf 49 N 

deat rd für aera aria à 

frat Prone asea sou 

Next, rising from the seat, keep your two feet 
horizontal and with the fingers save forefinger and 
thumb, take a palmful of water and with your face 
towards the Sun, recite the Gayatri three times and 
offer water to the Sun three times. Thus, O Muni! 
The method of offering the Arghyas has been 
mentioned to you. 

aa: wafünnt paterque: l 

ma Aes Beare’ RARE: 51 N 

gaan: WHI g ALAS guea: | 

emet rafagug fat: wr fērūgu: 52 u 

Then circumambulate, repeating the Sürya 
Mantra. The one thing to be noted in offering 
Arghyas is this: Offer once in the midday, and three 
times in the morning and three times in the evening. 
While offering the Arghya in the morning, bend 
yourself a little low; in offering the arghya in the 
midday, stand up; and while offering the arghya in 
the evening, it can be done while sitting. 

sad ANNAE: SUD | 

Finraen merear tiger ATA TRU: 53 N 

Now I will tell you why the Arghya is offered 
to the Sun. Hear. Thirty Koti Raksasas known as 


1316 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


the Mandehas, always roam on the path of the Sun 
(the mental Sun also). 

STAT arem er: gires arfēgm i 

WWE domat: We RAA AMAT: 4054 d 

sum Wendtat wfüriegeentwrhem | 

aed da dem asiya arto w55 tt 

They are great heroes, treacherous and ferocious. 
They always try to devour the Sun, while they 
assume terrible forms. For this reason the Devas 
and the Rsis combined offer the water with their 
folded hands to the Sun, while they perform the 
great Sandhya Upāsanā. The water thus offered, 
becomes transformed into the thunderbolt and 
burns the heads of the cruel demons (and throws 
them on the island Mandehāruņa). 

Wererrenrormirng: Heat feremus | 

"ungue wad deatoraadiftey 156 N 

aigis rond OT ARE | 

emma wir HEAT AAT 057 N 

Therefore the Brahmanas daily do their 
Sandhyopāsanā. Infinite merits accrue from this 
Sandhya Upāsanā. O Narada! Now I am speaking 
to you of the Mantras pertaining to the Arghya. 
No sooner they are pronounced the full effects of 
performing the Sandhyas are obtained. 

Asaraia Rife wae fra: 1 

SITE Yar: TASH ASHE II 58 ll 

SITE ote efe mata agrafūfor 1 

wagered Aaya gai WW 59 i 

Tam That Sun; I am That Light; I am That Atman 
(Self); I am Siva; I am the Light of Atman; I am 
clear and transparently white; I am of the nature of 
all energy; and I am of the nature of Rasa (the 
sweetness, all the sweet sentiments). O Devi! O 
Gayatri! O Thou! Who art of the nature of Brahma! 
Let Thee come and preside in my heart to grant 
me success in this Japa Karma. 

shag afa ia Gama | 

sms afe eed ufava gat ww ou60u 

at: IES ATT Taree: | 

GA Whose dem 061 


O Devi! O Gayatri! Entering into my heart, go 
out again with this water. But Thou wouldst have 
to come again. Sit thus on a pure seat and with a 
single intent repeat the Gayatri, the Mother of the 
Vedas. 

sara Get uar wrumerdpe AT od 

yadan wr entire Brea 62 0 

ware Vaga writ spp ANE | 

Part enfer ar eres enfer SV WaT 163 N 

dati gi vaf gut 1 

a ured fran A paS AS: 64 u 

O Muni! In this Sandhyopāsanā, the Khecari 
Mudrà ought to be done after practising the 
Pranayama. Hear now the meaning of the Khecari 
Mudra. When the soul of a being leaves the objects 
of senses, it roams in the Ākāša, i.e., it becomes 
aimless when the tongue also goes to the Akasa 
and roams there; and then the sight is fixed between 
the eyebrows; this is called the Khecari Mudra. 
There is no Asana (seat) equal to Siddhasana and 
there is no Vayu (air) equal to the Kumbhaka Vayu 
(suspension of air in the body). 

a Gata yal wet wet AMG | 

veranda Pa went: 11 65 Ni 

ferrent fort spear Ērta: à 

want waa spp Aaa A 66 N 

O Narada! There is no Mudra equal to the 
Khecari Mudra. One is to pronounce Pranava in 
Pluta (protracted) accents like the sound of a bell 
and, suspending his breath, sit quiet motionless in 
Sthirāsana without any Ahankāra (egoism). O 
Narada! I am now talking of Siddhasana and its 
characteristic qualities. Hear. 


egesta sued fi ror "67 Uu 

ara wrap edt stat were | 

Treat seat wake wer GIT A nesi 

Keep one heel below the root of the genital and 
the other heel below the scrotum; keep the whole 


Book XI Chapter XVI 


1317 


body and breast straight and motionless; withdraw 
the senses from their objects and look at the point, 
the pituitary body, between the eyebrows. This 
posture is called the Siddhāsana and is pleasant to 
the yogis. After taking this seat, invoke the Gayatri. 
“O Mother of the Vedas! O Gayatri! Thou art the 
Devi granting boons to the Bhaktas. Thou art of 
the nature of Brahma. 

"gr Hed ud dear Tamed | 

UST Ged wd aaa wipers 11 69 N 

udad werefer denad areata ! 

stat amt afe udafā ASK È 701 

Be gracious unto Me. O Devi! Whoever 
worships Thee in the day gets his day sins destroyed 
and in the night, night sins destroyed. O Thou! Who 
art all the letters of the alphabet! O Devi! O 
Sandhye! O Thou who art of the nature of Vidya! 
O Sarasvati! O Ajaye! O Thou immortal! Free from 
disease and decay. 

ashen adada: d 

agi eer acd wig Hon71 

we: virafertama fae aena, i 

O Mother! Who art all the Devas! I bow down 
to Thee." Invoke the Devi again by the mantra 
"Ojosi, etc. ," and then pray: "O Mother! Let my 
japam and other acts in Thy worship be fulfilled 
with success by Thy Grace." Next for the freedom 
of the curse of Gayatri, do the things properly. 

Amati fasi wp aša aT 072 1 

area galdafēfāti YUuemmm d 

seu Hava aaa fradd 73 

frare ferarfiraeer MTT: | 

aksen wer vit fravafa 174 i 

Brahma gave a curse to Gayatri; Vi$vàmitra 
gave a curse to Her and Vasistha also cursed Her. 
These are the three curses; they are removed in 
due order by recollecting Brahma, Visvamitra and 
Vasistha. 

eae ues ui 

emend ds | 
fagadh reram i075 N 


ary rata aaa derer sire | 

Sat yia ddr tarda 76 1 

Before doing Nyasa, one ought to collect one- 
self and remember the Highest Self; think in the 
lotus of the heart that Purusa (Person) who is Truth; 
who is all this Universe, who is the Highest Self 
and who is All knowledge and who cannot be com- 
prehended by words. Now I am speaking of the 
Anganyasa of Sandhya; Hear. First utter Om and 
then utter the mantra. 

RRA er UTT A Fels TSR | 

ya: yf g rpm xe: atraut aut ae 77 u 

Tease Wada KU AAA: | 

Holst a da: AR were ues 78 1 

Touch the two saying 
Bhuhpādābhyām namah" 

Touch the knees, saying “Om Bhuva Janubhyam 
namah” 

Touch the hip, saying “Om Svah Katibhyām 
namah” 

Touch the navel, saying “Om Maharnabhyai 
namah” 

Touch the heart, saying “Om Janah Hrdayāya 
namah” 

Touch the throat, saying "Om Tapah Kanthàya 
namah” 

Touch the forehead, saying “Om Satyam 
Lalataya namah” 


legs, “Om 


Thus perform the Vyarhiti nyāsa. 
: Peut WS | 

mar rangi tfrréreda etd un 79 u 

ammai Herat Brat at a: wd ae i 

wetsuregsdeustacnuep uso 

Next perform the Karafganyasa thus: Om Tat 
savituh ramgusthābhyām namah (referring to the 
thumb); Om Varenyam Tarjanibhyam namah 
(referring to the forefinger); Om bhargo devasya 
madhyamā bhyām namah (referring to the middle 
finger); Om Dhimahi anamikabhyam namah 
(referring to the ringfinger), Om dhīyo yonah, 


1318 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Kanisthabyam namah (referring to the little 
finger), Om pracodayat kara tala prsthābhyām 
namah (referring to the upper part and lower part 
of the palm and all over the body). 

Wer aafia AKT | 

Raana avd a Pre aa graft u81 n 

anit saree Garett Brama ua 1 

wera dite egere at: WOT 82 N 

caterers ferat at at ron SAT 1 


yagara HATRTSATA RATTA t 83 at 


Now Iam speaking of the Anganyasa. Hear. “Om 
tat savitur brahmatmane hrdayaya namah” (refer- 
ring to the heart). “Om Varenyam Visnva tmane 
Širase namah” (referring to the head); “Om bhargo 
devasya Rudratmane Šikhāyai namah” (referring 
to the crown of the head); Om dhimahi Šaktyātmane 
Kavacāya namah (referring to the Kavaca); “Om 
dhīyoyonah Kālātmane netratrayāya namah” (re- 
ferring to the three eyes); “Om pracodayat 
sarvātmane astrāya namah” (referring to the Astra 
or armour, protecting the body). 

aaa eet wet 1 

mafai RTA: UT: WI: 184 d 

Now I am speaking of the Varnanyasa. O Great 
Muni! Hear. This Varnanyāsa is performed by the 
letters in the Gayatri mantra. If anybody does this, 
he becomes freed of sins. 

wore queri quem: wentfdw: 1 

ATG esr urqhIgSS TT, 85 

wen TAUTĀ wer | 

Sgt fere HANS aeq 11 8 6 N 

Venter YU fures fet A | 

wen vata want ass 187 N 

Tat wed uuu xiu 1 

we fe faeere deque us8 

citai quest q Wen ase 1 

fran ata g frem Anise nso n 

ga da alent alent p Hees | 

wen d yaya vat aA YÈ ngon 


tant usa cant art cqui | 

"rent ast farre crest Ca TAT N97 

“Om Tat namah" on the two toes; (touching 
them). 

“Om sa namah” on the two heels; (touching 
them). 

"Om vi namah” on the legs; 

“Om tu namah” on the two knees; 

“Om va namah” on the two thighs; 

“Om re namah” on the anus; 

“Om ni namah” on the generative organ; 

“Om ya namah” on the hip; 

“Om bha namah” on the navel; 

“Om rgo namah on the heart; 

“Om de namah” on the breasts; 

"Om va namah” on the heart; 

“Om sya namah” on the throat; 

“Om dhi namah” on the mouth; 

“Om ma namah” on the palate; 

“Om hi namah” on the tip of the nose; 

“Om dhi namah” on the two eyes; 

“Om yo namah” on the space between the eye- 
brows; 

“Om yo namah" on the forehead; 

“Om nah namah” to the east; 

“Om pra namah” to the south; 

“Om co namah” on the west; 

“Om da namah” on the north; 

"Om ya namah” on the head; 

“Om ta namah” on the whole body from head 
to foot. 


ugemafaftr esferzresfer Waa: | 
wet earāmrgradt saree 092 0 
Tra Sart TT, 1 
THe ROAT 093! 
DOSE: Peqdamt i 


grat qaqa root fent rer farei n 94. u 

Some Japakas (those who do the Japam) do not 
approve of the above nyāsa. Thus the Nyasa is to 
be done. Then meditate on the Gayatri or the 


Book XI Chapter XVI 


1319 


World-Mother. The beauty of the body of the 
Gayatri Devi is like that of the full blown Java 
flower. She is seated on the big red lotus on the 
back of the Hamsa (Flamingo); She is holding the 
red coloured garland on Her neck and anointed with 
red coloured ungument. She has four faces; every 
face has two eyes. 

wefsrorddremgraaregrférdt wem | 

KRUTA TART EATA 95 N 

"quen Agita ērā, d 

aqaa naai fronted g Tata, 11 96 N 

BEN g neret T Wa MET RT 1 

On her four hands are a wreath of flowers, a 
sacrificial ladle, a bead, and a Kamandalu. She is 
blazing with all sorts of ornaments. From the Devi 
Gayatri has originated first the Rgveda. Brahma 
worships the virgin Gayatri; on the idea of Sti 
Paramešvarī Gayatri has four feet. The Rgveda is 
one; the Yajurveda is the second, the Sāmaveda is 
the third and the Atharva veda is the fourth foot. 
The Gayatri has eight bellies; the east side is the 
one; the south is the second; the west is the third; 
the north is the fourth; the zenith is the fifth; the 
nadir is the sixth; the intermediate space is the 
seventh and all the corners are the eighth belly. 
Gayatri has seven Siras (heads); Vyàkaranam 
(Grammar) is one; Siksà is the second (that Anga 
of the Veda, the science which teaches the proper 
pronunciation of words and laws of euphony); 
Kalpa is the third (the Vedanga which lays down 
the ritual and prescribes rules for ceremonial and 
sacrificial acts); Nirukta is the fourth (the Vedānga 
that contains glossarial explanation of obscure 
words, especially those occurring in the Vedas); 
Jyotish or astronomy is the fifth; Itihāsa (history) 
and Puranas is the sixth head; and Upanisads is 
the seventh head. Agni (fire) is the mouth of 
Gayatri; Rudra is the Sikha (the chief part; Her 
gotra (lineage) is Sankhyayana; Visnu is the heart 
of Gayatri and Brahma is the armour of Gayatri. 


Nevari AA wean u 97 N 

wd tare fara wrest dau i 

siat sr: wende Sem: MART: War: 98 N 

Think of this Mahe$vari Gayatri in the middle 
of the Solar Orb. Meditating on the Gàyatri Devi 
as above, the devotee should shew the following 
twenty-four Mudrās (signs by the fingers, etc., in 
religious worship) for the satisfaction of the Devi: 


mga dye da frad faga wem 1 
Rya Aya da ageh vad wem 199 N 
WOT da eurqenterfeseh TAT | 
ene Gat vr fr durum 100 i 
facia yd da reed quii area | 


ferni wennid yet ceed Far i101 N 

(1) Sammukha;.(2) Samputa; (3) Vitata (4) 
Vistrta; (5) Dvimukha; (6) Trimukha; (7) 
Caturmukha; (8) Paficamukha; (9) Sanmukha; (10) 
Adhomukha; (11) Vyāpaka; (12) Afjali; (13) 
Sakata (14) Yamapāša; (15) fingers intertwined end 
to end; (16) Vilamba (17) Mustika; (18) Matsya; 
(19) Kūrma; (20) Varāha; (21) Simhākrānta; (22) 
Mahākrānta; (23) Mudgara; (24) Pallava. 

agian TTT: uasa i 

magi a verfi wparadacget: u 102 u 

AITĀM rera: entfernt f à 

MAG wp APNEA: 0103 N 

area ATS refi aa | 

wade WTETQUSTS KAT fam i 104 li 

Next make japam once only of one hundred 
syllabled Gayatri. Thus twenty-four sy labled 
Savitri, "Jātavedase sunavama, etc.," forty-four 
syllabled mantra; and the thirty-two syllabled 
"Tryamvakam yajāmahe, etc.” These 
three mantras united make up one hundred 
lettered Gayatri. (The full context of the last 
Mantra is this Om Haum Om yum sah— 
Trayambakam yajamahe Sugandhim Pusti 
Vardhanam. Urbhārukamiva bandhanàn mrtyo 
müksiya ma mrtāt Bhur Bhuvah. Svarom Yum 
Svah Bhurbhuvah Svarom Haum.) 


mantra, 


1320 


Somn yiga ya: crete U. | 

agyag wr Treat enaa: 1105 N 

Ua fred rd gafara fanda: | 

Umi WC ure HT: quunt n 106 N 

sft sfera ergo? Wares 
SMSC: 0016 H 

Next make japam of Bhurbhuvaha Svah, twenty 

four lettered Gayatri with Om. O Narada! The 


Srīmaddevībkāgavatam 


Brāhmaņas are to perform daily the Sandhyopāsānā 
repeating Gāyatrī, completely adopting the rules 
above prescribed and then he will be able to enjoy 
completely pleasures, happiness and bliss. 

Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter of the Eleventh 
Book on the description of Sandhya Upāsanā in the 
Mahāpurāņam Srimaddevibhagvatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


CHAPTER XVII 
On the Sandhya and other Daily Practices 


starrer sara 

Rama qp mat waco 1 

aR treat wergedi wereofe 1 N 

aaam ada 4 feat: | 

angers fasta meane wr 002 N 

Narayana said: If one divides or separates the 
padas while reciting or making Japam of the 
Gayatri, one is freed from the Brahminicide, the 
sin of Brahmahatya. But if one does so without 
breaking the pādas, i.e., repeats at one breath, then 
one incurs the sin of Brahmahatyà. Those 
Brāhmaņas who do the Japam of the Gayatri 
without giving due pause to the padas, suffer pains 
in hells with their heads downwards for one 
hundred Kalpas. O Gayatri! Thou art of one foot, 
of two feet, of three feet and of four feet. Thou art 
without foot, because Thou art not obtained. 
Salutation to Thy Fourth Foot beautiful and which 
is above the Triloki (Rajas). This cannot obtain 
that. 

dyl stant wast fafetm war | 

aire sew Yat u30 


dayne rai l 

mianem Uet ATR: A d 

E Ra: WY Ha: ui rA, | 

arem wsnpeneq Bway fenex we ou 5 d 

Firstly, Gayatri is of three kinds: “Samputa,” 
“Ekomkara,” and “Sadomkara.” There is also the 
Gayatri, with five Pranavas, according to the 


Dharma Šāstras and Puranas. There is something 
to be noted while muttering or making the japam 
of the Gayatri: Note how many lettered Gayatri 
you are going to repeat (make japam). When you 
have repeated one-eighth of that, repeat (make 
japam) the Turiya pada of Gayatri (1.e., the fourth 
Pada, the mantram parorajase Sāvadomā prāpata) 
etc., once and then complete repeating the Gayatri. 
If the Brahmana makes the Japam (the silent 
muttering) in the above way he gets himself united 
with Brahma. Other modes of making the Japam 
do not bear any fruit. Om Gayatryasyekapadi 
dvipadi Tripadi catuspadasi nahi padyase namaste 
Turyāya daršatāyapadāya paro Rajase Sábado mā 
prapat. Gayatri is one-footed in the form of Triloki, 
two-footed, the Trayi Vidya from thy second foot; 
tripadi (all Pranas are thy third foot, catuspadi, as 
the Purusa apadi without any foot, Parorajase above 
the Rajas, the dust; asau-that; adah this not prapat 
may obtain. 

Hyl ster vaca Heda d 

eet agrart ar ategreff qtat aT u 6 i 

ged rene whe TEM a 

turae usar sn ETAT u7 N 

The Yogis who are Urdhvaretas (hold 
Brahmācaryam, continence) are to make Japam of 
the Samputā Gayatri (7.e., with Om). Gayatri with 
one pranava and as well the Gayatri with six 
pranavas. The householder Brahmacari or those 


1320 


Somn yiga ya: crete U. | 

agyag wr Treat enaa: 1105 N 

Ua fred rd gafara fanda: | 

Umi WC ure HT: quunt n 106 N 

sft sfera ergo? Wares 
SMSC: 0016 H 

Next make japam of Bhurbhuvaha Svah, twenty 

four lettered Gayatri with Om. O Narada! The 


Srīmaddevībkāgavatam 


Brāhmaņas are to perform daily the Sandhyopāsānā 
repeating Gāyatrī, completely adopting the rules 
above prescribed and then he will be able to enjoy 
completely pleasures, happiness and bliss. 

Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter of the Eleventh 
Book on the description of Sandhya Upāsanā in the 
Mahāpurāņam Srimaddevibhagvatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


CHAPTER XVII 
On the Sandhya and other Daily Practices 


starrer sara 

Rama qp mat waco 1 

aR treat wergedi wereofe 1 N 

aaam ada 4 feat: | 

angers fasta meane wr 002 N 

Narayana said: If one divides or separates the 
padas while reciting or making Japam of the 
Gayatri, one is freed from the Brahminicide, the 
sin of Brahmahatya. But if one does so without 
breaking the pādas, i.e., repeats at one breath, then 
one incurs the sin of Brahmahatyà. Those 
Brāhmaņas who do the Japam of the Gayatri 
without giving due pause to the padas, suffer pains 
in hells with their heads downwards for one 
hundred Kalpas. O Gayatri! Thou art of one foot, 
of two feet, of three feet and of four feet. Thou art 
without foot, because Thou art not obtained. 
Salutation to Thy Fourth Foot beautiful and which 
is above the Triloki (Rajas). This cannot obtain 
that. 

dyl stant wast fafetm war | 

aire sew Yat u30 


dayne rai l 

mianem Uet ATR: A d 

E Ra: WY Ha: ui rA, | 

arem wsnpeneq Bway fenex we ou 5 d 

Firstly, Gayatri is of three kinds: “Samputa,” 
“Ekomkara,” and “Sadomkara.” There is also the 
Gayatri, with five Pranavas, according to the 


Dharma Šāstras and Puranas. There is something 
to be noted while muttering or making the japam 
of the Gayatri: Note how many lettered Gayatri 
you are going to repeat (make japam). When you 
have repeated one-eighth of that, repeat (make 
japam) the Turiya pada of Gayatri (1.e., the fourth 
Pada, the mantram parorajase Sāvadomā prāpata) 
etc., once and then complete repeating the Gayatri. 
If the Brahmana makes the Japam (the silent 
muttering) in the above way he gets himself united 
with Brahma. Other modes of making the Japam 
do not bear any fruit. Om Gayatryasyekapadi 
dvipadi Tripadi catuspadasi nahi padyase namaste 
Turyāya daršatāyapadāya paro Rajase Sábado mā 
prapat. Gayatri is one-footed in the form of Triloki, 
two-footed, the Trayi Vidya from thy second foot; 
tripadi (all Pranas are thy third foot, catuspadi, as 
the Purusa apadi without any foot, Parorajase above 
the Rajas, the dust; asau-that; adah this not prapat 
may obtain. 

Hyl ster vaca Heda d 

eet agrart ar ategreff qtat aT u 6 i 

ged rene whe TEM a 

turae usar sn ETAT u7 N 

The Yogis who are Urdhvaretas (hold 
Brahmācaryam, continence) are to make Japam of 
the Samputā Gayatri (7.e., with Om). Gayatri with 
one pranava and as well the Gayatri with six 
pranavas. The householder Brahmacari or those 


Book XI Chapter XVII 


who want moksa are to make Japam of Gayatri with 
Om prefixed. Those householders who affix Om to 
the Gayatri do not get the increase of their families. 


The Turīya pada (foot) of Gayatri is the mantra 
"Parorajase Sāvodomā prāpat.” (Brhad. up. 
v.14.7). Salutation to Thy beautiful Fourth Foot 
which is above the Triloki (Rajas). This cannot 
obtain that. The presiding deity of this mantra is 
Brahma. I am now speaking of the full Dhyanam 
(meditation) of this Brahm so that the full fruit of 
the Japam (recitation) may be obiained: 


wag ua qasupufeseniewu: 8 

There is a full blown lotus in the heart; its form 
is like the Moon, Sun, and the Spark of Fire; i.e., 
of the nature of pranava and nothing else. This is 
the seat of the inconceivable Brahma. Think thus. 
Now on that seat is seated well the steady constant 
subtle Light, the essence of Ākāša, the everlasting 
existence, intelligence and bliss, the Brahma. May 
He increase my happiness 

Note: Aum! Gāyatryasyekapadī dvipadi, tripadī, 
catuspadasi, nahi padyase namaste turyaya daršatāya 
padāya parorajase, sāvado māprāpat. O Gayatri! Thou 
art of one foot (in the farm of Trilokī), of two feet (the 
Trayi vidya from Thy second foot) of three feet all 
Prana, etc., are Thy third foot and of four feet (as the 
Purusa). Thou art without foot because Thou art not 
obtained. Salutation to Thy beautiful fourth foot which 
is above the Triloki (Rajas). This cannot obtain that. 

Rope greet a ferry | 

aig a wengarüfe wur weyte uo d 

Now I am speaking of the Mudra of the Turtya 
Gayatri: (1) Tristla, (2) Yoni, (3) Surabhi, 
(4) Aksamālā, (5) Linga, (6) Padma and 
(7) Mahāmudrā. These seven Mudrās are to be 
shewn. 


"eie fa mast afesaariasfuvit i 


1321 


TET t ara fret WAST TT: 10 0 

GTM Wr Helfer varnrgīttanās: | 

What is Sandhya, that is Gayatri; there is no 
difference whatsoever between the two. The two 


are one and the same. Both are of the nature of 
Existence, Intelligence and Bliss. The Brahmanas 
would daily worship Her and bow down before 
Her with greatest devotion and reverence. After 
the Dhyānam, first worship Her with five upacāras 
or offerings. Thus: 

V garam remdarfi At am: 110 

PAH Wed ara TAT AA: | 

iw ATTATA sceau dtes 11 1 2 I 

Ču deur dandani wt we d 

anges wet AAA anda Nn 13 

Gis a gh u wursfenmemddq i 

ue Gat freee eed War: Wasa 14 u 

Om lam prthivyātmane gandham, arpayāmi 
namo namah. Om Ham ākāšātmane puspam 
arpayami namo namah. Om ram Vahnyātmane 
dipam arpayāmi namo namah. Aum vam 
amrtatmane naivedyam arpayāmi namo namah. 
Om yam ram lam vam ham puspanjalim arpayāmi 
namo namah. Thus worshipping with five 
upacaras, you must shew Mudrās to the Devi. 

turp wae edt nanpesnureg: | 

a duafesttftai dere wanna 15 N 

fafürEnRwngranEfdy at | 

EARN WT Atal wq GTA N16 |! 

Then meditate on the Form of the Gayatri 
mentally and slowly repeat the Gayatri. Do not 
shake head, neck and while making japam, do not 
show your teeth. According to due rules repeat the 
Gayatri one hundred and eight times, or twenty- 
eight times. When unable, repeat ten times; not less 
than that. 

aa samdeeigaaagaram: —|d 

a mai AREA RAA 117 ui 

a: fist prea: Arata: l 

ghad a gaf aes dary 18 I 


1322 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Then raise the Gayatri placed before on the heart | wa: Malmi da gad «dam u 24 


(seat) by the mantra “Gayatrasyai kapadī Dvipadī, 
etc., and then bid farewell to Her after bowing down 
to Her and repeating the mantra “Omuttame 
Sikhare Devi bhümyàm parvata mürdhani 
Brahmana ebhyobhya anujfiata Gaccha Devi 
yathāsukham” on the highest top of the mountain 
summit in earth (i.e., on the Meru mountain) dwells 
the goddess Gayatri. Being pleased with Thy 
worshippers go back, O Devi! to Thy abode as it 
pleaseth Thee." (See page 110, The Daily Practices 
of the Hindus.) 

font Prati ta maids St avida i 

qaau 9 wera o — 019 0 

The wise men never mutter nor recite the Gayatri 
mantra within the water. For the Maharsis say that 
the Gayatri is fire-faced (agnimukhi). After the 
farewell shew again the following mudras: Surabhi 
Jüàna, Sürpa, Kūrma, Yoni, Padma, Linga and 
Nirvana Mudras. 

ard aac afa mrana 1 

maiad ure: aft wenpr 020 u 

Then address thus: “O Devi! O Thou who 
speakest pleasant to Ka$yapa! O Gayatri! Whatever 
syllables I have missed to utter in making Japam, 
whatever vowels and consonants are incorrectly 
pronounced, I ask Thy pardon for all my above 
faults." O Narada! Next one ought to give peace 
offerings to the Gayatri Devi. 

masg omeni ferarftraaafā :Wgg:d 

"ferr gaat yrenr fatrarte eut 21 u 

The Chanda of Gayatri Tarpanam (peace 
offerings to Gayatri) is Gayatri; the Rsi is 
Vi$vamitra; Savità is the Devatā; its application 
(Niyoga) is in the peace offerings. 

qhara a sragyet quum uw i 

Ya GAARA AT uwpdqnue add 1 22 1 

vacnlgf RTU AAS AEA | 

ay sudà a adāg 123 

wa: wala grieg, 1 


Urdu dS tam eu eae i 

aqfaa wah war aga "25 

yqasfe spaefeped aden a | 

Ta: wenheneues uu wd: Wup 4 26 N 

Syaa TW TD adarftr wr 1 

at faai rast adafa entier, 11 27 n 

easy faugi mast adafa erat aqq i 

soupfag taste met a TATA t 28 i 

“Om Bhüh Rgvedapurusam tarpayami." 

“Om Bhuvah Yajurvedapurusam tarpayami.” 

“Om Svah Samaveda purusam tarpayami.” 

“Om Mahah Atharvaveda purusam tarpayami.” 

“Om Janah Itihāsapurāņa purusam tarpayami.” 

“Om Tapah Sarvāgama purusam tarpayāmi.” 

“Om Satyam Satyaloka purusam tarpayāmi.” 

“Om Bhüh bhürloka purusam tarpayami.” 

“Om Bhuvah bhuvoloka purusam tarpayāmi.” 

“Om Svah svarloka purusam tarpayāmi.” 

“Om Bhüh rekapadām Gāyatrīm tarpayami.” 

“Om  Bhuvo dvitiyapadim Gayatrim 
tarpayami.” 

“Om Svastripadàm Gayatrim tarpayami.” 

“Om Bhürbhüvah Svascatuspadam Gayatrim 
tarpayāmi.” 

sot cra rast aR er recent | 

art wet edis da g array 11 29 u 

Vietā à ardia mati dut ada 1 

wdurid a vreueb sadega, 30 u 

maA Hotu pref wde: i 

aasi mieta: piad: RAT: t 31 1 

wegutffe ii a mesada T | 

ardt dar gfer great waira Ra u 32 1 

vara farfersiaror TĀ patron 1 

warfare a Aage ATATA: 033 ul 

Pronouncing these, offer the Tarpanams. Next 
add the word Tarpayàmi to each of the following 
words “Usasim, Gayatrim, Savitrim, Sarasvatim 
Vedamātaram,  Prthvim, Ajām,  Kauéikim, 
Samkrtim, Savajitim, etc.,” and offer Tarpanams. 


Book XI Chapter XVII 


After the Tarpanam is over, offer the peace- 
chantings, (Santivari) repeating the following 
mantras. 

“Om Jatavedase sunavama romam, etc.” 

“Om Manastoka, etc.” 

“Om Tryambakam Y ajàmahe, etc.” 

“Om Tacchamyoh, etc." 

Then touch all the parts of your bodies, repeating 
the two mantra, “Om atodeva, etc.” And reciting 
the mantram "Svona Prthivi,” bow down to the 
earth, after repeating one’s name, Gotra, etc. 

vé ferar Hearn: MaA aT 1 

dean wars vai EAT 11 34 1 

urere wr da: Hatred: d 

ferat Bre 1Toraft we foot aarsaa u 35 u 

O Narada! Thus the rules of the morning Sandhya 
are prescribed. Doing works so far, bid farewell to 
the above-mentioned Gayatri. Next finishing the 
Agnihotra Homa sacrifice, worship the five Devatās, 
Siva, Siva, Gaņeša, Sürya and Visnu. 

ded q Ores egre am warf: 1 

era at Hataetter A sf 36 N 

wart g ersrrest enger | TUTA, 0 

amat Ranga miror verat fateri 37 u 

Worship by the Purusa Sükta mantra, or by Hrim 
mantra, or by Vyahrti mantra or by Sriscate 
Laksmīšca, etc., place Bhavani in the centre; Visnu 
in the north east corner, Siva in the south-east 
corner; Gaņeša in the south-west corner, and the 
Sun in the north-west corner; and then worship 
them. While offering worship with the sixteen 
offerings, worship by repeating sixteen mantras. 

: 1 

wrssmqwenis Aen: 138 i 

As there is no other act more merit-giving than 
the worship of the Devi, so the Devi should first 
of all be worshipped. Then worship in due order 
the five Devatàs placed in five positions. 

wired g ase d 

4 Sdiasraraquenaféres eaferdiazre i 39 N 

arque g etam desrarié: sia i 

"damus qur WaT 0 40 di 


1323 


galfratdāggmt taht ĒRTU, | 
ferner Hest wed wem 11 41 N 
fagh sepes se wre g carter | 
fsrgrarswarfsrerqud eitrenrmemqura 42 N 
Wed fagat a wend AM 1 
gali Raah pia Mar 043 N 


l 

wen] P a endsrepup AM 44 N 

yamana T 1 

wanrdtr gar effer a 45 i 

As the worship of the Devī is the chief object, 
so in the three Sandhyās, the worship of the 
Sandhyā Devī is approved of by the Šrutis. Never 
worship Visnu with rice; Gaņeša with Tulasi 
leaves; the Devi Durga with Durba grass and Siva 
with Ketaki flower. The under-mentioned flowers 
are pleasing to the Devi: Mallika, Jati, Kutaja, 
Panasa, Palāsa, Vakula, Lodha, Karavira, Šimšapa, 
Aparājitā, Bandhüka, Vaka, Madanta, Sindhuvāra, 
Palāša, Durbhā, Sallaki, Madhavi, Arka, Mandara, 
Ketaki, Karņikāra, Kadamba, Lotus, Campaka, 
Yūthikā, Tagara, etc, 

yra vega dra: eT: 1 

wide Sans wat yore wT lt 46 ü 

ud gat Vana durum wg d 

Wa: APT Heit aa ATN | 

qian g funr fragu: 147 0 

sft ARRITI margaret GATT) 
FARISTI: 0017 11 

Offer incenses Guggul, Dhüpa and the light of 
the Til oil and finish the worship. Then repeat the 
principal (male) mantra (make Japam). Thus 
finishing the work, study the Vedas in the second 
quarter of the next day; and in the third quarter of 
that day feed father, mother and other dependent 
relatives, with money earned by one's own self 
according to the traditions of one's family. 

Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Eleventh 
Book on the description of Sandhya and other daily 
practices in the Mahapuranam Srimaddevibhagavatam 
of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1324 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER XVIII 
On the Greatness of the Devi Pūjā 


siana sara 


iea d sitgfireorfi arg | 
Ward aye: papaa, oU 1 ou 


Narada spoke: O Bhagavan! I am now very eager 
to hear the special Pūjā of Sri Devi. The people get 
their desires fulfilled if they worship Her. 


sft gara 


ead spur gear sig: YAAR, | 

yrru HTBITTHETÉSSRUTN 2 1 

emer at HA TT RA, i 

agar q WS 03 a 

Narayana said: O Devarsi! I shall now specially 
speak to you how the World Mother Bhagavati is 
worshipped; by worshipping Whom one easily gets 
objects of enjoyments, liberation and the 
destruction of all evils. Controlling one’s speech 
and making Acamana, one must make one’s 
sankalpa and perform Bhūtašuddhi, Mātrkānyāsa, 
Sadanganyasa. 

VIE eas FT emat FETA wr | 

USS wre NAATA: 4 d 

Waa at: Tat waa | 

disqui qu gear Saft EHE: WAL UU 5 di 

Placing conchshell and doing other necessary 
acts. Offering the ordinary Arghya, one should give 
special Arghya and with the mantra “Astraya Phat" 
sprinkle over all the articles brought for worship. 
Taking the Guru's permission, he is to go on with 
his Püjà. First worship the pitha or seat whereon 
the Devi would be placed; then perform dhyana 
(meditation of the Devi). 

Smeg Rea Na | 

xamuenedi at dunmgeaunfsfro 6 

degaia PON: NIAGA: | 

Then with great devotion, offer to the Deva, the 
seats (āsana) and other articles of worship; then 
perform the bath of the Devi by the water of the 


Paficamrta (the five nectars). 


wae weet + cw sputsfTemed 7 ou 

ag wrt emàn, | 

dammi pa NAg a usu 

att 1 aAA wat da ma i 

ag Aaa agua wT 9d 

APAVI apgat AM: d 

If anybody performs the bath ceremony of Sti 
Devi with one hundred Jars of sugarcane juice, he 
will not have to incur any future birth. He who 
performs this bath, and recites the Veda Mantras, 
with mango juice or sugarcane juice gets for ever 
Laksmi ever and ever and Sarasvati bound at his 
doors. He who gets this sacred bath of the Devi 
with grape juice, along with his relatives and 
acquaintences dwells in the Devi-loka for as many 
years as there are atoms in the juice. 

Taya a As mētāt nion 

aigeann iR: —| 

afee: mA Aemmet EA ud] 

smertsreifer uar eana wt à 

a gamed vauagswed: 012 

anced a fed aferd afteamt | 

"ug aemfirfücrat afireearafestad 13 u 

He who bathes the Devi with the Vedic mantras, 
and with water scented with camphor, the fragrant 
aloe wood (aguru), saffron, and musk, becomes 
freed at once of the sins acquired in his hundred 
births. He who bathes the Devi with jars of milk, 
lives in the ocean of milk (ksira samudra) for one 
Kalpa. So he who does this bathing ceremony with 
jars of curd, becomes the lord of Dadhikunda (the 
reservoir of curd). 


nya uda AAT Vesti wp 


AMATA fra, u14u 
acano erect: d 


Book XI Chapter XVIII 


1325 


ge les TST areas Get dq N 15 i 

He who performs the Snanams of the Devi with 
honey, ghee and sugar becomes the lord of these 
things. He who bathes the Devi with one thousand 
jars, becomes happy in this world as in the next. 

Note: Make the liquid current flow pure in your body 
is the esoteric meaning of the bath. 

att caged Grat angore U TEST | 

Tafa erar faférafersiar uw 16 u 

aigi «eur agtifāgattam à 

JUR NIC NM Cp UAE "17u 

gaat med Mataufa: ue: | 

If you give Her a pair of silken clothes, you will 
go to the Vàyu-Loká. If you give Her the jewel 
ornaments, you will become the Lord of gems and 
jewels. (Make your mind like the gem). If anybody 
gives saffron, sandalpaste, musk, Sindüra and 
Alaktak (red things), he will go to the Heavens 
and become there the Indra, the Lord of the Devas, 
in the next birth. 

yarr fefe: wsrresdfor mer: 18 N 

wirft GET amori ATRI HAA TAT 1 

Various flowers ought to be offered in Sri 
Bhagavati’s worship; or the flowers of the season 
offered to the Devi will lead the devotee to Kailāša. 


faeeuareeurarr dt serena 419 


qa ga waked aqferea 1 wires 1 
fare Theat g ded 020 
"rarstsrret DEG: ES wrfedieur i 
"rarefrerfares ATA aged SST 421! 
misi Mat Ta wefbenurdenst | 


aadA HN deu TAH ll 22 I 

The devotee that offers the beautiful Bel leaves 
to the Devi never experiences anywhere pains and 
difficulties. The devotee who writes the Bija mantra 
of Maya "Hrim Bhuvanešvaryai Namah” with red 
sandalpaste thrice on the tri-leaves of the Bilva tree 
leaf and offers this to the lotus feet of the Devi, 
becomes Manu by the merit of this virtuous act! 


"p wd Hod THM Acad Had fF a: | 


amg nia amex: 123 0 

The devotee becomes the Lord of the whole 
universe who worships the Devi Bhagavati with 
ten millions of entire Bilva leaves, fresh, green and 
spotless. 


VA gadu aaien, 1 


ead wettest: 240 
AT: Usa IISTI HAYA | 
naRead afd: W250 


ife: qst TĀ V wq: 

wsrerefnGr da gaida u26u 

If any devotee worships with ten millions of 
entire fresh green Kunda flowers, with eight scents, 
he gets surely the Prajapatihood. The worship of 
the Devi with ten millions of Mallika and Mālatī 
flowers besmeared with eight scents makes a man 
the four faced (Brahma); and one hundred millions 
of such flowers will make the devotee a Visnu. 

fare eret nef aregieafür gei | 

Raagi wd qd weet 127 0 

watchin Kari AGITA i 

PARA HK TT Were Td: 128 N 

In days of yore, Visnu worshipped the Devi in 
the aforesaid way and so got His Visnuhood. If 
any devotee worships the Devi with one hundred 
Kotis of Mallika or Mālatī flowers, the man 
becomes certainly Sutrātmā Hiranyagarbha. 

GEJ aa Ruawai mA, | 


SARPA T 29N 


€ VON 


eon fafürg saita: 

warf quifor diac ffm "30 u 

T Tavai = mAs Ws od 

weiss: ya 140131! 

In ancient days Hiranyagarbha worshipped thus 
the Devi with great devotion and so he became 
Hiranyagarbha! (These Hiranyagarbha, Brahma, 
Visnu and Maheša were mere ordinary men before. 
See the Brhadáranyaka Upanisada). 

Note: The eight scents refer to Jatàmamsi Kapiyutà 
Saktergandhastakam! So will be the results if Java, 
Bandhüka and Dadimi flowers be offered in the 


1326 


Bandhüka and Dadimi flowers be offered in the 
worship. Various other beautiful flowers can be offered 
duly to the Devi by the devotee. The merits accruing 
from such offers are not known even to the God I$vara. 
The flowers that spring in their proper seasons are to 
be offered every year to the Devi, repeating Her 
thousand names enumerated in the Twelfth Book or in 
the Kürma Purana. 

andar uadi: 1 

"p Wd Hed WaT s M 32 V 

Fort d Kad wur: 

strats gest mew: u33 

- the above worship be offered to the Devī, then 
that man, whether he be a sinner or a great sinner, 
will be freed from all the sins and after leaving his 
mortal coil, he will get, no doubt, the lotus feet of 
the Sri Devi Bhagavati. 

SIE BHA T AAT HITU: | 

qwe Magi dart maT 1 34 N 

Rice eremi Iyer ema | 

gu cerned da vanggfud qeu u35 u 

Offer Dhüpa made of black Aguru, camphor, 
sandalpaste, red sandalpaste, Sihlaka and Guggula, 
saturated with ghee in such a way as the whole 
room of Sri Bhagavati scents with pure fragrant 
smell. 

Aa wera du garā AAA, | 

dunds gammā fia, 1360 

yitna ATS creat fenem | 


The Devi Bhagavati becomes pleased with this 
and offers the lordship of the three Lokas to the 
devotee. The devotee, who offers daily the light of 
camphor to the Devi, goes to the Sürya Loka. There 
is no doubt in this. 

wader GREAT URRA: 37 0 

Adel Geet ter: vemasrered agn 1 

gda ddr: wedeg wares: 1.38 1 

ATV facut target veretfer E i 

miaa crest FIA, 39 N 

With one’s whole heart, one should give one 
hundred or one thousand lights to the Devi. The 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


devotee should offer heaps of food consisting of 
six Ràsas, the plates and dishes for chewing, 
sucking, licking and drinking, that is, all kinds of 
food solid, and liquid, mountain-like high. Always 
give food on golden flat plates and cups and various 
delicious sweet juicy nice heavenly fruits, nicely 
arranged on trays, cups and saucers. 

Gara sitrerceat seat sRTonm | 

ameter wd vest uut wem AMT 40 1 

When Šrī Mahādevī Bhuvanešvarī gets pleased, 
the whole universe gets pleased. For the whole 
Universe is all Devī; as a rope is mistaken for a 
snake, so this Mahādevī is mistaken for the 
universe. 


43 U 

Offer a jar of drinking Ganges water, cool and 
nice, scented with camphor to the Devi; then offer 
betels with camphor, cardamum, cloves, and 
various delicious scents. These all are to be offered 
with great devotion so that the Devi may be 
pleased. Next have music with lovely mrdangas, 
flutes, murajas, Dhakkās and dundubhis and so 
please Her. 

AA att mera: 1 

ATT: xdi: onan 44 u 

vi u ume g GEIEGI ama: | 

marema steed eda wat 145 u 

The Veda mantras are to be recited, the Puranas 
are to be read and the hymns to be chanted. With 
whole head and heart offer to the Devi the umbrella 
and camara, the two kingly offerings. 

yai wenn pan stare | 

arse «dat gde: 46 i 

warrant at edt ueia 1 

waresirentir weiter a: KA: 847 d 


Book XI Chapter XVIII 


1327 


Then circumambulate round Her and prostrate 
before Her and ask Her kindness and pray to Her 
to forgive all faults and shortcomings. The Devi is 
pleased with anybody who remembers Her even 
once! 

ama waaay ustsfereneutrerdt 1 

Ad spen Herat g erenod fa qd: WO 048 n 

aa d MUTĒ wq Wr | 

sere wed: frat RRITAR 49 di 

What wonder then that She will be pleased with 
all these offerings! The Mother is naturally merciful 
to her child. When She is loved with devotion, then 
She becomes very merciful. There is nothing 
strange here! On this point I will recite to you the 
history of Vrhadratha Rajarsi. Hearing which gives 
rise to Bhakti and Love. 


WT Viera AA HUTA ATT 51 Ui 

Once in a certain region in the Himālayas there 
lived a bird called Cakravak. It flew over many 
countries and went once to Kasidhama. As a fruit 
of his Pararabdha Karma, that bird, desirous to find 
some rice beans, voluntarily went like an orphan 
round about the temple of Sri Annapürnà Devi. 

at yafaa sora H ATA | 

were aada yi fewer 152 0 

wear mande: ig Ufā 1 

ays ferrara faoreutnt War 53 u 

There circumambulating round the Devi 
Bhagavati the bird left the city Kāšī, that grants 
liberation and flew away to another country. In 
time the bird left his body and went to Heavens. 
There he assumed a heavenly form of a youth and 
began to enjoy various pleasures. 

megi Ta Spam Ys: TU ye fw | 

aan pè wat yo WARTA 054 

geaate aes yag: ARE i 

narar erias rarardi frafsa: 1 55 i 


Thus he enjoyed for two Kalpas. Then he got 
back to the earth and took his birth as the best in 
the Ksattriya family. He became celebrated as the 
king Brhadratha in this world. That King was 
truthful, controlled his senses, and practised 
Samyama and deep concentration and knew 
everything of the past, the present and the future. 

xen: mi wur agi: | 

yaar add gowr ufa use 

sr sper frad Ta: AUT: | 

Grafa uxor ea A 157 tt 

uyga: wd ENNS NETU | 

eat uusauwrdur qd 158 i 

He conquered all the enemies and performed 
various sacrifices and became the Emperor of the 
sea-girt earth and acquired the very rare faculty in 
the knowledge of everything of his previous births. 
The Munis came to know of this from various 
rumours and came to the King. The King 
Brhadratha duly entertained those guests. The 
Munis took their seats and asked: "O King! We 
hear that all the events of previous births are vividly 
reflected in your memory. 

Breanne Hare Yaa: | 

mi TA SIEHT: TT aif 59 N 

ag mesa ATA Aaah AMAA | 

On this point great doubts have come upon us. 
Kindly describe in detail. By what Punyam (merits) 
you have come to know all about previous births 
and the knowledge of the past, the present and the 
future. We have come to you to know how you got 
this wonderful supersensual knowledge. Kindly say 
to us sincerely everything about this and oblige.” 

shana sare 

gia vat oer: spear Tat UAT: 1160 ui 

Tar Tene) Walang | 

Hati Yara: Us MA ATT AUT, 6 1 

Narayana said: O Brāhmaņa! The very 
religious King Brhadratha heard them and began 
to speak out all the secret causes for his 


1328 


knowledge of the past, the present and the future, 
thus: O Munis! Hear how 1 acquired this 
knowledge. 

amare: fera: yd Aans ar i 

ergradtsfü araraguiveraromy 162 1 

aa graamatu tat neaga: 1 

PIRTS TTT TATA: 11 63 N 

In my previous birth I was a very low bird 
cakravāk. Once, out of my ignorance, I 
circumambulated round the temple of the Devi 
Bhagavati Annapūrņā at Kast. And, as the result 
of that, I lived in the Heavens for a period of two 
Kalpas and I have got this birth and J have got the 
knowledge of the past, the present and the future. 

whl da Weta: wearers Pēra | 

"uem auteur q udersiforisterem u 64 u 

firme err qui à gie mat q urfümr i 

O You of good vows! Who can ascertain what 
amount of merits accrues from remembering the 
Feet of the World-Mother. Remembering Her 
glories, I always shed tears of joy. Those who do 
not worship the adorable Deity Jagadamba are the 
Great Sinners and they are treacherous. Fie on their 
births! The worship of Siva or Visnu is not eternal. 

a adata cat varameri a srsife fF i 65 n 

q faran Freer a roaa ver i 

Rea: man reat ēra A 11 66 u 

fe war ag ame vem aafe i 

vats uate Arae fia 67 ud 

Only the Jagadamba’s worship is eternal. Thus 
it is stated in the Srutis. What more shall I speak 
on this worship of the World-Mother, which is void 
of the best trace of any doubt. Everyone ought to 


Šrimaddevībhāgavatam 


serve devotedly the lotus feet of the Devi Bhagavati. 
There is no other act more glorious in this world 
than serving the feet of Jagadamba. 
ma: usd fefe was 1 
taster wn «dt fior as erat 068 u 
Itis highly necessary to serve the Highest Deity, 
whether in Her Saguna or in Her Nirguna aspect. 
(Eat the sugarcandy, holding itin any way. It makes 
no difference.) 
simaa sara 
gA aa aa: spear aR RA | 
maaga: We Wet: Tatar 11 69 N 
Narayana said: Hearing the aforesaid words of 
the virtuous Rājarsi Brhadratha, the Munis went 
back to their respective abodes. 
War or edt wegen: we fena | 
entr era Wed qvod ra HARA 7O N 
Ai g rarest qui Snap Wm | 
at g START qui STET STRE 071 Ui 
ēft MAERT ETT CaS - 
DEISE: |1 18 11 
Such is the power of the Devī Jagadambikā! So 
who can guestion about the certainty of the high 
merits arising from the Jagadambika’s worship and 
who will not reply, when so questioned? Their births 
are really fruitful who possess faith in the Devi 
worship; but of those who have no such faith, there 
is some wrong mixture, no doubt; in their births. 
Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Eleventh 
Book on the greatness of the Devi Paya, in the 
Mahapuranam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


CHAPTER XIX 
On the Midday Sandhya 


starr sara 
HMA: FAA TAT HEAT AAMT ct WATT | 
agggrmdisgd MASA HL ud 
mf gadi varat da Preoreram i 
Mat amamen PILENTAFKTATI, 1 2 0 


Narayana said: O Narada! Now I am speaking 
of the auspicious midday Sandhya, the practice of 
which leads to the wonderfully excellent results. 
Listen. Here the Acamana and other things are 
similar to those of the morning Sandhya. Only in 


1328 


knowledge of the past, the present and the future, 
thus: O Munis! Hear how 1 acquired this 
knowledge. 

amare: fera: yd Aans ar i 

ergradtsfü araraguiveraromy 162 1 

aa graamatu tat neaga: 1 

PIRTS TTT TATA: 11 63 N 

In my previous birth I was a very low bird 
cakravāk. Once, out of my ignorance, I 
circumambulated round the temple of the Devi 
Bhagavati Annapūrņā at Kast. And, as the result 
of that, I lived in the Heavens for a period of two 
Kalpas and I have got this birth and J have got the 
knowledge of the past, the present and the future. 

whl da Weta: wearers Pēra | 

"uem auteur q udersiforisterem u 64 u 

firme err qui à gie mat q urfümr i 

O You of good vows! Who can ascertain what 
amount of merits accrues from remembering the 
Feet of the World-Mother. Remembering Her 
glories, I always shed tears of joy. Those who do 
not worship the adorable Deity Jagadamba are the 
Great Sinners and they are treacherous. Fie on their 
births! The worship of Siva or Visnu is not eternal. 

a adata cat varameri a srsife fF i 65 n 

q faran Freer a roaa ver i 

Rea: man reat ēra A 11 66 u 

fe war ag ame vem aafe i 

vats uate Arae fia 67 ud 

Only the Jagadamba’s worship is eternal. Thus 
it is stated in the Srutis. What more shall I speak 
on this worship of the World-Mother, which is void 
of the best trace of any doubt. Everyone ought to 


Šrimaddevībhāgavatam 


serve devotedly the lotus feet of the Devi Bhagavati. 
There is no other act more glorious in this world 
than serving the feet of Jagadamba. 
ma: usd fefe was 1 
taster wn «dt fior as erat 068 u 
Itis highly necessary to serve the Highest Deity, 
whether in Her Saguna or in Her Nirguna aspect. 
(Eat the sugarcandy, holding itin any way. It makes 
no difference.) 
simaa sara 
gA aa aa: spear aR RA | 
maaga: We Wet: Tatar 11 69 N 
Narayana said: Hearing the aforesaid words of 
the virtuous Rājarsi Brhadratha, the Munis went 
back to their respective abodes. 
War or edt wegen: we fena | 
entr era Wed qvod ra HARA 7O N 
Ai g rarest qui Snap Wm | 
at g START qui STET STRE 071 Ui 
ēft MAERT ETT CaS - 
DEISE: |1 18 11 
Such is the power of the Devī Jagadambikā! So 
who can guestion about the certainty of the high 
merits arising from the Jagadambika’s worship and 
who will not reply, when so questioned? Their births 
are really fruitful who possess faith in the Devi 
worship; but of those who have no such faith, there 
is some wrong mixture, no doubt; in their births. 
Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Eleventh 
Book on the greatness of the Devi Paya, in the 
Mahapuranam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


CHAPTER XIX 
On the Midday Sandhya 


starr sara 
HMA: FAA TAT HEAT AAMT ct WATT | 
agggrmdisgd MASA HL ud 
mf gadi varat da Preoreram i 
Mat amamen PILENTAFKTATI, 1 2 0 


Narayana said: O Narada! Now I am speaking 
of the auspicious midday Sandhya, the practice of 
which leads to the wonderfully excellent results. 
Listen. Here the Acamana and other things are 
similar to those of the morning Sandhya. Only in 


Book XI Chapter XIX 


meditation (Dhyànam) there is some difference. I 
will now speak of that. The name of the midday 
Gayatri is Savitri. She is ever a youthful maiden, 
of white colour, three-eyed; She holds in Her one 
hand a rosary, in Her other hand a trident and with 
Her two other hands She makes signs to Her 
Bhaktas to dispel fear and to grant boons. 
qea uddadfeat Kadam, d 

ai urat da qasira "w3u 

amfacrmmiwemenst urat aaa | 

Riding on the bull, She recites the Yayur Vedas; 
She is the Rudra Sakti with Tamo gunas and She 
resides in Brahmaloka, She daily traverses in the 
path of the Sun. She is Maya Devi, beginningless; 
I bow down to Her. 

aifeedina ITT wp ade ua d 

aa meyi g fear: d 


aan aeaa frem: usa 
su Gah! Aeae Rorà | 
We tenga uten eon nén 


After meditating on the Adya Devi Bhagavati 
perform Acamanas and other things as in the 
morning Sandhya. Now, about the offering of 
Arghya (an offer of green grass, rice, etc., made in 
worshipping a God or Bráhmana). Collect flowers 
for Arghya; in the absence of flowers, the Bel 
leaves and water will serve the purpose. 

Heats ha urat g RTE i 

adya wenn are wm 007 u 

«Ti HANA HNA WAAT: | 

afi yiii eui sftreatfer u 8 ou 

Facing the Sun, and looking upwards, offer the 
Arghya to the Sun upwards. Then perform other 
acts as in the morning Sandhya. In midday, some 
offer Arghya to the Sun, only with the recitation 
of the Gàyatri mantra. But that is not approved of 
by the tradition and community; there is the 
likelihood of the whole work being thwarted or 
rendered fruitless. For, in the morning and evening 


1329 


become ready to devour the Sun. This is stated in 
the Srutis. 

aag RUTA: deat puerum: | 

dade West wur wo 9 d 

sive wards erem sperare: à 

apaa Har weratsrferferfor i 10 N 

Therefore the midday offering of the Arghya is 
not for the destruction of the Daityas but for the 
satisfaction of the Devi; so with the mantra 
“Akrsnena, etc.,” the offering of Arghya can be 
effected; and the reciting of the infallible Gayatri 
mantra is only to create disturbance in the shape of 
thwarting the action. Soin the morning and evening, 
the Brahmana is to offer the Sūryārghya, repeating 
the Gayatri and Pranava; and in the midday to offer 
flowers and water with the mantra “Akrsnena, rajasā 
etc.," else it will go against the Sruti. 

aret farazga wee | 

arai quaranta wit deus wu 11 

aaa ado ast sy tafe | 

In the absence of flowers, the Durba grass, etc., 
can be offered carefully as the Arghya; and the 
full fruits of the Sandhya will be secured. O Best 
of Devarsis! Now hear the important points in the 
Tarpanam (peace offerings). Thus: 

qa: ya: Gos g ada Hp: 012 M 

add ada dec ada a oi 

Ruani a autre ada aw 13 | 

"rft a eret dani wig wem i 

deat ata gad sani gari wem u14 u 

qatati Ragat adrdardftf gara 1 

fa: g ed q git negad 1 15 u 

“Om Bhuvah purusam tarpayāmi namo namah.” 

“Om Yajurvedam tarpayami namo namah.” 

“Om Mandalam tarpayami namo namah.” 

“Om Hiranyagarbham tarpayāmi namo namah.” 

“Om antarātmānam tarpayāmi namo namah.” 

“Om Sāvitrīm tarpayāmi namo namah.” 

“Om Devamātaram tarpayami namo namah.” 

“Om Samkrtim tarpayami namo namah.” 

“Om Yuvatim sandhyàm tarpayami namo 


Sandhyās, the Raksasas named the Mandehas| nang 


84 


1330 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


*Om Rudrāņīm tarpayāmi namo namah.” 

“Om Nimrijàm tarpayāmi namo namah.” 

*Om Bhurbhuvah Svah purusam tarpayāmi 
namo namah.” 


sqerfüfer ra gatera a | 

fad dararftīfē a qateearmrat i 1 6 N 

aA we pda ciuem | 

woe wes g warf yoy AE 417 

Thus finish the midday Sandhyānga Tarpanam. 
Now, with your hands raised high up towards the 
Sun, worship Him by the two mantras, praising 
thus: “Om Udutyam Jatavedasam, etc.,” “Om 
Citram Devanam, etc.” Next repeat the Gayatri. 

eatery Gay ura: aret urtriēmt TAT à 

TAT wee q wem wu 18 N 

"wdgerrerfireur: nism g 1 

miod aren wenffüdr 19 

Hear its method. In the morning, repeat the 
Gayatri at the proper moment with hands raised; 
in the evening time with hands lowered and in the 
midday with hands over the breast. Begin with the 
middle phalanx (joint) of the nameless finger, then 
the phalanx at its root, then the phalanx at the root 
of the little finger, its middle phalanx and its top, 
then the tops of the nameless, fore and ring fingers, 
then the middle and finally the root of the ring 
finger (in the direction of the hands of the watch; 
avoiding the middle and root phalanx of the middle 
finger). Thus ten times it is repeated. 

iren: fuge TTT OTT eet: | 

waraarent wr 2r feng: wn fus u 20 N 


a maa: ASAT Tat wate WT: | 

"red aree urd adai 21 N 

In this way if the Gayatri be repeated one 
thousand times, the sins arising from killing a cow, 
father, mother, from causing abortions, going to 
the wife of one’s Guru, stealing a Brahmana’s 
property, a Bráhmana's field, drinking wine, etc., 
all are destroyed. Also the sins acquired in three 
births by mind, word, or by the enjoyments of 
sensual objects are thereby then and there instantly 
destroyed. All the labours of him, who works hard 
in the study of the Vedas without knowing the 
Gayatri, are useless. 

akeat areata aftr oret mma: | 

Treat at a rere gar eem after: 22 N 

Used Ut dary mast Maat AAT 1 

aan urges Sum: 123 0 

sft MTG: Wenn: atfādt war i 


era: Wi yaaa agaa 24! 
afar dhmēdtanrad Tengo? VETER aD 
CHAM SENT: 11 19 11 

Therefore if you compare on the one hand the 
study of the four Vedas with the reciting of the 
Gayatri, then the Gayatri Japam stands higher. 
Thus I have spoken to you of the rules of the midday 
Sandhya. Now I am speaking of Brahma Yajfia. 
Hear. 

Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter of the Eleventh 
Book on the midday Sandhya in the Mahāpurāņam 
Srimaddevibhàga vatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


CHAPTER XX 
On the Description of Brahma Yajnia, Sandhyas, etc. 


starrer IATE 
fre faa: wd Rahtaa, | 
wuwggterenuifór urat wr war: 1 
frit ag «at Ararat strays | 
Zea a AM Ute Wat wer 0 2 d 


TATA! Ages TIAMAT | 

The twice born (Brahmana) is firstly to sip three 
times (make Acamana); then to make the màrjana 
(sprinkle water) twice; he is to touch the water by 
the right hand and sprinkle water on his two feet. 
Next, he is to sprinkle with water his head, eyes, 


1330 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


*Om Rudrāņīm tarpayāmi namo namah.” 

“Om Nimrijàm tarpayāmi namo namah.” 

*Om Bhurbhuvah Svah purusam tarpayāmi 
namo namah.” 


sqerfüfer ra gatera a | 

fad dararftīfē a qateearmrat i 1 6 N 

aA we pda ciuem | 

woe wes g warf yoy AE 417 

Thus finish the midday Sandhyānga Tarpanam. 
Now, with your hands raised high up towards the 
Sun, worship Him by the two mantras, praising 
thus: “Om Udutyam Jatavedasam, etc.,” “Om 
Citram Devanam, etc.” Next repeat the Gayatri. 

eatery Gay ura: aret urtriēmt TAT à 

TAT wee q wem wu 18 N 

"wdgerrerfireur: nism g 1 

miod aren wenffüdr 19 

Hear its method. In the morning, repeat the 
Gayatri at the proper moment with hands raised; 
in the evening time with hands lowered and in the 
midday with hands over the breast. Begin with the 
middle phalanx (joint) of the nameless finger, then 
the phalanx at its root, then the phalanx at the root 
of the little finger, its middle phalanx and its top, 
then the tops of the nameless, fore and ring fingers, 
then the middle and finally the root of the ring 
finger (in the direction of the hands of the watch; 
avoiding the middle and root phalanx of the middle 
finger). Thus ten times it is repeated. 

iren: fuge TTT OTT eet: | 

waraarent wr 2r feng: wn fus u 20 N 


a maa: ASAT Tat wate WT: | 

"red aree urd adai 21 N 

In this way if the Gayatri be repeated one 
thousand times, the sins arising from killing a cow, 
father, mother, from causing abortions, going to 
the wife of one’s Guru, stealing a Brahmana’s 
property, a Bráhmana's field, drinking wine, etc., 
all are destroyed. Also the sins acquired in three 
births by mind, word, or by the enjoyments of 
sensual objects are thereby then and there instantly 
destroyed. All the labours of him, who works hard 
in the study of the Vedas without knowing the 
Gayatri, are useless. 

akeat areata aftr oret mma: | 

Treat at a rere gar eem after: 22 N 

Used Ut dary mast Maat AAT 1 

aan urges Sum: 123 0 

sft MTG: Wenn: atfādt war i 


era: Wi yaaa agaa 24! 
afar dhmēdtanrad Tengo? VETER aD 
CHAM SENT: 11 19 11 

Therefore if you compare on the one hand the 
study of the four Vedas with the reciting of the 
Gayatri, then the Gayatri Japam stands higher. 
Thus I have spoken to you of the rules of the midday 
Sandhya. Now I am speaking of Brahma Yajfia. 
Hear. 

Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter of the Eleventh 
Book on the midday Sandhya in the Mahāpurāņam 
Srimaddevibhàga vatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


CHAPTER XX 
On the Description of Brahma Yajnia, Sandhyas, etc. 


starrer IATE 
fre faa: wd Rahtaa, | 
wuwggterenuifór urat wr war: 1 
frit ag «at Ararat strays | 
Zea a AM Ute Wat wer 0 2 d 


TATA! Ages TIAMAT | 

The twice born (Brahmana) is firstly to sip three 
times (make Acamana); then to make the màrjana 
(sprinkle water) twice; he is to touch the water by 
the right hand and sprinkle water on his two feet. 
Next, he is to sprinkle with water his head, eyes, 


Book XI Chapter XX 


nose, ears, heart, and head thoroughly. Then 
speaking out the De$a and Kala (place and time) 
he should commence the Brahma Yajfia. 

ot eet fart eet ant SRA u 3 N 

sade Brari a urge) apa | 

fag udagan data fe nan 

Next for the destruction of all the sins and for 
getting liberation, he should have the Darbha 
(sacrificial grass, and the Kuša grasses), two on 
his right hand, three on his left hand, one grass 
each on his seat, sacrificial thread, his tuft, and his 
heels. No sin can now remain in his body. 

Atradi weed aera | 

meat Softee arfas wg: wn 5i 

réf aa: Grea ofer sft aaa 1 

aa end da dem tava ata u6u 

aad: darts fear maaa | 

Teas wur sdratst ga fe uu 


aa arate rere vrsteetidik er 
aq wur Ut gegaard is i 
aa frat yaar veras a i 
Tae tat gate HAT uou 
aardt trdfsrgrar aand wer seater 1 


wed aia a ree Ta A sears w 10 u 

“I am performing this Brahma Yajiiá for the 
satisfaction of the Devatā according to the Sūtra,” 
thus thinking he is to repeat the Gayatri thrice. 
Then he is to recite the following mantras: 


+ 


urohitam, etc.,  "Yadamgeti" 
p g 


‘Mahavrataficaiva panthā,” “Athatah 


* Agnimīle 
*Agnirvai, 


336 


Sari asc vidāmaghavat,” "Mahàvratasya," 
"[setvorjetvà," "Agna āyāhi” “anno Devi 
rabbistaye,” “Tasya Samāmnāyo” 


29 66 


“Vrdhairadaic” "Šiksām pravaksyāmi,” "Pafica 
Sarhvatsareti,” *Mayarasatajabhetyeva," 
also he is to recite hety we following 
“Athato 
Brahma Jijūāsa.” Next he is to recite ihe mantra 
“Taccham yoh” “Namo 


Brahmane namo stvagnaye namah prthivyai nama 


=» 


aun, 
Sūtras: 


and also the mantra 


1331 


Osadhībhyoh namah”. (These mantras are the 
famous mantras of the Rg Veda). 
adoi da dari da: Haterafarony i 
VTUTAN gen a der deme? 11 1 
uai ta wafer aatencada u | 
ATEATĪTEMA: WI dd: wap 12 0 
Treat ta uana wrargférdt gaf i 
sake Etat er ESSI BTA: TTT NI 13 Uu 
Rr: Bast NY RRAN dd: WU d 


IRT weather 014 i 
am aay mas et Raada ar à 
EL IECHESGIEIGOEEESHERCZGEG ti 15 tt 
aat Preftett aca a sadtadadūatā à 
Vate? HTV Tamga uw 16 N 
fasnfirat amats Annheg Ka a | 


afass TUV VIAA: TTT 0017 Ui 
Next perform the Deva-tarpaņam, thus: "Om 
Prajāpati stripyatu”, "Om Brahmā stripyatu”, 


“Om Vedās tripyantu,” “Om Rsayastri pyantu”, “ 
Om Devāstripantu,” “Om Sarvani chandarhsi 
tripyantu”, “Om Om Kara stripyatu", “Om Vasat 


Kara stripyatu", "Om Vyārhitayas tripyantu”, 
Om Sāvitrī tripyatu”, "Om Gayatri tripyatu”, 
“Om Yajūā stripyantu," Om Dyāvā prthivyau 
tripyatam. Om antarīksam tripyatu, Om 
Ahorātrāni tripyantu, Om Sānkhyā stripyantu, 
Om Siddha stripyantu, Om Samudra stripyantu, 
Om Nadyās tripyantu, Om girayastripyantu, Om 
Ksettrausadhivana — spati — gandharvapsarasas 
tripyantu, Om naga vayāmsi gāvasca sadhya 
viprasta thaiva ca, Yaksā raksārnsi bhütani tyeva 
mantani tripyantu. Next, suspending the 
sacrificial thread from the neck, perform the Rsi 
tarpanam, thus: Om Satarcina stripyantu, Om 
mādhyamā stripyantu, Om Grtsamada stripyatu, 
Om  Vi$vamitra stripyantu, Om Vāmadeva 
stripyantu, Om Atri stripyatu, Om Bharadvaja 
stripyatu, Om Vasistha stripyatu, Om Pragatha 
stripyatu, Pāvamānya stripyantu. Next, holding 
the sacrificial thread over the right shoulder and 
under the left arm, perform the Tarpanam, thus: 


1332 


ATA VER: AAG Weed: | 
STRATA TAHA Va U 18 ll 
efron feret atete: Tastes: | 
ueia Aa adem quum 19 n 
giada: o pnm 
qenmag a NAA ga 4020 0 
umferat gi ad gaiftata a aids i 
IRT aetna Aa MAG: 21 
WrwerWtserqdi Wigs mur WW | 

mi arad da aea wife i 22 0 
Gon pene Hess wd: wu d 
was werent d adata: 023 N 
angst up tet a neni qaqa d 
thereat «nett cgo 024 
ATA STR c iE: GCE z: a | 
steanf a tient gis Sra u 25 u 
Om Ksudrastkta stripyantu. 

Om Mahāsūktā stripyantu. 

Om Sanaka stripyatu. 

Om Sananda stripyatu. 


Om Sanātana stripyatu. 

Om Sanat Kumara stripyatu. 

Om Kapila stripyatu. 

Om Asuri stripyatu, 

Om Vohali stripyatu. 

Om Pajicasikha stripyatu. 

Om Sumantu Jaimini Vai$ampayana Paila Sütra 
Bhasya bharata Maha Bharata Dharmācāryah 
stripyantu. 

Om Janantivaha vigārgya Gautama Šākalya 
vabhravya Mandavya Mandikeya stripyantu. 

Om Gargi Vacaknavi stripyatu. 

Om Vadava prātitheyī stripyatu. 

Om Sulabhā maitreyi stripyatu. 

Om Kahola stripyatu. 

Om Kausitaka stripyatu. 

Om Maha Kausitaka stripyatu. 

Om Bharadvaja stripyatu, 

Om Paimga stripyatu. 

Om Mahāpainga stripyatu. 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


Om Sujajfia stripyatu. 
Om Samkhyayana stripyatu. 
Om Aitareya stripyatu. 
Om Mahaitareya stripyatu. 
Om Baskala stripyatu. 
Om Šākala stripyatu. 
Om Sujata vaktra stripyatu. 
Om Audavahi stripyatu. 
Om Saujàmi stripyatu, 
Om Saunaka stripyatu, 
Om Aévalàyana stripyatu. 
a are wd amaret we qftraregya: i 
FH TEC AT GAT MIT gar: 026 u 
a Teg Fa at ewe | 
wd 4 amaaa fatter we 27 N 
Let all the other Ācāryas be satisfied. “Om Ye 
Ke cāsmat kule Jātā aputrā gotrino mrtah. te 
grhnantu maya dattam vastranispidi to dakam.” 
Saying thus offer water squeezed out of a cloth. O 
Narada! Thus I have spoken to you of the rules of 
Brahma Yajfia. 
asd ged suere fap | 
addins FONT area: 128 1 
aged ad: paama ada vu | 
aRar a Prema KATRA ! 29 1 
TE it Grat Sale smgrót: wg à 
wa tat at wattage 30 
Whoever performs thus the Brahma Yajfia gets 
the fruits of studying all the Vedas. Then 
performing, in due order, the Vai$va deva, Homa, 
Sraddha, serving the guests, and feeding the cows, 
the devotee is to take his meals during the fifth 
part of the day along with the other Brāhmaņas. 
SAGA: wea Aad 1 
BSA CHAM q Ale: Peat Aa: TA: 37 N 
Then the sixth and the seventh parts of the day 
he is to spend in reading histories and the Puranas. 
Then the eighth part of the day he is to devote in 
secing the relatives, talking with them and recetving 
visits from other persons; then he will be prepared 
to perform the evening Sandhya. 


Book XI Chapter XX 


1333 


aa aiad deat yaar TENA | 

wegen mema pete 032 

O Narada! I am now talking of the evening 
Sandhya. Listen. Sri Bhagavati is pleased very 
quickly with him who performs the evening 
Sandhya. 

araa WUT aT Aree: RATA: | 

SUM ah eria feat aT 33 N 

girarranfearatal aed: gorn: | 

ITT tari qu uris: Weather: 034 N 

First make the Acamana and make the Vayu (air) 
in the body steady. With neart tranquilled and with 
the seat Baddha Padmasana, be calm and quiet 
while engaged in performing the Sandhya. At the 
commencement of all actions prescribed in the 
Srutis and Smrtis, first perform the Sagarbha 
Pranayama. In other words recite the mantra 
mentally for the due number of moments and make 
the Pranayama. Simply meditating is called 
Agarbha Pranayama. Here no mantra is necessary 
to be recited. 

WARM Hear AAA aH enfer | 

"et saat sara WTA: 0 35 N 

ear yga UTT ARTT: | 

Then have the Bhūtašuddhi (have the 
purifications of the elements) and make the 
Sankalpa. First of all, the purification of elements, 
etc., are to be done first; one becomes, then, 
entitled to do other actions. While doing Püraka 
(inhaling), Kumbhaka (retaining) and Recaka 
(exhaling) in Pranayama, meditate on the Deity 
stated duly. In the evening time meditate on the 
Bhagavati Sandhya Devi thus: The name of the 
then Gayatri Devi is Sarasvati. 


She is old, of black colour, wearing ordinary 


clothes; in her hands are seen conch shell, disc, 
club and lotus. On Her feet the anklets are making 
sweet tinkling sounds; on Her loins there is the 
golden thread; decked with various ornaments. She 
is sitting on Garuda. On Her head the invaluable 
jewel crown is seen; on Her neck, the necklaces of 
stars; Her forehead is shining with a brilliant lustre 
emitting from the pearl and jewel Tātamka 
ornaments. 

dtarereni edt wfesaracassfinvftq i 

amà afta uai aai 39 0 

aad a tae MMT i 

sargam detmraidi wiser 40 

Ud enat a ai dd EXIT TT 1 

ardida rur aftasta ada wr 41 n 

framerate vn yda, | 

matianga = sftanraunftat 042 

She has put on yellow clothes; Her nature is 
eternal knowledge and ever-bliss. She is uttering 
Sama Veda. She resides in the Heavens and daily 
She goes in the path of the Sun. I invoke the Devi 
from the Solar Orb. O Narada! Meditate on the 
Devi thus and perform the Sandhya. Then perform 
the Marjanam by the mantra ““Apohistha” and next 
by the mantra “Agnig§ca mà manyušca.” The 
remaining actions are the same as before. Next, 
repeat the Gayatri and offer, with a pure heart, the 
offering of Arghya to the Sun for the satisfaction 
of Narayana. 

ated TATE gaia urere: YATE: | 

PŪT Heat gut gear NT, 43 

ad areal Heme farted qq: PATA | 

are garg at AR Were ameter: 11 44 N 

ICA ainiai wratareft vrüafürer 1 

While offering this Arghya, keep the two legs 
level and similar and take water in folded palms 
and meditating on the Devatà within the Solar 
Orb, throw it towards Him. The fool that offers 
Siryarghya in the water, out of ignorance, 
disregarding the injunctions of the Srutis, will 
have to perform Prāyašcitta for that sin. 


PH 

wd: giyera aT: 45 i 

Treas we pagaia cat qt i 

wed ar qai ar sftēdtemrmgdem 46 u 

am Wit: paggena wq | 

"wr demada a ator uate 1 47 0 

Next, worship the Sun by the Sürya mantra. 
Then taking one’s seat, meditate on the Devi and 
repeat the Gayatri. One thousand times or five 
hundred times the Gayatri is to be repeated. The 
worship, etc., in the evening is the same as in the 
morning. Now I am speaking of the Tarpanam in 
the Evening Sandhya. 

aka fa IT: gentia: | 

Seer Rayan ur Bada acī 1 48 N 

ardemetdeararemdtt faferanren: | 

Taegan a get add data un 49 N 

tse ofa durer fērmamie: war | 

ada marei adtsfā a arcadia u50 1 

aaa went ager a 1 

deat quii ver Rosoga wem n 51 N 

fri a arr adferat RoN ram i 

weiarferufeent yaara ew u52 N 

Hear. Vasistha is the Rsi of the aforesaid 
Sarasvati. Visnu in the form of Sarasvati is the 
Devata; Gayatri is the Chanda; its application is in 
the Evening Sandhya Tarpanam. Now the 
Tarpanam of the Sandhyānga (the adjunct of 
Sandhya) runs as follows: 

“Om Svah Purusam Tarpayami.” 

“Om Sāmavedam Tarpayāmi.” 

“Om Sūryamaņdalam tarpayāmi.” 

“Om Hiraņyagarbham tarpayami.” 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


“Om Paramātmānam tarpayāmi.” 

“Om Sarasvatim tarpayami.” 

“Om Devamātaram tarpayami.” 

“Om Samkrtim tarpayāmi.” 

“Om Vrddhām Sandhyām tarpayāmi 

“Om Visnu rūpinīm Usasim tarpayami.” 

"Om Nirmrjim tarpayámi." 

“Om Sarvasiddhi kāriņīm tarpayami.” 

“Om Sarvamantra dhipatikām tarpayami.” 

“Om Bhurbhuvah Svah Purusam tarpayami.” 

sad quut wre dearer: afer i 

area deneni wr enfird unam 53 N 

adgas cartier Wird wem | 

waren dean: wr wen d 

Herer ect warts ueregfet 54 ut 

sf frere merge] gerna A 
fdgisemm: 200 

Thus perform the Vaidik Tarpanam. O Narada! 
Thus have been described the rules of the sin de- 
stroying evening Sandhya. By this evening 
Sandhya, all sorts of pains and afflictions and dis- 
eases are removed. And ultimately the Moksa is 
obtained. What more than this that you should 
know this Sandhya Vandanam as the principal thing 
amongst the good conduct and right ways of liv- 
ing. Therefore Sri Bhagavati fructifies all the de- 
sires of the Bhaktas who perform this Sandhya 
Vandanam. 

Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Eleventh 
Book on the description of Brahma Yajfia, Sandhyās, 
etc., in the Mahāpurāņam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 

18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


CHAPTER XXI 


On the Gayatri Purašcaraņam 


stant sara 


AAA: TAA TA MASA: UTA AT | 

venu qui UALR NIN 

Narayana said: Now I shall speak of the Gayatri- 
purascaranam. Hear. By its performance all the 


desires are obtained and all the sins are destroyed. 
ada dr fara wer 
MS xeredssr srt geda 2 u 
raga tt: urgd RARAS ur | 
rat Reda a dym 430 


On the tops of mountains, on the banks of the 


PH 

wd: giyera aT: 45 i 

Treas we pagaia cat qt i 

wed ar qai ar sftēdtemrmgdem 46 u 

am Wit: paggena wq | 

"wr demada a ator uate 1 47 0 

Next, worship the Sun by the Sürya mantra. 
Then taking one’s seat, meditate on the Devi and 
repeat the Gayatri. One thousand times or five 
hundred times the Gayatri is to be repeated. The 
worship, etc., in the evening is the same as in the 
morning. Now I am speaking of the Tarpanam in 
the Evening Sandhya. 

aka fa IT: gentia: | 

Seer Rayan ur Bada acī 1 48 N 

ardemetdeararemdtt faferanren: | 

Taegan a get add data un 49 N 

tse ofa durer fērmamie: war | 

ada marei adtsfā a arcadia u50 1 

aaa went ager a 1 

deat quii ver Rosoga wem n 51 N 

fri a arr adferat RoN ram i 

weiarferufeent yaara ew u52 N 

Hear. Vasistha is the Rsi of the aforesaid 
Sarasvati. Visnu in the form of Sarasvati is the 
Devata; Gayatri is the Chanda; its application is in 
the Evening Sandhya Tarpanam. Now the 
Tarpanam of the Sandhyānga (the adjunct of 
Sandhya) runs as follows: 

“Om Svah Purusam Tarpayami.” 

“Om Sāmavedam Tarpayāmi.” 

“Om Sūryamaņdalam tarpayāmi.” 

“Om Hiraņyagarbham tarpayami.” 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


“Om Paramātmānam tarpayāmi.” 

“Om Sarasvatim tarpayami.” 

“Om Devamātaram tarpayami.” 

“Om Samkrtim tarpayāmi.” 

“Om Vrddhām Sandhyām tarpayāmi 

“Om Visnu rūpinīm Usasim tarpayami.” 

"Om Nirmrjim tarpayámi." 

“Om Sarvasiddhi kāriņīm tarpayami.” 

“Om Sarvamantra dhipatikām tarpayami.” 

“Om Bhurbhuvah Svah Purusam tarpayami.” 

sad quut wre dearer: afer i 

area deneni wr enfird unam 53 N 

adgas cartier Wird wem | 

waren dean: wr wen d 

Herer ect warts ueregfet 54 ut 

sf frere merge] gerna A 
fdgisemm: 200 

Thus perform the Vaidik Tarpanam. O Narada! 
Thus have been described the rules of the sin de- 
stroying evening Sandhya. By this evening 
Sandhya, all sorts of pains and afflictions and dis- 
eases are removed. And ultimately the Moksa is 
obtained. What more than this that you should 
know this Sandhya Vandanam as the principal thing 
amongst the good conduct and right ways of liv- 
ing. Therefore Sri Bhagavati fructifies all the de- 
sires of the Bhaktas who perform this Sandhya 
Vandanam. 

Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Eleventh 
Book on the description of Brahma Yajfia, Sandhyās, 
etc., in the Mahāpurāņam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 

18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


CHAPTER XXI 


On the Gayatri Purašcaraņam 


stant sara 


AAA: TAA TA MASA: UTA AT | 

venu qui UALR NIN 

Narayana said: Now I shall speak of the Gayatri- 
purascaranam. Hear. By its performance all the 


desires are obtained and all the sins are destroyed. 
ada dr fara wer 
MS xeredssr srt geda 2 u 
raga tt: urgd RARAS ur | 
rat Reda a dym 430 


On the tops of mountains, on the banks of the 


Book XI Chapter XXI 


rivers, on the roots of Bel trees, on the edges of 
tanks, within the enclosures of the cows (cow- 
stalls), in temples, on the root of A$vattha trees, in 
gardens, in the Tulasi groves, in the Punya 
Ksetrams (holy places), before one's Guru, or 
wherever the mind feels exalted and cheerful, and 
gets strength, the Pura$caranam if performed, lead 
to a speedy success. 


fart near qc St aera PIE «dq 5 u 

Before commencing the Pura$caranam of a 
mantra (the Pura$caranam means repetition of the 
name of a deity or of a mantra attended with burnt 
offerings, oblations, etc.,) first Prāyašcitta 
(penance) is done in the shape of repeating one 
million times the Gàyatri with the Vyarhitis. In 
any Vaidic Karma or in making PuraScaranam of 
the mantra of the Devatās Nrsimha, Sūrya, Varāha, 
etc., the first thing done is to repeat the Gayatri. 
Without the japam of Gayatri, no action is attended 
with success. 

wr VITA fara: Iet Sar ep ATAT: | 

emfavrveunid cun denn 6 

Ti dzītu wel: GUAM: | 

TARGA BATE TTT, "7 U 

The reason is this: Every Brāhmaņa is a Šākta 
(a follower of Šakti); he cannot be a Vaisņava or 
Šaiva; for he is the worshipper of the Prime Force 
Vedamātā Gāyatrī. Therefore obtain first the Grace 
of one’s own Īsta Devatā Gayatri by Her Japam. 
Then worship the other Deities. 

Thus one should purify one’s jāpya mantra (the 
mantra that is to be repeated) by first repeating one 
million times the Gayatri; then one is to commence 
Purascaranam. 

emere Bed Meter: | 

aaa vienen: g after acta us ou 

aragia fara ardstugtamfēamm: fener: | 


1335 


C ee al 
radā 
bi Ric, ALI UN M T 


Again before purifying the mantra, one is to 
purify one's Atman (Self). In this purification of 
one's Atman three lakh times, in case of inability, 
one lakh times Gayatri is to be repeated without 
one's atman’s purification, the Japam, Homa and 
other actions all become useless. This is specially 
noted in the Vedas. By Tapas eg, Japam, 
Candrayana and Vrata, (asceticism) mortify your 
body. By offering Tarpanam (peace-offerings) to 
the Fathers and the Devas, one can get self 
purification. If you want to get the Heavens and if 
you want to become great, practise Tapasya. 
There is no other way. Tapasyà is the intent 
calling of the Mother, That Call which penetrates 
through and through the Brahmāņda. 

arret agh amare aren: | 

aaa yu: wae AA: 17 u 

aata q fate qu: qatar: | 

wigan WIEESTTHTETH SAM 012 N 

The Ksattriyas should cross difficulties and 
dangers by force of arms; the Vaisyas, by wealth; 
the Südras, by serving the twice born; and the 
Brahmanas should cross difficulties and dangers, 
by Tapasya, Homa, Japam, etc. So the Brahmanas 
should always be cheerful and in prompt readiness 
to do Tapasya. Of all sorts of tapasyās, mortifying 
the body by observing vows and fastings ts the best. 
So say the Rsis. (This mortification of the body 
gives self-reliance and self intuition more surely 
and speedily than all the other studies and other 
practices.) 

medam pegaram: i 

amaya eamm yoy AR 0413 

CPHIPIEST CES SERI RECS EER 


l 
aada hrda reno AET 14 u 
The Brāhmaņas should purify themselves by 
following duly Krechra Candrayana vratas, etc., 


1336 


O Narada! Now I am speaking of the purification 


of food. Hear. The following four occupations of 


the Brahmanas are the best: Ayācita, (without 
begging or asking for anything), Ufica, (the 
gathering in of handfuls of the corn left by the 


reapers), Sukla (the maintenance derived by a 
Brahmana from other Brahmanas; a pure mode of 


life). And Bhiksu (begging). Whether according 
to the Tantras or according to the Vedas, the food 
obtained by the above four means is pure. 

Prana parra pest rage | 

Th ant PT TTT factores: t 1 5 u 

sifera aged g raurdūt: | 

STAT TAT STET HA TATA BHAT N 1 6 Ui 

andl ean qe saree ATF | 

TA INĀ BT: 1 17 N 

What is earned by Bhiksā (begging) is divided 
into four parts: 
Brahmanas; the second part is given to the cows; 
the third part is given to the guests, the fourth part 
is to be taken by him and his wife. Whatever is 
fixed for taking (swallowing) mouthfuls of food, 
that is to be taken on a tray or a platter, First throw 
a little cow-urine over that and count duly the 
number of mouthfuls. 


one part is given to the 


: tu + rifā | 
SIST OT TIE ares AAA, wu 1 8 M 
waren gas a np faradu | 
Went aaan a wean a PTA 11 19 N 
Paes er at Hear ules a aera i 


igari wur wart fakrecat 20 n 

The mouthfuls are to be of the size of an egg; 
the house-holders are to take eight such mouthfuls 
and the Vānaprasthīs are to take four such 
mouthfuls. The Brahmacarins can sprinkle their 
food with cow-urine nine times, six times, or three 
times as they like; while sprinkling, the fingers are 
to remain intact. The Gayatri is to be repeated 
also. 


at a afa ateror ava: AAKTĀT Tt 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


at dard a: miya fattreead u 21 u 

ET yada AUD UD ARTA | 

a wife rds at maea 122 0 

The food offered by a thief, Candala, Ksattriya 
or Vaišya is very inferior. The food of a Südra, or 
the companion with a Sidra or taking food in the 
same line with a Šūdra leads one to suffer in the 
terrible hells as long as there are the Sun and Moon. 

maies F TUTGETATĒT st i 

TAG cadet UTI AAT 0023 d 

ayran q fran wem 1 

wfradtit wem dē: weeny 4 sm 24 N 

The Purašcaraņam of Gayatri is repeating this 
twenty four lakh times (7.e., as many lakh times as 
there are syllables in the Gayatri). But, according 
to Vi$vamitra, repeating thirty two lakh times is 
the Purašcaraņam of Gayatri. As the body becomes 


useless when the soul leaves the body, so the mantra 
without Pura$caranam is useless. 

Wer wem da: waaa: d 

SSA mai did q ONARA 025 N 

am wrferart a aRar cer AAR | 

stent vont ust weit a sates 26 u 

aqirina wate vc qaem PTT i 

AAAKARŪ SAGA N27 

Arahat da ata | 

wate asai gg u28 i 

The Purašcaraņam is prohibited in the months 
of Jyaistha, Asadha, Pausa and Mala (dirty) 
months. Also on Tuesday, Saturday; in the 
Vyatīpāta and Vaidhrti Yogas; also in Astamī 
(eighth), Navami (ninth), Sasthi (sixth), Caturthi 
(fourth) Trayodašī (thirteenth), Caturdašī 
(fourteenth) and Amāvasyā (New Moon), Tithis 
(lunar days); in the evening twilight and in the 
night; while the star Bharani, Krttika, Ārdrā, 
Ašlesā, Jyestha, Dhanisthā, Sravaņā, or the Janma 
naksatra (Birth time star) is with the Moon; while 
the signs Mesa, Karkata, Tula, Kumbha, and 
Makara are the Lagnas (signs in the ascendant). 


URE a Tad fasted od 


Book XI Chapter XXI 


1337 


VT paia: MaA 29 0 

xafiarer pataia vremterfer | 

Porta eta sitsrareoraamfafir: n 30 N 

MÀJ Wt: UMAGEN, | 

LASU: forever fare wi t 31 u 

When the moon and the start are auspicious, 
especially in the bright fortnight, the Purašcaraņam 
performed, gives the Mantra Siddhi. First of all 
repeat Svasti vācana and perform duly the Nāndī 
mukha Šrāddha and give food and clothing to the 
Brāhmaņas. Take the permission of the Brāhmaņas 
and begin the Purašcaraņam. Where the Siva 
Lingam exists, facing west, or in any Siva temple, 
commence repeating the mantra. 

areata ant AETATGIS a ATTIE | 

mam ep aA va dur ga yf 32 u 

were fg dar uie ary | 

marama amaaa 133 

The other Siva Ksettrams are: Kasi, Kedara, 
Maha Kala, Sri Ksettra, and Tryambakam. These 
five are the Great Ksettrams, known widely on 
this earth, for the fructification and the siddhis of 
the Mantras. At all other places than these, the 
Karma Cakra is to be drawn according to the 
principles of the Tantra. And then they will be fit 
for PuraScaranam. The number of times that the 
Pura$caranam (the repeating of the mantra) is 
done on the first day, the same number is to be 
continued every day until completion; not greater 
nor less than that and also no intermission or 
stoppage should occur in the interval. 

D mgri a at Hates fa i 

Header pia gut gam: 0340 

wine fāftrasatareziferattr oi 

"gui vii vari Aaa 35 N 

maiad AAT «197 4TRRUTUT eT | 

The repeating of the Mantra is to be commenced 
in the morning and should be done up to midday. 
While doing this, the mind is to be kept free from 
other subjects, and it is to be kept pure; one is to 


meditate on one's own Deity and on the meaning 
of the mantra and one should be particularly careful 
that no inaccuracies nor omissions should occur in 
the Gayatri, Chandas and in the repetition of the 
Mantra. 

arama ended WAIT Wem 136 UI 

Wa wads Vasa 1 

fad: wat: vads àa nama: 37 1 

One tenth of the total number of Pura$caranams 
that are repeated is to be used for the Homa 
purpose. The Caru is to be prepared with ghee, til, 
the Bel leaves, flowers, jaya grain, honey and sugar; 
all mixed, are to be offered as oblations to the fire 
in the Homa. Then the success in the Mantra comes 
(i.e., mantra siddhi is obtained or the Mantra 
becomes manifested). 

gatge gui wa: fest saam: à 

mas da deer eferareintaret u 38 ul 

Fred farts ered faerit g uem: à 

"mem uim Be GH UIT TA 39 N 

wer fm At raaraa: i 

we wad dinars: 40 N 

After the Pura$caranam one should do properly 
the daily and occasional duties and worship the 
Gayatri that brings in dharma, wealth, objects of 
desire and liberation. There is nothing superior an 
object of worship to this Gayatri, whether in this 
world or in the next. The devotee, engaged in the 
Pura$caranam, should eat moderately, observe 
silence, bathe thrice in the three Sandhya times, 
should be engaged in worshipping one's Deity, 
should not he unmindful and should not do any 
other work. He is to remain, while in water, to 
repeat the Gayatri three lakhs of times. 


er A ITT: ASÀ ar i 
marae A Rr carats 41 
Varam wemafüftrewu i 
SAS TAM VES WIS TAT 42 N 


In case the devotee repeats the mantra for 


1338 


In case the devotee repeats the mantra for 
achieving success in any other desired work (kamya 
karma), then he should willingly stick to it until 
the desired success is attained. Now is being told 
how to get success in ordinary Kamya karmas. 
When the sun is rising, repeat the Purašcaraņam 
mantra daily thousand times. 

srgrtatad xt at vad YA d 

won ar rand at cate friget u 43 u 

Wadi SAKA uam FATT | 

reife Fac wet freed t ya: 11 44 N 

Then one's life will be lengthened, no disease 
will occur, and wealth and prosperity will be 
obtained. If it be done this way, success is surely 
attained within three months, six months or at the 
end of one year. If the Homa (offering oblations to 
the fire) be offered one lakh times with lotuses 
besmeared with ghee (clarified butter), Moksa 
(liberation) is attained. 

statis fee adeft: fer: | 

"rt ar ate at ater: wd arene Sq 145 i 

"ierfágrferessrur azar affitur at gam i 

vada fread wiqugdfor wd wem n46 n 

If, before the Mantra-Siddhi, or the success in 
realising the Mantra, is attained, one performs 
Japam or Homam for Kamya Siddhi (to get certain 
desires) or moksa, then all his actions become 
useless. If anybody performs twenty-five lakh 
Homas by curd and milk, be gets success (Siddhi) 
in this very birth. So all the Maharsis say. 

SETA T C: ure GIRO | 

wee Riff ara carat fere 11 47 ti 

ren arfür ar at ament frd wu i 

Weare fakes: TSA: War 11 48 i 

By this the same result is attained that is got by 
the aforesaid means, i.e., by the eight-limbed Yoga, 
whereby the Yogis become perfect. He will attain 
Siddhi if he be devoted to his Guru and keep 
himself under restraint for six months only (i.e. 
practise Samyama) as regards taking food, etc., 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


whether he be incapable or his mind be attached to 
other sensual objects. 

Wenré tenang tam NAT: 1 

Cale Merah mastu et 49 1 

aret imah verus wu 1 

yaaa: Viet wear: wqemd 050 u 

One should drink Paficagavya (cow-urine, cow- 
dung, milk, curd, ghee) one day, fast one day, take 
Bráhmana's food one day and be mindful in 
repeating the Gayatri. First bathe in the Ganges or 
in other sacred places and while in water repeat 
one hundred Gayatris. If one drinks water on which 
one hundred Gāyatrīs are repeated, one is freed 
from all one's sins. 

UGU ETT Hes Wesel TAT | 

wem ar ae on fere: Hala Tt 51 tt 

TER aaar at aage Tanks = | 

arenas we aR 1520 

saana ant rad nania: | 

He gets the fruit of performing the Krcchra vrata, 
the Candrayana vrata and others. Be he a Ksattriya 
King, or a Bráhmana, if he is to remain in his own 
house, hold Arama and be engaged in performing 
Tapasya then he will be certainly freed of all his 
sins. Be he a house holder or a Brahmacari or 
Vanaprasthi, he should perform sacrifices, etc., 
according to his Adhikara (or his rights) and he 
will get fruits according to his desires. 

wits waren fegfagsr forfan: u 53 u 

Ww: Halas ueteres 1 

Rara enaA MATT FST 5 4 t 

Ud queri Hen akera, | 

The Sagnik man (who keeps the Holy Fire) and 
other persons of good conduct and of learning and 
of good education should perform actions as 
prescribed in the Vedas and Smrtis with a desire 
to attain Moksa. Thus one should eat fruits and 
vegetables and and water or take eight mouthfuls 
of Bhiksānna (the food got by begging). If the 


*|Purašcaraņam be performed this way, then the 


Mantra Siddhi is obtained. 


Book XI Chapter XXII 
wregeatü a quarat edt Raga lt 55 i 


ait Area Were? THIER AT 
CHM ea: 11 21 11 


1339 


hears this simply, his merits get increased and he 
attains great success. 
Here ends the Twenty first Chapter of the Eleventh 


O Narada ! If the Pura$caranam be done with] Book on Gayatri Purašcaraņam in the Mahāpurāņam 


the mantra thus, his poverty is removed entirely. 
What more shall I say than this that if anybody 


Srimaddevibhàgavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyàsa. 


CHAPTER XXII 


On the Rules of Vaiévadeva 


starrer Zara 

sat: Fae AATĀTAdATUTTA, | 

maa cere afar ot tt 

Narayana said: O Narada! In connection with 
this Pura$caranam it comes now to my memory 
about the rules concerning the Vaiáva Deva 
worship (An offering made to the Vigvadevas; an 
offering to all deities made by presenting oblations 
to fire before meals). 


eat Tet yaa a | 

fuqust Aga agsa q dum 2 tl 

GAGA Wee west WATER: 1 

muse Aah dui urges wis uad 

a Weert ATTĀ UTA A TAT aT unt | 

Arada uardfa us ar veifeeisfu at ua it 

Hear. The five yajfias are the following: (1) The 
Deva yajiia, (2) Brahma yajfia, (3) Bhüta yajiia, 
(4) Pitr yajíia, and (5) Manusya yajūa. Fireplace, 
the pair of stone pestles, brooms (for sweeping, 
etc.), sieves and other house-hold things of the sort, 
wooden mortars (used for cleansing grains from 
husk) and water-jars, these five are the sources of 
evils inasmuch as they are the means of killing. So 
to free one’s self from the above sins, one is to 
sacrifice before the Vai$vadeva. Never offer 
oblations of Vai$vadeva on hearths, on any iron 
vessel, on the ground or on broken tiles. They are 
to be offered in any sacrificial pit (Kunda) or on 
any sacrificial altar. 


a urftrar a gyfer a a Aea: à 
qurituumef yaa AAA us 


edi vegas: yor TANITA, | 

mA yara afia g ue 

Do not fire the hearth by fanning with hands, 
with winnowing baskets, or with holy deer skin, 
etc., but you can do so by blowing by your mouth. 
For the mouth is the origin of fire. If the fire be 
ignited by clothes, one is liable to get disease; if 
by winnowing baskets, then less of wealth comes; 
if by hands, one's death ensues. But if it be done 
by blowing, then one's success comes. (There is 
the danger of catching fire.) 


geh AT urere qesmdsmmemu AT 1 8 LI 

sre: mif: gut soda fiat avft | 

sA ofa am GT meu 9 i 

One should sacrifice with curd, ghee, fruits, 
roots and vegetables, and water and in their absence 
with fuel, grass, etc., or with any other substances 
soaked with ghee, curd, Pāyasa or lastly with water. 
But never with oil or with salty substances. If one 
performs the Homa with dry or stale substances, 
one is attacked with leprosy; if anybody performs 
Homa with leavings of other food he becomes 
subdued by his enemy; if one does so with rude 
and harsh substances, he becomes poor and if one 
does with salty substances, he meets with a 
downward course, gets degraded in position and 
honour. 


Book XI Chapter XXII 


! 


1339 


CHAPTER XXII 


On the Rules of Vaisvadeva 


sianar Zara 

aad: saat aAa ANTR, | 

asad Mar wafer i od 

Narayana said: O Narada! In connection with 
this Pura$caranam it comes now to my memory 
about the rules concerning the Vaišva Deva 
worship (An offering made to the Vigvadevas; an 
offering to all deities made by presenting oblations 
to fire before meals). 


qa waa Yara a | 

Agad mg aaa q dew 2 0 

daga Yer pest UWUSure d 

musth Mapu dui urges vias 11 3 i 

a geet ATG Ua AT TAT Tat aT i 

Ayata vada qua ar mifšasfi arua u 

Hear. The five yajfias are the following: (1) The 
Deva yajfia, (2) Brahma yajfia, (3) Bhüta yajfia, 
(4) Pitr yajūa, and (5) Manusya yajūa. Fireplace, 
the pair of stone pestles, brooms (for sweeping, 
etc.), sieves and other house-hold things of the sort, 
wooden mortars (used for cleansing grains from 
husk) and water-jars, these five are the sources of 
evils inasmuch as they are the means of killing. So 
to free one's self from the above sins, one is to 
sacrifice before the Vai$vadeva. Never offer 
oblations of Vaisvadeva on hearths, on any iron 
vessel, on the ground or on broken tiles. They are 
to be offered in any sacrificial pit (Kunda) or on 
any sacrificial altar. 

a urftrar a gyfer A1 Aea AN: à 

Adua „anda smaga 5 il 


eder STARTI: yor waa d 

wifi qequremfer i A q uu 

Do not fire the hearth by fanning with hands, 
with winnowing baskets, or with holy deer skin, 
etc., but you can do so by blowing by your mouth. 
For the mouth is the origin of fire. If the fire be 
ignited by clothes, one is liable to get disease; if 
by winnowing baskets, then less of wealth comes; 
if by hands, one's death ensues. But if it be done 
by blowing, then one's success comes. (There is 
the danger of catching fire.) 

wedge: payaan: i 

HOT a daft se Euegquuar 7 0 

HEAT S mr omaa, | 

Ere AT ure eeiam AT us Li 

sre: wf: get soda fri ayh | 

FASTSAT aie sm GT ASU: 9 di 

One should sacrifice with curd, ghee, fruits, 
roots and vegetables, and water and in their absence 
with fuel, grass, etc., or with any other substances 
soaked with ghee, curd, Páyasa or lastly with water. 
But never with oil or with salty substances. If one 
performs the Homa with dry or stale substances, 
one is attacked with leprosy; if anybody performs 
Homa with leavings of other food he becomes 
subdued by his enemy; if one does so with rude 
and harsh substances, he becomes poor and if one 
does with salty substances, he meets with a 
downward course, gets degraded in position and 
honour. 


wgsrByeed qo anifetatetsrny w 10 N 

HM Ayala g ut sies Teele: à 

"math aA ARAR: 11 N 

You can offer oblations to Vai$vadeva with 
burning coals and ashes from the north side of the 
fire of the hearth after the preparation of the meals. 
But you should never offer sacrifices with salty 
things. The illiterate Brahmana who eats before 
offering oblations to Vai$vadeva goes headlong 
downwards into the Kāla Sütra hell. 

wire a Ue aT at qe AT AY aT REN 1 

dare sat wesmf 120 

aga draa q fuat fieri 1 

sara Ayane Prat avo frat aq t 13 N 

Whatever food that you are intending to prepare, 
whether they be vegetables, leaves, roots or fruits, 
offer oblations to Vai$vadeva with that if, before 
the Homa be performed of Vai$vadeva, any 
Brahmacārī comes, then take off, for the Homa, 
first something; and then give to the beggar and 
satisfy him and tell him to be off. 

Ayaka dni rent fuepedutfeq | 

aq Riggi att avadat eautefā 14 i 

alia werent er Terme a 

PARANA q Yara USAT MT 1 1 5 N 


For the Brahmacārī mendicant can remove any 
defects that may occur to Vaisvadeva but 
Vaisvadeva is unable to remove any defects that 
may occur regarding the mendicant Brahmacārī. 
Both the Paramahansa or Brahmacārī mendicant 
are the masters of the prepared food (Pakkānna); 
so when anybody takes one's food without giving 
to any of these two, if they happen to come there, 
he will have to make the Cāndrāyaņa (religious or 
expiatory penance regulated by the moon's age, 
that is, waxing or waning). 

dvargariat a Ti ufeuresq d 

afgart yaan sy gafa 116 u 

giada aram frei ferrea ferr i 

Word a MET wi up wRRTERTHD N 17 N 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


O Narada! After the offering given to 
Vai$vànara, one is to offer Gogrāsa, that is, 
mouthfuls of food to the cows. Hear now how that 
is done. The mother Surabhi, the beloved of 
Visnu, is always stationed in the region of Visnu 
(Visnupada); so O Surabhi! I am offering you 
mouthfuls of food. Accept it. 

reaper aa sete qui gear TASHA | 

"mH g Ararat qe: wudteft ui 18 n 

aad Agi are fašeda uut | 

aaaea mt Teratītrada 19 M 

“Salutation to the cows,” saying this, one is to 
worship the cows and offer food to them. Hereby 
Surabhi, the Mother of the cows, becomes pleased. 
After this, one is to wait outside for a period that is 
taken to milch a cow, whether any guests are 
coming. 


wb gop rar queue Teale | 
"rer fren regie Wat ara: AAS: 20 Ut 
apanrarstafaganttatd wea Sareea: | 
Wel AAT qp At Area HAL TET. 21 u 
aa aes a g ud rer afa ater: 1 


"reme BAI urhe range: u22 u 

For if any guest goes back disappointed from 
any house without any food; he takes away all the 
punyams (merits) of the house-holder and gives 
him back his own sin. The house-holder is to 
support mother, father, Guru, brother, son, servants, 
dependants, guests, those that have come, and Agni 
(Fire). Knowing all these, he who does not perform 
the functions of the house-hold is reckoned as fallen 
from his Dharma both in this world and in the next. 

were ARAA WII | 

aa umR aA g aes ufa 023 n 

regnat Heat iiaa: | 

Uke qed Ar: cunefefesu: 124 0 

faftrar qed St KĀ U PUTT | 

seran fent aarafeeery u25u 

west: deas est | 


The poor house-holder gets the same fruit by 


Book XI Chapter XXII 


134] 


performing these five Maha Yajfias that a rich 
Brahmana gets by performing the Soma Yajfia. O 
Best of the Munis! Now I am talking of the 
Prāņāgni Hotra or about taking food, knowing the 
rules of which makes a man free from birth, old 
age and death and ftom all sorts of sins. He who 
takes his food according to proper rules, is freed 
of the threefold debts, delivers his twenty one 
generations from the hells, obtains the fruits of all 
the Yajfias and goes unhampered to all the regions 
of the righteous. 

weeftamdünidt HAHAE u26u 

arg nàg wapa ur | 

Think of the belly as Arani or the piece of wood 
for kindling the fire (by attrition), think of the mind 
as the churning rod, and think of the wind as the 
rope, and then kindle the fire, residing in the belly; 
the eyes are to be considered as the sacrificer, (the 
Adhvaryu), and consider fire in the belly as the 
result of churning. 


admen heana fata 27 0 

neniani eag famnp | 

ABT ATT TT ata 028 tl 

aferat=aysearteangta fara 1 

waidai warmen famnp 129 0 

xargiarammarergw AAA d TST i 

In this fire of the belly, one is to offer oblations 
for the satisfaction of Prana, etc., the five deities. 
First of all offer oblations to the Prana Vayu with 
food taken by the forefinger, middlefinger and 
thumb; next offer oblations to the Apana Vayu with 
the thumb, middle finger and the nameless (anāmā) 
finger; next offer oblations to the Vyana Vayu 
(breath) with the thumb, nameless finger and the 
little finger; next offer oblations to the Udana Vayu 
with the thumb, forefinger and the little finger and 
lastly offer oblations to the Samana Vayu with food 
taken by all the fingers. At the same time repeat 
respectively the mantras: 

“Om Prāņāya Svāhā,” 


“Om Apānāya Svaha,” 

“Om Samānāya Svāhā,” 

“Om Udānāya Svāhā,” 

“Om Vyānāya Svāhā.” 

We maing gad meus: 030 

RĪTU ARA: TT: AMAT TA | 

AAA WITT ITT MARTA wp 0 31 0 

Tat gen MA gAATTĪTUTA TA V | 

STEAM: UYFAH wr: VA say 0032 0 

afara uct dites aah gerent | 

Bt aeq Varin gart: LA eat art 1 33 N 

Within the mouth, there is the Ahavaniya fire; 
within the heart, there is the Garhapatya fire; in 
the navel, there is the Daksiņāgni fire; below the 
navel, there is the Sabhyāgni fire and below that 
there is the Āvasathyāgni fire. Think thus. Next 
consider the Speech as the Hota, the Prana as the 
Udgatha, the eyes as the Addhvaryu, the mind as 
the Brahmi, the ears as the Hota and the keeper of 
the Agni, the Ahankara (egoism) as beast (Pašu), 
Om Kara as water, the Buddhi (intellect) of the 
house-holder as the legal wife, the heart as the 
sacrificial altar, the hairs and pores as the Kuša 
grass, and the two hands as the sacrificial ladies 
and spoons (Sruk and Sruva.) 

grises ur St waant: arena: | 

cadet wart "adress scm 034 

yora U MT tater Hated daf | 

gamenaam a atta ada uszsu 

Then think of the colour of the Prana mantra as 
golden the fire of hunger as the Rsi (seer), Sürya 
(the sun) as Devata, the chandas as Gayatri and 
Prāņāya Svaha as the Mantra uttered; also repeat 
‘“Tdamadityadevaya namah” and offer oblations to 
the Prana. 

aaa wem Telma mg: 1 

agaa wt d dat Sat 36 N 

STS KTATS TTU Tatra aid 1 

dturād ua atest: uen: 037 u 


The colour of the Apāna mantra is milk white. 


1342 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


Šraddhāgni is the Rsi, the Moon is the Devatā, 
Usnik is the chandas, and '*Apānāya Svaha,” “Idam 
Somaya na namah” are the mantras. 

TAU AMATI FATA: | 

waite gaa, ws stay 138 u 

CUA SF TAT TaTSTAAS A TAA | 

Se AUT Vemtuaavim: 139 N 

waft: caret arse Saat arn: i 

gedteds arenaga U Uda ! 40 N 

aaa Ad TAA we datvatafēs: 1 

The colour of the Vyàna mantra is red like red 
lotuses; the fire Deity Hutāsana is the Rsi, the fire 
is the Devatā; Anustup is the chandas, “Vyanaya 
Svaha” and “Idamagnaye na namah” are the 
mantras, The colour of the Udana mantra is like 
that of the worm Indra Gopa; fire is the Rsi; Vayu 
is the Devatà, Brhatī is the chandas; “Udanaya 
Svaha’’ and "Idam Vayave na namah” are the 


mantras. 
AMATA faggot frm: 141 
ĪRĒT: UATCATA: Tata tara Wa: \ 
Gf g: waned Tar U Way !42 N 
wiara wet Pareles fara 1 


The colour of the Samana mantra is like 


lightning; Agni is the Rsi; Parjanya (the rains, 
water) is the Devatà; Pankti is the chanda; 
“Samanaya Svāhā” and "Idam Parjanyaya na 
namah” are the mantras. 

àra verted RaT: 043 0 

maies Smeg Saar srarefir | 

Tagi KA ATGITA: UAT edt ! 44 t 

zd cUm werd ard ATUTRAR i 

O Narada! Thus offering the five oblations to 
the five breaths, next offer oblations to the Atman; 
the Bhisana Vahni is the Rsi; the Gáyatri is the 
chanda; the Self is the Devata; ^Atmane Svaha,” 
and "Idamātmane na namah” are the mantras. 

erstes faker Hear ARITA HET ui 

wonftagrafaedt tAn fē F145 n 

sft MRR Were) CHIRE 
ÄISE: 11 22 11 

O Nārada! He who knows this Homa of 
Prāņāgnihotra attains the state of Brahmā. Thus I 
have spoken to you in brief the rules of the Prāņāgni 
hotra Homa. 

Here ends the Twenty-second Chapter of the 
Eleventh Book on the rules of Vaisvadeva in the 
Mahapuranam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 

verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


1342 


CHAPTER XXIII 
On the Tapta Krcchra Vrata and Others 


siana gara 

anartean Tt: | 

IRR: urate gaid ŠAUT: 1 it 

YH TE MA SATAN: | 

a ad gfanmmatq war ant Yas u2 

Narayana said: The best Sadhaka, then uttering 
after his meals, the mantra *Amrtápidhanamasi." 
(O Water-nectar! Let Thou be the covering to the 
food that I have taken), should make Acamana (sip 
one Gandusa water) and distribute the remnant food 
(the leavings) to those who take the leavings. 

trasquafea wandefraar 1 

ST gad qang Sg — u30 


Raag tee afer fafünn d 

TA g fane ow fay: degen: 4n 

"Let the servants and maid-servants of our 
family that expect the leavings of food be satisfied 
with what leavings I give to them." "Let those 
inhabitants of the Raurava hell or other unholy 
places who have remained there for a Padma or 
Arbuda years and want to drink water, be satisfied 
with this water that I offer to them and let this water 
bring unending happiness to them.” Repeating the 
above two mantras let the house-holder distribute 
the leavings of food to the servants and the water 
to those who want water respectively. Then 


Book XI Chapter XXIII 


1343 


opening the knot of the Pavitra (a ring of Kuša 
grass worn on the fourth finger on certain religious 
occasions), let him throw this on the square 
mandalam or the ground. 

Shere dU: NGL AT q fēst: | 

sary aAA terest aA us o 

STS ue: Tara faf | 

Taggers Mikam wq 6 tl 

The Brahmana that throws this Kuša grass on 
the vessel (Patra) is said to defile the vow of 
Brahmanas, taking their food. The Brahmana that 
has not yet washed his face after taking the food, 
or touching another such Brahmana or a dog, or a 
Šūdra, should fast one day and then drink 
Paficagavya and thus purify himself. 

Wer tandai aetna MAR, 1 

mR aa a ae aft a7 u 

agda gagi AHA q AH | 

Wepre ada gre at eae 8 ou 

And in case the Ucchista Brahmin (who has not 
washed his mouth and hands after meals) be 
touched by another Brahmin, who is not Ucchista, 
then simply bathing will purify him. By offering 
this Ekahuti (oblation once) according to rules 
mentioned above, one obtains the fruit of 
performing ten million sacrifices; and by offering 
this oblation five times one gets the endless fruit, 
of performing fifty million sacrifices, and if one 
feeds such a man who knows well how to do this 
Pranagnihoma, then he as well as he whom he 
feeds both derive full benefits and they ultimately 
go to heaven. 

aan sch deg faut fee: 1 

Te mÀ we Aer deers TAT 119 di 

Tatar Fret areata a | 

at aey Rna WaT 110 N 

The Brahmana acquires while taking each of his 
mouthful of food the fruit of eating Paficagavya, 
who takes his food duly with the holy Pavitra Kuša 
grass tied on his finger. During the three times of 


worship, the devotee is to do his daily Japam, 
Tarpanam and Homa and he should feed the 
Brahmins. Thus the five limbed Purašcaraņa is 
completely done. 
aer gary eaten Ramet feries: à 
wyteteaat er facta: yirda 17 ut 


e ae ae 


The religious man should sleep on a low bedding 
(lie on the ground); he is to control his senses and 
anger; he is to eat moderately, the things that are 
light, sweet and good; he is to be humble, peaceful 
and calm. He is to bathe thrice daily and not to 
hold any unholy conversation with any woman, a 
Sidra, one who is fallen, without any initiation, 
and who is an atheist; as well he should not speak 
in a language spoken by the cāņdālas. One is to 
bow down before him who is in the act of 
performing the Japam, Homa and worship, etc; one 
is not to talk with him. 

reper cared quia arsta 1 

HAUT TOUT ara walang Wer 11 14 N 

ada Greprun gerard Vaga d 

Taya YER wera 15 |i 

sq unu iat aaa: 1 

gai wanted FT watt: 116 uN 

Never by deed, mind or word, on all occasions 
never speak about sexual intercourses; nor hold any 
contact with such people. For the relinquishment 
of this subject is called Brahmacaryam (continence) 
of the kings as well as of the house-holders. But 
one should go to one’s legal wife during the night 
time after her menstruation duly according to the 
rules of the Šāstras; the Brahmacaryam is not 
thereby destroyed. 

wat qp we art gered RA wq d 

mua way warm u17 ul 

an TRITT U AeA TATE: | 


ATT AST ASA RAMP 11 1 8 I 


1344 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


ree a ee ee 


at 1L 19 

vāji cannot repay the three-fold debts and he 
cannot aspire for moksa without procreating sons 
or without doing the duties of the house-holders, 
as prescribed by the Šāstras. An attempt to do so 
becomes entirely fruitless like the breast on the 
neck of a goat. Rather it drags one downward. So 
the Srutis say. So let yourself be free first from the 
debts due to the Devas, the debts due to the Rsis 
and the debts due to the Pitrs. Make sacrifices first 
and then be free from the Devas’ debt. 

sufirszi serach frgeag fre: | 

eres gāda: vere tare 11 20 N 

Hold Brahmacaryam and be free from the 
Rsis’ debt. Offer til and water; that is, do Srāddhas 
and tarpanams and be free from the debt due to the 
Pitrs. Then do readily practise your own 
Varnasrama Dharma. 

Aeri messi ar genre ar gerere; | 

Reasi ar srüfggr-qregettanmfegq 21 1 

want ATT upper HRA d 

wis a fap  GEATA: WaT ll 22 0 

gferegfafērīei er rd watt fererstatq i 

gar A AIS mmgqgaetemamd:u23 N 

One is to practise Krechra cāndrāyaņa Vrata and 
to take for his food, milk, fruits, roots and 
vegetables, Havisyannam and food obtained by 
begging so that one may become sinless. One is to 
make japam for Purašcaraņam. One is to avoid salt, 
salty or alkaline substances, acid, garlic, turnips, 
eating in Kāmsa vessels, chewing betels, eating 
twice, putting on impure clothings, the intoxicating 
things and the unšāstric nocturnal japam; also one 
is not to waste one's time over blaming and trying 
to find faults with the relatives, playing at dice, or 
talking at random with one's wife (so that evil 
effects may arise). 

BED CRIMI ICE IRC A: 1 

wreaked E EE T D CE 24 01 


k 25.1 


Dues is to spend one's time in worshipping the 
Devas, reciting the hymns of praise, and studying 
the Šāstras. One is to sleep on the ground, practise 
Brahmacaryam, and the vow of silence, bathe 
thrice, not practise anything which befits the Südras 
only. 

aired da fayarat Tear: i 

wf oat d rey uhr 26 n 

Pret eique aca enfirgiit rq i 

zaad ar ert ats ees apr: 0 27 i 

One is to worship everyday, make charities duly 
and be always happy, recite stotras daily, do 
occasional Deva worships, have faith in one's Guru 
and Deva. These twelve rules are to ensure success 
to the devotee who does Pura$caranam. One is to 
daily praise the Sun, with one's face turned towards 
Him, do japam before Him; or one is to worship 
one's own Deity in front of fire or the image of 
any god, and do japam simultaneously. 

UAT TTT ATA UTI: 

Ara dadgrai a wdesdfrdes: 128 N 

vmis Pamaran, | 

aenga: IAA ATAT: 29 U 

wea A Agah: 

The devotee who practises Puraścaraņam is to 
bathe, worship, do japam, meditate, practise Homa, 
Tarpanam, is to have no desires and to surrender 
all fruits to one’s own desired Deity, etc. These 
are necessarily to be observed by him. Therefore 
while doing japam, Homa, etc., the devotee’s mind 
is to remain always pleasant and satisfied. One 
should be ready to practise tapasya, to see the 
Šāstras and be merciful to all the beings. 

aoe tarifa amar faad we 30 U 

renes KITT anti Paar: | 

fawo dei mui Weer 031 i 

As asceticism leads one to to heaven and to the 
attainment of one's desires, therefore know this 


Book XI Chapter XXIII 


that all the powers come to an ascetic. An ascetic 
can cause another's death (māraņa); he can injure 
others, cure diseases and kill all. 

aa tara af dazi dad: Te: | 

"DER: mpeg qui qui wem em 32 N 

ait cantor aaa aera er enim | 

Wea wp HAUT faker |1 33 N 

Whatever the several Rsis wanted from the Devi 
Gayatri and to that end made Purašcaraņam and 
worshipped Her, they obtained from Her all those 
things. O Narada! I will speak of Santi Karmas 
etc., in a future chapter. Here I will speak of those 
rules, etc., that are to be observed in Pura$caranam 
in as much as they play the principal part to success. 

GTA A VITUS: | 

AAA GIGA anifiran aa: YA: t 34 Ut 

fast wal g IRA amu: 1 

saari ufénnfor rsen 035 N 

First of all shave yourself and have your hairs 
and nails, etc., cut off and bathe and be pure. Then 
perform the Prajapatya prāyašcitta for one's peace 
and purification and next do the pura$caranam of 
the Gayatri. Do not speak the whole day and night. 
Keep your thoughts pure. If words are to be spoken, 
speak only what you take as true. 

SORTA A Te Teri er KTR | 

aratfesta pes er ufēst UTA u 3 6 N 

yia: RTA WaT ATT St 

aAa a HAUT 37 N 

First recite Mahāvyārhiti and then the Savitri 
mantra with Pranava prefixed. Then recite the sin- 
destroying mantra “Apohistha, etc.,” and 
Svastimati Sükta and "Pāvamānī Sükta." In every 
action, in its beginning and at its end one is to 
understand the necessity of doing the Japam, why 
and what for one is doing that. 

MAAN MI AMMATA AIT | 

soot credits: MRSN 3 8 N 

airiran dirai Saar: | 

amar wma VISTU 4 wféd: 039 u 


85 


1345 


One is to repeat the Pranava, the three Vyarhitis 
and Savitri ayuta times or one thousand times or 
one hundred times or ten times. Then offer with 
water, the peace offerings (tarpanam) to the Acarya, 
Rsi, Chandas, and the Devas. Being engaged in 
action, do not speak any impure language of the 
Mlecchas or talk with any Südra or any bad person. 

"nfi RTA aear aaae: à 

a gaea daea: 1400 

a mganda aa | 

Fama wdui faftrewtsqudsr u41 u 

Do not talk with wife in the period of 
menstruation, with one who has fallen, with the 
low-class person, with any hater of the Devas and 
the Brahmanas, Ācāryas and Gurus, with those 
who blame the fathers and mothers; nor show any 
disrespect to anybody. 

WAT HAHA TAM ANAE E | 

WET PERU faassen wr 4.2 N 

Thus I have spoken in due order about all the 
rules of Krchra vrata. Now I will speak of the rules 
of the Prājāpatya Krcchra, Santapana, Parāka 
Krechra and Candrayana. 

"ufi urn: addenda wem d 

Mapes walter Grama gali aum, i 43 N 

Araiza: wat sre VATA | 

asda: MAAA MAAT 11 44 di 

One becomes freed of all the sins, if one performs 
the above five Candrayanas. By the performance 
of the Tapta Krechra, all sins are burnt off in an 
instant. By the performance of the three Candrayanas 
the people get purified and go to the Brahma Loka. 
By doing eight Candrayanas, one sees face to face 
one's Devatā, ready to grant boons. 

Bai GĒTE ata T d 

TIE Wits WI vTEHemesmem lt 45 d 

wae wt Aaaa wafers: | 

"inp tert gharaf: eyes 46 N 

With ten Candrayanas, one gets the knowledge 
of the Vedas and one acquires all what one wants. 


1346 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


In the observance of the Krechra Prājāpatya 
Vrata, one has to take food once in midday for 
three days, once in the evening for three days, and 
for the next three days whatever one gets without 
asking anything from anybody. For the next three 
days one is not to take any thing at all and go on 
with one’s work. These twelve day’s work 
constitutes the Prajapatya Vrata. 

KATY Hes TAT FAN, | 

waa mansiai Afr gag 147 u 

Now about the rules of the Santapana Vrata. On 
the preceding day one has got to eat food consisting 
of the mixture of cow urine, cow-dung milk, curd, 
ghee and the water of the Kuša grass; the day 
following he is to fast. These two days’ work 
constitutes the Santapana Vrata. 

mé wneaufeenmiqges wies 

wana fafrded wena wn 48! 

Now about the Ati Krechra vrata. For the first 
three days, one is to eat one mouthful of food a 
day and for the next three days one is to fast. This 
is the Ati Krcchra vrata. This vrata repeated three 
times is called Maha Santapana vrata. 

Note: According to the opinion of Yama, the fifteen 
days’ work constitutes Maha Šāntapana. For the three 
days’ one has to eat cow-urine; for the next three days, 
cow-dung, for the next three days, curd; for the next 
three days milk; and for the next three days one has to 
take ghee. Then one becomes pure. This is called the 
all sin-destroying Maha Santapana Vrata. Now I am 
speaking of the nature of the Tapta Krechra Vrata. 

ceed nia ITTA! 

Nat rage aiT: 49 0 

Fradeg füsrara: ursmaeaferftr: aya: | 

AAAS BME WSC tt 

The Tapta Krechra vrata is carried out for the 
twelve days. For the first three days, one has to 
drink hot water; for the next three days, hot milk; 
for the next three days, the hot ghee and for the 
next three days, air only. Everyday one has to bathe 
once only under the above rules, and remain self- 


controlled. If one drinks water simply everyday 
under the above conditions, that is called the 
Prajapatya vrata. 

What ATA Hesse uduruguitam: | 

ukh qp Takes GET yrs lg, n 51 N 

To remain without any food for twelve days 
according to rules is called the Parāka Krechra 
vrata. By this vrata, all sins are destroyed. 

UTA «t gosia Wel aiarad afèr: à 

sree Aradac BAT 052 0 

age magiaa: frerqarfaon: i 

Now about the rules of taking food in the 
Cāndrāyaņa vrata. In the dark fortnight one will 
have to decrease one mouthful of food every day 
and in the bright fortnight one will have to increase 
one mouthful every day and one has to fast 
completely on the Amāvasyā (new moon) day. One 
has to bathe thrice daily during every Sandhya time. 
This is known as the Candrayana Vrata. 

SKA qa forgrertsreut BATA 53 i 

serere unvtarfrsrarta fat fara à 

Frare grae arferertzrenut ATT 54 N 

In the Si$u Cāndrāyaņa Vrata one will have to 
take four mouthfuls of food in the midday and four 
mouthfuls in the evening. In the Yati Candrayana 
one has to take eight mouthfuls in the midday and 
to control his passions. 

Waganeenfacur ada waif fe 1 

wd potest tat MEAN aT We N55 N 

These abovementioned vratas are observed by 
the Rudras, Adityas, Vasus, and Maruts; and they 
are enjoying thereby their full safety. 

Ua aero gare fara | 

«enmfenrtorareftfer RASA ATTA ! 5 6 N 

Wd; WWRTAUT YLZICIG A HITA: | 

Ardifa asd edi frm 057 N 

Each of the above vratas purifies the seven 
Dhátus of the body in seven nights simply! First 
skin, then blood, then flesh, bones, sinews, 
marrows and semen are purified. There is no doubt 


Book XI Chapter XXIV 


1347 


in this. Thus purifying the Atman by the above 
vratas, one is to do religious actions. The work done 
by such a purified man is sure to be met with 
success. 

KA anit RIAA TUITE: | 

aren end gela varāt frase: U58 n 

serena: wain 2a aya: | 

Braaaaasiea: udam 1590 

First control the senses, be pure and do good 
actions. Then all your desires will be undoubtedly 
fructified. Fast for three nights, without doing any 
actions and see the result. (You will not do anything 
and you want self control! Is this a child’s play?) 

Aft Tar ot gate: ai wn | 

wd fret afi KAIVA 60 N 

mamas urit adamya | 

wer Ta dat meaa 61 tt 

Perform for three days the nocturnal vratas. Then 
proceed with your desired duties. If one works 


PS a 


according to these methods, one gets the fruits of 
Purašcaraņam. O Narada! By the Pura$caranam of 
Sri Gayatri Devi all desires are fulfilled and all 
sins are destroyed. 

andl palgad waht cautery | 

Ural wu: cpuiemmeneesmrmdq ! 62 N 

fa d af eb galmam, | 

KAT sr med sent a: BTA 0 63 N 

efr RRAIN TERT CARRE 
INASEMA: 11 23 11 

Before doing Purašcaraņam purify your body 
by performing the above vratas. Then you will get 
all your desires completely fulfilled. O Narada! 
Thus I have spoken to you of the secret rules of 
Pura$caranam. Never disclose this to any other 
body. For it is recognised equivalent to the Vedas. 
Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter of the Eleventh 

Book on the Tapta Krcchra Vrata and others in the 
Maha Purāņam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


PN cor OY Ww V 


Book XI Chapter XXIV 


1347 


CHAPTER XXIV 


On Sadacara 


siana sara 
ARET ENT MA TATA: | 
VITA cara REAA ug ou 
Narada said: O Bhagavan! Thou art the ocean 
of mercy; kindly speak out to me in brief all the 
things and the duties to be observed and applied in 


the Santi Karmas (the peace bringing acts) of 


Gayatri. 
siana sara 

afar ys wa agea | 

a meat U armed qure faye g 0 2 ou 

aeger: warner: aftrfesfgargfēsm: | 

miaa: mafa ITU: 3 N 

Nārāyaņa said: O Nārada! The question asked 
by you is esoteric. Never divulge this to a wicked 
person or any hypocrite. It is to be kept secret. 
While doing this Śānti Karma, the Brāhmaņas are 


to perform the Homas with fuel soaked in milk 
(Payah). If the fuel of the Sami tree be offered in 
Homa ccremony, then diseases caused by planets 
are cured, 

arar: aftra aA agaa aT: | 

Wearencatfe datumā 4 u 

weet weg urfüreat virfamTeranr i 

ITE SIG Tea Waterers AMT us u 

If the Homa be performed with wet Ašvattha or 
Udumbara or other ksira trees, the diseases caused 
by demons and hob-goblins are cured. 1f one offers 
Tarpanam with one palmful of water, repeating the 
mantra "Süryam Tarpayami namah”, the pending 
evils are also averted and troubles are ceased. 

HOTA AS WET Hermae Trete. | 

wee: yine PITSSATUJ U: vd: 11 6 N 

"rauf rer asà ur arash ar | 

affeqanra ate fact yarasfū ar 7 ui 


1348 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


The repetition of the Gāyatrī mantra with knees 
immersed in water averts all evils. The repetition 
of Gāyatrī with body immersed in water upto the 
throat, averts the danger of life; and the same with 
whole body immersed grants all success. 

ma TE Feat Yrafoasay | 

ditgamt: mÈ: vi dma: u 8 

AB ganan NEE Usa | 

awa d weet PAEA ud 

This is the best of all the Santi karmas, the acts 
that bring health, wealth, happiness and peace. 
While performing Homa, light with the fuel of 
Ksiravrksa (the trees that emit milky juice); place 
Paiicagavya in a vessel made of gold, silver, 
copper or wood of ksira trees, or in the vessels 
made of earth, without any knot or crack; utter the 
Gayatri mantra and offer one thousand homas. 
Sprinkle with water at every offering, touching 
the Paficagavya with Kuša grass, thousand times. 

fe fieret TTT, i 

ARTA Heat urd wp 9ufW 11 10 N 

dadaftivrarar "ebd ned ast | 

Ju umi wt ws ad deat fea ug 

Then offer the sacrifices there where calamities 
or nuisances are seen and meditate on the Highest 
Devata. Thus all the magic spells used by other 
persons for a malevolent purpose will be rendered 
nugatory. Bring under your control any Deva 
Yoni, Bhüta Yoni, or Pisaca Yoni that causes you 
troubles; then they will quit the house, village, 
city, way, even that kingdom. 


Prat qun teat fear tardis à 

tse sponsum qates a masta ar 12 u 

ata age edadia | 

viret wart art gai ara WT 13 U 

Now hear how they are brought under control. 
Prepare a sacrificial altar with sand, draw a square 
on it, place a Süla (spear) in its centre and plaster 
with Astagandha. For the sake of converting all 
the evils, repeat Gayatri mantra thousand times and 


impregnate it with the mantra, dig the ground and 
place or bury the Süla under it. 

"gd at ad feet wsdibquavm à 

mE ded IM ATA: | 14 N 

fn areca Hai sergeant farther: à 

KAA T: wis i 

Rani aahit adt Aiaia | 

aimreigani yare a ffA n 16 u 

Place on the level ground or sthandila a jar or 
Navaphala, a fruit made of gold, silver, or copper 
or a newly made earthen jar and enclose it with 
thread. Then have the sacred waters brought from 
the several Tirthas by the Brahmins and fill the 
jar, repeating the Gayatri Mantra. Put within this 
jar the twigs, then of Cardamom tree, sandal tree, 
Karpüra tree, Jāti, Aparājitā. Saha Devi, Pātala, 
Mallika flower, Bel leaves, rice, barley, Til, 
mustard, Asvattha, and Udumbara trees and throw 
them within the jar. (The Ksira trees are ASvattha, 
Udumbara, Plaksa, and Nyagrodha.) 

vatrafitaarād paaa aN i 

Fa: ATs fenr: wget Aaa: u 17 N 

fey dnretdnaiarfragrerifēa: 1 

greed AN aaah 178 N 

Doing all these, prepare one Kuša Kürca made 
of twenty seven Kuša grass in the form of a braid 
of hair, round one end of a straight rod and tied in 
a knot and place it there. Then take your bath and 
repeat the Gayatri mantra over it one thousand 
times with your whole mind fully concentrated. 
Then the Veda knowing Brahmanas would recite 
the Saura mantra and sprinkle the man attacked by 
the demon with water and make him drink also the 
water saturated with the mantra and bathe him also 
with that. Then that person will be dispossessed of 
the devil and be happy. 

MTA: wr ferdben: TAH way i 

arian GA KTM AG 19 

sare attātģaramm «te fersttfērg: | 

"rt Saray wna afte Me v u 20 N 


Book XI Chapter XXIV 


1349 


Even when the man (possessed by a devil), is 
going to die, he gets his life again if he be made to 
drink this water saturated with this mantra and have 
his bath with that. So a wise King must do this, 
with a desire to have a long life; and after he is 
sprinkled with this mantra-charged water he is to 
give one hundred cows to the Brāhmaņas as the 
Daksina. 

afon Aa at ydens era He,t 

qsen Wat vmi füsn 210 

AMMA pene edt TAL | 

Team: wdfafessr: ware gametām: t 22 tl 

The Daksiņā is to be given according to one's 
might; and specially what gives satisfaction to the 
Brāhmaņas. If one be terrified by a Devil or so or 
by the mischievous magic spells of others, one is 
to sit on Saturday under an A$vattha tree and repeat 
one hundred Gayatris. 

wa gear zur: udon AANT: i 

amea EAT: WebhediyÜdd 123 N 

aarti: vae: are gear fram i 

nyheter werent aaga 24 0 

For the cure of all diseases, if one has to perform 
the Mrtyufijaya Homa, one will have to do Homa 
with the Gulafica creeper, soaked in milk and 
deducting the knots thereof. For the pacification 
of fever, mango leaves soaked with milk ought to 
be used in the Homa ceremony. The wasting 
diseases are cured if Homa be performed with the 
leaves of the Vaca soaked in milk; phthisis or 
consumption is cured if Homa be performed with 
curd, milk and ghee. 

Frater smear urad enden | 

Tareas vr wrsrdeoifuTeqan u 25 N 

Var: udg afaa inrer spares: | 

wu ifr dips waren: ASTITĀ 11 26 N 

Again, if offerings be given to the Solar Deity 
and if Pāyasānnam be given to him and if this be 
given to the consumptive patient, his disease will 
be cured. Again, on the Amāvasyā tithi (new moon 


day) if Homa be performed with Soma creeper 
(excluding the knot joints) soaked in milk, then 
consumption will be cured. 

Heh: verges BT eps fammi | 

sae: ATG das: 027 N 

ataarangi aaya à 

sigarafretrefte: art asa 128 N 

wae AEN ayaa ar | 

neuf wast water 29 

aAa gear regie watery i 

sésvaerseciihrergmmi gta N30 Nl 

If Homa be made with the flowers of the 
Sankhya tree, then leprosy is cured; if the Homa 
be done with the seed of Apāmārga, the Migis or 
the hysteric and epileptic fits are cured. So if Homa 
be performed with the fuel of Ksira trees, lunacy 
is cured; if with the fuel of Udumbara, meha 
(spermatorrhea) is cured; if with sugarcane juice, 
gonorrhea is cured; if with curd, milk and ghee or 
with the ghee of Kapilà cow, the homa be 
performed, the Mastrika disease or smallpox will 
be cured, and if Homa be performed with the fuels 
of Udumbara, Vata, and A$vattha be performed, 
then the diseases of cows, elephants and horses 
are cured. 

RRA UE mt smi yum | 

Vats ufüsr gng: 11 31 u 

aged imar PĒTA ates RA | 

RUA AA wed 32 1 

If the trouble be caused by many ants and ant- 
hills (Madhu Valmika) then perform the Homa 
ceremony with the fuel of Sami tree one hundred 
times and with the food prepared of ghee one hundred 
times and offer sacrifices with the rest of the food; 
then the above troubles will cease. If there be a 
earth quake or if there be seen flashes of lightnings, 
then homa is to be performed with the fuel of Vana 
Vetasa and the whole kingdom will be happy. 

aa WEA Ue west wu eq | 

at fasi yeaa wParrwaTSaT 33 N 


1350 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


aats Ramena wet eret ratā à 

ere Beat Tel Gat SAAT 34 n 

If you surcharge any piece of iron with Gayatri 
mantra repeated hundred times and if you throw it 
in any direction then no fear will arise from that 
quarter out of fire, air, or any other enemy. If one 
be imprisoned, and if he repeats the Gayatri 
mentally, he will be liberated from the prison. 

qaaa a: crore ferireritq i 

srerfaszit fenestra ari oir u 35 u 

BTA yri sre aA iT i 

fren URĀGAT atmet afeerar 36 u 

pat sidet wur: | 

aR: ARESTI AG greet q AT H 37 ti 

If you touch the man possessed by. a devil, 
disease or mortification and sorrow with the Kuša 
grass and repeat the Gayatri mantra, and thus 
charge him with Divine electricity, that man will 
be liberated from the fear caused thereby. If you 
make the man possessed by devils, etc., drink the 
water charged with the Gayatri mantra or if you 
cast on his body the ashes charged with hundred 
Gayatris or tie those ashes on his head repeating 
the Gayatri mantra, he will be instantly freed of all 
diseases and will live for one hundred years in 
happiness. In case a man is unable to do fully all 
these himself, he can get all these done by other 
Brāhmaņas and pay Daksina (fees) to them duly 
for the same. 

ater ofS frei cent ere careret: à 

siar YEATTĀ teh: PAMATU, n 38 N 

ga forenrareitfer metus: gr: à 

Viegas frame vene u 39 u 

aiaa gear ranar, | 

PFT Vega VA: THI: WORT 40 N 

fraareitfa ueni qeret vrnefu 1 

afafefaragarer areas cw owfüwn 141 i 

wre yi a Beare Brat Prenar, | 

O Narada! Now I will tell you how nourishment 
and weaith are attained. Wealth is attained if the 


Homa be performed with red lotus or fresh Jati 
flower or with the Sali rice or with the fuel of Bel 
tress, leaves, flowers, fruits or roots or with any 
portions thereof. If for one week the oblations be 
offered with fuel of Bel tree mixed with Payasa or 
with ghee one hundred times, then Laksmi Devi 
will surely be attained. 

oN aT 42 N 

ara fatter enr AA athe i 

TNT FAT AVA BH TAI 43 1 

sql ferar wes Brat Meee ŠTATAM 1 

ara garga Ra AT u 44 i 

If the Homa be performed with Laja (fried rice) 
mixed with curd, milk, and ghee, the daughter will 
be obtained. If for one week, the Homa be 
performed with red lotus, then gold is obtained. If 
the Tarpanam (peace offering) be offered to the 
Sun, then the treasures, gold hidden under the 
water, are obtained. If the Homa be performed with 
food (Anna) then Anna is obtained; if Homa be 
performed with rice, then rice is obtained. 

ataia gear TAATA, | 

Ripard sraragraferfor: Wat 45 11 

fade smear ur grade i 

weet ud waa 46 i 

If Homa be performed with calfdung, dried and 
powdered, then animals are obtained. If Homa be 
performed with Priyangu, Payasa or ghee then the 
progeny is obtained. If the oblations of Payasanna 
be offered to the Solar Deity and if the Prasādam 
(remnant) be given to one’s wife under menstruation 
to eat, then excellent sons will be obtained. If the 
Homa be performed with the fuel of wet pointed 
Ksira trees, then longevity is attained. 

tant gÀ: 1 

siit a yri gear En MRT 47 u 

Baiga EA MATATTAT FATT | 

garter: were anit wept aff ar 48 u 

If Homa be performed with the fuel of the Palāša 
tree, pointed and wet and mixed with curd, milk, 


Book XI Chapter XXIV 


and ghee for one hundred times consecutively, then 
longevity and gold are attained. If the Homa be 
performed with Durba grass, milk, honey or ghee, 
one hundred times, then longevity and golden lotus 
are obtained. 

wet wet a wumemugei saute | 

wnt afte wearer at a after 49 u 

vri wet a wememugei caterer | 

Tamera Kat grad gw: u50u 

wet wi a AEA cauteter | 

Aena: wurrerfaerdt ydq 51 N 

If for one week the Homa ceremony be 
performed with the fuel of Sami tree mixed with 
food, milk or ghee one hundred times of each or if 
for one week the Homa he performed with the fuel 
of Nyagrodha tree and afterwards one hundred 
Homas be made with Pāyasānna, the fear of 
unnatural death is removed. That man can conquer 
death who can remain for one week living on milk 
only and who performs during that time hundreds, 
and hundreds of Homas and repeats the Gayatri, 
controlling his speech. 


ATZĪT MAT fast PETA AAT | 
kahi GE la "52N 
wrüfied aiaa Ard aA, | 
fared Grats SKATA TITO 53 i 


If anybody can fast three nights and control his 
speech and repeat Gayatri he gets himself freed 
from the hands of Death; or totally immersed in 
water if he repeats Gayatri, he will be saved from 
the impending danger of death. If anybody repeats 
the Gayatri mantra for one month, taking his seat 
under a Bel tree or performs Homa with Bel fruit, 
root or leaves, he gets kingdoms. (Know all the 
Mantrams are electric in their effects). 

gar Vag UTC TATA ATE i 

"an orate gear PTA, N 54 N 

Tera Fa Tren TTATCTATT | 

aher afte geom da faae aT 11 5 5 N 

HJR: ware UA: eat CETUR E | 

Waa Viet gem AUS ATĒATTATA, w 56 N 


1351 


Similarly if anybody performs Homa with one 
hundred lotuses, he gets a foeless kingdom. So one 
becomes the lord of a village if one performs Homa 
with Yavāgu (barley gruel) and Šālidhānya. If the 
Homa be performed with the fuel of ASvattha tree, 
victory in battle is ensured and if the Homa be 
performed with the fuel of Akanda tree, then 
victory everywhere is ensured. If one hundred 
Homas be performed extending a week with Vetasa 
tree’s leaves or fruits, dipped in milk and mixed 
with Payasa, the rainfall is ensured. 

TRIS es unt Ae gènere i 

We TET et gen Healy fear 57 1 

Similarly if anybody repeats Gayatri for one 
week with his body upto navel immersed in water, 
the rainfall is ensured; on the contrary if the Homa 
be performed with ashes in water, then the cessation 
of heavy rainfall is ensured. 


UTT gga 

Tal Grats Spree ANT | 

afria daargi ta Aeara 1 59 1 

The Homa with the fuel of Palāša gives 
Brahmateja; Homa with the flowers of Palāša gives 
everything desired. Homa with milk or drinking 
Brāhmarasa, charged with mantra, increases the 
intellect; and the Homa with ghee gives Buddhi 
(medhā) (intelligence). 


vem supgnndgqfmfüt ue | 
want naii ges aya d 60 uU 


fag avi gear want gtg: 1 
frenisrferearaufurfürerssre fiera: 61 0 


HAAG TATRA ATTA i 

gaase As qfemarepurm tl 62 N 

ag atamai weet wad uq 1 

SIETA: YA Sot MANETTA |1 63 N 

arene wears fet: 1 

Homa with flowers gives good smell; Homa 
with thread gives cloth; Homa with salt and honey 
mixed or Bel flowers gives one power to control 


1352 


anything and everything that is desired. If anybody 
bathes everyday immersed completely within water 
and sprinkles water on his body, he becomes cured 
of diseases and he becomes very healthy. If any 
Brahmana does these things for others, he becomes 
also no doubt healthy. If anybody wants to increase 
his life period he should practise good deeds and 
repeat Gayatri thousand times daily for one month. 
Thus his longevity will be increased. 


waarmee Prat nnd WAT 11 64 1 

ag: AGATE AGT AM rame | 

Garena fire fērert wr wmm u65 u 

wana mÀ, | 

Two months’ such practice gives long life and 
perpetual health; three month’s such practice will 
give life, health, and wealth, four months such 
practice gives longevity, wealth, fame, women, 
sons, etc., five months such practice gives 
longevity, health, wealth, wife, sons and learning. 
So one should repeat this as many months in 
proportion to the number of his desires and he 
would get them. 


taad sigedarg: Ferran Frist: 66 n 

ae VIA Rra: TATA ETAT | 

Wd Wa Wea Tee TARTAN 1167 M 

SQA MOTT U TAT VT | 

MESA EART 1168 N 

Again any Brahmana who stands on one leg 
without holding any other thing and raises both 
his hands and daily repeats three hundred Gayatris 
for one month, gets all his desires fulfilled. And if 
he repeats one thousand one hundred Gāyatrīs, 
there is nothing in this world that is not met and 
attained with success. Controlling the Prana 
(inhaling) and Apana (exhaling) Vayu (breath), he 
who repeats daily three hundred Gāyatrīs to the 
Devi, his highest desires are satisfied. 

Tand màgia gens avit 1 

ard renar afgeēfāfa alts: 1 69 N 

Wd yaad wur wget wiar, | 

Fesa Aae aenaran 70 N 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


Višvāmitra si says: Standing on one leg, with 
both hands raised and controlling Vāyu he who 
repeats daily one hundred Gāyatrīs for one month, 
gets all his desires fulfilled. Similarly with three 
hundred or thousand repeatings, all things are 
attained. Submerged under water, if one repeats 
Gayatris as many times as mentioned above, he 
gets everything. 

Wa Wars Wear Ug WUHTCIUR | 

tad see wae PTA: 47] 0 

aay eae areata | 

If, for one year, with hands uplifted and without 
holding anything, anyone stands on one leg, 
controls one’s breath and repeats Gayatri mantra 
three hundred times or thousand times, eating 
Havisyannam only in the night time, he becomes a 
Rsi (Seer). 

Tivatar weed wer odacnguu 472 N 

Baat wed dA, d 

saat wrercaarg:darat We u73 U 

vaida Ranim wA 

Ud gaai wean ARAA 11 7 4 N 

l 


rarfird e em eremo. 

Wed ufu: Rafts aAa 175 u 

LATE wremued Ya w:o 

AMAA WHAT BISMARCK ! 76 Ui 

This thing repeated two years gives infallible 
speech; three years gives knowledge of the present, 
past and future; four years will enable one to see 
face to face the Solar God; five years will give the 
eight Siddhis, lightness, etc., six years will enable 
one to assume forms as he desires; seven years 
gives immortality; nine years gives Manuhood; ten 
years gives Indrahood; eleven years gives Brahmā- 
hood; and twelve years gives the state of Parama 
Brahma. 

ware ferar PITT ararfarar: à 

MEA V oue wem Va: wi ow77 4 

gay ur at wega: | 

WRIT: wayi asferqstearfortsgft 1 78 N 


Book XI Chapter XXIV 


saem: da ut wu: 

IU Wega wert regelt wüafüst: 179 1 

O Narada! By these practices of Tapasyās you 
and other Rsis have been able to conquer the three 
Lokas (regions). Some ate only vegetables; some 
fruits; some, roots; some simply water; some, ghee; 
some, Somarasa; whereas some others ate only caru 
and did tapasyā. Some Rsis practised this great 
Tapasyā by eating very little for a fortnight only. 
Some ate food, only what they got by begging 
during the day; and some ate only Havisyānna. O 
Narada! Now hear the rules for the purification and 
expiation of sins. 

and grat art gate fase: | 

word aage Gea: Rg i 80 i 

are sfr et Yat: VAT ETAT: | 

Rage ward Het Great ad ATA u81 1 

For the expiation of the sin incurred in stealing 
gold, one is to repeat three thousand Gayatris 
(daily) for one month; then the sin will be 
destroyed. By this act also the sins incurred by 
drinking or by going to one’s Guru’s wife are 
destroyed. Vi$vàmitra Rsi says: The sin incurred 
by killing a Brāhmaņa (Brahmahatyā) is destroyed 
if one erects a shed in a forest and, living there, 
repeats three thousand Gayatris daily for one 
month. 

srerer Heat urarfafer enrforen fa 1 

srasmé KIT wee werd wq 82 N 

Hate: wd wera fem: 1 

Partei soared warn dne: i83 N 

muang AT KĀ Ed Ward d 

Those Brahmanas that have committed the 
Great Sins (i.e, Mahāpātakas), become free, if 
they repeat one thousand Gāyatrīs daily, 
submerged under water, for twelve successive 
days. By controlling speech and by practising 
Pranayama, if one repeats three thousand Gayatris 
daily for one month, one will be free from the 
Mahāpātakas. 


1353 
Waa aeS fagqeaft N 84 N 
Wed; adatu uremardt arte: | 

Wore adu aAA: ss ti 
eene fàrfera: vrfererfirar i 


If one practises one thousand Prāņāyāmas re- 
peating the Gayatri, one becomes freed also of 
Brahmahatya. If one draws upwards the Prana and 
Apāna Vāyus six times, repeating the Gayatri with 
collected mind, this destroys all the sins and it is 
called all-sin destroying Pranayama. If one prac- 
tises this Pranayama one thousand times for one 
month, the lord of the earth becomes freed of all 
sins. 

gar fare vūfg Mad fet: use 

SATA TARA TE THTSTRETSTRTUT 

STATESMAN Maat Maa FAL 87 1 

If any Brahmana incurs the sin of killing a cow, 
for twelve days he is to repeat three thousand 
Gāyatrīs daily for expiation. Similarly the repeti- 
tion of ten thousand Gayatris removes the sin of 
going to those not fit to be gone into, eating the 
uneatables, stealing and killing and this act brings 
in peace. 

WTA Hear Feat ndina | 

adma wort dat aft vp u 8s u 

wear reas at wu i 

SVA weet Page afer 89 N 

All sins are destroyed by performing one 
hundred Pranayamas with Gayatri. Again if there 
be a mixture of various sins, one will have to live 
in the forest for one month and repeat one thousand 
Gāyatrīs or practise fasting and repeat three 
thousand Gāyatrīs; thus all sins will be destroyed. 

aginean pegia | 

agaaa aia g "900 

To repeat Gāyatrī twenty-four thousand times 
is equal to performing the Krcchra vrata and to 
repeat sixty four thousand Gayatris duly is equal 
to performing the Candrayana. 

WAH AS AAT WOT AAT: | 

aeaa udurgard um 91 N 


1354 

Pag BE TE RAGE Tas ESEO GE | 

taradi gisa udurū: wga 92 N 

If anybody repeats, in the morning and evening 
Sandhya times, the merit giving Gayatri one 
hundred times, with Pranayama, all his sins are 
destroyed. So, submerged under water, if one 
repeats the Gayatri Devi, meditating Her in the 
Sun, one hundred times daily, one’s all the sins 
are fully destroyed. 

gA Aamen: ARERIA: | 

wenknees Naaa wur 0 93 N 

ofa Gada: Great: Aae im: | 

PART ATat gat wetafr 94 i 

SrfirFere et Pret er nme vrenfarfir i 

ameter: ise MARTA, i 95 i 

arent: Way erat eren wepüsr 1 

O Narada! Thus I have described to you all about 
averting or destroying the evils and the purification 
of various sins. All this is secret. Keep it carefully 
concealed. Never divulge this. Whoever divulges 
this will bring his own ruin. I have spoken to you, 
in brief, all about Sadacara (right way of living). If 
anybody practises this duly, according to rules, Sri 
Mahamaya Durga Devi becomes pleased with him. 
If anybody wants to have both enjoyment and 
liberation, he is to practise all these daily, as well 
as the occasional, and Kàmya (desired) duties duly 
according to rules. 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


gah wdsmerg warenué HEA 496 

araara Ud: marmar ge à 

RATATAT IT: Mest Ue A ANT 497 N 

uaaa weranfraray | 

waft IATA weretuferdhesrema; 98 UI 

marno fires tara iors Gar | 

ada c Hat Wert aare 1 99 u 

efr SCAT TAT ergo? WHIRL ATARI TOT 
amr IJSS: 1134 11 
amet erarfeeriag ( 124311) aetentagīd: gA: | 
dimanea: tHe PR: na n 

Itis stated in all the Sastras, that this Acara (right 
way of living) is the foremost and the chief Dharma, 
the Deity of which is the Supreme Mother Herself. 
O Narada! That man who practises duly this Acara 
is, in this world, holy, happy and blessed. This I 
speak to you truly. If anybody desires to get the 
Devi Bhagavati’s Grace, he should first of all set 
himself at once to practise this Sadācāra. He who 
hears this gets wealth and great happiness. There 
is no doubt in this. Now speak what more you want 
to hear. 

Here ends the Twenty fourth Chapter of the Eleventh 
Book on Sadācāra in the Mahāpurāņam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyàsa. 

[Here ends the Eleventh Book.] 


ek 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


—k- 


CHAPTERI 
On the Description of Gāyatrī 


ING IATA 


werenfaftrfa wan afa: wat | 

META eum dodi 

qd agaimi sara | 

BATT Bret Arca AATATTSTAT st 0 2 u 

gam ae: ep TERT TP T | 

Narada said: O Deva! The rules of Sadācāra 
(right ways of living) and the all-sin-destroying 
unequalled Glories of the Devi Bhagavati have 
been described by Thee. And I, too, have heard 
the nectar of the Glories of the Devi from Thy 
lotus mouth. The Candrayana and other Vratas; 
described by Thee, are very difficult to practise. 
So they are impracticable with the ordinary persons. 


aamini ay gari ÄRMA 43 u 
[GIPESIESSEE l 
wend ag W enitepurgd MNR 4 di 


Therefore, O Lord! Kindly describe those 
actions which can easily be carried out by common 
persons, at the same time, the Devi's Grace and 
Siddhis can be obtained by those practices. 

waranfadt ag maA: 1 

ferent fe verre oT quenférasmem uw 5 u 

A maia eurer: | 

Wai ew: rent: rft Sais a AT 6 u 

Qai Hr daram: Wear: wd HAT A wu | 

Wecenhqee N U eub Utada u7u 


Again what thou hast described about the 
Gayatri in connection with Sadācāra kindly say 
which are the chief and foremost as well as those 
that are more meritorious. O Best of the Munis! 
Thou hast told that there are the twenty-four 
syllables in the Gàyatri. Kindly describe now their 
Rsis, Chandas, Devatās and other things that should 
be known regarding them and thus satisfy my 
longings. 


sftanraur sara 


waieaa ar guiggsmmfēd war | 

Tatar were west: 8 

teary weder u masta wp | 

mahai qs ws dep ouod 

Sri Narayana said : O Narada! The twice-born 
would have done what they ought to do if they be 
engaged in repeating their Gayatri only, whether 
they be able or not able to practise the Candrayana 
and the other vratas. Whichever Brahmin repeats 
the Gayatri three thousand times and offers Arghya 
to the Sun in the three Sandhya times, the Devas 
worship him; what to speak of other ordinary 
persons! 

FTA AT AT AT MAAS AAT | 

ATT sam gran aaar u 10 u 

wasted: welt aera: d 

gRr: MIIN 


1358 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


2a 

aaa: saai Tara Enea | 

Baile taqredganararas via fF 012 0 

Whether he practises Nyasa or not, if anybody 
sincerely repeats the Gayatri Devi, Whose Nature 
is Existence, Intelligence, and Bliss and meditates 
on Her, even if he attains siddhi in one syllable 
even, then as a result of that, he can vie with the 
best of the Brahmanas, the Moon, and the Sun; 
nay, with Brahma, Visnu, and Maheévara even! O 
Narada! Now I will tell in due order the Rsis, 
Chandas, and the Devatās of the twenty-four 
syllables of the Gayatri. 


amS AANS: yr: ATA: WIR: \ 
fasnftst were: after: vitet wer 13 ii 
TAA Mera wafer: i 
watt qaeda deers wT: 114 N 
TT: SH AT: FORA HGRA | 


gaturenrat set are: AVATKTAT 11 15 N 

The Rsis, in due order, are (1) Vāma Deva, (2) 
Attri, (3) Vasistha, (4) Sukra, (5) Kanva, (6) 
Parāšara, (7) the very fiery Visvamitra, (8) Kapila, 
(9) Saunaka, (10) Yajfiavalkya, (11) Bharadvāja, 
(12) the ascetic Jamadagni, (13) Gautama, (14) 
Mudgala, (15) Vedavyāsa, (16) Lomaša, (17) 
Agastya, (18) Kaušika, (19) Vatsya, (20) Pulastya, 
(21) Manduka, (22) the ascetic in chief Durvasa, 
(23) Narada and (24) Kašyapa. 

ch ANA: Gre ata ennt A i 

mrg a gedt drat a ou 16 N 

fret sort a aasad T | 

wreerdifergrarartt vr RRRA li 17 N 

ĒRU aft: Vatrrafa: | 

fagi: iqnferzrarardfenerirer wr 118 u 

pfa: TR derer Safer uam | 

saat a defi afta wes u 19 u 

Now about the chandas : (1) Gayatri, (2) Usnik, 
(3) Anustup, (4) Brhati, (5) Pankti, (6) Tristup, (7) 
Jagati, (8) Atijagati, (9) Sakkari, (10) Ati Sakvari, 
(11) Dhrti, (12) Ati Dhrti, (13) Virat, (14) 
Prastárapankti, (15) Krti, (16) Prākrti, (17) Akrti, 


(18) Vikrti, (19) Sankrti, (20) Aksarapankti, (21) 
Bhuņ, (22) Bhuvah, (23) Svah and (24) Jyotismati. 

amia TY Wa durer gqdsn | 

BTA VT ure uremaed fata 20 u 

ada wr can detent a agate i 

mea wat wad smR aT 21 0 

ATi runi g AAEE, | 

wad wnat at cunis 022 

niyay ATE CD TRU VTA | 

Awi sratayi nAn U aware ! 23 N 

amei daagh unde uw KIEV | 

rarewfürgued wad AUGI 0424 

aseyi dacanafartrargerr 1 

Wd fave unguium (25 u 

afar sist was | 

Watfagt a Hrs TTS |1 26 N 

The Devatās of the several letters in due order, 
are : (1) Agni, (2) Prajapati, (3) Soma, (4) Isana, 
(5) Savita, (6) Aditya, (7) Brhaspati, (8) 
Maitrāvaruņa, (9) Bhagadeva, (10) Aryama, (11) 
Gaņeša, (12) Tvastra, (13) Pūsā, (14) Indragni, (15) 
Vayu, (16) Vàmadeva, (17) Maitrávaruni (18) 
Visvadeva, (19) Matrika, (20) Visnu, (21) Vasu, 
(22) Rudra Deva, (23) Kubera, and (24) the twin 
A$vini Kumāras. 

agya Weed a due: | 

ft: MUAS Weare: Gi 

TATA ant MTV SAT 27 N 

efr MERITI meram? gravid NAA ant 

NUES 11 1 11 

O Nārada! Thus I have described to you about 
the the Devatās of the twenty-four syllables. The 
hearing of this destroys all sins and yields the full 
results of repeating the mantra Gayatri. 

Note: The Devatàs, mentioned in the Gayatri 
Brahma Kalpa are different from those mentioned here. 
Here ends the First Chapter of the Twelfth Book on 
the description of Gāyatrī in the Mahāpurāņam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses by 
Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book XII Chapter lI 


1359 


CHAPTER II 
On the Description of the Saktis, etc., of the Syllables of Gayatri 


ARTA SAT 

Sat VITRA: HFA A: TOTES HATTA | 

amet far wen fear aaaea u 1 n 

Varat set VT enfer qub Met | 

fagar a feror carte? ferae aom i 2 u 

ansao gam fayd riat a i 

vansar WT PITT wat ep PUT UIT 1 3 di 

aganit wera: MAE: | 

aa: wt ATS TATA 4 ou 

Narayana said : O Narada! O Great Muni! Now 
hear which are the Saktis in due order of the twenty 
four syllables of the Gayatri Devi : 

(1) Vàma Devi, (2) Priya, (3) Satya, (4) Visva, 
(5) Bhadravilasini, (6) Prabha Vati, (7) Jaya, (8) 
Santa, (9) Kanta, (10) Durga, (11) Sarasvati, (12) 
Vīdrumā, (13) Visalesa, (14) Vyāpinī, (15) Vimalā, 


collyrium of the eye; (14) red; (15) like the 
Vaidüryamani; (16) like Ksaudra (Campaka tree, 
honey, water); (17) like turmeric; (18) like Kunda 
flower; and the milk (19) like the rays of the Sun; 
(20) like the tail of the bird Suka; (21) like 
Satapatra; (22) like Ketaki flower; (23) like 
Mallika flower; (24) like Karavi ra flower. 

aut: HITAITA autat ngara ANETA: | 

Verear Ast ATTAIN TA U N10 N 

Tet Tag wt U wed: TĀ E | 

sucer urguré xr o anf xr ATT u 11 ii 

Wot Rg a erp] ASA ep Aa: WU | 

MOASTRA GUT: GAAS Wd: TA 1 12 N 

Now about their Tattvas : (1) earth; (2) water; 
(3) fire; (4) air; (5) Ākāša (ether); (6) smell; (7) 
taste; (8) form; (9) sound; (10) touch; (11) male 


(16) Tamopahāriņī, (17) Sūksmā, (18) Višvayoni,| generative organ; (12) anus; (13) legs, (14) hands; 
(19) Jaya, (20) Vasa, (21) Padmālayā, (22)| (15) speech; (16) Prana (vital breath); (17) tongue; 


Parasobha, (23) Bhadra, and (24) Tripada. 


nén 
sation dark PRIT, | 
aami cw tat dgd aimxufenn 7 Ni 
ake Hagen wamian, | 
Yager dgesquafei Mar us ti 
dangai WÉROSRIDHHNNW | 
ada gad mao Rafa: 


I9 ut 


(18) eyes; (19) skin; (20) ears; (21) Prana (up going 
breath); (22) Apàna; (23) Vyana, (24) Samana. 
marae aiat eem: entfeerfa q i 
aa: w yaaa atga: mAN g ou 13 N 
gga dye da feud fq wem od 
fea fag da wg: vaga «ur 14 N 
WETS da earqasterfesc TT | 
rad anasto of METS 15 tt 
facie gfte ca weed ani are | 
Kreraid wennid ygt ueod Tam 16 u 
Now about the Mudras of the syllables: (1) 


Now hear the respective colours of the several | Sammukha; (2) Samputa; (3) Vitata; (4) Vistrta; 


syllables of the Gayatri Devi: (1) like Campaka| (5) Dvimukha, (6) Trimukha; (7) Caturmukha; (8) 
and Atasi flowers, (2) like Vidruma, (3) like| Paficamukha; (9) Sanmukha; (10) Adhomukha, 
crystal, (4) like lotus; (5) like the Rising Sun; (6)| (11) Vyapakafijali (12) Sakata; (13) Yamapāša; 
white like conchshell; (7) white like Kundaļ (14) Grathita; (15) Sammukhonmukha (16) 
flower; (8) like Prabāla and lotus leaves; (9) like| Vilamba; (17) Mustika; (18) Matsya; (19) Kūrma; 
Padmaraga, (10) like Indranilamani; (11) like| (20) Varahaka; (21) Simhakranta, (22) Mahakranta; 
pearls; (12) like saffron; (13) like the black| 23) Mudgara, and (24) Pallava. 


1360 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


fare: spirare U femen i 

sigs a NAT KUT: enfe: N 17 0 

seam: alleen Yat atrtai d ETH | 

Hea: afta: enira g 018 d 

efr MERITAR ergo? grams 
RRRS: 11 2 11 

The Mahāmudrās of the fourth foot of Gayatri 
are (1) Trišūlayonī (2) Surabhi; (3) Aksa-mālā; 
(4) Linga; and (5) Ambuja. O Narada! Thus I have 


described to you all about the Mudrās, etc., of the 
several syllables of the Gayatri. If during Japam, 
one thinks all these and at the same time repeats, 
all his sins are destroyed and his wealth gets 
increase and the fame attends on him. 

Here ends the Second Chapter of the Twelfth Book 
on the description of the Saktis, efc., of the 
syllables of Gayatri in the Mahapuranam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 Verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


CHAPTER III 
On the Description of the Kavaca of Sri Gayatri Devi 


ANG dara 


varfirrdsnramer dzratsfta WA uut i 

UA maA aN 

TAT der aT METRU: wet NAT | 

wes waet maa faved: 2 

Narada spoke : O Bhagavan! Thou art the Lord 
of this world; Thou canst shew favour and disfavour 
both; Thou art specially versed in the sixty-four 
Kalas (arts of learning); Thou art the chief of the 
Yogis. I therefore ask Thee to solve a doubt of 
mine. By what Punyam a man can become free 
from all his sins and limitations and he can realise 
and become of the nature of Brahma. 

cad weglqfireorfir ard u faftrqeenq 

aftusaiftrād u tari a fafaa 3 N 

O Lord! And what are duly the Rsis, Chandas, 
Devatās, Dhyana, and Nyasa, etc., of this 
meritorious act? I want to hear. 

sftanrant IATA 

sata ut eb maiaa Wem | 

yearend: wdur AAA dad 

wafer aa wad 1 

Teter «safest: us Ul 

RIN magama ANT | 

Bea cadet West U Her u6 N 

ada ent gear vivement aAA: i 

lod er fra: rei ware fara u 7 u 


agad ura fafsreuf: fore: ga i 

agi: koa VIA aret vm t 8 u 

wgfírfagfeg wgfü warren | 

HU cart Wasa maea uo u 

Narayana said : O Narada! There is but one and 
the only one way to this and though that is very 
secret, I will disclose that to you. Itis the Gayatri- 
Kavaca. It can destroy all sins. Therefore to recite 
or to hold it on one's body enables the man to 
become free from all his sins and to get all his 
desires fulfilled and he gets the Sayuya Mukti with 
the Devi (be merged in the Devi-Body). Now hear 
the Rsis, Chandas, etc., of this Kavaca: Brahma, 
Visnu and Mahešvara are the Rsis; the Rk, Yajus, 
Sama and Atharva Vedas are the Chandas; the 
Parama Kala Gayatri of the nature of Brahma is 
the Devata; “Tat” in Gayatri is the Bija; “Bharga” 
is the Sakti; and “Dhi yah” is the Kilaka; and its 
viniyoga (application) is in getting the Moksa 
(liberation). With the first four syllables touch the 
heart; with the next three letters touch the head; 
with the next four letters touch the tuft on the crown 
of the head; with the next three letters on the 
Kavaca; with the next four letters on the eyes and 
with the last four letters make the Nyasa, all over 
the body repeating “Astraya Phat," O Narada! Hear 
now the Dhyānam of Gayatri, that grants all 
desires. 


1360 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


EE ji 
CHAPTER III 
On the Description of the Kavaca of Sri Gayatri Devi 
ANG IATA agfūtad vrad frfratt: forc ETA i 
varfirrdsnraner dzratsfta Au uit à T: aries uaa Rg Here en u 8 u 


UA maA aN 

TAT der aT METRU: wet NAT | 

wes waet maa faved: 2 

Narada spoke : O Bhagavan! Thou art the Lord 
of this world; Thou canst shew favour and disfavour 
both; Thou art specially versed in the sixty-four 
Kalas (arts of learning); Thou art the chief of the 
Yogis. I therefore ask Thee to solve a doubt of 
mine. By what Punyam a man can become free 
from all his sins and limitations and he can realise 
and become of the nature of Brahma. 

cad weglqfireorfir ard u faftrqeenq 

aftusaiftrād u tari a fafaa 3 N 

O Lord! And what are duly the Rsis, Chandas, 
Devatās, Dhyana, and Nyasa, etc., of this 
meritorious act? I want to hear. 

sftanrant IATA 

sata ut eb maiaa Wem | 

yearend: wdur AAA dad 

wafer aa wad 1 

Teter «safest: us Ul 

RIN magama ANT | 

Bea cadet West U Her u6 N 

ada ent gear vivement aAA: i 

lod er fra: rei ware fara u 7 u 


wgfírfagfeg wgfü warren | 

HU cart Wasa maea uo u 

Narayana said : O Narada! There is but one and 
the only one way to this and though that is very 
secret, I will disclose that to you. Itis the Gayatri- 
Kavaca. It can destroy all sins. Therefore to recite 
or to hold it on one's body enables the man to 
become free from all his sins and to get all his 
desires fulfilled and he gets the Sayuya Mukti with 
the Devi (be merged in the Devi-Body). Now hear 
the Rsis, Chandas, etc., of this Kavaca: Brahma, 
Visnu and Mahešvara are the Rsis; the Rk, Yajus, 
Sama and Atharva Vedas are the Chandas; the 
Parama Kala Gayatri of the nature of Brahma is 
the Devata; “Tat” in Gayatri is the Bija; “Bharga” 
is the Sakti; and “Dhi yah” is the Kilaka; and its 
viniyoga (application) is in getting the Moksa 
(liberation). With the first four syllables touch the 
heart; with the next three letters touch the head; 
with the next four letters touch the tuft on the crown 
of the head; with the next three letters on the 
Kavaca; with the next four letters on the eyes and 
with the last four letters make the Nyasa, all over 
the body repeating “Astraya Phat," O Narada! Hear 
now the Dhyānam of Gayatri, that grants all 
desires. 


Book XII Chapter III 


gafgataievavesnjūcitat- 

iui M Keri 

vid emere guregdt ast 1 10 i 

The Gayatri Devi has five faces; one of which 
is of white colour; and the other four is of pearl, 
Vidruma, golden, and Nilakantamani colour 
respectively. Each face has got three eyes; on the 
head there is a crown of jewels and the digit of the 
Moon is shining there. Her body is composed of 
the twenty-four tattvas. She has ten hands : On the 
top right and left hands there are two lotuses; lower 
down, there are disc and conch shell; lower down, 
there are rope and skull; lower down, there are 
noose and goad; and on the bottom hands right and 
left she is making signs of “No fear" and "ready to 
grant boons." 

Treat yda: ung attest ung «fēru 1 

aarden g À uaga wea 11 1 

wredt 3 fast Anan resntardt i 

urgeri fest Amga 12 tt 

raat fest Raamaa 1 

fasi Uo wr urg Sao exsefuvft 1 13 u 

aed centr d Aeae war | 

wa am fast Aaaf yada ui4 

werd Ug À ural sfa R wfeg: way | 

avd wfeest g ah mies wou15u 

dara À aged india a recu: | 

fra: wd wr d AD a: Us A eem |1 16 N 

+: wig À ae fet raat à eres | 

Thus meditating on Sri Gayatri, one is to recite 
the Kavaca thus : Let the Gayatri Devi protect 
my front; Savitri Devi protect my right; the 
Sandhya Devi, my back and the Devi Sarasvati, 
my left. Let my Mother Parvati Devi protect my 
quarters. Let Jala$ayini protect the southeast; 
Yātudhāna Bhayankari protect my South-west, 
Pavamānavilāsinī my north-west, Rudrarüpini 
Rudrani protect my north-east. Let Brahmani 
protect my top and Vaisnavi protect my nether 


86 


1361 


regions. Let the word “Tat” in the Gayatri protect 
my legs; "Savituh" protect my Knees; 
“Varenyam,” protect my loins; “Bhargah,” my 
navel. Let "Devasya" protect my heart; "Dhī mahi” 
protect my neck; “Dhi yah,” protect my eyes; 
“Yah,” protect my forehead; Nah" protect my 
head; and “Pracodayat” protect the tuft on the 
crown of my head. 

werd Ug Welt wenn: Ug MTA, (1 17 ti 

agh g frontend Ute: | 

mÈ wennTU Tareq FG Wem ou 18 d 

fora ats qp TEAST | 

ITEM a ARRIA Wem u 19 N 

VHT: BISA Y Wenn: HUSA | 

ram afarat wet effet are 20 i 

Wet wed Tag sat We | 

IET arrest g aras wee wem n 2 1 ti 

Tet Tag Wenn HS Bt A: Waray | 

Want mgA AAR HANEN 0 22 N 

IRR AI qp TH: VARN, | 

TaN wderi da watt A nasag l 23 N 

Again let the “Tat” of the twenty-four syllabled 
Gāyatrī protect my head; “Sa,” protect my 
forehead; “Vi” protect my eyes; “Tu” my cheeks; 


6615? 


“Va,” protect my nostrils; “Re,” my mouth; “ni 
protect my upper lip; “Yah” protect my lower lip; 
“Bha” within my face; “rgo,” protect my cheeks; 
"De," my throat; “Va” my shoulders; “Sya” my 
right hand; “Dhi” my navel; “ma,” my heart, “Hi,” 
my belly; “Dhi,” my navel; “Yo” my loins; “Yo”, 
my anus; “nah,” my thighs, “Pra,” my Knees; “Co” 
my shanks “Da” my heels; “Ya” my legs; and let 
“at” protect all my sides. 

Sd g mad feet enaA NITATE, | 

"wg:wfbenenfaerqrreh MARRA 0 24 I 

O Narada! This divine Kavaca of the Devi 
Gayatri can baffle hundreds and thousands of 
obstructions and evils; can grant sixty-four Kalas 


and liberation. 


1362 


yad vinda: wt ARTIST | 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


We-regaumgifü Tages wT 025 
sft SERAI ergy greznas MASTE TA 
JARSE: 31 
By the glory of this Kavaca, man can become 
free from all evils and can attain the state of 
Brahma. Moreover whoever reads or hears this 


acquires the fruits of making a gift of a thousand 
cows. 

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Twelfth Book on 
the description of the Kavaca of Sri Gayatri Devi 
in the Mahāpurāņam Srimaddevibhàgavatam 

of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1362 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


ead udurūva: wt generate | 
Wa-regaumgrfü TEAM PA, 25 Nu 
sft SERAI ergy greznas MASTE TA 
JARSE: 11 3 11 
By the glory of this Kavaca, man can become 
free from all evils and can attain the state of 
Brahmā. Moreover whoever reads or hears this 


acguires the fruits of making a gift of a thousand 
cows. 

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Twelfth Book on 
the description of the Kavaca of Sri Gayatri Devi 
in the Mahāpurāņam Srimaddevibhàgavatam 
of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


CHAPTER IV 


On the Gayatri Hrdayam 


ARE Tareas 
waa TTT d 
wad a ad feet wnpfüexfenm niu 
aga Ago wetter RA od 
"nume maas Ra u2 N 
Nārada said : O Bhagavan! I have heard from 
you all about the Kavaca and the Mantra of Śrī 


are similar, consider yourself as of the form of the 
Devi and meditate within yourself on the Devatas, 
thus: The Pandits, the Knowers of the Vedas, say 
this: He is not yet fit to worship the Deva and he 1s 
not an Adhikari as yet who has not been able to 
make himself a Deva; therefore to establish the 
knowledge of the oneness of the Deva and himself, 


Gayatri. O Deva Deva! O Thou, the Knower of |he is to meditate the Devas within his body, thus: 


the present, the past, and the future! Now tell about 
the Hrdaya, the highest, the interior or esoteric 
Essence of the Gayatri, holding which, if one 
repeats the Gayatri, he acquires all the punyam 
(merits), I am desirous to hear this. 


sianar gara 


sears Kad Wik amerudut ETA | 

Adam Vaga were 1 3 N 

Nārāyaņa said: O Nārada! This subject on the 
Hrdaya of Gāyatrī is explicitly written in the 
Atharva Veda. Now I will speak on that, the great 
secret, in detail. Listen. 

Ruga erae mast aurum d 

waa TATA EXIRTQITST dam: 11 4 I 

First, consider the Gāyatrī, the Devī, the Mother 
of the Vedas as of a Cosmic Form (Virātrūpā) and 
meditate all the Devas as residing on Her Body. 

fisaaisdneargmredaaait ar | 

aient frst dē maaa Mr: 5 |i 

agatsariūtattt defeat fag: 1 

Tdissara «TĀ xd sqIESUT SAT: U6 di 


Now in as much as the Pinda and Brahmànda 


aa edema waren wa d 

maireana Aa eft: wp: 07 N 

"mes set dam ag a 

Walter Wenmtur Hatem We ATA, tl 

eme fast oot eames: 18 0 

O Narada! Now I will speak on the Hrdaya of 
Gayatri, knowing which every man becomes able 
to become all the Devas. Listen. The Rsi of this 
Gayatri Hrdaya is Narayana; the Chandas is 
Gayatri ; and Šrī Paramešvarī Gayatri is the 
Devata. Perform the Nyasa of this as mentioned 
before and taking your seat in a lonely place, 
meditate intently on the Devi with your heart and 
head well collected. 

amdana: n WA šadu n dqueerefun it 

sd dea Ae ou gana: ou fret ma oai 

Hami g get: uKratdaatsēt t amare: i 

KĀ mia: useage ar cef 

wena sad femen o warafa: n 

Semper Be gi AA art: o iura 

ATR: ere cmm frat: caret uferdt a 


enero th sew Thor zar BEATA u 


Book XII Chapter IV 


aReg Tet: n ageniagaa: | am À 
Aima STERTATATĀRAAST: 1 avi feeat 
Treat weertat PUA Woe | oraaa 
AA: 3A agaaa TT: 11 ASTTTĒKTA AA: dI 
aaran «n: yracefterst vnd urd 
argrafā ucuranefrarat Raagi ord arsrafe n 
"riureitara: starat safer (p wddidu carat 
watt nAdA safe starrer 
wate u AMAA onea wate it 
arsenide safe a sretereteumaņat 
wate n armeenia ate n 
game a udane 
vate tReet waft saaat 
qan amaaa agram afr aa 
aria mgA vate u 
wormage went we safer sy 
weed dp eeu futaniefr ua gè 
Remia arent: ya: fa: dur: wiped 
sft uw Merete maA n gee TATA) 
SAARTEN: Ui 
att MERTA ergo? ENEA MIRRA AT 
IJSEI: 11 4 11 
Now I am speaking of the Arthanyāsa. Hear. 
Meditate on the Devatā Dyau on your head; the 
twin A$vins on the rows of the teeth; the two 
Sandhyas on your upper and lower lips; the Agni, 
Fire, within your mouth; Sarasvati, on the tongue; 
Brhaspati on the neck; the eight Vasus on the two 
breasts; the Vayus, on the two arms; the Parjanya 
Deva on the heart; Ākāša, on the belly; Antariksam 
(the middle space) on the navel; Indra and Agni, 
on the loins; Prajapati, the condensed form, as it 
were, of Vijñäna, on the hip joints; the Kailāša and 
the Malaya mountains on the two thighs; the 
Višsvedevās on the two knees; Višvāmitra on the 
shanks; the Sun’s northern and southern paths, the 
Uttarāyana and Daksinayana on the anus; the Pitrs 
on the thighs; the Earth on the legs; the Vanaspati 
on the fingers and toes; the Rsis on the hairs of the 
body; the Muhürtas on the nails; the planets on the 
bones; the Rtus (seasons) on the blood and flesh; 


the Samvatsaras on the Nimisa (twinkling of eye) 


1363 


the Sun and the Moon on the day and night 
respectively. Thinking thus, repeat “I take refuge 
of the Divine Holy Gayatri, the Chief and most 
Excellent One, the Thousand eyed and I take refuge 
wholly unto Her.” 

Then repeat “I bow down to Tat savitur 
varenyam," “I bow down to the Rising Sun on the 
East,” “I bow down to the Morning Aditya,” "I 
bow down to the Gayatri, residing in the Morning 
Sun" and "I bow down to all." O Nàrada! Whoever 
recites this Gayatri Hrdaya in the morning finds 
all the sins committed in the night all destroyed! 
Whoever recites this in the evening gets his sins of 
the day all destroyed! Whoever recites this in the 
evening and in the morning can rest assured to have 
become free of sins; he gets the fruits of all the 
Tirthas; he is acquainted with all the Devas; he is 
saved if he has spoken anything that ought not to 
have been spoken; if he has eaten anything that 1s 
not fit to be eaten; if he has chewn and sucked 
anything that ought not to have been chewn and 
sucked; if he has done anything that ought not to 
have been done and if he has accepted hundreds 
and thousands of gifts that ought never to have been 
accepted. 

The sins incurred by eating with the others in a 
line cannot touch him. If he speaks lies, he will not 
be touched by the sins thereof; even 1f a non- 
Brahmacārī recites this, he will become a 
Brahmacārī. O Narada! What more shall I say to 
you of the results of Gayatri Hrdaya than this: 
that whoever will study this will acquire the fruits 
of performing thousand sacrifices and repeating 
the Gayatri sixty thousand times. In fact, he will 
get Siddhi by this. The Brahmana, who daily reads 
this in the morning will be freed of all the sins and 
go upwards to the Brahma (Loka) and is glorified 
there. This has been uttered by Bhagavan 
Narayana Himself. 

Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on 
Gayatri Hrdayam in the Mahapuranam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1364 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER V 
On the Gayatri Stotram 


wards Et UTA | 

TA: cer Tea: Kima 1 1 ud 

Narada said: O All knowing One! Thou showest 
Thy grace to Thy devotees! Thou hast described 
this sin-destroying Gayatri Hrdaya. Now describe 
Her Stava (hymn of praise). 


stanen zara 


afa wreath d 

ada anksia iie dt ATS « 1 2 N 

«ada tee maht afer a aac à 

arei er Arh Vt enr vert freni 3 n 

maato er ATA dam ways: | 

wan umi spread foe uif wer 4 d 

Narayana said: O World-Mother! O Thou, 
favouring Thy devotees! O Thou, the Prime Force, 
O Omnipresent! Infinite! Sri Sandhye! I bow down 
to Thee. Thou art the Sandhya; Thou art the Gayatri, 
Savitri and Sarasvati; Thou art Brahmi, Vaisnavi 
and Raudri and Thou art red, white, and black 
(the colours of Gayatri, Savitri and Sarasvatī) that 
Thou assumest respectively. O Bhagavati ! Thou 
art always meditated by the Munis as young in the 
morning, full of youth in the mid-day, and aged in 
the evening. I bow down to Thee. 

ČAU mesma wem quumufesi | 

maae rit grad ar quar 1 5 u 

Thou art seen by the Tapasvis (ascetics) as 
Brahmānī, riding on Hamsa (swan), Sarasvati 
riding on Garuda, and Savitri riding on Bull. 

agda wédt a sa fus | 

"wr arena weg meme eem spēt 1 6 N 

FAO TT ed fi faaan à 

rata gam erasuedquemmut u7u 


space (antariksam) and as manifesting Sāmaveda 
everywhere in the Rudra loka, thus roaming in the 
three worlds. I bow down to Thee. O Devi ! Thou 
art Rudràni in the Rudra loka, Vaisnavi in the 
Visnu loka, and Brahmāņī in the Brahma loka; 
thus Thou shewest Thy favour to the Immortals. 

waft wrt agawer | 

Prat: Ata ayaa us N 

O Devi! Thou art the Mother delighting the 
seven Rsis (of the Great Bear); Thou art Maya. 
Thou grantest great many boons to Thy Bhaktas. 
Thou art sprung from the eyes and hands, tears 
and perspiration of Siva and Siva. 

STR ent ame Ru | 

ata aa da fr mah non 


after a ate cur ater a UTT 1 
stentgt ver dear dar sittar 110 u 
miet neath ura Aaaf i 
Ramai eft eaaa i 11 u 
qaran ratarti aftat Ameno 1 


yik agere: varies derat ffr: u 12 u 

"week mertfigstacta ware 1 

auaf autera: RICA q werarg N 1 3 N 

Thou art the Mother of delights, Durgā Devī, 
recited by the following ten names: Varenya, 
Varada, Varisthà, Varavarnini, Garistha, Varāhā, 
Varārohā, Nīlagangā, Sandhya and Bhoga 
Moksada. Thou art the Bhagirathi (the river 
Ganges) in this world; the Bhogavati in the Patala; 
and the Mandākinī (the milky way) in the Heavens. 
Thou art in this world (Bhur loka) the all-enduring 
Prthvi (earth); Thou art the Vayu Sakti (air power) 
in the middle space (Bhuvar Loka); Thou art the 
energy (the ocean of Tejas) in the Heavens (Svar 
loka); Thou art the Great Siddhi in the Mahar loka; 


Thou art seen within by the ascetics as|Thou art Jana in the Janar Loka; Thou art Tapasvini 
manifesting the Rgveda (in the form of Savitri) in | in the Tapar loka; Thou art Truth (True Speech) in 
this world, as manifesting Yayurveda in the middle | the Satya lokam. 


Book XII Chapter V 


1365 


ug 


«AVI feres a a Meat aghar | 

"exea ferar virt gatear u 14 u 

sent ngada Vate R ffe a 

aranin cd fe Vavaensfūvft i 15 u 

aa: UT wf: uer vd fe Tft i 

Seo: frames Rari ent 16 16 N 

Thou art Kamalà in Visnu loka; Gáyatri in 
Brahma loka; and the other half of Hara as Gauri 
in the Rudra loka. O Devi ! Thou art sung as 
Prakrti— “Aham” “Om-Mahat” tattva and beyond 
that the Highest Sarva Brahmarüpini and 
Sāmyāvasthā Prakrti. Thou art the Para Sakti; Thou 
art the Parama Sakti; O Devi ! Thou art the Tri- 
Sakti: the Icchà Sakti (the will power), the Kriya 
Sakti (power of action) and the Jūāna Sakti (the 
force of knowledge). 

TAT ugar Aa feram er AeA i 

nadam frepiiemadt au 17 

vitare? wags aratt sacle | 

aire ae a ferret er aaa u 18 u 


set mAh ter wt dorercafi i 
got a fitter Aa qum wr adie 19 0 
Tiert eRafsrgr er qursusm asta E | 
serge spere wiget maA u 20 1 
arsta ed Irie Hae unen teet: à 


ROTM WOT: HSM AANA 27 N 
AG ed arem fagen argae | 

Thou art the Ganga, Yamuna, Vipasa, Sarasvati, 
Sarayu, Devika, Sindhu; Narmada, Īrāvatī, 
Godavari, Satadru; Kaveri, Kaušikī, Candra Bhāgā, 
Vitastà, Gandaki, Tapini, Karatoya, Gomati, and 
Vetravati and other rivers; Thou art the Ida, 
Pingalā, and Susumnā nerves; Thou art Gandhari, 
Hastajihva, Pūsā, Apüsá, Alambusa, Kuhü, 
Sankhini, Pranavahini and other nerves in the 
body; O Devi ! Thou art the vital power in the 
lotus of the heart; Thou art Svapnanayika in the 
throat; Thou art Sadādhārā in the palate; and Thou 
art the Bindumalini Sakti in the pituitary space 
between the eyebrows. 


We g hedini hone 22 u 
Ramee eet fg formar g udak à 


fers cfenfessndixd 123 0 

were vd grafa fra vies mite « à 

sate atic vatst dieat agga 11 2 4 u 

Thou art the Kundalini in the Mūlādhāra (sacral 
plexus), the Vyapini extending upto the roots of 
the hairs; Thou art Madhyāsanā on the crown of 
the head, and Thou art Manonmani in the 
Brahmarandhra. O Devi ! What need there is in 
stating these? Suffice it to say that whatever there 
is seen in this universe, all art Thou; therefore, O 
Šrī Sandhya Devi ! I bow down to Thee. O Narada! 
Thus I have spoken to you about the Gayatri-Stotra 
that gives all successes, destroys all sins, and yields 
all merits. 

namum eruat | 

Be Haast Gear weg: 25 0 

AYA: Waga sarah LTTATEĻAT | 

uddtdadtemagatmac wu 26 UN 

He who reads this in the Sandhya times, with 
all attention, will get sons if he has no sons, will 
get wealth if he has no wealth. There is no doubt 
in this. Whoever reads this Stotra gets the fruits of 
all Tirathas, all Tapasyas, all gifts, all sacrifices 
and all Yogas. 

airspace fort eres aAA, | 

aRar: qud vet PTT qu: TST 27 Uu 

UA HA TS TT: CATA STS USO | 

wud AeA Mee: We wed TA ANE 028 ü 

STATENS TAA A g ATTA | 

vigauggi arti dah Nafta 029 u 

sf Aedma merger greeny mias 
TA FSET: 05d 

He enjoys happiness in this world and finally 
gets the Moksa. The Munis who are engaged in 
Tapasyas read this Stotra. While bathing, if one 
reads this, merged under water, acquires the fruits 
of his being merged in the Sandhya. O Narada! I 
speak this verily, verily, verily, unto you that there 


1366 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


is no trace of any doubt in this statement. Whoever 
will hear with devotion this Sandhya stotra, the 
nectar-like thing, will be freed from all sins. 


Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on 
the Gayatri Stotra in the Mahapuranam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 verses 
by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


CHAPTER VI 


On the one thousand and eight names of the Gayatri 


ATG sara 


maada  wasmafame | 

greoa wet AAS ud ou 

Narada said: O Bhagavan! O All-knowing One! 
O Thou versed in all the Sastras! I have heard from 
Thy mouth all the secrets of Srutis and Smrtis. 

udi wa da fam wade | 

aa Wr sfera fs qp er AATETTA s 2 tt 

Seo fer: Sat SH ST NIAN | 

Ragip cha a VAIGA 13 11 

agen wd aema: |d 

Now I ask Thee, O Deva! How can the 
knowledge of that Veda Vidya (Learning) be 
obtained by which all sins are rooted out and 
destroyed, how is Brahmajiianam obtained and how 
can Moksa be obtained? How can death be 
conquered and how can the best results be obtained 
in this world and in the next. O Lotus-eyed One! 
Thou ought'st to describe fully all these to me. 


simran sare 


Arey my ARIAT MAH, VE AMIS d 4 ui 

Ty warf wea NRIBAFAMA | 

ATT rrt faearat we uraferammam 5 N 

geal ugma dd utei aftr A 1 

MEGA cafum wed Ne 

ase det Matt quer VAT | 

xe citar erar wen: IFA SAT: 11 7 N 

Narayana said: O Narada! O Highly Learned 
One! Sadhu! Sadhu! You have now put a nice 
question indeed! Now I will describe one thousand 
and eight names of the Gayatri Devi. Listen 
attentively. These all sin-destroying auspicious 
names were composed by Brahma and first recited 


by Him. Its Rsi is Brahma; the Chandas is Anustup; 
the Devatà is Gayatri; its Bija is Halavarna 
(consonants) and its Sakti is Svaravarna (vowels). 

aPC UTA: 1 

are eared werazrfir ureresrat fear d u 8 N 

Perform the Anga Nyasa and the Kara Nyasa 
by the Matrka varnas (that is, by the fifty syllables). 
Now hear its Dhyánam, that will do good to the 
Sadhakas (the practisers). 

Note: Anga Nyasa Touching the limbs of the body 
with the hand accompanied by appropriate Mantras. 
Kara Nyása-assignment of the various parts of fingers 
and hand to different deities which is usually 
accompanied with prayers and corresponding 
gesticulations. 

waded feats 

Tht Tatars afer Hartt 1 

mast ageret neeha Tenet 

a ava a audi iurtneet wp ouo ou 

I worship the Kumari (virgin) Gayatri Devi, 
the Lotus-eyed One, riding on the Swan (the 
Prāņas), and seated on a lotus (creation); Who is 
three-eyed and of a red colour; and Who is bright 
and decorated with gems and jewels of red, white, 
green, blue, yellow and other variegated colours; 
Who is holding in Her hands Kundika, the rosary, 
lotus and making signs as if ready to grant the 
desired boons and on whose neck is suspended the 
garland of red flowers. I worship the Devi Gayatri. 

Note: The colours are the various emotions and 
feelings. 

ATTUGAUMS CTA STARI TAK mt | 

ATA METRU TSTATŠTAT STATA 11 1 0 NU 


1366 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


CHAPTER VI 


On the one thousand and eight names of the Gāyatrī 


ATG sara 


maada  wasmafae | 

greoa wet ASST uou 

Narada said: O Bhagavan! O All-knowing One! 
O Thou versed in all the Sastras! I have heard from 
Thy mouth all the secrets of Srutis and Smrtis. 

udu wa da feum wade | 

aa ot wafer fs qp er Harm tt 2 tt 

Seo fer: Sat SH ST VATA | 

Ragip ht a VAIGA 13 11 

agian wd aema: |d 

Now I ask Thee, O Deva! How can the 
knowledge of that Veda Vidya (Learning) be 
obtained by which all sins are rooted out and 
destroyed, how is Brahmajfianam obtained and how 
can Moksa be obtained? How can death be 
conquered and how can the best results be obtained 
in this world and in the next. O Lotus-eyed One! 
Thou ought’ st to describe fully all these to me. 


simran sare 


Arey Mey HAIMA MAH, VE TAASTE d 4 di 

Ty ATT att VTESHESQUCR | 

ATT rrt fecarat re uraferammam 5 N 

grand ugma dd utei aftr A 1 

smrevugen cafum Vata: 6 u 

ase eet Matt gaat VAT | 

xe citar erar wen: IFA SAT: 11 7 N 

Narayana said: O Narada! O Highly Learned 
One! Sadhu! Sadhu! You have now put a nice 
question indeed! Now I will describe one thousand 
and eight names of the Gayatri Devi. Listen 
attentively. These all sin-destroying auspicious 
names were composed by Brahma and first recited 


by Him. Its Rsi is Brahma; the Chandas is Anustup; 
the Devatà is Gayatri; its Bija is Halavarna 
(consonants) and its Sakti is Svaravarna (vowels). 

APMC UTA: 1 

are eared werazrfir arerarat fart d u 8 uu 

Perform the Anga Nyasa and the Kara Nyasa 
by the Matrka varnas (that is, by the fifty syllables). 
Now hear its Dhyánam, that will do good to the 
Sadhakas (the practisers). 

Note: Anga Nyasa Touching the limbs of the body 
with the hand accompanied by appropriate Mantras. 
Kara Nyása-assignment of the various parts of fingers 
and hand to different deities which is usually 
accompanied with prayers and corresponding 
gesticulations. 

waded Beats 

Tht Teast afer Hartt 1 

mma aere naeia werrft 

a ava a audi iurtneet wp ouo N 

I worship the Kumari (virgin) Gayatri Devi, 
the Lotus-eyed One, riding on the Swan (the 
Prāņas), and seated on a lotus (creation); Who is 
three-eyed and of a red colour; and Who is bright 
and decorated with gems and jewels of red, white, 
green, blue, yellow and other variegated colours; 
Who is holding in Her hands Kundika, the rosary, 
lotus and making signs as if ready to grant the 
desired boons and on whose neck is suspended the 
garland of red flowers. I worship the Devi Gayatri. 

Note: The colours are the various emotions and 
feelings. 

ATTUGAUMS CTA STARI TAK mt | 

ATA METRU TSTATŠTAT STATA 11 1 0 NU 


Book XII Chapter VI 


1367 


arfürerfequremsurim ee dfe | 

AMISASUISTA 3TRRQGERTSERT N11 N 

S e IEAA TEALA LEA: ICG DAKS I [eta D 1 

CEEE GIC IRIIRI KE LEAT C LLES c ui2u 

affa frenstarfaefrstarom à 

siada: ferar fererreeifertt aiaa 1 13 N 

Now I will recite the one thousand and eight 
names of the Gayatri, beginning with the syllable 
“a” and going on a, à, i, I, etc., in due order of the 
alphabets. Listen! Her ways and actions cannot be 
comprehended by intellect (Buddhi); She is there- 
fore Acintya Laksana; She is Avyaktā (unmanifested; 
unspeakable); She is Arthamātrimahešvarī, (because 
She is the Controller of Brahma, etc.); She is 
Amrtarnava madhyastha, Ajita and Aparajita. Thou 
art Animadigunadhara, Arka mandalasamsthita, 
Ajara, Aja, Apara, Adharma (she has no dharma, 
etc.), "Aksasütradharà, Adhara; 
Akārādaksakārāntā (beginning with the syllable “a” 
and ending with the syllable "ksa", thus compris- 
ing the fifty syllables), Arisadvargabhedini (de- 
stroying the five passions), Aiijanādipratīkāšā, 
Aditi, Ajapa, Avidya, 
Aravindanibheksana, Antarbahihsthita, 
Avidyādhvamsinī, and Antarātmikā. 

AA AAG AAS aaa AAA | 

srefmrarderasmstakdsoafē nian 

AIT GATT ARITA | 

ATT 9m fam TA T ATTATTAT 11 1 5 0 


caste, 


Afijanadrinivasini, 


aferquedtanisearfecaakaraar 1 
emerated«aremrentagiet-aft ure 
Thou art Aja. Ajamukhāvāsā (residing in the 


Aravindanibhanana, 
called) 
Ardhamātrā, Arthadanajfia (because She grants all 
the Purusarthas.) Arimandalamarddini, Asuraghni, 
Amāvāsyā, Alaksighni, Antyajārcitā. Thus end Her 


mouth of Brahma), 


(Vyanjanavarnatmika, therefore 


names beginning with “A”. Now the names with 
“A” Thou art Adi Laksmi, Adi Sakti, Akrti, 


Ayatünanà, Adityapadavicara, Adityaparisevita, 
Ācāryā, Avartana; Ācārā, and Ādi Mūrtinivāsinī. 
aA VATA ATEN eme aA RT | 
SINTON ATTA TAT AAT n 17 ut 
SITEITRETHTS nr ATT | 
meezan manaa 018 
Thou art Agneyi, Amari, Adyà, Aradhya, 
Āsanasthitā, Adharanilaya (seated in the Mulādhāra), 
Ādhārā (the Refuge of all), and Ākāšāntanivāsini 
(of the nature of Aham tattva; Thou art Adyaksara 
samayukta, Āntarākāšarūpinī, Adityamandalagata, 
Āntaradhvāntanāšinī, (i.e., destroyer of the Moha 
of Jivas). Then come the names beginning with 
e» 
shear deer ast Adendo 1 
gad daa wirft Age u19 0 
Pats ag dune a 
zaftewurenr dzimtu 1201 
za dart edt Aaaa od 
Thou art Indira, Istada, Istà Indivaraniveksana, 
Irivati, — Indrapada, Indrani,  Indurūpiņī, 
Iksukodandasamyukta, Isusandhānakārinī, 
Indranilasamakara, Idāpingalarūpīnī, 
Isvari, Devi ihātrayavivarjitā. 


sar arn gef WI SERRAT 021 NI 


Indraksi, 


mha eaten RJA SAME 0 24 N 
devu ge. gandua i 
Garam warst u25u 
Thou art Uma, Usa, Udunibha, Urvarukapha- 
lānanā, Uduprabha, Udumatī, Udupa, Uduma- 
Urdhva, Ūrdhvakešī, Ūrdhādhogati- 
Ūrdhavāhupriyā, Ūrmimālāvāggran- 
thadāyinī. Thou art Rta, Rsi, Rtumati (the 
Creatrix of the world), Rsidevanamaskrta, 
Reveda, Rnahartri, Rsimandala carini, Rddhida, 


dhyaga, 
bhedini, 


1368 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


Rjumargastha, Rjudharma, Rjupradā, Reveda-| 


nilaya, Rjvi, Luptadharma pravartinī, Lūtārivara- 
sambhüta, Lūtādivisahāriņī. 
UTT EOS HTSIT went deena sar | 
st Aaaa ARR 026 u 
atan giei eter eirairaferarferdt i 
aat giveraerar situreatmomer u27 N 
NERU aet orenrerTefvit i 


Thou art Ekaksara, Ekamatra, Eka, 
Ekaikanisthita, Aindri, Airāvatārūdhā, 
Aihikāmusmikapradā, Omkārā, Osadhī, Otā, 
Otaprotanivāsinī, Aurbbā, Ausadhasampannā, 
Aupāsanaphalapradā, Aņdamadhyasthitā, 


Ahkāramanurūpinī. (Visargarūpiņī ). Thus end 
the names beginning with vowels. 
reared arena: esraraft arg lt 28 u 
GT HA Hie Ta ATS | 
aka mega 129 0 
meat disvadt pelaa 1 
geldan Hest PIAT 130 N 
Now begin the names beginning with 
consonants. Thou art Kātyāyanī, Kālarātri, 
Kāmāksī, Kāmasundarī, Kamalā,. Kāminī, Kāntā, 
Kamada, Kālakanthinī, Karikumbha stanadharā, 


Karavira Suvāsinī, Kalyani,  Kundalavati, 
Kuruksetranivāsinī, Kuruvindalākārā, Kuņdalī, 
and Kumudālayā. 

HURT HUH Am eT UIT | 

wanda eife: Hern puedo 31 N 

IRT! etree aara A 1 

mart memi east RA 32 0 

Thou art Kālajhivhā, Karālāsyā, Kalika, 
Kālarūpinī, Kāmanīyaguņā, Kānti, Kaladhara, 
Kumudvati, Kaušikī, Kamalākārā, 
Kāmacāraprabhaūjinī. Thou art Kaumarī, 


Karunapangi, Kakubanta (as presiding over all 
the guarters), and Karipriyā. 
Aa krag adapta d 
aid entfesenr ente ERRA u 33 u 
ATA Pg ara Hara | 


part aero feed targa 34 u 
het Gf hanp gaia 1 
wise arent maA 135 u 
HAT: HA PINGAR | 
Agttivam wur ATA HE: 36 U 


BAST HoT RA GENN | 

CUT ART Ha Hlareakactasa4r 137 u 

Thou art Kesarī, Kešavanutā, Kadamba 
Kusumapriyā, Kālindī, Kālikā, Kāūcī, 


Kala$odbhavasamstuta. Thou art Kāmamātā, 
Kratumatī, Kāmarūpā, Krpāvatī, Kumārī, Kuņda- 
nilayā, Kirātī, Kīravāhana, Kaikeyī, Kokilālāpā, 
Ketakī, Kusumapriyā, Kamaņdaludharā, Kālī, 
Karmanirmūlakāriņī, Kalahansagati, Kaksā, Krtā, 
Kautukamangala, Kastūrītilakā, Kamrā, Karīndra 
Gamanā, Kuhū, Karpūralepanā, Krsņā, Kapilā, 
Kuharāšrayā,  Kūtasthā,  Kudharā, Kamra, 
Kuksisthākhilavistapā. 
Thus end the names with Ka. Now come 
those with Kha. 


dames ai Bat ATA | 
aeainenttuft era amat team i 38 tu 
aoe afiša usema i 
GST gr mem 039 N 
mai viret fter aes men i 


rift miri men tieraferaferat 1 40 u 
Maganic grafēmām 1 

tad wag ater fem EAT Tat 41 0 
yam yad geag d 

ef yoradt Tar were yore 1 42 u 
Krita peregi TESLA | 
natago wer repose ITGTENT 0043 N 


Tima unused 1 
Thou art Khadga Khetadharā, Kharvā, Khecarī, 
Khagavahana, Khattāngadhāriņī, Khyata, 


Khagarājoparisthitā, Khalaghni, Khanditajara, 
Khadāksyānapradāyinī, Khandendu tilaka. 

Thou art Ganga, Gaņeša Guhapüjita, Gayatri, 
Gomati, Gītā, Gāndhārī, Gānalolupā, Gautami, 
Gāminī, Gādhā, Gandharvāpsarasevitā, Govinda 
caraņākrāņtā, Guņatraya vibhābitā, Gandharvī, 


Book XII Chapter VI 


Gahvari, Gotrā, Girīšā, Gahanā, Gami, Guhāvāsā, 
Gunavati (of good qualities), Gurupāpapraņāšinī, 
Gurbhi, Guņavatī (of the three gunas), Guhyā, 
Goptavyā, Gunadayini, Girijā, Guhyamātangī, 
Garudadhvajavallabhā, Garvāpahāriņī, Godā 
(granting Heaven), Gokulasthā, Gadādharā, 
Gokarnanilaya sakta, and Guhyamandalavartini. 
ade ade wver aarmantett 144 N 
"ferret art erneuern d 
araka urn ufündqueneit 45 it 
amis wur garh aatri 1 
amaga wet afan emegrirdt 1 46 i 
"deer ifsa feror Ramey | 
"eism mem mg fuer 047 u 
alert fersrerertar THAT | 
ARTA Urea want exegit 1 48 u 


ifa dzarttu eit aint a ife à 
dagraa A iaar anA n 49 u 
"wresiadferrivt agen | 
UR TA KAT vizsfuutt n 50 N 
red aratafter AREA d 
Ue Hassa 57 N 
UA KTI! VT ferar ATSTĀTI | 
araa erst errare IL 52 ll 
Watt Farag cement reaR | 
Now the names with "Gha”. Thou art 
Gharmadā,  Ghanadà, Ghanta,  Ghora 
Danavamarddini, Ghrni mantra mayi (of the Sürya 
mantra, Ghrini is to shine). Ghosa, 


Ghanasampātadāyinī, Ghaņtāravapriyā, Ghrana, 
Ghrnisantustikāriņī (giving pleasure to the Sun), 
Ghanārimandalā, Ghūrņā, Ghrtachi, Ghanavegini, 
Jūānadhātumayī. Thou art Carcā, Carcita, 
Cāruhāsinī, Catulā, Candika, Citra, Citramalyayi- 
bhūsitā, Caturbhujā. Cārudantā, Caturi, 
Caritapradā, Cūlikā, Citravastrāntā, Caņdramah 
Karņa Kuņdalā, Candrahāsā, Cārudātrī, Cakorī, 
Candrahāsinī, Candrikā, Candradhātrī, Caurī, 
Corā, Caņdikā, Cancadvāgvādinī, Candracūdā, 


Coravināšinī, Cārucandanaliptāngī, 


1369 


Caficaccamaravijità, Carumadhya, Cārugati, 


Candrika, Candrarüpini, Caruhomapriya, Carva, 
Carita, Cakrabahuka, Candramandalamadhyastha, 
Candramandala Darpana, Cakravākastanī, Cesta, 
Citra, Cāruvilāsinī, Citsvarūpā; Candavatī, 
Candramā, Candanapriyā, Codayitri (as impelling 
the Jivas always to actions), Ciraprajūā, Cataka, 
Caruhetuki. 
BI ENT PAGLU 153 N 


wer waned sada ST 55 N 
mgd wer sf mafi | 
adua were wat went 56 
Rira Ramten fararfiram sarma 1 
senmi fer were met RT 57 N 
wirft wearer maaka 1 
sereni smart caret fsrafermur i 58 i 
frente sare amaret aA | 


Thou art Chatrayata, Chatradhara, Chaya, 
Chandhahparicchada, Chaya Devi, Chidranakha, 
Channendriyavisarpini, Chandonustuppratisthanta, 
Chidropadravabhedini, Cheda, Chatrešvarī, Chinna, 
Churika, and Chelanpriya. Thou art Janani, 
Janmrarahita, Jātaveda, Jaganmayī, Jahnavi, Jatila, 
Jatri (Jetri ), Jaramaranavarjità, Jambudvipavati, 
Jvalà, Jayanti, Jalasalini, Jitendriya, Jitakrodha, 
Jitāmitrā, Jagatpriyā, Jātarūpamayī, Jihvā, Janaki, 
Jagatī, Jarā (Jayā) Janitrī, Jahutanayā, 
Jagattrayahitaisinī, Jvālamulī, Japavatī, Jvaraghnī, 
Jitavistapā, Jitakrantamayi, Jvala, Jāgratī, 
Jaladà, Jyestha, 


Jvaradevatā, Jvalanti, 


1370 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Jyāghosāsphotadinmukhī, Jambhini, Jrmbhaņā, 
Jrmbhā, Jvalanmanikya Kundala. Jhifijhika, 
Jhananirghosa, Jhafijha Māruta veginī, 
Jhallakīvādyakušalā, Nrüpa, Nbhuja, Tankabhedinī, 
Tanka-banasamayukta, Tankini, Tankabhedini, 
Tanki-ganakrtaghosa, Tankaniya mahorasa, Tankara 
Karini, Thathašavdaninādinī. 


nesu 


| 
| 
Li 


ee ee 


i 
1 
à 
111 


ji 
ju 


dma Aga fafagwr 680 
fraser Brecht ater diverraresgarfatt à 
Pts Ua aad Glad 69 
mm "70 
ATT frat edt frytpattarttar i 
were frome adcafraatet 171 0 
Prrerer ferfertt qur Afan AKTĀ: 1 
aH aA 0072 N 
Fiam Rani a EDO IUE EE 
adm grar qui enmt demsuq 73 N 
meter Aryan Anit agaran: i 
aa ma eriam ARA dager 11 7 4 1 
amain ent gaigtrattutt 
Gatfafgammtastud gonna 475 
gaat querar aftsatetedt fear | 
grata dtr fararer faftarfe-tt 76 u 
deana det gag | 
Sedem fefāvar gA grtargfā: 177 0 
TT diam qeerfavenefufur i 
art agda Agato etano 178 
tent mmea ater maA d 


miia meaa ugdafavmar 1179 


grea gaua trier gar | 

qma east erdsmenpen(srA uso n 

Now come the names beginning with “Da.” 
They are: Pāmarī, Dakini, Dimbha, Dundamarai- 
kanirjita, Damaritantramargastha, Dandadamaru- 
nádini, Dimbhalasatkri, 
Daparayana (dancing with joy in battles). Then 
Dhundhi vighņeša Janani, Dhakka hasta, Dhilivrajà 
(followed by Siva ganas), Nityajūānā, Nirupamā, 
Nirgunà and Narmada river. Now: Triguna, 
Tripada, Tantri, Tulasi, Taruna, 
Trivikramapadākrāņtā, Tūryapadagāminī, 


Dindiravasaha, 


Taru, 


Taruņādityasamkašā, Tàmasi, Tuhina, Tura, 
Trikalajfiana Sampanna, Trivali, Trilocana, Tri 
Sakti, Tripurà, Tungà, Turangavadani, 
Timingilagilā, Tivrà, Trisrota, Tāmasādinī, 
Tantramantravisesajiia, Tanumadhyā, Trivipstapà, 
Trisandhya, Tristani, Tosasamstha, Talapratapini, 
Tātankinī, Tusarabhà, Tuhinācalavāsinī, 
Tantujālasamāyuktā, Tārahārāvalipriyā, 
Tilahomapriyā, Tīrthā, Tamālakusumā krti, Tārakā, 
Triyutā, Tanvi, Trigamkuparivarita, Talodarī, 
Tirobhasa, Tātamkapriyavādinī, Trijata, Tittiri, 
Trsna, Trividha, Tarunakrti, Taptakaficana- 
samkāšā, Taptakaficanabhisana, Traiyambaka, 
Trivarga, Trikalajfanadayini, Tarpana, Trptida, 
Trpta, Tāmasī, Tumvarustutā, Tārksyasthā, 
Triguņākārā, Tribhangī, Tanuvallarī, Thātkārī, 
Thāravā, Thāntā, Dohini, Dinavatsala, 
Dānavāntakarī, Durgā, Durgāsuranivahrņī, 
Devarīti, Divaratri, Draupadi, Dundabhisvana, 
Devayani, Duravasa, Daridryabhedini, Diva, 
Dāmodarapriyā, Dipta, Digvāsā, Digvimohini, 
Dandakaranyanilaya, Dandini, Devapūjitā, 
Devavandya, Divisādā, Dvesini, Dānavākrti, 
Dinanathastuta, Dīksā, Daivašādisvarupiņī, Dhātrī, 
Dhanurdharā, Dhenur Dhāriņī, Dharmacāriņī, 
Dhurandharā, Dharādharā, Dhanadā, 
Dhānyadohinī, Dharmašīlā, Dhanādhyaksā, 
Dhanurvedavisarada, Dhrti, Dhanyā, Dhrtapadā, 


Book XII Chapter VI 


1371 


Dharmarajapriyà, Dhruva, Dhūmavatī, Dhūmakešī! Nitya, Nirmala, Nirguna, Nidhi, Nirādhārā, 


Dharmašāstraprakašinī. 
star safer frst gaat Aaaa à 
"Har fedt ater eeu u831u 
meann PAT fiie Erjon fre: i 
Prem Praun Praga fus us82 i 


ATT Afrar Patent i 
warp Aaea gs 
"fer warren Creer 1 
qaan art oWesaBnesr use 
früfireft adteur zfrosifrar Froftartt 1 


afi weer ifr: ats 97 it 
yait dredt quar yosin feriam i 
Ueda uter vtfefeafertt u 92 u 
wat meaa Uren werd i 
wsmufe: usi weegwrnmser 493 
urar uarie wemaft were | 
waar warmer ufarft Aano u 94 u 
wspazrfafrdver yet went | 
Genet Goat wat Raga wu 95 u 
ukam uf CquTERTUNTHUU | 
waad gar dift gargsar waa u 96 u 
Uu dfe: Agoa 1 
yam quarter a wurarfaterarfordt 97 u 


98 il 
Nandaprivà, Nidrā, 
Narmmada Nalini, 


Nanda, 
Nandanatmika, 


Nrnutā, 
Nīlā, 
Nīlakaņthasamāšrayā, Rudrāņī, Nārāyaņapriyā, 


Nirupamā, Nitya$uddha, Nirajfiana, Nādabindu 
Kalātītā, Nādavindu Kalātmikā, Nrsimhinī; 
Nagadharā, Nrpanāgavibhūsitā, Naraka 
Klešanāšinī, Narayanapadodbhava, Niravadya, 
Nirākārā, Nāradapriyakāriņī, Nānājyotih, Nidhida, 
Nirmalātmikā, Navasūtradharā, Nīti, Nirupadrava- 
kāriņī, Nandajā, Navaratnādhyā, Naimisaranya- 
vāsinī, Navanītapriya, Nārī, Nīlajī mūtanisvanā, 
Nimesiņī, Nadīrūpā, Nīlagrīvā, Nišišvarī, 
Nāmāvalī, Nisumbhaghni, Nāgalokanivāsinī, 
Navajāmbūnadaprakhyā, Nāgalokādhidevatā, 
Nūpurā Krāntacaranā, Naracitta pramodini, 
Nīmagnā raktanayanā, Nirghāta-sama-nisvanā, 
Nandanodyānilayā, Nirvyahoparicāriņī. 

yas yay yyw yaa 

arena fiat dream: Warren u 99 u 

wear yia quar frs wore rfe: 1 

yaani caan ura demfteram 100 N 

urarar uester: wetter: wer fer: 1 

mre ust draft urges: 1107 N 

yana utes Trea Uma | 

daii dita dragrear fügufardt u 102 n 

daN frac ureeraft ugfēram i 

danane yaaa u103 1 

Garrat uuudisfeufar | 

Waitt a aT whet: avurgreenrutt t 104 N 

yamie yer urftrariaetagur | 

wrafirar tara waaa i 105 u 

danne goat foras gereret | 


wareyiter warts Worst ewe 107 N 


Parvati, Paramodara, Parabrahmatmika, Para, 
Paficako$avinirmuktà, Paūcapātakanāšinī, 
Paracittavidhānajūā, Paricikà, Paficarüpini. Pirnima, 
Paramā Prīti, Paratejah prakašinī, Purani, Paurusi, 
Punya, Pundarikanibheksana, Patalatala nirmmagna, 
Prītā, Pritivivardhini, Pāvanī, Padasahita, Pesala, 
Parišrāntā, 


Pavanāšinī Prajāpati, 


1372 


Parvatastanamandala, Padmapriya, Padmasamstha, 
Padmaksi, Padmasambhava, Padmapatra, 
Padmapadā, Padminī, Priyabhasini, 
Pašupāšavinirmuktā, Purandhri, Puravāsinī, Puskala, 
Purusā, Parbha, Pārijāta Kusumapriyā, Pativrata, 
Pativratā, Pavitrāngī, Puspahāsa parāyaņā, 
Prajūāvatīsutā, Pautrī, Putrapūjyā, Payasvini, 
Pattipāšadharā, Pankti, Pitrlokapradayini, Purānī, 
Puņyašila, Prāņatārtivināšinī, Pradyumnajanani; 
Pustā, Pitāmahaparigrahā, Puņdarīkapurāvāsā, 
Puņdarī kasamānanā, Prthujanghā, Prthubhujā, 
Prthupādā, Prthūdarī, Pravālašobhā, Pingaksi, 
Pītavāsāh, Pracāpalā, Prasavā, Pustidā, Puņyā, 
Pratisthā, Prāņavā, Pati, Paiicavarņā, Pancavani, 
Paūcikā, Pafijarasthita, Paramāyā, Parajyotih, Parapri 
ti, Parāgati, Parākāsthā, Parešanī, Pāvanī, Pāvaka 
Dyutī, Puņyabhadrā, Paricchedyā. Puspahāsā, 
Prthūdarā, Pītāngī, Pītavasanā Pītašayā, Pišācinī, 
Pītakriyā, Pišācaghnī, Pātalāksī, Patukriyā, 
Paücabhaksapriyacara, Pūtanāprānaghātinī, 
Puņyāgavanamadhyasthā, Puņyatīrthanisevitā, 
Paūcāngī, Parāšakti, Paramādhādakāriņī, 
Puspakāņdasthitā, Pūsā, Positākhilavistapā, 
Pānapriyā, Paūcašikhā, Pannagoparišāyinī, 
Paficamātrātmikā, Prthvi, Pathikā, Prthudohini, 
Purāņanyāyamīmansā, Pātalī, Puspagandhinī, 
Puņyaprajā, Pāradātrī, Paramārgaikagocarā, 
Pravālašobhā, Pūrņāšā, Pranava, Palhabodari. 


AGM SIEHT ATAU THTSTSRT | 
aos sem smear wfguwqt 109 
adad feat afesrett atetyar i 
aiad attr afgaeranpgatyan u 110 u 
AITU elt AVA | 
AF gar w-ereefeefitu111u 
ECAC MIRE CANNAE GACIEUE E g 
WAT aga agantada N1121 
agagam anA agatfūvtt | 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


ISIECIESGE TT Tahara | 
mat sftevradt maA mago u 117 


ARTO stat samet mangea à 
traf iaman girar aferarfertt 118 
mii ARa sxe RAAT | 
sperem gge mieh TTA 0 119 
mirei rah raen faran | 
mAr ARA emer arh aftaferorr n 120 
iRam Aiad vaia EA à 
aia aea Rin gage u 121 
Tavam Ai steer smit à 
ma Wrar Hepat AegfSTaT Werfirar 122 
Teredt erar arfer-t rfe i 


mada epi WEPHTUT WIRST 00123 
mah ngia airera a 
nyae AA emot n124 
rietatt men Afreft mnf 1 
marsadh merae nA 125 
mi a Hanger | 
aaien Maa tao 1 126 


agafa ya ATA Wesurf-wer | 
Aen Arava me QARET 00 127 
nemi ngr HET HRAT | 
urgent ARa Ypa ANT 128 
Ferenc tara ge nAaR à 
quraft neea mRNA 129 
TTT SANT ATT IAAGTAAT 1 
Gast rater MAT BTM n 130 
atkrit areata azrrsmgafāsft i 
at afar AJANA ll 131 
Taree magh azrefūvit i 
mAh dm angered 1 132 
afani Tft erat terit Topent A: à 


Wt izfrram wear wafer u 133 


Book XII Chapter VI 


Tft wearer tar TT vrsfrerererat i 
Test KUBA verfürgraafisrat 1134 1 
TATA T THETA | 
TAA tar trafefiar 135 1 


watered uber | 
seada weet tant 136 tt 
Wish weet wast mef 1 
TAGAT wasaat 1137 U 
TAURA THAT HTT | 
VĒRA PIT Gf neno 1138 u 
vostfr reram afer wenger 1 
wisst Halal adt wert eraut u139 u 
«ar dfa ferer Aard anorg: | 
atst ferc aut armartifaortt 140 u 
ferat ATT aR aaa Re à 
areni augiem cifereten ferexfüft t 141 N 
aquse ararnar ferfxfürar i 
ferret ferret fererreoreft aper 142 N 
amaian den afit agatfēstt 1 
Aaanu ai astameve 143 N 
"redi amaA Ap ATT | 
earafirar aden arcrifērutafēmm 144 N 
maint fiar nia VGI oR: | 
wmdtaft yarar yiemqfemfadt 1145 u 
maad ferrem vieerdortfevft i 
virer sperma spar forc Henao 146 1 
WTA PRAT PASAT YT | 
wet yA gra grat aaa 147 N 
Aad shena sraura-carkrtt 1 


sratvft viet cen waste wzgfirat i 148 u 
eremie aft wearer à 


Wémeuquir quer 01409 1 
Phalini, Phaladā, Phalgu, Phutkārī, Phalakākritī, 


Phaņindrabhogašayānā, Phanimandalamandita, 
Bālabālā, Bahumatā, Bālātapanibhāmšukā, 
Balabbadrapriyā, Bandyā, Badavā, Buddhisams- 
tutā, Bandidevi, Bilavati, Badišaghinī, Baliprīyā, 
Bāndhavī, Bodhitā,  Buddhirbandhüka- 
kusumapriyā, Bālabhānuprabhākārā, Brāhmī, 
Brāhmaņadevatā, Brhaspatistuta. Brndā, 
Brndavanavihārinī, Bālākinī, Bilāhāra, Bilavasā 


1373 


Bahūdakā, Bahunetrā, Bahupadā, 
Bahukarņāvatamsikā, Bahubāhuyutā, Bijarūpiņī, 
Bahurüpini, Bindunādakalātitā, Bindunādasvarūpiņī, 
Baddhagodhāngulitrāņā, Badaryāšramavāsinī, 
Brndārakā, Brhatskandhā, Brhatī, Bāņapātinī, 
Brndādhyaksā, Bahunutā, Vanitā, Bahuvikramā, 
Baddhapadmāsanāsīna, Bilvapatratalasthitā, 
Bodhidrumanijāvāsā, Badisthā, Bindudarpaņā, Bālā, 
Vāņāsanavatī, Badavanalavegini, Brahmāņda 
bahirantasthà, Brahmakankaņasūtriņī, Bhavani, 
Bhīsaņavatī, Bhāvinī, Bhayahārinī, Bhadrakālī, 
Bhujangāksī, Bhāratī, Bhāratāšayā, Bhairavī, 
Bhīsaņākārā, Bhūtidā, Bhutimālinī, Bhāminī, 
Bhoganiratā, Bhadradā, Bhūrivikramā, Bhūtavāsā, 
Bhrgulatā, Bhārgavī, Bhūsurārcitā, Bhāgīrathī, 
Bhogavatī, Bhavanasthā, Bhisagvarā, Bhāminā, 
Bhoginī, Bhāsā, Bhavānī, Bhūridaksiņā, 
Bhargātmikā, Bhāmavatī, Bhavabandhavimochinī, 
Bhajaniyà, Bhūtadhātrirafijitā, Bhuvanešvarī, 
Bhujangavalayā, Bhīmā, Bheruņdā, Bhāgadheyinī 
; Thou art Mata, Maya, Madhumati, Madhujihavā, 
Manupriya, Mahadevi, Mahabhagiya, Māliri, 
Minalocana, Māyātītā, Madhumati, Madhumansa, 
Madhudravà, Mānavī, Madhusambhita, 
Mithilāpuravāsinī, Madhukaitabhasamhartri, 
Medini, Meghamālinī, Mandodara, Maha Maya, 
Maithili, Masrinapriya, Maha Laksmi, Maha Kali, 
Maha Kanyā, Mahešvarī, Mahendri, Merutanaya 
Mandārakusumārchitā, Mafijumanjiracarana, 
Moksada, Mafijubhasini, Madhuradravini, Mudra, 
Malaya, Malayānvitā, Medha, Marakatašyāmā, 
Magadhi, Menakātmajā, Mahāmārī, Mahavira, 
Mahasyama, Manustuta, Matrka, Mihirabhasa, 
Mukundapada Vikramā, Mūlādhārasthitā, Mugdha, 
Maņipūranivāsinā, Mrgāksī, Mahisārūdhā, 
Mahisāsuramardinī. Thou art Yogāsanā, 
Yogagamyā, Yoga, Yauvanakāšrayā, Yauvani, 
Yuddhamadhyasthā, Yamunā, Yugādhariņī, 
Yaksini, Yogayuktā, Yaksarājaprasūtinī, Yatra, 
Yanabidhanajfia, Yaduvaņšasamudbhavā, Yakārādi- 


1374 


Hakārāntā, (all Antahsthavarnas), Yājusī, 
Yajūārūpiņī, Yamini, Yoganirata. 
Yātudhānabhayamkarī, Rukmini, Ramani, Rama, 
Revati, Renuka, Rati, Raudri, Raudrapriyakara, 
Rāmamātā, Ratipriya, Rohini, Rajyada, Reva, Rasa, 
Rājīvalochanā, Rākešī, Rūpasampannā, 
Ratnasimhāšanasthitā, Raktamālyāmbaradharā, 
Raktagandhānulepanā, Raja hamsasamarüdha, 
Rambhā, Raktavalipriyā, Ramaņīyayugādhārā, 
Rājitākhilabhūtalā, Rurucarmaparidhānā, Rathinī, 
Ratnamālikā, Rogešī, Rogašamanī, Rāvinī, 
Romaharsini, Rāmacandrapadākrāntā, 
Ravaņacchedakāriņī, Ratnavastra paricchinvā, 
Rathasthā, Rukmabhūsaņā, Lajjādhidevatā, Lolā, 
Lalitā, Lingadhāriņī, Laksmī, Lolā, Luptavisā, 
Lokinī, Lokavisruta, Lajja, Lambodarī, Lalanā, 
Lokadhāriņī Varadā, Vanditā, Vidya, Vaisnavi, 
Vimalākriti, Vārāhī, Virajā, Varsā, Varalaksmi, 
Vilāsinī, Vinatā, Vyomamadhyasthā, 
Vārijāsanasamsthitā, Vāruņī, Veņusambhutā, 
Vītihotrā, Virūpiņī, Vayumandalamadhyastha, 
Visnurüpa, Vidhikriyā, Visnupatni, Visņumātī, 
Višālāksi, Vasundhara, Vāmadevapriyā, Vela, 
Vajrini, Vasudohini, Vedāksaraparītāngī, 
Vājapeyaphalapradā, Vāsavī, Vàmajanani, 
Vaikunthanilaya, Varā, Vyāsapriyā Varmadhara, 


Vālmīkiparisevitā. 

Thou art Sakambhari, Siva, Santa, Šaradā, 
Šaraņāgati, Šātodarī, Šubhācārā, 
Sumbhasuramardini,  Sobhavati,  Šivākārā, 
Šamkarārdhašarīriņi, Sona (red), Šubhāšayā, 
Šubhrā, Širahsandhānakāriņī, Šarāvatī, 


Šarānandā, Šarajjyotanā, Šubbānanā, Šarabhā, 
Šūlinī, Suddha, Šabarī, Sukavahand, Šrīmatī, 
Šrīdharānandā, Šravaņānandadāyinī, Šarvāņī, 
Šarbharīvandyā, Sadbhāsā, Sadrtupriyā, 
Sadādhārasthitādevī, Sanmukhapriyakarini, 
Sadamgarüpasumati, Surāsuranamaskrtā. 

anad erm adie i 

"mre qua maA APTA TANT "150 u 


Srimaddevii bhāgavatam 


RAAT HEART FETA ATRI | 
udadtrat fates: MARRA 151 N 
wafiisena aadeoatat i 

uda uizaeum animate 1 152 N 
Waly gt MARAT AAI HRATT 0 

"wem gaara geet unmet: u153 1 
ferrgant gR grant aA i 
Amaai aftrfertsra amar 1154 1 
Treat aa urfāstt urdeft a act i 
darat unter simah mifa 155 1 
Thou art Sarasvatī, Sadādhārā, 


Sarvamangalakāriņī, Sāmagānapriyā, Sūksmā, 
Sāvitrī, Sāmasambhavā, Sarvavāsā, Sadānandā, 
Sustani, Sāgarāmbarā, Sarvaišyaryapriyā, Siddhi, 
Sādhubandhuparākramā, Saptarsimaņdalagatā, 
Somamaņdalavāsinī, Sarvajfià, Sāndrakaruņā, 
Samānādhikavarjitā, Sarvottungā, Sangahīnā, 
Sadguņā, Sakalestadā, Saraghā (bee), Sūryatanayā, 
Sukešī, Somasamhati, Hiranyavarna, Hariņī, 
Hrīnkārī, Hamsavāhinī, Ksaumavastraparītāngī, 
Ksī rābdhitanayā, Ksamā, Gāyatrī, Sāvitrī, Pārvatī, 
Sarasvati, Vedagarbhā, Varārohā, Šrī Gāyatrī, and 
Parāmvikā. 


gf wreerd ATT ITATŠA ATG | 
grad adane EUR 156 I 
vet amis Trea HTT fa 1 
aeri a fast ufsa fast: wg 0157 N 
"rd quet KTS sea fama: | 


beds aret vmm fase: i158 N 

O Narada! Thus I have described to you one 
thousand (and eight) names of Gayatri; the hearing 
of which yields merits and destroys all sins and 
gives all prosperity and wealth. Specially in the 
Astami tithi (eighth lunar day) if after one’s 
meditation (dhyanam) worship, Homa, and japam, 
one recites this in company with the Brahmāņas, 
one gets all sorts of satisfactions. These one 
thousand and eight names of the Gayatri ought 
not to be given to anybody indiscriminately. 

Brera GŪTETA amet TTU À | 

PO: TTS A EISE T aa |1 159 lt 


Book XII Chapter VIT 


1375 


Speak this out to him only who is very devoted, 
who is a Brahmāņa, and who is an obedient 
disciple. Even if any devotee, fallen from the 
observances of Acara (right way of living), be a 
great friend, still do not disclose this to him. 

"age Rai great wa ear a HEAT | 

UBCTTU Rent IET Hae AT ffe 1160 N 

In whatever house, these names are kept written, 
no cause of fear can creep in there and Laksmi, the 
Goddess of wealth, though unsteady, remains 
steady in that house. 

Fe eet WH TET NET | 

quema wear aftaront faftraam 167 0 

Mare Wut enrfirat wena | 

Turic gear Wh st KĀ SIAM 162 N 

This great secret yields merits to persons, gives 
wealth to the poor, yields moksa to those who are 
desirous of it, and grants all desires. If anybody 
reads this, he gets cured of his diseases, and 
becomes freed from bondages and imprisonment. 


EAA ARAA AT: d 

TEAC arf Waa AS SAAT 163 N 

enaarfeureresrarerasrererfastw: | 

wasyem: USAT Wed u164 

zd KC Mati ws | 

agaga FUT Aes Hd A AMA: 11165 I 

šīd ETT GEIRR 
TART MI Weljumm 11 6 11 

All the Great Sins, for example, murdering 
Brahmanas, drinking wine, stealing gold, going to 
the wife of one’s Guru, taking gifts from bad 
persons, and eating the uneatables, all are 
destroyed, yea, verily destroyed! O Narada! Thus 
I have recited to you this Great Secret. All persons 
get, indeed, united with Brahma (Brahma sáyujya) 
by this. True. True. True. There is not the least 
trace of doubt here. 

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Twelfth Book 
on the one thousand and eight names of the Gayatri 
in the Mahapuranam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book XII Chapter VIT 


1375 


CHAPTER VII 
On the Diksa Vidhi or on the Rules of Initiation 


ane sara 

gi EET SIT: HATS | 

dis Aa weet VT dud od 

Nārada said: I have heard the one thousand 
names or nama stotras equivalent in its fruits to 
Sri Gayatri, highly potent in making a good fortune 
and tending to a splendid increase of the wealth 
and prosperity. 

aga sihgfirearft RATT, 

ferm da a Reda dids 1 2 u 

aema gA ai eioi ata a 

amaia wd faster ag wat 3 n 

Now I want to hear about how initiations in 
Mantrams are performed, without which nobody, 
be he a Brahmin, a Ksattriya, a Vaišya or a Südra, 


is entitled to have the Devi Mantra. O Lord! Kindly 
describe the ordinary (Sāmānya) and the special 
(Vi$esa) rules thereof. 


saraut zara 

yo dtart wererrfir Arei Aa i 

darftaTeusmaraftiemt wat wa d d 

jai ass | 

ta dtafa dur dgdafaymtā: 05 

Nārāyaņa said: O Nārada! Listen. Ī am now 
telling you about the rules of initiation (Dīksā) of 
the disciples, pure in heart. When they are initiated, 
they become entitled then and not before that, to 
worship the Devas, the Fire and the Guru. That 
method of instruction, and religious act and 
ceremony is called the Diksa (initiation) by which 


1376 


Srimadde vibhagavatam 


the Divine Knowledge is imparted, and at once 
flashes in the heart and mind of the initiated that 
Knowledge and all his sins are then destroyed. So 
the Pandits of the Vedas and the Tantras, say. 
aayi HT HAM Tat SIEUT AAT | 
ad nen 
Ta aaaea: gi ad faum wi 
varqdsarfaeh wel varfafti ferret wr 7 N 
(The Divine Knowledge is like lightning, fire, 
arising and permeating the body, mind, and spirit.) 
This Dīksā ought to be taken by all means. This 
gives excellent merits and pure results. Both the 
Guru and the Sisya (disciple) ought to be very pure 
and true. (This is the first essential requisite. Then 
the results are instantaneous). First of all, the Guru 
is to perform all the morning duties, he is to take 
his bath and perform his Sandhyà Vandanams. 
masg Wr vé ure i 
amsaa Aaaa at is il 
SITE moara terga AA srry | 
KRAMA wet ay UT uo 
He is to return home from the banks of the river 
with his Kamandalu and observe maunam (silence). 
Then, in order to give Dīksā, he is to enter into the 
assigned room (Yaga Mandapa) and take his seat 
on an Asana that is excellent and calculated to 
please all. He is to perform Acamana and do 
Pranayama. Then he should take water in his 
Arghya vessel and putting scents and flowers in 
that, charge that water with Phatkara mantra (that 
is, condense electricity Spirit in that). 
ater da fepe NACA, | 
viadegmuttav aa: Wat ATAKA, U 10 d 
uada We Torre wem firm | 
mead arā: igk: w7110 


um uttering the Phat mantra, he is to sprinkle 
the water on the doorways of the worshiproom and 
begin his Pūjā. Firstly, on the top of the door at 
one end invoke the Deity Gananatha by His mantra, 
at the other end invoke Sarasvati by Her mantra 


and at the middle, invoke Laksmi Devi by Her 
mantra duly and worship them, with flowers. 

anafora tt feretsrmdsm à 

rr ATTITGTAI Saure wp qum 11 1 2 N 

eet padae: 1 

"wd xdi graffa fae: ada: N 13 W 

Then, on the right side worship Ganga and 
Vighneša; and on the left side worship Ksettrapāla 
and Yamuna, the daughter of the Sun. Similarly, 
on the bottom of the door, worship the Astra Devata 
by the Phat mantra. Then consider the whole 
Mandapa as inspired with the presence of the Devi, 
and see the whole place as pervaded by Her through 
and through. 

RATA g | 

arerfisnrerfzaerararardeg AT (1 1 4 0 

"amma vgsrargrerfasrefárurifrurt i 

Wage erst dearer ATT PRI T 11 1 5 Ut 

Then, repeat the Phat mantra and destroy the 
Celestial obstacles as well as those from the middle 
space (Antariksa); strike the ground thrice with the 
left heel and thus destroy the Terrene obstacles. 
Then touching the left branch on the left side of 
the coukat, put the right foot forward and enter 
into the Mandapa. 

Aa area aT ae zr cart fafor TTT à 

aregqarea weretft tegna T: 16 u 

aa: pataa da TE feda U | 

aorta taas” ye: 4017 di 

Then instal the Santi Kumbha (the peace jar) 
and offer the ordinary Arghya (Sāmānyārgha). 
Next worship the Vāstunātha and Padmayoni with 
flowers and Atapa rice and the Arghya water, on 
the south-west and then purify the Pafica Gavya. 
Next sprinkle all the Mandapa and the entrance 
gate with that Arghya water. 

we edie dd Madam fue i 

Torta AUT AA TATEGTITAT 1 1 8 N 

mii geai medas, | 

gra g agram galergami wa: 1 19 N 


Book XII Chapter VII 


1377 


And, while sprinkling with Arghya water, 
consider the whole space right through as inspired 
with the presence of the Devi and repeat the Müla 
Mantra with devotion and sprinkle with Phat 
mantra. The Karta, then, uttering the mantra 
"Phat," is to drive away all the evils from the 
Mandapa and uttering the mantra "Hūm” sprinkle 
water, all around, thus pacifying the atmosphere 
and bringing peace into the hearts of all present. 

quad  yifafeutafataa: 1 

miig atan aerate qa: 20 N 

gafa degt grat dears | 

yagara pear ATTAIY FTA, 21 N 

Then burn the Dhüpa incense inside and scatter 
Vikira (water, sandal-paste, yava, ashes, Durba 
grass with roots, and Atapa rice). Then collect all 
these rice, etc., again with a broom made of Kuša 
grass to the north east corner of the Mandapa; 
making the Sankalpa and uttering Svasti vacana 
(invocation of good), distribute and satisfy the poor 
and orphans with feeding, clothing and money. 

Rogen UAE RT TE FISA i 

MIERA TT GATI qaem i 2 2 0 

Then he should bow down to his own Guru and 
take his seat humbly on the soft Āsanam allotted 
to him with his face eastwards and meditate on the 
Deity (Īsta Deva) of the mantra that is to be 
imparted to the disciple. 

Wey GT Yara THAT | 

REMC a paai d FF 23 1 

IRT q Bre qui wa: ATR i 

šadi eas Er wb g unt: 24 0 

wifes fren Wap aera: | 

Rai aaaea Ra RNA: u 25 0 

After meditating thus, he is to do the Bhita 
$uddhi (purification of elements) and perform 
Nyasa, etc., of the Deya mantra (the mantra that is 
to be imparted to the disciple) according to the rules 
stated below, i.e., the Rsi on the head; the chandas 
in the mouth, the [sta Devata in the heart, Bija on 


87 


the anus and Sakti Nyasa on the two legs. Then he 
is to make sound thrice by the clap of his palm and 
thus thwart off all the evils of the earth and the 
middle space and then make digbandhan (tieing 
up the quarters) by the mudra chotika three times 
(snapping the thumb and forefinger together). 

WTA AT: Prat WHAT | 

mont freee aad 126 1 

seat AT sft trea rae wate i 

waka g wdu unes À YA 27 0 

Then perform the Pranayama with the Mila 
mantra of the would-be-Īsta-Devatā and do the 
Mātrikā Nyāsa in one’s own body, thus: Om Am 
namah širasi, Om ām namah on the face, Om Im 
namah on the right eye, Om im namah on the left 
eye, and so on, assign all the letters duly to their 
respective places. 

yoii we wp mAd Waa: | 

a weurfag A ATA, 28 U 

AH: TagTauggagduemegam maš: i 
yaraga: gR were 129 u 


Then perform the Karánga Nyasa on the 
fingers and the Sadanga Nyasa thus: Speak: Om 
Hrdayāya namah, touching on the heart, utter Om 
Širase svāhā, touching the head; Om Sikhayai 
Vasat, touching the tuft; Om Kavacāya Him, 
touching on the Kavaca, “Om netratrayāya 
Vausat,” touching the eye, and “Om Astraya 
Phat” touching both the sides of the hand, the 
palm and its back. 

AUT UTA OHA ATTA | 

FTA Tea Hea AAA: BAT: u 30 N 

Then finish the Nayāsa by doing the Varņanyāsa 
of the Mīla mantra in those places that are said in 
the cognate kalpas (1.e., throat, heart, arms, legs, 
etc.). 

«dt Pra ITS YH | 

waa cw cuu rmi AAA ST 4310 

arant urfū drei gaitaa fercastq i 

tad quest g gt tanen 132 N 


1378 Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 
armare afr cararge qe va: | menaa wat Gada qeu | 
mrii Adata farmi u 33 i maar ward gara 400 
O Narada! Next consider within your body the) WST: Wesfafggrencaten Hrafn: | 


seat of an auspicious Asana (a seat) and make the 
Nyasa of Dharma on the right side, Jiianam on the 
left side, of Vairagyam (dispassion) on the left 
thigh, prosperity and wealth on the right thigh, of 
non-Dharma in the mouth and of Non-Jiianam on 
the left side, 

Ural erf: green: dieser AAA | 

arreter vronforegerfer frm: 11 34 u 

measad ae T SAAB TIS | 

ware fare ATTRA, 35 0 

Avairāgyam (passion) on the navel, and poverty 
on the right side. Then think of the feet of the Asana 
(the body) as Dharma, etc., and all the limbs as 
Adharma (non-Dharma). 

TAHOMA UTT AEN | 

FORT BAM HOV Fats VSM BAT: 11 3 6 N 

BN AR: HoT Weare ray ATR | 

ma wees werden 137 u 

aaa WaT A 1 

ATT ATARI ASA AAT 38 N 

agaaa aa sf HA WEG: | 

amr qurfercar g aR 11 39 N 

In the middle of the Asana (body), i.e, in the 
heart consider Ananta Deva as a gentle bed and on 
that a pure lotus representing this universe of five 
elements. Then make Nyasa of the Sun, Moon, and 
Fire on this lotus and think the Sun as composed 
of twelve Kalas (digits) the Moon composed of 
sixteen Kalas (digits) and the Fire as composed of 
ten Kalas. Over this make Nyasa of Sattva, Raja 
and Tamo Gunas, Atma, Antarātmā, Paramātmā 
and Jūānātmā and then think of this as his Ista’s 
altar where the devotee is to meditate on his Ista 
Devata, the Highest Mother. Nyasa-assignment of 
the various parts of the body to different deities 
which is usually accompanied with prayers and 
corresponding gesticulations. 


rfirféfararféreg Atel seared Sat 4.1 


Next the devotee is to perform the mental 
worship of the Deya Mantra Devata according to 
the rules of his own Kalpa; next he is to show all 
the Mudrās, stated in the Kalpa for the satisfaction 
of the Deva. The Devas become very pleased when 
all these Mudrās are shown to them. 
sframTaur sarar 

At: STITT Vatu adios i 

ated wae Weoume 42 1 

Treat Bran dies VIETAI west i 

wena a weaorerdarpquiefu: 11 43 1 

O Narada! Now, on one’s left side, erect an 
hectagon; inside it a circular figure; inside this again 
a square and then draw within that square a triangle 
and over it show the Šaūkha Mudra. After finishing 
the Pūjā of the Six Deities at the six corners of the 
hectagon, Fire, etc., take the tripod of the ankha 
(conch-shell) and sprinkling it with Phat mantra, 
place it within the triangle. 

aay q ung wenTd-ure | 

ATTUR vie ATA 44 d 

smear tem ITT ASS | 

V afadeorndreedr dd! qymemm 45 

ATH STEEPUTZRESITATST TA esf | 

asu g: VSAM SIT: 11 46 ui 

Utter, then, the Mantra "Mam Vahniman dalāya 
Daša Kalatmane Amuka Devya Arghyapātra- 
sthānāya namah” and thus worshipping the 
Sankhya vessel place it within the mandala. Then 
worship in the Sankha patra, the ten Kalas of Fire, 
beginning from the East, then south-east and so 
on. Sprinkle the Sankha, conchshell, with the Mila 
Mantra and meditating on it, place the Sankha 
(conch shell) on the tripod. 
smum wenn WwefmRHUD a | 
«sr afaenor: west afanvec der: 047 ui 


Book XII Chapter VII 


1379 


at d yes wifard Vegu | 
WIAA UE WIAA |1 48 ! 


si KLĀSMTATRAT grayrid Hara | 
agaaa TH BSAA: 49 N 
Vi yaw Ud Wiest aM settee | 
madda d vi afr-gres ws u50 N 
spear BIA HOTA AEN TATA | 


footage ties gens faery 51 1 

Repeating the mantra “Am Sürya mandalàya 
Dvadašakalātmane Amukodevya Arghyapatraya 
namah” worship in the Arghyapātra Sankha, 
sprinkle water in the Sankha with the Mantra “Sam 
Šaūkhya namah.” Worship in due order the twelve 
Kalas of the Sun Tāpinī, Tāpinī, Dhūmrā, etc., utter 
the fifty syllables of the Mātrkā in an inverse order 
(1.c., beginning, see the Sāradā Tilaka, with Ksam, 
Ham, Sam, Sam, Sam, etc.,) and repeating the Mila 
Mantra also in an inverse order, fill the Sankha, 
three-fourths, with water. 

mA aa red: Het AT | 

do miga VIETAOTAT 152 N 

sg garā TA tat T: WA: | 

Gaya at we oq ufnpeur N 53 N 

TATA AARAA? HIATT | 

wet We =I wai UAT: 54 N 

IEM AY BRAUKT | 

ad afiona vier gtarofi mq u 55 u 

siata fis frfarfürer haria adda: | 

Wed Praca faga sese: d 56 N 

Next perform in it the Nyasa of Candrakala and 
uttering the Mantra “Um Soma mandalàya 
Sodašakalātmane Amukademtāyā Arghya-mrtaya 
namah,” worship in this conchshell. Next with 
Ankuša mudrā, invoke all the tirthas there, 
repeating the Mantra “Gange Ca Yamune caiva, 
etc.,” and repeat eight times the Mila Mantra (the 
basic Mantra). Then perform the Sadanga Nyasa 
in the water and with the Mantra “Hrdā namah, 
etc.," worship and, repeating eight times the Mila 
Mantra, cover it with Matsyamundra. 


Next place on the right side of the Šankha, the 
Proksani Patra (the Košā vessel from which water 
is taken for sprinkling) and put a little water in it. 
By this water sprinkle and purify all the articles of 
worship as well as one’s own body and consider 
one’s Atman as pure and holy. 


sianar sara 


aa: und Gui uwdanmnHseW | 
store fiam cart u57 1 


tig asad g ancien u "591 

eredi pdi ciurfeufsnn d 

warme did q ast Vw: 060 N 

After doing works thus far the until Visesarghya 
is placed, the devotee should erect Sarvato bhadra 
mandala within the altar and put the Sali rice within 
its pericarp. Next spread Kuša grass on that 
Mandala and put on one Kürca, loeking well and 
auspicious within it, made of twenty-seven Kuša 
grass knotted with Venyagra granthi. Worship here 
the Ādhāra Sakti, Prakrti, Kürma, Sesa, Ksamā, 
Sudhāsindhu, Manimandala, Kalpavrksa and Īsta 
devata and the Pitha. (Durgā Devi yoga pithaya 
namah). Then have an entire kumbha (water jar) 
having no defect, wash it inside with Phat mantra, 
and encircle it with the red thread thrice as 
symbolising the three Gunas. Place within this jar 
the Nava ratna (nine jewels) with Kürca and 
worshipping it with scents and flowers put them in 
the jar repeating the Pranava, and place that on the 
Pitha (seat). 

tet GT dioc arena: | 

mam prams miak uei 

Yeast a das wager | 

aaa ameter: 

Wededhweed Wi WHAT | 
aera aaa awa 63 U 


Next consider the Pitha and Kumbha (water jar) 


"62 lt 


1380 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


as one and the same and pour waters from the 
Tirthas, repeating in an inverse order the Matrka 
Varnas (from Ksa to Ka) and fill it, thinking of the 
Ista Deva and repeating the basic mantra, put the 
new and fresh twigs (Pallavas) of A$vattha, Panasa 
and mango trees, etc., in the jar and cover its mouth 
and place over it fruits, rice, and casaka (honey) 
and wrap it with two red cloths. 

WUT WTO 

STATE aaa wm 164 n 

ware UT Heats Wenn: | 

Farid ITS SoM BT VASAT 65 N 

Then perform the Prana-Pratistha and invoke the 
Spirit of the Devi by the Prāņasthāpana Mantra 
and show the Mudrās, Avahana, etc., and thus 
satisfy the Devi. Then do the Sodašopacāra Püjà 
of the Devi after me-ditating on the Paramešvarī 
according to the rules of the Kalpa. 


Wel GET sued AKTA MTA | 
nyuh a meii det vari faded 11 66 N 
ATT a wt aum aft PAS | 
"TamafermrenturiaTeneuTe euin: 067 i 


qur yidan fata: 1 

wear afit feres AeA: AAE N 68 U 

First offer “welcome” in front of the Devi and 
then duly offer the Pādya, Arghya, Acamaniya 
water, Madhuparka, and oils, etc., for the bath. 
Then offer nice red silken clothes and various 
jewels, ornaments; repeating the Matrka syllables 
electrified with the Deya Mantra, worship the 
whole body of the Devi with scents and flowers. 

We: HOSA: HAT AAs: | 

TI tet att aqiüufed ui 169 1 

aaga weet anda 1 

AUS TEKA COME CAE "70H 

HT: Gat Wer: STHTGTHT MET 1 

daudana Ace adage: 71 U 

Next offer to the Devi the sweet scent of 
Kalāguru mixed with camphor and the Kāšmīri 
sandalpaste mixed with Kastūrī and various nice 


scented flowers, for example, the Kunda flowers, 
etc. Then offer the Dhüpa prepared from Aguru, 
Guggula, Uéira, sandalpaste, sugar, and honey 
and know that the Dhüpa is very pleasing to the 
Devi. Next offer various lights and offerings of 
fruits, vegetables and fooding. 

yaza we qumaiteriiteet FATA | 

aa: Hates eneubeeTeWum cw 0 72 NI 

aint etenam! dade quem | 

fait eiS GT Ta HATTA UL 73 N 

Be particular to sprinkle everything with the 
water of the Kosa, thus purifying, before it is 
offered to the Devi. Then complete the Anga Püja, 
and the Āvaraņa-Pūjā of the Devi, then perform 
the duty of Vai$vadeva. On the right side of the 
Devi erect an altar (sthandila) six feet square and 
instal Agni (Fire) there. 

ferent Gadi ATA UTT U SRI | 

maA ye a qd: 74 0 

vafan g urea uafūur | 

FAKTA: Was Aa 75 N 

Invoke there the Deity, thinking of Her Form 
and worship Her with scents and flowers. Then 
with the Vyarhiti Mantra with Svaha prefixed and 
Mula (Deya) Mantra perform the Homa ceremony 
with oblations, caru and ghee, twenty five times. 
Next perform Homa again with Vyarhiti. 

werda ur eet did g unn i 

fa frase gerat ferat fartentgfesm u 7 6 u 

erar: Uses equina i 

Next worship the Devi with scents, etc., and 
consider the Devi and Pitha Devatā as one and the 
same. Then take leave of (visarjana) the Agni (Fire). 
Offer valis (sacrifices) all round to the Parsvadas 
of the Devi with the remnant caru of the Homa. 

VAMATTGATU wis BAA 077 0 

Gare a mi Ugamgfmdt wu i 

rd gai wort ferfent fefor ritterd 11 78 u 

nett MĀTI STATA TTA 1 

ver tale Greate ATT R 1179: 


Book XII Chapter VII 


1381 


Teast West dead WefBnm | 

watt waa KTĀETAGA MTA i 80 N 

Now again worship the Devi with five offerings 
and offer betel, umbrella, cámara and others and 
repeat the Müla mantra thousand times. After 
finishing the Japam, place Karkari (a water-jar with 
small holes at the bottom, as in a sieve) on the rice 
in the north-eastern corner and invoke the Devi 
there and worship Her. Uttering the mantra "Raksa 
Raksa" moisten the place with water coming out 
of Karkari, and repeat the Phat mantra. 

usyre ew fore wg sistit are: i 

At wat g agent frt GAGA: 0 81 N 

After re-worshipping the Devi, place Karkari 
in due position. Thus the Guru finishes the Adhivasa 
(foregoing) ceremony and takes his meals with the 
disciple and sleeps that night on that altar. 

sianar sara 

Ta: HSA denn aT AA | 

aa aua emfafir Aa: 0 82 N 

yua aged dt: | 

admet gaitaa eds g 183 Ul 

O Narada! Now I am describing briefly about 
the Homa Kunda (a round hole in the ground 
consecrated to the Deity) and the Samskara 
ceremony of the Sthandila (the sacrificial altar). 
Uttering, first, the Mila Mantra, see, fix your gaze 
on the Kunda; then sprinkle it with water and the 
Phat mantra and drive away the evil-spirits from 
there. 

angen ayes freaked: wur i 

wm IETTY fedes AAT: 184 Ul 

mrda Mag did qoum web | 

ATTIE VeA MTA, uss it 

frate amare Prat uaa | 

"iemérewentzr yal ure: 86 ul 

Then with mantra “Him” again sprinkle it with 
water. 

Then draw within it three lines Pragagra and 


Udagagra (on the eastern and northern sides). 
Sprinkling it with water and the Pranava, worship 
within the Pithas, uttering the mantras from Adhara 
Saktaye namah to Amuka Devi Yoga Pithàya 
namah. Invoke, in that Pitha, the Highest One, Who 
is Siva Siva with all one-ness of heart and worship 
Her with scents and offerings. 

edt vurdgqemai dare viento g | 

RTHTERT rait: St hia ferai u 87 N 

AY wf Paes VAT Wat TĀM | 

meres urna qatasifaronfefir: 11 88 t 

dene ufa (e snpesrn quum | 

art awards 89 u 

Then think for a moment the Devi as having 
taken bath and as one with Sankara. Bring then 
fire in a vessel and taking a flaming piece thereof 
throw that in the south- west corner. Then purifying 
it by the gaze and quitting the portions of Kravyadah, 
impart the Caitanya by “Ram,” the Vahnibija repeat 
“Om” over it seven times. 

wur dat Agga Pastas: | 

vuU ward peat agais 190 u 

afad fr: aftr prefaaa wan: | 

IS wort MAENE: 191 N 

Rraci Soar att fé farfrfart | 

arama ga tat wr reaa 092 1 

Shew, then, the Dhenumudrā and protect it by 
Phat Kara and cover, veil, it with the mantra 
“Him.” Then turn the fire, thus worshipped with 
sandalpaste, etc., thrice over the Kunda and with 
both the knees on the ground and repeating the 
Pranava, consider the Agni as the Virya of Siva 
and throw it on the yoni of the Devi in the Pitha. 
Then offer Acamana, etc., to the Deva and the Devi 
and worship. 

fafine et ge Ta uni wd: Wuq d 

adaa tater Wasa afgdtut 193 0 

afta safer ad vad EITT, | 

gatava ut fare 940 


Then light the flame with the mantra “Cit 


1382 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Pingala Hana Hana Daha Daha Paca Paca Sarvajiia 
Jūāpaya Svaha.” Then utter the stotra to the Agni 
Deva with great love, repeating the mantra "Agnim 
Prajvalitam vande Jatavedam Hutāšanam suvarna 
varnamamalam samiddham Visvatomukham." 

wana wd afè gela wed |i 

wd! ardgfāusi wed orate: 95 

agafa: Ragot sfegquu: an: | 

grand? aafaa ayer sft spun u 96 N 

fear: wer: ar: Geary fermi | 

arā afg uani Pri veratuma u 97 u 

Then perform the Sadanganyasa to the Agni 
Deva “Om Sahasrárccise namah, Om Svasti 
Pūrņāya Svāhā,” “Om Uttistha purusāya vasat,” 
“Om Dhūma vyāpine Him Om Sapta Jihvaya 
vausat" “Om Dhanurdharaya Phat.” Repeating the 
above six mantras, perform the Nyasa on the heart, 
etc., the six places. 

genaam T WOT |i 

Rida: Hus tanta tafe ues 

af utrtagateifamaga d 

Ratan TEV Mg 199 1 

Now meditate on the Agni as of a golden colour, 
three-eyed, seated on a lotus and holding in His 
four hands signs of granting boons, Sakti, Svastika 
and sign of “no fear," also meditate on Agni, as 
the seat of the greatest auspiciousness. Then 
moisten the Kunda on the top of the belt (mekhalā) 
with water. 

ari famaage: wd ot afer i 

ware ydg Wasa d YA N 1001 

Aa ad wees: uaea | 

viag uiae adn ares 107 N 

akaraia taeda efi g Sr 1 

AE aerate enters ALVA WAT TT N 102 il 

TT HOT YW er Agena | 

Taare: HAA 01103 N 

Next spread the Kuša grass all around and draw 
the Agni yantra over it, 7.c., triangle, hectagon, 
circle, eight-petalled figure and Bhüpura; rather 


have this drawing before the Agnisthapana. Now 
meditate this only. Then, within the Yantra, recite 
"Vai$vanara Jataveda Lohitāksa sarvakarmāņi 
Sādhaya Svāhā” and worship Agni. Then worship 
in the centre and in the hectagon at the corners 
worship the Saptajihvà (seven tongues Hiranya, 
Gaganā, Raktā, Krsna, Suprabhà, Bahurūpā, 
Atiraktikā) and next worship within the pericarp 
of the lotus the Anga Devatās. 

wag wardrardf: Rna: | 

mada: urat gerne ws ow! 104 N 

aratra gts: Gad arate :1 

ATT: eniya taga: Wa: 105 1 

ARMAS UM: IAT fap: | 

ARA AATATIZĻATI |1 1 0 6 N 


Then recite the following mantras within the Eight 


petals: “Om Agnaye Jatavedase namah,” “ Om 
Agnaye Saptajihvaya namah,” “ Om Agnaye 
Havyavāhanāya namab," "Om Agnaye 


Ašvodarajāya namah,” “Om Agnaye Vaišvānarāya 
namah,” “ 

"Om Agnaye Višvamukhāya namah,” “Om Agnaye 
Devamukhaya namah” and considering the forms 
to hold Sakti and Svastik, worship them. Then 
consider Indra and the other Lokapālas (Regents 
of the several quarters) situated in the east, south- 
east, and so on together with their weapons, the 
thunderbolt and the other weapons, and thus worship 
them. 


Om Agnaye Kaumāra tejase namah,” 


Sanmraur gara 
Wd: RATATAT TA | 


Heal Et we: gUfegaumera dum 107 li 

fragm aadA EA | 

FRIAS varied A ATTĀTSUT: 108 U 

TTU tarefa WEXIRTHTSIU AAG | 

atamai KARTI META FAA: 1109 0 

O Narada! Next purify the sacrificial ladles, etc., 
éruk, Sruva, etc., and ghee; then, taking ghee by 
$ruva, go on with the Homa ceremony. Divide the 


Book XII Chapter VII 


1383 


ghee of the Ajyasthali (the vessel in which the 
ghee for the Homa purposes is kept) in three parts; 
take ghee from the right side and saying “Om 


5” 


Agnaye Svāhā offer oblations on the right eye of 
the Agni; take ghee from the left side and saying 
“Om Somāye Svāhā” offer oblations on the left 
eye of the Agni; take ghee from the centre and 
saying, “Om Agnisomābhyām Svāhā,” 
oblations on the central eye of the Agni. 

yarig Yaurgra d HG | 

amd Rata TARA ETAT: 1100 

warateatatahrs gare TE: | 

qgatetadan frat g dat: WEL 117 N 

Take ghee again from the right side and saying 
"Om Agnaye Svistakrte Svaha” offer oblations to 
the mouth of the Agni. Then the devotee is to repeat 
“Om Bhuh Svaha,” “Om Bhuvah Svaha,” “Om 
Svah Svāhā” and offer thrice the oblations; next 
he is to offer oblations thrice with the Agni mantra. 

ated Woratarasrast yaredt: 1 

miine GET 112 N 

After this, O Muni! for impregnation and each 
of the ten Samskaras, natal-ceremony, tonsure, etc., 
he is to repeat the Pranava Mantra and offer the 
eight oblations of ghee on each occasion. Now hear 
of the tenfold Sarhskaras: 

Tatar deat didtur aa: 1 

wired amWHaWiurqPTeRHUP AT 0 113 LI 

wat Tat ST Adal E 

Turm ad uamasmuRrgd gau 114 N 

Jraritgreent: GTA: safer: | 

aa: fora urddt er gate fērastāa, 115 0 


(1) Impregnation, (2) Pumsavan (a ceremony 


offer 


performed as soon as a woman perceives the foetus 
to be quick), (3) Simantonnayana (a ceremony 
observed by women in the fourth, sixth or the eighth 
month of pregnancy), (4) Jata Karma (ceremony 
at the birth of a child), (5) Nàmakarana, (naming 
the child), (6) Niskramana (a ceremony performed 
when a new-born child is first taken out of the house 


into the open air usually in the fourth month), (7) 
Annaprāšana (when the rice is put in the mouth of 
the child), (8) Cūdākaraņa (the ceremony of the 
first tonsure), (9) Upanayana (holding the sacrificial 
thread; (10) Godāna and Udvāha (gift of cows and 
marriage). These are stated in the Vedas. Next 
worship Siva Parvati, the Father and the Mother 
of Agni and take leave of them. 

parer wfirgt afgafēga urea: i 

"W2ITqre umet ATITATETA gu 116 N 

gi ufa wears ugati gar | 

facer at cere p famsfensmd ou 117 1 

daid WAT age Weare: | 

Tenia ggg NIIS 

Next in the name of Agni, offer five Samidhas 
(fuel) soaked in ghee and offer one oblation of ghee 
to each of the Avarana Devatās. 


Then take the ghee by the Sruk and covering it 
with the Sruva, offer ten oblations to Agni, and 
Maha Gaņeša with mantras ending in Vausat, The 
Maha Gaņeša mantras run as follows: (1) Om, Om 
Svaha (2) Om Srim Svaha, (3) Om Srim Hrim 
Svāhā, (4) Om Srim Hrim Klim Svaha, (5) Om 
Srim Hrim Klim Glaum Svaha, (6) Om Srim Hrim 
Klīm Glaum Gam Svāhā, (7) Om $rim Hrim Klim 
Glaum ityantah Gam Ganapataye Svaha, (8) Om 
Vara Varada ityantah Svaha, (9) Sarvajanam me 
Vašam ityanto Svaha and (10) Anaya Svaha 
ityantah. 

aÀ dió aaa qun wan | 

Fal TT Vert Wf RTT 11 1 19 N 

Toran YET WD | 

akaa waaay WE 00120 0 


Next perform in the Agni the Pītha Pūjā and 
meditate on the Deya Istadeva and worship him. 
Next offer twenty-five oblations to his face, 
repeating the Müla Mantra. 

Wenbspd Waray TA ATTA: | 

wi tani wguremdi: WaT u 121 u 


1384 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Targa ggaagditam 1 

Ka midi afaqsqun 1122 

Then think of that and Agni Deva as one and 
the same, and then again as one with Atman. Then 
offer oblations to each of the Sadanga Devatās 


separately. Then search for the Nàdis (veins) of 


Vahni and Ista Devatà and offer twenty one 
oblations. 


Vhamraniararadiat ata a | 

ĀRA YA Weary 123 0 

Ae: HOTA FaraTa fe: i 

Vanes MARAEA 10124! 

Then offer oblations to each of the two Devatās 
separately. Next offer one thousand and eight 
oblations to the Ista Deva with Til soaked in ghee 
or with the materials enumerated in the Kalpa. 

wa ger Wt adi ABI meum | 

adaga agaren tae aft 125 1 

ad: foret er gerd padena | 

weg waist HAFAMT 126 

O Muni! Thus finishing the Homa ceremony, 
consider that the Ista Deva (the Devi), Agni and 
the Avarana Deities are all satisfied. Then, by the 
command of the Guru, the disciple is to take his 
bath and perform his Sandhya, etc., and put on new 
clothes (cloth and cadar) and golden ornaments. 

is Sp preeriaa | 

AAR qu: R TTU SATA: IL 127 Il 

"edd magu Aaaama fast 1 c 

He is to come then, to the Kunda with Kamandalu 
in his hand and with a pure heart. He is to bow 
down to the elders and superiors seated in the 
assembly and take his seat in his Asana. 

Tek d frei qurggur AARAA 1 128 N 

ATM ft eg aradedrd fate 1 

qa: ŠITĀ wir! 129 N 

spat enar aar aara ien | 

Aa TAA gnare uut qaum 1 130 N 

start sare 
writ carey forem USA: HAUT q | 


Šrī Guru Deva then would look at the disciple 


with kind eyes and think the Caitanya of the disciple 
within his own (the Guru’s) body. Then the Guru 
Deva would perform the Homa and look at the 
disciple with a divine gaze, so that the disciple 
becomes pure-hearted and able to get the favours 
of the Devas. Thus the Guru must purify all the 
Adhvas (the passages) of the body of the disciple. 

UGU exarati Trae KA: 0 131 I 

mÀ q TATA ates AT ae 1 

Waren ver are Hama q weft 132 u 

frei eget A Prostar: | 

aaaea tarefa ATOM N 133 11 

marei YEARS prata fe | 

SLK Saale aet 11134 il 

Then the Guru is to touch respectively the feet, 
generative organ, navel, heart, forehead, and the 
head of the disciple with Kürca (a bundle of Kuša 
grass) and til soaked in ghee, in his left hand and 
offer at each touch eight oblations, repeating the 
mantra “Om adya Sisyasya Kalādhvānam 
Šodhayāmi Svāhā, etc." Thus the Guru would 
purify Kalàdhva (in the feet) Tattvadhva (in the 
generative organ), Bhūvanādhva (in the navel), 
Varnadhva (in the heart), Padadhva (in the fore- 
head) and Mantrādhva (on the head), the six 
Adhvas and think these all to be dissolved in 
Brahma (Brahmalina). 

LEE 

amerfeerd roce qa: fret g aterdq u 135 u 

yorigi wat gear derat Hest TAT 1 

greeting aginedterar 0136 0 

Then, again, the Guru would think all these to 
be re-born from Brahma and transfer the Caitanya 
of the disciple that was in him to the disciple. Then 
the Guru must offer Parnahuti and consider the Ista 
Devata, placed in the fire by the visarjana mantra 
for the Homa purposes, as entered into the water- 
jar. 
wae eder fenster | 
m: Pee 42 q Se Tur e: 1 137 1 


Book XII Chapter VII 


1385 


Sarin di Pret dredt ted Ri 

Wertes Percent feum: 138 

He is to perform again the Vyàrhiti Homa and 
offer all the Angahutis (oblations to all the limbs) 
of the fire and take leave of the fire withdrawing 
the Deity from the Jar, into his own body. Uttering 
then the Vausat Mantra he would tie the eyes of 
the disciple with a piece of cloth and would bring 
him from the Kunda to the mandala and make the 
disciple offer puspaiijali (flowers in his palm) to 
the Ista Deva. 

Aaa fuper AAE | 

yeahs freee gaita acia u 139 u 

ARa area ferner ert 

Ted areca pyaar u 140 u 

Then he would take away the bandage or piece 
of cloth from his eyes and ask him to take his seat 
in the seat Kušāsana. Thus the Guru, after having 
purified the elements of the body of the disciple 
and performed the Nyasa of the Deya Mantra, 
would make the disciple sit in another mandala. 

teasa araga Tad | 

wegen: Pret crakear: 1141 0 

EPLIEZ:E a EC HOLEN 

aa: rea: pear amt wera wu 142 u 

Then he would touch the head of the disciple 
with the twigs (Pallavas) of the Kunda and repeat 
the Matrka Mantra and make him have his bath 
with the water of the jar which is considered as the 
seat of the Ista Deva. Then, for the protection of 
the disciple, he would sprinkle (abhiseka) him with 
the water of the Vardhani vessel placed already in 
the north-east corner. 

parsers ufaseufet | 

we: tag eaarfāriai Tara i 143 u 

feret araga radem: | 

Weare À mai: 11 144 1 

Then the disciple would get up and put on the 
pair of new clothes and besmear his whole body 
with ashes and sit close by the Guru. When the 


merciful Guru would consider that the Šiva Šakti 
has now passed out of his own body and that Divine 
Force, the Devī, has entered into the body of the 
disciple, i.e., charged the disciple with the pass. 

waft garam Prerearatestays: | 

"eris Werqent: Tai ŪTTA 145 0 

STE rer wat foreitsfü wordt à 

deaa gÀ d qe Sagre 146 1 

Thinking now the disciple and the Devata to be 
one and the same, the Guru would now worship 
the disciple with flowers and scents. The Guru 
would then place his right hand on the head of the 
disciple and repeat clearly in his right ear the Maha 
Mantra of the Maha Devi. The disciple is to repeat 
also the Maha Mantra one hundred and eight times 
and fall prostrate on the ground before the Guru 
and thus bow down to the Guru, whom the disciple 
now thinks as the incarnate of the Deva. 

aerate masta: | 

emt ft rea eiA Sip 147 n 

garftrit: garttu agaiža wae: 1 

damare aramea: 1148 u 

GTC KAT sqqear TATA | 

gta e esfera: areata: 149 1 

The disciple, the devotee of the Guru, would 
now give as a Daksinà all his wealth and property 
for his whole life to the Guru. Then he would give 
Daksinà to the priests and make charities to the 
virgins; the Brahmanas, the poor and the destitute 
and the orphans. Here he is not to be miserly in 
any way in the expenditure. O Narada! Thus the 
disciple would consider himself blessed and he 
would daily remain engaged in repeating the Maha 
Mantra. Thus I have described to you above 

grdan sat dtaa, | 

arog weit eat areronana ferred 11150 0 

fee: verraten du afa tar | 

aimee g RaRa wert 151 u 

egeat d A Hest aaa i 


The most excellent Diksa. Thinking all these. 


1386 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


you are to remain ever engaged in worshipping the 
lotus feet of the Great Devi. There is no Dharma 
higher than this in this world for the Brahmanas. 
The followers of the Vedas would impart this 
Mantra according to the rules stated respectively 
in their own Grhya Sütras; and the Tántrikas would 
also do the same according to their own Tantras. 
The Vaidiks should not follow the Tantra rules and 
the Tantrikas are not to follow the Vaidik rules. 
Thus all the Sastras say. And this is the Sanātana 
Creed. 


siana gara 


oft we wats sued «gg ANS nu 152 N 

ara: wi qutm wat Pest Tatas à 

freres aea rdi wen ITT: 0153 u 

Narayana said: O Narada! I have described all 
about the ordinary Dīksā that you questioned me. 
Now the essence in brief is this that you would 
remain always merged in worshipping the Parà 
Sakti, the Highest Force, the Maha Devi. What 
more shall I say than this that I have got the highest 
pleasure and the Nirvana, the peace, that passeth 


all understanding, from my daily worshipping That 
Lotus Feet duly. 


Cara saru 


gfe manaa greca Wem | 

wurfertfoaranq cea qdtuaism t 154 1 

Vedavyasa said: O Maharaja! O Janamejaya! 
After having said this Diksatattva, the highest Yogi 
Bhagavan Narayana, meditated by the Yogis, 
closed his eyes and remained merged in Samadhi, 
in the meditation of the Lotus Feet of the Devi. 

mag margada: 1 

ANISH adt a TH TT AT t 

wUTH MARTĀ aA: 155 
sft MERTER merger EREA TASCA: 007 11 

Knowing this Highest Tattva, Nārada, the chief 
of the Rsis, bowed down at the feet of the Great 
Guru Narayana and went away immediately to 
perform the tapasya so that he also might see the 
Maha Devi. 

Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Twelfth Book 
on the Diksa Vidhi or on the rules of Initiation in the 
Mahāpurāņam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1386 Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


CHAPTER VIII 
On the Appearance of the Highest Šakti 

WARY Tara that the worship of the Gayatri is nityà, that is, 
wads  wdymemedi a 1 daily to be done at all times, especially during the 
Radi g adai requi: spdtRaT nin three Sandhya times, by all those that are twice- 
Jarana aR ferrea ferat à born? 
at faga feat: neq ETATE u 2 N Riman Aaaa TAAS: | 
GVA dona: AKARTTUCTETATAT | add agat wilh dgsrgīfaafsmam: 114 d 
verre 2f mt aeRO: 3 i In this world some are the devotees of Visņu, 


Janamejaya spoke to Veda Vyāsa: O Bhagavan! | some, the followers of Gaņapati, some are Kāpālikas, 
Thou art the knower of all the Dharmas and Thou | some follow the doctrines prevalent in China; some 
art the chief, the crown of the Pandits, knowing all |are the followers of Buddha or Carvaka; some of 
the Sastras. Now I ask Thee how is it that the twice- | them again wear the barks of trees and others roam 
born have ceased to worship the Highest Sakti, the |naked. So various persons are seen having no trace 
Gayatri and they now worship the other Devatas, | of faith in the Vedas. 


on the face of the distinct command in the Srutis| fear mut agdergarapaett | 


Book XH Chapter VIII 


1387 


ware: fsa maaha: 11 5 i 

aft diee Wu sur q feras: 1 

O Brahmana! What is the real cause underlying 
secretly here in this! Kindly mention this to me. 
Again there are seen many men, well versed in 
various metaphysics and logic, our B.A.s and 
M.A.s but then, again, they have no faith in the 
Vedas. 

TARGA! spar ergfiréeofet 11 6 1 

fara arm ABA defeat wi oi 

How is this? Nobody wants anything ominous 
to him consciously. But how is it that these so- 
called learned men are fully aware and yet they 
are wonderfully void of any trace of faith in the 
Vedas? Kindly mention the cause underlying this, 
O Thou! The foremost of the knowers of the Vedas. 

nida afer afr? sac WS 7 N 

amea agen: ut ta Wen | 

Wewrfü wd MATU SIETA WS |1 8 d 

Waar aede Wat TENUIT | 

There is, again, another question: Thou hadst 
described before the glories of Manidvipa, the 
highest and the best place of the Devi. Now I want 
to hear how is that Dvipa greater than the great. 
Satisfy this servant of thine by describing these. If 
the Guru be pleased, he reveals even the greatest 
and the highest esoteric secret to his disciple. 

Ha saru 

gf Wal ga: AT VRTSTSSTSNTWUT: 11 9 i 

frena ma: we mida ups | 

"reget q adai deste frat 10 u 

Sūta spoke: Hearing the words of the King 
Janamejaya, the Bhagavān Veda Vyāsa began to 
answer the guestions in due order. The hearing of 
this increases the faith of the twice-born in the 
Vedas. 


ana sara 


Ways TT anà AER, 1 
aramak day segratsya GET 111 1 


yd wear Wem cada g af | 

WI Tents Nea 0012 |i 

Vyasa said: Well has this been asked by you, O 
King! in due time and in an appropriate moment. 
You are intelligent and it seems that you have got 
the faith in the Vedas. I now answer. Listen. In 
ancient days, the Asuras, maddened with pride, 
fought against the Devas for one hundred years. 
The war was very extraordinary and remarkable. 

qaman amaaa a, 

mmaa cpi dui gdgudggu 0013 0 

"wüsfvepurdymeiear frat ur d 

spe xen afia rer: aAa A |1 14 u 

In this great war various weapons were used, 
variegated with numerous Mayas or ingenious 
devices. It tended to destroy the whole world. By 
the mercy of the Highest and the Most Exalted 
Sakti, the Daityas were overcome by the Devas in 
that Great War. And they quitted the Heavens and 
the Earth and went to the nether regions, the Patala. 

aa: verter tar: amaaa, | 

ap: Teen Aea: AAA: 15 |i 

Wastes Gat «vara eres AAT n: à 

Mata: Ha seat: UT Pera: 4 16 0 

The Devas were all delighted and began to dwell 
on their own prowesses and became proud. They 
began to say: "Why shall not victory be ours. Why 
are not our glories great? We are by far the best! 
Where are the Daityas? They are devils, powerless. 

afttatreraant ad ad aaa: | 

AMAT UAT Sea Wat HT HAT N17 N 

umay À a AAT AETA: | 

ware chd ada wafer NISN 

We are the causes of creation, preservation and 
destruction. We all are glorious! Oh! What can be 
said before us in favour of the Asuras, the devils?” 
Thus, not knowing the Highest Śakti, the Devas 
were deluded. At this moment, seeing this plight 
of the Devas, the World Mother took pity on the 
Devas and, to favour them, 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


O King! She appeared before them in the form 
of the Most Worshipful, the Great Holy Light. It 
was resplendent like ten million Suns, and cool as 
well like ten million Moons. It was brilliant and 
dazzling like ten million lightning flashes, without 
hands and feet, and exceedingly beautiful! Never 
was this witnessed before! 

aeegd AASR Aa: TG 12011 

"famae Wel: finfara finfari faf à 

errat afe fe ar aren erf wet n 21 N 

AITĀM ars sr darat Braet | 

Seeing this Extraordinary Beautiful Lovely 
Light, the Devas were taken aback; they spoke 
amongst themselves, thus: “What is this! What is 
this! Is this the work of the Daityas or some other 
great Maya (Magic) played by them or is it the 
work of another for creating the surprise of the 
Devas!" 

aya a dat wd frat wp 022 N 

"ener Prd Treat IRC neaaf | 

AAG TH Aiea Hear q ARR 23 N 

wdt afa wage Narda: qufera: 1 

TB dà AMET atst AAA 24 u 

O King! Then they all assembled together and 
decided to approach towards that Adorable Light 
and to ask It what It was. They, then, would 
determine its strength and decide what to do 
afterwards. Thus, coming to this ultimate 
conclusion, Indra called Agni and said: “O Agni! 
You are the mouth-piece of the Devas. 


adata g WTAE feats aaaf 1 
Rear: Bran aa AMAT 125 N 
aurea fria afeetat ware after i 
aq Wares eranc ed RSA gare t 26 i 
dtd a cafe fe ange dd MATA: | 


Therefore do you go first and ascertain distinctly 


what this Light is." Hearing thus the words of Indra, 


Agni, elated by his own prowess, set out immediately 
from the place and went to that Light. Seeing Agni 
coming, the Light addressed him thus: “Who are 
you? What is your strength? State this before Me.” 

aries aer rear arate dtsadta 11 27 u 

aber ze vrieme favaru fafa | 

At this Agni replied: “I am Agni. All the yajūas, 
ordained in the Vedas are performed through me. 
The power of burning everything in this universe 
resides in me.” 


Weal ag: Ut denen fedt qu 28 ui 


atri ufa d farea cesta fg 1 
Wal adadan KAT: 0290 
A VISIT qut arti PPTA | 
JB cael quid wd para gem 1 30 1 
anshi Wess AAMAS es ATT: à 


Then that adorable Light took up a straw of grass 
and said: “O Agni! If you can burn everything in 
this universe, then do you burn this trifling straw." 
Agni tried his best to burn the straw but he could 
not burn it. He got ashamed and fast went back to 
the Devas. Asked by the Devas, Agni told them 
everything and said: ^O Devas! Know verily that 
the pride cherished by us that we are supreme, is 
entirely false." 

adel quer arg owumpaeusdid 031 


med ae vehe fem 
vd yoe: udat wedsivufetmm: 132 0 


Indra then asked Vayu (wind) and said: “O 
Vayu! You are dwelling in this universe, through 
and through; by your efforts, all are moving; 
therefore you are the Prana of all; it is possible 
that all forces are concentrated within you. 

rata treat TA fenfird uraafireafir à 

ara: As maisa amd dei Tt ae: 33 N 

Wea: spem qnia 1 

ara sae ae web fene it 34 d 

Go and ascertain what is this Light? Verily I do 
not see any other person here than you who can 
ascertain this great adorable Light." Hearing these 


Book XII Chapter VIII 


1389 


commendable words of Indra, Vayu felt himself 


elated and went at once to that place where was 
that Light. 

dei SBT wur arg Vara WENTTAT | 

aisha ed cater an vid wd ATT: |1 35 N 

aA agaa: T dur Wess | 

wraftsarsgedtfe argent erdt 11 36 N 

ate g af wer ares nesha fg à 

mea wd wdeunened 37 N 

Seeing the Vayu, the Light, the Yaksa, the demi- 
god, the Spirit asked in a gentle language: Who 
are you? What strength is there in you? Speak out 
all these to me.” At this, Vayu spoke arrogantly, 
"Tam Matarisvan, I am Vayu; about my strength, 
I can move anything and I hold everything. It is 
through the strength of mine, that this universe is, 
and is alive and brisk with movements and works.” 

Bt spar argaroft farsa wt AE: | 

TATA weedres udfunni 38 

"redd fier wfssrat TES San i 

That Highest Mass of Light then replied: “O 


wd gA mmaa Wm 043! 

yaaa Ut du Barat Uem | 

Then all the Devas spoke with one voice to 
Indra: When You are the King of the Devas, better 
go yourself and ascertain the reality of Its Nature.” 
Indra, then, with great pride, went himself to the 
Light; the Light, too, began to disappear gradually 
from the place, and ultimately vanished from Indra's 
sight. 

siquid aa: Wo aag arama: 044 ul 

arta wfssrdt urat argat qausft 1 

agiman WT as 45 

Aa: WA ta war g Kaa | 

fee Wat qa aed VLE GTA 46 u 

canit area fe EAT aA i 

When Indra found that he could not even speak 
to That Light, he became greatly ashamed and 
began to conceive of his own nothingness. He 
thought thus: “T won’t go back to the Devas. What 
shall I say to them? Never will I disclose to them 
my inferiority; one is better to die than do this. 


Vayu! Move this straw that lies before you, and if| One's self-honour is the only treasure of the great 
you cannot, quit your pride and go back to Indra| and honourable. 


ashamed." 

Spear raperet arg: ainan RaT: i39 N 

SERT eS: CAAT KET € | 

vRNA manAR re a TA: 11 40 u 

: f Prat i 

Ara Waal: ar freman: 1 41 N 

afan iA rad tat: TET, | 

At this Vāyu tried all his might but, alas! He 
could not move the straw a bit from that place! 
Vāyu then gave up his pride and returned to the 


Devas and spoke to them all about the Yaksa (a 


sort of demi-god, a ghost). O Devas! Our pride is 


vain; in no way can we be able to ascertain the 


nature of that Light. It seems that that Holy Light, 
adorable by all, is extraordinary. 
wa: wd Gorm: weenabowufut u42 u 
ganef araa uai rift qva: | 


"rt ae wüfad g Agra d dm 047 Li 

ota ff ada wd frat tat: d 

uftartevi wer ada YU Wd: u48u 

aaa aut sra egtrmarmft ET | 

mai Cea wa du Tat we 49 tt 

If honour is gone, what use, then, is there in 
living?” O King! Then Indra, the Lord of Devas, 
quitted his pride and took refuge unto That Great 
Light which exhibited, ere long, such a glorious 
character. At this moment, a celestial voice was 
heard from the Heavens: “O Indra! Go on now and 
do the japam, the reciting of the Maya Bija Mantra, 
the basic Mantra of Maya. All your troubles will, 
then, be over." 

wat ware urn uraretsb TAK d 

ward Parent suraHfegeren: u 50 


Hearing this celestial voice, Indra began to repeat 


1390 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


the Maya Bija, the Seed Mantra of Maya, with rapt | ground as if ornamented with Padmarāga jewels. 


concentration and without any food. 
aR neu Tal 1 
ATT A wen» GA: 51 
quiso q garii EIE EIE | 
TRAUMA sresentfexfengwm u 52 u 
aeaieie KĀ | 
agian aria 053 ! 
Then on the ninth lunar day of the month of 
Caitra when the Sun entered the meridian, suddenly 
there appeared in that place a Great Mass of Light 
as was seen before. Indra saw, then, within that 
Mass of Light, a Virgin Form in full youth. The 
lustre from Her body was like that of ten million 
Rising Suns; and the colour was rosy red like a 
full-blown Java flower. On Her forehead was 
shining the digit of the Moon; Her breasts were 
full, and, though veiled under the cloth, they looked 
very beautiful. She was holding noose and a goad 
in Her two hands and Her other two hands indicated 
signs of favour and fearlessness. 
urat moai aasia Bran i 
amagi ATTRA li 54 d 
Poa aitwarmternatem rar | 
agag caqdenfmEgdWESW ussn 
Her body was decked with various ornaments 
and it looked auspicious and exceedingly lovely; 
nowhere can be seen a woman beautiful like Her. 
She was like a Kalpa Vrksa (celestial tree yielding 
all desires); she was three eyed and Her braid of 
hair was encircled with Mālatī garlands. She was 
praised on Her four sides by the Four Vedas, 
Incarnate, in their respective Forms. 


GATI: MATA, 1 


us6u 
TATA TTT, 1 
sates grat det taadi rary 57 u 
Reatro Gaara | 
GR ARAA VARĀM: o u 580 


The brilliancy of Her teeth shed lustre on the 


Her face looked smiling. Her clothing was red and 
Her body was covered with sandalpaste. She was 
the Cause of all causes. Oh! She was all Full of 
Mercy. O King Janamejaya! Thus Indra saw, then, 
the Uma Parvati Mahešvarī Bhagavati and the 
hairs of his body stood on ends with ecstasy. 

maid Wife |d 
us9nu 

gara fafad: cadre: | 

Gara usnm: fre aafaa 1160 n 

His eyes were filled with tears of love and deep 
devotion and he immediately fell prostrate before 
the feet of the Devi. Indra sang various hymns to 
Her and praised Her. He became very glad and 
asked Her, “O Fair One! Art Thou that Great Mass 
of Light? 

redd a Hedge wd YÀ i 

Stet AEA aa: sped TATA wema 116 1 1 

If this be, kindly state the cause of Thy 
appearance.” O King! Hearing this, the Bhagavati 
replied. 

wd ude AAPA, | 

nated g ada Faraz 62 n 

"wá det TAGAT quii walter a agate i 

"aft serere afr ud Se AAA u 63 u 

"This My Form is Brahma, the Cause of all 
causes, the Seat of Maya, the Witness of all, 
infallible and free from all defects or blemishes. 
What all the Vedas and Upanisads try to establish, 
what ought to be obtained, as declared by all the 
rules of austerity, and for which the Bráhmanas 
practise Brahmacaryam, I am all that. I havc told 
you about that Brahma, of the nature of the Great 
Holy Light. 

aA wur Targa BUTUH | 

3 ots HA risit KET GUAT u 64 tt 

serait SATIS HC TTT | 

MĀTI: GUTH: AAA: 11 65 N 


The sages declare that That Brahmana is revealed 


Book XII Chapter VIII 


1391 


by “Om” and "Hrīm”, the two Bijas (mystic 
syllables) that are My two first and foremost 
Mantras wherein I remain hidden. I create this 
universe with My two parts (in My two aspects); 
therefore My Bija mantra is two. “Om” Bija is 
denominated as Saccidànanda (everlasting 
existence, intelligence and bliss) and "Hrim" Bija 
is Maya Prakrti, the Undifferentiated Conscious- 
ness, made manifest. 

MTU fatter art w:o 

BTS ATT UT rfe Biba i 66 wu 

"wur ufu war KAA: | 

UTA OTT ATA WA ATA 11 67 N 

Know, then, That Maya as the Highest Sakti and 
know Me as that Omnipotent Goddess at present 
revealed before your eyes. As moonlight is not 
different from the Moon, so this Maya Sakti in the 
state of equilibrium is not different from Me. (The 
powerful man and the power he wiclds are not 
different. They are verily one and the same.) 

yoa udm Agfa faster 1 

miatuta: gta fe nesu 

wd manah cafasrager uw 1 

siata q saen wr anieafuituq 11 69 N 

During Pralaya (the Great Latency period), this 
Maya lies latent in Me, without there being any 
difference. Again at the time of creation, this Maya 
appears as the fructification of the Karmas of the 
Jivas. When this Maya is potential and exists latent 
in Me, when Maya is Antarmukhi, it is called 
Unmanifested and when the Maya becomes 
Kinetic, when the Maya is Bahirmukhi, when She 
is in an active Kinetic state, it is said to be 
Manifested. 

aktar g TATA ase HIVE | 

ATĻAUTA urate: 170 N 

wierd eÀ uem | 

MARA: VAI EART: 071 0 

There is no origin or beginning of this Maya. 
Maya is of the nature of Brahma in a State of 


equilibrium. But, during the beginning of the 
creation, Her form consisting of the several Gunas 
appears, when Maya is Bahirmukhi, She becomes 


Tamas, in Her Unmanifested state. O Indra! For 


this reason Her state of abstraction, and becoming 
introspective, this is Her Antarmukhi state; it is 
known as Maya and Her looking outward is Her 
Bahirmukhi state; itis denominated by Tamas and 
the other gunas. 

Tanna wen fare: area a 1 

aaNet wx: HARRER W720 

Fade! Tage naat eft: we: 1 

BR HN dega eua fF 073 N 

From this comes Sattva and then Rajas and 
Brahma, Visnu and Maheša are of the nature of 
the three gunas. Brahma has the Rajo guna in Him 
preponderating; in Visnu, the Sattva guna 
preponderates and in Maheša, the Cause of all 
Causes, is said to reside the Tamo guna. 

ATA g T ITT arati 1 

aa aed ui wer ngi Sua 074 N 

Brahma is known as of the Gross Body; Visnu 
is known as of the Subtle Body; and Rudra is known 
as of the Causal Body and I am known as Turiya, 
transcending the Gunas. 

fui wei afr fatur nga d 

ferui aren dbi gūt ara ATT 75 1 

sé ad STRIBI dast: dufWyu | 

Jamafa ha darat aarp 1176 ut 

This Turīya Form of Mine is called the state of 
equilibrium of the Gunas. It is the Inner Controller 
of all. Beyond this there is another state of Mine 
which is called the Formless Brahma (Brahmana 
having no Forms). Know, verily, that my Forms 
are two, as they are with or without attributes 
(Saguna or Nirguna). That which is beyond Maya 
and the Mayic qualities is called Nirguna (without 
Prakrtic attributes) and that which is within Maya 
is called Saguna. 


yanafaa reme ft | 


1392 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


remet a cen fere] ust À OTA 0077 n 

gagh uerit sfreur gees regi i 

wrfaugereagedisé Wehr uper 78 u 

O Indra! After creating this universe, I enter 
within that as the Inner Controller of all and it is I 
that impel all the Jivas always to their due efforts 
and actions. Know, verily, that It is I that engage 
Brahma, Visnu and Rudra, the causes of the several 
works of creation, preservation and destruction of 
this universe (they are performing their functions 
by My Command). Through the terror from Me 
the wind blows; through my terror, the Sun moves 
in the sky; through My terror, Indra, Agni, and 
Yama do their respective duties. 1 am the Best and 
Superior to all. All fear Me. 


TATA RAT Sa vasa ART i 

gare Adah arsqafeanteary 179 u 

qafa taret fererei eater | 

min out wd He eui: 80 

at at natami gad fragu ferenda: 1 

aiana AAA GTA, 81 i 

Through My Grace you have obtained victory 
in the battle. Know, verily, that it is I that make 
you all dance like inert wooden dolls as My mere 
instruments. You are merely My functions. I am 
the Integral Whole. I give sometimes victory to 
you and sometimes victory to the Daityas; Yea, I 
do everything as I wili, keeping My independence 
duly and, according to the Karmas, justly. Oh! You 
all, have forgotten me though your pride and sheer 
nonsense. You have been carried deep into dire 
delusion by your vain egoism. 

ag aT: md YRT | 

frsgd wee dat dei aara 182 u 

aa: w adnàféa Td q A | 

Arta yi aa akaagana 83 u 

And know now that to favour you, this My 
Adorable Light has issued suddenly. Hence forth 
banish ever from your heart all your vain boastings 
and idle pratings. Take refuge wholly unto Me with 


all your head, heart and soul, unto My Saccidānanda 
Form and be safe. (At times the Devas forget and 
so fall into troubles).” 


E sATA 


zara a were gouna | 

araa Tat AE Tara GenfTET (1 84 N 

at: we nd g Aea Vads d 

: WO ss i 

frei weder ud masta: | 

aama: wa det frei RAAT u86 u 

Vyasa said: Thus saying, the Müla Prakrti, the 
Great Devi, the Goddess of the Universe, vanished 
from their sight. The Devas, on the other hand, 
began to praise Her then and there, with rapt 
devotion. Since that day, all the Devas quitted their 
pride and engaged themselves in worshipping the 
Devi devotedly. They worshipped the Gayatri Devi 
daily during the three Sandhya times and performed 
various Yajfias and thus they worshipped Bhagavati 
daily. 

wd erp ad median: | 

mead we Franaa: 87 N 

qaaa PITT aa Aa q gaf | 

q Rada frerfear Preeti ara ar 88 1 

Thus, in the Satya Yuga, everybody engaged 
themselves in repeating the Mantra Gāyatrī and 
worshipped the Goddess indwelling in the Pranava 
and Hrinkara. So, See now for yourself, that the 
worship of Visnu or Siva or initiation in the Visnu 
Mantra or in the Siva Mantra are not mentioned 
anywhere in the Vedas as to be done always and 
for ever. 

Teagan fear adae: uf 1 

"ar ferat rr: stares Aaa 89 11 

Aad paper smear PTT fi à 

TTastaratremmat firsit HeTmaTtTaTa «90 i 

They are done for à while and not required any 
more when the objects are fulfilled; only the 
worship of Gayatri is always compulsory, to be 
done at all times, as mentioned in the Vedas. O 


Book XII Chapter IX 


1393 


King! If a Brahmana does not worship the Gayatri, 
know, then, for certain, that in every way, he is 
sure to go down lower and lower. There is no doubt 
in this. A Brahmin is not to wait, no never, to do 
any other thing; he will have all his desires fulfilled 
if he worships only the Devi Gayatri. 
Alga ar patia we Aq: ven | 
Rara at qp maA PTT TTT: 94 M 
Ararat ferit are arte War i 
wae TTT: Odd 
adara smeeud festa: 92 1 
aft AERA Weng? gISRGBSBSEWSEHTTS 1) 8 1 
Bhagavan Manu says that a Brahmin, whether 
he does any other thing or not, can be saved if he 
worships only the Divine Mother Gayatri. (This 


worshipping the Gayatri is the highest, greatest, 
and most difficult of all the works in this universe). 
If any devotee of Siva or Visnu or of any other 
Deity worships his desired Deity without repeating 
the Gayatri, he is sure to suffer the torments of 
hell. (But this age of Kali deludes the people and 
draws away their minds from reciting this Gayatri 
save a few of them.) O King! For this reason, in 
the Satya Yuga, all the Brahmanas kept themselves 
fully engaged in worshipping the Gayatri and the 
lotus feet of the Devi Bhagavatī. 

Here ends the Eighth Chapter in the Twelfth Book 
on the appearance of the -Highest Sakti in the 
Mahapuranam Srimaddevibhagavatam 
of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book XII Chapter IX 


1393 


CHAPTER IX 
On the Cause of Sráddha in other Devas than the Devi Gayatri 


ara sara 


walter ATS qp eva aa fast d 

mimi adage a gad vided: uou 

EIE EDISIGIAESESS ES GSP TEC IE: | 

We Ue Wart qp Wen ed A VTERIĀ 02 i 

Vyasa said: O King Janamejaya! Once on a time, 
on account of an evil turn of Fate (Karma) of the 
human beings, Indra did not rain on this earth for 
fifteen years. Owing to want of rain, the famine 
appeared horribly; and almost all the beings lost 
their lives. No one could count in every house the 
number of the dead persons. 

efaearauerat saratea perf | 

wet a Ayo AAA SAT: 3 

awh ATG Rad yer wa a | 

afar afer: ae aperar ASM ART: 4 d 

Out of hunger the people began to eat horses; 
some began to eat bears and pigs, some began to 
eat the dead bodies while some others carried on 
any how their lives. The people were so much 
distressed with hunger that the mother did not 


88 


refrain from eating her baby child and the husband 
did not refrain from eating his wife. 

wan agama feat apea, d 

aaterat ritaatsfta a a: Ge afta us 

aA tered AARAA | 

"Taf sre HTT ST S ETAT nén 

gig spud aa MAA agat Tat: | 

ue fava year: MRAN: Heer: 11 7 Nn 

ATT: aag WATT U3: 1 

O King! The Brāhmaņas then united and after 
due discussion, came to the conclusion that they 
would go to the hermit Gautama who would be 
able to remove their distress. So all of them wanted 
to go quickly to the hermitage of the Muni Gautama. 
They began to say:“We hear that there is no famine 
in the hermitage of Gautama. Various persons are 
running there from various quarters." 

Wdasmeg: Aaaa: o 8 

UIK Sf EeRTETETATTÉRTSZI: MAA: | 

Br Wurst faut wort a Chers 409 4d 


Thus coming to a conclusion, the Brāhmaņas 


1394 


Srimaddevibhàgavatam 


went to the Gautama’s Aérama with their cows, 
servants and relations. Some went from the east; 
some from the south; some from the west, and some 
from the north. Thus from various quarters the 
people flocked there. 

MATIN WHAT WTSSTA | 

Gat PNÄ AAAI 40010 i 

a ad eagai nennen i 

gp arg: Ra agani axremagtr 131 N 

yearned aasa Aer | 

wat ferent am fearon afer ara formar n 12 11 

Seeing the Brahmanas coming there, the Rsi 
Gautama bowed down to them and gave them a 
cordial welcome and served them with seats, etc. 
When all took their seats and became calm and 
quiet, Gautama enquired about their welfare and 
the cause of their arrival. They described everything 
about the dire famine and their own states and 
expressed their deep regret. Seeing them very much 
distressed, the Muni gave them word not to have 
any fear; he said: “I am today become blessed by 
the arrival of the great ascetics and honourable 
persons like you. I am your servant. 

GRSRATATANĀ ei wd Wurm: d 

wi usnm: qund Geet 40130 

a ad wena weet Te ww | 

a Wea weg ei AAMT 11 14 N 

wa ad: gada Hearruumatt: 1 

You consider all my houses as yours. Be guite 
comfortable. Bear no uneasiness. When your 
servant is alive, what fear do your entertain and 
whom do you fear? When the demerits are 
transformed into good merits by your mere sight, 
and when you have blessed my house with the dust 
of your holy feet, then who is more blessed than 
me? O Vipras! Kindly perform your Sandhyās, and 
Japams and rest here at ease.” 


ru gara 


gf ratem siegt WPS wa: 15 
Treat mima afresh: 1 


amt efé werd deaur Vaat 116 

wurgenfemenisued  urewefufür | 

ATALANTA ATTA STATA 1 17 i 

TARA wat aM RAT | 

waco aeaa 18 N 

Vyasa said: O King Janamejaya! Thus consoling 
the Brahmanas, the Rsi Gautama began to worship 
the Gayatri Devi with rapt devotional trance. “O 
Devi Gayatri ! Obeisance to Thee! Thou art the 
Great Vidya, the Mother of the Vedas, Higher than 
the Highest; Thou art Vyārhiti represented by the 
Mantra ‘Om Bhur Bhuvah Svah,’ O Mother! Thou 
art the state of equilibrium, i.e., the Turiya; Thou 
art of of the Form of Hrim; Thou art Svaha and 
Svadhà; Thou grantest the desires of the Bhaktas. 

gatiran wr wfesrardassfuuftq i 

terere "19 

yatei tant MTA gat wm | 

IIT Porat at Gast Fret AAAS 20 NU 

Thou art the Witness of the three states, Jagrat 
(waking), Svapna (dreaming) and Susupti (deep 
sleep). Thou art the Turiya and Saccidānanda 
Brahma. O Devi ! Thou resident in the Solar Orb 
and appearest as a ruddy girl in the morning, an 
youthful maiden at noon and a black old woman 
in the evening. O Devi ! Obeisance to Thee! Now 
shew favour on us at this severe famine time when 
all the beings are well nigh on the way to 
destruction.” 

advert ef ama uwa ad 

gtr war SATA uera el eat 21 N 

yiri get wet da erd, à 

sara gta ur dd Hrd cafiresfir 11 22 1 

Thus praised and worshipped, the World-Mother 
appeared and gave to the Rsi one vessel (cup) full 
to the brim by which every one can be fed and 
nourished. The Mother told the Muni: “This full 
vessel, given by me to you will yield whatever you 
wish.” 


weg ufeei uri wer ari orfereater a 


Book XII Chapter LX 


sqratada qt mesh oat me 23 N 

art terete: wet: à 

wear fafan miona freres a 24 u 

spem a feces A ena E | 

dara a umi: Tati fafesumia an 25 n 

GaSe ARTA: 

werd Pott aamgrastuvturaa: 426 

Thus saying, the Devi Gayatri, Higher than the 
Highest, vanished. Then, according to the wish of 


the Muni, came out from that cup, mountains of] - 


cooked rice, various curries and sweetmeats, lots 
of grass and fodder, silken clothings, various 
ornaments and various articles and vessels for 
sacrificial purposes. In fact whatever the Muni 
Gautama wished, that came out of the brimful cup, 
given by the Devi Gayatri. 


aaga yia naana | 


mana aa el Wer n27 0 
mafea far: EN 
frigragiemreugeweuwdted p 28 


Then the Muni Gautama called the other Munis 
that came there and gave them wealth, grains, 
clothing, ornament, and the sacrificial ladles and 
spoons and cows and buffaloes for the sacrificial 
purposes. 

a ad farfesar grt erfznt free: | 

wad des Rrena AN 0 29 1 

aafaa etg uut aed Ga | 

awd aa Raa madea: 4301 

The Munis then assembled and performed 
various yajfias, The place all round, then flourished 
and became so much prosperous that it looked like 
a second heaven. In fact whatever fair and beautiful 


there exist in the Trilokas, all came from the brimful | 


cup given by the Devi Gayatri. 
imaam enr vita wpuunfefü 1 
Wat wag aaia: 0310 
freta: waqd TSG l 
aimed fénferor et ca eafent 32 N 


At this time the Munis, with sandaipaste all over 


—— 


1395 


on their bodies, and decorated with very bright 
ornaments looked like the gods and their wives 
looked like goddesses. Daily utsabs began to be 
held in in the Āšrama of Gautama. Nowhere were 
seen any diseases or dacoities and there was no 
fear from any such things. 
BUA Gt: WHRYDSURTUTSI: | 
SET urfürit ashe asta aa HATTAT: 033 N 
ais natga gS TAMAS i 
madaan: T: 34 N 
Gradually the ASrama’s boundary extended to 
one hundred Yojanas (4 hundred miles). Hearing 
this greatness of Gautama, many persons came 
there from various quarters. And the Muni 
Gautama, too, gave them words, 
and fed them. 

we we mgla snp 

RATA FART YAY orit Yoh WEA: 035 N 

Bet aa 1: feo meaa 

anrea wee: 1 
Areas ga ufedur at 
Ge aa q sies u36u 

The Devas, on the other hand, became very 
much satisfied by the various Yajfias and extolled 
the Muni's greatness. So much so, that the famous 
Indra, the Lord of the Devas, came in the midst of 
the assembly and extolled his greatness, thus: "This 
Gautama has fulfilled all our wishes and has verily 
become a Kalpa Vrksa (celestial tree yielding all 
desires). If this man had not done such things, in 
this hard famine time, we would not have got the 
Havih offered in sacrifices and the prospect of our 
lives would have been at stake." 

sed gen ai gure geram | 

vaardaa RaRa: 0370 

mA: UH TATA ae gH: | 

ga adia: wsed maa 138 N 

Frente Kat HT NRAN: | 

areata aa oct HT maaien g Tad 11 39 1 

Rama gad qur UTT g yu | 


[13 3! » 
cast away fear 


1396 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


O King Janamejaya! Thus the Muni Gautama 
fed and nourished for twelve years all the Munis, 
like his sons and that place came to be recognised 
as the chief centre (the Head Quarters) of the 
Gayatri Devi. Even today, all the Munis perform 
with devotion the Purasacaranams and worship 
thrice the Bhagavati Gayatri Devi. Even today 
the Devi is there seen as a girl in the morning, as 
a youthful maiden at noon, as an old woman in the 
evening. 


wear TAA Anal ATA: 40 N 

Wate MIATA: WXHTSQUIT | 

ferrara amet gA snferareram i 41 u 

Then, once on a time, Narada, of best conduct, 
came there playing on his great lute and singing in 
tune the highest glories of Gayatri and took his 
seat in the assembly of the Munis. 

Namana: Osta: STATA: 1 

AUT ferfere vrerat TAA wu 42 N 

wert aah gare We WENT | 

wit agfāti vere gA WU 43 U 

Seeing the tranquil hearted Narada coming there, 
Gautama and the other Munis received him duly 
and worshipped him with the Padya and Arghya. 
In course of conversation he began to describe the 
glories of Gautama and said: “O Best of Munis! I 
have heard from the mouth of Indra, in the assembly 
of the Devas, your glories as to your supporting 
and feeding the pure-hearted Munis and I have 
come to see you. 

spear mudati cat XEHSHRTG: | 

eanstt wa WERTE. SRTGTSITHHTG: 11 44 N 

saan yihad d maai wat | 

weet STAR at wurpesfqorga: 45 

By the Grace of Sri Bhagavati Gayatri Devi, 
you have now become blessed. There is no doubt 
in this.” Thus saying, the Devarsi Narada entered 
into the temple of the Devi Gayatri and with eyes 
gladdened by love, saw the Devi there and offered 


due hymns in praise of Her and then ascended to 
the Heavens. 

qure atad samt fated ga: 1 

ara aa foerat À a aaron giri: 46 N 

seed GWA: Spese Gramm: | 

aas UIT garnd Aa ea fü u 47 u 

Here, on the other hand, the Brahmanas that 
were fed by Gautama, became jealous at so much 
honour offered to Gautama and tried their best so 
that no further honour be paid to him. They further 
settled not to stay any longer in his A$rama, when 
the next good harvest season comes. (Thus his 
glories will wane). 

ire warme warfare nda FBT 1 

aa: aie faausunyggfetao 1 48 u 

yagniy AN | 

sar arat afters füfear: wdargar: 11 49 u 

Ue wrest Er et WC 1 

eat aut a fedt vatsaferttgvtt 50 11 

O King! Some days passed when good rains fell 
and there was an abundance of crops everywhere 
and the famine ended. Hearing this, all the 
Brahmins united, Alas! O King! to curse the 
Gautama. Oh! Their fathers and mothers are blessed 
in whom do not arise such feelings of jealousy! 
This all is the wonderful play of the powerful Time; 
it cannot be expressed by any person. 

career TT Tsay chat für NFTA 1 

Aa area quus gu ust i 

ST AT VTA STATS YNAT | 

girata Ar wrote wet tt 52 N 

O King! These Brahmins created, by Maya, an 
aged cow, who was to die and pushed her in the 
sacrificial hall of the Muni Gautama at the time of 
the Homa ceremony. Seeing that cow entering into 
the enclosure where the Homa was being performed, 
Gautama cried out "Hoom Hoom" when the cow 
fell there and died. 

taste gtūrd d wes | 

ard ware yAn feed at Wa: 153 u 

amirim: arrears INT | l 


Book XII Chapter IX 


1397 


And the other Brahmanas instantly cried out 
“Look! Look! The wicked Gautama has killed the 
cow.” Seeing this inconceivable event, Gautama 
was greatly nonplussed and, completing his Homa 
ceremony, entered into Samadhi and began to think 
the cause of it. 

wd wd Raffa arent aga a: 54 Nn 

aut alt vai wot xeu | 

wena a RTA TAU Berg: 55 U 

dana mazi quunt TATA | 

waaga Fa wear STEIUTETHI: 1 56 N 

Then, coming to know that this has been 
concocted by the Maya of the Bráhmins, he became 
angry like Rudra at the time of dissolution; his eyes 
were reddened and he cursed the Rsis, thus:LJOh 
vile Brahmins! When you are ready to cause 
mischief to me unjustly then let you be averse to 
meditate and do the japam of the Devi Gayatri, 
the Mother of the Vedas. 


dà AAwa mamiy ada a 

Va Fa wear EET: 11 57 N 

fora Pree TA er foras ada a | 

WAT IHS Fo Waal AROMAT: |! 58 |i 

For your this act, never you will be eager to 
perform any Vedic sacrificial acts or any action 
concerning thereof. There is no doubt in this. You 
will be always averse to the mantra of Siva or the 
Tantra of Siva. 

OVEN: HAT RATT RUTA E | 

TANT TA Fa Adar STRIUTERHT: 11 59 it 

def «ram Feat: AS EARN à 

VAAN Fa Waal SITETUITETHT: 11 60 N 

Wegereafüzemat Seem 

spare epum Fa Ada ATRTUTETAT: 11 61 i 

Adm urfeaest caterers TAT à 

TANITA gd det AROMAT: 0 62 |! 

You will be always averse to Mila Prakrti Sri 
Devi, to Her Dhyānam, mantra, to any conversation 
regarding Her; to the visiting of Her place or 


Temple, to do worship and other ceremonies to Her, 
to see the Grand Festivals of the Devi, to singing 
the names and glories of the Devi, to sit before the 
Devi and to adore Her. 


Rretarafēgamai ramet Wsri | 
VATITYS YS Hag ATOTTAT: 1 63 d 
TAA faran Er TAT SEE a STEHT | 
qamqa ei TAA STEIUTETHT: 4 64 N 
siamdar sant ada a | 


THATS Fa Waal ITEIUTTETHT: 1 65 Ui 
TĀM Brut iRam | 
SGT dd eher ARITA: 1166 |i 
Prerentrsriseatagrnteanr 1 
MAAS Bet Heal TEIUTRTHU 1167 N 
TATA Aa TAT Vast T 1 
VAAL HS we wer mU N 68 N 
namg ay fugeman da ft | 
MATTIAS Fs Waa STRIUTTETHT: 11 69 | 
qaaa wa ward ata a d 
O vile Brahmanas! You will be always averse 
to see the festivals of Siva, to worship Siva, to 
Rudraksa, to the Bel leaves, and to the holy Bhasma 
(ashes). You will be wholly indifferent to practise 
the right ways of living as presented in the Vedas 
and Smrtis, to preserve your conduct good and to 
observe the path of knowledge to Advaita Jfianam, 
to practise restraint of senses and continence, to 
the daily practices of Sandhya Vandanam, to 
performing the Agnihotra ceremonies, to the study 


of the Vedas according to one's own Šākhā or to 
the daily studies thereof as to teach those things or 
to give, as gifts, cows, etc., or to perform the 
Sraddhas of the fathers, etc., or to perform Krchra 
Candrayana and other penances. 

TANI gd User STEIUTETHT: (70 d 

shaira sraa ana: | 

viene Tad EET: 07 1 odi 

O Vile Brahmanas! As you are ready to do these 
mean things, you will have to suffer for this that 
you will desist from worshipping the Most 


1398 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Adorable Sri Bhagavati Devi and that you will 
worship the other Devas with faith and devotion 
and hold on your bodies Sankha, Cakra and other 


: N72 N 


Amaga afaa | 


walfamords ead GITEDUTTHT: 073 |! 
wWeferenferereagditeifernfirued9m | 
udfamfiurnde.gad METET: 0074 0 


You will follow the Kāpālikas, Bauddha Šāstras 
and other heretics. You will sell your father, 
mother, brothers, sisters, sons and daughters and 
even your wives too! You will sell the Vedas, 
Tirthas, and your Dharma. You will not feel 
ashamed in any way to sell all these. 

VIETĀ TAVA LT ATT MA 1 

ae AGTgAT ge Taa sTEIUTETHT: 075 N 

Teams sfr | 

meier: wd Mad EAT: 176 N 

"qué; GTI finus eure | 

Reread wafer weer: 0 77 N 

fe war Agata euam 1 

"TED WORT STHTETSHR Tae; fra 007 8 1 

stapag usy quid FIAT faf: 

You will certainly have faith in Kapalika and 
Bauddha opinions, Paficaratras and Kama Šāstras. 
O vile Brahmanas! You will not hesitate to go to 
your mother, daughters or sisters and you will 
always be licentious with others’ wives and spend 
your time in that. This is not to you only but to the 
women and men, all that will come in your families. 
Let the Gayatri Devi be always indignant with 
you and let you all go in the end to the Andha Küpa 
hells, etc. 


Sle sata 
anderai qiersupTegyet so Ad: 0 79 N 
"TA avari A TTT: UTA: | 
worm grādi ursfü edt wren gd 80 n 
eran ate ep ard ford wn € | 
eremfü aen aai Waa cw grad 81 N 


Vyasa said: O Janamejaya! Thus taking the 
water symbolising the true rules and laws of 
creation, and cursing the Brahmanas, the Muni 
Gautama went hastily to see the Gayatri Devi and, 
on arriving at the temple there bowed down to Her. 
The Devi, too, became surprised to see their 
actions. O King! Even to day Her Lotus Face looks 
similarly astonished! 

sara grad d XH | 

qimat get adaa 182 1 

vita pe ngr cwn fef i 

ota edi wurzarer wat sma WRT u 83 u 

Then the Gayatri Devi told Gautama with 
amazementL [*O Gautama! The venom of the snake 
does not become less if you feed the serpents with 
milk; so never mind all these things; thc Karmas 
take their peculiar turns; it is hard to say when will 
happen what things. 

wat fer: roerifaegar saree: | 

mad frat wera gaara 184 N 

a wdser FTA qp uar | 

writ d deaa af nss 

Now be peaceful. Do not be sorry." Hearing 
these words of the Devi, Gautama bowed down to 
Her and went thence to his own A&rama. Here, on 
the other hand, the Brahmanas forgot everything 
due to the curse of Gautama, of the Vedas and the 
Gayatri Mantra. They then began to look at this 
event with wonder as unique and extraordinary. 

"refer art qo osaga: Ren 1 

wdtefr wear wee ga: ga: gén 

rebar: Rad yeu | 

armen AHA € 87 i 

All united they afterwards repented and going 
before Gautama, fell prostrate at his feet. But they 
could not speak any word out of shame. Only they 
said frequently: “Be pleased, be pleased with us.” 
When all the assembly of the Brahmanas prayed 
to him for favour and grace, the Muni Gautama 
took pity on them and replied. My word will never 
turn out false. 


Book XII Chapter IX 


1399 


aonad setae srafecerfer: | 

ah ares qur sqarfefer arta weer n 88 1 

at: Wafer afer orn rafes ATA | 

ged we vada A MAN 189 d 

ATBTUTU anand HTH eerd | 

aft dei war udrfesftademm 1190 N 

You will have to remain in Kumbhīpāka hell 
upto the time when Šrī Krsna will take his 
incarnation. Then you will be born in the earth in 
the Kali age and whatever I have uttered will 
exactly come unto you. And if you are in earnest 
to avert my curse then go and worship the Lotus 
Feet of Sri Gayatri Devi. The is no other remedy. 


wre Sara 

gfe Valfagema Tt aera: à 

mart treat qp foret rift ST e971 0 

KET TATA Por q tff 1 

mer at ugs g strae Petar: 92 n 

fer SAT STATUTE AT TTS: GT | À 1 

damama mestutrafeaam: 193 n 

agua urea: d 

aftagrafearndvaerrarenferatira: 94 N 

Vyasa said: Thus dismissing the Brāhmaņas, 
Gautama Muni thought that all these occurred as a 
result of Prárabdha Karma and he became calm 
and quiet. For this reason, after Sri Krsna Maharaja 
ascended to the Heavens, when the Kali age came, 
those cursed Brahmanas got out of the Kumbhi 
paka hell and took their births in this earth as 
Brahmins, devoid of the three Sandhyas, devoid 
of the devotion to Gayatri, devoid of faith in the 
Vedas, advocating the heretics’ opinion and 
unwilling to perform Agnihotra and other religious 
sacrifices and duties and they were devoid of 
Svadha and Svaha. 

Wege fnreraat ra arate Hera | 

wWungsifendr: defereenrHTe Tt: Ut d 95 N 


TR: ASRA erg VATETATUT à 

tfsar aft a ud guemede 96 

wer M$ grena: 1 

They forgot entirely the Unmanifested Müla 
Prakrti Bhagavatī. Some of them began to mark 
on their bodies various heretical signs, e.g., 
Taptamudrā, etc.; some became Kāpālikas; some 
became Kaulas; some Bauddhas and some Jainas. 
Many of them, though learned, became lewd and 
addicted to other's wives and engaged themselves 
in vain and bad disputations. 

heftar ga: wed reife Prarie: t 97 

amaaan waar TA 1 

a fast fen a f?raramra «em i 98 u 

fere eiturerat renard feram qp eere: | 

eus WAT Up AMSAT 199 N 

aa: wi auant sup KET | 

AA SITTHTEITUT IAAT STRE: 1100 N 

sft sfera: eng] STRRIre erat AAA 
STAV RR] TIAA: 09d 


For these, they will have to go again surely to 
the Kumbhipaka hell. So O King! Worship with 
your heart and soul Sri Bhagavati Paramešvarī 
Devi. The worship of Visnu or Siva is not constant 
(to be done everyday); only the worship of Sakti is 
to be constantly performed. For this reason 
whoever does not worship Sakti is sure to fall. Thus 
I have answered all your questions. Now 1 shall 
describe the highest and most beautiful place, 
Manidvipa of the Primal Force Bhagavati, the 
Deliverer from this bondage of world. Listen. 
Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on 

the cause of Sraddha in other Devas than the 
Devi Gayatri in the Mahapuranam 
Srimaddevibhagavatam of 18,000 
verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1400 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


ST 


CHAPTER X 
On the Description of Mani Dvipa 


Gra Jara 

GAGA UTT SKT A: A: | 

"ferita: a vata ga edt fene uod n 

adane Tene HAT: WI: i 

WT nma uwfegdt waa 02 d 

Vyasa said: O King Janamejaya! What is known 
in the Srutis, in the Subala Upanisad as the 
Sarvaloka over the Brahmaloka, that is Manidvipa. 
Here the Devi resides. This region is superior to 
all the other regions. Hence it is named 
"Sarvaloka." The Devi built this place of yore 
according to Her will. 

wafer frrararel wera Weyer | 

Aaaf east depverefu item: 11 3 n 

tetra nid feras: vage: | 

"aeri PIOTERTĪ q Yat feret sara 11 4 u 

In the very beginning, the Devi Müla Prakrti 
Bhagavati built this place for Her residence, 
superior to Kaila$a, Vaikuntha and Goloka. Verily 
no other place in this universe can stand before it. 
Hence it is called Manidvipa or Sarvaloka as 
superior to all the Lokas. 

wed Breet wadang, | 

sanyi maa sumen g RAR: 5 N 

agda iaa fe 1 

nirt utt add g yR: nen 

This Manidvipa is situated at the top of all the 
regions, and resembles an umbrella. Its shadow falls 
on the Brahmanda and destroys the pains and 
sufferings of this world. Surrounding this 
Manidvipa exists an ocean called the Sudha 
Samudra, many yojanas wide and many yojanas 


deep. 
sāta i 
ELESE VEJE kadi f : U7 
diferdiwieismaegtteitae: 
TATA TATU TaT: "gun 


Many waves arise in it due to winds. Various 
fishes and conches and other aquatic animals play 
and here the beach is full of clear sand like gems. 
The sea-shores are kept always cool by the splashes 
of the waves of water striking the beach. Various 
ships decked with various nice flags are plying to 


and fro. 
Rma: Raring ATT | 
agame AAA mM ad: 19 
wrerarsrrferttut: ure add MET | 
IHTPTENWENUT MN ARE: 0010 0i 


Various trees bearing gems are adorning the 
beach. Across this ocean, there is an iron enclosure, 
very long and seven yojanas wide, very high so as 
to block the Heavens. 

Tact rada nemm: Mad: | 

>: 811 

arm: uftgdt Gdhufenpds 1 

astra mai a at seat erg: 12 

Within this enclosure wall the military guards 
skilled in war and furnished with various weapons 
are running gladly to and fro. There are four 
gateways or entrances; at every gate there are 
hundreds of guards and various hosts of the 
devotees of the Devi. Whenever any Deva comes 
to pay a visit to the Jagadi$vari, their Vahanas 
(carriers) and retinue are stopped here. 

WWE wom Ada Tes a wu fu 1 

famasi ra aanp: 13 N 

rnga paR: | 

TH: froen EAS MZT: 14 N 

O King! This place is being resounded with the 
chimings of the bells of hundreds of chariots of 
the Devas and the neighings of their horses and 
the sounds of their hoofs. The Devas walk here 
and there with canes in their hands and they are 
chiding at intervals the attendants of the Devas. 


Book XII Chapter X 


1401 


Rant cadet ATT Ta are 1 

frater Tera ies: cafe t 15 i 

meafg seid armato i 

ua ue fimerRufigeiwifW a nie 

This place is so noisy that no one can hear clearly 
another’s word. Here are seen thousands of houses 
adorned with trees of gems and jewels and tanks 
filled with plenty of tasteful good sweet waters. 

afta ferferer trary vergatenatsrr: | 

age ngenang aaie: 17 

VITA STR werte TATE APT: | 

AT MST: yim Us 1 18 N 

O King! After this there is a second enclosure 
wall, very big and built of white copper metal (an 
amalgam of zinc or tin and copper); it is so very 
high that it almost touches the Heavens. It is 
hundred times more brilliant than the preceding 
enclosure wall; there are many principal entrance 
gates and various trees here. 

temata agga aT: 1 

UTAH TA: iferratearea Git a 1 19 N 

fri yaga: dgmoaafaat: | 

rane: under 201 

What to speak of the trees there more than this 
that all the trees that are found in this universe are 
found there and they bear always flowers, fruits 
and new leaves! All the quarters are scented with 
their sweet fragrance! 

TTT agen ore enfüTen Tg er STAT: | 

aena suns Pata: 021 

Pig fepe ST HAT: RERAN | 

Weert qae wfee uen 22 

MERAN: TCT CT ANAA: | 

Warm: Cera: Areata d VITRA: 23 Ul 

arrest feres urere TV erm: 0 

mAr iana sieta ÅER: |1 24 1 

iter siersffarzer a À RARA: | 

moyna am AANT: 25 ! 

geju qfaia AANT: | 

Aaaa aR Aaea 1126 N 


FaR: pe gan facraganeaada wt i 

yoi amda ufeseni ada a 271 

O King! Now hear, in brief, the names of some 
of the trees that are found in abundance there: 
Panasa, Vakula, Lodhra, Karņikāra, Šinšapa, 
Deodara, Kāñcanāra, mango, Sumeru, Likuca, 
Hingula, Ela, Labanga, Kat fruit tree, Pātala, 
Mucukunda, Tala, Tamàla, Sala, Kankola, 
Nāgabhadra, Punnāga, Pilu, Sālvaka, Karpüra, 
Ašvakarņa, Hastikarņa, Talaparna, Pomegranate, 
Gaņikā, Bandhujīva, Jamvīra, Kurandaka, 
Cāmpeya, Bandhujīva, Kanakavrksa, Kālāguru 
(usually coiled all over with cobras, very black 
poisonous snakes), Sandaltree, Datetree,Yūthikā, 
Talaparni, Sugarcane, Ksira-tree, Khadira, 
Bhallataka, Rucaka, Kutaja, Bel tree and others, 
the Talasī and Mallika and other forest plants. 

sates AATgTANTA U | 

maia fa è 1128 u 

EZIE SHEEP Ra EH S EP ES E LS LE 

Naire: Ud KARIESTTTETT: 029 N 

ATAKA TAT gat ATATUTARATĶOT: | 

"ererenfavfifsridtfsnfesnferm: 300 

The place is interspersed with various forests 
and gardens. At intervals there are wells, tanks, 
etc., adding very much to the beauty of the place. 
The cuckoos are perching on every tree and they 
are cooing sweetly, the bees are drinking the honey 
and humming all around, the trees are emitting 
juices and sweet fragrance all around. The trees 
are casting cool nice shadows. The trees of all 
seasons are seen here; on the tops of these are sitting 
pigeons, parrots, female birds of the Mayanà 
species and other birds of various other species. 


BIC RTA ATT: l 


daug gaa g  — 0311 
wimg agde, 1 
afet 9 eRuitgdeatamsRaad: 132 0 


There are seen rivers flowing at intervals 
carrying many juicy liquids. The Flamingoes, 


1402 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


swans, and other aquatic animals are playing in 
them. The breeze is stealing away the perfumes of 
flowers and carrying it all around. 

ISA hana: gaye: | 

fad det feet wepenfe we: 133 N 


HIMES AT q MaN: Wenthera: i 
USN SAT MAAA: 10034 di 


The deer are following this breeze. The wild 
mad peacocks are dancing with madness and the 
whole place looks very nice, lovely and charming. 
Next this Kamsya enclosure comes the third 
enclosure wall of copper. It is square shaped and 
seven yojanas high. 


waked ureatitā tem aseo | 
Qat aeri ufo entera yf 11 35 N 
"arfür Adama Id A VA at | 
Gats fF wadfa ara: 136 tl 


Within this are forests of Kalpavrksas, bearing 
golden leaves and flowers and fruits like gems. 
Their perfumes spread ten yojanas and gladden 
things all around. The king of the seasons preserves 
always this place. 

agt Wart maada, d 

yafe: weregafeufs: 37 N 

yards yaaga: 1 

meusftnterasftiu d Tā wu dud ut 38 n 

The king’s seat is made of flowers; his umbrella 
is of flowers; ornaments made of flowers; he drinks 
the honey of the flowers; and, with rolling eyes, 
he lives here always with his two wives named 
Madhu Šrī and Madhava Sri. The two wives of 
Spring have their faces always smiling. 

«ga: Braet yrange: 

ada vat ai ngea wart: 139 N 

adadi paag 1 

vid feared: wien: 1400 

They play with bunches of flowers. This forest 
is very pleasant. Oh! The honey of the flowers is 
seen here in abundance. The perfumes of the full 
blown flowers spread to a distance of ten yojanas. 


The Gandharvas, the musicians, live here with their 
Wives, 


VITA dat feat nanna | 

Wque«rogituqud tnu a "41u 

aera HIT: wed: 

ASST: ās, n42u 

The places round this are filled with the beauties 
of the spring and with the cooing of cuckoos. No 
doubt this place intensifies the desires of the 
amorous persons! O King! Next comes the 
enclosure wall, made of lead. Its height is seven 
yojanas. Within this enclosure there is the garden 
of the Santanaka tree. 

Warrerféermed vmeshq FAT 1 

arate VAN Had: 10043 

fira apre eer ferie i 

snpdsewiqeunet- AT a 044 i 

The fragrance of its flowers extends to ten 
yojanas. The flowers look like gold and are always 
in full bloom. Its fruits are very sweet. They seem 
to be imbued with nectar drops. 

Thera areca Tuner | 

yasha yfastiar 8 AT aver Had 45 N 

"areae JA ATT: | 

"erar: aftgat area: aaa: 46 n 

In this garden resides always the Summer 
Season with his two wives Sukra Sri and Suci Sri. 
The inhabitants of this place always remain under 
trees; otherwise they will be scorched by summer 
rays. Various Siddhas and Devas inhabit this place. 


Garena MoAA: 147 
Wren: ITT vrersdterererFrafafsr: | 
TMB: YA: 0480 


The female sensualists here get their bodies all 
anointed with sandal paste and all decked with 
flower garlands and they stalk to and fro with fans 
in their hands. There is water to be found here very 
cool and refreshing. 

Want add wenns | 

ftriegammi ardt wat: cup: 049! 


Book XII Chapter X 


1403 


Vada o adia: 1 

Raknes SAM: wp: 150 N 

And owing to heat all the people here use this 
water. Next to this lead enclosure comes the wall 
made of brass, the fifth enclosure wall. It is seven 
yojanas long. In the centre is situated the garden 
of Hari Candana trees. Its ruler is the Rainy Season. 

aahon aiaa: 1 

azai aan femme mgA: N51 N 

Asia aaah: arane | 

stat gor Prianie Gur 52 1 

adad feraftret Ren wr cat: | 

adagia utet: vraerat Wafergon: 53 N 

The lightnings are his anburn eyes; the clouds 
are his armour, the thunder is his voice and the 
rainbow is his arrow. Surrounded by his hosts he 
rains incessantly. He has twelve wives: (1) Nabhah 
Sri, (2) Nabhahsya Sri, (3) Svarasya, (4) 
Rasyasālinī, (5) Amba, (6) Dula, (7) Niratni, (8) 
Abhramanti, (9) Megha Yantika, (10) Varsayanti, 
(11) Civunika, and (12) Varidhara (some say 
Madamattā). 

AAUFVAgFA MU ataei: | 

vftarfer quara Aea Aers 11 54 i 

adaware Vaga a dm: | 

wie galaa utara cw 55 N 

All the trees here are always seen with new 
leaves and entwined with new creepers. The whole 
site is covered all over with fresh green leaves and 
twigs. The rivers here always flow full and the 
current is strong, indeed! The tanks here are very 
dirty like the minds of worldly persons attached to 
worldly things. 

fer dar rars 4 taR: 1 

adipem À dead datē: 156 N 

strum PIAA ferramenta: | 

amend Amata 1571 

The devotees of the Devī, the Siddhas and the 
Devas and those that consecrated in their life times 
tanks, wells, and reservoirs for the satisfaction of 


the Devas dwell here with their wives. O King! 
Next to this brass enclosure comes, the sixth 
enclosure wall made of five fold irons. 

Ware: Wrest Wet Haake | 

magusa ATAUG TTT 15.8 N 

SEIS HA: INGA: |d 

zyeadhesemdid art au daa 59 1 

arity ATA war: wuftesqr: i 

User waaay 60 1 

It is seven yojanas long. In the centre is situated 
the Garden of Mandara trees. This garden is 
beautified by various creepers, flowers and leaves. 
The Autumn season lives here with his two wives 
isulaksmi and Urjalaksmi and he is the ruler. 
Various Siddha persons dwell here with their wives, 
well clothed. O King! Next to this comes the seventh 
enclosure wall, seven yojanas long and built of 
silver. 

dart wert terra: | 

maeh neat ATAKA 61 N 

arate gam ada: d 

reae Toray à dta: 162 0 

In the centre is situated the garden of Parijata 
trees. They are filled with bunches of flowers. The 
fragrance of these Parijatas extend upto the ten 
Yojanas and gladden all the things all around. 
Those who are the Devi Bhaktas and who do the 
works of the Devi are delighted with this fragrance. 

amaa: daet addaa: | 

m: urge: Vata R ism: 63 

mesia ueersfti wm ma uud | 

ada aa fuer gaa: u64u 

The Hemanta (Dewy) season is the Regent of 
this place. He lives here with his two wives Saha 
Šrī and Sahasya Šrī and with his hosts. Those who 
are of a loving nature are pleased hereby. 

Taree nugis | 

wrauizme: HITU: 165 N 

"EH maaa qp Yarra | 

aaam: weder weet: d 66 U 


1404 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


Those who have become perfect by performing 
the Vratas of the Devi live here also. O King! Next 
to this silver, there comes the eighth enclosure wall 
built of molten gold. It is seven Yojanas long. 

EE GIH IG HEREISIE EISE S OC 1 

amma: apts: Andia: 067 0 

washer amasik wf ara www d 

mama: temati add Raa: u 68 n 

In the centre there is the garden of the Kadamba 
tree. The trees are always covered with fruits and 
flowers and the honey is coming out always from 
the trees from all the sides. The devotees of the 
Devi drink this honey always and feel intense 
delight; the Dewy Season is the Regent of this 
place. 

MANENT: | 
3 edema: 169 11 
ATAKA aT: — |d 
arr Rag dam: RaRa: 170 1 

He resides here with his two wives Tapah Sri 
and Tapasyā Sri and his various hosts, and enjoys 
gladly various objects of enjoyments. Those who 
had made various gifts for the Devi's satisfaction, 
those great Siddha Purusas live here with their 
wives and relatives very gladly in various enjoy- 


"referee 
raat merrt 


ments. 

waren gaa, d 

WSHETTU: wie: Hafan: 0710 

wenn spfüeeme Wen u | 

TOTQRITOSIROISI TATA: BAT: 0072 0 

O King! Next to this golden enclosure well 
comes the ninth enclosure made of red Kumkum 
like (saffron) Pusparaga gems. The ground inside 
this enclosure, the ditches or the basins for water 
dug round their roots are all built of Pusparaga 
gems. 

WIE GRE IR TRA FAT: 1 

aay: wanda wave w 73 N 

"eur tenet: ahs eset wr | 

Want aa aera ara Ta 74 N 


Next to this wall there are other enclosure walls 
built of various other gems and jewels; the sites, 
forests, trees, flowers birds, rivers, tanks, lotuses, 
mandapas (halls) and their pillars are all built 
respectively of those gems. Only this is to be 
remembered that those coming nearer and nearer 
to the centre are one lakh times more brilliant than 
the ones receding from them. 

Rma aag wet | 

ATT eeg ot: KĀVTOTATĪ qu 175 Nn 

ECRI Fades uisi eof | 

PATI KARA: PRANJA: 76 N 

This is the general rule observed in the con- 
struction of these enclosures and the articles 
contained therein. Here the Regents of the several 
quarters, the Dikpàlas, representing the sum total 
of the several Dikpalas of every Brahmànda and 
their guardians reside. 

vata miim qund a 

i winaa wÀ 0770 

TAN erar e ara erts ETER | 

waa ap: BAT (078 0 

On the eastern quarter is situated the Amaravati 
city. Here the high-peaked mountains exist and 
various trees are seen. Indra, the Lord of the Devas, 
dwells here. Whatever beauty exists in the separate 
Heavens in the several places, one thousand times, 
rather more than that, exists in the Heaven of this 
cosmic Indra, the thousand-eyed, here. 


aa afeqt agga gu uso u 
Here Indra mounting on the elephant Airavata, 
with thunderbolt in his hand, lives with Šacī Devi 
and other immortal ladies and with the hosts of the 
Deva forces. On the Agni (south-eastern) corner is 
the city of Agni. This represents the sum total of 
the several cities of Agni in different Brahmandas. 
TTU ater fers | 
faerie Paaa: su 


Book XII Chapter X 


1405 


"rng sagt ax det ngA | 

wawrédfgd! Tar, Perera: 082 N 

Here resides the Agni Deva very gladly with 
his two wives Svāhā and Svadha and with his 
Vāhana and the other Devas. On the south is 
situated the city of Yama, the God of Death. Here 
lives Dharma Raja with rod in his hand and with 
Citragupta and several other hosts. 

fragifesget maas fier AT MET 1 

"reca fafyr ari tara: uttartta: N 83 n 

IcEuPIHESUEIESBEEASIE gar; | 

ASV THU TT UTA ATA l 84 li 

On the south-westen comer is the place of the 
Ráksasas. Here resides Nirrti with his axe in his 
hand and with his wife and other Raksasas. On the 
west is the city of Varuna. 

Rees! Teva: 1 

Raaranga frame: t 85 i 

MATE arent wich ART: | 

ATH argotat argeramtrmgtm i! 86 U 

Here Varuna raja resides with his wife Vāruņī 
and intoxicated with the drink of Varuni honey; 
his weapon is the noose, his Vahana is the King of 
fishes and his subjects are the aquatic animals. On 
the north-western corner dwells Vayudeva. 

agatmdttrgatftrr: RaRa: 1 

Eat! from? FTATETĪRT: | 87 1 

meant: uaa Franaa aa: | 

IRR fatt ART eat stat AAT 11 8 8 1 

Here Pavana Deva lives with his wife and with 
the Yogīs perfect in the practice of Prāņāyāma. 
He holds a flag in his hand. 

"Tene RTT sega HA: 0 

afuf-ifürfiriensifeot trem: 189 N 

"fm: wind AARTEN: | 

nna wfürerdt uftrenfaent: 190 tl 

His Vahana, is deer and his family consists of 
the forty nine Vayus. On the north resides the 
Yaksas. The corpulent King of the Yaksas, Kubera, 
lives here with his Saktis Vrddhi and Rddhi, and 


in possession of various gems and jewels. His 
generals Manibhadra, Pürnabhadra, Maniman, 
Manikandhara, Manibhüsa, Manisragvi, Manikar- 
mukadhari, etc., live here. 

zaraa Praga | 

Hmm viuredt wxccRD OWENS 8910 

amekaa Ja Asfa, | 

Tord wags: 092 

On the north eastern corner is situated the Rudra 
loka, decked with invaluable gems. Here dwells 
the Rudra Deva. On His back is kept the arrow- 
case and he holds a bow in his left hand. He looks 
very angry and his eyes are red with anger. 

sfirsaerahinrad: | 

BATIS:  VISONTTÜ: 0093 

fagared: atecdtdugiafinnaa: à 

weed: wat: MAHA: 194 0 

agraredynfráferTaremafafur: l 

There are other Rudras like him with bows and 
spears and other weapons, surrounding him. The 
faces of some of them are distorted; some are very 
horrible indeed! Fire is coming out from the mouths 
of some others. Some have ten hands; some have 
hundred hands and some have thousand hands; 
some have ten feet; some have ten heads whereas 
some others have three eyes. 

sieftaren A a aa rfe: Bat: 95 N 

EANA CAT SAT: VĀNI VATA: | 

saina srzensresfamqfir: 1196 U 

aMinferamasermatarnad: | 

dhusieateet est o efenTed 197 1 

Those who roam in the intermediate spaces 
between the heaven and earth, those who move on 
the earth, or the Rudras mentioned in the 
Rudradhyaya all live here. O King! Īšāna, the 
Regent of the north eastern quarter lives here with 
Bhadrakālī and other Mātrgaņas, with Kotis and 
Kotis of Rudrani s and with Dàmaris and Vira 
Bhadras and various other Saktis. 

AUSTEN ma ANTHEM: | 

arate wmf: 198i 


1406 Šrīmaddevibhāgavatam 


- 
famae sain: ure: | is smeared with the ashes of the dead. He sounds 
fraasmaanattmtaatega: 991 frequently his Damaru; this sound reverberates on 
SRST ELSES: HTAA: | all sides, he makes big laughs called Attahasya, 
eet spuramdo AEM: d 100 N reverberating through the heavens. He remains 
SVIRA: TS AT VTA UST 00101 N always surrounded with Pramathas and Bhütas; 

gt MAMTA ergo? genes they live here. 
que 1010 11 Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on 
On his neck there is a garland of skulls, on his | the description of Mani Dvipa in the Mahapuranam 
hand there is a ring of snakes; he wears a tiger Srimaddcvibhagavatam of 18,000 verses 


skin; his upper clothing is a tiger skin and his body by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1406 Šrīmaddevibhāgavatam 


s: 
pe See Fhe E ee ee ea eee cuan: = M iek eas neers or ee ey VE 
CHAPTER XI 
On the Description of the Enclosure Walls Built of Padmaragamani, etc., of the Mani Dvipa 
Cara IATA Ramah urfāsft mrasft Pravtart 1 
Tema hpenn: | yan aga U hans tgaA 1 7 N 
anma: wet wet usa arggft nju fewer ATT ageet qaei d 
arias — Targa: d patafāgta: off: fiat: deferta aus N 
Afraid Wueur mu 2 N dear are Ut sat far efsrest wi i 


Vyasa said: O King Janamejaya! Next to this; ma mad gant area 9 
Pusparāga mani enclosure wall comes the tenth | Aydi aegen qanat i 
enclosure wall, made of Padmarága mani, red like atest cede a agettat gata n 10 
the red Kumkuma and the Rising Sun. It is ten | Raga uaaa Wem VT | 
yojanas high. All its ground, entrance gates and màm vàm àm Aa Aa: WU 01 1 Ui 
temples and arbours are all made of Padmaraga SRI YSU ATTA | 


mani. aang — ada 1.2 
meet yf anag: aE: Ber: | ST GT wafer Yea | 
amet dt  xenquunqfügno 3 u aimi IATA TA: GT N 1 3 N 
ILO! t ACCT ATTA: | maaa A agn YIPWHRT | 
aaa uftari Rea: Mar 4 n saren a ami Vg aA: BAT: 11 1 4 1 
vestra BT: ITRAIEARĪTRT: 1 They are: Pingalāksī, Visalaksi, Samrddhi, 


wat mer aaa TT ed STĀSTA 11 5 u Vrddhi, Sraddha, Svāhā, Svadhā, Maya, Smjūā, 

Within this reside the sixty four Kalas or Sub- | Vasundhara, Trilokadhatri, Savitri, Gayatri, 
Saktis adorned with various ornaments and holding | Tridae$vari, Surüpa, Bahurüpa, Skandamata, 
weapons in their hands. Each of them has a separate | Acyutapriya, Vimala, Amala, Aruni, Aruni, Prakrti, 
Loka (region) allotted and within this Loka he has | Vikrti, Sristi, Sthiti, Samhrti, Sandhya, Mata, Sati, 
get his own formidable weapons, Vahanas, families | Hamsi, Mardika, Vajrika, Para, Devamata, 
and their leaders or Governors. O King! Now hear | Bhagavati, Devaki, Kamalasana, Trimukhī, 


the names of the sixty four Kalas. Saptamukhi, Surāsuravimardinī, Lambosthī, 
irena fasmenat ugfsdfeata w d | Ūrdhvakešī, Bahušīrsā, Vrkodarī Ratharekhāhvayā, 


START ITE PATA ATT UT AFI tén Saśirekā, Gaganavega, Pavanavega, Bhuvanapala, 


Book XII Chapter XI 


Madanāturā, Ananga, 


Anangamekhala, Anangakusuma, Visvarupa, 


Anangamathana, 


Suradikà, Ksayankari, Aksyobhya, Satyavadini, 
Bahurūpā, Šucivratā, Udārā and Vāgīsī. These are 
the sixty four Kalās. 

TACHA: Hat AHA ACAI 1 

we fram: wars tert RIHTERTH 15 0 

Wad xdsraritsur Vara shay TATE | 

sft ari afta meres: 11 16 0 

All of them have got luminous faces and long 
lolling tongues. Fire is always coming out from 
the faces of all of them. The eyes of all of them are 
red with anger. They are uttering: We will drink 
all the water and thus dry up the oceans; we will 
annihilate fire, we will stop the flow of air and 
control it. Today we will devour the whole universe 
and so forth. 


forttectchya: UATT: TT 1 

sraradrfaforesr AARRE: Wartfetat 1 1 8 1 

All of them have got bows and arrows in their 
hands; all are eager to fight. The four quarters are 
being reverberated with the clashing of their teeth. 
The hairs on their heads are all tawny and they 
stand upwards. Each of them has one hundred 
Aksauhini forces under them. 

UA T: AMA SAIRE | 

wraraftfeuftenr Gar wreyf qus ou19 

faa PUTINA aaa TT | 

waite agat API? ferat As u 20 i 


1407 


Vera curfu: — d 

arrestee ma add wer 022 0 

ATT META TEV | 

Theatre ABT a aT N 23 N 

All the war materials exist within their 
enclosures. Chariots, horses, elephants, weapons, 
and forces all are unlimited. All the war materials 
are ready at all times and in abundance. Next comes 
the eleventh enclosure wall built of Gomedamani. 
Itis ten Yojanas high. Its colour is like the newly 
blown Javà flower. 

"faro: aata qu amar: TIA wr | 

Teeter us wherever 024 

TAA WECM BATT TT: Tad: | 

ameaga nAngA: n25 1 

All the ground, trees, tanks, houses, pillars, birds 
and all other things are all red and built of 
Gomedamani. Here dwell the thirty-two Maha 
Saktis adorned with various ornament made of 
Gomedamani and furnished with various weapons. 

Amama: Rard aida: | 

Ween cenar Agradan TT 026 1 

aeiaatttitāi ufsarssres: | 

mera Parte wer Fister atfa a 27 0 

aafia Had ure JARAT: | 

Ukren WETSTeRTGSTERfEfUTERT Wat lt 28 ui 

They are always eager to fight. Their eyes are 
always red with anger; their bees are like Pisacas 
and their hands are like cakras (discs). “Pierce 
Beat him," “ 


55 «€ 


Cut him," "Tear him asunder,” 
“Burn him down," are the words constantly uttered 


him, 


O King! What more to say than this that each of| by them. The inhabitants of the place always 
them has got power to destroy one lakh| worship them. Each of them has ten Aksauhini 


Brahmàndas; and their one hundred Aksauhini 
forces also can do the same. There is nothing that 
is not impracticable with them. What they cannot 
do cannot be conceived by mind nor can be uttered 
in speech. 
TUTAT raram «fist SAAT HRT TAT i 
WRATH ASANO TTUTAT TAT 4.2 1 0 


forces. 
ra aradan aaaea A 1 
agyi weraar autdttar web 29 11 
vere Aa GTUTHT TESTS ada a | 
wigan wem Rund 130 1 
These are inordinately powerful. It is impossible 
to describe that. It seems that each Sakti can easily , 


1408 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


destroy one lakh Brahmāņdas. Innumerable 
chariots, elephants, horses, etc., and other vahanas 
are here. Verily all the war materials of the Devi 
Bhagavati are seen in this Gomedamani enclosure. 
rat «mifer erai arasmerenufoT ur | 
foargtyga: wat ferfrardt qug u 31 
eat dtat war «tar drfervft aefagar IRT à 
meaa wufedi 32 
——À——BÀus 
Aoga engah 33 n 
zani ta sah yinni 1 
art mi wa Aaaa E n34 n 
sifra gA uad Irma: STAT: | 
adm: HUT CAT EEA 35 u 
Now I am mentioning the auspicious, sin 
destroying names of these Saktis: Vidya, Hri, Pusti, 
Prajfia, Sinivali, Kuhü, Rudra, Virya, Prabha, 
Nanda, Posani, Rddhidā, Subha, Kālarātri, 
Maharatri, Bhadra Kali, Kaparddini, Vikriti, 
Dandi, Mundini, Sendukhandà, Sikhandini, 
Nišumbhašumbhamathanī, Mahisasuramarddini, 
Indrani, Rudrani, Šankarārdhašārīriņī, Nari, 
Nīrāyaņī Trišūlinī, Palini, Ambika, and Hlādinī. 
(See the Daksina Mūrti Sarnhita and other Tantras.) 
Waa S Marat esarferererferefea ft 1 
Tenant naaa Aa: Nagu 
ardis Ageng: 1 
AUGS MAJAN: 037 u 
Never there is any chance that they will be 
defeated anywhere. Hence if all those aktis get 
angry at any time, this Brahmànda ceases to exist. 
Next to this Gomeda enclosure comes the enclosure 
made of diamonds. It is ten yojanas high; on all 
sides there are the entrance gates; the doors are 
hinged there with nice mechanisms. 
INTA eret KIT I 1 
Fert diera ten remiss wu 38 n 
AATGAGAA: Are sf TEV: 1 
Aam t aTIKTSTT: HATTA: 11 39 N 


Nice new diamond trees exist here. All the roads, 


royal roads, trees, and the spaces for watering their 


roots, tanks, wells, reservoirs, Sáranga and other 
musical instruments are all made of diamonds. 
aa yaaa cata ufverften | 
keza syair: Afa nanfa: n40 N 


AMAT: wire TAIRI: \ 
lb hii aaa RR: "41 
arasan Ram faee: l 


ander: ene cw Ica WT: 043 N 

Here dwells Šrī Bhuvaneávari Devi with Her 
attendants. O King! Each of them has a lakh 
attendants. All of them are proud of their beauty. 
Some of them are holding fans in their hands; some 
are holding cups for drinking water; some, 
betelnuts; some are holding umbrellas; some 
chowries; some are holding various clothings; some 
flowers; some, looking glasses; some, saffrons; 
some collyrium, whereas some others are holding 
Sindüra (red lead). 

miyan ferto: urges vat: | 

ATT] Tara? THTSTHTERT: WT: 1| 44 N 

GATT: Gastar: | 

"errem acer wafeen: wT 45 

Some are ready to do the painting works; some 
are anxious to champoo the feet; some are eager to 
make Her wear ornaments; some are anxious to 
put garlands of flowers on Her neck. 

Ragunda parca: weno athe | 

adt AUSI TTTAAT: 146 N 

UAT Gea: STAT deu: SHIA: | 

rat ATA aga yoy À yo 0 47 n 

All of them are skilled in various arts of 
enjoyments and they are all young. To gain the 
Grace of the Devi, they consider the whole universe 
as trifling. Now I shall mention to you the names 
of the attendants of the Devi, proud of their 
possessing lots of amorous gestures and postures. 

admu AAA U 1 

adtar g aa: Wheat ed Wea (148 lt 


1409 


Book XII Chapter XI 
qA Yara warrant gaa RART d 
rradisa 49 i 
Listen. They are: Anangarūpā, Anangamadana, 
Madanatura, Bhuvanavega, Bhuvanapalika, 
Sarvašišira, Anangavedana, Anangamekhalā, these 
are the Eight Sakhis. 
ferente: qante a: | 
wea atana: 50 i 
errare viri Mat fergpeenitumr: | 
CT: Uday sage: HAAT: 51 lt 
Each of them is as fair as Vidyullatā. Each is 
adorned with various ornaments and skilled in all 
actions. When they walk to and fro with canes and 
rods in their hands in the service of the Devī, they 
look as if the lightning flashes glimmer on all sides. 
asg darat wrenragfeta a | 
Uga Karra ener 52 u 
GATT arent aga: 1 
gAs Igenata: 153 
Agd: waite yerttr afarer ur à 
On the outer portion of the enclosure wall, on 
the eight sides are situated the dwelling houses of 


These Mātrkās represent the sum-total of the 
individual Matrkas in every Brahmanda. Now hear 
their names:(1) Brahmi, (2) Māhešvarī, (3) 
Kaumārī, (4) Vaisnavi, (5) Varahi, (6) Indrani, (7) 
Cāmuņdā, and (8) Maha Laksmi. 

sreresrfaderat MATTE AT: BAT: | 

ATR CTO: RAHAT TAT: 1159 N 

Their forms are like those of Brahma and Rudra 
and others. They are always engaged in doing good 
to the Universe and reside here with their own 
Vahanas and weapons. 

ABI dels areas WD: 

ASAT TIS She MIAN PAM: 11 60 H 

dfe: aifegt aren: AEN: forferamerar | 

dear fers TEST wat JIRAN 161 Ni 

At the four gates, the various Vahanas of 
Bhagavati remain always fully equipped. 
Somewhere there are Kotis and Kotis of 
elephants. At some places there are Kotis and 
Kotis of horses; at others there are camps, houses, 
at others there are swans, lions; at others there are 
Garudas; at other places there are peacocks, bulls 


these eight Sakhis and they are always full of| and various other beings all fully equipped and 


various vahanas and weapons. Next to this 
enclosure of diamond comes the thirteenth 
enclosure wal] made of Vaidürya mani. Its height 
is ten yojanas. There are entrance gates and 
doorways on the four sides. 

teat tear nert: ad dgdtatīam: 54 u 

adgas aad Wem a | 

agar da watsfü dgdattrfatām wu 55 u 

wargfasg uftdt argamdtat a ewm i 

fud uffqd ard guga 56 tl 


arranged in due order. 
adam: cdesrergentfesi ates | 
unftotoreRargat castrate fet: 1162 N 
ayra RTA atagani | 
maaga HERASTĻATTA FT N 63 NH 
Ssinfürgme VITES: UL: HE: d 
ardas aaaea aa: u6au 
Similarly the above mentioned animals are 

yoked to Kotis and Kotis of chariots; there are 

coachmen (syces); at some places flags are 


The court inside, the houses, the big roads, wells, | fluttering high on them so as to reach the heavens 
tanks, ponds, rivers and even the sands are all made| and thus they are adding beauty. At other places 
of Vaidürya mani. On the eight sides reside the| the aerial cars are arranged in rows, countless, with 


eight Mātrkās Brahmi, etc., with their hosts. 
tat: wae sar: | 

agi mad da «tur Arh aem n 57 u 
adt a adoh enjet: WA AAT: | 

amt g megia pe ATT: 58 tt 


89 


various sounding instruments in them, with flags 

soaring high in the Heavens and endowed with 

various ensigns and emblems. 
maaa e pera qerer i 
adiaua wd atta: ues 


1410 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


wa wast g urs agate i 

wemt dem yashin, 166 tt 

O King! Next to this Vaidürya enclosure, comes 
the fourteenth enclosure wall built of Indra- 
nilamani; its height is ten Yojanas. The court inside, 
houses, roads, wells, tanks and reservoirs, etc., all 
are built of Indranilamani. 

aa VISIT TA fate wr | 

Valgai AAS edi fF 1 67 u 

viret TATA aay go À TATA | 

et feret er cater at ater 168 N 

sitgutar ar «art: serrer gta: 1 

ASTĀRT uer: chiferrat AEN MAHA: 11 69 N 

Hester: FACATTT: | 

am: Aem qatar: 1170 i 

GATT: THOT AT: sita eT: i 

There is here a lotus consisting of sixteen petals 
extending to many Yojanas in width and shining 
like a second Sudaršana Cakra. On these sixteen 
petals reside the sixteen Šaktis of Bhagavatī, with 
their hosts. Now I am mentioning the names of 
these. Hear: Karālī, Vikarali, Uma, Sarasvati, Sri, 
Durga, Usa, Laksmi, Šruti, Smrti, Dhrti, Sraddha, 
Medha, Mati, Kānti, and Arya. These are the 16 
Saktis. They all are dark blue, of the colour of the 
fresh rain-cloud; they wield in their hands axes and 
shields. It seems they are ever eager to fight. O 
King! These Saktis are the Rulers of all the separate 
Saktis of the other Brahmāņdas. These are the 
forces of Šrī Devi. 

Yitagisaeart naat Ufer: KAT: 071 N 

gatsanrartttat qeftreequsi fem: | 

ARRAS Aes: 472 N 

Wenn ed AEETUTSTĀ A g: 1 

Being strengthened by the Devi's strength, these 
are always surrounded by various chariots and 
forces, various other Saktis follow them. If they 
like, they can cause great agitation in the whole 
universe. Had I thousand faces, I would not have 
been able to describe what an amount of strength 


they wield. Now I describe the fifteenth enclosure 


wall. Listen. 
sgfareqa: 


WERT: TAA THA STAG 74 

gafinet faei qp URIA | 

wa dhama RER: wet 1751 

vile ae farat aaia: i 

garaie graag fam: 176 n 

Next to this Indranilamani enclosure, comes the 
enclosure made of pearls (muktā), very wide and 


u73 it 


ten Yojanas high. The court inside, its space, trees, 
all are built of pearls. Within this enclosure there 
is a lotus with eight petals, all of pearls. On these 
petals reside the eight Saktis, the advisers and 
ministers of the Devi. Their appearances, weapons, 
dresses, enjoyments, everything is like those of Sri 
Devi. Their duty is to inform the Devi of what is 
going on in the Brahmandas. 

BET: adaig vafe ur: | 

ARA AAT: 077 u 

ATĪJA: ITT Sama | 

mA TT: KATE smagracar ferdfrr 17 8 N 

They are skilled in all sciences and arts and 
clever in all actions. They are very clever, skillful 
and clever in knowing beforehand the desires and 
intentions of Sri Devi and they perform those 
things accordingly. Each one of them has many 
other Šaktis who also live here. By their Jñāna Sakti 
they know all the news concerning the Jivas in 
every Brahmanda. 

ert avant cee at TOY UTA | 

IGA Waser 079 0i 

rimas diee l 

aq mA Àa Wd: UA Uu 80 N 

Vita a ma Wa Ww: TH 1 

Wrsrepsresfüfeen enfanz: 81 

Now I mention the names of those eight Sakhis. 
Listen. Anangakusuma, Anangakusumatura, 
Anangamadana, Anangamadanāturā, Bhuvanapālā, 


Book XII Chapter XI 


1411 


Gaganavegā, Sasirekha, and Gaganarekha. These 

are the eight Sakhis. They look red like the Rising 

Sun; and in their four hands they hold noose, goad, 

and signs of granting boons and “no fear.” 
fagia araf stereifer MTU | 

N82 il 


HEARTS Wan Teast TIA T | 

"Wee norderfenedftu e TUeerT quit: IT: 184 N 

At every instant they inform Sri Devi of all the 
events of the Brahmāņda. Next to this comes the 
sixteenth enclosure wall made of emerald 
(marakata); it is ten Yojanas high; the court 
inside, its space, and houses and everything are 
built of emeralds (marakata mani). 

vdentit agda rst farer: 1 

ghergo ARR: Wc uss i 

wamgeenr eet met uvae 

dar: ae aia: vert faferemfr «r 186 N 

Here exist all the good objects of enjoyments. 
This is hexagonal, of the Yantra shape. And at 
every corner reside the Devas. On the eastern 
comer resides the four-faced Brahma; he lives with 
Gayatri Devi; he holds Kamandalu, rosary, signs 
indicating “no fear” and Danda (rod). The Devi 
Gayatri is also decorated with these. 

maag Kauna afadta ata fea 

a gatane: fer mafana 4 087 u 

caredtat EI d frei aa dfe fe à 

Ta yaaa 188 i 

Here all the Vedas, Smrtis, the Puranas, and 
various weapons exist incarnate in their respective 
forms. All the Avataras of Brahma, Gayatri, and 
Vyahrtis that exist in this Brahmanda, all live here. 
On the south-west corner Maha Visnu lives with 
Savitri; He holds conch shell, disc, club, and lotus. 
Savitri has got also all these. 

mad add aa WERTE ares: | 

A faonfanenr: dit ueeranigatsfaen: 89 u 


"wrferftferzrer ta a ad aa dfe fg à 

Arga? MAANA: 090 N 

aaea addsa aracaft writ | 

aa y vata: ede uou 

The Avataras of Visnu that exist in every 
Brahmanda Matsya, Kürma, etc., and all the 
Avatàras of Sàvitri that exist in every universe, 
all dwell in this place. On the north western cornér 
exists Mahà Rudra with Sarasvati Both of them 
hold in their hands Parašu, rosary, signs granting 
boons and “no fear.” 

titers 4 ad a aa fruta fg à 

AAE Er À AAMT: BHAT: 92 N 

a we afitiava aa d Prosa fe | 

aaa tthe vem ATS, 93 u 

wert Progen Hat sera: | 

arareftetammgrat rerogdtuuf-aa: 194 0 

ae Pitu reat: uftaféra: 1 

All the Avataras of Rudra and Parvati (Gauri, 
etc.) facing south that exist in all the Brahmandas, 
dwell here. All the chief Agamas, sixty four in 
number and all the other Tantras reside here, 
incarnate in their due forms. On the south-eastern 
corner, the Lord of wealth, Kubera, of Bhagavati, 
surrounded by roads and shops resides here with 
Maha Laksmi and his hosts holding the jar of jewels 
(Mani Karandika). 

arent q maA west xig: 195 N 

aigna frd aà | 

Tera Adama aa arated: Wer u96 u 

On the western corner exists always Madana 
with Rati, holding noose, goad, bow and arrow. 
All his amorous attendants reside here, incarnate 
in their forms. 

fma far frei gamma: à 

wrgrepsrenY wr feed: fenem: 197 tt 

feret Taryn ar arc UPa TATA à 

wr: Gat faders wüyeduwfeds 198 N 

On the north-eastern corner resides always the 
great hero Gaņeša, the Remover of obstacles, 
holding noose and goad and with his Pusti Devi. 


1412 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


= 
O King! All the Vibhütis (manifestations) of Gaņeśa 


that exist in all the universes reside here. 

yRaemedema aenda WAEA: | 

Ud aenga: wenn Sad wes ue 1 

What more to say than this, that Brahma and 
the other Devas and Devis here represent the sum- 
total of all the Brahmās and the Devas and the Devi 
s that exist in all the Brahmandas. 

ET yra TA, | 

TATOO SHUM: SHASTA: 1 100 1 

ETSI! ITT GATT CC 

T General tanta: V ferr 101 0 

COO TAT ITT erg eff g SHUT | 

mAg tat a duspreur 102 0 

These all worship Sri Bhagavati, remaining in 
their own spheres respectively. O King! Next come 
the seventeenth enclosure wall made of Pravala. It 
is red like saffron and it is one hundred Yojanas 
high. As before, the court inside, the ground and 
the houses all are made of Pravala. The goddesses 
of the five elements, Hrllekha, Gaganā, Raktā, 
Karalikà, and Mahocchusmā reside here. The 
colours and lustres of the bodies of the goddessses 
resemble those of the elements over which they 
preside respectively. 

maigais frag: | 

danada Cerea: 1103 0 

yasen g maaa AE: | 

agaa maesa AT i 104 u 

All of them are proud of their youth and hold in 
their four hands noose, goad and signs granting 
boons and “no fear.” They are dressed like Sri 
Devī and reside here always. Next to this comes 
the eighteenth enclosure wall built of Navaratna 
(the nine jewels). It is many yojanas wide. This 
enclosure wall is superior to all others and it is 
higher also. 

TA amai wah agate i 

AARAA ASTTTA HI AN 105 N 

slider sare: pet aa Prete fè 1 

"efe Wenig aft ara aftr 106 N 


On the four sides there exist innumerable houses, 
tanks, reservoirs, all built of Navaratna; these 
belong to the Devis, the presiding Deities of 
Āmnāyas (that which is to be studied or learnt by 
heart; the Vedas). The ten Maha Vidyas, Kali, Tara, 
etc., of Sri Devi and the Mahābhedās, that is, 
their all the Avatāras all dwell here with their 
respective Avaranas, Vahanas and ornaments. All 
the Avatāras of Šrī Devi for the killing of the 
Daityas and for showing favour to the devotees 
live here. They are Pašamkušešvarī, Bhuvanešvarī, 
Bhairavi, Kapāla Bhuvanešvarī, AnkuSa 
Bhuvanešvarī, Pramada Bhuvanešvarī, Šrī Krodha 
Bhuvane$vari, Triputasvaridha, Nityaklinņā, 
Annapurņā, Tvaritā, and the other avatāras of 
Bhuvanešvarī, and Kālī, Tārā and the other 
Mahāvidyās are known as Mahāvidyās. 

Frsrenureaitfirtarsrepeurenet: 1 

adden KA hrga: 107 N 

maneng: uf TA Ft i 

AGA faa wed 1108 

AR! agn g ferarafürfet-rfée | 

They live here with their Āvaraņa Devatās, 
Vāhanas, and ornaments respectively. 

Note: The Avarana Deities are the attendant Deities. 

Here live also the seven Kotis of Devis presiding 
over the Maha Mantras, all brilliant and fair like 
the Koti Suns. O King! Next to this enclosure wall 
comes the chief and crowning palace of Sri Devi, 
built of Cintamani gems. All the articles within 
this are built of Cintamani gems. 

TaN HANTS | 

frets: edite EET: | 

Sat parte ag PĒRTA quee 110 N 

efr MERIMAA meno? BENRA 
CHIESA: 1) 11 11 

Within this palace are seen hundreds and 
thousands of pillars. Some of these pillars are built 
of Sūryakāntamaņi, some are built of Candrakanta 
mani, and some are built of Vidyutkanta mani. O 


u 109 


Book XII Chapter XII 1413 


King! The lustre and brilliance of these pillars is} Here ends the Eleventh Chapter on the description of 
so strong that no articles within this palace are| the enclosure walls built of Padmaragamani, etc., of 
visible to the eye. the Mani Dvipa in the Mahāpurāņam 


Note: The face of the Goddess Kālī is so bright that Srīmaddevībhāgavatam of 18,000 verses 


it appears like a shadow, i.e., black. by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


Book XII Chapter XII 


1413 


CHAPTER XII 
On the Description of Mani Dvipa 


dea a ma frida | 


niu 


: M2 I 

Se ed. uaa: 1 

aaae arated efter: 13 d 

Vyasa said: O King Janamejaya! The Ratnagrha, 
above mentioned, is the Central, the Chief and the 
Crowning Place of Mila Prakrti. [The nine jewels 
are: (1) Muktā, (2) Manikya, (3) Vaidürya, (4) 
Gomeda, (5) Vajra, (6) Vidruma, (7) Padmaraga, 
(8) Marakata, and (9) Nila.] This is situated in the 
centre of all the enclosures. Within this there are 
the four Mandapas, i.e., halls built of one thousand 
(i.e., innumerable) pillars. These are the Šrngāra 
Mandapa, Mukti Mandapa, Jiiana Mandapa and 
Ekanta Mandapa; on the top there are canopies of 
various colours; within are many scented articles 
scented by the Dhüpas, etc. 

rfe qeu: ica syst HEN: BMT: | 

ATSŪTI TĀ: mya IT 4 ul 

niaaa UA yR: fram: | 

adem uua: Rae Ju ou 5 

The brilliance of each of these is like that of 
one Koti Suns. On all sides of these four Mandapas 
there are nice groups of gardens of Kašmīra, 
Mallika, and Kunda flowers. Various scents, and 
scented articles, for example, of musk, etc., are 
fully arranged in due order. 


merugmedt — qaxendurH 1 
qund AU Ya 6 I 


gamsa megia | 

aAa già wferdid gaa 407 it 

There is a very big lotus tank here; the steps 
leading to it are built of jewels. Its water is nectar, 
on it are innumerable full-blown lotuses and the 
bees are humming always over them. Many birds, 
swans, Karandavas, etc., are swimming to and fro. 
The sweet scents of lotuses are playing all round. 
In fact, the whole Manidvipa is perfumed with 
various scented things. 

2 wert mifa fafa: xat: | 

amaA aa wen shaa 8 ui 

WReHeuner g areacafet ferar 1 

aai wed at gu wet uou 

agiis da TTT | 

abauttatednt fret atte snrafierenr 110 N 

Within the Šrngāra Maņdapa, the Devī 
Bhagavatī is situated in the centre on an Āsana 
(seat) and She hears the songs sung in tune by the 
other Devīs along with the other Devas. Similarly 
sitting on the Mukti Maņdapa, She frees the Jīvas 
from the bondages of the world. Sitting on the Jītāna 
Mandapa, She gives instructions on Jīāna, and 
sitting on the fourth Ekanta Mandapa, She consults 
with Her ministers, the Sakhis, Ananga Kusuma, 
etc., on the creation, preservation, etc., of the 
universe. 

farmin manara: ut: | 

Wrurrégfüest Weeetsvrfnend 1 11 N 

wer foyer HAVA SVATT aria: | 

Ut UZ GT: Urea: KA Mara: 11 12 N 

O King! Now I shall describe about the main, 


1414 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


Khāsa, room of Sri Devi. Listen. The Khāsa Mahala 
palace of the Devi Bhagavati is named Sri 
Cintamani Grha. Within this is placed the raised 
platform, the dais and sofa whereon the Devi taketh 
Her honourable seat. The ten Sakti-tattvas form 
the staircases. The four legs are (1) Brahma, (2) 
Visnu, (3) Rudra, and (4) Mahešvara. Sadāšiva 
forms the upper covering plank. 
wena werd? yah foem a 
"ur adt fromterd anger aya € 11 13 N 
Genel g w Wars qauigt aye | 
wewdedameefee-wduge 014 il 
Over this Sri Bhuvanešvara Maha Deva or the 
Supreme Architect of the Universe is reigning. 
Now hear something about this Bhuvanešvara. 
Before creation while intending to sport, the Devi 
Bhagavati divided Her Body into two parts and 
from the right part created Bhuvane$vara. He has 
five faces and each face has three oo 
taaa nga: 
zRo a Praag: n15 


wtfesdadiaisme-xezuytae: 16N 

yamai: iagh: | 

amik fanus adit gaisa 117 u 

He has four hands and He 1s holding in each 
hand spear, signs indicating do not fear, axe, and 
signs granting boons. He looks sixteen years old. 
The lustre of of His Body is more beautiful then 
Koti Kandarpas and more fiery than thousand Suns; 
and at the same time cool like Koti Suns. His colour 
is crystal white, and on His leftlap Sri Bhuvanešvarī 
Devi is always sitting. 


wevenmmenuiesetanrenT T 1 


TAA RAGA ITT u18W 
j uh 
weesifafesrefafseiqummg — u19u 


On the hip of Šrī Bhuvanešvarī, is shining the 
girdle with small tinkling bells, built of various 
jewels; the ornaments on the arms are made of 
burnished gold studded with Vaidüryamanis; the 


Tatanka ornaments on Her ears are very beautiful 
like Sri cakra and they enhance very much the 
beauty of Her lotus face. The beauty of Her 
forehead vies with, or defies the Moon of the eighth 
bright lunar day. 
faaaififrranttessefetret — a 
PAA 0201 
Reagema à 
TAHA SAAT ATT — 021 0 
arare eifsreere m rn TS fa | 
Uehara W220 
Her lips challenge the fully ripened Bimba fruits. 
Her face is shining with the Tilaka mark made of 
musk and saffron, The divine crown on Her head 
is beautified with the Sun and Moon made of 
jewels; the nose ornaments are like the star Venus 
and built of transparent gems, looking exceedingly 
beautiful and shedding charming lustre all around. 
ferfersrferféremTas eut Gta ranger | 
wsdrmestsrwéquivsfeufwar n23 
amekaa agge | 
aiene aE 124 
The neck is decorated with necklaces built of 
gems and jewels. Her breasts are nicely decorated 
with camphor and saffron. Her neck is shining like 
a conchshell decorated with artistic designs. Her 
teeth look like fully ripe pomegranate fruits. 
iz l 
u25 il 
|) | 
VISA TATA TA u26 1 
ATT B AKR RTA | 
On Her head is shining the jewel crown. Her 
lotus face is beautified with alaka as if these are 
mad bees. Her navel is beautiful like the whirls in 
the river Bhāgirathī ; Her fingers are decorated with 
jewel rings; She has three eyes like lotus leaves; 
the lustre of Her body is bright like Padmarāgamaņi 
cut and carved and sharpened on stone. 


=” 27 


Book XII Chapter XII 


1415 


. T 
Vea LIGA ere 
di renti faa Treerfereriet: l 
VAtfeuftme sm TART ! 29 i 


The bracelets are adorned with jewel tinkling 


N28 I 


bells; Her neck ornaments and medals are studded 
with gems and jewels. Her hands are resplendent 
with the lustre of the jewels on the fingers; the braid 
of hair on Her head is wreathed with a garland of 
Mallika flowers; Her bodice (short jacket) is 
studded with various jewels. 


Waufafesrnqgeenmmmewr fear od 


"aar eg mitra eq gu naon 

adygnamen gyman | 

WMedanradear ferma 11 31 N 

O King! Šrī Devī is slightly bent down with 
the weight of Her very high hard breasts. She has 
four hands and She is holding noose, goad and signs 
granting boons and “do not fear." The all beautiful 
all merciful Devi is full of love gestures and 
beauties. 


Aatom 1 

aifcatferdiqat «rifā ur fart us 32 0 

amandina arrears: 1 

aada adarautafšar 33 U 

Her voice is sweeter than that of lute; the lustre 
of Her body is like Kotis and Kotis of Suns and 
Moons if they rise simultaneously on the sky. The 
Sakhis, attendants, the Devas and the Devis 
surround Her on all sides. 

FOOT AMAA FATT VAP AAT 

PIT gf OB: ate: eif aa aT u 34 N 

after faciie: pm: | 

ware fester erem sra aafaa i03 5 i 

fere reficit eret eae tirer AAT | 

Harma uan Wd at GTifšrarT 11 36 i 

Icchà Sakti, Jñāna Sakti, and Kriya Sakti all are 
present always before the Devi. Lajja, Tusti, Pusti, 
Kirti, Kānti, Ksama, Daya, Buddhi, Medha, Smrti, 
and Laksmi are always seen here incarnate in their 
due Forms. The nine Pitha Saktis, Jaya, Vijaya, 


Ajità, Aparajita, Nitya, Vilāsinī, Dogdhrī, Aghorā, 
and Mangala reside here always and are in the 
service of the Devi Bhuvanešvarī. 

ART TVS ear feret dt haaa à 

AAs WERTE À BITS: 137 di 

aarenqaer sen farai g Anta: | 

yarei: wat FIAT 038 N 

On the side of the Devi are the two oceans of 
treasures; from these streams of Navaratna, gold, 
and seven Dhatus (elements) go out and assume 
the forms of rivers and fall into the ocean Sudha 
Sindhu. 

wr eat speriymdt agri: fenTend d 

uda Ve ma AAA 139 qi 

faerafüreeareg gurei spup srfinu 1 

Because such a Devi Bhuvanešvarī, resplendent 
with all powers and prosperities, sits on the left 
lap of Bhuvanešvara, that He has, no doubt 
acquired His omnipotence. O King! Now I will 
describe the dimensions of the Cintamani Grha. 

wee MEM o 0040 N 

AGU ETEN: E GESIEN LLERS: LBE 

srafianrd Aaen fet gr 

daraya ARAA AAAS PTT | 

vearndayd: yet wit dat 42n 

Listen. It is one thousand Yojanas wide; its 
centre is very big; the rooms situated further and 
further are twice those preceding them. It lies in 
Antariksa (the intervening space) without any 
support. At the times of dissolution and creation it 
contracts and expands like a cloth. 

Wert da ada weder. - 

fannar ure ga det enmt 143 1 

Ā A sumen aba wiraatsatrs: i 

aay mre wqennuy T1144 I 

share a adsft astra ftru | 

Adiga 9p crore roars TAT: 1 45 1 

a ad mifer ata ga eet cetera | 

The lustre of this Cintamani Grha is com- 
paratively far more bright and beautiful than that 


1416 


Srimaddevibhágavatam 


of other enclosure walls. Sri Devi Bhagavati dwells 
always in this place. O King! All the great Bhaktas 
of the Devi in every Brahmànda, in the Devaloka, 
in Nāgaloka, in the world of men or in any other 
loka, all those that were engaged in the meditation 
of the Devi in the sacred places of the Devi and 
died there, they all come here and reside with the 
Devi in great joy and festivity. 

TAG grew fr ETUT meer: 1 46 n 

IRT aha: wahanga: UTT: | 

RAAT: PJERA: WAT: 0 47 N 

MAAS AKT] AEST: | 

On all sides rivers are flowing; some of ghee, 
some of milk, curd, honey, nectar, pomegranate 
juice, jambu juice, and some of mango juice, 
sugarcane juices are flowing on all sides. 

TARDO Gat ATT: HUAI wp 48 N 

masa 3 p Reef ft | 

a trated aft oer aft wear u49 d 

ARTA aed tat Ah Tar t 


The trees here yield fruits according to one’s 
desires and the wells and tanks yield water also as 
people desire. Never is there any want felt here of 
anything. Never are seen here diseases, sorrow, old 
age, decrepitude, anxiety, anger, jealousy, and envy 
and other lower ideas. 

wá sara: walter: weenfacrasiu: t 50 1 

ast werd edt ax sftgaagūm d 

AAC TT: ARITA at 51 N 

wet Tat: Arti at a Ut TT: | 

OT UG qaare UTT ATT 052 1 

All the inhabitants of this place are full of youth 
and look like one thousand Suns. All enjoy with 
their wives and they worship Šrī Bhuvanešvarī. 
Some have attained Salokya, some Samipya, some 
Sarüpya and some have attained Sàrsti and pass 
their days in highest comfort. The Devas that are 
in every Brahmanda all live here and worship Sri 
Devi. 


ane: ferreae dei serátverttq i 
aafe afar sump 153 N 
"Werfererter ane: wrarerearterrent rary i 
ATR! at Nramracfāuema 0 54 
geb wear ured ufürdtd we d 
agii A fegpentedtsfeaeaira u 11 55 N. 
The seven Koti Mahā Mantras and Mahā Vidyās 
here assume forms and worship the Maha Maya 
Sri Bhagavati, Who is of the nature of Brahma. O 
King! Thus I have described to you all about this 
Manidvipa. The lustre of Sun, Moon and Kotis and 
Kotis of lightnings cannot be one Kotieth of one 
Koti part of Its lustre. 


freagra reifen AP 1 57 Uu 


At some places the lustre is like Vidrumamani; 
some places as are illumined like the lustre of 
Marakata Mani; some, like Stryakantamani and 
some places are rendered brilliant like Kotis and 
Kotis of lightnings. 

Pii Ad MG MM | 

u58 d 
erem enter 

aferedsraeran afar vr gafag | 59 u 

The light at some places is like Sindüra; at some 
places like Indranilamani; at some places, like 
Manikya, and at some places like diamond. Some 
places are blazing like the conflagration of fire; 
and some places look like molten gold; some places 
seem filled with the lustre of Candrakantamani, 
and some places look brilliant like Süryakantamani. 

Tjiraagai TATA 1 

Ten wwa uRdfemq neonu 

Tears aula | 

RREA: RAA wire tt 61 u 

The mountains here are all built of gems and 
jewels; the entrance gates and enclosures are built 
of gems and jewels; the trees and their leaves all 


Book XII Chapter XII 


1417 


are of gems; in fact all that exist here are all of 
gems and jewels. At some places numbers of 
peacocks are dancing; at some places cuckoos are 
captivating the minds of persons by cooing in the 
fifth tune and at others doves and pigeons and 
parrots are making sweet cackling sounds. 


gFrauvltaigvgratraiga — 0d 


aA Aa RAA: — 0621 
giar: sarang aad aaa, i 
KTM TAGAT 63 N 


Lakhs and lakhs of tanks are there with their 
pure crystal-like waters. The Red lotuses have 
blown fully and enhanced the beauty of the place. 
The captivating scents of these lotuses extend to a 
distance one hundred Yojanas all round and 
gladden the minds of people. The leaves are rustling 
with gentle breeze. 

Fararaftragerat seitferat farra | 

xennmufnfugt emmghtrafemeq "64u 

FAM AMSAT ATTA TT TTA | 

quer Itrdurgdtsava 65 N 

The whole sky overhead is radiant with the lustre 
of Cintamani gems and jewels. All the sides are 
illuminated with the brilliancy of the gems and 
jewels. O King! These jewels act like lamps. And 
the sweet scented trees emit their flagrance and it 
is transmitted by breeze all around. 

NĒ SOA TATTĀTĀT: 1 

Renters Aadi 66 

sader UHI TETRA V | 

Thus these trees serve the purpose of dhūpa 
(scent). The rays of these gems pierce through the 
openings of the jewel screens on the houses and 
fall on the mirrors inside, thus causing a nice 
brilliant appearance that captivates the mind and 
causes confusion. 


udaan: Vasa mA ww 67 u 
VAR Ader RAAE TI 


"Teen eras wurafg wud nesu 

Te amama wei IRTW | 

ariar 3t Rerer: ad dssratestaferfi i 69 n 

O King! And what shall I say of this place, more 
than this, that all the powers, and wealth, all the 
love sentiments, all the dress suited to amorous 
interviews, all the splendours, fire, energy, beauty 
and brilliance, the omniscience, the indomitable 
strength, all the excellent qualities and all mercy 
and kindness are, present here! The All 
Comprehending Bliss and the Brahmānaņda can 
always be witnessed here! 

fr 4 afr weruferdrd gu | 

"engen Ut tart wearer s» 70 N 

MTA SOT: werd faavate | 

WOON q egeat Aaa vregfe 71 N 

O King! Thus I have described to you about the 
Manidvipa, the most exalted place of the Devi 
Bhagavati. At Her remembrance all the sins are 
instantly destroyed. The more so, 1f a man 
remembers the Devi and'about this place at the 
time of death, He surely goes there. 

sea dast ATT: 1 

sapafisreanfearen Ta sea fF 0720 

aiaia argatt aha wor 

Wate yas meum da wat 173 N 

aft MERMA 467977) gena 
RENE: |1 12 H 

O King! He who daily reads the five Chapters, 
i.e, from the eighth to this twelfth chapter, is surely 
untouched by any obstacles due to the Bhūtas, 
Pretas and Pišācas. Especially the recitation of this 
at the time of building a new house and at the time 
of Vastuyaga ensures all good and auspiciousness.- 

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Twelfth Book 
on the description of Mani Dvipa in the 
Mahāpurāņam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 
18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyāsa. 


1418 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


CHAPTER XIII 


On the Description of Janamejaya’s Devi Yajfia 


ware sara 


oft a afar wu gE eus | 

ANT welt ART Wey dou 

Ary Medem: KAT GTA, | 

HAHA wares dem: fierent fg a: u 2 u 

Vyasa said: O King Janamejaya! Thus I have 
answered all your nice queries; also what Narayana 
spoke to the highsouled Narada is also said by me. 
He who hears this greatly wonderful Purāņam Sri 
Devi Bhagavatam certainly becomes dear to the 
Devi and all his actions become fructified with 
SUCCESS. 

ee Tama” VTDxsf uuum d a 

faasa aa ters agafar g eife u 3 it 

Fert cd META wat wats 1 

wrerferfer ferta SARATA 4 d 

Now as regards your mental distress, how you 
prevent any evil falling to your late father in his 
future life, I advise you to do the Y ajfia in the name 
of Bhagavati; and certainly your father will be 
saved. And you also better take the Most Excellent 
Mantra of the Maha Devi duly, according to rules; 
and your human life will then be crowned with 
success; (your life will be saved; thus you as well 
as your father will be saved). 


ya Tareq 


Pega Fags: mA gamma | 

manga Agri daadaa us d 

denfatt fata wine Fa: | 

at mga dreds nen 

Süta said:O Rsis! Hearing thus, the King asked 
Vyasa Deva to initiate in the Great Devi Mantra 
and thus to become his Guru. He was then initiated 
duly according to rules with the Great Mantra of 
Bhagavati united with Pranava. 

ward MARTI feregmeuferefent: | 

arent: mema KTI Gaga, 07 i 


siadsan getumrad TTT d 

ATTA TATA: Ya: 11 8 ti 

gideni darraimša a 1 

Ke eai age: 9 

When the Navarātra period arrived, he called 
Dhaumya and other Brāhmaņas and performed the 
Navarātra Vrata so very dear to the Devī, according 
to his state. At this time for the satisfaction of the 
Devī, he caused this Devī Bhāgavata Purāņa to be 
read by the Brahmanas and fed innumerable 
Brahmanas and Kumārīs (virgins) and gave in 
charity lots of things to the poor, orphans, and the 
Brahmin boys and thus finished the Vrata. 

AT us viver ia areae fi i 

mala fü TATA: Wart 1 10 N 

Tread Wirt samaa raaa: | 

Waray: Ayes WBD d ANE Ae 101 N 

O Rsis! Thus completing the Devi yajfia, while 
the King was sitting on his seat, the fiery Devarsi 
Narada came there from above playing with his 
lute. Seeing him there, all on a sudden, the King 
got up, and paid due respects to him by asking him 
to take his seat, with other necessary things. 

STATE 2T Veram fēru: od 

Ha FT HIM WUeSHHTSRUDD 8 1 2 N 

When the Devarsi became relieved of his labour 
of journey, the King asked him about his welfare 
and then enquired into the cause of his coming 
there. 

warar 

a ans eN ate fe aÀ d 1 

RNASE Haass ATARA 11 1 3 Ut 

O Devarsi! Whence and what for are you now 
coming? By your arrival here Iam become blessed 
and feel that my Lord has come to me; now what 
can I serve to you; kindly command and oblige. 


Book XH Chapter XIH 


1419 


gfe vat aa: A girare ATA: 1 

aes wat ge wegen gumu 114 u 

afda raran gaa: | 

Frat st grifi wea Partada 11 1 5 u 

Hearing this, the Devarsi Narada said: “O King! 
Today I saw in the Devaloka a very wonderful 
event. I wanted eagerly to inform that to you. Hence 
I have come here. Your father met with a bad turn 
of fate for his bad action. I saw today he assumed 
a divine form and he was going on a chariot. 

a wan Rawraq fü d 

Qaeda: Wa: MTNA: AAT: d 16 di 

amamen ATT TS, | 

ears sri A 017 ud 

ITT fuer a watt e: | 

aas gaqitsfrsfiferd wei Ta u 1 8 N 

The Devas were praising him and the Apsaras 
were encircling him. It seemed he was going in 
that dress to the Mani Dvipa. O King! You 
performed the Navaratra Vrata and read the Devi 
Bhagavata; it seems, as a result of that, your father 
has now been rewarded with such a noble and good 
turn of fate. Now you have become blessed and 
your actions have borne fruits. 

GTA g GT | 

data Craters ferqessreng 11 19 N 

You have delivered your father from the hell 
and so you have become an ornament in your 
family. Today your name and fame have extended 
to the Devaloka.” 

Ha sara 
mAh ATT ARTRĪTA: 1 
WUT waaa AAT EAHA: 0 20 N 

aag da padisë MEA | 

f& wur pirandet amean da 421 

Süta said: O Rsis! Hearing these words from 
the mouth of Nàrada, the King Janamejaya became 
very much happy and delighted and fell prostrate 
at the feet of Vyàsa Deva of glorious deeds and 
said: O Best of Munis! By Thy Grace, today I have 


become blessed. Now what return can I pay to Thee 
save bowing down to Thee. 

aqa: rEsTedeHg wat WA | 

ofa wat wa: Aerargtifrairie wr 22 N 

"ere GAT YO WMTAHATSTATT: | 

werd uftensu wat AA u23 N 

I pray that Thou dost shew such favours to me 
ever and again. O Rsis! Hearing these words of 
the King Janamejaya, Vàdarayana Veda Vyasa 
blessed him and spoke to him in sweet words: “O 
King! Now leave all other actions. 

Sdiwmred da us feb oumíes: | 

starr war wae che feremefsa: 124 0 

SATA Aa cd Wee WATT | 

were gon Regana a 25 0 

Amatu aot arta drevfta i 

aaa darn da wdyt 126 

Read always the Devi Bhàgavata and worship 
the Lotus Feet of Sri Devi. Leave off all laziness 
and now perform the Devi Yajña with great eclat. 
And you will surely be able to cross this bondage 
of the world. True there are various Puranas, the 
Visnu Purana, the Siva Purana, but those cannot 
compare with one sixteenth of this Devi 
Bhagavatam. 

yopa at g Rae | 

aa da ypy enaA 27 0 

Ud dau ys wem ATTA | 

qaba MUA dda feque: 28 0 

In fact, this Purana is the Essence of all the 
Puranas. How can the other Puranas be compared 
with this, wherein is established the Devi Mula 
Prakrti? Reading this Purana from the beginning 
to the end yields the result of reading the Vedas. 
So the wise persons should try their best to study it 
always.” 

zara gad «i TA afte ww: | 

WA Gaal ATASH: 11 29 u 

maada wri AGERT, d 

Tet VIETA TTT ad: ARTEATAA: N 


1420 Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


mai da usgan 130 the King Janamejaya, on the other hand, began to 
oft MERITA vengo? GEIRDA read and hear always the Devī Bhāgavatam and 
IRRIST: 11 13 11 spent his days happily in governing his kingdom. 


Thus saying to Janamejaya, Veda Vyāsa| Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Twelfth 
departed. Then the pure minded Dhaumya and the | Book on the description of Janamejaya’s Devi Yajfia 
other Brāhmaņas highly praised the Devi] the Maha Puranam Srimaddevibhagavatam of 
Bhagavatam and went to their desired places. And 18000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 


1420 


Šrīmaddevībhāgavatam 


IKO SENS PIRES SEU AE SES AA ECR TENS 


CHAPTER XIV 


On the Recitation of the Fruits of this Purāņam 


maaa wed aero WS 02 u 

Sita said: “O Rsis! In days of yore, from the 
Lotus Face of the Devi Bhāgavata came out Sri 
Madbhagavatam in the form of half a Sloka, as the 
decided conclusion of the Vedas. About what She 
gave instructions to Visnu, sleeping on a leaf of a 
Banyan tree, that same thing, the seed of the Sri 
Madbhagavata, Brahma Himself expanded into one 
hundred Koti Slokas. 

aaa: Hea SAA Yet | 
3 

damai ATA Gari oft ga 1 

areata tas anggana fe nugu 

Then, Veda Vyasa, in order to teach his own 
son Suka Deva, condensed them into eighteen 
thousand $lokas, in Twelve Books and named it 
Sri maddevibhagavatam, the present volume. That 
voluminous book comprising one hundred Koti 
$lokas compiled by Brahma are still extant in the 
Deva loka. 

mA mgh ques ufemb MANIAR, | 

we usA MON arta: 5 i 

Arh KK enareremmiefsr: | 

AGM epum AMATU: 6 u 

There is no Purana like the Devi Bhagavatam, 
so merit-giving, holy and capable to destroy all 


the sins. The reading of every line yields the fruits 
of performing many A$vamedha sacrifices. Human 
beings addicted to worldly affairs will get the merit 
of giving lands to the Brahmanas and they will 
enjoy also all the pleasures of the world and in the 
end will go to the region of the Devi, if they can 
hear, after they have fasted and controlled their 
passions, the recitation of this Puranam from the 
mouth of a Paurāņik Brahmana, who has been 
worshipped and given clothings and ornaments and 
is considered as a second Veda Vyasa. 

feat Freda vakna Wu d 

Wrgwet uiuunt tafteaafaaa 07 U 

erediafüresremer afar a gate i 

wea wet x afro tears usu 

virerdrqsrerumddsurumWuRHÜRTA | 

gatrterada padek: wg 9 it 

dian Aaaa A: | 

"rawreetumfü vierereepqurfafu u 10 N 

yua AM we UN | 

Be oth quit sgearsuid SAT AST N11 N 

Or, if anybody writes the whole of the Devi 
Bhagavatam with his own hand or gets it written 
by a writer from the beginning to the end and gives 
to a Pauranik Brahmin the book placed in a box of 
the form of a lion made up of gold and a cow 
yielding milk with her calf with gold as his 
sacrificial fee; or if he feeds as many Brahmanas 
as there are the number of chapters of the Devi 
Bhagavatam and worship as many Kumārīs (virgin 


Book XII Chapter XIV 


1421 


girls) with saffron, sandalpaste and ornaments and 


feeds them with Paysanna, he gets the merits of 


giving lands and enjoys all the pleasures of the 
world and goes in the end to the region of the Devi. 

Pret ur: ITT amai UTT i 

aer gest fsferesarfereraferaféa fF 1 12 u 

aga ed womereareff SITHTCTUEY | 

Rad ure qarfaert aiaga: i13 N 

He has no want of anything who daily hears with 
rapt devotion this Devi Bhàgavatam. One who 
has no wealth gets abundance of wealth, those who 
are students get knowledge, one who has no sons, 
gets sons if one hears this Devi Bhagavatam with 
true devotion. 

dat OT ARALAN T YALA U UTT | 

same detafada A dors: MIAN 

"gig gers deep ate free | 

aai cx rifam wat da weed 15 i 

A barren woman, or one who bears still-born 
children or whose offsprings never live long or who 
bears only a single child, gets all her defects 
removed, if she hears this Devi Bhagavatam with 
a steadfast devotion. The house where this Purana 
is worshipped, Laksmi and Sarasvati dwell there, 
leaving their animosities towards each on 

ETE E ME LUE LEES ESSE 

wdRd g at "EST ii li nin 

rigors sad aeaa AT: | 

VT KI veareraiit feragafe 17 u 

By the influence of this Devi Bhagavatam the 
Dakinis, Vetālas, Raksasas, and other ghosts cannot 
cast a glance even on its devotee. If anybody gets 
fever and if the Sri Devi Bhagavatam be read 
touching him with a concentrated attention, all the 
complaints disappear. By reading this Bhagavatam, 
one hundred times even more difficult than the 
severe disease pthisis is cured. 

yiri woereq Meat qua TANT: i 

UA UTT A AV HAATHAAT 1 8 U 

vestita eire aras ster f 1 


Wenn: Wem esféretsfeer amt 19 N 

Tai Aad pastāsta: 1 

amia gest aadteoīftra won |! 20 1 

If after performing the Sandhyā, one reads only 
one chapter of this Bhāgavatam with a collected 
mind, he soon acguires the Real Knowledge. O Muni 
Šaunaka! While going to read this Bhāgavatam, 
first ekamine omens and then read. I have spoken 
already on this subject. If during the Šāradīya Pūjā 
(the autumnal Durga Pūjā), at the Navarātra period, 
one reads with devotion this Bhagavatam, the Devi 
Bhagavati becomes greatly pleased and awards 
him results more than his desires. 

aoragaa weer TT Wie War 1 

ata màs Areg Ges 0021 u 

Ustad Gata AAG 1 

āttāfrrstitaā frm gÀ u22u 

During the Navaratri period all can read well 
this book for the satisfaction of his Ista Deva (his 
own deity) whether he be a Vaisnava, Saiva, Saura, 
Gāņapatya or a Sakta. All can read this for the 
satisfaction of Laksmi, Uma and other Saktis. The 
Vaidik Brahmanas are to recite this daily for the 
satisfaction of the Devi Gayatri. 

ufsa pera fattelt ATA TATA | 

suraa g adui sifesgeersfea dar i 2 3 0 

awaa dtard ufsa wer fas: 1 

cium a wdeaemarft a fata: 124 Nu 

This Purāņam is not contradictory to any 
sectarian belief. The reason of this being that to 
whatever deity he pays his worship, he must 
worship some Sakti or other, this is stated 
everywhere. So for the satisfaction of one's own 
Sakti, all can read this, without contradicting each 
other. Never any woman nor any Südra, is to read 
this herself or himself, even out of ignorance; rather 
they should hear this from the mouth of a 
Brahmana. 

STARTA frere a Rate: | 

fà wages ant caa wem: 125 0 


1422 


Srimaddevibhagavatam 


agente qud quot aera: 

WaurewH ud sat a ada fe 260 

This is the rule of the Šāstras. (The vibrations 
and the consequent results would be truer then.) O 
Rsis! What more to say on this book than this, that 
this Puránam is the most excellent of all and yields 
great merits. It is the essence of the Vedas. This I 
tell you with great certainty. There is not the least 
doubt in this. Reading or hearing this yields results 
equivalent to reading or hearing the Vedas. 

wfesariassut at vreasftufeufaan i 

aurftr indt odi frat at a: wetean 1 27 N 

fa gaara: spear rarae: à 

Yran: wd diufore dq 128 N 

asec: wd Adai: | 

fadi wort wem: qun PUTĀM: 429 0 

I now bow to the Devi of the nature of Hrim 
and established by Gayatri, of the nature of 
Everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss, Who 
stimulates our activities to the understanding of 
various subjects. Thus hearing the excellent words 
of Süta, the great Pauranik, all the Munis of 
Naimisaranya worshipped him specially and as the 
result of hearing this Puránam glady became the 
servants of the Lotus Feet of the Devi and they 
attained the Highest Rest. 

HEB: YA: Ue aaa at yee: | 

anarie Vert Te vata fe 11 30 N 


str a ATT: safa 
vache dU ART | 
amu ufu rers sma- 
GUAM ET PTStTATU Fa: (3 1 di 
ate MRTA TERTS ETIE AI aed 
EIRE JETA: 1114 11 
maig (963) aed: udlagt: gA: 1 
adferre FIRST df: 11 1 11 
The Munis expressed their humility and gratitude 
to Sūta freguently and bowed down to him again 
and again. And they said: “O Sita! It is you that 
have saved us from this ocean of world.” Thus (the 
great Bhagavata) Süta, the bee drinking the honey 
of the Lotus Feet of the Devi, recited before the 
assemblage of the best of the Munis this Puranam 
from the beginning to the end, the Secret of all the 
Nigamas and full of the Glories of the Devi 
Bhagavati. After this the Rsis bowed down to him 
and he blessed and honoured them. 

Then he went away to his desired place. Here 
the Devi Bhāgavatam ends and is fully completed. 
Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Twelfth 
Book on the recitation of the fruits of this Puranam in 
the Mahà Purànam Srimaddevibhágavatam 
of 18,000 verses by Maharsi Veda Vyasa. 

Here ends as well the Full Treatise, 
Srimaddevibhagavatam. 
Om. Om. Om. Om Tat Sat. Om Hari Om. 


«ek 


The End 


