OXFORD WORLD’S CLASSICS 


Dharmasutras 

THE LAW CODES OF ANCIENT INDIA 


A new translation by Patrick Olivelle 




OXFORD WORLD’S CLASSICS 

DHARMASUTRAS 


Patrick Olivelle is the Chair, Department of Asian 
Studies, and Director, Center for Asian Studies, at the 
University of Texas at Austin, where he is the Professor of 
Sanskrit and Indian Religions. Among his recent publications 
are The Samnyasa Upanisads: Hindu Scriptures on Asceticism 
and Renunciation (Oxford, 1992), The Asrama System: History 
and Hermeneutics of a Religious Institution (Oxford, 1993), 
Rules and Regulations of Brahmanical Asceticism (State 
University of New York Press, 1994), and The Early Upanisads: 
Annotated Text and Translation (Oxford, 1998). His translations 
of Upanisads and Pancatantra were published in Oxford 
World's Classics in 1996 and 1997. 



OXFORD WORLD’S CLASSICS 

For almost 100 years Oxford World’s Classics have brought 
readers closer to the world’s great literature. Now with over 700 
titles — from the 4,000-year-old myths of Mesopotamia to the 
twentieth century’s greatest novels — the series makes available 
lesser-known as well as celebrated writing. 

The pocket-sized hardbacks of the early years contained 
introductions by Virginia Woolf T. S. Eliot, Graham Greene, 
and other literary figures which enriched the experience of reading. 

Today the series is recognized for its fine scholarship and 
reliability in texts that span world literature, drama and poetry, 
religion, philosophy and politics. Each edition includes perceptive 
commentary and essential background information to meet the 
changing needs of readers. 



OXFORD WORLD’S CLASSICS 


Dharmasutras 

The Law Codes of 
Apastamba, Gautama, 
Baudhayana, 
and Vasistha 


Translated from the Original Sanskrit 
and Edited by 

PATRICK OLIVELLE 


OXFORD 


UNIVERSITY PRESS 



OXFORD 

UNIVERSITY PRESS 

Great Clarendon Street, Oxford 0 x 2 6 dp 
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 

It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, 
and education by publishing worldwide in 
Oxford New York 

Athens Auckland Bangkok Bogota Buenos Aires Calcutta 
Cape Town Chennai Dar es Salaam Delhi Florence Hong Kong Istanbul 
Karachi Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Mumbai 
Nairobi Paris Sao Paulo Singapore Taipei Tokyo Toronto Warsaw 
with associated companies in Berlin Ibadan 

Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press 
in the UK and in certain other countries 

Published in the United States 
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York 

© Patrick Olivelle 1999 

The moral rights of the author have been asserted 
Database right Oxford University Press (maker) 

First published as an Oxford World’s Classics paperback 1999 

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, 
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate 
reprographics rights organizations. Enquiries concerning reproduction 
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department, 
Oxford University Press, at the address above 

You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover 
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer 

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
Data available 

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Data available 
ISBN 0-19-283882-2 
13579 10 8642 

Typeset by RefineCatch Limited, Bungay, Suffolk 
Printed in Great Britain by 
Cox & Wyman Ltd., Reading, Berkshire 



For 

Anne, Gregory, and Richard 
kalyanam itrebhyah 



This page intentionally left blank 



PREFACE 


In 1879 George Biihler published his English translation of the 
Dharmasutras of Apastamba and Gautama under the title The 
Sacred Laws of the Aryas as the second volume of the Sacred 
Books of the East edited by Max Muller. Three years later he 
brought out the translations of Vasistha and Baudhayana, and 
in 1886 he published the translation of the law book of Manu 
(Manu Smrti ) in the same series. With the benefit of a hundred 
years of scholarship and numerous printed editions of the 
Dharmasutras to work from, it is easy to find fault with his 
pioneering translations. But Biihler had to work directly from 
manuscripts and without the benefit of much that scholars 
today take for granted. I have benefited enormously from his 
translation and from his thorough and detailed comments in the 
introductions and notes. I want to acknowledge my deep debt of 
gratitude to Biihler’s pioneering work. 

There are many individuals and institutions that helped 
me during the years when I was preparing this translation. A 
Guggenheim Fellowship and a faculty research assignment from 
the University of Texas in 1996-7 allowed me a year’s freedom 
to concentrate on several research projects, including this trans- 
lation. Ludo Rocher came to the rescue and made sense of 
several difficult and corrupt passages, as did Richard Lariviere. 
Gregory Schopen read the introduction and much of the trans- 
lation and as usual made wise and judicious suggestions. Their 
input has made this work better and the translations more 
accurate and accessible. 

My wife, Suman, read the entire work several times and 
caught numerous errors and lapses. I want to thank her and 
my daughter, Meera, for their love and support. The editorial 
staff in Oxford, especially Judith Luna, Joanna Rabiger, and 
Elizabeth Stratford, have been friendly, efficient, and generous. 
Thanks to all of them. 



This page intentionally left blank 



CONTENTS 


Abbreviations x 

Guide to the Pronunciation of Sanskrit Words xii 

Bibliography xiv 

Introduction xxi 

Literary History xxi 

Authorship and Dates xxv 

Literary Structure xxxiv 

Semantics and Sources of Dharma xxxvii 

Divergent Voices xlii 

Note on the Translation xliv 

DHARMASUTRAS 

Apastamba 3 

Gautama 74 

Baudhayana 127 

Vasistha 244 

Appendices 

i. Ritual Vocabulary 327 

ii. Names of Gods, People, and Places 341 

hi. Fauna and Flora 348 

Notes 

Apastamba 353 

Gautama 373 

Baudhayana 379 

Vasistha 390 

Index 399 


IX 



ABBREVIATIONS 


A Apastamba Dharmasutra 

AA Aitareya Aranyaka 

AB Aitareya Brahmana 

AG Apastamba Grhyasutra, tr. Oldenberg (1878-86) 

AnSS Anandasrama Sanskrit Series 

ArsB Arseya Brahmana 

B Baudhayana Dharmasutra 

BU Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, tr. Olivelle (1996) 

CU Chandogya Upanisad, tr. Olivelle (1996) 

G Gautama Dharmasutra 

GoB Gopatha Brahmana 

HOS Harvard Oriental Series 

KaU Katha Upanisad, tr. Olivelle (1996) 

KS Kathaka Samhita 

M Manu Smrti 

MNU Mahanarayana Upanisad 

MuU Mundaka Upanisad, tr. Olivelle (1996) 

MS Maitrayani Samhita 

PG Paraskara Grhyasutra, tr. Oldenberg (1878-86) 

PMS Purvamlmamsa Sutra 

RV Rgveda 

$adB Sadvimsa Brahmana 

SamB Samavidhana Brahmana 

SB Satapatha Brahmana 

SBE Sacred Books of the East 

SG Sankhayana Grhyasutra, tr. Oldenberg (1878-86) 

SV Samaveda 

TA Taittirlya Aranyaka 

TB Taittirlya Brahmana 

TS Taittirlya Samhita 

TU Taittirlya Upanisad, tr. Olivelle (1996) 

Va Vasistha Dharmasutra 

Vi Visnu Smrti 

Ykh Vaikhanasa Dharmasutra, tr. Caland (1929) 


x 



Abbreviations 


VkhG 

VS 

WZKSA 

Y 

ZDMG 


Vaikhanasa Grhyasutra, tr. Caland (1929) 
Vajasaneyi Samhita 

Wiener Zeitschrift fur die Kunde Sirdasiens 
Yajnavalkya Smrti 

Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen 
Gesellschaft 



GUIDE TO THE PRONUNCIATION OF 
SANSKRIT WORDS 


Sanskrit words, including proper names, are printed here with 
diacritical marks. Sanskrit diacritics are simple and, with a min- 
imum of effort, should enable the reader to pronounce these 
words properly. A general rule is that an ‘h’ after a consonant is 
not a separate letter but merely represents the aspirated version 
of a consonant. Thus ‘bh’ is pronounced somewhat as in 
‘abhor’, and ‘ph’ not as in ‘p/zysics’ but as in ‘shep/zerd’. The 
dental group of consonants (t, th, d, dh, n) are distinguished 
from the retroflex group indicated by a dot placed beneath (t, th, 
d, dh, n). The distinction in their pronunciation is somewhat 
difficult for the Western ear. The dentals are pronounced with 
the tip of the tongue placed behind the upper front teeth, and 
the sound is similar to the way these letters are pronounced in 
Romance languages such as French (e.g. toi, de). The English 
pronunciation of these letters is closer to the Sanskrit retroflex, 
but the latter is pronounced with the tip of the tongue striking 
the roof of the mouth further back. Thus ‘t’ is somewhat like t in 
Try’, and ‘d’ is like d in dental. The difference between the dental 
‘n’ and retroflex ‘n’ is very difficult for untrained ears to dis- 
tinguish and is better ignored. The same applies to the palatal 
sibilant ‘s’ and the retroflex ‘s’; both may be pronounced as sh in 
‘shame’, ‘m’ nasalizes the preceding vowel sound, as in French 
bon. ‘h’, with a dot underneath and most frequently at the end 
of a word, is a pure aspiration and is to be distinguished from 
the consonant ‘h’. In practice, the vowel sound preceding it is 
pronounced faintly; thus ‘h’ of bhuvoh is pronounced like the ho 
in Soho when it is pronounced with the accent on the first syl- 
lable and the second shortened. Finally, an apostrophe before a 
word indicates an elided ‘a’, which is not pronounced. 


xii 



Guide to the Pronunciation of Sanskrit Words 

Pronounce Sanskrit 

as in English 

a 

cut 

a 

far 

i 

sit 

T 

me 

u 

put 

u 

too 

r 

risk 

e 

pr ay 

o 

hope 

ai 

sigh 

au 

sound 

c 

c/mrch 

g 

give 

n 

anger 

n 

punching 


xiii 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Primary Sources 

Aitareya Aranyaka, ed. A. B. Keith (reprint, Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1969). 

Aitareya Brahmana, ed. with Sayana’s commentary by KasTnatha 
Sastrl Agase (2 vols., AnSS 32, Poona, 1896; tr. A. B. Keith, HOS 
25, Cambridge, Mass., 1920). 

Apastamba Dharmasiitra, ed. G. Biihler, (3rd. edn., Bombay Sanskrit 
and Prakrit Series, 44, 50, Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research 
Institute, 1932). Ed. with Haradatta’s commentary Ujjvala by 
U. C. Pandeya (Kashi Sanskrit Series, 93, Varanasi: Chowkhamba 
Sanskrit Series Office, 1969). Tr. in Biihler 1879-82. 

Apastamba Srautasiitra, ed. R. Garbe (Reprint, 3 vols., Delhi: 
Munshiram Manoharlal, 1983). 

Arseya Brahmana, ed. with Sayana’s commentary by B. R. Sharma 
(Tirupati: Kendriya Sanskrit Vidyapeetha, 1967). 

Baudhayana Dharmasiitra, ed. E. Hultzsch (1st edn., Abhandlungen 
fiir die Kunde des Morgenlandes, 8, Leipzig, 1884; 2nd edn. 
Abhandlungen fiir die Kunde des Morgenlandes, 16, Leipzig, 
1922). Ed. with Govinda’s commentary by L. Srinivasacharya 
(Government Oriental Library Series, Bibliotheca Sanskrita, 34, 
Mysore, 1907). Ed. with Govinda’s commentary by U. C. Pandeya 
(Kashi Sanskrit Series, 104, Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit 
Series Office, 1972). Tr. in Biihler 1879-82. 

Baudhayana Grhyasutra, ed. L. Srinivasachar and R. Shama Sastri 
(3rd edn., Mysore: Oriental Research Institute, 1983). 

Baudhayana Srautasiitra, ed. W. Caland (3 vols., reprint, Delhi: 
Munshiram Manoharlal, 1982). 

Brhaddevata, ed. and tr. A. A. Macdonell (HOS 5-6, Cambridge, 
Mass., 1904.) 

Caraka Samhitd, tr. A. C. Kaviratna and P. Sharma (5 vols., 2nd edn., 
Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications, 1996—7). 

Gautama Dharmasiitra, ed. A. F. Stenzler (London: Triibner, 1876). 
Ed. with Haradatta’s commentary by N. Talekar (AnSS 61, Poona, 
1966). Ed. with Maskarin’s commentary by L. Srinivasacharya 
(Government Oriental Library Series, Bibliotheca Sanskrita, 50, 
Mysore, 1917). Ed. with Maskarin’s commentary by Veda Mitra 
(Delhi: Veda Mitra and Sons, 1969). Tr. in Biihler 1879-82. 


xiv 



Bibliography 


Gobhila Grhyasutra, tr. Oldenberg, 1892. 

Gopatha Brahmana, ed. R. Mitra and H. Vidyabhusana (Calcutta: 
Bibliotheca Indica, 1872). 

Jaimini, PurvamTmdmsasutra, ed. with the commentaries of Sahara 
and Kumarila (7 vols., AnSS 97, Poona, 1971-81). Tr. G. Jha 
(3 vols., Gaekwad’s Oriental Series, 66, 70, 73, Baroda, 1973-4). 

Katyayana Srautasutra, ed. A. Weber (reprint, Chowkhamba 
Sanskrit Series, 104, Varanasi, 1972). 

Kautilya, Arthasastra, ed. and tr. R. P. Kangle (3 vols., Bombay: 
University of Bombay, 1965-72). 

Mahabharata, ed. V. S. Sukthankar et al. (19 vols., Poona: 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1927-59). 

Manu Smrti, ed., with the commentaries of Medhatithi, Sarva- 
jnanarayana, Kulluka, Raghavananda, Nandana, Ramacandra, 
Manirama, Govindaraja, and Bharuci, J. H. Dave (6 vols., 
Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 1972-84). Tr. Biihler 1886a; 
Doniger and Smith 1991. 

Mahanarayana Upanisad, ed. and tr. J. Varenne (2 vols., Serie in-8, 
11-12, Paris: Institut de Civilisation Indienne, 1960). 

Narada Smrti, ed. and tr. with Asahaya’s commentary by R. W. 
Lariviere (1989). Tr. Jolly 1889. 

Panini, A$tddhydyT, ed. and tr. S. C. Vasu (2 vols., reprint, Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass, 1962). 

Patanjali, Mahdbhdsya, ed. F. Kielhorn (3rd revised edn. by K. V. 
Abhyankar. 3 vols., Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Insti- 
tute, 1962-72). 

Rgveda Samhitd, ed. with Sayana’s commentary by F. Max Muller (6 
vols., London: Wm. FI. Allen & Co., 1849-74). Tr. K. F. Geldner 
(HOS 33-6, Cambridge, Mass., 1951-7). 

Sadvimsa Brahmana, ed. B. R. Sharma (Tirupati: Kendriya Sanskrit 
Vidyapeetha, 1967). 

Samavidhdna Brahmana, ed. B. R. Sharma (Tirupati: Kendriya 
Sanskrit Vidyapeetha, 1964). 

Sdhkhayana Grhyasutra, with extracts from the commentaries of Nar- 
ayana and Ramacandra (2nd edn., Sri Garib Dass Oriental Series, 
42, Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications, 1987). Tr. Oldenberg 1886. 

Sdhkhayana Srautasutra, ed. W. Caland (reprint, Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass, 1980). 

Satapatha Brahmana, ed. A. Weber (reprint, Chowkhamba Sanskrit 
Series, 96, Varanasi, 1964). Tr. J. Eggeling (SBE 12, 26, 41, 43, 44, 
Oxford, 1882-1900). 


xv 



Bibliography 


Srautakosa, English Section, ed. R. N. Dandekar (2 vols., Poona: 
Vaidika Samsodhana Mandala, 1958-82.) 

Taittirlya Aranyaka, ed. with Sayana’s commentary by K. V. 
Abhyankar (2 vols., AnSS 36, reprint, Poona, 1967). 

Taittirlya Brahmana, ed. with Sayana’s commentary by Narayana 
Sastri Godabole (3 vols., AnSS 37, reprint, Poona, 1979). 

Taittirlya Samhita, tr. A. B. Keith (2 vols., HOS 13, 19, Cambridge, 
Mass., 1914). 

Yaska, Nirukta, ed. V. K. Rajavade (Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental 
Research Institute, 1940). 

Vaikhanasa Smartasutra, ed. W. Caland (Bibliotheca Indica, 242, 
Calcutta: Asiatic Society of Bengal, 1927). Tr. in Caland 1927. 

Varahamihira, Brhatsamhitd, ed. and tr. M. R. Bhat (2 vols., Delhi: 
Motilal Banarsidass, 1981-2). 

VasLpha Dharmasutra, ed. A. A. Fiihrer (2nd edn., Bombay Sanskrit 
and Prakrit Series, 23, Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research 
Institute, 1930). Ed. with Krsnapandita’s commentary Vid- 
vanmodinl (Benares, 1878). Tr. in Biihler 1879-82. 

Vi$nu Smrti, ed. with Nandapandita’s commentary by V. 
Krishnamacharya (2 vols., Adyar Library Series, 93, Madras: 
Adyar Library and Research Centre, 1964). Tr. in Jolly 1880. 

Yajnavalkya Smrti , ed. with Vijnanesvara’s commentary by U. C. 
Pandey (Kashi Sanskrit Series, 178, Varanasi: Chowkhamba 
Sanskrit Series Office, 1967). Ed. with Visvarupa’s commentary by 
T. Ganapati Sastri (reprint, Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1982). 
Ed. with Sulapani’s commentary by J. R. Gharpure (Bombay, 1939). 
Ed. with Aparaditya’s commentary (2 vols., AnSS 46, 1903-4). 

Secondary Sources 

Banerjee, S. C. (1962), Dharma-Sutras: A Study in Their Origin and 
Development (Calcutta: Punthi Pustak). 

Bodewitz, H. W. (1973), Jaiminlya Brahmana I. 1-65: Translation and 
Commentary with a Study Agnihotra and Prdndgnihotra (Orientalia 
Rheno-Traiectina 17; Leiden: E. J. Brill). 

(1985), ‘Yama’s Second Boon in the Katha Upanisad’, WZKSA 

29: 5-26. 

(1996), ‘Redeath and Its Relation to Rebirth and Release’, 

Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik, 20: 27-A6. 

Bohtlingk, O. (1885a), ‘Bemerkungen zu Fiihrer’s Ausgabe und zu 
Biihler’s Uebersetzung des Vasisthadharmagastra’, ZDMG 39: 
481-8. 


xvi 



Bibliography 


(18856), ‘Bemerkungen zu Biihler’s Ausgabe und Uebersetzung 

des Apastambijadharmasutra’, ZD MG 39: 517-27. 

(1885c), ‘Einige Bemerkungen zu Baudhajana’s Dharma^astra’, 

ZDMG 39: 539-42. 

(1886a), 'Bemerkungen zu Biihler’s Artikel im 39. Bande dieser 

Zeitschrift, S. 704 fgg.’, ZDMG 40: 144-7. 

(18866), ‘Nachtagliches zu Vasishtha’, ZDMG 40: 526. 

Biihler, G. (1879—82) (tr.), Sacred Laws of the Aryas [containing the 
Dharmasutras of Apastamba, Gautama, Vasistha, and Baud- 
hayana] (2 vols., SBE 2, 14; Oxford: Oxford University Press). 

(1885), 'Einige Noten zu Bohtlingk’s Bemerkungen fiber 

Fuhrer’s Ausgabe und meine Uebersetzung des Vasish- 
thadharmasastra’, ZDMG 39: 704-9. 

(1886a) (tr.), The Laws of Mann (SBE 25; Oxford: Oxford 

University Press). 

(18866) ‘Einige Bemerkungen zu Bohtlingk’s Artikel fiber 

Apastamba’, ZDMG 40: 527^18. 

Caland, W. (1929) (tr.), Vaikhdnasasmdrtasutram (Calcutta: 

Asiatic Society of Bengal). 

Chatterjee, H. (1971), The Law of Debt in Ancient India (Calcutta 
Sanskrit College Research Series, 75; Calcutta: Calcutta Sanskrit 
College). 

(1972-4), The Social Background of the Forms of Marriage in 

Ancient India (Calcutta: Sanskrit Pustak Bhandar). 

Dave, K. N. (1985), Birds in Sanskrit Literature (Delhi: Motilal 
Banarsidass). See Linke 1997. 

Doniger, W., and Smith, B. K. (1991) (tr.), The Laws of Manu 
(London: Penguin). 

Dumont, L. (1980), Homo Hierarchicus: The Caste System and Its 
Implications (rev. edn., tr. M. Sainsbury, L. Dumont, and B. Gulati; 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press; 1st edn. 1966). 

Falk, H. (1986), Bruderschaft und Wurfelspiel: Untersuchungen :ur 
Entwicklungsgeschichte des vedischen Opfers (Freiburg: Fledwig 
Falk). 

Fitzgerald, J. L. (1998), 'Some Storks Eat Carrion; Flerons and 
Ospreys Do Not: Kankas and Kuraras (and Badas) in the 
Mahabharata’, Journal of the American Oriental Society, 118: 
257-61 

Friedrich, E. (1993) (tr.), Das Apastamba-Dharmasutra: Aufbau 
und Aussage (Europaische Hochschulschriften, Asiatische und 
Afrikanische Studien, 31; Frankfurt-on-Main: Peter Lang). 

xvii 



Bibliography 

Ghose, B. K. (1927), ‘Apastamba and Gautama’, Indian Historical 
Quarterly, 3: 607-11. 

Ghosh, A. (1973), The City in Early Historical India (Simla: Indian 
Institute of Advanced Study). 

Gonda, J. (1960-1), ‘Prayata’, Bharatiya Vidvd ( Munshi Indological 
Felicitation Volume), 20-1: 45-51. 

Halbfass, W. (1988), India and Europe: An Essay in Understanding 
(Albany, NY: State University of New York Press). 

Hara, M. (1979), ‘ Sraddhavivesa' , Indologica Taurinensia, 7: 261-73: 

(1980), ‘Hindu Concepts of Teacher: Sanskrit guru and dcdrya’, 

in M. Nagatomi et al. (eds.), Sanskrit and Indian Studies: Essays in 
Honor of Daniel H. H. Ingalls (Dordrecht: Reidel), 93-118. 

(1992), ‘Sraddha in the Sense of Desire’, Asiatische Studien, 46: 

180-94. 

Jamison, S. W. (1991), The Ravenous Hyenas and the Wounded Sun: 
Myth and Ritual in Ancient India (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press). 

(1996), Sacrificed Wife/Sacrficer’s Wife: Women, Ritual, and 

Hospitality in Ancient India (New York: Oxford University Press). 

(1998), ‘Rhinoceros Toes: Manu 5.17-18 and the Development 

of the Dharma System’, Journal of the American Oriental Society, 
118:249-56. 

and Witzel, M. (forthcoming), ‘Vedic Hinduism’. 

Jolly, J. (1880) (tr.), The Institutes of Vishnu (SBE 7; Oxford: Oxford 
University Press). 

(1889) (tr.), The Minor Law-Books [Narada and Brhaspati] 

(SBE 33; Oxford: Oxford University Press). 

Kane, P. V. (1942), ‘The Meaning of Acaryah’, Annals of the 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 23: 206-13. 

(1962—75), History of Dharmasdstra (5 vols.; Poona: Bhan- 
darkar Oriental Research Institute). 

Kangle, R. P. (1968), ‘The Relative Age of the Gautamadharmasutra’ , 
in Melanges d’Indianisme a la memoire de Louis Renous (Paris: 
Editions Boccard), 415-25. 

Keith, A. B. (1914) (tr.), The Veda of the Black Yajus School Entitled 
Taittiriya Sanhita (2 vols., HOS 18-19; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard 
University Press). 

Kohler, H. W. (1973), Srad-dhd in der vedischen und altbuddhistischen 
Literature (thesis, Gottingen, 1948; ed. K. L. Janert, Wiesbaden). 

Lariviere, R. (1989) (ed. and tr.), The Ndradasmrti (2 vols.; Philadel- 
phia: South Asia Regional Studies). 

xviii 



Bibliography 


Lingat, R. (1973), The Classical Law of India (tr. J. D. M. Derrett; 
Berkeley: University of California Press). 

Linke, E. (1997), ‘Birds in Sanskrit Literature: Sanskrit-English 
Index’, Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 78: 
121-41. Word Index to Dave 1985. 

Liiders, H. (1942), ‘Von indischen Tieren’, ZD MG 96: 23-81. 

Malamoud, C. (1972), ‘Observations sur la notion de “reste” dans 
le brahmanisme’, WZKSA 16: 5-16. Tr. in Malamoud 1996, 7-22. 

(1996), Cooking the World : Ritual and Thought in Ancient India 

(tr. D. White; Delhi: Oxford University Press). 

Meyer, J. J. (1927), Uber das Wesen der altindischen Rechtsschriften 
and ihr Verhdltnis zu einander und zu Kautilya (Leipzig: Har- 
rassowitz). 

Mines, D. P. (1990), ‘Hindu Periods of Death “Impurity”’, in M. 
Marriott, India through Hindu Categories (New Delhi: Sage Publi- 
cations), 103-30. 

Oldenberg, H. (1886-92) (tr.), The Grihya-Sutras: Rules of Vedic 
Domestic Ceremonies [containing the Sutras of Sankhayana, 
Asvalayana, Paraskara, Khadira, Gobhila, Hiranyakesin, and 
Apastamba] (SBE 29-30; Oxford: Oxford University Press). 

Olivelle, P. (1981), ‘Contributions to the Semantic History of 
SamnydscI, Journal of the American Oriental Society, 101: 265-74. 

(1986), Renunciation in Hinduism: A Medieval Debate (2 vols.; 

Vienna: Institute for Indology, University of Vienna). 

(1993), The Asrama System: The History and Hermeneutics of a 

Religious Institution (New York: Oxford University Press). 

(1996) (tr.), Upanisads (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 

(1998), ‘Caste and Purity: A Study in the Language of the 

Dharma Literature’, Contributions to Indian Sociology, 32/2: 
190-216 

Pandey, R. B. (1969), Hindu Samskdras: Socio-Religious Study of the 
Hindu Sacraments (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass). 

Prater, S. H. (1997), The Book of Indian Animals (3rd edn., reprint; 
Bombay: Natural History Society and Oxford University Press). 

Quigley, D. (1993), The Interpretation of Caste (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press). 

Renou, L. (1963), ‘Sur le genre du sutra dans la litterature Sanskrite’, 
Journal Asiatique, 251: 165-216. 

Smith, B. K. (1994), Classifying the Universe: The Ancient Indian 
Varna System and the Origins of Caste (New York: Oxford 
University Press). 


xix 



Bibliography 


Stenzler, A. F. (1849) (tr. ), Ydjnavalkya’s Gesetzbuch: Sanskrit und 
Deutsch (Berlin: Ferd. Diimmler). 

Tambiah, S. J. (1973), ‘From Varna to Caste through Mixed Unions', 
in J. Goody (ed.), The Character of Kinship (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press), 191-229. 

van Gennep, A. (1960) (1909), The Rites of Passage (tr. M. R. 
Vizedom and G. L. Caffee; Chicago: University of Chicago Press). 

Wezler, A. (1998), ‘Should the Adopted Son Be a Close Rela- 
tive? On the Interpretation of VaDhs 15.6 and 1\ Indologica 
Taurinensia, 17-18. 

Witzel, M. (1989), ‘Tracing the Vedic Dialects’, in C. Caillat (ed.), 
Dialectes dans les litteratures Indo-aryennes (Publications de 
L’lnstitut de Civilisation Indienne 55; Paris: Editions Boccard), 
97-265. 

(1997), ‘The Development of the Vedic Canon and its Schools: 

The Social and Political Milieu’, in M. Witzel (ed.). Inside the 
Texts, Beyond the Texts: New Approaches to the Study of the Vedas 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Department of Sanskrit and Indian Studies, 
Harvard University), 257-345. 


xx 



INTRODUCTION 


The texts translated here are the four surviving works of the 
ancient Indian expert tradition on the subject of dharma. Writ- 
ten in a pithy and aphoristic style, these Dharmasutras represent 
the culmination of a long tradition of scholarship; they reveal 
deep learning and document intense disputes and divergent 
views on a variety of topics as broad as the category of dharma 
itself. Dharma includes all aspects of proper individual and 
social behaviour as demanded by one’s role in society and in 
keeping with one’s social identity according to age, gender, 
caste, marital status, and order of life. The term dharma may be 
translated as ‘law’ if we do not limit ourselves to its narrow 
modern definition as civil and criminal statutes but take it to 
include all the rules of behaviour, including moral and religious 
behaviour, that a community recognizes as binding on its mem- 
bers. The subject-matter of the Dharmasutras, therefore, 
includes education of the young and their rites of passage; ritual 
procedures and religious ceremonies; marriage and marital 
rights and obligations; dietary restrictions and food transac- 
tions; the right professions for, and the proper interaction 
between, different social groups; sins and their expiations; 
institutions for the pursuit of holiness; the king and the adminis- 
tration of justice; crimes and punishments; death and ancestral 
rites. In short, these unique documents give us a glimpse if not 
into how people actually lived their lives in ancient India, at 
least into how people, especially Brahmin males, were ideally 
expected to live their lives within an ordered and hierarchically 
arranged society. 


Literary History 

The Dharmasutras belong to the same literary tradition that 
produced the works comprising the scriptural corpus of the 
Veda. Both in authorship and audience, that literary tradition 
was by and large limited to the hereditary Brahmin priests. 


xxi 



Introduction 


Although always an elite minority, the Brahmin community at 
any given time in history was both relatively large in numbers 
and geographically widespread. The Brahmanical literature, 
however, was created not by the Brahmins at large but by the few 
who belonged to expert traditions of knowledge. These tradi- 
tions were divided along the lines of the ‘vedic branches’ (sdklid) 
or schools. The vedic branches started as groups of Brahmins 
affiliated with one of the four Vedas: Rg, Yajur, Sama, and 
Atharva. But each of them split further into numerous branches 
due to a variety of factors that are little understood but may 
have included geographical location, ritual specialization, and 
doctrinal and ritual disputes. It is within these branches that 
most of the vedic texts were composed and orally handed 
down . 1 

Each of these vedic branches has as its foundational text a 
‘collection’ (Samhita) of verses or liturgical formulas 2 and a 
prose text (Brahmana) explaining the meaning of the liturgy. 
The Samhita is by and large common to all the branches of a 
Veda, even though some may have their own recension of it, 
while each branch has its own Brahmana. The Brahmanas were 
not the work of single authors, and periodic additions were 
made to them. These additions included esoteric material 
explaining the hidden meanings of ritual actions and words. 
Some of these esoteric sections of the Brahmanas came to be 
called Aranyakas (texts that were to be recited in the wilderness 
outside the village), while others came to be called Upanisads. 
The distinction between these two groups of texts is not 
altogether clear, since both deal with similar material; some of 
the Upanisads, such as the Aitareya, are embedded within their 
respective Aranyakas, while others, such as the Brhadaranyaka 
(lit., ‘Great Aranyaka’), are viewed as both an Aranyaka and an 
Upanisad. Brahmanical theology divides the vedic corpus into 

1 For an accessible account of the vedic literature the reader may consult 
Olivelle 1996, pp. xxiii-xl. For a more detailed account that, for the first time, 
attempts to understand the social underpinnings of this literature, see Witzel 1997. 

2 The Samhita of the Rgveda is in verse and contains 1028 hymns divided into 
ten books; the Samhita of the Samaveda consists mostly of Rgvedic verses set to 
music; and the Samhita of the Yajurveda is in prose and contains formulas that are 
recited during a sacrifice. 

xxii 



Introduction 


two categories of texts: mantra and brdhmana. The former 
includes the verses and ritual formulas contained in the 
Samhitas, and the latter refers to the Brahmanas, including the 
Aranyaka and Upanisad portions. Brahmana texts, which 
alone were thought to contain injunctions, constitute the vedic 
basis of the Dharma literature (see A 2.14.13 n.). 

Towards the end of the vedic period, some time after the 
middle of the first millennium bce, further expert traditions 
developed to deal with the ever more complex vedic ritual and 
to preserve and understand the vedic texts whose language 
was becoming ever more archaic and abstruse to people many 
centuries removed from their composition. The expert tradi- 
tions and the works that grew out of them were classified 
as the six Vedic Supplements ( veddhga , lit., 'limbs of the 
Veda’): ritual expositions of the Veda, grammar, astronomy, 
etymology, phonetics, and metrics (A 2.8.11). Although these 
expert traditions developed initially within the vedic branches, 
they became increasingly independent. Especially in the tech- 
nical areas of grammar and astronomy, it would have been 
natural for students to gather around renowned teachers and 
the appeal of their literary works would have transcended the 
boundaries of the vedic branches. Thus, for example, the 
great grammatical treatise of Panini, composed probably 
in the fourth century bce, became the standard Sanskrit 
grammar. 

Although the earliest texts, such as the hymns of the Rgveda, 
were composed in verse, the liturgical works ( brdhmana ) of the 
middle vedic period were composed in prose. This practice was 
continued in the literature of the expert traditions; most ancient 
works falling within the Vedic Supplements are in prose. Prob- 
ably because instruction in the expert traditions was carried out 
orally and the pedagogy of these schools was based on first 
memorizing the basic texts and then delving into their meaning 
with the aid of the teacher, the basic texts came to be composed 
in an aphoristic style known as sutra. 3 A sutra is a sentence 
from which most non-essential elements have been removed. 


3 For a detailed study of the siitra genre, see Renou 1963. 
xxiii 



Introduction 


Individual sutras are often syntactically connected to the 
preceding, words of earlier sutras being implicit in later ones, a 
convention technically called anuvrtti. This convention makes 
the entire composition similar to a chain and each sutra a link 
in that chain. It is this characteristic that probably gave it the 
name sutra (lit., ‘thread’), the composition being compared to 
a thread on which each aphorism is strung like a pearl. Given 
the brevity of each sutra, it is frequently impossible to under- 
stand the meaning without the benefit of either an oral explan- 
ation or a commentary. The sutra style of composition was 
perfected and taken to an extreme in the meta-language 
created in the grammatical tradition and reflected in the work of 
Panini. 

The Dharmasutras are part of the Vedic Supplements and are 
written primarily in the sutra style, even though verses are inter- 
spersed and the sutras are not as succinct as those of Panini. The 
Dharmasutras form part of the ‘ritual expositions’ known col- 
lectively as Kalpasutras that include three types of expositions: 
Srautasutras dealing with vedic rituals, Grhyasutras dealing 
with domestic rituals, and Dharmasutras. 

Only two Dharmasutras, however, those of Apastamba and 
Baudhayana, have come down as part of a larger Kalpasutra. 
It appears likely that the subject-matter of Dharma, just as 
that of grammar, became increasingly divorced from the vedic 
branches. Unlike Srautasutras and Grhyasutras that dealt 
exclusively with ritual matters and thus could easily be con- 
fined to the ritually based vedic branches, Dharma came to 
include areas of individual and social behaviour and norms, as 
well as personal, civil, and criminal law. The works on 
Dharma, just as works on grammar, became universally 
applicable treatises. The expert tradition of Dharma, which for 
short I will call the ‘legal tradition’, continued in later Indian 
history down to modern times as an independent and free- 
standing intellectual tradition not specifically tied to the vedic 
branches. 

A large number of works dealing with Dharma appears to 
have been composed in the centuries immediately prior to the 
common era; many such works are referred to, or cited in, the 


xxiv 



Introduction 


four extant Dharmasutras. But they are now lost; only the four 
translated here have survived. 4 

What may be called the sutra period of the legal tradition 
ended around the beginning of the common era. It gave way to 
the emerging literary genre of the simple verse called sloka with 
four octo-syllabic feet. Most literature of this and succeeding 
periods, including the epics and the Puranas, were composed in 
this style. The legal texts composed in this style are commonly 
called Dharmasastras or simply Smrti, the earliest representa- 
tive of which is the Manu Smrti (M). The influence of this new 
genre is already evident in Vasistha and the later sections (Books 
3 and 4) of Baudhayana, which contain numerous verses. The 
age of the Smrtis ended probably in the second half of the first 
millennium ce, and from about the ninth century the texts 
produced in the legal tradition consisted of commentaries on 
earlier Dharmasutras and Smrtis and of legal digests ( nibandha ) 
that deal with topics systematically but consist primarily of 
quotations from Smrtis with an added commentary. 

Authorship and Dates 

Who wrote the Dharmasutras and when? This is a simple and 
obvious question without a clear or straightforward answer. 
Unlike the vedic texts which do not have the names of their 
authors attached to them, many of the Vedic Supplements are 
ascribed to historical authors, for example, Panini for the 
grammatical text bearing his name. The Dharmasutras also 
carry the names of their authors: Apastamba, Baudhayana, 
Gautama, and Vasistha. The first two have entire Kalpasutras 
ascribed to them, and ritual traditions bearing their names con- 
tinued to exist until contemporary times. The two were certainly 
founders of these ritual and scholastic traditions, but it is 

4 We also possess the Dharmasutra of Hiranyakesin. but it is merely a different 
recension of Apastamba’s text. The differences in Hiranyakesin are noted in 
Biihler’s edition of Apastamba. The Visnu Smrti (Vi) was probably another such 
Dharmasutra containing material from the lost Dharmasutra of the Kathakas, 
but it has been radically recast many centuries into the common era by a devotee 
of Visnu. Another prose work is the Vaikhanasa Dharmasutra (Vkh), but this too 
is a work composed several centuries into the common era. 


xxv 



Introduction 


unclear whether they were the historical authors of these texts 
or whether the texts were ascribed to them because they were 
composed within the traditions bearing their names . 5 Gautama 
and Vasistha, on the other hand, are ancient seers. They could 
not have been the historical authors of the texts ascribed to 
them. These texts represent some of the earliest evidence for a 
phenomenon that became common in the versified Smrtis, 
namely the emergence of eponymous literature, that is, the 
ascription of treatises to eminent persons of the mythical 
past. 

The issue of authorship is further complicated by the fact 
that, apart from Apastamba’s, these texts contain numerous 
additions made at later times . 6 If we ignore these, however, it 
appears very likely that the Dharmasutras were composed by 
individual authors, in much the same way as Panini’s grammar, 
even though each author appears to have incorporated a sub- 
stantial amount of material from other common sources. These 
were not individual authors writing in isolation; they were part 
of a tradition of experts whose views and compositions influ- 
enced each other. 

Regarding the dates of these documents, there is un- 
fortunately little that can be said with any degree of certainty. 
No evidence external to the texts themselves has survived, the 
first references to them in other texts coming many centuries 
after their probable composition. Internal evidence, on the other 
hand, tends to be quite subjective and, like modern-day stat- 
istics, can be and has been used to prove divergent viewpoints. 
The use of internal evidence is complicated by uncertainty 
regarding the geographical provenance of these documents; a 
linguistic feature or a particular custom or rule used to establish 


5 Apastamba’s Kalpasutra is the best preserved with the least amount of later 
editorial intervention. Biihler (1879-82, vol. i, pp. xiii-xv) has shown that there are 
cross-references between the Grhyasutras and Dharmasutras of Apastamba 
pointing to a common author of the two. He also thinks that the entire 
Kalpasutra, including the Srautasutra, is the work of one author. The grounds for 
this conclusion rest on thinner evidence and it is rejected by Oldenberg (1878-86, 
ii, p. xxxii). 

6 I will deal with these probable additions in my preambles to individual 
Dharmasutras. 


xxvi 



Introduction 


the chronological priority or posteriority of a text may, on the 
contrary, indicate merely geographical difference. 

The geographical provenance of these documents is not very 
clear. Biihler (1879-82, i, pp. xxxii-xl) has argued that Apas- 
tamba came from South India, probably from Andhra, and 
Kane (1962-75, i. 67) accepts this conclusion. In medieval 
inscriptions Brahmins belonging to the Apastamba school are 
located mostly in South India; this is also true in modern times. 
But does this reflect the situation several centuries before the 
common era or is it the outcome of later migrations? There is a 
piece of internal evidence advanced to buttress the argument. 
Apastamba once refers to the practice of ‘northerners’ ( udicya , 
A 2.17.17), but it is unclear what region is meant by ‘north’. 
Even Panini (4.2.109) uses that term, even though he was clearly 
a northerner, probably from the north-western region. 

Biihler (1879-82, ii, pp. xli-xliii) and Kane (1962-75, i. 48) 
think that Baudhayana also belonged to the south, even though 
they admit that the evidence is weaker than for Apastamba. 
Here again, I think they have relied too much on evidence com- 
ing from much later times that may merely indicate patterns of 
Brahmanical migrations. Baudhayana refers to five distinctive 
practices of the south and the north (B 1.2. 1-8). Again, the 
exact meaning of ‘north’ and ‘south’, which are always relative 
terms, is unclear and cannot be assumed to be the same as the 
meaning attached to these terms in modern times. My view is 
that all the Dharmasutras were probably composed in the area 
that we today call North India, principally because that appears 
to have been the region of Brahmanical literary activity during 
the centuries before the common era. It may well be true that 
some, such as Apastamba, belonged to a marginal region rather 
than the heartland, which may explain some of the linguistic 
archaism and Prakritic forms present in that text. 7 Gautama’s 
use of the term yavana (‘Greek’) and bhiksu (‘mendicant’), terms 
also used by Panini, and his ‘correct’ Sanskrit conforming to 
Paninian rules may indicate that he came from the north- 
western region to which Panini also belonged. There is little 

7 These peculiarities, including Prakritic forms, are also found in the 
Srautasutra of Apastamba: see Garbe’s preface at iii. 5-12. 

xxvii 



Introduction 


internal evidence regarding the geographical provenance of 
Vasistha. 

Turning then to the dates of these documents, it would appear 
at first sight that it is easier to establish their relative chronology 
than their dates of composition. But, even here, scholarly opin- 
ion is divided, because internal evidence is subject to diverse 
interpretations. Based on the same evidence, for example, 
scholars have come to diametrically opposed conclusions 
regarding the relative age of Apastamba and Gautama. 8 To offer 
but one example of the hazards of determining age through 
internal evidence, Biihler (1879-82, i, pp. xix-xxi; Lingat 1973, 
21) thinks that the espousal of 'puritan opinions’ with respect 
to marriage and levirate indicates that Apastamba is younger 
than Baudhayana. Apastamba vigorously rejects levirate and 
strongly supports monogamy. But Vasistha, an undoubtedly late 
text, not only espouses levirate but even permits a woman whose 
husband is abroad to go to a male relative of her husband or 
possibly even a stranger (Va 17.75-80). Evidently, the 'puritan- 
ism’ is not necessarily a sign of a late text. 

A significant point to remember is that these authors were 
not, as often depicted, simply mouthpieces for an anonymous 
and static tradition. A close reading of the texts reveals a vibrant 
intellectual milieu in which authors and their opponents express 
strongly held and deeply personal views. On the question of 
levirate, for example, there evidently were strikingly different 
theological positions espoused by different authors, reminiscent 
of the current theological debates on abortion and the right to 
choose. 

So how are we to minimize, if not eliminate, subjective bias in 
evaluating internal evidence? A detailed discussion is not 
possible within the limits of this introduction, but I propose 
one criterion. Even though our authors often express personal 

8 The opinion of Biihler (1879-82, i. p. lix) that Gautama 'may be safely 
declared to be ihe oldest of the existing works on the sacred law' has been 
generally accepted: Kane (1962-75, i. 29); Lingat (1973, 19); Banerjee (1962, 46). 
Apastamba is placed before Gautama, however, by Ghose (1927), Meyer (1927, 
253-326), and Kangle (1968). Kangle’s opinion that Gautama is even later than 
Vasistha is extreme and can be dismissed, but he has shown that arguments for the 
priority of Gautama can be used equally well to show that he is later. 

xxviii 



Introduction 


opinions, they operated within an expert tradition. When certain 
features and elements were introduced into this tradition, they 
were invariably incorporated into later texts. Surveying the 
Dharma literature, therefore, we can make some predictions. 
The use of verse, for example, becomes more common and more 
consistent as time goes on, until Dharma texts come to be com- 
posed entirely in verse. Thus the presence of a large number of 
verses, especially when entire sections are composed in verse, is 
an indication of lateness. Likewise, we find certain central 
themes that are introduced at a particular time and then found 
in all subsequent texts, for example, the discussion of the ‘land 
of Aryas’ ( dryavarta ), the ‘legal assembly’ ( parisad ), and mixed 
classes. The absence of just one may be accidental or due to 
other reasons. The absence of a cluster or all of these features, I 
would argue, shows that a text antedates their introduction into 
the tradition. There are also structural features discussed below 
that emerge with time, such as the treatment of inheritance in a 
special section and placing the section on penance last. The 
presence of these features indicates lateness. 

Verses are interspersed among the prose siitras in all of our 
texts except Gautama. Usually, they are given as citations with 
the introductory comment: ‘Now, they also quote.’ Such verses 
generally do not introduce new material but simply reinforce 
injunctions already given in prose passages. In Baudhayana and 
Vasistha, however, there is an increasing use of verse not merely 
as quotations but as integral parts of the composition, reflecting 
the genre of the later Smrtis. Table 1 gives a comparative 
breakdown of the number of verses in the three texts. 


Table 1 



Total siitras 

Total verses 

Non-quote verses 



No. 

% 

No. 

% 

Apastamba 

1364 

30 

2 

5 

0.4 

Baudhayana 

1236 

279 

22 

176 

14 

Vasistha 

1038 

288 

28 

155 

15 


xxix 



Introduction 


According to this indicator, Vasistha is the youngest with 28 per 
cent of the text in verse, a large number of which ( 1 5 per cent of 
the text) are non-quote verses. In fact, chapters 26-8 are entirely 
in verse. 9 

Baudhayana has undergone numerous emendations and 
accretions, 10 but even if we limit ourselves to the early section 
(Book One and sections 1-16 of Book Two), which I have called 
Proto-Baudhayana, it is in my estimation later than both Apas- 
tamba and Gautama. Ofthe 853. swbus in Proto-Baudhayana, 161, 
or 19 per cent, are in verse, with 72 (8 per cent) non-quote verses. 
This argues for Apastamba predating even Proto-Baudhayana. 

Vasistha and Proto-Baudhayana also contain discussions of 
the land of the Aryas’, missing in Apastamba and Gautama, 
and of the ‘legal assembly’, missing in Apastamba but given by 
Gautama in the last chapter (28.48-9). Another criterion is the 
treatment of the so-called sacrificial cord. It is clear that in the 
earliest period the custom was that on certain occasions, such as 
during rituals, purifications, and eating, a Brahmin should wear 
an upper garment ( upavTta ), which was a looped shawl, in a 
special manner over the left shoulder and under the right arm, a 
manner of wearing called yajnopavTta (Kane 1962-75, ii. 287- 
300). Apastamba and Gautama use the term with this meaning. 
Indeed, Apastamba (2.4.21—2) allows the use of a cord merely as 
a substitute for the upper garment; there it appears as a ritual 
abbreviation. Baudhayana (1.8.5), on the other hand, takes it for 
granted that it is a cord and describes how it is manufactured. 
Both Baudhayana (1.5.5) and Vasistha (12.14) state that a 
bath-graduate ( snataka ) wears a double cord, reflecting the later 

9 This and other arguments presuppose that we have reliably edited texts. We do 
have critical editions of Apastamba and Baudhayana, but the editions of Gautama 
and Vasistha are not as reliable (see Note on the Translation). Some of my conclu- 
sions may have to be modified when more reliable editions become available. 

10 For a discussion of the composite nature of this text, see the preamble to 
Baudhayana. The Baudhayana school is certainly older than that of Apastamba, 
and it is generally true that the literature of the former is probably older than that 
of the latter. It may well be that the original of the Baudhayana Dharmastitra was 
older than Apastamba, but the same cannot be said with regard to the extant text. 
The added sections of Baudhayana, containing what amounts to a handbook for 
renouncers (2.17-18) and other ascetic literature, are probably not earlier than the 
3rd to 4th centuries ce, possibly contemporaneous with the Vkh. 


xxx 



Introduction 


practice that a student wears a single cord, a graduate and 
householder a double cord, a hermit a triple cord, and a 
renouncer four cords (Olivelle 1993, 147). Vasistha (8.17; 10.31), 
furthermore, appears to assume that this cord was worn per- 
manently by Brahmins, a later practice unknown to Apastamba 
and Gautama. I think we can assert with some certainty that the 
youngest of these texts is Vasistha, preceded by Proto- 
Baudhayana. 

I think that there is sufficient evidence to state that Apas- 
tamba is older than Gautama. The fact that Gautama is com- 
posed entirely in prose sutras that are frequently very brief, thus 
conforming to the aphoristic ideal, has been considered by some 
as arguing for its antiquity. 11 1 think, however, that the omission 
of all cited verses, a practice common in all other Dharma texts, 
argues for the author’s deliberate attempt to produce an ideal 
sutra work. If he lived in the north-west, as I believe he did, he 
may have been influenced to a greater degree by the model 
offered by Panini’s grammar. I think Kangle’s observation 
(1968, 424) is accurate: ‘Here we have unquestionably the work 
of a person who was trying to compress in as few words as 
possible all the teaching of this sastra [discipline], eschewing all 
extraneous discussions.’ There are, moreover, other indicators 
that argue for a later date for Gautama. Besides its use of the 
term yavana (‘Greek’) lacking in other texts, Gautama’s fre- 
quent use of asrama (‘orders of life’: 11.29; 19.1; 28.49) points to 
a time when the asrama system was fully integrated into the 
exposition of Dharma. 12 Apastamba’s priority is also indicated 
by the fact that he does not deal with mixed classes at all, a topic 
found in all other Dharmasutras and in the later Smrtis. 

The absolute dates of these documents are even harder to 
establish. Kane (1962-75, i) has given some tentative upper 
and lower limits: Gautama 600-400, Apastamba 450-350, 
Baudhayana 500-200, and Vasistha 300-100, all bce. These 

II In some ways this argument agrees with what I have said earlier about the 
increasing frequency of verses in later texts. But in the case of Gautama, however, 
I think the complete absence of verse appears to be totally artificial and deliberate. 

12 For a more detailed discussion of this, see Olivelle 1993. The early Dharma 
texts, especially Apastamba, discuss the asramas only within the context of pre- 
senting this theory, often in a hostile manner. 


xxxi 



Introduction 


dates are often repeated by scholars, even though they are at 
best educated guesses. The dates assigned to most ancient 
Indian documents are generally based on a particular docu- 
ment being before or after some other document, whose date 
in turn is dependent on a similar estimate, the whole edifice 
thus constituting ‘a chronological house of cards’ (Lariviere 
1989, ii, p. xx). Kane’s estimates are based on assigning rather 
early dates to the vedic texts, especially the Brahmanas and 
Upanisads. 

One piece of internal evidence, I believe, is central to estab- 
lishing a somewhat reliable chronology of these documents. 
Gautama (4.21) presents the opinion of some according to 
which yavana is the progeny of a Ksatriya father and a Sudra 
mother. Now, yavana is probably the Sanskritized version of the 
middle-Indic (Prakrit) yona derived from the Old Persian yauna. 
This term refers directly to Ionia, an area conquered by the 
Persian King Darius I (522-486 bce), but which became a more 
general term for Greeks. The Archaemenid Empire in the late 
sixth and early fifth centuries bce stretched from Greece to the 
north-western parts of India. The question is, when did the 
Indians come to designate the Greeks or people of Greek origin 
by the term yavandl It certainly could not have been before 
Darius I, that is, not earlier than about 500 bce. The earliest 
datable record for the term yona is in the 5th Rock Edict of 
Asoka of 256 bce, which comes from the north-western region 
in what is today Pakistan. Panini (4.1.49) uses the term, but his 
use is merely linguistic and does not necessarily indicate that he 
knew or was in contact with Greek settlers. 13 The case of 
Gautama is very different. His reference is to a group of people 
who, according to some experts on Dharma, originated through 
the mixed union between Ksatriyas and Sudras. Now, it is very 
unlikely that he is trying to explain the origin of a people he had 
merely heard about; he must be referring to a people to whom he 


13 Panini is generally placed in the fifth century bce, although his dating is also 
an educated guess at best. Biihler (1879-82, i, p. lx) tries to evade the problem 
created by Gautama’s use of yavana by taking the passage in question to be a later 
interpolation. This is too easy a solution and is rightly rejected even by Kane 
(1962-75, i. 35-6). 


xxxii 



Introduction 


and his audience had some connection. It is very unlikely that 
people of Greek origin in sufficient numbers to attract attention 
would have lived in north-western India before the invasion of 
Alexander. The Edict of Asoka (256 bce) calls the yavanas a 
border people. I think the use of yavana places the upper limit of 
Gautama in the middle of the third century bce. 

Baudhayana and Vasistha are the earliest Dharma writers to 
include a discussion of the ‘land of Aryas’. This is given as the 
region where proper customs are prevalent. The customs of this 
land are viewed as normative. A dehnition of the ‘land of Aryas’ 
agreeing almost verbatim with those given by Baudhayana and 
Vasistha is found twice in Patanjali’s great commentary, 
Mahdbhasya, on Panini’s grammar. Patanjali can be dated with 
some precision and certainty to the middle of the second cen- 
tury bce. So we have a maximum time span of less than one 
hundred years between Gautama, who is ignorant of the land- 
of-Aryas theory, and Patanjali, who presents what appears to be 
a codified definition of that region. I think neither Baudha- 
yana 14 nor Vasistha can be placed before the middle of the 
second century bce. I am, however, inclined to place Vasistha 
closer to the beginning of the common era, or even in the first 
century ce close to the beginning of the Smrti era. In the later 
chapters (25.1, 10; 28.10), for example, Vasistha uses the pro- 
noun ‘I’, a practice unknown to the earlier writers and common 
in the later Smrtis, which are presented as the personal teaching 
of a god or sage. In Vasistha (16.10, 14) we also encounter for 
the first time the use of written evidence injudicial proceedings. 15 

There is no compelling reason to place Apastamba at too 
great a distance in time from Gautama. 16 We would not be far 

14 A possible clue to the lateness of Baudhayana is a citation (B 2.4.15) that 
Biihler (1879-82, ii. 235) has correctly identified as coming from a verse Smrti. 
Although Biihler does not draw this conclusion, it is clear that such a citation 
places Baudhayana closer to the beginning of the common era when such versified 
Dharma texts probably were first composed. 

15 Kane (1962-75, iii. 307) thinks that G 13.4 about listed witnesses is a reference 
to a written list, which is rather doubtful. But even if we accept Kane’s opinion, it 
is not a reference to documents as evidence in a court of law. 

16 The rather shallow argument based on Apastamba’s mention of Svetaketu, 
who also appears in the Upanisads, has been properly refuted by Kangle (1968, 
422). 

xxxiii 



Introduction 


wrong in placing his upper limit around the beginning of the 
third century bce. We then have a much narrower time span for 
the composition of the three earlier documents, from the begin- 
ning of the third to the middle of the second centuries bce, and 
somewhat later for Vasistha. 

Literary Structure 

As the Dharmasutras emerged as a new class of literature, their 
authors no doubt had to struggle with the task of selecting and 
organizing their material. Two factors probably played a role in 
how they structured their texts: the target audience and the 
subject-matter. 

The principal audience of these texts was undoubtedly 
Brahmin males, who were also the principal creators and 
consumers of all the literature produced in the vedic branches. 
The Brahmin is the implied subject of most rules in the 
Dharmasutras. So, for instance, G 14.1 states that there is a 
ten-day period of impurity after the death of a relative and goes 
on to give shorter periods for Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras. 
Although left unstated, the implied subject of the first rule is the 
Brahmin. Va 18.9 states simply that a child born from a Sudra 
woman is a Parasava; the implied father is, of course, a 
Brahmin. When Gautama refers simply to ‘the husband of a 
Sudra woman’ (G 15.18), he is actually referring to a Brahmin 
husband of such a woman. The principle appears to be that when 
no class is explicitly mentioned or when the subject is referred to 
simply by a pronoun, then a rule refers to the Brahmin. 17 

The subject-matter of the Dharmasutras is dharma, a term I 
will examine in the next section. Although a variety of indi- 
vidual topics are encompassed by that term, including criminal 
and civil law, the central focus of these texts is on how a 
Brahmin male should conduct himself during his lifetime. Many 
other topics, such as marriage, inheritance, and women, are also 
introduced, but more often than not they are discussed in so far 
as they are related to the Brahmin male. The text of Apastamba, 

17 The reader may see examples of this at A 1.2.39; 1.14.23, 26; 1.16.2; 1.31.22; G 
7.4; B 1.11.1; Va 2.24; 4.6. 


XXXIV 



Introduction 


which is the best preserved with the least tampering, has a total 
of 1,364 sutras. Of these 1,206 (88 per cent) are devoted to the 
Brahmin, whereas only 158 (12 per cent) deal with topics of a 
general nature. 

Now, the Grhyasutras are also addressed principally to 
Brahmins and deal with the rites of passage and other rituals 
that Brahmins are obliged to perform throughout their life. Even 
though the topics covered by the Dharmasutras are broader 
than the merely ritual, nevertheless their authors may have found 
in the Grhyasutras a ready-made structure for their new compos- 
itions, especially because, as in Apastamba and Baudhayana, 
the two classes of texts belonged to a single textual whole called 
a Kalpasutra which had the same eponymous author. If we 
ignore some of the other rites discussed at the beginning and 
end of the Grhayasutras, the central core of most of these texts 
is structured in the following manner: marriage, rituals con- 
nected with sexual activity, pre-natal rites, birth and infancy 
rites of passage, childhood rites of passage (including initiation), 
and finally funeral and ancestral rites. This structure makes 
perfect sense. The Grhyasutras deal with domestic rites and are 
therefore addressed to the head of the household. So, it begins 
with marriage, which establishes a home and a householder, and 
then tells him the rites he must perform for his children. 

The Dharmasutras, however, changed this structure radically 
by beginning with the vedic initiation of the young boy and then 
following him through his growth into adulthood— return home 
from his teacher’s house, marriage, and responsibilities of adult 
life, including adoption, inheritance, death rituals, and ancestral 
offerings. 18 The principal reason for this change, I think, is the 
fact that an individual becomes subject to the prescriptions of 
dharma at his initiation, which is viewed as his second birth 
making him a ‘twice-born’ man. It is stated clearly that young 
children before initiation can act as they please and are not 
subject to the dharma regimen. 19 Significantly, the Dharmasutras 

18 This new structure, in turn, appears to have influenced later Grhyasutras. 
Thus, the sutras of Hiranyakesin, Jaimini, Laughaksi (= Kataka), and Vaikhanasa 
begin their treatment with vedic initiation. 

19 See A 2.15.19-25; G 2.1-5; B 1.3.6; Va 2.6. 


XXXV 



Introduction 


do not deal at all with pre-natal and childhood rites of passage 
that occupy a central position in the Grhyasutras . 20 

All the Dharmasutras begin with an examination of the 
sources of dharma, and this practice is followed even in the later 
Smrtis. Thereafter, the structure is not uniform. Apastamba has 
the most straightforward structure: initiation and the duties of a 
student; return home and the duties of such a young adult, 
followed by a parenthetical section on the bath-graduate; mar- 
riage and the duties of household life; and finally the king and 
the administration of justice. He deals with sons, inheritance, 
adoption, and the like within the context of the householder. 
Penances, on the other hand, are included within the discussion 
of the young adult who has completed his studies. This probably 
reflects the early structure of Dharma texts. 

Two noteworthy changes occur in later texts: separate sections 
outside the discussions of Brahmin students and householders 
are devoted to inheritance and penance. In Gautama and Baudha- 
yana penance precedes inheritance. In Gautama these two 
form the concluding sections of the text, whereas in Baudha- 
yana they come after the section on marriage but before the 
section on the householder . 21 Vasistha shows a further develop- 
ment: he places inheritance immediately after the section on the 
king and judicial procedure and makes penance the concluding 
section of the text. 

Although some of these differences may be due to the idio- 
syncrasies of each author, there is, I believe, an underlying 
chronological development. Evidence for this is found in the 
later Smrtis where inheritance is placed in the section on the king 
and civil law and penance forms the conclusion of the treatise. 
This sequence fits with the relative chronology given earlier, 
placing Apastamba earlier than the other three. 

We encounter with some frequency in these documents what 
appears to be unrelated material introduced in the middle of a 
discussion having little to do with the topic at hand. At first sight 

20 The only exception is the list of 'sacraments’ ( samskara ) in G 8.14-21. 

21 This and other indicators point to later revisions and tampering with the text. 
I do not think that the somewhat confused sequence of topics in Baudhayana is 
evidence for its early date as proposed by Lingat ( 1973, 21). 


xxxvi 



Introduction 


it would appear that the authors had little regard for organiza- 
tion. But I think there is a method to the madness. The underlying 
principle of the sutra genre is to give maximum coverage with the 
least amount of words. When extraneous material is introduced, 
it is generally connected to some theme or term in the preceding 
sutra. Thus at A 1.4.20 a person is prohibited from using water 
remaining after fire worship for other activities or for sipping. The 
prohibition of some types of water for sipping permits Apas- 
tamba to mention also other types of water that are unsuitable for 
sipping in the next sutra. Likewise, the mention of the death of a 
relative as one of the occasions when vedic recitation is suspended 
(A 1.10.4) permits him to state some other practices associated 
with such a death (A 1.10.5-6). Gautama (5.23) states that one 
should not give anything to a person for an unlawful purpose, 
even if one had promised to give it. This provides him with the 
opportunity to give the circumstances when one is permitted to 
make an untrue statement (G 5.24). An interesting example is 
found in Baudhayana. He deals here with the period of impurity 
following the death of a relative belonging to the same ancestry 
(1.11. 1-2). This prompts him to define the relationship based on 
ancestry (1.11.9-10), and, because such relations also inherit 
property, he goes on to deal with inheritance (1.11.11-16), before 
returning to the original topic of death impurity (1.11.17). 

Semantics and Sources of Dhanna 

Dharma is undoubtedly the most central and ubiquitous con- 
cept in the whole of Indian civilization. It is central not only in 
the Brahmanical/Hindu traditions, but also in the Buddhist and 
Jain. This very centrality, however, also made it possible for the 
concept to be given new twists and meanings at different times 
and by different groups, creating a dauntingly broad semantic 
range. Its very complexity may be the reason for the lack of a 
single comprehensive study of the term. 22 It is also a challenging 
term to translate or even to define adequately. 

22 An excellent and accessible discussion of dhanna in Indian cultural history is 
given by Wilhelm Halbfass: ‘Dharma in Traditional Hinduism’ (Halbfass 1988, 
310-33). 

xxxvii 



Introduction 


It first appears in the early vedic literature with reference to 
the rules and statutes connected with 'the continuous maintaining 
of the social and cosmic order and norm which is achieved by 
the Aryan [Arya] through the performance of his Vedic rites and 
traditional duties’ (Halbfass 1988, 315-16). Thus, the term often 
appears in the plural. Initially, it did not refer to any overarching 
cosmic order or natural law, which is comprehended by the term 
rta. 2} Like the related term karma (‘action’), dharma was at first, 
and in the Brahmanical tradition continues to be, associated 
with the ritual. As karma is primarily ritual action, so dharmas 
are the rules of correct ritual procedure. As the semantics of 
karma widened to include moral/immoral actions, so dharma 
came to include norms of correct behaviour within both the 
ritual and the moral/social spheres. These two spheres of activ- 
ity appear to be poles apart to the modern mind; it was not so to 
the traditional Indian mind. The ritual, the moral, and the social 
constituted a continuum. In the Dharmasutras we see the one 
overlapping the other and the authors passing from the one to 
the other imperceptibly. Some actions that may appear to us as 
sins and others that seem to be merely ritual infractions are 
often treated together. Ritual expiations, for example, are 
enjoined for immoral acts. This imperceptible movement from 
one meaning to another is illustrated by Apastamba. At A 
1.7.18 he uses dharma to mean a ritual oblation, whereas in the 
very next sutra (A 1.7.19) he uses it to mean ‘righteous’ and/or 
‘legal’. 

In these documents, the term dharma is used with this spec- 
trum of meanings: the accepted norms of behaviour, ritual 
actions and rules of procedure, moral/religious/pious actions 
and attitudes (righteousness), civil and criminal law, legal pro- 
cedure and punishment, and penances for infractions of 
dharma. It is dharma that provides the guidelines for proper and 

23 Scholars have assigned two somewhat different meanings to this term. It may 
refer to the cosmic order or harmony, or else to truth. The two aspects can be 
brought together by seeing 'truth' not in an abstract way but as ‘an active realiz- 
ation of the truth'. This active and creative aspect of truth underlies and brings 
about the cosmic order and harmony. See Jamison and Witzel forthcoming. Some 
aspects of rta, especially cosmic order, came to be attached to dharma in later 
times. 

xxxviii 



Introduction 


productive living and for social organization and interaction. It 
includes social institutions such as marriage, adoption, inherit- 
ance, social contracts, judicial procedure, and punishment of 
crimes, as well as private activities, such as toilet, bathing, brush- 
ing the teeth, food and eating, sexual conduct, and etiquette. 

A question that loomed large in the minds of all these authors 
was an epistemological one: Where can we find these guidelines? 
What are the sources of dharma! This epistemological question 
is tied to the theological definition of dharma. What I have given 
above is an empirical description of dharma gleaned from the 
way it is used in these documents. The Brahmanical theologians, 
however, sought to give it a theological definition: dharma is the 
content of vedic injunctions. This definition clearly defines 
dharma as positive, albeit revealed, law, rather than a cosmic or 
natural law which can be gathered by investigation, introspec- 
tion, or deductive inference. Dharma, according to this defin- 
ition, can only be gathered by examining the vedic injunctions. 
Like the Vedas, therefore, dharma is not of human origin, and it 
can have no practical value or visible aim. 

This definition is not problematic within the context of the 
original ritual meaning of dharma ; rules of the vedic ritual are 
clearly contained in vedic texts. Beyond that explicit and theo- 
logical definition, however, in their usage of the term our 
authors reveal an implied or working definition of dharma that 
greatly expands its semantic range. Some of the elements of 
such a working definition are contained in the description given 
above. Our documents also speak of the dharma of different 
regions ( desadharma ), of different social groups ( jatidharma ), 
and of different families (kuladharma). Our authors even 
admit that these dharmas are gathered from the customs of 
these groups; by definition, they cannot be found in the Vedas. 
Even many of the other rules of behaviour contained in these 
documents cannot be traced to the vedic texts. There is, then, 
a dissonance between the theologically correct definition and 
epistemology of dharma and the reality of the rules of dharma 
encoded in the Dharmasutras. 

Apastamba provides an early attempt at resolving this prob- 
lem (A 1.1. 1-3). He calls the dharmas (plural) he is going to 


xxxix 



Introduction 


explain ‘accepted customary’ ( samayacarika ), 24 that is, the dhar- 
mas that are accepted or agreed upon ( samaya ) by those who 
know dharma. Apastamba clearly places customary practice at 
the very heart of dharma', not just any custom, however, but only 
those accepted by an elite group. He then goes on to say that the 
authority is based also on the Vedas, placing it second after the 
accepted customs as the source of dharma. It is clear that de 
facto Apastamba had a broad conception of custom, because at 
the end of his treatise he refers to the knowledge of women and 
Sudras as part of the totality of our knowledge of dharma and 
states that one should learn from them the dharmas not con- 
tained in his treatise (A 2.29.11-12, 15). Elsewhere, he says that 
after a funeral people should ‘do whatever else the women ask 
them to do’ (A 2.15.9). Now, by definition women and Sudras 
cannot be counted among those who know the Veda, for they 
are explicitly forbidden to learn it. 

For Apastamba, I think, vedic prescriptions functioned as a 
check or a negative criterion: customs of a region or a group are 
authoritative for those belonging to that region or group pro- 
vided they are not in conflict with explicit vedic prescriptions (A 
1.4.8; 1.30.9; 2.14.10). The empirical nature of dharma is 
brought out clearly in his concluding statement: ‘It is difficult to 
gain mastery of the Law by means of scriptures alone, but by 
acting according to the markers one can master it. And the 
markers in this case are as follows: he should model his conduct 
after that which is unanimously approved in all regions by Aryas 
who have been properly trained, who are elderly and self- 
possessed, and who are neither greedy nor deceitful’ (A 2.29.13- 
14). He has a very realistic view of the difficulties inherent 
in finding the dharma'. ‘The Righteous ( dharma ) and the 
Unrighteous (adharma) do not go around saying, “Here we are!” 
Nor do gods, Gandharvas, or ancestors declare, “This is right- 
eous and that is unrighteous”. An activity that Aryas praise is 
righteous, and what they deplore is unrighteous’ (A 1.20.6-7). 

On the flip side, not everything found in the Vedas is dharma, 
at least with regard to contemporary people. Apastamba notes: 

24 That this definition may have been widespread is indicated by its use also by 
Gautama 8.1 1. 


xl 



Introduction 


‘Transgression of the Law and violence are seen among people 
of ancient times. They incurred no sin on account of their 
extraordinary power. A man of later times who, observing what 
they did, does the same, perishes’ (A 2.13.7-9; cf. G 1.3-4). Here 
we have the case of contemporary practice nullifying what is 
found in the Veda. The theological explanation is that the people 
of those days had extraordinary power lacking in modern men. 
This theory developed later into what is known as the yuga- 
dharma, the dharma of different world ages; the dharma 
appropriate for ancient ages may be inappropriate for the 
current depraved age. 

Apastamba proposes a principle that becomes a cornerstone 
of later thinking on the sources of dharma. He says that origin- 
ally all rules of dharma were contained in the Vedas, but now 
parts of those Vedas are lost. The theory of the ‘lost Veda’ is 
used as a hermeneutical strategy to theoretically derive all 
dharma from the Veda, while in practice providing for other 
sources. The customs from which some elements of dharma are 
derived are actually based on lost vedic texts, which can be 
‘inferred’ from the existence of these customs (A 1.4.8; 1.12.10- 
11). Thus, we have the distinction between ‘explicit vedic texts’ 
( pratyaksasruti ) and ‘inferred vedic texts’ (, anumitasruti ). This 
hermeneutical principle permitted Apastamba to recognize the 
customs among good people as a guide to proper living, that is, 
as dharma, while maintaining the theological fiction of the Veda 
as the sole source of dharma. 

Gautama ( 1 . 1-2) gives the three sources of dharma that become 
standard in later literature: the Veda and the tradition (, smrti ) 
and practice (dcdra) of those who know the Veda. Baudhayana 
(1.1 .3-4) explicitly calls smrti the second source, and the practice 
of cultured people ( sista ) the third. Limiting authoritative prac- 
tice to sis t as and the delimitation of the geographical area where 
such people live (B 1.1. 4-6; Va 1.5-16) are introduced by Baud- 
hayana and Vasistha and become standard in later literature. 
Increasingly, smrti comes to refer not to some ‘recollection’ 
on the part of sistas but to treatises on dharma, such as the 
Dharmasutras, which are often referred to simply as smrti 
(M 2.10). The theological fiction that all smrtis are based 

xli 



Introduction 


on vedic texts, whether explicit or inferred, continues to be 
maintained in the later Brahmanical tradition. 

Gautama (1.4) is the first to enunciate the exegetical principle 
that when injunctions of equal authority (e.g. two vedic texts) 
are in conflict a person has the option of following either course. 
Implied here is the rule that when injunctions are not of equal 
authority (e.g. a custom or a rule in a Smrti contradicting a 
vedic injunction), then the injunction of greater authority pre- 
vails (PMS 1.3.3). 


Divergent Voices 

The Dharmasutras are normative texts. They contain norms of 
correct behaviour and action. They tell people what to do; they 
do not tell us what people actually did. Normative texts have 
had a bad press lately among scholars. Some argue that these 
sources are unreliable and worthless for historical purposes, 
proposing instead the use of archaeological, inscriptional, and 
art historical materials for historical reconstruction. Clearly, 
these are invaluable sources for any study of India’s past. But 
I think the dismissal of normative texts is unwise and 
unwarranted and betrays a singular ignorance of these docu- 
ments. Many scholars unfortunately derive their knowledge 
of these texts through secondary sources, which often flatten 
the intellectual landscape and describe these documents as 
presenting a uniform code of conduct. The divergent views 
and dissenting voices are silenced. The reality, as anyone who 
undertakes a close reading of these documents can see, is very 
different. 

We find, for example, the conservative and adversarial (‘That 
is false!’) voice of Harita cited repeatedly by Apastamba. 25 Harlta 
is against any form of suicide, including a penance that involves 
the death of the penitent (A 1.28.16). He has a strict view of 
what constitutes theft; even coveting someone else’s property 
is a theft. Against the opinion of some that taking small 
amounts of fodder and the like does not constitute theft. 


25 


See A 1.13.11; 1.18.2; 1.19.12: 1.28.1-5. 16; 1.29.12, 16. 
xlii 



Introduction 


Harita maintains that one must always obtain permission first 
(A 1.28.1-5). 

Scholars have called Apastamba ‘puritanical’ . That may be so 
from one perspective. Within the context of the ideas prevalent 
in his time, however, I believe Apastamba’s views, especially with 
regard to sexual morality and women, were innovative and rad- 
ical. While others permit Brahmins to have up to four wives, 
Apastamba encourages monogamy, forbidding the taking of a 
second wife if the first is able to participate in ritual activities 
and bear children. After the sacred fires have been established, 
however, there is a blanket prohibition against taking a second 
wife (A 2.11.12-14). Apastamba’s view of women, I think, is 
quite progressive. A man is not allowed to abandon his wife (A 
1.28.19). He permits daughters to inherit (A 2.14.4). There can 
be no division of property between a husband and a wife, 
because they are linked inextricably together and have joint cus- 
tody of the property (A 2.29.3). Thus, a wife may make gifts and 
use the family wealth on her own when her husband is away (A 
2.12.16-20). Women are upholders of traditional lore, and 
Apastamba tells his audience that they should learn some cus- 
toms from women (A 2.15.9; 2.29.11). On levirate, that is, the 
procreation of children by the wife of a deceased husband, 
Apastamba is alone in his adamant opposition (A 2.27.2-7), a 
position in sharp contrast to the lax attitude of Vasistha, who 
permits a woman whose husband is missing for five years to have 
sexual relations with a relative of the husband or even a stranger 
(Va 17.75-80). 

The expert tradition of Dharma during the centuries immedi- 
ately preceding the common era appears to have been vibrant 
and dynamic as shown by the numerous contradictory opinions 
of experts recorded in the extant Dharmasutras. Such diversity 
of opinion belies the common assumption that ancient Indian 
society was uniform and stifling under an orthodoxy imposed by 
Brahmins. If even the experts recorded in these normative texts 
disagree so vehemently, the reality on the ground must have been 
even more chaotic and exhilarating. 


xliii 



NOTE ON THE TRANSLATION 


The translations of Apastamba and Baudhayana are based on 
the critical editions of Biihler and Hultzsch, respectively. We do 
not have critical editions of Gautama and Vasistha. I have used 
the less-than-perfect editions of Stenzler and Fiihrer (see Bibli- 
ography: Primary Sources for bibliographic details). I have made 
full use of the excellent but dated translations of all four Dhar- 
masutras made by Biihler (1879-82); they have proved to be 
invaluable, even when I depart from Bidder's interpretations. 

The sutra style in which these documents are written is brief 
and aphoristic. Each aphorism is brief and pithy, sometimes 
containing only one or two words and frequently without a verb. 
Texts written in this style were meant to be read with a commen- 
tary, written or oral. Translating this type of text presents 
unusual challenges, because a ‘literal’ translation will make no 
sense to an English reader. Biihler uses long parenthetical 
remarks (often longer than the translated text itself) in an effort 
to be both literal and comprehensible. The result, however, is 
less than elegant. Tie frequently includes commentarial glosses 
as part of the translation. I have tried to introduce as little non- 
literal material as possible, but have given up parentheses as an 
unnecessary crutch. One way I have tried to make the prose 
readable and brief is to weave several aphorisms into a single 
English sentence. This is in keeping with the sutra style itself, 
because, according to the common rule of this style, words of 
previous siitras are extended to, and implied in, later ones, a 
literary device technically known as anuvrtti. 

I have taken the liberty of introducing titles and subtitles into 
the translation. Readers should know that they are not found in 
the original text. I have introduced them only to make it easier 
for readers to wade through this complex material. The division 
of the translation into paragraphs, likewise, is mine. 

The broadest division of the texts of Apastamba and Baud- 
hayana is prasna (lit., ‘Question’, translated here as ‘Book’). 
Each of the two books of Apastamba and the first two books of 


xliv 



Note on the Translation 


Baudhayana are divided consecutively into sections called 
kandika and khanda, respectively. Their numbers are given in 
large figures. There is a secondary division called patala in Apas- 
tamba and adhyaya in the first two books of Baudhayana. I have 
omitted their numbers so as not to clutter the translation; these 
divisions are generally omitted in references to these texts. The 
last two books of Baudhayana, as well as the texts of Gautama 
and Vasistha are divided only into adhyayas (chapters). Their 
numbers are also given in large figures. The smallest division of 
all these documents is into sutras. Their numbers are given in 
small superscript before each sutra so as not to be intrusive, 
because they frequently appear in the middle of sentences. 

As in most Sanskrit texts, pronouns are used frequently here 
without clear antecedents. When the antecedent is unclear, I 
have frequently supplied the noun. The general principle, how- 
ever, is that a ‘he’ appearing in a section will refer to the person 
to whom that section is addressed— generally this person is iden- 
tified in the major title (in upper case, e.g. householder). 
When this is the case, I have left the pronouns in; they are so 
frequent that substituting the noun every time does not seem 
practical. 

I have tried to identify all quotations, especially vedic ones. 
Where citations have not been identified, it is to be assumed that 
they cannot be identified in the extant texts. Vedic citations are 
usually introduced either with a title (e.g. Aghamarsana) or with 
the first few words ( pratTka ). The original readers of these texts 
knew these citations by heart and it was unnecessary for our 
authors to cite the entire text. Since I cannot presume that 
knowledge among readers of this translation, I have given the 
full texts of the citation in Appendix 1.3, except in the case of 
long texts where it is impractical to reproduce them in full. 

Some words pose a special challenge to the translator. The 
most obvious is dharma (see pp. xxxvii -xxxix). Wherever pos- 
sible I have translated it as Law(s). It is, however, impossible and 
unwise to be consistent; some nuances and meanings of the term 
cannot be rendered as Law. I have used other terms, such as 
righteous(ness) and duty, but to signal to the reader that we are 
dealing with this central term I have always placed dharma within 

xlv 



Note on the Translation 


parentheses whenever it is translated with any term other than 
Law(s). I have left names of social groups (e.g. Ksatriya) 
untranslated; they are explained in Appendix II. The term 
brahmana is rendered ‘Brahmin’ when it refers to the priestly 
group so as to distinguish that usage from the brahmana 
texts of the Veda. Names of common flora and fauna (banyan, 
rice, dog, crow) have been translated. In the case of less common 
ones, especially when a specific species may be indicated, I 
have kept the Sanskrit terms but with an English explanation, 
e.g. the spotted Ruru antelope. I have dealt with the technical 
names of rituals in a similar manner; these names are listed in 
Appendix 1. 1 . 

Unless otherwise stated, the terms grandfather, grandson, 
etc., always mean ‘paternal’. Thus, one’s great-grandfather is 
one’s father’s father’s father. Maternal lines are generally 
ignored. To specify ‘paternal’ in every case would have been 
cumbersome. 

There appears to be a distinction between two terms often 
translated with the same word. They are sandha, translated as 
‘eunuch’, and kliba, translated as ‘impotent’. I think our texts 
make a distinction between the two: the first refers to a eunuch, 
that is, a man whose sexual organs are lacking or have been 
removed (see Haradatta and Maskarin on G 22.23), whereas the 
latter refers to an impotent or effeminate man. 


xlvi 



DHARMASUTRAS 



This page intentionally left blank 



The Dharmasutra of Apastamba 


The Dharmasutra forms part of the voluminous Kalpasutra of 
Apastamba containing thirty prasnas (lit., ‘questions’) or books. 
The first twenty-four comprise the Srautasutra. Books 25-6 
contain the Mantrapatha or the collections of ritual formulas to 
be used in domestic rites, and book 27 contains the Grhyasutra. 
The two books of our Dharmasutra occupy books 28-9, and 
the final book contains the Sulvasutra, a treatise on principles of 
geometry needed for the vedic sacrifice. Apastamba belongs to 
the Taittirlya branch of the Black Yajurveda. Opinion is divided 
as to whether the entire Kalpasutra was composed by a single 
individual (Kane 1962-75, i. 54). The Kalpasutra of Apastamba 
has been preserved better than most probably because com- 
mentaries were written on it at a relatively early date. Of the 
several ancient commentaries on the Dharmasutra, only one 
survives, that of Haradatta, who wrote commentaries also on 
Apastamba’s Grhyasutra and Mantrapatha and Gautama’s 
Dharmasutra. Haradatta was probably a South Indian, and 
Kane dates him to 1100-1300 ce. 

This Dharmasutra is better organized than most. The first 
book deals with the vedic student and concludes with the bath at 
the conclusion of studentship and the special observances 
required of a bath-graduate. Much of Book Two is devoted to 
the householder, and under this topic Apastamba deals with 
matters of civil law such as inheritance. The book concludes 
with brief sections on the orders of life ( asramas ) and the king, 
the latter incorporating civil administration including taxation, 
criminal law, and judicial procedure. 


3 



Dharmasutras 


1 . 1-3 

1 . 4-8 


1 . 9-10 

1 . 11-18 

1 . 19-27 

1 . 28 - 2.10 

2 . 11 - 17 

2 . 18 - 30 
2 . 31 - 3.10 

3 . 11 - 24 
3 . 25 ^ 1.12 
4 . 13-21 
4 . 22-9 
5 . 1-11 

5 . 12 - 7.2 
7 . 3-18 

7 . 19 - 30 


7 . 31 - 8.22 

8 . 23-30 

9 . 1 - 11.38 

12 . 1 - 12 

12 . 13 - 13.1 

13 . 2 - 4 

13 . 5 - 17 
13 . 18 - 14.2 

14 . 3 - 5 

14 . 6 - 15.1 
15 . 2 - 16.15 

16 . 16-32 

16 . 33 - 17.8 

17 . 9-13 

17 . 14 - 39 

18 . 1 - 19.15 

20 . 1 - 9 


CONTENTS 

Book One 

SOURCES OF LAW 
SOCIAL CLASSES 
THE STUDENT 
Initiation 
Teacher 

Time of Initiation 
Failure to be Initiated 
Residency 

A Student’s Code of Conduct 
General Rules 
Insignia 
General Rules 
Food 

Fire Worship 

Conduct towards the Teacher 
General Rules 

Conduct towards the Teacher 
General Rules 
Conclusion of Study 

A STUDENT WHO HAS RETURNED HOME 
Conduct towards the Teacher 
Duties of a Teacher 
Vedic Recitation and its Suspension 
Private Recitation of the Veda 
Great Sacrifices 
Salutation 

Study and Conduct towards the Teacher 

Return to Studentship 

Duty to Teach 

Salutation 

Purification 

Food 

Unfit Food 
Rules of Eating 
Eating Utensils 
Forbidden Food 

People from Whom Food May Be Accepted 
Path of the Law 


4 



20 . 10 - 21.4 

21 . 5 - 20 

22 . 1 - 23.6 

24 . 1 - 29.18 

30 . 1 - 5 

30 . 6 - 32.29 


1.1 

1.2-6 

1 . 7 - 12 

I . 13-15 
1 . 16 - 2.1 

2 . 2 - 7 

2 . 8 - 9 

3 . 1 - 11 

3 . 12 - 4.9 

4 . 10 - 20 
4 . 21-3 
4 . 24 - 5.3 

5 . 4 - 15 
5 . 16 - 6.2 

6 . 3 - 9.4 

9 . 5 - 13 

10 . 1 - 3 

10 . 4 - 11.4 

II . 5-9 

11 . 10 - 11 

11 . 12 - 14 
11 . 15-16 
11 . 17 - 12.4 

12 . 5 - 23 

13 . 1 - 4 

13 . 5 - 6 
13 . 7-11 

13 . 12 - 14.20 
15.1 


Dharmasutra of Apastamba 

Trade as an Occupation 

Acts Making a Man an Outcaste or Sordid 

Knowledge of the Self 

Penances 

THE BATH AT THE END OF STUDENTSHIP 
Observances of a Bath-Graduate 

Book Two 

THE HOUSEHOLDER 
Eating 

Wedding Anniversary 
Rites 

Rules of Sexual Intercourse 
Rebirth as Reward and Punishment 
Penances for Contact with Outcastes 
Food 

Preparation of Food 
Food Offerings 

Distribution of Food and Reception of Guests 
Rules of Eating 

The Teacher and the Annual Course of Study 
Conduct towards the Teacher 
Rules for a Teacher 
Reception of Guests 
Distribution of Food 
Rules about Begging 
Law with respect to Classes 
Lawful Occupations 
Rules of Precedence 
Rebirth 
Marriage 

Marrying a Second Wife 
Marriage of Daughters 
Types of Marriage 
Miscellaneous Rules and Penances 
Sons 

To Whom Belongs a Son 
Law in Previous Times 
Inheritance 

Family and Regional Customs 


5 



Dharmasutras 


15 . 2 - 10 

15 . 11 - 18 

15 . 19 - 25 

16 . 1 - 3 

16 . 4 - 22 
16 . 23 - 17.3 

17 . 4 - 10 

17 . 11 - 25 
18 . 1^4 

18 . 5 - 18 

18 . 19 - 19.16 

19 . 17 - 20.2 

20 . 3 - 9 

20 . 10 - 23 

21 . 1 - 5 
21.6 

21 . 7 - 17 

21 . 18 - 23.2 

23 . 3 - 24.14 
25.1 

25 . 2 - 5 

25 . 6 - 11 

25 . 12 - 14 
25 . 15 - 26.3 

26 . 4 - 8 
26 . 9-17 

26 . 18 - 27.1 

27 . 2 - 7 

27 . 8 - 13 
27 . 14 - 29.2 
29 . 3^4 

29 . 5 - 6 

29 . 7 - 10 

29 . 11 - 15 


Observances at the Death of a Relative 
Ritual Food Offerings 
Impurity of Children 
Ancestral Offerings 
Time 

Types of Food 
Quality of Invitees 
Procedure 
Prohibitions 
Daily Ancestral Offering 
Rite for Prosperity 
Monthly Ancestral Offering 
Rite for Prosperity 
Miscellaneous Rules 
ORDERS OF LIFE 
Student 

Wandering Ascetic 
Forest Hermit 
Superiority among Orders 
KING 
Royal Fort 
Duties 
Gambling 

Protection of Subjects 
Appointment of Security Officers 
Collection of Taxes 
Sexual Misconduct 
Rape 
Levirate 
Adultery 

Crime and Punishment 
Marital Property 
Judicial Process 
Witnesses 

CONCLUSION OF THE STUDY OF LAW 


6 



BOOK ONE 


SOURCES OF LAW 

I 1 And now we shall explain the accepted customary Laws, 
2 the authority for which rests on their acceptance by those 
who know the Law 3 and on the Vedas.* 

SOCIAL CLASSES 

4 There are four classes: Brahmin, Ksatriya, Vaisya, and Sudra. 
5 Among these, each preceding class is superior by birth to each 
subsequent. 6 Those who are not Sudras and are not guilty of 
evil deeds may undergo initiation, undertake vedic study, and set 
up the sacred fires; and their rites bear fruit. 7 Sudras are to serve 
the other classes; 8 the higher the class they serve, the greater 
their prosperity. 


THE STUDENT 
Initiation 

9 Initiation is the consecration of a person seeking vedic know- 
ledge carried out according to vedic rules, 10 for a Brahmana 
declares: ‘The Savitrl verse is recited for the sake of all the 
Vedas.’* 

Teacher 11 ‘From darkness they surely enter into further 
darkness— an ignorant man who performs an initiation, as also 
the person whom he initiates’, states a Brahmana. 12 So, to per- 
form the initiation, he should try to get a learned and steadfast 
man born in a family noted for vedic learning , 13 under whom he 
should complete his vedic studies unless that man deviates from 
the Laws. 

14 The teacher (, acarya ) is the person from whom a man 
gathers* (acinoti) the Laws. 15 He should never offend the 
teacher, 16 for he gives birth to him by means of vedic knowledge. 


7 



1.1.17 


Dharmasutras 


17 That is his most excellent birth; 18 his parents give birth only to 
his body.* 

Time of Initiation 19 A Brahmin should be initiated in the 
spring, a Ksatriya in the summer, and a Vaisya in the autumn; a 
Brahmin in the eighth year from conception, a Ksatriya in the 
eleventh, and a Vaisya in the twelfth. 

20 When initiations are performed with an objective in mind, 
21 a person seeking eminence in vedic knowledge should be initi- 
ated in the seventh year, 22 a person seeking long life in the 
eighth, 23 a person seeking power in the ninth, 24 a person seeking 
an abundance of food in the tenth, 25 a person seeking strength 
in the eleventh, 26 and a person seeking cattle in the twelfth. 

27 In the case of a Brahmin there is no lapse in postponing the 
initiation until the sixteenth year, in the case of a Ksatriya until 
the twenty-second year, and in the case of a Vaisya until the 
twenty-fourth year, so as to ensure that the person has the 
capacity to carry out the observances that we are about to 
describe. 

Failure to be Initiated 28 If his time for initiation has lapsed, a 
man should live observing the rules of a student of the three 
Vedas for one season* 29 and then undergo initiation. 30 For a 
year thereafter he should take a daily bath, 31 after which time he 
may receive vedic instruction. 

32 When both the father and grandfather of a man have not 
been initiated, they are all called ‘Brahman-killers’.* 33 People 
should refrain from visiting them and from eating or contracting 
marriages with them. 34 They may, if they so choose, do a 
penance— 35 such a person should perform for a year the same 
penance that was prescribed for a season (A 1.1.28 n.) when 
the initial time for initiation had lapsed 36 and then undergo 
initiation. 

2 Thereafter, he should take a daily bath 1 for as many years 

as the number of uninitiated persons in his family. 2 He 
should take this bath while reciting the seven Pavamanl verses 
that begin: ‘Whether near or afar’, as well as the purificatory 
formulas called Yajuhpavitra, Samapavitra, and Angirasa; 3 or 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 1 .2.33 

else, while reciting just the Calls. 4 Thereafter, he may receive 
vedic instruction. 

5 When no one can remember that any of a man’s ancestors 
back to his great-grandfather had been initiated, they are all 
called ‘cremation grounds’.* 6 People should refrain from visit- 
ing them and from eating or contracting marriages with them. 
They may, if they so choose, do a penance— such a person 
should live observing the rules of a student of the three Vedas 
for twelve years and then undergo initiation. Thereafter, he 
should take a daily bath while reciting the Pavamanl verses and 
the rest (A 1.2.2). 7 He may then be taught the rites to be per- 
formed by a householder 8 but not receive vedic instruction. 
9 And after he has completed that, his sacramentary rite is per- 
formed in the same manner as when the initial time for initiation 
has lapsed. 10 Afterwards, everything is done as at the regular 
initiation. 

Residency 11 An initiated person should reside as a student in his 
teacher’s house 12 for forty-eight years, 13 or for three-quarters of 
that time, 14 or for half that time, 15 or for one-quarter of that 
time; 16 the minimum is twelve years. 17 A student who seeks to 
acquire vedic knowledge may not reside with anyone else. 


A Student’s Code of Conduct 

General Rules 18 Next, the student’s code of conduct. 19 He shall 
submit to his teacher in all things except those that entail a sin 
causing loss of caste* 20 He shall promote his teacher’s welfare, 
never contradict him, 21 and occupy a lower seat and bed. 

22 He shall not eat ritual food,* 23 spices, salt, honey, or meat. 
24 He shall not sleep during the day, 25 wear perfume, 26 engage in 
sexual intercourse, 27 or show himself off. 28 He shall not wash his 
body.* 29 When anything dirty stains it, however, he may wash 
it out of his teacher’s sight. 30 If he bathes, he should not be 
boisterous in the water but plunge in like a stick. 

Insignia 31 He shall have his hair matted; 32 or, keeping just the 
topknot matted, let him shave the rest. 33 The girdle of a Brah- 
min should be a triple string of Munja grass, twisted clockwise 


9 



1.2.33 


Dharmasutras 


if possible (A 1.7.2 n.); 34 that of a Ksatriya a bowstring 35 or a 
string of Munja grass trimmed with pieces of iron; 36 and that of 
a Vaisya a woollen string 37 or, according to some, a plough cord 
or a string made with Tamala bark. 

38 A Brahmin’s staff should be of Palasa wood, a Ksatriya’s 
the prop root of a banyan tree, and a Vaisya’s of Badara or 
Udumbara wood. Some prescribe just a wooden staff without 
regard to class. 

39 His garment should be 40 made of hemp, flax, or antelope skin. 

3 41 Some, however, prescribe a garment dyed ochre. 1 It should 
be dyed madder for a Ksatriya 2 and yellow for a Vaisya. 
3 The skin of a Harina deer or a black Ena doe is prescribed for a 
Brahmin; 4 if he wears a black skin, he should not use it as a 
spread to sit or sleep on. 5 The skin of a spotted Ruru antelope is 
prescribed for a Ksatriya, 6 and that of a billy goat for a Vaisya. 
7 A sheep skin is suitable for all classes, 8 and so is a shawl of 
sheep wool. 9 For a Brahmana declares: ‘A person who desires to 
increase his Brahmanical might should wear only antelope 
skins, and a person who desires to increase his Ksatriya might 
should wear only cloth garments, while a person who desires 
both should wear both.’ 10 Over his upper body, however, he 
should wear only an antelope skin. 

General Rules 11 He shall not watch dancing, 12 nor visit casinos 
or fairs.* 13 He shall not be given to gossiping 14 but keep things 
confidential. 15 He shall not engage in recreational activities in 
places frequented by his teacher. 16 He shall speak with women 
only as much as is required. 17 He shall be gentle, 18 calm, 19 con- 
trolled, 20 modest, 21 firmly resolute, "energetic, 23 not given to 
anger, 24 and free from envy. 

Food 25 Morning and evening he shall go out to beg with a bowl, 
soliciting from those who are not degraded or heinous sinners,* 
and bringing all he receives to his teacher. 26 For a Brahmana 
declares: ‘When women (A 1. 3. 28-30 n.) refuse a steadfast stu- 
dent, he robs them of their sacrifices, gifts, oblations, offspring, 
cattle, sacred learning, and food supply. One should never refuse 
a group of students come to beg, therefore, for among them 
there may be one who is like that and who keeps that vow.’ 


10 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 1.4.12 

27 Almsfood should not be considered leftovers* by inference, 
but only through perception or testimony. 28 A Brahmin should 
beg placing ‘Madam’ at the beginning, 29 a Ksatriya placing 
‘Madam’ in the middle, 30 and a Vaisya placing ‘Madam’ at the 
end.* 

31 After he has collected the almsfood, he should place it 
before his teacher and announce it to him. 32 He should eat it 
when the teacher invites him to do so. 33 If the teacher is not 
at home, he should announce it to a member of the teacher’s 
family, 34 and, if they also are not at home, to some other 
vedic scholar. 35 Let him never go out to beg just for his own 
beneht. 

36 After he has eaten, he should wash his bowl himself. 37 Let 
him not leave any food uneaten. 38 If he is unable to do so, he 
should bury the leftovers in the ground, 39 throw them in water, 
40 or place them before an Arya 41 or before a Sudra who is a 
family servant. 

42 When he is away from home, he should eat after offering 
some of the almsfood in the sacred fire. 43 Almsfood is hailed as a 
sacrificial oblation at which the teacher plays the roles of the 
deity 44 and the offertorial fire (A 2. 16.3 n.). 45 When, after 

4 feeding his teacher, 'he eats what is left over— "that is 
indeed the leftovers from a sacrificial oblation (see A 
1.3.27n.). 3 When he gives to the teacher other things as he 
obtains them, they are truly the sacrificial fees. 4 This is the 
sacrifice performed daily by a student. 

5 The teacher should not give him any leftover items of food 
which are forbidden to him by vedic texts, however, 6 items such 
as spices, salt, honey, and meat. 7 His other restrictions are also 
intimated by this rule, 8 for a vedic text has greater force than a 
practice from which the existence of a corresponding vedic text 
has to be inferred (cf. PMS 1.3.3). 9 We notice here, moreover, 
a motive for such a practice, 10 for one derives pleasure from it 
(cf. PMS 4.1.2).* 

"It is permissible to eat the leftovers of one’s father or an 
older brother, 12 but not if it would result in breaking the Law 
(cf. A 1. 4.5-6). 


11 



1.4.13 


Dharmasutras 


Fire Worship 13 At dusk and dawn a student should fetch a pot 
of water, 14 and every day he should gather firewood from outly- 
ing areas and pile it on the ground. 15 After sunset he should not 
go out to gather firewood. 16 At dusk and dawn, after he has 
lighted the fire and swept around it, he should put firewood into 
it according to the instructions. 17 Some say that he needs to 
perform the fire worship only at dusk. 18 After he has lighted the 
fire, he should sweep around it with his hand and not with a 
broom, 19 but before lighting it he may do as he pleases. 20 Let 
him not use the remainder of the water from the fire worship to 
carry out mundane activities or for sipping, 21 nor sip water that 
has been stirred with the hand or poured into one hand. 

Conduct towards the Teacher 22 He should forgo sleep* 23 and 
every day take care of his teacher with activities that procure 
righteousness ( dharma ) and wealth (A 1 .24.23 n.). 24 After taking 
care of his teacher, he should say when he goes to sleep: ‘I have 
taken care of the man who takes care of the Law.’ 25 If the 
teacher breaks a rule through carelessness or deliberately, the 
student should point it out to him in private; 26 and if the teacher 
persists, he should either perform those rites himself 27 or make 
him desist.* 28 Now, they say that a student who gets up before 
and goes to bed after his teacher never sleeps. 29 A student who 
totally dedicates himself in this manner accomplishes in that 
very state all the rites carrying rewards, as well as those that 
pertain to a householder.* 

5 General Rules 'The term ‘austerity’ is used with reference 

to the rules of conduct. 2 When someone breaks these rules, 
the application to vedic study and the knowledge of the Veda 
will slip away from him, as well as from his children; 3 he will fall 
into hell, and his life will be shortened. 4 As a result of breaking 
these rules, seers are not being born in recent generations. 
"Through a residue of their merits, however, some people are 
reborn as seers on account of their vedic learning, 5 6 7 as, for 
example, Svetaketu. 

7 Whatever other science besides the Veda a steadfast man 
learns from his teacher, it will bear fruit for him just like the 


12 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 1.6.2 

Veda. 8 They point out, moreover, that when such a person 
thinks of anything, speaks about anything, or looks at anything 
with a will to accomplishing it, it will happen exactly as he wills. 

9 Activities pleasing to the teacher, those promoting his own 
well-being, and pursuing his studies: 10 undertakings other than 
these do not belong to a student. 11 When a student is faithful to 
his private vedic recitation, takes delight in the Law, and is 
observant, upright, and gentle, he will attain success. 

Conduct towards the Teacher 12 Rising each day during the last 
watch of the night (B 2. 17.22 n.), he should stand before the 
teacher and extend to him the morning greeting: ‘I am so-and- 
so, sir!’, 13 and, before the morning meal, to other very elderly 
persons living in the same village. 14 He should also greet them 
when he meets them after he returns from a journey 15 or if he 
desires heaven or long life. 

16 With joined hands, let a Brahmin greet by stretching his 
right hand level with his ears, a Ksatriya level with his chest, a 
Vaisya level with his waist, and a Sudra very low. 17 When return- 
ing the greetings of a person belonging to one of the higher 
classes, the last syllable of his name should be lengthened to 
three morae (Va 13.46). 18 When he meets the teacher after sun- 
rise, however, he should clasp his feet; 19 at all other times he 
should exchange greetings, 20 although, according to some, he 
should embrace the teacher’s feet even at other times. 21 After 
he has pressed his teacher’s right foot from the bottom to the 
top with his right hand, he should clasp it at the ankle. 22 Some 
say that he should massage both feet with both hands and clasp 
them both. 

23 He shall remain fully attentive all day long and at the time 
of vedic study never let anything distract him from his lesson, 
24 as also while he is attending to his teacher’s work. 25 At times 
when vedic recitation is forbidden,* he shall recite it mentally. 
26 And he should recite the Veda only when he is called upon to 
do so. 

6 ‘Every night he should get his teacher ready for bed by 
washing and pressing his feet, 2 and, when permitted, he 


13 



1 . 6.2 


Dharmasutras 


down to sleep himself 3 taking care not to stretch his legs 
towards the teacher. 4 According to some, however, it is not 
wrong to stretch the legs in that way if the teacher is lying on a 
bed.* 

5 In the presence of his teacher, moreover, he should not speak 
while lying down. 6 If the teacher speaks to him, however, he 
may answer him while remaining seated 7 or, if the teacher is 
standing, rising to his feet. 8 Let him walk behind the teacher 
when he is walking 9 and run after him when he is running. 

10 He should not come near the teacher wearing shoes, cover- 
ing the head, or carrying anything in the hands. 11 He may do so, 
however, when he is on the road or in the middle of doing some- 
thing, 12 provided he does not sit too close to the teacher. 13 Let 
him approach the teacher as he would a god, without idle talk or 
distracting thoughts and attentive to his words. 14 He shall not sit 
cross-legged. 15 If the wind is blowing from him towards the 
teacher, he should change his place. 16 He shall not sit supporting 
himself with his hand, 17 or leaning against anything. 18 If he is 
wearing two garments, he should wear one of them over his left 
shoulder and under his right arm,* 19 but if he is wearing a single 
garment, he should wrap it around his lower body. 20 Let him 
face the teacher even when the teacher is not facing him, 21 sit- 
ting neither too close nor too far, 22 but at a distance where the 
teacher, while seated, can reach him with his hands. 23 He shall 
not sit where the wind blows from the teacher to him. 24 A single 
student should sit on his teacher’s right, 25 while a group may sit 
as space permits. 26 When the teacher is not provided with a seat 
and remains standing, he should not sit down. 2 Likewise, while 
the teacher remains seated, he should not he down, 28 and when 
the teacher is doing something, he should, if he is capable, offer 
to do it himself. 

29 In the presence of the teacher, moreover, he should not clasp 
the feet of a person of lesser dignity than the teacher, 30 greet 
such a person using the name of his lineage (A 2.1 1.15 n.), 31 rise 
to meet him, or get up after him, 32 even if that person happens 
to be his teacher’s elder.* 33 But he should move away from that 
place and from his seat. 34 Some say that he may address a pupil 
of his teacher by name, even if that pupil happens to be an elder 


14 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 1 .7.22 

of his (A 1.6.32n.). 35 Towards a person who is revered for 
reasons other than being his teacher, however, he should behave 
as towards his teacher, even if he happens to be a person of 
lesser dignity than his teacher. 

36 7 After he has eaten in the presence of his teacher, more- 
over, he should neither give away his leftovers nor sip water 
without getting up. 38 After asking the teacher ‘What shall I do?’, 

7 'he should get up; or he may get up silently. "Let him not 
move counterclockwise but walk around his teacher clock- 
wise* and then leave. 

General Rules 3 He should not look at a naked woman 4 or cut 
anything from plants or trees to smell it. 5 He should refrain 
from using shoes, umbrellas, and vehicles. 6 ‘Let him not smile, 
7 or, if he smiles, let him do so covering his mouth’— so states a 
Brahmana. 8 He should not kiss a woman with his mouth, 9 covet 
her in his heart, 10 or touch her without a good reason. "A 
Brahmana states: ‘He shall keep his body dirty, his teeth stained, 
and his speech true’ (A 1.2.28 n.). 

12 He shall regard those who taught his teacher the same sub- 
ject that he is studying from him as his own teachers. 13 When he 
sees his teacher clasp the feet of other persons, he should also 
clasp their feet. 

14 If he has several teachers, the almsfood he gathers comes 
under the control of the teacher to whom he is currently 
attached. 15 A student who has returned home should offer the 
almsfood to his mother; 16 the mother should present it to her 
husband, 17 and the husband to the teacher. 18 Or else, it may be 
used for ritual ( dharma ) purposes. 


Conclusion of Study 

19 After learning as much as he can, he should present the fee for 
vedic study, a fee that is procured righteously (dharma) and 
according to his ability. 20 If his teacher has fallen into hardship, 
however, he may seize it from an Ugra or a Sudra. 21 Some main- 
tain that it is lawful at all times to seize wealth for the teacher 
from an Ugra or a Sudra. 22 Let him not brag about what he has 


15 



1.7.22 


Dharmasutras 


given 23 or gloat over what he has done. 24 He should refrain from 
praising himself and disparaging others. 25 When he is ordered to 
do something, he should go ahead and do just that. 

26 If the teacher is incompetent, however, he may live with 
another (A 1.2.17). 27 With the exception of clasping the feet and 
eating the leftovers (see A 1.3.27 n.), he should behave towards 
his teacher’s wife as towards his teacher 28 and conduct himself 
in the same manner towards a person whom the teacher deputes 
to teach him 29 and towards older classmates. 30 With the excep- 
tion of eating the leftovers, he should behave towards his 
teacher’s son as towards his teacher. 

A STUDENT WHO HAS RETURNED HOME 
Conduct towards the Teacher 

31 Even after he has returned home, the accepted practice is 
that he should behave towards these individuals exactly the same 

8 way 1 as he behaved when he was a student. 

2 He may wear a necklace; apply lotions on his face, oil on 
his hair and beard, collyrium on his eyes, and oil on his body; 
and wear a turban, a lungi, a jacket, sandals, and shoes. 3 But 
let him neither do these nor have them done in places where 
his teacher may see him, 4 or during private activities 5 such as 
brushing the teeth, massaging the body, and combing the hair. 

6 The teacher, for his part, should not speak admiringly of his 
pupil’s belongings in the hope of getting them. 7 Some, however, 
maintain that a bath-graduate who is summoned by or visits his 
teacher is not expected to take off what he had been wearing, in 
accordance with the rules, at the time of graduation. 

8 Let him not sit on a seat that is higher, 9 has more legs 10 or is 
sturdier than his teacher’s; 11 nor occupy a seat or bed that is 
normally used by his teacher. 12 When he is so ordered by the 
teacher during a journey, he may get on to the same vehicle, 
but after the teacher. 13 The same rule applies to entering an 
assembly hall or a harrow, and to occupying a mat or a straw bed. 

14 Except to give good news, he should not speak to the 
teacher unless the teacher addresses him first. 15 He should 


16 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 1.9.1 

refrain from tapping on, whispering to, laughing in the presence 
of, calling aloud, using the personal name of, or giving an 
order to his teacher; 16 although in an emergency he may report 
something to him. 

17 If they live close by, he should go to see the teacher every 
morning and evening without being summoned 18 and visit him 
the very day that he returns from a journey. 19 When his teacher 
and his teacher’s teacher are together, he should first clasp the 
feet of his teacher’s teacher and then try to clasp his own 
teacher’s feet, 20 but the latter should forbid him; 21 in the pres- 
ence of his teacher’s teacher acts of reverence to his own teacher 
are suspended. 22 He shall go frequently to visit his teacher at his 
home, bringing with him whatever personal gift he can afford, 
even if it is only a few tooth cleaners.* 


Duties of a Teacher 

23 Next, the teacher’s conduct towards his pupil. 24 Loving him 
like a son and totally devoted to him, the teacher should impart 
knowledge to him without holding anything back with respect 
to any of the Laws. 25 Except in an emergency, moreover, he 
should not employ a pupil for his own purposes to the detriment 
of the pupil’s studies. 26 A pupil ceases to be a pupil when he is 
inattentive to his teacher and so becomes a dolt* 27 A teacher, 
likewise, ceases to be a teacher when he neglects teaching. 

28 When a pupil does something wrong, the teacher should 
always correct him. 29 Instilling fear, making him fast or bathe, 
and banishing him from his presence are the punishments, and 
he should apply them according to the severity of the offence 
until the student has completed his studies.* 

30 When he has completed his studies and finished his period 
of studentship, the teacher should dismiss him with the words: 
‘From now on attend to other duties ( dharma ).’ 


Vedic Recitation and its Suspension 

9 1 After commencing his annual course of vedic study on the 
full moon of July-August, he should not recite the Veda 


17 



1.9.1 


Dharmasutras 


in the evening for a month 2 and should conclude the course 
of study on the full moon or the lunar mansion RohinI of 
December-January. 3 According to some, the course of study 
lasts for four and a half months * 

4 He should refrain from reciting the Veda in a market town— 
5 he may optionally recite it there after smearing an area with the 
dung of an ox— 6 or in a cremation ground and the surrounding 
area up to a distance of a rod’s throw.* 7 The recitation is not 
suspended, however, when a cemetery has been overtaken by a 
village or agricultural land, 8 but he should not recite the Veda at 
a spot that he knows to have been a cemetery. 

9 The rule pertaining to a cemetery (see A 1.2.5 n.) applies also 
when Sudras and outcastes are present, 10 although, according to 
some, it applies only if they are in the same house. 11 He shall 
suspend his vedic recitation, however, if he even exchanges 
glances with a Sudra woman 12 or any other woman who has 
violated class boundaries in her sexual relations. 13 If he wants to 
speak with a menstruating woman when he is about to recite the 
Veda, he should first speak with a Brahmin and then speak with 
her. After he has spoken with her, however, he should speak 
again with a Brahmin and then recite the Veda. In this way the 
child she bears will prosper (A 2.1.17n.). 

14 Vedic recitation is suspended in a village in which there is 
a corpse 15 or a Candida, 16 or when corpses are being carried 
within its boundaries; 17 in the wilderness when they are within 
sight; 18 and for the entire day when outsiders visit the village 
19 even if they are respectable people. 

20 When it thunders in the evening, vedic recitation is sus- 
pended during the night; 21 and when there is lightning, until 
he has slept. 22 When there is lightning about the time 
of dawn or at a time when one can distinguish a black cow from 
a red one at a distance of a rod’s throw (A 1.9.6 n.), vedic recita- 
tion is suspended for the day until the end of dusk; 23 as also 
when it thunders at the end of the last watch of the night (B 
2.17.22 n.) 24 or, according to some, after midnight; 25 and when 
cows have to be kept in their pens. 26 When people condemned to 
death remain in prison, it is suspended until they have been 
executed. 


18 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 1.10.21 

27 Let him not recite the Veda while he is mounted on an 
animal. 

28 Vedic recitation is suspended for two days and nights on 
1 new-moon days, 1 as well as on the full-moon days that 
-L vy open a four-month season;* 2 for three days after the 
conclusion of the annual course of vedic study, the death of an 
elder (A 1.6.32 n.), an ancestral offering made on the eighth day 
after the full moon, the commencement of the annual course of 
vedic study, 3 and the death of a close relative; 4 and for twelve 
days after the death of one’s mother, father, or teacher. 

5 At their death one should also bathe daily for the same 
period of time; 6 in addition, the mourners should shave them- 
selves completely. 7 Some maintain that students who have 
returned home should not shave except when they are con- 
secrated for a sacrifice.* 8 A Brahmana, moreover, declares: 
‘Empty and uncovered, indeed, is he who is shaven-headed; the 
topknot is his cover.’ 9 At sacrificial sessions, on the other hand, 
the topknot is shaved because it is explicitly enjoined. 

10 According to some, vedic recitation is suspended for three 
days and nights after the death of one’s teacher. "It is sus- 
pended for one day upon receiving news of the death of a vedic 
scholar within one year of his death, "but, according to some, 
only if he was a fellow student. 

13-14 If he wishes to recite or teach or if he is actually engaged 
in reciting or teaching the Veda during the visit of a vedic 
scholar, he may do so only after receiving his permission. 15-16 In 
the presence of his teacher, moreover, he may recite or teach the 
Veda only after the teacher has said: ‘Ho, recite!’ 17 Both when he 
intends to recite and when he has completed his recitation, he 
should clasp his teacher’s feet. "Likewise, when someone comes 
in during vedic recitation, he may continue the recitation only 
after that person utters the same words. 

19 Vedic recitation is suspended when dogs are barking, don- 
keys are braying, a wolf or a solitary jackal is howling, or an owl 
is hooting, and whenever the sound of music, weeping, singing, 
or Saman chants is heard (G 16.21 n.). 20 Likewise, when texts of 
another vedic branch are being recited, the recitation of Saman 
chants is suspended. 21 Vedic recitation is suspended also when 


19 



1 . 10.21 


Dharmasutras 


there is any other noise that may blend with the recitation; 
22 after vomiting until he has slept 23 or consumed some ghee; 
24 when there is a foul smell ; 25 and when he has indigestion. 26 He 
should not recite the Veda after the evening meal 27 or when his 
hands are wet. 

28 After eating food presented during a rite for a newly 
deceased person,* vedic recitation is suspended for a full day 
and an evening, 29 or until the food is digested; 30 in addition, 
however, he should eat some food that has not been so offered. 

1 1 1 This provision applies also after eating food given by a 

X motherless man on the day that a person starts a fresh 
vedic book ; 2 after eating the food given by a fatherless man on 
the day that he completes the recitation of a vedic book; 3 and, 
according to some, after eating at a sacrifice for gods who were 
originally humans .* 4 Vedic recitation is not suspended, however, 
after eating the following items given at such occasions: 
uncooked rice given the previous day and raw meat, 5 as well as 
roots and fruits of plants and trees. 

6 On the day that he performs the ceremony for commencing 
the recitation of a vedic book and on the day that he formally 
commences its recitation, he should not recite that book. 7 On 
the day he performs the ceremony for commencing or ending the 
recitation of an entire Veda, moreover, he should not recite that 
Veda. 

8 Vedic recitation is suspended in a place where the wind 
howls, swirls up grass on the ground, or drives the rain; 9 at the 
boundary between a village and the wilderness; 10 and on a 
highway. 11 When a fellow student is away, collective recitation is 
suspended for that day. 12 During personal activities 13 such as 
washing the feet, massaging, and applying oil, 14 he should 
neither recite nor teach the Veda as long as he is so occu- 
pied. 15 Vedic recitation is suspended at dawn and dusk; 16 while 
sitting on a tree 17 or standing in water ; 18 at night when the doors 
are open; 19 and during the day when the doors are shut. 20 Dur- 
ing the spring and summer festivals the recitation of an entire 
vedic chapter is forbidden, 21 as also the recitation of the daily 
vedic lesson if it is performed without following the proper 
procedure. 


20 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 


1 . 12.2 


22 This is its procedure: 23 he should go near the water before 
breakfast, purify himself, and, leaving out the chapter he has 
already finished, do his recitation at a clean spot aloud 24 or, if it 
is a time for suspending recitation, mentally. 25 They forbid men- 
tal recitation when there is unremitting lightning or thunder, 
when one is impure or has eaten food offered to a newly 
deceased person, and when there is frost; 26 some forbid it only 
when one has eaten at an ancestral offering. 

27 When lightning, thunder, and rain occur together out of 
season, vedic recitation is suspended for three days 28 or, accord- 
ing to some, until the ground becomes dry; 29 if only one or two 
of these occur, the suspension lasts until the same time the fol- 
lowing day. 30 Any time there is a solar or lunar eclipse, an earth- 
quake, or a whirlwind, and any time a meteor falls or a fire 
erupts, the recitation of all sacred texts is suspended until the 
same time the following day. 31 When a cloud appears out of 
season, when a halo appears around the sun or the moon, when 
a rainbow, a parhelion, or a comet is seen, and when there is a 
wind, a foul smell, or frost— vedic recitation is suspended for the 
duration of all these events, 32 and in the case of wind, for an 
‘hour’* after it has ceased. 

33 Vedic recitation is suspended until after he has slept when he 
hears a wolf or a solitary jackal howling, 34 and at night in the 
wilderness if there is no fire or gold. 35 A section of the Veda 
that has not been previously studied should not be recited out- 
side the proper time* 36 or in the evening. 37 What has already 
been studied may be recited at any time. 

38 With respect to particulars not given here, one should follow 
the directives of legal assemblies.* 


12 


Private Recitation of the Veda 

‘‘Private vedic recitation is austerity’— so states a 
Brahmana (TA 2.14). 2 In the same vedic text we hear: 
‘When a man does his private vedic recitation, whether he does it 
standing, seated, or lying down, he is in reality performing an 
act of austerity, for private vedic recitation is austerity’ (cf. TA 
2 . 12 ). 


21 



1.12.3 


Dharmasutras 


3 The Brahmana of the Vajasaneyins (cf. SB 11.5.6.8), more- 
over, declares: ‘Private vedic recitation is indeed a sacrifice 
offered to the Veda. When thunder rolls, when lightning flashes, 
when thunderclaps burst, and when the wind howls — they are 
the Vasat calls of that sacrifice. Therefore, when thunder rolls, 
when lightning flashes, when thunderclaps burst, and when the 
wind howls, one should recite the Veda without fail so that these 
Vasat calls would not be rendered futile.’ 4 This statement is 
made complete in a passage from a different vedic branch 
(p. xxii): 5 ‘If, moreover, the wind howls, thunder rolls, lightning 
flashes, or thunderclaps burst, he should recite a single Rc-verse, 
a single Yajus-formula, or a single Saman-chant; or else recite: 
“Earth! Atmosphere! Sky! I offer truth and austerity into faith!” 
In this manner, undoubtedly, his private vedic recitation for that 
day is accomplished.’ 6 That being the case, the above provision 
does not go against the accepted practice of the Aryas, 7 for 
they teach both the recitation of the Veda and its suspen- 
sion. That would become meaningless if we listened to the 
Brahmana of the Vajasaneyins, 8 for that accepted practice of 
the Aryas has no tangible motive (A 1.4.8-10n.). 9 The suspen- 
sion of vedic recitation laid down in the vedic texts refers 
to vedic recitation and not to the ritual use of vedic formulas 
(cf.PMS 12.3.19). 

10 All rites are described in the Brahmanas. The lost Brah- 
mana passages relating to some of them are inferred from 
usage. "When a practice is undertaken because of the pleasure 
derived from it, it does not presuppose a vedic text (cf. PMS 
4.1.2).* 12 A man who follows such a practice prepares himself 
for hell. 


Great Sacrifices 

13 Next, we present some rites given in the Brahmanas, 14 rites 
that are eulogized as ‘great sacrifices’ and ‘great sacrificial ses- 
sions’ (SB 11.5.6.1): "every day making a Bali offeringto beings, 
1 O giving food to men according to one’s ability, 1 offering 
1 J at least a piece of wood in the fire as an oblation to the 
gods while saying Svaha, making an offering of at least a pot of 


22 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 1.13.17 

water to the ancestors while saying Svadha, and doing one’s 
private vedic recitation. 


Salutation 

2 One should pay homage to people of higher classes 3 and to 
those who are older. 4 When a man is elated, he becomes proud; 
when he is proud, he violates the Law; and when the Law is 
violated, of course, he goes to hell once again. 


Study and Conduct towards the Teacher 

5 A teacher cannot give orders to a pupil of his who has returned 
home. 

6 The syllable OM is the gate to heaven. Therefore, when he is 
about to recite the Veda, he should pronounce that syllable at 
the beginning, 7 as also after saying something during the recita- 
tion that is not part of the recitation. In this way the Veda is kept 
separate from ordinary speech. 8 During sacrifices, moreover, 
commands begin with this syllable.* 9 In ordinary life also during 
rites to secure prosperity, it is this syllable that precedes state- 
ments such as, ‘May the day be auspicious!’, ‘May there be 
well-being!’, and ‘May there be prosperity!’ 

10 Without a mutual agreement,* one should not take up a 
difficult text, with the exception of the Trihsravana and the 
Trihsahavacana* "but according to Harita the Veda should be 
studied until all doubts are cleared. 

12 In the case of non- vedic texts, subservience does not come 
into play.* 

13 The pupil should clasp the feet of the person who instructs 
him on the orders of his teacher for the duration of the instruc- 
tion. 14 According to some, the pupil should do so always if 
the instructor is a worthy person. 15 With respect to such a per- 
son, however, subservience does not come into play,* 16 as also 
with respect to older fellow students.* 17 When two people 
rehearse the Veda with each other, subservience does not come 
into play.* 


23 



1.13.18 


Dharmasutras 


Return to Studentship 

18 The Veda waxes strong,’ they teach. 19 Svetaketu says: ‘If a 
man, after he has married and settled down, wishes to study the 
Veda further, he should live at the house of his teacher with a 
collected mind for two months every year, 20 for by these means I 
managed to study more of the Veda than during the time I was a 
student.’ 21 But that is forbidden by authoritative texts, 22 for after 
a man has married and settled down, he is enjoined by vedic 

H texts to perform daily rites, 'namely, the daily fire sacri- 
fice, hospitality towards guests, 2 and others of this sort. 


Duty to Teach 

'When someone asks him for instruction, he should not spurn 
him, 4 provided he does not see any fault in him. 5 If by chance he 
is unable to complete his studies, subservience (A 1.13.12, 15 n.) 
does indeed continue with respect to that teacher. 


Salutation 

6 To his mother and father he should show the same obedience as 
to his teacher. 7 A student who has returned home should clasp 
the feet of all his elders (A 1.6.32 n.); 8 he should do so when he 
returns from a journey as well. 9 He should also clasp the feet of 
his brothers and sisters according to seniority. 

10 He should pay them homage, moreover, in the prescribed 
manner. "He should rise up and greet an officiating priest, a 
father-in-law, or a paternal or maternal uncle who is younger 
than himself, 12 or he may silently clasp his feet. 

"A fellow citizen who has been a friend for ten 
years, a fellow student who has been a friend 
for five years, and a vedic scholar known for 
three years deserve to be greeted. 

14 If the relative ages of the persons are known, he should greet 
the older ones first. 

15 When a person other than an elder (A 1.6.32 n.) is standing 
at a different level than himself, it is not necessary to greet him, 


24 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 


1.15.8 


16 or he may greet him after climbing up or down to the same 
level as that person. 17 In every case, however, he should rise up 
before offering his greetings. 18 He should not offer greetings 
when he is impure 19 or to a person who is impure; 20 neither 
should he return a greeting when he is impure. 

21 Wives should be greeted according to the age of their hus- 
bands. 22 He should never greet anyone with his shoes on, or with 
his head covered, or carrying anything in the hand. 23 In greeting 
women, Ksatriyas, or Vaisyas, he should use a pronoun* and not 
his personal name. 24 Some maintain that he should do so also 
when he greets his mother or his teacher’s wife. 

25 A 10-year-old Brahmin and a 100-year-old 
Ksatriya, you should know, stand with respect 
to each other as a father to a son. But of the 
two, the Brahmin is the father! 

26 He should ask a person who is younger or of the same age 
whether he is doing well, 27 a Ksatriya whether he is in good 
shape, 28 a Vaisya whether his property is unharmed, 29 and a 
Sudra whether he is in good health.* 30 Let him not pass by a 
vedic scholar without talking to him, 31 and likewise a woman in 
the wilderness. 


1 ^ 'When he is paying his respects to elders (A 1.6.32 n.), 
J. _/ the aged, and guests; when he is offering sacrifices and 
softly reciting prayers;* and when he is eating, sipping water, 
and doing his private vedic recitation, he should wear his upper 
garment over his left shoulder and under his right arm (see A 
1.6.18 n.). 


Purification 

2 He becomes pure by sipping water collected on the ground,* 
3 or when a pure person gives him water to sip. 4 He should not 
sip rain water 5 or water in a crevice, 6 as also warm water without 
a good reason. 

7 If he lifts up his empty hands against birds, he should touch 
water. 8 If he is capable, he should not, even for a moment (A 


25 



1.15.8 


Dharmasutras 


I. 1 1.32 n.), remain impure 9 or naked. 10 He should not perform 
his purification while he is standing in water; 11 only after coming 
out should he sip water. 

12 He shall not put firewood in the sacred fire without first 
sprinkling the wood with water. 13 When he is seated alongside 
unclean people on a seat made with grass strewn haphazardly, 
he is considered pure if he does not touch them; 14 the same is 
true when he is seated on a bed of grass or a wooden seat fixed to 
the ground.* 15 He should wear a garment only after sprinkling it 
with water. 16 If a dog touches him, he should plunge into water 
with his clothes on; 17 or he becomes pure after he has washed 
that spot, touched it with fire, washed that spot again, as well as 
his feet, and sipped water. 18 When he is impure he should not go 
near the fire— 19 according to some, not nearer than the length of 
an arrow — 20 nor should he blow on it 21 or place it under his bed. 

22 The proper place for a Brahmin to live is a village where 
there is a lot of firewood and water and where he is able to 
perform his purifications on his own. 23 When he has washed 
away the stains of urine or excrement after going to the toilet, 
the stains of food, the stains from eating, and the stains of 
semen, and then washed his feet and sipped water, he becomes 
pure. 

1 /T 1 He should not sip water standing or stooping. 2 Let him 

J. VJ sip thrice seated on his haunches and with water suffi- 

cient to reach his heart,* 3 wipe his lips three times 4 or, according 

to some, twice, 5 and touch them with water once 6 or, accord- 

ing to some, twice. 7 8 9 With his right hand he should sprinkle water 

on his left hand and on his feet and head, and then touch the 

organs,* namely, the eyes, the nostrils, and the ears, with water. 

8 He should then wash his hands with water. 

9 Even though he is already pure, however, when he is prepar- 
ing to take his meal, he should sip water twice, wipe his lips 
twice, touch his lips with water once, 10 rub the inside of his lips, 
and then sip water. 

"He does not become sullied by the hair of his moustache 
getting into his mouth, so long as he does not touch it with his 
hand. "Sipping water is prescribed when one sees drops of 


26 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 


1.17.8 


saliva falling from one’s mouth. 13 According to some, sipping 
is unnecessary if they fall on the ground. 

14 After he has come into contact with nasal mucus or tears 
while he is sleeping or sneezing, or with blood, hair, fire, cattle, 
a Brahmin, or a woman; after he has travelled on a highway; 
after he has touched a filthy substance or an impure man; 
and after wearing his lower garment, he should touch water,* 
15 wet cowdung, plants, or the earth. 

Food 

Unfit Food 16 Meat that has been cut with a knife used for 
slaughtering is not fit to be eaten.* 17 Fie should not break off a 
piece of cake with his teeth. 

18 When a death has occurred in a house, he should not eat 
there for ten days, 19 as also after a birth before the mother comes 
out of the birthing room, 20 and when there is a corpse in a house. 

21 Food that has been touched by an impure person becomes 
impure but is not rendered unfit to be eaten.* 22 Food that an 
impure Sudra brings, on the other hand, is not fit to be eaten, 
23 as also food in which there is a hair 24 or some other filth;* 
25 food that has come into contact with filthy substances; 26 food 
in which there is an insect that lives on filth 27 or in which there 
are mouse droppings or mouse parts;* 28 food that has been 
touched with the feet 29 or with the hem of a garment; 30 food 
that has been seen by a dog or a degraded individual; 31 food that 
has been carried in the hem of a garment; 32 and food that has 
been brought at night by a slave woman. 

n Rules of Eating 33 If, while he is eating, 1 he is touched 
by a Sudra, he should stop eating. 2 FIe shall not eat 
seated alongside ignoble people; 3 or in a place where, while the 
group is eating, one of them may get up and give away his left- 
overs or sip water (A 1.3.27 n.); 4 or where people insult him 
when they give food; 5 or food that men or other filthy creatures 
have smelt. 

6 Fie should not eat on a boat 7 or a terrace.* 8 Let him eat 
sitting on a specially prepared area of the floor. 


27 



1 . 17.9 


Dharmasutras 


Eating Utensils 9 He should eat out of a clay vessel that has not 
been used before, 10 or, if it has been used, only after scorching 
it with lire. 11 A vessel made of metal is purified by scrub- 
bing, 12 and one made of wood by scraping. 13 During a sacri- 
fice, vessels are purified in the manner prescribed by the vedic 
texts. 

Forbidden Food 14 He should not eat food obtained from the 
market, 15 even seasonings, with the exception of raw meat, 
honey, and salt; 16 oil and ghee, on the other hand, may be used 
after sprinkling them with water. 

17 He should not eat, drink, or consume cooked food that has 
been left overnight 18 or turned sour, 19 with the exception of 
sugar-cane juice, rolled rice, gruel, roasted barley, barley meal, 
vegetables, meat, flour, milk, milk products, and roots and fruits 
of plants and trees. 20 He should not consume anything that has 
turned sour without mixing it with some other food. 

21 It is forbidden to drink any type of liquor ; 22 as also the milk 
of sheep, 23 camels, and deer; the milk of animals in heat or 
bearing twins ; 24 and the milk of a cow during the first ten days 
after giving birth . 25 Herbs used in the manufacture of liquor are 
likewise forbidden; 26 as also Karanja garlic, onion, leeks, 27 and 
any other food that is forbidden. 28 For a Brahmana states: 
‘Mushrooms should not be eaten.’ 

29 The meat of one-hoofed animals, camels, Gayal oxen, vil- 
lage pigs, and Sarabha cattle are forbidden. 30 It is permitted to 
eat the meat of milch cows and oxen. 31 A text of the Vajas- 
aneyins states: ‘The meat of oxen is fit for sacrifice.’* 32 Among 
birds that feed by scratching with their feet, the cock is for- 
bidden, 33 and among birds that feed by thrusting their beaks, 
the Plava heron. 34 Carnivorous birds are forbidden; 35 as also 
the Hamsa goose, the Bhasa vulture, the Cakra bird, and the 
Suparna falcon . 36 The Krunca curlew and the Kraunca crane are 
forbidden, with the exception of the Vardhranasa cranes and 
Laksmana cranes.* 37 Animals with five claws* are forbidden, 
with the exception of the Godha monitor lizard, tortoise, por- 
cupine, hedgehog, rhinoceros, hare, and Putikhasa. 38 Among 
fish, the Ceta is forbidden, 39 as also the snake-head fish, 


28 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 


1 . 18.26 


the Mrdura crocodile, carnivorous fish, and others that are 
grotesque, such as the mermen. 

1 O People from Whom Food May Be Accepted 'Honey, 
J. O uncooked food, venison, land, roots, fruits, protection, 
pasture for cattle, house, and fodder for a draught ox may be 
accepted from an Ugra. 2 According to Harlta, even these may 
be accepted only when they are brought by a pupil (A 1.7.20-1). 
3 Alternatively, uncooked food may be accepted, 4 or even cooked 
food if it does not contain any seasoning, 5 but not a lot. 

6 If he has lost his livelihood, he may eat food obtained on his 
own from anyone after paying for it with gold or an animal. 7 He 
should not be overly attracted to this way of life 8 and give it up 
when he finds his legitimate livelihood (A 2.10.4; cf. A 1.18.15; 
1.21.3-4). 

9 A student who has returned home may not eat any food 
given by people belonging to the three classes beginning with 
Ksatriya. 10 As a rule, he may eat the food of a Brahmin, 
although it may become unfit to be eaten for a particular reason, 
"as during a time when a person required to do a penance is 
performing the penitential act.* 12 After the man has concluded 
his penance, he may eat his food. 13 According to some, he is 
permitted to eat the food of people belonging to any class who 
adhere to their respective Laws, with the exception of Sudras, 
14 and even of a Sudra whom he has obtained according to the 
Law. 15 He may eat it after paying for it with gold or an animal, 
but let him not be overly attracted to this way of life and give it 
up when he finds his legitimate livelihood. 

16 He shall not eat the food given by a corporate body 17 or 
announced through a public invitation; 18 the food of anyone 
who lives by practising a craft 19 or using weapons; 20 the food of 
a pawnbroker, 21 a physician, 22 or an usurer; 23 and, prior to the 
purchase of the Soma, the food of a man who has been con- 
secrated for a sacrifice.* 24 Only after the animal dedicated to 
Agni and Soma has been killed 25 or after its omentum has been 
offered, may one eat the food of a man consecrated for a sacri- 
fice, 26 for a Brahmana states: ‘Alternatively, after setting aside 
the portion to be offered in sacrifice, they may eat the 


29 



1 . 18.26 


Dharmasutras 


remainder.’* 27 He shall not eat the food of the following: an 
impotent man; 28 a royal messenger; 29 a man who makes obla- 
tions with substances unfit for offering; 30 a spy; 31 a man who 
has become a wandering ascetic without following the proper 
procedure; 32 a man who has relinquished his sacred fires; 33 a 
vedic scholar who stays away from everybody, eats anybody’s 
food, neglects his vedic recitation, or is married to a Sudra 
1 C\ woman; 1 a drunkard; a mad man; a prisoner; a debtor;* 
J. y and a moneylender who hounds a man who owes him, 
as well as the man who makes the lender hound him, so long as 
they are thus engaged. 

2 Who, then, is the man whose food he may eat? 3 ‘Anyone who 
gives willingly,’ says Kanva. 4 ‘A pious man,’ says Kautsa. 5 ‘Any- 
one who gives,’ says Varsyayani, 6 for if impurities remain 
immobile in a person, then there is nothing wrong in eating 
his food, and if impurities are mobile, then the person will 
become pure by means of the gift. 7 ‘Almsfood is pure and may 
be eaten’, according to Eka, Kunika, Kanva, and Kutsa, as 
well as Puskarasadi; 8 and, according to Varsyayani, food that 
one receives unasked from anybody. 9 He may eat the food given 
willingly by a pious person, 10 but even when given by a pious 
person, he may not eat it if it is given unwillingly. 11 He may eat 
food that he receives unasked from anyone at all, 12 but, says 
Harlta, not if it is received subsequent to an invitation. 13 Now, 
they quote two verses from a Purana: 

Almsfood brought and handed over even by an 
evildoer, in the opinion of Prajapati, is suitable 
for eating, so long as it has not been previously 
announced. 

If a man spurns such food, his forefathers will 
not eat from him for fifteen years and the 
sacred fire will not convey his oblations. 

14 And further: 

It is forbidden to eat the food of physicians, 
hunters, surgeons, fowlers, unchaste wives, or 
eunuchs. 


30 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 


1.20.14 


15 Now, they also quote: 

An abortionist* rubs his sin off on the man 
who eats his food, an innocent person on the 
man who slanders him, a thief on the king who 
releases him, and a supplicant on the man who 
makes false promises. 


Path of the Law 

^ A 1 Let him not follow the Laws for the sake of worldly 
Z*\J benefits, 2 for then the Laws produce no fruit at harvest 
time. 3 It is like this. A man plants a mango tree to get fruits, but 
in addition he obtains also shade and fragrance. In like manner, 
when a man follows the Law, he obtains, in addition, other 
benefits. 4 Even if he does not obtain them, at least no harm is 
done to the Law. 

5 Let him not become vexed or easily deceived by the pro- 
nouncements of hypocrites, crooks, infidels, and fools. 6 The 
Righteous ( dharma ) and the Unrighteous ( adharma ) do not go 
around saying, ‘Here we are!’ Nor do gods, Gandharvas, or 
ancestors declare, This is righteous and that is unrighteous.’ 
7 An activity that Aryas praise is righteous, and what they 
deplore is unrighteous. 8 He should model his conduct after that 
which is unanimously approved in all regions by Aryas who have 
been properly trained, who are elderly and self-possessed, and 
who are neither greedy nor deceitful (= A 2.29. 14; cf. TU 1.11 .4). 

9 In this way he will win both worlds.* 

Trade as an Occupation 

10 Trade is not sanctioned for Brahmins. 11 In times of adversity, 
he may trade in permitted goods, eschewing these forbidden 
ones: 12 human beings, seasonings, dyes, perfumes, foods, skins, 
barren cows, glue, water, tender grain stalks, wine making 
ingredients, red and black pepper, grain, meat, weapons, and 
merits. 13 Among grains, however, the sale of sesame seeds and 
rice is strictly forbidden. 14 It is also forbidden to barter one of 


31 



1.20.14 


Dharmasutras 


the above items for another. 15 He may, however, barter food for 
food, human beings for human beings, seasonings for season- 
ings, perfumes for perfumes, and knowledge for knowledge. 
16 He may trade in permitted goods that have not been bought, 
^ 1 'as also in Munja grass, Balbaja grass, roots, and fruits, 
Z* J. 2 and in grasses and wood that have not been hand- 
crafted. 3 He should not be overly attracted to this way of life 
4 and give it up when he finds his legitimate livelihood. 


Acts Making a Man an Outcaste or Sordid 

5 Social interaction with outcastes is not permitted, 6 as also with 
degraded people. 7 These are the actions causing loss of caste: 
8 theft; acts causing infamy; homicide; neglect of the Vedas; 
abortion; sex with the siblings of one’s mother or father or with 
their children; drinking liquor; sex with those with whom sex 
is forbidden; 9 sex with a friend of one’s female or male elders 
(A 1.6.32n.) or with the wife of another man — '“some main- 
tain that there is no loss of caste when one has sex with a 
woman other than the wife of an elder—; "and the persistent 
commission of unrighteous ( adharma ) acts. 

12 And these are the actions that make people sordid:* 13 sex 
with Sudras on the part of Arya women; 14 eating the meat of 
forbidden animals, 15 to wit, dogs, humans, village cocks, village 
pigs, and carnivorous animals; 16 consuming human urine and 
excrement; "eating a Sudra’s leftovers (A 1.3.27n.); and sex 
with a degraded woman on the part of Aryas. 18 According to 
some, even these cause loss of caste. 19 Sinful actions other than 
these also make people sordid. 

20 When he comes to know about a sin that would make a man 
an outcaste, let him not be the first to tell others about it. He 
should, however, avoid such a person while he is performing 
religious activities. 


Knowledge of the Self 



1 He should practise the disciplines pertaining to the inner 
self, disciplines that have definite consequences and 


32 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 


1 . 23.2 


prevent mental digression. 2 There is nothing higher than the 
realization of the self. 3 In this regard, we will cite verses that 
speak to the realization of the self: 



4 All living beings are the residence of the one 
who dwells within the cave,* who cannot be 
slain, and who is free from stain. The one who 
is immovable but resides within the movable— 
those who worship him become immortal. 

5 Whatever there is here, whatever is called a 
sensory object in this world— casting away all 
that, a wise man should worship the one who 
dwells within the cave. 

6 Follow what is wholesome, not what is 
unwholesome. Not finding it in my own self, I 
then seek in others, without attachment, the 
abode of the good, the one who is the great 
body of lustre and the lord abiding in every- 
thing. 

7 The one who is the eternal among all crea- 
tures; who is wise, immortal, and unchanging; 
who has no limbs, voice, body, or touch; who is 
immense and resplendent — he is the whole 
world, he is the highest goal, he is the centre, he 
is the fort without compare.* 

8 When a man worships him everywhere, fol- 
lows his path always, and, self-possessed, sees 
that profound one who is difficult to see, he will 
rejoice in heaven. 

1 Seeing all beings in himself, a wise man thinks 
about it and is not perplexed. A Brahmin who 
sees himself in all beings, likewise, shines forth 
in the vault of heaven. 

2 The one who is profound, finer than a lotus 
strand, and stands encompassing the universe, 
who is wider than the earth, unchangeable, and 
stands containing the universe— he is different 


33 



1.23.2 


Dharmasutras 


from the knowledge of this world obtained 
through the senses; he is not different from the 
objects of knowledge; he is the highest lord; 
from him, as he divides himself, all bodies come 
into being; he is the root; he is everlasting; he is 
eternal. 

3 In this life, however, the eradication of faults 
depends on Yoga. The learned man who 
uproots these faults that torment creatures 
attains bliss. 

4 We will now enumerate the faults that torment creatures. 
5 They are: anger, excitement, rage, greed, perplexity, hypocrisy, 
malice, lying, overeating, calumny, envy, lust, ire, lack of self- 
control, and absence of Yoga. Their eradication depends on 
Yoga. 

6 Refraining from anger, excitement, rage, greed, perplexity, 
hypocrisy, and malice; speaking the truth; refraining from over- 
eating, calumny, and envy; sharing, liberality, rectitude, gentle- 
ness, tranquillity, self-control, amity with all creatures, Yoga, 
Arya-like conduct, benevolence, and contentment— there is 
agreement that these apply to all orders of life. By practising 
them according to the rules, a man attains the All. 


Penances 

/t 1 If someone kills a Ksatriya, he should give a thousand 
cows to erase the enmity,* 2 a hundred if he kills a 
Vaisya, 3 and ten if he kills a Sudra. 4 In addition a bull is to be 
given in each case as an expiation. 5 The same applies for killing 
women of these classes. 

6 If someone kills a man of the first two classes who has stud- 
ied the Veda or who has been consecrated to perform a Soma 
sacrifice, he becomes a heinous sinner (A 1.3.25 n.); 7 so too 
someone who kills an ordinary Brahmin, 8 a Brahmin’s foetus 
whose gender cannot be determined, 9 or a Brahmin woman 
soon after her menstrual period.* 

l0 This is the atonement for such a man. 11 He should build a 


34 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 


1.25.7 


hut in the wilderness, curb his speech, carry a skull as a banner, 
and cover himself from the navel to the knees with a scrap of 
hempen cloth. 12 His path is the gap between the tracks of cart- 
wheels, 13 and if he happens to see another person he should step 
aside. 14 He should set out to the village carrying a broken metal 
bowl 15 and visit seven houses, saying: ‘Who will give almsfood to 
a heinous sinner?’ 16 That is how he maintains himself. 17 If he 
does not receive anything, he should fast. 18 He should also look 
after the cows; 19 indeed, when the cows go out and return, he 
has a second reason for going to the village. 20 After he has lived 
like this for twelve years and become cleansed, he may associate 
with good people. 21 Alternatively, he may build a hut on a track 
usually taken by robbers and live there seeking to recover the 
cows of Brahmins. He is absolved after he has fought with them 
three times or after he has recovered the cows. 22 Or else, he is 
absolved after taking part in the ritual bath that concludes a 
horse sacrifice. 

23 The same penance applies to a man who, when Law and 
profit* are in conflict, chooses profit. 24 If someone has killed 
one of his elders (A 1.6.32 n.) or a vedic scholar who has 
completed a sacrifice, he should live in the same manner 
until his last breath. 25 No rehabilitation is possible for such a 
man in this life; his sin, however, is removed (cf. A 1.28.18; 
1.29.1). 

^ ^ 'A man who has had sex with the wife of an elder 
Z* _/ should cut off his penis together with the testicles and, 
holding them in his cupped hands, walk towards the south with- 
out turning back; 2 or else he should end his life by embracing a 
red-hot metal column* 

3 A man who has drunk liquor should drink burning hot 
liquor. 

4 A thief, his hair dishevelled and carrying a pestle on his 
shoulder, should go to the king and confess his deed. The king 
should slay him with that pestle, and, when he is killed, he is 
absolved. 5 If he is pardoned, the sin falls on the one who par- 
dons him. 6 Alternatively, he may throw himself into a fire, per- 
form severe mortifications, 7 end his life by reducing the amount 


35 



1.25.7 


Dharmasutras 


he eats, 8 or perform the arduous penance (see A 1.27.7) for a 
year. 9 Now, they also quote: 

'"People who have committed a theft, drunk 
liquor, had sex with the wife of an elder (A 
1.6.32 n.)— so long as they have not killed a 
Brahmin— should eat a little at every fourth 
mealtime,* dip into water at dawn, noon, and 
dusk, and remain standing during the day and 
seated at night. Such people get rid of their sin 
in three years. 

11 When someone not belonging to the first social class kills a 
man belonging to the first class, he should go and stand in a 
battlefield, where they would kill him. 12 Or else, he may have his 
body hair, skin, and flesh offered as a sacrifice in a fire and then 
throw himself into that fire. 

13 Crow, chameleon, peacock, Cakravaka goose, Hamsa 
goose, Bhasa vulture, frog, common mongoose, Derika rat, and 
dog— the penance for killing any of these is the same as for kill- 
O t -\ 4n £ a Sudra. 1 The penance is the same also for killing 
Z*\J a milch cow or an ox without cause 2 and for killing a 
cart-load of other animals. 

3 If someone uses harsh words against a person against whom 
one is not permitted to use such words, or if he tells a lie, he 
should eat food without milk, spices, or salt for three days; 4 if he 
is a Sudra, he should not eat for seven days. 

5 These provisions apply also to women. 

6 When, without endangering the man’s life, someone cuts off 
one limb of a man for whose murder he would become a heinous 
sinner; 7 when someone behaves in a manner unbecoming of an 
Arya, engages in slander, and does forbidden things; when 
someone partakes of food or drink that is forbidden or unfit (A 
1 . 16. 16 n.); when someone ejaculates his semen in a Sudra 
woman or in any place other than the vagina (B 3.7.2 n.); and 
when someone performs a nefarious rite intentionally or 
unintentionally— he should bathe reciting the Ablinga or 
VarunI formulas, or other purificatory texts in proportion to the 
frequency with which he has committed these offences. 


36 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 


1.27.9 


Employing the ritual procedure of the cooked oblation,* a 
student who has broken his vow of chastity should offer an ass, 
9 and a Sudra should eat of that offering. 

10 Next, the penances for studying in contravention of the 
rules. "Engaged in activities beneficial to his teacher, he should 
keep silence for a year, speaking only during his daily vedic 
recitation, when addressing his teacher or the teacher’s wife, and 
while he is begging. 12 The same applies also to other sinful acts 
that do not cause loss of caste, as do the penances that we will 
enumerate below. "Alternatively, he should make an offering to 
Lust and Anger or recite softly: 'Lust did it!’, ‘Anger did it!’ 
(cf. G 25.1-6). 14 Or else, on a day of the moon’s change* he 
should either eat some sesame seeds or fast, and on the following 
day he should bathe and recite the Savitrf verse one thousand 
times either controlling his breath or without controlling his 
breath. 

^ ^7 1 On the full-moon day of July-August he should eat 
/ some sesame seeds or fast, and on the following day 
bathe in a great river* and offer one thousand kindling sticks in 
the sacred fires while reciting the Savitrf verse or simply recite 
the Savitrf verse one thousand times. 2 Or else, he should offer 
Isti-offerings and Yajnakratu-sacrifices in order to purify 
himself. 

3 After eating something unfit to be eaten, he should fast until 
all the excrement is gone, 4 which happens after seven days. 
5 Alternatively, he should bathe each morning and evening dur- 
ing the winter and spring,* 6 or perform the twelve-day arduous 
penance. 7 This is the procedure for the twelve-day arduous pen- 
ance: for three days the person does not eat during the night, 
and for the next three days during the day; for three days he eats 
what he receives unasked, and for three days he does not eat at 
all (cf. B 2.2.38). 8 If he repeats this for a year, it is called the 
year-long arduous penance. 

9 Now, another penance— by reciting the Veda completely 
three times while abstaining from food, one discharges the pen- 
ance for committing even a great many sins that do not cause 
loss of caste. 


37 



1.27.10 


Dharmasutras 


10 When someone takes a non-Arya woman to 
bed, lends money on interest, drinks a decoc- 
tion,* or pays obeisance in a manner unworthy 
of a Brahmin, he should sit on a spread of 
grass letting the sun scorch his back. 

"The sin a Brahmin commits by serving a per- 
son of the black class* for one day he removes 
in three years by bathing daily and eating at 
every fourth mealtime (see A 1.25.10 n.). 

^ Q 1 ‘A man who, under any circumstance, covets what 
Z* O belongs to another man is undoubtedly a thief ’—that is 
the view of Kautsa and Harlta, as also of Kanva and Puskara- 
sadi. 2 There are exceptions in the case of certain belongings,’ 
says Varsyayani — 3 such as legume pods or fodder for a draught 
ox. Owners normally do not forbid someone from taking these. 
4 To take too much of these, however, is a crime.* 5 ‘One must 
always obtain permission first,’ says Harlta. 

6 Let him not visit a teacher or relative who has fallen from his 
caste with the intention of seeing him 7 or accept anything of 
value from him. 8 If he meets such a person accidentally, he 
should clasp his feet and go away silently. 

9 A mother does countless things to bring about male pro- 
geny.* So, even if she has fallen from her caste, he must always 
serve her, 10 but not let her participate in any of his religious 
activities. 

"He should separate himself from anything of value that he 
has obtained unrighteously (, adharma ), proclaiming ‘We and 
unrighteousness don’t go together!’; wear a piece of cloth from 
his navel to his knees; bathe three times a day at dawn, noon, 
and dusk; eat food without milk, spices, or salt; and not enter a 
house for twelve years. "After that he becomes cleansed, "and 
thereafter he may associate with Aryas. 

"This same penance applies also to other sins causing loss of 
caste. 

15 A man who has had sex with the wife of an elder (A 
1.6.32 n.), however, should enter a hollow metal column (see A 


38 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 


1.29.11 


1.25.2 n.), have fires lit on both sides, and burn himself up. 
16 ‘That is wrong,’ says Harlta; 17 for anyone who kills himself or 
another man becomes a heinous sinner without a doubt (A 
1.3.25 n.). 18 What such a man should do is to live in the above 
manner* until his last breath. No rehabilitation is possible for 
such a man in this life; his sin, however, is removed. 

19 A man who has unjustly abandoned his wife should wear a 
donkey’s skin with its hairy side out and beg from seven houses, 
saying, ‘Almsfood for a man who has unjustly abandoned his 
wife!’ That should be his livelihood for six months. 

20 Women who abandon their husbands unjustly, on the other 
hand, should perform the twelve-day arduous penance (see A 
1.27.7) for the same length of time. 

21 Now, a man who has performed an abortion (A 1.19.15 n.) 
should wear the skin of a dog or a donkey with its hairy side 
O Q out ’ carr y a human skull as his drinking cup 1 and a post 
Z* y from a bed-frame as his staff, and go around proclaim- 
ing the name of his crime and saying, ‘Who will give almsfood to 
an abortionist?’ Obtaining his sustenance from a village, he 
should seek shelter in an abandoned house or at the foot of a 
tree, with the thought, ‘I am not allowed to associate with 
Aryas.’ He should live in this manner until his last breath. No 
rehabilitation is possible for such a man in this life; his sin, 
however, is removed. 

2 A man who kills unintentionally reaps the fruit of his sin, 
3 but it is greater if he does so with forethought. 4 This principle 
applies also to other sinful acts 5 and also to meritorious deeds. 

6 A Brahmin should not take a weapon into his hands even to 
examine it. 7 ‘When someone kills an assailant who is trying to 
kill him, he commits no sin; for then wrath alone confronts 
wrath’— so states a Purana (cf. B 1.18.13). 

8 Now, heinous sinners (A 1.3.25 n.) should live in a common 
settlement and, convinced that this is in keeping with the Law, 
they should officiate at each other’s sacrifices, teach each other, 
and marry each other. 9 When they father sons, they should tell 
them: ‘Go away from us, for then you will be accepted from 
amongst us as Aryas.’ 10 When a man falls from his caste, more- 
over, his virile power does not fall with him, 11 the truth of which 


39 



1.29.11 


Dharmasutras 


can be gathered from the fact that a man lacking a limb fathers a 
child possessing all the limbs. 

12 ‘That is false,’ says HarTta. 13 A wife is comparable to a curd- 
pot, 14 for if someone were to put impure milk into a curd-pot 
and mix in the curdling substance, that curd cannot be used 
for ritual purposes. In like manner, there can be no association 
with what is produced by the semen of a sordid man* (cf. B 
2.2.18-24). 

15 Sorcery and cursing make a man sordid but do not cause 
loss of caste. 16 ‘They do cause loss of caste,’ says HarTta. 

17 People guilty of sins that make them sordid should follow 
the life prescribed for sins causing loss of caste for twelve 
months, for twelve fortnights, for twelve times twelve days, for 
twelve times seven days, for twelve times three days, for twelve 
days, for seven days, for three days, or for one day. 18 In this 
manner sins that make a man sordid should be expiated in 
accordance with the way the deed was committed* (cf. B 2.2.17). 

THE BATH AT THE END OF STUDENTSHIP 

O /"V “He should bathe after learning the Veda’— that is the 
\J view of some; 2 likewise after completing the forty-eight- 
year vow. 3 ‘He should bathe after learning the Veda and com- 
pleting the vow,’ contend others. 4 One should behave towards all 
of these as towards a bath-graduate;* 5 the specific reward of 
honouring such a person depends on the degree of his diligence 
and learning. 


Observances of a Bath-Graduate 

6 Next, the observances of a bath-graduate. 7 He should cultivate 
the practice of leaving and entering a village from the east or the 
north. 8 At the time of the morning and evening twilights he 
should sit silently outside the village. 9 When there is a conflict 
between rules, what is enjoined by a vedic text prevails.* 

10 With respect to clothes, he should avoid all that are dyed, 
11 as well as those that are naturally black. 12 He should wear 
clothes that are neither shiny 13 nor, if at all possible, squalid. 


40 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 


1 . 31.14 


14 During the day he should refrain from covering his head, 
except when he voids urine or excrement. 

15 He should void urine and excrement, however, after cover- 
ing his head and spreading something on the ground * 16 He 
should avoid voiding urine or excrement in the shade; 17 but he 
may discharge urine in his own shadow. 18 He should not void 
urine or excrement wearing footgear, or on ploughed land, on a 
road, or in water . 19 Likewise, he should refrain from spitting and 
having sexual intercourse in water 20 and from voiding urine or 
excrement in front of a fire, the sun, water, a Brahmin, a cow, or 
a divine image. 21 In cleaning himself after voiding urine or 
excrement, he should avoid using stones, clods, or green 
branches that he has broken off from plants or trees. 

22 If at all possible, he should not stretch his feet toward a fire, 
water, a Brahmin, a cow, a divine image, or a door, or in the 
direction from which the wind is blowing. 

23 Now, they also quote: 



'He should eat his food facing the east, void 
excrement facing the south, discharge urine 
facing the north, and wash his feet facing the 
west. 


2 He should, moreover, void urine and excrement moving far 
away from his house in the direction of the south or the south- 
west, 3 but after sunset he should refrain from voiding urine or 
excrement outside the village or far from his house. 

4 Let him refrain from pronouncing the name of a god while 
he is impure; 5 from speaking harshly about either the gods or 
the king; 6 from touching Brahmins or cows with his feet 7 or 
even with his hand without good cause; 8 and from speaking ill 
of cows, sacrificial fees, or nubile girls . 9 He should not disclose it 
when a cow is causing damage 10 or when she is with her calf, 
unless there is a reason. 

11 When speaking of a cow that does not yield milk, he should 
not say, ‘She is not a milch-cow’, but simply say, ‘She is going to 
be a milch-cow.’ 12 Nor should he call a lucky thing ‘lucky’, but 
just call it ‘holy’ or ‘auspicious’. 13 He should not step over a 
rope to which a calf is tied 14 or pass between the posts to which 


41 



1.31.14 


Dharmasutras 


a swing is attached. 15 He should not announce, That man is 
my adversary.’ If he announces That man is my adversary’, he 
will create for himself a rival who hates him. 16 He should not 
point out a rainbow to someone by saying Took, the Indra’s 
bow!’ 17 or count flying birds (cf. G 9.19-24; B 2.6.11-19; 
Va 12.32-3). 

18 He should avoid looking at the sun as it rises or sets. 
19 During the day the sun protects creatures, and during the night, 
the moon. Therefore, on the night of the new moon he should 
try his very best to guard himself by keeping himself pure and 
chaste and by performing rites appropriate for the occasion, 
20 for on this night the sun and the moon dwell together. 

21 He should not enter a village along a hazardous path. If he 
does so, he should softly recite this verse: ‘Homage to Rudra, the 
lord of the dwelling! . . .’ or another verse addressed to Rudra. 

22 He should not give his leftovers (A 1 .3.27 n.) to someone who 
is not a Brahmin. If he does so, he should pick his teeth, place 
what he has picked from his teeth on the leftovers, and then give 
it. 

23 He should avoid giving in to anger and other such faults 
that bring suffering to creatures. 

‘A man who is engaged in teaching the Vedas should 
Z refrain from sex during the rainy season and autumn, 
2 and if he has sexual intercourse, let him not sleep with her the 
entire night. 3 While he is lying down, moreover, he should 
refrain from teaching, 4 nor should he teach sitting on the bed in 
which he sleeps. 

5 Let him not appear in public wearing a garland or anointed 
with oil. 6 At night he should always adorn himself for his wife. 
7 He should refrain from submerging his head in water; 8 from 
bathing after sunset; 9 from using seats, footwear, and tooth 
cleaners made with Palasa wood;* 10 and from boasting in the 
presence of the teacher by saying, for instance, ‘I have taken a 
fine bath.’ 

u He should keep awake until nightfall* 12 Vedic recitation is 
forbidden at night, with the exception of teaching the Law to 
pupils 13 and reciting the Veda mentally by himself. 14 Teaching 


42 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 


2.1.6 


the Veda is permitted after midnight. 15 If he gets up in the last 
watch of the night, he should not go back to sleep thinking that 
vedic recitation is forbidden.* 16 He may, if he so wishes, rest 
leaning against something* 17 or recite the Veda mentally. 

18 Let him never visit vile men or regions inhabited by such 
men, 19 as also casinos and fairs (A 1 .3. 12 n.). 20 If he has to go to 
a fair, he should leave after walking around it clockwise (A 
1.7.2 n.). 21 He should also avoid visiting cities. 

22 Neither should he elucidate a question. 23 Now, they also 
quote: 

24 When a man explains something wrongly, it 
tears up his root and sprout, his children, cattle, 
and house. This is how Death, weeping, 
explained the question put to him: ‘O Dharma- 
prahrada, not on Kumalana.’* 

25 He should avoid climbing on to a donkey-cart or climbing 
on to or descending into precarious places; 26 as also crossing a 
river by swimming;* 27 using unsafe boats; 28 cutting grass, crush- 
ing clods of earth, and spitting, without a good reason; 29 and 
anything else that is forbidden. 


BOOK TWO 

THE HOUSEHOLDER 

I 1 After marriage, the special observances of the couple liv- 
ing the household life come into force. 


Eating 

2 The man should eat at the two appointed times (A 1.25.10n.), 
3 but not so much that he is overly sated. 4 On new- and full- 
moon days,* moreover, both should fast. 5 Eating at every other 
mealtime (A 1.25. lOn.) is a genuine fast, 6 and then they may eat 
until they are quite sated. 


43 



2.1.7 


Dharmasutras 


Wedding Anniversary 

7 On the anniversary day let the couple eat whatever they like, 

8 sleep on the floor, 9 and abstain from sexual intercourse. 
10 On the following day the man should offer an oblation of 
cooked food. 11 The procedure for this offering is explained in 
the section on the new- and full-moon offerings. 12 In the world 
people require the couple to perform the above rites on every 
anniversary day.* 


Rites 

13 On whatever occasion he is required to place the sacred fire on 
the altar, he should draw three lines from west to east and three 
lines from south to north, sprinkle water on them, and kindle 
the fire . 14 He should pour out the water used for that towards the 
north or the east and draw fresh water. 

15 Their water vessels should never be empty— this is an 
observance incumbent on a couple living the household life. 


Rules of Sexual Intercourse 

16 He shall not engage in sex during the daytime. 17 When his wife 
is in season,* he must have sexual intercourse with her as 
required by his vow. 18-19 And if his wife wants it, he may have sex 
with her between the seasons as well, in accordance with the 
Brahmana passage.* 20 He should only engage in sexual inter- 
course wearing the garment reserved for approaching his wife. 
21 Let him, moreover, lie with his wife only for the duration of 
sexual intercourse; 22 after that they should lie separately 23 and 

2 afterwards take a bath. *Or else, they may cleanse the 
stains, sip some water, and sprinkle their bodies with water. 


Rebirth as Reward and Punishment 

2 People of all classes enjoy supreme and boundless happiness 
when they follow the Laws specific to them . 3 Then, upon a man’s 
return to earth, by virtue of the residue of his merits he obtains a 


44 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 2.3.9 

high birth, a beautiful body, a fine complexion, strength, intelli- 
gence, wisdom, wealth, and an inclination to follow the Law. So, 
going around like a wheel, he remains happy in both worlds. 
4 This is similar to the way the seeds of plants and trees, when 
they are sown on a well-ploughed field, increase their fruit. 

5 This example explains also the way the fruits of sins increase. 
6 When a thief or a heinous sinner (A 1.3.25 n.), whether he is a 
Brahmin, a Ksatriya, or a Vaisya, completes his sojourn in the 
next world living in an interminable hell, he is born here again— 
a Brahmin as a Candida, a Ksatriya as a Paulkasa, and a Vaisya 
as a Vaina. 7 In like manner, others, when they fall from their 
castes as a result of their sinful acts, are born as outcastes in 
wombs that are the aftermath of their sins. 


Penances for Contact with Outcastes 

8 As it is a sin to touch a Candala, so is it to speak to or to look at 
one. These are the expiations for such offences: 9 for touching, 
submerging completely in water; for speaking, speaking to a 
Brahmin; for looking, looking at the heavenly lights. 

Food 

3 Preparation of Food 1 Arya men who are pure should cook 
the food intended for the offering to All-gods. 2 The cook 
should refrain from speaking, coughing, or sneezing while 
facing the food. 3 Should he touch his hair, body, or garment, he 
should wash himself with water. 

4 Alternatively, Sudra men under the supervision of an Arya 
may do the cooking. 5 They are to follow the identical procedure 
of sipping (A 1.16.1-10), 6 with the additional requirement that 
every day they should shave the hair of their heads, bodies, and 
beards; clip their nails; 7 and bathe with their clothes on. Alter- 
natively, they may shave only on the eighth day of each fortnight 
or on new- and full-moon days. 

9 If the food has been prepared by them out of his sight, the 
householder should place it over the fire and sprinkle it with 
water. Such food, they say, is pure enough even for gods. 


45 



2.3.10 


Dharmasutras 


10 When the food has been prepared, the cook should stand 
and announce it to his master saying, ‘It is done.’ 11 The latter 
responds: ‘It is well done, this splendid food! May it never 
fail!’ 


Food Offerings 12 The burnt oblations and Bali offerings made 
with the food of the couple living a household life lead to heaven 
and prosperity. 13 While the householder is learning the ritual 
formulas to be used in them, he should sleep on the floor, 
abstain from sex, and avoid spices and salt for twelve days. 
14 While he is learning the ritual formula to be used in the final 
offering, he should fast for one day.* 

15 The ground where each Bali offering is made should be con- 
secrated. He should sweep the area with his hand, sprinkling 
water on it, put down the offering, and then sprinkle water all 
around. 

16 Using the first six ritual formulas, he should offer at each 
formula an oblation with his hand into the domestic or the 
cooking fire, 17 and as before sprinkle water all around at the 
beginning and the end. 18 In like manner, when Bali offerings are 
made together in a particular place, the sprinkling is done only 
once at the very end. 19 If there is a sauce, the offerings should be 
mixed with it. 

20 With the seventh and eighth formulas the offerings should 
be made behind the fire — the one to the north of the other — ; 
21 with the ninth formula, near the water-pot; 22 with the tenth 
and eleventh formulas, in the middle of the house— the one to 
the east of the other—; 23 and with the last four formulas,* in 

4 the north-eastern part of the house. 'With the ritual 
formula addressed to Love he makes a Bali offering near 
the bed; 2 with the formula addressed to mid-space, at the 
threshold; 3 with the next formula, at the door; 4 and with 
the formulas that follow, at the seat of Brahman.* 5 With the 
formula addressed to ancestors he should make an offering 
towards the south with his upper garment slung over his right 
shoulder and under his left arm (A 1.6.18 n.) and his hand 
turned towards the right. 6 The offering to Rudra is to be made 
towards the north in the same manner as to the gods. 7 In the 


46 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 2.4.25 

case of the last two, the sprinkling around with water is done 
separately because they follow different rules ( dharma ). 8 The 
offering thrown in the air is made reciting the last formula, and 
it is done only at night* (A 2.3.14n.). 

9 If a man makes these offerings steadfastly in the prescribed 
manner, he obtains heaven forever, as well as prosperity. 

Distribution of Food and Reception of Guests 10 Let him also give 
a portion of the food as alms. 11 He should always feed his guests 
first, 12 and then the children, the aged, the sick, and pregnant 
women. 13 The master and mistress should never rebuff anyone 
who comes asking for food at the proper time. 

14 If there is no food, then a place on the floor, 
some water and straw, and a pleasant wel- 
come— these are never wanting in the house of 
a good man. 

15 A couple who acts this way wins a world without end. 

16 Let him give water and a seat to a Brahmin who has not 
studied the Veda but not rise up to greet him. 17 If the man 
deserves to be greeted, he may rise up to greet him. 18 Neither 
should he rise to greet a Ksatriya or a Vaisya. 19 When a Sudra 
comes as a guest, he should get him to do some work and then 
give him food. 20 Or else, his servants should bring provisions 
from the royal store and honour the Sudra as a guest. 

Rules of Eating 21 He should always wear an upper garment 
22 or, in place of that garment, wear just a cord slung over his left 
shoulder and under his right arm (A 1 .6. 18 n.). 23 He should 
sweep the place where the meal is taken, remove what has fallen 
down, sprinkle the place with water, scrape the remnants from 
the cooking pots, mix those remnants with water, and put them 
down in a clean spot towards the north as an offering for Rudra. 
In this way the house becomes auspicious. 


The Teacher and the Annual Course of Study 

24 Tradition says that only a Brahmin can be a teacher. 25 In times 
of adversity a Brahmin may study under a Ksatriya or a Vaisya 


47 



2.4.26 


Dharmasutras 


26 and walk behind him. 27 But after that time the Brahmin shall 
walk ahead. 

5 1 After commencing the annual study of all the Vedas and 
the Upanisads, vedic recitation is suspended for that day. 
2 After completing the vedic study he should not go away 
immediately. 3 If he is in a hurry to leave, he should do his private 
vedic recitation in the presence of the teacher and then go as he 
pleases. In this manner good fortune comes to both. 

Conduct towards the Teacher 4 If a teacher comes to visit a pupil 
of his who has returned home, the pupil should go out to meet 
him, clasp his feet— and he should not wash afterwards, show- 
ing abhorrence for it— make the teacher go ahead, fetch the 
necessary articles, and pay homage to him in the prescribed 
manner. 5 When his teacher is present, he should use a seat, bed, 
food, refreshments, and clothes of lower quality than his 
teacher’s. 6 Standing up and supporting the water pot with his 
left hand, he should pour water for his teacher to sip; 7 he should 
do the same for other distinguished guests. 8 He should seek to 
follow his teacher in rising, sitting, strolling, and smiling. 9 In the 
presence of his teacher, he should refrain from voiding urine or 
excrement, breaking wind, speaking in a loud voice, laughing, 
spitting, cleaning his teeth, blowing his nose, frowning, clapping, 
and cracking his finger joints, 10 as well as from embracing or 
speaking to his wife or children tenderly. 

11 He should refrain from interrupting* his teacher 12 or his 
superiors, 13 and from calumniating and reviling any creature 
14 or some Vedas by comparing them unfavourably with another. 

15 If he fails to excel in a particular Veda, let him return to his 
teacher and, observing the vows, master it. 

Rules for a Teacher 16 These are the restrictions that a teacher 
should observe from the commencement of the annual course of 
vedic study until its completion. He should abstain from shaving 
the hair on his body, eating meat, partaking of an ancestral 
offering, and sexual intercourse. 17 He may optionally have sex 
with his wife during her season (A 2.1.17 n.). 18 In accordance 
with the vedic precepts, he should be intent on imparting vedic 


48 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 2.6.16 

knowledge to his pupils and on observing the restrictions. If he 
acts in this manner, he will bring bliss to his ancestors, to his 
descendants, and to himself. 19 When a man shuns sensual 
objects with his mind, speech, breath, sight, and hearing, objects 
to which the skin, the penis, and the stomach cling, he becomes 
fit for immortality. 

6 1 If he has any doubt about the caste or conduct of some- 
one who has come to him for the sake of the Law, he should 
kindle the sacred fire and ask him about his caste and conduct. 
2 Should the man vouch for his uprightness, the teacher should 
declare: ‘Fire, who sees, Wind, who listens, and Sun, who 
reveals— they vouch for his uprightness. May he be upright and 
free from sin’, and then set about teaching him. 


Reception of Guests 

3 A guest comes blazing like a fire. 4 When someone has studied 
one branch from each of the Vedas* in accordance with the Law, 
he is called a ‘vedic scholar’. 5 When such a man comes to the 
home of a householder devoted to the Law proper to him— and 
he comes for no other purpose than to discharge the Law— then 
he is called a ‘guest’. 6 By paying him homage, the householder 
obtains peace and heaven. 

7 He should go out to meet the guest, receive him according to 
his age, and have a seat brought for him — 8 if possible, some say, 
a seat that has many legs. 9 He should wash the guest’s feet. 
Some say that this should be done by a pair of Sudras, 10 one of 
them being employed in pouring the water. 11 He should have 
water brought for the guest; according to some, in a clay pot. 
12 If the guest is a student who has not yet returned home, there 
is no need to have water brought for him; 13 in his case, however, 
there is the additional requirement to perform the vedic recita- 
tion along with him. 14 After addressing the guest with kind 
words, the host should refresh him with drinks and food, or at a 
minimum with some water, 15 and offer him a room, a bed, a 
mattress, a pillow with a cover, and lotion. 

16 He should summon his cook and give him rice or barley to 


49 



2.6.16 


Dharmasutras 


be prepared for the guest. 17 When the food has been dished out, 
he should look at it, thinking: ‘Is this portion larger or this?’ 
18 and make sure to tell the guest: ‘Take the larger portion.’ 

19 A man should not eat the food of someone whom he hates 
or who hates him, or of someone who suspects him of a sin or 
who is suspected of a sin; 20 ‘for that man’, it is stated, ‘eats the 
other’s evil.’ 

7 1 This is the sacrifice to Prajapati that a householder offers 
incessantly — 2 the fire within the guests* is the offertorial 
fire, the fire within his house is the householder’s fire, the fire 
used for cooking is the southern fire . 3 A man who eats before his 
guest eats up the vigour, prosperity, progeny, livestock, sacri- 
fices, and good works of his family. 4 When milk is poured 
over it, that food is equal to an Agnistoma sacrifice; when ghee 
is poured over it, it is equal to an Ukthya sacrifice; when 
honey is poured over it, it is equal to an Atiratra sacrifice; 
when meat is poured over it, it is equal to a Dvadasaha sacri- 
fice; and when water is poured over it, it procures the increase of 
progeny and a long life. 5 ‘Whether you hold them dear or not,’ 
it is stated, ‘guests lead you to heaven .’ 6 When a man gives food 
in the morning, at noon, and in the evening, they constitute 
the three pressings of Soma; 7 when he rises as his guest gets up 
to leave, it constitutes the final rite of the Soma sacrifice ; 8 when 
he addresses the guest with kind words, it constitutes the praise 
of the priestly fee; 9 when he follows the guest as he leaves, it 
constitutes the Visnu steps ; 10 and when he returns, it constitutes 
the final bath* 

"That is the procedure when a guest comes to a Brahmin. 

12 If a guest comes to a king, he should have the guest treated 
with greater honour than himself. 

13 If a guest comes to a man who has set up the three ritual 
fires, he himself should go out to meet the guest and tell him: 
‘Vratya, where did you stay? Vratya, here is water. Vratya, let this 
refresh you.’ "Before offering his daily fire oblation, he should 
say softly in a hushed voice, ‘Vratya, may you obtain whatever 
you have set your mind on. Vratya, may you obtain what- 
ever you wish. Vratya, may you obtain whatever you like. 


50 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 2.8.13 

Vratya, may you obtain whatever you desire.’ 15 If a guest comes 
after he has arranged the fires but before he has made the 
offerings, he himself should go out to meet the guest and tell 
him: ‘Vratya, give me leave so I may make the offerings.’ After 
he is given leave, he should make the offerings. If he makes the 
offerings without being given leave, a Brahmana text states, he 
commits a sin. 

16 ‘By giving shelter to guests for one night,’ it is stated, ‘a 
man wins earthly worlds; with a second night he wins inter- 
mediate worlds; with a third night heavenly worlds; with a 
fourth night farthermost worlds; and by giving shelter for an 
unlimited number of nights, he wins unlimited worlds.’ 

17 If an unaccomplished man arrives saying that he is a guest, 
the householder should give him a seat, water, and food, saying: 
‘I give this to a vedic scholar.’ In this way he will gain prosperity. 

8 ' If a person has already paid his respects to a guest whom 
he has provided with accommodation, thereafter he does 
not have to rise up or get off his couch to greet him. 

2 Let him eat what is left over after he has fed his guests. 
3 He should not consume all the savoury dishes* in his house so 
that there is nothing left for his guests 4 or have exquisite dishes 
prepared for his own use. 

5 A man who is capable of reciting the Veda is worthy of 
receiving a cow and the honey mixture, 6 as also a teacher, an 
officiating priest, a bath-graduate, and a king who follows the 
Law. 7 A cow and the honey mixture are to be given to a teacher, 
an officiating priest, a father-in-law, and a king, when they visit 
after the lapse of one year. 8 The honey mixture is made by 
mixing honey into curd or milk, 9 or, when they are unavailable, 
into water. 

10 The Veda has six supplements: "ritual expositions of the 
Veda, grammar, astronomy, etymology, phonetics, and metrics. 
12 [objection] The term ‘Veda’, however, extends to the entire 
body of traditional texts dealing with rites undertaken on the 
authority of explicit vedic injunctions or meanings implicit 
in vedic statements, contradicting thereby the number given 
above. 13 [answer] Experts in exegesis, on the contrary, are in 


51 



2.8.13 


Dharmasutras 


agreement that supplementary texts should not be called by the 
name of the principal texts.* 

14 While he is taking his meal, if at some point he remembers 
that he has spurned a guest, he should stop eating and fast 

9 that day. 1 * On the next day he should satisfy that guest to his 
heart’s content and follow him as he leaves. 

2 If a guest has come in a carriage, he should follow him as far 
as the carriage; 3 others he should follow until they give him leave 
to return. 4 If a guest forgets to do so, he may turn back at the 
village boundary. 

Distribution of Food 5 He should make all creatures, down to 
dogs and Candalas, partake of the offering to All-gods. 6 Some, 
however, maintain that he should not give food to unworthy 
people. 

7 An initiated man should avoid eating the leftover food (A 
1.3.27 n.) of women or uninitiated men. 

8 He should pour water before giving any gift; 9 within the 
sacrificial enclosure, however, he should follow the vedic pre- 
scriptions. 10 The rule is that the distribution of food should be 
carried out in a way that does not cause inconvenience to 
those who receive food every day. 11 If he wants, he may 
deprive himself, his wife, or his son, but never his slaves or 
workers; 12 but he should not deprive himself to such a degree 
that he is unable to carry out his ritual duties. 13 Now, they 
also quote: 

A sage’s meal is eight mouthfuls, a forest dweller’s sixteen, a 
householder’s twenty-two, and a student’s an unlimited 
quantity. 

A man who has set up the three ritual fires, a draught ox, and 
a student— these three are able to do their tasks only if they 
eat. They cannot do them if they do not eat. (B 2.13.7-8; 
Va 6.20-1) 


1 A Rules about Begging 1 The appropriate reasons for beg- 

J. W ging are the following: to pay the teacher, to celebrate a 

marriage, to perform a sacrifice, trying to support one’s parents, 


52 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 2.10.16 

and when a worthy person would have to suspend an obligatory 
act. 2 In such a case, the householder should investigate the 
supplicant’s qualities and give according to his ability. 3 The 
gratification of the senses, however, is not an appropriate reason 
for begging, and he should pay no heed to such requests. 

Law with respect to Classes 

Lawful Occupations 4 The occupations specific to a Brahmin are 
studying, teaching, sacrificing, officiating at sacrifices, giving 
gifts, receiving gifts, inheriting, and gleaning, 5 as well as 
appropriating things that do not belong to anybody. 

6 The occupations specific to a Ksatriya are the same, with the 
exception of teaching, officiating at sacrifices, and receiving 
gifts, and the addition of meting out punishment and warfare. 

7 The occupations specific to a Vaisya are the same as those 
of a Ksatriya, with the exception of meting out punishment 
and warfare, and the addition of agriculture, cattle herding, and 
trade. 

8 A man should neither choose as his officiating priest a man 
who is not deeply versed in the Veda or haggles over his fees, 
9 nor officiate at the sacrifice of a man who does not engage in 
vedic recitation. 

10 In war, people should conduct themselves according to the 
strategies taught by those proficient in such matters. "Aryas 
condemn the killing of those who have thrown down their 
weapons, who have dishevelled hair, who fold their hands in 
supplication, or who are fleeing. 

12 When those who have been instructed in the precepts go 
astray because of the weakness of their senses, the preceptor 
should impose an expiation proportionate to the gravity of the 
infraction and in accordance with the rules. 13 If a guilty person 
refuses to follow his orders, he should send him to the king, 
14 and the king should send him to his personal priest well versed 
in Law and Government (A 1.24.23n.). 15 The latter should 
compel those who are Brahmins 16 by some forcible means, 
except corporal punishment and slavery, and reduce them into 
subjection with penitential acts. 


53 



2.11.1 


Dharmasutras 


1 1 ‘With respect to persons belonging to other classes, 
J. the king, after he has carefully examined their actions, 
may impose on them even the capital punishment. 2 If there 
is a doubt, however, he should not impose a punishment. 
‘Only after conducting a careful inquiry, including even the 
use of ordeals and interrogations, should a king proceed with 
punishment. 4 A king who behaves in this manner wins both 
worlds. 

Rules of Precedence 5 The road belongs to the king, except when 
he meets a Brahmin; 6 and when he does, it is to the Brahmin 
that the road belongs. 7 All must yield to vehicles, people carry- 
ing heavy loads, the sick, and women; 8 so also must people 
of lower classes yield to people of higher classes. 9 For their 
own well-being, moreover, all must yield to fools, outcastes, 
drunkards, and madmen. 

Rebirth 10 By following the righteous ( dharma ) path people 
belonging to a lower class advance in their subsequent birth to 
the next higher class, “whereas by following an unrighteous 
( adharma ) path people belonging to a higher class descend in 
their subsequent birth to the next lower class. 


Marriage 

Marrying a Second Wife 12 So long as his wife participates in 
religious rites and bears children, a man may not take another 
wife. “If she is wanting in either of these, he may take another 
prior to establishing his sacred fires, 14 for a wife who participates 
in the ritual establishment of his sacred fires becomes associated 
with the rites to which the establishment of the sacred fires is 
only supplementary.* 

Marriage of Daughters “He shall not give his daughter in mar- 
riage to a man belonging to the same lineage* as he, 16 or to a 
blood relation of her mother. 

Types of Marriage 17 At a ‘Brahma’ marriage, he should enquire 
about the groom’s family, virtue, learning, and health; adorn the 


54 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 


2.12.19 


girl with jewellery to the best of his ability; and give her for 
bearing children, for companionship, and for carrying out 
rituals. 18 At a ‘Seer’s’ marriage, the bridegroom should give a 
bull and a cow to the bride’s father. 19 At a ‘Divine’ marriage, 
the father should give the girl in marriage to the officiating 
priest during the course of a sacrifice. 20 When a couple in love 
engages in sexual intercourse, it is a ‘Gandharva’ marriage. 
1 ^ 'When the groom gives a bride-price to the best of 
J. Z- his ability and then marries the girl, it is a ‘Demonic’ 
marriage. 2 When a group of men violently overcomes the girl’s 
guardians and carries her away, it is a ‘Fiendish’ marriage. 

3 Among these, the three enumerated first are the most excel- 
lent, and each preceding one is better than the one that follows. 
4 The excellence of the marriage determines the excellence of the 
children that issue from it. 


Miscellaneous Rules and Penances 

5 When a Brahmin has touched some place with his hand, no one 
should step on that spot without first sprinkling it with water. 

6 Let him not pass between a fire and a Brahmin, 7 or between 
Brahmins; 8 he may optionally do so, but only after obtaining 
their permission. 

9 He should not carry fire and water at the same time 10 and 
should refrain from mixing together different sorts of fires.* 
"When a fire is being carried towards a person, he should not 
circumambulate (A 1.7.2 n.) it before it has been placed on the 
ground. 12 Let him not clasp his hand behind his back. 

13 If the sun sets while a person is asleep, he should remain 
seated that night, without eating and observing silence. The 
next morning he should bathe and then break his silence. 14 If 
the sun rises while a person is asleep, he should remain standing 
that day, without eating and observing silence. 15 According to 
some, he should control his breath until he becomes exhausted; 
16 he should do so also when he has seen a bad dream, 17 desires 
to accomplish some objective, 18 or has transgressed some other 
rule. 

19 When he has a doubt whether the result of an action is evil 


55 



2.12.19 


Dharmasutras 


or not, he should not do it; 20 the same is true when he has a 
doubt as to whether it is permitted or not to engage in vedic 
recitation. 21 Let him not speak about doubtful matters as if they 
were clear (A 1.32.22-4). 

22 A man who is asleep when the sun sets or rises, or has bad 
nails or black teeth; a man who marries a younger sister while 
her older sister remains unmarried or an older sister whose 
younger sister is already married; a man whose younger brother 
has set up the ritual fires or performed the Soma sacrifice before 
him; a man whose younger brother gets married before him; and 
a man whose younger brother receives his portion of the estate 
before him or who receives his portion of the estate before his 
older brother— all these must perform the penances for sins that 
make a man sordid (A 1.29.17-18), each succeeding offender 
performing a more severe penance than the preceding. 23 Accord- 
ing to some, after performing the required penance, he should 
get rid of the condition that necessitated it. 


Sons 

1 O 'When a man has sexual intercourse with his wife dur- 
J. ing her season (A 2.1.17 n.), a wife who belongs to the 
same class as he and has not been married before, and whom he 
has married in the manner prescribed in the scriptures— sons 
born to him have a claim to follow the occupations of his class, 

2 and neither parent may deprive such a son of his share in the 
estate. 

3 It is a sin to engage in sexual intercourse with a woman who 
has been married before, or whom he has not married with the 
proper rites, or who belongs to a different class than he; 4 and a 
son born from their union undoubtedly participates in their sin. 

To Whom Belongs a Son 5 ‘A son belongs to the man who 
fathers him’*— so states a Brahmana. 6 Now, they also quote: 

Only now, Janaka, have I become jealous about 
my wives; I was not so formerly. When we are in 
the abode of Death, they say, a son belongs to 
the man who fathered him. After he dies, the 


56 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 


2.14.8 


man who deposited the seed takes the son to 
himself in the abode of Death. People guard 
their wives, therefore, fearful of the seed of 
strangers. 

Diligently guard this progeny of yours, lest 
strangers sow their seeds in your held; in the 
transit to the next world, a son belongs to the 
man who fathered him. Otherwise a husband 
makes this progeny of his worthless for himself. 

(cf. B 2.3.34; Va 17.9) 

Law in Previous Times 7 Transgression of the Law and violence 
are seen among people of ancient times. 8 They incurred no sin on 
account of their extraordinary power. 9 A man of later times who, 
observing what they did, does the same, perishes (cf. G 1 .3-4). 

10 The custom of donating or selling one’s children is not re- 
cognized as legitimate. 11 It is said in the Veda that at the time of 
marriage the groom should voluntarily give a gift to the bride’s 
father in order to fulfil the Law: Therefore, the groom should 
give one hundred cows together with a chariot to the bride’s 
father. The latter should repudiate that gift.’ The term ‘sale’ used 
in connection with this rite is only a figure of speech, for their 
union is brought about through the Law (cf. PMS 6.1.15). 

Inheritance 12 After gratifying the eldest with a choice portion 
1 A of wealth, 'he should, while he is still alive, divide his 
J. l T estate equally among his sons, excluding those who are 
impotent, mad, or fallen from their caste. 2 If there are no sons, 
the closest relative belonging to the same ancestry* as the 
deceased takes his inheritance. 3 If there are no relatives belong- 
ing to the same ancestry, his teacher or, if there is no teacher, 
his student should take the inheritance and use it to perform 
rituals for the benefit of the deceased. 4 Alternatively, the 
daughter 5 or, if none of these is available, the king should take 
the inheritance. 

"According to some, the eldest son inherits the entire estate. 
7 In some regions gold, black cattle, and black produce of the 
earth* belong to the eldest son. 8 The chariot and the household 


57 



2.14.8 


Dharmasutras 


furniture belong to the father,* 9 while the jewellery and the 
money given by her relatives belong to the mother, maintain 
others. 10 That* is forbidden by the scriptures, "for in the Veda 
we find this statement, which makes no special allowance, 
‘Manu divided his estate among his sons’ (TS 3. 1.9. 4). 
12 [objection] But we also find in the Veda the statement that 
posits a single heir, ‘Therefore, they invest the eldest son with 
wealth’ (TS 2.5.2. 7). 13 [answer] Experts in exegesis, however, 
maintain that such statements are not injunctions but only 
reiterate common facts, as in the examples: ‘Among domestic 
animals, therefore, goats and sheep range together’; ‘Therefore, 
the face of a bath-graduate appears to sparkle’; and ‘Therefore, 
a billy goat and a vedic scholar display the greatest desire for a 
mate.’* 14 The reason is that all sons who live righteously are 
entitled to inherit. 15 He should, on the contrary, disinherit a son 
who uses the wealth in unrighteous ways, even if he is the eldest. 

16 There is no division of property between a husband and a 
wife, 17 because from the time of their marriage they are linked 
together in performing religious rites, 18 as also in receiving the 
rewards of their meritorious deeds 19 and in acquiring wealth; 
20 for while the husband is away people do not consider it a theft 
for the wife to make a gift when the occasion demands. 


Family and Regional Customs 



'The above principle resolves issues relating to customs 
of regions and families.* 


Observances at the Death of a Relative 

2 Blood relations of the mother and relations of the father up to 
the sixth degree (A 2. 14.2 n.), or as far back as the relationship is 
known— when any of these dies, one should bathe, unless the 
deceased is a child less than one year old, 3 in which case only its 
parents 4 and those who carry the corpse need to bathe. 

5 At the death of a wife or a principal elder,* people should 
fast from the time of death until the same time the next day 6 and 
display the signs of mourning: 7 the mourners should dishevel 


58 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 


2.16.1 


and throw dust on their hair, wear a single garment, face the 
south, submerge themselves once in the water, come out of the 
water, and sit down. 8 They should repeat this three times. 9 They 
should pour out water in such a way that the deceased recog- 
nizes it, then return to the village without looking back, and do 
whatever else the women ask them to do.* 10 Some prescribe 
these same observances also at the death of other relatives. 

Ritual Food Offerings 11 At all rituals one should feed indi- 
viduals who are upright and learned in the Vedas. 12 He should 
offer gifts in proper places, at appropriate times, on the occasion 
of purificatory rites, and to proper recipients. 

13 He should not eat food from which a portion has not been 
first offered in the fire or given to a guest. 14 Food containing 
spices or salt cannot be used for a burnt offering, 15 as also when 
it is mixed with some other inferior food. 16 When he offers a 
burnt offering of food unfit to be offered, he should take out 
some hot ashes from the northern side of the fire and offer it in 
those ashes. In this way the offering takes place, but it is not 
offered in the fire. 

17 A woman should not make an offering in the fire, 18 nor 
should a man who has not been initiated. 

Impurity of Children 19 Children do not become impure until the 
first feeding with solid food has taken place; 20 according to 
some, until they have completed one year; 21 or until they are able 
to distinguish the cardinal points; 22 or until they have under- 
gone initiation, which is the superior position, 23 for it is through 
this that they come under the jurisdiction of the scriptures. 
24 This last view is the authoritative one, 25 and it is the traditional 
teaching.* 


Ancestral Offerings 

1 S' 1 In ancient times gods and men used to live together in 
J. V/ this world. Then the gods went to heaven by performing 
rites, while men were left behind.* Those among them who per- 
form rites in the same manner get to dwell in that world together 
with the gods and Brahman. For this purpose Manu proclaimed 


59 



2.16.1 


Dharmasutras 


this rite bearing the name ‘Ancestral Offering’; 2 he did that also 
for the prosperity of the people. 3 In this rite the ancestors are 
the deity to whom the offering is made, while the Brahmins 
stand in the place of the offertorial fire.* 

Time 4 It is to be offered every month. 5 An afternoon in the 
fortnight of the waning moon is preferable, 6 as also the last days 
of the fortnight of the waning moon. 

7 No matter what day of the fortnight of the waning moon it is 
offered, it gives delight to the ancestors. The specific reward 
earned by the performer, however, depends on the time that he 
offers it. 8 If he offers it on the first day, his children will turn out 
to be mostly girls; 9 on the second day, his children will not turn 
out to be thieves; 10 on the third day, his children will be eminent 
in vedic knowledge; 11 on the fourth day, he will become rich in 
small animals; 12 on the fifth day, his children will turn out to be 
boys, and he will have a lot of offspring and not die childless; 

13 on the sixth day, he will be adept at travelling and gambling; 

14 on the seventh day, he will be successful in agriculture; 15 on the 
eighth day, he will become prosperous; 16 on the ninth day, he 
will acquire one-hoofed animals; 17 on the tenth day, he will be 
successful in business; 18 on the eleventh day, he will acquire iron, 
tin, and lead; 19 on the twelfth day, he will become rich in cattle; 
20 on the thirteenth day, he will have many sons and friends, and 
his children will be beautiful but die young; 21 on the fourteenth 
day, he will be successful in battle; 22 and on the fifteenth day, he 
will become prosperous. 


Types of Food 23 The materials used in this rite are sesame and 
beans, rice and barley, water, roots, and fruits. 24 When the food 
is made greasy (cf. A 2.19.17-20), however, the gratification 
it gives the ancestors is more ample and lasts longer, 25 as 
also when one gives righteously ( dharma ) acquired wealth to a 
worthy person. 26 With cow’s meat their gratification lasts 
for a year, 27 and even longer than that with buffalo meat. 28 This 
rule makes clear that the meat of domestic and wild animals 

n is fit to be offered. 'With the meat of a rhinoceros 
offered on a rhinoceros skin, their gratification lasts an 


60 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 2. 1 7.2 1 

unlimited time, 2 as also with the flesh of the Satabali fish 3 and 
the Vardhranasa crane. 

Quality of Invitees 4 Pure and with a composed mind and firm 
resolve, he should feed Brahmins well versed in the Vedas, 
Brahmins who are not related to him by blood or lineage, or by a 
relationship established by sacrifice or pupillage.* 5 But if out- 
siders lack the required qualities, he should feed a man who 
possesses them, be it his own full brother. 6 This rule clarifies the 
issue also with respect to pupils. 

7 Now, they also quote: 

8 Feeding-one-another is the name of alms- 
food given to ghouls. It reaches neither ances- 
tors nor gods. Bereft of merit, it wanders in this 
very world, like a cow, her calf dead, wandering 
among the corrals. 

9 The meaning is: gifts of food that are eaten by one another, 
going from one house to the other, perish in this very world. 
10 Among those possessing equal qualities, an older person is 
better, as also a poor person who desires to attend. 

Procedure 11 On the day before the rite he issues the invitations 
to the Brahmins, 12 and the next day he issues a second invita- 
tion. 13 The third invitation consists of summoning them. 
14 Some assert that everything at an ancestral offering is repeated 
three times: 15 everything is repeated a second and a third time 
exactly as it was done the first time. 

16 After all the offerings have been made, he should cut off 
portions from all and eat a tiny lump of the remainder in the 
prescribed manner. 17 It is the custom of northerners, however, 
to pour water taken from the water pot into the hands of the 
seated Brahmins (see p. xxvii). 

18 He addresses them: ‘Let me take out some food. Let me 
offer it in the fire.’ 19 ‘Take it out as you wish. Offer it in the fire as 
you wish.’ After he has been given leave in this manner, he 
should take it out and offer it in the fire. 

20 Letting dogs or degraded people (A 1.3.25 n.) look at an 
ancestral offering is condemned. 21 A leper, a bald man, an 


61 



2.17.21 


Dharmasutras 


adulterer, and a son of a Brahmin soldier or of a Sudra by a 
Brahmin woman— these, when they eat at an ancestral offering, 
defile those alongside whom they eat.* 22 A man who knows the 
three ‘Honey’ verses, a man who knows the Trisuparna, an 
expert in the three Naciketa fire altars, an expert in the four 
types of sacrifices, a man who maintains the five sacred fires,* 
a man who sings the Jyestha Samans, a man who recites the 
Veda, a son of a vedic savant, and a vedic scholar— these, when 
they eat at an ancestral offering, purify those alongside whom 
they eat. 

23 An ancestral offering should not be performed after night- 
fall, 24 and once it is started the performer should not eat until it 
is completed; 25 the only exception being when there is a lunar 
eclipse.* 

1 Q Prohibitions 'He should abstain from the following: 

J. O butter, butter-milk, oil-cake, honey, meat , 2 black grain, 
food given by Sudras or by others whose food one is forbidden 
to eat , 3 food unfit for sacrifice, lying, anger, and whatever would 
provoke someone to anger. From these twelve a man should 
abstain, if he desires a good memory, fame, intelligence, heaven, 
and prosperity. 

4 Wrapping a cloth around himself from navel to knees, he 
should bathe at dawn, noon, and dusk; live on uncooked food; 
never seek a shady spot; and remain standing during the day and 
seated at night. He should keep this vow for a year. This is said 
to be equal to the forty-eight-year vow.* 

Daily Ancestral Offering 5 Next, the daily ancestral offering. 
6 Men who are upright should cook the food at a clean spot 
outside the village . 7 New vessels are used for this purpose , 8 both 
the vessels in which the food is cooked and those out of which it 
is eaten. 9 And he should give them away to those who have 
partaken of the meal. 10 He should feed only individuals who 
possess the required qualities "and not give any leftover food to 
anyone who does not possess the same qualities. 12 He should do 
this for a year. 13 The last of these offerings should be made with 
the meat of a red goat. 14 He should have a screened altar con- 


62 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 


2.20.1 


structed 15 and feed the Brahmins on its northern side. 16 They 
point out that in this way he sees both the Brahmins eating and 
his ancestors gathered at the altar.* 17 Thereafter, he may either 
continue to do it or stop, 18 for the ancestors let him know that 
the ancestral offering has satisfied them. 

Rite for Prosperity 19 A man who wants to be prosperous should, 
1 O on the day of the constellation Tisya,* 'get some white 
J. y mustard seeds made into powder, rub it on his hands, 
feet, face, and ears, and eat it. Then, if there is no strong wind, 
he should sit on a seat— the first preference is that it be the skin 
of a billy goat— and eat in silence facing the south. 2 They point 
out, however, that when a man eats facing in that direction his 
mother’s life is shortened. "The vessel for eating is made of 
copper, with its centre gilded with gold, 4 and no one else should 
eat from it. 5 He should make a lump small enough to be swal- 
lowed 6 without dropping any fragments on the ground. 7 Then, 
without keeping the bowl down 8 or after putting it down, 9 he 
should swallow the whole lump by pushing it into the mouth 
with his thumb, 10 not making any sound with his mouth "or 
shaking his hand. 12 After he has sipped water, he should keep his 
hands raised so long as they are dripping 13 and then hold them 
over the fire. 14 During the day, moreover, he should not eat any- 
thing besides roots and fruits 15 and avoid sacrificial milk-rice or 
food offered to gods or ancestors. 16 He should eat wearing his 
upper garment over his left shoulder and under his right arm (A 
1.6.18 n.). 

Monthly Ancestral Offering 17 The obligatory ancestral offering, 
however, should be made only with greasy food. 18 The first 
alternative is to use ghee and meat, 19 but when these are unavail- 
able sesame oil and vegetables may be used. 20 During the con- 
stellation Magha (A 2.18. 19n.), moreover, he should use a 
greater amount of ghee when feeding Brahmins according to the 
rules of ancestral offerings. 



'At a monthly ancestral offering he should use one 
measure each* of sesame seeds in whatever manner he is 


63 



2.20.1 


Dharmasutras 


able. 2 He should feed only individuals who possess the required 
qualities, and not give any leftover food to anyone who does not 
possess the same qualities. 

Rite for Prosperity 3 A man who wants to be prosperous should 
fast for at least one night during a fortnight of the waxing moon 
falling within the half-year when the sun moves north; on a day 
of the constellation Tisya (A 2.18.19 n.) prepare a milk-rice 
oblation; make an offering of that in the fire to the Great King;* 
feed a Brahmin with that milk-rice mixed with ghee; and get him 
to proclaim success with a formula signifying prosperity. 

4 He should repeat this every day until the next Tisya day. 

5 During the second Tisya cycle he should feed two Brahmins, 

6 and during the third, three Brahmins. 7 By increasing the 
number in this manner for a whole year, 8 he will attain great 
prosperity. 9 The fast takes place only at the very beginning. 

Miscellaneous Rules 10 He should refrain from eating foods 
whose essence has been extracted (G 9.58); “standing on ashes 
or grain husks; “washing the feet by rubbing one foot with the 
other; placing one foot on the other; “swinging the feet; “plac- 
ing one foot over the other knee; “making noises by striking 
the nails against each other; “cracking the finger joints without 
a good reason; 17 and other acts that are forbidden. 

18 He should be a man who applies himself to acquiring 
wealth in righteous ( dharma ) ways, “distributes it to worthy 
people, 20 gives not to unworthy people if they pose no threat to 
him, 21 conciliates people, 22 and enjoys pleasures that are not 
forbidden by the Law. 23 In this manner he wins both worlds. 

ORDERS OF LIFE 

^ 1 ‘There are four orders of life:* the householder’s life, 
Z* J. living at the teacher’s house, the life of a sage, and that 
of a forest hermit. 2 If a man remains steadfast in any of these, 
he attains bliss. 3 A common prerequisite for all is to live at the 
teacher’s house following one’s initiation, 4 and all are required 
not to abandon vedic learning. 5 After he has learnt the rites, he 
may undertake the order that he prefers. 


64 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 

Student 


2.22.4 


6 Following the rules of a novice student,* a student should 
serve his teacher until death, leaving his body in his teacher’s 
house. 


Wandering Ascetic 

7 Next, the wandering ascetic. 8 From that very state,* remaining 
chaste, he goes forth. 9 With regard to him they admonish: 

10 Fie should live as a silent sage, without fire or 
house, without shelter or protection. 

Speaking only when he is engaged in private vedic recitation and 
obtaining food from a village to sustain himself, he should live 
without any concern for this world or the next. 11 Discarded 
clothes are prescribed for him. 12 Some say that he should go 
completely naked. 13 Abandoning truth and falsehood, pleasure 
and pain, the Vedas, this world and the next, he should seek the 
Self. 14 When he gains insight, he attains bliss. 

15 But that is contradicted by the scriptures. 16 If a man attains 
bliss when he gains insight, moreover, he should not feel pain in 
this very world. 17 This clarifies what will be said later on .* 


Forest Hermit 

18 Next, the forest hermit. 19 From that very state (A 2.21.8n.), 
remaining chaste, he goes forth. 20 With regard to him they 
admonish: 

21 He should live as a silent sage with a single 
fire, but without house, shelter, or protection. 


Let him speak only when he is engaged in private vedic recita- 
tion. ‘Clothes made of materials from the wild are 


22 


prescribed for him. 

2 Thereafter, he should roam about, living on roots, fruits, 
leaves, and grasses, 3 and finally on what he happens to find lying 
about. 4 After that he should sustain himself on water, air, 


65 



2.22.4 


Dharmasutras 


and space. 5 Among these, each subsequent pursuit is more 
exceptional in terms of its reward. 

6 Now, some teach an orderly sequence limited to the forest 
hermit . 7 After completing his vedic studies, a man should marry 
a wife, set up the sacred fires, and begin to perform the rites 
taught in the Vedas, at a minimum the Soma sacrifice . 8 Then he 
should build a dwelling outside the village and live there either 
with his wife, children, and sacred fires, 9 or alone. 10 He should 
live by gleaning 11 and from that time onwards never accept gifts. 
12 Only after he has bathed should he offer oblations in the fire. 
13 He should enter the water slowly and bathe facing the sun, 
without splashing. 14 This procedure of bathing is applicable to 
all. 

15 Some say that he should prepare two sets of utensils for 
cooking and eating, as well as two sets of knives, axes, sickles, 
and mallets. 16 He should give one* of the two sets, take the 
other, and set out to the wilderness. 17 From then on he should 
use only wild produce to offer fire sacrifices, to sustain himself, 
to attend to guests, and to clothe himself. 18 He should use rice 
porridge in rites that call for cakes. 19 And he should recite every- 
thing, including his private vedic recitation, in an inaudible 
voice, 20 never permitting wild animals to hear him . 21 He should 
have a shelter only for his sacred fires , 22 while he himself lives in 
the open 23 sitting and sleeping on the bare ground.* 24 When he 
has obtained a new stock of grain, he should get rid of the old. 

^ Q 1 Alternatively, if he desires greater severity, he should 
^ gather food with his bowl each and every day both in the 
morning and in the evening . 2 Thereafter, he should roam about, 
living on roots, fruits, leaves, and grasses, and finally on what he 
happens to find lying about. After that he should sustain himself 
on water, air, and space. Among these, each subsequent pursuit 
is more exceptional in terms of its reward. 


Superiority among Orders 

3 [view of opponents] Now, they quote a couple of verses 
from a Purana: 


66 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 


2.24.7 


4 The eighty thousand seers who desired off- 
spring went along the sun’s southern course. 

They obtained cremation grounds. 

5 The eighty thousand seers who did not desire 
offspring went along the sun’s northern course. 

They, indeed, attained immortality. 

6 Such is the praise of those who live celibate lives. 7 And further, 
these are men who make whatever they want happen by their 
mere thought, 8 for example, producing rain, bestowing children, 
seeing what is far away, moving as quickly as thought, and others 
of this sort. 9 Therefore, on the basis of vedic testimony and 
visible results, some claim that these orders of life are superior. 

10 [author’s view] It is the firm view of the most eminent 
scholars of the triple Veda, however, that the Vedas are the 
ultimate authority. The rites using rice, barley, animals, ghee, 
milk, and potsherds and involving the participation of the wife 
that are prescribed in the Vedas must be performed with the 
loud and soft recitation of ritual formulas, they hold, and any 
practice opposed to those rites is devoid of authority. "With 
regard to the statement about ‘cremation grounds’, on the other 
hand, that passage enjoins the funerary rites at the death of 
those who have performed many sacrifices. 12 Thereafter, the 
Vedas declare, they obtain an eternal reward designated by the 
term ‘heaven’. 

0 /I 1 ^ le scriptures declare, moreover, that immortality con- 
sists of offspring: ‘In your offspring you are born again. 
That, O mortal, is your immortality’ (TB 1.5. 5. 6). further- 
more, we can see with our very eyes that the son is a distinct 
clone of the father himself. One can even see that they are iden- 
tical, only the bodies are distinct. 3 And the sons, as they con- 
tinue to perform the prescribed rites, increase the fame and 
heavenly life of their departed ancestors. 4 Each subsequent gen- 
eration does the same for those that preceded it. 5 They dwell in 
heaven until the dissolution of creation. 6 ‘At the new creation, 
they serve as the seed’, says the Bhavisyat Purana. 7 And there is 
also the declaration of Prajapati: 


67 



2.24.8 


Dharmasutras 


8 Study of the triple Veda, studentship, pro- 
creation, faith, austerity, sacrifice, giving 
gifts— those who perform these dwell with us. 

Anyone who praises other things becomes dust 
and perishes. 

9 If any of the children commit sins, they alone perish, like the 
leaf of a tree. They do not harm their ancestors. 10 As in this 
world a parent is not tied to the actions of his children, so in the 
next world he is not tied to the results of their actions. 11 This 
principle is illustrated by the following fact. 12 This creation is the 
work of Prajapati and the seers. 13 We see the bodies of those 
seers who have done meritorious deeds shining brilliantly far 
above.* 

14 It may well be that someone, through a portion of his 
accumulated merits or by means of austerity, attains a limited 
world together with his body and even makes what he wants 
happen by his mere thought. But that is no reason to make one 
order of life superior to another. 


KING 


^ ^ 1 We have explained the general and specific Laws of all 
the classes. We will now present specifically the Laws 
pertaining to a king. 


Royal Fort 

2 He should have a residence and a fort constructed, with their 
gates facing the south. 3 The residence is within the fort, 4 and 
in front of the residence is the lodge, which is known as the 
Audience Hall. 5 To the south of the fort is the assembly hall 
with doors on both the south and the north sides so that one 
can see what goes on within and without. 

Duties 6 In every one of these buildings fires should be kept 
burning continuously, 7 and every day offerings should be made 
in these fires in the same manner as at the domestic ritual. 


68 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 


2.26.8 


8 The king should put up in the lodge at least those guests who 
are vedic scholars. 9 They should be given accommodation, as 
well as beds, food, and drink, in accordance with their 
distinction. 

10 The king should not live more opulently than his elders (A 
1.6.32 n.) and ministers. 11 And in his realm no one should suffer 
from hunger, illness, cold, or heat, either through want or by 
design. 

Gambling 12 In the middle of the assembly hall he should erect 
a gaming table, sprinkle it with water, and place there dice— 
they should be in pairs, of Vibhrtaka seeds,* and in adequate 
numbers. 13 Aryas who are upright and honest may gamble 
there. 

14 Weapons contests, dancing, singing, and concerts should 
not be held without the presence of royal officials. 


Protection of Subjects 

15 A king provides protection only when there is no fear of 
^ /T thieves in the villages or wild tracts of his realm. 1 If 
Z^\J he gives land and wealth to Brahmins according to 
their worth without depriving his own dependants, he will win 
eternal worlds. 2 When a king is killed attempting to recover 
property stolen from Brahmins, they call it a sacrifice at which 
his own body serves as the sacrificial post and an unlimited 
amount is given as the sacrificial fee. 3 This explanation covers 
also other heroes who sacrifice their lives fighting for a just 
cause. 

Appointment of Security Officers 4 To protect his subjects he 
should appoint over villages and towns Aryas who are upright 
and honest. 5 Their subordinates should also be men possessing 
the very same qualities. 6 They must protect a town from thieves 
up to nine miles* on all sides, 7 and a village up to a couple of 
miles.* 8 They must be forced to make good anything that is 
stolen within those limits. 


69 



2.26.9 


Dharmasutras 


Collection of Taxes 

9 The king should get them to collect lawful taxes. 10 The follow- 
ing persons are exempt from taxes: vedic scholars, "women of 
all classes, 12 pre-pubescent boys, "'those who are living in some- 
one’s house for the purpose of study, 14 ascetics devoted to the 
Law, 15 Sudras who are personal servants, 16 people who are 
blind, dumb, deaf, and sick, 17 and those who are excluded from 
acquiring property. 


Sexual Misconduct 


Rape 18 If a young man all primped up barges accidentally into 
the presence of another man’s wife or a young woman, he 
should be verbally reprimanded; 19 but if he does so deliberately 
and with a malicious intent, he should be punished. 20 If inter- 
course took place, his penis should be cut off along with the 
testicles. 21 If it was with a young woman, he should be banished 
and his property confiscated. 22 Thereafter, the king should 
support those women 23 and from then onwards guard them 
from sexual congress. 24 If they agree to perform the expiation, 
however, he should hand them over to their respective guard- 
^ ^7 ians. 1 Once the expiation has been performed, the 
Z* / guardians should treat them as before, for their relation- 
ship is based on the Law. 


Levirate 2 ‘A man should not introduce to an outsider the 
woman who has assumed his lineage (A 2. 11.1 5 n.), 3 for a wife is 
given to the family’ — so they admonish. 4 That is now forbidden 
because of the weakness of the flesh, 5 for with respect to the 
husband all are equally outsiders. 6 When this is violated, both 
husband and wife will undoubtedly end up in hell, 7 for the hap- 
piness resulting from following this restriction is far greater than 
that resulting from children obtained by following that custom. 

Adultery 8 An Arya who has sex with a Sudra woman should be 
banished, 9 while a Sudra who has sex with an Arya woman 
should be executed, 10 and that wife of his should be emaciated. 


70 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 


2.28.11 


11 If a man has sex once with a married woman of his own class, 
they say, the punishment is one-quarter of what is prescribed for 
one fallen from his caste. 12 Each time he repeats it, likewise, one- 
quarter is added, 13 and the fourth time he gets the full 
punishment. 


Crime and Punishment 

14 If a Sudra hurls abusive words at a virtuous Arya, his tongue 
shall be cut out. 15 If, while he is speaking, walking on the road, 
lying in bed, or occupying a seat, a Sudra pretends to be equal to 
Aryas, he should be flogged. 16 If a Sudra kills a man, steals, or 
appropriates land, he should be executed and his property 
confiscated. 

17 If a Brahmin is guilty of these crimes, however, he should be 
blindfolded.* ^Alternatively, those who transgress their specific 
duties should be kept in secret confinement 19 until they relent. 
20 If they do not relent, they should be banished. 21 A teacher, an 
officiating priest, a bath-graduate, and the king may save him 
from punishment, except in the case of a capital crime. 

O Q 'If someone takes a piece of land on lease and it pro- 
zL O duces no harvest because he puts no effort into it, then, 
if he has the means, he should be made to pay the landowner 
what would have been his due. 2 An indentured farmhand who 
quits working should be flogged; 3 so also a herdsman, 4 and his 
flock should be impounded . 5 If cattle escape from the corral and 
begin to eat the crops, one may emaciate them but not abuse 
them. 6 If someone takes charge of cattle and lets them die or 
become lost, he should pay restitution to the owners. 

7 If someone sees cattle that have been carelessly allowed to 
wander into the wilderness, he should bring them to the village 
and return them to their owners. 8 If such negligence happens 
again, he should return them after first impounding them , 9 and 
thereafter he should ignore them. 

10 If someone unknowingly takes the property of another, 
such as fuel, water, roots, flowers, fruits, perfume, fodder, or 
vegetables, he should be verbally reprimanded. 11 If he does so 


71 



2.28.11 


Dharmasutras 


knowingly, his clothes should be taken away. 12 Even if it is done 
intentionally, no one should be punished for taking food to save 
his life. 

13 If the king fails to inflict punishment when it is called for, 
O Q t ^ ie s * n reco ^ s u P on him. 'Those who direct, those who 
Z* y consent, and those who carry out an act share in its fruit, 
whether it is heaven or hell, 2 but those who are more closely 
involved with the act receive a larger share of the fruit. 


Marital Property 

'The husband and wife have joint control over their property. 
4 With their consent and for their benefit, others also may tend 
to it. 


Judicial Process 

5 Men who are learned, of good family, elderly, wise, and 
unwavering in their duties shall adjudicate lawsuits , 6 in doubtful 
cases investigating the matter by examining the evidence and 
using ordeals. 

Witnesses 7 In the morning of an auspicious day and in the 
presence of a blazing fire, water, and the king, both sides should 
be asked to present their case and, with everyone’s approval, the 
chief witness should answer the questions truthfully . 8 Should he 
answer untruthfully, the king should punish him; 9 and in add- 
ition hell awaits him after death. 10 Should he answer truthfully, 
he will go to heaven and all beings will sing his praises. 

CONCLUSION OF THE STUDY OF UAW 

"The knowledge found among women and Sudras forms 
the conclusion, 12 and they point out that it is a subsidiary 
component of the Atharva Veda. 

13 It is difficult to gain mastery of the Law by means of scrip- 
tures alone, but by acting according to the markers one can 
master it. 14 And the markers in this case are as follows: he 


72 



Dharmasutra of Apastamba 2.29. 1 5 

should model his conduct after that which is unanimously 
approved in all regions by Aryas who have been properly 
trained, who are elderly and self-possessed, and who are neither 
greedy nor deceitful. In this way he will win both worlds (= A 
1.20.8-9; cf. TU 1.11.4). 

15 According to some, one should learn the remaining Laws 
from women and people of all classes. 

That concludes the Apastamba Dharmasutra. 


73 



The Dharmasutra of Gautama 


The Dharmasutra of Gautama has come down as a separate 
treatise without any connection to a larger Kalpasutra. Tradi- 
tionally, Gautama has been associated with the Samaveda. This 
connection is supported, among other factors, by the fact that 
the twenty-sixth chapter on penance is taken from the 
Samavidhana Brahmana belonging to the Samaveda. The 
Dharmasutra does not contain the prasna (Book) division found 
in the texts forming part of the Kalpasutras. Its division into 
chapters resembles the internal division of the later Smrtis. 
There are two extant commentaries on Gautama by Maskarin 
and Haradatta. Maskarin can be assigned to 900-1000 ce and 
is therefore older than Haradatta, who also commented on 
Apastamba. It appears that Haradatta has made extensive 
use of Maskarin’s commentary, a usage that would amount to 
plagiarism if it was done today. 


CONTENTS 


1.1-4 

SOURCES OF LAW 
THE STUDENT 

1.5-14 

Time of Initiation 
A Student's Code of Conduct 

1.15-27 

Insignia 

1.28-45 

Purification 

1.46-61 

Rules of Study 

2.1-5 

Uninitiated Children 

2.6-22 

General Rules 

2.23-34 

Conduct towards the Teacher 

2.35M1 

Food 

2.42-4 

Punishment 

2.45-51 

Conclusion of Study 
ORDERS OF LIFE 

3.1-3 

Argument of Opponents 

3.4-10 

Student 

3.11-25 

Mendicant 


74 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


3.26-35 

Anchorite 

3.36 

Author’s Judgement 
THE HOUSEHOLDER 

4.1-5 

Marriage 

4.6-15 

Types of Marriage 

4.16-28 

Mixed Classes 

4.29-33 

Sons 

5.1-2 

Rules of Sexual Intercourse 

5.3-17 

Ritual Duties 

5.18-24 

Gifts 

5.25M5 

Guests 

6.1-19 

Salutation 

6.20-2 

Rules of Precedence 

7.1-25 

Times of Adversity 

8.1-13 

The Brahmin and the King 

8.14-21 

Sacramentary Rites 

8.22-5 

Virtues 

9.1-74 

THE BATH-GRADUATE 

10.1 

OCCUPATIONS OF THE FOUR ' 

10.2-6 

Brahmin 

10.7-12 

King and Ksatriya 

10.13-23 

War 

10.24-35 

Taxes 

10.36M8 

Ownership 

10.49-66 

Vaisya and Sudra 

11.1-18 

THE KING 

11.19-26 

The Judicial Process 

11.27-32 

Punishment 
Criminal and Civil Law 

12.1-14 

Abuse and Assault 

12.15-18 

Theft 

12.19-28 

Property Damage 

12.29-36 

Rates of Interest 

12.37-9 

Ownership 

12.40-2 

Debts 

12.43-52 

Punishment 

13.1-31 

Witnesses 

IMPURITY 

14.1-22 

Death Impurity 

14.23-9 

Contact with a Corpse 

14.30-3 

Contact with Impure Persons 


75 



Dharmasutras 


14.34M3 

Libations to the Deceased 

14.44-6 

Immediate Purification 

15.1-5 

ANCESTRAL OFFERINGS 

15.6-14 

Quality of Invitees 

15.15 

Types of Food 

15.16-21 

Unfit Invitees 

15.22-3 

Sexual Abstinence 

15.24-9 

Pollution and Remedies 

16.1-4 

ANNUAL COURSE OF STUDY 

16.5M9 

Suspension of Vedic Recitation 
FOOD 

17.1-8 

Food Transactions 

17.9-21 

Unfit Food 

17.22-38 

Forbidden Food 
WOMEN AND MARRIAGE 

18.1-3 

Duties of a Wife 

18.4-8 

Levirate 

18.9-14 

To Whom Belongs a Son 

18.15-17 

Remarriage of a Wife 

18.18-19 

Marriage of a Younger Brother 

18.20-3 

Time of Marriage for Girls 

18.24-32 

LEGITIMATE SEIZURE OF PROPERTY 

19.1 

PENANCES 

19.2-10 

Justification of Penance 

19.11-20 

General Penances 

20.1-7 

Excommunication from Caste 

20.8-9 

Contact with an Outcaste 

20.10-17 

Readmission into Caste 
Sins Causing Loss of Caste 

21.1-3 

Grievous Sins 

21.4-6 

Consequences of Falling from Caste 

21.7-8 

Expiations 

21.9 

Fall of Women 

21.10 

Sins Similar to Grievous Sins 

21.11-16 

Secondary Sins 

21.17-22 

Other Sins 

22.1 

Description of Penances 

22.2-27 

Killing Humans and Animals 

22.28-23.7 

Adultery, Drinking, and Other Sins 

23.8-13 

Incestuous Sex 

23.14-16 

Illicit Sex 


76 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


23.17-20 

Breaking the Vow of Chastity 

23.21-2 

Miscellaneous Sins 

23.23-6 

Eating Improper Food 

23.27-31 

Sins of Speech 

23.32^1 

Illicit Sex 

24.1-25.10 

Secret Penances 

26.1-25 

Arduous Penances 

27.1-18 

Lunar Penance 

28.1-17 

INHERITANCE 

28.18-20 

Appointed Daughter 

28.21 

Property of a Soilless Man 

28.22-3 

Levirate 

28.24-6 

Women’s Property 

28.27-9 

Inheritance after Partition 

28.30-1 

Estates of Coparceners 

28.32M7 

Legal Heirs 

28.48-53 

RESOLVING DOUBTS REGARDING 


77 



SOURCES OF LAW 


I 1 The source of Law is the Veda, 2 as well as the tradition (A 
2.15.25 n.) and practice of those who know the Veda. 

3 Transgression of the Law and violence are seen in great men. 
They do not constitute precedents, however, on account of the 
weakness of the men of later times (cf. A 2.13.7-9). 

4 When injunctions of equal force are in conflict with each 
other, there is an option* 

THE STUDENT 
Time of Initiation 

5 A Brahmin’s initiation shall be performed in his eighth year, 
6 or, if performed with an objective in mind, in his ninth or fifth 
year. 7 The years are counted from conception. 

8 The initiation is a second birth (A 1.1.1 6—18 n. ). 9 The teacher 
is the man from whom one receives initiation 10 or instruction in 
the Veda. 

11 A Ksatriya’s initiation shall be performed in his eleventh 
year, and a Vaisya’s in his twelfth. 

12 In the case of a Brahmin, the time for the Savitrl does not 
elapse until the sixteenth year, 13 in the case of a Ksatriya until 
the twenty-second year, 14 and in the case of a Vaisya until two 
years after that (see A 1 . 1 .28 f ). 


A Student’s Code of Conduct 

Insignia I5 Their girdles are a cord of Munja grass, a bowstring 
of Murva, or a cord of thread, respectively; 16 and their skins are 
that of a black antelope, a spotted Ruru antelope, and a billy 
goat, respectively. l7 The garments of all students, irrespective of 
class, are made of hemp, flax, tree bark, or a woollen blanket, 
18 or else of raw cotton; 19 some even allow dyed cotton— 20 dyed 


78 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


1.40 


with tree resin for a Brahmin, 21 and with madder and turmeric 
for the other two, respectively. 

22 A Brahmin’s staff is made of wood-apple or Palasa wood, 
23 and those of the other two of banyan and PTlu wood, respect- 
ively. 24 Alternatively, for all students, irrespective of class, the 
staff may be made of any wood suitable for use in a sacrifice. 
25 Staffs should be undamaged, bent in the manner of a sacri- 
ficial post,* and have their barks intact. 26 They should reach the 
crown of the head, the forehead, and the tip of the nose, respect- 
ively, for each class. 

27 Students may shave their heads completely, wear their hair 
matted, or keep just the topknot matted. 

Purification 28 If, while holding something in his hand, he hap- 
pens to become impure, he should sip water without laying it 
down.* 

29 The cleansing of things— articles made of metal, clay, 
wood, and cloth are cleaned by scrubbing, scorching, scraping, 
and washing, respectively. 30 Stone, gem, shell, and mother-of- 
pearl are cleaned in the same way as metal; 31 bone and mud, in 
the same way as wood— 32 mud also by plastering; 33 and ropes, 
wicker, and skin, in the same way as cloth. 34 Articles that have 
become extremely unclean, on the other hand, should be thrown 
away. 

35 He should commence his personal purification facing either 
the east or the north. 36 Seated on a clean spot, placing his right 
arm between his knees, and wearing his upper garment over his 
left shoulder and under his right arm (A 1.6.18n.), he should 
wash both his hands up to the wrists. Then, he should silently sip 
three or four times an amount of water sufficient to reach his 
heart (A 1.16.2n.), wipe his lips twice, sprinkle water on his feet, 
rub water on the cavities of his head,* and place his hand on the 
crown of his head. 37 After sleeping, eating, and sneezing, he 
should sip water over again. 

38 Bits of food sticking between the teeth are like the teeth 
themselves, unless they are touched with the tongue 39 or, accord- 
ing to some, until they get detached. 

40 When they get detached, a person should 
79 



1.40 


Dharmasutras 


know that he is cleansed of them by simply 
swallowing, just like saliva. 

41 Saliva spattering from the mouth does not make a man impure 
unless it falls on his body. 

42 In the case of filthy substances, purification consists in 
removing their stains and smell 43 by washing first with water 
and then with earth and water ,* 44 which is done also when urine, 
excrement, or semen falls on a person, or when one is stained 
with the remnants of food. 

45 In cases covered by vedic rules, purification is carried out in 
the manner prescribed in the Veda.* 

Rules of Study 46 Clasping the teacher’s left hand— excluding 
the thumb— with his right, the pupil should address the teacher: 
‘Teach, Sir!’ 47 Focusing his eyes and mind on the teacher, 48 the 
pupil should touch his vital organs* with Darbha grass, ^con- 
trol his breath three times for fifteen morae each, 50 and sit on a 
bed of grass with the tips of their blades pointing east . 51 The five 
Calls should begin with OM and end with ‘Truth’.* 

52 The pupil shall clasp the teacher’s feet each morning 53 and 
also when he begins and ends his vedic recitation. 54 When he is 
given permission, he should sit at the teacher’s right facing the 
east or the north. 55 And he should repeat after the teacher the 
Savitrl verse 56 when he first begins to receive instruction in 
the Veda , 57 while the syllable OM should be recited also at other 
times. 

58 If someone passes between the teacher and the pupil, this 
preparatory ceremony should be repeated. 59 If a dog, a mon- 
goose, a snake, a frog, or a cat passes between them, he should 
observe a fast for three days and spend some time away from the 
teacher’s house, “whereas if it is some other animal, he should 
control his breath and consume some ghee. 61 He shall do the 
same if he happens to recite the Veda in a cemetery. 

2 Uninitiated Children 'Before his initiation, a child may 
behave, speak, and eat as he pleases. He may not partake of 
ritual offerings and should observe chastity. He may void urine 
and excrement whenever he has the urge. 2 The set of rules 


80 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


2.24 


regarding sipping water and other rituals of purification do not 
apply to him, other than wiping, washing, and sprinkling with 
water, 3 and no one is made impure by his touch. 4 No one should 
ever employ him to make fire oblations or Bah offerings, 5 and he 
should not be made to recite the Veda, except for uttering 
‘Svadha’. 

General Rules 6 Restrictive rules come into force from the time a 
person is initiated. 7 The rule of chastity has already been given. 
8 He shall put wood into the sacred fire, beg his food, speak the 
truth, bathe— 9 only after the beard-shaving rite, according to 
some—,* 10 and perform the twilight worship outside the village. 

11 Controlling his speech, he should remain standing during 
the morning twilight worship from the time the stars are still 
visible until the sun comes into view, and remain seated during 
the evening from the time the sun is still visible until the stars 
come into view, 12 without ever gazing directly at the sun. 

13 He should abstain from the following: eating honey and 
meat; wearing perfumes and necklaces; sleeping during the day; 
applying oil and collyrium; travelling in carriages; using shoes 
and umbrellas; lust, anger, greed, perplexity, and squabbling; 
playing musical instruments; bathing and cleaning the teeth (A 
1.2.28 n.); excitement, dancing, singing, calumny, and dangers; 
14 wrapping his neck; sitting cross-legged, leaning against some- 
thing, or stretching out his feet within sight of his elders; ^spit- 
ting, laughing, yawning, and cracking his fingers; 16 looking at or 
touching a woman if there is a hint of sexual intimacy; 17 gam- 
bling, degrading services, taking what is not given, and causing 
injury to living beings; 18 uttering the names of his teacher, the 
teacher’s sons and wives, and of persons consecrated for a sacri- 
fice; 19 and speaking harsh words. 20 If he is a Brahmin, he should 
always abstain from liquor. 

21 He shall occupy a bed and seat lower than his teacher’s, get 
up before and go to bed after him, 22 and keep his tongue, arms, 
and stomach under strict control. 

Conduct towards the Teacher 23 He should utter the personal and 
lineage names (A 2. 1 1 . 1 5 n.) of his teacher with respect 24 and 
behave in the same manner towards revered people and his 


81 



2.24 


Dharmasutras 


superiors. 25 He should answer his teacher after getting up from 
his bed or seat 26 and go to him when he calls, even if he is out of 
sight. 27 If he sees his teacher standing or sitting on a lower place 
or answering the call of nature, he should get up. 28 If the teacher 
is walking, he should walk behind him, apprising him of the 
things to be done and reporting to him what has been done. 

29 Let him recite the Veda only when he is called upon to do so 

30 and apply himself to doing what is pleasing and beneficial to 
his teacher. 

31 He shall behave in the same manner towards his teacher’s 
wife and sons, 32 with the exception of eating their leftovers (A 
1.3.27 n.), assisting them with their bath or dressing, and wash- 
ing, rubbing, or clasping their feet. 33 When he returns from a 
journey, he should clasp the feet of his teacher’s wives; 34 some 
maintain that a pupil who has reached the legal age* should not 
do so in the case of young wives. 

Food 35 Almsfood may be obtained from people of all classes, 
excepting heinous sinners (A 1.3.25 n.) and outcastes. 36 The 
word ‘Madam’ should be placed at the beginning, middle, or 
end of the request, respectively, according to the class (A 1 .3.28— 
30 n.). 37 If he does not receive any elsewhere, he may beg from 
the house of his teacher, a relative, or an elder (A 1.6.32 n.), or 
from his own house; 38 let him, however, avoid having to beg 
from ones given earlier in the list. 

39 He should eat the almsfood after announcing it to his 
teacher and with his permission, 40 and, in the absence of the 
teacher, to his wife or son, or to a fellow student or a virtuous 
person. 41 Placing some water at his side, let him eat silently and 
contentedly, but without craving. 

Punishment 42 A pupil shall be disciplined without resorting to 
corporal punishment, 43 or, if that is not viable, with a slender 
rope or cane. 44 If the teacher strikes with anything else, the king 
should punish him. 

Conclusion of Study 45 To study a single Veda, he should live as a 
student for twelve years, 46 and to study all the Vedas, twelve 
years each 47 or until he has grasped them. 


82 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


3.24 


48 After completing his studies, he should present the teacher 
with a gift. 49 After he has done that or after obtaining the 
teacher’s permission, he may take the concluding bath. 

3 °The teacher is the foremost of his elders (A 1.6.32 n.); 
51 according to some, the mother. 

ORDERS OF LIFE 
Argument of Opponents 

3 ‘He* has a choice, some assert, among the orders of 
life: 2 student, householder, mendicant, or anchorite (A 
2.21.1 n.). 3 The householder is their source, because the others 
do not produce offspring. 

Student 4 Among these, the rules of a student have already been 
given (A 2.21. 6n.). 5 He shall remain subject to his teacher until 
death 6 and pray softly (A 1.15.1 n.) during any time that 
remains after attending to his teacher’s business. 7 When his 
teacher is no more, he should serve his son; 8 and if there is no 
son, an older fellow student or the sacred fire. 9 A man who 
conducts himself in this manner attains the world of Brahman 
and becomes a man who has mastered his senses. 

10 All these rules of a student apply to people in subsequent 
orders as well, so long as they are not inconsistent with the 
provisions specific to each. 

Mendicant 11 A mendicant shall live without any possessions, 
12 be chaste, 13 and remain in one place during the rainy season* 
14 Let him enter a village only to obtain almsfood 15 and go on his 
begging round late in the evening, without visiting the same 
house twice 16 and without pronouncing blessings. 17 He shall 
control his speech, sight, and actions; 18 and wear a garment to 
cover his private parts, 19 using, according to some, a discarded 
piece of cloth after washing it. 20 He should not pick any part 
of a plant or a tree unless it has fallen of itself. 21 Outside the 
rainy season, he should not spend two nights in the same village. 
22 He shall be shaven-headed or wear a topknot; 23 refrain from 
injuring seeds; 24 treat all creatures alike, whether they cause him 


83 



3.24 


Dharmasutras 


harm or treat him with kindness; 25 and not undertake ritual 
activities. 

Anchorite 26 An anchorite shall live in the forest, living on roots 
and fruits and given to austerities. 27 He kindles the sacred fire 
according to the procedure for recluses* 28 and refrains from eat- 
ing what is grown in a village. 29 He shall pay homage to gods, 
ancestors, humans, spirits, and seers 30 and entertain guests from 
all classes, except those who are proscribed. 31 He may also avail 
himself of the flesh of animals killed by predators. 32 He should 
not step on ploughed land 33 or enter a village. 34 He shall wear 
matted hair and clothes of bark or skin 35 and never eat anything 
that has been stored for more than a year. 

Author’s Judgement 

36 There is, however, only a single order of life,* the Teachers 
maintain, because the householder’s state alone is prescribed in 
express vedic texts* 

THE HOUSEHOLDER 
Marriage 

4 1 A householder should marry a wife who comes from the 
same class as he, who has not been married before, and who 
is younger than he. 2 A marriage can be contracted only between 
persons not belonging to a family with the same ancestral seer 
(A 2. 11.1 5 n.) 3 and not related within six degrees on the side of 
the legal 4 or the biological father (cf. G 28.32-3), 5 or within four 
degrees on the mother’s side. 

Types of Marriage 6 When one dresses up a girl, adorns her with 
jewellery, and gives her to a man of learning, character, and 
virtue who has relatives, it is a ‘Brahma’ marriage. 7 At a 
‘Prajapati’ marriage, the nuptial formula is ‘May you jointly 
fulfil the Law’. 8 At a ‘Seer’s’ marriage, the bridegroom should 
give a bull and a cow to the father of the girl. 9 When one adorns 
a girl with jewellery and gives her to the officiating priest within 


84 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


4.30 


the sacrificial arena, it is a ‘Divine’ marriage. 10 When a man on 
his own has intercourse with a willing woman, it is a ‘Gandharva’ 
marriage. "When a man courts the guardians of the girl with 
money, it is a ‘Demonic’ marriage. 12 When a man abducts her by 
force, it is a ‘Fiendish’ marriage. 13 When a man has intercourse 
with an unconscious girl, it is a ‘Ghoulish’ marriage. 

14 The first four types are in accordance with the Law; 15 the 
first six, according to some. 

Mixed Classes 16 Children born in keeping with the natural 
order of classes from women of the class immediately below the 
man’s are Savarnas, Ambasthas, and Ugras; from women two 
classes below the man’s, Nisadas and Dausyantas; and from 
women three classes below the man’s, Parasavas . 17 Children born 
in the reverse order of classes from women of the class immedi- 
ately above the man’s are Sutas, Magadhas, and Ayogavas; from 
women two classes above the man’s, Ksattrs and Vaidehas; and 
from women three classes above the man’s, Candidas. 

18 From men of the four classes, a Brahmin woman gives birth 
respectively to Brahmins, Sutas, Magadhas, and Candidas; 
19 from the same men, a Ksatriya woman gives birth respectively 
to Murdhavasiktas, Ksatriyas, Dhivaras, and Pulkasas; 20 from 
the same men, a Vaisya woman gives birth respectively to 
Bhrjyakanthas, Mahisyas, Vaisyas, and Vaidehas; 21 and from 
the same men, a Sudra woman gives birth respectively to 
Parasavas, Yavanas, Karanas, and Sudras. That is the opinion of 
some. 

22 By successively marrying persons of the higher or the lower 
class, in the seventh generation the offspring moves to the one or 
the other class; 23 in the fifth, according to the Teachers. 24 This 
is true also in the case of those born to parents belonging to 
different mixed classes. 

25 Children born to parents in the reverse order of classes, on 
the other hand, are outside the Law, 26 as also those born to a 
Sudra woman* 27 A child of a Sudra man from a woman of a 
different class shall be treated like an outcaste, 28 the one listed 
last being the vilest. 

Sons 29 Virtuous sons purify— 30 a son born from a ‘Seer’s’ 


85 



4.30 


Dharmasutras 


marriage purifies three ancestors; 31 a son born from a ‘Divine’ 
marriage, ten; 32 a son born from a ‘Prajapati’ marriage, also ten; 
33 while a son born from a ‘Brahma’ marriage purifies the ten 
ancestors before him and the ten descendants after him. 

5 Rules of Sexual Intercourse 'A man should have sexual 
intercourse with his wife when she is in her season (A 
2.1.17n.), 2 or at any time, except on days when it is forbidden. 


Ritual Duties 

3 He shall pay homage to gods, ancestors, humans, spirits, and 
seers. 4 Every day he shall perform his private vedic recitation, 
5 the offering of water to his ancestors, 6 and other rites, accord- 
ing to his ability. 7 Let him set up his sacred fire either on the day 
of his marriage or upon the division of the paternal estate 8 and 
perform in it his domestic rites, 9 as well as sacrifices to gods, 
ancestors, and humans, private vedic recitation, and Bah 
offerings. 

10 Fire oblations are offered to Fire, Dhanvantari, All-Gods, 
Prajapati, and Fire who makes the offering flawless. 

"Oblations are offered also to the guardian deities of the 
directions, each in his respective place— 12 to the Maruts at the 
doors to the house, 13 to the guardian deities of the house after 
entering the house, 14 to Brahman at the centre of the house, 15 to 
the waters by the water pot, 16 to space in the intermediate 
region, 17 and to night-stalkers in the evening. 


Gifts 

18 He shall give almsfood after getting the recipient to wish him 
well and pouring water. 19 The same applies to other righteous 
( dharma ) gifts. 20 A gift bears an equal reward when it is given to 
a non-Brahmin, twice as much when it is given to a Brahmin, a 
thousand times as much when it is given to a vedic scholar, and 
an infinite reward when it is given to one who has mastered the 
entire Veda. 21 Goods should be distributed outside the sacri- 
ficial arena to those begging in order to pay the teacher’s fee, to 


86 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


5.41 


perform a wedding, or to procure medicine, as also to the indi- 
gent, to those preparing to perform a sacrifice, to students, to 
travellers, and to those who have offered the Visvajit sacrifice. 
22 When others come to beg, let him give them cooked food. 

23 When a request is made for an unlawful (, adharma ) purpose, 
he should not give, even if he has already promised to do so. 
24 Untrue statements made by people who are angry, jubilant, 
afraid, in pain, greedy, young, old, feeble-minded, drunk, or 
mad are not sins causing loss of caste. 


Guests 

25 He should give food first to guests, children, the sick, pregnant 
women, females in his household, and the old, as well as the 
menials. 26 When his teacher, father, or friend is visiting, however, 
he should check with them before cooking the meal. 

27 When his officiating priest, teacher, father-in-law, or pater- 
nal or maternal uncle visits him, he shall offer them the honey 
mixture (A 2.8.8). 28 It needs to be repeated only after the inter- 
val of a year; 29 but on the occasion of a sacrifice or a wedding, it 
should be repeated even if a year has not elapsed. 30 It should 
also be offered to a king and to a vedic scholar.* 31 To a Brahmin 
who is not a vedic scholar, he should offer a seat and water; 32 but 
to one who is a vedic scholar he should have water for washing 
the feet and the welcome water* prepared, as also lavish food 
33 or the normal food prepared in a special way. 34 To a Brahmin 
without vedic learning but of good conduct, he should give 
average food; 35 but to one with the opposite qualities, just some 
straw and water, and a place on the floor, 36 or at the very least, a 
word of welcome. 

37 He should show respect to the guest and not eat before him. 
38 To those who are his equals or superiors, he should offer a 
room, bed, and seat as good as his; treat them hospitably; and 
follow them as they leave; 39 somewhat less than that if it is a man 
inferior to him. 

40 A guest is defined as a man from a different village who 
comes when the sun is setting behind the trees to spend just one 
night. 41 He should ask him whether he is doing well; or whether 


87 



5.41 


Dharmasutras 


he is in good shape; or whether he is in good health, in accord- 
ance with his class (A 1. 14.26-9 n.), 42 the last being used in the 
case of a Sudra. 43 A non-Brahmin is never a guest of a Brahmin, 
unless he has come on the occasion of a sacrifice. 44 A Ksatriya, 
however, should be fed after the Brahmins, 45 and the others 
should be fed together with his servants to show compassion. 


Salutation 

6 1-3 His mother and father, their relations, his older brothers, 
his teachers, and their teachers— each day when he meets 
them he should clasp their feet, as also when he returns from a 
journey. 4 When he meets several of them together, he should 
first clap the feet of the one who is most superior. 5 When he 
meets a knowledgeable person, he should greet him by stating 
his own name and saying, ‘I am so-and-so’. 6 Some say that there 
is no restrictive rule about salutation between husband and wife. 
’Except upon returning from a journey, there is no need to greet 
women other than his mother, paternal uncle’s wife, and his 
sisters; 8 nor should he clasp the feet of his brothers’ wives or his 
mother-in-law. 9 In the case of an officiating priest, a father-in- 
law, or a paternal or maternal uncle who is younger than him- 
self, on the other hand, he should rise up to receive him but there 
is no need to offer a formal greeting. 10 An aged fellow townsman 
or even an 80-year-old Sudra should be treated in the same way 
by a man young enough to be his son, 11 as also an Arya even 
younger than himself, by a Sudra. 

12 Such a person, moreover, should refrain from saying the 
other’s name, 13 as also a royal officer who has not studied the 
Veda, the name of the king. 14 A friend born on the same day as 
oneself should be addressed ‘Mister!’ or ‘Sir!’, 15 as also a fellow 
townsman ten years older than oneself; 16 an artist five years 
older; 17 a vedic scholar of one’s own vedic branch (p. xxii) who 
is three years older; 18 an ignorant Brahmin following the 
occupations of a Ksatriya or a Vaisya; 19 and a man consecrated 
for a sacrifice before the purchase of Soma (A 1 .18.23 n.). 

Rules of Precedence 20 People should be honoured on account 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


7.26 


of wealth, relatives, occupation, birth, learning, and age, but 
each succeeding one is more important than each preceding, 
21 but vedic learning is the most important of all, 22 because it is 
the source of Law 23 and because it is so stated in the vedic texts. 

24 One must yield the way to people in vehicles, extremely old 
people, the sick,* women, bath-graduates (A 1.30.9 n.) and 
kings; 25 and a king to a vedic scholar. 


Times of Adversity 

7 ‘These are the rules for times of adversity. A Brahmin 
may receive vedic instruction from a non-Brahmin, 2 walk 
behind him, and obey him. 3 Once the study is completed, how- 
ever, the Brahmin becomes the more honourable of the two. 

4 One may teach, officiate at the sacrifices of, and receive gifts 
from people of all classes, 5 each preceding occupation being 
more honourable. 6 When these occupations are unavailable, one 
may live by the occupations of a Ksatriya, 7 and when even these 
are unavailable, by the occupations of a Vaisya. 

8 One may not trade in the following goods: 9 perfumes, con- 
diments, prepared foods, sesame seeds, hemp or linen cloth, 
skins, ‘“garments that are dyed red or washed, “milk and milk 
products, “roots, fruits, flowers, medicines, honey, meat, grass, 
water, poisons, 13 and animals for slaughter; 14 and, under any 
circumstance, human beings, barren cows, heifers, and pregnant 
cows. 15 According to some, one may also not trade in land, rice, 
barley, goats, sheep, horses, bulls, milch-cows, and oxen. 16 One is 
restricted to bartering “condiments for condiments 18 and ani- 
mals for animals; 19 but not salt, prepared food, or 20 sesame 
seeds. 21 One may, however, exchange uncooked food for an 
equal amount of cooked food for immediate use. 

22 When none of this is possible, however, one may sustain 
oneself by any occupation except that of a Sudra; 23 some permit 
even that when one’s life is at stake. 24 Even then, however, one is 
not allowed to mix with that class or to eat forbidden food. 
25 When his life is at stake, even a Brahmin may live by the use of 
arms, 26 and a Ksatriya may resort to the occupations of a 
Vaisya. 


89 



Dharmasutras 


The Brahmin and the King 

8 ' There are in the world two who uphold the proper way of 
life— the king and the Brahmin deeply learned in the Vedas. 
2 And on them depend the life of the fourfold human race and of 
internally conscious creatures that move about, fly, and crawl; 
3 as well as their increase, protection, non-intermixture, and 
adherence to the Law. 

4 He alone is deeply learned in the Vedas 5 who knows the 
secular sciences, the Vedas, and the Vedic Supplements; 6 who is 
well read in the dialogues, epics, and Puranas; 7 who relies on 
them and patterns his conduct after them; 8 who has been sanc- 
tified by the forty sacramentary rites (G 8.14-21); 9 who is 
devoted to the three occupations 10 or to the six (G 10.1-2); 
11 and who has been trained in the accepted customary Laws (A 
1.1. In.). 

12 The king should exempt such a man from six things: 13 he 
should not be subjected to corporal punishment, imprisonment, 
fines, banishment, upbraiding, and abandonment. 

Sacramentary Rites 14 Impregnation rite, quickening a male foe- 
tus, parting the wife’s hair, birth rite, naming, first feeding with 
solid food, tonsure, and initiation;* 13 the four vows* associated 
with vedic study; 16 bath at the conclusion of study, marrying a 
helpmate in fulfilling the Law, and performing the five sacrifices 
to gods, ancestors, humans, spirits, and Veda (A 1.12.13 fi); 17 as 
well as of the following: 18 the seven kinds of sacrifices using 
cooked food, viz., ancestral offerings on the eighth day after the 
full moon, offerings on full-moon and new-moon days, ances- 
tral offerings, and offerings on the full-moon days that open a 
four-month season (A 1.10.1 n.); 19 the seven kinds of sacrifices 
with burnt offerings, viz., setting up the vedic fires, daily fire 
offering, new- and full-moon sacrifices, sacrifice of first fruits, 
seasonal sacrifices, Nirudhapasubandha, and SautramanI; 20 the 
seven kinds of Soma sacrifices, viz., Agnistoma, Atyagnistoma, 
Ukthya, Sodasin, Vajapeya, Atiratra, and Aptoryama — 21 these 
are the forty sacramentary rites. 

Virtues 22 Next, the eight virtues of the self: 23 compassion 


90 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


9.19 


towards all creatures, patience, lack of envy, purification, tran- 
quillity, having an auspicious disposition, generosity, and lack 
of greed. 

24 A man who has performed the forty sacramentary rites but 
lacks these eight virtues does not obtain union with or residence 
in the same world as Brahman. 25 A man who may have per- 
formed only some of the forty sacramentary rites but possesses 
these eight virtues, on the other hand, is sure to obtain union 
with and residence in the same world as Brahman. 

THE BATH-GRADUATE 

9 ‘Such a man (A 1.30.9 n.), after he has completed his stud- 
ies, should bathe according to the rules (A 1.30.4n.), marry 
a wife, and, as he continues to observe the Laws proper to a 
householder described above, subject himself to the following 
vows. 

2 He shall always keep himself clean and smelling good and 
cultivate the habit of bathing. 3 If he has the means, he should 
not wear old or dirty clothes, 4 nor ones that are dyed red or 
costly, or that have been worn by others— 5 not even garlands or 
shoes; 6 if he does not have the means, he should wash the gar- 
ment before wearing it. 7 Let him not grow his beard without a 
good reason* 

8 He should not carry fire and water at the same time; 9 drink 
water from his cupped hands; 10 stand while he sips water that 
has been drawn out;* 11 or sip water given by a Sudra or an 
impure person, or taken with one hand. 12 He should not dis- 
charge urine, excrement, or bodily filth facing or looking at the 
wind, a fire, a Brahmin, the sun, water, a divine image, or a cow; 
13 nor should he stretch his feet towards any of these divinities. 

14 He should not use leaves, clods, or stones to clean himself of 
urine or excrement; 15 stand on ashes, hair, potsherds, or filth; 
16 or converse with barbarians or with sordid (A 1.21.12-19) or 
unrighteous people. 17 If he happens to converse with them, he 
should mentally reflect on virtuous men 18 or speak with a 
Brahmin. 

19 When speaking of a cow that does not yield milk, he should 


91 



9.19 


Dharmasutras 


say ‘She is going to be a milch-cow’; 20 and when speaking of 
something unlucky, he should say ‘It’s a lucky thing’. 21 In refer- 
ring to a skull, he should use the word bhagala in place of 
kapcilcv* 22 and in referring to a rainbow, the word manidhanus 
(‘jewelled bow’) in place of indradhanus (‘Indra’s bow’: see A 
1.31.17). 23 He should neither inform anyone that a cow is suck- 
ling her calf 24 nor prevent her from doing so. 

25 After engaging in sexual intercourse, he should not be tardy 
in purifying himself. 26 And he should not do his private vedic 
recitation sitting on the same bed. 27 After reciting the Veda in 
the last watch of the night (B 2.1 7.22 n.), moreover, he should 
not go back to bed. 28 He should not have intercourse with his 
wife when she is indisposed 29 or having her period, 30 or embrace 
her when she is in that state. 31 Neither should he embrace an 
unmarried girl. 

32 He should refrain from the following: blowing on a fire with 
his mouth; engaging in polemics; wearing perfume and neck- 
laces outdoors; scratching himself with disgusting things; eating 
with his wife; looking at a woman applying oil on herself; enter- 
ing by a back door; washing the feet by rubbing one foot with 
the other; eating food placed on a chair; crossing a river by 
swimming (A 1.32.26n.); climbing trees; climbing on to or des- 
cending into dangerous places; and putting his life in danger. 
33 He should not get into an unsafe boat. 34 Let him take care of 
himself in every possible way. 

35 He should go about with his head uncovered during the day 
36 and covered at night. 37 He should cover his head also when he 
is voiding urine or excrement, 38 which he should never do with- 
out spreading something on the ground (A 1.30. 15 n.), 39 or close 
to his house, 40 or upon ashes or cow-dung, on a ploughed field, 
in a shadow, on a road, or in a beautiful spot. 41 He should void 
both urine and excrement facing the north during the day 42 and 
at dawn and dusk, 43 but facing the south at night. 

44 He should avoid seats, footwear, and tooth cleaners made 
with Palasa wood (A 1.8.22 n.; 1.32.9 n.) 45 and refrain from 
eating, sitting, greeting, or paying homage with his shoes on. 

46 He should not spend the morning, midday, or afternoon 
fruitlessly, but pursue righteousness, wealth, and pleasure to the 


92 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


9.74 


best of his ability, 47 but among them he should attend chiefly to 
righteousness (A 1.24.23 n.). 

48 He should not look at someone else’s wife when she is 
naked, 49 or draw a seat to himself with his foot. 3 °He should not 
let his penis, stomach, hands, feet, speech, or sight get out of 
control; 51 engage in cutting, breaking, gashing, or crushing any- 
thing or in cracking the finger joints without a good reason; 52 or 
step over a rope to which a calf is tied. 53 Let him not carry tales 
from one family to another.* 54 He should not go to a sacrifice 
unless he has been chosen to officiate, 55 but he may go there 
freely to witness it. 

56 He should not eat food placed in his lap 57 or brought at 
night by a servant; 58 and foods whose nutrients have been 
extracted, such as de-creamed milk products, whey, oil-press 
residue, and buttermilk. 59 Morning and evening, however, he 
should take his meal, revering the food and never disparaging it. 

60 He should never sleep naked at night, 61 or bathe naked. 
62 And whatever people who are self-possessed, elderly, properly 
trained, and free from hypocrisy, greed, and perplexity, and who 
know the Vedas instruct him to do, he should carry it out. 63 He 
may approach the king for the sake of a livelihood, 64 but not 
anyone else except gods,* elders, and righteous people. 65 He 
should try to live in a place well supplied with firewood, water, 
fodder, Kusa grass, and garland material; served by many roads; 
inhabited mainly by Aryas; full of energetic people; and ruled by 
a righteous man (B 2.6.31). 66 When he passes people or things 
that are distinguished or auspicious, as also temples, intersec- 
tions of two roads, and the like, he should keep his right side 
towards them (A 1.7.2 n.). 

67 The rule for times of adversity is that he should observe all 
the rules of conduct mentally. 68 He shall speak the truth; 
69 behave like an Arya; 70 teach only cultured men; 71 be cultured 
by adhering to ritual purifications; 72 take delight in the vedic 
texts; 73 never hurt any creature; be gentle and steadfast; and be 
devoted to self-control and gift giving. 

74 A bath- graduate who lives in this manner will liberate his 
parents and his relatives of past and future generations from 
sins, and he will never fall from the world of Brahman. 


93 



10.1 


Dharmasutras 


OCCUPATIONS OF THE FOUR CUASSES 



'Study, sacrifice, and giving gifts pertain to all twice- 
born classes. 


Brahmin 

2 In addition to these, teaching, officiating at sacrifices, and 
receiving gifts pertain to Brahmins, 3 but only the former are 
obligatory. 4 Vedic instruction may be imparted outside the 
above mentioned rules to a teacher, relative, friend, or elder (A 
1.6.32 n.), or when it is imparted in exchange for knowledge or 
money. 5 A Brahmin may also engage in agriculture and trade if 
he does not do the work himself, 6 and in lending money on 
interest. 


King and Ksatriya 

7 To a king pertains, in addition, the protection of all creatures, 
8 as also meting out just punishment. 9 He should support 
Brahmins who are vedic scholars, 10 non-Brahmins who are 
unable to work, 11 those who are exempt from taxes, 12 and novice 
students (A 2.21. 6 n.). 

War 13 He should also take measures to ensure victory, '^spe- 
cially when danger threatens; 15 travel about in a chariot armed 
with a bow; 16 and stand firm in battle without fleeing. 17 He 
commits no sin if he kills someone in battle, 18 except the follow- 
ing: those who have lost their horses, charioteers, or arms; those 
who join their hand in supplication or have dishevelled hair; 
those who are fleeing or hunkering down; those who have 
climbed on to a ledge or a tree; messengers; and those who say 
they are cows or Brahmins.* 19 If another Ksatriya depends on 
the king for his livelihood, he too must participate in the king’s 
undertakings. 20 The victor should take the booty of battle, 21 but 
the mounts* go to the king, 22 as well as a choice portion of the 
booty unless it has been won in single combat. 23 Everything else, 
however, the king should distribute equitably among his men. 


94 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


10.51 


Taxes 24 Farmers shall pay one-tenth, or one-eighth, or one- 
sixth of their produce to the king as taxes. 25 According to some, 
there is a tax of one-fiftieth on cattle and gold. 26 There is a duty 
of one-twentieth on merchandise, 27 and one-sixtieth on roots, 
fruits, flowers, medicine, honey, meat, grass, and firewood. 28 The 
grounds for taxation is the king’s duty to protect the people; 29 he 
should always be attentive to them.* 30 The king shall obtain his 
livelihood by means of this additional duty of his. 

31 Every month each artisan shall work one day for the king. 
32 This applies also to people who live by manual labour 33 and to 
those who operate boats and carriages. 34 The king should give 
them food when they work for him. 35 Every month traders 
should give the king a piece of merchandise below its market 
value. 

Ownership 36 If someone finds lost property whose owner is 
unknown, he should disclose it to the king. 37 The king should 
have it publicized and keep it safely for a year, 38 after which time 
a quarter goes to the finder and the rest to the king. 

39 Ownership is established by inheritance, purchase, parti- 
tion, possession, and discovery; 40 additionally, acceptance for 
Brahmins, 41 conquest for Ksatriyas, 42 and wages for Vaisyas and 
Sudras. 43 A treasure- trove is the property of the king, 44 except 
when it is found by an upright Brahmin. 45 According to some, 
even a non-Brahmin who discloses a find should receive one- 
sixth. 

46 When property is stolen by thieves, the king should recover 
it and return it to its rightful owner 47 or pay compensation from 
his treasury. 48 Fie should keep the property of children safely 
until they reach the legal age (G 2.23 n.) or have completed their 
studies. 


Vaisya and Sudra 

49 To a Vaisya pertain in addition agriculture, trade, animal 
husbandry, and lending money on interest. 

50 The Sudra is the fourth class with a single birth (A 
1.1.1 6— 1 8 n . ) . 51 Speaking the truth, refraining from anger, and 


95 



10.51 


Dharmasutras 


purification apply to him also. “According to some, he should 
simply wash his hands and feet in place of sipping water. “He 
should make ancestral offerings; “support his dependants; 55 be 
faithful to his wife; “serve the upper classes; “seek his liveli- 
hood from them; “use their discarded shoes, umbrellas, clothes, 
and mats and the like; “and eat their leftovers (A 1.3.27 n.). 
60 He may also support himself by working as an artisan. 61 The 
Arya whom he serves must support him even when he is unable 
to work, “and under similar circumstances he should support 
the upper-class man 63 using his savings for that purpose. 64 When 
he is given leave, he may use the word ‘Homage!’ as his mantra. 
“According to some, he may offer sacrifices on his own using 
cooked food. 

“All should serve the people belonging to classes higher than 
themselves. 67 If Aryas do the jobs of non-Aryas and vice versa, 
they become equal. 


THE KING 

1 1 1 The king rules over all except Brahmins. 2 He should be 

J. correct in his actions and speech 3 and trained in the 
triple Veda and logic. 4 Let him be upright, keep his senses under 
control, surround himself with men of quality, and adopt sound 
policies. 5 He should be impartial towards his subjects 6 and work 
for their welfare. 

7 As he sits on a high seat, all except Brahmins should pay him 
homage seated at a lower level, 8 and even Brahmins should 
honour him. 9 He should watch over the social classes and the 
orders of life in conformity with their rules, 10 and those who stray 
he should guide back to their respective duties ( dharma ), 11 ‘for 
the king,’ it is stated, ‘takes a share of their merits (dharma).’’ 
12 He should appoint as his personal priest a Brahmin who is 
learned, born in a good family, eloquent, handsome, mature, 
and virtuous; who lives according to the rules; and who is aus- 
tere. 13 He should undertake rites only with his support, 14 ‘for a 
Ksatriya, when he is supported by a Brahmin,’ it is said, ‘pros- 
pers and never falters.’ 15 He should also pay heed to what his 
astrologers and augurs tell him, “for, according to some, his 


96 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


11.31 


welfare* depends also on that. 17 In the fire within the assembly 
hall, he should perform rites to secure prosperity in connection 
with a propitiation, festive day, military expedition, long life, or 
auspiciousness, as well as rites to stir enmity, to subdue or slay 
his enemies, or to bring them to their knees. 18 His officiating 
priests shall carry out the other rites as prescribed. 


The Judicial Process 

19 His administration of justice shall be based on the Veda, the 
Legal Treatises, the Vedic Supplements (A 2.8.10-11), and the 
Purana. 20 The Laws of regions, castes, and families are also 
authoritative if they are not in conflict with the sacred scrip- 
tures. 21 Farmers, merchants, herdsmen, moneylenders, and 
artisans exercise authority over their respective groups. 22 He 
should dispense the Law after he has ascertained the facts from 
authoritative persons of each group. 

23 Reasoning is the means of reaching a correct judgment. 
24 Having reached a conclusion in this manner, he should decide 
the case equitably. 25 If there is conflicting evidence, he should 
consult those who are deeply learned in the triple Veda and 
reach a decision, 26 for, it is said, acting in that way, he will attain 
prosperity. 


Punishment 

27 ‘Brahmins united with Ksatriyas’, it is stated, ‘uphold the 
gods, ancestors, and human beings.’ 28 The word ‘punishment’ 
( danda ), they say, is derived from ‘restraint’ {daman a); therefore, 
he should restrain those who are unrestrained. 

29 People belonging to the different classes and orders of life 
who are steadfastly devoted to the Laws proper to them enjoy 
the fruits of their deeds after death; and then, with the residue 
of those fruits, take birth again in a prosperous region, a high 
caste, and a distinguished family, with a handsome body, long 
life, deep vedic learning, and virtuous conduct, and with great 
wealth, happiness, and intelligence. 30 Those who act to the con- 
trary disperse in every direction and perish. 31 The teacher’s 


97 



11.31 


Dharmasutras 


advice and the king’s punishment protect them; 32 therefore, one 
should never belittle the king or the teacher. 


Criminal and Civil Law 

1 ^ Abuse and Assault 1 If a Sudra uses abusive language or 
J. Z* physical violence against twice-born people (A 1.1.1 6— 
1 8 n. ), the part of his body used for the crime should be chopped 
off. 2 If he has sex with an Arya woman, his penis should be cut 
off and all his property confiscated; 3 if the woman had a guard- 
ian, then, in addition to the above, he shall be executed. 4 And if 
he listens in on a vedic recitation, his ears shall be filled with 
molten tin or lac; 5 if he repeats it, his tongue shall be cut off; 6 if 
he commits it to memory, his body shall be split asunder. 7 If, 
while he is occupying a seat, lying on a bed, speaking, or walking 
on the road, he seeks to be their equal, he should be beaten. 

8 If a Ksatriya hurls abusive words at a Brahmin, he shall be 
fined a hundred;* 9 if there is physical violence, the fine is 
doubled. 10 A Vaisya guilty of the same crime shall be fined one 
and a half times as much as a Ksatriya. 11 A Brahmin guilty of 
the same crime against a Ksatriya, on the other hand, shall be 
fined fifty, 12 half that amount if it is against a Vaisya, 13 and none 
at all if it is against a Sudra. 14 If a Ksatriya is guilty of the 
same crime against a Vaisya, or a Vaisya against a Ksatriya, 
the fine shall be the same as that levied on a Brahmin vis-a-vis a 
Ksatriya, and on a Ksatriya vis-a-vis a Brahmin, respectively. 

Theft 15 When a Sudra steals, he must be made to repay the loss 
eightfold, 16 and the fine is progressively doubled for thieves 
belonging to each of the prior classes. 17 If the felon is a learned 
man, he should be punished more severely. 18 For stealing small 
amounts of fruits, vegetables, or grain, the fine is five Krsnalas 
(G 12.8 n.). 

Property Damage 19 The owner is at fault when his animals 
cause damage; 20 but if a herdsman was looking after them at the 
time, then it is the herdsman’s fault. 21 If the damage is done to 
an unfenced field by the side of a road, then the fault lies with 
both the herdsman and the owner of the held. 22 For damage 


98 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


12.44 


done by a cow, the fine is five Masas (G 12.8 n.); 23 by a camel or 
a donkey, six; 24 by a horse or a buffalo, ten; 25 by sheep or goats, 
two for each. 26 If the whole field is destroyed, the fine is the 
value of the crop. 

27 If a man consistently neglects what is prescribed and does 
what is forbidden, his property, beyond what is necessary to 
clothe and feed himself, shall be confiscated. 28 One may gather 
grass for a cow, wood for the fire, and flowers from vines and 
trees as if they were his own, and, if they are not fenced in, also 
fruits. 

Rates of Interest 29 The legal ( dharmya ) rate of interest is five 
Masas a month for twenty.* 30 According to some, this rate does 
not apply for longer than a year. 31 If the loan remains outstand- 
ing for a longer period of time, the principal is doubled.* 32 No 
interest accrues if the lender makes use of the borrower’s col- 
lateral, 33 or when the borrower is eager to settle the debt but is 
prevented from doing so. 34 The types of interest are: cyclical 
rate, periodic rate, 35 contractual rate, manual labour, daily rate, 
and use of the collateral.* 36 In the case of animal products, 
wool, farm produce, and beasts of burden, the interest shall not 
exceed five times the loan. 

Ownership 37 When others make use of the property of a person 
who is neither mentally incapacitated nor a minor before his 
very eyes for ten years, it belongs to the user, 38 unless the user is 
a vedic scholar, a wandering ascetic, or a royal officer. 39 There is 
no such limit on the period of use in the case of cattle, land, and 
women.* 

Debts 40 Those who inherit the property of someone have to pay 
his debts. 41 Sons are not accountable for a surety’s bond, a busi- 
ness debt, a bride price, debts relating to liquor or gambling, or 
fines. 42 So long as a person has a blameless reputation, he is not 
accountable for an open or sealed deposit, something borrowed 
or purchased, or a collateral for a loan that is lost without his 
fault. 

Punishment 43 A thief, his hair dishevelled and carrying a pestle, 
should go to the king proclaiming his deed. 44 He is cleansed by 


99 



12.44 


Dharmasutras 


being killed or released, 45 but by not killing him the king 
assumes the sin. 

46 There shall be no corporal punishment of Brahmins ; 47 they 
are punished by extricating them from such deeds, publishing 
their crimes, sending them into exile, and branding them . 48 If a 
king fails to punish, he should perform a penance. 

49 A man who knowingly becomes an associate of a thief shall 
be treated like a thief, 50 as also a man who illicitly (, adharma ) 
receives goods from him. 

51 Punishment should be meted out after taking into account 
the type of a man he is, his strength, the gravity of the crime, 
and how often he has committed it. 52 Alternatively, the man 
may be pardoned according to the verdict of an assembly of 
men learned in the Vedas. 

B Witnesses 'If there is conflicting evidence, the truth 
shall be ascertained by means of witnesses. "They 
should be numerous, of blameless reputation with respect to 
their duties, worthy of the king’s trust, and neither friendly nor 
hostile towards either party. 3 They may even be Sudras. 4 Unless 
a Brahmin is listed in the plaint, however, he should not be 
forced to testify at the behest of a non-Brahmin. 

5 Witnesses should not speak until they are convened and 
questioned; 6 but if they then refuse to speak, they commit an 
offence. 7 If they speak the truth, they will go to heaven; if they 
do the contrary, hell awaits them. 8 Even those not listed in the 
plaint may be obliged to give evidence. 9 No objection can be 
raised against a witness in cases involving violence 10 or for 
things he may have said inadvertently. "If the execution of the 
Law* is thwarted, the guilt falls on the witnesses, the assessors, 
the king, and the transgressor. 12 According to some, the wit- 
nesses are to be placed under oath to speak the truth; 13 if they 
are not Brahmins, the oath should be administered in the 
presence of divine images, the king, and Brahmins. 

14 If a witness gives false testimony with regard to small farm 
animals, he slays* ten ; 15 with regard to cattle, ten times as many; 
with regard to horses, ten times as many as for cattle; with 
regard to human beings, ten times as many as for horses. 16 If he 


100 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


14.12 


gives false testimony with regard to land, he slays all; 17 and if he 
steals land, he goes to hell. 18 The penalty for false testimony 
with regard to land applies also to water 19 and sexual inter- 
course; 20 the penalty in the case of farm animals applies also to 
honey and ghee; 21 the penalty in the case of cattle applies also to 
clothes, gold, grain, and the Veda; 22 and the penalty in the case 
of horses applies also to carriages. 23 When a witness gives false 
testimony, he should be reprimanded and punished. 24 It is not 
an offence to give false testimony if a man’s life depends on it, 
25 but not if it is the life of an evil man. 

26 The king shall be the judge, or else a learned Brahmin. 
27 Witnesses should appear before the judge. 28 If they are unable 
to appear, the judge may wait for one year. 29 But in cases affect- 
ing cows, draught oxen, women, and begetting children, he 
should summon them immediately, 30 as also when the matter is 
urgent. 

31 Of all the Laws, speaking the truth before the judge is the 
most important. 


IMPURITY 
Death Impurity 

ten-day period of death impurity affects people 
belonging to the same ancestry (A 2. 14.2 n.) as the 
deceased, unless they are officiating as priests in, or are con- 
secrated for, a sacrifice, or are vedic students. 2 In the case of 
Ksatriyas, the period of impurity lasts for eleven days; 3 in the 
case of Vaisyas for twelve days— 4 or, according to some, for a 
fortnight — ; 5 and in the case of Sudras for a month. 6 If during 
that period another period of impurity arises, they become pure 
at the end of the time remaining from the first period of impur- 
ity; 7 but if only one day remains, then at the end of two days; 
8 and if it happens on the morning after the conclusion of the 
first period, then at the end of three days. 

9 When people are killed while defending cows or Brahmins,* 
their relatives become pure immediately; 10 as also when they are 
killed due to the king’s anger "or in a battle; 12 and when they 


101 



14.12 


Dharmasutras 


die voluntarily by walking without food or drink, by fasting, by 
a sword, in a fire, by poison, by drowning, by hanging, and by 
jumping from a precipice. 

13 Relationship caused by ancestry (A 2. 14.2 n.) ceases with 
the fifth or seventh generation. 

14 These same rules of impurity come into effect also at the 
birth of a child; 15 they apply to the parents 16 or just to the 
mother. 

17 When there is a miscarriage, the period of impurity lasts for 
as many days as the months since conception, 18 or else for three 
days. 

19 If someone hears of a relative’s death after ten or more 
days, the period of impurity lasts two days plus the intervening 
night, 20 as also at the death of a maternal relative not belonging 
to his ancestry or of a fellow reciter of the Veda. 21 For a fellow 
student,* the period of impurity lasts for a day, 22 as also for a 
vedic scholar who lives close by. 

Contact with a Corpse 

23 When someone comes into contact with a corpse, the period 
of impurity lasts for ten days if it is done for a consideration. 

24 The period of impurity for such contact in the case of Vaisyas 
and Sudras is the same as that given above, 25 or for as many days 
as there are seasons* in a year. 26 The latter rule is applicable also 
to the two higher classes; 27 or else their impurity lasts for three 
days, 28 as also when someone comes in contact with the corpse 
of his teacher, the teacher’s son or wife, a man for whom he 
performs priestly functions, or his pupil. 

29 If a person of a lower class comes in contact with the corpse 
of a higher class person, or a person of a higher class with the 
corpse of a lower class person, then the period of impurity is 
what is prescribed for the class to which the dead man belonged 
(G 14.1-5). 


Contact with Impure Persons 

30 When a man touches an outcaste, a Candida, a woman who 

102 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


15.5 


has just given birth or is menstruating, a corpse, or someone 
who has touched any of these, he becomes purified by bathing 
with his clothes on; 31 as also when he has gone behind a corpse 
32 or touched a dog. 33 According to some, the spot touched by 
the dog should be washed. 


Libations to the Deceased 

34 Those who belong to the same ancestry should offer water to a 
deceased person whose tonsure ceremony (G 8.14n.) has been 
performed 35 and for the wives of such a person; 36 according to 
some, also for their married relatives. 

37 All should sleep and sit on the floor; remain chaste; 38 not 
wash themselves; 39 not eat meat until the funeral oblation has 
been offered; 40 offer libations of water on the first, third, fifth, 
seventh, and ninth day after the death; 41 discard the garments 
worn during these rites; 42 but on the last day give them to people 
of the lowest class. 43 Parents must offer these libations to a child 
who has teethed. 


Immediate Purification 

44 When infants, people who have gone to a distant region, wan- 
dering ascetics, and people who do not belong to the same 
ancestry die, a person is purified immediately; 45 as also kings, 
lest their duties be impeded; 46 and a Brahmin, so as not to 
interrupt his daily vedic recitation. 


ANCESTRAL OFFERINGS 

1 ^ 1 Next, the ancestral offerings. 2 One should offer them to 
-L _/ one’s ancestors on the new-moon day, 3 or else after the 
fourth day of the fortnight of the waning moon 4 or on any day 
of that fortnight according to one’s faith. 5 If materials, location, 
or Brahmins of special significance are at hand, however, one 
does not have to observe any restriction with regard to time. 


103 



15.6 


Dharmasutras 


Quality of Invitees 

6 One should obtain the best possible food, get it prepared to the 
best of one’s ability, 7 and feed an uneven number of 
Brahmins— but at least nine 8 or as many as he can afford— 
9 Brahmins who are vedic scholars, gifted with eloquence and 
beauty, mature in years, and virtuous. 10 It is best to feed people 
who are young ; 11 according to some, they should be of the same 
age as the deceased ancestor. 12 One should not use this rite to 
strike a friendship. 

13 In the absence of a son, those belonging to the same ances- 
try, those belonging to the same ancestry as his mother, or his 
pupils should make the ancestral offering ; 14 and if even these are 
unavailable, his officiating priest or teacher. 


Types of Food 

15 By offering sesame, beans, rice, barley, and water, the ancestors 
are satisfied for a month; by offering fish or the meat of ante- 
lope, Ruru antelope, rabbit, turtle, boar, or sheep, for several 
years; by offering cow’s milk or milk pudding, for twelve years; 
by offering the meat of a Vardhrmasa crane, sacred basil, or the 
meat of a goat, a red goat, or a rhinoceros, mixed with honey, 
for an unlimited time.* 


Unfit Invitees 

16 He should not feed the following: a thief; a man who is impo- 
tent; an outcaste; an infidel or a man who lives like an infidel; 
someone who has relinquished his sacred fires; someone who 
has married a younger sister with an unmarried older sister or 
an older sister whose younger sister is already married; someone 
who officiates at the sacrifices of women or a group of men; a 
goat herder; someone who has given up fire sacrifices, drinks 
liquor, or behaves improperly; a false witness; a door-keeper; 

17 the lover of a married woman and that woman’s husband; 

18 someone who eats the food of a man born from an adulterous 
union or sells Soma; an arsonist; a poisoner; a man who has 


104 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


15.28 


broken his vow of chastity as a student; someone who is in the 
service of a guild; someone who has sex with a forbidden 
woman; a sadist; a man whose younger brother gets married 
before him or who gets married before his older brother; some- 
one whose younger brother has set up the ritual fires before him 
or who has set up the ritual fires before his older brother; some- 
one who is suicidal; a man who is bald-headed or has bad nails, 
black teeth, or white leprosy; the son of a remarried woman; a 
gambler; someone who does not engage in the soft recitation of 
prayers (A 1.15.1 n); a servant of the king; someone who cheats 
by using false weights and measures; the husband of a Sudra 
woman;* someone who neglects his private vedic recitation; a 
man with spotted leprosy; a usurer; someone who lives as a 
merchant or artisan; someone who is fond of archery, playing 
music, keeping the beat at performances, dancing, and singing; 
19 and those who have divided the paternal estate against their 
father’s wishes. 

“According to some, he may invite his pupils and people 
belonging to his ancestry. 21 He should feed more than three 
persons, or a single distinguished person. 


Sexual Abstinence 

22 If someone has sex with a Sudra woman soon after eating at 
an ancestral offering, he will plunge his ancestors in her excre- 
ment for a whole month. “That whole day, therefore, he should 
remain chaste. 


Pollution and Remedies 

24 An ancestral offering is ruined if it is seen by a dog, a Candida, 
or an outcaste. “Therefore, he should offer it in an enclosed 
place; “alternatively he should scatter sesame seeds over the 
offering, 27 or a man who purifies those alongside whom he eats 
(A 2.17.21 n.) may remove the defilement. “These are the 
persons who purify those alongside whom they eat: a man 
who knows the six Vedic Supplements (A 2.8.10-1 1 ); a man who 
sings the Jyestha Samans; an expert in the three Naciketa fire 


105 



15.28 


Dharmasutras 


altars; a man who knows the three ‘Honey’ verses; a man who 
knows the Trisuparna; a man who maintains the five sacred fires 
(A 2.17.22 n.); a bath-graduate; a man who knows the vedic 
Hymns and Brahmana texts; a man who knows the Law; and a 
descendant from a line of vedic scholars. 

29 The above rules apply also to sacrificial offerings. 30 Accord- 
ing to some, however, the prohibition of a bald man and those 
listed after him applies only to ancestral offerings. 

ANNUAL COURSE OF STUDY 

1 /Z ‘After commencing the annual course of study on the 
-L U full-moon day of July-August or August-September, he 
should study the Vedas 2 for four and a half months, or five 
months, or else during the time the sun moves south. 

3 During this period he should remain chaste, refrain from 
shaving, and abstain from meat. 4 Optionally, these rules may be 
observed for just two months. 


Suspension of Vedic Recitation 

5 He should suspend vedic recitation during daytime when the 
wind whirls up the dust; 6 at night when he can hear the wind 
blow; 7 when the sound of a lute, drum, side drum, chariot, or 
wailing is heard; 8 when dogs are barking, jackals are howling, 
and donkeys are braying; 9 when the sky turns crimson; when a 
rainbow appears; when there is frost on the ground; 10 when 
clouds appear out of season; “when he has the urge to void 
urine or excrement; 12 in the middle of the night, at the time of 
twilight, and while standing in water; 13 when it is raining — 
14 but, according to some, only when the water is running down 
the eaves—; “when Venus and Jupiter are surrounded by halos, 
16 as also the sun and the moon; “when he is frightened, travel- 
ling in a vehicle, lying down, or has lifted his feet; 18 when he is in 
a cremation ground, at the village boundary, on a highway, or in 
an impure state; 19 when there is a foul smell; when there is a 
corpse or a Candida in the village; when a Sudra is near by; 
20 and when he experiences an acrid belching. 


106 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


16.44 


21 The recitation of the Rgveda and the Yajurveda, moreover, 
is suspended as long as the recitation of the Samaveda is heard.* 
22 When there is a lightning strike, an earthquake, an eclipse, or 
the fall of a meteor, vedic recitation is suspended until the same 
time the next day; 23 as also when there is thunder, rain, or light- 
ning during twilight when the fires are visible. 24 When these 
happen during the rainy season, however, the suspension lasts 
only that day. 25 When there is lightning during the night, more- 
over, the suspension lasts until the last watch of the night (B 
2.17.22 n.); 26 but if it occurs during or after the third part of the 
day, the suspension lasts the whole night. 27 According to some, a 
meteor has the same effect as lightning with respect to the sus- 
pension of vedic recitation, 28 as does thunder when it occurs in 
the afternoon 29 or even at dusk. 30 If there is thunder before 
midnight, the suspension lasts for the whole night; 31 if it hap- 
pens during the day, the suspension lasts throughout the day- 
light hours, 32 as also when the king of that realm dies, 33 and 
when one student goes on a journey and another stays behind 
with the teacher (cf. A 1.11.11). 

34 The suspension lasts for a day and a night when there has 
been a social disturbance or a fire; when he has finished reciting 
one Veda; when he has vomited; when he has eaten at an ances- 
tral offering or at a sacrifice to humans (A 1.11.3 n.); 35 on the 
new-moon day— 36 alternatively, the suspension here may last for 
two days—; 37 and on the full-moon days of the lunar months 
October-November, February-March, and June-July. 

38 At the three eighth-day offerings during the three fortnights 
of the waning moon following the full moon of November- 
December, the suspension lasts for three days; 39 according to 
some, the suspension takes place only at the last of these eighth- 
day offerings. 40 When the annual course of study is commenced 
and concluded, the suspension is in effect on that day, as well as 
on the preceding and following days. 41 In the opinion of all 
authorities, when rain, lightning, and thunder occur together, 
the suspension lasts for three days, 42 as also when there is heavy 
rain. 

43 On a festive day vedic recitation is suspended after the meal. 
44 Immediately after commencing the annual course of study, 


107 



16.44 


Dharmasutras 


recitation is suspended during the first four ‘hours’ (A 
1.11 .32 n.) of the night. 45 According to some, vedic recitation is 
always suspended in a town. 46 Even mental recitation is sus- 
pended when a person is impure. 47 After making an ancestral 
offering, the suspension lasts until the same time the next day, 
48 as also when uncooked food is distributed at an ancestral 
offering. 

49 Vedic recitation is also suspended for reasons given in each 
vedic branch (p. xxii). 


FOOD 

Food Transactions 

n ‘A Brahmin may eat food given by twice-born men 
renowned for their devotion to their respective duties. 
2 He may also accept gifts from them. 

3 Firewood, water, fodder, roots, fruits, honey, a promise of 
safety, what is given unasked, beds, seats, shelter, carriages, milk, 
curd, roasted grain, Sapharl fish, millet, garlands, venison, and 
vegetables should not be refused from anyone, 4 as also other 
things needed to take care of the ancestors, gods, teacher, and 
dependants. 5 If he is unable to sustain himself by other means, 
he may accept food from a Sudra. 6 A man who looks after his 
animals or ploughs his fields, a friend of the family, his barber, 
and his personal servant— these are people whose food he may 
eat, 7 as also a merchant who is not an artisan. 

8 This type of food is not fit to be eaten every day. 


Unfit Food 

9 The following are unfit to be eaten: food into which hair or an 
insect has fallen; 10 what has been touched by a menstruating 
woman, a black bird, or someone’s foot; 11 what has been looked 
at by an abortionist (A 1.19.15 n.) 12 or smelt by a cow; 13 food 
that looks revolting;* 14 food that has turned sour, except curd; 
15 re-cooked food; 16 food that has become stale, except veget- 
ables, chewy or greasy foods, meat, and honey; 17 food given by 


108 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


17.38 


someone who has been disowned by his parents, a harlot, a 
heinous sinner (A 1.3.25 n.), a hermaphrodite, a law enforce- 
ment agent, a carpenter, a miser, a jailer, a physician, a man who 
hunts without using the bow or eats the leftovers of others, a 
group of people, or an enemy, 18 as also by those listed before 
a bald man as people who defile those alongside whom they 
eat (G 15.16-18; A 2.17.21 n.); l9 food prepared for no avail; a 
meal during which people sip water or get up against the rules, 
20 or at which different sorts of homage are paid to people of 
equal stature and the same homage is paid to people of different 
stature; 21 and food that is given disrespectfully. 


Forbidden Food 

22-3 It is forbidden to drink the milk of a cow, a goat, or a 
buffalo, during the first ten days after it gives birth; 24 the milk of 
sheep, camels, and one-hoofed animals under any circum- 
stances; 25 the milk of an animal from whose udders milk flows 
spontaneously or of an animal that has borne twins, gives milk 
while pregnant, 26 or has lost her calf. 

27 The following are forbidden foods: animals with five claws 
(A 1.17.37n.), with the exception of the hedgehog, hare, porcu- 
pine, Godha monitor lizard, rhinoceros, and tortoise; 28 animals 
with teeth in both jaws,* with a lot of hair, or without any hair; 
one-hoofed animals; Kalavinka sparrows; Plava herons; 
Cakravaka geese; Hamsa geese; 29 crows; Kanka herons; vul- 
tures; falcons; water birds; red-footed and red-beaked birds; vil- 
lage cocks and pigs; 30 milch-cows and oxen; 31 meat of animals 
whose milk-teeth have not fallen and of animals that are sick or 
wantonly killed; 32 young shoots; mushrooms; garlic; resins; 
33 red juices* flowing from incisions on trees; 34 woodpeckers; 
Baka egrets; Balaka ibis; parrots; Madgu cormorants; Tittibha 
sandpipers; Mandhala flying foxes; and night birds. 

35 Birds that feed by thrusting their beaks or scratching with 
their feet and that do not have webbed feet may be eaten, 36 as 
also fish that are not grotesque, 37 and animals that have to be 
killed for the sake of the Law.* 38 He may avail himself of ani- 
mals killed by predators after washing them, so long as he does 


109 



17.38 


Dharmasutras 


not detect any flaw in them and after getting them verbally 
declared as suitable. 


WOMEN AND MARRIAGE 


Duties of a Wife 


1 Q 1 A wife cannot act independently in matters relating to 
J. O the Law. 2 She should never go against her husband 3 and 
keep her speech, eyes, and actions under strict control. 


Levirate 4 When her husband is dead, she may seek to obtain 
offspring through her husband’s brother 5 after she has been 
appointed to the task by the elders (A 1.6.32 n.). She should not 
have sex with him outside her season (A 2. 1 . 1 7 n.). Alter- 
natively, she may obtain offspring through a relative* belonging 
to the same ancestry, lineage, or line of seers (A 2.14.2 n.; A 
2. 11. 15 n.), or just a relative; According to some, however, 
through no one other than her husband’s brother. 8 She shall 
bear no more than two children. 


To Whom Belongs a Son 9 The offspring belongs to the man who 
fathers it, 10 unless there has been a compact (G 18.5) "or it has 
been fathered on a wife whose husband is still alive. 12 If it is 
fathered by an outsider, however, the offspring belongs to that 
outsider, 13 or to both; 14 but if the husband cares for that off- 
spring, then it belongs to him alone (A 2. 13.5 n.). 

Remarriage of a Wife 15 If her husband is missing, she shall wait 
for six years. If he is heard from, she shall go to him. 16 If her 
husband has become an ascetic, on the other hand, she shall give 
up all attachments. 17 When a Brahmin has gone away to study 
the Veda, his wife should wait for twelve years. 

Marriage of a Younger Brother 18 Likewise, when an older 
brother is missing, a younger brother of his should wait for the 
same length of time before getting married or establishing the 
sacred fires; 19 for six years, according to some. 

Time of Marriage for Girls 20 When three menstrual periods 
have passed, a girl may discard the jewellery her father has given 


110 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


19.7 


her and join herself on her own to a man of blameless reputa- 
tion. 21 A girl shall be given in marriage before she reaches 
puberty, 22 and a man who fails to give her incurs a sin. 23 Accord- 
ing to some, she should be given in marriage before she begins to 
wear clothes.* 

LEGITIMATE SEIZURE OF PROPERTY 

24 To perform a marriage or in connection with the course of the 
Law (G 13.11 n.), a person may take money from a Sudra, 25 or 
even from a non-Sudra who has plenty of livestock but neglects 
his rituals, 26 who owns a hundred cows but has not set up the 
sacred hres, 27 or who owns a thousand cows but has not offered 
a Soma sacrifice. 

28 A man may do so also when he has had nothing to eat until 
the seventh mealtime (A 1.25. 10 n.), but not to hoard, 29 taking 
even from people who do not neglect their rituals. 30 If the king 
interrogates him, he should confess, 31 for if he is learned and 
virtuous, the king is required to support him. 32 If the king does 
not act when the course of the Law (G 13.11 n.) is in jeopardy, 
he is at fault. 


PENANCES 



'We* have explained the Law pertaining to the social 
classes and the Law pertaining to the orders of life. 


Justification of Penance 

2 Now, a man here is tainted by foul actions, as, for example, by 
officiating at sacrifices of people for whom it is forbidden to 
officiate, by eating what is forbidden to eat, by saying what is 
forbidden to say, by failing to do what is enjoined, and by 
indulging what is forbidden. 3 There is a debate as to whether 
such a man is required to perform a penance or not. 

4 Some say that he is not required to do so, 5 arguing that an 
act can never be wiped out. 6 The other, and correct, view is that 
he is required to do so, 7 as it is stated, ‘After offering the 


111 



19.7 


Dharmasutras 


Punahstoma sacrifice, he gets to participate again in the Soma 
sacrifice’, 8 or after offering the Vratyastoma. 9 Likewise, ‘A man 
who offers a horse sacrifice overcomes all sins, he overcomes 
even the murder of a Brahmin’ (SB 13.3.1.1); 10 and, ‘A heinous 
sinner (A 1.3.25 n.) should be made to offer the Agnistut 
sacrifice.’ 


General Penances 

“The expiations for such a man are softly reciting prayers (A 
1.15.1 n.), austerity, ritual offering, fasting, and giving gifts. 
12 Upanisads; the conclusions of the Vedas (vedanta); the Hymn- 
Collections of all the Vedas; the ‘Honey’ verses; Aghamarsana 
hymn; Atharvasiras; Rudra hymn; Purusa hymn; the Samans 
called Rajana, Rauhini, Brhat, Rathantara, Purusagati, 
Mahanamm, Mahavairaja, and Mahadivaklrtya; any of the 
Jyestha Samans; Bahispavamana Saman; Kusmanda verses; 
Pavamanl verses; and the Savitrl verse— these are the purifi- 
catory texts. 13 Living on milk alone; eating only vegetables; 
eating only fruits; living on gruel made with one handful of 
barley; eating gold; consuming ghee; and drinking Soma juice— 
these are the cleansing activities. 14 All mountains; all rivers; 
sacred lakes; sacred fords; dwellings of seers; cow-pens; and 
temples— these are the appropriate places. 15 Observing chastity; 
speaking the truth; bathing at dawn, noon, and dusk; remaining 
in wet clothes after the bath; sleeping on the floor; and fasting— 
these are the austerities. 16 Gold; cow; garment; horse; land; 
sesame seeds; ghee; and food— these are the gifts. 17 One year; six 
months; four months; three months; two months; one month; 
twenty-four days; twelve days; six days; three days; and a day 
and night— these are the lengths of time. 

18 When no specific penance has been prescribed, people may 
perform these optionally, 19 the heavier penances for grave sins 
and the lighter penances for minor sins. 20 The arduous penance 
(B 2.2.38), the very arduous penance (B 2.2.40), and the lunar 
penance (G 27; B 3.8) are expiations for all types of sins. 


112 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 

Excommunication from Caste 


20.16 


^ 1 A man should disown a father who assassinates a king; 

Z*\J sacrifices for a Sudra; uses a Sudra ’s money for a sacri- 
fice; divulges the Vedas; is an abortionist (A 1.19.15n.); lives 
with very low caste men; or cohabits with a woman of a very low 
caste. 2 Assembling the father’s vedic teachers and blood rela- 
tions, they should perform on his behalf all the funerary rites, 
beginning with the offering of water, 3 and overturn his water 
pot. 4 A slave or a workman should bring a dirty pot from a 
garbage dump, fill it with water from a slave woman’s pot, and, 
facing the south, overturn it with his foot, pronouncing the 
man’s name and saying, ‘I deprive that man of water’. 5 All of 
them, their upper garments slung over their right shoulders and 
under their left arms (A 1 .6. 1 8 n.) and their topknots untied, 
should touch that slave, 6 while the vedic teachers and blood 
relations look on. 7 They should then bathe and enter the village. 

Contact with an Outcaste 8 Thereafter, if someone were to speak 
with that man, he should remain standing reciting the Savitrl 
verse for one night if it was done unintentionally, 9 and for three 
nights if it was done intentionally. 

Readmission into Caste 10 An excommunicated man may be 
purified by performing a penance, however, and when he has 
been so purified, they should fill a golden pot with water from a 
very sacred lake or from a river and make the man take a bath 
with the water from that pot. 11 They should then give that pot to 
him. Taking that pot, he should pray silently: ‘The sky is 
appeased, the mid-space is appeased and auspicious, the earth is 
appeased. I here take hold of the radiant one.’ 12 Reciting these 
Yajus formulas, as well as the Pavamanl, Taratsamandl, and 
Kusmanda verses, he should offer ghee in the sacred fire. 13 He 
should then give gold or a cow to a Brahmin, 14 as well as to his 
teacher. 

15 A man whose penance lasts until death (cf. G 23.1-11), on 
the other hand, becomes pure only after he dies. 16 They should 
perform for him all the funerary rites beginning with the offer- 
ing of water. 


113 



20.17 


Dharmasutras 


17 The same rite of bathing with water consecrated by the 
‘appeasement’ formulas given above is to be performed for all 
secondary sins causing loss of caste. 

Sins Causing Loss of Caste 

^ 1 Grievous Sins 'People who murder a Brahmin; drink 
-L liquor; have sex with the wife of an elder (A 1 .6.32 n.) or 
with a woman who is related through his mother or father, or 
through marriage; steal gold; become infidels; habitually com- 
mit forbidden acts; refuse to disown someone fallen from his 
caste; or disown someone who has not fallen from his caste— 
these have fallen from their caste, 2 as also those who instigate 
sins causing loss of caste, 3 and those who associate with out- 
castes for a year. 

Consequences of Falling from Caste 4 Falling from one’s caste 
entails exclusion from the occupations of twice-born people 
5 and going empty-handed into the next world. 6 Some call this 
condition ‘hell’. 

Expiations 7 According to Manu, no expiation is possible for the 
first three sins. 8 Some maintain that a man does not fall from his 
caste by having sex with women other than the wives of his 
elders (A 1.6.32 n.). 

Fall of Women 9 A woman falls from her caste by carrying out 
an abortion and by having sex with a low-caste man. 

Sins Similar to Grievous Sins 10 Giving false evidence, slander- 
ous statements that will reach the king’s ear, and false accusa- 
tions against an elder (A 1.6.32 n.) are equal to sins causing loss 
of caste. 

Secondary Sins "People who defile those alongside whom they 
eat and listed before a bald man (G 15.16-18; A 2.17.21 n.); 
people who kill cows, forget the Veda, or recite sacred formulas 
for such people; students who break their vow of chastity; and 
those who let the time for their initiation lapse (G 1 . 1 2—14) — 
these are guilty of secondary sins causing loss of caste. 


114 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


22.12 


12 One should disown an officiating priest or a teacher who is 
ignorant or does not teach, or who commits a sin causing loss of 
caste. 13 If anyone disowns them for other reasons, he falls from 
his caste, 14 as also, according to some, all those who receive him. 

15 A man shall never deprive his father or mother of susten- 
ance, 16 but he should not accept any share of their estate.* 

Other Sins 17 When someone accuses a Brahmin of a sin, he 
incurs a sin equal to it; 18 twice as large if the man he accuses is 
innocent. 19 When someone is hurting a weaker man, if a person, 
although he is able, does not rescue him, that person incurs a sin 
equal to that of the man causing the hurt. 20 A man will be 
excluded from heaven for a hundred years if he threatens a 
Brahmin in anger ; 21 for a thousand years, if he strikes ; 22 and, if 
he draws blood, for as many years as the number of dust 
particles that the spilled blood lumps together. 


Description of Penances 



'Next, the penances. 


Killing Humans and Animals 2 A man who has killed a Brahmin 
shall emaciate his body and throw himself into a hre three 
times,* 3 or make himself a target during an armed battle. 4 Or 
else, for twelve years he should live a chaste life and, carrying a 
skull and the post from a bed-frame, enter a village only to beg 
for food while proclaiming his crime . 5 When he sees an Arya, he 
should get out of the road . 6 In this manner he becomes purified, 
as he remains standing during the day and seated at night, and 
bathes at dawn, noon, and dusk. 7 He is purified also if he saves a 
Brahmin’s life ; 8 if he is defeated three times while attempting to 
recover the property stolen from a Brahmin ; 9 or if he takes part 
in the ritual bath at the end of a horse sacrifice 10 or even of 
another sacrifice as long as it concludes with the Agnistut 
offering. 

"The same penance applies to a man who makes an attempt 
on the life of a Brahmin, even if he does not kill him, 12 as 
also to one who kills a Brahmin woman soon after her 


115 



22.12 


Dharmasutras 


menstrual period 13 or a Brahmin’s foetus whose sex cannot be 
determined (A 1.24.8-9 n.). 

14 If someone kills a Ksatriya, he should observe the standard 
vow of chastity for six years and give a thousand cows together 
with a bull (A 1.24.1 n.); 15 if he kills a Vaisya, he should do so 
for three years and give a hundred cows together with a bull; 
16 and if he kills a Sudra, he should do so for one year and give 
ten cows together with a bull, 17 as also when he kills a Brahmin 
woman who is not in her season. 

18 The penance for killing a cow is the same as for killing a 
Vaisya; 19 it is the same also for killing a frog, a mongoose, a 
crow, a chameleon, a rat, a mouse, or a dog, 20 and for killing 
a thousand animals with bones 21 or a cart-load of animals 
without bones. 22 0r else, he may give some small amount for 
each animal with bones that he has killed. 

23 If someone kills a eunuch,* he should give a load of straw 
and a Masa (G 12.8 n.) of lead; 24 if he kills a boar, a pot of ghee; 
25 if he kills a snake, an iron bar; 26 if he kills a wanton woman 
who is a Brahmin only in name, a leather bag; 27 and if he kills a 
prostitute, nothing at all. 

Adultery, Drinking, and Other Sins 28 If someone frustrates the 
acquisition of a wife, food, or wealth, for each such offence he 
should observe a life of chastity for one year; 29 if he commits 
adultery, for two years; 30 and if he does so with the wife of a 
vedic scholar, for three years. 31 If he has received anything from 
her, he should throw it away 32 or return it to its owner. 33 If 
someone employs ritual formulas on behalf of proscribed 
people, he should observe a life of chastity for one year if the 
formulas contained a thousand words; 34 as also a man who 
extinguishes his sacred fires, neglects vedic recitation, or com- 
mits a secondary sin causing loss of caste, 35 and a woman who 
goes against her husband. She should be kept under watch, 
however, and receive food. 36 If someone has sex with an animal 
other than a cow,* he should offer ghee in the sacred fire while 
reciting the Kusmanda verses. 


116 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


23.21 


^ O 'They should pour hot liquor into the mouth of a 
Z— Brahmin who has drunk liquor. He is purihed after he 

dies. 2 If he has drunk it inadvertently, he should subsist on hot 
milk, hot ghee, hot water, and hot air, for a period of three days 
each; this is the arduous penance (cf. B 2.2.37-8). After that he 
should undergo initiation. 3 The same penance should be per- 
formed when someone consumes urine, excrement, or semen, 
4 as also a part of a predatory animal, a camel, or a donkey, 5 or 
of a village cock or pig. 6 If someone smells the breath of a man 
who has drunk liquor, he should control his breath and eat some 
ghee, 7 as also when he is bitten by an animal mentioned above. 

Incestuous Sex 8 A man who has had sex with the wife of an 
elder (A 1.6.32 n.) should he on a heated iron bed; 9 embrace a 
red-hot column (A 1.25.2 n.); ,0 or tear out his penis together 
with the testicles and, holding them in his cupped hands, walk 
straight toward the south-west until he collapses. "He is purified 
after he dies. 

12 Sex with one’s female friend or sister, a woman belonging to 
one’s lineage (A 2.11.15n.), the wife of one’s pupil, one’s 
daughter-in-law, and a cow is equal to sex with the wife of an 
elder. 13 According to some, it is equal to a student’s breaking the 
vow of chastity. 

Illicit Sex 14 If a woman has sex with a low-caste man, the king 
should have her publicly devoured by dogs 15 and have the man 
executed, 16 or punish him in the manner stated above (G 12.2). 

Breaking the Vow of Chastity 17 A student who has broken his 
vow of chastity should sacrifice a donkey to Nirrti at a cross- 
road. 18 Wearing its skin with the hairy side out and carrying a 
red bowl, he should beg food from seven houses while proclaim- 
ing his deed. 19 He will be purihed in a year. 20 If he discharges 
semen out of fear, because of an illness, or in sleep, or if he 
neglects to put wood into the sacred hre or to go begging for 
food, he should offer ghee or two pieces of firewood in the 
sacred hre reciting the two Retasya verses. 

Miscellaneous Sins 21 Someone who is asleep at sunrise should 
stand during that day, remaining chaste and without eating any 


117 



23.21 


Dharmasutras 


food; while someone who is asleep at sunset should stand during 
that night reciting the Savitrl verse. 22 When someone sees a 
sordid man (A 1.21.12-19), he should control his breath and 
look at the sun. 

Eating Improper Food 23 If a man eats something unfit to be 
eaten or consumes an impure substance, he should rid himself 
of all the excrement 24 by not eating for at least three days; 25 or 
else he should subsist for seven days on fruits that have fallen on 
their own without skipping any* 26 If he eats anything listed 
before the animals with five claws (G 17.22-7), he should throw 
up and eat some ghee. 

Sins of Speech 27 If someone uses abusive words, tells a lie, or 
inflicts an injury, he shall practise austerities for a maximum of 
three days. 28 If his words were true, however, he should offer a 
sacrifice using the Varum formulas and the Manavl hymns. 
29 According to some, telling a he at a marriage, during sex, in 
jest, or in grief is not a sin, 30 but not if it concerns an elder (A 
1.6.32 n.), 31 because when a man tells a lie with regard to an 
elder even in his mind and even with respect to something trivial, 
he brings ruin upon himself and upon seven generations before 
him and after him. 

Illicit Sex 32 If someone has sex with a low-caste woman, he 
should perform an arduous penance (B 2.2.38) for a year; 33 for 
twelve days, if he does it inadvertently; 34 for three days, if he has 
sex with a woman during her menstrual period. 


24 


Secret Penances 

1 For sins unknown to the public, a man may perform a 
secret penance. 2 A person who yearns to accept or actu- 
ally accepts something that he is forbidden to accept should 
stand in water and recite the four Taratsamandl verses, 3 while a 
person who yearns to eat food that is unfit to be eaten should 
sprinkle some earth on it. 

4 A man who has sex with a woman during her menstrual 
period, according to some, is purified by bathing, 5 while, 


118 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 25.5 

according to others, this applies only when the woman is his 
wife. 

6 The penance for performing an abortion (A 1.19.15 n.) is 
this. He should live on milk for ten days, on ghee for a second 
ten-day period, and on water for a third ten-day period, partak- 
ing of these only once a day in the morning. During this period 
he should keep his clothes wet and make offerings of his hair, 
nails, skin, flesh, blood, sinews, bones, and marrow in the sacred 
fire, saying at the conclusion of each offering: ‘I offer in the 
mouth of the self, in the jaws of death.’ 7 And this is another 
penance for it. 8 The observances are the same as above. 9 He 
should offer ghee in the sacred fire, while reciting the verse ‘You, 

0 Fire, take us across . . . ’, the Great Calls, and the Kusmanda 
verses. 

10 Alternatively, for the murder of a Brahmin, for drinking 
liquor, for stealing, and for having sex with the wife of an elder 
(A 1.6.32 n.), a man may perform the same observance, tire 
himself out by controlling his breath, and silently recite the 
Aghamarsana hymn. This is equal to participating in the ritual 
bath at the end of a horse sacrifice. 

11 Or else, a man may indeed purify himself by reciting the 
Savitrf verse one thousand times. 12 By reciting the Aghama- 
rsana hymn three times while standing in water a man is freed 
from all sins. 

^ ^ 'So, they ask: ‘Into how many does a student who has 
_/ broken his vow of chastity enter?’— 2 ‘Into the Maruts 
with his breaths; into Indra with his strength; into Brhaspati 
with the splendour of his vedic learning; and into just the Fire 
with everything else.’ 3 Such a student should kindle the sacred 
fire on the night of the new moon and offer as penance two 
oblations of ghee, 4 while reciting: ‘O Lust, I have spilled semen! 

1 have spilled semen, O Lust! To Lust, Svaha!’ and ‘O Lust, I 
have been squeezed out! I have been squeezed out, O Lust! To 
Lust, Svaha!’ He should then put a piece of firewood into the 
fire, sprinkle water around the fire, offer the Yajnavastu obla- 
tion, come near the fire, and worship it three times, reciting 
the verse ‘May the Maruts sprinkle me . . .’ 5 There are three 


119 



25.5 


Dharmasutras 


worlds here; he does this to conquer these worlds, to subjugate 
these worlds. 6 Some take this same rite to be a universally 
applicable penance, saying with regard to it: ‘A man who is 
in some way impure should make an offering and recite the 
ritual formulas in the above manner, giving a choice gift as the 
sacrificial fee.’ 

7 When someone cheats, slanders, does forbidden things, eats 
forbidden foods; when someone ejaculates his semen in a Sudra 
woman or in any place other than the vagina (B 3.7.2 n.); or 
when someone performs witchcraft even intentionally— he 
should bathe, reciting the Ablinga or VarunI formulas, or other 
purificatory texts. 8 If someone commits an offence by speaking 
or thinking of something forbidden, he should recite the five 
Calls (cf. G 1.5 In.). 

9 Alternatively, for all sins he may sip water in the morning 
reciting, ‘May the day and the sun purify me’, and in the evening 
reciting, ‘May the night and Varuna purify me.’ 10 Or else, by 
merely offering eight pieces of firewood into the sacred fire while 
reciting the formulas ‘You are the expiation of sins committed 
against the gods . . . ’, one is freed from all sins (B 4.3. 6-7). 

Arduous Penances 

^ /T 1 Next we will describe the three types of arduous pen- 
Z- VJ ances. 2 During three days a man should eat in the morn- 
ing food fit for sacrifice and not eat anything in the evening; 

3 during the next three days he should eat only in the evening; 

4 during the following three days he should not request 
food from anyone; 5 and during the final three days he should 
fast. 

6 A person who wants the penance to act quickly should 
remain standing during the day and seated at night; 7 speak 
the truth; 8 not talk with non-Aryas; 9 sing the Raurava and 
Yaudhajaya Samans every day; 10 bathe at dawn, noon, and 
dusk while reciting the verses ‘Waters, you are refreshing . . . ’; 
and dry himself while reciting the eight purificatory verses 
‘Golden-coloured, pure, and purifying . . .’ 

"Next, he offers libations of water, saying- 


120 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


26.12 


12 Homage— to the creator of ego- 

consciousness, to the creator of illusion, to 
the giver of gifts, to the effacer of sins, to the 
performer of austerities, to Punarvasu— 
Homage! 

Homage— to the one worthy of Munja grass 
offerings, to the one worthy of water 
offerings, to the one who finds wealth, to the 
one who finds all — Homage! 

Homage— to the one who assures success, to 
the one who assures total success, to the one 
who assures great success, to the one who 
best assures success — Homage! 

Homage— to Rudra, to the Lord of cattle, to the 
Great God, to the Three-eyed God, to the 
Lone Itinerant, to the Supreme Lord, to 
Hari, to Sarva, to Isana, to the Dread God, 
to the Wielder of the Thunderbolt, to the 
Violent God, to the Matted God — Homage! 

Homage— to the Sun, to Aditya — Homage! 

Homage— to the Blue-necked God, to the 
Dark-throated God— Homage! 

Homage— to the Black God, to the Brown 
God— Homage! 

Homage— to the First-born God, to the Best 
God, to the Eldest God, to Indra, to the 
Yellow-haired God, to the Continent God- 
Homage! 

Homage— to the True God, to the Purifying 
God, to the Fire-coloured God, to Passion, 
to the God whose form is passion — Homage! 

Homage— to the Brilliant God, to the God of 
brilliant form — Homage! 

Homage— to the Fiery God, to the God of 
fiery form — Homage! 

Homage— to Sobhya, to the Fine Man, to the 
Great Man, to the Middle Man, to the High- 
est Man, to the Chaste Student— Homage! 


121 



26.12 


Dharmasutras 


Homage — to the God who wears the moon on 
his forehead, to the God who wears a skin— 
Homage! (cf. SamB 1.2.7) 

13 The worship of the sun is carried out in the very same man- 
ner, 14 as also the offering of ghee in the sacred fire. 15 At the end 
of the twelve days, he should cook an oblation of milk rice and 
offer it in the sacred fire to the following deities, saying, 
16 ‘To Fire Svaha! To Soma Svaha! To Fire and Soma Svaha! To 
Indra and Fire Svaha! To Indra Svaha! To All-gods Svaha! 
To Brahman Svaha! To Prajapati Svaha! To Fire who makes the 
offering flawless Svaha!’ 17 After that he should gratify the 
Brahmins. 

18 These very rules explain the procedure of the very arduous 
penance, 19 at which he should eat only as much as he can take in 
a single mouthful. 

“Taking only water is the third type of arduous penance, and 
it is called the ‘penance beyond the very arduous penance’. 

21 By performing the first, a man becomes pure, cleansed, and 
fit to engage in the occupations of his class. 22 By performing the 
second, he is freed from all except the grievous sins causing loss 
of caste. 23 By performing the third, all his sins are wiped away. 

24 By performing all three types of arduous penances, he 
becomes a bath-graduate with respect to all the Vedas, he 
becomes known to all the gods— 25 so also a man who knows 
this. 


Lunar Penance 

^ ^7 'Next, we will describe the lunar penance. 2 To it also 
Z/ / apply the rules given under arduous penance. 3 A person 
who performs this as a penitential vow should shave his head. 
4 On the day before the full moon he should fast. 5 He should 
offer libations of water, offer ghee in the sacred fire, consecrate 
the sacrificial oblation, and worship the moon using the follow- 
ing formulas: ‘Swell up . . . ’, ‘May the juices unite in you . . . ’, 
and ‘Being born, it becomes ever new . . . ’. 6 He should offer 
ghee in the sacred fire, reciting the four verses ‘O gods, whatever 


122 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


28.5 


offence we have committed against the gods . . . 7 and at the 

end put pieces of firewood into the fire, reciting the formulas 
‘You are the expiation for sins committed against the gods . . . ’ 

8 The mouthfuls of food should be consecrated by mentally 
reciting these formulas, one for each mouthful: ‘OM! Earth! 
Mid Space! Sky! Austerity! Truth! Fame! Prosperity! Vigour! 
Refreshment! Strength! Lustre! Male! Law! Auspicious!’; 9 or 
else he may consecrate all of them, saying ‘Homage Svaha!’ 
10 The mouthfuls shall be of such a size as not to distend the 
mouth. 

"The sacrificial oblations are milk rice, almsfood, barley 
flour, husked grain, barley gruel, vegetables, milk, curd, ghee, 
roots, fruits, and water, each succeeding being more excellent 
than each preceding. 

12 On the full-moon day he should eat fifteen mouthfuls, and 
during the fortnight of the waning moon reduce the amount 
of food by one mouthful a day. 13 On the new-moon day he 
should fast, and during the fortnight of the waxing moon 
increase the amount of food by one mouthful a day. 14 Some 
invert this procedure (B 3.8.26 n.). "This is a month of the lunar 
fast. 

16 A man who completes one such month becomes free from 
sin, free from evil; and he wipes out all offences. I7 A man who 
completes a second such month purifies his ten ancestors and 
ten descendants, with himself as the twenty-first, and also those 
alongside whom he eats (A2.17.21 n.). 18 A man who completes 
one year in this manner will dwell in the same world as the 
moon. 


INHERITANCE 


O Q 1 Af ter their father’s death, the sons may divide the estate, 
A* O 2 or, if the father so wishes, even during his lifetime but 
after their mother has reached menopause. 3 Alternatively, the 
eldest son may inherit the entire estate, and he should maintain 
the others just as the father. 4 When the estate is partitioned, 
however, ritual activities increase. 

5 The additional share of the eldest son consists of 


123 



28.5 


Dharmasutras 


one-twentieth of the estate, a pair of livestock, a carriage yoked 
to animals with teeth in both jaws (G 17.28 n.), and a bull. 6 The 
additional share of the middle son consists of animals that are 
one-eyed, old, hornless, and tailless, if there are more than one 
of these in the herd. 7 The additional share of the youngest son 
consists of sheep, grain, iron utensils, a house, a cart yoked with 
oxen, and one of each kind of livestock. 8 All the rest are to be 
divided equally. 

9 Alternatively, the eldest son may take two shares, 10 and the 
others one each. 11 Or else, each son may take one kind of prop- 
erty, selecting according to seniority whatever he likes, 12 as also 
ten heads of livestock, 13 but not of one-hoofed animals or 
slaves. 14 A bull is the additional share of the eldest, 15 while fif- 
teen cows and a bull are the additional share of the eldest son 
from the seniormost wife. ^Alternatively, the eldest son born 
from a wife who is not the seniormost may receive a share equal 
to that of his younger brothers born from the seniormost wife. 
17 Or else, the special shares are fixed within each group of 
brothers from the same mother. 


Appointed Daughter 

18 A father who has no son should offer an oblation to Fire and 
Prajapati, proclaim ‘Your son is for my benefit’, and appoint his 
daughter. 19 According to some, he may appoint the daughter by 
his mere intention. 20 Because of this uncertainty, a man should 
not marry a girl who has no brother. 


Property of a Sonless Man 

21 The estate of a man who dies sonless is shared by those related 
to him through ancestry (A 2.14.2 n.), lineage, or a common seer 
(A 2. 1 1 . 1 5 n.), and by his wife. 

Levirate 22 Alternatively, the widow may seek to procure a son. 
23 When her brother-in-law is alive, a son born to such a widow 
by another person does not share in the inheritance. 

Women’s Property 24 The wife’s property goes to her daughters 


124 



Dharmasutra of Gautama 


28.40 


who are unmarried or indigent. 25 A sister’s dowry goes to her 
uterine brothers after her mother dies, 26 or, according to some, 
even before. 

Inheritance after Partition 27 When a brother who, after par- 
titioning, has not reunited dies, the eldest brother takes his 
estate. 28 When a brother who, after partitioning, has reunited 
dies, his coparcener takes his estate. 29 When a son is born after 
the partition, he alone inherits the paternal estate. 

Estates of Coparceners 30 A learned coparcener, if he so wishes, 
does not have to give what he has earned on his own to his 
coparceners who are not learned, 31 whereas coparceners who 
are not learned should share equally what they have earned on 
their own. 


Legal Heirs 

32 A natural son, a son begotten on the wife, a son given in 
adoption, a contrived son, a son born in secret, and a son 
adopted after being abandoned by his birth parents— these 
share in the inheritance. 33 A son of an unmarried woman, a son 
born to a woman who was pregnant at marriage, a son born to a 
re-married woman, a son born to an appointed daughter, a son 
who hands himself over for adoption, and a purchased son— 
these share in the lineage* (A 2.1 1.15 n.) 34 and receive one- 
quarter of the estate in the absence of the sons in the list 
beginning with the natural son. 

35 A son born to a Brahmin by a Ksatriya wife, if he happens 
to be the eldest and possesses good qualities, receives an equal 
share of the estate, 36 but he is not entitled to the additional share 
reserved for the eldest son. 37 When a Brahmin has sons by 
Ksatriya and Vaisya wives, the division takes place in the same 
way as between sons by Brahmin and Ksatriya wives; 38 so also 
when a Ksatriya has such sons. 39 When his father dies without 
heirs, even a son by a Sudra wife may receive a share sufficient to 
maintain himself, if he has been obedient like a pupil (cf. B 
2.3.10-13). 

40 According to some, even a son by a wife of the same class as 


125 



28.40 


Dharmasutras 


the husband does not receive a share of the inheritance if he 
lives an unrighteous life. 

41 When a Brahmin dies childless, Vedic scholars should divide 
his estate among themselves; 42 or, according to some, the king 
should take it. 

43 Mentally retarded and impotent brothers should receive 
maintenance, 44 whereas a son of a mentally retarded brother 
receives a share of the inheritance. 45 When a man fathers sons 
through women belonging to a caste higher than his, they are to 
be treated like the sons by a Sudra wife. 

46 Sources of water, security measures, and cooked food are 
not to be divided , 47 as also women belonging to the family. 

RESOLVING DOUBTS REGARDING THE LAW 

48 In matters that are unclear, one should follow what is endorsed 
by a minimum of ten persons who are cultured, skilled in rea- 
soning, and free from greed . 49 A legal assembly is said to consist 
of a minimum of ten members— four who have mastered the 
four Vedas; three belonging to the three orders enumerated first; 
and three who know three different Legal Treatises . 50 When such 
persons are unavailable, however, one should follow in doubtful 
cases what is recommended by a learned and cultured Brahmin 
who knows the Veda, 51 because such a man is incapable of 
hurting or favouring creatures. 

52 A man who knows the Law, by his knowledge of and adher- 
ence to the Law, obtains the heavenly world to a greater degree 
than those who follow the Law. 

53 That is the Law. 

That concludes the Gautama Dharmasutra 


126 



The Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


The Dharmasutra of Baudhayana, as that of Apastamba, 
forms part of the Kalpasutra ascribed to this eponymous author 
and divided into prasnas (lit., ‘questions’) or books. Unlike 
Apastamba’s, however, the ritual texts of Baudhayana have been 
tampered with repeatedly and contain numerous additions and 
interpolations. The extent and structure of the entire Kalpasutra 
are not altogether clear. It appears that the first twenty-nine 
books contain the Srautasutra and other ritual treatises; book 
30 contains the Sulvasutra (vedic geometry); and the next four 
books comprise the Grhyasutra. The last four books are the 
Dharmasutra. The only commentary on the Dharmasutra is by 
Govindasvamin. His commentary is clearly inferior to that of 
Haradatta on Apastamba and Gautama, and his date is 
uncertain but he cannot be very ancient. 

There is scholarly agreement that the last two books of the 
Dharmasutra are later additions (Biihler 1879-82, ii, pp. xxxiii- 
xxxv; Kane 1962-75, i. 42-3). Chapters 17 and 18 of Book Two 
containing the rite of renunciation is also undoubtedly a late 
addition from a renunciatory handbook. The text appears to 
have come under the influence of people quite partial to, or 
interested in, ascetic practice, which would account for the 
inclusion of several sections on various types of ascetics (B 
2.17-18; 3.1-3). The original Dharmasutra, what I call ‘Proto- 
Baudhayana’, consisted of Book One and the first sixteen 
chapters of Book Two. Even this section, however, may have 
undergone tampering and interpolation. 

The organization of the treatise leaves a lot to be desired, 
especially when we compare it with Apastamba. Identical 
topics are treated in different places: funerary rites at 1.11.24-6 
and 2.14-15; inheritance at 1.11.11-16 and 2.3. Marriage 
(1.20) is introduced long before the section dealing with the 
householder (2.4). Baudhayana contains more detailed descrip- 
tions of rituals— sacrifices, twilight worship, bathing, quenching 
libations (tarpana ) — than any other Dharmasutra. 


127 



Dharmasutras 


CONTENTS 

BOOK ONE 

SOURCES OF LAW 


1.1-6 

Principal Sources 

1.7-16 

Legal Assembly 
Regional Differences 

2.1-8 

The South and the North 

2.9-12 

Land of the Aryas 

2.13-17 

Border Regions 
THE STUDENT 
Initiation 

3.1-5 

Length of Time 

3.6 

Uninitiated Children 

3.7-12 

Time of Initiation 
A Student's Code of Conduct 

3.13-15 

Insignia 

3.16-18 

Begging 

3.19-24 

General Rules 

3.25-34 

Etiquette of Greeting 

3.35-8 

Conduct towards the Teacher 

3.39-4.8 

General Rules and Final Bath 
THE BATH-GRADUATE 

5.1-13 

General Rules 

6.1-7.10 

Water Pot 
Purification 

8.1-4 

Internal and External Purification 

8.5-10 

The Sacrificial Cord 

8.11-31 

Washing and Sipping 

8.32-53 

Purification of Things 

9.1-10.1 

Purity of Persons and Things 

10.2-9 

Purity of Food 

10.10-15 

Excretions 

10.16-19 

The Lower Body 

10.20-34 

Purity and Occupations 
Death of a Relative 

11.1-10 

Period of Impurity 

11.11-16 

Inheritance 

11.17-23 

Death and Birth Impurity 

11.24-6 

Funerary Rites 

11.27-31 

Death Impurity for Distant Relatives 


128 



11 . 32-41 

12 . 1 - 15 
12.16 

13 . 1 - 16 

13 . 17 - 20 
13 . 21 - 14.10 
14 . 11-19 

15 . 1 - 28 
15 . 29-32 

16 . 1 - 5 

16 . 6 - 17.15 

18 . 1 - 8 
18 . 9-13 
18 . 14-16 

18 . 17 - 19.6 

19 . 7 - 16 
20 . 1 - 21.3 
21 . 4-22 


1.1 

1.2-12 

1 . 13 - 15 
1 . 16-17 
1 . 18-22 
1 . 23-35 
1.36 
1 . 37-40 
2.1-11 
2 . 12-14 
2 . 15-17 
2 . 18-25 
2 . 26-9 

2 . 30 - 3.1 

3 . 2-13 

3 . 14 - 30 

3 . 31 - 42 
3 . 43-6 


Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 

Impurity from Touch 
Forbidden Food 
Annual Course of Study 
Sacrifices 

Sacrificial Garments 
Sacrificial Ground 
Sacrificial Utensils 
Sacrificial Offerings 
Sacrificial Actions 
Observances 
SOCIAL CLASSES 
Mixed Classes 
KING 
War 

Duties and Taxes 
Punishment 
Witnesses 
MARRIAGE 

SUSPENSION OF VEDIC RECITATION 

BOOK TWO 

PENANCES 
Penances for Killing 
Incestuous Sex 
Theft 

Drinking Liquor 

Penances Relating to Students 

Excommunication from and Readmission to Caste 

Improper Marriage 

Sins Causing Loss of Caste 

Secondary Sins Causing Loss of Caste 

Sins Making a Man Sordid 

Outcastes 

Sale of Forbidden Goods 
Types of Penances 
INHERITANCE 
Partitioning of the Paternal Estate 
Types of Sons 

Inheritance of Different Sons 
Inheritance of Women 


129 



Dharmasutras 


WOMEN 


3.47-4.5 

Adultery 

4.6-10 

Divorce and Widowhood 

4.11-15 

Women with Whom Sex Is Forbidden 
HOUSEHOLDER 

4.16-21 

Lawful Occupations 

4.22-6 

Duties of a Householder 

5.1-9 

Bathing and Libations 

5.10 

Duties of a Bath-Graduate 

5.11-20 

Feeding Guests 

5.21-6.6 

Rules of Eating 

6.7-42 

General Rules 

7.1-22 

Twilight Worship 

8.1-13 

Bath 

8.14-10.6 

Quenching Libations 

11.1-8 

Great Sacrifices 
ORDERS OF LIFE 

11.9-12 

Argument of Opponents 

11.13 

Student 

11.14-15 

Forest Hermit 

11.16-26 

Wandering Ascetic 

11.27-34 

Author’s Judgement 
HOUSEHOLDER (continued) 

12.1-13.4 

Offering to Vital Breaths 

13.5-13 

Eating 

14.1-15.12 

ANCESTRAL OFFERINGS 

16.1-14 

THE IMPORTANCE OF CHILDREN 

17.1 

PROCEDURE OF RENUNCIATION 

17.2-6 

Time for Renunciation 

17.7-9 

Praise of Renunciation 
Rite of Renunciation 

17.10-21 

Preliminary Rites 

17.22-6 

Last Sacrifice 

17.27-31 

Formula of Renunciation 

17.32-6 

Taking the Insignia 

17.37—41 

Concluding Rites 

17.42-18.3 

Rules of Conduct 
Rules about Food 

18.4-6 

Begging 

18.7-14 

Eating 

18.15-19 

Special Vows 


130 



18 . 20-6 

18.27 


1.1-8 

1 . 9 - 17 
1 . 18-26 

2 . 1 - 19 

3 . 1 - 2 
3 . 3-8 

3 . 9 - 22 

4 . 1 - 6 

5 . 1 - 7 

6 . 1 - 13 

7 . 1 - 18 

8 . 1 - 30 

9 . 1 - 21 

10 . 1 - 18 


1.1-10 

1 . 11-16 

1 . 17-21 

1 . 22-30 

2 . 1-16 

3 . 1 - 4.10 

5 . 1 - 7.3 
7 . 4 - 8.16 


Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 

Daily Rites 
Conclusion 

BOOK THREE 

HOLY HOUSEHOLDERS: Salinas, Yayavaras, and 
Cakracaras 

Rite of Initiation 
Rules of Conduct 
Nine Means of Livelihood 
FOREST HERMIT 
Hermits Who Cook 
Hermits Who Do Not Cook 
PENANCES 

Student Breaking His Vow 
Aghamarsana 
Barley Dish 
Kusmanda Rite 
Lunar Penance 

Vedic Recitation while Fasting 
Justification of Penance 

BOOK FOUR 

Controlling the Breath as a Penance 
Offences Regarding Marriage 
Marital Offences 

Yogic Practice and Control of Breath 
Purificatory Texts 
Penances for Secret Sins 
RITES TO OBTAIN WISHES 
Preliminary Purifications 
Gana Oblation for Securing Wishes 


131 



BOOK ONE 


SOURCES OF LAW 
Principal Sources 

I 1 The Law is taught in each Veda, 2 in accordance with 
which we will explain it. 3 What is given in the tradition (A 
2.15.25 n.) is the second, 4 and the conventions of cultured 
people are the third.* 5 Now, cultured people are those who are 
free from envy and pride, possess just a jarful of grain, and are 
free from covetousness, hypocrisy, arrogance, greed, folly, and 
anger. 6 As it is said: 

Cultured people are those who have studied the 
Veda together with its supplements (A 2.8.10— 

11) in accordance with the Law, know how to 
draw inferences from them, and are able to 
adduce as proofs express vedic texts. (G 3.36 n.) 

Legal Assembly 

7 When these fail to address an issue, it falls on a legal assembly 
with a minimum of ten members. 8 Now, they also quote these 
verses: 


Four men, each proficient in one of the four 
Vedas; one exegete; one man who knows the 
Vedic Supplements; one legal scholar; and three 
learned Brahmins belonging to three different 
orders of life— these constitute a legal assembly 
with a minimum of ten members. 

9 Or they could be five, or three; or even a single 
man, if he is of unimpeachable conduct, may 
explain the Law, but not others, be they in their 
thousands. 

10 An uneducated Brahmin is like an elephant 

132 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


1 . 2.3 


made of wood or a deer made of leather: all 
three are so only in name. 

11 When fools, befuddled by darkness, make a 
pronouncement without knowing the Law, that 
sin, compounded a hundredfold, engulfs those 
who proclaim it. 

12 The Law has many gates and its path is nar- 
row and difficult to follow. When there is a 
doubt, therefore, one man, however learned, 
should not pronounce on it. 

13 When twice-born men, riding in the chariot 
of the Legal Treatises and wielding the sword 
of the Veda, make a pronouncement even in 
jest, that, the tradition tells us, is the highest 
Law. 

14 As the wind and the sun make the water col- 
lected on a stone disappear, so a sin clinging to 
a sinner vanishes like that water. 

15 A man who knows the Law should determine 
the penances after examining a man’s build, 
strength, and age, as well as the time and the 
deed. 

16 Even if people who have not kept the vows or 
studied the Veda and who use their caste only 
to make a living come together in their thou- 
sands, they are incapable of constituting a legal 
assembly. 


Regional Differences 

2 The South and the North 1 There are five areas in which the 
practices of the south and the north differ from each other 
(see p. xxvii). 2 We will explain the ones peculiar to the south. 
3 They are: eating in the company of an uninitiated person, eat- 
ing in the company of one’s wife, eating stale food, and marry- 
ing the daughter of the mother’s brother or the father’s sister. 


133 



1.2.4 


Dharmasutras 


4 The ones peculiar to the north are: selling wool, drinking 
rum, trafficking in animals with teeth in both jaws, making a 
living as a soldier, and travelling by sea. 

5 If a man follows the practices of the former in the latter, and 
those of the latter in the former, he becomes defiled. 6 Each prac- 
tice is based solely on the authority of the customs of that 
region. 

7 That is untrue, say Gautama (cf. G 11.20). 8 A man should 
pay heed to neither set of practices, because they are shown to 
be opposed to the tradition of cultured people. 

Land of the Aryas 9 The region to the east of where the Sarasvati 
disappears, west of Kalaka forest, south of the Himalayas, and 
north of Pariyatra mountains is the land of the Aryas.* The 
practices of that land alone are authoritative. 

10 According to some, the land of the Aryas is the region 
between the rivers Ganges and Yamuna. 11 In this connection, 
moreover, the Bhallavins cite this verse (Va 1.14): 

12 The boundary river in the west and land of 
the rising sun in the east— between these as far 
as the black antelope roams, so far does vedic 
splendour extend. 

Border Regions 

13 The inhabitants of Avanti, Anga, Magadha, 
Surastra, the Deccan, Upavrt, and Sindh, as 
well as the Sauvlras, are of mixed blood. 

14 If someone visits the lands of the Arattas, Karaskaras, 
Pundras, Sauvlras, Vangas, Kalingas, or Pranunas, he should 
offer a Punastoma or a Sarvaprstha sacrifice. 15 Now, they also 
quote: 

When someone travels to the land of the 
Kalingas he commits a sin through his feet. The 
seers have prescribed the Vaisvanari sacrifice as 
an expiation for him. 


134 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


1 . 3.12 


16 When someone has committed even a multi- 
tude of sins, they commend the Pavitresti for 
their removal; for it is the highest means of 
purification. 

17 Now, they also quote: 

When someone performs every season the 
Vaisvanari, the Vratapatl, and the Pavitresti, he 
is completely released from all sins. 


THE STUDENT 
Initiation 

3 Length of Time 1 Forty-eight years, according to ancient 
practice, is the period of studentship for studying the Veda; 
2 alternatively, twenty-four years, or twelve years per Veda , 3 or at 
least one year for each book, 4 or, given the uncertainty of life, 
until he has learned it . 5 A vedic text states: ‘A man should estab- 
lish his sacred fires while his hair is still black.’ 

Uninitiated Children 

6 Before the cord of Munja grass is tied, they do 
not impose any ritual observances on a child, 
for until he is born through the Veda, he is 
equal to a Sudra in conduct. 

Time of Initiation 7 The years are counted from conception. A 
Brahmin should be initiated in the eighth year after conception, 
8 a Ksatriya three years later than a Brahmin , 9 and a Vaisya one 
year later than a Ksatriya. 

10 According to the order of the classes, spring, summer, and 
autumn are the seasons in which they are initiated; 11 the 
Gayatrl, the Tristubh, and the Jagati are the metres used in their 
initiation;* 12 and the time for their initiation does not lapse until 
the sixteenth, the twenty-second, and the twenty-fourth year, 
respectively. 


135 



1.3.13 


Dharmasutras 


A Student’s Code of Conduct 

Insignia 13 Their girdles are made of Munja grass, a bowstring, 
and hemp; 14 their skins are those of a black antelope, a spotted 
Ruru antelope, and a billy goat; 15 and their staffs should be cut 
from a tree suitable for use in a sacrifice and reach the crown of 
the head, the forehead, and the tip of the nose, respectively for 
each class.* 

Begging 16 He should go around begging for almsfood using the 
seven-syllabic formula, with ‘Madam’ (bhavati) at the begin- 
ning, ‘almsfood’ ( bhiksam ) in the middle, and ‘give’ (dehi) at the 
end, without pronouncing the syllables ksa (of bhiksam) and hi 
(of dehi) too loudly. 17 He should request almsfood from people 
of all classes, a Brahmin placing ‘Madam’ at the beginning, a 
Ksatriya placing ‘Madam’ in the middle, and a Vaisya placing 
‘Madam’ at the end (A 1.3.28-30 n.). 18 The people from whom 
the request is made should be Brahmins and so forth who are 
devoted to the occupations proper to their class. 

General Rules 19 Every day he should fetch firewood from a wild 
tract and offer it in the sacred fire. 20 He shall speak the truth and 
remain modest and free from pride. 21 He should get up before 
his teacher, go to sleep after him, 22 and never disobey his teach- 
er’s commands in any matter, except when it entails a sin causing 
loss of caste. 23 Let him speak with women only as much as is 
required, 24 and refrain from dancing, singing, playing musical 
instruments, wearing perfumes or necklaces, using shoes or 
umbrellas, and applying oil or collyrium. 

Etiquette of Greeting 25 He should clasp the teacher’s right leg 
with his right hand and the teacher’s left leg with his left hand. 
26 If he desires long life and heaven, he may, if he so wishes, act in 
the same manner towards other virtuous people with his teach- 
er’s permission. 27 After saying ‘I am so-and-so, sir!’ while he 
touches his ears so as to concentrate his mind, 28 let him clasp the 
legs below the knees and above the feet. 

29 He should not do so while he or the person greeted is seated, 
lying down, or impure. 30 If he is able, he should not remain 
impure even for a moment (A 1.1 1.32 n.). 31 He should not greet 


136 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


1.4.2 


anyone while he is carrying firewood, holding a water pot, 
flowers, or food in his hand, or engaged in other similar activ- 
ities. 32 When he meets someone, he should not greet him in an 
exaggerated way.* 33 If he has reached the age of puberty, he 
shall not greet his brother’s wives and the young wives of his 
teacher, 34 but it is not an offence to sit with them in a boat, on a 
rock, plank, elephant, terrace, or mat, or in a carriage. 

Conduct towards the Teacher 35 Assisting in getting dressed, 
rubbing the body, attending during the bath, and eating the left- 
overs (A 1.3.27n.)— he should perform these for this teacher, 
36 as also for the teacher’s son, with exception of eating his left- 
overs even if he is very learned, 37 and for the teacher’s wife, with 
the exception of assisting in getting dressed, rubbing the body, 
attending during the bath, and eating the leftovers. 

38 He should run after his teacher when he is running, walk 
behind him when he is walking, and stand by him when he is 
standing. 

General Rules and Final Bath 39 When he bathes, he should not 
be boisterous in the water 40 but plunge in like a stick. 

41 During a time of adversity, he may study under a teacher 
who is not a Brahmin; 42 and, while he is studying, he shall obey 
him and walk behind him. 43 This very activity purifies both of 
them. 44 The same applies to the brothers, sons, and other pupils 
of the teacher; 45 whereas he should only rise up and greet an 
officiating priest, a father-in-law, or a paternal or a maternal 
uncle who is younger than he. 46 Katya states that these persons 
should return the greeting, 47 because this rule is illustrated in the 
story of the young Angirasa.* 


4 


1 If he gets no merit or money, or even the cus- 
tomary obedience, then he should go to the 
grave with his knowledge. Let him not sow it on 
barren soil. 


2 As a fire burns up dry grass, so the Veda burns 
a man who requests it without showing any 
respect. Let him, therefore, never disclose the 
Veda to those who fail to honour him accord- 


ing to their ability. 


137 



1 . 4.3 


Dharmasutras 


3 They proclaim this teaching with regard to him: 

4 Now, Brahman handed over the creatures to Death. The 
only creature he did not hand over to him was the student. 
Death said to Brahman: ‘Let me have a share of him also.’ 
Brahman replied: ‘Only on the night that he fails to bring a 
piece of firewood.’ 

5 The night, therefore, on which a student fails to bring a 
piece of firewood, he spends by subtracting it from his life 
span. A student should bring a piece of firewood, therefore, 
lest he spend that night by subtracting it from his life span. 

6 It is a long sacrificial session that a man undertakes here, 
when he undertakes the life of a student. The piece of fire- 
wood that he offers in the sacred fire when he is about to be 
initiated as a student constitutes its introductory rite; the 
piece of firewood he offers when he is about to take the con- 
cluding bath constitutes its final rite; and the pieces of fire- 
wood he offers in between those two constitute the offerings 
of the sacrificial session. 

7 Now, a Brahmin, when he is about to undertake the life of 
a student, enters the creatures in four parts. With one-quarter 
he enters the fire, with one-quarter death, and with one- 
quarter the teacher; while one-quarter remains within him- 
self. When he offers a piece of firewood in the fire, he buys 
back that quarter of himself that is in the fire. He consecrates 
and places it within himself, and it enters him. 

And when, making himself poor and feeling no shame, he 
begs for almsfood and observes chastity, he buys back that 
quarter of himself that is in death. He consecrates and places 
it within himself, and it enters him. 

And when he does what his teacher tells him to do, he buys 
back that quarter of himself that is in the teacher. He con- 
secrates and places it within himself, and it enters him. 

And when he performs his private vedic recitation, he buys 
back that quarter of himself that is in himself. He consecrates 
and places it within himself, and it enters him.* 

After he has taken the bath that concludes his student life, 
he should never beg for almsfood. He may beg almsfood even 


138 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


1.5.13 


after the final bath to assuage the hunger of his relatives and 
ancestors, and for the sake of other rites.* 

If he cannot find another woman (A 3.28-30 n.) from whom 
he could beg for almsfood, he may even beg from the wife of 
his own teacher or from his mother. He should not let the 
seventh night pass without begging for almsfood. 

He commits a sin by failing to beg for alms- 
food and to feed the sacred fire with firewood. 

If he fails to do that for seven nights, he 
should undergo the penance prescribed for a 
student who has broken his vow of chastity.* 

(B 2.1.30-5) 

All the Vedas enter a man who knows this and 
who acts in this way. 8 As a fire glows when it is 
set ablaze, so does a man here who knows this 
and lives the life of a student glow when he has 
taken his final bath.(SB 11.3.3; GoB 1.2.6) 

So states a Brahmana. 

THE BATH-GRADUATE 
General Rules 

5 ‘Next, the rules of a bath-graduate (A 1.30.4n.). 2 He shall 
wear a lower and an upper garment; 3 carry a bamboo staff 
4 and a pot filled with water; 5 wear a double sacrificial cord (A 
1.6.18 n.), 6 a turban, a skin as an upper garment, and shoes; 
carry an umbrella; maintain the sacred domestic fire; and offer 
the new-moon and full-moon sacrifices. 7 On the days of the 
moon’s change (A 1.26.14n.), moreover, he should get the hair 
of his head, beard, and body shaved and his nails clipped. 

8 This is how he should maintain himself. 9 He should ask for 
uncooked food from Brahmins, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, and 
Rathakaras, 10 or even for almsfood.* “When he does so, he 
should stand in silence. 12 And with that food he should perform 
all the cooked oblations offered to gods and ancestors, as well as 
rites for securing prosperity. 13 By following this procedure, says 


139 



1.5.13 


Dharmasutras 


Baudhayana, the supreme seers attain the highest abode of 
Prajapati, the supreme lord. 


Water Pot 

^ 1 Now, they prescribed for him the use of a water pot. 

2 Fire is said to reside in the right ear of a billy 
goat and in the right hand of a Brahmin, as 
well as in water and in a clump of Kusa grass.* 

After performing his purification, therefore, he should rub the 
water pot all around with his hand, while reciting ‘Blaze up, O 
Fire . . .’ This, indeed, amounts to surrounding it with fire and is 
better than firing the pot again.* 

3 4 Nevertheless, they point out the following: ‘If in his mind 
he has an inkling that the pot has been slightly sullied, he should 
set fire to some Kusa or ordinary grass and burn the pot all 
around in a clockwise pattern (A 1.7.2 n.). When pots have been 
touched by dogs, crows, and the like, he should burn them even 
more until they become fiery red.’ 5 When they have come into 
contact with urine, faeces, blood, semen, and the like, they 
should be thrown away. 

6 If his water pot breaks, he should offer a hundred oblations 
of ghee reciting the Calls or simply recite them softly a hundred 
times. 7 While reciting 

Earth has gone to earth, the mother has joined 
the mother. May we become rich in sons and 
cattle, and may he who hates us shatter apart 
(SadB 1.6; KS 25.5.29) 

he should collect the broken pieces, throw them into water, recite 
the Savitri verse ten times, and once again take another pot. 
8 Taking refuge in Varuna by reciting ‘That is yours, Varuna. 
Once again it has come to me. OM’, let him meditate on this 
syllable. 

9 If he accepts the pot from a Sudra, he should 
recite the Savitri verse one hundred times; from 


140 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


1 . 7.4 


a Vaisya, tradition says, fifty times; from a 
Ksatriya, twenty-five times; and from a Brah- 
min, they say, ten times. 

10 Vedic savants ponder the question: ‘After the sun has set, is 
it or is it not permissible for a man to take water?’ 11 The superior 
view is that it is permissible for him to do so; 12 he should control 
his breath while he is taking water, 13 for fire undoubtedly takes 
up water.* 

14 ‘When someone has washed his hands and feet with water 
from his pot,’ it is stated, ‘he remains impure vis-a-vis others as 
long as he remains wet. He uses that water only to purify 
himself; he should not use it for other rites.’ 15 ‘Or else,’ says 
Baudhayana, ‘he becomes pure at each purification by washing 
his hands up to the wrists.’ 

16 Now they also quote: 

7 ' The water pot was ordained in ancient times 
by Brahman and the foremost of sages for the 
purification of twice-born people. One should, 
therefore, carry it at all times. 

If a man cares for his own well-being, he should 
use it without hesitation to purify himself, to 
drink, and to perform his twilight devotions. 

2 Let him perform them with a clear mind. A 
wise man should not sully his mind. The Self- 
existent One came into being carrying a water 
pot. Therefore, he should go about carrying a 
water pot. 

3 While he is voiding urine or excrement, he should hold the 
water pot in his right hand; and while he is sipping water, he 
should hold it in his left hand.* That is the settled practice 
among good people. 

4 As the sacrificial cup is said to be pure because 
it comes into contact with Soma, so the water 
pot remains always pure because it comes into 
contact with water. 


141 



1.7.5 


Dharmasutras 


5 Let him, therefore, avoid using it in rites for 
ancestors and gods, and in fire rituals. 

6 He should, therefore, never go on the road without his water 
pot, not even to the village boundary or from one house to 
another, 7 or, according to some, even a step beyond the length 
of an arrow. 8 ‘He needs to do so only if he wants to perform his 
rites without interruption,’ says Baudhayana. 9 And scripture 
states that there is a Rgvedic verse to this effect* 

Purification 

8 Internal and External Purification 'Next, the method of 
purification. 

2 Water cleanses the body, and knowledge the 
understanding. Abstaining from hurting others 
cleanses one’s inner being, and truth cleanses 
the mind. 

'Internal purification is the cleansing of the mind. 4 We will 
explain external purification. 

The Sacrificial Cord 5 A sacrificial cord is made using three 
triple strings of Kusa grass or cotton 6 and reaches up to the 
navel. 7 It is put on by raising the right arm and lowering the left 
arm and the head. 8 The opposite procedure is used in rites for 
the ancestors. 9 When it is worn around the neck, it is called 
‘pendent’; 10 and when it is worn below, it is called ‘low-hung’ (A 
1.6.18 n.). 

Washing and Sipping "He should perform his purification 
seated on his haunches in a clean spot and facing the east or the 
north. Placing his right arm between his knees, he should wash 
his feet and then his hands up to the wrists. 12 He should not use 
the water left over from washing his feet for sipping; 13 or, if he 
uses it, he should pour some on the ground before sipping. 

14 He should sip using the part of the hand sacred to Brahman. 
15 The base of the thumb is the part of the hand sacred to Brah- 
man; 16 the top of the thumb is the part sacred to ancestors; the 


142 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 1.8.27 

tips of the fingers is the part sacred to gods; and the base of the 
fingers is the part sacred to seers.* 

17 He shall not use for sipping water that drips from the fin- 
gers; water with bubbles or froth; water that is warm, pungent, 
salty, muddy, or discoloured; or water that has a bad odour or 
taste. 18-19 Three times he should sip water sufficient to reach his 
heart (A 1. 16.2 n.)— without laughing, talking, standing, or 
looking around; without bowing his head or stooping; never 
with his topknot untied, his neck wrapped, or his head covered; 
never hurriedly or without wearing his sacrificial cord over his 
left shoulder and under his right arm; never with his feet spread 
apart or his loins wrapped, or without holding his right arm 
between his knees; and without making a noise. 20 He should 
wipe his lips three times; 21 twice, according to some. 22 Sudras 
and women do both the sipping and the wiping just once. 
23 Now, they also quote: 

A Brahmin is purified by water reaching the 
heart, a Ksatriya by water reaching the throat, 
and a Vaisya by water taken into the mouth; 
whereas a woman and a Sudra are purified by 
wetting the lips. (A 1.16.2n.) 

24 Drops clinging to the teeth are to be treated 
like the teeth themselves, because a man bears 
them like the teeth themselves; he does not 
have to sip water when they drop. A man is 
purified from them just as he would be from his 
own saliva. 

25 Now they also quote: 

Bits of food sticking to the teeth are to be treat- 
ed like the teeth themselves. A man is purified 
by just swallowing whatever is in the mouth or 
what remains in the mouth after sipping. 

26 Then he should apply water to the cavities of his head (G 
1.36 n.); to his feet, navel, and head; and finally to his left hand. 

27 If he is sullied while he is holding a metal utensil, he should 


143 



1.8.27 


Dharmasutras 


set it down, sip some water, and sprinkle water on it as he 
picks it up again. 28 And if he is sullied while he is holding a 
dish of food, he should set it down, sip some water, and 
sprinkle water on it as he picks it up again. 29 And if he is sullied 
while he is holding a pot of water, he should set it down, sip 
some water, and sprinkle water on it as he picks it up again. 
30 The same should be done, but in the opposite way,* in the case 
of earthenware, 31 while there is an option in the case of wooden 
utensils. 

Purification of Things 32 When articles become sullied, they are 
purified in the following ways— if they are metal, by scrubbing 
them with cowdung, earth, and water, or with just one of them; 

33 if they are copper, silver, or gold, by using an acidic cleanser; 

34 if they are earthenware, by firing them; 35 if they are wooden, 
by scraping them; 36 if they are wicker, by using cowdung (G 
1.42 n.); 37 if they are made of dried fruits, by using a cow’s hair 
scourer; 38 if they are skins of the black antelope, by using wood- 
apple and rice; 39 if they are goat’s wool blankets, by using areca 
nuts; 40 if they are woollen, by putting them in the sun; 41 if they 
are linen, by using a paste of yellow mustard; 42 and if they are 
cotton, by using earth (G 1.42n.). 43 Skins are purified like 
cotton; 44 stones and gems like metal; 45 bones like wood; 
46 conch-shells, horn, mother of pearls, and ivory like linen, 47 or 
by using milk. 

^Alternatively, when articles come into contact with urine, 
faeces, blood, semen, or a corpse, they are to be scrubbed 
twenty-one times using one of the scrubbing agents listed above, 
depending on how they strike one’s eyes and nose.* 49 Non-metal 
articles that come into contact with them, however, should be 
discarded. 

50 Ritual vessels used in sacrifices are cleansed in the manner 
prescribed in the Veda. 51 A vedic text states: ‘They are not 
sullied by coming into contact with Soma juice.’ 

“Time, fire, cleansing the mind, water and the 
like, applying cowdung, and ignorance— these, 
they say, are the six ways of purification for 
creatures. 


144 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


1 . 9.8 


53 Now, they also quote: 

The time, the place, himself, the article, the 
purpose of the article, the cause, and the 
condition— after examining these, a smart man 
who knows the methods of purification and 
wants to adhere to the Law should perform the 
purification. 


Purity of Persons and Things 


9 


1 The hand of an artisan is always clean, as also 
goods displayed for sale. Almsfood received by 
a student is always pure. So states a vedic text. 

2 A calf is pure when it makes the milk to flow, a 
bird when it makes a fruit to fall, women when 
one is making love, and a dog when it catches a 
deer. 

3 All factories are pure, except liquor breweries. 
Streams with constantly flowing water do not 
become polluted, as also dust blown up by the 
wind. 

4 Flowers and fruits of flowering and fruit- 
bearing trees, likewise, do not become polluted 
even if they are growing in unclean places. 

5 If a Brahmin touches a sanctuary tree,* a 
funeral pyre, a sacrificial post, a Candida, or a 
man who sells the Veda, he should bathe with 
his clothes on. 

6 One’s own bed, seat, clothes, wife, children, 
and water pot are pure with respect to oneself; 
but they are impure vis-a-vis others. 

7 When seats, beds, vehicles, boats, roads, and 
grass come into contact with Candidas or out- 
castes, they are purified by just the wind. 

8 Grain from a threshing floor and water from a 
well or reservoir, as also milk from a dairy 


145 



1 . 9.8 


Dharmasutras 


farm— these may be consumed even if they are 
given by someone whose food one is not 
allowed to eat. 

9 Gods invented three means of purification for 
Brahmins: being unaware that something is 
impure, sprinkling it with water, and getting it 
verbally declared as suitable. 

10 Water collected on the ground sufficient for 
cows to slake their thirst may be used for purifi- 
cation, as long as it is not saturated with foul 
substances or has a bad odour, colour, or taste. 


11 A piece of ground, on the other hand, is made pure by 
sweeping, sprinkling with water, smearing with cowdung, scat- 
tering clean soil, or scraping, depending on the degree of the 
defilement. 12 Now, they also quote: 



1 Each drop of water when sprinkled purifies an 
area as large as a cow’s hide* irrespective of 
whether the ground has been swept or not, so 
long as one does not notice anything filthy on it. 


Purity of Food 2 Food that has been prepared out of one’s sight 
should be heated and sprinkled with water, 3 as also viands 
bought at the market. 4 And it is said: 


For the gods, being apprehensive and desirous 
of pure things, do not relish the oblations 
offered by people without a spirit of generosity.* 

5 And also: 


The food of a man who is pure but not gener- 
ous and the food of a man who is generous but 
impure— having pondered over this, the gods 
pronounced them to be equal. 

But Prajapati told them: ‘They are not equal; 
they are clearly unequal. The food of the man 
who is not generous is totally useless, and the 
food cleansed by generosity excels it by far.’ 


146 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


1 . 10.20 


6 Now, they also quote: 

Lack of generosity is the highest sin; generosity 
is clearly the highest austerity. The gods, there- 
fore, do not eat an oblation offered without a 
spirit of generosity. 7 Such a fool will never go 
to heaven, though he may have offered sacri- 
fices or distributed gifts. 

8 A man whose conduct is plagued by vacilla- 
tion, who pursues his own objectives, and who 
violates the scriptural provisions— such a man, 
tradition says, is a fool, because he thwarts the 
course of the Law. (G 13.11 n.) 

9 Vegetables, flowers, fruits, roots, and herbs bought at the 
market, however, should be washed. 

Excretions 10 After spreading some dry grass, pieces of wood 
unfit for ritual use, or some clods of earth on the ground and 
covering his head, he should void urine and excrement facing the 
north during the day and the south during the night. 

"After voiding urine, he should first wash the organ with 
earth and water (G 1.42 n.), 12 and then the left hand three times. 
13 He should do the same after voiding excrement, 14 but three 
times in turn for the anus and the left hand. "After a seminal 
discharge, he should do the same as after voiding urine. 

The Lower Body 16 After tying or untying the lower garment, he 
should wash himself 17 or else touch wet grass, cowdung, or the 
earth. "When he is engaged in ritual activity, he should avoid 
touching below the navel, "for a vedic text states: ‘A man’s body 
is clean above the navel and unclean below the navel’ (TS 
6.1.3.4). 


Purity and Occupations 

20 Sudras employed by Aryas should shave their hair and cut 
their nails every fortnight or every month and follow the Arya 
mode of sipping water. 


147 



1 . 10.21 


Dharmasutras 


21 A Vaisya may live by lending money on interest, 22 but only 
at a rate of five Masas for twenty-five (G 12.29 n.). 23 Now, they 
also quote: 

When a man takes a loan at the going rate of 
interest and then lends it at a higher rate, he is 
an usurer and is denounced in all the codes of 
Law. 

Usury and abortion were once weighted in a 
balance. The abortionist rose to the top, while 
the usurer trembled. 

24 Brahmins who are cattle herders, traders, 
artisans, bards, servants, and usurers should be 
treated like Sudras. 

25 Men of the first two classes, nevertheless, may freely lend 
money on interest to people who neglect their ritual duties, to 
misers, to infidels, and to wicked people. 

26 By not offering sacrifices, by not getting 
married, by spurning vedic study, and by neg- 
lecting Brahmins, respectable families fall into 
disrepute. 

27 One does not incur the sin of neglecting a 
Brahmin when the man is a fool and bereft of 
vedic knowledge, for one does not offer an 
oblation in the ash ignoring a blazing fire. 

28 When they are bereft of vedic knowledge, 
respectable families fall into disrepute by deal- 
ing in cattle, horses, and vehicles, by engaging 
in agriculture, and by entering the royal service. 

29 When they are rich in vedic knowledge, even 
poor families are counted among the respect- 
able and attain great fame. 

30 Vedic study impedes agriculture, and agri- 
culture impedes vedic study. A man who is able 
may pursue both, but if he is unable, he should 
give up agriculture. 


148 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


1.11.7 


31 Surely, a fat, unruly, fierce, and bellowing bull, 
attacking creatures and saying what he pleases, 
does not reach the gods. It is the tiny ones with 
emaciated bodies who reach there. 

32 At various times in his youth a man may have 
foolishly done all sorts of good or evil deeds. If, 
however, in his later years he leads a virtuous 
life, only that will follow him, not the acts of his 
youth. 

33 Leading an austere and vigilant life, let him 
always grieve in his heart when he recalls his 
misdeeds. He will thus be freed from those 
sins. 

34 When a man pours water for others to sip and 
drops of that water fall on his feet, they do not 
make him impure. They are just like water that 
collects on the ground. 


Death of a Relative 

1 1 Period of Impurity 1 With reference to births and deaths, 
J. they say that the period of impurity of people belonging 
to the same ancestry (A 2. 14.2 n.) lasts for ten days, except for 
officiating priests, those consecrated for a sacrifice, and students. 
2 Among people belonging to the same ancestry, the relationship 
based on common ancestry extends to the seventh genera- 
tion. 3 Only a bath is prescribed when a child dies before it is 
seven months old or before teething. 

4 When a child dies before it is 3 years old or 
before teething, no offerings of food or water 
are prescribed, and it should not be cremated. 

5 The same is true when unmarried girls die. 

6 Some do perform these rites for married 
women, 7 but they do it just to curry favour with 
people; ritual formulas are thought not to 
apply to women. 


149 



1 . 11.8 


Dharmasutras 


8 When unmarried women die, their relatives 
become pure in three days, but their uterine 
brothers are purified by following the pro- 
cedure given above. 

9 Furthermore, one’s great-grandfather, grandfather, father, 
oneself, one’s uterine brothers, son by a wife of the same class, 
grandson, and great-grandson— but not the great-grandson’s 
son— they say, belong to the same ancestry; among these, one’s 
son and grandson share an undivided oblation. 10 Those who 
share in separate oblations, they say, belong to the same family 
line.* 

Inheritance 11 In the absence of other heirs, the estate goes to the 
relatives belonging to the same ancestry (A 2.14.2 n.); 12 in their 
absence, to the relatives belonging to the same family line (B 
1.11 .9—10 n.); 13 in their absence, the teacher who had been like a 
father to the deceased, or a student or officiating priest of the 
deceased may take it; 14 and in their absence, the king— but let 
him donate that property to persons deeply versed in the three 
Vedas. 15 The king himself, however, should never appropriate 
the property of Brahmins. 16 Now, they also quote: 

Poison kills just one man, but a Brahmin’s 
property destroys even his sons and grandsons. 

Poison is not truly poison, they say; the true 
poison is the property of a Brahmin. 

Therefore, a king should never appropriate the property of 
Brahmins, for it is said that the property of Brahmins is the 
deadliest poison.’ 

Death and Birth Impurity 17 If a birth and a death occur at the 
same time, the ten-day period of impurity is observed in com- 
mon for both. 18 If, moreover, before the completion of the ninth 
day of one ten-day period of impurity other periods of ten-day 
impurity arise, then the impurity ends after the first ten-day 
period. 19 At a birth, meanwhile, the ten-day period of impurity 
affects only the mother and the father. “According to some, it 
affects only the mother, because it is she that people avoid; 


150 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


1.11.33 


21 while according to others, it affects only the father, because of 
the predominance of the semen, 22 for the scriptures record sons 
who took birth outside the womb. 23 Without a doubt, however, 
both the mother and the father become impure, because they 
participate equally. 

Funerary Rites 24 When a death has occurred, however, the rela- 
tives should wear their sacrificial cords over their right shoulders 
and under their left arms (A 1 .6. 1 8 n.) and, placing the younger 
ones first, go down to a bathing place. They should submerge in 
the water, rise up, climb up to the bank, sip some water, and 
offer a libation of water to the deceased person— repeating this 
sequence of acts three times. They should finally climb up to the 
bank, sip some water, touch a piece of coal and water at the 
door to the house, and remain seated there on mats for ten days 
eating food without spices or salt. 

25 The ancestral offering is performed either on the eleventh or 
the twelfth day. 26 With respect to other rites, one should follow 
the local customs. 

Death Impurity for Distant Relatives 27 Even when a person 
unrelated by common ancestry dies (A 2.14.2n.), one should 
observe a period of impurity for three days, for a day and a 
night, or for a single day, depending on how closely one is 
related to the deceased. 28 At the death of one’s teacher, tutor, or 
a son of theirs, the period of impurity lasts for three days,* 29 as 
also at the death of an officiating priest. 30 At the death of a 
pupil, a person studying under the same teacher, or a classmate 
during one’s vedic studentship, one should observe a period of 
impurity for three days, for a day and a night, and for a single 
day, respectively. 

31 After miscarriages women remain impure for the same 
number of days as the months of pregnancy. 


Impurity from Touch 

32 When someone accidentally touches the corpse of an outsider, 
he becomes pure immediately after taking a bath with his 
clothes on; 33 whereas if someone does so deliberately, he 


151 



1.11.33 


Dharmasutras 


remains impure for three days. 34 The same is true in the case of a 
menstruating woman; 35 the observances for her are explained in 
the passage: ‘A son born from such a woman is a heinous sin- 
ner’* (TS 2.5. 1.6). 

36 If someone touches a man who sells the Veda, 
a sacrificial post, an outcaste, a funeral pyre, a 
dog, or a Candida, he should take a bath. 

37 If a Brahmin has an open wound filled with 
pus and bloody discharge and a worm appears 
in it, what penance should he observe? 

38 A man who has been bitten by a worm is 
purified after he has bathed in and drunk a 
mixture of cow’s urine, cowdung, milk, curd, 
ghee, and a decoction of Kusa grass. 

39 If someone is touched by a dog, he should bathe with his 
clothes on. ^Alternatively, he becomes pure by washing that 
spot, touching it with fire, washing it again, washing his feet, and 
sipping some water. 41 Now, they also quote: 

If a Brahmin is bitten by a dog, he is purified 
by going into a river that flows into the sea, 
controlling his breath one hundred times, and 
consuming some ghee. 

Alternatively, he becomes pure at once by bath- 
ing with water from a golden or silver pot, from 
a cow’s horn, or from new earthen pots. 


Forbidden Food 

1 ^ 'It is forbidden to eat village animals*— 2 the carnivor- 
J. Z_, ous and birds, 3 as well as cocks and pigs, 4 with the 
exception of goats and sheep. 

5 It is permissible to eat the following: porcupine, Godha 
monitor lizard, hare, hedgehog, tortoise, and the rhinoceros— 
these, excluding the rhinoceros, are the five five-clawed animals 
(A 1.17.37 n.); 6 Rsya antelope, Harina deer, Prsata deer, the 


152 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 1.13.3 

buffalo, the wild boar, and Kulunga antelope— these, excluding 
the Kulunga antelope, are the five animals with cloven feet; 7 the 
following birds: partridge, pigeon, Kapinjala partridge, Vard- 
hranasa crane, peacock, and Varana bird— these, excluding the 
Varana bird, are the five birds that feed scratching with their 
feet; 8 and the following fish: Sahasradamstra, Cilicima, Varmi, 
Brhacchiras, Mahasakari,* Rohita, and Rajlva. 

9 It is forbidden to drink the milk of an animal during the first 
ten days after it has given birth or of an animal that is pregnant, 

10 whose calf has died, or that is suckling a calf that is not hers. 

11 It is forbidden to drink the milk of sheep, camels, and one- 
hoofed animals. 12 If someone drinks milk that is forbidden, with 
the exception of cow’s milk, he should perform an arduous pen- 
ance; 13 in the case of cow’s milk, on the other hand, he should 
fast for three days. 

14 One should not eat stale food— except vegetables, soup, 
meat, ghee, cooked grains, molasses, curd, honey, and barley 
meal—; 15 as also foods that have turned sour, including 
molasses. 


Annual Course of Study 

16 People should commence the annual course of study on the 
full-moon day of July-August or August-September and con- 
clude it on the full-moon day of December-January or January- 
February. 


Sacrifices 


13 


Sacrificial Garments 'The gods take delight in a pure 
sacrifice; 2 for the gods are pure and love pure things, 3 a 


point affirmed by this vedic verse: 


Pure oblations to you, O Maruts, who are pure. 
A pure sacrifice I offer to the pure ones. By 
ritual ordinance the lovers of rites have reached 
the truth, they who are pure, of pure birth, and 
purifying. (RV 7.56.12; TB 2.8.5.5) 


153 



1.13.4 


Dharmasutras 


4 Among clothes, new ones are pure. Therefore, he should per- 
form everything connected with the sacrifice wearing new clothes. 
5 The patron of the sacrifice, his wife, and the officiating priests 
should wear clothes that have been washed and dried in the wind 
and are not worn out — 6 this provision applies after the measuring 
out of the altar, Muring long Soma sacrifices, and at sacrificial 
sessions. 8 On other occasions, one should follow the specific pre- 
scriptions. 9 So, when fire offerings, animal sacrifices, and Soma 
sacrifices are performed for the purpose of sorcery, the officiating 
priests should wear red turbans and clothes; while reciting the 
Vrsakapi hymn, they should wear multi-coloured clothes and 
shawls; 10 and at the establishment of the sacred fires, linen clothes 
are used, and if they are not available, cotton or woollen clothes. 

"Clothes that are tainted by urine, excrement, blood, semen, 
and the like should be washed with earth and water (G 1.42 n.). 

12 Silk* and bark garments are cleaned like ordinary clothes; 

13 and black antelope skin, like bark garments. 14 He shall not 
wear a cloth that has been wrapped around his loins or on which 
he has slept without first washing it. 15 He should not use in a rite 
for the gods a cloth that has been used by humans without first 
laundering it. 

Sacrificial Ground 16 When polluted, compact earth is purified 
by smearing with cowdung; 1 7 loose soil, by tilling; 18 and wet soil, 
by covering it with clean soil. 19 The ground is purified in four 
ways: by cows trampling it underfoot, by tilling it, by burning it, 
and by rain falling on it; 20 the fifth way is to smear it with 
cowdung, and the sixth is through the lapse of time. 

Sacrificial Utensils 21 Grass placed on unconsecrated ground 
must be washed. 22 Grass that may have become polluted out of 
sight must be sprinkled with water. 23 Small pieces of wood shall 
be cleaned in the same way, 24 while large pieces of wood must be 
washed and dried when they become polluted. 25 If the quantity 
is large, however, it may be sprinkled with water. 26 Wooden ves- 
sels touched by a person sullied with remnants (A 1.3.27 n.) 
must be scrubbed; 27 whereas those that are tainted by the stain 
of remnants must be scraped; 28 and those that are tainted with 
urine, faeces, blood, semen, and the like must be thrown away. 


154 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


1.14.18 


29 These provisions apply unless there is a special rule, 30 as, 
for example, washing with Darbha grass and water at all these 
rituals: daily fire sacrifice, Gharmocchista, Dadhigharma, 
Kundapayinam Ayana, Utsarginam Ayana, Daksayana Sacri- 
fice, Idadadha, Catuscakra, and Brahmaudana. 31 At all Soma 
sacrifices the utensils are washed only with water at the washing 
mound Marjaliya. 32 Those that are tainted with urine, faeces, 
blood, semen, and the like must be thrown away. 

1 A 1 Earthen vessels touched by a person sullied with rem- 
J. i nants (A 1.3.27 n.) must be heated over a fire; 2 whereas 
those that are tainted by the stain of remnants must be fired 
anew; 3 and those that are tainted with urine, faeces, blood, 
semen, and the like must be thrown away. 

4 Metal vessels must be scrubbed as before and then washed. 

5 Materials used for scrubbing are cowdung, earth, and ash. 

6 When metal vessels have been tainted with urine, faeces, 
blood, semen, and the like, they must be recast 7 or completely 
immersed in cow’s urine or in a great river (A 1.27.1) for seven 
days. 8 Vessels made of stone are to be treated the same way. 

9 Vessels made of gourd, wood-apple, or skin* should be 
scrubbed with cow’s hair; '“whereas those woven out of Nala 
reeds, bamboo, Sara reeds, or Kusa grass should be washed with 
cowdung and water. 

Sacrificial Offerings "When unhusked rice becomes tainted, it 
must be washed and dried. 12 If the quantity is large, however, it 
may be sprinkled with water. 13 Husked rice, on the other hand, 
shall be thrown away, 14 as also cooked sacrificial oblations. 15 If a 
large quantity has been polluted by a dog, a crow, and the like, 
however, after taking out a portion from that place as food for 
humans, one may sprinkle water reciting the passage The puri- 
fier, the heavenly one . . . .’ 16 Honey water and milk preparations 
are purified by pouring them from one vessel into another. 
17 Likewise, one may use oil or ghee that has been touched by a 
person sullied with remnants after pouring it into water. 18 If an 
impure substance has been put into the sacred fire, he shall make 
the fires ascend the fire-drills, produce a new fire by churning the 
fire-drills,* and offer the Pavamanesti sacrifice. 


155 



1 . 14.19 


Dharmasutras 


19 Purification, proper place, ritual formulas, ritual sequence, 
purpose, materials and their consecration, and proper time— 
when there is a conflict between these, each preceding item is 
more important than each succeeding one. 

1 ^ Sacrificial Actions 'One should enter the sacrificial 
J. «_/ arena from the north 2 and leave it in the same direction. 
3 In rites for ancestors, however, one should do the opposite. 
4 One should wash anything that one has touched with the feet. 
5 After touching one’s body or the hem of the garment, one 
should touch water; 6 as also after cutting or breaking some- 
thing; after digging; after removing something; after a rite to the 
ancestors, fiends, Nirrti, or Rudra; and after a rite of sorcery. 

7 When a sacrificial tool is used while reciting a ritual formula, 
a man should not move it around his body; 8 sacrificial tools are 
more closely connected with the sacrifice, 9 whereas the officiat- 
ing priests are more distant. 10 The patron of the sacrifice and his 
wife are closer to the sacrifice than the officiating priests; "the 
ghee is closer than the sacrificial tools; the sacrificial oblations 
are closer than the ghee; the sacrificial animal is closer than the 
sacrificial oblations; the Soma is closer than the sacrificial ani- 
mal; and the sacred fires are closer than the Soma. 

12 In accordance with the ritual acts they are performing, the 
officiating priests should not turn away from the sacrificial 
arena — 13 if he is facing the east, he should turn towards his right 
shoulder, 14 and if he is facing the west, towards his left shoulder. 

15 The passageway to and from the sacrificial area lies between 
the Catvala pit and the Utkara mound. 16 In the absence of a 
Catvala pit, it lies between the offertorial fire and the Utkara 
mound. 17 Those who carry out the ritual acts, as well as the 
patron of the sacrifice and his wife, should walk through that 
passageway 18 as long as the sacrifice is not completed. 19 After it 
has been completed, however, the passageway lies on the side 
that does not contain the Utkara mound.* 

20 One should not put into the sacred fire logs or kindling 
wood that have not been sprinkled with water, or that have not 
been dedicated,* or that are wet. 21 The Brahman priest and the 
patron of the sacrifice should walk in front of 22 or, according to 


156 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


1.16.10 


some, behind the offertorial fire. 23 The seat of the Brahman 
priest is located to the south of the offertorial fire; the seat of the 
patron of the sacrifice, to the west of the Brahman priest’s seat; 
24 the seat of the Hotr priest, to the north of the northern corner 
of the sacrificial arena; 25 the seat of the Agnldhra priest, at the 
Utkara mound; 26 and the seat of the patron’s wife, behind the 
householder’s fire. 27 Each and every time any of these seats is 
used, one should spread Darbha grass on it. 28 Each person 
should be provided with a pot of water to be used for sipping. 

Observances 29 A man who has been consecrated for a sacrifice 
shall observe the following vows. 30 He should not disclose a sin 
committed by someone else; become angry; weep; or look at 
urine or faeces. 31 If he sees any filth, let him recite softly: ‘Mind, 
uncontrolled; eyesight, feeble; sun, the greatest of lights. O 
Consecration, do not forsake me.’ 32 And if it rains on him, 
let him recite softly: ‘Place strength in me, O Flowing Waters; 
place vigour in me; place strength in me. Do not destroy my 
consecration or my austerity.’* 


SOCIAL CLASSES 

1 ' There are four classes: Brahmin, Ksatriya, Vaisya, and 

-L VJ Sudra. 2 Of these, according to the order of the classes, a 
Brahmin may have four wives, 3 a Ksatriya three, 4 a Vaisya two, 
5 and a Sudra one. 


Mixed Classes 

6 Sons born from wives of the same class as the husband’s or 
the class immediately below his are Savarnas; 7 sons born from 
wives two or three classes below the husband are Ambasthas, 
Ugras, and Nisadas; 8 and sons born from wives in the reverse 
order of class are Ayogavas, Magadhas, Vainas, Ksattrs, Pulka- 
sas, Kukkutas, Vaidehakas, and Candidas (cf. G 4.16-21; Va 
18.1-6). 

9 From a wife belonging to the first class an Ambastha fathers 
a Svapaka. 10 From a wife belonging to the second class an Ugra 


157 



1 . 16.10 


Dharmasutras 


fathers a Vaina. "From a wife belonging to the third class a 
Nisada fathers a Pulkasa, 12 while the inverse produces a 
Kukkuta. 

13 A fifth-generation son fathered by a Nisada from a Nisada 
woman rids himself of the Sudra status, 14 and one may perform 
his initiation. One may officiate at a sacrifice of a sixth- 
generation son. 15 Together with the seventh-generation son, 
these are given respectively the following appellations: a man of 
unmodified seed, a man of equal seed, and an equal. 

16 Sons fathered by an uninitiated man are 
Vratyas, excluded from initiation— so state the 
wise with equal reference to the three classes. 

n ‘Rathakara, Ambastha, Suta, Ugra, Magadha, 
Ayogava, Vaina, Ksattr, Pulkasa, Kukkuta, Vaidehaka, 
Candida, Svapaka, and so forth — 2 among these, sons of equal 
class are born from wives of the same class as their husbands; 
3 whereas a Brahmin fathers a Brahmin from a Ksatriya wife, an 
Ambastha from a Vaisya wife, and a Nisada from a Sudra wife, 
4 or, according to some, a Parasava; 5 a Ksatriya fathers a Ksa- 
triya from a Vaisya wife, and an Ugra from a Sudra wife ; 6 and a 
Vaisya fathers a Rathakara from a Sudra wife. 

7 A Sudra fathers a Magadha from a Vaisya wife, a Ksattr 
from a Ksatriya wife, and a Candala from a Brahmin wife; 8 a 
Vaisya fathers an Ayogava from a Ksatriya wife, and a Vaid- 
ehaka from a Brahmin wife; and a Ksatriya fathers a Suta from 
a Brahmin wife. 

9 Among these, the union of an Ambastha man with an Ugra 
woman produces a son in the proper order of class; 10 whereas 
the union of a Ksattr man and a Vaidehaka woman produces a 
son in the reverse order of class. 

"From an Ugra father and a Ksattr mother is born a 
Svapaka; "from a Vaidehaka father and a Ambastha mother, a 
Vaina; "from a Nisada father and a Sudra wife, a Pulkasa; 
14 and from a Sudra father and a Nisada wife, a Kukkuta. 

"The wise say that sons born from a union 
between people of different classes are Vratyas. 


158 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 

KING 


1.18.16 


1 Q 1 Receiving one sixth as taxes, a king should protect his 
-L O subjects. 

2 Brahman, clearly, placed his grandeur in Brahmins along 
with the duties of studying and teaching, offering and officiating 
at sacrifices, and giving and receiving gifts, for the preservation 
of the Vedas. 3 In Ksatriyas he placed his strength along with the 
duties of studying, offering sacrifices, giving gifts, using 
weapons, and protecting the treasury and creatures, for the 
enhancement of government. 4 In Vaisyas he placed the duties of 
studying, offering sacrifices, giving gifts, agriculture, trade, and 
animal husbandry, for the enhancement of economic activity. 
5 In Sudras he placed the service of the higher classes, 6 for it is 
said, ‘they were created from his feet.’ 

7 The king should select as his personal priest a man pre- 
eminent in all matters 8 and follow his instructions. 


War 

9 The king should not turn back in battle 10 or strike with barbed 
or poisoned weapons. 11 He should not engage in battle people 
who are afraid, intoxicated, mad, or delirious, or who have lost 
their armour; as also women, children, old people, and Brah- 
mins, 12 unless they are trying to kill him. 13 Now they also quote: 

When someone kills even a teacher born in an 
illustrious family who is trying to kill him, it 
does not make him a murderer of a learned 
Brahmin; there wrath recoils on wrath, (cf. 

A. 1.29.7) 


Duties and Taxes 

14 The duty on goods imported by sea is 10 per cent plus a choice 
piece of merchandise. 15 He should assess an equitable tax also 
on other types of merchandise corresponding to their value, a 
tax that would not be oppressive. 

16 When the owner has disappeared, the king should look after 


159 



1.18.16 


Dharmasutras 


his estate for one year, after which he may appropriate it, so long 
as it does not belong to a Brahmin. 


Punishment 

17 A Brahmin, clearly, is not subject to capital punishment for 
any crime. 18 When a Brahmin kills a Brahmin, has sex with the 
wife of an elder, steals gold, or drinks liquor, the king should 
brand the man’s forehead with the mark of a headless corpse, a 
vagina, a jackal, or a tavern banner, respectively, using a heated 
iron and banish him from his kingdom. 

19 When a man belonging to the Ksatriya or lower class kills a 
Brahmin, he should be executed and all his property confiscated. 
20 When such people kill a man of equal or lower class, the king 
should impose a suitable punishment in accordance with their 
ability. 

1 O ' ^ someone kills a Ksatriya, to erase the enmity he 
-L y should hand over to the king a thousand cows and in 
addition a bull (A 1.24.1 n.); 2 a hundred if he kills a Vaisya, 
and ten if he kills a Sudra— here too, in addition a bull. 3 The 
provision for killing a Sudra applies also to the killing of a 
woman or a cow, except when it is a Brahmin woman soon 
after her menstrual period (A 1.24.8-9 n.), or it is a milch cow 
or a draught ox. 4 If someone kills a milch cow or a draught 
ox, after paying the penalty he should perform a lunar pen- 
ance (B 3.8). 5 The provision for killing a Ksatriya applies to 
the killing of a Brahmin woman soon after her menstrual 
period. 6 Hamsa goose, Bhasa vulture, peacock, Cakravaka 
goose, chameleon, crow, owl, frog, Diddika rat, Derika rat, 
dog, Babhru mongoose, common mongoose, and the like— the 
punishment for killing any of these is the same as for killing a 
Sudra. 


Witnesses 

7 To gain the respect of the world, a witness should give testi- 
mony consistent with what he saw or heard. 


160 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


1 . 20.2 


8 One-quarter of a crime* falls on the offender, 
one-quarter on the witness, one-quarter on all the 
officials of court, and one-quarter on the king. 

When a man who should be condemned is, in 
fact, condemned, then the king is released from 
guilt and the court officials are set free; upon 
the offender falls the guilt. 

9 Sharp-witted, he should interrogate a desig- 
nated* witness in the following manner: 

10 ‘Whatever good you may have done from the 
day you were born until the day you die, all that 
will go to the king, if you tell a lie. 

11 ‘He slays for sure three fathers and three 
grandfathers, as also seven generations of his 
descendants born or yet to be born— when a 
witness gives false testimony. 

12 ‘He slays three grandfathers with false testi- 
mony concerning gold (G 13.14 n.); five with 
false testimony concerning farm animals; ten 
with false testimony concerning cows; a hun- 
dred with false testimony concerning horses; a 
thousand with false testimony concerning men; 
and all with false testimony concerning land — 
when a witness gives false testimony.’ 

13 People of all four classes who have sons can be witnesses, 
except vedic scholars, the royalty, wandering ascetics, and those 
who lack humanity.* 14 If a witness abides by his recollection, he 
will receive praise from those in authority; 15 whereas if he acts 
to the contrary, he will fall into hell. 16 Such a man should live on 
hot milk for twelve days (B 2.2.37) or offer ghee in the sacred fire 
while reciting the Kusmanda verses. 


MARRIAGE 



1 There are eight types of marriages. 2 When a girl is given 
to a vedic student who requests her, after enquiring into 


161 



1 . 20.2 


Dharmasutras 


his learning and character, it is a ‘Brahma’ marriage. 3 After 
dressing her up and adorning her with jewellery, when a girl is 
given with the formula, ‘Here she is! May you jointly fulfil the 
Law’, it is a ‘Prajapati’ marriage. “When the groom first offers 
parched grain in the sacred fire and gives a cow and a bull to the 
girl’s father, it is a ‘Seer’s’ marriage. 5 When a girl is given to the 
officiating priest within the sacrificial arena while the sacrificial 
gifts are being taken away, it is a ‘Divine’ marriage. 6 When the 
groom takes the girl after gratifying her parents with money, it is 
a ‘Demonic’ marriage. 7 When a lover has sex with his beloved 
through mutual consent, it is a ‘Gandharva’ marriage. 8 When a 
man takes away a girl by force, it is a ‘Fiendish’ marriage . 9 When 
a man has intercourse with a girl who is asleep, intoxicated, or 
insane, it is a ‘Ghoulish’ marriage. 

10 Of these, only the first four are suitable for Brahmins, and 
even among these each preceding type is better than each follow- 
ing. 11 Of the last four, each subsequent type is worse than each 
preceding. 12 Among the latter, moreover, the sixth and seventh 
flow from the Ksatriya nature, because that is the dominant 
feature of Ksatriyas; 13 while the fifth and the eighth are suitable 
for Vaisyas and Sudras, 14 for Vaisyas and Sudras are lax about 
their wives 15 because they are occupied with agricultural and 
servile work. 16 Some commend the ‘Gandharva’ form of mar- 
riage for all, because it flows from love. 


21 

2 Now 


'‘The excellence of the marriage’, it is stated, ‘deter- 
mines the excellence of the children that issue from it.’ 
they also quote: 


It is laid down that a woman who is purchased 
for money is not a wife. She cannot take part in 
rites for gods or ancestors, and Kasyapa has 
declared her to be a slave. 

3 When people, bewitched by greed, deliver a 
daughter of theirs for a payment, these wicked 
men, selling their own selves and guilty of a 
heinous crime, fall into a gruesome hell, slay 
their families up to the seventh generation (G 


162 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


1.21.15 


13.14n.), and repeatedly die and are reborn- 
all this is decreed when a payment takes place. 

SUSPENSION OF VEDIC RECITATION 

4 Vedic recitation is suspended for a day and a night on the fol- 
lowing occasions: full-moon day; eighth day of each fortnight; 
new-moon day; fall of a meteor; earthquake; visiting a cemetery; 
and the death of the king, a vedic scholar, or someone who has 
studied under the same teacher. 5 When there is wind, a foul 
smell, or frost, and at the sound of dancing, music, weeping, or 
the singing of Samans (G 16.21 n.), vedic recitation is suspended 
for their duration. 6 When thunder, rain, and lightning occur 
together outside the rainy season, vedic recitation is sus- 
pended for three days; 7 and even during the rainy season when 
they occur without rain, it is suspended until the same time the 
next day. 

8 When someone has received a gift or eaten food at an ances- 
tral offering, the suspension lasts for the remainder of that 
day— 9 after eating, however, until the food has been digested— 
10 for a Brahmin’s hand is his mouth* "Now, they also quote: 

There is no difference between what is eaten 
and what is received, states a vedic text. 

12 At the death of one’s father, the suspension lasts for three 
days. 13 A Brahmin* who is a renowned vedic savant has clearly 
two kinds of semen, the one located above the navel and the 
other below. By means of the semen above the navel he begets 
offspring when he initiates Brahmins, when he teaches them, 
when he makes them offer sacrifices, and when he makes them 
good people. All these become his children. By means of the 
semen going downward from the navel, on the other hand, he 
obtains the children of his loins. About a vedic scholar and 
savant, therefore, they never say, ‘You have no children’ (Va 2.5). 
14 ‘Therefore,’ it is said, ‘a learned Brahmin has two names, two 
mouths, two kinds of semen, and two births.’ 

15 Within sight or hearing of a Sudra or a degraded person, 
furthermore, vedic recitation is suspended for the duration. 


163 



1.21.16 


Dharmasutras 


16 When someone hears the howling of a jackal at night, he 
should not recite the Veda until he has slept. 

17 During the morning and evening twilights and on the days 
of the moon’s change (A 1.26.14n.), one should not recite the 
Veda, 18 eat meat, or have sex with one’s wife; 19 ‘for on the days 
of the moon’s change,’ it is stated, ‘fiends and ghouls undertake 
their nefarious wanderings’. 

20 Also when other omens or portents occur, vedic recitation is 
suspended for a day and a night, with the exception of mental 
recitation; 21 and even mental recitation is suspended when there 
is a birth or a death. 

22 Now, they also quote: 

The eighth day slays the teacher, the fourteenth 
day slays the pupil, and the fifteenth day slays 
the knowledge; therefore, he should refrain 
from recitation during the days of the moon’s 
change. (A 1.26.14n.) 


BOOK TWO 

PENANCES 
^ 'Next, the penances. 

Penances for Killing 

2 A man who has killed a learned Brahmin should do the follow- 
ing for twelve years. 3 He should carry a skull and a post from 
a bed-frame; wear the skin of an ass; reside in the wilderness; 
and, using the head of a corpse as his flag, get a hut built in a 
cemetery and live in it. He should maintain himself by begging 
almsfood from seven houses while proclaiming his crime. When 
he does not receive any almsfood, he should fast. 4 Alternatively, 
he may offer a horse sacrifice, a Gosava sacrifice, or an Agnistut 
sacrifice; 5 or cleanse himself by participating at the bath that 
concludes a horse sacrifice. 6 Now, they also quote: 


164 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


2.1.17 


When someone kills a Brahmin unintention- 
ally, according to the Law he becomes guilty of 
a sin. Seers prescribe an expiation for such a 
man, so long as it is done unintentionally. No 
expiation is possible for anyone who kills 
intentionally. 

7 A man who raises his hand should perform an 
arduous penance; if he strikes, he should per- 
form the very arduous penance; and if he draws 
blood, he should perform both an arduous and 
a lunar penance (B 2.2.38, 40; 3.8). Therefore, a 
man should neither raise his hand nor draw 
blood. 

8 This penance should be observed for nine years when one 
kills a Ksatriya, 9 for three years when one kills a Vaisya, 10 and 
for one year when one kills a Sudra 11 or a woman. i: The pen- 
ance for killing a Brahmin woman soon after her menstrual 
period (A 1.24.8-9 n.) is the same as for killing a Brahmin. 


Incestuous Sex 

13 A man who has had sex with the wife of an elder (A 1 .6.32 n.) 
should lie on a heated iron bed; 14 embrace a red-hot column 
(A 1.25.2 n.); 15 or cut off his penis together with the testicles, 
hold them in his cupped hands, and walk in a south-westerly 
direction until he collapses. 


Theft 

16 Making his hair dishevelled and carrying a pestle of Sidhraka 
wood, a thief should go to the king and say ‘Bludgeon me with 
this.’ The king should bludgeon him with it. 17 Now, they also 
quote: 


A thief should go to the king carrying a pestle 
on his shoulder: ‘Punish me with this, O King, 
calling to mind the duty of a Ksatriya.’ 


165 



2.1.17 


Dharmasutras 


Whether he is punished or released, the thief is 
absolved of his sin. By not punishing him, the 
king assumes the sin of the thief. 


Drinking Liquor 

18 If a man drinks liquor, he should scald his body by drinking 
hot liquor. 19 If he drinks inadvertently, he should perform the 
arduous penance (B 2.2.38) for three months and undergo initi- 
ation over again, 20 at which the cutting of hair and nails, the 
observances, and the restrictive rules are omitted, because they 
have already been performed. 21 Now, they also quote: 

If a Brahmin, a Ksatriya, or a Vaisya uninten- 
tionally drinks liquor or consumes urine or 
excrement, he should undergo initiation over 
again. 

22 If someone drinks water left overnight in a 
vessel for keeping liquor, on the other hand, 
he should live for six days on milk boiled with 
Sankhapuspi grass. 

Penances Relating to Students 

23 If a student dies while carrying out his teacher’s orders, the 
teacher should perform three arduous penances (B 2.2.38). 24 He 
should do the same penance if he fails to complete his pupil’s 
instruction.* 

25 A student should begin his vow over again if he participates 
at a funeral of anyone except his father, mother, or teacher. 26 If 
he is sick, he may freely eat all the leftovers* of his teacher as 
medicine (A 1.3.27 n.), 27 and he may treat himself with anything 
he wants. 28 When he recovers, he should get up and worship the 
sun, reciting the verse ‘The goose seated in the light . . .’ 

29 If he ejaculates semen during the day, he should drink three 
times water sufficient to reach the heart (A 1.16.2 n.) while recit- 
ing the Retasya verses. 30 A student who has sex with a woman 
has broken his vow of chastity. 31 He should offer a sacrifice 


166 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


2.1.39 


using an ass as the sacrificial animal. 32 The animal and the sac- 
rificial cake are offered to Nirrti, Raksasa, or Yama. 33 ‘The por- 
tion to be eaten by the sacrificer’, it is stated, ‘should be cut from 
the animal’s penis, while the other portions are offered in water.’ 
34 Alternatively, he should put firewood into the sacred fire on 
the night of the new moon; perform the preliminary rites of a 
Darvlhoma; and make two offerings of ghee, saying: ‘O Lust, I 
have broken the vow of chastity! I have broken the vow of chas- 
tity, O Lust! To Lust, Svaha! O Lust, I have done wrong! I have 
done wrong, O Lust! To Lust, Svaha!’ (cf. G 25.1-6). 35 After 
making these offerings, he should stretch his cupped hands, turn 
slightly away, and address the fire: 

May the Maruts pour upon me, may Indra and 
Brhaspati; and may this fire pour upon me long 
life and strength. May they make me live long. 

(TA 2.18) 


Excommunication from and Readmission to Caste 

36 Now, his relatives should turn over his water pot at a formal 
assembly, while he says: ‘I, so-and-so, am guilty of this.’ After he 
has undergone the penance and touched water, milk, ghee, 
honey, and salt, Brahmins should ask him: ‘Have you undergone 
the penance?’ He should reply, ‘Yes.’ After he has undergone the 
penance, they should let him participate in sacrifices. 


Improper Marriage 

37 If someone has sexual relations with a woman unaware that 
she belongs to the same lineage as he (A 2. 11. 15 n.), he should 
support her like his mother. 38 If she bears his child, he should 
perform the arduous penance (B 2.2.38) for three months and 
make an offering of ghee reciting these two verses: ‘What- 
ever blemish there is in me . . .’, and ‘Fire has put back the 
sight . . .’ 

39 Someone whose younger brother gets mar- 
ried before him or who gets married before his 


167 



2.1.39 


Dharmasutras 


older brother; the woman who gets married to 
such a man; the man who gives her away; and 
the fifth, the man who officiates at the 
wedding— all these go to hell. 

40 Someone whose younger brother gets mar- 
ried before him or who gets married before his 
older brother, the man who gives the woman 
away, and the man who officiates at the wed- 
ding are purified by performing the arduous 
penance (B 2.2.38) for twelve days, whereas the 
woman is purified by performing it for three 
days. 


Sins Causing Loss of Caste 

2 'Next, the sins causing loss of caste: Undertaking a sea 
voyage; 3 stealing a Brahmin’s property or a deposit; 4 bear- 
ing false witness with regard to land; 5 trading in all sorts of 
merchandise; 6 serving Sudras; 7 fathering children by a Sudra 
woman; 8 and becoming a child of a Sudra.* 9 When people have 
done any one of these, 

'"they should eat a little at every fourth meal- 
time (A 1.25.10n.); bathe at dawn, noon, and 
dusk; and remain standing during the day and 
seated at night. In three years they wipe off 
their sin. 

11 It takes three years of bathing at every fourth 
meal-time to remove the sin a Brahmin com- 
mits by serving the black class (A 1 .27. 1 1 n.) for 
one day. 

Secondary Sins Causing Loss of Caste 

12 Next, the secondary sins causing loss of caste: 13 sexual inter- 
course with a woman with whom sex is forbidden; sexual inter- 
course with a woman friend of a female or male elder (A 
1.6.32 n.), with a degraded woman (A 1.3.25 n.), or with an out- 


168 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


2.2.24 


caste woman; practising medicine; officiating at a sacrifice 
offered by several individuals; obtaining one’s livelihood by 
staging theatrical performances; teaching dance; looking after 
cattle and buffaloes; and other similar professions, as well as 
violating virgins. 

14 The expiation for these is to live as an outcaste for two years. 


Sins Making a Man Sordid 

15 Next, sins that make people sordid: 16 gambling; sorcery; living 
by gleaning on the part of a man who has not established the 
sacred fires; begging almsfood by a man who has returned home 
from his teacher’s, as well as his residing at his teacher’s house 
for more than four months; teaching a man who has returned 
home from his teacher’s; and practising astrology. 

17 The expiation for these lasts twelve months, twelve fort- 
nights, twelve times twelve days, twelve times six days, twelve 
times three days, twelve days, six days, three days, a day and a 
night, and one day, in accordance with the way the deed was 
committed (A 1 .29. 1 8 n.). 


Outcastes 

18 Living in a common settlement, outcastes should carry out 
their duties ( dharma ), officiating at each other’s sacrifices, teach- 
ing each other, and getting married to each other. If they father 
sons, they should tell them: ‘Go away from us, for then you will 
attach yourself to the Aryas’. 19 A man does not, moreover, fall 
from his caste together with his virility, 20 the truth of which one 
can gather from the fact that a man lacking a limb fathers a child 
possessing all the limbs. 

21 ‘That is false,’ says Harlta. 22 Wives are comparable to curd- 
pots, for if someone were to put impure milk into a curd-pot and 
mix in the curdling substance, cultured people do not use it for 
ritual purposes. 23 In like manner, there can be no association 
with what is produced by the semen of a sordid man (A 
1.29.14 n.). 

24 If they so wish, people born from the semen of sordid men 


169 



2.2.24 


Dharmasutras 


may perform a penance, 25 males one- third of the penance pre- 
scribed for those fallen from their caste, and females one-ninth. 


Sale of Forbidden Goods 

26 Now, they also quote: 

If a man uses sesame for any purpose other 
than eating, anointing, and giving as a gift, 
reborn as a worm, he will plunge into a pile of 
dog shit together with his ancestors. 

27 A man who sells sesame sells his own ancestors. A man who 
sells rice sells his own life. A man who haggles when he gives his 
daughter in marriage sells shares of his merits. 28 He may sell 
grasses and wood that have not been handcrafted. 29 Now, they 
also quote: 

Domestic animals with teeth in one jaw (G 
17.28n.), stones with the exception of salt, and 
undyed thread— these are the goods, O Brah- 
min, that you may sell. 

Types of Penances 

30 For a sin that does not entail loss of caste, a man may give a 
vedic savant a brown or red cow with a lot of hair after anoint- 
ing it with ghee and sprinkling black sesame seeds over it; 31 or 
else he may make offerings while reciting the Kusmanda verses 
during twelve days, 32 for it is said, ‘a man is thus freed from any 
sin short of murdering a Brahmin’ (A 1.19.15 n.). 

33 When a man is accused of a sin causing loss of caste, he 
should perform an arduous penance, 34 while the accuser should 
perform it for one year. 

35 When someone associates with an outcaste— 
not, however, by officiating at his sacrifices, by 
teaching him, or by contracting a marriage 
with him— but by travelling in the same vehicle 
or sitting on the same seat as he, or by eating 


170 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


2.3.2 


together with him, he himself becomes an out- 
caste within a year.* 

36 The penance for eating an impure substance is to fast until 
all the excrement is gone, which happens after seven days. 

37 The hot-arduous penance consists of consuming hot water, 
hot milk, and hot ghee for three days each, and fasting for three 
days. 38 The arduous penance consists of eating only in the 
morning for three days, eating only in the evening for three days, 
eating what is received unasked for three days, and fasting for 
three days. 39 Eating only in the morning one day, eating only in 
the evening the next day, eating what is received unasked the 
following day, and fasting on the last day— to do this for three 
successive four-day periods constitutes the arduous penance for 
women, children, and the elderly. 40 When a man performs the 
same penance as above but eats only a single mouthful at each 
meal, it is the very arduous penance. 41 The third type* is sub- 
sisting on water alone, and it is the penance beyond the very 
arduous penance. 

42 During an arduous penance, one should bathe at dawn, 
noon, and dusk; 43 sleep on the floor; 44 wear a single garment; 
and have the hair of the head, beard, and body shaved and the 
nails clipped. 45 Women must do the same, with the exception of 
shaving the head. 

3 ‘When a Brahmin always carries his water 
with him (B 1.7.6), wears his sacrificial cord 
constantly (A 1.6.18n.), does his private vedic 
recitation every day, refrains from eating the 
food of Sudras, has sex with his wife during her 
season (A 2.1.17 n.), and makes offerings in the 
sacred fire according to the rules, he will not fall 
from the world of Brahman. 

INHERITANCE 
Partitioning of the Paternal Estate 

2 ‘Manu divided his estate among his sons’ (TS 3. 1.9.4), states a 


171 



2.3.2 


Dharmasutras 


vedic text. 3 Because it makes no special allowance, a man should 
divide his estate equally among all his sons. 4 Alternatively, the 
eldest son may take for himself a choice piece of property (cf. B 
1 .18.14), 3 for a vedic text states: Therefore, they invest the eldest 
son with wealth’ (TS 2. 5.2.7). 6 Or else, the eldest son may take 
an additional one-tenth of the estate, 7 while the others take 
equal shares, (cf. A 2.14.6-15) 

8 While the father is alive, the partitioning of the estate takes 
place only with his consent. 

9 Among the four social classes, the special share of the eldest 
is a cow, a horse, a goat, and a sheep, respectively. 

10 When there are sons from mothers of different classes, they 
should divide the estate into ten equal portions and take four, 
three, two, and one portion according to the class. "When a 
natural son (B 2.3.14) is born, however, other sons belonging to 
the same class take one-third of the estate as their share. 
"Among two sons, the one born from a mother of the same 
class as the father and the other born from a mother of the class 
immediately below the father’s, the latter, if he is endowed with 
good qualities, may take the share reserved for the eldest, 13 for 
the one who is endowed with good qualities becomes the sup- 
porter of the others, (cf. G 28.35-9) 


Types of Sons 

14 A son whom a man fathers by himself* through a wife who 
belongs to the same class as he and whom he has married 
according to the proper rites should be recognized as his natural 
son. Now, they also quote: 

From my body you spring— from every inch! 

From my heart you are born! You are my self, 
bearing the name ‘son’. May you live a hundred 
years. (BU 6.4.9) 

15 A male child born to a man’s daughter following an agree- 
ment (G 28.18) should be recognized as his son by an appointed 
daughter ; any other child is his grandson by his daughter. 
16 Now, they also quote: 


172 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


2.3.29 


At the ancestral offering, the son of an 
appointed daughter should offer the first ances- 
tral oblation to his mother and the second and 
third to his mother’s father and paternal grand- 
father, respectively. 

17 When someone else fathers a son on the wife of a person 
who is dead, impotent, or sick, after she has received permission 
(Va 17.55-66), he is a son begotten on his wife. 18 He has two 
fathers, belongs to two lineages (A 2.11.15 n.), and makes ances- 
tral offerings to and inherits the property of two different 
fathers. 19 Now, they also quote: 

When a man with two fathers offers an ances- 
tral offering, he invokes two names at each 
offering and offers three offerings to six ances- 
tors. Acting in this manner, he will not 
stumble.* 

20 When a boy is given for adoption by his parents or by one of 
them and is accepted as one’s own child, he is a son given in 
adoption. 21 When a man accepts as his own a boy who is willing 
and is akin to him, he is a contrived son. 22 When a boy is born 
secretly in the house and is found out afterwards, he is a son bom 
in secret. 23 When a boy is abandoned by his parents or by one of 
them and is accepted by someone as his own child, he is a son 
adopted after being abandoned. 24 When someone has sex with an 
unmarried woman without permission, the child she bears is a 
son of an unmarried woman. 25 When someone marries a preg- 
nant woman, whether he is aware of her pregnancy or not, the 
child she bears is a son received with the marriage. 26 When a boy 
is sold by his parents or by one of them and is accepted as one’s 
own child, he is a purchased son. 27 When a woman leaves a hus- 
band who is impotent or has become an outcaste and marries 
another husband, a boy born to such a remarried woman is a 
son of a remarried woman. 28 When a boy without mother or 
father gives himself over to someone, he is a son given in adop- 
tion by himself. 29 When a man belonging to the highest of the 
twice-born classes fathers a son by a Sudra woman, that son is a 


173 



2.3.29 


Dharmasutras 


Nisada, 30 whereas if they cohabit through lust, the son is a 
Parasava. These are the various types of sons. 

Inheritance of Different Sons 

31 Now, they also quote: 

A natural son, a son by an appointed daughter, 
a son begotten on the wife, a son given in adop- 
tion, a contrived son, a son born in secret, and 
a son adopted after being abandoned— these, 
they declare, share in the inheritance. 

32 A son of an unmarried woman, a son born to 
a woman who was pregnant at marriage, a pur- 
chased son, a son of a remarried woman, a son 
given in adoption by himself, and a Nisada — 
these, they declare, share in the lineage (A 
2. 11.1 5 n.). (cf. G 28.32-4) 

33 ‘Only the first of these receives a share’, says Aupajanghani. 

34 Only now, Janaka, have I become jealous of 
my wives; I was not so formerly. For when we 
are in the abode of Death, they say, a son 
belongs to the man who fathered him. After he 
dies, the man who deposited the seed takes the 
son to himself in the abode of Death. People 
should, therefore, guard their wives, fearful of 
the seed of strangers. 

35 Diligently guard this progeny of yours, lest 
strangers sow their seeds in your held; in the 
transit to the next world, a son belongs to the 
man who fathered him. Otherwise a husband 
makes this progeny of his worthless for himself. 

(cf. A 2.13.6; Va 17.9) 

36 They should closely guard the shares of minors together 
with the accrued interest until they reach the legal age (G 
2.34 n.) 37 and maintain those who are legally incompetent with 


174 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


2.4.2 


food and clothing, 38 namely, those who are blind, mentally 
retarded, impotent, addicted to vice, and sick, 39 as well as those 
who neglect their duties, 40 but not those who have fallen from 
their caste or the offspring of such persons. 

41 No association is permitted with outcastes. 42 Even if she has 
become an outcaste, however, a man should support his own 
mother, but without speaking with her (A 1.28.9-10). 


Inheritance of Women 

43 Daughters should take their mother’s jewellery and anything 
else customarily given to her. 44 It is not possible for women to 
act independently. 45 Now, they also quote: 

Her father takes care of her in her childhood; 
her husband takes care of her in her youth; and 
her son takes care of her in her old age. A 
woman is not fit to act independently. 

46 Women are considered to be devoid of 
strength and not to inherit property (TS 
6. 5. 8. 2), says a vedic text. 


WOMEN 


Adultery 

47 If women strive to do what is beneficial to their husbands, they 
will win the heavenly world. 48 When she is unfaithful, she should 
perform an arduous penance (B 2.2.38). 49 If it is with a Sudra 
man, she should perform a lunar penance (B 3.8). 50 If it is with a 
Vaisya and so forth in the reverse order of classes, she should 
perform the penance beyond the very arduous penance (B 
2.2.40), and so forth.* 51 Brahmin and other male offenders 
should observe chastity for one year, 52 whereas a guilty Sudra 
man should be burnt with a straw-fire (see Va 21.1-3). 

53 Now, they also quote: 


4 


'Everybody except a Brahmin is subject to 
corporal punishment for adultery. 2 People of 


175 



2.4.2 


Dharmasutras 


all four classes should guard their wives more 
closely than their wealth. 

3 There is no corporal punishment, however, 
when the adultery involves actresses or the 
wives of minstrels, for such women lure these 
men and stir even people with great self- 
control. 

4 Women have an unparalleled means of purifi- 
cation and they never become sullied, for 
month after month their menstrual flow washes 
away their sins. 

5 The Moon granted them purification; Gandh- 
arva, a sweet voice; and Fire, the capacity to 
eat anything. Women, therefore, are free from 
taint.* 


Divorce and Widowhood 

6 In the tenth year a man may dismiss a wife 
who bears no children, in the twelfth year a 
wife who bears only daughters, and in the fif- 
teenth year a wife all of whose children die; a 
wife who is sharp-tongued, however, he should 
dismiss immediately. 


7 When her husband dies, a wife should abstain from honey, 
meat, liquor, and salt, and sleep on the floor for one year; 8 for 
six months, according to Maudgalya . 9 After that time, if she has 
no son, she may bear one through a brother-in-law with the 
consent of her elders. 10 Now, they also quote: 


One should not enjoin a leviratic union on a 
woman who is barren, who has borne a son or 
reached menopause, whose children have died, 
or who is unwilling— that is, a woman from 
whom a fruitful outcome cannot be expected. 


176 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 2.4.21 

Women with Whom Sex Is Forbidden 

"Father’s sister, maternal uncle’s sister, sister, sister’s daughter, 
daughter-in-law, maternal uncle’s wife, friend’s wife— these are 
women with whom sex is forbidden. "Penances for having sex 
with forbidden women are the arduous penance, the very ardu- 
ous penance, and the lunar penance (B 2.2.38; 3.8). 13 The same 
applies to sex with a Candida woman. 14 Now, they also quote: 

When a Brahmin has sex with a Candala 
woman, eats her food, or accepts gifts from her 
without knowing that she is a Candala, he falls 
from his caste; whereas if he does so knowingly, 
he sinks to the same level as she. 

"When someone heedlessly has sex with the 
wife of his father, an elder (A 1.6.32 n.), or the 
king, he becomes guilty of sex with an elder’s 
wife. The atonement for such a man has been 
given above.* 

HOUSEHOLDER 
Lawful Occupations 

16 If a man is unable to maintain himself by teaching, officiating 
at sacrifices, and receiving gifts, he may live according to the 
Ksatriya Law, because it comes next. "Gautama says no, 
because the Ksatriya Law is too brutal for Brahmins. 18 Now, 
they also quote: 

To protect cows and Brahmins, and when the 
social classes are in danger of intermixing, 
Brahmins and Vaisyas may take up arms out of 
concern for the Law. 

19 Or he may follow the livelihood of a Vaisya, because it 
comes next. 20 He should plough the land before breakfast, 
21 using a pair of uncastrated bulls whose noses have not been 
pierced, without beating them with a prod but urging them on 
repeatedly. 


177 



2.4.22 


Dharmasutras 


Duties of a Householder 

22 The ritual fire* is established at marriage. A man should 
perform his rites in it until he has established his vedic fires. 

23 From the time he establishes his vedic fires, he should offer the 
following rites without fail: establishing the vedic fires, daily fire 
offering, new- and full-moon sacrifices, sacrifice of first fruits at 
winter and summer solstices, animal sacrifices, seasonal sacri- 
fices, Saddhotr offering at the beginning of a season, and the 
Jyotistoma sacrifice in the spring. In this way he obtains 
bliss. 24 Now, they also quote: 

Surely, a man who is accustomed to sleeping 
during the day, eats food given by anybody, or 
has lapsed from the vow he has undertaken 
cannot attain heaven. 

25 He should refrain from miserliness, guile, and crookedness. 
26 Now, they also quote this verse recorded in the dialogue 
between the daughters of Usanas and Vrsaparvan: 

You, undoubtedly, are the daughter of a man 
who flatters, who supplicates, and who accepts 
gifts, while I am the daughter of a man who is 
being flattered, who gives, and who accepts no 
gifts.* 


Bathing and Libations 

5 1 Bathing by immersing oneself in water promotes austerity. 

2 After he has offered water to quench the gods, let him offer 
water to quench his ancestors, 3 pouring water from the 
appropriate part of the hand (B 1.8.1 4 1 6 n . ) , saying, ‘Bearing 
vigour . . .’ (see B 2.10.4). 4 Now, they also quote: 

Men belonging to the three twice-born classes 
should get up in the morning and offer water to 
quench the gods, seers, and ancestors, water 
that is unconfined and flows freely. 

5 Let them not use water that is confined, for 


178 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


2.5.17 


then the builder of the dam will obtain a share 
of that offering. 6 Therefore, let him avoid dams 
and wells built by others. 

7 Now, they also quote: 

Or else, after taking out three lumps of mud, he 
may use confined water in a time of adversity 
but not regularly; from a well he should take 
out three lumps of mud, as well as three potfuls 
of water. 

8 If a man accepts a lot of gifts from someone from whom he is 
permitted to accept or anything from someone from whom he is 
forbidden to accept; or if he officiates at a sacrifice of someone at 
whose sacrifices he is forbidden to officiate; or if he eats the food 
of someone whose food he is forbidden to eat— he should 
silently recite the Taratsamandl verses. 9 Now, they also quote: 

People who associate with an outcaste teacher 
or pupil, or who associate with outcastes by 
eating their food or performing religious ser- 
vices for them sink into deep darkness. 


Duties of a Bath-Graduate 

10 Next, the observances of a bath-graduate. 

Feeding Guests "Using a portion of whatever food he may 
have, every morning and evening he should make an offering to 
the All-gods and a Bali offering, and according to his ability 
offer hospitality to Brahmins, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras 
who have arrived as guests (G 5.40-3 n.). 12 If he is unable to give 
food to many, he should give to a single person endowed with 
the proper qualities 13 or to the person who arrives first. 14 If a 
Sudra comes as a guest, he should employ him in some work. 
15 Alternatively, he may give a goodly portion* to a vedic scholar. 

16 The distribution of food should be carried out in a way that 
does not cause inconvenience to those who receive food every 
day, 17 but he should never eat without giving food to someone. 


179 



2.5.18 


Dharmasutras 


18 Now, on this matter they also quote a couple of verses sung by 
Food: 


Without giving me to ancestors, gods, depend- 
ants, guests, and friends, when a man in his 
folly eats what has been cooked, he eats 
poison— I eat him and I am his death. 

After performing the daily lire sacrifice and the 
oblation to All-gods and offering hospitality to 
guests, when a man who is content and purified 
eats me— the food left over after feeding his 
dependants— with a spirit of generosity, he rel- 
ishes me and I am his ambrosia. 

19 Provisions should be distributed according to one’s ability 
outside the sacrificial arena to virtuous Brahmins, vedic 
scholars, and masters of the Veda when they come begging in 
order to give the teacher’s gift, to perform a wedding, or to 
procure medicine; when they are indigent or preparing to per- 
form a sacrifice; or when they are students, travellers, or people 
who have offered the Visvajit sacrifice (G 5.21). 20 When others 
come to beg, he shall give them cooked food. 

Rules of Eating 21 Flaving washed his hands and feet thoroughly 
and sipped some water, he should sit in a clean and enclosed 
place; receive respectfully the food presented to him; get rid of 
lust, anger, hatred, greed, and folly; and eat the food using all his 
fingers and without making any noise. 

6 1 Let him not put back on to his plate a ball of rice from 
which he has taken a bite. 2 If he eats food mixed with meat, 
fish, or sesame, he should wash with water, warm himself over a 
fire, 3 and bathe after sunset. 4 Fie should refrain from using a 
seat, clogs, or tooth cleaners made of Palasa wood (A 1.32.9 n.). 
5 Fie should not eat food placed on his lap 6 or on a stool. 

General Rules 7 Fie should carry a bamboo staff; wear a pair of 
gold earrings; 8 and refrain from washing the feet by rubbing one 
foot with the other and from placing one foot on the other. 9 Fie 


180 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


2.6.33 


should not wear a necklace outdoors 10 or look at the sun at 
sunrise or sunset. 11 He should not point out a rainbow to some- 
one by saying ‘Look, the Indra’s bow!’; 12 if he does so, let him 
say ‘Look, a jewelled bow!’ (cf. A 1.31.16; G 9.19-24; Va 12.32— 
3) 13 He should not pass between the cross-beam and bolt of a 
city gate 14 or the posts to which a swing is tied; 15 step over a rope 
to which a calf is tied; 16 or step on ashes, bones, hair, grain 
husks, potsherds, or bath water. 

17 He should not tell anyone when a cow is suckling her calf. 
18 When he speaks of a cow that does not yield milk, he should 
not say, ‘She is not a milch-cow’; 19 if he speaks of her, he should 
simply say, ‘She is going to be a milch-cow.’ 20 He should not use 
harsh, cruel, or rude words. 

21 He should not go on a journey alone, "with outcastes, or 
with a woman or a Sudra. 23 He should not venture out when 
evening is approaching. 

24 He should not bathe naked 25 or at night; 26 cross a river by 
swimming (A 1.32.26 n.); 27 look down into a well 28 or a pit; 29 or 
sit down in a place from where someone may eject him. 

30 A man should give way to a Brahmin, a cow, 
a king, a blind man, an old man, someone 
weighed down by a heavy load, a pregnant 
woman, and a feeble person. 

31 A righteous man should try to live in a village well supplied 
with firewood, water, fodder, kindling wood, Kusa grass, and 
garland material; served by many roads; full of wealthy and 
energetic people; inhabited mainly by Aryas; and not easily 
accessible to robbers (G 9.65). 

32 If a Brahmin married to a Sudra woman lives 
for twelve years in a village which obtains its 
water from wells, he becomes equal to a Sudra. 

33 ‘A man who keeps himself well under control 
will attain final bliss even if he lives in a city 
with his body covered with the city dust and his 
eyes and face coated with it’— now that is 
something impossible. 


181 



2.6.34 


Dharmasutras 


34 The dust coming from carriages, horses, ele- 
phants, grain, and cows is auspicious, whereas 
the dust of brooms, dogs, goats, sheep, don- 
keys, and garments is dirty. 

35 He should honour those deserving of honour. 

36 A seer, a learned man, a king, a bridegroom, a 
maternal uncle, a father-in-law, and an officiat- 
ing priest— these, according to tradition, are 
the people that the authoritative texts decree as 
entitled to the welcome water (G 5.32 n.) at 
specific times. 

37 A seer, a learned man, and a king should be 
honoured whenever they come; a bridegroom 
and an officiating priest, at the beginning of the 
rite; and a maternal uncle and a father-in-law, 
when they visit after a lapse of one year. 

38 He should raise the right hand in the fire stall, 
in the midst of cows, in the presence of Brah- 
mins, at the private vedic recitation, and at a 
meal. 

39 He should wear an upper garment during 
these five activities: private vedic recitation, 
voiding urine and excrement, giving a gift, eat- 
ing, and sipping water. 

40 He should never offer an oblation in the fire, 
eat food, give a gift, make an offering, or accept 
a gift without keeping his right hand between 
his knees; the same, according to tradition, 
applies to sipping water. 

41 ‘Creatures depend on food and food is life’ — 
so states a vedic text (cf. TU 2.2). Therefore, 
people should give food, for food is the highest 
sacrificial offering. 

42 Sin is allayed by a burnt offering; a burnt 
offering is allayed by giving food; and the giving 


182 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


2.7.11 


of food is allayed by the concluding gift— so 
have we heard in a vedic text. 


Twilight Worship 

7 'Next, we will explain the procedure of the twilight wor- 
ship. 2 After going to the bathing place, he should bathe if 
he is ritually impure— or, if he is already ritually pure, omit the 
bath—; wash his feet and hands; sip some water; and sprinkle 
his body with water while reciting the following: the Surabhimati 
verse, the Ablinga verses, the Varum verses, the Hiranyavarna 
verses, the Pavamam verses, the Calls, and other purificatory 
formulas. In this way he becomes ritually pure. 3 Now, they also 
quote: 


Bathing by immersion in water is prescribed for 
all classes, whereas sprinkling oneself with 
water while reciting ritual formulas is charac- 
teristic of twice-born people. 

4 At the beginning of any ritual activity and prior to the time 
for twilight worship, a man becomes ritually pure by sprinkling 
himself with water while reciting this same set of purificatory 
formulas. 

5 Now, they also quote: ‘Seated facing the east on a spread 

of Darbha grass and holding some blades of Darbha grass in 
his right hand filled with water, he should recite the Savitrl 
verse one thousand times.’ 4 5 6 Alternatively, he may recite it one 
hundred times while controlling his breath ; 7 or recite it mentally 

ten times together with the seven Calls, placing the syllable OM 

at the beginning and the end. 8 9 Let him tire himself by control- 
ling his breath three times while reciting the ‘Brahman’s Heart’ 
text* 

9 In the evening one performs the worship using the two verses 
addressed to Varuna: ‘Hear this cry of mine, O Varuna . . .’ and 
‘To you, therefore, I go . . .’ 10 In the morning one performs the 
worship in the same way, but standing and facing the east. 

"During daytime one performs the worship using the two 


183 



2.7.11 


Dharmasutras 


verses addressed to Mitra: ‘The fame of Mitra, supporter of the 
people . . .’ and ‘Mitra draws people together . . .’ 

12 The morning twilight worship should be started long before 
sunrise and concluded after the sun has risen, 13 while the even- 
ing twilight worship should be started before sunset and con- 
cluded long after the sun has set. 

14 The full performance of the twilight worship leads to 
the uninterrupted sequence of days and nights.* 15 In this 
connection, moreover, there are a couple of verses sung by 
Prajapati: 

When Brahmins do not worship the morning 
twilight before the sun rises and the evening 
twilight before the sun sets, how can they be 
considered Brahmins? 

When Brahmins never worship the morning 
or the evening twilight, a righteous king may 
freely employ them to do the work of Sudras. 

16 In that event, a man should fast during the night if he neg- 
lects the evening twilight worship and during the day if he 
neglects the morning twilight worship. 17 He obtains thereby the 
reward of standing during the morning and sitting during the 
evening twilight worship. 18 Now, they also quote: 

Whatever sin a man may have committed 
through his sexual organ, feet, arms, mind, or 
speech, he frees himself from it by worshipping 
the evening twilight. 

19 He also unites himself with the night, and Varuna does not 
seize him. 20 Likewise, by worshipping the morning twilight he 
frees himself from sins committed during the night. 21 He also 
unites himself with the day; Mitra, moreover, protects him, and 
Sun leads him up to heaven. 22 ‘When in this manner a Brahmin 
worships during the twilights between the day and the night,’ it 
is stated, ‘he becomes purified by Brahman; he becomes Brah- 
man; and, abiding by the dictates of scripture, he wins the world 
of Brahman.’ 


184 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 2.8.10 

Bath 

8 ‘Then, he should wash his hands, take the water pot and a 
lump of earth, go to a bathing place, and wash his feet and 
his body three times. 2 Now, some indeed declare: ‘A cemetery, 
water, a temple, a cowpen, and a place where there are 
Brahmins— one should not enter them without washing the 
feet.’ 3 He enters the water then, while reciting: 

To the golden-horned Varuna I go for refuge. I 
beg of you; grant me a place to bathe. Whatever 
sin I may have committed— eating the food of 
bad men, accepting gifts from evil men, sins 
committed in thought, word, or deed— may 
Indra, Varuna, Brhaspati, and Savitr purify me 
from all that over and over again. (MNU 130-3) 

4 Then he takes water in his cupped hands, saying: ‘May the 
waters and plants be amiable towards us’ (MNU 122); 5 and 
pours that water in the direction in which lives an enemy of his, 
saying: ‘May the waters be inimical to the man who hates us and 
whom we hate’ (MNU 123). 

6 He then washes himself and whirls the water around three 
times with his hand in a clockwise motion (A 1.7.2 n.), saying: 
‘Whatever hazard, whatever filth, whatever sinister there is in the 
water— may all that be banished’ (MNU 135). 7 After he has 
submerged himself in the water and emerged, 8 let him not, while 
he is still in the water, perform personal purification, wash his 
clothes by beating them on a rock, or sip water. 9 If he uses water 
drawn from a confined source (B 2. 5.4-7), he should pay hom- 
age to it, saying: ‘Homage to Fire, lord of the waters! Homage to 
Indra! Homage to Varuna! Homage to Varunl! Homage to the 
waters!’ (MNU 134). 

10 After he has climbed back on to the bank and sipped water, 
he should sip again, saying: 

May the waters cleanse the earth! May the 
earth, so cleansed, cleanse me! May Brah- 
manaspati and Brahman cleanse the earth! 

May the earth, so cleansed, cleanse me! 


185 



2.8.10 


Dharmasutras 


If I have eaten leftovers (A 1.3.27 n.) or unfit 
food, if I have committed an improper act, if I 
have accepted gifts from evil men— may the 
waters cleanse me of all that, Svaha! (MNU 
317-20). 

11 He then prepares two purificatory blades of grass and rubs 
his body with water. After he has rubbed his body with water 
while reciting the three verses: ‘Waters, you are refreshing . . 
the four verses: ‘Golden coloured, pure, and purifying . . and 
the passage, ‘The purifier, the heavenly one . . he goes into the 
water and controls his breath three times while reciting the 
Aghamarsana hymn. Then he climbs back on to the bank, 
squeezes the water from his clothes, puts on fresh clothes that 
are not worn-out and that have been washed and dried in the air, 
and sips some water. Seated facing the north on a bed of Dar- 
bha grass and holding blades of Darbha grass in his hand, he 
should recite the Savitrl verse one thousand times, one hundred 
times, or an unlimited number of times— ten times at the 
minimum. 

12 Next, he worships the sun, reciting these formulas: ‘Gazing, 
beyond the darkness, upon the highest light . . ‘The rays carry 
you up . . ‘The resplendent face of the gods . . ‘That bright 
eye rising in the east . . and ‘He who has arisen . . .’ 

13 Now, they also quote: ‘The syllable OM, the three Calls, and 
the Savitrl verse— these five veda-sacrifices (cf. B 2. 1 1 . 1) purify a 
Brahmin from sin every day.’ 


Quenching Libations 

14 Purified by the five veda-sacrifices, he then quenches the deities 
with libations: 

9 'OM Fire, Prajapati, Soma, Rudra, Aditi, 
Brhaspati, and Serpents— I quench these 
deities of the eastern gate, together with the 
constellations, the stars, the days and nights, 
and the ‘hours’ (A 1.11. 32 n.). OM I quench 
also the Vasus. 


186 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


2.9.6 


2 0M Ancestors, Aryaman, Bhaga, Savitr, 
Tvastr, Wind, Indra, and Fire— I quench these 
deities of the southern gate, together with the 
constellations, the stars, the days and nights, 
and the ‘hours’. OM I quench also the Rudras. 

3 OM Mitra, Indra, Great Ancestors, Waters, 
All-Gods, Brahma, and Visnu— I quench these 
deities of the western gate, together with the 
constellations, the stars, the days and nights, 
and the ‘hours’. OM I quench also the Adityas. 

4 OM Vasus, Varuna, Aja Ekapad, Ahirbudh- 
nya, Pusan, Asvins, and Yama— I quench these 
deities of the northern gate, together with the 
constellations, the stars, the days and nights, 
and the ‘hours’. OM I quench the All-Gods. 
OM I quench also the Sadhyas. 

5 OM I quench Brahma. OM I quench 
Prajapati. OM I quench the Four-faced God. 
OM I quench Paramesthin. OM I quench 
Fliranyagarbha. OM I quench Svayambhu. 
OM I quench Brahma’s male attendants. OM 
I quench Brahma’s female attendants. OM 
I quench Fire. OM I quench Wind. OM I 
quench Varuna. OM I quench Sun. OM I 
quench Moon. OM I quench the constella- 
tions. OM I quench Sadyojata. OM Earth, I 
quench the Person. OM Atmosphere, I quench 
the Person. OM Sky, I quench the Person. OM 
Earth Atmosphere Sky, I quench the Person. 
OM I quench the Earth. OM I quench the 
Atmosphere. OM I quench the Sky. OM I 
quench Mahar. OM I quench Janas. OM I 
quench Tapas. OM I quench Satya. (see App. 
1. 1 Calls) 

6 OM I quench the god Bhava. OM I quench 
the god Sarva. OM I quench the god Isana. 
OM I quench the god Pasupati. OM I quench 


187 



2.9.6 


Dharmasutras 


the god Rudra. OM I quench the god Ugra. 
OM I quench the god Bturna. OM I quench the 
Great God.* 

OM I quench the wife of the god Bhava. OM I 
quench the wife of the god Sarva. OM I quench 
the wife of the god Isana. OM I quench the wife 
of the god Pasupati. OM I quench the wife of 
the god Rudra. OM I quench the wife of the god 
Ugra. OM I quench the wife of the god Bhhna. 
OM I quench the wife of the Great God. 

OM I quench the son of the god Bhava. OM I 
quench the son of the god Sarva. OM I quench 
the son of the god Isana. OM I quench the son 
of the god Pasupati. OM I quench the son of 
the god Rudra. OM I quench the son of the god 
Ugra. OM I quench the son of the god Bhima. 
OM I quench the son of the Great God. 

OM I quench the Rudras. OM I quench 
Rudra ’s male attendants. OM I quench Rudra ’s 
female attendants. 

OM I quench Vighna. OM I quench Vin- 
ayaka. OM I quench Vlra. OM I quench 
Sthula. OM I quench Varada. OM I quench 
Hastimukha. OM I quench Vakratunda. OM I 
quench Ekadanta. OM I quench Lambodara.* 
OM I quench Vighna’s male attendants. OM I 
quench Vighna’s female attendants. 

8 OM I quench Sanatkumara. OM I quench 
Skanda. OM I quench Indra. OM I quench 
Sasti. OM I quench Sanmukha. OM I 
quench Jayanta. OM I quench Visakha. OM 
I quench Mahasena. OM I quench Subrah- 
manya. OM I quench Skanda’s male attend- 
ants. OM I quench Skanda’s female attendants. 
9 OM I quench Aditya. OM I quench Soma. 
OM I quench Angaraka. OM I quench Budha. 


188 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


2.9.14 


OM I quench Brhaspati. OM I quench Sukra. 

OM I quench Sanaiscara. OM I quench Rahu. 

OM I quench Ketu. 

10 OM I quench Kesava. OM I quench 
Narayana. OM I quench Madhava. OM I 
quench Govinda. OM I quench Visnu. OM I 
quench Madhusudana. OM I quench Trivi- 
krama. OM I quench Vamana. OM I quench 
Srldhara. OM I quench Hrslkesa. OM I quench 
Padmanabha. OM I quench Damodara. OM I 
quench the goddess SrT. OM I quench the god- 
dess Sarasvati. OM I quench Push. OM I 
quench Tusti. OM I quench Garutmat.* OM I 
quench Visnu ’s male attendants. OM I quench 
Visnu’s female attendants. 

11 OM I quench Yama. OM I quench King 
Yama. OM I quench Dharma. OM I quench 
King Dharma. OM I quench Kala. OM I 
quench Nila. OM I quench Mrtyu. OM I 
quench Vaivasvata. OM I quench Citra. OM I 
quench Citragupta. OM I quench Audum- 
bara.* OM I quench Vaivasvata’s male attend- 
ants. OM I quench Vaivasvata’s female 
attendants. 

12 OM I quench the deities of the earth. OM I 
quench Kasyapa. OM I quench mid-space. 

OM I quench Knowledge. OM I quench 
Dhanvantari. OM I quench Dhanvantari’s 
male attendants. OM I quench Dhanvantari’s 
female attendants. 

13 Next, wearing the sacrificial cord over his neck (A 1.6.18 n.) — 

14 OM I quench the Seers. OM I quench the 
Great Seers. OM I quench the Supreme Seers. 

OM I quench the Brahman Seers. OM I quench 
the Divine Seers. OM I quench the Royal Seers. 

OM I quench the Seers by learning. OM I 


189 



Dharmasutras 


quench the Seers of Janas. OM I quench the 
Seers of Tapas. OM I quench the Seers of 
Satya. OM I quench the Seven Seers. OM I 
quench the Seers of the Kandas.* OM I quench 
the Subordinate Seers. OM I quench the wives 
of the Seers. OM I quench the sons of the 
Seers. OM I quench the grandsons of the Seers. 

OM I quench Kanva Baudhayana. OM I 
quench Apastamba, the composer of the Sutra. 

OM I quench Satyasadha Hiranyakesin. OM I 
quench Vajasaneyin Yajnavalkya. OM I 
quench Asvalayana Saunaka. OM I quench 
Vyasa. OM I quench Vasistha.* 

OM I quench the syllable OM. OM I quench 
the Calls. OM I quench the Savitrl. OM I 
quench the Gayatn. OM I quench the Metres. 

OM I quench the Rg Veda. OM I quench the 
Yajur Veda. OM I quench the Sama Veda. OM 
I quench the Atharva Veda. OM I quench the 
Atharva-Angirasas. OM I quench the Itihasa- 
Puranas. OM I quench all the Vedas. OM I 
quench all the servants of gods. OM I quench 
all beings. 

'Next, wearing the sacrificial cord over his right shoul- 
der and under his left arm (A 1.16.18 n.) — 

OM I quench the fathers— Svadha! Homage! 

OM I quench the grandfathers— Svadha! 
Homage! OM I quench the great-grand- 
fathers— Svadha! Homage! OM I quench the 
mothers— Svadha! Homage! OM I quench the 
paternal grandmothers— Svadha! Homage! 

OM I quench the paternal great-grand- 
mothers— Svadha! Homage! OM I quench the 
maternal grandfathers— Svadha! Homage! OM 
I quench the mother’s paternal grandfathers— 

Svadha! Homage! OM I quench the mother’s 


190 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


2 . 11.2 


paternal great-grandfathers— Svadha! Hom- 
age! OM I quench the maternal grand- 
mothers— Svadha! Homage! OM I quench the 
mother’s paternal grandmothers— Svadha! 
Homage! OM I quench the mother’s paternal 
great-grandmothers— Svadha ! Homage ! 

2 OM I quench the teacher— Svadha! Homage! 

OM I quench the teacher’s wives — Svadha! 
Homage! OM I quench the elders (A 
1.6.32 n.)— Svadha! Homage! OM I quench the 
wives of the elders — Svadha! Homage! OM I 
quench the friends— Svadha! Homage! OM I 
quench the wives of friends — Svadha! Hom- 
age! OM I quench the relatives— Svadha! 
Homage! OM I quench the wives of the 
relatives— Svadha! Homage! OM I quench the 
residents of the house— Svadha! Homage! OM 
I quench the wives of the residents of the 
house— Svadha! Homage! OM I quench all 
men— Svadha! Homage! OM I quench all 
women— Svadha! Homage! 

3 He pours water from the parts of the hand sacred to the 
appropriate deities (B 1. 8. 14-16 n.). 4 He recites: ‘Bearing vigour, 
immortality, ghee, milk, nectar, and brew, you are the refreshing 
drink. Quench my fathers! May you be quenched! May you be 
quenched! May you be quenched!’ (VS 2.34). 

5 He should never participate in divine rites wearing a single 
garment or wet clothes, 6 nor, according to some, even in 
ancestral rites. 


Great Sacrifices 

1 1 'Now, these are the five great sacrifices, which are the 
J. same as those called great sacrificial sessions, namely, 
sacrifice to gods, sacrifice to ancestors, Bali sacrifice to beings, 
sacrifice to humans, and sacrifice to the Veda. 

2 Every day he should make an offering to the gods with the 


191 



2 . 11.2 


Dharmasutras 


ritual exclamation ‘Svaha’, even if it is just a piece of firewood. 
In this way he fulfils that sacrifice to gods. 

3 Every day he should make an olfering to the ancestors with 
the ritual exclamation ‘Svadha’, even if it is just a cup of water. 
In this way he fulfils that sacrifice to ancestors. 

4 Every day he should pay homage, even if it is with just 
some flowers. In this way he fulfils that Bali sacrifice to 
beings. 

5 Every day he should give food to Brahmins, even if it is 
just some roots, fruits, or vegetables. In this way he fulfils that 
sacrifice to humans. 

6 Every day he should perform his private vedic recitation, 
even if it is just the syllable OM. In this way he fulfils that 
sacrifice to the Veda. 7 Clearly, the sacrifice to the Veda is 
private vedic recitation. Now, at this sacrifice to the Veda, 
the Juhu spoon is indeed speech; the Upabhrt spoon is the 
mind; the Dhruva spoon is sight; the Sruva spoon is intelli- 
gence; the concluding bath is truth; and the conclusion of 
the rite is the heavenly world. When a man performs his 
private vedic recitation with this knowledge, he wins as great 
a heavenly residence as a man who gives as a gift this world 
filled with wealth— indeed, he wins a heavenly residence even 
greater than that, a residence that is unending; and he 
overcomes repeated death.* ‘Therefore,’ a Brahmana text 
declares, ‘one should perform one’s private vedic recitation’ (SB 
11.5.7.2). 

8 Now, they also quote: ‘When someone recites a text per- 
taining to a particular rite, even if he does so while lying on a 
couch, well-anointed and fully satisfied, he has thereby actually 
performed that rite’ (SB 11.5.7.3-4). 


ORDERS OF LIFE 
Argument of Opponents 

9 Now, some do indeed posit a fourfold division of this Law 
—In the absence of a vedic text to support their position, 


192 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


2 . 11.26 


however, the text ‘Four paths . . .’ must refer to rites, '“namely, 
Isti sacrifices, animal sacrifices, Soma sacrifices, and ghee 
offering—* 

11 a division enunciated in this verse: 

Four paths leading to the gods traverse between 
heaven and earth. Among these, all you gods, 
place us on that which brings unfailing pros- 
perity. (TS 5. 7.2.3) 

12 That division consists of the student, the householder, the 
forest hermit, and the wandering ascetic. 

Student 13 A student shall serve his teacher until death. 

Forest Hermit 14 A forest hermit lives in conformity to the 
treatise on anchorites. 15 An anchorite shall live in the forest, 
subsisting on roots and fruits, given to austerities, and bathing at 
dawn, noon, and dusk. Having kindled the hermit fire (G 
3.27 n.), he shall refrain from eating what is grown in a village; 
pay homage to gods, ancestors, spirits, humans, and seers; and 
entertain guests from all classes, except those who are pro- 
scribed. He may also avail himself of the flesh of animals killed 
by predators. He should not step on plowed land or enter a 
village. He shall wear matted hair and clothes of bark or skin, 
and never eat anything that has been stored for more than a 
year. 

Wandering Ascetic 16 A wandering ascetic should wander forth 
according to the rule, abandoning his relatives and free of pos- 
sessions. 17 Going into the wilderness, 18 he has his head shaven 
except for the topknot; 19 wears a loin cloth; 20 resides in one 
place during the rainy season (G 3.13 n.); 21 and wears ochre 
clothes. 

22 He should go out to beg when the pestle has been laid aside, 
the coals have gone cold, and the plates have been put away;* 
23 without hostility to any creature by violent word, thought, or 
deed; 24 carrying a cloth to strain water for use in purification 
25 and using water that has been drawn out (G 9.10n.) and 
properly strained for ablutions; 26 and claiming, ‘Rejecting vedic 


193 



2.11.26 


Dharmasutras 


rites and cutting ourselves off from both sides, we embrace the 
middle course.’ 


Author’s Judgement 

27 There is, however, only a single order of life (G 3.36 n.), the 
teachers maintain, because no offspring is produced in the 
others.* 

28 With respect to the above position they cite this: There was 
once a demon named Kapila, the son of Prahlada.* It was he 
who created these divisions in his campaign against the gods. No 
wise man should pay any heed to them.’ 

29 In the absence of a vedic text to support their position, the 
text ‘Four paths . . .’ must refer to rites, namely, Isti sacrifices, 
animal sacrifices, Soma sacrifices, and ghee offering. 

30 Now, this verse is cited in support of their position: 

This is the eternal greatness of a Brahmin — he 
is not made greater or smaller by actions. It is 
his trail that the self knows; and knowing him, 
he is no longer stained by sinful actions. (TB 
3.12.7-8; cf.B 2.17.7-8) 

31 One should respond: 

A man who knows not the Veda does not at the 
moment of his death think of that great all- 
perceiving self, by whose power the sun, ablaze 
with splendour, gives warmth and a father 
comes to have a father through his son in birth 
after birth. (TB 3.12.7) 

32 These men who rove neither near nor afar, 
who are neither Brahmins nor pressers of 
Soma— they master speech and with evil 
speech spin their thread without understand- 
ing, like a spinster. (RV 10.71.9) 

33 There are innumerable texts that refer to the debts that people 
incur, such as: ‘Through offspring, O Fire, may we obtain 


194 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


2.12.3 


immortality’ (RV 5.4.10; TS 1.4.46.1); and ‘At his very birth, a 
Brahmin is born with a triple debt— of studentship to the seers, 
of sacrifice to the gods, and of offspring to the ancestors’ (TS 
6.3.10.5). 


34 Study of the triple Veda, studentship, pro- 
creation, faith, austerity, sacrifice, giving 
gifts — those who perform these dwell with us. 

Anyone who praises other things becomes dust 
and perishes. 

HOUSEHOLDER (continued) 

Offerings to Vital Breaths 

1 ^ 'Next, we will describe the fire offerings to the vital 
J. Z— breaths* performed by men who offer sacrifices in their 
selves, the Salmas and the Yayavaras (B 3.1). 

2 When he has finished all his daily obligations, he should sit 
facing the east on a place that has been swept and smeared with 
cowdung; worship the food as it is being brought, saying: ‘Earth, 
Atmosphere, Sky, OM!’; and thereafter remain silent. 3 When the 
food is placed before him, he should sprinkle water over it 
clockwise (A 1.7.2 n.), reciting the Great Calls. While continuing 
to hold the vessel in his left hand, he drinks some water prior to 
the meal, saying: ‘You are an underlayer for the Immortal!’ 
(MNU 479); and makes five offerings of food to the vital 
breaths, saying: 

Established in the out-breath, I offer the 
Immortal. Enter me kindly, so as not to burn 
me. To the out-breath, Svaha! 

Established in the in-breath, I offer the 
Immortal. Enter me kindly, so as not to burn 
me. To the in-breath, Svaha! 

Established in the inter-breath, I offer the 
Immortal. Enter me kindly, so as not to burn 
me. To the inter-breath, Svaha! 


195 



2.12.3 


Dharmasutras 


Established in the up-breath, I offer the 
Immortal. Enter me kindly, so as not to burn 
me. To the up-breath, Svaha! 

Established in the link-breath, I offer the 
Immortal. Enter me kindly, so as not to burn 
me. To the link-breath, Svaha! (MNU 480-4) 

4 After making the five offerings of food to the vital breaths, 
he should complete the rest of his meal silently, reflecting in his 
mind on Prajapati. Tie should not speak during the meal. 5 If he 
happens to speak during the meal, he should say softly ‘Earth, 
Atmosphere, Sky, OM’, and begin eating once again. 

6 If he sees a piece of skin, hair, or nail, an insect, or mouse 
droppings, he should take out a lump from that place; sprinkle 
the food with water; scatter some ash over it; sprinkle it with 
water again; have it declared suitable; and then avail himself of 
it. 7 Now, they also quote: 

Seated facing the east, he should eat the food in 
silence without disparaging it or scattering it on 
the ground and with his mind on the food. 

After eating, he should warm his hands over 
the fire. 

8 Tie should not bite off with his teeth pieces from cakes, bulbs, 
roots, fruit, and meat, which are to be eaten whole. 9 Tie shall not 
eat until he is completely full. 

10 After the meal he drinks some water, saying: ‘You are the 
overlayer of the Immortal’ (MNU 486); sips some water; and 
rubs some water over his heart, saying: ‘You are the bond of the 
vital breaths. You are Rudra. You are Death. Enter me. May you 
wax strong through this food’ (MNU 498). 

11 He then sips water again and lets drops of water from both 
his hands fall on the big toe of his right foot, as he recites: 

The Man the size of a thumb dwells in the 
thumb as the lord of all, the sovereign of the 
world, and the enjoyer of the universe— may he 
be pleased. (MNU 492-3; cf. B 2.15.2) 


196 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


2.13.4 


12 He should perform the consecration of the food that has 
been olfered with his arms raised, reciting these five formulas: 

Having established myself in the out-breath, in 
faith I have offered the Immortal. May my 
out-breath wax strong through this food (B 
1.10.4n.). 

Having established myself in the in-breath, in 
faith I have offered the Immortal. May my 
in-breath wax strong through this food. 

Having established myself in the inter-breath, 
in faith I have offered the Immortal. May 
my inter-breath wax strong through this 
food. 

Having established myself in the up-breath, in 
faith I have offered the Immortal. May my 
up-breath wax strong through this food. 

Having established myself in the link-breath, in 
faith I have offered the Immortal. May my 
link-breath wax strong through this food. 

(MNU 487-91) 

13 Let him then recite, ‘May my self become fit for immortality 
in Brahman’ (MNU 485), 14 and focus his mind on his self while 
reciting the syllable OM. 

15 A man who offers sacrifices to his self far surpasses people 
who perform all the various kinds of sacrifices. 16 Now, they also 
quote: 

1 O 1 As the tip of a reed stuck in a fire goes up in 
J. .J flames, so indeed do all his sins burn up when 
a man offers sacrifices to his self. (cf. CU 
5.24.3) 

2 A man who eats alone reaps evil alone; in vain 
does the foolish man procure his food. (RV 
10.117.6; TB2.8.8.3) 

3 In this manner let him offer every day morning and evening, 
4 or he may offer just water in the evening. 


197 



2.13.5 


Dharmasutras 


Eating 

5 Now, they also quote: 

He should first feed the guests, next the preg- 
nant women, then the children, the elderly, the 
indigent, and especially the sick. 

But a man who eats before giving food to these 
people according to rule does not realize that 
he is being eaten— he does not eat but is being 
eaten. 

6 After giving to ancestors, gods, and servants, 
as well as to his parents and teacher, he should 
eat what remains in silence— that is the fixed 
rule. 

7 Now, they also quote: 

A sage’s meal is eight mouthfuls, a forest 
dweller’s sixteen, a householder’s twenty-two, 
and a student’s an unlimited quantity. 

8 A man who has set up the three vedic fires, a 
draught ox, and a student— these three are able 
to accomplish their tasks only if they eat. They 
cannot accomplish them if they do not eat. (A 
2.9.13; Va 6.20-1) 

9 And: 

When a householder or a student practises aus- 
terity by not eating, however, by his failure to 
perform the offering to the vital breaths he 
becomes equal to a student who has broken his 
vow of chastity. 

10 That is true outside a penance; such fasting is indeed pre- 
scribed during a penance. "Now, they also quote: 

When a man never eats between his morning 
and evening meal, he observes a continuous 
fast. 


198 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


2.14.7 


12 As one must recite softly (A 1.15.1 n.) the 
ritual formulas used at the daily offering in 
the three vedic fires (A 2. 17.22 n.) when the 
material for that offering is unavailable, so one 
must recite softly the ritual formulas used at 
the offering to the vital breaths when one is 
prevented from eating. 

13 Acting in this manner, a man becomes fit for becoming 
Brahman. 


ANCESTRAL OFFERINGS 


H 'An offering to ancestors is a rite that is praiseworthy 
and secures long life, heaven, and prosperity. 

2 A man who knows the three ‘Honey’ verses; an expert in the 
three Naciketa fire altars; a man who knows the Trisuparna; a 
man who maintains the five sacred fires (A 2.17.22n.); a man 
who knows the six Vedic Supplements (A 2.8.10-1 1); a man who 
performs the ‘Head’ vow; a man who sings the Jyestha Samans; 
and a bath-graduate— these purify the people alongside whom 
they eat (A 2.17.21 n.). 3 When such individuals are not available, 
[he may invite] a man who knows the secret texts* 4 Rg verses, 
Yajus formulas, and Saman chants are the glory of an ancestral 
offering. He should, therefore, feed a man who knows them, 
even if he happens to belong to his own ancestry (A 2.14.2 n.). 


5 As he feeds them, he should get them to listen 
successively to the ‘Fiend-killing’ Samans, the 
‘Svadha-containing’ Yajus formulas, and 
‘Honey’ Rg verses. 

6 On the day before or on that very morning, he should invite 
an uneven number of persons, at least three, who are of good 
conduct and vedic savants, who are not related by marriage or 
ancestry (A 2. 14.2 n.), or by a relationship established by sacri- 
fice (A 2.17.4n.), and who are upright and learned in the Vedas. 
He gets them to sit facing the east or the north on seats covered 
with Darbha grass. 

7 Then he presents them with water mixed with sesame seeds, 


199 



2.14.7 


Dharmasutras 


adorns them with perfumes and necklaces, and says, ‘I will make 
a fire offering.’ After they have given him permission, he puts 
wood into the sacred fire, spreads sacred grass around it, com- 
pletes the rites up to the Agnimukha, and offers three oblations 
of that very food in the fire, saying: 

To Soma, who has absorbed the ancestors, 
svadha! Homage! Svaha! 

To Yama, accompanied by Angirases and 
ancestors, svadha! Homage! Svaha! 

To Fire, who conveys the offering, who makes 
the offering flawless, svadha! Homage! Svaha! 

8 The above three offerings should be made only with food that 
has been sprinkled with the remaining ghee. 

9 He should give a lump of rice to crows, 10 for it is stated: 
‘Ancestors roam about in the guise of crows.’ 

"Then he touches the remaining food with his hand and 
thumb, reciting these formulas: 

12 You are as vast as the earth— the fire sees 
you, and the Rg-verses are your glory to fore- 
stall any error in giving you. The earth is your 
bowl, and the sky is your lid. I offer you in 
the mouth of Brahman. I offer you in the out- 
breath and in-breath of learned Brahmins. You 
are inexhaustible. May you never be exhausted 
for my fathers over there in that world. 

You are as vast as mid-space— the wind hears 
you, and the Yajus formulas are your glory to 
forestall any error in giving you. The earth is 
your bowl, and the sky is your lid. I offer you in 
the mouth of Brahman. I offer you in the out- 
breath and in-breath of learned Brahmins. You 
are inexhaustible. May you never be exhausted 
for my grandfathers over there in that world. 

You are as vast as the sky— the sun discloses 
you, and the Saman chants are your glory to 
forestall any error in giving you. The earth is 


200 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


2.15.10 


your bowl, and the sky is your lid. I offer you in 
the mouth of Brahman. I offer you in the out- 
breath and in-breath of learned Brahmins. You 
are inexhaustible. May you never be exhausted 
for my great-grandfathers over there in that 
world. 



'Now, these do indeed happen— 

2 He should sprinkle that food with the ghee 
remaining after the fire oblations. When food is 
given without touching it with the thumb, it 
does not gladden the ancestors at all. 

3 With perverse minds the demons surely wait 
for their chance nearby when someone offers 
food to the ancestors without using both hands. 

4 Goblins and ghouls snatch that offering— but 
they do not get a share when sesame seeds are 
scattered; and demons snatch it when he is 
overcome by anger. 

5 When someone engages in the soft recitation 
of prayers (A 1.15.1 n.), performs a sacrifice, or 
accepts a gift dressed in ochre clothes— an 
oblation made in this way at a rite to gods or 
ancestors does not reach its deity. (A 2.16.3 n.) 

6 When someone gives or receives food without 
touching it with the thumb or sips water stand- 
ing, he does not reap its benefits. 


7 At the beginning and the end, water should be given to each 
guest. 8 Rites beginning with the Jaya offering are to be per- 
formed following the procedure laid down, 9 whereas the rules 
for the other rites are given under the Astaka offering on the 
eighth-day after the full moon* 


10 He should feed two at an offering to the gods 
and three at an offering to ancestors, or one at 
either offering. Even a rich man should not 
indulge in feeding a larger number. 


201 



2.15.11 


Dharmasutras 


11 A large number is detrimental to five things: 
offering proper hospitality, doing things at the 
right place and the right time, carrying out 
purifications, and finding Brahmins of quality. 
Therefore, he should refrain from feeding a 
large number. 

12 In front of him he feeds his fathers, to his left 
his grandfathers, to his right his great- 
grandfathers, and behind him the supplicants 
for morsels.* 


THE IMPORTANCE OF CHILDREN 


16 


'Next, some instructions for a person desirous of off- 
spring. 2 The pair of Asvins have proclaimed that fame 


rests on fathering offspring: 


-’Endowed with longevity, given to austerity, 
devoted to private vedic recitation and sacrifice, 
and controlling his senses, a man should dili- 
gently beget offspring, each within his own 
class. 

4 A Brahmin from his very birth becomes sad- 
dled with three debts. After he has paid them, 
free from doubts regarding the Law, he 
becomes autonomous. 

’After a man has worshipped the seers by his 
private vedic recitation, Indra with Soma sacri- 
fices, and his ancestors with offspring, he will 
rejoice in heaven free from debt. 

6 He wins the worlds through a son, attains 
eternal life through a grandson, and climbs to 
the very summit of heaven through his son’s 
grandson. 

7 It is, moreover, stated: ‘At his very birth a Brahmin is born 
with three debts— of studentship to the seers, of sacrifice to the 


202 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


2.17.9 


gods, and of offspring to the ancestors’ (TS 6.3.10.5). In this 
manner, the Veda points out that people are saddled with debts. 

8 By fathering a virtuous son a man rescues himself. 

9 A man who obtains a virtuous son rescues 
seven generations after him and seven gener- 
ations before him— that is, six others with 
himself as the seventh— from sin and danger. 

10 By fathering offspring and thus continuing the line, there- 
fore, he reaps the reward. 11 So a man should work hard at father- 
ing offspring 12 through the use of medicines and incantations. 

13 This instruction for him is here presented in conformity with 
the Veda, 14 because it produces rewards for people of all classes. 


PROCEDURE OF RENUNCIATION 



'Next, we will explain the procedure of renunciation* 


Time for Renunciation 

"Some say: ‘From that very state, remaining chaste, he goes 
forth’ (A 2.21.8 n.). 3 Alternatively, it is meant for Salinas and 
Yayavaras (B 3.1) who are childless. 4 Or else, a widower may 
undertake it, or someone who has settled his children in their 
respective duties. 5 Some prescribe renunciation for people over 
70 6 or for a forest hermit who has retired from ritual activities. 


Praise of Renunciation 

’This is the eternal greatness of a Brahmin— he 
is not made greater or smaller by actions. It is 
his trail that the self knows; and knowing him, 
he is no longer stained by sinful actions. (TB 
3.12.7-8; cf. B 2.11.30) 

8 ‘Eternal’ because he leads to the cessation of rebirth; 8 9 and 

‘greatness’ because he makes him attain the Immense. 


203 



2.17.10 


Dharmasutras 


Rite of Renunciation 

Preliminary Rites 10 After getting the hair of his head, beard, and 
body shaved and his nails clipped, he gets these things ready: 
"staffs, sling,* water strainer, water pot, and bowl. 12_13 Taking 
these, he goes to the outskirts of the village, or to the village 
boundary, or to a fire stall; eats the triple mixture of ghee, milk, 
and curd, or drinks some water; and then fasts. 

14 OM Earth! I enter Savitrl. That excellent 
[glory] of Savitr. 

OM Atmosphere! I enter Savitrl. The glory of 
god we meditate. 

OM Sky! I enter Savitrl. That he may stimulate 
our prayers. 

He recites this first foot by foot, then half-verse by half-verse, 
and finally the whole verse and each section of the verse. 

15 It is stated: ‘Taking himself from one order of life to the 
other, he becomes purified by the Veda.’ l 6 Now, they also quote: 

When he has offered fire sacrifices and gained 
control of his senses by going from one order to 
the other and finally becomes wearied of giving 
alms and making offerings, he then becomes a 
mendicant. 

17 And such a mendicant is fit for the eternal state. 

18 Before sunset he puts firewood into the householder’s fire, 
brings the southern fire to that spot, draws the blazing offerto- 
rial fire out of the householder’s fire, melts the ghee over the 
householder’s fire, and strains that ghee. He then puts firewood 
into the offertorial fire and, taking four spoonfuls of ghee in the 
Sruc spoon, offers a full oblation, saying, ‘OM Svaha!’ 19 ‘This’, 
it is stated, ‘is the placing of firewood in the fire for the sake of 
Brahman.’* 

20 Then, in the evening after he has performed his daily fire 
sacrifice, he spreads some grass to the north of the householder’s 
fire; places the sacrificial vessels upside down in pairs on that 
grass; spreads some Darbha grass to the south of the offertorial 


204 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


2.17.36 


fire at the location of the Brahman priest’s seat (A 2.4.4 n.); 
covers that grass with a black antelope skin; and spends the 
night there keeping awake. 

21 When a Brahmin who knows this dies after fasting during 
that night of Brahman and after depositing the sacred fires (B 
2.17.27 n.), he rises above all sins, even the sin of killing a 
Brahmin. 

Last Sacrifice 22 Then, at the time sacred to Brahman,* he gets 
up and performs his daily fire sacrifice at the proper time. 
23 Next, he spreads grass along the spine of the sacrificial arena,* 
fetches water, and makes an offering to the Fire common to all 
men with an oblation prepared in twelve potsherds. This well- 
known sacrifice is the last he will offer. 

24 The vessels used in the daily fire sacrifice that are not made 
of clay or stone he throws into the offertorial fire. 25 The two fire- 
drills (B 1.14.18 n.) he throws into the householder’s fire, saying, 
‘May you two be of one mind with us.’ 26 Fie deposits the sacred 
fires in himself,* breathing in the smell of each fire three times, 
saying: ‘With that body of yours worthy of sacrifice, O Fire . . .’ 

Formula of Renunciation 27 Then, standing within the sacrificial 
arena he recites, ‘OM Earth, Atmosphere, Sky! I have 
renounced! I have renounced! I have renounced!’ — three times 
softly and three times aloud; 28 ‘for the gods’, it is stated, ‘are 
triply true’ (TS 3.4.10.5). 29 Filling his cupped hands with water, 
he pours it out, saying, ‘I give safety to all creatures!’ 30 Now, 
they also quote: 

When a sage goes about after giving safety to 
all creatures, no creature in this world will pose 
any threat to him as well. 

31 Fie curbs his speech. 

Taking the Insignia 32 Fie takes the staff, saying: ‘Friend, protect 
me’; 33 the sling, saying: ‘Born beyond this firmament . . .’; 34 the 
water strainer, saying: ‘With that purifier of a thousand streams 
. . .’; 35 the water pot, saying: ‘The light by which the gods went 
up on high . . .’; 36 and the bowl, reciting the seven Calls. 


205 



2.17.37 


Dharmasutras 


Concluding Rites 37 Taking with him the staff's, the sling, the 
water strainer, the water pot, and the bowl, he goes near a place 
of water; bathes; sips water; and washes himself, reciting 
the Surabhimatl verses, the Ablinga verses, the VarunI verses, 
the Hiranyavarna verses, and the Pavamam verses. Entering the 
water, he controls his breath sixteen times while reciting the 
Aghamarsana hymn; comes out of the water; squeezes the water 
from his clothes; wears another clean garment; and sips water. 

He then takes the water strainer, saying: ‘OM Earth, Atmos- 
phere, Sky!’, and offers quenching water: ‘OM Earth, I quench. 
OM Atmosphere, I quench. OM Sky, I quench. OM Mahar, I 
quench. OM Janas, I quench. OM Tapas, I quench. OM Satyam, 
I quench.’ 

38 Taking water in his cupped hands, he offers it to the ances- 
tors in the same manner as to the gods, saying: ‘OM Earth 
Svadha! OM Atmosphere Svadha! OM Sky Svadha! OM Earth, 
Atmosphere, Sky, Mahar, Homage!’ 

39 Then he worships the sun, reciting the two formulas: 
‘The rays carry you up . . .’, and ‘The resplendent face of the 
gods . . .’ 

40 ‘Brahman is OM. Clearly, that light, the one that shines 
there, is Brahman. The one that shines there is the Veda. The 
one that shines there is that which should be known’ — in this 
manner, indeed, he offers quenching water to his self, he pays 
homage to his self. Brahman is the self. The light is the self. 
41 He should repeat the Savitrl verse one thousand times or one 
hundred times or an unlimited number of times. 


Rules of Conduct 

42 He fetches water, taking with him the water strainer, saying: 
‘Earth, Atmosphere, Sky!’ 43 From now on he should not sip 
water that has not been drawn up (G 9.10n.), strained, and 
completely purified. 

1 Q 44 From now on he should not wear white clothes. 'Let 
J. O him carry a single or a triple staff (B 2.17.11 n.). 2 And 
he has these vows: abstaining from injuring living beings, speak- 
ing the truth, not stealing, abstaining from sex, and renunci- 


206 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 2.18.12 

ation. 3 He also has five secondary vows: not giving way to anger, 
obedience to the teacher, not giving in to carelessness, purifica- 
tion, and purity with respect to food. 

Rules about Food 

Begging 4 Next, begging for almsfood. He should seek to obtain 
almsfood from Salinas and Yayavaras (B 3.1) after they have 
completed their offerings to the All-gods. 5 He should make the 
request placing the word ‘Lady’ at the beginning (A 1.3.28-30) 
6 and wait there no longer than the time it takes to milk a cow. 

Eating 7 Then, returning from his begging, he places the bowl on 
a clean spot; washes his hands and feet; and announces the 
almsfood to the sun with the formulas: The rays carry you up 
. . and ‘The resplendent face of the gods . . .’, and to Brahman 
with the formula, ‘Brahman was first born in the east . . .’ 

8 It is stated: ‘From the time that he has placed the firewood in 
the fire, the sacred fires remain within the patron of the sacrifice 
himself. The householder’s fire is his out-breath; the south-fire is 
his in-breath; the offertorial fire is his inter-breath; the hall fire 
is his up-breath; and the hearth fire is his link-breath. These five 
fires (A 2. 17.22 n.) remain within his self. So he offers oblations 
only in his self.’ 

9 ‘This is a man who offers sacrifices in his self,’ it is said, ‘a 
man who is firmly rooted in the self, firmly established in the 
self, a man who guides his self to final bliss.’ 

10 After distributing portions of his food to living creatures 
out of compassion, he should sprinkle water over the remainder 
and eat it as if it were medicine. 11 After he has eaten and sipped 
some water, he recites softly the formula, ‘May my speech be in 
my mouth . . .’; and worships the sun reciting the Jyotismatl 
verse: ‘Gazing, beyond the darkness, upon the highest light . . .’ 

12 Merely to sustain his life, let him eat a simple 
meal that he receives without solicitation or 
obtains from houses not previously selected, or 
that he comes by accidentally. 


207 



2.18.13 


Dharmasutras 


13 Now, they also quote: 

A sage’s meal is eight mouthfuls, a forest dwell- 
er’s sixteen, a householder’s twenty-two, and a 
student’s an unlimited quantity. 

14 He may obtain almsfood from all classes, or 
food given by a single individual from twice- 
born people. Or else, he may obtain almsfood 
from all classes, but never food given by a single 
individual from even twice-born people. 

Special Vows 

15 Now, with reference to those times when teachers explain an 
Upanisad, they cite these rules: ‘Intent on standing during the 
day; keeping silence; sitting on the haunches during the night; 
bathing at dawn, noon, and dusk; and keeping the vow of eating 
at every fourth, sixth, or eighth mealtime (A 1.25.10n.)— he 
observes the vow of living on grain, oil-cake, barley, curd, and 
milk.’ 

16 It is stated: ‘While observing silence on that occasion, he 
may speak when necessary with those deeply versed in the triple 
Veda, with his teachers, with sages, or with learned people 
belonging to other orders of life, pressing his teeth together and 
without opening his mouth— but never with women or when he 
is liable to break his vow.’ 17 Standing, keeping silence, and sit- 
ting on the haunches— let him observe only one of these, not all 
three at once. 18 ‘During a time of distress, however,’ it is said, ‘a 
man who is taking part in it should observe at least as much as 
required for him not to break his vow.’ 

19 ‘For a man intent on standing during the day; keeping 
silence; sitting on the haunches during the night; bathing at 
dawn, noon, and dusk; and keeping the vow of eating at every 
fourth, sixth, or eighth mealtime— 

eight things do not undo his vow: consuming 
water, roots, ghee, milk, or sacrificial food; 
eating at the request of a Brahmin or at the 
command of the teacher; and taking medicine.’* 


208 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 3.1.2 

Daily Rites 

20 Morning and evening, he should recite softly the ritual formu- 
las used in the daily fire sacrifice; 21 he should do so after he has 
performed the evening twilight worship, reciting the verses 
addressed to Varuna, and the morning twilight worship, reciting 
the verses addressed to Mitra (cf. B 2.7.9-11). 

22 He should live as a silent sage, without fire or 
house, without shelter or protection. He should 
enter a village only to seek almsfood and speak 
only during his private vedic recitation. 

23 ‘Limited indeed are the Rg verses,’ it is stated, ‘limited the 
Saman chants, and limited the Yajus formulas. But this alone is 
without e-ad— brahman. He should announce this to the one 
who makes the response. This is the response.’* (TS 7.3. 1.4) 

24 He remains in this manner until he is freed from his body. A 
renouncer of Veda is a man who abides at the root of the tree. 
25 The tree is the Veda, and its root is the syllable OM. The 
syllable OM is the quintessence of the Veda. 26 Prajapati has 
declared: ‘Meditating on OM, containing OM within himself, he 
becomes fit for becoming Brahman.’ 


Conclusion 

27 He should wash the Brahman-bowl* reciting the seven Calls. 


BOOK THREE 

HOLY HOUSEHOLDERS 

Salinas, Yayavaras, and Cakracaras 

I 1 Next, we describe those who desire to follow the Law of 
Salinas, Yayavaras, and Cakracaras. These sustain them- 
selves by nine means of livelihood. 2 We will show below that 


209 



3.1.2 


Dharmasutras 


these means derive their names from the activities by which 
people procure their livelihood (B 3.2). 

3 The name ‘Salma’ is derived from their living in houses 
(said). 4 ‘Yayavara’ is derived from the fact that they follow (yd) 
an excellent (vara) means of livelihood, 5 and ‘Cakracara’ from 
their going (carana) in sequence (anukrama). 

6 We will explain these means of livelihood. 7 They are nine: 
Sannivartim, Kauddall, Dhruva, Sampraksalanl, Samuha, 
Palam, Siloncha, Kapota, and Siddheccha. 8 Among these 
means is counted also a tenth means of livelihood, living on 
forest produce (Vanya: B 3.3). 

Rite of Initiation 

9 This is the procedure for adopting any of the above means 
of livelihood up to the ninth. 10 After getting the hair of his 
head, beard, and body shaved and his nails clipped, he gets 
ready "a black antelope skin, a water pot, a staff, a shoulder 
pole, and a sickle. 12 He begins the process of going away 
by offering the TraidhatavTya sacrifice or the Vaisvanari 
sacrifice. 

13 Then, after sunrise the next morning, he should get his 
fires to blaze up following the procedure laid down in his 
particular ritual text; melt the ghee over the householder’s 
fire; strain that ghee; heat and clean the Sruc and Sruva spoons; 
and, taking four spoonfuls of ghee in the Sruc spoon, offer an 
oblation to the guardian deity of the house in the offertorial 
fire. 14 After reciting the invitatory verse: ‘Accept us, O guardian 
of the house . . .’, he makes the offering while reciting the 
offertory verse: ‘May we, O guardian of the house, obtain your 
fellowship . . .’ 

15 This should be done, some say, by everyone who has set up 
the three sacred fires, 16 while according to others, only by 
Yayavaras. 

17 After leaving his home, he stops at the outskirts of the 
village or the village boundary. There he builds a hut or cabin, 
or occupies one that has already been built. 


210 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 3.2.3 

Rules of Conduct 

18 He should use the black antelope skin and the other articles 
that he had prepared for those purposes for which they are 
intended. 

19 Attending to the sacred fires, offering the new- and full- 
moon sacrifices, and carrying out in sequence the five great 
sacrifices (B 2.11.1)— these are well known. Offering oblations 
with vegetables that he has grown is sanctioned. 20 Saying, ‘I 
offer what is pleasing to all the gods’, or silently, he consecrates 
and cooks them. 

21 He stops teaching, officiating at sacrifices, and accepting 
gifts, as well as other sacrificial activities. 

22 Sacrificial food fit to be used during the performance of a 
vow is sanctioned. 23 It is as follows — food that is mixed with 
ghee or curd, without spices, salt, or meat, and not stale. 

24 Let him either remain chaste or engage in sexual inter- 
course with his wife only during her season (A 2.1.17 n.). 25 On 
each day of the moon’s change (A 1.26. 14n.) he should get 
the hair of his head, beard, and body shaved and his nails 
clipped, and carry out purificatory rites. 26 Now, they also 
quote: 


The Veda points out two types of purification 
which are practised by cultured people: exter- 
nal purification is the elimination of stains 
and smell, whereas internal purification is the 
abstention from injuring living beings. 

27 The body is purified by water, and the intellect 
by knowledge; the inner self is purified by 
abstaining from injuring living beings, and the 
mind by truth. 


Nine Means of Livelihood 

2 ‘Now, with respect to Sannivartim — 2 he cultivates six 
Nivartanas* of fallow land and gives to the owner his share 
of the crop or, if permitted, keeps it to himself. 3 Let him plough 


211 



3 . 2.3 


Dharmasutras 


the land before breakfast, using a pair of uncastrated bulls 
whose noses have not been pierced, without beating them with a 
prod but urging them on repeatedly. 4 In this manner he culti- 
vates six (san) Nivartanas, from which is derived the name 
‘Sannivartinf . 

5 With respect to KaudddlT—he tills an area close to water 
with a spade, a ploughshare, or a sharp stick; sows seeds 
there; and grows bulbs, roots, fruits, and cereals. 6 He cultivates 
with a spade (, kuddala ), from which is derived the name 
‘Kauddalf . 

7 A man who lives by the Dhruva mode wraps his head with a 
white cloth, saying, ‘I wrap you up, O head, for prosperity.’ He 
takes the black antelope skin, saying, ‘You are the lustre of 
sacred knowledge. I take you for the lustre of sacred knowledge’; 
the water strainer, reciting the Ablinga verses; the water pot, 
saying, ‘You are strength. I take you for strength’; the shoulder 
pole, saying, ‘You are grain. I take you for bounty’; and the staff, 
saying, ‘Friend, protect me.’ 

8 Then, upon leaving his residence, he recites softly the Calls 
and the formulas for consecrating the quarters: 

Earth, atmosphere, sky, constellations, the 
quarters, fire, wind, and sun— may these deities 
protect me along the road. 

9 After reciting softly the formula ‘Do not hurt us in our 
children . . .’, he enters the village and shows himself at the door 
of one house after another with his shoulder pole; and because 
of this they call it ‘showing oneself’ (, samdarsani ). 10 When every 
other means of livelihood fails, he sustains himself steadfastly 
( dhruvam ) by just this means; and because of this it is known as 
‘Dhruva’. 

11 With respect to Sampraksalam—he throws away the cereals 
he obtains— does not save or hoard them— and washes 
(, sampraksal ) the dishes and keeps them upside down (ni-ubj); 
from which is derived the name ‘Sampraksalam’.* 

12 With respect to Samuhd—m whatever unfenced area he 
finds cereal plants, either along roads or in fields, he sweeps 


212 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


3.3.2 


( samiih ) them up with a broom and sustains himself with those 
cereals; from which is derived the name ‘Samuha’. 

13 With respect to PdlanT* which is described as simply 
Ahimsika — he asks for husked rice grains from virtuous people 
and thus protects (paid) live seeds; from which is derived the 
name ‘Palanf. 

14 With respect to Siloncha— in whatever unfenced area he 
finds cereal plants, either along roads or in fields, he gleans 
(; uhch ) ears of grain one by one from time to time and sustains 
himself with those gleaning (, sila ); from which is derived the 
name ‘Siloncha’. 

15 With respect to Kapota — in whatever unfenced area he finds 
cereal plants, either along roads or in fields or in other places 
with unrestricted access, he gleans with just two fingers those 
cereals one by one and eats like a pigeon ( kapota ); from which is 
derived the name ‘Kapota’. 

16 With respect to Siddheccha— exhausted by these means of 
livelihood because of either old age or sickness, he asks (iccha) 
for cooked ( siddha ) food from virtuous people; from which is 
derived the name ‘Siddheccha’. 17 Such a person should deposit 
the sacred fires in his self (B 2.17.26n.) and conduct himself like 
a renounces with the exception of the water strainer and ochre 
clothes. 

18 There is also the living on forest produce obtained from 
fruit-bearing trees, vines, and creepers, and from cereal plants 
such as wild millet and sesame. This means of livelihood is 
called Vanya because one lives on forest produce ( vanya). 19 Now, 
they also quote: 

To move around with animals, to dwell with 
them alone, and to sustain oneself just like 
them— that is the visible token of heaven. 


FOREST HERMIT 

3 ‘Next, the two types of forest hermits: 2 those who cook 
and those who do not cook. 


213 



3.3.3 


Dharmasutras 


Hermits Who Cook 

3 Of these, the hermits who cook are of five types: 
Sarvaranyaka—Q ating all forest produce; Vaitusika — eating only 
husked grain; Kandamulabhaksa — e ating only bulbs and roots; 
Phalabhaksa—e ating only fruits; and Sakabhaksa — eating only 
leafy vegetables. 

4 Of these, the Sarvaranyakas are of two types, using two 
kinds of forest produce. They are the Indramsiktas— those who 
use plants produced by rain; and the Retovasiktas— those who 
use animals produced from semen. 5 Of these, the Indravasiktas 
collect the produce of vines, shrubs, creepers, and trees; cook it; 
offer the daily fire sacrifice with it morning and evening; give 
portions of it to ascetics, guests, and students; and eat what 
remains. 6 The Retovasiktas collect the flesh of animals killed by 
tigers, wolves, hawks, or other predators; cook it; offer the daily 
fire sacrifice with it morning and evening; give portions of it to 
ascetics, guests, and students; and eat what remains. 

7 Vaitusikas, avoiding grains with husks (B 2.2.13), collect 
husked rice kernels; cook it; offer the daily fire sacrifice with it 
morning and evening; give portions of it to ascetics, guests, and 
students; and eat what remains. 

8 Those who eat only bulbs and roots, or only fruits, or only 
leafy vegetables, also do likewise. 


Hermits Who Do Not Cook 

9 There are, likewise, five types of hermits who do not cook: 
Unmajjakas* — the submerged; Pravrttasins — e ating what is 
found; Mukhenadayins — taking with the mouth; Toyaharas— 
subsisting on water; and Vayubhaksas — subsisting on air. 

10 Of these, Unmajjakas avoid using iron and stone imple- 
ments. “Pravrttasins take food in their hands. “Mukhenadayins 
take food with their mouths. “Toyaharas subsist only on water. 
14 Vayubhaksas do not eat at all. 

“Accordingly, ten observances are prescribed for anchorites 
(Vaikhanasas). 16 After subscribing to the treatise meant for him, 
he shall carry a staff, keep silence, and be vigilant. “Anchorites 


214 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


3.4.2 


abstain from food and become purified. 18 Here is the gist of 
what the treatise prescribes for all Brahma-anchorites:* 

19 Let him not hurt even gnats or mosquitoes. 

Let him suffer cold and undertake ascetic prac- 
tices. Residing in the forest, let him be content 
and find delight in bark garments, skins, and 
water. 

20 When guests arrive during a meal time, he 
should first* receive them hospitably. Let him 
be intent on honouring gods and Brahmins, 
offering daily fire sacrifices, and performing 
ascetic practices. 

21 This is a difficult mode of life— it cannot be 
given up; it is similar to that of animals and 
birds; it involves collecting what one needs for 
that day and eating acrid and bitter food. Hav- 
ing embarked on this splendid path far away 
from wicked men and undertaken the forest 
life, a Brahmin never comes to ruin. 

22 To move around with animals, to dwell with 
them alone, and to sustain oneself just like 
them— that is the visible token of heaven. 

PENANCES 
Student Breaking His Vow 

4 ‘Now, if a student in some way breaks his vow, eats meat, 
or has sex with a woman— in all tribulations, 2 let him put 
wood in the sacred fire within the house; spread sacred grass 
around it; complete the rites up to the Agnimukha; and offer 
oblations of ghee in the fires, saying: 

It was done by Lust. Lust does it. To Lust 
belongs all this. To him who makes me do 
this, Svaha! 

It was done by Mind. Mind does it. To Mind 

215 



3.4.2 


Dharmasutras 


belongs all this. To him who makes me do 
this, Svaha! 

It was done by Passion. Passion does it. To 
Passion belongs all this. To him who makes 
me do this, Svaha! 

It was done by Blindness. Blindness does it. To 
Blindness belongs all this. To him who makes 
me do this, Svaha! 

It was done by Evil. Evil does it. To Evil 
belongs all this. To him who makes me do 
this, Svaha! 

It was done by Wrath. Wrath does it. To Wrath 
belongs all this. To him who makes me do 
this, Svaha! (cf. MNU 424-9) 

3 The rites beginning with the Jaya offering until the giving of 
a fine cow are well known. 4 Then he remains to the west of the 
sacred fire wrapped in a black antelope skin with its hairy side 
out and neck turned towards the east. 

5 At daybreak, he should crawl out through the hind part of 
the skin; go to a sacred ford; bathe in the standard way; while 
standing in the water, control his breath sixteen times, reciting 
the Aghamarsana hymn; perform the other well-known rites up 
to the worship of the sun; and return to his teacher’s house. 

6 He should know that this is equal to participating in the bath 
that concludes a horse sacrifice. 

Aghamarsana 

5 'Next, we will explain the procedure of the Aghamarsana, 
an unsurpassed means of purification. 

2 The person should go to a sacred ford; bathe; wear clean 
clothes; erect an altar at the water’s edge; wet his clothes with 
one handful of water; and, filling his hand once with water and 
facing the sun, perform his private vedic recitation with the 
Aghamarsana hymn. 3 He recites it one hundred times in the 
morning, one hundred times at midday, and one hundred times 
in the afternoon— or an unlimited number of times. 4 After the 


216 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 3.6.5 

stars have risen, he should eat a dish prepared with one handful 
of barley. 

5 In seven days he is freed from secondary sins causing loss of 
caste committed intentionally or unintentionally; and in twelve 
days from all sins except these — killing a Brahmin (A 
1.19.15 n.), having sex with the wife of an elder, stealing gold, 
and drinking liquor. 6 In twenty-one days he rises above even 
these, he conquers even these. 

7 ‘He rises above all. He conquers all. He obtains the fruits 
of all sacrifices. He becomes a man who has bathed in all 
the sacred fords. He becomes a man who has completed the 
vows for studying all the Vedas. He becomes a man known to 
all the gods. He purifies a row of people (A 2.17.21 n.) by just 
looking at them. And all his activities are successful’— so says 
Baudhayana. 


Barley Dish 

6 1 If what he has done weighs heavily on his conscience, after 
the stars have risen he should get a handful of barley 
cooked for his use. 2 Let him not offer any portion of it in the 
sacred fire; 3 at this rite no Bali offering is made. 4 He should 
consecrate the barley before it is cooked, while it is being 
cooked, and after it is cooked, reciting these formulas: 

5 You are barley. You are the king of grains, 
sacred to Varuna. Mixed with honey, you 
take away all sins, and the seers have 
proclaimed you the means of purification. 

Barley, you are ghee, you are honey, you are 
indeed water and immortality. May you 
cleanse me of all my sins, of every evil deed I 
have done. 

Barley, cleanse me of what I have said, of what 
I have done, of evil thoughts I have had; 
cleanse me of bad luck and misfortune. 

Defilement from eating what has been touched 
by dogs or pigs or sullied by crows or leftovers 


217 



3.6.5 


Dharmasutras 


(A 1 .3.27 n.), and disobedience to my parents 
—cleanse me, 0 Barley, of all that. 

The heinous crime against the king, together 
with grievous sins causing loss of caste, as 
well as offences against children and the 
aged— cleanse me, O Barley, of all that. 

Stealing gold, breaking my vow, officiating at 
the sacrifices of people for whom it is for- 
bidden to officiate, and defaming Brahmins 
—cleanse me, O Barley, of all that. 

Eating food given by a group of people, by 
prostitutes, Sudras, and thieves, or by people 
impure on account of a birth or death, or 
food given at an offering to ancestors or to a 
recently deceased person— cleanse me, O 
Barley, of all that. 

6 While the barley is being cooked, he should guard it by 
reciting: ‘Homage to Rudra, the lord of creatures! The sky is 
appeased’; the passage: ‘Unfurl your strength like a net spread 
out . . .’; the five refrains: 

The fiend-slaying gods seated in the east led by 
Fire— may they guard us, may they aid us! 

To them, homage! To them, Svaha! 

The fiend-slaying gods seated in the south led 
by Yama— may they guard us, may they aid 
us! To them, homage! To them, Svaha! 

The fiend-slaying gods seated in the west led by 
Savitr— may they guard us, may they aid us! 

To them, homage! To them, Svaha! 

The fiend-slaying gods seated in the north led 
by Varuna— may they guard us, may they aid 
us! To them, homage! To them, Svaha! 

The fiend-slaying gods seated in the zenith led 
by Brhaspati— may they guard us, may they 
aid us! To them, homage! To them, Svaha! 

(TS 1.8.7. 1); 


218 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


3.7.7 


and the two formulas: ‘Do not hurt us in our children . . and 
The Brahman-priest of the gods . . .’ 

7 When it is cooked, let him eat a little of it, after purifying 
himself and serving it on a plate. 8 He should offer it in his self, 
reciting: 

The gods born from the mind, united with the 
mind, of keen wisdom, and sons of wisdom- 
may they guard us, may they aid us! To them, 
homage! To them, Svaha! (TS 1. 2.3.1) 

9 A man desiring wisdom should do this for three nights. 10 By 
drinking it for six nights, a sinner becomes purified of his sins; 
11 by drinking it for seven nights, a man is purified of killing a 
Brahmin, having sex with the wife of an elder (A 1.6.32 n.), 
stealing gold, and drinking liquor; 12 and by drinking it for 
eleven nights, a man erases even sins committed by his ancestors. 

13 ‘Indeed, by drinking for twenty-one nights a gruel made 
with barley seeds excreted by cows, a man even sees the divine 
hosts, he sees the lord of the divine hosts; he sees learning; he 
sees the lord of learning’— so says Lord Baudhayana. 

Kusmanda Rite 

7 1 ‘A man who considers himself to be in some way impure 
should make an offering with the Kusmanda formulas. 2 A 
man who ejaculates his semen in any place other than the 
vagina* becomes equal to a thief, equal to a murderer of a 
Brahmin (A 1.19.15 n.). 3 He is freed from any sin short of 
murdering a Brahmin (TA 2. 8. 1-3).’ 

4 Now, a man who has ejaculated his semen in any place other 
than the vagina except in sleep, or even a blameless man who 
wants to purify himself, 5 should get the hair of his head, beard, 
and body shaved and his nails clipped on a new-moon or a full- 
moon day. Following the rules laid down for a student, he 
observes a vow 6 for a year, for a month, or for twenty-four, 
twelve, six, or three days. 7 He should not eat meat, engage in sex, 
or sit on anything above the floor, and recoil from uttering an 
untruth. 


219 



3.7.8 


Dharmasutras 


8 Living on milk is the primary rule. Or else, eating only a 
barley dish, he should perform the twelve-day arduous penance 
(B 2.2.38). Alternatively, he may beg for almsfood. 9 On these 
sorts of occasions Ksatriyas take barley gruel, and Vaisyas curd. 

10 In the morning, after putting wood into the sacred fire as 
prescribed for a cooked oblation and spreading sacred grass all 
around the fire, he completes the rites up to the Agnimukha and 
then makes offerings of ghee into the sacred fire, reciting these 
three passages: ‘O gods, whatever offence we have committed 
against the gods . . .’; ‘Whatever debt I have contracted without 
gambling . . .’; and ‘May he give you the fullness of life on every 
side . . .’ 11 He should offer ghee at each verse. 

12 He makes four offerings of ghee with the Sruva spoon, 
reciting: ‘The strength in the lion, the tiger, the panther . . .’; 
and makes offerings of ghee reciting the four ‘Returner’ verses: 
‘O Fire, O Returner, return to us with fullness of life . . ‘O 
Fire, O Angiras, may your returns be a hundredfold . . 
‘Return again with strength . . .’; and ‘Return with wealth, O 
Fire . . .’ Firewood in hand, he remains at the place meant for 
the patron of the sacrifice and worships the fire, reciting the 
twelve-verse hymn: ‘We announce to the Fire common to all 
men . . .’ 13 Reciting the verse, 

If I have ever committed a sin by thought or 
word, free me from all that, you, whom I have 
praised, for you know the truth, Svaha! (TA 
2.6.2) 

he puts a piece of wood into the sacred fire and gives the priestly 
fee. 

14 The rites from Jaya to the giving of a cow as the priestly fee 
are well known. 15 Only one person performs the fire services. 

16 At the setting up of the sacred fires, on the other hand, full 
oblations of ghee are offered, while reciting: ‘O gods, whatever 
offence we have committed against the gods . . ‘Whatever debt 
I have contracted without gambling . . and ‘May he give you 
the fullness of life on every side . . .’ 17 One who is going to 
perform the daily fire sacrifice after making these oblations 
should use the Ten-hotra text. One who is going to perform a 


220 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


3.8.10 


new-moon or a full-moon sacrifice after making these oblations 
should use the Four-hotra text. One who is going to perform a 
seasonal sacrifice after making these oblations should use the 
Five-hotra text. One who is going to perform an animal sacrifice 
after making these oblations should use the Six-hotra text. One 
who is going to perform a Soma sacrifice after making these 
oblations should use the Seven-hotra text. 

18 It is stated, moreover: ‘Let him make an offering with these 
Kusmanda verses at the start of any rite. Purified in this manner, 
he will attain the world of the gods’ (TA 2.7.5). So states a 
Brahmana text. 


Lunar Penance 

8 ‘Next, we will explain the rules of the lunar penance. 2 On 
the fourteenth day in the fortnight of the waxing moon he 
should fast. 3 Fie should get the hair of his head, beard, and 
body shaved and his nails clipped— or just get his beard 
shaved— and, wearing a new set of clothes and speaking the 
truth, enter the fire hall. 

4 A fire should be brought to that place for him a single time, 
or it may be produced by twirling the fire-drills (B 1 . 14. 1 8 n.). 
5 A student friend of his should be at hand to carry out his 
directions. 6 Fie eats sacrificial food for the duration of the vow. 

7 After putting wood in the sacred fire and spreading sacred 
grass all around it, he completes all the rites up to the Agni- 
mukha and offers in the fire portions of the cooked food— 8 to 
Fire; to the lunar day on which the offering is made; to the lunar 
mansion together with its deity; the fifth to the moon, reciting 
the verse: ‘Flere indeed did they recognize . . .’; the sixth to 
heaven and earth; the seventh to the day and the night; the 
eighth to Rudra; the ninth to the sun; the tenth to Varuna; the 
eleventh to Indra; and the twelfth to the All-gods. 9 Tradition, 
moreover, records further oblations to the cardinal directions 
together with their respective deities and to the wide expanse of 
mid-space together with its deity. 

10 After he has made the offering to Fire who makes the offer- 
ing flawless, reciting: ‘Being born, it becomes ever new . . .’, he 


221 



3 . 8.10 


Dharmasutras 


serves the remainder of the sacrificial oblation into the Kamsa 
bowl or the Camasa vessel; pours sauces fit for sacrifice over it; 
and eats fifteen regular-size lumps— 11 the first, saying ‘You are for 
the out-breath!’; the second, saying ‘You are for the in-breath!’; 
the third, saying ‘You are for the inter-breath!’; the fourth, say- 
ing ‘You are for the up-breath!’; and the fifth, saying ‘You are for 
the link-breath!’ When he eats only four lumps, he eats the first 
reciting the first two formulas; when he eats only three lumps, 
he eats the first reciting the first two and the second reciting 
the second two; when he eats only two lumps, he eats the first 
reciting the first two and the second reciting the last three; and 
when he eats only one lump, he eats it reciting all the formulas.* 
12 He then drinks water, saying, 

You are the waters heard by the gods. Refresh 
my life. Refresh my out-breath. Refresh my in- 
breath. Refresh my inter-breath. Refresh my 
sight. Refresh my hearing. Refresh my mind. 

Refresh my speech. Refresh my body. Refresh 
my limbs. Refresh my offspring. Refresh my 
house. Refresh my men. Refresh me together 
with my men. May my men never go thirsty (TS 
3 . 1 . 8 . 1 ) 

and afterwards makes additional offerings of ghee, reciting 
these seven texts: 

May my out-breath, in-breath, inter-breath, 
up-breath, and link-breath become purified. 

May I become the radiant, free of dust and 
evil! Svaha! 

May my speech, mind, sight, hearing, taste, 
smell, semen, intelligence, intentions, and 
desires become purified. May I become the 
radiant, free of dust and evil! Svaha! 

May my head, hands, feet, sides, back, belly, 
thighs, penis, sexual organs, and anus 
become purified. May I become the radiant, 
free of dust and evil! Svaha! 


222 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


3.8.25 


May my outer and inner skin, flesh, blood, fat, 
marrow, sinews, and bones become purified. 

May I become the radiant, free of dust and 
evil! Svaha! 

May my (bodily constituents of) sound, touch, 
visible appearance, taste, and smell become 
purified. May I become the radiant, free of 
dust and evil! Svaha! 

May my (bodily constituents of) earth, water, 
fire, wind, and space become purified. May 
I become the radiant, free of dust and evil! 

Svaha! 

May my (body) made of food, breath, mind, 
intelligence, and bliss become purified. May 
I become the radiant, free of dust and evil! 

Svaha! (cf. MNU 440-56) 

13 The rites from the Jaya offering to the giving of a fine cow 
are well known. 14 He worships the sun reciting the solar verses, 
and the moon reciting the lunar verses. 15 He recites softly, ‘Keep 
awake, O Fire . . .’, as he goes to sleep; 16 and ‘You, O Fire, are 
the guardian of vows . . as he wakes up. 

17 Let him not speak with women or Sudras, or look at urine 
or faeces. 18 Should he happen to see such filth, let him recite 
softly: ‘My mind was out of control, and my sight was way- 
ward. The sun is the best of the celestial lights. May you, O 
Consecration, forsake me not!’ (TS 3. 1.1. 1-2). 

19 On the first day of the fortnight of the waning moon, he eats 
fourteen mouthfuls. 20 In this manner he decreases his food by 
one mouthful a day until the new moon. 21 No food is taken on 
the new-moon day. 22 Then, on the first day of the fortnight of 
the waxing moon, he eats one mouthful, and two on the second 
day. 23 In this manner he increases by one mouthful a day until 
the full moon. 24 On the full-moon day, he offers an oblation of 
cooked food to the fire, to the lunar day on which it is offered, 
and to the lunar mansions together with their respective deities. 
25 Having first made an offering to the lunar mansion Abhijit 


223 



3.8.25 


Dharmasutras 


that comes before Srona,* as well as to its deity, he should give a 
cow to Brahmins. 

26 What has been described above is the lunar penance with its 
middle like that of an ant. When it is done in the opposite way, 
its middle is like that of a barley grain.* 

27 When a sinner performs either of these, he become purified 
of all his sins causing loss of caste. 28 They say that this may be 
performed to obtain any type of wish; 29 by this a man obtains 
whatever he wishes. 30 It is by means of this that in ancient times 
the seers purified themselves and accomplished their goals. It 
procures wealth, merit, sons, grandsons, cattle, long life, heaven, 
and fame, as well as everything one desires. 31 A man who recites 
this obtains the splendour of the lunar mansions, as well as 
union with and residence in the same world as the sun and the 
moon themselves. 


Vedic Recitation while Fasting 

9 'Next, we will describe the procedure of reciting the com- 
plete Veda while fasting. 2 The performer should be dressed 
in clean clothes or a bark garment 3 and try to procure food fit 
for a sacrifice or water and fruits. 

4 Setting out from the village towards the east or the north, he 
should apply a coat of cowdung on and sprinkle with water a 
quadrangular area of ground the size of a cow’s hide (B 
1.10.1 n.); draw auspicious lines on it; and sprinkle the area with 
water. He should then put firewood into the fire, spread Kusa 
grass around it, and offer oblations to these gods: ‘To Fire, 
Svaha! To Prajapati, Svaha! To Soma, Svaha! To All-gods. To 
Svayambhu. To Rg-verses. To Yajus-formulas. To Saman- 
chants. To Athavan-formulas. To Faith. To Intelligence. To Wis- 
dom. To Prosperity. To Modesty. To Savitr. To Savitrl. To the 
Guardian of the Abode. To Assent.’ 

5 After making these offerings, he should start reciting from 
the very beginning of the Veda and continue the recitation 
without interruption. 6 During the recitation he should neither 
talk nor pause. 7 Should he talk or pause during the recitation, 
let him control his breath three times and start reciting from 


224 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


3.10.1 


the exact point where he left off. 8 If he cannot remember* a 
passage, he should recite a passage he knows for as long as 
he fails to remember,* substituting Rg-verses for Rg-verses, 
Yajus-formulas for Yajus-formulas, and Saman-chants for 
Saman-chants; 9 he may recite the Brahmana text connected 
with and the deity and metre of the forgotten passage. 

10 He should recite the Vedic Collection twelve times. If he has 
recited the Veda during forbidden times, angered his elders (A 
1.6.32 n.), or done forbidden things, this recitation cleanses him 
of all that. The Veda he possesses becomes purified and 
cleansed. 11 If he recites more than that, the results accumulate. 
12 By reciting the Vedic Collection twelve more times, he obtains 
the world of Usanas. 13 By reciting the Vedic Collection an add- 
itional twelve times, he obtains the world of Brhaspati. 14 By 
reciting the Vedic Collection a further twelve times, he obtains 
the world of Prajapati. 15 Should he recite the Vedic Collection 
one thousand times without eating, becoming Brahman and free 
from stain, he becomes Brahman. 

16 If he lives on almsfood for one year, he obtains divine 
vision. 17 By living on barley for six months, on water and barley 
meal for four months, on fruits for two months, or on water for 
one month, or fasting completely for twelve days, he obtains the 
power to disappear suddenly; he purifies his relatives— seven 
before him, seven after him, with himself as the fifteenth; and he 
purifies those alongside whom he eats (A 2.17.21 n.). 

18 This, they say, is the ladder of gods. 19 By means of this, 
evidently, the gods obtained their status as gods, as also the seers 
their status as seers. 20 Now, there are just three times when this 
sacrifice can be started: at the time of the morning or the midday 
Soma pressing, or during the night’s last watch sacred to Brah- 
man (B 2. 17.22 n.). 21 It was Prajapati who disclosed this to the 
seven seers. The seven seers disclosed it to Mahajajnu, and 
Mahajajnu to Brahmins. 


Justification of Penance 



'We* have explained the Law pertaining to the social 
classes and the Law pertaining to the orders of life. 


225 



3.10.2 


Dharmasutras 


2 Now, when a man here commits foul actions or acts wrongly, 
officiates at sacrifices of people for whom it is forbidden to 
officiate, accepts gifts from people from whom it is forbidden to 
receive gifts, eats food given by people whose food it is forbidden 
to eat, or indulges in forbidden activities— 3 there is a debate as 
to whether such a man is required to perform a penance or not. 

4 Some argue that an act can never be wiped out. 5 But he is 
indeed required to do so, 6 as it is stated, ‘After offering the 
Punahstoma sacrifice, he gets to participate again in the Soma 
sacrifice.’ 7 Now, they also quote: ‘A man who offers a horse 
sacrifice overcomes all sins, he overcomes even the murder of a 
Brahmin’ (SB 13.3.1.1); 8 and, ‘A heinous sinner (A 1.3.25n.) 
should offer the Agnistut sacrifice’. 

9 The expiations for such a man are softly reciting prayers (A 
1.15.1 n.), austerity, ritual offering, fasting, and giving gifts. 
10 Upanisads; the beginnings of the Vedas; the conclusions of 
the Vedas ( vedanta ); the Hymn-Collections of all the Vedas; the 
‘Honey’ verses; Aghamarsana hymn; Atharvasiras; Rudra 
hymn; Purusa hymn; the Samans called Rajana, Rauhini, 
Brhat, Rathantara, Purusagati, Mahanamnl, Mahavairaja, and 
Mahadivakirtya; any of the Jyestha Samans; Bahispavamana 
Saman; Kusmanda verses; Pavamam verses; and the Savitrl 
verse— these are the purificatory texts. 11 To do the following in 
accordance with the rules of fasting: living on milk alone; eating 
only vegetables; eating only fruits; eating only roots; living on 
gruel made with one handful of barley; eating gold; eating ghee; 
and drinking Soma juice— these are the cleansing activities. 
12 All mountains; all flowing rivers; sacred lakes; sacred fords; 
dwellings of seers; cow-pens; sacred grounds; and temples— 
these are the appropriate places. 13 Practising non-injury; speak- 
ing the truth; refraining from theft; bathing at dawn, noon, and 
dusk; obedience to elders; chastity; sleeping on the floor; wear- 
ing a single garment; and fasting— these are the austerities. 
14 Gold; cow; garment; horse; land; sesame seeds; ghee; and 
food— these are the gifts. 15 One year; six months; four months; 
three months; two months; one month; twenty-four days; twelve 
days; six days; three days; a day and night; and one day— these 
are the lengths of time. 


226 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


4.1.8 


16 When no specific penance has been prescribed, people may 
perform these, 17 the heavier penances for grave sins and the 
lighter penances for minor sins. 18 The arduous penance (B 
2.2.38), the very arduous penance (B 2.2.40), and the lunar pen- 
ance (B 3.8) are expiations for all types of sins. 


BOOK FOUR 

Controlling the Breath as a Penance 

I 1 We will describe separately the penances 
meant for different offences, both the heavier 
penances and the lighter ones. 

2 Let a man prescribe whichever is suitable for a 
particular case— heavier penances for severe 
offences and lighter ones for minor offences. 

3 A man should control his breath several times 
in accordance with the rules given in authorita- 
tive texts for sins committed through his sexual 
organ, feet, hands, mind, speech, hearing, skin, 
smell, or sight. 

4 Alternatively, when he has committed transgressions 
through his sight, hearing, skin, smell, or mind, he is purified by 
controlling his breath three times. 

5 When someone eats the food given by a Sudra or has sex with 
a Sudra woman, for each such offence he should control his 
breath seven times a day for seven days. 6 When someone con- 
sumes forbidden or unfit food, forbidden drink, or improper 
food; sells forbidden goods with the exception of honey, meat, 
ghee, sesame oil, spices, salt, or inferior food; or commits other 
similar offences, he should control his breath twelve times a day 
for twelve days. 7 When someone commits a sin— except a griev- 
ous, non-grievous, or secondary sin causing loss of caste—, he 
should control his breath twelve times a day for half a month. 
8 When someone commits a sin— except a grievous or non- 
grievous sin causing loss of caste—, he should control his breath 


227 



4.1.8 


Dharmasutras 


twelve times a day for twelve times twelve days. 9 When someone 
commits a sin— except a grievous sin causing loss of caste—, he 
should control his breath twelve times a day for twelve half- 
months. 10 When someone commits a grievous sin causing loss of 
caste, on the other hand, he should control his breath twelve 
times a day for one year. 

Offences Regarding Marriage 

11 A man should give his daughter in marriage 
while she still runs naked (G 18.23 n.) to a man 
of good qualities who has maintained his vow 
of chastity, or even to a man lacking good 
qualities; let him not hold back a girl who has 
started to menstruate. 

12 If a man does not give his daughter in mar- 
riage within three years after she has reached 
puberty, he undoubtedly incurs a guilt equal to 
that of performing an abortion (A 1.19.15 n.). 

13 That is the case if there is no suitor; but if 
there are suitors, then he incurs that guilt each 
time. Manu has declared that he becomes guilty 
of a grievous sin causing loss of caste at each of 
her menstrual periods. 

14 For three years a girl who has reached 
puberty should heed her father’s orders. But 
after that, in the fourth year, she may choose a 
husband of equal station. If a man of equal 
station is not found, she may even turn to a 
man lacking good qualities. 

15 If a virgin has been forcibly abducted but has 
not been married with the recitation of ritual 
formulas, she may be given in marriage to 
another man in accordance with the rules; she 
is in every respect like a virgin. 

16 If the husband dies after a girl has been given 
away or after the nuptial offering has been 


228 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


4.1.22 


made, and she returns home after going away, 
she may be given in marriage again following 
the procedure of a second marriage, provided 
she is still a virgin. 

Marital Offences 

17 If a man does not have sexual intercourse for 
three years with his wife who menstruates, he 
incurs a guilt equal to that of performing an 
abortion (A 1.19.15 n.). 

18 If a man does not have sexual intercourse 
with his wife after she has taken the bath that 
concludes her menstrual period when she is 
nearby, his ancestors will he during that month 
in her menstrual discharge. 

19 One who does not have sex with his wife dur- 
ing her season (A 2. 1 . 1 7 n.), and one who has sex 
with her outside her season, as also one who 
deposits his semen in a place other than the 
vagina (B 3.7.2 n.)— they all incur the same guilt. 

20 When a wife suppresses her menstrual 
periods* out of antipathy towards her husband, 
he should bring her to the middle of the village, 
declare her to be an abortionist, and drive her 
away from his house. 

21 If a man does not have sexual intercourse 
with his virtuous and disciplined wife after she 
has taken the bath that concludes her men- 
strual period, for that transgression he should 
control his breath one hundred times. 

Yogic Practice and Control of Breath 

22 Seated with purificatory grass in hand, he 
should control his breath and recite the purifi- 
catory texts, the Calls, the syllable OM, and the 
daily portion of the Veda. 


229 



4.1.23 


Dharmasutras 


23 Constantly practising Yoga, he should con- 
trol his breath repeatedly, generating the most 
extreme heat of austerity up to the very tips of 
his hair and nails. 

24 The suppression of breath generates wind; 
fire arises from wind; and lire gives rise to 
water. By these three, therefore, he is purified 
internally. 

25 By Yoga one obtains knowledge. Yoga is the 
mark of the Law. All good qualities are rooted 
in Yoga. Therefore, one should constantly 
practise Yoga. 

26 The syllable OM is the beginning and end of 
the three Vedas. The syllable OM and the Calls 
constitute the eternal Veda. 

27 When a man is constantly devoted to the 
recitation of OM, the seven Calls, and the 
three-footed Gayatrl verse, no danger will ever 
befall him. 

28 When someone recites the Gayatrl together 
with OM, the Calls, and the Siras formula while 
controlling his breath, it is called the control of 
breath. 

29 Controlling the breath sixteen times every 
day while reciting the Calls and the syllable 
OM cleanses even an abortionist (A 1.19.15 n.) 
within one month. 

30 The best austerity begins with this. This is the 
mark of the Law. And to wipe out all sins, this 
is the most excellent means. 


2 


Purificatory Texts 

'We will describe individual penances meant 
for various types of offences, both the heavier 
penances and the lighter ones. 


230 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


4.2.10 


2-3 Let a man prescribe whichever is suitable for 
a particular case— heavier penances for severe 
offences and lighter ones for minor offences. 

Let him prescribe penances in accordance with 
the rules given in authoritative texts. 

4 A man who has intended to accept, as also a 
man who has actually accepted, gifts [from 
someone from whom it is forbidden to accept 
gifts] should recite the four Taratsamandl 
verses. 

5 When someone has eaten unfit food or food 
given by unfit persons, the way to remove his 
sin is to wash himself while reciting the Tarat- 
samandl verses. 

6 Next, I will declare an alternate procedure 
for expiating the murder of a Brahmin (A 
1.19.15n.),a procedure by which a man is freed 
also from every type of grievous sin causing 
loss of caste. 

7 8 During twelve nights, living on milk and con- 
trolling his breath, he should recite softly the 
purificatory texts, the Calls, the syllable OM, 
and the Aghamarsana hymn. Alternatively, he 
becomes pure by bathing and then remaining in 
his wet clothes for three nights, subsisting on 
nothing but air. 

9 Even if a man has habitually engaged in for- 
bidden practices over and over again, he is 
freed from all sins by worshipping with the 
Varum verses. 

10 Now, a student who has broken his vow of chastity should 
put firewood into the sacred fire on the night of the new moon, 
perform the preliminary rites of a Darvihoma, and make two 
offerings of ghee, saying: ‘O Lust, I am a man who has broken 
his vow of chastity! I am a man who has broken his vow of 
chastity, O Lust! To Lust, Svaha! O Lust, I have done wrong! I 


231 



4.2.10 


Dharmasutras 


have done wrong, O Lust! To Lust, Svaha!’ 11 After making this 
offering, he should join his palms together and, turning some- 
what sideways, worship the fire, saying: 

May the Maruts pour upon me, may Indra and 
Brhaspati, and may this fire pour upon me long 
life and strength. May they make me live long. 

(TA 2.18) 

The Maruts, indeed, give him back the vital breaths, Indra the 
strength, Brhaspati the lustre of vedic knowledge, and fire every- 
thing else. He is made whole in his body and lives his full life 
span. Let him then address the gods repeating the formulas 
three times; ‘for the gods’, it is stated, ‘are triply true’ (TS 
3.4.10.5). 


12 When a man feels that he is in some way 
stained by a secondary sin causing loss of caste, 
he is freed from all sins by making a fire offer- 
ing according to the above procedure. 

13 When someone, moreover, has consumed unfit food or for- 
bidden drink or food, or performed a sinister rite, whether it is 
done deliberately or not, and when someone deposits his semen 
in a Sudra woman or in a place other than the vagina (B 
3.7.2 n.), he becomes purified by bathing while reciting the 
Ablinga and VarunI verses. 14 Now, they also quote: 

Whether he has consumed unfit food or forbid- 
den drink or food, performed rites that are 
against the Law, and even committed delib- 
erately sins comparable to sins causing loss of 
caste— he is cleansed of all that, and even of 
every sin causing loss of caste. 

15 Or he may fast for three nights, bathe three 
times a day, and recite the Aghamarsana hymn 
while controlling his breath. Manu has declared 
this to be equal to taking part in the bath that 
concludes a horse sacrifice. 


232 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


4.3.6 


16 It is also said: 

This purificatory procedure has been displayed 
of old, purified by which one passes beyond 
evil deeds. Purified by that spotless means of 
purification, may we pass beyond evil and 
adversity. 


Penances for Secret Sins 

3 1 We will describe specifically the penances for secret sins— 
what should be done when people who are collected and 
controlled commit mistakes. 

2 For all sins causing loss of caste, a man should sip water 
while reciting all the Calls preceded by the syllable OM. 3 When 
he sips water the first time, he gladdens thereby the Rgveda. 
When he sips water the second time, he gladdens thereby the 
Yajurveda. And when he sips water the third time, he gladdens 
thereby the Samaveda . 4 When he wipes his lips the first time, he 
gladdens thereby the Atharvaveda. And when he wipes his lips 
the second time, he gladdens thereby the Itihasa-Purana . 5 When 
he sprinkles water on his left hand, and when he applies water to 
his feet, head, heart, nostrils, eyes, ears, and navel, he gladdens 
thereby plants and trees, as well as all the deities. Therefore, a 
man is freed from all sins by just sipping water. 

6 Alternatively, he may offer eight pieces of firewood in the 
fire, saying: 

You are the expiation of sins committed against 
the gods, Svaha! 

You are the expiation of sins committed against 
human beings, Svaha! 

You are the expiation of sins committed against 
the forefathers, Svaha! 

You are the expiation of sins committed against 
myself, Svaha! 

You are the expiation of sins that we have 
committed during the day and the night, 

Svaha! 


233 



4.3.6 


Dharmasutras 


You are the expiation of sins we have committed 
while asleep or awake, Svaha! 

You are the expiation of sins that we have 
committed knowingly or unknowingly, 

Svaha! 

You are the expiation of each and every sin, 

Svaha! (cf. VS 8.13; TS3.2.5.7) 

7 By making offerings with these eight formulas, one is freed 
from all sins . 8 Now, they also quote: 

Aghamarsana, Devakrta, Suddhavatl, Tarat- 
sama, Kusmanda, Pavamam, Viraja, Mrtyu- 
langala, Savitn verse, the Calls, and the Rudras 
wipe out the great sins. 

4 'We will describe specifically the penances for secret sins— 
what should be done when people who are collected and 
controlled commit mistakes. 

2 When a man recites three times the Aghamarsana hymn: 
The right and the truth . . while standing in water, he is 
freed from all sins. 3 When a man recites three times the verse, 
The spotted bull has come . . .’, while standing in water, he is 
freed from all sins. 4 When a man recites three times the verse: 
‘As one released from the stake . . while standing in water, 
he is freed from all sins. 5 When a man recites three times the 
verse, The goose seated in the light . . .’, while standing in 
water, he is freed from all sins. 6 Or else, when a man recites the 
Savitrl verse three times, first foot by foot, then half-verse by 
half-verse, and finally the entire verse, while standing in water, 
he is freed from all sins. 7 Or, when a man recites the Calls three 
times, first individually and then collectively, while standing in 
water, he is freed from all sins. 8 Or, when a man recites just the 
syllable OM three times while standing in water, he is freed 
from all sins. 

9 One should not impart this Treatise of Law to someone who 
is not one’s son or pupil or who has not lived with him for at 
least one year . 10 The fee is one thousand, or ten cows with a bull, 
or the teacher’s kindness. 


234 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 

RITES TO OBTAIN WISHES 

Preliminary Purifications 

'Now I will proclaim the rites of the Rg-, 
Sama-, Yajur-, and Atharva-vedas by which a 
man will quickly obtain his heart’s desires. 

2 He should perform the rites only after purify- 
ing his body by the soft recitation of prayers, 
burnt offerings, oblations, and restraints. He 
will not attain success otherwise. 

3 When he is about to engage in the soft recita- 
tion of prayers, make burnt offerings and obla- 
tions, and practise restraints, a Brahmin should 
first get his head and beard shaved and his nails 
clipped on an auspicious day and under an 
auspicious lunar mansion during the fortnight 
of the waxing moon. 

4 Let him bathe at dawn, noon, and dusk; guard 
himself from anger and untruth; not speak 
with women or Sudras; remain chaste; and eat 
only food fit for sacrifice. 

5 Let him pay homage to cows, Brahmins, 
ancestors, and gods and refrain from sleeping 
during the day; and, engaged in the soft recita- 
tion of prayers, in making burnt offerings and 
oblations, and in practising restraints, let him 
remain standing during the day and seated 
during the night. 

6 When during twelve days a man successively 
eats only during the daytime for three days and 
during the night for three days, eats food given 
unasked during three days, and lives on air 
during three days, that is the arduous penance 
sacred to Prajapati. 

7 When a man eats one day during the daytime 
and the next day during the night, the following 


4.5.7 


235 



4.5.7 


Dharmasutras 


day eats what is given unasked, and lives on air 
the last day, and repeats this three times, it is 
called the arduous penance of children. 

8 When someone eats a single mouthful of food 
a day during the first three three-day periods 
according to rules given above and lives on air 
during the final three days, it is called the very 
arduous penance. 

9 When a man lives on water during those three- 
day periods and lives on air during the final 
three days, this third type should be known as 
penance beyond the very arduous penance, 
which is highly purifying. 

10 When a man drinks only hot milk, hot ghee, 
and a hot decoction of Kusa grass during the 
three three-day periods respectively, and lives 
on air during the final three days, it is called the 
hot-arduous penance. 

11 When a man subsists on cow’s urine, cowdung, 
milk, curd, ghee, and a decoction of Kusa grass 
for one day each, and on the final day lives on 
air, tradition calls that the Santapana penance. 

12-13 He takes the cow’s urine with the Gayatrl 
formula, the cowdung with the formula ‘Per- 
ceived by the smell . . the milk with the for- 
mula ‘Swell up . . .’, the curd with the formula 
‘Of Dadhikravan . . the ghee with the for- 
mula ‘You are the sheen . . .’, and the decoction 
of Kusa grass with the formula ‘Aroused by 
god Savitr . . .’ He mixes one part of cow’s 
urine, half that amount of cowdung, three parts 
of milk, two parts of curd, one part of ghee, 
and one part of the Kusa decoction. This is the 
Santapana penance; it purifies even a Svapaka. 

14 When a man subsists one day each on cow’s 
urine, cowdung, milk, curd, and ghee for five 


236 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 

days, he is purified by these five products of the 
cow. 

15 When a man, self-controlled and vigilant, 
lives without eating for twelve days, that ardu- 
ous penance is called Paraka; it effaces all sins. 

16 When a man lives one day each on cow’s urine 
and so forth for a total of seven times three 
days, vedic savants call that arduous penance 
the Great-Santapana. 

17 When a man observes two fasts during the 
two fortnights, increasing the food eaten by one 
mouthful during the fortnight of the waxing 
moon and decreasing by one mouthful during 
the fortnight of the waning moon, the trad- 
itional texts call it the lunar penance. 

18 When a Brahmin eats four lumps of food in 
the morning with a collected mind and four 
lumps after sunset, he is performing the lunar 
penance of children. 

19 When a man, self-controlled, eats eight lumps 
of food fit for sacrifice at noon each day for one 
month, he is performing the lunar penance of 
ascetics. 

20 When a Brahmin eats eighty times three (240) 
lumps of food fit for sacrifice during one month 
in any manner whatsoever, he attains the same 
world as the moon. 

21 As the moon, when it rises, removes the fear 
of darkness from the world, so a Brahmin, 
when he performs the lunar penance, removes 
the fear of sin. 

22 When a man subsists on rice alone for one 
day, on oil-cake for three days, on watered but- 
termilk for five days, and on barley water for 
seven days, and lives on air for one day, it is the 
Tulapurusa penance that destroys sins. 


4.5.22 


237 



4.5.23 


Dharmasutras 


23 Living on barley gruel, as also a seven-day 
fast, wipes out the sins of embodied beings 
within seven days — this was discovered by wise 
men. 

24 By remaining in wet clothes during the fort- 
night of the waxing moon in the lunar month 
December-January, by living in the open air 
during the same fortnight in August- 
September, and by exposing himself to the sun 
during the same fortnight in May-June, a 
Brahmin is freed from all sins except those that 
cause loss of caste. 

25 Cow’s urine, cowdung, milk, curd, ghee, 
and a decoction of Kusa grass when mixed 
with barley water is the highly purifying 
Brahmakurca. 

26 When a man fasts on new-moon days and 
eats only sesame seeds on full-moon days, with- 
in the course of one year he will be freed from 
sins committed during the fortnights of the 
waxing and waning moon. 

27 Subsisting on almsfood obtained from 
Brahmins who perform the daily fire sacrifice 
purifies a man in one month, whereas sub- 
sisting on almsfood obtained from Yayavaras 
(B 3.1.1) purifies him in ten days, and from 
forest hermits in five days. 

28 Subsisting on food obtained from a man who 
keeps provisions sufficient for a single day 
purifies a man in one day. A man who subsists 
by drinking water given by a person living the 
Kapota life (B 3.2.15) is purified in three days. 
29 A man should recite three times the Rg-, 
Yajur-, and Sama-vedas or just one of these 
Vedas from beginning to end while fasting. 
That is an exceptional means of purification. 


238 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


4.6.6 


30 If, however, someone wants to finish it fast, 
let him live on air during daytime and spend 
the night standing in water until daybreak. 
That is equal to the arduous penance sacred to 
Prajapati (B 4.5.6). 

31 By reciting the Gayatrl verse eight thousand 
times at sunrise, a man is freed from all sins, 
provided he is not a murderer of a learned 
Brahmin. 

32 A man who distributes food, speaks the 
truth, and is full of compassion to creatures is 
far better than any man purified by the above 
mentioned restraints. 

1 The Rudra verses accompanied by the 
Madhuchandas hymns, the Gayatrl verse 
together with the syllable OM, and the seven 
Calls should be recited; they wipe out sins. 

2 The Mrgara, the Pavitresti, the Trihavis, and 
the PavamanI, together with the Vaisvanari, are 
the offerings that wipe out sins. 

3 4 Listen further to this other secret that I will 
disclose. A man is freed from all sins except the 
grievous sins causing the loss of caste by wash- 
ing himself while reciting the purificatory 
verses (B 3.10.10), by reciting softly the eleven 
Rudra verses, by making oblations of ghee 
while reciting the purificatory verses, and by 
giving gold, a cow, and sesame seeds. 

5 When a man eats barley gruel cooked in cow’s 
urine together with liquid cowdung, curd, milk, 
and ghee, he is instantly freed from sin. 

6 A man who fathers a child from a Sudra 
woman, as also a man who has sexual inter- 
course with a woman with whom sex is 
forbidden— both are freed from their sins in 
seven days by this method. 


239 



.7 


Dharmasutras 


7 It is also the remedy for consuming semen, 
urine, or faeces and for eating unfit food, as 
well as for a younger brother who establishes 
his sacred fire, performs the Soma sacrifice, or 
gets married before his older brother. 

8 A man is thus freed from all his sins, even if he 
has committed a very large number of them, 
provided they do not entail loss of caste— that 
is the judgement of virtuous men. 

9 This procedure, which is based on the author- 
ity of the vedic tradition, is declared to be that 
by which the likes of Bharadvaja attained the 
same nature as Brahman. 

10 When a Brahmin performs this rite with a 
tranquil heart, he obtains whatever his heart 
desires. 

1 When a Brahmin has turned away from sinful 
acts and practises meritorious deeds, his rites 
will succeed even without practising the above 
restraints. 

2 Upright Brahmins, therefore, purified by 
upright activities, accomplish whatever they 
have set their minds on. 

3 Thus a wise man should practise these 
restraints until such time as he achieves the 
purity of his body. 


Gana Oblation for Securing Wishes 

4 Having purified himself by these restraints and 
fasted for three nights, he should commence the 
rite by which he seeks to achieve success. 

5 7 Ksmapavitra, Purusa hymn, Mrgara verses, 
the two Ganas* called Amhomuca, Pavamanl 
verses, KusmandT verses, and Vaisvanarl 


240 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


4.8.4 


verses— by offering ghee and rice in the sacred 
fire at dawn, noon, and dusk for seven days 
while reciting these formulas, as he remains 
silent, eating food tit for sacrifice, and control- 
ling his senses and actions, and by gazing into a 
pot full of water placed at a cross-roads while 
reciting ‘Into the lion my . . .’, a man is freed 
from all sins, even from grievous sins causing 
loss of caste. 

8 He is freed also from the sins he has heaped up 
unintentionally in his old age, youth, and 
childhood, as well as in his previous births. 

9 10 When, at the conclusion of that rite, he 
feeds Brahmins with milk-rice mixed with ghee 
and, after they have eaten, presents them with 
cows, land, sesame seeds, and gold— that 
Brahmin, his sins burnt up like a kindling stick, 
becomes purified and ready to perform rites for 
securing wishes, as also rites such as the estab- 
lishment of the sacred fires. 

'if a man performs this rite for someone else 
either through excessive greed or through 
carelessness, he becomes tainted with sin and 
perishes as if he had drunk poison. 

2 A Brahmin who performs this rite for the sake 
of his teacher, father, mother, or himself shines 
forth like the sun. Therefore, one may perform 
this rite for them. 

3 The Creator made the Thousand-eyed god 
pure by means of this purificatory rite, as also 
Fire, Wind, Sun, Moon, Yama, and the other 
gods. 

4 Whatever holy name there is in this world, a 
name such as ‘Brahmin’ known across the three 
worlds, the Creator made it by means of this 
purificatory rite. 


241 



4.8.5 


Dharmasutras 


5 This secret of Prajapati was the first rite to be 
created for destroying sins. Thousands of other 
purificatory rites were produced after that. 

6 A man who offers this Gana oblation for a 
year, for half a year, for a season, for a fort- 
night, or for a day purifies his ten ancestors and 
his ten descendants. 

7 And, while he is still on earth, he will become 
known to the gods in heaven as a man of meri- 
torious deeds; and, as a man who has per- 
formed meritorious deeds, he will also rejoice in 
heaven like a god. 

8 If a Brahmin is unable to offer all these eight 
Gana oblations, he should offer at least one of 
them, and it will destroy his stains. 

9 When someone’s children or pupils offer the 
eight Gana oblations, through the agency of 
these individuals, whom he has bought by his 
instruction, he is also freed from sin. 

10 When someone is unable to perform them 
himself, he may pay some people to offer these 
oblations with the desire of destroying his sins; 
an embodied man should not torment himself. 

"Money is donated to secure the success of 
even proper rites. In some rites it frees a man 
without debt from his sin. 

"Freed from the surging ocean of sin by this 
rite, a man should consider himself purified 
and competent to perform rites successfully. 

"And when, freed from the torrent of all sins, 
someone undertakes any rite, it will become 
successful effortlessly for that man with a puri- 
fied body. 

14 When someone teaches this ceaselessly, 
recalls it, or even listens to it, he will be freed 


242 



Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 


4 . 8.16 


from all sins and become exalted in the world 
of Brahman. 

15 A man should recite softly for twelve days 
those formulas by which he seeks to secure his 
wishes, eating once a day at night rice mixed 
with ghee, milk, and curd. 

16 To secure one’s wishes, one should offer the 
oblation together with ghee in the fire ten times 
at dawn, noon, and dusk, before he recites 
those formulas. 

That concludes the Baudhayana Dharmasutra 


243 



The Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


This Dharmasutra has been handed down as an independent 
treatise unconnected to any Kalpasutra. Traditionally, Vasistha 
has been associated with the Rgveda. Like Gautama, this text is 
divided into chapters, reflecting the practice of later Smrtis. 
Probably because it did not have the benefit of an ancient com- 
mentary, this Dharmasutra does not have a strong manuscript 
tradition and contains some very corrupt passages. Stenzler’s 
first edition (1883) was based on only five manuscripts, and in 
the Preface to the second edition (1914) he confesses that he was 
able to find only one additional manuscript. It is likely that the 
original text of Vasistha ended after the 24th chapter. The 
commentary of Krsnapandita was written in Benares in the 
middle of the nineteenth century and is of little value. 


CONTENTS 

1 . 1- 3 KNOWLEDGE OF LAW 

1 .4- 7 SOURCES OF LAW 

1.8-16 Geography and the Law 

1.17 Regional Law 

SINS 

1.18 List of Sinners 

1 .19-22 Grievous Sins Causing Loss of Caste 

1 .23 Secondary Sins Causing Loss of Caste 

MARRIAGE 

1 . 24- 7 N umber of Wives 

1.28-38 Types of Marriage 

1.39-41 GOVERNANCE BY BRAHMIN AND KING 
1 .42-5 Taxes 

2.1- 3 SOCIAL CLASSES 

2.4- 12 The Teacher 

2.13-20 Occupations 

2.21 Hair Dressing 

2.22-3 Occupations in Times of Adversity 

2.24- 39 Trade 


244 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


2.40-50 

Lending on Interest 

3.1-12 

Brahmins and Learning 

3.13-14 

Treasure-Trove 

3.15-18 

Killing an Assailant 

3.19 

Persons Who Purify Others 

3.20 

Legal Assembly 

3.21-3 

Definition of Teacher 

3.24-5 

Taking up Arms 
PURIFICATION 

3.26-43 

Purification of Persons 

3.44-63 

Purification of Things 

3.64-8 

Parts of Hand for Sipping 

3.69-71 

EATING ETIQUETTE 

4.1-4 

SOCIAL CLASSES 

4.5-8 

MEAT AND HOSPITALITY 
OBSERVANCES AT THE DEATH OF A 
RELATIVE 

4.9-15 

Funerary Rites 

4.16-38 

Periods of Impurity after Death and Birth 
WOMEN 

5.1-5 

Dependence on Men 

5.6-10 

Menstruation 

6.1-9 

GOOD CONDUCT 

6.10-13 

Excretion 

6.14-19 

Purification 

6.20-2 

Food 

6.23-32 

Brahmin and Sudra 

6.33-44 

Rules of Good Conduct 

7.1-3 

ORDERS OF LIFE 

7.4-17 

Student 

8.1-3 

Householder 

8.4-8 

Hospitality 

8.9-10 

Sacrifices 

8.11-17 

Duties 

9.1-12 

Forest Hermit 

10.1-29 

Wandering Ascetic 

10.30-1 

Virtues Common to All Orders 
DISTRIBUTION OF FOOD AND RECEPTION < 
GUESTS 

11.1-15 

Guests 

11.16-44 

Ancestral Offerings 


245 



Dharmasutras 


1 1 .45-8 Sacrifices 

THE STUDENT 
11.49-51 Time of Initiation 

11.52-67 Insignia 

11.68-70 Begging 

11.71-9 Time Limit for Initiation 

THE BATH-GRADUATE 

12.1- 47 Proper Conduct 

13.1- 7 Annual C ourse of Study 

1 3 . 8^10 Suspension of Vedic Recitation 

13.41-6 Salutation 

13.47-53 Falling from Caste 

13.54- 61 Precedence 

FOOD 

14.1- 32 Unfit Food 

14.33^18 Forbidden Food 

15.1- 10 ADOPTION 

15.11- 21 EXCOMMUNICATION FROM AND 

READMISSION TO CASTE 
KING 

16.1- 5 Legal Procedure 

16.6- 20 Property Rights 

16.21-6 Royal Entourage 

16.27-37 Witnesses 

17.1- 5 SONS 

1 7.6- 1 1 To Whom Belongs a Son 

17.12- 39 Types of Sons 

1 7.40-54 Partitioning of the Estate 

17.55- 66 Levirate 

1 7.67-74 Time of Marriage for Girls 

17.75-80 Missing Husband 

17.81-7 Alternate Heirs 

18.1- 17 MIXED CLASSES 

19.1- 6 KING 

19.7- 16 Administrative Duties 

19.17-28 Ferries, Tolls, and Taxes 

19.29-34 Succession 

19.35-7 Taxes 

19.38^18 Criminal Justice 

PENANCES 

20.1- 12 Miscellaneous 


246 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


20 . 13 - 22 

20 . 23 - 40 
20 . 41 M 
20 . 45-7 

21 . 1 - 5 
21 . 6-17 
21 . 18-26 
21 . 27-33 

22 . 1 - 7 
22 . 8-16 

23 . 1 - 13 

23 . 14 - 23 

23 . 24 - 35 
23 . 36-41 
23 . 42 - 24.7 

25 . 1 - 27.21 

28 . 1 - 9 
28 . 10-15 
28 . 16 - 29.21 

30 . 1 - 11 


Grievous Sins 

Murder 

Theft 

Association with Outcastes 

Illicit Sex 

Adultery 

Killing Animals 

Miscellaneous 

Justification for Penance 

General Penances 

Sins of a Student 

Suicide 

Contact with Impurity 
Miscellaneous 
Description of Penances 
Secret Penances 
Purification of Women 
Purificatory Texts 
Gifts 

EXCELLENCE OF THE BRAHMIN 


247 



KNOWLEDGE OF LAW 


I 1 Next comes the desire to know the Law for the sake of 
attaining the highest goal of man.* 2 Now, a man who 
knows the Law and follows it is a righteous man ( dharmika ). 
3 Such a man becomes pre-eminent in this world and wins 
heaven after death. 


SOURCES OF LAW 

4 The Law is set forth in the Vedas and the Traditional Texts (A 
2.15.25 n.). 5 When these do not address an issue, the practice of 
cultured people (Va 6.43; B 1.1. 5-6) becomes authoritative. 
6 Now, a cultured man is free from desires. 7 For something to be 
the Law, it must not have a tangible motive (A 1.12.8-1 1 n.). 


Geography and the Law 

8 The region east of where the Sarasvatl disappears, west of 
Kalaka forest, north of Pariyatra mountains, and south of the 
Flimalayas is the land of the Aryas; 9 or else, north of the 
Vindhya mountains. 10 The Laws and practices of that region 
should be recognized as authoritative everywhere, "but not 
others found in regions with Laws contrary to those.* 12 Accord- 
ing to some, the land of the Aryas is the region between the 
Ganges and Yamuna. 13 According to others, vedic splendour 
extends as far as the black antelope roams. 14 The Bhallavins, 
moreover, in their Book of Causes* cite this verse (B 1.2.11): 

"Vedic splendour extends only as far as the 
black antelopes roam east of the boundary 
river and west of where the sun rises. 

"What men who have a deep knowledge of the 
three Vedas and are learned in the Law declare 


248 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


1.23 


to be the pure and purifying* Law, that, 
undoubtedly, is the Law. 

Regional Law 

17 When there are no specific rules in vedic texts, Manu has said 
that one may follow the Laws of one’s region, caste, or family. 

SINS 

List of Sinners 

18 A man who is asleep when the sun rises or sets, or has bad nails 
or black teeth; a man whose younger brother gets married 
before him or who gets married before his older brother; a man 
who marries a younger sister whose older sister remains unmar- 
ried or an older sister whose younger sister is already married; a 
man who has extinguished his sacred fires or forgets the Veda— 
these are sinners. 

Grievous Sins Causing Loss of Caste 

19 They teach that there are five grievous sins causing loss of 
caste: 20 having sex with the wife of an elder (A 1.6.32 n.), drink- 
ing liquor, murdering a Brahmin, stealing gold from a Brahmin, 
and associating with outcastes 21 either through vedic instruction 
or through marriage. “Now, they also quote: 

When someone associates with an outcaste— 
not, however, by officiating at his sacrifices, by 
teaching him, or by contracting a marriage 
with him— but by travelling in the same vehicle 
or sitting on the same seat as he, or by eating 
together with him, he himself becomes an 
outcaste within a year. (B 2.2.35 n.) 

Secondary Sins Causing Loss of Caste 

23 Throwing away one’s fires, assailing one’s elder, being an 

249 



1.23 


Dharmasutras 


infidel, obtaining one’s livelihood from infidels, and selling 
Soma— these are secondary sins causing loss of caste. 

MARRIAGE 
Number of Wives 

24 According to the order of the classes, a Brahmin may take 
three wives, a Ksatriya two, and a Vaisya and a Sudra one each. 

25 According to some, one may even marry a Sudra woman just 
as one marries others but without the recitations of ritual form- 
ulas. 26 One should not do so, 27 for it results in the certain decline 
of one’s family and the exclusion from heaven after death. 


Types of Marriage 

28 There are six types of marriage: 29 Brahma, Divine, Seer’s, 
Gandharva, Ksatriya, and Human. 30 When a girl is given to a 
suitor after pouring water, it is a ‘Brahma’ marriage. 31 When 
during the course of a sacrifice a man adorns a girl and gives her 
to the officiating priest as he performs the ritual, they call it a 
‘Divine’ marriage. 32 When a girl is given for a cow and a bull, it 
is a ‘Seer’s’ marriage. 33 When a man in love has sex with a 
woman in love of a similar station, it is the ‘Gandharva’ mar- 
riage. 34 When a man forcibly abducts a girl, violently putting 
down opposition, it is the ‘Ksatriya’ marriage. 35 When a man 
negotiates a price and purchases a girl for money, it is the 
‘Human’ marriage. 36 Purchase is pointed out in this passage: 
‘Therefore, the groom should give one hundred cows together 
with a chariot to the bride’s father’ (A 2.13.11). 37 And in the 
chapter on seasonal sacrifices it is said: ‘When a woman has 
been purchased by her husband and afterwards has affairs with 
other men. . . .’* 38 Now, they also quote: 

Lost knowledge comes back again; but when 
the family is lost, everything here is lost. Even 
a horse gets honour on account of its family 
line. Therefore, people marry wives from dis- 
tinguished families. 


250 



Dharmasutra ofVasistha 2.5 

GOVERNANCE BY BRAHMIN AND KING 

39 The three classes shall abide by the instructions of the Brah- 
min. 40 The Brahmin shall proclaim their duties (, dharma ), 41 and 
the king shall govern them accordingly. 


Taxes 

42 Governing in accordance with the Law, however, the king 
may take in taxes a sixth part of their wealth, 43 except from 
Brahmins. 44 Indeed, it is said ‘From them he takes as his share 
a sixth part of their sacrifices and good works’ (cf. G 11.11); 
45 ‘The Brahmin makes the Veda rich; the Brahmin rescues 
from misfortune. Therefore, the Brahmin is not to be fed upon; 
Soma is his king’ (SB 5.4.2. 3); 46 and ‘After death, moreover, he 
prospers’. 


SOCIAL CLASSES 

2 ‘There are four classes: Brahmin, Ksatriya, Vaisya, and 
Sudra. 2 Three classes are twice-born: Brahmin, Ksatriya, 
and Vaisya (A 1.1.16-18). 3 Of these— 

The first birth is from the mother and the sec- 
ond at the tying of the Muiija-grass girdle. At 
the latter birth, the Savitrl verse is his mother, 
while the teacher is said to be his father. 


The Teacher 

4 The teacher is said to be the father because he imparts the 
Veda. 5 They likewise quote: ‘A Brahmin man clearly has two 
kinds of semen, the one located above the navel and the other 
located below the navel and going downward. By means of the 
semen above the navel children are born to him when he initiates 
Brahmins, when he teaches them, when he officiates at their 
sacrifices, and when he makes them good people. By means of 
the semen going downward from the navel, on the other hand, 


251 



2.5 


Dharmasutras 


the children of his loins are born. About a vedic scholar and 
savant, therefore, they never say, “You have no children” ’ (B 
1.21.13). 

6 Harita also quotes: 

A child can perform no rites at all until the 
Munja-grass girdle is tied around him, for he is 
equal to a Sudra with respect to conduct until 
he is born through the Veda— 

7 except rites connected with offering water, saying Svadha, and 
ancestors. 

8 Now, vedic knowledge came up to the Brah- 
min and said: ‘Guard me; I am your treasure. 

Do not disclose me to a man who is envious, 
crooked, or uncontrolled. Thus I shall wax 
strong. 

9 ‘A man you know to be pure, alert, wise, and 
chaste, a man who will not become hostile 
towards you under any circumstance— only to 
such a man should you disclose me as to a 
guardian of your treasure.’ 

10 The man who drills his ears with the truth, 
making him free from pain and conferring 
immortality upon him— that man he should 
consider as his father and mother, and at no 
time should he show hostility towards him. 

"When Brahmins do not honour in thought, 
word, or deed the teacher who taught them, 
just as they are of no use to their teacher, so 
their learning will be of no use to them. 

12 As a fire burns up dry grass, so the Veda 
burns a man who requests it without showing 
any respect. Let him never disclose the Veda to 
such a man, who fails to honour him according 
to his ability. (= Yaska, Nirukta, 2.4) 


252 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 2.30 

Occupations 

13 A Brahmin has six occupations: 14 studying the Veda and 
teaching, offering sacrifices and officiating at sacrifices, giving 
and receiving gifts. 15 A Ksatriya has three occupations: 16 study- 
ing, offering sacrifices, and giving gifts. 17 The Law specific to 
him is the protection of his subjects by the use of weapons; he 
should obtain his livelihood by this means. 18 The very same are 
the occupations of a Vaisya, 19 and in addition agriculture, trade, 
animal husbandry, and lending money on interest. 20 To serve 
these classes is the invariable means of livelihood for Sudras. 

Hair Dressing 21 Each may wear his hair according to the fixed 
practice of his family, or all may let their hair hang loose with 
the exception of the topknot. 

Occupations in Times of Adversity 22 Those who are unable to 
sustain themselves through the Law proper to their class may 
resort to the livelihood of the class immediately below theirs 
23 but never to that of a class above theirs. 

Trade 24 When someone assumes a Vaisya livelihood and lives 
by trade, he should not deal in rocks,* salt, precious stones, 
hemp cloth, silk, linen, skins, 25 all types of dyed cloth, 26 pre- 
pared foods, flowers, fruits, roots, perfumes, condiments, water, 
plant extracts, Soma, weapons, poison, meat, milk, milk prod- 
ucts, iron, tin, lac, and lead. 27 Now, they also quote: 

By selling meat, lac, or salt, a Brahmin falls 
from his caste immediately; and by selling milk, 
he becomes a Sudra in three days. 

28 He may not sell the following: among domestic animals, 
those that are one-hoofed or furry; all wild animals, birds, and 
animals with fangs or tusks; 29 among grain, they mention ses- 
ame. 30 Now, they also quote: 

If a man uses sesame for any purpose other 
than eating, anointing, and giving as a gift, 
reborn as a worm, he will plunge into a pile of 
dog shit together with his ancestors. 


253 



2.31 


Dharmasutras 


31 Or else, people may freely sell sesame if they have tilled the 
ground and grown it themselves; 32 and for that purpose he 
should plough the land before breakfast, using a pair of 
uncastrated bulls whose noses have not been pierced. 33 When 
ploughing in the summer, he should give them water to drink. 

34 The plough accompanied by stout ones, pro- 
vided with a fine share, and with a handle for 
the drinker of Soma— it digs up a cow, a sheep, 
a plump maid, and a swift horse for the chariot. 

(VS 12.71) 

35 ‘The plough accompanied by stout ones’— accompanied by 
virile ones, namely, by men and oxen; ‘provided with a fine 
share’— provided with a good looking ploughshare, for its 
ploughshare is good looking and with the ploughshare it digs 
up, that is, pierces deep; ‘and with a handle for the drinker of 
Soma’— for Soma reaches him, and that is the handle; ‘it digs 
up a cow, a sheep’ as well as goats, horses, mules, donkeys, 
and camels; ‘a plump maid’— beautiful, good looking, in the 
flower of her youth.* 

36 For how can the plough dig that up unless he sells the grain. 

37 Fie may barter condiments for condiments of greater or 
lesser value, 3S but never salt for condiments. 39 Fie is permitted 
to barter sesame, rice, cooked food, knowledge, and human 
beings. 

Lending on Interest 40 Brahmins and Ksatriyas shall not engage 
in usury. 41 Now, they also quote: 

When a man acquires grain at the going 
rate of interest and lends it at a higher rate, 
he is an usurer and is denounced by vedic 
savants. 

42 Usury and abortion (A 1.19.15 n.) were once 
weighted on a balance. The abortionist rose to 
the top, while the usurer trembled, (cf. B 
1.10.23) 


254 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


3.4 


43 Or else, they may freely lend on interest to people who neg- 
lect their ritual duties or to wicked people. 44 The interest on gold 
is double the principal, on grain triple the principal. 45 The rule 
with respect to grain applies to condiments, 46 as well as flowers, 
roots, and fruits. 47 The interest on articles measured by weight is 
eight times the principal.* 48 Now, they also quote: 

Two, three, four, or five per cent a month is laid 
down in traditional texts, and he may charge 
these rates of interest according to the order of 
the classes. 

49 When the king dies, however, the interest on 
loans ceases to accrue. The principal begins to 
accrue interest when the new king is anointed. 

50 Listen to the rate of interest laid down by 
Vasistha for moneylenders: five Masas for 
twenty (G 12.29 n.). In this way the Law is not 
violated. 


Brahmins and Learning 

3 1 Brahmins who are not learned, who do not teach, or who 
do not maintain the sacred fires become equal to Sudras. 
2 On this point they cite a verse of Manu: 

When, without studying the Veda, a twice-born 
man strives after other matters, he quickly sinks 
to the level of a Sudra in this very life together 
with his descendants. (M 2.168) 

3 A man ignorant of the Veda cannot be a 
Brahmin, and neither can a trader, an actor, 
a man taking orders from a Sudra, a thief, or a 
physician. 

4 The king should punish a village from which 
Brahmins who do not keep to their vows or 
study the Veda obtain almsfood, for such a 
village is giving sustenance to a thief. 


255 



3.5 


Dharmasutras 


5 Even if people who do not keep to their vows 
or study the Veda and who use their caste only 
to make a living come together in their thou- 
sands, they are incapable of constituting a legal 
assembly (Va 3.20). 

6 When fools, befuddled by darkness, make a 
pronouncement without knowing the Law, that 
sin, compounded a hundredfold, engulfs those 
who proclaim it. 

7 When three or four experts in the Veda pro- 
claim something, it should be recognized as the 
Law, not what others say, be they in their 
thousands. 

8 Offerings meant for gods or ancestors should 
always be given only to a learned Brahmin, for 
what is given to one who is not a learned 
Brahmin reaches neither the gods nor the 
ancestors. 

9 Even if a learned man lives far away, while a 
fool lives in one’s own house, one should give a 
gift to the learned man; one does not incur the 
sin of neglecting a Brahmin when the man is a 
fool. 

10 One does not incur the sin of neglecting a 
Brahmin when the man is a fool and bereft of 
vedic knowledge, for one does not offer an 
oblation in the ash ignoring a blazing fire. 

"An elephant made of wood, a deer made of 
leather, and an uneducated Brahmin: all these 
three are so only in name. 

"Those kingdoms in which ignorant men eat 
what ought to be eaten by the learned will 
experience a drought or a great calamity. 

Treasure-Trove 13 If someone finds a treasure whose owner is 
unknown, the king may take it after giving one-sixth to the 


256 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


3.20 


finder. 14 If, however, the treasure is found by a Brahmin devoted 
to the six occupations proper to him, the king should not take it. 

Killing an Assailant 15 When someone kills an assailant, they say 
that the killer incurs no guilt. 16 Now, they also quote: 

An arsonist, a poisoner, a man brandishing a 
weapon, a robber, and a man who seizes one’s 
land or abducts one’s wife— these six are called 
assailants. 

17 A man may kill an assailant who attacks with 
the intent to kill, even if he is deeply versed in 
Vedas including the Vedantas; it does not make 
him a Brahmin killer. 

18 When someone kills even a man learned in 
the Vedas and born in an illustrious family who 
is trying to kill him, it does not make him a 
murderer of a learned Brahmin; there wrath 
recoils on wrath. 

Persons Who Purify Others 19 An expert in the three Naciketa 
fire altars; a man who maintains the five sacred fires (A 
2. 17.22 n.); a man who knows the three ‘Bird’ verses; an expert 
in the four types of sacrifices (A 2.1 7.22 n.); a man who knows 
the White Yajur Veda; a man who knows the six Vedic Supple- 
ments (A 2.8.10-11); a son of a woman given in marriage 
according to the ‘Brahma’ rite (Va 1.30); a man who knows the 
Sama Veda; a man who sings the Jyestha Saman; a man who 
knows both the mantra and the liturgical portions of the Veda 
(p. xxiii); a man who studies the Laws; a man in whose family 
nine generations of ancestors on both the father’s and mother’s 
side are known to have been learned Brahmins; learned men; 
and bath-graduates (A 1.30.9 n.)— these are persons who purify 
those alongside whom they eat (A 2.17.21 n.). 

Legal Assembly 

20 Four men, each proficient in one of the four 
Vedas; one exegete; one who knows the Vedic 
Supplements (A 2.8.10-11); one legal scholar; 


257 



3.20 


Dharmasutras 


and three leading men belonging to three dif- 
ferent orders of life— these constitute a legal 
assembly with a minimum of ten members. 

Definition of Teacher 21 The man who initiates a person and 
teaches him the entire Veda is called ‘teacher’; 22 whereas some- 
one who teaches just a section of the Veda is called ‘tutor’, 23 as 
also someone who teaches the Vedic Supplements. 


Taking up Arms 

24 A Brahmin or a Vaisya may take up arms to defend himself 
and to prevent the mixing of classes. 25 A Ksatriya, on the other 
hand, should do so all the time, because it is incumbent upon 
him to protect the people. 

PURIFICATION 
Purification of Persons 

26 Having washed his feet and his hands up to the wrists and 
seated on his haunches facing the east or the north, he should 
sip water three times without making any sound and using the 
part of the hand sacred to Brahman, that is, the line above the 
base of the thumb (B 1.8. 14 16 n.); 27 wipe his lips twice; 28 rub 
water on the cavities of his head (G 1.36n.); 29 and pour water on 
his head and on his left hand. 30 He should not sip water while he 
is walking, standing, lying down, or stooping. 

31 A Brahmin is purified by water free of bubbles or froth and 
reaching the heart; 32 a Ksatriya by water reaching the throat; 33 a 
Vaisya by water taken into the mouth; 34 and a woman or Sudra 
by water merely touching the lips (A 1.16.2n.). 35 Even water 
from a crevice may be used if it is sufficient to slake the thirst of 
a cow, 36 but not water contaminated with colouring, perfume, or 
condiments, or collected in a foul place. 

37 Saliva spattering from the mouth does not make a person 
impure if it does not touch his body. 38 After sleeping, eating, 
sneezing, drinking, crying, or bathing, and after putting on a 
garment, he should sip water over again even if he had already 


258 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


3.54 


sipped water, 39 as also after touching a hairless part of the lips. 
40 No taint is created by the hair of the moustache getting into 
the mouth. 

41 Bits of food sticking between the teeth are 
like the teeth themselves, as also whatever is in 
the mouth. One becomes purified by simply 
swallowing them. 

42 Even when someone pours water for others to 
sip and drops splash on his feet, they do not 
make him unclean; they are said to be the same 
as the ground. 

43 If a person touches something unclean while 
handling food, he should lay that food on the 
ground, sip some water, and continue with his 
activity once again. 


Purification of Things 

44 Whenever a person has a doubt regarding the purity of some- 
thing, he should sprinkle some water on it. 

45 7 Wild animals killed by dogs; a fruit made to 
fall by a bird; what has been passed around by 
children or handled by women; goods dis- 
played for sale so long as they have not been 
spoilt by gnats and flies landing on them; 
impurities in the mouths of women; water col- 
lected on the ground sufficient to slake the 
thirst of cows— having enumerated all these, 
Prajapati declared them to be pure. 

48 Anything stained with an impure substance is purified when 
the stain and smell are removed with earth and water (G 1.42 n.). 
49 Articles made of metal are to be scrubbed with ash; earthen- 
ware is to be fired; wooden implements should be scraped; and 
cloth is to be washed. 50 Stones and gems are purified like metal; 
51 conch shells and mother of pearl like gems; 52 bone like wood; 
53 and ropes, cane, and leather like cloth. 54 Articles made of 


259 



3.54 


Dharmasutras 


fruits are purified by rubbing them with cow’s hair, 55 and those 
made of linen by rubbing them with a paste of yellow mustard. 

56 The purity of a piece of land is restored by sweeping, smear- 
ing with cowdung, scraping, sprinkling water, and by scattering 
clean soil, depending on the degree of defilement. 57 Now, they 
also quote: 

Digging, burning, scraping, and trampling by 
cows— by these four means, and fifthly by smear- 
ing with cowdung, a piece of land is purified. 

58 A woman is purified by her menstrual flow, a 
river by its current, brass with ash, and earth- 
enware by being fired again. 

59 Earthenware that has come into contact with 
liquor, urine, faeces, phlegm, pus, tears, or 
blood cannot be purified by being fired again. 

60 The body is purified by water, the mind by 
truth, the spirit by knowledge and austerity, 
and the intellect by knowledge. 

61 Gold is cleaned with just water, 62 as also silver. “Copper is 
cleaned with an acidic cleanser. 


Parts of Hand for Sipping 

64 The base of the little finger is the part of the hand sacred to the 
gods; “the middle of the fingers is the part sacred to the seers; 
“the tips of the fingers is the part sacred to human beings; “the 
middle of the palm is the part sacred to Fire; “and the part 
between the forefinger and the thumb is sacred to the ancestors 
(B 1 .8.14—16 n.). 


EATING ETIQUETTE 

69 He should pay homage to his meals morning and evening, by 
saying ‘I am delighted!’; 70 at an ancestral offering, by saying ‘I 
have eaten well!’; 71 and at a rite for prosperity, by saying ‘It is 
perfect!’ 


260 



Dharmasutra ofVasistha 4.8 

SOCIAL CLASSES 

4 1 The four classes are distinguished by their origin and by 
specific sacramentary rites. 2 There is also the vedic passage: 

His mouth became the Brahmin; his arms were 
made into the Ksatriya; his thighs are the 
Vaisya; and from his feet the Sudra was born. 

(RV 10.90.12) 

3 ‘He created the Brahmin with the Gayatrl metre, the Ksatriya 
with the Tristhubh metre, and the Vaisya with the Jagatl metre; 
whereas the Sudra he created without the use of any metre.’* 
This passage points out that the Sudra is not to undergo any 
sacramentary rite. 

“Speaking the truth, refraining from anger, giving gifts, not 
killing living creatures, and fathering children— these are com- 
mon to all classes. 

MEAT AND HOSPITALITY 

5 The treatise of Manu states: ‘An animal may be killed only on 
the occasion of paying homage to ancestors, gods, or guests.’ 

6 When offering the honey mixture (A 2.8.8), at 
a sacrifice, and during rites for ancestors and 
gods— only on these occasions, Manu has 
declared, should an animal be killed. 

7 Without killing a living creature you can never 
obtain meat; and killing living creatures does 
not get you to heaven. Killing an animal at a 
sacrifice, therefore, is not a killing.* 

8 ‘He should, moreover, cook a big ox or a big male goat for a 
Brahmin or a Ksatriya who comes to his house. In this way they 
show him hospitality’ (SB 3. 4. 1.2). 


261 



4.9 


Dharmasutras 


OBSERVANCES AT THE DEATH OF A RELATIVE 
Funerary Rites 

9 When those who are two years or older die, they are to be 
offered libations of water, and their death creates a period of 
impurity; 10 according to some, this is true from the time a child 
has teethed. 

"After cremating the body, they should go away without 
looking back and enter a place of water. 12 On uneven days they 
should pour libations of water with both hands facing the south. 
13 The south, clearly, is the direction of the ancestors. 14 After 
returning home, they should remain seated on mats fasting for 
three days. 15 If they are unable, they should live on food that 
they have purchased or has been given to them unasked. 


Periods of Impurity after Death and Birth 

16 After a death, a ten-day period of impurity is enjoined on 
those belonging to the same ancestry (A 2. 14.2 n.). "Relatives 
up to the sixth degree, it is said, fall under the category of com- 
mon ancestry, 18 and in the case of married women, up to the 
second degree. "Others should perform the funerary rites of 
married women; and such women should perform them for 
those people.* 

20 The very same rule regarding impurity 
applies also to a birth for those who desire per- 
fect purity. 

21 Alternatively, it applies only to the mother and the father, 22 or, 
according to some, only to the mother, because the birth results 
from her. 23 Now, they also quote: 

At a birth there is no period of impurity for the 
man, unless he comes into contact with her. 

One should know that the impure element there 
is the vaginal discharge, and that does not 
occur in the man. 

24 If during that period another arises, they become pure at the 


262 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


4.38 


end of the time remaining from the first period of impurity; 
25 but if only one day remains, then at the end of two days; 26 and 
if it happens on the morning after the conclusion of the first 
period, then at the end of three days. 

27 A Brahmin becomes pure after ten days, 28 a Ksatriya after 
fifteen days, 29 a Vaisya after twenty days, 30 and a Sudra after a 
month. 31 Now, they also quote: 

When a man eats the food of a Sudra who is in 
a state of impurity caused by a death or a birth, 
he will go to hell and take birth in the womb of 
an animal. 

32 If a Brahmin accepts an invitation and eats at 
the house of an outsider during the ten days of 
impurity cased by a death, when he dies he will 
be reborn as a worm and eat the faeces of that 
man. 

33 ‘Such a man’, it is said, ‘becomes purified after reciting a vedic 
collection of hymns for twelve months or twelve fortnights 
without eating’ (B 3.9). 

34 When a child less than two years old dies or when there is a 
miscarriage, the period of impurity of those belonging to the 
same ancestry (A 2. 14.2 n.) lasts for three days; 35 according to 
Gautama, they become pure immediately (cf. G 14.44). 36 When 
someone living in a distant region dies and the news arrives after 
ten days, the period of impurity lasts for one day. 37 According 
to Gautama, when a man who has established his sacred fires 
dies while he is away on a journey, they should perform his 
final obsequies anew and then purify themselves as if they had 
actually disposed of the corpse. 

38 If someone touches a sacrificial post, a pyre, a cemetery, a 
menstruating woman, a woman who has just given birth, and 
sordid men (A 1.21.12-19), he should enter water submerging 
his body and head under water. 


263 



5.1 


Dharmasutras 


WOMEN 
Dependence on Men 

5 'A woman cannot act independently; she is under the 
authority of the man. 2 ‘A woman who is neither a girl run- 
ning naked (G 18.23 n.) nor in her menstrual period’, it is stated, 
‘is ambrosia.’ 3 Now, they also quote: 

Her father takes care of her in her childhood; 
her husband takes care of her in her youth; and 
her son takes care of her in her old age. A 
woman is not fit to act independently. 

4 The penance for her being unfaithful to her husband has been 
declared in the secret penances: 

5 For month after month their menstrual flow 
washes away their sins. (Va 28.4) 


Menstruation 

6 A menstruating woman remains impure for three days. 7 She 
should not apply collyrium on her eyes or oil on her body, or 
bathe in water; she should sleep on the floor and not sleep dur- 
ing the day; she should not touch the fire, make a rope, brush her 
teeth, eat meat, or look at the planets; she should not laugh, do 
any work, or run; and she should drink out of a large pot or 
from her cupped hands or a copper vessel. 8 For it is stated: 
‘Indra, after he had killed the three-headed son of Tvastr, was 
seized by sin, and he regarded himself in this manner: “An 
exceedingly great guilt attaches to me”. And all creatures railed 
against him: “Brahmin-killer! Brahmin-killer!” He ran to the 
women and said: “Take over one-third of this my guilt of killing 
a Brahmin.” They asked: “What will we get?” He replied: 
“Make a wish.” They said: “Let us obtain offspring during 
our season, and let us enjoy sexual intercourse freely until we 
give birth.” He replied: “So be it!” And they took the guilt 
upon themselves. That guilt of killing a Brahmin manifests 
itself every month. Therefore, one should not eat the food of a 


264 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


6.5 


menstruating woman, for such a woman has put on the aspect 
of the guilt of killing a Brahmin’ (TS 2. 5. 1.2-5). 

9 Now, they say: ‘One should never accept collyrium or oil 
from such a woman, because for women that is food’ (TS 
2.5. 1.6); and ‘Therefore, people feel disgust towards her and her 
condition, thinking “Let her not come near!” ’ 

10 People in whose homes there are menstruat- 
ing women, people who do not maintain the 
sacred fires, and people in whose family there 
hasn’t been a vedic scholar— all these are equal 
to Sudras. 


6 


GOOD CONDUCT 

1 Good conduct is the highest Law for all— that 
is certain. A man steeped in vile conduct comes 
to ruin in this world and the next. 

2 Whether it is austerities, vedic learning, daily 
fire sacrifices, or gifts to priests— nothing will 
rescue a man of vile conduct who has gone 
astray. 

3 The Vedas do not purify a man bereft of good 
conduct, even if he has studied them together 
with the six supplements (A 2.8.10-11). The 
vedic lore forsakes him at the time of death, like 
birdlings a nest when they have grown their 
wings. 

4 Like a pretty wife to her husband who is blind, 
what happiness can all the Vedas together with 
the supplements and sacrifices bring to a 
Brahmin who is bereft of good conduct? 

5 The vedic lore cannot rescue from his wicked- 
ness a deceitful man living by deceit. When 
even a couple of syllables are learnt properly, 
that Veda purifies the man, like clouds in the 
autumnal month.* 


265 



6.6 


Dharmasutras 


6 For a man of evil conduct is the object of 
contempt in the world. Woes follow him all 
the time; afflicted with sicknesses, his life is cut 
short. 

7 Through good conduct flourishes righteous- 
ness; through good conduct flourishes wealth; 
through good conduct he obtains success; and 
good conduct erases inauspicious marks. 

8 Even if he lacks auspicious marks, a man of 
good conduct, full of generosity (B 1.10.4n.) 
and free from envy, will live a hundred years. 

9 A man who knows the Law should eat, void 
urine and excrement, and engage in sexual 
activity in great secrecy. Likewise, what he says 
and thinks, as well as his wealth and age, 
should be kept well concealed. 

Excretion 

10 He should void both urine and excrement 
facing the north during the day and the south 
during the night. In this way his allotted span 
of life will not be diminished. 

11 If a man urinates in the direction of a fire, the 
sun, a cow, a Brahmin, the moon, or water, it 
will destroy his intelligence. 

12 He should not pass urine in a river, on a road, 
on ash, on cowdung, on a field that has been 
ploughed or sown with seed, on a grassy patch, 
or in a shady spot offering shelter. 

13 When he is standing in the shade, when it is 
dark, or when he fears for his life, a Brahmin 
may do it day or night facing any direction he 
wants. 


266 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 6.23 

Purification 

14 He should perform rites with water that has been drawn out 
(G 9.10 n.), 15 but he may bathe even with water that has not been 
drawn out. 

16 A Brahmin should fetch some sandy earth 
(G 1 .42 n.) from the bank of a river. 

17 Earth from under water, a temple, anthill, or 
a mound over a rat-hole, and earth left behind 
by someone after his purification — he should 
not take these five types of earth. 

18 Tradition lays down one application of earth 
on the penis, three on the left hand, and two on 
both hands; and five applications on the anus, 
ten on the left hand, and seven on both hands. 

19 This is the purification for householders. It is 
twice that much for students, three times for 
forest hermits, and four times for ascetics. 

Food 

20 A sage’s meal is eight mouthfuls, a forest 
hermit’s sixteen, a householder’s twenty-two, 
and a student’s an unlimited quantity. 

21 A man who has set up the three ritual fires, a 
draught ox, and a student — these three are able to 
do their tasks only if they eat. They cannot do 
them if they do not eat (A 2.9.13; B 2.13.7-8). 

22 These restrictions apply to vows, penances, sacrifices, vedic 
recitations, and religious observances. 


Brahmin and Sudra 

23 Discipline, austerity, self-control, liberality, 
truthfulness, purity, vedic learning, compas- 
sion, erudition, intelligence, and religious 


267 



6.23 


Dharmasutras 


faith— these are the characteristics of a 
Brahmin. 

24 Bearing long grudges, envy, mendacity, revil- 
ing Brahmins, slander, and ruthlessness— these 
should be recognized as the characteristics of a 
Sudra. 

25 Those who are tranquil and self-controlled, 
whose ears are ever occupied with listening to 
the Vedas, who have mastered their senses, who 
refrain from killing living creatures, and who 
close their hands when they are offered gifts — 
they are the Brahmins who have the capacity to 
redeem others. 

26 Some are worthy to receive gifts because of 
their vedic learning, and others because of their 
austerities. Among all men worthy of receiving 
gifts, the most worthy is the man into whose 
stomach the food of a Sudra has never entered. 

27 If a Brahmin dies with the food of a Sudra in 
his stomach, he will be reborn as a village pig or 
in the family of that Sudra. 

28 For a man whose body is nourished by the 
food of a Sudra does not find the celestial path, 
even though he recites the Veda, offers sacri- 
fices, and is constantly engaged in the soft reci- 
tation of prayers (A 1.15.1 n.). 

29 If a man has sex after eating the food of a 
Sudra, however, his sons will belong to the man 
who gave the food, and he will not attain heaven. 

30 A man who rises to recite the Veda and comes 
from a good family; who is perfectly tranquil, 
devoted to performing sacrifices, and afraid of 
sin; who has vast knowledge and is patient with 
women; who is righteous, protects cows, and 
wears himself out with penances— such a man, 
they say, is worthy to receive gifts. 


268 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


7.3 


31 2 As milk, curd, ghee, or honey poured into 
an unbaked pot is lost because the pot was so 
weak, and both the pot and those delicacies 
perish, so when an ignorant man accepts a cow, 
gold, a garment, a horse, a piece of land, or 
sesame seeds, he is reduced to ashes like a piece 
of firewood. 


Rules of Good Conduct 

33 He shall not make a noise by cracking his joints or striking his 
nails; 34 tap an eating bowl with his nails; 35 drink water from his 
cupped hands; 36 splash the water with his foot or hand; 37 splash 
water on to water; 38 or pluck fruits by throwing brickbats 39 or 
other fruits at them. 

40 He should not become a cheat or a hypocrite, 41 or learn the 
language of barbarians. 42 Now, they also quote: 

‘He should not be fickle in anything he does, 
whether it is with his hands, feet, eyes, speech, 
or body’— that is the view of cultured people. 

43 Those Brahmins, in whose families the study 
of the Veda together with its supplements is 
hereditary, and who are able to adduce as 
proofs express vedic texts (G 3.36 n.), should be 
recognized as the cultured. 

44 When no one knows whether he is good or 
bad, learned or ignorant, virtuous or vile, he is 
indeed a Brahmin. 

ORDERS OF LIFE 

7 ‘There are four orders of life: 2 student, householder, forest 
hermit, and wandering ascetic. 3 After studying one, two, or 
all the Vedas, a man who has not violated his vow of chastity 
may live in whichever of these he prefers. 


269 



7.4 


Dharmasutras 


Student 

4 Student— he should serve his teacher until death 5 and, when 
the teacher dies, the sacred fire; 6 * * for it is stated, ‘The fire is your 
teacher’ (SG 2.3.1). 

7 He should be restrained in his speech lS and eat every fourth, 
sixth, or eighth mealtime (A 1.25.10n.). 9 He should beg for 
almsfood 10 and obey his teacher. 11 He should wear all his hair 
matted, or just the topknot. 

l2 He should wait upon his teacher, walking behind him if he is 
walking, standing by if he is seated, and sitting if he is lying 
down. 13 He should recite his lesson only when he is called upon 
to do so. 14 He should announce everything he has received to the 
teacher and eat with his permission. 

15 He should refrain from sleeping on a bed, brushing his 
teeth, washing his body, applying collyrium on his eyes or oil on 
his body, wearing shoes, or carrying an umbrella. 16 He should 
remain standing during the day and seated at night, 17 and bathe 
three times a day. 


Householder 

8 'Householder— after bringing his anger and excitement 
under control and taking the final bath with the permission 
of his teacher, he should select for his wife a woman who does 
not belong to a lineage with the same ancestral seer (A 
2. 11. 15 n.), who has not experienced sex before, who is younger 
than he and belongs to the same class as he, 2 and who is not 
related within four degrees on the mother’s side or six degrees on 
the father’s side. 3 He should kindle the nuptial fire. 

Hospitality 4 He should not turn away a guest who arrives in the 
evening. 5 A guest should not remain in his house without being 
given to eat. 

6 When a Brahmin who has come to someone’s 

house seeking a place to stay is given nothing to 

eat, he leaves taking with him all the good 

works of that man. 


270 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


8.17 


7 A Brahmin who spends one night, according 
to tradition, is called a guest. He is called 
‘guest’ because his stay is brief* 

8 A Brahmin who lives in the same village or 
comes for a social visit is not a guest. Whether 
he comes at the proper time or not, a guest 
should not remain in his house without receiv- 
ing food. 

Sacrifices 9 A man who is generous (B 1.10.4n.) and without 
greed, should neither live without the sacred fires if he has the 
means to establish them, 10 nor fail to offer the Soma sacrifice if 
he has the means to offer it. 

Duties 11 He should be intent on privately reciting the Veda, 
offering sacrifices, and begetting offspring. 12 He should honour 
anyone who comes to his house by rising up to meet him, offer- 
ing him a seat, and giving kind greetings and unstinting praise; 
13 and all creatures by giving them food according to his ability. 

14 A householder alone offers sacrifices; a 
householder performs austerities. Of all the 
four orders, the householder is the best. 

15 As all rivers and rivulets ultimately end up in 
the ocean, so people of all the orders ultimately 
end up in the householder.* 

16 As all living beings live dependent on their 
mothers, so all mendicants live dependent on 
the householder. 

17 When a Brahmin always carries water with 
him (B 1.7.1), always wears the sacrificial cord 
(A 1 .6. 1 8 n.), always recites the Veda privately, 
avoids the food of outcastes, has sexual inter- 
course with his wife during her season (A 
2.1. 17n.), and offers sacrifices according to the 
rules, he does not fall from the world of 
Brahman. 


271 



9.1 


Dharmasutras 


Forest Hermit 

9 1 Forest hermit— he should wear matted hair and a garment 
of bark or skin. 2 He should not enter a village 3 or step on 
ploughed land. 4 He should gather uncultivated roots and fruits; 
5 observe chastity; 6 be full of patience; 7 and when guests come to 
his hermitage, honour them with almsfood of roots and fruits. 

8 He should only give and never receive, 9 and bathe at dawn, 
noon, and dusk. 10 After establishing the hermit fire (G 3.27 n.), 
he should maintain the sacred fire. "After continuing in this 
manner for six months, he should live homeless and without a 
fire at the foot of a tree. 

12 He should make offerings to gods, ancestors, and men. He 
will thus attain an endless heavenly abode. 


Wandering Ascetic 



'Wandering ascetic— he should depart after giving the 
gift of safety to all creatures. 2 Now, they also quote: 


When a sage wanders about after giving the gift 
of safety to all creatures, no creature poses a 
threat to his own safety. 

3 When, however, someone gives up the active 
life without giving the gift of safety to all crea- 
tures, as also when he accepts donations, he 
brings to ruin the past and future generations 
of his family. 

4 Let him abandon all ritual activities; the Veda 
alone let him never abandon. By abandoning 
the Veda he becomes a Sudra; therefore let him 
never abandon the Veda. 

5 The Monosyllable OM is the highest Veda; the 
control of breathing is the highest austerity. 

Eating almsfood is better than fasting; and 
compassion far excels the distribution of gifts. 

6 A wandering ascetic should be shaven-headed, free from 


272 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


10.23 


selfish yearning, and without possessions. 7 He should go ran- 
domly to seven houses to beg for almsfood 8 at a time when 
smoke is not rising from the kitchens and the pestles have been 
laid aside (B 2. 1 1 .22 n.). 

9 He should wrap himself with a single piece of cloth, 10 or 
cover his body with an antelope skin or with a garment of grass 
nibbled by cows. 

11 He should sleep on the ground 12 and not keep a fixed resi- 
dence, 13 staying in the outskirts of a village, in a temple or an 
abandoned house, or at the foot of a tree. 14 He should apply 
his mind to the cultivation of knowledge, 15 living always in the 
wilderness 16 and never walking within sight of village animals. 

17 Freedom from rebirth, indeed, is secure for a 
man who always lives in the wilderness; has 
brought his senses under control and put an 
end to all sensual pleasures; focuses his mind 
on contemplating the Highest Self; and looks 
upon everything dispassionately. 

18 He should display neither the emblems* of his state nor his 
way of life 19 and, although he is not mad, give the appearance of 
being mad. 20 Now, they also quote: 

Liberation is not achieved by a man who takes 
delight in verbal sciences and in captivating the 
folks, has his heart on food and clothes, and 
loves beautiful residences. 

21 He should never try to get almsfood by inter- 
preting portents or omens, by displaying his 
knowledge of astrology or somatomancy, by 
giving advice, or by participating in debates. 

22 Let him neither be disheartened when he does 
not receive nor elated when he does. Let him 
take only as much as would sustain his life, free 
from attachment even to the few articles in his 
possession. 

23 Hut, water, clothes, tripod (B 2.17.11 n.), 

273 



10.23 


Dharmasutras 


house, seat, food— a man who is not attached 
to these has surely won liberation. 

24 Morning and evening he should eat only what he obtains 
from a Brahmin household, avoiding honey and meat 25 and 
without eating until he is full. 

26 Alternatively, he may live in a village, 27 abandoning crooked 
and dishonest ways, homeless and resolute. 28 Let him not 
become sensually attached to anything. 29 Let him look upon 
everyone dispassionately, desisting from either causing harm or 
doing favours to any creature. 

Virtues Common to All Orders 

30 To refrain from slander, envy, pride, egotism, disbelief, dis- 
honesty, praising oneself, running down others, hypocrisy, 
greed, perplexity, anger, and jealousy is regarded as the Law 
common to all orders of life. 31 A Brahmin who wears a sacri- 
ficial cord, carries a water pot, is pure, and avoids the food of 
Sudras will not fail to win the world of Brahman. 

DISTRIBUTION OF FOOD AND RECEPTION OF 

GUESTS 

Guests 

1 1 1 Six individuals are worthy to receive the welcome water 

J. (G 5.32 n.): 2 an officiating priest, a bridegroom, a king, 
a paternal uncle, a bath-graduate, and a maternal uncle. 

3 Morning and evening, he should offer in the fire a portion of 
the food he has cooked as an oblation to the All-gods; 4 make a 
Bah offering to the house deities; 5 give the first portion to a 
vedic scholar or a student; and immediately thereafter make an 
offering to his ancestors. 6 After that he should give food to the 
guests according to their relative eminence; 7 among those of his 
household, to the young women, the children, the elderly, the 
youngsters, and the women who have recently given birth; 8 and 
finally to other members of his family. 9 He should throw some 
food on the ground for dogs, Candidas, outcastes, and crows; 


274 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


11.21 


10 and give leftover (A 1.3.27n.) or fresh food to a Sudra. u The 
householder and his wife should eat what remains. 

12 If a guest arrives after he has made the offering to the 
All-gods, he should cook a fresh meal using all the normal 
ingredients. He should prepare an exquisite meal for that guest. 
13 For it is stated: 

A Brahmin guest enters a house as the fire 
common to all men. Through him they obtain 
rain, and through rain food. So people call the 
reception of such a guest a rite to avert evil. (cf. 

KaU 1.7) 

14 After giving food to that guest, he should pay him homage 

15 and follow him as he leaves up to the village boundary or until 
he gives him leave to return. 

Ancestral Offerings 

16 He should offer oblations to the ancestors after the fourth day 
in the fortnight of the waning moon. 17-18 Having issued invita- 
tions to the Brahmins the day before, he should feed ascetics or 
virtuous householders who are not too old, do not follow bad 
occupations, and are vedic scholars, and who neither have been 
his pupils nor are living with him as pupils; or he may even feed 
his pupils who possess fine qualities, 19 but avoid people who go 
naked, suffer from white leprosy, are impotent or blind, have 
black teeth, suffer from black leprosy, or have bad nails. 20 Now, 
they also quote: 

If, however, a man who knows the Veda is 
afflicted with bodily defects that defile those 
alongside whom he eats, Yama has proclaimed 
him faultless; he undoubtedly purifies those 
alongside whom he eats (A 2.17.21 n.). 

21 At an ancestral offering the leftovers should 
not be removed until the end of the day, for 
streams of nectar ooze from them, which are 
drunk by the departed who have not been 
offered libations of water (B 2. 15. 12 n.). 


275 



11.22 


Dharmasutras 


22 One should not clean up the leftovers until 
the sun has set; rich streams of milk flow from 
them meant for the departed who get their 
share with difficulty. 

23 Both the leftovers and the fallen fragments, 
Manu has declared, are undoubtedly the share 
of one’s own family members who have died 
before initiation. 

24 Fragments fallen on the ground and the 
smearings and water scattered on the sacred 
grass he should offer as food to the spirits of 
those who have died young or without 
offspring. 

25 With perverse minds the demons surely wait 
for their chance nearby when someone offers 
food to the ancestors without using both hands. 

26 Let him, therefore, not keep either hand 
empty as he serves the food; or let him stand 
holding the food plate until both kinds of rem- 
nants have been produced.* 

27 Fie should feed two at an offering to the gods 
and three at an offering to ancestors, or one at 
either offering. Even a rich man should not 
indulge in feeding a larger number. 

28 A large number is detrimental to five things: 
offering proper hospitality, doing things at the 
right place and the right time, carrying out 
purifications, and finding Brahmins of quality. 
Therefore, he should refrain from feeding a 
large number. 

29 Or else, he may feed a single Brahmin who 
has mastered the Veda, is endowed with learn- 
ing and virtue, and is free of any unfavourable 
bodily marks (Va 11.19). 

30-1 Flow can an offering to the gods be made at 
an ancestral offering where just one man is fed? 


276 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


11.40 


Taking some from all the prepared food and 
putting it in a bowl, he should place it in a 
temple and then continue with the ancestral 
offering. He should throw that food in the fire 
or give it to a student. 

32 The ancestors will eat as long as the food is 
warm, the diners eat in silence, and no com- 
ment is made about the quality of the oblation. 

33 No comment must be made on the quality of 
the oblation until the ancestors have been 
sated. After the ancestors have been sated, they 
should say The oblation was exquisite!’ 

34 If an ascetic invited to an offering to the 
ancestors or gods refuses to eat meat, he will go 
to hell for as many years as the number of hairs 
on that animal’s body. 

35 Three things purify an ancestral offering: a 
daughter’s son, the midday, and sesame seeds. 
Three things they commend for it: purification, 
not being angry, and avoiding haste. 

36 During the eighth part of the day the sun 
moves slowly; this period is known as ‘midday’; 
and anything given to ancestors at this time 
becomes inexhaustible. 

37 If someone engages in sexual intercourse 
after offering or eating at an ancestral oblation, 
his ancestors eat his semen during that month. 

38 A child born from such a union after offering 
or eating at an oblation to the ancestors does 
not acquire knowledge and is born with a brief 
life span. 

39-40 When a son is born, his father, grandfather, 
and great-grandfather hover around him, as 
birds around a hg tree, saying: ‘He will present 
ancestral offerings to us with honey, meat, 
vegetables, milk, and milk-rice pudding during 


277 



11.40 


Dharmasutras 


the rainy seasons and the Magha constellation’ 

(A 1.6.18 n.). 

41 The ancestors rejoice at a son who extends the 
family line, is diligent in presenting ancestral 
offerings, and devoted to gods and Brahmins. 

42 When someone offers food to his ancestors at 
Gaya, they rejoice, just as farmers rejoice at 
well-ploughed fields; in him his ancestors are 
blessed with a true son. 

43 He should make ancestral offerings on the full-moon days 
of July-August and November-December and on the ninth day 
of the fortnight of the waning moon in the four lunar months 
between November and March. 44 When extraordinary materials 
or Brahmins or an extraordinary place is at hand, however, rules 
regarding the proper time do not apply. 


Sacrifices 

45 A Brahmin has the obligation to establish the sacred fires. 

46 And he should offer the full-moon and the new-moon sacri- 
fices, the sacrifices of the first fruits, the seasonal sacrifices, the 
animal sacrifices, and the Soma sacrifices; 47 for this is specific- 
ally enjoined and is also acclaimed as a debt. 48 It is stated: ‘A 
Brahmin is born carrying three debts— of sacrifice to the gods, 
of offspring to the ancestors, and of studentship to the seers. 
That man is free from debts who has offered a sacrifice, fathered 
a son, and lived as a student’ (cf. TS 6.3.10.5). 

THE STUDENT 
Time of Initiation 

49 One should initiate a Brahmin in the eighth year from concep- 
tion, 50 a Ksatriya in the eleventh year from conception, 51 and a 
Vaisya in the twelfth year from conception. 


278 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 11.79 

Insignia 

52 A Brahmin’s staff should be of Palasa wood, 53 a Ksatriya’s of 
banyan wood, 54 and a Vaisya’s of Udumbara wood. 55 A Brah- 
min’s staff should reach the hair of the head, 56 a Ksatriya’s the 
forehead, 57 and a Vaisya’s the nose. 58 A Brahmin’s girdle should 
be made of Munja grass, 59 a Ksatriya’s of a bowstring, 60 and a 
Vaisya’s of hemp thread. 61 A Brahmin’s upper garment should 
be the skin of a black antelope, 62 a Ksatriya’s the skin of the 
spotted Ruru antelope, 63 and a Vaisya’s the skin of a cow or a 
male goat. 64 A Brahmin’s garment should be white and 
unblemished, 65 a Ksatriya’s dyed madder, 66 and a Vaisya’s dyed 
yellow or made of silk. 67 Or else, people of all classes may wear 
undyed cotton garments. 


Begging 

68 A Brahmin should request almsfood placing ‘Madam’ at the 
beginning, 69 a Ksatriya placing ‘Madam’ in the middle, 70 and a 
Vaisya placing ‘Madam’ at the end (A 1.3.28-30 n.). 


Time Limit for Initiation 

71 For a Brahmin the time for initiation does not lapse until the 
sixteenth year, 72 for a Ksatriya until the twenty-second year, 
73 and for a Vaisya until the twenty-fourth year. 74 After that time 
they become excluded from the Savitn; 75 and no one should 
initiate them, teach them, officiate at their sacrifices, or enter 
into marriage alliances with them. 

76 A man who is excluded from the Savitn should perform the 
Uddalaka penance: 77 for two months he should live on barley 
gruel, for one month on milk, for a fortnight on curd, for eight 
days on ghee, for six days on food received unasked, and for 
three days on water; and he should fast for a day and night. 
78 Alternatively, he may participate in the ritual bath that con- 
cludes a horse sacrifice; 79 or he may perform the Vratyastoma 
sacrifice. 


279 



12.1 


Dharmasutras 


THE BATH-GRADUATE 
Proper Conduct 

1 ^ 'Next, we will describe the observances of a bath- 
J. Z_, graduate (A 1.30.4 n.). 2 He should not beg for anything 
except from the king or a pupil of his. 3 If he is racked by hunger, 
however, he may beg for a little something— a ploughed or 
unploughed piece of land, a cow, a goat, or a sheep, and in the 
last place gold, grain, or food. 4 The directive, however, is that a 
bath-graduate should not languish because of hunger. 

5 He should not have sex with a menstruating woman, 6 with a 
pre-pubescent girl, 7 or with an inappropriate woman. 8 Let him 
not carry tales from one family to another (G 9.53 n.). 9 He 
should not step over a rope to which a calf is tied 10 or look at the 
sun at sunrise or sunset. 

"He should not urinate or defecate in water, 12 or spit into it. 
13 He should void urine and excrement with his head covered and 
after spreading some grass unfit for ritual purposes on the 
ground, facing the north during the day and the south during 
the night, and sitting down facing the north during the twilights. 
14 Now, they also quote: 

Bath-graduates should always wear a lower and 
an upper garment and two sacrificial cords (A 
1.6.18 n.), and carry a staff and a pot filled with 
water. 

15 Purity, it is said, is brought about by water, 
hand, stick, and fire. Therefore, he should clean 
the water pot with his hand using water; 16 for 
Manu, the Lord of creatures, has proclaimed 
this to be the encircling with fire (B 1.6.2). 

17 After he has answered a call of nature, a man 
with a sound knowledge of the rules of purifi- 
cation should sip some water. 

18 He should eat his food facing the east. 19 He should silently 
swallow the whole lump, pushing it into the mouth with his 
thumb 20 without making any sound. 


280 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


12.45 


21 He should engage in sexual intercourse with his wife during 
her season (A 2.1.17n.), avoiding the days of the moon’s change 
(A 1.26.14n.) 22 and not having intercourse in unusual positions. 
23 Now, they also quote: 

If a man performs the sex act in the mouth of 
the woman he has married, during that month 
his ancestors will feed on his semen. All bizarre 
sexual practices are against the Law. 

24 It is, moreover, stated in the Veda of the Kathakas: ‘ “May we 
lie with our husbands even when we are going to give birth the 
following day.” This is the wish granted to women by Indra’ (cf. 
Va 5.8). 

25 He should not climb trees; 26 go down into wells; 27 blow on a 
fire with his mouth; 28 or pass between a Brahmin and a fire, 
29 between two fires, 30 or between two Brahmins— or he may do 
so after receiving their permission. 31 He should not eat in the 
company of his wife; in the Veda of the Vajasaneyins it is stated: 
‘His children will lack manly vigour’ (SB 10.5.2.9). 32 He should 
not point out a rainbow using the name ‘Indra’s bow’ ( indra - 
dhanus ); 33 instead, he should call it ‘jewelled bow’ ( manidhanus ; 
cf. A 1.31.16; G 9.19-24; B 2.6.11-19). 

34 He should avoid stools, footwear, or tooth cleaners made 
with Palasa wood (A 1.32.9 n.); 35 and not eat food placed on his 
lap 36 or on a chair. 

37 He should carry a bamboo staff 38 and wear a pair of gold 
earrings. 39 Outdoors, he should not wear a necklace, except one 
made of gold. 40 He should avoid casinos and fairs (A 1 .3 . 1 2 n.). 
41 Now, they also quote: 

To deny the authority of the Vedas, to vilify the 
seers, and to act contrary to the rules in any 
matter is to destroy one’s self. 

42 He should not go to a sacrifice unless he has been chosen to 
officiate; but if he does, he should return keeping his right side 
towards it (A 1.7.2n.). 43 He should not set out on a journey 
when the sun is seen over the trees,* 44 get into an unsafe boat, 
45 or cross a river by swimming. 


281 



12.46 


Dharmasutras 


46 If he gets up in the last watch of the night, he should recite the 
Veda and not go back to sleep. 47 At the time sacred to Prajapati* 
a Brahmin should perform some religious observance. 


Annual Course of Study 

1 O ‘Next, the commencement of the annual course of vedic 
J. study. It takes place on the full moon day of July- 
August or August-September. 2 He should kindle the fire and 
offer whole rice grains in it, 3 saying: ‘To the gods! To the seers! 
To the Vedas!’ 4 He should get Brahmins to say ‘May there be 
well-being!’, feed them with curd, and then begin the study of 
the Veda. 

5 He should continue the study for four and a half or five and 
a half months (A 1 .9.1—3 n.). 6 Outside that period, he should 
study the Veda during the fortnights of the waxing moon. 7 If he 
wants to, he may study the Vedic Supplements (A 2.8.10-11). 

Suspension of Vedic Recitation 

8 Vedic recitation is suspended 9 when it thunders during twilight; 
10 at the morning and evening twilights; “in places where there is 
a corpse or a Candala; in towns— 12 or, if he wishes, he may 
recite it there after smearing an area with cowdung and drawing 
a line around it—; 13 near a cemetery; 14 when he is lying down; 
“and when he has accepted anything at an ancestral offering. 
16 In this connection, they cite this verse from Manu: 

Even after accepting fruits, water, sesame seeds, 
foodstuffs, or anything else given at an ances- 
tral offering, vedic recitation is suspended; a 
Brahmin’s hand, tradition says, is his mouth. 

(B 1.21 .8—10 n.) 

17 Vedic recitation is suspended when he is running; when there is 
a foul smell and the like; in a barren area; 18 when he has climbed 
a tree; 19 in a boat and an army encampment; 20 after eating, as 
long as his hands are wet; 21 when the sound of a lute is heard; 


282 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


13.46 


22 on the fourteenth day of every fortnight; on new-moon days; 
on the eighth day of every fortnight; at the ancestral offerings on 
the eighth day after the full moon; 23 when he is seated with his 
legs stretched out, cross-legged, or leaning against something; 
24 near his elders (A 1.6.32n.); 25 on the night that he engages in 
sexual intercourse; 26 while wearing the clothes he had on when 
he had intercourse, unless they have been washed; 27 in the out- 
skirts of a village; 28 after vomiting; 29 and after voiding urine or 
excrement. 

30 The recitation of the Rgveda and the Yajurveda is sus- 
pended when the recitation of the Samaveda is heard (G 
16.21 n.). 31 Vedic recitation is suspended when he has indiges- 
tion; 32 when lightning strikes; 33 when there is an earthquake; 
34 and during an eclipse of the moon or the sun. 

35 When a strange sound comes from the sky or there is an 
earth slide on a mountain, and when it rains stones, blood, or 
dust, vedic recitation is suspended until the same time the next 
day. 36 When meteors fall and lightning flashes at the same time, 
the suspension lasts for three days; 37 if they happen separately, 
for that day; 38 and if they occur out of season, until the same 
time the next day; 39 when his teacher dies, for three days; 
40 when his son, pupil, or wife of his teacher dies, for a day and 
a night. 


Salutation 

41 He should rise up and greet an officiating priest, a father-in- 
law, or a paternal or maternal uncle who is younger than him- 
self; 42 the wives of those whose feet he is obliged to clasp and 
of his teacher; 43 and his parents. 

44 To a person who knows how to greet, he should say, ‘I am 
so-and-so, sir!’ 45 A person who does not know, however, [he 
should greet without using his name: A 1.14.23 n.]. 46 When 
returning a greeting, he should lengthen the last vowel of the 
name of the person he is greeting to three morae. If it is a 
diphthong V or ‘o’ subject to euphonic combination, it is 
pronounced ‘ay’ and ‘av’; thus ‘bho’ becomes ‘ bhav ’.* 


283 



13.47 


Dharmasutras 


Falling from Caste 

47 A father should be forsaken when he becomes an outcaste, 
whereas a mother is never an outcaste to her son (A 1.28.9 n.). 

48 Now, they also quote: 

A teacher is ten times more eminent than a 
tutor (B 1.11.28n.); a father is a hundred times 
more eminent than a teacher; and a mother is a 
thousand times more eminent than a father. 

49 One should first reprimand a wife, sons, or 
pupils who have become involved in sinful 
activities, and only thereafter should one for- 
sake them. If someone forsakes them other- 
wise, he himself becomes an outcaste. 

50 A man should disown an officiating priest or a teacher who 
neglects to officiate at sacrifices or to teach the Veda; if he does 
not, he becomes an outcaste. 

51 They say that a son born to an outcaste becomes an outcaste 
himself, but not a daughter, 52 for she betakes herself to an out- 
sider. 53 One may marry such a girl without taking a dowry. 


Precedence 

54 When his teacher’s teacher is near by, he 
is expected to treat him as he does his own 
teacher. He should treat his teacher’s son as he 
does the teacher himself— so states a vedic text. 

55 A Brahmin must not accept weapons, poison, or liquor as 
gifts. 56 Knowledge, wealth, age, kinship, and occupation are 
deserving of respect, 57 each preceding one being more respect- 
able than the one that follows. 

58 Old people, children, the sick, people carrying heavy loads, 
women, people riding on vehicles— when someone meets these, 
he should give way to them, the ones mentioned later taking 
priority over the ones mentioned earlier. 59 If a king and a bath- 
graduate meet, the king should give way to the bath-graduate. 


284 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 14.15 

60 All should give way to a bride being taken to her husband’s 
house. 

61 Some straw, a place on the floor, fire, water, a welcome that 
is joyful and ungrudging are never wanting in the house of a 
good man. 


FOOD 
Unfit Food 

I A 'Next we will describe food that is fit and food that is 
J. T" unfit to be eaten (A 1.16.16 n.). 2 The following are unfit 
to be eaten: food given by a physician, a hunter, a harlot, a law 
enforcement agent, a thief, a heinous sinner (A 1.3.25 n.), a 
eunuch, or an outcaste; 3 as also that given by a miser, a man 
consecrated for a sacrifice, a prisoner, a sick person, a man who 
sells Soma, a carpenter, a washerman, a liquor dealer, a spy, an 
usurer, a leather worker, 4 a Sudra, 5 a man who bears arms, 6 a 
lover of a married woman and a husband who countenances it, 
7 an arsonist, 8 or one who does not execute those who deserve 
the capital punishment; 9 food announced publicly: ‘Who will 
eat this?’; 10 food given by a corporate body or by a courtesan. 

I I Now, they also quote : 

Gods do not eat the food of a man who keeps 
dogs, who is married to a Sudra woman, who is 
controlled by his wife, or who lets his wife’s 
lover remain in his house. 

12 He may accept the following from even such people: fire- 
wood, water, fodder, Kusa grass, popped rice, food given 
unasked, vehicles, shelter, Sapharl fish, millet, garlands, per- 
fumes, honey, and meat. 13 Now, they also quote: 

For the sake of his teacher, to save his wife, and 
to honour gods or guests, a man may accept 
gifts from anyone, but never to satisfy himself. 

14 He should not refuse the food of a man who hunts with bow 
and arrow, 15 for it is stated: ‘During a sacrificial session lasting a 


285 



14.15 


Dharmasutras 


thousand years, Agastya went hunting; and he had sacrificial 
cakes made with the choice meat of excellent animals and birds.’ 
16 In this connection, moreover, they cite these verses of Prajapati: 

Almsfood brought and handed over even by an 
evildoer, in the opinion of Prajapati, is suitable 
for eating, so long as it has not been previously 
announced. 

17 In particular, the food given by a generous 
man (B 1.10.4n.) should be eaten, even if he is 
a thief, but never that given by a man who per- 
forms sacrifices for a lot of people and initiates 
a lot of people. 

18 If a man spurns such food, his forefathers will 
not eat from him for fifteen years and the sac- 
red fire will not convey his oblations. 

19 Almsfood given by physicians, hunters, sur- 
geons, fowlers, eunuchs, and unchaste wives is 
not to be accepted even if it is given unasked. 

“Leftover food (A 1.3.27n.) from anyone other than one’s 
teacher is unfit to be eaten, 21 as also one’s own leftovers, and 
food that has come into contact with leftovers 22 or with a gar- 
ment, hair, or insects. 23 If he wants, however, he may eat it after 
removing the hair or the insect from it, sprinkling it with water, 
strewing some ash over it, and getting it verbally declared as 
suitable. 24 In this connection, moreover, they cite these verses of 
Prajapati: 

Gods invented three means of purification for 
Brahmins: being unaware that something is 
impure, sprinkling it with water, and getting it 
verbally declared as suitable. 

25 When food is touched by crows or dogs dur- 
ing a divine procession, marriage festivities, or 
while sacrifices are in progress, it should not be 
thrown away. 

26 After extracting from it the defiled portion of 

286 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


14.40 


food, the rest should be purified, liquids by 
straining them and solids by sprinkling them 
with water. 

27 When something is touched by a cat’s mouth, 
it undoubtedly remains pure. 

28 Food that has gone stale, looks revolting (G 17.13 n.), makes a 
person uneasy, has been cooked again, or is raw or undercooked 
is unfit to be eaten. 29 If he wants, however, he may eat such food 
after pouring some curd or ghee over it. '°In this connection, 
moreover, they cite these verses of Prajapati: 

A Brahmin should not eat anything that drips 
from someone’s nails, whether it is ghee or oil; 

Yama has declared that it is impure and equal 
to eating cow’s meat. 

31 Oils, salt, or sauces served with the hand are 
of no service to the giver, while the eater 
devours guilt. 

32 These should never be served with the hand 
or with an iron utensil. 


Forbidden Food 

33 If someone eats garlic, onions, mushrooms, Grnjana onions, 
Slesmantaka fruits, tree resins, or red juices flowing from inci- 
sions on tree barks (G 17.33 n.), he should perform the very 
arduous penance (B 2.2.40). 34 Fie should not drink* the milk of 
cows in heat or whose calves have died, 35 or of cows, buffaloes, 
or goats during the first ten days after giving birth; 36 or water 
collected at the bottom of a boat. 37 Fie should refrain from 
eating wheat cakes, fried grains, porridge, barley-meal, oil- 
cake, oil, milk-rice, or vegetables that have turned sour, 38 as also 
preparations made with milk and barley-meal. 

39 Among animals with five claws, the porcupine, hedgehog, 
hare, tortoise, and Godha monitor lizard may be eaten (A 
1 . 1 7.37 n.), 40 as also, among domestic animals, those that have 
teeth in only one jaw, with the exception of the camel (G 17.28 n.). 


287 



14.41 


Dharmasutras 


41 These are forbidden to be eaten:* among fish, the Ceta, the 
Gavaya, the porpoise, the alligator, and the crab, 42 as also gro- 
tesque fish and snake-head fish; 43 Gaura bison, Gayal oxen, and 
Sarabha, 44 as also animals not specifically indicated; * 45 milch- 
cows, draught oxen, and animals whose milk-teeth have not fallen. 

46 It is stated in the Veda of the Vajasaneyins that the milch- 
cow and the draught ox are pure and can be eaten (A 1.17.31 n.). 
47 Regarding the rhinoceros and the wild pig, however, there are 
conflicting opinions. 

48 Among birds, the following are forbidden: birds that feed by 
scratching with their feet, web-footed birds, Kalavinka sparrow, 
Plava heron, Hamsa goose, Cakravaka goose, Bhasa vulture, 
crow, Paravata dove, Kurara osprey, Saranga cuckoo, white 
dove, Krauiica crane, Krakara partridge, Kanka heron, vulture, 
falcon, Baka egret, Balaka ibis, Madgu cormorant, Tittibha 
sandpiper, Mandhala flying fox, nocturnal birds, woodpecker, 
sparrow, Railataka bird, Hanta pigeon, Khanjanta wagtail, vil- 
lage cock, parrot, Sarika starling, Kokila cuckoo, and carnivor- 
ous birds, as well as those living in villages. 

ADOPTION 

1 ^ ‘A man comes into being through blood and semen* 
J. _/ with his mother and father as the cause. 2 His father and 
mother have the power to give for adoption, to sell, or to aban- 
don him. 

3 No one should give for adoption or adopt an only son, 4 for 
he is intended to continue the family line for his ancestors. 5 A 
wife should neither give a son for adoption nor adopt a son 
except with her husband’s permission. 

6 When someone is going to adopt a son, he should summon 
his relatives; inform the king; in the middle of the house make 
an offering of ghee in the fire, reciting the Calls; and then take in 
adoption only someone whose relatives do not live far away, that 
is, someone with relatives close by. 7 If, however, a doubt arises, 
he should keep the person whose relatives live far away as if he 
were a Sudra,* 8 for it is stated: ‘By means of one he saves a 
multitude.’ 


288 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


15.21 


9 If, after adopting a son, a natural son is born to a man, the 
adopted son inherits one-quarter of the estate, 10 unless he is 
devoted to performing rites to secure prosperity. 

EXCOMMUNICATION FROM AND 
READMISSION TO CASTE 

11 A man who has divulged the Veda or officiated at a Sudra’s 
sacrifice, and those who have fallen from the rank of the highest 
class— for them the rite of overturning the water pot should be 
performed. 12 A slave, a son from a wife of a lower caste, or a 
relative of a lower class lacking good qualities should fetch a 
broken pot from a heap of unusable pots; spread on the ground 
some Darbha grass or Lohita grass with their tips cut off; and 
overturn the pot filled with water with his left foot for that per- 
son. 13 And his relatives, their hair dishevelled, should touch the 
man who overturned the pot. 14 They may then return home as 
they wish, turning their left side towards that place (A 1.7.2n.). 
15 From that time onwards they should not let him participate in 
their religious activities. 16 Those who let him participate become 
his equals. 

17 Outcastes who have performed the penance, however, may 
be readmitted. 18 Now, they also quote: 

One should walk in front of those who are 
being readmitted displaying revelry and laugh- 
ter, and behind those who are being excom- 
municated displaying grief and lamentation. 

19 A person who has assaulted his teacher, mother, or father 
may be readmitted through the compassion of these people or 
by performing an expiation. 

This is how such people are readmitted. 20 They should fill a 
gold or clay pot with water from a holy lake or a river and pour 
it over him while reciting the verses ‘Waters, you are refreshing 
. . .’ 21 The discussion about the birth of a son gives all the rites 
to be performed upon the readmission of a person who has been 
bathed in this manner* 


289 



16.1 


Dharmasutras 


KING 

Legal Procedure 

1 S' 'Next, the legal procedure. 2 The king or his minister 
J. U should run the court proceedings. 3 When there is a legal 
dispute between two parties, he should not take one side. 

4 An offence is determined according to social position; 
with regard to people of the lowest caste, there can be no 
offence. 5 He should treat all creatures equally. An offence is 
determined according to social position in the case of the first 
two classes, and lastly according to knowledge.* 


Property Rights 

6 He should, moreover, protect what he has won, 7 as also the 
property of royal children 8 and minors (G 2.34 n.). 9 When they 
have reached the legal age (G 2.34 n.), however, it should be 
handed over to them. 

10 Written evidence, witnesses, and possession 
are, according to traditional texts, the three 
types of evidence for claiming title to a prop- 
erty. In this way an owner may reclaim a 
property that had previously belonged to him. 

11 Space must be reserved for the road in a field through which 
a road runs, as also space for turning a cart. 12 Along newly built 
houses and other similar structures one should allow a passage 
three feet wide. 

13 When there is a dispute regarding a house or a field, the 
testimony of neighbours provides the proof. 14 When neighbours 
provide contradictory evidence, written documents provide the 
proof. 15 When conflicting documents are produced, the proof 
is based on the testimony of aged inhabitants of the town or 
village and that of guilds. 16 Now, they also quote: 

Ancestral property, what is bought, a pledge, 
things received by a wife at her wedding, a gift, 
what one receives for conducting a sacrifice, 


290 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


16.31 


property of reunited coparceners, and the 
eighth, wages. 

17 Any of these is lost to the owner when it is used by someone 
else continuously for ten years. 18 But they also quote a verse to 
the contrary: 

A pledge, a boundary, property of minors, an 
open deposit, a sealed deposit, women, and the 
property of the king or a vedic scholar are not 
lost to the owner by being used by someone else. 

19 Abandoned property belongs to the king. 20 If it is not 
abandoned, the king, together with ministers and city folk, 
should administer the property. 


Royal Entourage 

21 Is a king, shifty like a reed, better off surrounded by vulture- 
eyed courtiers? 22 Or is he better off without an entourage of 
vulture-eyed courtiers? 23 He should surround himself with an 
entourage of vulture-eyed courtiers, but he should not be a vul- 
ture surrounded by vulture-eyed courtiers.* 24 For it is the court- 
iers who bring to light crimes 25 such as theft, robbery, and 
oppression . 26 At the outset, therefore, he should make enquiries 
of his courtiers. 


Witnesses 

27 Next, witnesses. 28 Vedic scholars, handsome men, people of 
good character, people who do good works, and people who 
speak the truth— these may act as witnesses . 29 Or else, anyone at 
all may act as witnesses for anyone. 30 For women he should get 
women to act as witnesses; for twice-born men, twice-born men 
of equal standing; for Sudras, Sudras; and for the lowest caste 
people, men of the lowest birth . 31 Now, they also quote: 

A son is not obliged to repay the following 
[debts of his father]: what he owed as a surety 
or promised idly, debts he incurred gambling 


291 



16.31 


Dharmasutras 


or drinking, and unpaid portions of lines or 
taxes. 

32 Speak the truth, O witness! Your ancestors 
hang in suspense awaiting your statement, in 
accordance with which they will soar up or 
come crashing down. 

33 When a man bears false witness, he will end 
up naked, shaven-headed, and blind; racked 
with hunger and thirst; and going to his 
enemy’s house with a begging bowl to obtain 
almsfood. 

34 When he gives false testimony concerning 
virgins, he slays five; concerning cattle, he slays 
ten; concerning horses, he slays a hundred; and 
concerning a man, he slays a thousand (G 
1 3. 14 n.). 

35 [verse corrupt and untranslatable]* 

36 A man may tell a lie at a marriage; during a 
sexual encounter; when his life is at stake; when 
there is a risk of losing all his property; and for 
the sake of a Brahmin. These five types of lies, 
they say, do not entail loss of caste. 

37 If during a trial someone gives evidence that 
is partial to one side either to help a relative or 
for money, he will cause the ancestors of both 
his spiritual lineage (A 2.17.4n.) and his nat- 
ural family, even those who are in heaven, to 
fall. 


SONS 



'‘A debt he pays in him and immortality he 
gains, the father who sees the face of his son 
born and alive’ (AB 7.13). 


2 ‘Eternal are the worlds of those men who have sons. A 
sonless man has no world’— so states a vedic text (cf. AB 7.13). 


292 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


17.13 


3 And there is the curse: ‘May our enemies be childless!’ (RV 
1.21.5). 4 There is also the vedic saying: ‘Through offspring, O 
Fire, may we attain immortality’ (RV 5.4.10). 

5 Through a son one gains the worlds; through a 
grandson one attains eternal life; and through 
the son’s grandson one gains the crest of the sun. 


To Whom Belongs a Son 

6 People are in disagreement, some saying: ‘A son belongs to the 
husband of the woman,’ and others: ‘A son belongs to the man 
who fathered him’ (A 2.13.5n.). 7 And they produce evidence in 
support of both positions: 

8 Even if a bull fathers a hundred calves on 
someone else’s cows, the calves belong to the 
owner of cows; the bull has spilled his semen 
in vain. 

9 Diligently guard this progeny of yours, lest 
strangers sow their seeds in your held; in the 
transit to the next world, a son belongs to the 
man who fathered him. Otherwise a husband 
makes this progeny of his worthless for himself. 

10 If one among many brothers of the same 
father has a son, then through that son they all 
become men who have sons— so states a vedic 
text. 

11 If one among many wives of the same hus- 
band has a son, then through that son they all 
become women who have sons— so states a 
vedic text.* 


Types of Sons 

12 Only twelve types of sons are recorded in the Puranas. 13 The 
first is a son sired by the husband himself on his own wife whom 
he has married according to the proper rites. 


293 



17.14 


Dharmasutras 


14 Failing that, a son begotten on his wife after she has been 
duly appointed is the second. 

15 The third is an appointed daughter. 16 ‘A brotherless girl’, it is 
stated, ‘goes back to her male ancestors and returning gains the 
status of a son.’ 17 On this there is a verse: 

I will give you in marriage the brotherless girl 
adorned with finery with the provision that the 
son she bears will be my son. 

18 The fourth is a son of a remarried woman. 19 A ‘remarried 
woman’ is one who, after leaving the husband of her youth and 
consorting with others, returns to his house again. 20 A ‘remar- 
ried woman’ is also one who, after leaving a husband who is 
impotent, an outcaste, or mad, or after her husband is dead, 
finds another husband. 

21 The fifth is a son of an unmarried woman. 22 They say that a 
child born of lust to an unmarried woman in her father’s house 
is the son of his maternal grandfather . 23 Now, they also quote: 

When someone’s unmarried daughter bears a 
son from a man of the same class, through that 
child his maternal grandfather gets a son. Fie 
should make funeral offerings to that grand- 
father and inherit his estate. 

24 The sixth is a son born in secret at home. 25 These types of 
sons, they say, are heirs and relatives; they rescue one from great 
danger. 

26 Now, among the sons who are relatives but not heirs, the 
first is the son received with the marriage. 27 When one marries a 
pregnant woman, that is the son received with the marriage. 

28 The second is a son given in adoption, 29 that is, given for 
adoption by his parents. 

30 The third is a purchased son. 31 This type is described in 
the story of Sunahsepa: 32 ‘There was a king Flariscandra. Fie 
purchased the son of Ajigarta Sauyavasi.’ 

33 The fourth is a son given in adoption by himself. 34 This type is 
described in the story of Sunahsepa: 35 ‘Sunahsepa, when he was 
tied to the sacrificial post, praised the gods. The gods released 


294 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


17.57 


him from his bonds. The officiating priests said to him: “Let him 
be my son.” He did not acquiesce to them. Then they said: “Let 
him be the son of whomever he chooses.” The Hotr priest of that 
sacrifice was Visvamitra, and Sunahsepa made himself his son.’* 

36 The fifth is a son who has been abandoned , 37 that is, a son who 
is adopted after he has been abandoned by his parents. 

38 The sixth, they say, is simply the son from a Sudra wife. 
These types of sons are relatives but not heirs. 39 Now, they also 
quote: ‘When there is no heir belonging to the first group of six, 
then the latter may inherit the estate.’ 


Partitioning of the Estate 

40 Next, the partitioning of the estate among brothers. 41 [It 
should be delayed] until the childless wives bear sons. 42 The 
oldest son should take a double share 43 and one-tenth of the 
cows and horses. 44 The youngest son gets the goats, the sheep, 
and the house. 45 The middle son gets the iron and the household 
goods. 46 The daughters should share the mother’s wedding gifts. 

47 If a Brahmin has sons from wives of Brahmin, Ksatriya, 
and Vaisya classes, 48 the son of the Brahmin wife should take a 
triple share, 49 the son of the Ksatriya wife should take a double 
share, 50 and the others should get equal shares. 

51 If one of them has contributed his own earnings, he should 
take a double share. 52 Those who have entered another order of 
life do not receive any shares, 53 as also those who are impotent, 
mad, or outcastes. 54 The impotent and the mad should be 
maintained. 


Levirate 

55 The wife of a deceased man should sleep on the floor for six 
months, observing her vow and eating food without salt or con- 
diments. 56 After the completion of the six months, she should 
bathe and make a funeral offering to her husband. Then the 
father or the brother should assemble the elders (A 1.6.32 n.) 
who taught or performed rites for the deceased person and his 
relatives and get them to appoint her for levirate. 57 One should 


295 



17.57 


Dharmasutras 


not appoint a widow who is deranged, barren,* or sick, 58 as also 
one who is very old — 59 the age-limit is sixteen years from 
puberty. 60 Nor should she be appointed if the man with whom 
she should cohabit is sickly. 

61 At the time sacred to Prajapati (Va 12.47 n.), the man 
should approach her like a husband, without laughing together 
and without maltreating her verbally or physically. 62 She should 
be given precedence in food, clothing, bathing, and lotions. 

63 A son born to a widow who has not been appointed, they 
say, belongs to his biological father, 64 whereas if she has been 
appointed, the son belongs to both the males involved in the 
appointment. 65 An appointment is invalid if it is made through 
greed for the estate of the deceased, “although, according to 
some, one may appoint her after imposing a penance. 

Time of Marriage for Girls 

67 After she attains puberty, a girl shall wait for three years. 
“After three years, she should hnd herself a husband of the 
same class as she. 69 Now, they also quote: 

If due to her father’s negligence a girl here is 
given in marriage after her proper time has 
elapsed, she, who was made to wait, brings ruin 
to her giver, like a teacher’s fee that is paid after 
the time has passed. 

70 Out of fear that she should menstruate, a 
father should give a girl in marriage while she 
still goes about naked (G 18.23 n.), for if she 
remains in his house after puberty her father 
becomes guilty of a sin. 

71 As many menstrual periods a girl has while 
men of equal class are asking for her hand in 
marriage and she herself is willing, so many 
foetuses do her parents kill— so states the Law. 

72 If, after a girl has been betrothed with words 
and the pouring of water but before she is 
given in marriage with the recitation of ritual 


296 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


17.81 


formulas, the bridegroom dies, the girl belongs 
to her father. 

73 If a virgin has been forcibly abducted but has 
not been married with the recitation of ritual 
formulas, she may be given in marriage to 
another man in accordance with the rules; she 
is like a virgin in every respect. 

74 If the husband dies after a young girl has 
been given in marriage with the recitation of 
ritual formulas and if she is still a virgin, she 
may be given in marriage again. 


Missing Husband 

75 The wife of a man who has gone to a distant land should wait 
for five years. 76 After the lapse of five years she may go to her 
husband. 77 If, however, she is unwilling to go to a distant land 
for religious or financial reasons, she may act as if he were dead. 
78 Accordingly, a Brahmin woman should wait for five years if 
she has offspring and for four years if she does not; a Ksatriya 
woman should wait for four years if she has offspring and for 
three years if she does not; a Vaisya woman should wait for 
three years if she has offspring and for two years if she does not; 
and a Sudra woman should wait for two years if she has off- 
spring and for one year if she does not. 

79 After that time [she may go to one of the following]: one 
who shares the same property as her husband, one who is born 
from the same parents, one who belongs to the same ancestry (A 
2. 14.2 n.), one who belongs to the same distant ancestry,* and 
one who belongs to the same lineage (A 2. 1 1 . 1 5 n.). Among 
these each preceding is more honourable than each following. 
80 She should not, however, go to a stranger when a member of 
her family is available. 


Alternate Heirs 

81 In the absence of an heir belonging to the first six types of sons 


297 



17.81 


Dharmasutras 


(Va 17.13-25), people belonging to the same ancestry or those 
taking the place of sons (Va 17.26-38) should divide the estate 
of the deceased; 82 in the absence of these, the teacher and the 
resident pupil should take the estate; 83 and in their absence, 
the king. 84 The king, however, should not take the estate of a 
Brahmin; 85 the property of a Brahmin is dreadful poison. 

86 Poison is not truly poison, they say; the true 
poison is the property of a Brahmin. Poison 
kills just one man, while a Brahmin’s property 
kills even his sons and grandsons. 

87 He should hand it over instead to virtuous men versed in the 
triple Veda. 


MIXED CLASSES 

IQ ‘A child sired by a Sudra man on a Brahmin woman, 
J. O they say, becomes a Candala; 2 on a Ksatriya woman, a 
Vaina; 3 and on a Vaisya woman, an Antyavasayin. 4 A child 
sired by a Vaisya man on a Brahmin woman, they say, becomes a 
Ramaka; 5 and on a Ksatriya woman, a Pulkasa. 6 A child sired 
by a Ksatriya man on a Brahmin woman, they say, becomes a 
Suta. 7 Now, they also quote: 

You can know by their actions all those who 
have been secretly conceived and who are 
tainted with the attributes arising from relation- 
ships in the inverse order of class, because they 
are devoid of virtue and good conduct. 

8 Children sired by Brahmins, Ksatriyas, and Vaisyas on 

women of one, two, or three classes below the man’s become 

Ambasthas, Ugras, and Nisadas, respectively. 8 9 Children sired by 

a Brahmin on a Sudra woman are Parasavas. 10 They say that a 
Parasava is neither fully alive nor fully a corpse. 11 According to 

some, Sudras are a cremation ground. 12 Therefore, one should 
not recite the Veda in the vicinity of a Sudra. 13 Now, they also 

quote these verses proclaimed by Yama: 


298 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


19.8 


Sudras, people of evil conduct, are manifestly a 
cremation ground. Therefore, one should not 
recite the Veda in the vicinity of a Sudra. 

14 One should not impart wisdom to a Sudra or 
give him one’s leftovers (A 1.3.27 n.) or the 
remnants of a sacrificial offering. One should 
not teach him the Law or prescribe to him a 
vow. 

15 A man who teaches him the Law or prescribes 
to him a vow will go to the dreadful hell called 
Asamvrta. 

16 If ever a worm is found in someone’s wound, 
he is purified by performing the Prajapatya 
penance (B 4.5.6) and giving gold, a cow, and a 
garment as a sacrificial fee. 

17 After a man has performed the rite of building the fire altar, 
he should not cohabit with a Sudra wife. 18 A wife belonging to 
the dark class is only for pleasure, not for the fulfilment of the 
Law. 


KING 

1 O 1 T° ta ^ e care creatures is the special duty ( dharma ) of 

1 y a king, and he attains success by fulfilling it. 2 To give up 
fear and pity, wise men say, is truly for him a sacrificial session 
lasting until old age.* 3 Therefore, he should appoint a personal 
priest to carry out the obligations incumbent on a householder. 
4 It is stated: ‘When a Brahmin has been appointed as the king’s 
personal priest, the kingdom prospers’, 5 for thus both sets of 
duties are taken care of, 6 because he is unable to do both.* 


Administrative Duties 

7 After enquiring into all the Laws specific to various regions, 
castes, and families, the king should make the four classes 
adhere to the Laws proper to them 8 and punish them when they 


299 



19.8 


Dharmasutras 


deviate from them. 9 The punishment for battery and the use of 
abusive language should be imposed in keeping with the place 
and time of the offence; the virtue, age, knowledge, and social 
position* of the parties; 10 and in accordance with precept and 
precedent. 

11 He should not damage trees that produce flowers and fruits, 
12 but may cut them down to facilitate cultivation or for house- 
hold needs.* 

13 He should secure the measures and weights. 14 Export is not 
permitted from the capital city. 15 Merchants may only export 
the selling price or the value of the merchandise. 16 During the 
two festive times, however, there is no crime and there should be 
no punishment.* 


Ferries, Tolls, and Taxes 

17 For water transport, a boat should have ten oarsmen and two 
sets of equipment. 18 Each vessel should have its own drinking 
water supply. 19 It should carry a load of not more than one 
hundred men; 20 and one and a half times that many women. 

21 If the river’s width is such that an arrow shot from the shore 
will land in the middle, then the toll is eight Masas (G 12.8); 
whereas if it lands beyond that, then the toll is a quarter Karsa- 
pana. 22 When the water level is low, the toll is one Masa.* 23 The 
following are exempt from toll: vedic scholars, officials of the 
king, destitutes, wandering ascetics, children, old people, young- 
sters, and new mothers; 24 as also widows who have returned to 
their families, young women, and wives of servants. 25 If some- 
one crosses a river swimming, he should pay one hundred times 
the toll (A 1.32.26 n.). 

26 There shall be no taxes on what is obtained from rivers, 
thickets, forests, cremation places, and mountains; 27 or else, 
people who gain a living in this manner may give something. 
28 From artisans,* however, he should collect taxes every month. 


Succession 

29 When the former king has died, he should give the requisites 

300 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


19.46 


for the occasion. 30 This provision entails the maintenance of his 
mother. 31 The king should also maintain the paternal and 
maternal uncles of the queen, 32 as also her other relatives. 33 The 
wives of the deceased king should receive food and clothing; 
34 or, if they are unwilling, they may become wandering ascetics. 


Taxes 

35 The king should maintain people who are impotent or mad, 
36 because their estates go to him. 37 With reference to taxes, they 
also quote this verse of Manu: 

There is no tax when the sum is less than one 
Karsapana, as also on craftsmen, children, and 
messengers; on what is received as alms or what 
remains after a robbery; and on vedic scholars, 
wandering ascetics, and sacrifices. 


Criminal Justice 

38 A man is not considered guilty of theft simply by accompany- 
ing a thief, 39 but only if he is caught armed, carrying stolen 
property, or wounded; and, according to some, if he has mis- 
represented himself.* 40 If a guilty man is allowed to go free, the 
king should fast for one day 41 and his personal priest for three 
days. 42 If an innocent man is punished, his personal priest 
should perform an arduous penance (B 2.2.38) 43 and the king 
should fast for three days. 44 Now, they also quote: 

The murderer of a learned Brahmin rubs his sin 
off on the man who eats his food, an adulterous 
wife on her husband, a pupil and a patron of a 
sacrifice on the teacher, and a thief on the king. 

45 Those people who have committed sins and 
have been punished for them by kings, however, 
go to heaven unsullied, just like virtuous men 
who have done good deeds. 

46 When he sets free a culpable man, the sin falls 

301 



19.46 


Dharmasutras 


on the king. If he has him executed, however, 
the king slays the crime with the Law. 

47 The rule is that the king always becomes pure 
immediately when he carries out capital as well 
as non-capital punishments; the reason for this 
is simply time. 

48 In this connection they also quote a verse proclaimed by 
Yama: 

The stain of impurity* does not affect kings, as 
well as people performing vows and sacrificial 
sessions, for they are always seated on the 
throne of Indra and become one with 
Brahman. 

PENANCES 

Miscellaneous 

^ /"V 1 A penance should be performed for any offence not 
Z*\J deliberately committed 2 and, according to some, even 
deliberately committed. 

3 The elder (A 1.6.32 n.) disciplines those who 
are self-controlled and the king disciplines 
those who are wicked, whereas Yama, son of 
Vivasvat, disciplines those who commit sins 
secretly. 

4 Among these, a person who was asleep at sunrise should 
remain standing during the day reciting the Savitrl verse; 5 and a 
person who was asleep at sunset should remain seated during 
the night. 6 A man with bad nails or black teeth, on the other 
hand, should perform the arduous penance (B 2.2.38) for twelve 
days. 

7 A man whose younger brother has got married before him 
should perform the arduous penance for twelve days and get 
married, and then take her to himself;* 8 whereas a man who 
gets married before his elder brother should perform an arduous 
and a very arduous penance, hand his wife over to his brother, 


302 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


20.20 


and get married again, and then take her to himself. 9 A man 
who marries a younger sister whose older sister remains unmar- 
ried should perform an arduous penance for twelve days and get 
married, and then take her to himself. 10 A man who marries an 
older sister whose younger sister is already married should per- 
form an arduous and a very arduous penance, hand his wife over 
to his brother, and get married again. 

11 We will explain below (Va 21 .27) the penance for a man who 
has extinguished his sacred fire. 12 A man who has forgotten the 
Veda should perform an arduous penance for twelve days and 
once again learn the Veda from his teacher. 


Grievous Sins 

13 A man who has had sex with the wife of an elder (A 1 .6.32 n.) 
should tear out his penis together with the testicles and, holding 
them in his cupped hands, walk towards the south. And wher- 
ever he meets with an obstacle, he should stand at that spot until 
he dies. 14 Or else, he should shave his hair, smear his body with 
ghee, and embrace a heated column (A 1.25.2 n.). It is stated: 
‘He will be purified after death.’ 15 The same applies for having 
sex with the wife of a teacher, son, or pupil. 

16 If someone has sex with a female elder (A 1.6.32 n.) of the 
family, a female friend, a female friend of an elder, or a 
degraded or outcaste woman, he should perform an arduous 
penance for three months. 17 The same applies for eating the food 
of a Candida or an outcaste. Afterwards he should be re- 
initiated; the shaving and other similar rites, however, are omit- 
ted. 18 On this point, moreover, they quote a verse of Manu: 

Shaving, girdle, staff, begging almsfood, and 
the vows— these are omitted in the rite of re- 
initiation. (M 11.152) 

19 If someone deliberately drinks an intoxicant that is not sura 
liquor* or inadvertently drinks surd liquor, he should perform 
an arduous and a very arduous penance and consume some 
ghee, and then he should be re-initiated. 20 The same applies to 
consuming urine, faeces, or semen. 


303 



20.21 


Dharmasutras 


21 If a twice-born man drinks water that has 
remained in a liquor pot, he becomes purified 
in three days by drinking a decoction made 
with the leaves of lotus, Udumbara, wood- 
apple, and Palasa. 

22 If a twice-born man drinks surd liquor repeatedly, however, 
he should drink the same liquor boiling hot. It is said, ‘He will 
be purified after death.’ 


Murder 

23 We will explain the meaning of the term bhrunahan— 
‘murderer of a Brahmin’ (A 1.19.15 n.). By killing a Brahmin or 
a foetus whose gender cannot be determined one becomes a 
bhrunahan — a murderer of a Brahmin; 24 for foetuses whose 
gender cannot be determined grow to be males. That is why 
people offer oblations in the fire so as to produce a male child.* 
25 A murderer of a Brahmin should kindle a fire and make the 
following offerings in it: 

26 First: ‘I offer the hair of my body to Death. I 
invest Death with the hair of my body.’ 

Second: ‘I offer my skin to Death. I invest 
Death with my skin.’ 

Third: ‘I offer my blood to Death. I invest 
Death with my blood.’ 

Fourth: ‘I offer my flesh to Death. I invest 
Death with my flesh.’ 

Fifth: ‘I offer my sinews to Death. I invest 
Death with my sinews.’ 

Sixth: ‘I offer my fat to Death. I invest Death 
with my fat.’ 

Seventh: ‘I offer my bones to Death. I invest 
Death with my bones.’ 

Eighth: ‘I offer my marrow to Death. I invest 
Death with my marrow.’ 


304 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


20.43 


27 Or else, facing the enemy unflinchingly, he may lay down his 
life in battle for the sake of the king or a Brahmin; 28 for it is 
stated: ‘A criminal is purified when he remains undefeated three 
times.’ 

29 It is said: ‘For when confessed, a sin is made less’ (SB 
2.5.2.20). 30 Now, they also quote: 

By telling an outcaste ‘You’re an outcaste!’, or 
a thief ‘You’re a thief!’, a man by his speech 
becomes as sinful as they; and if his accusation 
is false, he becomes twice as sinful. 

31 If someone kills a Ksatriya, he should perform for eight 
years the same penance* [as for killing a Brahmin]; 32 if he kills a 
Vaisya, for six years; 33 and if he kills a Sudra, for three years. 

34 If someone kills a Brahmin woman who is an Atreyl (A 
1.24.8-9 n.) or a Ksatriya or a Vaisya engaged in performing a 
sacrifice, [the penance is the same as for a Brahmin], 35 We will 
explain who an Atreyl is. They say that ‘Atreyf is a woman who 
has bathed after her menstrual period, 36 for in her (atm) the 
future (f-) offspring comes into being. 

37 For killing a Brahmin woman at a time other than after 
her menstrual period, the penance is the same as for killing a Ksa- 
triya man; 38 for killing a Ksatriya woman, the same as for killing 
a Vaisya man; 39 and for killing a Vaisya woman, the same as 
for killing a Sudra man. 40 If someone kills a Sudra woman, he 
should perform the same penance for one year. 


Theft 

41 When someone has stolen gold from a Brahmin, the thief 
should dishevel his hair and run to the king, saying, ‘I am a thief, 
sir! Do punish me, lord.’ The king should hand him a weapon 
made of Udumbara wood. With that the thief should kill him- 
self. It is stated: ‘He will be purified after death.’ 42 Alternatively, 
he may shave his hair, smear his body with ghee, and get himself 
burnt from feet upward in a fire of cowdung. It is stated: ‘He will 
be purified after death.’ 43 Now, they also quote: 


305 



20.43 


Dharmasutras 


Listen to how their bodies are— people who 
died a long time ago after engaging in various 
types of sinful activities and are now reborn in 
new bodies. 

44 A thief becomes a man with deformed nails; a 
murderer of a Brahmin becomes a man with 
white leprosy; one who drinks liquor becomes a 
man with black teeth; and one who has sex with 
the wife of an elder (A 1.6.32 n.) becomes a 
man with skin disease. 


Association with Outcastes 

45 When someone has established a ritual or matrimonial alli- 
ance with outcastes, he should give up any articles he may have 
received from them and cease associating with them. 46 ‘He 
becomes purified by going towards the north and reciting a 
vedic Collection of Hymns without eating any food,’ says the 
Veda. 47 Now, they also quote: 

A sinner is freed from his sin by mortifying his 
body, by austerity, and by reciting the Veda, as 
also by giving gifts. 

So it is stated. 


Illicit Sex 

^ 1 1 If a Sudra has sex with a Brahmin woman, he should 

A* J. be wrapped in Virana grass and thrown into a fire. The 
Brahmin woman’s head should be shaved and her body smeared 
with ghee, and she should be paraded on a highway naked and 
seated on a black donkey. ‘In this way,’ it is stated, ‘she becomes 
pure.’ 

2 If a Vaisya has sex with a Brahmin woman, he should be 
wrapped in tufts of Lohita straw and thrown into a fire. The 
Brahmin woman’s head should be shaved and her body smeared 
with ghee, and she should be paraded on a highway naked and 


306 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 21.10 

seated on a yellow donkey. ‘In this way/ it is stated, ‘she becomes 
pure.’ 

3 If a Ksatriya has sex with a Brahmin woman, he should be 
wrapped in Sara grass and thrown into a fire. The Brahmin 
woman’s head should be shaved and her body smeared with 
ghee, and she should be paraded on a highway naked and seated 
on a white donkey. ‘In this way,’ it is stated, ‘she becomes pure.’ 
4 The same punishment applies to a Vaisya who has sex with a 
Ksatriya woman 5 and to a Sudra who has sex with a Ksatriya or 
a Vaisya woman. 


Adultery 

6 If a wife has been unfaithful to her husband in her mind, she 
should spend three days eating barley or milk-rice and sleeping 
on the floor. At the end of the three days, the husband should 
make eight hundred offerings in the fire reciting the Savitrl verse 
and the Siras formula while the wife remains immersed in water. 
‘In this way,’ it is stated, ‘she becomes pure.’ 

7 If she has had an adulterous conversation with another man, 
she should do the same penance for one month. At the end of 
the month, the husband should make three thousand two hun- 
dred offerings in the fire reciting the Savitrl verse and the Siras 
formula while the wife remains immersed in water. ‘In this way,’ 
it is stated, ‘she becomes pure.’ 

8 If she actually committed adultery, however, she should wear 
a garment smeared with ghee and sleep in a trough of cowdung 
or on a spread of Kusa grass for one year. At the end of the year, 
the husband should make eight hundred offerings in the fire 
reciting the Savitrl verse and the Siras formula while the wife 
remains immersed in water. ‘In this way,’ it is stated, ‘she 
becomes pure.’ 

9 If she commits adultery with an elder (A 1.6.32 n.), however, 
she cannot participate in her husband’s ritual activities. 

10 These four are to be abandoned: a wife who 
has sex with one’s pupil, a wife who has sex 
with one’s elder, especially a wife who tries to 


307 



21.10 


Dharmasutras 


kill her husband, and a wife who has sex with a 
degraded man. 

11 When a Brahmin woman drinks liquor, gods do not lead her 
to the world of her husband; bereft of merits, she meanders in 
this very world, becoming a leech or a pearl oyster living in 
water. 

12 When wives of Brahmins, Ksatriyas, or Vai- 
syas have sex with Sudra men, they are purified 
by a penance only if they do not bear children, 
not otherwise. 

13 Women who have sex with men of a class 
lower than they should perform an arduous 
penance (B 2.2.38) followed by a lunar penance 
(B 3.8). 

14 Wives who are devoted to their husbands, 
vowed to truth and purity, however, attain 
worlds equal to those of their husbands; those 
who are unfaithful are born as jackals. 

15 Half his body* becomes outcaste when a 
man’s wife drinks liquor. No expiation is pro- 
vided for someone half of whose body has 
become outcaste. 

16 If a Brahmin inadvertently has sex with the wife of another 
Brahmin, he should perform an arduous penance if her husband 
has not abandoned his ritual duties, and a very arduous penance 
if he has abandoned his ritual duties. 17 The same applies to 
Ksatriya and Vaisya men. 


Killing Animals 

18 If a man kills a cow, covering himself in its raw hide, he should 
perform an arduous or a very arduous penance for six months. 

19 This is the procedure for those two penances. 

20 He eats during the daytime for three days and 
during the night for the next three days, subsists 


308 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


21.32 


on what he receives unasked for three more 
days, and does not eat at all for the last three 
days. That is an arduous penance. 

21 He drinks hot water for three days, hot milk 
for the next three days, and hot ghee for three 
more days, and subsists on air during the last 
three days. 

That is a very arduous penance.* 22 In addition, he should give a 
gift of a bull and a cow. 23 Now, they also quote: 

Because of killing a spotted deer, a billy goat, 
and a bird, three diseases came into being in 
ancient times: jealousy, hunger, and old age. A 
man who kills them should perform a penance 
for ninety-eight days. 

24 If someone kills a dog, a cat, a mongoose, a snake, a frog, or 
a rat, he should perform an arduous penance for twelve days 
and give a little something as a gift. 25 If he kills a quantity of 
boneless animals equal in weight to a cow, however, he should 
perform an arduous penance for twelve days and give a little 
something as a gift. 26 In the case of animals with bones, on the 
other hand, the penance should be performed separately for 
each. 


Miscellaneous 

27 If a man extinguishes his sacred hres, he should perform an 
arduous penance for twelve days and have the rite of establish- 
ing the sacred fires carried out over again. 28 If someone falsely 
accuses an elder of his (A 1.6.32 n.), he should bathe with his 
clothes on and seek forgiveness from that elder. ‘He becomes 
pure’, it is stated, ‘by his forgiveness.’ 

29 An infidel should perform an arduous penance for twelve 
days and abandon his infidelity. 30 Someone who receives sub- 
sistence from infidels, however, should perform a very arduous 
penance. 31 This explains the penance for a man who sells Soma. 
32 A forest hermit who violates his vow should perform an 


309 



21.32 


Dharmasutras 


arduous penance for twelve days and increase his austerities in a 
dense wood. 33 Mendicants violating in the same manner as 
hermits should perform a lunar penance (B 3.8) and undergo 
initiation in the manner prescribed in their respective texts. 


Justification for Penance 

^ ^ 'Now,* with regard to a man here who makes false 
Z*Z* statements, officiates at sacrifices of people for whom it 
is forbidden to officiate, accepts gifts from people from whom it 
is forbidden to accept, eats forbidden food, or does things that 
one ought not to do— "there is a debate as to whether such a 
person is required to perform a penance or not. "Some say that 
he is not required to do so, 4 arguing that an act can never be 
wiped out. 5 But he is indeed required to do so, because it is so 
prescribed in vedic texts; * 6 for example: ‘A man who offers a 
horse sacrifice overcomes all sins, he overcomes even the murder 
of a Brahmin’ (SB 13.3.1.1); 7 and, ‘A heinous sinner (A 
1.3.25 n.) should offer the Gosava or the Agnistut sacrifice.’ 


General Penances 

8 The expiations for such a man are: softly reciting prayers (A 
1.15.1 n.), austerity, ritual offerings, fasting, and giving gifts. 
9 Upanisads, the beginnings of the Vedas, the conclusions of the 
Vedas [vedanta], the Hymn-Collections of all the Vedas, the 
‘Honey’ verses, Aghamarsana hymn, Atharvasiras, Rudra 
hymn, Purusa hymn, the Samans called Rajana and Rauhini, 
Kusmanda verses, Pavamanl verses, and the Savitrl verse— these 
are the purificatory texts. 10 Now, they also quote: 

The Vaisvanarl sacrifice, the Vratapati sacrifice, 
and the Pavitresti sacrifice— a man who offers 
these once every season purifies ten ancestors. 

"To do the following in accordance with the rules of fasting: 
living on milk alone, eating only fruits, living on gruel made with 
one handful of barley, eating gold, and drinking Soma juice— 
these are the cleansing activities. 12 All mountains, all rivers, 


310 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


23.13 


sacred lakes, sacred fords, dwellings of seers, cow-pens, and 
temples— these are the appropriate places. 13 One year, one 
month, twenty-four days, twelve days, six days, three days, and a 
day and night— these are the lengths of time. 

14 When no specific penance has been prescribed, people may 
perform these optionally, 15 the heavier penances for grave sins 
and the easy penances for minor sins. 16 The arduous penance (B 
2.2.38), the very arduous penance (B 2.2.40), and the lunar pen- 
ance (B 3.8) are expiations for all types of sins. 

Sins of a Student 

^ Q 1 If a student has sex with a woman, he should sacrifice a 
jL* donkey dedicated to the fiends, offering it in an ordinary 
fire at a crossroad in the wilderness; 2 or he should offer an obla- 
tion of milk-rice to Nirrti. 3 He should make offerings of it in the 
fire, saying: ‘To lust, Svaha! To the one who lusts after lust, 
Svaha! To Nirrti, Svaha! To the divine fiends, Svaha!’ 

4 The same penance applies when he masturbates deliberately, 
sleeps during the daytime, or practises some other observance, 
until the time he returns home after completing his studies. 

5 If he has sex with an animal, he should give a gift of a white 
bull. 6 The culpability for having sex with a cow is spelt out in the 
rule about killing a Sudra woman. 

7 A student breaks his vow if he takes part in a funeral, 8 except 
that of his parents. 

9 If a student is sick, he may freely eat all his teacher’s leftovers 
as medicine (B 2. 1.26 n.). 10 If a student dies while engaged in 
something ordered by his teacher, the teacher should perform 
three arduous penances (B 2.2.38). 

11 If a student eats meat as part of the leftovers of his teacher, 
he should perform an arduous penance lasting twelve days and 
finish his vow. 12 The same applies for eating food given at an 
ancestral offering or by someone tainted with the impurity of a 
recent birth or death. 13 Honey offered without being yearned 
for, it is stated in the Vajasaneyaka text, does not defile (cf. SB 
11.5.4.18). 


311 



23.14 


Dharmasutras 


Suicide 

14 A man who commits suicide becomes a heinous sinner (A 
1.3.25 n.); relatives of his belonging to the same ancestry (A 
2. 14.2 n.) desist from performing funeral rites for him. 15 A per- 
son who kills himself by means of a club, water, a clod of earth, 
a stone, a weapon, poison, or a rope, is a suicide. 16 Now, they 
also quote: 

If out of love a twice-born man performs the 
funeral rites for someone who has committed 
suicide, he should perform a lunar penance 
accompanied by a hot-arduous penance (B 
2.2.37). 

17 We will describe the lunar penance below (Va 23.45). 

18 One who resolves to commit suicide should fast for three 
days. 19 It is said: ‘A man who survives an attempt at suicide 
should perform an arduous penance for twelve days; fast for 
three days; and, always wearing clothes smeared with ghee and 
controlling his breath, recite three times the Aghamarsana 
hymn.’ 20 Alternatively, he may recite the Savitrl verse following 
the same procedure; 21 or, having kindled his sacred fire, he 
should offer ghee while reciting the Kusmanda verses. 22 It is 
said: ‘By means of this a man is cleansed of all except the griev- 
ous sins causing loss of caste (Va 1.19-20).’ 23 He may, moreover, 
sip water in the morning, saying, ‘May fire and wrath, and the 
lord of wrath, protect me’; focusing his mind on his sin, he 
should recite the Calls beginning with OM and ending with 
Truth, or recite the Aghamarsana hymn. 


Contact with Impurity 

24 If someone touches a human bone with soft tissue attached to 
it, he remains impure for three days; 25 while if it has no soft 
tissue attached to it, he is impure for a day and night, 26 as also 
when he follows a corpse in a funeral procession. 

27 If someone passes between persons engaged in vedic 
recitation, he should fast for a day and night; 28 and the reciters 


312 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


23.39 


should stay away from home for three nights and sprinkle 
each other with water. 29 They should do the same for a day 
and night if a dog, a cat, or a mongoose passes quickly between 
them. 

30 If someone eats the meat of a dog, a cock, a village pig, a 
Kanka heron, a vulture, a Bhasa vulture, a Paravata dove, a 
man, a crow, or an owl, he should fast for seven days until all the 
excrement is gone, then consume some ghee and undergo re- 
initiation. 

31 A Brahmin who is bitten by a dog becomes 
purified by going into a river that flows into the 
ocean, controlling his breath one hundred 
times, and consuming some ghee. 

32 These six means of purification are recom- 
mended for creatures: time, fire, purifying the 
mind, water, looking at the sun, and being 
unaware that something is impure. 

33 ‘If someone touches a dog, a Candala, or an outcaste,’ it is 
stated, ‘he becomes pure immediately by bathing with his 
clothes on.’ 34 When people hear* the sound of an outcaste or a 
Candala, they should remain seated silently and without eating 
for three days. 35 ‘Or else,’ it is stated, ‘they become pure by 
reciting it* at least one thousand times.’ 


Miscellaneous 

36 The above provision spells out the penance for teaching repre- 
hensible people and for officiating at their sacrifices. ‘They also 
become pure’, it is said, ‘by giving up the fees they have 
received.’ 37 This also spells out the penance for a heinous sinner 
(A 1.3.25 n.). 

38 If a man is guilty of murdering a Brahmin (A 1.19.15 n.), he 
should live on water for twelve days and observe a total fast for 
twelve more days. 39 If someone has falsely accused a Brahmin 
of a grievous or secondary sin causing loss of caste (Va 1. 19- 
23), he should repeat the Suddhavatl verses for one month while 


313 



23.39 


Dharmasutras 


living on water 40 or participate in the ritual bath that concludes 
a horse sacrifice. 

41 This provision spells out the penance for sexual intercourse 
with a Candala woman. 


Description of Penances 

42 Next, another procedure of the arduous penance, a modified 
form applicable universally: 

43 Eating only in the morning on one day; eating 
only at night on the next day; eating only what 
is received unasked on the following day; 
observing a total fast on the next day; repeating 
the same series during the following two four- 
day periods— as a favour to Brahmins, Manu, 
the chief upholder of the Law, has proclaimed 
this ‘Children’s Arduous Penance’ for children, 
old people, and the sick. 

44 Next, the procedure of the lunar penance: 

45 On the first day of the fortnight of the waning 
moon a person should eat fourteen mouthfuls 
and complete the fortnight by reducing the 
food by one mouthful each day. In this manner, 
he should eat one mouthful on the first day of 
the fortnight of the waxing moon and complete 
the fortnight by increasing the food by one 
mouthful each day. 

46 During that period he should sing Saman 
verses or softly recite the Calls. 

47 This month-long lunar penance has been 
acclaimed by seers as a means of purification. 

It is prescribed as the penance for all offences 
for which there is no specific penance. 



'Next, the very arduous penance: 2 one should perform 
the arduous penance as given above— eating only in the 


314 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


25.4 


morning for three days, eating only in the evening for three days, 
eating what is received unasked for three days, and observing a 
total fast for three days— except that one should eat only what 
one can take in one mouthful. That is the very arduous penance. 

3 A very arduous penance during which one lives only on 
water is the penance beyond the very arduous penance. 

4 The observances during arduous penances are as follows. 
5 Blessed Vasistha has said: ‘He should shave the hair of his 
beard and head, except the eyebrows, eyelashes, and the top- 
knot; cut his nails; wear a single garment; eat food that is 
beyond reproach— food obtained by begging just once is beyond 
reproach—; bathe at dawn, noon, and dusk; carry a staff and a 
water pot; refrain from speaking with women and Sudras; carry 
out faithfully the standing and the sitting— that is, remain stand- 
ing during the day and seated during the night.’ 

6 Now, a man should impart this Treatise on Law to no one 
other than a son or a pupil who has lived with him for at least a 
year. 7 The fee for teaching it is one thousand in cash, or ten cows 
and a bull, or obtaining the favour of the teacher* 


Secret Penances 



'I will explain fully the purification of all 
sinners whose guilt has not been made public, 
sinners guilty of both major and minor sins. 

2 The penances given in the section on secret 
penances are meant for individuals who have 
established the sacred fires and are disciplined, 
elderly, and learned. Other people should 
follow the penances given above. 

3 Those who are constantly engaged in con- 
trolling their breath, reciting the purificatory 
formulas (Va 28.10), giving gifts, offering 
sacrifices, and the soft recitation of prayers 
will undoubtedly be free from sins causing loss 
of caste. 

4 Seated with purificatory blades of grass in 


315 



25.4 


Dharmasutras 


hand, he should control his breath repeatedly 
and recite the purificatory formulas, the Calls, 
the syllable OM, and the daily sections of the 
Veda. 

5 Always intent on yogic practice, he should 
control his breath repeatedly and thus practise 
the highest austerity up to the very tips of his 
hair and nails. 

6 By suppressing the breath air is generated, and 
from air, fire, and from fire, water. So he is 
cleansed internally by these three. 

7 Not by severe austerity, not by the daily recita- 
tion of the Veda, not even by sacrifice can a 
man attain the state that one obtains by the 
practice of Yoga. 

8 By Yoga one obtains knowledge. Yoga is the 
earmark of the Law. Yoga is the highest auster- 
ity. Therefore, he should always be engaged in 
yogic practice. 

9 A man who is always intent on reciting the 
syllable OM, the seven Calls, and the Gayatrl 
with its three feet will never experience any 
danger. 

10 The syllable OM is the beginning and the end 
of the Vedas; all that consists of speech is OM. 
Therefore, one should repeat OM. 

11 The Monosyllable OM, which is the supreme 
Veda, traditional texts declare, is the best 
purifier. 

12 When all sins rise up in unison, the most 
effective purification is to recite the Gayatrl 
verse ten thousand times. 

13 When someone recites three times the Gayatrl 
verse together with the Calls, the syllable OM, 
and the Siras formula while controlling his 
breath, it is called ‘control of breath’. 


316 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


26.9 


'When a man duly controls his breath three 
times without tiring, that very instant the sins 
he committed during the previous day and 
night are destroyed. 

2 By controlling his breath while seated during 
the evening twilight a man wipes away the sins 
he committed during that day by thought, 
word, or deed. 

3 By controlling his breath while standing dur- 
ing the morning twilight, a man wipes away the 
sins he committed during that night by 
thought, word, or deed. 

4 Controlling one’s breath sixteen times every 
day while reciting the Calls and the syllable OM 
purifies even a murderer of a Brahmin within a 
month. 

5 Even a man who has drunk liquor is purified 
by reciting silently Kutsa’s hymn ‘Burning away 
our evil . . .’, the triple verse of Vasistha ‘To 
welcome the Dawn . . .’, the Mahitra hymn, 
and the Suddhavati hymn. 

6 Even a man who has stolen gold becomes 
instantly stainless by reciting silently the 
AsyavamTya hymn and the Sivasamkalpa 
formulas. 

7 A man who has had sex with the wife of an 
elder (A 1.6.32 n.) is freed from his sin by recit- 
ing silently the hymn ‘Of that pleasant and 
gray-haired Hotr priest . . .’, the triple verse 
‘No anxiety, no danger . . .’, and the Purusa 
hymn. 

8 Or else, he should recite the Aghamarsana 
hymn silently while immersed in water. Manu 
has declared it to be equal to bathing at the 
conclusion of a horse sacrifice. 

9 The sacrifice consisting of softly recited 

317 



26.9 


Dharmasutras 


prayers is ten times better than a sacrifice 
involving the immolation of an animal; reciting 
prayers silently is a hundred times better; and 
mental prayer, tradition says, is a thousand 
times better. 

10 The four types of sacrifices with cooked food* 
together with the sacrifices ordained in the 
Veda are not worth a sixteenth part of a sacri- 
fice consisting of softly recited prayers. 

"Only through softly recited prayers does a 
Brahmin attain final bliss, in this there is no 
doubt. Whether he does other things or not, he 
is said to be a Brahmin who is a friend to all. 

"People who softly recite prayers, offer fire sac- 
rifices, meditate, live at sacred fords, or have 
bathed after the ‘Head’ vow*— their sins do not 
endure. 

13 As a fire fanned by the wind and fed with 
offerings of ghee burns brightly, so a Brahmin 
given constantly to the soft recitation of 
prayers glows exceedingly bright. 

"People who always engage in private vedic 
recitation and constantly keep themselves pure, 
who softly recite prayers and offer sacrifices— 
they will never come to ruin. 

15 A man who seeks purity, though he be stand- 
ing in the midst of all sins, should recite the 
divine Gayatn at most one thousand times, one 
hundred times on an average, and ten times at a 
minimum. 

16 A Ksatriya should overcome his misfortunes 
through the strength of his arms, a Vaisya and 
a Sudra through wealth, and a Brahmin 
through softly recited prayers and fire sacrifices. 
17 As horses without chariots and chariots 
without horses, so is austerity for a man with- 


318 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


27.7 


out knowledge and knowledge for a man not 
given to austerity. 

18 As food combined with honey or honey com- 
bined with food, so austerity and knowledge 
combined is a powerful medicine. 

19 When a Brahmin is united with knowledge 
and austerity and softly recites prayers every 
day, he does not become guilty of sin even if he 
constantly commits evil deeds. 

'Even if a man has done a hundred crimes or 
more but remembers the Veda, the fire of the 
Veda burns up all that, like a fire the kindling 
wood. 

2 As a fierce fire burns up even green trees, so 
the fire of the Veda burns up his guilt caused by 
evil deeds. 

3 Even if he were to slaughter the whole wide 
world and to eat the food of anyone at all, no 
sin touches a Brahmin if he keeps the Rgveda 
in mind. 

4 Relying on the power of the Veda, one should 
not take pleasure in sinful deeds. It burns up 
only sins committed through ignorance or neg- 
ligence, and not others. 

5 Take a sage who practises austerities in the 
wilderness eating roots and fruits, and someone 
who recites a single verse of the Rgveda— these 
two and their actions are of equal worth. 

6 One should strengthen the Veda by means of 
epics and Puranas; the Veda dreads a man of 
modest learning, fearing ‘Tie will neglect me.’ 

’Reciting the Veda and carrying out the series 
of Great Sacrifices (B 2.11.1-8) every day 
according to one’s ability quickly destroy sins, 
even grievous sins causing loss of caste. 


319 



27.8 


Dharmasutras 


8 Every day a man should perform tirelessly the 
rites specifically enjoined on him by the Veda. 
By performing them according to his ability he 
attains his highest goal. 

9 By teaching sinful people, by officiating at 
their sacrifices, by contracting marriage alli- 
ances with them, and by accepting gifts from 
them, a learned Brahmin does not incur any 
guilt, for he is like the fire and the sun. 

10 When a doubt has arisen as to whether a par- 
ticular food one has eaten is forbidden or not, 
I will describe the purification. Listen well as I 
explain it! 

"Let a Brahmin drink a decoction of the 
Brahmasuvarcala plant without salt or condi- 
ments for three days, as also a decoction of the 
Sankhapuspi grass together with milk. 

"He should boil Palasa and wood apple leaves, 
Kusa grass, and lotus and Udumbara leaves, 
and drink that water; he will be purified in just 
three days. 

1 'Living one day each on cow’s urine, cowdung, 
milk, curd, ghee, and water boiled with Kusa 
grass, and observing a total fast for one day 
purifies even a man who has eaten dog meat. 

14 When a man subsists one day each on cow’s 
urine, cowdung, milk, curd, and ghee for five 
days, he is purified by these five products of the 
cow. 

"When a man consumes barley grains in 
accordance with the rules (B 3.6), he becomes 
visibly pure: if he has become pure, the grains 
remain white; whereas if he has not become 
pure the grains become discoloured.* 

16 Lor three days eating in the morning food fit 
for sacrifice, similarly for three days in the even- 


320 



Dharmasutra of Vasistlui 


28.3 


ing, and for three days eating what is received 
unasked — that constitutes three fasts. 

17 If, on the other hand, someone wants to 
expedite it, he should subsist on air during the 
daytime and during the night remain standing 
in water until daybreak. This is equal to the 
Prajapatya penance.* 

18 By reciting the Savitn verse eight thousand 
times at sunrise, however, a man is freed from 
all sins, unless he has murdered a Brahmin. 

19 Even if someone has been a thief, drunk liquor, 
murdered a Brahmin, and had sex with a wife 
of an elder, he is freed from all sins causing loss 
of caste by simply studying the Treatise on Law. 

20 The arduous penance and the lunar penance 
destroy all sins, whether they are improper 
actions, improper sacrifices, or grievous sins. 

21 One should increase the food by one mouth- 
ful each day of the fortnight of the waxing 
moon, decrease it by one mouthful each day 
of the fortnight of the waning moon, and not 
eat at all on the new-moon day. This is the 
procedure of the lunar penance. 

Purification of Women 

1 A woman is not polluted by a lover, a Brahmin 
by vedic rites, water by urine and faeces, and 
fire by the act of burning. 

2-3 Whether she has strayed on her own or 
has been expelled, whether she has been raped 
forcibly or abducted by robbers— a wife who 
has been defiled should not be forsaken; there 
is no law permitting the forsaking of a wife. 
One should wait for her to menstruate; she is 
purified by her menstrual period. 


321 



28.4 


Dharmasutras 


4 Women possess an unparalleled means of 
purification; they never remain defiled, for 
month after month their menstrual flow washes 
away their sins. 

5 Women are first enjoyed by the gods Moon, 
Gandharva, and Fire, and only thereafter go to 
men; in accordance with the law therefore, they 
cannot be defiled. 

6 The Moon granted them purification; Gandh- 
arva, a sweet voice; and Fire, the capacity to 
eat anything. Women, therefore, are free from 
taint. 

7 There are three things in the world, people 
who know the Law declare, that cause women 
to fall from their caste: killing the husband, 
murdering a Brahmin, and getting an abortion. 

8 A calf is pure when it makes the milk to flow, 
a bird when it makes a fruit to fall, women in 
the act of love, and a dog when it catches a 
deer. 

9 Pure is the mouth of a goat and horse; pure 
the back of a cow. Pure are the feet of a 
Brahmin; but a woman is pure all over. 


Purificatory Texts 

10 Next, I will declare the purificatory texts of 
all the Vedas by whose soft recitation or use in 
fire sacrifices people are undoubtedly purified. 

11-15 They are: Aghamarsana, Devakrta, 

Suddhavati, Taratsama, Kusmanda, Pavamam, 
Durgasavitn, Atlsanga Saman, Padastobha 
Saman, Vyahrti Samans, Bharunda Samans, 
Gayatra Saman, Raivata Saman, Purusavrata 
Samans, Bhasa Saman, Devavrata Samans, 
Ablinga, Barhaspatya Saman, Vaksukta, 


322 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


28.22 


‘Honey’ verses, Satarudriya, Atharvasiras, 
Trisuparna, Mahavrata, Gosukta, Asvasukta, 
the two Suddhasuddhlya Samans, the three 
Ajyadoha Samans, the Rathantara Saman, the 
Agnervrata Saman, the Vamadevya Saman, 
and the Brhat Saman. When these are recited 
softly, they purify creatures, and, if someone so 
desires, he will acquire the memory of past 
lives. 


Gifts 

16 Gold is the firstborn of Fire; land is the 
daughter of Visnu; and cows are the children 
of Sun. A man who gives gifts of gold, land, or 
cows obtains an eternal reward. 

17 The cow, horse, gold, and land frustrate the 
donor when they see the outstretched hand of a 
Brahmin who is ignorant and neglectful of his 
rites. 

18-19 On the full-moon day of April-May if 
someone gives to seven or five Brahmins black 
or white sesame seeds mixed with honey, say- 
ing, ‘May the King of Law rejoice!’, or express- 
ing any other wish he may have in mind, that 
very moment all the sins he has committed dur- 
ing his whole life will be wiped away. 

20 Listen now to the merit that is the reward for 
giving the skin of a black antelope to which the 
legs are still attached, after gilding the navel 
with gold and covering the skin with sesame 
seeds: 

21 ‘Undoubtedly by that gift he has in fact given 
the four-faced earth, together with its caves 
filled with gold and with its mountains, forests, 
and groves. 

22 ‘A man who places sesame seeds, gold, honey, 
323 



28.22 


Dharmasutras 


and ghee upon a skin of a black antelope and 
gives it to a Brahmin overcomes all sins.’ 


O Q gi y i n g gifts a m an obtains all his wishes— 2 a long 
Z/ y life and rebirth as a handsome vedic student. 

3 A man who refrains from causing injury to living beings goes 
to heaven. 4 By entering a fire, one attains the world of Brahman; 
5 by keeping a vow of silence, one achieves prosperity; 6 and by 
living in water (B 3.9 n.), one becomes the lord of elephants. 

7 A man who gives until his store is exhausted becomes free 
from disease. 8 A man who gives water fulfils all his wishes. 9 A 
man who gives food gets a good eyesight and a keen memory. 
10 A man who gives the gift of safety from all dangers becomes 
intelligent. 11 By allowing the use of cows, one gets the same 
reward as by bathing in all the sacred fords; 12 by giving beds and 
seats, one becomes the lord of a harem; 13 and by giving 
umbrellas, one gets a house. 14 A man who gives a house obtains 
a town. 15 A man who gives shoes obtains a vehicle. 

16 Now, they also quote: 


Whatever sin a man may have committed under 
the pressure of his occupation, he is cleansed 
from all that by giving a piece of land even as 
small as a ‘cow’s hide’ (B 1.10.1 n.). 

17 If a man gives a pot full of water to a Brah- 
min for use in sipping, after death he obtains 
complete immunity to thirst and is reborn as a 
man who drinks Soma. 

18 Giving one thousand oxen capable of draw- 
ing carts to a most worthy recipient according 
to the rules is equal to giving a virgin in 
marriage. 

19 Three, they say, are super-gifts: cows, land, 
and knowledge. The gift of knowledge is 
superior to all gifts and surpasses even those 
super-gifts. 

20 'This is the rule of conduct that grants end- 
less rewards and awards liberation with the 


324 



Dharmasutra of Vasistha 


30.7 


release from the cycle of rebirth — a wise man 
who, free from envy, follows it, or a man, pure 
and self-controlled, who simply remembers or 
hears it with a trusting heart, sheds all his sins 
and rejoices in the very summit of heaven. 


EXCELLENCE OF THE BRAHMIN 



1 Practise righteousness ( dharma ), not unright- 
eousness. Speak the truth, not an untruth. 
Look at what is distant, not what’s near at 
hand. Look at the highest, not at what’s less 
than the highest. 


2 A Brahmin is a fire, 3 because a vedic text states: ‘A Brahmin 
is clearly a fire’ (cf. SB 1 .4.2.2; B 1.6.2 n.). 4 How can that be? 5 It 
is, moreover, stated in the vedic text of the Kathakas: ‘At this 
rite the altar is the body of the Brahmin occupying his seat; the 
sacrifice is his declaration of intent; the sacrificial animal is him- 
self; the rope for tying it is his intellect; the offertorial fire is the 
mouth of the Brahmin occupying his seat; [the south fire] is 
his navel; the householder’s fire is the fire of his stomach; the 
Adhvaryu priest is his out-breath; the Hotr priest is his in- 
breath; the Brahman priest is his inter-breath; the Udgatr priest 
is his link-breath; and the sacrificial vessels are his sense organs. 
A man who, knowing this, offers to the sense organ by means of 
the sense organs . . .’* 

6 Now, they also quote: 

An offering made in the fires that is the mouth 
of a Brahmin, fires that have been set ablaze by 
the kindling wood of the Veda, protects both 
the giver and that Brahmin himself and rescues 
them from sins. 

7 Since it is not spilt or dropped, and does not 
fall on the offerer, an oblation offered in the 
mouth of a Brahmin is far better than the daily 
fire sacrifice. 


325 



30.8 


Dharmasutras 


8 The fire is meditation, the firewood is truth- 
fulness, the offering is patience, the Sruva 
spoon is modesty, the sacrificial cake is not 
causing injury to living beings, and the priestly 
fee is the arduous gift of safety to all creatures. 

9 As a man gets old his hair and teeth show 
signs of age. The yearning for life and wealth, 
however, show no sign of aging even as a man 
grows old. 

'“Yearning! Fools find it difficult to give it up. It 
does not weaken with age. It is a lifelong dis- 
ease. A man who gives it up finds happiness. 

"I pay homage to Satayatu Vasistha, the son of UrvasT by 
Mitra and Varuna! 

That concludes the Vasistha Dharmasutra 


326 



APPENDIX I 

RITUAL VOCABULARY 


1. Names of Rites, Priests, and Ritual Objects 

Adhvaryu. One of the four principal priests at a vedic sacrifice. He 
belongs to the Yajurveda and is responsible for most of the sacri- 
ficial actions, including the offerings made in the sacred fire. 

Agnidhra. The name of one of the assistants of the Adhvaryu, he 
maintains the fires. His seat is located to the west of the Utkara 
mound. 

Agnimukha. This term refers to all the preliminary rites that precede 
the principal offering. 

Agnistoma. One of the seven types of Soma sacrifices (see G 8.20), it 
is considered the model for Soma sacrifices lasting one day. 

Agnistut. A Soma sacrifice of the Agnistoma type. 

Aptoryama. One of the Soma sacrifices: Kane 1962-75, ii. 1206. 

Astaka. The rite for ancestors offered on the eighth day after the full 
moon. 

Atiratra. One of the seven types of Soma sacrifices (see G 8.20) per- 
formed over a day and a night. 

Atyagnistoma. A variation on the Agnistoma with the addition of 
several rites. 

Bali. The offering of cooked food to various deities, spirits, and 
animals. 

Brahmaudana. A preparation of rice cooked during a ritual for the 
use of the officiating priests. 

Camasa. A square ladle made of banyan wood and used for a variety 
of purposes in a sacrifice, including serving as a container or a 
drinking vessel for Soma. 

Catuscakra. This is an optional rite to be performed on a new- or 
full-moon day. It is recommended for a person who has enemies. 
The sacrifice consists of four offerings. See Srautakosa, i. 524. 

Catvala. A pit dug outside the sacrificial arena (vedi) near its north- 
eastern corner. Earth dug from this pit is used for a variety of ritual 
purposes. 

Cooked oblation ( pakayajna ). This is a general term for domestic 
rites involving the offering of cooked food. It is distinguished from 
vedic offerings called haviryajna. 


327 



Appendices 


Cooking fire. This is the ordinary kitchen fire in which the daily 
cooking is done. It is distinguished from the five sacred fires (A 
2. 17.22 n.). 

Dadhigharma. A mixture of hot milk and curd poured into a warm 
pot and used as a libation at a Soma sacrifice. 

Daksayana sacrifice. A modified form of the full-moon sacrifice per- 
formed to obtain a special wish, such as heaven, cattle, or children. 

Darvihoma. A simplified fire offering of ghee or curd made with a 
ladle named Darvl. 

Dhruva. A round spoon with a spout at the end and a long handle, 
somewhat similar to the Juhu. It belongs to the Sruc class and is 
used in making offerings into the fire. 

Domestic fire (aupasana). The fire in which domestic offerings (as 
opposed to vedic sacrifices) are made. This fire is established at 
marriage (G 5.7). 

Dvadasaha. A Soma sacrifice lasting twelve days. 

Gharmocchista. Gharma is the hot milk mixed with ghee used at a 
Soma sacrifice. Gharmocchista is the drinking of the remnants of 
Gharma (after it has been offered in the fire) by the offerer. 

Gosava. This is a one-day Soma sacrifice. It is recommended for 
people aspiring to sovereignty. See Kane 1962-75, ii. 1213. 

Hall fire ( sabhya ). This fire is located in the hall where ritual gam- 
bling takes place and forms one of the five sacred fires of the vedic 
sacrifice (A 2.17.22n.). 

Hearth fire ( avasathya ). This fire is located in the shed for guests and 
forms one of the five sacred fires of the vedic sacrifice (A 
2.17.22 n.). 

Horse sacrifice ( asvamedha ). One of the most important vedic sacri- 
fices, it is perfomed by a king to demonstrate his sovereignty and 
ritually to enhance his dominion. A horse is set free to roam at will 
for a whole year, during which time it is guarded by the king’s 
troops. At the end of the year it is brought back and sacrificed. 

Hotr. The priest belonging to the Rgveda and responsible for all the 
recitations during a sacrifice. 

Householder’s fire ( garhapatya ). One of the three fires required for 
vedic sacrifices. It is located at the western end of the sacrificial 
arena in a round fire pit. 

Isti. This is a class of sacrifices, of which the model is the new-moon 
sacrifice, requiring four priests. It is distinguished from other types, 
such as animal sacrifices and Soma sacrifices. 

Idadadha. This is a sacrifice consisting of three offerings of cakes to 


328 



Ritual Vocabulary 

Fire, Indra, and Mitra-Varuna on the new-moon day. Described in 
Srautakosa, i. 523-4. 

Jaya. These are a set of ghee offerings called 'victorious’ recom- 
mended for a person setting out for battle. See TS 3.4.4. 1; 
Srautakosa , i. 201. 

Juhu. A round spoon with a long spout at the end and a long handle. 
It is held over the Upabhrt and used to pour ghee into the fire. It 
belongs to the Sruc class and is made of Palasa wood. 

Jyotistoma. A Soma sacrifice lasting five days. 

Kamsa. A bowl made of brass and used in sacrifices to hold the 
melted ghee. 

Kundapayinam Ayana. This is a sattra (sacrificial session) type of 
Soma sacrifice lasting a full year. 

Marjallya. A mound of earth where sacrificial utensils are cleaned. It 
is located on the south side of the great sacrificial arena ( mahavedi ) 
half inside and half outside with the entrance towards the north, 
that is, facing the arena. 

Mrgara. A set of ten offerings forming part of the horse sacrifice: TS 
7.5.22. See Mrgara verses in App. 1.2. 

Naciketa. Bodewitz (1985, 8-10, 25) has shown that this term refers 
not to particular fires but to the building of a special fire-altar 
bearing the name of Naciketas, the central figure in the KaU. 

Nirudhapasubandha. Sometimes called simply Pasubandha, this is 
the sacrifice of a disembowelled animal. It is regarded as the model 
for all animal sacrifices. See Kane 1962-75, ii. 1107 f. 

Offertorial fire ( ahavanfya ). One of the three sacred fires at a vedic 
sacrifice, it is located at the eastern end of the sacrificial area in 
a square fire pit. All offerings intended for the gods are placed in 
it. It is kindled by taking flaming pieces of firewood from the 
householder’s fire (B 2.17.18). 

Pavamanl/Pavamanesti. This is a triple oblation to the Fire ‘that 
purifies’. See Apastamba Srautasutra, 5.21.1-1 1. 

Pavitresti. This is a sacrifice to ‘Fire that purifies’ performed on a 
new- or full-moon day to expiate any sin. See Srautakosa , i. 594. 

Punahstoma. This is a Soma sacrifice performed in a single day. It is 
prescribed for someone who has accepted too many gifts and feels 
as if he has swallowed poison. 

Sacrificial session (sattra). This is a class of Soma sacrifices lasting 
more than twelve days. 

Sadhotr. A subsidiary offering at an animal sacrifice using the six- 
hotr text: TA 3.6. 


329 



Appendices 


Sarvaprstha. This is a sacrifice to Indra performed by a person seek- 
ing virility. See Srautakosa, i. 635. 

Sautramanl. A sacrifice at which surci liquor and a goat are offered. It 
is performed either as an independent rite or at the conclusion of a 
royal consecration. See Kane 1962—75, ii. 1224. 

Seasonal sacrifices ( caturmdsya ). These are sacrifices performed on 
the full-moon days that begin the seasons: Vaisvadeva in the 
Spring, Varunapraghasa in the Rainy Season, Sakamedha in 
the Autumn, and Sunaslrlya on the fifth full-moon day after the 
Sakamedha. 

Sodasin. One of the seven principal types of one-day Soma sacrifice. 
Kane 1962-75, ii. 1204. 

Soma. This is the name of a plant that was crushed to extract its 
juice. Soma juice was used in several types of Soma sacrifices. 

Southern fire ( anvahdryapacana or daksinagni). One of the three 
vedic fires, it is located to the south-east of the householder’s fire in 
a half-moon-shaped fire pit. The southern fire was used for cook- 
ing the grain preparations used at a sacrifice. 

Sruc. The common name for ladles, including Juhu, Upabhrt, and 
Dhruva, used for pouring ghee into the sacred fire. 

Sruva. Distinguished from the Sruc-type ladles, this is a smaller 
spoon used mainly for spooning out ghee or milk into the Sruc. 
The Sruva has a long handle at the end of which there is a small 
globular spoon without a spout. It is made of Khadira wood. 

Traidhatavlya. A sacrificial rite to obtain a particular wish, this is 
recommended for people who wish to perform sorcery. Three cakes 
(from which it gets the name) are offered, the first made with rice, 
the second with barley, and the third again with rice. 

Trihavis. It is described as a triple offering to ancestors in 
Sahkhayana Srautasutra, 3.16.1. Govinda (on B 4.6.2), however, 
identifies it as Savanesti, which is an offering of a cake baked in 
eight potsherds to Fire, a cake baked in eleven potsherds to Indra 
and Fire, and a cake baked in twelve potsherds to the All-gods: see 
Srautakosa, i. 760. 

Ukthya. One of the seven principal types of one-day Soma sacrifice. 
See Kane 1962-75, ii. 1204. 

Utkara. This is a small mound made with the earth dug up 
while preparing the sacrificial arena. It is located outside the 
north-eastern comer of the arena. 

Utsarginam Ayana. A Soma sacrifice of the ‘sacrificial session’ type 
lasting one year. See Sahkhayana Srautasutra, 13.20. 


330 



Ritual Vocabulary 


Upabhrt. A spoon with a long handle somewhat similar to the Juhu 
and used in making offerings of ghee into the fire. It belongs to the 
Sruc class and is made of banyan wood. 

Vaisvanari. A sacrifice to the ‘Fire present in all men’ generally 
cooked on twelve potsherds. 

Vajapeya. A type of Soma sacrifice in which the number seventeen 
dominates. It was supposed to be offered by someone who desired 
lordship. 

Visvajit. A sacrifice at which a person gave away all his possessions as 
a sacrificial gift to the officiating priests. 

VratapatL An offering to the ‘lord of the vow’. See Apastamba 
Srautasiitra, 9.3.24; 9.4.17. 

Vratyastoma. A Soma sacrifice performed in a single day. It is said to 
get its name from the fact that through this rite even people who 
have not performed their initiation at the proper time (i.e. Vratyas) 
become as illustrious as a vedic savant. 

Yajnakratu. According to Haradatta (on A 1.27.2), these are rites 
such as Soma sacrifices. 

Yajnavastu. A domestic rite of the Samaveda Brahmins at which a 
handful of sacred grass is sprinkled with ghee and thrown into the 
fire. See Gobhila Grhyasiitra, 1.8.26-9; Oldenberg 1886-92, ii. 37. 


2. Names of Ritual Formulas and Texts 

Ablinga. See App. 1.3: ‘Waters, you are refreshing.’ 

Aghamarsana. This is the hymn RV 10.190 used in a particular ritual 
to efface sins: see B 3.5. 

Agnervrata Saman. ‘Fire is the crown, the peak, of the sky. Lord here 
of the earth, he quickens the seeds of the waters.’ SV 1.27 (= RV 
8.44.16). See Sayana on ArsB 6. 4. 1.1. 

Ajyodha Saman (also called Acyadoha, Acidoha). ‘The crown of the 
sky, the dispenser of the earth; Vaisvanara, the fire born of Rta, the 
sage, the sovereign, the guest of men— the gods have begotten him 
as a cup for their mouths.’ SV 1.67 (= RV 6.7.1). See Sayana on 
ArsB 6. 1.4.2. 

Amhomuca. This consists of two sets of formulas. The first is: ‘That 
body of yours to be striven after, O Indra and Varuna, with that 
free this person from tribulation. That strong, protecting, brilliant 
body of yours, with that free him from tribulation.’ The second is: 
‘That disease of yours, O Indra and Varuna, that is in the fire— that 
disease of yours I appease hereby. That disease of yours, O Indra 


331 



Appendices 


and Varuna, that is in the two-footed cattle, the four-footed, 
the cattle-yard, the houses, the waters, the plants, the trees— that 
disease of yours I appease hereby.’ TS 2.3.13.1. 

Angirasa. For this verse, see App. 1.3: The goose seated in the 
light; . . .’ 

Asvasukta. The Saman SV 1.122 (= RV 8.14.1; same verse is given 
under Gosukta). See Sayana on ArsB 2.1.9. 

Asyavamlya. See App. 1.3: ‘Of that pleasant and grey-haired Hotr 
priest . . .’ 

Atharvasiras. Nandapandita (on Vi 56.22) identifies this as the verse 
beginning ‘Brahma arose as the first among gods.’ See MuU 1.1. 

Atlsanga. This consists of the verses SV 2.47-9 (= RV 9.101.1-3). See 
Sayana on ArsB 6.4.2.12-13. 

Bahispavamana Saman. This central chant of the Soma sacrifice con- 
tains nine verses: RV 9.11.1-3; 9.64.28-30; 9.66.10-12. For a 
description see Kane 1962-75, ii. 1 1 69 f. 

Barhaspatya Saman. This Saman consists of SV 1.56 (= RV 1.40.3). 
See Sayana on ArsB 1.7.2. 

Bharunda Saman. According to Nandapandita (on Vi 56.13), this 
consists of the twenty-one verses beginning with RV 10.16.6. This 
verse, however, is not found in the SV. 

Bhasa Saman. This consists of SV 1.470 (= RV 8.46.8). See Sayana 
on ArsB 5.1.4. 

Brahman’s Fleart. This passage is TA 10.28. 

Brahmana. A vedic text distinct from the hymns and ritual formulas. 
Such texts are considered to contain injunctions, which are the 
source of dharma. See p. xxiii. 

Brhat Saman. This consists of SV 1.234 (= RV 6.46.1). 

Calls ( vyahrti ). These are the names of the seven worlds in ascending 
order: bhur (earth), bhuvah (mid-space), svar (sky), mahar (great), 
janas (people), tapas (austerity), satya (truth). The utterances are 
considered sacred and powerful. The first three are generally 
referred to as simply Calls, whereas all seven are called Great Calls 
( mahavyahrti ). 

Devakrta. The formulas contained in VS 8.13, variants of which are 
given in B 4.3.6: ‘You are the expiation of sins committed against 
the gods 

Devavrata Samans. Krsnapandita (on Va 28.13) identifies these as 
‘From untruth I go to truth . . .’ (TB 1.2.1.15). Sayana (on ArsB 
6. 3. 5. 2) gives a different identification. 

Durgasavitri. The verse RV 1.99.1. 


332 



Ritual Vocabulary 


Fiend-killing Samans (raksoghna). SV 1.124 (= RV 7.15.13). See 
Sayana on A rs B 1.4.4. Besides this Govinda (on B 2.14.5) lists RV 
6.16.43; 10.87.24-5; 8.23.15, 14, 13; 1.127.1 as forming part of 
these Samans. See also the formulas at B 3.6.6 (= TS 1.8. 7.1 ). 

Five-hotra text. This is TA 3.2. 

Four-hotra text. This is TA 3.3 

Gayatra Saman. This is the Gayatrl verse sung in the Saman manner. 
Sometimes other verses set in the Gayatrl metre are used. See 
Eggeling, SB, iv. 178. 

Gayatrl. This term is used with two meanings. First, it is a type of 
metre with three octosyllabic feet. Second, it is another name for 
the Savitrl verse, which is set in the Gayatrl metre. 

Gosukta. The Saman SV 1.122 (= RV 8.14.1; same verse is given 
under Asvasukta). See Sayana on ArsB 2.1.9. 

Great Calls. See Calls. 

Hiranyavarna verses. The four verses TS 5. 6. 1.1. 

‘Honey’ verses ( niadhvrcah ). The three verses RV 1.90.6-8, each 
containing the word ‘honey’ (rnadhu). 

Jagati. A vedic metre consisting of four feet of twelve syllables 
each. 

Janas. See Calls. 

Jyestha Saman. Haradatta (on A 2.17.22; G 15.28) identifies this as 
SV 1.31 (= RV 1.24.15), while Govinda (on B 2.14.2) identifies it as 
SV 1.67 (= RV 6.7.1) and (on B 3.10.10) as SV 1.33 (= RV 10.9.4) 
and RV 1.115.1. Obviously, there is a lot of confusion regarding 
this Saman. 

Ksmapavitra. According to Govinda (on B 4.7.5), the six verses 
beginning: ‘O Fire, lead us by a fair path to wealth . . .’, TS 
1.1.14.3^4. 

Kusmanda. The four formulas TA 2.3. 

Lunar verses. According to Govinda (on B 3.8.14), the three verses 
RV 10.85.19; 6.6.7; 1.84.15. 

Madhuchandas hymns. The ten hymns RV 1.1-10. 

Mahadivaklrtya. The Saman SV 2.803 (= RV 10.170.1). See Sayana 
on ArsB 6.4. 1.5-6. 

Mahanamni. The verses contained in A A 4. 

Mahar. See Calls. 

Mahavairaja. The Saman SV 1.398 (= RV 7.22.1). See Sayana on 
ArsB 6.1.6.15. 

Mahavrata. This is a Sama-chant sung at a bawdy rite of the 
same name that takes place on the penultimate day of the Soma 


333 



Appendices 


sacrificial session called Gavamayana. This chant consists of sev- 
eral Samans: Gayatra, Rathantara, Brhat, Bhadra (SV, ii. 460-2), 
Rajana. See Eggeling in SB, iv. 282-3. Nandapandita (on Vi 56.24) 
identifies it as SV 1.91. 

Mahitra. The hymn RV 10.185. 

ManavT hymns. The hymns RV 8.27-31. 

Mitra, verses addressed to. See App. 1.3: The fame of Mitra, 
supporter of the people . . .’ 

Mrgara verses. These are the twenty-two formulas of the Mrgara 
offering contained in TS 4.7.15. 

Mrtyulangala. The verse ‘I know that immense Person, having the 
colour of the sun and beyond darkness. Only when a man knows 
him does he pass beyond death; there is no other path for going 
there’, TA 3.13.1. 

Padastobha. The Samans SV 2.578-80. 

Pavamanl. For these seven purificatory verses, see App. 1.3: ‘Whether 
near or afar . . .’ 

Purusa hymn. The creation hymn RV 10.90. 

Purusagati Saman. The verse ‘I am the firstborn . . TB 2.8.8. 1; see 

Sayana on ArsB 6.1.6.18. 

Purusavrata Samans. The first six verses or the first and fourth verses 
of the Purusa Hymn (RV 10.90). See Sayana on ArsB. 

Raivata. The Saman SV 1.153 (= RV 1.30.13). 

Rajana. The Saman SV 1.318 (= RV 7.27.1). See Sayana on ArsB 
6. 3.4. 8. The same verse is used for singing the Rauhini Saman. 

Rathantara. The Saman SV 1.233 (= RV 7.32.22). See Sayana on 
ArsB 6.1.6.10. 

Rauhini. The Saman SV 1.318 (= RV 7.27.1). See Sayana on ArsB 
6. 3. 4. 8. The same verse is used for singing the Rajana Saman. 

Raurava. The Saman SV 1.511 (= RV 9.63.28). The same verse is 
used for singing the Yaudhajaya Saman. 

Retasya. This is the verse TA 1.30.1 (= BU 6.4.5): ‘I retrieve this 
semen that fell on earth today; into water or plants though it may 
have seeped. May I regain my virility, my ardour, my passion; let 
the fire and the fire-mounds each return to its place.’ Hardatta (on 
G 23.20) cites another opinion, according to which the formula is 
TA 2.5.3. 

Rudra verses. The eleven passages beginning: ‘Homage to your 
wrath, O Rudra . . .’, TS 4.5.1. 

Saman. A verse generally taken from the RV and sung to a particular 
melody. The Samans are contained in the Samaveda. 


334 



Ritual Vocabulary 


Samapavitra. 'With what riches will this splendid friend, waxing ever 
strong, come to us, with what mighty aid.’ RV 4.31.1; SV 1.169. 

Satarudriya. The hymn to Rudra found in VS 16.1-66. 

Satya. See Calls. 

Savitri. The most sacred of ritual formulas: RV 3.62.10. See also 
Gayatrl. Sometimes the term is used with reference to vedic initi- 
ation, because teaching this verse to the initiated boy forms a cen- 
tral part of that rite (see Va 1 1.74). 

Seven-hotra text. TA 3.5. 

Siras formula. ‘OM the Waters, the Light, the Taste, the Immortal, 
Brahman! Earth, Atmosphere, Sky! OM!’ MNU 342. 

Sivasamkalpa hymn. This is VS 34. 

Six-hotra text. This is found in TA 3.6. 

Solar verses. According to Govinda (on B 3.8.14), RV 1.50.10; 
1.50.1; 1.115.1. 

Suddhasuddhiya. The Saman SV 1.350 (= RV 8.95.7). See Sayana on 
ArsB 3.12.9. 

Suddhavati. The three verses RV 8.84.7-9. 

Surabhimatl verse. The verse ‘Of Dadhikravan . . .’ See App. 1.3. 

Svadha. The exclamation accompanying the offering of an oblation 
to ancestors. See Svaha. 

Svadha-containing Yajus. This is found in TB 1.3.10.2. 

Svaha. The exclamation accompanying the offering of an oblation to 
gods. See Svadha. 

Tapas. See Calls. 

Taratsama. Same as the following. 

Taratsamandi. The hymn RV 9.58. 

Ten-hotra text. This is found in TA 3.1. 

Tristubh. A vedic metre of four feet with eleven syllables each. 

Trisuparna. The verse containing the term suparna (‘bird’) three 
times: RV 10.114.4. This explanation is given by Haradatta on G 
15.28; but commenting on A 2.17.22 he gives opinions that take it 
to be TB 1.2.1.27 or TA 10.48-50. 

Vaksukta. Krsnapandita (on Va 28.13) identifies this as ‘The female 
mongoose, covered by the lips’ found in the Sama-Mantra- 
Brahmana, 1.7.15. See Oldenberg 1886-92, ii. 2, 84; Gobhila 
Grhyasutra, 3.4.29. 

Vamadevya. The Saman SV 1.169 (= RV 4.31.1). See Sayana on 
ArsB 2.6.6. 

Varuna, verses addressed to. See the following. 

VarunI verses. ‘Hear this cry of mine, O Varuna . . .’ and ‘To you, 


335 



Appendices 


therefore, I go . . See App. 1.3; B 2.7.9. Haradatta (oil G 23.28), 
however, identifies them as RV 7.89.5; 1.25.19; 1.24.11, 14. 

Vasat. A ritual exclamation uttered by the Hotr priest at the conclu- 
sion of the sacrificial verse as the Adhvaryu priest puts the oblation 
into the sacred fire. 

Viraja. The formulas contained in MNU 440-56. Some of these 
formulas are given in B 3.8.12. 

Vrsakapi. The hymn RV 10.86. 

Vyahrti Saman. The five Calls bhuli, bhuvah, sval.i, satyam, and 
purusah sung as Samans. 

Yajus formula. A ritual formula in prose contained in the Yajurveda. 
These formulas accompany the ritual offerings into the fire. 

Yajuhpavitra. ‘May the waters, the mothers, cleanse us. May they who 
cleanse the ghee cleanse us with ghee/ RV 10.17.10; TS 1.2. 1.1 

Yaudhajaya. The Saman SV 1.511 (= RV 9.63.28). The same verse is 
used for singing the Raurava Saman. 


3. Formulas Cited in the Translations by the First Words 

Note: Translations of TS are based on Keith 1914. 

‘Accept us, O guardian of the house. Be of kind entrance for us and 
free from ill. Grant to us what we seek from you.’ TS 3.4.10.1. 

‘Aroused by god Savitr, I take you with the arms of the Asvins, with 
the hands of Pusan. You are the spade. You are the woman.’ TS 

1.3. 1.1. 

‘As one released from the stake; as a sweaty man cleansed from the 
filth by bathing; as ghee purified by a strainer; so may all the gods 
free me from sin.’ TB 2. 4. 4. 9. 

‘Blaze up, O Fire, dispelling my misfortune. Bring me cattle and grant 
me sustenance in every direction.’ MNU 67-8. 

‘Being born, it becomes ever new. It goes in front of the dawns as the 
banner of the days. As it arrives, it apportions to the gods their 
portions. The moon stretches out a long life span.’ RV 10.85.19; TS 

2.4.14.1. 

‘Born beyond this firmament, may that bright light carry us 
beyond our enemies. To the Fire common to all men, Svaha!’ 
TS4.2.5.2. 

‘Brahman was first born in the east. Vena [sun] has disclosed from the 
glittering boundary. Fie has disclosed its fundamental nearest 
forms, the womb of the existent and the non-existent.’ AV 4.1.1; TS 
4.2. 8. 2. 


336 



Ritual Vocabulary 

‘Burning away our evil . . This is the hymn RY 1.97, whose seer is 
Kutsa Ahgirasa. 

‘Do not hurt us in our children, our descendants, or our life. Do not 
hurt us in our cattle or our horses. Do not assail our heroes in 
anger, O Rudra. With oblations, let us serve you with honour.’ TS 
3.4.11.2-3. 

‘Fire has put back the sight; Indra and Brhaspati have put it back. 
And you two, O Asvins, put back the sight into my eyes.’ TS 3. 2. 5. 4. 

‘Gazing, beyond the darkness, upon the highest light, we have come 
to the sun, god amongst gods, the highest light.’ TS 4. 1.7. 4. 

‘Golden-coloured, pure, and purifying, in whom were born Kasyapa 
and Indra; who have conceived Fire as a germ of varied colour- 
may these waters be gentle and kind to us. Those, in whose midst 
Varuna goes gazing on the truth and falsehood of men, dripping 
honey, pure, and purifying— may these waters be gentle and kind 
to us. Those in the sky that the gods make their food; those that are 
diffused manifold in mid-space; those that inundate the earth with 
their sap, the pure ones— may these waters be gentle and kind to us. 
With an auspicious gaze look upon me, O waters; with an auspi- 
cious body touch my skin. I invoke all you Fires that sit in the 
waters. Do you confer upon me radiance, might, and force.’ TS 
5. 6. 1.1-2. These are the four Hiranyavarna verses. 

‘Flear this cry of mine, O Varuna, and be merciful this day. Seeking 
for help, I call on you.’ TS 2.1.1 1.6. 

‘Here indeed did they recognize the hidden bull of Tvastr, in the very 
house of the moon.’ TB 1.5. 8.1; RV 1.84.15. 

‘He who has arisen from the great ocean, glistening from the midst of 
the water; may that sun, the red-eyed bull, the sage, purify me with 
his mind.’ TA 4.42.5. 

‘Homage to Rudra, the lord of the dwelling. In coming, in running 
away, in leaving, in departing, in returning, in journeying, I invoke 
him who protects.’ TB 3. 7. 9. 6-7. 

‘Into the lion my fury . . .’ This is a rather long passage given in the 
Baudhayana Srautasutra, 2.5, as a vedic text. 

‘Keep well awake, O Fire. Let us be glad. Guard us for prosperity, 
grant us to wake again.’ TS 1.2. 3.1. 

‘May he give you the fullness of life on every side, Fire here, the 
desirable. Let your breath come back to you. I drive away the 
disease from you . . .’ This is a long recitation of seventeen verses 
contained in TA 2.5. 

‘May my speech be in my mouth, breath in the nostrils, sight in the 


337 



Appendices 


eyes, hearing in the ears, might in the arms, and strength in the 
thighs. May all my members be uninjured. May your body be with 
my body. Homage to you. Harm me not.’ TS 5. 5. 9. 2. 

‘May the juices unite in you, may your strength, the might of him 
who overcomes the foe. Swelling up for immortality, O Soma, place 
in the sky the highest glories.’ TS 4. 2. 7. 4. 

‘May the Maruts pour upon me, may Indra and Brhaspati; and may 
this fire pour upon me long life and strength. May they make me 
live long.’ TA 2.18. 

‘May we, O guardian of the house, obtain your fellowship in a friend- 
ship effectual, joyful, and proceeding well. Aid our wishes in peace, 
in action. Guard us always with blessings.’ TS 3.4.10.1. 

‘Mitra draws people together, the wise one. Mitra supports the earth 
and sky. Mitra regards men without blinking. To the true one let us 
offer an oblation rich in ghee.’ TS 3.4.1 1.5. 

‘No anxiety, no danger . . .' These verses are found in RY 10.126. 

‘O Fire, O Returner, return to us with fullness of life, with radiance, 
with gain, with wisdom, with offspring, with wealth.’ TS 4.2. 1.2. 

‘O Fire, O Angiras, may your returns be a hundred; your movements, 
a thousand. With the increase of their increase, do you bring back 
for us what is lost; bring back to us wealth.’ TS 4. 2. 1.3. 

‘Of Dadhikravan have I sung, the swift strong horse. May he make 
our mouths fragrant and lengthen our life.’ TS 1.5.11.4; RV 4.39.6. 

‘Of that pleasant and grey-haired Hotr priest . . .' This is the rather 
long hymn RV 1 . 1 64 containing fifty-two verses. 

‘O gods, whatever offence we have committed against the gods . . .’ 
These verses are contained in TA 2.3. 

‘Perceived by the smell, invincible, ever fertile, abounding in cow- 
dung, and the sovereign over all creatures, I invite her [the earth] 
here for prosperity.’ MNU 110-11. 

‘Return again with strength. Return, O Fire, fatten with food and life. 
Guard us again on all sides.’ TS 3. 2. 1.3. 

‘Return with wealth, O Fire, fatten with the stream, all-gaining on 
every side.’ TS 3.2. 1.3. 

‘Swell up, O Soma [moon], and may your strength be gathered from 
all sides. Become strong in the gathering of vigour.’ TS 3. 2. 5. 3. 

‘That bright eye rising in the east appointed by the god— may we see 
it a hundred autumns, may we live a hundred autumns.’ TA 4.42.5. 

‘The Brahman-priest of the gods, leader of poets, sage of seers, bull 
of wild beasts, eagle of vultures, axe of the forests, Soma goes over 
the sieve singing.’ TS 3.4.11.1. 


338 



Ritual Vocabulary 


The fame of Mitra, supporter of the people, of the god, is eternal, 
true and most varied in fame.’ TS 3.4. 11.5. 

The goose seated in the light; the bright one seated in mid-space. The 
Hotr seated at the altar; the guest seated in the house. Seated 
among men, seated in the highest, seated in truth, seated in the 
firmament. Born of the waters, born of the cow, born of truth, 
born of the mountain, the great truth.’ TS 1.8.15.2. 

The light by which the gods went up on high, as also the Adityas, 
Vasus, and Rudras, by which the Ahgirases attained greatness— 
with that light may the patron of the sacrifice attain prosperity.’ TS 
5.1.22. 

The purifier, the heavenly one . . .' This is a passage ( anuvaka ) with 
seventeen verses in TB 1.4.8. 

The rays carry you up— you the all-knowing god, the sun— for all to 
see.’ TS 1.4.43.1. 

The resplendent face of the gods has risen, the eye of Mitra, Varuna, 
and Agni. He has filled the sky and earth, and the mid-space. The 
sun is the self of what moves and what stands still.’ TS 1.4.43.1. 

The right and the truth . . .’ This is the Aghamarsana hymn, RY 
10.190. 

The spotted bull has come and reached again the mother and the 
father, faring to the heaven.’ TS 1.5. 3.1. 

The strength in the lion, the tiger, the panther . . .’ These four verses 
are found in TB 2.7.7. 1-2. 

To you, therefore, I go, praising you with my hymn. The sacrificer 
seeks this with his offerings. Be not angry here, O Varuna. Do not 
carry away our life, O wide ruler.’ TS 2. 1 . 1 1 .6. 

To welcome the Dawn the inspired Vasisthas did first awaken with 
songs and praises . . .’ This is the hymn RV 7.80 containing three 
verses. 

‘Unfurl your strength like a net spread out . . .' This is the passage 
( anuvaka ) TS 1.2.14. 

‘Waters, you are refreshing. Further us to strength, to see great joy. 
The auspicious flavour that is yours, accord to us here, like eager 
mothers. To him may we come with satisfaction, to whose dwelling 
you quicken us, O waters, and propagate us.’ TS 4. 1.5.1. These are 
the Ablinga formulas. 

‘We announce to the Fire common to all men . . .’ This hymn is 
found in TA 2.6. 

‘Whatever blemish there is in me. Fire, all-knowing and swift-moving, 
has removed it.' TS 3. 2. 5. 4. 


339 



Appendices 


'Whatever debt I have contracted without gambling . . This is a long 
recitation of thirteen verses contained in TA 2.4. 

'Whether near or afar . . These are the seven PavamanI verses 
contained in RV 9.67.21-7. 

‘With that body of yours worthy of sacrifice, O Fire, come here and 
mount my body, procuring many riches, splendid and manly. 
Becoming the sacrifice, sit down at the sacrifice, your own abode. O 
All-knowing Fire, being born from the earth, come with your 
abode.’ TB 2. 5. 8. 8. 

‘With that purifier of a thousand streams with which the gods always 
cleanse themselves, may the purificatory verses cleanse me.’ TB 
1.4. 8. 6. 

‘You are the sheen! You are the radiance! You are the brilliance!’ TS 
1.1.10.3. 

‘You, O Fire, are the guardian of vows among gods and men, you 
who are to be invoked at the sacrifices.’ TS 1 .2.3.1. 

‘You, O Fire, with your favour take us across once more over every 
trouble. Be a broad, thick, and wide fortress for us, and health and 
wealth for our children and descendants.’ TS 1.1.14.4. 


340 



APPENDIX II 

NAMES OF GODS, PEOPLE, AND PLACES 


Aditi. A female deity, the mother of several gods, including Varuna 
and Mitra. In later mythology she is made the mother of gods in 
general. Sometimes she is identified with the earth. 

Aditya(s). Literally the son(s) of Aditi, the term in the plural refers to 
a group of gods, including some prominent ones such as Varuna, 
Mitra, and Indra. Early texts give their number as eight, but the 
Brahmanas already show their number as twelve, which has 
remained the norm ever since. Together with the Vasus and the 
Rudras, they constitute the three major classes of gods. In the 
singular, the term Aditya refers to the sun. 

Agastya. The name of an ancient sage, said to be the son of Mitra 
and Varuna. In a later myth he is said to have instructed the 
Vindhya mountains to remain bowed (not to grow taller) until he 
turns from southern India. 

Agni. Fire and the god of Fire. 

All-gods ( visvedeva ). The name of a class of gods. In the later 
Dharma texts they are listed as ten in five pairs: Kratu and 
Daksa, Vasu and Satya, Dhuri and Locana, Kala and Kama, and 
Pururavas and Ardrava. See Kane 1962-75, iv. 457. 

Ambastha. A mixed social class consisting of offspring fathered by a 
man on a woman one class ( varna ) below him. 

Anga. The name of the far eastern region of the Ganges plain, 
roughly corresponding to the western part of Bengal. 

Angirasa. The name of a class of priests closely associated with 
another group called Atharvan. The name is also used with refer- 
ence to a group of sundry divine beings and is an epithet of several 
gods, especially the fire god Agni. 

Antyavasayin. A child fathered by a Sudra man on a Vaisya woman. 

Aratta. The name of a people and a region in the Punjab, in the 
north-western part of India. This region was outside the cultural 
area of Brahmanism and out of bounds to Brahmins. 

Asamvrta. The name of a hell: see Va 18.15; M 4.81. 

Asvins. Twin deities described as young, beautiful, fond of honey, 
and expert in medical knowledge. They are the physicians of the 
gods. 


341 



Appendices 

Aupajanghani. An ancient authority on Dharma cited by Baudhayana 
(2.3.33) on inheritance. 

Avanti. An area of western north-central India, corresponding to 
western Madhya Pradesh. 

Ayogava. A child fathered by a man on a woman of the class ( varna ) 
immediately above his. 

Bhallavins. The adherents of an ancient school of teachers constitut- 
ing a branch of the Samaveda. A Brahmana belonging to this 
branch is cited in the Brhaddevata, 5.23. 

Bharadvaja. An ancient seer to whom the composition of the sixth 
book of the Rgveda is ascribed. 

Bhrjyakantha. A mixed class considered to be the offspring of a 
Brahmin father and a Vaisya mother. 

Boundary River. This river is given in a verse of the Bhallavins (B 
1.2.12; Va 1.15) as the western boundary of the land of vedic 
splendour. Its identity is unclear, but it is probably the same as the 
Sarasvatl. 

Brahman. This term is applied to the ultimate cosmic principle 
and, in the Vedas, especially to formulations of ultimate truth. In 
later times, it is used with reference to the creative principle and 
sometimes also the creator god. 

Brahmanaspati. Literally ‘the lord of brahman’, the term is an epithet 
of Brhaspati. 

Brahmin. The first of the four classes of ancient Indian society, 
generally associated with learning and ritual activities. 

Brhaspati. A deity closely linked to the fire god and to sacred speech. 
Regarded as the priest of the gods and the source of wisdom, he is 
the lord of speech and eloquence. Later tradition identifies him 
with the planet Jupiter and ascribes to him, now considered a seer, 
texts of religious law and politics. 

Candala. An outcaste person whose mere touch pollutes. He is 
considered the offspring of a Sudra father and a Brahmin mother. 

Dausyanta. A mixed class, considered as the offspring of a Ksatriya 
father and a Sudra mother. 

Deccan. The region in India to the south of the Vindhya mountain 
range. 

Dhanvantari. A god produced at the cosmogonic churning of the 
ocean, he is the physician of the gods and the divine author of 
medical science. 

Dhlvara. A mixed class considered to be the offspring of a Vaisya 
father and a Ksatriya mother. 


342 



Names of Gods, People, and Places 

Eka. An ancient teacher of Dharma cited in A 1.19.7. 

Gandharva. In the early vedic literature Gandharvas appear as a 
class of divine beings alongside the gods and the forefathers. They 
are associated with the Soma drink and are said to be fond of 
females. They are often associated with the celestial nymphs, 
Apsarases. In later literature, especially the epics, the Gandharvas 
are depicted as celestial singers and are associated with music. 

Ganges. The major Indian river, of which the Yamuna is a tributary, 
flowing from the north-central plains into the Bay of Bengal. 

Gaya. One of the most sacred places of pilgrimage located close to 
the modern city of Patna in Bihar. 

Harita. The name of an ancient authority on Dharma cited 
frequently in the Dharmasutras. 

Indra. The most famous of the vedic gods, Indra is called the king of 
the gods. He is powerful and loves to drink Soma. His claim to 
fame is his victory over Vrtra, a combat that is given cosmogonic 
significance. In the Vedas Indra is closely associated with rain, and 
prominence is given to his weapon, the Vajra, conceived of as the 
thunderbolt. 

Janaka. Perhaps the most famous and prominent of the kings 
mentioned in the Upanisads. Videha is to the east of the 
Kuru-Pancala country, the home of the major figures of the 
Upanijads. Janaka, the king of Videha, represents the growing 
importance of the eastern regions from which the new religions of 
Buddhism and Jainism would emerge some centuries later. 

Kalaka (lit., ‘black forest’). The location of this forest is uncertain, 
but it must have been in the eastern reaches of the Ganges, possibly 
eastern Bihar or western Bengal. 

Kanva. An ancient authority on Dharma cited by Apastamba: see 
Kane 1962-75, i. 273. 

Kanva. An ancient authority on Dharma cited by Apastamba. This 
is also the name of a vedic branch to which Baudhayana belonged 
(B 2.9.14): see Kane 1962-75, i. 273. 

Karana. A mixed class considered as the offspring of a Vaisya father 
and a Sudra mother. 

Karaskara. Name of a people and a region. Later literature places it 
somewhere in the Narmada river valley in the Vindhya hills. 

Kasyapa. The name of an ancient sage, cited as an authority on 
Dharma by Baudhayana (1.21.2): see Kane 1962-75, i. 274. 

Katya. An ancient authority on Dharma cited by Baudhayana 
(1.3.46). 


343 



Appendices 

Kautsa. An ancient authority on Dharma cited by Apastamba 
(1.19.4; 1.28.1). 

Ksattr. A mixed class considered to be the offspring of a Vaisya 
father and a Brahmin mother. 

Ksatriya. The second of the four classes of ancient Indian society, 
generally associated with warfare and government. 

Kukkuta. A mixed class said to be the offspring of a Vaisya father 
and a Nisada mother. 

Kunika. An ancient authority on Dharma cited by Apastamba 
(1.19.7). 

Kutsa. An ancient authority on Dharma cited by Apastamba 
(1.19.7). 

Magadha. An eastern region along the Ganges plain correspond- 
ing roughly to modern Bihar. It was the centre of the Asokan 
empire. 

Magadha. A mixed class considered to be the offspring of a Vaisya 
father and a Brahmin mother. 

Mahajajnu. The name of an ancient teacher mentioned by 
Baudhayana (3.9.21). 

Mahisya. A mixed class considered to be the offspring of a Ksatriya 
father and a Vaisya mother. 

Manu. The first man and the progenitor of all humans, he plays the 
central role in the Indian myth of the flood. Later legends make 
him also the first lawgiver, and an important collection of ancient 
Indian laws is ascribed to Manu. 

Maruts. A group of gods connected with the wind and the thunder- 
storm, and thus associated with Indra’s exploits. They are called 
the sons of Rudra and are often referred to in the plural as The 
Rudras’. 

Maudgalya. An ancient authority on Dharma cited by Baudhayana 
(2.4.8). 

Murdhavasikta. A mixed class considered to be the offspring of a 
Brahmin father and a Ksatriya mother. 

Nirrti. A goddess who is the personification of evil and adversity. 

Nisada. A mixed class considered to be the offspring of a Brahmin 
father and a Vaisya mother. 

Parasava. A mixed class considered to be the offspring of a Brahmin 
father and a Sudra mother. 

Pariyatra. Probably a mountain range of the Vindhyas, the latter 
being substituted for Pariyatra in the definition of the land of 
Aryas found in later texts (M 2.21). 


344 



Names of Gods, People, and Places 

Prajapati. Literally ‘lord of creatures’, he is the creator god par 
excellence in the Brahmanas and the Upanijads. He is the father of 
the gods and the demons ( asura ), as well as of all creatures. 

Pranuna. I have not found any source that identifies this region. 

Pulkasa. A mixed class considered to be the offspring of a Nisada 
father and a Vaisya mother. 

Pundra. Appearing already in the AB 7.18 as a degraded people, they 
were probably located somewhere in Bengal or Bihar. 

Pusan. Closely associated with the sun god, he is viewed as the one 
who knows the paths and conducts the dead safely to the world of 
the fathers. 

Puskarasadi. An ancient authority on Dharma cited by Apastamba 
(1.19.7; 1.28.1). 

Ramaka. A mixed class considered to be the offspring of a Vaisya 
father and a Brahmin mother. 

Rathakara. A mixed class considered to be the offspring of a Vaisya 
father and a Sudra wife. 

Rudra. Generally regarded as a storm god, Rudra has an ambivalent 
personality. He is fierce and feared. He is also a healer, the one who 
averts the anger of gods. In his benign aspect he is referred to as 
siva, ‘the benign one’, an epithet that becomes the name of the later 
god Siva, with whom Rudra is identified. 

Rudras. In the plural, the term refers to a group of eleven gods, who, 
together with the Adityas and the Vasus, constitute the three 
classes of gods. The Rudras are associated with the Maruts; both 
of these groups are ruled by Rudra. 

Sadhyas. A group of somewhat ill-defined deities, said to occupy a 
region above that of the gods. 

SarasvatL The most celebrated river of the vedic age (although its 
identity in the early period is not altogether certain), it is personi- 
fied as a goddess. In the Brahmanas she becomes identified with 
speech and the goddess of speech, and in later mythology Sarasvatl 
is the goddess of eloquence and wisdom. This river flowed between 
the Indus and Ganges river systems. Its disappearance in the desert 
became the focus of myths and folk tales. 

Sauvira. Name of a border people living probably in south-western 
Punjab near the Indus. 

Savarna (lit., ‘of the same class’). Offspring of a mother of the same 
class as the father or one class below him. 

Savitr. An aspect of the sun god, this deity became famous because 
the celebrated Savitrl verse is addressed to him. 


345 



Appendices 


Sindh. The region around the southern reaches of the Indus river; 
today the area around Karachi in Pakistan. 

Soma. A sacrificial drink pressed from a plant with apparently mind- 
altering qualities, it was personified as a god and later identified 
with the moon. Thus the term often simply means the moon. 

Sudra. The fourth and lowest of the four classes of ancient Indian 
society associated with service and servile functions within society. 
Some Sudras may have been slaves. 

Suta. A mixed class considered to be the offspring of a K$atriya 
father and a Brahmin mother. 

Surastra. The region of Kathiawar in south-eastern Gujarat. 

Svapaka. A mixed class considered to be the offspring of an Ugra 
father and a Ksattr mother. 

Svetaketu. The reference probably is to the son of Uddalaka Aruni, 
who figures prominently in the Upanisads. BU 6.2; CU 5.2; 6. 

Tvastr. Described as a skilled workman, he is the father of Indra. 

Ugra. A mixed class considered to be the offspring of a Vaisya father 
and a Sudra mother. 

Upavrt. A border land whose geographical location is uncertain. 

Usanas. The name of an ancient sage who becomes the domestic 
priest of the Asuras (demons) in their war with the gods. He is cited 
as an authority on Dharma. 

Yaideha(ka). A mixed class considered to be the offspring of a Sudra 
father and a Ksatriya mother (see also Vaina). 

Vaina. A mixed class considered to be the offspring of a Sudra father 
and a Ksatriya mother (see also Vaidehaka). 

Vaisya. The third of the four classes of ancient Indian society. 
Vaisyas are the common people engaged in agriculture and trade. 

Vanga. Bengal or its eastern regions. 

Varuna. One of the great gods in the early vedic literature, he is 
viewed as the grand sovereign and upholder of the natural and 
moral order. He becomes increasingly associated with the waters 
and the west, and his residence comes to be located within the 
ocean. 

Varsyayani. An ancient authority on Dharma cited by Apastamba 
(1.28.2). 

Vasus. A group of eight gods distinguished from the Adityas and 
Rudras, although their general character and specific identities 
remain rather vague. 

Vindhya. The major mountain range in north-central India dividing 
north India from the Deccan. 


346 



Names of Gods, People, and Places 

Visnu. The great god of later Hinduism, who is a somewhat minor 
solar deity in the vedic literature. He is especially celebrated in his 
two human incarnations, Rama and Krsna. 

Vratya. The term is used in ancient literature to refer to groups of 
people, at least some of whom appear to have led a wandering or a 
nomadic life. Already in some vedic texts, however, the Vratya is 
presented as a mysterious, powerful, and even divine person. In 
later times the term is used to refer to either mixed-caste people or 
to Brahmins who have not undergone vedic initiation. 

Vrsaparvan. The name of a sage whose daughter entered into a 
dispute with the daughter of Usanas. 

Yama. The Indian god of death from the most ancient period of 
vedic mythology until contemporary times. In ancient myths he is 
called king and divine characteristics are ascribed to him, but he 
comes to be identified with death itself and many of the negative 
aspects of death become associated with Yama. Later myths 
associate him with judgment and punishment of the dead. 

Yamuna. The major tributory of the Ganges river. 

Yavana. A mixed class considered to be the offspring of a Ksatriya 
father and a Sudra mother: see p. xxxii. 


347 



APPENDIX III 

FAUNA AND FLORA 


Common fauna and flora that can be readily translated are not listed 

here; they are found in the Index. 

Babhru (lit., ‘deep- or reddish-brown’). The term refers to a type of 
mongoose, possibly the Ruddy Mongoose (Herpestes smithi ), a 
variety of the common Indian mongoose (Herpestes edwardsi). 
Prater 1997, 102. 

Badara. The jujube tree. Zizyphus Jujuba. 

Baka. This term is applied to a wide variety of water fowl, including 
heron, ibis, stork, and the common flamingo. Dave 1985, 383-7, 
408-9. 

Balaka. Flamingo; the term is sometimes applied to other water 
fowl, such as the egret. Dave 1985, 409-21. 

Balbaja. A type of coarse grass. Eleusine Indica. 

Bhasa. A species of vulture, identified by Dave (1985, 188) as the 
bearded vulture. 

Black antelope: see Ena and Harina. 

Brhacchiras. ‘Large-headed’, a type of fish, although the reading is 
somewhat uncertain: B 1.12.8 n. Biihler identifies it as the Indian 
salmon (Mahsir). 

Brahmasuvarcala. Refers either to a variety of sunflower (Heriantus) 
or to Clerodendron Siphonanthus. 

Cakravaka. The ruddy sheldrake called the Brahmani Duck. The 
fidelity of a mated pair to each other and their grief when separ- 
ated is celebrated in Indian poetry and folklore. 

Ceta. The identity of this fish or aquatic animal is uncertain. 
Krsnapandita (on Va 14.41) reads Aveta and explains it as 
KumbhTra, the Ganges alligator. Given the other aquatic animals 
listed alongside at A 1.17.38-9 and Va 14.41-2, it is likely that this 
is also either an unusual fish or some type of amphibian. 

Cilicima. A kind of fish also forbidden in the Caraka Samhitd 
(1.26.83; tr. i. 210). There it is described as full of scales, with red 
eyes and red lines on its body, resembling a Rohita fish, and gener- 
ally moving ‘on the ground’ (probably, at the bottom of the water). 

Darbha. A type of grass used for ritual purposes, most commonly 
the same as Kusa; specifically the grass Saccharum cylindricum. 


348 



Fauna and Flora 


Sometimes, Darbha can mean simply a tuft or bundle, as in Va 21.2 
lohitadarbha (Lohita grass). 

Derika. A type of musk rat according to Haradatta (on A 1.25.13). It 
must have had some cultural importance, since killing it was con- 
sidered a serious crime (B 1.19.6). 

Diddika. Another type of musk rat. Govinda (on B 1.19.6) identifies 
it as ChuchundarT, a term occurring at M 12.65, where the com- 
mentator Govindaraja identifies it as Rajaduhitr, also a kind of 
musk rat. 

Ena. The Blackbuck (also called Krsnasara: M 2.23), an antelope 
with black hair on the back and sides and white under the belly: 
Antilope cervicapra. About 32 inches at the shoulder and weighing 
about 90 lbs., with horns 20-5 inches long. See Prater 1997, 270. 

Gaura. The Indian bison, standing close to 6 feet at the shoulders: 
Bos gaurus. See Prater 1997, 243. 

Gavaya. In Va 14.41 it is given as a type of fish. The name indicates 
that the fish (or probably its head) must have had the appearance 
of an ox or bison. 

Gayal. A wild ox: Bos gavaeus. 

Godha. Often translated as ‘iguana’ (a lizard found exclusively in the 
Americas), this is clearly the Indian monitor lizard (see Liiders 
1942; Jamison 1998), the smaller variety of which (called Talagoya 
in Sri Lanka) is eaten. 

Grnjana. An unidentified species of onion or garlic. 

Hamsa. The ruddy goose, most celebrated species of Indian goose. 
The term is often applied to other large geese and swans. 

Harina. An Indian antelope. According to Prater (1997, 270), 
Harina is the female of Ena. But it appears from A 1.3.3 that 
Harina is distinguished from Ena and may have been light brown 
in colour. There may have been some confusion here, since the male 
Ena is black, whereas the female is brown. 

Harlta. The green pigeon. Dave 1985, 251. 

Kalavinka. A species of sparrow, identified as the ‘village sparrow’ by 
Vijnanesvara on Y 1.174. According to Dave (1985), the word is 
used for blackbirds, magpies, and finches. 

Kalinga. The east-central coastal region, corresponding roughly to 
modern Orissa up to the mouth of the river Kr$na. 

Kanka. The name is used for several varieties of eagle, heron, and 
kite. Its feathers were used in making arrows. Dave 1985, 242. 
Fitzgerald (1998, 258) has argued that the term refers to a 
carrion-eating stork. 


349 



Appendices 


Kapinjala. The Francoline partridge, called Cataka in North India. 

Karanja. The term karanja (also written kalanjd) is not found in any 
Dharma text apart from Apastamba (1.17.26), although it figures 
prominently in the exegetical rule ‘Karanja Maxim’ described in 
PMS 6.2.5.19-20. Commenting on this, Sahara gives an ancient 
food prohibition. ‘Kalanja, garlic, and onion should not be eaten.’ 

Khanjarita. The yellow wagtail. Dave 1985, 103. 

Kokila. The black Indian cuckoo (Koil), whose singing has made it 
famous in Indian poetry and folklore. 

Krakara. The large imperial sand-grouse. Dave 1985, 265. 

Kraunca. A species of large water bird, probably the common crane: 
Dave 1985, 312. Haradatta (on A 1.17.36) says that they travel in 
pairs, and Biihler identifies the bird as the red-crested crane now 
called Saras. 

Krunca. The flamingo: Dave 1985, 313, 408. Haradatta (on A 
1.17.36) says that these travel in flocks, and Biihler identifies the 
bird as the common crane now called Kulam or Kune. 

Kulunga. A species of antelope. 

Kurara. The osprey. Dave 1985, 185. 

Kusa. The most common of the sacred grasses (see Darbha) used for 
ritual purposes. Poa cynosuroides. 

Laksmana. A type of crane related to Vardhanasa: see A 1.17.36. 
Dave 1985, 312. 

Lohita. The reference is not altogether clear. The term is used for a 
variety of plants, but the reference here may be to a variety of rice. 
The term is used only at Va 15.12 and 22.2, where the meaning may 
be dried straw of the Lohita rice. 

Madgu. The snake fish or a cormorant. Dave 1985, 372. 

Mahasakari. A kind of fish, although the reading is uncertain: B 
1.12.8 n. 

Mandhala. A species of bat or flying fox. 

Mrdura. The identity of this aquatic species is unclear. Haradatta 
(on A 1.17.39) calls it Makara, a somewhat mythological sea ani- 
mal often identified with the crocodile. 

Mufija. A species of rush belonging to the sugar-cane family and 
reaching about 10 feet in height and used for basket weaving: 
Saccharum Munja. Its principal ritual use is in the manufacture of 
the girdle given to a Brahmin boy at his vedic initiation. 

Murva. A species of hemp used in the manufacture of bow strings 
and of the ritual girdle given to a K$atriya boy at his vedic initi- 
ation: Sanseviera Roxburghiana. 


350 



Fauna and Flora 


Nala. A kind of reed used for weaving baskets: Arundo Tibialis or 
Karka. 

Palasa. A variety of fig tree called Dhak with a beautiful trunk and 
abundant leaves: Butea frondosa. Incisions produce a red juice used 
as an astringent. The tree was viewed as sacred in ancient India and 
its wood used to make ritual implements. 

Paravata. This name is applied to a variety of pigeons, including the 
blue rock pigeon, wood pigeon, and snow pigeon. 

Pilu. The tree Careya arborea (patana oak) growing in grassy 
expanses. 

Plava. A coot or cormorant. Dave 1985, 372. 

Prsata. A spotted antelope or deer. 

Railataka. I have been unable to find any information on this bird. 

Rajiva. Said to be a kind of lotus-coloured fish, or one with stripes 
(Medhatithi and Govindraja on M 5.16). 

Rohita. A kind of red fish said to feed on moss ( Caraka Samhitd, 
1.27.80) and called the most nutritious of fish (ibid. 1.25.38). 

Rsya. The white-footed antelope called Nilgai (blue bull): Boselaphus 
tragocamelus. The male is dark in colour, reaching over 4 feet in 
height, and the female is light brown. Prater 1997, 272. 

Ruru. A species of spotted antelope. 

Sahasradamstra (lit., ‘with a thousand teeth'). Possibly a type of 
sheat fish. 

Sankhapuspl. A type of grass: Andropogon aciculatus. Govinda (on B 
2.1.22) remarks that it grows mainly along the seashore. 

Saphari. A small glittering minnow that darts in the water. 

Sara. A species of reed belonging to the sugar-cane family used for 
making arrows: Saccharum Sara. 

Sarabha. Probably a kind of large antelope. In later literature a 
mythical beast of enormous strength. Haradatta (on A 1.17.29) 
calls it ‘a wild deer with eight feet’; clearly he was guessing! 

Saranga. The name is applied both to the peacock and to the crested 
little bustard. Dave 1985, 328. 

Sarika. A small brown bird commonly known as Maina (mynah) 
that can imitate human speech like a parrot. Dave 1985, 81. 

Satabali. A kind of fish identified with Rohita by Haradatta (on A 
2.17.2), who says that it has a lot of bones. 

Sidhraka. Appears to be a type of tree with strong and heavy wood 
used for making pestles for husking rice. I have not succeeded in 
identifying the tree. 

Slesmantaka. Also called Slesmata and Selu; the fruit of this small 


351 



Appendices 


tree is about the size of a cherry. Called Bhokar in Marathi, it is 
used today for making pickles. 

Snake-head fish (Sarpaslrsa). The identity is unclear, and the 
commentators are of no help. Possibly a kind of eel or water snake. 

Suparna. A common name for any large bird of prey, especially the 
golden eagle. Dave 1985, 201. 

Tamala. The tree Xanthochymus pictorius with a very dark bark. 
Haradatta (on A 1.2.37) says that this tree is also known as 
Muloda. 

Tittibha. The name refers to a variety of plovers and lapwings. Dave 

' 1985,357. 

Udumbara. A type of fig tree whose wood is used for ritual purposes: 
Ficus glomerata. 

Varana. Identified by Dave ( 1985, 327) as the great bustard. 

Vardhranasa (or VardhrTnasa; lit., ‘leather-snouted’). This sometimes 
refers to the rhinoceros, but in these texts it refers to a type of bird, 
probably a hornbill: Prater 1997, 159. At B 1.12.6, however, it is 
classified as a bird that scratches with its feet in searching for food, 
which would argue against a waterbird. 

Varmi. A kind of fish, commonly known as Vami. 

Vibhitaka. The tree Terminalia Bellerica, whose seeds were used as 
dice in gambling. 

VIrana grass. A fragrant grass: Andropogon Muricatus. 


352 



NOTES 


The Dharmasutra of Apastamba 

BOOK ONE 

1.1-3 accepted customary Laws . . . Vedas'. Apastamba, more than any 
other author, points to generally accepted custom as the basis of 
Law (dharma). Here he puts the Vedas last, in contrast to the 
other three who place it first (G 1.1; B 1.1.1; Va 1.4). Apastamba 
opens his Grhyasiitras (1.1.1) with a similar remark: 'Next, we 
take up the rites derived from practice ( acaradyani ).’ He refers 
to customs over which there is common agreement also at A 
1.7.31; 1.23.6. ‘Those who know the Laws’ are called elsewhere 
‘the cultured elite’ (sista: see the definition in B 1. 1.5-6), that is, 
those who are both learned in the sacred traditions and steadfast 
in virtue, who are authorities both with regard to the correct 
language (Sanskrit) and in matters of proper conduct. ‘Author- 
ity’ (pramdna) has a technical meaning in Indian epistemology. It 
signifies a means or source of correct knowledge. Several such 
means are recognized, including perception, inference, and 
authoritative verbal testimony. Both the conduct of the cultured 
elite and Vedic revelation are such verbal testimonies, and there- 
fore authoritative means of knowing the Laws. See p. xxxix. 

1.10 SavitrT . . . Vedas', the purpose here is to show that no separate 
initiation takes place for studying the different Vedas. 

1.14 teacher . . . gathers: a common strategy in these texts is to use 
phonetic similarities to establish etymological derivations, which 
in turn has the didactic purpose of explaining the ‘deeper’ mean- 
ing of a word, in this case ‘teacher’. I give the Sanskrit within 
parenthesis to help the English reader to detect the phonetic link. 

1.16-18 gives birth . . . body. The initiatory rite performed by the teacher 
is viewed as the second birth of the boy. It is because of this 
second birth that people belonging to the three upper classes 
(varna), who alone are entitled to vedic initiation, are called 
‘twice-born’ ( dvija ): see G 1.8; 10.50. 

1 .28 season: an Indian season lasts approximately two months. See G 
14.25 n. 

1.32 Brahman-killers: there is a double entendre here, the term mean- 
ing both a murderer of a Brahmin and a man who has not kept 
the Veda ‘alive’ by neglecting vedic study and has thus ‘killed’ the 


353 



Notes to pages 8-11 


Veda, which is also called brahman. 'They are all", namely oneself, 
one’s father, and one’s grandfather; the same meaning below at A 
1.2.5. 

2.5 cremation grounds : this is an epithet used elsewhere with reference 

to Sudras and other low-caste and outcaste people (Va 18.1 1-13) 
and indicates the impurity of such individuals. 

2.19 sin causing loss of caste, for this category of sins, see A 1 .21 .7-20; 
G 21.1-3; B 2.2.1-11; Va 1.19-22. 

2.22 ritual food: i.e. food that is ritually offered to gods or ancestors. 

2.28 not wash his body: the period of studentship was viewed as a time 
of penance. Rites of passage generally involve separation from 
one’s previous status, a liminal period sometimes involving seclu- 
sion, and finally the integration into the new status (van Gennep 
1960). Vedic studentship was such a liminal period. Not washing 
oneself and keeping oneself dirty are some ways of expressing 
this liminality. The student is required to keep ‘his body dirty, his 
teeth stained’ (A 1.7.11; cf. G 2.13). These provisions stand in 
contrast to others that require a student to bathe frequently, indi- 
cating changing practices or that here ‘bathing’ is considered 
purely a ritual immersion and not ‘washing’ the body. People in 
periods of ritual impurity (dsauca), such as after the death of a 
family member, and menstruating women are also not permitted 
to wash themselves, since washing is a rite that expresses the 
recovery of purity: see Va 4.14; 5.6-7. The end of studentship, 
significantly, is signalled by a ritual bath (integration into a new 
status), after which the young graduate decorates his body and 
wears perfumes and garlands (A 1.8.2). 

3.12 casinos and fairs: the meanings of sabhd and samdja are unclear, 

but I think they are technical terms rather than generic words 
translated by Biihler as ‘assemblies and crowds’. I take the former 
in the sense of a gambling hall as used at A 2.25.12. The second 
probably refers to some sort of fair or spectacle that attracted 
crowds, something looked down upon by the third-century bce 
emperor, Asoka (Rock Edict 1). See Ghosh 1973, 56. 

3.25 degraded or heinous sinners: these are technical terms for classes 
of sinful and/or socially ostracized people. The former are 
referred to at A 1.21.6 and probably defined under sins that make 
people sordid at A 1.21.12-19. Acts making someone a heinous 
sinner are given at A 1.24.6-9 and Va 23.14. 

3.27 leftovers: the Sanskrit term ucchista refers most frequently to the 
food left over after one has eaten. Such remnants are considered 
extremely impure and polluting. In an adjectival sense, however, 
the term refers to a person who is rendered impure by coming 


354 



Notes to pages 11-12 


into contact with ucchista food. Thus, after a meal a person 
remains ucchista until he or she has performed the required puri- 
fication. There are, however, other extended meanings of the 
term. Medhatithi (on M 4.80), an early commentator of Manu, 
isolates four possible meanings of ucchista : (1) because of contact 
with the inside of the mouth while eating, the eater, the eaten 
food, and the plate from which one eats become ucchista', (2) food 
left on the plate after someone has eaten off it is ucchista', (3) as 
also what is left in the dish from which food has been served to 
someone; (4) food left in the pot after people have been served; 
and (5) a person is ucchista after voiding urine or excrement and 
before purification. According to Medhatithi, the primary mean- 
ing of the term is (1), the pollution resulting from food and fin- 
gers coming into contact with the inside of the mouth. Some 
types of ucchista, however, are good and can be eaten. Generally 
such leftovers belong to a person superior to oneself. Thus, a wife 
may eat the leftovers of her husband, a student the leftovers 
of his teacher, and everyone the leftovers of a sacrifice or an 
offering to a god (A 1.4.1-11; G 2.31-2). Eating what is left over 
after feeding guests and members of the household is often con- 
sidered as a great virtue in a householder (A 2.8.2; B 2.5.18). See 
Malamoud 1972; Olivelle 1998. 

3.28-30 A Brahmin ... at the end : the set formula for requesting 
almsfood is: ‘Madam, give food' (see B 1.3.16), which is how a 
Brahmin would say it. A Ksatriya would say ‘Give, Madam, 
food', and a Vaisya, ‘Give food, Madam’. The formula implies 
that it was the housewife who normally distributed food to stu- 
dents and mendicants. This type of public ritualized behaviour, 
as well as minute differences in the dress code, are constant 
reminders to oneself and to others of the class of society to which 
a person belongs and points to the centrality of the class ( varna ) 
system within ancient Indian society, at least in the eyes of our 
Brahmin authors. 

4.8-10 for a vedic text . . . from it', for a discussion of these exegetical 
rules, see G 3.36 n.; p. xlii. 

4.22 forgo sleep: the meaning is that a student should assist the teacher 
in preparing his bed and so forth, and go to sleep after the teacher. 
When he does this, he can be said to never sleep: see A 1.4.28. 

4.27 make him desist: Biihler translates this as ‘he may return home’. 
The Sanskrit term nirvartayet, however, has the meaning of 
restraining someone (so also Bohtlingk 18856, 518), and the 
commentator Haradatta’s observation that he should do this 
himself or get someone else like his father to do it also points to 
putting pressure on the teacher to abandon his former ways. 


355 



Notes to pages 12-1 7 


4.29 A student . . . householder, this hints at the possibility of a person 
remaining a student throughout his life, an institution recognized 
within the asrama system: A 2.21.6; Olivelle 1993, 78-81. 

5.25 At times . . . forbidden : for these occasions, see A 1.9.1 — 1.11.38 
and parallels elsewhere. 

6.4 not wrong . . . bed: it is understood that the student sleeps on the 
floor. 

6. 1 8 wear one . . . arm: the upper garment is simply a piece of cloth like 
a shawl formed into a loop. Wearing it in this manner is called 
yajhopavtta or simply upavita. Later the upper garment worn in 
this manner became contracted to merely a cord, also called by 
those terms (B. 1.8.5), a cord with which a boy was ritually 
invested at his initiation (p. xxx). This cord was made with three 
strings, each containing three threads twisted to form a single 
string (B 1.8.5). So each cord had nine threads. It became the 
practice especially for Brahmins to wear this sacred cord (also 
called brahmasutra ) at all times (B 2.3.1; Va 8.17), a distinguish- 
ing mark of Brahmins in India even today. Some recommend one 
such cord for students and a double cord (i.e. with six strings and 
eighteen threads) for a bath-graduate and a householder (B 1.5.2; 
Va 12.14). The upper garment (or the sacred cord) is worn over 
the right shoulder and under the left arm (a pattern called 
pracinavTta ) at ancestral rites (B 2.10.1), and over the neck like a 
garland (a pattern called nivtta) in rites involving humans, such as 
sexual intercourse, sacramentary rites, and going to the toilet. 
Another mode of wearing it (‘suspended or tied below’) is given 
in B 1.8.10. Govinda explains this as tying it below the navel when 
engaged in activities such as applying oil on or massaging the 
body. See B 1. 8.7-9; TS 2.5.11.1; Kane 1962-75, ii. 287-97. 

6.32 elder: the Sanskrit term guru is frequently translated as teacher, 
but in these texts it has a much wider connotation. It includes the 
teacher, the specific word for whom is acarya (A 1.1. 14 n.), but 
frequently refers to other venerable people, such as parents, 
grandparents, uncles, and the like. I have translated guru generally 
as elder, unless the context clearly indicates the teacher. On the 
term guru, see Hara 1980. 

7.2 counterclockwise . . . clockwise: walking around a sacred object 
or a revered person in a clockwise manner, that is, keeping 
one’s right hand towards the object or person (technically called 
pradaksina ) as a mark of respect has been a cultural constant in 
India from the most ancient to contemporary times. The counter- 
clockwise procedure is used to indicate disrespect and in rites that 
are inauspicious (see Va 15.14). 

8.22 tooth cleaners: in ancient India, as also in rural areas today, sticks 


356 



Notes to pages 1 7-20 


cut from certain trees are used to brush the teeth. One end of the 
stick is crushed to form the brush. 

8.26 A pupil ceases . . . dolt : I follow Bohtlingk’s (18856, 519) convin- 
cing argument. The commentator Haradatta has misunderstood 
this passage, and Biihler follows him in this laboured trans- 
lation: ‘That pupil who, attending to two (teachers), accuses his 
(principal and first) teacher of ignorance, remains no (longer) a 
pupil.’ 

8.29 until . . . studies: the commentator Haradatta and, following him, 
Biihler interpret the expression a nivrtteh to mean ‘until he stops 
his wrong behaviour’. But in the very next sentence the term 
nivrtta is used with a reference to the completion of studentship. 
The meaning is that the teacher has the authority to punish a 
pupil’s infractions only while he is his student. 

9.1-3 After commencing . . . half months: RohinI (Aldebaran) is the 
fourth lunar mansion of the month. Under the first option, the 
period of study lasts five months. Under the second option, where 
the period is shortened to four and a half months, the start is 
delayed until the full moon of August-September or the conclu- 
sion is advanced. Cf. Va 13.5. 

9.6 rod’s throw: the term samya (‘rod’) refers to a stick (about one and 
a half feet long) used in preparing the sacrificial arena. A ‘rod’s 
throw’ must have referred to a particular distance; the same 
expression is used in M 8.237, where three rod’s throws and hun- 
dred arrow-lengths (about 600 feet) are juxtaposed. If the two 
distances are comparable, then one rod’s throw should be about 
200 feet. 

10.1 full-moon . . . season: these are the full-moon days on which the 
seasonal sacrifices ( cdturmdsya ) are to be performed: February- 
March, June-July, and October-November. 

10.7 consecrated for a sacrifice: prior to performing a sacrifice, the 
patron is ritually consecrated through a rite of initiation at which 
his head and beard are shaved. The provision of this rule refers 
only to such a shaving of the head, and not to the routine shaving 
of the beard. 

10.28 rite for a newly deceased person: after death a person enters a 
liminal state (preta, ‘ghost’) in which the dead person is danger- 
ous and impure. Rites ( ekoddistasrdddha ) are performed for such 
newly deceased individuals at which Brahmins are fed. This 
period lasts until the rite (sapindana or sapindlkarana) that for- 
mally transfers the deceased to the world of the ancestors is per- 
formed, usually on the twelfth day after death. On ancestral rites, 
see Kane 1962-75, iv. 334-551. 


357 



Notes to pages 20-23 


11.3 gods who were originally humans', the meaning of the expression 
manusyaprakrtTndm devanam is unclear, and the commentator 
Haradatta gives different possible interpretations, including gods 
who have human faces. He gives Nandi and Kubera as examples 
of gods who were formerly humans and became gods through 
severe austerities. A similar provision is found in G 16.34, where it 
reads simply ‘sacrifice to humans’ ( manusyayajna ). In explaining 
the latter passage, the commentator Haradatta refers to A 1.11.3, 
but Maskarin explains the term as simply referring to a get- 
together with friends ( mitramelaka ). But this can well be simply 
the feeding of guests that is part of the five ‘great sacrifices’: see B 
2.11.1, 5, where the very term manusyayajna is used. 

11.32 hour. i.e. a muhurta, 48 minutes, the Indian equivalent of an hour. 
There are thirty muhurtas in a day. Often the term muhurta does 
not have a precise meaning of 48 minutes, but refers to a some- 
what extended period of time or to a brief moment (see A 1.15.8; 
Friedrich 1993, 101). Thus brahma muhurta is the time of the 
morning sacred to Brahman (B 2.17.22n.). Often muhurta 
indicates an aupicious time when significant activities, such as 
marriage, are performed. 

11.35 outside the proper time : the time for taking up a new section is the 
annual course of study described above, and that is done under 
the tutelage of a teacher. Only texts that have already been stud- 
ied can be recited at other times. Study here refers principally to 
the proper method of reciting the vedic texts, with the correct 
accentuation, etc. Without that knowledge, which can be received 
only from a teacher, it is forbidden to recite a vedic text. 

11.38 legal assemblies', the commentator Haradatta takes the term 
parisad here to mean legal texts ( dharmasdstras ), which is 
unlikely. Biihler takes it to mean ‘teaching and works of other 
Vedic schools’, a meaning 1 have not found elsewhere. On legal 
assemblies, see G 28.49 n. 

12.8-11 accepted practice . . . vedic text', for an explanation of these 
exegetical rules, see p. xli. 

13.8 During . . . syllable : commands given by one priest to another 
during a sacrifice, as well as the assent to such commands, begin 
with OM. See TU 1.8. 

13.10 mutual agreement', this appears to be a technical term for the 
ritual/legal obligations undertaken by both teacher and pupil 
when the latter ritually places himself under the former as his 
pupil. Such a compact requires the pupil to submit to a strict 
behaviour regimen and total obedience to the teacher, as described 
in the section on the student, A 1 .2-7. 


358 



Notes to page 23 


Trihsravana, Trihsahavacana : the commentator Haradatta, as 
well as Biihler (1879-82) and Friedrich (1993) pass over these 
in silence. They clearly referred to some type of vedic texts or 
passages. I have been unable to identify them. 

13.12, 15, 17 subservience . . . play, the meaning of the term gati is 
unclear. It is used a total of four times, three times in the negative 
phrase na gatir vidyate (A 1.13.12, 15, 17), and once positively 
gatir eva tasmin (A 1.14.5). The term appears to be used with a 
technical meaning by Apastamba. A similar meaning is not 
attached to it in any other Dharmasastric text. The commentator 
Haradatta and, following him, Biihler take it to mean obedience. 
But the word for that is susrusa, which is used at A 1.14.6. So the 
two cannot be simply synonyms. Friedrich (1993) takes it to mean 
‘Weg’, the way to heaven, and connects it with the paragraph on 
OM at A 1.13.6-9. I think he is mistaken. There appears to be a 
clear attempt here to distinguish a pupil’s relationship to his 
teacher ( dcdrya ) from that to other individuals who may teach 
him or occupy a position of authority. We see a similar distinc- 
tion earlier at A 1 .7.28-9, where also the teacher is distinguished 
from a temporary tutor appointed by the teacher and from older 
fellow students. It is likely that in such an academy more 
advanced students may have been given the task of instructing 
less advanced students, somewhat like graduate students acting as 
teaching assistants for undergraduate courses in modern uni- 
versities. The term gati is probably also connected with the 
‘mutual agreement’, that is, the ritual and legal contract between 
teacher and pupil referred to in the previous sentence (A 1.13.10). 
I think gati refers to this condition of being a pupil vis-a-vis the 
teacher, a condition that entails special privileges and obligations, 
such as eating a teacher’s leftovers, massaging his feet, etc. It may 
be possible that gati is related to anugamana (‘walking behind’), a 
term used with regard to the primary duty of a pupil: see A 
2.4.26. Sahara (on PMS 6.2.6.21-2) uses the term anugantavya 
(the teacher ‘to be followed’) as a short-hand term for a pupil’s 
duties. For want of a better term, I have translated it as 
‘subservience’. 

13.16 as also . . . students: this extraordinarily brief {vrddhanam tu) 
aphorism of two words is extremely unclear. I think the commen- 
tator Haradatta’s instinct to take tu (‘but’) as meaning ‘and’ (ca) 
is correct. I also think that the sequence of appointed tutors and 
older students found at A 1 .7.28-9 is repeated here, and the term 
vrddhanam (lit., ‘of old people’) refers to fellow students older 
than oneself. The commentator Haradatta gives three possible 
explanations, indicating that he is also merely guessing. Basically, 
according to his explanation, older students need not obey 


359 



Notes to pages 25-26 


younger teachers. But the teacher was dealt with in A 1.13.10-12, 
and from A 1.13.13-15 the subject is tutors other than the 
teacher, tutors who may indeed have been older fellow students. 
Friedrich (1993) joins this siitra with the preceding one and 
thinks that tu (‘but’) has somehow migrated into this from the 
previous sutra. His translation of the two sutras (1.13.14—15) 
does not make sense to me: ‘Nicht aber gibt es den Weg von den 
alten.’ 

14.23 use a pronoun: the normal way to greet someone is: ‘I, so-and-so 
[one’s personal name], greet you.’ But in these cases the personal 
name is omitted, and one simply says, ‘I greet you’. See G 6.5; Va 
13.44-6. 

14.26-9 He should ask . . . good health: this is one more example of 
public and routinized assertion of class/caste distinctions (cf. A 
1.3.28-30 n.). The first provision applies to Brahmins, and, since 
they are the target audience of these texts, the author does not 
mention them explicitly (p. xxxiv). The Sanskrit terms kusala 
(‘doing well’) and anamaya (‘in good shape’) have similar mean- 
ings, although the latter may have a physical meaning (not 
injured), given the military calling of K$atriyas. 

15.1 softly reciting prayers: the common Sanskrit term japa has the 
technical meaning of ‘murmuring’ ritual formulas or texts, that is, 
articulating the words with the mouth and lips in such a way that 
they are audible only to oneself. 

15.2 water collected on the ground: generally, this would be water in a 
lake or reservoir. But even ‘water collected on the ground suf- 
ficient for cows to slake their thirst’ (B 1.9.10) may be used for 
purposes of purification. 

15.13-14 Whenheis. . . to the ground: in general, when a pure person sits 
on the same seat or couch as an impure person, the seat transmits 
the impurity from the latter to the former. Such a seat could be 
made by arranging a bed of straw properly. But when it is 
arranged haphazardly, it is not considered a seat. Likewise, when 
seats are directly on the ground and not raised up on legs, they are 
equivalent to the ground itself, which is always pure (A 1.16.15) 
and hence cannot spread impurity. 

16.2 water sufficient to reach his heart: the issue is the quantity of water 
used for sipping. The largest amount is required by Brahmins, 
and this amount is characterized by ‘sufficient to reach the heart’; 
possibly because one can feel the water going all the way into the 
chest. Here too some texts indicate a difference among the classes: 
K§atriyas become pure by sipping water sufficient to reach the 
throat, Vaisyas with water taken into the mouth, and Sudras and 
women by water touching the lips: B 1.8.23; Va 3.31-4. 


360 



Notes to pages 26-28 


16.7 touch the organs : one rubs water on the eyes with the thumb and 
ring finger, either simultaneously or one eye at a time; on the 
nostrils with the thumb and forefinger; on the ears with the 
thumb and little linger. 

16.14 touch water: the Sanskrit term upasprset is ambiguous. The 
commentator Haradatta explains that in some instances one 
should bathe, in others sip water, and in yet others merely touch 
water. 

16.16 not fit to be eaten : the Dharma texts make a clear distinction 
between two types of food that should not be eaten. The first is 
‘unfit food’ given the technical term abhojya, and the second is 
‘forbidden food’, abhaksya. The first type consists of food that 
one is normally permitted to eat, such as meat and rice, but that 
has been rendered unfit to be eaten because it has come into 
contact with something or someone impure. Thus, food in which 
one finds a hair or which has been licked by a dog is ‘unfit’ to be 
eaten. ‘Forbidden food’, on the other hand, are types of food that 
are never permitted, such as garlic and the meat of certain ani- 
mals (see M 1.113; 5.1-26). Although the two terms are not used 
exclusively in this technical sense, we can detect a clear distinction 
between these two types of food that should not be eaten: see A 
1.26.7. 

16.21 Food that . . . eaten : not all food that becomes impure needs to be 
thrown away as ‘unfit’ to be eaten. Some, like the ones mentioned 
here, can be purified, generally by sprinkling it with water or 
mixing it with ghee, and then consumed. 

16.24 filth : the Sanskrit term amedhya, like its quasi-synonym mala, 
may refer to any type of filthy substance. Most frequently, how- 
ever, these terms refer specifically to substances that come out of 
the human body, such as urine, excrement, and phlegm. Sources 
often refer to twelve such substances: ‘Oily exudations, semen, 
blood, fat, urine, faeces, snot, ear-wax, phlegm, tears, discharge 
of eyes, and sweat— these are the twelve impurities ( malas ) of 
men (M 5.135; Vi 22.81). See Olivelle 1998. 

16.27 mouse droppings or mouse parts: Bohtlingk (18856, 520) emends 
musakaldngam to musakalahkam . The translation then would be 
‘in which there are mouse droppings’, eliminating mouse parts. 
Biihler (18866) rejects this emendation. 

17.7 terrace: the commentator Haradatta, whom Biihler follows, 
interprets the term prasada to mean a wooden platform. 

17.31 The meat . . . sacrifice: I have been unable to trace this passage in 
the SB, which is the text normally referred to by Apastamba as 
the text of the Vajasaneyins (White Yajurveda). But at SB 


361 



Notes to pages 28-30 


3.1.2.21 there is a discussion of the cow and the ox as containing 
the vigour of all other species of animals and a prohibition 
against eating their meat. But it cites a sarcastic saying by 
Yajnavalkya (the reputed author of the White Yajurveda) that he, 
for one, will eat it if it is tender! 

17.36 Vardhranasa cranes and Laksmana cranes'. Haradatta and, follow- 
ing him, Biihler take Laksmana as a qualifier of Vardhranasa. 
The translation would then be: ‘with the exception of the 
Laksmana variety of Vardhranasa cranes’. 

17.37 Animals with five claws : this is an ancient and widespread rule 
forbidding the eating of animals with five nails or claws, with the 
exception of some. Here seven such exceptions are listed, whereas 
the standard rule contains only five exceptions. The general 
formulation of this rule is: ‘The five five-clawed animals may 
be eaten’, meaning that five-clawed animals other than those 
enumerated are forbidden. This is an example of the so-called 
parisamkhya injunction, which is a prohibition couched as an 
injunction. Thus, the intent of the rule is to prohibit five-clawed 
animals, not to enjoin the eating of the five listed animals. Thus, 
someone may avoid eating all five-clawed animals, even those 
listed, without violating this injunction. The forbidding of 
animals with five ‘nails’ may indeed be a residue of a proscription 
of cannibalism, since human beings are among animals with five 
nails. See G 17.27; B 1.12.5; Va 14.39; M 5.17-18. For a detailed 
study, see Jamison 1998. 

18.11 as during . . . penitential act: here I follow the compelling emend- 
ation suggested by Bohtlingk (18856, 520) yatra prayascittam for 
yatraprayascittam, although I recognize that the latter is the 
lectio dijficilior and therefore has a greater claim to be the 
original. Biihler, following Haradatta, translates: ‘He shall not eat 
in a house where (the host) performs a rite which is not a rite of 
penance, whilst he ought to perform a penance.’ This appears to 
be rather far-fetched and convoluted, whereas the alternative is 
rather simple: one is not permitted to eat at the house of a man 
who has committed a sin and is in the process of performing the 
required penance. 

18.23 prior to .. . for a sacrifice: the reference is to a Soma sacrifice. Part 
of the ritual process consists of the ritual purchase of the Soma 
plants to be used in the sacrifice. This rule forbids eating the food 
of a man consecrated for the sacrifice (see A 1.10.7 n.) before that 
purchase. 

18.24—6 Only after . . . remainder: a similar provision is found in AB 2.9. 

19.1 debtor: 1 follow the sensible emendation suggested by Bohtlingk 
(18856, 520), reading rnaka (‘debtor’) for anika, a term of very 


362 



Notes to pages 30-34 


doubtful meaning interpreted by Haradatta as ‘a man who learns 
the Veda from his son’. 

19.15 abortionist: the Sanskrit term hhrunahan has two meanings: a killer 
of a foetus (abortionist) and a killer of a learned Brahmin. The 
VkhG (1.1), giving the definitions of eight types of Brahmins in 
terms of their learning, defines a bhruna as a Brahmin who has 
mastered the Veda, set up the ritual fires, and offered a Soma 
sacrifice. See Kane 1962-75, ii. 131, 148 n„ 334; iii. 612n. 1161. 
The Dharma literature uses the term with both meanings. At G 
21.9 it means an abortionist, while at B 1.18.13 it clearly refers to 
a murderer of a Brahmin. At other places, such as here and in 
most passages, it is impossible to tell which meaning is intended. 
Indeed, both meanings may be intended in many of these pas- 
sages; Va 20.23, in fact, gives both definitions of the term. 

20.9 both worlds : i.e. this world and the next. 

21.12 actions that make people sordid: Apastamba uses asuci (‘impure’) 
eight times (1.21.12; 1.21.19; 1.29.14; 1.29.15; 1.29.17; 1.29.18; 
2.12.22; at 1.2.29 it means filth). Certainly in six of these and in 
all likelihood also in a seventh (A 1.29.14), asuci is used not as an 
adjective but as a substantive with reference to a type of sinner. 
The sins that create this state are called asucikara, ‘making some- 
one asuci’. Apastamba does not know or does not recognize the 
distinction common in later literature between mahapatcika and 
upapataka, grievous and secondary sins causing loss of caste. 
He begins the section on sins by stating that ‘social interaction 
with outcastes (jratita) is not permitted, as also with degraded 
( apapatra ) people’ (A 1.21.5-6). Then he describes one group of 
sins which he calls patamydni (‘causing loss of caste’: A 1.21.7- 
11), and a second group of sins which he calls asucikardni (‘caus- 
ing someone to be asuci: A 1.21.12-19). These two groups must 
correspond to the two categories of people in the introductory 
statement; an asuci, therefore, is an apapatra, a degraded person 
with whom social interaction is forbidden. For similar use of this 
term, see G 9.1 1; 9.16; 16.46; 23.22; B 2.2.15; 2.2.23; 2.2.24. 1 have 
discussed this in detail in Olivelle 1998. 

22.4 cave: This probably refers to the cavity of the heart: cf. KaU 
1.14; 2.12; 3.1; 4.6-7; MuU 2.1.8, 10; 3.1.7. 

22.6-7 Follow what . . . without compare: these two verses are very 
obscure and possibly corrupt. The translation is tentative. 

24. 1 If someone . . . enmity: although the person committing the crime 

is not identified, a Brahmin is clearly meant (p. xxxiv). Biihler’s 
translation ‘for the expiation of his sin’ follows the commentator 
and is obviously wrong, as he himself acknowledges in a note on 
this passage. The motive for giving the cattle was to appease the 


363 



Notes to pages 34-37 


vengeance of the murdered man's relatives, a common feature in 
ancient penal codes. This motive is stated also in B 1.19.1. See 
Lingat 1973, 64. 

24.8-9 foetus . . . period : these two provisions are linked by the fact that 
in the first the foetus may be a male Brahmin and killing it would 
entail the murder of a Brahmin (see the reason given in Va 
20.24 n.), whereas in the second the woman is in her fertile period 
and killing her is tantamount to killing a future Brahmin (cf. G 
22.12-13). Here there is the added possibility that the woman is 
pregnant. A woman soon after her menstruation is called by the 
technical term atreyi, which is given an interesting etymological 
spin in Va 20.35-6. For a detailed study of this provision, see 
Jamison 1991, 213-23. 

24.23 Law and profit : these are technical terms for two of the three 
traditional spheres of human endeavour ( purusartha ): Law / 
righteousness ( dharma ), profit/wealth/power ( artha ), and pleasure 
(, kama ). When they are in conflict with each other, one is expected 
to choose the higher— profit over pleasure, and righteousness 
over both profit and pleasure. In each of these fields expert trea- 
tises were composed: the Dharmasastras for the first, treatises on 
government (Arthasastra) for the second, and texts on erotics 
(Kamasutra) for the third. 

25.2 metal column : the meaning of the Sanskrit term surmi is not 
altogether clear. It is certainly a cylindrical object made of metal. 
Bidder, following the lead of Haradatta, translates it as a ‘metal 
image of a woman’. The column may have been hollow, because 
at A 1.28.15 the criminal is said to enter it. 

25.10 every fourth mealtime : two mealtimes a day are acknowledged for 
humans, morning and evening. Eating every fourth mealtime 
amounts to eating one day in the morning and the next day in the 
evening, thus skipping two mealtimes between meals. 

26.8 cooked oblation : the procedure for cooked oblations ( pakayajha ) 
are given at the very beginning of most Grhyasutras: see SG 1.1. 

26.14 moon’s change (parvan): this may refer simply to the new- and 
full-moon days; or else, to the new moon, the eighth day after the 
new moon, the full moon, and the fourteenth day after the full 
moon. See also B 1.21.22. 

27.1 great river : generally defined as a river that flows into the sea (cf. 

B 1.11.41). 

27.5 winter and spring : winter ( hemanta ) is the two months from 
mid-November to mid- January (the lunar months of Agrahayana 
and Pau§a), and spring is the two months from mid- January to 
mid-March (Magha and Phalguna). 


364 



Notes to pages 38-40 


27.10 decoction: Haradatta interprets this term ( kasaya ) as referring to 
any intoxicating drink other than the type called surd (see Va 
20.19n.). 

27. 1 1 serving a person of the black class : according to some commenta- 
tors, this refers to having sexual contact with a woman of the 
‘black class’, i.e. Sudra. 

28.2-4 There are . . . crime: the text is somewhat elliptic and possibly 
corrupt: see Bohtlingk (1885/?, 522) and Biihler’s (1886/?, 537) 
reply. In all likelihood, the statements following the direct quota- 
tion also form part of Varsyayani’s opinion. 

28.9 to bring about male progeny: the reading putratvasya is problem- 
atic and possibly corrupt. Haradatta’s explanation is far-fetched 
and rightly rejected by Bohtlingk ( 1 885/?, 522), who offers the 
conjecture putratve ’sya with the translation: ‘dabei, dass er Sohn 
wird, das er zur Welt gelangt u. s. w.’ I think Bohtlingk’s instinct 
is right, even if we do not accept his conjectural reading. The 
meaning appears to be that a mother undergoes many rites to 
ensure that a male child is born, and once born does numerous 
things to make sure that he grows into adulthood. The maternal 
link created by these activities cannot be ruptured completely 
under any circumstances (see Va 8.16). 

28.18 in the above manner: the reference is to the penance described in 
sutra 1 1 . 

29.14 semen of a sordid man: I take asucisuklam as a compound (see A 
1.21. 12n.). Haradatta and Buhler (as also Bohtlingk 18856, 523) 
take asuci as an adjective; the translation then would be ‘impure 
semen’. See Friedrich 1993, 135; Olivelle 1998. 

29.18 in accordance . . . committed: this may refer to whether the sin 
was committed intentionally or not (A 1.29.2^1) and/or to the 
frequency of the sin (A 1.26.7). 

30.4 bath-graduate: the term sndtaka means ‘one who has taken a 
bath’, and specifically a student who after completing his studies 
has taken the ritual bath that signals the conclusion of student- 
ship. It appears that Apastamba distinguishes a bath-graduate 
from a mere student who has returned home, a subject he deals 
with at A 1.7. 19 f. A bath-graduate is accorded special status and 
privileges (A 2.8.6; 2.27.21; G 6.24). It is clear that the title of 
bath-graduate attaches to an individual not merely between the 
conclusion of studentship and marriage, as generally believed by 
scholars, but also after marriage. Many of the provisions given 
under the topic of bath-graduate imply that he is married and is 
the head of a household (A 1.32.1-2; G 9.25). 

30.9 When there . . . prevails: for the general rule that when there is a 


365 



Notes to pages 40-43 


conflict between injunction in vedic f sruti ) and traditional texts 
(smrti) the former prevails, see p. xlii. The reason for inserting 
this statement here, according to Haradatta, is that a person who 
performs the daily fire sacrifice ( agnihotra ) should not go outside 
the village, because the Veda prescribes that rite is to be per- 
formed in the home. That rule takes precedence over the previous 
rule that requires a person to perform the normal twilight wor- 
ship ( sandhya ) outside the village. 

30.15 spreading something on the ground : Haradatta says that one 
should spread grass or some such material on the ground and 
void urine or excrement on it and not directly on the ground (see 
B 1.10.10). 

32.9 Paldsa wood'. Palasa (see Appendix III) is a sacred tree and its 
branches and wood are used for ritual purposes (see A 1.2.38). It 
should not be used for making the items listed in this prohibition, 
all of which come into contact with impure parts of the body. Cf. 
A 1.8.22n. 

32.11 until nightfall'. Biihler, following the commentator Haradatta, 
translates: ‘Let him be awake from midnight.’ This translation is 
inaccurate: the particle a means ‘until’ and not ‘from’ and nisa 
means ‘night’ and not ‘midnight’. See Bohtlingk 18856, 523. 

32.15 thinking . . . forbidden', the reason for such a conclusion, accord- 
ing to Haradatta, is that the next day happens to be a day on 
which recitation is forbidden (see A 1.9-10). 

32. 1 6 rest . . . something', the meaning of apassaytta is unclear. Haradatta 
and Biihler take it to be an altered form of apdsrayita, and I have 
followed their lead in taking it to be a Prakritic form. Bohtlingk 
(18856, 523) rejects this and gives the conjecture apasaylta, ‘er 
lege sich abseits, in einiger Entfernung nieder’. The point of the 
prescription, however, is that he should not go back to sleep. 

32.24 This is how . . . Kumalana: Haradatta gives the story behind this 
elliptic quote. A certain seer had two pupils, Dharmaprahrada 
and Kumalana. Once the two brought two large bundles of fire- 
wood from the forest and threw them carelessly into the teacher’s 
house. One of these hit the teacher’s son and killed him. The 
teacher asked them who killed his son, and both denied responsi- 
bility. The teacher then summoned Death and asked him. Death 
did not want to give a direct answer and, weeping, indirectly 
pointed to Dharmaprahrada as the guilty party by saying that the 
guilt fell ‘not on Kumalana’. See A 2.12.21. 

32.26 crossing a river by swimming: an obvious reason for this is the 
danger it poses: G 9.32. Another reason is given in Va 19.25: 
swimming across a river is a way to avoid paying the toll at a river 


366 



Notes to pages 43-46 


crossing. A man who resorts to it is fined one hundred times the 
applicable toll. 


BOOK TWO 

1.4 On new- and full-moon days: literally, ‘on the days of the moon’s 
change’ (A 1.26.14n.), but here the reference is specifically to the 
new- and full-moon days: see SG 1.3. 

1.7-12 On the anniversary . . . every anniversary day: my translation of 
this passage is based on the interpretation of the ambiguous 
expression etasminn ahani (lit., ‘on that day’) as referring to the 
day of the couple’s marriage. This is Haradatta’s interpretation, 
although he acknowledges that other commentators did not agree 
with him. At AG 3.8.7 the expression etad ahar (‘that day’) clearly 
refers to the wedding day, and I think the expression has the same 
meaning here. Friedrich (1993, 145) thinks that this expression 
refers to the ‘days of the moon’s change’ of the sutra 4; but that 
is unlikely because the term there ( parvasu ) is in the plural and, 
as Haradatta himself observes, unlikely to be referred to by a 
pronoun in the singular. 

1.17 in season: the ‘season’ for the wife is the days of the month when 
she is fertile, which were thought to be the days immediately fol- 
lowing her menstrual period. During that time a husband was 
obligated to have sexual intercourse with his wife. AG 3.9.1 
recommends even days from the fourth day (that is, the day when 
the period of menstrual impurity ends with the wife’s bath) to the 
sixteenth following the start of the menstrual flow. 

1.18-19 And if his wife . . . Brdhmana passage: the Brahmana passage 
referred to may be TS 2.5. 1.5, where it is said that women 
obtained from Indra the gift of becoming pregnant after their 
period and of enjoying sex right up to the time of delivery. 
Accordingly, Haradatta is right to take darn eva (‘only regarding 
the wife’) to mean dara eva sakame sari, ‘only when the wife 
wishes’. The intent appears to be that a good man should eschew 
such intercourse, but if the woman wants it (women being viewed 
as unable to control their passions), he should oblige because of 
this vedic text. Cf. Va 5.8; 12.24. 

3.14 While . . . one day: the final offering is described at A 2.4.8. 
According to Haradatta, the formula here is TA 10.67 (= MNU 
465-6). 

3.16-23 first six . . . last four formulas: these formulas are given in the TA 
10.67 (= MNU 457-9), each formula ending with Svaha: 1. To 
Fire; 2. To All-gods; 3. To Firm Earth; 4. To Firm Abode; 5. To 
Unshakable Abode; 6. To Fire who makes the offering flawless; 


367 



Notes to pages 46-51 


7. To Dharma; 8. To Adharma; 9. To Waters; 10. To Plants and 
Trees; 11. To Fiends and Divine Hosts; 12. To Home Deities; 13. 
To Hosts nearby; 14 To Lords of the Hosts nearby; 15. To All 
Creatures. 

4. 1-8 With the ritual formula ... at night, these formulas are also found 
at TA 10.67 (= MNU 460-2), and all end with Svaha: 1. To Love; 
2. To Mid-space; 3. What stirs, bestirs, and moves, Bhaga by 
name— to that name; 4. To Earth; 5. To Mid-space; 6. To Sky; 7. 
To Sun; 8. To Moon; 9. To Constellations; 10. To Indra; 11. To 
Brhaspati; 12. To Prajapati; 13. To Brahman. The last two are 
special: 14. Svadha to Ancestors, to Gods Svaha; 15. Hail to 
Rudra, Lord of Animals, Svaha. 

4.4. seat of Brahman: Haradatta explains that this is the centre of the 
house. Others explain it as the place where the Brahman priest 
sits, that is, to the south of the sacred fire. 

5.11 interrupting: I follow Bohtlingk’s (18856, 524) interpretation. 
Biihler, following Haradatta, translates: ‘He shall not contradict 
his teacher’, which is also the interpretation of Friedrich (1993). 

6.4 one branch . . . Vedas: Haradatta thinks the meaning is that the 
person has studied the Veda of his own branch, because that was 
the accepted meaning of the term srotriya (‘vedic scholar’). It is 
difficult to see how the Sanskrit expression ekaikam could be 
made to elicit that meaning. For vedic ‘branch’, see p. xxii. 

7.2 fire within the guests: this may refer to the fire in the stomach 
thought to be responsible for digestion or to the breaths con- 
ceived of as fires: see B 2. 12. For the other fires, see App. 1. 1 . 

7.6-10 When a man . . . final bath: here the various acts of hospitality 
towards a guest are equated with parts of a Soma sacrifice. Visnu 
steps are the four steps a person offering the sacrifice takes at its 
conclusion. He recites a ritual formula at each step, and every 
formula begins with ‘You are the step of Vi§nu’. See Kane 1962- 
75, ii. 1083. Every sacrifice concludes with the final bath known 
as avabhrtlia. 

8.3 savoury dishes: the meaning of rasa here and elsewhere is unclear. 
It can refer to any tasty beverages, spices, seasonings, or condi- 
ments, and thus to sweet or savoury foods. 

8.10-13 The Veda . . . principal texts: this section appears to be somewhat 
out of context, the only connection being with sutra 5 dealing 
with a man capable of reciting the Veda. This passage dis- 
tinguishes the ‘Veda’ from its six supplements. The opponent 
objects, because, according to Haradatta, the ritual expositions 
contain material dealing with vedic rituals and should therefore 
be regarded as the ‘Veda’. Thus the number of supplements 


368 



Notes to pages 51-57 


should be five and not six. The author answers that supplemen- 
tary texts cannot be given the same name as the principal, a doc- 
trine articulated in the PMS 1.3.11-14. 

1 1.14 for a wife . . . supplementary, the meaning appears to be that the 
wife who participated at the establishment of the husband's sac- 
red fires must be present for all subsequent rites using those fires, 
effectively making it impossible for him to divorce her or to take 
another wife. 

11.15 lineage : the term gotra refers to a family line that is connected to a 
single ancient teacher as a common ancestor. The definition of 
this relationship is quite vague and often confused in the litera- 
ture: see Kane 1962-75, ii. 479-501. Gotra is connected to another 
ancient Indian kinship category called pravara based on having 
the same ancestral seer. Each gotra may have several pravaras. 
‘Connection of gotra and pravara may be stated thus: Gotra is the 
latest ancestor or one of the latest ancestors of a person by whose 
name his family has been known for generations; while pravara 
is constituted by the sages or in some cases the remote ancestor 
alone’ (Kane, 1962-75, ii. 497). Two persons related through the 
one or the other are not permitted to marry each other. 

12.10 mixing . . . fires : this may mean that one should not put a fire- 
brand from a sacred fire into a common fire, or vice versa. 
Haradatta explains it as forbidding a person from bringing to 
one place fires burning in different places. 

13.5 A son . . . fathers him: there was an intense debate in ancient India 
about the person to whom a son belonged. Some maintained that 
the husband of the mother, being ‘the owner of the field’, owned 
the son. The example for this position is a seed and a field. If one 
man plants a mango seed (i.e. his semen) in another man’s field 
(i.e. wife), the mangoes produced from that tree belong not to the 
man who owns the seed but to the man who owns the field (M 
9.42-3). This anxiety is revealed in the advice that a man should 
not marry a girl without brothers, because the girl’s father may 
have secretly appointed her to bear sons for him, and thus owns 
the field (G 28.20). On the other hand, as this passage indicates 
(cf. G 18.9), when the protection of the wife is uppermost in the 
mind, the opposite view is maintained. Cf. Va 17.6-11. 

14.2 relative belonging to the same ancestry, the Sanskrit term sapinda 
refers to a group of close relatives, but there is great controversy 
in the tradition with regard to both its meaning and the extent of 
the group covered. One interpretation takes pinda (lit., ‘round 
lump’) to mean a bodily particle and sapinda to mean people who 
through birth have bodily particles in common. In general, the 
relationship extends to six generations before and after the father 


369 



Notes to pages 57-59 


and five generations before and after the mother. Another inter- 
pretation takes pinda to mean the balls of rice offered to ances- 
tors and sapinda to mean people who are connected through these 
ancestral offerings. See B 1 . 1 1 .9. This subject is treated in detail by 
Kane (1962-75, ii. 452-78). 

14.7 black produce of the earth : according to Haradatta, either black 
grains, such as beans, or iron. 

14.8 The chariot . . . father, some connect this sentence with the previ- 
ous one and translate: ‘. . . eldest son, as well as the father’s char- 
iot and the household furniture’ (Friedrich 1993; Biihler 1879-82, 
i. 134 n. 8). 1 agree with Haradatta and Biihler that this is a 
separate sentence for two reasons. First, the syntax with the geni- 
tive pituh (‘of/for father’) coming as the second word followed by 
a further item and then by ca (‘and’) replicates the syntax of the 
next sutra regarding the wife. Second, Apastamba appears to 
refute this view about the share of the eldest son (sutras 6-7) in 
sutras 10-15, and the division of estate between husband and wife 
(sutras 8-9) in sutras 16-20. 

14.10 that : the antecedent of this pronoun, though left unstated, is 
clearly sutras 6-7: see the previous note. 

14.13 Experts . . . for a mate'. The argument is based on a fundamental 
principle of vedic exegesis that distinguishes injunctions, which 
alone are meaningful with regard to Law ( dharma ) from ‘explana- 
tory passages’ ( arthavdda ) that do not have injunctive force (PMS 
6.7.30). The latter type of passages are further subdivided into 
metaphor (gunavada), reiteration (anuvada), and historical state- 
ment ( bhutarthavada ). Here Apastamba puts the texts cited by the 
opponent into the second subdivision. For a detailed discussion 
of these exegetical principles, see Kane 1962-75, v. 1225-56. The 
passages quoted cannot be identified in any known vedic text. 

15.1 The above . . . families : the meaning is that customs of a particu- 
lar region and family are authoritative vis-a-vis people belonging 
to that region or family unless those customs go against vedic 
provisions, a principle stated above in sutra 10. 

15.5 principal elder. Haradatta defines as teacher, mother, and father: 
see A 1.6.32 n. 

15.9 They should ... to do : the deceased recognize that the water is 
offered to them through the recitation of the proper ritual for- 
mula: ‘I offer this water to you, N. N.’, stating the personal and 
family name. For the interesting comment about women as the 
repositories of traditional custom, see also A 2.29.11, 15. 

15.25 traditional teaching: the reference is to the authoritative texts 
of the tradition called smrti that are distinct from the Vedas: 
see p. xli. 


370 



Notes to pages 59-63 


16.1 In ancient times . . . behind : this is an old belief recorded in 
ancient vedic texts: SB 2. 3.4.4. See Olivelle 1993, 37-41. 

16.3 In this rite . . . fire : in the technical ritual vocabulary ‘deity’ 
( devatd ) refers not directly to a god but to that with reference to 
which an offering is put in the fire (Kane 1962-75, v. 1207). So, 
the ‘deity’ can be an ancestor, a demon, or some other being. An 
ancestral offering is a meal, and the food is offered there in the 
mouth of the participating Brahmins, their mouths substituting 
for the olfertorial fire in which offerings are normally placed. 

17.4 blood . . . pupillage', for lineage, see A 2.11.15n. Officiating at a 
sacrifice establishes a spiritual bond between the priest and the 
patron of the sacrifice. A pupil and teacher, likewise, become 
spiritually related. 

17.21 alongside whom they eat : at a funerary offering the assembled 
Brahmins sit in one row on seats of sacred grass spread on the 
floor. An especially holy and learned Brahmin (see list in G 15.28) 
is viewed as transmitting his purity to those who sit on the same 
row as he. The inverse of such a man is a person who defiles those 
alongside whom they eat (G 21.11). 

17.22 four types . . . sacred fires', the four types of sacrifices are: horse 
sacrifice, sacrifice of all possessions (Sarvamedha), human sacri- 
fice (Purusamedha), and funeral offering (Pitrmedha). But see 
Va 26.10n. The five fires are the three used in vedic rituals: 
householder’s, olfertorial, and southern; as well as the hearth 
( avasathya ) and the hall (sabhya) fires. See App. 1.1. 

17.23-5 An ancestral . . . eclipse: the last siitra is not found in some 
manuscripts, and Haradatta says that it was not recognized by 
northerners. He also thinks that it should come immediately after 
siitra 23. The meaning appears to be that when the night falls 
after the start of an ancestral offering, it should be suspended 
until the next morning, unless there happens to be a lunar eclipse 
that night; in any case the participants have to fast until the entire 
rite is completed. 

18.4 forty-eight-year vow. according to Haradatta, this is the student- 
ship ( brahmacarya ) lasting forty-eight years (see A 1.2.12). 

18.14—16 He should have . . . the altar: this appears to be an occult rite. 
Ancestors normally occupy the southern side. Thus, when the 
Brahmins are on the northern side, the performer will be able to 
see both. Haradatta thinks that it is the power of this rite that 
makes the normally invisible ancestors visible to the performer. 

18.19 Tisya: also called Pu§ya (y, 6, and 0 Cancri), it is the eighth in 
the sidereal monthly cycle of twenty-seven lunar mansions 
( naksatra ), while Magha (a, y, s, £, r|, and |i Leonis) is the tenth. 


371 



Notes to pages 63-69 


20. 1 one measure each: the term drona technically refers to a weight of 
approximately 21 .25 lb. or 9.6 kg. The meaning appears to be that 
for each rite requiring sesame, such as food and anointing, such a 
quantity should be used if possible. 

20.3 Great King: Haradatta identifies the god as Vaisravana, the 
patronymic of the god Kubera. 

21.1 four orders of life: for a detailed study of this entire chapter, see 
Olivelle 1993. 

21.6 novice student: two types of students are identified here: the nov- 
ice student, who spends a number of years following his initiation 
at his teacher's house studying the Veda (dealt with in sutra 3); 
and the permanent student, who lives with the teacher all his life 
(cf. A 1.4.29). The latter alone is considered an order of life 
( asrama ). 

21.8 From that very state: that is, from the state of a novice student. 

21.17 said later on: the exact meaning of par am is unclear. Friedrich 
(1993, 193) takes it to mean ‘the next order of life’, namely, the 
forest hermit; but that is quite unlikely. Haradatta takes it as 
referring to the pain felt in the next world, but this expression 
generally refers to some topic dealt with in the text. I think the 
term refers to the later discussion (A 1.23.3-24.14) regarding 
the relative superiority of the orders of life where Apastamba 
attacks the position of those who take the celibate orders to be 
the best. 

22. 16 give one: possibly to his wife who remains behind at home. 

22.23 sitting . . . bare ground: Biihler (1879-82) and Friedrich (1993) 
interpret anupastlme as a dual qualifying sayyasane. The transla- 
tion would then be: ‘His seat and bed is uncovered.’ But it is 
anomalous for a man who lives in the open air to have chairs and 
beds! I agree with Haradatta that anupastlme is a locative going 
with an implied dese (‘on uncovered ground’). The meaning then 
is that he has his seat and bed on an uncovered piece of ground, 
that is, he sits and sleeps on bare ground. 

24.13 bodies ... up above: the seven ancient seers were believed to be 
visible in the night sky as the seven stars in the Big Dipper. 

25.12 of Vibhltaka seeds: Haradatta and Biihler think that the dice were 
made of Vibhltaka wood. See, however, Falk 1986, 103. Falk also 
has the most detailed and up-to-date discussion of the ancient 
Indian game of dice. 

26.6-7 nine miles, couple of miles: a yojana is approximately 9 miles or 
14.5 kilometres, and a krosa is one-quarter of that, approximately 
2.25 miles or 3.6 kilometres. 

372 



Notes to pages 71-80 


27.17 blindfolded : the Sanskrit caksunirodha is ambivalent. It may also 
mean to blind, a meaning favoured by Friedrich (1993, 203). But 
that is unlikely, because Dharma texts generally prohibit the cor- 
poral punishment of Brahmins. 


The Dharmasutra of Gautama 

1 .4 When . . . option: this is a basic principle of vedic exegesis. The 
standard example given in the exegetical literature is the fact that 
some vedic texts enjoin barley for ritual purposes and others rice, 
creating a conflict. So, a person may use either. But for there to be 
an option the injunction should have equal force. Since the Veda 
has greater authority than either traditional texts or custom, 
when an injunction in such a text or a custom is in conflict with a 
vedic prescription, then the latter has to be followed. See G 1 1 .20; 
A 2.14.10; Kane 1962-75, v. 1250. 

1 .25 bent . . . sacrificial post: the sacrificial post, to which the animal to 
be immolated is tied, is cut from a tree with green leaves. It must 
not be crooked and must be bent towards a direction other than 
the south: Kane 1962-75, ii. 1110-12. 

1.28 If while . . . down: the complication created by Sanskrit sandhi 
makes the reading ambiguous: ucchisto ’nidhdya where the neg- 
ative ‘a’ is elided and in manuscripts often left unmarked (no 
avagraha ); thus the latter term may be read as a positive or a 
negative. The commentator Maskarin reads without the negative 
‘a' and interprets this to mean that one should place what is in the 
hand on the ground and then sip water. Haradatta, on the other 
hand, reads it with the negative ‘a’, but says that one should place 
any food on the ground but not other articles, such as clothes. See 
Biihler’s long note to this passage. 

1.36 cavities of his head: they are the eyes, ears, and nostrils: see A 
1.16.7n. Water is applied also on the chest above the heart: B 

4.3.5. 

1.43 earth and water: in ancient India soft earth, as well as other 
substances such as ash and cowdung, were used with water as 
cleansing agents, much like soap powders today. It was used on 
the body and to clean utensils. Other substances, such as ash and 
cowdung, were used for utensils made of different materials: B 

1.14.5. 

1.45 In cases . . . Veda: this applies to purifications carried out at a 
vedic ritual. Utensils used in a sacrifice, for example, are cleansed 
in the manner prescribed by vedic texts. See A 1.17.13; B 1.8.50. 

1 .48 vital organs: according to the commentators, these are the sense 


373 



Notes to pages 80-87 


organs of the head, the same as the ‘cavities of the head’: G 

1.36 n. 

1.51 The five . . . Truth : this probably refers to the Vyahrti Saman (see 

App. 1.2). 

2.9 only after . . . some : the ritual of the first shave (called godana, 
‘gift of cow’) is performed when the young man is 16 (see Pandey 
1969). According to some, the daily bath is required only after 
this ceremony. See G 2.13, where the student is forbidden to bathe 
or clean his teeth, and A 1.2.28 n. 

2.34 legal age : according to the commentators, the legal age is 16. 

3.1 He: i.e. a student who has completed his vedic studies (see G 

3.36 n.). 

3.13 rainy season: the rainy season or monsoon lasts for about four 
months from June to October. This period, during which travel 
was difficult and sometimes dangerous, is generally considered 
holy in India. Wandering ascetics are not permitted to roam 
about during the rains and are required to set up a stable resi- 
dence in one place, generally in or near a village from which they 
can obtain their almsfood. 

3.27 He kindles . . . recluses : a hermit gives up the normal ritual fires he 
used as a common householder and sets up a new ritual fire. The 
procedure for setting up this fire appears to have been given in a 
treatise on that subject. Such a treatise in mentioned in B 2.11.14, 
and a procedure for setting up the hermit’s fire is given in Vkh 2.1. 

3.36 single order of life : the position that the householder’s life is the 
only legitimate order for adults is expressed also in B 2. 1 1 .27. For 
an extensive study of this early view of conservative Brahmins, 
see Olivelle 1993, 83-91. Given that Gautama frequently refers to 
the orders of life (see p. xxxi), it is likely that his intent here is not 
to issue a blanket prohibition of the orders but to forbid any 
order other than a householder’s for a student who has com- 
pleted his vedic studies (see G 3. In.). 

express vedic texts: these are texts that are actually available and 
recited in various vedic branches. They are distinguished from 
vedic texts whose existence has to be inferred through the evidence 
of traditional texts or customs: see A 1.4.8-10 and p. xli. 

4.26 as also . . . woman: the meaning is that a child of a Sudra woman 
fathered by a man of a higher class, even though this does not 
constitute a reversed order, is nevertheless outside the Law. 

5.30 to a king and to a vedic scholar: the Sanskrit lacks the word ‘and’ 
(ca) after srotriya (‘vedic scholar’), and because of this both 
Haradatta and Maskarin, as well as Biihler, takes ‘vedic scholar’ 
as qualifying the king. The translation would then be: ‘. . . to a 


374 



Notes to pages 87-93 


king who is a vedic scholar’. I think this interpretation is unlikely, 
both because in these documents the term srotriya always refers 
to Brahmins and because it is highly unlikely that somebody 
would slight a king simply because he is not considered to be 
learned. 

5.32 welcome water, this consists of perfumed water with flowers and 
forms an integral part of the welcoming ceremony for important 
guests. 

6.24 extremely old people, the sick: literally, ‘those who are in the tenth 

decade of life’ and ‘those who deserve consideration’. 

8.14 Impregnation . . . initiation: these are the rites of passage con- 
nected with birth, infancy, and childhood. The impregnation rite 
is performed soon after marriage to assure successful pregnan- 
cies. The quickening of a male foetus takes place in the third 
month of pregnancy to assure the birth of a boy (cf. Va 20.24 n.). 
The ritual parting of the wife’s hair takes place in the seventh 
month of pregnancy to assure a safe delivery. The birth rite is 
performed for the newborn baby, and its naming ceremony is 
done on the tenth or twelfth day after birth. The first feeding with 
solid food takes place in the sixth month, and the tonsure, the first 
cutting of the baby’s hair, between the first and seventh year. See 
Pandey 1969. 

8.15 four vows: according to the commentators, the reference is to the 
special vows undertaken to study each of the four Vedas. Other 
vows are also associated with vedic study: see Bidder 1879-82, i. 
216 n. 15. 

9.7 without a good reason: the commentator Haradatta cites a verse 
giving the reasons for letting the beard grow: ‘During his sixth 
and sixteenth year, during the year of his marriage, and when his 
wife is pregnant, he should refrain from using a razor.’ See also G 
16.3. 

9.10 drawn out: this refers to water that has been drawn out of a well, 
pond, or river and kept in a pot (A 2.5.6; G 5.15). Such water 
should be strained with a cloth water strainer (Va 6.14). This rule 
applies only when one sips water from a pot; when one sips water 
at a pond or river, one may sip while standing. 

9.21 bhagala in place of kapala: both Sanskrit terms mean ‘skull’. 
Kapdla may well have been a more direct or coarser word, while 
bhagala may have been a more polite way of referring to a skull. 

9.53 not carry . . . another: the meaning of the term kulamkula is 
uncertain. The commentators give diverse opinions, indicating 
that they are simply guessing. Bidder, following Haradatta’s lead, 
translates: ‘Let him not be a stay-at-home.’ The term occurs also 


375 



Notes to pages 93-99 


at Va 12.8 and SG 4.12.11, where Oldenberg translates it as ‘a 
wanderer from house to house’. But in the SG this term is given 
alongside ‘reviler, slanderer, prattler’, and I think in that context 
the term may mean ‘carrying tales from one family to another’. 

9.63-4 livelihood . . . gods: I think the commentators and Biihler have 
overinterpreted the expression yogaksema (which I have trans- 
lated ‘livelihood’) as ‘obtaining what one does not have and 
securing what one has’. ‘Gods’ here refer to divine images. The 
meaning may be that a Brahmin in dire straits may go to a temple 
to obtain assistance from the temple funds, which technically are 
owned by the deity. 

10.18 cows or Brahmins: this probably means that defeated warriors 
who debased themselves by calling themselves cows or Brahmins, 
both considered inviolable, are to be spared their lives. 

10.21 mounts: this term may refer to horses, elephants, and/or chariots. 

10.29 he should . . . them: the antecedent of ‘them’ is unclear. The com- 
mentator Haradatta takes it as referring to the subjects he is 
obliged to protect, while Maskarin thinks that it refers to his 
responsibility to collect taxes and duties. 

11.16 welfare: for the expression yogaksema, see G 9.63—4 n. 

12.8 fined a hundred: the currency of payment is left unstated. The 
commentator Haradatta states that traditionally fines are calcu- 
lated in terms of the copper Karsapana (often called simply 
Pana), a coin with a weight of probably 9.33 gm. There are, 
according to Haradatta, twenty Ma§as to a Kar§apana (cf. G 
12.22, 29), and four Krsnalas (another name for Raktika) to a 
Ma§a (G 12.18). Coinage in India varied widely both geographic- 
ally and over time; so it is impossible to determine with precision 
either the weight or the relative value of these coins. 

12.29 five . . . for twenty: the meaning is that the monthly interest rate is 
five Ma$as for twenty Karsapanas (=400 Ma§as; see previous 
note). Thus the monthly interest rate is 1.25 per cent, which con- 
verts to an annual rate of 15 per cent. The same rule is given in Va 
2.50. The interest rates given in M 8.140 and Y 2.37 agree with 
this. 

12.31 If the loan . . . doubled: this rule is called ddmdupat in modern 
times. The total amount of interest payable on a loan can never 
exceed the loan. So, at any time the total amount payable by a 
debtor is twice the amount of the loan, that is, the loan plus 100 
per cent in interest. See Kane 1962-75, iii. 419-24; Lariviere 1989, 
ii. 30, 59. 

12.34—5 The types . . . collateral: the cyclical rate is often translated as 
‘compound interest’, which is misleading. This is really simple 


376 



Notes to pages 99-102 


interest but payable only at the end of the loan period together 
with the principal (see Lariviere 1989, ii. 59). The periodic rate is 
generally payable each month (G 12.29). The contractual rate is 
variable, either above or below the normal rate of interest, 
depending on the reliability of the person taking the loan. Man- 
ual labour is probably connected with indentured labour, the 
interest on the loan being deducted from the daily wages. On the 
question of debts in ancient India, see Kane 1962-75, iii. 414—61; 
Chatterjee 1971. 

12.39 There is . . . women : the two commentators differ on the interpret- 
ation. Maskarin takes this to mean that even after ten years 
of use one does not gain ownership in these cases, whereas 
Haradatta takes the opposite view. In these cases, according to 
him, their use for even a shorter period of time establishes 
ownership. ‘Women’ here refers to slaves. 

13.11 execution of the Law: the exact meaning of the expression 
dharmatantra is unclear. It occurs also in G 1.18.24, 32 and B 
1.10.32. The commentators give different explanations at differ- 
ent places and are, therefore, untrustworthy. It is unlikely that it 
means different things in different places. I think tantra here 
means something like ‘the working’ or ‘the execution’. Here the 
reference is to the execution of justice in a court of law, whereas 
at G 1.18.24, 32, the reference is to the performance of required 
rites, and at B 1.10.8 it may be either. 

13.14 slays : here too the two commentators differ. According to 
Haradatta, the false witness kills the given number of animals or 
men with regard to whom he lied; that is, he should be subjected 
to the punishment for killing that many of the species. Maskarin 
thinks that this means he ‘slays’, that is, brings to ruin (or sends to 
hell) that number of his relatives. This view is supported by M 8.97. 

14.9 killed . . . Brahmins: this is the interpretation of the commen- 
tators: cf. Y 3.27. But it could also mean ‘killed by cows or 
Brahmins’, and this provision is found also in Y 3.21. 

14.20-1 fellow reciter . . . fellow student: the difference between 
sahadhydyin and sabrahmacdrin is unclear. I think the interpret- 
ations of the commentators are mere guesswork. The latter 
occurs frequently enough (A 1.7.29; 1.10.12; B 1.11.30; M 5.71) 
for us to be sure that it refers to a person who was a fellow 
student. This may explain the relatively short period of impurity, 
because theirs was merely a relationship formed in their student 
days. The former does not occur elsewhere, and I think indicates a 
closer relationship (hence the longer period of impurity), as that 
between people who regularly recite the Vedas together or who 
observe the annual course of study together. 


377 



Notes to pages 102-115 


14.25 seasons: there are five seasons in a year: spring, summer, rains, 
autumn, and winter; sometimes a sixth, the cool season, is added 
after winter. 

15.15 By offering . . . unlimited time : this passage is not commented on 
by either Haradatta or Maskarin. In the absence of a critical 
edition of G, its authenticity cannot be determined. 

15.18 husband of a Sudra woman: that is, a Brahmin who has married a 
Sudra woman. 

16.21 The recitation . . . is heard: the reason for this, according to M 
4.124, is the association of the Samaveda with deceased ancestors 
and hence with impurity. 

17.13 looks revolting: the meaning of bhdvadusta is unclear. Biihler trans- 
lates: ‘naturally bad’, which makes little sense. Both Haradatta 
and Maskarin give the identical explanation: ‘food that is given 
contemptuously or that is offensive to the eater’s mind’. 

17.28 animals . . . jaws: Haradatta and Govinda (on B 1.2.4) give as an 
example the horse, while Maskarin’s example is a man. In the 
Puru§a Hymn (RV 10.90.10) also animals with teeth on both jaws 
are associated with the horse. Obviously, this cannot have a literal 
meaning and must refer to animals that have incisor teeth on both 
jaws, for example, horses, donkeys, and mules, as well as dogs, 
cats, and most carnivorous animals. 

17.33 red juices: at TS 2. 5. 1.3^1 a mythological reason for this rule is 
given. A third of Indra’s guilt of killing a Brahmin (Visvarupa, 
the son of Tvasjr) was assumed by plants. This guilt became their 
sap, and the red sap has the colour of that guilt. 

17.37 killed for the sake of the Law: that is, killed in a sacrifice. 

18.6 relative: the commentators Haradatta and Maskarin take this to 
mean just a Brahmin, that is, a man of the same class or caste. 
But the term yonisambandha elsewhere refers to either blood rela- 
tives or relatives from the mother’s side. 

18.23 before . . . clothes: a girl is supposed to be given in marriage while 
she is young enough to be running about naked. Such a girl is 
given the technical term nagnika (‘naked girl’) in later texts: see B 
4.1.1 1; Va 17.70. A parallel development occurs in Sinhala, where 
a younger sister is called nahgi (naked girl). Although such a girl’s 
marriage is ritually and legally a true marriage, she would remain 
in her parent’s home until puberty, when she will be taken cere- 
monially to her husband’s home. 

19 This entire chapter is the same as the corresponding chapter in 
B 3.10. 

21.15-16 A man . . . estate: the reference here is to parents who have 
fallen from their caste. 


378 



Notes to pages 115-137 


22.2 throw . . . three times: Haradatta points out that, since he throws 
himself three times, the penance does not entail his death. 

22.23 ewutch: the commentators themselves appear to have noticed the 
anomaly of inserting the eunuch in the middle of a passage on 
animals. Haradatta cites the opinion of some that the term sanda 
here refers to animals that have been castrated. 

22.36 other than a cow: the cow is a sacred animal in India and is con- 
sidered a mother, one reason being that we drink its milk. Sex 
with a cow, therefore, is equivalent to incest: see G 23.12. 

23.25 without skipping any: the commentators explain that while he is 
gathering these withered fruits, he should not skip any in trying to 
find better ones. Biihler translates: ‘avoiding (all other food)’. 

28.32-3 A natural son . . . lineage: for definitions of these types of sons, 
see B 2.3.14-28. 


The Dharmasutra of Baudhayana 

BOOK ONE 

1 . l^f The Law . . . the third: the reference here is to the three sources of 
the Law: cf. p. xli. 

2.9 The region . . . Aryas: a similar definition is found twice in 
Patanjali’s commentary on Panini (2.4.10; 6.3.109) and Va 1.8. 
Hultsch’s second edition of B reads kanakhalad, ‘from Kana- 
khala’. But this reading is supported only by two manuscripts. 
The evidence of Patanjali shows that the correct reading should 
be kalakavandd. The meaning of adarsa is unclear. Biihler 
(on Va 1.8) takes it to mean a mountain range called Adarsa. In 
all likelihood, however, the term is a secondary derivative of 
adarsa, ‘non-seeing’, and refers to the place where the sacred river 
Sarasvatl disappears in the Punjab. This place gets the name 
vinasana (‘perishing’) in later texts: M 2.21. 

3.10-15 According to . . . each class: in all these statements, the first refers 
to Brahmins, the second to Ksatriyas, and the third to Vaisyas. 

3.11 GayatrT. . . initiation: the year in which people of the three classes 
are initiated is related to the number of syllables in each foot of 
the metre used in their initiation: GayatrT has eight, Tristubh 
eleven, and Jagatl twelve. For the actual verses in these metres 
that a student is taught, see Kane 1962-75, ii. 302. 

3.32 in an exaggerated way: I follow Bohtlingk (1885c) in translating 
the ambiguous word antyasah. The commentator Govinda and, 
following him, Biihler take it to mean ‘too close’, that is, standing 
too close. 


379 



Notes to pages 137-141 


3.47 story of the young Ahgirasa : this story is found in M 2. 1 5 1-3. The 

wise young Ahgirasa taught his relatives who were old enough to 
be his father and addressed them as ‘Little Sons’. The relatives 
complained to the gods, and the gods told them that Ahgirasa 
had acted properly, because a man without knowledge is a child 
and the man who teaches him is his father. 

4.7 And when he performs his private . . . enters him: this section is not 
found in the SB and is probably a later insertion for the sake of 
symmetry; there is, after all, no need to buy back the part that is 
already in him. 

he may beg almsfood . . . of other rites : the text here appears to be 
corrupt and dilfers from the SB reading. It is left untranslated by 
Biihler. My translation is tentative. The SB reading makes better 
sense: ‘Surely, by taking the final bath he conquers beggary, he 
conquers the hunger of his relatives and ancestors.’ 

He commits a sin . . . chastity : this verse is not found in the SB but 
is found in all the manuscripts of B. 

5.10 almsfood : the difference is that ‘uncooked food’ consists of grain 

and other provisions, while almsfood is already cooked. 

6.2 Fire is said . . . grass: the basis for the equation of these four items 
with fire is a passage in TB 3.7.3. It says that the daily fire sacrifice 
(agnihotra) should be offered in the fire. If a fire cannot be found, 
it should be offered in a male goat (nothing is said about the ear), 
because the goat is sacred to Fire (dgneyf); if a goat is unavailable, 
in the right hand of a Brahmin, because a Brahmin is the Fire in 
all men (agni vaisvanara: see Va 30.2-7); and if a Brahmin is 
unavailable, in a clump of Darbha grass, because such a clump 
contains fire; and if Darbha grass is unavailable, in water, because 
water is all the gods. 

firing the pot again: the reference is to cleansing the pot. Firing is 
one of the methods of cleansing an earthen pot that has become 
polluted (B 1.14.1). 

6.13 for fire . . . water: the commentator Govinda explains that when 
someone controls his breath, heat (fire) is generated internally (B 
4.1.23^1). At night the sun, which normally takes up (absorbs) 
water, enters the fire. So, with internal fire (Sun) the Brahmin can 
take up the water. The Brahmin, however, has already been com- 
pared to fire (B 1.6.2). Note the double meaning of ‘take up’: to 
draw water from a well or pond and to absorb water or to make it 
evaporate. 

7.3 While he . . . left hand: the reason is that after toilet one pours 
water with the right hand and washes the private parts with the 
left hand, whereas in sipping one holds the pot in the left hand 


380 



Notes to pages 142-146 


and pours water into the right hand for sipping. The practice of 
using the left hand for unclean tasks made the left hand impure 
and inauspicious in Indian culture. Thus, one never uses the left 
hand for eating or for any sacred action. 

7.19 scripture . . . effect', the commentator Govinda refers to TA 1.7.1 
where a Rg verse is cited. 

8.14-16 He should sip ... to seers: water is taken into the right hand (B 
1.7.3 n.), the hand is placed on the lips, and the water is sipped. 
The part of the hand placed on the lips, that is, the part through 
which water passes into the mouth, is given the technical term 
tlrtha, which literally means a ford in a river. Different parts are 
used depending on the ritual of which sipping is a part. See Kane 
1962-75, ii. 315-16, 652-3. 

8.30 in the opposite way: Biihler, following Govinda, takes the term 
vipartta as ‘contrary to the rule’. But the same term is used else- 
where (B 1.8.8; 1.15.3) with the meaning of ‘opposite’, or doing 
something in an inverse manner. The meaning here appears to be 
that in the case of an earthen pot one sips water before placing it 
on the ground: cf. G 1.28; M 5.143. 

8.48 depending . . . nose: I follow Bohtlingk’s (1885c) interpretation, 
which I think is more appropriate. Biihler translates: ‘. . . semen, 
or a dead body, (but) are agreeable to the eye and the nose, shall 
be rubbed. . . .’ 

9.5 sanctuary tree: the word caityavrksa is ambiguous. A caitya is 
some sort of a sacred area, especially a funerary mound, often 
demarcated by a wall or some structure. The tree commonly 
associated with such sanctuaries is the Bo tree (Ficus religiosa ), 
although it is unclear whether Baudhayana uses it with reference 
to Buddhist sanctuaries. 

10.1 cow’s hide: this probably refers to a particular measurement of 
land. Govinda takes it to mean an area that can contain a hun- 
dred cows. In Vi 5.183 ‘cow’s hide’ is defined as an area of land on 
which one man can subsist for a year, whereas the commentator 
Nandapandita (on Vi 92.4) defines it as an area 300 by 10 hastas 
(approximately 450 by 15 feet). But see B 3.9.4, where the area 
appears to be much smaller and the term taken literally. 

10.4 spirit of generosity: the Sanskrit terms sraddadhanci and sraddha 
are often taken as referring to ‘faith’. But in the early literature 
these terms are closely associated with hospitality and generous 
giving. These verses oppose two types of givers, the one who gives 
in a spirit of generosity and the other who gives for other motives. 
‘Vacillation’ ( sahka ) in verse 8 is probably the opposite of gen- 
erosity: one is hesitant to give. See also greed and envy as the 


381 



Notes to pages 146-153 


opposites of sraddha at Va 6.8; 8.9. For sraddha as generosity, see 
Jamison 1996, 176-84; Hara 1979, 1992; Kohler 1973. 

11.9-10 one’s great-grandfather . . . family line : those belonging to the 
same ancestry (A 1.10.28n.) are seven: oneself, three immediate 
ancestors, and three immediate descendants (all in the male line: 
see Note on the Translation). So, the great-grandson's son is 
excluded. These share an undivided oblation, because at the 
monthly ancestral offering rice balls are offered in common to 
father, grandfather, and great-grandfather. The son and grand- 
son, together with oneself, are said to share an undivided obla- 
tion, probably because they will receive the monthly oblation 
from the great-grandson. But this passage is convoluted and pos- 
sibly corrupt (Bohtlingk 1885c). Those belonging to ‘the same 
family line’ (sdkulya) are more distant relatives to whom a com- 
mon ancestral offering is not made, and they appear to be even 
more distant than those who ‘belong to the same lineage’, since 
their claim to an inheritance is more remote than that of the latter 
(B 1.11.11-12; M 9.187). 

11.28 one’s teacher . . . three days', the commentator Govinda has a dif- 
ferent reading, according to which the impurity lasts for three 
days for the teacher, two nights and the intervening day for the 
tutor, and one day for a son of theirs. The teacher ( acdrya ) is 
defined in Va 3.21-3 as a man from whom one receives vedic 
initiation and learns the entire Veda, whereas a tutor ( upddhyaya ) 
is a person who teaches a section of the Veda or the Vedic 
Supplements. 

1 1.34-5 The same . . . sinner. Biihler and Govinda take this to mean that 
the above provisions apply also when someone touches a men- 
struating woman. But the term rtumatyam is in the locative, and it 
is more likely that the rule of the three-day impurity applies to 
such a woman and during that period one should not touch her; 
the cited passage implies that touching here means having sexual 
intercourse. 

12.1 village animals', the exact meaning of grdmya is unclear. It can 
mean animals that generally live in or around a village (as I have 
taken it) or specifically domesticated or tame animals (so Biihler). 
I think this provision does not refer to livestock, which can surely 
be eaten as indicated in the exception indicated in sutra 4, but to 
other animals and birds, such as village pigs, cocks, and crows: see 
A 1.21.15; G 17.29; 23.5; Va 14.48; 23.30. At A 2.16.28 both 
village and wild animals are said to be fit for use in ancestral rites, 
while Va 14.47 refers to a debate whether non-village pigs can be 
eaten. 

12.8 Brhacchiras, Mahdsakciri: the reading appears to be corrupt with 

382 



Notes to pages 153-161 


a large number of variants. The reading adopted in the edition is 
conjectural. 

13.12 Silk: the term tdrpya occurs in vedic texts (TS 2.4.11.6; SB 
5.3.5.20: see Eggeling’s note to this) and was obscure even to the 
early commentators, who explain it in various ways which are 
mostly educated guesses. It is likely that the term referred to a silk 
garment. 

14.9 skin: the meaning of vindda (or vincda ) is not clear. For the former, 
Monier-Williams (in his Sanskrit dictionary) gives the meaning 
‘leather bag' with just this reference. Govinda takes it to be a long 
sacrificial vessel made out of bamboo or cane. Cf. SB. 5. 3. 2. 6. 

14.18 fires ascend . . . churning the fire-drills: fire-drills consist of a 
wooden shaft twirled with a cord wrapped around it on a slab of 
wood with a depression in the middle. A new fire is produced by 
the friction caused by the churning of the shaft on the slab. The 
fire-drills are viewed as the womb of fire and are thought to con- 
tain the fire in a latent form. The sacred fire is sometimes made to 
‘ascend’ the fire-drills through a special ritual. After this one’s 
sacred fires are contained in the fire-drills and can be made to 
descend again through churning. For making the fires ‘ascend’ 
one’s self, see B 2.1 7.26 n. 

15.19 the passageway . . . mound: the Utkara is located outside the 
north-eastern corner of the sacrificial arena (see App. 1. 1). The 
performers go in and out along the western side. 

15.20 not been dedicated: the meaning of aprapanna is unclear and the 
translation is tentative. Govinda does not comment on it, and 
Biihler leaves it untranslated. I take it that the wood should be 
brought in a special way into the sacrificial area and placed in the 
proper place beside the fire. The verb pra-pad with a similar sense 
of walking in the proper manner is found in adjacent sutras 1 7 
and 21. 

15.31-2 If he sees . . . my austerity: the two ritual formulas are taken 
from TS 3. 1 . 1 .2-3. There the text explains the use of these formu- 
las by saying that when a consecrated man sees filth (probably 
faeces), his consecration leaves him, as do his dark complexion 
and beauty; the ritual formula prevents them from leaving. Like- 
wise, when rain falls on him, the heavenly waters, if unappeased 
by this formula, will destroy his force, might, and consecration. 
Sutra 32 is missing in both Govinda and Biihler. 

19.8 crime: Biihler (here and in the parallel at M 8.18-19) interprets 
adharma as the guilt of an unjust decision. This is clearly the 
sense of G 13.11. But here and in Manu, I think, adharma refers 
to the crime of which the man is accused; if he is not punished 


383 



Notes to pages 161-171 


properly part of the guilt of the man's crime falls on the king and 
the court. A similar statement is made in the case of a king who 
fails to kill a thief who comes to him with a club: B 2.1.16-17: A 

I. 25.4-5; G 12.43-5. 

19.9 designated : this is a technical term ( uddista ) for a witness listed in 

the plaint (N 1.147-8; Vi 8.12) and distinguished from those not 
so listed. At N 1.129 these two types are called krta (appointed) 
and akrta (not appointed). 

19.13 lack humanity, the meaning of manusyahtna is unclear. Biihler 
translates it as ‘destitute of human (intellect)’. Govinda interprets 
it to mean a man without relatives. 

21.8-10 When someone . . . his mouth : a Brahmin may either accept 
grains and provisions or actually eat at an ancestral offering. 
Even in the former case, he has to suspend recitation, because 
a Brahmin’s hand (accepting provisions) is equal to his mouth 
(eating food): cf. B 1.6.2n. For the time taken to digest food 
completely, see B 2.2.36. 

21.13 A Brahmin: the reason for introducing this seemingly extraneous 
point is that the provision of sutra 12 applies also to the death of 
one’s teacher, because he is one’s spiritual father. The commenta- 
tor Govinda remarks that the three-day suspension applies only 
to a student who has not returned home, because a ten-day period 
of impurity is the norm when one’s father dies. 

BOOK TWO 

1.24 fails . . . instruction : the term samskrte is unclear. Both Biihler and 
I follow Govinda’s explanation. 

1.26 cdl the leftovers : the great medieval theologian Vijnanesvara 
(commenting on Y 3.282) cites this passage and interprets ‘all’ 
( sarvam ) to mean food items such as meat and garlic that are 
normally forbidden to students. When he is sick he may eat these 
so long as they are his teacher’s leftovers; but for the contrary 
view see Va 23.11. 

2.8 child of a Sudra: Biihler translates this as ‘becoming thereby her 
son’. Govinda takes it to mean a man who gives himself up for 
adoption by a Sudra. I prefer Govinda’s interpretation because 
all the other sins enumerated are avoidable actions (see the state- 
ment in sutra 9 ‘When people have done any one of these’) that 
cause loss of caste, whereas being born of a Sudra woman is 
beyond the control of the child. 

2.35 When someone: ... a year: this verse is found in Va 1.22 and M 

II. 181. Most commentators agree with the interpretation given 


384 



Notes to pages 171-177 


in my translation, including Vijnanesvara who cites it in his 
commentary on Y 3.261. It is also supported by the reading 
of Vi 35.3-5. According to this interpretation, by doing the 
four exempted activities one becomes an outcaste immediately 
rather than after the lapse of a year. Govindaraja and 
Sarvajnanarayana, commenting on M 11.181, think that one 
becomes an outcaste within a year by officiating at their sacrifices, 
etc., and not by travelling with them in the same vehicle and 
other similar activities. See Bohtlingk 1886a, 144; 1886A 

2.41 The third type : the meaning of ‘third’ is unclear, and Govinda 
gives several different explanations, which are mere guesses. It 
could be that the first two are arduous penance and very arduous 
penance. The hot-arduous (37) and that of women and children 
(39) may be simply variants of the first and thus to be subsumed 
under it. 

3.14 by himself, this is meant to exclude a son born through levirate ( B 
2.3.17). ' 

3.18-19 He has two fathers . . . stumble : this indicates that persons other 
than the dead man’s brother were permitted to father children for 
him. This is the only way that the child could have two different 
lineages and patrimonies, because brothers have the same lineage. 
In the verse, moreover, the son from such a union is said to make 
offerings to six ancestors, which is possible only if the biological 
father and the leviratic father belong to two different families. 
Ancestral offerings are made to the father, grandfather, and the 
great-grandfather; these will be different only if the two fathers 
are not brothers. See G 18.6-7. 

3.50 If it is .. . so forth: Govinda explains: when a Brahmin woman 
has sex with a Vaisya she performs the penance beyond the very 
arduous penance, and with a K§atriya, the very arduous penance, 
whereas a Ksatriya woman having sex with a Vaisya performs the 
arduous penance. 

4.5 The Moon . . . taint: Va 28.5-6 indicates that these three deities 
grant these boons to the woman after enjoying her prior to her 
marriage, a point repeated by Vijnanesvara commenting on Y 
1.71. ‘Purification’ here may refer to her menstrual flow regulated 
by the lunar cycle (B 2.4.4). This verse occurs also in Varahami- 
hira’s Brhatsamhitd in the eulogy of women (74.7), where the 
final phrase reads: ‘Women, therefore, are like a gold ornament.’ 

4.15 given above: Govinda refers to B 2.4.12, but the reference is 
found within the quoted verse and, therefore, must refer not to 
Baudhayana but to the original from which the quotation is 
taken. As Biihler notes, this is a significant piece of evidence for 
the existence of metrical works on Law at a very early period, 


385 



Notes to pages 177-192 


distinct from floating verses containing age-old wisdom (Lariviere 
1989, ii, p. xi). 

4.22 ritual fire', in Sanskrit, simply agni (fire), probably referring to the 

domestic fire ( aupdsana ), which is different from the three vedic 
fires (see App. 1.1). 

4.26 Now, they ... no gifts: this dialogue is part of a quarrel between 
two young women, Devayam and Sarmis(ha, each trying to show 
that her father is superior to the other’s. The full story is found in 
the Mahabharata 1.73-8. 

5.15 goodly portion: Govinda takes agra (‘goodly portion’) as a tech- 
nical term referring to a specific quantity of food: grasa (‘mouth- 
ful’) is a lump the size of a peahen egg; four mouthfuls make a 
bhaiksa (‘almsfood’); four almsfoods make one puskala ; and four 
puskalas, one agra. 

7.8 Let him . . . text: Govinda and Biihler take this to be an 
incomplete sentence: ‘If he gets tired by controlling . . . text, (let 
him recite the SavitrT).' 

7.14 uninterrupted . . . nights: the performer will not die before the 
completion of his full life span. There may also be a cosmological 
meaning: the twilight worship ensures the rise of the sun each day 
and the regular sequence of days and nights. 

9.6 god Bhava . . . Great God: these are all names of Siva. 

9.7 Vighna . . . Lambodara: these are all names of Ganesa, the son of 
Siva. 

9.10 Kesava . . . Garutmat: the first twelve are the well-known names 
of the major Indian god Visnu. The next four are the names of his 
wife, Sri. Garutmat is another name for Garuda, the bird that 
acts as Vi§nu’s mount. 

9.1 1 Yama . . . Audumbara: these are the different names of Yama, the 
god of death. 

9.14 Seers . . . Kdndas: the seers who discovered the Vedas are divided 
into Brahman, Divine, and Royal. For seers by learning, see A 
1.5. 5-6. Janas, Tapas, and Satya are three of the seven worlds: see 
under Calls in App. 1.2. ‘Kandas’ probably refer to the internal 
divisions of the vedic texts. For the seven seers, see A 2.24.13 n. 

Kama . . . Vasistha: all these are individuals to whom major texts 
of the vedic tradition are ascribed. Baudhayana, Apastamba, 
Hiranyakesin, Asvalayana, Saunaka, and Vasi§(ha are the 
authors of texts on ritual and Law. Yajnavalkya is responsible for 
the so-called White Yajurveda and figures prominently in the BU. 

11.7 repeated death: the meaning is not altogether clear, but the impli- 
cation is that a person subject to this type of death would die a 


386 



Notes to pages 192-199 


second or third time after his natural death on earth. This idea is 
important because it is probably related to the development of 
the pivotal doctrines of later Indian religion: rebirth and karma. 
The concept of re-death does not exist in the early vedic litera- 
ture, and its use is limited almost exclusively to the late vedic texts. 
For a discussion of this concept and the possible location of its 
origin, see Witzel 1989, 201-5. In his recent treatment of this 
topic, Bodewitz (1996, 36) claims that the concept of repeated 
death ‘introduced together with its solution and with emphasis on 
this solution, reflects the reaction of the ritualists to attempts 
made by non-ritualists to devalue the ritualistic claims. These 
ritualists probably tried to refute the opinion of other circles that 
ultimately the merits become exhausted in heaven.’ 

1 1.9-10 In the absence . . . offering : this is an interpolation that appears 
to have migrated from its natural place within Baudhayana’s 
refutation of this novel doctrine at B 1.11.29. Excluding this 
interpolation, the passage B 1.11.1-25 contains the view pro- 
posed by an opponent ( purvapaksa ). The terse expression 
adrstatvat (‘because of the fact it is not seen’) refers to the 
absence of an explicit vedic text to back the interpretation offered 
by the opponents: see A 1.4.8-10 n.; G 3.36 n.; Olivelle 1993, 89. 
The entire section on the orders of life appears to be a paren- 
thetical digression; Baudhayana returns to the topic of the 
householder in the next section. 

1 1 .22 He should go . . . put away, the meaning is that a religious mendi- 
cant should go to beg when people have already finished their 
meals. In this way he does not become a burden on householders. 
It also means that he eats their leftovers (A 1.3.27 n.). 

1 1 .27 no offspring is produced in the others: the argument here is that the 
Veda enjoins all men to father children. Since that is precluded in 
all but the householder’s order, the Veda implicitly prohibits the 
others. 

1 1 .28 Kapila, the son of Prahlada: Kapila is well known as a sage and a 
renouncer in ancient Indian literature. This passage appears to 
ascribe the authorship of the ‘orders of life’ to him, calling him a 
demon and the son of a well-known demon king, Prahlada. See 
Olivelle 1993, 98-9. 

12.1 offerings to the vital breaths: the five breaths that reside in the body 
are often conceived of as fires. Offerings to these breaths are seen 
as an internalized substitute for the daily fire offering ( agnihotra ) 
of ordinary Brahmins. For a detailed study, see Bodewitz 1973. 

14.3 secret texts: the meaning of rahasya is uncertain. Govinda takes it 
to mean sections of the Aranyaka. The Upani§ads are also 
referred to as ‘secrets’: Olivelle 1996, pp. lii-liii. 


387 



Notes to pages 201-209 


15.9 rules . . . full moon : the reference is probably to the Grhyasutra of 
Baudhayana, where these rules are given at 2. 1 1 . 

15.12 supplicants for morsels', these are distant ancestors, as well as 
those who do not normally receive offerings. They receive only 
fragments from or the leftovers of the main offerings. See Va 
11.21-4. 

17.1 renunciation', the term samnyasa, common in later texts, appears 
here for the first time in the Dharma literature. This term spec- 
ifically refers to the process and procedure whereby a man 
abandons his family, ritual fires, and possessions. See Olivelle 
1981. The entire rite described here is probably a later addition 
and resembles the ritual accounts of medieval handbooks 
( paddhati ). 

17.11 staffs, sling: the plural ‘staffs’ indicates the triple staff carried by 
some types of ascetics (see Olivelle 1986, i. 35-54). It was made by 
tying together three thin bamboo reeds. Other ascetics carried a 
single bamboo staff (B 2.18.1). Sometimes the staff is confused 
with the tripod, also made with three sticks, and used to carry the 
water pot. The sling was similar to a macrame pot-hanger and 
was used to carry the water pot. 

17.19 Brahman: here the term may well refer either to the syllable OM 
or to the Veda, or to both: see B 2.17.40. 

17.22 time sacred to Brahman: Govinda defines this as the final period 
(about one hour and twelve minutes) of the last watch (three 
hours) of the night. ‘Time’ here is muhurta: see A 1.11.32n. 

1 7.23 spine of the sacrificial arena: that is, along the middle of the arena 
from east to west. 

17.26 Deposits . . . himself: in this rite, the new renouncer internalizes 
the sacred fires. From now on he will carry them in the form of his 
breaths. See B 1.14.18 n; 2.18.8; A 1.11. 32n. 

18.15-19 Now, with reference . . . medicine: this entire section is some- 
what obscure, and Govinda himself does not appear to have fully 
grasped its meaning. It probably refers to some special obser- 
vances, especially dietary restrictions, relating to the study of an 
Upanisad or a secret text. 

1 8.23 brahman . . . response: the word brahman here refers to the syllable 
OM. The ‘response’ is a technical term referring to the reply 
uttered by the Adhvaryu priest in reponse to the invitation 
( dhdva ) of the Hotr priest. 

1 8.27 Brahman-bowl: the meaning is unclear. It may refer to the begging 
bowl or to the body of the ascetic, or to both. 


388 



Notes to pages 211-224 
BOOK THREE 

2.2 six Nivar tanas: a Nivartana is an area of land approximately 
10,000 square yards. 

2. 1 1 With respect . . . Sampraksalanl: this passage is obscure and pos- 
sibly corrupt. Govinda, and following him Hultzsch (1st edn. of 

B, p. 84), think that this ascetic cultivates grains, which goes 
against the whole point of washing and turning over the dishes to 
indicate that he has nothing for the next day. The name is said to 
be derived from sampraksdl (‘to wash’) and the prefix ni of ni-itbj 
(‘to turn over’). 

2.13 Palatu: I follow the reading adopted by Hultzsch in his first edi- 
tion of B; the meaning agrees with the second name ahimsika, a 
life given to non-injury. In the second edition Hultzsch adopts the 
reading phalanl. 

3.9 Unmajjakas : this may be a reference to a type of ascetic who 

spent much of his time standing in water up to the neck: see 
Rdmdyana 3.6.3. 

3.18 Brahmci-anchorites: the meaning is unclear. It may mean either 
that the rules are meant for anchorites who are Brahmins or for 
anchorites who seek union with Brahman. 

3.20 first: the meaning is that he should offer hospitality, including 
food, to the guest before he himself eats. 

7.2 A man . . . vagina: both Govinda and Sayana (on TA 2.8. 1-3) take 
ayoni (lit., ‘non-vagina’) to mean ‘an improper vagina’ and inter- 
pret the passage as forbidding sex with a Sudra woman. But at B 
4.2.13 and A 1.26.7 having sex with a Sudra woman is dis- 
tinguished from depositing semen in a ‘non-vagina’. The meaning 
may well include masturbation, nocturnal emission (which is the 
meaning in sutra 4), anal intercourse, and oral sex (see Va 12.23). 
Commenting on A 1.26.7, Haradatta explains ‘non-vagina’ as 
discharging semen in water. 

8.11 When he eats only four ... all the formulas: these contingencies 
arise because the number of lumps eaten is reduced by one every 
day. Thus on the twelfth day of the fast he eats four lumps, the 
next day three lumps, and so on. 

8.25 Abhijit, Srona: the 28th lunar mansion is called Abhijit (a, £, and 

C, Lyrae) and was placed between the Uttara§adha (21st; £ and a 
Sagittarii) and Srona (or Sravana, 22nd; a, (3, and y Aquilae), 
spanning the fourth quarter of the former and the first quarter of 
the latter. Its presiding deity is Brahma. Cf. TB 1.5. 2. 3. 

8.26 What has been . . . barley grain: the lunar penance described here 
begins on the day after the full moon with a meal of fourteen 


389 



Notes to pages 224-253 


mouthfuls. The food is decreased until the new moon, when there 
is a total fast, and increased until the full moon. Thus the ends are 
larger and the middle narrower, like an ant. The opposite method 
is to begin on the new moon with a fast, increasing the food until 
the full moon and then decreasing again until the new moon. 
Here the two ends are narrow and the middle large, like a barley 
grain. 

9.8 remember, this indicates that the person recited the Veda from 
memory and did not read from a manuscript. 

10 This entire chapter is almost identical with G 19. 

BOOK FOUR 

1.20 suppresses her menstrual periods : Govinda explains that this is 
done through medications and other such means. 

7.5-7 Ganas : the name Gana (lit., ‘host’ or ‘multitude’) probably refers 
to groups of verses. Here the first Gana contains four formulas, 
and the second eight. The entire rite is also called Gana. The 
reason may be because this rite contains numerous offerings 
using several groups of verses set in numerous metres, a point 
stressed by Govinda. 

The Dharmasutra of Vasistha 

1.1 Next . . . goal of mam. the wording here is so similar to the open- 
ing siitras of the PMS (1.1. 1-2) that it is unlikely to be accidental. 

1.8-11 The region . . . contrary to those: the reading of these passages, 
especially sutra 11 , is probably corrupt, and the translation is 
tentative. 

1.14 Book of Causes: the meaning of nidana is unclear. The commen- 
tator Kr§napandita take it to mean a treatise on various regions 
of India. It is more likely, as Biihler has noted, that the reference 
is to an ancient work of the Bhallavins cited in the Brhaddevata, 
5.23. 

1.16 pure and purifying: I follow Bohtlingk’s (1885a) conjecture 
pavanam pcivanam for pavane pdvane. Biihler translates: ‘for 
purifying oneself and others’. 

1.37 When a woman . . . men: this statement is found in the chapter on 
seasonal sacrifices of MS (1.10.1 1) and KS (36.5). The rest of the 
statement reads: ‘she undoubtedly commits a falsehood (or 
‘cheating’: amt a).’ 

2.24 rocks: Bohtlingk (1885a, 482) proposes changing asma (‘rock’) 


390 



Notes to pages 253-271 


to apanya (‘not to be traded’) as in G 7.8, because rocks are 
permitted to be traded in B 2.2.29. 1 prefer to keep the traditional 
reading and take na kadacana (‘never’) of the previous sutra as 
continuing into this. Rocks are, indeed, forbidden in M 10.86. See 
Bidder's (1885) response to Bohtlingk, and the latter’s further 
response (Bohtlingk 1886a). 

2.35 The plough . . . her youth', this passage has probably been 
incorporated here from an old commentary or an exegetical text 
( nirukta ): see Bohtlingk 1885a, 482; 1886a, 145; 18866, 526; 
Biihler 1885. The meaning is that by ploughing the fields a man 
obtains wealth, which in turn provides the resources to purchase 
cows, sheep, maids, and the like. The point of this citation, as the 
very next sutra indicates, is to show that the Veda permits the sale 
of grain, for that is the only way to purchase these items. 

2.44—7 The interest on gold . . . the principal', the meaning is not 
altogether clear. This may refer to the general rule that the total 
interest on a loan cannot exceed the principal: see G 12.31n. 
Here, however, that rule applies only to gold, whereas the interest 
on other kinds of property may exceed that amount. 

4.3 He created . . . any metre', although this particular passage cannot 
be traced to any existing vedic text, the connection between the 
social classes and specific metres in which the vedic hymns are set 
is common: see TS 7. 1.1. 4-6 (where the Sudra is associated with 
the Anustubh); Smith 1994, 58-82. 

4.7 Without killing . . . not a killing', the argument here appears to be 
as follows. You cannot get meat (required for sacrifice) without 
killing, and killing is a sin which will not get you to heaven. 
But offering a sacrifice does take you to heaven. So, killing for a 
sacrifice cannot really be a killing. 

4.19 Others should . . . people', the same passage is found in PG 
3.19.42-3. The meaning is that the funeral of a married woman is 
performed not by her own blood relations but by her husband or 
her in-laws. And married women participate in the funerals of her 
in-laws. Cf. G 14.36. 

6.5 like clouds in the autumnal month', the month is September- 
October when the normal rainy season is over. The simile is 
somewhat obscure. The meaning probably is that a few good 
clouds in this month can still produce rain, so a couple of 
syllables learnt well can purify a man. 

8.7 because his stay is brief, here we have a phonetic etymology of 
‘guest’ ( atithi ) derived by combining ‘a’ from anitya (‘brief) and 
‘tit hi’ from sthiti (‘stay’). See A 1.1.14n. 

8.15 As all rivers . . . householder : the meaning of ‘end up in’ ( yanti 


391 



Notes to pages 271-288 


samsthitim) appears to be as follows. The existence of rivers 
depends on their connection with the ocean: it provides them 
initially with their water and into it they finally merge. Similarly, 
the existence of people in other orders depends on the house- 
holder in a variety of ways: they obtain food from householders, 
and new recruits are either householders or their children (see M 
3.77-8). In a more pregnant sense, however, they end up with the 
householder, because in the rebirth process they end up as the 
semen of the householder through whom they receive their new 
birth (BU 6.2.9-13). 

10.18 emblems', these are the staff, the begging bowl, and the like. 
Displaying them invites honour and adulation from ordinary 
people. An ascetic is expected to live incognito and even to invite 
ridicule by acting as if he were mad or a simpleton. 

1 1 .26 Let him . . . produced', the meaning of the verse is not altogether 
clear. It appears that he should use both hands in serving the 
food, left hand holding the bowl and the right hand the spoon. 
The two kinds of remnants may refer to the remnants in the bowl 
he is holding and the remnants in the plates of the Brahmins who 
are eating (A 1.3.27 n.). The meaning then is that he should 
remain standing with the bowl ready to serve until the Brahmins 
have finished their meal. 

12.43 sun is seen over the trees : the reference is to late afternoon when 
the sun can barely be seen over the treetops. 

12.47 time sacred to Prajapati: this is the same as the time sacred to 
Brahman: B2.17.22n. 

13.46 When returning . . . bhav: in addressing a person the vocative case 
is used. Frequently, the vocative ends in ‘a’, e.g. Devadatta. Then 
the final syllable is lengthened. But in words whose stem forms 
end in ‘i’ or ‘u’ (e.g. Hari, Bandhu) the vocatives end in ‘e’ and 
‘o’: Hare, Bandho. When these come before a vowel they are 
changed to Haray and Bandhav. The final syllables of such words 
are prolated, e.g. Haray and Bandhav. 

14.34 He should not drink : the aphorism does not contain these words, 
but they are clearly implied within the context of the topic deal- 
ing with forbidden items of food and drink. 

14.41 These are forbidden to be eaten : these words (see previous note) 
are missing in the aphorisms but are clearly implied. 

14.44 not specifically indicated', the meaning is not altogether clear. It 
appears to say that one is not permitted to eat an animal that is 
not explicitly permitted, even though it may not be in the list of 
forbidden animals. 

15.1 blood and semen', it was generally believed that the father con- 


392 



Notes to pages 288-293 


tributes the semen and the mother the blood (often identified with 
menstrual blood) to the formation of the foetus. 

15.6-7 take in adoption ... a Siidra: the meanings of the Sanskrit com- 
pound words adurabandhava and durebandhava are not altogether 
clear. Biihler takes them to mean ‘a not remote kinsman' and ‘a 
remote kinsman’, respectively (they are then ‘descriptive 
determinative’ compounds: karmadhdrayd). The meaning would 
then be that a person should adopt a boy who is not a distant but 
a close relative of his. Wezler (1998), however, has convincingly 
demonstrated that the terms adiira and dura refer to the prox- 
imity or distance not in terms of kinship but with reference to 
geography and that the compounds are ‘possessive’, bahuvrThi : ‘a 
person whose relatives are near by or far away’. The reason for 
this provision is that an adoptive parent should not take the 
biological parent’s words regarding the boy’s ancestry and qual- 
ities at face value but should check with other relatives of the 
child for their accuracy. This would not be possible if the boy’s 
relatives live in a distant region. The expression ‘someone with 
relatives close by’ ( bandhusamnikrstam ) appears to be an old 
gloss on the previous expression ‘someone whose relatives do not 
live far away’ ( adurabdndhavam ), a gloss that found its way into 
the text. 

15.21 The discussion . . . manner, the meaning is that a person who is 
readmitted should be treated like a newborn. All the sacramen- 
tary rites (G 8.14 n.) should be performed for him. 

16.4—5 An offence . . . knowledge : these two siitras are evidently corrupt 
(Bohtlingk 1885a, 485). I think Biihler’s translation is off the 
mark. I take the crucial expression yathasanam to mean ‘accord- 
ing to rank or social position’. The translation, however, is 
tentative. 

16.21-3 Is a king . . . courtiers: these three siitras are obscure and prob- 
ably corrupt. I have followed the conjectures and interpretation 
offered by Bohtlingk (1885a, 485), because they at least make 
some sense, even though I am sceptical that Bohtlingk has dis- 
covered the original readings or meaning. A comparison between 
courtiers and vultures is also made in verse 118, Book 1, of the 
Pahcatantra. For a variant reading from a later citation of a simi- 
lar passage ascribed to Sankha-Likhita in a medieval text, see 
Kane 1962-75, i. 104 n. 108. 

16.35 This verse is corrupt and makes no sense. Biihler omits it without 
explanation. 

17.10-11 If one among many brothers ... a vedic text: variants of these 
provisions occur also in M 9.182-3 and Vi 15.41-2. The connec- 
tion between the two verses is not altogether clear. The second 


393 



Notes to pages 293-300 


clearly refers to a polygamous marriage. Wezler (1998) disagrees 
with Jolly’s suggestion that the former may refer to a polyandric 
marriage of several brothers to a single wife, as exemplified in the 
marriage of the five Pandava brothers in the Mahabharata. 
Wezler suggests that when one brother has a son all his other 
brothers also become ‘men who have sons’ because through that 
son they all are freed from the debt to their father of bearing a 
son to continue the line. Likewise, the common wives are relieved 
of the burden of bearing a son for their common husband. At a 
linguistic level, moreover, a man can claim ‘I have a son’ when his 
father gets a grandson, just as a woman can claim ‘I have a son’ 
when the husband gets a son. 

17.31-5: This type . . . his son: the story of Sunahsepa is told in the AB 
7.13. King Hariscandra was childless. He made a vow to Varuna 
and received a son, Rohita, whom he was obliged to sacrifice to 
Varuna. Rohita ran away and Varuna brought a sickness upon 
Hariscandra. Rohita purchased Sunahsepa, the son of Ajlgarta 
Sauyavasi, as a substitute (this is an example of a purchased son). 
Sunahsepa saved himself from being sacrificed by praising the 
gods and gave himself to Visvamitra as his son. 

1 7.57 barren: I follow Bidder's (on B 2.4. 10) suggestion that the reading 
avasd (‘not barren’) here should be changed to vasa (‘barren’). 

17.79 same distant ancestry: the term samanodaka means a set of rela- 
tives connected by the offering of water to the same ancestors. 
This relationship, according to some sources, extends up to the 
fourteenth degree. 

19.2 lasting until old age: Biihler translates the expression jardmarya 
as ‘life-long’. Bodewitz (1973, 155 n. 2), commenting on the 
same expression used with reference to the daily fire sacrifice 
( agnihotra ), has shown that ‘having old age as its limit (maryd) 
is the only tenable’ meaning. Eggeling’s translation (at SB 
12.4.1.1)— ‘ensuring death in old age’— is clearly inaccurate. 

19.6 both: that is, the ritual duties incumbent on the king as a house- 
holder and the royal duties connected with good government. His 
personal priest becomes his alter ego and carries out his ritual 
duties, while he himself attends to governmental affairs. 

19.9 social position: Biihler translates the term sthana (lit., place) as 
‘the seat (of the injury)’, meaning that different sorts of punish- 
ment would be meted out depending on what part of the body 
was injured. This interpretation is supported by M 8.124 where 
sthana is used with the meaning of an area of the body. But I 
think ‘social position’ is more in keeping with the rest of the 
statement, and in very similar contexts the same term is used with 
this meaning in Kautilya’s Arthasastra, 2.9.9; 2.10.5; 2.27.15. 


394 



Notes to page 300 


19.12 or for household needs: Fuhrer’s edition of Va joins this phrase 
with siitra 13. I follow Laksmldhara, Krtyakalpataru, Vyavah- 
arakdnda, 504, and Candesvara, Vivadaratnakara, 284, in joining 
the phrase with siitra 12. Their reading clearly makes better sense. 
I also adopt their reading gdrhasthydnge (or - amse ) in place of this 
edition’s gdrhasthydhgandm. Candesvara explains this phrase as 
grhasthakarma (‘householder’s activities’) or grhasthopakarana 
(‘householder’s implements’). The meaning appears to be that 
trees may be cut down to provide wood for household needs. 
Given the first provision allowing trees to be cut down for cultiva- 
tion, the meaning also may be that they can be cut down to build 
houses. 

19.14—16 Export . . . punishment: this passage is probably corrupt. I have 
followed, by and large, the reading found in Laksmldhara and 
Candesvara (see previous note). The meaning, nevertheless, is still 
not completely clear. They read nirhdra for nihara (lit., ‘fog’) in 
this edition. Even though I have kept the latter as the lectio dif- 
ficilior, I take it to be a variant of the former. I take its meaning to 
be the exporting of merchandise, a meaning attested to in M 
8.399, rather than tax or duty, as assumed by Biihler. I take these 
two sutras to mean that from the capital city merchants are not 
permitted to export their merchandise (possibly what they have 
imported into the city). They may take away only the sale price 
(argha) or the original value ( mulya ) of the merchandise. Com- 
mentators explain the ‘two festivals’ as the birth of a son to the 
king and the festival of Indra. The translation, however, is very 
tentative. My reading of the text, on which the translation is 
based, is somewhat of a hybrid, but that is inevitable when the 
text is as corrupt as this: 14. adhisthdndn na nthdrah ; 15 sarthan- 
dm arghamanamulyamatrarri naihdrikam syat; 16 mahcimahayoh 
tv anatyayh syad abhayam ca. 

19.17-22 For water . . . one Mdsa: this section is exceedingly corrupt and 
some readings of Fuhrer’s edition make no sense. Biihler has left 
several such passages untranslated. I have had the benefit of the 
reading found in Candesvara, Vivadaratnakara, 645, and his 
detailed commentary on it. On the whole, I think Candesvara is 
right in taking the passage as referring to ferries and tolls. For 
Ma$a and Karsapana, see G 12.8 n. The meaning is that to cross a 
large river the toll is 8 Masas, for a narrower river a quarter 
Karsapana (= 5 Ma$as), and when the water is low, 1 Ma$a. My 
translation is based on the following somewhat hybrid reading: 1 7. 
samydne dasavdhavaliim dvigunakdrinl syat; 1 8 . pratyekam prapdh 
syuh; 19. pumsam satdvarardhavdham vahet; 20. adliyardhah stri- 
yah syuh; 21. taro ’stall mdsdh saramadhydya asaramadhyaydh 
pdidah kdrsapanasya; 22. nirudakas taro masyah. 


395 



Notes to pages 300-313 


19.28 artisans : I follow Biihler and the commentator in taking udvaha 
to mean artisan, although I am unsure about this meaning. 

19.38-9 A man . . . misrepresented himself: the text is somewhat obscure. 
I have followed the interpretations of Laksmldhara, Krtyakalpa- 
taru, Vvavaharakdnda , 542, and Candesvara, Vivadaratnakara, 
331. 

19.48 stain of impurity: I read aghadosa (found in the parallel in M 5.93) 
in place of adya dosa in Fiihrer’s edition. 

20.7 take her to himself: that is, the older brother should take the 
younger brother’s wife as his own. The commentator notes that 
this is done only ritually, after which the wife is taken back by her 
husband. 

20.19 surd liquor: often surd is used as a generic term for liquor. Here, 
however, it appears to refer to a specific type of intoxicant. M 
11.95 distinguishes three types of surd made from molasses, rice, 
and a particular flower. The commentator Kulluka (on M 1 1.95) 
lists nine types of liquors called madya , which are distinguished 
from the three types of surd. 

20.24 That is why . . . child: the rite called pumsavana (‘quickening a 
male child’) is performed during the third month of pregnancy 
(G 8.14n.). The argument here is that a foetus without developed 
sexual organs will turn out to be a male through the power of this 
rite and, therefore, aborting such a foetus is equivalent to murder- 
ing a Brahmin (always assumed to be male, because the murder 
of a female does not carry the same sanction: see Va 20.37). See A 
1.24.8-9 n. 

20.31 the same penance: the text here is evidently defective. Before this 
one should expect a penance for killing a Brahmin. Such a pen- 
ance lasting twelve years is given in other texts: see A 1.24.10-20; 
G 22.4-6; B 2. 1.2-3. 

21.15 Half his hodv: the wife is considered a half of the husband’s self 
or body: SB 5.2.1.10. 

21.21 very arduous penance: this penance is elsewhere called ‘hot ardu- 
ous penance’ ( taptakrcchra ). See B 2.2.37. For another descrip- 
tion of the very arduous penance, see B 2.2.40. 

22.1 The entire chapter 22 is almost identical with G 19 and B 3.10, 
where notes are given. 

22.5 vedic texts: the wording here makes it likely that the passage 
found in B 3.10.6 and G 19.7 has been omitted in the manuscripts 
of Va. 

23.34 people hear: this, in all probability, cannot be taken literally. The 
commentator Kr§napandita and Biihler think that this applies 
when they are reciting the Veda. 


396 



Notes to pages 313-325 


23.35 it: Krsnapandita and Biihler take this to be a reference to the 
Gayatri verse. 

24.7 the teacher: it appears very likely that at one time the text of 
Vasistha ended here. The final six chapters are probably later 
additions and are composed in the metrical style of the later 
Dharmasastras: see Biihler 1879-82, ii, p. xxii. 

26.10 four . . . cooked food: this verse is identical with M 2.86 where 
most commentators interpret the four as four of the five so-called 
Great Sacrifices, excluding vedic recitation (B 2.11.1-6). Biihler 
takes them to mean four of the five sacrifices listed in M 3.73^1. 

26.12 ‘Head’ vow: the meaning is unclear. The same expression occurs 
in MuU 3.2.10 and may refer to some type of head-shaving con- 
nected with studying a particularly sacred text. 

27.15 if he has . . . discoloured: the reference possibly is to excrement. 
After eating barley, if one’s excrement contains white barley seeds 
then he is pure, if they are discoloured, he remains impure. 

27.17 Prajapatya penance: this is the same as the normal arduous 
penance (B 2.2.38). 

30.5 sense organs: this appears to be a broken citation. 


397 



INDEX 


In several significant areas, this Index groups related terms under a single broad 
topic. Accordingly, all animals are listed under animals , apart from birds and fish, 
which are listed separately; everything relating to ascetic life styles, under ascetic 
institutions', all bodily parts and fluids, under body, all matters relating to death 
and funerary practices, under death', directions, such as north and south, under 
directions', all grasses, under grasses, and all plants and trees, under trees', all items 
of food, under food, all deities, under god', matters relating to civil and criminal 
law, under king', issues relating to Law ( dhartna ), under Law, all kinship terms and 
relatives, under kinship', all metallic substances, under metal: mother and father, 
under parents: names of regions, under regions: everything relating to sacrifices, 
under sacrifice ; all social divisions and castes, under social classes: all divisions of 
day and night, under time; everything relating to the Veda, including vedic texts 
and formulas, under Veda; cities, towns, and the like, under village. The numbers 
refer to the internal divisions of the Dharmasutras as described in the Note on the 
Translation (p. xliv). 


abortion A 1: 19.15; 21.8; 24.8; 28.21; 
G17.ll; 20.1; 21.9; 24.6-9; B 1: 
10.23; B 4: 1.12-13, 17, 20. 29; Va 
2.42; 20.23-4; 28.7 
actress B 2: 4.3 

adversity, time of A 1: 20.11; A 2: 4.25; 
G 7. 1-25; 9.67; B 1: 3.41-2; B 2: 
5.7; 18.18; Va 2.22 
Agastya Va 14.15 
age G6.20;Va 13.56 
one A 2: 15.2, 20 
five G 1.6 
seven A 1: 1.21 

eight Al: 1.19, 22; G 1.5; B 1: 3.7; 
Va 11.49 

nine A 1: 1.23; G 1.6 
ten A 1: 1.24 

eleven Al: 1.19, 25; G 1.1 1; B 1: 3.8; 
Va 11.50 

twelve Al: 1.19, 26; G 1.11; B 1:3.8; 
Va 11.51 

sixteen A 1: 1.27; G 1.12; B 1: 3.12; 
Va 11.71; 17.59 

twenty-two A 1: 1.27; G 1.12; B 1: 
3.12; Va 11.72 

twenty-four A 1: 1.27; G 1.12; B 1: 
3.12; Va 11.73 
eighty G 6.10 

counted from conception A 1 : 


1.19; G 1.7; B 1: 3.7; Va 11.49-51 
legal G 10.48; B 2: 3.36; Va 16.9 
seniority A 1: 14.9, 14, 21; A 2: 6.7; 
17.10 

agriculture A 2: 10.7; 16.14; G 10.5; 
Bl: 10.28, 30; 18.4; B 3: 2.2-4; 

Va 2.19; 19.12 

agricultural land A 1: 9.7; G 
12.19-26, 28 

farmers A 2: 28.1; G 10.24; 11.21; 
Va 11.42 

Ajrgarta Sauyavasi Va 17.32 
ancestors A 1: 2.5; 19.13; 20.6; A 2: 
4.5; 5.18; 17.8; 24.3; G 3.29; 
4.29-33; 5.3, 9; 11.27; 15.22; 17.4; 
27.17; B 1:4.7; 8.16; 19.11-12; 

B 2: 2.26-7; 5.2-4, 18; 11.15, 33; 
16.5, 7-8; B 3: 6.12; B 4: 1.18; 3.6; 
5.5; 8.6; Va 2.7, 30; 3.68; 4.10; 
10.3; 11.37, 48; 12.23; 14.18; 15.4; 
16.32, 37; 17.16; 22.10 
see also death, kinship, parents 
ancestral offering A 1: 10.28; 11.26; 
13.1; A 2: 5T6; 15.11-18; 16.1-28; 

17.1- 25; 18.1-19; 19.17-20; 

20.1- 2; G 8.18; 10.53; 14.39; 

15.1- 30; 16.47-8; B 1: 5.12; 7.5; 
8.8; 11.4; 15.3, 6; 21.2; B 2: 3.16, 
18-19; 10.6; 11.1, 3; 13.6; 14.1-12; 


398 



Index 


15. 1- 12; B 3: 6.5; Va 3.8, 70; 4.5-6; 
9.12; 11.5, 16-44 

daily A 2: 18.5-18 
eating at A 1: 10.28-30; 11.26; G 
16.34; B 1: 21.8-11; Va 13.15-16; 
23.12 

eighth day after full moon A 1; 10.2; 

B 2: 15.9; G 16.38-9; Va 13.22 
food A 2: 16.23-8; 17.1-3; G 15.6, 15 
invitees A 2: 17.4-15,21-2; 18.9-16; 
20.2; G 15.6-14. 16-20; Va 
11.17-35 

monthly A2: 16.4; 19.17-20; 20.1-2; 
G 15.2-4 

observances A 2: 18. 1—4; G 15.22-3 
procedure A 2: 17.11-25; 18.5-18; 

B 2: 14.1-12; 15.1-12; Va 1 1 . 16—44 
time A 2: 16.4-22; 17.23-5; G 

15.2- 5 

water offering A 2: 15.9; G 5.5; 
14.34-6, 40, 43; Bl: 11.4; B 2: 
17.38; Va 11.21 
see also death 

anger A 1: 3.23; 23.5-6; 26.13; 31.23; 

A 2: 18.3; G 2.13; 5.24; 10.51; 
14.10; B 1: 1.5; 15.30; B 2: 5.21; 
15.4; 18.3; B 4: 5.4; Va 4.4; 8.1; 
10.30; 11.35 
Angirasa B 1: 3.47 

animal Al: 18.6, 15;A2: 16.11:22.20; 
23.10; G 7.18; 13.14, 20; 17.6, 31; 
28.6; Bl: 18.4; 19.12; B 3: 3.4, 
21-2; Va 14.15, 39-47 
alligator Va 14.41 
ant" B 3: 8.26; anthill Va6.17 
antelope A 1: 2.40; 3.9-10; G 15.15; 
black G 1.16; B 1: 2.12; 3.14; 8.38; 
13.2; B 2: 17.20: B 3: 1.11, 18; 2.7; 
4.4; Va 1.13-15; 11.61; 28.20. 22; 
Kuluhga B 1: 12.6; Rsya B 1: 
12.6; Ruru A 1: 3.5; G 1.16; Bl: 
3.14; Va 1 1.62; see also skin 
beasts of burden G 12.36 
bitten by G 23.7 
boar G 15.15:22.24; B 1: 12.6 
with/without bones G 22.20-2; Va 
21.25-6 

buffalo A 2: 16.27; G 12.24; 17.22-3; 
B 1: 12.6; B 2: 2.13; Va 14.35; 
Gaura bison Va 14.43 


bull A 1:24.4; A 2: 11.18; G 4.8; 
7.15;22.14-16; 28.5. 14-15; B 1: 
10.31; 19.1-2: B 3: 2.3; Va 1.32, 36; 
2.32; 17.8; 21.22; 23.5; 24.7; ox 
A 1:9.5; 17.30-1; 18.1; 26.1; 28.3; 
A 2: 9.13; G 7.15; 13.29; 17.30; 
28.7; Bl: 19.3—4; 20.4; B 2: 4.21; 
13.8; Va 2.35; 4.8; 6.21; 14.45-6; 
29.18, Gayal A 1: 17.29; Va 14.43, 
Sarabha A 1: 17.29; Va 14.43 
camel A 1: 17.29; G 12.23; 23.4; Va 
2.35; 14.40; milk A 1: 17.23; G 
17.24; Bl: 12.10 

cat G 1.59; Va 14.27; 21.24; 23.29 
carnivorous A 1: 21.15; B 1: 12.2 
chameleon A 1: 25.13; G 22.19: B 1: 
19.6 

cloven-footed B 1: 12.6 
cow A 1: 3.26; 9.22, 25; 24. 1-5, 
18-21; 30.20; 31.6-13; 32.24; A 2: 
17.8; G 4.8; 9.12, 19,23-4; 10.18; 
12.22, 28; 13.29; 14.9; 17.12; 
18.26-7; 19.16; 20.13; 22.14-16, 
36; 28.15; B 1: 9.10; 13.19; 19.1-4, 
12; 20.4; B 2: 2.30; 3.9; 4.18; 6.30, 
34, 38; B 3: 6.13; 7.14; 8.13, 25; 
10.14; B 4: 4.10; 5.5; 6.3-4; 7.9-10; 
Va 1.32, 36; 2.34-5; 3.35, 45-7, 57; 
6.11, 30-2; 10.10; 11.63; 12.3; 
17.8,43; 18.16:21.22, 25; 24.7; 
28.9, 16-17:29.11, 19; barren Al: 
20.12; G 7.14; black A1:9.22;A2: 
14.7; calf Al: 31.10, 13; A 2: 17.8; 
G 9.23-1, 52; 17.26; B 1: 9.2; 

12.10; B 2: 6.15; Va 12.9; 17.8; 
28.9; cattle A 1: 16.14; A 2: 16.19; 
28.5-9; G 10.25; 12.39: 13.15,21; 
26.12; B 1:6.7; 10.28; B 2: 2.13; 

B 3: 8.30; Va 16.34; cowpen A 1: 
9.25; G 19.14; B 2: 8.2; B 3: 10.12; 
cow's hide B 1: 10.1; Va 29.16; 
dung A 1:9.5; 16.15; G 9.40; B 1: 
8.32, 36; 9.11; 10.17: 11.38; 13.20; 
14.5, 10; B 2: 12.2; B 3: 9.4; B 4: 

5. 1 1-14, 25; 6.5; Va 3.56-7; 6.12; 
13.12; 20.42; 21.8; 27.13-14; gift 
of A 2: 8.5-7; 11.18; 13.11; hair 
B 1: 8.37; 14.9; B 2: 2.30; Va 3.54; 
heifer G 7.14; horns B 1: 11.41; 
killing G 21.11; 22.18; Va 21.18; 


399 



Index 


animal (coni.): 
cow ( cont.): 

meat A 1: 17.30-1; A 2: 16.26; Va 
14.31; milch cow A 1: 17.30; 26.1; 
31.11; G 7.15; 9.19; 17.30; B 1: 
19.3—1; Va 14.45-6; milk A 1: 
17.24; G 15.15; 17.22-3; Va 
14.34-5; 27.13; milking B 2: 18.6; 
sex with G 22.36; 23.12; Va 23.6; 
urine B 1: 11.38; 14.7; B 4: 
5.11-14, 16, 25; 6.5; Va 27.13-14 
crocodile, Mrdura A 1: 17.39 
deer A 1: 3.3°, 5; G 15.15; 17.3; B 1: 
1.10; 9.2; Va 3.1 1; 21.23; 28.8; Ena 
A 1: 3.3; Harina A 1: 3.3; B 1: 12.6; 
milk A 1: 17.23; Prsata B 1: 12.6; 
Ruru G 15.15 

dog Al: 10.19; 15.16; 16.30; 21.15; 
25.13; 28.21; A 2: 9.5; 17.20; G 
1.59; 14.32-3; 15.24; 16.8; 22.19; 
23.14; B 1: 6.3-4; 9.2; 11.36, 

39^11; 14.15; B 2: 2.26; 6.34; B 3: 
6.5; Va 2.30; 3.45-7; 11.9; 14.11, 
25; 21.24; 23.29-31, 33; 27.13; 

28.8 

domestic A 2: 14.13; 16.28; B 2: 

2.29; Va 2.28; 14.40 
donkey A 1: 10.19; 26.8; G 12.23; 
16.8; 23.4, 17; B 2: 1.31; 6.34; Va 
2.35; 21.1-3; 23.1; donkey-cart 
A 1: 32.25; skin of A 1: 28.19, 21; 
G 17.27; 23.18; B 2: 1.3 
elephant B 1: 1.10; 3.34; B 2: 6.34; 

Va 3.11; 29.6 
fanged Va 2.28 

five-clawed A 1: 17.37; G 17.27; 

23.26; Bl: 12.5; Va 14.39 
flies Va 3.45-7 

forbidden, see under food: meat 
frog A 1: 25.13; G 1.59; 22.19; B 1: 
19.6; Va 21.24 
gnat B 3: 3.19; Va 3.45-7 
goat A 2: 14.13; G 7.15; 12.25; 
15.15-16; 17.22-3; B 1: 8.39; 12.4; 
B 2: 3.9; 6.34; Va 2.35; 1 1.63; 12.3; 
14.35; 17.44; 28.9; billy A 1: 3.6; 

A 2: 14.13; 19.1; G 1.16; B 1: 3.14; 
6.2; Va 4.8; 21.13; red A 2: 18.13; 
G 15.15 

hairy/hairless G 17.28; Va 2.28 


hare A 1: 17.37; G 15.15; 17.27; B 1: 
12.5; Va 14.39 
hawk B 3: 3.6 

hedgehog A 1: 17.37; G 17.27; B 1: 
12.5; Va 14.39 

horse G7.15; 10.18; 12.24; 13.15, 

22; 19.16; B 1: 10.28; 19.12; B 2: 
3.9; 6.34; 10.14; Va 2.35-6; 6.31-2; 
16.34; 17.43:26.17; 28.9 
insects A 1: 16.26; G 17.9; B 2: 12.6; 
Va 14.22-3 

jackal Bl: 18.18; Va 21.14; howling 
Al: 10.19; 1 1.33; G 16.8; B 1: 
21.16; solitary A 1: 10.19; 11.33 
killing A 1: 25.13; 26.1; G 17.31, 37; 
21.11; 22.18-25; B 1: 19.3-6; Va 
4.4-8; 6.25;21.18-26 
leech Va 21.11 
lion B 3: 7.12 

livestock A 2: 7.3; G 18.25; 28.5, 7, 
12 

mongoose A 1: 25.13; G 1.59; 22.19; 
Bl: 19.6; Va 21.24; 23.29; 

Babhru B 1: 19.6 

monitor lizard (Godha) A 1: 17.37; 

Bl: 12.5; Va 14.39 
mosquitoes B 3: 3.19 
mouse A 1: 16.27; G 17.27; 22.19; 

B 2: 12.6 
mule Va 2.35 

one-hoofed Al: 17.29; A 2: 16.16; G 
17.24, 28; 28.13; Bl: 12.11;Va2.28 
panther B 3: 7.12 
pig B 3: 6.5; Va 14.47; village A 1: 
17.29; 21.15; G 17.29; 23.5; B 1: 
12.3; Va 6.27; 23.30 
porcupine A 1: 17.37; G 17.27; B 1: 
12.5; Va 14.39 
porpoise Va 14.41 
predatory G 23.4; B 3: 3.6 
pregnant G 7.14; B 1: 12.9 
Putikhasa A 1: 17.37 
rat G 22.19; Va 21.24; Derika Al: 
25.13; Bl: 19.6; Diddika B 1:19.6; 
rat hole Va6.17 

rhinoceros A 1: 17.37; A 2: 17.1; G 
15.15; 17.27; B 1: 12.5; Va 14.47 
sheep A 1: 3.7-8; A 2: 14.13; G 7.15; 
12.25; 15.15; 28.7: B 1: 12.4; B 2: 
3.9; 6.34; Va 2.35-6; 12.3; 17.44; 


400 



Index 


milk Al: 17.22; G 17.24; B 1: 
12.11 

for slaughter G7.13 

snake G 1.59; 22.25; Va 21.24 

with teeth in one/both jaws G 17.28; 

28.5; B 1: 2.4; B 2: 2.29; Va 14.40 
tiger B 3: 3.6; 7.12 
tortoise/turtle A 1: 17.37; G 15.15; 

17.27; B 1: 12.5; Va 14.39 
tusked Va 2.28 
village Bl; 12.1; Va 10.16 
wild A 2: 16.28; B 3: 2.19; Va 2.28; 
3.45-7 

wolf B 3: 3.6; howling A 1: 10.19; 
11.33 

worm Bl; 11.37-8; B 2: 2.26; Va 
2.30; 4.32; 18.16 
areca nut B 1: 8.39 
arrow A 1: 15.19; B 1: 7.7; Va 14.14; 
19.21 

arsonist G 15.18; Va3.16; 14.7 
artisan G 10.31,60; 11.21; 15.18; 17.7; 

B 1:9.1; 10.24; Va 19.28 
artist G 6.16 

Arya A 1: 3.40; 12.6, 8; 20.7-8; 21.13, 
17; 23.6; 26.7; 28.13; 29.1, 9; A 2: 
3.1,4; 10.11; 25.13; 26.4; 27.8-9, 
14—15; G 6.11; 9.65, 69; 10.59, 
65-6; 12.2-4; 22.5; B 1: 10.20; B 2: 
2.18; 6.31 

ascetic institutions: 

Ahimsaka B 3: 2.13 
Cakracara B3: 1.1-26; 2.1-19 
Dhruva B 3: 1.7; 2.7-10 
forest hermit A 2: 21.1, 18-21; 

22.1- 24; 23.1-2; G 3.2, 26-35; B 2: 
11.12, 14-15; 17.6; B 3: 3.1-22; 

B 4: 5.27; Va 6.19-20; 7.2; 9.1-12; 
21.32; classification B 3: 3.1-9; 
clothes A 2: 22.1, 17; G 3.34; Va 
9.1; food A 2: 9.13; 22.2-4, 24; 

23.1- 2; G 3.26, 28, 31,35; B 2: 
11.15; 13.7; 18.13; B 3: 3.3-14; 
hermitage Va 9.7; treatise on B 2: 
14; B 3: 3.16-18 

Kapota B 3: 1.7; 2.15; B 4: 5.28 
KauddalT B 3: 1.7; 2.5-6 
PalanI B3: 1.7; 2.13 
Salma B 2: 12.1; 17.3; 18.4; B 3: 

1.1- 26;2.1-19 


SampraksalanI B 3: 1.7; 2.1 1 
Samuha B 3: 1.7; 2.12 
Sannivartinl B 3: 1.7; 2.1^1 
Siddheccha B 3: 1.7; 2.16 
Siloncha B 3: 1.7; 2.14 
Vanya B 3: 1.8; 2.18-19 
Yayavara B 2: 12.1; 17.3; 18.4; B 3: 

1.1- 26; 2.1-19; B 4: 5.27 
ascetic/mendicant Al: 18.31; A 2: 

21.1,7-17; 26.14; G 3.2, 11-25; 
12.38; 14.44; 18.16; Bl: 19.13; 

B 2: 11.12, 16-26; 13.7;B3: 

3.5-7; B 4: 5.19; Va 6.19-20; 7.2; 

10.1- 31; 11.17-18, 34; 19.23, 34, 
37; 21.33 

begging/food A 2: 21.10; G 3.15-16; 

B 2: 18.4-15; Va 10.8-9,21-2 
clothes A 2: 21.11; G 3.18-19; B 2: 
17.44; B 3: 2.17 
naked A 2: 21.12 
procedure of renunciation B 2: 

17.1- 41; Va 10.1 

renouncer (samnyasin) B 2: 18.14; 

B 3: 2.17 

rules B 2: 17.42^1; 18.1-27; Va 
10.6-29 

ash A 2: 15.16; G 9.15, 40; B 1: 10.27; 
14.5; B 2: 6.16; 12.6; Va 3.10, 49, 
58; 6.12; 6.31-2; 14.23 
astrology/astronomy A 2: 8.11; G 
11.15-16; B 2: 2.16; Va 10.21 
auspicious/inauspicious A 1: 13.9; 
31.12; A 2: 4.23; 29.7; G 8.23; 9.66; 
11.17; 20.1 1; 27.8; B 2: 6.34; B 3: 
9.4; B 4: 5.3; Va 6.7-8 
austerity A 1: 5.1; 12.1-2, 5; A 2: 24.8, 
14; G 3.26; 19.11. 15; 23.27; 26.12; 
B 1: 10.6, 33; B 2: 5.1; 11.15, 34; 
13.9; 16.3; B 3: 3.12, 20-1; 10.9, 

13; B4: 1.30; Va 3.60; 5.2; 6.23, 26; 
8.14; 10.5; 20.47; 21.32; 22.8; 25.5, 
7-8; 26.17-19; 27.5 
axe A 2: 22.15 

balance Va: 2.42 

bald people A 2: 17.21; G 15.18, 30; 
17.18; 21.11 

Bali offering A 1: 12.15; A 2: 3.12, 
15-23; 4.1-9; G 2.4; 5.9; B 2: 5.11; 
11.1, 4; B 3: 6.3; Va 11.4 


401 



Index 


barbarian G 9.16; Va 6.41 
barber G 17.6 
bard B 1: 10.24 

bath A 1: 1 .30, 36; 2. 1-2, 6; 10.5; 15.2-7; 
32.7-10; A2: 1.23; 18.4;22.12-14;G 
2.13, 32; 9.2; 19.15;20.7, 10, 17;B 1: 
3.35, 37, 39^40; 11.3, 36, 41; B 2: 
2.42; 5.1; 6.3; 7.2-3; 11.15; 17.37; 
18.15, 19; B 3: 4.5; 5.2; 10.13; B 4: 
5.4; Va 3.38; 5.7; 7.17; 9.9; 17.56; 
24.5 

bathing place/ford G 19.14; B 2: 7.2; 
8.1; B 3: 4.5; 5.2, 7; 10.12; Va 
22.12; 26.12; 29.11 
with clothes on A 1: 15.16; A 2: 3.6; 
G 14.30; B 1:9.5; 11.32, 39; Va 
21.28; 23.33 

after death Al: 10.5; 15.2-7 
as penance A 1: 8.29; 26.14; 27.1, 5, 
11; 28.11; A 2: 12.13;G21.6; 24.4; 
25.7; 26.10; B 2: 2.10-11; 6.24-5; 

B 4: 2.15; Va 4.38 
procedure A 1: 2.30; B 2: 8.1-13 
see also under death, sacrifice, 
student 

bed A 1:2.21; 6.4; 8.11, 13; 15.21; 32.4; 
A 2: 4.1; 5.5; 6.15; 25.9; 27.15; G 
2.21, 25; 5.38; 9.26-7; 12.7; 17.3; 
23.8; B 1: 9.6-7; B 2: 1.13; Va 7.15; 
29.12 

mat A 1: 8.13; G 10.58; B 1: 34 
mattress A 2: 6.15 
post A 1: 29.1; G 21.4; B 2: 1.3 
begging G 5.21-3; B 1: 4.7; 5.8-11; 

B 2: 2.16; 5.19; 11.22; 18.4—6; B 3: 
7.8; Va 7.9; 8.16; 10.7-8,21-2; 
12.2^4; 19.37; 24.5 
bowl A 1:3.25, 36; 24.14; A 2: 23.1; 
G 23.18; B 2: 17.11,36-7; 18.7,27; 
Va 16.33 

as penance A 1: 24.14— 17; 28.19; 

29.1; G 21.4; 23.18-19: B 2: 1.3 
procedure A 1: 3.25-35; B 1: 
3.16-18; 5.11; Va 11.68-70 
reasons for A 2: 10.1-3; G 5.23^1; 

B 1:4.7 

as sacrifice A 1: 3.43-5; 3.1^1 
women as alms givers A 1: 3.26-30; 

B 1: 4.7; B 2: 18.5; Va 11.68-70 
see also under ascetic, student 


belching G 16.20 
Bhallavins B l:2.11;Va 1.14 
Bharadvaja B 4: 6.9 
birds A 1: 15.7; 17.32-6; 31.17; B 1: 
9.2; 12.2, 7; B 3: 3.21-2; Va 2.28; 
3.45-7; 11.39^40; 14.15; 28.8 
blackbird G 17.10 
Cakra Al: 17.35 
carnivorous A 1: 17.34; Va 14.48 
cock A 1: 17.32; Va 23.30; village 
A 1: 21.15; G 17.29; 23.5; B 1: 

12.3; Va 14.48 

cormorant, Madgu G 17.34; Va 
14.48 

crane A 1: 17.36; Kraunca A 1: 
17.36; Va 14.48; Laksmana A 1: 
17.36; Vardhranasa A 1: 17.36; 

A 2: 17.3; G 15.15; B 1: 12.7 
crow A 1: 25.13; G 17.29; 22.19; B 1: 
6.3^4; 14.15; 19.6; B 2: 14.9-10; 

B 3: 6.5; Va 11.9; 14.25,48; 23.30 
cuckoo, Kokila Va 14.48; Saranga 
Va 14.48 

curlew Al: 17.36; Krunca Al: 
17.36 

dove Va 14.48; Paravata Va 14.48; 
23.30 

egret, Baka G 17.34; Va 14.48 
falcon G 17.29; Va 14.48; 

Suparna A 1: 17.35 
feeding by scratching with feet A 1 : 
17.32; G 17.35; B 1: 12.7; Va 
14.48 

feeding by thrusting beaks A 1: 
17.33; G 17.35 

flying fox (Mandhala) G 17.34; Va 
' 14.48 

geese: Cakravaka A 1: 25.13; G 
17.28; B 1: 19.6; Va 14.48; Hamsa 
Al: 17.35; 25.13; G 17.28; B 1: 
19.6; Va 14.48 

heron A 1: 17.33; Kanka G 17.29; 
Va 14.48; 23.30; Plava A 1: 17.33; 
G 17.28; Va 14.48 
ibis, Balaka G 17.34; Va 14.48 
night birds G 17.34; Va 14.48 
osprey, Kurara Va 14.48 
owl B 1: 19.6; Va 23.30; hooting 
A 1:10.19 

parrot G 17.34; Va 14.48 


402 



Index 


partridge B 1: 12.7; Kapinjala B 1: 
12.7; Krakara Va 14.48 
peacock A 1: 25.13; B 1: 12.7; 19.6 
pigeon Bl: 12.7; B 3: 2.15; 

Harlta Va 14.48 
Railataka Va 14.48 
red-beaked/footed G 17.29 
sandpiper, Tittibha G 1 7.34; Va 14.48 
sparrow Va 14.48; Kalavinka 
G 17.28; Va 14.48 
starling, Sarika Va 14.48 
Varana B 1: 12.7 
village Va 14.48 

vulture A 1; 17.35; G 17.29; Va 14.48; 

16.21- 3; 23.30; Bhasa A 1: 17.35; 
25.13; B 1: 19.6; Va 14.48; 23.30 

wagtail, Khanjarlta Va 14.48 
water birds G 17.29 
web-footed G 17.35; Va 14.48 
woodpecker G 17.34; Va 14.48 
birth A 1: 1.16-18; 17.24; G 6.20; 

17.22- 3; B 1:21.14, 21; B 2; 11.31, 
33; Va 2.3, 6; 15.21 

birthing room A 1: 16.19 
impurity A 1: 16.19; G 14.14-16; 
Bl: 11.1, 17-23; B 3: 6.5; Va 
4.20-3,31-2:23.12 
miscarriage G 14.17-18; B 1: 11.31; 
Va 4.34 

see also initiation, rebirth 
blind A 2: 26.16; B 2: 3.38; 6.30; Va 
6.4; 11.19; 16.33 

boat A 1: 17.6; 32.27; G 9.33; 10.32; 

B 1: 3.34; 9.7; Va 12.44; 13.19; 
14.36; 19.17-20 

body A 1:7.11; 8.2; A 2: 3.3; 23.2; 
24.13-14; G 1.41; 11.29; B 1: 15.5; 
B 2: 18.24; B 3: 1.26; Va 3.60; 5.7; 
6.42; 7.15; 20.43 
ankle A 1: 5.21 

anus B 1: 10.14; B 3: 8.12; Va 6.18 
arm G 1.36; 2.22; B 1: 8.11, 18-19; 

B 2: 12.12; Va 4.2; 26.16 
beard Al: 8.2; A 2: 3.6; G 9.7; B 1: 
5.7; B 2: 2.44; 17.10; B 3: 1.10, 25; 
7.5; 8.3; B 4: 5.3; Va24.5 
blood A 1: 16.14; G 21.22; 24.6; Bl: 
6.5; 8.48; 11.37; 13.11.28, 32; 

14.3, 6; B 2: 1.7; B 3: 8.12; Va 
3.59; 13.35; 15.1:20.26 


bones G 24.6; B 2: 6.16; B 3: 8.12; 

Va 20.26; 23.24-5 
chest A 1: 5.12 
cutting a limb A 1: 26.6 
ears A 1: 5.16; 16.7; A 2: 19.1; G 
12.4; B 1: 3.26; 6.2; B 4: 3.5; Va 
6.25 

excrement A 1: 15.23; 27.3 — 4; 

30.11- 21; 31.1-3; A 2: 5.9; G 1.44; 
2.1; 9.12, 14, 37^13; 15.22; 16.11; 
23.3; B 1: 6.5; 7.3; 8.48; 10.10-15; 
13.11.28, 32; 14.3, 6; 15.30; B 2: 
1.21; 2.26, 36; 6.39; B 3: 8.17; B 4: 
6.7; Va 2.30; 3.59; 4.32; 6.9-13; 

12.11- 13; 13.29:20.20; 23.30 
eyes A 1: 8.2; 16.7; B 2: 6.33; B 4: 

3.5; Va 5.7; 6.42; 7.15; eyebrows 
Va 24.5; eyelashes Va 24.5 
face A 1:8.2; A 2: 19.1; B 2: 6.33 
fat Va 20.26 

feet A 1: 5.18-22; 6.29; 7.13; 11.13; 
15.17,23; 16.7, 28; 31.6; A 2: 19.1; 

20.12- 14; G 1.36; 2.14; 9.13, 
49-50; 16.17; 17.10; 20.4; B 1: 
3.25-8; 8. 12, 26; 15.4; 18.6; B 4: 

I. 3; 3.5; Va 3.42; 4.2; 6.36, 42; left 
Va 15.12; right Al: 5.21; B 2: 

12.1 1: washing A 1: 31.1; A2: 6.9- 
10; G 9.32; 10.52; B 1: 6.14; 8.11; 

II. 40; B 2: 5.21; 6.8; 7.2; 8.1-2; 
18.7; Va 3.26 

fingers B 1: 8.16-17: B 2: 5.21; Va 
3.64-8; cracking joints A 2: 5.9; 
20.16; G 2.15; 9.51; Va 6.33; 
thumb A 2: 19.9; G 1.46; B 1: 
8.15-16; B 2: 12.11; 14.11; 15.2, 6; 
Va 3.26, 68; 12.19 
flesh A 1: 25.12; G 24.6; B 3: 8.12; 

Va 20.26 

forehead G 1.26; B 1: 3.15; 18.18; Va 
11.56 

hair: body A 1: 25.12; A 2: 3.6; B 1: 
5.7; B 2: 2.44; 17.10; B 3: 1.10,25; 
7.5; 8.3; Vail. 34; 20.26; 25.5; 
head A 1: 8.2; 16.14, 23; A 2: 3.3; 
G 9.15; 17.9; 24.6: B 2: 6.16; 12.6; 
B 4: 1.23; Va 11.55; 14.22-3; 30.9; 
black B 1: 3.5; combing A 1: 8.5; 
customs Va 2.21; dishevelled Al: 
25.4; A 2: 10.11; 15.7; G 10.18; 


403 



Index 


body ( cont .): 

hair: body {cont.): 

B2: 1.16; Va 15.13; 20.41; loose Va 
2.21, matted A 1: 2.31-2; G 1.27; 
3.34; 26.12; B 2 : 1 1.15; Va 7.1 1; 
9.1; shaving A 1: 2.32; 10.6-9; A 2 : 
3.6-7; 5.16; G 1.27; 3.22; 16.3; 
27.3; B 1: 5.7; 10.20; B 2 : 1.20; 
2.44-5; 11.18; 17.10;B3: 1.10,25; 
7.5; 8.3; B 4: 5.3; Va 10.6; 16.33; 
20.14, 17-18; 20.42; 21.1-3; 24.5; 
topknot A 1: 2.32; 10.8-9; G 1.27; 
3.22; 20.5; B 1 : 8.18-19; B 2 : 

11.18; Va 2.21; 7.11; 24.5; see also 
animal, bald 

hands A 1: 4.18, 21; 6.10, 16,22; 
10.27; 14.22; 16.8, 11; 31.7; A 2 : 
3.15; 12.12; 19.1, 1 1; G 9.9 1 1, 50; 
10.52; B 1:3.25; 6.14; 8.11:21.10; 
B 2 : 5.21; 7.2; 8.1. 4, 6; B 2 : 12.7, 
11; 14.11; 18.7; B 3: 3.1 1; 8.12; B 4: 
1.3; Va 3.26; 6.18, 35-6, 42; 12.15; 
13.16,20; 14.31-2; joined A 1: 
5.16; 25.1; A 2 : 10.11; G 10.18; 
left A 1: 16.7; G 1.46; B 1: 7.3; 
8.26; 10.12-14; B 4: 3.5; Va 3.28; 
6.18; parts for pouring/sipping 
water B 1: 8.14-16; B2: 5.3; 10.3; 
Va 3.26, 64-8; right A 1: 5.16, 21; 
16.7; G 1.46; B 1:6.2; 7.3; B 2 : 
6.40; 7.5 

head A 1: 16.7; 32.7; G 1.26; B 1: 
3.15; 8.26; B 3: 8.12; B 4: 3.5; Va 
3.28; 11.55; cavities of G 1.36; 

B 1: 8.26; Va 3.28; covering A 1: 
6.10; 14.22; 30.14-15; G 9.35-7; 

B 1: 8.18-19; 10.10; B 3: 2.7; Va 
12.13 

heart A 1:7.9; 16.2; G 1.36; B 1: 
8.18-19, 23; B 2: 1.29; 3.14: 12.10; 
B 4: 3.5; Va 3.31; as cave A 1: 
22.4-5 

knees A 1: 24.11; 28.1 1; A 2 : 18.4; 
20.14; G 1.36; B 1: 3.28; 8.11, 
18-19; B 2 : 6.40 
legs A 1: 6.3^1 

lips A 1: 16.3-5, 9-10; G 1.36; B 1: 
8.20-3; B 4: 3.4; Va 3.27, 34, 39 
lower body A 1: 6.19 
marks of Va 1 1 .29 


marrow G 24.6; B 3: 8.12; Va 20.26 
massaging Al: 8.5; 11.13 
moustache A 1: 16.11; Va 3.40 
mouth A 1: 7.7-8; 16.11-12; A 2: 
19.9-10; G 1.41; B 1:8.23; 21.14; 

B 2: 18.16; B 3: 3.9, 12; Va 3.33, 
37,41,45-7; 4.2; 12.27; 13.16; 
30.5-7 

nails A 2: 20.15; G 24.6; B 2: 12.6; 

B 4: 1.23; Va 6.33^4; 14.30; 25.5; 
bad A 2: 12.22; G 15.18; Va 11.19; 
20.6, 44; clipping A 2: 3.6; B 1: 
5.7; 10.20; B 2: f.20; 2.44; 17.10; 

B 3: 1.10,25; 7.5; 8.3; B 4: 5.3; Va 

24.5 

navel Al: 24.1 1; 28.1 1; A 2: 18.4; 

B 1:8.6, 26; 10.18-19; 21.13; B 4: 
3.5; Va 2.5; 30.5 
neck G 2.14; B 1:8.18-19 
nose A 2: 5.9; G 1.26; B 1: 3.15; B 3: 
2.3; Va 2.32; 11.57; nasal mucus 
A 1: 16.14; nostrils A 1: 16.7: B 4: 

3.5 

omentum Al: 18.25 
penis A 1: 25.1; A 2: 5.19; 26.20; G 
9.50; 12.2; 23.10; B 1: 10.1 1; B 2: 

I. 15, 33; B 3: 8.12; B 4: 1.3; Va 
6.18; 20.13 

phlegm Va 3.59 
pus B 1: 11.37; Va 3.59 
saliva A 1: 16.12; G 1.40-1; B 1: 
8.24; Va 3.37; see also spitting 
semen A 1: 15.23; 26.7; 29.14; A 2: 
13.6; G 1.44; 23.3; B 1: 6.5; 8.48; 

II. 21; 13.11, 28, 32; 14.3, 6; 
21.13-14; B 2: 2.23-4; B 3: 3.4; 
8.12; B 4: 6.7; Va 2.5; 11.37; 

12.23; 15.1; 17.8; 20.20; discharge 
of G 23.20; 25.7; B 1: 10.15; B 2: 
1.29; B 3: 7.2,4 

shoulder A 1: 25.4 

sinews G 24.6; Va 20.26 

skin A 1: 25.12; A 2: 5.19; G 24.6; 

B 2: 12.6; B 3: 8.12; B 4: 1.3^1; Va 
20.26, 44 

stomach A 2: 5.19; G 2.22; 9.50; B 3: 
8.12; Va 30.5 
tears A 1: 16.14; Va 3.59 
teeth A 1: 7.11; 16.17; 31.22; G 1.38; 
B 1: 8.24-5; B 2: 12.8; 18.16; Va 


404 



Index 


3.41; 30.9; black A 2: 12.22; G 
15.18; Va 1.18; 11.19; 20.6,44; 
brushing A 1: 8.5; A2: 5.9; G2.13; 
Va 5.7; 7.15; milk teeth G 17.31; 
Va 14.45; tooth cleaner A 1: 8.22; 
32.9; G 9.44; B 2: 6.4; Va 12.34 
testicles A 1: 25.1; A 2: 26.20; G 
23.10; B 2: 1.15; 20.13 
thighs B 3: 8.12; Va 4.2 
throat B 1: 8.23; Va 3.32 
toes B 2: 12.11 

tongue A 2: 27.14; G 1.38; 2.22; 12.5 
urine A 1: 15.23; 21.16; 30.14-21; 

31.1- 3; A 2: 5.9; G 1.44; 2.1; 9.12, 
14, 37^13; 16.11; 23.3; B 1: 6.5; 

7.3; 8.48; 10.10-15; 13.11,28, 32; 
14.3,6; 15.30; B 2: 1.21; 6.39; B 3: 
8.17; B 4: 6.7; Va 3.59; 6.9-13; 
12.11-13; 13.29; 20.20 

vagina B 1: 18.18; discharge of Va 
4.23 

waist A 1: 5.16 
womb B 1: 11.22 

wrist G 1.36; B 1: 6.15; 8.11; Va 3.26 
Book of Causes Va 1.14 
bow G 10.15; 17.17; Va 14.14 
archery G 15.18 

bowstring A 1: 2.34; G 1.15; B 1: 
3.13; Va 11.59 

Brahman A 2: 16.1; G 5.14; 26.16; B 1: 
4.4; 7.1; 8.14-15; 18.2; B 2: 3.1; 
7.22; 8.10; 12.13; 13.13; 17.19; 
17.21-2, 40; 18.7, 23-6; B 3: 9.15; 
B 4: 7.9; 8.14; Va 3.26; 8.17; 10.31; 
19.48; 29.4 

Brahmanaspati B 2: 8.10 
Brahmin A 1: 1.4. 19, 27; 2.33, 38^11; 
3.3-4, 9, 28; 5.16; 14.25; 16.14; 
23.1, 21; 27.11; 29.6; 30.20; 31.6; 

A 2: 2.6, 9; 4.24; 11.5-6; 12.5-8; 
16.3; 20.3-7; G 1.11-12; 5.43-4; 

7.1- 3; 8.1-12; 9.12, 18; 10.18,40; 
11.1,7-8,27; 12.8-14; 13.4. 13; 
14.9, 46; 15.5, 7-9; 17.1-2; 20.13; 
21.17, 20-2; 22.7-8; 26.17; B 1: 

1.8; 3.7, 17-18; 5.9; 6.2, 9; 8.23; 
9.5, 9; 10.24-7; 11.15-16, 37,41; 

16.1- 2; 17.3; 18.9-11; 20.10; 
21.10-13; B 2: 1.21; 2.3; 3.1; 4. 18; 
5.11. 19; 6.30, 32, 38; 7.15; 8.2, 13; 


11.32; 16.4, 7; 17.21; 18.19; B 3: 
3.20; 8.25; 9.21; B 4: 5.3, 5, 20, 27; 
6.10; 7.1-2, 9-10; 8.2, 4, 8; Va 
1.24, 39-15:2.1-2, 8, 11.27,40; 

3.1- 14, 24, 31;4.2-3, 8, 27; 6.4, 11, 
13, 16, 23-32, 43-4; 8.6-8; 10.24, 
31; 11.28-9,41,48-71; 12.28-30, 
47; 13.4, 16, 55; 14.30; 16.36; 
17.47-8, 78; 18.1-9; 20.27,41; 

21.1- 3, 11. 16-17; 23.31,43:26.11, 
13, 16-19; 27.9-11; 28.9; 29.17; 

30.1- 10 

ignorant A 2: 4.16; G 6.18: B 1: 

“ 1.10-11; 10.27-8; Va 3.1-12 
murder of A 1: 1.32; 24.6-25; 
25.10-12; G 19.10; 21.1; 22.2-13; 
24.10; Bl: 18.13, 17-19; B 2: 

1.2- 7; 2.32; 17.21; B 3: 5.5; 6.11; 

7.2- 3; 10.7; B 4: 2.6; 5.31; Va 1.20; 

3.17- 18; 5.8; 19.44; 20.23-30, 44; 
22.6; 23.38; 26.4; 27.18-19; 28.7 

occupations of A 2: 10.4—5; G 

10.1- 6; B 1: 18.2; B 2: 4.16-19; Va 
2.13-14; 3.14 

privileges of G 8.12-13; B 1: 
11.15-16; Bl: 18.16-18; Va 
17.84-7 

punishment of A 2: 10.15-16; 

27.17- 20; G 12.46-8; B 1: 18.18; 

B 2: 4.1 

residence A 1: 15.22; G 9.65; B 2: 
6.31 

see also social classes 
breaking wind A 2: 5.9 
breath A 2: 5.19; G 25.2; B 2: 12.10; 
18.8; B 3: 8.10-12; B 4: 2.11; Va 
30.5 

control of A 1: 26.14; A 2: 12.15; G 

I. 49; 23.6, 22; 24.10; B 1: 6.12; 

II. 41; B2: 7.6, 8; 8.11; 17.37; B 3: 
4.5; 9.7; B 4: 1.1-30; 2.7-8, 15; Va 
10.5; 23.19, 31; 25.2-13; 26.1-4 

offerings to B 2: 12.1-15; 13.1-3,9, 
12; B 3: 8.10-11 

Brhaspati G25.2;B2: 1.35; 8.3; B 3: 
6.6; 9.13: B4: 2.11 

broom A 1: 4.18; B 2: 6.34; B 3: 2.12 
brother A 2: 17.5; G 28.25-31; B 1: 
11.9; Va 17.10, 40, 56; 20.7-8 
older A 1: 4.11: 14.9; G 6.1-3 


405 



Index 


brother ( cont .): 
wife of G 6.8; B 1:3.33 
see also under fire, marriage, sacrifice 
brother-in-law G 28.23; B 2: 4.9 

Calls A 1: 2.3; 12.5; G 1.51; 24.9; 25.8; 
B 1: 6.6; B 2: 7.2, 7; 8.13; 12.2-5; 
17.14, 36-42; 18.27; B 3: 2.8; B 4: 
1.22, 26-9; 2.7-8; 3.2, 7; 4.7; 6.1: 
Va 15.6; 23.23, 46; 25.4, 9, 13; 26.4 
Camjala, see under social classes 
cane G 2.43; Va 3.53 
carpenter G 17.17; Va 14.3 
carriage A 2: 9.2; 13.11; 14.8; G 2. 13; 
10.32; 13.22; 17.3; 28.5; B 1: 3.34; 
B 2: 6.34 

cart A 1: 26.1; G 28.7; Va 16.11; 29.18 
cartwheel A 1: 24.12 
casino A 1: 3.12; 32.19; Va 12.40 
cave A 1: 22.4-5; Va 28.21 
celibacy A 2: 23.5-6 
cemetery see under death 
chariot G 10.15; 16.7; B 1: 1.13; Va 

I. 36; 2.35; 26.17 
charioteer G 10.18 

chastity A 1: 31.19; A 2: 21.8, 19; G 
2.1, 7; 3.12; 14.37; 15.23; 16.3; 
19.15; 22.4, 14, 28-33; 23.21; B 1: 
4.7; B 3: 1.24; 10.13; B 4: 1.11; 5.4; 
Va 7.3; 9.5 

children A 1: 3.26; 5.2; 32.24; A 2: 

4.12; 5.10; 7.3A; 12.4; 16.8-20; 
22.8; 23.4-5, 8; 24.1-10; 27.7; G 

2.1- 5; 3.3; 5.25; 13.29; 14.44; B 1: 
3.6; 9.6; 18.1 1; 21.1; B 2: 2.39; 

II. 27, 33^4; 13.5; 16.1-13; 17.4; 

B 3: 2.9; 6.5; B 4: 5.7; 7.8; 8.9; Va 
2.5-7; 3.45-7; 4.4, 9-10, 34-5; 
8.11; 11.7, 48; 12.21; 13.58; 

17.1- 5; 19.23, 37; 21. 12; 23.43 
abandoned G 28.32; Va 15.2; 17.35 
childlessness A 2: 16.12; G 28.41; 

B 2: 17.3; Va 17.3,41 
impurity of A 2: 15.19-25 
minors G 12.27; B 2: 3.36 
property of G 10.48; B 2: 3.36; Va 
16.6-9. 18 

selling A 2: 13.10-11; Va 15.2 
teethed G 14.43; B 1: 11.3A; Va 
4.10 


see under death, impurity 
clapping A 2: 5.9 

clockwise A 1: 2.33; 7.2; 32.20; A 2: 
12.11; G 9.66; B 1: 6.3-4; B 2: 8.6; 
12.3; Va 12.42 

counterclockwise A 1: 7.2; Va 15.14 
clothes A 1: 2.39A1; 3.1-10; 6.18-19; 
8.2; 15.15; 24.1 1; 28.1 1; 30.10-13; 
A 2: 3.3; 5.5; 22.1, 17; 28.11; G 
1.17-21,29; 3.18; 9.3-6; 10.58; 
13.21; 19.16; B 1: 9.6; 13.1-15; 

B 2: 6.34; 8.8, 11; 10.5: 11.15,21; 
15.5; 17.37; B 3: 3.19; 5.2; 8.3; 

9.2; 10.14; Va 3.38, 49; 6.31-2; 
10.9-10. 20, 23; 11.61-7; 14.22; 
17.62; 18.16; 19.33; 23.19; 24.5 
bark garment G 1.17; 3.34; B 1: 
13.12-13; B2: 11.15; B 3: 3.19; 

9.2; Va 9.1 

dyeing A 1: 2.41; 3.1-2; 30.10; G 

I. 19-20; 7.10; 9.4; Va 2.25; 

II. 64-7 

hem of garment A 1: 16.29, 31; B 1: 
15.5 

loincloth B 1: 13.14; B 2: 11.19 
lower garment A 1: 16.14; B 1: 5.2; 
10.16; Va 12.14 

upper garment A 2: 4.21; B 1: 5.2; B 
2: 6.39; Va 11.61-3; 12.14; over 
left shoulder A 1: 6.18; 15.1; A 2: 
4.22; 19.16; G 1.36; over right 
shoulder A 2: 4.5; G 20.5; see also 
sacrificial cord 

wet G 19.15; 24.6; B 2: 10.5; B 3: 5.2; 
B 4: 2.7-8; 5.24 

white B2: 17.44; B 3:2.7; Va 11.64 
cloud A 1: 11.31; G 16.10; Va 6.5 
collyrium A 1: 8.2; G 2.13; B 1: 3.24; 

Va 5.7, 9; 7.15 
comet A 1: 1 1.31 
concerts A 2: 25.14 
conch B 1: 8.46; Va 3.50 
constellations B 3: 2.8 
Abhijit B 3: 8.25 
Magha Va 11.39A0 
Srona B 3: 8.25 
Tisya A 2: 18.19:20.3-5 
cooking A 2: 3.1-1 1; 6.16; 18.6; G 
5.26; 26.15; B 3: 1.20; 3.1-9; Va 
4.8; 11.3, 12; 14.28 


406 



Index 


cooks A 2: 3.1-11; 6.16; 18.5 
cotton G 1.18; B 1:8.5, 42-3; 13.10; Va 
11.67 

coughing A 2: 3.2 
crafts A 1: 21.2 
craftsmen A 1: 18.18; Va 19.37 
creation A 2: 24.6, 12 
creatures A 1: 31.19, 23; A 2: 9.5; G 
9.73 

dissolution of A 2: 24.5 
crying, see weeping 
cultured persons G 9.70-1; 28.48, 50; 

B 1 : 1 .4-6; 2.8; B 2: 2.22; B 3: 1 .26; 
Va 6.43 

curse A 1: 29.15; Va 17.3 
dam B 2: 5.5-7 

dancing A 1:3.11; A 2: 25.14; G 2.13; 

15.18; B 1: 3.24; 21.5; B 2: 2.13 
daughter A 2: 16.8; G 28.24; B 1: 21.3; 
B 2: 2.27; 4.6; B 4: 1.11-16; Va 
11.35; 13.51-3 

appointed G 28.18-20, 33; B 2: 
3.15-16; Va 17.15-17 
inheritance of A 2: 14.4; Va 17.46 
daughter-in-law G 23.12; B 2: 4.11; Va 
20.15 

deaf A 2: 26.16 

death A 1: 10.2-12; 15.2-7; 32.24; A 2: 
13.6; 15.5; G 20.15; 24.6; B 1: 4.4, 
7; 11.5-8; 21.21; B 2: 3.34; 5.18; 
11.7,31; 12.10; Va 1.3,27, 45; 
4.9-38; 7.4-5; 11.23^1: 13.40; 
17.20, 77 

cemetery A 1: 2.5; 9.6-9; A 2: 23.4, 
11; G 1.61; 16.18; B 1: 21.4; B 2: 

I. 3; 8.2; Va 4.38; 13.13; 18.11-13; 
19.26 

child’s A 2: 15.2; B 1: 11.3-4; Va 4.9; 

II. 23 

corpse A 1: 9.14-17; 16.20; A 2: 

15.4; G 14.23-31; 16.19; B 1: 8.48; 
11.32; 18.18; B 2: 1.3; Va 4.37; 
13.11; 23.26 

cremation B 1 : 1 1 .4; Va 4. 1 1 
funeral A 2: 23.11; G 20.2, 16; B 2: 
1.25; Va 4.9-15; 17.56; 23.7-8, 
14-16, 26 

immediate purity G 14.9-12, 44-6; 
Va 4.34 


impurity A 1: 16.18; G 14.1-29; B 1: 
11.1-8, 17-18, 27-31; B 3: 6.5; Va 
4.9, 16-38; 23.12 

news of a death A 1: 10.11; Va 4.35 
observances A 2: 15.1-10; G 
14.37^13; Va 4.14-15 
pyre B 1: 9.5; 1 1.36; Va 4.38 
suicide A 1: 25.1-12; 28.15-17; G 
14.12; 15.18; Va 20.13-14, 22; 
23.14-23 

debt G 12.32, 40-2; B 2: 11.33-4; 
16.4-7; Va 8.11; 11.47-8; 16.31; 
17.1 

debtor A 1: 19.1 
demon Va 11.25 

fiend G 4.12; B 1: 15.6; 20.8; 21.19; 

B 2: 14.5; B 3: 6.6; Va 23.1. 3 
ghoul A 2: 17.8; G 4.13; B 1: 20.9; 

21.19; B 2: 15.4 
goblin B 2: 15.4 

descendants A 2: 5.18; G 4.33; 27.17; 

B 1: 19.11; B 4: 8.6; Va 3.2 
Dhanvatantri G5.10 
Dharmaprahrada A 1: 32.24 
directions A 2: 15.21; G 5.1 1; B 3: 

8.9 

east A 1:30.7; 31.1; A 2: 1.13-14; 
3.22; G 1.35, 50, 54; B 1:8.11; 
15.13; B 2: 7.5; 12.7; 14.6; B 3: 4.4; 
6.6; 9.4; Va 3.26; 12.18 
north A 1: 30.7; 31.1; A2: 1.13-14; 
3.20; 4.6, 23; 25.5; G 1.35, 54; 9.41; 
B 1: 2.1,4; 8.11; 10.10; 15.1, 24; 

B 2: 8.1 1; 14.6; 17.20;B3: 6.6; 9.4; 
Va 3.26; 6.10; 12.13; 20.46 
north-east A 2: 3.23 
south A 1:25.1; 31.1-2; A 2: 1.13; 
4.5; 15.7; 19.1; 25.2, 5; G 9.43; 
20.4; B 1: 2.1-2; 10.10; 15.14, 23; 

B 2: 17.20; B 3: 6.6; Va 4.12-13; 
6.10; 12.13; 20.13 

south-west A 1: 31.2; G 23.10; B 2: 

1.15 

west A 1: 31.1; A 2: 1.13; B 1: 15.23; 

B 3: 4.4; 6.6 
zenith B 3: 6.6 
door-keeper G 15.16 
drought Va3.12 
drowning G 14.12 
drum G 16.7 


407 



Index 


dumb A 2: 26.16 

dust G 16.5; B 1: 9.3; B 2: 6.33^1; Va 
13.35 

dye A 1: 20.12; 30.10 

earrings B 2: 6.7; Va 12.38 
earth A 1: 16.15; 23.2; G 1.43; B 1: 

6.7; 8. 32, 42; 10.11, 17; 13.11; 

14.5; B 2: 8.1, 10; B 3: 8.7; Va 3.48; 
6.16-19; 28.21 

earthquake A 1: 11.30; G 16.22; B 1: 
21.4; Va 13.33 
earth slide Va 13.35 
eating A 1: 11.1-5; 15.1; 16.9; 8.17; 

19.12- 13; 31.1; A 2: 2-7; 19.14; 

G 1.37; B 1: 2.3; B 2: 2.26, 35; 
12.1-15; 13.1-13; B 3: 6.5; 

8.10-11; B 4: 5.6; Va 1.22; 2.30; 
3.38; 6.9; 7.8, 13; 10.24-5; 13.20 

breakfast Al: 1 1.23; B 2: 4.20; B 3: 
2.3; Va 2.32 

digestion A 1: 10.29; B 1: 21.9 
indigestion A 1: 10.25; Va 13.31 
mealtime A 1: 25.10; 27.1 1; A 2: 1.2, 
5; G 9.59; 18.28; B 2: 2.10-11; 
18.15, 19; Va7.8 
overeating A 1: 23.5-6; A 2: 1.3 
people defiling company A 1 : 

15.13- 14; A 2: 17.21; G 17.18; 
21.11; Va 11.20 

people purifying company A 2: 
17.22; G 15.27-8; 27.17; B 2: 14.2; 
B 3: 5.7; 9.17; Va 3.19; 11.20 
quantity A 2: 9.13; G 26.19; B 2: 
13.7-8; Va 6.20 

rules of Al: 16.33; 17.1-8; A 2: 
4.21-3; G 9.32, 45; 17.19-20; 

B 2: 5.21; 6.1-6, 38-40; 18.7-14; 

B 3: 3.5; Va 3.69-71; 12.18-20 
with whom one can/not eat A 1 : 
1.33; 2.6; 16.18; 17.2-3; Va 12.31 
see also ancestral offering, food, 
sacrifice 
Eka A 1: 19.7 

elder (guru) A 1: 6.32n„ 34; 14.7-8, 15; 
15.1; 21.9-10; 24.24-5; A 2: 25.10; 
G 2.14, 37, 50-1; 9.64; 10.4; 18.5; 
21.10; 23.30-1; B 2: 2.13; 4.9; 

B 3: 10.13; Va 1.23; 13.24; 17.56; 
20.3, 16; 21.9-10, 28 


death of Al: 10.2; A 2: 15.2 
sex with wife A 1: 21.10; 25.1-2, 10; 
28.15-18; G 21.1. 8; 23.8-12; 
24.10; Bl: 18.18; B 2: 1.13-15; 
4.15; B 3: 5.5; 6.11; Va 1.20; 

20.13-15,44; 26.7; 27.19 
enemy A 1: 31.15; G 11.17; 17.17; B 1: 
6.7; B 2: 8.5; Va 16.33; 17.3; 20.17 
envy A 1: 3.24; 23.5-6; B 1: 1.5; Va 6.8, 
24; 10.30; 29.20-1 

epics (Itihasa) G 8.6; B 4: 3.4; Va 27.6 
etymology A 2: 8.1 1 
eunuch Al: 19.13; G 22.23; Va 14.2, 19 
see also impotent man 
exegetical rules A 1: 4.8-10; 10.9; 

12.6-11; 30.9; A 2: 8.13; 14.13; 
23.10-11; G 1.3-4; B 1: 1.6, 8; Va 
3.20 

factory B 1: 9.3 

fairs A 1: 3.12; 32.19-20; Va 12.40 
faith A 1: 12.5; A 2: 24.8; G 15.4; B 2: 
11.34 

fame A 2: 18.3; 24.3; B 1: 10.29; B 2: 
16.2; B 3: 8.30 

family A 1: 1.12; 2.1; Va 1.27, 38; 3.18; 
6.30; 10.3; 12.8 

customs of A 2: 15.1; G 1 1.20; Va 

I. 17; 2.21; 19.7 
fasting, see under penance 
father-in-law A 1: 14.11; A 2: 8.7; G 

5.27; 6.9; B 1: 3.45; B 2: 6.36-7; Va 
13.41 

fear A 1: 8.29; G 5.24; 23.20 
fences G 12.21, 28; B 3: 2.12-15 
fire A 1: 3.42; 4.14-21; 11.30,34; 
15.17-21; 16.14; 17.10; 18.24; 
19.13; 30.20; A 2: 1.13; 3.20; 6.1-2; 

12.6- 11; 19.13; 21.21; 22.8, 21; 

25.6- 7; 29.7; G 3.8; 5.10; 9.8, 12; 

II. 17; 12.28; 14.12; 16.23, 34; 
20.12; 24.9; 25.2-4. 10; 26.14-16; 
27.5-7; 28.18; B 1: 4.2, 7-8; 6.2-5, 
13; 8.52; 10.27; 11.40; 14.18; 20.4; 
B 2: 1.34; 4.5: 11.33; 13.1; 18.8,22; 
B 3: 1.13, 19; 2.8; 6.2, 6; 8.3-10; 
9.4; B 4: 3.6; 8.3; Va 2.12; 3.1. 10, 
67; 5.7, 10; 6.11; 7.5-6; 11.13, 
30-1; 12.15, 28-9; 13.2, 61; 14.18; 
17.4; 20.24-5; 23.1, 21; 25.6; 26.13; 


408 



Index 


27.1- 2, 9; 28.5-6, 16; 29.4; 

30.2- 8 

abandoning A 1: 18.32; A 2: 21.10; 
G 15.16; 22.34; Va 1.18, 23; 9.11; 
20.11; 21.27 

altar A 2: 1.13; Va 18.17 
blowing on A 1: 15.20; G 9.32; Va 
12.27 

cooking A 2: 3.16; 7.2 
depositing B 2: 17.21, 26; B 3: 2.17 
domestic A 2: 3.16; B 1: 5.6 
establishing Al: 1.6; A 2: 11.13-14; 
22.7; G 5.7; 8.19; 18.26; B 1: 3.5; 
13. 10; B 2: 2. 16; 4.22-3; B 3: 7. 16; 
B 4: 7.9-10; Va 8.9; 11.45; 21.27; 
25.2; younger brother before older 
A 2: 12.22; G 15.18; B 4: 6.7 
fire-drill B 1: 14.18; B 2: 17.25; B 3: 
8.4 

firewood A 1: 4.14-16; 15.12, 22; 
27.1; G 9.65; 10.27; 12.28; 17.3; 
23.20; 25.4, 10; B 1: 3.19, 31; 
4.4-7; 15.20; B 2: 1.34; 6.31; 11.2; 
17.18-19; 18.8; B 3: 4.2; 7.10; 
7.12-13; 8.7; 9.4; B 4: 2.10:3.6; 

Va 6.31-2; 14.12; 30.8 
five G 15.28; B 2: 14.2; 18.8; Va 3.19 
forest hermit's G 3.27; B 2: 1 1.15; 

Va 9.10 

hall fire B 2: 18.8 
householder’s A 2: 7.2; B 1: 15.26; 

B 2: 17.18,20, 25; 18.8; B 3: 1.13; 
Va 30.5 

making offering flawless G5.10 
man with three fires A 2: 7.13-15; 

9.13; B 2: 13.8; Va 4.37; 6.21 
nuptial Va 8.3 
offering A 1: 13.1; 27.1; A 2: 
15.13-16; 17.18-19; 20.3; 22.12; 
25.7; G 2.4; 5.10; 8.19; 23.20; B 1: 
3.19; 4.6-7; 13.9; B 2: 3.1; 6.40; 
14.7; B 3: 1.13; 4.2-4; 7.10-12; 9.4; 
B 4: 2.10, 12; 7.5-7; 8.16; Va 11.3; 
15.6; 21.6-8; 23.1-3, 21; 30.8 
offertorial A 1: 3.44; A 2: 7.2; 16.3; 

B 1: 15.16, 22-3; B 2: 17.18,20, 24; 
18.8; B 3: 1.13; Va 30.5 
southern A 2: 7.2; B 2: 17.18; Va 30.5 
stall B 2: 6.38; 17.12-13: B 3: 8.3 
sweeping around A 1:4.16-19 


three A 2: 7.13; 9.13; B 2: 13.12; 

B 3: 1.14 

throwing into A 1: 25.6, 12; Va 

21.1- 5; 29.4 

fish A 1: 17.38-9; G 15.15; B 1: 12.8 
Brhacchiras B 1: 12.8 
carnivorous Al: 17.39 
Ceta Al: 17.38; Va 14.41 
Cilicima B 1: 12.8 
crab Va 14.41 
Gavaya Va 14.41 
grotesque G 17.36; Va 14.42 
Mahasakari B 1: 12.8 
mermen A 1: 17.39 
oyster Va 21.1 1 
RajTva B 1: 12.8 
Rohita B 1: 12.8 
Sahasradamstra B 1: 12.8 
Sapharl G’l7.3; Va 14.12 
Satabali A 2: 17.2 
snake-head A 1: 17.39; Va 14.42 
flax A 1: 2.40; G 1.17 
flowers A 2: 28.10; G 7.12; 10.27; 

12.28; Bl: 3.31; 9.4; 10.9; B 2: 

11.4; Va 2.26, 46; 19.11 
fodder A 1: 18.1; 28.3; A 2: 28.10; G 

9.65; 17.3; B 2: 6.31; Va 14.12 
foetus A 1: 24.8; G 22.13; Va 17.71 
gender of A 1: 24.8; G 8.14; 22.13; 

Va 20.23^1 

food A 1: 3.26; 15.23; A 2: 3.1-23; 

4.1- 23; 5.5; 20.12, 15; 25.9; 28.12; 

G 9.56-9; 19.16; 22.28: B 1: 3.31; 

8.25,28; 10.2-9; 11.24; B 2: 

5.11-20; 12.2-12; 18.3; B 3: 10.14; 

Va 3.43, 45-7; 10.20, 23; 11.13; 

12.3, 35-6; 13.16; 14.1^18; 17.62; 

19.33,44; 26.18; 29.9 

almsfood A 1: 3.27^43; 7.14-18; 

19.7, 13; A 2: 17.8; G 5.18; 27.1 1; 

B 1: 5.10; 9.1; B 2: 1.3; 18.4-14,22; 

B 3: 7.8; 9.16; B 4: 5.27; Va 3.4; 7.9; 

9.7; 10.5,21; 14.16-19: 16.33:24.5 
barley A 1: 17.19; A 2: 6.16; 16.23; 

23.10; G 7.15: 15.15; 19.13; 27.11; 

Bl: 12.14; 18.15; B 3: 5.4; 6.1-13; 

7.8-9; 8.26; 9.17; 10.11; B 4: 

5.22-3, 25; 6.5; Va 11.77; 

14.37-8; 21.6; 22.11; 27.15 
beans A 2: 16.23; G 15.15 


409 



Index 


food ( cont .): 

bulbs B 2: 12.8; B 3: 2.5; 3.3,8 
butter A 2: 18.1 

butter-milk A 2: 18.1; G 9.58; B 4: 
5.22 

cake Al: 16.17; A 2: 22.18; B 2: 

I. 32; 12.8; Va 14.15, 37; 30.8 
condiments G 7.9. 17; Va 2.26, 37-8, 

45; 3.36; 17.55; 27.11 
cooked A 1: 17.17; 18.4; G 5.22; 

7.21;28.46; B 3: 2.16; Va 2.39 
curd A 2: 8.8; 29.13-14; G 17.3. 14; 
27.11; B 1: 11.38; 12.14;B2: 2.22; 
17.12-13; 18.15, 23; B 3: 7.9; B 4: 
5.11-14, 25; 6.5; 8.15; Va 6.31-2; 

II. 77; 13.4; 14.29; 27.13-14; 
curd-pot A 1: 29.13; B 2.2.22 

distribution Al: 12.15; A2: 4.10-20; 
9.5-12; 15.13; G 5.25-6; B 2: 
5.16-20; 6.41-2; 11.1, 5; 13.5-6; 
18.10; B 3: 3.5; B 4: 5.32; Va 8.13; 

11.3- 11 

evening meal Al: 10.26; B 2: 13.11 
fish A 2: 17.1: B 2: 6.2; see also fish 
forbidden A 1: 17.14-39; 21.14-15; 
26.7; G 7.24; 17.22-38; 19.2; 

23.4- 5,26; 25.7; B 1: 12.1-15; 

B 4: 1.6; 2.13-14; Va 14.33—48; 
22.1; 27.10 

from whom accepted/not accepted 
Al: 11.1-2; 18.1-33; 19.1 15; A 2: 
6.19-20; 18.2; G 17.1-8; B 1: 9.8; 

B 2: 5.8; 8.3; B 3: 6.5; 10.2; B 4: 
1.4; Va 5.8-9; 8.17; 14.2-19; 20.17; 
27.3 

fruit Al: 11.5; 17.19; 18.1; 21.1; A2: 
16.23; 19.14; 22.2; 23.2; 28.10; G 
3.26; 7.12; 10.27; 12.18,28; 17.3; 
19.13; 27.11; B 1:8.2; 9.4; 10.9; 

B 2: 11.5, 15; 12.8; B 3: 2.5; 3.3, 8; 
9.3, 17; 10.1 1; Va 2.26, 46; 3.45-7, 
54; 6.38-9; 9.4, 7; 13.16; 19.11; 
22.11; 27.5; 28.8; Slesmantaka 
Va 14.33 

garlic A 1: 17.26; G 17.32; Va 14.33; 

Karanja A 1: 17.26 
ghee A 1: 10.23; 17.16; A 2: 7.4; 

20.3; 23.10; G 13.20; 19.13. 16; 
20.12; 22.24, 36; 23.2, 20, 26; 24.6, 
9; 25.3; 26.14; 27.5-6, 11; B 1:6.6; 


11.38,41; 12.14; 14.17; 15.1 1; B 2: 
1.34, 38; 2.30, 37; 10.4; 11.10, 29; 
14.8; 15.2; 17.12-13, 18; 18.19; 

B 3: 1.13, 23; 4.2; 6.5; 7.10-12, 16; 

10.11, 14; B 4: 1.6; 2.10; 5.10-14, 
25; 6.3-5; 7.5-7, 9-10; 8.15-16; Va 
6.31-2; 11.77; 14.29-30; 15.6; 

20.14, 19, 42;21.1-3, 8, 21; 23.19, 
30-1:26.13; 27.13-14; 28.22 

grain A 1: 20.12-13; A 2: 18.2; 

22.24; G 12.18; 13.21; 17.3; 27.11; 
28.7; Bl: 1.5; 9.8; 12.14; 20.4; B 2: 
6.16, 34; 18.15; B 3: 2.5, 11-15; 

3.3, 7; Va 2.29, 36, 44-5; 12.3 
greasy A 2: 16.24; G 17.16 
gruel Al: 17.19; G 19.13 
honey A 1: 2.23; 4.6; 17.15; 18.1; 

A 2: 7.4; 18.1; G 2.13; 7.12; 10.27; 
13.20; 15.15; 17.3, 16; B 1: 12.14; 
14.16; B 2: 4.7; B 3: 6.5; B 4: 1.6; 
Va 6.31-2; 10.24; 26.16; 11.39-40; 
14.12; 23.13; 28.18-19, 22 
leeks Al: 17.26 

leftovers A 1: 3.27, 38-41; 4.1, 5-12; 
6.36-7; 7.27, 30; 17.3; 21.17; 

31.22; A 2: 4.23; 9.7; 18.11; 20.2; G 
2.31; 10.58: 17.17; B 1: 3.35-6; 

B 2: 1.26; 8.10; B 3: 6.5; Va 11.10, 
21^1; 14.20-1; 18.14; 23.9, 11 
meat A 1:2.23; 4.6; 11.4; 16.16; 

17.15, 19, 29-37:20.12; A 2: 7.4; 
16.27; G 3.31; 7.12; 10.27; 15.15; 

17.16, 37; B 1: 12.14; B 2: 6.2; 12.8; 
B 3: 1.23; 4.1: B 4: 1.6; Va 2.26-7; 
4.5-8; 5.7; 11.34, 39^40; 14.12; 

23. 1 1 , 30; abstention from A 2: 
5.16; 18.1; G 2.13; 14.39; 16.3; Bl: 
21.18; B 2: 4.7; B 3: 7.7; Va 
10.24; animals killed by 
predators G 17.38; B 2: 1 1.15; B 3: 
3.6; cow’s A 1: 17.30; A 2: 16.26; 
Va 14.31; forbidden animals A 1: 
21.14-15; G 17.27-34; 23.26; 
27.13; goat A 2: 18.13; G 15.15; 
human A 1: 21.15; Va 23.30; 
infant animals G 17.31 

milk Al: 17.19, 22-4; 26.3; 28.11; 

A 2: 7.4; 8.8; 23.10; G 7.1 1; 9.19, 
58; 15.15; 17.3; 19.13; 23.2; 24.6; 
27.11; B 1: 8.47; 9.2, 8; 11.38; 


410 



Index 


12.9-13; 14.16; 19.16; B 2: 1.22; 
2.22, 37; 10.4; 17.12-13; 18.15, 

19; B 3: 7.8; 10.11; B 4: 2.7-8; 
5.10-14; 6.5; 8.15; Va 2.26-7; 
6.31-2; 11.22, 39-40, 77; 14.38; 
21.21; 22.1; 27.11, 13; 28.8; of 
animals in heat Va 14.34; of 
animals with twins A 1: 17.13; G 
17.25; during first ten days after 
birth A 1: 17.24; G 17.22-3; 

Bl: 12.9; Va 14.35; impure Al: 
29.14; G 17.24-6; when calf dies 
Va 14.34 

millet G 17.3; B 3: 2.18; Va 14.12 
molasses B 1: 12.14—15 
morning meal A 1: 5.13; B 2: 13.1 1 
mushrooms A 1: 17.28; G 17.32; Va 
14.33 

mustard A 2: 19.1; B 1: 8.41; Va 3.55 
oil-cake A 2: 18.1; B 2: 18.15; B 4: 
5.22; Va 14.37 

onion A 1: 17.26; Va 14.33; Grnjana 
Va 14.33 

pepper A 1: 20.12 

preparation of A 2: 3.1-1 1; B 1: 10.2 
prepared food G 7.9, 19; Va 2.26 
purchased A 1: 16.32; 17.14—16; 

18.6; Bl: 10.3, 9; Va 3.45-7; 4.15 
quantity A 2: 9.13; B 2: 18.13; Va 
6 . 20-1 

received unasked A 1: 19.8, 11; 27.7; 
G 17.3; B 2: 2.38-9; B 4: 5.6-7; Va 
4.15; 11.77; 14.12; 21.20; 23.43; 
24.2; 27.16 
re-cooked G 17.15 
remnants G 1.44; B 1: 13.26-7; 

14.1-2, 17; Va 3.41 
resins G 17.32; Va 14.33 
revolting G 17.13; Va 14.28 
rice Al: 11.4; 17.19; 20.13; A 2: 
6.16; 16.23:22.18; 23.10; G 7.15; 
15.15; B 1: 8.38; 14.11-12; B2: 
2.27; 6.1; 14.9; B 3: 2.13; 3.7; B 4: 
5.22; 7.5-7; 8.15; Va 2.39; 13.2; 
14.12; milk-rice A 2: 19.15; 20.3; 
G 26.15; 27.11; B 4: 7.9-10; Va 
1 1.39^40; 14.37; 21.6; 23.2 
roots Al: 11.5; 17.19; 18.1; 21.1: 

A 2: 16.23; 19.14; 22.2; 23.2; 28.10; 
G 3.26; 7.12; 10.27; 17.3; 27.11; 


Bl: 10.9; B 2: 11.5, 15; 12.8; 18.19; 
B 3: 2.5; 3.3, 8; 10.11; Va 2.26, 46; 
9.4, 7; 27.5 
sacred basil G 15.15 
sacrificial A 1: 2.22; A 2: 15.14-16; 
18.2; 19.15; G 26.2; B 2: 18.19; 

B 3: 1.22; 8.6; 9.3; B 4: 5.4, 19-20; 
7.5-7; 27.16 

salt A 1:2.23; 4.6; 17.15; 26.3; 28.11; 
A 2: 3.13; 15.14; G 7.19: B 1: 11.24; 
B 2: 2.29; 4.7; B 3: 1.23; B 4: 1.6; Va 
2.24, 27, 38; 14.31; 17.55; 27.11 
sauce A 2: 3.19; Va 14.31 
seasonings A 1: 17.15; 18.4; 20.12, 15 
sesame A 1: 20.13; 26.14; 27.1; A 2: 
16.23; 20.1; G 7.9, 20; 15.15,26; 
19.16; B 2: 2.26-7, 30; 6.2; 14.7; 

B 3: 2.18; 10.14; B 4: 1.6; 5.26; 
6.3-4; 7.9-10; Va 2.29-36, 39; 
6.31-2; 11.35; 13.16; 28.18-22 
soup B 1: 12.14 
sour G 17.14; B 1: 12.14 
spices A 1: 2.23; 4.6; 26.3; 28.1 1; A 2: 
3.13; 15.14; B 1: 11.24;B3: 1.23; 

B 4: 1.6 

stale A 1: 17.17-20; G 17.16; B 1: 
2.3; 12.14; B 3: 1.23; Va 14.28 
storage G3.35; B2: 11.15 
sugar-cane juice Al: 17.19 
uncooked A 1: 18.1, 3; A 2: 18.4; G 
7.21; 16.48: B 1: 5.9 
unfit food A 1: 16.16-32; 18.10-12; 
26.7; 27.3; A 2: 20.10; G 9.32, 
56-8; 15.18; 17.9-21; 23.23-5; 
24.3; B 2: 8.10; B 4: 1.6; 2.5, 13-14; 
6.7; Va 14.1-32 

vegetables A 1: 17.19; A 2: 28.10; G 
12.18; 17.3, 16; 19.13; 27.11; B 1: 
10.9; 12.14; B 2: 11.5; B 3: 1.19; 
3.3, 8; 10.11; Va 11.39-40; 14.37 
venison Al: 18.1; G 17.3 
whey G 9.58 

see also ancestral offering, animals, 
birds, eating, fish, sacrifice 
forest B 2: 11.15; B 3: 1.8; 2.18-19; 
3.1-4, 19; Va 19.26; 28.21 
see also wilderness 
friend A 1: 14.13; 21.9; A 2: 16.20; G 
5.26; 6.14; 10.4; 17.6; B 2: 4.11; 

B 3: 8.5 


411 



Index 


friend ( cont .): 

female A 1: 21.9; G 23.12; B 2: 2.13; 
Va 20.16 

frost Al: 1 1.31; G 16.9; B 1: 21.5 

gambling A 2: 16.13; 25.12-13; G 2.17; 
12.41; 15.18; B 2: 2.16; Va 16.31 
dice A 2: 25.12 

garland A 1: 32.5; G 9.5, 65; 17.3; B 2: 
6.31; Va 14.12 
Gaya Va 11.42 

gems G 1.30; B 1: 8.44; Va 2.24; 3.50-1 
generosity Bl: 10.4-7; Va 6.8; 8.9; 14.17 
gift A 1: 3.26; 8.22; 19.6; A 2: 10.4, 6; 
14.20; 15.12; 16.25; 22.11; 24.8; G 
5.18-24; 7.4; 9.73; 10.1-2; 17.2; 
19.11. 16; 25.6; Bl: 10.7; 18.2-4; 
21.8; B 2: 2.26; 4.16, 26; 5.8; 11.7, 
34; 15.5; B 3: 1.21; 8.25; 10.2,9; 

B 4: 6.3^1; 7.9-10; Va 2.13-15, 30; 
6.2, 25-6, 30-2; 10.5; 13.55; 14.13; 
16.16; 20.47; 21.22-5; 22.8; 25.3; 
27.9; 28.16-22; 29.1-21 
forbidden G 24.2; B 2: 5.8; 8.3, 10; 

B 4: 2.4; Va 22.1 

procedure for giving A 2: 9.8-9; B 2: 
6.39^10 

proper recipient A 2: 16.25; G 5.20; 
Va 6.30-2 

of safety G 17.3; B 2: 17.29-30; Va 
10.1-3 

gleaning A 2: 10.4; 22.10; B 2: 2.16; 

B 3: 1.6; 2.14-15 
see also ascetic institutions 
glue A 1: 20.12 

god(s) Al: 11.3; 20.6; 31.4-5; A 2: 3.9; 
4.6; 16.1; 17.8; G 3.29; 5.3, 9; 9.64; 
11.27; 17.4; 25.10; 26.24; 27.6-7; 

B 1:8.16; 9.9; 10.4-6,31; 13.1-2, 
15; 21.2; B 2: 5.2-4, 18; 11.11, 15, 
28, 33; 13.6; 16.7; 17.28; B 3: 3.20; 
5.7; 6.6; 7.18; 9.18-19; B 4: 2.11; 
3.5-6; 5.5; 8.3, 7; Va 3.64; 11.41, 
48; 13.3; 14.13,25; 17.35; 21.11; 
28.5 

All-gods G 26.16; B 3: 8.7; 9.4; 
offering to A 2: 3.1; 9.5; G 5.10; 

B 2: 5.11: 18.4; Va 11.3, 12 
Asvins B 2: 16.2 

Gandharva A 1: 20.6; A 2: 1 1.20; G 


4.10; B 2: 4.5; Va 1.28, 33; 28.5-6 
Hari G 26.12 

images of A 1: 30.20; G 9.12; 13.13 
Indra G 25.2; 26.12. 16; B 2: 1.35; 
8.3, 9; 16.5; B 3: 8.7; B 4: 2.11; Va 
5.8; 12.24; 19.48; Indra’s bow A 1: 
31.16; G 9.22; B 2: 6.11; Va 12.32 
Isana G 26.12 

Maruts G 5.12; 25.2, 4; B 1: 13.3; 

B 2: 1.35; B 4: 2.11 
Mitra B 2: 7.10, 21; Va 30.11 
offering to A 1: 13.1; B 1: 5.12; 7.5; 
10.4, 6; Va 3.8; 4.5-6; 9.12; 11.27, 
34 

Prajapati Al: 19.13; A 2: 7.1; 24.7-8, 
12; G 5.10; 26.16; 28.18; B 1: 5.13; 
10.5; 20.3; B 2: 7.15; 12.4; 18.16; 

B 3: 9.4, 14, 21; B 4: 5.6, 30; 8.5; Va 
3.45-7; 12.47; 14.16, 24, 30; 17.61 
Rudra A 1: 31.21; A 2: 4.6, 23; G 
26.12; Bl: 15.6; B 2: 12.10; B 3: 
6.6; 8.7 

Savitr B 2: 8.3; 17.14; B 3: 6.6; 9.4 
Tvastr Va 5.8 
gossip A 1: 3.13; G 9.53 
gourd B 1: 14.9 
grammar A 2: 8.1 1 
grass A 1: 1 1.8; 21.2; 32.28; A 2: 22.2; 
23.2; G 7.12; 10.27; 12.28; B 1: 4.2; 
6.3^4; 9.7; 10.10, 17; 13.21-2: B 2: 
2.28; 8.11; 17.20, 23; B 3: 4.2; 7.10; 
8.7; B 4: 1.22; Va 2.12; 12.13; 25.4 
Balbaja A 1: 21.1 
Darbha G 1.48; B 1: 13.30: 15.28; 

B 2: 7.5; 8.11; 14.6; 17.20; Va 15.12 
Kusa G 9.65; B 1: 6.2^4; 8.5; 11.38; 
14.10; B 2: 6.31; B 4: 5.10-13,25; 
14.12; 21.8; 27.12-13 
Munja A 1: 2.33, 35; 21.1; G 1.15; 

26.12; Bl: 3.13; Va 2.3, 6; 11.58 
Lohita Va 15.12; 21.2 
SankhapuspI B2: 1.22; Va 27.11 
Sara Va21.3 
VIrana Va21.1 

greed A 1: 20.8; 23.5-6; A 2: 29.14; G 
2.13; 5.24; 8.22; 9.62; 28.48; Bl: 
1.5; 21.3; B 2: 5.21; B 4: 8.1; Va 
8.9; 10.30 

greeting A 1: 6.29-35; G 6.1-25; 9.45; 
Bl: 3.45-7; Va 8.12 


412 



Index 


procedure A 1: 5.12-22; 14.10-31; 
15.1; A 2: 4.16-18; 5.4; 6.7-15; G 

6.1-19; B 1: 3.25-32; Va 13.41-6 
see also guest, salutation 
guest A 1: 14.1; 15.1; A 2: 4.19-20; 5.7; 

6.3- 20; 7.1-17; 8.1-14; 9.1-4; 
22.17; 25.8-9; G 3.30; 5.25-45; B 2: 
5.11-20; 6.35-12; 8.14; 9.1; 11.15; 
15.7; B 3: 3.5-7, 20; Va 4.5-8; 

8.4- 8; 9.7; 11.1-15; 13.61; 14.13 
definition A 2: 6.4-5; G 5.40, 43 
feeding A 2: 4.1 1; 6.14-19; 7. 1-10, 

17; 8.2—4; 15.13; G 5.34, 37, 44-5; 
B 2: 5.11-15; 13.5; Va 8.5-8; 11.6, 
12-14 

honey mixture A 2: 8.5-9; G 
5.27-30; Va 4.6 

reception of A 2: 6.7-15:7.11-15; 

8.1, 5-9; 9.2-4; G 5.41-2; Va 13.61 
welcome water G 5.32; B 2: 7.36; Va 
11.1 

see also hospitality, salutation 
guild G 15.18; Va 16.15 

Hariscandra Va: 17.32 
harsh speech A 1: 26.3; 31.5; A 2: 
27.14; G 2.19; 23.27 
Head vow B 2: 14.2; Va 26.12 
hearing A 2: 5.19: B 4: 1.3—1 
heaven A 1: 5.15; 13.6; 22.8; 23.1; A 2: 
2.9; 3.12; 4.9; 7.5; 16.1; 18.3; 23.12; 
24.3-5; 29.1, 10; G 13.7; 21.20; 
28.52; B 1: 3.26; 10.7; B 2: 3.47; 
4.24; 11.7; 14.1; 16.5-6; B 3: 8.7, 
30; B 4: 8.7; Va 1.3, 27; 4.7; 6.28-9; 
9.12; 16.37: 19.45:29.3,20-1 
hell Al: 5.3; 12.12; 13.4; A 2: 2.6; 27.6; 
29.1, 9;G 13.7, 17;21.6;B1: 19.13; 
21.3; B 2: 1.39; Va 4.31; 11.34 
Asamvrta Va 18.15 
herding A 2: 10.7; B 1: 10.24 
herdsmen G 11.21; 12.20-1; 15.16 
hermaphrodite G 17.17 
hospitality A 1: 14.1; A 2: 4.11, 13-20; 
B 2: 6.35-42; B 3: 3.20; Va 4.5-8; 

8.4-8; 11.28 
see also greeting, guest 
house A 1:9.10; 16.20; 28.11; 31.2-3; 
32.24; A 2: 3.20-3; 4.1-8, 23; 
21.21; 22.21; G 9.39; 23.18; 28.7; 


B 1: 7.6; B 2: 1.3; 18.12, 22; B 3: 
2.8; 4.2; Va 8.5-6; 10.23; 16.12-13; 
17.44; 29.13-14 
abandoned A 1:29.1 
deities of G5.13;B3: 1.13-14; Va 
11.4 

door Al: 11.18-19; 30.20; A 2: 4.3; 

G 5.12; 9.32; B 3: 2.9 
eaves G 16.14 
floor Al: 17.8 
furniture A 2: 14.8 
hut A 1: 24.11. 21; B 2: 1.3; B 3: 

I. 17; Va 10.23 
terrace A 1: 17.7 
threshold A 2: 4.2 

householder A 2: 1.1, 15; 2.7; 3.12-13; 

6.5-6; 7.1, 17; 9.13; 10.2; 21.1; G 

3.2- 3, 36; 4.1; 9.1; B 2: 4.16-26; 
5.1-9; 11.12; 13.7, 9; Va 6.19-20; 
7.2; 8.1-17: 11.11; 19.3 

hunger A 2: 25.11; Va 11.3-4; 16.33; 
21.23 

hunting Va 14.15 
fowler Al: 19.14; Va 14.19 
hunter A 1: 19.14; G 17.17; Va 14.2, 
14-15, 19 

husband A 1: 7.16-17; 14.21; A 2: 
14.16-20; 27.2-7; 29.3-4; G 6.6; 
15.18; B 4: 1.16; Va 5.3-4; 6.4; 
13.60; 17.6. 11, 19-20, 56, 68, 
74-9; 19.44; 21.6-17 
widower B 2: 17.4 

hypocrisy A 1: 23.5-6; G 9.62; B 1: 1.5; 
Va 6.40; 10.30 

immortality A 1: 22.4; A 2: 5.19; 23.5; 
24.1; B 2: 10.4; 11.33; 12.3, 10-13; 
B 3: 6.5; Va 2.10;17.1, 4 

implements, see utensils 

impotent man A 1: 18.27; A 2: 14.1; G 
15.16; 28.43; B 2: 3.17, 38; Va 

II. 19; 17.20, 53-1; 19.35 
see also eunuch 

impurity A 1: 11.25; 15.8, 13-14; 

16.14, 22-6; 19.6; G 15.24-7; 
16.18, 46; 25.6; B 1: 3.29-30; 6.14; 

9.3- 6, 9, 11; 10.1,5, 34; B 2: 2.22, 
36; 7.2; Va 3.37-43; 23.24-35 

of children A 2: 15.19-25 
impure persons A 1: 14.18-20; 


413 



Index 


impurity (cont.y 

impure persons (cont.y. 

15.13, 18; 16.14; 31.4; G9.ll; 
14.30-3; B 1: 14.17 
from touch A 1: 15.13-14; A 2: 
2.8-9; G 2.3; 14.30-3; 17.10; B 1: 
6.3^1; 9.5; 10.18; 11.32-41; 15.5; 
Va 23.24-5, 33 

see also birth, death, purification, 
purity 

infidel A 1: 20.5; G 15.16; 21.1; B 1: 
10.25; Va 1.23; 21.29-30 
inheritance A 2: 10.4; 13.2; 14.1-20; 
10.39; G 12.40; 21.15; 28.1—47; 

B 1: 11.11-16; B 2: 3.1-13, 18, 
31^16; Va 15.9-10; 17.23,65 
coparceners G 28.28-31; Va 16.16 
disinheriting A 2: 14.15 
heirs G 28.32-45; B 1: 11.11; Va 
17.25-6, 38-9, 81-7 
of legally incompetent B 2: 3.37-8 
of minors B 2: 3.36 
partitioning A 2: 12.22; 13.12; 

14.1- 20; G 5.7; 10.39:28.1-17; 

B 2: 3.2-13; Va 17.40-54, 81; 
against father’s wishes G 15.19; 

B 2: 3.8; while father is alive A 2: 
14.1; G 28.2; B 2: 3.2-8 

primogeniture A 2: 13.12; 14.1. 
6-15; G 28.3, 5, 9, 14-16, 36; B 2: 
3.4-9; Va 17.42 
of sonless man G 28.21, 41-2 
wife's property G 28.24-5; B 2: 3.43; 
Va 16.16 

women’s A 2: 14.16-20; G 28.24-6; 

B 2: 3.43-6 
see also son 

initiation A 1: 1.6, 9-36; 2.1-10; A 2: 
9.7; 15.22-5; 21.3; G 1.5-14; 2.6; 
8.14; B 1:3.6; 4.6; 16.14; Va 2.3, 
5-6; 3.21; 11.75; 14.17 
definition Al: 1.9-10 
failure to be initiated Al: 1.27-36; 

2.1- 10; G 1.12-14; 21.11; B 1: 

3.12; Va 11.71-9; penance for A 1: 
1.34-6; Va 11.76-9 

new birth A 1: 1.16-18; G 1.8; B 1: 
3.6; 21.13 

performed for a purpose A 1 : 

1.20-6; G 1.6 


re-initiation G23.2;B2: 1.19; Va 
20.17-19:23.30 

times for A 1: 1.19-27; G 1.5-7, 
11-14; 21.11; B 1: 3.7-12; Va 
11.49-51, 71-5 

uninitiated persons A 2: 9.7; 15.18; 

G 2,1-5; B 1: 2.3; 16.16; Va 1 1.74-9 
see also student, teacher 
injury G 2.17; 21.19; 23.27; Va 29.3 
non-injury G 9.73; B 2: 18.2; B 3: 

I. 26; 3.19; 10.13; Va 4.4; 6.25; 30.8 
insanity A 1: 19.2; Va 17.57 

madmen A 2: 11.9; 14.1; G 5.24; B 1: 
18.11; Va 10.19; 17.53^1; 19.35 
mentally retarded G 28.43^1; B 2: 
3.38 

intentionality A 1: 26.7; 29.2-5; A 2: 
28.12; G 2.8-9; 25.7; 28.19; B 1: 

I I. 32-3; B 2: 1.6, 19, 21; 4.14; B 3: 
5.5; B 4: 2.13-14; 3.6; 7.8; Va 
14.24; 20.1-2; 21.16; 23.32 

Janaka A 2: 13.6; B 2: 3.34 
jealousy A 2: 13.6; Va 10.30; 21.23 
jewellery A 2: 11.17; 14.9; G 4.6, 9; 

18.20; B 1: 20.3 
journey, see travel 
Jupiter G 16.15 

Kalaka B l:2.9;Va 1.8 

Kapila B 2: 11.28 

king Al: 19.15; 31.5; A 2: 8.6-7; 

11.5-6; 25.1-14; 26.1-24; 27.1-21; 

28.1-13; 29.1-10; G 5.30; 6.24-5; 
8.11-13, 12; 9.63, 65; 10.7-12, 30, 
36 — 48; 11.1-18,27,31-2; 14.10, 
45; 18.30-2; 21.10; B 1: 18.1-7; 

B 2: 1.16-17; 6.30, 36-7; 7.15;B3: 
6.5; Va 1.41; 2.49; 3.4, 13-14; 11.2; 
12.2; 13.59; 15.6; 16.6-9, 18-20; 
19.1^18; 20.3, 27 
army Va 13.19 
assassination of G20.1 
crime Va 16.24-6; 19.16; G 12.27; 
abuse G 12.1, 8-14; 23.27; Va 19.9; 
assault G 12.1, 8-14; 13.9; Va 
15.19; 19.9; killing animals Al: 
25.13; 26.1; G 22.18-25; B 1: 
19.3-6; Va 4.5-8; 21.18-26; 
murder/killing A 1: 21.8; 24.1-25; 


414 



Index 


25.10, 11-12; 26.6; 24.24-5; 

29.2- 7; A 2: 27. 1 6; G 22.2-1 7, 23, 
26-7; 24.10; B 1: 18.18-20; 19.1-6; 
B 2: 1.1-12; Va 20.23^10; 23.38; 
27.3. in self-defence A 1: 29.7; B 1: 

18.12- 13; Va 3.15-18; property 
damage G 12.19-26; rape A 2: 
12.2; 26.18-24; 27.1; G 4.12; 
12.2^1; B 1: 20.8-9; Va 1.34; theft 
A 1: 21.8; 28.1-5; A 2: 26.2, 4-8; G 
10.46-7; 12.15-18, 43-5, 49-52; 
13.17; 21.1; 24.10; B 1: 18.18: B 2: 

I. 16-17;2.3; 18.2:B3: 5.5; 6.5, 11; 
10.13; Va 1.20; 16.25; 19.37, 38-9; 
20.41—4; 26.6 

death of G 16.32; B 1: 21.4; Va 2.49 
deposits G 12.42; B 2: 2.3; Va 16.18 
fort/residence A 2: 25.2-1 1 
hall A 1: 8.13; A 2: 25.4— 5, 12; G 1 1.17 
as heir A 2: 14.5; G 28.42; B 1: 

II. 14-16; Va 17.83-7; 19.36 
judicial procedure A 2: 11.2-4; 

29.5- 10; G 11.19-26; Va 16.1-5; 
19.38—48; assessor G13.ll; false 
witness G 21.10; B 1: 19.10-12; 

B 2: 2.4; Va 16.33-7; jailer G 
17.17; judge G 13.26-31; oath G 

13.12- 13; ordeal A 2: 11.3; 29.6; 
witness A 2: 29.7-10; G 13.1-31: 
15.16; B 1: 19.7-16; Va 16.10, 
13-15; 16.27-37; written 
evidence Va 16.10, 14 

labour disputes A 2: 28.1-6 
messenger A 1: 18.28; G 10.18; Va 
19.37 

ministers A 2: 25.10; Va 16.2, 20 
officers A 2: 26.4-8; G 6.13; 12.38; 

17.17; Va 14.2; 16.21-6; 19.23 
ownership G 10.36—48; 12.37-9; Va 

16.6- 19 

personal priest of A 2: 10.14-16; G 

11.12- 14, 18; Bl: 18.7-8; Va 

19.3- 6,41-2 

protection of subjects A 2: 25.15; 
26.1-8; G 10.7; Bl: 18.1; Va 2.17; 
3.25; 19.1 

punishment A 1: 25.4—5; A 2: 

10.6- 7, 12-16; 11.1-4; 26.18-24; 
27.8-21; 28.1-13; 29.1-2; G 2.44; 
10.8; 11.27-32; 12.1-28,43-52; 


B 1: 18.17-20; 19.1-6; Va 19.7-10, 
16; 19.38—48; 20.41; branding G 
12.47; Bl: 18.18; capital A 1:9.26; 
A 2: 11.1; 27.9, 16,21; G 12.4,6, 
43-5; 23.14-16; B 1: 18.17-19; B 2: 

1.16- 17; 3.52; Va 14.8; 19.46-7; 
20.41; 21.1-5; confiscation of 
property A 2: 27.16; G 12.3, 27; 

B 1: 18.19; corporal A 2: 10.16; G 
8.13; 12.3-7, 46-8; B 2: 4.1-3; 
exile A 2: 26.21; 27.8, 20; G 8.13; 
12.47; Bl: 18.18; fines G8.13; 
12.8-18, 41; Va 16.31; 
imprisonment A 2: 27.18; G 8.13; 
prison A 1: 9.26; 19.1; Va 14.3 
reception of guests A 2: 7.12; 25.8-9 
royal store A 2: 4.20 
servant of G 15.18; B 1: 10.28 
succession Va 19.29-34 
surety G 12.41; Va 16.31 
taxes/duties A 2: 26.9-17; G 

10.24- 35; Bl: 18.1, 14-16; Va 
1.42-5; 16.31; 19.23-8, 35-7; 
people exempt A 2: 26.10-17; G 
10.11; Va 19.26-8, 37; tolls Va 
19.21-5 

treasury G 10.47; B 1: 18.3 
war A 2: 10.6-7. 10-11; 16.21; 26.3; 
G 10.13-23; 11.17; 14.11; 22.3; 

B 1: 18.9-13; battle-field A 1: 
25.11; booty G 10.20-3; fleeing 
A 2: 10.11; G 10.16, 18; Bl: 18.9; 
rules of A 2: 10.10-11; G 
10.17-18; Bl: 18.9-12 
wives B 2: 4.15; Va 19.30^4 
kinship/relatives G 4.2-5; 6.20; 9.74; 
10.4; B 1: 11.27:B2: 11.16; Va 
8.1-2; 13.56; 15.6-7, 12-16; 16.37; 

17.25- 6, 38, 79 

ancestry A 2: 14.2-3; G 14.1, 13, 20, 
34,44; 15.13,20; 18.6; 28.21; 

Bl: 11.1-2,9, 11,27; 14.3, 6; Va 

4.16- 18, 34; 17.79, 81; 23.14 
blood A 2: 17.4 

family line B 1: 11.10. 12 
lineage A 1: 6.30; A 2: 1 1.15; 17.4; 
27.2; G 2.23; 18.6; 23.12; 28.21, 

33; B 2: 1.37; 3.18-19, 32;Va8.1; 
16.37; 17.79 

line of seers G 18.6; 28.21; Va 8.1 


415 



Index 


kinship/relatives ( cont .): 
by marriage B 2: 14.6 
maternal uncle A 1: 14.11; G 5.27; 
6.9; Bl: 3.45; B 2: 6.36-7; Va 11.2; 
13.41 

mothers relatives A 2: 11.16; 5.2; G 
14.20; 28.21 

paternal uncle A 1: 14.11; G 5.27; 

6.7, 9; B 1: 3.45; Va 11.2; 13.41 
sharing oblation B 1: 11.9 
spiritual A 2: 17.4; Va 16.37 
knife A 2: 22.15 

slaughtering A 1 : 16.16 
knowledge A 1: 20.15; Va 13.56; 16.5; 
26.17-19; 29.19; G 10.4; 28.52; 

B 1:4.1; 8.2; 21.22; B 2: 9.12; 11.7; 
B 3: 1.26; 2.7; B 4: 1.25; 2.11; Va 

1.16, 38; 2.8, 39; 3.60; 6.30; 10.14, 
21; 11.38; 13.56; 16.5; 19.9; 25.8; 
26.17-19; 29.19 

Ksatriya A 1: 1.4, 19, 27; 2.34, 38; 3.1. 
5, 9, 29; 5.16; 14.25; A 2: 2.6; 

G 1.11-12; 4.19; 5.44; 10.41; 
12.8-14; 14.2; B 1 : 3.8, 17; 5.9; 6.9; 
8.23; 16.1-3; 17.3-8; 18.3, 19; 
19.1,5; 20.12; B 2: 1.21: 5.1 1: B 3: 
7.9; Va 1 .24, 28, 34; 2. 1-2, 40; 3.25, 
32:4.2-3,8,28; 11.50-72; 17.47-9, 
78; 18.1-9; 21.1-5, 12, 17; 26.16 
greeting A 1: 14.23, 27 
guest A 2: 4.18 

killing A 1:24.1, 6; G 22.14; B 2: 1.8; 

Va 20.31, 34, 37-8 
occupations A 2: 10.6; G 6.18; 7.6, 
25; 10.7-12, 30; B 1: 18.3; B 2: 
4.16-18; Va 2.14-17; 3.25 
see also king, social classes 
Kumalana A 1: 32.24 

lac G 12.4; Va 2.26-7 
lake G 19.14; 20.10; B 3: 10.11; Va 
15.20; 22.12 

land Al: 18.1: G 7.15; 12.38; 13.16-18; 
19.16; Bl: 19.12; B 2: 2.4; B 3: 2.2; 
10.14; B 4: 7.9-10; Va 3.16, 56-7; 
6.31-2; 12.3; 16.1 1-16; 28.16-17; 

29.16, 19 

fenced/unfenced G 12.21, 28: B 3: 
2.12-15 

see also under plough 


laughing A 1: 8.15; A 2: 5.9; G 2.15; 

B 1: 8.18-19; Va 5.7; 15.18; 17.61 
Law ( dhanna ) A 1: 1.13; 4.12, 23—4; 
5.11; 8.24, 30; 13.4; 18.13-14; 
20.1-9; 24.23; 29.8; 32.12; A 2: 
2.2-3; 6.1, 4-5; 8.6; 10.14; 11.10; 
13.7, 11; 16.25; 20.18,22:25.1; 
26.14; 27.1; G 1.3; 4.7, 14, 25; 8.3, 
16; 9.1,46-7; 11.10, 29; 13.11,31; 
18.1,24, 32; 19.1; 28.48-53; B 1: 
1.6, 11-16; 8.53; 10.8; 20.3; B 2: 

I. 6; 4.16-18; 11.9; 16.4; B3: 10.1; 
B 4: 1.25, 30; Va 1.1-17,41-2; 
2.17, 50; 3.6-7, 19; 6.1,7, 9, 30; 
10.30; 12.23; 18.14-15, 18; 19.1, 7, 
46; 23.43; 25.8; 30.1 

of castes G 11.19; Va 1.17; 19.7 
customary A 1 : 1 . 1 ; G 8. 1 1 ; B 1 : 2.6; 

II. 25 

doubts concerning A 2: 12.19-21; G 

28.48- 51 

of earlier times A 2: 13.7-11 
of families A 2: 15.1; G 11.20; Va 
1.17; 19.7 
of groups G 11.21 
knowers of A 1: 1.2; G 15.28 
legal assembly A 1: 11.38; G 12.52; 

28.48- 9; B 1: 1.7-16; Va 3.4, 20 
legal authorities: Apastamba B 2: 

9.14; Asvalayana Saunaka B2: 
9.14; Aupajanghani B 2: 3.33; 
Baudhayana B 1: 5.13; 7.9; B 2: 
9.14; B 3: 5.7; 6.13; Gautama B 1: 
2.7; B 2: 4.17; Va 4.35, 37; Harlta 
A 1: 13.11; 18.2, 12; 28.1, 5, 16; 
29.12, 16; B 2: 2.21; Kanva A 1: 
19.3; Kanva A 1: 19.7; 28.1; 
Kasyapa B 1: 21.2; Katya B 1: 
3.46; Kautsa A 1: 19.4; 28.1; 
Kunika Al: 19.7;Kutsa A 1:19.7; 
Manu A 2: 14.11; 16.1; G 21.7; 

B 2: 3.2; B 4: 1.13; 2.15; Va 1.17; 
3.2; 4.5-6; 11.23; 12.16; 13.16; 
19.37; 20.18; 23.43; 26.8; 
Maudgalya B 2: 4.8; Puskarasadi 
A 1: 19.7; 28.1; Satyasadha 
Hiranyakesin B 2: 9.14; 
Varsyayani A 1: 19.5, 8; 28.2; 
Vasistha Va 2.50; 24.5; 30.10; see 
also Prajapati 


416 



Index 


legal scholar B 1: 1.8, 15; Va 3.20 
legal treatises G 1 1.19; 28.49; B 1: 
1.13; 10.23; B4: 4.9; Va 24.6; 27.19 
regional A 2: 15.1; G 1 1.20; B 1: 

2.1- 8, 13-17; 11.24; Va 1.17; 19.7 
sources of A 1: 1.1-3; A 2: 23.10; 

29.11-12, 14-15; G 1.1-4; 6.22; 
9.62; 11.20-1:28.48-51; B 1: 

1.1- 16;2.1-12; Va 1.4-7; 12.41 
study of A 1: 1.14; A 2: 29.13-14 
unrighteous ( adhanna ) A 1: 21 . 1 1 ; 

28.1 1; A 2: 11.11; G 5.23 
see also adversity, time of 
leftovers, see under food 
leprosy G 15.18; Va 11.19; 20.44 
leper A 2: 17.21 
levirate, see under son 
liberation Va 10.20, 23; 29.20-1 
life: 

aims of G 9.46-7 

long life A 1: 1.22; 5.15; A 2: 7.4; G 
11.17, 29; B 1: 3.26; B 2: 1.35; 14.1; 
16.3; B 3: 8.30; B 4: 2.11; Va 6.8; 

29.2 

shortening of A 1: 5.3; A 2: 16.20; 
19.2; B 1: 4.5; Va 6.6, 10: 11.38 
lightning A 1: 4.16-19; 9.21-2; 11.25, 
27-9; 12.3, 5; A 2: 1.13; G 16.22-7, 
41; Bl: 21.6; Va 13.32, 36 
linen G 7.9; B 1: 8.41, 46; 13.10; Va 
2.24; 3.55 

liquor A 1: 17.21, 25; 20.12; 21.8; 25.3, 
10; G 2.20; 12.41; 15.16; 21.1; 

23.1- 2, 6; 24.10; B 1:2.4; 18.18; 

B 2: 1.18-22; 4.7;B3: 5.5; 6.11; Va 
1.20; 3.59; 13.55; 16.31; 20.19-22, 
44; 21.11. 15; 26.5; 27.19 
brewery B 1: 9.3 
dealer Va 14.3 

intoxication A 1: 19.1; A 2: 11.9; G 
5.24; Bl: 18.11 
tavern B 1: 18.18 
logic G 11.3 
lost property G 10.36-8 
lotion A 1:8.2; A 2: 6.15 
lucky A 1: 31.12; G 9.20 
lust A 1: 23.5; 26.13; G 2.13; 25.4; B 2: 
1.34; 5.21; B 3: 4.2; B 4: 2.10; Va 

23.3 

lying A 1:23.5; 26.3; A 2: 18.3:21.13; 


G 13.14-25; 23.27-31; B 3: 7.7; 

B 4: 5.4; Va 16.33-7; 22.1 
permissible G 5.24; 13.24-5; 
23.29-31; Va 16.36 

lying down A 1:6.5, 27; 12.2; 31.3; A 2: 
27.15; G 16.17; B 1: 3.29; Va 3.30; 
7.12; 13.14 

mad, see insanity 

madder A 1: 3.1; G 1.21; Va 11.65 

Mahajajnu B 3: 9.21 

mallet A 2: 22.15 

market A 1: 17.14 

marriage A 1: 13.19, 22; 29.8; A 2: 1.1, 
7-12; 10.1; 13.3. 11; 14.16-20; 22.7; 
G 4.1-15; 5.7,21,29;8.16; 9.1; 
18.24; 23.29; B 1: 10.26; 20.1-16; 

21.1-3; B 2: 1.37—40; 2.18, 27, 37; 
5.19; Va 1.21-2, 24-38; 8.1-3; 
11.75; 13.52-3; 14.25; 16.36; 17.13, 
21-7, 67-74; 20.45; 27.9; 29.18 
bride A 2: 11.18; 13.11; Va 13.60 
bride-price A 2: 12.1; 13.11; G 
12.41; B 1: 20.6; 21.2-3; Va 1.35-7 
bridegroom A 2: 11.18; B 2: 6.36-7; 

Va 11.2; 17.72 
brotherless girl's G 28.20 
cross-cousin B 1:2.3 
daughter's A 2: 11.15-16 
divorce B 2: 4.6 
dowry Va 13.53 
marital property A 2: 29.3^4 
marrying another wife A 2: 11.12-14 
number of wives B 1: 16.2-5; Va 
1.24-7 

people with whom marriage is 
forbidden A 1: 1.33; 2.6 
to Sudra woman A 1: 18.33; G 28.39, 
45; B 2: 6.32; Va 14.11; 18.9-18 
time for girls G 18.20-3; B 4: 
1.11-16; Va 17.67-74 
types of A 2: 11.17-20; 12. 1—4; G 
4.6-15, 29-33; B 1: 20.1-16; Va 
1.28-38; 3.19 

wives of different classes G 
28.35^10, 45; B 2: 3.10-12; Va 
1.25; 18.1-18 

younger brother before older A 2: 
12.22; G 15.18; 18.18-19; B 2: 

1 .39—40; B 4: 6.7; Va 1.18; 20.7-8 


417 



Index 


marriage ( cont .): 

younger sister before older A 2: 
12.22; G 15.16; Va 1.18; 20.9-10 
see also husband, sex, wife, woman 
medicine G:5.21;7.12; 10.27;B2: 1.26; 
2.13; 5.19; 16.12; 18.10, 19; Va 
23.9 

memory A 2: 18.3; Va 29.9 
mendicant, see ascetic 
merit A 1: 5.5; 20.12; A2: 2.3; 14.18; 
24.13-14; 29.1-2; G 11.11; B 1: 
4.1; B 2: 2.27: B 3: 8.30; B 4: 7.1; 
8.7; Va 21.11; 28.20 

metal A 1: 24.14; G 1.29: B 1; 8.27, 32, 
44; Va 3.49-50 
brass Va 3.58 

column A 1: 25.2; 28.15; 23.9; B 2: 
1.14; Va 20.14 

copper A 2: 19.3; B 1: 8.33; Va 3.63; 
5.7 

gold Al: 11.34; 18.6, 15; A 2: 14.7; 
19.3; G 10.25; 13.21; 19.13, 16; 
20.10, 13; 21.1; B 1:8.33; 11.41; 
18.18; 19.12; B 2: 6.7; B 3: 5.5; 6.5, 
11; 10.11, 14; B 4: 6.3^1; 7.9-10; 
Va 1.20; 2.44; 3.61; 6.31-2; 12.3, 
38-9; 15.20; 18.16; 20.41; 22.11; 
26.6:28.16-17, 20-2 
iron A 1: 2.35; A 2: 16.18; G 22.25; 

28.7; B 3: 3.10; Va 2.26 
lead A 2: 16.18; Va 2.26 
silver B 1: 11.41; Va 3.62 
tin A 2: 16.18; G 12.4; Va 2.26 
meteor A 1: 1 1.30; G 16.22, 27; B 1: 
21.4; Va 13.36 
metres B 1: 3.1 1 
GayatrT B 1: 3.11; Va 4.3 
Jagatl B 1: 3.11; Va 4.3 
metrics A 2: 8.11 
Tristubh Bl: 3.11; Va 4.3 
MImamsa, see exegetical rules 
mind A 2: 5.19; B 4: 1.3-4 
cleansing B 1: 8.52;B3: 1.26; Va3.60 
minstrel B 2: 4.3 

miraculous powers A 2: 23.7-8; 24.14 
miser G 17.17; B 1: 10.25; B 2: 4.25; Va 
14.3 

money B 1: 4.1; B 4: 8.1 1; Va 16.37 
Karsapana Va 19.21, 37 
Krsnala G 12.18 


Masa G 12.22, 29; 22.23; Va 2.50; 

19.21- 2 

money lending A 1: 27.10; G 10.6; B 1: 
1(1.21-5; Va 2.19 
collateral G 12.32, 35, 42 
interest rates G 12.29-36; B 1: 

10.22- 3; Va 2.41-50 
moneylender A 1: 18.20; 19.1; G 

11.21 

non-monitory loans G 12.36 
usury Al: 18.22; G 15.18; Bl: 
10.23^1; Va 2.40-50; 14.3 
see also debt, king 
month B 4: 5.19-20 

fortnight of waning moon A 2: 
16.5-7; G 15.3-4; 16.38; 27.12; 

B 3: 8.19; B 4: 5.17, 26; Va 11.16, 
43; 23.45; 27.21 

fortnight of waxing moon A 2: 20.3; 
G 27.13; B 3: 8.2, 22; B 4: 5.3, 17, 
26; Va 13.6; 23.45; 27.21 
moon A 1: 31.19-20; B 2: 4.5; B 3: 8.7; 
B 4: 5.21; 8.3; Va 6.11; 28.5-6 
change of A 1: 26.14; B 1: 5.7; 21.4, 
17-19, 22; B 3: 1.25; Va 12.21; 
13.22 

eclipse A 1: 11.30; A 2: 17.25; G 
16.22; Va 13.34 

full A 1: 9.1-2; 10.1-2; 27.1; A 2: 

1.4, 11; 3.8; G 8.18-19; 16.1,37; 

27.4. 12; Bl: 5.6; 12.16; 21.4; B 2: 
4.23; 15.9; B 3: 7.5; 8.24; B 4: 5.26; 
Va 11.43; 13.1.22; 28.18-19 

halo Al: 1 1.31; G 16.16 
lunar mansion A 1: 9.2; B 3: 8.7, 
24-5, 30; B 4: 5.3 
new A 1:9.28; 31.19; A 2: 1.4, 11; 
3.8; G 8.18-19; 15.2; 16.34; 25.3; 
27.13; Bl: 5.6; 21.4: B 2: 1.34; 
4.23; B 3: 7.5; 8.20-1; B 4: 2.10; 
5.26; Va 13.22; 27.21 
world of G 27.18; B3: 8.30; B4: 5.20 
worship G 26.5; B 3: 8.14 
see also under penance, sacrifice 
mother-in-law G 6.8 
mother-of-pearl G 1.30; B 1: 8.46; Va 
3.50 

mountains G 19.14; B 3: 10.12; Va 
13.35; 19.26; 22.12; 28.21 
Himalaya B l:2.9;Va 1.8 


418 



Index 


Pariyatra B 1: 2.9; Va 1.8 
Vindhya Va 1.9 

music A 1: 10.19; G 2.13; 15.18; B 1: 
3.24;21.5 

lute Va 13.21; G 16.7 

Naciketa A 2: 17.22; G 15.28; B 2: 

14.2; Va 3.19 

naked A 1: 15.9; G 9.60-1; B 2: 6.24; 

Va 11.19; 16.33; 17.70; 21.1-3 
name A 1: 5.17; 6.34; 8.15; 14.23; G 
2.18,23; 6.5, 12-13; B 1:21.14 
necklace A 1: 8.2; G 2.13; 9.32; B 1: 
3.24; B 2: 6.9; 14.7; Va 12.39 
Nirrti G 23.17; B 1: 15.6; B 2: 1.32; Va 
23.2-3 

Nivartana B 3: 2.2-4 

ochre A 1: 2.41; B 2: 11.21; 15.5; B 3: 
2.17 

oil Al: 8.2; 11.13; 17.16; 32.5; G 2.13; 
9.32; Bl: 3.24; Va 5.7, 9; 7.15; 

14.30- 1, 37 
oil-press G 9.58 

old people A 1: 5.13-15; 13.3; 15.1; 
20.8; A 2: 4.12; 29.14; G 5.24. 25; 
6.24; 9.62; Bl: 18.1 1; B 2: 2.39; 
6.30; 13.5; 17.5; B 3: 2.16; 6.5; B 4: 
7.8; Va 11.7; 13.58; 16.15; 17.58; 
19.23; 23.43 

old age Va 19.2; 21.23; 30.9 
OM A 1: 13.6-9; G 1.51, 57; B 1: 6.8; 

B 2: 7.7; 8.13: 11.6; 12.2, 5, 14; 
17.14, 18, 38^40; 18.13-26; B 4: 
1.22, 26-9; 2.7-8; 3.2; 4.8; 6.1; Va 
10.5; 23.23; 25.4, 9-13; 26.4 
omen B 1: 21.20; Va 10.21 
orders of life A 1: 23.6; A 2: 21.1-21; 

21.1- 24; 23.1-12; 24.1-14; G 

3.1- 36; 11.9, 29; 19.1; 28.49; B 1: 
1.8; B 2: 11.9-34; 17.15-16; 18.16; 
B 3: 10.1; Va 3.20; 6.19; 7.1-3; 

10.30- 1; 17.52 

relative superiority A 2: 23.3-12; 

24.1- 14; G 3.3; Va 8.14-17 

see also ascetic institutions, house- 
holder, student 

outcaste, see under social classes 
parents A 2: 10.1; 13.2; 14.6; G 9.74; 


14.15,43; 17.17; B 2: 13.6;B3:6.5; 
Va 13.43; 17.79 

father A 1: 1.32; 4.11; 14.25; 21.8; 

A 2: 14.8; 24.2; G 4.3—4; 5.26; 

6.1- 3; 18.20; 28.1-3; B 1: 11.9, 
19-23; B2: 3.18; 11.31; 15.12;B4: 

1.1- 14; 8.2; Va 2.3-4, 10; 3.19; 
4.21-3; 5.3; 11.39-40; 13.48; 

15.1- 2, 19; 17.10, 56, 69-72; death 
of Al: 10.4; B 1: 21.12; B 2: 1.25; 
Va 23.8; fatherless person A 1: 
11.2; fallen G20.1-7;21. 15-16; Va 
13.47; grandfather A 1: 1.32; B 1: 
11.9; B2: 2.16; 15.12; Va 1 1.39-40; 
great-grandfather A 1: 2.5; B 1: 
11.9; B 2: 15.12; Va 11.39-40 

mother A 1: 7.15-16; 14.6; 16.19; 
21.8; A 2: 19.2; G 2.51; 4.5; 6.1-3, 
7; 14.16; 28.2, 17; B 1:4.7; 6.7; 
11.19-13; B2: 1.37; 3.16; B 4: 8.2; 
Va 2.3, 10; 3.19; 4.21-3; 8.16; 
13.48; 15.1-2, 19; 19.30-2; death 
of Al: 10.4; B 2: 1.25; Va 23.8; 
fallen A 1: 28.9-10; G 
21.15-16; B 2: 3.42; Va 13.47; 
maternal grandfather Va 17.22-3; 
motherless person A 1 : 11.1 
parhelion A 1: 1 1.31 
penance A 1: 1.34-5; 2.6; 18.11-12; 

24.1- 25; 25.1-13; 26.1-13; 

27.1- 11; 28.1-21; 29.1-18; A2: 
10.12, 16; 12.22-3; G 12.48; 

19.2- 20; 20.10-17; 21.7-8; 

22.1- 36; 23.1-34; Bl: 1.15; 4.7; 
11.37-8; 19.16; B 2: 1.1-36; 
2.24-5, 30-45; 13.10; B 3: 4.1-6; 

5.1- 7; 6.1-13; 7.1-18; 8.1-30; 

9.1- 21; 10.1-18; B 4: 1.1-30; 

2.1- 16; 3.1-8; 4.1-10; 6.22; Va 
17.66; 20.1-47; 21.1-33; 22.1-16; 

23.1- 47; 24.1-7; 25.1-13; 

26.1- 19; 27.1-21; 28.1-15 
arduous A 1: 25.8; 27.6-8; 28.20; G 

19.20; 23.2, 32-4; 26.1-25; 27.2; 

B l: 12.12; B 2: 1.7, 19, 38,40; 
2.33, 38-45; 3.48; 4.12; B 3: 7.8; 
10.18; B 4: 5.6-10; Va 19.42; 
20.6-12, 19;21.13, 16, 18-20, 
24-32; 22.16; 23.10-11, 19, 42-3; 
27.20; hot G 23.2; B 2: 2.37; B 4: 


419 



Index 


penance ( cont .): 
arduous (cont.): 

5.10, 16, 30; Va 21.21; 23.16; 

24. 1- 5; Prajapatya Va 1 8. 1 6; 27. 1 7; 
very arduous G 19.20; 26.18-19; 

B 2: 1.6-7; 2.40; 3.50; 4.12; B 3: 
10.18; B 4: 5.8; Va 14.33; 20.8, 10, 
19; 21.16, 18,21.30; 22.16; 24.1-3 

barley dish B 3: 6.1-13 
death/suicide as A 1:25.1-12; 
28.15-17; 22.2-3; 23.1-2, 8-1 1;B 2: 

1.13- 18; Va 20.13-14, 22, 41-2 
fasting A 1: 8.29; 24.17; 26.4, 14; 

27.1,3, 7, 9; A 2: 1.4-5; 3.14; 8.14; 

12.13- 14; 15.5; 20.3, 9; G 1.59; 
19.11, 15; 23.21; 26.2-5; 27.3, 13; 
B 1: 12.13; B 2: 1.3; 2.36-9; 7.16; 
13.10-11; 17.12-13, 21; B 3: 8.2; 

9.1- 21: 10.13: B 4: 2.15; 5.17, 26, 
29; 7.4; Va 4. 14; 10.5; 11.77; 19.40- 
3; 20.46; 21.20; 22.8, 11: 23.18-19, 
27, 30, 34-9, 43; 24.2; 27.13, 16; to 
death A 1: 25.7; G 14.12 

justification of G 19.2-10; B 3: 

10.1- 18; Va 22.1-7 

lunar G 19.20; 27.1-18; B 1: 19.4; 

B 2: 1.7; 3.49; 4.12; B 3: 8.1-30; 
10.18; B 4: 5.17-21; Va 21.13, 33; 
22.16; 23.16-17, 44-7; 27.20-1 
Paraka B 4: 5.15 
Santapana B 4: 5.11-16 
secret G 24.1-12; 25.1-10; B 4: 

3.1- 8; 4.1-10; Va 5.4; 20.3; 

25.1- 13; 26.1-19; 27.1-21 
Tulapuruja B 4: 5.22 
Uddalaka Va 11.76-7 

perfume A 1: 2.25; 20.12, 15; A 2: 
28.10; G 2.13; 7.9; 9.32; B 1: 3.24; 
B 2: 14.7; Va 2.26; 3.36; 14.12 
pestle A 1 : 25.4; B 2: 1 . 1 6-1 7; 1 1 .22; 

Va 10.9 

phonetics A 2: 8.1 1 

physician A 1: 18.21; 19.14; G 17.17; 

B 2: 2.13; Va 14.2, 19 
surgeon A 1: 19.14; Va 14.19 
planet Va 5.7 
plants, see under trees 
pledge Va 16.18 
plough B 3: 2.5; Va 2.34-5 
plough cord A 1: 2.37 


ploughed land A 1: 30.18; A 2: 2.4; 
G 3.32; 9.40; B 2: 11.15; Va 6.12; 
9.3; 11.42; 12.3 

ploughing G 17.6; B 2: 4.20-1; B 3: 
2.3, 5; Va 2.31-6 

poison G 7.12; 14.12; Bl: 11.16; B 2: 
5.18; B 4: 8.1; Va 2.26; 13.55; 
17.85-6; 23.15 
poisoner G 15.18; Va 3.16 
poor A 2: 17.10; G 5.21; B 2: 13.5; Va 

19.23 

portent Bl: 21.20; Va 10.21 
potsherd A 2: 23.10; G 9.15; B 2: 6.16; 

17.23 

Prahlada B 2: 11.28 

precedence A 1: 14.9-30; A 2: 11.5-9; 

G 6.4, 20-5; B 2: 6.30; Va 13.54-61 
pride A 1: 13.4; B 1: 1.5; 3.20; Va 10.30 
priest, officiating Al: 14.11; A2: 8.6-7; 
11.19; 27.21; G4.9; 5.27; 6.9; 14.1; 
15.14; 21.12; B 1: 3.45; 11.1, 13,29; 
13.5, 9; 15.9-12; 20.5; B 2: 6.36-7; 
Va 1.31; 11.2; 13.41, 50; 17.35 
Adhvaryu Va 30.5 
Hotr Bl: 15.24; Va 17.35; 30.5 
Udgatr Va 30.5 

prosperity G 1 1.26; B 2: 14.1; Va 29.5 
rite for A 2: 18.19; 19.1-16:20.3-9; 
B 1: 5.12; Va 3.71; 15.10 
prostitute G 17.17; 22.26-7; B 3: 6.5; 
Va 14.2, 10 

puberty G 18.21; B 1: 3.33 
Punarvasu G 26.12 
pupil, see student 

Purana A 1: 19.13; 29.7; G 8.6; 1 1.19; 
B 4: 3.4; Va 17.12; 21 A 
Bhavisyat A 2: 24.6 
purification A 1: 2.28-30; 1 1.23; 

15.2-23; 16.1-15; 27.2; G 1.28—45; 
2.2; 5.3-7; 8.22; 9.2; 10.51; 24.11; 
B 1: 2.16; 6.2. 14-16; 7.1-2; 

8.1- 53; 9.1-12; 10.1-34; 13.11-32; 

14.1- 10; B 2: 15.11; 18.3;B3: 

I. 25-6; 7.1-18; B 4: 5.2; 7.4; 

II. 28, 35; Va 12.15-17; 14.23-6; 
23.24-36; 28.1-15 

of articles/vessels A 1: 17.10-13; G 
1.29-34; Bl: 6.2-5; 8.32-53; 
13.11-32; 14.1-19; Va 3.44-63 
external B 1: 8.4; B 3: 1.26 


420 



Index 


of ground B 1: 13.17-20 
internal B 1: 8.2-3; B 3: 1.26 
personal G 1.35-45; B 1: 8.11; B 2: 
8.8; Va 3.26 — 43; 6.14-19 
purificatory formulas A 1: 2.2; 26.7; 

B 2: 7.2-4; Va 25.3—4 
purificatory texts G 19.12; 25.7; B 4: 
1.22; 2.1-16; Va 22.9; 28.10-15 
after sex A 2: 1.23; 2.1; G 9.25, 71; 

B 1: 10.15 

time as B 1: 8.52; 13.20 
see also death, eating, impurity, water 
purity A 1: 31.19; B 1: 13.1^1 
statutory purity B 1: 9. 1—4; Va 
19.47-8 

rain A 1: 11.8,27-9; 15.4; A 2: 23.8; G 
16.13-14, 23, 41-2; B 1: 13.19; 
15.32; 21.6-7; B 3: 3.4; Va 11.13; 
13.35 

see season 

rainbow Al: 11.31; 31.16; G 9.22; 

16.9; B 2: 6.11-12; Va 12.32-3 
rebirth A 1: 5.5; A 2: 2.3-7; 11.10-11; 
G 4.22^1; 11.29-30; B 1: 21.3; B 2: 
2.26; 17.8; B 4: 7.8; Va 2.30; 
4.31-2; 6.27; 10.17; 29.2, 17, 20-1 
regions A 1: 20.8 
Anga B 1: 2.13 
Arattas B 1: 2.14 
Avanti B 1:2.13 

customs of A 2: 15.1; G 1 1.20; B 1: 

2.1- 17 

Kalingas B 1: 2.14-15 
Karaskaras B 1: 2.14 
Magadha B 1:2.13 
northern A 2: 17.17; B 1: 2.1, 4 
Pranunas B 1: 2.14 
Purujras B 1: 2.14 
Sauvlras B 1: 2.13-14 
Sindh B 1:2.13 
southern B 1: 2.1-3, 13 
Surastra B 1:2.13 
Upavrt B 1: 2.13 
Vangas B 1: 2.14 
see also Arya 

rites A 1: 1.6; 2.7; 4.29; 7.18; 12.13-14; 
13.8, 22; 26.7; A 2: 9.12; 11.12, 17; 

16.1- 3; 21.5; 22.7; 23.10; 24.4; G 
3.25; 5.6, 8; 11.17-18; 19.11; 28.4; 


B 1:4.7; 7.8; 10.18; B 2: 2.22; 
4.22-3; 10.5; 11.26; 17.6; Va 2.6; 
22.8; 27.8 

abandoning Va 10.4 
of cooked oblation A 1: 26.8 
Gana B 4: 7.4-10; 8.1-16 
householder's A 1: 2.7; 4.29; A 2: 

I. 13-15 

neglecting G 18.25-7; Va 2.43 
to obtain wishes B 3: 8.28-30; B 4: 

5.1- 32; 6.1-10; 7.1-10; 8.1-16 
river G 19.14; 20.10; B 1: 9.3; B 3: 

10.12; Va 3.58; 6.12, 16; 8.15; 
15.20; 19.21-2, 26; 22.12 
boundary B 1: 2.12; Va 1.15 
crossing A 1: 32.26; G 9.32; B 2: 
6.26; Va 12.45; 19.17-25 
Ganges B 1: 2.10; Va 1.12 
great A1:27.1;B1: 11.41; 14.7; Va 
23.31 

Sarasvatl B 1: 2.9; Va 1.8 
Yamuna B 1: 2.10; Va 1.12 
road A 1:6.11; 11.10; 16.14; 30.18; 
31.21; A 2: 11.5-9; 27.15; G 9.40, 
65-6; 16.18; B 1: 7.6; 9.7; B 2: 6.31; 
B 3: 2.12-15; Va 6.12; 16.11-12; 

21.1- 3 

crossroad G23.17;B4: 7.5-7; Va22.1 
rod's throw A 1: 9.6, 22 
rope A 1: 31.13; G 1.33; 2.43; 9.52; B 2: 
6.15; Va 3.53; 5.7; 12.9; 23.15; 30.5 
running A 1: 6.9; Va 5.7; 13.17 

sacramentary rites G 8.8, 14-21, 24-5; 
Va 4.1, 3 

sacrifice Al: 3.26; 4.2^1; 11.3; 12.3-9; 
13.8; 15.1; 17.13; 25.12; A 2: 7.3; 
10.1; 22.17; 23.11; 24.8; G 5.21; 
8.16-20; 9.54-5; 10.65; 15.29; 
23.28; B 1: 7.5; 10.7; 13.1-32; 

14.1- 19; 15.1-32; B 2: 1.31-6; 

II. 1-2, 33^1; 12.15; 15.5; 16.3, 7; 
17.16; B 3: 1.21; 5.7; Va 1.31,44; 
4.6-7; 6.22: 11.45-8; 12.42; 14.15, 
25; 19.37; 20.34; 25.7; 26.9; 30.6 

Agnldhra B 1: 15.25 
Agnimukha B 2: 14.7; B 3: 4.2; 7.10; 
8.7 

Agnistut G 19.10; 22.10; B 2: 1.4; 

B 3: 10.8; Va 22.7 


421 



Index 


sacrifice (cont.y. 

animal A 1: 18.24; B 1: 13.9; 15.11; 
B 2: 4.23; 11.10, 29; B 3: 7.17; Va 
11.46; 26.9; 30.5 

of bodily parts G 24.6; Va 20.25-6 
Brahman priest B 1: 15.21-3; B 2: 
17.20 

Brahmaudana B 1: 13.30 
Camasa B 3: 8.10 
Catuscakra B 1: 13.30 
Catvala pit B 1; 15.16 
concluding bath A 1: 24.22; A 2: 
7.10; G 22.9-10; 24.10; B 2: 1.5; 
11.7; B 3: 4.6; B 4: 2.15; Va 11.78; 
23.40; 26.8 

consecration for Al: 10.7; 18.23-5; 
24.6; G2.18; 6.19; 14.1; B 1: 11.1; 
15.29-32; Va 14.3 
daily fire sacrifice ( agnihotra ) A 1: 
14.1; A 2: 7.14-15"; B 1: 13.30; B 2: 
4.23; 5.18; 17.20,21; 18.20; B 3: 
3.5-7, 20; 7.17; B 4: 5.27; Va 6.2; 
28.10; 30.7 

Daksayana B 1; 13.30 
Darvlhoma B 2: 1.34; B 4: 2.10 
Dhruva B 2: 1 1.7 
feeding guest as A 2: 7.1-10 
of first fruits B 2: 4.23; Va 1 1.46 
garments B 1: 13.1-16 
Gharmocchista B 1: 13.30 
Gosava B2: 1.4; Va 22.7 
great Al; 12.13-15; 13.1; G 3.29; 
5.3, 9; 8.16; B 2: 11.1-8; B 3: 1.19; 
Va 27.7 

horse sacrifice A 1: 24.22; G 19.9; 
22.9; 24.10; B 2: 1.4-5; B 3: 4.6; 
10.7; B 4: 2.15; Va 11.78; 22.6; 
23.40; 26.8 
Idadadha B 1; 13.30 
Isti A 1: 27.2; B 2: 11.10,29 
Jaya B 2: 15.7; B 3: 4.3; 7.14; 8.13 
Juhu B 2: 11.7 
Marjallya mound B 1: 13.31 
Mrgara B 4: 6.2 

new/full-moon sacrifice B 1: 5.6; B 2: 
4.23; B 3: 1.19; 7.17; Va 11.46 
Nirudhapasubandha G 8.20 
offering A 2: 10.4; B 1: 18.2-4; 
21.13; B 2: 5.19; Va 2.13-15; 6.28, 
30; 8.11. 14, 17; 25.3:26.14 


officiating at A 1: 29.8; A 2: 10.4, 6, 
8-9; G 7.4; 9.54; 10.2; 15.16; 19.2; 
Bl: 10.26; 16.14; 18.2: B 2: 2.13, 
18, 35; 4.16; 5.8; B 3: 1.21; 6.5; 
10.2; Va 1.22; 2.5; 2.13; 11.75; 
12.42; 13.50; 14.17; 21.1; 23.36; 

27.9 

patron of B 1: 13.5; 15.10, 17, 21, 23; 
Va 19.44 

Pavamanesti B 1: 14.18; B 4: 6.2 
Pavitresti B 1: 2.16-17; B 4: 6.2; Va 

22.10 

Punahstoma G 19.7; B 3: 10.6 
remnants Va 18.14 
sacrificial cup B 1: 7.4 
sacrificial arena A 2: 9.9; G 5.21; 

B l: 15.1-2. 12-19, 24; 20.5; B 2: 
5.19; 17.23,27 

sacrificial fee/gift A 1: 4.3; 31.8; A 2: 
10.8; 26.2; G 25.6; Bl: 20.5; B 3: 
4.3; 7.13-14; 8.13; Va 16.16; 23.36; 
30.8 

sacrificial post A 2: 26.2; G 1.25; 

B 1:9.5; 11.36; Va 4.38; 17.35 
sacrificial session A 1: 10.9; B 1: 4.6; 

13.7; Va 14.15; 19.2,48 
Saddhotr B 2: 4.23 
Sarvaprstha B 1:2.14 
Sautramani G 8.20 
seasonal B3:7.17;Va 1.37; 11.46 
Soma A 1: 18.23-4; 24.6; A 2: 22.7; 
G 6.19; 8.20; 10.1; 15.18; 19.13; 
26.16; B 1:7.4; 8.51; 13.7, 9,31; 
15.1 1; B 2: 11.10, 29, 32; 16.5;B3: 
7.17; 9.4; 10.6, 11; Va 1.23,45; 
2.16, 34-5; 8.10; 11.46; 22.11: 
29.17; Agnistoma A2: 7.4; G 8.20; 
Aptoryama G 8.20; Atiratra A 2: 
7.4; G 8.20; Atyagnistoma G 8.20; 
Dvadasaha A 2: 7.4; Jyotistoma 
B 2: 4.23; pressing A 2: 7.6; B 3: 
9.20; Punahstoma B 1: 2.14; 
sacrifice A 2: 7.6-10; G 18.27; 
19.7; selling G 15.18; Va 14.3; 
21.31: Socjasin G 8.20; Ukthya 
A 2: 7.4; G 8.20; Vajapeya G 8.20; 
younger brother before older A 2: 
12.22; B 4: 6.7 
Sruc B 2: 17.18; B 3: 1.13 
Sruva B 2: 11.7; B 3: 1.13; 7.12 


422 



Index 


Svadha A 1: 13.1; G 2.5; B 2: 11.3; 
Va 2.7 

Svaha A 1: 13.1; B 2: 11.2; 17.18 
Traidhatavlya B 3: 1.12 
Trihavis B 4: 6.2 

types of A 2: 17.22; Va 3.19; 26.10 

Upabhrt B 2: 11.7 

utensils B 1: 8.50-1; 13.21-32; 

14.1-10; 15.8, 11; 17.20, 24; Va 30.5 
Utkara mound B 1: 15.16, 19,25 
Utsarginam Ayana B 1: 13.30 
Vaisvanarl B 1: 2.15, 17; B 3: 1.12; 

B 4: 6.2; Va 22.10 
Vasat A 1: 12.3 
Visvajit G 5.21; B 2: 5.19 
Vratapatl B 1: 2.17; Va 22.10 
Vratyastoma G 19.8; Va 11.79 
Yajnakratu A 1: 27.2 
Yajnavastu G 25.4 
sacrificial cord A 2: 4.22; B 1: 5.5; 
8.5-10; B 2: 3.1; 9.13; 10.1; Va 
8.17; 10.31; 12.14 
different positions B 1: 8.7-10, 
18-19; B 2: 9.13; 10.1 
see also clothes: upper garment 
salutation Al: 13.2-4; 14.6-31; 15.1; 
G 6.1-19 

clasping the feet A 1: 14.7-12; 28.8; 

G 6.1-9; B 1: 3.25-9 
see also greeting, guest 
sea Va 8.15; 23.31 
voyage B 1: 2.4; B 2: 2.1 
season A 1: 1.28,35; 10.1; 11.27, 31; G 
8.18-19; 14.25; 16.10; B 2: 4.23; 

Va 13.38 

autumn Al: 1.19; 32.1; B 1: 3.10; 

Va 6.5 

rainy A 1: 32.1; G 3.13, 21; 16.24; 

B 1: 21.6-7; Va 11.39^40 
spring Al: 1.19; 11.20; 27.5; B 1: 
3.10; B 2: 4.23 

summer A 1: 1.19; 11.20; B 1: 3.10; 
Va 2.33 

winter A 1: 27.5 
seat A 1:2.21; 6.26, 33; 8.8-10; 
15.13-14; 32.9; A 2: 4.16; 5.5; 
6.7-8; 7.17; 19.1; 27.15; G 2.21. 

25; 5.32, 38; 9.44, 49; 12.7; 17.3; 

B 1: 9.6-7; 15.23-7; B 2: 2.35; 6.4; 
Va 1.22; 10.23; 12.34; 29.12 


seed A 2: 2.4; 24.6; G 3.23; B 3: 2.5, 13; 
Va 6.12; 17.9 

seer A 1: 5.4-6; A 2: 23.4-5; 24.12-13; 
G 3.29; 4.2, 8; 5.3; 18.6; 19.14; B 1: 
5.13; 8. 16; 20.4; B 2: 5.4; 6.36-7; 
11.15, 33; 16.5, 7;B3: 8.30; 9.19, 
21: 10.12; Va 1.28, 32; 3.65; 8.1; 
11.48; 12.41; 13.3; 22.12; 23.47 
self A 2: 21.13; B 2: 11.31; 12.14; 18.9; 
Va 10.17 

knowledge of A 1: 22.1-8; 23.1-2 
sacrifice to B2: 12.1, 15; 13.1: 
18.8-9; B 3: 6.8 

senses A 1: 22.5; 23.2; A2: 5. 19; B 3: 8. 12 
servant A 2: 4.20; G 5.25, 45; 9.57; 

17.6; Bl: 10.24; B 2: 13.6; Va 19.23 
sex A 1:2.26; 30.19; A 2: 5.17; 11.20; 
13.1, 3; G 13.19; 18.5; 23.29; B 1: 
9.2; 20.7: B 2: 2.13; 3.1; B 3: 1.24; 
4.1; Va 1.33; 5.8; 6.9, 29; 8.17; 
11.37; 12.5-7, 21^1; 13.25-6; 
16.36;21.1-17 

abstention from A 1: 32.1-2; A 2: 
1.9; 3.13; 5.16; B 1: 21.18; B 2: 
18.2; B 3: 7.7 

adultery A 1:21.9; A 2: 17.21; 

27.1 1- 13; G 15.17-18; 22.29-30; 

B 2: 3.47-53; 4.1-5; Va 19.44; 
21.6-17 

with animals G 22.36; 23.12; Va 
23.5-6 

between Ary a and Sudra A 1: 21.13; 
26.7; 27.10; A 2: 17.21; 27.8-10; G 
12.2-3; 15.22; 20.1; 21.9; 23.32; 
25.7; B 2: 2.7-8; 3.49; B 4: 1.5; 
2.13; 6.6; Va 21.1. 5 
with Candida B 2: 4.13-14; Va 23.41 
with degraded man/woman A 1 : 
21.17; Va 20.17; 21.10 
forbidden people A 1: 21.8-10; G 
15.18:23.8-16; 24.10; B 2: 2.13; 

4.1 1- 15; B 4: 6.6; Va 12.5-7; 
20.13-16; 21.1-5; 27.19 

garment for A 2: 1.20; Va 13.26 
incest A 1: 21.8; G 21.1. 8; 23.8-12; 

B 1: 18.18; B 2: 1.13-15 
masturbation Va 23.4 
with menstruating woman G 23.34; 
24.4; Va 12.5 

non-vaginal A 1: 26.7; G 25.7; B 3: 


423 



Index 


sex ( cont.Y 
non- vaginal ( cont .): 

7.2, 4; B 4: 1.19; 2.13; Va 12.22-3 
oral Va 12.23 

rules of A 2: 1.16-23; 2.1; G 5.1-2; 
9.25,28-31 

see also elders; king: crime, wife, 
women 

shoes A 1: 6.10; 7.5; 8.2; 14.22; 30.18; 
32.9; G 2.13; 9.5, 44-5; 10.58: B 1: 
3.24; 5.6; Va 7.15; 12.34; 29.15 
shoulder pole B 3: 1.11; 2.9 
sick A 2: 4. 12; 1 1 .7; 26. 16; G 5.25; 

6.24; B 2: 1.26; 3.17; 13.5; Va 
13.58; 14.3; 17.57; 23.9, 43 
sickness A 2: 25. 1 1 ; G 23.20; B 3: 
2.16; Va 6.6; 29.7 
sickle A 2: 22.15; B 3: 1.11 
sight A 2: 5.19; G.9.50; B 4: 1.3^4; Va 
29.9 

silence A 1: 26.1 1; 30.8; A 2: 12.13-14; 
G 2.41; B 1: 5.11; B 2: 12.2, 7; 

18.15- 19; B 4: 7.5-7; Va 12.19-20; 
23.34; 29.5 

silk Bl: 13.12; Va 2.24; 11.66 
sin A 1:23.3; 24.1-25; 25.1-13; 

26.1- 13; 27.1-1 1:28.1-21; 

29.1- 18; A 2: 2.5-7; 6.2, 19; 7.15; 
13.4, 7; 9.74; G 19.9-10, 19-20; 
23.29-31; 24.11; 25.9-10; 26.12. 
21-3; 27.16; Bl: 1.14; 2.15-17; 
10.6, 27, 33; 15.30; B 2: 1.6, 17; 
2.10; 6.42; 7.18-20; 8.3, 13; 13.1; 
16.8; 17.7, 21; B 3: 5.5-6; B 4: 

1.7- 10; Va 3.6; 5.4, 8; 6.30; 13.49; 
17.70-1; 19.45; 22.6; 26.1-6; 

27. 1 - 4, 18-20; 28.18-19; 29.16 
causing loss of caste A 1: 2.19; 

21.7- 11, 20; 21.18, 20; 28.14; 

29.15- 17; A 2: 2.7; 27.11; G 5.24; 
20.17; 21.1-22; 26.22; B 1: 3.22; 

B 2: 2.1-11,33-5; 4.14; B 3: 6.5; 
8.27; B 4: 1.7-10, 13; 2.6, 14; 3.2; 
5.24; 6.3^4, 8; 7.5-7; Va 1.19-22; 
2.27; 23.22, 39; 25.3; 27.7, 19; 
expiation for G 21.7-8; secondary 
sins G22.ll. 34: B2: 2.12-14; B 3: 
5.5; B 4: 2.12; Va 1.23; 23.39 

causing infamy A 1:21.8 
confession A 1: 21.20; Va 20.29 


secret G 24.1; Va 20.3; 25.1 
sinners Al: 19.13; B 1: 1.14; Va 1.18; 
degraded people A 1: 3.25; 16.30; 
21.6; A 2: 17.20; B 1: 21.15: B 2: 

2. 13; heinous A 1: 3.25; 24.7-9, 15; 
26.6; 28.17; 29.8-11; A 2: 2.6; G 
2.35; 17.17; 19.10; B 1: 1 1.35; B 3: 
10.8; Va 14.2; 22.7; 23.14, 37 
sordid A 1: 21.12-19; 29.14-18; A 2: 
12.22; G 9.16; 23.22; B 2: 2.15-17, 
23-4; Va 4.38 

singing A 1: 10.19; A 2: 25.14; G 2.13; 

15.18; B 1:3.24 
sipping, see under water 
sister G 6.7; 23.12; 28.25; B 2: 4.1 1 
older Al: 14.9 

sitting A 1: 3.3; 6.6, 16-17, 21-7; 

8.8-11; 12.2; 15.13-14; 16.2; 17.8; 
32.4; A 2: 18.4; 22.23; G 2.1 1; 9.45; 
14.37:22.6; 26.6; B 1: 3.29; B 2: 
2.10; 7.5, 17; 8.11; 12.7; 18.15-19; 
B 4: 1.22; 5.5; Va 7.12, 16; 12.13; 
13.23; 20.5; 23.34; 24.5 
cross-legged A 1: 6.14; G 2.14; Va 
13.23 

skin A 1:2.40; 3.3-10; 20.12; A 2: 17.1; 
19.1; G 1.16, 33; 3.34; 7.9; 23.18; 
26.12; B 1: 5.6; 8.43; 13.12; B 2: 

I. 3; 11.15; 17.20;B3: 1.11, 18; 2.7; 
3.19; 4.4-5; Va 2.24; 9.1; 10.10; 

II. 61-3; 21.18; 28.20, 22 
leather G 22.26; Va 3.11, 53 
leatherworker Va 14.3 

skull A 1:24.11; 28.21; G 9.21; 22.4; 

B 2: 1.3 

slander/calumny A 1: 19.15; 23.5-6; 

26.7; G 2.13; 21.10; Va 6.24; 10.30 
slavery A 1:20.12, 15; A 2: 10.16 
slave A 2: 9.1 1; G 20.4-5; 28.13; Va 
15.12 

slave woman A 1: 16.32 
see also trade, in human beings 
sleeping A 1: 3.4; 4.22-4; 5.12; 6.1-4; 
9.21; 10.22; 11.33; 16.14; 32.4, 
11-17; G 1.37; 9.60; 23.20; B 1: 
3.21; 13.14; 21.16; B 3: 8.15; B 4: 
3.6; Va 3.38 
dreaming A 2: 12.16 
during daytime A 1: 2.24; A 2: 
12.13-15, 22; G 2.13; 23.21; B 4: 


424 



Index 


5.5; Va 1.18; 5.7; 20.4-5; 23.4 
on lloor/ground A 2: 1.8; 3.13; 

22.23; G 14.37; 19.15; B 2: 2.43; 

4.7; B 3: 10.13; Va 5.7; 7.15; 10.11; 
17.55; 21.6 

sling B 2: 17.11, 33, 37 
smell G 1.42; B 4: 1.3-4; Va 3.48 
foul A 1: 10.24; 11.31; G 16.19; Bl: 
8.17; 9.10; 21.5; B 3: 1.26; Va 13.17 
smelling A 1: 7.4; 17.5 
smiling A 1: 7.6-7; A 2: 5.8 
sneezing A 1: 16.14; A 2: 3.2; G 1.36; 

Va 3.38 

social classes A 1: 1.4—5; 2.38; 18.9, 13; 

A 2: 2.2; 25.1; G 2.35; 3.30; 7.4; 

8.2; 10.65-6; 11.9,29; 19.1; 20.1; 

B 1: 3.10, 15. 17; 10.25; 16.1-5; 
19.13; B 2: 3.9; 7.3; 11.15; 16.3, 14; 
18.14; B 3: 10.1; Va 2.1-3, 21, 48; 
4.1-4, 27-30; 8.1; 11.67; 15.12; 
16.4-5; 17.47; 19.7 
caste A 2: 6.1-2; G 11.29 
excommunication from G 20. 1-7; 

B 2: 1.36; Va 15.11-21 
higher/lower A 1: 1.8; 5.17; 13.2; 

A 2: 11.8 

karma and A 2: 11.10-11 
mixed G 4.16-33; 7.24; B 1: 2.13; 

16.6-16; 17.1-15; 18.1-17; 
Ambastha G4.16; B 1: 16.7, 9; 
17.1,3,9. 12; Va 18.8; 

Antyavasayin Val8.3;Ayogava G 
4.17; Bl: 16.8; 17.1,8; 
Bhrjyakantha G 4.20; Candala 
A 1: 9.15-17; A 2: 2.6, 8; 9.5; G 
4.17. 18; 14.30; 15.24; 16.19; Bl: 
9.5, 7; 11.36; 16.8; 17.1, 7; B 2: 
4.13-14; Va 11.9; 13.10; 18.1; 

20.17; 23.33-4,41; Dausyanta G 
4.16;DhIvara G4.19;Karana G 
4.21; Ksattr G4.17;B 1: 16.8; 

17.1, 7, 10-11; Kukkuta B 1: 16.8, 
12; 17.1, 14; Magadha G 4.17, 18; 
Bl: 16.8; 17.1, 7; Mahisya G4.20; 
Murdhavasikta G 4.19; Nisadha G 
4.16; B 1: 16.7, 11, 13; 17.3, 13-14; 

B 2: 3.29, 32; Va 18.8; Parasava G 
4.16, 21; Bl: 17.4; B 2: 3.30; Va 
18.9-10; Paulkasa A 2: 2.6; 

Pulkasa G4.19; B 1: 16.8, 1 1; 17.1. 


13; Va 18.5; Ramaka Va 18.4; 
Rathakara B 1: 5.9; 17.1, 6; 
Savarna G 4.16; B 1: 16.6; Suta G 
4.17, 18; Bl: 17.1, 8; Va 18.6; Sva- 
paka Bl: 16.9; 17.1, ll;UgraAl: 
7.20-1; 18.1; G 4.16; B 1: 16.7, 10; 
17.1, 5, 9,11; Va 18.8; Vaideha( ka) 
G 4.17, 20; Bl: 16.8; 17.1,8, 10, 
12; Vaina A 2: 2.6; B 1: 16.8, 10; 
17.1, 12; Va 18.2; Yavana G 4.21 
mixture of B 2: 4.18; Va 3.24 
occupations/livelihood A 1: 18.6-8, 
15; 20.10-16; 21.1-4; A 2: 10.4-7; 
13.1; G 6.18, 20; 7.4-7; 8.9-10; 
9.63-4; 10.1-12, 49-66; 21.4; 
26.21; Bl: 3.18; 4.16-19; Va 
2.13-50; 13.56 

outcaste A 1: 2.19; 9.9; 21.5-20; 

28.6- 10; A 2: 11.9; 14.1; G 2.35; 
14.30; 15.16,24; 20.8-9:21.1-22; 
Bl: 11.36; B 2: 2.10. 14, 18-25; 
3.40-2; Va 8.17; 11.9; 13.47-53; 
14.2; 17.20, 53; 20.16-17, 30; 
21.15; 23.33—4; association with 
B 2: 2.35; 3.42; 5.9; Va 1.20-2; 
20.45-7; children of A 1: 29.9-14; 
B 2: 2.18-25 

proper/reverse order G4.17, 25; Bl: 

16.6- 8; 17.9-10; Va 18.7 
readmission into G 20.10-12; B 2: 

1.36; Va 15.17-21 

rising to higher caste B 1: 16.9-15 
twice-born" G 10.1; B 1: 7.1: B 2: 5.4; 
7.3; 18.14; Va 2.2-3, 6; 3.2; 16.30; 
20.21-2;23.16 

see also Brahmin, Ksatriya, Sudra, 
Vaisya 

soldiers A 1: 18.19; A 2: 17.21; G 7.25; 

B 1: 2.4; Va 14.5 
somatomancy Va 10.21 
son A 1: 8.24; 14.25; 28.9; 29.9; A 2: 
9.11; 16.12, 20; 24.2-3; G 4.29-33; 
6.10; 12.41; 15.13; B 1: 6.7; 11.9, 
16, 22; 16.6-16; 17.1-15; 19.13; 

B 2: 3.2—41; 11.31: 16.1-13: B 3: 
8.30; B 4: 4.10; Va 5.3; 11.39-12, 
48; 13.40, 47, 49,51; 15.21; 16.31; 
17.1-66, 86; 24.6 

adoption G 28.32-3; B 2: 3.20, 23, 
28, 31; Va 15.1-10; 17.28-36 


425 



Index 


son ( cont.y. 

from appointed daughter G 
28.18-20; B 2: 3.15, 31; Va 14.15 
born after partitioning G 28.29 
grandson B 1: 11.9, 16; B 2: 3.15; 

16.6; B 3: 8.30; Va 17.5, 86 
great-grandson B 1: 11.9;B2: 16.6; 

" Va 17.5 

levirate A 2: 27.2-7; G 18.4-8; 
28.22-3; B 2: 3.17-18; 4.9-10; Va 
17.14, 55-66 

natural A 2: 13.1-2; G 28.32-3; B 2: 

3.11, 14; Va 15.9 

types of G 28.32-40; B 2: 3.10-32; 
Va 17.12-39, 81 

from wife of different class A 2: 

13.4; B 2: 3.29; Va 15.12; 17.47 
to whom belongs A 2: 13.5-6; G 
18.9-14; B 2: 3.34-5; Va 17.6-11 
see also children, daughter, father, 
inheritance 

sorcery A 1: 29.15; B 1: 13.9; 15.6; B 2: 
2.16 

sowing A 2: 2.4; Va 6.12 
spade B 3: 2.5-6 

speech A 2: 5.19; G 9.50; B 4: 1.3^4; Va 
6.42; 7.7 

spitting A 1: 30.19; 32.28; A 2: 5.9; G 
2.15; Va 12.12 
see also body: saliva 
spy Al: 18.30; Va 14.3 
staff A 1: 2.38; 29.1: B 1: 5.3; B 2: 6.7; 
17.11,32, 37; 18.1;B3: 1.11; 2.7; 
Va 11.52-7; 12.14, 37; 24.5 
see also under student 
stain G 1.42-4; B 3: 1.26; Va 3.48 
standing A 1: 6.7, 26; 12.2; 16.1; A 2: 
18.4; G 2.11; 20.8-9; 22.6; 23.21; 
26.6; B 1: 8.18-19: B 2: 2.10; 7.17; 
15.6; 18.15-19; B 4: 5.5; Va 3.30; 

7.12, 16; 20.4; 24.5 
stars G 2.11; B 3: 5.4; 6.1 

student A 1: 2.28-30; 13.10; 18.2; A 2: 

6.1-2; 17.6:21.1,3; 24.8; 26.13; G 
3.2,4-10; 5.21: 10.12; 14.1; 16.33; 
B 14.4-8;9.1; 11.1, 13, 30; 20.2; 
21.22; B 2: 1.23-35; 5.9, 19; 
11.12-13, 33^1; 16.7; B 3: 3.5-7; 
7.5; B 4: 4.9; Va 6.19-21; 7.2, 

4-17; 11.5, 17-18, 30-1,48-79; 


12.2; 13.49: 19.44; 20.15; 22.1-13; 
24.6; 29.2 

begging A 1: 3.25-36; 7.14-18; 
26.11; G 2.35^41; 23.20; B 1: 

3.16- 18; 4.7; Va 11.68-70; 20.18 
chastity, breaking vow A 1: 26.8; G 

21.11; 23.13, 17-20; 25.1-5; B 1: 
4.7; B 2: 1.30-5; 13.9; B 3: 4.1-6; 

B 4: 2.10; Va 22.1-6 
clothes A 1: 2.39—41; 3.1-2; G 

1.17- 21 

conclusion of studentship A 1: 
7.19-25; 8.7, 30; 30.1-3; G 2.48-9; 
8.16; 9.1; B 1: 4.6-8; Va 8.1; 23.4 
death of B 2: 1.23; Va 13.40; 23.10 
dirty A 1: 2.28-30; 7.1 1 
eating A 1: 3.32-45; 4.1-12; 6.36-7; 
7.27; G 2.39—41 

fellow students A 1: 10.12; 11.11; 
13.16; 14.13; G 2.40; 3.8; 14.21; 

B 1: 11.30 

food of A 1: 2.22-3; 3.25—45; 

4.1- 12; A 2: 9.13; G 2.13, 35—41; 

B 2: 13.7-9; 18.13 

girdle A 1: 2.33-7; G 1.15; B 1: 3.13; 

Va 2.3, 6; 11.58-60; 20.18 
greeting elders A 1: 5.13-15; 

6.29-35; 7.13 
group of A 1: 3.26; 6.25 
hair A 1: 2.31-2; G 1.27 
as heir A 2: 14.3; Va 17.82 
penances for A 1: 26.8-14; B 2: 

I. 23-35; B 3: 4.1-6 

period of A 1:2.11-18; 30.2; G 
2.45-7; B 1: 3.1-5 
permanent A 2: 21.6; G 3.5-9; B 2: 

II. 13; Va 7.4-17 

punishment of A 1: 8.28-9; G 2.42-4 
return to studentship A 1: 13.18-22; 

14.1- 2 

returned home A 1:7.15-18 
rules of Al: 1.28; 2.6, 18-30; 
3.11-24; 4.13-21; 5.1-11; 7.3-18; 
G 1.46-61; 2.6-51: B 1: 3.19-24 
sexual mores A 1: 2.26; 3.16; 7.3, 8- 
10; G 2.16; 15.18; B 1: 3.23, 33-4 
skin garment A 1: 3.3-10; G 1.16; 

B 1: 3.14 

sleep A 1: 4.22-8; 5.12; 6.1-4; G 
2.21; B 1: 3.21 


426 



Index 


staff A 1: 2.38; G 1.22-6; B 1: 3.15; 

Va 11.51-7; 20.18 
teaching householder's duties A 1: 
2.7 

vedic instruction A 1: 1.13, 31; 2.4, 
8; 5.23; 30.1-3 

student returned home A 1: 7.15-18, 
31; 8.1: 10.7; 13.5; A 2: 5.4; B 2: 
2.16 

bath-graduate A 1: 8.7; 30.1-5; A 2: 

8.6- 7; 14.13; 27.21; G 2.49; 6.24; 
8.16:9.1-74; 15.28; 27.24; B 1: 

5.1- 15.32; B 2: 5.10-21; 6.1^12; 
14.2; Va 3.19: 11.2; 13.59 

rules of conduct A 1: 8.2-5; 14.7-9; 
18.9-8; 29.6-23; 31.1-23; 32.1-29; 
B 1: 5.1-13; 6.7^12; Va 12.1—47; 

13.1- 61 

Sudra A 1: 1.4, 7-8; 3.41; 5.16; 16.22; 
17.1:26.4, 9; 27.11; A 2: 2.6; 
3.4-11; 6.9-10; 17.21; 26.15; 
27.8-10, 14-16; G 4.21; 6.11; 9.11; 
10.42, 50; 12.1-7, 13, 15; 13.3; 14.5, 
24; 16.19; 20.1; B 1:6.9; 8.22-3; 
10.20,24; 16.1-5, 13; 17.3-7, 13-14; 
18.5; 19.2-6; 20.13-15; 21.15; B 2: 

2.6- 8; 3.49, 52; 5.11-12; 7.15; B 3: 
6.5; 8.17; B 4: 5.4; Va 1.24; 2.1, 6, 
27; 3.1-3, 34; 4.2-3, 27-31; 5.10; 
6.23-32; 10.4; 11.10; 14.4; 15.7; 
16.30; 17.78; 18.1-18; 21.1-5, 12; 
24.5:26.16 

black A 1: 27.11; B 2: 2.11; Va 18.18 
cooks A 2: 3.3 

food of A 1: 18.13-14; A 2: 18.2; G 
17.5; B 2: 3.1; B 4: 1.5;Va4.31; 
6.26-9; 10.31 

greeting A 1: 14.29; G 5.42; 6.10 
killing A 1 : 24.3; 25. 1 3; G 22. 1 6; B 2: 
1.10; Va 20.33, 39^10; 23.6 
occupations of G 7.22-3; 10.50-65; 

B 1: 18.5; Va 2.20 
sacrificing for G 20. 1 : Va 1 5. 1 1 
seizing property from A 1: 7.20-1; G 
18.24 

serving B 2: 2.6, 1 1; Va 2.20 
teaching the Law A 2: 29.11-12 
wife G 15.18; 28.39; Va 17.37 
woman A 1: 9.11; 18.33; G4.26; 
15.18; 25.7; B 2: 3.29; B 4: 1.5; 


2.13; 6.6; Va 1.25 
see also social classes 
sun A 1: 27.10; 30.20; 31.19-20; A 2: 
6.2; 22.13; G 2.11-12; 9.12; 25.9; 
26.12; Bl: 1.14; 8.40; B 2: 6.10; 
7.21; 11.31: 18.7; B 3: 2.8; 5.2; 8.7; 
B 4: 5.24; 8.2-3; Va 6.11; 11.36; 
17.5; 27.9; 28.16 

eclipse A 1: 11.30; G 16.22; Va 13.34 
halo Al: 11.31; G 16.16 
looking at G 23.22; Va 23.32 
northern course A 2: 20.3; 23.5 
solstice B 2: 4.23 
southern course A 2: 23.4; G 16.2 
sunrise A 1: 5.18; 31.18; A 2: 12.14, 
22; G 23.21; B 1: 2.12; B 2: 6.10; 
7.12-15; B 3: 1.13; B 4: 5.31; Va 

I. 15; 12.10; 20.4; 27.18 

sunset A 1: 4.15; 31.3, 18; 32.8; A 2: 
12.13, 22; G 23.21: B 1:6.10; B 2: 
6.3, 10; 7.13-15; 17.18; B4: 5.18; 
Va 11.22; 12.10, 43; 20.5 
world of B 3: 8.30 
worship G 26.13; B 2: 1.28; 8.12; 
17.39; 18.11; B 3: 4.5; 8.14 
Sunahsepa Va 17.31-5 
Svapaka B 4: 5.12-13 
Svetaketu Al: 5.6; 13.19 
sweeping A 2: 3.15; 4.23; B 1: 9.11; 

10.1; B 2: 12.2; B 3: 2.12; Va 3.56 
swimming A 1: 32.26; G 9.32; B 2: 

6.26; Va 12.45; 19.25 
swing A 1: 31.14; B 2: 6.14 
sword G 14.12; Bl: 1.13 

taste B 1: 8.17; 9.10: B 4: 1.3 
teacher Al: 1.11-13, 15; 3.43-5; 

4.1-4; 5.7; 6.13; 10.15-17; 26.11; 
32.10; A 2: 5.11; 6.1-2; 8.6-7; 21.6; 
27.21; G 2.50; 5.26-7; 10.4; 

II. 31-2; 14.28; 15.14; 17.4; 20.2. 

6, 14; 21.12; B 1: 4.7; 11.13,28; 
18.13; 21.22; B 2: 5.9; 11.13; 13.6; 
18.15-16, 19; B 3: 4.5; B 4: 8.2; Va 
2.3-12; 7.4-14; 8.1; 13.48, 50, 54; 
14.13,20; 15.19; 19.44; 20.12; 
23.9-11 

assisting A 1: 6.1; B 1: 3.35-5 
conduct towards A 1: 1.15; 2.19-21; 
3.15, 31^1, 43-5; 4.1^1, 22-9; 


427 



Index 


teacher ( cont .): 

conduct towards (cont.): 

5.9, 12-26; 6.1-38; 7.1-2, 12-14; 
8.3-22; A 2: 4.26-7; 5.4-14; G 
1.46-61; 2.18, 21, 23-34; B 1: 
3.21-2, 35-8 

death of Al: 10.4. 10; B 2: 1.25; Va 
13.40 

definition A 1: 1.14; Va 3.21 
duties to student A 1: 4.5-10; 8.6, 
23-30; 13.5; G 2.42^1; B 2: 1.23^1 
fallen A 1: 28.6 
family of A 1: 3.33 
fee A 1: 7.19-22; A 2: 10.1; G 2.48; 
5.21; B 2: 5.19; B 4: 4.10; Va 17.69; 
23.36; 24.7 

feet, clasping A 1: 5.18-21; 6.1; 7.13, 
27; 8.19-20; 10.17; 13.13-14; A 2: 
5.4; G 1.52-3; 2.32-4; 6.1-3; B 1: 
3.25-8 

gifts to A 1: 8.22 

gives birth to student A 1: 1.16 

greeting A 1: 5.12-22; A 2: 5.4; G 

6.1- 3 

as heir A 2: 14.3; Va 17.82 
incompetent A 1: 7.26; G 21.12 
in hardship A 1: 7.20 
Ksatriya teacher A 2: 4.25-6 
many teachers A 1: 7.14 
obedience to A 1: 14.6; G 3.5; B 1: 
3.22,42; 4.1, 7;B2: 18.3; Va 7.4-6, 
10 

pupils of A 1: 6.34; 7.29 
son of A 1: 7.30; G 2.18, 31-2, 40; 
3.7-8; 14.28; B 1: 3.36; 11.28; Va 
13.54 

subservience to A 1: 13.12. 15, 17; 
14.5 

substitute teachers A 1: 7.28; 13.1 3— 
16; Bl: 1 1.28; Va 3.22-3; 13.48 
teacher's teacher A 1: 7.12; 8.19-21; 
Va 13.54 

Vaisya teacher A 2: 4.25-6 
visit, duty to A 1: 8.17-22 
wife of A 1: 7.27; 14.24; 26.1 1; G 
2.18, 31^1, 40; 14.28; B 1: 3.33, 37; 
4.7; Va 13.40; 20.15 
see also student, teaching 
teaching A 1: 10.13-16; 11.13; 29.8; 

32.1— 4, 14; A 2: 10.4, 6; G 7.4; 


10.2; B 1: 4.1-2; 18.2; B 2: 2.16, 18, 
35; 4.16; B 3: 1.21; Va 1.22; 3.1; 
11.75; 13.50; 23.36; 27.9 
duty to Al: 8.24-7: 14.3—4 
temple G 9.66; 19.14; B 2: 8.2; B 3: 
10.12; Va 6.17; 10.13; 11.30-1; 
22.12 

theatrical performance B 2: 2.13 
thief A 1: 19.15; 24.21; 28.1-5; A 2: 

2.6; 16.9; 25.15; 26.2; 27.16; G 
12.43-5, 49-52; 15.16; B 2: 1.16- 
17; 6.31; B 3: 6.5; 7.2; Va 3.4, 16; 

14.2, 17; 19.38,44; 20.30,41-4; 
27.19 

see also king: crime 
thirst Bl: 9.10; Va 16.33; 29.17 
thread B 2: 2.29 
threshing floor B 1: 9.8 
thunder A 1: 9.20, 23; 11.25, 27-9; 

12.3, 5; G 16.23, 28-31, 41; B 1: 
21.6; Va 13.9 

bolt G 26.12 
time B 1: 8.52-3 
afternoon G 9.46: 16.28: B 3: 5.3 
dawn A 1:4.13-16; 9.22: 11.15; 
25.10; 28.11; A 2: 18.4; G 9.42; 
19.15:22.6; 26.10; B 2: 2.10, 42; 
11.15; 18.15, 19; B 3: 4.5; 10.13; 

B 4: 5.4; 7.5-7; 8.16; Va 9.9; 24.5 
daytime A 1: 1 1.19; 25.10; 27.7; 
30.14; 31.19; A2: 1.16; 18.4; 19.14; 
G 9.35, 41; 16.5; 23.21; 26.6; B 1: 
10.10; B2: 2.10; 7.16-22; 18.15, 19; 
B 3: 8.7; B 4: 3.6; 5.5-7, 30; Va 6.10; 
7.15; 12.13; 21.20; 24.5; 26.2; 27.17 
dusk A 1: 4.13-17; 9.22; 11.15; 
25.10; 28.11; A 2: 18.4; G 9.42; 
16.29; 19.15; 22.6; 26.20; B 2: 2.10. 
42; 11.15; 18.15. 19; B 3: 10.13; 

B 4: 5.4; 7.5-7; 8.16; Va 9.9; 24.5 
evening A 1:3.25; 8.17; 9.1,20; 
10.28; 27.5; 30.8; A 2: 23.1; G 3.15; 
5.17; 9.59; 25.9; 26.2-3; B 1: 21.17; 
B 2: 2.37-9; 5.11; 7.9-21; 17.20; 
18.20; B 3: 3.5-7; Va 3.69; 8.4; 
10.24; 11.3: 13.10; 24.2; 27.16 
morning A 1: 3.25; 5.12; 8.17; 27.5; 
30.8; A 2: 23.1; G 1.52; 9.46, 59; 
14.8; 24.6; 25.9; 26.2; B 1: 21.17; 

B 2: 2.37-9; 5.4, 11:7.10-20; 


428 



Index 


18.20; B 3: 1.13; 3.5-7; 5.3; 7.10; 

B 4: 5.18; Va 3.69; 4.26; 10.24; 
11.3; 13.10; 23.23, 43; 24.2; 27.16 
night A 1: 6.1;9.20; 11.18, 34; 16.32; 
25.10; 27.7; 31.19-20; 31.2; 32.6, 
11-17; A 2: 4.8; 12.13; 17.23; 18.4; 
20.3; G 9.36, 43, 60; 16.6, 12, 
25-30, 44; 20.8-9; 25.3; 26.6; B 1: 
4.4-5; 10.10; 21.16; B 2: 1.29, 34; 
2.10; 6.25; 7.16-22; 17.20-1; 

18.15, 19; B 3: 8.7; B 4: 3.6; 5.5-7, 
30; 8.15; Va6.10; 7.16; 8.7; 12.13; 
13.25; 21.20; 23.43; 24.5; 26.3; 
27.17; last watch A 1: 5.12; 9.23; 
32.15; G 9.27; 16.25: B 3: 9.20; 

Va 12.46; midnight A 1: 9.24; 

32.14 

noon A 1:25.10; 28. 11; A 2: 18.4; G 
9.46; 19.15; 22.6; 26.10; B 2: 2.10, 
42; 11.15; 18.15. 19; B 3: 5.3; 

10.13; B 4: 5.4, 19; 7.5-7; 8.16; Va 
9.9; 11.35-6; 24.5 

twilight A 1: 30.8; G 16.12, 23; B 1: 
21.17; Va 12.13; 13.9-10; 26.2-3; 
worship A 1: 30.8; G 2.1 1-12; Bl: 
7.1; B 2: 7.1-22; 18.21 
tonsure G8.14; 14.34 
trade A 1: 20.10-16; 21.1—4; A 2: 10.7; 
16.17; G 7.8-21: 10.5, 35: B 1: 2.4; 
18.4; B 2: 2.5, 26-9; Va 2.19, 
24-39; 19.13-16 

barter A 1: 20.14-15; G 7.16-21; Va 
2.37-9 

forbidden goods A 1: 20. 1 1-14; G 
7.8-20; B 2: 2.26-9; B 4: 1.6; Va 
2.24-39 

in human beings A 1: 20.12-13; G 

7.14 

measures and weights Va 19.13; false 
measures G 15.18 
merchandise G 10.26; Va 19.15 
merchants G 11.21; 15.18; 17.7; Bl: 
10.24; Va 19.15 

tradition (, smrti ) A 2: 4.24; 8.12; 15.25; 
G 1.2; B l: 1.3, 13; 2.8; 6.9; 10.8; 

B 2: 6.36, 40;B3: 8.9;B4: 5.11, 17; 
6.9; Va 1.4; 2.48; 6.18; 8.7; 13.16; 
16.10; 25.11; 26.9 

travel A 1: 8.12; 16.14; A 2: 16.13; G 
2.13; 5.21; 16.17, 33; B 1: 7.6; B 2: 


2.35; 5.19; Va 1.22; 4.37; 12.43 
return from A 1: 5.14; 8.18; 14.8; G 
6.7 

sea B 1: 2.4; B 2: 2.1 
treasure-trove G 10.43-5; Va 3.13-14 
tree/plant A 1: 7.4; 11.5; 16.15; 17.19; 
20.3; A 2: 2.4; G 12.28; B 1:9.4; 

B 2: 8.4; 18.24-5; B 3: 2.18; 3.5; 

B 4: 3.5; Va 2.26; 27.2 
Badara A 1: 2.38 

bamboo B 1: 5.3; 14.9-10; B 2: 6.7; 
Va 12.37 

banyan A 1: 2.38; G 1.23; Va 1 1.53 
bark G 1.17, 25; 3.34; B 1: 13.12; 

B 2: 11.15; B 3: 3.19;9.2 
Brahmasuvarcala Va27.11 
climbing A 1: 1 1.16; G 9.32; Va 
12.25; 13.18 

cutting A 1: 7.4; G 3.20; Va 19.1 1-12 
fig Va 11.39^10 

foot of A 1: 29.1: Va 9.11; 10.13 
hemp A 1: 2.40; G 1.17; 7.9; B 1: 

3. 1 3; Va 2.24; 1 1 .60; Murva G 1 . 1 5 
lotus A 1: 23.2; Va 20.21; 27.12 
mango A 1: 20.3 
Nala" B 1: 14.10 

Palasa A 1: 2.28; 32.9; G 1.22; 9.44; 
B 2: 6.4; Va 11.52; 12.34; 20.21; 
27.12 

PIlu G 1.23 

resin/juice G 17.32-3; Va 14.33 
sacrificial G 1.24; B 1: 3.15 
sanctuary B 1: 9.5 
Sara B 1: 14.10 
Sidhraka B 2: 1.16 
Tamala A 1: 2.37 
Udumbara A 1: 2.38; Va 11.54; 

20.21,41:27.12 
Vibhltaka A 2: 25.12 
wood-apple G 1.22; Va 20.21; 27.12 
tripod Va 10.23 

truth A 1: 7.11; 12.5; 23.6; A 2: 21.13; 
G 9.68; 10.51: 13.7, 12, 31; 19.15; 
26.7; B 1: 3.20; 13.3; B 2: 11.7; 
18.2; B 3: 1.26; 8.3; 10.13; B 4: 
5.32; Va 3.60; 4.4; 16.28, 32; 

30.1 

turban A 1: 8.2; B 1: 5.6; 13.9 

turmeric G 1.21 

twins Al: 17.13; G 17.25 


429 



Index 


umbrella A 1: 7.5; G 2.13; 10.58; B 1: 
3.24; 5.6; Va 7.15; 29.13 
uncle, see kinship 
usury, see under moneylender 
UrvasiVa30.il 
Usanas B2: 4.26; B 3: 8.12 
utensils/implements Al: 17.9-13; A 2: 
22.15-17; G 28.7; B 1: 13.21-32; 

14.1- 10 

bone G 1.31 B 1: 8.45; Va 3.52 
clay A 1; 17.9; G 1.29; B 1: 8.30, 34; 
11.41; 14.1-3; B 2: 17.24; Va 3.49, 
58-9; 15.20 
copper Va 5.7 
horn B 1: 8.46 

iron B 3: 3.10; Va 14.32; 17.45 
ivory B 1: 8.46 

metal A 1: 17.11; G 1.29-30; B 1: 
8.27; 14.4-7 

stone G 1.30; B 1: 8.44; 14.8; B 2: 
2.29; 17.24; B 3: 3.10; Va 3.49; 
13.35 

wooden A 1: 17.12; G 1.29; B 1: 
8.31, 35; Va 3.49, 52 

Vaisya A 1: 1.4, 19, 27; 2.36-8; 3.2, 6, 
30; 5.16; A 2: 2.6; G 1.1 1-12; 

4.20; 10.42; 12.8-14; 14.3,24; 

B 1: 3.9, 17; 5.9; 6.9; 8.23; 16.1-4; 
17.3-8; 18.4; 19.2; 20.13-15; B 2: 
1.21;3.50; 5.11; B 3: 7.9; Va 1.24; 

2.1- 2; 3.24, 33; 4.2-3; 11.51-73; 
17.47, 78; 18.1-9; 21.2-5, 12, 17; 
26.16 

greeting A 1: 14.23, 27 
guest A 2: 4.18 

killing A 1: 24.2; G 22.15, 18; B 2: 
1.9; Va 20.32, 34, 38-9 
occupations of A 2: 10.7; G 6.18; 
7.7,25; 10.49; B 1: 10.2-22: 18.4; 
B 2: 4.18-19; Va 2.18-19, 24 
see also social classes 
Varuna G 25.9: B 1: 6.8; B 2: 7.9, 19; 

8.3, 9; B 3: 6.5-6; 8.7; Va 30.11 
Veda A l: 1.3; 4.5-8; 5.7; 12.2,9, 11; 
13.22; 21.8; 32.1; A 2: 5.14; 
8.10-13; 14.11-12; 23.10. 12; G 

1.1- 2, 45; 5.20; 9.72; 11.19; 13.21; 
20.1; 26.24; B 1: 1.1, 13, 16; 4.2, 7; 
18.2; B 2: 11.31: 16.7, 13; 17.15; 


18.24-6; B 3: 1.26; B 4: 1.26; Va 
1.45; 2.8, 12; 3.19-22; 6.3-5,25; 
7.3; 12.41; 15.1 1; 27.1-8; 30.6 
abandoning A 2: 21.13; G 25.7; Va 
10.4 

Ablinga A 1: 26.7; B 2: 7.2: 17.37. 

B 4: 2.13; Va 28.11-15 
Aghamarsana G 19.12; 24.10-1 1; 

B 2: 8.11; 17.37; B 3: 4.5; 5.1-7; 
10.10; B 4: 2.7-8, 15; 3.7; 4.2; Va 
22.9; 23.19,23; 26.8; 28.1 1-15 
Agnervrata Saman Va 28.1 1-15 
Ajyadoha Samans Va 28.11-15 
Amhomuca B 4: 7.5-7 
Angirasa A 1: 2.2 
Asvasukta Va 28.11-15 
Asyavamiya Va 26.6 
Atharvan formulas B 3: 9.4 
Atharvasiras G 19.12; B3: 10.10; Va 
22.9; 28.11-15 

Atharvaveda A 2: 29.12; B 4: 3.4; 5.1 
Atisanga Saman Va 28.1 1-15 
Bahispavamana Saman G 19.12; 

B 3: 10.10 

Barhaspatya Saman Va 28.1 1-15 
Barumja Saman Va 28.1 1-15 
Bhasa Saman Va 28.1 1-15 
Bird verses Va 3.19 
Brahman's Heart B 2: 7.8 
Brahmana text A 1: 1.10. 11; 3.9, 26; 
7.6, 7, 11; 10.8; 12.1, 3, 7, 10, 13; 
17.28; A 2: 13.5; B 2: 11.7;B3: 
7.18; 9.9 

Brhat Saman G 19.12: B 3: 10.10; Va 
"28.11-15 

Devakrta B4: 3.7; Va 28.1 1-15 
Devavrata Saman Va 28.1 1-15 
Durgasavitrl Va 28.1 1-15 
explicit vedic text A 1: 4.8; A 2: 8.12; 

Bl: 1.6; Va 6.43 
‘Fiend-killing" Saman B 2: 14.5 
forgetting G 21.1 1; Va 1.18; 20.12 
Four-hotra text B 3: 7.17 
four Vedas G28.49;B1: 1.8; Va 3.20 
Gayatra Saman Va 28.11-15 
Gosukta Va 28.11-15 
Hiranyavarna B 2: 7.2; 17.37 
'Honey' verses A 2: 17.22; G 15.28; 
19.12; B 2: 14.2, 5; B 3: 10.10; Va 
22.9; 28.11-15 


430 



Index 


Hymn Collections G 15.28; 19.12; 

B 3: 9.10-15; 10.10; Va 4.33; 20.46; 

22.9 

inferred vedic text A 1: 4.8; 12.10 
instruction in A 1; 1.31; 2.4, 8; 5.23; 

G 7.1-3; 10.4; Va 1.21 
Jyestha Saman A 2: 17.22; G 15.28; 

19.12; B 2: 14.2;B3: 10.10; Va3. 19 
Jyotismatl B 2: 18.1 1 
Kathaka Va 12.24; 30.5 
Kautsa Va 26.5 

knowledge of A 1: 1.16, 21; 2.17; 5.2 
Ksmapavitra B 4: 7.5-7 
Kusmanda verses G 19.12; 20.12; 
22.36; 24.9; B 1: 19.16; B 2: 2.31; 

B 3: 7.1-18; 10.10; B 4: 3.7; 7.5-7; 
Va 22.9; 28.11-15 
lost Al: 12.10 
Madhuchandas B 4: 6. 1 
Mahadivaklrtya Saman G 19.12; 

B 3: 10.10 

MahanamnI Saman G 19.12; B 3: 

10.10 

Mahavairaja Saman G 19.12; B 3: 

10.10 

Mahavrata Va 28.1 1-15 
Mahitra Va 26.5 
Manavlhymn G 23.28 
Mrgara B 4: 7.5-7 
Mrtyulangala B 4: 3.7 
Padastobha Saman Va 28.11-15 
Pavamam verses A 1: 2.2, 6; G 
19.12; 20.12; B 2: 7.2; 17.37; B 3: 
10.10; B 4: 3.7; 7.5-7; Va 22.9; 

28.11-15 

Purusa hymn G 19.12; B 3: 10.10; 

B 4: 7.5-7; Va 4.2; 22.9; 26.7 
Purusagati Saman G 19.12; B 3: 

10.10 

Purusavrata Saman Va 28. 11-1 5 
Raivata Saman Va 28.1 1-15 
Rajana Saman G 19.12; B 3: 10.10; 
Va 22.9 

Rathantara Saman G 19.12; B 3: 
10.10; Va 28.11-15 
Rauhini Saman G 19.12; B 3: 10.10; 
Va 22.9 

Raurava Saman G 26.9 
Rc-verses A 1: 12.5; B 2: 14.4; 

18.23; B 3: 9.4, 8 


Retasya verses G 23.20; B 2: 1.29 
Rgveda G 16.21; B 1: 7.9; B 4: 3.3; 

" 5.1, 29; Va 13.30; 27.3, 5 
Rudra hymn G 19.12; B 3: 10.10; 

B 4: 3.7; 6.1, 3^4; Va 22.9 
Saman chant A 1: 10.19-20; 12.5; 

B 1; 21.5; B 2: 14.4; 18.23; B 3: 9.4, 
8; Va 23.46 

Samapavitra formulas A 1:2.2 
Samaveda G 16.21; B 4: 3.3; 5.1, 29; 

Va 3.19; 13.30 
Satarudrlya Va 28.11-15 
Savitri verse A 1: 1.10; 26.14; 27.1; 

G 1.12, 55; 19.12; 20.8; 23.21; 
24.11; Bl: 6.7, 9;B2: 7.5; 8.11, 13; 
17.14, 41; B 3: 9.4; 10.10; B 4: 

I. 27-8; 3.7; 4.6; 5.12-13, 31; 6.1; 
Va 2.3; 1 1.74-6; 20.6; 21.6-8; 
23.20; 25.9. 12-13; 26.15; 

27.18 

selling B 1: 9.5; 11.36 
Seven-hotra text B 3: 7.17 
Siras formula B 4: 1.28; Va 21.6-8; 
25.13 

Sivasamkalpa Va 26.6 
Six-hotra text B 3: 7.17 
Suddhasuddhlya Samans Va 

28.11-15 

Suddhavatl B 4: 3.7; Va 23.39; 26.5; 

28.11-15 

supplements of A 2: 8.10-13; G 8.5; 

II. 19; 15.28; B 1: 1.6, 8; B 2: 14.2; 
Va 3.19, 23; 6.3^4, 43; 13.7 

Surabhimatr B 2: 7.2; 17.37 
‘Svadha-containing’ formulas B 2: 
4.5 

Taratsama B 4: 3.7; Va 28.1 1-15 
Taratsamandl G 20.12; 24.2; B 2: 
5.8; B 4: 2.4-5 
Ten-hotra text B 3: 7.17 
three Vedas A 1: 1.28; 2.6; A 2: 
23.10; 24.8; G 11.3, 25; B 2: 18.16; 
Va 1.16; 17.87 
Trihsahavacana Al: 13.10 
Trihsravana A 1: 13.10 
Trisuparna A 2: 17.22; G 15.28; B 2: 
14.2; Va 28.1 1-15 
Upanisad A 2: 5.1; G 19.12; B 2: 
18.15; B 3: 10.10; Va 22.9 
Vaisvanarl B 4: 7.5-7 


431 



Index 


Veda ( cont .): 

Vajasaneyin A 1: 12.3, 7; 17.31; Va 
12.31; 14.46; 23.13 
Vaksukta Va 28.11-15 
Vamadevya Saman Va 28.1 1-15 
VarunI A 1: 26.7; G 23.28; 25.7; B 2: 
7.2; 17.37; B 4: 2.9. 13 
Vasistha Va 26.5 
Vedanta G 19.12; Va 3.17; 22.9 
vedic branch A 1: 10.20; 12.4; A 2: 
6.4; G 6.17; 16.49 

vedic learning A 1: 1.12, 16, 21 ;2. 17; 
3.26; 5.2, 5; A2: 10.8; 15.11; 16.10; 
1 7.4; 21 .4; G 6.20-3; 9.62; 1 1 .25, 
29; 25.2; 28.50; B 1: 10.29; Va 1.16; 

3.1- 12, 17-18; 6.23, 26 
vedic savant/scholar A 1: 3.34; 

10.11-14; 14.13, 30; 18.33; 
24.24-5; A 2: 6.4; 7.17; 14.13; 
17.22; 23.10; 25.8-9; 26.10; G 

5.20, 30-2; 6.17, 25; 8.4-11; 12.38; 
14.22; 15.9, 28; 22.30; 28.41; B 1; 
6.10; 11.14; 19.13; 21.4, 13;B2: 
2.30; 5.15, 19; 14.6; B 4: 5.16; Va 
2.5,41; 3.7; 5.10; 11.5, 17-18, 29; 
16.18,28; 17.87; 19.23, 37 

Viraja B 4: 3.7 
Vrsakapi B 1: 13.9 
Vyahrti Saman Va 28.11-15 
Yajuhpavitra formulas A 1: 2.2 
Yajurveda G 16.21; B 4: 3.3; 5.1, 29; 
Va 3.19; 13.30 

Yajus formulas A 1: 12.5; G 20.1 1; 

B 2: 14.4; 18.23; B 3: 9.4,8 
Yaudhajaya G 26.9 
vedic recitation/study Al: 1.6; 1.9-10, 
13; 5.2, 10-11,25-6; 9.9-11; 
12.3-9; 13.6-11. 18-20; 7.19; 
18.33; 24.6; 26.11; 27.9; 30.1; A 2: 
5.1, 15; 6.13; 10.4,9; 12.20; 22.7; 
24.8; G 1.53, 55; 2.5,29, 45-7; 
6.13; 8.15; 9.27; 10.1; 12.4-6; 

14.20, 46; 16.34; 18.17; 22.34; B 1: 

I. 6; 3.1^4; 10.26, 30; 18.2^1; B 2: 

II. 1,6-7, 34; B 3: 5.7; 9.1-21; B 4: 
5.29; Va 2.13-15; 3.2-5; 6.22, 28, 
30, 43; 7.3; 12.46; 20.47; 23.27-8 

annual course A 1:9.1-28; 10.1-30; 

11.1- 38; G 16.1-49; Va 13.1^40; 
commencement A 1: 9. 1 ; 10.2;A2: 


5.1, 16; G 16.1.40, 44; Bl: 12.16; 
Val3.1^1;conclusion Al:9.2;10.2; 
A 2: 5.2-3, 16; 16.40; B 1: 12.16 
daily Al: 11.21^1; Va 25.4, 7 
mental A 1: 11.24-6; 32.13, 17; B 1: 
21 . 10-1 

private A 1: 12.1-12; 13.1; 15.1; A 2: 
5.3; 21.10, 21; 22.19; G 5.4, 9; 9.26; 
15.18; Bl: 4.7; B 2: 3.1; 6.38-9; 
16.3, 5; 18.22: B 3: 5.2; Va 8.11, 17; 
26.14; as austerity Al: 12.1-2 
starting/completing a whole Veda 
A 1:11.7 

starting/completing a vedic book 
Al: 11.1-2,6, 35-6 
suspension of A 1: 5.25; 9.1, 4-27; 

10.1-30; 11.1-38; 32.12, 15; A 2: 
5.1; G 1.61; 16.5^19; B 1: 21.4-22; 
B 3: 9.10; Va 13.8^10; 17.12-13 
vehicle A 1: 7.5; 8.12; A2: 11.7;G6.24; 
16.17; B 1: 9.7; 10.28; B 2: 2.35; Va 
1.22; 13.58; 14.12; 29.15 
Venus G 16.15 

village A 1: 5.13; 9.7. 14-19; 15.22; 
24.14, 19; 29.1; 30.7; 31.3, 21; A 2: 
15.9; 18.5; 22.8; 25.15; 26.4, 7; 
28.7; G 3.14, 21,28, 33; 16.19; 
20.7; 22.4; B 2: 6.31; 11.15; 18.22; 
B 3: 2.9; 9.4; B 4: 1.20; 3.4; Va 8.8; 
9.2; 10.13, 16, 26; 16.15 
boundary A 1: 9.16; 1 1.9; A 2: 9.4; G 
16.18; Bl: 7.6; B 2: 17.12-13; B 3: 
1.17; Va 13.27 

city A 1: 32.21 ;B 2: 6.13, 33; Va 19.15 
market town A 1: 9.4 
town A 2: 26.4, 6; G 16.45; Va 
13.11-12; 16.15; 29.14 
vines G 12.28; B 3: 2.18; 3.5 
violence A 2: 13.7; G 1.3 
Visnu Va 28.16 
steps A 2: 7.9 
Visvamitra Va 17.35 
Vivasvat Va 20.3 

vomiting A 1: 10.22; G 16.34; 23.26; Va 
13.28 

Vratya A 2: 7.13-15; B 1: 16.16; 17.15 
Vrsaparvan B 2: 4.26 

wages G 10.42; Va 16.16 
walking A 1: 6.8; Va 7.12 


432 



Index 


washerman Va 14.3 
washing A 1: 15.17, 23; 16.8; A 2: 2.1; 
3.3; 5.4; G 1 .29, 43; 2.2; 9.32; 10.52; 
14.38; B 1: 6.14-15; 10.11-16; 
11.40; 13.21-32; 14.4, 10-11: 15.4; 
B 2: 5.21; 6.2; 8.1-2; 17.37; 18.7; 

B 4: 6.3-4; Va 3.48-9; 7.15 
water A 1: 2.30; 3.39; 4.13-21; 11.23; 

15.6- 7, 22; 16.5, 7, 14; 20.12; 
30.18-22; 32.7; A 2: 1.14; 4.14, 16; 
6.11-12; 7.4, 13. 17; 8.8; 9.8; 12.9; 
16.23; 17.17; 22.4; 23.2; 28.10; 
29.7; G 2.41; 5.15, 31-5; 7.12; 
9.8-12; 13.18; 15.15; 16.12; 17.3; 
20.4; 24.6; 25.4; 27.1 1; 28.46; B 1: 

I. 14; 6.2, 10-13; 8.12-29, 32, 52; 
9.8, 10; 13.11; 14.17: B 2: 2.41; 3.1; 
6.31:8.2-11; 14.7; 17.12-13,23, 
42; 18.19; B 3: 3.13, 19; 9.3, 17; 

B 4: 5.8-9; Va 2.26, 33; 3.31-6, 
45-8, 60-1; 6.11; 8.17; 10.23; 

II. 77; 12.15; 13.16, 61; 14.12; 

21.6- 8, 21; 23.15, 32, 38-9; 24.3; 
25.6; 29.6, 8 

drawn out G 9.10; B 2: 1 1.25; Va 
6.14-15 

offering G 26.1 1-12; 27.5; B 2: 

5.2- 4; 8.14; 9.1-14; 10.1-6; 17.38; 
Va 2.7; 4.9, 12 

pot A1:4.13;A2: 1.1 5; 3.21; 5. 6; 6. 11; 
17.17; G 5.15; 20.3-i, 10-11; B 1: 
3.31; 5.4; 6.1-16; 7.1-10; 8.29; 9.6; 
11.41; 15.28; B2: 1.36; 8.2; 17.11, 
35, 37; B 3: 1.1 1; 2.7; B 4: 7.5-7; 
Va 10.31; 12.14-15; 15.11-12,20; 
24.5:29.17 

sipping A 1: 4.20-1; 6.36-7; 15.1-6, 
11, 17,23; 16.1-13; 17.3;A2: 2.1; 
3.5; 5.6-7; 19.12-13; G 1.36-7; 

2.2; 9.9; 10.52; 17.19; 25.9; B 1: 
7.3; 8.13-31; 10.20, 34; 11.40; 
15.28; B 2: 5.21; 6.39-40; 7.2; 8.8, 
10-11; 12.10-11; 15.6; 17.37, 43; 
18.11; B 4: 3.2-3, Va 3.26-13; 
12.17; 23.23; 29.17 
sprinkling A 1: 16.7; 17.16; A 2: 

1.13; 2.1; 3.9, 15-18; 4.7, 23; 12.5; 
G 2.2; B 1: 8.27-9; 9.9, 11; 10.1-2; 
13.22, 25; 14.11-15; 15.20; B 2: 

7.2- 4; 12.3, 6; 18.10; B 3: 9.4; B 4: 


3.5; Va 3.44, 56; 14.23-6; 23.28 
standing in A 1: 11.17; 15.10; G 
24.2, 11; B 4: 5.30 

strainer B 2: 11.24; 17.11,34,37,42; 
B 3: 2.7, 17 

wealth A 1: 4.23; 7.21; A 2: 2.3; 14.12, 
15, 19; 16.25; 20.18-19; 26.1; G 
6.20; 9.46; 1 1 .29; 22.28; 26. 12; B 2: 
11.7; B 3: 8.30; Va 6.7, 9; 13.56; 
26.16; 30.9 

weapons A 1: 18.19; 20.12; 29.6; A 2: 
10.11; G 10.18; B 1: 18.3; Va 2.17, 
26; 3.16, 24-5; 13.55; 19.39; 23.15 
contests A 2: 25.14 
living by G 7.25 

weeping A 1: 10.19; G 16.7; B 1: 15.30; 
21.5; Va 3.38 

well B 1: 9.8; B 2: 5.5-7; 6.27, 32; Va 
12.26 

wicker G 1.33; B 1: 8.36 
wife A 1: 14.21; 29.13; 32.6; A 2: 5.10; 
9.11; 15.5; 22.8; 23.10; 27.2-7; G 
6.6; 9.32; 10.55; 14.35; 18.1-3; 
22.28; 23.12; 24.5; B 1:9.6; 13.5; 

15.10. 17, 26; 16.6-16; 17.1-15; 
21.18; B 2: 2.22; 3.14-17, 34-5; 

Va 1.38; 6.4; 11.11; 13.42, 49; 

14.11. 13; 15.5; 17.11-39; 19.23; 
20.8-15 

abandoning husband A 1:28.20 
abandoning wife A 1: 28.19; Va 
21.10:28.2-3 

adultery A 1: 19.13; G 22.35; B 2: 
3.48-50; Va 1.37; 5.4; 14.19; 19.44; 

21.6-17 

another man’s G 9.48 
of different classes A 2: 13.3; G 
28.35—10; B 1: 16.6-16; 17.1-15; 

B 2: 3.10-12; Va 15.12; 17.37, 47 
division of property A 2: 14.16-20; 
G 28.24-6 

eating with B 1: 2.3; Va 12.31 
guarding A 2: 13.6; B 2: 3.34-5; 4.1 
husband missing G 18.15-17; Va 
17.75-80 

killing husband Va 21.10; 28.7 
lover of Va 14.6, 8 
property of A 2: 14.9; 29.3; G 
28.24-6; Va 17.46 
qualifications Va 8.1-2 


433 



Index 


wife ( cont .): 

remarriage A 2: 13.1, 3; G 15.18; 
18.15-17; 28.33; B 2: 3.27; Va 
17.18-20, 74 

in season A 2: 1.17-19; 5.17; 13.1; G 
5.1; 18.5; B 2: 3.1; B 3: 1.24; B 4: 
1.17-21; Va 5.8; 8.17; 12.21 
senior G 28.15-16 
widow G 28.22-3; B 2: 4.7-10; Va 
17.55-66; 17.74; 19.24 
see also marriage, women 
wilderness A 1:9.17; 11.34; 24.11; A 2: 
22.1, 16-17; 25.15; 28.7; B 1: 3.19; 
B 2: 1.3; 11.17; Va 10.15, 17; 23.1; 
27.5 

boundary A 1: 1 1.9 
wind Al: 6.15,23; 11.31-2; 30.20; A2: 
6.2; 19.1; G 9.12; 16.5-6;B1: 1.14; 
9.3, 7; 13.5; 21.5; B 3: 2.8; B 4: 8.3 
howling A 1: 11.8; 12.3, 5 
whirlwind A 1: 11.30 
witchcraft G 25.7 
women A 1: 7.8-10; 9.1 1-13; 16.14; 
26.5; A 2: 9.7; 11.7; 15.17; 26.11;G 
6.24; 9.32; 12.38; 13.29; 15.16; 
28.47; B 1: 8.22-3; 9.2: 18.11; B 2: 
2.39, 45; 3.45-6; Va 3.34, 45-7; 
5.1-10; 12.24; 13.58; 16.18, 30; 
19.23; 27.1-9 

abduction B 4: 1.15; Va 1.34; 3.16; 
17.73 

barren B2:4.10;Va 17.57 
childbearing A 2: 11.12, 17; B 2: 4.6 
childbirth A 1: 9.13; G 14.14-16, 30; 
Va 4.20-3, 38; 5.8; 11.7; 12.24; 
19.23 

girls A 1: 31.8; A 2: 16.8; G 9.31; Va 
2.35; 5.3; 12.6; brotherless G 
28.20; Va 17.16-17; marrying on 
their own G 18.20-3; naked G 
18.23; B 4: 1.11; Va 17.70 
killing A 1:24.5, 9; G 22.12, 17, 
26-7; Bl: 19.3-5; B 2: 1.11-12; 

Va 20.34^10 
kissing A 1: 7.8 

menstruation A 1: 9.13; 24.9; G 
9.29-30; 14.30; 17.10; 18.20; 

23.34; 24.4; B 1: 1 1.34-5; B 2: 4.4; 
B 4: 1.11-14. 17-21; Va 3.58; 4.38; 
5.2, 5-10; 12.5; 17.70-1; 20.35-7; 


menopause G 28.2; B 2: 4.10; 
puberty Va 17.59, 67-71; as 
purification Va 5.5; 28.2—4; 
suppression of B 4: 1.20; soon 
after menstruation A 1: 24.9; G 
22.12; Bl: 19.3-5; B 2: 1.12; Va 
20.34-6 

naked A 1: 7.3; G 9.48; Va 5.2 
non-independence B 2: 3.44—6; Va 
5.1, 3; 15.5 

pregnant A 2: 4.12; G 5.25; 28.33; 

B 2: 6.30; 13.5; Va 17.27 
property rights A 2: 14.16-20; G 
28.24-6; B 2: 3.43-6 
purification of B 2: 4.5; Va 28.1-9 
raped A 2: 26.18-24; 27.1; Va 28.2-3 
sex with low-caste men G21.9; 

23.14; Va 21.1-5; 21.12-13 
speaking with A 1: 3.16; B 2: 18.16; 

B 3: 8.17; B 4: 5.4; Va 24.5 
teaching Law A2: 15.9; 29.1 1-12, 15 
virgin B 4: 1.15-16; Va 16.34; 
17.73—4 

see also menstruation, marriage, wife 
wood A 1: 21.2; B 1: 10.10; 13.23-8; 

B 2: 2.28; Va 3.11 
wood-apple B 1: 8.38; 14.9 
wool A 1: 2.36; 3.8; G 1.17; 12.36; B 1: 
2.4; 8.39—40; 13.10 
workers A 2: 9.1 1; G 20.4 
indentured A 2: 28.2-3 
world A 2: 4.15; 7.16; 21.13; 24.14; 
26.1; G 25.5; B 2: 16.6; B 3: 7.18; 
8.30; Va 17.2, 5; 21.11. 14 
both A 1:20.9; A 2: 2.3; 11.4; 20.23; 
29.14 

Brahman’s G 3.9; 8.24-5; 9.74; B 2: 
3.1; B 4: 8.14; Va 8.17; 10.31; 29.4 
Truth G 1.51 

wound B 1: 11.37; Va 18.16; 19.39 

Yajnavalkya B 2: 9.14 
Yama B 2: 1.32; B 3: 6.6; B 4: 8.3; Va 
14.30; 19.48; 20.3 
yawning G2.15 
yellow Al: 3.2; Va 11.66 
Yoga A 1: 23.3-6; B 4: 1.22-30; Va 
25.5-8 

young G 5.24; 15.10; B 1: 10.32; B 4: 
7.8; Va 11.7 


434 



