r; air 


GRUNDRISS 

I 

JitK 


INDO-ARISCHEN PHILOLOGIE 

USD 


ALTERTUMSKUNDE 


bsxn ivust. VO 


A J C Jinsu MtrwlXsA i loouftiLo Daliu oxy J lurrc s-I ui'^iiRnr 

T I FirFflosooN 0 KCstr 1>- Gvrb> Tiuisaiv W Giiors TTl^sz^\ 

K. CsutNEi. Cfruv 0 \ CHiEPSoh C\LCurr« \ IlatiBR^snrLar^LAt U JvcosfUoNs 
f Jdi.TY VtOsiCyRO, U RfRS Ijnt>rs L Kvhs Munchs'S, r Ittmvss bTRA WRO 
IJ LiJ PiciUiRr Lvu II J fnrRsOCJrTLV rs A A Macponpji OsroRf J ^t^KV 
r piiaiM U\!U r J RArsovTosDos J ^ Siivj c GROMs<'r v M \ stj-js CAictrA 

O T»tT AVT Atl AJfABXD A ^ FMS B MAKlI Si*. I Mf«TlONPOS, M \\ fSTERMTZ BrAG 
^ In /AaiARUC llMtr 


JK ONDCr 

GEORG BOHLER 

roi rfr^nzi 


\ 


I ~i 




F. KIELHORN 




I HE \1II\KVA\LDV 

M BLOOMFIELD 


SlR'VSbBURG 

VUU \G VOJS KARL J IRUHNEE 

ii >90 



In diescn %Vetk, soil lan er'len Mat dcr J 
ffKScht iverileT), anen Gesamlulier* , 
lilick tljct die citwclnen Gel'ie'e dcr mdo- ; 
'’ri'cl.sn Piiilolo’ie ur.d Altertttrris~vnde in 
‘.I’HTer imhI ^jsierafitiscliet DiuicHunj r« 
ccbeiu J>i(? Mehrzalil <kr GcgCnnande wird 
(kja't liberhaupS zazncnien Mai fine zusiuiijacn* 

1 iji[’fTide a'lgerandete IlelianPunR crfahrcn; 

daif ^on dem ^Vcrl^ reichcr Gewinn 
fir die \\ 13 'ersrlnft selb'>t cilio'Tl a%erden, 
iroUdeai m er'-ter Lime fur I.ernende bc- 
j'lmnl jst. 

Ehn d'Ci'^ig Grlfihrte aas Dcnt^ddand, 
O'tcrrekh, rngUnd, Holland, Indlen end 
A-icril a hebcii neb \crcirigt. am diescAuf* 
gabe 2U lusen, vol^ei tin'Ieil dtr Miiaibeiler 
ibre Jlfiirigc fleinsrJ), die ubrigen i»e ergbseh 
nbfa^'cn verden. f^iebe naebfolgendcn 
Plan.) 

Pcsttlit sdion In der numbeben Enl> 
fernong -vielcT Mitatbeiter erne g-!Ss«ere 
Schuierighen nh bcl ande/en sbnbehen U»tC7> 
"cUniijiigen, 'O schiea es aaeh gebotep, die 
UnzutrSslicbl-cit der meiiten Santnelwerbe, 
velche ilurcli den imbcreobenbaren Ab» 
Hefenmgslermm tier einitlncn He-lragc ent- 
ileUti dadurch rnsermenlen, dasi die emaelnen 
Ab thrltle gleich nach ilirct Ablitferung 
einieln gednicVt und ausgeseben •aetden. 

-Das Work niriLaus drci litmlen Lcr. S'* 
I'T) nngEfalircn llaifang von je uoo Seiten 
besteben, lu der AusstaUung des m densclben 
Vetlag erscbeinenden Cruitrinss/t Jer ueniK^tn 
PhdokgK. Der Pubslvrir'tion«pfeii des canien 
Werles betrsgc diircbsabniSdieh d< Vt. pro 
. DrueVbogen von i6 Sciten, der I’reis der 
emielnen Hefte durchschn-tUIeb So Pf. pro 
Druckbogen. Aiichf&r die Tafeln ond Kanen 
n ird den Subsbtibenten erne JlnnSssigang von 
soo^t, ftuf den Einzelpreis siigesjcbcJl, Obrr 
■lie Einieilung des Werbes glebt der ouf 
Seite 3 dieses UmsebUgs befmdllche Plan 
' Ausbunff. 

< Stras*clrc, 5 m September 1S99. 

Die Verlagshandlung. 


' The Encyclopedia oflndo-AryanUeseirch 
contains the first attempt at a complete, syste- 
'matlc and concise survey of the vast field of 
' Indian languages, religion, litslorj', niitlquilics, 
and art,\inost of viblcb subjects Imve never 
before been treated in a connected form. Though 
the Encyclopedia is primanly intended as 3 
booh of rercreiicc for students, it mil never- 
tbciess be useful to nil connected with India;, 
and though it chiefly summarises the results 
achieved, it will also contain much that i« 
new and leads op to further revearcli. 

About thirty rfehoUts of various ua* 
Uonahlics,— “ from Austria, England, Germany, 
India, the Netherlands and liic United Ststes — 
have pronised to mute in order to accomplish 
this task. The contributions wi'l be written 
either in English or In German 

Each part (see the Planl svill be pu- 
blished separatciy end u!<h a separate 
pagination. 

The Mork will eonslst of three volumes 
each of about I too psges royal octavo. The 
subscription for the .complete work will he 
at the rate of about fij rfennig (8 d), the 
price of a single part at the rate of 80 ITciinlg 
(to dj, per sheet of lO pages. Subscribers 
will also enjoy a reduction of so percent 
for plates and maps. 

Tor the plan of the work see page 3 of 
tills cover. 


The Publisher. 


zes* Auf IVunsch einiger litbllotheken sserden von j'etzt an dtfn ein^olnc^ 
Heften vorUufige eigene Titelblatter brig^eben. Auch von den bereits erschicnenen 
Heften sind solche TitelbUlter nacbtraglich za haben und werdea auf Verlangen 
durch die iuclihandlungen, uelclie die Sobsknptioo vermiltelt haben, unestgellJifh 
nadigeliefert. 

- Die Verlagshandlung; 




0 ■ 0 "' 
-o' 


GRUNDRISS DER IND0-ARI5DHEN PHiLOLOGlE UNO ALTERTUMSKUNDE 

(ENCYCLOPEDIA OF 1NDO ARYAN RESEARCH} 

ULGRUNDET \ON G nOum , FORFCLSl TZT VON I KIFI HORN 


II I AND, I HETT « 


THE ATHARVAVEDA 


n\ 


M BLOOMFIELD. 


20 



SI RASSBURG 

VCRLAG VON KARL J TROnNLR 
1S99 



Grundriss der Indo-Arisohen Philologie und Altertumskunde 

(ENCTCLOPCWA OF 1'<00-ADTAN PESEARCfO 

BLGRO.NDLT \ON O BOHUK, lORrcrsrTZT VON t KiriHOlK 

It LVND, 1 Itl-d r 


Till* ATIIARVA-VIiDA 
AND THE GOPATIIA-BRAIIiMANA 

H\ 

M \URICL HLOOMI ILLD 


l‘ARl 1 THE AIHARVA-VCDA IN GENERAL. 

\ UIAKVCItR \ND CHRONOLOGY 01 'HIE \Ur\RVA\LD\ 

S r iMeriwl compiribon with the other — ihi. Atlnr\a 

\i.iU IS I coUei-tion o f 710 h)mnN contwnmc; iome 6000 stanzas OimJceI 
iiitii eo boohs About ont sT\Iir 5 T the mT?s, mtluEliti^ two eiTtir^ooks (i 5 
itul x6), Is wnttcti lu I'rost., <imiUr m st>le nml Uiujinsje to llie Unhmams’, 
the rest is iioetrv lu the usiul\e<lt nutres Jht.htt(.r howtver are hanilled 
\\il!v greit treedoni, often beirTMcit; either lenoraute or ilisregTrd ot the Vedic 
metrical canons ia apphul to the i>oetr\ of thv kic \ eih^ Genuine tradition 
as to the authorship of the h>mn.. there is none die lumns ihems^hes are 
<dent, tilt reports of tht ^irv rmilraiiut,tikE or the V\ are iti this rtspett 
absoluttl) fatuous InliketheKik ''unin xiid \ x}us — the \ ed is respettnelj 
of hjmii of pnisi, xhinlul son^ iml sunju. d \<frscs imi formulas — the 
names of the W do not m the lirst pln.e retkti the nature ot the contents, 
or tilt iiuimir ot cni|ioxmem 01 its hsinn U c n xiue hrxlinu \ edx is \er> 
late and xlocs n t in the iinin design xtc \tU y| durms inJ im intitions, 
but rxtlicr V csla of the I rahmx ihot) wor 1 sir ich»i n) dxe nxinc w is arnvexl 
at in X rouiul ibout ixshion’ tUher It crnt»\^ nviues such is t/itajuu, n//, 
etc, are onU ji-irti d de'enj tions xul th m-,h t im hir en > Mh, were ncier iise<.i 
e'ctensnel) Instead, the X iHixUon ot thisVedx is with imthu tire priests of 
prehi'toru iniiimti, Vthirxan xnvl \u-,xras Uxter dso ! hrgtd resulting m the 
niuics Uhxrx ui'irxsah 1 lire,' xiwi x 'h an I tmalh Uiunivedi It has been 
assumed that this as'Oiialton is entirel) eeonlu} due 10 the nxtural desire 
to adorn tlicNe othemtse almost nuneless <*»iM|*osit<ofis with in antiquit} an<l 
diciuli whiih do not belong to tVm but the names tT ir ’♦/ and 
Ue 'ull ingrained in the poems tlieimehes, m \ sense 'tn much the same 
as dm of die oldest tide of the V\ it^r<.'sa\)^ Hence U max be 

"ell to remember that the Uh»r\ane nles it well as the Hindu ceremonies 
connected "vllx home-lite ( v^r r) centre about the fire, m di tmction from 
the ^reaterVeHlic eereiiioncs (jTT/'r) wheh are in the niaai concerned walh 
oblitipiis of somx It Is therefore po-'ible to belitie tint the V edie Hindus, 
"hen die) sanl of these charms that the} were th and 

meant *iire-eharnis' i e thamxs pronounced when some oUition, not sonn, 
"as poured or dirown into the tire* 

laJ9 tn h« rs !,<! III*. 1 



3 II LiTTER\TURU. Gl-SCHiaiTL. IB. AniARVA-VCDA AND GorATH A-BR^l lMANA. 

§ 3. Relative chTonology" of the popular and hieratic litera- 

Anyhow this, difference of nomenclature between the three Vedas on 

the one side and the Atharvan On the other is an important and profound 
one in the history of Vedic literature. Leaving aside the beginnings of specu- 
lative theosophic literature nbidi are represented freely in both types (RV. 
and AV.), ne are lead to two main divisions of Vedic literature, the three 
Vedas \Mth their soma-sacrifices, and the AV. with the house-ceremonies 
(^r/yn), i. e., respectively, the hieratic and the popular religion. Tire statement 
put m this form is of importance for the relaiive 'chronology of the Atharvan 
li ritings; it becomes evident at once, and from the ethnological point of view 
a /crime, tknt there can have-been no period of Vedic history in which 
house-customs and mantras of essentially Athananic character were wanting, 
while at the same time the more chiborate hieratic mantras and soina-sacn- 
ficea were present In fact, in some form or other both are prehistoric. , The 
hieratic religion joins the Avestan /mawn-worsbip; the Atharvanic charms and 
jiractices are very liVely rooted in an even earlier, perhaps Indo-European, 
antiquity'*. At least, he who does not regard the analoga between Atharvanic 
charms .and practices and those of the Teutonic and other I. E. peoples as 
entirely accidental (anthropological) must hesitate to ascribe all the mantras 
of the AV. and G'rhyasutras to a late Vedic period’®. In the case of some, 
e. g. tlie weddmg-channs and the funeral hjmns, this is manifestly impossible! 
tt is not less so in the case of at least some hymns embodied in tlie AV. 
Samhitas alone, as, e. g. 4. is. Tliis point of view gains much firmness 
from a complete survey of the vast armory of channs, blessings, and curses 
cont.ained in the AY., such as may be gained by reading over the analysis 
of the vulgattf as given in th»> book (I’art III). Wiut H the nature of the 
impulse which cre.ated <x nilttle, at a late period so strong ami popular a 
need, .and with it such elaborate means of satisfaction; whatwere the conditions 
which exempted the earlier and therefore more primitive Vedic time from 
these needs and their gratification? It has been assumed that the more 
intimate blending of theVeibc people with the barbarous aborigines of India 
may have contributed much to the viilgariration of the beliefs .and literature 
of the Vedic Hindus. This is certainly true to some extent, but it does not 
.account for a litenatiire of such eMent .and character as the Atharvan. This 
IS, after all, only to a l.mited e.xtent suggestive of aboriginal barbarism; 
(lemonolatry with all other things that are hideous and uncanny make up only a 
part of file W. and the related Grhya-hteraiure; nor is it possible to demon- 
sfrate that even all that is borrowed from outside sources. Contrariwise, Athar- 
vanic charms are often pervaded by a more genuine ‘Aryan* sjiirit than the 
more artistic prayers to the gods of the Rigvedic pantheon (e g. 3. 12; 3,30; 
4. S; 7. 30' and 37) 'I'hal the differences in language, style, and metre 
betweerv.VY. and RV. are by no means always to be mterpreted as chrono- 
logic.irbut mtber^as diileclic; and that the songs of the lower grades of the 
peO[)le were sure to be compoved in a language .slightly' different from that 
of the higher i»riestly families will be shown below (<; 3S and 42). 

M 3. Chronology of the Atharvan redaction. — Yet there can be . 
no doubt (hat (he existing collections of ttie Atharvan are the final product 
of a reiiactioral activ iiy much later than that of the RV., ami tint many 
hymns arid prose pieces in the AV. date From a very Lite period of Vedic 
productivity. The Atharvan hymns as well as the CThy.a-rites present them- 
selves m a form thoroughly Rislnfied and Ilrahmantred; even th* m.un{ras 
and rites of the. most primitive ethnological flavor have been caught in tlie 
drag-net of the priestly class and made part of ihrf universal ^*edic religion. 



1. 'Inn ATi[\KVA-VrnA in GnNtRAi. — A. Ciiar\cur and Chronoiocy. 3 


'i'luis the AV. ^\ith its popular beliefs poses outwardly in the same attitude 
of dignity as the RV. witlr the soma-rites, I e. Brahmanical priests handle 
ciiarm and hocus-pocus as religion, not as superstition. As a n.-vtural con- 
secpience the Vedic pantheon is 'brought down and made to participate in the 
common peojde's customs and superstitions. Hut one feels the ilifferencc; 
they are emplojed mechanically, they have become sterile, and only rarely 
develop tiieir character" beyond the point at which'lh^RV. leaves them. 
Agni, Imlra, the Maruts, Ihhaspati, etc., are mentioned most ahv.ays in series 
which show that the Vedic gods have become indifferently of equal value. 
Ruing of old slayers of demons they are needed, of coiirseT against the dirUing 
brood of demons, goblins, wizards, and witches which ri»e above the horizon 
from the lowest depths of the folks consciousness; demon-shyers they are in 
the AV., and htlle else. IZven ethical Vanma with his spies, by virtue of 
hK unrivaled facilities for ferreting out hostile, i. e, eoi/so sinful, scheme^ of 
enemies and sorcerers, figures farodhrly'. Such criticisms as are c.illed out 
by this inherently difficult and paradoxical condition of things in the midst 
of a people capable of higher thought, belong to a rather late time. While 
all this has been going on speculative theosophic thought which seems never 
to have been wanting in IndiVl'-'^s also movetl from such beginnings as are 
found In the R\’. to a greater degree of subtlety and mysticivm: the subli- 
mated pantheism of the Upani^ads has been reached nearly, if not quite. 
Everything is grist to the mill of the Atluirvan not only are entire theosophic 
hymns fitted out as weapons against the Inied enemy and wizard, but 
individual speculative formulas and theosophic entities have joined the clap- 
trap tint is supposed to be effective agamvt ‘him tint hates u» and whom we 
hate’. Tliis explains the extraordinary fact that a hymn like 8 G, resting 
upon the lowest bathos of folk-lore, can exist peaceably by the side of sucli 
fine-spun theosophic lucubrations as the two hymns to Skamblia ‘Support’ 
(10, 7 and 8) which present the knowledge of brahma and ainun as the 
highest goalj or that dsal 'non being’, the perplexing cosmogonic conception, 
m.iy be turned against performers of spelU 14 i«;. 6)’’. I'rom such pheno- 
mena as these, r.ither than the vvoul-forms, or demonological contents of tlie 
hymns, tlie eudence of .a hter time must lie extracted the concurrent use 
of popular, hieratic, and philosophical themes for practical purposes, often 
manifestly secondary, betokens a highly reflective, inampulalmg period of 
Brahmanical activity 

S Relation of the \\ to the I'nlimapas, and the Dliarma- 
le\ts. — Judeed die word Jlrahiimni* .il which ha-, just now been used is to 
be taken, it seems, in its narrower sense, namclv, the jieriud ol the compo- 
sition of the Ih.'dim m t texts 'Ibe observant reader of a commenUiry on the 
A\'., such as has been puhh-'heii by (he author m Si.i , vof Xl.Ii, will find 
abund.ant evidence that the spirit of (he Hrahnuna texts - 1 refrain from 
saying Br.'ihmana period because there never was a period devoted exchisnely 
to the compo'ition of Br-'dimanas — asserts lUelf mightily in the collection of 
lhe_AV. as a whole. Above all, these hvmns run the whole gamut of the 
prc'teiiMOiis and demands of (he I»r.ibinana priesthood in the style of the 
15 rrdnuaiya-te\ts themselves, 'llie Ilnhmans in the AV.. as in the Brrihmana- 
texls, call themselves lAvii, ’gods’”; their claims reach the highest pitch. 

A comparison of Wu-er’s ‘Collectanea on the Castes’’^ with the chapter in . 
this book on tlie 'I’rayers and imprecations in the interest of Brahmans’ 
fSsG) fixes pretty definitely the lower limit in the relative chronology of the 
Atharvan diaskeu.asis: it belongs to an advanced period of Bnhmanlcal literary 
activity; there is nothing in the way of assuming that the compos’lion 



II. LnTERATURU.GESCHiCTiTtu IB. Aiharva-Veda AND GorvriiA-IjRAHMAy\. 


of such texts as AK. and SB. preceded the redactions of the Atharyan Sarp- 
liitas'. The sparse geographical data of the AV., especially the mention of the 
n\ers Yamuna and Varanrivatl and the regiorrs of the Ahgas and Magadhas*^, 
point to an acquaintance with India far enough to tlie east and south-east 
to accommodate the scene of action of the Ilrahmana-texts. Among zoograpliic 
facts pointing in the same direction the most conspicuous is the Atharvan’s 
familiarity with the tiger, the inhabiwnt of the swampy forests of Bengal, 
perhaps more narroNNly the region about Benares'^. The inevitable and 
doubtless prehistoric (Indo-Iranian) distinction, on tlie one liand, between priests, 
cfiieftains, and free commoners, aff three drya^ and the aborigt'naf .servrfor- 
class {dasyu, iudra) lias advanced in the AV., so that the line is drawn sharply 
not only between the two {arya and STulrd) but also between the first three, 
brafnnana, ksairi\a and vaiiya'^. The knowledge of anatomj, human and 
animal, has advanced nearly if not quite so far as in the Brahmanical accounts 
of the aStaimifia and piiruvitmai/ta'J. The hymn tr. 7 which deifies the 
leavings of the porrhige {uc/kitfa) is not only full of hair-splitting scholastic 
theosophy, but also contains a long catalogue of llte srauta-s:tcutices and 
the technical forms of recitation of hymns and liturgic chant. The combination 
of the tno gods 'IVast'^r and Savitar and their assimilation to iVaj-lpati reflects 
the spirit of the Drihrnanas (see s. sC. i ; 3. 8. a; 7. 1 7. 4)- In another direction 
tlie AV reiclies an advanced penoU of literary activity, namely in the marked 
development of expiatory hymns {piayaieilla)', the entire tract of hymns, 
.W. 6 no- 121, deals with sm ipApa, tnas, kUbna, etc.) very much in the 
same spirit as the ViJhllna-iexts and the Dharma-iexts. 'I'lius the chaiiter of 
this book on Txpiation of sin and defilement’ (S 58) touches at many points 
the paragraph entitled 'Religious delinquencies’ in Joicy’s ‘Recht und Sitte’ 
p, iisff, as also the /A?/n/c///<i.chapters, Svidh. j.sff. Especially noteworthy 
are 6 117 — 119 vvliich apparently aim to salve the conscience for unpaid 
debts {.rnd), m part gambhng-debts; and 6. m and 113 which deal with 
the class of sins ‘wiped off’ by the gods from themselves upon the ‘scape- 
god’ Trita, sms like the marriage of a younger brother before the older, 
abonion, and murder of Brahmans This class of hymns together wiiii the 
closely related so-called kintnAnifa ”, TA. 2. 3—6, mark, as has hardly been 
noticed, the longest line of contact between mantra and dharma, and the 
matter Is of some importance in determining tlie relative chronology of the 
'.Mliarvan redaction .as very bie. Of couree dates, real dates, inVcdic literature 
prior to Bmldlia .and the Epic are still ‘pins set up only to be bowled down 
again’. So true is this that fortunately no knoiving attempts liave been made 
as jet to fix either the date of the composition of the individual hymns or 
the redacUon. Ihis much is clear that the chronology of each hymn, and 
each ^antiquarian and institutional theme, must be viewed from an -ever 
changing critical position, and vrith a particularly constant regard of the 
related facts of the whole Vedic tradition: to mass the testimony of the AV. 
at any one point, to speak, except for occasional convenience, of the period 
of the i\\., seems an even more pernicious error than the bundling together 
of the facts of the so-called ‘Rigvedic* period into one package, separate 
, from all the rest of the early Brahmanic antiquity. 

MvDiRsCnwAiwovsv v«. rrasihina».hTda, IS. I, l6 (Dfcsscs, Allaemcliic Ce- 
schichle acr riii'o«op}iie, »oI. I. part t, p. 50); SAyava. Introdncnor, to Iiis com- 
mentary on the Auzit-M, loJia (CACMAlTstransJalioa), p J29IT; Cou'JSOOKi, 
toh I, p 13, ^{T; PoiiLis, Das alle InJkn, ^ot. 1 , ^ tsS; l.AstJs, 
indische .\iterthjm«kufi le, fot f, p. 523; KoTu, Zur I ittcratur uni Oestliiclilc 4 cs 
, E.-t • 3 ?^ «■ Ahhanltang ulMr 4ett AHiarra-Vcda {T6Iiin"<.n Der 

Athanra.VcJi to Kaschmir (T«biii~eB |8J5); AUx JlCliHt, IlA-sU p.44'ifL; Chips 



I The Ati!arva-Vet)a in General. — B. Hi^roRicAL Character. 


5 


from a Gcrmin Workshop, vol.I, p. gff.; Wrots, !'?• I, 2S9, 294 fT,; XllI, 33lff.; 
Indhche I ifcntur;;esc 5 iichlc*, p II, i6lir.; WhITNPY, JAOS. IV. 254; 01 S, I, 
p. iSff.; .Sin^krit Grammir, p xvi; I umvin, Her Ur^-Vedt, vol. Ill, p 28, 341IT.; 

V. FciiRornFR, Intlicn’.^ Ijicratur nnd Cnltur, p. i7o'iT j Kafci, The Ris*Veda 
(.\RRonsMir)!*s irinOaJion), p. 4, 97; R. T. 11 . GKirfmt, of the Atharva- 

^cda (translation), in the preface; IIardV, 15 ic Vcdisch brahmanisclie I’eriode, 
.p. 190 ff.; OLnrvnERG, Die Religion des Veda, p. t 7 ff.; IlorKiN's, Religions of 
India, p. iJifT.; litoosrriFLn, Ifymns of (iie Ath-irvaseda, Sf)C.XIir, Introduction! 
Anonymus, The Alharva-Veda dcscnbcil, Ixindon and Madras 1897 (missionary tract). 

» Took 16 contains, honeser, some passages vhiclj are written in cadciiced 
prose from which it is possible to extract at least single metrical pidas. This is 
true of much other prose material in the AVT ^as .also in the VV.), so that it is 
not Vnfrequently difficult to decide whether a gisen hymn or stansa is prose or 
poetry: prose and loose aerse are mixed up in the AV'. to an cstent not quite 
reached in any other class of Ycdic writings. Cji. A\iiitnfv, Index Verborum, 
p. 5 - — * ^ce hetow, S 3 S. — 3 Relow, $19.-4 Helow, $ g .ami 33, and more 
fully, Slir. XI.H, p, ivtH, nnd Lxvff. — 5 Sec $ Sand 9 — • ° WrcFR, IS. I, 295; 
Oinina nnd I’ortcnla, p. 347; \Vl-», p. 164; WmxM v, OI-S. I, 18. — 7 SUE. Xldl, 
p. XXr and xxxiif. — » The connection of othan-an with fire is Indo Iranian 
(Avestan oMretew); cp. Spipcfl, nnnische AUertUumsktmdc, III,f.S 59 ! Die arische 
renodc,' p 233; JlMO, Dssays on the Parsis, p. 2S0, 294; Ccjgir, Civihralien of 
the Ilasiern Iranians, sol. 11 , |».4S(I.; and many other writers. Halo’s attempt to 
show that the Avesta is acquainted with someAtharsan collection under the name 
itfi'at only historical interest: see, llralima ond,die Jlrahmancn, p. 43 if 5 

J.ss.ays, p. 182. — 9 Cm KNaurR, lestgruss an IloTli, p, 64115 Wintprmiz, 
The Mantrapiiha of the Apastambins, p xita’. — AirsLiirRT Kinix, KZ. XIU, 
P- 49 - 74 ! t !3 — 157 ! SJIL. XLII, p. 313, 3S6, 454 * ‘'TFSZLER, Otier die Sitte, 
Appendix to his translation of AG.; lIiLLriiRSMTr, RiiuaM.ilteratur, p. 2, — »« See 
S 59 > — “ See $. it. it; 6. 13. 1 , 114 1, n. 1. S3, 12. 3. 3S; 4. 23; 19. 62. 
Cp. /.iMMtR, p. 205 ff.; sue XIJI, Index, under, ‘Brahman-priests’. — *3 IS X, 
1—160. — «4 ZtMMFR, p. 5, 20, 31; Ihc interpretation of laranhatt is, howeier, 
quite ilouhtfuJj SUE. .Mil, p 376 — *5 Ziijmfr, p 79. — 16 See, 5. J?. 9; 
6. 13 i; 7. 103. t; 12. $. 46, 15 8 1 ff.. 19- 32. 8, 62. i. — »7 See, 9 6 anti 7; 
to. 2, etc. — •* See RtooMFirm, ( onuibutions Seventh Senes. AJPh. XVII, 
430 ff.; Jouv, p. 1J6. — »!> .Sec $ 58, note 3 


B, inSTORICAL CriARACTER OF THC ATHARVAN, AND ITS 
RELATION TO THE HOUSE-LOOKS. 

S 5. The mutual reLations ol'theAV. and the Grhya*sutras, and 
their historical value. — Ancient India, as is well known, h.as no history in 
the orcltnary sense, no secular history In hen thereof the history of its religion 
and the history of its institutions are nnnvaled among the peoples of olden times 
in their continuity and completeness. Especially the obscurer and more sluggish 
ettfrenCs of ordinary d itiy hfe, a liio«ledge of which /s so /mporlcint for the 
true estimate of a people, are Ind bue to Oie eye of the luston.an by an 
altogether unusual kind of tnidiUon 'Ve arc not left to reconstruct a picture 
of the private hfe of the Vedic Hindu from scattered, incidental statements 
of their ancient literature alone Valuable as such statements are, more trustworthy 
perhaps, as fir .as they go, than intentional descriptions, they are yet certain 
to be fragmentary, and to yield but .a hazy outlme of the subject In addition 
to such incidental statements Vedic literature has preserved native systematic 
tre.ntises on home-life vvliich have searched out and stated systematically a 
well defined body of f.icts connectetl with the every-day existence of the 
individual and the family. These are the Grhya-sutras, or house-books, composed 
as formal treatises at a comparatively late Vedic period*, but reporting 
practices and pr.ayers of great antiquity'. This class of texts owe their 
existence to the religious view which the Hindus were led to take of tlie 
entire course of their lives. In its even daily course, as well as in its cruci.al 
moments, the life of the Hindu is surrounded by a plethora of religious forms; 



6 n. I-ITTERATUR V. Gj^CHICHTC. I B. AtHARVA-VeDA AND GOPATIIA- BrAiIMAN A^ 

it js, as It were, sacramental throughout. Tire beliefs of the folk did not 
forever flow in a separate undercurrent beneath the open-air religion, scorned 
by the latter as superstition, but they were at an early time imbedded \\itlnn 
the religion. The Grhya-sutras, as in a measure also the Si'auta-sutras^, 
resulted from a* codification of popular beliefs undertaken by the Brahmans 
at a time when these beliefs had been completely harmonized vWtJi the 
Brahmanical order of things, as well as with the divine law and tlie personal 
needs and demands of tiie gods. 

It IS not to be doubted that the simple practices which are at tlie bottom 
of the sj-stematic house-books were at all times accompanied by prayers to 
such gods, genii, and demons as peopled the fancy of the simple folk-*. To 
be sure the Gfhya-sritras in their finished form are later redactorial products 
of schools of Vedic learning, and as such participate to a large evtent in the 
entire stock of hymns, stanzas, and liturgic prayers of their particular school 
vvitliout careful regard to the original purpose for which these hymns, stanzas, 
etc., were composed*. In other w'oids, as the practice of home-rites passed 
more and more into the hands of the Brahmans, the latter did not stint tiiera 
their spiritual learning, they decked out the practices witij mantras often 
ludicrously misapplied to the situation. \\'’e may also suppose that many 
ancient prayers were remodelled by the Brahmans to accord better with their 
own religious ideas and htenary lubits. Vet it ts impossible to believe lliat 
marnage-ceremony, burial-rite, medical clwrm, exorcism .and tlie like can ever 
have been carried on without prayer, and it will be ultimately a distinct task 
of Vedic study to find out what are the original grhya-mantras and grliya- 
formulas \n distinction from the later importations. Such a body of prayers 
would be even more fit to be trusted as a report of early customs than the 
Sfitras themselves, they would cancel for themselves all suspicion that we are 
dealing with individual trumped up fancies. The prayers of the Grhif.vsiitras 
are either woven into the account of the practices themselves, or they are 
preserved as separate coiiections (inanfra-drd/tmafia, tnantra-pdiha)'. tlieSaiiv 
hitas of the AV. are, as it were, Mantra-pathas on a large scale, broader i« 
scope .and freer from school-influence than those of the house-books proper. 
We may expect to find m their hymns a picture of ilje priv.ate .antiquities of 
ancient India, painted on a large canv.iss with no particular clioice of favored 
subjects placed in the fore-ground; a picture such as cannot be furnished by 
the Grhya-sutras, because they limit themselves eclectically to good or pious 
subjects in the main 'Ihe light and the shadows, the good and the evil in 
the life of this ancient people must appear in due proportion. 

SO. Scope of the AV. as a record of ancient life.' — This expectation 
the hymns of the AV. fulfil quite amply'. Siipporteil by' its own ritual book, 
the Sutra of K.au'iika, which reports the practices connected with tliese hymn? 
m a way that is on the whole tnistworthy, the AV. furnishes an almost com- 
plete picture of the ordinary life of the Vedic Hindu. The AV. deaU with 
the themes of the house-books proper and is, of course, .supjilernented by 
these interesting and important treatises, 'fhe life of the average .\rya from 
the cradle to the fimeral-pyie is depicted by the AV. with greater freedom 
and completeness than in the house-books; the difTcrence, as I have said 
before, is that the AV. is not at all squeamish in the choice of its lliemes, 
and exhibits the ordinary Hindu not only in his aspect of devout and virtuous 
adherent of the Brahmanic gods, and perfonner of pious practices, but aUo 
as the natural semi-civilized man: rapacious, demon and fear-ridden, hateful, 
lustful, addicted to sorcery. The variety of practices and beliefs connected 
with house and home, field ami cattle, love and maniage, trade ami village- 



I. Thi; ATirARVA-Vtn v w Gcss kal. — C The Names ot-xitr. AxifARVA-VEDA. 


7 


politics, is also far greater m the AV. than in the house-books. But it con- 
tains. in addition much that ts »*antm;r or barel/ touched upon in the Grhya* 
sutras. The anal) sis of the AY. which forms the third part of this work e\- 
hihits this difference even in the headings of its separate paragraphs. Tims 
the medical charms (§ 50) present a complete picture of primitive Hindu 
medicine, a theme Uiat is hardly indicated in any other department ofVedic 
literature. The house-books Jiave nothing that corresponds to the tlieine, 
‘Prayers and imprecations in the interest 'of Brahmans’ (S56); very little that 
corresponvls to the 'Royal rite->’ fSSS): these two chapters hold the earliest 
fmrly systematic account of the t«o superior castes, the Brahmans and the 
K?alriyas. The ‘Women’s rites’ (S S5)> the ‘Ch.arms to secure harmony, in- 
fluence in the village-assembly' (S 54), and many other less prominent themes 
though not entirely absent in the house-books, are also clnracteriitically 
Atlnrvan. It may be said fairly that the house-books are excerpts from the 
broad sphere of life with all its realities, excerpts which were begun in a 
certain mood that governed the choice of subjects, and .that this choice 
became traditional in all non-Atharvanic Vedic schools. 1 Ims all GrhyA-sQtras 
present in the main the same selections, their many differences notwith- 
standing*: the circle or endless chain of human existence: birth, confirm-ition, 
Ilrihman discipfehoocl, arrival at man’s estate, marriage, Iioiiseholdership and 
again birth, etc, with many intermetUate rites. Other matters are treated only 
incidentally and in a subsidiary way. Not only are the Grbja-sGtras restricted to 
the more pious and orderly .aspects of daily life, but they deal aUo in the m.ain 
with those practices whicli are of a regular, permanent, or periodic character 
— as the theologians call them — whereas the AV. is engaged 

largely with occ.asional and optional practices (nniwiyMi?, ^a/nja) To this 
the AV. owes its flavor of romance and unexpectedness. As the reader 
works his v»ay hymn by hjmn through the Atlnrvan coDeetJons, arranged 
with a degree of gauchene hardly to be excelled s he is surprised .and 
bevvilderevl by the number and variety of subject-., bv the insistent way in 
which the obscurer relations and emotions oi human life are brought to the 
surface and exploited. And there is left finally the definite impression that 
llie precious litemry diligence of the Hindus his m this instance preserved 
a tlocumeut of priceless value for the institutional history of early India as 
well as the ethnological history of the human race, that in this respect the 
•W. i-, a document as precious as is the R\ . on the side of mythology and 
formal priestly religion. 

> J’ce Oloemfk.., SIJI. AW, xuiff — * Note in tfii> connccfion, e. g, 
the wav in which Che I'roper noun ‘prescnlin- v cow to j^uesls’, in the 

KV„ hiv cnilnlnie.l in cvjcnini fotor, of the .i'T'*'*. fecepUon of 

111 honotcil uuest; see CoutribtiUonv wcvinth '-erics. -VJl'h. \\II,424 — j Uillf- 
DKIMU, liiriiit I-Iitcraiur, p. 1 ff — 4 Qurtc the opposUe view i- advocated by 
Oldixperi., 1.C, p. X- it has been cntKiied bv \M\TfRMT7, The vranUipIiKa of 
the itp.istim!)5ns, n. XLIV. — 5 Cp. K.A\ b v\, Johns lloj>l>ins University Circufarv, 
May, 1S90, vol.I\. nr. St, p.74, SHE. XUI. p XUUlT — 0 For 1 comprehensive 
view of the themes of the Crhvi sitra* -ce Olpfxber-.'s synopsis, SHE. X\X. 
p. 300— 307; for a description in detvil, lUiCFt.'tWnT. l.c., p.41 fT — ; See S 36 H. 

C. THR NAMUS OF THR ATIIARVA-VEDA AND THEIR MEANINGS'. 

\y 

S 7. The compound Atharvangtrasah and the meaning of its 
two members, .Vtbarvan and Angira^— "nie oldest name of the fourth 
Veda is the dvandva-phiral a/Aarhlfl^rasat^iW. 10. 7. 20), the name found 
at the head of the manuscripts of the Saunakiya-Samhitl. More ov less 
seconiLiry and irrejuLar forms and derivatives, such as occur in the expressions 



8 II. IvlTTCKAlUn U. GeSCHICIITE. Jl5. ATIIARVA-VlDA and GOPATirA'BR.A»'f-E^A. 

n//mn’Hrirasi Malubh. 3.303.20-17066*; luMam c(/,an.h}sir»sej 

Yrijn. J, 312; li/jam athnn-afij^irasm, Maliabli S. 40. 33-® t8;S; ainarva- 
finraslh Srut'th, Manu 1 1.33; atharvan^ratani iafpayimty ] 5 .iucili. Dli. 2. 5. 9 - M. 
are of ).ater gro\Mb. The name atharvan and Us derivatives are emploved 
crowinely throughout the literature, whereas the name by itself occurs 

but in a single Vetlic passage, TS. 7. 5. JJ. 2 ®= Kaihaka Asvamedhagrantha 
{(tii^rolhyah rcaJut), as the designation of the fourth Veda 3 . Quite frequently, 
however, the inembers of the compound atharvSfi^irasali are separated so 
that each is mentioned by itself, but alft'a)s in more or less close vicinity to 
one another, showing that the Atharvans and Ahgirases bad a separate e-vlstence, 
and tiiat the AV’. consists of these two component parts In fact, in a con- 
siderable range of the literature especially of older times the term athanan 
refers to the auspicious practices of the V''eda, the bhesitjant (AV. ri. 6. 14), 
those parts of the Veda which are recognized {))’ the Atharvan ritual and the 
orthodov Brahmanical writings as ianta, ‘hoi/, and fausHka, 'auspicious’; the 
term aii^iras refers to the hostile sorcer)’ practices .of the Veda, tlie yalu (SB. 
10- 5. 3. 20), or abbiedrn, which is terrible (g/wra). 

This view of the double character of the AV. is expressed most .plainly^ 
and familiarly in the Gopathabrahmana. 'fhus i. a. 21 and i. 5* 

^ajufi idmut idute 'tha ghorc', in the last-named case GB. substitutes these 
five Vedas for the trayi in the corresponding passage, SB. 12. 3. 3. 2, upon 
which GD. IS based, 'i'liese two Atharvanic Vedas assume such reality in the 
mind of the author of GB. as to be furnished each with an independent 
lyahrii, to match bhUr, h/iuvah, si’alt of the irayl, namely, o»i for the Atharvan 
« idnta, janat for the Angiras ■=• ghora: Gl>. i. 2. 24 and 1.3. 3. In 1. 3. 3 
the vyah>tis of the t)a)l are sandwiched in between oii and janat for protection 
(gup', see GB. 1. 1. 13) Cp also 1. r. 5 , 8 and j. 3. 4. In the ritual practices, 
Vait. 5. 10, GB. I. 2. 18 the same distinction is maintained in behalf of two 
classes of plants, one of which is described as bdu/a, or Stban-ana", ilie other, 
used m hostile sorcerj, as duprasa. The latter word has assumed in the 
K.au^ika the meaning of Abfitedrila or gbora, and the fifth Kalpa of the AY. 
goes by the names Anglrasa-kalpa, Abhicara-kalpa, and ^’idIl^tna-kalpx The 
words aitgirasa « dbhicdnkct, and pra/jd/igtrasa as referring to ‘counter-^ 
witchcraft’ {prutycMiUarana) are also used In Vidhana-tevts outside of the AV.,' 
in fact as designations of such texts, e. g. Rig-vidhana 4. 6. 4«; with this 
pejorative use of the word we may perhaps also connect the fact that the 
Piiranas count the Atigirasa-Veda as one of the four Vedas of the Parsis 
(Maga), the other three, Vada, Visvavada, and Vidut, also conveying thinly 
veiled 'contempt for the religious books of a foreign religion ^ \Vhat is even 
more significant, the distinction between Atharvana-Veda and Angirasa-Vedi 
is also recognized by the non-Atharvanic Br.vlimanas and Sutras, and also 
associated by them in explicit, terms respectively with Sdnla and ghora. At 
SB 13 4 - 3 . 3 fi"; AS. 10.7. iff.; SS i6.2.9ff, on the occasion of the pdripta\a^ 
at the horse-sacrifice, sections from these two Vedas are recited: AS. andSS. 
specify that a bheKajam be recited from the Atharvana-Veda, ^ghoiaui 

(abhicdrif:am) from the Angirasa-Veda. Cp, also PB. 12. 9. 10; i6. 10. 10, and 
the names of apocryphal sages and, divinities like Bhisaj Atharvapa, in con- 
trast with Ghora Angirasa, as also Satpyu Atharvapa .and Sinti, the wife of 
Atharvan . I’ovsibly tiie assumed inferiority of the Angiras in the Brahmana- 
legends of the contests between the Adityas and Angiras also points to the 
uncannj, devilish character of the latter, and may be derived from the 
same sphere of conceptions; the Angiras regularly appear as vanquished 
victims, similar to the Asuras in their struggles with the Devash 



I. The Atharva-Vcda in GrNLRAi-.—C. The Names of the Atjiarva-Vlda. p 

The AV. Sarjihit.1 marks the same distinctfon very clearly. At 11.6.14 
four Yedic manlra-categories are indicated by the expressions rcah, samani, 
l/ifKajtl, yajum;i] here the choice , of the word bhe;ajd is eclectic and 
one-sided. Its precise complement is Sll 10, 5. a. 20, where and the 
ydiuvidaft are placed b) the side of the three Vedas and tlieir representative 
priests. That bhesaja and yatu are complements of one another appears 
from AV.6.13.3, namns te (sc. mrtyoK) ^dtuHkdnd’hyo^ namas te bhesajibhyah. 
The bhcsaja ofAV.ii.6.14 and the of the SO. passage make up together 
what IS embraced in the n.ame nt^/jrpa/^irasa/i (AV.id.^.so). The Sanihit.'i 
also associates inarkeiliy the term dn^rasa with aggressive sorcery and the 
pr.actice of spells {krtya]. Thus krtyd, ihii^irasVy, prattcina an^i- 

rasali ... praHcVt krtyd dlityd ‘mun htyakito jahi) cp. aUo 12. 5. 52, and 
^•4 5- 3 ='1^V. 10. 164.4. the distinction between Atharvanic and Ahgir.abic 
plants appears also in ii. 4. j6 (cp. S. 7. 17), prob-ibly in the same sense as 
in the Atharvan ritual, i. e. in the sense, respectively, of ‘holj’ and ‘witchcraft’ 
phants. Finally the late Parisi>{a h>mns, AV. 19. 22 and 23, repe.ifed in the 
Utt.\mapatala, Ath. Tarli. 46. 9 and to, deal with and state subdivisions of 
^ dnpitasa and (tthanwia te.\ts, each separately^ cp. GB. i. 1. 5, 8, and 1. 3. 4. 

S S. Cause of tlie distinction between Atharv.an .and Angir.as — 
As regards the chronology and cause of this differentiation of athan-an and 
aAsirat the te.xts offer but .sc.mt information. 1 he association of botli names 
(and later of the name bhrpu also) with the texts and practices of the fourth 
Veda may be sought in their char-icier ofmjthic fire-pnests, or fire-churners ; 
the liomely practices of i)ie AV. may have been »i clwrge of human fire- 
priests in distinction from som.vpnesis*. As regards the terrible aspect of the 
Angir.xs as compared with the Atharv.ans, we in.iy point to RV'. 10. loS. 10, 
where SaranU threatens the I’anU wuh the aupttasab ... s/ioralt. .More im- 
portant is the Angirasic character of lirhasiMU, the divine I’urohita. m Kaus. 
135. 9 Brliavp-ati Angir.asa .api>ears as the represenuiiv e, or the divinity of 
sorcery; in tlie Mali^bh. he i> frequently callevl In Ins 

'function of body-priest of the god-, he exercl^e^ ag.imst hostile powers those 
fierce qualities which arc Uler reg.xrded as .\ngir.isic in the broader sense, cp. 
RV. 10. 164.4-= AV.0.45 3. where Brhaspati tigures as Pr-aticina Back-hurler’) 
.\ng)T.isa. Still less obvious .ire the rea-'ous win the word should be ' 

particuhrl) assoeuxted with santa .iml perhap-. this was accomplished 

by simply cantmsCing it with an^ira^, after the Utter had .tssumed its sinister 
sense'’. In anj case at an early tune the terms in the sense of 

‘holy charms’, ami arf^tninrA ifi the scn-.e of ‘wftc'/fcr.ift ch-irms'. jotn^i t/?e 
more distinctively hieratic terms /nM, Mt/um i and saiiunn-, as characteristic 
types of Brahmanic.al liter.ary perlorm am es. But this distinction w. as at a later 
period .tgain .aLantloned, m die end the-naine alkanan and itj deriv.ati\es 
Kathcinatuil}, atharv(ii!diu,(iihan<tn>ib,athar 7 .anik(x, atiuinami, athanana, and, 
timlly, athan^i-icia)^' prevail as designations of the chirms and practices of 
the fourth Veda, without reference to their suongly diversified character. 

$9- The terms Bhrgvangirasah. Brahmaveda, and the designa- 
tions of Ath.irv.an priests. — Two other designations of the AV. dilfer from 
the preceding in that they are tlie product of a later .-Vtharv ante literary age, 
neither of them are found in the Samhit.!, both are almost wholly restneted 
to the ritual texts of the Atharvan itself. Tlvey are the names 
and briibr'iiT-zY/j- 'Ihe term bk/^a/^irasaA, as far as is known, occurs only* 
in Atharvan texts. '1 hough Mrya in this compound lakes the place of uMi/rort, 
the terms bbr^'atab or bZ/rpuzi'da do not occur, except that the Cuhk.l-Up. 1 1 
designates the Ath.arv.in collection of mantras as b.iryvj is.'arti (schol, bbdrpjva- 



lo II. LiiTFRAiUR u. GcscmcuTF. 1 B. Atharva-V cda AND Gopatha-Brahmana. 

sranl/tdfj). The term bhrgvai'igtras, almost always in the compound b/irgv- 
ailfirovtd, is the favorite designation of the AV. in the Atharvan ritiml texts; 
It makes a show, in fact, of crowding out designations based upon the stem 
al/tarvan'K And there is an indefinable tendency to magnify the importance 
of the term bhrgu at the expense of the others, as when the cosmogony GB. 
I. I. 3 creates Bhrgu before Athars'an; or when GB. i. 2. 22 says (hat the 
Atharvans and Ahgiras are the eyes of Bhrgu; or when the Culika-Up. 10 
says that the Bhrgus are foremost among the Atharvans {atharvduo bhr^iitla- 
inahy. if this is taken seriously at all it reflects ratiier the result than the 
cause of the substitution of the name bhrsu for athanan. There is indeeti 
no valid reason why the term bh^u has succeeded in encroaching so far upon 
the term atharvan. 'lire following may, how'ever, be remarked. Tiie three 
words atharvan, ahgiras, and bhgu are in general eq^uivalent, or closely 
related mythic names, concerned with the production, or the service of the 
fire. Occasionally in the mantras (RV. 10. 14.6) they are found all together, 
or bhrgu is found in company with athanan (RV.io.pz.io), or w'ith 
(RV. 8. 43 13). This inter-relation continues in the Vajus and Bralimana- 
texts'* in sucii a way that the juxtaposition of bhrgu arid aiigiras becomes 
exceedingly freciuent, broaching on the complete synonymy reached in SB. 
4. s* I, where the sdge Cyavana is designated either as a Bhtrgava, or as 
an .\ngirasa. Perhaps the frequency of this collocation suggested to the 
Atharsasedins a mode of freshening up the more trite compound athani' 
ngirasab', of any more conscious reason for the preference of the word bhrgti 
tlie texts show no trace. 

The term brahma'Vcda whose drigm is discussed below (% 33) likewise 
belongs to the sphere of llie Atharvan ritual. Outside of the Atharvan there 
IS but a single unquestionable occurrence, SG.1.16.3. Even in the Atharvan 
Upanisads the term is wanting, curiously enough The earliest occurrences, 
aside from SO., are Vai't. 1. 1 ; GB. i. i. 22; 2. 16, 19; 5. 15, ,19; e. 2. 6. The 
word IS common la the ParKistas'*. The supposition that SB. 148.14.1—4 
*= Bfh. Up. 5. 13. I — 4 with its series, ullham j-h), ,\o/uh, sdma, ksatratn, 
alludes to the Atharvan as the Veda of the Kjatriyas Is at present no more 
likely than when it w'as advanced by the author, SHE. XLIl, j). xxvfT. Cp. 
also Weinr, Ver2. II, p. 1203. Tlic KV. rratixakhya 16.51 (55) mentions 
.aVedic book or colleclion by the name of suh/u>a/a, ‘collection of remcdi.al 
charms’, probably Only another w.-iy of saying bhe^ajmi, 1. c. the aiispicioiis 
Atharvan charms; cp. the t.\xisz%%vm saubhesajam thandah, GB. X. 5, 23 (p. 85, 
bottom). • Curious is Ai-mniNi’s statement (India, Saciiau's translation, vohJ, 
p. 159) that the AY. does not consist of the same compositions as the Rik 
and Yajus, but of a third kind called bhara ‘song of praise’ (RV.). 

Designations of prie^ts devoted to the AV. are wanting in the Saqiliitus, 
unles-, the terms hhrsu and dhgirasa, AV. 5. 19. 1, s are intended a.s such. 
'Hie Atharvan ritual texts use brahman and hhrgiahgirn'id, in .iddilion to 
derivalhes from the stem athanan. Very late'js the use of the baliuvrJhis 
faricakal/a faucahalfin, ‘one who practices with the fi%e Kalpas of the 
AV.’; MahabK ... 342. 9, — 1325S; 13. .4. 309 - 90,1 Ma)uljhl5ra (IS. 
Xlir. 455); and as titles of scribes of Atharvan ritual texts’k 'Whether the word 
vidtrkat^ika in the M.xhabhjs)a bears any relation to the AY. is still an tin- 
settled point; See Kaus. Inirod- p. iaiil 


' The jnescnt chapter i* an aWr.xct of the essay on this subject, i^lir Xt 11 
.it-XXMii, with certain not unimportant corrohoratiie a-tauional deiaih lliat 
come JO hand since the dale of that puUiMtion. Cp. nuirnFAVDT, Ritual, 
ati-f, p. 109. — a Itouiiar aftm'ai’in/ri Iraiim-, Calctlla, however, 



I. 'liic Aiiiarva'Vkoa in Gwekai. — • D. Tiik: Scnoots of iiin A.-V. 1 1 

athonasirau srut.iui. — i Ijiler this designtUon crops out iti graramatlcal wriiines, 
in tlic sHpcrscfipfton of Ath. lYAfii, anil in the Mahaljhl«\a to I'anini 5. 2.37 feiv. 
K Mn. 43 ,' 5 )- — ■> llLooNinriti, J\OS. XI. SS;^; XLII, p xviiifT. — s Cp. 
WiisoN ill Klinwii’s Mcmoirc sur ritxk, p. 394; WmiR, IS. 1 , 292, note; WI-* 
l 6 t, note. — 6 Slii:. XUI, p. NXI. ~ 7 Cp. Wtiirre, Is. I. 291 ff.; and below. 
S 52. note 3. — 8 Cp ICMMrt, trttgru-.s an Uoth, p. 6411.-9 A da.h of 
popular cljmology may have btlpcil the process s a-jiana>i 'nai injiirjiig’; Ihirv 
in tlie^scnsc of ‘injure’, DUatupUh-x 15. 62, and perhaps MS. 2. 10. l; also the 

roots .and tihu/v with sinnlar tneaiiiRgs. — »» Sb’II. XLIf, p. vxv. »' hee 

KauC 63. 3; 9j. 3, 4 {cp. 137. 25; 139. b)i Vait. I. S; Git. I. 1. 28, 39: 2 9, iS 
(end); 3. t, 2, 4. The term is familiar in the ratiMsias ami in the AV. Amil.ra- 
inaoU cp- WruLR, Omiua und I'oitenta, p. 346 ff.; Wfors, Vcr^. II. .S9ff.; SHC. 
-Xr-tf, p. XWiff. — iJ See the passages cited XLII, p XKVit, note. — See 

ih. p, N'tviii, note, — n Sec Wjblk, Yen. I|, SSff. — is SHF- M.II, p xwiii; 
Wrnrn, Verz. II. 96 (cp. aKo 919 ami 921) 

D. 'I’lIC SCIIOOIii OF -nu: ATIIAkVA-Vj;D.\^ 

S 10. Ch.ir.icter .and sources of the reports on tlie schools of 
the AV. — Ilintlii tradition has fixed upon the number nine as expressing the 
extent to which the Atharv.anic collections of hymns, or their emplojment in 
the hands of the Atharvanic practitioners was diversified by diderences of 
tre.atment in Atharvanic schooU eara/ja, bhciia). Numerical statements 

of this sort are apt to be apocryphal; and the differences wlncli represent to 
tlie Hindu mind sufficient reason for positing an independent iiikM vary 
greatly in scope and importance. They m.ay be due to genuine differences 
in the extent and arr.angement of the hyaim-coUections themselves; to differ* 
ences of ritualistic employment of one and the s.ame hymn-collection {iiitra' 
SAkhit)) to the existence of independent Upankads among the votaries of 
the same /r«//*producis m all other respects, or to other more trivial points, 
at times of great obscurity ‘. These dilferences great and small are lumped 
together in the inaditioml Atharvanic count of nine s.'ikh is, without perspective 
or sense of proportion; their analysis, moreover, is rendered somewhat im* 
certain owing to the modulations which the mimes of the sfikhls have been 
subjected to m the course 0/ time, nwde and outMile of the Atlurvan, .ind 
even more by the portentous amount of blundering report on the part of the 
>cribes unacquainted with these mines. 

'ihe reports on the Atharv-in sakhls .ire from the following sources: 

1. The two Caran.uyuh.is one. counted as the lifth Ikirisista of the White 
A'.ijur-Yed.i, registers the schools of the \\ m chapter one, another, figuring 
as the {9’^ rarisjst.1 of the AV , Ireils the s.ame subject in briefer form. — 

2. IncitlenUl mention in I’anim, the Mah»bhas).i, and other grammitic.il liter.i' 

ture. — j^te ovcr-svstematic reiwrts of the t’ur.vnas, and other 

hte hter.Uiire, e. g. the S-upskaragmapiti of Rimikrsna. — 4. Incidental 
mention throughout the literature ol the iVtharvan, to which miy be added 
Say.ui.is list ot the s. 1 khas in the introduction to his commentiry to the AV., 
j), 25’. — Sl).ni.i’s st.itement coincides with that of the AV. C.ir.inavyuh.i, 
and it would seem that these two authorities present .1 correct list of the 
sTklus .IS known in their day: Ihe different versions of other texts are due 
to blunders, and more or less consdous milformalions and additions on the 
part of writers f.irther removed from the sphere of the Atharv an. Accordingly 
the traditional nine iiklus are as follows: 

S II. Tlie nine snkhSs of the AV. — i. The PaippalnU (also, Taip- 
pil'uUka, Tilppal'idi, I’ippaUda, Taippala, Paippallyana, ^:c.), a patronymic 
tlerived from the name of a teacher Pippalldi. In the Atharvan hteraCure 
itself tliese mmes do not appear prior to the Parisistas and the Upani'adsJ, 



13 lll>rnn:uVKt' Gi-scmciiTt, ip.A-nuRVA'VEr*^ANi*Goi-ATiu-I5rXnM4iv'A,^ 

l.cinj; unknown even in Knav., Vait, and GIL 'Hie name occurc as the 
<!ciV'mtion of a ptotip of mantras which fipurc as an appcndis to the Na- 
ksam.iL3l(>3, nlienexer tlial teat figures as the first I’ln'-i'-la: these mantras 
are In fu't derhc.l from AVI**. Apam. AV. u). S^— SS >n the Sa-inaUja 
ate (lesipinteil as /ai//aliiJa-ns<tntriih at the end of Atli. I’arih 8. Ih'is is 
Mpnificanl'in the lipht of the close reUlion'hip of booV ly of AV. with AVI'. 
'Ihc so-called .\tfu ILtris. 34. 20, hepins with the praCiLa, 

iiifj! w deti (\utcAta 1. 0) which is in all jirohahiJity the openinp vcr.e 0/ 
the Kashmirian ijLhl. I’lirther .\tli J'aris. 2 . 3, 0; 2 j. jo; 24. >4/ 4t. Csi.ASri. 
Alinencji)}, p. 06, 107, 543!^, has rcconstmctetl a considerable pait of a 
I'.uppallda-srriddhakdlpa, and surmises that the school of the Paippalada is 
older than the Saunahiya. 'Ihc tradition of the Ath.irv.'in Upanisads ihstrihutcs 
them largely, and sery secondarily, among the two more imjiortant schools, 
the r'aiinaka and the I’aippaUda; one of the older UpantjatK, the J’rasna, is 
rep'darly and probably with good re.ison assigned to the I’aippaLlda*. Cjx 
al^o ilie .end of Garbha-Up. 'JJie llrahun-Up. opens with a conversation 
between Saiinaka and 1’ippalid.i. ‘llic name occurs also freiiuenlly in the 
colophons of Ailiarvanic writings, and K contained in all S)stematic reports 
of the s'lUrvs, Aiharvanic and otherwise*. 

3. The Tauda or Taudlyana, written frequently, Stauda ami S'taudXjana. 
Appears iti the literature itself only Ath. rarih 23. 3, d slandhiid tirasc tsf ’/f 
Vr ttaudiiyanmh s»irti\ (sa aramfi). The i.lLh.l-reports Jiave jiropagated this 
name with a brood of vanant-s, often of the most ignorant character, contri- 
buting nothing to the teal history of the names 

3. 'Ihe Mauda or Maudly.ana are mentioned several times .in the Pari* 

si?la-<. Espciiill), .an interesting passage. 2.4, declares that only Saunaka and* 
Paippalada pnests are iit to be i’urohitas, uliereas tlie kltigdon) uhose spiritual 
care is m the bands of priests of the Jalada or Manila schools rapidly goes 
to destruction*. OtherwKe the names occur Ath. I’arH. 23. 3 {vmida\ and 
24. 10 (J/m), and in all systematic accounts of the sakhus with the 

U'lual corruptions*’. 

4. The SaunaLTya or SaunaLln. The term Saunakin occurs by the side 
of Devad-arsm, Kaus. S5. 8. At Yait 43. 25 .a jv?«!?w.ff7-sacrir)ce is prescribed 
for such as desire to become adepts in sorcery {launaKa) etjiio 'l‘hicarakcimas\ a ) : 
the force and originality of this, testimony i.s somewhat impaired by the occurrence 
of a sitnikar statement KB. 4. 7 (cp SS. 3, id. 7), as we may not be sure that 
tiie R\'. llrahmaija has in m.md an Alharvan doctor. In Ath. I’addh. at Kau',. 
I. 6 tha I’aif. is cited as .Saunaklya-sStra; the title of the published rruti- 
^akhya of the AV. (\ulgata) is Saunakiya Catur.idhy.lyika*®; and the terms 
Saunaka, sauiiaki, and Jiiurjitkija .are common in the AV. rarisistas. The 
Atharvan Upaniyads also regard Saurialca as one of their great teachers 
(Munijaka 1.1.3; Brahmai); one of them appears under the name of Saunaka- 
Upani'srd (Sliavank, m A>QOcni.’s translation)”, and the commentators on 
these texts are apt to ascribe them for the most part either to the scliool of 
Saunaka or to tint of I’aippalada. Finally all the systematic reports of the 
bdkhiis present the name, though often corrupted almost beyond recognition”. 

5. Ihe Jjjaia. Ihe form of this name, which is obscured by the usual 

bliimlers in the systematic reports, may be considered as established on the 
strength of the uneqimocal statement Alli. Paris. 23.2, hahui/iiitra dtiuidirSair 
jajaUir UruviUtriki arani^Y, cp. Sayana, Introduction, p. 25. The 'Jrir/Ti; 
eponymous of the school seems to have been Jaiali, as reported b\ the Maha- 
bhljya’L 1 • 

6. Jbe j.ilada, mentioned in tlie ' polemic statement, Ath. I’atii. 3. 4, 



I. Thl Atharva-Veda ik Ginij^au — D. The Schools of 'riu. A.-V. 13 

reported above under Mauda. In addition jalada^hna, Ath. Paris. 23. 2, jala- 
dayanair ulastir tii (sc. orrtji/Vi) sedait 'ti tu bfidr^aiah, 

7. Ihe Brahmavada. Not found in Atharvan literature outside of die 
Caranavyuha; the outside reports of the sakhoa all present the name, mostly 
with variants more or less corrupt 

S.^lhe Devadatsa or Devadatsin. They occur Kauk S5. 7, in opposition 
to the Saunakin; in tlie gramrnatical gan.i iaunaka in the form da-adatianinah-, 
and in Ath. Paris. 23. 2, see abo\e under 5. The saklu lists in sphe of great 
corruption intend the same name. 

9. The Cjranavaidya. Mentioned by Kcsava at Kaus. 6. 37, and Ath. 
Paris. 23. a: caramiaid^air Janghe ca mauJend ’sjMgulani ca (length of the 
ara’tt). The sakhadlsts all ha\e the name. 

S 12. Estimate of the historical value of the sakhas, and their 
relation to the teachers of the Sutras. — 'Aside from a difference of 
opinion on the part of the Saumakin and De%adarsin m a trivial matter of 
measurements at Kaus. 55.7,8; and the polemic confronution of the Saun.akin 
and Paippaklda with the Mauda and J.iJada (above under 3), the only direct 
sutement as to the belongings of iheie sikhls h, that K.ausika’s Sfitra was 
Uied by four of them, the Sajin.rkJ)a, Jajala, Jakula, .and Braluiuvada ‘k With 
the exception of the names Saunaka (’km) and l)tt\adarsa (‘sin) neither Kaus, 
'I’ait., nor GB. include these i.lkh.l-n.ames .imong those of the teachers td «hom 
they base occasion to refer’s. The Rishis and teachers of GB. are largely 
non-.\th.trv.inic and uholly iimtsable for a reconstnu tion of Atharvan literary 
history, owing to the licentious way m which this late text has pilfered the 
entire Brahnwnic ItCe^at^In;'^ 7 'hose of Kau> .ind \’aiL, on the othe.r hand, 
have the true ring: Kairiika, Yman K.ausika, Bhagali, Mathara, Saun.\ka 
(K.tus. and Vait.), Gargja, P.Trthasr.iv.isa, Kankajana, I'arihabhr.Ha, jttikayana, 
Kaurupathi, Isuphlli and I)e\.ad.arsa (Kau>.) In addition Kaus. 140. iS and 
Vait. I. 3j 5. 13; 7. 16 mention ur.io.i// m the plural, both texts refer aUo 
to nameless autliorities (ofv, i/y a/iu/ii'' The absence of these names from 
the rikha-list of Itself stamps the latter as an exceedingly late evolution, 
(piite as late or later th.in the theory of the five Atharvanic Kalp.as. Just 
as it is impossible to explnn the elexaiion of the m^’gmUcant Santikalpa to 
a place among the five Kalpas by the side of the re.il Sutras of the .kV., 
whereas the enmaliy trivial Asunknipa must content itself with a place among 
the P.vriM>5as‘*, so it is impossible to s.iv why the Carana\aul)a, Manila, and 
Jakada figure as sikhas whereas the I{h.irgava who are mentioned with them, 
Ath. r.tns. 23. 2, .are exc/aifed from (his honor. SeteKi of f?ie 
are not patron) mics; they seem to point to professional phases of Atlniaanic 
life rather thin to school-difterences. Thus the Brahinavad.i seem to allude 
to the function of Allwrv.an iheologuns as Brahmans (tourth priests) .at the 
Sr.mta ceremonies’’, the C.lr.inavaidja to the profession of w.indenng medicine- 
men; and J.i!ada (‘water-giver') to the exceedingly common sorceries with 
water*’. An>how, the 'akha-hst is a medley of things of very different im- 
port.ance, and the tradition that the Kau^ is the book of rites {siVnhtid-xtJ/i!) 
of four of these sakhas indicates pretty dearly that these ‘school’-dilTerenccs 
did not extent in every case to the SainhiCts themselves, nor even to difierent 
Siitr.is of the same S.xmhlta. 

S 13. The two S.imhita-sakhas, the SaunakTya and the Paip- 
palada. — At ihU date there have been found no texts represendog either 
Sanihifi-sakhls, or Sutra-sakhls, in addition to the vulgate Simhita and the 
Kashmirian SamhitX Tint the vulgate, together wiUiKaui, \ait., and CD, 
belongs to the school of Saunaka may be regarded as certain. The Ak . Pr-lti- 



14 1 I. 141 TERA 11 'U U. GtSCinCnTt. tr^AlHAlUA-VrPA A!^D 


iaklna \)ears the title SaunaUju CaluradliySyikS; it is the ])honetic manual of 
the Milgate, and no other text”, 'flie Ath. I’addh., at Kaus. i. 6, desig;nates 
Valt. as the Saunaklya-sutra; the dependence of Vait. upon Kaus. is certain; 
the Kaus. is therefore also a Sutra of the Saunakin**. ihe tradition alluded 
to abo\e, that Kaiiv is cataitsu i&Uiosu iatinakadiiu sainhilavtdhih points to 
the same conclusion ^independently, as does also Kaus. S5. 7> S n here the 
SQtra sides A\itTi the Saunakin against the nevadarsi'n. Again the Kau^ 
the initial hjinn of the \ulgate {yt fri;aJ)fM) as ftinain (or, irisapi'iya/fi) sultam, 
and in general cites its hymns hy pratika, reproducing occasional orthogra-^ 
phicai or textual blunders: the school-correspondence of tlie tivo texts is quite 
complete ’■>. On the other hand Kaus. as irell as Vait. quote hymns from llie 
Kashmirian version in full they cannot therefore belong to 

the I’aippallda. Being themselves Saiinakiya, the vulgata is by this perfect 
correspondence also stamped as ^unabiya, as there is no evidence that this 
term uas the designation of a special Sutra-ilikha. 

Il.ardly less conclusive is the evidence that the Kashmirian Sarnbita 
belong', to the school of the PaippaUda, in accordance with the statements 
in the colophons of the Tubingen MS. of that Veda*^ The text is there 
described as li/Z/an ff/uV^d faippalada-iaklid. Tire evidence of the Parisista-s on 
this point is given aboxe under PaippaUda (p. is); especially significant is 
the fippaladi idnti^ana, AtK Paris. 34. ao (Kau§. 9. 7, note), doubtless so 
called because it begins with the pralika iavi no dct'T, the probable opening 
serse ofAVP. The fact that the name is found associated rather 
loosely with Atharvan productions in general*'^ is paralleled frequently in the 
history of the Vedic slkhis and is not sufficient to cast doubt upon this con* 
elusion. Neither JJrJtimana nor SQlras seem to have been preserved in this 


school, at least neither \’edic nor Atharvan literature Iiave the least tiling to 
say about any such works. 'Hte discovery of this s3kha in a single birch bark 
MS, was due to the mgeniilt) and the efforts of Rotir: the reasons which led 
this scholar to surmise its existence, a history of its discovery, and a brief 
comparison of it with the vulgate was published by him in a Tiibingen Pro- 
gramme in 1875, entitled ‘Der Alharv'.aveda in Kaschmir*; cp. the same 
author in the Aiti del IV. Congresso Internazionnle degli orienialisli, vol. 31, 
p. Sg — gC. A photographic reproduction of the Tiibingen MS. is proposed 
by the present author’^. The readings of ,the Paippalada texts in those parts 
of the Veda which correspond with the Saunaklya are to be presented in 
WiniNCv’s posthumous translation and ciitical apparatus of the Saunaklya’®. 
Connected p.issages of AVP. arc occasionally cited in full in Kaus. and Vait; 
the i’aippalada form ofAV.ii.s appears in a l^caka of the Katlnka school, 
described by von ScimorDER*’. Sayana m his commentary to the Saunakiya 
occasionally adopts readings from the Paippalltla^’. 

.S 14. Brief account of the PaippaUtda-sakha. — The AVI', like 
the Saunakiya is divided into so books, subdivided into anuvSkas and suktas; 
die latter, like the books themselves, are sometimes designated as knn<l.as. 
The relation of AVP, to the vulgata (represented in the seqirel by the rmm- 
bers in brackets) is as follows; the opening stanza of AVP, was in all proba- 
bility the stanra /am tio, dan (i. 1.6), as was surmibed by Roan, ii. lO; the 
opening stan/a of the Saunakiya, je tri$aptah, heads the second anuvaka of 
the first book ofAVP.s'. The pratikas of the remaining books are: s.arasam 
pnxoam (4. 7 - 1); d tvA gan (3.4-1); 4 . hiran^agarlhat ( 4 . 2 . 7 ). 
^pita^oba/ivai stnd/iujaidyat- C.tadiddsa (5.2.1); 7. suparms tvd (5.14 i)* 

itti, u ham-, shtmm arialt 13 . asms lahamau 



I. Tin: Atharva-Ykoa in Gcnkrau — E. BRirrSKncu or A. LiTiiUTunr. 15 

<*5. 32 . i); 14. H« (2. s. 5); 1$. sam^a^^ (iisb/Qah] 16. an/ahiya 

(S.i.i); 17. snlyavi brftad 1 tarn (is. 1. i); i8. saiycnchabfiifd 

’19. ih^o j7<y’<T (6. 1. 1); 20. iiATti 7 'd ye (7. 1. 1). 

Books 1—7 of the Saunaliya reappear for the most part hi AVI’.; S — 14 
almost completely. Of 15 there is only the beginning; lO and 17 appear 
for the most part. On tlie other hand the funeral-hymns, 2 >ook iS, .ire 
wanting entirely. Of the two supplementary hooks, 19 and 20, the latter 
Jnchuling the >{wr/.i/rt’-h>mns is w.inting in AVT., except those stan/as which 
are not hmtApn and are not borrowed from the K.V.J*; hook 19 with the 
e'ccejition of about 12 of its 72 hymns is scattered through the AVI’,, showing 
tint this supplement to the SaunakT>a is largely deri\ ed from its si-,ter-iikha. 
The arrangement of, the two Vedas is to a certain e\tent on jiamllel lines: 
books I — 5 of the Saunaklya are contained in i — 9 of AVP.; books S — 11 
in the large book 16; book 12 in 17; books 13, 14, rO, 17 tn iS: the one 
notable divergence concerns 6 and 7 of the Saunaklya: they appear in 19 
and 20 of AVP. Tlie \ariaiions between the two texts range all the way 
from inconsiderable varkints to complete change of sense. Perfect textual 
correspondence between parallel stanias ami hymns of the two sikhis is 
comparatively rare. eighth or one ninth of AVP. is original, being 

found neither in the SaunakTya nor in any other of the accessible collections 
of mantrasJh 

t Cp. OLorMURO, nic llymnen H«s Ri^-VeOa, p 430 ff. — » See, M\\ MOuir, 
IIASU P' 37>5 IS, I. 132, 296; III. 277— S, XIII. 434—5; Omlna unrt 

Portenta, p. 4 Ja — 35 WI»* p. 170; KXjrhORAi Ai amctra jh the iiilroiluetioa to the 
nopilln-r.nhmaivi, p. C>: Sxbdakalputnim-*. s. v tc'fi, RoTii, Der .\V. In Kasclimir, 
p.a4fr.; Stuo.v, Pcitr-ie^e riir Kemifuiss <lcr tedischcn ScJiuleit, p.Jf; lltoOMflfrp, 
J\OS. Xr. 377 — 8 ; Kauiika, Introduction, p \x\tfr. — i '^ee jxcol.’s Conconhnec, 
tinder and fj'ffittiJi. — 4 ''«« Koili, AV. in Kasclimir, p. to; the 

ntaiilna are printed in, BioOMFinn, S,\«n llvmns of the AV., AJI’h. \ II, 4SG— 7. 
— 5 See CeLrRROOv,r, Es'ays I*. 1* 93. Dits-ix, sechiig Upimsliid’s, pp', 531, 
530 . — ® Sec Kau 4 , Introd, p. xxxiti. — 7 See. ibid p. \x\iv. — 8 jVOS XI. 
37S note, — 0 Km 4 , tbid. — *•> Wmrxrv. JAtts. \ii. 333^. — «» Diossrs, 
Secltrig Upanisln<l’s, p. SGyff. — ” Kaii', ibid xxw — tj IS. Mil. 43$. — 
»4 Ititrodifction, p. 24, and Kcliv.t md Xthtn.ipaddliift m their rejptelire 

introductions — *s JA 0 '>. XI 3S4. O.opathAliTXhmxnx, 1 1st of proper names, at the 
beginning of the edition — » 6 * 4 ec below «o — •* ste the indexci, especially Kaiw. 
r- 37 I — ** fAO'' XI lySff., Kail' Introd.p \XXM. Mw.oiix, Asurikilpa, Ail’ll X. 
iGsff.icp below, S t6 — •ISccIhIow.S 33 — -«Cp ''ItF \I II, Imlt-x, under ‘waters’, 
and the ilctii', a/m suittm, ii’’hneii^<ifia, /Hiit. maAittnd, saoiMunaitAAii, mUS'i/, 
etc. iiiKauX., Index I?,p iSjff — *’ 1 he Kau^. follows some of the orthocpic pcsulianlies 
of the aiilgalc a> described bv AV. I rails . see Kau> , Introil , p wxvui — *» The GB. 

Is in turn dspcntleiit uwon Vait ami exhtbiK no TOctipcudcnt. school traits; see 
below S 6t. — »3 Kau> Introd. p wxviuff — >• Kius. 72, Oi; 107, 11%; \.ait. 
to. 17; 14. t; 24 I sec Rom, A\. in Kaschniir, p 23, G\Rrt, \ aitina ^utr.a 
(texlh p. in; J.\O.S \J. 377. — Roi«, ibid. (» 12. Kaus Intro<) {>. XY.xui. — 

JO <;o, e.g, the Vrasnx-Upamsad, because the t■.•lcUcT Pippaladi figiiri.* in it. sec 
above, p. 13; Kaui. il'id ; WtlirMV. Index seihortmi, p 2, note — *7 bio's 
Vol XX, p iSair. — U Sec, J.\0? W, p.cixxtii. — a* vee note ea, x.SinAor- 
r>R, I'lC TuMnger Katha Handsdinftcn, p 1411 (SWAW. iSoS, vol. OXXWU, 
part IVi cp. I'^. XMII. dt?'- Some stanras of .\\l*. .arc riuoted abo in Cl!.- see 
. RoTii, ibid p 23 — WmrNFx, lest;rmss an U a.Koth, p. 93. — J« Cp. K.au; 

Introd. p. \N\\ii. — 3* bee AVliirsFY, Index Vetborum, p 3; cp below $62 — 

• .'see, KoriJ, ibid. p. 15—20. 

11 BRIEF SKiri’ClI OF ATII,\RVj\XiC UTER.VrURE, 

§ 15. The S.aiphitas, Sutras, and Brahmana — The literature of 
the Atharvan comprises the tivo collections of hjmns connected by tradition 
respectively with the schools of Saunaka and r.iippallda*. Tlie latter exists 
only in a single hitherto unpublished sarphitl-manuscript without pada-patha 



i6 ILLnTiRATURU.GEScmciiic. ir.. Atharva-Vepa an p G orATJU-Bn^nMANA. 

or commentaTv; the former in nnmerous mss. of both s-itphila and pada- 
pfitln, except that no pada-text of the so-called i-w«/J/fl-h)mns has as yet 
come to li^'ht*; it probably does not exist at all. It has been edited by 
liOTfc and iViJiTNCY (Berlin 1855). The pada-patha of the Saunaklya is 
characterized in relation to other pada texts by UEiitR, IS. XIII. 6ff- It js 
particul.nrJy blundering in the corrupt book ro, but aUoJiable to serious error 
elsewhere; e.g, it divides sUnattnemi into siuv<ni nemt, instead o{ stuvoim oni 
(.;.28.5^), Qx yad^amam yad yamam, instead ai yady dmam {.Ci.xxft.V). 
A fragmentary commentary on the Saunakiya with an elaborate introduction, 
containing .a v.aluable sketch of die more important accessory Atharvan texts, 
.and an Alharvanic view- of the character and importance of the AV., is as 
usual ascribed to SSyana; llits commentary is non- in the course of^publica- 
tiont. The most important accessory text ofthe AV. is the Sutra ofKauSikab 
It comprises, along with a good deal of peculiar matter, the themes ordinarily 
treated in the Grhja-sutras, and, in addition, what may be called an Alharva- 
Sutra proper, or aVldhana-SQtra: cp. the frequent designation of the text as 
sawJnty-iiiihi''. The Kaus. belongs to the Saunakqa-school, or to a school 
deiiating from the Saunaklya only in minor matters; there is however a later 
tradition that it was used as the Sutra of four of the Alharvanic schools or 
Sikhas, the Saunaklya at the head*. In addition to the commentary ofDiirila, 
the Paddhati of Kesava, and other minor I'addhatis, tlie Kaus. seems also to 
have been commented upon byBhadra and Rudra^; judging from quotations 
of these writers (Kauv. p. 312, 338, and 352) their works are composed in 
Slokas of a late Smyti character. The Alharvan has .also a Sr.auta-sfltra, the 
antborlcss Vaitina-Shira which also belongs to the school of Saunaka; the 
published text contains eight adhy."»yas*: an appendi.x called YajSaprUy.a^citta' 
sStra, or VaiMyana, consists of six adh).a)as which aie a.s yef unedited^'. 
Shankar Pandit in the introduction to AV. 1 r. a mentions .a commentary on 
Vait, called Ak?epa by Somadityx The relation of Vatt. to Kaus. and the 
AV, Saqihit.i is quite peculiar as comp.ired with the inter-relation of the cor- 
responding, texts in otlier schools. As a rule the Grhya-sQtras are dependent 
upon the Stauta-satras; they refer to them familiarly, and do not describe a 
second time performances which have been treated in the Srauta-sutras. The 
two Atharvan Sutras reverse this relation: there is no point in which Kaus. 
depends upon Vait; on the other hand the dependence of Vait. upon Kaui. 
is .apparent at almost every step. The Vait treats the K.aui. as though it 
were a Sarphita; tlie Titu.al pmctices .ind independent inanlras of Kaui. are 
taken for granted, .and .alluded to as understood by and known to the sravta- 
priests practicing wit]iV.ait From (he point of view of the other Srauta-sutras the 
Vait. may be judged as follows: it is not the product of practices in irauta- 
ceremonies which have slowly and gradually developed in a certain high 
priestly school, but a somewhat conscious product, made at a time when the 
Alhatvavedins began to feci the need of a distincth e Srauta-manual to support 
their chiin that the AV. is a canonical Veda of independent and superior char- 
acter. Vait. I S acknowledges its dependence upon the Yajiir-Yeda’®. To the 
S.aunaka-school belongs also the single Brahmana of the AV., the Copafha- 
brahmana which is in turn later than and dependent upon the V.iitana; see S f- 
S x6. The K.T3p35 and the Parisryfas. — IVith the above-cnenfioneil 
SOtr.as three olher te.xts of slight intrinsic import.ince are associated; Hindu 
tradition persistently states that the ritual literature attached to the AV. con- 
sists of five Kalpas'*. q'he {/i 7 /Tff-)»rr«i//j<i-teacher Upavarsa” goes so fat 
as to assert that these five are Jnid (zedafufya). contrasting them with others 
that .are smy/ieu^^a^K Priests practicing with these five kalpas are known as 



I. *1 HE Atii wa-Yeda IN' General. — E. Brief Sketch of A. Literature, i 7 


pancakalpa at pahcakalpin''^. The r.ither variable nomenclature of these texts 
js: I. The Kausika-sutra, or Sanihita-vidhi, or Samhit.i-kalna- 3. TheVaitana- 
sutra, or Vitarii-kalpa *5. 3. The Nak?atrakalpa. 4. The Santi-kalpa. 5. The 
x\figirasa*kalpa, or Abhictira-kalpa, or Yidhana-kalpa. The last three are 
FarUistas, intrinsically not at all more interesting than many of the 
numerous Atharvan texts of that class: why they should have been deemed 
worthy of a place by the side of the real Sutras does not appear. Ko 
, mss. of the Aiigirasa-kalpa have as yet come to hand, nor are there any 
announced in the ms. catalogues: our previous surmise that the text would 
bear upon the sixth book of Kaus. is rendered probable by SJyana’s brief 
summary of its contents (introd. p. aS). The Nak5atrakalpa is called a Pan- 
siyfa outright, and is frequently found, at the head of the Parisi5f.i-mss.; this 
text, as well as the still more trivial Santikalpa are in the main of an astro- 
nomic-astrologic diameter I'he Parisijtas, according to Hatfield’s count 
72 in number**, deal with a great variety of subjects; leaving aside the Na- 
k?.atTakalpa (nr. i) and its appendix, the so-called Paipp.al.Td3 Mantrfih (nr. i *>, 
they begin wit!\ a considerable number of te.xts m the nature of rajakarmant 
(ro3al rites), and end with a Uttle less numerous a class of (omens 

and portents), thus continuing in these, as in other cases, the tradition of the 
Kaus. (14 — 17, and adhyaya XUI). A considerable number of these texts are 
devoted to grammatical, text-hUtoncal, or astronomical subjects, of a degree 
of interest that calls for a critical edition of the entire collection. Quite a 
number of them are even now edited or adequately discussed the Paippallda 
Mantrah (x*J have been reproduced by Bloomfield'*, the Indramihotsava (19) 
is very similar to the corresponding chapter, Kaus. 140, the Skandajaga or 
HhQrtakalpa (30), a kind of a thieves manual, has been edited and trans- 
Jated by Goodw'iv'^; the GaijaniaJl (jt) is worked up in connection with 
the corresponding groups in the Kaus.**; the \sur5kalpa (35), a witch-craft 
practice imderraken with the risuri-phm. hoN been editpd and translated, with 
the aid of a native commentarj, by M\cous“, the Sraddhakalpa (44) has 
been edited and translated by Caiand*‘, the Uitamapapila (46) is tre.ated 
in part by Wider *•>, the Kautsavya (or, K mtsavaya )niruktanighantu (48) has 
been commented upon and compared with Ys-,ka's Nighantu by Ploomfield*', 
the Caranavyuha (49) is discussed b) WtarR’s, the Grahayviddha (51) has 
been edited by Wei-lr'*’, the Adbhuiasmti (67) is for the most part repro- 
duced and tr.anslated by Yeuer'", the Vusanavidbhutani has been edited 
.and translated bj Hatfield** \side from Pansiytas and Paddhatis there 
exist also mss. of certain pniyer aod ntuai book-, of a jef shghfer uh- 
portance and prob.ib!y later date than the Pansistas, e. g. an Atharva- 
tarpao-am, the Athan.anapr.imitjk>ari ot V.1suiJe\a, the Sodasopac-irapujl; and 
nriorj.T-texts IlemSdn in the VratakhaQda of the Cawrvargaciniamam 
presents an .\tharvakavidhanaJ ’. For an Atharvavedoktarp J)oti?ain irntten by 
a pancakalptn see 3VfiiER, Verz. II, p. 96, for a similar text called .\ranyaka 
j)Oti?am, Haug, IS. LX. I 74- 

S 17. On the Sinrti of Paithinasi — The question raised by the pre- 
sent author^* as to whether PaHhmasi, the reputed author of a work on dharma, 
belongs to the AY., has been answered m the afiirmatue by Pisciiel^* Ca- 
L\ND», Jolly J’, and HiLLxrRAVDTM. Pischel regards P.aitlilnasi as the author 
of a Dhirma-sastra in mixed prose and slokas; Cvl.an*d and Jollv as the 
author of a Dlurmasutra. .\nd Cauxnd conclude^ that Paiih'nasi was at any 
rate an Athan.anic writer, because the Sniddhakalpa of this author recon- 
structed from Henudri's citations, is related to the Atharvan /riiJy’/^^r•texts5^ 

It would seem po-sible, however, that there existed more than one PaithinasL 
Wo arnvh« l-h lolofi< U. 1 ». 2 



l8 II. LirTERATURU.GESCinCJlTE. 1 B. AtH.%RVA«Ve1M and GoEATHA-BkXHMAN 


The .^ihananlya-paddhati describes him as an author of a Paddhati; the 
citations in the Aihar\anic commeotariesi^ seem to point to a knowledge of* 
special Atharranic ntes so particular as to make it seem quite likely that 
some Pauhlnasi was the author of a ve^ late metrical tc\t, dependent directly * 
upon the Kausika. Pai{hmasi in the Parisi5|as is called Mausahputra; he seems 
abo not likely to have been the author of the dharma-xtW. in question. At any 
rate it will be well to remember that if all references to Paithinasi are intended 
for the dharma-wvXAt it .will not be easy to assign to him too late a date. . 

S iS. The Atharvan Upanisads. — .With the AV. are .associated 
traditionally the great mass of the Upamsadsi^, m fact all e.vcept those that 
belong definitely to schools of the other three \'edas. Some of these, ei en, 
appear m Atharvanic recensions, e. g., the Kena (SV.), BhrguvallF, Ananda- 
valli Cr^ittiriya-Upanisads •= TA. 8 and 9), and Bfhannarayana (=■ Mahana- 
rayana = TA. 10) 3’. What ought to be an authoritative statement of the 
number and names of the Atharvan Upanisads is the list of 27 presented by 
the 49’*' Paribi5ta, the Caranavyuha^“; they are: i. ^t^ndaka. 2. Prasna, 

3. Brahmavidya. 4. Ksurika. Olhka. 6. AtfiarvasiVas. 7. Athar\ asYkht. 

8. Garbha. 9. Maha. to. Brahma. 1 1. Praijagnihotra. 12. Manejukya. 13. N'ada- 
bindu. X4. Brahmabindu. 15. Amrtabindu. 16. Dhyanabindu. 17. Tejobindu. 
18. YogasikhS. 19. Yogatattva. 20. Ndatudra. 21. PaheatSpini (’tapanlya). 

2 2.Ekadan(li5arrinyasa. 23. Anmi. 24. Harhsa. 25. Paramahainsa. 26. NarSyana.^ 
27. Vaitathya. The majority of the names in this list require no explanation;’ 
the Pancatapanlya is doubtless the NrsimhapOrvatapani; one ms." reads Dvitn- 
panlya, having in mind probably the additional NrsimhoUarat5panT. The tenn 
Ekadandisamnyasa is othenvise unknown as a designation of an Upani$ad:' 
the stem thadaniin (cp. schol. to PB. 19. 4. 7) occurs in Brahma 3; Parama- 
hamsa 3; and Gopichandana 5; cp. Jhe ms. listed as a DharmaiSstra under 
the title Ekadarujibamnyasavidhih, by Saunaka, in Stein’s Catalogue of Sanskrit 
MSS. at Jammu, p. 84. I do notsenture to assume that the text is identical 
with the well-known Samnyasa-Upanriad. The Vaitathya is the independent 
name of the second of the four parts of Gauijapada’s Karika to the Manijukya,' 
all of which are usually counted as independent Upani^ads”. The presence 
in this list of the work of a personal author makes for the belief that it, 
like all other Upaniyad lists, is late and eclectic, representing the learning of 
some particular scholar or coterie of scholars. It does not coincide with any 
other historical collection, as, e. g., the collection of the Muktika-Upanisadj 
the Persian translation of the Oupnekhat in AnquEtil-Duperron’s LaUn trans- 
lation; Nara Yana’s collection; Coi ebrookr's collection; or the lists of the 
Chambers collection^’. JIvXnanda’s ‘Alharvanopanishat* (Calcutta 1891), to 
be sure, contains 29 Upanisads, but they are copied, apparently, from the 
unfinished edition in five fasciculi, printed in the Bibliotheca Indica. They 
also are the result of an independent selection of the minor UpanisaiL, differing 
from that of the Parisi?ta in the choice and order of the te.\ts. There is in 
fact no complete collection of Upanisads, because the term Upanijad does 
not represent a closed canon but an indefinitely extensible type of literature 
‘which has not been formally concluded and which may yet be continued in 
the present or the future’. The number of Upanisad-names counted by Weber 
m 1876.1,1*, all m all 235, mdudmE apocrypha; e, ea a Moileraic Allopaoiiad 
fisates among them. Ihc ,adgmcnt of the i„i„ndc and historical value of 
the Atharvan Uparaiids docs not thetefote depend upon any one collection; 
then laloe - m the first njsunce their historical value — depends upon the 
degree of regularity „ith which they occur in the collections. Even so it is 
obvious that literary products of the most tliversified character (cp e g the 



I. The Ath \rva-Ved \ in- Ginlrm . — E Brief Skncn or A. Literature. 1 9 

G3ni(,lci, X snake-chAim) have found their way into the principal collections, 
all of uhicli are probably relatively late, so that finally the chronology and 
the % alue of each Upanisad will have to be determined by its style, contents 
and other inner criteria^’. 

Beussfn, extending and developing a suggestion of \Vehek, divides the 
Atharx aiiiUp.inisads into five clearly defined classes i. Bure Vedanta-Upani* 
sads, i. e., such as continue the Vedanta doctrines of the older texts without ' 
undue development of the notions Qf^t>xw (concentration, and abstraction from 
all mundane matters), rcr-v-'-vi era (asceticism), or Sivaitic or Visniiitic symbolism, 
beyond where these ideas had developed in the older Upanlsads. e. Yoga-Up.ini- 
sads, I. e.j such as presuppose theVedInta ideas, ami in addition advise con- 
centration upon the morae of the sound cm, especnllj its last half mora 
(ri'ida). 3. Snrpnyasa-Upanisads, i. e., those which recommend and describe 
a life of asceticism as the practical result of the doctrines, of the UpanKads. 

4. Siva-Upanisads, i. e, such as interpret the popular god hiva or one of his 
viiirlis (Isana, Mahesvara, Mahxdeva, etc.) as a personification of the Atman. 

5. Visnu-Upanisad-,, i. e, those which similarly transform Vijnu or one of his 
matums iX.lr.lyana, Xrsimha, Rama, Krjni) j»to human m.inifestations 0/ the 
‘Atman. Of these classes the first (cp. AV, 10. 7 and S; n. 4 and S), the 
third (cp. AV, ir. 5) and the fourth (cp. AV. 4. 2S; ir. z) mfglit be expected 
to be in organic touch with the hymns of the AV. Hut this is not the case: 
the Ath.irvan Upani$ads are connected with the AV. S.amhu.i bj ties that 
are but little more dose than those thu connect them with the Vedic man- 
tras in general. There is one notable exception, the CQhka, which presents 
(iloka to ft-.) ch.ar.ictetistically as 'mari/rc/anixad’ an almost complete catalogue 
of the cosmogonic .and theosophic hjmns of the .\V, naming them by well 
selected catch-word>, such as brahmacenn fii 5), skambhn (10. 7 .and 8), 
uceAisfj (it. 7), etc.A OthenvLe the .\tharvan hymns are cited only sporad- 
ically, not more freijuentl)' or fimilnrly than m.intr.i3 of the other Vedas*^. In 
addition the relation of these texts to the .\\ is ot the loosest sort- they 
are apt to add the name of the A\ to th.it of the /mji mote regularly than 
the older Upanis.ads**, and the mines of their hoh Rishis .are to a con- 
siderable extent those of earlier as well as Liter •Ith.irv.inic tradition. Athanan, 
Aiigiras (from which MunOaka 1. 1. 2 abstracts Angir), bhfgu. Saunoka, Pippa- 
ladi. The last two are the names oi two .Atbarvan stliuols, being the only 
names of the tr.iditional -Cikhas that are mentioned m the .VV. Upanisads. 
With one or the other of thc-»e two school-n.imes the commentators .ire apt to 
.a5‘!Ociate loosely and inconsistenth the mdividuil Cp.inisads as speci.xi school- 
products”- CotELROv'Ki. e. g., report-- that the first fifteen m his count belong 
to the Siun.Tk.i-sdiool; or the colophon of the Pr.isn i states that itself belongs 
/■i/'/-a/ifdi//iar:crii Ji .r/« (:) *". Put. aside again from the LQhk.i which 
distilled) refers to the S.iunakiya, there r> little or nothing in the texts tbem- 

' selves that binds them to one or the other .\tharvan school, or for that 
matter, to the itself, .as .a wMe This is r.Uher striking .at the first glance, 

because the theosophic hvmns of the AV. seem to heraW the Upanisad specu- 
Lations more loudly th.in (he theosophic mantras of the other \ed.i.>, and 
bec.aHse the Later ritual literature of the AV,, notabl) the GB, professes to 
be devQtevi to a knowlevlge of the brahmx The GB, moreover, noLablv in 
its first prapajhaka, resembles the Upanijads m diction and style; especially 
its speculations on the syllable cn remind one of tbeyi’s-a-class oflTpantyarU. 
Indeeil one of the treatises of Glk, the <>wr cosmogony*' was res-^tded as .an 
Upanis.ad by the Persian tmndators: the Pranou (Pranava) in-ASQumus 
tr-mdaiion is almost idemic.al with GB. i. *. 16 — 3*. ^ which will be of 



20 11, Litteratuk V. GEScnicmr. ir- AxmRVA-VEDA and Gopatha-BrAumana, 

especial interest to Wfbcr and DeossenS*. Another treatise, that^on the 
rmatrl (GB. I. 1. 31 — 3S)5i describes itself at the end as an Upanlsad: it 
also suggests, without being at all like it, the Shavank of ASQUrnu/s Oupne- 
khat54 But there nas probably, ne\ettheless, a greater break in time between 
Mantra and Upanisad in the AY. than in the other Vedas: the older AY. 
Upanisads doubtless grew up in priestly communities that practiced with the 
AY.; the more secondary and recent ones are the products of later mystic, 
ascetic, and sectarian speculations which were compelled to associate them- 
selves also with the AY., because less rigid school dibcrlmination obtained 
at all times in the AY., and because the canons of the other Vedic schools 
were definitelj closed. As h is texts like the Jabuia or the Nilaradna (cp. 
VS. 16 and 13) are in some aspects paradoxical members of a collection 
that professes to be Atharvanic. The hibliog^phy and contents of the 
Atlurvan Upantsads may now be studied conveniently, aside from Weber’s 
pioneer treatment, in connection with Diussc.n’s excellent translations with 
introductions (Sechaig Upanishad’s, p. 531 IT.). 

19. Grammatical and text-historical treatises. — Of gramma- 
tical and Jext-hibtorical books the most important is the AY. Prriti^Akhya, the 
so-called SaunaUyS CaturSdhyijikS, in Wiut.ncv's careful edition BOiidck' 
has reported on another AV. rr 5 tis 3 khya different from the preceding 5 *. A 
grammatical text called AtlnrvanasOtra by 1‘aniniya seems to have been 
known to Trikandamandana^b The so-called Nirukta-nighantu of Kautsavja 
or Kautsa\aya (Ath. Bans. 4S) is a collection of glosses similar to Yaska's 
Nighanpi, not a n/rH-O/u-text at alls’, fs'ote also the VarnapaiaU, Ath. ParN. 
47. The CaranavjQiia and the Ultamap.itala, interesting for the history of 
Athanan texts, have been mentioned above (p. 17). 'Ihe unpublished iJrhat-^ 
sarirmukramaniku of the AV. is a very late and secondarj- text of that sort; hi* 
statements, especially those on ihe .authorship of the hjmns (mostly gods 
or seroi-disine beings) are of minimal value’’. The I’ailcapafalikn is anotlier 
text of the nature of an Anukramani, mostly metrical*’. I'he CarapavyQha 
mentions four related texts as ' laksatiasrantfiah\ tiamely, catur&dhyOyihi 
yrahUtkhyam paucama/'aUlda^’) damtyoiihaiidhir Irhatsatvanukramani ro*'. 
A work on accentuation, the Svara-sistra was known imdltionally to one of 
the Bandits of Shankar Pandit’s acquaintance*’. 

NYfetfl, \ eri 1. bs IT , It. 790., j>. 161 ff.; I!u»uncu>, TAOS. XLj/Sff-J 

IlntEiBV-Nr/T, Kiiual Litwratur, p. 35(1. 


> Nome dita on t?ie I’aippiticTa (.At f.) arc jire^entcij (on ItoTli's autlionl)) aboTc, 
p. raff; for the Siunakwa »ee iJ.e enure lecon't part o! 1},;* bwol. — » Sec ItoTJJ, 
AY. in Ka*chTOir, p 8j WmiNrs, In-Ux VeiDtiniw, p. 4; the are 

ansiyieJ te'ow, <, {33 — J See the inltodaqlnry note* below p. 40. * The Kau- 

iAa NEira of ihe Alhan»Ae>3a, wifh cetrscu fren the comwentaMei of Dlriia and 
Keiax^ Ediied l-> MArxn UwoMiiru. (VoL XIV of TAQS.); cp. IJiliorandt, 
Rncal-I I’teratJ', p. — S Wjmhsch, laleransthe* CenltalMall, Xo\. 21, ib^i. 

tv r- «3; cp. main, CG.\., .Apnl 15. 1891, nr. 8. 

^ V*' P- -IV snd XVII. _ » Hditcd ar-l 

f'l'^'txn/'Vxrt. Teipecmelj. London, l!i;5, aud, Mrastburi:. 187S 
Ibe \a>t. ben.r. ^.ith Ihe votUs «i*» wfrjya On a rcmoic nos, ',11. tv of eon- 


. ,1.= 

rf »r. d. t 1’ AiX. Kaut Introd. P xit. N^mnane* 

r .-iJfl- The Na,... oeciMona’ v ref-ne! <0 by h, t.il veer’s Jrti./j rehinu 



I. Tni; Aiiuuva-Vfda in Gi-Skrai. — K A.-V , iv H indu L iiERATURr. 21 

AVeher, Veri. II, ji. S9, 1 7. — 17 JAOs. XIV', t>. CLVifT i cp. VVriiES, Ver*. I. 
p. S9IT.; 1 !, 5>. 87 IT - is AJPh. VII, p. 485 ft — >9 JAO‘^. XV, p. vff. - >9 Sec 
Index II, p 3S3ff. — ^aUimore DUbertition: AJPh. X. 163—197. — ” Almcn- 
kiilt, p. 95, 240 IT< This SrSddhakalpa belong to the school of Saunakn. Out of 
Ifemulri’s Caturvargacintamapi Calanp, ibtd.p.243d'., has reconstructed a ^rScldha. 
kalpa belonging to the Paippalida-school; he also presents fragments from the 
same source of ceremonies according to the f/irJj of I'ajiliJnasi (p. Jc^/T); 

cp. the next paragraph. — *3 VVjifr, K IV. 43tff. —‘*4 JAOs. XV, p. xuniff. 
Cp. also the curious >r>7;),7W>.bke passage. Til 3. jo. i — ‘i \VI,», p. 170 (cp. 
Ih III. 247^'.); VVctiFR, Vcr*. I. 92; II. 8S. — « IS. X. 317!!. — *7 Omina und 
Pottenla, p. 32oiT. — as JAOR. XV. 207!!. — a) Tor a list of such texts seeJ.VOS, 
XI, p c/\\J, nnd ep At fReciit's Catalogus Cata!o;,’ontm. The .Ithm atarpanarii 
is, of course, likely to be the same as Ath. ParU. 43. — 3 > Wliifr, Vers. I, p. 332. 

— 3» J\0^. XI. 376; Kaui. Introd. p. xxuff. — ja CCA , tSgi, nr. 8, p. 283. — . 
33 .\hnenkult, 31. 99, 109 ff. — 34 Keeht und httte, p. taff *— is Ritual-I itteratur, 
p. 36. — 36 Cat \Nn, ibid. 95, t07ff. — 37 Kau4. Introd. p. xMlff — ji MIIASL., 
p. 32Sfr; .AIa.x .’lIOriCR, ZDVG. XIX. 137!!.; U'eber, IS. 1. 2471!, jSolT.; 11. iff., 
lyoffi III. 324fr.; IX. iff; IStr. 11. 135; III. 5851!.; VVU^ 1701! (especially p.t;!, 
note 3); Dmssi s, 'lechzig Upanlsbad's, p.jjiff. — 37 VYI-*, p. 172 ff — Weiser, 
Verr. II. 88; IIatfieid, JAOS. XIV, p cue.— 4» IIeussen, ibid, p. 573, 5S3ff — 
4J Ibid. p. 532ff; VVtiEB, Yer*. I. 95. — 45 \\T,4, p. 171, note 3. — 44 Dfisse- 4, 
ibid. — 43 IS. 251 ; \VX.*, p. 173; Deossfv, p. 543. — 4* See befov., s 59 — 
•47 r.. g. AV.3.2Q i! Jtbala4; A\.4.l.ti .Vthsrvaiiras t; AV.4 4 u SsmnjSsal; 
AV. 6. 96. I j rraoJgiiihofra i; AV. ics 2. 26—27. Athirvaiira- 6; AV. 10. S. 27: 
Alharvaiiras t; AV. u. 4 to be compared «ith IVatna s. 7ff; AV. 11. 4. 13: 
Mun'hka 2. t. 71 AV. it. &t Samnyl'A 3, and Kanlhalruti $; AV. 181 Ssinnylsa 1. 

— 45 Cp. below, $24 — 4) DttssEN, ibid. p. S3l- — ^ Kaulika, Introduction, 
p. NXXlil —S' See below, t( 65 — s* IS. IX. 49tt., Sechng Upanishad’s. p.855ff 
The I'ranavopamjad is catalogued byl'tRvrtL, Sk. ^I'?'? ut the paltce of Tanjore, 
33'’! SrilN, Catalogue of SxnsktU .Manuscripts at Jammu, p 31, Catalogue of 
the Oriental Manuscript Library in Madras, p 52, eju .also Tavlor, Catalogue of 
Oriental MRS. in Fort St. George, II, 472 — 33 see below, S 69. — M I)EISS£S, 
pi. S67 ff, — S3 J.VO's. Vn. 333—613. X- 456— t?!, cp Is. IV ;9ffs V. 4Stff, 
JSfr. il 23ofrj WI .f, p. t68. — 5* sI'AW. tS/i, p. 7 T — if JI/hvoiricar, Kejwrt 
1SS3— 4, p. 30 — i» llLOOMFtCtt), J.VOs W, P XLMItlT — S') WEDFR, Vcm II. 
jpff; -and in the introductions of hi» translations of .\V, books 3—5, I'*. XVlt 
t77fr ; XVIIl. I ff j SnsNMR I’AMiiT III his edition of the VV. vol. I, Critical note, 
p. I7ff — *» See the passages extracted by Sii\sk\r I'wmt, ibid p 18—33, cp. 

J. kOR. X/ 376.— U'fbfr, Ven II 5-^ — '* sitsM.A6 I’txhtT, ibid p JS(top). 


F. THE POSITION OF THE .ATH \R\ A-VEH.V IN HINDU 
\ / LITERATURE IN GC.N'EK.Vf.. ' 

S 20. General e< 5 timate of the .W' — The .\th.artan is a sacrerl text 
in more than one reipect aside from the materia!' which it shares with the 
other Vedas the majority of its hjinns .tre IwneioJent or highly religious 
(theosophic), these cannot at any Ume haxe been rei'ctved with any other 
sentiment than esteem. Even the sorceries of tlie .\\. necessarily' show a 
double f.xce . they are useful to oneself, harmful to others. Thus there arises 
a conflict of emoCtoRs which Lists throughout the history of recorded 
Hindu thought and is summetl up m the hnal orthodox and stereotyped view 
thtt the Atharvan h used ‘to appease, to bless, .and to curse’*. In the long 
tun there arose withal .a strong wave ot popular aversion against the Veda 
whose most pointed teaching is after all sorcery. This appears from the 
discussions of the Hind'is themselves as to the orthodoxy of that \eda 3 j 
from the conscious efTorfs of the hter Athrn-on nrdirgs to v/mlicate ns 
character and value; from the allegorical representation of the Atharvan as 
‘a lean bhek nnn. sharp, irascible, and amorous’*; and from occasional 
Statements of the Vedic and Oassical texts. 

S 21. The Atharvan in the RV.— TheRV. has no specific designa- 



22 lI.LiiTERATUKU.Gi:i>cnicHiE. IE. Atiiarva-Veda axd Gop atha-Brah m ana. 

tion for Athar\an charms, although it contains a goodly number of such 
charms. No great importance is to be attached to _this silence; the praises 
to the gods in connection «ith the great soma-sacrifices offer but scant occa- 
sion for the mention of sorcery, or the plainer practices of every-day life. 
Yet sorcery and house-practices there were in India at all times'*. The failure 
of the RV. to mention such charms by a collective name like at/iarviv)girijsah 
must be gauged by the slenderness of its opportunities to mention the ^ eda 
as a generic name (cp. S. 19. 5), or Vedic collections or redactions in par- 
ticular (jo.90.9)*. There is no proof that even the oldest ‘Rigiedic period, 
or the most ancient Hindu tradition accessible historical!)’, evclucled writings 
which would be entitled to the name of Atharvan-charnis by their subject- 
matter, form (metre), or stvlei even the absence of generic names, such as 
blKsajcnty athariAnah^ ni'i^irasah, for such compositions may be due to acci- 
dental silence. The C-visting redactions of the AV., to be sure, betraj them- 
selves as later than the RV. redaction in many ways, especially by the 
character of the variants in those mantras which they share with the RV.^; 
certainly .also a good inan> of evisting Athatv,an h>mns are later than the 
bulk of the RV. Nevertheless, we cannot escape the conclusion that hymns 
of the Atharvanic t>pe were composed simultaneously with, or even prior to 
those of the Rigvedic {imutn) type*. 

S 23 . The Atharvan in the AV. itself —The AV. alludes to its 
own class of compositions bm rare!); ro. 7. 20 Uilbiaiiai\!;tras<ili)\ i:. 6. 14 
Wieffijti), cp. al'O 19. 54 5, and 19. 22. i; 23. t**. There is to be noted 
also a decided advance in the association of the names Atharvan, Aiigiras 
and Hhrgu with the practice and the conditions which these hjmns are aimed 
at e g. 4 37, i wliere the Ath.uvans appear as slajers of the Rak^as; see 
also 4. 3. 7, 5. 19 I ; JO. 0. 20-. Kspccially notevvotth) is the evident asso- 
ciation of the word ni^pntsa with sorcery and spells, and the somewh.at less 
clear vorrciponding correlation of ai/tarz-am with auspicious charms (see 
above, p. S/. OthernNe the attitude of the AV, ts tiuich the same as 
that of the Yajus-tevts: the threcVedas are often mentioned without the fourth 
by wav of esoteric restrictioti to the sphere of the great Vedic (irauld) ritual. 
Thus It augurs no contempt or neglect of the Atharvan, if m a charm con- 
stnicted for the purpose of obtaining a knowledge of the Vedas (7. 541 Kaus. 
42. 9), only ri, Syirnan, \ajufi. vote, and oblation are mentioned: the 

person who here desire-, Vedic learning is not in training for Ath.irvan priest- 
hood, and therefore does not take care to include this special branch of 
learning. A shmUr pas^acc "in a RY. Siitra {AG.3.3.J— 3) does not hesiMte 
to include the .\Y. on the same occasion.' Even the GI 3 . which cerlamly 
c.innot be aCcu-ed of .Alliarvaphoby (see S N caught napping once or 
twice, and omits the AV. from svstcmatic statements of Vedic compositions: 
1. 1. 23 and 24. In faa th's very omission shows that the AV. Saiphita; 
unlike US i.tuvlist'c adjuncts fseev^o)^ is Jn no engaged eidier in self- 
glonficalion, or m polemics against the other Vedas: the Atharvan poets 
ceria n!) are «{!: te unconscious of any disadvantages inherent in tlieir P-xt, or 
of any coniemptuo-as view of the AY. on the p.irt of the adherents of the 
other \ ed i-s 

y 23. The Atharv an in the Srauta-texts — povmon of the A V. 
m t.ie i>-^r//4l.ter2turs m gencnl dey^nds nltogctlier on tne pr.ictiral char- 
of these texts as eKpoaents cf the great Ved:c «,acTif.Le,; these, bv their 
very CSV re, ^^clude d lect interest in the systematic charms of the- i/irsajtini 

.ufi’cdnia-j ..uch «orcerv -vs h interwoven w.th the //fl«/4-p-rfonitanccs 
•Kitains -n epem-ent expre'Mon m mttneal .vjanzav j.nrl CoTmuh^ (jj/us) 



I, The Am \Rv\-Yt.j>\ k G» vlrai . — F. A.'V. iv Hindu LiTmvTURn. 33 

which are ihoroiighly Atharvanic''*. Dm in the/ru/i the -iphcre of the Atiian-an 
ia restricted to matters that are incidental and suhaidiary, intended merely to 
pave the way for ilie main mue» the successful dispatch of the sacrifice to 
the gods, and the undisturbed gratification of the priests (//// and //?/■//). Under 
these ci^cum^tances pronounced hostility against the AV,’, sucli as crops out 
at a liter and more' reflective age', would be a paradox, too silly even for 
the Yajus-texts and the Jhabmams. Ri^'d consistency is, of course, not to 
be expected; witchcraft blows hot and cold from the same mouth: according 
as it H turned towards the inimical forces, human and demoniac, or is turned 
by others against oneself, it is regardwl as tisefuJ or noxious. 'J’lie AV. takes 
the s.ame xiew- bj imphcalion, as maybe gathered from a comparison of 2.12 
with 7. 70, or 3. 7 with f». 13 and 37. It is a ipiestlon throughout of my 
sorcery or iby «orcen. The poet of RV. 7. lop 15, jC exclaims '>fa} I die 
to-day if I am a sorcerer’, and mikes complaint against his enemy who'calls 
him, though he is pure, a sorcerer, and against the real sorcerer who pretends 
that he js pure. Though j/rAv here, as at AV. i. 7 .and 8, is reg.irded as 
desilish, the writer of Sll. 10.5.2.20 is not prevented from pkicing the 
‘thosc that are skilled in sorcery', in solemn arr.iywith the repre- 
sentatives of tlie holiest forms of literature, the I’aktrrnh etc. On the other 
hand even bha.xjam ‘cure, medicine’, the aUmistIc prosince of the Atliarsan, 
though well regarded in general, does not come oft' without a sneer'*! we 
may trust lh.-it tlie cinons of sochi! standing and litemry apprechitjon of .a 
people that produced the better types of Vedic hieraiurc could not fail, in 
the proper mood, to estim.ite at its right value the wretched hocus-pocus of 
the bhi\ajam, though these were the best tint theVeihc period hid produced 
for the relief of bodily ailment. Yet the Veila without ch.irms and sorcery 
would not be the Veda, and the //in/iSr-iexts .arc not m the position to throw 
stones at the Atharvan. .\n)'how a sober survey of the position of the AV. 
m the iruti shows tliat this Veda, while not within the jiroper sphere of the 
greater concerns of ^■cdlc religion, h coniulered within its own sphere as a 
Veda In perfectly good standing, the question of its rekitise importance, its 
authority, and us canonicity is not disruised, nor even suggested 

Accordingly the mythic personages Athanan, .\tigifas, .and flhrg^' dieir 
descendants (.\th.nr>.ina etc), whose proper names m the course of time are 
restricted more and more to the sphere of die \tharvan, lontinue m the 
iruh to be design.itions of demigo<J> .ind Risbis**. These names are held 
in honor no more and no less than other epony ms, it being reserved for the 
l.iter Atharsan writings to extol them beyond measure, and to claim for them 
a special position .as lypic.alVedn wmts \nd this is true .illhough tlie /r///; 
occasionally feels the connection between these mimes and the sphere of the 
Atharxan, as when KS i6. 13 mentions a Rixhi Wiisaj .Vtharvana, the KB. 
30, 6 a Rishi Ghora Angirasa", or when Tlk 12 8. 6 states that Dadhyafic 
Ahgirasa was the diapl.am of the gods. I'.ven more clearly 

does this appear from the way in xrfuch the hymns of tlie AV .are alluded 
to in the //«//. Ordinarily the texts are preoccupied with the sacrificial lite- 
rature in the narrower sense, and hence devote themselves to the mention 
and laudation of the /raj! ru/id. On the other hand, wlienever the Jrauta- 
texts mention, or draw upon other literary* forms like Ui/utsa, furCina, gatha, 
sTitra, upanUad, and many others, the Athanan is regularly included, and 
that too, .allnost ini.ariably in the following order: the three Vedas occupy 
the first three places; the AV, holds the fourth place, and next follow in 
variable arrangement the types f/i^dta etc. Typical examples are: TS. 

7, 5. j I. 3 — KS., A^vamcdliagrantha, 5. a {arigir.u alone); SB 10. 5. s. 10; 



34 n.LlTTERA'TUHU.GESCllIClITE. IB. ATnARVA-VCDA .AND 

II. 5.6.4-S; .13. 4- 3. 3ff.; TB. 3. 12.8.2; TA. 2.9. 3; 10. 7. S; ii. 2; 
AS. 10. 7. iff.; SS. i6. 2. 2ff. . ' ... 

• §24 The.Atliarvan in the-Upanisads. — The position of the A\. 

in the Upanl?ads is much the same as in the M in general. _ Aside from 
the Atharvan Upanl5ads, which refer more freely to the .AV., it is introduced 
but rarely, and in the same it ay as in the Srauta tests, 1. e., preceded by the 
trayi, and followed by a variable list of other types of composition: e. g. 
Bihu.2.4. 10; 4. 1.2; 5. Ii; 0111.3.1—4; 7. *.2. 4; 2. i; 7.1; MU. 6. 32 and 
33. Very much more numerous are the cases in nhich the alone 

occurs’^ showing that the draughts upon the AV. and the subsequent liter^y 
compositions are, in general, made under the excitement of formulaic solemnity- 
Needless to say, the Upanijads with their eye aloft alike from hymn, sacri- 
ficial formula, and witchcraft-charm, ha\e no occasion to condemn the AV., 
aside from that superior altitude of theirs which implies and diplomatically 
expresses condemnation of the entire Veda that is not hralmavidya. Even 
the Atharvan Upanisads do not m general sound either the polemic or the 
apologetic note of the ritualistic wTiUngs of the AV. The late Praoava (Pranou) 
assumes the superiority of the AW*, but the I*ranav.a is a part ot the Gopatha- 
BrShmana (S 08). Besides this there is only an interpolated passage in the 
Prasna that tries to secure nt any cost the correlation of the Athar\an witlt 
the highest hrahma'^'^. The authority of Atharvan teachers, Sanatkumira, 
Angiras, Paippaljda, etc. is, of course, invoked, by way of imparting to those 
texts an esoteric school-character. But in general, all that may be said is, 
that these tmcts mention the fourth Veda along with the other three more 
frequently than the Upaniyads of other schools, that tlie AV. is quietly added 
to the *«7>7, whether other literary forms like the iiihasapur&Natny etc., appear 
in the sequel or not. Thus the four Ved-as alone: NrsinihapQrvatSpani i. 2 
and 4, 2. G Atharvasiras i; Muktiki a — 14; Maha 3; the four Vedas with 
other literary categories, Mumjaka 1. 1. 5, KrsimhapQrvatripanT 5. 9. Even 
these Upanisads, however, occasionally lapse into the more frequent habit of 
the hulk of the Vedic literature, and fail to refer to the AY., whether con- 
sciously or unconsciously, It seems impossible to say. Mundaka ?. r. 6; PraJna 
2. 6; Nrsnhhat^pani 5. 2, Brahmaxidya sfT. As a class the Atharvan Upani- 
sads are engaged neither in defending the AV, from attack, nor in securing 
for it any special degree of prominence. 

S 25. The Atharvan m the Grhj a-sutras. —In the GrhyasDtras one 
would expect a greater degree of intimacy with the Athanan, and hence a 
more frequent and less formulaic leftrence to its writings, since in more than 
one seme the Grhyasutras are thtmseUes Atharxanic. Many of their mantras 
are identical with, or xanants of those contamed m the AV, But even the 
Gthya-rites, popular, nay vulgar, as they must haxe been in their untrammeled 
beginnings xvtre, so to speak, Rishified, and in time passed through a process 
of school treatment winch enstranged them from the Alharx an, and assimilated 
them, as far as possible, to the RV., SV., and YV.. as tlie ca^e in.ay be. 
Thus the battle-ch-irm AG. 3. i2, instead of drawing upon the very abundant 
mantras of this kind m the .W.'i, is decked out with the scattering material 
of this class ,n the Rk. Nowhere is there a marked degree of literary rela- 
tionship wmh the .\N Sometimes the Atharvan is mentioned in the manner 
wh.ch IS normal m the srut,, 1. e, preceded by die irojT, and folloixed by 
other x.xriet.es of composition: AC. 3. 3- *—3; SG. i. 24. S, HG. 2. 19. lO. 

20.9 iathat-aieJa) there is a distinct 
advance along the Ime of later development in the more distinct and familiar 



I. Thu Atiiarva-Veda w Generai — F. A.-V. in Hindu Litiraiure. ’ 25 

mention of the fourth Ve<la,* this is not balanced altogether by the cases of 
restriction to the /raj-i (SG. 1. 22. 15; 24. s; HG. i. 5. 13; 2. 13. i), or 
to two Vedas (AG. 1,7. 6 = SG. i. 13. 4-PG. j, 6. 3;GG. i. 6. 19; 3.2.48), 
because these passages are to a considerable extent quotations, or modified 
mantras from the /n///. The true value of thi> testimony is chronological, not 
sentimental: the-Grhjasutras, as much as their subject-matter is abm to the 
AV., are not. imbued with a sense of its especial value and importance, any 
more than the /nru/n-texts. They handle their materials in a self-centred 
fashion; their reference to the AV. is formulaic in every single instance; and 
llie greater frequency with wbich it is jnentioneil marXs the Later chronology 
of the composition of the Grhyasutras into formal treatises**. This Is illustrated 
significantly by the list of Rishis at the Uirpana in the Grhyasutras of the RV.”: 
here Sumaniu whom very late tradition designates as the source of Atharvan- 
lore’°, but who figures not at all in Atharvan texts, is given a prominent 
place. From such a late period of Aiharvanic development do the Grhy.1- 
sutras deriie their consciousness of the AV. 

S 36. The Atharvan in the Jaiv-Jiterafure (dharni.-:).— -There i> 
jet another field of literature whose roots also reach down to the Veda, 
namely that of the law-books {dhanna)'. in tire legal SQtras, Slstras, and 
Smrtis, especially in their so-called t9nf<f^.lr<r-chapters, judgment must be 
finally passed on the unclean and sinister pluses of Atharvamc activity. 
Here the golden rule must come up for consideration. The need of doing 
unto others what one would have others do unto oneself, and leaving the 
opposite undone, is sure to be felt and expressed. In the dZ/arwa-texts also 
the AV. retains in a measure its place by virtue of its profound hold upon 
popular beliefs, because indispensable sciences like medicine and astrology are 
.\tharvanic by distinction, and because the .\iharvan priest performs, especially 
for the king, inestimable services m the injury and ov eithrow of enemies. The 
kmg'*s chaplain ipurchitci) was m all probabditj as a rule an .A tharv an priest 
(cp. Yajfiav. 1. 312). But incanutions, sorceries, love charms and the like do 
work injury, and the ,iharma-\t\l% pronounce vnth no uncertain voice tlie 
judgment that the Atharvan, useful or mdispen:>.able as it is under certain cir- 
cumstances, IS on the whole inferior m character and position, that its practices 
are impure, and must be either stncllj regulated, or prohibited bj the proper 
punishments. 

The AV. IS not mentionetl by name verj freqtientJj in the Dh.ami.a-texts 
.\ number of times it presents itself in the normal .and formal Vedic manner, 
i. e. preceded by the traixid^a^ and followed bj other literary types, especially 
the itihdsapuraijam, e. g.AiDh3o37, UDh 2 39.14, \.ljnav.i.44, Aiisanasa 
3. 44, Karmapradipa 2. 5. 10 little less fre»iuenUy u holds the position of 
the fourth Ved.a in cases where no subsidiary literature is mentioned. BDh. 
3.9.4; 4.5.,!, V.iDh. 32. 9, .\usanasa 3 S6, ^ rddha-Hanta 3 43. The 
Athcirvasiras (Siras), an Up.anK.ad connected with iheAV., is often mentioned, 
with respect of course, e. g. GDh. 19 12; VaDh. 22 9; llDh. 4. i. 2S; ViDh. 
55. 9; .\u>an,asa 4. 5. More pointedly the s.vcred texts of the .VV. are re- 
commended as the true weapons with which the Crahmana may slay his ene- 
mies, Manu II. 33 Urutir a{iiin»i»pirasin); the king must choose as his Piiro- 
hita one skilled in the .\.tharv.m and Angiras Yrijaav. 1.312, 

the same behest is implied GDh. ii. 15. »7» "bere the king is enjoined to 
hake heed of that which astrologers and interpreters of omens tell him, and 
to cause the Turohita to perfomt in his house-fre expiatory rites U.wii), rites 
for prosperity {mjrisa!.?), and witchcraft-practices .against enemies (irM/cird) “. 
Such a Purohita is t/tif an .Atharvan priei,t. .It BDh. 2. S. 15. 4; ViDh. 



26 II. Litte r \tuk^TGe^^utc. ic. AiiiARVAA^ro^ AN-p G^iHA-BRAtnuN-A. 

-I II- 81.4 the demons called yaUtdham are driven out by means of 
^e^me. in ptrfect accord niih 2VV. i. 7. a- In the Atri-Samlnta (JIv.nmn’DAS 
collection, vol. i, p. 4$) Athar^'ati priests skilled m astrology nre recommended 
for the performance of sraddbas and sacrifices. Cp. also \iDh. 3. 75, 7*- 

Manu^^^^ ^fat the rt'//nmn'-texts express regard for the AV. and conscious 
dependence upon its literature and its practices. But the dubious quality ot 
the fourth Veda sounds from notes pitched in a different key. In the tir»t 
place the omission of the .\V. from Vedic lists which characterires tht . 

texts, !s continued m the /ihnrma-it\\i, here as there without pronounced 
disapproval Thus notably in the prohibition of the other Vedas while the 
sound of the Samans is heard, only RV. and YV. .are mentioned: GDh. 16. 21; 
VaDh. 13. 30; ViDb. 30. 26; Manu 4, 123, 124. Other cases m which the 
traividya is mentioned without reference to the AV. are BDh. 2. S. 14. 4i.S; 

4. 5. 29; Manu 1. 23; 3. 145, 11. 263—6; 12. 112; V.ljnav. 2. 211. Tlte m* 
feriorlt} of the AV. is st.ated outright at.ApDK 2. ii. 29. lo, ji, where it is 
said that the knowledge of women and SOdras forms a supplement to the 
AV.’j, yet mote brusquel> ViUh. 5. 191 counts him that recites a deadly m- 
cant.ahon from the AV as one of the seven kinds of ass-assins. More fre- 
quently performances which impl> the use of the AV. are decried and punished, 
though the Veda is not mentioned by name. Magic rites with intent to harm 
enemies, and curses in general cause defilement: they are visited with severe 
penances, e. g .\pDh i 9 26. 7, BDh. 2 i. 2. 16; GDh. 25. 7; ViDh. 37. afi) 
Manu 9,290; Yrijhav. 3. 289 («ontrariwi>e Manu 11.33). The practice of 
medicine is emphaiicall)’ described .is impure liere as in the Bruhman.is’S 
e. g .\pDh. 1. 0 j8 20. \tDh 51 10, GDh. 17. 17; YaDh 14. 2, tp; Manu 
3. 152; Y;\]i*ia\ I. tOs the charge, of course, reflects u])on the AV. Astrology 
and forlune-telhng .ire impure professions, e g. BDli. a. r. r, tC; ViDli. Ss. ?; 
VaDh. 10. 21. Manu 3. i6j that these occupations were Atli.irvanic jseems to 
follow from .\V. 6 128, Kaus. 50. 15 (tp. Airusamhita, above). An especially 
pointed reflection .igainst the .W. is implied in the prohibition ol tnuhhri)^ 
or vtulakarman, ‘practises with roots’, ViDh 25. 7, Manu 9. *290; 1 1. 64: the 
brunt of this charge is without doubt directed ag.iinst the AV. (see, e. g. 

3- .1.1, fi- Ihougli pr.-iciiees of this kind are not wanting outside of tJiat 
Veda (cp. RV. 10. 145. the (irlwasQtras). Finally, GDh. 15. 16; ViDh. 
S2. 12; Manu 3. 151; 4. 205, he that sacrifices for the common herd {yrOina- 
yiJaKa) is impure: wc may presume that this kind of .actii it} was I.irgely, if 
not entirely m the hands of .\th.ir\an priests; q>. .Sllll XLll, p. \i,, note. 

S 27. The Atharvan in the Mahiblulrata. — 'Ilie position of the 
AV. in the Mah'iblurata is cliaractcnred by the single statement that its 
importance as a Neda, and its canonicit)-, are finally and fomplclel) estab- 
lished; liiat its pr.ictices are faroiharb known and, in geneml, not subjected 
to any particular criticism. 'I he great colJeclion deals so largely witli Die 
interests of lheK?atrl)as as to preclude any conscious discrimination against 
the AV., since this Veda a?^o is largely engaged in the interest of the kings 
iySjKtlannamy^. I re(,ucntly, to be sure, the presailing Vedic hab.t of sneaking 
of tbe threefold Veda U co-nmaerl mechanically but the high regard far 
the Athanan and its unchallenged posAioii m the canon are prosed by the 
quist-cosmogon-c passages m which the four Veslas figure in close .nffmitv 
w.tH the lerson-fied cieatoi.^ Tims, at 5.108. 10 - 3770 Brahman is said 
10 hare first s-iiic tie fiiurkedas, and at 3.203. 15 >3560 Bralimin has 

the epdiet Catuneda; ard s-milailj much ehe of this sort’b I’.s itself the 
IS mentioned frequentb either with duect prai-e, or in a position of 



T. '1 ME ATHARVA*Yl,r)\ IN GCNEKAI- — ■ F. A.-V. IN IIiNDU LiILR VI 2 7 

indisputable usefulness. E. y. at 2. ii. 19 — 437 die atJian'aii!;irasah perso- 
tiificd, are mentioned honOrifically along vvitli other Vedic Risiiis; at 5. 18.5 
»= 54Sft. Angir.as praises Intlra w'ith mantfas of the AV., iience Inclra deci ires 
that this Veda shall thenceforth have the name athan'Sii^irasa. At 12. 342. 
99 13258^. Prajapalt declares that Atharvan sages fashioned him into 

an Atharvan priest devoted to the practice of the five kalpas {_parual(i//<aiit 
a.'ftiirvitnain)-, at 3.305-8o*=* 17066 Kimtl knows Atlurvan mantras {atharva- 
figirasi^'^ irutain) whicli coini>el the gods to appear; and so on’’. It is, of 
course, not to be expected that the Atharvan and its practices, notivithstanding 
their establishment in the good gmees of the Epic writers, shall come ofl' 
entirely without criticism; there must have been persons .iching under its 
supposed inflictions, .and moods .due to a full sense ofits vulg.irity. In such 
cases the Epic reflects entirely the spirit of the <M(r////n*texts. Thus physicians 
are declared to be impure, 12. 36. 2S ^ 1322,' 13. 90. 13 •=' 4282; or, 
practices of bad women with clurms and roots are condemned, 3. 39. 6 = 
2237^. Magic or sorcery is in geneml regarded as good, but jet it is possible 
in the view of the Epic to bewitch right so as to make it wrong, to be a k/iarnui- 
i/uedrin (12. 140, 42 3288), or to use foul }nd)d (7. 30. 15 1316 fl'.): 

the .\tlurvan duplicity is ineradicable. 

S sS. The Atharvan in Sanskrit, Jaina, andllauddha literature. — 
In Sanskrit literature in general the AV., though not mentioned very frequently, 
is just .as firmly establisheil .as in the Mahlbhinata The Ramayaija refers to 
the AV. but once (2. 26. 2t); but the I).as.akumrkrac.irtt.i (twice, ebap. s, p. 94, 
and chap. 3, p. :o8), the Kir.it'iquniya 10. 10, .and the proverbs here and 
tliere, exhibit it in imdiininished usefulness and respect, Susruta’s Ajurveda 
is naturally acquainted with the oldest source of Hindu medicine: i. 8g. 19; 
12a, 10. Tlie r«r3nas ahv.ij-s si>eak of tlie fourfold ^’ed.a, and present the 
AV, in the exalted position given it m its own nmalistic literature (see the 
neat cliapter;. pattrehUxetm iaulipau'.iikSnt nt/rhrm 
trahnuitiam e(t (Vi?9U*Purana, Pr.ixth mabheda, p 16, 1. 10). q'he M.atsya, .as 
quoted by S.ijana m the introduction to the A\., p 6, orders tliat the Piiro- 
hita shall compass the m.mtras and the Itrlhmana of tlie W., and tlie M3r- 
kamjeja claims that the king consecnied with its mantras enjojs the earth 
and the ocean (Saj.ini, ibul)A On the other hand the Jainist and Buddhist 
liter.atures naturally cap their small esteem ot the Veda in general with occa- 
sional express condemnation of the pr.w.tu.C' of the AV 'I'liiis the Sutra- 
kj-t.mga sutra 2. 27 forbids the intaiuitions of the .\lhar\an {at/idnunl)-, 
or the Anhal..av.agg.a 14- 13 of the Suttaniplti forbids the pnictice of the 
Athabbana-Veda. To the condemnation of pracUtes essentiallj Alharxanic is 
ilevoted the Miha Silam m the second chapier of the 'levijja-sullaj similarly 
Ihc Vmaj.a, Kulla\.igga 5 32 e-* 

§ 2p. 'J’he Atharv an in grammatical, le xi cal, and text-historical 
^\o^ks. — In grammatical, lexical, and tcxt-histoncal treatises the Atharvan 
still occupies a somewhat uncertain position IMnini 4.3. 133, 6.4. 174 h.is 
dt/iiincniLa (cjx the to 4.2.63), witlvout defining its position^'; the 

M.alubha?}.! not only menlions its Saiphita (Saunakiya or I’aii'palada) b\ the 
term timsino hut is peculiar in placing it, or rather its opening 

sfitira, s'iiffi rr^’ liczl, .it the head of the list ofVedic wntings-’*; the scholnst 
explains this unusud position of the AV. on the ground that all sacrifices 
be'’iti with (he expulsion of demons (ratios and piiaso) from the s.icrifici,al 
ground. IVliur prefers to think that the Vedas of the irauia (trahidyd) 
had at that time become obsolete and were only nietitionevl for fonn’s sake. 
Perhaps the growing impotiantc of the ofiice of the Brahman, the fourth 



2S II. LnTERATCR U. GeSCHICHTE. IB. AtHARVA-VeDA and GOPATltA-DR.^!lMANA. 


l}pe of priest, at the Vedic sacrifice, and the gwvingly frequent tenure of 
this office by Atharvan priests, accounts for the unusual attitude of PataftJaliJ^'. 
Or we may bear in mind the special practical importance of this Atharvan 
stanra as a purificatory prayer in the morning, manifested by the fact that it 
is placed at th_e head of man) Saunakiya*MSS. where it does not originally 
belong The Ailiarvanika are also cited respectfully in the Anupada (3.12) 
and Nidana Sutras (2. 12) of the SV. 3 » in connection with teachers of other 
, Vedic schools; similarly Sayana to Mahanarajana Up. (IS. II. 100, note 2). 
The CaranavyOhas treat the AV. as the fourth Veda, on the same plain as 
the other Vedas^®; the Brhadde^ata 5. 15 know^ the atharvdugirasal^ mantrdfi 
in active practice. Of lexical texts the Aroarakosa does not mention the AV,; 
in the Medinlkosa Atharvan figures as the name of the Veda 3 "’. But a writer 
as late as Hemacandra, 249, may still describe the AV. as an extract 
{j/djhrti) from the 


» This chapter is a revised Al>slrac! of the investigation on this subject printed 
by the author, SRr,.Xl.ll,p.xxvai— CM; the paragraph at the end, on the position 
cl the AV. in the grammatical mid hmdred literature, is added to the onginal 
treatment of the subject. — * MAWU'sOoAsssvRASVAtl (IS, I. 16); KtsWA loKauf. 
t. t; DtVA (0 Kh. t5. 7. II, am? eheuhere — i ALUtKU.M, India (Sackav's trans- 
laiioiii, >o3 I, p 189, reports tint the A\. is less in favor wilh the IJindus than 
the other Vedas According to liiRvrtt. Vaniiabrihmana oftheSV, p.xxi, the most 
milucnUal scholars of '^omhenv India still deny the genuineness of tlie AV. — 
* U^JFXDRM tUASiiTKA, 1ft the iiitruJuction to Clh, p. 4. — $ Cp , e. g. UV. 1. 191 5 

7 50, 7. 104, to isS; and see AcSRFCitr’s edition of the KV., voi. II, p 670^. 
— ii .''et SJlK XI IJ, p x.xx. notf 3—7 See above, % 31 below', S 42 ' ~ 

8 Ksavfb, Testgruss an ItOTli, p. (ijd, and lu ojiposifieii to our view, OUilsorR'i, 

DI.Z. March 13, iSo? tp* dWffj. On the metrical and linguistic criteria for the 
relative dates of KS'. and AV poetry sec below, S 3^1 42 -— " The word irnh'iit 
which <s catafogued ««?• thi era)i, 11. .S. 23; 15. <5. 3 (cp. also 15 3.7) does flol 
refer to die .\\ , hut is tlie broader and higher term for rehgfon in general} cp» 
U\. 10 7J II, and see below, $ 33 — lo 1.. g, *1 dig Ipits) that destroy the 
Uahiav ctr’ fS i 3 j. i; Ms 1 2. ,o; V*.. 5 23; SI) 3 4. 8. — «» T.. ff 

lo. <> 4 - 9 - 3 . 462, f>l! 4. • 5 ‘4 — MSE. XITI, p. XXMVff. — 

Cp. above, p S. — •* sec Jaccu’s Concordance, s. vs. wr.’ir, riimaytr, rr, 
jiyHftr-'e, j<vnfwej 9 , 3 ,r/«r, tTimaxiJa. linema^a, Js.l.296‘| IX. SI* — 

SUE. Mil, p \ut. note 2 - Ibid p 117B — tS OLnLsrrttr., Slil',. XXX. 

P. 1 ai'd YHtT - »i AO 344. ‘’C. 4 - 10 3; i^ambavyaGrliya, IS. XV. 153. 
Cp N- Xn 441 ; p. 165. - KotIi, A\' iii Kavchmir, ji. 2S. — *« I or 

detailed Stalemenis see .MtE. MJI, p. xi vitT -« Tins « the stereotyped summary 
tb' 'V., i i"la/u/tU.iHtr,lnlai see p. S. — *4 Civ 


,, .:„r* IfocTZMANv, Das Mihahharat*.' vol. IV, i'.. 4. — 

' XLll, r- m — r* Calcutta td , ar^oriniirnn. — a> Ibid, ilti — 3* Ibid. 

lanini’s acrjuaintance willi the so-calicd 
* . ^ 1 ••• 2 ■“ Kaihaha Avvamedliagraiitha. 


UV ff - 


■ i " '"I’ • , i II. 2 • Kaiiiaka Avvainedlia’'raiitUa» 

.vnd the ruierscripiion of the Ath. IrMitiU.ja. - jl IS. XIII. 43lfr.; XlV. 44lJ 
«? .*. p.ifi;, no-e 3 — jj .See *ie« chaitcr. $ 21. ~ Kaut. Inlrod. n.yxxvil.- 
3t Is. J. 42. 4 fl XlIJ. 144, JS/i. ^M-r, p 00. 163 _ jv Is. ifj j-.p- _ y , jvt, 
l.ex I. V, a Anttan, 2 _ 4'» 1-, 1. 2'JJ, bottom 


G. THE .\TH.\KVA.VEDA JN IIIC VIEW OF ITS KITUAIJVilC 
Lm:R.n'URE*. 

S 3'. Tfie attitude of ihe ritual texts towards the Atharvat 
and ‘Je I*reced.ng chaper vre may gather that the Sam 

arc Ihc-T rcra-cd aalhorr, and lo Athairaaic prlcits. Of any r.ucmat* 
IhciE i. r.o Bfo s.ci lai!)- tU n;u3l lexis of fts .yV. ail j.jc It-fttalrh, anc 



I. Ttm x\Tn A RVA-V EOA I.V GCMERAU — G A.-V. IN ITS RiTUAL LITERATURE. 29 

yet incidentally, to their own Veda, and as occasion offers, bring to the front 
the priests schooled in it: e. g. Kaus. 63. 3; 139.6; Vait. i. 5; Ath. Pans. 
40. !2, .etc. But over ami above this the ritual te.xts raise certain special 
claims regarding the position of the AV. among the Vedas, and they demand 
with obvious polemic intention that certain offices shall be reserved for Atharvan 
priests. The position 0/ these tftrts may he stated under three heads. Yirst, 
they are^ not content with the rather vacillating attitude of the non-Atharvanic 
texts w'liich restrict the iionorific mention of the fourth Veda to more or less 
well-defined occasions, especially to moods when it appears desirable to call 
into requisition the entire range of Vedic literary' compositions in addition to 
the trayl vitfya (e. g. Uihiisay furma, etc). Secondly, the office of the Brahman, 
the fourth priest at the srauta ceremonies, is said by tliem to belong to an 
Atharvavedm, and Vait and GB. in fact exhibit the bhr^ati^irovid in pbssession 
of that office. Thirdly, a similar claim is advanced in respect to tlie office 
of the Purohita; the king must choose an Athanan priest conversant with the 
Atharvan writings as his chaplain or house-priest: purohita, puru^ or brahnan, 
as he is \ ariously called. The latter claim is supported, as has been shown, 
to some extent by later Brahmanlcal treatises not derived from Atharvan 
schools 

$3*- I'i'tsiltation of the Atharvan, and the office of the Brahman 
in the ritual texts. — As regards the first point, the GE i. i. 4— »0’de- 
scribes the cosmogonic origin of the universe and the Vedas from the lone 
brahma. Vedic texts in general ignore the AV. m lliese creative fancies, but 
in the GB. the Atharvan and Angiras texts are placed at the head; the other 
Vedic texts (i. i. 6) as well as the subsidiary compositions {sarpatedu etc., 
t. I. 10) are relegated to the rear. GB i. 3. 4 lauds the .VV. as the most 
imporra.’Jt. rehgious manifestathn (rAr-d r<rr i'rad>»ia 

arsUasal.i)\ GB. i. S- 25 ends with the .assertion that the students of the trayi 
reach, to be sure, the highest heaven, but that the Atharvans and Angiras go 
even beyond to the great worlds of Brahma (ata uttare Irahmaloka mahantali). 
In fact the leading theme at the heart of the composers of the GB. is to 
carry to the front the AV. and its adherents and only rarely, as if by 
mistake, does this text omir theA\. from its Vedic lists fabox'e, S sah And 
in the same way Yait 6. i plates the AV. at the head of the four Vedas, 
not to speak of the exen more energetic exaltation of the Vtharvan in the 
Parisijias, As regards, secondh, the Brahman, the overseer of the irauta- 
sacrifices, Vait. i. x; n. 2 (GB. 1. 2 16) slate that he must be conversant 
with the Br.vhma-Veda, or Aiharv.lhgirasah, m the latter passage in expressed 
contrast with u.ij.'ttar, hotar, and aJhiaryu of the trau. AtGB.i.a.iS fend) 
the Brahman is described xvith the words, e^a ha vat vuivan sanaiid brahma 
yad bhrgyangtro-.td, indicating the identification of the A^' with the san-a- 
tidya which stands above the irau (below, S 33), GB i 3. i, 2 describes 
vividly the futility of the sacnficc wnthout a Brahman skilled in the 
arl'prasah) as a cow, horse, mule, or chariot cannot proceed witlj les> than 
four feel, so the sacrifice must have four feet the four Vedas and the four 
priests. Cp. especially GB. a. 2. 13 with its source, TS. 3. 5. 2. 1, where the 
GB. demurs at the statement of the TS., tasmad tasistho brahma karyah, the 
GB. being committed emphatically to the bhrgiah^iroviJ 

S 32 The office of the Purohita in the ritual texts. — Even more 
energetic .ire the demands of the liturgic texts in the matter of the office of 
the purohita {brahman, gurtt): ‘The king who rules the country shall seek a 
wise Brahman {brahmanam). He verily i> wise tlut is skilled in the bhrgu 
and an^ras] for tlie bhr^u and extras act as a charm against all ominous 



30 II.UrrFKATLKf.GU-CHrCmE. IIl..\lJURV^A’riMAM*GoI‘ATn.\-Bia 5 lMAS^A. 

occurrences, and protect everjlbing* (Kau^ 91. 2 — 4; ♦)' 

\aience of drafttutit, furv/iita, and guru is fruararitecd by comparing Ath. 
I'arii. 3. i, luhtav! in'inyam l/irgz<iigir0:icfat;t . . . stffujn vr;;:f.u 1 
and 3.3, (avnati lArgxatgin’XuiiiM ... kuryai funikitam. C> also 2. 2, 
Irahnui UismCtd athakaxit. Comersely, 'The gods F.ithers, and the 
twice-born (priests) do not receixe the oWalion of the king in whose house 
there is no guru skilled in the .\thatvan’ (2.3)^. Kauk 17. t 4 ^» * 4 ®- 4 ik 
eihibif king and rurohita in active cooperation. Tlie Parisislas are not content 
with such strong recommendations of the adherents of their Vedaj thcyx'ouM 
haxe the adherents of the other Vedas, yea ex'en of certain branches (Jdkha) 
of the AV. ilseif, excluded from the purohiih 'The Atharvan keeps off terrible 
occuaences, and acts as a charm against portentous ones ... not the .\dhvaryu, 
not the Cliandoga, and not the Balwfca ...'The Talnrca destroys the kingdom, 
the Adlnarsm destroys sons, the Chandoga dissipates wealth; hence the g^tru 
must be an .\tharvan i A Vaippalada as guru increases happiness, sovereignty, 
health, and so does a Saunakin who understands the gods and the mantras ... 
The kmgwho^e purodha U in any way a Jalada or a Mauda is deposed from 
his kingdom wathin the year, (Ath. 1 ‘arik 2. 2 — 5)*. The last four names are 
alike representatives of.Vtharvan schools (above, p. itff.); the passage shows 
how eager was the scramble for the office of Vurohiia. That the Alharvar.s 
finally succeeded m making heard their clamorous demand for this office (see 
below, 8 34). ts probably due to their superior, if not exclusive, knowledge 
of witclicraft, which was doubtless regarded in the long run as the most 
practical and trenchant instrument for the defence of king and people. 

8 33. Causes leading up to the exaltation' of the .\tharvan and 
its priests — In order to estimate these claims of the Atharvanists at their 
correct value the following needs to be considered. In the Vedic religion, or 
perhaps better religious evolution, three literary forms and correspondingly 
three liturgic methods of application of these forms to the saenhee, were 
evolved at a time prior to the recorded history of Hindu religious thought 
and action. They are the well-known types sAmini, and and 

their priestly exponents, hotar, udgatar, and adhvaryu. These literary forms 
taken individually are mere fragments of religious activity; these priests are 
only individual actors, not qualified each by himself to shoulder the burden 
of the literary knowledge or liturgic technique. The Hindus were at all times 
aware that these religious forms are fragmentary and phases of a whole. Hie 
RV. contains countless expressions indicating the Insufficiency of the /cuh to 
fulfill alone the scheme of religious action: the absence of samani would in 
principle leave Vedic religion just as much mutilated as the absence ofrraff; 
the categories are the three parts of a trio whose melody is carried by each 
in turn. A comprehensive vision was never wanting, tliough the search for 
a word for ‘religion’, or religious practice as a whole was at first not very 
successful. The iJrahmana-texts^ use sarzatidjd for knowledge of all the 
Vedas, but the most successful attempt at describing the religious literature 
and action as a whole is the word brahma^ and, correspondingly, he that 
knows the religion as a whole is a brahmdn. Each of these words appears 
occasionally in the fourth place, btd/ima after Uie avl: bruhmdnm comp.any 
with the pnests of the (ray. Tims theTS. (7. 3. i. 4) can say: parimitA za 
rcah purunitam samdni, parimUclni yajumsi; athAx Vaxj,., ‘vA 'vto na ‘sit rad 
brahma. In a sense the bnihma is a fourth Veda, but it is not coordinate 
with the other tbree;^ it embraces and comprehends them and much else 
besides; it is the religious expression and religious action as a whole, and the 

le.^me(l esoteric understanding of the nature of the gods and the mystery of the 



I. T:ni: AnMRVA-V^r)^ t.v GtXKRA L. — C. A.-V. ts ns Ritual Literature. 31 

sacrifice as a w hole (^raAma in irahmodya and bra/unnvadin). In the Upani* 
?acU this brahma, fre<iuently contrasted vnth the ordinary Vedas, is extolled 
above all other knowledge, and in a way personified, becoming one of the 
main 'conceptions which finally precipitate themselves in the pantheistic 
I 5 rahman-.\tman. T he knowledge of this brahma there constitutes the ^brahma- 
vtil^ati. Needless to say this fourth Veda, if we may so call ir, in all its aspects 
has primarily no connection with the AV., not even in the Saiphita (i 1.S.23; 

71 6. 3; cp. All 1. 2s. 13), nor in the Upanijads of thvit Veda Ye. g. 
iNrsimhapQrvatapanT 5. 2); the claim that the Atharvan is the Brahma-Veda 
belongs to the Atharvan ritual L 

'Ihis broader religious knowledge exists again from earliest times, not 
only in the abstract, but centres in persons who grasped it as a whole, in 
distinction from the technically qualified priests devoted to some specialty. 
W'hat tlie brahma is to the tra\7^ that the brahman is to hotar, ud^atar, and 
adhiar)Uy RV. 10. 71. 11 depicts the activity of the four priests, the first 
three handling their respective hteiar)! productions ij-cah etc,). The fourth 
priest is described in the words, brahma tadati jataiUi^dm^-. he has no special 
Veda, certainly there is no allusion to the AV. In RV. 7. 7. 5 the god Agni 
appears chosen as a Brahmin^ at a sacrifice which suggests tlie later iattra 
(rig/nV brahma nrsddane itdharhi). In the expression, brahma tadati jataiid^dm, 
the 'own wisdom’ is the MW/vr/ (neuter), and vada/i Jataiidjdvi foreshadows 
the brahmod}a ‘the holy, or theological mystery, or riddle’, as well as the 
ritualist refinements which the Srauta-te.xts miroduce so often witli the related 
expression, brahmaiddino vadantt. In the non-Alharvamc Vedic tests it is 
never suggested that (he Atharvan is of all other things the specific equipment 
_w)uch shapes the faculties of this all around Vedic theologian On the con- 
■ trary the KB. raises the onesided claim that a RV. scholar is the proper 
Brahman; Apastamba, Yajuaparibh 5 $asutr.% 19, more liberally, permits the 
Dr.^hman to perform with all three Vedas, yet even he ignores the AV.'^ 
Vasisiha was a celebrnted Brahman and I’urohita, and these quahfic.iiions were 
said for a time (probably by the descendants of Vasistha themselves) to be 
heredit.ary in this family But the Brahnuijas say explicitly that this is an ob- 
solete custom, every one properly equipped ma> be a Brahman .An} how 
there is no original connection between \ asistha and the .W”, and it is not 
going too f.vr to .assume that the distinguished abilities demanded by the 
theory of this office were rare enough to admit everyone that had intrinsic- 
ally valid claims upon it. 

Doubtless the .\th.arvanist5, p/ea that the Crahman must he one of them- 
selves, .and that, consequently, the AV was the Hrahma-Veda was suggested 
by an obvious schematic proportion. As tlie Ilotar, etc, u to theRV, etc., 
so the Bralvman is to the fourth Veda, and .os the .VV. is the fourth Veda, 
or rather a fourth Veda, it required no too violent nrench to identify invilh 
that other comprehensive fourth Veda, the knowledge of the brahma. Ihus 
the Atharvan became the Brahma-Veda, and GB. r. a. tS, end, c.an say 
ha till tidziin sanavid brahma yad bhrgiangtrcttd (cp. 1.5. 1 1,15, 19 > always 
with the idea of the sanam). The fact that there was no systematic, sharply 
defined place for the Atharvamst in the scheme of the hieratic {irauta) 
religion — witchcraft formulas at the sacrifice being handled as.ia///r by (he 
Adhvaryu — must have been galling in the long run, until this arrangement 
was completed to their own s.atisraction. They may have, though we do not 
know that they did, gathered courage for this tour deforce from the frequent 
mention in the AV. itself of the word brahma in the sense of charm, praver, 
c. g. I. 10. i; 14. 44; 23. 4, etc. If this was done it was a proceeding both 



33 ]J.IjrjjR\TURi:.Gr.>cinciirE. i l. A inAR^A-Vtj A and G opA'niA-l’RX^^^^^-^ 

arbitrary and superficial: the word has in the AV. the meaning of charm only 
in so far as the hymns of that Veda happen lo be charms; tire RN. employs 
the term freely to designate tls own sSltani <e. g. 5. S5. t; 7. 28. i). One 
misses, too, in the AV. the plural hahmAni as the true Vedic type of de- ■ 
signati’on for a special class of compositions, on a level nitb rtah, samani, 
^ajimsi, or, atkananah {thesajitni), and (oM/cJn- 

The Aihar\ anists doubtless also remembered that the AV. of all Sam- 
hiias contains the largest collection of theosophic hymins which deal explicitly 
(10. s), or impbclth (10, 7), with the divine Ilrahtnan and the brahma'^','- 
hence, to some extent at least, the later association of the superabundant 
■Upani?ads with Atliarvan schools. In the Upanfeads, as we have seen, the 
knon ledge of just such theosophic relations is styled br2htnavid\a. 

S 34. Connection of the I’urohita vvith the AV., and interrelation 
ofl’urohita andBrahman. — To these Atharvanic pretensions there came 
from another quarter a measure of substantiality, probably at a comparatively 
early time, in this instance with the passive support of allVedic schools. The 
matter concerns the office of the Puroluta, the spiritual and temporal aid of 
(he king, his chaplain and chancellor. To be sure the non-Atharvanic Sarphitos, 
Brahmanas, and SQtras do not mention the AV. in this connection any more than 
in connection with the office of the Brahman at the /re;//fl-sacrifice. Yet it seems 
very- unlikely that the knowledge ofAtharvan practices should not at all times 
have been considered a very valuable adjunct, if not a (onditio sine t/uii non, 
of the purohtl'i. Purohitas, whether they are formal adherents of the AY. or 
not, are ahvajs engaging in Atharvanic practices, even against one another*^. 
The interests of the king and his sovereignty {ksatri^n Isatrani) are too 
obviously dependent upon magic rites to admit the likelihood that the pre- 
tension? to this office on the part of him that knew ihem-should have been 
ignored At all periods the safety of the king, the prosperity of his people, 
his ascendency over hostile neighbors, must have depended upon his Pino* 
hita's skill in magic. The description, AB 8. 24 — 28, of the Purohita, his 
functions, and his relation to the king, transfers the reader to the sphere' 
and spirit of the AV.; the same text (S. 25) describes, a magic rjte, called 
brahmanah parimata, designed to kill hostile kings, which might be an extract 
from the ritual of the Atharvan”. In later texts (GDh. ti. 15, ry; Yajilav. 
I, 312; cp. also Manu ix. 33), as a matter of fact the rule is laid down 
formally that the Purohita should be an Atharvavedin. Sayana, Introd. to 
AV,, p. 5, 6, makes the same claim outright {paurvftityam ‘iftanavldai 
’va kar)amy, he is able to cite in support not only the rallier hysterical 
dicta of the Atharvan writings themselves, but also slokas from the Puranas, 
the NltiSastra, etc.’5, in the Daiakumaracanta the marri.xge ceremony, as 
well as magic rites, are in fact performed at the court of a king vvith Atharvan 
ntes, athananena {atbarvanikaia) vidhina'. the statement is the more valuable 
as It is incidental’®. 


Not quite so well-defined are the practical realities in favor of the claim 
that the liiahraai, (fourth priest) must be an Athareavedin, but tve mav 
assume that the gtowmi; affinity betn-een the AV. and the funUr, contri- 
buted at least something to the partial success which doubtless attended that 
claim It IS not necessatj for the purpose in hand to establish at all points 
the ongmal telabon between the 1-urohitn and the lirahman whose identitj- is 
baldly assumed m many passages of the earl.er Hindu hteralure-h A com- 
p Me sorter of thc^ character of each, as well as their respective names 
estabhshes ajmuor, genuine dilfetences in tlreir character. There is, hott- 
ever, one strihing point of similarity between them, namely this, that they 



I.TiicAinARVA-VrD\ i\' Gcncrai- — G. A.-V. iv ns Ritual Liti-raicre. 33 

have in charge, each in his own way, the general interests of their noble 
emplojers. On the other hand all priests having other names, at a very 
early period, certainly at a period prior to the Atharvanic assumption, had 
in ordinary practice only subordinate charges, because of the technical char- 
acter of their knowledge and occupation. RV. 10. 71. ti (cp. 7. 7. 5) ex- 
presses clearly the existence of broader theological interests than mere expert- 
ness in the recitation and cKanling of hymns, and the mechanical service of 
the sacrifice {hotar, \id"\tar and atlAva/ju). llns is the Br.ahmanihip which 
later forks into two directions, on one side the general knowledge of the 
procedures at llie sacrifice (the llrahman as fourth priest), anil the theological 
speculations attaching {l/ia/mtr, ^on the other, the higher theosophy 
which ultimately leads to the h-ahmoftdya of the Up.anisads It is natural 
that a dhine thus qualified should at a very early time have assumed per- 
manent and confidential relations to his noble r<f/h«v<r-employer, in all matters 
that concerned his religious and sncrlficul interests. Ilis functions are those 
of a high-priest. It seems unlikely that this llrahman was in all c.ases, too, 
competent to attend to those more secular and practic.il needs of the king 
connected with the security of his kingdom, the fealty of lus people, and the 
suppression of his enemies. These activities, rJjixKarindni, as the Atharsan 
writings call them*'', must have callefl for different training and different 
t.ilenti — they represent r,ather the functions of a cluncellor and fighting 
chaplain, than those of a high-priest — and there is no reason to believe 
that every llrahman possessed these necessary qualifications m addition to hii 
expertness in systematic theology. On the other hand, conversely, there must 
h.ive been I’lirohha? incapable of assuming intelligent charge of the more 
elaborate Vedic performances {irauia), unless we conceive tint m such cases 
the Ilrahm.in was a mere figure-head and his office a sinecure. Yet precisely 
Jiere is to be found the measure of truth which we m.ay suspect m the 
Atharvaoist claim tint ilie supervising llrahman shall he an adherent of the 
AV. In many cases the tribal king, or n//u, might have had but one body- 
priest, well cap.able of attending to the kingdom’s needs in all manner of 
charms and sorcer), and thus filling the yauroAitia creditably with the entire 
armament of the Veda of rhann» and sor< ery. lumself an Atharvavcdin. If 
the king lud about him no systcm.atK theulogun resplendent in h\s /d/andja, 
if there was no adept m that ided fourth Vcvla, the sarvitndnt that looms 
above the /rcj\i iidvii, the remoter .ippUcabilit) of the /r<7«Ar-pr.actices to 
real life, or tonfidence m the ability of Ae/ar, ad/iraryu, etc., to perform 
ihcir duties correctly of themvelve-., woutil lead him to entrust the general 
supervision of the performain cs t> his tru>ty \llurvan I’urohita. Thus 

the sweeping claim of the Atinrs in priests may be founded at least upon a 
narrow margin of fact, later the \tharv.in priests are likely to have equipped 
themseUes with enough external .in I meiliamcal knowledge to perform the 
function of llrahman with a show of respet Lability , witness the activity of the 
Ilmhman in the V.iit. In very life limes the .ibility of the Atharvins to 
practise drau/d-znes, and the c.inomcily ot theVaiL were recogm/ed by other 
Vedic schools, if the maltcr-offact references to tint Sutna on the part of 
the commentators to KS, be regarded as normal'h However the entire 
question of tlie rchtion of the AV. lo //-rfwAr-prartices is a rather obscure 
point in the history of Vcdic liter.aUirc, it being assumed generally that the .\V. 
had origin dly nothing to do with the larger Vedic ritual The assumption 
in this bro.vd form is .it .my r.itc too swcepiiig The existing Saiph.t.Ts of 
the AV. contain nnntr.is which could luve had no sense and pnrjiose except 
in connection witii /Aii/Af-performanccs. A scries of formulas, e. g. like .VV, 
Inio-ic, h, |■hil.>l‘32 < fl > 3 



. ILLnTcVATORU.GESCHtCirrE. l P. ATHARVA-VeDA and G0 P.^T^1A•BRAH^^A^•A. 


6. 47 and 4S, has no meaning except in connection with the three daiJ/ 
savanas-. Vait. 21. 7 exhibits them, properly no doubt, as part of the 
stoma. Or AV. 6.114 is evidently an expiatory formula for faults committed 
at the sacrifice'". This last is the special sphere of the Brahman. The OB., 
more frequently than other Brahmanas, refers to defects m the sacrifice 
(zirisla, Una, which ate to be corrected (santMia) by mantras 

(x. 1. 13 and 22), and there are mss. of the Vait, nhich add six prSyaicttta- 
chapters to the body of that text”. Some knowledge of j>a«/a-maUers, 
though not very extensive perhaps, the Atharvans must have had at a very 
early* time, and thus the germs of the correlation of the Atiiarvan and Brahman . 
may even rest upon some slender basis of very ancient tradition. 

J Abstract of the essay on this sulycct, .SBE. "XUI, p. tX’il ff. — ® Cp. above, 

S 26. and below, S 34. — 3 ‘>ec below % 66, and note especially GB. 2. 2. 14, 
ivheie the alhervangiraioh are atlded every pme in liturgical foriniilas to the 
yojunUi, and tamant — •> Cp. XVEBkR, Omina und Tortenta, p, 346 ff-J IS. X, IjS; 
SA^A^A, Introd. to the AV, p 6 — i Wfber, IS. I. 296} llLOOMriELD, J.40S.Xf. 
3?S, note. — 6 XB. 3 JO ji. 4; TA. lo 47; SB, 14- 6. 7 - 9 4- 17- — 

T SBE. XUl, p. XLUi -- ® Cp ibid. p. uv, note i, — 0 The commentary admits 
that the AV. may be included MHASL., p. 470; ZDMG. IX, p xr.wt; SUE. 
XXX. p. 321; cp. ihid. XUl, p ixv, note 2. — >® Wcbeb, IS. X. 34. 35* ‘37 
It hBE. XLII, p. Lv, note i; uxv, note 3. Cp. also RoTll, Abhandlung, p. 91 
MfJR, OST. 1, 395 — •» Cp. the mantra, GJb i J. p; SIVANa, Jntrod, lo AV,, p. 4J 
Vi^nu I’utiija 6. 5 (XViusoVs translation, vol. V, p, 210). —'*3 JIUASL, p. 4§6. — 

M Cp. AV. 3. 195 KaoS u 22—23; lU'. 4 $«• 7—9- — ‘J Cp. Deva at KS. 15, 

7. n. ” See above, S 28; SUE XLII, p. ixvm. — V E, g. RV. 4. 50 7 If, 
^^here the Purohita » called Brhaspati, i. e. the di\mc Irahman, Tor the htera 
lure on the subject see SjiC. XLII, p. ixnu, note 3. — »8 See below S 55. — 

*9 Carve in llie preface to the edition of Van, p. vi. — *0 See the anal>8i8 of 
these two classes of hymns, below, $ 58 and 60 — »f See Garvc, ibid p. v; 
Weber, Ver*. II, p. S3, Kau.. Introd. p xxxiil 


PART II. THE REDACTION AND EXTERNAL FORM OF 
THE ATHARVA-VEDA IN THE SCHOOL OFSAUNAKA. 


A. DIVISION AND ARRANGEMENT OF THE HYMNS. 

.S 35 - The division of the SainhitJ into 20 boohs. — ^Tlie AA'. in 
the Saunaklya-iiklu is divided into 2o books, a number which is upheld to 
some extent by tradition. Thus GB. 1. 1,5 and 8 speaks of 20 mythical sages 
descended from Alliarvan and Aiigiras, and Pataiijah in the .Mahlbliasya 
lo Fan. 5. 2. 37, cites the example, limlirn} 'tigtrasaJt', General state- 
ments ol this son, cannot, however, be regarded as conclusive for the original 
number of the Sannaklya-books, because AVP. also has 20 books whose 
genuineness is unimpeachableh Indeed it iiould seem as though the original 
collection of the Saunakins consisted of a lesser number of books, and that 
It was later swelled by the addmon of a number of books sulBcient to bring 
It into accord with the traditional number, that is. to assimilate it to AVI’” 
or to some other redaction in ao books. There is no doubt that the 20'" 
book IS a late addition compiled for the most part from the RAh for ntJahstic 
purposes of an advanced character (see below, S 62). The concludmg prayer 
at the end of book t, ftjmn 72) shows in fact that the collection w a, at 
tZt n “ '•"■"S',?'"' “ “ f"ll «op with book lint the 

^ V, doubtfully a secondary appendage, for the following 

a™r;me ‘,';r,h' h”® ■’ « <■“« ■>« barmomte with the plan of 

artan„ement of the hymns m the first iS books, which, in spue of certain 



II. TfiF A.-V. iN'iftF. School OF Salnaka. — A. Dfvi«!ov and ARRANCEMrNT. 35 

obscurities, or even puerilities, Is on the whole a consistent one AVP. contains 
the72h>mns of book ip (with the eveeptJon ofahoutado/en) scattered ibroughout 
that collection, making it seem probable that the supplementary book 19 of the 
\ulgata is in the mam gathered from that \ery source*; AV. 19.7 and 8 are 
Tepe.ated in full in XaVijatrakalpa 10 and 26, svhich would seem to show that at 
the time of the composition of that tevt these h)'nms did not belong to the vul- 
gata, as in the contrary case they would ha\e been cpioted by their pratikas’, 
AV. 19. 23 and 23, a fanciful catalogue, or table of contents, of the S.'irt'hit’i, 
are of obvious rarisishi-chamclcr'*, and certtinly do not refer to book 19", 
although they seem to refer conlinously (19. 23. 23 — 2S) to books 13 — 18; 
the Kaus., by quoting only a few mantras of book ip by /‘raii^-a, and pre- 
senting others in full seems to assign to it something like an inter- 

mediate position between a collection fully established within the Samhiti of 
its school, and a body of mantras conceived as belonging to another school’*; 
finally both books ip and 20 are not treated m the i’ratisakhya of tlie AV., 
or included m the analysis of the S-ipibitu as given by the Paficapifihkj’, 
a fact which is perhaps self-explanatory as regards book 20, but which stamps 
book 19 as a stranger at the time of the composition of the rrStisakhja. 
Kemarkable but nof finally significant is the reference of the rttamapa(ala, 
Aih. , Varik 46. 4 — 6 , to the constuuency of the AV, According to this text 
the Siimaklja ended with book 16, unless it were assumed that reference is 
made in u to another Inasmuch however as this tr.act indulges m 

oddities in connection with the remaining Vedic SaiphiMs, and because its 
account has in view specific ritualistic purposes, it is not necessary to assume 
that books 17 and iS were added after the composition of this Varisista, or 
are in any sense the product of a later redaction ih.an that of books 1—16. 
Hook 18, to be sure, is wanting in book 17, however, is for the most 

p.art included in it“. 

'Ihe AV. IS divided into ‘books’, aninala ‘lessons’, and silkt<.t 

‘hymns’ Another continuous division inio pii/'nihaka extends in Rom and 
Wiinsiv’s edition through the fif't 18 books <38 in all), but does not con- 
tinue through books ig and so In addition to sr/^At there is abo .a par- 
allel division of each /('tifip m /Tr/Z/aiUi^Ar 'hymns divided off according to 
sense', and faryayasuUa, briefer subdivisions into groups of verses, usually 
ten .a group. The latter subdiv iMon i-i to be compared with the Rigvedic 
vnfgci, be-,ide the suktci beginning with book 7 SiKNkAR VASOir’s divisions 
m accordance vviUi his authonlies diflcr wmevvhat irom those of the vulg.ate 
edition”. In Saj.ana’s comment.iry the bneter hymns are cornbmed into 
kvrger hymns in accordance with the traditional recitation,^ e g in the case 
of book 6 two hymns ytxti) .are tuscd into one** The Kaus i> .icquainted 
with the terms ad/iytiyit (•— /u/n/a), anuuka^ sulAt zn<l SIk rj. 

4. 3. 7, 8 mentions the term fartan m connection with the recit.al of sections 
from the alhanitnah on the one hand and the ai^nnah on the other, the 
statement is on the f.ice of U e.xotenc and fanciful, simikar to the loose use 
of /<?rr<?/: in RV. 7. 103 5; I’G. 2. 10. 20’s. The entire collection as printed 
in the vulgate numbers 731 hymns, aggregating about 6000 stanzas 

S 3G .krrangemenl of the books according to hymns of differ- 
ent length. — I.e.aiitig uvide book 20 whose arT.ingement like that of the 
jnri/Ar-collections of the Yajus samhitas is liturgical, .md the supplementary 
book 10 whose arrangement is apparently hap-hazani, and at any rate not 
to be discussed without reference to AVP., the first iS books d.sclose the 
following redactorial scheme**. The first seven books consist each of num- 
erous hymns (respectively 35, 36, 31, 40, 31, J 42 . and ii8)^ot hot very 



30 11. ImEHAIUluirGESailCHT t- l B. ATIIARVA-YEDA AKD GoPATHA-I!li.''llMA> A. 

miny staiiza.5 each, iS at the utmost (S- t/)- The hymns of each booh ate 
recoiated by a loner limit in the number of then stanzas. First, ascendingl), 
the hymns ofbooks 1—5, each containing about the same number ofhymns, 
have respectively at least 4, 5. 6 , 7 and S stanzas; this ascending scale seems 
to be repeated m a way inside of book 5, the norm of nhose first tno 
anuvakas (h)Tnns t-io) seems to be 8 or 9 stanzas followed m the resfot 
the book by hymns consisting at least of 11, and rising p high as it> 
stanzas (h>mn 17). After book 5 there is an obvious break in the arrange- 
ment: the number of hymns increases vastly but the scale of stanzas de- 
scends; book 6 contains 142 hymns of at least 3 stanzas each; book 7 con- 
tains 1 18 hymns of two, or even as low as one stanza each. The lower limit 
of stanzas in the hymns of each book may therefore be regarded in a cer- 
tain sense as the normal number of stanzas of that book”, suggesting critical 
operations in connection with those hymns that have more than the normal 
number. In such cases the question arises whether stanzas were not added 
by a later hand. It is also possible to sunnisc that certain hymns which 
originally fell short of tlie normal number of a pi’en book were brought up 
to the norm by later additions. Systematic investigations of this sort ha\e 
been earned on by Bergaionl and Oi.i>i.NtcRG on the RV. with interesting 
side-ghmpses at the AV”. Tlius the normal number of stanzas in the first - 
book is 4, intenupted only by hymins 3 (9 stanzas), 7 (7 stanzas), ii (6 stanzas), 
29 (6 stanzas), and 34 (5 stanzas). ll>mn 3 suggests the throwing out 
of the liturgically repeated stanzas 2 — 5, leaving 5 stanzas, but there is no 
reason further to suspect any of the remaining. In hymn 7 the first four 
stanzas ate anuijlubli, interrupted by a tristabh (stanza 5); it is therefore 
possible to imagine that the stanzas 5 — 7 were added later. Yet these stanzas 
are original, and there is no reason to suspect them on intrinsic grounds. 
In hymn 11 of 6 stanzas the last two maybe suspected because they repeat 
the pada, aia jarayu fadyciiam, as a refrain. Hymn 29 suggests by com- 
parison, with RV. 10. 174 a critical manipulation which shall do justice to 
the original diaskeuastic intention of both collections By cutting out AV. 
29 4 and s we have left 4 swnzas = RV 10. 174. i — 3 and 5, and if we 
assume that RV. 10 j 74. 4 => 10. 159. 4 li also secondary we obtain the original 
4 stanzas of the h)mn m bothRV. andAV”. Finally AV. i. 34 has 5 staiu.as, 
of whicli the last may possibly be later, since its second hemistich U for- 
mul.aic; then the first 4 stanzas might be looked upon as a debating charm, 
turned into a io\e charm by the appendage of stanza 5” Conversely it 
is no less easy to breed in one s mind distrust of certain final stanzas of the 
h>mns of four stanzas as indeed of the final stanzas of many Yedic hymns 
in general. This is so not only because additions are njlurally made at ihe 
end, but also because final stanzas frequently disclose the true point of a 
hymn to which the imtial stmzas themselves of a preparatory or ornamental 
character, as it were, work their way. E. g in RV. 7. 103, a prayer to the 
frogs for ram, or AV. 4. 16, an imprecation against an enemy, or AV. 3. i3, 
a charm to conduct a river into a new channel, the initial stanzas work their 
10 ll,e clima. (or mther ant, .climax) i„ the latt slanta of each hymn”. 
Thetefote there ,, ijuite frequently a break in ,l,e sense just before the last 
staura. Thus, unless ,ve be named by these considerations, AV. a may 
be p ausibly repatded as a battle-charm consisting of ,he fet 3 sianras, but 
adapted later to a charm agamst diarrhora by the added fourth terse”. 
Next A\ I. 5 and 0 contain 4 slanras each, together S staneas; the cotres- 

t‘!im ’’f"' 5 ■ '.?■ ’’ 1 °'“'^'^ Seven stansas ate common 

to both texts, bow the scheme of the RV.fators 7 stanzas for 10 9: shall 



II. 1 1!E A.-V. IN THE SCJIOOI-OF SaHNAKA. — A. Dl\’ISION AND ARRANCPMENT. 37 

we say that RV. lo. g. 8 and g, as well asAV. i. G. 4'!ire later appendages, 
and tlut the last-mentioned stanz.a ii’as added in tlie A^’ to bring the hymn 
X. 6 up to the normal number of 4 stan?as? The same question may be 
asked anent AV. r, 17. 4 which looks a bit patchy (pJda c=-Rr. i. igi. 6 “^), 
and differs in metre from die rest Certainly according to the ritual stanza 

4 is important, and contains the \ery point of the practices connected with 
the. hymn Then what is the meaning of the diaskeuastic manccuvre in AV. 
I. 20 and 21? The two hymns are patchwork: stanza 20. 1 «« TE. 3. 7. 5. 12 
(ApS. 2. 20. 6); stanza 20. 2 occurs with variants AS. 5. 3. 22; the next, stanza 
20. 3, seems onginal. From that point on the two hymns (20. 4—21. 4) are 
the same as I\\ . 10. 152, in 5 stanzas. Shall we say that a single hymn of 

5 stanzas was inflated by the Alharvauist into two hymns of 4 stanzas each, 
in order to fit it to the external scheme of his arrangement? This would 
accord in principle with the prexious critical acts. Once again, 5 stanzas of 
the tw'o hymns 1, 23 and 24, dealing with the same subject (leprosy), are repeated 
TB. 2. 4. 4. I — 2. Has the AV. taken once more a h)mn of 5 stanzas, and 
swelled it out to two of 4 stanzas e.sch, in order lo pamper its scheme? 
Tlie danger and difficulty of such operations may be seen best in hymn 1.4*“ 
RV.i. 23,16 — tg According to Oidcxcero, l.c., p. 225, RV. 1.23 consists of 

6 tjcas (stanzas i— iS) which form a ritual senes, stanzas ig — 24 being an 
apjiendix. Now, unless tlie AV. borrowed its four stanzas (•— R\’. 16 — ig) 
directly from the redactorlally finished RV. — a very unlikely assumption — 
these criteria lose something of their force as applied to the RV. itself; if 
their stringency in the RV. is not aboxe suspicion, little confidence can be 
placed in similar operations m the AV., because they are in general depen- 
dant upon Rigvedic data. Without going so far as to say that the \erse- 
nonns of the Atharvamc books should be ignored in judging the historical 
make-up of the hj mns, extreme scepticism is for the present the proper frame 
of mind, I s.ay, for the present, bec.ause the prospect of having the other 
Atharvan Saiphul, the PaippaUda, m our hands soon is now very goodi 
cert.ainly even the most enthusiastic believei in these studies will be in favor 
of deferring them until the Saunakiya's sister-sai\vhita discloses its treasure 
of filers. Hence similar observanons for the rem lining books will not be here 
undertaken' they would mdeeil require Uic freetlom and space of an inde- 
pendent e»s.ay’fi We mu’^t not, however, foil to draw attention to the fact 
that tlie ritual of the .Vth.u-v,in, as tlut of the R'l' , generally recognizes h>mns 
that .are clearly composite by ciuploving each part independently with a true 
sense of its proper value lliiiEt;K\Ni>i has discussed and illustrated this 
point for the RV. the present writer for die .\.\ Composite hymns of 
this sort are 4. 28 in two parts, 7. 56 in two parts, stanzas 5 ft. w.-inting in 
.\VP., and ni!jric.ated sejiamtely Kam jjg. S, the two hymns 7. 74 and 7. 76 
are trip.artite and consist of heterogeneous stanz.is which are employed pro- 
perly in the Srnra-*; f)n.a 3 J)- the checkered ,(«nAr/<?-hymns are divided pro- 
perly in the ritual tr.adUion of all schools that take occ.asion lo introduce 
them (see below, § 63). 

We have seen th.at the first sexen books are .arranged on the basis of 
the number of st.anra> in the hymns; the numbers ascend from book i — ^5, 
descend from book 6—7. Books 8— iS, wuh the exception of 15 and 16, 
consist of long liymns; the sJiortest hymn {S. i) in these is longer lh.an the 
longest in the first seven books (hymn 5. 17 of 18 st.anzas). We may note 
also that the shortest hymn, again barring books 15 and iG, stands at the 
beginning of the entire series; the longest at the end (hymn iS. 4 vvith Sg 
Stanzas). lunher, books 8 — ii consist of 10 hymns each; after that the numbers 



3S 41. LmEUATUK U. GEsCUICmE. I C. AntARV A SV GoMTiU-BRAUMAKA . 

descend in book '12 (5. hymns)’, 13 (4 hjTrnii); X 4 (2 h)-mns), and 17 (one 
hvmn)/ cf. the arrangement" according to anuvakas, -below. Again, l)Ook o 
has the^shortest hjmns N\itlV an awrage of 25. 8 stanzas to a hymn; next, 
book 9 tuth an average of 30. 5 stanzas to a hymn; next, book 10 uith an 
a\erage of 35 stinzas'to'a hymn. But book ii interrupts this ascending 
scale with an aTefage of'3r» 3 stanzas* to a hymn, and ahor that this cri- 
terion, if it be more than dn accident, is no 'longer applicable. Instead, 
another element of dujsiQn mips tire arrangement of the booksj. namely the 
dhision into anuvakasi the books are arranged from S — 17 according to the 
number of anuvlkaS m a descending scale. Books 8 — 13 have 5 amu-akas 
each; book 13 has ^;‘books 14 — 16 have two each; and book 17 has 1 
anuvaka. Book 18, -to be sure, again disturbs this descending scale with its 
4 anuvakas. As far as books 13 — 18 are concerned, the prominence ^of the 
anu\ aka- arrangement which plays no r6le in the first 7 books at all, is brought 
into view by the plural, duals, singular, and then again plural in the catalogue of 
• these hooks, AV. 19. 23. 23 — aS: rohiicbhyah svaUa, plural (book 13); 
suryahhyam ivahcit dual (book 14); vratydbhyaiii sva/ni, dual (book 15); 
frajafatyabhyain (why this designation?), dual (book lO); xhasahyat 

svahdi singular (book 17), and, mau^ahhebhyalj, svaha, plural (book i8)»k 
S 37 * Arrangement of the hymns within the' books. — Within 
a given book the hymns are on the whole not arranged at all, but seem to 
follow ‘one upon the other pell-mell, iwib little reference to their sub;ect 
matter, or any other discernible criterion. The numerical scheme of each 


book, to begin with, prevents the grouping of all related hymns. Thus 7. 65 
is too short to take ns place h> the side of "the hymns to the apantirgO' 
plant, 4. 17—19, the hymn 12 5, on the other hand, is too long to figure 
by the side of j,j; — j/?, though they ore oil curses agamst.thi opprei^ors of 
Brahmans. Similarly 5. 23 is prevented by its length fiom joining the charms 
against worms (2. 32, 33) Yet a considerable amount of tlie material is 
obviou'ly arranged according to subject matter: two, three, four, and rising 
from that to as high as twelve hymns, dealing with quite or nearly the same 
theme, are grouped in the same place. The last mentioned number is the 
highest, being evliibited by 6. 110— izi, all of wliicli deal with expiation 
(ynhaict/id) of sins’*. The nc.xt largest number, sev’en, is represented by 
the so-called w/yaro-hj mns, 4.23—29 (see SS 45 . 57 ), the group 2.1S— 23 
contains 6 imprecations against enemies. Book 3 begins w itli an anu\ aka in 
5 hymns connected with royal practices (i — 5); in a certain 'sense the five 
hymns of entire anuvaka 4.16 — 20, dealing with witchcraft, are made of the 
same stuff. Four groups of 4 hymns each are 7. 35—38 (women’s charms), 
7. 46—49 (divinities of the moon and heavenly wives); 19. 40— 4j {byalma, 
ta/ns, rt’iX-m); and 19. 47 — 50 (Night), Very much more frequent are group-, 
of three: i. 4—6 (water-charms); i. 19—21 (battle-charms); i. 22—24 (skin- 
diseases); 2. 15—17 (prose-fomuUs to secure long life); 4 17 — 19 (charms 
with the 5. 17—19 (against oppressors of Brahmans), 6. 

22 — 24 (water): 6. 27—29 (ominous birds); 6.34—36 (Agni hymns): 6. 30-41 
(;ra,-«li)Dins; seeS 6 o,eni 3 ); 6. 65— li?(battlc chaniis); 0.S6—SS (niiciliil)); 

6. 57-59 battle-ch„„„), 6. .30-.3, (lo.e-tharn,,); .4-.6 (Siviti); 
,.17 19 (Dlular;, 7 79 — Si (lunar); ij. 3—5 (!„ ;„terKt orBralimanj); 

9.9 II (run IT nnd / mil }; 19. 14 — .6 (freedom from tlaneer); 19. 17 — 19 
(prose hemes for proleclion,; and ,9. aS-jo (amulet ol i/arl'/L). And then 
there ate rn aclihtion some sixty or more pairs of hymns more or less allied 
in soblect-matter: m general ibeir conneai’on is too obsious to reriiiirc special 
statement, at times it needs to ire natched for rather tloselv, as. e. g, in the 



II. Tnn A.'V. in iiin Sciiooi. okSwnak v”. — A. DiVistp’jj a'jd ARRAN'CF\iE\T. ^ 

case of 3. 1, 3 (Vena .mil Gandlian’a); 4. i, e , and ia)i' j. i, 3 

{ma/ias anil rJf); 7. S, 9 (journey and road); 6. 47, 4S (Oie three stit'a/ias); 
7. 27, 2S and 9S, 99 (ritualistic pairs); 7. 76 (end) and 77 (Indra .md Maruts); 
II. 7, S (both theosophic, sharinR the padas; 7. 25**^ == 26}^, and 7, 

26"*'’ = S. 24)’’). OF special importance for the future fnlal liistor)’ of the 
Saipiiita is the undoubted prehistoric 'and organic connection of some of the 
groups; tl^ey appear together many times not only 'because they deal uith 
the same-theme, but because a given group in an earlier period of mantra- 
production made up one and the same hymn, or, tup or more hymns bearing 
upon the saine theme and the same occasion. ' 'I’h'uS the ffi/^ara-group 
(4 - =3 — so) is undoubtedly built up. on a rather slender tradition of ya/us- 
inateriala; the first and last stanzas are'blmost ahvajs directly derived from 
some Yajus-collection, the interior five stanzas are the original product of the 
Atharvanist’s muse’^. Of the group a. 19 — 23 the first seems also originally 
^<7/V/r-matter (MS. i. 5. 2; ApS. 0 . st. t): out of these passages the entire 
litany is produced by .a kind of Atharvamc innation-'’. There is a simibr 
historic .md organic connection betneen the four hymns 7. 46 — 49; the three 
hymns 1.4—6; 6. 27—29; 7. 39— 41; .md 7. 79— Si, 'the t»o hjiunsi.jo, 
e:; 24, 35; 2, 32, 33; 4. 31, 32; 6. S7, 8S; 135, 126; 9. 9, 10; 19. 7, 8; 22, 23 
and Oo, 6t. A more complete sifting of the mantras will disclose other groups 
of tins kind, and on the other h.and the record of some tonnections of this 
sort is sure to have perKhed (e. g, perhaps, m the c.\se of i. 7, S; 6. 103,' 
104; io.7,S; 1 1. 9. to, etc ). Xot infrequently the hymns are grouped for reasons 
that are ur more superficial and haphazard than those just mentioned. The 
present writer drew attention to facts of this son m connection with the 
first book, as did later Mr.NRV m connection with tiie seventh bookJfj they 
appear sporadically throughout the Saiphita In the first place, just .as the 
introductory hymn i. i and the closing hvmn of book 19 liold their places 
bec.aii»e of their subject-matter. \o there is design in the opening-h) mns of 
books 2, 4, 5, and 7, all of which begin with .1 theOiOphic or ^ra. 4 wp</><?.h>mn 
in loftier diction. The grouping of 9 5 — 7 seeuia to be due to the large 
patch of hmhuiana pro>e tomamed m them. Hymns j, 3 , j .and 7. 6, ? f.Vditi 
and Dm) deal in each pair with opposite rather th.an same themes .Vbove 
ail verbal correspondences, .vt times -.o vague as to tast doubt upon one or 
the other of the following observ .itions seem to be the sole cause of the 
ju\t.apo>ition of hvmns. 'Ilms i. 9, 10 a»e not connected by theme, but each 
contains the word ziirttmi m the opening hemtstich Hymns ti — 13 are 
linked b> subtle correspondences hvmn 1 1 is a chirm for ea-.y delivery m 
childbed, ending with the refrain. «/:« /<mn« /uAnMw, hvmn 12 begins 
With the word farmfjyt'ih, its theme being the 'cloml jilacenw born’ lightning, 
then follows hymn 13 .also addressed to lightning (root stun in 12. i and 
13. ^)J^ The word xci/ra links externally o 134 ami 135, the words j/ena 
and stan<iv>tnu 7. 10 and 1 1 , nm Dirj and apa mtj 7 G4 .and 65,/rj;.;:i7//.'a// 
and 7.74 and 75, rrkau and x'rkkm 7 95 and 96, stem ka, 
felt to be the same as /ntyj/i)//, 7. 100 ami loi, stem raksohart 3 . 2. aS 
and 3. I ; stem prdna 11. 3. 54 ff and ii. 4, Mtn and sam (as occasionally 
in parallel versions of the same mantra) 19 i, 2, /.t/iAr and iam 19. 9 — 11. 
The group 7. S.'S— 90 seems to be linked by a cumukation of verba! corre' 
spon tences: they begin respectively with the words ayt, and (ipi, SS and 
S9 I contain the root /;<■. amt iept in S9 3 is perhaps correkated with sepo 
in 90.3. In the group 7. 115 — 115 such an external correspondence can 
be made criticallv helpful. 7. 113 and 114- * obviously treat the same subject, 

« hereas 1 1 1. r is foreign to their theme, and «>ay hav e gotten this berth 



» H.LlTTERATUKU.GE'^CUrCinz:. t H. ATIMRV.\-VEDA and GoPATUA-BryAUMANA. 


because its words ^reto yanlu, as well as its sense, concatenate plaus'Uy with 
7. 115. I which begins, $ra fatttah\ cp. below, S 40 * 

The Samhita-text of the AV. in the Saunaklya-school was pubJishecl m 1S5S 
Horn and W. D. ^VlUT^EY under the title, Athar^a Veda Sanhita: the ^lition is 
occasionally spoken of as the sujgate by the present and other writers |h>s 'v^ 
followed by a number of subsidiary publications by WntTNiYi an 
of tratUas, or \ crsc-beginmncs, in IP. IV. Off.; the edition of the i 

rratuakhya, or Saunal.TyaCalur’idh)5>ilwa in JAOS. MI. 333 — ^*5 (adcienoa, jA h. 

X 156 ft.), and an Index Verbonim to the published text which at the same lime 
reproduces the readings of the pnda text {J-^OP. XII) Whitney’s posthumous 
work, containing other indexes, critical notes to the text, and a translation is now 
in the press of the Harvard Oncnta! Senes (ed, C. R. LaNMAN): see TAOS. Xy. 
CEXXtff. .\nother edition of the same Veda m both fum/iuS and /u/a-form, with 
a fragmentary commentary ascnbed to SSyana, is partly published and wholly in 
the press, under the title AtharvavedasamJiita (Bombay 1895); it is from the pen 
of the late Piiankar I’Andcrakg I’AhDiT. The value of the commentary is stated 
critically by 'Whitney, Festgruss an Rudolf son Rotli, p. S9 ff. For the Kashminan 
version of the AV., the so-called Paippalsda '^lkli4 (above p. ii), see ROTit. Her 
Atharva-Veda m Kaschmir (lubmgen 1875): it is now proposed b\ the present 
author to publish a photographic reproduction of Ibe unifiue manuscript of that 
Veda; see the circular to that effect issued by the Johns Hopkins Unnersity in 1898, 

and JAOS XX iS+fT. 

« Weber, IS XIII 433, kVL.*, p. 161, note. The statements of both CB. and 
Mahahhs«ya refer in this matter to an Atharvanic tradition broader than that of 
the Saunaklya, since both texts present iam no i. 6 ) as the initial stanza* 

This probably suits the AV!' , see Kaubka, Introduction, p. xvxvilff. — * The 
beginnings of the books of AM*, and their relation in general to the books of the 
Saunaklya we stated above, p. 14. on the authority of RoTll, HerAV. in Kaschmir, 
p. 15 ff., 18 — J Sec below, $5 3^ and 37.— 4 RoTif, ibid. p. iS. AV. it), 
are directly designated as faiffalodtimantrrih, Ath. 2’arif. S. 2: see above p. ts- 
5 WruER, IS. IV. 433. note 2. — * Tliey occur, m fact, in full text, at the end of 
the UUamapatala, Aili I'ariJ 4O. cp \Yfiier, ib 433.-7 The expression, hrahmane 
n~M, which Weisfr, ib 433, note 3, suspects as referring to book 19, is a mere 
general ending to both lixts 19 22. 20 and 23. 29: it invokes irahma, prayer, m 
general; cp the metrical $t>. at the end of each chapter, — ^ fee Kauw Introd. 
p XL. and cp. I’uciiEL, GGA, April 1891. p 283.-0 WiIiT.VFY, JAOS, VH. 334. 
581 ; SitAMtAR PAsniT’s edition, vol I, Critical Notice, p. 24.— lo WEBER, IS. !'*• 
432 - — Roth, ibid _p j8. — ■» Miakkar PAKctT, ibid. p. i6fr — 'i 

AanJe frayena xanSnt tntiZm Iro'ilmat'iny eva talkSfi aSy’pal.asanifma'jy'nurodheitit 

tytadiayam <l‘drtya suKtantna tyatahriyale voJ. 12, p. 2)‘ nSte Indexes, 

p. 382. "^e fifyoya are also alluded to m the Htc RanJma-hymn 19. 22. 7. The 
date of A\. 19 22 and 23 can be fixed as later than the KauSika. In 22. Ii— 13 
the formulas npoKamtihyah uram.bf'^ak svSiS, and tiUartbhyah naka aiiude 

without doubt to the freejuent citations in RauS. of hymns and slanias which haie been 
prcMOusly staled in groups Nee for w/e//ema, Kaui 26. 34 j for w/towe, K.sui 2C.40; 
41. 151 50. i4,for«r/aro,Kauf.48. 36. — «S DifTercntly WeiicR, IS. I.293; II. 39<J> 
IV. 434; V. 22, 77;SrA\V. i89i,p.770.notei,\\T-» 137, lOjicp. snE..XI.II.p. XXI. — 
>6 Cp. BfXOAicxE. Recherche* sur J’hisfoire de la Samluta du Kig-Veda, I, r, 4 ami 
75 0 .}. 18S6,; Wffer. is. XMI. 178; XVUI. i. 154 _ 17 The Anukramani of the 
A\. designates this lower broil a& the norm (/ra4rf.) of the books, the deNiaiions 
as see VrcER, L c. — Bfrcaicm:, L c.; OuTirMirRG, Die llymncn des 

Rig-Vcd-i, p. 243^fk^- OLOEMiriie. 1 c. - .0 Cp SHE. XT.II. 274IT. - 
!. Webfr, is ,\V 2If. 66; SUE. XL2I. 348 — 

Cp SBL Xl.Il. 233 iT. — »j As further specimens of hymns ihat invite such 
criticism wc inay mention 2 3. 4 (last sts.); 2. lo (cp. TH.2. 5.6 1; IIG. 2.3. 10! 

^ ^ siJikxLrr.297j; 2. 14 (st. 4 ; cp. iWd.soO: 

■’f 30 (the irregular st. 6 interrupts the concatenation 

of 5 and 7 ; but see SUE. XLIL 363 ); 4 . 2 Owt sr); 4 . 16 (last two sis.); 4 - '7 
(st. 3 , rather extraneous - 7 . 23); 5 . ,7 (Berrairme,' 1 . c . p. 22 ; OLnE-M.rRG, 1 c., 
I’' ^DMG, XU 708 ff ; cp. Wfbfr, SIWW. l 89 >. 
P '95 — 5 Knusika, introdoetion, p. x/i. — «s <,j*r vr rr etx et- cco. — 

iQ*'-r ,>i f 7S. note. — J» In a less specific ’way'’’all^the\ynins 

rnnuleU of some sort, and therefore represent a Still larger 
xeiv^wmJitenr'" rr Tv* « 45 Wxd 57. — ja In accordance with notions 

very prominent m CL. The Rig.\edic cosmic triad, Agni, V5)u, SOrja, is there 



II. Tiir A.*V. ixTiii School ov Sauxaka. — B. JIkihs OFUJEArjnRVAN. 41 


SHclIsd 0!it to it Iffrad by the addition of Cnndr-t and Apali (die moon With the 
wnters) to provide for the AV., the other three hem" correlated with the members 
of the /w/ 2 w>- 7; see S 45- — J» beven Ilymn« of tlic AV.. AJHi. MI. 4joff.; 
Le Ihre Vll de I'AV., p. Ix. — •ja The first 13 hjmns of book 1 seem to be 
.arnnjici! coiitJnuously in gnojis; after that the regularity of the scheme breaks 
down; cp. ScNcn Iljmns, ibid. 


B THE METRES OF THE ATIURVAN AND THEIR REL-\'UON TO 
THE CRITICAL RFisTORiVnON OF THE TFXl’. 

S 3S. The metres, wUh special reference to the Atharvanic 
(popufar) anii§Iubh — 'i'he metres of the origmai parts of the AV. are m 
the main stOl the common Vedic metres, gayatrT, anujtiibh, pahUi, in, short 
metre; trlspibh, and jagat], in long metre. A considerable part of the Sauna- 
kl}a-te\t, noLably book 15 -nnd most of book j6, .are in prose’; metrical 
and prose matter ore a good deal mived up’, so that it is frequently difficult 
to determine whether a passage is merely cadencetl prose, or doggerel metre, 
or originally good metre spoiled by interpolations and additions which at 
times distinctly betray themaelvea as glosses. Tlie BfhatsarsanukramanT, in 
the course of its struggles with these defective metres enriches the metrical 
terminology with new varieties: the words, //iir/, bhimj, '^arbhA (e. g. t/Vj,/- 
garbhtx b/tunk)y (inT, etc. figure frequently •». 'I'he metres vary in the same 
h)mn more than is customary m the RV.. it would seem as though this 
variation was in a measure felt to be a stylistic or literary device*. L. g, it 
is hardly mere accident that many hymns oj>cn with a (to our feeling) livelier 
anu?lubh stanza (short metre), and continue with tn^fabli-stanzas (long metre); 
see I. 13; I. iS; s ag; 4. 16; 6. 3 6. 49, 7. 6S, 7. 72 (cp. RV. 7. ro3). 

Occasionally an aniiy;ubh-liymn opens m still livelier gSyatn 2. 32, 4. xe. 
Conversely some effect, perhaps the opposite eftect of solemnity, seems also 
to be intended when a short metre hymn is introduced by a tnsjubh* 
2 * 4 S 3 * 5; 5 - 7 ) d til. It IS perlups no accident that the Vedic wedding- 
stanzas .are prevailingly anuqubhs, the fiincr.al-sUn/ ts tnjjubhs. The metres 
of the .\Y. are on a level with those of the Grhy.uiitras. Aside from the 
greater freedom .vntl irregularity of all types this k 'hown by .applying Olden- 
utRC’s test of the .anustubh* The onginxl \tUarvanit. anuNtubh stanzas, l c. 
those that do not coincide with the hieratic KV. slin/.as, ditTcr from the 
R)g-Yedic anusfubh on the one h.ind, and from the Epic .and Buddhistic 
sloka on the other. Whereas in the R\ the tir.t pida of the anus^ubh 
hemistich reguJarJy ends ni a diuinbiis or second peon ('•' - and 

in the Epic and Buddhisiic slcka still more regularly in a first epitrite or 

antispast C'- the first pada of the -Mluirvan and Grhya hemistich 

permits these as well as ail other possible feet of four sylKibles. 'Ihe hymns 
that were tested for tins purpose arc 1.1,1 2, 1.7, 1.8, 5. 19, ami 1 2. 4. 

I — JO, In .adclitian Co single stanzas of many other hymns The Atharvanic 
and Grhya anujpibh may be desigiuited as the popular anuspibh in distinction 
from the hieratic anuytubii of the soma-hynms m the R\' . a hymn like RV. 
10. S5 is, of course; m popular anuqubh. Considering the absolute ijuan- 
tiiative freedom of the eight-syllable line of the Younger Avevta^ we have 
reason to .assume th.it the popular and freer .muqubh is structurally and 
clironoiogkany earlier tlian the better regulited hiemtic (somic) .inus{ubh, an 
assumption which is no wise disprovcrl by the parallel grammatical and lexica! 
criteria of llie two types of literature (sec below, S 42). The theory that the 
development of the popular foot tovik plicc from through 

to S' is on Its f.acc implausible: m the light of the trend of all Hindu 



; II. LirrtRUUR u. Gi-scnicirii:. i P. Atharva-V^a and Gofatiia-BiOiimava. 


raetrical development the change from the regulated type 
free type ss i-' is unparalleled and uninteJhgible. Instead we nmy assume 
that the Ari-an free octos>llabic Imes, grouped into two hemistichs of i6 
syllables developed the iambic .cadence at the end of each hemistich m pr 
historic Vedic times, and continued so in the more popular poetry until the 
beginnings of the Epic and Buddhistic Sloka. At t!ie same time a more 
exquisite treatment at the hands of the hieratic poets developed the Kig-\ epic 
anu5tubh on a parallel line, b> repeating the final cadence of the hembticli 
before the cicsura in the middle of it^ 

g 39. On the critical restoration of Atharvan metres. — Atliarvan 
metres are so generallv capable of improvement that we are in danger of 
singing our own rather than Atharvan hjmns, when we apply ourselves to 
the task of improving them. An uneasy sense is left that we all know how , 
to make better verse lines than those that have somehow got to be in 
among the Atharvan writers, carried out to its full consequences this would 
eliminate one of the more marked pecidiarities that render the Atharvan 
what It is®. Yet it is impossible to .abstain entirely: such abstemiousness 
would suggest the equally mistaken view that all Atharimn stanzas are before 
us in the form in which Ihej were originally composed. Great tact and a 
keen sense of where to draw the line are particularly required in amending 
the text m any case the critic upon whom this task is forced may not hope 
to escape error altogether In the very opening hymn (i. i. 4^) it seems 
necessary to tlirow out tlie entirely untnetrical /ivttia/aM, although uliat remains 
is by no means perfect But there are far more certain cases: in 2. 3 6 
rak^asam is surely a gloss, so alao krtmln in ?. 31. 4', In s. 33. 5**^ bhisadivn 
IS certainly superfluous, being derived from the parallel version, RV. 10 163. 4- 
Quite certain are the following ca-ses of interpolations and glosses: deidn in 
3. 15 5**, dyaAm(!j)as^a in 5 19 7'^, tahnamt m 5. 22. 5'j havita in <3. 4®' 
!*•, svatti m C 40 2^, m 6 9S. j** (cf. TS 2.4. 14. 1; MS. 4. I2‘ 
dantau in 6. 140. 3*, puru in 7 21. j**, dri’a in 7. 70. e® (cf. TB. 2. 4. 2- s)j 
(iini/ra in 8. 8. 2'**, arsanlr m 9. 8 i\'-, visvaspa in 9 10 14* (cf RV. 1. 164. 
35**; VS. 23. 62^; LS 9 10 14*’), duskrte m 10. i 23’=} var u^ram in 10 4 
S'*, 4^* (cf 7 sfi 3^*, 7‘*>, malarisvd in 10 9. 26'; either ubhe or Une m n- 
S. h\prthivydm in ii. 5 12*'*, m 19. 1 3'. Less certain is the dis- 

position oi pahr in 3. 4 sr/tana/n m 3. 12 6, g<tndkarvan in 4. 3-. S'; 
amQvt m 5. 8. 8', sacetasah m 0 68 manasd m 6. 83. 4'; adharo in 6- 
134 2*; Lalaiah in 9. i O**, bJnks&tn m 11. 5. 9*’. And there are, of course, 
cases in which corrections of other sorts strengthen the impression that the 
metres may be improved by critical restorations. Thus the defective pada 
9. 2. 4** IS followed m the same hymn, pada 9'*, by what reads like its own 
correction; or, the temptation to make over into good metre 9. 5. 1*^ so as 
to read, a uaya_ etam anv a ra>’hasta, sukrtatjt lokam p-acka/u p>ajanau, is 
very great Similarly 11,2.2 may be much improved by transferring avityavah 
at the end of the first hemistich (so also AVP.) to the second hemistich’. 
On the other hand tliere are not wanting instances in winch inferior metre 
15 on second thought proved to be just what the Atharvavedin wrote. Thus 
9.4.22' consists of two defective padas; the first being short, the second 
ending in a wrong cadence: ayur asmabhyam dadhat prajani ca, rayas ca 
posair alia nah sacaldm. All attempts to better this hemistich are wasted, 
b^aube It IS nothing but a secondary transfer from the plural to the singular 
of the perfectly good heinistirfi 18. 4. 62, ayur asmabhyam dadhatah prajdi’i 
ca^potair ahhi nah sacadhiam. Or, one might be tempted to amend 
the short p.ula 2. 4 6 , atho aratidasih, especiallj as it is repeated in a 



II. The A.-V. in the School of Sausak.\. 


. — I!. Metres of the .'Vtharvan. 4-? 


metrically preferable form in 19. 34. 4t‘, atho aratidu.anah. But the entire 
character of the last hjnm n inferior and its \ersion of the pada is probably 
in the nature of a secondary Icctw /acillon the catalectic line, 3, 4. G*', had 
best be left undisturbed, as such lines must be in many other instances”'. 
Anjnay there are almost countless cases in the AV. in which corrections 
at the hand of the metre would really amount to independent composition, 
cases like 3. 28. i; 4- it. 4'“, 4. 17. j'-i; 5. 7. 1'-i; 0 234. 3; 7O. 5“; they 

not only point out the need of extreme caution in general, but tend to shake 
confidence in all but the most unavoidable emendations. 

S 40. Order of stanzas and concatenation as critic.al aids. — 
Of distinct strophic arrangement of stanzas there is little or nothing in the 
A\.; the arrangement of the hymns in the sanous books according to the 
number of their stanzas is also carried out in a very crude and superficial 
manner". Hence tliere is \ery little basis for a critique of the arrangement 
of the stanzas in a given hymn, or the distinction between original stanzas 
and such a» may )i.ive been added by .1 hater hand Nevertheless the e\isting 
text is open to improvement in these respects, although subjective impression 
is here more easily than in other forms of criticism confounded with historical 
reality. To begin with, some hymns are certainly composite, as may be readily 
gathered from their context and their employment m the ritual booksj e. g. 
4. 3S; 7. 74; 7. 7O". For no visible re.nson, but yet certainly, 6. 48. : and 
3 have changed places Vait 17. lo .and the parallel versions have them in 
the nglit order". The long hymn 12 4 shows traces of confusion in the 
order of its stanzas: the fourth may be suspected of having stood originally 
after the fifth, because the second hemistirh of st. 4 seems to summarize the 
statements m.ade in the remaining three heimsiichs of the two stanzas. SimiU 
arly there seems to be considerable confusion m the order of stanzas 43 — 47. 
cf. the re.iTrangemeni proposed by the .luthor" When we find in the midst 
of die wedding*stanzas of the iurjii‘Sidtit (14 i. 1 ft RV. 10 85. t ft.) the 
stanza 14. 1. 17, which is evnlently R^■ 7. 59 tj in a form .adapted to the 
marnage-rites {arjtrmcinar/t stibstmit<^ for /ncwhtJiam), we may judge at least 
th.1t It did not belong 10 the onginal siock of the wedding-stanzas, on the 
other hand the concatenation of its second henmiuh with would seem 
to show that it was adapted to serve in the very place where it occurs m 
the AV Similar considenviions will show that the stanza 14 i 43. m con- 
catenation with 44, although aUo of secondary workmnislup — it occurs 
nowliere else — yet holds its pLue by rights m the W Concatenation is 
a very ccumnon feamre m ihe yV ", .and lu a certain extent guarantees the 
order of stanzas m the S.atiibiLi 'I'Jius .dl three stanz-as of 6 42 and 6 iiS 
conc.atenate, so that we in.aj feel furlv sure that the Ath.ir\an composer 
placed them in this order, whatever may have been their pre history, whether 
they were onginal with the AUiarvanist. 01 lirst composed in .another qii.arter 
of Vedic activity. So also the first two stanzas of 6 i iS occur again MS 4 14. 
17; TA. 2. 4 1 (cp.TU. 3. 7 12. 3), the thtnl seems original with the Athar- 
vanivt; yet it is not therefore m any sense a stranger to the Atharv an redac- 
tion. 'ihe same rhetorical device of concatenation may at times point to 
the excluMon of one of the connected stanzas, e. g. the irregukar stanza 5. 

14 1 1, containing tlie expression m/y/riz, may h.ave slipped in because of 
wi-giTM r.it in stanza 12. or 5.4.6, also irregular, containing the words <i . 
til).'?, may have been placed where it is, because of ninii-a/ian in stanza 5. 
Again, a verse that interrupts two concatenating stanz.as may be suspected; 

S 3- 50. 6, interrupting stanzas 5 and 7; or 2. 3 4. interrupting stanzas 3 
and 5; cp. also our remark on 7.114.2, above, S 37, en 1. Jn tlie commentary to 



gopa™ a-d^^ 

44 lI.LllTERATVRU .OrsClUUUL.. _ 


44 ll.LnTERA-lLK.u.ia.^-‘— . 

“°ron»\r™“on'fte conscious directness of purpose, or cerUn.nt) 
'touch of the Atharran poets m an) such muttere.^ VeilSor™. 

. , lU. the utore passages II rnutc 


— tisi-ot 

„ _ I Cp. e. E, 4- 3- 7'“; •t-'';f > ^ ch it cLscts from the AnuHs- 

J'l, a t 7. Ss. =; S. a. Hi to- *■ 3S- — 7 up- „ XVItl, i ff. — 
inaat m ^WrEHi’s trenslauons of AV. 3 iSi ff.i AXXVIt. OsffA 

"ScoMnsru JAOS xx n -7h. m. Taco.., IS. 


?So».nS!“AOs'xxn. '’‘ij"«f-sB,?^’SxVA“'i'^“e'.j.i'ep:jaco..:g 
W.SrSm, The Manuapaiha. Introd. P' A"-''--- ‘ ““O^jmrru _ 

"SH OLursir..., 1 » S ieiioa., P- 

,„to v.,bc,.«, p. s - __^s« cinuiaious. I 

ai.. Co^aK.t.! >t.tfU the proper arrangement ot t‘>c co” t 


?i Sec BJoo^JiEtD, C^ntributrons. ^ ®“o”,i,c^MTr«ponding 

.» .h. sa»h,.a ....« •>"„r'’"rar = Tt c " a“ ■■ '-■• <• ’■ 

J.’ / “ - , ,nd 1. — M SliE \UI, p. 660. — ’5 i- g. 1. ■‘i ' g 


abo\c, S 3^' ~ 


the Samhita itscll ‘t"= P™1"=‘ V 1. 23. 1. 2; 4- 5 

•.,“an-,a-s- 6 'a,. -- aa.t 3- - ■< f 1. 3-,^. S^'• 7' 

4e; 4 b. 4i S» 4 29 1» 2> 4- ^ g ge 5 29. 2, 3» 5- 29- *2> t3» 

30 . 8 . r. YTs.'\.'i.’<>’V’=‘'.’si’ Vi‘ to.' s."- ' ’’ 

8. =. ,,_Si^, e^ 0. .Oi_ 9^ S- ^3:^. 33, 54. 


22, 23 i 


, 5. 6; 


c THE RELATION OF THE ATHARVA-VEDA TO THE REMAINING 
HYMN-COLLECTION'S. 

S 41. Special features of the Atharvan "oHecUon; its conne^cuo^^ 

means of such a concordance of these mantras as has ^ 

Whitney for his posthumous t\ork on the AV., notv passing thro g ® JJ. 
ni™ Harvard Oriental Senes*. A yet more perfect ^'^sight mto the relation 
ship\ of the Atharvan mantras tvill result from the P^J=^*^5’"^°;^f"?,vriter». 
entire body ofVedic mantras which is being compiled by the present e 
The Atharsan is very reminiscent m unexpected places, often m ly mns 
are on the whole original with the AY , a shorter or longer 
quently only a single pSda, appears to hate been 
connection, or, to state it more cautiously, to coincide with another coll 
S in the v^ry first hymn pada 3^-= RV. 10. 166. 3^1 m the second h>mn 

pSdas 2*^ ate ^ananls of RV. 6. 75- 12* , pada 2 =• RV. 3. ^ ‘ 6'=- 

instances of fragmentary correspondences ate AV. i. 17. 4 "“.RN . i- 1 J‘- » 

AV. I. 26. i'« RV. 1. 172. 2'i AY. 2. 2. RV. 8 48-^; A\-/' 

HV. 7. 44. 4't; AV. 4- 4. 4* — RV. 10. 97. 8» (et al.); A^ . 4- 5 - 7 “ , 

166. 2'>j AV. 4. 10. 6' (formulaic appendage = 2. 4- G"*; 12. 2. 13^ 5 ^4- -• 
67‘‘i is’common in the entire mantra-hterature ; AV. 5. 20. S •= 

IC» (cp. lo"); AV. 5. c. .I- (- 13. >. S-'-) - .TL. =.,5' 7- /‘l 
So. l" — RV. 1C 136. 4’'’; AV. S. 7. 77*- RV. 10. 97. 3 ; AV. 10. I. 0 
P.V. 10. 164. 4'=; AV. io. 8. 40'='* •= RV. S. lOi. .\V..io. 9. 27 

4. 50. 6'^ (et a!.): AV. 10. 10. 32“’’ — RV. 10. 154. 1'“'; AV. ii. i. 3 
RV. 4. 50. lo"*; AY. 13. I. ii't-= RV. 10. 123. S'*; and many other m<'tances. 
These correspondences fade out into mere reminiscences or echoes, .as 
* e. c. AV.3.1.2 is made up from a variety of RV. motives (AururenT, ^4* 
XXVII. 219; Bloomfiutj, sue. XLII. 326). Similarly AV. 3. 3. 2*^, S'' reminds 
one of RV. 10. 103. 6; or AV. 4. 7. 2, 3 of RV. 10. iS;'. lo; or AV. 5, 23 
of RV. 10. 191; or AV. I. 26 of RV. i. 172; or AV, 2. 3 of TD. 2 . 5. G. 4- 


lI.Tl!KA.-Y.lSTHESCnOOI.OrS\UK\KA. — C. Rr.LATIONTOOTHERCoi,I.ECniOVS. 45 


Iti this connection are to be mentioned a number of interesting or curious 
points of contact of the AUiarxan mantras with the remaining body of the 
Veilic hymns and formulas. * AV. i. 17. i is quoted by Yaska, Nirukta 3. 4, 
in a variant form which is not derived fromAVP.; Durga to Nir.6.i2 quotes 
AV. ta. 2. sS with variants (perhaps those of AVP.): see Roth, Erliuterungen, 
p. So. The JB. quotes in full AV. 5. 19. 1 with variants. AV. 4. 16 is un- 
known in the, other collections, except that its sixth stanza is modulated 
interestingly SS. r. 6. 3. A formula LS. 3 5. 15 reproduces AV. 9. r. 9, and 
a mantra inVait. 36. 27 contains marked features derived from AV. 13. 1.23. 
The prose formula AV. 19. 55. 5* is a variant form of MS. 3. 9. 4 (p. lao, 

I , 17), .and the formukas AV, 20. 2 are somewliat independent versions of ApS. 

II. 9. KS. 9. S. 9 ff. Tlie fifth st. of AV. 3. 4 is quoted w’ith a v.ariant 

prattka, a prtfii paramasydti fanivald {iti ydj}anui\'fi}e) atJfS.a.a.ii (p.24, 
1 . 3), hut no such two stanzas are qoouble elsew’here in the Maitr'iyanT, or 
anywhere else in the literature: the pratika at MS. is employed in connection 
with a royal rite similar to that at the b.ase of the Atharvati Iq-mn. Quite a 
number of those sts. of the SV. which are not derived from the RV. occur 
also in the AV., as may be seen readdy in AurRFCHT's list of these sts. in 
the Introduction to the second edition of »D)e Hymnen des Rjg-Ved.a(f, 
p. xt.v fF. The correspondences of Ath-arvan and Grh>a*stanza5 are very ex- 
tensive, and often disguised by corruptions and second.vry m.mipulat{on 5 of 
the original text: both varieties of mamias perform tlieir share of these pro- 
cesses, but the mantras of the Grhyasutras are even more corrupt than thove 
of the AV. Cp. as examples AV. 5. 25. 8 with SG. 1. 19. iij AV. 3. 10. i 
with SMB. 2. S. i; or AV. S. 6 26 with IIG. i. 19, 7. Noteworthy, above all, 
are the special correspondences of the ApS, with the .\V., shovvmg depen- 
dence of the Satra upon the AV,- the v.arunts of the ApS. are generally, of 
inferior quality. Thus AV. c. 7 1 is reproduced in a corrupt form .\pS.6. 
21.2; the two Sts. AV.3.7 r, 2 appear, with interior variants, Apa.i3.7.rfi, 
the opening sts. of AV 5. 6 recur second.arily ApS. 16. iS. 7, part of the 
formula AV. s- 9 - 8 occurs at the beginning of ApS 6 ai; the ^t AV. 7,27 
recurs .with v.ariant3 ApS 4.13.4; AV S5 19 ippears with essential diftcrences 
in Ap§. 16. 19. I, and simiUrl) A\ 5 a m .\i)S 7 17. s, or W. 12 i, 55 
in .\pS. 5.9 11; the two v(!>. AV 12 2 *3, 14 irc varied even more Ap. 9 . 9. 
3. 22, especially noteworthy is* the reproduction ot the obscure furinuUs AV. 
if), 2. 4 m ApS. 0 20 2 (end) We may .aUo note dual \pS 16. 16 i re- 
produces with v-arkants some of the slokas m Kaus 97. S, .1 sign of con- 
nection between the two sphere-, ot m mtra tradition (^uite a considerable 
number of .\th.iTV.an hvmns and stanz is recur m TU. and, apparent!), nowhere 
else: e. g., AV. i. 23, 24 in TB a 4 4. i, 2, AV 2. 10 m TB. a. 5 6. i fi:, 

AV. 4, S luTD 2 7. 15 and 16. .VV 4 22 inTU. 2 4 7 7IT.. AV 6. 3S in 

TB. 2. 7. 7. Iff.; AV. 6. 75 m TB 3 3 - * « 3 3 ‘4 =>/ •’^V. 7. 70 in 

TB. 2. 4. 2. i ff., AV. 7. 99 m TB. 3. 7 6- «. AV. 7 iio in TB. 2. 4 5. 7; 

AV. 13. 1 (in part) in 'I'B. 25 2. i ff. Since the TB i> the Brahmana of 
ApS. this marked relationship of both these texts with the AV. may possibly 
not be without significance; it seems to reach decidedly bevond that general 
connection which' maybe expected m all mantra-collections: no such degree 
of intimacy exists c. g., between the AV. and the cprrc'pondiqg texts attaching 
themselv es to the Wliite \’ajur-^’ieda, oamely the SD. and KS. 

842. Relation of the language of the -VV. to that oftheRV. — 
All d'seussions of the rel.vtion of the SaunaUj-a-S.iiphita to the other Vedic 
collections must be regarded as proaWonal as long .as the text of the .VVP. 
renuins inaccessible. Still certain general statements as to the relationship of 



46 ILLmEKATCRU.GCSClUCnTE. 1 1. AtIIARVA-VEDA and GQ rAllU -BR XHMAKA. 

the SaunaUja-cohectioit \%Uh the RV. on the one hanil, iincl the Yajur-Vedos 
on the other, are not likely to be subject to great change upon the accessjon 
of new materials. With the RV. the Saunakija shares about one se\-enih of 
its materia!, if we leave aside the b)nins of book 20 that are borrowed 
directly from the RV.k Considerably more than one half of the RV. sts 
which correspond to the AV. belong to the tenth book of the RV., largely 
the last anmaka of that book; about one sixth to the first book; about one 
tenth to the seventh book; about one eighth to all the other books put 
together*. In the overwhelming number of cases, aside from the wedding 
stanzas (AV. 14), and the funeral stanzas (AV. j 8), the material common to 
the two Sainhitis is Atlurvanic m character, t. e. it consists of charms friendly 
or hostile; on the other hand the more general prayers which have for their 
theme the adoration of a given divinity, rather than the attainment of a spe- 
cific -object, are rarely shared by the two collections. The two st>les of hymns 
may be conveniently designated as popular or Atharvanlc on the one hand, 
and hieratic or ritualistic on the other. The language of the former class is. 
related more closely to that dialect or dialects which are at the base of the 
language of the iJralimanas, SQtras, .and the later literary forms in general. 
For reasons that are nearly al\va>'s one-sided and subjective, sometimes 
patently erroneous, th® language of the popular or Atharvanic hymns, is gene- 
rally regarded as chronologically later than that of the hieratic hymns, and 
thus every Vedic hymn that deals with popular matters is condemned on 
account of Us l.mgucige to a berth m the 'later Vedic period'. The scope 
of the present work does not permit the full discussion of this important 
question suffice it to say th.it many linguistic forms that are looked upon as 
indications of late date are m reality as old, sometimes older, than the entire 
individual period of theAr)an language in Indlx Thus the dual in -tfrr, and 
the instrumental plural in-arr, though dealt vvitli in such discussions as signs 
of a later time are Indo European forms (Goth, n/r/aw; Lith. t/ftniV); similarly 
the ‘late’ forms, steins, or roots karomt'karu, ^antkdmxm, san'cc (as 

compared with ri/z'it), rajitt, lub/t, sxap for sat, which have been regarded 
as signs of late date are each of them prehistoric*. The question is there- 
fore largely one of degree of closeness to the popular dialect or style “of 
diction: this is the primary point of view from which the language of what 
we have called Atharvanic, or popular hymns can be compared with the 
hieratic hymns. A given form is not necessarily of recent origin because it 
begins to crop out m the tenth book of the RV., appears still more frequently 
in the popular Vedic collection of the AV., and is the regular form of the 
post-manttic language; nor, consequently, are hymns necessarily late because 
tliey abound m v\ ords and forms that ate strangers to the diction of the 
hieratic hymns. A necessary preliminary to a final study of the relative 
chronology of the Yedic hymns is therf separation into at least two classes 
which grew up along parallel lines, the hymns connected with the soina- 
worship and the hymns connected with popular practices. They are largely 
synchronous; each is addicted to its own dialect, differing from the other in 
lexicon, grammar, style, and metrical habits*. 

'lh.1t the purely linguistic data alone are a broken reed in support of 
the chronological fixation of a given hymn may be illuslr-ited by a comparison 
of A\ . 3. iS with RV. 10. 145. The second st. of the' RV. ends in luru for 
which \y. reads : now /lara is Mate’, and lnff,i is ‘old’, i. e. it belongs 

to the hieratic sphere of diction. To suppose therefore that the -Atharvan form 
of the hymn is older than that of the RV. would at fir.t sight he tlie ortliodo< 
conclusion, but in st. 5 AV. reads Mate’ thQha for RV. mtil, and the RV. 



lI.Tiii.A.A . INI UF School oKSAUifvkA. — CR clauoviootiifrCollfctions. 47 

readings, />ani dhama for para nuda (st 2); atha sa/alnl (RV. 3) for ad/iaft 
sapatnl (AV. 4); ^tbhfidmi (RV. 4) for ja^^rdha (AV. 3); atha tram for al/io 
tiani (st, 5)7 make a better impression, and a decidedly strong case for the 
RV., rather than for the AV., as representing the original version of the hymn 
at the back of both redactions The AV. has slipped into the hieratic diction 
in the case of irdAi, whereas luru was quite natural in a popular hymn 
from the very e.arliest times, although, of course, it is also possible tliat A-uru in 
the RV. w as substituted in a popular mood for tfdhi. All this is as though a 
preacher in the pulpit glided in and out of biblical diction in the course of 
his sermon: at one moment he may be employing the language of Isaiah or 
the Psalms, at another the most forceful popular speech of the d.ay. The 
proximity of the language of the genuine Atharvanic hymns to that of the 
Drahmanas and Classical Literature is no chronological criterion; only when 
what we lia\e called hieratic hymns .are modulated over into Atharvanic 
diction does the presumption of late dale stand Justified. Especially desimble 
is cumulative evidence: bad metre, obvious adaptation to secondary purposes, 
disjointedness of stanzas, and the hke; they are the true .Uharvan char- 
acteristics. 

a view . to all these considerations there can be no <ioubt th.at the 
redaction of the AV, Is of later date than that of the RV., that its external 
presentation by the <]iaskeuasi.ae is less scholarly, or rather more ignorant 
than that of the RV.; that the secondary application of old liymnal nnaterial 
— a kind of popular etymology exercised upon the startr.as, as it were — 

Is more common than in the RV.. that possibly some materials are directly 
derived from the ready made Rig-Vcdic collection, and, tin.ally, tli.at a good 
part of the AV, was composed at a very late time On the other hand’ it 
w equally certain (hat the mam current of .\tti.arvan tradition, the Atharvanic 
ur popular hymns by distinction, goes back to a head-spring quite as far away 
and as high up in antiquity — if not more so — than the hiemtic or ritiulistic 
hymns. A hymn like AV. 4. 16, representing the better type of .\tharvanic 
effort, is quite .as archaic as any RV. hymn of related character, .a hjinn 
like AV.4. 12 seems even to be rootevl in prehistoric antu'juity. 'Ihe assumption, 
e. g, that none of the numerous medicind charms of the .S.V., not.ably the 
charms against tak>nau (fever), existed prior to the redaction of the RV. is 
not warranted, as we h.ave seen, by linguistic criteria, and contrary to sound 
ethnological consideration Precisely the'-e md kindred hymns conuam most 
abundantly the evidence of prehistoru origin see, e. g, .VV. 7. 1x6 (SUE. 
XLII, p. 4 and 565). ’Ihat the R\. picketl up quite a considerable number 
of .\tharv.anic charms (see AuFRtciir's edition, vol. If. p. and p.assed 

by others, is due to its prevailing character ot a Srauta Mantraputha, so to 
say. The hier.Uic hymns were the theme that really concerned theRigvedins 
interest; of other m.alenal lie took, what wa^ conveniently at hand, without 
aiming at .and without being able to reach exhaustiveness. 

S 43 The V arious readings of the RV. and the W. The following 
selection of examples niav illustrate the interrelation of the materials common 
to RV. and AV. In AV.'i. 4. 4 the fourth pada is an Atharvanic addendum 
as compared with RV. i. 23. 19, and more particularly the other vers.ons 
VS 9.6, etc.: the Atharvanist clinches the statement of pada c, a/ru WuruMo 
v-iytna/i, hv adding the otherwise unknown plda.^urt7 MazafAa lijnu't. In r.29 
frani,:<i for /rarisa in RV. 10. 174. and the substitution of uWi vard/i for 
uMi la/t seem to represent later Atharvanic intensity. In 2. is- 6 ahva is 
inferior to ati id, RV. 6. 52. 2- In 2-33-5'^ the metrically superfluous 
H.dsndani is certainly a gloss derived from the R^. version, to. 163- 4- 





AV 6 91. 3 ‘ a' compared rrith RV. 10. 137. 6' has version "of the 

Tant>l: i' is P°-WV"“fr'%*rSen = mafhe all there is at the 

St as the older, though a hteratic temrirtsoenc 7 of the Atharvan 

bottom of viiratya. hat nhat is hu P si^t AV.t.7.5 aath the last pada 


bottom of vUrasi'a. hnly si^i^can j j „,;tb the last pada 

redaction is the occatrence *,3 ,l.rmnlu tefril'd/, mdl- 

altered from, «r « unquestionably later trme to a 

eating the adaptation of the son ^ later 

secondary purpose. In At . 3. it - 3 . 4 t'S ,id. especially At . 4 1 

handling of the parkas “Pf” be^a tet Shan RV. 4', 

lalam ta miro agmh samta briMpaUh " Mentically in its P.roP« 

mercWs°Aar'm not to be AV ^3 I', a'' fla«en’’s“Ihem S 

Imamal,!, but m ptdas l^ a* Wm, A\. 3. to^^ .|yer’ it 

out to haza,mh,. tvithout any v 1,™ fiM by these changes 

may be safely assumed *at this old hieralm hymn »« Py ,,,>,1/4 

brought nearer to the popular “ '“IV'™' and the Yajur- 

for s,rd ta, and, d yittue for ayat or of. K' ■ '.f ’ \ mere mouthing 

’overof “RV,*’t=^?“ (op rv°" 8 “u 53 ) i"'' *eosophic hyrnn (/.frgVd; 

garm) AV.4.2 IS descnbed by Wi t,EB IS XVill. 9 , “S ^ to 

and mutilated version of RV. lo. 121 (et !. j e a suppos- . 

the very use in whch ii appears Kaus 45 - then this 

ediy sterile cow, is slam, and it turns out that 

hymn is employed and adapted 0. 126 

AV. s. a with RV. to. 120, of AV. 5. 3 with RV. to. 128, 0^ ■7.'; " gf 

with RV G. 47. 20—31 Will reveal every time better trsvdition o’^ P .oy 

RV 'w. 4. 9 4 is \n evident adaptation of st. 12 of the 
,^97 (etV). In AV.4.21.5* is a n^o^^erri cor^tion of 

(3-^ 8g. of J-aorist from root c/iand), RV. 6. 28. 5; c^. Jnufe for R . 
in St 4. The three hymns AV. 6 . 27—29 represent RV. 10. 1 <>S ''■* ,y 
polations and corruptions- AV. 27. 3 *^ metncally inferior - 3 » ^ 

20 1' to RV. 4 (i-<x in AV. is supernuous); AV. 28. i-* has pra L 

sthah for RV. 5^ pra patat pAtisfhah-. the false accent of AV. 
should be pathi-sih&h, if it meant ‘standing upon .the road ) . 

condary character of the Atharvan version; cp. also AV.28.1', „1.1 

popular, for RV. 5' samyopayanfo, hieratic, which are illustrated i 

by the relation ofAV. 12. i. 29** Ob/) to K.lu%. 71. 19 
dhaiatu for dhatu, RV. to. 56. 2^ is a sign of secondary adaptation. 
Atharvan version is part of a charm to endow a horse with swiftness. ^ • 

7. 39, as compared with RV. 1. 164. 52; TS. 3. i. ii. 3 (^P. 
khyana 17.4), is secondary in it readings, and in plda d exhibits adapta^ 
to a practical purpose. Tlie pada, AV. 7. 89. i* (lo. 5. 46’), 
aca\isam, is scarcely to be recognized as the opening of tlrnt " . , ° . 

sUanza which begins lit other Vedic teats (RV. 1. 23. 23* et al.) with 
padas, apo (or, apo) adyatrv aedrisam, and, apo anv acdrisanf. there can ^ 
no doubt about the secondary character of the AV. reading. In zV^. 7 . 9 *•J 
vah is metric.illy superfluous, and wanting in all other versions of the s 
RV. 6. 47. 12; 10. 131. 0 , AV. 20. 125. 51, etc. The sL AV. 7. 97. 2 is m 
of changes from the hieratic to popular diction as compared with R^ • 


II.Tiu'A.*V.iktheSciioolofS\unaka. — CR fL.\uoNTOornrRCoi.ixcTiONS. 49 

and partly also uith the Yajur-versions (\^S. 8. 15, etal.): w for no-, nesa for 
nest', harivan for hanvah-, sx-attyd for svasti-, cp. also the corrupt 
in pada c, assimilated to det-dndm in pada d, for the correct hrahmasia of 
the parallel texts. AV.S.7.28 is a secondary' working over of RV.io. 97. j 6, 
notwithstanding that AV, has in plda d the inore hieratic lihasmad for RV. 
sanasmad. To these examples may be added those pointed out by Oldex- 
ncRG, especially from the m'** and iS'** books of the AV.9: they also show 
the constant remoxal of theAthatvan stanza^ from the more archaic hieratic 
form and ihouglit sphere to the plainer liabits of speech and thought of tlie 
people. Of especial significance for the cbronolog)’ of the AV. seem to me 
to be certain cases in which that Veda emplojs one or more stanzas that 
coincide with the RV. as a theme which is expanded or beaten out, either 
into several stanzas, or into an entire hymn. Thus the two sts AV.i.19.3,4 
seem to be nothing more than RV. 6 . 75. r9 spun out, and rendered more 
topically .\tharvanic by introducing Rudra and his arrows. -AV, i. 23 cor- 
respond-. in its first and fourtli stanzas to RV.1.50.1 1,12. the interior stanzas, 
absolutely. original, seem to modulate and expand the iheine set by sts. 1 
and 4.. Simihrly AV. 3. 34. i to. 17. 14 fet al) looks as though it had 
been picked out as the theme which a later po^ might fitly deielop into a 
song of the harvest. Again AV. 14. 2. 17, representing RV. to. 85. 44, is 
followed by the simihar st. 18 which it original with the Atharvaanist, is linked 
aerbally with 17, but does not add .anything of consequence to the thought. 

iUaskeu.xstic performance hke AV. 7. 50 m which the anujlubh stanza.? are 
original, the tristubhs common property, with distinct signs of adaptation to 
the aim in hand (gambUng-ch.arm), lends support to such analyses. The force 
of the-te necessarily subjective observations is increased a good deal by the 
unquestionable fact that the .W. handles stanza^ seemingly original m the 
Yajus-S.amhitns in the same wav, the most notable instances being the t»vo 
chains of hymns 2. 19—23, and 4. 23—29 (the so-called wr^rmr-hymns'. See 
below, S 4S' 

S 44. Traces of superior tradition in the AV as compared 
with the RV. — -As regards direct evidence thit the AV. reaches in some 
rc'pects behind the tradition of the RV. to that floating mass of mantra- 
materials from which all redactions flowed, it must be .idmitted to be we.xk 
in force in comparison with the evidence just presented, Dercmcne and 
Olpeneirg have assumed that such evidence mav be gathered from certain 
groupings of stanr.as, and arrangements of hjanns in both \ e lie schools, and 
we have felt compelled, without denying the jiussible force ot their observ- 
ation-, lo suspend judgment upon them, .« least until the evidence of the 
PaippaLida is m*'’. Such inferences as ma> be gathered from the metres, 
sense, and linguistic forms .are rarely ot such a nature as lo prove the superior 
tr.adition of the -VV. Occasional instances hke AV. infAt for R\. Aura, .W. 
lis'Zit for RV. Jtirru, noted above, are almost torceless. An an haism (attrac- 
tion) such as is contained in .VV. 14. i 46**, /-anMjo /on^ije /orisiisje, 

where RV. 10. 40. lo** reads janeiyah, looks a little affected, because the 
plural to match j-atibh^o seems really to be demanded by the sense, and the 
general form of the obscure stanza seems more trustworthy in RV. than AV. 

In .\V. 6. 27. 3'’ the form dstrl (patlap. dstri tit), for asjrxam, R\ . 10. 165. 3, 
is an archaic locative (.\th. Prat. I. 74) which seems to indicate a cenam 
supcrioritv of the Alharvan text: this is, however, not borne out by pad;^ 

2'“ and 3' whose Rigvcdic form is metrically pjeferablc. Again AV. S. 3, 7* , 
vtCirabdhdn sprnuhi' ptaiedj utjrrbAJn.m rs/ib/.tr jdfud/tifnJn, .as compared 
with RV. 10. 's’?. 7*'", u/JbJlJAayt s/rnuAi jdAnf.fj d/ebAanJd rsfibAir jj/u- 
riuIJfas.*. » »»• * 



50 31. LlTr^R^TUR U.GESCHICHTE. U\AtHARVA^V^A AKDGorA THA- I)R\miAJ>^ _ 

(f/idmif, contains t«ice the 'old* form raM where the KV. has ‘late’ /t?M, but 
nrida b is metrically superior iullV., and the sense of the R\. is also more 
compact (see Ludwig’s translation, nr. 430). assailable is the superjonty 
of the reading AV. 3. 1. 4', visfaksaiyam ipiuht eiltam qdvi, depnve their 
schemes of fulfilment’, for the senseless version, RV. 3 - 3 °- 
hnnthi vutam astUy even though plda a in RV. is distinctly superior to A . 
Arid so tiie reading aviivazinndm, in contrast to riivdvidam, AV. 9. 9. 10 , 
is not only superior to avihatnitfvam, RV. i, 164. 10; it is of the kind 
that cannot be explained as due to later correction, but represents the original 
tradition of the stanza**. Cp. also farMfid,jW. 14. i, 7**, better ihan/cm^y/ir/w, 
RV. 10. S5. janant ami, AV. 14. 2. lo**, for the senseless /««(?</ anu, RV. to. 
85. 31**. Occasionally, too, there are to be found here, as in the inter-relation of 
all Saiphitas, independent varianiswhose language and general impression seems 
equally good m both sources. Thus the little hymn AV. 6. 2 is related to 
RV. 7. 32. 6, 8, but its character is so independent and archaic, as to suggest 
original workmanship of no mean quality and age. Or the subtle modulation 
of RV. 6. II. 4 (MS. 4 14. 15) in AV. 3. 3. i, in spite of certain adaptive 
traits in AV. {amutu naya, in pida d), is not easily accounted for as a working 
over of the RV. form; it represents rather an independent effort in the same 
sphere of ideas, whose language and dale as compared with RV. cannot be 
said to be inferior. And there are, of course, tliroughout the AV., hymns 
and stanzas of a totally independent character that suggest \ery old 'work* 
manship, not only such as are of purely Athari’anic character and popular 
diction, but such as .are written in good hieratic language. I'hus tlie hymn 
to the battle-drum, 5. 20, may be later than the oldest parts of the RV., 
but there is in it nothing that suggests late composition, later, e. g., than 
the stanzas addressed to the drum, RV. 6. 47, 39 — 31 (AV. 6. 126, et al). 
Or the language of the theosophic hymn 5. i, which is original with the 
exception of stanz.a 6 — RV. xo. 5. 6, is not of such a character as to justify 
the belief that a later versifex might have so completely immersed himself 
in the style and mode of thought of the early Rishis, as to be able to pro- 
duce stanzas as good — or as bad, according to the point of view. Cf. 
also such a hymn as 6, 61, On the whole therefore the AV. is the bearer 
of old tradition not only in the line of the popular charms; but also to some 
extent, albeit slight, its hieratic matenaU are likely to be the product of 
independent tradition that has eluded the collectors of the other Vedas, the 
RV, not excepted ’A. 


« Cp JAOS. XV, p. CLXXH. — » Cp. .b» 4 ., p. cLxxjuir, — j See below, $<52- 
^ Up. ^VlUT^fY’s tables. IS. II. 347. — j hvayatni 15 Avestan siajimi; Cor the 
dissyllabic root* in u see IIloomweld, JAOS. XVI, p. clvjiiIT.; BB. XXUI. 107 d; 
pr^tkariam is Asestan fantanem', larva w AvesUn hawitt, etc.; raijn is not separable 
from l.ith. r«f«‘bra5d’. Cp. niiLri!R\M)T, GCA. 188?, p. 401 ; BwoMririi), JAOS. 
Vinh "“"J- — J**® literature on this subject see Arnold, JAOS. 

-Will. 204 ff. ; cp. Ro rn. Abhandlung. p. 22 ff. _ 7 sMe at the beemnini; of pidas 
IS a faionie AUiarian cspression.— 8 c^ SRC. XLII. 353.— 9 Die llymnen <les 
R)S-\ cda. p, 320 /T- - 50 .See above $ 36. _ »r SBC .XUL 326. — n Oldfsceec. 
I C.323. follovMng I.VDWIO, V. 447. - «3 Cp. niLLriiRvM.T, GGA. 18S9, p. 404 IT. 


S 45 - Adaptation and expansion of Yajus-themes for Athar- 
~ preceding analysis of the relation of the AV. to 
the R\ . has been on the whole m the nature of support to existing t icw’s 
on the subject, it does not seem at all likely that these w lil ever be materially 
chaoeed As regards the relation of the AV, to the Yaius-Sainhitas the im- 
rression exists among scholars — to what extent it is not easy to say, hecanse 
of the absence of defmitne sutements — that the AV, is enhtled to a prior 



lI.TjlF,A.-V.INTUk.SCJIOO?,orS\CXAK\.— C.REt.A'll0KT0Ol}lEuC0trnCT10NS. 51 

position and date of final tedacrion as compared ^\ith the collections of 
mantras in the YV. Such a view, if it cmsis at all‘, is not sustained by the 
facts in the case; on the contrary an extended comparison of the two classes 
goes to show that the redaction of the AV. holds much tlie same place 
compared with the redactions of the YV. as when compared with the RV. 
The materials common to the l»so Vedas appear m the main in better form 
and more original application in the Yajus than in the AV.; the special habit 
of the .W. to adapt and to group stan/as for secondary purposes is fullv 
in e\idence. Here again the Athars'an redactors may, in fact are likely to 
ha\e gathered up some materhals that escaped tlie scnjtin)’ of the Yajus- 
redactors, or that had passed out of active use before the conclusion of these 
redactions, but the Atharvan redaction cannot ivell be assumed to hate pre- 
ceded the Yajus. The best evidence for this is not so much the general 
superiorit) of the readings of tire Yajus as certain drastic methods by uhicfi 
the AY. forces purely liturgical stanzas into its own service of low folk-lore 
and witch-craft The Atharv.an in such cases Jus not in Weiv incidental 
features of larger aims and performances, as is the case with the sorcery 
stanzas and formulas of the Yajus, but it makes the Yajus-stamas in question 
the basis of an independent, self-centred act of the usual Atharvanic sort 
Jt will be worth while to dwell in detail upon a few cases of this kind by 
way of establishing tlie presumption that this habit exists in the AV. on a 
hirger scale. 

In MS. i, 3. 2; ApS. C. 21. i we have five formubts addressed to Agni 
in which he is implored to attack with his manifold fierj’ qualities ‘him that 
hates us and whom we hate’ These same five formulas appear AV. 3. 19, . 
but this is followed by four other hymns m which Vayu, SOrja, Candra, and 
Apah (the waters) are addressed m the same terms. To speak of the fiery 
qualities, //art?/, arrrs, ims, tfjai, of V.lju or the waters is of course 

possible m the course of the development of the later hturgic litanies, where 
everj thing is possible on a pinch. Yet « may not be doubted th.at the 
restriction m the /rm/fo-teMs, of these me appeals to Agni marks the original 
status; out of this the AY. h.as developeil a formidable pentad in Uie second 
degree (23 formulas) which are prescribed, correctly no doubt, Kaub 47, at 
the introductory oblations m practices (hostile sorcery) But further, 

the pentad of divinities is iniM characteristically -Vtharvanic. Whereas (he 
I 5 r.lhmanical texts in general present limes without end a cosmic-Vedic triad. 
Agni-PrthivT-Rig\ed.a, etc . \ .i)iwVntank§a Yajurveda. etc, Siirya-Pyu Samaveda, 
etc, the Atharvan wTitings, tniviug a cosmic base for their Veda, expand this 
into a tetrad or pentad, by the addition of Candramas, or Candramas and 
the waters’: K.aus. 119. 2, 5, CB i i 17 — - 9 > - 24; 3. 24, etc. 

Tliere can be no doubt that the old fire formukvs were an original stock of 
Yajus, and that the AV. has expanded them to at cord wnh notions of its own 
whose date cannot have been as early as that of the existing Yajus-collections. 

Closelv and clnracteristic.illy similar is the lustory of the so-called 
v!rf;dra-suUdiii, AV. 4. 23—293. In the tirst place we may note that this 
lit.iny consists of seven hjmn> of seven stanzas e.ach, i e, .a heptad in the 
second degree; this numerical symmetry, in itself suspicious, points to second- 
ary handling, just as in the preceding pentads. The entire htany aims, 
its refrain-padas cle.arly show, to drive out calamity (tnuc avdiasah) 'H,- 
structure of these hymns is as follows, barring A -^1 'he first and last stanza 
of each hymn consists of Yajur-mantras which .are employed in the Yajii,- 
satphiu'is as yajydpurofundkyds, TS. _ 4 . 7 - *55 3 -. 55 RS. 22. 1 5; ori the 

other hand the intervening stanzas in (he AV. are m the mam original, .sVjia- 



52 JLLiruRAiunaGESCHicin-E. 


Il’.ATHAM’A‘Vt DA ANnOOPAHK-IJR-'^nMAN^. 


it wre Do.sible to imagine that the Yajus-^tanzas were picked 
h\Tiins, though there is no special reason for such -a supposition. lhatthe> 
were not gathered from tiie Athar\'an hjmns in question may be regardeii 
as certain; uhy should the choice have fallen every time upon stanzas i and 7. 
More important, nay conclusive, however, is the fact that the intervening 
stanzas (a— 6) m the AV. are obviously secondary padding. This may be 

seen best in 4.29. stanzas 1 and 7 are of ordinary mantra-character, praising 
Mitra and Varuna in language that does not arrest attention. Stanza 2, on 
the other hand, in its first liemistich chews over padas b and d of stanza i, 
adding nothing but the beginning of a list of old Rishis whom Mitra and 
Varuna are supposed to have helped out of difficulties in the days of yore: 
they are the traditional worthies Babhru, Ahgiras, Agasti, Jamadagni, Atn, 
etc. The dulness of the epigonal author betrays itself throughout: in stanzas 
3 and 4 he repeats Atn’s name, the whole is veritable clap-trap. R will 
not require cloie inspection of the intermediate stanzas of the remaining 
hymns to convince one that there also the outer stanzas are the ‘leitmotiv , 
the rest the muse of a late author who relies in tlie main upon his own 
mediocrity, hut occasionally gathers in some existing mantra or pada. On 
the other hand the one altogetiier original hymn of the series, 4. 28, is 
addressed to IJha\ a and Sarva: these popular cUvinities must not be wanting 
in the AV. m any continuous invitation of w/wJ-cliaracter, addressed to the 
Vedic pantheon (cf. AV. ii. 2). Along with its originality 4. s8 exhibits abo 
its particular Athananic character (Ariyakft and mfdalrfm stanza 6; kmldin 
in stanza 7). the hymn is clearly an intnuler in the sphere of ideas from 
which these r«r.f<!r<j*stanzas are derived, lending itself conveniently to the 
building out of the numerical scheme, as well as to the Atharvanic idea of 
the proper way of making an exhaustne appeal to the most important members 
of the pantheon of that time. 

We may in fact safely present the statement as the outcome of tbe 
preceding analysis, that the AV. handles the prose formulas of the W. in a 
decidedly secondary fashion, and that both Yajus-formulas and Yajus-stanzas 
are frequently used as themes to which the Athananist has added new matter 


to suit his own devices Tor instance 10. 5 is, an incantation to the waters, 
being a long and weary litany, partly in Yajus-prose, partly in poor metre. 

In it occur as themes that are beaten out beyond endurance such formulas 
. as, indrasyauja siha cVS. 37. 6), or vUnoh kramo Vi (T3. 4. a. 1), There is 
not the slightest chance that these formulas were borrowed by the YV. from 
the AV., nor can there be any doubt tliat the AV. got hold of these tliemes 
at a tune when they were already perfectly familiar in their liturgical apphe- • 
ation to special acts of the /ruj/Za sacrifice. Similar/ AV. 5. 24 is an over- 
long litany engaging, the lielp of the ptyitheon, mmin brahmany asmin 
many asyam purodhayam etc.; according to Kaui. 17. 30 the piece is recited 
bn entering upon the duties of the puro/tUi, a rather secondary and Athar- 
vanic restriction. Anyhow, the Athar\'anjc handling of this theme is secondary 
to that of die YV.: TS. 3, 4. y, MS. 2. 6. 6; I'Jj. 3 4; si 4. 10. .r— 31 

1 tj. I. 5. 10; Htj. I. 3. 10, II; if nothing else, atmm brahmany of the AV., 
as against amin brahmam of the YV., points to later redaction and the 
passage out of the hieratic sphere to the popular. Similarly a prose hymn 
like AY. 2. 17, consisting of formulas of the type, ojo 'si, 0,0 me dah srdhd, 
presupposes existing Yajm-formulas, developed into a litany for specific pur- 
poses; cf. \S. 19 9; IB. 2. 6. 1. 5, etc. As regards the use of one or two 
Yajus-stanzas as a theme for an entire hymn there are quite a number of 
unquestionable cases. Phus AV. i. 31 begins with the tvell-known stanza, 


II.T lie A.-V. ISTHl-SCHOOL OfS VU yAK.\. — CRciJVTIONTOOlIICRCOtl-ECriON'S. 53 

rjsamm aiapCihhhyah, TD. 2. 5. 3. 3; 3. 7. 5. S; AS. 2. 10. 18; ApS 4. ii. 1, 
etc., but the remaining stanzas of the h>mn do. not occur outside of AV. 
One needs but look at the stanza r*** to eliminate the possibility that the 
YV. borrowed its stanzas from the AY: it is the latter that beats out the 
theme of the first stanza in good stupid Atiurvan fashion. And the others 
are no better: the case is most comincing. Similar, though not quite so 
certain, is the structure of AV. i. 35 « addressed to the diik^a^(ina-^xa\At\.\ the 
first two stanzas occur VS. 34. 51, 52; RV. Khila lo.'ieS. S, 9; the Last two 
are original, except that a'** is formulaic (AV. 8. e. 21). Here also it would 
seem as though the Atbari.anist h.id borrowed an existing theme in order 
to build up a more substantial hymn suitable to his own devices. Again AV. 
3. 19 begins with a stanza that occurs also VS. 11. Si; TS. 4. 1. lo. 3; MS. 

2. 7. 7 (et ah), followed in the sequel, stanu 3'^*, by two padas that repre- 

sent the continuation of the Yajus-texts. The very mixed character of the 
Atharvan stanz.as makes at once for the supposition th-it the hymn is a 
mere elaboration of a pair of well-connected Yajus-stanzas: stanza a is hack- 
neyed; stanza 3^^ substitutes a trijjubh, whose metre disturbs, and whose 
tone is Secondarily Atharvanic, for the regular an«?tubh Yajus-padas; above 
ai! the introduction of ntlrwr in paUa 1* which makes the p 3 da falsely regular, 
ending in and changes the sense {idum brahma ‘this charm’, for 

brahma ‘brahmanhood’) ~ all these points .are well accounted for if we regani 
the AV. hymn as a compilation, with the Yajus-stanzas as the main motive; 
it would be a total perversion to assume that the Yajus-texts selected and 
varied the two stanzas i and 3. TJie same kind of theory is applicable 

to AV. C. fia whose first stanza MS. 3 11. to, Tlk 1. 4. S. 3, m.ay have 

served as the theme: the other two stanzas seem to occur nowhere else, 
and they are not of such a kind as to exclude the notion of late origin by- 
way of variations to the theme, even though ihev fall very well into the tone 
of the hieratic language. Or .again, .\V. 7. 20 begins with two anustubh stanzas 
that are familiir in the Yajm, 'Ih. 3 3 11, Mb 3 16.4, the hymn continues 
with four fntitubh smnz.as that are origmal \gim it would seem as though 
the Yajus-stanzas were the theme the variant mama m AVk i'* for mayah 
of the Vaius favors the assumplion .V little ditf«.rent is the case of AV. t.eo 
and 21, two battle ch.irms which are built up m the mam upon mantra-stock 
tliat occurs also RV. 10 152. 'Ihe circurosUncea are as follows the two 
hymns making together 8 stanzas coincide m their hast 5 stanzas with the 
RV, hymn ’Ihe tir»t three stan/as .ire pitchwork, stin/a i -= H'. 3 7 5 12. 
ApS. 2. 20 C, stanza 2 -= A.s 5. 3 22. one <an not say here exactly that 
the first stanza is the theme ol the entire hymn, but certainly when the 
Atharvan compilation took place its first stunzi existed as a Yajus. whence- 
soever the Yajus-text derived it, it was not boriovvevl from Mharvan sources, 
the reverse i-. altogether more likely. 

S 46. The various readings of the AV. and the Yajus-Sarp- 
hitas. — Extensive comparison of the readings of .\V. as compared with the 
Yajiis show the former lo be on the whole inferior lo the latter: the tnidition 
of the AV. IS less pure m every way. The metres are more irregular, the 
gramm.atical forin> .and constructions less mielhgible, the adaptive touches 
very frequent. Thu» AV. a 6. returs 27. i ff.; IS 4. i. 7..1 fT.; MS. 2. 
12. 5. on the whole with itivignificint variants, until we arriv-e .it st. 4. Here 
-\V, has in the middle of a tri-lubh the non-descript pula c, sa/afjnan 
madhjamff/hd, for which MS. has, sajdldnart ma./hiamrMr}‘V‘r, in good metre 
and excellent sense: the AV., in addition to the metrical irregularity, places 
madhiamf'fhah into agreement with Agni whom it doe^ not fit nearly as 



54 II. ijvrLRMUKU.GFsciiiciuE. 1 B. ATiiARVA-Vro* .WD 

Fiell AS llK person niAing the prajer; It is lie thsttvishes to stand (suiierlor) 
in the midst of his rivals. The other Yajur-tersions have sajalmuim 
viasthi td/u ithich is also possible metre, though nOt absolutely com ilicro„, 
pada b is superior in all the Yajus. In AV. a_ =8, 5' .Kt,<i for of all 

Other versions marks the popular strainr see, IS. 2 . 3 - 35 - o; V 

TB. 2. 7 . 7 . 5 ; TA. 2. 5. r. The sL X\\ 2 29. 3. quoted \ah 22. lO, is 
repeated with %'ariants MS. 4. 12. 3; KS. 5. 2; TS. 3. 2. 8. 5; KS. 10. 5. 3. 
In all these the difficult duals dhattam and sautasau are replaced b) binguiara, 
dadhCitu and satarcasam (KS. suzarcasam); and they all regard tr/Tr as the 
nom. sg. of the stem ds'ir ‘milk added to soma’j see especial!) Vait. and 
KS. {(i/iram). This construction fails in the AV. where dsir is the nom. sp 
of aits ‘prayer’. The dual dhattam in pada b seems to refer proleptically 
to dyavdp>tlnii\xi st. 4, as Sayana assumes unhesitatingly. Note also saupra- 
jasltam (AV.) for suprajasttam (YV ); the former is a monstrosity. The entire 
St. of AV. is adapted secondaril) to two persons who .ire engaged in the 
practice of transmitting disease one from the other: the Yajur-version has 
nothing of the kind, and its originality is not to be doubted*. In AV. 2. 34. 1, 
^'£j tie paiupatih paiundm is metrically inferior to yesam tie, TS. 3. i. 4 * 
as also in st 2, pramuheanta bhmanasya reta, to TS., pramuitcamina!}, etc. 
AV 3. 13 adapts a number of fanciful stanzas to the practice of conducting 
a river into a new channel- the first si\ sis. recur m TS. 5. 6. i* 2 — 4 ! 

2. 13 I m connection with certain oblations of water {.ktmbhajakali, or api«i 
SrahdJp)^ being cvidenil) at home m the Yajurriiual. As frefiuenll) elsewhere 
m the A.V., the body of the hymn is mere ornamentation or, solemn verbiage, 
the seventh and last st is original, turning forth the point of the hymn and 
the practice. Accordingly pitb s'*, d tnd prdnatn sa/ia varcasa f'amet^ a 
jagatl in the midst of tristublis, is more modem and inferior to a m&prdntna 


saha vareasd gan {vctrcasagan) of the Yajus. The version of AV. 3. 14- *» 3 
seems mfenor to that of MS 4. 2. 10, where the gayatri-form instead of the 
anustubhs of AV and sundry readings, posd for avihrutdiy for abihhytf 
<th, and purlstnih for kartnntf}, make a belter impression. No hymn illu* 
strates better the impurity, one might saj the stupidity, of the rendering ofYajus- 
material in die AV. than the «/ri-hymn, 5 27, which is repeated in all Yajus- 
samhitas, VS. 27 11 — 22,Tb.4 i. 8; MS. a. 12. 6; KS 18 17; KapS. 29. 5 - 
Where.-is these tevts agree in the roam, the Atharvan \ ersion is \ erbally and 
metrically so corrupt as to be scarcely Uanslatable. Notably the first pada 
of the second st. appears in the AV. as the fourth pada of (he Tirst st, thus 
depriving the second st. of its necessary «/r 7 -diviniiy, tanunapCil, and over- 
loading st. I with two, the sarwdh and tan&Hapat-, sts. 10 — 12 are mere hodge- 
podge as regards metrical amangemenL Tlie version of AV. 6. 38 in 'I’B. 2. 
7. 7. I presents on the whole more priraarj' readings in TB.: dgan for du in 
the refrain; krandye for vdje m 4’’, the former being the arcluvic UcUo diffi- 
cilior, and in close jiarallelistn to mdyou} AV. a'', tvisir apsu gatu yd puru- 
is an obvious verbal and metrical comiption as compared with TB, 
tvisir aivcsu purutau gosu: to be sure contrariwise AV. 4“^, rdjanie seems 
better than ji.i rajanyc of TB. The sense and the wording of AV. 6 74- 3 
is inferior to TS. 3. 1. ti. 3: the entire AY. hymn is patchwork; especially 
S'* exhibits the usual adaptive touches, to make the sL directly and pract- 
ically serviceable. AV. 6. 9S. reads, prdcyd diias Itam indrdst sajoto- 
dicya dtio vitfaham chatruho ’si, for TS. 2. 4. 14. ijMS. 4. ta. 2, pnicyd'n 
diii tvam indrasi rd/ciodkydyt vttrahan vrtrahasix not only is ' dih m AV., 
pada b, metricaHy superfluous, but the AV, version is altogether slipshod. 
A V . 7 - 3 - I « svayd tanva tanvavi airayat, is a miserable pada in a lri$lubh 



II.'liirA.-V.iNTurScnooLorSAUSAKA. — C.R ei.mjon toot her CoLircrioNS. 55 

all oiher versions, TS. i. 7. is. 2; MS. i. 10. 3; Ab. 2. 19. 32; SS. 3. 17. i; 
KS. 25. 6 .^ 10, are better. In AV. 7. 4 su/iu/^ is inferior to svab/iule of all 
other versions; and especially viyu^ihir, jn the sense of ‘unhitching’, replacing 
m)udbhir, and coined for ihe nonce to tnatdt vi tniinca, exhibits the stanza 
in a corrupt and adapted form: see VS. 37. 33; hfS. 4. 6. 2; SB. 4. 4. i. 15; 
TfV I. ii. S; AS. 5. iS. 5; SS. 8. 3. 10. In the irijtubh st. AV. 7. 6. 2 p.lda 
b is a jagatl, because AV. has substituted popular /lavdma/ie for hieratic 
hivana of all other versions: VS. 21. 5; TS. i. 5. ir. 5; .MS. 4. ro. r; .\S. 3. 
i.29;SS. 2. 2. 14. The fondness of the AV. for /invijtnaJie in pl.ace of 
htnma lus beguiled it elsewhere into the same irregular proceeding: e. g. in 
7.40. I'’, rompared with TS. 3. i. ii. 3; .MS. 4. ro. i (cp. aho R^^ i. 164. 
52'^): or, compare .V\ . 7. 63. i**, vkt/utir Iiatdma/ie faramat sadhastat, with 
the p.iraiiel p.tdas, a^nim /ttnema etc., TA. 10 2. i (6S)'’, and 
etc, Mahanaraj ana Up. 6. In .\V. 7. 14 2** the reading hrpdt of both 
published editions and the mss in siiithita and padapafha is nonsensical- 
Slyatta reads and comments upon kr-pd m accordance with ail the other 
numerous versions, SV. X..464; VS. 4/, 35, VSK. 4 S. 3; TS i. 2. 6. i; MS. 

l. 2. 5; SB. 3. 3. 2. i2j .\S. 4. 6. 3; SS. 5. 9. 7. 'Hie comparison of AV. 7.15 

with the p-irallel versions, .MS. 2. le. C, et al, reve.ils seconchiry re.'idmgs and 
adaptation in AV.jin 7. iG the .VV. re.ads tardAma for bodhaya of the other 
texts CMS. 2. t2. s, et.al), .md to bod/taya, curiously enough, the ritual, Kaus. 
59. iS, V.iit. 5. 9, responds with it-, verb hdAnytUti; m AV. 7. 47. suhavA 
is inferior to suha^dm of the other versions, MS. 4. is. C, et al. That the 
•VV. tersion of the at the beginning of bool. 13 is inferior to 

that of TU. 2. 5 2, and the result of ad.apntion has been shown by the writer, 
Contributions, Fourth Serie->, AJPh xii. .130 ftl 

S 47. The various readings of the .W. and the SrautasQtras. — 
The comp-irisons just stated have shown mcidentil!) that the m.antras in the 
Sraut i-sOtras share in general the supenoruy of the V.ijus-satTihit3s as com* 
pared, with the AX. This seems to be true .vl>o of those cases in which AV. 
and brauta-sQtras present materials of the hieratic quality which do not occur 
ill either RV. or Y.ijiis-s.uphJtas As e.nrl> as 1S56 RoTit did not shrink 
from exposing the secondar)* m.mipuhiio»s and inferior readings of AV. a. 5 
as coinp.ared with 63 i**, he might hue added, if the te;ct Iiad been 
accessible, bS. 9. 5. 2. Ihe liturgic.d torm of these sts. in the brauta-sutras, 
manifest from the insertion ofsecondan phrases, is disregarded and corrupted 
in the .VV to suth .an extent th it the sts. are in reality untranslatable in its 
xersion. detailed companson ot \V. 6 i with .V-s S. 1 iS t— S\. i. 177; 

AB 5 13.8) exhibits the little hjmn m what may be regarded .os at ie.ist a more 
origiiul form in .\P both m sense .ind metre. The himn begins AS, doio 
d^Jd brAitd ff.WiT, ‘now exening hath amxed, sing thou mernl)', for this AV. 
reads, ddf.,' brAad .oyvr, ‘now sing in the evening, sing thou m,erriiy’: 

the first ^dyj seems a mere repetition of the second. T.ida 2* in AS., tJin 
u arit.jAsilid/iiim, is co.rrupted metncatly in .VV., (an « s(uAi ys) an/.iA 
sh'iiAiiu-, .and pada 3^ in A»., saitsa.i v<itupat:h, is also more trustworthy than 
AV., saiisab iimrt.ir.i bhC,ri. .\gain AV. 6 33 "hose first two sts. are scarcely 
translatable in our version .appears ik». iS. 3. 2 in .a form which at least 

m. ikes a show of intelllgiViility; ct. also A.\, $• -• x- * — 4, ArS i. 3. Similarly 

compare AV. 6. 33 "ith AS. S. ii. 4; i>S. 10. 9. 17, especialJy the sen-eless 
pada 2', ukiAeyv anAc^su, witli, a^nir tJAJsJ of the Srauta- 

texts. The distinction bebveen hieratic and popular mantras is to be 
observed here as elsewhere: ne may expect popuhr stanzas in as good or 
better form in the AV.; see especially the parallels between ApS. and 



^6^. IaTTERATURU. GR^CHICIITC. in, AtIIARVA-Vi P A ANDGOPAIHA-nR^inUNA. 
AV. grouped together above, S 4i; or cf. the corrupt version of AV.-io. 3. 5 

S 48? Traces of superior tradition in the AV. as compared 
^Yith the Yajus-texts. — Here and there, but rarely, the AV. seems to 
present superior readings; more frequently, the .^tharvan readings seem no 
better and no uorse than those of the Yajoi-texts. Pjscjjrx' has made out 
a good c.ase for the superiority of AV. G. 22. 3 over TS. 3. i. n- ?: especaliy 
pada b in .VV. is superior to TS. which seems to be borrowed from R'. 

5. 58. 3. In AV. 3. 4. 2 the first pada, fidm rise vniatavi riyydya, is almost 
certainly superior to the adapted, tram gave 'vniaia rajy&ya, TS. 3- 3. 9* 

MS. 2. 5. 10, although the Yajur-version of the remaining jiadas is at least as 
good as the Atharvan. In AV. 6. 5. 3’ krnmc is an instance of an occasional 
hieratic form for popular kurmo of the Yajus (VS. 17. 52; TS. 4. 1. !• 2; 
MS. 2. 10.4®), but this instance of superiority is at once reduced to the 
proper proportion on observing that pada a** in AV., JjvAlave jarase nasa, 
is unmetrical, and the result of . adaptation to 'tyx^rtir-purposes, as compared 
with the Yajus'plda, sajatanam asnd tali. AV. 2. lo, notwithstanding the 
secondarily introduced refrain, is based upon* a quite as good or better source 
than TB. 2. 5 6. r fF.: see padas i*, 3*, and p3di 2^, iatrt semah saJiaufa- 
dhlbkilj, which is also better than TB., iant dydvt^frtkivt sahausadhtihVy, in 
the latter f is out of keeping, borrowed fiom the preceding stania, 

apparently to equalize the metre. .W. 3. 10. 1 impresses one as at least 
as good as its parallel, TS. 4. 3. u. $; m fact in pada 3 Is an archaism. 

' as compared with dhuksva in TS. Nevertheless the entire hymn in theAV. 
is a mixtum compositurn, as ina> be seen especially in st. 7 which consists 
of an original gajatrbprida, followed by a rather formulaic, imitative trijiubh- 
plda9, and concludes with a common anustubh-hemistich (VS. 3. 49; TS. 1. 
8. 4. 1, MS. 1. 10. 2j. Instances m which the quality of the readings seems 
equally goo(^ as those of the Yajus are AV. 6. 47. 1, as compared with TS. 
3. I. 9. 1, KS. 9. 3 21 (.MS I. 3. 36 is inferior); or AV. 6. 55. i, as compared . 
with TS. s- 7. 2- 3« "here indeed p3da c in AV. is smoother, though probably 
not more original than TS And in a case hke the little hymn AV. 6. ?9, 
as compared with TS. 3. 3 8. 2, it seems equally impossible to establish 
chronological relation on the ground of the variants. Neither these nor other 
sporadic instances of intelligent handling of mantra-themes are likely ever to 
change the mam proposition, namely that the collection and redaction of the 
AV, took place at a time when the main body of Yajus stanzas and formulas 
were in existence in essentially their present forms and present application. 
The fuller knowledge in the future of the Yajus-tradltion likely to come 
especially with the publication of the Ka(haka and Kapislhala Samhitls will 
not change this, even granted that here and theie an inferior reading regarded 
at present as of Atharvanic origin may m reality have come from a source 
outside of that Veda: in the majority of cases the Atharvan variants of the 
hieratic mantras are original with that Veda and inferior lo the tradition of 
the Yajus, no less than to that of the Rig-Veda. 


IV JAOS Xn, p. 3, bottom. — » In the latter case Candraaias 

IS Ihe divinity, corresponding e. g. to Agm; the waters ate the clement, corre- 
sponding e. g. to Ppbivt. — 3 bee below, $ 57- ’ < Cn ‘^UE \I II ^09. 

5 Cp. Henry. Lc Uvre VII, ^ 58 — « AbUandlung uber den Aiharv.vVeda. p. U iT.— 
7 \ed. Stud. E 84fT — s C^. also irMt, AV. st. 2», for in YV. — 9 Cp. AV. 



HI. Contents of tiu: Atiiarva-Veda in tjie SaunakIva-Sciiool. 


57 


PART HI. CONTEN'rS OF THE ATHARVA-VEDA 
■ IN THE SAUNAKlYA-SCHOOL. 


$49- Classification of the hymns. — The classification of a body 
of 731 Yedic hymns is not an altogether easy matter. The question what 
a given hjnm is about is not always to be answered in certain tones, e\en 
in the case of Alharvan hjmns, although prayer and action arc more closely- 
allied m this than in any other Veda. All scholars are agreed now that the 
SQtra of Kausika freijuently furnishes valuable hints towards making out the 
situation within which many' hymns were conceived, by farnUhing the mist- 
<n scine-y as it were, of a given hymn; bat all scholars are also agreed that 
the Sutra draws in a large measure upon the independent tradition of folk- 
customs and practices in general, inletw easing the Atharv an hymns as prayers 
applicable to the situation, with mote or less fitness. The -\tharvan hymns 
themselves, 'as the hymns of the Veda in general, are open to the charge 
of secondary adaftation of the floating body of Vedic stanzis to purposes 
different from those which were in the mind of the original composers; see 
SEC. xur, Introduction, p. i4tin ff, and the Index under, 'adaptation of mantra.s'. 
In such cases, of course, the Atharv amc view is the one that primarily con- 
cerns the interpreter of the AV. A large number of hymns are hard to 
classify because of the variety of* themes and objects presented in them.. 
The arrangement of the hymns mto ten classes, attempted for the first time 
by the author in his ‘Hymns of the .Aiharva-\eda’, SHE. .XLII, has upon closer 
inspection proved quite tenable; it is made the basis of the following analysis. 
Eut m atklition the materuls that did not come wnhm the scope of that 
\oUime had to be taken into account here; the result altogether is stated 
under i.; heads: 1) Clurms to cuic dise.ises and possession by demons 
Wmsaj/Jm). — 2) Prayers for long life .mil hejlih — j) Imprec- 
ations against demons, sorcerers, and enemies and /fljd/roit' 

Aaramvit). — 4) Charms pertaining to women KUnlarmani). — 5; Charms 
to secure harmony, influence in the assembly, and the like Udi’.manauJiii, 
etc.'. — 6) Charms pertaining u> rov.iltv {r>»,xtlarKUint) — 7) Prayers and 
imprecations m the interest ol Ibahmms ' S) Charms to secure prosperity 
and freedom from danger ^fau^t^klJnl — «)i Charms m exiiiaiion of sin and 
defilement — 10) tt»}m>i.o«it .ind theosopbic hymns. — 

11) Rilu.alistic and general hymns — 12' Ihe books dealing with individu.al 
themes (books 13— iSJ, — 13J Ihe twenteth bock. — 14) Tie /frwATper- 
hymns. — 


The only coru'lete (ransbtion of Ihe W »' tint of the \nglo Indian scholar 
R. 1. H. CRiFFlTli, entitleil. Hymns of the -MUnrva Veda tlienarc^, Latarus ^ Co.). 
\\lllTNF\’s posthumous Iranshlion of the entire collctl on is p>irj tliroush the 
press, to lie published in the Harvard Oriental bencs (ed. C R Lvnsus \ large 
nimibcr of hjtniis have been transhteil hs V. ftPWic. in Hie third lolunte of his 
great work, Her Ui edt, p. aiSff, as tUo scatiennglv through ihe same 'olume, 
sp. the fudex to the entire wort, sol. VI p. 57ff -V Imndi-ed selected hymns 
uetc traiishted bv Jtuvs Gkih. under the heading, ‘Hundett Iieder des .Uharva- 
Vedt’, In the •IVo'-ninni des Seminars Miulbronn', Tubingen iSjO, published in a 
second cd ticin as an inilcptndent Tolome, Tubingen iSSS. .\boul one third of the 
h'lnns were seletlcd by ihe present author for his \olume •Hstniis of the .\tharva. 
Veda, to'-ether with LstraeU from the Ritual PooU and the Conimemanes’, SEE. 
M !l (ed. -M vx Ml llerX A considerable quantity of .Uht'van matter is treated by 
Roni. .\bhandlun- Sber den .\lharv a-Veda. Tubirgcn 1S56. and in ite ‘festgruia 
.an Otto son llShtlingk.’, p. 95^.; by J Mur m 0>T, (see the indexes to soU I, 
lY, and Y); by It. ZiMSttR. .\IUidiscLc* Leben (see the indexes p. 4551; hj .'cjirs- 



58 II.LnTERATUrsV.GE'CniCIlTE. IIEATHARVA-Vl-nAASDCOPAlIU-Bl^ffWA^A.^ 
Ih.lo.ophUchs lljmnen aus der und AihanaA-cdi-Samluta. ^ 

byinoOMFitin, in 'Fc.cn Ilynits of .{.cAVA and the su sen« of ‘ConmbuUOns 


JonrnVls' and treatises^ Many translations of”indhiduaj booCs rsist; ‘ 5 

bv \Niber is IV. 303(1, Xin. 129(1., XVII. 177 ff- ^^UI. iff.; book 6, hymns 
1L50 by C A. i'fOR.Nt, BB XII. 249ff; 7 ~l 3 »>/ 

Va.sonncuvc, 1891-96); i'ook 14 l«y Wfi.ee, IS. V. l9S‘l^; '’“‘l'' >5 
I'-, r. 130 ff.; hook 18 by Wicra, SI’AW. 1895. ?■ Stiff; 1S96. I>- 
translation of the AV, into Persian is said to ha.e been made by Brahmans tor 
the emperor Akbar, but »t has not as y«t turned up? see Abu Farl s Am i-AKuaji 
in l>Lou^M^^^’s translation, Bibliotheca Indica, tS6S, p. 105 (a d. 1S75)' ^P‘ ’ 

Si'.kW., 1S90, p. 7S7, note. 


S 50. Class 1). Charms to cure diseases and possession by 
demons (bhai5ajyrini). — ITye medicinal charms of the -W. go by the 
name of bhesajani ‘remedy’, the healing pUnt is bheiajt, the \vaten> are l//ie<<tjin. 
The term ts not restricted altogether to medicine; it includes also exorcism 
of demons, and approaches closely to the conception of ianti in distinction 
from abhicaray embracing thus everything that comes under negative, defensbe, 
pious magich The derivative bhahajya occurs neither in RV^ nor A' ; it 
appears later in connection with the more advanced and technical medicinal 
practices as laid down m the Wff/n^_»<T*chapters of the Katisika-sQtra (25 — 3^)/ 
and found scatteringly in the Brahmanas and SOtras*. The" practices there 
involve a more e'ltensive m.ateria medica and more elaborate therapeutics, 
but It is difficult to define in detail the extent to which practices similar to 
those of the SQtras must be jiresupposed from the start with the charms of 
the AV. Action of some sort is likely to have accompanied nearly all of 
them, frequently otherwise umntelUgible statements of the hymns are clarified 
by the practices in the SutrasJ. At any rate the cliarms of the AV. along 
with such practices as wenr with them rej>resent quite the most complete 
account of primitive medicine pteservetl in any literature. The limited numUSr 
of RV. hymns which deal with the same subjects are of essentially Ihe same 
character and period (RV. 10. 137, 161, 163; cp. also i. 191J 7. 50; .S* 
9t; 10. 57—60, and other sporadic utterances). The existence of such charms 
and practices is guaranteed moreover at least as early as the Indo-Imnian 
(Aryan) period by the stems batsaza and bae<azya {maWtra baesaza, and 
iaesazya", haoma baesaz}a), and by the preeminent position of water and 
plants in all prayers for health and long life*. Atiaiiichi K.U11N has pointed 
out some interesting and striking resemblances between Teutonic and Veihc 
medicinal charms, especially m connectioh with cures for worms "and fracb 
ures. These may perliaps be mere anthropologiLal coincidences, due to the 
similar mental endoHment of the two peoples. But it' is no less likely that 
some of these folk-notions had crystallized m prehUtorlc times, and that these 
parallels rellect the c^tinuation of a crude Indo European folk-lore tint 
had survived among tire' Teutons and Hindus. The op[,osIte~ i leiv is now 
ordinarily asserted with a degree of dogmatism not at all warranted by the 
evidence*. 

The connection of the AtharvaniC medical charms with the later Hindu 
tnedicme of classical times (Ayur-veda) Im never fiviled to impress lUelf both 
upon the Hindus themselves who regard the.Ayur-veda as an r^/-azw/a (‘after- 
y^eda) of the Atliarvan; Western scholars also were not slow to' correlate 
the two strata of medical literature — to the advantage of the understanding 
of both. The diagnosis of fevci (iai/nan in the AV., jt-ara in the later 
medicine), especially of intermittent fever; of wasting pulmonary diseases 



in. 0 )Su:ni> or tiik Aih\rv.\-Vfd\ ik Tii^vrxAK^A-Saiooi.. 59 

\\ahtitti), and of a considenible number of other diseases is almost the same 
in both. Thesnresent author has more recently identified the .irrinu of the 
AV. Mith later u/miru Miarihiea’; the afacU of the M. with later nywri 
‘scrofulous sores', and the Athatianic disease nliich is described (AV. 6. .5) 
as iiimiju and rfuW/yrr iiith the ‘.Mansliinder (also a scrofulous aneclioii). 
as repotted upon the basis of the classical Sastras by Misn, llmdii Med cine, 
p. 3 i 6‘. rtom the other side the sapjietu'cen classical .and ^ 

medicine, still a wide one, has .dso narroucd very ni-iterially. lie early 
views of European scholars as to tlie fabulous antiqiiilj of the 
(.000 li. C) vvas criticired especially by Haas ami Zivimek but ■'“=' <>' P“; 
itlon of the chronology of classical medicine seems to have 
as much in the direction of too great a modernness av “ 

the direction of an impossible antiquity'. Ihe recent '’’“'"V 
ms. eshibit, medical science at about the the 

same condition and the same degree of development “.'V™,™, S Sd 
of Suvmta and Carata, presupposing an evolution ''''"c > ine of 

some centuries when compared with even *'■' .If ‘ "’f ' 
the Kausika*. The presence of foreign, S' "rooim^ of 

r“Sblan«. whert'ronT'mire^ hand''tr inlluenee of Hindu medicine 
'upon eat" Arabic medicine, and through it upon &.ropean 

^o!Hl%feririft.S?" 

SI 

regions: the of the names oi lu the same 

a great ^a^iety of unrelated daemons and demoniac 

charm; the line between diseaiC and |»osse _s .ivat are employed 

influences is not drawn sharply, .and the curati c instead of healing 

are either of the symbolic onler, or comwt of kts 
substances. These amulets are brgely derive obscure. I Good 

the designation of the plant, being agam t'’ 

illustrations of the symbol., treatment (7. ri6). In the 

Jaundice (1. 32), and the brief naturally belongs, to 

former the yellow color of the patient t'> ^ substituted 

the yellow sun and yellow bird,, the red wuo may 

for the yellow; in the latter •*« "^^her hand the plant that 

be suj.posed to find it enjoyable. )n ,,cp,.er-corn tliat K 

is implored to help against fever •*' cannot be supposed 

employed m the quaint charm a„.uitot ^ medicinal properties, 

to owe their presence in these surroundings to any real me ^ 

Tor all that a classification of the ^ bulWily in tlie S.'istras and 

of that same Hindu medicine that is j hj mas against 

their descendant works. does not occur 

or^fever, the Jtara of tlie later mcdicm . 7.116, are devoted 

outside of the AV.> Four hymns, 1. 25, 5' -* pl^nt 

to its cure; two others, 5- 4 a^easc. (Just as Susrut.i designates 

with special reference to the cure of seems in Atliarvamc times to 

fever L ‘the king cf .li«.vww‘ “ ''“vf/",?" S Iccmv to l,.vvc beeu fairly 
have been the most ‘beaded admcnL) g alternation between hc-at and 
vearebiug and uv-act: 'tbc rfurf ay^T ” r.s„ a, tbe same time, every 
chill,; ii i, intcrmilteut.lamvin'i „ccotupanied by j.annilice vvbich 

third day, or omitting every third day, . 



6o II.Ll'iTFR.'TURU. Geschichte. I b. Ati urva-Vepa rkd Gopatjia-BieShmara. 

suseests tiuc mahrial rc^c^, espedaHy during die rainy season. It is assoc- 
iated "itli a 'aiiely of Ollier diseases, headache, cough, to/iitc, tul}U^a, 
and taman ‘itch’ (also in the Asesta), the takman's ‘brothers son. J*® ““j 
salient symptom, heat, suggests Agni ‘fire’ as the cause. It is generally mted 
by prayer and conjuration to ■which the Kausiha adds symbolic Radices, 
the plant hniha and the tree ja^t4a furnish amulets against it, 

116. 2) the cooHng frog is suggested in the mantra, and applied in the 
corresponding practice of the Sutra", (aosely associated with the takman- 
• hymns is i. 12, an interesting chann addressed to lightning (Agni) conceived 
as the cause of fever, headache, and cough‘% To the cure of jaundice, 
frequently mentioned along with fever, i. 22 is devoted independently; the 
symbolic proceedings indicated above are executed energetically in the pract- 


ices of the Sutra’i. _ , 

(llie ancient Vedic disease dropsy (Jatodara, ‘water-belly'), the infliction 
of Varuna in punishment of moral delinquency (an/ia), is represented by 
three hymns, )i. 10; 7.83; and 6.24. In the latter (it seems coupled with 
heart-disease, Jan instance of good diagnosis. (The cure indicated both in the 
hymns and sQtras is water which js used symbolically and vith a touch of 
homotqpathy '<•> Again, in another disease which suggests the presence ol 
’■^vmbunclant humors, water and water-procuring ants (‘piss-ants’) figure as 
the remedy, in the same symbohohomocopaihic way (attractio similium) as 
in the case of dropsy. The disease in question, astdva, is treated in_ i. 2; 
8, 3; and 0. 44, the commentators define it as a/isdra ‘diarrhcua’ which is 
correct in the mam, although perhaps excessive micturi^tion and other excessive 
discharges may have been included primarily. One of these charms (i- 2) 
seems to have been originally a battle-charm, adapted by adding sb 4 
its present use**. Another (6. 44) appeals for help to an object called 
tisSnakd, either a plant or a horn (at any rate with punning intention: f/ 
‘loosen’)**'. The converse of excessive discharges, namely constipation and 
retention of urine, h cured by i. 3, and is accompanied by an interesting 
medical practice in Kau>. 25. 10 — 19. ( A disease whose vague description 
suggests either jbeumati’^m or colic, due to the missiles of Rudra, is driv en 
out With 6. 9®- to this Kaus. 31. 7 adds homccopathlcally a spear-amulet to 
counteract the pains that seem as if from a spear. ( Diseases of the pul- 
monary order are exotcisedjin 6, 14, addressed to laldsa^^^ and to cough 
{kdsa) in G. 105; 7. 107. I'lhe terms rdja^aksvia, and ajudta^aksfna 

(also /o/j; in TS) are m the later medicine ’applied to pulmonary 

diseases '5'-, for the Vedic period this definition seems too narrow: .VV. c. 33 
(^^•_ro. 163); 3. 11; 9. 8; 19. 36, 44, etc. point to the more general meaning 
wasting disease, or ‘disease in general’. Very curious and problematic is 
6. 80, accompanying an oblation ihazis in the technical sense; see below, 
S Oo, end) to the sun, conceived as one of the two heavenly dogs. In the 
ntual this is treated as a cure for paralysis (paksakata, hemiplegia)*?. Three 
charms are directed against k^drija ‘inherited disease’ (2. 8; 10; 3. 7); the 
sympioms of the kulnjn are not described: the disease may Iiave been of 
the scrofulous or syphilitic' order. Other internal diseases arc alluded to 
jncidenfall}', or grouped in the panaceas Isarzaikai^ajya of the commentators), 
especially in e. 33; 9, 8; and 19. 44- cf. for these Zimmcp, n. 378 ff., and the 
item di:,eases’ in the Index to SBIIXIJ/. 697, 

‘ To the cure of ills of a more external character,' especially shin dise.ases, a 
considerable number of cLvrms address themselves. Leprosy {Wdsa) is cured 
in I. 23 and 24 by applying black plants, rajan'i and sjtima, (allopithic sym- 
bohsm); .abcesses {ztifraif/m) are mentioned with other diseases in 6. 127. U 



. III. CoyrtSTs ov 'inr: ATinRVA-VcoA is rut: SAtf.v.iKrv'A-Scicooi,. 6 i 

g. S. 30 Df particular interest are the charms «iirected against scrofulous 
sores called apacit (later apacl)^ and related dise.ise3:^6. 25; 6. 57; 7, 74. i, 2; 
7. 76. I, 3; 7 - 7 < 5 « 3 - Their character was misunderstood prior to the author's 
essay on this theme*'. Tiie sores, tumors, and pustules apparent in this 
dise.ase are conjured in the hymns themselves to fall olT, or fly away, because 
in the naive view of the folk they were supposed to have settled like birds 
up6n the afflicted person. The Sutra, however, treats the disease by drastic 
applications, and in one instmee (6. 57) the famous remedy of Rudra, the 
jjlilsa (urine), is indicated .as the remedy by' the mantr.rs themselves*'. (The 
cure of wounds and fractures is accomplished by' two hymns (4. 12; 5.5) 
which appeal to the plant called variously arundhati, Jak:a, or Tilacl-. the 
name arundhati points towards a punning symbolic connection between the 
disease {nrut ‘wound’) and the simple. The first of these two hymns has 
been compared by A. Kuns with the Merseburg charm, and many other 
similar productions from various Teutonic and Slavic sources *- 5 . )The pepper- 
corn (pippali) curiously figures in 6, log as a cure or preventive of the same 
trouble. Flow of blood is charmed to a stop by the pretty hymn 1. 17 which 
seems fst. 4) to indicate tlie use of a bandage or compress filled with sand **. 
The lirShnunas and Sutras mention types ofVedic lore designated '&%sarpa- 
lidj-H and viiathipd ‘science of serpents and of poisons’**. n'Jiese so-called 
sciences similarly to yAtuiidyt., raksov'tdya, etc., are referable in the main to 
the .\V. which presents many charms not only' to keep serpents from the 
premises (below, S 57), but also for the cure of their poisonous bitesi Such 
charms are 5. 13; 5. 6 ts; 7 56; and ?. 88, of these 5. 13 is of especial 

interest as contiining many w-ords founded upon the bed-rock of folk-lore, 
among others the word (iikut-am which Wemn has identified with ‘taboo’, 
not, however, failing to recognise the .altenXmt difficulties The importmce 
of this parcicul.tr phase of witchcraft i» shown by the cvistence of the Garu/li- 
Upani>ad which is nothing more than a charm .igamst sn ike bites, put into 
the mouth of lirahman, and elev.ited to the position of krahmavidyV, Jn 
the Ilengal Presidency alone the number of deailu from serpents bites in 187C 
amounted (o 11416**. And{there are also chtrms directed against poison 
not derived from serpents, 4-0 (poisonous arrows), 47, and 6.100. In these 
c.ises w'atcr seems to be depended upon .as a cure, 'of especai interest is 
6. 100 in which the water-producing .ants (upajtka) y'leld the healing llmd^b 
The rituil reinforces these poison-charms with appeds to Takyak.i (VatslJey.a), 
the serpent-good-i'’. To the cure of worms iknnii) tiuee charnu .ire devoted 
.'.31 (worms m general), 2.32 (worms in c.ctUe), and $.33 (worms in 
children). Identical, or similar stanris .ippear m many other texts, ejpectilly 
'I’A. and SV. .Mantrabr.lhmam:(A. KmiN has shown that the grcitevt variety 
of disease-) are regarded in the naive view of folk-niedicine as due to the 
presence of worms, 'i'his .accounts for ‘worms in the head’ (s 31. 4) ‘the 
varicgited worm,- the four-eyed’ (2. 32. 2), and the like*‘.)The Sutra presents 
complicated practices. The charm 6. 16, addressed to a substance called 
ddavu, which Kauhka identifies with mustard, is directed against ophthdmia, 
a disease of the eye, aia/i, known m the later medicine^*, is mentioned 
9. 8. .3 0. In the same hymn and cRewhere diseases of the ear are also 
mentioned (9. S. I, 2). ^I’hree lively, picturesque charms, 6. 21; 136; 137, 
cause hair to grow- luxuriantly: '‘With reins they had to be measured, with 
outstretched arms they had to be measured oiiU May’ thy hair grow as 
reeds, may it (cluster), black, about thy head!' (6. 137. 3). One of these 
charms (6. 136J is performed with the otherw'ise unknown plant nitatm, ‘she 
that takes root'; all three are accompanied in the Sutra by fanciful symbolic 



62 II. Littcraturu. GcscHicmc. IB. ATirARVA-YEnA and GoPA-niX-BRA^BrANA. 


practices. fThree charms, 4. 4 ; 6 - 7 =; “nd «• i“>. .® -la"S 04 B= 
veiled, profess to promote virility {iefaharsana). \ • j • 

A maniac ‘'\ho, bound and well-secured, loudly jabbers' is exorcised m 
6.111/ Insanity is due to possession by demons, especially the mind-bewildering 
Gandhatv'as • and ApsarasA At this point especially Atbarvanic medicine 
passes over into demonology: the boundary-line between the two is rarely 
well-defined 3 '. ThTs“class of h)mns, therefore, is in close contact with those 
treated here in the third category. The rather romantic charm 4 - 37 appems 
to the plant ‘goats-hom’ {ajainigl: comms., mesa^ri'ifi, and vi^aiu) to drive 
Rahsas, Apsaras, and Gandharvas out of a possessed person. The choice of 
this particular plant is probably due in part or entirely to its meaning (.etj'mo- 
logical symbolism).] 'Rak^as and fits {grdlii) are driven out in 2. 9 with an 
amulet made from ten different kinds of holy Udrtfa) wood; demons and 
diseases in rg. 36 with another composite hundred-fold amulet. The last 
three charms have suggested analogies from Teutonic folk-lore Rak5as and 
Pisacas are also exorcised in 4. 36 and 6. 32. The plant prinipanii is con- 
jured, 2. 25, against the demon of disease called /I’a/ipa, conceived especially 
as the devourer of the embryo in the womb ^usruta still recommends the 
primpanii as, a preventive against miscarriage Three charms, 

2. 4, 19. 34, 35 > addressed to an amulet'denved from the javguia-Xitt, are 
directed against diseases and demons. 

^ At another point the remedial charms pass over by imperceptible degrees 
-into tlie class of tlie ‘life-givmg’ charms (^dyusyatiif\ol our second category- 
Special substances, or water and the plants in general, are implored 
for complete exemption from sickness isanarogabhaisajya, i. e., panaceas).) 
Thus the t'lrrawa-tree (rar ‘protect’) in 6. 25; the plant kusjha in 6. 95; the 
eipudrtHW in tJ, 127; bdellium in 19. 3S, barley and vvafer in 6. 91; 
affinsf of salve {atijana) m 19. 44. Or Soma and Rudra are appealed to 
m 7. 42 (RV 6.74.2,3), Vata, the wind, in 4. 13 (RV.10.137), the so-called 
/a/«/ab>a-h)mn. Hymns and stanias addressed to the waters, often not 
original m theAV, are used as panaceas (r 4-— 6), or against some special 
disease, e. g., 6.22, which the Sutra prescribes against dropsy. Plants are 
simihily appealed to in 6, 96, and especially in the long hymn S. 7 which 
counts upon the virtue of all possible magic and medicinal plants (analogous 
to the so-called csadht-stuH, RV. jo 97). Or, again, a hymn or stanza of 
general character is adapted as a Matsajjam, as e. g. 7. 10 (RV. i. 164. 49) 
which IS prescribed for a child seized by the demon Jambha (convulsions) 
as it is being nursed by its mother (note the word stanet in the st.). And 
there are h)mns which aim to secure immunity from all diseases, real or 
fanciful, by simply driving them out by conjuniiion, naming them one after 
another, until the list is exhausted: 2. 33 (RV. 10. 163 == AV. 20. 96) and 
9. S (cp. also rg. 44); We may finally note 2. 29. a charm for securing long 
life (djui’ja), which Kaus 27.9 — 13 employs in a practice designed to transmit 
the disease of one seized by thirst {trsnagrliUa) upon another person. St. 6 
seems to accord with this transference, vaguely suggesting modern trans- 
fusion 


RoTii.ZurIitteraturMndCescWchieU«\Vcda,i,.37; GrvOiunvs, 
o3 ('P- 283^-}; Die Cntcbtn in Indioi, .ci'AW., ii9o, p. 924*^-! 

^ r 3t3; p. 37417 (cp Kaeoi, TahrbacJier fur c!-vsv'»rhc 

r}nJc,}os.e. jSSo, p -i&tff JJioowirtD, .SDIl xr 11, p. 1-48. aivl the notes cof 
‘"Ancient India, Nature, sol. l.\ 111. j-. 233 

s- a ‘ "P®® Important division of the .ttharv.-.n nito 

\edas, Alhan-api(4e«rj,A4„«^„, and Afis, rasa see above, p. Sff.; 



CONTEKIS OF THE AiHARVA'VeOV tS HI!, i AU.S'AKiVA-SCJIOOL. 63 


SBE. XLU, p. wuifT.; iriuviBRANDT, RituaT-Uttcratur, p. 169, 177. Good and cmI 
niagic are distnigiiishcd at all lime^ e. ff., in the MahabhArata: ^oJ‘KL^s, JAOS. 
XIJl. 315, 365. Ry the side of tbt* stands the three-fold distinction of the ritualistic 
manuals: JWrrii/jtiT, and /ow^Wa; see MADl!t.sCi)AS-\SARASV\Tr, !<>. I. 16; 

• IJLOOMFifjD, Sesen Hymns, AJlh. VII, Hii.LEiisr.NDT, ibid. p. 169; cp Jiig- 

vidhina 1. i. 3, and, Mkyer, Introduction, p. \il. — • * Hillferandt, 1. c. iSt. 
Cp. Meafr, Rig-\idhAna, Introduction, p. mil — i Bloomfifid, Seven Ilvmns, 
AJI’li, Yll. 467 IT. 5 Contributions. Second S».ries, AJPh. XI. 320 ff. — 4 See Vend. 
20-.S2 (especially 30. 4; SUE. IV. 231, note); SpuGEU, Die Arlsche Periode, p. 97, 
155> I7®i 201; GEiGrn, Ctsilizalion of the Eastern Iranians, p. otjff Avestan 
/aman =« Ycd. f^man ‘ucU’ is the apparently solitary instance of the identical 
nomenclature of a disease. — 5 A. Kurv, KZ. XIU, pp. 49—74, and 113—157; 
U V. SciiRoriiER, Indien’s 1 iltcratur, p. 17$ ff; SHE. XlII, p. 313, 3S6, 454; cp. 
ruTET, K/. V. 337 (antiijiiafei)'. The use of the frog against le\er may also reach 
back to prehistoric beginnings; see G».oH\t\N<, IV 3S6, 414; SBE Xl.II 565!!.; 
J-VOS. XVn. 173 — 6 AJl'h. \TI. 467 IT.; XI. 320 ff. — 7 Hws. ZDMO. XXX. 

XX.XI. 647ff.j ZnniFu, 574 ff ; Wl.r, 2S6 (and. Xachtrag. p. 23(1); L. v. 
‘^cimovTiFR, 1. c. 73off; Wfbek, SPAW, iS^. p. 924 ff. — ® Hofsnle, I’HAS., 
April iSgo; Jfi \S., iSqi.p t39ff.; Roth, \VZK>f. V. 303 , BOhlfr, ibid. 103 ff, 30311.; 
JoLL\, Fesigruss nn Roth, p. »S; \\/,KM. XI. i64ff. — 9 Iborit, ZDMG. XXVT. 
4tS; WrEfR, Sl’AW., 1S90, p. 29 -- w Connected treatises on classical Hindu 
Medicine; p. abjIT.; v. ScttROFOCR, I. c. 729ff. The’ most convenient digest 

of Jlindii .Metlicjne based upon natue bteraiure 1# still, WjsE, Commentary on the 
Ilnulii System of Medicine*, t86o (regrettably s'lthout an vnilcn). Tor purposes of 
comparison see the list of diseases wul plants (manv medicinal) in tne indeic of 
SHE. Mil, p 697 and 702. — »« WrtiER, in IV. 119, Croumann, I\. 381 ff.; 
3'lMMrR, p. 379ff.; llARtiy, l)ie Vedisch litahmanische renode, p 198, I’tooMnCLD, 

SHE. xrir, p. 441 ff.. 565 it., cp ukr, ^ 21911 — •» ijrh vri. p. 4«9ff; sle. 

XUI 7. 346(1 — »» SHE. XLII. 263(1. — M ‘il'.E. XLII. llfl, 841, 471, ^62, 
and ep. Inde*, under ‘altractio simihum’, and, 'honi topatliv’. — >Jl bDE. .M.IL 
333 (cp. AJl’h. VH. 467). -- t* AjHi Ml 426 ff. SRU XlII. 4S1. — «? SBC. 
X1.1I. 450 shoMS that tlie exact natme of i^r/r/rf is not defined by the texfi — 
tS NVlsr, p. 310, 331 ff., Grohuvnv. IS 1\ 400. Zimmer, p. 376 ff. — «9 JAO'^. 
XV iG3fl}SBC XIU. sooff- — Zimmlk. p rSo. Wise, p 210. — *i Con- 
tributioris. Second sene*. .\jPh. XI 32>ff < i> the commentary on these staiuas 
In .SHE. XLII. — Contfibuiiona toiirih Senes, \ll‘i» 4251!.. bBL XnL4S9.— 

*3 See note 5. — *4 St 1 mih inieresuiig » rriant- occurs in Yaska’s NinAta 7.4. 
— « to s 2 20. 13 4 3 <»• -Ss 10 2 IS. " JO 7 S' ^hlnd Up 7 l.aff. 
Cp. RV. 7 50, and, 14 g 'ulbsna 1 3 4. 27 1 2S 1 — 5. — SPWS 1S96, 
p 6Si — 4 873—5, I estschnfl fur V UaMiaiu p 30I— 0 Cp non IS X\ III 215 — 

1 Aooi., I leven Aiharvatia Ui*ani»\L, p b , -Sb. U n er, 1 '' W H 10 1 ff , Dei sspn, 
Nedui’ Upain«hid s, p. 627 ff. »* Wrnn., ib'd p to* nLOOMUrtn, Seven 

n>mns of the A\., \Jt U \ 1 I 4S2 ft . MtL. \UI 5 n — J' Xl.lf 374; 

VuiKR, '-rWV, IS90, p 0S4 iiou, i?;; — /• 4 Ktii', K/ \ 1 W 49 ff. Hjff: 
/IMMLR. p. 3.)J. Mir. XLII 2an.ji3lT, cp Wi'S. p 'O?. , 3 -J^ *1 “ i'"*^*’* 
p. 2')6. ZlMMtK, p J 90 . — Me the noti on o iii 4 . ''bl. XLII 520. Cp 

J. 217. nole. — 3* Cp •'usn.ti t S4 10. ^,naiUs/j^rlt< yt Jr..ilrt.hui 

nih/jsUtkl .irbnajfr/: u‘assr(ti,u, .0 v.i.iam*' - "M- MU 409 and 291 

— J* Ibid. 302 — r Ibid. 3 ckN. 310. 

S 31. Class r). i’raNcrs for long hie and health Unus}Jm>. —The 
second class of hvmns to which tradition tittiftgl) a->M"ns the name ajunjn: 
(sc sui/ani}' is not separUed by h.\rd and ft»t hnes from the /ned.cmal 
ch.arm5 Thus 10. 44, though it CNhibits m the mam the characteristics of 
an .nuA-am, mentions specific.all> a considerable list of daetses. or 3 ti nhtch 
also mentions diseases is employed, Kaus 27 3»— 53* >« interesting sym- 
bolic practice directed against the commentator^ pretty con- 

s:.stenth expLun this as Aenfired diserse' Throushout fhz iraati^ srA^s■ 
te\ts are found in enormous i^nantity farmulai and stmzas wh.ch pray for 
hie ij3,-us\ hh\ I'reath (/ri-a, etc->. and incidentally for all other de>ideraUi. 
such as tanas, Ma, taias, iJrit (strength and glory), cattle and other pro- 
pertr In the forthconnn; Vedic Concordance tJie lormulas and padis 
be'dnnin" .ilone with the words and (.aurt), or densatne^ from 



64 II. I-ITTEEATUR U. GeS CHICIITE. 1 E. ATIIARVA-VeDA ASP GorATOA-BiailMAyA. 

these tvoids, Rumber eoo or mdreb The chanicterfetic feature of such formulas, 
as also of the in the AV., is not so much pta>er for the cure of disease 

as the eager endeavor to secure life unto the ideal oM .age of a hundrea 
years* for a person, either a sacrificer, or still more frequently, a boy entering 
adult life through the various ceremonial stages attendant upon the develop* 
ment of the young Hindu from birth to confirmation (vpanayam). Hence 
these hymns are emplo)ed ver)- properly in the Atbarvan ritual under the 
rubric of {sc. X-arxidnt), beginning Kaui 55. iS, and containing the 

• ceremonies of tonsure (f/?(f<J^<rrwfl«), shearing of the beard {^cJdna), and the 
■ upanayana. The Grhja-sutras exhibit them in much the same way on the 
, same occasions: the Atharvan materials shd%v little originality and frequently 
coincide nath the mantras of the other SamhitSs. A survey of one or tno 
of these charms, e. g. 2.28 or 3. ii, discloses at once the very family ' 
■ catch-words of the entire class: they ask for life \.3yus, jivana, asu, pratid- 
panau)\ it shall last a hundred years {iala^drada, satam hitndh, salayus)', 
death shall not come until old age (jara.t, yard, jariman, jaramrtyu, jarad- 
asti)', the charm shalj protect against the regrettably large number ofdeatlis, 
100 or more {mriyat-o ... ialaijt ye, s. 28. 1; ariye mrtyavo ydn Ahur itarani 
chalam, 3, 11. 7; ehaiaiam, 8. 2. 27); tor deaths are still remembered by 
Suirula (Ayur-veda 1. ua. 10) as a characteristic conception of tlie AV , 
ekoftararn mrtyuiatam atharvanal} pracakiate (cp. SBE. XLII, p. 307 )j finallj'i 
Varna, Mttyu, Antaka, Nirrti, etc. are cajoled with politenesses and obeisance. 
Of course this technique is by no means restricted to the diuryifw/; not only 
is it' exiiibited a /oriion by the medicinal charms, but also the charms for 
prosperity in general and the wltchcnift-charms naturally avail themselves of 
It. Yet it IS unmistakably the specialty of this class: the Sntra and the 


' Atharv.an scholiasts deserve credit for defining it schematically and presenting 
the employment of the hymns in question in the very situations to which they 
owed. their composition at least in a luge measure. • , 

A noteworthy charicteristic of these hymns is the specixl prominence of 
»Agm, nhereby_ hangs f. bit of ancient mythological history. Agni himself is 
Aju ‘alhe’j the personal Ayu of the myths and legends, notably Ayu, the son 
ofrururavas andUrvaSI, is not likeJy.exer to divulge his true nature without 
the same naturalistic, back-grounds Hence the a^/vri'ir-hymns phce life in , 
the special charge of Agni, without, of course, excluding other diiinities. In 
the Yajus-texts, Grhya-sutras, and Upanijads aUoAgni is frequently associated 
x\ith life's breaths^'. Typical for the AV, is 7. 53. 6, a\ur na vlivato dadhad 
ayam agnir vareri)afi. The hymns 2. 13; 28; 29; 7. 32 and other scattered ' 
•stanzas furnish illustrations of this point Otherwise the absence of salience 
of these hjrnins is relieved only by the association with them of life-bestowing, 
and life-protecting amulets which are in the main truly Atharvani'c. The 
golden amulet which the Daksayaiyas, rich in the passessiori ofgold, fistened 
upon hatanika {i. 35) is such a one?; an amulet of gold is used also vritli 
19. 26. Salve {aiija/ta) figures in 4- 9, 19. 44; 45; the pMrl and its shell in 
. 4. to; the puludru tree in 8 2; an amulet addressed as astrta 'unconquered'* 
r, in 19. 4G. Similarly the sacred girdle [mekfiald) furnishes the basis of an 
ayunam in 6 .’i 33 ; and the shearing of the beard is turned into a life-giving 
ceremony in 6. CS. Quaintly does the hymn 3. 31' solder together a mixtum 
composnum to the same end out of a lariety of psicho-phisical and mytho- 
logical remim.cence. 9 . The hymns 8. j and a, employed Kau.. «;8. 3, n >« 
special ceremonies called and (parts of the vpannjana), 

Atharvanesque by virtue of their impassioned fervor and great length, 
rhe relationship of this type with the prose formulas of the Yajus and the 



III. Contents of the AnnRVA-VEDA in the S\unakI\-a.School. 65 

Grinyas betr.i)s itself in the so-called hyran'» 2.15 — 17; 5.9; the prose’ form- 
ulas that go to make up 19. 51; 601 61; 67 occur in .these texts also'". 
The remaining <y//yrt-hymns are devoid of either mythological or antiquarian 
interest (i. 30J 3. ii; 3. 2§; 30; 6. 41; 53; 19, 24; 27; 5S; 70), and glide 
over imperceptibly into a style of hymn which is not strictly being 

regarded otherwise (/aits/iJiai our class S, S 57) by the Sutra. They are in 
reality not different m their general purpose (x. 31; 4. 13; 6 5; 13; 16. 4; 
19. 30; 32; 33} see .also the long so-called i'/r<M<T/^AhjTnn, book 17). 

* Sic SRI . II. 49 ff, ami notes; KautiEn, Index R, )>. 3S3’, s.v. cp.-- 

Mescr, Uig-vulKlm, Introduction, p.xii, under the heading 'longa Mta’; S\i<lh. 

2. l i I“G. t. 16. 3 fT. _ 2 SRF- XI 11 . 34t. — 3 We refer to the fonnuU? of the , 
l)pe, Si'wr tn • dthf, Jj'«4 frjnaot me dhutpiai Hyufl'l. a^e 'sy Syur me fTAk, i- 
yutv'iya MMtfrdj'iyij; etc — 4 W»BrR, I*'. XMl. i 9 »fT ! lest^russ an Rudolf \on 
Roth^ p. 137. — 5 Rfrusu.m:, ] -v Religion Vediqite, I. 59 ff.; II. 91 (T.; RV. 4. 2. iS, 
eiJ iirvatTr atr/rai trJAe eut atya u/amtylf’i ‘for mortals e\en manj’ 
Uriiatt' ('fire-sticEs’) were prepared (root = ///>) unto the production of the 
nohle A\a ('fire’) below*. IVirflmvas and ITrens'f suggest the f!rt*-s{icl.s ; Ajai i, their 
son: \.s. 5 q; TS. t. 3 7 - i; 6. 3 - 5 3 ! MS- 1 . 2 .- 7 . S- 0- S'. 3 4 i. 22; 

KS. 5. 1.301 ApS 7. 12 13; Haul 69 20. The expression Miafo »>■ fteiltli, 
used by vfyii, MS, i. 6 12, refers to the many tndiitduil productions of fire, cp. 
the brothers ofAgni. See non Rioomfiflu, j\OS 'XX. tSofT. Differently GFi.pN£K,Ved. 
Stud. I.a43tT, especially 283. — * K.g VS. 3. 175 TS. f. 5. 5. 3; 7. 45 .S 15 2. 3. 

4. lOi 2. 1 1 .3J rtJ. 2. 4. 8. I'ra^na Up. t. 7; Miiiri Up 6. 5. 9. 33; cp. SBh. 
MU 36G. — } iiR. 6. 7. 4. 2. WruER. IS. l\ 35S, 430. Cp. Rinih. 4. 9 j. — 

* Mynna, as/i-tinliuSiAy.twntt . — *) JVC's XW iSllT.; .^RR. XI.II. 36417. — 

«« Uymns 19 60 and 6t m Vs 5. 5.9 2: OR 2 i 3, T.V (Andhra) lo 721 \ps 
3 20. 3; I'G. i. 3. 25! Vait. 3. 14 Hymn 07 fr«<;uciit[> m the Cmya-sairat. 

S 52. Class 3). Imprecations against demons, sorcerers, and 
enemies and krtydfrateAaraniiniy.-^'Tht third d.iss of 

hjnnns is directed ag.iinst demons, sorcerers, and enemies*;"between hostile 
human sorcerers and dtngerous demons the Atharv\ntc Hindu knows no 
distinction, as may be seen from a. iS, where the iArtUnya, rir/jf/w, 

/iVJnj, and satiiimA .'re succes»ivel> pl.iced under’the ‘.me ban. The de- 
limitation of this cliss is again some\\h.it uncertain .and subjectise. On the 
side of demonology it touches upon the first class, because the remediil 
charms are not unfrequently directed -og.nnst po'SCssion by demonsi In so 
far as tt is composed of miprec.ttions and sorceries against enemies it con- 
citenites with the royal rites (cltss 6, Ji 55) whose b ittle-ch.irms assail the 
enemy m essentially identical terms with the imprecations of Brahmans against 
thoae that neglect and oppress them (class 7, S lose-praclices 

of women, m so far as they are calculateil to undermine nsals (class 4, § 53); 

.'iml w ith the charms designed to secure mtluenlial position in the community 
•and superiority m general tchss 5, S 54). masm ich as here also rmlry is 
expressed or implied. The present class cosers howescr the central ground 
of whit Js known and (niA/izz'-f/iii), the terrible side 

(g-vi’ni) of this Vedt. A wide-spread tratliuon reaching back to tiie Vedic 
hymns themselves assocutes this part of the Veda with the semi-divme race 
of the .\ngiras: such charms are known as the a’^ras,zA, the second part of 
the old designation of the AV. (o/ArrrJ«gin?w«>; the term Angirasa-seda 
also occurs’. All this in distinction from the u/Azrcit’iai (.ybaraapa-veda) 
which refer? to the auspicious charms and practices (Mefj/j, /./'i/j, and 
'The term atAicara is genetic; the Athars.in and other Vedic 
texts knoiri'it .add.tion ‘spell*, ‘secret spell’, and muJj-Urman 

(•^'i.j) ‘practices with the roots of plants’, performances undertaken more 
drastically with tangible objects: magic or spells are pheed or hidden m 
places where they may most injure The hymn zo. x represe.ats the Ar/jj 
In.l»-»rwli* PhUolojic. li. l» 5 



6 S ll.Un'Tru.xa-Rtj.Gv.s'cincHTu in.ATiuMA-YrDAAN'nGorMiiA'iii<\H«ANA. 

same notmo U present %hidl> in tlie conflict of SAcrif.ces called 
tisMni;i<}*\ An esj.ecjaJly Albarvamc na>or attaches to 7. 5 
to the extravagant praUc of this same iviftaija) h>mn. Ihe gods performed 
the human ‘.acrifice i turi:uim'dko\ but mightier than that ts the ti/iavja- 
sacrifice: in vain** did they sacrifice a dog, in \am the hmbs of a cow, the 
ttVtax-ya alone availed them (sts. 5). Very charactensiic, too, js the bleno 
of witchcraft with original theosophic conceptions in the hymn to Kama, tiie 
bull that slays the encmj’, 9. s: I'Jma ‘loie* is origimlly a cosmic force 
(KV. 10. 129. 4 — = AV. 19. 52. i), but Us personification as a supreme being 
suggests very soon his power to protect (hose who worship him, and to destroy 
the enemies" of the tvorshipper (cp. below, S 59)* . ^ • 1 

(The class of ‘counter-witchcraft’ charms {lrl)J/ra(: 7 i{:r'ar!a)*^ is char- 
acterized especially by the word prati and derivatives and compounds from 
it) e. g. /r<i/i(iW/Vrt><7«a s.n.z', /rafisara And /raf^rar/it, 8.5.1, 4,* 
and fratiema 10. 1.6. The persons against whom these defensive charms are 
directed are designated, 5. 31. 12, a-, krhdkrt ‘he that fashions spells*, 

‘he that digs for magic purposes’, vtiilin ‘he iliat digs after roots’, and /<*/;*• 
the^ya ‘he that emits curses' (cp. 4. 9. 5)./ A good specimen of the style of 
these defensive charms Is 10. t. 6: ‘Praticina (‘Back-hurler’), the descendant 
of Ahgiras, is our overseer and Purohi'ta: do thou drive back ipratici!}) the 
spells, and yonder fashioners of th’e spells!' Two of these charms (s.iij 8.5) 
are undertaken with tlie fAii/)'<Z'ainulet, derived from the rr<7if’(»<*'tree (schol. 
titaKay‘'\ another (5 14) is .addres>ed to a plant whose name is not stated; 
yet another, : 24, names four male /•mi/m and four female kim~dinl\i\x\\ curious, 
at times euphemistic designations, and calls upon their sorceries to turn against 
themselves, that against the perpetrators of these sorceries. Especially forceful 
is 5 31, containing a long catalogue of homely animate or imnimate objects 
within which spells were instituted: an unburned vessel, grain, raw meat; the 
cock, goat, and other antmah; the ^.}r//ii/<r/y<r-fire, house-fire, house, assembly 
hall, gammg-place, the army, the drum, the arrow, and the weapon; the well, 
and the burial-place. A spell m the nature of a terrify ing, evil-w orking figure 
(bug-bear, bogey, bogle, German popanz) 'endowed with nose, endowed vvith 
ears, and multiform’, ‘prepared by a Klja, prepared by a woman, prepared 
by Hrahmans', is driven out, under protestation of great loathing and fear, 
in 10 I. /I’rose formulas similar to those enumerated. Kaiii. 49. 7 It are 
banded together as hymns for the same purposes in 4. 40 and 5. 10. Curse 
personified is invoked against him that curses in (5. 37 and 7. 59. ' 

« Lunwir,, Der Rig-VcAn, HI. 33S(r,; Hirneli, Saina\uUiana-Ilrahi'r.ana. Intro- 
•duction, j). XXII IT.} MrvhK, Rig-Mdhsna, Inuoduclion, p. xiiifT.; HarpV, P'« 
VeJisch-l’ralimanischc Tcriocle. ji 193 (T ; OinrscERt,, DR- Religion dcs Veda. 
I> 262 IT.; 4715 fT.; UlLttBKANWT, Ritual-Utteratur, p 167 IT.-, 174 ft.; IlLooMfirLP. 
bJjH. XLH, p.64tT, .and notes; .tJH,. X.iC5(r.; Win rCRNn z, Witelicr.ah 

in Ancient India, >'e\, World, ’'cptemlier 1898 — » Sec tlie elaboration of lU'S 

view, SBR. Xl.ll, p xviiiff , above, p. 8ff.; cp. IIiiudr\mit, l.c. 169. — 3 The 
rreqneiu legend* in the Brahmavas, narrating ilic conflict between the Aiisira'i a"*! 
the Adit) as in conncclion »HU sacnriciol performances, generally inot so All. 0 . 34 tf ) re* 
present the Adilyas as Ihe pious, ultimately successful sacrificers, wliereS' the 
Angiras appear in a light similar to the Asuras in the so called ,/jivlsui 7 ff< (sc. 5 f J- 
I I. e ihcy are worsted in the conflict: Wlbfr, IS. l.sojj Ftr lll.’Soi Sl'.tW, 

ii9i, ]>. Sn ir. Tins also reflects perhaps, in a roundabout wav, the svinrd, im- 
pious character of th^c Angirai, and corresponding!) the conncclion of holy rites 
with the Adilyas Cp. the Iuta»> yajZmfi » au/rim In tite 'sB (tVrKER, J c- 
p. i,t2, note 2) In the a ajus-formnlas, hoasever, both An-iras and Adityas ore 
venerable: MS 1. 6. t (SG. 7); i, 6. 2 (S;. 3)5 Api 5. 7. 7 ° 6- - 

* f*"* Ii'trodaction, p. Xl.au, s. a. oiaMfiaxT (fratarU\ and SBC. Xf-H. 

Index, under ■effig)'. Cp. IIilLebrandt, 1 . c. 177. I'r.acticcs with roots arc ex- 



III. Contents or the Atiiarva-Veda in the SaunakIva-School. C9 

pressly forbidJtn in tlie Dh»ma-texts, and execrated in the ^fahSbhlrata; SBC 
XLII, p L, nv {cp. abo%e. $ 26, 27). — 5 GolostOckfr, Sanskrit Dictionary, s. v. 
ai^uara-y SIncR, RiR-vidhJna, Introdnction, p. idtT,; Weber, IS. III. 156; Verz. 

1. 270^.; II. 318, 11845 HiLi.EBR4M)T, 1. c. 177, note j. — 6 See AV. 2. 11. i ; 
Kaulika, Index B, 5. v. irIytfralJiaratiani (cp. AV. 5. 14). For fralisata and fraii’- 
tana see SBC. XLIf. 576; WebER, Ar.WV. 1S93, p. 1S5 for fratv7ingi>-asa, SBE 
XLII, p. XIX, and abo\e, p. 8. — 7 Sec .SB. 14.9.4. 10 = Drh. Ar. Up. 6. 4. 12; and 
cp. the Garudopanijad. — « Rlrncii, 1. c .xxm; U v. ScHRorDFR, Indiens Litte- 
ratar, p. 12I fT. — <) VS. 5. 235 TS. i. 3 2. I; MS i. 2. lo; Ap>. 11. 11. S. etc. 
— H g. MS. 4 7. 9 (106. 3); ApS. 14. 6. 12 — «i See above, s 45- — 

— «» SrircEL, DieAriscbe Penodf. p. 218/r,; Cricjs, Civilization of the Eastern 

Iranians, I. idofT. — »J SBC. XLlI. 256. — u I.mnin, Her Rfg-Veda, Ilf. 479; 
llENRy,lesLi\resX— XII, p iSSff..227ff. Cp.SBE. XI.II, Index, under 'beans’ and 
'ie'ame’. — JJ SHE. XI.II dS, jgSff.j Contributions. Seventh Senes-, AJI’h. XVII. 
402 ff. — >6 VS. 35- II » 13. S. 4. 4. Cp e. g. the apamarga-homa at the 

Rajasilja: V/EEFr, AI’AW'., 1S93 p,l7fr., and the indexes to Olpexberc;, Religion 
lies Veda and SCL. XLIf Cpianis and trees') — 1? RV. t. 174 1, 

obhltartena hav’ia. It is not easy to decide pbich reading is older, as does Webfr, 
1^=. IV. 423, rote, in favor of himfti both mani ami i<avis are characteristically 
Atharsamc. See for the Aowi-hymns, below, J Co, end. The hymn is known as 
the o*'Kixertam (sc. iuktant\ ApS. I4. 19. 6; 20. i; .\0. 3 12. 12; K.nut. 16. 29 — 
** Sec the authorities for this conslnictlon, SBC. XI 11. 6oSff. ^ — »9 I.unwic, Der 
Uig.Vcda, HI. 343. 344i 5‘7 ; Hfnrv, Le livre VH, p. 3Sff, 109 ft. Differently, 
Wei.fr, is. V. 347. — ''BE, XIII, p. 8S. 389 IT. — »» Contributions. Second 

Senes, AJI’b. XI. 330 ff.; SUE. XLII. 89. 244 ff- — .\l»o iifiatijio, K.S. 2?, i4, iS. 

See T^. 3. 1. 7. 3; I'B. 9- 4- *4; Ll>. 4- 10. 8. In Kaul 38. 26 this hymn is 
recited secondarily but significantly by a father who is about to diiide his prop* 
trty, so that no quarrels shall ensue. — >4 See IJwiirRi.MiT, Soma, p. tJj/T.; 
RiluabUtteialur, p t66; Garbe, VaitJna, Translation, 16.65 i*.?, notes. C}’. T**. 

2. 4. 1—3. — IlE^R\’s emendation of oixctfAj to mZrdkna (1 c li>re VII, p. 2, 

49) thus becomes uunccessirj. — XLIf. 70— So, and the notes on the 

hymns there rendered. Cp Kaui. 39 7, «nd llitt.Fr»\.sDT, Ritual Liitetatiir, p. 178. 

— s6 Seven Hymns, AJPU. VII. 477 ff . bBE. Mil. 575 

S S3. Class 4). Charms pertaining to women (strlkarmani). — 
The scheme of the Atharvan ritual makes proMSion for a class of practices 
aptly designated as ‘womens* rites’ (strUarmum) they are treated connect- 
edly in. the second half of the fourth hook of Kausika (32. 2S to the end 
of the book). The practices there work up %‘er) intelligently a ipute con- 
(■siderable number of hymns scattered through the hrst se^en books of the 
zVY. (in .adclitiori only 5. 6)? these are siifbciently marked to entitle them to 
treatment m a class by thettisehes'. In the «.enire of ihc'C hymns stand the 
wedding stanzas of the suna-sui/a (R\, 10 S5) whose superior length and 
importance, howe\er, calls fur a separate presentation and a separate account 
of the practices connected with them, m the 14'* hook of the .IV. and the 
lo'^book of Kau-»ik.i.’. The exeutful life of women before, during, and after 
marriage has given rise to many practices and ch.trms which are naturally 
ignored by the main current of Vedn tradition, the braiita-htemture, but are 
fitly embodied in the .ktharv.xn and the Grhya-sutras. The RV. in addition 
lo the wedding-stanms (10. 85,, aUo 10. 4°.. and eUewhere) has a number 
of such charms in the 10''* book (145, 159. *62, 1S3); m the Srauta-hterature 
pas^.■^ges like TS. 2. 3. 9. 1; MS. 2. 3 2, Tlk 2 3. 10 (love-charms), or SB. 
14. 9.4 — Brh. Ar.Up. C.4, devoted to women, attract .attention b> their rareness 
and comparative incompatibility with their surroundings. The Grhja-ntes are 
also restricted in the main to the more normal auspicious fe.Ti'nine practices; 
Wedding ceremonies, and the holy performances (sarisijms) connected with 
pregnancy and child-birth, A sorcery -practice like ApG. 3. 9. 4 If- (Mantrap i^ha 
1. 13 «» RV. lo. 145 “ A'A 3- tS), designed to cut out the co-wives or rivals 
of a' womani is rare and has quite the .Vtharvanic ftavor. Simdarh HG. i. 
14. 7; z\pG. S. 23. 3. 'ihe later Vidh.lna-Iiterature, on the other hand, repro- 



70 11 1i:ti>uxs i. ts i ouk I'J 


j:j,..j. 5 --j.^ of tfs'-iTi* r'l "t alU In tl c Ait’^nan st?; >-1'; i'.itjni 

4. •. 9J “,U St *=■:•■<.'{ r VcVk% Oc of ni^t.Us hi 

oUt x^anii.,: 'o'V'C wUUt: sn jle^rO'e .i< 

‘c3past.-v wt r iV.-j’-t’c"* he ha< sa 

Ulh tie J)\r<l5W‘' of t' e } recent olcrory. and the snoic fcnenl coticil' 
ia*<'!) lujv.nt of t' e *lhe K’^ ti<Vi..!iJ eirjtojs the ternit 

jjririf'r.M ;. and ;<?j./.?rii» 1 fur both the<c itfuU of <htr:n»: t. ?. 5*' 
s. 3?. -*; j. 15. s Jf.: I'i- c? 5l; sj. }» clr.*; the ‘^utsuvi.lh'.na hr^hnsra ueats 
the cone'} orti.jij tnattc:*. in 2. ? and f>, ^J’.erc S^tani li.it aNo freqoent 
fHfis'on to en.jilot the \ctl> r-tfila'’* tlev ere alto h'.nswn in the lar.irc 


>1 -J re<i ton* 
rh >^5'; T-Vj-'ni 


ioscerj-hoohs r(c,l». 

’Ihf tswjoni) of lie l)>«nnt m *jni''i3un aie Jeiotr.l lo the relation of 
the two setesu V.'j ceiallt connr.on are I'hilttes or Jotc ^harra^ {ifrfotjrif’l by 


men at well at t\ottv-n; i. 3 1; a. 5°; 3 . ^5; C. S; 9 J ?•); : 1 so; i3o*-"tjs j 

*o 95T-38; i:i ihc'e^arioas {•l.intii anl other ♦•abiMnte?. hct-r^ce, saUe, 
fp-.henanl. etc., are invoked to len<I charm to the person j'etformmj 
the phihrc. Or the act'nitiet »)f amtn.ij hfe and nimrc in ceneral tl>at arc 
anaio^out to the emotions of lore, are ca.VeU ti(on to reprmfu'ce c?icm*chcs 
la the heJuved object; ‘1 dra^v to njyjelf thj m'nd as the leading tlallion 
the female sidehor5.c’ {0. tes. 2); ‘the c<«vs who Jlrh their >f)uni:, in whote 
heart lose U planted, dull male sender woman bedow lose upon m<’ 
(6. 1} jl; 'as the 'sin«l tear'* this gT*fs frorn the suffice of tlic eifth. thus do 
1 tear thy soul' 3«* >)> ’** th« creeper cmbrnj;cs the tree on all sides, 
thus do thou embrace me* t,6. S i); ‘thy heart slull jutch wntli love of me, 
,and thy mouth shall parch w>th lose of me* ((>. 131; sj; *vie inllaine thy 
heart, we inHame thy mimV {(, S<>. a). With the last passage cf, ‘ut ferjatis 
ct incpndiatis cor ct mentem Js. in amoreni meum' ’H jo arrosv of tl>e god 
of love figures 3 25. 25 hhe anow, ssmge<\ with longing, barbed with lose, 
whose shaft « unsssersltig desire, with that, saeli-aiined, Kama shall pierce 
ihec in the heart'? The fotmulalc hemistich, s>r iu second })rida.juMd rrj/a.i 
kfMi' a:^, dtlan *m orslet that thou shall be at m) bidding, 

«!nlt follow my thought*, recurs frcf^uentlj; 1. 34. j; 3. 35. 5; f,. 45. 3; 43. 3; 
simllajly, _) /vitm k.iminv jsi>, jalh.i miin at, 7}/, 1.34. 5; j. 3o..r; 

0 . S. \. These eapresdon* arc imheatue of a certain mechanical technique 
in the }iroduction of these philtres: they roust has-e had a considerable marlet, 
bat the) ’certainl)’ are not the worst that the Atharvan has preserved. Closely 
.related with these philtres is another group aiming at the discomfiture or 
destruction of riv.als in lose, or co-nises Rsidh. 4. ta. 1, 3). 

Two hjmns of this sort are found RV. 10 115 (AV*. 7. iS; ApMIl 1. 15); 
anil 10.155 I. t6)«. Hio Altianaii lias-i. jj' {inisunjerelooil by 

the earlier interpreters as a marriage hymn’); 3, iS; 7.35; ii-.j and 114; 
with tierce denunciation and uncanny practices 'one Woman ’.endeavors to rob 
another of her attractiveness, her hho^a (hick in love), or her fecundity. Still 
more dra.slic are two charms 10 deprise men of their sirilitv, 6. 13S and 
7. po: ‘0 herb, turn this man for me-toilay into a eunuch that wears his 
hair dressed . , ih.nt wears a )Kx>dl 'Hien /ndra with .i pair of stones sltaJl 
break his testicles both! ... A hood upon bis head and a hair*net do wc 
place ( 0 . ijh). The Conserse of the preceding hymns are the charms to 
allay jeaJoU'.v, aiming to <iuench the lire, the he.m-burning of love: 6. iS; 
7. 4S; and 7. 74. 3. To the domain of romantic lose belongs abo 6. 77 a 
chirm to cause the return of a truant woman, furnished with significant s)m- 
oot'c t radices, Kaus. 36. 5 — 9; and 4. 5, a sleeping-charm preparatory to an 



III. Convents oe the .\tiiarva-Vcp\ intiit Swnaktya-Sciiool. 71 

assignation, working up (perhaps with secondary adaptation) a number of 
stanzas of RV. 7 - 5 S- 

The remaining hymns of this class belong to the c.Tlmer sphere of con- 
jugal life. The charm 1. iS (cp. 7. 115) aims to remove evil bodily charac- 
teristics and to drive out Ar-lli from a woman, apparently that she may 
afterwards bear offspring (st. 1'*). These evil charactenstics^suggest those that 
are to be avoided when choosing a bride, in the Grhya-sutras and Dharma- 
sastras*”: the present hymn seems to be in the nature o{ a. prayaJcUtii calcu- 
lated to render such a woman fit for marriage. Nev.t come the so-called 
yalkedanani, 'charms to obtain a husband (orwife)’; 2. 36; 6. do; and C.Sa. 
Here-lhe serene, auspicious gods Ary’amtyn and Bhaga figure especially: the 
coloring is 'that of the weddmg-stanz.Ts and ceremonies Similar is the position 
of 6. :8, a blessing upon a married (royal) couple; of 7 - 37 i ^ stanza in 
which the bride says to the bridegroom- ‘I envelop thee in iny S“nrent 
that was produced by Manu, that thou shalt be mine alone, shall not men 
discourse of other womenf: and 7 - 3 «. » loae-charm spoken by be Jar dal 
couple; ‘The ejes of us two shine like honey, 

ointment. I’l-ace me within tliy he.irt, may one mind be in co > 

Fimilly the post-marital interests of conception, child-birth, 

represented by a sufficient number of hymns they are ’ . with more 

th corresponding saipskaras of the GrhyasOtras, "t1 

or les. variation a considerable number of the stanzas of these.^js. The 

four lunar divinities Amimati, Raka, Simvali. and ^ 

great rtedilection; rr.ijapati. Tvast-ar, Dh.lur figtire trenuently. 

dhan<i is represented by the robust J holder’, called 

peculiarly Athartanic charm 0 . Si. ‘ at Aditi wore, when 

parih(tsi(!,\% invoked to secure conception Ih ,,nma,i mtending that 

she derir;d a son, god Tvajtnr shdl ^ 

she shall be-ar a son’. To obviate praise of heaven, 

centering about AV. i. 3a, an "'S'"’' L rel-atiin of the hjinn to 

earth, and especially the the womb, i. e, 

the practice is obscure. The protection t>t ^ 

the prevention of miscarruage, is secured b pi^e elaborate conjuration 

5- I. I, and the hymn contained m Kau'. 9 , . names. 8 6, is used, 

of evil demons with the greatest vanetv o u . Charms 

K.au;. 35..0, m a rite which Kesava <!e>cr.be> m 7. 17. and 7. i9- 

to secure the birth of a son (pwtisaiana\ are -S- 3. ' pattern of 

A cbp-tmp god Sa,an. made fi^m the cure sa^^ belong, 

lusan. is invoked m the lively hymn i-t . Grhy a-siitr.is and 

to the sphere of the so^)anti-k.\rma, ju it evpiatory charm 

elsewhere*!. If the child is born m under Vhe constellation) iVAr/vu- 

6.110 h recited: »Hiin th.al hath been bom ( they that uproot’), 

S^‘n 7 (‘.he that slays the oldest’), or On a tiger- 

save thou (0 Agm) from being tom up > tows up, his 

like Jay the hero war born . . . I-et b'l” '„en hini.- rinall) 

father, let him not injure the mother tha of the 

appear.mce, perhaps the irregular appear^c^. 

two tigers’ calls for the eTpi-atory hymn, - *4 • 0.;— no, and the 

. Mrern, IS. V. S «>- -- > ''““'-'-i 'LS 

i on the hkinns there treated. -- \ mi-, x't':uc_ 


, » See below. S Timni’s state- 


roles on the hsinns there treated. 

; \\n. 315. — * . - 

t above is nrobablv based directly ° “ j \\eefr, ' 

to IS KV. 10. Sr . 0.1 s-t - AV. .. 31 3 -- 

31S. iiSii IS. lit. l-,6. - - Wti'iin'J’- 



72 ll.LiiTrr.ATi'RV.Cj'ancinr, ir.AaHARVvYiiiXAM'GorMiiv-I^iMA^'^ 

ic V. 24R — ? >-j 1- NUl. 550. — *■ Thr' stt tt^j \o\ti Aj O, 5. <>.J> ii'4 ^). -- 
v'?«, nyrar.,. .\\Uu Ml. 4J3-*; XI-JL ~ 1- S': 

ur.; K»ui 5;. 7if; GG. 2. I. l R.; Ai«. i. 3. 115 HG. 1. 19 4^5 Ojl.j*- 
ia-r'iiSis 5 :i— 53 M»'ts 3 . 4 ff; I. 5-- ^5’- 

iSS; liLooMiirir., /GMG. XXW. $73; ^^l^■rft^M7, .VW AN%., 1S92. •• 

llaUfKiNDT, Ki*uaJ-Utifra*tfr. p u*, — *« Tlj«ei>%nr» arc caUcd 
Ki\ul. ■55. 12; ilic nne •ulojt jf*’*^* ’* ikauv 9S. si U taid l>y IWrils to 
be from ancll.et n^<i «e may «r«t f{ h .\\i\ Cp. >C- 

1. 21; AG. t.ti i. — «> WrEts, 5. S51 IT.: I town;, Ijcr Ui{:-\ed». HI, 5530.5 
Iksn. Us livres VlII tt IX, p. 17, i4flr — ‘j ^tc .‘'ru -XIU- 'fJ. :*:((■ 


S 54. Class 5». Charms, to secure harmony, influence in the 
assembly, and the like (simmanasyini, tic,). — The present class of 
h>mns‘ exhibits many points of contact sslih the preceding, differing from it 
most conspicuousl}' by the absence of the element of romantic, sexual lo\e- 
‘llie boundarj* btuscen the two classes is hard to ‘cl; a conciliatory charm 
like t. 34 may be, and is employed to secure the love of a person of (he 
opposite sex tKau(. 76. S, 9, 79. to), or it may l)C recited by one who wishes 
to gain the car of the sa/'Aa, the \ilhge assembly (Kaus 3S. 17). Or, the 
hjmn 6.^2 aims to appease anger wuhoui spedfjing the enraged person fcp, 
HG. 1. 15.3)5 It may however have been constructed originally to end the 
contlict between a woman and her husband or paramour (Kaus. 3C. sS— 3i;k 
The later tradition harbors both classes of clurm> and practices within th^ 
terms iaifnanarta, and xaitkarar.tt (see above, § 53). blending the 

two in its literary presentations*, 'fhe Srauta*tc\ts are also aajuaiijted vrith 
practices of this son which figure among the Hmyi i/f-ija/j’, e. g, SS. 3. C. i, 
and the so-called nn'tratim/d, ss. 3. 75 AS. a. ji; K^. 5. la. 13. 'Ihe key- 
note of the present class is harmony {sai^imatias, sdnit/ianas^a, sauusanasa, 
saitijiidna), harmony, of course, from die point of view of the person prac- 
tising the charm; harmony that agrees with bis personal slews and desires, 
and leas-es him in the position of arbiter and superior. The lUShmaija-story 
of Cyavan.! the Ilhiirgava, or Ahgirasa, vindly portrays family dissensions as 
a curse- ‘Father fought with son, and brother with brother*.’ ‘Then neither 
did mother know son, nor son mother’^. Quarrels in the family [JHufe Ao/a* 
/lini’, jairai/at kulam kalahi bhaialt) are regarded as portentous, the family 
has been attacked by Nirrti- they reciuire eliborale expiation'. This, then, 
is the theme of one group of hymns in this class: the stilling of wrath .and 
discord, and the establishment of harmony between contending persons or 
parties. Fhe other group, more subjectively, aims at success, prominence, 
or superiority in social and political life: favor among men, influence iri the 
assembly, success in debate, and subordination to one's will. None of these 
themes are entirely unknown in Vcdic literature in general, but nowhere are 
they treated as prominently or distinctly as in the Alharsan. I’lie h.as 
two hymns of this sort, xo. 166 and jpi (q>. KV, Khila zo. roi); similar 
stanzas occur MS. 2. 6. 6; TB. 2. 4. 4- 4.ff.; cp. also VS. 7. 55; SB. 4. a. 4. 23. 
Practices bearing upon such hyrons'are described Kaiis. is. 5 ff.; 3S. raff.; 
97, 1 ff; HG. I. 13. 19 ff; 15. 2 ft; ApG. 8, 22. 19 ff; Svidh. 2. 5; Rvidh 4- 
20. 3; 24. 4 


Two hymns, 6 42 and 43, are constructed to appease anger; tlie latter 
charni is reinforced by the use of ^*r^Ma-gTass which for the nonce we.ars 
the title appeaser of wrath’ imayu/amaHa). They are the converse of the 
two hymns 4. 31 and 32 (-» RV. 10,84 and 83) in which Wr.ath personi- 
fied IS conjured to destroy enemies^, lour hymns, 6. 64; 73; 74; 7. 52, aliay 
disord, suspend strife and bloodshed. Especially fervent and picturesque is 
the appeal for harmony m the family, 3. 30: ‘Unity of heart, and unity of 



HI. CONIENTS OF Till-. A m HIV \-V ed ' m •■■■■: St P NtKlr^-SclIOO L. « 

b^en fo7”a kini; C, 39, as also for the Brahmans themselves (6 58; 69). 
STL seems to be a’piece of se.fglorifieat|on on the P« = ” 

Brahn.™); it saunds as though it were adapted from f"'” 
h)Tnn representing Indra engiged in “ 1 -i Ig^st related to 

, there. The hymns to Roh.ta and Rohmi king 

the present class; they represent this pair o ibey iTre esalted rellect 

and queen (see below, S hi', and the eonnected with 

the praise and adulation of terrestrial T"?' a ' represents the king 

the royal hymns, as also the r.ynr»yn m /are/, r/i there 

and Ids Purohita in mutual "<='<>'^Pr''"“; LfcSonmlss, considering the 
can be no sound isalru. 1\ nh p.irdon.ible king’s success 

temper of the time,, the Purohita assumes ‘ ‘ "force and 

in 3. 19; ‘Keen (sharpened) is thiSTrayer “f ”'"?- of him whose 

strength; keen therefore shill be O'' ™''; ,'5 I„ humbler spirit the 

victorious Burohila I am . Smiilirl) I 7- rpe„„ for success m 

prose litiny 3. =4 contains .) is adapted as .an echort- 

the function of Purohita; and t9- *J ^ • ' I caotivate the gods and 
ation addressed to a Purohita (Brahmainspati), to captnai 

make powerful the king (yajamana). eKploitition of detaiU 

In their extent and ^ of the Athnrvan constitute 

elsewhere unknown, the war and ban ^nniment of weapons, snares, 

also a decided peculiarity 0 that N etka.^Ue^^^^ ^ 

traps neu*’, ami the stench (§. 8), bear the earmarks 

in order to bewilder and ^ , appear generally in pairs, or 

01 the Veda of the f/mrn™. I"' ™;“S„ds, follon-ed by i. e= 
groups of three: i. I9 ‘S ^ uroun 6. 6s— (>7 >* of similar import; 

and 31, battle-charms in general. "figure prominently hand- 

in the first two the words „ms shall be broken. Still other groups 

less the scheming enemy shall be, •» * confuse the enemy, 4- 3*. 3* 

are 3. 3. battle songs as the MCtonou^ spirit of battle 

(RV. to. 84. S3i addressed toMrm ^, Agni, Indra, ecc, upon the eve 

(cp. 6. 65); 6. 97-99. dd&na). 

of b.Utle; 6. 103—104 charms to ^ Oie foe undertaken with 

Especially fierce .md prolongu^ 'L nit demons .\rbiuh, N>arbudi, and Tn- 
it 9 and to, addressed to bait e demons^^^^ msamdhi. ‘Three- 

?amdhi, who are regirded as pomieil bolt of Indra fi i 10.3); 

joints*, IS cMdenily a rorsonmcation 01 the m>th of the demon 

Arbudi and Nyaxbudi are pretty ceri y ^'Ja^blldl seems to owe its 

Arbuda, the cloud-serpent, bal luvtapoMtions such as, ny arbudam 

intrinsically meaningless prefix jjejjry regards Arbuda as originall} a 

v.ltrJhano astah, RV. n- '^hh suppose that the friendly relation 

- mjihic double of Indra; we may p ^ Arbuda are due to a later 

of Indra and these secondary pr * . who are by these ver)- terms 

view of Arbudi .and ,v^jn,th has passed out of sight'*. Another 

auspicious. The e uher ‘twpor the better grade of Atharvanic 

pair of hymns, 5. -30 •'**\d 3i, I battle-drum, the terror of the enemy: 
literary endeavor, are ihe voice of the drum that sr.eaks to a 

■When the wife of the ^j,e sound, distressed, snatch her ch'ld 

far distince, may she, , ‘ ‘ rfish of arms’. Cp aL'i 0 . i e'S fRV. 

to her arms and run, fright dealt wnth in 19. 2=, the praver 

6. 47- 39— 31'- ^ jjnnor (cp. the sb 7. iiS « RV. c. 75. 18); 

of .1 kia.g and 3. rra>"> “f “ king u he mounu to 



_:rasa'^itTScf 

iromahd.nta, Kati- 
7 See S 26/r.; SUE. XUI. 


-6 H.I.lTrERATVR.ir.Gr=CHlCHTC. t E. ATHARYA-VeDA AN D G 0F AniA-BR5miA>A. 

wjr-ch-iriot. FinaHy there beJoog lo ibis class the Athaisan version of the 
famous afraUraiha-sUta, ro. 13 (RV. 10 103), and the hymns more vaguely 
redolent of war, G. 13; 7- S6; 91; 9 *» 93 J toS; and no. 

» See abo%e, S aO, SEC. XU!, p. XL note, u — » Abo\e, S 33; SUE. XUl, 
p. WMt, nuff.— i WocR. ‘'PAW.. 1891, ^;S 3-75 APAW.. 1S93. p 4. =3 note. 
143; BiooMFiriD. Sr.F- Xl. 1 I. p. \x\P.; above, p. 10. — « Sill- XI-U, P* 
LMifT.; above, $ 26-28. — s Slti:. XUI, p- * 11 - 1 . 33 *. ep- WrurR, IS. X. 26 ff.; 
LvD'vm. Der Hig-VeJa, 111 , 54811 .; ZiMvinR. p. iibfT. Cp. ihi 
beioQs, Kau< , p. 290, note 7. — Cp also tin Paruhia M.i 

t4o; Atlv. p.an 4 10 (Kav-ita, Ir.troJ. r* ~ 7 Scl 

p. XUVUI. VL — « WinJt. r.Sjasova (Al'AtV., 1893', Index, nndcf 'svU'ttng. ami 
•tiger fell’. — 9 See KV. lo. 173, ami cp. Lfowin, ibid., p. 25°! lit'tutR. 
162 ff.; Mil- .\I If. 331. — «» Kai-f. 17. 6, J; WrKrK, Iliiatiiva (Al'AtV., J_S93-, p. 4. 
140—143. — 1* The Kiulita designates the battle charm* a* ^14. "): 

‘peciii ' aneties arc brown os e^finiiXfiSrn (*4. 14', and r:fkirnijr'i Il4. ! ?'. 3 he 

Cananalj, .\th. V&n<. 34 13, prejents in the a[-jrTi/iij a similar coIJeflion. 
Cp. ‘•ri'Mi 3. (', and the term* ard ifnuij'nlh^’A in Tantric texts: AVi LfR, 

Acre I, 270; IJ. 11S4 — •• Cp. the tfiJiefjh ti-kjtdt AArj.rjt, Veri. I. 270. wiiH 
.IV. S. 5 5-S. — Cp aho KV. r. 51. Oi i4. 4; S. j2. j. — »♦ .‘'DE. -M-II- 
631 }T , IlrsRV. J rj JJvrcv X. .\J. et XII, p. JC4 IT. 

j; 5G. Cl.ASi 7x rrayers and imprecations In ihc interest of 
Ilratimans. — 'Ilic cla-ms ..nd prerogatives of the lirahm.vns* luve readied 
m the .\V. their highc't p'lch, excepting tlui the bvjtcrliohc .imounts of live 
stoeV and other pojert), rej-vited to have licen given theoi. as Jnk^itut in 
llie il,>Kastufu, f>.ir>Unru}iri, .md l) e intidei.tal rcporii of the tirauladileMlure, 
j» restnctetl wiih'n tne>rc reisomlile bound' in i)ie ni»nerou*> 
of the AV 'Hib I’r.tiinnn' bc'tow upon tlieio'clvcs ftedy the epithet tftzt 
•god'*, which iv .after aU peilwp'. at least in tlic lieginnmp. noilimg rnore 
dun a hit ol .\vvl.w.ird lyg.c, derived from the perception tint the sicrlfice 
and the jnedh reward are both samtiried acts \vlm.h therefore 

n.as! enii address therrselic* to a th\ nr hemg. 'Jliei .ire furtJier fdJy con* 
jciout of he.ng in chirge by virtue of their function as Ihirohiu-. of the soict* 
eigtitj of kincs nr<J the safety of countries, m .idd lion, all blessings of the 
invatc foik iloK from the I’t-ilnnanv .is die middlemen lielween the Jiuimn 
race and the gods. Ihe S'x ial and economic conditions of llie Fill manas 
in t’^c .\A. are very nvjcli tlie s’lnv as those el cited from riatementv in 
the brv.nO irraluje >;« 3 i m have been palhered by Wji rs m hit •Collectanea 
on ll.e Cote«’. IS. X'. i— tOo llsiecialh pronounced is tJieir cla’m of 

‘im lohv!' It)’ and the still exorbitant demand of .yj-f'OiJ. 

ir.ovUtive av it secivs coropared with lie Vev of the ifjnorfwb'h 'Ihc Adi.r- 
var.ic clcrrert apjears in the former claw in the iluj c of trnj'rtcr.tion% fiei'C 
bevi.nd anjtl'fj; krowr. e'.siwbere n the Hcrature; opj res-ion and mardtr 
cf brilm-inv ;< the sn ac.rn.t lire holy phot. 'J},f iMjiiri' desenbinp ihe 
beton.-;! cl are *^wite nn.” e; the feTfo.'fnariCt' ate rreufed, iO.i'?- 

i!n<e$ at great Jerijrih, is jr.depender.t •-acri'’'Ci2l acts t!cJ rta'pii with fiie mo t 
I ir“s-taki’-c deta 1. thrj we «crTc'ited w.i*s aJJ t! *» U'j]y or nivstic in 
pvture ?.''d ti.e^’srpf.c ‘peculation (fra/r’ai. ll.i' js one of the tnarlel 
ciil'.fs cf tie'* hyn's: w1 cn a poJt U the //Vfc rr'.Utarrr of a 
is K.th c-'3t and lie dnlrie.Va Uajld; nh-n .v x’eer, d j; b'i'h 
*aaj C.4. ar. mal ssd Cvics s*c<t Tb-.v I; « d.f ' ii ind i-dial 

‘a‘ev to -«vLe*\*r a l'-— chan — a jenh'e — O'f 

bat l.efn aia.-ei tj r,a, or w} « the K th- or/t.d 

lutw.A uhe fam.. a.- mock ofde 

^ ^The .nv'oa. I'y tfH-.Atr.a'.i snd tier u tl.e s- ' >."1 of four 

c. t-r r-n i-nr cf the AV. (5. i;-.io, jz. r,. n." 


ciri't'-ii 1 



III. COSIEMTS OF TUF. ATIURVA-VcdA IN TIIEj^ WN \^CHOOL. 7 J^ 

occurs fragraentirlly its RV.i 0.109, '''W'k “j'j! '< “'“s” 

ioa positron in tlie RV. redaction porntms to a fu let version of y sts 
perhaps identical with the first 11 sts. of A\. le . J ^ 
therefore, as also for intrinsic re.asons, be regarded of a 

n,e entire hyntn is an imprecation again, t the 

brahman; kings or arrog,ant nobles (sts 3 .0) seem 0 = >'>' ^ 

mind of the poet. Even king Soma ceded V' lie! 

tot husband of even- woman 'J" 

conducted the wedding ceremonies. Woe betide the km J 

a Enahman's spouse is injured ”h 

portentous occurrences terrify the people .„,;n5t those that rob 

Lted against the oppressors “P'f fthUo^v) 

(withhold) their cattle : Tint > In which they injure .a Brah- 

a leaking ship; misfortime “do not come within our 

mana. I he trees chase n\\a> , , itrahmani. 0 Narada 

shade", him that covets the wealth tint thus emptied; fiercel)' 

(5. 19. 8, 9). The vials of the Brahman's ^(jggestive 

they consign their oppresmr ‘ ‘The /vJf/f-plant 

references to f-tsten to the dead that 

that «ipes aw.ay the track (ot ucaui; , declare Ihy couch . . . 

very one, 0 olipressor of „nh which they moisten his 

‘The Mater nith which they the gods did assign to thee 

beard, that very water, O oppressor of Eralimans, 

as thy share of water' (S- 'H-y-,'”' ,|,t impottance and power of 

On the positive side the /j) But above all the 

the puroMti (3. 195 5 - *'*• v^idic literature", pleads not at all 

AY., as almost every otlier courage of us convictions for the per- 

8ham^facedly hut with the . which narrates fabulous feats of 

quisites of {he Brahmans. The ' ‘'f is to be sure almost 

giving, doubtless by of st.muus p e- 

entirely absent In this . Qr the witchery oi magic formuU 

scriptive or didactic than conjure liberality The pretty 

and prajer is applied, to J ‘Grudge’ {anUt) cijoles her, though she 

h>mn 5. 7, addressed to the ^ coiden cushions, quite an 

be 'golden-coniplcMoned, lovely, f^cunations, to go awa>. 

Apsaras or 'schocne c.-,.,,^aU (holy speech), the yoke-fellow of 

‘him whom I implore with \a ’ „.-if la works, sc m shall find 

thought, StaiUhri (f-iith that evpresvev uven 

to-day, bestowed b, the brown Sm «» ,!> even a Brahman 

in the following rather “ i nr..r ‘What king, desirous of 

might be xpT,3uo3JVll t 'f .w xvretched nnber>* '\ho is desirous 

more possessions, will get . heavenly reward of) presents (to le 

ofsackfice, and who of the god.?’ (?. toJ! ep., 7 .ro 4 )‘h 

Brahmans)? Who seeks for >»'’5 '' ° ^ conversation between 'arunti and 

tVithin this sphere belongs abo 5 - cow bestowed by the former 

.Uh3rv,an (the typical priest) hack, hut is induced by A harvan 

upon the latter, ''anma tries to taw _ ^ ,h„r,y Brahmans stood ready 
to desist". Aside from „j ' 'Thus the birth of twin-cabes (3. -S), 

to gather in all sorts of Sh tegatds .animals born m pair, as 

contr.ary to modern superstition " , occurrence requiring eapiation, 

auspicious, is made to ?■’ ",cr ‘the gto»l‘”S 

part of which consists A cow which after a certain time is 

njureth the cattle’ to the Brahmans . 



discovered to be s.enle 

the brunt of the vwih o?^^oS!•^n.S to occoropan)- the 

position of ebborate hj-mns ^'b'clt ^ ,„ elevate the 

Lstovval of s*s’™“' ■ “S,;’ position of independent sacral acts of 

ceremonies connected therevv.th to desisnated by Kaas.ha « 

great formality and d'gmtv. These • • ^ dvls sense dofs not 

(Mivin i/d to give inrni) — “e , , The Sraata- 

”‘cnr in the teat of S’^bh'ta; !«. b 

tests ate acquainted vvath , , special ceremonies of consider- 

ttay ate solemn consecrations (oM.rr^ii) for p cdamsmn 

aS variety. ™. =■ 7 tcconnls sev^n of th^ 

(' J.7), perfoimedb) an <i«>.'.i<fl''eo"'0' 1 ,he entire 

tJiedLfion of the '-«»''»V’;[e''f;.“\e S o"' ‘^'’7^’ 

eighth adhy-aya. T'™ Eolh the sacrificer and his 
the other in the nature of a fartsi.ta. , ,i-.,:i5 of these performances as 

Lartarau\ special utentils {Mtijh ^ J . 'Ihe Jnost pro- 

TZ. summarires these sotar, .‘““S'""' "“'"'’V. , 7 k rr.3 which Kes. 

iS-aSSiiinSsrE^ 

Le tpohen of (tt.t.tp) as a iw .ce '““S e did cook 
with fi\ e rf/.TCJ/ {aj'a far.inudana) is ihe subje« 5 (^p. **• ’*?'^ 

'' 7 nWccvdeut sauces and' called r/./or.n 's,, reader', is described n 

- ”o':bi vsr^.^:’av^s, m"i-a:^:^s 
tiiu (RoViti, Indrs. T.as-.ar, etc.); 4- *1 (adaited 

\ co'Wt and ur.xtelhgible formulae occurring dsel^herc’^ • 

c-lscTJ, fol'o^kefl in sxs. 7, S by i frj/a/crCa to expiate fo it^ 
n«: in *-!• 6 40 i. in ini’se of gxa'n (x<rt«) inixcd '(vith bon-x, is ^ 
(Kaxii 60 . xc) Ke^asa’s list of ee 
.et other h>rr.r.. and stanzas recited, at thnes qu.te ^ 

-„t, yf’f'trJ- e c X. tx, a Itascr lo the rcpotjs of space (a/j^) lot it- 
iid tr's .r'-v?®;r a^ 7 at.«r;-.-,»ri, (Ka-is, Or. t). Decdedl, tl^ 

Cf'all the-e drki’i;;- is der.ctri in 1.3 (/.i/J.a:ar. a bo--e 
pidLVv' taken aim. l.ke a U>E tVng h i. Ucdied very g.ngedy cc.i^. 
7 e iro«5i-, then f. h. made over <0 fhe brahman who receives I. -....I ."- 



111 . Conti nts ok the Atharva-Veda in the hAUNAKlvA-^cnoo^ 79 

prajers for Ws o«n future well-being in it, and fmilly takes it to Ws O'*" 

plaL of residence's, of importance also is the 

notion, more or less hke those of the Dharntasastras ‘ 

to lirahmans, either independently, or as part of a mote substantial 

is a holy ac : 6. tea (to. O- =!; n- >■ '7. r?)”- 'he occasional squeamish- 

ness Ae Mrahmans nhich arises from the feeling that ^ 

‘on the make’, or are receiving improper gifts, gams "P 5 

toiy prayer 0. yt, or in the formnlas 3- =9- 7, S; cp Wsimas collections, IS. 

chapter of the greed and self-assertion of the Brahmans is relieved 
considerably Lre, as ■throttghont Brahmanical h>' °PP7;“heTco"m 

of thought and feeling The redemptory note ^ 

scionsness of naUast ebli^t. A Brahman must e n „ j jg) 

and therefore well-qualified for hts holy offi . il:n\his end they must 
signalire their craviig for the esteem o men b T<> fmn to^end toy must 

be wise, illumined, spiritually pure, Vac,” 4. 30' (RV. 

perly then the famous hymn <r«nm ays of the riryiauiiw, is 

to. . = 5), even in ■"'■f Sf o' 'h' ‘ 
employed in a rite to bept °' ' ' 0^,, .j™, for »m««, ‘ivisdora’; 

directly fo '"S (cp. RVKh. ,.o. tSO « ’spiritual 

19.4 for am ‘perception; ‘9- ,4' -*7 „ pmyer for wisdom and 

elevation’, .and Msi consecration, JJ, Brahinacann as he builds 
Other more worldly advantages on the p p-neral character, are three 
the fire. Related \vith these, ® ^ Devotion to Veclic learning is 

prajers for purification, 6. 19. S‘» «'»“ • . ^jg introductory 

at the base of such compositions a* 7- 5 ‘ ^ ^ success m the study 

to the teaching of the Veda, 7-54 learning, and ig 71. 

of the Veda; 7. « 4nd_07, Tam “ awr .9- 7-43 'S37, 

the praise of the ^ samhit/fi. ») to VScaspati, 

note 14). The opening hymn of the bamnii ' J ^ the holy 

the ‘lord of speech’, for to.cy«™r> 

learning following in the . f jpetph shall make mine to day ». 

wearing all forms, their P""" *K conmins ,1 blessing a. the con- 

a\ similar stanza at the end of bo ^ . the late and secondary char- 

elusion of this Veda, confirming the iheor> o. 

acter of book so (S 35l- . . , ,i.,rMo cn Wider, 1’=; X i ff i l'°- 

.o,'K0,hf 

5$ 2; U I 23! >= 3 _4 AVIOER. ll . P 53! 

1 c, p 6o ff ; ZiiisiER, *97 If « ,<» the L’ 


I t -’T- 3= J , r. Cf ti vt* . iS9i 3'- 771. ti«low 

S 0, V'-rf^Jer^eToV'-'r-nt-'i-o? 

J,,/’ _ 6 01.1)1 NCFR'!. **3"'"*“. ** - ,s inixetl prose and qui^-poetry 

Jcctirs «nh variants Jli * 'S "’ ?9 at'e ^'‘’'‘""’^3,1; VkUme 

Cp Svidb. I. 6 - « nc"” 5 'S «« ‘9 quotes a simiUr HeUeme 

,3ff _ 9 Roth. f" MIL Mil 436 - '“'-r 7^' *' ‘^S 

pfL ZiImG Iv. 42311 ■I'*'* *•'“* « to £e 6«n adapted secon-hr.ly from 

4VS4 - 

Pvidh l‘. C 2) 3 >• 4! ^*"1- 'r o*l6S.^lS6; Mmda 5-41; 

_ *0 Cp Manu 3- =44! 4 «9, 6 7, ^ml Mn,aiar.asJ. Ib. 

135 RCiHTtlNOK,'- — ’* 



III. C0NTr.sTS OF Tiir. Atiiarva-Vcda in iiir. -— 

artiitiiJiali for the protection of cnttlc. The tliree sts. 4 . 3 S .5 /' 

Kiui !t. It, as Lrklpmvidah (sc. rcah), .iccordtng to the schohast ensure 
the prosperity of c.attle: tve have interpteted them more ' 

prayer to secure the return of calves that have strayed to a " “ 

special interest are 0. 70, a charm to secure the ■•'f chment o a cm to her 
calf; 6. 141, a prayer pronounced while marking the ear . If, 
4.0 and 4 .L a very forceful shepherfs, charm aE...nst i dd beasts and 

Jobber (tiger, man, wolf, and serpent). The 

gain, espresion in 6.,=, a charm to f emonv” 

stances seem to have originated in connection with '''' ’"VfXd.' t I is 
similarly perhaps = 5 - Tt.a<Ii"S ■'»l t„r„V an 1 

a lively merchants rr.:yer to •Indra the 'f.S'J'yr a 

abundant g,ain; 6. 55; 7. S; and 7. 55 are stanais a ‘P . ‘ , g m 

safe journey; and the rather indefinable mistitm composilun 5^6 rn, to 
be ai oracle to find out whether one ty« survive a pu ney ;^On r=._^_^ „ 
from ."i journey there i-. the prayer, ?• <»®* especial interest is 

fear of the owner, and to make it ' predicts the weather for 

6. leS, the propitiation of the weather-prophet 'vho pred. ts 
a person about to start on a journey .t,. of burning 

made Sakadhnma (he who predicts ^ ^ f-phis shall be his 

dung) their king, they bestowed g 90 ‘l * u^Jeally originally the human 

dominion", they said'. Whether to be made out with 

weather-propliet or some mythical . traveller and householder in 

certainty‘k‘ The special danger the prem- 

India are serpents: O.sd seems and ?7, seem to h.ave 

ises; where.as the so-called dtsyttUe 'nroid’ as they mention all directions 
in mind the danger from serpents when . • » charm against serp- 

of the compass*^. Especially noteworthy horse of the sun in 

ents, invoking the white horse of l eu , p PgUdva is substituted for 

practice an insect that has come by ^ mixed stanzas ad* 

the unattainable horse (Kau^. $3 ■> f,n(i,nvj lost property, and there 

dressed to l>ri,an% makes i 5 tmbhng at dice. 4- 3 S. >- 4 . 

are finally three or four prayers for ,%speciallv to Apsara (Apsaras) 

7.50; 7.109, ami P"'”!" rcimmtion. the paiMOii for gauibling 
who otherwise also bears an un jhe classic.il complaint of the gambler 

is quite as lierce as it is deplete 

who would reform, RV. 10. 44 -^ < are more general in character, divisible 

The remaining hymns o' * .,re health, wealth, and prosperity ; the 
into two classes: one j ^i,> Three Mnins, 1.15, »■='*■ and 19.1, 

other to ward off d.anger and cai^uy ^^hich secures the 

centre about the «ealth'* (see S 6 ®. cad), the hymns 4 13; 

‘f!n\vmr» tDrcethcr’ of all possib^ ^ _ «„.„cvw«r;»v\ the prose forrr.ulas 4. 39. 

heavenly powers to one’s 
14 is a prayer to the gods 

- .cv vivA vAfvions 


of »i. FoscibV^Sbw 4. av 

7, 6,;“.,. ,-n me PW'”/“ef To W1 the beuveul) power, to one's 
known as samiali >, , °f i,fej the st. 7- =4 is a prayer to the gods 

desire for all the BO“;' “ p™erity, i.3> '» o prayer to the regions 

to engage person illy f .gn„,iy. 1,32 and 6. 10 are cosmic stanzas or 
of space for health “d prospetuy .^^r. 3 ^ .g. ,3 

formulas similarly design . prosperity; similar is the purpose of 

dressed to Agni, arc icl to secure prosperity. 19.31* 

19. 5s The Mntheon are called upon individually to furnish 

The members ' ‘'iycnlly coinciding with those of other teats, with 

prosperity, the of iheir origin outside of the AV.: Indra m 19. S 

the presumption m * c 

rhtloloi'* '1- 





— ^ « t Aani Vaiivlinara 

CRV. 7. =7-3); Agni:m'>- 8= “"^'9^^ ^ sv. J.'iosS-eo); Savtar in 

m 6. 35, nnd.sS (AS- 8- 4! >^9. S 5 ^ 

6, . (AS. 8. I. 18), 7- U (SV. >■ 464ffi). ^ 

aj. xa (W- JO- “x ., 3 )-'thn’<lmne angle in 7-39 (RV. ...64.^J1 

Sarasvant in 7- 4° U^- o- 1- “ _« the devapainyah m 7-49 (^' • 


-'■ \ » ,e^ /T«; - I II. •?): the divme eagie m /-.jy „ /Tjv 

Sarasvant in 7- 40.q^- o- 1- ” ,-8. i): the devapainyah in 7-49 (^' • 

TarVsya Ari?tanemi m 7. 85 ‘ . J* -f moon, amavasya, pau- 

5. 46. 7, 8). Especially Ae P'®““ ^se pLases, Anumati 

rnamasl, darsa (.7* 79 ^ u-i-s (t ^81*“ are implored for wealth 

(,.co), Sxmvali (7.46), ™ (J-47); f '., Ten-ace the faxor' of 
Li , especially, offspnngi the very late hy^s 19. 7,^8 ^ 

rarch1rrs^eran":art^8^ 

the most notable are the 8^°“? 4- =3-29, >;no«m as the ^ purification 
rf.hfnni^i Thev were obviously compiled by the Athar\anist to i 
and acainst misfortune: the refram contains tliroughout the expression 
“il-,aT4tose Ton. ..srcrtuneh The M'-- ate a corpus 
the so-called mrsmtsu of the Yajus-texls", to tvhich the) 

secondary (see S 45) Tl'= (■'»• •™'l «>' "LTmI Only I =8 

are derived from the Yajos; the intervening stantas are PJ.T"'';. m, Jva and 
does not seem to oceur m the Yajus at all; the *' 1 "' ■ P'/y'' “ ““Tnot 
Saiva, marks it as Athat.amc by distinction (cp. it. -)• 8°” -Tents: 

to be omitted from such an appeal to Ae pantheon, 

isro-ilirt and muMit in st. 6, /.mldm in St. ;. N eiy similar to "W Ty 
Md having the same tefram, is ii.O, aprayetfor deliverance to-ncalamy 
addressed to the panAeon. the clear and fairly complete list of divim e , 
very much on the plain of the Yajus-teats, imparts to the its c i 

inteiest; cp. also r. aO, 6. 3,4, 7; 7- The dninity to sihora this class 

of prayers is addressed most fre<iuenlly is Rudra (Siva-Agm), under the w b 
variety of names of embodiments (f/iMi) customary ^\ith that divinity • 
addition to 4.28 the long prayer ii. s, to Bhava and Sarva, ° . 
embodiments of Rudra, is conspicuous for its intensity; cp. aho 6. 93 ana , . /• 
Other divinities and personifications are occasionally appealed 
Agni Saiptapana in 6. 76, personified Death by weapons wielded by Brahm 
(d^va), K^alriyas, Yaiivas, etc. 106.13*'; Soma, the slayer of demons, in - T/ 
Aditi, the universe, and therefore the universal protector, in 7.6 (cp- 
Ki^'ht, the protector against the robbers, wild animals, and demons that m 
her, in the late hymns 19. 47 — 49 (cp. RY. 10. 127); and the shallow 
characteristic personifications Viivajit, TrJyamaija, Raljani, and Sarvavi 
the prose-formulas 6.107. Ih the manner of the M.r.j’a/'fl-hymns, which accen 
uate the idea of release from calamity {niue amhatah) other hymns emp O; 
other catch-words to gam similar results; the word alhaya ‘freedom itoh 
danger”'* is the keynote of 6.40; 19.14 and 15 (followed by similar trasi) 
matter in 19. 17— »9); the hymn 4. 33 (RV. 1. 97, et al) with its refraim 
apa naJi Iciucad a^ham, the so-called «7/a^^<i-liyinu*i', figures as a matter 
course; the prose-formulas 5. 10 harp upon the word aimavarma ‘jirotection 
firm as stone', being exploited practically in that sense Kaus. 5. 1 4 \ 

there is to be mentioned tlie singular charm i. 27 in which danger is vvarde 
off by an amulet made from the sUn of a moulting serpent, the serpents m 
this condition symbohzing the powerless enemy. The amulet is homccopalluc, 



11. Contents of the Atharva^Veda im the SAUNAKlvA-SctiooL. 83 


as it wereJ'. 'Ihc hymns to the waters (see S 5°. very general 
in character, are also in close touch with this class. . 

SBC. NXX,P 503. {uli'M 

rn rniFiiRODKr I'ssivs 1. tIO- — ® Conlnbnlions .Second Series, ■rr\ 

Cp COLFIIROOKI, l..s 53 ys 1 . i’j -iiR (T __ 8 UlLLniRASDT, UUA., 

SBC. Xllt, p. 147 . 5 >tfr .-7 R«n . ,',_,05. ,0 9S, and 

1SS9. p. 4061 ISLOOMriLll), J.XOS. '”fr- Cp- J 7 DfLCROcK. 

the hjmns to I'arjanya .n J Sl‘ U? &V. P- 78S; IBoOMrctLO. SBC. 

(.urui.fljaVaumudl, p 4S — hymn is especnlly related to 

Xl.ll, p. 50S — ” Lp. kauS 15. l.. !»• ' 7 - y . ‘ Grliyn-53tr.as and 

ApS 16 . IS. 7 fr; - *3 A nnmLcrof lhes^ 8 »nr«^^^^ AJl’l. VIl 484IT.; 

elsewhere; cp. m S«ner.al KauS. S9 *2 ..-jiieJ Ar/l/S//*, TS. 5 S- ‘”55 

snn XI.II, 1> 160, S 32 fi-- — ’* ‘^P- vvi -out - WeneR, IS. I. 292; 

MS. 2 13 2i; ApMB. 2. 17. WrorR. IS 7 ^' "• -,f ‘ jjjn. ,52, Cosff. — 
ItiRnuc.NF, VWiq-e. 3;r; llnir- 

«7 UV. 10 17. 6, 5. a'l'l ® 5 -»- 9 ‘ ’^'.rc^J'c eV note S — ‘o Cp. Kan 4 1.29.3°; 
liRSNOT, UitinM-meratiir, p 114 — ’ 5 ;’ , ,, i,y pnllta. sliowms 

« (IB 2 1. to.-» XaU?atraUlpa at the time of tbe com- 

that these pieces did not figure in ^vyu -tgff ; UtiiriuAM’T, Ritual- 

pilalion of the Xat.|3trsValpa " „ \,S9 ,3 37. note. The wordw/f^w 

1 itleratiir, p. 9 t — ?, V U Lt certain Cp (Ixef'irgnra-tra/j.Wei.. 

seems to be from « 4 V‘ ^ _ S4 TS. 4 7 - 15 . >«S 3 16 5 l 

to Kaui. 43 13 IT.: Ath 1 ‘addh *® ,ha i,ymn .nculcnt.Mly; cp Sill, 

cp. IS. HI 395. — n Most of the b-inle-charms, nnd employed m 

XI.II 618. Closely rchted, of . .l.Ti .. E. under, 


nnrse'io thc buile-charms, nmi cuip^w.. “- 

- , irJr kanSiU-i. Index C, under, amMinnt^ 

that function, KaiiS. 14 25; '5 ^ _ jo Read, iraUfS ‘/nr/ "1^» 

(p. 3S3) — iS See Ibid. — •'9 Sec ibid _ .uWnirR. IS. 


(r. 3 S 3 ) ~ "The pSlrt formulas KluJ 40 7 ff 

n ..xmaiion of sin and defilement 
S 58. Class 9). Charms in e p • complex. Not 

(prSyaScittrini).— The Hmdu of the htvs of the gods 

only H sin an individual, conscious . morbid substance or entity 

and the universe, but it _,.kouJ his conscious participation, or at 

nhich may fasten itself upon 3^j,3g jin or evil, e/ins, pap/nan, 

least without his choice or ’ . nhssical deficiency or disease. Sm, 

etc., assume the character of an father to son, yea from gods to 

too, IS transferable from man t - endangering the peace of 

men; the sin of the gods P oroduced by Mns of the gods. He who is 
inen‘: e g. m 0. depmed of his strength by Indra and held 

seized by sin , t -I Personal defects and mishaps, eul 

captive in Varuna’s toils (*=•;; f’ om.nous and portentous occurrences in 
dreams, aspersion of ones c nature about one, and, a ferhore, 

the sphere within which one ’ -g of religious ceremonies are conceived 
irregularities and with sin and personal olTences; they all re- 

as closely allied, and co prajaictUt ox prayainllct . Neither of 

quire expiation, the former only once m AV. 14. 13°. hut 

these words occur m the iv»,, .^^t the mantra-literature ^ They are 

expiatory stanzas are practices in the Srauta-texts m connection 

supported moreover hj co ijmya istdjah of persons attacked by 

with faults in the j. the extensive sections on m the 

sin, calumny, =‘”‘1 rrhvvsatras, where they are not very common®; and 
^///iirwu-texts; m the ^ variety of namely those connected 

in theVidluna-texts . / hvwjVhas passed through a somewhat independent 

with omens and the character of a special and extensive ckass 

development, so as a* 



S4 n. LiTTERATUS U, GcSCmCilTE. IB. ATHARYA-VEDA asp GOPATnA-BR.'^HMAKA. 


of literature; tlie most noiaWe conipoKtions of this sort are the 13"' book of 
the KauMka and the so-called Adbhuta-Brahmana (SB. 5)®. 

hfore than 40 hymns of theAV. are devoted to this class of subjects", 
quite a considerable part of them covering a single tract, d. 110—121. Jt 
is worthy of note that these hymns, with the exception of 6. ir4 and per- 
haps also 19. 59, do not expressly deal with prayaiciUas for defects in the 
sacrifice. The late Gopatha-BrShmana in whose view the fourth priest at a 
Vedic ssacrifice, the so-called Brahman, must be an Atharvavedin, repeatedly 
assigns to him ex ojfieio the correction of blunders in the ritual, the samdhana 
of what is r'lVix/a’'’. Nevertheless /ra>'<rfr///a-mantras that pertain directly to 
the events of the ritual, such as those ofVaiL i*. 8, 9; GB. t. 2. 7, are pre- 
sented by these texts in sakalofSlha, and do not occur in the Sariihita, which 
in tliis as in all other respects touches but lightly upon the splieie of the 
yrirff/a-practices, although it does not fail entirely to take cognizance of them 
(see beloiv S 60). That ritualistic prdyaieitta became later very prominent 
m theAthar^an schools we may gather from the existence of the unpublished 
six /rdya/rf/fa-chapters of the Vaitana". The largest number of these hymns 
address themselves in general terms to the expiation and consequent release 
from sin, frequently cataloguing a variety of misdemeanors, but not specifying 
what particular one it is that burdens the conscience; identical or similar 


stanzas frequently recur in the other Saiphitas, most especially in TA. a. 3— -fi. 
Thus 6. 45 (cp. RV. to. 164) is in expiation of mental delinquency {tnanas' 
pd/a), 6. s6 is directed against pdpman, ‘evil’, personified as a ‘thousand* 
eyed Immortal’; G.115 against sm, this time called ends-, C.119 and 120 are 
pra)ers to AgniYaibsanara for remission of sins and ultimate paradise; G.121 
aims at release from Varupa’s fetters of sin. Three of these hymns 6. 117— ' 
119 harp upon the word rna ‘debt’, carrying wiih it the notion of debts in- 
curred, but not paid, especially 6.118, addressed to the two Apsaras suggests 
gamblmg-debts. Another, 6. 116, exhibits a conscience afllicted by the sin of 
sorcery-practice, yaJy d»io»i fakrurn}i:ha»a/i/ak^\ 'Jhe boundary-line between 
sin and misfortune (furr/i) Is evanescent- liymns hke 6. 63 and 84 do not 
differ much in spirit and diction from the preceding. Similarly curses from 
the outside and sin are correlated in 7.65 and 1 12, and the rather obscure stanza 
7. 43, rubricated Kaus. 46. i in a practice to avert calumnious accusation, 
may also be of this sort. Also the general purificatory charms, 6. 19; 51 » 
and Gz (aboie S «nd), contain certain touches of expression which ally 
them to this sphere. Frequently, on the other hand, the fault requiring 
prayaSciita js stated more or Jess clearly: 6. 114 seems to be an expiatory 
formula to correct imperfections in the Sacrifice (cp. 19. 59); 7. 106 is a 
prayer to Agni to forgive sins due to forgetfulness (in religious matters); 
19. 40 seems to be the prayaUitta of one consecrated for the soma-sacrifice 
{dtksi(a) who has commiUed a disturbing fault (anger); 7. 06 and 67 seem 
to be prayers for regaining one’s holy learning {brdh,na>iam\ perhaps after 
It has been lost through some sin; 7. 102 is a pr.naJe,f}a for urinating while 
standing erecq addressed to the offended deities (Vno’ avr’ -rskiou rsTpap- 
pivo; GpOJ; opv/.eiv, Hes. Eiga, v. 727); cp. 13. r. 56. The obscure mixlum 
cqmpovitum, 6 49. « recited Kaus. 46. 14 by a Brahmacarin at the death of 
hn teacher, whereas ApS. 14. 29. 3 puts the first two stanzas in the mouth 
of a d.iuta who has fallen from grace {yadi diknto ’vak'irctYK That the 
receipt of gifts by the Brahmans is occasionally looked upon as an act re- 
^3-=9.7..8; 6,71; 7.57) has been shown above (556)- 
Related with these last ts a, 35 Cl’S. 3. 2. 8. 3; ms. s) an expiatory 
hymn recited to atone for the sin of depnvbg them Lt arc justly 



111. CONTFNTS OF THC ATH 'RYA-VeDA IV TUC SWNAKl'«-SC l^ S5 

etilllled to it of their sh.ire of food. Thus m FS. '’1'^'’'';*,“' gerthe 
pirticipants are entitled to J"' (j„,,r,am anmm, Til. 

stinta .about the imiildin whose Jbo hymn is 

e.8.S.3). or siufut ^0. defence against the evil e,e 

recited by one uho e.tts .alone ““f J;, cjllle is constantly looked 
of those that do not r.atticiiiate. The slaugiuer overlaid nith the 

at askant by the Hindus; hence ^ ^ performed without 

fiction that the proper eaecotion <>ff ' ,, .J is in the nature 
injury to it, and even with it, consen =. .as in reality 

of an atonement for a sacrifice m>vhic ^ cirrificer to hea%en‘-‘. One of 
ransonieil from death, and_ following * ® ;njurer and injured, is the 

the greatest crimes of ancient India, ® ° . sarious solemn 

precedence of the younger '>"»'>« 4 (/or, trV). Tnphynins 

occasions in life, especially m the ma . - t me sundry others, is looked 
6. 112 and 113, atone for this sort o sin, <J^iped it off' on their scape- 
upon as having originated Nvith the on to men't. 

gOsat, the god Trita, by ^^hom ["i.on extends aUo to circum- 

Ihit, as stated before, the o.^aml do not involve pereonal 

sUnces inherent or accidental which of cure or correction of 

tesponsibilily. Here expiation assumes * broaching upon the 

. inauspicious conditions and accidei s, • ‘misfortune (6.C3 

ofWr^fvlT ‘cure’*^ 'I he conception 7^«5 « 

and S4) is founded largely upon , aivl the acquisition of 

the removal of e\U characteristics (/^A composite stanzas 

auspicious ones • ' „i,ose hair has been cut by a 

C. 30.2, 3 are prescribed, Kaus. 3>- • 
and one who has evil 

seems to allude to responsible for drunkenness, or 

the /iTfflT would then appear ;"/®Xd 'aWawnce of him whose hair m 

perhaps merely the drunken l^seems to be addressed to such 

been ‘cut with an instrument of , s' implored not to harm 

an instrument, used for ‘^“V i^cNewhere addressed 

the manner in which .he «■>' 't:"7’’„el>'reJactoml, due .u >1'' 
juxtapoviliou of the two Sts. tnv, \,,„w„ot ". Vtonemeot for pe^ouul 

of /L uud fco m eucl. Ihew ewes . clukt botu urn e, »„ 

mhKvps is the motw c .ibo ^ appewanue of the fuvt I 

nnhickv star and 6. 140 •»' . ’i If iw.iw or die appearance of a 

SfUfs's.rcnd,., AS* the owu 

sterile cow in the herd (3. „ 2 ./tuU tomeu> and pottentsl 

(S 56)1 they belong to the domum pigeons, owU. “d 

sort abo are the so-called eiil, V ‘'''''es 6. -7 
black birds whose appearanw « “r"" ,, 6. .=4, rec.teil 

beensbUk'ommou^boa.^^^^^^ 

icSroi^Siniaglloot „ 

■ ^'-j -• Orwai^w P^a - t 

4. 14 175 -• a 4* > 



I n. LiTTERATUU U. GESCHICHTE. IC. AtHARVA-VeDA and GorATHVnR^HMAW. 


especially in the Jhamia textsj c.g.Aas Dh. 22. 9; ^ J' Dh SG. 2J , Gaut Dh. Q. . 
Baudh. Dh.3. 10. 10; Manvi 8. to6; Mjiiav.S.SOt; Laghu Atri Di».-.4; ^rdclha-Ain 
Dh.3.11; Vrddha-narltaDb. S ayo, etc., q>.MC.2. J4 2;, — < Sec the references, 
lhLi.FBRANDT, 1 c. — s Cp , c. g , the /tf/»/a«5 ir/if/ar/r/f/, T.S, 2. 3. 13; me 
ahhi'aitUU, TS.2.2 s.l; \\\^ yainnibhramtU TS. 2. 3 3 ^ Ot-OENCtRC, 

SBE. XXX. 307, for the citations. — 7 Kjg-viilJiana, MfYERS Introduction, p Xlti; 
under sTtiil'li‘ Sviilh. t. 2 ff. — * Weuer, Omina and I’ortenta, A? AW , 1859 ; Hat- 
field, The’ AuSanasadhhutani, J.\OS XV. 207 ff. (with bibltoeraphtcai notices m the 
' foot-note on p. 208, and par^lels from classical sources on p. 220); HiLLFuatxuT, 
Ibid p. 182. - 9 Slin. XIAI. 163-16S, and the notes on these hymns; 

Der Rig-Yeda, HI. 442 fT- — •'* i- >4. 15. 23. Cp. M. JlfcJLLFR, HA';!.. 

p.450; JiLOOMnrLD, SjiE, XUI.p-LXXJ; cp belovf,.S 67 end, and ff. — See UARDr, 
m the preface to the edition of the text, p $1 WfBFR, Vers. II. S3; KauSika, 
Introduction, p. xxxiu. These chapters are probably ulenlical svith the \ajna- 
prSyaJcitlastitra, called YaUayana, Ecopuxo, Catalogue, nr. 367; cp. niLtriiftAXDT, 
Ritual-I itteratur, p. 36, note, i ; and above, p. 16. — 1 he padapllha erroneously, 

ydd yamam etc. (there is no oxylonc ><7»/a); the passage means, 'if thej has-e made 
a spell of an unbumed (vessel) digging it down’. See 5. 31. i. and cp. SBE. XI.Il- 
457. — »3 Cp. PG. 3. 12 — yaianlo vai sada'jds U satve Ubkyo y>_ 

da/pndnt /tit ttayfd athkya vrj/yf/a, yad tathahar/ttattairt jiiheti tadaiyd/t na tat fflnali 
(cp Iadwig. I)er Rig-Vcda, V. 60I).— ■ 'S Contributions. Sixth Series, ZDMG. XI.VIll. 
55(5. — ’6 RoTlt, Abhandlung, p. 14; WniER, IS. XlII. 207 ; LCDWjo, ibid. IIL 433* 
Cp. the simil.ir hymn AVP. »» Vsit. jo. 17 (GB. j. 1. 12\ — '7 Contributions. 
Seventh Series, Ajrh XVII.430IT.; SBE. XLII. 164, Saiff. — «8 Cp. Darila to Kaui 
31 l (note 8). — *'5 Cp the virrhkermdnt, Kau4 t8. — s” I-DDWlG, ibid. Ilf 512 5 Zisiiirn. 
60, 274; and TLORUXt, BiC Xll. 288, do not throw light upon the situation. — 
*1 Adbhuta Brahmana G and 8 (§15 $. 6, 8); cp. lIULTZcit, I’rolegomcna lu des 
Vnsantaraja^ Sakuna: .SBE. XLII. 474 — *» Sec Kaui, Index It, p. 384.. * 
Juhne/naiiaianrttin SCE.XLll 484, and. Index, p. 697, under/dreams’; RigAidhana, 
Introduction, p. XIU (tn/aiitfa tamnta). - " , 

S 59. Class 10). Cosmogonic and theosophtc hymns. — The presence 
In the AV. of a considerable number of cosmogonic-iheosophlc hymns*, marking 
in a way tlie extreme distance from the ordinary tvitchcraft-formula, is not 
readily explained. The common vtUage-praciitloner is not likely to have had 
much use for them, and even the Purohita in his ordinary offices in the 
rijakamani might well have dispensed with them. Though they occur for 
the most part, barring the opening-hymns of several of the first books (?. r ; 
4. I, 2; 5. I, 2j 7. I, 2)*, in the books 8—19, yet there is no reason to 
regard them as late on the whole. Their greater length excluded them from 
the .first seven books, in accordance with the requirements of the redactors. 
But it is not saying too much that some of them at least, say the Dlrgha-' 
tam.TS braJmodya, 9.9 and 10 (RV. 1. J64), were adopted at a time u’hen Use 
adherents of the atharvanal} and angirasa^ had coquetted for some time witli 
the notion that their true place in the Vedic economy was the brahma as a 
whole, in distinction from the individual Vedic types of the trayi within winch 
there was for them no place. Jn other words, that consciousness which later 
led to the name Drahma-Veda for the Atharvan is likely to have been to a 
certain extent a stimulus productive of just such compositions as would tend 
to strengthen this consciousness still furtherJ. But it would be a mistake to 
suppose that theosophic speculation is foreign to theAtharvan, and inorganic; 
or, that all hymns of this sort are loosely att.iclied to tlie main body of iti 
compositions. On the contrary, there is evidence that theosophic ideas and 
formulas had to some extent worked their way into the very ihsue of its 
composition. The charm 4. 19 with the has for iu sixth 

■ stanza; hon-bemg (um/) arose from the earth; that goes to heaven, (as) a 
f spreading vapours, shall turn against 

the performer (of spells)! The hymn 9. 2 presents In an ordinary witchcraft 
charm a personalized god Kama as a destroyer of enemies, not very different 



in Contents OF TiiF Atharva-Vcoa iv mr S _ 2 ^ 

K the 'first seed “^eh ™e”ativf fen-or (latat)-. RV. io.i = 9.4 (ep- 

had sprang into es.stence of tliioso^^^ conceptions 

AV. 19 . 5a)'. tven mote mtncnte is the Wen ,,,,,4 ,,j,on 

and material purposes m the . . *he ijgst theosophic diction, often 

of this book the sun-prmciple 1 ^ 

in the lety formulas (oirO^fiD "f •'» 

hymn m the service of the doctnne nunishes the persecutors of 

Brahmans: Rohita is here the theme and object of his dis- 

Brahmans iyo brahmanam jtrtoii), th y the fir-it hjann 

pleasure and wath owhap.*) . the terrestrial Kohita, 

(.3. r. .-35) let T 

i.e, the Ung, nith the divine Rohita, the ^ ,^5 

exalted allegorically to the position of Kon ^ ,0 decide 

fusion of the tivo is so *'>'“?Sl)-E°"’= ’ "s .f the vers.feaS The .attentive 
Mhich, the king or the god, is ™ , ,y, pansilion from philosophy 

reader of the Atharvan will frequently decomposed, mixed and 

to sophistry: philosophical ideas gone to secu, , „ produce 

co-igulated,’ bandied about and t'Sistic object far beyond 

some magic effect, or to exalt some divinity or ^ 

its proper sphere (e. g. ?• ' a’excessne philosophemata are, .as 
medium for the culture *J**^*®/ !,’ ejoiis ^n^st'id or jirrir-Mrons. Every 
has been hinted above (S 5<»)» ^ cosmic power of the fbst ran . 

-imal offered as da/:sM is both Aja Ekaprul with hts mystic 

: gift of a goat, aja ( 4 - t4; ,s exalted beyond 

=llSS‘Siri;7cSA ?r"^!:'r»a. 


animal ' 

the gift V. ^ t,— , -V 

punning attributes; in 9-4 - t becmning ot uunkia n*'' ‘'''"■"'■,‘ ■..,1 

carries all forms in his body . ^ „ na^ughl but an ordinary saorificia 

of the waters- (sts. i,a); but af cr all « metaphysical di>qu« t.ons 

bull. Similarly the devoted ‘It ,s a relief to reas.ure one s self 

so fleeting, disjointed, and unsteady, h^ ^ ‘‘ ® lo 

with the aid of St. I that, it is doubt remains as to 

there as e c , in hvmn 4- “► \ , wnm or .1 6f>. i-). 

s±;y,£h:e7iSe^^ 

S'r;'1rld:'7:?'S* oi'me sire„,e 


umib 7 L Ta° "rin rnSnitally most "““we educuk hu. imUarb been 

!,, If,, uppurently fi™"; m the ™d - /-f "fc^uin 

3»» of?™”* ”hlcb'77ite: ihem to a considerable 
kind of Sriminllty »nd independence .hmb sn,pi,,,u,, us 

extent front «>' theosoplnc m.nfj. ^ u. It is not suyng 

' RV. To this is to b' 0'“'“ b™ 



8S IT. Litteratur u. GrscHicirrc. i b. ATit.ARVA«VrDA asv Gopatha-Brahmaxa. 


these ideas: the important theosopliic attributes are taken out of pigeon- 
holes, as it \vere, and applied to the paiu’cular subject in hand, not without 
sjncretism and awkward muddling. Occaaonally the whole trick is to sub- 
stitute one name for another? one and the same pada and stanza is predicated 
in effect to different subjects of speculation. Cp. e. g. the Rohita-stanzas, AV. 
13. !• 45 — 55 with the Purusa-hjmin, RV. ro. go'« AV. 19. 6; or the even 
more literal equation, AY. 4. n. 1 — »o. 7. 35. And these subject-, have in- 
creased in number and variety. Tire AV. shares with the RV, the brahmodya- 
stanzas of Dirghatamas, 9. 9, 10 (RV. 1. 164), which present in the form of 
theologicd charades the doctrine of the essential oneness of the universe, of 
its laws, and also of the nature of the sacrifice; the division of the stanzas 
into two hymns corresponds in general with the division of the subject matter: 
the second part (AV. 9. ro «= RV. 1. 164. 23 ff.) deals more directly with the 
relation of the sacrifice and its attributes (metres, priests, ivoly speech) to the 
universal order, whereas the first part deals with the manifestations of the 
universal one in the universe. The purusa hymn, RV. ro. 90, reappe-irs here, 
AV. 19. G (as also in other texts), with some variations that ease the sense, 
•and point to later handling*. Two independent Atharvan-hymns (10.2; 11.8) 
owe their origin at least in part to suggestions derived from the purusa-subba: 
10. 3 is a mystic meditation, in the form of question {ba), of the origin, form, 
parts of the body, and biological character of the purusa, the primeval 
cosmic man, who is, of course, described m the terms of the natural man. 


The questions introducing the stem la allude to PwjSpati-IJfahman, and 
assimilate the hymn furtliermore to the famous hiran^agarbha-sUkia, RV. to. 
xsi, of which the AV. also presents a poor version, 4. ?. Another even more 
mystic derivation of purusa in his double cosmic and human aspect is con- 
tained in 11. 8, the purusa is derived from a cosmic marriage in the manner 
of the vveddmg-hymn (.sur)'a-sf4l!ia, AV. 14 RV, 10.85), but all the parties 
concerned are psychological and religious forces: Manyu ('Will') leads Akfiti 
(‘Intellect’) from the house of Samkalpa (‘Determination’); Tapas and Karman 
are the woers, Brahman the wocr-m chief. It is a kind of a soul-marriage: Manyu 
15 identified further on with ten psycho-physical forces, prdna, apdna, ctxksufj, 
U-otram, etc., and it is they that produce the /r/n/ja. Thus' in reality Brahman 
and the psychic and religious forces connected with him express themselves 
in the soul-hfe of the purusa. On (he other iiand tiie Vedic gods, Indra, 
Agni, and even Brhaspati, occupy a very subordinate position, being regarded 
(st. 10) as ‘children’, each bom out of himself, Indra from Indr.a, Agni from 
Agni, etc., Devas from Devas; (o them the world is made over. The hymn 
seems to postulate distinctly enough the identity of soul (iJ/wi7«) willi brahma, 
clearly expressed m the Upani?ads, though the word aunan does not occur 
dtman appears also in the hvTnn to Prana 
breath personified as the supreme spirit; and the two pec- 
uliMly abstract and involved hymns to Skambha ‘Support’ (10. ? and 8). 
which seem to reach out after an even more subtle formulation of the last 
puse of things than that contained in Putuya or Brahma, wind up .ifter all 
^ Statement that presents the knowledge of Brahma 
and Atoan as the highest goaP». Related vmU this h)nin is the brahmodya 
5. i. t'nie W/wu, prayer (\ edi), as supreme principle, is modukated in the 
neatest vanety of keys: m 4.1 it appears in its own neuter character as 
he first born brahma begotten of yore’, but passes over quickly (st 2) mto 
die related, conception of Vac ‘speech’, i e. holy speed) embodied in the 
Veda, and m this form it ,s represented especially by the hymn to Vac, 4. 3° 
(RV. 10. i.s), and m the brahmodya-&.9aai. j. qhe enigmatic brahvwd^a- 



III. Contents or the Atuvry-V'Yedv in tiif S\us'\KTvA-Scfiooi. 


h\mn 8. o, addressed to Viraj, has also in mind Vac 'V traj (9. ?. 5); m startl- 
inir language st. 7 asserts the paradox, ‘they call Vir.ij (female) the father 
of lhahma'. She in turn acts as the creative principle, her two calves (sun 
.and moon) came forth from the waters (st. i). The following piece, y 10, 
recite, in Braliniana-rrose the curious migrations ami metamorplio.es olMr.), 
posited as the first principle {tmi4 vd Uam dut)', Xnt pervasive *1^^ ') 
of Vita) (holy speech) culminates in the truly Atharsan'C anti cljmaa at the 
end of the hymn, 30—33. betrays the batho. and specious 

of both hymns (0 and to): they are an mtellectnil cverc.se “ 

co.mter-»itchcraft; it one merely says, 'in my mmd do I repel 
Joes (by that mere statement) repel it The ",3. 

knowledge as the spiritual. hght that causes and revtas nf *1,^ universe 
roots itself within more conaele individual facts and cn ‘ 

•Thus st. 7 of the above-mentioned h)mn 4- *. ^ v!},irvan (I5rhisr.tti), 

‘view, pav-.es the draAvut on to its typical pnes . - - • 

oho’ henceforth tabes the place, « is 'ntnnttely assom^^ 
rrajvpali, and the crevtive principle- .y , ..npciiliv the 

‘ .\tharv,anlr vervlon of tlie change o( trJA>rit to 'J ' ’ {nextrcahlv- with 

dominant power of the visible world, the sun. Rv! 

the conception of the Ari.iAm.iy begmnin.g vvit i v _ty' tlieaynpli’c 

6... to.'., as to jns.if, the li-e 

hvmn which does not more or levs divtmtt), i 
in mind the grett heavenly body. ^ 



90 II. LlTTfRATUR V. G rSCHfCHTE. I B. AthARVA-VedA AND GO PATIIA-BrXHMASA. 

as a Bull, steer, or cow; the bestowal of such animals as dal-shd {sara) 
especially elicits this animal-symbolism; to such an extent is this true, th.at 
the victim is animal and pantheistic-monotbeistic divinity at the same time. 
Thus the bull, rsabha, in 9. 4 is assimilated in turn to the various celestial 
bulls, Koliita, Indra, Tva^tar etc.; or 9.7, a pantheistic meditation in Brahmana- 
prose, compares each limb or part of the bull senselessly with a divinity or 
cosmic force. ’The sava of a steer {pnadvan, 4. ii) furnishes occasion with 
equal facility to mate the steer the exponent of the same sublime conditions 
as the very much more abstract Skambha; cp. 4. 11. 1 with 10. 7. 35 
above). The gift of a goat, afa (4. »4;9- 5), finds in the divine Aja Ekapad 
a convenient peg to fasten theosopWc disquisitions upon. And finally when 
occasion arises for the bestowal of the female vaiA fp. S7) it requires but 
little more sophistry and oddity to make her the wife of Par/anya, the guardian 
of heaven and earth (12.4.4,6). We have seen above that the purely 
ritualistic hrahmaudana and especially its leavings {ticchisjd) also appear in 
the light of the universal panUieistic force: we m.ay suspect this to be an 
extension of the treatment of the animal-j/72-/7X. To the same sphere of con- 
ceptions, hut more liturgic in tone, is 9. 6, jn praise of the mystic merits of 
hospitality (argAya); the details of its acts are compared -svith a sacrifice in 
i\hich tlie host {atUhipalt) as sacrificer (}a/atn3na) virtually accomplishes a 
sacrifice, providing he understands the mystic purport of his own acts. / 

In striking contrast with the vigorous though peculiar development of 
theosophic speculations in the .W. is its barrenness on the side of purely mytho- 
logical fancy. The RV. deals with tlie gods of nature as the theme of its 
poetry: the Atharvan cultivates the mote homely genii like Aryaman, Anumati, 
etc., or substitutes demonologj’. The character of the lead’ng divinities of 
the RV , Agni, Indra, SQrya, is scarcely developed at all, barring the un- 
doubtedly popular advance of that fusion of Agni with Ruclra in the direction 
which finally produces the god Siva‘«. The hymns and stanzas addressed to 
the mythological gods are m the main borrowed from outside sources; thus 
when \se encounter the long Indra-h)Tnn, 5. 2, it is in reality RV. 10. 120 
(employed as a battle-charm, Kaui. 15. i), or the still longer hymn to Agni, 
S. 3 (RV. 10. S7), is addressed to Agni in llie character of Raksas-killer. Like 
a fresh breath of wind upon the sultry atmosphere of both demonology and 
theosophy comes the singular and e.\ceptional hjmn 12. i, addressed to 
Goddess Earth, lliis is one of the most attractive compositions of the AV., 
rising at times to poetic conception of no mean merit, and comp.aratively free 
from the stock-artificialities of the Vedic poets. The relation of the real 
visible earth to man, animals, and plants preponderates wholesomely over the 
remoter mythological and mvsric conceptions’k Somewhat in the same vein, 
though decidedly inferior, is 9. i, the so-called viadkitt&lta, a hymn to the 
honey-lash of the Asvins {madhuAnili^, The mjthic or realistic back-ground 

of the hone> -lash may possibly be ‘the honey (the heavenly water) th-tt laslie>’, 

or the lightning which whips the clouds and produces rain. I'he bjunn sym- 
bohzes prosperity in its wid«t aspect (txrrrc^o) •«. The cosmic hymn 1.32. 
de.aling m praise of the physical atmosphere {anlarik^a), also desen es mention 
m.this connection. 


mi 1 of me theosophic hvmns of tlie AV. in the 

MOm*. HAhUp. ss«<r.; MtiR. O^T.. V. jsoff; 
3Wff; SaiESMAs-, Jl.iJosophische Jlymner. p 44-SS; 
,1 -.ofl? v Veil.ich-brsh^anisdfc renorfr. 

V?,* vol I. part I. V.JOOIT.; 

’ f !> *hc notes to ihese hvnms. See aUo die 

transUlions of nearly alt these lijmns m lirsttv, Lcs l.ivrcs MH ei I\ de r.VV.j 



III. CONTFNTS OF THE AtIIARVA-VeDA IS TH E SaUSAKIVA-S c HOOI- JJI 


Its Li.rcs IX, X, ct XI dc I’AV.j ni.,1 Its ‘‘'"'J'j'LT 

S“s6'i‘cp’^°i)™i?x. 7 2 'li?’- MlJomitD, Ita.lh^S=r,c.,^ AJIU 

^Thf hy“;,7i.’ «nVT!iio«lV-‘4 

inferior importincc to all (liviniucs ami TcliKiojis ftc , P DEl'isi v, p. 310 fT- 

knowledge of the fundamental cau*c, the one “ P'__ „ «T|ie liglit of 

2 , 11.2 ...ooJ-.. MO,., OST.V.39S! ''\!Sr= 4, IIoo.v, I.. 

.Mi'll Xll. 4=9ir.l noossrs. p ='= 'i,- 'V'' l ‘|,2 ,ri«,,.., 2 clions, book IS, 

I,„o> X, XI, ot XII, ii.loil.!lln'>n'’'“'"' l.to, 

22 >lt on oi.lcoit, or.OEobon'l, ”1.0 I‘« I _ cptclly AV. 4 . 2 I oml 11=1 

as the supreme leing {HrahTn-»), see S siiH- XLII 190, <^iO: nFNR\, 

, cp,sm;.XU1.406,Cl8.-'>l4,'mvio, I:0.III-«4ff, bi.l- xI.II, 

, Ki.uAUs.ic 

arises s\hether the AV. contains hymns Athnrvanic Sraiita*rites. Since 
collection from the start to late’, the appearance in 

the Srauta-manual of the A^.. the ^alUn ’.significant anil otiose. The 
it of many hymns of the Saunaki>a*!>.Ahj^ jj {jg^ip 

Vait. nibricates practically the proving nothing for its original 

a late Srauta-supplement to the Jp^ys many scattered hymns 

scope and intention*. In addition the • . in a manner more or 

and stanzas, especially of the sixth an f„„ucntly coincident with the em- 
less befitting its own J 

ployment of the same kind of ...orked up in the KausAa as well; 

happens, the same stanzas are as a wie orimnally to arcumstances 

they may therefore owe J,' ,n mind, th? Vait. may have later 

and practices such as the ^ m ps own sphere of aciiuty. The 

taken them up anew in a sense tlwse circumstances not calculated 

inner content of a hymn or f of the duiskeuasis- a secondary employ- 

to decide as to the original »"*®""°Vonolomcally anterior to the more pn- 
ment of a hymn in Kaiis. maj author of the \ait. 

miry in Vait., providing of the Srauta-practices to reco^ize 

with a sufficient knowledge , . -jf such hymns to Sraut.i-practices. Thu', 
the obvious and correct apphcabiWy oi ^^^^ „f AS8 i.iS. is an evening-song 


the obvious and version of AS 8 i 

the h>mn O.i, a scemmgl) ^ 3 ^ 

to Savitar, *^’^!^„,i„v’and very general. N 


,. 8 , is an evening-song 
scv:».i..r.v 3 50 13.59 -5‘ Its emplo>Tnent 

10 savitar, .nd ver/ gener.ik Notwithstanding this, and 

ii, all Ihree pl.au« 5"°;“Sri.4r m more or ks. clore correspondonce 
sranting its intrmUu 5"““;''’” ."bore » no, proof .hat i. vra, orismally 
.vlih its employment ’7 ejpaatv as a Sranta-hyim; some such use 

incorporated into the AV occurrences m Kaos, ka m.ay have 

as is manifested m ouf.. Mhana.edins, or its employment both in Kalis, 

been the original of f,om and secondary lo the ongmal tnlentton. 
and Vait. may ”„,ion 3 ty circnmstances .ne may neierthcleys say 

Recognumg the ' „ith pretty much the entire sphere of „rauta- 

ontright tlut the A' ■ ,bat some of its hymns cannot be imsfned 
ritesi, anti, ”hat » " "Xorbed from other Vedte sources tvitfut direct 
base been composed nrdmanly treated m the brauta-manuaK. 

reference to pmo’' , ijjs; of the o^«r./am«. possibly in some simpler form 
Thus the tudunents at 



92 II. Loteratur u. Geschichte. IB. Atiiarva-Veda and Gopatha-BrXiimana. 

ihan ibaj tYJjibifetl hy the of the /raj 7 , are represented by 6.. 47 

and 48. Tl)e first of these is not mentioned in Kaiis. at all, but appears 
altogether suitably in connection nith tlie three iaianas, Yait. 2:. 7 - These 
stanzas, probably not original with the AV., can hardly have been absorbed 
in the redaction except for the reason that ihej' 'vere at that time in vogue 
at the three savonat, as ]>racticed by adherents of the AV. 'I'he second of 
these hymns (6. 48) consists ofYajus formal is differing more or less from the 
corresponding formulas of the Srauta-texts*; it is quoted in Kaus. 56. 4; 59. 
26, 27 under circumstances ihn betray unmistakably its secondary employment. 
JJere sho hy the i-ery foTCt of theh cooients it stems unlikely tliat tliey 
owe their Alharvanic composition to anything else than the sat anas, llie 
Yait. employs them accordin{*ly, i;. loj ei. 7, and that too in the order of 
the three sts. demanded by their context and the parallel formulas: in (his 
instance (he ritualistic tradition suqjasses that of the Sarnliitj, either reaching 
behind it, or correcting it by superior information'- Again, the loosely attached 
si. 7. 76. (t <,KY. C. 47 6), addressed to Indra at the tnaif/iyamifitia-saiatta, is 
not mentioned in Kaus, whereas it appears in a proper pUce, Yait. 16.14. 
.\<ld to this the familiarity wjth the saiattas hctraied by incidental allusions, 
such .Is in 9. i. It— 13 (cp. aKo “.72. .7), or the elaborate invitations to 
Indra to partake of soma. e. 5, 6 (cp. abo 7. 5S and 117), and it is not 
too much to say that the Vtharvans knew and practised soma-rites prior to 
tile redidiofi of the .'simhita Whether this was carried on in the spirit and 
with the erjuipmcnt ot the \etlit schools of the traVl, or in some more 
elem'^ntary form that «hd, above all, not requbit a variety of priests, can 
hardly lie discerned*' The -ame kind of enquiry js suggested by the two 
/t/eJ hymns, s le (KV »© 1,0, <-f al ) and 5.27 (VS. 27. r i ff.; MS. 2.12.6; 



in. Co^^'E^’-rS OF the ATllARVA-Vr.DA IK THE SauhakTya-Sciiooi- 

1.4—6- 0.23; 7.89; 16.1; I9.2;fi9; and especially the long composite 

rinnaroie, 10.5. Cp. the rt/dm Kausika, index L, p, 3 3, le ja / , 

.0 a conquerable number of 

of varyine import all of which slate distinctly that they are accompanied y 
1 obMon riJ. This Wr is preceded by an adjective or^ 
erpresses tersely the purpose of the by™ I nis 't„„etl,er of 

are accompanied by sainirttvya havti th . ^asiarshiarn havis 

aealtho 6.39 by yJa havi, ‘that confers Story’l Mo by 
■oblation to the Seven Risliis_ (that frees from /,nr* ‘that makes 

Aaiit ‘that mikes liarmonious j 6.65 ctmnresses fthe enemy); 

(the enemy) handless’; 6.7s ''Z pj. Jhyasya mahat 

0.78 by bh-uta /inr/r 'that 6 87 (and 88); 7-94 

hmit 'that contains the majesty of the he y s ^ Jefined /.aris 

by dhruva havts ‘that makes 4“^= i j ” ,,,5 fraimsa ajya in 

in t.jt; 6 411 7.7°; ”! *>'= ^^i'^^^- ^,,J;.a^Kiraelerist,ea% aUlv^rta 
S. ai. 2. Once, m 1. ap- ■. <“ pV, mentions such special 

man'i for abh'aarta havis^ KV. io-i,4- m 6.75. S; dkruia 

havit in hymns of Atharvanic chaincter; r invited attention to this 

/intir in L .73. « (AV. 7 - 94). the AV s fitly « *'“'!• 

feature and its peculiar development in forllier by describms K 

c.-etimome' for a special P“'P““- of 'h' Srauta-literalure. 

as the hymnal correspondent of t i,»,,i,on for a purpose, aside per- 

In the course of other practices a J'J introduced. Since this action 

haps from the main action, ■"'S''* ^^5,„i3Kd itself more paitictikarly into 

bore upon matters of ordinary h Adiarvans, assuming there n more 
the prayers and performances of the Aiii 

independent and teclimcal form. ,yo8 M 37S«il "".J" 

■ Oisse, V.iitSiiaS«"nl’nf’".f j Jj, j 1 he 

imintiT, KilinU iint.t.r, p 3.. , „„io|.«s ot sast.lites vae luii'.wn 

- ,ir ■, ■ if 

» .us — "" ' 

500 , , ..,th induidual themes 

• 8 6.. Class .2). The L devoted to special themes 

(hooks .3-.8).-Tl.e ''°'^^„/;.aJ„sse,t to a term ot the son.god 

Dock 13' contains fo“' '“""e Constant puns on the root .n/i. as thmieh. 
called Roliita "the Red . "* his female Rohini (Surj 1, Uas) 

'he that has been led "f v ,he heavenly body or its ilisimty, both- is 
figures .ilso, Kobita is V notions, so as to ap|.e.ir as the creator 

swelled out by means of th« 1 r„jipatu A considerable part of 

A.a.1 aaracKsyi.cr of tlis utti' cTb , mth ilic oiam theme at all, o. 


swellea out ^ form ot frajH'.uu . 

•and preserver of the nmien , .„,h the mam theme at all, o. 

the book, honever is uppheationk The first 35 “f 'J' 

eahibits the mam ‘ stoik of the entire book, correlate R^ita 

first b>mn, apparent!) u„J ,v„ose kingdorn A 

niili an earlhly k“fi , -6—44 ate n mystic presentation of the aonders 

preserved by Koh« and disappearance of the sun; Sts. 4o--oo 

connected with the - j P j-^hi »ho kindles with his pr.ayers the 

present Rohita (cm. ""7 



-e. a„^on^- - Tff^jS 

t ■_ .Ue roa^U. h>.n„. pa...y P-e, 

engag's m praise of the god “ J'JJ'*' ,(l„„.ans' They coincide 

® Book u contains '•'' ''-=“" 8 -=^““?%^ R^ Other 

lasgely, though by no meam '"^'’Vtfs JuSingTy^^^^ 

Stanzas oftlieRV., notablj 10.4 • -i Grbp'Sbtras 

yet a considerable number are not found m the 1 .,.._noio,vy and inter- 
Lost of these stanras recur uidr.many vananf. Jhe ahronolo„, 

Six-- ^ 

,.,dtyai. In the list of theosoph.c subjects which 5) and 

fo the AV. the iratyn figures between the llrahmacarm ^ i;-. 

fX* ^Xdi;'^sLirirduXheX;rL\ti^ 

S[kllXa^aX:Xh»-rX;cli^ 

S xir o?-Xaii:ix^SL 

IheXndLok'aild lliel.^lrril’notXe qu’e'sdoned, in .5. a to 
sutemcnL that ‘faith has bec-ome hi, paramour, holy “X/yn 

Magadha (outcaste .xssociate)’ dearly refers to the conversion of the t' } ^ 
the occurrence of such words as utmsa, fraioda, »nd AV. | 5 ' • 

a, well as in Vl\. ty.i. 14, clinches Uie connection still further . /Ih® !'' ’ 

haiin" become holy through his acquired l-rakmacaryam is 
renres’entative of Irafwui, like the Brahmicarin (11.5) he is 
'Ihe mention of a large number of Simans m ibc book secins to p 
to some sort of a connection with the schools of the SamaA cda. 
contents .are loo abstruse and loo absurd for analjsK. ’Ihe book is want c 

The sixteenth book contains two ^sllnct parts not related in any waj. 
AV 10. 5 3 - 2^ seems to refer to them m the expression 

'il'C f'rst four pieces (first anuvaka) consist of prose-formulas, 
into metre occasionally (4, sj; they ate designated, Ath. I'arls. 10, as 
kantafiirdh. They clearlj consKt of ritualistic formulas dealing to some ® 
with the prai'C of the waters*’. Their purpose however is not quite ’ 
even in the light of Kausika’s employment of them. Section 2 lecure Ap • 
0 . 20. 2 with interesting variations. The rest of the hook, 

an elaborate conjoralion against n’ghtmare whidi is driven o 
Fclf and imposed uj>on enemies. \\hy these two sections hit'' 


anuv jkal 
from one’i 


from one’s relf and imposed uj>on enemies. Why these two 
been gathered up in a separate book docs not apitear. 

Nor is it pOiS.ble to |>oint out the reason why the single hymn, book t "» 
should have readied the disrinction of a separate book for itself- 'I he hymn, 
known as the ri’csali {AV. 19. aj. 57), is one of the most prominent o 
the .n«nJ'-4 (class 2) and figures esjedahy in the r.tes connected wU" the 
life of tiie young .\rya”. Kesava to Ka*is.-42. tat?, and Atlu i’addh. to 



111. Co-JTE,>tTS OF THE AniAKTA-VEDA IN THE SATOtAKlYA -SCH^ 95 

Kaui^F mention a wniw/i/WA” from tlie same sphere of practices; 
doubtless this hymn figured prominently m iL fiineral-stanras, 

bel„/;rlnei?aSy‘irS:.-r»rB^£ 

order as the RV., omitting only siv dialogue betneen 

In the AV, is natural, because the bf r"" “»'• „„ direct relation 

Yama and Yarai, whereas RV. lo. ii and . 

toYainaor the fiiner-al-practices, are “ i’V Kausiha. 'Ihe 

to the redaction of the ^9 * ' totally changed 

remaining sts. of hymn i and the whole oi j other RV. sts., or 

order sts. from RV^. ro. u-.l. mUoducjjg „cc.,onally^ota 
such as do not appear m kV. at O and theYajus (TA.6). 

3: are found m RV.; the rest are _ are recruited from various 

Still more original is hymn 4: only 12 v funeral stanzas of 

books of the RV., and only 7 oihere comc^ to lome extent original,. 
T.V. 6”. The Alharvan version of this "“actices of Kausika which in turn 
and is not in complete accord with a single original funeral 

present many individual traits collection, being seemingly 

stanza, 7. 21, is stranded outside of , . j not bear upon tU con- 
employed, Kaiii S6. 16, ,ue funeral-practices are afforded by 

tents. Very valuable side-hghts xipo details freer and more con- 

numerous Atharvan conjurations , funeral-stanzas or m the SQtrM; 

Nincing than many. that are codmedei alluded to m many passages . 

thus the practices of mourning-women Inaex.under'funemlprAactices. 

For other suggestions of this kind see ‘1 j’., 159, remarks that the A^. 

Alleruni, India (SACtuu’s tramlat.°ni and wlut .s to be done with them, 
contains injunctions regarding the t > uolnta*. in-oonrircn, 

« Muir. OST. V S95. on>e» I' ‘ ' 





Iittcratur, r- 5* r.'V’si'siT* iS>t>, • 'I’,*' 

Airrm, sv.w.. ‘S’hC:,,™ ™i t"!":'” ““u r.rriiiui.tu 

n 7 S 6 . lor llie Iitiratiire ,i.„,inuncscebrauehe. m , ^ 11 

Die AltmJiselien Vneci-Uly »l‘« T 'lecon’l ?' 

Amsterdam Acaiicm). iSA Co.unUutions. '^econU 

Kilual-Littcratur, p. »7 “• 


lal ceremonies see Calnsi , 
the transactions of the 

MU LTERf'i’a 
AJPh. 


^k336fr- *ri,hook — Ofthe 143 of book 


Of the 143 hjmnb of book 20 
- — ’ — 13U1 

IX ■ j-t “• 

„ . S; Iw.rrMm;c"fonn uud cclent are 

so.calleii Imljta-sStIMt, ' = 1 J,- ’ ^ to cccl; they are iianling A\ l. 

oiighial, ami uo Paia-leM °t “f „e boiroived f™"- " > • 
•Ihe other hymns ami *““’?• A „sd, aiWtessed to Indra, are 'lAt'C 

The temaimiig hymns of *' RV.. largely the eighth mamlaU 



96 II. Littfratur u. Gtsci ncurr., ib. 




Compare similarly - . heinc larcelv rubricated in Vait., beginning 

booV 1, Uo>™ as the ’ and extending through to the 

nhh .5. 6 (in the course f ,be Urahman-priest, or more 


nith .9.6 (in the course ™ of the lirahman-priest, or more 
end of that text. It was Btahmanacchaif sin, at the /as/ras and 

particularly his Atharvanic ^ ^ J, ^ Atharvans had adopted 


^i^iaS; hiTAhiarvanio ^iste^ f "ISsT hS a.^pte.1 
siotrns of the soma-sacrifices , ^ _ v-tinn nf the other Vedic schools; 

e^Sematic and extensive Srauta ntes m 

the Ri"-Vedic parts of book ao belong to another formulas 

IS a Uter modification of 13. 8. 35 t nf their contents, 

Vvmrts call for a separate and more searching statement of tneir 
Sose and relation' to the ritual, since their Atharvan version seems to be 
the fullest and most original m existence. ^ 

I WiUThFY, Index Vctborum, p 2, Olocnuerc, Die j v«»clunir, 

- * \loT^^ K.schm.r. p 23 , KoTit. AtoUhng. p. all AV in 

'■ m;Tfr «iiv^ 

KS. 9 8 9«i Al*. 11- 9- 8 («r- hll. 4. 6 «• S)- 

c 6-1. Class 14). The kuniSpa-hymns.— AV. 20. 127— 136 ^te 
sitrnated in the mss. as kuntapasuktam \ being introduced and concluded y 
the expressions, atha kuntapasuktani, and, th kuntdpasuklant sa/iiaptani. 
exact scope of the designation Wd/a is not certain. Sayana at Ab 0 32- » 
It I defines as the kuntdpa-hymn the thirty stanzas, equal to the first 
hymns of the kuntdpa-samhitd, as given in the AV. (20. 127 and ”8), 
tlie •whole colleaion also figures in his view as a supplementary book \eni ; 
with the name kuntdpa\ This seems also to be the view of theVaik 32- ^9- 
whlch assigns the name to the first two hymns, and employs die designatio 
aitalapraldpa, etc. for the following hymns (32. 2off.). In SS. 12. 

!•' 6. 13) the terra kuntapa seems to be restricted to a part of the ccJlectio^, 
as'civen in that Sutra (re. I4”i6 AV. 20. 127. 1—6, 11—13; 

jg. jts, 13, II, 12). liut inasmuch as all parts of the collection, including 
those just mentioned, have specific names in addition to Oie generic kuntdp<t 
(see below), the latter word may after all have been used by Sankhayana 
fnci oKn bv Vait.) at the becimunc of his presentation of the kuntdpa materia s 


raibhah, etc.)h until lie amvea *7) at xns parusupan. i.— 
born out by Klk 30- 5- Similarly AS 8, 3. 7 the word kuntdpa is used o> 
wav of introduction to these materials, none of the subsidiary designation 
appearing until the Mfi/rf/mrfirA-stanzas (AV. 20I 135. ii ff.) are reached, sQtra 
27. Again, GB. 2. 6. is begins with, atAa kuntdpar/i iamsati, neglecting the 



"hi. Con- 1 CNTS o7TH^lHA^V rDA in TIII: SAUNAKlVAj ^U 


97 


111. CON'lllNlS 'Jr itic. 

belong to the tvhole colleotion tthtch vanes ,„^etin°es em-. 

i,, each or the texts that employ th tat Itat „.e spec, he 

ployed for one or two of the initial hymns, suppressed, although 

deignations of the opening hjnins were more 
they were probably well knonyt m each of *e schoon.^^^^ 

In addition, to AV. only SS. gives tie ‘ occasional stanta in full; 

texts (AB. GB AS. Vait.) give only J'f *ti„„s the subdivisions iiii(!|r 
the O. does not esen cite the pr.Uika /Jww/j/a-texts in tlie SS. 

their specific designations {tidriiiamsjra., )■ jirrancement markedly 

(.a,.4fr,) rearl like an extract s of KB. 3o.,5 f Stah'S 

dilTerent; this version also underlies school of the Siinkluyan.'is 

therefore tiie traditional material in " of sS. appear aUo 

or Kau^itakins. All the stanzas, ritld , -•scentin'’ the bracketed st. 7 m 
in. the much larger collection of some mss,., being omitted by 

•si re. at. ., iihich occuts on "’fS;"cdin« Tf ,he SS. mss. agtee ii.lh 

others altogether'. In many cases >'>= ,,,, frequently adopted 

those at the basis of the ’ Sf the vitetah The rema.niug ex s 

the corrections proposed by the edi ....|y ,f not quite identical with the 
All. Gil. Ai Van., presuppose a 'f '™ ualuh of variant readmgs 

AV.: the few dllTetences are susp.cm by the pvceeding 

whose substantiality lioivever is o respects the, AS- kand 

corruption of the text of the accordance with SS.than A\., , 

its maletials, as might ta %. 3 >4—7 (>« . 

e.g, in its treatment of ‘’;'w{,„,hC;,i,tra “'‘"Xmselves- 

The liturgic tradition “V” m the f-ii’iA'/a I'J''''''? 

natural subdivisions according to ) ^ points of Mew of h> 

their tteatment therefore from i,. Hymns as t'POf « 

ritual is imperative. 7''' tr nmnsic contents as well as their 

AV. appears to be founded upon _ 

Use in the sastras: •• ,_ 3 . St. i m ^ 

stanzas as n.,rala„UM (*<=■ Rn^mai.': See 19 • ‘9“-. 

praise of Kaurama, a prince “ a. 4-15 i b" , 

Rebha (Agni) who Lctions. A comparison of Ihe ch 

■ chanter (poet) to, pettara jee SBC. XUI. .97. 69= 'b CB. 

Agni is involved m »"! 9«'-„ ta. I?- '-4- ^”5, and Ihe 

4,.“^, ^he'S.;: A^. d^3;.;;^,(V^4Sy^S^n.5i5h.^taUpica.god 
coranis. design.ite tht.m as/ 197* ^9* b. _j, „ g 

'l-ht. rr Ali‘6 3 = >6 It (cp. al^o ^^ho, as reward for a song 

■,‘,^e:..^ai-4j»;4#? See SBE. Xl.II. .,S, 6, a. 

Of praise, grant, wealth and destro. j 

rtiViOS'.. It- 



9$ II. lanKRATUR U. GESCnrCKTE. I B. Atharva-Vi da and Gopatju-B^i^a^ 

Y. AY. ao. 128. I— 5 «= si 12. ao. I. I— Tl\e pratika in Ga2.fi.12. 
The GB., AB. 6. 32. 19 fil, KB. 30.7, Sl, and the corams, designate them as 
diianj l-ltlayali, ‘arrangement of the directions of space, orientation'. ITie 
‘paragraph consists of didactic stanzas («r* 7 , in nhich certain kinds of conduct 
are correlated 'vith the five directions of space, frak, adharak, miak,^ a/dk, 
and, apparently, urdkrom as the fifth, implied in the \\ords, dham^ iva ga- 
tvdya, in st. 5. Proper conduct seems to be associated in 1, 3, 5 with /rak, 
udak, and urdhvam\ improper conduct in 2,4 with adharak, and The 

possible pejorative sense of the last two in contrast to the good sense of the 
other three seems to be the. main point of tliese ssise saws, but the untrust- 
worthiness of the text '(cp Sl) renders this entire construction problematic. 
St. i; ‘The man of good house, of rich establishment, who presses (the soma) 
and brings sacrifices, as well as yonder sun, the illustrious gods fixed as 
east’". The opposite kind of a man (a stingy one) is correlated in s(. 4 
with ‘west’ iapak). 

YI. AY. 2 0. ia8. 6 — 11 •= SS. ia.. 2 i. 2. i — 6. The pratika in GB.2.6.12. 
The GB, AB. C. 32. 23tf., KB. 30. 7, SS, and the comms. designate them as 
janakalpdkt ‘containing the classification of folk’, or tlie like 'i'he subject is 
didactic and related to the preceding: desirable and undesirable folks are 
compared in classes. K. g. sis. 8, 9: ‘A lake without walering'plAce, a rich 
man who is stingy, and an unseductive, ugly maid are of like cKiracterj of 

like character (on the other hand are also) a hake with a good watering- 

place, a liberal rich man, and a seduttne, beautiful maid’. The classification 
m sts. 10, Ji of the pothi'kid makisi ami the vdiiUd of a slow and a 

sw ift horse, and the obscenity which appears here, as also frequently in the sequel, 
suggest conditions similar to the noionons practices at tlie alvnmcdha and /««/• 
jomalka Indeed the three abusive stanzas 10, 8, 6 (inverse order), 

are employed SS.16. 13.10 in the course of the pumiamedha\ cp.Vait.38.2. 

VII, AV. 20. 128. 12 — 16 Ss 12. 15. j. 5 — 12. 16. 1. 2 (sts. 14, 16 

of AV, wanting in bS,), The pratika in GB. 2. 6. J2. The GB., AB. 6. 32. 

25 fT., KB. 30.5, and the comms. designate them as indragkth&J}. The theme 
ib praise of Indra, the conquero.r. of demons and enemies. 

Yin. AV. 20. isp— X32. SS. has only a limited number of these padas; 
AV. 20. 129, r— to SS. 12. 18. i. 1—9, AV. 20. 132. 2—7, 9, n, 12 « 

SS. J2. 18. I. 10—iS; AV. 20. 131. 10, 11 = SS. 12. iS. I. 19, 20. The j\S. 
8. 3. 14 17 presents the same three groups of stanzas as appear in SS., 
giving as pnalik-as SS. 12. 18. i. i and to, followed by 19 and 20 in full". 
AA ■■ 3 *' "o the pratika appears; AB., GB., 

SS., KI3.30. 5, and the comins. designate it as aitaiapratCipa etaia") ‘the 
clnatter of Au.iba’'k Ihe Brahmana-texis present mystic, apologetic legends 
in explanation of this chatter of the sage Aitaso, designed to show iis great 
liturgic power. But there is certainly no basis in the text itself for a sage 
Aita^a. Either the n.ime w^s .il«tracted verbally from tiie initial words 
aivd, or the v.'iriegated horse of the sun, dada, is supposed to underlie the 
enigmatic {brahmodyd) nonsense of the textM. The first part has been rendered 
tentatuely and wuliont explanation by Zimuiji, p 131. 

X2, 22, where an .additional riddle without .answer 
is added by some mss. {st.7). The pratika. GB. 2. G. 13; AS. S. 3. i8j Yait. 
32.21. The answers to these riddles are inserted in AV., are stated separately 
AS. S. 3. 19; \ ait. 32/ 25, but arc altogether absent from Is. The GB, AB-fi- 
?Mii J-’ comms. designate them as praialhikdli^^, 

riddles ; by proi^unding them the gods (.i U Sphinx) got the belter of die 
Asur.is. In the .U . the nddle is gis-en firs^ tlien the answer, and fm.ally a 



III. Contents of tjif. Atiiarva-Vcda im Ttin Sauna kTya-School. ^9 

curious refrain, addressed apparently to an (innocent) girl ^vho is tlius instructed 
in these jttix d'csprit. In the sastra the riddles seem to be chanted by me 
Hot-ir, the answers fig\iring as praHgaras in the mouth of the Adhvar>m who 
addresses the Hotar as jaritar. Tliese riddles are either obscene 
folk, productions. Of the latter sort are 3 and 4: ‘15y drawing wo i tie 
to oneself they arc gotten out in the middle (: what is it?) . _ .. . 

tying of a knot in a rope’. ‘In Avhat lies stretched out ^h^^e^ 
which stands (: what is it?)’. Answer; ‘The foot in the shoe. 

X. AY. CO. 134 =■ SS' i=. =3. I. only four of these riddle.^ are 

given (1—3, 6 of AV.’«): the answers in SS 12. 23 .3- ^S. 8. 3- - - 

pratila of the hymn; the smstteB to the same four “! "PI’'” “ ^',0 

g,ven ,.s t'cUsarL in 8. 3. Vait. 3». »= 1“ P’"*'';"’ !'’Vn 1 6 

all sH in the order .-3, 6, 5, 4 in 3=- =5- T‘“; f"''''" 

■Ihe Gil,, All, 6. 33. tS IT, (omitted in KIl. 30' 7). "'nl ' 1^' ...eublc 

them as ajijndsmyah 'puzales*. They .are riddles rlenvet rom 

and rrtlneral klnEims. Riddle 4: nVell, here ,t ts, 

south; as soon as you touch it it melts (or vantshes: nhat .s .t?) . Ansa 

‘'vf' av —a - SS. ra. 23. = with the ansners 

in 3.‘ The i>r,atll.'a, AS. S. 3- 33- '9, 

handicap'. They^ are three riddles P'"® *[[ , „„5„j„ce, and firm standing, 

typifying the actions of quick atnval, ""'f' '^P ‘The dog’, a '"’hist, 

Riddle .1 ‘Bounoe, he has come (1 n 't?)' “ .%^g, i, has 

it is gone (1 svliat is it?)'. Ansrver; -rhe M 

trodden (: what is it?)’. Auswe?, ^ . e The pratika, AS. 8 3- *3! 

XII. AV. 20. 135. 4, 5 — 'a* 26 t\xt prattgaKJf iri 27. The 

the prafisaras in 24. AD 6 20. 3® comms. 

prailka also. GB. 2. 6. 13. ’ c^eL^ aUo to be a nddle or two with 

designate it as a/tvdda ‘outtalking . , ,« v 

obscene answers (cp. AY. 20. *3 ^ ^ $ 35. 5 ft. •=• Git. 

XIII. AV. 20. 135- “ .X* VAii 1- 28. The .\B.. GB. designate 

2.6. I4»^ The pratika. :^‘a.Midi<rfras\aA'' I'he subject seems 

it as da-anll/ia, the ^ ' i,cated tragmcntanly in the stanzas, but fitting 

to be an interesting ak/iyM^x Brahmana-.. .According to this the Angiras, 
well in to the story as told om.e helped them at a soma- 

ordinatil) inferior and hostile Angiras the white horse of the 

sacrifice. For this >1 ’", is therefore a heuvenl) da^atiut, 
sun as sacrificial tenard. me ^ changed order (st. 

XIV. AV. 20. 135- ” 5. .,,5 pratika, GB. 2. 6. 14. -kS. S 3. a?, ^'t 

13 of AV. also AG. 2. 9. 4)- the comms. designate them 

32.30. TheGll., The passage ismpra.se 

as bhutahadiih (Ab-. 

of Indm. , ^ 12. 24. 2 (sK 4. t. 2. 9* *5 of 

XY. AY. 20. 136 - , anti ,). 'Die pratika, OB. A- *5: 

to »hich are added .\B. 6. 36. 4 ff. KB. 30. 5. Sh-, ""3 .<!>= 

8. 3. 28; Vait. S-}' .ifianasydi (lo in number according to Ab. bb., 
comms. desigpAte the ^ ^ 23. -S, 29; 9. to. 

cp. schol. AS 8* 3- 3 h j anamrJia, and the theme ot tlie jAanasyjh, 
5.6. in the coui-e o /\B. 6. 3G. 3). 5^ T 

•lechery’ than that familiar at the abrj»:fdda . In 

spoken variety o‘ • 7* 



loo 1 I.Tattlr\turu,Gesc!IJchte! I «. Atharva-Vcda a nd Gopatha-Brahmani. 

Rig-vidluna 3. 24. 4 the ahattasyal^ are ledted over a woman who runs about 
wkh other men; cp. Mcydi’s introduction, p. xv, xvn. 

The Xw/Zd/ff-hymns are preceded in the AV. by iht' vrs^/:ap-\\)m.n (126; 
and iblion-ed by tlie dad/iii:ra-i>\ama<i (iJ7- 3 ff-)f esactly as in the Rrahmanas 
and Sutras. Their preservation is therefore due to the presence in the ^astra- 
hantha (book 20) of lire hymnal material recited primarily in the RV. schools 
on t)ie sixth da)- of tJre prsfhyasadaha^ a sacrificial week of six days belonging 
to the so-called a/ibia-sacrifices, lasting from 2 to 1 2 days. Tlie prsl/iyasa 4 ‘ifia 
is a part of the dvadaidha**^ Tiie entire series of hymns in question, tlie 
so-called idpas ‘works of art’ (AB. 6. 27 ff) bear a popular character. As 
regards the /f’»^«/(i/a-pieces, their presence in the ritual is taken with the 
utmost seriousness by the ritualists, though not without apologies for their 
disgusting, foolish, and obscene character. Tims G15. 2- 6, 12 etymologizes upon 
Kunidpa as hiUitam ..,yat tapati ‘loathsome and offensive’, and the nonsense 
of the aitaiapraldpa is whitewashed by liturgic legends (see above). The 
entire material bears the impress of a fossil in the midst of an honest serious 
performance: it Is something which must have stood outside in a prehistoric 
period of the sacrifice, being connected with it at first by looser, more accid- 
ental ties, until the rigid formalism of which the existing texts are the final 
expression had placed e\er>llMng upon the same footing of sanctity. The 
nursery-charade and tlje so»g of the brothel cannot reasonably^be supposed 
to have found its way into the Srauta-nlual in any other w’ay. Traces of 
such extra-Dtahmanical domgs occur in connection witli many other Srauta- 
sacrifices, notably the rdjasuya, aivamedha, and pu) u}amedfia*^\ they» as 
indeed most other sacnfices, mark the presence of popular customs and 
festivities encrusted within Bnahmanical solemnities. One source of the more 
natural human element m the sacrifice was unquestionably the dahind, the 
priests’ reward. The ddnastuht even m the RV, betray the exhilarated frame 
of mind of those that received the daltsujd. 'fhe exaggerated statements of 
gifts received were not only intended to stimulate future givers, but mark the 
ivoie of festivity. Closely related to the ddnasUtUs are the^dMrt ndraSami^ah', 
or gdihdh and nardiamsyah, ‘stanzas which sing tlie praises of generous men’, 
in the Drahmanas and Sutras**. Tlicy sing them so loudly that the texts in 
their soberer moments decry them as anr/a;« Mies’ (K5. 14. 1 5), and y<TWfr/2"' 
‘pollution’ (Til. I. 3. 2. 6)**. In the last-mentioned place the reciter of the 
^dthd ridrdiamst, and the man drunk with surd are placed on the same level: 
they are polluted, their g^fts must not be accepted. Now the merry and 
unsavory literature of the >lo«/.r/«-variety is likely to have been associated 
wiih ddnastuti, ndrusamt, and (see already RV.i. 126, and S.t.SolT.), 

just as the obscene pr-actices — in part to be sure symbolic — of the 
aivamedha follow upon the great and festive slaughter of cattle customary 
on that occasion. And it is noteworthy tiiat both aivamedha and purw^a- 
medha are the special repositories of «ar<7/<7»/ja-llterat»re’^ 

The danaztuUs and ndrdiamsls are therefore one of the more hilarious 
elements which tended to bridge over from the solemn acts of the sacrifice 
to what for lack of a belter term we might call a kind of htnrgic ‘saukneipe’. 
Plainly speaking, the bestowal of the daksind in many instances must have 
lead to gormandizing and drunkenness, and these were probably in turn 
followed •— the practice rs not entirely unknown in our days — by shallow 
witticisms, by obscene talk, and worse. This we must not imagine to have taken 
place uninterruptedly without sporadic recolletUon of the relK-ious character of 
the event (cp. tlie theosophic and cosmogonic hrahmodya at the aivamedha)^'-, 
m the mam however socul joHificaiioo was the motive, until, m the course of die 



102 n.LlTrERATURU. GV-SCUICUTE. IB. AtHARVA-VeDA and Gor ATl fA-I^RAr^fANV^. 

Upani?ad; indeed one passage, GB. i. i. 16—30. practically identical with 
the Franou (Pranava) Upani^ad in ANQurriL-Dui’ERUON’s Latin translaUon ol 
the Persian Oupnekhat; another, Glk i. i- 3^“3 ^j itself claims the title o 
Upanisad (1.1.38, end); see 8§i8 and 68fr. Nor are they presented in accord 
w ith and in the order of the sacrifice 0 ajiiakrarna) either in Vait. or any other 
Srauta-text. The ultara, on the other hand, follows in the main the order of 
Vait. by compiling from xatious sources a fairly connected Br3hmana to 
accompany the action of VaiL ITtis is attended inevitably by Atharvanic 
adaptations, sporadic, hap-hazard, and imperfect, both as regards subject- 
matter and mantras: the scrappy character of the product is evident on the 
surface. In ‘a general nay the ultara m its relation to Vait. may be compared 
with the relation of the first nine books of SB. to the original nucleus of the 
VS. (books 1— iS); the pfirva being comparable with (as it is to some extent 
dependent upon) the remaining five books of SB.J Both parts, however, are 
very late productions, one cannot say from how recent a century; both parts 
were composed after Vait., resting upon a most slender basis of ancient Athar- 
vanic tradition: the ultara, moreover, leaves the impression of a date still later 
than the purva. Thus the usual chronological relations in the redaction of 
Brahmana, Srauta-sutra, and Grhya-sfitra are turned about in, the Atharvan: the 
KauSlka (Grhya-sutra) was composed before the VaitSna (Srauta-sutra)*, the 
Vaitana before die Gil , — the cone is inverted and balances upon a mere point 
of genuine Atharvanic tradition as f.ir as both Vait. and GB. are concerned. 

S O5. The Uttara-Br ahmanx — 'llie history of this production is well 
illustrated by its treatment of the cAturmAsyani, or seasonal offerings, sections 
2. I. 19— 2O ofGB. These are purloined with slight modifications from KB., 
being its fifth book m toto. The Vait treats this subject in 8. 8—9. 27, and 
there are, of course, conespondcnces between it and GB., due to the sameness 
of the subject. I'lius ^''a^t. S. 8 is literally identical with the opening of GB- 
2. I. 19. The GB. does not mention the mantras of Vait., e.\cept that it 
works in the two formula^ pm stadhp, and, cstu SfadM (Vait 9. zt), in 
2. I. 24. Tlie adaptation is most superficial; at any rate there can be no 
question tint this part of GB was composed subsequently to both Vait. and 
KB. K\en more characteristic is the ire.itraent of the (soma-sacrifice), 

GB. 2. 5. 1—5. This is compiled from two sources, AB. 4. 5 and 6, and 
KB 17- 7 — 9i baldly put down, one after anotlier, witliout any attempt to 
harmonize. Thus tlie three paryayas (periods) of the atir&tra are explained 
twice as typifying tlie successive expubion of the Asuras from the three 
periods of the night, once in the words of AB. 4. 5, ihe second time in the 
words of KB. 17. S. Very striking, too, is GB. 2. 3. 1 1, illustrating in the 
course of the agnUjorna the passage VaiL 2i. 3. 4; the Brahmana is 
copied with slight alterations fromKB.ir.4 and 5; the compiler is not even 
at pains to expunge the expression, tti ha smaha kausitakih, 'which of itself 
betrays its origin Indeed throughout the text the Atharv.avedin borroiis the 
Rishis along with the passages in which they figure, .\gain, cases of un- 
disguised pilfering are the three kdmyetfayah, GB. 2.1. 13— 15, which reproduce 
almost verbatim MS. a. x. iq, and the statement about the arndkaryit, GB. 
2. 1. 6, taken from MS. i. 4. 6 (p.. 54, 1. 3 ff.). These are specimen cases; the 
uttara exploits especially AB. and KB., but other Braiimanas, SB., TS., MS., 
and even PB , are not exempt from depredation. 

Stated numerically, about 80 of tlie X23 sections of the uttara owe their 
materials either entirely or largely to older texts, as far as is known now. 
Doubtless future search will reveal still other instances of the dependence of 
GB., since there ate at present no regular channels for investigations of this 



IV. Gopa tha-Br.\hmana. — A. Reiationto A.-V. and V^dic Literaiuri:. 103 

kind. The correspondences stated in the order of the nttara are: 3.1. i . 

KB 6. ir — 2. I. 3 (l:itter half): KB. 6. 14 (beginning); - 2. i. 4- 
, ^ /■ f, ^ — 2. I. 9, very similar to Tb. 

60: — 2. I. 6: MS. I. 4. o (p. 54* ^ 3**di ■» s 

-If ^ ^ f ^ 

6. u. 6(f., ami 6. 12. 6(1.; — 2. 3- 3- S ». ± , ' 

half): AE.7.33.5fr-; - 3- 7 . «= 2. 3. ‘.V-Jq; 

AB. 3. 13; — 2. 3- n- 4, SJ 34; — 2.4. 5 = 

MS. 4. 8. 3; — 2. 3. 30, 21: AB. 3- -3> - •>* , c. tS t t- S. off; — 

AB. 6. 3. S-:x; - =. 4. 6: KB. tS. 7. 8; - , 5I.S; 

2. 4. 9: TS. 3. 3. 8. 4ff.J - =• 4. 7-9; - 2. s. 6: SB. 12. 

— 2. 5. 1—3: AB. 4- 5«. ~ 5-4 5- 7g. 7. _ 5. n: 

S. 3. I, =; — 2. 5. 7 : SB. 12. S. 3- =3— »S, ^ -• 5^ _ ^ 6 . T, - 

AB. 6. .7. X, 2, ami 6. S; — S' „ ■inuoduced by a seatcnce from 

2. 5. 14: AB. 6. S; — 2. s. is: AB. 6. 18. _ fmalty of the 

' AD 6. 17. 2, and ending in a P“f ^>5';/'°™ half (2. 6. 6, and 

16 sections of the si.xth prapSthaka al ev p . jg^t upon the fifth and 
the first half of 2. 6. 7) t^te ^^^rely or largel> 

especially the sixth book of Aik f < originality. Thus OB. 

of the materials in the uttara that _.,i,jn<» but Brtthmanized extr.acts 

2. I. ihi 2. 9; nnd 2. 13 are "" 3 '’, 6 . 15-17. 

from Yait. itself, respectively, n '• GB. which suggest the super- 

other verbal correspondences ^ly o„t of the sQlras of Vait. Again, 

ficial creation of Brahmanvmatter the wj/rnr of the three 

tpiite a considerable number of secti^ , ^ I l,ltie 

daily (2. 3. t3-%5; /• 4. ^ o.er slightly into Jr 'hmm 

more than the statements of tils Rv .. .,^ 24 , As. ?• 4 >5- 

form; cp.. e. g. GB. 3. 4 *-3 ^'or of GB nmH <loubtless narroiv 

sestig.ations on the part of • ,he uttara to a minimum. 

«ru,n,y 

?ext^S^o some estent the A a^L ^ stated m ^ 

Thu original m.antras of ' f ’ j;;.;j,raula Hie Brihrnana •; not con.isteat 

frequent!? cited m the 3 P’: Vnd T 

in these matters- the ^ \ ,6, are ciletl h' pralik-a. G > - • j 4^ 

rtr s:! 

■cb2:':m=s;'io. .. . .. r™p»-7 -»■ 

starts with an e'^P 



(Cl II.UiTii Mrra'.Oi-' incim- ij. AiiukvaA 


cf t'.H* tamuctf <'cti;a!iifn tn 


lU 


to o:.c »-f ilK-*.- «1 on the tlcfrt*.% cf . _ 

-^Kth van br lortfctr-l only l»y «bf i;'irr''2:uno'i(l. Qi. 

ihi (Tiivn twKl.fv in r. i. ij; s. <1, »4. »?• .I 9.. -I’y" 

un^inabn of t'.r nvan ». a cmam «fc«lcin nxr.-.n'‘t ion" lav «.iriiuo 

of the }l:.sh’nso'v -f^hkh it hit Lorrunf}!; n a ’'mlH-lif" i-oine ■— thuuj: i I') 
no infant sll -- of Oicir My.ar< to Athanan-c ior.Jitlo-is ‘>'>'1. above all, 
in in no ^inall inea uro the jmnirn cil'*'! »n tlic^c Uratunmas J-) 

ih'i'c in \o;:oc vvith tie Athanam ’Jims in s. l. l. a borfowt-d 

fiuin KK 6 . 13 , the fonn-ila, a/.jn i' tl\an^c<l rt ,^.■'1 

tKaut. ; 7; t37. 3'»)j in the ‘(.•vr'lri:cnd. 'IS.,;. 5. i. J, 

the till. 3 3 »3 osn-ts, /jjnJ/ r.}nV/<» ltah *.3 hcraiKC its idc.-il of 

.1 l!raliman-pnci.t i^ a Illip^vanpitovid. Other Atlap'atiutis of Oiu s<irt, .it 
iju.ie deter, umre often saperhcitl and bunRlmy, i\iU appear in U'c anal)i>!i 
of the text that ii to follow. 

S fiC The I’urtn-llrrihmanft. — ‘Ihc nioit conspicuous feature of the 
first port of the OH. i> that it docs not follow at .ill the order {^.ip'akrarr.a) 
of the Valt-, nor ii its objert in the main the fllu'-lration of the norm.il hinds 
of Sraut.vsacrifice5. It ii, to bepn wiih.^ aUo a !.iri:e borrower, but the source 
dr.ii\n upon is .ihno't e\cVid\ely the SatapaUi.vlir.‘ihm.nji (boohs it and 12). 
I'tom the bejjlnrt’ng of the fourth prap.’iOfsha through to t. 5. 25 the text 
seetns to be nothing but a «ecoudnr)' tnouthing over of a consideniMe part of 
the t2''‘book of Sit. 'Ihe subject is a mystic, tlicosojihic treatment of the 
tafira of li’.c scar and odier forms of the som.-x-s.icrifice. '/bough tliere is 
some degree of independence on t1 c p.irt of GH., both in the wording, and 
in on occi«tonal mantr.i, there catj be m this p.irt no question of independent 
At)j3rv.in school tradition; nor can the subject as irp.ited by both texts be 
Referred to a common earher «oufcc. The G/i. purloins the materwls of the 
SIJ quite wndisgmscdly , occiMon.iU) only it infuses into them those special 
Atharv.mic traits uhicli th.it text a/Tects the prabe of the fourth Veda, tlie 
mention of Aiharvan, Ahgir.is, P.hrgu, etc.; sec, c. g., Gil. t.^. S4; 5. to, 11, 
15,19, 'J1)e dependence in general of the Vail, uponj the school of the 
white YV. ensures a cert.im correspondence with the treatment of the sjftra 
in Yait^i— 34; but this is no more m the nature of close companionship 
th.m h the case in the relation of Sit. 12 to its Satphia (VS.). Aside from 
this, only tlie eleventh booh of SH. .and a section or two of tlie AB, have . 
been exploited by GB.: 1. 3. 2: AB. 5. 32. 3 ff.; — 1. 3. 3; aB. 5. 32. 5— 
33- 4;,— t. 3. 4: AB. 5. 31. Iff.; -- I. 3,6—10: SB. ti. 4. 1; — t. 3. n, 
12: SB. It. s. 3- t— 7; — >• 3 - »3» *4? SB. ri. 5. 3. S ff.; — 1, 3. i.<l: AB. 

?. I. lb 

'fhe last liiree sections of the pflrva are metrical, and not far removed 
from the type of ParUijtt; they are, apparently, not from one and the same 
hand. They do. not bear upon the rndnidual acts of the ritu.al, but seem 
to be a statement of the iiosilion and beliefs of the Atharvans in regard to 
the general .aspects of Vcdic lore and sacrifice, with the special purpose of 
defining and glorifying the AV. This, indeed, is the le.ading thetnc of the 
prin.i as a whole; to tins it .adheres throughout the considerable v.ariety of 
subjecU which arc handled in the first three prap.ltimk.is, whether they are 
cosmogome.s sjieculations in Uiianijad style, comments on sacrificial details, 
grammalic.ll disquisitions (1. r. 24—28), or even statements in the m.inner of 
th. Car.i?:ivjnlu (j. i. 29). I'o caiij- to tho front the AV, .tnd the foorth 
priest (the so^a led Brahman), »ho most be an Athatv.ilngitQsiJ, ami to point 
to Mute ami thscomfitute in all holy concerns managed ivithoul t)ie fourtli 
Veda, is beyond question tbn otiginal motive nnderlying the production of 



A.Rr^°-«- TOA.A^ANDYrDicl.rn:K v™c^J^ 

t!ie Atharvan Brahnnana. Every tetrad is a tenable metres 

or authors. Whether it be the fo m rioms 7. . 

(often); the sacred syllable cm, divided artiOmlly m |,„ven and sun; 

the cosmic tetrad-^, earth and fire; atmosphw tetrads lihe speech, 

moon and iiaters '(,• -■ =9, et tt'-); to t» 

breath, sight, and tnmd'(i. 2. , .aturzeda, as stated most 

show the inherent need and primordiality of tl ^ ^ 

formally i. i. 16. Occasionally, yet quite ^iia y • -• ’ ^tharvanic 

also 1.7.7 and ..d-d), the “P“7fa7d^ 

pentad by dividing the AV. into two, lanta > author as to 

(see p. S). These two -assume such , he Adrian, >»ii/ 

be furnished each aMth an independent fravT (bhith, h/mvab, 

for the Ahgiras: between these two ^ --..i- tjons are carried on 

na.^) are placed for protection 0:1//) • for ccitn^pddah 

to this end" .a, when GB. r. 4- =4 "frassu^ms the abovc-ment- 

palavah in SB. 12. 2. 2. 20, or when OU-^ • 5 ^ ^jg^rly associates 

ioned five Vedas for three in SR 12- 3- 3* - • universal religion 

the AV: and its functionaries with brahma 'i' . ^ theologian {^$arvavt<i) 

(sm.vi,id). .and il«i!i«<nti the sense of S. XUI, 

may be gathered from i. 2. »8; 5-itt 5» 

above, S 33. ... z,..™ 41 , a ultara, impresses one with a 

■ntough the ptlrva, in (■“'"'otion from t 5utjj!.,.n,utt=r; thougli it 

certain elemental, energetic mdependence m yl ^ ,t joes 

does not borrow as much and as b ■ ,. j uny other Atli-arvan text; 

notmahe it its business to follow “"‘'“Xhon, and also presupposes 
yet it is without nuestion an '“ee£mo'y f ^u,-. in ro booksh Not are 
Kaus. and -Vait., as well as the , f on comp-aring, e. E*. 

ils materials at all from the same hand as j af , , ^6-30, the 

the opening cosmogony, . .■ t-'S. f “„„oiis the god “"f 
so called rtanava-upamsad. Sec ion 1.^ Dosapati, ' 

I’autrinic. Section 1. 1. aS mentions ' ^ reminding us of If“smi “ 

. as a Rishi .at the b'6m"“e ?' J tctos 1 =3- = ! “’"'T/orana’ 

name of the Buddhist desil «"» • , the nature of a,f-amn.a 

ic,al matters of an o^ that the piir'-t tame abet Viil., just 

lyuha, certainly very late. B suited dcfmitel) and mo ni f‘ , 

.as V.a,t ,s later than Kaus.. lan be suwi holy), the other 

7ah. ; .7 two classes of “"'TTd I 

Afigir-asic (terrible, ®?rcery-P a having been stated, aus. ^ 

Kaub, is catalogued 111 full, tthadit'Atr atharvanibhtli . ■ *■ 

merely alluded to with thf " un,! Vait. behind it, is conicn . ...q.iIj 

,n its:t,ir„, hating both ...v.eiraitM.r e« hes would 

“llWwe' bu.'fr.h- mton« .0 J^a'ls'^ail . i. W 

Sn;\s'7arT .h7 -irSe "A ,ten 

p-ida, .i.wiii-p.yd'iV' s (u„J) quotes ‘’f s'„'b,ecl- 

7 n^aiV aSe ^™m g-f f7r.Tr4"to ?s. 

S.?r"to .77inV,ogy: as wben;^^ 

.:S7^77-iia; 7:3 

the- taiierv of u„-e;.aw„. c-xM bulf) conlam, an Atharf 

thought m Vait. =4- ao; O' ' - 



lofi II. LlTJEKATl'RU.GESaiiaiTr. IB.ATMAKVA-VEnAANnGorATIIA-BRSl!\IANA. 

anic legend clearly built upon VaiL 5. xo, and, more remotely, upon Kaus. 
S and p. 

Yet tbe pQrva is not devoid of a certain originality. The cosmogony, 
I. I. I — 15; the Pranava-Upani^ad, i. i, 16 — 30; the Gayatrl-Upanijad, i. i. 
31 — 38; the sections on the duties of the Ilrahmaclrin (rubricating AV. n. 5) 
in 1- 2- I — p; Uie Brahmana of the ‘fire-footed horse’ at the a,!;yi}'d(f/!aTta in 
r. 2. 18 — 21, with quite a number of original words at the end of i. 2. 21; 
and other sections seem to represent a fonn of scholastic activity unknown 
elsenhere in tliis precise form. Tlie list of subsidiary nTitings in i. 2. ro 
(i. 2. 9 of the edition), though again late in character, does not occur else- 
where in this arrangement and extent**. A somewhat independent statement 
of the yajHakrCKia is presented in 1, 5. 7. No Vedic text is wanting in 
independent mantras and formulas, or fails to introduce independent variants 
into such as are paralleled by other texts. In this regard the purvais much 
like other Brahmanas: i. r. 9 contains a mantra of Upanijad-character 
ha redai), repeated with variants by Sayana in his introduction to the AY., 
p. 5, but otherwise unknown. In *-i.39 the pratika, apo ^arbhamjanayantlh, 
seems to be a version (PaippaUda^) of AV. 4. 2. 8. In i. s. 7 an expiatory 
mantra, recited by llrahmaclrins m case they happen to step upon a burial- 
ground, is added to other //•«i>-tf/f/V/'<t-stanzas w-)iich GB shares with Vait. 
12. 8, 9. At the end of the same section (1.2. 7) AV, 11. 5. 23 in its Pafppa- 
llda form is presented in sakalapdfhn-, similarly the mantra, catv&ri 
(for RV. 4.58 3, et al), in 1.2.17**. I" i- 2- 9 the mantra, antarikse 

paihibhir etc., shows marked variants as compared wnth its parallel, RV. ro. 
1O8. 3; the formulas in i. 3. 13. do not occur in Vait., and differ from those 
in the corresporiding passage, SB. 11. 5. 3. 8 ff.; , the two stanzas at the end 
of 1. 5. 5 also present variants as compared with SB. 1 2. 3. 2. 7—8, occurring 
nowhere else, Above all, the typical mantras at the three daily soma-offerings 
{i^eno 'rt ^etc.) in i. 5. 12 differ not only from thos? of the corresponding 
passage, $11,12,3.4.3—5, but also from those of the Saunakvya-samhita (AV. 
6. 48), and, as far as known, from all other versions of these formulas’*. 
And throughout the text, aside from the three metrical chapters 1.3.23—25. 
there are siokas and other metrical passages so clearly Atharvanic in 
character that they may not be expected to turn up in older teats fe. g. 
I. I. 32, end; cp. 2. 2. 5); their ParBista-character and their 'originality are 
equally obvious. 

The following brief account of the contents of the GB. follows the text 
section by section. Ihe more or less original themes of the text are dealt 
with at greater length; the parts which are extracted with or without modi- 
fications and adaptations from other Btaimanas are dealt with very lightly: 
frequently a mere reference to the source from which /the GB. has derived 
its material was found sufficient. 


The GopalhaUrahmana of the Aiharva Ve4a. Edtted Jjy RAJE^nRAIJt£.A ^flTAV 
and ll ARACANDRA A IDA ABUticANA, Calcutta 1872. Critical remarks on the text of 
this edition; Ow Bohtu-vgk, JJKSflAV., April. iSg'^. P Jaff. of the reprmt; 
liLooMmiD, J<\OS. XIX, P- r ff. ^e first account of the contents and character 
^ P-«S-45S; cp-Coi-rBRooKsnssajs. 

.V. *^« followng two paragraphs are hised on the author’s article on 

-T. . ~ * *“1^ goptilhah iatatratatha^amK) hfahmanam 

.m, A, cinrav>0h.; A h. P.tiS'4'). 

The COM.™ . toKl or. ml, ,, p„p,„b*., - j Cp. «l->. 

p. nS .0.1 I301t _ , Bi.oomri.1.. JAOS. XI. p. 375 c j nii.o,p,,N„l Rlwal. 
Lmemur. p. 35 il- — S ^otc also the possone beginnin,; uitb, W forf.I to../... 
GR. I. I. 14, which seems bonooed from Chand. Up. 4 17. 7; and GR. 1. $■ U 



IV. TllE Gopatiia-BrIiimana, — B, CONTTNTS OFTIir. rOKVAJiK'll'lA!'*' '»7 

,n,l - Kan!. 94 3 . 4 - - ‘ '"S’ M 

the Atliarvaiis as £<'/fdrafi, sec GH. I- I. 13 * — / ’"i Vote 

allude in a cloudy way to the finished ^ashcuasjs 1 m i. 2 9 

the contrast between rfd'n mandahiA (RV.) and ‘ 5) 

That the late CaratiavyOha-passage, I. 1 . 29. presents _ < I • • ^ 

as the initial stansa of the AV. docs not tn.Utate t da- sec p 14 The 

belongs to the school of Saimaha, rather th^ -mAal vU- see below. — » Windiscii. 
Gll. is, however, not unacquainted with th_e PaijyalKU. personification of the 
r.uddha unil Mara, p. 151. ^P* XI. 387. — Cp. 

evil principle, ” Cp. similar lists in 

for other cases of this kind, J.VOS. XI?G 10, - T)j;r A\'. m Kaschmir 

t. t 10 21. 2t. 24; 3 . 3. Cp. also 2 2 6 — " Cp. ‘'OT'Vrri vvr i fT 
p. 23 note 6\n p. U3. - lJte.oMi.FU>. JAGS XV I. . (T- 

11. CONTEN-IS OF THE TORVA-BR.MI'IANA 

SO 3 . F.rat PraprUhAka: 4 .. to aealTHfco?,;! 

in Upanijad manner’. — The lonel) Bra the Hnhma’s brow; 

god By means of /a/xtt sweat (st^/a) w j knowledge (sinrdii), 

tliR it pnaaingly ’ ^ ^ Throogh contmueil 

alluding perliapu in Hus way to , , „ J ii,al,ni.Vs h.-ur'SocVet> 

more s«ual breaks in stre.ams create 

on account of nhich tlie Ilralima l’t°Pt>ses diatn of more nr 

{J>.vta\h\Cimi), and obtain {ii/syaint) , ...,^,5 punning "idi 

less irrelevant additional puns the yf the Ailnrvan throughout, 

.l/ydmf) Lakes place. »aters he beholds his onn 

just as its divinity is the moon* t-b nrahnu belabors the waters 

reilection; lus seed falls into the .table otcan, .and the sweet 

until they are divided into two, the sat dried ii]! (rtMvjd/'O. 

waters. Tlie hitter being heated, the 'e lirahma vanishes, Bhrgu 

lo, we have the Atharvamc sage inirgn i3 (V:,t.i) 

starts after tt in various ® \ these waters Therefore that 

telK him to look for T .^1 Hrahnn (4> Brahma ehborates 

b.c,,mo AHuarvan and . Arc.,, f 

.\lharv.m into lo Atharaan K ’ r-J!/, ./..lAft.r. cti (.rnibolirmg the -o 
Atharvana .\r.eyas, rcspettncly ' ..m, rrom the latter the 

i>ook, of the AV)<. From can he unde to asiume 

svllable cm which (in the roamier oi ii i treation oftheAedi 

the function and airluc ol "« entire „|,o.e tinal oiiicome i, 

of Atliarvan come, the regilkition J ri„/i.r,r. c g. Ri.C ^da 

the t,a,7 riVvi. nlth its m the sweet -e .iters produced 

earth, .\gnt, .and ( 61 . Jus s.iline « iter. b\ sJctessise 

Hhrgu ai'id in tlK sequel Athat'an. ls,„„/.Aol. 

cosmogonic acts (with I’""®' ' „,,rt,ng from the liiiihs iu't,a') ol Mrtiii 
Vanin?, Mttyu (Mucy-'). uml b) „,u,ed». The otigm ot An,mras 

their sap (nnu) the dual ° ?eat from Varuna who is taken here 

from the bitter waters of the em (n, u ' Pta». and 

wathoiit doubt in his forth the temble side of the Anpr.rt.a- 

fin.allj fromMttjai, “ '"*t„lciourAlIia<van and .\thart ana-\ eda, densu 
Veda in contrast watli the au p particokatly the sabstitiitc ol 

abose tlirough Dhrgu. J“,S)dC.-rtrtU« (7I. From the sage Augiras he 

Atharsam: Mcirt »■&'««* - »"s (rom them . o .Angirasa .Arsei as, the 
llrahma elaborates =0 Anj- . J® 5 ,S_ 3, 4, 3, 6, and 7 era* Th , 

latter correkated respeeti.ely wu ^ „„ml.er,, and wby 

again allude, to the diaske.ia.is o 



lof) II. I.ITrtUATURU. Gr-SCHICUTE, II’.. ATHARVA-VF.nAAKDG0PA'niA*I5RSllMANA. 


this order? From the Ah^Irasa-Veda comes the word janat which is the 
tyiVirti of thatVed.a5 (8). 'llns is followed by an especial panegyric of the 
Ahgirasah, illustrated by a mantra of independent character"’. (9). Brahma 
next elaborates from the six directions other Vedas and from lliese 
the 7yd/i_r{ts 1 sar/tjvfdn and vrdhttt\ piidcaveda and karat', asuraveJa 
and guhat', itihSsaveda and mahai-, furanaveda and tad""^ (10). From the 
near and distant regions lie extracts Jam, 'the high syllable’, urdinam 
aksaram, with allusion, doubtless,’ to the Janta-veda (n). Brahma continues 
to create the moon, stars, plants and trees, and from ‘his minor breaths the 
many other gods’, winding up with the ‘threefold, seven-stringed sacrifice 
consisting of a i forms’. The text illustrates the latter by citing a pada from 
the Paippalada-hymn given In full Vait 10. 17, and by referring to the sloka- 
chapter, 011.1.5.25,(12). Brahma then institutes a sacrifice choosing certain 
divinities as special Srauta-priests'*. Oindramds the divinity of the AV. figures 
as Brahman-priest, the Atharvangirasah as a special variety of Brahmans, 
called ^optarali. Prajapati recommends that abundant fees be given to such 
priests lest there be injury to the rri-i;) the sacrificer, and his offspring (i3)- 


Finally the functions of the Brahman-priest (and the sopiaraJi) as curers 
{samdhand) of the flaus of the sacrifice {vinstd) are defined'^ (14,15). The 
entire cosmogony is original in that if establishes the Atlnrvan as the pitot 
about A\hich the creative acts revolve, and in leading- up dexterously to the 
presumably main object of a Brahmana of the AV.; the exaltation of the 
functions of the Brahman-priest who is, of course, understood to be an 
Atharvavedln. 

» Cp. Bril An Up. 5. 4 — * CD. i. 1. 7 (ljis\ 2. ai (bir); 3 >9/ 

4 23, and similarly AD. 3. 33. 6; 7. 30. 4; IB. 1. 5. 9. 2, etc. -• i CD. I. I. 20. 

29. 39; *• 23; 3- '41 S' *S. *9- The conception reaches back to the Samhitt 

itself, AV. 2. 22 and 231 see 3 45, — 4 Cp AV. 19. 22 nnd 23, and see $ Si- — 

5 The same subject is treated m an expanded form in the second cosmogony, 

1. X. 17— X9,— 0 This etymology occurs also JBU. 2. li. 9,— 7 BFRO^lCNn, 
III. 144; Gelonfr, Ved. Stud. II. 292. — * Cp. IS. XTII. 433. 9 /anot os the 

of the Aiigirasa-Veda is contrasted with em of the Alharv ana* Veda also In 
GD. I. I. 205 2 24} 3 3} 2. 2. 14. Neither Kautika nor YaitSna brine; out any 
such diiiinction, jaxal ^itxnz the general .Mhwanic Viakrtu see the indexes to the 
editions, p. 3S1 (Kaiin and p.95 (Vait). Tor the origin of ,n?tae cp. RV, 2. zr. 4; 
4 40. 2 (cp also 3- V*- 4). — Quoted with variants by Sayaiix in the intro- 
duction to the AV., p. 5. — u Cp. KauJ. 91. 10 If. — n Emend in, the text, 
aimaiS, adhvar^ava to camasadkvafyova. — rj Cp. KauJ. 9. 5 If The passage in 
GB. I. I. 14, tad ^atha Jaxantna etc, is borrowed from Chlnd Up. 4 17. 7; it i» 
alluded to a second time in GB i. 3. 3, 


S 68. First PrApSIbaka: i. i. 16 — jo. The Pr.^n^va-Upaniy-'id, 
being a cosmogonic account deriving creation from the om. — In 
the Persian translation of fifty Upanisads, the so-called Oupnekhat, which was 
made in 1656 for the Sultan Mohammed Dtra Shukoh in the city ofDelhi, 
and which was afterwards (1801 — s) translated by Anquetil Dui’irron into 
Latin, the Pranou figures as the 48* Upanisad of the collection'. Weufu, 
after erroneously identifying the Pranou with the Prlna and Pranagnihotra 
Upani§ads (IS. I. 249. 286), soon recognized its proper title to be Pranava 
(IS. II. 394. 396; IB. 326)' prKented an account of it, condensed from 
Anquetb.’s Latin translation (IS. IX 49 ff.). Manuscripts of an independent 
Pranava-Upaniyad are reported in the catalogues*, but have not up to date 
come into (he hands of students of (he Upanijads. Thus Deusscn in liis 
recent translation of the Upanhads (Sechzig Upanishad's, p. 858 ff.) felt com- 
pelled to present the Pranou in a German translation from AKQurni.’s Perso- 
I,.atin version, without, as he thought, having access to ■' ’ ‘ ''Ti^inal. 

Yet the Sanskrit text of the Praiyava has nnconsciousli ‘ ^ of 



IV. The Gup,lrn.\-Ilr,JiiM*KA. — 11. Oisti sts of the Tueva-IIkUimana. log 


IndoIogisU for more llutt :$ years: it is the part of the Gil. here before us. 
A comparison of Gil. r. t. 16—30 with DtlKsrH's traiislalion shows that l ie 
differences between tlie two versions are unimportant: they are likely to be 
due to the blending of text and commentary m the Persian version, as well 
as to the peculiar tertiary character of DEUssts’s final result In its form as 
an Independent Upanijad the Pranava is clividetl into tiiree lirAhinanas, em- 
bracing respectively sections 16—22; section 23; and sections 24— 3 © 01 
GB. A quick survey of its contents and a comparison witii OJi. may ue 
gotten with the help of DrusstN’s Uanslation. 

This part of Gil. represents obviously »» 
creation by a different writer. It is probably of later da c la 

cosmogony, and ronceived under different impulses: Tim 

creates Ilrahma (iiiasc.) upon a lotus-leaf. Hie .J, ],e 

petcehes the s,llahle f '»? ''r\|.Sr.rTeeon. bSha“ and .l:: 
perceives the waters and moisture*, with the se . niutiect^ 

luminaries' (t6). From the three vocalic jnofa® , , c) are next 

a chain of cosmic, liturgic, and psycho-physiol tria ( | • • ' . j 

derived: earth, atmosphere, heaven; fire (with p an s Til-Z 

RV., YV., SV.i Un.lihrM, -v-h cp. r. t. ni 

Trom iis first consonantal inora n> are deme a , I 

AV., ... itself (, e,„ /// f'— e 4 S mora the 

cp. I. 2. S4), anuiful'/i, etc. (eo)- Ptom ^ from the cor- 

tUfhtsa'puriiua and other hter.ary v.arieties, j,. and the other 

responding account in tiie first rsmeng, and dancing, the 

Atharvanie rjd/irt/r (. r. ro); CoTy the same elunae 

metre Ir/iai!) etc. (at), Ihe second cosmog y^^ Atharv.amc Brahman-priest 
as the fir^t, the glorification of the dut a)l ,ts defects OHustrated 

v-ho heals with the cm before and auc n,f,ed chapter winds up with 

by AV. 10. 8. 5, and 9. to. t8>. Ihe times grants all wishes 

a hocus pocus according to of the Pranava. 'Ihe remaining 

(J3). At this point ends the first ‘secondary. In BrShmana manner 

chapters of the <7//;-cosmogony seem fc ^my {amdraiKtsaraiu) of the 

a conflict of the gods am! Asuras - narrated, the Asuras are victorious 
V.asordlurxs (Anqiiltic’s defec iv leadership uf om, the oldest son of 

until the gods turn victors no l,oiy text shall be chanted without 

Brahmx 'Ihe reward ^^i-,,iiows- m /x samnt 

cm. Hence the cm figures t jj^us sayetU a lirahmana-text The AV. 

s.ma, Hoke ilokah, pranaie of the passage from a non- 

is omitted, pointing seemiug'y jhe second Brahmana of the 

Atharvan source® (aj)- ^ -nntam a grammatico-philosophic disquisition on 

Praijava. 'Ihe next chapters independent origin by statements not 

the om which betrays its v«ry section 25. as frequently m the later 

m accord with the re .ascribed to the cm in a manner different 

AV. Upani?.ads, four m * pronunciation, and use of <>w are described 
from section 17- 'ibe "KL a large number of technical grammatical terms*, 
with great detail. about the are posited. In section 25 rr-^nPfti 

In section 24 thirty-s’' to have different pronunciations m the 
- explains the 1**** the RV., etc.). Its four morae are said to be 

four Vedas ^Unudc-oatyirti^nadr.aty.xjanadaatyi^ 

resnectively/'-'T'*'"'?,'! color.' In, icetion 26 the questions asked m 24 are 
each Ims'an '"'bvidu jjefming the term mo'aya the UnkS, MahaMu^ya I, 
answered in Ufion) is introdiiced. In section 28 an evil divinity Dojapati 

p. 96 (KiccUORt" s cci 



, . oirLmrRATOR U.GcscHicHTE. ic. Athacya-V f-ua A-iP 

figures as a Rislii at the begiraimg of the Aat/era-age (see S 66, ' 

The chapter again leads np to the imporance of the 

8) This in tom famishes the occasion for an account of the our 

Vedas and renewed exaltation of the AV. The Vedas, g 

moon, as usual, the divinity of the AV.), metres, and especially then m.M 
mantras are stated: as opening mantra of the AV. the pratika of i.6. ( 

BO druir ali/uslaji) is given’. A renewed mystic exaltation of the mi ser 
as the finale of the ^w-cosmogony (29, 30). , 

« Cp. Max MOLl-rR, SKll \ol. 1, p. Lvuff.— » See p. 21 , note 52-— 
a/Gh snil.am for with B 6 iiTilNCk, BKSGW., Icbruary, ‘890. " 

of ihe reprint. - t Cp.. e. g. Chand. Up. VI. a/T. - 5 Though " 

I. j. 16 , 25 to consist of four morae, Its treatment here presupposes ii\e 
V seems to !ie a transitional consonant deriscd from e =» av, i. e., 
liSilTiixCK, 1. c - 6 Cp. howexer SBll XLII, p. xxxilff. - r See JiaiiTUMix. 

1 . c., P 17. — 8 Sec Ktoiika, Inirodottion, p. xxxvjiiT, and above, p. 14 - 
£69. First Prapalhaka: 1,1.31 — 38, The G5yatrI-Upani?aJ- 
This te.xt describea itself as an Upam^ad, and deals vsith a theme suggests 
of the Sh.ixank Upanisad, though it is not at all like it (cp. DtussiN, • 
p. 867). It has been translated by Raji.si»rai\la Mitra in the introduction 
to his edition of GI 3 ., p 1 9 IT. Jt begins with the legend of a scholastic ne 
between Maudgdl)a and a strange sage Gl'iva Maitre)a, apparently an adiH-ren 
of the Sinia\eda, judging b) the fact that the name Glfiva is mentionen 
in I'B.ss. 15.3, ''H I 4 (i; ChVnd Up. 1.12, and, as far as is known, nowhere 
else. Glava ts defeated because he cannot explain The saiUrl, Uie , 
of 24 s)llablcs mil 12 (tosmicj pairs, whose eye are tlie 
wliich all this IS founded*. Maudg.aija then explains (33) Savitar and tlic 
tawUl as consisting of 12 cosmic pairs {inithwamy. mind and speech; Agi" 
and earth, etr., v inding up with the sacrifice and its fee {yajtia and 
'Ihen follows a inj>jtic correlation of the three padas of tlic^’d^'rf” "dh du'®* 
connic sets of twelve each, fithtit, re, a^;rii, etc., ffntarilfa, yajut, eic* 
each of which has the final outcome of?/<T/tf, religious devotion (rp. 

III the text of the With characteristic mconsUlcncy the AV. itself is 

ignored in tlrs apportionment of the K^yatrl, though it has been assumeu 
that the Ihrf^.ai^trasak are iu eje. The suliject ends with the stateuien, 
/njjOT ainuU ia .. r.am elam te<fdn.im mdfaram snjitrisat/i/ai/aM u/atihadani 
tti irithmaram 

S 70. First Pr.iprithaka i. i. 39 . The acamana-rite, — Ihe frst 

prap ijhika ends with a ch.apler on the deamatia, being llic Ilrahinana-cotnmcn 
. to Van. I. 19, Kaus 3. 4; yo. 22 'Ibe opening pratika, a/<? 
yanfi/t, seems to refer to an mdejjendent (PaippalJda?; version of A\. 4 - 2 ' 
(a/i^ xatsar\ jar.ayaru!})-, other mantras (AV. 19. C9 and 70), foriruilas, ann 
slokas are also cited, llie main pic-cript i*:, lliat the acamatia, the act 0 
rmv.ng the incjjih, shall lake pbee three times; the Alharvan srliool<haracler 
of the chapter appears in the HentKscalion of the tlirec d«i>nanai ''yf 
the t^rastaW.nr.a, djyah/>a;;au, and samsUiitahomdh (IlaUS 3- > 5 ? 

1.4, etc.) Jir.illj the iJhrgvangirasah arc correlated with U.e water? 0 
means of a d.U siir.ifar lo the j.rose-stateinent In J. 1 . 29 - 
15 an inde{<nuem, though late, Alliarsamc lucubration: it ma) 
have been suggested b) the exj.re*vion, dfa nohsi irathjl.iUth, m die pr 
ced.r.g <ecl!OT. * j t . 

_ £ 7 «. Second PrapSlfcaU: i.2.t-9. The duties of the brahma* 
c.ir!n. The Lieme maj Vaxc been sugtrcAted bv die preceding treal.se ■ 
the jJ.T/A., whose ac-jVf’oa is an imporUnt part of the trairurg of ti. 



“iV.Thl Goi-ATlu-MmuSA. - Jl. Co^rrl^^^l• ™ 

l’.iihnun disciple. The ’considerable onginali® 

.fce sun AS a Itiuhmun d.seiple'; it is earned out «.lh con,,dcrame^ 

ifferins markedly from ' om'e tlm se«™ passion,: 

Gthyasulris, The llrahm.ac.-irm w tirgerl to otercome r^ nersonal beauty, 
caste-pride {brahmcii arcaiam), farire, sleep,_ “"get, • ^ antelope, rhe teacher, 
and fragrance, which are correlated respective J clothes liimself 

the boa, the boar, \vater^ m.atdens, trees am P ' r . ^vorks for lii!> 
ia the skin of the antelope ^sleepy, he abstains from sleep 

teacher he obtains the latter s fame; 6 . 5rf<nlrit lie does not injure . 

he obtains the sleep that is in the boa; rf, ?n he hoar; if he does 

any one through anger he obtains the anger j braggadocio that is 

noi perform braggaA tricks in the Sen he obtains the beauty 

in the uater; if he does not look a a naked haying 

that is in the maiden; if he does not sm.^ I sections continue 

cut them, he becomes himself fragrant (i,-h allecories and illustrative 

the duties and rewards of the Brahmacari • et^piation, of certain 

legends (3-6), The next chapter contains manwsmj^ (ApS-P-tS- 

sins to svhich he is liable: two of them ®c _with the GC. The 

but a third {ya/Mam r/Mn/a «tc-) ‘that which has been 

iJrahmacarln is next described -'Aq aV. : 1 . 5.23 ''' PaippalJda- 

set in motion by the gods’ (the sun), refe S yjggd to betake himself to 
sersiont (7), In chapter sages o^f yore. The son of the 

a hermitage, afier the J'* ?,ich AV. ii- 5- sS**” (it- S- *4 “i 

great Rishi Vasi^tha recited ‘'>e order tlut a cold .and a hot 

the vulgata) into the mouth cf a she!,^ the i‘ver Vpas 

spring should issue therefrom. T w name. This was fol 

there arose the first l'«'"“S'/SL'es are^for the most P““ 
by Olliers: the names of the fc ot asceticism it is said t « 

After an account of an L,tow years upon the bMk of the 

hiva performed Ar/ur during d Paiiramc rather than jgj 

Sy (f'Spmffas at 'the primutence 

one stanza {antank^.t /<! entnects- t 2 

Various subjects, i. 

\ariants. n,.,r>athaka concludcO. v f,cial place 

.0-1'' - rn!S 

*»«yuy.:«o).--- A subsidence, u se eiuperotMan- 

o^rr I 

relative position ^ ,l,e 

iS r"irTsp=sW f evliihiting points of contact 
heads,. rtMd, iraddM, . 
with Sn. 3* *• *' 



112 II.LrnERAHJRU.GtSClIiaiTn. ID.ATllARVA-VEDA ASt) GoP^fHA- BRAHMA^A. 

.j_ 2^ — 17, 'Die brahmaudana at the agnyadheya. Here the 

GI5. begins to address itself more directly to the task of acting as a Ih.ihmaua 
to the Vait.(5.4; cp. 6.6j. Not, as might be expected, is this subject treated 
here in relation to the conspicuous hra/imauz/ana-hymns, AV. u.i and 12.3, 
but with the superficial purpose of correlating the aiiuhptiiiya odatia (porridge 
sufficient for four priests) with the Atharxanic^Vedic tetrad,' the string upon , 
which the brahniana harps in and out of season. 'After reciting the familiar 
legend of Aditi who begot die Aditj'os by eating the leavings of tlie 
brahmaudana^, the tatuhptai\a is correlated with the stereotyped cosmic 
and liiurgic tetrads; the AV. comes in for the tetrad, apah, canJramciff, 
brahmateda, and hrahwatva (function of the llrahman-priest). This is^ 
supported by liiurgic explanations of the mantra catvctri in'isas etc. (RV. 
4.5S.3. etal)®, and AV. 10. 10. a. This is followed by the recommendation, 
rather striking in an extreme partisan text, that tlie first fee at the 
sacrifice be gucn to an Atre)a priest, descended from the Atri-sfock, for 
the well-known reason that Atri freed the sun from darkness. The passage 
rubricate^ AV. 13. 2. 12, and seems to illustrate Vait. SJ. 25 (cp. SB. 

4.3 4 2J). 

1. j. iS— 21. The iron-shod horse at tlie agnyadheya. 7— In'** 
hor-ie, one of the main requirements of \\\t <»^)iid/ieya (Wit. 5. jij Ml. 3.1. 

4 16), is produced by Vac from, fnghifnl, gruesome w.-iter.s. 'Die tliree Vedas 
fill to pacify the horse; then Sam)u Atharvana, the /(fw/AprlncIple of the 
iW’d, engages Vicarin, the son of Kabandlu Atharvaoa (cji. i. 2. Jo), who 
prepares the ‘lioly w.-iiei' {{iinixudala) by means of ‘holy’ (dZ/mn and 
•witchcraft' [Ai\i^hasa) jilaiits, and b> the recitation of the appropriate lists of 
immras* (18). 'Ihe account of the horse is intemipleil by an Atliarsanlc 
legend concerned with the origin and nature of ilie llrahnnn-priest and his 
.assistants fcp. Vait 11. 3): the latter arc *taicd to be Sadasy.i, llr3limaii"c- 
chainsin, Totar, ami Agnhllita'* (19). The tc.xi returns to the 'fire-footed' 
horse, cxpliimng wliy it is calleil Agni Vatsxanara in tlie mantra, 
tuViuf t.nhAnaratn (Vait. 6. 7; Glk 1. 2. 21). and to differentiaie it from 
Agtii Jltascdfts, the fire at the oipndd/^.ina itself. 'Ihe Ur.HtmaJ7a (le. llic 
Ilrahmanio religion) earned Agni Vamanara; the l.iUer cre.ated these worlds, 
'Ihen .^gni jatasedas in rivalry determines to exhibit his brilliancy and force, 
VO that the Brahmans should carry him also. JaLavedas exhibits his virtues 
in four dificrcnt ways; the last time 'he sawViraj, the wife of the IJrrihmain', 
.-iml gave her to him. Then the Iltahmapa built Agnt jatavedas; Agni 
V.nisv'in.ara, on die other Jiand, became the horse whicli' frightened the gods, 
and brahman (the llrahman-priesi; calmed it w«)j the aboie-mentivnedAtami, 
and With the five stanras, Vait. 0. i. Next, anent Vait 0. «, the chariot (ra/ba) 
IS mounted It originated bom the tap (rata) of tlie Umhin.-n, went to the 
god>, frightcnetl them, but sundry tianias apjH-.ased it aUo. I'milly reasons 
are given why cows and gold are presented to Uie Brahmans at the Zrf/r/f'- 
prjij a (V.ut. 6. 6). 

1. 2. 22 23. I he sliTilapana-nre, — I'rom the time of ItV. 7. 59. 9 

Uie term s.i>:.ljpana w awochted with the Maruts, being ritualivtically tinted 
from the start. As in \ait. 9. e the term appear# everywhere in connection 
with the Mamu at the JJ^aw/x^i-r-ccreinonies Zone of the seasonal fiacrifices, 
Here, however, it 2ri»ears is the name of a fire connected 
w.th the lr<th>^ara, aad the Aaiii. liMiccfaHy in tie 

Grhy2<ert:m'.n-es the I'rahmana w.thcui the td^tfar^ra iugre--» 

to it.c writer a cl<‘d ;n 3 j-ot that does not tbme. Jt would seem aslnougb 
til- smgle fire of the house-practices, ta wblcli a single BrShiTuya is engaged. 



,ete here called ™„/,./a/i<i. The subject-matter itself, ,aud the reasou for its 
presence here are far from clear. , , ^„icBrahmau-priest.— 

The 

' nf}^ira(i, hrahviati'a,, apaht candramah • • ' 

Uy aiigirasam (cp, i. i. '2°. above, P‘ ■'* for irodhopiislagham, 

it. tie lert, ,t, 23, last line. - 3 See Korft AV ,‘ 5,',,'“^ 

Tm the ed.ttont the (else ■'""■'■'“C 0 ■ This I'ta'S" "P 

Ss'tfSlS|~i!53Set£ 

lliit the writing tatv.in (Cl^. ^ 34 / have the . - ,ofr.; 

below, however, and at the “f J?®* ^xt. - «>«' 9. V=^ belra; 

<atil,i sr»?fU. - 7 See P- S. 'J. 9 Later, m P=‘’**f' »ia trlvaruna 

see JAOS. XL 3S7ff-5, SBC. MIL BriUnianlcclunisin, with _ 

their origin from ritual-teats o t , '^jjjsjants of the 1*°**^! Lf^ahLitteratur, 
and AchavaU, figures as one of the agi jui.tWRANDT, K.tualL 

« Cn. Sc. I. 4. I- toff. — »* 

P- t‘7' . 1 t.X— S- 

of thVi^I^vtuic ?rihman-2«^ 

continues u-ith “ 

^ Hl:3s 

(cp. i.r.eo, =■=•>>'. '’%,,'([ sertices for '«h'<* „( ,,,. Etahmanpt.esl 

these. In t- 3- 3 pattern of AB.S 33 ’pj^ p folloneti ft- 3- S) h> 

are recounted after the p fh P„i only 

an inconsequential Wo ,...tuced bt on® ^a^rtn Tnd full-moon 

three prtests the lee. "f pl'p," na«°" ''''in' .Ta I pv.ns the tm- 

sacrifice. — Ihi® V* jence upon ihit text 

pression of direct of the Kurupanc5l • . contest 

bomma, from >''= « "^nn), "here >.0 ™p.ara.e acts of 

go to the the pn*® being a uec the development 

with SvauUyana correbted with later eomes the heard and 

the darSir/umamJf • , grows first on thv - . 

of the human body fir,t on the b®--'d. ^,11 the 

hair on the bod> , *^*n,«d"Srio f.dl’ out m the end. 'fhe 

Creatures are borri . doomed an nirrower and 

seventh TlS physiological review ends, 

^fnrdfr, h hrs. spread 

furnafrid’i'^ ',11...,,,^ it ‘»- 


, rif u'-’** 



IV. The GQrATnA-lk\itMANA. — B. Coktests of the Purva-ISr'\iimana. 115 


16. 6. — 8 Xhe majority of the mss. at Vait present them 
(ga/i.'a) form. 


an abbreviated 


S 74- Fourth PrapAthaka. Mystic-theosophic e\position of the 
sattra of the year. — The dependence of this long and elaborate theme of 
GR. upon book 12 of SR. has been stated above, S CC. It extends through 
the fourth and fiftli prapalhakas, with the excep^tion of the last three sections 
(23 — 25) of the fifth. The first 6 sections SD. 12. 1. 1, deal with the 
of the 16 Srauta-priests — the i?’\ the sadasya, is not mentioned (cp. Vait. 
31. I .and II. 3). This is followed (7,8) by a mythical derivation of the 
various isfis and otlier acts of the a^nistoma from the diilmties supposed to 
correspond to tliem, and an account of the rewards attending these ceremonies; 
the a^nhtoma figures here as one of the mam features of, the r’/a/rvif day of 
tlie sallra of the >ear’, as well as many other da).s: see SR. le. i. 2. i and 
12. I. 3. i — 7, and cp. Vait ii — 17. 'llie next two sections (9, lo) derive 
the separate parts and ceremonies of the normal rn/'/rir, the^ij:dMa)iiNj, from 
gods and divine personifications, with attendxnt rewards: see SR. 12. i. 2. 2,3 
and 12. 1. 3. 8 — 22, and cp Vait 31. 7 IT. Next, two sections (ii, 12) correlate 
the Sii//ra and certain of its parts with the year: see SR. 12. 2, 3. 1. Then 
five sections (13 — 17) discuss the parts of the jir/M; from the point of view 
of the M(?/i<U'r( 7 /a'da)s’: see SB. 12. 1. 3 23 and, 12. 2. 3. 2 — 4. S. The 
discussion winds up with an expanded stiiement ofSR.12.2.3 4- tbe position 
of the nbhiplavd in the sattra between t«vo pnt/tya xs correlated with fertain 
facts of ordinary life. Two sections (18, 19), essentially the same as SR. 12. 
3'3.d. 7, compare the ra//r(Z-) ear with the wings of a great eagle, the r 
day in the middle being, as it were, the body of the eagle. Next fco^SR. 
12, 2. 2. i) the character of the jyaUh {pnhstoma) xs part of the abhiphva 
is discussed. Then follow two sections (21,22 ■= SR. 12. 2 3.10,11) with an 
account of the ascending and descending scale of the fe'tival-divisions of the 
Ji?///'tf.year, the r/wirZ-day in the middle ■, the second part of this account is 
then (23) supported by a legend of the contest between the .Ulityas and 
Angiras* which is worked up r.ilher ditlereutl) m SR 12 2. 2.9—12. This 
is dangerous ground for the GR. to venture upon, iince the legends of the 
struggles between the .\dit)as and .Angira> regularly exlubit the latter in the 
position of vanquished victims, similar to the A»uri3 in their struggles with 
the Devas; that, of course, is contr.ary to the spini of the GR where the 
Ahgiras are especially revered The mere appear.mce ot such a legend in 
this text betrays its seconibrv origin, but for the fict tint it does not in this 
instance present the Angir-is m too pronounced a position of disadvantage, 
it would be intolerable here. The priplthaka is concluded (24 SR 12.2. 

2. 13 — 23) a theological discourse {ira/iMi' tia) between Rredi (SR Proti) 

Kauslmbeya Kausunavindu and his teacher (Jddilaka .\runi in which the 
sacrifice, the year, .as the single one {eiam), is said to consist of respecti^Iy 
ten, nine, eight, etc. vlays (a'liant). Very neat is the turn given by the Gl». 
to the relation of the ye.ar with the number four W hereas the SR. establishes 
thb relation through the four-footevl cattle, the GR. does not neglect to clinch 
its ofi-repeated assertion th.it the Veda is fourfold; (atvani tai nJi 7 s^jir 
dajnas tax ate. It is not possible to doubt that GR. presents the secondary 
version of the two. 


» Vait 31. 10 - 13 . 2 - 7 - — * Sec HiLLFBaANDT, Rituil-Utteratur. p. ij'- — 

3 VVecer, Nakjatra. 11. 2&2, note; IIiiiEBRANPr. L c.; cp. Vait. 31. 14- — < Cp. 
Weber, IS. I. 20t ff.; rpischc* iia vedwchen Ruual. p. 4 o- 
S 75. Fifth Prapathaka: i. 5. 1-**=- Exposition of the sattra of 
the year concluded. — The first section — Slk 12. 2. 2. 12, de.tla wth the 



'ii6 II.LrrrERXTUKU.GnscniciTTE- iB. A tiiarva-Ved v a^d G opatha-BrAhmaka. 

abhiplava^ normally of six (!a>s, in mystic, variations «hich enable it to em- 
brace from five da)s to one. Next (2 — SB. 12.2. 1. 1—9), comes a phase of 
tile sattra called gadhaptaththa\ and then three sections in which the sattra 
and its parts are correlated with the cosmic man (purusa) and his members 
(3 = SIS. 12. I. 4. iff-l 4 - SB.12. 2. 4. iff -5 5 — SB. 12. 3- J.ff-). In 
these sections the GB. exhibits a good deal of independence; especially the 
'two slokas in section 5 differ considerably from those in SB. 12. 3; 2. 6, 7 - 
they occur nowhere else in the published literature. 'I’hen (6 =• SB. 12.3. 
5, 12 — 13) comes a statement of the identicargrouping and numerical relation 
of the main events of the two saUra half-years on cither side of the visvz-al- 
day, which differs from 'those made in Vait. 3r. 15; GB. i. 5. 23.' 

At this point (7) the text introduces nyajuakrama stating the so-called 
haiiryajita or ri/i, and the soma-sacrifices (somasamsthali). It coincides with 
the order followed in the Vait only up to the first of the soma-festivals, the 
agnisfoma'-. Nor does yajnakrama, or that exhibited practically in Vait, 
coincide with' that stated farther on, GIJ. r. 5. 23. The hitter coincides .nlmost 
perfectly with the classical yajnakrama, as reported on the authority of 
Gautanux’s DharmasQtra 8. 19, 20’j the present account is more or less 
independent of all other known statements. This yajiiahravia is merely a 
stepping-stone to the glorification of the sahasradal;Hna-%^zn'bz^ (8). Praj-lpati 
performs all ceremonies in the order of the ^aj'/akrama, obtaining only 
perishable results (nntain), but when he follows up a srt'/'/ra with the sa/iasrU' 
dal-siija he obtains imperishable results. The two sections be.ir every mark 
of secondary construction in behalf of Vait. 34. 21. 

In renewed touch witli SB, section 9 of GB, ■* SB. 12.3. 5.3—11 
advises those that are devoting themselves to the /er/rrt 
to keep intact the other sacrifices, agnihotra, etc., which ordinarily would 
claim their attention, Next (10 — SB. 12. 3. 3. 1 ff.) there is a legend, in 
illustration ofVait. 42. 18, about the impossible saHra of a 1000 years*, for 
which the viivajit is substituted: the GB. characteristically substitutes five Vedas 
(ret, yajtisi, s<hnni, iante = athananf, exA ghon •=* afigirasi) for the three 
YedaS, SI 5 . 12. 3. 3. 2*. Sections 11 — 20 expand considerably the subject of 
the three daily savanas, as treated in SB. 1 2. 3. 4. i IT. The GB. manages to 
import a good many Atharvan traits: in 1 1, propos of vidvamrah, the fourth 
(Brahman) priest is described in almost the same words as KauS. 9,4. 3, 4. 
Ihe four fonnulas, j)tayi bhargah ... mayi sarvam, are correlated in SB 12 
3. 4. 6 — p with three cosmic-hturgfc forms, induding the ridya and an 
indefinite fourth corresponding io sariam, r>a.me\y, ye anye lokds {deids, vedds, 
pranas) iat sarranr, the GB. changes this into a definite tetrad, so as to 
provide amply for an Albari'anic cosmos {dpah, candramd/i, etc.) in relation 
to the formula mayi sanam {sarvavidyd — btahmaveda)'. see sections 15 
and ip.’ Very noteivorlb/ is the original version of the three formulas at the 
three (12—14)*: the passage GB. 11 — 20 offers perhaps the most 

conspicuous instance of the manner in which this text, though removed by 
an .almost immeasurable distance from the original springs ofSrauta-lradition, 
yet manages to adapt e-xisling materials to its all-absorbing purpose, the 
glorification of the Atharvan At this point (21) a legend introducing Dadhyanc 
Angirasa, not found in SB , correlates the formulas, om Jrdvaya, etc., containing 
. 17 syllables, with the year, orPrajapati, or the sacrifice^ and then leads up 
to the pravara, the invitation of the manes, Vait, 2. 15; the very words of 
that text as also the citation. (AV. 6. 123. 3— 5) are repeated in GB. The 
subject is concluded (22 — SB 12.3. 5. ii) with the sdvitrapaiu (cp. Vait. 



IV. TiiK GOrATUA l!R\nMANA* — C CoNTHNlS OF HU UtTARA-BrAIIM \NA. II7 

S 76- Fifth rrapathaka: i. 5. 33—25. Metrical treatise on the 
sacrifice. — 'Ihe last three sections of the rOrva-Brahtnana lack a certain 
unity of structure, whitli makes it possible to imagine that they are not from 
the same hand. First (23) there is the otiUmzxY yajiiail:rt] 7 ii(f, its account of 
the haxlryajna and somasamsthitk (suirai^) coincides with Gant. Dh 8.19,20- 
the fafiayoj/ 7 a accord with' the w-ording and order of Satyavrata Saml-irami 
in the Hindu Journal Usha?. The apparent derivation* here of the><yV7(7/n7«a 
from schools of die SV.'may lend s{gm’fic.ince to the presence in this section 
of blokas th.it are paralleled by the JaiminTya-Br.ihm.ana, also a STman-text. 
The rest of the section consists of questions and amw'ers ii) devoted 

to the time-divisions of the s.-\cnficial year. One of the stanzas is identical 
with Wait. 31. 15. Anodier (p. S5, J. 17) occtirs in a v.rriant form in Jaim. 
Br. 2. 73'^; yet another stanz.!, Jaim, Br. 2. 71“*, exhibits a certain relationship 
with that beginning Glk, p. 85, I 13. 7 ”be nett section fe-O conMins a 
coamogonic Alharv.inic account of the origin of the sacrifice. Vaiavanara 
heated with ia/ns, desiring offspring, poun. semen into Sraddhi. From this 
union the world-conquering somx-toothed Angiras is born, 'then the resulting 
• four Ved.as"* are described: ‘The holy Atlnrvan .ind.Ahgiras praise with 
/rdya/eittns and d/iaaj\ 7 s\ Nett follows a list of the 17 .Srauta-priests, divided . 
into four Yedic groups’*, to which are added four other functionaries, 'the 
. wife at the sacrifice (/iihita /atnJ), the butcher {iatfiiar), the houaeholder’ 
(pfiapiti), and lastly Angira-s lum»elf. The last section (24) is the final 
apotheosis of the Atharvan. After sutlng that all the 21 otthoilox sacrifices, 
bolh'of the present and of yore, resolve themsehes in the Angiras, the text 
enters once more upon an el.abor.ue cosmic tetrad tn behalf of the AV., similar 
to, jet somewhat different from the preceding ones’^ ITie imal outcome of the 
cosmogonyis the s.acrifice protected {guy-fj'') by the Aibirvan. In adiiidon 
to the regular sacrifice the formulas and offerings of the village’* and forest 
also resolve themsehes m the Angiras, .md, iinallj, the Atharvan secures the 
heaven of Brahma, whereas the fra\i n-fi.t can onU procure the 
(ruitfjm nakam ullamam. 

» See GMiBf, NaiUnabOwi, Trinslalion. P *' — * ^^£BVR, 

Mi’ulr. ZDMO. I\. ^ MiE .\\\ aS 7 tr ilinpuvsnT. Ibid r H 

3 VVfpir, In xur 33 ?, 

above, *'**• ’ ^ 1 .* ' ' ‘ * 

Mli: N\X.35S, Cl', abovcp no ih 

K.', 10. 9. 3S - » To «.t 
sahairam <iitsalJ i/jiu 




See nbo'f, 

3. a — » Mv-c.airUER. 

iiie also with .\h. 6 ll. l , 
•n Ktf .fbv »r rpit fHif tram. 


tUtxfl'.'.i ftj «ffA fAe ftraAvAi'y iriyrecsion 
of the ^vmtn’, a- «n the <,rh>a and 1 •harmvtevt%. — ■» The 


inehided ibia time tnion,; the cj' (.11 i 4 1- 

•? v V m I. 5- tS aod 19- - ‘J l-P the Gli. i. i. ij 

etc.. hBi:. XLll. p. M, note. 


6. Var 


4 Cp. the 


C CONrENTS or THE UTrAKA-BR.\HMA\.\ (THE YAINAKR.\MA’). 

e — First rrapathaha; a i. r— 13. The new and full-moon 
, ^ section deals with three points, the purificat.on of the 

0 tenngs.^ fetch.ng of the /m«i/.i"iv-ater, an-l the placing of the 

around the fire ITie first two themes are borrowed literally 
f' VCR 6 I* except for two characterfetic tou!,hes. The formula, iJjn 
trom . • o* .ippears m its Atharvanic form, tJj<n aham arTJ:y:ssoh 
j,); .mJ for, r rl trdh-.,, in 

KTl, lh™GS- re-"''.' -.S unto the peittr glotj of the 



I iR I!. Urn v. Gi ''Ciucurr. i r. Aw \ rva-Vi:oa AS' r)GorATjrA-JlK.Xrn{\N’A, 

Arsj^tra^a-Vcila. 'I'he statcmtriit about the /r«J«r/J*wa{cr, Vjit. s. s, coincides 
with Ijoth GR and KH., whereas that which concerns ihc /an'd/iis (Vait. 2. 
8, t^t) docb not appear in but sectRS to be orijjirial with Cli. Tiie next 
Oiree sections (2 — deal with the /rJA//-o-food, Yait.3.7ff.*, beginning with 
the /r.TjVV/'i>-legend; Ru<lfa being refused a share of the sacrifice cut oiT a 
portion of it, the fraiilra. lliis h given successiiely lo Bliaga whom it 
makes blind; to Saiiiar whom it m.ikes handle's (and subsequently golden* 
handed); to I'u^an whom it makes a toothless eater of gruel; to Idhma 
Angirasa who loses by it his head; to Varhi (barlii) Angirasa whose body is 
disjointed by it; finally to Jlfhaspati Ahgirasa (the typical Drahman-priest) 
who recites mantras o\er it that render it harmless k Idhma Angirasa echoes 
the well-known legend of lladhjahc Atharsana or Afiglrasa’. Neither Idlima 
nor Itarhi are mentioned elsewhere, -being clap-trap personifications; tiie three 
Afigirasas who figure here indicate the working over of the legend into an 
Atharsanic mould. The last half of section 3 corresponds closely to KU. 
6. 14; section 4 toTS.2.6.9. Next, mdividual points of the ditrsapfirnamma 
are treated: the prohibition of the daluna, because tlie «r«:if/?if/yfl-pomdgc 
IS the ordained fee at these sacrifices^ {5); the next section (6), A propos 
of the anviihCina^ is borrowed almost literally from MS. 1.4.6 Cp.54, I.3IT.); 
then (7) the anxithdrya is de»cribe<l as IVajupati’s share, the point being 
illustrated by the legend of the god>’ sacrifice to I’nijapati, whereas the Asuras 
sacrificed into one another’s mouths*. The need of performing the darlH' 
fitrrsamasa before entering upon the soma-sacrifice is urged in section 8j an 
expiatory act on the rise of the moon when the priest is about to cook for 
the tiening-ofi'ering is the theme of section 9?; the mystic description of the 
ffimi and utfant fdtintamjtt and amdxtis}J is copied literally from Kau^. 

1. 29, 30, and defined further in section 10. Tlie rule that only one of the 
two full-moon and new-moott days shall be chosen fn) is copied almost 
Ncrbatim, with shocking blunders on the part of the edited text, from 'I'S. 

2. 5. S. 2 IT. I'mally (12) certain oblations to Agni-Yisnu, and to SarassatT 
and Sarasiant, preparatory to the dafsafUrnamasa, arc described in accordance 
with Vait. S. i, 2*. 

2- X. 13—16. Krimyejtayah, — The next three sections (13 — 25) deal 
with sacrifices for the fulfilment of special wishes. The Vait. has nothing to 
correspond; they are, indeed, an almost verbatim copy of MS. 2. i. 10®. 
Section 16 is the Ihrilimana of Vait 11. r (beginning of the apiif/omd), in 
verbal agreement with Glk: he that wishes to perform a soma-sacnfice shall 
oli'er a freed steer {tisram anus/sfam) to Indra-Agni, in case his father and 
grandfather had not made a soma-sacrifice in their life-time. Since the theme 
is treated out of order it w'as perhaps conceived as .a /(■tUnjeffi. 

2.1,17—26. Agrwyana; agnicayana; and caturmrisySni. — The 
ofTcring of the first fruits of the season (17) begins with the usual legend ex- 
plaining the libations to Agni-Indra, the Visve Devah, and Soma»°; otherwise 
the treatment corresponds closely to Vait. S. 3— 7. judging from the mention, 
at the end, of the Atharvanic /«rar/<f4fd7/wff« ami samsthUahoma CIxaus.3.19; 
Vait. I. 4, etc.) this seems to be a somewhat original IWhmana. In section 
18 the text, apparently without reason, undertakes a salto mortale into the 
nsmcayana-ccTemony, describing the use of the a/-raiiral/tn-h} mn in its Athars an 
version (AV. 19. 13) at that ceremony. The Itrahmana illustrates Vait. 2 9. 16, 
and IS almost identical with MS. 3. 3. 7 (p. 40, 1. 2 ff.); cp. also SB. 9. 2. 3. 
I— S. The irregularity is the more marked because the next sections deal 
With the (dti/rmdsydni which in Vait. 8 follow immediately upon the dg/d- 
yana. The remaining sections of tliis prapathaka (19—26) de.al xviih the 



Goi‘AlllA.I!R\nM\SA. — C CONfENlSOi- lllE UnAR\-BB\iI\nNA. 119 


spsonal offerings; they are, as has been shown above fp. 102), taken from 
KB., and call for no further comment. 

* Ste above p. 116. — » Cp. KB. 6. 13, 14; SB. t 7. 4 5 (T ; TS 2. 6. 8; 

Mura, Introd. p 29ft — 3 Cj’ especially, 'IS 2. 6. S. 5 IT — 

4 WrncR. IS. I. 890, 3S4. — s Van. 3. 19; cp. ^IS. i. 7. 3. 3; Mi. t. 2. 3. $. — 

6 Yait. 3. 20; cp. IS. i. 7. 3. 4 — 7 Very similar to TS. 2. 5. 5 iff; en. KB. 
4. 2. — s Cp. All. I. 1; SB. 3. I. 3. I. — 9 Cp. TS. 2. 2. 2. 1; KC. 4. 3. — 
la Cp. SIS. 2. 4. 3. • , 

5 7S. Second Pr.ipa|haka; 2. s. i — The tanSn.iptra-ceremony 

of the Agni^^oma. — The first section opens in .1 rather perplexing manner 
'\ith certain /'dmj-^r/is in which quadrupeds and birds are sacrificed by him 
tint has built tlie holy fire in order to gain some special wislih 

It interrupts the yry/ 7 /i;J/aw/i of Vait, which in chapter 10 deals with the 
fiiiubandha, unless the Git. reganls this as a note on th.it very ceremony, 
'ihen (2 — 4) the text turns to the tanunaptra, beginning with the legend in 
TS. 6. 2. 2. I almost verbatim*. Then comes the ceremony proper, again in 
close touch withTS., but with an Ath-itvanic miprosement or two; e. g, the 
GB. substitutes Martas (representing the Ilrahnwn-priest) for /rdna in TS. 
The numerous mantras, however, accord m the mam with Vait. (13. 16 fT.) 
r.itlicr tlwn 'J’S.J App.irently the CB. embellishes tlie acts of tlie SDim with 
the Br.lhmani of TS., nithout drawing upon independent tradition. 

2. 2. 5—6. The pravarg>a*ceremony.— Section 5 again interrupts the 
^ajiliikramn ofV.iit. by one ol those disqiiUiiion-. on defects m the sacrifice 
which lead up to the glorification of the bhrj;tau’ir<nid, it may have been 
thought suitable here because of the legend tn section d. The dis* 
cussion is b.ised upon the word tnal/id, introduced m the statement, ntalAa 
f/y (tad yij!lein>imadh(\a>it, which is the Unguage of the Naighintukas*. lhi» 
section is almost cert.imly liter thanYl'ki sundry Parivjjfi-slokas also point 
to a very late d.tte. Then comes the beginning with the usual 
m)th, copied almost verbitim from .\B 1 iS fcp. abo AB 1 4. q). The per- 
forin.ince and the niantra> accord m the mavw with \ ait. 13. 5 5ff wnh which 
GB, at times agrees almost verbalU le g 13 26. 30) 'Ihe Vait. (14 i) 
quotes the i'//nmtf-hymn from AM* m full, d** i-'B- d b>' pr.ttika 
Ksfiarmam tapAmi). Ccrtniil) GB presupposes the Sutra 

2 - 7 — 12. '1 lieupasad'days, aiultontinuation of the agni?toma.— 
.Sections 7 antl S de.il with fhe legeml .and gener.al matters pertaining to the 
upasads°- the legend i-. tre.atedwith some degree of independenie*. .Section 9 
join-. \'ait. 15. 3'’in fhe sime retiUl of the divine women {Jaapatmatt), both 
texts differ from the similar statements, 'V^ 1 0 r.’lA j 9 lii.*. Section 10 
IS the llrihmana ot Vait. 16 5. partly in verhil agreement the source of the 
Ic'endiry expluution of fhc 33 ‘forms oi the sjcnJire’ {}a;>u7t.7nus} is un- 
known’ Section II, in verbal agreement with \ ait. 16 h, prescribes how 
the soma-xacnfice of a rival may be frustr.ated'* Section 12 is the nr.ihman2 

of Vait 15 1 “. dedmg with expiations for the overflow of tlie soma- 

the two agree verb-ally. 'Ihe mantras of V.ut 16. 17 .ue quoted frag- 

ment.anli in GBrwith evpbn ifory remarks, quite .as though the Vait were in 
this inst.ince the Samhiti of Oik „ c- • t • -t 

„ , ,j. 'pbe stomabhaga-niantras". — section 13 begins with 

the le-^md of tlieir origin, substamialU the sitne as TS. 3. 5. 2. 1, except that 
GB omits verv signific-antly the statement /Jrwd/ rJs:</b:> irjbnd ijna^, 
which is of course, contrary to the dotinne of the .\th.arian ritu.ahsts. The 
ro.antras 'in the sequel diiier from those in Vait and , but section 14 
shares with Vait. 17. the list of Atharvan (cp. GB. i. 3 3), and 



120 11. LnTrUATl.'R u GF>ClUCinE. lD.A■^IARVA•VCI^AA^•DGorATiIA-l!R.^^^^ANA. 


presciibes the use of cm and Janat, one on each side of the ordmarj' ones 
(e. g., cm hhtir Janat), for the purpose of protection {r^bhirnohhayato'ihan' 
iiu'^ircbtiir f;uj'liil’/iir)'\ The expression afa's^ ‘cease to sing’ occurs only 
here and at Yait. 17. 4. Section 15, illustrating Vait. 17. 7, dwells upon the 
value of the stcmal/iiisas in oxercoming the simultaneous sacrifice of a rival: 

the two texts share the long mantra, slutese etc. The Brihinana, though 

nuking some show of independence, is later than the Sutra. In continued 
touch with Vait., section 16 deals with the distribution of the agtiid/ira-ins 
at the close of \\\t,bafiis/‘avamana, with the same /rnwr in both texts (VaiL 

17. 12 — iS. I j cp. SB. 4. 2. 5. 11). Section 17, anent Yait. 18. 5 (cp. TS. 3. i. 
10. i), deals with the fravrfaAutit, oblations on choosing the priests; sections 

18, 19 (Vait. iS. II — 15) with the practices about the sadas. The mantra, 

d!iim)cbh)o name Hamah, Yait. 18. 11, is alluded to (ragroentarily in GB., as 

though the Vait occupied the place of a Sarphita. A propos of Vait. 19. <3, 
sections 20 — ss describe the Hotar-priesl’s oblations with the Jrast/d/a-cups 
at the three savanas. Since the Hotar is a Rigvedin these sections are pur- 
loined bodily from the AB. 6. 10; 6. 11. 6flr.; and 6. 12. Off. The prapathaka 
ends with two seemingly inconsequential sections (23, 24), the first of which 
is again taken up xvith the explanation of the terms ikahsanaiati vilc, and 
eanasiiatatt xAe (see 1. 3. 19); the last surprisingly bounds back to the 
dariapurnamata, urging the engagement of the gods {parisrk>\i)Sl) on the 
first of the new-moon and fuU-rooon daj-s, because these sacrifices ztesafiia, 
L e., undertaken by many at the same time'J. The section seems to be the 
Bralimana of Vait i. 14, 

« Cp. Yait. 43- 33r 331 »«• 7* «• Ap's 7. 28. S5 MS. 2. 5. »>• — * Cp. 

A13 1. 24; .'ill. 3 4. 2. I IT.; MS. 3. 7. lo. See XYsrER, 15. X. 362; IlaiFPRANUT, 
RUual-Littcralur, p. 127. — 3 lJul, onabhtiastffjom ili, in Cl!. 3, accords with T.S. 
6. 2 2. 4; the Vait. 13. 18 has anethiailih.— 4 Yaska’s Nigh. 3. 175 Kautsax&ja 
45! cp. PAOS., Ociolier 1890, p. XfvmIT. — 5 IIavg, All., lYansfation, p. 41, 
note t; Wesfr, IS. IX. 218—20; Hu.lccrakdt, 1- c. p. 127, 1341?. — 6 XVsler, 
IS. X. 36311.; inumRAMDT, 1 c. 127. — 7 Cp. 3 4. 4. 3 fr ; AR. 1. 23; KIl. 
8, 8j TS. 6. 2 35 MS. 3. 8. 1. — » inooMFiEiD, ZDMG. XLYlIl. 549 — 9 Cp. 
.Garqc, Vait, Translation, lO. $• note. Gll. is cited by the scholiast to Pan. 3. 
4. 16. — JO See the remark on 1. 3 l<>. abo\e, S 73. note 7.— >« Vail. 17. 417.; 
is. 3- 5- 25 -• 8. S; 6c. 8. 5 3» t. 9* 1 77. — 1» Cp. aboie under 1.3.3. 

— »3 Sec the note on i. 3. 19 

S 79* Third Prapathaka: 2.3.1 — 11, Agni§toma continued: the 
va?atkara and anuvasatkSra; rtugrahas; etc. — By way of illustrating 
Vait.19. 8 — IS which deals with the jaia/iara and anuiafafidm (acts of the 
'i'iotaT) sections i — 6 o! GK present »ith slight modlRcsitions AB. 3. 5 — 3. S. 
Yaska, Nirukta 8. 22, also presents the opening of AB. 3. 8. i; GB. 2. 3. 4 
in a form different from each, but it is not necessary in this instance to credit 
him with independent tradition anymore than GB.; both have mouthed over 
the text of AB. The second part of section 6 (Vail. 19. iS, 19) explains the 
blessing on drinking the soma, reproducing with verbal changes AB. 7. 33. sff. 
Sections 7, 8 treat the rtugrahas (Vait2o.2): section 7 is partly identical with 
and wholly similar to AB.2.29; section 8 in part corresponds to AB 6.14. 5 
Section 9 presents a legend.iry'explanation of the sound him (Vaif.20.15, 16), 
being written in good archaic BrShmana-language*, and deriving some inter- 
esting illustrations from every-day life. A closely similar passage has not 
been foundb it may have been derived from a Saman-source with Atlnarvamc 
adaptations {hbiikrtyatharrario brahmatiani Aurvanlt). Section 10, dealing 
with the a/iava and /r<7/r^ara-formulas« (Vait. 20. 15 ff.), is copied almost 
verbatim from AB. 3. 12 (cp. KB. 14.3), excepting that the formulas them- 
selves are quoted m the spelling of Vait which differs from that of all the 



The GorATi!A-TRAH\fAKA. — C CoNirNTs op Titi: Uttara-Er^iimanx. 121 


other texts ^ Section 1 1, illustrating Vait 2 1.3, 4, i^ copied with sli.c;ht alterations 
from KE. 11. 4 and 5, including the expression, ill ha sma'ha haii^T/ahyi, 
which leaves no doiiht as to its origin: cp. above, p. roe. 

2. 3. 12 — 15. The pratahsavana of the ckTiha. — Section 12 begins 
with a legend, similar to AB. 3. 14, in which I’rajapati while performing an 
{<7/;»V/t?/«rt-)sacrifice encounters Ji)eath nboni lie drives step bp step from one of 
the iastras and j/e/roj of the a^nitlotna to the other. Sections 13 — 15 account 
for the three iastrai (following the njya and of the three assist.mts 

of the Hotar, the Maitravaruna, Erahmanacchanisin, and Achlivaka*’; these 
sections bear upon Vait. 20. 14. Although they contain many mantras which 
ought to guide to par.allel chaptere in other JJrahm.ina-te\ts this is not the 
casej^jhey seem original with GH, patterned perhaps after some RV.-sutra 
(cp. SS. 13. 1 ff.). 'llius the mantra, ayaut u ha ticanane (RV, S. 17. 7 
AV. 20. 5. i) is not quoted outside of Vait, 2j. 2 .and GE 2. 3. 14; uidra 
piba ptaiilCimani svias^a (RV. ro. ri2. i) only in GE. 2. 3 14 Section 16 
motiv'ates by a IJrAhmnn.a, which ag.iin seems independent, the fourfold use 
of the iihaza {iamsCnem) of the prataftsavana m relation to Vait. 20. 15 (rp, 
GE. 3. 4. 4 and x8). Sections 17 — 19 de.al with the ciaksiua^ the order m 
"hich it should be given to the priests, and the materials of which it sJjall 
consist (cp. V.ait 21.34—33.2): they are an almost verbatim cop) of 
iMS, 4. S. 3. 

2.3.20—2.4.4. The mridhyaipdin.isavan.i of the ekSha.— The 
subject is treated in the mam m the order of Vait, borrowing considerably 
from AE., but, as in the c.ise of the pnifahsata/ja, some clnpters seem to 
be original with GB. Sections 20, 21, reproducing almost literally AE.3.a3, 
present the legend of the union of SX (the Rk) with Ama (the S.Xman), 
resulting in the junction of three teas to produce one etc. (cp. Vait. 

22. S). Section 23, reproducing AD 3- 24. «leaU with the sU'triya, aniirupa, 
diajjj, pnii^i/ha, .and «//•*// of the mikKal)^ saslra, and bears ujion X'aif. 
32.10—131. Section 23 presents i legendary account of Indr.v’s exclusive 
right to the ntsknalyadastra at the mi Jdaj -pressure of the soma ‘7n the 
beginning there w.i8 but one soma-pre^sure, in the morning. Tlien PrajXp.iti 
created 'the midday-pressure for his eldest son Indra’. The legend is quite 
difierent from that told AIX 3. 24- tott’- (cp 15 +). it is ongmal, if we 
may trust the quotation of the mantra R\. 7 9S. 5 — W. 20. R7 3, as this 
is not mentioned m .my other text, not even the \ aitana. 


« Cp .iUo kb. 13- 0. — * Cp <*>0 aonNt p 127. 1 3 — 

i Cp 6.4- 11.3—4 — * IhiLCKRvxpT. I ^ loi IT. - s r g eJ 4 -^iya 

iJHisacni \n»t 20 iS, ^'rc ami 2 4. 4- K'>. K) 6. 2f>. 

di'tt.io** KH. 14 3; *''• 7 I'’ AH. 3 12 3 . 

X 14 T Ap'' 12 27 *2. — * •'*" vvum. I'' X. 3x; The strictly^ Atliorvanic 
division of the 17 SnalapAMts Joes not a^si^n the flrthminiechanism to the 
ltntra!.as blit iniKCs him an assKlant of the Trahman \ »it. 11. 3; GB. l. 

46 —'7 The worif frtMTt-i does not otxcr outside of CB and Vait. 


(22. 12). 


S So Fourth PrapSthaka: 2. 4 1 — ^ 4 . The madhj amdinasavana 

concluded The madynantdina is continued m sections i — 3 with an account 

of the slctriU, anurupa, pragatKa, etc.,, of the three Ilotrakas fcp.2.3.13- 15). 
TTiey are b.i-'ed upon AS. 7. 4. i ft; SS. 7. sa — 24, worked over slighdv info 
lirlbmnpa-forin. Section 4 accounts for the five-fold use of the dhaia of Xhe 
ndJhun’tdt’ia /JwjJrt’OT)*: the Erahiuapi seems onginal; cp. GE. 

1 16 and 2. 4- >*'• 

^ 5— iS. The trliya-savana of the ekaha, — Continuing m the 

order* of Vait-> section 5 illustrates the (X'aia sa. 3), and the 



122 ir. LiTTFRAI-UR U. GESCmCHTE. ir.,ATHARVA-VEDAANDGorATIIA-BRXnMANA, 

consumption of the Agniclhra's share in the lap of the Nes(ar (Vait. 25. 5). 
The Brahmana is borrowed from AD. 6. 3. 8—11*. Section 6 illustrates the 
ofierings of shavings (Vait. 23- 12); the scattering of baxley-grafns in the 
(ihavamya-'bxt (Vait.23. 13); the pouring of the soma-cups west of the 
pits (Vait.23.14): the IJrahmana is borroned from KB rS. 7 and 8 . Section 
7 deals with the purification of the sacrificer, and is similar to, yet different 
from Vait. 23. 22. The mantras, aMv./ devah, and the drapavaljnh (sc- 
rca)^ occur in both Vait. and GB; but instead of the PaippaUda-hymn, ji a/ 
ie grava, of the Vait., the GD. has savmtbhifii {sc. rgbhihy. the Brahmana 
seems to be derived from an unho\Nn Srauta-source. Section 8, illustrating 
Vait. 24. 15, 16, describes the burning up of the vedi and the offering of 
grits {saktithomd) : TS. 3. 3. 8. 2 ff. presents a fairly close parallel. Tint the 
TS. is in fact its source seems likely, because the next section (9) interrupts 
the order of the Vait., jet is also derived from the same chapter of TS. 
Section 9 begins with a rite on the ekastaka'^xf bearing, out of order, on 
Vait. 31. 4, s, and being a continuation of the Brahmana in TS. 3. 3. S. 4 — C, 
which is copied almost literally. But at the end the section returns to the 
order of Vait (24. 14), describing the agmsamaropana (cp. TS. 3. 4 - to. 4). 
Section 10 deals with the relation of the three savanas to the day and their 
symbolic connection with the three main positions of the sun; it is borrowed 
from All. 3. 44. 

At this point the GB. turns to the ittstras of tlje i/t!}asaia>ta, in a 
treatment analogous to that of the first tsso savanas (2. 3. 12 — 19, and 2.3 
30— a 4.4), Sections 11—14 introduce a legend, elsewhere unknown in 
this fonn. The gods Indro, Agni, Varuna, Brhaspati, and Vi?nu prevented 
the Asuras from entering the evening twilight, and thus ruining the Jasiras of 
the evening Agni changes into a horse {ah-a) and enters the conflict first; 
hence the sakamaiva-saman heads the iastras at the trtiyn'Savana*'. The 
live gods, engaged in tlie conllict, are identified respectively with 
manas, (aksus, irdra, and through these ‘pranas' with Prajipati; reasons 
are assigned why they are praised at the irtiyasavana. Finally, these gods, 
barring Agni who has been provided for in the sSkamaha, are distributed 
among the Saslras of the three Hotrakas; Indr 3 *Varuna with tlie Jfaitra- 
varuna; Indra-Brhaspati with the Brahttianacchamsin; and Indr.Wisnu with 
the Achiv^ka*. Tlie next three sections (15 — 17) state the m.antr.as for ihe 
uktha, stolriya,^ anurupa, etc., of the Hotrakas, being based upon Rig-Ve<lic 
sources (cp. AS. 0 . i. 2; SS. 9. 2 — 4). Section iS concludes the agnUtoma 
with an account of the fourfold ihSva of the Irtiyasavana {adhittr\o' Sant' 
iantsaiom) which seems original, like the parallel sections 2. 3. io, and 


2.4.19. The ?o< 1 asin-sacririce. — Section 19 concludes the prapSthaka ■ 
with a brief exphanation of this sacrifice, thus returning to the order of Vait. 
(25. 12). Tlie Brahmana is borrowed from Aik 4. i. 5 — S. 


> Cp. Ali. 3. 12. j; Kn. J4. 3 — J VVJ>PZ*, JS. X 300; 
> 33 - — 3 Cp. ApS. 13. 2a S. — 4 Cp AIL 3 49 i I’H B 8. t 
3. 50; n?. 8 . 8. 6, 7. 


llnLrvRAsvT, 1. c. 
— 5. — 5 Cp, All. 


SSi. Fifth rrapathaka: 2.5.1— 5. The ntiratra-performances.— 
These continue the order of Vait, chapter 26: the GB. is p.atched together 
out of passages of AB. and KB. (cp. above, p. 102). Section i, almost 
identical with AB. 4 5. explains the origin of the atlratra as typifsin" the 
expulsion of the Aruras out of the night hj Indra and the metres, his affies- 
the three periods (papayas) represent the successive acts of expulsion from 
the first part of the night, midnight, and the last part of the night. Section 2 



IV. — C. CONTTNTS OF Tilt UTTARA-BRXiniAN'A. 123 

borrowed from AT!, .j. 6. 4—7^ explains the advantages of the /<!s/ras at the 
three far^-aj’as (Vait. 26. 3). Section 3, borrowed from AB. 4. 6. S— r4, ev 
plains liow the /aiamdna-s/oirat, which properly belong to the day alone, 
are also provided for the night; it also explains other features of the atinilm 
that are patterned after the soma-performances of the day'. Section 4, 
borrowed from Kll. rj. 7, identifies the fixtures of the sacrifice nith the 
members of the cosmic man (/urusa), and the officiating priest'^ with the 
breatlis and other functions of the body. The first part of section 5 deaK 
once more with the expulsion of the Asuras; this time the statement is 
borrowed from KR, in 'mechanical continuation of 17.7, whereas the first 
discussion of the same theme w.as derived from the AR. 'I'he compiler has 
not taken the trouble to as:>imilate his excerpts. The second part of section 5, 
borrowed from KR. 17. 9, explains the distribution of the metres at 
the itislras. 


2. 5. 6 — to. The sautramant, vjjapeya, and aptorylima rites. — 
The next two sections disturb the order of theV*ait, which treats the 
warn in chapter 30, after the vdjapcya and aptoruJma. Section d presents 
one of the legends that h.ave attached themselves to the sautriimam. being 
SR, 12. 8. 3. 1— a; section 7, illustrating Vait. 30 id, i.'!, deals witli tlic 
sainan-chants at the sautramam- it almost copies SR. la. 8 . 3. S3~:8'. In 
section S the text returns to the order of V.ajt (27. 1 — 17), illustrating the 
t(^’<?/ei<i-ceremony by a Rrahmana obviously copied from RR. 18. 7^ Sections 
9, 10 deal with the nplorydma*’, the presentation is not in >ery close touch 
with Vait. (27. iS/f.), nor has it been possible fo find its source in the 
published Rrhhm.anas. Cp. in a general s'.ay PR j© 3. s ff. 

2 . 5. IX— 2. 6. Id fend). The ahma*fsattra-)sacrifices. — To these 
performances^ are deiiOCed the rem.smlng sections of C.R, in geneml torre* 
spoiuience with the order and treatment of Vait 31 ft. The Rrlhmanns are 
borrowed en bloc from the sixth book of \R. with the usual slight alterations; 
the mantras are .issimihated to some extent to those of Vait. Section rr is 
composed of AR. 0 . 17. i. 2 -ind <>■ sesiion t: — \R 6. 0 , section 13 «- 
AB.6. 7; section 14 is sery simihr to AR 6 S, section 15 is .ilmoit identical 
with AR'. d. iS. 4fr, introduceil by a sentence from .\R 6172. •'md ending 
in a p.assage from AR d. 17. 3 * 4. cp \.ut. 31 19, 20 


I CTl. shires with Nait 20 15 the eiffeisioc, mtim 
Gll ami Vail reail lamhim for ra-n r»4. m s|{ anil 
nole on 'ait to lli. - ’ 'VriifR. I chrr Jen \aiai>«vi. 

— 4 ri-crti'c, !»Tir. XII. p x\. lliLiuRwnr. I c 
Jes,en.-jtfs them as («-P I'so 

in ihe lc%icons. 


7/ ^rankarat. — » ruth 
eNewherr, cji. OasCf’s 
, i^os, r- 

j' ns 5 The f.r. 

the word is snntinc 


S S'*. Sixth Prapathaka 'Fhc ahina-sacrificei continued. — 
Section i is composed of AR. 6. 18 1—3, 6. 19 t — to tep Vait. 31. 25) 
Section •* continues from the middle of i\R. ti 19. 10 ihruueh to d. 20, 
with some omisdons on the part of OR. (cp Vait. 32. 10). Sections 3—5 
are almoxt identical with AR. 6. 21-23 fcp. Vait. JS r^. and 35.2.4). 
Section 6 explains why the Uotar reates two uMat and one sui/j, whereis 
his assistants the Ilotrakas, recite one udA.t ami two tiiirn. the fint part 
of section 7 «pccifies the s'lstnzs of the Ifotrakas to the-r rcspecCnc pairs 
of divinities. Neither of these passages <eems to be derised from any 
known Brahman': howea-er, AR6. 13 and 14 (e^pec;a]ly AR. 6. 13. 7 

with OR. p. td 7 * I -5 section 7, dealmg with the so called 

Si/Mnt is nearly idetitic.al with Aik 6. 27. t — 5. Section 8 is .almoNt idertiral 
with AR. 6. 27 “ ^ -O action 9 with AR. 6. 3a. 5 — d. 31; section 10 with 



124 II. Litter \TURU.G iJ5ci»cHrc. ib. ATH\ ftVA*VEDA ANoGopATifA-BRA/mANA. 


AP). 5.-9 and lo (cp. Vait. 31. 27); section ti %Yith AB. 5. ii—S- 12. 3, 
fintsliing with 6. 32. i, 2. Section 12 is composed of a selection of passages 
some of nljich .are identical with* paragraphs of the AB.; otheis exhibit a 
certain degree of independence, yet seem to have been suggested by the 
same text: AB, 5. 19. 12 (cp. Vait. 32. la); 6. 29. i -(cp. Vait. 32. 13); G.29.2 
(the rrw^’ff/f-hymn; cp. Vait. 32. 14); and 6. 32 (cp.Vait.32. ig). Section 13 
is compiled similarly from AB. 6. 33. 1 — 5 (cp. Vait 32.20; KB 30.5); 
33 16. 17 (cp. Vait. 32. 27; KB. 30. 7); 6. 33. 19 (cp. Vait 32. 22); 0. 33. 18 
(cp. Vait. 32. 23); 6. 33. 20 (cp. Vait 32. 26). Section 14 is compiled from 
AB, 6. 34 — 36.3 (cp. Vait. 32. 28 — 30); section 15 works over AH. 6. 36. 4 — 7 
with a considerable degree of independence (cp. Vait 32. 31); and, finally, 
section 16 is based upon .MJ. 6. 36. S — 17 (cp. Vait 32. 33, 35). 



UST OF ABBREWATIONS. 


AA. <==i Aitarcyi-Aranyakft. 

All. s= Aitireya-nrahmanv 

AWiaiKllunq .\bh4ndlung fiber <len Atlur»a-Vcda- 
AG. «=. Ajvaljyaha-Gfljjasatra. 

AJPh Americm Journal of Miilolosy 
• Al*A\V, « Abhaiidlimuen dcr Kgl I’rcus^iscbcn Akadcmic <ler Wisscn'cltaften. 
Apt>l\ SM Apaslamba-DliirmasiitM. 

ApG. = Apastivmba GcU>asiilra. 

Af>yu. «3 Apasfimba-.Mantrabrlhntim, or Manaapufia. 

Aj'S. ApaitambvSramvfllra. 

ArS. AranyakivSamhm. 

A\ •=. Aitnhyana.SrantMBlKL 

AUi. rail(lh.*i» Atharva-or .\Oiarvaot)4-;ra»Ulhati lo KauliVa-^airi 

A(li, Pari^. M Alliarva*rariji<(3. 

Atii. Prst. AtKarva-rratil Ahya 

AV. ■>■ AthirvaAeda in the ''aunaki)i school 

AVP. «=» Atharvo-Vcda jh the I’aippiUda school 

AWA\V. «=• AbhaniUungcn Jcr Kais AkiJcime der Wtsscnsehafien ru ^^len. 
Ihuilh. Dh •«= llaudliiyana niurmasOtra 
aa U«\nage tut Kunde 

JlDli. llauU!ilyana*l)harmasttira. ■■ 

UK^CW — JJcrtchto tier Kgl ’*jch»«»chin {•e>tll»ciia/t dcr \l)|jenielurtcn< 
llfbU ami Hih *=» Hfhi I At myaka I pim«a-i 

im\\‘ WH HinTil**<iK and Roth, Mnskrit Uoricrhuch. 

ChU ami Clilnd. Up ChimJogyi Lp->m>wl 

Conttibuiioni. lliooMiinn, Co Hrilmiionj to the Inierpreliiion of the Veda. 
D1 Z =» Deutfche I,Ht<*rituKeH«n^' 

Caut. Dh. =»■ OautamaDharinacatti. 

GB Gopatha-lirahmaiia. 

CDh. = Oautama-DharmasOtri. 

CG. GobhiWGrhyasatra. 

CG\ — GoH(«g<»she pelcbrie Sntei^en 
IIASL •= llistorv of Ancient ‘sansknt lalcrature. 

HG. r=. Uiranyakcii Grh>asOtra 
Iiitrod. ■= InitoiU'Ction 
Imlischc Studien 
•=■ lndi«c)ie >treifcn- 
J « Journal ,\5iali«iue. 

Jaim Pc. =» Jaiminiya-Brlhmarui. 

J \OS — Journal of the American Oriental Society 
Jll. •=. Jamiiniya-llraUinaoa 

=- Journal of the .\aialic Society ol Retisal. 

Jl,U. •=• Jaiminiva I’rahmana UpanijaJ. 

KapS. «. Kapijtfiala-Sa'nhitt 
Kaui Kaulika'-'®3trn* 

Kll. — KaujUaki Drahmaiju 

KeJ. — Istiwa’J Ya Yv»tta)i.%Sltaa- 

KS •— KVihakvSamhitl. 

K-s. «— Kitiavafia-Srautnatn. 

K/- KuuVs Acitschriti fur serslcichende SprachfoKchans;. 

I.S. =• L1iylyana-^rartta»I3l^^. 

M»ht*'h. “ .Mah'l'harata- 



List of Abbreviations. 


126 


MG. = Mlnava-Gfliyastitra.' 

MIIASU = ^^AX MOller, History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature. 

MS. => Maitrsyani-Sainhita. 

MU. ■=* Maitii-Upani^ad. 

Nak^. r= Nakiatrakalpa. 

Nigh. »» Nigbantuka. 

Nir. = Ninikta 

OLS. Oriental and IJngaistic Studies. 

OST. = Original Sanskrit Texts. 

Pan. = I’aijini. 

I'AOS. «=! Proceedings of the American Oriental Society. 

PB. «= raucaviniia-Brahmana, or Tandya-Brahmao*. 

PBAS. »= Proceedjngs of the Asiatic Society of Itcngal 
Pet. Lex. = Petersburg Lexicon 
I’G. «= Parasknia-Grhyas'ilira. 

KV. = Rig.Veda. 

Rvidh. = llig-vidhana. 

RVKh « Rjg-Veda IChila. 

Say. «=» Styana. 

U. = .Satapatha Brliimana. 

SB «=> §a'5,vithja'ljfahmai)a. 

SUE. xa Sacred Books of the East • 

Seven JJywns ”• BtoowtEtD, Seven Jlymns of the Atharva-Veda. 

SG. iK> bihkh'tyana.GrhjasOtra. 

SMB Stmaveda-MantrabrAhmana- 

sPAW. •=» .Sitiungsberichle der KgU Preusslschen Akadeinie der Wissen^chaften. 
SS B bahkha^ana'brautasQtra. 
st and Sts, b stanaa, sod stanzas. 

5V. »• Scma'Veda. 

Stidk B Samavidh-ina-Iitihmana. 

TA. B Taiiintya.Ata'oyaVa. 

TB. B Taittirtya.Brahraana 
TS. »«i Tniltirlj'a.Ssnihifa. 

Up. B Upanl^ad. 

't'sDh. and Mas. Dh. b Vssitiba.DharmafttsIra. 

Vait. B \ aitJna-Satrs. 

Ved. Stud. B risciir.!. and Ccldkcr, Vedische Studien. 

Vend. B Yerdidad. 

Veti. «= Verzeichniss der Sanskjit* und PrlktU-lIandschriften in der Kgl. BibUolhck 
ru Berlin. 

ViTBi. and Ai«. Dh, >= Yijpu-Snifli. 

VS. »= Vajasatieyi-Sa'nhitl in the .Msdhjaiydma school. 

VSK. ■== Yajasaneyi-SamhitA in the Kapva school. 

%VL. = Wt-urA, tndische LWeratnrgtsclnchtt 

"WZKJl. •= Wiener Zeiiscbrift far die Konde des Worgenlandes. 

Yapi. and Yaj'iav. b YajhavalkyaDharmailslra. 

YV. c== VaJar-^’ccla. 

Yhidh. ®=» Yajur-iidhana 

ZDMG. «*= Zeitschrifi der I>coischen MorgenUndischen Cesellsthaft. 

Zimmer « Zimmer, AUindischcs Lcben. 



'rABLE OF CONTENTS. 


I’ART I, TJIi: .\TiIARVA.VLJ>.\ JX 
Cr.NCRAU 

A. CllAR\CTrR ANn CitRQVOIOOV OI 
TOE ATO\RVA-V|D\. 

S >■ External comparison with lUe 

other Vedas 

S 2. Relative chronolojjy of tlic po- 
pular and hieratic literatures 
S 2' Chronolosy of the Atharsan 

redaction 

S 4- Rehtion of the AV, to thcDrah- 
mapis, and the Uharma texts 
R. lltSTORICAI ClIVRACTIB. or THE 
AtHVRVAV, and its RrEATlON TO 
TJtR IIOUSI -COOKS. 

S S- The mutual relations of thcAV. 

, anil the Cfhya-sfltr.ss, and their 

historical \aliie . ■ 

S 6. Scope of the AV. .as a record 
of ancjent life ... 

C Tjtl NASirS or THE ;\THARVA-V) DS 
AND TIIFIR MrAMN<.«. 

S 7 ThecompoundAtharvJn.’irasaii 
and the meaning of its two 
members, -AUiarvan and Aiigiras 

S S. Causcofthedistiiictionbetween 

Alharvan and Ait,;iras • • 

S 9 J'be terms lihr/'angiraiah, 
Brahmaveda, and the designa- 
tions ofAthar^anpriests 

D. TiirScuooisorTiic VTiraKVA-Vto*. 

S to. Character and sources ot' iiie 

reports on the schools Ol 
the AV. • ' 

S 11. ihc nine SiUhas of the A\. i 

S ta. rstimateorihehistoncal value 
oftheSaUas,andtIieirreiation 

to the teachers of theS01r« x 
i” The two Samhita-ithhis, trie 

.SaunaVtya and the I'aippaildi i 

S 14. Brief account of the l.aippa- 

UJailkha * 

E. llRirF Sketch of Atiiarvasic 

I-ITERATURE. 

S 15. The SatnliiMs. •‘latras. and 

nnlimapi. *, ; • • • ‘ 

S , 6 . TheKalpasaml therat.i.^as 1 

« 17 On the ■''nr*' I’ailbliiasj . t 
S l£ The Atharvan Upamjads . I 


S 19 Grammatical and (exf-hislor- 

icat treatises 20 

r. Tiir Posniov or tih. AriitiivA- 
V'ena is f/isoy IirrsATCKf. i.v 
Gi NIRAL. 

S 30. General estimate of the AV. 21 
$21. The Atfaartan in the XiV, . 21 

S 32. TI1C Atharvan in the AV. itself 22 
$ 23 The Atharvan in the Israuta- 

texts . ..... 22 

S 34 IbeAtlurvanintheUpanisads 34 
S 25. Tlie Atharvan in the Crhya* 

sSIras 34 

$ 2O. The Alharvan in the law- 

literature (dharma) ... 35 

S 27. The Athariian in the Maha- 

bharata 26 

S aS The \iharvan in Sanskrit, 

I Jama, and Diuddhaliterature 27 

I $ 29. '1 he Atharvan in grammatical, 

I lexical, and text-histoneal 

works . ..... 37 

I G The ATiiaRVA-Vrot i\ tiieNiew 
or 115 HiTIAUSfIC I 
$ 30. riie attitude of the ritual texts 
I towards the Mhauan and its 

I pnetts . . . 2S 

I S 31. Exaltationofthe \tharvan,and 
I the ofiicc of the Brahman in 

the ritua! texts . . . 29 

$ 32. the ofhec of the Purohita in 
I (he ntual texts ... 29 

{ S Causes leading up to tlie ex- 

Its priests . . .30 

$ 34. Connection of the I'urohita 
niththe AV , and interrelation 
of Purohita and Brahman . 32 

PART II. TIICRED.XCTIONANIi EX- 
TERNAL FORMOFTHE ATHARVA- 
VLDA IN' THE SCHOOL OE S VU- 
NAKiV. 


S 36. .Arrangement o( the books 
according to hymns of differ- 
ent length . . . . ■ . 

S 37- Arrangement of tlie hymns 
xnthin the books . . , 



Tabu, of Contents. 


p»6e 


r>. TiiLMLrRU-or the AnuTtVAN and j 
TiiriR KftAriojJ 70 rnr CbitIcAi : 

KrSTORATioN 01 Tiir Tixt. I 

5 3S. The metres, Avllh special refer* 

encc to tlio Atliarvanic (pop«* ' 

lat) anu«tubh 4> 

J 39. On ihe cniicsi restoraiion of 

Atharvan metres ... 4* 

S 40. Order of stanzas and conca- 
tenation as critical aids « 43 ■ 


C. Tie. l^rLATioN or the Atiiskva- 
VEOA. to Tlir ’ REMAlMNrS HraN- 
COLLrCTIONS. 

S 41. Special features of the Athar- 
\an collection ; its connection 
^vlth Ap^). and TD. ... 44 

S 42. Relation of the language ofthe 

AV. to that of the RV. . 45 

S 43 The various readings of the 

RV. and the AV. ... 47 

S 44 Traces of superior tradition 
in the AV. as compared viilh 

■ the RV. .49 

S 43. Adaptation and expansion of 
Yajus-themes for Atbatvanic 

purposes 50 

S 46. rhevariousreatlingsofthe.W. 

and the Yajus-'samhliss . 53 1 

S 47. IhevanousreadingsQfUic.W. 

and the i&riota-sbtras . . 55 

S 48. Traces of superior tradition in 
the AV. fis compared mlh (he 
Yttjus-texts . . , • . Sd 


TART 111. CONTRNTS OV TIIC 
ATHAUVA.V1.D.\. IN THE SAU- 
NAKlYA-SCIlOOI.. 

S 49. Clas-ification of the hymns 57 
3 50. Class l). Charms to citredis' 

■ cases and possession by de- 


mons (bhaisaijam) ... 58 

S 51. Class 2}. I*r3yera forloijglife 

•and health ^ . O3 

8 52. Cla«5 3),,Imprec3iiotis3gainst 
demons, sorcerers, and ene- 
mies (abhieSrika^i andtrlya- 
' pralihatanini) .... O5 
S S3 Class 4). Charms pertaining to 

women (strll.armmi) ... 69 

S 54 Clisssb Chaimstosceurehar- 
mony, influence in the assem- 
bly, and the like (tamniana- 
syjni, etc.) 72 

S 55. Chss6} Charmspertainingto 

royalty (rAjakarntni) . 73 

S 56. Class 7). Trayers and impre- 
cations in the interest of 
Rrabmans 76 


page 


S 57, Class 8). Charms to secure 
jirosperity and freedom from 
danger (pausiikani) ... So 
S 58. Oass9). Charms in expiation 
of sin and defilement (pritya- 
ficittani) ...... 83 

5 59. Class 10). Cosmogonic and 

thcosophic hymns ... 86 

S 60 Class Ji). Uitualisticand gene- 
ral hymns ...... 9^ 

S 61. Class 12). The books dealing 
with individual themes (books 


S 62. Class 13). The twentieth book 95 
$ 63. Class 14). The kuntapa-hymns 96 
rARTIV.TlICGOrATIIA-ISRAlIMANA. 


A. RElATlOtr OF T»E Te.XT TO THE 
Atiisrva-Ved\ and its Position in 
V roic LiTERsTUitr. 

$ 64. General remarks .... 

S 63. The Uttara.Rrahmana . , 

S 66. The Parva-Brahmapa . . 

B. Contents orTHfcPCRVvBRMiMAVA. 
S 67. First i’rapaihaka? 1, 1. 1—15, 

An Atharvanic cosmogony in 
Upanljad manner , . . 

$ 68. FirstPrapathaka: 1,1.16—30. 
The Pr-mava Upanl^ad, being 
a cosmogonic account derlv* 
ing creation from the otn . 

5 69. First I’rapSlhakai 1, 1.31—38. 

The Gflyatrl-Upani^ad , , 

S 70. lirsfprapaihakas J, 1.39. The 

acamana-rile 

S 71- SecondlVapajhaka: i.s. i—g. 
The duties .of the Brahma. 

catin 

5 79. .Second rnspajhakaeoneJufied. 

Vanoiis subjects . . . 

S 73 - Third I’rapsihaka Various 

subjects 

S 74 Fourth I'rapftihaka. Myslic- 
' theosopliic exposition of the 
satira of the year . . , 

S 75 . lifth Ptap3\hakai 1.5.1—12. 
Ijposiiion of the sattra of the 
year concluded . . . • . 

S 7 ®- 1 iflhPrapathak.a: 1.5.23— 25. 
Mcfricaltreatisconliiesacnrice 
C Contents of tjit llTTARA-nKSii- 
I MAN'S (tiir. Yajnakrasu). 

S 77 - fbrsi I’rapailiaka .... 

S 78. Fecond I'raptjhaka . . . ' 

I S 79 - Third I'rap'i(hal:a , . 

; S iio. Fourth Prapsihaka . . | 

1 S 8t. Pifih Prapaihaka .... 

I S 82. .Sixth Prap-iiliaka . . . .' 

|l 4 ST OF ARLRrUSTfOSS 


lot 

102 

104 


107 


10 $ 

ito 

110 


110 

III 

II3 


i‘5 


ns 

117 


117 

U9 

120 

121 
132 
123 



I. SANSKRIT INDEX. 

Tlic references in both Imlexes arc to j 


auilioliuglh {«;c. rcali) 83 note 

Agni, his relation to life- 
bestOMin;; clnrms 6h 
a-nicajma 92, U8. 

Agn'i I’ariksit 97. 
agni^toma 91, II4" 
agnisamaropaiia 123. 
agniliotra 1 14> ll(i. 
agnjlilheya HJ. 

Aiigiras, mythic fire-priests I, 

9, 10, 23; origin of K’Ti 
117 inamc ofnnAtliarvanic 
teacher 19 (Aiiglr), 24;aaccs 
31, 1075 as a name of AV, 


107,117, i!0. C|>.l!bn:viiii' Akstpa. commraUry on Vol- 

I nni-Siil™ 'li- 

iu.o'i.o„r,.oo.,„., 

ArllhulaJanli 17- 1 

ailbUntitni S3. 85. Cp. omen* , 
anil portents. ' 

AnuVninint (of AV.) so, 40 

noiel7.4«-Cp.lill>ttsarvV, 

and Sarvinu' 


cil with .Slliarvana 8, 9, ; 
51, 62 note 1, 105, 107, 
112, 113! aiiginsa sages 

107. Cp. Aiigiras .and ihlii* 
eJriVaiji. 

Augirasa-Kalpa S, l?- 


nr,;«<a!k1r7 170. Angimo-C.ln o/. '»7. '"S' 

anusfubh. popular and hieratic I to- 
il* in ssedding.charms 41 fleamana I to. 
anaiUhika — ahina 123 no‘e apjflasenyah 93 

ilnian in Av. oa. 

075 as a name owav.i 5 a. l Atreya priest lt2 

..itchcraft) S, 9. *3- (*l ^.5^ saktam) 76 stharvaija, blessings, contrast- 

liesignation of AY. ns a apa.io.Unim (ts. saktan.) 70 

whole 27} their eonflictsl not* ” ,enote2o. oa' Ca note 1. 105, 107, J12, 
with the AdityasS, CS note apim 5 jj, tuginsa-sagcs 107. 

3.115. Ci/aiigirasa. i *4 „ote iC CpV \tharvan 

angirasah Mniiinah 31. ioj. Aihnisnna-pramttak'ara 17 

\)a l.knpad 87, <^1 , ,6. , ,5, Atharvana sCtra, a grainnia- 

an pancaudana 7h I “Ph,-ita (ontraUmans) ;6. ueal trealDe 20 

aja^fiigl (52. ^bhicara<56 (p ahhicU.kam Alharvaniya paddhati 18 

ajr.itajnksnin 60 Abhiclra kV CpAug. Ad.tyas, m cond.ct with A.igi 

aj)cyatl(ofIlrahmansl7d, 87 Ai.ntcap j 

at.ihigva; .prescil.ni a cow ra.ak.1pn 
to guests' 7 note 2 
alitliipati 90. 
atimrtju sasa 79 note 17 
atirSlra 102, 122. 
alivJda 99, lot "O'* ^ 

Atlnrvaka-vidhaiia 17. 

Alharva-iarpana I/- 

.Mhatvin, nijll™ "i-;!" Xiliml. 75. 

S. ” CSl 1 7S. i - „ . 

popnht tl.molosy , niUHM.i.inim pS, V)- C,,. Hsiwa 59. 6o 

9; .l.ii.af'.' Hh.nnsyaljSJ. 

1. 1 w lyriyj' I 

priest 77- t-r- ,, [ 3, }*6. 


Adityas, 11 

rases S. es note 3. ”5 

«I,inr.lava IIS. n6 adityliigirasyali (sc. rcali) 99 

ffika-gail and, mantrtl. Apasiamba-srautasutra 4S 

«oteSV9» aprisnuns4.92. 

aU,„..,.a M... l™».) 03 jbjyu 


[ [ir.-«lu aronict 60. 

1 Arati 7'- 
I onindhatl 61. 
re-pnest arghya-ccremony 7 no'* 


|A>u G4. 

1 Ayur-\ eda 58. 
ayu'jiin (sc suktam) Si 
Arapyaka-jyotisam 17. 
asuia plpman 107 note o. 

I Asurlkalpa 13, 17. 20 note 1 


asorvseda loS. 
astrta-amukt 64. 
ahargana 123 note 5- 


yikl. ahargana 123 note 5 - 

Aiharvavedoktanij) __ 7 ahim.fiatUa-).-acnfices 123 

AlliaTiangiraS.a1.i >* ''i' fp saftra 

nitration'. 22 , -3' 


Idhma Ai'girasa 103, llS. 
iliidra, prototyi'C of kings 74 
’ indragilhah 98. 

’ indramahofsava 17. 7*5 note G. 
jltuphah 13 
lijiapOrtam 76 



130 II. Lu'rcRAiuR u. G eschiciite. id. Atiiarva-Vedaand Gopatha-Brahmana. 


Tauda, Ta\idl)ana 12. 
TvaMar-Savitar 4. 


acchUtadiymn S7, 90. 
Ultamapatala 17, 20, 35. 40 
nole <3. 

uUarabriliraana lOl, io2. 
UJdllaka Aiiini 113—1 15- 
udyiiga Oo. 
upajika Cl. 
upanayaiia 64 
Upavar'.a lO. 
upasad-d’ajs iig. 

Un.aii 64. I 

j-tugcalia i2o. 
jsiliasla, a ceremony 64 

ekagu (agnijioina) 103, 1 14. 
I^kad.mdisaiiinjJtsa-upanUad 1 
(and -vidhi) iS. 
eka'iaka S>3, 122. 
ekalia 121. 

aifaiapralJi>.a 96, 97, gS, loo, 

■ loi nole 13. 

od.ini'sava yS. 

0U1, origin oT 107, loS, iioi 
as the vyalifti oflUeiuspi* 
cious parts ol llie AV. S, 
105) 109, 113, 120. 

AuianasadCIiutdnt j;. 

kauva, a kind ot denioti (>: 
KabandiiaAtharv ana II 1,113. 
karkipraiadlh (sc. rcali) Si. 
Kasyapa ao note 
K'lnkayana 13 
Klibaka ],;eaka 14. 

Kama 70,' 87. 

kamjA I'jajafi, kamjestajah 
66, 72, 74, So, 83 (bis), 93, 
102, iiS, 119. 
karavylii (sc, rcab) 97. 

Kara 114. 

KaU, liyinn lo Sg 
kimldm 52. 

kuntipa-liymiis 15, tO, 37, 
79 note II, 95, 96, 100. 
ku§iha-phnt 59, 60, 62. 
kadi-plant 77. 
kosminda 4, 86 nolc 3. 

*-11)2 9. 52. 65. 
kitjapratiharanani 65, 6S. 
kevalidin S? 

Ke^ssa 16. 

Kautsasya, or Kautsayaja, 
author of an Atharvaii Nir- 
iikta 17, 20, 120 nolc 4. 
Kaurupathi 13 
Kaulika 13. 16, 17, 57. 
■k«a(ra-vecla’ lo. 73. 
k'ctrija 60. 

(JanamaJa ly. 

garbhadnhbavani 72 note It. 


garbhsdhSna yt. 
garamayana 115 . 
gaihS naraSamsyah loo. 
g3dhaprati«tM 116 . 
gsyatrljsliitil) 79 , 89,91 note 
12 , iia 

Gflyatri'Upani^ad 20 , loC, 1 lO. 
Caruila'Upanisad 19 , 61,69 
note 7 . 

1 Gargya 13 . 

1 guhja gbfla 93 , 
godsna 64 . 

goplarah loS, 117 note 13 . 
go-sava 7 S. 

Grahaynddlia 17 . 
gr’Smayajaka, and -yajtn 73 , 
fty note I 4 . 
gramya vyAdVd O 3 . 
grabi 62 . 

Glava Maitfcya Iio. 

gbarma-sQkla 92 , 103 , 119 . 
gliora,^OTa-vc<laS, 105 , itC. 
Gbora Angirasa 8 , 23 . 

CaturAdbyayika 12 , I 4 . Cp. 

Atbarstt'l’ratUlkbya. 
caturveda 105 . 
catuhiarlsa'S.wa 78 . 

CaranaiyOba 11 , 17 , 30,104, 
105. 106 note t, to 7 note 7 . 
cltal.ipru'ya odana |I 2 . 
caturmasyini 102 , 112 , iiS. 
Ciranasaidya 13 
clpudni*trec 62 . 
cQcIlkarma Cf. 
CC)ika>Upamfad 19.9011016 i, 
94- 

Cjavana BUargaia, or Abgt- 
rasa 7 *- 

jaAgida-tree 60 , 62 
Jajah 12 , 

)anaka 1 pa 1 t 98 . 
janat, vyaiiiU of tlic terrible 
parts of AV’: 8 , 105 , 'loS, 
109 , 113 , 120 . 
jambha 62 

Jalada, Jaladayana 12 , I 3 . 
jajala ■ 12 , 13 
Jitikayana 13 . 

'jAl3«a Ci. 

3 H 3 b ('c. rcab) IS note 20 . 

takman 58 , 59 
Tak^aka VaUaleya 61. 
tanOnaptia'Ceremony 1 19. 
tebuva, ‘taboo’ 61 . 

Tirkjya Arijianemi S 2 
lfli)a*sa\ana 121 , 122 . 
tl'-nAgflittA 62 . 
I'nkapdamandaiia 30 . 

TrJta S 5 . 

Tn^aindhi 75 . 

tri^rana Trata 93 note 6. 

In^tubb, in fcneral hymns 41 . 


daksinS 121} its consequences 
loo; dak«inadiymns 76,77, 
78, Sj, 90. 

Dadliyafic Angirasa or Atliar- 
vana 23, 116, 118. 
Damtyojlhaiidhi, a gramma- 
ticat treatise 20. 
dakjiyana-amulet 53, 64. 
dadbikra-stanias 100. 
danastuti 76, 77, 97, 99, 100. 
daralak$apa 7^ note lo. 
D3rila 16. 

dig-yukte (sc. siikle) Si. 
dUSm kjptayali 98. 
dlk55 79, It4, 115. 
dlk$ita 84. 

J3lrghataniis-hymn 86, SS. 
DQsin Mara 105, lio. 
devo, as designation of lir.alt- 
mans 3, 76. 

Devadaria, Devadarfin 13, 13. 
devanitlia 99. 

Dofspati 105. 

drapsa\at)a1i (sc. fcai;) 123. 
Uvitlpaniya-Upaiiisad 18. 

DbOrtakalpa 17, 30 note 13. 
dhrma Invis 93. 

Kaksalrakatpa 17, 35, 
njratau »>a1.i (sc, rcah) 76, 79 
note 11, 97, 100. 
nitatnT, a plant 61. 

Nirukta 45, 119; Kirukta* 
niglia^lu of Kaulsavya 20. 
nifftikarmSiii SC noie 19. 
ni^keiatya-taslra 121. 
nairbVdiiya liavis 93. 
niithasta ha\!s 93. 

Nyarbudi 75. 

pak;ahata 60. 
paiicakalpa, 'kalpin 10, 17. 
raricatSpanIya-Upani?ati 18. 
Paucapaialikl 2o, 35. 

Parikjit 97. 

I’aiibablirava 13. 
pari \id S5. 
piTivikta mabi^l 98. 

Parili'las of AV. 16. 
parihasla 71. 

parvan, fictitious subdivision 
of AY. 35. 
pavarmna-ilotra 123. 
jiaiubandha 92. 
pqa-plant 73. 
pltnlvata-graha 121. 
pipayak'ma 60. 

Ipapl lakjinl 85. 
pjpmagrhlta S 6 no(e 5. 

piman 60. 

parlkvtyVh (sc. jeah) 97, 
parjpla>ainakhy5nara lOi note 

14. 



I. Sanskrit Index. 


13 


rail]iajray«a 13. 

Pippalldt II, 19, 24. 
pjppa1lcli-ianti-!;ana 12, 14. 
pKlc.i-veda loS. 
pun sayana 71. 
punys lakjmi 85. • 
punna-veda 108. 
puru«amedha 9S, loo. 
paruja-sdkta 8S. 

I’unlravas 64. 

purohita 25, 29, 30, 34 note 17, 
7-1. 75. 76, 77i 86. 
pu«tikarma 80. 
pi3gaya3niya 73. Cp. grflm 
pQtudru-tree 64. 
parva-brahmana loi, 104,107. 
prinjparnT-plant 63. 
pr»ai-sava 7S. 

I’edu Si. 

Paithtnasi, author of a smrti 
17J of a Iraddhakalpa 18, 
21 note 22. 

Pallhlnasl Mausahputra tS. 
Taidva Si. 

Paippalada, raippaUda'iiakha 
13, 14, 15>40, 103, to; 
I06, loS, no, 113 note < 
119, 122. 

paippal.itla>manttal} 12, 17,40 
noic 4. 

I'aippalsda.kTaddhakalpa 12. 
pauaah4ila madhumantha 78. 
pauftika S. Cp. pujlikarma 
l’ranava*(rranou)Upani?ad 19, 
34, 103, 105, 106, loS. 
ptati, characteristic of'coun* 
ter<witc1icraft’ 68, 69 note 6 
pratipraj 73. 
ptatirldha 99 
I’ratrcfna “ fJfhaspati 9. 
pratyangirasa •= pratytibhc 
caraiya S, 66, 68. 
pratrlsa 5jya 93. 
pravara 1 16. 
pravargya 119. 
pravalhikSli 9S. 

1‘rflclnayogya 114 
prljlpatya hymns 3S, 94- 
i’rana-liymij S8 
prlt.tlfsav.ma I3i. 
Pratiinkbya: sec, Alharva- 
lYitKakhy-v. 

prayaicitta 4. S3, loj, I0|, 
106, 114, 117 

prJUitra-food, and -legend 

103, iiS. 

I'riyamedha KharaJ^lia 1 14. 
rredi(l‘roit)Ktii4ambeyaKao- 

suraMndu 115- 

rifhi Ai'ijirasa 103, iiS. 
batasa 60. 

l'jhatsarv5nukramapiklof \1. 

30. Cp. Anukramaiji, and 
Sarvana*. 


‘.Vanskunder (manja and 
skandhya), a disease 59. 
Mahabhasya, passage from In 
Clk 109. 

mahSvrata-days 115. 
mahiiinti 15 note 20. 
Mathara 13. 
matrkalpika 10. 
madhyamdma-savaiia 92, 121. 
Mara 105, no. 
mitravindl 72. 

milakarman, mulaknys 26, 
65. Cp. root* 
mdlakrC, mfllin 6S, 82. 
mpgara-hymns 3S, 51, 82; 
migara-vrata S3 note 23. 
.ejaJpiSt. « plant 62. 

I mohana 76 note 11. 

Mauda, Maudayana I2, 13, 


' }irhaspati, prototype of purO' 
hita 34 note 17, 74, 7$; 

A&girasa 9, 117, iiS. Cp. 

Brabioanaspati. 
brahma, religion a* a whole, 

30, S6; in relation to the 
sun 89. 

brahmagftil 79 note 8. 
brabroaclrin, duties of 106, 
no; hymn to 89 
Crahmanaspati, prototype of 
purohitayj. Cp. rybaspati. 
brahman-pnest, universal the- 
ologian and fourth pnest j 
at irauta-sacrifices 10, 29, 

30, 32, 105, loS. tl2, 113, j 
Ij^ it9; in relation to j mefaipigi, 
puiohita 32 ff 
Brahmavada 13. 

brahmavarcasa 79 note 21. jMaudgalya no. 
Crahma-Veda 1,9, to, 24,31, . Mausallputra (Paithtnasi) iS. 
73, 86, 107, 112, lt6. Cp. j 
sliyMidy,. I pi, m 6a 

brjhmoJr., .o;, ,o6, 1|6, 

hymns SS, gS. loo, 113,1 ' 

US, 117, l)ajnanrl\aicilta-sDtra,npiiemI- 

brahma«3ana7S. 67.90, lU- i, ilVaiUaa 16, 86 nila 1 1, 
Ilrahmanlsthamsm 96. 

btlhmanoklam, a caramanr ,, s, 9, 1] 

yiliidhana 26. 
yJtuildya 6l| 65. 

Ilhaga 71. ^ 

Bhadra, commentator of Kau- . y KauJika It 

Sika i6 . 

•Bharadvaja'scIcavet’.aUymn | 

67. rak?as, charms against 63 

nhava and Sarva 52, Sr 'raksoritlyT 61, 65 
Uhsgah 13 raihavahana Invis 93 

Bhlrga/a 13 rahasya-texts 17. 

Jlhjjaj .^iharvipi 8. tj MyakarmSni 7J. 74, 86 Cp 
bhata havis 93 royal rites 

bhaiechadah-siaoias 96, 99 rajayaksma 60. 
llhlKu, a mythic fire priest «. rijasDya 74, lOO. 

9, 10,23, name of ateaclicc Ramakryna, author ofSansska- 
19, origin of 107, designa taganipati ll. 
non of AV 9, 10 rijtrasamvarga hymns 76nole 

Bhlgu-veita tbhfguvistant) 9, , 5 

10. Rudra, commentator ofKau- 

Chrgsaiigirasah 1, 9, 10, 107, Jika 16. 

110,111,. 113 Cp .Uharvln Rebha (Agni) 97 
girasah. raibhyali (sc renh) 97. 

Bhrgraftgirovid 10. lot, 110. rohila-hjmns jS, 55, $7, 89 
119. Cjh. AiharslAgirovid 93 
bheyajtm 1, ^ 9. 10, 22, 23, Kohita and Rohinf, symbols 
5S, 117. Cp sSnta. , of king and queen 75 

bhaifayya 5S. 

,,,, ..,.1 , laksanagranlhih 20 

m,67,l.U.h7n,i.s (.VS. book 

6*: likilpUni 61. 

mo,lta.«l.t, 90. iij 

manaspspa S4. “ * 

manupraTallta tor note 15. 

'landMtar YauvaoJUva in. varaija tree 62 
Jfanya 'wrath’, as spirit of 'arnapifah sc 
battle 75- valaga 65, valagm 6S. 

manyu,amana 72. I vill 7S, Sj. 90, 92. 



132 11. 1.1TTCRATURU. Gl-SCniCHTE. IB. ATH^RVA-VFDA AND GoPAlII\-BRAnMAN\. 


va:iJ.arana, xa-'ik.mn,tina;i- 
trlli 70, 72. 
vasatkSra 120. 

Vacaspatl 79. 

Vic Yiraj I^9 
Vac ''insvaii 77. 
vajapcya 74, Si, 123. 

\a\ata mahi^t 98 
YJsudeia 17. 

VicSrm HI, 112 
Vitaiia-kalpa jy. 

\idradha 60. 1 

\idh 5 nvkalpa 8. Cp. Angi- 
rasa kalpa. 

Virij 89. 

M^vajit 116. 

vi'ftMilya 61. 

lijamka, ‘plant', or 'horn' 60, 
■%is 5 nl 62 1 

vijasalii-liymn 38, 65, 94; 

M'Ssaht'vrala 95. 
vi«uvat 115. ilC 
\i«iitin odina 78. 

%ilii\)a (Tihaviya-)liymn C7, 
<>S, 69 note 22. 
vrjSkapi-hymn 100, 124 
Vena 89 

Viitlna-satra 16/ 17. 
\aita)ana IC, SC note ll. 
lyihrtis in AV. 105, toy, loS, 
tog, It's. tiQ- 

vi.ltya book (book isofAV.) 
38, 91 note IS; irfttya-slo 
mah 94. 

Simyu Xlhirvaija S, 112. 
xikadhQma Si. 
latiuJana 78. 
saintail>a*!iymn Ci. 
sanibliumayobliO-hymns 15 
note 30 , 

‘•aria 52, 82, jog. 
iastrak.inda gO, loo. 

'ikuna Sj. 

Miiu,baiita«vedaS,g,62 note 1, 
103, 116. C]>. f>hc«ajin{ 


Mifc of Atbirvan 8. 
Saniikalpt 13, !<- 

iSsntyiidaka ils. 

£ll 3 .*sava 7^’ 

-ilpa, iilpani loo, 123. 

Siva go, 105. ' 

<uno divyasya maho havis 
93- 

^epabarsana 63. 

SaunaVa, ^aunakin, battnakly a 
12, ij, 19. 

haunaka {SlwvankJUpmisad 
, 12, 20, 110. 

Saunakiya-sStra 14, 30 note 

‘s- 

Syenayaga, <yenejyil 80 
kraddha, 'faith expressed in 
, woiks’ 77. 

Sraddha, personified 117, 
Sraddhakalpai7(bis), 21 note 


;odabm«sacTiriec X2Z. 
$o<tasopacarapQjl 17. 

sanivatsara-praiaTIia lot note 
J 5 ‘ 

samvanana 70, 72. 
samskara Cg. 
Samskaraganapali ll. 

S.iiiiliiti knipa, mil •v'ldlii lf>, 

17. 

sattra 104, 115, 123. \ 

Sadasya-priest 115, 117. 
S.inatknmara 24. 
satnnati, samnatidiomiU 73, 
81. 

Bipatiubsdbanx 70. 
saptai'lgtin bavis 93 
samitna bavis 93. 
iarpaTiilyS,safpa'\cdaCl,*ioS. 
sarpahuJi Sj note 15. 
sarvivid, sarvavidy v 103, llC 
Cp. llra’ima*Vcda. 
Sarvanukramamki; i. Cp Ami- 
kramaiil, and I'rbauana'. 


salil2ni sOktani 15 note 20, 93 
sava, sava hymns 7S, 87,90. 
savanas, three daily 34, y2, 
103, 106, H6.' 
sabasradakjipa-sacnliec 116. 
samsrSvya havis Si, 93. 
sakama4i a-5iman 122. 
sakaniedlia-rites 112. 
simgrJmikSni suktSni 76 note 
ii. 

samtapana-fire H2. 
s’imaghosa 117 note 10. 
sSmmanasj.'ini 72. ‘ 

stvikth sainbliarab jS. 
saiitra pa(u li6. 
s\vilrl: see, gayatrl. 
siUcV-plmt 6t. 
stmantakarma ji. 
subliesaja lo. 

Sumanta 25. 

sUtyS-sakta {book 14 of AV._) 
38, O9, S8, 94. 
senSstarobbann 76 note tl. ‘ 
Somtiditya, author of the 
ilkycpi, commentary ofVdi- 
tana 16. 

sosyanttkarma 71. 
saiitramant 74, 93 note 3, 123. 
saumyali {sc. fcaiy) 122. 
Skandaylga 17, so note 13 
RVnmbha-hymiis 3, 8S. 
sioinaI>!iagn.Iegcndt04;-man 
tr.is 119. 

Rtaiida, ^tautnyaiia 12 
sirJkarnSni Cg. 
sraktya tree, sraktj a-amulel 
TiS. 

SvaratTslra 80. ’ 

svargaudatia 78. 

Svanilyaua Jbaunakn 113. 

havis, Jmis-hymnv 67, Cg 
note 17, 93. 
liir.iiiyagatbha-bymn SS. 
liftlya, hrdayasya landkanah 
70. 7=- 



II. GENERAL INDEX. 


Aliorisiiiil barbariim, mllii- 
cncc upon Ihc Ve<)-» S. 
a'lipiatiou of an'l 

Stanzas 45, 50, _57. 

on AV. I, to, 


Al'i 


.—i 3. 5j- 
allopatli), allopathic sjtiibo- 
listn M 

aiiiukts, ficntral characlcr of 
51): bestow an'l protect life 
f*t; various kinds 53, 6s, 
fit, 66, 6j. 

anatomy, knowledje of in AV. 

4 - 

aiits 60, < 3 t, 

ApaslambvsMiitasQtra, reh* 
tion of to AV. 45. 
‘.appeaser of wrath’ js. 
arranKcnicnt of the h) mns of 
AV. 3J, 3C, 3S. 
assemblyi charms to secure 
inllucnfe tn 72. 

Atharvan hymns, iff.nii;cnient 
and division of 3f, 3'i, 38, 
classification of 57, niitni>er 
oft, 57; grouped accordini; 
tosubjcct-maitcrjS, group 
cd on account of verbal 
vofrcspondcitces 3{J 
.\tlnrvan literature, brief 
skelcli of 15IT 

\thaTTin redaction, cUrono- ^ 
logy al 2, 3 

.\llnrva-veda, names of 1. 7, 
books-numher of j4 : borrow - 
e<lnntcri3lin44! commeii- ^ 
ItTy of .|o; contempt of 3, 
coiitenlsof 57 ! designations 
. of l. 7i editions of 40, 

verse-beginnings of 40! 

historical character of 5, 6 ; 
iiidec verboriim of 4°! I 
metres of 40; position of 1 
.. in llii'dii hterntiire 21; ini 
AV. Itself 22; text htslon- ' 
cil treatises of 20; trins- 
htions of 57 note; schools 
of U ff. ; relation to other 
collections 44- Q’- hauni- 
klya version. ^ 


‘atlractio similium’ Co, 63, ''cleaver of Illiaradv3ja*, a 
note 14 I h)]im 67. 

.avatice.conjiiTalion against 77. 1 colic 60. 

Avcsti, Supposed to roenttou commentary on AV, 40; com- 
AV. 5 note S; luoina-uor>| mcnt.vrics on Viitsna suira 

ship m 2 1 and KatiiiWa-siilra lO. 

j composite hjnins 37, 43. ■ 

bailev and water, curattvc<J2. concatenation of stanzas 43, 
batllc'charms, battle devices I 44 note 15 

7?. contliet of sacrifices G71T, 

ibdellium 62 , 114 note 7. 

j beans, used m sorcery 66, <«3 j consecration of kings 74. Cp. 

' note 14. * rljasoya, 

I birds ominous, chirms against constipation 60 
I 85 1 contempt of AV. 3. 

1 bleeding 61 , contents of AV. 57. 

books of W', number of 34 , | cosmogonic hymns S6 
I arrangement and snbdivi. | cosmogonic., Atliarvaniu 107, 


0(35 ff . firvt-.cvtn35; I 105, : 
eight to iightccn 37, tlnr ’ coiintcr.witchcraft 65 . 
leen to eighucn 9 J ff , cow and calf, charm to se- 
tueniieih book 95 | cure mutual attachment of 

borrowed material m A\ > St. 

44. cow of riralim.an, inslolaMc 

iSrahmanv, claims and pre- ' 77 

tensionv of 3, 7ofr , ,,ifis 

to 7S, high thanstcr f>f|danger, charms to obviate it 
79, inviolability of 7ii, 77, So, St. 

S7, prayers and imprcta deaths, too or more varieties 


lions m behalf of 7, 70, 
social coiiditiuh of 76.. 
' povertv of 77 * noblesse 
oblige of 79. 

Ilrllimma-texts, their relation 
to .\V. 3 

liuddliistic literature, refcreii 
ces to AV 27 

calumny, chaim again'l h4 
cattle, muking of 81 
cattle-charms bo. 
cattle-daughter, expiation of 


S 5 - 

caste in AV. 4. 
charades gS — too. 
chronology of Atharvan re- 
daction 2, 3; of popular 
and hieratic language 2, j, : 
46. : 

classification of AV, hymns ■ 
57 - ! 


of 64 

debate, success in 72. 75. 
debts, burden the conscience 
bt- 

de-rdenient, charms against 

S 3 - 

demons, charms against Ga, 
65. designations of 06 , 65 . 
tsignaiious of A\'. 1, 7. 

relation of to 


AV 3, 25 
dialectic dilTercnces contrast- 
edwilh chronological dilTer- 
cncev 2, 46 
didactic stanzas 9S 
diseases, account of S9tf.; 

transference of O2. 
dissension in family etc. 72 
divine eagle 80, S2. 
diridons of AV. 34, 36, 3S 
dogs heavenly 60, 93; dog. 
sacrifice 6S. 



132 ir. T,infRAri’RU. GlSCIUCinC. lIS.ATirARVA-VrDA AVD GOPATU\-BRAll^tANA. 


va^lUarana, vaiikaranamaii- 
traii 70, 72. 
va^alksra 120. 

Vacaspati 79. 

Vic Vjraj S9 
Vac ‘^iraivall 77. 
vajapeya 74, 81, 123. 

\a\at5 mahi'i 9S 
YA'!uJe\a 17. 

Vicann III, 112 . 

Vitana-kalpa 17* 
vjdraiJha 60. 

Vidliln-i kalpa 8. Cp. Angi- 
rasa-kalpa. 

Viraj 89. 

\i4vajit 11(3. 
vi'aMdyl Ol. 

v 1 «anak 3 , 'plant', or Miofn' 60. 
vi'lnl 62 I 

vi^asahi-liymn 38, G5, 94; 
M‘5ftsalu*vfata 95. 

\i«uval iij, 1 16 
Msturin odana 78. 

Mlnvya (vihavly 4 -)hymn 67, 
a, (39 note 22. 
vyjakapi hymn ico, 124 
Vena 89. 

Vaitlna-sOtra 1 ( 3 , 17. 
Vaitiyana 1 ( 3 , 80 note 11. 
^jAhrtis in AV. 105, 207, loS, 
«o9i ii'S. no- 

vritya book (book 15 ot AV.) 
38, 91 rote 15; >ratya-sto 
mail 94. 

^amyu Alhanana 8, 112. 
»a 3 >adbQin.a 8 j. 
iataujana 78. 
sanitltlj'vhymn ( 32 . 
hambhumajobliS-liymtu 15 
note 20. 

>ana 52, 82, 109. 
iastrakanda 96, 100. 
sAkuna 85. 

sinla,iSula-'ed.a8,0,62 note J, 
105, 116 Cp t)bc'>aj\ni 


iaSnti, a^ife of Atliarvan 8. 
.Santikalpa ij. t}. 
iantyudaka 112. 
ialX'Sava 78; 
silpa, iilpSni 100, 123. 

Siva 90, 105. ■ 

&unD (livjasya maho bails 
93- 

^epaharsana 62. 

Saunaka, ijannakin, Saunaklya 
12, 13. 19- 

Sannaka (Shavank)Upam5ail 
, 12, 20, 110 

Saunaklya-sQtra 14, 20 note 

IS- ' 

£yenay5ga, <ycncjyl 80 
iraddhl, ‘faitU expressed in 
Tvoiks’ 77. 

Sraddha, personified 117. 
Sraddbaialpai? (bis), 21 note 
22 . 

xod3.<m-sacri(ice 222. 
?o^a.<opacirapuja 17. 

samvaUara-jiraialba io( note 
IS- 

sainvanana 70, 72. 
samskSta 69. 
Samskaraganaptti tt. 
Samhill'knlpa, and-vidlil i(3, 
»7- 

sattra 104, lIS, 123. 
Sadasya.|>fiesl 115, 117. 
SanatkumXra 24. 
saninati, samnati-botna)i 73, 
Si, 

sapatiilbadUana 70. 
saptarpmin havis 93. 
samfoa havts 93. 
»arpa\iiI}l,sarpa-vcda(3i,'io8. 
sarptUuti S3 note 1 5. 
sarvavid, sarvavidyt 103, 116. 

Cp. Ilralima-Vcdo. 
Sarvflnokramamkti. C|. Anu- 
kramanl, and Hrliatxana'. 


salilSni sOktani 15 note 20, 93. 
sava, sava-hy/nns 78, 87, 90. 
savanas, three claiiy 34, 92, 
103, 106, 1 16. 

sahasradak^ina-sacrifice ilO. 
samstSvya havis Si, 93. 
slkamaiva-sarnan 122. 
sakamedha-rites 112. 
sSmgramikapi s(2k(Tni 76 note 
II. 

stmtapana fire lia 
sSraagho^a 117 note 10. 
sammanasyani 72 
savikSii samldiar.ili jS. 
slvjlra pa^ii I16. 
savitrtJ see, glyatrf. 
sthcl-plmt 61. 
simantakarma 71. 
subheyaji 10. 

Sumantu 25. 

sficyS-sfikta (book 14 of AV.) 

38, 69, 88. 94 - 
senlstambJiam 7C note ll. 
SomSditya, author of the 
Akyepa, commentary of V 5 i- 
t^na 16. 

sosyanllkarma 71. 
sautrXmaiyt 74, 93 note 3, 123. 
saumyah (sc. fcxly) 123 . 
Skan^iylga 17, so noto 13. 
Skambln hymns 3, 88. 
stomabhsga-legend lo4;-maii- 
tras 119. 

Statida, StaudXyana 12 
sitlkatm 3 iti O9. 
sraktya tree, briklya-amuiet 
58 . 

SvaratSstra so • 
siargauilaiia.yS. 

Siaidiyana fiaunaka 113. 

liavis, havis-h'ymiis 67, (39 
nole 17, 93 

liiranyagaibha-hyniii SS. 
lifdya, lifdaynsya bindUanal.i 
70, 72. 



11, GliNKRAL INDRX, ■ 


Abori^mil hifbarism, inllu- MUraelio similium* Co, Oj, 
cncc upon the Ve<ln S. ‘ note 14. 
a'iiptalion of hymni and avante.conjurationagninst;;, 
staniat 49, 50. 57. AveMa, supposed to mentian 

Al'jcriini on AV. }, to, aS AV. 5 note S; litoma-ttor- 


note 3. 93. 
allopathy, allopathic symbo' 


ship I 


barley and w Her, curativedi- 
aiiiulcta, general character of ljattlc»charins, baitlc-derice* 
J9; bestow aii'l i-rot«cl life I “5. 

('4{ various kinds 53, Cs.l bdellium 02. 

64, 66, O7. j beans, used in sorcery 00, Oyi 

anatomy, knowledge of in AV. f®** M- I 

birds ominous, charms against • 

ants Oo, Cl. 

Apailamba JraatasOtn, rch* ' . 

otto AV 4S. “t'V. o.m.o.oI j,. 

ot ot.th’ 74. . "”"1:;”™ ‘“'"'■■'f 

arrangement of the hymns of 
AV. 34. 36. 3S 
assembly, charniH to secure 
inlluciice in " 


clasvification of 57 ; number 
of I. 57 ; grouped accor.ling 
tosub)ect-matter 3 S , group 
id on .account of verbal 
coirespondcnccs 39 ^ 

\tharvan literature, brief 
sketch of J 5 fr. ' 

\tliarvjn redaction, chrono- 
logy of 2, 3 

ecla, names of 


isof^sff .first ‘even 35; 
eight to eighteen t7 , thir- 
teen to eighteen 93 ff, 
twentieth book 93 
borrowed m iierul in AV 

ment 

4 ^' brahmans, cUima and pre* 


•ions of 3, 76ff , 
to ^6, high cliaiuter .f 
79, inviolability of 76, 77, 
87, inayers and imi rcca 
lions in bchdf of 7, 76, | 
social condition of 76, 
poverty of 77. noblesse 
oblige of 79 

Itrahmaiia texts, their relation 
W. 3 


books-numberof34:bortaw- biiddUislic liUrature, refertn 


ed material in 44, commen- 
tary of 40; contempt of 3, . 

content>ofS7; designations j 

, of 1, 7i editions of 40 > I 
verse beginnings of 40; I 
historical character o( $,6-, 
index verborum of 40; 
metres of 40; position of 
in Hindu literature 21; in 
AV. itself 23 ; Icxt-histoii- 
cal treatises of 20; trans- 
hiions of 57 note; schools 
of It ff. ; relation to, other 
collections 44. Cp. bauna- 
Mya-vcrsioii. ^ 


AV 27 

calumny, charm against bj 
cattle, marking of bl. 
cattle charms hO. 
cattle-slaughtcr, expiation of 
85. 

caste in AV. 4. 
charades gS — 10a 
chronology of Atharvan re- 
daction 2, 3 ; of popular 
and hieratic language 2, 3, 
46. 

cfassihcation of AV. hymns 


‘cicascr of Uhiradvaja', a 
hymn 67. 
toiic Cio 

commcnt.ary on AV, 40 ; com- 
mentaries on Vaiiana sulra 
and Kauiika sflUa iC. 
composite hymns 37, 43. ’ 
concatenation of st.anrax 43, 
44 nole 15. 

eonliict of sacrifices 67fr., 
114 note 7. 

consecration of kings 74. Cp. 

ra;astlyj, , 
constipation 60. 
contempt of AV. 3. 
contents of .\V. 57^ 
cosmogonic hymns Sf. 
cosmogonies, Atlnrvanlt 107, 
>09. 117. 

coiiiiC(.r.\v!tchcrnrt 68 
cow and calf, charm to se- 
cure mutual attachment of 
Si. 

cow of llrahman, inviolable 
77 


ilanger, charms to obviate it 
So. St. 

deaths, 100 or more vantlics 
of fi| 

debate, success in 72, 73. 
debts, burden the conscitncc 
St- 

dcrilement, charms against 


65s dcsigintions of 06, 6s! 
designations of AV. 1, 7. 
Dhatnia texts, relation of to 
AV 3, 25. 

dialectic differences contrast- 
ed with chronological differ- 
enecs 2, 4O 
didactic stanias 9S 
[diseases, account of 59rr • 

I transference of 62. * 

dissension n, family etc. •}■• 
divine eagle So, 82 
.[..Mon. or AV. 34, jt, ,g 
I dogs heavenly Oo, 93- Jop. 
sacrifice 68. ** 



134 n. Lirrt-RATUR 

dreams, evil 83, 85. 
dropsy 60. 

Earth, hymn to 90. 
eating alone, expiation of 

S5. 

editions of AV. 40- 
effigies used in witchcraft 66. 

C8, 6S note 4. 
eighth to eighteenth book of 
AV. 37. 

eighteenth book of AV. OS' 
election of kings 74- 
elephant, symbol of royalty 
74- . . I 

eiil bodily characteristics,! 

charms against 71. 
evil dreams S3, 85. 
exiled king, charm to restore 
him 74- 

expiation for gifts received 
79. S4. 

expiatory hymns, slaiitas.'awt 
formulas 34, 38, 83, 84. 
Ill; chronological signifi- 
cance of 4- 
eye, diseases of 61 


I E. A-niARVA-VrDA AND GorAHlA-BR-AHMANA. 


103, J04; secondary cha- 
racter of 102. 

grain, charms to secure abund- 
ance of So. 

eatises, 
ing to AV. 20; contain 
references to AV. 27 > gram- ; 
matical matters in GopatUa- 
brshmana 105, 109. 

Gfhya sSltas, character of and 
relation to AV. 5 « * 4 . 

45 - 

grouping of hymns, according 
to subject-matter 38; on 
account of verbal corres- 
pondences 39. 

'Grudge’ (Aratil, name of a 
demon 77. 

cause its 


hair, charms 
■growth 61. 

haoma-worship in Avesta 
harmony, cliarms to secure it 
7 . 72 - 

health, charms to procure it 

81. 

hemiplegia 60. 

, hieratic language and religion 
contrasted with pojiular 2, 

1 46. 

I Hindu literature, its estimate 
of AV. 21 

I historical character of AV. 
5. 6 

somvservice l. 2 ilW.n.U of fi, 

first to seventh book of AV.'lj^’y ‘ ^ t*’ 

homnopathy 60, 63 note 14- 

f... VcUip) 10s, loS, 116, '» 

four Yed.as, posited, defended, , , . . . „ 

-nd .lla.lkt.a 40 not. 30, lio.p'IAltt). "I.s ol 1 

no, 112, 113, , , 

116 117 house, moved when given 


family strife, charms against 

7*' 

‘Father time 89. 
fifteenth book of AV 94. 
fire, charms against So. 
fire-service contrasted with 
somv 


‘>4. US. 
fourteenth book of AV. 94 
frog, against fire So, symbol 
of ram So; against fever 
63 note 5. 

funeral-hymns and stanzas 15, 
95; chronology of 2; funeral- 
practices 77. 

gambluig-charnis St; -debts 
St. 

geographical data in AV. 4. 

gifts, expiation for receipt of 
79. Sf. 

girdle, sacred 64. 

goat, as gift to lirahmans 
78. 

Gopatha-brahmaija lO, lOlfT.;: 
contents of 107; pQrva. . 
bralimana of 104, 107; 

nltara-brflliroana of 102,117; 
cortcspondcncB of with 
Jaiminlya • brahmana 117; 
with Vedic texts in general 


as a gift to ItraUmans 

78 

house building 80. 

Iinndfed years, ideal length 

'of life 64. 

husband, charms to obtain 
one 71. 

imprecations, against demons i 
etc. against oj.pres- ' 

SOTS of Cr^mans 77 ; again st 
rivals 70 ' 

index verborum of AV. 40; 
index of pratikas 40. 

Jaiminiya-brahmana, corres- 
pondence of with AV. 45; 
with GB. 117. 

Jainx-hteratnre, its view of 
AV. 27 . 

jouraey. charm to ensure its 

. safety 81. 


Kalpas of AV-, five 13. i6- 
Kauiika-saira described lO, 
17; its relation to AV- 
57- 

ngs, 

secration, or exile 74. Cp. 
roy.al rites. 

K5atrtyas, their relation to 
AV. 10, 73. 

language of AV., chronology 
of 45; lelation to that of 
RV. 45, 47 ; to the classical 
dialect 45. 

law-books, relation of to AV. 

3 . 2S- 

lead, used in sorcery 66. 
leprosy 60. 

lightning, protection against 
80. 

Hon, symbol of royalty 74- 
literature of AV., brief sketch 
of tsff. 

iliturgic terms in AV. 93 
note 3. 

long life, charms to secure it 
62, 63. 

lost property, charms to fino 
it 81. 

love charms 70, 71. 

Mahibhlrali, relation of to 
AV. 86. 

mania S3; charms to cure it 
62. 

marking of cattle 81. 
medicine and medical cliarms 
in AV. 7, 57, 5S. chrono- 
logy of 59; symbolic treat- 
ment of 59(T.i In classical 
Sanskrit 63 note to. 
merchant’s prayer 8l. 
metres of AV. i, 41; critical 
restoration of 42. ■ 
miscaniage, charm to prevent 
It 7I/ 

mishap and misfotlune, charms 
to prevent them {?3. 


note 30, 51, 107, 108, 112. 
114, 1 16. 

mourning-women 95. 
mustard, against ophthalmia 
61. 

names of AV. 1, 7- 
new-moon and fuli-nioon 
offerings' II3, It?- 
new-year’s festival 82. 

Night, hymns to 82 
nightmare 83, 85.^ 

Ninikla, relation 'of I 
45* 

noblesse oblige ofllrahmans 


, AV. 



II. General Index. 


1 AV. I, 


nnmbtr of hymni 
57- 

obscenity in AV. 9S>99i^^' 
omens and portents 17, S3 
Cp. adbhutani. 
ophthalmia 6t. 
oppression of Brahmans 7 ^i 
77. 94- 

order of Atharvan stanzas as 
critical help 43 


Paippallda-vcrsion of AV , 
description of 14. ^SJ 
tract from in the Ksihaha 
Itcaka 14. 
panaceas 62. 

pantheon, Vcdic in AV. 3. 
panther, symbol of royalty 

Tanlstas of AV. described 
t6.' 

I’arsis, ‘Vedas’ of S. 
pearl and its shell as amulets 

pepper as a cure fotnounds 

Persian translation of AV. 5S . 

of Upanisads 19, wS. , 

personal characteristics, goo<l , 
and evil 7s note 10, 85 , 

pliUttes 70 ' 

‘piss'ants’ 60, 61. 
ploughing-charm So 

ploiiglishare-anuilet 6? 

poison, charms against ot. 
popular religion conltasteu 
with hieratic religion 2 
porridge as gift to Krahmatis 

7S- 

purificatory charms 84- 
Purohiia, his relation to AV 

2S. 29. 30. 74; to 

pati 34 note 17S to royalty 

pQrva-brthmana of Gopatha- 
braUmana loiff. 
tents of 107. ^ 

prSyaicitta literature m 

prose^UotAV t. 5 note 1, 

prosperity, charms to obtain 
it So, Si. 

rain, charms to secure it Sa 
religious matters, ficglcct 0 

84- 

riddles 9S— too . w 

Rlg-\edi, Its relation to AV. 

.mair,!,’. 

ritual texts of 

attitude towanls the -U' 

aS. 29 


I rivals, charms against 69, 70- ■ 
j river, charm to conduct it 
into a new channel So. 
roots of plants, sorcery with 
26, 27, 52, 65, 6S, 68notc4, 
S2. 

royal rites and charms 7, 1 7» 
33. 73 ff- 

sacrifices, conflict of 67 ff-. 
114 note 7; iroperfectioiis 
in S4, 103, 104, 106, loS, 
**9- 

salve, amulet of 62, 64. 
Saina-vcJ®. relation of to AV. 

Sanskrit literature, its esti- 
mate of AV. 27. 
gaunakiya-version ofAV. de- 
scription of ‘3. *Si “* 
padapaiha described 10, 
Its commentaty «6; »** 
Uaction 34 Atharva- 

sehSls of AV. II (f , discti- 
minated against In the Pan 
iijias 30 , - 

seed, blessing of So 
serpent, s)n»bol of royalty 
74 }seri.ent$. charms against 

61. St 

sesame m sorcery-practices 

; j 6, 69 note M 

! seventeenth book of A\ . 94 
1 Cp vKSsaln 

shepherd’s charm against wihi 

beasts Si . 

sin Hindu conception ot 03. 

s’, ns of the gods S3, Sj. 
sixteenth book of AV . 94- 


sleeping charm 70- 
soma service, contracted with 

sorivry practices 66 , - — 

literature of 66. undertaken 

«ilh tbeosophic hymns 3, 
86. b9. with an ethical 
hymn S7. 
sores, cure of 61 
spells, planted in all sorts of 
' ohjecli. OS cp. kri)a- _ 

vrauta-practice*- tn AV - 4. jo. 

84. 9t. 92. 93 w®** , ,, 

srauta-priests, 16 

■ ”15; 17 Of ^ 

ihCT .Mi”-" '' 
AV* 22. . . 

I stanzas, number ol m as . . 

1 stetiUiy, ebann against , i- 
' stray Wttle. charm to brin, 
U back Si, . 

sun in relation to brahma 
S9. lY ns 

siipenor pv ao- 

^ compared with R . 49. 



as compared with Yajur- 
veda 56. 

symbolic treatment of disease 
S9lT. 

Taittirlya brShmana, its rela- 
tion to AV. 45. 
teachers, list of Atharvanie 

13- 

teeth, first pair of in children 

71- 

tetrads, Atharvanie; see, four 
Vedas. 

text-historical treatises of AV. 
20. 

theosophic hymns 2, 3, 4. 06; 
list of in Calik-t-upanisad 
90 note I. 

thirteenth book of AV*. 87, 
93- 

ti^er, tiger-skin, symbol of 
“rojalty 74 

Time as a theosophic con- 
cept 89. 

transference of disease 62. 
translations of AV. 57 
truant woman, charm to bring 
her back 70. 
tumors 61. 

twentieth bookofAV. 91,93. 
96. iw. 

twenty, number of Atliarxau 
books 34. 107' . , , 

twin-calves, expiation of the 
birih of 77- 

unlucky star, child born under 

Upan*ixad> m general, their 
relation 10 AV. 24; Upani- 
5aUs of the AV. 18—20; 
Upauisad material in Go- 
patha-brihmana 19. I04.‘ 

107, loS, no- 

urine, retention of 60; urin- 
ating, expiation of 84. 
Uttara brihmana of Copatha- 
brahmana loi, secondary 
character of 102 ; contents 
of 117. 

\ aitana Sutra, described 16, 
17; relation of to Gopatha- 
brahmana 102. 

Various readings of AV*. and 
RV. 47; of \V. and Yajur- 
veda S3, of AV. and hsrauta- 
sutias 53. 

Varuna and Alhartan, dia- 
logue between 77. 

Vedas: sec, four Vedas, and, 
fi\e Vedas. 

Vedic learning, prayers to 
obtain It 79. 

; venereal disease 63 



136 lI.LlTTERAltlRU. Gr^CmCirrE.»IB.A'ni\RVA*Vl da and GOPATHA-BRAnMANA. 

vermin in the field, csorusm qo note 30, 51, 107, loS, ' wisdom," rjtc to procure it 
of fo. j H2, 114, 116. I 79 • * 

village-politics 7, 73.' water-plants, used against fire 'witchcraft: see, sorcerj. 

virility, charms to produce it £0. ^ I women, charms pertaining to 

<J2; charms to deprive men 1 wealtli, charms to procure it j 7, C9. 
men of it 70. ' Si. ‘worms, charms agiinst 61 . 

wealhcr-charm, weather-pro- wounds, cure of 61. 
war-clnnns 75. phet 8l. . ' ‘ 

water, as gift to llralimans wctlding-charms 69, 71 ; cliro- i younger hrollier’s jirccedence, 
79; as a cute of disease oology of 2. expiation of S5. 

62; waters and moon in . wedding-liymns of AV. 94 , - ' ' 1 

' cosmic relation with AV. Cp. sOiy^-sahta. I loograjiliic data in A\.*4 , 



VERLAQ VON KARL, J. TRObNER IN OTRASSBURG, 

Grundri,ss 

’ ' <ler 

indo-aiisclieu Philologie unci Altertumskuncle. 

Plan des Wcrkes. 


Band I. Allgemcincs und Sprachc. 

t) *’<j) GeoTE Hulilcr \on J. Jolly. 'Alu cincm CilJnUIiulilers in lleUojravure [5uljsTcr.-I'rei3 
5f. 3 LIn*clprcis M. S-So]. 

1) Gf«chielite dir ludo artsehen I'liilologle Pml AUcrtumsVunilc von Arnst Kuhn 

2) Vorgeseliichle der indo-arischen Spraciten von K. Meringer. 

3) a) D;e indnehen Syatemo.iler Orammtik, riionetik und Etymologic von I! I.iehicli. 
*f) Die indischcn'\Voriecl»udjer{KoEi) von Th. Znohanao {SuhsEr.-rrcis .'I.? — , hlnreN 

4> Gramraatik der vcdtschen Dialecte yon A- A. Mncdoncll (eugliich). Ii-reis M. 2.50] 
5} Groinmnlib des clisslschcn Sanskrit der Grammatiker, der Lilterator und der IiischrUter, 
. souie der Miachdialekle (episclier und nordbiddhisittcher) von II. I.udets. 

'61 Vedische und ^#nsk^lt•SynlVJ^ yon J. S. Speyer (Subskr.-Freis M. 4.—, IJnieIjneU M. 5.— 1 
. 7) raligrammallker, raligrommatik von O. Tranke. 
i>} IVakrugratnmaUkcr, Itakritgr-unmatlk von H, I‘i»cl«e1. 

9) Grammatik und I.itteratur des (ertiaren rraktitg von Indicn von G. A. Grierson (etigliscli\ 
10) Grammalik und Eitteralut des Smglialesiselien von Willi. Geiger. 

•n) Indfsehe Tatlograpfiie (mil 17 Tafein >n .'fappe) von G. L’uhler ^Stibskr.-rreis Jf. 15.—, 

Unselpreis M. >S 50]. 


’ Band II. Litteratur und Geschichte. 

x) k’eitrsclie IineraCur (**ruti). 

o) Die lire! Veden von K. Geldner. 

'i) The AtliiTYWeda and the Cop.nliv Belhinanv by M. nionmfield‘(engJiich) [’'ubskr. 

I'reis M. S — » rjnselj’rej. M. b— ]. 
i) I'plsche un 1 clnssIscheLiiieratur leinscbliesslicii derroeiik und derMetiik) von M. Jacobi 
3 I Quelleu tier Indisclien Geschtihie. . 

at I.luetantclie Werke uml Iiiselitifiert von F. Klelhorn (englueh). 

•i) Indian Coins. ^Yu!^ five plates. l>v i;. J. Kapson (enghseh) (^ubskr -Prels M. 5.— 
4l (leographic Non M. A. Stetn. ^ [Emiclprels M. 6.—], 

51 1 (hnographie von llaincs (engbseli) 

• b] Siantsalterl&mei I von J Jolly 
7} VrivalnliertDiiier j und Sir U. West (cnglisch). 

*Sj Kecht und Sitie (emsehliesslicU der einheiinischen Otltralur) von J. Jolly [Subskr^eii 
• V. 650, Ktnselpreis ^1. 8,-1. 

p) Politische Geschichtc bis tor foubammetlanischen Lroberung von J. F, Fleet (engnseh). 


Band III. Religion, wcItUche Wissenschaften und Kunst. 

*f3) Veihc lifyihotogy by A. A. Vacdonell ^ergliscls) {Subskr.JVeis M. “-Jo, Cinzclpteis 
i) Cpische Mythologie von M.Winiernit*. ['!• 9; — ]• 

Kituil-Ijitevaturi N edische Opfer und Zaubcr Von A. llillebrandt [3ubskr.»Treis M. S.— , 
binielpreis M 9 30] 

Ved'nta und -Mimuial von G.lliibant. 

Ss-klija und Yoga von K Carbe (Sttbskr-Preis M.250. Etrrelpreis M. 3.— J. 

NyUa vnd Yai-'esika vou A. Vents ^ngaseUi. « . . ' 

' ^'iaUaV’ j BhaktimXrga j 

Jainas ron *E. I.eutnann. [‘'I* 7.“A 

Manual of Indian Buddhism by 11. Kern {engliscM {Sub8kr..rreis M. S;5o. Einielprcis 
Astroromie, .^5t^o^ocle und Malhematik von C.Thibaut [Snbskr.-rrcis M- 3'3®< Cinzel* 

Medism von J. Jolly _ ' , , u, ” * ' 

I’.ildende Kunst imit lUustralionen) von J. Burgess ^eng.iseh). 

Musik. 


! M. 4.-]. 


Ml. Die nit * beseichneten Hefte siod berells erschlenen und sa den beigeselitea 
Treisen dutch die meisten Rachbandlangen *a besleheo. 



VEPLAfi voq KARE J. TJROBNER IN STRASSBURG. 


ON THE ORIGIN 

OF THE 

INDiAN BRAHAdA ALPHABE 

m . ^ 

GEORG BUHLER. 

SLCO’ro Rr\ISrD EDIUON of INDUN nUDlES, No III 

TOGETIII R ^^nJl IWO ArPFMlICr-. ON rilE ORIGIN onilF klUROSTHI 

\LmAcrT AM) or thi- 

SOC\Ua:DIXTTLTl\L\IIKAI.S 01 TIIL BlvAUMI 
^^iTiumcn iL/rrs 

Gr &> Mit ,.4 <! J89S Ms- 


Ilittiter unci Ar 


menie 


P- Jensen. 

M, U,kcs,.ph.c,.r., ScH,,U.p,. u„i.,nrr mc.M.U 
' =55 S 189S M 25 - 

^ t 

Uberset7urgs>ersudie — jir ^rans^kript ons 1 

Schnftzachen und .hre A en^endun-^ Af Schr.ftsj.tem A. P 

VoibM „e. R Do, ,0, . 

batechei, Schnft . IV n . % ^ Falieintnioniiclier Urs,imng dt 

A Grommatisches B T e.,i m ^*^**'^ Hatier und das Armenischt 
Sprache ini su j,„ j* A ^ autljEstand der "hatisol 

— V Zut hatsdt.3nn™K I, ” -“Saraanw -n uiid des aVtmemscl 
H Hatsche GStlemamra. C M ^^’^sclie GttterieicPa 

Kalms atf dtn der Hadei E.’^ ® - 

Aru,en.e. _ yj «■= Rel.g,o„ der Haber und d.e d 

'uneelu,.se, * aime„,sd,aj Gesc. ,chte — N,ulb 



